Veterinary
Hematology
A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas
John W. Harvey, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Professor and Chair
Department of Physiological Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Florida
Gainesville, Florida
with 836 illustrations
ELSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas
ISBN: 978-1-4377-0173-9
Copyright  2012 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
systemwitoutemissioninwritingromth publisheDetailsnhowtsek emissionth
information about thePublisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizationsuch
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden
our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become
necessary.
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their owm experience and knowledge in evaluating
and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein In using such
information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including
Withrespect toaydugrpharmaceticalprodutidentideaderareadvied tohek themst
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their owm experience and knowledge
 of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual
patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume
any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability,
negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas
 contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Harvey, John W.
Veterinary hematology : a diagnostic guide and color atlas / John W. Harvey.
P.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4377-0173-9 (pbk : alk paper)
I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Hematologic Diseases-veterinary-Atlases. 2. Animals, Domestic-blood-Atlases.
3. Hematologic Tests-veterinary-Atlases. SF 769.5]
636.089′615-dc23
2011039099
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Acquisitions Editor: Heidi Pohlman
Associate Developmental Editor: Brandi Graham
Publising Services Manager: Catherine Jackson
Senior Project Manager: Carol O'Connell
Design Direction: Jessica Williams
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.clsviet.com |www.bookaid.otg | www.sabte.otg
Printed in China
ELSEVIER
Sabre loundation
Last digit is the print number:987654321
his book is dedicated to the memory of Charles F. Simpson, DVM, PhD. Charlie
 sraiun a ie isod e e p sia u ne a e se pun
Minnesota. He was a member of the University of Florida faculty for 33 years. Charlie's
research focused on the cardiovascular system, including blood. When I joined the Uni-
versity of Florida faculty in 1974, he had already published hematology papers on babesio-
sis in horses, anaplasmosis in cattle, sickle cell formation in deer, the extrusion of the
 metarubricyte nucleus, the maturation of reticulocytes, and the formation of Heinz bodies
in erythrocytes. His major research tool was the transmission electron microscope shown
in the image below. As a mentor and friend, Charlie opened not only his laboratory, but
also his home to me. During the years our careers overlapped, and we published 11 papers
together. Nineteen of his transmission electron microscope images are included in this
book To me and others who knew him, Charlie is remembered as a warm, generous person
with an inquisitive mind and a wonderful sense of humor. His memory also lives on in
the form of the Charles F. Simpson Memorial Scholarship that is given each year to a
 graduate student in the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Florida.
JohnHarvey
Dr. Charles F. Simpson (leff) and his technologist Tom Carlisle in front of their transmission electron
microscope.
FOREWORD
Benefits for the Veterinarian and the Veterinary Clinical Pathologist
When the Atlas of Veterinary Hematology first appeared in
the bibliography, outstanding in the 2001 Atlas, has been
2001, it was an instant classic. The atlas was well-organized,
comprehensively updated.
concise, and extremely well-illustrated. The accompanying ref-
From cover to cover, Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostit
erence list was comprehensive. Furthermore, and perhaps 
Guide and Color Atlas reflects the commitment to excellence,
 most important, the atlas provided readers with the singular
attention to detail, and dedication to the discipline of veteri-
experience, insight, and perspective of one of the world's most
nary hematology that have made John Harvey such a credit
well-known  and well-respected veterinary hematologists,
to the specialty of veterinary clinical pathology Although
John Harvey. It quickly became a standard reference for vet-
future updates will surely be needed, this new book serves as
erinary clinical pathologists, pathology trainees, private prac-
a timeless contribution to our knowledge and understanding
titioners, veterinary technicians, and veterinary students alike.
of comparative hematology. As a contemporary colleague and
 This long-awaited revision will do nothing but add to the 
friend of John's, I have personally had the privilege to learn
original text's legacy of excellence. Under the new title Veteri-
from him directly through our numerous discussions, interac-
nary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas, this
tions, and case reviews. Through this, his new master work,
edition is significantly expanded and updated. The outstand-
his wisdom is preserved and made available for the ages.
ing illustrations that made the original Atlas of Veterinary
Hematology such a valuable contribution have been augmented
by additional illustrations that even include electron micro-
Alan H. Rebar, DVM, PhD, DACVP
 graphs of a number of significant hematologic disorders. The
Senior Associate Vice President for Research
discussions of the physiology and pathophysiology of blood
Executive Director of Discovery Park
and bone marrow have been very significantly enhanced
Professor of Veterinary Clinical Pathology
throughout the text, thereby making the new volume even
School of Veterinary Medicine
more valuable to specialists and students at all levels. Of note,
Purdue University
iv
FOREWORD
Benefits for the Veterinary Technician
Veterinary professonals and students alike need comprehen-
Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas
sive medical reference texts that may better enable us to
provides additional information on techniques for performing
 perform our jobs accurately and help our patients. Even the
hematology testing. Veterinary technicians and students will
brightest minds are not walking encyclopedias. Therefore,
especially appreciate the logical organization of the material
Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas is a
 as well as the additional information included regarding clini-
needed source of knowledge for both study and in practice.
cal and diagnostic aspects of specific diseases.
I first met Dr. Harvey more than 30 years ago during an
Veterinary Hematology: A Diagnostic Guide and Color Atlas
internship at the University of Florida, and I have attended
enhances understanding of the material and serves as a
many of his continuing education lectures through the years.
vital reference text for both veterinary technician students
Dr. Harvey has always been my 'go-to' specialist. If I am
 and practicing veterinary technicians. I am confident this
looking under the microscope, he's always just a fip of a page'
reference atlas and guide will be a welcomed addition to
away!
 every veterinary clinic and classroom throughout the veteri-
The original Atlas of Veterinary Hematology: Blood and Bone
nary world.
Marrow of Domestic Animais has for years been a valuable
resource both as a bench-top reference for practicing veteri-
narians, veterinary students, and veterinary technicians and an
 aid to technician students in their quest for mastery of this
Elaine Anthony MA, CVT
complex topic. This exciting new book is a combination of the
Associate Professor
School of Veterinary Technology
Atlas with Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Interpretation and
Diagnosis.
St. Petersburg College
PREFACE
This reference presents images and information concerning
Veterinary technologists will likely find the techniques and
the hematology of common domestic mammals including 
 blood cell morphology sections most useful. Attempts were
dogs, cats, horses, cattle, sheep, goats, pigs, and llamas. The
 made to include both common and rare morphologic findings
hematology of nonmammalian species is presented superfi-
 in blood and bone marrow, including preparation and staining
cially, primarily focusing on comparisons with mammals. This
 artifacts. Often, more than one example of a cell type, parasite,
book updates and expands the material published in 2001 in
 or abnormal condition is shown, because the morphology can
the Atlas of Veterinary Hematology: Blood and Bone Marrow of
be variable. The benefits and pitfalls of automated instrumen-
 Domestic Animals by John Harvey and combines its morpho-
 tation are discussed, as is the importance of manual blood flm
logic content with additional updated topics covered in the
review as an important quality control measure for hematol-
 introduction and hematology chapters of Veterinary Labora-
ogy instrument-generated data and in the identification of
tory Medicine. Interpretation and Diagnosis, 3rd edition, which
morphologic abnormalities and parasites that cannot be
was published in 2004 by Dennis Meyer and John Harvey.
 detected using automated instruments.
Even more information is provided concerning the clinical
 Practicing veterinarians and veterinary students should
 and hematologic appearance of specific disorders, and electron
beneft from this complete reference, even if they are not
 microscopy images have been added to provide ultrastructual
directly involved in bone marrow evaluation, because the bone
detail of cell morphology.
 marrow chapters provide the basis for understanding diseases
 that result in abnormalities in the peripheral blood. The added
except therapy It contains concise discussions of hematopoiesis
electron microscopy images and bone marrow aspirate smear
and the physiology oferythrocytes, leukocytes, and hemostasis
cytology and core biopsy histology chapters will be most
 that provide the foundation needed to understand disorders of
useful to clinical pathologists, anatomic pathologists, and resi-
blood. These topics are presented in sufficient detail to be ben-
dents in training for these disciplines. Readers interested in
eficial in the training of interns and residents, as well as veteri-
learning more about a given topic will hopefully appreciate
nary students. The differential diagnoses of anemia, leukocyte
 the extensive bibliography provided.
 disorders, and hemostatic disorders are presented in such a way
as to emphasize the pathophysiology underlying these pro-
cesses. The utilization and interpretation of both routine and
specialized diagnostic tests are also discussed.
John Harvey
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I want to acknowledge those most responsible for my educa-
 sessions. Contributors are acknowledged in appropriate figure
tion as a clinical pathologist. Few peopile have the opporrunity
legends for photographs I have taken from these glass slides.
to receive training from the giants of their profession, but
Likewise, I am extremely grateful for images enthusiastically
I was blessed in being trained by Jerry Kaneko, the father of
provided by collagues that are also acknowledged in the
veterinary clinical biochemistry and Oscar Schalm, the father 
figure legends.
of veterinary hematology, during my graduate training at the
Jennifer Owen and Heather Wamsley provided the con-
University of California, Davis. Many other colleagues have
scientious reviews and helpful suggestions for which I willbe
contributed to my development as a hematologist, with Alan
forever grateful. Completion of text was only possible because
Rebar and Victor Perman being particularly noteworthy, as
 Glen Hoffsis, Dana Zimmel, John Haven, and Rachel DiSesa
we challenged one another with unknown hematology slides
assumed some of my job duties during the last year. I also
in front of various national audiences. Past and present Uni-
appreciate the strong support from Elsevier staff members,
versity of Florida faculty members, Charles Simpson, Dennis
most notably Brandi Graham and Carol O'Connell.
Meyer, Rose Raskin, Mary Christopher, Rick Alleman,
Finally, I especially want to thank my wife Liz for her
Heather Wamsley, Mark Dunbar, and many University of
 patience, understanding, and support, not only during the
Florida residents have advanced my understanding of veteri-
many months required to produce this text, but during my
nary hematology.
entire academic career. Joseph Campbell urged everyone to
 University of Florida clinical pathologists and technolo-
"Follow your bliss."For me that has been teaching and research
gists, most notably Melanie Pate, Lane Pritchard, and Tina
in veterinary hematology, and this pathway would not have
Conrad, have also helped me by identifying and preparing
been possible without Liz's many years of support.
 leagues who have submited material to the annual American
Society for  Veterinary Clinical  Pathology  slide review
JohnHarvey
vii
CHAPTER
INTRODUCTION TO VETERINARY
HEMATOLOGY
Laboratory tests are done for a variety of reasons. Screening
INTERNAL VERSUS EXTERNAL
tests, such as a complete blood count (CBC), may be done on
LABORATORIES
clinically normal animals when they are acquired to avoid a
financial and/or emotional commitment to a diseased animal,
A variety of factors should infuence the decision of whether
to examine geriatric patients for subclinical disease, or to
a test will be done in an in-house laboratory or be sent to an
identify a condition that might make an animal an anesthetic
 external laboratory. A major concern is whether the necessary
or surgical risk Screening tests are often done when an ill
personnel, equipment, and supplies are available to perform
animal is first examined, especially if systemic signs of illness 
the test accurately. Considerations include personnel knowl-
are present and a specific diagnosis is not apparent from the 
edge of species differences and a willingness to conduct
history and physical examination. Tests are also done to
quality-control tests to verify that the procedure is working
confrm a presumptive diagnosis. A test may be repeated or a
properly. The costs per test (technician time, reagent costs,
different test may be done to confrm a test result that was
cquipment costs) must be compared to determine which
previously reported to be abnormal. Tests may be done to
option is more economical. The stability of the test may deter-
assist in the determination of the severity of a disease, to help
mine whether it will be done internally. The time it takes to
formulate a prognosis, and to monitor the response to therapy
obtain results may be important, especially with critically ill 
or progression of disease.
 patients. The hours of operation of the laboratories are impor-
 Decisions to request hematology tests in animals are largely
tant for test results that are needed at night or on the weekend.
based on the cost of the test versus the potential benefit of
 Commercial laboratories generally have better quality control
the result to the animal. A CBC is routinely done to establish
 than laboratories within private practices.
a database for patient evaluation, while other hematology tests
Commercial veterinary laboratories are preferred to com-
may be done in an attempt to evaluate a specific problem.
mercial human laboratories because errors can occur if tests
Examples of more specific hematologic tests that focus on a
designed to evaluate human samples are used without modi-
problem identifed during the diagnostic evaluation of an
fication to test samples from animals. Hematology analyzers
animal include coagulation tests, such as prothrombin time;
must be calibrated for species differences to obtain accurate
bone marrow biopsy and interpretation; and immunologic
results. Technologists must be aware that blood cell morphol-
tests, such as the direct Coombs test. Although single tests
 ogy and blood parasites are different in various animal species.
may be done to address a specific problem (e.g.,an erythrocyte
Antibody-dependent immunology tests designed for humans
phosphofructokinase assay), multiple tests are often utilized 
 are generally not valid in animals. Veterinary laboratories are
 to provide a more comprehensive answer to a broader problem
more likely to have established their own reference intervals
(e.g-, a hemostasis panel is generally requested to evaluate a
for various animal species (as opposed to extracting them from
bleeding animal).
 the literarure) than are human laboratories. A knowledge of
Stat is an abbreviation for statim (Latin meaning “immedi-
specific animal diseases and training in veterinary laboratory
 d   a en sisan  sisan s 
medicine is essential for the evaluation of hematologic speci-
begun immediately in situations where rapid results are needed
mens and interpretation of laboratory data; consequently a
for the medical management of critically ill patients. Addi-
veterinary clinical pathologist should be available to perform
 tional fees may be charged for stat tests because they disrupt
 certain subjective tests and provide consultation concerning
the fow of work in the laboratory and result in inefficiency.
all test results.
2
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
animals of both sexes and various breeds. Monogastric animals
REFERENCE INTERVALS
should have been fasted overnight prior to blood sample
collection.
In order to be able to interpret laboratory data from ill animals,
it is essential that appropriate reference intervals be estab-
Determination of Reference Intervals
 lished from apparently healthy animals drawn from the same
Specific reference intervals should be established for each
general population as the ill animals to be examined. The term
instrument and each test evaluated. Ideally, each animal would
reference interval is preferred to the commonly used normal
have its own reference intervals established by multiple assays
range. The latter term implies that it is the range of test results
 done over time when the animal was healthy In some instances,
ssd m e r u seue aeu, e u
of
limited numbers of baseline values are available for an animal
apparently healthy “normal" animals will have test values
that can be helpful, but rarely are analytes measured often
outside the normal range, and, depending on the test, many
enough to establish an accurate reference interval for an
abnormal (diseased) animals may have values within the
 individual animal. Consequently population-based reference
normal range. Healthy animals may have transient increases
intervals are used.
or decreases in laboratory test results based on changes in
When the frequency diagram of test results from a healthy
environment, emotional status, diet, and so on, and a low
 population is examined, many analytes exhibit a Gaussian or
 percentage of healthy animals simply have values above or
bel-shaped distribution (Fig. 1-1). When a Gaussian distri-
below the general population of healthy animals. Apparently
bution is present, a minimum of 40 individuals (100 or more
healthy animals may also have occult disease that causes one
is preferred) should be assayed for statistical validity.^ In this
or more abnormal laboratory test results, and sample collec-
 case, the reference interval is calculated using the mean ±2
tion, handling, and laboratory errors can result in artifactually
standard deviations (SD). This interval approximates the 95%
high or low values from healthy animals. Consequently it is
confidence interval. In other words, about 95% of healthy
 not appropriate simply to use the actual range of values from
animals have test values within this reference interval, with
all apparently healthy animals assayed. To develop useful ref-
about 2.5% of healthy animals having values above and about
erence intervals, one must decide
which animals
willbe
2.5% of healthy animals values below the reference interval.
assayed, how many animals need to be analyzed, and what
 A common mistake made by novices is to calculate the refer-
method or methods will be used to remove high or low outli-
ence interval from the mean ±1 SD. When this is done, about
ers that would otherwise render the interval of limited value
 32% of healthy animals will have values outside the calculated
as a reference.
interval. If less than 40 healthy animals are available, the upper
and lower values measured should be used to create an esti-
Selection of Reference Animals
 mated reference interval.$
Specific reference intervals are needed for each species of
 Some analytes do not exhibit a Gaussian distribution. Most
animal being tested. Less often, a different reference interval
commonly there is a skew toward the higher values. The use
is needed for an analyte from a specific breed of animal (e.g..
of mean ±2 SD to calculate reference intervals results in
hematocrit values in greyhound dogs are higher than those in
 inappropriate reference intervals for skewed populations, as
 most other dog breeds). Values may vary with the age of the
shown in Figure 1-2. Data may be manipulated (e.g, log or
animal, with major changes occurring prior to puberty (e.g.-,
 3-week-old pups have lower hematocrits than aduls). Con-
sequently some analytes need different reference intervals for
Mean
different age groups. Some analytes also vary with sex, preg-
nancy, emotional state, and activity level. The types of animals
空
quer
sampled and environmental conditions present during the
 establishment of a reference interval shouid be defined, along
ativefrer
with the methods and equipment used, so that the user can
make appropriate evaluations. Ideally, a reference interval
Rel
should be established using a population of healthy animals
with a composition (age, breed, sex, diet, etc.) like the popula-
tion of ill animals being evaluated. Homogeneous populations
generally have more narrow reference intervals than heterog-
16
18
20
22
26
enous populations. Establishing a reference interval for a
mmol/L
blood analyte using a group of male foxhound dogs housed in
FIGURE 1-1
a research colony, fed the same diet, and conditioned to phle-
botomies would likely result in reference intervals too narrow
Frequency diagram of a hypothetical plasma analyte with Gaussian dis
tribution. The central (tallest) vertical line denotes the mean. Each addi-
for the population of dogs examined in a typical small-animal
tional vertical line represents one standard deviation (SD) from the
practice. Reference intervals are generally established for a
adjacent verticaline. The reference interval calculated using mean ±2 SD
(21 ± 4 mmol/L) is 17 to 25 mmol/L.
CHAPTER 1 = Introduction to Veterinary Hematology
3
square root transformation) so that the frequency distribution
conducting the test. Hematology indices such as the red
of the transformed data approximates a Gaussian distribution.
cell distribution width (RDW) vary more between laborato-
The boundaries are determined as before and results are
ries, making the use of published reference intervals less
retransformed to determine the reference interval. Alterna-
acceptable.
tively, one can use percentiles to determine upper and lower
The units used in reporting values can vary by laboratory
limits, especially if large numbers of healthy animals are evalu-
and a conversion factor may be needed to compare a measured
ated. Values are listed in ascending order. The lower limit is
value to a published reference interval. For example, blood
determined by the formula (n + 1) × 0.025, and the upper
iron might be reported as 100 μg/dL or 18 μmol/L. Most US.
limit is determined by the formula (n + 1) × 0.975, where n
laboratories continue to use conventional units, such as mg/
= the number of normal animals assayed.2 If 119 animals were
 dL; Canadian and European laboratories use the Interna-
used, the value for the 3rd lowest animal would be used as the
tional System of Units (SI units), such as mmol/L. Where
lower limit and the value from the 117th animal (3rd from
possible, moles are used rather than weight (e.g., mg) for SI
 the top) would be used as the upper limit.
units. This cannot be done for analytes, such as serum
 protein concentration, where the molecular weight is variable
Interpretation of Test Results Relative to
 and/or unknown. For enzymes, an SI enzyme unit is defined
Reference Intervals
IS pauoy ionpord ro pazun aensqns jo uuloun 1 se
The common usage of the 95% confidence interval to establish
units are reported per liter.
reference intervals means that 5% of healthy animals will be
 For many wild animal species, reference intervals may not 
reported as abnormal for a given test. When multiple tests are
be published for some or all tests. The simultaneous measure-
done in laboratory medicine profles, the probability of at least
ment of a healthy “control" animal from the same species,
one test being abnormal increases with the number of tests
preferably a cohort, can be used as a rough guideline reference
done. For example, there is a 64% chance that at least one
value and therefore can aid interpretation of the patient's
abnormal test result will be obtained when 20 analytes are
results.
measured from a healthy animal.? The degree to which a test 
 result is above or below the reference interval is generally
 important in deciding whether a high or low value should be
SENSITIVITY AND SPECIFICITY
taken seriously.
OF TESTS
Use of Published Reference Intervals
Ideally analyte values obtained from a healthy animal popula-
Routine hematology test results are usually similar between
fion would not overlap with values obtained form a diseased
laboratories; consequently published reference intervals for 
 animal population. Unforrunately there is almost always some
values such as total leukocyte counts and hematocrits are often
overlap in the distribution of individual analyte test results
used to interpret results from a species (e.g., wallaby) when
between the two groups (Fig. 1-3). When the disease being
reference values have not been established in the laboratory
considered has a major impact on an analyte, little overlap in
Mean
Healthy
A
trequer
ive
！！+6
Relati
Diabetes
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
50
100
150
200
0.2
250
Cells ×103/μL
Glucose (mg/dL)
FIGURE 1-2
FIGURE 1-3
  s   e  r  
Overlapping Gaussian distributions of a healthy dog population com-
skewed population. The central (tallst) vertical line denotes the mean.
pared with a population of dogs with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Each additional verticalline represents one standard deviation (SD) from
the adjacent vertical line. The use of mean ±2 SD to calculate the refer-
ToefigureisredrawnfromFaruerTB.Conceptsofnormalitynclinicalbia
ence interval is inappropriate, as demonstrated by the lower limit being
chemistry.In:KanekJHarveyJWBrass M,edsClinical Biochemistry
an impossible negative value
of Domestic Anirmals. 6fb ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2008:1-25.
4
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
values will occur; however, extensive overlap occurs if the
for which they are being tested. As can be seen in Figure 1-4,
 analyte concentration is minimally altered by the disease being
if one increases the reference interval of the healthy popula-
considered. True positives (TPs) are positive test results from
tion in order to minimize the FPs, the number of FNs
animals with the disease for which they are being tested, false
increases.
positives (FPs) are positive test results for animals witbout the
A clinical test should be safe and practical, and should
disease for which they are being tested (Fig. 1-4), true nega-
accurately indicate the presence or absence of a specific disease
tives (TNs) are negative test results from animals without the
or pathology. Sensitivity, specificity, and predictive value con-
disease for which they are being tested, and false negatives
stitute measures of a test's utility for ruling in or ruling out a
(FNs) are negative test results from animals with the disease
given disease.
 Sensitivity is the likelihood of a positive or abnormal test
result occurring in animals with the disease being considered
(Box 1-1). For example, if 23 of 28 cats with feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP) are recognized to have a low absolute lym-
 phocyte count in blood, the sensitivity of lymphopenia as a
Healthy
diagnostic test for cats with FIP is calculated to be 82%
Relativefrequen
(Tables 1-1 and 1-2).?
 Specificity is the likelihood of obtaining a negative or
normal test result in nondiseased animals—that is, animals
FP
without the particular disease under consideration. In other
TN
words, specificity represents the proportion of animals without
the disease in question that have normal tests. Specificity may
N
TP
be calculated in two distinctly different ways, either by assum-
Diabetes
ing that all of the nondiseased animals are healthy or by
assuming that although nondiseased animals do not have the
 particular disease for which the analysis is being performed,
they may have other diseases.
 Determining the specificity of a test in a group of healthy
animals is of little value because reference intervals are gener-
ally established to include 95% of the total population of
Healthy
healthy animals, with 2.5% of healthy animals having values
Relativefrequency
above and 2.5% of healthy animals having values below the
reference interval. The specificity of a test is much more useful
when the population of animals typically evaluated in a vet-
erinary hospital setting is being used. In this approach, the
FP
TN
"nondiseased" group includes not only healthy animals pre-
sented for elective procedures but also animals with diseases
FN
TP
other than the disease being considered.
Diabetes
PREDICTIVE VALUES AND
50
100
150
200
250
DISEASE PREVALENCE
B
Glucose (mg/dL)
Predictive values demonstrate how well a test performs in a
FIGURE 1-4
given population. In contrast to sensitivity determinations
Frequency diagrams ofa healthy dog population compared with a popu-
(which are made using only a population of animals with the
lation of dogs with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Graphs are redrawn from
 disease in question) and specificity determinations (which are
Figure 1-3 to demonstrate true-negative (TN),false-negative (FN),true-
made using only a population of animals without the disease
positive (TP), and false-positive (FP) values used to calculate sensitivity,
under consideration), predictive value determinations are
specificity, and preditive values. The top graph (A) demonstrates the
effect of using the mean +2 standard deviations (SD) to set the upper
made from populations that contain animal both with and
limit of the reference interval. The lower graph (B) demonstrates the
without the disease in question.
effect of using the mean +3 SD to set the upper limit. The rumber of
 The predictive value of a positive test (PVPT) considers
 FP tests are reduced but the number of FN tests are increased by using
only animals in the population being studied that have a posi-
the higher reference limit.
tive test result and determines what percentage of animals
actually have the disease being considered (see Box 1-1). It
biochemistry. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemis
answers the question “How likely is it that an animal with a
try of Domestic Animals. 6th ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2008:1-25.
 positive test will actually have the disease being considered?"
CHAPT ER 1 = Introduction to Veterinary Hematology
5
TABLE 1-1
Test Results from the Evaluation of 224 Cats with a History and Clinical Signs Consistent with Feline
 Infectious Peritonitis (FIP) Resulting in the Inclusion of FIP in the List of Differential Diagnoses*
NUMBER OF CATS AFFECTED
Test
Have FIP (N = 28)
Do Not Have FIP (N = 196)
Total Cats (M = 224)
Lymphopenia (<1.5 x 10² cells/μL)
23
43
66
Monocytosis (>0.9 x 10 cells/μL)
2
43
45
Hyperglobulinemia (>5.1 g/dL)
11
1
18
Coronavirus titer positive
22
84
106
N, Number of cats.
Data from Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Harbour DA. An appraisal of the value of laboratory tests in the diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis. J Am Anim
Hosp Ass0c. 1994;30:345-350.
TABLE 1-2
BOX 1-1
Formulas for the Calculation of
Examination of Lymphopenia as a Diagnostic Test
Sensitivity, Specificity, Predictive
Value of a Positive Test,
Predictive Value of a Negative
NUMBER OF CATS AFFECTED
Test, and Prevalence
Have FIP
Do Not Have FIP
Total Cats
Test
(N = 28)
(N= 196)
(N = 224)
TP ×100
Sensitivity (%)
TP+FN
Lymphopenia
23
43
66
True
False positive
TN×100
Total
Specificity (%)
positive
positive
TN+FP
No lymphopenia
TP×100
5
153
158
Predictive value of a positive test (%)
False
True negative
Total
TP+FP
negative
ne gative
TN×100
 Predictive value of a negative test (%)
TN+FN
N, Number of cats.
(TP+FN)×100
Cats with a history and clinical signs consistent with FIP were evaluated,
Prevalence (%)
resulting in FlP being included in the list of differential diagnoses. Lymphope-
TP+TN+FP+FN
nia was defined as <1.5 x 103 lymphocytes per microliter of blood.
"Data from Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Harbour DA. An appraisal of the 
TP, true positive (the number of animals with the dise ase being tested for that
value of laboratory tests in the diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis. J Am
have a positive test result); FP, false positive (the number of animals without
Anim Hosp Ass 0c. 1994;30:345-350.
the disease being tested for that have a positive test result); TN, true negative
 (the number of animals without the disease being tested for that have a nega-
tive test result); and FN, false negative (the number of animals with the
disease being tested for that have a negative test resultyl.
 prevalence of a disease affects the predictive values of a test
used to diagnose the disease but not its sensitivity or specific-
Based on the selected population of cats presented in Tables
ity. For most tests, the PVPT will be low and the PVNT will
1-1 and 1-2, there is a 23/66 or 35% chance that a cat with
be high if the disease has a low prevalence in the population
 lymphopenia in this population will have FIP?
 being studied. The PVPT will be low because low prevalence
The predictive value of a negative test (PVNT) considers 
magnifies the number of false-positive results—that is, most
only animals in the population being studied that have a nega-
positive test results are false positives because few animals
tive or normal test result and determines what percentage of
actually have the disease (see Box 1-1). The exception would
animals with negative test results do not have the disease
be a test where false-positive results occur infrequently (e.g-,
MoH, uosanb sui sramsue in (i-I xog sos) parapisuos huiq
polymerase chain reaction tests for specific infectious agents 
 likely is that an animal with a negative or normal test result
or inherited blood cell defects). The PVNT will be high
will be free of the disease being considered?" Based on the
because few false-negative results are present in a population
 selected population of cats presented in Table 1-2, there is a
when the disease prevalence is low.
153/158 or 97% chance that a cat with a normal or increased
 To improve diagnostic accuracy, the prevalence (likelihood)
 blood lymphocyte count will not have FIP.
of the disease being considered can be increased by using the
The prevalence of a disease in a population is simply the
history, physical examination, and adjunctive diagnostic tests
percentage of animals in a given population that have a certain
to restrict the population, as described for cats in Table 1-1.
disease (see Box 1-1). The prevalence of FIP in the selected
The prevalence of FIP in the general cat population is much
population presented in Table 1-1 is 28/224 or 12.5%. The
lower than 12.5%. By ruling out one or more diseases that can
6
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 give the same positive test result as the disease being consid-
ered, a clinician decreases the size of the population being
CUTOFF VALUES
studied, thereby increasing the prevalence of the disease in the
population and increasing the positive predictive value of the
 The PVPT may be increased by using a cutoff value above or
test for the disease being considered.
below the standard reference interval, depending on whether
Laboratory tests are used to help rule in or rule out a spe-
the disease under consideration results in an increase or a
cific disease. When significant hazards are associated with
decrease in the analyte being measured. For example, low
treatment (e.g, amputation or high-risk chemotherapy) or
mean cell volume (MCV) is a diagnostic test suggestive of
euthanasia is being considered, it is necessary to be as certain
chronic iron deficiency in dogs. If we use 64 fL as the lower
as possible that the disease is actually present. Consequently
lmit of the reference interval to calculate its positive predic-
tests with high positive predictive values are needed for a
tive value, the value would not be remarkably high because
rule-in strategy When the penalty for missing a diagnosis is
there are various other relatively common disorders that can
high, as with a disease for which therapy is effective if begun
 result in low MCVs in dogs, most notably infammatory con-
quickly, tests with high negative predictive values are theoreti-
ditions and portosystemic shunts. However, it is recognized
cally important as a rule-out strategy. A normal test result by
 that the other causes of microcytosis rarely result in MCV
 virtue of its high negative predictive value would suggest that
values below 52 fL. Consequently,if a dog has a MCV below
the disease is not present. Unfortunately many diseases have
 52 fL, chronic iron deficiency anemia is highly likely and the
 low prevalence, which by itself can result in a high negative
 PVPT using this cutoff value would approach 100%. However,
predictive value. The best evidence for ruling out a disease is
52 fL is not routinely used as a cutoff value for a positive test
fnding a negative test result for an assay that has a high
 because many cases of chronic iron deficiency would be
sensitivity for recognizing the disease. Based on the selected
missed. Nonetheless, it is important to realize that dogs with
e aupuy '7-T pue I-I saqe u paiussand sies go uoendod
 especially low MCV values almost certainly have chronic iron
normal or increased blood lymphocyte count is more reliable
 deficiency anemia.
for ruling out FIP than is finding a low lymphocyte count for
The effects of varying the cutoff value of a test on sensitiv-
 making a diagnosis of FIP.
 ity, specificity, and predictive values are demonstrated in Table
 Information is generally available concerning the sensitiv-
 1-3, where plasma fbrinogen concentration was evaluated as
ity of routine tests for common diseases, but information is 
a diagnostic test for Rhodococcus equi pneumonia in 165 foals
often lacking concerning all diseases that may have a positive
from a single farm.? It is important to recognize that fbrino-
test result and the frequency of these diseases in the popula-
 gen is an acute-phase protein that often increases in associa-
tion being evaluated. Consequently, the specificity ofa test can
tion with various causes of infammation in horses and that
vary when populations containing animals with other diseases
 the heat precipitation assay used to measure fbrinogen (while
are analyzed. PVPTs and PVNTs also vary considerably
easily performed and clinically useful) is relatively imprecise.
depending on the population analyzed. Although accurate
As the cutoff value for plasma fbrinogen concentration is
values are not usually available for PVPTs and PVNTs, clini-
increased, the specificity and PVPT increase, but the sensitiv-
cians use their knowledge and experience, combined with the
ity and PVNT decrease (see Table 1-3). Results from this
principles outlined above, to make informed judgments con-
 study also demonstrate that the PVPT increases and the
 cerning the likelihood that a disease can be ruled in or ruled
PVNT decreases as the prevalence of disease in a population
out of the differential diagnosis. These decisions are seldom
increases. In choosing the most appropriate cutoff value for a
based on a single test result; instead, information in the history
test, one must consider a number of factors including sensitiv-
is considered along with the clinical signs and results of the
ity and specificity of the test, prevalence of disease in the
physical examination, diagnostic imaging, and other labora-
 tory tests. The likelihood that a disease will be present increases
 and false-negative tests. In the example above, failure to iden-
if several findings are supportive of the diagnosis. For example,
tify an infected foal (false-negative test) might result in the
in the FIP study discussed above, the PVPT was 35% for cats
debilitation or death of the foal. Conversely, the treatment of
with lymphopenia, 77% for cats with lymphopenia and hyper-
healthy foals based on false-positive test findings could result
globulinemia, and 89% for cats with lymphopenia, hyper-
in unnecessary financial losses and potential injury to healthy
 globulinemia, and a positive coronavirus titer. The PVNT
foals as a result of the adverse side effects of antimicrobial
 increased from 97% when lymphopenia alone was absent to
therapy.
99% when all three findings were absent. Minimal change
 occurs in the PVNT because the relatively low disease preva-
lence in the population is a major contributing factor to the
ACCURACY VERSUS PRECISION
high negative PVNT. This contribution is most clearly dem-
 onstrated by looking at blood monocyte data in the FIP study
The accuracy of an analytical procedure is determined by
presented in Table 1-1. Only 7% of FIP cats have a monocy-
how closely the result approaches the true value of the
tosis (sensitivity), and the PVPT for monocytosis is only 4%,
analyte being measured. An accurate test is one where the
 yet the PVNT for a cat lacking a monocytosis is 88%.
average of several assay results is close to the true value (Fig.
CHAPTER 1 = Introduction to Veterinary Hematology
TABLE 1-3
Sensitivity, Specificity, and Predictive Values of Plasma Fibrinogen Concentrations at Selected Cutoff Values
for the Early identification of Foals with Rhodococcus equi Pneumonia, Assuming Two Different Prevalences
of Disease?
PREDICTIVE VALUES
PREVALENCE 10%
PREVALENCE 40%
 Cutoff value (mg/dL)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
PVPT (%)
PVNT (%)
PVPT (%)
PVNT (%)
300
100
9
100
42
100
400
91
51
17
98
55
89
500
71
68
20
96
60
78
600
38
96
93
86
70
700
26
51
92
86
67
800
12
100
100
91
100
63
PVPT, Predictive value of a positive test; PvNT, predictive value of a negative test.
Data from Giguere S, Hernandez J, Gaskin J, Miller C, Bowan JL. Evaluation of white blood cell concentration, plasma fibrinogen concentration, and an agar
gel immunodiffusion test for the early identification of foals with Rhodoc occus egui pneumonia. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2003;222:775-781.
Precise
Accurate
40
accurate
40
imprecise
30
30
ol/L)
(mmol/L)
(mmo
Precise
ilts
ults
20
Inaccurate
20
inaccurate
resl
res
imprecise
Test
口
10
10
10
20
30
40
10
20
30
40
Standard (mmol/L)
Standard (mmol/L)
FIGURE 1-5
FIGURE 1-6
Plots comparing test results oftriplicate assays ofthree standards (y-axis)
Plots comparing test results of four replicate assays of three standards
to the known values of the standards (x-axis). The top plot is accurate
(y-axis) to the known values of the standards (x-axis). The top plot is
with good precision. The bottom plot has good precision but is
accurate but imprecise. The bottom plot is inaccurate and imprecise.
inaccurate.
1-5). Analytic procedures with low accuracy are said to have
 sample. The CV is the standard deviation (SD) of the repeated
 a negative bias if results are below the true value or a positive
measurements expressed as a percent of the mean of the
bias if results are above the true value.
repeated measurements (SD/mean X 100). The CV indicates
 The precision of a test refects how reproducible the test
 the amount of random error (imprecision) that is present in
results are when the assay is replicated. Precision is indepen-
 an assay. A high CV value (e.g., more than 10%) indicates that 
 dent of accuracy (Fig. 1-6); consequently test results can be
an assay lacks precision. A low CV value (e.g., less than 5%)
highly reproducible but erroneous (see Fig. 1-5, lower plot).
 indicates that assay results are reproducible, varying little with
Precision or, more accurately, the amount of imprecision
repeated measurement. The degree of imprecision of an assay
 present in an assay, is determined by calculating the coefficient 
can also be measured over time intervals to assess within-run,
 ofvariation (CV) for repeated measurements made on a single
between-run, or between-day variation.
8
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
selected blood films (100 cells per differential). CVs were also
Automated versus Manual Methods
calculated from results from 20 pairs of randomly selected
As can be seen in Figures 1-7 and 1-8, manual leukocyte and
slides (200 cells per differential). Last, CVs were calculated
platelet counts are less precise (CV 15% and 13%, respectively)
from results from 20 quads of randomly selected slides (400
than automated leukocyte and platelet counts (CV 2% and
cells per differential). As expected, the CVs for leukocyte types
4%, respectively). These values do not indicate whether manual 
 that were numerous (e.g., neutrophils) were much lower than 
or automated methods are more accurate. In fact, the mean
CVs for leukocyte types that were present in low numbers
manual platelet count is probably more accurate (more near
(e.g., basophils), and CVs decreased as the total number of
the true platelet count) than the mean automated platelet
cells counted in the differential increased (Figs. 1-9 and 1-10).
count because platelets in small platelet clumps can be visual-
The CVs for each of the five leukocyte types from this dog
 ized and counted separately in a hemacytometer chamber but
were plotted versus the mean percentage of each leukocyte
would be counted as one platelet or not counted at all in an
 type for 100-, 200-, and 400-cell manual differential counts
automated cell counter.
 and compared with a like plot with data determined by per-
For manual differential leukocyte counts, the CV varies 
forming 20 automated differential counts on blood from a
with the percentage of a given leukocyte type present in the
single dog using an Advia 120 (Siemens Healthcare Diagnos-
blood film and the total number of leukocytes included in the 
tics, Inc., Tarrytown, NY) hematology analyzer (Fig. 1-11).
differential leukocyte count. For example, 100 cell differential
Automated hematology analyzers have lower CVs for each
counts were performed by a single technologist on each of 80
 percentage of leukocyte type present because they examine
stained coverslip blood flms from a dog with a mild baso-
thousands
 of leukocytes (assuming a normal leukocyte
philia. CVs were calculated from results of 20 randomly
count) in performing the differential leukocyte count.
10 
300-
+e+
.+*.
Y
200
(7d/g
×
℃
X
100
Manual
Automated
 Manual
Automated
FIGURE 1-7
FIGURE 1-8
Individual plots of total leukocyte counts performed 20 times each using
Individual plots of platelet counts performed 20 times each using a
a marual method and an automated method on the same canine blood
manual method and an automated method on the same canine blood
sample. The manual method utilized 20 separate dilutions (Unopette
sample. The manual method utilized 20 separate dilutions (Unopette
365855, Becton Dickinson Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ), followed by the
365855, Becton Dickinson Co., Franklin Lakes, NJ), followed by the
counting of all leukocytes in 1 μL of 1/100 diluted blood in a hemacy-
counting of all platelets in 1/25 μL of 1/100 diluted blood in a hema-
tometer chamber. A CellDyn 3500 (Abbott Laboratories, North
cytometer chamber. A Cell-Dyn 3500 (Abbott Laboratories, North
Chicago, IL) calibrated for canine blood was used to perform the auto-
Chicago, IL) calibrated for canine blood was used to perform the auto-
mated cell counts. The mean and coefficient of variation (CV) for the
mated cell counts. The mean and coefficient of variation (CV) for the
manual counts were 7.1 x 10°/μL and 15% respectively The mean and
manual counts were 240 x 10°/μL and 13% respectively. The mean and
Xaadsa z pue /ot x/'g aam sunos paeue a io A
CV for the automated counts were 219 x 10°/μL and 4% respectively.
CHAPTER 1 = Introduction to Veterinary Hematology
9
70-
100-
90
 100 Cell manual
65
200Cell manual
2
80
400 Cell manual
70
Advia 120
60
variati
60
ills
55
CV 6%
50
CV 5%
6
CV 9%
40
50
30
20
45
10
40 +
101520253035
4045505560
100
200
400
Leukocyte type (%)
 Number of cells per differential count 
FIGURE 1-11
FIGURE 1-9
Mean coefficient of variation (CV) values for each of the five leukocyte
Box plots of neutrophil percentages and coefficients of variation (CVs)
types from a single dog are plotted versus the mean differential counts
from manual differential counts from a single dog with 5.4% neutro-
ofeach leukocyte type. Meanvalues were determined from20 differential
phils. Values represent the results of20 differential leukocyte counts each
leukocyte counts each of 100,200, and 400 rucleated cells. A like plot
of 100, 200, and 400 nucleated cells. A median line is shown. Boxes
with data determined by performing 20 automated differential counts on
include 25th to 75th percentiles and error bars include 10th to 90th
 bood from a single dog using an Advia 120 hematology analyzer is
percentiles.
ineluded for comparison.
Critical Difference
The CV of an assay affects how the results are interpreted,
1
especially if an assay is being repeated to determine whether
a treatment is effective. For example, if the total leukocyte
(%)
3
count for a dog is 4600/μL before treatment and 5800/μL
after treatment, does this represent a real improvement or
opr
might it refect imprecision in the measurement of the total
leukocyte count? An additional confounding variable in this
example is the biological variability of the animal itself.
CV 94%
Jensen et al.4 calculated the analytical CV for an automated
total leukocyte count in healthy laboratory beagles to be
 3.7%, while the CV for repeated total leukocyte counts from
100
200
400
individual beagles (within dog CV) was 12.1%.4 From these
numbers, a critical difference of 35% was calculated. This
 Number of cells per differential count
means that the total leukocyte count would have to increase
FIGURE 1-10
by more than 35% before the therapy could be assumed to
 Box plots of neutrophil percentages and coefficients of variation (CVs)
have an infuence on this analyte. In the example above,
from manual differential counts from a single dog with 1.4% basophils.
the automated total leukocyte count would have to exceed
Values represent the results of 20 differential leukocyte counts each of
4600/μL × 1.35, or 6200/μL, before a therapeutic effect might
100, 200, and 400 nucleated cells. A median line is shown. Boxes
be assumed. A considerably greater difference would be
include 25th to 75th percentiles and error bars include 10th to 90th
required if total leukocyte counts were done using a manual
percentiles.
 method because of its higher analytical CV. A greater critical
difference might also have been calculated in the above
example had client-owned animals been used for this study
However, they are not always more accurate. The inability to
rather than laboratory animals, because it is likely that the
correctly identify certain cell types (especially basophils),
biological variation would be higher in client-owned animals
abnormal cell morphology, or abnormal cel types can lead to
 that were not accustomed to the phlebotomy procedure, the 
 the misclassifications of cell types. For example,the Advia 120
individuals handling them, or the environment in which the
failed to identify any basophils in blood from a cat with 39%
 phlebotomy was done.
basophils or a dog with 14% basophils identifed on manual
Unfortunately, critical difference measurements have been
differential leukocyte counts.
done for few analytes in veterinary medicine, and values will
10
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 vary depending on methods and instruments used and animal
3. Giguere S, Hernandez J, Gaskin J, et al. Evaluation of white blood cell concentration,
populations evaluated. Nonetheless, linicians develop knowl-
Ajea au jop isat uosnyipounww! ian jebe ue pue uopeuauon uabouqy ewseld
identification of foal with Rhodococcus equi pneumonia. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 edge and inruition through study and experience that can help
2003;222:775-781.
them to make informed judgments concerning the impor-
4. Jensen AL, lversen L, Petersen TK. Study on biologic variability of haematological
tance of changes in laboratory data.
components in dogs. Comp Haematol Int. 1998;8:202-204.
 5. Lumsden JH. Reference values. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's 
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams & Wilkins;
2000:12-15.
REFERENCES
6. Marshall VJ. The interpretation of biochemical data. In: Marshall WJ, Bangert SK, eds.
Clinical Biochemistry. Metabolic and Clinical Aspects. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill 
Livingstone Elsevier; 2008:17-27.
1. Braun JP, Concordet D, Lyazrhi M, et al. Overestimation of the predictive value of posi-
7. Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Harbour DA. An appraisal of the value of laboratory
tives by the usual calculations of the specifity of diagnostic tests. Vet Res Commn.
tests in the diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
2000;24:17-24.
1994;30:345-350.
 2. Farver TB. Concepts of normality in clinical biochemistry. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JVV.
Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego: Academic
Press; 2008:1-25.
CHAPTER
2
HEMATOLOGY PROCEDURES
COMPOSITION OF BLOOD
CALCULATION OF
BLOOD VOLUME
Blood is composed of cells (erythrocytes, leukocytes, and
platelets) circulating within fuid called plasma (Fig. 2-1).
Total blood volume accounts for about 10% to 11% of body
Erythrocytes or red blood cells are most numerous, with
weight in hot-blooded horses; 8% to 9% in dogs; 6% to 7%
several million erythrocytes per microliter of blood in
in cats, ruminants, laboratory rodents, and cold-blooded 
mammals (Appendix Table 1). Depending on the species,
(draft) horses; and 5% to 6% in pigs. The total blood volume
erythrocytes typically account for one-fourth to one-half of
 ofyoung growing animals often exceeds 10% of body weight.33
the total blood volume as measured by determining the hema-
 It may be desirable to calculate the total blood volume of an
tocrit. Platelets or thrombocytes are the next most numerous
animal in determining the size of a needed blood transfusion,
celltype in blood, with platelet counts as low as 100 × 10’/μL
or the amount of blood that can safely be removed for a series
in healthy horses to several hundred thousand per microliter
 of diagnostic tests, or when an animal is to be used as a blood
 in other mammalian species. Total leukocyte or white blood
 donor. For example, the total blood volume of a 4-kg cat is
cel counts are much lower than erythrocyte and platelet
0.07 × 4 kg = 0.28 kg = 280 mL, assuming that 7% of body
counts, with total leukocyte counts ranging from about 5 x
weight is blood in cats and the specific gravity of blood is 1.0
10°/μL to about 20 × 10°/μL in mammals. The proportion of
(1 mL weighs 1 g). Since one can safely remove 20% of the
blood volume from an animal, the calculated amount that can
 being the most numerous leukocyte type present in the blood
be removed from the cat in this example is 280 x 0.2 = 56 mL.
of carnivores and lymphocytes being the most numerous leu-
kocyte type present in the blood of ruminants and rodents.
Plasma consists primarily of water that contains about 6 to
SAMPLE COLLECTION
 8 g/dL of plasma proteins and 1.5 to 2.0 g/dL of inorganic
AND HANDLING
salts, lipids, carbohydrates, hormones, and vitamins.1? Plasma
is prepared in the laboratory by collecting blood with
1an
In monogastric animals, an overnight fast avoids postprandial
anticoagulant, followed by centrifugation to remove the blood
lipemia, which can interfere with plasma protein, fibrinogen,
cells. If blood is collected without anticoagulant and allowed
and hemoglobin determinations. Ethylenediaminetetraacetic
 to clot, the fuid that is obtained following centrifugation is
acid (EDTA) is the preferred anticoagulant for complete
called serum. The protein concentration in serum is usually
 blood count (CBC) determination in most species, but blood
about 0.2 to 0.5 g/dL lower than that in plasma, primarily
from some birds and reptiles hemolyzes when collected into
owing to the absence of fibrinogen—which is consumed
 EDTA. In those species, heparin is often used as the anti-
during coagulation—in serum. Serum proteins may be sepa-
coagulant. The disadvantage of heparin is that leukocytes
rated by electrophoresis into albumin, α-globulins, β-globulins,
do not stain as well (presumably because heparin binds to
and y-globulins (Fig. 2-2). Albumin is a single protein that
leukocytes),4 and platelets generally clump more than
 generally accounts for nearly half of the total plasma proteins
they do in blood collected with EDTA. However, as discussed
present by weight. Each of the globulin classes is composed 
 later, platelet aggregates and leukocyte aggregates may occur
 of many different proteins.12
pooa pene- pno adord un u
11
12
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Whole
blood
 Formed 
Leukocytes
(volume)
elements
(differential)
(number per μL)
1
Neutrophils
60-77%
Leukocytes
6,000-17,000
Formed
elements
Erythrocytes
45%
5.5-8.5
 million
Eosinophils 2-10%
Platelets
Body
-Basophils (rare)
200,000-500,000
weight
Lymphocytes
Blood 8%
12-30%
Monocytes 3-10%
Proteins
(electrophoresis)
Plasma
Other
weight
fluids
Proteins 7%
and 
Plasma
Albumin
teins
tissues
55%
44%
prot
Globulins
92%
proteins
(electrophoresis)
un.
Alpha 14%
Water
Beta 15%
91.5%
Globulins 
52%
Gamma 23%
Fibrinogen 4%
Inorganic salts, lipids, hormones,
vitamins, carbohydrates 1.5%
FIGURE 2-1
Approximate composition of normal dog blood.
be made as soon as possible and rapidly dried to minimize
 another anticoagulant (e.g., citrate) may prevent the forma-
morphologic changes.
tion of cell aggregates. Cell aggregation tends to be more
pronounced as blood is cooled and stored; consequently
 processing samples as rapidly as possible after collction
GROSS EXAMINATION OF
may minimize the formation of leukocyte and/or platelet
BLOOD SAMPLES
aggregates.
Collection of blood directly into a vacuum tube is preferred
 Samples are checked for clots and mixed well (gently inverted
 to collection of blood by syringe and transfer to a vacuum tube.
 20 times) immediately before removing aliquots for hematol-
This method reduces platelet clumping and clot formation in
samples for CBC determinations, as even small clots render
because of rouleaux formation (adhesion of erythrocytes
a sample unusable. Platelet counts are markedly reduced, and
together like a stack of coins). Blood should be examined
a significant reduction can sometimes occur in hematocrit
grossly for color and evidence of erythrocyte agglutination.
(HCT) and leukocyte counts as well. Also, when the tube is
 The presence of marked lipemia may result in a blood sample
 allowed to fil based on the vacuum within the tube, the proper
with a milky red color resembling “tomato soup" when
sample-to-anticoagulant ratio will be present. Inadequate
oxygenated.
 sample size results in decreased HCT due to excessive EDTA
solution. Care should be taken to avoid iatrogenic hemolysis,
Methemoglobinemia
which interferes with plasma protein, fbrinogen, and various 
Hemoglobin is a protein consisting of four polypeptide globin
 erythrocyte measurements. Samples should be submitted to
chains, each of which contains a heme prosthetic group within
 the laboratory as rapidly as possible, and blood films should
a hydrophobic pocket. Heme is composed of a tetrapyrrole
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
13
with a central iron molecule that must be maintained in the
ferrous (+2) state to reversibly bind oxygen. Methemoglobin
differs from hemoglobin only in that the iron molecule of the
heme group has been oxidized to the ferric (+3) state and is no
longer able to bind oxygen.28 The presence of large amounts of
A
deoxyhemoglobin accounts for the dark bluish color of normal
venous blood samples. Methemoglobinemia may not be recog-
Albumin
nized in venous blood samples because the brownish color of
methemoglobin is not readily apparent when methemoglobin
is mixed with deoxyhemoglobin (Fig. 2-3, A). When deoxyhe-
moglobin binds oxygen to form oxyhemoglobin, it becomes
bright red; consequently the brownish coloration of methemo-
 globin becomes more apparent in the oxygenated samples (Fig.
2-3, B). A simple spot test provides a rapid way to oxygenate a
venous blood sample and to determine whether clinically sig-
 nificant levels of methemoglobin are present. One drop of
blood from the patient is placed on a piece of absorbent white
 paper and a drop of normal control blood is placed next to it.
If the methemoglobin content is 10% or greater, the patient's 
blood will have a noticeably brown color compared with the
bright red color of control blood (Fig. 2-4).2* Accurate deter-
B
mination of methemoglobin content requires that blood be
submitted to a laboratory that has this test available. Methe-
FIGURE 2-2
moglobinemia results from either increased production of
Serum protein electrophoresis from a dog with a polyclonal hyperglobu
methemoglobin by oxidants or decreased reduction of methe-
linemia, including increased Oz-globulin and β- bridging. A, Agarose
moglobin resulting from a hereditary deficiency in the eryth-
gel stained with Coomassie blue for protein. Albumin (band on fhe far
rocyte cytochrome-bs reductase enzyme (see Chapter 4).27
leff) migrates more rapidly than other proteins. B, Densitometer tracing
of the agarose gel used to determine the contribution of each protein
type: total protein7.7 g/dL,albumin2.05 g/dL,α, 0.42 g/dL,αz 1.51 g/
Erythrocyte Agglutination
dL, β 1.86 g/dL,  1.86 g/dL.
The appearance of red granules in a well-mixed blood sample
(Fig. 2-5) suggests the presence of erythrocyte autoagglutina-
tion. However, it is important to differentiate agglutination
FIGURE 2-3
Gross appearance of mixtures of oxyhemoglobin, deoxyhemoglobin, and methemoglobin.A, Venous blood sample from a cat with 28% methermoglobin
 x e  o sds g  u)    ss  i  e    n  )
oxyhemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin. B, Oxygenated blood sample from a cat with 28% methemoglobin (eff sample) compared with blood from a
normal cat with less than 1% methemoglobin (rigbt sample). The sample on the left contains a mixture of oxyhemoglobin and methemoglobin, the
one on the right contains almost exclusively oxyhemoglobin.
14
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 2-4
Methemoglobin spot test. A drop of blood from a methemoglobin
reductase-deficient cat with 50% methemoglobin (eft) is placed on
absorbent white paper next to a drop of blood from a normal cat with
less than 1% methemoglobin.
FIGURE 2-6
Microscopic rouleaux in an unstained wet mount preparation of normal
at blood.
FIGURE 2-5
Grossly visible agglutination in blood from a dog with immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia.
FIGURE 2-7
(aggregation of erythrocytes together in clusters) from rou-
 Microscopic agglutination in an unstained wet mount preparation of
leaux (adherence of erythrocytes together like a stack of coins),
saline-washed erythrocytes from a foal with neonatal isoerythrolysis.
which can be seen in the blood from healthy horses and cats
(Fig. 2-6). Rouleaux formation is eliminated by washing
erythrocytes in physiologic saline, but agglutination is not.
between negatively charged erythrocytes.7 In addition, there
This differentiation requires centrifugation of blood, removal
are 10 antigen-binding sites per IgM molecule compared with
 of plasma, and resuspension of erythrocytes in saline. A rapid
2 binding sites per IgG molecule (Fig. 2-8). A direct anti-
way to differentiate rouleaux from agglutination is to mix five
globulin test is not needed to identify the presence of immu-
drops of physiologic saline with a drop of anticoagulated
noglobulin bound to erythrocytes if agglutination is present
blood on a glass slide and examine it as a wet mount using a
 in saline solution-washed erythrocyte samples.
microscope. This dilution reduces rouleaux, but agglutination
 is not affcted. The microscopic appearance of agglutination
in a sample of washed erythrocytes is shown (Fig. 2-7). The 
MICROHEMATOCRIT TUBE
 presence of agglutination indicates that the erythrocytes have
EVALUATION
increased surface-bound immunoglobulins. These immuno-
globulins are usually of the IgM type when agglutination is
A microhematocrit tube is filled to about 90% of capacity with
present, because the greater distance between binding sites on
well-mixed blood and sealed with clay at one end. The tube is
IgM molecules compared with IgG molecules makes it easier
then placed in a microhematocrit centrifuge with the clay
for IgM molecules to overcome normal repulsive forces
 plug oriented to the periphery of the centrifuge head and
CHAPTER 2 = Hematology Procedures
15
hyperbilirubinemia) in horses owing to reduced removal of
0 a a yo an eya  aq uqn pienfon
Erythrocytes
remove unconjugated bilirubin from blood has also been
reported to cause hyperbilirubinemia in one-fourth of the sick
(often anorectic) cattle in one study.4 In other species, yellow
ondary to liver disease. Hyperbilirubinemia associated with a
marked decrease in the HCT suggests an increased destruc-
tion of erythrocytes; however, the concomitant occurrence of
liver disease and a nonhemolytic anemia could produce a
similar finding (Fig. 2-9, B).
Red discoloration of plasma indicates the presence of free
hemoglobin. This discoloration may represent either true
Anti-erythrocyte IgM
hemoglobinemia, resulting from intravascular hemolysis, or
hemolysis occurring after sample collection due to such causes
 as rough handling, fragile cells, lipemia, or prolonged storage
(Fig. 2-9, C, D). The HCT value may help differentiate between
FIGURE 2-8
 these two possibilities, with red plasma and a normal HCT
Antierythrocyte IgM antibodies causing erythrocyte agglutination
 suggesting in vitro hemolysis. The concomitant occurrence of
 i  r sn i
occurred. Plasma will also appear red following treatment with
centrifuged for 5 minutes. After centrifugation, the blood
cross-linked hemoglobin blood substitute solutions.
sample will be separated into three layers based on density,
Lipemia is recognized as a white opaque appearance caused
with packed erythrocytes located at the bottom. A white
by chylomicrons and very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs).
"buffy coat" is located above the erythrocyte layer, and the
The presence of chylomicrons may also result in a white layer
acellular plasma is located above the buffy coat.
at the top of the plasma column (Fig. 2-9, E). The presence
When blood is submitted for a CBC, most commercial
 of lipemia is frequently the result of a recent meal (postpran-
laboratories determine an electronic HCT rather than a
dial lipemia), but diseases including diabetes mellitus, pancre-
packed cell volume (PCV) by centrifugation. This efficiency
 atitis, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, protein-losing
 negates the need to centrifige a microhematocrit tube filled
nephropathy, cholestasis, obesity, and starvation may also con-
with blood. Unfortunately useful information concerning the
 tribute to the development of lipemia in dogs and cats.23,72
appearance of plasma is missed unless a serum or plasma
Transient lipemia and accompanying anemia has been
sample is also prepared for clinical chemistry tests.
 described as a syndrome in kittens, but a direct link between
hyperlipidemia and anemia has notbeen clearly documented.23
Packed Cells
Hereditary causes of lipemia include lipoprotein lipase defi-
The PCV is measured after centrifugation by determining the
ciency in cats and idiopathic hyperlipidemia in miniature
fraction of total blood volume in a microhematocrit tube that
is occupied by erythrocytes. Leukocytes and platelets are pri-
 Equids of any age and either sex may develop lipemia, but
marily located within the buffy coat, although certain leuko-
obese ponies, miniarure horses, and miniature donkeys are
 cyte types may be present in the top portion of the packed
most susceptible. Lipemia has been associated with a broad
erythrocyte column in some species (e.g, neutrophils in
range of diseases, but it is more prevalent in association with
cattle). The width of the buffy coat generally correlates directly
 pregnancy, lactation, and/or anorexia.65 Lipemia has also been
with the total leukocyte count. A large buffy coat suggests
reported in llamas and alpacas with severe systemic diseases.
leukocytosis (Fig. 2-9, A) or thrombocytosis, and a small buffy
It is not associated with age, sex, or reproductive status in thse
coat suggests that low numbers of these cells may be present.
camelids.64 The pathogenesis of marked secondary hyperlip-
The buffy coat may appear reddish owing to the presence of
idemia is not always clear. It often appears to result from a
 a marked reticulocytosis.
mobilization of unesterified fatty acids from adipose tissue
and the subsequent overproduction of VLDLs by the liver,
The Appearance of Plasma
but it may also result from ineffective clearance of VLDLs
Plasma is normally clear in all species. It is nearly colorless in
by tissues or a combination of both, as occurs in diabetes
small animals, pigs, and sheep but light yellow in horses
mellitus.
because they naturally have higher bilirubin concentrations.
 Plasma varies from colorless to light yellow (carotenoid pig-
Plasma Protein Determination
ments) in cattle, depending on their diet.2 Increased yellow
After the PCV is measured and the appearance of the plasma
coloration usually indicates increased bilirubin concentration.
and buffy coat is noted, the microhematocrit capillary tube is
This increase often occurs secondarily to anorexia (fasting
broken just above the buffy coat and the plasma is placed in
16
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
D
FIGURE 2-9
Gross appearance of microhematocrit tubes demonstrating leukocytosis, icterus, hemolysis, and lipemia.
A, Microhematocrit tube from a cat with a large buffy coat resulting from a chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
B, Microhematocrit tube from an anemic cat, with icteric plasma secondary to hepatie lipidosis. C, Micro-
hematocrit tube with evidence of hemolysis in plasma from a cat with acetaminophen-induced Heinz body
hemolytic anemia. Less dense erythrocyte ghosts can be seen above the packed intact erythrocytes. D, Micro-
hematocrit tube with evidence of hemolysis in plasma from a horse with intravascular hemolysis induced by
the inadvertent intravenous and intraperitoneal administration of hypotonic fuid. Less dense erythrocyte
ghosts can be seen above the buffy coat. E, Microhematocrit tube with marked lipemia in plasma from a dog
with hypothyroidism that was also being treated with prednisone for an allergic dermatitis. It was unclear
fom the medical record if this was a fasting blood sample.
A,Courtesy of Heather Wamsley
a refractometer for plasma protein determination. Plasma
BLOOD CELL COUNTING
protein concentrations in newborn animals (approximately
AND SIZING
4.5 to 5.5 g/dL) are lower than adult values and increase to
within the adult range by 3 to 4 months of age.33 The presence
 Total leukocyte counts, erythrocyte counts, and platelet counts
of lipemia or hemolysis will falsely increase the measured
in mammals may be determined using manual or automated
plasma protein value. Maximum information can be gained
techniques.
 by interpretation of the HCT and plasma protein concentra-
Manual Cell Counting
tions simultaneously (see Chapter 4).
Manual erythrocyte counts are not accurate enough to be
Fibrinogen Determination
useful. Manual total leukocyte counts and platelet counts can
Fibrinogen can be measured in a hematocrit tube because it
be performed using commercially available reservoirs and
readily precipitates from plasma when heated to 56'C to 58°℃
 pipettes to dilute the sample and lyse erythrocytes prior to the
for 3 minutes. The difference between the total protein of the
microscopic counting of leukocytes and platelets using a
plasma and the total protein of the defibrinogenated (heated)
hemacytometer chamber. Manual leukocyte counts and plate-
plasma gives an estimate of the fibrinogen concentration in
let counts are done when errors are suspected in cell counts
the plasma.32 This method is useful in identifying high fbrin-
 generated by automated cellcounters. Manual cell counts may
ogen concentrations, but it is not accurate in identifying low
 also be done in an emergency situation when automated cell
fibrinogen concentrations.411
counts are not available.
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
17
All blood cell types in birds and reptiles are nucleated,
must usually be corrected for the presence of nucleated eryth-
making accurate separation and counting diffcult or impos-
rocytes when present.
 sible with automated cell counters. Consequently manual
leukocyte counts are generally required in nonmammalian
Errors in Blood Cell Counting and Sizing
species. Thrombocytes can be estimated based on the number
 The accuracy of blood cell counting depends on the quality
 present in stained blood films.47
 and characteristics of the blood sample as well as the accuracy
If properly maintained, automated blood cell counters are
of the analytic methods used. Storage of blood samples for
 more precise and accurate than manual techniques in mam-
more than a few hours can result in sample deterioration and
 malian species. Various technologies—including quantitative
inaccurate cell counts. The presence of even small clots in the
buffy coat analysis, impedance measurements, laser fow
blood tube invalidates all cell counts. Even without clot for-
cytometry, and cytochemistry—-are utilized to generate these 
 mation, platelet aggregation may occur if platelets become
cell counts.
activated during blood colection, as can happen when speci-
mens are collected with a syringe and then transferred to an
Automated Cell Counting
 anticoagulant tube. Heparin is generally not used as an anti-
Quantitative buffy coat analysis (QBC VetAutoread Hema-
 coagulant because it does not prevent platelet clumping, and
tology System, IDEXX, Inc., Westbrook, ME) depends on
leukocyte staining is poor on blood flms. EDTA is the pre-
variations in cell density to separate cell types. Cells are not 
ferred anticoagulant for CBC determinations in most species,
actually counted; instead the widths of the various layers of
but EDTA may induce platelet, leukocyte, and erythrocyte
cell types that form are measured and the cell “count" is
 aggregate formation in some individuals with antibodies
 generated assuming a standard cell size for the cell type in
 When this occurs, collction of blood into citrate may prevent
question.35
Impedance counters such as the Heska CBC-Diff (Heska
 the problem. Cell aggregation tends to be more pronounced
Corporation, Loveland, CO) and Abaxis VetScan HMII
 as blood is cooled and stored; consequently processing samples
(Abaxis, Union City, CA) depend on the principle that cells
 as rapidly as possible after collection may minimize the for-
 are poor electrical conductors. Blood is diluted in an electri-
 mation of leukocyte and/or platelet aggregates. EDTA can
cally conductive solution and a precise volume of this diluted
cause marked hemolysis in some species of birds (ostriches,
suspension is drawn through a small aperture between two
Ysy pue zs'(ssooi pue son) suda s's'(shef pue snus
electrodes. Each cell produces a change in electrical imped-
ance, resulting in a change in voltage that is proportional to
lant in these species. Both lysis and clumping can result in
 the size of the cell counted. Several thousand cells per second
reduced cell counts of the cell types involved.
can be counted and sized. Erythrocytes and platelets can be
Aisnosu ue u snsan auo jou u audun iaed
differentiated by size alone in many species using impedance
decreased platelet count? but also in a falsely increased mean
counters, but not in cats, because their platelets are large and
 platelet volume (MPV) and occasionally a falsely increased
their erythrocytes relatively small Leukocytes are counted as
free nuclei following lysis of erythrocytes and platelets.
in the blood sample can result in a spuriously increased mean
The development of laser fow cytometry for use in
cell volume (MCV) and mean cell hemoglobin concentration
instruments such as the CELL-DYN 3500R (Abbott Labo-
(MCHC) and a decreased HCT and total erythrocyte count.43
ratories, Abbott Park, IL), the Advia 120 (Siemens Healthcare
As indicated earlier, with the use of most hematology analyz-
Diagnostics, Inc., Tarrytown, NY), the Sysmex XT-2000iV
ers, the presence of nucleated erythrocytes can result in a
(Sysmex Corporation, Kobe, Japan), and the LaserCyte
falsely increased total leukocyte count. Residual erythrocyte
(IDEXX, Inc., Westbrook, ME) has allowed for cells to be
 stroma from inadequate lysing of erythrocytes may also result
characterized in greater detail Individual cells pass through a
 in spuriously increased total leukocyte counts.35.76
laser beam, absorbing and scatering light. Interruptions in
 The presence of severe lipemia can result in spuriously
light are used to count cells and light scatter is used to deter-
increased hemoglobin and MCHC values and possibly even
mine size and internal complexity or density. The Advia 120
srd s s sn   pe id psr
also utilizes a peroxidase channel to aid in determining spe-
of in vitro or in vivo hemolysis in the sample or prior treat-
cific leukocyte types. When properly calibrated, laser fow
ment with a cross-linked hemoglobin solution can result in
analysis allows for a more complete and accurate differential
 an erroneously increased MCHC value.3s The presence of
leukocyte count than can be done using cell size alone. Laser
numerous Heinz bodies in erythrocytes can also result in
fow cytometry also permits the development of automated
spuriouslyincreased hemoglobin and MCHC values, increased
reticulocyte counts and reticulated platelet counts3644 as well
 automated reticulocyte counts,452 and sometimes increased
as the development of new erythrocyte and reticulocyte
 total leukocyte counts.6? The precipitation of an IgM parapro-
 parameters based on the simultaneous measurement of size
tein in blood from a dog by the lysing reagent used in the
 and hemoglobin concentration within individual cells.17
CELL-DYN 3500 falsely increased the spectrophotometric
Nucleated erythrocytes are counted as leukocytes in most
 measurement of hemoglobin (Hb), which falsely increased the
electronic cell counters; consequently total leukocyte counts
calculated MCHC.
18
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Laboratory errors may occur as a result of mistakes made
 testing programs provide external quality control. Samples are
by operators. These operator errors include a lack of knowl-
periodically sent to participating laboratories for analysis.
edge or the skills for the test being done, improper labeling
Results are sent back to the agency supplying the samples and
of samples, dilution errors, use of outdated reagents, inade-
these values are compared with those from reference labora-
quate quality control measures, or improper calibration of
tories and other participating laboratories using the same
equipment. The instruments being used must be optimized
methods. Proficiency testing programs provide valuable peer
and validated for the species being tested.
review of instruments and methods used, but the expense is
Erythrocytes and platelets vary considerably in volume
beyond the means of most private practices.
among animal species, and instruments must be adjustable to
Manual methods are also used as quality control measures
accurately count and size these blood cells for the species
for automated hematology instruments. A PCV can be mea-
being assayed. Cats naturally have large platelets and moder-
sured following centrifugation of a blood sample for compari-
ately small erythrocytes. The resultant overlap of erythrocyte
son to the HCT determined electronically. If values do not
 and platelet size makes separation of cat platelets and eryth-
 match within a couple of percentage points after adequate
 rocytes unreliable with the use of impedance counters.77 Con-
sample mixing, it suggests that the MCV or the RBC count
 sequently cat platelet counts are spuriously decreased when
is probably incorrect, because these two values are used to
measured with impedance counters. This inclusion of platelets
determine the HCT.
in the erythrocyte measurements can result in increased
 Stained blood flms should be examined as a part of each
erythrocyte counts and HCT values and reduced MCV
CBC. The blood film is scanned to verify that the automated
and MCHC values, but the ratio of platelets to erythrocytes
total leukocyte count and the platelet count appear to be
is usually not large enough to have appreciable effects on
correct. If the automated platelet count is low, it is especially
these parameters (exceptions include cats with severe anemia
important to examine for platelet clumps that could result in
 a spuriously low count. If an electronic differential leukocyte
included in erythrocyte measurements, but the ratio of leuko-
 count is to be reported, one must review the blood flm to
 o yno sre iou nsn si ssia oi s
verify that the percentages of each leukocyte type recorded
appreciable effects on erythrocyte parameters (exceptions
appear to be correct and that there are no other cell types
include animals with severe anemia and marked leukocytosis).
present that are not identifed (e.g., basophils are not identi-
 In these instances the inclusion of leukocytes in erythrocyte
fied by most electronic cell counters). More details concerning
measurements can result in increased erythrocyte counts,
 the estimation of cell counts and the proper examination of
HCT and MCV values, and reduced MCHC values because
stained blood films are given later in this chapter.
leukocytes are larger than erythrocytes.7 These errors result-
 ing from diffculties in separating celltype by size alone should
be minimized in automated cell counters that separate cells
BLOOD-FILM PREPARATION
xa p q ose inq azis q Ao n
With the advent of new laser fow cytometry techniques,
Blood flms should be prepared within a couple of hours of 
it is now possible to perform automated differential leukocyte
blood sample collection to avoid artifactual changes that will
counts; however, most instruments cannot accurately count
distort the morphology of blood cell. Blood films are pre-
basophils. For most instruments, a high basophil count is an
 pared in various ways including the slide (wedge) method,
error,35 as has been noted in old blood samples.63 These fow
coverslip method, and automated slide spinner method. It is
cytometers must be specifically calibrated for each species, and
essential that a monolayer of intact cells is present on the slide
they work best when leukocyte morphology is normal. More
so that accurate examination and differential leukocyte counts
reliable fags are needed to identify the presence of left shifts
can be performed. If blood films are too thick, cells will be
 and neoplastic cells.35
shrunken and may be difficult to identify If blood films are
The examination of a stained blood flm is essential as a
 too thin, erythrocytes will be fattened and lose their central
quality control measure regardless of the technology used to
i pue sanor adsa) saonal sos pue rod
count blood cells. In addition to verifying the accuracy of
cells) will be ruptured. 30
leukocyte and platelet counts, a number of other evaluations
 are made. Examples include determining whether erythrocyte
Glass-Slide Blood-Film Method
polychromasia, erythrocyte shape abnormalities, neutrophilic
A clean glass slide is placed on a fat surface and a small drop
left shifts, neutrophil toxicity, reactive lymphocytes, blast cells
of well-mixed blood is placed on one end of the slide (Fig.
mast cells, and/or blood parasites are present.
2-10). This slide is held in place with one hand and a second
glass slide (spreader slide) is placed on the first slide and held
Quality Control
between the thumb and forefinger with the other hand at
Commercial control samples (preferably at two levels)
about a 30- to 45-degree angle in front of the drop of blood.
 approved by the instrument's manufacturer should be run each
The spreader slide is then backed into the drop of blood, and
day, the values obtained should fll within the confidence
as soon as the blood flows along the back side of the spreader
 intervals supplied with the control sample.3 Proficiency
slide, the spreader slide is rapidly pushed forward. The
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
19
B
$
C
D
FIGURE 2-10
Slide blood-film preparation. A, A glass slide is placed on a Hat surface 
D
E
and a small drop of well-mixed blood is placed on one end of the slide
using a microhematocrit tube. B, A second glass slide (spreader slide) is
FIGURE 2-11
placed on the first slide at about a 30-degree angle in front of the drop
Coverslip blood film preparation. A, B, One clean coverslip is held
ofblood. The spreader slide is then backed into the drop of blood. C, As
between the thumb and index finger of one hand and a small drop of
soon as the blood fows along the back side of the spreader slide, the
blood is placed in the middle of it using a microhematocrit tube. C, A
spreader slide is rapidly pushed forward. D, The blood film produced is
second clean coverslip is dropped on top of the first in a crosswise posi-
thick at the back of the slide, where the drop of blood was placed, and
tion. D, Blood spreads evenly between the two coverslips and a feathered
thin at the front (feathered) edge of the slide.
edge forms at the periphery. E, The coverslips are rapidly separated by
  o a  d d   ps ue 
pulling apart in a smooth, horizontal manner.
thickness of the smear is infuenced by the size of the blood
drop, the viscosity of the sample (HCT), the angle of the
spreader slide, and the speed of spreading. The greater the
 One coverslip is held between the thumb and index finger of
angle (a more upright spreader slide) and faster the speed of
one hand and a small drop of blood is placed in the middle
spreading, the thicker and shorter the blood film will be. Thus
of the coverslip using a microhematocrit tube. The drop of
the spreader slide should be held more upright in preparing
blood should be as perfectly round as possible to produce even
 smears from anemic patients so as to create a thicker blood
 spreading between coverslips. The second coverslip is dropped
film.30
on top of the first in a crosswise position. After the blood
If the drop of blood is the proper size, all of the blood will 
remain on the slide and a smear will be prepared that is thick
-ess aider ae sdsia s rdd su ie sr sapa
at the back of the slide, where the drop of blood was placed,
rated by grasping an exposed corner of the top coverslip with
 and thin at the front (feathered) edge of the slide. If the drop
the other hand and pulling apart in a smooth, horizontal
of blood is too large, some of the blood will be pushed off the
manner. Coverslips are immediately dried as described above
end of the slide, causing potential problems. Often these blood
and then identified by marking on the thick end of the smears
films will be too thick for accurate evaluation. Second, clumps
with a graphite pencil or a pen containing ink that is not
of cells tend to be pushed off the slide, making them unavail.
removed by alcohol fixation.
able for examination.
 If the drop of blood used is too large, a feathered edge will
 Once prepared, the slide is immediately dried by waving it
not form and the blood film will be too thick Multiple cov-
in the air or holding it in front of a hair dryer set on a slightly
erslip blood films may be stained in small slotted coplin jars
warm-air setting. Holding the slide close to a dryer set on a
or in ceramic staining baskets that are placed in beakers of
hot-air setting can result in fragmentation of cells. Slow
fixative and stain.
drying can cause cells to contract, making them diffcult to
identify3 Slides are identifed by writing on the thick end of
BLOOD-FILM STAINING
 the smear or the frosted end of the slide with a graphite pencil
PROCEDURES
 or a pen containing ink that is not removed by alcohol
fixation.
Romanowsky-Type Stains
a-ysmo e ym us iunn ae su po
Coverslip Blood-Film Method
 stain (e.g., Wright or Wright-Giemsa) either manually or
Two 22-mm square No. 1% coverslips are required to make
uing an automatic slide stainer. Romanowsky-type stains are
coverslip blood films (Fig. 2-11). A camel's hair brush is used
 composed of a mixture of eosin and oxidized methylene blue
to remove particles from the surfaces that will contact blood.
(azure) dyes. The azure dyes stain acids, resulting in blue to
20
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 2-12
Appearance of blood flms from a normal cat stained with Wright-Giemsa. A, Blood flm was rinsed in distilled water. Five neutrophils, a basophil
n u psu si uy pooa da sie u hg ieu e ixeao na sarg sd ae (sa po) o e pe iu 
with inappropriate pH.
purple colors, and eosin stains bases, resulting in red color-
ation (Fig. 2-12, A). These staining characteristics depend on
the pH of the stains and the rinse water as well as the nafure
of the cells present (Fig. 2-12, B). Low pH, inadequate stain-
ing time, degraded stains, or excessive washing can result in
excessively pink-staining blood films. High pH, prolonged
staining, or insufficient washing can result in excessively blue-
staining blood films.30
Blood films should be fixed in methanol within 4 hours
 (preferably within 1 hour) of preparation. If the methanol
 contains more than 3% water, morphologic artifacts including
loss of cellular detail and vacuolation may be present.3 Blood
films may have an overall blue tint if stored unfixed for long
periods before staining or if the unfixed blood films are
exposed to formalin vapors, as occurs when blood films are
shipped to the laboratory in a package that also contains
formalin-fixed tissue. Blood films prepared from blood col-
FIGURE 2-13
lected with heparin as the anticoagulant have an overall
 Refractile inclusions in erythrocytes from a horse are artifacts resulting
 magenta tint owing to the mucopolysaccharides present.30
fom drying or fxation problems. Erythrocytesexhibit rouleaux,a normal
Drying or fixation problems can result in variably shaped
finding in horses. Wright-Giemsa stain.
refractile inclusions in the erythrocytes, these may be confused
with erythrocyte parasites (Fig. 2-13). The presence of stain
obtained by longer staining procedures, but staining quality is
 precipitation can make identification of leukocytes and blood
improved by allowing the blood film to remain in the fixative
parasites diffcult (Fig. 2-14). Precipitated stain may be present
for several minutes. The Diff-Quik stain is classifed as an
because the stain or stains needed to be fltered, the staining
aqueous stain, even though the fixation is done in methanol,
procedure was too long, or the washing was not sufficient.
because the component stains were prepared in water. A sig-
Carboxymethylcellulose has been infused into the peritoneal
nificant limitation of the Diff-Quik stain and other aqueous
 cavity of horses and cattle in an attempt to prevent abdominal
stains, such as Hema 3 (Fisher Scientific, Pittsburgh, PA) and
adhesions after surgery. This material can appear as a precipi-
the stain used in the automated stainer Aerospray 7120
 tate between cells in blood that resembles stain precipitation
(Westcore, Inc, Logan, UT), is that they do not stain basophil,
(Fig. 2-15).6
mast cell, or large granular leukocyte granules well (Fig.
Various rapid stains, such as Diff-Quik (Dade Behring
2-16).1 However, these aqueous stains are superior to conven-
Inc., Newark, DE), are available. The quality of Diff-Quik-
 tional methanolic Wright or Wright-Giemsa stains in the
 stained blood flms is generally somewhat lower than that
staining of distemper inclusions in canine blood cells.126
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
21
B
FIGURE 2-16
Band basophils in the blood of a horse. A, Granules stain well with
Wright-Giemsa. B, Most granules are not stained with Diff-Quik stain.
FIGURE 2-14
Stain precipitation in blood from a dog. The two neutrophils present
might be mistaken for basophils because of the adherent precipitated
stain. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 2-17
Reticulocytes in dog blood. Four reticulocytes (with blue-staining mate-
rial) and three mature erythrocytes in blood from a dog with a regenera-
tive anemia. New methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
 reticulocytes. The use ofa Miller's disc in one ofthe microscope
FIGURE 2-15
oculars saves time in performing the reticulocyte count.
Carboxymethylcellulose precipitation. The blue-to-purple precipitate
The blue-staining aggregates or *reticulum" seen in reticu-
present between erythrocytes in this horse blood results from treatment
locytes (Fig. 2-17) does not occur as such in living cells but
with carboxymethylcellulose. Wright-Giemsa stain.
results from the precipitation of ribosomal ribonucleic acid
Pbotograpb of a stained blood film from a 1994 ASVCP slide review case
(RNA; the same RNA that causes the bluish color seen in
submitted by M.J. Burkbard, M.A.Thrall and G.Weiser.
polychromatophilic erythrocytes) in immature erythrocytes
number of ribosomes decreases until only small punctate (dot-
Reticulocyte Stains
like) inclusions are observed in erythrocytes (punctate reticu-
 Reticulocyte stains are commercially available (N. Brecher,
locytes) stained with the reticulocyte stain (Fig. 2-18). To
Harleco, EMD Chemicals). Those wishing to prepare their
reduce the chance that a staining artifact would result in
own stain can do so by dissolving 0.5 g of new methylene blue
 misclassifying a mature erythrocyte as a punctate reticulocyte
and 1.6 g of potassium oxalate in 100 mL of distilled water.
when using a reticulocyte stain, the celi in question should
Following filtration, equal volumes of blood and stain are
have two or more discrete blue granules that are visible without
mixed together in a test tube and incubated at room tempera-
requiring fine focus adjustment. These inclusions should be
ture for 10 to 20 minutes. After incubation, blood films
 away from the cell margin to avoid confusion with hemotro-
are made and reticulocyte counts performed by examining
phic mycoplasmas (formerly Haemobartonella organisms) or
1000 erythrocytes and determining the percentage that are
small Heinz bodies.
22
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 2-18
FIGURE 2-19
Reticulocytes in cat blood. Three whole aggregate reticulocytes (contain-
Reticulocytes in the blood of a dog. Five reticulocytes (with blue-staining
ing blue-staining aggregates of RNA) and half of ann aggregate reticulo
material) in blood from a dog with a regenerative anemia in a rew
cyte (far rigbtjin blood from a cat with a markedly regenerative anemia.
methylene blue-stained wet preparation. Note the difference in morphol-
A majority of the remaining cells are punctate reticulocytes containing
ogy compared with reticulocytes stained with a standard reticulocyte
discrete dot-like inclusions. New methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
stain (see Figure 2-17). New methylene blue-stained wet preparation.
 In normal cats as wellas in cats with a regenerative anemia,
 the number of punctate reticulocytes is much greater than
New Methylene Blue "Wet Mounts"
 that seen in other species.2 This apparently occurs because
A new methylene blue “wet mount" preparation can be used
 the maturation (loss of ribosomes) of reticulocytes in cats is
for rapid information concerning the number of reticulocytes,
 slower than in other species. Consequently reticulocytes in
 platelets, and Heinz bodies present on a blood flm. The stain
cats are classifed as aggregate (ifcoarse clumping is observed)
consists of 0.5% new methylene blue dissolved in 0.85% NaCl.
 Or punctate (if small individual inclusions are present). Per-
 One mililiter of formalin is added per 100 mL of stain as a
centages of both types should be reported. Based on compos-
preservative. This stain is filtered after preparation and stored
ite results from several authors, normal cats generally have
in dropper bottles. Alternatively, the stain may be stored in a
from 0% to 0.5% aggregate and 1% to 10% punctate reticu-
plastic syringe with a 0.2-qμm syringe filter attached so that
locytes as determined by manual means. Higher punctate
the stain is fltered as it is used. Dry, unfixed blood films are
numbers of 2% to 17% have been reported using fow
stained by placing a drop of stain between the coverslip and
cytometry.46
a glass slide. This preparation is not permanent and does not
 The percentages of aggregate reticulocytes in cats directly
stain mature erythrocytes or eosinophil granules. Punctate
correlate with the percentages of polychromatophilic erythro-
reticulocytes are not demonstrated, but aggregate reticulocytes
cytes observed in blood flms stained with Wright-Giemsa.2
appear as erythrocyte ghosts containing blue to purple granu-
Jo ep e u sad aeiund o ameu saironuar aeaiaiy
lar material (Fig. 2-19). Platelets stain blue to purple, and
less. Several more days are required for maturation (total dis-
Heinz bodies appear as refractile inclusions within erythro-
cyte ghosts. Although this staining method is not optimal for
In contrast to those of the cat, most reticulocytes in
differential leukocyte counts, the number and type of leuko-
other species are of the aggregate type. Consequently
no
cytes present can be appreciated.
aftempts are made to differentiate the stages of reticulocytes
 in species other than the cat. In most species, the percentages
Iron Stains
of reticulocytes directly correlate with the percentages of poly-
An iron stain such as the Prussian blue stain is used to verify
chromatophilic erythrocytes observed on routinely stained
 the presence of iron-containing (siderotic) inclusions in blood
blood films.
and bone marrow cells and to evaluate bone marrow iron
 In examining a reticulocyte-stained blood film, one should
stores. Smears may be sent to a commercial laboratory for this
also be careful not to confuse precipitated RNA with Heinz
stain, or a stain kit can be purchased and applied in house
bodies. Heinz bodies are composed of denatured precipitated
(Harleco Ferric Iron Histochemical Reaction Set, #6498693,
hemoglobin. They are spherical, stain pale blue with reticulo-
EM Diagnostic Systems, Gibbstown, NJ). Iron-positive mate-
cyte stains, and are usually found at the periphery of the
rial stains blue, in contrast to the pink color of the cells and
erythrocyte.
the background when this stain is applied.
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
23
B
FIGURE 2-20
Neutrophils containing hemosiderin (sideroleukocytes) in blood from a
dog with a hemolytic anemia. A, Wright-Giemsa stain. Hemosiderin
inclusions stain gray or brownish. B, Prussian blue stain. Hemosiderin
inclusions stain dark blue.
FIGURE 2-21
The presence of focal areas of basophilic stippling within
Autoagglutination of erythrocytes in blood from a dog with immune-
ans suis poq ai-ysoe y pns so
mediated hemolytic anemia and marked leukocytosis. Wright-Giemsa
 gests that the stippling maycontain iron. ron-containing eryth-
stairl.
rocytes are referred to as siderocytes. Neutrophils and monocytes
may also contain dark bluish-black or greenish iron-positive
particles within their cytoplasm when they are stained with
Romanowsky-tpe stains. Leukocytes containing iron-positive
 inclusions have been called sideroleukocytes (Fig. 2-20).
Prussian blue stain applied to bone marrow aspirate smears
is a useful way to evaluate the amount of storage iron present
 in the marrow. Minimal or no iron is expected in iron defi-
ciency anemia (although cats normally have no stainable iron
in the marrow), whereas normal or excess iron may be observed
 in animals with hemolytic anemia and those with anemia
 resulting from decreased erythrocyte production.
Cytochemical Stains
A variety of cytochemical stains—such as peroxidase,
 chloroacetate esterase, alkaline phosphatase, and nonspecifc
esterase—are utilized to classify cells in animals with acute
and stage of maruration but also by species.$ These stains are
FIGURE 2-22
 done in a limited number of laboratories, and special training
and/or experience is required to interpret the results. The
 present when EDTA was used as the anticoagulant but not when citrate
appearance of positive reactions also varies depending on the
was used as the anticoagulant. Wright-Giemsa stain.
reagents used Because of the complexities ofthe staining pro-
cedures and interpretation of results, minimal information on
cytochemical stains is presented in this book As more antibod-
ies become available for immunophenotyping acute myeloid
 Blood flms are generally examined following staining with
leukemias, the need for cytochemical stains will decrease.6
Romanowsky-type stains such as Wright or Wright-Giemsa.
These stains allow for the examination of erythrocyte, leuko-
cyte, and platelet morphology. Blood films should first be
EXAMINATION OF STAINED
scanned using a low power objective to estimate the total
BLOOD FILMS
leukocyte count and to look for the presence of erythrocyte
autoagglutination (Fig. 2-21), leukocyte aggregates (Fig.
An overview and organized method of blood film examina-
2-22), platelet aggregates (Fig. 2-23), microflaria (Fig. 2-24),
tion are presented here. Descriptions and photographs of
and abnormal cells that might be missed during the differen-
 normal and abnormal blood cell morphologies,inclusions, and
tial leukocyte count. It is particularly important that the feath-
infectious agents are given in subsequent chapters.
ered end of blood films made on glass slides be examined
24
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 2-23
FIGURE 2-25
 Platelet aggregate in blood from a cow. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Leukocytes concentrated in the feathered edge of a blood film from a
dog. The blood film was prepared using glass slides. Wright-Giemsa
stairn.
FIGURE 2-24
FIGURE 2-26
Diroflaria immitis microflaria in blood from a cat with heartworm
 Platelet aggregate in the feathered edge of a blood film from a cat. The
disease. Wright-Giemsa stain.
blood film was prepared using glasslides. Wright-Giemsa stain.
because leukocytes (Fig. 2-25) and platelet aggregates (Fig.
Leukocyte Evaluation
 2-26) may be concentrated in this area. Conversely, aggregates
As a quality control measure, the number ofleukocytes present
of cells tend to be in the center of blood films rather than at
should be estimated to assure that the number present on the
the feathered edge when the coverslip blood-film method is
slide is consistent with the total leukocyte count measured. If
used.
10X oculars and a 10x objective are used (100x magnification),
 In examining a glass slide blood film, the blood flm will
the total leukocyte count in blood (cells per microliter) may
be too thick to evaluate blood cell morphology at the back of
 be estimated by determining the average number of leukocytes
the slide (Fig. 2-27, A) and too thin at the feathered edge,
 present per feld and multiplying by 100 to 150. If a 20x
where cells are fattened (Fig. 2-27C). The optimal area for
objective is used, the total leukocyte count may be estimated
 evaluation is generally in the front half of the smear behind
by multiplying the average number of leukocytes per field by
the feathered edge (Fig. 2-27, B). This area should appear as
400 to 600. The correction factor used may vary, depending
a well-stained monolayer (a field in which erythrocytes are
 on the microscope used. Consequently the appropriate cor-
 close together with approximately half of the cell touching
rection factors for the microscope being used should be deter-
each other).
mined by performing estimates on a number of blood flms
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
25
in which the total leukocyte counts have been accurately
 determined. Manual differential leukocyte counts are inher-
ently imprecise, so it is also important to scan the blood film 
 to gain an appreciation for the relative distribution of leuko-
 cyte types present prior to performing the differential leuko-
cyte count.34
Leukocytes tend to smudge in samples with high hemato-
crits, making it diffcult to perform a differential leukocyte
count (Fig. 2-28, A). When this occurs, one can dilute a
portion of the blood sample with equal parts of plasma
or serum and make another blood film for examination
(Fig. 2-28, B). Obviously estimated cell counts will be pro-
 portionally reduced in this dilute blood flm.
 A differential leukocyte count is done by identifying 200
consecutive leukocytes using a 40X or 50x objective. Because 
 monocytes and other large leukocytes are pushed to the sides
 and ends of wedge-prepared blood flms, differential counts 
are done by examining cells in a pattern that evaluates both
FIGURE 2-27
Selection of the appropriate area for microscopic examination of a slide
blood flm prepared from a dog.A, Thick area in the back end ofa blood
flm. B, Optimal area for morphologic evaluation in the front half ofthe
blood film. C, Thin area near the feathered edge of the blood film.
 apparent. Wright-Giermsa stain.
FIGURE 2-28
Blood flms from a dog with a high hematocrit and toxic left shift prior
to (A) and after (B) dilution of the blood sample with serum. Leukocytes
are smudged and dificult to classfy prior to blood sample dilution.
26
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
the edges and the center of the smear (Fig. 2-29).30 After the
those from normal horses and cats may contain a low percentage
 count is complete, the percentage of each leukocyte type
 of small, spherical nuclear remnants called Howell-Jolly bodies.
present is calculated and multiplied by the total leukocyte
Rouleaux and the presence of Howell-Jolly bodies should be
count to get the absolute number of each cell type present per
recorded on the hematology form when they appear in blood
microliter of blood.
flms from species in which these are not normal findings.
 It is the absolute number of each leukocyte type that is
Additional observations regarding erythrocyte morphol-
important. Relative values (percentages) can be misleading
ogy, such as the degree of polychromasia (presence of poly-
when the total leukocyte count is abnormal. Let us consider
chromatophilic erythrocytes), anisocytosis (variation in size),
two dogs, one with 7% lymphocytes and a total leukocyte
and poikilocytosis (abnormal shape) should also be made.
 count of 40,000/μL and the other with 70% lymphocytes and
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes are reticulocytes that stain
a total leukocyte count of 4000/uL. The frst would be said to
bluish-red because of the combined presence of hemoglobin
have a “relative" lymphopenia and the second would be said
(red-staining)
and
1
ribosomes (blue-staining). Abnormal
erythrocyte shapes should be classified as specifically as pos-
the same normal absolute lymphocyte count (2800/μL).
sible, because specific shape abnormalities can help to deter-
 Nucleated red blood cels (NRBCs) are counted along with
mine the nature of a disorder that may be present. Examples
 the leukocytes when leukocyte counts are done using manual
of abnormal erythrocyte morphology include echinocytes,
methods or automated impedance cell counters. As encoun-
acanthocytes, schistocytes, keratocytes, dacryocytes, ellipto-
tered during blood-film examination, the number of NRBCs
cytes, eccentrocytes, and spherocytes. The number of abnormal
per 100leukocytes should be tabulated and the total leukocyte
cells should be reported in a semiquantitative fashion, such as
count corrected for the number of NRBCs present (see
that shown in Table 2-1.68
formula below) prior to calculating the absolute cell counts
Platelets
for each blood cell type.
Platelet numbers should be estimated as low, normal, or
Corrected leukocyte count =
increased. Blood smears from most domestic animals nor-
(measured leukocyte countX100)/(100+ NRBC)
mally average between 10 and 30 platelets per field examined
under 10X oculars and the 100x objective (1000x magnifica-
If leukocyte counts are performed with automated cell
tion). As few as 6 platelets per 1000x field may be present in
counters using technology that can differentiate NRBCs from
normal horse blood films.6α Platelet numbers may be esti-
leukocytes (e.g., morphologic characteristics of cell are dter-
mated by multiplying the average number per field by 15,000
mined by using a laser beam), the above calculation will not
to 20,000 to get the approximate number of platelets per
be necessary. However, the number of NRBCs present should
microliter of blood 61.s While special attention will be given
still be recorded.
to the estimation of platelet numbers in animals with hemo-
The presence of abnormal leukocyte morphology—such as
static diatheses, it is important to routinely estimate the
toxic cytoplasm in neutrophils or increased reactive lympho-
platelet numbers on blood films, because many animals with
cytes (e.g., more than 5% reactive lymphocytes)—shouid be
thrombocytopenia exhibit no evidence or past history of
recorded on the hematology report form. The frequency of
toxic neutrophils is reported as few (5% to 10%), moderate
(11% to 30%), or many (more than 30%) and the severity of
toxic change is recorded as 1+ to 3+ (Box 2-1).68
BOX 2-1
Semiquantitative Evaluation of
Erythrocyte Morphology
Toxic Changes in the Cytoplasm
Erythrocyte morphology should be examined and recorded as
of Neutrophils
either normal or abnormal. Erythrocytes on blood films from
 Neutrophils with Toxic Change
 normal horses, cats, and pigs often exhibit rouleaux formation;
Few
5-10 (%)
Moderate
11-30 (%]
Many
>30 (%]
Severity of Toxic Change in Cytoplasm
Dohle bodiesa
1+
Mildly basophilic
1+
6334
Date
Moderately basophilic with Dohle bodies
2+
Moderately basophilic and foamy
2+
Dark blue-gray and foamy
3+
Basophilic with toxic granulesb
3+
FIGURE 2-29
aOne or two Dohle bodies are sometimes seen in a few neutrophils from cats
Patterns of slide blood film examination (marked in wbite) that may be
that do not exhibit signs of illness.
used to improve the accuracy of differential leukocyte counts.
*May also contain Dohle bodies.
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
27
TABLE 2-1
 Semiquantitative Evaluation of Erythrocyte Morphology Based on Average Number of Abnormal Cells per
1000x Microscopic Monolayer Fielda
1+
2+
+
4+
Anisocytosis
Dog
7-15
16-20
21-29
>30
Cat
5-8
9-15
16-20
>20
Cattle
10-20
21-30
31-40
>40
Horse
1-3
4-6
7-10
>10
Polychromasia
Dog
2-7
8-14
15-29
>30
Cat
1-2
3-8
9-15
>15
Cattle
2-5
6-10
11-20
>20
Horse
Rarely observed
 Hypochromasia and Shapes
Hypochromasiaa
1-10
11-50
51-200
>200
Poikilocytosisa
3-10
11-50
51-200
>200
Codocytes (dogs)
3-5
6-15
16-30
>30
Spherocytesb
5-10
11-50
51-150
>150
Echinocytesb
5-10
11-100
101-250
>250
 Other shapesc
1-2
3-8
9-20
>20
A monolayer field is defined as a field in which erythrocytes are close together with approximately half touching each other. In severely anemic animals, such
monolayers may not be present. When erythrocytes are generally not touching fe.g., tend to be separated by the distance of one cell diameter), the number of
 erythrocytes with morphologic abnormalities are counted for two fields.
bThe same parameters are used for all species.
' Parameters are used for acanthocytes, sc histocytes, keratocytes, elliptocytes, dacrocytes, drepanocytes, and stomatocytes in all species.
 bleeding tendencies. If a thrombocytopenia is suspected, it 
 blood storage.7 Nuclear swelling may be present in leukocytes,
should be confirmed with a platelet count. Dogs and cats have
a process that can result in an increased percentage of bands
larger platelets than do horses and ruminants. Platelets contain
 on microscopic examination.33 Neutrophil cytoplasmic vacu-
magenta-staining granules, but these granules generally stain
olation develops, which may be confused with toxic changes.21
poorly in horses. The presence of abnormal platelet morphol-
Leukocytes that undergo programmed cell death (apopto-
 ogy (large or hypogranular platelets) should also be recorded
sis) exhibit pyknosis and karyorrhexis (Fig. 2-30). Pyknosis
 on the hematology form.
involves shrinkage or condensation of a cell with increased
nuclear compactness or density. Karyorrhexis refers to the
Degenerative Changes in Blood Samples
subsequent nuclear fragmentation. It may not be possible to
Degenerative changes are apparent in blood samples within a
determine the cell of origin. These abnormalities can occur in
few hours after collction; consequently blood films should be
vivo but are more commonly associated with prolonged or
made and stained and blood cell counts performed as soon as
inadequate sample storage before blood films are made.30
possible after collection. Blood samples should be refrigerated
With excessive storage, all blood cell types willyse,resulting
if tests cannot be performed within a couple of hours. CBCs
in cytopenias.
are often performed on day-old blood that has been kept
 refrigerated and submitted to a commercial laboratory, but 
Infectious Agents or Inclusions of Blood Cells
 some changes will already be present. Various progressive
 Blood films are examined for the presence of infectious agents 
changes may be observed depending on the animal species
 or intracellular inclusions using the 100x objective. Infectious
 agents or inclusions that may be seen in blood cells include
 Erythrocytes can swell, which results in increased MCV and
Howell-Jolly bodies, Heinz bodies (unstained), basophilic
HCT and decreased MCHC within 12 hours. Platelets tend
stippling, canine distemper inclusions, siderotic inclusions,
to aggregate and degranulate, resulting in lower automated
Dohle bodies, Babesia species, Cytauxzoon felis, hemotrophic
platelet counts and higher MPV values.14s Electronically
Mycoplasma (formerly Haemobartonella) species, Ebrlichid
determined differential counts become less accurate with
 species, Anaplasma species, Hepatozoon species, and Theileria
28
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
B
FIGURE 2-31
Mitotic cells in blood. A, Mitotic cell in anaphase in blood from a cat
with erythroleukemia (AML-M6). B, Mitotic cell (presumably lym-
 phoid) in prophase in blood from a horse with equine infectious anemia.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
C
D
FIGURE 2-30
Pyknotic and karyorrhexic cells in blood. A, Pyknotic cell with con-
densed chromatin in blood from a dog with a toxie left shift. B, Pyknosis
and karyorrhexis of a cell in blood from a dog with diroflariasis.
C, Pyknosis and karyorrhexis of a cell in blood from a dog with
acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5). D, Pyknosis and karyorrhexis of
a cell in blood from a cow with leukemie lymphoma. Wright-Giemsa
stairn.
FIGURE 2-32
Free nuclei in blood. A, Free nucleus in blood from a dog with chronic
species. The appearance of these agents and inclusions is dis-
lymphocytic leukemia. B, Free nucleus with a distorted net-like structure
cussed in subsequent chapters.
(*basket cell") in blood from a cat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Miscellaneous Cells and Parasites in Blood
 Degenerative cells, mitotic cells, vascular lining cells, and
other cells not typically seen in blood may occasionally be
a basket cell is not truly a cell but only the distorted nucleus
recognized during blood film examination. Parasites and bac-
of a cel Lymphocytes are the most likely blood cell type to
teria that are not associated with blood cells may also be seen
lyse during blood-film preparation.
in blood. However, bacterial rods and cocci between cells are
usually the result of contaminated stain.
Endothelial Cells
 Spindle-shaped endothelial cells with elongated nuclei may
Mitotic Cells
sometimes be seen in blood films (Fig. 2-33). Endothelial cells
 Mitotic cells may be present in the blood of animals with
line vessels and may become dislodged as the needle enters
malignant neoplasia (Fig. 2-31, A),but they may also occur in
the vein during blood sample collection.
nonneoplastic disorders, such as lymphocytes undergoing
blast transformation (Fig. 2-31, B), nucleated erythroid pre-
Megakaryocytes
cursors in regenerative anemia, and activated mononuclear
 Megakaryocytes are multilobulated, platelet-producing giant
phagocytes.
cells that lie against the outside of vascular sinuses in bone
marrow (see Thrombopoiesis section in Chapter 3 for more
Free Nuclei
details). Cytoplasmic processes of mature megakaryocytes
When cells are lysed during blood-flm preparation, free
extend into the sinus lumen, where they develop into pro-
nuclei (nuclei without cytoplasm) may be seen (Fig. 2-32, A).
platelets and subsequently individual platelets. Sometimes
When a free nucleus is spread thin on the blood flm, it
whole megakaryocytes enter vascular sinuses, accounting for
 appears as a net-like pinkish structure, which has been referred 
 the rare recognition of these cells in blood films from animals
to as a “basket cell" (Fig. 2-32, B). This is a misnomer, because
(Fig. 2-34).51 Megakaryocytes are more easily found by
CHAPTER 2 = Hematology Procedures
29
FIGURE 2-34
Mature megakaryocyte in blood from dog with an absces and accom-
 panying toxic left shiff. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 2-33
Courtesy of HeatherWamsley.
Two spindle-shaped endothelial cells with elongated ruclei in blood
from a cow. These cells were likely dislodged from the vessel wall during
blood sample collection. Wright-Giemsa stain.
C
FIGURE 2-35
Dwarf megakaryocytes in blood from dogs with myeloid neoplasms. A, Dwarf megakaryocyte with single
rucleus in blood from a dog with chronic myeloidleukemia (CML).B, Dwarf megakaryocyte with two nuclei
in blood from a dog with CML. C, Dwarf megakaryocyte in blood from a dog with AML-M7. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
examination of blood buffy coat smears. Those reaching the
Microflaria
blood are quickly trapped in lung capillries, where continued
Microfilariae (nematode larvae) that might be observed
platelet production may occur.
include Diroflaria immitis (see Fig. 2-24) and Diroflaria
 Dwarf megakaryocytes are smaller than normal mature
repens in dogs, cats, and wild canids, Dipetalonema reconditum
 megakaryocytes and have decreased nuclear ploidy, but their
 in dogs, and Setaria species in cattle and horses.74
cytoplasm generally contains granules and appears similar to
that of blood platelets (Fig. 2-35). Dwarf megakaryocytes are
Trypanosoma Species
common in the bone marrow of animals with myeloid neo-
Various Trypanosoma species may be seen in blood. These
plasms but are only rarely seen in blood.
 elongated, fagellated protozoa cause important diseases of
30
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 2-36
FIGURE 2-38
Trypanosoma fheileri in blood from a 3-day-old female Angus calf.
Two Borrelia turicatae spirochetes inblood from a North Central Florida
Wright stain.
dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Photograpb of a stained blood flm from a 1989 ASVCP slide review case
submitted by H. Bender, A. Zajak, G. Moore,and G. Saunders.
bacteria within neutrophils indicates that the bacteria are
 likely of clinical significance. Spirochetes have been seen in
blood from dogs with Borrelia infections.$ Borrelia burgdorfer?
 does not usually result in microscopically detectable spiro-
chetemia.$6 However, relapsing fever spirochetes, Borrelia
turicatae and Borrelia bermsii, have been readily identified
 in stained blood flms from dogs in the United States (Fig.
2-38) 5,57,58,70
REFERENCES
A
Aq pauieas swjy poolq ui sllan paneinueib jo anueieaddy 3y uanbian 'y uos!lit 'l
FIGURE 2-37
automated aqueous versus methanolic Romanowsky methods. Vet Clin Pathol.
2010;39:99-104.
A, B, Trypanosoma cruzi organisms in blood from a dog. Wright stain.
2. Alsaker RD, LaberJ, Stevens JB, etal. A comparison of polychromasia and reticulocyte
sspaa/ wr ien ap ul auodsal aeiauabal aoua buissasse u sunon
Photograpbs ofa stained bloodflm from a 2006ASVCP slide review case
1977;170:39-41.
submitted by PK.Patten andJ.M.Meinkoth.
3. Barr SC. American trypanosomiasis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog
 and Cat 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:676-681.
4. BlaisdellFS, Dodds WJ. Evaluation of two microhematocrit methods for quantitating
plasma fibrinogen. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1977;171:340-342
livestock outside the United States,74 but the species seen in
g  sa i ie a d a i   aiaa 9
cattle (Z. theileri) in the United States is usually nonpatho-
spirochetes in two dogs in Florida. J/ Clin Microbiol. 1994;32:352-357.
6. Burkhard MJ, Baxter G, Thrall MA. Blood precipitate associated with intra-abdominal
 genic (Fig. 2-36),16,39 Many dogs are infected with T cruzi in
Carboxymethylcelulose administration. Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:114-117.
pue pooq ui usss kiaren are susjueio inq 'saies paiun su
7. Clark P, Mogg TD, Tvedten HV, et al. Artifatual changes in equine blood following
 most cases are subclinical (Fig. 2-37). When present, clinical
storage. detected using the Advia 120 hematology analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol.
2002;31:90-94.
forms of disease have principally involved heart or neural
8. Corn SC, Wellman ML, Burkhard MJ, et al. IgM paraprotein interference with hemo-
dysfunction.
1972;160:61-67.
Bacteria
10. Deol I, Hernandez AM, Pierre RV. Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid-associated leuko
Various bacterial species may be present in blood flms. It is
agglutination. Am J Clin Pathol. 1995;103:338-340.
 important fo verify that these are not contaminants, especially
11. Dintenfass L, Kammer S. Re-evaluation of heat precipitation method for plasma fibrino-
gen estimation: effect of abnormal proteins and plasma viscosity. J Clin Pathol.
 during the staining procedure. The presence of phagocytized
1976;29:130-134.
CHAP TER 2 = Hematology Procedures
31
12. Eckersall PD. Proteins, proteomics, and the dysproteinemias. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JV.
 43. Orlov SN. Aksentsev SL. Kotelevtsev SV. Extracellular calcium is required for the
Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemisty of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego: Academic
maintenance of plasma membrane integrity in nucleated cells. Cell Calcium.
Press; 2008:117-155
2005; 38:53-57.
13. Engelking LR. Evaluation of equine bilirubin and bile acid metabolism. Comp Cont Ed
44. PankrazA, Bauer N, Moritz A. Comparison of flow cytometry with the Sysmex XT200iv
Pract Vet 1989;11:328-336.
automated analyzer for the detection of reticulated platelets in dogs. Vet Clin Pathor.
14. Espanol I, Pedro C, Remacha AF. Heinz bodies interfere with automated reticulocyte
2009;38:30-38.
counts. Haematologica. 1999;84:373-374.
45. Pastor J, Cuenca R, Velarde R, et al. Evaluation of a hematology analyser with canine
15. Fan LC, Dorner JL, Hoffman WVE. Reticulocyte response and maturation in experimental
and feline blood. Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:138-147.
acute blood loss anemia in the cat. J Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1978;14:219-224.
16. Farrar RG, Klei TR. Prevalence of Trypanosoma theiler in Louisiana cattle. J Parasitol.
aggregate reticulocyte responses in phlebotomized cats. Am J Vet Res. 1995;56:
1990:76:734-736
1564-1569.
17. Fry MM, Kirk CA. Reticulocyte indices in a canine model of nutritional iron deficiency.
47. Pierson FVV. Laboratory techniques for avian hematology.In: Feldman BF, Znkl JG, Jain
Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:172-181
NC, eds. Scham's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
18. Furlanello T, Tasca S, Caldin M, et al. Artifactual changes in canine blood following
Wilkins; 2000: 1145-1147.
storage, detected using the ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol.
 48. Porter RE, Weiser MG. Efect of immune-mediated erythrocyte agglutination on analy-
2006; 35:42-46.
sis of canine blood using a multichannel blood cell counting system. Vet Clin Pathol.
19. George JV. The usefulness and limitations of hand-held refratometers in veterinary
1990;19:45-50.
laboratory medicine: an historical and technical review. Vet Clin Pathol. 2001;
49. Ragan HA. Platelet agglutination induced by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid in blood
30: 201-210.
samples from a miniature pig. Am / Vet Res. 1972;33:2601-2603.
 20. Ginzinger DG, Clee SM, Dallongeville J, et al. Lipid and lipoprotein analysis of cats
50. Raskin RE.Cytochemical staining.In: Weiss Du, Wardrop KJ, eds. Scham's Veterinary
9-2l6z66l isa v r3 Auaap ased uaododl 4r
 21. Gossett KA, Carakostas MC. Effet of EDTA on morphology of neutrophils of healthy
 51. Roszel J, Prier JE, Koprowska l. The occurrence of megakaryocytes in the peripheral
dogs and dogs with inflammation. Vet Clin Pathol. 1984;13:22-25.
blood of dogs. J/ Arm Vet /Med Assoc. 1965;147:133-137.
 22. Grindem CB. Blood cell markers. Veterinary Clinics of North America, Small Animal
 52. Sato S, Hirayama K, Koyama A, et al. Pseudoreticulocytosis in a patient with hemo-
Practice. 1996;26:1043-1064.
 globin Koln due to autofluorescent erythrocytes enumerated as reticulocytes by the
 23. Gunn-Moore DA, Watson TD, Dodkin SJ, et al. Transient hyperlipidaemia and anaemia
Cell-Dyn 4000. Lab Hematol. 2004;10:65-67.
in kittens. Vet Rec. 1997;140:355-359.
53. Savage RA. Pseudoleukocytosis due to EDTA-induced platelet clumping. Am J Clin
24. Harenberg , Malsch R, Piazolo L, et al. Preferential binding of heparin to granulocytes
Pathol. 1984;81:317-322.
of various species. Am / Vet Res. 1996;57:1016-1020.
 54. Schaefer DM, Priest H, Stokol T, et al. Anticoagulant-dependent in vitro hemagglutina-
 25. Harr KE, Raskin RE, Heard DJ. Temporal efects of 3 commonly used anticoagulants
tion in a cat. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009.
 on hematologic and biochemical variables in blood samples from macaws and Burmese
 55. Schalm OVw. Uncommon hematologic disorders: spirochetosis, trypanosomiasis, leish-
pythons. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:383-38B.
maniasis, and Pelger-Huet anomaly. Can Pract. 1979;6:46-49.
26. Havey JW. Hematology tip—stains for distemper inclusions. Vet Clin Pathol.
56. Schwan TG, Burgdorfer W, Rosa PA. Borrelia.In: Murray PR, Baron EJ, Pfaller MA, et
1982;11:12.
al, eds. Manual of Clinical Microbiology 7th ed. Washington, DC: ASM Press;
 27. Harvey JV. Pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis, and clinical implications of
1999: 746-758.
erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies in dogs, cats, and horses. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:
 57. Schwan TG, Raffel SJ, Schrumpf ME, et al. Phylogenetic analysis of the spirochetes
144-156.
 Borrelia parkeri and Borrelia turicatae and the potential for tick-borne relapsing fever
 28. Harvey JW. The erythrocyte: physiology. metabolism and biochemical disorders.
in Florida. J/ Chin Microbiol. 2005;43:3851-3859.
In: Kaneko J, Havey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals.
58. Stevenson C, Schwan T. Boelia hemsi spirochetemia in a dog fabstract). Proc XiVth
Bth ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2008:173-240.
Cong Int Soc Anim Clin Pathol. 2010;18.
 29. Hinchcliff KW, Kociba GJ, Mitten LA. Diagnosis of EDTA-dependent pseudothrombo-
 59. Stokol T, Erb HN. A comparison of platelet parameters in EDTA- and citrate-
cytopenia in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:1715-1716.
anticoagulated blood in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:148-154.
 30. Houwen B. Blood film preparation and staining procedures. Lab Hematol. 2000;
 60. Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytometric
6:1-7.
immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases (2002-
 31. Ihedioha JI, Onwubuche RC. Artifactual changes in PCV, hemoglobin concentration,
2006). Vet Chin Pathol. 2009;38:2-12.
and cel counts in bovine, caprine, and porcine blood stored at room and refigerator
61.
Tasker S, Cripps PJ, Macklin AJ. Estimation of platelet counts on feline blood smears.
temperatures. Vet Chin Pathol 2007;36:60-63.
Vet Chin Pathol. 1999;28:42-45.
    a       
'spa h ssg r Aaeh 'rr oyauey u uonung anedah s jauan 'a nueuua1 79
1986.
33. Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger 1993.
2008: 379-412.
 34. Kjelgaard-Hansen M, Jensen AL. Is the inherent imprecision of manual leukocyte
 63. Tvedten H. Advanced hematology analyzers. Interpretation of results. Vet Clin Pathol.
differential counts acceptable for quantitative purposes? Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:
1993; 22:72-80.
268-270.
 64. Waitt LH, Cebra CK. Characterization of hypertriglyceridemia and response to treat-
 35. Knoll JS. Clinical automated hematology systems. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC.
ment with insulin in llamas and alpacas: 31 cases (1995-2005). / Am Vet Med Assoc.
eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott VVilliams &
2008;232:1362-1367
Wilkins; 2000:3-11
 65. Waitt LH, Cebra CK. Characterization of hypertriglyceridemia and response to treat-
Jot wass Aojowau Aoz-ix xawss aun yo uoepe H uapai 1 ooua ge
ment withinsulin in horses, ponies, and donkeys: 44 cases ↑1995-2005) JAm Vet Med
dogs, cats, and horses. l. Erythrocytes, platelets, and total leukocyte counts. Vet Clin
Assoc. 2009;234:915-919.
Pathol 2009;38:163-174.
 66. Walencik J, Witeska M. The effects of anticoagulants on hematological indices and
 37. Lumsden JH. Quality control. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schal's
blood cell morphology of common carp fCyprinus carpio L). Comp Biochem Physiol C
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:
Toxicol Pharmacol. 2007;146:331-335.
16-19.
67. Wardrop KJ. The Coombs' test in veterinary medicine: past, present, future. Vet Clin
38. March H, Barger A, McCullough S, et al. Use of the ADVIA 120 for differentiating
Pathol. 2005;34:325-334.
 extracellular and intracellular hemoglobin. Vet Clin Pathor. 2005;34:106-109.
 68. Weiss DJ. Uniform evaluation and semiquantitative reporting of hematologic data in
 39. Matthews DM, Kingston N, Maki L, et al. Trypanosoma theileri Laveran, 1902, in
veterinary laboratories. Vet Clin Pathol 1984;13:27-31.
Wyoming cattle. Arm J Vet Res. 1979;40:623-629.
 69. Werner LL, Christopher MM, Snipes J. Spurious leukocytosis and abnormal WBC
7 han veg aen yais ui eiaungngian or piieg 'hr uapswnn 'ra Aaysn 0t
histograms associated with Heinz bodies fabstract). Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:
1984;48:237-240
20.
41. Moraglio D, Banfi G, Arneli A. Association of pseudothrombocytopenia and pseudo-
70. Whitney MS, Schwan TG, Sultemeier KB, et al. Spirochetemia caused by Borrlia
leukopenia: evidence for different pathogenic mechanisms. Scand / Clin Lab nvest.
turicatae infection in 3 dogs in Texas. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:212-216.
1994;54:257-265.
71. Wills TB, Wardrop KJ. Pseudothrombocytopenia secondary to the effects of EDTA in
42. Muro J, Cuenca R, Pastor J, et al. Effects of lithium heparin and tripotassium EDTA on
a dog. / Armm Animm Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:95-97.
hematologic values of Hermann's tortoises /Testudo hermannil. J Zoo Widl Med.
72. Xenoulis PG. Steiner JM. Lipid metabolism and hyperlipidemia in dogs. Vet J.
1998; 29:40-44.
2009.
32
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
73. Xenoulis PG, Suchodolski JS, Levinski MD, et al. Serum liver enzyme activities in
 76. Zandecki M. Genevieve F. Gerard J, et al. Spurious counts and spurious results
healthy Miniature Schnauzers with and without hypetriglyceridemia. J Am Vet Med
 on haematology analysers: a review. Part ll white blood cells, red blood cells,
Ass0c. 2008;232:63-67.
haemoglobin, red cell indices and reticulocytes. int J Lab Hematol. 2007;29:
74. Zajac A, Conboy GA, Sloss MV. Veterinary Clinical Parasitology. 7th ed. Hoboken, NJ:
21 -41.
Wiley-Blackwell; 2006.
77. Zelmanovic D, Hetherington EJ. Automated analysis of feline platelets in whole blood,
 75. Zandecki M, Genevieve F, Gerard J, et al. Spurious counts and spurious results on
including platelet count, mean platelet volume, and activation state. Vet Clin Pathol.
haematology analysers: a review. Part I: platelets. Int J Lab Hematol. 2007;29:4-20.
1998;27:2-9.
CHAPTER
HEMATOPOIESIS
OVERVIEW
Organization of Bone Marrow
Sites of Blood Cell Production
Bone marrow develops in mammals during the second trimes-
In mammals, primitive hematopoiesis begins outside the
ter.21 Rudimentary fetal bone is initially flled with cartilage.
body of the embryo in the yolk sac and shortly thereafter
 Chondrocytes hypertrophy and promote mineralization of the
within the aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region of the
 cartilage matrix in the center of the rudimentary bone. This is
followed by the entry of progenitor cells, which develop into
(HSCs) have been identified attached to the endothelium of
 chondroclasts that partially degrade the mineralized cartilage
the yolk sac and the dorsal aorta. These HSCs and the associ-
 and form bone marrow spaces colonized by incoming blood
 ated endothelial cells are produced by common embryonic
vessels.23,131
 Osteoblast progenitors enter the space created,
stem cells known as hemangioblasts 34,74.15o In addition to
 adhere to remaining cartilage, develop into mature osteoblasts,
HSCs, committed erythroid and megakaryocytic progenitor
 and begin the formation of bony trabeculae. Vascular sinuses
cells, primitive erythrocytes (large nucleated cells containing
 and extravascular mesenchymal cells subsequently form a con-
 embryonal hemoglobin), large primitive reticulated platelets,
nective tissue meshwork within which HSCs originating from
and rare primitive macrophages are also produced in the yolk
 the liver (and probably the spleen) bind, proliferate, and dif-
sacs of rodents and humans.28136 Notably, these primitive
ferentiate, ultimately producing cireulating blood cells.131
s rd  aap dap oi redde sro
 When these structures are fully developed, blood is supplied
 to the bone marrow by nutrient arteries and periosteal capil-
 Definitive erythropoiesis, prominent megakaryocytopoiesis,
laries (Fig. 3-2).7
and limited leukocyte production also occur in the yolk sacs
The stroma of the marrow is a connective tissue consisting
 of cats, with hematopoiesis persisting longer during gestation
of stromal cells (fbroblast-like cells, also called reticular cells),
than it does in rodents and humans.134 The AGM region 
 adipocytes, vascular elements (endothelial cells and myocytes),
transiently supports the development of HSCs and some
 neural elements, and extracellular matrix (ECM), with the
committed hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs), but rec-
 arrangement creating both intravascular and extravascular
ognizable blood cells are not produced in the AGM.93
 Sites of blood cell production shift during embryonic and
 are continuously produced within the extravascular spaces of
fetal development as optimal microenvironments are produced
 bone marrow. Leukocytes are also produced within the extra-
in various tissues (Fig. 3-1).102 The liver and, to a lesser extent,
 vascular spaces of bone marrow in birds, but erythrocytes and
 the spleen become the major hematopoietic organs by midges-
thrombocytes are produced within the vascular spaces of the
avian marrow.20
 AGMis more important than the yolk sack in providing HSCs
This specialized arrangement of the marrow vasculature is
to seed the liver and spleen, but the relative importance of each
important in the organization of intramedullary hematopoi-
area in embryonic and fetal hematopoiesis remains to be clari-
etic microenvironments, as marrow endothelial cells are
fied.102 Blood cell production begins in bone marrow and lym-
actively involved in the regulation of transendothelial (not
phoid organs during midgestation in mammals, with nearly all
interendothelial) movement of hematopoietic cells and blood
blood cells being produced in these organs at the time of
cells between the extravascular hematopoietic space and
birth.134 Blood cells are produced in the bone marrow of
 peripheral blood. 214 Together, endothelial cells and stromal
adult birds?; the bone marrow and sometimes the spleen
 cells produce the ECM, which consists of collagen fbers,
of adult reptiles3; the kidney, liver, spleen, and/or bone marrow
various macromolecules capable of binding cells, and basal
of amphibians542; and the kidney and/or spleen of fish.424$
33
34
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
100%
80%
—Yolk sac
60%
Bone
Liver
marrow
40%
ni
20%
Spleen
0%
10
15202530354045505560
Gestation days
FIGURE 3-1
Sites of definitive hematopoiesis during prenatal development in cats.
Cl
Percentages represent relative contributions of sites to definitive blood
cell produetion. Lymphoid populations also develop in lymph nodes and
BHENK
cla
thymus beginning in midgestation (not shown).
FIGURE 3-2
Redrawnfrom Tiedemann K, van Ooyen B.Prenatal bematopoiesis and blood
characteristics of tbe cat. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1978;153:243-267.
Anatomy and circulation of the bone marrow. Periosteum (p), cortical
bone (cb), nutrient foramen (nf), nutrient artery (na), nutrient vein (nv),
central longitudinal artery (cla), central longitudinal vein (clv),periosteal
capillaries (pc), arteriole (a), sinuses (s), hematopoietic compartment (h),
extensively branched cytoplasmic processes and, along with
anastomosis of the rutrient capillaries and sinuses (1), anastomosis of
the fbers that they produce, provide structural support for the
marrow (Fig. 3-5). 147 These stromal cells have generally been
of the periosteal capillaries and sinuses (3).
considered to be fibroblast-like, but they also display smooth
muscle characteristics in culrure and have been classifed as
FromAakerRD.efomation,mergenceandmaturatioofteretc
myofibroblasts by some investigators.122 The particular stromal
cyfe: a review. Vet Clin Pathol. 1977;6(3):7-12.
cells that support the endothelium of the venous sinuses are
termed adventitial stromal cells (Fig. 3-6).147 Granulopoiesis
also occurs primarily on the surface of stromal cells.1s Adi-
Hematopoietic Stem Cells and Progenitor Cells
 pocytes develop from mesenchymal stem cells and may share
Beginning in midgestation and continuing throughout post-
common hematopoietic functions with stromal cells.47 Auto-
natal life, mammalian blood cells are produced continuously
nomic nerves occur in bone marrow. Their function is not
from HSCs within the extravascular spaces of the bone
 clear, but direct and indirect effects of the sympathetic nervous
marrow. HSCs are capable of proliferation; they exhibit long-
system on hematopoietic stem cell and hematopoietic pro-
term self-renewal and differentiation. HSCs replicate only
 genitor cell proliferation and motility have been described.61
once every 8 to 10 weeks.2 The term bematopoietic progenitor
 In addition to hematopoietic cells and developing blood
cell (HPC) refers to cells that form colonies in bone marrow
cells, a number of accessory cells involved in regulating hema-
culture like HSCs but do not have long-term self-renewal
 topoiesis reside within the extravascular space of mammalian
capacities. HSCs and HPCs are mononuclear cells that cannot
bone marrow. These accessory cells include macrophages,
be distinguished morphologically from lymphocytes. The
mature lymphocytes, and natural killr (NK) cells.i2,31,33.$5
presence of a transmembrane glycoprotein termed cluster of
Erythrocyte development occurs in close association with
differentiation antigen 34 (CD34) has been used to identify
marrow macrophages.26
HSCs and early HPCs, but some HSCs (possibly inactive
In contrast fo other organs such as skin and intestine,
ones) lack CD34.3 In addition, CD34 is also present on the
where continuous new cell production occurs throughout life,
surface of nonhematopoietic stem cells and vascular endo-
thelial cels.72.149 CD34 is believed to play a role in cell
arranged in stratified layers of progressively more differenti-
adhesion.43
 ated cells. Although some segregation of cell types may be
 The most primitive HSC has the capacity to differentiate
visualized by microscopic examination of stained bone marrow
into HPCs of all blood cell lineages and several cell types in
sections, the overall impression is that bone marrow contains
tissue. The frequency of HSCs in the marrow is estimated to
an unstructured mixture of cells of different lineages and
be less than 0.01% of nucleated marrow cells in adult mice
 stages of maturation. Nonetheless, hematopoietic cells develop
and less than 0.0001% of nucleated marrow cells in adult cats.2
in specialized microenvironmental niches within the bone
HSCs produce HPCs that can give rise to one or more blood
marrow.
cel types. Thus, HPCs are much more numerous in marrow
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
35
ARTER
BTMENTS
INUS
ARTERY
CENTRAL
LONGITUDINAL
VEIN
FIGURE 3-3
Schematic view of a cross section of bone marrow near the central longitudinal vein. Hematopoietic cells lie
in the hematopoietic compartment between the vascular sinuses that drain into the central vein. The sinus
wall consists of endothelial cells (end), a basement membrane, and, in some areas, adventitial stromal cells
[adu). Megakaryocytes (meg) lie against the outside of the vascular sinus wall and discharge proplatelets
directly into the vascular lumen through apertures in the sinus wall. Erythroid cells are shown developing in
an erythroid islet (eryth islet around a central rmacrophage. Emperipolesis (emp),the entry of megakaryocyte
cytoplasm by other cells, is occasionally observed.
From Weiss L. The Blood Cells and Hematopoietic Tissues. New York: Elsevier; 1984.
than are HSCs. Less than 2% of nucleated bone marrow cells
 The CMP (also called a colony-forming unit-granulocyte-
3y s +ta %81 o1 dn 1nq '+ta ae saop inpe u!
erythrocyte-monocyte-megakaryocyte
[CFU-GEMM])
gives  rise  to  the  megakaryocyte-erythrocyte  progenitor
The HSC produces a common lymphoid progenitor (CLP)
(MkEP) and the granulocyte-monocyte progenitor (GMP).
and a common myeloid progenitor (CMP), as shown in
 The MkEP produces megakaryocyte progenitors (MkP) and
 Figure 3-7. The CLP is believed to give rise to B lymphocytes,
erythrocyte progenitors (EP). The GMP produces the granu-
T lymphocytes, and NK cells.16 The CMP is believed to give
locyte progenitor (GP), the monocyte-dendritic cell progeni-
rise to all nonlymphoid blood cells (see Fig. 3-7) as well as
tor (MDP), the basophil-mast cell progenitor (BMaP), and
macrophages, dendritic cells, osteoclasts, and mast cell 6,.9
(     () rd a 
HPCs proliferate with higher frequency than do HSCs, but
However, in humans, the EoP may develop from the CMP,
 the self-renewal capabilities of HPCs decrease as progressive
rather than the GMPs9
differentiation and cellineage restrictions occur. When mea-
sured in an in vitro cell culture assay, HPCs are referred to as
Mesenchymal Stem Cells
colony-forming units (CFUs). HPCs that rapidly proliferate,
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are estimated to occur in
retain their ability to migrate, and form multiple subcolonies
bone marrow at a frequency of 0.001% to 0.0002% of nucle-
around a larger central colony in culrure are calld burst-
 ated marrow cell.4 Evidence suggests that the MSC lineage
forming units (BFUs).
 differentiation pathways are less strictly delineated (exhibit
36
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 3-6
Structure of the bone marrow sinus wall. Sinus lumen (s), endothelial
cell (e), basement membrane (bm), hematopoietic compartment (h),
FIGURE 3-4
adventitial stromal cel with processes (ac).
A scanning electron micrograph of the cut surface of bone marrow
FromAlsakerRD.Theformation,emergence,andmaturationof the reticulo
showing a system of vascular siruses originating at the periphery of the
cyte: a review. Vet Clin Pathol. 1977;6(3): 7-12.
 s m su sde s s n a 
venous sinuses. Hematopoietic tissue lies between the vascular sinuses.
From Weiss L.The bematopoietic microenvironment of the bome marrow: an
ultrastructural study of tbe stroma of rats.Arat Rec.1976;186:161-184.
NKP
T/NKE
NK cell
TLE
Pro-T lymphocyte
BLF
Blymphocyte
MkP
1S
Platelets
rythrocytes
daF
BMaP
Basophil
Eosinophil
Neutrophil
nocyte
FIGURE 3-7
FIGURE 3-5
Simplifed working model of hematopoiesis. HSC, hematopoietic stem
A scanning electron micrograph from the extravascular space in rat bone
cell; CLP,common lymphoid progenitor, CMP, common myeloid pro-
genitor, T/NKP, T lymphocyte-natural lilr cell progenitor; MikEP,
marrow. Spherical hematopoietic cells are shown developing in close
association with marrow stromal cells and their cytoplasmic processes.
megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor; GMP, granulocyte-monocyte pro-
Courtesy of Abmed Deldar
erythroid progenitor,Ma,basophilmast celrogenitor, EoP,osin-
phil progenitor, GP, granulocyte progenitor, MDP, monocyte-dendritic
cell progenitor;, NK, natural kller, MaP, mast cell progenitor; CDP,
common dendritic progenitor.
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
37
 greater plasticity) than the HSC pathways.115 MSCs have the
injection of growth factors is one approach used to collect
ability to differentiate into multiple lineages, including marrow
increased numbers of stem cells from blood for human bone
stromal cells, adipocytes, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, fbroblasts,
 marrow transplantation.46
and myoblasts." Progenitor cells for a variety of peripheral
tissue celltypes are also present in bone marrow. Some studies 
Hematopoietic Microenvironment
 suggest that MSCs may also produce epithelial cells, hepato-
 Blood cell production occurs throughout life in the bone
cytes, and neuronal cell8115 Endothelial progenitor cells are
marrow of adult animals because of the unique microenviron-
present in bone marrow and blood; however, their origin
 ment present there. The hematopoietic microenvironment is
remains to be clarifed. Evidence has been presented suggest-
 a complex meshwork composed of stromal cells, endothelial
ing an association with both MSCs and HSCs 24.18
cells, adipocytes, macrophages, subsets of lymphocytes, NK
cells, osteoblasts, ECM components, and glycoprotein growth
 Homing of Hematopoietic Stem Cells and Progenitor
factors that profoundly affect HSC and HPC engraftment,
Cells to the Marrow
 survival, proliferation, and differentiation.1
 Homing is the process by which circulating HSCs and HPCs
 Stromal cells and endothelial cells produce components of
 bind to the luminal surface of bone marrow endothelial cells,
the ECM, including collagen fibers, basement membranes of
 migrate through the endothelial cells, bind selectively to sites 
 vessels and vascular sinuses, proteoglycans, and glycoproteins.
in the extravascular space, and begin the process of prolifera-
 In addition to providing structural support, the ECM is
tion and differentiation. Homing of HSCs/HPCs is mediated 
important in the binding of hematopoietic cells and soluble
by chemoattractants produced by endothelial cells and other
growth factors to stromal cells and other cells in the micro-
cells in the microenvironment and by adhesion molecules
environment so that optimal proliferation and differentiation
expressed on the surfaces of HSCs/HPCs that bind to pro-
can occurbyvirtue of these cell-cellinteractions (Fig. 3-8)110
teoglycans and glycoproteins on the surfaces of various marrow
Collagen fibers produced by stromal cels may not have
cells and the extracellular matrix.27
 direct stimulatory effects on hematopoiesis but rather are
The chemokine (chemoattractant cytokine) CXCL12, also
permissive, promoting hematopoiesis by forming a scaffolding
called stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1), is especially
around which the other elements of the microenvironment are
important in the homing of HSCs/HPCs, but other chemoat-
 organized. Hematopoietic cells can adhere to collagen types I
tractants are also involved in this process. SDF-1 is produced
and VI.22
by both marrow endothelial cells and stromal cels, and migra-
 Adhesion molecules (most importantly β-integrins) on
tion of HSCs/HPCs from blood to bone marrow occurs
 the surface of hematopoietic cells bind to ECM glycoproteins
toward an SDF-1 gradient by virtue of an SDF-1 receptor 
such as VCAM-1, hemonectin, fbronectin, laminin, vitronec-
 CXCR4 expressed on these migrating cels. SDF-1 promotes
fin, and thrombospondin. The spectrum of the expression of
the expression of CXCR4 and other adhesion molecules on
adhesion molecules on hematopoietic cells that differentially
the surface of HSCs/HPCs and induces transendothelial
 bind to ECM glycoproteins varies with the type, maturity,and
migration.27
activation state of the hematopoietic cells. In addition to
HSCs/HPCs must be activated by locally produced factors
anchoring cells to a given microenvironmental niche, the
(including SDF-1) for optimal transendothelial migration to
binding of adhesion molecules on hematopoietic cells also
occur. P- and E-selectin molecules (membrane-spanning,
sugar-binding glycoproteins), expressed on bone marrow
endothelial cells, bind to glycosylated ligands on HSCs/HPCs
Progenitor cell
Y
Growth factor
HSCs/HPCs and endothelial cells in blood. Tight adhesion
receptor
β,-lntegrin
and migration through endothelial cells is dependent on 
integrin molecules—particularly the c4β,-integrin (very late
antigen-4, VLA-4) on the surfaces of migrating cells-
Proteoglycans
binding to their counterreceptors, especially vascular cell
Growthfactor
adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), on endothelial cells.27
VCAM-1
The first successfil bone marrow transplants were done
ol
experimentally in dogs in the late 1950s. Because of the
homing properties of HSCs, bone marrow transplants are
 performed by injecting bone marrow cells into the blood. In
Stromal cell
addition, HSCs/HPCs nafurally circulate in blood. The physi-
ologic mechanisms involved in the release of these hemato-
poietic cells from the bone marrow are not well defined, but
FIGURE 3-8
HSC and HPC numbers can be increased markedly in blood
Interactions between a progenitor cell and a stromal cellin the exravas-
following injection of growth factors such as granulocyte
cular microenvironment of the bone marrow. VCAM-1, vascular cell
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF).113 In fact, intravenous
adhesion molecule-1.
38
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
plays a role in cell regulation directly by activating signal
cells, and T lymphocytes to produce HGFs. Different combi-
pathways for cell growth, survival, and differentiation or indi-
nations of HGFs regulate the growth of different types of
rectly by modulating the responses to hematopoietic growth
HSCs and/or HPCs.66
factors.22
Early-acting HGFs are involved with triggering dormant
 A proteoglycan consists of a protein core with repeating
(Go) primitive HSCs to begin cycling. Stem cell factor (SCF),
carbohydrate glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) attached. Major
fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (Flt3L), and TPO are
proteoglycans in the marrow include heparan sulfate, chon-
important early factors that act in combination with one or
droitin sulfate, hyaluronic acid, and dermafan sulfate. Proteo-
more other cytokines such as IL-3, IL-6, IL-11, and G-CSF.
glycans enhance hematopoiesis by trapping soluble growth
 Intermediate-acting HGFs have broad specificity. IL-3
factors in the vicinity of hematopoietic cells and by strength-
(multi-CSF), granulocyte-macrophage-CSF (GM-CSF), and
ening the binding of hematopoietic cells to the stroma.
IL-4 support proliferation of multipotent HPCs. These factors
 Hematopoietic cells develop in specifc niches within the
also interact with late-acting factors to stimulate the prolifera-
 marrow. During steady-state conditions, quiescent HSCs are 
 tion of a wide variety of committed progenitor cells. Late-
concentrated near endosteal and trabecular bone, where osteo-
acting HGFs have restricted specificity. Macrophage-CSF
blasts help to regulate their numbers.152 HSCs and HPCs are
(M-CSF), G-CSF, EPO, TPO, and IL-5 are more restrictive
 also located near vascular sinuses, where they appear more
in their actions. They have their most potent effects on com-
active. HSCs and HPCs in this vascular niche likely have
mitted progenitor cells and on later stages of development
 homeostatic roles during steady-state conditions.4 Erythroid
when cell lines can be recognized morphologically.?7 TPO
cells develop around macrophages and megakaryocytes form
appears to be an exception. In addition to stimulating platelet
adjacent to sinusoidal endothelial cells; granulocyte develop-
production, it is important in maintaining a population of
ment is associated with stromal cells located away from the
HSCs in their osteoblastic niche.*
vascular sinuses.1.63.6
Hematopoietic Growth Factors
ERYTHROPOIESIS
 Proliferation of HSCs and HPCs cannot occur spontaneously
Primitive Erythropoiesis
but requires the presence of specifc hematopoietic growth
 Primitive erythropoiesis begins and predominates in the yolk
factors (HGFs); these may be produced locally in the bone
sac but also occurs later in the liver. Primitive erythrocytes are
marrow (paracrine or autocrine) or more remotely by periph-
large (more than 400 fL in humans), generally nucleated cells
eral tissues and transported to the marrow through the blood
with high nuclear:cytoplasmic ratios. Their nuclei have open
 (endocrine). All cells in the hematopoietic microenvironment,
(noncondensed) chromatin and their cytoplasm contains pre-
including the hematopoietic cells themselves, produce HGFs
dominantly embryonal hemoglobin (Hb) with a high oxygen
 and/or inhibitors of hematopoiesis.? Some HGFs have been
called poietins (erythropoietin [EPO] and thrombopoietin
primitive RBCs enter the blood as nucleated cells, but in
[TPO]). Other growth factors have been classifed as colony-
contrast to nonmammalian species, enucleation can evenfually
stimulating factors (CSFs) based on in vitro culture studies.
occur in the circulation.? These extruded nuclei circulate for
Finally, some HGFs have been described as interleukins
a short time in the blood. They are surrounded by a small
(ILs).67
 amount of cytoplasm and have been called pyrenocytes.?7
 Hematopoietic cells express receptors for more than one
A switch to defnitive erythropoiesis occurs during fetal
 HGF on their surfaces. The number of each receptor type
development. This results in the production of smaller cells
 present depends on the stage of cell activation and differentia-
that generally extrude their nuclei before entering the blood,
tion. Binding of an HGF to its receptor results in a series of
 produce fetal Hb (in some species) and adult Hb, and are
enzymatic reactions that generate transcription factors; these
highly dependent on EPO for proliferation.13
promote the synthesis of molecules that inhibit apoptosis, the
formation of cell-cycle regulators (cyclins), and the synthesis
Hematopoietic Progenitor Cells and the Bone
Marrow Microenvironment
 involved in generating lineage-restricted transcription factors
The CMP gives rise to the MkEP, which can differentiate into
 is complex and beyond the scope of this text.22
megakaryocyte progenitors (MkPs) or erythroid progenitors
HGFs vary in the type(s) of HSCs and/or HPCs that they
(EPs). The production of EPs is stimulated by SCF, IL-3,
can stimulate to proliferate. Factors are often synergistic in
GM-CSF,and TPO.67 The earliest EP is the burst-forming-
their effects on hematopoietic cells. In some instances, an
unit erythrocyte (BFU-E), which differentiates into the
HGF may not directly stimulate the proliferation of a given
colony-forming-unit erythrocyte (CFU-E). EPO is the
cell type, but may potentiate its proliferation by inducing the
 primary growth factor involved in the proliferation and dif-
expression of membrane receptors for HGFs that do directly
ferentiation of CFU-Es into rubriblasts, the first morphologi-
stimulate proliferation. Some glycoproteins, such as IL-1 and
cally recognizable erythroid cells. CFU-Es are more responsive
tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-c), can modulate hematopoi-
to EPO than BFU-E cells because CFU-Es exhibit greater
esis indirectly by stimulating marrow stromal cells, endothelial
numbers of surface receptors for EPO.116
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
39
 Marrow macrophages are important components of the
 Rubriblast
hematopoietic microenvironment involved with erythropoie-
sis. Both early and late stages of erythroid development occur
with intimate membrane apposition to central macrophages
Prorubricytes
in “erythroid islands." Several adhesion molecules on ery-
throid cells and macrophages, and extracellular matrix glyco-
Rubricytes
proteins are important in forming these erythroid islands.26
Direct contact with these macrophages enhances the prolif-
Rubricytes
 eration oferythroid precursors under basal conditions. Central
Aq uoonpord ssorqia peseq siouid Aeu saeqdoreu
Rubricytes
producing positive growth factors, including EPO; however,
sy u nrd q soor   
such as IL-1, TNF-α, transforming growth factor-β (TGF-
Metarubricytes
β), and interferons (IFNs)-α, -β, and -y in infammatory
Reticulocytes
by erythroid progenitors suggests that these cells may support
Marrow
release
Reticulocytes
degree of basal regulation of erythropoiesis occurs within the
marrow microenvironment, humoral regulation is also impor-
+
Erythrocytes
tubular interstitial cells of the kidney and various inhibitory
FIGURE 3-9
cytokines being produced at sites of infammation throughout 
Diagram oferythropoiesis showing the release of reticulocytes into blood
the body.
 as it normally occurs in dogs.
Nutrients Needed for Erythropoiesis
In addition to amino acids and essential fatty acids, several
metals and vitamins are required for normal erythropoiesis.
 progressively accumulates, imparting a red coloration to the
 Iron is needed for the synthesis of heme, an essential compo-
cytoplasm (Fig. 3-10). Cells with both red and blue coloration
nent of Hb and certain enzymes. Copper, in the form of
 are described as having polychromatophilic cytoplasm. An
 ceruloplasmin, is important in the release of iron from tissue
immature erythrocyte, termed a reticulocyte, is formed follow-
 to plasma for transport to developing erythroid cells. Vitamin
ing extrusion of the metarubricyte nucleus. This generally
B (pyridoxine) is needed as a cofactor in the first enzymatic
 occurs while cells are still bound to central macrophages.?6
step in heme synthesis.
 Extruded nuclei are bound and phagocytosed by a novel
Tetrahydrofolic acid, the active form of folic acid (a B
vitamin),is needed for the transfer of single carbon-containing
 However, nuclei can be extruded in blood when metarubri-
molecules in DNA and RNA synthesis. The physiologic
 cytes are released from the bone marrow (Fig. 3-11).119
 mechanism of Bz2 involvement in erythrocyte production is
Early reticulocytes have polylobulated surfaces. Their cyto-
not well understood, but it is related to folate metabolism.
plasm contains ribosomes, polyribosomes, and mitochondria
Cobalt is essential for the synthesis of Bz by ruminants.51
necessary for the completion of Hb synthesis.15 Reticulocytes
derive their name from a network or reticulum that appears
Maturation of Erythroid Cells
when they are stained with basic dyes such as new methylene
 Rubriblasts are continuously generated from progenitor cells
 blue and brilliant cresyl green. That network is not preexisting
in the extravascular space of the bone marrow. The production
 but rather an artifact formed by the precipitation of ribosomal
 of a rubriblast initiates a series of approximately four divisions
 ribonucleic acids and proteins secondary to staining.57 As
 over a period of 3 or 4 days to produce about 16 metarubri-
reticulocytes mature, the amount of ribosomal material
cytes that are no longer capable of division (Fig. 3-9).36 These
decreases until only a few basophilic specks can be visualized
divisions are called mafurational divisions because there is a
with reticulocyte staining procedures. These mature reticulo-
progressive maturation of the nucleus and cytoplasm con-
cytes have been referred to as type IV reticulocytes$3 or punc-
comitant with each division.
When they are stained with Romanowsky-type blood
 The development of a reticulocyte into a mature erythro-
 stains, early precursors have intensely blue cytoplasm owing
 cyte is a gradual process that requires a variable number of
to the presence of many basophilic ribosomes and polyribo-
 days depending on the species involved. Consequently the
somes that are actively synthesizing globin chains and smaller
 morphologic and physiologic properties of reticulocytes vary
amounts of other proteins. As these cells divide and mature,
with the stage of maturation. The cell surface undergoes
overall cell size decreases, nuclear chromatin condensation
 extensive remodeling, with loss of membrane material and
increases, cytoplasmic basophilia decreases,  
 and
Hb
ultimately the formation of the biconcave shape of mature
40
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Rubriblast
Prorubricyte
Reticulocyte
rubricyte
rubricyte
Eosinophilic
Eosinophilic
Eosinophilic
myelocyte
Eosinophil
metamyelocyte
band
Neutrophilic
 Neutrophilic
Neutrophilic
Myeloblast
Promyelocyte
Neutrophil
myelocyte
metamyelocyte
band
Basophilic
Basophilic
 Basophilic
Basophil
myelocyte
 metamyelocyte
band
FIGURE 3-10
Maturation of canine erythroid and granulocytic cells as they appear in Wright-Giemsa-stained bone marrow aspirate smears.
Drawing by Perry Bain.
erythrocytes.15 The loss of membrane protein and lipid com-
ponents requires ATP and involves the formation of intracel-
 mature, a characteristic that also facilitates their release from
lular  multivesicular endosomes that fuse  with  the plasma
the marrow.144 To exit the extravascular space of the marrow,
membrane, releasing vesicles (exosomes) extracellularly.45.140
reticulocytes press against the abluminal surfaces of endothe-
 This is a highly selective process in which some proteins (e.g,
lial cells making up the sinus wall. Cytoplasm thins and small
transferrin receptor 1 and fibronectin receptor) are lost and
 pores develop in endothelial cell, which allow reticulocytes 
cytoskeletal proteins (e.g., spectrin) and firmly bound trans-
 to be pushed through by a small pressure gradient across the
 membrane proteins (e.g., the anion transporter and glycopho-
 rin A) are retained and concentrated 45.13
are
 The mitochondria undergo degenerative changes in a pro-
released from canine bone marrow; consequently most of
 grammed death phenomenon (mitoptosis)4s and are either 
 these cel appear polychromatophilic when they are viewed
digested or extruded following entrapment in structures
following routine blood-flm staining procedures.73 Reticulo-
cytes are generally not released from bone marrow of non-
somes separate into monosomes, decrease in number, and
anemic cats until they matrure to punctate-type reticulocytes
 disappear as reticulocytes mature into erythrocytes. The deg-
(Fig. 3-13) consequently few or no aggregate reticulocytes
radation of ribosomes appears to be energy-dependent and
(less than 0.4%) but up to 10% punctate reticulocytes are
 presumably involves proteases and RNAases.112
found in blood from normal adult cats.2 The high percentage
Reticulocyte mafuration begins in the bone marrow and is
 of punctate reticulocytes results from a long maturation time
completed in the peripheral blood and spleen in dogs, cats,
with delayed degradation of RNA.3 Reticulocytes are gener-
and pigs.56 As reticulocytes marure, they lose the surface
ally absent in the peripheral blood of healthy adult cattle and
receptors needed to adhere to the fibronectin and thrombo-
goats, but a small number of punctate types (0.5%) may occur
spondin components of the extracellular matrix, presumably
in adult sheep."6 Based on microscopic examination of blood
facilitating their release from the bone
flms stained with new methylene blue, equine reticulocytes
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
41
FIGURE 3-12
 Transmission electron mieroscopy of mitochondrial extrusion from
canine reticulocytes. A, A series of vesicles appear to be surrounding
three mitochondria. B, Fusion ofa vacuole containing mitochondria with
 the reticulocyte outer membrane, thereby promoting mitochondrial
extrusion.
FromSimpson CF,KingJM.Themechanismofmitochondrial extrusionfrom
phenylbydrazime-induced reticaulocytes in tbe circaulating blood. J Cell Biol.
1968;36:103-109.
Wright-Giemsa
Reticulocyte
Metarubricytes
Aggregate
reticulocytes
Punctate
B
Marrow
reticulocytes
FIGURE 3-11
Blood
Punctate
Nuclear extrusion of metarubricytes to form canine reticulocytes. A,
reticulocytes
Blood film from a dog with a hemolytic anemia secondary to hemangio-
sarcoma. Frictional forces during smear preparation may have contrib-
uted to the nuclear extrusion. B, Transmission electron microscopy of
Erythrocytes
nuclear extrusion of a metarubricyte.
B,From Simpson CF,King JM.The mechanism of denucleation in circulating
FIGURE 3-13
erythroblasts. J Cel1 Biol. 1967;35:237-245.
Cat erythroid cells demonstrating reticulocyte release into blood as it
occurs in most normal cats. Note that punctate reticulocytes do not
appear polychromatophilic when stained with Wright-Giemsa.
are normally absent from blood and are rarely released in
response to anemia.
values in CFU-E cells, decline in rubriblasts, and continue to
Control of Erythropoiesis
decrease in the later stages of erythroid development.104.105
Because of their EPO receptor density, CFU-E cells readily
SCF, IL-3, GM-CSF, and TPO—are utilized to produce EPs.
respond to EPO, promoting their proliferation, differentia-
EPO is the principal growth factor promoting the viability,
fion, and transformation into rubriblasts, the first morpho-
proliferation, and differentiation ofEPs (BFU-E and CFU-E)
logically recognizable erythroid celltype. High concentrations
that express specific cell-surface EPO receptors. The main
 of EPO may accelerate rubriblast entry into the first mitotic
 mechanism used to achieve these effects is inhibition of apop-
 division, thus shortening the marrow transit time and result-
tosis.124 Early BFU-E cells do not express EPO receptors, but
 ing in the early release of stress reticulocytes.105
more mature BFU-E cells do and are thus responsive to EPO.
including
EPO receptor numbers on cell surfaces increase to maximum
 androgens,glucocorticoid hormones, growth hormone,insulin,
42
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
and insulin-like growth factors (IGFs)—can enhance the
 of vascular tone, and exerting cardioprotective and neuropro-
 growth of erythroid progenitor cell in vitro.76.ss The thyroid
tective effects.59
hormone 3,5,3'-triodothyronine (T,) promotes the differen-
tiation and maturation of erythroid cells.7 Thyroid hormones
LEUKOPOIESIS
 may also promote the synthesis of EPO in the kidney.2 EPO
production in adult mammals ocurs primarily within peritu-
Neutrophil Production
bular interstitial cells located within the inner cortex and outer
Neutrophilic cells within the bone marrow can be included in
medulla of the kidney. The liver is an extrarenal source of EPO
two pools (Fig. 3-15). The proliferation and maturation pool
 in adults and the major site of EPO production in the mam-
(mitotic pool) includes myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and
 malian fetus.$? Bone marrow macrophages and erythroid pro-
myelocytes. Approximately four or five divisions occur over
several days (Fig. 3-16). During this time primary (reddish
 purple) cytoplasmic granules are produced in late myeloblasts
 Hematopoietic cells die not only as a consequence of lack
 or early promyelocytes and secondary (specific) granules are
of HGFs but also in response to the presence of molecules
synthesized within myelocytes (see Fig. 3-10). Once nuclear
that induce apoptosis. Inhibitors of erythropoiesis include
indentation and condensation become apparent, precursor
TGF-β, TNF-α, IFN-, IL-6, and TNF-related apoptosis-
 inducing ligand (TRAIL).26
 The ability to deliver oxygen to the tissues depends on
cardiovascular integrity, oxygen content in arterial blood, and
Bone marrow
Blood
Hb oxygen affnity. Low oxygen content in the blood can
Pro
result from a low partial pressure of oxygen (Po2) in arterial
Blast
Myelo
Meta Band
 Segmented 
blood, as occurs at high altitudes or with congenital heart
 defects in which some of the blood fow bypasses the pulmo-
 nary circulation. A low oxygen content in blood can also be
 present when arterial PO is normal, as occurs with anemia
MNE
and methemoglobinemia. An increased oxygen affinity of Hb
within erythrocytes results in a decreased tendency to release
Mitosis
 Maturation and storage
Oxygen to the tissues.& Regardless of the cause, EPO produc-
FIGURE 3-15
tion is stimulated by tissue hypoxia (Fig. 3-14), which is
 Approximate sizes of mitotic and postmitotic neutrophilic compartments
mediated by hypoxia-inducible factors that control the tran-
within bone marrow.
Other tissues also exhibit EPO receptors, and EPO stimu-
lates nonhematopoietic actions, including promoting the
 proliferation and migration of endothelial cels, enhancing
neovascularization, stimulating the production of modulators
Myeloblast
Promyelocytes
Marrow
BFU-E
CFU-E
NRBC
Myelocytes
Myelocytes
EPO
RBC
Myelocytes
￥
?
?
?
Metamyelocytes
 Kidney
率
 Oxygen sensor 
C
C
C
C
Bands
Marrow
Blood flow -
- O2 consumption 
release
》
率
Blood flow
O2 supply-→* -
C
 Oxygen content
C
C
n
Neutrophils
Oxygen affinity
FIGURE 3-14
n
 Neutrophils
Central role of erythropoietin (EPO) in the control of erythropoiesis.
FIGURE 3-16
BFU-E, burst-forming unit-erythroid; CFU-E, colony-forming unit-
erythroid,; NRBC, nucleated red blood cell.
A diagram of granulopoiesis.
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
43
cells are no longer capable of division. The maturation and
neutrophilic colony formation. If this also happens in vivo, it
 storage pool (postmitotic pool) includes metamyelocytes,
 might provide negative feedback for neutrophil production in
bands, and segmented neutrophils. Cells within this pool nor-
the extravascular space of bone marrow.71 One possible mech-
mally undergo maturation and storage for several more days 
 anism is the release of serine proteases, such as elastase, from
prior to the migration of mature neutrophils through the
neutrophils. Elastase appears to inhibit granulopoiesis by
vascular endothelium and into the circulation.123 The number
 inactivating G-CSF35 Second, increased neutrophil numbers
of mafure neutrophils stored in marrow is more than seven
in blood are associated with the increased clearance of circu-
times the number present in the circulation of the dog.2 The
lating G-CSF following binding to surface receptors on neu-
marrow transit time from myeloblast to release of mature
trophils, thereby decreasing the primary stimulus for their
neutrophils into the blood varies by species but is generally
between 6 and 9 days. This time can be shortened considerably
 granulopoiesis by the removal (through phagocytosis) of
invading microorganisms that would otherwise stimulate the
 A variety of cytokines with overlapping specificities are
production of HGFs by tissue cells. Activated T lymphocytes
 important in neutrophil production (also called granulopoie-
may also inhibit neutrophil production by secreting the soluble
sis). IL-3, GM-CSF, and G-CSF are of primary importance
 molecule Fas-ligand and the cytokine IFN-y.??
in the production of neutrophils. These cytokines act on
various stages of development from CMPs to GMPs to GPs,
Eosinophil, Basophil, and Mast Cell Production
depending on the array of growth factor receptors displayed
The eosinophil progenitor (EoP) or colony-forming unit
 on their surfaces. GPs are stimulated to proliferate and dif-
 cosinophil (CFU-Eo) is reported to develop from the CMP
ferentiate into myeloblasts by G-CSF. This cytokine appears
in humans but downstream from the GMP in mice.8? Eosino-
to play a role in the basal regulation of granulopoiesis as well
phil production in the marrow parallels that of neutrophils.
as to function as a primary regulator of the neutrophil response
 Eosinophil precursors become recognizable at the myelocyte
to inflammatory stimuli. G-CSF increases the number of cell
stage, when their characteristic secondary granules appear (see
 divisions and reduces the time for granulocytic progenitors to
Fig. 3-10). The marrow transit time is 1 week or less, with a
 develop into neutrophils. It also promotes the release of neu-
 significant storage pool of mature eosinophils.142 As in the
trophils from bone marrow into blood 108.127
case of neutrophils, growth factors, including IL-3 and
As neutrophils mature, there is a progressive downregula-
GM-CSF, are needed for the proliferation of early progeni-
tion of certain surface receptors, including CXCR4 and the
 tors. In addition, activated T2 lymphocytes produce IL-5,
C4β, integrin, that adhere neutrophils to glycoproteins within
which promotes the terminal maturation of eosinophils. IL-3,
the extravascular space. CXCR4 binds to CXCL12/SDF-1
 GM-CSF, and IL-5 also inhibit eosinophil apoptosis,2 while
produced by stromal cell, and the C4β, integrin binds to
inhibitors
 of eosinophil production include IL-12 and
VCAM-1 on endothelial cells. Experimental neutralization of
IFN-y.110
CXCR4 and VCAM-1 results in an increased release of neu-
 The GMP reportedly produces the bipotential basophil-
trophils into blood. G-CSF promotes neutrophil release from
mast cell progenitor (BMaP), which gives rise to the basophil
bone marrow at least in part by decreasing CXCL12/SDF-1
 progenitor and the mast cel progenitor (MaP).121 Like eosin-
production and decreasing CXCR4 expression on the surface
ophils, basophil precursors become recognizable at the myelo-
 of neutrophils. 127
cyte stage, when their characteristic secondary granules appear
Activated helper T lymphocytes produce various growth
(see Fig. 3-10). A specifc growth factor for the production of
factors including IL-3 and GM-CSF. Mononuclear phago-
basophils has not been identified. IL-3 appears to be the
cytes, fbroblasts, and endothelial cells can also produce
 major growth and differentiation factor for basophils, but
GM-CSF and G-CSF when appropriately stimulated. Mono-
other growth factors—including GM-CSF, IL-5, TGF-β,
nuclear phagocytes can not only synthesize HGFs when they
and nerve growth factor—also promote the production of
contact bacterial products but can also stimulate other cells to
basophils.37
produce them. The cytokines, IL-1 and TNF-α, produced by
In contrast to basophils, which mature in the bone marrow,
monocytes and macrophages stimulate the production of
 maturation of mast cell progenitors into mast cell occurs in
HGFs by other cell types. These monokines are important in
the tissues.40 SCF appears to be the major growth and dif-
the infammatory response to foreign organisms and neoplas-
ferentiation factor for mast cells. Additional cytokines
including IL-3, IL-4, IL-9, IL-10, and IL-13—also stimulate
IL-6 is a multifunctional cytokine that regulates inflammation
 mast cell production.54 Some local proliferation of mast cells
(including the hepatic acute-phase response), the immune 
can occur in tissues if they are appropriately stimulated.41
response, and hematopoiesis. In this latter role, it promotes 
Production of Monocytes, Macrophages, Dendritic
Inhibition of neutrophil production is not well understood,
Cells, and Osteoclasts
but mature neutrophils may provide negative feedback inhibi-
Bone marrow MDPs give rise to monocytes and common
tion on their own production in three ways. First, the addition
dendritic celprogenitors (CDPs) 153 Monocytes are produced
of mature neutrophils to bone marrow culture inhibits
through the combined effects of IL-3, GM-CSF, M-CSF, and
44
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
IL-34 on the proliferation and differentiation of bone marrow
required for pre-B lymphocytes to develop into mature, naive
 progenitor cells.44 Lesstime is required to produce monocytes
B lymphocytes in the marrow and enter the circulation. Less
than granulocytes, and there is little marrow reserve of these
than 20% of B lymphocytes produced in the marrow become
cells.
 part of the peripheral mature B lymphocyte pool, with most 
 Monocytes have long been viewed primarily as precursors
of the cells being culled in the bone marrow or after
that develop into tissue macrophages and dendritic cells.
their entry into blood.83 B lymphocytes also proliferate in
However, it is now recognized that many macrophage and
peripheral lymphoid tissues in adults. As with other blood
dendritic cells in tissues do not originate from monocytes
cells, the microenvironment of the marrow and lymphoid
under steady-state conditions because these cells are capable
organs is important for lymphopoiesis. The production of
of self-replication. In addition, neither microglia (macro-
antigen-sensitive, surface-immunoglobulin-positive B lym-
phages in the central nervous system) nor Langerhans cells
phocytes is marked by successive rearrangements of the
(epidermal dendritic cells) depend on cells from the bone
immunoglobulin gene loci and selective expression of surface
 marrow for their renewal under steady-state conditions and
proteins. Although a number of cytokines—including SCF,
 possibly also during infammation.1 In fact, Langerhans cells 
Flt3L, SDF-1, and IGF—are involved in B lymphocyte pro-
appear to develop from embryonic progenitor cells that enter 
duction in marrow, IL-7 appears to be an especially important
 the epidermis before birth.44
positive growth factor.1977 B lymphocyte lymphopoiesis is
Monocytes are important effector cells during infamma-
inhibited by several factors, including TGF-β, IFN-α, IFN-β,
tory conditions. They exit the blood, respond to the tissue
and IFN-.77
environment, and differentiate into subsets of macrophages
 Recirculating B lymphocytes are activated by antigenic
 and infammatory dendritic cells. Exposure to M-CSF
pro-
stimulation in the T lymphocyte region of secondary lym-
motes the development of monocytes into macrophages. The
phoid organs, followed by migration to the cortex in lymph
addition of IFN-y to M-CSF promotes the formation of
nodes and to follicles in jejunal Peyer's patches and the spleen
M1-like macrophages, while the addition of IL-4 to M-CSF
in mammals.13 B lymphocyte activation and differentiation
induces the differentiation of M2-like macrophages. The
into plasmablasts is induced by combinations of microbial
exposure of monocytes to GM-CSF, IL-4, and TNF-α pro-
 products, cytokines, and molecules bound to the surfaces of T
      n
lymphocytes and dendritic cells. Plasmablasts can develop
or TNF-α and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS)-
 into plasma cells in the lymphoid organs where they are pro-
 producing (TiP)-dendritic cell,104,.153
duced or can migrate through blood and develop into plasma
CDPs can give rise to preclassic dendritic cells (Pre-cDC)
cells in peripheral tissues or bone marrow. SDF-1 attracts
and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) in bone marrow.?6
circulating plasmablasts to the bone marrow, and factors
Both cell types are released into blood and enter the tissues,
including SDF-1 and IL-6 promote plasma cell development
where the Pre-cDCs develop into classic dendritic cells (cDC)
 by preventing apoptosis.91
T lymphocyte progenitors leave the marrow and migrate
Cytokines including Flt3L, GM-CSF, and lymphotoxin
to the thymus. Homing of these cells to the thymus depends
Cβ2—appear to be important for the development of cDCs
on their interaction with various adhesion molecules on
 and pDCs 10,44
thymic endothelial cells and the production of specifc che-
Osteoclasts develop when monocyte progenitors are cul-
motactic factors by thymic stromal cells. T lymphocyte pro-
tured with M-CSF and a soluble form of receptor activator
 genitors develop into T lymphocytes under the infuence of
of nuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL). IL-3 and GM-CSF
the thymic microenvironment and growth factors (including
inhibit osteoclast formation. The relative amounts of these
 Flt3L and IL-7) produced in the thymus.151 After maturation
growth factors and presumably others present in the micro-
in the thymus, T lymphocytes accumulate within paracortical
environment of a monocyte progenitor apparently determine
areas of lymph nodes, periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths of the
whether macrophages, dendritic cells, or osteoclasts are
spleen, and the interfollicular areas of jejunal Peyer's patches
formed.
in mammals.13s
 Most NK cells are produced from progenitor cells in the
Lymphocyte and NK Cell Production
bone marrow, where they undergo expansion and maturation
The CLP is believed to give rise to B lymphocytes, T lym-
for a week or more before their release into the blood.15s
 phocytes, and NK cels.1 The development of B lymphocyte
Growth factors controlling their production need further
and T lymphocyte progenitors in bone marrow is antigen-
characterization, but SCF, IL-2, IL-7, and IL-15 can stimu-
 independent. Both SCF and Flt3L appear to be involved
lte NK cell development from progenitor cells in vitro.
in the production of early lymphoid progenitor cells in
Subsets of NK cells also develop in the thymus and possibly
mice.17
other organs, such as lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. These
B lymphocyte progenitors produce mature, naive B lym-
sites may depend on the trafficking of bone marrow-derived
 phocytes in the marrow in most mammals, in specialized ileal
 progenitfor cels and/or immature NK cells into these organs
Peyer's patches in dogs, pigs, and ruminants, and in the bursa
from the blood, where they mafure under the infuence of
of Fabricius in birds.83133 Approximately 2 to 3 days are
microenvironmental factors.49,ss
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
45
individual platelets within the sinuses and general circula-
THROMBOPOIESIS
-sa oyi yanoq eau karen eu sore oguo
 cular endothelium into the sinuses, enter the general venous
Blood platelets in mammals are produced from multinucle-
circulation (see Fig. 2-34), and become lodged in pulmonary
ated giant cells in the bone marrow called megakaryocytes.
capillaries.11 It is estimated that 1000 to 3000 platelets are
The CMP gives rise to the MkEP, which can differentiate into
produced from each megakaryocyte, depending on mega-
karyocyte size.6* Megakaryocytes are not present in nonmam-
(EPs). The earliest MkP is the burst-forming-unit mega-
malian species. Like erythrocytes and leukocytes, the nucleated
karyocyte (BFU-Mk). When appropriately stimulated, this
thrombocytes of nonmammalian species are produced by
progenitor celldivides and differentiates into colony-forming-
mitosis of precursor cells.
unit megakaryocyte (CFU-Mk) progenitor cells, which divide
 A number of cytokines can stimulate or enhance the pro-
and differentiate into megakaryoblasts (Fig. 3-17).6* Mitosis
liferation and expansion of megakaryocyte progenitor cells.
stops at this stage and endomitosis (nuclear reduplication
Factors that may be involved include SCF, Flt3L, IL-3,
without cell division) begins. Generally 2 to 5 nuclear redu-
plications occur resulting in 8 to 64 sets of chromosomes
of platelet production by stimulating megakaryocyte prolifera-
(8 N-64 N) in mature megakaryocytes, compared to two sets
tion, survival, and size (ploidy).66s TPO also transiently
of chromosomes (2 N) in most cells in the body. Individual
enhances the aggregatory response of platelets to agonists.4
nuclei can be observed following the first two reduplications
Although various cels in the body can produce TPO,
ass si snaonu paengoiod sarel e inq (saoreyesad)
[s mou suq pue Aau s u ss hu
when mature megakaryocytes are formed. The mean ploidy of
cell,$387 the major sites of TPO production appear to be the
human and mouse megakaryocytes (16 N) is lower than mean 
values (32 N to 64 N) reported for megakaryocytes in dogs,
 duced in the body appears to be relatively constant. TPO
 receptors (c-Mpl receptors) on blood platelets and maturing
intensely basophilic. There is a progressive decrease in baso-
 megakaryocytes can bind, internalize, and degrade TPO,
 providing negative feedback on platelet production.68 Conse-
Cell volume increases with each reduplication; consequently,
quently blood TPO concentration is remarkably high in the
 m ro e r r nu se si
case of thrombocytopenia resulting from megakaryocytic
except osteoclasts. In contrast to mafure megakaryocytes,
hypoplasia. In contrast, blood TPO concentrations are much
osteoclasts have multiple discrete nuclei.
lower with ongoing immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,
Mature megakaryocytes develop just outside vascular
 because megakaryocytes are generally increased in the marrow
sinuses. SDF-1 and fibroblast growth factor-4 promote the
 and rapid platelet turnover is occurring, resulting in increased 
localization and binding of megakaryocyte progenitors in this
binding and removal of TPO from blood.52
vascular niche (via adhesion molecules VCAM-1 and the C4β1
However, the number of maturing megakaryocytes and
integrin), which promotes survival, maturation, and platelet
blood platelets present may not be the only determinants of
production.1 Protrusions of cytoplasm (proplatelets) from
blood TPO concentrations. IL-6 stimulates thrombopoiesis
megakaryocytes form and extend into sinuses where they can
by increasing the production ofTPO by the liver, which con-
be sheared off by the force of fowing blood (see Fig. 3-3).
 tributes to the thrombocytosis seen in some infammatory
These beaded-appearing proplatelets eventually fragment into
 conditions.4 Conversely, platelet factor 4 (PF4), TGF-β,
IL-4, and TNF-α appear to be inhibitors of megakaryocyte
production.13,137
Mitosis
Endomitosis
REFERENCES
Promegakaryocyte
1. Abboud CN, Lichtman MA. Structure of the marrow and the hematopoietic microen-
vironment. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology.
7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:35-72.
MkEP
2. Abkowitz JL, Catlin SN, McCallie MT, et al. Evidence that the number of hematopoi-
etic stem cells per animal is conserved in mammals. Blood. 2002;100:2665-2667.
Megakaryoblast
Jo nuawainbai auyoa pue uonenaoid leuoi  emenn d eeen ' ei g
BFU-Mk
Megakaryocyte
murine progenitors for natural killer cells. Blood. 1997;89:4005-4012.
4. Akkerman JW. Thrombopoietin and platelet function. Semin Thromb Hemost.
CFU-Mk
2006;32:295-304
5. Allender MC. Fry MM. Amphibian hematology. Vet Clin North Amm Exot Anim Pract.
FIGURE 3-17
2008;11: 463-480.
6. Alpen EL, Baum SJ. Modification of x-radiation lethality by autologous marrow infu-
Stages of megakaryocyte development. MkEP, Megakaryocyte-erthroid
sion in dogs. Blood. 1958;13:1168-1175.
progenitor, BFU-Mega, burst-forming unit megakaryocyte, CFU-
7. Alsaker RD. The formation, emergence, and maturation of the reticulocyte: a review.
Mega, colony-forming unit megakaryocyte.
Vet Clin Pathol. 1977;6(3):7-12.
46
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 8. Arai F, Yoshihara H, Hosokawa K, et al. Niche regulation of hematopoietic stem cells 
Jo anuabiawa ayn buuwexa sisalodoneway jo Auabouo 1l uoz 7r Aemolie9 7t
 in the endosteum. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2009;1176:36-46.
hematopoietic cells in the vertebrate embryo. Curr Top Dev Biol 2003;53:
9. Asagiri M, Takayanagi H. The molecular understanding of osteoclast differentiation.
139-158.
Bone. 2007;40:251-264.
43. Gangenahalli GU, Singh VK, Verma YK, et al. Hematopoietic stem celantigen CD34:
10. Auffray C, Sieweke MH, Geissmann F. Blood monocytes: development, heterogeneity.
role in adhesion or homing. Stem Cells Dev. 2006;15:305-313.
and relationship with dendritic cells. Annu Rev lmmunol. 2009;27:669-692.
44. Geissmann F, Manz MG, Jung S, et al. Development of monocytes, macrophages, and
11. Avecilla ST, Hattori K, Heissig B, et al. Chemokine-mediated interaction of hemato-
dendritic cells. Science. 2010;327:656-661.
 poietic progenitors with the bone marrow vascular niche is required for thrombopoi-
 45. Geminard C, de Gassart A, Vidal M. Reticulocyte maturation: mitoptosis and exosome
esis. Nat MMed. 2004;10:64-71.
release. Biocell 2002;26:205-215.
12. Barao I, Ascensao JL. Human natural killer cells. Arch immunol Ther Exp (WVarsz).
46. Gertz MA. Current status of stem cell mobilization. Br J Haematol. 2010;150:
1998;46:213-229.
647-662.
13. Battinelli EM, Hartwig JH, Italiano JE, Jr. Delivering new insight into the biology of
47. Gimble JM, Robinson CE, Wu X, et al. The function of adipocytes in the bone marrow
megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. CurrOpin Hematol. 2007:14:419-426.
stroma: an update. Bone. 1996;19:421-428.
14. Berrand JY, Jalil A, Klaine M, et al. Three pathways to mature macrophages in the
48. Glomski CA, Tamburlin J, Chainani M. The phylogenetic odyssey of the erythrocyte.
early mouse yolk sac. Blood. 2005;106:3004-3011.
ll. Fish, the lower vertebrate experience. Histol Histopatho. 1992;7:501-528.
15. Bessis M. Living Blood Cels and Their Ultrastructure. New York: Springer-Verlag:
49. Gregoire C, Chasson L, Luci C, et al. The trafficking of natural killer cells. Immunof
1973.
Rev. 2007;220:169-182.
16. Blom B, Spits H. Development of human lymphoid cells. Annu Rev Immunol.
50. Gruber M, Hu CJ, Johnson RS, et al. Acute postnatal ablation of Hif-2α results in
2006;24:287-320
anemia. Proc Nat Acad Sci U/ S A. 2007;104:2301-2306.
17. Borge OJ, Adolfsson J, Jacobsen AM. Lymphoid-restricted development from multi-
 51. Harvey JW. The erythrocyte: physiology, metabolism and biochemical disorders. In:
 potent candidate murine stem cels: distinct and complimentary functions of the c-kit 
Kaneko J, Harvey JV, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals.
 and ft3-ligands. Blood. 1999;94:3781-3790.
Bth ed. San Diego: Academmic Press; 2008:173-240.
18. Boudreaux MK. Thrormbopoiesis. In: Weiss DU, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schaim's Veterinary
 52. Hou M, Andersson PO, Stockelberg D, et al. Plasma thrombopoietin levels in throm-
Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:56-60.
bocytopenic states: implication for a regulatory role of bone marrow megakaryocytes.
19. Burkhard MJ. Lymphopoiesis. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary
Br J Haematol. 1998;101:420-424.
Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:61-64.
53. Houwen B. Reticulocyte maturation. Blood Cells. 1992;18:167-186.
20.CambelFFine structureof thebonemarowofthehickenand pienMrh.
54. Hu ZQ, Zhao WH, Shimaura T. Regulation of mast cell development byinflammatory
1967;123:405-439.
factors. Curr MMed Chem. 2007;14:3044-3050.
 21. Carbonell F, Calvo V, Fliedner TM. Cellular composition of human fetal bone marrow.
 55. Huntington ND, Vosshenrich CA, Di Santo JP. Developmental pathways that
Histologic study in methacrylate sections. Acta Anat (Basell 1982;113:371-375.
generate natural-kiler-cell diversity in mice and humans. Nat Rev lmmunol.
22. CarrBD. The hematopoietic system In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veteri
2007;7:703-714.
nary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames,IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:27-35.
 56. Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1986.
23. Cecchini MG, Hofstetter V, HalasyJ, et al. Role of CSF-1 in bone and bone marrow
 57. Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1993.
development. Mol Reprod Dev. 1997;46:75-83.
58. Jelkmann VW. The role ofthe liver in the production of thrombopoietin compared with
24. Chao H, Hirschi KK. Hemato-vascular origins of endothelial progenitor cells? Mico-
erythropoietin. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2001;13:791-801.
vasc Res. 2010;79:169-173.
59. Jelkmann W. Erythropoietin after a century of research: younger than ever. Eur J
 25. Chasis JA. Erythroblastic islands: specialized microenvironmental niches for erythro-
Haematol. 2007:78:183-205.
poiesis. Curr Opin Hematol. 2006;13:137-141.
 60. Junt T, Schulze H, Chen Z, et al. Dynamic visualization of thrombopoiesis within bone
26.
marrow. Science. 2007;317:1767-1770.
2008;112:470-478.
61. KalinkovichA, SpiegelA, ShivtielS,etal. Blood-forming stem cell are nervous: diret
27. Chute JP. Stem cell homming. Qurr Opin Hematol. 2006;13:399-406.
weg wanss snonau ayn Aq sllan +tog uewny aineww! jo uopenbaj napui pue
28. Coombe DR. Biological implications of glycosaminoglycan interactions with haemo-
Behav Immun. 2009;23:1059-1065.
poietic cytokines. mmunol CellBiol. 2008;86:598-607.
62. Kankaanranta H, Moilanen E, Zhang X.Pharmacological regulation of human eosino-
 29. Cramer DV, Lewis RM. Reticulocyte response in the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
phil apoptosis. Curr Drug Targets Infamm Allergy. 2005;4:433-445.
1972;160:61-67.
63. Kaplan RN, Psaila B, Lyden D.Niche-to-niche migration of bone-marrow-derived cells.
 30. Dabrowski Z, Sano MI, Tabarowski Z, et al. Haematopoiesis in snakes ←Ophidia) in
Trends Mol Med. 2007;13:72-81.
early postnatal development. Cell Tissue Res. 2007;328:291-299.
 64. Kaser A. Brandacher G, Steurer W, et al. Interleukin-6 stimulates thrombopoiesis
 31. Dent AL, Kaplan MH. T cell regulation of hematopoiesis. Front Biosci. 2008;13:
through thrombopoietin: role in inflarmmatory thrombocytosis. Blood. 2001;98:
6229-6236.
2720-2725.
32.[
 Deubelbeiss KA, Dancey JT, Harker LA, et al. Neutrophil kinetics in the dog. J Clin
65. Kastner M, Maurer HR.Pure bovine granulocyes as a source of granulopoiesis inhibi-
nvest. 1975;55:833-839.
tor (chalone). Hoppe Seylers Z Physior Chem. 1980;361:197-200.
33. DiRosa F. T-lymphocyte interaction with stromal, bone and hematopoietic cells in the
 66. Kaushansky K. Hematopoietic stem cells, progenitors, and cytokines. In: Lichtman 
bone marrow. /mmunol Cell Biol. 2009;87:20-29.
MA, BeutlerE, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-
 34. Durand C, Dzierzak E. Embryonic beginnings of adult hematopoietic stem cells. Hae-
Hill; 2006: 201-220.
matologica. 2005;90:100-108.
 67. Kaushansky K. Lineage-specific hematopoietic growth factors. N Engi J Med.
35.El Ouriaghli FFujwaraHMlenhstJ t aleuphillastae nzmatially
2006;354:2034-2045
antagonizes the in vitro action of G-CSF: implications for the regulation of granulo-
 68. Kaushansky K. Historical review: megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. Blood.
poiesis. Bl0od 2003;101:1752-1758.
2008;111:981-986.
 36. Erslev AJ, Beutler E. Production and destruction of erythrocytes. In: Beutler E, Licht-
 69. Kim DH, Yoo KH, Choi KS, et al. Gene expression profile of cytokine and growth factor
man MA, Coller BS, et al, eds. Wilims Hematology. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill
 during differentiation of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell. Cytokine.
1995:425-441.
2005;31:119-126.
37. Falcone FH, Haas H, Gibbs BF. The human basophil a new appreciation of is role in
70. Kingsley PD, Malik J, Fantauzzo KA, et al. Yolk sac-derived primitive erythroblasts
immune responses. Blood. 2000;96:4028-4038.
 92-6ttot:to0z poog sisauabogwa veewwew bunp aeanua
38. Faldyna M, Sinkora J, Knotigova P, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of bone marrow
W sllan analodoway auuen Aq uonewoy Auojon Wl jaupae ' yaunig 'd snenoy l2
leukocytes in neonatal dogs. Vet lmmuno Immunopatho. 2003;95:165-176.
vito. Inhibition by polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Acta Haematol. 1976;56:107-115.
39. Fan LC. Dorner JL, Hoffman WE. Reticulocyte response and maturation in
72. Kucia M, Reca R, Jala VR, et al. Bone marrow as a home ofheterogenous populations
experimental acute blood loss anemia in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
of nonhematopoietic stem cells. Leukemia. 2005;19:1118-1127.
1978;14:219-224.
 73. Laber J, Perman V, Stevens JB. Polychromasia or reticulocytes—an assessment of
40. Fodinger M, Fritsch G, Winkler K, et al. Origin of human mast cells: development from
the dog. J Armm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1974;10:399-406.
transplanted hematopoietic stem cells after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
74. Lancrin C, Sroczynska P, Serrano AG, et al. Blood cel generation from the hemangio-
Bl00d 1994;84:2954-2959.
blast. / Mor Med. 2010;88:167-172.
41. Galli SJ, Metcalfe DD, Arber DA, et al. Basophils and mast cells and their disorders.
75. Layton JE, Hockman H, Sheridan WVP, et al. Evidence for a novel control mechanism
In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiiams Hematoogy. 7th ed. New
of granulopoiesis: mature cell related control of a regulatory growth factor. Blood.
York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:879-897.
1989;74:1303-1307.
CHAPTER 3 · Hematopoiesis
47
76. Leberbauer C, Boulme F, Unfried G, et al. Different steroids co-regulate long-term
107. Qui LB, Dickson H, Hajibagheri N, et al. Extruded erythroblast nuclei are bound and
 expansion versus terminal diferentiation in primary human erythroid progenitors.
phagocytosed by a novel macrophage receptor. Blood. 1995;85:1630-1639.
Blood. 2005;105:85-94.
108. Radin MJ, Welman ML. Granulopoiesis. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's
77. Lebien TW. Lymphopoiesis. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams
Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:43-49.
Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:1039-1049.
109. Rafi S, Mohle R, Shapiro F, et al. Regulation of hematopoiesis by microvascular
78. Liang DC, Shih LY, Chai IJ, et al. The synergistic effect of thrombopoietin in erythro-
 endothelium. Leuk Lymphoma. 1997;27:375-386.
poiesis with erythropoietin and/or IL-3 and myelopoiesis with G-CSF or IL-3 from
110. Rais M, Wild JS, Choudhury BK, et al. Interleukin-12 inhibits eosinophil differentiation 
umbilical cord blood cells of premature neonates. Pediatr Hemato Oncol.
 from bone marrow stem cells in an interferon-gamma-dependent manner in a mouse 
2002;19:399-405.
model of asthma. Cin Exp Alergy. 2002;32:627-632.
 ooa  a w sa i r d    
111.
Raj DS. Role of interleukin-B in the anemia of chronic disease. Semin Arthritis Rheum.
1986;12:11-23.
2009;38:382-388.
B0. Linthorst GE, Folman CC, van Olden RW, et al. Plasma thrombopoietin levels in
112.
Rapoport SM. The Reticulocyte. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Inc.: 1986.
 patients with chronic renal failure. Hemator J. 2002;3:38-42.
113. Robinson SN, Seina SM, Gohr JC, et al. Hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization
B1. Liu ZJ, Zhuge Y, Velazquez OC. Trafficking and differentiation of mesenchymal stem
by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and erythropoietin in the absence of matrix
cells. / Cel Biochem. 2009;106:984-991
metalloproteinase-9. Stem Cels Dev. 2005; 14:317-328
sadxa aua ualodouia sanpui auowou piou e ia r nouz 'd beniay '4 e z8
114. Sage PT. Carman CV. Setings and mechanisms for trans-cellular diapedesis. Front
sion through augmented accumulation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1. Ar J Physior
Biosci 2009;14:5066-5083.
Regul Integr Commp Physiol. 2004;287:R600-R607.
115. Satija NK, Singh VK, Verma YK, et al. Mesenchymal stem cell-based therapy a new
83. Macallan DC, Wallace DL, Zhang Y, et al. B-cell kinetics in humans: rapid turnover
 paradigm in regenerative medicine. / Cell Mo Med. 2009;13:4385-4402.
of peripheral blood memory cells. Blood. 2005;105:3633-3640.
116. Sawada K, Krantz SB, Dai CH, et al. Purification of human blood burst-forming units-
B4. Martin DR, Cox NR, Hathcock TL, et al. Isolation and characterization of multipotential
erythroid and demonstration of the evolution of erythropoietin receptors. J Cel!
mesenchymal stem cells from feline bone marrow. Exp Hematol 2002;30:
Physiol 1990;142:219-230.
879-886.
117.
.Segel GB, Palis J. Hematology of the newborn. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ,
 85. Mayani H, Guilbert LJ, Janowska-Wieczorek A. Biology of the hemopoietic micro-
et al, eds. WViliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:B1-99.
environment. Eur J/ Haematol. 1992;49:225-233.
118. Silva GV, Litovsky S. Assad JA., et al. Mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into an 
eines ugoboway paanje jo uoeuanap oin uin abig g aueuo 'y Aingan g8
endothelial phenotype, enhance vascular density. and improve heart function in a
in dogs with M-type phosphofructokinase deficiency. Muscle Nenve. 1999;22:
 canine chronic ischemia model. Circulation. 2005;111:150-156.
621-627.
119. Simpson CF, Kling JM. The mechanism of denucleation in circulating erythroblasts.
 87. McIntosh B, Kaushansky K. Transcriptional regulation of bone marrow thrombopoietin
/ Cell Bio. 1967;35:237-245.
by platelet proteins. Exp Hematol. 2008;36:799-806.
120. Simpson CF. Kling JM. The mechanism of mitochondrial extrusion from
B8. Miyagawa S, Kobayashi M, Konishi N, et al. Insulin and insulin-ike growth factor I
phenylhydrazine-induced reticulocytes in the circulating blood. J Cell Biol.
 support the proliferation of erythroid progenitor cels in bone marrow through the
1968;36:103-109.
sharing of receptors. Br J Haematol. 2000;109:555-562.
121. Siracusa MC, Perrigoue JG, Comeau MR, et al. New paradigms in basophil develop-
B9. Mori Y, Iwasaki H, Kohno K, et al. Identification of the human eosinophil lineage-
committed progenitor: revision of phenotypic definition of the human common myeloid
122.SitnickaE Wang QR TsaiS,et al. Support verss inhibitionof hematopoiesis bytwo
progenitor. J Exp Med. 2009;206:183-193.
characterized stromal cell types. Stem Cels 1995;13:655-665.
 90. Mortensen M, Ferguson DJ, Simon AK. Mitochondrial clearance by autophagy in
Japnag 'tn uewuai ul 'sdonau jo aney pue uoanqusip 'uoanpod o yaiws eh
developing erythrocytes: Clearly important, but just how much so? Cell Cycle.
E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill:
2010;15:1901-1906.
2006:855-861.
 91. Moser K, Tokoyoda K, Radbruch A, et al. Stromal niches, plasma cell differentiation
124. Socolovsky M. Molecular insights into stress erythropoiesis. Curr Opin Hematol.
and survival. Curr Dpin Jmmunol. 2006;18:265-270.
2007;14:215-224.
 92. Nilsson SK, Simmons PJ. Transplantable stem cels: home to specific niches. Curr
 125. Sorrell JM, Weiss L. Cell interactions between hematopoietic and stromal cells in
Opin Hematol. 2004;11:102-106.
the embryonic chick bone marrow. Anat Rec. 1980;197:1-19.
 93. Nobuhisa l. Takizawa M, Takaki S, et al. Regulation of hematopoietic development 
126. Stopka T, Zivny JH, Stopkova P. et al. Human hematopoietic progenitors express
in the aorta-gonad-mesonephros region mediated by Lnk adaptor protein. Mol Cell
erythropoietin. Blood. 1998;91:3766-3772.
Biol. 2003;23:8486-8494.
127. Summers C, Rankin SM, Condliffe AM, et al. Neutrophil kinetics in health and disease.
94. Oh IH, Kwon KR. Concise review. multiple niches for hematopoietic stem cellregula-
Trends /mmunol. 2010;31:318-324.
tions. Stemm Cells. 2010;28:1243-1249.
128. Suter SE. Gouthro TA. McSweeney PA. et al. Isolation and characterization of
pediatric canine bone marrow CD34+ cells. Vet Immunol immunopathol.
2010;109:277-282.
2004;101:31-47.
96. Onai N, Manz MG, Schmid MA. Isolation of common dendritic cell progenitors (CDP) 
129. Tavassoli M. Embryonic and fetal hemopoiesis: an overview. Blood Cels.
from mouse bone marrow. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;595:195-203.
1991;17:269-281
97. Palis J. Ontogeny of erythropoiesis. Curr Opin Hematol. 2008;15:155-161.
130. Tavian M, Biasch K, Sinka L, et al. Embryonic origin of human hematopoiesis. nt J
98. Palis J, Malik J, McGrath KE, et al. Primitive erythropoiesisin the mammalian embryo.
Dev Biol. 2010;54:1061-1065
Int / Dev Biol. 2010;54:1011-1018.
131.
.Tavian M, Peault B. The changing cellular environments of hematopoiesis in human
99. Papadaki HA, Stamatopoulos K, Damianaki A, et al. Activated T-lymphorytes with
development in utero. Exp Hematol. 2005;33:1062-1069.
 myelosuppressive properties in patients with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. Br J
132. Telen MJ. Red blood cell surface adhesion molecules: their possible roles in normal
Haematol. 2005;128:863-876.
human physiology and disease. Semin Hematol. 2000;37:130-142.
100. Penn PE, Jiang DZ, Fei RG, et al. Disseting the hematopoietic microenvironment.
133. Tiedemann K. On the yolk sac of the cat. ll. Erythropoietic phases, ultrastructure of 
IX. Further characterization of murine bone marrow stromal cells. Blood. 1993;81:
aging primitive erythroblasts, and blood vessels. Cell Tissue Res. 1977;183:71-89.
1205-1213.
134. Tiedemann K, van Ooyen B. Prenatal hematopoiesis and blood characteristics of the
101. Perkins PC, Grindem CB, Cullins LD. Flow cytometric analysis of punctate and aggre-
Cat. Anat Embryol (Berl)l 1978;153:243-267.
gate reticulocyte responses in phlebotomized cats. Am J Vet Res. 1995;
135.
sans iaped pa g np i o eyaa l pei
56:1564-1569.
Elsevier; 2009.
102. Pietila I, Vainio S. The embryonic aorta-gonad-mesonephros region as a generator of
136. Tober J, Koniski A, McGrath KE, et al. The megakaryocyte lineage originates from
haematopoietic stem cells. APMIS. 2005;113: 804-812.
jo pue anjwud jo ypog zuauodwon jeibau! ue s! pue sjosinaid iseigoiueway
103. Ponka P. Beaumont C, Richardson DR. Function and regulation of transferrin and
definitive hematopoiesis. Blood. 2007;109:1433-1441.
ferritin. Semin Hematol. 1998;35:35-54.
137.
Tornquist SJ, Crawford TB. Suppression of megakaryocyte colony growth by plasma 
104. Porter DL, Goldberg MA. Regulation of erythropoietin production. Exp Hematol.
from foals infected with equine infectious anemia virus. Blood. 1997;90:2357-2363.
1993;21:399-404.
138.Tuj-TakayamaK,Otani T, InoueT, et al. Erthropietininduces sustained phosphor-
105. Prchal JT. Production of erythrocytes. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds.
lation of STAT5 in primitive but not definitive erythrocytes generated from mouse
Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hil; 2006:393-403.
embryonic stem cells. Exp Hematol. 2006;34:1323-1332.
106. Prosper F, Verfaillie CM. Regulation of hematopoiesis through adhesion receptors.
139.
jo uopendde sisalodoneway ses ylon jo ael pue ubjo aul 7l uewssia/n 'H ouan 
/ Leukoc Biol 2001;69:307-316.
 chimera analyses to developmental studies. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54:1019-1031.
48
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
140. Vidal M. Exosomes in erythropoiesis. Transfus Chin Biol. 2010;17:131-137.
149. Wu H, Riha GM Yang H, et al. Differentiation and proliferation of endothelial pro-
141. Vogt C, Pentz S, Rich IN. The role for the macrophage in normal hematopoiesis: Il.
genitor cells from canine peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J Surg Res.
In: vitro and in vivo erythropoietin gene expression in macrophages detected by in
2005;126:193-198.
situ hybridization. Exp Hematol. 1989;17:391-397.
sosinad jeuanod anead yu jo uonepi ie ia x bue 'gn 'Hoe o1
142. Wardlaw A. Eosinophils and their disorders. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et
with hemangioblastic activity in the mouse aorta-gonad-mesonephros region. Stem
al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill: 006: 863-878.
Cells. 2007;25: 1423-1430.
143.
Waugh RE. Reticulocyte rigidity and passage through endothelial-like pores. Blood.
151. Ye M, Graf T. Early decisions in lymphoid development. Curr Opin immunol.
1991;78:3037-3042.
2007;19:123-128.
144. Waugh RE, Mantalaris A, Bauserman RG, et al. Membrane instability in late-stage
152. Yin T, Li L. The stem cel niches in bone. / Chin hnvest. 2006;11B:1195-1201.
erythropoiesis. Blood. 2001;97:1 869-1875.
153. Yona S, Jung S. Monocytes: subsets, origins, fates and functions. Curr Opin Hematol.
145.
Weiss G. Goodnough LT. Anemia of chronic disease. N Engl J Med.
2010;17:53-59.
2005;352:1011-1023.
154. Zermati Y, Fichelson S, Valensi F, et al. Transforming growth factor inhibits erythro-
146.
Weiss L. The hematopoietic microenvironment of the bone marrow: an ultrastructural
 poiesis by blocking proliferation and accelerating differentiation of erythroid progeni-
study of the stroma in rats. Anat Rec. 1976;186:161-184.
tors. Exp Hemmatol. 2000;28:885-894.
147.
Weiss L. The Blood Cels and Hematopoietic Tissues. New York: Elsevier; 1984.
155. Zhang Y, Wallace DL, de Lara CM, et al. In vivo kinetics of human natural killer
148. Wolber EM, Jelkmann W. Thrombopoietin: the novel hepatic hormone. News Physiol
cells: the effects of ageing and acute and chronic viral infection. Immunology. 2007: 
Sci. 2002;17:6-10.
121:258-265.
CHAPTER
EVALUATION OF ERYTHROCYTES
 Each hemoglobin tetramer is capable of binding four mol-
NORMAL ERYTHROCYTES
ecules of Oz when fully oxygenated. The initial binding of a
Erythrocyte Morphology
molecule of O2 to a monomer of tetrameric deoxygenated
Erythrocytes from all mammals are anucleated, and most are
hemoglobin facilitates further binding of O2 to the hemoglo-
in the shape of biconcave discs called discocytes (Figs. 4-1,
bin molecule. The changing Oz affinity of hemoglobin with
4-2)2 The biconcave shape results in the central pallor of
oxygenation results in a sigmoid O dissociation curve (Fig.
 erythrocytes observed in stained blood flms. Among common 
 4-9), when the percent saturation of hemoglobin with O2
 domestic animals, biconcavity and central pallor are most pro-
 is graphed against the PO2. The steepness of the middle
nounced in dogs (Figs. 4-3, 4-4), which also have the largest 
portion of the curve is of great physiologic significance
erythrocytes. Other species do not consistently exhibit central
because it covers the range of Oz tensions present in tissues.
pallor in erythrocytes on stained blood flms. The apparent
Consequently a relatively small decrease in Oz tension in
benefit of the biconcave shape is that it gives erythrocytes high
tissues results in substantial Oz release from hemoglobin.
surface area:volume ratios and allows for deformations that
The overall affinity of hemoglobin for O2 is decreased by
must take place as they circulate. Erythrocytes from goats
 increasing H', COz, temperature, and, in most mammals,
generally have a fat surface with little surface depression;
 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3DPG). There is a direct correla-
a variety of irregularly shaped erythrocytes (poikilocytes) may
 tion between body weight and the O affnity of hemoglobin
be present in clinically normal goats (Fig. 4-5). Erythrocytes 
 in whole blood (lower body weight, lower O2 affinity) when
from animals in the Camelidae family (camels, llamas, vicunas,
various species of mammals are compared.205
and alpacas) are anucleated, thin, elliptical cells termed ellip-
The O affnity of fetal blood is greater than that of mater-
tocytes or ovalocytes (Fig. 4-6). They are not biconcave in 
 nal blood except in the cat. Differences in fetal versus maternal
shape and are minimally deformable.437 Erythrocytes from
O2 affnity may potentiate O2 transport from the mother to
birds (Fig. 4-7), reptiles, and amphibians are also elliptical in 
the fetus. However, the fetus is subjected to low arterial O2
shape, but they contain nuclei and are larger than mammalian 
 tensions, and the increased O, affnity of fetal blood is likely
erythrocytes. Blood cells in salamanders are the largest
 needed to more fully saturate hemoglobin with O2.20s
recognized (Fig. 4-8).
The ability of plasma to carry COz is small, but the car-
bonic anhydrase reaction in erythrocytes increases the CO2-
Erythrocyte Functions
carrying capacity of blood 17-fold by rapidly converting CO
Mammalian erythrocytes normally circulate for several
to carbonic acid (HCOs). The HCO; spontaneously ionizes
months in blood despite limited synthetic capacities and
to H+ and bicarbonate (HCO;). The HCO; diffuses out of
repeated exposures to mechanical and metabolic insults.
 the cell down a concentration gradient and chloride (Cl)
Erythrocytes have three functions: transport of oxygen (O2)
 moves in (chloride shift) to maintain electrical neutrality.
to tissue, transport of carbon dioxide (CO2) to the lungs, and
 These processes are reversed at the lungs. Some COz is also
buffering of hydrogen ions (H+). In nonanemic animals, the
transported bound to hemoglobin as carbamino groups.
presence of hemoglobin within erythrocytes increases the
 Deoxyhemoglobin binds about twice the CO, that oxyhemo-
Oz-carrying capacity of blood more than 50 times that of
 globin does.20s
plasma without erythrocytes. The O2 content of blood depends
 Hemoglobin is the major protein buffer in blood. Deoxy-
on the blood hemoglobin content, the partial pressure of dis-
hemoglobin is a weaker acid than oxyhemoglobin. Conse-
 solved oxygen (Po2) in blood, and the affnity of hemoglobin 
quently, when oxyhemoglobin releases its O2 in the tissues,
for O2.
 the formation of deoxyhemoglobin results in increased binding
49
50
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-1
FIGURE 4-3
Scanning electron photomicrograph ofa normal horse erythrocyte called
Scanning electron photomicrograph of dog erythrocytes (discocytes)
a discocyte.
Courtesy of K. S. Keeton and N. C. Jain.
From Stockham SL,Harvey JW,Kinden DA.Equine glucose-6-pbosphate
debydrogenase deficiency. Vet Pathol. 94;31:518-527.
FIGURE 4-4
FIGURE 4-2
Blood from a dog with acute blood-loss anemia and normal erythrocyte
Blood film from a horse. Most erythrocytes are adhered together like
stacks of coins (rouleaux), a normal finding in this species. Individual
neutrophils and a platelet (bottorm rigbt corner) are also present. Wright-
nonadherent erythrocytes exhibit central palloras a result oftheirbicon-
Giemsa stain.
 ave shape. A basophil with purple granules is present in the bottom
right of the image. Wright-Giemsa stain.
the outer layer of the membrane, with carbohydrate groups
of H+. Hemoglobin buffers the effects of HCO; and allows
extending outward. Some blood group antigens are glycolip-
for the isohydric transport of CO2. Hemoglobin also buffers
ids, with their specificity residing in the carbohydrate moieties
 organic acids produced during metabolism.205
(see Chapter 6 for a discussion of clinically significant blood
groups).205
Erythrocyte Biochemistry
 Membrane proteins consist of integral membrane proteins
Membrane Structure and Function
 that penetrate the lipid portion, often spanning the bilayer,
 The erythrocyte membrane contains a phospholipid bilayer
and skeletal proteins that form or attach to the internal surface
with molecules ofunesterified cholesterolintercalated between
of the lipid bilayer. Glycoproteins associated with the mem-
fatty acid chains. Phospholipids can move in various ways and
brane are integral membrane proteins with the carbohydrate
contribute to membrane fuidity. Glycolipids are located on
residues extending from the outside surface of the cell
CH APTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
51
FIGURE 4-5
FIGURE 4-7
Poikilocytes in blood from a normal goat. Note the small size of the
Blood film from a macaw. Nucleated erythrocytes and three heterophils
erythrocytes compared with the neutrophil in the left part of the image.
 are present.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-6
FIGURE 4-8
Elliptocytes in blood from a normal lama. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Blood film prepared by mixing equal parts of blood from a salamander
(Amphiuma means) with that ofa domestic cat to demonstrate the large
size of the nucleated erythrocytes and a neutrophil in the salamander.
 membrane. They carry erythrocyte antigens and function as
Most of the cat erythrocytes are echinocytes, a shape artifact of sample
receptors or transport proteins (e.g.,band 3 is an anion trans-
handling in this instance. Wright-Giemsa stain.
porter). The membrane skeleton is composed of various pro-
Courtesy of H. L. Wamsley.
teins located in a lattice-like arrangement on the inner surface
of the erythrocyte membrane. This meshwork is aftached to
the membrane by binding to transmembrane proteins. The
dog with protein 4.1 defciency and another with mutant
membrane skeleton is a major determining factor of mem-
brane shape, deformability, and durability. It is in a condensed
but the protein 4.1-deficient dog had a reticulocytosis, indi-
confguration in intact cells and can be stretched considerably
 cating a shortened erythrocyte life span. Hereditary stomato-
without rupruring.20s
cytosis occurs in multiple dog breeds, but the specific
Inherited membrane defects can result in abnormally
 membrane defects have not been reported.2s
 shaped erythrocytes with shortened erythrocyte life spans and
variable degrees of anemia. Band 3 deficiency in cattle results
ATP Generation
in marked spherocytosis with membrane instability and severe
 Mammalian erythrocytes lack nuclei; therefore they cannot
 anemia.232 Hereditary elliptocytosis has been reported in one
 synthesize DNA or RNA. They also lack ribosomes,
52
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
100-
is stimulated by increased blood inorganic phosphate (P;) con-
Decr: 2,3DPG
centration and increased blood pH, both of which stimulate
Temp
anaerobic glycolysis. 2,3DPG is the most abundant organic
CO2
 phosphate in the erythrocytes of most species but its concen-
75
H+
tration is low in erythrocytes of Felidae (including domestic
cats), Bovidae (cattle,sheep, and goats), and Cervidae (deer).415 
Animals with high erythrocyte 2,3DPG concentrations,
Saturatic
50
including dogs and horses, have the potential to alter their
Incr: 2,3DPG
hemoglobin O affinity to meet their metabolic needs. The
%
Temp
significance (and, in some cases, the appropriateness) of
CO2
alterations in 2,3DPG in disease states is not always clear.
25
H+
Erythrocyte 2,3DPG concentration increases in some anemic
 animals, and the resultant decrease in hemoglobin Oz affnity
would seem to be beneficial.205 Increased 2,3DPG has also
 been reported in erythrocytes from horses with hypoxic con-
ditions.i73 In the case of severe hypoxic hypoxemia, the
20
40
60
80
100
response might be detrimental because hemoglobin cannot be
pO2 (mmHg)
fully sarurated.241 High-altitude camelids (including lamas,
 m sira ay (n pe sona se
FIGURE 4-9
hemoglobin oxygen affinity, even though their erythrocytes
 Hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve and factors infuencing the posi-
tion of the curve.
have relatively high 2,3DPG concentrations, because their
hemoglobin exhibits low reactivity toward 2,3DPG.377 The Pso
FromHarvey JW.The erytbrocyte:physiology,metabolism,and biochemical
for greyhound erythrocytes in whole blood is lower than that
disorders. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry
for mongrel dogs, yet the groups have similar 2,3DPG con-
of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:
centrations.4ss The cause ofthis difference remains to be deter-
173-240.
mined, but it could refect a low reactivity to 2,3DPG. It is
suggested that the higher hematocrit found in greyhound
mitochondria, and endoplasmic reticula; consequently they
dogs may represent a compensatory response to a higher
have no Krebs cycle or electron transport system and are
oxygen affinity of hemoglobin in this species.
unable to synthesize proteins or lipids de novo. Glucose is the
PFK deficiency inhibits glycolysis above the DPG pathway,
primary substrate for the energy needs of erythrocytes from
resulting in markedly decreased 2,3DPG concentrations,
all species except the pig, where inosine appears to be the
which makes dog erythrocytes alkaline-fragile. Episodes of
major substrate. Mature erythrocytes depend on anaerobic
intravascular hemolysis occur when PFK-defcient dogs
glycolysis for energy (Fig. 4-10). The ATP generated by gly-
develop alkalemia secondary to hyperventilation.203
colysis is needed for the maintenance of erythrocyte ionic
composition, shape, and deformability and for limited syn-
Oxidant Injury
thetic activities such as glutathione synthesis. Hypophospha-
Animals are exposed to low levels of oxidants in their environ-
temia results in decreased erythrocyte glycolytic rates and
ments and from normal metabolic processes in the body.
decreased ATP generation. Hemolytic anemia resulting from
Reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species are
hypophosphatemia has been reported in diabetic cats and in
 formed as products of normal cellular metabolism. When they
 a diabetic dog following insulin therapy, in a cat with hepatic
 are generated at higher concentrations in disease states, these
lpidosis, ad in postparturient cattle andbuffaloes 0,2s De-
free radicals (and the even more potent oxidative metabolites
ciencies of rate-controlling enzymes in glycolysis also result
 that they produce) can overwhelm protective systems within
in insuffcient ATP generation and shortened erythrocyte
the body, producing celular injury and/or destruction.492
survival. Pyruvate kinase (PK)-deficient dogs and cats have
Oxidative reactions can damage hemoglobin, enzymes
mild to severe regenerative hemolytic anemia. Phosphofruc-
(sulfhydryl groups especially), and the membrane lipids of
 tokinase (PFK)-deficient dogs have compensated hemolytic
erythrocytes. Methemoglobin forms when hemoglobin iron is
 anemia plus sporadic episodes of intravascular hemolysis and
oxidized from the +2 to the +3 state. Heinz bodies are inclu-
hemoglobinuria.203
sions that form within erythrocytes following the oxidative
denaturation of the globin portion of hemoglobin. Membrane
23DPGPathway
damage can result in intravascular hemolysis or erythropha-
 2,3DPG binds to hemoglobin and reduces the affinity of
 gocytosis and shortened erythrocyte life spans.205
 hemoglobin for oxygen in erythrocytes from most mammals.
 Protection against Oxidant Injury. NADPH generated
It is produced from a side pathway of the anaerobic glycolysis
in the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) provides electrons
pathway No net ATP is generated when molecules traverse
for protection against oxidants. It is needed to maintain glu-
this DPG pathway. The formation of 2,3DPG in erythrocytes
tathione and thioredoxin in their reduced states, and it is
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
53
O2-+ O2-+ 2H+
SOD
O2
H2O2
2H2O
GPx
GSH
GSSG
GR
NADP
NADPH
HK
Glucose
G6P
+
 6PG
G6PD
L GPli
NADP、
ATP
ADP
6PGD
NADPH-D
F6P
NADPH
MB
ATP
PFK
CO2
ADP
、TK +TA
Pentose PO4
FDP
TPI
DHAP  G3P
NAD + P
GAPD
NADH
1,3 DPG
DPGM
ADP
2,3DPG
PGK
ATP
P
3PG
ADP
ATP
NADH NAD
2PG -- PEP
- Pyruvate -
- Lactate
PK
LDH
FIGURE 4-10
Metabolic pathways of the mature erythrocyte. HK, hexokinase; GPI, glucose phosphate isomerase; PFK,
phosphofruetokinase; TPI, triosephosphate isomerase; GAPD, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase;
PGK,phosphoglycerate kinase; MPGM,monophosphoglycerate mutase; DPGM,diphosphoglycerate mutase;
PK, pyruvate kinase; G6PD, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase; 6PGD, 6-phosphogluconate dehydroge-
nase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase, GR, glutathione reductase, GPx, glutathione peroxidase, TK, transketolase,
TA, transaldolase; GSSG, oxidized glutathione; G6P, glucose 6-phosphate; F6P, fructose 6-phosphate;
FDP, fructose 1,6-diphosphate; DHAP, dihydroxyacetone phosphate; GAP, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate;
1,3DPG, 1,3-diphosphoglycerate; 2,3DPG, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate, 3PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; 2PG,
2-phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; ADP, adenosine diphosphate, ATP, adenosine triphosphate;
NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADH, reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; NADP, nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate; NADPH,reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate;
GSH, reduced glutathione; P;, inorganic phosphate; SOD, superoxide dismutase.
FromHarveyJW.Theerytbrocytephysiology,metabolism,and biochemical disorder.In:KanekoJHarveyJW,Bruss
ML,eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals, 6th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:173-240.
important in maintaining catalase in a functional form.
eccentrocytosis has been described in an American saddlebred
 Defects in the PPP can render erythrocytes susceptible to
 colt with less than 1% of normal G6PD activity.452
 Kinful juepixo snoushoxa pue snousaopua
Glucose-6-
 Reduced glutathione (GSH) is a tripeptide containing a
phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is the
rate-controlling
highly reactive sulfhydryl group that may act nonenzymati-
enzyme in the PPP. A persistent hemolytic anemia with
ep supixo irerunos oi ridase pepeu sag e se aeo 
54
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
GSH also functions as an electron donor in various reductive
 Circulating
 enzyme reactions including glutathione peroxidase (GPx),
erythrocytes
phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione peroxidase, glutathi-
one S-transferase, and glutaredoxin. Following oxidation, glu-
tathione forms a disulfide (GSSG) that can be reduced back
Marrow erythrocyte
to GSH by the favin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)-dependent
Macrophages
precursors
glutathione reductase (GR) enzyme, using NADPH as the
Hb
source of electrons (see Fig. 4-10). Horses with erythrocyte
Iron 
FAD deficiency have markedly reduced GR activity, decreased
cycle
Fe
Ferritin/Hemosiderin
 Selenium acts as an antioxidant when incorporated as
selenocysteine at the active site of a wide range of selenopro-
Transferrin-Fe
 teins, including GPx, phospholipid hydroperoxide glutathione
Liver
complex
 peroxidase, and thioredoxin reductase in erythrocytes.73 Heinz
Transferrin
Fe
body hemolytic anemia has been reported in selenium-
 Plasma
 deficient cattle grazing on St. Augustine grass.327 Catalase is
 an enzyme that can catalyze the conversion of HzOz to water
FIGURE 4-11
 and O without using energy.
Iron cycle. Iron (Fe) is highly conserved in the body. Iron in plasma
 Recent studies suggest that peroxiredoxins may be more
is bound to transferrin, a transport protein that is synthesized in the
-us on pzns u sou qsnss e opodsun  u
thesize hemoglobin in developing erythroid cells. Aged blood erythro-
Oxidized peroxiredoxins are regenerated using reduced thio-
 si u e sae a prd ae s
redoxin, and oxidized thioredoxin is reduced by NADPH
Released iron is either returned to plasma or stored in macrophages as
using thioredoxin reductase.277 Ascorbate functions as an anti
ferritin and hemosiderin. Nearly all of the iron in plasma under normal
oxidant by donating one or two electrons to a variety of oxi-
conditions comes from the release of iron by macrophages that have
phagocytized and degraded erythrocytes. Only about 3% of the iron in
dants, including oxygen free radicals and peroxides. Vitamin
plasma results from gastrointestinal (GI) enterocyte absorption in
 E is lipid-soluble and acts as a free radical scavenger in the
normal individuals.
membrane.205
From Harvey JW. Iron metabolisms and its disorders. In: Kaneko J
Methemoglobin Formation and Reduction
Harvey JW Bruss ML, e&s. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals,
6th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:259-285.
About 3% of hemoglobin (Fe+) is oxidized to methemoglobin
(Fe+3) each day Methemoglobin is unable to bind O2. To
prevent hypoxemia, which would result from the accumulation
of a high level of methemoglobin, the methemoglobin formed
is reduced back to functional hemoglobin in a reaction that
lysed, hemoglobin is degraded, and iron is released. Most iron
requires the cytochrome-bs reductase (CbsR) enzyme and
released from degraded hemoglobin is quickly released back
NADH generated by anaerobic glycolysis20s An inherited
into plasma, but a small amount may be stored as ferritin or
deficiency in Cbs R in dogs and cats results in persistent met-
hemosiderin within macrophages, which is released more
 hemoglobinemia with minimal or no clinical signs.203 Methe-
slowly into plasma. The vast majority of iron entering plasma
moglobinemia also occurs in horses that have decreased CbsR
 activity secondary to erythrocyte FAD deficiency.212
About 60% to 70% of total body iron is present in hemo-
globin (3.4 mg iron per gram of hemoglobin). About a third 
Iron Metabolism
of total body iron is stored as ferritin and hemosiderin (pri-
 Iron metabolism is presented in this chapter because more
marily within macrophages), 3% to 7% is present in myoglo-
 iron is needed for the production of erythrocytes than for all
bin (with the higher values occurring in dogs and horses), 1%
other cells in the body combined. Iron is absorbed from the
is present in hemoprotein and favoprotein enzymes, and only
diet in the small intestine and transferred to plasma, where it
 is bound to transferrin for transport to cells within the body.
 Iron Absorption. The absorption of iron from the diet
Once inside the body, iron cycles in a nearly closed system
depends upon age, species, iron stores, rate of erythropoiesis,
(Fig. 4-11) because little iron is lost in domestic animals unless 
infammation, and pregnancy, as well as the amount and
hemorrhage occurs. About 75% of the iron present in plasma
chemical form of iron ingested. A low percentage 
of
will be transported to the bone marrow for incorporation into
dietary iron is absorbed in normal adult animals. Iron absorp-
tion occurs through enterocytes of the duodenum and proxi-
plasma iron is taken up by nonerythroid tissues, primarily the
mal jejunum. Iron can be taken in by enterocytes as free ions
liver26 Erythrocytes containing hemoglobin normally circu-
 or as heme by different pathways (Fig. 4-12). The relative
late for several months before being phagocytized by macro-
importance of these pathways varies depending on species and
phages when senescent. Affter phagocytosis, erythrocytes are
diet.204
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
55
Intestinal
Plasma
lumen
Feritin
Fe
Fe+3
(mTf-Fe+3
DcytB
/Fe+3 Fet
Fe+2
(aTf)
DMT1
 Hemoglobin
Fe+2
and myoglobin
Hephaestin 
HO
Fe+2 S
Fe+2
Heme
HCP1
Ferroportin
Enterocyte
Hepcidin
Globin
FIGURE 4-12
Mechanisms ofiron absorption. Ferrous iron (Fet2) ions are transported into enterocytes in the duodenum by
the divalent transporter-1 (DMT1) after reduction of ferric iron (Fe) ions using a duodenal cytochrome b
(DeytB). Heme is transported into enterocytes using heme carrier protein-1 (HCP1). Once inside, inorganic
iron is released from heme by the action of the heme oxygenase (HO) reaction. Fe ions are exported from
enterocytes using ferroportin, oxidized to Fet using hephaestin, and bound by apotransferrin (aTf) to form
monoferric transferrin (mTf) and diferric transferin (not shown). Hepcidin in plasma inhibits iron export
to plasma by interacting directly with ferroportin, leading to ferroportin's internalization and lysosomal deg-
radation. Fet not transported to plasma is stored as ferritin follwing oxidation to Fe. Iron stored as ferritin
is returned to the lumen of the small intestine when enterocytes are sloughed at the tip of the villus.
From Harvey JW. Iron metabolism and its disorders. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eads. Clinical Bio-
chermistry of Domestic Animals. 6th ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press 2008:259-285.
Most inorganic iron in the diet is in the ferric (Fe+) state.
fates, export or storage, depending on the body's iron needs.
 Fe+3 iron is solubilized from food by hydrochloric acid in the
 If iron is required by the body, molecules will be transported
stomach and binds to mucins and various small molecules in
 from enterocytes to transferrin in plasma. This transportation
the stomach, which keep the iron soluble and available for
paieso uanond jodsu uoni ue uodony Aq paieipu s!
absorption in the more alkaline environment of the small
on the basolateral surface of mafure enterocytes. In addition
intestine. The most important pathway for nonheme iron
to ferroportin, the effux of iron from enterocytes requires a
uptake utilizes the divalent metal transporter-1 (DMT1). Fe+3
copper-containing protein called hephaestin, which is also
ions must be reduced to ferrous (Fet2) ions before they can be
 located on the basolateral membranes of mature enterocytes.
transported into the enterocyte via the DMT1. Although
Hephaestin is a membrane-bound ferroxidase that has signifi-
some Fe3 ion reduction may occur by direct interaction with
cant homology to the plasma protein ceruloplasmin. Hepha-
dietary ascorbic acid, most reduction appears to rely on duo-
 estin's function may relate to its ability to oxidize Fe+2 ions to
 denal cytochrome b (DcytB) and possibly other brush border
 Fe+3 ions for binding to transferrin in plasma.20
ferrireductase enzymes. Although humans absorb Fe+2 salts
If body iron requirements are low, enterocyte cytoplasmic
more readily from the intestine than Fe+3 sals, dogs are
 iron accumulates. Free iron is toxic; consequently the mucosal
reported to absorb both valence forms equally well.204
cell protects itself by increasing apoferritin synthesis and
 Heme is released from dietary myoglobin and hemoglobin
 incorporating the excess iron into ferritin. Each ferritin mol-
by the action of digestive enzymes. Dietary heme iron is gen-
ecule is composed of a protein shell of 24 apoferritin subunits
erally more bioavailable than is nonheme iron and is an
 surrounding a central core of up to 4500 iron atoms as ferric
important nutritional source of iron in carnivores and omni-
 oxyhydroxide. Ferritin is a storage protein that prevents free
vores. Heme enters duodenal enterocytes as an intact metal-
 iron from catalyzing oxidative reactions, which would injure
loporphyrin, possibly using a brush border transporter named
the cell. Ferritin within mucosal cells is returned to the small
heme carrier protein 1 (HCP1). However, this protein trans-
intestine lumen when enterocytes are sloughed at the tip of
ports folate more efficiently than heme; consequently,
its
the villus after 1 to 2 days.45s
physiologic role in intestinal heme uptake remains to
be
 Iron absorption is increased when total body iron content 
clearly defined. After heme absorption, iron is released from
is low or erythropoiesis is increased. Iron absorption is
heme by the action of the heme oxygenase reaction.20
 decreased when total body iron content is high or infamma-
Once within the enterocyte, intracellular iron molecules are
 tion is present.204 Components of brush-border iron uptake,
likely bound to one or more chaperone molecules. A potential
 including DMT1 and DcytB, are strongly infuenced by the
chaperone named poly (rC)-binding protein 1 (PCBP1) has 
 iron concentration within enterocytes, with increased compo-
 been described.422 Iron taken up by enterocytes has one of two
nents expressed when intracellular iron content is low and
56
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
decreased components expressed when iron content is high.
form heme. A direct interorganelle transfer of iron occurs
 These locally responsive changes in brush-border transport
between endosomes and mitochondria in developing ery-
components help buffer the body against the absorption of
throid cells.419 Some iron is presumably released from endo-
excessive iron, but it is the control of the basolateral transport
somes into a cytoplasmic labile iron pool, with excess
 of iron from enterocytes to plasma that represents the primary
cytoplasmic iron stored as ferritin. TfR and apoferritin syn-
 site at which iron absorption is regulated.4s
thesis are regulated by the amount of intracellular iron present.
 Systemic Control of Iron Metabolism. Hepcidin, a
High iron content stimulates apoferritin synthesis and inhib-
 peptide secreted by hepatocytes into the circulation, is an
its TfR expression to minimize the potential of iron toxicity
to the cell. Low iron content results in decreased apoferritin
m suauanbar uon Apoq Aq paienpou si uonpond
synthesis and increased TfR expression on cell surfaces to
 are largely infuenced by the magnitude of erythropoiesis
maximize iron uptake and use for heme synthesis. Free heme
present.34 Hepcidin inhibits iron export from enterocytes,
concentration  within  erythroid cells  controls  hemoglobin
macrophages, and hepatocytes by interacting directly with
synthesis. An increase in free heme promotes the synthesis
ferroportin, leading to the internalization and lysosomal deg-
of globin chains and inhibits the uptake of iron from
radation of this iron export protein.2? Hepcidin production is
transferrin.204
decreased in iron deficiencyand disorders resulting in increased
 Macrophage Iron Metabolism. Litle iron enters macro-
erythropoiesis, which increase the demand for iron.152 As a
phages, in contrast to other cell types in the body, via plasma
result, ferroportin receptors are abundant on cell surfaces and
 transferrin. Rather, nearly all iron enters macrophages by the
dietary iron absorption is increased, as is the export of iron
phagocytosis of aged or prematurely damaged erythrocytes
from macrophages and hepatocytes. Conversely, hepcidin pro-
(Fig. 4-13)373 Following phagocytosis, erythrocytes are lysed
 duction is increased and ferroportin transporter expression on
and hemoglobin is degraded to heme and globin. The micro-
cell surfaces is decreased when iron overload is present. Hep-
somal heme oxygenase reaction degrades heme and releases
cidin production is also increased during infammation by a
iron. Most of the iron released from degraded heme is quickly
 pathway not dependent on body iron requirements.445
exported from the macrophage and bound to plasma trans-
 Plasma Iron. Nearly all of the iron in plasma is bound to
ferrin for transport to other cells (especially erythrocyte
the protein apotransferrin to form transferrin. The binding of
 iron to apotransferrin keeps iron molecules soluble and pre-
vents iron-catalyzed oxidative reactions. Apotransferrin is a
β-globulin with two binding sites for Fe+3. Normall, 25% to
50% of the iron-binding sites are saturated with iron. Plasma
 iron turns over rapidly in 3 hours or less.436 Nearly all of the
iron in plasma under normal conditions comes from the
release of iron by macrophages that have phagocytized and
Hemosiderin
degraded erythrocytes. In contrast, in normal individuals, only
about 3% of the iron in plasma results from enterocyte
absorption.372
cr
mTfC
Iron Uptake by Erythroid Cells. The delivery of iron
from plasma to developing erythroid cells and other cell types
Ferritin
aTfC
Ferroportin
except macrophages is dependent on transferrin.26 Trans-
ferrin (especially diferric transferrin) molecules bind to
Hepcidin
transferrin receptor 1 (TfR1) on the surface of cells, and these
FIGURE 4-13
transferrin-TfR1 complexes invaginate to initiate endocytosis.
After the transferrin-TfR1 complexes are internalized as
As sa   n s   
 the phagocytosis of aged or prematurely damaged erythrocytes. Follow-
 endosomes, a proton pump decreases the pH in the endosome,
ing phagocytosis, erythrocytes are lysed, and hemoglobin is degraded to
resulting in conformational changes in the proteins and sub-
heme and globin. The microsomal heme oxygenase reaction within mac-
 sequent release of iron ions from transferrin. The released iron
rophages degrades heme and releases iron to the labile iron pool (LIP)
 is exported from the endosome using DMT1.349 The resultant
apotransferrin-TfR1 complex is recycled to the cell mem-
as ferrous iron, oxidized to ferric iron by ceruloplasmin (Cp) in plasma,
and bound to apotransferrin (aTf) to form monoferric transferrin (mTf)
brane, where apotransferrin is released from the cell, and the
or diferric transferrin (not shown). Hepcidin in plasma inhibits iron
TfR1 is again available for binding additional iron-containing
transferrin molecules. Erythroid precursor cells in the bone
internalization and lysosomal degradation. Iron not rapidly released to
marrow and reticulocytes that synthesize hemoglobin have
plasma is stored within macrophages as ferritin, which may be degraded
to hemosiderin within lysosomes.
TfR1 on their surfaces for iron uptake, but reticulocytes lose
their TfR1 as they develop into mature erythrocytes.372
From Harvey JW. Iron metabolism and its disorders.In: Kaneko JJ,Harvey
 After its release from transferrin, iron is transported to the
JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. 6fb ed.
mitochondria, where it is incorporated into protoporphyrin to
San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:259-285.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
57
 precursors in the bone marrow).204 The export of iron from
 antigenic remains to be clarified, but oxidative mechanisms
macrophages is mediated by ferroporin and controlled by
 are probably involved. A natural antibody against the senes-
hepcidin, as has been discussed for enterocytes.4 The copper-
cent cell antigen is present in human plasma. This antibody
containing plasma protein ceruloplasmin oxidizes Fe+2 ions to
binds to senescent cell antigens on the surface of aged cells
Fet3 ions for binding to transferrin in plasma.341
 and, together with bound complement, promotes the phago-
The mononuclear phagocyte system accounts for much of
cytosis of aged erythrocytes by macrophages that exhibit Fc
the total body iron stores. Iron not rapidly released to plasma
 and C3b surface receptors. Senescent dog erythrocytes accu-
is stored within macrophages as ferritin and hemosiderin. Free
mulate surface-associated immunoglobulin, which is believed
cytoplasmic ferritin molecules are visible by electron micros-
to promote their removal by macrophages.3 The relative
copy but not by light microscopy. Hemosiderin is composed 
importance of the immune- and nonimmune-mediated
 of aggregates of protein and iron within lysosomes. It is insol-
phagocytosis  of senescent erythrocytes remains  to be
uble in water and thought to result from the degradation of
clarifed.
ferritin. Hemosiderin is visible by light microscopy when it is
Erythrocytes lose volume by shedding microvesicles as they
stained with an iron stain (Prussian blue stain). Iron in the
 age. The composition of the resultant microvesicles varies, but
 storage pool turns over slowly unless there is an increased need
they typically contain hemoglobin. Other components that
for iron for hemoglobin synthesis.45
may be present include glycophorin A, breakdown products
of band 3 (senescent antigen), IgG, and exposed phosphati-
dylserine. They do not contain the skeletal proteins spectrin
ERYTHROCYTE DESTRUCTION
 Normal Removal of Aged Erythrocytes
circulation by macrophages, using receptors discussed above
Most erythrocytes circulate in blood for a finite time period
for aged erythrocytes It maybe that this process ofmicrove-
(survival time or life span) ranging from 2 to 5 months in
 siculation removes patches of damaged membrane that would
 domestic animals, depending on the species. Erythrocyte life
 otherwise bind to macrophages and result in the early removal
spans are related to body weight (and consequently metabolic
 of otherwise healthy erythrocytes.36
rate), with the smallest animals (highest metabolic rate)
 Following phagocytosis by macrophages of the spleen, liver,
having the shortest erythrocyte life spans. Greyhound dogs
and other organs, erythrocytes and erythrocyte microvesicles
are often used as blood donors. The erythrocyte life span of 6
are lysed and hemoglobin is degraded to heme and globin
 greyhound dogs (mean 93 days) was not significantly different
(Fig. 4-14). Globin is catabolized to constituent amino acids,
from that of 3 nongreyhound dogs (103 days).15s Aged eryth-
and the microsomal heme oxygenase reaction within macro-
rocytes are phagocytized by macrophages of the mononuclear 
phages degrades heme to iron, biliverdin, and carbon
phagocyte system. Oxidative injury, especially near the end of
 their life span, appears to be responsible for normal erythro-
Mononuclear phagocytes
ors can induce suicidal death of erythrocytes (eryptosis), with
 reactions similar to some of those that occur during apoptosis
Fe
 of nucleated cell. Eryptosis is characterized by Ca entry,
Globin
HD
Globin
erythrocyte shrinkage, membrane blebbing (microvesicle for-
Heme
RBCS
Biliverdin
mation), and cell membrane phospholipid scrambling, with
Fe
Bilirubin
+CO
 phosphatidylserine exposure on the cellsurface.271
Porphyrins
 Surface membrane alterations on aged or damaged cells
ALA
 that may be recognized by macrophages include exposure of
奉
Bilirubin-albumin
phosphatidylserine on the external surface, modified external
Glycine
complex
membrane carbohydrate residues (e.g., desialation of sialogly-
十
coproteins), and/or modifed membrane proteins (e.g.,
Succinate
Conjugated
Jog seuais aqssd are sssq (e pueq paperaap Aered
Liver
 Nonhemoglobin
Bone marrow
bilirubin
heme
the inner leafet of the lipid bilayer, but with cell damage
phosphatidylserine may be exposed on the outer leafet of the
lipid bilayer, where it can be bound by phosphatidylserine
Urobilinoid compounds
receptors such as CD36 on the surface of macrophages.249
Fecal urobilinogen
 Other macrophage receptors can recognize altered carbo-
hydrate moieties on the surface of erythrocytes.
 The appearance of a senescent cell antigen may be an
Stercobilin
 important signal in the removal of aged erythrocytes.246 This
FIGURE 4-14
senescent cell antigen is derived from the band 3 anion trans-
Overview of erythrocyte production,erythroyte phagocytosis by mono-
 porter. The specific alteration required for band 3 to become
ruclear phagocytes,hmoglobin degradation, and bilirubin metabolism.
58
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
monoxide. Biliverdin is reduced to bilirubin via biliverdin
humans include sepsis, malaria, hemoglobinopathies, G6PD
reductase in nearly all mammals. Biliverdin reductase activity
deficiency, phosphate depletion,iron deficiency, and hemolic
 is low in rabbits and nutria and almost completely lacking in
uremic syndrome.270
birds; consequently biliverdin is the predominant bile pigment 
Almost no lysis of erythrocytes occurs within the circula-
in these species.101,476 Considerable heterogeneity exists in
tion of normal individuals, but intravascular hemolysis can be
reptiles, amphibians, and fish in the production of bilirubin
present when severe membrane damage occurs in disease
versus biliverdin.101 Bilirubin is released from macrophages
states (Fig. 4-16). Following lysis, hemoglobin in plasma
 and bound to albumin for transport to the liver for conjuga-
(hemoglobinemia) reversibly dissociates into dimers that bind
tion and excretion. Approximately 80% of the bilirubin pro-
almost irreversibly to haptoglobin, an C2-glycoprotein in
duced in the body comes from the degradation of hemoglobin
plasma. The hemoglobin-haptoglobin complex is too large to
with the remainder coming from the degradation of other
be fltered through the kidney and is rapidly removed from
heme-containing proteins.4
476
 the circulation following binding to the hemoglobin scavenger
receptor CD163 on macrophages. Once inside the cell,
Pathologic Destruction of Erythrocytes
hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes are transported to lyso-
 Increased membrane injury associated with various pathologic
somes for degradation, and receptors are recycled to the cell
 disorders can result in increased phagocytosis of erythrocytes
surface.2? The hemoglobin is degraded and iron is conserved,
by macrophages (see previous discussion concerning the
as discussed previously.
removal of aged erythrocytes). Anemia develops if the rate of
Once plasma haptoglobin is saturated (about 50 to 150 mg/
 erythrocyte destruction exceeds the ability of the bone marrow
 dL of hemoglobin-binding capacity in dogs, cats, and horses),
 to respond by producing new erythrocytes. Lysis of erythro-
remaining free hemoglobin dimers are small enough to be
cytes within macrophages after phagocytosis is sometimes
readily fitered by the kidney.1°6 Some hemoglobin is reab-
referred to as extravascular hemolysis. Hyperbilirubinemia
sorbed by the proximal tubules, but once that capacity is
may be present within a few hours following substantial
exceeded, hemoglobin appears in the urine (hemoglobin-
erythrocyte destruction.
 Increased eryptosis (similar to the apoptosis of nucleated
 hemoglobin is present; consequently hemoglobinemia may
cells) may contribute to the development of anemia in some
be observed in the absence of hemoglobinuria. Hemoglobin
disorders. As discussed earlier, eryptosis is characterized by
absorbed by the proximal tubules is rapidly catabolized, and
Cat2 entry, erythrocyte shrinkage, and membrane blebbing
iron is stored as ferritin and hemosiderin.2 Iron that is not
with ectosome formation (Fig. 4-15)271 Reported triggers of
reutilized is lost when tubular epithelial cells slough into the
eryptosis include oxidative stress, energy depletion, osmotic
urine.
shock, lipid-derived signaling molecules, certain bacterial exo-
toxins, various drugs, and metals including lead, copper, zinc,
and mercury. Diseases associated with accelerated eryptosis in
Erythrocytes
Intravascular
hemolysis
Hemoglobin (Hb)
+Haptoglobin
HpHb
αβ dimers
"Free" hemoglobin
鼻
Hepatocytes
Methemoglobin
A
 Globin
Heme
FIGURE 4-15
+ Hemopexin
Hemopexin
-Heme
Hemoglobinuria
in blood from dogs.A, Blood from a dog with regenerative anemia and
hemangiosarcoma. Frequent acanthocytes and echinocytes and occa-
+ Albumin
Methemalbumin+ Hemopexin
sional schistocytes and keratocytes were also noted in the stained blood
flm. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Blood from a febrile dog with mild non-
FIGURE 4-16
regenerative anemia and lymphoma. Low numbers of eccentrocytes and
pyknoctyes and rare hemoglobin crystals were also noted in the stained
Pathophysiology of intravascular hemolysis. Methemalbumin forms in
blood film. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 primates but not in common domestic animals. Hp, haptoglobin.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
59
 Free hemoglobin in plasma can spontaneously oxidize to
in species other than horses, cats, or pigs should be noted
form methemoglobin, which tends to dissociate into ferri-
 as an abnormal finding.
heme (hemin) and globin. Free heme binds to a plasma
 Prominent rouleaux formation results in rapid erythrocyte
protein called hemopexin. The heme-hemopexin complexes 
 sedimentation in whole blood samples allowed to stand undis-
undergo endocytosis after binding to CD91 on the surface of
turbed. This characteristic formed the basis of an erythrocyte
macrophages and hepatocytes.229 The binding to hemopexin
 sedimentation rate test that was done with special sedimenta-
protects cell membranes from toxic effects of free heme, and
tion tubes. Increased sedimentation rates affer 1 hour were
it also conserves iron. Albumin from primates can also bind
 suggestive of increased globulins in plasma, as typically seen
heme to form methemalbumin, but albumin from common
with infammation. Unfortunately the sedimentation rate
 domestic animals does not bind heme.163
increases as the hematocrit decreases, so correction factors
were required for the HCT. The sedimentation rate has largely
been replaced by making direct measurements of total globu-
ABNORMAL ERYTHROCYTE
lins and fibrinogen and other acute-phase proteins.
MORPHOLOGY
Rouleaux
Agglutination
Erythrocytes on blood films from healthy horses, cats, and
Aggregation or clumping of erythrocytes in clusters (not in
pigs often exhibit rouleaux (aggregations of erythrocytes
chains, as in rouleaux) is termed agglutination (Fig. 4-18).
grouped together like a stack of coins) formations (see Fig.
Agglutination is caused by the occurrence of immunoglobu-
4-2). Rouleaux formation depends on both the nature
lins bound to erythrocyte surfaces. Because of their pentava-
of the erythrocytes and the composition of plasma.37 Eryth-
lent nature, IgM immunoglobulins have the greatest propensity
rocytes that are more deformable and have greater membrane
to produce agglutination.i29 EDTA-dependent IgM-mediated
erythrocyte agglutination has been reported in a cat without
electrostatic repulsive force) aggregate more readily than
evidence of hemolysis. Agglutination did not occur if blood
cells with the opposite  characteristics.37443460 Rouleaux
was collected in heparin or citrate.411 High-dose unfraction-
formation also depends on the presence of high-molecular-
ated heparin treatment in horses also causes erythrocyte
globulin proteins—including fibrinogen, haptoglobin, and 
immunoglobulins—-potentiate rouleaux formation in associ-
Polychromasia
ation with infammatory conditions. 1532 Rouleaux formation
 The presence of bluish-red erythrocytes in stained blood flms
can also occur in association with some lymphoproliferative
is called polychromasia  (Fig.  4-19).  Polychromatophilic
 disorders in which one or more immunoglobulins are secreted
erythrocytes are reticulocytes that stain bluish-red owing to
in high amounts (Fig. 4-17). Prominent rouleaux formation
the combined presence of hemoglobin (red staining) and
FIGURE 4-18
FIGURE 4-17
Erythroyte agglutination and spherocyte formatininblood froma dog
Rouleaux formation in blood from a dog with multiple myeloma and a
with von Willebrand's disease after transfusion. A large basophilic eryth-
rocyte (macroreticulocyte or stress reticulocyte) is present in the upper
pale compared to the background that stains blue because ofthe increased
left corner and an echinocyte is present in the lower left corner. Wright-
protein present in the blood. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Giemsa stain.
60
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-19
FIGURE 4-20
Increased polychromasia and anisocytosis in blood from a dog with a
Blood from a dog with a nonregenerative aplastic anemia secondary to
hemolytic anemia caused by Mycoplasma baemocanis, although no organ-
isms are present in this field. Three large polychromatophilic erythrocytes
except for several erythrocytes with scalloped borders (echinocytes).
(reticulocytes) are present in the central area. A rucleated erythrocyte
Wright-Giemsa stain.
(metarubricyte) is present in the upper left. Wright-Giemsa stain.
individual ribosomes and polyribosomes (blue staining). Low
 numbers of polychromatophilic erythrocytes are usually seen
in blood from normal dogs and pigs, because up to 1.5%
reticulocytes may be present in dogs and up to 1% reticulo-
cytes may be present in pigs even when the HCT is normal.23s
Slight polychromasia may be present in normal cats, but many
normal cats exhibit no polychromasia in stained blood films.
Polychromasia is absent in stained blood flms from normal
 catfle, sheep, goats, and horses because reticulocytes with suf-
ficient RNA to impart a bluish color are not normally present
in the blood in these species.
The most useful approach in the classification of anemia is
to determine whether or not evidence of a bone marrow
response to the anemia is present in blood. For all species
except the horse, this involves determining whether absolute
reticulocyte numbers are increased in blood. Horses rarely
release reticulocytes from the bone marrow even when an
FIGURE 4-21
increased production of erythrocytes occurs. When an abso-
lute reticulocytosis is present, the animal is said to have a
stress reticulocytes) are present in blood from a dog with immune-
regenerative anemia. The presence of a regenerative response
mediated hemolytic anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 suggests that the anemia results from either increased eryth-
rocyte destruction or hemorrhage. A nonregenerative anemia
 generally indicates that the anemia is the result of decreased
the blood (Fig. 4-21). High concentrations of erythropoietin
shep s oi e inoqe ramoq (og-t ai uoonpord sooqn
shorten the marrow transit time for erythroid cells, resulting
are required for increased reticulocyte production and release
in the early release of immature reticulocytes that are twice
the normal size.37 There is a direct correlation between
Consequently the anemia appears nonregenerative shortly
the percentage of polychromatophilic erythrocytes and the
after hemolysis or hemorrhage has occurred (see Fig. 4-4).
percentage of reticulocytes in dogs (and presumably in pigs)
 Increased polychromasia is usually present in regenerative
and between the percentage of polychromatophilic erythro-
anemias because many reticulocytes stain bluish-red with
cytes and percentage of aggregate reticulocytes in cats (Fig.
routine blood stains (see Fig. 4-19). When the degree of
anemia is severe, basophilic macroreticulocytes or so-called
reticulocytes from the marrow but will release punctate reticu-
stress reticulocytes or shift reticulocytes may be released into
locytes (Fig. 4-23, A).15 Because punctate reticulocytes do not
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
61
A
B
FIGURE 4-23
Blood from a FeLV-positive cat with a macrocytic normochromic anemia
(HCT = 23%, MCV = 70 fL, MCHC = 33 g/dL). A, Low numbers of
aggregate reticulocytes but markedly increased punctate reticulocytes
(83% uncorrected) are present. Methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
 B, Increased anisocytosis is present but polychromasia is not apparent,
 even though most of the blood cells present are punctate reticulocytes,
because there is insufficient RNA present to impart a blue color to the
 cytoplasm of these cells. Wright-Giemsa stain.
contain sufficient numbers of ribosomes to impart a bluish
 color to the cytoplasm, mild regenerative anemia in cats may
C
lack polychromasia in stained blood flms (Fig. 4-23, B).
FIGURE 4-22
Anisocytosis
Agglutination of aggregate reticulocytes in blood from a cat with a
Variation in erythrocyte diameters in stained blood films is
Coombs'-positive hemolytic anemia. A, Agglutination of polychromato-
called anisocytosis (see Fig. 4-23, B). It is greater in normal
philic erythrocytes and a metarubricyte. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Agglu-
 attle than in other normal domestic animais 23s Anisocytosis
tination of aggregate reticulocytes. New methylene blue reticulocyte
 is increased when different populations of cells are present,
 stain. C, Agglutination of aggregate reticulocytes. New methylene blue
as can occur following a transfusion (Fig. 4-24). Anisocytosis
wet mount preparation.
 may occur when substantial numbers of smaller than normal
cells are produced, as occurs with iron deficiency, or when
 substantial numbers of larger than normal cells are produced,
as occurs when increased numbers of reticulocytes are
62
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-24
FIGURE 4-26
Marked anisocytosis in blood from a 6-week-old kitten after a blood
Hypochromic erythrocytes in blood from a dog with iron deficiency
transfusion. The RDW (43%) was also markedly increased. The kitter
 presented with marked lipemia and a severe iron-deficiency anemia. The
 r  pe  an  es  
diameter of the area of central pallor is increased relative to the red-
rocytes from the blood donor cat. Two lysed erythrocytes (red smudges)
staining periphery ofthe cell. A polychromatophili erythrocyte (reticu-
are present eff center)because lipemia enhances erythrocyte lysis during
locyte) is present near the left edge of the image. Wright-Giemsa stain.
blood film preparation. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-25
FIGURE 4-27
Increased anisocytosis in blood from a horse with a regenerative anemia
Hypochromic erythrocytes in blood from a dog with iron deficiency
resulting from internal hemorrhage. Horses almost never release reticu-
secondary to chronic gastrointestinal blood loss. A microytic hypochro-
locytes in response to anemia; therefore no polychromasia is present.
mic anemia with poikilocytosis (including keratocytes, schistocytes, and
Wright-Giemsa stain.
dacryocytes) were present.
Hypochromasia
produced. Consequently increased anisocytosis is usually
 present in regenerative anemia (see Figs. 4-18, 4-19, 4-21),
 The presence of erythrocytes with decreased hemoglobin con-
but it may be present in some cases of nonregenerative anemia
 centration and increased central pallor is called hypochroma-
sia (Figs. 4-26 through 4-32). Not only is the center of the
 polychromasia may be seen in horses with intensely regenera-
cell paler than normal but the diameter of the area of central
tive anemia (Fig. 4-25).
 pallor is increased relative to the red-staining periphery of the
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
63
FIGURE 4-28
FIGURE 4-30
Marked poikilocytosis and hypochrormasia in blood from a 6-week-old
Marked poikilocytosis and hypochromasia in blood from a piglet with
lamb with mierocytic hypochromic iron-defciency anemia. Wright-
microcytic hypochromic iron-deficiency anemia resulting from a failure
Giemsa stain.
to provide iron injections that are part of the husbandry required in
raising piglets on slated foors. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-29
FIGURE 4-31
Marked poikilocytosis (primarily dacryocytes) and hypochromasia in
Microcytic erythrocytes in blood from an iron-deficient lama exhibiting
blood from a goat with microcytic hypochromic iron-deficiency anemia
irregular or eccentric areas of hypochromasia within the cells. Wright-
secondary to chronic blood lossresulting from Haemonchus gastrointes-
Giemsa stain.
 tinal parasites. Wright-Giermsa stain.
cell. True hypochromic erythrocytes must be differentiated
the cells are thin leptocytes (Fig. 4-34,A). Because these micro-
from torocytes, which have colorless punched-out centers 
cytic leptocytes have increased diameter-to-volume ratios, they
 may not appear as small cells when viewed in stained blood
Torocytes are generally artifacts. Increased hypochromasia is
flms (Fig. 4-34, B).210 Microcytic erythrocytes from iron-
 observed in iron-deficiency anemia.
 deficient lamas and alpacas exhibit irregular or eccentric areas
 Erythrocytes from dogs, ruminants, and pigs with iron-
 of hypochromasia within the cells (see Figs. 4-31, 4-32).326 
 deficiency anemia ofen appear hypochromic on stained blood
 smears. Hypochromasia is less prominent (see Fig. 4-24) and
Poikilocytosis
 generally not recognized in iron-deficient cats and horses.
Erythrocytes can assume a wide variety of shapes. Poikilocytosis
Hypochromasia in iron deficiency results from both decreased
 is a general term used to describe the presence of abnormally
 hemoglobin concentration within cells and from the fact that
 shaped erythrocytes. Although specific terminology is used
64
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
FIGURE 4-32
Blood from an iron-deficient alpaca with dacryocytes and spindle-shaped
hypochromic erythrocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B
FIGURE 4-34
Comparison of discocytes to leptocytes. A, The profle of a normal dis-
cocyte is compared to a leptocyte with similar diameter but smaller
volume. B, Blood from a dog with a microcytic hypochromic (MCV =
32 fL, MCHC = 23 g/dL) iron-deficiency anemia was mixed with an
FIGURE 4-33
equal volume of blood from a normal dog (MCV = 70 fL, MCHC =
34 g/dL) prior to blood film preparation. Because the hypochromic cells
Two torocytes (center and bottom left) with colorless punched-out centers
are leptocytes, they have diameters similar to normal cells even though
and wide dense red-staining peripheries in blood from a dog. Wright-
 they are microcytic cells. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Giemsa stainn.
FromHarvey JW,FrenchTW, Meyer DJ.Chronic iron deficiency anemia in
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1982;18:946-960.
for certain abnormal shapes, it is less important to quantify
each type of shape change than it is to determine the cause
of the shape change .s Poikilocytosis may be present in clini-
in dogs, pigs, and ruminants may exhibit
pronounced
cally normal goats and young cattle Figs. 4-5, 4-35)225.4 In
      
some instances,these shapes appear tobe related to the hemo-
can form when oxidant injury results in Heinz body forma-
globin types present, but an abnormality in protein 4.2 in the
tion and/or membrane injury. One or more blunt erythrocyte
 membrane has been suggested as a causative factor in calves.352
surface projections may form as the membrane adheres to
 Increased numbers of poikilocytes are also present in human
Heinz bodies bound to its internal surface.392 Various abnor-
 s u pr rm s  i s
 Poikilocytosis forms in various disorders associated with
intravascular hemolysis resulting from severe cufaneous burn
erythrocyte fragmentation, including disseminated intra-
injuries. Membrane blebbing with fragmentation was promi-
vascular coagulation (DIC), liver disease, myeloid neoplasms,
nent (Fig. 4-36).347 A variety of abnormal erythrocyte shapes
myelofbrosis, glomerulonephritis, and hemangiosarcoma
have been reported in dogs and cats with doxorubicin toxic-
(dogs).32 For unknown reasons, severe iron-deficiency anemia
as'sissnodoniasap ym shp u pue ste'r!
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
65
FIGURE 4-37
Echinocytes in blood from a dog with histiocytic sarcoma. A, Spicules
of similar length are regularly spaced. B, Echinocytes, in a thinner area
of the same blood flm, appear as erythrocytes with scaloped borders.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-35
 Poikilocytosis (acanthocytes and echinocytes) in blood from a nonanemic
 young calf. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-38
Echinocytes in blood from a normal pig appear as erythrocytes with
scallopedborders, consequently the term crenation,from Latinmeaning
"notched," has previously been used for echinocytes. Wright-Giemsa
FIGURE 4-36
stairn.
 Echinocytes with membrane blebbing and fragmentation in blood from
a horse with intravascular hemolysis resulting from severe cutaneous burn
injuries. Wright stain.
(Fig. 4-38),forming in vitro.3 The morphology of echino-
Phatograpb ofa stained blood flm from a 2004 ASVCP slide reriew case
cytes varies from slightly spiculated echinodiscocytes to highly
submitted by E.Spangler,M.Jobnson,A.Kessell,B.Weeks,T. Norman,and
spiculated spheroechinocytes, which have been called burr
K.Chafin.
cells (Fig. 4-39, A). The most advanced echinocytes are those
 that have lost most of their spicules and have nearly become
spherocytes (Fig. 4-39, B). Echinocytes form when the surface
Echinocytes (Crenated Erythrocytes)
 area of the outer lipid monolayer increases relative to the inner
 Echinocytes are spiculated erythrocytes in which the spicules
monolayer.438
 are relativelyevenly spaced and of similar ize 523 Spicules may
 Echinocytic transformation occurs in the presence of fatty
be sharp or blunt. When observed in stained blood films,
acids, lysophospholipids, and amphiphatic drugs that distri-
echinocytosis is usually an artifact that results from excess
bute preferentially in the outer half of the lipid bilayer.20s
adus pauord ro uoeedand resus rdordun viT
 Transient echinocytosis occurs in horses with Clostridium per-
 storage before blood film preparation. The appearance of the
fringensinfection26 and in dogs following rattlesnake (see Fig.
echinocytes can vary depending on the thickness of the blood
4-39, A),70,191 coral snake (see Fig. 4-39, B),30 water moccasin
film (Fig. 4-37). They are common in normal pig blood smears
(Fig. 4-40), and asp viper (Vipera aspis) envenomation,303
66
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
B
FIGURE 4-39
Echinocytesin theblood ofdogsfollowing snakebites.A,Highlyspiu
lated echinocytes (burr cells) in blood from a dog following an Eastern
diamondback rattlesnake bite. B, Spheroechinocytes and a lysed eryth-
rocyte “ghost" (bottom center) in blood from a dog following a coral snake
bite. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-41
An echinocyte (center) and four polychromatophilic erythrocytes in
blood from a pyruvate kinase-deficient beagle dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Although the mechanisms are not fully understood, ATP is
required for the maintenance of normal shape and deform-
ability of erythrocytes.20s Phospholipids are asymmetrically
arranged in the plasma membrane, with anionic amino-
containing phospholipids (predominantly phosphatidylserine)
located in the inner leafet of the bilaminar membrane.
These anionic phospholipids are shuttled (fipped) from the
outer leafet to the inner leafet by an ATP-dependent
aminophospholipid-specific translocase or fippase.,s ATP
also provides the energy needed to pump Caz out of cells.
 Increased Cat activates neutral proteases (calpains), which can
 degrade membrane skeletal proteins; phospholipase C, which
cleaves phosphoinositides; and scramblase, which accelerates
FIGURE 4-40
the bidirectional transbilayermovement ofphospholipids 208 540
Highly spiculated echinocytes in blood from a dog following a water
The inhibition of the fippase and/or the activation of the
moccasin bite. Two large polychromatophilic erythrocytes (reticulocytes)
scramblase can result in increased phosphatidylserine in the
are also present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
presumably secondary to the action of phospholipases present
Echinocytes and other shape abnormalities have been rec-
 in venom.49s Depending on the time course and dose of venom
received, either echinocytosis or spherocytosis may be observed
(Fig. 4-41), which results in a decreased ability to generate
after these snakebites.
ATP 86,32412 Occasional echinocytes may also be seen in dogs
Echinocytes may occur in uremic animals and immediately
with erythrocyte phosphofructokinase deficiency (Fig. 4-42).
 after transfusion of stored blood.392 They have been seen with
 PFK-deficient erythrocytes have decreased ATP and increased
increased frequency in dogs with glomerulonephritis and neo-
Cat2 concentrations.404
plasia (lymphoma, hemangiosarcoma, mast cell tumor, and
Acanthocytes
cyte shape abnormality in human burn patients, and this was
Erythrocytes
   
one of the shape abnormalities recognized in horses with
spicules are called acanthocytes or spur cells (Fig. 4-43).43
Acanthocytes form when erythrocyte membranes contain
 Echinocytes also form when erythrocytes are dehydrated,
excess cholesterol compared to phospholipids. If cholesterol
pH is increased, ATP is depleted, and intracellular calcium is
and phospholipids are increased to a similar degree, codocyte
increased.31.205 Echinocytosis occurs in horses when total body
formation is more likely than acanthocyte formation.?3
depletion of cations has occurred (endurance exercise, furose-
Alterations in erythrocyte membrane lipids can result from
mide treatment, diarrhea, systemic disease),1222s
increased blood cholesterol content or due to the presence of
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
67
FIGURE 4-42
FIGURE 4-44
An echinocyte (center) and four polychromatophilic erythrocytes in
Acanthocytes in blood from a dog with neoplastie lymphoid infiltrates
blood from a phosphofruetokinase-deficient English springer spaniel
 in the liver. A neoplastic lymphoblast is also present. Wright-Giemsa
dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
stairl.
凸
B
FIGURE 4-43
Acanthocytes in blood from a dog and cat. A, Two acanthocytes (above)
with irregularly spaced, variably sized spicules in blood from a dog with
neoplastic lymphoid infiltrates in the liver. B, An acanthocyte in blood
Of a cat with hepatic lipidosis. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-45
Three acanthocytes, four polychromatophilic erythrocytes, two metaru-
abnormal plasma lipoprotein composition.9 Acanthocytes 
bricytes, and a neutrophil in blood from a dog with hemangiosarcoma.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
have been recognized in animals with liver disease (Fig. 4-44),
possibly due to alterations in plasma lipid composition, which
can alter erythrocyte lipid composition.9,32,s22They have also
been reported in dogs with disorders that result in erythrocyte
the hole results in the formation of one or two projections.
fragmentation, such as hemangiosarcoma (Fig. 4-45), DiC,
Keratocytes have been recognized in various disorders
 and glomerulonephritis.342.471,52
 including iron-deficiency anemia,20 liver disorders,21 doxoru-
Marked acanthocytosis is reported to occur in young goats
bicin toxicity in cats,348 myelodysplastic syndrome,$24 and in
and some young cattle (see Fig. 4-35). Acanthocytosis of
various disorders in dogs having concomitant echinocytosis
young goats occurs as a result of the presence of hemoglobin
or acanthocytosis 342 2323
C at this early stage of development.2us
Stomatocytes
Keratocytes
Cup-shaped erythrocytes that have oval or elongated areas of
 Erythrocytes containing one or more intact holes are called
central pallor when viewed in stained blood films are called
prekeratocytes, and erythrocytes with ruptured holes are
stomatocytes (Fig. 4-48, A). They most often occur as artifacts
called keratocytes (Figs. 4-46 and 4-47).14 The rupture of
 in thick blood flm preparations Stomatocytes form when pH
68
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
B
FIGURE 4-46
FIGURE 4-48
Scanning electron photomicrographs of cat keratocytes. A, A prekerato-
Stomatocytes with elongated areas of central pallor in blood. A, Blood
cyte contains a hole completely through the cell. B, A keratocyte forms
fom a cat with hemolytic anemia. The stomatocytes were not uniformly
when the hole in the prekeratocyte ruptures, resulting in the formation
present in the blood flm and were considered to be an artifact. Wright-
of one or two projections. This cell might be considered an echinokera-
Giemsa stain. B, Stomatocytes in blood from an asymptomatic Pomera
tocyte because of its additional projections.
rian dog with persistent stomatocytosis associated with macrocytic
Photomicrographs were provided by C. L. Flint and M. A. Scott.
matocytosis, these erythrocytes were osmotically fragile and had a low
concentration of reduced glutathione. Wright-Giemsa stain.
A
FIGURE 4-49
Scanning electron photomierograph of a discocyte (lft and spherocyte
(rigbt) in blood from a dog.
Courtesy of K. S. Keeton and N. C. Jain.
FIGURE 4-47
Keratocytes in blood from a cat with hepatic lipidosis. A, Prekeratocyte
 Pomeranians (Fig. 4-48, B) with hereditary stomatocytosis.
with a hole. B, Keratocyte where the hole has ruptured, producing a
 Chondrodysplasia (short-limbed dwarfism) occurs along with
single horn.C, Keratocyte where hole has ruptured, producing two horns.
D, Keratocyte where two holes have ruptured. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 sisios et'sneu s un sisios
Drentse patrijshond dogs is associated with severe polysys-
temic disease and shortened life span.43
is decreased16 and amphiphatic drugs are present that distrib-
Spherocytes
ute preferentially in the inner leafet of the lipid bilayer.205
Spherical erythrocytes that result from cell swelling and/or
Stomatocytes also form when the water content of eryth-
 loss of cell membrane are referred to as spherocytes (Fig.
rocytes is increased, as occurs in at least three diffrent
4-49). Spherocytes lack central pallor and have smaller diam-
inherited syndromes in dogs.20s No clinical signs occur in
eters than normal on stained blood films (Fig. 4-50, A).
miniature   schnauzers,71.170
Or
Spherical erythrocytes with slight indentations on one side
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
69
FIGURE 4-51
Spherocytes, polychromatophilic erythrocytes, and two rubricytes in
blood from a dog with primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
C
D
FIGURE 4-50
Spherocytes and stomatospherocytes in animal blood samples. A, Three
spherocytes (bottom) and a large polychromatophilic erythrocyte or retic-
 p-au m op e u poq u (o) ao
anemia. B, Two stomatospherocytes in blood from a dog with primary
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. The stomatospherocytes are not
perfect spheres, rather, each has a slight indentation on one side. C, Two
stomatospherocytes in blood from a cat with Mycoplasma baemofelis
infection. D, A spherocyte (top) and a discocyte (bottom) in blood from
a foal with immune-mediated neonatal isoerythrolysis. Wright-Giemsa
stairn.
B
FIGURE 4-52
may be called stomatospherocytes (Fig. 4-50, B,C). Since
Schistocytes in dog blood. A, A fragmented erythrocyte (schistocyte)
erythrocytes from other common domestic animals exhibit
and two discocytes in blood from a dog with disseminated intravascular
less central pallor than those of dogs,it is diffcult to be certain
coagulation (DiC).B, A schistocyte (left),discocyte top),and echinocyte
when spherocytes are present in these noncanine species
(bottom) in blood from a dog with DIC. Wright-Giemsa stain.
(Fig. 4-50, D).
 Spherocytes and stomatospherocytes occur most frequently
in association with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in
Schistocytes
formation
 include
 snake
envenomations,301,303,498
bee
Erythrocyte fragments with pointed extremities are called
schistocytes or schizocytes (Fig. 4-52), and they are smaller
 than normal discocytes. Schistocytes may be seen in dogs with
 Spherocytes have been reported in cattle with anaplasmosis463
 microangiopathic hemolytic anemia associated with DIC,
 and Theileria buffeli infection453 and in horses with cutaneous
where they can be formed by the impact of erythrocytes
burns. 347
with fibrin strands in fowing blood (Fig. 4-53).392 Schisto-
Defects in ankyrin, band 3, protein 4.2, and certain
cytes are less consistently seen in cats, horses, and cattle with
 defects in Q-spectrin and β-spectrin result in hereditary
DIC,234.477
 possibly because the erythrocytes of these species
spherocytosis in mice and humans.116 A complete absence of
are smaller and less likely to be split by fibrin strands in the
 band 3 results in hereditary spherocytosis in Japanese black
circulation.
cattle 34232 Hereditary spherocytosis has been reported in
 Schistocytes have also been seen in severe iron-deficiency
golden retriever dogs with reductions in erythrocyte mem-
brane spectrin432, however, spherocytes were not recognized
glomerulonephritis, hemolytic
uremic syndrome, hemo-
in stained blood films.434
phagocytic histiocytic disorders, hemangiosarcoma in dogs,
70
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-53
FIGURE 4-55
Drawing of schistocyte and microspherocyte formation when an eryth-
Echinocytes, acanthocytes, and echinoschistocytes in blood from a
rocyte impacts a fibrin strand under fow conditions.
splenectomized pyruvate kinase-deficient Cairn terrier dog. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
Leptocytes
 These cells are thin, often hypochromic-appearing erythro-
cytes with increased membrane-to-volume ratios. Some lep-
tocytes appear folded (Fig. 4-56,A), some appear as triconcave
knizocytes (Fig. 4-57) that give the impression that the eryth-
rocyte has a central bar of hemoglobin (Fig. 4-56, B,C), and
others appear as codocytes (Fig. 4-58). Codocytes (target cells)
are bell-shaped cells that exhibit a central density or "bull's-
eye" in stained blood films. Small numbers of codocytes are
often seen in normal dog blood, and both codocytes and
knizocytes are increased in regenerative anemia in dogs.
 Codocytes are especially increased in dogs with a congenital
anemia (Fig. 4-58, B)* and rarely in hepatic insufficiency
(Fig. 4-58, C), resulting in a balanced accumulation of mem-
brane phospholipids and cholesterol." Polychromatophilic
FIGURE 4-54
erythrocytes can sometimes appear as leptocytes.
Echinocytes, a polychromatophilic erythrocyte, a metarubricyte and a
 r  e   
Eccentrocytes
resulting from diroflariasis and caudal vena cava syndrome. A neutrophil
and band neutrophil are also present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
An erythrocyte in which the hemoglobin is localized to part
of the cell, leaving a hemoglobin-poor area visible in the
remaining part of the cell, is termed an eccentrocyte (Figs.
caudal vena cava syndrome of dirofilariasis in dogs (Fig. 4-54),
4-59, 4-60). Other terms used to refer to eccentrocytes include
and congenital and acquired dyserythropoiesis in dogs.*
bemigbosts, irregularly contratted cels, double-colored cells, and
Marked poikilocytosis with schistocytes and acanthocytes
cross-bonded erytbrocytes24 Oxidant damage to erythrocyte
 has been recognized in pyruvate kinase-deficient dogs after
 membranes results in the adhesion of opposing areas of the
splenectomy (Fig. 4-55)378412 It is assumed that the spleen
cytoplasmic face of the erythrocyte membrane.24.137 It has
had previously removed these fragmented erythrocytes. Schis-
been suggested that eccentrocytes form in vivo when adhesive,
tocytes have been described in cats with liver disease, in cats
s q ran nq oe s pe
and dogs with doxorubicin toxicity,91,348 and in horses with
shrinkage in the kidney and/or from squeezing through the
severe cutaneous burns. 347
microcirculation.138
 Eccentrocytes have been recognized in dogs secondary to
increased endogenous oxidants associated with ketoacidotic
*References 193, 197,223,281, 392, 522, 524.
diabetes, infammation (Fig. 4-61), neoplasia (especially
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
71
B
C
FIGURE 4-56
Leptocytes in blood from dogs. A, Two thin, fat, hypochromic-appearing erythrocytes (leptocytes) with 
increased membrane-to-volume ratios are present in blood from a dog with severe iron-deficiency anemia.
The bottom leptocyte is folded. B, A discocyte and triconcave knizocyte in blood from a dog with a mild
nonregenerative anemia associated with a hepatocellular carcinoma. C, Leptocytes, ineluding two knizocytes
(top and bottom center), are present in blood of a dog with iron-deficiency anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Eccentrocytosis was recognized in a cow treated with
 intravenous hydrogen peroxide as a "home remedy,"291 Eccen-
trocytes have been reported in horses ingesting red maple
leaves and in those with severe cutaneous burns.?
347,389 Finally,
eccentrocytes have been seen in horses with inherited G6PD
deficiency (see Fig. 4-59, B) and glutathione reductase
deficiency secondary to erythrocyte
e FAD deficiency (Fig.
4-64)212.4s2 Both of these hereditary disorders result in the
decreased ability of erythrocytes to protect against endoge-
nous oxidants.
Pyknocytes
Irregularly spherical erythrocytes with small cytoplasmic pro-
jections are called pyknocytes (see Figs. 4-59, D, 4-60, D).
Like eccentrocytes, pyknocytes appear to be a product of
FIGURE 4-57
lowing the loss of much of the fused membrane.212 Pyknocytes
Scanning electron photomicrograph of two discocytes and a knizocyte
 are appreciably smallr in diameter and stain more densely
Itop) in blood from a dog.
(especially with new methylene blue) than discocytes (Fig.
Courtesy of K. S. Keeton and N. C. Jain.
bin concentrations than normal131 and presumably represent
erythrocytes undergoing eryptosis.
Elliptocytes (Ovalocytes)
lymphoma), and Babesia canis canis infection.7782 Eccentro-
Erythrocytes from nonmammals and animals in the Cameli-
 cytes have been seen in dogs ingesting or receiving oxidants
dae family are elliptical or oval in shape (see Fig. 4-6). They
including onions and garlic, acetaminophen (see Fig. 4-59, C)
 are generally flat rather than biconcave. Abnormal elliptocytes
and nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs, vitamin K and
have been recognized in cats with bone marrow abnormalities
vitamin K antagonist rodenticides, naphthalene, and pro-
(myeloid neoplasms and acute lymphoblastic leukemia),81
hepatic lipidosis,21
 portosystemic shunts,41 and doxorubicin
formation also occurs in cats following oxidant damage
- os  sp pe s
(Fig. 4-63).
plastic syndrome524 and glomerulonephritis, in which the
72
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
C
FIGURE 4-58
Codocytes in blood from dogs. These erythrocytes exhibit a central density or *bull's-eye"and are often referred
to as target cells. A, Three codocytes in blood from a Cairn terrier dog with a regenerative anemia and hepatic
hermochromatosis secondary to pyruvate kinase deficiency. B, Two codocytes (top and bottom center) and a
schistocyte (bottom leff) in blood from a dog with severe iron-deficiency anemia. C, Codocytes in blood from
a dog with liver disease. Wright-Giermsa stain.
B
C
D
FIGURE 4-60
Scanning and transmission electron photomicrographs of eccentrocytes
C
e  a   e     e p
 dinucleotide (FAD) deficiency A, Scanning electron photomicrograph
of an eccentrocyte showing a fused membrane leaf in the left portion
FIGURE 4-59
and a spheroid region containing hemoglobin in the right portion of anl
Eccentrocytes in blood from dogs and a horse. A, An eccentrocyte
erythroyte. B, Scanning electron photomicrograph of an eccentrocyte
(center) in blood from a dog with prolonged propofol anesthesia. B, Two
showing fused membranes in different planes. C, Transmission electron
eccentrocytes in blood from a horse with inherited erythrocyte glucose-
 photomicrograph of an eccentrocyte showing a fused membrane leaf in
 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency C, Two eccentrocytes
the left portion and a spheroid region containing hemoglobin in the right
and a discocyte (left) in blood from a dog with oxidant injury induced
portion of an erythrocyte. D, Scanning electron photomicrograph of a
by the administration of acetaminophen. The cell at top center appears
spheroid pyknocyte with only tags of cytoplasm rermaining.
 spherical with a small tag of cytoplasm and is classified as a pyknocyte.
D, Two echinocytes (top), an eccentrocyte (bottom left) and a pyknocyte
From Harvey JW, Stockbam SL,Scott MA,et al. Metbemoglobinemia and
(bottom rigbt) in blood from a dog with diabetes mellitus and septic
eccentrocytosisnequineerytbrocytefavinadenine dimucleotidedeficiency.Vet
hepatitis. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Pathol. 2003;40:632-642.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
73
FIGURE 4-61
Blood from a dog with diabetes mellitus and septic hepatitis. Four eccen-
trocytes, two pyknocytes, and a toxic band neutrophil are present.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-63
Heinz body and eccentrocyte formation in blood from a cat with acet-
aminophen toxicity. A, Heinz bodies are barely discernible as pale spots
in erythrocytes. A polychromatophilic erythrocyte (left lower quadrant)
 e    e  a  p
present. B, Eccentrocytes and pale-staining Heinz bodies are visible in
blood collected 2 days after the sample shown in (A).
FIGURE 4-62
Eight eccentrocytes in blood from a dog subjected to prolonged propofol
myeloid neoplasms,23 dogs with glomerulonephritis, and a dog
anesthesia. A neutrophil is present at bottom right. Wright-Giemsa stain.
with hypersplenism.267 Dacryocytes are common erythrocyte
 shape abnormalities in iron-deficient ruminants, including
Ilamas and alpacas (Fig. 4-67, C, D). 326,43
elliptocytes may be spiculated (Fig. 4-65)39 Hereditary
Drepanocytes (Sickle Cells)
elliptocytosis has been reported in a dog with a membrane 
 These fusiform or spindle-shaped erythrocytes were first rec-
protein 4.1 deficiency and in another with a mutant β-spectrin 
 ognized in deer blood in 1840 and in a human with sickle cell
(Fig. 4-66) 122,439
anemia in 1910.44 Drepanocytes are often observed in blood
from normal deer (Figs. 4-68, A, 4-69)44 They develop sec-
Dacryocytes
 ondary to hemoglobin polymerization, and drepanocyte shape
 These erythrocytes are teardrop-shaped with single elongated or
 in deer depends on the hemoglobin types present. This is an
pointed extremities (Fig. 4-67,A,B). Dacryocytosis is a common 
 in vitro phenomenon that occurs when oxygen tension is high
feature of myelofibrosis in humans, but dacryocytes are not as
 and pH is above 7.4. Members of the Cervidae family whose
 commonly recognized in dogs with myelofibrosis. 281,38, 42 Dac-
 erythrocytes do not sickle in vitro include reindeer, caribou,
 ryocytes have also been seen in the blood of dogs and cats with
 and muntjac deer.479
74
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-65
 Elliptocytes in blood from a cat and a dog. A, Three elliptocytes (top)
and a discocyte in blood from a diabetic cat with mild anemia. Radio-
graphs revealed diffuse interstitial lung disease of unknown etiology.
with glomerulonephritis. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B
FIGURE 4-64
Pyknocytes and eccentrocytes in blood from horses with erythrocyte
Havin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) deficiency A, Two eccentrocytes
s
taining an eccentrically located hemoglobin crystal (botfom) in a stained-
blood film from a mustang mare with FAD deficiency Wright-Giemsa.
B, Dark blue-staining eccentrocytes and pyknocytes in a blood film from
a Kentucky mountain saddle horse gelding with FAD deficiency. New
 methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
FromHarveyJWPatbogenesis,laboratorydiagnosis,and clinicalimplications
of erytbrocyte ezyme deficiencies in dogs, cats, and borses. Vet Clin Pathol.
2006;35:144-156.
FIGURE 4-66
Elliptocytosis in blood from a dog with a mutant β-spectrin. A, Ellip-
 tocytes and echinoelliptocytes in blood from a dog. Wright-Giemsa
stain. B, Scanning electron photomicrograph of elliptocytes and echino-
elliptocytes in blood from a dog.
From Di Terlizzi R,GallagberPG,Mobandas N,et al.Canine elliptocytosis
due to a mautant beta-spectrin. Vet Clin Pathol.2009;38:52-58.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
75
B
FIGURE 4-69
Transmission electron photomicrograph of a matchstick-shaped drepa-
nocyte in blood from a deer showing filamentous aggregates of
hemoglobin.
C
FIGURE 4-67
The matchstick cell. Blood. 1974;43:907-914.
Dacryocytes in the blood of animals. A, A dacryocyte (bottmj and two
discocytes in blood from a cat. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, A dacryoyte
(top) and elliptocyte (bottom) in blood frorm a dog with glomerulo-
nephritis. C, Hypochromic dacryocytes in blood from a goat with severe
iron-defciency anemia. D, Hypochromic daeryocytes in blood from a
depending on the individual goat and on in vitro alterations
llama with severe iron-deficiency anemia. The presence of the normal
 in temperature, pH, and oxygenation. The number of these
llama elliptocyte (aboue rigbt) is the result of a blood trarsfusion. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
cells decreases during anemia, probably because of the synthe-
sis of hemoglobin C.239
Crystallized Hemoglobin
The presence of large hemoglobin crystals within erythrocytes
is occasional recognized in blood flms from cats (Figs. 4-70,
the blood of llamas and alpacas (Fig. 4-70, C).483 No hemo-
globin abnormalities have been recognized by hemoglobin
electrophoresis in animals with hemoglobin crystals.
 In addition to eccentrocytes and pyknocytes, intraerythro-
cytic crystals have been recognized in low number in horses
with erythrocyte G6PD and FAD deficiencies (Figs. 4-70, D,
A
B
4-71, B).212 Large hemoglobin crystals were reported in horses
FIGURE 4-68
carb dipropionate (Fig. 4-71, C).42 Low numbers ofintraeryth-
Drepanocytes and fusiform erythrocytes in a deer and goat.A, Elongated
drepanocyte (sickle cell) in blood from a white-tailed deer. B, Erythro-
rocytic hemoglobin crystals have been reported in two dogs
cytes containing hemoglobin inclusions in blood from a mixed-breed
with multiple erythroid abnormalities including prominent
goat. Some erythrocytes appeared as rectangles but most appeared more
siderotic inclusions in their erythrocytes (Fig. 4-71, D).81.209
q u uau jo uzud sa u pu ui
Hemoglobin crystals may also develop as sample storage
flaments, as oceurs in drepanocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
artifacts.38
The mechanism or mechanisms of hemoglobin crystal for-
 Polymerization of hemoglobin in tubular flaments occurs
mation are unknown, but based on studies of humans with
hemoglobin C disease, crystal formation may be infuenced
British sheep.13 The resultant fusiform or spindle-shaped
 by factors such as pH, degree of oxygen saturation, and cellular 
erythrocytes resemble drepanocytes in deer, they have been
dehydration/increased intracellular  hemoglobin  concentra-
called acuminocytes by some authors (Fig. 4-68, B)233
 tion.7 Their potential relationships to oxidant injury, eccen-
 The proportion of fusiform cells in Angora goats varies
 trocytes, and eryptosis need further study.212
76
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
C
D
C
D
FIGURE 4-70
FIGURE 4-71
Hemoglobin crystals in stained blood films. A, Crystallized hemoglobin
Scanning and transmission electron photomicrographs of hemoglobin
in an erythrocyte from a cat. B, Discocyte and erythrocyte with crystal-
Crystals. A, Scanning electron photomicrograph of a cat erythrocyte
lized hemoglobin in the blood from a dog with a mild nonregenerative
containing crystallized hemoglobin. B, Scanning electron photomicro-
anemia associated with a hepatocellular carcinoma. C, Crystallized
graph of an erythrocyte containing a hemoglobin crystal in blood from
hemoglobin in two erythrocytes from a llama. D, An eccentrocyte
a mustang mare with FAD deficiency C, Transmission electron photo-
(bottom; and hemoglobin crystal in blood from mustang mare with FAD
micrograph of a horse erythrocyte containing both a hemoglobin crystal
deficiency. Wright-Giemsa stain.
and a Babesia egui organism. The horse had been treated with imidocarb.
D, Transmission electron photomicrograph of a dog erythrocyte contain-
ing a hemoglobin crystal The dog had mierocytic hypochromic erythro-
cytes that also contained siderotic inclusions and Heinz bodies.
A, From Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology.4th ed. Philadelpbia,
Lysed Erythrocytes
Lea  Febiger,1986.B,From Harvey JW, Stockham SL,Scott MA,et al
Methemoglobinemia andeccentrocytosisinequine erytbrocyteflavinadenine
The presence of erythrocyte “ghosts" in peripheral blood films
dimucleotide deficiency. Vet Pathol. 2003;40:632-642. C, From Simpson CF,
 indicates that the cells lysed prior to blood film preparation
TaylorWJ,KitchenH.Crystalineinclusionsinerytbrocytesparasitized with
(Fig. 4-72,A). Erythrocyte membranes are rapidly cleared from
Babesia equifolowing treatment of ponies with imidocarb. Am JVet Res.
 the circulation following intravascular hemolysis; consequently
1980;41:1336-1340. D,Courtesy of W. L. Clapp.
the presence of erythrocyte ghosts indicates either recent intra-
vascular hemolysis or in vitro hemolysis in the blood tube after
collection. If the hemolysis is caused by an oxidant, Heinz
bodies may be visible within erythrocyte ghosts (Fig. 4-72, B).
Erythrocyte Vesicles
When erythrocytes lyse during blood flm preparation, they
Erythrocyte injury can result in the formation of variably
appear as red smudges (see Figs. 4-24, 4-72, C). These smudged
sized erythrocyte vesicles (Fig. 4-74, A-C). They are classified
 erythrocytes are commonly seen in lipemic samples.
as microvesicles when their diameter is less than 1 μm. The
small size of microvesicles makes them diffcult to identify
in stained blood films and difficult to count using fow
Erythroid Loops
cytometers.
 In addition to echinocytes, spherocytes, and erythrocyte
 Erythrocytes, leukocytes, platelets, and endothelial cells all
ghosts, moderate numbers of unusual erythrocyte membrane-
release membrane-bound microvesicles (also called micro-
like structures (termed erythroid loops) have been found in
particles) into the circulation, even in healthy individuals.
the blood of dogs bitten by the asp viper (Fig. 4-73).303
Depending on the cell type and stimulus, these microvesicles
Although generally round, these loops were sometimes dis-
may be either exosomes or ectosomes. Exosomes are micro-
rupted and appeared as thin, pale reddish-blue bands. They
vesicles that form following inward budding of membranes
are believed to be a consequence of erythrocyte hemolysis, but
to form multivesicular bodies, and multivesicular bodies sub-
 the mechanism of their formation is unknown.
sequently fuse with the external cell membrane, releasing
CH AP TER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
77
C
FIGURE 4-72
Lysed erythrocytes in blood films. A, Red-staining intact erythrocytes (echinocyte in the center) and
 pale-staining erythrocyte ghosts in blood from a horse in which intravascular hemolysis was produced by
the intravenous and intraperitoneal administration of hypotonic fuid believed isotonic at the time of
administration. B, Erythrocyte ghosts, each containing a single red-staining Heinz body, in erythrocytes
from a cat with intravascular hemolysis caused by acetaminophen administration. C, A lysed erythrocyte (red
smudge at fopy and discocyte in blood from a dog with lipermia The lysis occurred during smear preparation.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-73
Three erythroid loops in blood from a dog bitten by a snake (Vipera
aspis).
From MasserdottiC.Unusualerythroid loops"in canine blood smears after
D
viper-bite envenomation. Vet Clin Patho1. 2009;38:321-325.
FIGURE 4-74
Erythrocyte vesicles in blood films. A, Erythrocyte vesicle (center) in
- pue eae au p m aop a e u po
phoma. Low rumbers of eccentrocytes and pyknoctyes and rare hemo-
globin crystals were also noted in the stained blood film. B, Erythrocyte
vesicle formation in blood from a cat with eccentrocytes and erythrocytes
containing Heinz bodies. The cat was a ketoacidotic diabetic with hepatic
lipidosis. C, Elongated erythrocyte vesicle (fop leff) and eccentrocyte
(bottom rigbt) in blood from a dog subjected to prolonged propofol
anesthesia. D, Microvesiculation from an acanthocyte in blood from a
 dog with neoplastic lymphoid infiltrates in the liver.
78
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 preformed exosomes.405 As presented in Chapter 3, as reticu-
transfusion when ATP depletion results in echinocyte forma-
locytes mature into erythrocytes, this process is used by reticu-
tion and blebbing of ectosomes from the tips of echinocytic
locytes to eliminate unneeded proteins, such as transferrin
spicules. 186
receptors and Na*, K+ ATPase transporters (in dogs) from
  p   sisar 
their surfaces.263
phages in the liver.37 The spleen also appears to be important
 Ectosomes are shed by many cells, including erythrocytes,
in this regard because erythrocyte microvesicles are higher in
following the budding of microvesicles directly from the cell
splenectomized compared with nonsplenectomized humans
membrane (Fig. 4-74, D). The mean numbers of erythrocyte
with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.143
 microvesicles in healthy humans are reported to vary from
about 30 to 300/μL of plasma, depending on the methods
Nucleated Erythrocytes
 both procoagulant and anti-inflammatory/immunosuppres-
 Rubricytes and metarubricytes (Fig. 4-75, A,B) are seldom
 sive activities.40 They are released in increased numbers during
 present in the blood of normal adult mammals, although low 
numbers may occur in some normal dogs and cats.4 Meta-
earlier in this chapter.27 Increased total microvesicles, includ-
rubricytosis(
(generally called normoblastemia in human
ing erythrocyte microvesicles, are present in the blood of
hematology) is often seen in blood in association with a
humans with metabolic syndrome and oxidative stress 216
 regenerative anemia; however, their presence does not neces-
 Large numbers of microvesicles can form in blood stored for
sarily indicate that a regenerative response is present.26
F IG U RE 4-7 5 Nucleated erythroid cells and nuclear fragmentation
B
D
A, Polychromatophilic rubricyte in blood from a dog with regenerative anemia. B, Metarubricyte in blood
rubricyte in blood from a cat with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML-M6) and a nonregenerative anemia.
D, Exceptionally large basophilic rubricyte in blood from a cat with myelodysplastic syndrome and a nonre-
generative anemia.
E
G
H
E, Rubriblast in blood from a cat with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML-M6) and a nonregenerative
anemia. F, Polychrormatophilic metarubricyte with elongated nucleus and erythrocyte containing nuclear
fagments in blood from a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia 5 days after
treatment with vincristine. G, Erythrocyte containing nuclear fragments in blood from a dog with immune-
mediated hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia 5 days after treatment with vincristine. H, Mitotic rubri-
 cyte in blood from a dog with hemangiosarcoma and a regenerative anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
79
 Nucleated erythrocytes are rarely seen in horses with regen-
when the nucleus is expelled (Fig. 4-77).43.7 They have gener-
erative anemia.
ally been called Howell-Jolly bodies by hematologists and
 Nucleated erythrocytes may be seen in animals with lead
micronuclei by toxicologists 194ss2 The latter term is advanta-
 poisoning, in which there is minimal or no anemia,164.325 and
 geous because it describes their composition. Howell-Jolly
in nonanemic conditions in which the bone marrow is
 damaged, such as septicemia, endotoxic shock, and drug 
 and erythrocytes squeeze through interendothelial slits of the
splenic sinus.76528 They may be present in low numbers in
the blood of most dogs presented with heat stroke.2s
erythrocytes of normal horses and cats (Fig. 4-76,A). They are
Low numbers of nucleated erythrocytes are seen in a wide
often present in association with regenerative anemia or
variety of conditions in dogs, including cardiovascular disease,
 trauma, hyperadrenocorticism, and various infammatory
bodies may be increased in animals receiving glucocorticoid
conditions.226
therapy (Fig. 4-76, B),23 in benign poodle macrocytosis (Fig.
When  frequent nucleated erythrocyte precursors are
4-76, C),38
 and in animals being treated with chemothera-
present in the blood of an animal with nonregenerative anemia
peutic agents that induce nuclear fragmentation, such as
(Fig. 4-75, C-E), conditions including myelodysplasia, hema-
vincristine, colchicine, cytosine arabinoside, and cyclophos-
phamide (see Fig. 4-75, F G),194.552
 impaired splenic function,4 and inherited dyserythropoietic
disorders2344 should be considered. The presence of rubri-
Heinz Bodies
blasts in blood from an animal with nonregenerative anemia
These inclsions are large aggregates of oxidized, precipitatd
 ) sussard si usedosu pru e re sissains As
hemoglobin attached to the internal surfaces of erythrocyte
 s    s  
membranes. In contrast to Howell-Jolly bodies, which stain
(Fig. 4-75, D) and erythrocyte nuclei may be lobulated or
dark blue, Heinz bodies stain red to pale pink with
fragmented in animals with myeloid neoplasms (Fig. 4-75,
Romanowsky-type stains (Fig. 4-78, A,C). Heinz bodies stain
lighter blue than Howell-Jolly bodies when stained with
Nucleated erythroid precursors are capable of division earlier
reticulocyte stains (Fig. 4-78, B, D). They can also be visualized
than metarubricytes; consequently, mitotic nucleated erythro-
as dark refractile inclusions in new methylene blue wet mount
cytes may be seen in blood (Fig. 4-75, H).
preparations (Fig. 4-78, E). Heinz bodies may also be visible
within eccentrocytes (Fig. 4-78, F) If they bind extensively to
the inner surface of erythrocyte membranes, they may be
INCLUSIONS OF ERYTHROCYTES
recognized as small surface projections when the membrane
Howell-Jolly Bodies (Micronuclei)
binds around much of an inclusion (Figs. 4-78, FG, 4-79,
 These small spherical nuclear remnants (Fig. 4-76) form in
4-80). When intravascular hemolysis occurs, they may be
 the bone marrow following nuclear fragmentation or rupture
visible as red inclusions within erythrocyte ghosts (Figs. 4-72,
of the nuclear membrane, with nuclear material left behind
B, 4-78, G, 4-79, C).
FIGURE 4-76
Howell-Jolly bodies (spherical ruclear remnants) in erythrocytes. A, Erythrocyte (left) containing a Howell-
 Jolly body in blood from a cat. B, Three Howell-Jolly bodies in erythrocytes in blood from a dog being treated
with glucocorticoid steroids. C, Three Howell-Jolly bodies in a single erythrocyte from a poodle with benign
macrocytosis
80
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
formation can also occur in cats with repeated propofol anes-
thesia.2134 Although erythrocyte survival tends to be short-
 ened, anemia is either absent or mild in the above conditions.
Causes of Heinz body hemolytic anemia are presented under
"Hemolytic Anemias, below.
Basophilic Stippling
Reticulocytes usually stain as polychromatophilic erythrocytes
with Romanowsky-type blood stains owing to the presence of
dispersed ribosomes and polyribosomes; however, sometimes
the ribosomes and polyribosomes aggregate fogether, forming
blue-staining punctate inclusions referred to as basophilic
stippling (Fig. 4-81).3 These aggregates are similar to those
 produced using reticulocyte stains, but they form during the
process of cell drying prior to staining with Romanowsky-
type blood stains. Difuse basophilic stippling commonly
occurs in regenerative anemia in ruminants (Fig. 4-81, A,B)
and occasionally in regenerative anemia in other species (Fig.
4-81, C).233 It may be prominent in any species in the presence
pling was reported in a dog with dyserythropoiesis and Cabot
rings within erythrocytes.
Siderotic Inclusions
 Anucleated erythrocytes containing siderotic (iron-positive)
inclusions are calld siderocytes. Nucleated siderocytes have
been called sideroblasts in human hematology In contrast to
difuse basophilic sippling, which is distributed throughout
the erythrocyte, siderotic inclusions generally appear as focal
B
basophilic inclusions located near the periphery of erythro-
cytes (Fig. 4-81, E,F). A Prussian blue staining procedure is
FIGURE 4-77
used to verify the presence of iron-positive material (Fig. 4-81
Formation of Howell-Jolly bodies. A, Apparent rupture of the nuclear
G). Siderotic inclusions in erythroid cells may consist of cyto-
membrane of a metarubricyte, allowing nuclear material to enter the
plasmic ferritin aggregates or iron-loaded mitochondria. Fer-
cytoplasm and potentially form a Howell-Jolly body. B, Transmission
ritin aggregates can occur normally in nucleated erythroid cells
of humans, dogs, and pigs, but the presence of iron-loaded
ruclear pore or rupture of the ruclear membrane, allowing ruclear mate-
- so auy od e si ( ) epu
rial to enter the cytoplasm and potentially form a Howell-Jolly body
 loaded degenerative mitochondria may be contained within
From Simpson CF,Kling JM.The mechanism of denucleation in circaulating
autophagic vacuoles (lysosomes).43 These inclusions have been
erytbroblasts. J Cell Biol. 1967;35:237-245.
called Pappenheimer bodies in human hematology.? Electron
microscopy is used to identify the nature of siderotic inclu-
sions; however, the location ofiron-positive inclusions in a ring
around the nucleus of a nucleated siderocyte (termed ringed
 In contrast to other domestic animal species, normal cats
sideroblast in human hematology) strongly suggests the pres-
may have up to 5% Heinz bodies within their erythrocytes.?
ence of iron-loaded mitochondria.60
Small Heinz bodies may be seen in other species following
Except for iron deficiency, disorders of mitochondrial iron
splenectomy23 Not only is cat hemoglobin more susceptible
metabolism have the potential to cause excess iron accumula-
s e n sosep sn qupo
tion in mitochondria. Erythrocytes may be microcytic and/or
 is less efficient in the removal (pitting) of Heinz bodies from
hypochromic secondary to defective heme synthesis.23 Exper-
erythrocytes than are spleens of other species.5 Increased
imental pyridoxine deficiency and experimental  chronic
 numbers of Heinz bodies may occur in cats with spontaneous
  u psar oq a p ro
diseases such as diabetes mellitus (especially when ketoacido-
overload in nucleated erythroid cells in the bone marrow of
sis is present), hyperthyroidism, and lymphoma.82* Increased
 deficient pigs.20s Drugs or chemicals reported to cause sidero-
numbers of Heinz bodies have been seen in kittens fed
cytes and/or nucleated siderocytes in dogs include chloram-
fish-based diets21α and in cats fed commercial soft-moist
 phenicol (see Fig. 4-81, E),lead, hydroxyzine (Fig. 4-83), zinc,
diets containing propylene glycol.92,218 Increased Heinz body
 and an oxazolidinone antibiotic 213,2ss.370
F I G U R E 4 - 7 8 Staining characteristics and appearance of Heinz bodies
B
A, The erythrocyte at the top contains a pale-pink staining Heinz body at the margin at the 7 oclock position.
This cat had a Heinz body hemolyticanemia resulting from acetaminophen toxicity.In contrast,the erythrocyte
at the bottom contains a Howell-Jolly body that stains dark blue. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, For comparison,
erythrocytes from the same cat presented in (A) were stained with a rew methylene blue reticulocyte stain. The
erythrocyte on the left contains a dark blue-staining Howell-Jolly body and the other two cells each contain a
ight blue-staining Heinz body C, Heinz bodies in blood from a cat appearing as pale spots"within erythro-
cytes. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Heinz bodies in blood from a cat. New methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
G
 E, Heinz bodies in blood from a cat. New methylene blue wet rmount preparation. F, Eccentrocyte with a
visible Heinz body in blood of a cat with acetaminophen toxicity G, A large polychromatophilic erythrocyte
[top), erythrocyte “ghost" containing a Heinz body (bottom), and an intact erythrocyte containing a Heinz
body projecting from its surface (rigbt) in blood from a dog with a hemolytic anemia resulting from the
 ingestion of several pennies containing zine. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-79
Transmission and scanning electron photomicrographs of Heinz bodies. A, Transmission electron photomi-
Crograph of a Heinz body bound to the inner membrane of a horse erythrocyte. B, Scanning electron pho-
tomicrograph of a Heinz body protruding from a cat erythrocyte. C, Scanning electron photomicrograph of
A, From Simpson CF. The ultrastructure of Heinz bodies in borse, dog, and turkey erytbrocytes. Cornell Vet.
1971;61:228-238.B,FromJain NC.Schalm's Veterinary Hematology.4tbedPhiladelphia:Lea Febiger,1986.
C, From Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea C3 Febiger; 1986.
82
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Cabot Rings
Cabot rings are reddish purple-staining threadlike loops or
fgure-eight structures that are primarily found in reticulo-
cytes in humans.13 Diffuse basophilic stippling is usually also
 present. Spectral analysis indicates that Cabot rings contain
arginine-rich histones but not DNA.401 They may be remnants
of mitotic spindle microtubules. Cabot rings have been
reported in erythrocytes from humans with cobalamin and
folate deficiency, dyserythropoiesis, and myelodysplastic
syndrome.189
 Cabot rings have been observed in normal camel and llama
erythrocytes stained with reticulocyte stains (Fig. 4-84, A,B)
and less frequently in llama erythrocytes prepared with May-
erythrocytes demonstrate thin elliptical and figure-eight-
shaped structures in reticulocytes that presumably represent
 Cabot rings. When examined by transmission electron micros-
copy, these structures were described as marginal bands that
are composed of microtubules and associated proteins. These
marginal bands disappear as the cell matures..4
Cabot rings have been reported in a May-Grunwald-
Giemsa-stained blood flm from a dog with dyserythropoiesis
(Fig. 4-84, C,D).286 As in humans, most Cabot rings occurred
 in polychromatophilic erythrocytes.
INFECTIOUS AGENTS OF
ERYTHROCYTES
 A number of infectious agents are recognized to occur in or
FIGURE 4-80
on erythrocytes. These include intracellular protozoal parasites
Idiopathic Heinz body hemolytic anemia in a horse. A, Heinz bodies
(Babesia species, Theileria species, and Cytauxzoon felis), intra-
cellular rickettsial organisms (Anaplasma species), and epicel-
contain hemoglobin crystals. A large platelet is located on the left side.
lular Mycoplas ma species. The erythrocyte protozoal organisms
Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Heinz bodies protruding from erythrocytes.
(piroplasms) of the order Piroplasmida each have a nucleus
Apparently shrunken erythroeytes with larger Heinz bodies stain more
basophilic. New methylene blue reticulocyte stain.
within their cytoplasm. In contrast to Plasmodium and Hae-
moproteus genera, these organisms do not form pigment in
infected erythrocytes even though they also consume hemo-
globin.491 The rickettsia and mycoplasma organisms are bac-
teria and therefore lack nuclei. These infectious agents
Siderotic inclusions in erythroid cells have been recognized
generally cause mild to severe hemolytic anemia depending
in some dogs and cats with myeloid neoplasms.56.524 Acquired
on the pathogenicity of the organism and the susceptibility of
dyserythropoiesis with siderocytes has been reported in dogs
the host. Distemper virus inclusions may also be seen in dog
 in which specific etiologies could not be determined, although
erythrocytes.
some of these animals had infammatory disorders.81,513 Con-
 genital anemias with ringed nucleated siderocytes have been
Babesia Species
More than 100 species of Babesia are recognized to infect
been recognized  in microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes
domestic animals, wild animals, and humans worldwide 2.491
from an English bulldog; they were composed of degenerate
When stained with Romanowsky-type blood stains, a babesial
iron-loaded mitochondria (see Fig. 4-82). Echinocytes and
organism (piroplasm) generally has colorless to light-blue
 pe a pe srd m se
cytoplasm with a red to purple nucleus (Fig. 4-85). Babesial
bodies and low numbers of hemoglobin crystals (see Fig.
parasites vary considerably in size from large (2.5-5.0 μm),
 4-83)20 A congenital defect resulting in mitochondrial iron
easily visualized Babesia canis parasites (Fig. 4-85, A) to small
lou inq paioadsns sem Ainful juepixo Arepuoss pue peoliaao
(1.0-2.5 μm in diameter), difficult-to-see Babesia gibsoni
identified.
(Fig. 4-85, B) and Babesia felis (Fig. 4-85, C) parasites. Large
CH AP TER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
83
F IG U RE 4-8 1  Diffuse and focal basophilic stippling
B
C
D
A, Diffuse basophilic stippling (bottom left) in a macrocytic polychromatophilic erythrocyte, a macrocytic
erythrocyte (fop rigbt), and three normal-sized erythrocytes in blood fom a cow with anaplasmosis(no organ-
a large erythrocyte (leff in blood from a sheep with a regenerative anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Eryth-
rocytes containing a Howell-Jolly body (top), difuse coarse basophilic stippling (middle), and difuse fine
basophilic stippling (bottomj in blood from a cat with Mycoplasma baemofelis infection (no organisms present)
and a regenerative anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, A polychromatophilic erythrocyte with basophilic stip-
pling (leff) and a polychromatophilie metarubricyte (rigbt) in blood from a dog with lead toxicity. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
G
E, Focal basophilic stippling in an erythrocyte in blood from a dog treated with chloramphenicol. The inclu-
sions were shown to contain iron using the Prussian blue staining procedure and can therefore be called
siderocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain. F, Focal basophilic stippling in two erythrocytes (siderocytes) in blood from
a male Sheltie dog that had many siderocytes in his blood when examined several times over 4 years. Eryth-
rocytes were microcytic but the dog was not anemic. The dog was treated with hydroxyzine. Abnormalities in
copper, zinc, and pyridoxine metabolism were ruled ut, as was lead toxicity WrightGiemsa stain. G, Ir-
 positive inclusions in erythrocytes (siderocytes) in blood from the same dog as shown in (F), Prussian blue
staii.
F-G, Blood sampiles and case information prouided by M.Plier.
84
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 4-82
Transmisson electron photomicrograph ofa cluster ofiron-loaded (dark
material) degenerating mitochondria ina circulating erythrocyte froman
Englishbulldog,which produced focalbasophilistippling seen in eryth
rocytes by light microscopy in this animal (see Fig. 4-83).
D
Courtesy of W L. Clapp.
FIGURE 4-84
Cabot rings in erythrocytes. A, Cabot ring with a figure-eight shape in
an erythrocyte from an adult alpaca with a moderately regenerative
hypochromic iron-deficient anemia secondary to gastric ulceration and
hemorrhage. New methylene blue reticulocyte stain. B, Erythrocyte with
 u u  n epe d a e  io e
from an adult alpaca with a moderately regenerative hypochromic iron-
deficient anemia secondary to gastric ulceration and hemorrhage. New
methyleeblereticulyt stainC,Caboting withgur-ighha
 in ani erythrocyte from a dog with dyserythropoiesis. D, Cabot rings in
an erythrocyte from a dog with dyserythropoiesis. May-Grunwald-
Giemsa stain.
A,Froma stained bloodflmfrom a 2009 ASVCPslidereview case submitted
by B. Fierro and M. Scott. B, From a stained blood film from a 2009 ASVCP
slide review case submited by B. Fierro and M. Scott. C and D, From
LakaszeruskaJ,Lewandouski K.Cabot rings as a result of severe dyseryth
ropoiesis in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:180-183.
FIGURE 4-83
iron metabolism.A,Basophilic stipplingis dffuse in ne erythrocyte (p
center/but focal in other erythrocytes. Echinocytes and acanthocytes are
 present, and two erythrocytes contain hemoglobin crystals. Wright-
Giemsa stain. ,Focal (iron-positive) basophilic inclusions are present
in a blood flm from the same dog presented in (A). These siderotic
inclusions were composed of degenerate, iron-loaded mitochondria (see
Fig. 4-82). Prussian blue stain.
CH APTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
85
B
FIGU RE 4-8 5 Babesia organisms in erythrocytes
A, Two pear-shaped Babesia canis organisms in each of four erythrocytes in blood from a puppy with hemolytic
anemia. Infected erythrocytes often were seen to be adhering to one another. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Single
small Babesia gibsoni organisms in two erythrocytes from a dog. C, Single Babesia felis organisms in three
erythrocytes in blood from a domestic cat from South Africa. Wright stain. D, Two Babesia bigemina organ-
isms in an erythrocyte from a cow. Wright-Giemsa stain. E, Two pear-shaped Babesia caballi organisms in a
horse erythrocyte. Wright-Giemsa stain. F, A single Babesia equi organism in one erythrocyte (top) and a
Maltese cross of four organisms in another erythrocyte (bottom) in blood from a horse. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 babesial organisms generaly appear pear-shaped and com-
dogs. B. microti organisms exhibit characteristics of Theileria
monly occur in pairs. Small babesial organisms are more often 
species, and a B. microcoti-like organism in dogs has been
 round in shape. Aside from size, the morphology of protozoal
called Theileria annae, but a new genus may be required for
organisms infecting erythrocytes is similar; therefore poly-
 this group of organisms.491
 merase chain reaction (PCR) and 18S rRNA gene sequencing
B. felis (Fig. 4-85, C) causes hemolytic anemia in cats in
 is required to specifically identify these organisms.28 New
 South Africa.362 Additional piroplasms have been identifed
 organisms will continue to be identifed using genetic
by PCR in domestic cats,but their clinical significance remains
analysis.
to be determined.491 The two most important Babesia species
infecting cattle appear to be Babesia bigemina (Fig. 4-85, D)
tanis, B. canis vogeli, and B. canis rossi) have been identified as
 and Babesia bovis. The two most important piroplasms infect-
causing disease in dogs.467 In reality, these organisms appear
ing horses are the large Babesia taballi parasite (Fig. 4-85, F)
to be different species; consequently they may be renamed B.
and the smaller, more pleomorphic Babesia. equi parasite (Figs.
canis, B. vogeli (Fig. 4-85, A), and B. rossi, respectively,4 In
4-85, E, 4-86). Some investigators have recommended that
addition, a large Babesia species was originally described in 
 B. equi be renamed Theileria equi based on genetic studies as
dogs in North Carolina; it has yet to be named 5126,427 At least
well as finding schizonts ransiently in lymphocytes.31# Other
three small protozoal species, B. gibsoni (Fig. 4-85, B), Babesia
 investigators believe B. equi belongs in a new genus that is
tonradae, and a Babesia microti-like organism cause disease in 
distinct from both Babesia and Tbeileria14.491
86
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
A
FIGURE 4-86
Babesia egui organisms in erythrocytes froma horse with clinical disease.
m (is u   ) urd yn
prominent, PCR and gene sequencing of the 18S rDNA gene identified
a single infective agent. Wright-Giemsa stain.
D
FIGURE 4-87
Theileria and Cytauxzoon organisms in erythrocytes. A, Theileria buffli
Theileria Species
organism in an erythrocyte in blood from a cow. Wright stain. Photo-
grapbfrom a 2001 ASVCP slide review case submitted by A.Boisvert and
Theilerial organisms appear similar to babesial organisms
R. Pillars./ B, Theileria cervi organisms in erythrocytes in blood from a
when observed on stained blood films (Fig. 4-87, A). The
white-tailed deer. Several drepanocytes (sickle erythrocytes) are present.
genus Theileria differs from the genus Babesia in that the
Wright-Giemsa stain. C, A Cytauxzoon felis organism in a domestic cat
erythroyte. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Single Cytaxzoon fels organisms
former species has a tissue phase as well as an erythrocyte
in several domestic cat erythrocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
stage of development. Schizonts develop in lymphoid cells
 and, when mature, release merozoites, which enter erythro-
 cytes. Babesia organisms proliferate only in erythrocytes.
Theilerial species (Theileria parva and Theileria annulata)
cause important diseases in ruminants in Africa, Asia, and the
is directly related to the number of subunits present. Unlike
Middle East74; however, the theilerial organisms present in
Howell-Jolly bodies, Anaplasma organisms are generally not
ruminants i the United States are usuallynonpathogenic 245.43
 perfect spheres, and most are smaller than Howell-Jolly bodies.
Piroplasms are commonly observed in deer blood in the
Anaplasma marginale is an important pathogen of cattle.
 United States (Fig.4-87, B). They are generally considered of
 Organisms are often located at the margin in erythrocytes
rapun eusue spouq ssnes Au inq Arusoed mon
when viewed on stained blood films (see Fig. 4-88). Anaplasma
centrale is less pathogenic and organisms are more often located
more centrally in erythrocytes when viewed on stained blood
Cytauxzoon felis
films.159 Anaplasma ovis (see Fig. 4-88, C) is pathogenic for
Cytauxzoon felis (Fig. 4-87, C, D), as its name implies, infects
sheep, goats, and some wild ruminants.112
feline erythrocytes.1s It is similar in morphology to B. felis in
erythrocytes (see Fig. 4-85, C). Like Theileria, the genus
Distemper Inclusions
Cytauxzoon has both a tissue phase and an erythrocyte phase.
In contrast to Theileria, the schizonts of Cytauxzoon develop
Viral inclusions may be seen in the blood cells of some dogs
in macrophages rather than in lymphocytes.
during the viremic stage of canine distemper virus infec-
Anaplasma Species
 routine Wright or Giemsa stains are used. In erythrocytes,
Anaplasma organisms appear as round to oval basophilic inclu-
they appear as variably sized round, oval, or irregular blue-gray
sions in ruminant erythrocytes (Fig. 4-88), which must be
inclusions that most often occur in polychromatophilic cells
differentiated from Howell-Jolly bodies. ∞ Although morulae
(Fig. 4-90, A). For an unknown reason, distemper inclusions
are not appreciated by light microscopy, the inclusions consist 
typically stain red and are easier to see in erythrocytes stained
of one to several subunits within a membrane-lined vesicle
1 si yom (a 0at hi) uis yno- snone syn 
(Fig. 4-89). The size of an inclusion seen by light microscopy
rapid modified Wright stain.13.19s
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
87
B
FIGURE 4-88
from a Holstein cow. Three platelets are also visible (rigbt). Wright-Giemsa stain. B, An erythrocyte contain-
ing an Anaplasma marginale organism (bottom leff), a macrocytic erythrocyte (top left), and an abnormally
shaped erythrocyte with basophilie stippling (rigbt) in blood from a Holstein cow. Wright-Giemsa stain.
C, Anaplasma ovis organisms in blood from a 6-month-old goat with esophageal perforation and intestinal
Trichosfrongylus infestation. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 4-89
FIGURE 4-90
Transmission electron photomicrograph of Anaplasma marginale organ-
Distemper inclusions in dog erythrocytes. A, Round blue-gray distemper
isms in bovine erythrocytes. A, Binary fission of an Anaplasma organism
inelusion in a polychromatophilie erythrocyte (top leff). Wright-Giemsa
within an erythrocytic vacuole. B, Six Anaplasma organisms within an
stain. B, Two round reddish distemper inclusions in erythrocytes in
erythrocytic vacuole.
blood from the same dog as shown in (A). The inclusion at top right is
in a large polychromatophilic erythrocyte. Diff-Quik stain.
FromSimpson CF,KlingJM,Love JN.Morpbologicand bistochemical nature
of Anaplasma marginale. Am J Vet Res. 1967;28:1055-1065.
Distemper inclusions are composed of aggregates of viral
 Hemoplasmas has been proposed as a trivial name for these
nucleocapsids. 31 The presence of viral inclusions in anucleated
cells is explained by the fact that they form within nucleated
Hemoplasmas appear as small (generally 0.5 to 1 μm)
 erythroid precursors in the bone marrow and persist following
blue-staining cocci, rods, or rings on erythrocytes in blood
expulsion of the nucleus.181
flms stained with Wright-type blood stains (Fig. 4-94, A,B).
 Reticulocyte stains cannot be used to search for mycoplasmas
Hemotropic Mycoplasmas (Hemoplasmas)
because the basophilic ribosomal material in reticulocytes can
 Hemotropic mycoplasmas are gram-negative non-acid-fast
 appear similar to the organisms. These organisms were classi-
bacteria that aftach to the external surfaces of erythrocytes
fied as rickettsia in the genus Haemobartonella or the genus
(Figs. 4-91, 4-92, 4-93), although evidence that Mycoplasmα
Eperytbrozoon for many years.202 Organisms that were tightly
suis can enter erythrocytes has recently been published.187
 bound to erythrocyte surfaces, with prominent cocci and rod
88
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 4-91
FIGURE 4-93
Scanning electron photomicrograph of erythrocytes from a cat infected
 Scanning electron photomicrograph of a bovine erythrocyte parasitized
with Mycoplasmabaemofelis.
with M. wenyoni.
From Harvey JW.Hemotrophic mycoplasmosis (bemobartonellosis).In: Greeme
From Keeton KS, Jain NC. Eperytbrozoon wenyoni: a scanming electron
CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. Philadelphia
microscopy study.J Parasitol. 1973;59:867-873.
Saunders Ebevier; 2006:252-260.
 manner in which a blood film is prepared. In addition, organ-
isms detach from erythrocytes over time in blood samples
collected using EDTA as an anticoagulant (Fig. 4-94, C)12
Results from sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene indicate
 that all of these epicelluar erythrocyte parasites are mycoplas-
2oon genera have been discarded and organisms in these
genera were moved to the genus Mycoplasma. Species names
often include the prefix haemo (e.g., Mycoplasma baemofelis)
to identify these unique mycoplasmas that attach to
erythrocytes.
Three different hemoplasmas have been identified in cats
based on 16S rRNA gene sequences, Mycoplasma baemofelis
(formerly called the large form of Haemobartonella felis), Can-
didatus Mycoplasma baemominutum (formerly called the small
form of Haemobartonella felis), and Candidatus Mycoplasma
FIGURE 4-92
turicensis.47339 M. baemofelis is more pathogenic than either
Transmission photomicrograph of Mycoplasma baemofelis organisms
of the other organisms.473
attached to the external surface of a cat erythrocyte.
M. baemofelis organisms appear as small blue-staining
cocci, rods, or rings on feline erythrocytes (see Fig. 4-94, A).
FromSimonCFGaskinMHaxueyJWUtrastructureoferytroy
Chains of organisms may be present on the surface of heavily
parasitized by Haemobartonella felis. J Parasitol. 1978;64:504-511.
parasitized erythrocytes (Fig. 4-95). Ring- and rod-shaped
organisms are seen more readily in thin blood flms. Organ-
isms are pleomorphic and vary in size, but most are between
forms, were classified in the Haemobartonella genus. Organ-
0.5 and 1.5 μm in diameter or length. They appear to be
isms that were offen found between erythrocytes, as well as
 partially buried in indented foci on the surface of the eryth-
adhered to erythrocytes, with prominent ring forms, were
rocytes (Fig. 4-96). Parasitized erythrocytes may lose their
classifed in the Eperytbrozoon genus. These criteria seemed
 normal biconcave shape and become spherocytes or stomato-
inadequate for the establishment of two genera, especially
spherocytes (see Fig. 4-91). Organisms occur in cyclic para-
since the frequency of ring forms and the number of free 
sitemias; consequently they are not always identifiable in
 organisms can be infuenced to some degree simply by the
blood even during acute infections.202
CH APTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
68
A
B
A, Mycoplasma baemofelis organisms located on the surface of erythrocytes in blood from a cat. Some organ-
isms appear as rings, including the unattached one at the bottom right.Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Mycoplasma
baemomimutum organisms on the outside of an erythrocyte. C, An aggregate of free Mycoplasma baemofelis
organisms that have detached from erythrocytes following 3 days in transit to the laboratory ofinfected blood
collected with EDTA as the anticoagulant. Wright stain. D, Mycoplasma baemocanis organisms located on
the outside of erythrocytes in blood from a dog. One erythrocyte (center has a rod-shaped structure on its
surface that may be composed of two closely associated organisms, while another erythrocyte (top rigbt has
matophilic erythrocyte are also present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
E, Mycoplasma suis organisms on the surface of erythrocytes and between erythrocytes in blood from a
splenectomized pig. Erythrocytes appear as echinocytes, a normal finding in pig blood. Wright stain.
F, Mycoplasma ovis organisms between erythrocytes in blood from a sheep. Wright-Giemsa stain. G, Myco-
 plasma wenyoni organisms between erythrocytes in blood from a Charolais bull. Wright stain. H, Mycoplasma
baemolamae organisms on the surface of erythrocytes and between erythrocytes in blood from a llama. Wright-
Giemsa stainl.
B, Courtesy ofJ. B. Messick.C, From Alison RW, Fielder SE,Meinkoth JH.What is your diagnosis2 Blood film
from an icteric cat. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:125-126. E, Photograpb of a stained blood film from a 1980 ASVCP
slide reviewcase submitted byG.Searcy.F,Photographofa stained bloodflmfroma 1993ASVCPslide reiew case
submitted by E.G.Welles,J.W.Tyler,andD.F.Wolfe
Candidatus M. baemominutum organisms (see Fig. 4-94, B)
identification. Candidatus M. turicensis has been documented
are rarely recognized in stained blood films. When seen, they
 in blood from many cats using PCR-based assays, but it has
appear as smallrods or coccoid organisms and infrequently as
 not yet been identifed in stained blood flms from infected
ring forms, which stain less densely and measure about half
cats, presumably because of the low numbers of organisms
the size (approximately 0.3 μm) of M. baemofelis.142,16s5
present.539
 However, this reported size difference has been challenged by
Three hemoplasmas have been reported in dogs based on
the finding of a Candidatus M. baemominutum isolate in
16S rRNA gene sequences. Organisms are generally observed
Great Britain that is about 0.6 μm in diameter.472 Conse-
 only in splenectomized or immunosuppressed dogs.202 Single
Mycoplasma baemocanis (formerly
yHaemobartonellacanis)
ing these isolates; genetic analysis is needed for specific
 organisms dimple the surface of host erythrocytes in a manner
90
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
recent studies evaluating RNase P gene sequences demon-
strated a lower degree of sequence homology between the two
organisms (about 95%), suggesting that the organisms may
represent different species.48
A hemoplasma with 99% 16S rRNA gene homology to
Candidatus M. baemominutum has been identifed in a dog
in China.551 Another hemoplasma with somewhat less 16S
rRNA gene homology has been identifed in multiple coun-
tries and classifed as Candidatus Mycoplasma baematopar-
as small (0.3 μm), basophilic coccoid bodies on the surface of
Hemoplasmas, previously classified as Eperythrozoon
and goats (Mycoplasma ovis, Fig. 4-94,G),32 cattle (Myco-
plasma wenyoni [Figs. 4-93, 4-94, F], and Candidarus Myco-
FIGURE 4-95
plasma baemobos or the synonymous Candidatus Mycoplasma
baemobovis),43,457.493 and llamas and alpacas (Candidatus
Large rumbers of Mycoplasma baemofelis organisms (including ones
forming chains) located on the outside of erythrocytes in blood from a
Mycoplasma baemolamae, Fig. 4-94, H),315.390
 Hemoplasma infections have been recognized for many
also present (upper rigbt),. Wright-Giemsa stain.
years in animals but, using PCR assays, have only recently
been documented in humans. These human organisms were
related to M. suis, M. wenyoni, and M. ovis. 95,46 Based on the
widespread use of PCR assays, new hemoplasmas will
undoubtably be identifed in animals and humans.
Bartonella Species
Members of the Bartonella species are small gram-negative
bacteria. Cats and dogs are infected with multiple Bartonella
species.8 Bartonella benselae appears to be the primary cause
of cat-scratch disease in humans. This organism causes mild
illness and anemia in cats during the initial infection; subse-
quently, however, cats generally become carriers without evi-
dence of disease. This small rod-shaped bacterium occurs
within erythrocytes4 but is rarely appreciated in blood flms
of bacteremic cats (Fig. 4-97, A), even though the organism
can be culrured from the blood of many healthy cats.63
Artifacts Resembling Infectious Agents
FIGURE 4-96
 q isn (seusedoq Anadsa) siseed aorg
Blood film from a cat with Mycoplasma baemofelis infection demonstrat-
ferentiated from precipitated stain, refractile drying or fixa-
ing features that help distinguish this parasite from stain precipitation.
tion artifacts (Fig. 4-97, B), poorly staining Howell-Jolly
An organism indents the membrane ofthe erythrocyte in the upper left.
bodies, and basophilic stippling. Platelets overlying erythro-
A second organism (center rgbt) binds two areas of anerythroyte rmem-
cytes (Fig. 4-97, C) may also be confused with erythrocyte
locytes) are also present.
 parasites, especially Babesia species.
ERYTHROCYTE ASSAYS
similar to M. baemofelis and chains of organisms are frequently
Erythrocyte Counts, Hematocrit, and
found in grooves or deep folds, which can markedly distort
Hemoglobin Content
the erythrocyte shape and appear as flamentous structures on
Erythrocytes in blood are quantified by cell counting (number
the surface of erythrocytes (see Fig. 4-94, D). M. baemocanis
of cells per microliter), by determining blood hemoglobin
has long been considered to be a distinctly different organism
content (grams per deciliter), and by determining the hema-
from M. baemofelis, but the sequence of the 16S rRNA gene
tocrit (HCT) as a percentage of blood volume. Because essen-
of a M. baemocanis isolate from one dog was remarkably
tially all hemoglobin is present within erythrocytes, the
similar (99% homology) to that of M baemofelis.67 More
erythrocyte count or red blood cell (RBC) count, HCT, and
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
91
B
C
FIGURE 4-97
Bartonella organisms and artifacts that might be confused with erythrocyte parasites. A, Bartonella benselae
 organisms in an erythrocyte (center right) from a confrmed bacteremic cat. In addition to blood culture,
B, Drying artifact and precipitated stain present in this blood film from a cat may be confused with blood
parasites. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, A platelet overlying an erythrocyte (botfom lef) may be confused with a
blood parasite in this blood flm from a dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
A, Courtesy of R.E. Raskin.
 hemoglobin content parallel each other when a change occurs.
sympathetic tone keeps the spleen slightly contracted during
The term packed cell volume (PCV) is often used when the
the awake resting state.1o A slight postprandial increase in
 HCT is measured by centrifuigation of blood in a microhe-
HCT has been reported after feeding dogs and sheep; this
matocrit centrifuge. The PCV is the easiest and most repro-
 persists for several hours, and most of this change in dogs and
ducible test available for quantifying erythrocytes in clinical
about half of this change in sheep is attributable to splenic
 practice. The RBC count and hemoglobin content need to be
contraction.123268 HCT increases associated with splenic con-
measured only when erythrocyte indices are to be calculated.
traction in ruminants and pigs are smaller than increases in
The RBC count and mean cell volume (MCV) are accurate
if they are measured using an electronic cell counter that has
with barbiturates) can produce splenic enlargement, causing
been designed or adjusted to measure the variably sized eryth-
 the HCT to drop below reference intervals.66
rocytes of animals. Hemoglobin concentration is measured
 Maximum information can be gained by interpretating the
spectrophotometrically Modern electronic cell counters cal-
HCT and 
 plasma protein concentrations simultaneously.
culate the HCT using the measured RBC count and MCV.
Various combinations of low, normal, or high HCT values
This efficiency negates the need to centrifuge a microhema-
 may occur with low, normal, or high plasma protein concen-
tocrit tube of blood. Unfortunately, useful information con-
 trations. The various combinations and examples of how they
cerning the appearance of plasma is missed when the HCT
can be interpreted are given in Box 4-1.
is determined electronically unless a serum sample is also
Reticulocyte Counts
prepared for clinical chemistry tests.
Cats, dogs, hot-blooded horses, and some marine diving
Manual methods used in performing reticulocyte staining and
mammals (e.g., seals) have large (as much as one-third of the
 counting are given in Chapter 2. Reticulocytes in cats are
total blood volume in horses) contractile spleens.44 This pro-
classified as aggregate (if coarse clumping is observed) or
vides a blood reservoir that can be released into the general
punctate (if small individual inclusions are present). In healthy
circulation in response to sympathetic stimulation induced by
 cats as well as cats with regenerative anemia, the number of
exercise, hypoxia, hemorrhage, or excitement. The capacity of
punctate reticulocytes is much greater than that seen in other
 the spleen to expand and contract results in substantial changes
species.5 In contrast to those of the cat, most reticulocytes in
in the peripheral blood HCT in these species because the
 other species are of the aggregate type; consequently no
HCT in the spleen (about 80%-90%) is much higher than 
 that in peripheral blood 10,442 Maximal splenic contraction 
 in cats. The higher number of punctate reticulocytes occurs
increases the HCT 1.3- to 1.5-fold above resting levels in
in cats because the maturation (loss of ribosomes) of
reticulocytes in cats is slower than that in other species.
 intact versus splenectomized dogs, presumably because basal
Aggregate reticulocytes in the cireulation mature to punctate
92
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
reticulocyte count would be 9 divided by 45 (mean normal
BOX 4-1
HCT for dogs) times 6% = 1.2%. The corrected reticulocyte
Concomitant Interpretation
of Hematocrit (HCT) and 
count is used to determine whether reticulocytes are truly
Total Plasma Protein (TPP)
increased in blood. Although the raw reticulocyte count (6%)
Concentration
suggests that the reticulocyte numbers were increased sub-
 Normal HCT with
stantially in blood, the corrected reticulocyte count demon-
strates that little increase in reticulocyte numbers was present
Low TPP: Gastrointestinal protein loss, proteinuria, severe
liver disease, vasculitis 
in blood. Normal dogs generally have no more than about 1%
Normal TPP: Normal
reticulocytes when this value is determined by manual
High TPP-Increased globulin synthesis, dehydration-masked
methods.
anemia
If the total RBC count is known, an absolute reticulocyte
High HCT with
count (reticulocytes per microliter) can be determined. This is
 Low TPP: A combination of splenic contraction and a source
 done by multiplying the percentage of reticulocytes counted 
of protein loss
(expressed as a fraction) by the total RBC count.
Normal TPP: Splenic contraction, primary or secondary eryth-
rocytosis, dehydration-masked hypoproteinemia
Absolute reticulocyte count (per microliter)
High TPP: Dehydration
= RBC count (per microliter)
Low HCT with
Low TPP: Substantial ongoing or recent blood loss.
X raw reticulocyte count (fraction)
overhydration
Normal TPP: Increased erythrocyte destruction, decreased
It should be noted that the calculations of absolute reticu-
erythrocyte production, chronic blood loss
locyte counts and corrected reticulocyte counts are indepen-
High TPP: Anemia of inflammatory disease, multiple myeloma,
dent calculations, with each one using the original raw
lymphoproliferative diseases, hepatocellular carcinoma (one
reticulocyte count.
report in a dog)97
 Absolute reticulocyte counts in normal dog are generally
less than 80 x 10’/μL when manual counts are done. Deter-
 mined manually, absolute aggregate reticulocyte counts in 41
reticulocytes in a day or less, but a week or more is required
normal cats were between 0 and 95 x 10′/μL and absolute
for maturation (total disappearance of ribosomes) of punctate
 punctate reticulocyte counts were between 0 and 650 × 10°/μL.
reticulocytes in cat blood.13 Percentages of both types should
Absolute reticulocyte counts can also be determined
be reported separately in cats. Manual reticulocyte counts
directly by fow cytometry with some automated hematology
were done in blood from 41 healthy cats. Aggregate reticulo-
analyzers. These instruments provide more rapid results with
cyte counts were between 0% and 0.9% and punctate reticu-
 better precision than the manual method. Their use is also
locyte counts were between 0% and 7.4%.
much less labor-intensive. However, it is essential that these
Raw (uncorrected) manual reticulocyte counts can be mis-
automated counts be validated by comparing automated
leading when moderate to severe anemia is present because
counts against manual counts for accuracy. Automated refer-
reticulocytes are quantified as a percentage of the total number
ence intervals can vary considerably depending on the instru-
of erythrocytes (reticulocytes plus mature erythrocytes)
ment used. In cats, it is especially important to determine
counted. The raw reticulocyte count (percent) would be higher
whether some punctate reticulocytes are counted by the
in an anemic animal (with a lower number of mature eryth-
machine, along with the aggregate reticulocytes, before
rocytes) than it would be in a normal animal (with a higher
 the reticulocyte counts can be interpreted appropriately The
number of mature erythrocytes), even if the actual number of
Advia 120 (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Inc., Tarrytown,
reticulocytes per microliter in the circulation was the same in
NY) hematology analyzer appears to count primarily aggre-
each animal. Consequently reticulocyte counts should either
gate reticulocytes in cats; reticulocyte counts from the same
be corrected for the degree of anemia using the HCT or an
41 normal cats listed above were between 8 × 10’/μL and 57
absolute reticulocyte count should be calculated using the
X 10°/μL, when measured by the Advia 120. This was similar
 total RBC count. The reticulocyte count is corrected by divid-
to the absolute reticulocyte counts in 58 normal dogs, which
ing the patient's HCT by the mean normal HCT for the
were between 8 × 10°/μL and 65 × 10°/μL when measured
species and then multiplying this value by the raw reticulocyte
using the Advia 120.
count to obtain a corrected reticulocyte count.
 The corrected reticulocyte response to blood loss anemia in
the cat is shown in Figure 4-98.15 As in other species, about
Corrected reticulocyte count
4 days are required to obtain a maximal aggregate reticulocyte
=(patient's HCT/mean normal HCT for species)
response to anemia because of the time needed for the pro-
X raw reticulocyte count in percent
duction of aggregate reticulocytes from progenitor cells. The
maximal punctate response occurs considerably later, primar-
For example, if the raw reticulocyte count was determined
ily because of the long time required for punctate reticulocytes
to be 6% in a dog with an HCT of 9%, the corrected
to mature to erythrocytes. As can be seen in Figure 4-98,
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
93
Controlled bleeding in cats
Erythrocyte Indices
45
45
Before
After bleeding
Determination of erythrocyte indices can assist in the dif-
40
40
Corr
ferential diagnosis of anemia. Of the erythrocyte parameters
35
35
routinely determined or calculated, the MCV is the most
30
30
cted
useful.
25
25
reti
PCV
PCV
20
Mean Cell Volume
The MCV represents the average volume of a single erythro-
15
15
 Punctate reticulocytes 
cyte in femtoliters (10-5 L) in a population of erythrocytes
10
10
(%)
(typically whole blood). Erythrocytes lose volume and hemo-
Aggregate reticulocytes
 globin through vesiculation as they age. The MCV measured
Aq paseaap sem uoendod sroqra uny pate ue u
-2024681012141618202224
Days
30%, while the mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC)
was increased by 15%.$3 The MCV is determined most accu-
FIGURE 4-98
 rately by direct measurement with electronic cell counters. It
Reticulocyte response following controlld bleeding in cats. Reticulocyte
can be determined indirectly by dividing the HCT (as a per-
counts have been corrected using packed cell volume (PCV) values.
 centage) by the RBC count (in millions of cells per microliter)
 and multiplying by 10, but this calculated value is less accurate
DatafromAlsakerRD,LaberJSteuensJB,etalA comparisonofpolychro
because two separate measurements are required. The MCV
masiaandreticulocyte countsinassessingerytbrocyte regenerative response in
varies greatly depending on species. Mammals have smaller
the cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1977;170.39.
 erythrocytes than birds, reptiles, or amphibians.21s Erythro-
cytes (and other blood cell types) are especially large in
amphibians with MCVs in excess of 10,000 fL in the Ampbi-
punctate reticulocyte continue to be released from bone
uma salamander (see Fig. 4-8).175 Species with larger erythro-
 marrow after the HCT begins to increase and aggregate retic-
cytes have lower RBC counts, resulting in similar HCTs and
ulocyte release has ceased. Consequently cats with mild regen-
 hemoglobin concentrations in mammals and birds.21 MCVs
erative anemia may have increased punctate reticulocyte
can vary with age, with higher MCVs reported in older horses
counts and normal aggregate reticulocyte counts (see Fig.
4-23, A).
 Lower HCTs typically result in higher plasma erythropoi-
When identified, high MCV values (macrocytosis) are
 etin concentrations,3$1 which lead to higher absolute blood
usually associated with regenerative anemias because the
reticulocyte counts (except in horses) if the marrow is able to
volumes of individual reticulocytes (especially stress reticulo-
 respond appropriately. High erythropoietin concentrations
cytes) are larger than the volumes of mature erythrocytes.
also lead to the early release of reticulocytes from the bone
 However, it is important to remember that many macrocytic
marrow into the blood.? Instead of continuing to mature in
 cells must be present to increase the MCV above the normal
the bone marrow, these more immature reticulocytes mature
in the circulation. This reticulocyte maturation time or resi-
dence time increases from about 0.5 day to 1 day in sheep
Some dogs with nonregenerative immune-mediated anemia
following a phlebotomy removing more than half of the cir-
 and/or myelofbrosis also have a macrocytosis.454 High MCVs
culating erythrocyte mass.146 Absolute reticulocyte counts are
 may occur in animals with myeloid neoplasms and nonregen-
 generally higher in response to hemolytic anemia than they
are in response to hemorrhage, presumably because plasma
leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive cats with nonregenerative
iron concentration is high in animals with hemolytic anemia
 anemias.507 Folate deficiency has been reported as a cause of
and normal or low in animals following hemorrhage. Conse-
quently the presence of a marked reticulocytosis indicates the
(without anemia or reticulocytosis) occurs in some apparently
likelihood that increased erythrocyte destruction is the cause
healthy miniature and toy poodle dogs that have variable
 of the anemia. When the degree of anemia is severe, basophilic
 megaloblastic abnormalities in the bone marrow and normal
macroreticulocytes or so-called stress reticulocytes may be
 serum folate and cobalamin values.8 Dogs with hereditary
released into the blood (see Fig. 4-21). It is proposed that one
 stomatocytosis may have high MCVs, with normal or only
immature reticulocytes are released. Although a portion of
 hyperthyroidism have slightly increased MCVs with normal
these macroreticulocytes may be rapidly removed from the
 or inecreased HCT. 36 Macrocytic anemia has been reported
circulation, if appears from studies in cats that some can
 in Hereford calves with congenital dyserythropoiesis. In these
mature into large (macrocytic) erythrocytes with relatively
calves, many nucleated erythrocytes are present in blood but
normal life spans.506
 reticulocyte counts are only slightly increased.47
94
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
High MCVs may occur as an artifact secondary to
(rcEPO) therapy38 Microcytosis apparently occurs because
agglutination of erythrocytes, as can occur in immune-
iron delivery to the developing erythroid celsis not suficient
 mediated disorders or following heparin administration
to
to fully support the accelerated erythropoiesis accompanying
horses 32,374,489ss0 MCVs may also be spuriously increased in
rcEPO administration.
cats and dogs with persistent hypernatremia because the cells
 Copper is needed for optimal iron absorption and release
can swell in vitro when diluted with counting fuid prior to
from body iron stores. Consequently prolonged copper defi-
sizing in an electronic cell counter.$ Finally, MCVs increase
ciency results in microcytic anemia in some species. Pyridox-
with prolonged storage ofblood samples; however, the increase
ine is required for the frst step in heme synthesis. Although
 may not be suffcient to elevate the value beyond the reference
natural cases of pyridoxine deficiency have not been docu-
interval. 156,31
mented in domestic animals, microcytic anemias with high
Macrocytosis is more likely to occur in response to hemo-
serum iron values have been produced experimentally in dogs,
lytic anemia than to hemorrhage, at least in part because
 serum iron concentration is increased in animals with hemo-
 The MCV may be slightly decreased in association with
lytic anemia. While iron does not stimulate erythropoiesis,
the anemia of infammatory disease, but the MCV is at the
decreased iron availability may limit the 
erythropoietic
low end of the reference interval in most cases. Microcytosis
response following hemorrhage. H
Reticulocytes,
especially
is common in dogs with portosystemic shunts.243 In these
cases, the MCV is seldom more than 7 fL below the reference
cytes), are larger than mature erythrocytes. A week or more is
interval and the HCT is within the reference interval or only
required before macrocytosis occurs in response to hemolytic
slightly decreased.201 This modest decrease in MCV may be
anemia. Although the bone marrow normally contains some
reticulocytes undergoing maturation, most reticulocytes 
released from the bone marrow in response to anemia must be
formed de novo. A minimum of 4 days is required for a peak
fere with heme synthesis, such as chloramphenicol, lead, and
probably hydroxyzine (dogs) have the potential for causing
duced, larger cells must comprise a high enough percentage of
 the formation of microcytic erythrocytes with siderotic inclu-
the total erythrocytes present to increase the MCV above the
 sions.2s Microcytic anemia may also occur in myeloid
reference interval. Although there is a reduction in size as
 neoplasms exhibiting iron accumulation in erythroid cel.524
reticulocytes mature into erythrocytes, larger-than-normal
Persistent siderotic inclusions have been recognized in micro-
cytic hypochromic erythrocytes from an English bulldog (see
 The erythrocytes produced in the fetus are larger than those
Fig. 4-83, A,B). These erythrocytes also contained Heinz
MCV during fetal development. The MCV is within adult
resulting in mitochondrial iron overload and secondary
reference infervals in horses and cattle at birth.20723 The
MCV is above adult reference intervals in dogs and cats at
erative microcytic anemia with many circulating nucleated
birth, and it declines as the larger erythrocytes formed in the
erythrocytes has been reported in related English springer
fetus are replaced by smaller erythrocytes produced affter
 spaniels with dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and heart
birth. 126,508
disease.23 Microcytosis has been described in a crossbred dog
Microcytic (low-MCV) anemias usually indicate the pres-
with persistent elliptocytosis resulting from a lack of erythro-
ence of chronic iron deficiency.204 Microcytic iron-deficiency
cyte membrane protein band 4.1. Although the animal was
anemia in adult animals is almost always due to chronic hem-
not anemic, the reticulocyte count was about twice normal in
orrhage. Depending on the initial MCV and the magnitude
response to a shortened erythrocyte life span.205 Some Japa-
of ongoing blood loss, one or more months are required before
nese breeds (Akita and Shiba) normally have MCV values
the MCV decreases below the reference interval. Body iron
below the reference intervals established for other breeds of
 stores must be depleted and then the microcytes formed must
 dogs, but they are not anemic.11.179
comprise a high enough percentage of the total erythrocytes
 d    s 
present to decrease the MCV below the reference interval.
 included with erythrocytes in MCV calculations in severely
Microcytic anemia rarely occurs as a result of dietary iron
anemic animals or animals with marked thrombocytosis.s50
deficiency in adult animals. However,iron deficiency without
MCVs may also be spuriously decreased in dogs with persis-
blood loss is common in nursing animals, because milk is low
tent hyponatremia because the erythrocytes shrink when they
in iron and these rapidly growing animals have an increased
are diluted in vitro with counting fuid prior to sizing in an
 demand for iron.204 Although microcytes are often formed in
electronic cell counter. s
nursing animals, the MCV may not be reduced in iron-
deficient neonatal dogs and cats because of the persistence of
Mean Cell Hemoglobin Concentration
macrocytes formed before birth.so Even if body iron stores
 The MCHC represents the average hemoglobin concentra-
have not been depleted, erythrocytes may become microcytic
tion within erythrocytes. It is calculated by dividing the
in dogs given long-term recombinant canine erythropoietin
whole blood hemoglobin value (in grams per deciliter) by the
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
95
HCT (as a percentage) and multiplying by 100. The MCHC
dogs with hereditary stomatocytosis because the increased
is expressed as grams per deciliter of erythrocytes. (Note:
 intracellular water, which occurs in this condition, dilutes the
Hemoglobin values in blood are expressed as grams per deci-
hemoglobin concentration within the cells 59231 MCHCs may
liter of whole blood.) Electronic cell counters calculate the
be spuriously decreased in cats and dogs with persistent
MCHC using three measured parameters (RBC count, MCV,
hypernatremia because the cells can swell when they are
and hemoglobin concentration); consequently the MCHC
 diluted with counting fuid prior to analysis in an electronic
can provide a form of quality control for these measured
 cell counter.$8
parameters.
High MCHC values are artifacts. They may result from in
Mean Cell Hemoglobin
vivo or in vitro hemolysis, lipemia, the presence of Heinz
 The mean cell hemoglobin (MCH) is calculated by dividing
the hemoglobin value (in grams per deciliter) by the RBC
the sample is cooled, or paraprotein precipitation in the ana-
count (in millions of cells per microliter) and multiplying
 by 10. The MCH provides no added value because it depends
globin is free in plasma; but the formula used to calculate the
on the MCV and MCHC. It usually correlates directly with
MCHC assumes that all measured hemoglobin is contained
 the MCV except in animals with macrocytic hypochromic
within erythrocytes. Lipemia, protein precipitation, and Heinz
erythrocytes.
bodies cause turbidity in the spectrophotometric assay for
hemoglobin, thereby giving erroneously elevated hemoglobin 
Red Cell Distribution Width
values. A high MCHC may also occur if there is agglutination
The red cell distribution width (RDW) is an electronic
of erythrocytes when the specimen is assayed in an electronic
 measure of anisocytosis or erythrocyte volume heterogeneity.
cell counter, as can happen with cold-acting autoantibodies or
A histogram of the volume of individual erythrocytes reveals
Large
a plot approximating a Gaussian distribution. Consequently
-ia parapiss q oi sar ooi ae siearle arora
 one can calculate the degree of size variation by determining
cytes; consequently cell counters are programmed to exclude
the standard deviation (SD) of erythrocyte volumes. However,
them from erythrocyte measurements. This results in errone-
the SD depends on the size of the cells as well as the degree
y aisnosu unuo pe snea H mo kisno
of size variation around the MCV. To provide a measure of
MCHC values. Agglutination should not interfere with HCT
size variation that does not depend on how large the cells are,
values determined by centrifugation as long as the blood
the coeffcient of variation of erythrocyte volume is calculated
samples are well mixed before the microhematocrit tubes are
by dividing the SD by the MCV and then multiplying by 100.
filled. In addition to the standard MCHC calculation, the
 In short, the RDW is the SD of erythrocyte volumes expressed
Advia 120 (Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics, Inc., Tarrytown,
 as a percentage of the mean erythrocyte volume.
NY) determines the hemoglobin concentration within indi-
 Reference values vary depending on the instrument used
vidual erythrocytes based on defection of light that occurs
 to measure the RDW. Cattle and horses normally have some-
when a laser beam strikes individual cells. The mean of hemo-
globin concentrations within erythrocytes determined in this
 only refer fo the upper limit of a reference interval in examin-
manner is calculated and referred to as the cell hemoglobin
ing data from a patient, because there is no pathologic state
 concentration mean (CHCM). The CHCM provides an accu-
in which erythrocytes have greater volume homogeneity
rate measure of mean hemoglobin concentration within
(lower RDW) than in the normal state.
erythrocytes even when hemoglobinemia and lipemia are
Examination of the RDW has not been extensively utilized
in veterinary medicine. It is expected to be increased in cases
microcytic anemia (HCT 12%, MCV 33 fL) had a calculated
where the degree of anisocytosis (as estimated on the stained
 MCHC of 122 g/dL but a CHCM of 26 g/dL.
 blood flm) is increased. It is often increased in regenerative
MCHC values may be decreased in animals with regenera-
anemias because reticulocytes and young erythrocytes are
tive anemia, especially those with high percentages of stress
larger than mature erythrocytes.127,32 Like the MCV, the
reticulocytes. Hemoglobin synthesis is not complete until late
 number of large erythrocytes in blood must reach a certain
in reticulocyte mafuration. Consequently hemoglobin synthe-
 level before the RDW of a given patient exceeds the reference
sis is less complete in stress reticulocytes because these cells
 interval. As an animal responds to anemia and young eryth-
are released from the bone marrow earlier than would occur
rocytes become the predominant population, the RDW will
normally.205
begin to decline and may return to the reference interval even
 Low MCHC values may also occur in animals with chronic
 though the MCV is still high.
iron-deficiency anemia. When it is determined using an elec-
The RDW is also expected to increase in iron-deficiency
tronic cell counter, the MCHC may be normal in animals
 anemia, where smaller than normal erythrocytes are produced.
with slight microcytosis, but it is usually low when the MCV
As in regenerative anemia, the increase is most likely to be
 is markedly reduced.20 The MCHC is low in iron deficiency
 seen during the phase of disease when a significant number
because there is inadequate iron to support the synthesis of
 of normally and abnormally sized erythrocytes are present
normal amounts of hemoglobin. Low MCHC values occur in
 simultaneously.21 In severe chronic iron-deficiency anemia,
96
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
the RDW might decrease toward normal once the whole
 population of erythrocytes is small. The RDW may increase
again following iron therapy as normally sized erythrocytes
 are produced.
 Other potential causes of increased RDW include condi-
 tions in which substantial fragmentation of erythrocytes is
occurring and following transfusion of blood from a donor
animal in which the MCV is substantially different from that
of the recipient. The RDW is also increased in dogs with
 anemias will have normal RDW values unless significant dys-
erythropoiesis is present. Spuriously increased RDW values
may occur when agglutination is present or platelets are
Erythrocyte volume
included with erythrocytes in caleulations of cell volume dis-
tribution in severely anemic animals.183
Erythrocyte Volume Histograms and
Erythrocyte Cytograms
Although quite useful when abnormal, MCV and MCHC
values are relatively insensitive in identifying the presence of
erythrocytes with abnormal volumes or hemoglobin concen-
trations. Many microcytic or macrocytic erythrocytes are
required to move the MCV below or above the reference
interval, and many hypochromic erythrocytes are needed to
 move the MCHC below the reference interval. In addition to
counting cells, electronic cell counters can determine and plot
the volume of individual erythrocytes, and examination of
B
Hemoglobin concentration
these erythrocyte volume histograms can reveal the presence
of increased numbers of microcytes or macrocytes even when
FIGURE 4-99
the MCV is within the reference interval (Fig. 4-99, A). Some
Erythrocyte histograms from a 6-week-old kitten after a blood transfu-
electronic cell counters, such as the Advia 120, can also deter-
sion. The kitten presented with marked lipemia and a severe iron def-
au se es e  s e e 
mine the hemoglobin concentration of individual erythrocytes
nursing. An image from the stained blood flm prepared from this cat is
from the defection of light that occurs when a laser beam
shown in Figure 4-24. Most erythrocytes from normal animals are
strikes individual cells. This allows for the generation of
expected to be between the vertical lines.A, Erythrocyte volume histo-
hemoglobin concentration histograms (Fig. 4-99, B). Inspec-
gram demonstrates a population of small erythrocytes from the patient
tion of hemoglobin concentration histograms can reveal the
and a population oflarge erythrocytes from the blood donor. The MCV
presence of increased numbers of hypochromic erythrocytes
was 47 fL and the RDW was 43%. B, Erythrocyte hemoglobin concen-
tration histogram revealed hypochromic cells but did not demonstrate
even when MCHC has not decreased below the reference
two distinct cell populations. Histograms were generated using an Advia
interval. Individual erythrocytes can be further characterized
120 hematology analyzer.
by creating a cytogram in which the erythrocyte volumes of
individual cells are plotted against their respective hemoglobin
concentrations (Fig. 4-100).
Direct Antiglobulin Test
A direct antiglobulin (Coombs') test is done when autoag-
content in blood above 1.5% of total hemoglobin. Clinical
glutination is absent but immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
signs associated with methemoglobinemia are the result of
 is still suspected. Species-specific antisera against IgG, IgM,
 tissue hypoxia, because methemoglobin cannot bind O2. Both
and the third component of complement (Cs) are used to
low blood Oz tension and methemoglobinemia can result in
detect the presence of one or more of these factors on the
cyanotic-appearing mucous membranes and dark-colored
surface of erythrocytes502 This test is discussed in greater
 blood samples. Hypoxemia is documented by measuring a low
 detail in Chapter 6.
PO2 in arterial blood (PaO2). Methemoglobinemia is sus-
 pected when arterial blood with normal or increased PaO2 is
Methemoglobin Determination
dark-colored. Methemoglobin is quantified spectrophoto-
Methemoglobin differs from hemoglobin only in that the iron
metrically, but a spot test can be used to determine whether
moiety of heme groups has been oxidized to the ferric (+3)
clinically significant levels of methemoglobin are present (see
state. The term methemoglobinemia refers to methemoglobin
Fig. 2-4).
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
97
in cattle, copper toxicity in sheep and goats, and red maple
toxicity in horses.53.20s These oxidants can also produce Heinz
body hemolytic anemia. Methemoglobinemia without Heinz
bodies or eccentrocytes has been reported in a dog with
ime
hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea) toxicity.542 Nitrite produces
VOlL
methemoglobinemia without Heinz body formation or devel-
Erythrocyte
opment of anemia. Methemoglobinemia occurs in ruminants 
eating nitrate-accumulating plants, especially when those
plants have been fertilized with nitrogenous compounds.
Nitrate is relatively nontoxic, but it is reduced to nitrite by
 in dogs and cats fed a commercial pet food that had sodium
A
Hemoglobin concentration
Cytochrome-b, Reductase Deficiency
Persistent methemoglobinemia resulting from erythrocyte
CbsR deficiency has been recognized in many breeds of dogs
volume
 and in domestic shorthaired cats.2 Methemoglobin content
is generally higher in cats (44% to 52%) than in dogs (13% to
Erythrocyte
51%) with this deficiency because of lower enzyme activity in
deficient cats compared with deficient dogs. Flavin adenine
 dinucleotide (FAD) is a cofactor for the CbsR enzyme, and 
 persistent methemoglobinemia (26% to 48%) has also been
recognized in horses with CbsR deficiency secondary to
erythrocyte FAD deficiency23 Animals with Cb;R defciency,
in contrast to those with methemoglobinemia produced by
Hemoglobin concentration
 oxidant drugs and compounds, usually exhibit few or no clini-
 cal signs of illness. The diagnosis of this deficiency is made by
FIGURE 4-100
Erythrocyte volume versus hemoglobin concentration (V/HC) cyto-
 measuring enzyme activity within erythrocytes.
grams. Most erythrocytes from normal animals are expected to be within
the square formed by the double vertical and horizontal lines. A, Eryth-
SERUM IRON ASSAYS
rocyte V/HC cytogram from a 6-week-old kitten with marked lipemia
and a severe iron-deficiency anemia that was a littermate of the cat
Serum lron
presented in Figures 4-24 and 4-99. A population of microcytic hypo-
se u par a s u u s
chromic cells is clearly visible. The HCT was 12%, MCV was 33 fL,
RDW was 30%, MCHC was 122 g/dL, and CHCM was 26 g/dL. The
with hemolytic anemia, dyserythropoiesis, hypoplastic or
MCHC was spuriously inereased because of the lipemia. B, Erythrocyte
aplastic anemia, iron overload, acute iron toxicity, chronic
V/HC cytogram from a 6-week-old kitten with lipemia and severe iron
hepatopathy (dogs), experimental pyridoxine deficiency (pigs),
deficiency that is also presented in Figures 4-24 and 4-99. The kitten was
 and following the administration of glucocorticoid steroids to
given a whole-blood transfusion prior to sample analysis. The HCT was
23%, MCV was 47 fL, RDW was 43%, MCHC was 40 g/dL, and
CHCM was 27 g/dL. Two populations of erythrocytes are visible. The
increased if laboratory tubes or pipettes that are used to handle
kittens cells are concentrated in the bottom left area of the cytogram.
blood or serum are contaminated with iron.
       s  
Serum iron concentration is generally low in iron defi-
tology analyzer.
half of the dogs with portosystemic shunts.204 Serum iron may
be decreased when demands for erythropoiesis exceed the iron
fow from the diet and storage pools, such as might occur with
Toxic Methemogiobinemia
erythropoietin administration or following acute hemor-
Methemoglobinemia results from either increased production
of methemoglobin by oxidants or decreased reduction of met-
 glucocorticoid administration to cattle and goats.204
hemoglobin associated with a deficiency in the erythrocyte
True iron deficiency may be differentiated from other
 causes of hypoferremia by examination of bone marrow for
 Experimental studies indicate that many drugs can produce
 stainable iron, which is minimal or absent in iron deficiency
methemoglobinemia in animals. Significant methemoglobin-
and normal or high in other disorders (see Chapter 8).
emia has been associated with clinical cases of benzocaine
 However, stainable iron is not present in the bone marrow of
 toxicity in several species, acetaminophen and phenazopyri-
 normal cats; consequently a lack of stainable iron does not
dine toxicities in cats, skunk musk in dogs, chlorate toxicity
 suggest iron deficiency in this species.204
98
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
used to measure EPO, but commercial tests developed for
Total Iron-Binding Capacity
human assays may not always cross-react sufficiently for use in
 The total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) of serum is a measure
other species. Consequently individual tests require validation
of serum transferrin concentration because insignificant
for each species to be assayed before they can be used clinically.
amounts of circulating iron are bound to other proteins. TIBC
 Serum EPO is increased in response to various anemias except
is calculated by measuring serum iron and serum unsaturated
the anemia of chronic renal disease, in which EPO production
iron-binding capacity and summing these values. Serum
 is decreased.26,350,361 Serum EPO concentration appears to be
TIBC is low normal or decreased in association with infam-
 regulated not only by the rate of renal production but also by
matory disorders and increased in iron-deficient humans,
 the rate of utilization by erythroid celis. At any given blood
rabbits, pigs, horses, and cattle24 A slight increase in serum
hemoglobin concentration, the serum EPO concentration is
TIBC was reported in an experimental study of diet-induced
 likely to be highest in disorders with low marrow erythroid
activity (eg., erythroid aplasia).83 The EPO assay has received
TIBC is generally normal in dogs with naturally occurring
 lmited use in veterinary medicine. EPO has been assayed in
 iron-deficiency anemia.204 About half of the dogs with porto-
systemic shunts exhibited hypoferremia with normal or
EPO values should be normal or low) from secondary eryth-
 slightly decreased serum TIBC.24 TIBC may be increased in
some animals with iron overload and in dogs with chronic
d e dera ri i r 
hepatopathy.2041
with primary and secondary erythrocytosis, thus limiting the
diagnostic value of the EPO assay.?6
Serum Ferritin
 Ferritin is secreted by cells into the blood rather than leaking
from the cytoplasm of damaged cells. Serum ferritin typically
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
has a much lower iron content than does intracellular ferritin.
OF ANEMIA
The macrophage appears to be the primary cell involved in
secreting ferritin into the blood, at least under steady-state
True or absolute anemia is defined as a decrease in erythrocyte
conditions, but other cells, including kidney proximal tubular 
mass within the body. HCT, hemoglobin, and RBC count
cells and hepatocytes, may also secrete ferritin into the
values are usually below their reference intervals; however, the
blood.93486
anemia can sometimes be masked by concomitant dehydra-
Serum ferritin concentration correlates with tissue iron
tion. Low erythrocyte parameters may also be present in blood
stores in domestic animals, including cats. Consequently
when the total-body erythrocyte mass is normal (relative
serum ferritin concentration can help differentiate true iron
anemia). This can result from overhydration resulting in
deficiency (serum ferritin is low) from the anemia of infam-
erythrocyte dilution and from splenic sequestration of eryth-
 matory disease (serum ferritin is normal or high).204 Increased 
rocytes as occurs with splenic relaxation during anesthesia,
serum ferritin occurs in animals with increased storage iron,
heparin-induced erythrocyte agglutination in horses, and
 as may occur with hemolytic anemia, hemophagocytic histio-
cytic sarcoma (in dogs), and repeated blood transfusions. An
Anemia is a condition, not a diagnosis. Anemia is classified
increase has also been reported in dogs with infammation,
 s ids s i  ssisse  s  
liver disease, and lymphoma.148 It is transiently increased in
 that effective therapy can be given. In addition to past history,
 horses after moderate to severe exercise and in foals following
presenting complaints, and laboratory findings, results of
consumption of colostrum. Serum ferritin is an acute-phase
other test procedures (e.g., diagnostic imaging) are important 
 protein; consequently increased values are expected in infam-
 in reaching a final diagnosis.
 matory conditions in addition to conditions with increased
Anemia may occur following blood loss, increased eryth-
 iron stores.2?4 It should be remembered that true iron defi-
rocyte destruction, or decreased erythrocyte production.
ciency can be missed if concomitant infammation is present,
Factors that can be useful in categorizing anemia into these
resulting in increased ferritin secretion into blood. Commer-
broad causes (and often into more specifc causes) include
cial assay kits are not available for serum ferritin assays in
reticulocyte counts, erythrocyte indices, erythrocyte morphol-
animals, but ferritin assays may be performed for several
ogy on stained blood flms, the appearance of the plasma,
species at the Kansas State University College of Veterinary
 plasma protein concentration, serum iron measurements,
Medicine.
serum bilirubin determination, direct antiglobulin test, and
bone marrow evaluation.
Anemia may also develop as a result of the expansion of
ERYTHROPOIETIN ASSAY
the vascular space faster than the expansion of the total-body
erythrocyte mass. This hemodilution contributes to the anemia
Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein hormone that stimu-
of the neonate (to be discussed later) and to the mild anemia
 lates erythropoiesis in a number of ways. Radioimmunoassays
that develops during pregnancy in most domestic animals, the
or enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) may be
horse being an exception.84,208,31
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes 
99
development than normally occurs. These large “stress"reticu-
REGENERATIVE VERSUS
locytes (see Fig. 4-21) apparently remain in the circulation
NONREGENERATIVE ANEMIA
longer than other reticulocytes before maturation is com-
 plete.146 Factors have been utilized in an attempt to correct for
The most useful approach in the classification of anemia is to
this longer reticulocyte circulation time in humans, and some
determine whether evidence of a bone marrow response to the
veterinary authors have empirically applied these same factors
anemia is present in blood. For all common domestic animals
 to anemic dogs to calculate what has been called the reticulo-
except the horse, this involves determining whether absolute
 cyte index. This approach has not been validated in dogs.
reticulocyte numbers are increased in blood. Horses rarely
 Hemolytic anemia usually elicits a more dramatic regen-
release reticulocytes from the bone marrow even when an
 erative response than hemorrhagic anemia at least in part due
increased production of erythrocytes occurs. MCV and/or
to the greater availability of iron. There are also species differ-
RDW values are increased in some horses responding to anemia,
 ences in the ability to increase erythrocyte production. The
but others recover from anemia without having these parame-
 HCT increases about 1 percentage point per day following
experimental phlebotomy in dogs and cats, with a slightly
 evaluation is often needed to determine whether an appropriate
 lower response in cattle and horses.1.65364
response to anemia is present in a horse. Myeloid to erythroid
 Anemias with no or minimal increase in blood reticulocyte
(M:E) ratios below 0.5 and bone marrow reticulocyte counts
 counts are classified as nonregenerative and poorly regenera-
five respectively The lack of a reticulocyte response in none-
 Increased polychromasia is usually present in regenerative
quine species generally indicates that the anemia results from
 pr r s sr  sssaq s
insufficient erythrocyte production in the marrow. A minimal
routine blood stains (see Figs. 4-18, 4-19, 4-21, 4-22). Cats
 reticulocyte response may be present if the anemia develops
with mild anemias may not release aggregate reticulocytes
acutely following hemorrhage or hemolysis because about 4
from the marrow but will release punctate reticulocytes.
Because punctate reticulocytes do not contain suffcient
occur. Mild anemias may have minimally increased reticulo-
numbers of ribosomes within them to impart a bluish color
cyte counts.
to the cytoplasm, mild regenerative anemias in cats may lack
polychromasia in stained blood films (see Fig. 4-23, A,B).
Classification of Anemia Using Erythrocyte Indices
 Increased anisocytosis is often present in regenerative anemias
An anemia can also be classified using the MCV and MCHC
because of the presence of large immafure erythrocytes (see
values to assist in determining its cause. The terms used to
Figs. 4-18, 4-19, 4-21), although anisocytosis may be marked
indicate size are macrocytic (increased MCV), normocytic
 in some nonregenerative anemias as well.
(normal MCV), and microcytic (decreased MCV). The terms
Except in horses, some nucleated erythrocytes (rubricytes
used to describe MCHC values are normocbromic (normal
and metarubricytes) are often seen on blood films in associa-
MCHC) and bypocbromic (decreased MCHC). Anemias are 
 tion with regenerative anemia; however, nucleated erythro-
not classified as hyperchromic because high MCHC values
cytes may also be present in anemic and nonanemic disorders 
 are artifacts. A comparison of erythrocyte indices and causes
with minimal or no reticulocytosis (see Fig. 4-75, C-E). There-
of anemia is given in Box 4-2.
fore the presence of nucleated erythrocytes in blood is a much
 less reliable indicator of a regenerative response to anemia
than is an increased reticulocyte count.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS
 Howell-Jolly bodies are often present within erythrocytes 
 in regenerative anemias, but they also occur in normal cats 
Hemolytic anemias occur as a result of increased erythrocyte
(see Fig. 4-76, A) and horses and in splenectomized animals
destruction within the body. Causes of hemolytic anemia in
of other species. Basophilic stippling occurs in regenerative
animals are given in Box 4-3. Erythrocytes may be lysed
 anemias in ruminants (see Fig. 4-81, A,B) but rarely in other
within the circulation (intravascular hemolysis), but more fre-
species (see Fig. 4-81, C). Basophilic stippling can also occur
 yo so Aq sisor au ps ae Aau Aun
 in erythrocytes of any species with lead toxicity whether or 
mononuclear phagocyte system (extravascular hemolysis).
not anemia is present (see Fig. 4-81, D).
Hemolytic anemias are generally regenerative if sufficient
The presence of compensatory reticulocytosis indicates that
fime has elapsed for a bone marrow re
the anemia has resulted from either blood loss or increased
They are initially normocytic normochromic but may be mac-
erythrocyte destruction. Several factors should be kept in mind
rocytic hypochromic or macrocytic normochromic if sufficient
 in interpreting the magnitude of a reticulocyte response. In
 fime has elapsed for the release of a significant number of
rgenerative anemias, animals with lower HCTs should
 large reticulocytes from the bone marrow. Macrocytic hypo-
have higher absolute reticulocyte counts. Severe anemia evokes
s ry un o ose u sr s
a greater stimulus for increased erythrocyte production
 tosis in dogs as a result of membrane abnormalities and
 than does mild anemia.3$1 Also, in response to severe anemia,
reticulocytes can be released from the marrow earlier in their
 that is usually nonregenerative and normocytic normochromic
100
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
BOX 4-2
Normocytic Normochromic
4. Nonregenerative immune-mediated anemia and/or
1. Hemolytic anemia if reticulocyte response is mild or if
myelofibrosis in dogs
sufficient time has not elapsed for a prominent reticulocyte
5. Poodle macrocytosis (healthy miniature poodles with no
response to occur.
anemia)
 2. Hemorrhage if reticulocyte response is mild or if sufficient
6. Hyperthyroid cats (slight macrocytosis without anemia)
 time has not elapsed for a prominent reticulocyte response to
7. Folate deficiency (rare)
occur.
 8. Congenital dyserythropoiesis of Hereford calves
 3. Early iron-deficiency anemia before microcytes predominate
 9. Spurious with erythrocyte agglutination
 4. Chronic inflammation and neoplasia (sometimes slightly
10. Spurious in cats and dogs with persistent hypernatremia (may
microcytic)
be hypochromic)
 5. Chronic renal disease
6. Endocrine deficiencies
Microcytic Normochromic/Hypochromica
7. Selective erythroid aplasia
1. Chronic iron deficiency (months in adults, weeks in nursing
 8. Aplastic and hypoplastic bone marrows
animals)
 9. Lead toxicity (may not be anemic)
 2. Portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats (often not anemic)
10. Cobalamin deficiency
3. Anemia of inflammatory disease (usually normocytic) 
4. Hepatic lipidosis in cats (usually normocytic)
 Macrocytic Hypochromic
5. Normal Akita and Shiba dogs (not anemic)
 1. Regenerative anemias with marked reticulocytosis
 6. Prolonged recombinant erythropoietin treatment (mild)
 2. Hereditary stomatocytosis in dogs (often slight 
7. Copper deficiency (rare)
reticulocytosis)
8. Drugs or compounds that inhibit heme synthesis
 3. Abyssinian and Somali cats with increased erythrocyte
9. Myeloid neoplasms with abnormal iron metabolism (rare)
osmotic fragility (a reticulocytosis is usually present)
10. Pyridoxine deficiency (experimental)
 4. Spurious with prolonged storage of blood sample
11. Familial dyserythropoiesis of English springer spaniel dogs
(rare)
Macrocytic Normochromic
12. Hereditary elliptocytosis in dogs (rare)
 1. Regenerative anemias (decreased MCHC is not always
13. Spurious when platelets are included in erythrocyte
present!
histograms
2. FeLV infections with no reticulocytosis (common)
14. Spurious in dogs with persistent hyponatremia (not typically
 3. Erythroleukemia (AM L-M6) and myelodysplastic syndromes
anemic)
is cytauxzoonosis in cats. Most cats die before there is time
for a regenerative response to the anemia to occur.1s Increased
-  se  sro sid a
cytic syndrome (macrophage activation syndrome), but the
anemia may not be regenerative because the associated release
of infammatory
mediators  interferes   with
1normal
erythropoiesis.49,316
 An increase in the plasma bilirubin concentration imparts
a yellow color to the plasma (see Fig. 2-9, B). Mucous mem-
branes and skin may also appear yellow (icteric) in extreme
cases of hyperbilirubinemia (Fig. 4-101). Hyperbilirubinemia
associated with a substantial decrease in the HCT suggests
 increased phagocytosis of erythrocytes.
 If substantial intravascular hemolysis occurs rapidly,
hemoglobinemia (see Fig. 2-9, C, D) and subsequently hemo-
 globinuria may be observed. Disorders where significant
intravascular hemolysis sometimes occurs include immune-
FIGURE 4-101
mediated hemolytic anemia, oxidant chemical and plant tox-
Iteric mucous membranes in an English springer spaniel dog with a
icities, severe hypophosphatemia, leptospiral and clostridial
hermolytic crises associated with PFK deficiency.
infections, coral snake and rattlesnake envenomation, zinc
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
101
BOX 4-3
Causes of Hemolytic Anemias in Domestic Animals
 1. Immune-mediated erythrocyte destruction: Primary or
in horses), crude oil (marine birds), venoms (snakes, bees,
autoimmune hemolytic anemia (common in dogs); neonatal
wasps, and spiders]
 5. Fragmentation: Disseminated intravascular coagulation
(primarily dogs); incompatible blood transfusions; drugs,
(primarily dogs), dirofilariasis (especially posterior vena cava
including penicillin (horses), cephalosporins (dogs), levamisole
syndrome) in dogs, hemangiosarcoma (dogs), vasculitis,
(dogs), sulfonamides (horses and dogs), pirimicarb (insecticide
hemolytic uremia syndrome
 in dogs), and propylthiouracil (cats)
 6. Hypo-osmolality: Hypotonic fluid administration, water
 2. Erythrocyte parasites (may have an immune-mediated
intoxication (primarily in cattle)
componenty: Anapiasma spp. (ruminants), erythrocytic
Mycopiasma spp. (except horses), Babesia spp., Cytauxzoon
ketoacidotic diabetic animals following insulin therapy (cats 
felis, Theieria spp. (ruminants)
and dogs), hepatic lipidosis (cats)
3. Other infectious agents (may have an immune-mediated
 8. Hereditary erythrocyte defects: Pyruvate kinase deficiency
component: Leptospira and Clostridium spp. (primarily
(dogs and cats), phosphofructokinase deficiency (dogs),
ruminants and horses), FeLV (seldom hemolytic),
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (horses],
equine infectious anemia virus (multifactorial, also
with decreased production], Sarcocystis spp. (cattle
porphyria (cattle and cats), hereditary nonspherocytic
and sheepl, Trypanosoma spp. (primarily outside the
 hemolytic anemias of unknown etiology (poodle and beagle
United States]
dogs), idiopathic increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility (cats),
4. Chemicals and plants (most are oxidants): Onions, red maple
erythrocyte flavin adenine dinucleotide deficiency in horses 
(horses), Brassica spp. (ruminants), lush winter rye (cattle),
(methemoglobinemia and sometimes mild anemia), hereditary
 copper (sheep and goats), phenothiazine (horses),
spherocytosis in cattle
acetaminophen (cats and dogs), methylene blue (cats and
9. Miscellaneous: Liver failure (horses), hypersplenism,
dogs), benzocaine (cats and dogs), phenazopyridine (cats)
hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, splenic torsion (dogs),
methionine (cats), vitamin K (dogs), propylene glycol (cats),
selenium deficiency in catle grazing on St. Augustine grass,
naphthalene (dogs?), zinc (dogs and ruminants), indole
postparturient hemoglobinuria in cattle not associated with
(experimental in catle and horses), tryptophan (experimental
hypophosphatemia
 caudal vena cava syndrome of dirofilariasis in dogs, hepatic
primary, disorder. Primary IMHA may be associated with
failure in horses, phosphofructokinase deficiency in dogs,
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia; it may also be part of
inherited idiopathic increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility in
systemic lupus erythematosus, a multisystemic autoimmune
Abyssinian and Somali cats, postparturient catle without
disease. 167.480
hypophosphatemia, and splenic torsion in dogs. In most of
these disorders, however, erythrocyte destruction occurs pri-
Neonatal Isoerythrotysis
marily by increased phagocytosis.
Neonatal isoerythrolysis is an IMHA that develops in neona-
tal animals following ingestion of colostrum containing anti-
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia
bodies against antigens on their erythrocytes.480 It occurs
The binding of antibodies and/or complement to erythrocyte
primarily in horses, mules, and cats. In horses, dams become
surfaces can result in phagocytosis by macrophages and,
sensitized to foreign erythrocyte antigens from leakage of fetal
in some cases, intravascular hemolysis. Immune-mediated
erythrocytes through the placenta during pregnancy or from
hemolytic anemia (IMHA) may be primary or it may occur
exposure to fetal erythrocytes of the same blood type during
secondarily to rickettsial, bacterial, protozoal, viral, or hemo-
 a previous parturition. Antibodies are produced against these 
 tropic mycoplasmal infections; neoplasia (especially lympho-
 antigens and secreted in colostrum.131 Neonatal isoeryth-
mas); and toxin or drug exposure. Additional information
rolysis can occur in kittens with blood type A born to queens
concerning IMHA is given in Chapter 6.
with blood type B who have had no prior exposure to blood
type A antigens, because all adult cats with type B blood
Primary IMHA
naturally have high anti-A antibody titers.171
A diagnosis of primary IMHA, also called autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, is reached by ruling out other disorders
Transfusion Reactions
known to have concomitant IMHA. Primary IMHA
is
 Hemolytic transfusion reactions may occur when plasma of
common in dogs,33 1ess common in cats,261 and rare in other
 the recipient contains antibodies against one or more antigens
domestic animal species. About two-thirds of the dogs with
 on the surface of donor erythrocytes. Erythrocyte destruction
 IMHA appear to have primary IMHA 394 In contrast, IMHA
 may also occur when plasma of the donor contains antibodies
in noncanine species is usually a secondary rather than a
against one or more antigens on the surface of recipient
102
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 erythrocytes, but the amount of antibody present to react with
B. canis canis occurs primarily in Europe and Asia and is of
erythrocytes is considerably less. With the exception of cats,
intermediate pathogenicity.467 In addition, an unnamed large 
naturally occurring antierythrocyte antibodies of clinical sig-
Babesia species has been described in the United States in
nificance seldom occur in animals. Rather, antibody formation
immunosuppressed dogs 51,22,427
results from prior exposure to different erythrocyte antigens
 B. gibsoni is a small Babesia species infecting dogs; it is
via transfusion, pregnancy, or vaccination with products con-
endemic in Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. There has been
taining blood group antigens. Consequently severe hemolytic
a rapid increase in the number of cases reported in various
transfusion reactions generally do not occur at the time of the
 parts of the United States, predominantly in American pit bull
first blood transfusion. Cats with blood type B have naturally
terriers.547 Although ticks are considered the primary vector
occurring anti-A antibodies with high hemolytic titers. There-
 in much of the world, it appears that transmission of infected
fore the transfusion of type A blood into a type B cat can
 blood through dog bites is a major mechanism of transmission
result in a life-threatening intravascular hemolytic reaction
of this organism in the United States.4? A second small Babesia
 the first time such a transfusion is given.
species called Babesia conradae has been recognized in Cali-
fornia. Like B. gibsoni, it causes severe clinical disease in adult
dogs.52 It is closely related to piroplasms isolated from wild-
Erythrocyte Parasites
life and humans in the western United States. A third small
 Erythrocyte parasites include intracellular protozoal parasites
piroplasm has been identifed causing hemolytic anemia in
(Babesia species, Tbeileria species, and Cytauxzoon felis), intra-
dogs; it is closely related to Babesia microti, a previously rec-
cellular rickettsial organisms (Anaplasma species), and epicel-
 ognized parasite of rodents and humans. A provisional name
lular Mycoplas ma species. The morphology of these organisms
 of Theileria annae has been assigned to this organism based
is presented earlier in this chapter. These infectious agents
on its 18S rRNA gene sequence.79
generally cause mild to severe hemolytic anemia, depending.
 B. felis causes hemolytic anemia in cats in South Africa.362
on the pathogenicity of the organism and the susceptibility of
Additional piroplasms have been identified by PCR in
the host. Some damage to erythrocytes is caused directly by a
domestic cats, but their clinical significance remains to be
parasite, but secondary immune-mediated injury may be more
determined.491
 The two most important Babesia species infecting cattle are 
Antierythrocyte antibodies are often present and spherocytes
 B. bigemina and B. bovis. Both are capable of causing life-
 may be seen in stained blood films; therefore it is important
to differentiate these infectious diseases from primary
piroplasms infecting horses are the large B. caballi parasite,
 IMHA 82,176 Macrophage activation with increased erythro-
and the smaller, more pleomorphic B. equi parasite.491 The
phagocytosis may also contribute to the development of
 anemia is generally more_ severe in B. equi-infected than in
anemia.330
 B. caballi-infected horses.?8
 Except in horses, reticulocytosis is generally present if suf-
ficient time (about 4 days) has elapsed for a bone marrow
Theileria Species
response to occur. The anemia may be nonregenerative if a
Theileria parva and Theileria annulata cause important diseases
concomitant infammatory response inhibits erythropoiesis
in ruminants in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East.274 The
(see “Anemia of Infammatory Disease,"below), and/or if the
associated anemia may be regenerative or nonregenera-
 infection results in decreased hematopoietic precursors, as
tive 3s3.3 Theilerial organisms present in domesti ruminants
reported with Theileria parva infection in cattle.3os Thrombo-
 in the United States are usually nonpathogenic.2454s3 Like-
cytopenia is usually present with protozoal infections of
wise, Theileria in deer are generally considered of low patho-
 erythrocytes. Platelet consumption may occur in association
genicity, but may cause hemolytic anemia under some
circumstances.544 Some investigators have proposed that B.
probably more often associated with increased phagocytosis
equi and B. microti be moved to the genus Theileria, but others
of platelets in response to antibodies on their surfaces and/or
believe that they belong in a new genus that is distinct from
because of macrophage activation by infammatory cytokines
both Babesia and Tbeileria.14.491
generally present with erythrocytic Anaplasma and hemo-
Cytauxzoon felis
plasma infections.
Like Theileria, the genus Cytauxzoon has both a tissue phase
and an erythrocyte phase. In contrast to Theileria, the schiz-
Babesia Species
onts of Cytauxzoon develop exclusively in macrophages
Three genetically distinct large B. canis subspecies (B. canis
rather than in lymphocytes.4$ Most domestic cats with acute
canis, B. canis vogeli, and B. canis rossi) have been identifed.
cytauxzoonosis die.18s Cats generally have icteric plasma
 B. canis vogeli in the United States generally causes mild or
in the terminal stage of the disease. The HCT may be in
 inapparent disease in adults (unless they are immunosup-
the low thirties but is usually in the twenties. Reticulocyte
 pressed) but severe hemolytic anemia in pups. B. canis ross in
counts are not increased in response to the anemia. Cats
 South Africa can cause severe disease and death in adult dogs.
become thrombocytopenic during the late stage of disease.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
103
Coagulation tests may be prolonged or remain normal, tests
been associated with growth retardation and mild anemia in
for fbrin degradation products (FDPs) may be positive, and 
feeder pigs and unthriftiness with poor reproductive perfor-
 the total serum protein concentration is variably decreased.
mance in sows.221,.397
White blood cell counts are variable, but leukopenia generally
 M. ovis generally causes hemolytic anemia in young sheep
develops terminally. Parasitemia occurs late in the disease.
Since domestic cats with acute cytauxzoonosis generally die
However, severe hemolytic anemia and death have been
in a matter of days, they are believed to be dead-end hosts.
described in an outbreak in adult sheep that were also infected
Bobcats, however, usually do not die when infected with C.
with A. ovis.227
felis and serve as a reservoir of infection for transmission to
Systemic illness with edema has been reported in cattle
 domestic cats by ticks. A low percentage of cats have been
 not be reproduced experimentally,$22 M. wenyoni is not
 infection with a less virulent strain of the organism; however,
 reported to produce significant anemia in cattle unless they
 studies are needed to determine if these cats can serve as a
 have been splenectomized.
reservoir for C. felis transmission that would result in disease
 Variable anemia has been reported in lamas and alpacas
 in other domestic cats.72
 infected with Candidatus M. baemolamae,but most infections
appear to be subclinical Camelids that are immune-
Anaplasma Species
compromised or have other concurrent disorders are more
likely to be ill and anemic.43 The anemia may not be regenera-
Anaplasma marginale is an important pathogen causing mild
to severe hemolytic anemia and sometimes death in naive
 tive if it is complicated by infammatory disease.300
adult cattle.2s Infected calves generally do not become ill but
become carriers of the organism. Anaplasma centrale is much
less pathogenic in cattle and has been used as a vaccine against
Other Infectious Agents
 In addition to erythrocyte parasites, infections with other
 goats, and some wild ruminants.112
agents may result in hemolytic anemia. As in the case of
erythrocyte parasites, the enhanced erythrocyte destruction
Hemotropic Mycoplasmas (Hemopiasmas)
may have an immune-mediated component. Leptospira species
Hemotropic mycoplasmas are bacteria that attach to the
have been reported to cause hemolytic anemia in cattle, sheep,
external surfaces of erythrocytes. In contrast to erythrocyte
protozoal parasites, thrombocytopenia is not a feature of
hemoplasma infections. Three different hemoplasmas have
Hemolytic anemia has been described in experimental
Mycoplasma baemofelis generally produces anemia and clinical
Several Trypanosoma species cause hemolytic anemia in cattle,
signs of disease, while Candidatus Mycoplasma baemominutum
 sheep, and goats in tropical and subtropical regions, except in
 generally results in unapparent infection and minimal change
the United States, even though the parasite is not directly
in HCT unless the infection is complicated by other disorders
such as FeLV infection, feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
The anemia associated with equine infectious anemia
turicensis can be pathogenic in cats, causing a moderate to
(EIA) virus infection is multifactorial. It includes both an
severe hemolytic anemia. Early reports suggest that the
immune-mediated destruction of erythrocytes and bone
clinical signs of infection are worsened in cats having concur-
rent FIV infections or following the administration of
 are important components of the erythropoietic microenvi-
corticosteroids.538
ronment, where they can produce erythropoietic stimulatory
 Three hemoplasmas have been reported in dogs based on
 and inhibitory factors (see Chapter 3). The EIA virus repli-
16S rRNA gene sequences. Mycoplasma baemocanis is closely
ates in macrophages, including those in the bone marrow,462
related to M baemofelis.48.67 A hemoplasma closely related to
 and macrophages produce proinflammatory cytokines in
Candidatus M. baemominutum has been identified in a dog in
response to EIA infection that may inhibit both erythrocyte
China.51 Another hemoplasma has been identified in mul-
 and platelet production.283,461.484
tiple countries and classified as Candidatus Mycoplasma
 A transient regenerative anemia was repored in some
kittens experimentally infected with FeLV2 and immune-
immunosuppression is generally required before hemoplasmas
 mediated hemolytic anemia has infrequently been reported
are recognized in stained blood flms, and hemolytic anemia
in naturally infected cats,261 although some of these animals
develops in dogs.202
 might have had concomitant hemoplasma infections.16.174
 Mycoplasma suis causes hemolytic anemia with icterus in
However, the anemia seen in FeLV-infected cats is typically
young piglets. Hemolytic anemia may also occur in pigs at
nonregenerative because it is secondary to bone marrow pro-
weaning, in feeder pigs under stress, and in pregnant sows
liferative abnormalities, discussed later in this chapter and in
immediately preparfum.314 However, M. suis has more often
Chapter 9. 174.421
104
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Chemicals and Plants
Drugs Causing Immune-Mediated Anemia
Oxidants
A number of drugs are reported to produce secondary IMHA
Most chemicals and plants that cause hemolytic anemia are
in animals These drugs include penicillin (horses),306,3 ceph-
oxidants. Consequently Heinz bodies, eccentrocytes, and/or 
alosporins (dogs),54 levamisole (dogs),28 sulfonamides (horses
methemoglobinemia may be present. Dietary causes of Heinz
and dogs),478.47 pirimicarb (insecticide in dogs),3s and pro-
body hemolytic anemia (with or without eccentrocytosis and/
pylthiouracil (cats).2
or methemoglobinemia) include consumption of onions and
garlic in small and large animals, consumption of kale and
Fragmentation
other Brassica species by ruminants, consumption of lush
 Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia may occur when eryth.
winter rye by cattle, and consumption of red maple leaves by
 rocytes are forced to fow through altered vascular channels
horses and alpacas.* Heinz bodies have been recognized in
 or exposed to turbulent blood fow. Erythrocyte fragments
 erythrocytes from selenium-deficient Florida cattle grazing
with pointed extremities are called schistocytes. Erythrocyte
on St. Augustine grass pastures and in postparturient New
fragmentation may be seen in animals (especially dogs) with
DIC. Mechanical fragmentation occurs as the cells pass
Copper toxicity results in Heinz body formation in sheep and
through the fbrin meshwork of a microthrombus (see Fig.
 goats.39 Heinz body formation has been reported in dogs
4-53). Fragmentation anemia is especially common in dogs
ingesting zinc-containing objects (e.g., US. pennies minted
with hemangiosarcoma and in dogs with caudal vena cava
after 1982).46.20s Naphthalene ingestion may have caused
syndrome, resulting from a rapid blockage of the posterior
Heinz body formation in a dog.120
vena cava with large numbers of adult heartworms.
97,392,456
Heinz body hemolytic anemia has occurred following the
Erythrocyte  fragmentation is a component of the
administration of a variety of drugs including acetaminophen
hemolytic-uremic syndrome. This rare syndrome is character-
and methylene blue in cats and dogs, methionine and phenazo-
ized by hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute renal
pyridine in cats, menadione (vitamin Kg) in dogs, and pheno-
failure.34s In humans (and probably animals), the syndrome is
thiazine in horses. The application of benzocaine to infamed
dog skin can result in Heinz body formation, but methemo-
(and less often other bacteria) infecting the gastrointestinal
 globinemia is more prominent.205"
 tract; however, atypical cases have also been associated with
 Heinz body hemolytic anemia has been reported in a dog
nongastrointestinal infections, cancer, parturition, immuno-
 that had been sprayed with skunk musk.49 The ingestion of
suppressive drug therapy, organ transplants, and autoimmune
crude oil by marine birds results in Heinz body hemolytic
 anemia. 278.488
endothelial injury, activation of hemostasis, the formation of
Heinz bodies were consistently present in erythrocytes
microthrombi, erythrocyte fragmentation, and reduced blood
from a male English bulldog with multiple erythroid abnor-
malities including prominent siderotic inclusions in his eryth-
Atypical cases have been attributed to the overactivation of
 the alternative complement pathway. The glomerular capillary
Fig. 4-80, A,B), with an HCT of 14% to 24% and a mild 
bed of the kidney may be at increased risk because of its
methemoglobinemia (about 13%), persisted in a rescued
fenestrated endothelium, which continually exposes the sub-
quarter horse colt during 3 months of study. A source of
endothelial matrix to a variety of circulating proteins and
dietary oxidants was not identified, and hemoglobin electro-
peptides346 Additional disorders where erythrocyte fragmen-
 phoresis appeared normal. Erythrocyte reduced glutathione
tation may be observed are described under “Schistocytes,'
concentration was below the reference interval. An erythro-
above.
cyte metabolic defect was suspected, but erythrocyte enzyme
 assays failed to identify a cause. (J. W. Harvey, unpublished).
Hypo-osmolality
Intravascular hemolysis can occur in calves that drink exces-
Venoms
sive amounts of water following a period of water depriva-
Venoms from snakes, bees, wasps, and brown recluse spiders 
tion.172 Water intoxication decreases plasma osmolality, and
are complex mixtures of proteins, peptides, enzymes, and
water moves into erythrocytes causing them to swell and lyse.
chemicals that have multiple pathologic effects, including
Hemolysis has been reported in juvenile pygmy goats fed
water using a nipple bottle for human infants,316 and hemo-
 Phospholipase enzymes (especially phospholipase A2) in
lysis may occur when hypotonic fuid is administered intra-
 s n n  o e soa
venously (see Fig. 4-72, A).
Hypophosphatemia
 Hemolytic anemia can occur secondary to hypophosphatemia
because hypophosphatemia decreases the erythrocyte glyco-
lytic rate, which results in a decreased ATP concentration.
*References 18, 27, 121, 205, 470, 545.
Hemolytic anemia resulting from hypophosphatemia has
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
105
 been reported in diabetic cats and in a diabetic dog following
anemias and sporadic episodes ofintravascular hemolysis with
insulin therapy, in a cat with hepatic lipidosis, and in post-
hemoglobinuria. HCTs are generally between 30% and 40%,
 except during hemolytic crises, when the HCT may decrease
low ATP concentrations, dog erythrocytes might hemolyze 
to 15% or less. MCVs are usually between 80 and 90 fL and
as a result of decreased erythrocyte 2,3DPG concentration,
reticulocyte counts are generally between 10% and 30% even
because dog erythrocytes with low 2,3DPG are more alkaline-
 when the HCT is within the reference range. Lethargy, weak-
fragile than those of normal dogs and may hemolyze at physi-
ness, pale or icteric mucous membranes, mild hepatospleno-
 ologic pH values.20s
megaly, muscle wasting, and fever as high as 41°C may
occur during hemolytic crises, which occur secondary to
Hereditary Erythrocyte Defects
hyperventilation-induced alkalemia.
Pyruvate Kinase Defciency in Dogs and Cats
Affected dogs appear to tire more easily than normal, and
 Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency is transmitted as an autoso-
a myopathy with cramping is infrequently observed. Progres-
 mal recessive trait in many breeds of dogs, with highest preva-
 sive cardiac disease was reported in two whippets. In contrast
lence reported in basenji and beagle dogs. Homozygously
 to PK deficiency myelofibrosis and liver failure have not been
affected animals have decreased exercise tolerance, pale
 recognized in dogs with PFK deficiency.
mucous membranes, tachycardia, and splenomegaly. Affected
Homozygous affected animals more than 3 months of age
animals have a macrocytic hypochromic anemia (HCT 16% 
 can easily be identifed by measuring erythrocyte PFK activity.
to 28%) with marked reticulocytosis (15% to 50% uncorrected
 A DNA test using PCR technology has been developed that
reticulocyte count) when young. Myelofbrosis and osteoscle-
can clearly differentiate normal, carrier, and affected dogs of
rosis develop in the bone marrow, and hemochromatosis and
 all breeds except wachtelhunds, which have a different genetic
cirrhosis develop in the liver as the dogs age. HCT and reticu-
mutation.20s
locyte counts decrease as myelofbrosis and osteosclerosis
become severe. Affected dogs generally die between 1 and 5
years of age because of bone marrow failure and/or liver
Increased Erythrocyte Osmotic Fragility in Cats
failure.169,203
A hemolytic anemia with markedly increased osmotic fragil-
PK deficiency has been reported in Abyssinian, Somali,
ity occurs in Abyssinian and Somali cats 26 Splenomegaly and
 and domestic shorthaired cats. Affected cats are often asymp-
 polyclonal hyperglobulinemia are common. The HCT is gen-
tomatic, but lethargy pale 
mucous membranes,
and
erally between 15% and 25%, but values as low as 5% have
inappetence may be recognized. The HCT is generally
been recognized. A macrocytosis with mild to moderate retic-
normal or mildly decreased, but severe anemia may occur
ulocytosis is present in most cats. Most samples exhibit
during intermittent hemolytic crises. The MCV is usually
extreme hemolysis after 1 day of refrigeration; however, in
mildly increased. The MCHC is sometimes decreased. An
vivo intravascular hemolysis also occurs, as evidenced by
aggregate reticulocytosis is present in 90% of cases.2$9 Sple-
hemoglobinuria in some cats. An erythrocyte membrane
 nectomy may reduce the severity of the anemia in cats. In
 defect is suspected.
contrast to dogs, bone marrow and liver failure have not been
reported in cats; consequently the life expectancy in cats with
PK deficiency is generally longer than that in dogs with this
Hereditary Spherocytosis in Cattle
defect.169
Severe hemolytic anemia with icterus and splenomegaly is
 PK deficiency can be diagnosed by measuring erythrocyte
 present shortly after birth in Japanese black cattle that lack
enzyme activity in affected cats, but it can be difficult to
band 3 in their erythrocyte membranes. The mortality rate is
 diagnose by measuring enzyme activities in affected dogs
high in affected animals, especially during the first week of
because their erythrocytes contain an unstable M, isozyme
 life. Those that survive exhibit a persistent mild hemolytic
 that is usually lost as erythroid precursors develop into eryth-
anemia (HCT 25% to 35%), with marked spherocytosis and
rocytes.20 All PK-deficient cats identifed thus far have had
anisocytosis but no reticulocytosis. This defect is inherited as
the same mutation; therefore a single DNA-based diagnostic
an autosomal dominant trait, and osmotic fragility is increased
 test may be used to identify deficient cats.259 Unfortunately
several different genetic mutations have been identified in
dogs with PK deficiency. Consequently different DNA-based
diagnostic assays must be developed and/or validated for each
Glucose-6-Phosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency in a Horse
 affected dog breed. 169
 Persistent hemolytic anemia and hyperbilirubinemia have
been described in an American standard-bred colt with severe
Phosphofructokinase Deficiency in Dogs
 G6PD activity. Morphologic abnormalities of erythrocytes
Autosomal recessive inherited erythrocyte PFK deficiency
included eccentrocytosis, pyknocytosis, increased anisocytosis,
occurs in English springer spaniel, American cocker spaniel,
increased Howell-Jolly bodies, and rare hemoglobin crystals.
 Heinz bodies were not observed in erythrocytes stained with
 gously affected dogs have persistent compensated hemolytic
 new methylene blue.452
106
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Erythrocyte Flavin Adenine Dinucleotide Defciency
Postparturient Hemoglobinuria in Dairy Cattle
in Horses
 Postparturient hemoglobinuria in dairy cattle has been associ-
Eccentrocytosis, pyknocytosis, and variable numbers of hemo-
ated with hypophosphatemia.4o The anemia appears to
globin crystals have also been seen in FAD-deficient horses,
develop because affected animals have decreased erythrocyte
but HCTs were normal or only slightly decreased. Affected
 ATP concentrations.2s An apparently different syndrome of
 horses have undetectable glutathione reductase and reduced
postparturient hemoglobinuria has been reported in cattle in
CbsR enzyme activities because FAD is a cofactor for these
New Zealand grazing primarily on perennial ryegrass (Lolium
enzymes. A persistent methemoglobinemia (25% to 46%) is
perenne). The presence of Heinz bodies in these animals indi-
 present because of the CbsR deficiency.203
cates an oxidant etiology. Postparturient cattle may be more
susceptible to the development of anemia because increased
food consumption associated with lactation could increase
Hereditary Stomatocytosis in Dogs
exposure to an unidentified dietary oxidant. Copper deficiency
 Stomatocytosis is recognized in association with three differ-
may contribute to the severity of the anemia in these cattle by
 r so n sae n sp  ss p r
rendering their erythrocytes more susceptible to oxidants.292
membrane defects causing erythrocytes to swell. Hemoglobin
values and erythrocyte counts are low-normal or slightly
reduced, but HCTs are normal in Malamutes, schnauzers, and
BLOOD-LOSS ANEMIAS
Pomeranians. The MCV is increased and MCHC decreased
even though reticulocyte counts are normal or only slightly
Causes of blood-loss anemia are given in Box 4-4.* In some
increased. Affected Drentse patrijshond dogs have lower
cases the diagnosis of blood-loss anemia and its cause is
HCTs and higher reticulocyte counts than those found in the
apparent from the history and/or physical findings. In other
 aar s e  s s r
 osmotic fragility and shortened erythrocyte survival.25
*References 6, 107, 145, 161, 168, 284, 298, 312, 380, 414, 444.
Additional Hereditary Defects
Familial nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia has been reported
in poodles. Despite extensive studies, the defect in this disor-
 der could not be determined, but PK deficiency cannot be
BOX 4-4
ruled out. A mild hemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis,
Causes of Blood-Loss Anemias in
slightly increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility, shortened
Domestic Animals
erythrocyte life span, and normal erythrocyte morphology has
1. Trauma: Accidents, fights, gastrointestinal foreign bodies,
been reported in beagle dogs. A membrane defect was sus-
surgery
 2. Parasites: Hookworms, fleas, blood-sucking lice,
described in a crossbred dog that lacked erythrocyte mem-
Haemonchus spp. (small ruminants), liver flukes,
brane protein 4.1. Although the animal was not anemic, the
Coccidia spp.
reticulocyte count was about twice normal in compensation
 3. Coagulation disorders: Vitamin K deficiency, sweet clover
for a shortened erythrocyte life span.20s
(dicoumarol) toxicity (cattle), rodenticide toxicity, bracken 
fern toxicity (catle and sheep), disseminated intravascular
Miscellaneous Causes of Hemolytic Anemia
coagulation, inherited coagulation factor deficiencies (see 
Splenic Disorders
Chapter 7]
Disorders that cause splenomegaly may result in a syndrome
4. Platelet disorders: Thrombocytopenia and inherited platelet
called hypersplenism, where phagocytosis of blood cells is
function defects (see Chapter 7)
 increased.442 Increased erythrophagocytosis and anemia occur
 5. Neoplasia: Gastric tumors including carcinomas,
in various hemophagocytic disorders,516 most notably in
leiomyosarcoma, and lymphoma; transitional cell carcinoma
and transitional cell papilloma of urogenital system; and 
hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, which typically involve
ruptured hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, and adrenal gland
tumors with bleeding into body cavities and tissues
to splenic torsion, where stagnation and breakdown of blood
6. Gastrointestinal ulcers: Glucocorticoids, nonsteroidal
results in hemoglobinuria.338
anti-inflammatory drugs, mast cell tumors, gastrinoma,
stress, metabolic diseases (uremia, liver failure,
hypoadrenocorticism!
Liver Failure in Horses
7. Vascular abnormalities: Arteriovenous fistula and vascular
 Marked intravascular hemolysis has been reported in horses
ectasia in the gastrointestinal or urogenital tracts
with liver failure. The mechanism of this hemolysis is unknown,
 8. Phenylephrine-induced hemorrhage: Presumably associated
but bile acids or their salts have been considered possible
entrapment of the large colon
hemolytic factors in horses.33
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
107
cases hemorrhage is apparent but its cause must be deter-
mined. Finally, blood-loss anemia and its cause may not be
ANEMIAS RESULTING FROM
recognized until laboratory tests and other diagnostic tests are
DECREASED ERYTHROCYTE
done. The gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts are common 
PRODUCTION
 sites of occult hemorrhage. Tests that may assist in the diag-
 nosis of gastrointestinal hemorrhage include the occult blood
Anemia resulting from decreased erythrocyte production
test in feces, fecal examination for parasite ova, and diagnostic
hcks evidence of bone marrow response to the anemia (e.g-)
 imaging to identify tumors or ulcers. Urinalysis and diagnostic
the absolute reticulocyte count in blood is not increased or
imaging of the urinary system may assist in the diagnosis of
 only minimally raised for the degree of anemia). Nonregen-
renal or bladder hemorrhage.
 erative anemias result from reduced or defective erythropoi-
Although total blood volume is decreased, HCT and
esis (Box 4-5). They are usually normocytic. Exceptions
plasma protein concentration are normal immediately after
 include microcytic anemia associated with chronic iron-
substantial acute blood loss has occurred because there is a
deficiency anemia, copper deficiency, pyridoxine deficiency,
balanced loss of erythrocytes and plasma. The HCT may even
 and dyserythropoiesis in English springer spaniel dogs and
be increased shortly after acute blood loss in horses and dogs
macrocytic anemia associated with folate deficiency, FeLV
 because splenic contraction occurs, which releases blood with
infection in cats, erythroleukemia, some myelodysplastic dis-
a higher HCT into the general circulation.237 Afer several
 orders, and dyserythropoiesis in polled Hereford calves201,257
hours, the HCT and plasma protein concentration decrease
Bone marrow biopsies are often required to delineate the
as fuid moves from the digestive tract and extravascular spaces
nafure of nonregenerative anemias.
into the circulation to return the blood volume toward normal.
 If no further hemorrhage occurs, the plasma protein concen-
tration will return to normal within a few days. Consequently
BOX 4-5
 the occurrence of a low plasma protein concentration in asso-
Anemias Resulting from
Decreased Erythrocyte
Production in Domestic Animals
hemorrhage. Considerably more time is required for the HCT
to return to normal than is required for the plasma protein
Reduced Erythropoiesis
concentration to return to normal. The HCT increases about
1. Chronic renal disease: Primarily lack of erythropoietin
1 percentage point per day following experimental phlebot-
2. Endocrine deficiencies: Hypothyroidism,
omy in dogs and cats, with a slightly lower response in caftle
hypoadrenoc orticism, hypopituitarism, hypoandrogenism
 and horses.15,65,364
 3. Inflammatory disease: Inflammation and neoplasia
 4. Cytotoxic damage to the marrow: Bracken fern poisoning
 loss because approximately 4 days are required for production
(cattle), cytotoxic anticancer drugs, estrogen toxicity (dogs
and ferrets), chloramphenicol (cats, usually not anemic),
of reticulocytes by the marrow. The MCV may not be increased
phenylbutazone (dogs), trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (dogs),
following blood loss in animals because the reticulocyte
radiation, albendazole (dogs, cats, alpacas), griseofulvin 
response may not be of suffcient magnitude to result in a high
(cats), trichloroethylene (cattle)
MCV. Few reticulocytes are released from the marrow in
5. Infectious agents: Ehrlichia spp. (dogs, horses, and cats),
response to blood-loss anemia in cattle and no reticulocytes
FeLV, nonbloodsucking trichostrongyloid parasites
are released following hemorrhage in horses.
(ruminants), parvovirus (pups)
Chronic external blood loss can result in iron deficiency.
 6. Immune-mediated: Nonregenerative anemia, selective
Iron-deficiency anemia is common in adult dogs and rumi-
erythroid aplasia, continued treatment with recombinant 
nants but seldom occurs in adult cats and horses because
human erythropoietin, idiopathic aplastic anemia (?)
 uosun si sso pooq usyuiis hunsn ussrd
7. Congenital/inherited: Foals and dogs?
these species. If iron deficiency persists for several weeks, the
8. Myelophthisis: Myeloid leukemias, lymphoid leukemias,
 anemia can become microcytic and hypochromic. Reticulo-
myelodysplastic syndromes, multiple myeloma, myelofibrosis,
osteosclerosis, metastatic lymphomas, metastatic mast cell 
A  ps    sq e so 
iron-deficiency anemia in dogs; however, as iron deficiency
tumors 
becomes more severe, the regenerative response will be attenu-
Defective Erythropoiesis
ated (see discussion of iron deficiency under “Abnormalities
1. Disorders of heme synthesis: lron, copper, and pyridoxine
 in Heme Synthesis, later in this chapter).204 Internal hemor-
deficiencies; lead toxicity; drugs
rhage can share some characteristics of hemolytic anemias.
2. Disorders of nucleic acid synthesis: Folate and cobalamin
Iron is conserved so that hypoferremia does not occur. Slight
deficiencies
hyperbilirubinemia may occur due to phagocytosis and deg-
 3. Ahnormal maturation: Erythroleukemia or AM L-M6 (primarily
radation of erythrocytes at the sites of widespread hemor-
cats), myelodysplastic syndromes with erythroid
rhage. Some plasma proteins may be reabsorbed when
predominance (MDS-Er), inherited dyserythropoiesis of
 hemorrhage occurs in body cavities, thus shortening the return
Hereford calves, inherited dyserythropoiesis of English
springer spaniels
of plasma protein concentrations to normal.
108
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 Nonregenerative Anemias without Leukopenia
Abnormalities in Heme Synthesis
or Thrombocytopenia
 Iron deficiency in adult domestic animals usually results from
 A nonregenerative anemia without an accompanying leuko-
blood loss. The absolute reticulocyte count may be increased
 penia or thrombocytopenia in blood suggests a bone marrow
early in response to hemorrhage, but as iron deficiency
 abnormality affecting only erythroid cell. Mild to moderate
becomes more severe, a minimal regenerative response is
anemia of this type may occur in association with chronic
present. Microcytic erythrocytes form when iron becomes
renal disease, endocrine deficiencies, and the anemia ofinfam-
limiting because erythroid cells apparently undergo additional
matory disease. Erythroid production is reduced in these dis-
divisions, resulting in smaller-than-normal cells. If sufficient
orders, but often not enough to result in an M: E ratio in the
 time has elapsed for these small cells to account for a substan-
 marrow that is increased above the reference interval.
tial portion of the total erythrocyte population, the MCV will
decrease below the normal reference interval. When the MCV
Hormone Defciencies
is only slighty decreased, the MCHC is usually normal.
 Because the kidney is the major site of EPO production in
When the MCV is substantially below normal, the MCHC
the body, chronic renal disease can result in a mild to moderate
will also be decreased.204 Erythrocytes in these microcytic
nonregenerative anemia secondary to reduced EPO produc-
hypochromic anemias will appear hypochromic (pale cells
with prominent areas of central pallor) on stained blood films.
ticism, and hypothyroidism may result in mild nonregenerative
 A low MCHC is seldom present and hypochromasia is usually
 anemia because these hormones enhance the growth of ery-
not apparent in stained blood films from iron-deficient horses
and adult cats. Hematologic aspects of iron deficiency are
compared to the anemia of infammatory disease in Table 4-1.
(e.g., following hemorrhage or increased erythrocyte destruc-
 Milk contains little iron; consequently nursing animals can
tion, when a substantial increase in erythropoiesis is required).
 deplete body iron stores as they grow. Microcytic erythrocytes
Thyroid hormones may also promote the synthesis of EPO in
 are produced in response to iron deficiency, but a low MCV
the kidney.20s
may not develop postnatally in species such as dogs and cats
in which the MCV is above adult values at birth. The potential
Anemia of Infammatory Disease
for development of severe iron deficiency in young animals
(Anemia of Chronic Disease)
appears to be less in species that begin to eat food at an early
 A mild to moderate nonregenerative anemia often accom-
age. Piglets are especially susceptible to the development of
panies chronic infammatory and neoplastic disorders. The
iron deficiency when they are not raised on dirt; thus the
cause of the anemia is multifactorial and only partially under-
practice of iron injctions of piglets.204
stood. Abnormalities that can contribute to the anemia
 Prolonged copper deficiency usually results in anemia in
include low serum iron, the production of infammatory
mammals. Because copper is required for normal iron
mediators that can inhibit erythropoiesis, and shortened
erythrocyte life spans, presumably secondary to membrane
damage caused by endogenous oxidants generated during
infammation.204
TABLE 4-1
Disorders of Nucleic Acid Synthesis
Anemia resulting from folate deficiency is rarely reported in
Laboratory Findings in Chronic Iron-
 animals. Macrocytic anemia has been produced experimen-
Deficiency Anemia versus the Anemia of
tally in pigs and a clinical case of folate deficiency has been
Inflammatory Disease
recognized in a cat.20s Cobalamin (vitamin B2) deficiency in
Anemia of
humans, who require cobalamin for normal folate metabolism,
Chronic Iron
Inflammatory
causes hematologic abnormalities similar to folate deficiency.
Parameter
Deficiency
Disease
In contrast, cobalamin deficiency does not cause macrocytic
HCT
Slight to marked
Slight to moderate
anemia in any animal species. Anemia has been reported in
decrease
decrease
some experimental animal studies, but erythrocytes were
of
MCV
Slight to marked 
 Normal to slight
normal size. Cobalamin deficiency occurs secondarily to an
decrease
decrease
inherited malabsorption of cobalamin in dogs. Affected
 Serum iron
Slight to marked
Slight to moderate
animals have normocytic, nonregenerative anemia with
decrease
decrease
Serum TIBC
Normal to increased 
Normal to decreased
 increased anisocytosis. Additional findings include neutrope-
Serum ferritin
Decreased
Normal to increased
nia with hypersegmented neutrophils and giant platelets. A
Marrow
Decreased or absent
Normal to increased
normocytic nonregenerative anemia was also present in a
hemosiderin
cobalamin-deficient cat that probably had an inherited defect
in cobalamin absorption.20s
HCT, Hematocrit; MCV, mean cell volume; TIBC, total iron-binding capacity.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
109
metabolism, the anemia that develops is generally microcytic,
 may be a prominent feature of some hematopoietic neoplasms,
but it may be normocytic. Pyridoxine (vitamin B,) is required
 especially erythroleukemia, and some myelodysplastic syn-
for the first step in heme synthesis. While natural cases of
 pyridoxine deficiency have not been documented in domestic
 nia are usually present along with nonregenerative anemia in
animals, microcytic anemias with high serum iron values have
these latter disorders, which in cats are usually associated with
been produced experimentally in dogs, cats, and pigs with 
FeLV infections.56
dietary pyridoxine defciency.20
Nonregenerative Anemias with Leukopenia
Nonregenerative Immune-Mediated Anemia
and/or Thrombocytopenia
Erythroid cellularity in the marrow varies from hypocellular
The pattern of a pancytopenia with a nonregenerative anemia
to hypercellular in dogs and cats with nonregenerative
 suggests a defect in the production of blood cell in bone
immune-mediated anemia.  Erythroid maturation may be
marrow. The bone marrow may be hypocellular, with low
complete to the polychromatophilic erythrocyte stage or a
numbers of cells (including hematopoietic precursors) present,
maturation arrest may occur at an earlier stage of erythrocyte
 or high numbers of abnormal cells may have replaced the
 normal hematopoietic precursors in marrow (myelophthi-
anemia with maturation arrest has also been reported in a
 sis),520 However, pancytopenia with nonregenerative anemia
ferret.2?4 An antibody or cell-mediated response may be
may sometimes be present in disorders other than marrow
directed against one or more maturation antigens present on
 hypoplasia/aplasia and myelophthisis. These disorders gener-
nucleated erythrocyte precursors and/or reticulocytes. Ery-
ally have increased numbers of macrophages (histiocytes) in
throid hypoplasia occurs when the immune response is
 bone marrow and/or peripheral tissues, and the destruction of
blood cells is a component of the pathogenesis of the cytope-
nias in these histiocytic disorders. Histiocytic infammatory
Selective Erythroid Aplasia
conditions that may have accompanying pancytopenia include
 Pure red cell aplasia or selective erythroid aplasia can result
the terminal stage of cytauxzoonosis in cats,$ histoplasmo-
in severe anemia in dogs and cats. Most cases appear to be
sis,15 1eishmaniasis,3 and mycobacteriosis3 Bicytopenia or
pancytopenia has been reported in dogs classified as having
Some cases in adult dogs and cats appear to be immune-
the hemophagocytic syndrome (activated macrophage syn-
 drome) with greater than 2% hemophagocytic macrophages
 infected with FeLV subgroup C, but not in cats infected only
in bone marrow.51 This syndrome develops secondary to some
with subgroups A or Biss Colony-forming-unit-erythrocyte
infectious, neoplastic, and immune-mediated conditions, but
(CFU-E) numbers are markedly decreased but burst-forming-
 an underlying disease may not always be identifed.49516
unit-erythrocyte (BFU-E) numbers are normal in infected
Cytopenias may also occur with hypersplenism, associated
cats. FeLV-C binds to a heme exporter on bone marrow
with splenomegaly and increased phagocytosis of blood cells
CFU-E cells, and it is hypothesized that this binding inhibits
heme export from these cells, resulting in their destruction
because free heme is toxic to cells.331 High doses of chloram--
 generally nonregenerative in most of these histiocytic disor-
phenicol cause reversible erythroid hypoplasia in some dogs
 ders because of accompanying infammation (see “Anemia of
and erythroid aplasia in cats.205 Marked erythroid hypoplasia
 Inflammatory Disease," above),but the anemia may be regen-
has been reported in dogs, cats, and horses given recombinant
erative in response to erythrocyte phagocytosis in some his-
human EPO.106,39 Antibodies made against this human
tiocytic disorders.
recombinant glycoprotein apparently cross-react with the 
Hypocellutar/Apiastic Bone Marrow
duced in a hamster cell line has also caused erythroid aplasia
 A marrow is classified as hypoplastic when 5% to 25% of the
in cats.386
hematopoietic space consists of bone marrow cells. General-
Dyserythropoiesis
generally fat replaces lost hematopoietic cells in hypocellular
The term dyserytbropoiesis refers to various disorders in which
marrow. When all hematopoietic cell types—erythrocytic,
 abnormal erythrocyte maturation and/or morphology is asso-
granulocytic, and megakaryocytic—are absent or markedly
ciated with ineffective erythropoiesis (see dyserythropoiesis
reduced (less than 5% of the hematopoietic space consists of
 section in Chapter 9). Dyserythropoiesis is a prominent com-
hemic cells), the marrow is said to be aplastic. Anemic animals
 with generalized marrow aplasia in which nearly all of the
marrow space is occupied by fat are reported to have aplastic
Dyserythropoiesis has been reported  in association with
 anemia. When only one cell line is reduced or absent, more
immune-mediated disorders, drug toxicities, and myelofibro-
restrictive terms, such as granulocytic bypoplasia or erytbroid
sis.2,51s Dyserythropoiesis with Cabot rings has been reported
aplasia, are used to describe the abnormalities present. Hypo-
 in a dog with a metastatic carcinoma.2s Dyserythropoiesis
cellular or aplastic bone marrow may result from insufficient
110
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
numbers of stem cells, abnormalities in the hematopoietic
cases of aplastic anemia are immune-mediated, and activated
microenvironment or abnormal humoral or cellular control of
type-1 cytotoxic T cells have been implicated 4 Consequently
hematopoiesis. These factors are interrelated, and the specific
most cases of idiopathic aplastic anemia in animals may be
defect in a given disorder is usually unknown.
immune-mediated, if the pathophysiology is similar to that in
Drug-induced causes of aplastic anemia or generalized
humans.
 marrow hypoplasia in animals include estrogen toxicity in
Congenital aplastic anemia, renal abnormalities, and skin
kqissod pue) saop un Anixi suozenquyd otsaop
lesions have been reported in newborn foals whose mothers
in
were treated for equine protozoal myeloencephalitis with sul-
fonamides and/or pyrimethamine during pregnancy.42 Aplas-
trichloroethylene-extracted soybean meal in cattle,18 alben-
tic anemia has been described in 11- and 14-day-old Holstein
calves that may have also developed in utero.19424 An in utero
toxicity in cats,402 methimazole toxicity in cats,15 
various
toxic insult was suspected in a 9-week-old Clydesdale foal with
 cancer chemotherapeutic agents, immunosuppressive drugs,
s eiedodq moru uq pzeru e euue se
 aq pas ssou paq-prepueis fun nuaia ui paodar uaa
amide, meclofenamic acid, and quinidine have also been
incriminated as potential causes of aplastic anemia in dogs.2
In addition to exogenous estrogen injections, aplastic
Myelophthisic Disorders
 anemia can occur in dogs because of high levels of endogenous 
Myelophthisic disorders are characterized by the replacement
 estrogens produced by Sertoli cell, interstitial cell, and granu-
of normal hematopoietic cells with abnormal ones. Examples
losa cell tumors.4 Functional cystic ovaries also have the
include myelogenous leukemias, lymphoid leukemias, multi-
 potential of inducing myelotoxicity in dogs.6? Ferrets have
 ple myeloma, myelodysplastic syndromes, and myelofibrosis
induced ovulations and may remain in estrus for long periods
(often associated with anemia but less often with pancytope-
of time when they are not bred. This prolonged exposure to a
nia). Nonregenerative anemia with leukopenia and/or throm-
high endogenous estrogen concentration can result in aplastic
bocytopenia are often recognized in cats infected with FeLV
 and less often with cats infected with FIV 154.174 Examination
anemia.258
Acute parvovirus infections may cause transient marrow
of bone marrow generally reveals the presence of a myelodys-
 hypoplasia, but not true aplastic anemia. Parvovirus infections
can cause erythroid hypoplasia, as well as myeloid hypoplasia
 penias may sometimes be present secondary to the extensive
metastasis of lymphomas, carcinomas, and mast cell tumors.*
Myelophthisic disorders do not simply “crowd out" normal
or the bone marrow returns to normal within a week
If
 cells, but also alter the marrow microenvironment so that
present, anemia is usually mild, unless GI hemorrhage is
normal hematopoiesis is compromised. In the case of myelo-
 severe, because of the long erythrocyte life span. Thrombocy-
dysplastic syndromes, increased apoptosis probably accounts
topenia, if present, is generally mild unless DIC occurs as part
Although some degree of marrow hypoplasia and/or dys-
Physiologic Anemia of Neonatal Animals
HCT and hemoglobin values increase during fetal develop-
tic anemia is not a well-documented sequela,400 but it may
ment, reaching values near those of adult animals upon birth
rarely occur.515 Hypocellular bone marrow has been reported
(Fig. 4-102). Following birth, there is a rapid decrease in these
in experimental cats coinfected with FeLV and feline
parameters during the first few weeks of life, followed by a
parvovirus.289
gradual increase to adult values by 4 months of age in most
 Dogs with acute Ebrlichia canis infections may spontane-
species (Fig. 4-103). Factors involved in the development of 
ously recover or develop chronic disease that generally exhibits
the anemia of the neonate include absorption of colostral
some degree of marrow hypoplasia. Although rare, aplastic
proteins during the first day of life (increases plasma volume
anemia may develop in association with severe chronic
through an osmotic effect), decreased erythrocyte production
during the early neonatal period, shortened life span of eryth-
(Theileria parva infection) have been described in cattle with
rocytes formed in utero, and rapid growth with hemodilution
 resulting from total plasma volume expansion, which occurs
Aplastic anemia has been reported in five cats with chronic
 more rapidly than the increase in total erythrocyte mass.205
renal failure. These cats also exhibited prolonged anorexia and/
 In some species, production of erythrocytes is decreased
 or emaciation, and it was suggested that starvation played a
because of low EPO concentrations at birth. The decreased
stimulus for EPO production at birth may occur as a result of
Idiopathic aplastic anemiahas been reported in dogs,4720
a placental blood transfusion that increases erythrocyte mass
aplasia with normal megakaryocyte numbers has been reported
 in a horse; the etiology was unknown.so1 In humans, most
*References 4, 22, 135, 154, 220, 279, 299, 420, 514, 519, 520.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
111
immediately after birth, a rapid increase in PaO, associated
with breathing air, and a decrease in hemoglobin O, affinity
ERYTHROCYTOSIS
due to an increase in erythrocyte 2,3DPG content after birth.
(POLYCYTHEMIA)
Although not involved in the early, rapid decrease in HCT,
iron availability may limit the response to anemia in some
Erytbrocytosis refers to an increase in HCT, hemoglobin, and
rapidly growing animals.204
 RBC count above the normal reference interval. The reference
interval can sometimes vary by breed as well as by species. The
13
HCTs of hot-blooded horses (e.g., thoroughbreds, quarter
horses, and Arabians) are usually higher than those of draft
12
horses because of the larger spleens, relative to body weight,
dL
 in the hot-blooded group,254 Some sighthound breeds (grey-
11
uigo
hounds, whippets, Afghan hounds, and salukis) have higher
10
HCTs than other breeds.238,481 The reference interval for the
ibor
HCT in adult greyhound dogs is reported to be 48% to
 64%.423 A reference interval of 50% to 69% was reported using
blood from healthy adult whippets, Afghan hounds, and
R
salukis.21 In addition, slightly increased HCTs are sometimes
measured in individuals from some non-sighthound breeds
30 -20-10
102030
¥5060150
(i.e., poodle, German shepherd, boxer, beagle, dachshund,
 Days from birth
 and Chihuahua) 23 These somewhat higher values may result
FIGURE 4-102
from splenic contraction in animals with a high normal eryth-
 Blood hemoglobin values in prenatal and postnatal cats.
rocyte mass.
Relative Erythrocytosis
Data from Windle WF,Sweet M,Whitebead WH.Some aspects of prenatal
and postnatal development of the blood of cats.Arat Rec.1940;78:321.
 Erythrocytosis is either relative (spurious) or absolute (Box
4-6). A relative erythrocytosis is one in which the HCT is 
Basenji pup
high but the total erythrocyte mass in the body is normal.
6.5
 It is caused by splenic contraction or dehydration. Splenic
contraction results from sympathetic stimulation as occurs
6.0
6
with excitement, fear, pain, or exercise. The HCT measured in
PP
5.5
 blood from peripheral veins increases because the HCT in the
5.0
spleen is considerably higher than that in the general circula-
tion.110.49 Splenic contraction results in higher (30% to 50%)
06
3
80
MCV
70
BOX 4-6
60
Erythrocytosis in Domestic
15
Animals
2
10
Relative Erythrocytosis
Retic
1. Splenic contraction: Excitement, exercise, pain (primarily in
horses, dogs, and cats)
 2. Dehydration: Water loss, water deprivation, shock with fluid 
40
shift into tissues
Absolute Erythrocytos is
PCV
30
1. Primary erythrocytosis: A myeloproliferative neoplasm in 
 adult dogs and cats
 2. Familial erythrocytosis in young Jersey cattle: Etiology
20
unknown
 3. Hypoxemia with compensatory increased erythropoietin
20
40
60
80
100
120
 production: Chronic lung disease, heart disease with
Days of age
right-to-left shunting of blood, chronic methemoglobinemia
(rare in dogs and cats)
FIGURE 4-103
 4. Inappropriate erythropoietin production: Renal lesions
Age-related changes in total plasma protein (PP) concentration, mean
(primarily tumors), nonrenal erythropoietin secreting
cell volume (MCV), reticulocyte (Retic) count, and packed cell volume
tumors (rare)
(PCV) in blood from a basenji dog.
112
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 increases in HCT in dogs, cats, and hot-blooded horses than
confirmed by finding evidence of dehydration on physical
 in ruminants, pigs, or draft horses because the former group
examination.
have large, contractile spleens.449.48s
 The persistence of a moderate or marked increase in HCT
Dehydration results from increased water loss (diarrhea,
suggests that an absolute erythrocytosis is present. Tests that
vomiting, excessive diuresis, or sweating) or from water depri-
may help determine the cause of the absolute erythrocytosis
vation. The plasma protein concentration is also usually
 include arterial blood gas measurements, diagnostic imaging,
increased. The HCT may also be high when increased vascular
a methemoglobin screening test, and a validated EPO test.
 permeability results in water loss from the circulation into the
The cytologic examination of bone marrow is not useful.
When present, methemoglobinemia is easily recognized using.
a simple spot test (see “Methemoglobin Determination,”
Absolute Erythrocytosis
above). The presence of low PaO2 suggests that either a heart
An absolute erythrocytosis is one in which the HCT is high
defect (with right-to-left shunting of blood) or chronic lung
 because the total erythrocyte mass in the body is increased.
 disease is present. Diagnostic imaging procedures are used to
Absolute erythrocytosis may occur secondary to increased
differentiate heart and lung disease and search for renal lesions
EPO production (secondary erythrocytosis) or in disorders
and tumors. Plasma EPO values should be increased when
where increased erythrocyte proliferation occurs in the pres-
hypoxemia, renal lesions, or EPO-secreting tumors cause
 ence of normal or low blood EPO values (primary erythrocy-
the erythrocytosis, but are low when primary erythrocytosis
tosis). Causes of secondary erythrocytosis include chronic
is present. Unforrunately, there is considerable overlap among
hypoxemia (heart defects with right-to-left shunting of
 patients with primary and secondary erythrocytosis, limiting.
42,367
 persistent methemo-
the diagnostic value of the EPO assay? A diagnosis of
globinemia203), renal disorders causing local tissue hypoxia
 primary erythrocytosis is reached after ruling out other poten-
tial causes of persistent erythrocytosis.
tumors that secrete EPO, EPO-like proteins, or other hor-
 mones such as androgens that might enhance the effects of
EPO.104,17726,408.546
REFERENCES
Primary erythrocytosis (polycythemia vera) is considered
to be a myeloproliferative neoplasm that results from an
1. Abkowitz JL. Retrovirus-induced feline pure red blood cell aplasia: pathogenesis and
autonomous  (erythropoietin-independent)  proliferation
of
response to surammin. Blood 1991;77:1442-1451
erythroid precursor cells, resulting in high numbers of mature
 2. Abrams K. Yunusov MY. Slichter S. et al. Recombinant human macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-induced thrombocytopenia in dogs. Br J Haematol.
cythemia vera, blood granulocyte and platelet numbers are
2003;121:614-622
 3. Adachi K, Makimura S. Changes in anti-erythrocyte membrane antibody level of dogs
 generally not increased in animals; consequently, in veterinary
experimentally infected with Babesia gibsoni. J Vet Med Sci 1992;54:1221-1223.
medicine, the term primary erytbrocytosis is more appropriate
4. Adam F, Viliers E Watson S, et al. Clinical pathological and epidemiological assess-
than polycytbemia vera. A diagnosis of primary erythrocytosis
ment of morphologicaly and immunologically confirmed canine leukaemia. Vet Comp
Oncol. 2009;7:181-195
is ultimately made by ruling out causes of the secondary
5. Adams TJr, Traber DL. The effects of a prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor, ibuprofen,
erythrocytosis.
on the cardiopulmonary response to endotoxin in sheep. Circ Shock.
Familial erythrocytosis (HCTs of 60% to 80%) has been
1982;9:481 -489.
6. Aird B. Acute blood loss. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary
 described in calves from a highly inbred Jersey herd.47 The
Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wvilliams & Wilkins; 2000:151-153.
 cause of this defect was not determined. Affected calves had
7. AI-Huniti NH, Widness JA, Schmidt RL, et al. Pharmacodynamic analysis of changes
normal hemoglobin types and arterial blood gas values and
in reticulocyte subtype distribution in phlebotomy-induced stress erythropoiesis. J
Phammacokinet Phammacodyn. 2005;32:359-376.
lacked measurable EPO in plasma. The majority of the affected
8. Allard RL, Carlos AD, Faltin EC. Canine hematologic changes during gestation and 
calves died by 6 months of age. HCTs of surviving animals
lactation. Compan Anim Pract 1989;19:3-6.
 9. Alleman AR, Harvey JVV. The morphologic effects of vincristine sulfate on canine 
returned slowly to normal by maturity. Erythrocytosis of
bone mafrow cells. Vet Clin Pahol. 1993;22:36-41.
 unknown etiology has also been diagnosed in an 8-month-old
10. Allen AL, Meyers SL, Searcy GP, et al. Hematology of equine fetuses with compari-
 Japanese black heifer.46 A variety of familial and congenital
sons to their dams. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;2793-100.
11. Allen BV. Relationships between the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, plasma proteins
erythrocytosis syndromes have been described in humans.
and viscosity. and leucocyte counts in thoroughbred racehorses. Vet Rec.
They include altered hypoxia sensing, mutations in the
1988;122:329-332
 EPO receptor gene, high-affnity hemoglobins, and 2,3DPG
12. Alison RV, Fielder SE, Meinkoth JH. What is your diagnosis? Blood film from an 
icteric cat. Vet Chin Patho. 2010;39:125-126.
13. Allison RVw, Velguth KE. Appearance of granulated cells in blood fims stained by
automated aqueous versus methanolic Romanowsky methods. Vet Clin Pathor.
Differential Diagnosis of Erythrocytosis
2010;39:99-104.
Splenic contraction is considered a likely cause of erythrocy-
14. Allsopp MT, Cavalier-Smith T, De Waal DT, et al. Phylogeny and evolution of the
piroplasms. Parasitology. 1994;108{Pt 2):147-152.
 tosis when the HCT is slightly to moderately increased in the
15. Alsaker RD, Laber J, Stevens JB, et al. A comparison of polychromasia and reticulo-
absence of evidence of dehydration. A slight to moderate
cyte counts in assesing erythrocyte regenerative response inthe cat. JAm Vet Med
increase in HCT with increased plasma protein concentration
Assoc. 1977;170:39-41
16. Altman NH. Intraerythrocytic crystalloid bodies in cats and their comparison with
 suggests that dehydration is present. This interpretation is
hemoglobinopathies of man. Ann N Y Acad Sci 1974;241:589-593.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
113
17. Altman NH, Melby EC. Squire RA. Intraerythrocytic crystalloid bodies in cats. Blood.
49. Birkenheuer AJ, Correa MT, Levy MG, et al. Geographic distribution of babesiosis
1972;39:801-803.
-000z} sasen 0sl :saiq bop 4pi uojeinose pue saneas paqun a4n u! sbop buowe
18. Alward A, Corriher CA, Barton MH, et al. Red maple {Acer rubrum) leaf toxicosis
2003). J Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 2005;227:942-947.
in horses: a retrospective study of 32 cases. J Vet Intem Med. 2006;20:1197-
 50. Birkenheuer AJ, Le JA, Valenzisi AM, et al. Cytauxzoon felis infection in cats in the
1201.
mid-Atlantic states: 34 cases {1998-2004). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2006;228:568-571.
19. Ammann VJ, Fecteau G, Helie P, et al. Pancytopenia associated with bone marrow
51. Birkenheuer AJ, Neel J, Ruslander D, et al. Detection and molecular characterization
aplasia in a Holstein heifer. Can Vet J. 1996;37:493-495.
of a novel large Babesia species in a dog. Vet Parasitol. 2004;124:151-160.
 20. Anderson GJ, Frazer DM, McLaren GD. Iron absorption and metabolism. Curr Opin
52. Biryomumaisho S, Katunguka-Rwakishaya E. The pathogenesis of anaemia in goats
Gastroenterol. 2009;25:129-135.
experimentally infeted with Trypanosoma congolense or Trypanosoma brucei use
uo eisaunsaue lojodod Aep anasuon jo saa aui a Aea ii Aea ir ssaipus lz
of the myeloid:erythroid ratio. Vet Parasitol. 2007;143:354-357.
feline red blood cells. Vet Surg. 1995;24:277-282.
 53. Blakley BR, Fraser LM, Waldner C. Chlorate poisoning in beef cate. Can Vet J.
 22. Angel KL, Spano JS, Schumacher J, et al. Myelophthisic pancytopenia in a pony mare.
2007;48:1071-1073.
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1991;198:1039-1042.
 54. Bloom JC, Thiem PA. Sellers TS, et al. Cephalosporin-induced immune cytopenia in
23. Anosa VO, Logan-Henfrey LL, Wells CVw. The haematology of Trypanosoma congo-
the dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil- and platelet-associated IgG fol-
lense infection in catle l. Sequential cytomorphological changes in the blood and
lowing treatment with cefazedone. Amm J/ Hematol. 1988;28:71-78.
bone marrow of Boran cattle. Comp Haematol Int. 1997;7:14-22.
 55. Blue J, Weiss L. Vascular pathways in nonsinusal red pulp—an electron microscope
24. Arese P, De Flora A. Denaturation of normal and abnormal erythrocytes Il Pathophysi-
study of the cat spleen. Am / Anat 1981;161:135-168.
ology of hemolysis in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency. Semin Hematol.
56. Blue JT, French TW, Kranz JS. Non-lymphoid hematopoietic neoplasia in cats: a
1990;27:1-40.
retrospective study of 60 cases. Comell Vet. 1988;78:21-42.
 25. Aroch I, Segev G, Loeb E, et al. Peripheral nucleated red blood cells as a prognostic
 57. Boas FE, Forman L, BeutlerE. Phosphatidylserine exposure and red cellviability in red 
indicator in heatstroke in dogs. J/ Vet lntem MMed. 2009;23:544-551.
cell aging and in hemolytic anemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998;95:3077-3081.
 26. Aronson LR, Gregory C. Possible hemolytic uremic syndrome in three cats after renal
58. Boisvert AM, Tvedten HVV, Scott MA. Artifactual effects of hypernatremia and hypo-
transplantation and cyclosporine therapy. Vet Surg. 1999;28:135-140.
roea u al jazleus lH jaeg ayn Ag painsew saeue lin pal uo eiwaieu
 27. Aslani MR, Mohri M, Movassaghi AR. Heinz body anaemia associated with onion
1999;28: 91-96.
{Alium cepa) toxicosis in a flock of sheep. Comp Clin Path. 2005;14:118-120.
 59. Bonfanti U, Comazzi S, Paltrinieri S, et al. Stomatocytosis in 7 related Standard 
 28. Atwell RB, Johnstone I, Read R, et al. Haemolytic anaemia in two dogs suspeted to
Schnauzers. Vet Chin Pathol. 2004;33:234-239.
have been induced by levamisole. Aust Vet J. 1979;55:292-294.
60. Bottomley SS. Sideroblastic anemias. In: Greer JP, Foerster J, Lukens JN, et al, eds.
 29. Aucoin DP, Peterson ME, Hurvit Al, et al. Propylthiouracil-induced irmune-mediated
Wintrobe's Clinical Hematology. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wil-
disease in the cat. / Phanmacol Exp Ther. 1985;234:13-18.
liams; 2004:1011-1033.
 30. Azwai SM, Abdouslam OE, Al-Bassam LS, et al. Morphologic characteristics of blood 
61. Boyle AG, Magdesian KG, Ruby RE. Neonatal isoerythrolysis in horse foals and a mule 
cells in clinically normal adult llamas {Lama glamal. Veterinarski Amiv.
foal: 18 cases {1988-2003). J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 2005;227:1276-1283.
2007;77:69-79.
62. Brace RA, Langendorfer C, Song TB, et al. Red blood cellife span in the ovine fetus.
31. Backman L, JonassonJB, Horstedt P.Phosphoinositide metabolism and shape control
Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2000;279:R1196-R1204.
in sheep red blood cells. Mol Membr Biol. 1998;15:27-32.
 63. Breitschwerdt EB. Feline bartonellosis and cat scratch disease. Vet immunol /mmu-
 32. Badylak SF, Van Vleet JF, Herman EH, et al. Poikilocytosis in dogs with chronic
nopathol. 2008;123:167-171.
doxorubicin toxicosis. Amm / Vet Res. 1985;46:505-508.
-xot uiz anse jpo sase aaul ie ia '7o anauigo 'rd buoswt a3 apiamyiaia t9
 33. Balch A, Mackin A. Canine immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: pathophysiology.
cosis in dogs. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1986;28:109-117.
 clinical signs, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Vet. 2007;29:217-225.
 65. Bremner KC. The reticulocyte response in calves made anaemic by phlebotomy. Aust
34. Ban A. Ogata Y, Kato T. et al. Erythrocyte morphology and the frequency of sphero-
J/ Exp Biol Med Sci. 1966;44:251-258.
cytes in hereditary erythrocyte membrane protein disorder in Japanese Black cattle.
66. Breznock EM, Strack D. Effects of the spleen, epinephrine, and splenectomy on
Bull Nippon Vet Anim Sci Univ. 1995;44:21-27.
determmination of blood volume in cats. Am J/ Vet Res. 1982;43:2062-2066.
 35. Barker EN, Tasker S, Day MJ, et al. Development and use of real-time PCRto detect
 67. Brinson J, Messick JB. Use of polymerase chain reaction assay for detection of 
-jedonewaey ewsedos sneppuey . pue syueaoway euserdos/yy Auenb pue
Haemobartonella canis in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;218:1943-1945.
vum" in dogs. Vet /icrobiol. 2010;140:167-170
68. Brock KV, Jones JB, Shull RM, et al. Effect of canine parvovirus on erythroid progeni-
 36. Barrows PL, Prestwood AK, Green CE. Experimental Sarcocystis suicanis infetions:
tors in phenylhydrazine-induced regenerative hemolytic anemia in dogs. Am J Vet
disease in growing pigs. Am J Vet Res. 1982;43:1409-1412.
Res. 1989;50:965-969.
37. Baskut OK, Farley RA, Meiselman HJ. Erythrocyte aggregation tendency and celular
ansa jeuung ym paneosse Aiixojau uabonsa snouabou  snxaog 6g
properties in horse, human, and rat: a comparative study. Am J Physiol.
ovaries in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;27:55-56.
1997;273:H2604-H2612.
70. Brown DE, Meyer DJ, Wingfield WE, et al. Echinocrytosis associated with ratesnake
 38. Beaudoin S, Lanevschi A, Dunn M, et al. Peripheral blood smear from a dog [hemo-
envenomation in dogs. Vet Pathol. 1994;31:654-657.
 globin crystals]. Vet Clin Pathol. 2002;31:33-35.
71. Brown DE, Weiser MG Thrall MA, et al. Erythrocyte indices and volume distribution
39.BelfodCavenCRBlackHChniccor poisninginAngoraidNwZeaad
in a dog with stomatocytosis. Vet Pathol. 1994;31:247-250.
Veterinary Journal 1989;37:152-154.
72. Brown HM, Berghaus RD, Latimer KS, et al. Genetic variability of Cytauxzoon felis
 40. Berckmans RJ, Neiuwland R, Boing AN, et al. Cel-derived micropaticles circulate in
rsa wbera ia/ 7 'iioag pue sesueit ui she ansawop panau ao woiy
healthy humans and support low grade thrombin generation. Thromb Haemost.
2009;21:59-63.
2001;85: 639-646.
73.
. Brown KM, Arthur JR. Selenium, selenoproteins and human health: a review. Public 
 41. Berman E. Hemograms of the cat during pregnancy and lactation and after lactation.
Health Notr 2001; 4:593-599.
Armm / Vet Res. 1974;35:457-460.
74. Bryan JN, Henry CJ, Turnquist SE, et al. Primary renal neoplasia of dogs. JVet lntem
 42. Bertazzolo W, Zuliani D, Pogliani E, et al. Diffuse bronchiolo-alveolar carcinoma in a
Med. 2006;20:1155-1160.
dog. J/ Small Anim Pract. 2002;43:265-268.
75. Buhles WC Jr, Huxsoll DL, Hildebrandt PK. Tropical canine pancytopenia: role of 
43. Bessis M. Living Blood Cells and Their Uitrastructure. New York: Springer-Verlag:
aplastic anaemia in the pathogenesis of severe disease. J Comp Pathol.
1973.
1975;85:511-521
 44. Bessis M, Delpech G. Sickle cell shape and structure: images and concepts ↑1840-
76. Bull BS. Morphology of the erythron. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds.
19801. Blood Cells. 1982;8:359-435.
 45. Beutler E. Disorders of iron metabolism. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ.
77. Caldin M, Carli E, Furlanello T, et al. A retrospective study of 60 cases of eccentro-
et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:511-
cytosis in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:224-231.
553.
78. Camacho AT, Guitian FJ, Pallas E, et al. Theileria Babesia) equi and Babesia caballi
 46. Bexfield N, Archer J, Hertage M. Heinz body haemolytic anaemiain a dog secondary
infections in horses in Galicia, Spain. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2005;37:293-302.
to ingestion of a zinc toy: A case report. Vet J. 2007;174:414-417.
79. Camacho AT, Pallas E, Gestal J, et al. Infection of dogs in north-west Spain with a
 47. Bhasin JL, Freeman MJ, Morter RL. Properties of a cold hemagglutin associated with
Babesia microti-like agent. Vet Rec. 2001:149:552-555.
leptospiral hemolytic anemia of sheep. Infect /mmun. 1971;3:398-404.
B0. Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ. Investigations of bone marrow dyscrasia in a poodle with
48. Birkenheuer AJ, Breitschwerdt EB, Alleman AR, et al. Differentiation of Haemobar-
macrocytosis. J Comp Patho. 1989;101:269-278.
 tonella canis and Mycoplasma haemofelis on the basis of comparative analysis of
81. Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, Ratlife RCC. Dyserythropoiesis, sideroblasts/siderocytes
 gene sequences. Am / Vet Res. 2002;63:1385-1388.
and hemoglobin crystallization in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1987;16{1:21-28.
114
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 B2. Carli E, Tasca S, Trotta M, et al. Detection of erythrocyte binding IgM and IgG by flow
114. Decker MJ, Freeman MJ, Morter RL. Evaluation of mechanisms of leptospiral hemo-
cytometry in sick dogs with Babesia canis canis or Babesia canis vogelinfection. Vet
lytic anemia. Am / Vet Res. 1970;31:873-878.
Parasitol 2009;162:51-57.
115. Degen M. Pseudohyperkalemia in Akitas. J/ Am Vet MMed Assoc. 1987;190:541-543.
B3. Cazzola M, Guarnone R, Cerani P, et al. Red blood cell precursor mass as an inde-
116. Delaunay J. The molecular basis of hereditary red cell membrane disorders. Blood 
 pendent determinant of serum erythropoietin level. Blood. 1998;91:2139-2145.
Rev. 2007;21:1-20.
B4. Cebulj-Kadunc N, Bozic M, Kosec M, et al. The influence of age and gender on hae-
117. Deldar A, Lewis H, Bloom J, et al. Cephalosporin-induced changes in the ultrastruc-
matological parameters in Lipizzan horses. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med.
ture of canine bone marrow. Vet Pathol. 1988;25:211-218.
2002;49:217-221.
118. DellOrco M, Bertazzolo V, Pagliaro L, et al. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in a dog.
B5. Center SA, Crawford MA, Guida L, et al. A retrospective study of 77 cats with severe 
Vet Chin Pathol 2005;34:264-269.
hepatic lipidosis: 1975-1990. / Vet Intem Med. 1993;7:349-359.
86.0
Chandler FV, Prasse KW, Callaway CS. Surface ultrastructure of pyruvate kinase-
with mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration in 
deficient erythrocytes in the basenji dog. Am J Vet Res. 1975;36:1477-1480.
anermic cats (abstract). Vet Pathol. 2008;45:732.
87. Chen Y, Zhang Q, Liao Y, et al. A modified canine model of portal hypertension with
120. Desnoyers M, Hebert P. Heinz body anemia in a dog following possible naphthalene
hypersplenism. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2009;44:478-485.
ingestion. Vet Clin Pathol. 1995;24:124-125.
88.
 Chomel BB, Boulouis HJ, Maruyama S, et al. Bartonella spp. in pets and effect on
121. Dewitt SF, Bedenice D, Mazan MR. Hemolysis and Heinz body formation associated 
human health. Emerg Infect Dis. 2006;12:389-394.
with ingestion of red maple leaves in two alpacas. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
B9. Christopher MM. Relation of endogenous Heinzbodies to disease and anemia in cats:
2004;225:578-583.
120 cases (1978-1987). J/ Armn Vet MMed Assoc. 1989;194:1089-1095.
122. Di Terlizi R Gallagher PG, Mohandas N, et al. Canine ellitocytosis due to a mutant
90. Christopher MM, Broussard JD, Peterson ME. Heinz body formation associated with
beta-spectrin. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:52-58.
ketoacidosis in diabetic cats. / Vet ntem Med. 1995;9:24-31.
123. Dooley PC, Wiliams VJ. Changes in plasma volume and haematocrit in intact and 
 91. Christopher MM, Lee SE. Red cel morphologic alterations in cats with hepatic
splenectomized sheep during feeding. Aust J Biol Sci. 1976;29:533-544.
disease. Vet Clin Pathol. 1994;23:7-12.
124. Dubey JP Weisbrode SE. Speer CA, et al. Sarcocystosis in goats: clinical signs and
 92. Christopher MM, Perman V, Eaton JV. Contribution of propylene glycol-induced
pathologic and hematologic findings. J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1981;178:683-699.
Heinz body formation to anemia in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1989;194:1045-
125. Durando MM, Alleman AR, Harvey JV. Myelodysplastic syndrome in a quarter horse
1056.
gelding. Equine Vet J/. 1994;26:83-85.
93. Cohen LA, Gutierrez L, Weiss A, et al. Serum feritin is derived primarily from
126. Earl FL, Melveger BE, Wilson RL. The hemogram and bone marow profile of normal
macrophages through a nonclassical secretory pathway. Blood. 2010;116:1574-
neonatal and weanling beagle dogs. Lab Anim Sci. 1973;23:690-695.
1584.
Aeaadxa y aepinba jo yrpim unqsip ia pai pue weoy yr Aaisee zl
 94. Cohen WD, Terwilliger NB. Marginal bands in camel erythrocytes. J Cel Sci
induced anemia. Amm J/ Vet Res. 1985;46:2378-2384.
1979;36:97-107.
128. English RV, Breitschwerdt EB, Grindem CB, et al. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and
95. Congbin Y. Aibin L, Congli Y, et al. Overexpression of complement receptor type 1
myelofibrosis in a dog. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1988;192:1430-1434.
{CR1. CD35) on erythrocytes in patients with hemoplasma infection. Microbiol
129. Ernst M, Meier D, Sonneborn HH. From IgG monoclonals to IgM-like molecules. Hum
Immunol. 201 0;54:460-465.
Antibodies. 1999;9: 165-170.
 96. Cook SM, Lothrop CD Jr. Serum erythropoietin concentrations measured by radioim-
130. Evans ETR. Sickling phenomenon in sheep. Naure. 1968;217:74-75.
munoassay in normal, polycythemic, and anemic dogs and cats. J Vet lntem Med.
131. Eyssete-Guerreau S, Bader-Meunier B, Garcon L, et al Infantile pyknocytosis: a cause
1994;8:18-25.
of haemolytic anaemmia of the newborn. Br J Haematol. 2006;133:439-442.
97. Cooper ES, Wellman ML, Carsillo ME. Hyperalbuminemia associated with hepatocel-
132. Fabry TL. Mechanism of erythrocyte aggregation and sedimentation. Blood.
lular carcinoma in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:516-520.
1987;70:1572-1576.
98. Cooper RA, Diloy-Puray M, Lando P, et al. An analysis of lipoproteins, bile acids, and
red cell membranes associated with target cels and spur cells in patients with liver
experimental acute blood loss anemia in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1978;14:
disease. J/ Chin lnvest. 1972;51:3182-3192.
219-224.
99. Cooper RA, Leslie MH, Knight D, et al. Red cell cholesterol enrichment and spur cell
anemia in dogs fed a cholesterol-enriched atherogenic diet. J Lipid Res.
1990;76:734-736.
1980;21:1082-1089.
135. Feldman BF, Soares CJ, Kitchell BE, et al. Hemorrhage in a cat caused by inhibition
100. Corn SC, Wellman ML, Burkhard MJ, et al. IgM paraprotein interference with hemo-
of factor Xl fplasma thromboplastin antecedentj. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
1983;182:589-591.
101. 
Cornelius CE. Bile pigments in fishes: a review. Vet Clin Pathol 1991;20:106-115.
136. Fernandez FR, Grindem CB. Reticulocyte response. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC.
102. Cote E, Etinger SJ. Long-term clinical management of right-to-leftf"reversed") patent
eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
ductus arteriosus in 3 dogs. J Vet /ntem AMed. 2001;15:39-42.
Wilkins; 2000:110-116.
103.
Cotter SM. Anemia associated with feline leukemia virus infection. J Am Vet Med
137. Fischer TM. Role of spectrin in cross bonding of the red cel membrane. Blood Cells.
Assoc. 1979;175:1191-1194.
1988;13:377-394.
104. Couto CG, Boudrieau RJ, Zanjani ED. Tumor-associated erythrocytosis in a dog with
Wi sllan pai ui bupuog ssoin aueigwan leia 'dg euowensad 'ljuojan 'l jayosy 8e1
nasal fibrosarcoma. / Vet Intem Med 1989;3:183-185.
favic crises: a missing link in the mechanism of extravascular haemolysis. Br J
105.
Couto CG, Kallet AJ. Preleukemic syndrome in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
Haematol. 1985;59:159-169.
1984;184:1389-1392.
139. Fletch SM, Pinkerton PH, Brueckner PJ. The Alaskan Malamute chondrodysplasia
106. Cowgill LD, James KM, Lev JK, et al. Use of recombinant human erythropoietin for
{dwarfism—anemia)
syndrome—in review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
management of anemia in dogs and cats with renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
1975:11:353-361.
1998;212:521-528.
140. Flint CL, Scott MA. Do keratocytes form in EDTA-anticoagulated feline blood 
107.
fabstracti? Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:E6.
Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1992;14:60-67.
141. Foley JE, Harrus S, Poland A, et al. Molecular, linical, and pathologic comparison of 
108. Da Silva AS, Hoehne L, Tonin AA, et al. Trypanosoma evansi levels of copper, iron
two distinct strains of Haemobartonela felis in domestic cats. Am J Vet Res.
and zinc in the bloodstream of infected cats. Exp Parasito. 2009;123:35-38.
1998;59:1581-1588.
109.
Dalir-Naghadeh B, Seifi HA, Asri RS, et al. Post-parturient haemoglobinuria in Iranian
142. Foley JE, Pedersen NC. "Candidatus Mycoplasma haemominutum", a low-virulence 
river buffaloes: a preliminary study. Comp Clin Path. 2006;14:225.
epierythrocrytic parasite of cats. Int J Syst Evo Microbol. 2001;51:815-817.
110. Dane DM, Hsia CC, Wu EY, et al. Splenectomy impairs diffusive oxygen transport in
143. Fontana V, Jy V, Ahn ER, et al. Increased procoagulant cll-derived microparticles
the lung of dogs. JAppl Physiol. 2006;101:289-297.
fC-MP) in splenectomized patients with ITP. Thromb Res. 2008;122:599-603.
111. de Carvalho H, Matos JA, Bouskela E, et al. Vascular permeability increase and 
144. Fox LE, Ford S, Alleman AR, et al. Aplastic anemia associated with prolonged high-
plasma volume loss induced by endotoxin was attenuated by hypertonic saline with
dose trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol.
or without dextran. Shock. 1999;12:75-80.
1993;22:89-92.
112. de la Fuente J, Atkinson Mw, Naranjo V, et al. Sequence analysis of the msp4 gene
145. Frederick J, Giguere S, Butterworth K, etal. Severe phenylephrine-associated hemor-
of Anaplasma ovis strains. Vet Microbiol. 2007;119:375-381.
rhage in five aged horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2010;237:830-834.
113. De Lorimier LP, Messick JB. Anemia associated with * Candidatus Mycoplasma hae-
146. Freise KJ, Widness JA, Schmidt RL, et al. Pharmacodynamic analysis of time-variant
mominutum* in a feline leukemia virus-negative cat with lymphoma. JAmAnim Hosp
-euar daaus pazwoiogalud ui sabueys uogisodsip aojnaal uogisodsip eniaa
Assoc. 2004;40:423-427.
macokinet Phanmacooyn 2007;34:519-547.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
115
147. Frelier PF, Lewis RM. Hematologic and coagulation abnormalities in acute bovine
177. Gold JR, Waren AL, French TV, et al. What is your diagnosis? Biopsy impression 
sarcocystosis. Am / Vet Res. 1984;45:40-48.
 smear of a hepatic mass in a yearling Thoroughbred filly. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:
148. Friedrichs KR, Thomas C, Plier M, et al. Evaluation of serum ferritin as a tumor marker
339-343.
for canine histiocytic sarcoma. J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:904-911.
178. Goodfellow M, Papasouliotis K, Cue S, et al. Effect of storage on microcytosis
149. Friedrichs KR, Young KM. Histiocytic sarcoma of macrophage origin in a cat: case
observed in dogs with portosystemic vascular anomalies. Res Vet Sci.
report with a literature review of feline histiocytic malignancies and comparison
2008;84:490-493.
with canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:121-
179. Gookin JL, Bunch SE, Rush LJ, et al. Evaluation of microcytosis in 18 Shibas. J Am
128.
Vet /Med Assoc. 1998;212:1258-1259.
150. Fry MM, Forman MA. 5-fluorouracil toxicity with severe bone marrow suppression in
180. Gossett KA. Anemias associated with drugs and chemicals. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG,
a dog. Vet Humm Toxicol. 2004;46:178-180.
- n iaed payg o aa sws pa n uer
151. Fry MM, Kirk CA. Reticulocyte indices in a canine model of nutritional iron deficiency.
liams & Vvilkins; 2000:185-189.
Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:172-181.
181. Gosset KA, MacWilliams PS, Fulton RV. Viral inclusions in hematopoietic precursors
152. Fry MM, Kirk CA. Liggett JL, et al. Changes in hepatic gene expression in dogs
with experimentally induced nutritional iron deficiency. Vet Cin Pathol. 2009;38:
182.
.Gray HE, Weigand CM, Cotrill NB, et al. Polycythemia vera in a dog presenting with
13-19.
uveitis. / Arm Anim Hosp Assoc. 2003;39:355-360.
153. Fry MM, Liggett JL, Baek SJ. Molecular cloning and expression of canine hepcidin.
183. Green RA. Spurious platelet effects on erythrocyte indices using the Cell-Dyne 3500
Vet Clin Pathol. 2004;33:223-227.
Automated Hematology System. Vet Clin Pathoi.1999;28:47-49.
154. Fujino Y, Horiuchi H, Mizukoshi F, et al. Prevalence of hematological abnormalities 
184.
.Greene CE, Addie DD. Feline parvovirus infections. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious
 and detection of infected bone marow cells in asymptomatic cats with feline immu-
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier: 2006:
nodeficiency virus infection. Vet Microbol. 2009;136:217-225.
78-88.
155. Fujino Y, Ohno K, Tsujimoto H. Molecular pathogenesis of feline leukermia virus-
185.
.Greene CE, Meinkoth J, Kocan AA. Cytauxzoonosis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious
induced malignancies: insertional mutagenesis. Vet mmunol immunopathol.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders EIsevier; 2006:716-722.
2008;123:138-143
186. Greenwalt TJ. The how and why of exocytic vesicles. Transfusion. 2006;46:
156. Furlanello T, Tasca S, Caldin M, et al. Artifactual changes in canine blood following 
143-152.
storage, detected using the ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol.
187.
7. Groebel K. Hoelzle K. Wittenbrink MM, et al. Mycoplasma suis invades porcine
2006;35:42-46.
erythrocytes. Infect /mmun. 2009;77:576-584.
157. Gabbert NH, Campbell TW, Beiermann RL. Pancytopenia associated with dissemi-
188. Gruntman A, Nolen-Walston R, Parry N, et al. Presumptive albendazole toxicosis in
12 alpacas. / Vet Intern Med. 2009;23:945-949.
158. Garon CL, Cohn LA. Scot MA. Erythrocyte survival time in Greyhounds as assessed
189. Gulati G, Caro J. Blod Cels: An Atlas of Morphology With Clinical Relevance. Sin-
gapore: American Society for Clinical Pathology Press; 2007.
159. Gaunt SD. Hemolytic anemias caused by blood ricketsial agents and protozoa. n:
190. HaberMD, Tucker MD, MaHS,et al. The detetion of Cyauxzoo felisin apparenty
Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Phila-
healthy free-roaming cats in the USA. Vet Parasitol. 2007;146:316-320.
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:154-162.
191. Hackett TB, Wingfield WE, Mazzaferro EM, et al. Clinical findings associated with
160. C
Gedde MM, Davis DK. Huestis WH. Cytoplasmic pH and human erythrocyte shape.
prairie rattlesnake bites in dogs: 100 cases (1989-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
Biophys J. 1997:72:1234-1246.
2002;220:1675-1680.
161. Gelens HC, Moreau RE, Stalis IH, et al. Arteriovenous fistula ofthejejunum associated
192. Haldane SL, Davis RM. Acute toxicity in five dogs after ingestion of a commercial
with gastrointestinal hemorrhage in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;202:
snail and slug bait containing iron EDTA. Aust Vet J. 2009;87:284-286.
1867-1868.
193. Hammer AS, Couto CG, Swardson C, et al. Hemostatic abnormalities in dogs with
162. Geor RJ, Lund EM, Weiss DJ. Echinocytosis in horses: 54 cases {1990]. JAm Vet Med
hemangiosarcoma. J Vet lntern Med. 1991;5:11-14.
Assoc. 1993;202:976-980.
194. Harper SB, Dertinger SD, Bishop ME, et al. Flow cytometric analysis of micronuclei
163. George JV. Methemalbumin: reality and myth. Vet Clin Pathol. 1988:17:43-46.
in peripheral blood reticulocytes. ll. An efficient method of monitoring chromosomal
164. George JV, Duncan JR.The hematology of lead poisoning in man and animals. Vet 
damage in the beagle dog. 7oxicol Sci. 2007;100:406-414.
Chin Pathol. 1979;8:23-30.
195. Harris RL, Cottam GL, Johnston JM, et al. The pathogenesis of abnormal erythrocyte
165. George JV, Rideout BA,GriffeySM, et al. Effect of preexisting FeLV infection orFLV
morphology in burns. / Trauma. 1981;21:13-21.
and feline irmmunodeficiency virus coinfection on pathogenicity of the small variant
196. Harvey JV. Quantitative determinations of normal horse, cat, and dog haptoglobins.
of Haemobartonela felis in cats. Am / Vet Res. 2002;63:1172-1178.
Theriogenology. 1976;6:133-138.
166. Gerber K, Harvey JW, D'Agorne S, et al. Heolysis, myopathy, and cardiac disease
197.
.Harvey JV. Canine hemolytic anemmias. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1980;176:970-974.
associated with hereditary phosphofructokinase deficiency in two Vhippets. Vet Clin
  suosnu awsj susdr Aal
Pathol. 2009;38:46-51
1982;11:12.
167. Gershwin LJ. Antinuclear antibodies in domestic animals. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
199. Harvey JV. Canine bone marw: normal hematopoiesis, biopsy techniques, and cell 
2005;1050:364-370
identification and evaluation. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1984;6:909-926.
168. Gerspach C, Hull BL, Rings DM, et al. Hematuria and transitional cell papilloma of
 200. Harvey JV. Methemoglobinemia and Heinz body hemolytic anemia. In: Bonagura JD.
the renal pelvis treated via unilateral nephrectomy in an alpaca. JAm VetMed Assoc.
ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xil. Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: WV.B.
2008;232:1206-1209.
Saunders Co.: 1995:443-446.
169. Giger U. Erythrocyte phosphofructokinase and pyruvate kinase deficiencies. In:
 201. Harvey JVV. Microcytic anemias. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Scham's
d a y  a s sa   r  sai
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams & Wilkins:
delphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:1020-1025.
2000:200-204.
170. Giger U, Amador A, Meyers-VWallen V, et al. Stomatocytosis in miniature schnauzers.
 202. Harvey JV. Hemotrophic mycoplasmosis (hemobartonellosis). In: Greene CE, ed.
Proc ACVM Forumm 1988;754.
Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier;
171. Giger U, Casal ML. Feline colostrum-friend orfoe: maternal antibodies in queens and
2006:252-260.
kittens. / Reprod Fertil Suppl 1997;51:313-316.
 203. Harvey JVV. Pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis, and clinical implications of erythro-
172. Gilchrist F. Water intoxication in weaned beef calves. Can Vet J. 1996;37:490-
cyte enzyme deficiencies in dogs. cats. and horses. Vet Clin Pathol.
491.
2006;35:144-156.
173. Giordano A, Salvadori M, Pieralisi C, et al. Increases in 2,3-diphosphoglycerate con-
 204. Harvey JVV. Iron metabolism and its disorders. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JVV, Bruss ML,
centration in blood from horses with poor performance due to respiratory disorders.
eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego: Academic Press;
Comp Clin Path. 2005;14:24.
2008:259-285.
174. Gleich S, Hartmann K. Hematology and serum biochemistry of feline immunodefi-
 205. Harvey JV. The erythrocyte: physiology. metabolism and biochemical disorders. In:
ciency virus-infected and feline leukemia virus-infected cats. J Vet intem Med.
Kaneko JJ, Havey JV, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals.
2009;23:552-558.
6th ed. San Diego: Academic Press; 2008:173-240.
175. Glomski CA. Tamburlin J, Hard R, et al. The phylogenetic odyssey of the erythrocyte.
206. Harvey JV. Red blood cell enzyme activity. In: Vaden SL, Knoll JS, Smith FWVK, et al.
IV. The amphibians. Histol Histopathol. 1997;12:147-170.
eds. Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic
176. Goes TS, Goes VS, Ribeiro MF, et al. Bovine babesiosis: anti-erythrocyte antibodies
Procedures. Ames, lowa: Wiley-Blackwell; 2009:520-521.
 purification from the sera of naturally infected cattle. Vet immunor immunopathol.
207.
.Harvey JVV, Asquith RL, McNulty PK, et al. Haematology of foals up to one year old.
2007;116: 215-218.
Equine Vet J. 1984;16:347-353.
116
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 208. Harvey JVV, Asquith RL, Pate MG, et al. Haematological findings in pregnant, post-
240. Jain NC, Kono CS, Myers A, et al. Fusiform erythrocytes resembling sickle cells in 
 parturient and nursing mares. Comp Haematol Int. 1994;4:25-29.
jo lesjanal pue saniey lenueusaw pue snowso uo suonenjasqo sieo enobue
 209. Harvey JW, Clapp WL, Yao Y, et al. Microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes containing
shape during anaemia. Res Vet Sci. 1980;28:25-35.
siderotic inclusions, Heinz bodies, and hemoglobin crystals in a dog fastract). Vet
241.
Jensen F.Red blood cell pH, the Bohreffect and other oxygenation-linked phenom-
Clin Pathol. 2007;36:313-314.
ena in blood O and CO, transport. Acta Physiol Scand. 2004;182:215-227.
242. Jensen WA, Lappin MR, Kamkar S, et al. Use of a polymerase chain reaction assay
Hosp Assoc. 1982;18:946-960.
paa Aleneu usay eauaegouaeh jo sues o areuaa pue aap o
211. Harvey JV, Gaskin JM. Feline haptoglobin. Am J Vet Res. 1978;39:549-553.
cats. Amm / Vet Res. 2001;62:604-608.
 212. Harvey JV, Stockham SL, Scott MA, et al. Methemoglobinemia and eccentrocytosis
 243. Johnson CA. Armstrong PJ, Hauptman JG. Congenital portosystemic shunts in dogs:
in equine erythrocyte flavin adenine dinucleotide deficiency. Vet Pathol. 2003:
46 cases 1979-19861. /Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1987;191:1478-1483.
40:632-642.
 244. Jonas LD, Thrall MA, Weiser MG. Nonregenerative form of immune-mediated hemo-
 213. Harvey JV, Wolfsheimer KJ, Simpson CF, et al. Pathologic sideroblasts and sidero-
h o  a op e ui Adeau loayoa ym paesse saa
 245. Kawazu S, Kamio T. Sekizaki T, et al. Theileria sergenti and T. buffel: polymerase
14/11:36-42.
chain reaction-based marker system for differentiating the parasite species from
 214. Hasler AH, Giger U. Serum erythropoietin values in polycythemic cats. JAm Anim
infected catle blood and infected tick salivary gland. Exp Parasitol.
Hosp Assoc. 1996;32:294-301.
1995;81:430-435.
215.H
 Hawkey CM, Bennett PM, Gascoyne SC, et al. Erythrocyte size, number and haemo-
 246. Kay M. Immunoregulation of cellular life span. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1057:
 globin content in vertebrates. Br J Haematol. 1991;77:392-397.
85-111.
wog buneuibuo saledoi jo sianal paseaii le 1a s yago  oojan 0 leiah 91z
247. Kelton DR, Holbrook TC, Gilliam LL, et al. Bone marrow necrosis and myelophthisis:
endothelial cels, platelets and erythrocytes in subjects with metabolic syndrome: rela-
manifestations of T-cell lymphoma in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:403-408.
tionship with oxidative stress. Nutr AMetab Cardiovasc Dis. 201 0; (Epub 2010 Apr 14)
 248. Kessler M. Secondary polycythaemia associated with high plasma erythropoietin
217. Henson KL, Alleman AR, Fox LE, et al. Diagnosis of disseminated adenocarcinoma by
hg wuy feus 7 shudauoad busnoau e yim bop e ui suoenuauo
uuun jo jaa ue sisegoanal i bop e u uoedse mo aog
2008;49:363-366.
origin. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;27:80-84.
249. Kiefer CR, Snyder LM. Oxidation and erythrocyte senescence. Curr Opin Hematol.
218. Hickman MA Rogers QR, Morris JG.Effect of diet on Heinz body formationin kittens
2000:7:113-116.
Arm / Vet Res. 1990;51:475-478.
 250. King LG, Giger U, Diserens D, et al. Anemia of chronic renal failure in dogs. J Vet
 219. Hilppo M. Some haematological and clinical-chemical parameters of sight hounds
ntem Λed. 1992;6:264-270.
'991-8t18g986l pa/ a/ poy (addum pue 14ies pun0y uey6s)
 251. Kirkebo A, Tyssebotn l. Renal blood flow distribution during E. coli endotoxin shock 
 220. Hisasue M, Nagashima N, Nishigaki K, et al. Myelodysplastic syndromes and acute
in dog. Acta Physiol Scand. 1980;108:367-372.
myeloid leukemia in cats infected with feline leukemia virus clone33 containing a
252. Kjemtrup AM, Wainwright K, Miller M, et al. Babesia conradae, sp. Nov. a small
unique long teminal repeat. int / Cancer. 2009;124:1133-1141.
 canine Babesia identified in California. Vet Parasitol. 2006;138:103-111.
221.
 Hoelzle LE. Haemotrophic mycoplasmas: recent advances in Mycoplasma suis. Vet
 253. Klainbart S, Segev G, Loeb E, et al. Resolution of renal adenocarcinoma-induced
Microbiol. 2008;130:215-226.
secondary inappropriate polycythaemia after nephrectomy in two cats. J Feline Med
222.
Hoff B, Lumsden JH, ValliVE. An appraisal of bone marrow biopsy in assessment of 
Surg. 2008; 10:264-268.
sick dogs. Can J Comp MMed. 1985;49:34-42.
 254. Kline H, Foreman JH. Heart and spleen weights as a function of breed and somato-
223. Holland CT, Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, et al. Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy. and
type. Equine Exercise Physiology. 1991;3:17-21.
cardiac disease in three related English springer spaniels. J Vet lntem Med. 1991;
255. Kocan KM, de la Fuente J, Blouin EF, et al. The natural history of Anaplasma margi-
5:151-159.
nale. Vet Parasitol. 2010;167:95-107.
 224. Holloway S, Senior D, Roth L, et al. Hemolytic uremic syndrome in dogs. / Vet ntern 
256. Koch TG, WenX,Bienzle D. Lymphoma, erthrocytosis, and tumor erythropoietin gene
Med. 1993;7:220-227.
expression in a horse. J Vet lntern Med. 2006;20:1251-1255.
225. Holman HH, Drew SM. The blood picture ofthe goat. ll Changes in erythrocyte shape.
257. Kociba GJ. Macrocytosis. In:Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary
size and number associated with age. Res Vet Sci. 1964;5:274-285.
Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams & Wilkins; 2000:196-199.
 226. Holman PJ, Backlund BB, Wilcox AL, et al. Detection of a large unnamed Babesia
258. Kociba GJ, Caputo CA. Aplastic anemia associated with estrus in pet ferrets. JAm
Jo Aons!y ou ypim bop e ui eujojeg yuoN u! shop u! payquap! Ajeujbuo wsejdouid
Vet //ed Assoc. 1981;178:1293-1294.
travel to that state. J Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 2009;235:851-854.
 259. KohnB, Fumi C. Clinical course of pyruvate kinase deficiencyin Abyssinian and Somali
 227. Hornok S, Meli ML, Erdos A, et al. Molecular characterization of two different strains 
cats. / Feline Med Surg. 2008;10:145-153.
of haemotropic mycoplasmas from a sheep flock with fatal haermolytic anaemmia and
 260. KohnB, Goldschmidt MH, Hohenhaus AE, etal. Anemia, splenomegaly, and increased
concomitant Anaplasma ovis infection. Vet Microbiol. 2009;136:372-377.
osmotic fragility of erythrocytes in Abyssinian and Somali cats. JAm Vet Med Assoc.
 228. Hunfeld KP, Hildebrandt A, Gray JS. Babesiosis: Recent insights into an ancient 
2000;217:1483-1491.
disease. Int J Parasitol. 2008;38:1219-1237.
 261. Kohn B, Weingart C, Eckmann V, et al. Primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
229. Hvidberg V, Maniecki MB, Jacobsen C,et al. Identification of the receptor scavenging
in 19 cats: diagnosis, therapy. and outcome {1998-2004). J Vet Intem Med.
hemopexin-heme complexes. Blood. 2005;106:2572-2579.
2006;20:159-166.
230. Igbokwe IO, Anosa VO. Response to anaemia in experimental Trypanosoma vivax
 262. Kohn CV, Swardson C. Provost P, et al. Myeloid and megakaryocytic hypoplasia in
infection of sheep. / Comp Pathol. 1989;100:111-118.
related standardbreds. / Vet lntern Med. 1995;9:315-323.
231.
Inaba M. Red blood cell membrane defects. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
asuenn pue asedit-y'en yo uoisnx3 ie ia '4 exnsio 'n yusent '1 nsiew 29
 Scham's Veterinary Hematoogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins;
receptor with lipid raft-associated proteins in different populations of exosomes
2000:1012-1019.
27-2l8g0ioz say ia/ r uor shop ui uonemew aaojnana buunp
232. Inaba M, Yawata A, Koshino l, et al. Defective anion transport and marked sphero-
264.K
Kordick DL, Breitschwerdt EB. Intraerythrocytic presence of Bartonela henselae.
 pa po Aaap e aau  pasne aeui ueaw y sis
/ Clin Microbiol. 1995;33:1655-1656.
218l-08l26i966l asan vg 7 uoge1nw asuasuou e 01 anp apen ui g pueg
265. Kosower NS. Altered properties of erythrocytes in the aged. Am J Hematol
 233. lolascon A, De Falco L, Beaumont C. Molecular basis of inherited microcytic anemia
1993;42:241-247.
due to defects in iron acquisition or heme synthesis. Haematologica. 2009;94:
266.Koury MJ, Ponka P.New insights into erythropoiesis: the roles of folate, vitamin B2.
395-408.
and iron. Annu Rev Notr 2004;24:105-131.
234. Irmak K, Sen l, Col R, et al. The evaluation of coagulation profiles in calves with
 267. Kuehn NF, Gaunt SD. Hypocellular marrow and extramedullary hematopoiesis in a
suspected septic shock. Vet Res Commun. 2006;30:497-503.
dog: hematologic recovery after splenectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1986;188:
235.
Jackson JA, Chart IS, Sanderson JH, et al. Pirimicarb induced immune haemolytic
1313-1315.
anaemia in dogs. Scand / Haematol. 1977;19:360-366.
 268. Kurata M, Nakamura H, Baba A, et al. Postprandial change in canine blood viscosity.
236.
Jacobsen S, Nielsen JV, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, et al. Acute phase response to surgery
Comp Biochem Physiol Comp Physiol 1993;105:587-592.
of varying intensity in horses: a preliminary study. Vet Surg. 2009;38:762-769.
269. Laber J, Perman V, Stevens JB. Polychromasia or reticulocytes—an assessment of
237.
the dog. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1974:10:399-406.
238.
Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology, Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1993.
270. Lang F, Gulbins E, Lerche H, et al. Eryptosis, a window to systemic disease. Cell
239.
:an ayais buqwasa sieon enoue u saaoja woyisny so ouoy on uier 
Physiot Biochem. 2008;22:373-380.
influence of temperature, pH, and oxygenation on cell shape. Arm J Vet Res. 1977:
 271. Lang F, Lang KS. Lang PA, et al. Mechanisms and significance of eryptosis. Antioxid
38:983-990.
Redox Signal. 2006;8:1183-1192.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
117
5g po yodal e euadoynajued aual po AbojounedosH S uasiain vY 4uiaybuen zz
 305. Mbassa GK, Balemba O, Maselle RM, et al. Severe anaemmia due to haematopoietic
cases. J/ Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1971;158:863-872.
precursor cell destruction in field cases of East Coast Fever in Tanzania. Vet Parasitol.
 273. Larsen S, Flagstad A, Aalbaek B. Experimental panleukopenia in the conventional cat.
1994;52:243-256.
Vet Pathol. 1976;13:216-240.
306. McConnico RS, Roberts MC, Tompkins M.Penicillin-induced immune-mediated hemo-
274. Lau AO. An overview of the Babesia. Plasmodium and Theileria genomes: a compara-
lytic anemia in a horse. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1992;201:1402-1403.
tive perspective. Mol Biochem Parasitol. 2009;164:1-8.
307. McDonnell AM, Holmes LA. Haemoglobinuria due to Clostridium perringens type A
 275. Lavoie JP, Morris D, Zinkl JG, et al. Pancytopenia caused by marrow aplasia in a
mastitis in a ewe. Br Vet J. 1990;146:380-381.
horse. J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1987;191:1462-1464.
308. McGuire TC, Henson JB, Quist SE. Impaired bone marrow response in equine infec-
 276. Lee KV, Yamato O, Tajima M, et al. Hematologic changes associated with the
tious anemia. Am J/ Vet Res. 1969;30:2099-2104.
appearance of eccentrocytes after intragastic administration of garlic exracto dogs.
 309. McKeever KH, Hinchcliff KV, Reed SM, et al. Role of decreased plasma volume in
Amm J/ Vet Res. 2000;61:1446-1450.
hematocrit alterations during incremental treadmill exercise in horses. Am J Physio.
277. Lee TH, Kim SU, Yu SL, et al. Peroxiredoxin ll is essential for sustaining life span of
1993;265:R404-R408
erythrocytes in mice. Blood. 2003;101:5033-5038.
 310. McLaughlin BG, Adams PS, Cornell WVD, et al. Canine distemper viral inclusions in 
 278. Leighton FA, Peakall DB, Butler RG. Heinz body hemolytic anemmia from the ingestion
blood cells of four vaccinated dogs. Can Vet J. 1985;26:368-372.
of crude oil: a primary toxic effect in marine birds. Science. 1983;220:871-873.
 311. Medaille C. Briend-Marchal A, Braun JP. Stability of selected hematology variables
 279. Lester GD, Aleman AR, Raskin RE, et al. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leuke-
in canine blood kept at room temperature in EDTA for 24 and 48 hours. Vet Clin Pathor.
mia in three horses. / Vet hntem /M/ed. 1993;7:360-363.
2006;35:18-23.
 280. Levy JK, Bunch SE, Komtebedde J. Feline portosystemic vascular shunts. In: Bonda-
312. Medinger TL, Williams DA. Bruyette DS. Severe gastrointestinal tract hemorrhage
gura JD, ed. Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy Xi. Small Animal Practice. Philadel-
     7   s  
phia: W.B. Saunders; 1995:743-749.
1869-1872.
281.
Lewis HB, Rebar AH. Bone Marrow Evaluation in Veterinary Practice. St. Louis:
 313. Melendez RD, Toro BM, Niccita G, et al. Humoral immune response and hematologic
Ralston Purina Co.; 1979.
evaluation of pregnant Jersey cows after vaccination with Anaplasma centraie. Vet
282. Liton SJ, King LG, Zerbe CA. Glucocorticoid deficient hypoadrenocorticism in dogs:
Microbiol. 2003;94:335-339.
18 cases ↑1986-1995). / Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1996;209:2076-2081.
 314. Messick JB. Hemotrophic mycoplasmas hemoplasmas): a review and new insights 
 283. Lim WS, Payne SL, Edwards JF, et al. Differential effects of virulent and avirulent
into pathogenic potential. Vet Clin Pathol. 2004;33:2-13.
equine infetious anemia virus on macrophage cytokine expression. Wrology.
 315. Messick JB, Walker PG, Raphael W, et al. "Candidatus Mycoplasma haemodidelphi-
2005;332:295-306.
usidohyy pue aou ds aweloway ewseldon sepioue . "aou ds s
 284. Littman MP, Niebauer GVV, Hendrick MJ. Macrohematuria and life-threatening
haemocanis comb. nov., haemotrophic parasites from a naturally infected opossum 
 anemia atributable to subepithelial vascular ectasia of the urinary bladder in a dog.
{Dideiphis virginianal, alpaca ↑Lama pacos) and dog ↑Canis famiiaris): phylogenetic
J Armm Vet Med Assoc. 1990;196:1487-1489.
 and secondary structural relatedness of their 16S rRNA genes to other mycoplasmas.
285. Low FM, Hampton MB, Peskin AV, et al. Peroxiredoxin 2 functions as a noncatalytic
Int / Syst Evol /Microbiol. 2002;52:693-698.
scavenger of low-level hydrogen peroxide in the erythrocyte. Blood. 2007;109:
 316. Middleton JR, Kat L, Angelos JA, et al. Hemolysis associated with water administra-
2611-2617.
tion using a nipple botle for human infants in juvenile pygmy goats. J Vetintem Med.
 286. Lukaszewska J, Lewandowski K. Cabot rings as a result of severe dyserythropoiesis
1997;11:382-384.
in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:180-183.
317. Milne EM, Pyrah ITG, Smith KC, et al. Aplastic anemmia in a Clydesdale foal: a case
287. Lund JE. Hemoglobin crystals in canine blood. Amm / Vet Res. 1974;35:575-577.
report. J Equine Vet Sci. 1995; 15:129-131.
288. Lund JE, Brown PK. Hypersegmented megakaryocytes and megakaryocytes with mul-
318. Moltmann UG, Mehlhorn H, Schein E, et al. Fine structure of Babesia equi Laveran,
e aouexo ue zoid u paea sp u au aeedas ad
1901 within lymphocytes and erythrocytes of horses: an in vivo and in vitro study.
Toxicol Pathol. 1997;25:339-343.
J Parasitol. 1983;69:111-120.
 289. Lutz H Castellil, Ehrensperger F, et al. Panleukopenia-like syndrome of FeL caused
 319. Monreal L, VillatoroAJ, Monreal M, et al. Comparison ofthe effects of low-molecular-
by co-infection with FeLV and feline panleukopenia virus. Vet immunol lmmunopathol.
1995;46:21-33.
 320. Moore AH, Day MJ, Graham MV. Congenital pure red blood cel aplasia Diamond-
 290. Mackey L, Jarrett W, Jarrett O, et al. Anemia associated with feline leukemmia virus
Blackfan anaemial in a dog. Vet Rec. 1993;132:414-415.
infection in cats. / Nat Cancer /nst. 1975;54:209-217
321. Moore DM. Hematology of camelid species: lamas and camels. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl
 291. MacWilliams P, Meadows R. Unpublished case submitted to the 1993 ASVCP micro-
JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
scopic slide review. 1993, personal communication.
Williams & Wilkins; 2000:1184-1190.
 292. MacWiliams PS, Searcy GP, Bellamy JEC: Bovine postparturient hemoglobinuria: a
322. Moore JN, Mahaffey EA, Zboran M. Heparin-induced agglutination of erythrocrytes in
review of the literature. Can Vet J. 1982;23:309-312.
horses. Arm / Vet Res. 1987;48:68-71.
 293. Mahaffey EA, George JV, Duncan JR, et al. Hematologic values in calves infected
 323. Moore KVV, Stepien RL. Hydroxyurea for treatment of polycythemia secondary to
with Sarcocystis cruzi. Vet Parasitol 1986;19:275-280.
right-to-eft shunting patent ductus arteriosus in 4 dogs. J Vet lntem Med.
294.
Malka S, Hawkins MG, Zabolotzky SM, et al. Immune-mediated pure red cell aplasia
2001;15:418-421
in a domestic ferret. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2010;237:695-700.
324. Moore PF, Affolter VK, Vernau W. Canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: a
295. Mandal D, Mazumder A, Das P, et al. Fas-, caspase 8-. and caspase 3-dependent
proliferative disorder of CD11d+ macrophages. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:632-645.
signaling regulates the activity of the aminophospholipid translocase and phosphati-
 325. Morgan RV, Moore FM, Pearce LK, et al. Clinical and laboratory findings in small 
    sa   xa a
companion animals with lead poisoning: 347 cases ↑1977-1986). JAm Vet Med Assoc.
39460-39467.
1991;199: 93-97.
 296. Mandell CP, Jain NC, Farver TB. The significance of normoblastemia and leukoeryth-
 326. Morin DE, GarryFB, Weiser MG. Hematologic responses inllamas with experimentally-
induced iron deficiency anemia. Vet Clin Patho. 1993;22:81-85.
297. March H, Barger A, McCullough S, et al. Use of the ADVIA 120 for diffeentiting
 327. Morris JG, Cripe WS, Chapman HL, et al. Selenium deficiency in cattle associated 
 extracellular and intracellular hemoglobin. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:106-109.
with Heinz bodies and anemia. Science. 1984;223:491 -493.
 298. Marchetti V, Beneti C, Citi S, et al. Paraneoplastic hypereosinophilia in a dog with
wewny pue bop u Aauaiap aseuy anennd 3a japelg '0 neld 'f oueos-jain 8ze
intestinal T-celymphoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:259-263.
uogeipay jeinian pue uogisoduos uopen uo uoadap iaua jpo siaya sasoupia
 299. Marconato L, Betini G, Giacoboni C, et al. Clinicopathological features and outcome
Anm / Hematol. 1986;23:217-221
for dogs with mast cell tumors and bone marow involvement. J Vet lntem Med.
 329. Munoz A, Riber C, Santisteban R, et al. Cardiovascular and metabolic adaptations in
2008;22:1001-1007.
horses competing in cross-country events. J Vet Med Sci 199;61:13-20.
300. 
Marcos R, Santos M, Malhao F, et al. Pancytopenia in a cat with visceral leishmani-
330. Murase T, Maede Y. Increased erythrophagocytic activity of macrophages in dogs
asis. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:201-205.
 301. Marks SL, Mannella C, Schaer M. Coral snake envenomation in the dog: Report of 
 331. Musaji A, Cormont F, Thirion G, et al. Exacerbation of autoantibody-mediated
four cases and review of the literature. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1990;26:629-634.
thrombocytopenic purpura by infection with mouse viruses. Blood. 2004;104:2102-
302.
 Masini AP, Baragli P, Tedeschi D, et al. Behavior of mean erythrocyte volume during
2106.
submaximal treadmill exercise in the horse. Comp Haematol int. 2000;10:38-42.
 332. Myers S, Wiks K, Giger U. Macrocytic anemia caused by naturally occurring folate-
 303. Masserdoti C. Unusual “erythroid loops in canine blood smears after viper-bite
deficiency in the cat {abstract). Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:30.
envenomation. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:321-325.
 333. Mylonakis ME. Day MJ, Siarkou V, et al. Absence of myelofibrosis in dogs with 
 304. Matthews NS. Brown RM, Barling KS, et al. Repetitive propofol administration in
myelosuppression induced by Ehrlichia canis infection. J Comp Pathol.
dogs and cats. J/ Arm Anim Hosp Assoc. 2004;40:255-260.
2010;142:328-331.
118
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 334. Nakage AP, Santana AE, de Capua ML, et al. Characterization and quantification
 362. Penzhorn BL, Schoeman T, Jacobson LS. Feline babesiosis in South Africa: a review.
of blood cells from the umbilical cord of dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:394-
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2004;1026:183-186.
396.
 363. Perkins PC, Grindem CB, Levy JK. What is your diagnosis? Mycobacteriosis. Vet Clin
335. Nantakomol D, Imwong M, Soontarawirat I, et al. The absolute counting of red cell-
Pathol. 1995;24:77.
y g Aawg Aesse paseq anei mo Aq pean lan pal ym saedoa paiap
0 xooixai pa 'rs jabu u slan pal a4n po saseasi o leyos ' uead t9e
Cytom. 2009;76:191-198.
Veterinary Intemal Medicine: Diseases ofthe Dog and Cat. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB.
 336. Neath PJ, Brockman DJ, Saunders HM. Retrospective analysis of 19 cases of
Saunders Co; 1983:1938-2000.
isolated torsion of the splenic pedicle in dogs. J Smal Anim Pract. 1997;38:
365. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanaugh PG, et al. Feline hyperthyroidism : pretreatment
387-392.
clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1983;183:
 337. Neer TM, Harrus S. Canine monocytotropic ehrlichiosis and neorickettsiosis {E. canis.
103-110.
E. chaffeensis. E. ruminatium. N. sennetsu, and N. risticinfections). In: Greene CE,
366. Phillips B. Severe, prolonged bone marrow hypoplasia secondary to the use of carbo-
ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier:
platin in an azotemic dog. J Armm Vet Med Assoc. 1999;215:1250-1252.
2006:203-219.
 367. Philips S, Barr S, Dykes N, et al. Bronchiolitis obliterans with organizing pneumonia
-uou pue anjenauaba yrim shop po uoneuaiaa na jaiald 'r Aaipeh y jabian 8ce 
in a dog. / Vet Intem Med. 2000;14:204-207.
 regenerative anaemia on the basis of their red cell distribution width and mean
 368. Piek CJ, Junius G, Dekker A, et al. Idiopathic immune-mediated hemolytic anemia:
corpuscular volume. Vet Rec. 2002;150:431-434.
treatment outcome and prognostic factors in 149 dogs. J Vet lntem Med.
   n        i 
2008;22:366-373.
ls/s raur sieob pue daays ui eiwaeue slowaeu jpo uabe aaojup/aida ue '(sno
369. Piercy RJ, Swardson CJ, Hinchcliff KV. Erythroid hypoplasia and anemia following
Evol M/icrobiol. 2004;54:365-371.
adrministration of recombinant human erythropoietin to two horses. J Am Vet Med
 340. Neimark H, Johansson KE, Rikihisa Y, et al. Proposal to transfer some members of
Assoc. 1998;212:244-247.
the genera Haemobartonella and Eperythrozoon to the genus Mycoplasma with
 370. Plier M. Unpublished studies. 2000, personal communication.
descriptions of "Candidatus Mycoplasma haemofelis". "Candidatus Mycoplasma
371. Polkes AC, Giguere S, Lester GD, et al. Factors associated with outcome in foals with
haemomuris", “Candidatus Mycoplasma haemosuis" and *Candidatus Mycoplasma
neonatal isoerythrolysis {72 cases, 1988-2003). J Vet lntem Med. 2008;22:
Wenyonir. Int J/ Syst Evol Microbiol. 2001;51:B91-899.
1216-1222.
 341. Nemeth E. Tuttle MS. Powelson J, et al. Hepcidin regulates cellular iron efflux
 372. Ponka P. Beaumont C. Richardson DR. Function and regulation of transfein and
 by binding to feroportin and inducing its internalization. Science. 2004;306:
ferritin. Semin Hematol. 1998;35:35-54.
2090-2093.
 373. Ponka P, Richardson DR. Can ferritin provide iron for hemoglobin synthesis? Blood.
 342. Ng CY, Mills JN. Clinical and haematological features of haemangiosarcoma in dogs.
1997;89:2611-2612.
Aust Vet J. 1985;62:1-4.
 374. Porter RE, Weiser MG. Effet ofimmune-mediated erythrocyte agglutination on analy-
 343. Nishizawa l, Sato M, Fujihara M, et al. Differential detection of hemotropic Myco-
sis of canine blood using a multichannel blood cell counting system. Vet Clin Patho.
 plasma species in cattle by melting curve analysis of PCR products. J Vet Med Sci
1990;19:45-50.
2010;72:77-79
 375. Potgieter LN, Jones JB, Patton CS, et al. Experimental parvovirus infection in dogs.
344.Noble SJ, Armstrong PJ. Bee sting envenomation resulting in secondary immune-
Can J Comp Med. 1981;45:212-216.
mediated hemolytic anemia in two dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1999;214:
 376. Potocnik SJ, Wintour EM. Development of the spleen as a red blood cell reservoir in
1021-1026.
lambs. Reprod Fertil Dev. 1996;8:311-315.
 345. Noris M, Remuzzi G. Hemolytic uremic syndrome. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005;16B:
 377. Poyart C, Wajcman H, Kister J. Molecular adaptation of hemoglobin function in 
1035-1050.
mammals. Respir Physiol. 1992:90:3-17.
 346. Noris M, Remuzzi G. Atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:
 378. Prasse KW, Crouser D, Beutler E, et al. Pyruvate kinase deficiency anemia with
1676-1687.
terminal myelofibrosis and osteosclerosis in a beagle. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 347. Norman TE, Chaffin MK, Johnson MC, et al. Intravascular hemolysis associated with
1975;166:1170-1175.
severe cutaneous burn injuries in five horses. J Am Vet AMed Assoc. 2005;226:
379. Prchal JT. Production oferythrocytes.In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds.
2039-2043.
Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 2006:393-403.
 348. O'Keefe DA, Schaeffer DJ. Hematologic toxicosis associated with doxorubicin admin-
380. Pusterla N, FecteauME, MadiganJE, etal. Acute hemoperitoneum in horses: areview
istration in cats. / Vet lntern Med. 1992;6:276-283.
of 19 cases 1992-2003). / Vet /ntemm M/ed. 2005;19:344-347
349. Ohgami RS, Campagna DR, Greer EL, et al. Identification of a fereductase required
aodxa away uewny e jpo uoeuapi ie ia in uoibuujo 'z bues 9r Aaiino 8g
for efficient transferrin-dependent iron uptake in erythroid cels. Nat Genet.
that is essential for erythropoiesis. Cen. 2004;118:757-766.
2005;37:1264-1269.
382. Radin MJ, Eubank MC, Weiser MG. Electronic measurement of erythrocyte volume
350. Oishi A, Sakamoto H, Shimizu R. Canine plasma erythropoietin levels in 124 cases of
and volume heterogeneity in horses during erythrocyte regeneration associated with
anemia. J/ Vet Med Sci. 1995;57:747-749.
experimental anemias. Vet Pathol. 1986;23:656-660.
351.0
 Oishi A, Sakamoto H, Shimizu R, et al. Evaluation of phlebotomy-induced erythropoi-
383. Ramaiah SK, Harvey JV, Giguere S, et al. Intravascular hemolysis associated with
89-19:9966l 19s pa1a/ 7 6op a41 u1 uog3npo1d una
liver disease in a horse with marked neutrophil hypersegmentation. / Vet ntern Med.
 352. Okabe J, Tajima S. Yamato O, et al. Hemoglobin types, erythrocyte membrane skel-
2003;17:360-363.
yos pa a 7 sisoaoiod ym saen ui uoenuauon uo ewseid pue uoa
 384. Ramirez-Munoz MP, Zuniga G, Torres-Bugarin O, et al. Evaluation ofthe micronucleus 
1996;58:629-634.
wju qet lapow pazwoaualds aun jo asn Aq saisoju/a poog lesaudjad ui sa
 353. Omer OH, El Malik KH, Mahmoud OM, et al. Haematological profils in pure bred
Sci 1999;49:418-420
cattle naturally infected with Theieria annulata in Saudi Arabia. Vet Parasitol.
385. Randhawa SS, Sharma DK, Randhawa CS, et al. An outbreak of bacillary haemoglo-
2002;107:161-168.
binuria in sheep in India. Trop Anim Health Prod. 1995;27:31-36.
 354. Pak M, Lopez MA, Gabayan V, et al. Suppression of hepcidin during anemia requires 
386. Randolph JE, Scarlett JM, Stokol T, et al. Expression, bioactivity, and clinical
erythropoietic activity. Blood. 2006;108:3730-3735.
assessment of recombinant feline erythropoietin. Am J Vet Res. 2004;65:
 355. Paltrinieri S, Comazzi S, Ceciliani F, et al. Stomatocytosis of Standard Schnauzers is
1355-1366.
not associated with stomatin deficiency. Vet J. 2007:173:202-205.
 387. Randolph JF, Stokol T, Scarlett JM, et al. Comparison of biological activity and safety
356.
Paltrinieri S Preatoni M,Rosi S.Microcytosis does not predict serum ironconcenr-
of recombinant canine erythropoietin with that of recombinant human erythropoietin
tions in anaemic dogs. Vet J. 2010;185:341-343.
in clinically nomal dogs. Am J/ Vet Res. 1999;60:636-642.
 357. Panciera DL. Conditions associated with canine hypothyroidism. Vet Clin North Am
Small Animm Pract. 2001;31:935-950
389. Reagan WJ, Carter C, Turek J. Eccentrocytosis in equine red maple leaf toxicosis. Vet 
358.
Patnaik MM, Tefferi A. The complete evaluation of erythrocytosis: congenital and
Clhin Pahol. 1994;23:123-127.
acquired. Leukemia. 2009;23:834-844.
390. Reagan WJ, Garry F. Thrall MA, et al. The clinicopathologic, light, and scanning
359.
Paul AL, Shaw SP, Bandt C. Aplastic anemia in two kittens following a prescription
sewellpaau Aeineu jnot u sisouoozoyada jo saineal aidosoi oaia
error. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:25-31
Vet Pathol. 1990;27:426-431.
 360. Pechereau D, Martel P. Braun JP. Plasma erythropoietin concentrations in dogs and
391. Rebar AH. Hemogram nterpretatin for Dogs and Cats. St. Louis: Ralston Purina Co.
cats: reference values and changes with anaemia and/or chronic renal failure. Res
1998.
Vet Soi 1997;62:185-188.
392. Rebar AH, Lewis HB, DeNicola DB, et al. Red celfragmentation inthe dog: an edito-
 361. Pechereau D, Martel P, Braun JP. Plasma erythropoietin concentrations in dogs and
rial review. Vet Pathol. 1981;18:415-426.
cats: reference values and changes with anaemia and/or chronic renal failure. Res
 393. Reef VB. Costridium perringens celulitis and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Vet Scr. 1997;62:185-188.
in a horse. J Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1983;182:251-254.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
119
 394. Reimer ME, Troy GC, Varnick LD. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: 70 cases
426. Shimoda T, Shiranaga N, Mashita T, et al. Bone marrow necrosis in a cat infected 
{1988-1996]. / Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1999;35:384-391.
with feline leukemia virus. J/ Vet Med Sci. 2000;62:113-115.
 395. Rettig MP, Low PS, Gimm JA, et al. Evaluation of biochemical changes during in vivo
427. Sikorski LE, Birkenheuer AJ, Holowaychuk MK, et al. Babesiosis caused by a large
Babesia species in 7 immunocompromised dogs. J Vet lntem Med. 2010;24:
 396. Ribeiro RO, Chaim OM, da Silveira RB, et al. Biological and structural comparison of
127-131.
recombinant phospholipase D toxins from Loxosceles intemedia {brown spider)
428.SimpsonCF GaskinMHarvyW.Utrastructure of erthrocytes parasitizd
venom. Toxicon. 2007;50:1162-1174.
Haemobartonella felis. J Parasitol 1978;64:504-511.
 397. Ritzmann M, Grimm J, Heinritzi K, et al. Prevalence of Mycoplasma suis in slaughter
429. Simpson CF, Taylor WJ, Kitchen H Crystalline inclusions in erythrocytes parasitied
pigs. with correlation of PCR results to hematological findings. Vet Microbiol.
with Babesia egui following treatment of ponies with imidocarb. Am J Vet Res.
2009;133:84-91.
1980;41:1336-1340.
 398. Robbins RL, Wallace SS, Brunner CJ, et al. Immune-mediated haemolytic disease
430. Singh A, Singh J, Grewal AS, et al. Studies on some blood parameters of crossbred
after penicillin therapy in a horse. Eguine Vet J. 1993;25:462-465.
calves with experimental Theileria annulata infections. Vet Res Commun.
 399. Robinson WF, Wilcox GE, Fowler RLP: Canine parvoviral disease: experimental repro-
2001;25:289-300.
duction of the enteric form with a parvovirus isolated from a case of myocarditis. Vet
431.
Sitprija V. Animal toxins and the kidney. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol. 2008;4:616-627.
Pathol. 1980;17:589-599.
432. Slappendel RJ. Hereditaryspherocytosis associated with spectrin deficiencyin golen
 400. Rojko JL, Olsen RG. The immunobiology of the feline leukemia virus. Vet immunol
retrievers (abstract). Eur Soc Vet Intem Med 1998;131.
Immunopathol. 1984;B:107-165.
433. Slappendel RJ, Van der Gaag I, Van Nes JJ, et al. Familial stomatocytosis-
 401. Rothmann C, Malik Z, Cohen AM. Spectraly resolved imaging of Cabot rings and
Hypertrophic gastritis (FSHG). a newly recognized disease in the dog Drentse patri-
Howell-Jolly bodies. Photochem Photobiol. 1998;68:584-587.
jshond). Vet Q. 1991;13:30-40.
 402. Rottman JB, English RV, Breitschwerdt EB, et al. Bone marrow hypoplasia in a cat
434. Slappendel RJ, van Zwieten R, Van Leuwen M, et al. Hereditary spectrin deficiency
treated with griseofulvin. J Am Vet /Med Assoc. 1991;198:429-431.
 403. Ruef P. Linderkamp O. Deformability and geometry of neonatal erythrocytes with
435. Smith JA. Thrall MA. Smith JL, et al. Eperythrozoon wenyoni infection in dairy
irregular shapes. Pediatr Res. 1999;45:114-119.
cattle. / Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1990;196:1244-1250.
 404. Sabina RL, Woodliff JE, Giger U. Disturbed erythrocyte calcium homeostasis and
436. Smith JE. Iron metabolism and its disorders In: Kaneko J, Harvey JVV, Bruss ML,
d Aaap aseonudsod aue u uoenasp aau auae
Clhin Path. 2008;17:117-123.
1997:223-238.
405. Sadallah S, Eken C, Schifferli JA. Ectosomes as modulators of inflammation and 
437. Smith JE, Mohandas N, Shohet SB. Variability in erythrocyte deformability among 
immunity. Cin Exp /mmunol 2011;163:26-32.
various mammals. Amm / Physiol. 1979;236:H725-H730.
 406. Sakthivel R, Farooq SM, Kalaiselvi P, et al. Investigation on the early events of
438. Smith JE, Mohandas N. Shohet SB. Interaction of amphipathic drugs with erythro-
aa reinanen uo siseudwa eiads yi saoa nuaauas ui sisodoe
cytes from various species. Am / Vet Res. 1982;43:1041-1048.
calcium and loss of phospholipid asymmetry in chronic renal failure. Clin Chim Acta.
439.
.Smith JE, Moore K, Arens M, et al. Hereditary elliptocytosis with protein band 4.1
2007;382:1-7.
deficiency in the dog. Blood. 1983;61:373-377.
407. Santos LD, Santos KS, de Souza BM, et al. Purification, sequencing and structural
440. Sontas HB, Dokuzeylu B, Tuna O, et al. Estrogen-induced myelotoxicity in dogs: A
characterization of the phospholipase A1 from the venom of the social wasp Polybia
review. Can Vet J. 2009;50:1054-1058.
paulista (Hymenoptera, Vespidae). Toxicon. 2007;50:923-937.
441. Soubasis N, Rallis TS, Vlemmas J, et al. Serum and liver iron concentration in
408. Sato K, Hikasa Y, Morita T, et al. Secondary erythrocytosis associated with high
 dogs with experimentally induced hepatopathy. / Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2006;21:
 plasma erythropoietin concentrations in a dog with cecal leiomyosarcoma. J Am Vet
599-604.
ed Ass0c. 2002;220:486-490, 464.
442. Spangler VL, Kass PH. Splenic myeloid metaplasia, histiocytosis, and hypersplenism
 409. Sato T, Mizuno M. Poikilocytosis of newborn calves. Nijppon Juigaku Zasshi.
in the dog (65 cases). Vet Pathol. 1999;36:583-593.
1982;44:801-805.
443. Spengler MIl, Bertoluzo SM, Catalani G, et al. Study on membrane fluidity and 
410. ScaveliTD, Hornbuckle WE, Roth L et al. Portosystemic shunts in cats: seven cases
erythrocyte aggregation in equine, bovine and human species. Clin Hemomheo Micro-
{1976-1984]. / Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1986;189:317-325.
circ. 2008;38:171-176.
411. Schafer DM, Priest H, Stokol T, et al. Anticoagulant-dependent in vitro hemaggluti-
444.
. Stanton ME, Bright RM. Gastroduodenal ulceration in dogs. Retrospective study of
nation in a cat. Vet Chin Pathol. 2009;38:194-200.
43 cases and literature review. / Vet lntem AMed. 1989;3:238-244.
 412. Schaer M. Harvey JV. Calderwood Mays MB, et al. Pyruvate kinase deficiency
445. Steele TM, Frazer DM, Anderson GJ. Systermic regulation ofintestinal iron absorption.
 bop Jaan uen e ui sisoewoaoway Aepuoas yim ewaue aloway buisnen
UBMB Life. 2005;57:499-503.
J Arm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1992;28:233-239.
446. Steffen DJ, Elliott GS, Leipold HW, et al. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progres-
 413. Schlafer DH. Trypanosoma theileri a literature review and report ofincidence in New
sive alopecia in Polled Hereford calves: hematologic, biochemical, bone marrow
York cattle. Comell Vet. 1979;69:411-425.
cytologic, electrophoretic, and flow cytometric findings. J Vet Diagn lnvest. 1992:
 414. Schoofs SH. Lingual hemangioma in a puppy: a case report and literature review.
4:31-37.
J Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1997;33:161-165.
447. Stefen DJ, Leipold HV, Gibb J, et al. Congenital anemia, dyskeratosis, and progres-
 415. Scott AF, Bunn HF, Brush AH. The phylogenetic distribution of red cell 2,3 diphospho-
glycerate and its interaction with mammalian hemoglobins. J Exp Zool.
448. Steinhardt M, Petzold K, Lyhs L. Blood storage function of the spleen in the domestic
1977;201:269-288.
pig.1. Effect of adrenaline and bodily exercise on the haematocrit value and the
 416. Searcy GP, Orr JP. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a horse. Can Vet J. 1981;22:
haemoglobin content. Arch Exp Vet Med. 1970;24:817-824.
148-151.
 449. Stewart IB, McKenzie DC. The human spleen during physiological stress. Sports Med.
 417. Sentsui H, Kono Y. Complement-mediated hemolysis of horse erythrocytes treated
2002;32:361-369.
with equine infectious anemia virus. Arch Virol. 1987;95:53-66.
 450. Stockdale CR, Moyes TE. Dyson R. Acute post-parturient haemoglobinuria in dairy
 418. Serres F, Chetboul V, Sampedrano CC, et al. Ante-mortem diagnosis of persistent 
cows and phosphorus status. Aust Vet J. 2005;83:362-366.
truncus arteriosus in an B-year-old asymptomatic dog. J Vet Cardio. 2009;11:
451.
 Stockham SL. Anemia associated wit bacterial and viral infections. In: Feldman BF.
59-65.
Zinkl JG, Jain NC. eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
 419. Sheftel AD, Zhang AS, Brown C, et al. Direct interorganellar transfer of iron from
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:163-168.
endosome to mitochondrion. Blood. 2007;110:125-132.
 uanonpuap aneyosoud-g-asosngi auinb3 ta uapuny 'r Aanien is weuaas 7
420. Shelly SM. Causes of canine pancytopenia. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1988;10:9-16.
deficiency. Vet Pathol. 1994;31:518-527.
 453. Stockham SL, Kjemtrup AM, Conrad PA, et al. Theilerosis in a Missouri beef herd 
infections in the cat. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Animl 1995;10:220-233.
caused byTheieria buffel case report, herd investigation, ultrastructure, phloge-
422.
 Shi H, Bencze KZ, Stemmler TL, et al. A cytosolic iron chaperone that delivers iron to
netic analysis, and experimental transmission. Vet Pathol. 200037:11-21.
feritin. Science. 2008;320:1207-1210.
454. Stokol T, Blue JT, French TV. Idiopathic pure red cell aplasia and nonregenerative 
423. Shiel RE, Brennan SF, ORourke LG, et al. Hematologic values in young pretraining
immune-mediated anemia in dogs: 43 cases {1988-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
healthy Greyhounds. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:274-277.
2000;216:1429-1436.
424. Shimada A, Onozato T, Hoshi E, et al. Pancytopenia with bleeding tendency associ-
 455. Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, et al. Development of bone marow toxicosis after
albendazole administration in a dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1997;210:
1317-1319.
1753-1756
 425. Shimazaki K, Ohshima K, Suzumiya J, et al. Apoptosis and prognostic factors in
 456. Strickland KN. Canine and feline caval syndrome. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract.
myelodysplastic syndromes. Leuk Lymphoma. 2002;43:257-260.
1998;13:88-95.
120
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
457. Su QL, Song HQ, Lin RQ, et al. The detection of "Candidatus Mycoplasma haemobos"
 488. Troisi G, Borjesson L, Bexton S, et al. Biomarkers of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
in cattle and buffalo in China. Trop Animm Health Prod. 2010;42:1805-1808.
{PAH}-associated hemolytic anemia in oiled wildlife. Environ Res. 2007;105:
458. Sullivan PS, Evans HL, McDonald TP. Platelet concentration and hemoglobin function
324-329.
in Greyhounds. / Arm Vet MMed Assoc. 1994;205:838-841.
489. Tvedten HW, Tetens J. What is your diagnosis? [Heparin induced erythrocyte agglu-
459.
 Susta L, Torres-VelezF, Zhang J, et al. An in situ hybridization and irmmunohistochemi-
tination in a horse]. Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25(5):27-28.
cal study of cytauxzoonosis in domestic cats. Vet Pathol. 2009;46:1197-1204
490. Tyler RD, Cowel RL. Normoblastemia. In: August JR. ed. Consuitations in Feline
460.
 Suzuki Y, Tateishi N, Cicha I, et al. Aggregation and sedimentation of mixtures of
Intemal Medicine 3. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 1997:483-487.
erythrocytes with different properties. Clin Hemoheal Microcirc. 2001;25:105-117.
491. Uilenberg G. Babesia—a historical overview. Vet Parasitol. 2006;138:3-10.
461.
 Swardson CJ, Kociba GJ, Perryman LE. Effects of equine infectious anemia virus on
492. Valko M, Leibfritz D, Moncol J, et al. Free radicals and antioxidants in normal physi-
ological functions and human disease. Int J Biochem CellBiol 2007;39:44-B4.
462. Swardson CJ, Lichtenstein DL, Wang S, etal. Infection of bone marw macrophages
493. Vandervoort JM, Bourne C, Carson RL, etal. Use of a polymerase chain reaction assay
-tl2 s  7   ee si aa g
to detert infetion with Eperythrozoon wenyoni in cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
463.
 Swenson C. Jacobs R. Spherocytosis associated with anaplasmosis in two cows.
2001;219:1432-1434.
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1986;188:1061-1063.
494. Velcek FT, Kugaczewski JT, Jongco B, et al. Function of the replanted spleen in dogs.
464. Sykes JE, Bailiff NL Ball LM, et al. Identification of a novel hemotropic Mycolasma
/ Trauma. 1982;22:502-506.
in a splenectomized dog with hemic neoplasia. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2004;224:
 495. Verga Falzacappa MV, Muckenthaler MU. Hepcidin: iron-hormone and anti-microbial
1946-1951.
peptide. Gene. 2005;364:37-44.
465. Sykes JE, Ball LM, Bailiff NL, et al.  Candidatus Mycoplasma haematoparvum", a
496. Vetter J. A biological hazard of our age: bracken fern [Pteridjum aquiinumL.) Kuhn]—
novel small haemotropic Mycoplasma from a dog. int J/ Syst Evol Microbiol. 2005;55:
a review. Acta Vet Hung. 2009;57:183-196.
27-30.
497. Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, et al. Bone marrow mast cell hyperplasia in
466.
 Sykes JE, Lindsay LL, Maggi RG, et al. Human coinfection with Bartonella henselae
dogs with aplastic anemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:106-111.
and two hemotropic Mycoplasma variants resembling Mycoplasma ovis. / Clin Micro-
498. Walton RM, Brown DE, Hamar DV, et al. Mechanisms of echinocytosis induced by
biol. 2010;48:3782-3785.
Crotalus arox venom. Vet Pathol. 1997;34:442-449.
467.
Taboada J, Lobetti R. Babesiosis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog
sop tu shupu ieoa mw au e 1a  le droue y uone 66
and Cat. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:722-736.
and a cat with hemophagocytic syndrome. J Vet lntem Med. 1996;10:7-14.
468.
Takagi M, Takagaki K, Kamimura S, et al. Primary erythrocytosis in a Japanese black 
 500. Wanduragala L, Ristic M. Anaplasmosis. In: Woldehiwet Z, Ristic M, eds. Rickettsial 
calf: a case report. J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med. 2006;53:296-299.
and Chlamydial Diseases of Domestic Animais. New York: Pergamon Press;
eunuooway eg josuawean nssas ieaseses oewe w eyei 69
1993:65-87.
in Japanese Black cows. / Vet Med Sci. 2009;71:1105-1108.
 501. Ward MV, Mountan PC, Dodds WJ. Severe idiopathic refractory anemia and leuko-
470. Tang X, Xia Z, Yu J. An experimental study of hemolysis induced by onion (Allium 
penia in a horse. Calif Vet 1980;12:19-22.
cepa) poisoning in dogs. J Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2008;31:143-149.
 502. Wardrop KJ. The Coombs' test in veterinary medicine: past, present,future. Vet Clin
471.
 Tant MS, Lumsden JH, Jacobs RM, et al. Evaluation of acanthocyte count as a
Pathol. 2005;34:325-334.
diagnostic test for canine hemangiosarcoma. Comp Clin Path. 2004;12:174-181.
503. Watson ADJ: Erythrocytosis and polycythemia. In: Feldman BF ZinkI JG, Jain NC,eds.
472.
Tasker S. Helps CR. Belford CJ, et al. 16S rDNA comparison demonstrates near
 g sea noudd eudapd pa yg iooewah Aeuaa/ s,wes
identity between a United Kingdom Haemobartonella felis strain and the American
2000:217-221.
California strain. Vet Microbiol. 2001;81:73-78.
504. Watson ADJ, Wright RG. The ultrastructure of inclusions in blood cells of dogs with
473.
Tasker S, Peters IR, Papasouliotis K, et al. Description of outcomes of experimental 
distemper. J Comp Pathol. 1974;84:417-427.
infection with feline haemoplasmas: copy numbers, haematology. Coombs' testing
 505. Weiser MG. Erythrocyte volume distribution analysis in healthy dogs, cats, horses 
and blood glucose concentrations. Vet Microbiol. 2009;139:323-332.
and dairy cows. Amm / Vet Res. 1982;43:163-166.
474.
Taylor WJ. Sickled red cells in the Cervidae. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med.
506. Weiser MG. Kociba GJ. Persistent macrocytosis assessed by erythrocyte
1983;27:77-98.
286l pooig sien u! uopeiauabal aaojupa bumollol sisAjeue uopeindodgns
475.
Tennant B, Harrold D, Reina-Guerra M, et al. Arterial pH, POz, and PCO of calves with
60:295-303.
familil bovine polycythemia. Comell Vet 1969;59:594-604.
 507. Weiser MG, Kociba GJ. Erythrocyte macrocytosis in feline leukemia virus associated
476. Tennant BC, Center SA. Hepatic function. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JVV, Bruss ML, eds.
anemia. Vet Pathol. 1983;20:687-697.
Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego: Academic Press;
 508. Weiser MG. Kociba GJ. Sequential changes in erythrocyte volume distribution
2008:379-412.
and microcytosis associated with iron deficiency in kittens. Vet Pathol. 1983;20:
477. Tholenl, Weingart C, Kohn B.Concentration of D-dimers in healthy cats and sick cats
1-12.
with and without disseminated intravascular coagulation DIC). J Feline ∧Med Surg.
 509. Weiss DJ. Uniform evaluation and semiquantitative reporting of hematologic data in
2009;11 :842-846.
veterinary laboratories. Vet Clin Pathol. 1984;13:27-31.
478.
 Thomas HL, Livesey MA. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia associated with
 510. Weiss DJ. Aplastic anemmia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veteri-
 trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole administration in a horse. Can Vet J. 1998;39:
nary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams & Wilkins; 2000:
171-173.
212-215.
479. Thorn CE. Normal hematology of the deer. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC. eds.
 511. Weiss DJ. Primary pure red cell aplasia in dogs: 13 cases 1996-2000l. JAm VetMed
Schaim's Veterinary Hematoogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & VWvilkins; 
Assoc. 2002;221:93-95
2000:1179-1183.
 512. Weiss DJ. New insights into the physiology and treatment of acquired myelodysplas-
480.
Tizard IR. Veterinary lmmunology. An Introduction. Bth ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
tic syndromes and aplastic pancytopenia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract.
 Elsevier; 2009.
2003;33:1317-1334.
481.
Toll PVW, Gaehtgens P, Neuhaus D, et al. Fuid, electrolyte, and packed cell volume
513. Weiss DJ. Sideroblastic anemia in 7 dogs f1996-2002). J Vet lntem Med.
shifts in racing greyhounds. Am / Vet Res. 1995;56:227-232.
2005;19:325-328.
482. Toribio RE, Bain FT, Mrad DR, et al. Congenital defects in newborn foals of mares 
 514. Weiss DJ. A retrospective study of the incidence and the classification of bone
treated for equine protozoal myeloencephalitis during pregnancy. J Am Vet Med
marrow disorders inthe dog at a veterinary teaching hospital 1996-2004). JVet lntem
Assoc. 1998;212:697-701.
/ed. 2006;20:955-961
483.
Tornquist SJ. Clinical pathology of llamas and alpacas. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim
 515. Weiss DJ. Aplastic anemia in cats—clinicopathological features and associated 
Pract 2009;25:311-322.
disease conditions 1996-2004. J/ Feline Med Surg. 2006;8:203-206.
484. Tornquist SJ, Crawford TB. Suppression of megakaryocyte colony growth by
pa/ 1a/ w/7 (900z-966ll sase2 tz :s6op u awospuns sh3o6eydowah r0 ssla/ 919
plasmafrom foals infected with equine infectious anemia virus. Blood. 1997;90:2357-
Assoc. 2007;230:697-701.
2363.
 517. Weiss DJ. Bone marrw pathology in dogs and cats with non-regenerative immune-
485.
Torten M, Schalm O. Influence of equine spleen on rapid changes inthe concentra-
mediated haemolytic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Pathol. 2008;138:
 tion of erythrocytes in peripheral blood. Arm / Vet Res. 1964;25:500-504.
46-53.
486. Tran TN. Eubanks SK. Schaffer KJ, et al. Secretion of ferrtin by rat hepatoma
518. Weiss DJ, Aird B. Cytologic evaluation of primary and secondary myelodysplastic
cells and its regulation by inflammatory cytokines and iron. Blod. 1997;90:4979-
 syndromes in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2001;30:67-75.
4986.
519. Weiss DJ, Evanson OA.A retrospective study of feline pancytopenia. Comp Haematol
487. Trepanier LA, Danhof R. Toll J, et al. Clinical findings in 40 dogs with hypersensitivity
ht. 2000;10:50-55
associated with administration of potentiated sulfonamides. J Vet Intem Med.
a/ euadoaued auuen po Apns aadsoal  r saxs 'to uosue3 'ra ssa 0z9
2003;17:647-652
Clin Pathol. 1999;28:83-88.
CHAPTER 4 = Evaluation of Erythrocytes
121
 521. Weiss DJ, Klausner JS. Drug-associated aplastic anemmia in dogs: eight cases ↑1984-
538. Wili B, Boretti FS, Cattori V, et al. Identification, molecular characterization, and
1988). J/ Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1990;196:472-475.
experimental transmission of a new hemoplasma isolate from a cat with hemolytic
 522. Weiss DJ, Kristensen A. Papenfuss N. Quantitative evaluation of irregularly spicu-
anemia in Switzerland. / Clin Microbiol. 2005;43:2581-2585.
lated red blood cells in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22:117-121.
 539. WiliB, Boretti FS, Tasker S, et al. From Haemobartonella to hemoplasma: molecular
523.
 Weiss DJ, Kristensen A, Papenfuss N, et al. Quantitative evaluation of echinocytes 
methods provide new insights. Vet Microbio. 2007;125:197-209.
in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1990;19:114-118.
 540. Wolfs JL Comfurius P. Bevers EM, et al. Influence of erythrocyte shape on the rate
 524. Weiss DJ, Lulich J. Myelodysplastic syndrome with sideroblastic differentiation in a
of Ca2+-induced scrambling of phosphatidylserine. Mol Membr Biol. 2003;20:83-91.
dog. Vet Chin Pathol. 1999;28:59-63.
541.
Worth AJ, Ainsworth SJ, Brocklehurst PJ, et al. Nitrte poisoning in cats and dogs
525.
Weiss D, Miller DC. Bone marrow necrosis associated with pancytopenia in a cow.
fed a commercial pet food. N Z Vet J. 1997;45:193-195.
Vet Pathol. 1985;22:90-92.
542. Wray JD. Methaemoglobinaemia caused by hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea) inges-
 526. Weiss DJ, Moritz A. Equine inmmune-mediated hemolytic anemia associated with
tion in a dog. / Smal Anim Pract. 2008;49:211-215.
Clostridium perringens infection. Vet Clin Pathol. 2003;32:22-26.
543. Wysoke JM, Berg BB, Marshall C. Bee sting-induced haemolysis, spherocytosis and
 527. Weiss DJ, Raskin RE, Zerbe C. Myelodysplastic syndrome in two dogs. JAm Vet Med
neural dysfunction in three dogs. / S Afr Vet Assoc. 1990;61:29-32.
Assoc. 1985;187:1038-1040.
 544. Yabsley MJ, Quick TC, Little SE. Theileriosis in a white-tailed deer {Olocoileus vir-
 528. Weiss Ll. The Blood Cels and Hematopoietic Tissues. New York: Elsevier, 1984.
ginianus) fawn. J Widl Dis. 2005;41:806-809.
 529. Welles EG, TylerJV Wolfe DF. Hematologic and semen quality changes in bulls with
545.YamatoO,Kasai E, Katsura T, etal.Heinzbodhemolytic anemiawitheccentrocytoss
from ingestion of Chinese chive {Alium tuberosum] and garlic {Alium sativum in a
 530. Welles EG, Tyler JV, Wolfe DF, et al. Eperythrozoon infection in young bulls
dog. J Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 2005;41:68-73.
 paneosse sisaa Aeas e ia '1 epeo 1 ea ' uan 9
557-567.
schwannoma in a dog. / Vet Med Sci 2004;66:1605-1608.
 531. Wells MY, Decobecq CP, Decouvelaere DM, et al. Changes in clinical pathology
 547. Yeagley TJ, Reichard MV, Hempstead JE, et al. Detection of Babesia gibsoni and the 
 parameters during gestation in the New Zealand white rabbit. Toxicol Pathor.
canine small Babesia "Spanish isolate" in blood samples obtained from dogs confis-
1999;27:370-379.
cated from dogfighting operations. J/ Amm Vet Med Assoc. 2009;235:535-539.
 532. Weng XD, Cloutier G, Beaulieu R, et al. Influence of acute-phase proteins on
 pue AbojoisAydouied aui u! srdason juaung d bjaquiauns 'ly opelen 'SN bunos 8t9
6     7   
treatment of aplastic anemia. Blood. 2006;108:2509-2519.
H2352.
 549. Zaks KL Tan EO, Thrall MA. Heinz body anemia in a dog that had been sprayed with 
533.
Westfall DS, Jensen VWA, Reagan WJ, et al. Inoculation of two genotypes of Hemo-
skunk musk. J Am Vet MMed Assoc. 2005;226:1516-1518.
 bartonela felis {California and Ohio variants) to induce infection in cats and the
uo shjnsal snounds pue stunon snounds 'le ia 'r prejag ' analnauag 'W lyrapuez o99
response to treatment with azithromycin. Am / Vet Res. 2001;62:687-691.
haematology analysers: a review. Part ll. white blood cells, red blood cells, haemo-
 534. Wilcox A, Russell KE. Hematologic changes associated with Adderalltoxicity in a
 globin, red cellindices and reticulocytes. int J Lab Hematol. 2007;29:21-41.
dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:184-189.
 551. Zhuang QJ, Zhang HJ, Lin RQ, et al. The occurrence of the feline “Candidatus Myco-
 535. Willekens FL, Roerdinkholder-Stoelwinder B, Groenen-Dopp YA, et al. Hemoglobin
 plasma haemominutum* in dog in China confirmed by sequence-based analysis of 
loss from erythrocytes: in vivo results from spleen-facilitated vesiculation. Blood.
ribosomal DNA. Trop Anim Heath Prod. 2009;41:689-692.
2003;101:747-751.
 552. Zuniga Gonzalez G, Rammirez Munoz MP, Torres Bugarin O, et al. Induction of micro-
 536. Willekens FL, Werre JM, Groenen-Dopp YA, et al. Erythrocyte vesiculation: a self-
nuclei in the domestic cat {Felis domesticus) peripheral blood by colchicine and 
 protective mechanism? Br J Haematol. 2008;141:549-556.
cytosine-arabinoside. Mutat Res. 1998;413:187-189.
537.
Willekens FL, Werre JM, Kruijt JK, et al. Liver Kupffer cells rapidly remove red blood
 553. Zwaal RF, Comfurius P, Bevers EM. Mechanism and function of changes in membrane-
cell-derived vesicles from the circulation by scavenger receptors. Blood. 2005;105:
phospholipid asymmetry in platelets and erythrocytes. Biochem Soc Trans.
2141-2145.
1993;21: 248-253.
CHAPTER
5
EVALUATION OF LEUKOCYTIC DISORDERS
cattle and sheep (8000/μL)26 Neutrophils and lymphocytes
LEUKOCYTE TYPES AND
are the most numerous leukocyte types present in the blood
NUMBERS IN BLOOD
of healthy domestic mammals. Dogs, cats, and horses usually
have more neutrophils in blood than lymphocytes. In contrast,
Mammalian leukocytes or white blood cells have been classi-
lymphocytes are usually more numerous in pigs, cattle, sheep,
fied as either polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) or
mononuclear leukocytes. The PMNs have condensed, seg-
cytes change with age after birth. The neutrophil-to-
mented nuclei. They are commonly referred to as granulocytes
 lymphocyte ratio tends to be higher at birth than in later life,
because they contain large numbers of cytoplasmic granules
 in part because of the increased blood cortisol concentration
(Fig. 5-1). The term granulocyte is preferred in veterinary med-
icine because nuclear segmentation does not occur in the
numbers to increase and circulating lymphocyte numbers to
 granulocytes of most reptiles and it is not as prominent in
decrease. Calves have neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratios well
birds as it is in mammals. The granules in these cells are lyso-
above 1.0 at birth owing to neutrophil numbers above and
 somes containing hydrolytic enzymes, antibacterial agents,
lymphocyte numbers below those of adults. Within a week,
and other compounds. Primary granules are synthesized in the
neutrophil  numbers  decrease  and  lymphocyte  numbers
cytoplasm of late myeloblasts or early promyelocytes. They
-odi ym enbs Aexdde ae seyi siun oi ssen
 appear reddish purple when stained with routine blood stains
such as Wright-Giemsa (see Chapter 8). Secondary (specific)
Low numbers of monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils are
 granules appear at the myelocyte stage of development in the
present in normal mammals. Basophil numbers are especially
bone marrow. Three types of granulocytes (neutrophils, eosin-
low in dogs and cats, with none being seen in blood from
ophils, basophils) are identified by the staining characteristics
many healthy animals.
of their secondary granules (Fig. 5-2).
 Mononuclear leukocytes in blood are classifed as either
lymphocytes or monocytes (Fig. 5-3). These cells are not
LEUKOCYTE KINETICS
devoid of granules but rather have lower numbers of cytoplas-
mic granules than do granulocytes. Lymphocytes have high
 In contrast to erythrocytes, leukocytes do not exhibit a life
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N:C) ratios. Their nuclei have
span in blood but rather leave blood at random times in
coarsely clumped chromatin and are usually round, but they
response to chemoattractant stimuli. Except for lymphocytes
may be oval or slightly indented. A low percentage of lym-
that recirculate, it was thought that leukocytes did not reenter
phocytes in blood have focal accumulations of red- or purple-
 the circulation after migration into the tissues. However, there
staining granules within the cytoplasm (Fig. 5-4). These
is evidence that some tissue eosinophils return to the circula-
granular lymphocytes may be cytotoxic T lymphocytes or
tion via lymphatics47α and that, in the absence of infamma-
natural killer (NK) cells. Monocytes are usually larger than
tion, some monocytes may shuttle back to the bone marrow.
506
lymphocytes, have nuclei with finer chromatin clumping that
 are more variable in shape (round-, kidney-, or band-shaped),
Neutrophils
and have N:C ratios of 1 or less. They often exhibit cytoplas-
 Following release from the bone marrow, neutrophils are nor-
mic vacuoles in films prepared from blood collected with an
 mally present in blood for a short time (half-life about 5 to
anticoagulant.
The total number of leukocytes varies considerably by
 trophils appear to survive no more than a few days in tissues.433
species. Among common domestic animals, the mean total
Neutrophis that remain in blood spontaneously undergo
leukocyte count is highest in pigs (16,000/μL) and lowest in
apoptosis and are removed by macrophages in the spleen,
122
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
123
FIGURE 5-3
Blood film from a cow demonstrating the types of mononuclear leuko-
cytes normally present inblood.Nucleated cells present include a mono
FIGURE 5-1
Wright-Giemsa stain.
Transmission electron photomicrograph of a cat neutrophil containing
many characteristically small cytoplasmic granules. The thin sectioning
of the sample creates the apearance of the rucleus as being in three
parts.
Courtesy of C. F. Simpson.
FIGURE 5-4
Granular lymphocyte in blood from a dog. Wright-Giermsa stain.
circulating neutrophil pool (CNP) is assessed by routine blood
FIGURE 5-2
sample collection. The marginating neutrophil pool (MNP)
Blood film from a horse demonstrating the types of granulocytes nor-
consists of neutrophils that are transiently retained in capil-
mally present in blood. Granulocytes present include a neutrophil (bottom
laries and veins. The lung has long been considered the
left), five eosinophils (middle), and a basophil (top rigbt). Granules in the
 predominant organ contributing to the MNp121.309; however,
basophi stained poorly, which is a characteristic of the aqueous stainl
 recent studies suggest that the liver, spleen, and bone marrow
used. Diff-Quik stain.
may contribute substantially to the MNP.4s The retention of
 neutrophils in the vasculature does not appear to involve neu-
liver, and bone marrow via a phagocytic process (termed
 trophil adhesion to endothelial cells.2 The size of the MNP
efferocytosis) that does not generate an infammatory
 in an organ is related to its blood fow and the neutrophil
reaction.162,328,422
donnan srearo sq yanorn sug usuen rensseanu
 Neutrophils occur in circulating and marginating pools in
margination is increased in lungs when blood fow is reduced
blood, with 50% or less of the total blood neutrophil pool
 and decreased when blood fow is increased.45s The absolute
being present in the circulating pool (Fig. 5-5)2433 The
neutrophil count measured in blood samples can be affected
124
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Bone marrow
account for 5% to 10% of blood lymphocytes.458 Some NK
cells appear as granular lymphocytes, but not all. A subset of
A majority of blood lymphocytes are naive T and B lym-
phocytes, and most of the remaining blood lymphocytes are
CNP
CNP
antigen-primed memory T and B lymphocytes.i4 The frac-
MNP
tion of memory lymphocytes increases and the fraction of
?
?
?
naive lymphocytes decreases in the blood of humans as they
?
age.23 Most lymphocytes in blood have come from peripheral
- ssoydu (sapou qdu reud) sueano proyd
?
culate for a short time in blood (half-life about 30 minutes),
exit, migrate through lymphoid tissues (and to some degree
extralymphoid tissues), and return to blood via lymphatics so
For leukocyte
 B and T lymphocytes migrate through lymph nodes with
counts
Tissues
average velocities of around 6 and 12 μm/min, respectively It
is estimated that it takes about 1 day for a recirculating lym-
FIGURE 5-5
 phocyte to migrate through a lymph node 40so7 Recirculation
Neutrophil distribution in blood. Neutrophils occur in the circulating
allows lymphocytes, with their complete repertoire of unique
neutrophil pool (CNP) and marginating neutrophil pool (MNP), with
antigen receptors, to be available for immune reactions
 50% orless ofthe total blood neutrophil pool being present in the CNP.
throughout the body.
Naive lymphocytes have a propensity to recirculate through
lymph nodes. They migrate into lymph nodes through high
by cell movements between the MNP and CNP. A net move-
endothelial venules (HEVs) because these venules have adhe-
 ment of neutrophils from the MNP to the CNP increases the
sion molecules and chemokines on their surfaces that recog-
circulating blood neutrophil count. A net movement in the
nize complementary adhesion and chemokine receptors
opposite direction results in a decreased circulating blood
expressed on naive lymphocyte surfaces.39 Recirculating lym-
neutrophil count.43s
phocytes generally exit the lymph nodes via the efferent lym-
phatics; however, they appear to emigrate from lymph nodes
Eosinophils and Basophils
via paracortical postcapillary venules in pigs.°1 Efferent lym-
The half-life reported for human eosinophils ranges from 8
phatics join together to form large lymphatic vessels, the
to 18 hours.38 Little information is available concerning
largest of which is the thoracic duct, and drain into the blood
blood basophil kinetics, but a half-life of 2 to 3 days has been
at the level of the heart (Fig. 5-6).
reported for humans.40 Basophils appear to survive no more
 Dendritic cells are exposed to antigens in tissues and
migrate to draining lymph nodes. When naive T and B lym-
 remain in tissues for weeks to months unless they migrate into
Aq paussard susaue aiuaos u oi pasodxa are siord
airways or the gastrointestinal tract.478
dendritic cells in lymph nodes,they proliferate and form effec-
tor lymphocytes and long-lived memory lymphocytes. Den-
Monocytes
dritic cells present not only antigens but also environmental
 The half-life for monocytes in blood is reported to vary from
signals (including vitamin A and D; metabolites) that program
migration pathways.428 Memory lymphocytes develop an array
 also have a marginating pool within pulmonary capilaries.2
 of adhesion molecules and chemokine receptors that target
 Monocytes develop into macrophages and dendritic cells in
their subsequent migration to specific tissues including skin,
the tissues, where they survive for variable time periods.506
Macrophages may survive up to 3 months in tissues.16s Den-
ydusi oi paes are pue sseqduii suarae kq dn payid
dritic cells in lymphoid organs are reported to survive 10 to
nodes, where they exit by efferent lymphatics, traverse large
14 days.24 In contrast, dendritic cells in skin (Langerhans
lymphatic vessels, and reenter the blood (see Fig. 5-6). Most
cells) are reported to survive more than a year.322
plasma cells and proliferating lymphocytes, such as those
present in germinal centers, do not express the adhesion mol-
Lymphocytes
ecules necessary for migration.458
Most lymphocytes reside within lymphoid organs (lymph
 Lymphocytes generally survive much longer than granulo-
nodes, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow). Only about 2% to
cytes. Naive T lymphocytes are reported to have a half-life of
5% of lymphocytes circulate in blood So4s Like neutrophils
about 40 days in mice. CD8+ memory T lymphocytes and
 and monocytes, lymphocytes have a MNP within pulmonary
some CD4+ memory T lymphocytes are long-lived in mice
capilaries 114s Depending on the species and individual vari-
(many months), but other CD4t memory T lymphocytes
ability, about 50% to 75% of blood lymphocytes are T lym-
survive only about 2 months. Memory T lymphocytes are
phocytes and about 10% to 40% are B lymphocytes. NK cells
reported to survive for many years in humans 3 Long-term
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
125
survival may require cell proliferation; therefore it may be a
include certain chemokines as well as bacterial products, leu-
matter of semantics whether long-term survival refers to an
 kotrienes, and C5a. Marked infiltrates of NK cells are also
 individual lymphocyte or a population of lymphocytes.
 The t/2 disappearance rate for B lymphocytes from the
recirculating pool is reported to be 2 to 3 weeks in humans.
LEUKOCYTE FUNCTIONS
 Long-term-memory B lymphocytes appear to be maintained
 as proliferating clones of cells rather than as individual cells
Neutrophil Functions
that survive for a long time23 Plasma cels survive for variable
 Neutrophils are essential in the defense against invading
periods of time. Those that develop in sites of infammation
microorganisms, primarily bacteria To be effective, they must
disappear when the infammation is resolved. However, some 
recognize infammatory signals, leave the blood, migrate
plasma cells may survive for years in humans, especially within
 through tissue to a site where bacteria are present, and then
stromal niches in bone marrow.39
 neutralize the bacteria. Neutrophils display glycoprotein
An NK cells half-life in the circulation is about 7 to 10
adhesion molecules on their surfaces that are needed for
days in mice and 12 days in humans under normal conditions.
 various adhesion-dependent functions, including adhesion to
NK cells leave the circulation by entering tissues during
 endothelium and subendothelial structures, spreading, hapto-
 steady-state conditions or through cell death. NK cellsurvival
taxis, and phagocytosis.106 Unless they are activated, neutro-
is promoted by the cytokine, interleukin-15 (IL-15).s13 NK
phils and endothelial cells exhibit little tendency to adhere
cells are located in many organs including spleen, lung,bone
to each other. Following the stimulation of endothelial cells
marrow, lymph nodes, liver, intestine, skin, and thymus (low
by mediators—such as thrombin, histamine, and oxygen
numbers). Some NK cells recirculate through blood and
radicals--P-selectin is rapidly mobilized from storage gran-
ules and expressed on the surfaces of endothelial cells. Infam-
NK cell reserves that can rapidly enter the blood and subse-
matory mediators, including interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor
quently migrate into tissues in response to infammation. NK
necrosis factor (TNF), promote the expression of E-selectin
cell migration from blood to infammatory sites occurs by
adhesion molecules on the surface of activated endothelial
 mechanisms similar to those described for granulocytes. These 
 cells within 1 to 2 hours.s8 These oligosaccharide-binding
include initial adhesion to endothelial cells via selectins,
selectin molecules, acting in concert with the L-selectin adhe-
followed by tighter adhesion to endothelial cells via integrins
sion molecule expressed on the surface neutrophils, bind to
and chemoattractant-directed migration. Chemoattractants
their counterligands, most notably P-selectin glycoprotein
ligand-1 (PSGL-1), which results in the initial adhesion of
 unstimulated neutrophils to activated endothelial cells (Fig.
 5-7).511 As a result of selectin binding between neutrophils
and activated endothelial cells, the velocity of neutrophils in
Heart
the circulation is markedly decreased and they are seen to roll
along the endothelium.513
Thoracic
、duct
Random
contact,
Rolling
Firm
 Adhesion
Diapedesis
Haptotaxis
 Selectins
Integrins
Lymph
node
Flow
Normal
tissues
Endothelial cell
Leukocyte
activation
activation
Spleen
Chemoattractants
FIGURE 5-6
Circulation routes for lymphocytes. Solid lines represent blood vessels
FIGURE 5-7
and dashed lines represent lymphaticvessels. Naive lymphocytes circulate
Endothelial cell activation, neutrophil rolling along vessel walls, tight
 primarily through lymph nodes and memory lyrmphocytes circulate
adhesion between neutrophils and endothelial cells, diapedesis, and
through tissues.
haptotaxis.
126
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Activated endothelial cells produce factors including
including collagen, laminin, fbronectin, and vitronectin.280
 interleukin-8 (IL-8) and platelet activating factor (PAF, a
 Movement depends on actomyosin-mediated contractions at
biologically active phospholipid) that result in neutrophil acti-
 the leading edge for pseudopod advancement and in the trail-
vation. Other mediators that can activate neutrophils include
 ing end to break adhesive contacts.41
opsonized particles, immune complexes, N-formylated bacte-
For phagocytosis to occur, neutrophils must be able to first
rial  peptides, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
bind invading bacteria to their surfaces (Fig. 5-8). This adher-
factor (GM-CSF), granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
ence is greatly potentiated if bacteria have been opsonized
(G-CSF), and chemoattractants produced during infamma-
(have antibodies and complement components bound to their
tion.5 Neutrophil activation results in increased expression
surfaces) because neutrophils have immunoglobulin Fc and
and enhanced binding affnity of β2 integrin adhesion mole-
C3b receptors on their surfaces. Following binding, bacteria
cules and shedding of L-selectin molecules. β2 integrins
 are engulfed by the neutrophils cytoplasmic processes, which
(CD11a,b,c/CD18) are heterodimers that bind with variable
extend around the organisms. The membranes of the neutro-
affinity to intercellular adhesion molecules (ICAMs). β, inte-
 phils' cytoplasmic processes fuse to form phagocytic vacuoles
 grin binding further slows rolling and ultimately results in the
surrounding the engulfed bacteria 5$,16
frm adhesion of neutrophils to endothelial cells. Adherent
Bacterial killing involves a multitude of mechanisms that
(activated) neutrophils then spread and exhibit pseudopod
are set into motion by two cellular events, initiation of the
formation. Neutrophil activation also promotes degranulation,
 respiratory burst and degranulation. The respiratory burst is
superoxide generation, and the production of arachidonate
initiated by the activation of an NADPH oxidase enzyme
 metabolites, to be discussed later.38
(Fig. 5-9). This enzyme is normally “inactive" in resting or 
In addition to increased β integrin affnity, activated neu-
unstimulated phagocytes. Enzyme activation depends on the
trophils have increased numbers of surface receptors and/or
assembly of multiple components, some of which are already
enhanced receptor affinity for chemoattractants.432 These
membrane-bound and others that must be translocated from
receptors are also found in granules, suggesting that they are
 the cytoplasm to the membrane. Activated NADPH oxidase
mobilized to the cell surface during neutrophil activation.
is located in the plasma membrane and becomes incorporated
When they are exposed to chemoattractants, neutrophils pen-
into the phagocytic vacuole. It catalyzes the one-step reduc-
 etrate the wall of postcapillary venules, primarily by moving
tion of O2 to form superoxide (O2).16 The NADPH needed
to generate superoxide is formed in the pentose phosphate
for neutrophils to pass between endothelial cells, but
15
pathway. The superoxide thus formed undergoes dismutation
minutes or more may be required for them to pass through
 to form hydrogen peroxide, as shown below:
the vascular basement membrane.277 Once outside the vessel,
the active directional migration of neutrophils in tissues occurs
2O2 +NADPH → 2O +NADP+ +H+ (oxidation)
largely by haptotaxis, which means migration up a gradient
2O-+ 2H+ →O+HO(dismutation)
of immobilized chemoattractants rather than soluble che-
moattractants (chemotaxis). A wide variety of substances
Hydrogen peroxide and superoxide can diffuse from the
can function as a chemoattractant, including IL-8 and other
 phagocytic vacuole into the cytoplasm of the cell. Activated
chemokines, C5a (complement fragment), leukotriene B4 (a
 product of arachidonic acid metabolism via the lipoxygenase
pathway), PAF (1-0-alkyl-2-acetyl sn-glyceryl phosphoryl-
Residual body
Fusion
choline) and bacterial products (e.g., N-formyl-methionyl
and exocytosis
Primary lysosome
During their movement toward increasing concentrations
Phagosome
of chemoattractants, neutrophils become elongated, with a
frontal pseudopod extending in the direction of movement
 and a distal uropod that consists of fine trailing appendages.
Membrane sheets (lamellipodia) on the leading edge of the
Membrane
invagination
pseudopod are in continual motion, orienting in the direction
and
of chemoattractants.441 Neutrophils crawl (10-12 μm/min)
phagocytosis
toward the source of the chemoattractant by the binding of
integrin surface molecules to their respective ligands within
 the extracellular matrix at the frontal pseudopod and detach-
ing from these ligands at the distal uropod. Although present
in only small amounts on the surfaces of circulating blood
Bacterium bound
to cell surface
neutrophils, activated neutrophils express increased surface β
integrins, which appear to be the most important class of
FIGURE 5-8
integrins for migration. Members of the β integrin family
 Basic events involved in the phagocytosis, killing, and the discharge of
have high affinity for proteins in the extracellular matrix,
killed bacteria and degraded bacterial products.
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
127
Phagosome
bacteria and other microorganisms by altering their mem-
brane permeability. They are inserted into the lipid bilayer,
disrupting interaction between lipid molecules. In addition,
lactoferrin occurs within secondary granules and chelates iron
NADPH
oxidase
 Pentose
required for microbial growth.432
phosphate
The growth factors G-CSF and GM-CSF are important,
 pathway
not only in the production of neutrophils but also in promot-
NADPH
NADPH
 ing neutrophil survival and function. G-CSF and GM-CSF
oxidase
are produced by macrophages, neutrophils, and other cell
NADPHNADP
that enhance their functions and inhibit apoptosis of neutro-
NADP
 Pentose 
phosphate
adhesive and responsive to other stimuli, including chemoat-
 pathway
tractants, and their respiratory burst is enhanced after they
Following the killing and digestion of bacteria, the phago-
 cytic vacuole fuses with the plasma membrane and discharges
 the killed bacteria, products of degraded bacteria, and contents
FIGURE 5-9
of granules to the outside of the cell in a process called exo-
cytosis (see Fig. 5-8). Discharge of granules can also occur
NADPH oxidase enzyme.
following activation of neutrophils in the absence of phago-
cytosis. Considerable tissue injury occurs in areas where neu-
neutrophils utilize the superoxide dismutase and glutathione
 trophils are activated because of the oxidants they produce and
peroxidase reactions to protect themselves from these oxi-
the granule contents they release.
 dants. The latter reaction requires that additional NADPH be
Neutrophils can trap and kill bacteria and fungi without
 generated to maintain glutathione in the reduced form. Acti-
phagocytosis by  releasing  neutrophil extracellular traps
vation of the respiratory burst requires neither phagocytosis
(NETs). These NETs consist of fbers (composed of DNA,
nor degranulation to occur In addition to opsonized particles,
histones, and proteinsfrom graules) that can kil microbs 1
chemoattractants, such as C5a, can activate the respiratory
Initial reports indicated that these NETs were generated by
burst.106
 neutrophils undergoing cel death15"; however, more recent
Superoxide, other free radicals (e.g., hydroxyl radical), and
reports indicate that NET formation can occur without
HzOz may be involved directly in the killing of bacteria, but
 killing is potentiated by degranulation, which results in the
not the result of leakage during cellular disintegration. The
fusion and release of the contents of lysosomal granules into
NETs formed by living neutrophils contain mitochondrial
the phagocytic vacuole (see Fig. 5-8). Myeloperoxidase is an
 DNA but no nuclear DNA.s In addition to mammalian
 iron-containing enzyme located in the primary granules of
neutrophils,192,477
 neutrophils from fish and heterophils
neutrophils. The myeloperoxidase reaction greatly enhances
from birds produce NETs when they are appropriately
the bactericidal potency of HO2. This reaction catalyzes the
stimulated.8s,365
oxidation of chloride to hypochlorous acid, resulting in
 Several pathogens have co-opted phagocytic and killing
halogenation of bacterial cel walls (see below) and loss of
processes to survive within phagocytes. These include Listeria,
integrity 106
Yersinia, and Mycobacterium species106
Cl-+HO+H+ →HOC1+HO
Eosinophil Functions
Most tissue eosinophils reside in the gastrointestinalmucosa33s
R-NH +HOC1 →R-NHC1+HO
Eosinophils have less phagocytic ability than neutrophils and
Other enzymes are also present in primary and secondary
 However, eosinophils are an important component of the type 
 neutral hydrolases, and lysozyme, which hydrolyzes glycosidic
 2 cytokine-induced infammatory response that is critical in
linkages in the cell walls of certain bacteria. These enzymes
the host defense against helminth infections and is respon-
are probably more important in digestion than in killing.
sible for the pathogenesis of type 1 hypersensitivity allergic
Nonenzymatic agents are also involved in neutrophil
reactions. CD4+, type 2 helper T (TH2) lymphocytes secrete
defense. A number of cationic proteins and peptides in neu-
 a group of cytokines that result in the recruitment and/or
 trophil granules have antimicrobial properties.432 Of these
 activation of efector cells including B lymphocytes producing
molecules, defensins appear to be the most common. With
 IgE, mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils.346
the lowest molecular weight, defensins are small (4 kD) anti-
Rather than simply responding tfo an otherwise innocuous
microbial peptides within primary granules that act against
environmental antigen by producing IgG or IgA antibodies,
128
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
some animals respond to environmental antigens with an
peroxidase released from granules interacts with hydrogen
exaggerated T2 response that produces excessive amounts of
 peroxide generated from the respiratory burst and halide ions.
 IgE. IL-4 and IL-13 from Th2 lymphocytes and the presence 
This complex-along with other oxygen metabolites, major
of activated mast cells, basophils, and eosinophils stimulate B
basic protein, eosinophil cationic protein, and eosinophil
neurotoxin released from secondary granules—is primarily
IgE binds to receptors (FceRI) on mast cels in the tissues and
 involved in the killing of helminths.4s8.473
primes the mast cells to bind the environmental antigen (aller-
 The eosinophil has been perceived as a terminal effector
 gen) that stimulated the IgE response. When the primed mast
cell in the T2 infammatory response. However, recent work
cell encounters the allergen and it cross-links two of the
indicates that eosinophils have the ability to modulate
bound IgE molecules, the mast cell will degranulate and
 T lymphocyte responses. Eosinophils can present antigens to
release a mixture of infammatory mediators and potent che-
T lymphocytes and produce cytokines (primarily IL-4 and
 IL-13) that induce TH2-cell development and recruit addi-
These chemoattractants include histamine and small C-C
tional TH2 cells to sites of inflammation.438
chemokine proteins, including eotaxins (CCL11, CCL24, and 
-rodun Aenred sq oi readde ym 'sT pue (9T
Basophil Functions
 tant in the selective recruitment of eosinophils. Other factors
Basophils generally occur in low numbers in the circulation.
such as PAF and leukotriene B4 also function as chemoat-
They contain most of the histamine measured in blood. His-
tractants, but these factors are not specifc for eosinophils. TH2
tamine in granules is bound to proteoglycans (such as chon-
lymphocytes and activated mast cells produce factors (IL-5,
 droitin sulfate and heparin), which are responsible for the
IL-3, and GM-CSF) that not only stimulate the production
metachromatic staining (purple color with blue dyes) of the
and release of eosinophils but also activate eosinophils and
 granules. Basophils have biochemical characteristics similar to
promote their survivail.4ss
those of mast cell and share a common progenitor cell with
Helminths stimulate both humoral and cellular immunity,
 mast cells in bone marrow, but they are clearly different cell
sun [euo Aq s on suisisn ae Aq inq
types.14 Basophils have segmented nuclei and mast cells have
 mechanisms. B lymphocytes produce IgG antibodies that may
 round nuclei. Mast cells usually have more cytoplasmic gran-
bind to the parasites, but their extracellular cuticles cannot be
ules than basophils. In cats, both primary and secondary gran-
 penetrated by the complement membrane attack complex
ules in basophils are morphologically different from mast cell
 or T lymphocyte perforins. As previously discussed for aller-
granules.
 gens, specifc IgE antibodies against parasite antigens are
Basophils have functions similar to those of mast cells,
also produced, and these IgE molecules bind to mast cells.
 including being important in the protective immunity against
 The binding of parasite antigens to these IgE antibodies
helminths.361 In contrast to mast cels, which develop and
results in mast cell activation and degranulation and release
reside in tissues, basophils are recruited from blood into sites
of infammatory mediators and potent chemoattractants for
of infammation after exposure to allergens, helminths, and
eosinophils. 458
ectoparasites.476 Among chemoattractants, chemokines that
Like molecules associated with neutrophil adhesive pro-
bind to C-C chemokine receptor type 3 (CCR3) are the most
cesses, selectins and β2 integrins are involved in eosinophil
potent basophil chemoattractants. These chemokines include
adhesion to activated endothelial cells. In addition, endothelial
the eotaxins (CCL11, CCL24, and CCL26) and CCL5,
cells activated by IL-4 and IL-13 express vascular cell adhe-
CCL7, and CCL13.47 IL-33 has recently been identifed as
sion molecule-1 (VCAM-1), which binds to very late
an interleukin that targets basophils. It enhances histamine
 antigen-4 (VLA-4) on the surfaces of eosinophils. This inte-
release by IgE-dependent stimuli as well as the secretion of
 grin is not expressed on neutrophils and presumably helps to
IL-4, IL-8, and IL-13 by blood basophils. IL-33 may also
 provide specificity for eosinophil localization.478
 help regulate basophil binding to endothelium and migration
Eosinophils migrate into the tissues in response to che-
into the tissues.470
 moattractants generated in response to helminths. Initially,
 Following the binding of an antigen to a specific, surface-
migration is stimulated primarily by mast cell- and/or parasite-
bound IgE antibody, basophils are activated and release his-
derived attractants, including C
chitin (N-acetyl-beta-D-
tamine and other mediators that contribute to the infammation
glucosamine), a widespread polymer that provides structural
 present in immediate hypersensitivity reactions. In addition to
rigidity to helminths, insects, crustaceans, and fungi.33 A
IgE-mediated antigenic activation, other substances including
 second wave of migration is supported by IL-5 and other
C5a, various bacterial peptides, and chemokines can also acti-
cytokines produced by TH2 lymphocytes.43
vate basophils.470 Recent studies reveal that basophils perform
 ea saniseed paziuosdo a on punq souisog
essential nonredundant fuinctions in T2 cytokine-dependent
surface receptors to IgG and complement. The parasites are
 immunity. In particular, basophils migrate to lymph nodes and
much too large for eosinophils to ingest, but when activated,
function as antigen-presenting cells, which appears to be criti-
eosinophils exhibit dramatic NADPH oxidase activity, which
cal for the induction of TH2-cel differentiation.411431 In
generates extracellular oxidants. They also exocytose their
concert with IL-3, stem cell factor (SCF) prolongs basophil
granules in the area of the invading parasite. Eosinophil
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
129
response, they express an array of microbial pattern-recognition
Monocyte/Macrophage/Dendritic-Cell Functions
receptors, including Toll-like receptors, which allow them to
Monocyte Functions
recognize a variety of bacterial molecules such as LPS from
Monocytes are present in mammals, birds, amphibians, and
Gram-negative bacilli. Macrophages also have Fc receptors for
fish.27 Several subsets of monocytes are reported to occur in
 antibodies and complement receptors, which promote their
mice and humans.27 One subset of monocytes appears to crawl
 phagocytosis of opsonized microorganisms.160
along the luminal endothelium of blood vessels during the
The antimicrobial properties of macrophages are less well
steady state, patrolling the endothelium independent of the
understood than those of neutrophils. NADPH oxidase and
 direction of blood fow.27 Monocytes and their progeny have
myeloperoxidase activities are present, although the activity of
 at least three major functions in mammals: phagocytosis,
 myeloperoxidase is considerably less than it is in neutrophils.
 antigen presentation to T lymphocytes, and immunomodula-
 Lysozyme is present, but few organisms are sensitive to it in
tion associated with the production of an array of cytokines
their native states. Nitric oxide, a free radical generated from
involved in the regulation of infammation and hematopoiesis.
 L-arginine, generally appears to be important in microbial
 Monocytes may circulate in blood and return to the bone
killing by macrophages, especially affer nitric oxide interacs
with superoxide to generate toxic derivatives, including
 into tissues, where they can diffrentiate into macrophages
peroxynitrite 108,160,341
and dendritic cells. They are rapidly mobilized from the bone 
 Macrophage scavenger receptors recognize not only micro-
 organisms but also lipids and dying or dead cels2 Macro-
kines, including CCL2 and CCL7, promote this egress from
phages  demonstrate
necrotaxis
 and necrophagocytosis
 bone marrow.27 Monocytes migrate in tissues in response to
(phagocytosis of devitalized tissue). Opsonization of necrotic
a similar array of chemoattractants to which neutrophils
tissue is not required for necrophagocytosis to occur. Conse-
 respond, including various chemokines, C5a, leukotriene B4,
 quently macrophages serve an important function in cleaning
 PAF, and bacterial products 106,160
up necrotic tissue and other debris within the body.160
 Macrophages have important functions in the modulation
Macrophage Functions
roni jo huy sussoond usaue hupnou Kunuu jo
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) stimulates
cells after sensitization by T lymphocytes; and synthesis of
 not only monocyte production but also the transformation of
 CSFs,interleukins, complement components, IFN, and TNF-
monocytes into macrophages.122 M1 macrophages are acti-
C. Macrophages also remove aged or damaged erythrocytes.
vated by lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and interferon- (IFN-).
Most of the iron released from these phagocytized erythro-
 They have potent antimicrobial properties, promote infam-
 cytes is rapidly returned back into the circulation, but some
mation, and secrete IL-12, which stimulates T-helper 1 (TH1)
 of it is stored in macrophages in the form of ferritin and
responses. M2 macrophages appear to be more important in 
hemosiderin. Macrophages are also necessary for normal
wound repair, tissue remodeling, and immunomodulation by
wound healing.16 Macrophages in the liver and spleen are
 most important in clearing blood-borne pathogens of dogs,
The development of monocytes into macrophages is associ-
rodents, rabbits, monkeys, and humans, but intravenous pul-
ated with a marked increase in size, an increase in granules
(lysosomes), an increase in the size and number of mitochon-
 dria, and an increase in phagocytic capacity. Macrophage
function is augmented by various cytokines, the most potent
Dendritic-Cell Functions
of which is reported to be IFN-y. M-CSF and GM-CSF also 
 Classic dendritic cells are antigen-presenting cells that are
enhance macrophage function. The mononuclear phagocyte 
 present in nearly all tissues. They are essential in the initiation
system consists of various macrophage subsets, including
and control of acquired immunity as well as in maintaining
Kupffer cells in the liver, littoral cells in spleen, nurse cells in
immunologic tolerance. They continually present antigenic
marrow, peritoneal and pleural macrophages, alveolar macro-
peptides, processed from self and foreign proteins within the
phages, and multinucleated giant cells that may form during
body, to a spectrum of T lymphocytes. This communication 
chronic infammatory conditions from a fusion of mononu-
with T lymphocytes requires that antigenic peptides be pre-
clear phagocytes.160
sented in the context of major histocompatibility complex
Macrophages move more slowly and are generally less
class I (MHC-I) and major histocompatibility complex class
potent in killing bacteria, but they are notably more active
II (MHC-II) molecules on the surfaces of dendritic cells.
against viral, fungal, protozoal, and helminth infections than
Dendritic cells develop from immature dendritic cells that
are neutrophils. Macrophages can synthesize new membrane
leave the bone marrow, enter blood, and migrate into the
material and replace expended lysosomes. Therefore they have 
tissues. Immafure dendritic cells are estimated to account
 more staying power in combating infections than do neutro-
for about 5% of the monocyte-like cells in the blood
 phils, which have limited synthetic abilities.106.160
 of humans.27.5o Immature dendritic cells are capable of
Macrophages play important roles in linking the innate
recognizing invading pathogens because they have pattern-
and adaptive immune responses. As part of the innate immune
 recognition receptors (PRRs), including Toll-like receptors
130
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)
CD4+ T Lymphocyte Functions
receptors, on their surfaces, which bind to pathogen-associated
 Naive CD4+T lymphocytes develop into subsets of T-helper
 molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as lipopolysaccharides and
(TH1, TH2, and T17) lymphocytes through maturational
microbial nucleic acids. Once immature dendritic cells bind
processes induced by binding of processed antigens (bound to
and phagocytize an exogenous antigen, they rapidly mature
MHC-II on the surface of antigen-presenting cells) to com-
 and develop enhanced antigen-processing abilities. Engulfed
plementary TCRs on the surface of the lymphocytes. Differ
antigens are partially digested when phagosomes containing
ent sets of cytokines promote lineage differentiation.514 The
antigens fuse with lysosomes. Resultant endosomes contain-
binding of an antigen to its complementary TCR sends a
ing peptide fragments fuse with other endosomes containing
signal through CD3 proteins that triggers a clonal prolifera-
 newly formed MHC-II molecules. The MHC-II molecules
tion of cells and the production of short-lived effector cells
combine with peptide antigens to form MHC-peptide com-
and long-lived memory cells. When these antigen-specifc
plexes, which are presented on the cell surface for binding fo
memory cells recognize the same antigen at a later date, they
CD4+ T lymphocytes with complementary T cell receptors
undergo a secondary heightened proliferative response. Den-
(TCRs).
dritic cells are particularly important as antigen-presenting
A subset of dendritic cells can process endogenous antigen
cells and appear to be required to activate naive T lympho-
 and express both MHC-I and MHC-II on their surfaces. The
cytes. Macrophages and B lymphocytes can also function as
antigen bound to MHC-I may be acquired if the dendritic
 antigen-presenting cells with MHC-II on their surfaces.48
cells are infected with a pathogen, or they may acquire the
T lymphocytes exert their control in defending against
 antigen from dying cells. Dendritic cells with foreign antigen
pathogens and neoplasia by recruiting and activating other
bound to MHC-I and MHC-II molecules on their surfaces
immune cells, including B lymphocytes, CD8+T lymphocytes,
migrate to lymph nodes and present antigen to naive CD8+
macrophages, mast cells, neutrophils, eosinophils, and baso-
phils 514 TH1 lymphocytes produce IFN-, TNF-β, IL-2, and
Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are produced in the bone
IL-3; support cellular immunity, and are particularly impor-
 marrow and migrate to the tissues. Although they can also
tant in the defense against intracellular pathogens. T2 lym-
 process antigens and control T lymphocyte responses, they are
phocytes produce IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-i0, IL-13,and IL-25;
 specialized cells that respond to viral infections with a massive
they also support humoral immunity and are essential in the
production of IFN-0.17
 defense against helminths and other extracellular pathogens.
Monocytes can develop into infammatory dendritic cells
TH17 lymphocytes secrete IL-17,IL-21, and IL-22; generate
 or TNF-α- and iNOS-producing (TiP) dendritic cell under
strong proinfammatory effects, and are involved in fighting
 infammatory conditions. The main function of monocyte-
 gram-negative bacteria, fungi, and some protozoa.144 Consid-
 derived inflammatory dendritic cells may be to kill organisms
erable heterogeneity and variable plasticity exist between TH
rather than to process antigens and regulate T lymphocyte
lymphocytes.
function.'7
CD4+T lymphocytes can also differentiate into regulatory
T (Treg) lymphocytes. These Treg lymphocytes synthesize
Lymphocyte and NK Cell Functions
IL-10 and appear to suppress potentially deleterious effects of
 Lymphocytes are divided into T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes,
Th cytokine production. CD8+ Treg lymphocytes have also
and NK cells. A thorough discussion of the functions of
been identified but are less wellstudied. Altered T lymphocyte
these cells is beyond the scope of this text, the reader is there-
function may result in the development of autoimmune and
fore referred to immunology textbooks such as the one by
allergic infammation; Treg lymphocytes may help prevent the
Tizard458 for more detailed information.
 development of these disorders.26,172,231
 T lymphocytes are largely responsible for ceular immu-
nity. They are involved in immune regulation, cytotoxicity,
CD8+ T Lymphocyte Functions
 delayed-type hypersensitivity, and graft-versus-host reactions.
CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes are antigen-dependent cells
T lymphocytes are also actively involved in the control of
that can destroy target cells (e.g, virus-infected cells and
hematopoiesis. To produce these effects, different subpopula-
neoplastic cells) by a contact-dependent MHC-I-dependent
tions produce a large number of cytokines with diverse bio-
nonphagocytic process. With the exception of erythrocytes,
logical activities. Most T lymphocytes express TCRs composed
neurons, gametes, and trophoblasts, MHC-I molecules are
of α and β chains. These TCRs recognize peptide antigens
bound to MHC-I or MHC-II molecules. Peptides bound to
thesize proteins, samples are procesed to form small peptides
 MHC-I molecules are synthesized intracellularly by most cell
 that are transported to the surface bound to MHC-I mole-
types in the body, while peptides bound to MHC-II mole-
cules. Abnormal cells, such as neoplastic cells or virus-infected
cules are formed from extracellular antigens that have been
cells, express abnormal antigens as well as normal self antigens
endocytosed and processed by professional antigen-presenting
bound to MHC-I on their surfaces. Self antigens are not
cells, with dendritic cells being most important. Surface pro-
recognized by TCRs on CD8+ lymphocytes; however, the
teins CD8 and CD4 are coreceptors that bind to MHC-I and
recognition and binding of abnormal antigens by TCRs trig-
MHC-II, respectively, 458
 gers lymphocytes to respond.
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
131
Dendritic cells with foreign antigen bound to MHC-I
may occur by diffusion; but dendritic cels, macrophages, or
migrate to lymph nodes and present the antigen to naive
susaue sare Aies o panbar aq oi readde saoudu 8
CD8+ lymphocytes. The activation of naive CD8+ lympho-
(particulates, immune complexes, viruses, and bacteria) to the
cytes also requires IL-12 from activated dendritic cells and
follicles. Resident follicular dendritic cells mediate the reten-
IL-2 and IFN- from T1 lymphocytes that recognize the
tion of antigens and function as potent accessory cells during
same antigen. Stimulated naive and memory CD8+ lympho-
B lymphocyte activation.40
cytes proliferate and develop into short-lived cytotoxic
Although B lymphocytes can interact with antigens in
T lymphocytes and long-lived memory cells. When these
 various forms, it appears that membrane-bound antigens are
antigen-specific memory cells recognize the same antigen at
the predominant forms that initiate B lymphocyte activation.
 a later date, they undergo a secondary heightened proliferative
 In contrast to the need to process protein antigens to small
response.458
 peptides for binding to TCRs on T lymphocytes, intact anti-
Immunologic synapses form when TCR-CD8 complexes
 gens are recognized and bound by B cell receptors (BCRs) on
on the surface of cytotoxic T lymphocytes bind to target cells 
B lymphocytes. It is unclear whether antigens are internalized
expressing complementary peptide antigens bound to MHC-I
into
 nondegradative intracellular compartments and then
molecules on the surfaces of target cells. Following adhesion,
 recycled to the surfaces of macrophages, dendritic cells, and B
cytotoxic proteins (including perforin, granzymes, and granu-
lymphocytes or simply retained as antigen on the surface of
lysin) within secretory lysosomes of cytotoxic T lymphocytes
 these antigen-presenting cells. Macrophages and dendritic
are exocytosed. Released perforin creates transmembrane
 cells may bind antigens to a variety of surface receptors,
channels that facilitate the entry of granzymes and granulysin
 including Fc receptors, complement receptors, paftern-
 into the cytoplasm of target cells, and these molecules induce
recognition receptors, and/or lectin receptors that could
apoptosis. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes also mediate apoptosis of
 present unprocessed antigen to B lymphocytes, and B lym-
 target cells by binding between CD95L (Fas-ligand) expressed
 phocytes are reported to bind antigen to complement recep-
 on their surfaces to CD95 (Fas) on the surface of target cells.
tors, thereby transporting antigen independently of their
This death receptor pathway is important as a mechanism for
BCRs.40
removing excess or self-reactive T lymphocytes.4ss
 B lymphocyte activation is initiated following the binding
of antigens to their cognate BCRs. Not only does antigen
B Lymphocyte Functions
binding initiate their activation, but B lymphocytes can
 B lymphocytes are primarily responsible for humoral immu-
 process the bound antigen and present it along with MHC-II
nity; however, immunoglobulin production also requires the
to specific CD4+ T lymphocytes, which secrete cytokines
participation of T lymphocytes, dendritic cells, and macro-
 that stimulate B lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation.
phages. Soluble antigens can enter lymph nodes and spleen 
IL-21, produced by T lymphocytes (especially TF lympho-
by afferent lymph and blood, respectively. Immature dendritic
 cytes), is a potent cytokine for the activation and proliferation
 cells beneath the skin and mucosal epithelium also carry anti-
of human B lymphocytes, for differentiation of these cells into
 gens to regional lymph nodes.
plasma cells, and for stimulating antibody production by
Naive B lymphocytes are exposed to antigens in lymph
plasma cells. This interaction between B and T lymphocytes
nodes and spleen. These recirculating cells enter lymph nodes
results in the simultaneous stimulation of humoral and cellular
through HEVs in the paracortex, a region that contains resi-
immunity,40.282,410 B cell activating factor (BAFF) also induces
dent dendritic cells, recently migrated dendritic cells that have
 B lymphocyte proliferation and differentiation into plasma
collected antigen from peripheral tissues, and CD4+ T lym-
cells. This glycoprotein member of the TNF family is secreted
phocytes needed for the maximal activation of B lymphocytes 
by activated innate immune cells and appears to be an impor-
to produce antibody and to undergo class switching and affin-
ity maturation. A separate T lineage termed folicular helper 
 Following activation, B lymphocytes are transformed into
T lymphocytes (TFH) has been reported to promote B lym-
immunoglobulin-producing immunoblasts and subsequently
 phocyte activation,2 but some authors have suggested that
plasma cells. IgM is initially produced by these cells, but with
TF cells may be a different state of one or more of the other
continued antigenic stimulation, IgG becomes the predomi-
TH lineages.514 These activated B lymphocytes may develop
 nant antibody type produced. Clonal amplification of these
into extrafollicular plasma cells which mount early antibody
 cells results in the production of greater amounts of antibody
responses to antigen, or they may migrate to follicles and
 against the foreign antigen. In addition to immunoglobulins,
 promote the formation of germinal centers, which generate
 B lymphocytes produce cytokines that may infuence the pro-
plasma cells that can secrete high-affinity antibody
and
memory B lymphocytes, which provide long-lasting protec-
 B lymphocytes provide a link between innate and adaptive 
r  ss sn s 
Most B lymphocytes in lymph nodes are located in folli-
 in addition to antigen-specific BCRs. Antigen binding to
a s r r nre  s  is
 u  sn a r  sdar a
subcapsular sinus must gain access to follicular B lymphocytes.
their activation and differentiation into immunoglobulin-
For small antigens, such as low-molecular-weight toxins, this
 secreting plasma cells independent of T lymphocytes.102
132
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
NK Cell Functions
 NK cells appear as granular lymphocytes in most species. They
do not have antigen receptors on their surfaces, like T and B
lymphocytes. NK cells have receptors for MCH-I molecules
that are present on the surfaces of normal cells, and they
have a NKG2D receptor that recognizes several proteins,
including MHC-I chain-related A and B (MICA and MICB),
which are expressed on stressed cells but not on normal
cells. Target cell destruction by NK cells is triggered if target
cells express MICA or MICB, but destruction is inhibited
P
if target cels express appropriate MHC-I molecules.
 Tumor cells and virus-infected cells are destroyed by NK cells
because these cells have upregulated proteins like MICA
and MICB and decreased amounts of normal MCH-I mol-
 ecules on their surfaces. NK cells also have Fc receptors and
can bind to and kill cells with antibodies on their surfaces
through  a  process  called  antibody-dependent  cellular
cytotoxicity.45$461
 After activation, CD8+ lymphocytes typically proliferate
 and exhibit clonal expansion before acquiring cytotoxic poten-
tial. In contrast, NK cells become cytotoxic rapidly following
 activation by IFN-y and a number of cytokines without going
through a phase of prolferation and expansion.513 Activated
NK cells bind to target cel and induce apoptosis using mech-
anisms like those described previously for cytotoxic T lym-
phocytes.461 Activated NK cell also secrete an array of
cytokines (including TNF and IFN-y) and chemokines that
recruit and activate other hematopoietic cells into sites of
infammation.117
三
NEUTROPHILS
 Normal Neutrophil Morphology
FIGURE 5-10
 Normal neutrophil morphology is similar in common domes-
Normal neutrophil morphology. A, Neutrophil in blood from a dog with
nearly colorless granules. Wright-Giemsa stain.B, Neutrophil in blood
tic mammalian species. The chromatin of the nucleus is
 condensed (dark-staining clumped areas separated by lighter-
fom a dog with pink-staining granules. Wright stain. C, Bilobed neu-
trophil in blood from a cow. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Two neutrophils
adind suiens pue (paneqnqol) pausuass pue (seare buureis
in blood from a horse. Wright-Giemsa stain. E, Neutrophil in blood
to blue (Fig. 5-10, A, B). Nuclear lobes may be joined by fine
from a female dog exhibiting a sex chromatin lobe or Barrbody Wright-
flaments, but generally there is simply
yanarrowing
Giemsa stain.
of the nucleus between lobes without true filament
formation. When an area of the nucleus has a diameter less
5-10, E).226 This round basophilic body is attached to a ter-
 than two-thirds the diameter of any other area of the nucleus,
minal lobe of the nucleus by a thin chromatin strand. It
the neutrophil is classified as mature, even if only two lobes
contains the inactivated X chromosome.239 The background
 are present (Fig. 5-10, C). The nuclear outline is more scal-
cytoplasm of neutrophils generally appears colorless but may
loped (jagged) in horses than in other species (Fig. 5-10, D).
appear pale pink or faintly basophilic. In most mammalian
 Most invertebrates and most reptiles, including turtles and
species, neutrophil granules either do not stain or appear light
 pink with routine blood stains (see Fig. 5-10, B).
 Neutrophils in amphibians are lobulated and exceptionally
 In birds,reptiles, fish, and some mammalian species (e.g.,.
large, like their erythrocytes (see Fig. 4-8). Some species of
rabbits, guinea pigs, and manatees), the granules of these cells
lizards, including the green iguana, have lobed nuclei.74 Avian
stain red and the cells are called heterophils (Fig. 5-11, A).
 They must be differentiated from eosinophils, which also have
mammalian neutrophils. Granulocytes have lobulated nuclei
red-staining granules. The granular shape can often help to
in some species of fish, but many have round or oval nuclei.74
 differentiate these cells. Heterophils usually have rod-shaped
 Some neutrophil nuclei are ring-shaped in mice.49
 or oval granules and eosinophils usually have round granules
A Barr body (sex chromatin lobe or drumstick) is present
(Fig. 5-11, B). In addition, the cytoplasm tends to be more
 in a low percentage of neutrophils from female mammals (Fig.
basophilic in eosinophils than in heterophils.203
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
133
A
FIGURE 5-11
Morphology ofa rabbit heterophil (A) compared with a rabbit eosinophil
(B). Wright-Giemsa stain.
Morphology of Left Shifts
 Mature segmented neutrophils and sometimes low numbers
 of band neutrophils are released from bone marrow into blood
in normal animals. When increased numbers of nonseg-
 mented neutrophilic cells are present in blood, their presence
C
D
is referred to as a left shift.
Band neutrophils are commonly seen in blood, with meta-
myelocytes and myelocytes present less offten and promyelo-
cytes and myeloblasts rarely encountered. Morphologic
changes that occur as cells of the granulocytic series undergo
maturation from myeloblasts to mature granulocytes in the
 bone marrow include a slight diminution in size, a decrease
in nucleus:cytoplasm (N:C) ratio, progressive nuclear con-
 densation, changes in nuclear shape, and the appearance of
cytoplasmic granules. In the absence of toxicity, the back-
F
 ground (i.e., nongranular) cytoplasm color changes from gray-
FIGURE 5-12
blue in myeloblasts to nearly colorless in mature neutrophils.
However, cytoplasmic toxicity is often present in animals with
Neutrophil precursor cells. A, Myeloblast in blood from a cat with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). B, Promyelocyte with purple cytoplasmic
 pronounced left shifts in their blood.
granules in blood from a dog with acute myelomonocytic leukemia
(AML-M4). C, Neutrophilic myelocyte in blood from a dog with
Myeloblasts
chronic myeloid leukemia. D, Neutrophilic metamyelocyte in blood from
The
 morphology  of  myeloblasts  is  described
under
a dog with chronic myeloid leukemia. E, Band neutrophil in blood from
"Blast Cells or Poorly Differentiated Cells," below. Their
a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. F, S-shaped band neu-
 presence indicates the likelihood of a myeloid neoplasm
trophil in blood from a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
(Fig. 5-12, A).
Promyelocytes
Metamyelocytes
 Promyelocytes or progranulocytes have round to oval nuclei
 Nuclei with slight indentations are still classified as myelo-
with lacy to coarse chromatin. Their most identifiable charac-
cytes, but once the nuclear indentation extends more than
teristic is the presence of many magenta-staining primary
25% into the nucleus, the cell is called a metamyelocyte (Fig
 granules within light-blue cytoplasm (Fig. 5-12, B).
5-12, D). Nuclear condensation becomes readily apparent at
this stage of maturation.
Myelocytes
Myelocytes have round nuclei (Fig. 5-12, C), but they are
Band Neutrophils
 generally smaller with more nuclear condensation and lighter-
Various criteria have been used to differentiate bands from
blue cytoplasm than promyelocytes. The primary magenta-
 mature neutrophils in humans. The National Committee for
staining granules characteristic of promyelocytes are no longer
 Clinical Laboratory Standards and the College of American
visible in myelocytes. Secondary granules that characterize
Pathologists differentiate a band from a segmented neutrophil
neutrophils are present but are difficult to visualize because of
by requiring a segmented neutrophil to have a complete sepa-
their neutral-staining characteristics.
 ration of the lobes, with a clearly visible strand that appears
134
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
as a solid thread-like dark line, containing no visible chroma-
 tin between the margins.? This criterion is not appropriate for
most animal species, because neutrophils do not have the
degree of segmentation seen in humans. Generally speaking,
band neutrophils have rod-shaped nuclei with parallel sides
 d   s  a (  )
sides, it is recommended that no area of the nucleus should
have a diameter less than two-thirds the diameter of any other
area of the nucleus; otherwise the cell is classifed as a mature
neutrophil. Band neutrophil nuclei twist to conform to the
space within the cytoplasm, and U-shaped or S-shaped nuclei
(Fig. 5-12, F) are common. Chromatin condensation is promi-
nent, and the cytoplasm's appearance is essentially the same
 as that seen in mature neutrophils. Once nuclear segments 
form, the cell is called a mature neutrophil even if only two
lobes are present (see Fig. 5-10, C).
FIGURE 5-13
Disorders with Left Shifts
Toxic left shift in blood from a dog with a septic peritonitis. Two band
 Left shifts are usually associated with infammatory condi-
neutrophils with toxic cytoplasm are present.
may be noninfectious, as in immune-mediated disorders and
animals with chronic myeloid leukemia and Pelger-Huet
anomaly_270.471
Infiammation
 The presence of a significant left shift in animals with an
 infammatory disorder indicates that the stimulus for release
of neutrophils from bone marrow is greater than can be
accommodated by release from mature neutrophil stores alone.
The magnitude of a left shift in response to infammation can
vary from slightly increased numbers of bands to severe left
shifts with metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and, rarely, even pro-
myelocytes present in blood. The total neutrophil count may
be low, normal, or high depending on the number of these
cells released from the bone marrow versus the number uti-
lized in the inflammatory proces. Toxic cytoplasm is often
present in animals with left shifts in response to infammatory
FIGURE 5-14
disorders (Fig. 5-13). Other abnormalities that may be present 
Toxic left shift in the blood of a cat with diabetes mellitus and fungal
 include donut-shaped nuclei and giant neutrophils (Figs.
 pneumonia.Aband neutrophil anda neutrophiliccel with a donut-shaped
5-14, 5-15).
nucleus are present. Pale inclusions in erythrocytes are Heinz bodies.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
 Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) presents with a high total
leukocyte count (usuall greater than 50,000/μL) with a
and physical evidence of infammation suggests that a leuke-
domestic animals, CML is primarily seen in dogs. Increased
moid reaction is present rather than CML.
numbers of monocytes, eosinophils, and/or basophils may also
be present. Myeloblasts are either absent or present in low
Peiger-Huet Anomaly (Hyposegmentation)
 numbers in blood. CML is suspected when no infammatory
The term byposegmentation refers to a left shift with condensed
disorder can be found to explain the extreme left shift. The
nuclear chromatin and few or no nuclear constrictions (Figs.
left shift present in CML is usually less orderly than that seen
5-17, 5-18, 5-19). Nuclei may be round, oval, kidney-shaped,
in leukemoid reactions. The presence of dysplastic abnormali-
band-shaped, peanut-shaped, or bilobed. Hyposegmentation
ties in other blood cell types also supports a diagnosis of
occurs as an inherited Pelger-Huet anomaly in dogs, cats,
CML. On the other hand, the presence of moderate to marked
cytoplasmic toxicity, increased infammatory plasma proteins,
phils may also be affected. This abnormality in humans is
CHA P T ER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders 
135
FIGURE 5-15
FIGURE 5-17
Giant neutrophil (bottom)in the blood ofa cat with a leukemoid reaction
Band neutrophil (lef and neutrophili myelocyte (rigbt) in the blood of
secondary to a bacterial infection that resulted in the formation of mul-
a dog with Pelger-Huet anormaly. Wright-Giemsa stain.
tiple draining abscesses. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-16
FIGURE 5-18
Left shift in the blood of a dog with chronic myeloid leukemia. Band
Band neutrophil (leff), bilobed neutrophil (center), and eosinophilic
neutrophils, neutrophilie metamyelocytes, and a neutrophilie myelocyte
myelocyte (rigbt) in the blood of a cat with Pelger-Huet anomaly.
are present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
caused by a defect in the lamin B receptor (LBR) gene. LBR
hyposegmented in disorders exhibiting pseudo-Pelger-Huet
is an integral membrane protein in the nuclear envelope.218
cells. 105,414,427
No clinical signs are associated with animals that are het-
 erozygous for this disorder. Homozygous affected animals
Hypersegmentation
exhibit skeletal deformities and die in utero or shortly after
Hypersegmentation (right shift) has generally been defined as
birth.21s The Pelger-Huet anomaly is common in Australian
the presence of five or more distinct nuclear lobes within
shepherd dogs, where it appears to be transmitted as an
neutrophils of domestic animals (Fig. 5-20). However, nuclei
autosomal dominant trait with incomplete or decreased pen-
of horse neutrophils have large clumps of dense chromatin
etrance.270 A pseudo-Pelger-Huet anomaly may occur in
 projecting from their surfaces, making them appear more seg-
myeloid neoplasms, transiently with infections, or rarely with
mented than the neutrophils of other common domestic
the administration of certain drugs. In contrast to hereditary
 animals. Normal horse neutrophils average about five lobes,
Pelger-Huet anomaly, a minority of neutrophils are generally
where a lobe is defined as a rounded part of the nucleus that
136
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
is focal and distinct. Consequently it has been suggested that
seven or more lobes are required before a horse neutrophil is
 considered to be hypersegmented.46 Hypersegmentation in 
rats has been defined as six or more lobes.44
may refect prolonged transit time in blood, as can occur with
resolving chronic infammation, glucocorticoid administra-
mentation in these horses does not appear to be associated
with clinical disease. Neutrophilic hypersegmentation has 
been described in dogs with an inherited defect in cobalamin
absorption and in a cat with folate deficiency (see Fig. 5-20,
FIGURE 5-19
described in association with oxazolidinone and amphetamine
Neutrophilic myelocytes in the blood of a horse with Pelger-Huet
 toxicity291.49 and with long-term phenytoin administration in
anomaly.
dogs.
From Grondin TM,Dewitt SF, Keeton KS. Pelger-Huet anomaly in an
Toxic Cytoplasm
Arabian borse. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:306-310.
When the cytoplasm ofa neutrophilic cell has increased baso-
 philia, foamy vacuolation, and/or contains Dohle bodies, it is 
said to be toxic. Criteria for classifying the degree of toxicity
are given in Table 2-1. These morphologic abnormalities
develop in neutrophilic cells within the bone marrow prior to
 their release into the circulation.182,183 Toxic cytoplasm is
conditions.  Nuclear  abnormalities—including  karyolysis,
A
C
FIGURE 5-20
FIGURE 5-21
Hypersegmented neutrophils. A, Hypersegmented neutrophil in blood
Persistent (presumably inherited) hypersegmentation in blood from a
from a dog with systemic mastocytosis treated with vineristine and pred-
e  s r m sii  r
misone. B, Hypersegmented neutrophil in blood from a dog with
 present; it was attributed to tranisient liver disease.
AML-M4. C, Hypersegmented neutrophil in blood from a cat with
folate deficiency. Wright-Giemsa stain.
From Ramaiah SK,Harvey JW,Giguere S,et al. Intravascaular bemolysis
associatedwithliverdiseaseinaborsewitmarkednetrophilypersegme
C, Courtesy of S. Myers.
tation. J Vet Intern Med. 2003;17:360-363.
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
137
karyorrhexis,
hyposegmentation, ring 
formation
and
 granules tended to be maintained in each foal through 30 days
binucleation—may also be present in neutrophils with toxic
 of age (J. W. Harvey, unpublished data). It is assumed that
cytoplasm. Giant neutrophils with nuclear abnormalities are
 rean sn Ard a ss 'sn sixn 
most often seen in cats.226 Animals with toxic neutrophils
retained the staining intensity normally observed in promy-
 generally exhibit severe signs of illness, require longer hospi-
elocytes in the bone marrow.
talizations, and have higher mortality (at least among dogs)
than animals without toxic neutrophils.2415 Although toxic
Lipemia in a Horse
neutrophils are most often associated with bacterial infections
Purple granules were present in neutrophils from a Paso Fino
mare with hyperlipidemia and hepatic lipidosis (Fig. 5-23, B).
they may also be observed in viral infections (e.g, parvovirus
 As in the normal foals described above, no other cytoplasmic
 in dogs and cats, upper respiratory viruses in cats),41 immune-
evidence of toxicity was present. Consequently caution must
mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs,317 and some severe meta-
be exercised in using the term toxic granulation with regard to
bolic disorders (e.g., acute renal filure, ketoacidotic diabetes,
horses.
hepatic lipidosis in cats) 2.415
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
Foamy Basophilia
The lysosomal system is the principal site of intracellular deg-
Foamy basophilia often occurs with severe bacterial infections
radation. Lysosomes are membrane-bound organelles that
but can occur with other causes of toxemia (Fig. 5-22, A-H).
 contain more than 40 acid hydrolases capable of degrading
When viewed by electron microscopy, foamy vacuolation
most biologically important macromolecules. An inherited
appears as irregular, electron-lucent areas that are not mem-
deficiency in one of these enzymes can result in the accumula-
brane bound. Cytoplasmic basophilia results from the persis-
tion of undegraded substances (e.g, glycosaminoglycans,
tence of large amounts of rough endoplasmic reticulum and
complex oligosaccharides, cerebrosides, etc.) within lysosomes;
polyribosomes.
182
hence the name lysosomal storage disease.24 Blue- to magenta-
staining granulation occurs in the cytoplasm of neutrophils
Dohle Bodies
from animals with certain lysosomal storage disorders, incld-
 Dohle bodies are bluish angular cytoplasmic inclusions of
neutrophils and their precursors (Fig. 5-22, D-I). They are 
composed of retained aggregates of rough endoplasmic retic-
GM2-gangliosidosis (Fig. 5-23, G) 30.256
ula.47 By themselves, these inclusions represent evidence of
mild toxicity and are sometimes seen in neutrophils of cats
Birman Cats
that do not exhibit signs of illness (Fig. 5-22, I). Dohle bodies
Small reddish granules have been reported as an inherited
must be differentiated from iron-positive granules, distemper
 anomaly in Birman cats without evidence of illness217 These
inclusions in dogs, and granules present in neutrophils from
 granules were of normal size when examined by transmission
cats with inherited Chediak-Higashi syndrome.
electron microscopy. They did not stain with alcian blue or
toluidine blue, indicating that the animals did not have an
Toxic Granulation
inherited mucopolysaccharidosis.
Toxic granulation refers to the presence of magenta-staining
cytoplasmic granules (Fig. 5-22, J-L).47 These granules are
Reddish Granulation in Cats
primary granules that have retained the staining intensity
We have observed persistent reddish granulation in neutro-
 normally observed in promyelocytes in the bone marrow. The
phils of five cats (Fig. 5-23, H) that appeared similar to that
presence of toxic granulation and cytoplasmic basophilia sug-
reported in Birman cats. Affected animals have included
 gests severe toxemia. Toxic granulation is most often seen in
several Siamese and Himalayan cats. The granules were nega-
horses and rarely in dogs and cats.226 It should not be confused
tive when they were stained with toluidine blue. No clinical
with the pink staining of secondary granules, which is not a
signs could be associated with the presence of the granules,
sign of toxicity. Toxic granulation must be differentiated from
which were found even when animals were healthy.
the granules present in some Birman cats, granules in animals
with certain lysosomal storage disorders, and miscellaneous
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
 granules and inclusions to be discussed subsequently.
The Chediak-Higashi syndrome is an inherited disorder char-
acterized by partial oculocutaneous albinism, increased sus-
Granules and Inclusions
ceptibility to infections, hemorrhagic tendencies, and the
Normal Foals
 presence of enlarged membrane-bound granules in many cell
 Purple granules are often seen in neutrophils from foals
types including blood leukocytes. It has been described in
without other evidence of cytoplasmic toxicity (Fig. 5-23, A).
Persian cats, several species of cattle, Aleutian mink, foxes,
The percentage of neutrophils with purple granules varied
beige rats, and a killer whale 32s Neutrophils from afected
from 0% to 70% (mean 13%) in 38 healthy newborn thor-
ale303ss and Persian cats272 contain large pink-to-purple
oughbred foals, and the percentage of neutrophils with
 granules (Fig. 5-23, IJ). The giant granules may arise from
138
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
F IGU RE 5-22 Toxic cytoplasm in neutrophils
B
C
D
A, Neutrophil with foamy basophilia (toxicity) of the cytoplasm in blood from a cat with septic peritonitis.
B, Neutrophil with donut-shaped nucleus and foamy basophilia (toxicity) of the cytoplasm in blood from a
horse with a Babesia eguinfectionC,Toxic metamyelocyte with foamy basophiliaof the cytoplasm in blood
from a cat with septic peritonitis. D, Toxic neutrophil with foamy basophilia and Dohle bodies (angular blue
inelusions) in the cytoplasm in blood from a cat with septic peritonitis.
F
G
E, Toxic neutrophil with foamy basophilia and Dohle bodies in the cytoplasm in blood from a cat with a
marked left shift (leukemoid reaction) secondary to a bacterial infection that resulted in the formation of
blood from a horse. G, Toxic band neutrophil with foamy basophilia and Dohle bodies in the cytoplasm in
blood from a cat with septic peritonitis. H, Toxic neutrophilic metamyelocyte with foamy basophilia and
faintly staining Dohle bodies in the cytoplasm in blood from a cat with a leukemoid reaction secondary to a
bacterial infection that resulted in the formation of multiple draining abscesses.
K
I, Dohle bodies in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a cat without other cytoplasmic evidence of
toxicity J, Band neutrophil with toxic granulation in blood from a horse with acute salmonellosis. K, Band
neutrophil with basophilic cytoplasm and toxic granulation in blood from a Holstein cow with a bacterial
infection L, Neutrophilic metamyelocyte with toxic granulation in blood from a Holstein cow with a bacterial
infection. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FI G U RE 5 - 2 3 Granules and siderotic inclusions in neutrophils
B
A, Neutrophil with basophilic cytoplasmic granules in the blood of a normal foal. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B, Neutrophil with cytoplasmic granules in the blood of a hyperlipemic 7-year-old Paso Fino mare with
miniature schnauzer dog with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Neutrophil with
cytoplasmic granules in the blood ofa1-year-old domestic shorthair cat with inherited mucpolysaccharidosis
typeVI.Wright stain.
G
E, Neutrophil with cytoplasmic granules in the blood of an 8-month-old domestic shorthair cat with inherited
mucopolysaccharidosis type VII. Wright stain. F, Neutrophil with cytoplasmic granules in the blood of a
3-month-old German shepherd dog with inherited mucopolysaccharidosis type Vll. Wright stain. G, Neu-
trophil with cytoplasmic granules in the blood of a korat cat with inherited GM-gangliosidosis. Wright-
Giemsa stain. H, Neutrophil with reddish cytoplasmic granulation in blood from a Siamese cat without
clinical igns atributable to a lysosomal storage disease. Wright-Giemsa stain.
I, Neutrophil with large cytoplasmic granules in blood from a 15-month-old Hereford female with Chediak-
Higashi syndrome. Wright stain. J, Neutrophil with large cytoplasmic granules in blood from a Persian cat
with Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Wright stain. K, Neutrophil with siderotic cytoplasmic inclusions in blood
inclusions in blood from a horse with equine infectious anemia (same blood sample as shown in K). K, Blue-
staining inclusions indicate the presence of iron. Prussian blue stain.
B,Photograph ofa stained blood filmfrom a 1983 ASVCP slide review case szubmitted by J. R.Duncan and E.A.
Mabaffey.C,Photograph ofa stained bloodfilmfrom a1995 ASVCP slide review case submitted by P R.Avery,D.
E.Brown,M.A. Thrall,and D.A.Wenger. D, Photograph ofa stained blood film from a 1995 ASVCP slide review
case submitted by D.A.Andrewus,D.B.DeNicola,S.Jakoujevic,J.Turek,andU.Giger.E,Photograph ofa stained
blood flmfroma 1996ASVCP slide review case submited by M.A.ThrallL.Vap,S.Gardner,andD.Wenger
F,Photograpbofa stained bloodflmfrom a 1997ASVCPslidereview case szubmitted by D.I.Bounous,D.C.Siluer-
stein,K. S. Latimer, and K. P Carmicbael. I,Photograph ofa stained bloodfilmfrom a 1987 ASVCPslide review case
submitted by M. Menard and K.J.Wardrop.J, Photograph taken from a stained slide provided by J. W. Kramer.
140
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
unregulated  fusion of primary  lysosomes during  cell
development.
Infectious Agents
Distemper Inciusions
May-Hegglin Anomaly
 Distemper viral inclusions are formed in bone marrow precur-
The May-Hegglin anomaly is characterized by a triad of
sor cells and may be present in blood cells during the acute
leukocyte inclusions, thrombocytopenia, and macroplatelets
 (macrothrombocytes). It results from a mutation in the MYH9
can be diffcult to visualize in the cytoplasm of neutrophils in
 gene that encodes for the heavy chain of nonmuscle myosin
Wright- or Giemsa-stained blood films but can easily be seen
IIA. It is an inherited autosomal dominant disorderin humans,
as homogeneous round, oval, or irregularly shaped 1- to 4-μm
where only heterozygous mutations have been identifed. This
red inclusions when they are stained with Diff-Quik (Fig.
5-25, A).200
trophils typically had one to four large blue fusiform inclusions
 in their cytoplasm (Fig. 5-24). The inclusions resembled Dohle
Rickettsial Species
bodies but were larger (up to 2 × 4 μm) and more distinct than
 Dohle bodies. When they were examined by transmission
ewingiand Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Morulae of Ebrlichia
electron microscopy, the inclusions a
 appeared as  non-
and Anaplasma species appear as tightly packed basophilic
membrane-bound areas devoid of granules containing thin
clusters of organisms within phagosomes in the cytoplasm
flaments oriented parallel to the longitudinal axis of the inclu-
(Fig. 5-25, B-F; Figs. 5-26, 5-27). Morulae are regularly found
sions. Neutrophil function appeared to be normal, and there
in neutrophils and infrequently in eosinophils during the
was no evidence of an increased bleeding tendency in this dog.
acute stage of infection. 18$139
 In 2001, based on genetic findings obtained using PCR
Siderotic Inciusions
and sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene, Ebrlichia equi, Ebrlichia
Iron-positive inclusions (hemosiderin) may be seen in neutro-
phagocytophila, and the human granulocytic Ebrlicbia (HGE)
phils and monocytes from animals with hemolytic anemia.169
organism were reorganized into a single species named
Prior to the development of definitive serologic tests, the pres-
 Anaplasma phagocytophilum.124 However, different variants or
ence of these inclusions in equine leukocytes (sideroleuko-
strains of A. pbagocytopbilum vary in their pathogenicity and
cytes) was used to support a diagnosis of equine infectious
host specificity. For example, a variant of A. pbagocytopbilum
 in Europe causes severe disease in cattle, but a California
tiated from Dohle bodies using the Prussian blue staining
variant of A. pbagocytophilum failed to induce such disease.14$
procedure because Dohle bodies do not stain positively
Similarly, the variant of A. pbagocytophilum previously classi-
for iron.
fied as HGE causes disease in dogs,but the variant previously
classifed as Ebrlichia equi does not.130.276
E. ewingii (see Fig. 5-25, B) and the HGE variant of A.
 phagocytopbilum (see Fig. 5-25, C) cause similar, nonspecific
signs of illness in dogs, including fever, lethargy, depression,
and sometimes reluctance to move associated with infamma-
tory arthritis. In addition to blood neutrophils, morulae may
be found in a low percentage of neutrophils within the joint
fuid of E. ewingi-infected and A. pbagocytopbilum-infected
most common hematologic finding, followed by mild to mod-
 erate nonregenerative anemia. Lymphopenia is also reported
to be a common finding in A. pbagocytopbilum-infected
dogs 5,188,189
Infection with the equine variant (formerly E. equi) and
the HGE variant of A. pbagocytopbilum cause high fever,
depression, inappetence, ataxia, petechial hemorrhages, and
edema, resulting from an associated vasculitis,274 of the distal
limbs in horses6,53303 Hematologic fndings include a tran-
FIGURE 5-24
sient leukopenia (neutropenia and lymphopenia), thrombocy-
May-Hegglin anomaly in a dog. A neutrophil with two large blue fusi-
topenia, and mild anemia. Morulae are present in neutrophils
form cytoplasmic inclusions (left) and a macroplatelet (macrothrombo-
(see Fig. 5-25, D,E; Fig. 5-26) for about a week after clinical
cyte) are present. Wright stain.
signs are apparent.1s3 The disease is usually selflimiting and
Photograpb ofa stained blood filmfrom a 2010ASVCP slide review case
rarely fatal.154
submitted byB.Flatland,M.M.Fry,S.J.Baek,J.H.Babn,C.J.LeBlanc,
A variant of A. phagocytophilum (formerly E. phagocytophila)
J.R.Dunlap, D. J. Kosiba, D.J. Millsaps,and S.E.Schleis.
causes tick-borne fever in sheep, goats, and cattle in Europe
CHA P T E R 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
141
FI G U RE 5 - 2 5  Infectious agents in neutrophils
C
D
A, Three reddish distemper inclusions in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a dog with canine
distemper. Diff-Quik stain. B, Ebrlicbia ewingii morula in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a dog.
Wright-Giemsa stain.C, Anaplasma phagocytopbilum (formerly human granulocytic Ehrlichia morulae in the
cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a dog from Minnesota. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Anaplasma phago-
cytopbilum (formerly Ebrlicbia equi) morula in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a horse. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
G
E, Anaplasma phagocytophilm(formerly Ehrlichia equi) morula in the cytoplasmofa neutrophil inblood from
a horse stained using the new methylene blue wet mount procedure. F, Two Anaplasma pbagocytopbilum
(formerly Ebrlichia pbagocytopbila) morulae in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil in blood from a goat. Wright-
Giemsa stain. G, Bacterial rods phagocytized by a neutrophil in a bufy coat smear prepared from blood from
a cat with a leukopenia and septicemia. Wright-Giemsa stain. H, Bacterial cocci phagocytized by a neutrophil
in blood from a dog with urolithiasis, pyelonephritis, and septicemia. Stapbylococas imtermedizs was cultured
from blood and urine. Wright-Giemsa stain.
K
I, Toxic and degenerative neutrophil with muliple intracellular Francisella pbilomiragia organisms in a dog
with septicemia and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Wright-Giemsa stain. J, Mycobacterium
organisms in the cytoplasm ofa neutrophil in blood from a dog. These organisms do not stain, they appear
neutrophil. Modified Wright stain. L, Neutrophil containing a Leisbmania infanfum amastigote within its
cytoplasm. Dif-Quik stain.
C,Image provided byH.L.Wamsiey.I,Photograpb ofa stained bloodflmfrom a2O09 ASVCPslide review case
submitted by M.Cora, J. Neel, and J. Tarigo. K, From Gingerich K,Gumptill L.Canine and feline bistoplasmosis:
a review of a widespread fungus. Vet Med. 2008;103:248-264. Image prouided by C. A. Thompsom. L, Image
provided by M. Santos.
142
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 5-27
FIGURE 5-26
An Anaplasma pbhagocytopbilum morula within a neutrophil and many
two Anaplasma phagocytophilum(forrmerly Ebrlichia equi) rmorulae.Each
small Mycoplasma baemolamae organisms between and attached to eryth-
u u sn p-uqu e go ssisu e
rocytes in blood from an alpaca. Wright stain.
organisms.
From Lascola K,Vandis M,Bain P,et al. Concurrent infection with Ana-
From Brewer BD,Harvey JW, Maybew IG,et al.Ebrlichiosis in a Florida
plasma pbagocytopbilum andMycoplasma baemolamae in a youngalpaca
J Vet Intern Med. 2009;23:379-382.
borse. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1984;184:446-447.
(see Fig. 5-25, F).5o The disease is severe in sheep, causing
abortion in adults, and high fever, lameness, and sometimes
 death in lambs. In addition to fever and respiratory signs, a
drop in milk production is reported in infected dairy cattle.
Hematologic findings in sheep include a prominent leukope-
nia (neutropenia and lymphopenia), thrombocytopenia, and
generalized immunosuppression resulting in secondary bacte-
rial infections. During the peak bacteremia, as many as 90%
 of granulocytes (neutrophils and eosinophils) may contain
morulae 5o A. pbagocytopbiluminfection has also been reported
 in a llama and an alpaca (see Fig. 5-27).36.267
Hepatozoon Species
Hepatozoon is a protozoal parasite in the Apicomplexa phylum.
 Approximately 50 Hepatozoon species are recognized to infect
mammals, but only two species (H. canis and H. americanum)
are currently documented to infect dogs.2838 H. canis infec-
FIGURE 5-28
tions generally cause mild or inapparent disease in dogs in
Hepatozoon americanum gamont in the cytoplasm of a neutrophil bottom
temperate and tropical regions of the world, but severe illness
rigbt in blood from a dog. Modified Wright stain.
may occur. 4s Gamonts of H canis are offen seen in the cyto-
plasm of circulating neutrophils. This organism was not
Photograph of a stained blood film from a 2002ASVCP slide review case
submitted by C. J. LeBlanc,K. A. Ryan, and S. D. Gaunt.
reported to occur within the United States before 2008.6
 In contrast, H. americanum has been documented to occur
only in the United States, with most infections reported in
 dogs living in southeastern and south central states.2830 It
cardiac muscle. A marked neutrophilic leukocytosis is often
causes a severe, debilitating ilness in dogs that is characterized
 present. However, H. americanum gamonts are rarely seen
by fever, lethargy, musculoskeletal pain, lameness, and muco-
in the cytoplasm of circulating neutrophils (Fig. 5-28) and
purulent ocular discharge. Periosteal proliferation of the long
monocytes. On routine blood staining, the gamonts appear as
bones may be observed on diagnostic imaging. Cysts, meronts,
large oblong structures with a poorly staining nucleus.
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
143
FIGU RE 5 -29 Miscellaneous neutrophil abnormalities
A, Giant neutrophil in blood from a cat with septic peritonitis. B, Giant hypersegmented neutrophil in blood
is being treated with chemotherapy. D, Giant toxic neutrophil in blood from a cat with diabetes mellitus and
fungal pneumonia.
F
G
H
E, Toxic degenerate neutrophil exhibiting karyolysis (nuclear lysis) in blood from an FIV-positive leukopenic
  e   e   n hu e n si  si  r
(ALL). G,H, Phagocytized eosinophil granules in horse neutrophils. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 H. tanis has been identifed in cats using PCR and sequenc-
ing of the 18S rRNA gene,103 but additional Hepatozoon
Miscellaneous Neutrophil Morphologic
species may also infect cats.104 A wide variety of clinical signs
Abnormalities
have been reported in domestic cats with Hepatozoon infec-
Giant Neutrophils
tions, some of which may be the result of concomitant
Large neutrophils may occur in animals (especially cats) with
diseases.34.35
inflammatory diseases and/or dysgranulopoiesis.226 They may
exhibit normal nuclear morphology (Fig. 5-29, A) or appear
Miscellaneous Bacteria, Fungi, and Protozoa
hypersegmented (Fig. 5-29, B-C). Cytoplasmic toxicity may
Although bacteremia is common in animals, microorganisms
be prominent in infammatory conditions (Fig. 5-29, D). Dys-
are seldom numerous enough to be found in stained blood
 granulopoiesis is seen in acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs),
flms. Because blood stains are easily contaminated with bac-
myelodysplastic syndromes, feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
teria (especially when they are also used to stain exfoliative
infections, and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infec-
cytology),it is important that the bacteria be found phagocy-
tions.425 49 Giant neutrophils have also been reported in blood
tized within cells before a diagnosis of a bacteremia is made
 secondary to other disorders including lymphoma, immune-
(see Fig. 5-25, GI). Mycobatterium organisms appear as
mediated
thrombocytopenia  (IMT),  immune-mediated
hemolytic anemia (IMHA), and pyometra in dogs.4? Giant
 In addition to mononuclear phagocytes, neutrophils 
may
neutrophils have been reported in humans following admin-
also rarely contain phagocytized organisms in animals with
 istration of recombinant G-CSF.73 They may occur transiently
systemic histoplasmosis (see Fig. 5-25, K)53,90.176 and dogs and
 in animals recovering from granulocytic hypoplasia, such as
cats with leishmaniasis (see Fig. 5-25, L)308.407
 panleukopenia in cats.
144
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Karyolysis
 The dissolution of the nucleus resulting in nuclear swelling
and loss of affinity for basic dyes is referred to as karyolysis
(Fig. 5-29, E). This degenerative change occurs outside the
bone marrow. It is frequently observed in neutrophils present
in septic exudates and may sometimes be observed in the
 mammalian blood.
Pyknosis and Karyorrhexis
Neutrophils that undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis)
 exhibit pyknosis and karyorrhexis.$2 Pyknosis involves the
shrinkage or condensation of a cell with increased nuclear
FIGURE 5-30
compactness or density; karyorrbexis refers to subsequent
Stain precipitatin artifact.A,Stain precipitation associated with a neu-
nuclear fragmentation (Fig. 5-29, F). Pyknosis and karyor-
trophil in blood from a dog. B, Normal-appearing neutrophil, in blood
rhexis are degenerative changes that are often observed in
fom a dog, three oil immersion fields away from the neutrophil as shown
nonseptic exudates. They may be seen in blood neutrophils
in (A). Wright-Giemsa stain.
that have had prolonged time in the circulation. Pyknotic
neutrophils are reported in increased numbers in infamma-
 tory and neoplastic disorders in humans.423 Neutrophil hyper-
TABLE 5-1
segmentation and pyknosis were reported in a dog with
Expected Findings in Different Types
 amphetamine toxicity attributed to high body temperature
of Neutrophilia
and accelerated apoptosis.46
Type
Lymphocyte Count
Left Shift
Physiologic
Cytoplasmic Vacuoles
Normal or
None
 Foamy vacuolation occurs in toxic neutrophils, but clear, dis-
(epinephrine)
increased
Stress
Usually decreased
None or slight
crete vacuoles in the absence of cytoplasmic basophilia usually
(glucocorticoids)
represent an in vitro artifact. In addition to discrete vacuola-
Inflammation
Often decreased
Often present
tion, uneven distribution of granules, irregular cell membranes,
and pyknosis may occur in neutrophils in blood samples that
 have been collcted in EDTA and kept at room temperarure
for several hours.1 These artifacts are avoided by preparing
release, which can enhance the neutrophilia, as discussed sub-
blood films quickly after blood collection.
sequently, Some animals may exhibit an accompanying lym-
phocytosis. Leukogram effects should return to normal within
Phagocytized Eosinophil Granules
30 minutes of removal of the stimulus.226
Keu Au is'sdousos uo papnxa aq ues sanua sou
The increased endogenous release or exogenous adminis-
be phagocytized by neutrophils, as is shown in Figure 5-29,
tration of glucocorticoid steroids has profound effects on cir-
G,H. The significance of this finding is unclear.
culating blood cell numbers within a few hours after release
or administration. Potential causes of increased endogenous
Stain Precipitation
release of glucocorticoids include pain, trauma, prolonged
An inexperienced observer may confuse neutrophils with pre-
emotional stress, intense sustained exercise, high body tem-
cipitated stain with basophils (Fig. 5-30, A). When this arti-
perature, and hyperadrenocorticism.6s.11 The duration of
fact is unevenly distributed, other areas of the blood film can
effects depends on the nature of the exogenous glucocorticoid
be found that stain normally (Fig. 5-30, B).
administered (long- or short-acting). Neutrophilia occurs
because glucocorticoids cause increased release of mature neu-
Neutrophilia
trophils from bone marrow stores and decreased egress of
Neutrophilia may develop as a result of increased neutrophil
 production and/or release from the bone marrow, decreased
induced release of neutrophils from bone marrow is reduced
movement of neutrophils from blood into the tissues, or net
 in elderly humans.*3 A higher proportion of neutrophils is also
movement of neutrophils from the MNP to the CNP, as
 present in the CNP compared with the MNP, but the size of
shown in Figure 5-31. Neutrophilia develops rapidly in blood
the MNP may not actually be decreased because the total
following catecholamine (norepinephrine and epinephrine)
 blood neutrophil pool is increased. The absolute number of
release, as occurs in early exercise, fear, or excitement.
neutrophils seldom increases above twice normal and little or
This results from a shift of neutrophils from the MNP to
 no left shift is present. Glucocorticoids also cause lymphope-
the CNP43 The cell count usually does not increase above
nia and eosinopenia in all domestic animals (see Table 5-1).
twice normal and no left shift occurs (Table 5-1). Sustained
Monocytosis is commonly observed in dogs and occasionally
exercise, especially in a hot environment, also results in cortisol
in cats.226 The magnirude of the neutrophilia decreases with
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
145
Bone marrow
》
Blood
Mitosis
Maturation and storage
Pro
Blast
Myelo
Meta
Band
Segmented
CNP
Health
MNP
CNP
Epinephrinerelease
本★
MNP
CNE
Glucocorticoid response
MNP
CNE
Acute inflammation
MNP
CNP
Established inflammation→→
MNF
CNP
Chronic inflammation
MNP
FIGURE 5-31
 Mechanisms responsible for the production of a neutrophilia.
time, but the lymphopenia and eosinopenia persist as long
 Neutrophilia is less common and neutropenia is more common
as plasma glucocorticoid concentrations are increased. For
in response to acute bacterial infections in ruminants com-
 example, most dogs with pituitary gland-dependent hyperad-
pared with other species. Total leukocyte counts of 20 to 30
renocorticism have lymphopenia and eosinopenia with normal
X 10°/μL are considered to be markedly elevated in ruminants.
neutrophil counts 281,334
 Detection of increased concentrations of acute-phase proteins,
Neutrophilia without a significant left shift may also be
such as haptoglobin and fibrinogen, can provide evidence
present in association with hemorrhage, hemolysis, necrosis,
of chronic infammation that may not be seen in the
chemical and drug toxicities, malignancy mild infammation,
and some chronic infammatory conditions. The mechanism
Prominent left shifts are often associated with infamma-
 causing neutrophilia in these disorders is not always clear.
tory conditions. These may be infectious (especially bacte-
Various conditions, including hyperthermia, can result in
increased concentrations of hematopoietic growth factors
(especially G-CSF) in the circulation that result in increased
indicates that the stimulus for release of neutrophils from
bone marrow is greater than can be accommodated by release
 cytokines IL-1 and TNF-α induce neutrophilia by stimulat-
from mature neutrophil stores alone. Regenerative left shifts
ing the production of growth factors such as G-CSF and
 are generally viewed as an adequate marrow response at that
GM-CSF.421 In mild infammatory conditions and some
moment. However, the presence of significant cytoplasmic
chronic infammatory conditions, the increased peripheral
toxicity requires a guarded prognosis. A marked leukocytosis
 demand for neutrophils is met by increased production and
(total leukocyte count of greater than 50,000/μL) with a
release of mature neutrophils from the marrow.
 neutrophilia and marked left shift back to at least myelocytes
 The neutrophil response to infammatory stimuli is more
 associated with an inflammatory condition is called a “leuke-
muted in ruminants than in other domestic animals.
moid reaction" because it resembles the blood pattern seen
146
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
in CML. Left shifts associated with leukemoid reactions are
 This diagnosis is usually reached by ruling out infammatory
usually orderly, with mature segmented neutrophils being the
causes and documenting the concomitant occurrence of
 most numerous neutrophilic cells present, bands being the
additional proliferative abnormalities  in blood and bone
next most numerous, metamyelocytes being less numerous,
marrow.273,450
 and myelocytes being present in the lowest numbers. A local-
Neutrophilia with or without a modest left shift is present
 ized purulent infammatory condition, such as pyometra, is
in some animals with inherited neutrophil dysfunctions. Pro-
found neutrophilia occurs in dogs and cattle with β, integrin
Disorders that  may stimulate  extreme  neutrophilic
 adhesion molecule defciency.174394 Both increased production
leukocytosis in dogs and cats (leukocyte counts 
above
of neutrophils and decreased egress of neutrophils from blood
50,000/μL with neutrophils greater than 25,000/μL)
into the tissues contribute to the high number of neutrophils
 include infections (such as pyothorax, pyelonephritis, septic
 in blood of animals with this inherited defect.1α A prominent
peritonitis, pyometra, abscess, pneumonia, and hepatitis),
neutrophilia with no or minimal left shift also occurred in a
immune-mediated disorders (such as  immune-mediated
German shepherd dog with Kindlin-3 deficiency that failed
hemolytic anemia, glomerulonephritis, polyarthritis, and vas-
to activate β2 integrin normally, resulting in leukocyte and
culitis), neoplasia (such as lymphoma, acute and chronic
platelet function defects.8 Inherited neutrophil dysfunctions
myeloid leukemia, and mast cell tumors), and tissue necrosis
 should be included in the differential diagnosis when unex-
(caused by diseases such as trauma, pancreatitis, thrombosis,
 plained recurrent bacterial infections ocur in a young animal.
Neutropenia
 as 200,000/μL has been reported in dogs with H. americanum
Neutropenia can develop from decreased release of neutro-
Extreme leukocytosis also occurs during the first 3 weeks after
phils from bone marrow, increased egress of neutrophils from
the injection of a toxic dose of estrogen in dogs. This neufro-
blood, destruction of neutrophils within the blood, or a shift
philic hyperplastic phase in the marrow is followed by gener-
of neutrophils from the CNP to the MNP (Fig. 5-32). Healthy
 Belgian Tervuren dogs living in North America are reported
 Neutrophilia in animals with a wide variety of tumors may
to frequently have physiologic leukopenia, with total leuko-
result from infammation or necrosis within the tumor; but
cyte counts, absolute neutrophil counts, and absolute lympho-
 neutrophilia may also occur as a paraneoplastic phenomenon
secondary to the production of growth factors, such as G-CSF
However, leukopenia appears to be rare in this breed in
Animals with CML have persistent marked neutrophilia
Decreased release of neutrophils from bone marrow
with a pronounced left shift that may extend to myeloblasts.
can result from decreased progenitor cells or from abnormal
Bone marrow-
Blood
Mitosis
Maturation and storage
Pro
Myelo
Meta
Band
Segmented
CNP
Health
MNP
Excess tissue demands
CNP
Pseudoneutropenia
MNP
Reduced granulopoiesis
CNP
MNP
Dysgranulopoiesis
CNP
MNP
FIGURE 5-32
Mechanisms responsible for the production of a neutropenia.
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
147
precursor cell maturation called “dysgranulopoiesis." Condi-
 Primary immune-mediated neutropenia is difficult to diag-
tions in which neutrophil precursors are present in normal or
nose in the absence of readily available and reliable diagnostic
 increased numbers in bone marrow but the release of mature
tests.431 Neutrophilic precursors may be decreased or increased
neutrophils into blood is decreased include some AMLs, some
in the bone marrow, depending on the neutrophilic stage
myelodysplastic syndromes, secondary myelodysplasia, FeLV
asymptomatic or may be ill because of secondary bacterial
been reported in young dogs with inherited cobalamin defi-
infections. The pathogenesis of some drug-induced neutrope-
ciency and dysgranulopoiesis in the marrow.163
nias and some neutropenias associated with infectious agents 
 Decreased numbers of neutrophil precursors can occur in
probably also have an immune-mediated component. The
bone marrow when generalized marrow hypoplasia or selec-
neutropenia sometimes associated with Anaplasma pbagocyto-
 philum infections appears to be associated with increased neu-
tions associated with decreased numbers of neutrophil
 trophil destruction following the appearance of organisms
precursor cells in the marrow include idiosyncratic drug reac-
within neutrophils.500
tions (e.g-, phenylbutazone, trimethoprim/sulfadiazine, gris-
The long-term use of a recombinant G-CSF from one
 species in a second species can result in a persistent neutro-
 toxicity (exogenous or endogenous) in dogs and ferrets,
45.437
 penia in the second species when antibodies made against the
cytotoxic chemotherapy drugs, viral diseases (e.g., parvovirus
recombinant G-CSF also neutralize the endogenous G-CSF
in dogs and cats and equine herpesvirus-1 in foals),67.2.26,372
rickettsial diseases (Ebrlicbia canis infection in dogs and
 Neutropenia can develop in acute infammatory conditions
E. ristici infection in horses),34s 515 and inherited disorders 
when the demand for neutrophils depletes the bone marrow
(cyclic hematopoiesis in gray collie dogs and some cats with
 storage pool and insuffcient time has elapsed for increased
Chediak-Higashi syndrome) 18,20.34
 granulopoiesis to occur. Neutropenia is common in over-
 Phenobarbital toxicity is reported to cause neutropenia and
whelming septic conditions (e.g, septicemia) and secondary
thrombocytopenia in dogs, but its effects on the bone marrow
 to endotoxemia.* Degenerative left shifts are often present in
need further study.69,223244 
 Marrow necrosis has been sug-
 these disorders. A common example of this type of presenta-
gested in dogs, but bone marrow in neutropenic humans
tion is acute salmonellosis in horses and calves 343,408 Finally.
neutropenia can occur following the net movement of neu-
 neutrophil production in dogs and humans, but it causes a
trophis from the CNP to the MNP, as occurs during
 bone marrow neutrophilic maturational arrest and neutrope-
shock 155 248,45
nia in cats.119.402
 Familial neutropenia and thrombocytopenia have been
Inherited Neutrophil Defects
reported in eight horses with severe neutrophilic hypoplasia/
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
aplasia and megakaryocytic hypoplasia in bone marrow25s
 The Chediak-Higashi syndrome has been reported in cattle,
 Chronic (possibly congenital) neutropenia has been described
Persian cats, Aleutian mink, the beige mouse, blue and silver
in a young Rottweiler dog with G-CSF deficiency. Bone
foxes, and a killer whale, as well as in humans.32s This disorder
marrow aspiration biopsy revealed a mafurational arrest at the
is characterized by partial oculocutaneous albinism, increased
 promyelocyte-myelocyte stage.264 A hereditary defect has 
 susceptibility to infections, hemorrhagic tendencies, and the
been suggested as a cause of chronic neutropenia with recur-
presence of enlarged membrane-bound granules in many cell 
rent bacterial infections in border collie dogs, but myeloid
types, including melanocytes and blood leukocytes. The giant
hyperplasia is also reported in this disorder.?
 granules may arise from abnormal fusion or fssion of lyso-
 Decreased numbers of neutrophil precursors can also occur
somes or lysosome-related organelles during cell develop-
in bone marrow when myelophthisis is present. Myelophthisic
 ment.22 Neutrophils from affected animals exhibit reduced
disorders are characterized by the replacement of normal
mobility  and
d  defective   phagocytic  and/or  bactericidal
hematopoietic cells with abnormal ones. Examples of myelo-
responses, explaining these animals' increased susceptibility to
phthisic disorders—where decreased numbers of neutrophil
bacterial infections.32s A defect in the Chediak-Higasbi syn-
precursors may occur in marrow—include lymphoid leuke-
drome 1 (CHS1) gene (beige gene in deficient mice) has been
mias, multiple myeloma, some myeloid leukemias, some 
identified in humans and mice. The protein produced by this
myelodysplastic syndromes, myelofibrosis (often associated 
 gene appears to be involved in regulating vesicular size and
with anemia but less often with leukopenia or thrombocyto-
trafficking.237 Neutropenia has been reported in some humans
penia), and possibly metastases of lymphomas, carcinomas,
with Chediak-Higashi syndrome,6 and neutropenia is
a
and mast cell tumors.269,369,390451 1
Myelophthisic disorders
 common finding in cats with this disorder.384 An increased
 do not simply “crowd out" normal cells but also alter the
bleeding tendency is also present because platelets lack
marrow microenvironment so that normal hematopoiesis is
normal dense granules, resulting in a platelet storage pool
compromised.
deficiency,101,408
*References 41, 157, 180, 370, 377, 486.
*References 22, 128, 306, 385, 415, 464.
148
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
β Integrin Adhesion Molecule Defciencies
blood with the same periodicity, but they cycle out of phase
 An autosomal recessive deficiency in leukocyte surface adhe-
with neutrophils and from normal to above-normal values in
sion glycoproteins (β, integrins), resulting from a defect in the
blood. Affected pups are susceptible to bacterial and fungal
CD18 β subunit, has been recognized in Irish setter dogs and
infections, especially during the neutropenic episodes. A
Holstein cattle .174,24s This leukocyte adhesion defciency-I
defect in neutrophil bactericidal function also contributes to
(LAD-I) defect results in decreased neutrophil adhesion,
 the recurrent infections that occur in these animals.°6 Affected
impaired chemotaxis and aggregation, and minimal bacteri-
pups usually die by 6 months of age. Animals that reach adult-
cidal activity.1α Similar defects also occur in monocytes. As a
hood often die of systemic amyloidosis, which is believed to
result, animals have recurrent bacterial and fungal infections
be the result of the repeated activation of the acute-phase
without pus formation. Clinical signs include gingivitis, oral
response by infammatory cytokines during periods of
ulcers, periodontitis, chronic pneumonia, poor wound healing,
monocytosis.334
and stunted growth. Marked neutrophilia with or without a
 This defect in dogs results from a mutation in the AP3B1
modest left shift is usually present. Increased numbers of other
 gene, which produces a subunit of the adaptor-related protein 
blood leukocyte types may also occur at times. Mild to moder-
complex 3 (AP3) and is involved in trafficking of vesicular
 ate nonregenerative anemia and a polyclonal hyperglobulin-
cargo proteins, including neutrophil elastase (NE), from the
Golgi to lysosomes. Affected dogs have reduced amounts of
mature NE (ie., NE activity) in their primary granules but
Kindlin-3 Defciency
increased amounts of the inactive NE precursor protein bound
 A mutation in the Kindlin-3 gene in a German shepherd dog
 to membranes, most likely in the trans-Golgi network.321 It is
resulted in leukocyte adhesion deficiency III (LAD-II), a
noteworthy that some defects in ELA2, the gene that encodes
phenotype characterized by increased susceptibility to infec-
NE, result in cyclic neutropenia in humans. NE appears to
tion and increased risk of bleeding. β-integrin proteins are
provide feedback inhibition in normal neutropoiesis, and it is
important adhesion molecules on the surfaces of leukocytes
postulated that a disruption in this feedback loop results in
and platelets. These integrin molecules bind poorly to their
the cycling phenomenon.220
ligands when blood cells are quiescent, but they become adhe-
sive following activation by inside-out signaling through other
EOSINOPHILS
 membrane receptors. The Kindlin-3 protein is critical in the
Eosinophil Morphology
pathway of β-integrin activation. Consequently a deficiency
in the Kindlin-3 protein abolishes the activation of β integrins
Eosinophils are so named because their granules have an
and prevents normal leukocyte and platelet adhesion. In the
affinity for eosin, the red dye in routine blood stains. The size,
case of neutrophils, the lack of Kindlin-3 abolishes β2-integrin 
shape, and number of eosinophil granules vary considerably.
 activation, preventing the firm adhesion of neutrophils to
In most animal species, eosinophils have round granules, but
 activated endothelial cells.6
those from domestic cats have rod-shaped ones (Fig. 5-33,
A,B). Eosinophils from dogs often exhibit a few cytoplasmic
Unknown Neutrophil Function Defects
vacuoles (Fig. 5-33, C), and the granules can sometimes be
 A less well-defined defect in neutrophils has been reported in 
exceptionally large (Fig. 5-33, D). Eosinophils from grey-
Doberman pinscher  dogs.64  Neutrophil chemotaxis
and
hound dogs and occasionally from individual animals 
in
 phagocytosis are normal, but these cells have reduced bacteri-
other breeds appear highly vacuolated (Fig. 5-33, E) and
cidal ability. The bactericidal defect appears to be the result
may be mistaken for vacuolated neutrophils by inexperienced
 observers. Horse eosinophils have especially large granules
stimulation. An inadequate oxidant burst may also occur
(Fig. 5-33, F). Granules in ruminant and pig eosinophils
in young Weimaraner dogs that present with recurrent
are small (Fig. 5-33, G). The cytoplasm between the granules
infections.27
is usually faintly blue in color. Iguanas and psittacine birds
have “eosinophils" with gray-blue-staining granules (Fig.
Cyclic Hematopoiesis
5-34).
Cyclic hematopoiesis (previously termed cyclic neutropenia)
Intact granules can be extruded from eosinophils (see Fig.
is transmifted as an aufosomal recessive trait in gray collie
 5-29, G,H). These extracellular granules express cytokine
dogs. The “gray collie syndrome" is associated with several
 receptors on their membranes and function as independent
distinct abnormalities (abnormal hair pigmentation, bilateral
secretory organelles that release granule constifuents in
scleral ectasia, enteropathy, and gonadal hypoplasia) in addi-
response to appropriate cytokines. 3s1
tion to cyclic hematopoiesis. Blood neutrophil counts exhibit
The nucleus of eosinophils is similar to that of neutrophils
12- to 14-day cyclic fuctuations. Neutrophils may be com-
but tends to be less lobulated (often divided into only two
pletely absent from the blood during neutropenic episodes,
lobes) and may be partially obscured by granules in some
which last for 2 to 4 days. Blood neutrophil counts return to
species, most notably the horse. Pyknosis and karyorrhexis
 normal or even increase above normal following neutropenic
may occur in eosinophils (see Fig. 5-33, H), as discussed previ-
 periods. Monocyte, platelet, and reticulocyte counts cycle in
ously for neutrophils.
CHA P T ER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
149
FI G U RE 5 -33 Morphology of eosinophils
B
D
A, Eosinophil with rod-shaped granules in blood from a cat. B, Eosinophil with rod-shaped granules in blood
fom a cat. C, Eosinophil with round granules and a small cytoplasmic vacuole in blood from a dog.
D, Eosinophil with two exceptionally large granules in blood from a dog.
E
F
G
H
E, Heavily vacuolated eosinophil in blood from a greyhound dog. F, Eosinophil in blood from a horse,exhibit-
 srmall round granules typical of this species. H, Eosinophil in 2-day-old blood from a dog exhibiting pyknosis
and karyorrhexis.
K
I, Band eosinophil from a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J, Eosinophilic metamyelocyte from
a dog with irmmune-mediated hemolytic anemia. K, Eosinophilic metamyelocyte in blood from a dog
    e   i      m
Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Band eosinophils are common in some animals (see Fig.
to identify with certainty when granules obscure the nucleus.
 5-33, I) and eosinophilic metamyelocytes may sometimes be
Eosinophil  maturational  stages  may  be  differentiated
seen (see Fig. 5-33, J). They are not usually separated from
 when extreme eosinophilia is present in an attempt to help
 segmented eosinophils during differential counts because they
 separate hyperplastic from neoplastic disorders.3,348,462 As in
 are generally of little clinical significance and may be difficult
neutrophils, a pronounced left shift is present in eosinophils
150
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 5-34
FIGURE 5-35
An “eosinophil with gray-blue staining round granules (left) and a het-
Eosinophilia in blood from a cat with diroflariasis. Wright-Giemsa
erophil with red, primarily elongated, granules (rigbt) in blood from an
stainl.
African gray parrot. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 in the blood of animals with Pelger-Huet anomaly (see Fig
 Although not usually present, eosinophilia may occur in
 5-33, K,L).1"6 Increased numbers of hyposegmented (pseudo-
animals with mast cell tumors (Fig. 5-36) and T lymphocyte
Pelger-Huet) band eosinophils have been reported in a family
lymphomas.* Eosinophilia rarely occurs in animals with
of Samoyed dogs with accompanying ocular and skeletal
lymphomatoid granulomatosis (T lymphocyte-rich large
 abnormalities.23
Ebrlicbia and Anaplasma organisms have rarely been
Marked eosinophilia with extensive eosinophilic organ
infiltrates in animals (primarily cats) and humans has been
been identified in blood eosinophils from a dog.
classified as either chronic eosinophilic leukemia or hypere-
Eosinophilia
ing this collection ofheterogeneous disorders into two distinct
Eosinophilia occurs in disorders that result in increased IL-5
entities have been diffcult to define. Using new molecular and
 production.257 The injection of recombinant IL-2 resulted in
genetic diagnostic techniques, it appears that most human
patients diagnosed with hypereosinophilic syndrome have
especially those caused by nematodes and fukes (Fig. 5-35).*
 phenomenon willikely occur in veterinary medicine as addi-
Eosinophilia is not typically seen in animals with protozoal
tional molecular and genetic techniques become available 171.417
 infections, but marked eosinophilia was reported in a puppy
Eosinophilia may also be present in CML, where neutrophilia
with hepatic sarcocystosis. Eosinophilia is more likely present
 predominates, and in thrombocythemia.145,329
when intestinal nematodes are migrating within the body
Marked eosinophilia with eosinophilic infltration of mul-
than when they are located only within the intestine.
tiple organs including liver, spleen, lungs, and lymph nodes
 Eosinophilia may occur in association with eosinophilic
infammatory conditions of organs that normally contain
were classified as having idiopathic hypereosinophilic syn-
 numerous mast cells, such as skin, lung, and intestine. It may
drome because mean serum immunoglobulin E concentra-
be present in animals with IgE-mediated allergic hypersensi-
tions were markedly high and no karyotype abnormalities
were identified on cytogenetic analysis.447 One dog underwent
Eosinophilia has also been reported with sarcoptic mange and
a spontaneous remission.228
nasal mite infestations.278 Eosinophilia occurs in some animals
Eosinopenia
eosinophilic granulomas.269272 Eosinophilia has been reported
The absolute eosinophil count may be zero in some normal
in some hyperthyroid cats treated with methimazole or its
animals, making eosinopenia of limited significance. Endog-
 prodrug carbimazole 156.376
enous and exogenous glucocorticoids rapidly induce eosino-
*References 25, 61, 78, 82, 197, 259, 389, 453, 498.
+References 42, 87, 278, 279, 292, 508.
*References 20, 38, 59, 100, 123, 262, 307, 396, 448.
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
151
 dark purple in a cat with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI and
 in two cats with reddish granulation of neutrophils of unknown
etiology (Fig. 5-37, H).
Granules are often so numerous in ruminant and pig baso-
phils that the nuclear shape is obscured (Fig. 5-37, I). In some
instances, discrete granules are not seen but the cytoplasm
stains purple (Fig. 5-37, J). Variable numbers of purple gran-
ules are present in horse basophils (Fig. 5-37, K). Basophils
can be difficult to recognize in blood flms stained with
aqueous stains, such as Diff-Quik (Dade Behring Inc.,
Newark, DE),Hema 3 (Fisher Scientifc, Pittsburgh, PA), and
the Wright-type stain used in the automated stainer Aero-
spray 7120 (Westcore, Inc., Logan, UT), because granules do
not stain as well with these stains (see Fig. 2-16, B).1 Rick-
 ettsial morulae have been recognized in basophils from a dog
(Fig. 5-37, L).
FIGURE 5-36
 Band basophils are not usually separated from segmented
Eosinophilia in blood from a horse with an abdominal mast cell tumor.
basophils during differential counts because they are generally
Wright-Giemsa stain.
of little clinical significance and, except in dogs, may be diff-
cult to identify with certainty when granules obscure the
 nucleus. Basophilic cell stages may be differentiated when
 extreme basophilia is present in an attempt to help separate
eosinophilic cells in bone marrow together with eosinopenia
hyperplastic from neoplastic disorders. A more pronounced
in blood and reduced numbers of tissue eosinophils suggests
left shift is expected in an animal with chronic basophilic leu-
 decreased marrow release of eosinophils,13 and glucorticoids
kemia than in one with an infammatory basophilia29s.35, 320
are reported to inhibit eosinophil release from the bone
marrow.7 This might be the result of upregulation of α4
Basophilia
integrin adhesion molecules on the surfaces of immature 
 Basophilia is generally associated with IgE-mediated disor-
eosinophils by glucocorticoids,1 Glucorticoids also potenti-
 ders. When it is present, basophilia usually accompanies
eosinophilia.* Basophilia may occur in some animals with
therapy may decrease eosinophil production by decreasing the
mast
t cell tumors, primarily noncutaneous types (Fig.
production of growth factors from T lymphocytes. Eosinope-
nia is often present in acute infammatory conditions, and
endogenous glucorticoid production contributes to this
decrease in eosinophil numbers.50s8
been reported in association with basophilic leukemia in
animals.25,305,320 Basophilic leukemia must be differentiated
from mast cell neoplasia with mastocytemia (sometimes called
BASOPHILS
mast cell leukemia). Mast cells have round nuclei and baso-
Basophil Morphology
 phils have segmented nuclei.20,10,216.448
The cytoplasm of basophils is generally pale blue in color, and
 basophil nuclei are often less segmented than neutrophil
nuclei. Basophil granules are acidic and consequently have an 
MAST CELLS
affinity for the basic (blue) dyes in routine blood stains. The
 number, size, and staining characteristics of the granules vary
Mast cels are not normally found in blood.5716 They
considerably by species. Granules in dog basophils generally
 develop in tissues from precursor cells produced in the bone
-0fo su y oi qanoua snoraunu jou are pue adind readde
marrow. Mast cells have biochemical characteristics similar to
plasm (Fig. 5-37, A-C). Degranulated basophils may have
those of basophils and share a common progenitor cell with
purple-staining cytoplasm in the absence of granules (Fig.
 basophils in bone marrow, but they are clearly different cell
5-37, D).
types. 164
The basophils of domestic cats are distinctive. Most of their 
 granules are round or oval and stain light lavender or mauve
Mast Cell Morphology
in color (Fig. 5-37, E,F). Some basophils have large purple
 Basophils have segmented nuclei and mast cells have round
 granules in addition to the light lavender ones (Fig. 5-37, G),
nuclei (Fig. 5-39, A,B). Mast cells usually have more
as is seen in basophil precursors in the bone marrow. The
granules typically fill the cytoplasm, giving the cat basophil
nucleus a moth-eaten appearance. All of the granules stained
*References 26, 72, 120, 259, 389, 469.
152
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIG U RE  5-3 7  Morphology of basophils
B
C
D
A, Basophil in blood from a dog. B, Basophil in blood from a dog. The nucleus is ribbonlike in shape and
few granules are present. C, Band basophil in the blood ofa dog with a basophilia. D, Degranulated basophil
 in blood from a dog with a basophilia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
G
H
E, Basophil in blood from a cat with light-lavender granules filling the cytoplasm and giving the rucleus a
moth-eaten appearance. F, Basophil in blood from a cat with light-lavender grarules filling the cytoplasm
and giving the nucleus a moth-eaten apearance. G, Basophil in blood from a cat with a mixture of light-
  s aand ri  hos     sa ad pe ia
cytoplasm in blood from the same Siamese cat as described in Figure 5-23, H.
I, Basophil in blood from a cow. The granules are so rumerous that they prevent evaluation of ruclear shape.
J, Basophil in the blood ofa goat. Few granules are visible, but the cytoplasm stains purple. K, Band basophil
in the blood of a horse. L, Basophil with a rickettsial morula of unknown species in blood from a dog.
The dog had a basophilia and organisms were found in several basophils. Wright-Giemsa stain.
cytoplasmic granules than do basophils. In cats, both primary
Mastocytemia
 and secondary granules in basophils are morphologically dif-
Mastocytemia occurs in association  with  noncutaneous
ferent from mast cell granules. Like basophils, granules in
mast cell stain poorly if at all with Diff-Quik and other
aqueous blood stains.10
CHAP TER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
153
MONOCYTES
Monocyte Morphology
Mononuclear leukocytes in blood are classified as either lym-
phocytes or monocytes. These cells are not devoid of granules
but rather have lower numbers of cytoplasmic granules than
-oqduk ueqi raarel Aensn are saiisouo sansoqnuena op
cytes and have nuclei that are more variable in shape and have
N:C ratios of 1.0 or less.
The monocyte nucleus may be round, kidney-shaped,
band-shaped, or convoluted (ameboid) with chromatin that is
diffuse or mildly clumped (Fig. 5-40, A-H). The cytoplasm is
typically blue-gray and often contains variably sized vacuoles.
Less often, dust-like pinkish or reddish purple granules may
be visible in the cytoplasm (Fig. 5-40, G,H). Monocytes
develop into macrophages after they leave the blood and enter
FIGURE 5-38
tissue. In some disorders, mononuclear phagocytes in blood
Marked basophilia (13 x 10/μL in a cat with splenic mastocytosis.
 become activated and enlarged, resembling macrophages (Fig.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
5-40, I,J).
 Monocytes in dogs often have band-shaped nuclei (Fig.
5-40, B,C); consequently they may be confused with band
neutrophils (Fig. 5-41). The cytoplasmic staining of the marure
neutrophils should be examined. If no toxicity is present, the
cells with band-shaped nuclei and blue-gray cytoplasm are
identifed as monocytes. Other potentially helpfil criteria
include the following: the ends of the band-like nucleus of
the monocyte are often enlarged and knob-like and the
 nuclear chromatin of the monocyte is not clumped in the
dark-light pattern to the degree commonly seen in band
neutrophils. If marked toxicity is present in the cytoplasm
of neutrophilic cells, differentiation becomes much more
difficult.
 Differentiation of monocytes with round nuclei from large
lymphocytes can be difficult, especially in ruminants (Fig.
5-42). The N:C ratio is typically greater than 1.0 for large
lymphocytes. Monocytes must also be differentiated from
lrge reactive lymphocytes with convoluted nuclei. The cyto-
plasm of reactive lymphocytes is more basophilic (navy blue
in color) than the cytoplasm of monocytes (Fig. 5-43). Finally,
monocytes may sometimes be confused with basophils
(Fig. 5-44).
C
Erythrophagocytosis may be present in monocytes in
primary or secondary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
FIGURE 5-39
(Fig. 5-45, A)202 and in neoplastic cells in dogs with hemo-
Morphology of mast cells. A, Mast cell in blood from a cat with splenic
 phagocytic histiocytic sarcoma.4α Like neutrophils, monocytes 
mastocytosis. B, Large mast cell with cytoplasmic vacuoles in additionl
may phagocytize extruded eosinophil granules (Fig. 5-45, B).
to granules in blood from a dog with a noncutaneous mast cell neoplasm.
Monocytes may also contain hemosiderin, which stains gray-
C, Large mast cell exhibiting erythrophagocytosis in blood from a cat
to-black with routine blood stains (Fig. 5-45, C) and blue with
with a noncutaneous mast cell neoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
the Prussian blue stain (Fig. 5-45, D). Iron-positive inclusions
may be seen in association with hemolytic anemia and/or
marked infammatory responses.16 Mononuclear phagocytes 
be present in the blood of dogs with infammatory
 containing melanin granules (melanophages) may rarely occur
diseases, necrosis, tissue injury, and severe regenerative
with malignant melanoma (Fig. 5-45, E).
anemia.8031.42 In contrast to findings in dogs, mast cells are
Rickettsial organisms that infect mononuclear phagocytes
rarely seen in the blood of cats in the absence of mast cell
include Ebrlichia canis, E. chaffensis, and Neorickettsia risticii.
neoplasms 16
In contrast to granulocytic rickettsial species, morulae of
154
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGU RE 5-40 Morphology of monocytes
A
B
C
D
A, Monocyte in blood from a dog with band-shaped nucleus and prominent cytoplasmic vacuolation.
B, Monocyte in blood from a dog with a band-shaped nucleus, basophilic cytoplasm and two vacuoles.
C, Monocyte in blood from a dog with a band-shaped nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm D, Monocyte in
blood of a dog with kidney-shaped rucleus.
E
G
H
E, Monocyte in blood from a horse with a pleomorphic nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm containing vacuoles.
 F, Monocyte in blood from a cow with a pleomorphic nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm. G, Monocyte in
 blood from a dog with band-shaped nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm containing magenta-staining granules.
 H, Monocyte in blood from a horse with a kidney-shaped nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm containing
magenta-staining granules.
I, Large activated monocyte or macrophage with prominent vacuolation in blood from a horse with Babesia
egui infection. J, Macrophage in blood from a cat with Mycoplasma baemofelis infection. Lower magnification
than other images in this figure. Wright-Giemsa stain.
monocytic rickettsial species are rarely found in blood leuko-
signs. Laboratory findings generally include marked throm-
cytes. When present, these morulae appear as tightly packed
bocytopenia, mild nonregenerative anemia, variably mild
basophilic clusters of organisms within the cytoplasm (Fig.
leukopenia, and hyperglobulinemia. Marked pancytopenia
5-45, FG; Fig. 5-46).
 secondary to bone marrow aplasia is rarely seen in the United
E. canis causes mild-to-severe disease in dogs. Clinical
States.
signs include fever, anorexia, weight loss, hemorrhagic diathe-
 E. chaffensis (human monocytic ehrlichiosis) infects dogs.
sis (especially epistaxis), lymphadenopathy, and neurologic
Clinical signs have not been reported following experimental
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders 
155
FIGURE 5-41
FIGURE 5-43
Monocyte (eft) and band neutrophil (rigbt in blood from a dog with
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 plasm (rigbt)inblood froma dog after vaccination. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-42
FIGURE 5-44
Monocyte (left) and large lymphocyte (rigbt) in blood from a cow.
Monocyte (lef) and basophil (rigbt) in blood from a dog with a severe
Wright-Giemsa stain.
fea infestation. Wright-Giemsa stain.
infections,113.512 but anterior uveitis, vomiting, epistaxis, and
infantum,44 and remarkablylarge schizonts of Cytauxzoon felis
 lymphadenopathy have been reported in clinical cases.139
(Fig. 5-47).9.484
Thrombocytopenia has been reported in animals without evi-
dence of illness. 189
Monocytosis
N. risticii is primarily pathogenic to horses (Potomac horse
fever), where it causes fever, depression, anorexia, diarrhea, and
 philia (discussed earlier in this chapter). It may be present
variable leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.12651s N.ristici also
in both acute and chronic infammation.* The injection
infects other mammals including dogs and cats.12350 Clni
 of recombinant growth factors—-including IL-3, GM-CSF,
Kr raa o suu uo pa say shop ui sus des
G-CSF, and M-CSF—results in a monocytosis 347,357421,46.42
 bleeding diathesis, and polyarthritis. Thrombocytopenia is
 Endogenous and exogenous glucocorticoid steroids can
Other infectious agents that may rarely be seen in blood
mononuclear phagocytes  include Histoplasma capsulatum
*References 139, 190, 229, 246, 247, 364, 469.
156
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
F IG U RE  5 -4 5 Monocyte inclusions and infectious agents
A
D
A, Monocyte with erythrophagocytosis in blood from a dog with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.
Wright-Giemsa stain.B,Monocyte that has phagocytized eosinophil granules inblood from a horse. Wright
Giemsa stain. C, Monocyte containing hemosiderin (dark inclusions in the cytoplasm) in blood from a dog
with a hemolytic anemia. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Monocyte containing hemosiderin (dark blue inclusions
in the cytoplasm) in blood from a dog with a hemolytic anemia. Prussian blue stain.
G
H
E, Mononuclear cell containing melanin granules (presumably a melanophage) in blood from an aged gray
Arabian gelding with disseminated malignant melanoma. Wright stain. F, Macrophage with an Ebrlicbia canis
morula in the cytoplasm in a buffy coat smear from a dog. Wright-Giemsa stain. G, Ebrlichia canis morula
in the cytoplasm of a dog monocyte. Wright-Giemsa stain. H, Histoplasma capsalatum in the cytoplasm of a
monocyte in blood from a dog. Modified Wright stain.
E,Photograph of a stained blood film from a 1999 ASVCP slide review case submitted by J.Tarrant, T. Stokol, J
Bartol, and’J. Wakshlag. H, Image prouided by C.A. Thompson.
 Monocytosis occurs in animals with acute monocytic or acute
from one another based on morphology in stained blood
flms.4s8
times accompanies histiocytic sarcoma in dogs.252 Normal
domestic animals may have few or no monocytes in blood;
Lymphocyte Morphology
consequently the term monocytopenia is not usually used.
Normal Lymphocyte Morphology
 Most lymphocytes have microvilli on their surfaces (Fig. 5-48,
A).47 They have high N: C ratios and vary considerably in size,
LYMPHOCYTES
with the highest N:C ratios in the smaller cells (Fig. 5-49,
 A-F). The cytoplasm of resting (unstimulated) blood lympho-
Most lymphocytes reside within lymphoid organs (lymph
cytes is usually pale blue in color. Unstimulated lymphocytes
nodes, thymus, spleen, and bone marrow), with only a small 
have a few mitochondria and numerous ribosomes but little
 percentage circulating in blood. Depending on the species and
or no rough endoplasmic reticulum. Granules are generally
individual variability, about 50% to 75% of blood lymphocytes
absent or low in number unless the cell is a granular lympho-
are T lymphocytes and about 10% to 40% are B lymphocytes.
cyte. Their nuclei are usually round but may be oval or slightly
NK cells account for 5% to 10% of blood lymphocytes. T
indented (Fig. 5-48, B).24 Nuclear chromatin varies from
lymphocytes  and  B lymphocytes cannot be differentiated
condensed and densely staining to a pattern of light and dark
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
157
B
FIGURE 5-48
Electron microscopy oflymphocytes. A, Scanning electron photomicro-
graph of a small lymphocyte with numerous short microvilli on its
surface in blood from a dog with chronie lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
B, Transmission electron photormicrograph of a small lymphocyte in
blood from a dog with CLL. Abundant heterochromatin and single deep
cleft are present in the nucleus. Many ribosomes, a few mitochondria,
FIGURE 5-46
Transmission electron photomicrograph of an Ebrlichia canis morula inl
a monocyte from a dog. The morula consists ofa membrane-lined vesicle
FromHaeyWerrelTG,HyeDM,t alWeldifetatd l
containing multiple organisms.
1981;18:37-47.
Courtesy of C. F. Simpson.
 low numbers of lymphoblasts in blood. Most lymphocytes in 
the blood of domestic animals are small to medium in size,
but some large lymphocytes may be present. Lymphocytes in
ruminants are often larger, with more cytoplasm than is seen
in other species, sometimes making these cells diffcult to
differentiate from monocytes (see Fig. 5-42).19* Ifit is unclear
whether a cellis a lymphocyte or a monocyte, it is classifed
as a lymphocyte because cells of this type are usually much
 more numerous in blood than are monocytes.
 A low percentage of lymphocytes in blood have red- or
purple-staining (generally focal) granules within their cyto-
plasm (see Figs. 5-4, 5-49, G,H). These cell are generally
pue useidos snou saeq Aensn pue azis ui sarel oi unipau
lower N:C ratios than small lymphocytes. Granular lympho-
cytes appear to be either NK cells or a subset of cytotoxic T
jou op ssui ena u sna u e'sasou
stain as well with aqueous blood stains (such as Diff-Quik)
as they do with methanolic blood stains.10
FIGURE 5-47
Reactive Lymphocytes
Cytauxzoon felis schizont development in a large macrophage in blood
Lymphocytes proliferate in response to antigenic stimulation.
from a cat. Note the small size of the erythrocytes compared to the
 They increase in size and exhibit increased cytoplasmic baso-
 macrophage in this low-magnifcation image. Wright-Giemsa stain.
philia (Fig. 5-50, A-C). Most of these antigenically stimulated
cells remain in peripheral lymphoid tissues but some may
enter the circulation, although usually in low numbers. Various
terms including reactive lympbocytes, transformed lympbocytes,
ous e ym inu hunuiis-iaui on pue seae hunuiis
and immunocytes have been used to describe them. Some reac-
 chromatin pattern. Lymphocytes in healthy ruminants may
five lymphocytes are large, with convoluted nuclei (se Figs.
 have ring-like clumped chromatin patterns in their nuclei that
 5-43, 5-50, B,C). They resemble monocytes except that their
may be confused with nucleoli (Fig. 5-49, F). Consequently
cytoplasm is more basophilic (navy blue in color) than cyto-
caution should be taken in making a diagnosis of lymphoid
plasm seen in monocytes (see Fig. 5-43). These cells can also
neoplasia in cattle based on a finding of what appear to be
be difficult to differentiate from some neoplastic lymphocytes.
158
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIG U RE  5-49 Normal lymphocyte morphology
B
C
A, Small lymphocyte in blood from a dog. B, Small lymphocyte in blood from a cow. C, Medium-sized
lymphocyte in blood from a horse. D, Medium to large lymphocyte in blood from a cow.
H
E, Large lymphocyte in blood from a cow. F, Medium to large lymphocyte in blood from a cow. The ringlike
dlumped chromatin patterns in the nucleus may be confused with rucleoli. G, Granular lymphocyte in blood
from a cow. H, Granular lymphocyte in blood from a cat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
When it is not possible to decide whether a basophilic lym-
 B). Discrete vacuoles may occur in the cytoplasm of lympho-
 phocyte is reactive or neoplastic, the term atypical lympbocyte
cytes from animals with inherited lysosomal storage diseases
is sometimes used. Basophilic erythroid precursors may be
(Fig. 5-51, C-E), including mucopolysaccharidosis type VII
confused with reactive lymphocytes. Some reactive lympho-
cytes are plasmacytoid (plasma-cell-like) in appearance (Fig.
C-mannosidosis in cats,11 β-
5-50, D,E) and may rarely contain pinkish or bluish globules
mannosidosis in goats,371 Niemann-Pick type C in cats, and
(Russell bodies) within their cytoplasm (Fig. 5-50, F). These
C-L-fucosidase in dogs.243 Basophilic granules and vacuoles
inclusions are composed of dilated endoplasmic reticula
may not become apparent in some lysosomal disorders until
the affected animal reaches adulthood.
Russell bodies have been called Mott cells. Plasma cells are
 Lymphocytes may also contain distemper inclusions as in
present in lymphoid organs except the thymus, but they are
other blood celtypes 314 Finally, Sarcocystis neurona organisms
rarely observed in blood even when plasma cell neoplasia (e.g.,
have been recognized in blood monocytes and lymphocytes
multiple myeloma) is present.
(Fig. 5-51, F) from an immunosuppressed dog (R Di Terlizzi,
personal communication).
Cytoplasmic Granules, Vacvoles, and Inciusions
A low percentage of lymphocytes in blood from normal
Neoplastic Large Granular Lymphocytes, Plasma Cells,
animals contains cytoplasmic granules (see previous discus-
and Mott Cells
sion of granular lymphocytes). Basophilic granules may be
Neoplasms involving lymphoid cells with large cytoplasmic
seen in the lymphocytes from animals with certain lysosomal
magenta granules in cats have been called large granular lym-
storage diseases (Figs. 5-51, 4; 5-52), including mucopolysac-
phomas, globule leukocyte tumors, and granulated round cell
GMz-gangliosidosis in pigs.256
 appear to originate as intestinal tumors composed of cytotoxic
Cytoplasmic vacuoles may be seen in lymphocytes from a
T lymphocytes. As with other lymphomas, neoplastic cells
variety of neoplastic and nonneoplastic disorders (Fig. 5-51,
 may sometimes be present in blood (Figs. 5-53, A, 5-54) and
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
159
C
D
FIGURE 5-50
FIGURE 5-51
Morphology of reactive lymphocytes. A, Reactive lymphocyte with
Cytoplasmic granules, vacuoles, and inclusions in lymphocytes. A, Lym-
intensely basophilic cytoplasm in blood from a cow infected with bovine
phocyte containing basophilic granules in the blood of a 3-month-old
leukemia virus. B, Reactive lymphocyte with a convoluted nucleus and
German shepherd dog with inherited mucopolysacharidosis type VII.
intensely basophilic cytoplasm in blood from a cat with a bacterial infec-
Wright stain.B,One of many lymphocytes containing cytoplasmic vacu-
tion. C, Reactive lymphocyte with a convoluted nucleus and intensely
dles in blood from an 8-week-old foal with Corynebacterium egu pneu-
basophilic cytoplasm in blood from a dog with a mild cough. D, Plas-
 monia. Lymphocytes appeared normal after treatment and recovery.
Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Lymphocytes with cytoplasmic vacuoles in the
a dog with babesiosis. E, Plasmacytoid lymphocyte with intensely baso-
blood of a Korat cat with inherited GMz-gangliosidosis. D, Lympho-
philic cytoplasm in blood from a horse with Anaplasma pbagocytopbilum
cytes with cytoplasmic vacuoles in the blood of a goat with presumptive
infection. F, Lymphocyte containing Russell bodies in the cytoplasm in
diagnosis of inherited β-mannosidosis. Wright stain. E, Lymphocytes
blood from a horse. Wright-Giemsa stain.
with cytoplasmic vacuoles in the blood of a domestic shorthair cat with
inherited Niemann-Pick disease type C. Wright-Giemsa stain. F, Lym-
Wright stain.
 described in blood lymphocytes from a horse with large gran-
A,Photograph ofa stained blood flm from a 1997ASVCP slide review case
ular lymphocyte leukemia.258
submitted by D. I. Bounous, D. C. Siluerstein, K. S. Latimer, and K. P Car-
 Plasma cells are present in lymphoid organs (except the
michael.D,Photograpbofa stained bloodflmfroma 1990ASVCP slide
thymus but they are rarely observed in blood even when
review case submitted by W.Vernau.E,Photograph ofa stained blood film
plasma cell neoplasia (e.g., multiple myeloma) is present (Fig.
from a 1993 ASVCP slide review case szubmitted by D. E. Brown and M.A.
5-53, B)129,369 Plasma cels have lower N:C ratios and greater
Thrall. F, Photograpb from a 2007 ASVCP review case submitted by R. Di
Terlizzi,H.Bender, K.Gibson-Corley,A.Ginman, J. Haynes, M.Lappin.
cytoplasmic basophilia than resting lymphocytes. The pres-
 nae and ad e e a  nd go a
the cytoplasm. Plasma cells typically have eccentrically located
nuclei with coarse chromatin clumping in a mosaic pattern.
 In adition to reactive Mott cells, neoplastic Mott cells may
160
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 5-52
Blood from a bulldog with an inherited mucopolysaccharidosis with
 purple granules in a lymphocyte and a neutrophil. The general disorder
rp iou si a ads a iq ssa aas n ps s
mined. Wright-Giemsa stain.
C
FIGURE 5-53
Neoplastic large granular lymphocytes, plasma cells, and Mott cells.
 be seen in low numbers in blood from dogs with B lymphocyte
A,Neoplastilarge granular lymphocyte inblood fma at with rge
lymphoma with Mott cell differentiation (Fig. 5-53, C,D). In
granular lymphoma. Note the large size of the granules compared to the
these neoplasms, Mott cells appeared to develop from lym-
normal granularlymphocyte as shown in Figure 5-49, H.Wright-Giemsa
stain. B, Plasma cell with eccentric nucleus in blood from a dog with
multiple myeloma. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Mott cell in the blood of a
Lymphocytosis
dog with lymphoma and Mott cell differentiation. Wright-Giemsa stain.
D, Transmission electron photomicrograph of a Mott cell from a dog
Lymphocyte numbers in blood vary with age. Absolute lym-
with lymphoma and Mott cell differentiation. Disorganized and dilated
 phocyte counts are lower in young animals than in adults of
endoplasmic reticula containing immunoglobulin.
some species (e.g., horses) and higher in young animals than
C,D,From Stacy NI,Nabity MB,Hackendabl N,et al. B-cell lympboma
much les common than neutrophilia Transient lymphocyto-
with Mott cell differentiation in fwo young adult dogs.Vet Clin Pathol.
2009;38:113-120.
sis sometimes occurs with excitement or exercise in animals
pools are reported to occur in lungs and spleen, and lympho-
cytosis may occur secondary to increased blood fow and
factors—including IL-2, SCF, GM-CSF, and G-CSF—has
phocytosis in humans associated with exercise, acute psycho-
resulted in lymphocytosis in animals 19 161.29,.347
logical stress, or the activation of β-adrenergic receptors (by
 Parasitic diseases that may result in a lymphocytosis in a
infused isoproterenol) results from increased numbers of cir-
small percentage of cases include trypanosomiasis in several
culating NK cells and, to a lesser degree, increased numbers
 of y8 T 1ymphocytes and CD8+ T lymphocytes.15 Lymphocy-
terebralis infection in sheep,364 Leishmania infection in dogs,29
tosis has been reported in rats and humans affter
experimental Toxoplasma gondi infection in cats, and Babesid
splenectomy.242,49s
Although
1  increased  proliferation  of  lymphocytes  is
Bacterial diseases that may sometimes have an associated
common in lymph nodes during response to foreign antigens,
 lymphocytosis include bartonellosis in cats and subclinical
 evidence of this reaction is often not present in blood. In
some cases, reactive lymphocytes account for a substantial
clinical E. canis infection results from an increase in CD8+
 proportion of the total lymphocytes present in blood, but an
lymphocytes, which may appear as granular lymphocytes in
 absolute lymphocytosis is uncommon.
stained blood films.214,286,.483
Lymphocytosis is sometimes present in animals with low-
Viral diseases that may sometimes have an associated lym-
grade or chronic infammatory conditions. In contrast,
phocytosis include FeLV infection in cats,17caprine arthritis-
lymphopenia is more often present in acute and/or severe
encephalitis virus infections in goats,31 and bovine leukemia
 infammatory conditions. The injection of recombinant growth
virus (BLV) infection in cattle and sheep.14 Although acute
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
161
FIGURE 5-54
FIGURE 5-56
Three large granular lymphocytes in blood from a cat with an abdominal
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) in blood from a cat with normal-
large granular lymphoma. Wright-Giemsa stain.
appearing lymphocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
reactive lymphocytosis in animals, but evidence for this phe-
 nomenon has not been substantiated in published studies.29
 Persistent lymphocytosis has been described in association
with an indolent lymphoproliferative disease in ferrets. This
disorder appears to be caused by a virus other than FeLV or
Aleutian disease virus. 13s. 136
 Lymphocytosis is reported in about 40% of cats with
primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, but lymphocy-
Lymphocytosis is common in Abyssinian and Somali cats
with a disorder characterized by increased osmotic fragility of
erythrocytes.253
rd aoi e un mo oi pada uaoq seq sissd
phocytosis has also been reported in a low percentage of cats
with hyperthyroidism in one study454 However, treatment of
FIGURE 5-55
hyperthyroid cats with methimazole has also been reported to
Nonneoplastic lymphocytosis in blood from a cow infected with bovine
cause a lymphocytosis in some, raising the concern whether
leukemia virus. Lymphocytes are medium to large in size with increased
utreated hyperthyroidism causes lymphocytosis 375.376
cytoplasmic basophilia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
  sd m e  pardn uoq su sis
dogs, cats, and humans with thymoma29 Lymphocytosis in
humans has been associated with invasive, lymphocyte-rich
parvovirus infection in dogs causes lymphopenia, lymphocy-
thymomas 3,434 The lymphocytosis is attrbutable to non-
tosis may occur during recovery from the infection.379
neoplastic T lymphocytes whose proliferation is probably
BLV is a B-lymphotrophic retrovirus that can produce a
increased secondary to factors produced by neoplastic thymic
 persistent lymphocytosis in cattle and sheep. Some reactive
epithelial cells. B lymphopenia is much more common than
lymphocytes, as well as normal-appearing lymphocytes, may
T lymphocytosis in humans with thymoma.332
be seen in cattle with persistent lymphocytosis (Fig. 5-55).142
 Marked lymphocytosis, involving normal-appearing small
 This persistent lymphocytosis is due to an increase in cir-
 to medium-sized lymphocytes, is present in the blood of
animals with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) (Figs.
develop because lymphocytes, in which the virus is transcrip-
tionally silenced, survive and accumulate.147 BLV infection can
 have abnormal function. CLL is uncommon and is reported
also produce lymphomas in cattle and sheep, which can have
most often in older dogs.47453 About three-fourths of dogs
 secondary lymphocytosis comprised of neoplastic lympho-
with CLL exhibit T lymphocytosis, and about three-fourths
 of these cases ofT lymphocyte CLL appear as CD8+ granular
162
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 5-57
FIGURE 5-59
Chronic lymphocytie leukemia (CLL) involving normal-appearing small
Acute lymphoblastie leukemia (ALL) involving granular lymphocytes in
lymphocytes with scant cytoplasm in blood from a dog. Wright-Giemsa
blood from a dog. Lymphoblasts with fine nuclear chromatin and nucle
stairi.
stairl.
Photograph ofa stained blod fim from a 1989 ASVCP slide review case
submitted by M.Wellman and G.Kociba.
single phenotype along with peripheral cytopenias. A lym-
phocytosis is occasionally present in animals with lymphomas.
The morphology of the neoplastic lymphocytes in blood is
generally refective of the morphology of the lymphocytes in
the solid tumors.2?
Lymphopenia
Lymphopenia occurs in response to endogenous or exogenous
part from the sequestration oflymphocytes in lymphoid organs,
apoptosis of sensitive lymphocytes.14 The release of endoge-
nous glucocorticoids in response to severe systemic disorders
FIGURE 5-58
may play a major role in the production of the lymphopenia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) involving granular lymphocytes
that often accompanies these disorders.191 Lymphopenia occurs
with abundant cytoplasm in blood from a dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
following the experimental injection of IL-1 and TNF and
Lymphopenia also accompanies many viral infections in
lymphocytes (Fig. 5-58).474 CLL is much less common in cats
than in dogs. Like dogs, most cats with CLL exhibit T lym-
1 IFNs (especially IFN-c) produced in response to viral infec-
 phocytosis, but in contrast to dogs, the CD4+ helper cell are
 the predominant type involved. s03
nia that develops in response to type 1 IFNs may result from
Most cases of granular lymphocyte leukemia in dogs
lymphocyte activation and binding to endothelium234, however,
consist of mature-appearing lymphocytes and behave as a
high concentrations of type 1 IFNs can result in lymphocyte
form ofCLL,being indolent and slowly progressive. However,
apoptosis and lymphoid depletion.35 Lymphopenia also occurs
lymphocytes in some cases appear less well differentiated, with
following the use of immunosuppressive drugs and irradiation,
fine nuclear chromatin, and the disorder behaves more like
which result in lymphocyte destruction.45s
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), being fulminant and
 Lymphocytes are present in afferent lymph from gastroin-
rapidly fatal (Fig. 5-59).474.44 A granular lymphocyte leukemia
 testinal and bronchial lymphoid tissues and efferent lymph
has also been reported in a horse.2s
from lymph nodes. The loss of lymphocyte-rich afferent
A lymphocytosis often occurs in animals with ALL. Most
lymph (e.g., lymphangiectasia) or efferent lymph (e.g., tho-
cases have increased numbers of circulating lymphoblasts of a
racic duct ruprure) results in lymphopenia because most blood
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
163
lymphocytes recirculate through lymphoid tissues. Lympho-
penia can also occur when lymph node architecture is
disrupted (e.g., multicentric lymphoma or generalized granu-
lomatous infammation), preventing the normal recirculation
of lymphocytes.226
Lymphopenia occurs with inherited severe combined
 immunodeficiency (SCID) in horses and dogs.374 Details con-
cerning these disorders are given in Chapter 6.
BLAST CELLS OR POORLY
B
DIFFERENTIATED CELLS
Blast cells in blood generally have single round nuclei with
finely stippled or smooth chromatin containing one or more
 distinct or indistinct nucleoli. The N :C ratio is generally high,
and the cytoplasm varies from lightly to darkly basophilic.
Similarities in the appearance of different types of blast cells
can make a specific diagnosis diffcult or impossible based on 
routinely stained blood and bone marrow smears. Despite this
problem, the morphologic appearance of the blast cels can be
helpful in reaching a presumptive diagnosis. Blast cells may
also be tentatively identifed by the company they keep. Con-
sequently the types of easily identifable cells that are increased
 in blood may be helpful in reaching a diagnosis (e.g., increased
monocytes in acute monocytic or acute myelomonocytic leu-
 kemias and increased nucleated erythrocytes in erythroleuke-
mia). Specific diagnosis often requires special histochemical
stains, immunophenotyping, and/or assays for clonal rear-
Lymphoblasts
Lymphoblasts are larger than the normal small lymphocytes
present in blood. The nucleus is generally round but may be
FIGURE 5-60
indented or convoluted. The chromatin is usually finely stip
Lyrmphoblasts in blood. A, Lymphoblast in blood from a dog with acute
pled but may be coarsely granular. One or more nucleoli are
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Lymphoblast
in blood from a cat with ALL.Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Large lympho-
present in the nucleus, but they are often diffcult to see in
blast in blood from a dog with lymphoma. Wright-Giemsa stain.
routinely stained blood flms (Fig. 5-60, A). The cytoplasm is
D, Large lymphoblast in blood from a cow with lymphoma. Wright-
more basophilic than is seen in most blood lymphocytes and
Giemsa stain. E, Large heavily vacuolated neoplastic cell in blood from
sometimes contains vacuoles. Rare lymphoblasts may be
a dog with intravascular lymphoma. The cell type is uncertain; however,
 observed in disorders with increased antigenic stimulation;
it was considered most likely to be of NK cell origin. Aqueous
but when several of these cells are found during a differential
Romanowsky stain.
 count, lymphoid neoplasia is suspected.
E,Photograph ofa stained blood film from a 2O09 ASVCP slide review case
ALL originates from the bone marrow, and lymphoblasts 
mubmitted by L. V. Devai, R. W Allison, T. R. Rizzi, A. W Stern, T. A. Snider,
 are generally although not invariably present in blood from
and W.Vernau.
animals with ALL (Fig 5-60,,B;Fig 5-61)29,275,3347 Ly-
phoblasts are also released into blood in some animals with
monocytoid (Fig. 5-64),91.471 Nuclei may be especially convo-
lymphoma (Fig. 5-60, C,D; Figs. 5-2, 5-63),9,2263243s When
luted (cerebriform) in the blood of dogs and cats with T
 present in blood, this pattern is sometimes called leukemic
lymphocyte epitheliotropic cutaneous 1ymphoma.99 When
lymphoma or lymphosarcoma cell leukemia. The morphology
 these neoplastic cells with convoluted nuclei are present in
of the neoplastic lymphoid cells in blood from animals with
blood, they have been referred to as Sezary cells, and this rare
lymphoma is quite variable. One or more morphologic fea-
variant of epitheliotropic cutaneous lymphoma with leukemia
tures that may be present include exceptionally large size,
has been referred to as the Sezary syndrome.* Lymphoblasts
abundant cytoplasm, monocytoid appearance (see Fig. 5-62),
may lyse during blood film preparation, making it diffcult to
and heavily vacuolated cytoplasm, as shown from a dog
characterize them morphologically (Fig. 5-65, A,B).
 diagnosed with intravascular lymphoma (Fig. 5-60, E). Cells
       
*References 149, 150, 333, 336, 409, 457, 502.
FIGURE 5-61
FIGURE 5-64
Lymphoblasts in blood from a dog with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
A small normal-appearing lymphocyte and three large monocytoid neo-
(ALL). Wright-Giemsa stain.
plastic lymphocytes in blood from a cow with metastatic lymphoma.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-62
Pleomorphic lymphoblasts in blood from a dog with a T lymphocyte
lymphoma. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-65
Plasmacytoid lymphoma in a dog. A, Blast cells in the blood tended to
FIGURE 5-63
 lyse, making morphologic identification difficult. B, Lymph node aspi-
Lymphoblasts in blood from a goat with metastatic lymphoma. Wright-
rate smear demonstrating the plasmacytoid appearance of the neoplastic
Giemsa stain.
cells. Wright-Giemsa stain.
CHAPTER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
165
FIG U RE 5 -66  Nonlymphoid blast cells in blood
C
B
D
A, Myeloblast in blood from a cat with erythroleukemia (AML-M6). This neoplastic cell has a round mucleus
 and gray-blue cytoplasm. Two nucleoli are visible in the right side of the nucleus. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B, Myeloblast in blood from a dog with myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M2). This cell may be classified as a
the top of the cell. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Monoblast in blood from a dog with acute myelomonocytic
leukemia (AML-M4). The rucleus is more irregular than typically seen in myeloblasts. Wright-Giemsa stain.
D, Rubriblast in blood from a cat with erythroleukemia (AML-M6Er). This neoplastic cell has a remarkably
round rnucleus with intensely basophilic cytoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
E
F
一
E, Megakaryoblast in blood from a dog with megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML-M7). The rneoplastic cell has
a remarkably round rucleus with cytoplasm that contains almost irmperceptible pink granules and vacuoles.
Wright-Giemsa stain. F, Megakaryoblast in blood from a dog with AML-M7. The neoplastic cell has a
remarkably round nucleus with pinkish cytoplasm that contains vacuoles and has surface projections. Wright-
H, Giant nonhematopoietic neoplastic cell in blood from a dog with widespread metastasis. Although this
tumor was highly anaplastic,a pancreatic carcinoma was considered the likely tumor type based on necropsy
findings. Wright-Giemsa stain.
G, From Allison RW, Brunker JD, Bresbears MA, et al. Dendritic celleukemia in a golden retriever. Vet Clin Pathol
2008;37:190-197.
Myeloblasts
(Fig. 5-67). They are more often present in blood with various
Type I myeloblasts appear as large round cells with round to
forms of AML, including myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M1
oval nuclei that are generally centrally located in the cell. The
 and AML-M2) (Fig. 5-68), acute myelomonocytic leukemia
N:C ratio is high (more than 1.5), and the nuclear outline is
(AML-M4), and  erythroleukemia (AML-M6) (Fig-
usually regular and smooth (Fig. 5-66, A). Nuclear chromatin
 is finely stippled, containing one or more nucleoli or nucleolar 
 in blood all have round nuclei and resemble lymphoid cells,
rings. The cytoplasm is generally moderately basophilic but
 but cytochemical stains and/or recognition of surface markers
not as dark as rubriblasts. Some myeloblasts may contain a
 can help differentiate these celltypes in leukemic animals.2,193
few (less than 15) small magenta-staining granules in the
cytoplasm and may be classified as type II myeloblasts (Fig.
Monoblasts
5-66, B).1 Myeloblasts with numerous magenta-staining
Monoblasts resemble myeloblasts except that their nuclear
 granules are classifed as type III myeloblasts.194,27471 Myelo-
:3) souereadde ul painqoauos 1o punor Ajreqnlaun s! sdeqs
blasts may be present in blood in low numbers in CML
 5-66, C). A clear area in the cytoplasm, representing the Golgi
166
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 5-67
FIGURE 5-69
Blood from a cat with a presumptive diagnosis of chronic myeloid leu-
Blood from a cat with erythroleukemia (AML-M6). The two largest cells
kemia (CML) exhibiting marked neutrophilia with a prominent left
with pale-blue cytoplasm are myeloblasts. The smaller round cells are all
 shift. A bone marrow biopsy was not done to confirm the diagnosis. Rare
erythroid precursors. Wright-Giemsa stain.
myeloblasts (ftop left) were seen in the blood flm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-68
FIGURE 5-70
 u u sa e ue ) ise I a
Blood from a dog with acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4). A
blood from a dog with myeloblastic leukemia (AML-M2). Wright-
mixture of neutrophils, monocytes, and precursors of both cell types are 
Giemsa stain.
 present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
zone, is often observed, especially near the site of nuclear
 perfectly round. The chromatin is generally finely granular,
indentation. The N:C ratio is high but may be somewhat
with one or more nucleoli. Rubriblasts are not usually seen in
lower than that in myeloblasts.227 Monoblasts may be present
 the blood of animals with regenerative anemia They may be
in blood in animals with acute myelomonocytic leukemia
 present in variable numbers in the blood of animals with
(AML-M4) (Fig. 5-70) and acute monocytic leukemia
erythroleukemia (AML-M6 or AML-M6Er) (Figs. 5-69,
5-72), 194,316.471
reported with “AML have had either AML-M4
or
AML-M5.313
Megakaryoblasts
Rubriblasts
 Megakaryoblasts occur in the blood of animals with mega-
 Rubriblasts have more basophilic cytoplasm than myeloblasts,
 karyoblastic leukemia (AML-M7). Nuclei of megakaryoblasts
monoblasts, and most lymphoblasts (Fig. 5-66, D). Although
 are nearly as round as rubriblast nuclei, but their cytoplasm is
the other blasts mentioned have nuclei that are generaly
typically less basophilic and may contain magenta-staining
 round in shape, the nucleus of a rubriblast is usually nearly
granules (see Fig. 5-66, E,F) Unique features present in some
CHAPTER 5 · Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
167
FIGURE 5-71
FIGURE 5-73
Blood from a dog with acute monocytic leukemia (AML-M5). All cells
Blood from a dog with megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML-M7). Four
present, except a neutrophil (botfom leff) are monocyte precursors or
neoplastic megakaryoblasts with prominent cytoplasmic vacuoles are
mature monocytes. Wright-Giermsa stain.
 present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 5-72
FIGURE 5-74
Blood from a cat with erythroleukemia (AML-M6Er). A neutrophil and
Blood from a cat with acute unclassified leukemia (AUL). Two unclas-
 two rubriblasts with basophilic cytoplasm are present. Wright-Giemsa
sified neoplastic cels are present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
stairn.
Unclassified Blast Cells
of these cells include multiple discrete vacuoles (Fig. 5-73)
 and cytoplasmic projections (see Fig. 5-66, F).13,327,446.471
Primitive cells that cannot be classified with certainty are
listed as unclassified during differential cell counts. When
Neoplastic Dendritic Cells
unclassified cells predominate in bone marrow (and some-
 Dendritic cell leukemia has been described in a dog (see Fig.
 fimes blood),a diagnosis of acute unclassifed leukemia (AUL)
5-66, G).* The neoplastic dendritic cells in this case were larger
is made (Fig. 5-74).227
 than neutrophils; they had round to oval nuclei with coarsely
 stippled to granular chromatin. Indistinct nucleoli were visible
Metastatic Blast Cells
in some cells. The cytoplasm was blue, moderately abundant,
Although metastasis of tumors from nonhematopoietic organs
and sometimes contained vacuoles. Cytoplasmic borders were
is common, these neoplastic cells are rarely recognized in
often ruffed and indistinct.*
blood (except for malignant mast cells). When present, these
168
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
blast cells are typically much larger than hematopoietic blast
28. Aulitzky VE, Tilg H, Vogel W, et al. Acute hematologic effects of interferon alpha,
cells (see Fig. 5-66, H).
interferon gamma, tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin 2. Ann Hematol.
1991;62:25-31.
29.A
Avery AC, Avery PR. Determining the significance of persistent lymphocytosis. Vet
Chin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2007;37:267-282, vi.
REFERENCES
30. Ayers JR, Leipold HV, Padgett GA. Lesions in Brangus catle with Chediak-Higashi
syndrome. Vet Pathol. 1988;25:432-436.
31. Bain BJ. Relationship between idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome, eosinophilic
1. Abraham G, Allersmeier M, Gottschalk J, et al. Effects of dermal dexamethasone
leukemia, and systemic mastocytosis. Am J Hematol. 2004;77:82-85.
 application on ACTH and both basal and ACTH-stimulated cortisol concentration in
 32. Bain PJ, Alleman AR, Sheppard BJ, et al. What is your diagnosis? An 1B-month-old 
normal horses. J/ Vet Pharmacol Ther. 2009;32:379-387.
spayed female boxer dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:55.
 2. Adam F, Villiers E Watson S, et al. Clinical pathological and epidemiological assess-
33. Baird SM. Morphology of lymphocytes and plasma cells. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E.
ment of morphologically and immunologically confirmed canine leukaemmia. Vet Comp
Kipps TJ. et al. eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill;
Oncol. 2009;7:181-195.
2006:1023-1030.
3. Allan FJ, Thompson KG, Jones BR, et al. Neutropenia with a probable hereditary basis
 34. Baneth G. Feline hepatozoonosis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog
in Border Collies. NZ Vet J. 1996;44:67-72.
and Cat 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:705.
4. Allan GS, Watson AD, Duff BC, et al. Disseminated mastocytoma and mastocytemia
35. Baneth G, Aroch I Tal N, et al. Hepatozoon species infection in domestic cats: a
in a dog. J/ A Vet Med Assoc. 1974;165:346-349.
retrospective study. Vet Parasitol. 1998;79:123-133.
 5. Alleman AR, Wamsley HL: An update on anaplasmosis in dogs. Vet Med.
 36. Barlough JE, Madigan JE, Turoff DR, et al. An Ehrlichia strain from a llama fLama
2008;103:212-220.
glama) and Ilama-associated ticks {/xodes pacificus). J/ Clin Microbiol. 1997;35:1005-
6. Allen KE, Li Y, Kaltenboeck B, et al. Diversity of Hepatozoon species in naturally
1007.
 infected dogs in the southern United States. Vet Parasitol. 2008;154:220-225.
 37. Barr SC, Gossett KA, Klei TR. Clinical, linicopathologic, and parasitologic observa-
7. Allison R, Williams P, Lansdowne J, et al. Fatal hepatic sarcocystosis in a puppy
tions of trypanosomiasis in dogs infected with North American Trypanosoma cruzi
with eosinophilia and eosinophilic peritoneal efusion. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:
isolates. Arm / Vet Res. 1991;52:954-960.
353-357.
 38. Barrs VR, Beatty JA, McCandlishIA, et al. Hypereosinophilic paraneoplastic syndrome
 8. Alison RVV, Brunker JD, Breshears MA, et al. Dendritic cell leukemia in a golden
in a cat with intestinal T cel lymphosarcoma. J Small Anim Pract. 2002;43:401-
retriever. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:190-197.
405.
ye wo wy po0la 2sIsoubeip Jnon s! neu Hr yoyulan '3s Japial 'y uos 6
 39. Barton AD. T-cell lymphocytosis associated with lymphocyte-rich thymoma. Cancer.
icteric cat. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:125-126.
1997;80:1409-1417.
Aq pauiens swy pooiq ui sllan paneinuei jo anuejeadds 3y yanbian y uosd 01
sllan g ot uogenuasaid uabnue po aJayM pue moy 'oym aul '3n poomjeh 'oy easneg 0t
automated aqueous versus methanolic Romanowsky methods. Vet Clin Pathol.
Nat Rev lmmunol. 2009;9:15-27.
2010;39:99-104.
 41. Beale KM, Altman D, Clemmons RR, et al. Systemic toxicosis associated with aza-
11. Alroy J, Freden GO, Goyal V, et al. Morphologyof leukocytes from cats affected with
thioprine administration in domestic cats. Am J Vet Res. 1992;53:1236-1240.
-mannosidosis and mucopolysaccharidosis VI {MPS VI). Vet Pathol. 1989;26:294-
 42. Bell SA, Drew CP, Wilson WD, et al. Idiopathic chronic eosinophilic pneumonia in 7
302.
horses. / Vet Intem Med. 2008;22:648-653.
12. Alroy J, Orgad U, Ucci A, et al. Neurovisceral and skeletal GM1-gangliosidosis in
-nal paanpul-auwelouaanen W lysmoipauas w uyeyjanaj-zanbiupoy 'ry doussuag 2t
dogs with beta-galactosidase deficiency. Science. 1985;229:470-472.
kocytosis: early observations, current research, and future directions. Brain Behav 
13. Ameri M, Wilkerson MJ, Stockham SL, et al. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemmia in a
mmun. 1996;10:77-91.
German Shepherd dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:39-45.
44. Berger J. The segmentation of nucleiin circulating neutrophils of laboratory rats. Folia
14. Armmersbach MA, Kruth SA, Sears V, et al. The effect of glucocorticoids on canine
Haematol int /ag Kin Aorphol Blutforsch. 1982;109: 602-607.
lymphocyte marker expression and apoptosis. J Vet lntem Med. 2006;20:1166-
1171.
in ferrets. Am / Vet Res. 1983;44:657-661.
15. Anane LH, Edwards KM, Burns VE, et al. Mobilization of gamma delta T lymphocytes 
46. Beryessa NA, Marks SL, Pesavento PA, et al. Gastrointestinal pythiosis in 10 dogs
in response to psychological stress, exercise, and beta-agonist infusion. Brain Behav
/mwn. 2009;23:823-829.
 47. Bessis M. Living Blood Cels and Their Uitrastructure. New York: Springer-Verlag:
16. Anderson BH, Watson DL, ColditzIG. The efct of dexamethasone on some immu-
1973.
 nological parameters in cattle. Vet Res Commun. 1999;23:399-413.
48. Bienzle D. Monocytes and macrophages. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
17. Anderson DE, Constable PD, St Jean G, et al. Small-intestinal volvulus in catle: 35
Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
cases (1967-1992). J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:1178-1183.
2000:318-325.
18.
 Andreasen CB, Roth JA. Neutrophil functional defects. In: Feldran BF, Zinkl JG, Jain 
49. BiemannH, Pietz B, DreierR, et al. Murine leukocytes withring-shaped nuclei include
 NC, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams
granulocytes, monocytes, and their precursors. J Leukoc Biol. 1999;65:217-231
& W/ilkins; 2000: 356-365.
 50. Bimczok D. Rothkotter HJ. Lymphocyte migration studies. Vet Res. 2006;37:
19. Andrews RG, Briddell RA, Appelbaum R, et al. Stimulation of hematopoiesis in vivo
325-338.
by stem celfactor. Curr Opin Hematol. 1994;1:187-196.
51. Binns RM Whyte A, Licence ST. Constitutive and inflammatory lymphocyte traficking.
 20. Antognoni MT, Spaterna A, Lepri E, et al. Characteristic clinical, haematological and
Vet /mmuno Immunopathol. 1996;54:97-104.
histopathological findings in feline mastocytoma. Vet Res Commun. 2003;27Suppl
 52. Blanchard PC. Ridpath JF, Walker JB, et al. An outbreak of late-term abortions,
11:727-730.
premature births, and congenital deformities associated with a bovine viral diarrhea
 21. Arjona A, Escolar E, Soto l, et al. Seroepidemiological survey of infection by feline
-8zlzz0loz isaau ubeyg ia/ 7 euadonaogwoun saanpu ieun q adigns 1 snjin
leukemia virus and immunodeficiency virus in Madrid and correlation with some
131.
clinical asperts. / Chin Microbiol. 2000;38:3448-3449.
 53. Blischok D, Bender H. What is your diagnosis? 15-vear-old male domestic shorthair
22. ArochI, Klement E, SegevG. Clinical, biochemical, and hematological characteristics,
cat [disseminated histoplasmosis]. Vet Cin Pathol. 1996;25:113, 152.
disease prevalence, and prognosis of dogs presenting with neutrophil cytoplasmic
 54. Bloemena E, Weinreich S, Schellekens PTA. The influence of prednisolone on the 
23. Aroch l, Ofri R, Aizenberg 1. Haematological, ocular and skeletal abnormalities in a
1990;80:460-466.
Samoyed family. J Small Anim Pract 1996;37:333-339.
 55. Blue JT. Myelodysplasia: differentiating neoplastic from nonneoplastic syndromes of 
24. Arochl, Perl S, Markovics A. Disseminatedeosinophilic disease resembling idiopathic
ineffetive hematopoiesis in dogs. Toxicol Pathol. 2003;31Suppl:44-48.
hypereosinophilic syndrome in a dog. Vet Rec. 2001;149:386-389.
plo ue uedxa sauan mau euadonau jenjuabuon aaas  uialy 'y anan g uuog 99
 25. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC. Coats JR, et al. Heartworm infection in cats: 50 cases
disease. Curr Dpin Rheumatol. 2007;19:644-650.
{1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;217:355-358.
 57. Bookbinder PF, Butt MT, Havey HJ. Determination of the number of mast cells in 
 26. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Mille MV, et al. Prevalence of heartworm infection in
lymph node, bone marrow, and buffy coat cytologic specimens from dogs. J Am Vet
cats with signs of cardiorespiratory abnormalities. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998:
Med Assoc. 1992;200:1648-1650.
212:517-520.
Janag tn uewua ul uoung ydonau jo siapiosio '3 Jaanag 'N pieebanog 89
 27. Auffray C, Sieweke MH, Geissmann F. Blood monocytes: development, heterogeneity.
E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Williams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill
 and relationship with dendritic cells. Annu Rev immunol. 2009;27:669-692.
2006:921-957.
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
169
 59. Bortnowski HB, Rosenthal RC. Gastrointestinal mast cel tumors and eosinophilia in
91. CockerellGL, Reyes RA. Bovine leukemia virus-associated lymphoproliferative disor-
two cats. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1992;28:271-275.
ders.In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th
 60. Boudreaux MK, Wardrop KJ, Kiklevich V, et al. A mutation in the canine Kindlin-3
ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins; 2000.
gene associated withincreased bleeding risk and susceptibilitytoinfections. Throm
92. Codner EC,Farris Smith LL. Characterization of the subclinical phase of ehrlichiosis
Haemost. 2010;103:475-477.
in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1986; 189:47-50.
uaweajof jauenbizeid jouogenien3 leia 'oy uosuyor 'yn obuoy 'oo uewmog 19
 93. Colins MT, Suarez-Guemes F. Effect of hydrocortisone on circulating lymphocyte
of experimentally induced paragonimiasis in dogs and cats. Am J Vet Res.
numbers and their mitogen-induced blastogenesis in lambs. Am J Vet Res.
1991;52:68-71.
1985;46:836-840.
saeudoew jenasenenui Aneuowind ie na 'wn dwenaa y eun ar uie 79
 94. Corcoran BM, Foster DJ, Fuentes VL. Feline asthma syndrome: a retrospective study
their contribution to the mononuclear phagocyte system in 13 species. Am / Physiol.
1999;276:L146-L154.
95.
Cornbleet PJ. Clinical utility of the band count. Chin Lab Med. 2002;22:101-136.
63. Breitschwerdt EB. Feline bartonellosis and cat scratch disease. Vet Immunol mmu-
96.
6. Corthay A. How do regulatory T cells work? Scand J Immunol. 2009;70:326-336.
nopathol. 2008;123:167-171.
97. Couto CG, Krakowka S, Johnson G, et al. In vitro immunologic features of Weimaraner 
 64. Breitschwerdt EB, Brown TT, De Buysscher EV, et al. Rhinitis, pneumonia, and defec-
 dogs with neutrophil abnormalities and recurrent infections. Vet lmmunol immuno-
tive neutrophil function in the doberman pinscher. Am J Vet Res. 1987;48:1054-
pathol. 1989;23:103-112.
1062.
98. Cowell KR, Jezyk PF. Haskins ME, et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat. J Am Vet
 65. Brenner I, Shek PN, Zamecnik J, et al. Stress hormones and the immunological
Med Ass0c. 1976;169:334-339.
responses to heat and exercise. int J/ Sports AMed. 1998;19:130-143.
99.
9. Cowell RL, Decker LS. Interpretation of feline leukocyte responses. In: Feldman BF,
66. Brewer BD, Harvey JW, Mayhew IG, et al. Ehrlichiosis in a Florida horse. JAm Vet
ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
Med Ass0c. 1984;185:446-447.
pincott Wiliams & Wikins; 2000:382-390.
67. Brock KV, Jones JB, Shull RM, et al. Efect of canine parvovirus on erythroid progeni-
100.
.Cowgill E, Neel J. Pleural fluid from a dog with marked eosinophilia. Vet Clin Pathol.
lan r wy shop ui ejwaue spljoway anpejauabal paanpu-auzespyjAuayd ui sion
2003;32:147-149.
Res. 1989;50:965-969
101.
Cowles BE, Meyers KM, Wardrop KJ, et al. Prolonged bleeding time of Chediak-
68. Brown DE, Thrall MA, Walkley SU, et al. Feline Niemann-Pick disease type C. Amm J/
Higashi cats corrected by platelet transfusion. Thromb Haemost. 1992;67:708-712.
Pahol. 1994;144:1412-1415.
102.
-jalot pue uopenje lan-g on sAeuied aneuul s puelog '3 enouAoA 'ds uondweng 
69. Brown MR, Rogers KS. Neutropenia in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 261
ance. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1183:58-68.
cases. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2001;37:131-139.
103. Criado-Fornelio A, Buling A, Pingret JL, et al. Hemoprotozoa of domestic animals in 
 70. Bunch SE, Easley JR, Cullen JM. Hematologic values and plasma and tissue folate
France: prevalence and molecular characterization. Vet Parasitol. 2009;159:73-76.
concentrations in dogs given phenytoin on a long-term basis. Am J Vet Res.
104. Criado-Fornelio A. Ruas JL, Casado N, et al. New molecular data on mammalian 
1990;51:1865-1868.
Hepatozoon species (Apicomplexa: Adeleorina) from Brazil and Spain. J Parasitol.
71. Burnett RC. Vernau W. Modiano JF. et al. Diagnosis of canine lymphoid
2006;92:93-99.
 neoplasia using clonal rearangements of antigen receptor genes. Vet Pathol.
105. Cunningham JM, Patnaik MM, Hammerschmidt DE, et al. Historical perspective and
2003;40:32-41.
clinical implications of the Pelger-Huet cell. Am / Hematol. 2009;84:116-119.
 72. Calvert CA, Mahaffey MB, Lappin MR, et al. Pulmonary and disseminated eosinophilic
106. Dale DC, Boxer L, Liles W/C. The phagocytes: neutrophils and monocytes. Blood.
 granulomatosis in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1988;24:311-320.
2008;112:935-945.
73. Campbell LJ, Maher DVV, Tay DL, et al. Marrow proliferation and the appearance of
107. Darbes J, Majzoub M, Breuer W. et al. Large granular lymphocytic leukermia/
 giant neutrophils in response to recombinant human granulocyte colony stimulating
lymphoma in six cats. Vet Pathol. 1998;35:370-379.
factor (rhG-CSF). Br / Haematol. 1992;80:298-304.
108. Darrah PA, Hondalus MK, Chen Q, et al. Cooperation between reactive oxygen and
nitrogen intermediates in killing of Rhodococcus equi by activated macrophages.
Ames, IA: Blackwell Publishing: 2007.
Infect /mmmun. 2000;68: 3587-3593.
 75. Carakostas MC, Moore WE, Smith JE. Intravascular neutrophilic granulocyte kinetis
aaouduai suoua jo uoeuanaa 1e na da yezuy ho bueuz rr oueasa 601
in horses. Amm / Vet Res. 1981;42:623-625.
leukemia in the horse. A report of two cases. J Vet Intern Med. 1992;6:225-229.
 76. Caramori G, Adcock l. Antinflammatory mechanisms of glucocorticoids targeting
110. Davies AP, Hayden DV, KlausnerJS, etal. Noncutaneous systemic mastocytosis and
granulocytes. Curr Drug Targets Inffamm Allergy. 2005;4:455-463.
mast celleukemia in a dog: case report and literature review. JAmAnim Hosp Assoc.
77. Carlson GP, Kaneko JJ. Influence of prednisolone on intravascular granulocyte kinet-
1981;17:361-368.
111.
.Davis JM, AIbert JD, Tracy KJ, et al. Increased neutrophil mobilization and decreased 
78. Caro-Vadillo A, Martinez-Merlo E, Garcia-Real l, et al. Verminous pneumonia due to
 chemotaxis during cortisol and epinephrine infusions. / Trauma. 1991;31:725-731.
Filaroides hirthr in a Scottish terier in Spain. Vet Rec. 2005;157:586-589.
112. Dawson JE, Abeygunawardena I, Holland CJ, et al. Susceptibility of cats to infection
79. Carrade DD, Foley JE, Borjesson DL, et al. Canine granulocytic anaplasmosis: a
with Ehrlichia ristici, causative agent of equine monocytic ehrlichiosis. AmJ VetRes.
review. J Vet Intem /Med. 2009;23:1129-1141.
1988;49:2096-2100.
 B0. Cayatte SM, McManus PM, Miller WHJ, et al. Identification of mast cells in buffy
113. Dawson JE, Ewing SA. Susceptibility of dogs to infection with Ehrlichia chaffeensis.
coat preparations from dogs with inflammatory skin diseases. J Am Vet Med AssoC.
1995;206: 325-326.
114. Debacq C. Asquith B, Kerkhofs P, et al. Increased celproliferation, but not reduced
B1. Cello RM, Moulton JE, McFarland S. The occurrence of inclusion bodies in the circu-
 cell death, induces lymphocytosis in bovine leukemia virusinfected sheep. Proc Natl
lating neutrophils of dogs with canine distemper. Comell Vet. 1959;49:127-146.
Acad Sc USA. 2002;99:10048-10053.
Anas anpaadsonal e 1en a4n ui eludouiso3 le ia 'NH q3 sr 4diopuey 'bs Januan 78
115. Decaro N, Campolo M, Lorusso A, et al. Experimental infection of dogs with a novel
of 312 cases f1975 to 1986l. JAm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1990;26:349-358.
 strain of canine coronavirus causing systemic disease and lymphopenia. Vet AMicro-
B3. Chatta GS, Price TH, Stratton JR, et al. Aging and marrow neutrophil reserves. J Am
biol 2008;128:253-260.
Geriatr Soc. 1994;42:77-81.
116. Deubelbeiss KA, Dancey JT, Harker LA, et al. Neutrophil kinetics in the dog. / Clin
 84. Chirico G, Gasparoni A, Ciardelli L, et al. Leukocyte counts in relation to the method
/nvest 1975;55:833-839.
of delivery during the first five days of life. Bio Neonate. 1999;75:294-299.
117. Di Santo JP. Natural killer cells diversity in search of a niche. Nat lmmunol.
B5. Chuammitri P, Ostojic J, Andreasen CB, et al. Chicken heterophil extracellular traps
2008;9:473-475.
{HETs): novel defense mechanism of chicken heterophils. Vet immunol /mmunopathoy.
118. Dial SM, Mitchell TW, LeCouteur RA, et al. GM-gangliosidosis Type Il in three cats.
2009;129:126-131.
J Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1994;30:355-359.
B6. Chusid MJ, Bujak JS, Dale DC. Defective polymorphonuclear leukocyte metabolism
119. Dieringer TM, Brown SA, Rogers KS, et al. Effects of lithium carbonate administration 
and function in canine cyclic neutropenia. Blood. 1975;46:921-930.
to healthy cats. Amm J/ Vet Res. 1992;53:721-726.
la r shop u Ayiedownaudoyouoig aludouiso leia 'y sdeus'o siaiaad ' xiaio 28
120. Dillon AR. Brawner AR Jr. Robertson-Plouch CK, et al. Feline heartworm disease:
Intem M/ed. 2000;14:282-291.
correlations of clinical signs, serology, and other diagnostics-results of a multicenter
B8. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in cats: 12 cases
study. Vet Ther. 2000;1:176-182.
{1981-1986]. J/ Arm Vet //ed Ass0c. 1987;190:1445-1448.
121. Doerschuk CM, Downey GP, Doherty DE, et al. Leukocyte and platelet margination 
circulating eosinophils of a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;192:217-218.
122. Douglass TG, Driggers L, Zhang JG, et al. Macrophage colony stimulating factor: not
 90. Clinkenbeard KD, Wolf AM, Cowell RL, et al. Feline disseminated histoplasmosis.
just for macrophages anymore! A gateway into complex biologies. Int Immunophar-
J Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1989; 11:1223-1233.
macol. 2008;8:1354-1376.
170
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
123. Duckett W/M, Matthews HK. Hypereosinophili in a horse with intestinal lymphosar-
153. Franzen P, Aspan A, Egenvall A, et al. Acute clinical, hematologic, serologic, and 
coma. Can Vet J. 1997;38:719-720.
polymerase chain reaction findings in horses experimentallyinfected with a European 
124. Dumler JS, Barbet AF, Bekker CP, et al. Reorganization of genera in the families
strain of Anapiasma phagocytophilum. J Vet Intem Med. 2005;19:232-239.
 Rickettsiaceae and Anaplasmataceae in the order Rickettsiales: unification of some
154.F
Franzen P. Berg AL, Aspan A, et al. Death of a horse infeted experimentally with 
species of Ehrlichia with Anaplasma, Cowdria with Ehrlichia and Ehrlichia with Neo-
Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Vet Rec. 2007:160:122-125.
ricketsia, descriptions of six new species combinations and designation of Ehrichia
155. Frauenfelder HC, Fessler JF, Moore AB, et al. Effects of dexamethasone on endotoxin
equi and *HGE agent" as subjective synonyms of Ehrlichia phagocytophia. Int J Syst
shock in the anesthetized pony: hematologic, blood gas, and coagulation changes.
Evol Microbiol. 2001;51:2145-2165.
Am J Vet Res. 1982;43:405-411.
125. Dunn JK, Heath MF, Jefferies AR, et al. Diagnosis and hematologic features of
156. Frenais R, Rosenberg D, Burgaud S, et al. Clinical efficacy and safety of a once-daily
probable essential thrombocythemia in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 1999;28:
         
131-138.
2009;50:510-515.
126. Dutta SK, Penney BE, Myrup AC, et al. Disease features in horses with induced equine
157. Fry MM, Foman MA. 5-fluorouracil toxicity with severe bone marrow suppression in
   w  u  sa m
a dog. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2004;46:178-180.
snuenngns-snoaunnn po uondisap  je ia i Aio 'n deus r ensxa h
158. Fuchs TA, Abed U, Goosmann C, et al. Novel cell death program leads to neutrophil
pythiosis in fifteen dogs. Med Mycol. 1999;37:427-433.
extracellular traps. / Cell Biol. 2007;176:231-241
128. East LM, Savage CJ, Traub-Dargatz JL, et al. Enterocolitis associated with Clostridium
159. Fujino Y, Horiuchi H, Mizukoshi F, et al. Prevalence of hematological abnormalities
perfringens infection in neonatal foals: 54 cases f1988-1997). J/ Armm Vet Med Assoc.
-nwwi aual yri sien spewondwse ui san mojew auog paaju! po uopiap pue
1998;212:1751-1756.
nodeficiency virus infection. Vet Microbiol. 2009;136:217-225.
129. Edwards DF, Parker JV, Wilkinson JE, et al. Plasma cell myeloma in the horse. A
160. Fujiwara N, Kobayashi K. Macrophages in inflammation. Curr Drug Targets Infammm
case report and literature review. / Vet intem Med. 1993;7:169-176.
Allergy. 2005;4:281-286.
130.
 Egenvall A. Bjoersdorff A, Lilliehook l, et al. Early manifestations of granulocytic 
161. Fulton R, Gasper PV, Ogilvie GK, et al. Effect of recombinant human granulocyte
aads ei ysipans e yi Aeaadxa paeoui sh ui sisoa
colony-stirmulating factor on hematopoiesis in normal cats. Exp Hemato.
isolate. Vet Rec. 1998;143:412-417.
1991;19:759-767.
131. Eichacker P, Lawrence C. Steroid-induced hypersegmentation in neutrophils. Am J
162. Furze RC, Rankin SM. The role of the bone marrow in neutrophil clearance under
Hemato1. 1985;18:41-45.
homeostatic conditions in the mouse. FASEB J. 2008;22:3111-3119.
132. Elis GS, Carlson DE, Hester L, et al. G-CSF, but not corticosterone, mediates circulat-
163. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Hall CA, et al. Inherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption 
ing neutrophilia induced by febrile-range hyperthermia. J Appl Physiol. 2005;98:
and cobalamin deficiency in dogs. Pediatr Res. 1991;29:24-31.
1799-1804.
164. Galli SJ, Metcalfe DD, Arber DA, et al. Basophils and mast cells and their disorders.
133. Elsas PX, Neto HA, Cheraim AB, et al. Induction of bone-marrow eosinophilia in mice
In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New 
submitted to surgery is dependent on stressinduced secretion of glucocorticoids. Br
York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:879-897.
/ Phammacol. 2004;143:541-548.
165. Ganz T, Lehrer Rl. Production, distribution, and fate of monocytes and macrophages.
134. Endicott MM, Charney SC, McKnight JA, et al. Clinicopathological findings and results
In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed New
of bone marrow aspiration in dogs with cutaneous mast cell tumours: 157 cases
York: McGraw-Hill 2006:979-986.
f1999-2002). Vet Comp Oncol. 2007;5:31-37.
166. Garret LD, Craig CL, Szladovits B, et al. Evaluation of buffy coat smears for circulating
135. Erdman SE, Kanki PJ, Moore FM, et al. Clusters of lymphoma in ferrets. Cancerinvest.
mast cells in healthy cats and ill cats without mast cell tumor-related disease. /Am
1996;14:225-230.
Vet MMed Assoc. 2007;231:1685-1687.
136. Erdman SE, Reimann KA, Moore FM, et al. Transmission ofa chronic lymphoprolifera-
167. Gary AT, Kerl ME, Wiedeyer CE, et al. Bone marrow hypoplasia associated with
tive syndrome in ferrets. Lab Invest. 1995;72:539-546.
fenbendazole administration in a dog. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2004;40:224-229.
mdonau pauis- Joy alon Aay  e na n ue 'r Aa r se 2l
168. Gaspar-Elsas Ml, Queto T, Vasconcelos Z, et al. Evidence fora regulatory role ofalpha
'1o2-6i9zll8ooz poog syne Aonewweui bunp buyaen pue uonpond
4-integrins in the maturation of eosinophils generated from the bone marow in the
138.
Fagbemi BO, Otesile EB, Makinde MO, et al. The relationship between dietary energy
presence of dexamethasone. Clin Exp Aergy. 2009;39:1187-1198.
levels and the severityof Trypanosoma brucerinfection in growing pigs. VetParasitol.
169. Gaunt SD, Baker DC. Hemosiderin in leukocytes of dogs with immune-mediated 
1990;35:29-42.
hemolytic anemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 1986;15(2):8-10.
139. Faldyna M, Laznicka A, Toman M. Immunosuppression in bitches with pyometra.
170. Geissmann F, Manz MG, Jung S,et al. Development of monocytes, macrophages and
J Small Anim Pract. 2001;42:5-10.
dendritic cells. Science. 2010;327:656-661.
140. Farstad IN, Norstein J, Brandtzaeg P. Phenotypes of B and T cells in human intestinal
171. Gelain ME, Antoniazzi E, Bertazzolo W, et al. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia in a cat:
and mesenteric lymph. Gastroenterology. 1997;112:163-173.
172. Gerner W, Kaser T. Saalmuller A. Porcine T lymphocytes and NK cells-an update.
Diergeneeskd. 2004;129:360-364.
Dev Comp Immunol. 2009;33:310-320.
142. Ferer JF, Marshak RR, Abt DA, et al. Relationship between lymphosarcoma and
173. Gieg J, Rikihisa Y, Welman M. Diagnosis of Ehrlichia ewingi infetion by PCR in a
persistent lymphocytosis in cattle: a review. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1979;175:705-
puppy from Ohio. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:406-410.
708.
174. Gilbert RO, Rebhun WC, Kim CA, et al. Clinical manifestations of leukocyte adhesion
143. Fews D, Scase TJ, Battersby IA. Leiomyosarcoma of the pericardium, with epicardial
metastases and peripheral eosinophilia in a dog. J Comp Pathol. 2008;138:224-
175. Gill AF. Gaunt S. Sirninger J. Congenital Pelger-Huet anomaly in a horse. Vet Clin
228.
Pathol. 2006;35:460-462.
144. Fietta P, Delsante G. The effector T helper cell triade. Riv Biol. 2009;102:61-74.
176. Gingerich K, GuptilL Canine and feline histoplasmosis: a review of a widespread
 pa a wr op e ui enal aan  ui a au tl
fungus. Vet Med. 2008;103:248-264.
1999;214:1809-1812.
177. Gitzelmann R, Bosshard NU, Superti-Furga A, et al. Feline mucopolysaccharidosis VI
146.
Flatland B, Fry MM, Baek SJ, et al. May-Hegglin anomaly in a Pug dog. Vet Clin Pathol.
due to β-glucuronidase deficiency. Vet Pathol. 1994;31:435-443.
2011;40:207-214.
178. Gleich S, Hartmann K. Hematology and serum biochemistry of feline immunodefi-
 147. Florins A, Gillet N, Asquith B, et al. Cell dynamics and irmmune response to BLV
ciency virus-infected and feline leukemia virus-infected cats. J Vet lntem Med.
infection: a unifying model. Front Biosci 2007:12:1520-1531.
2009;23:552-558.
148. Foley J, Nieto NC, Madigan J, et al. Possile differential host tropism in Anapasma
179. Gommeren K, Duchateau L, Paepe D, et al. Investigation of physiologic leukopenia in 
phagocytophilum strains in the Western United States. Ann N Y Acad Sci
0  w    
2008;1149:94-97
'9r iuz'da uewpiay ul 'slewaya pue shnsp yr paneiosse sewaus dy massog 081
149. Fontaine J, Bovens C, Bettenay S. et al. Canine cutaneous epitheliotropic T-cell
Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
lymphoma: a review. Vet Comp Oncol. 2009;7:1-14.
liams & W/ilkins; 2000:185-189.
150. Foster AP, Evans E, Kerlin RL, et al. Cutaneous T-cellymphoma with Sezary syndrome
181. Gossett KA, Carakostas MC. Effect of EDTA on morphology of neutrophils of healthy
in a dog. Vet Chin Pathol. 1997;26:188-192.
dogs and dogs with inflammation. Vet Clin Pathol 1984;13:22-25.
151. Fox LE, Ford S. Alleman AR, et al. Aplastic anemia associated with prolonged high-
182. Gossett KA. MacVilliams PS. Ultrastructure of canine toxic neutrophils. Am J Vet
dose trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol.
Res. 1982;43:1634-1637.
1993;22:89-92.
183. Gossett KA, MacWilliams PS, Cleghorn B. Sequential morphological and quantitative 
152. Franks PT. Harvey JV, Mays MC, et al. Feline large granular lymphoma. Vet Pathol.
changes in blood and bone marrow neutrophils in dogs with acute inflammation. Can
1986;23:200-202.
J/ Comp Med. 1985;49:291-297.
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
171
184. Gossett KA, MacWilliams PS, Fulton RV. Viralinclusions in hematopoietic precursors
 214. Hess PR, English RV, Hegarty BC, et al. Experimental Ehrlichia canis infection in
in a dog with distemper. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1982;181:387-388.
the dog does not cause immunosuppression. Vet immunol immunopathol.
185. Goto Y, Hogg JC, Suwa T, et al. A novel method to quantify the turnover and release
2006;109:117-125.
of monocytes from the bone marrow using the thymidine analog 5'-bromo-2'-deoxy-
215. Hess RS, Saunders HM, Van Winkle TJ, etal. Clinical, clinicopathologic,radiographic.
uridine. Am / Physiol Cell Physiol. 2003;285:C253-C259.
and ultrasonographic abnormalities in dogs with fatal acute pancreatitis: 70 cases 
186. Greenfield CL, Messick JB, Solter PF, et al. Results of hematologic analyses and 
{1986-1995). J Am Vet M/ed Assoc. 1998;213:665-670.
 pa a w r uanal uebiag ui euadoal aoosud jo aualed
 216. Hikasa Y, Morita T, Futaoka Y, et al. Connective tissue-type mast celleukemia in a
2000;216:866-871.
dog. J Vet Med Sci. 2000;62:187-190.
187. Gregoire C. Chasson L Luci C, et al. The traficking of natural killer cells. mmunol
 217. Hirsch VM, Cunningham TA. Hereditary anomaly of neutrophil granulation in Birman
Rev. 2007;220:169-182.
cats. Arm / Vet Res. 1984;45:2170-2174.
188. Greig B, Armstrong PJ. Canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis {A. phagocytophilum
218. Hoffmann K, Sperling K, Olins AL, et al. The granulocyte nucleus and lamin B receptor:
infectioni. In: Greene CE, ed. lnfectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat 3rd ed. St. Louis:
avoiding the ovoid. Chromosoma. 2007;116:227-235.
Saunders Elsevier; 2006:219-224.
 219. Hopper PE, Mandell CP, Turrel JM, et al. Probable essential thrombocythemmia in a
189. Greig B, Breitschwerdt E, Armstrong J. Canine granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis {.
dog. J Vet Intem Med. 1989;3:79-85.
ewinginfections]. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed.
 220. Horwitz MS. Duan Z. Korkmaz B, et al. Neutrophil elastase in cyclic and severe
St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:217-218.
congenital neutropenia. Blood. 2007;109:1817-1824.
190. Greiner M, Wolf G, Hartmann K. A retrospective study of the clinical presentation of
221.
Huibregtse BA, Turner JL. Hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic leukemia: a
140 dogs and 39 cats with bacteraemia. / Small Anim Pract. 2008;49:378-383.
comparison of 22 hypereosinophilic cats. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1994;30:591-599.
191. Griebel PJ, Qualtiere L, Davis WC, et al. Bovine peripheral blood leukocyte subpopula-
222. Huizing M. Helip-Wooley A. Westbroek W, et al. Disorders of lysosome-related
tion dynamics following a primary bovine herpesvirus-1 infection. Viral lmmunol.
organelle biogenesis: clinical and molecular genetics. Annu Rev Genomics Hum
1987;1:267-286.
Genet. 2008;9:359-386.
192. Grinberg N, Elazar S, Rosenshine I, et al. Beta-hydroxybutyrate abrogates formation
 223. Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kaufman A. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in three dogs 
of bovine neutrophil extracelular traps and bactericidal activity against mammay
treated with anticonvulsants. J/Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998;212:681-684.
pathogenic Escherichia coli Infect Immun. 2008;76:2802-2807.
 224. Jain NC. Schaim's Veterinary Hematoogy 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1986.
193.
Grindem CB. Blood cell markers. Vet Clin Norh Am Small Anim Pract 1996;26:
225.
 pasodod eans buisn sen ui siapiosip apejayloidojaAw jo uopenysselo on uier 
1043-1064.
266l-696l sasen l8l fo Apngs an1adsonale :dnoj6 Apns ejwaeynal ewjue ayn Aq
194. Grindem CB. Acute myeloid leukemia.In: Feldman BF ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's
Comp Haemato Int 1993;3:125-134.
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
   8 a    s5   9
2000:717-726.
 227. Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al. Proposed criteria for classification of acute
195. Grindem CB, Stevens JB, Brost DR, et al. Chronic myelogenous leukaemia with 
myeloid leukemia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol. 1991;20:63-82.
meningeal infitration in a dog. Comp Haematol Int. 1992;2:170-174.
228.
1. James FE, Mansfield CS. Clinical remission of idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome 
196. Grondin TM, Dewit SF, Keeton KS. Pelger-Huet anomaly in an Arabian horse. Vet 
in a Rottweiler. Aust Vet J. 2009;87:330-333.
Chin Pathol. 2007;36:306-310.
229. Johnson LR, Herrgesell EJ, Davidson AP, et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic, and radio-
197. Gustafson BVV. Ivermectin in the treatment of Physaloptera preputialis in two cats.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1995;31:416-418.
Med Assoc. 2003;222:461-466.
198. Hammer RF, Weber AF. Ultrastructure of agranular leukocytes in peripheral blood of
 230. Johnsrude JD, Alleman AR, Schumacher J, et al. Cytologic findings in cerebrospinal
normal cows. Arm / Vet Res. 1974;35:527-536.
fluid from two animals with GMz-gangliosidosis. Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:80-83.
199. Hammond WP, Csiba E, Canin A, et al. Chronic neutropenia. A new canine model 
 231. Joosten SA, Otenhoff TH. Human CD4 and CD8 regulatory T cells in infectious dis-
induced by human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. J Clin nvest. 1991;87:
eases and vaccination. Hum Immunol. 2008;69:760-770.
704-710.
232. Jordan HL, Cohn LA,Armstrong PJ. Disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex
 200. Harvey JV. Hematology tip—stains for distemper inclusions. Vet Clin Pathl.
infection in three Siamese cats. J/ Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1994;204:90-93.
1982;11:12.
 233. Kakoma l, Hansen RD, Anderson BE, et al. Cultural, molecular, and immunological
 201. Harvey JV, Asquith RL, McNulty PK, et al. Haematology of foals up to one year old.
 characterization of the etiologic agent for atypical canine ehrlichiosis. J/ Clin Micro-
Equine Vet J. 1984;16:347-353.
biol. 1994;32:170-175.
 202. Harvey JV, Gaskin JM. Experimental feline haemobartonellosis. J Arm Anim Hosp
234. Kamphuis E, Junt T, WaiblerZ, et al. Type linterferons directly regulate lymphocyte
Assoc. 1977;13:28-38.
recirculation and cause transient blood lymphopenia. Blood. 2006;108:3253-
 203. Harvey JV, Harr KE, Murphy D, et al. Hematology of healthy Forida manatees Tri-
3261.
chechus manatus). Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38;183-193.
235. Kaname H, Mori Y, Sumida Y, et al. Changes in the leukocyte distribution and surface
 204. Haskins M, Giger U. Lysosomal storage diseases. In: Kaneko J, Harvey JVV, Bruss
expression of adhesion molecules induced by hypothalammic stimulation in the cat.
ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animais. Bth ed. San Diego: Academic
Brain Behav lmmun. 2002;16:351-367.
Press; 2008:731-749.
 -ouisoa uewny jo uogejnbal jeajbojosewjeud x bueuz'3 uaueon 'H enuejueexuey 9ez
 205. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis type VIl (Sly syn-
 phil apoptosis. Curr Drug Targets Inffamm Allergy. 2005;4:433-445.
dromel: beta-glucuronidase-deficient. Am / Physiol. 1991;138:1553-1555.
 237. Kaplan J, De Domenico I, Ward DM. et al. Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Curr Opin 
206.
Haskins ME, Desnick RJ, DiFerrante N, et al. β-glucuronidase deficiency in a dog: a
Hematol. 2008;15:22-29.
model of human mucopolysaccharidosis Vll PediatrRes. 1984;18:980-984.
238.． Kariya K, Konno A, shida T. Perforin-like immunoreactivityin four cases of lymphoma
207. Hatano Y, Taniuchi S, Masuda M, et al. Phagocytosis of heat-killed Staphylococcus
61-99tte2661 ro4eg 1a/ e3 aun ui saaoud jenue6 abie1 10
aureus by eosinophils: comparison with neutrophils. APMIS. 2009;117:115-123.
 239. Karni RJ, Wangh LJ, Sanchez JA. Nonrandom location and orientation of the inactive
 208. Heinemann A, Sturm GJ, Ofner M, et al. Stem cell factor stimulates the chemotaxis.
 X chromosome in human neutrophil nuclei. Chromosoma. 2001;110:267-274.
integrin upregulation, and survival of human basophils. J Allergy Clin immuno.
-An ao yo Aonosyod au  s  An '3 eusimy-nun 
2005;116:820-826.
panosomosis: haematological and blood biochemical changes. Vet Parasitol.
 209. Helfand SC, Soergel SA, MacW/illiams PS, et al. Clinical and immunological effects
1992;45:17-32.
of human recombinant interleukin-2 given by repetitive weekly infusion to normal
 241. Kaufman J. Diseases of the adrenal cortex of dogs and cats. Mod Vet Pract.
dogs. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1994;39:84-92.
1984;65:429-434.
 210. Helton KA, Nesbitt GH, Caciolo PL. Griseofulvin toxicity in cats:literature and report
 242. Kelemen E, Gergely P. Lehoczky D, et al. Pemanent large granular lymphocytosis in
of seven cases. / Armm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1986;22:453-458.
the blood of splenectomized individuals without concomitant increase of in vitro
211.Henningson JN, TopliffCL, Gil LH, et al. Effect of the viral protein Nfpro) on virulence
natural kille cell cytotoxicity. Cin Exp Immunol. 1986;63:696-702.
of bovine viral diarrhea virus and induction of interferon type I in calves. Am J Vet 
jauds ysiug ue ui aseasp anons iewosos pauauui r aewen an jaliay 2
Res. 2009;70:11171123.
Spaniel. J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1992;200:194-195.
 212. Henson JB, McGuire TC, Kobayashi K, et al. The diagnosis of equine infectious anemia
244. Khoutorsky A, Bruchim Y. Transient leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and anaemia asso-
using the complement-fixation test, siderocyte counts, hepatic biopsies, and serum
 ciated with severe acute phenobarbital intoxication in a dog. / Small Anim Pract.
protein alterations. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1967;151:1830-1839.
2008;49:367-369.
213.
.Henson KL, Alleman AR, Fox LE, et al. Diagnosis of disseminated adenocarcinoma by
245.
.Kijas JM, Bauer TR Jr, Gafvert S, et al. A missense mutation in the beta-2 integrin
bone marrow aspiration in a dog with leukoerythroblastosis and fever of unknown
gene fITGB2) causes canine leukocryte adhesion deficiency. Genomics.
origin. Vet Chin Pathol. 1998;27:80-84.
1999;61:101-107.
172
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 246. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB. Cutaneous actinomycosis and nocardiosis in dogs: 48
276. Lewis GEJ, Huxsoll DL, Ristic M, etal. Experimentallyinduced infection of dogs, cats,
cases f1980-1990). / Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1992;201:917-920.
and nonhuman primates with Ehrlichia equi, etiologic agent of equine ehrlichiosis.
247. Kirpensteijn J, Fingland RB, Ulrich T, et al. Cholelithiasis in dogs: 29 cases {1980-
Anm / Vet Res. 1975;36:85-88.
19901. JAm Vet MMed Assoc. 1993;202:1137-1142.
277.L
Ley K, Laudanna C, Cybulsky MI, et al. Geting to the site of inflammation: the leuko-
 248. Kitoh K, Kitagawa H, Sasaki Y. Pathologic findings in dogs with shock induced
cyte adhesion cascade updated. Nat Rev immunol. 2007;7:678-689.
 by intravenous administration of heartworm extract. Am J Vet Res. 1998;59:
278. LiliehokI, Gunnarsson L, Zakrisson G, et al. Diseases associated with pronounced
1417-1422.
 249. Knowles TG, Edwards JE, Bazeley KJ, et al. Changes in the blood biochemical
279. Lilliehook I, Tvedten H. Investigation of hypereosinophilia and potential treatments.
 and haematological profile of neonatal calves with age. Vet Rec. 2000;147:593-
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2003;33:1359-1378.
598.
280. L
Lindbom L, Werr J. Integrin-dependent neutrophil migration in extravascular tissue.
 250. Kodama A, Sakai H, Kobayashi K, et al. B-cell intestinal lymphoma with Mott cell
Semin /mmunol. 2002;14:115-121.
differentiation in a 1-year-old miniature Dachshund. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:
Ling GV, Stabenfeldt GH, Comer KM, et al. Canine hyperadrenocorticism: pre-
409-415.
treatment clinical and laboratory evaluation of 117 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
251. 
Kogan DA, Johnson LR, Jandrey KE, et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic, and radiographic 
1979:174:1211-1215
findings in dogs with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases (2004-2006). J Am Vet Med
 282. Linterman MA, Vinuesa CG. Signals that influence Tfollicular helper cell differentia-
Assoc. 2008;233:1742-1747.
tion and function. Semin Immunopathol. 2010;32:183-196.
252.
Kohn B, Anold P, Kaser-Hotz B, et al. Malignant histiocytosis of the dog: 26 cases
283. Little SE, Allen KE, Johnson EM, et al. New developments in canine hepatozoonosis
{1989-1992) Kleintierpraxis. 1993;38:409-424.
in North Armerica: a review. Parasit Vectors. 2009;2Suppl 1):S5.
 253. KohnB, Goldschmidt MH, Hohenhaus AE, et al. Anemia, splenomegaly, and increased
284. Liu K, Waskow C, Liu X, et al. Origin of dendritic cells in peripheral lymphoid organs
osmoticfragilityof erythrocytes in Abyssinian and Somali cats. JAm Vet Med Assoc.
of mice. Nat /mmunol. 2007;8:578-583.
2000;217:1483-1491.
 285. Lofstedt J, Dohoo IR, Duizer G. Model to predict septicemia in diarrheic calves. J/ Vet
 254. Kohn B, Weingart C, Eckmann V, et al. Primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
ntern Med. 1999;13:81-88.
in 19 cats: diagnosis, therapy. and outcome f1998-2004). J Vet Intem Med.
-ua ieuns yim shoppo adouaydouni  onosaitzuies ' auaio 8z
2006;20:159-166.
sis. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1149:114-117.
255.
Kohn CVw, Swardson C, Provost P, et al. Myeloid and megakaryocytic hypoplasia in
 287. Losco PE. Local and peripheral eosinophilia in a dog with anaplastic mammary carci-
related standardbreds. / Vet Intern Med. 1995;9:315-323.
noma. Vet Pathol. 1986;23:536-538.
256.
 Kosanke SD, Pierce KR, Bay WV. Clinical and biochemical abnormalities in porcine
288. Lowe AD, CampbellKL, Barger A, et al. Clinical, linicopathological and histological
GMz-gangliosidosis. Vet Pathol. 1978;15:685-699.
 changes observed in 14 cats treated with glucocorticoids. Vet Rec. 2008;162:777-
 257. Kouro T, Takatsu K. IL-5- and eosinophil-mediated inflammation: from discovery to 
783.
therapy. Int Immunol. 2009;21:1303-1309.
 289. Lucroy MD, Madewell BR. Clinical outcome and associated diseases in dogs with
258.
Kramer J, Tornquist S, Erfle J, et al. Large granular lymphocyte leukemia in a horse.
leukocytosis and neutrophilia: 118 cases {1996-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22:126-128.
1999;214:805-807.
259.
Kringel H Roepstorff A. Trichuris suspopulation dynamics following a primaryexper-
 290. Lucroy MD, Madewell BR. Clinical outcome and diseases associated with extreme
mental infection. Vet Parasitol. 2006;139:132-139.
260. Kubo H, Doyle NA, Graham L, et al. L- and P-selectin and CD11/CD18 in intracapillary
2001;218:736-739.
neutrophil sequestration in rabbit lungs. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999
 291. Lund JE, Brown PK. Hypersegmented megakaryocytes and megakaryocytes with mul-
159:267-274.
tiple separate nuclei in dogs treated with PNU-100592, an oxazolidinone antibiotic.
 261. Kueck BD, Smith RE, Parkin J, et al. Eosinophilic leukemia: a myeloproliferative disor-
Toxicol Pathol 1997;25:339-343.
der distinct from the hypereosinophilic syndrome. Hematol Pathol. 1991;5:195-205.
 292. Lyles SE, Panciera DL, Saunders GK, et al. Ildiopathic eosinophilic masses of the
262. La Perle KM, Piercy RJ, Long JF, et al. Multisystemic, eosinophilic, epitheliotropic
gastrointestinal tract in dogs. J/ Vet Intem Med. 2009;23:818-823.
disease with intestinal lymphosarcoma in a horse. Vet Pathol. 1998;35:144-146.
 293. Macallan DC, Wallace DL, Zhang Y, et al. B-cell kinetics in humans: rapid turnover
 263. Lan NT. Yamaguchi R. Furuya Y. et al. Pathogenesis and phylogenetic analyses 
of peripheral blood memory cells. Blood. 2005;105:3633-3640.
of canine distemper virus strain 007Lm, a new isolate in dogs. Vet Microbiol.
294. Macdonald D,Gordon AA, Kajitani H, et al.Interleukin-2treatment-associated eosino-
2005;110:197-207.
philia is mediated by interleukin-5 production. Br J Haematol. 1990;76:168-173.
 264. Lanevschi A, Daminet S, Niemeyer GP, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
 295. MacEwen EG, Drazner FH, McClelland AJ, et al. Treatment of basophilic leukemia in
deficiency in a rotweiler with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. J Vet intern Med.
a dog. J Am Vet MMed Assoc. 1975;166:376-3B0.
1999;13:72-75.
296. Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N, Dillon AR, et al. Hepatozoonosis in dogs: 22 cases
 265. Langheinrich KA, Nielsen SWw. Histopathology of feline panleukopenia: a report of 65
↑1989-1994). J Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1997;210:916-922.
cases. JAr Vet Med Assoc. 1971;158:863-872.
297. Maddison JE, Hoff B, Johnson RP. Steroid responsive neutropenia in a dog. J Amm
266.
Larsen S, Flagstad A, Aalbaek B. Experimental panleukopenia in the conventional cat.
Anim Hosp Assoc. 1982;19:881-886.
Vet Pathol. 1976;13:216-240
298. Madewell BR, Gunn C, Gribble DH. Mast cell phagocytosis of red blood cells in a cat.
267. Lascola K, Vandis M, Bain P, et al. Concurrent infetion with Anaplasma phagocyto-
Vet Pathol. 1983;20:638-640.
philum and Mycoplasma haemolamae in a young Alpaca. J Vet intem Med.
 299. Madewell BR, Munn RJ. Canine lymphoproliferative disorders. An ultrastructural
2009;23:379-382.
02-89:t0661 pa/ wa1u/ 18/ 7 sas93 81 1o Ap1s
 268. Latimer KS. Pelger-Huet anomaly. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's
 300. Madewell BR, Munn RJ, Phillips LP. Endocytosis of erythrocytes in vivo and particu-
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins:
late substances in vitro by feline neoplastic mast cells. Can J Vet Res. 1987;51:
2000:976-983.
517-520.
 269. Latimer KS, Bounous Dl, Collatos C, et al. Extreme eosinophilia with disseminated 
 301. Madewell BR, Wilson DVV, Hornof WJ, et al. Leukemoid blood response and bone 
 eosinophilic granulomatous disease in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:23-26.
infarcts in a dog with renal tubular adenocarcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 270. Latimer KS, Campagnoli RP, Danilenko DM. Pelger-Huet anomaly in Australian shep-
1990;197:1623-1625.
herds: 87 cases {1991-1997). Comp Haematol Int 2000;10:9-13.
-86ll sasen 6t eoen wayou ui sisouya auinb3 0 aiaag '3r uebipe zog
 271. Latimer KS, Jameson PH, Crowell WA, et al. Dissemminated Mycobacterium avium 
19811. J/Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1987;190:445-448.
complex infection in a cat: presumptive diagnosis by blood smear exammination. Vet
303. Madigan JE, Pusterla N. Ehrlichial diseases. Vet Cin North Am Equine Pract.
Chin Pathol 1997;26:85-89.
2000;16:487-499, ix.
 272. Latimer KS, Robertson SL. Inherited leukocyte disorders. In: August JR, ed. Consuta-
304. Maeda K, Sakonju I Kanda A, et al. Priming efects of lipopolysaccharide and inflam-
tions in Feline internal Medicine 2. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.: 1994:503-
matory cytokines on canine granulocytes. J Vet Med Sci. 2010;72:55-60.
507.
 305. Mahaffey EA, Brown TP, Duncan JR, et al. Basophilic leukaemia in a dog. J Comp
 273. Leifer CE, Matus RE, Patnaik AK, et al. Chronic myelogenous leukemia in the dog.
Pathol. 1987;97:393-399
J Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1983;183:686-689.
 306. Mair TS, Hillyer MH, Taylor FG. Peritonitis in adult horses: a review of 21 cases. Vet 
 274. Lepidi H, Bunnell JE, Martin ME, et al. Comparative pathology and immunohistology
Rec. 1990;126:567-570.
associated with clinical iness after Ehrlichia phagocytophilagroup infections. AmJ
 307. Marchetti V, Benetti C. Citi S, et al. Paraneoplastic hypereosinophilia in a dog with
Trop M/ed Hyg. 2000;62:29-37.
intestinal T-cellymphoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:259-263.
 275. Lester GD, Alleman AR, Raskin RE, et al. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leuke-
 308. Marcos R, Santos M, Malhao F, et al. Pancytopenia in a cat with visceral leishmani-
mia in three horses. / Vet Intem Med 1993;7:360-363.
asis. Vet Chin Pathol. 2009;38:201-205.
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
173
 309. Martin BA, Wiggs BR, Lee S, et al. Regional differences in neutrophil margination in
n wo paseaia saaonal jeaianuoudioiod ieia ' ysbu3  jywez 'h aen o
dog lungs. / Appl Physiol. 1987;63:1253-1261.
bone marrow by granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: intravascular behavior.
 310. Mason KV, Evans AG. Mosquito bite-caused eosinophilic dermatitis in cats. JAm Vet
Hematol J. 2000;1:159-171.
Med Assoc 1991;198:2086-2088.
 341. Mukbel RM, Patten C Jr, Gibson K, et al. Macrophage killing of Leishmania amazo-
 311. Matthews S, Dart AJ, Dowling BA, et al. Peritonitis associated with Actinobacilus
nensis amastigotes requires both nitric oxide and superoxide. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
equwsin horses: 51 cases. Aust Vet J. 2001;79:536-539.
2007;76: 669-675.
 312. McCauleyI. Hartmann PE. Changes in piglet leucocytes, B lymphocytes and plasma
 342. Muller G, Alldinger S, MoritzA, et al. GM-gangliosidosis in Alaskan huskies: clinical
cortisol from bith to three weeks after weaning. Res Vet Sci. 1984;37:234-241.
and pathologic findings. Vet Pathol. 2001;38:281-290.
 313. McClure JT. Leukoproliferative disorders in horses. Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract.
343. Murray MJ. Salmonellosis in horses. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1996;209:558-560.
2000;16:165-182.
344.
aelo buno Aenu Aq pasnen ewaue o n Jaig  s 's sa 
 314. McLaughlin BG, Adams PS, Cornell VWVD, et al. Canine distemper viral inclusions in
deficiency in the cat fabstract). Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:30.
blood cells of four vaccinated dogs. Can Vet J. 1985;26:368-372.
 345. Mylonakis ME, Day MJ, Siarkou V, et al. Absence of myelofibrosis in dogs with
 315. McManus PM. Frequency and severity of mastocytemia in dogs with and
myelosuppression induced by Ehrlichia canis infection. J Comp Pathol
without mast cell tumors: 120 cases {1995-1997). J Am Vet MMed Assoc. 1999;215:
2009;142:328-331
355-357.
 346. Nair MG, Guild KJ, Artis D. Novel efetor molecules in type 2inflammation: lessons 
 316. McManus PM. Classification of myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review. Vet Cin 
drawn from helminth infection and allergy. J Immunol. 2006;177:1393-1399.
Pathol 2005;34:189-212.
347. Nash RA, Schuening F Appelbaum F, et al. Molecular loning and in vivo evaluation
 317. McManus PM, Craig LE. Correlation between leukocytosis and necropsy findings in
of canine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood. 1991;78:
dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemmia: 34 cases {1994-1999). J Am Vet Med
930-937.
Assoc. 2001;218:1308-1313.
 348. Ndikuwera J, Smith DA, Obwolo MJ, et al. Chronic granulocytic leukaemia/
 318. McManus PM, Litwin C, Barber L. Immune-mediated neutropenia in 2 dogs. J Vet 
eosinophilic leukaemia in a dog? J Small Anim Pract. 1992;33:553-557.
Intem //ed 1999;13:372-374.
 349. Neer TM, Dial SM, Pechman R, et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis VIl in a miniature Pin-
 319. Mdurwwa EG, Ogunbiyi PO, Gakou HS. et al. Pathogenic mechanisms of caprine
scher. J/ Vet Intern Med. 1995;9:429-433.
arthritis-encephalitis virus. Vet Res Commun. 1994;18:483-490.
 350. Neuwelt EA. Johnson WG, Blank NK, et al. Characterization of a new model of
320.
Mears EA, Raskin RE, Legendre AM. Basophili leukemia in a dog. J Vet lntem Med.
s8el sau u r sien nenoy u! (aseasi soiuesl sisopisouen-g
1997;11: 92-94.
482-490.
321. Meng R, Bridgman R, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al. Neutrophil elastase-processing defect
351. Neves JS, Welle PF.Functional extracellular eosinophil granules: novel implications
in cyclic hematopoietic dogs. Exp Hematol. 2010;38:104-115.
in eosinophil immunobiology. Curr Opin Immunol. 2009;21:B94-699.
322.
 Merad M, Manz MG, Karsunky H, et al. Langerhans cells renew in the skin throughout 
 352. Nfon CK, Toka FN, Kenney M, et al. Loss of plasmacytoid dendritic cell function
life under steady-state conditions. Nat /mmunol. 2002;3:1135-1141.
 coincides with lymphopenia and viremia during foot-and-mouth disease virus infec-
 323. Messick JB. Chronic myeloid leukemias. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
tion. Wral Immunol. 2010;23:29-41.
su g swe nouidd eudaped pa yg Aooewah Aeuyaa sweus
 353. Nielsen HB, Secher NH, Kristensen JH, et al. Splenectomy impairs lymphocytosis
2000:733-739.
during maximal exercise. Am J Physiol. 1997;272:R1847-R1852.
 324. Meyer J, Delay J, Bienzle D. Clinical, laboratory, and histopathologic features of
 354. Niemeyer GP, Lothrop CD Jr. Cyclic hematopoiesis. In: Feldrman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC.
equine lymphoma. Vet Patho. 2006;43:914-924.
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lipincot Williams &
Wvilkins; 2000:960-964.
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
 355. O'Connor CR, Schraeder PL, Kurland AH, et al. Evaluation of the mechanisms of 
2000:971-975.
 326. Mevers-Wallen VN, Haskins ME, Patterson DF. Hematologic values in healthy neo-
natal, weanling, and juvenile kittens. Ar J Vet Res. 1984;45:1322-1327.
J Vet Intern Med. 1987:1:75-80.
327.
 Michel RL, O'Handley P, Dade AV. Megakaryocytic myelosis in a cat. JAm Vet Med
357. Obradovich JE, Ogilvie GK, Powers BE, et al. Evaluation of recombinant canine granu-
Assoc 1976;168:1021-1025.
locyte colony-stimulating factor as an inducer of granulopoiesis. J Vet lntem Med.
 328. Michlewska S. Dransfield l. Megson IL, et al. Macrophage phagocytosis of 
1991;5: 75-79.
Aotewweyu-oid po suoe busoddo au Aq paenbaAjeu s sudonau sodode
 358. Ogawa H, Tu CH, Kagamizono H, et al. Clinical, morphologic, and biochemical char-
acteristics of Chediak-Higashi syndrome in fifty-six Japanese black cattle. Am / Vet
854.
Res. 1997;58:1221-1226.
 329. Mizukoshi T, Fujino Y, Yasukawa K, et al. Essential thrormbocythermia in a dog. J Vet
359. Oguma K, Kano R, Hasegawa A. In vitro study of neutrophil apoptosis in dogs. Vet
/Med Sci. 2006; 68:1203-1206.
immwnol /mmunopathol. 2000;76: 157-162.
 330. Modiano JF, Helfand SC. Acute lymphocytic leukemia. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain
 360. Oguma K, Sano J, Kano R, et al. In vitro effet of recombinant human granulocyte
NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematoogy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams
yoyedounuw/ pounuw a/ sisodode qdonnau aujues uo joef bupejnws-Auojos
& Wilkins; 2000:631-637.
2005;108:307-314.
 331. Mohri M, Sharifi K, Eidi S. Hematology and serum biochemistry of Holstein dairy
 361. Ohnmacht C, Voehringer D. Basophils protect against reinfection with hookworms
calves: age related changes and comparison with blood composition in adults. Res
09-tte:t8t0toz younw 7 sllan zul Aowaw pue san isew po Auapuadapu!
Vet Sci. 2007;83:30-39.
 362. Okada K, Nakae N. Kuramochi K, et al. Bovine leukemia virus high tax molecular
 332. Montella L, Masci AM, Merkabaoui G, et al. B-cell lymphopenia and hypogamma-
clone experimentally induces leukemia/lymphoma in sheep. J Vet Med Sci.
 globulinemia in thymoma patients. Ann Hematol. 2003;82:343-347.
2005;67:1231-1235.
 333. Moore PF, Affolter VK, Graham PS, et al. Canine epitheliotropic cutaneous T-cell
 363. Osbaldiston GW, Greve T. Estimating adrenal cortical function in dogs with ACTH.
lymphoma: an investigation of T-cell receptor immunophenotype, lesion topography
Comell Vet. 1978;68:308-309.
and molecular clonality. Vet Dermatol. 2009;20:569-576.
 364. Ozmen O, Sahinduran S, Haligur M, et al. Clinicopathologic observations on Coenurus 
 334. Mori A, Lee P, Izawa T, et al. Assessing the immune state of dogs suffering from
  r z     s
pituitary gland dependent hyperadrenocorticism by determining changes in peripheral
134.
Iymphocyte subsets. Vet Res Commun. 2009;33:757-769.
365. Palic D, Ostojic J, Andreasen CB, et al. Fish cast NETs: neutrophil extracellular traps
335. Mori Y, Iwasaki H, Kohno K, et al. Identification of the human eosinophilineage-
 are released from fish neutrophils. Dev Comp /mmunol. 2007;31:805-816.
committed progenitor: revision of phenotypic definition of the human common myeloid
pue lenownu po shadse awos ie ia 'g enenewwen dn enenewwen 's yauied 9g
progenitor. J Exp Med. 2009;206:183-193.
cellular immunity in naturally occurring feline infectious peritonitis. Vet immunol
336.
 Moriello KA. Cutaneous lymphoma and variants. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC.
immunopathol. 1998;65:205-220.
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
 367. Pardanani A, Verstovsek S. Hypereosinophilic syndrome, chronic eosinophilic leuke-
Wilkins; 2000:648-653.
mia, and mast cell disease. Cancer J. 2007;13:384-391
337. Morris DD, Bloom JC, Roby KA, et al. Eosinophilic myeloproliferative disorder in a
368. Park YM, BochnerBS.Eosinophil survival and apoptosis inhealth and disease. Alergy
horse. J/ Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1984;185:993-996.
Asthma Immunol Res. 2010;2:87-101.
 338. Morris DD, Moore JN. Tumor necrosis factor activity in serum from neonatal foals
 369. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective
study. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:341-352
339. Moser K. Tokoyoda K Radbruch A, et al. Stromal niches, plasma cell differentiation
 370. Paul AL, Shaw SP, Bandt C. Aplastic anemia in two kittens following a prescription
and survival. Curr Dpin /mmunol. 2006;18:265-270.
error. / Amm Animm Hosp Assoc. 2008;44: 25-31
174
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 371. Pearce RD, Callahan JV, Little PB, et al. Caprine β-D-mannosidosis: Characterization
403. Rothenbacher HJ, Ishida K, Barner RD. Equine infectious anemia-part Il. The sidero-
of a model lysosomal storage disorder. Can J Vet Res. 1990;54:22-29.
leukocyte test as an aid in the clinical diagnosis. Vet Med. 1962;57:886-890.
 372. Perkins G, Ainsworth DM, Erb HN, et al. Clinical, haematological and biochemical
jeuwopge pue pooig lejayduad sisoubeip ino s! seunn A epeds3 y inbadog-ziny t0t
as ym paed  adia auba u y seu su
fluid from a dog with abdominal distention [eishmaniasis]. Vet Clin Pathol.
and premature foals. Equine Vet J. 1999;31:422-426.
1998;27:64,67.
 373. Perkins MC, Canfield P, Churcher RK, et al. Immune-mediated neutropenia suspected
405. Sakuma M, Nakahara Y, Suzuki H, et al. A case report: a dog with acute onset of 
in five dogs. Aust Vet J. 2004;82:52-57.
Hepatozoon canis infection. / Vet Med Sci. 2009;71:835-838.
 374. Perryman LE. Molecular pathology of severe combined immunodeficiency in mice,
406.S
SallesIl Feys HB, Iserbyt B, et al. Inheritedtraits afeting platelet function. Blood
horses, and dogs. Vet Pathol. 2004;41:95-100.
Rev. 2008;22:155-172.
 375. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanaugh PG, et al. Feline hyperthyroidism : pretreatment
407. Santos M, Marcos R, Assuncao M, et al. Polyarthritis associated with visceral leish-
clinical and laboratory evaluation of 131 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
maniasis in a juvenile dog. Vet Parasitol. 2006;141:340-344.
1983;183:103-110.
408. Santos RL, Tsolis RM, BaumlerAJ, et al. Hematologic and serum biochemical changes
 376. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Hurvitz Al. Methimazole treatment of 262 cats with hyper-
in Saimonella ser Typhimurium-infected calves. Am J/ Vet Res. 2002;63:1145-1150.
 409. Schick RO, MurphyGF, Goldschmidt MH. Cutaneous lymphosarcoma and leukemia in 
 377. Philips B. Severe, prolonged bone marrow hypoplasia secondary to the use of carbo-
a cat. J/ Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:1155-1158.
410. Schmidlin H, Diehl SA. Blom B. New insights into the regulation of human B-cell
378.
 Postorino NC, Wheeler SL, Park RD, et al. A syndrome resembling lymphomatoid 
differentiation. Trends /mmunol. 2009;30:277-285.
 granulomatosis in the dog. / Vet Intem Med. 1989;3:15-19.
411.Schroeder JT. Basophils beyond effector cells of allegicinflammation. Adv mmunol.
379. Potgieter LN, Jones JB, Patton CS, et al. Experimental parvovirus infection in dogs.
2009;101:123-161
Can / Cop MMed. 1981;45:212-216.
 412. Schultze AE. Interpretation of canine leukograms. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC,
-anos au ui asasp buawa ue weawe voozed ya a i Jad o
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lipincott Wiliams &
central/southeastern United States. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antoniol
Wilkins; 2000:366-381
2010;20:70-76.
 413. Schwartzl, Bensaid A, Polack B, et al. In vivo leukocyte tropism of bovine leukemia
 381. Poulsen LK, Hummelshoj L Triggers of IgE class switching and allergy development.
virus in sheep and cattle. J Virol. 1994;68:4589-4596.
Ann N/ed. 2007;39:440-456.
 414. Searcy GP. Oorr JP. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a horse. Can Vet J. 1981;22:
 382. Prasse KV, George LVV, Whitlock RH. Idiopathic hypersegmentation of neutrophils in
148-151.
a horse. / Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1981;178:303-305.
 415. Segev G, Klement E, Aroch I. Toxic neutrophils in cats: clinical and clinicopathologic
 383. Prasse KV, Kaeberle ML, Ramsey FK. Blood neutrophil granulocyte kinetics in cats.
features, and disease prevalence and outcome—a retrospective case control study.
Am J Vet Res. 1973;34:1021-1025
/ Vet Jntem //ed. 2006;20:20-31.
 384. Prieur DJ, Collier LL. Neutropenia in cats with the Chediak-Higashi syndrome. Can J
416. Sellon RK, Rottman JB, Jordan HL, et al. Hypereosinophilia associated with transi-
Vet Res. 1987;51:407-408.
 385. Raisis AL, Hodgson JL, Hodgson DR. Equine neonatal septicaemia: 24 cases. Aust
417. Sharifi H, Nassiri SM, Esmaelli H, et al. Eosinophilic leukaemia in a cat. JFeine Med
Vet J. 1996;73:137-140.
Surg. 2007;9:514-517.
 386. Ramaiah SK, Harvey JV, Giguere S, et al. Intravascular hemolysis associated with
418. Sharkey LC. Rosol IJ, Grone A, et al. Production of granulocyte colony-stimulating
liver disease in a horse with marked neutrophil hypersegmentation. J Vet Intern Med.
factor and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor by carcinomas in a dog
2003;17:360-363
and a cat with paraneoplastic leukocytosis. J Vet lntern Med. 1996;10:405-408.
387. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Myelodysplastic changes in a cat with myelomonocytic leu-
419. Sheikh J, Weller PF. Clinical overview of hypereosinophilic syndromes. immunol
kemia. J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1985;187:171-174.
Aergy Clin North Am. 2007;27:333-355.
 388. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Prevalence of leukemic blood and bone marrow in dogs with
multicentric lymphoma. JAmm Vet MMed Assoc. 1989;194:1427-1429.
infections in the cat. Semin Vet //ed Surg /Small Anim). 1995;10: 220-233.
389.
Rawlings CA, Prestwood AK, Beck BB. Eosinophilia and basophilia in Dirofilaria
immitis and Dipetalonema reconditum infetions. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
DG, Friedland JS, eds. Cytokines in Heaith and Disease. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel
1980;16:699-704.
Dekker, Inc.: 1997:487-505.
390.F
Reagan WJ. A review of myelofibrosis in dogs. Toxicol Pathol. 1993;21:164-169.
Due jo saqwu buena ujala jo al enaogno'a rs zt
391.Reagan WJ, Murphy D, Battaglino M, et al. Antibodies to canine granulocyte colony-
neutrophils. Blood. 2001;98:1226-1230.
stimulating factor induce persistent neutropenia. Vet Pathol. 1995;32:374-378.
423. Shidham VB, Swami VK. Evaluation of apoptotic leukocytes in peripheral blood
392.
aibeag e u! paambei ot Ajunww Aeuowind le 1a 'a3 jeg y ydiopny yl uewpay 
smears. Arch Pathol Lab MMed. 2000;124:1291-1294.
dog model of allergic asthma. Exp Lung Res. 2001;27:433-451
424. Shimizu T, Kawamura T, Miyaji C, et al. Resistance of extrathymic T cells to stress
393. Reese TA, Liang HE, Tager AM, et al. Chitin induces accumulation intissue of innate
and the role of endogenous glucocorticoids in stress associated immunosuppression.
inmune cells associated with allergy. Nature. 2007;447:92-96.
Scand / /mmwnol. 2000;51:285-292.
 394. Renshaw HVV, Davis WC. Canine granulocytopathy syndrome: an inherited disorder
shen uaaun uo Apnas lenbojoiewau  le ia '1 eusen 'N ebeueus '1 epowus 9t
 of leukocyte function. Amm J Pathol. 1979;95:731-744.
395. Renson P, Blanchard Y, Le Dimna M, et al. Acute induction of cell death-related IFN
426. Shimoda T, Shiranaga N, Mashita T, et al. Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia in a cat.
stimulated genes (ISG) diferentiates highly from moderately virulent CSFV strains.
J Vet //ed Sci. 2000;62:195-197.
Vet Res. 2010;41:7.
 427. Shull RM, Powell D. Acquired hyposegmentation of granulocytes (pseudo-Pelger-Huet
396.F
 Reppas GP, Canfield PJ. Malignant mast cell neoplasia with local metastasis in a
anomaly) in a dog. Comell Vet. 1979;69:241-247.
horse. NZ Vet J. 1996;44:22-25.
-webod aun pue slan auap san eua a ayaaa h pspunsis t
397. Reyers F, Leisewitz AL, Lobetti RG, et al. Canine babesiosis in South Africa: more
ming of tissue-selective lym phocyte trafficking. Nat /mmwnol. 2008;9:981-987.
than one disease. Does this seve as a model for falciparum malaria? Ann Trop Med
429. Silverstein D, Carmichael KP, Wang P. et al. Mucopolysaccharidosis type Vll in a
Parasitol. 1998;92:503-511.
German Shepherd dog. JArm Vet Med Assoc. 2004;224:553.
398. Ristic M, DawsonJ, Holland CJ, et al. Susceptibility of dogs to infection with Ehrichia
 430. Singh B, Pearce JVV, Gamage LN, et al. Depletion of pulmonary intravascular macro-
ristici, causative agent of equine monocytic ehrlichiosis (Potomac horse fever). Am
phages inhibits acute lung inflammation. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol.
/ Vet Res. 1988;49:1497-1500.
2004;286:L363-L372.
399.F
Robertson JM, Macleod M, Marsden VS, et al. Not all CD4+ memory T cells are long
431. Siracusa MC, Perrigoue JG, Comeau MR, et al. New paradigms in basophil develop-
lived. Immnol Rev. 2006;211:49-57.
ment, regulation and function. mmunol CellBio. 2010;88:275-284.
400. Rose RJ, Allen JR, Hodgson DR, et al. Responses to submaximal treadmill exercise
432. Smith CV. Composition of neutrophils. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al.
asen-pise pue seb pooig leyaje Abojorewaey ui sabueyg :asoy ayn ul buujenn pue
eds. Wiiams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 2006:847-854.
measurements., plasma biochemical values and heart rate. Vet Rec. 1983;113:
433. Smith CV. Production, distribution, and fate of neutrophils. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler
612-618.
E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
401. Rossi G, Gelain ME, Foroni S, et al. Extreme monocytosis in a dog with chronic
2006:855-861.
monocytic leukaemia. Vet Rec. 2009;165:54-56.
402. Rossof AH, Fehir KM, Budd HS, et al. Lithium carbonate enhances granulopoiesis and
thymomas. Amm / Clin Pathol. 1994;102:447-453.
086l roig par dx3 Aoy bop aun u! Aunlu! paanpul-apiweydsoudoja sanenuae
127:155-166.
 96z-18z:00z :su 8g swe mosuiddn ediaped pa 4ng Xoojoewa
CHAP TER 5 = Evaluation of Leukocytic Disorders
175
436. Smith JE, Erickson HH, DeBowes RM, et al. Changes in circulating equine erythrocytes 
hematologic effects of TNF alpha in Corynebacterium parvum-primed rats. / Leukoc
induced by brief, high-speed exercise. Eguine Vet J/. 1989;21:444-446.
Biol. 1989;45:546-557.
437. Sontas HB, Dokuzeylu B. Turna O, et al. Estrogen-induced myelotoxicity in dogs: a
 468. Ulich TR, del CJ, Souza L. Kinetics and mechanisms of recombinant human
review. Can Vet J. 2009;50:1054-1058.
granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor-induced neutrophilia. Am J Pathol.
438.S
 Spencer LA, Weller PF. Eosinophils and Th2 immunity: contemporary insights.
1 988;133: 630-638.
Immunol Cell Biol. 2010;88:250-256.
469. Unterer S, Deplazes P. Arnold P, et al. Spontaneous Crenosoma vuipis infection in 10
439. Stacy NI, Nabity MB, Hackendahl N, et al. B-celllymphoma with Mott cell differentia-
tion in two young adult dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:113-120.
2002;144: 174-179.
-nnau jo siaaweed anauiy po uonewns3 ieia 'd iadail 'dxuas  yreguias ot
470. Valent P, Dahinden CA. Role of interleukins in the regulation of basophil development 
philic. eosinophilic and basophilic granulocytes in human blood. Blut. 1979;39:
 and secretion. Curr Dpin Hematol. 2010;17:60-66.
27-38.
471.
ValiVEVetrinaryCoparativemataathogyAmesIABlakwellPublishing
441. Stephens L, Milne L, Hawkins P. Moving towards a beter understanding of chemo-
2007:119-456.
taxis. Curr Biol. 2008;18:R485-R494.
 472. van Miert AS, van Duin CT, Wensing T. Fever and acute phase response induced in
442. Stockham SL, Basel DL, Schmidt DA. Mastocytemia in dogs with acute inflammatory
dwarf goats by endotoxin and bovine and human recombinant tumour necrosis factor
diseases. Vet Chin Pathol 1986;15f11:16-21.
alpha. / Vet Pharmacol Ther. 1992;15:332-342.
443. Stockham SL, Schmidt DA, Curtis KS, et al. Evaluation of granulocytic ehrlichiosis in
473. Vargo CL, Taylor SM, Haines DM. Immune mediated neutropenia and thrombocyto-
dogs of Missouri, including serologic status to Ehrichia canis. Ehrlichia equi and
penia in 3 giant schnauzers. Can Vet J. 2007;48:1159-1163.
Borrelia burgdorferi Am J Vet Res. 1992;53:63-68
474. Vernau V, Moore PF. An immunophenotypic study of canine leukemias and prelimi-
444. Stockham SL, Tyler JV, Schmidt DA, et al. Experimental transmission of granulocrytic
nary assessment of clonality by polymerase chain reaction. Vet immuno lmmuna-
ehrlichial organisms in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 1990;19:99-104.
pathol. 1999;69:145-164.
445.S
 Summers C, Rankin SM, Condliffe AM, et al. Neutrophil kinetics in health and disease.
475. Villiers E, Baines S, Law AM, et al. Identification of acute myeloid leukemia in dogs 
Trends /mmunol. 2010;31:318-324.
using flow cytometry with myeloperoxidase, MAC387, and a canine neutrophil-
446. SuterSE, Vemau V, FyMM,et al. CD34+, CD41+ acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
specific antibody. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:55-71.
in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:288-292.
476. Voehringer D. The role of basophils in helminth infection. Trends Parasitol.
447.
 Sykes JE, Weiss DJ, Buoen LC, et al. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome in 3
2009;25:551-556.
Rottweilers. J Vet Intem AMed. 2001;15: 162-166.
477. Wardini AB, Guimaraes-Costa AB, Nascimento MT, et al. Characterization of neutro-
448. Takahashi T, Kadosawa T, Nagase M, et al. Visceral mast celltumors in dogs: 10
 phil extracellular traps in cats naturally infected with feline leukemia virus. J Gen
Virol. 2010;91:259-264.
449. Takeuchi Y, Matsuura S. Fujino Y, et al. Hypereosinophilic syndrome in two cats.
478. Wardlaw A. Eosinophils and their disorders. In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ.
/ Vet Med Sci 2008;70:1085-1089.
et al, eds. WViiams Hematology. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:863-878.
450. Tarrant JM, Stokol T, Blue JT, et al. Diagnosis of chronic myelogenous leukemia in 
479. Watson AD, Wilson JT, Turner DM, et al. Phenylbutazone-induced blood dyscrasias
a dog using morphologic, cytochemical, and flow cytometric techniques. Vet Clin 
suspected in three dogs. Vet Rec. 1980;107:239-241.
Pathol. 2001;30:19-24.
480. Watson ADJ, Wright RG. The ultrastructure of inclusions in blood cells of dogs with
451. 1
 Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytometric 
distemper. J/ Comp Pathol. 1974;84:417-427.
immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases 2002-
 481. Weaver BMQ, Staddon GE, Pearson MRB. Tissue blood content in anaesthetised
2006). Vet Chin Pathol. 2009;38:2-12.
sheep and horses. Comp Biochem Physiol [A). 1989;94A:401-404.
452. Taylor JA. Leukocyte responses in ruminants. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds.
482. Weiner LM, Li V, Holmes M, et al. PhaseI trial of recombinant macrophage colony-
 Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wikins;
 stimulating factor and recombinant gamma-interferon: toxicity. monocytosis, and 
2000:391-404.
 clinical effects. Cancer Res. 1994;54:4084-4090.
453. Thamsborg SM, Leifsson PS, Grondahl C, et al. Impact of mixed strongyle infections
483. Weiser MG, Thrall MA, Fulton R, et al. Granular lymphocytosis and hyperproteinemia
in foals after one month on pasture. Equine Vet J. 1998;30:240-245.
in dogs with chronic ehrlichiosis. J/ Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1991;27:84-88
 454. Thoday KL, Mooney CT. Historical, clinical and laboratory features of 126 hyperthyroid
484. Weisman JL, Woldemeskel M, Smith KD, et al. Blood smear from a pregnant catthat 
cats. Vet Rec. 1992;131:257-264.
died shortly after partial abortion. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:209-211.
455. Thommasen HV, Martin BA, Wiggs BR, et al. Effect of pulmonary blood flow on
485. Weiss DJ. Leukocyte response to toxic injury. Toxicor Pathol. 1993;21:135-
6-969t6l ros4a rdd bun bop Aq asealai pue ayendn aoal
140.
456. ThompsonJP, Christopher MM, Elison GW, etal. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis associ-
486. Weiss DJ. Aplastic anemia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Veteri-
ated with a rectal adenomatous polyp in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
nary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;: 2000:
1992;201:737-738.
212-215.
487. Weiss DJ. Bone marrow necrosis in dogs: 34 cases f1996-2004). JAm VetMed Assoc.
 a dog resembling Sezary syndrome in man. Vet Pathor. 1984;21:182-186.
2005;227:263-267.
 458. Tizard IR. Veterinary lmmunology. An lntroduction. Bth ed. Philadelphia: Saunders
488. Weiss DJ. Recognition and classification of dysmyelopoiesis in the dog: a review.
Elsevier; 2009:1-527.
J Vet Intern MMed. 2005;19:147-154.
459. Toft P, Lillevang ST, Tonnesen E, et al. Redistribution of lymphocytes following E. coli
 489. Weiss DJ. Evaluation of dysmyelopoiesis in cats: 34 cases {1996-2005). J/ Am Vet
sepsis. Scand / Immunol 1993;38:541-545.
//ed Ass0c. 2006;228:893-897.
460. Toman M, Faldyna M, Knotigova P. et al. Postnatal development of leukocyte
490. Weiss DJ, Aird B. Cytologic evaluation of primary and secondary myelodysplastic
subset composition and activity in dogs. Vet Immunol immunopathol. 2002:87:
 syndromes in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2001;30:67-75.
321-326.
491. Weiss Du, Henson M. Pure white cell aplasia in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol.
461. Topham NJ, Hewitt EVw. Natural kiler cell cytotoxicity. how do they pull the trigger?
2007;36:373-375.
mmunology. 2009:;128:7-15.
492. Weiss DJ, Lulich J. Myelodysplastic syndrome with sideroblastic differentiation in a
 462. Toth SR, Nash AS, McEwan AM, et al. Chronic eosinophilic leukaemia in blast crises
dog. Vet Chin Pathol 1999;28:59-63.
in a cat negative for feline leukaemia virus. Vet Rec. 1985;117:471-472.
493. Welles EG. Clinical interpretation of equine leukograms. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG.
463. Trowald-Wigh G, Ekman S, Hansson K, et al. Clinical, radiological and pathological
Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wil-
features of 12 Irish setters with canine leucocyte adhesion deficiency. J Smal Anim
liams & Wvilkins; 2000:405-410.
Pract. 2000;41:211-217.
494. Welman ML. Lymphoproliferative disorders of large granular lymphocytes. Lake
-doanap u Joey bunee ialaed jo al 'eia s nos ' jueoy 'y eyansl t
Buena Vista, FL, Proc 15th ACVIM Forum, 1997:20-21.
ment of thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in dogs with endotoxemia. Am J Vet Res.
495. Westermann J, Schwinzer R, Jecker P, et al. Lymphocyte subsets in the blood. The
1999;60:216-221.
influence of splenectomy, splenic autotransplantation, ageing. and the site of blood 
 465. Tvedten H, Rihimaki M. Hypersegmentation of equine neutrophils. Vet Cin Pathol.
sampling on the number of B, T, CD4+, and CD8+ lymphocytes in the rat. Scand J
2007;36:4-5.
Immunol. 1990;31:327-334.
466. Ulich TR. del Castillo J, Busser K, et al. Acute in vivo effects of IL-3 alone and in
 496. Wilcox A. Russell KE. Hematologic changes associated with Aderall toxicity in a
combination with IL-6 on the blood cells of the circulation and bone marrow. Am J
dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:184-189.
Pathol 1989;135:663-670.
497. Wilkerson MJ, Dolce K, Koopman T, et al. Lineage differentiation of canine lymphoma/
467. Ulich TR, del Castillo J, Ni RX, et al. Hematologic interactions of endotoxin, tumor
leukemias and aberrant expression of CD molecules. Vet immunor mmunopahol.
necrosis factor alpha TNF alpha). interleukin 1. and adrenal hormones and the
2005;106:179-196.
176
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
498. Willesen JL, Jensen AL, Kristensen AT, et al. Haematological and biochemical
508. Young KM. Eosinophils. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's
changes in dogs naturally infected with Angiostrongylus vasorum before and after
Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia Lippincott Williams & Wilkins;
treatment. Vet J. 2009;180:106-111.
2000:297-307.
499.
Wolach B, van der Laan LJ, Maianski NA, et al. Growth factors G-CSF and GM-CSF
509. Yousefi S, Mihalache C, Kozlowski E, et al. Viable neutrophils release mitochondrial
differentially preseve chemotaxis of neutrophils aging in vitro. Exp Hematol.
DNA to form neutrophil extracelular traps. Cell Death Difer. 2009;16:1438-
2007;35:541-550.
1444.
500.
p A n wuy adong ui sueuwnj ui wndoeud eusedeu Z iamyapio 
 510. Zarbock A, Ley K. Neutrophil adhesion and activation under flow. Microcircuation.
Sci 2006;1078:446-460.
2009;16:31-42.
501.
Woldehiwet Z. The natural history of Anaplasma phagocytophilum. Vet Parasitol.
 511. Zarbock A, Muller H, Kuwano Y, et al. PSGL-1-dependent myeloid leukocyte activa-
2010;167:108-122.
tion. / Leukoc Biol. 2009;86:1119-1124.
502.
Wood C, Almes K, Bagladi-Swanson M, et al. Sezary syndrome in a cat. JAm Anim
 512. Zhang XF, Zhang JZ, Long SVV, et al. Experimental Ehrlichia chaffeensis infection in 
Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:144-148.
beagles. JMed Microbiol. 2003;52:1021-1026.
503.
Workman HC, Vernau V. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in dogs and cats: the veteri-
513. Zhang Y, Wallace DL, de Lara CM, et al. In vivo kinetics of human natural killer cells:
nary perspective. Vet Clin North Am SmallAnim Pract 2003;33:1379-1399.
the effects of ageing and acute and chronic viral infection. lmmunology.
 504. Yabsley MJ. Natural history of Ehrlichia chaffeensis vertebrate hosts and tick vetors 
2007;121:258-265.
from the United States and evidence for endemic transmission in other countries. Vet
 514. Zhu J. Paul WE. Heterogeneity and plasticity of T helper cell. Cell Res.
 Parasitol. 2010;167:136-148.
2010;20:4-12.
505.
Yamada R, Tsuchida S, Hara Y, et al. Apoptotic lymphocytes induced by surgical
 515. ZiemerEL, Whitlock RH, Palmer JE, et al. Clinical and hematologic variables in ponies
trauma in dogs. J Anesth. 2002;16:131-137.
with experimentally induced equine ehrlichial colitis (Potomac horse fever). Am / Vet
 506. Yona S, Jung S. Monocytes: subsets, origins, fates and functions. Curr Opin Hematol.
Res. 1987:48:63-67.
2010;17:53-59
fo asinos aun buunp sabueyn lenjbojonewah 1e 1a '9 exedey '0 exslog 'AA Jau6Az 919
 507. Young AJ, Marston WVL, Dudler L. Subset-specific regulation of the lymphatic exit of
canine babesiosis caused by large Babesiain domestic dogs in Warsaw {Poland). Vet
recirculating lymphocytes in vivo. / Immunol. 2000;165:3168-3174.
Parasito. 2007;145:146-151.
CHAPTER
IMMUNOHEMATOLOGY
response can occur the second time the same invader is
IMMUNE SYSTEM
encountered. Lymphocytes are immunocompetent cells that
respond to specific foreign antigens. The production and func-
 The immune system is an integrated network composed of
tion of lymphocyte types are discussed in Chapters 3 and 5,
various cell types, numerous cytokines, and certain plasma 
respectively. B lymphocytes are primarily responsible for
proteins that work in synergy to eliminate infectious agents,
immunoglobulin (antibody) production. In contrast to B lym-
 parasites, and noxious antigens. Consequently defects in the
phocytes, which produce immunoglobulins carried in the
immune response result in increased susceptibility to these 
blood (humoral immunity) to the site of a foreign antigen,
foreign invaders. However, inappropriate or exaggerated
T lymphocytes migrate to the site of a foreign antigen
immune responses can result in immune-mediated tissue
 (celular immunity). T lymphocytes are involved in immune
injury. Because a thorough review of immunology is beyond
 regulation, cytotoxicity, delayed-type hypersensitivity, and
the scope of this text, the reader is referred to current immu-
 graft-versus-host reactions. Helper T (CD4, CD8) lympho-
nology textbooks for more detailed information.140
cytes secrete cytokines that infuence mmune responses, and
cytotoxic T (CD4', CD8+) lymphocytes play pivotal roles in
Innate Immunity
-ulno ueozoiord uny ie paoanp Aunuu paiepau-
 The innate immune system responds immediately once an
isms, and neoplastic cels Regulatory T lymphocytes function
invading organism is detected, but it lacks any form of memory
 to maintain a balance between activation of the immune
and responds in a similar manner and time frame to a repeated
 system and prevention of autoimmunity 30,$1. 140
u Aun seuun usur pun ue Aq u
specific immunity) is possible because chemical compositions
TESTS FOR IMMUNE-MEDIATED
of invading microorganisms differ from those of normal body
DISORDERS
 components. Innate immunity involves neutrophils, eosino-
phils, basophils, macrophages, mast cells, and natural killer
Tests for Antierythrocyte Antibodies
(NK) cells, along with the complement system, enzymes such
 Tests for antierythrocyte antibodies are done when autoag-
as lysozyme, and carbohydrate-binding proteins that can
 glutination is absent but immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
promote microbial destruction. These cells express microbial
is still suspected.
pattern-recognition  receptors  that  recognize  pathogen-
associated molecular patterns (PAMP) on invading microor-
Direct Antiglobulin Test or Coombs' Test
ganisms. Following activation, the cells release components
The direct antiglobulin test (DAT) utilizes washed erythro-
that can result in microbial destruction. Activated cells also
cytes from the patient and species-specific antisera against
produce various cytokines that result in infammation and the
IgG, IgM, and the third component of complement (Cs) to
recruitment of additional cells that can attack and destroy
detect the presence of one or more of these factors on the
invaders. The production and function of these various cell
surface of erythrocytes (Fig. 6-1). Blood should be collected
types are discussed in Chapters 3 and 5, respectively.140
in EDTA to avoid in vitro uptake of complement by erythro-
cytes.146 The DAT may be done in either tubes or microtiter
Acquired Immunity
 plates.16 Unless clinical evidence of cold-agglutinin disease is
-depe ro Arunuu syds se umouy ospe Xrunuu panby
 present, this test is usually conducted only at 37C, because a
tive immunity, is a more recent evolutionary development
substantial number of healthy animals exhibit positive test
 than innate immunity. It is distinguished by its specificity for
results when the test is run at cold temperatures. In addition
an invading organism and for its ability to remember an
 to primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA),
encounter with an invader so that a more rapid and intense
 neonatal isoerythrolysis, and blood transfusion reactions, the
177
178
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
lower specificity than the DAT assay when used to evaluate
 No agglutination
a cutoff limit of greater than 5% positive cells before a test is
considered positive. This should largely exclude low-level
 Anti-dog erythrocyte IgG
binding of immunoglobulin to normal (presumably aged)
 Goat anti-dog IgG
erythrocytes. 104
Direct Enzyme-Linked Antiglobulin Test
Erythrocyte
The direct enzyme-linked antiglobulin test (DELAT) is an
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) that has been
developed and evaluated for use in dogs. Regardless of the
cause of the anemia, a majority of anemic dogs have increased
erythrocyte-bound  immunoglobulin  and/or  complement
Agglutination
when the DELAT is used. This test has high sensitivity but
low specificity for the diagnosis of primary IMHA. It is also
time consuming and is typically used as a research tool and
not in a clinical setting.
FIGURE 6-1
146
Direct antiglobulin test (Coombs' test). The addition of anti-dog IgG
Blood Typing
antibody results in the agglutination of erythrocytes coated with dog
IgG.
Large numbers of protein and complex carbohydrate antigens
occur on the external surface of erythrocytes. Some antigens
are present on erythrocytes from all members of a species and
DAT may be positive in association with various infectious,
others (including blood group antigens) segregate genetically,
parasitic, neoplastic, infammatory, and other secondary
immune-mediated diseases. If a drug-induced immune-
antigen is present in some members of the same species but
mediated disorder is suspected, the offending drug should be
is not common to all members of that species, it is called an
 included in the assay system.146
alloantigen (also an isoantigen). If an alloantigen is presented
A negative DAT does not rule out an IMHA. A false-
to a member of the same species that does not have the allo-
negative test may occur if there are insufficient quantities of
antigen, it will be recognized as foreign and antibodies called
antibody or complement on erythrocytes, the ratio of anti-
alloantibodies (isoantibodies) will be produced against it.71
globulin in the reagent to antibody or complement on eryth-
i uo Aesiooras paioaap ae suslguone dnora poo
rocytes is not appropriate, the test is performed with an
surface of erythrocytes using agglutination and/or hemolysis
tests. Blood groups have individual chromosomal loci and
ture, the antibodies and/or complement elute from erythro-
each locus has from two to many allic genes. Most blood
cytes because the assay is delayed, the washing of erythrocytes
 groups derive their antigenicity from the carbohydrate com-
is not adequate, the pH of the washing solution is too low, the
position of membrane-associated glycolipids and glycopro-
centrifugation of the sample is not suffcient or there is exces-
teins. Most alloantigens are produced by erythroid cells, but
sive agitation in reading the tube test, or the drug was not
some—such as the J group in cattle, the DEA-7 (Tr) group
added to the test for an animal with a drug-induced immune-
 in dogs, the R group in sheep, and the A and O groups in
 mediated hemolytic anemia.146
pigs—are produced by other tissues and adsorbed from
 False-positive tests may occur if clots are present (resulting
plasma.1.10
in complement activation), blood is collected through infusion
 Blood groups in domestic animals have been reviewed. 113.10
lines used to administer dextrose containing
gsolutions,
They have been most extensively characterized in horses and
 cryptantigens are exposed by the actions of bacterial enzymes
cattle, in which blood typing was routinely used for animal
on erythrocytes in septicemic patients, naturally occurring
identification and parentage testing. Blood typing for these
cold autoantibodies result in complement binding to erythro-
purposes is being phased out in favor of assays based on DNA
cytes, hypergammaglobulinemia is present, glassware or saline
sequences. Blood group alloantigens of clinical significance
is contaminated, or if excessive centrifugation of tubes or
are discussed subsequently under *Transfusion Reactions" and
misreading of results occurs.146
"Neonatal Isoerythrolysis," below.
Ideally, blood typing of donor and recipient animals for
Direct Imm unofuorescence Flow Cytometry Assay
Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled antibodies against
formed prior to all blood transfusions, as occurs in human
immunoglobulins of the species being evaluated are used to
medicine. Point-of-care card and gel typing tests are available
label erythrocyte-bound immunoglobulins, which are subse-
for DEA 1.1 in dogs and types A and B in cats.141 In addition,
 quently detected using fow cytometry. The direct immuno-
blood samples from potential donors can be sent to a limited
fuorescence fow assay has greater sensitivity but somewhat
number of commercial laboratories for blood typing, and
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
179
blood donors can be selected that are negative for clinically
result in phagocytosis and removal of these erythrocytes
significant erythrocyte alloantigens, including DEA 1.1 in
within a few days.141 Additionally there can be reactions to
 dogs and Aa and Qa in horses. The use of blood from these
 transfused leukocyte or plasma protein antigens, with adverse
 donors, coupled with cross-matching of donor and recipient 
reactions varying from urticaria to anaphylactic shock 7,157
 samples, will minimize the likelihood of severe transfusion
reactions.71
Tests for Antinuclear Antibodies
 Blood typing of animals may be done prior to mating to
The presence of circulating antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) is
identify animals with the same blood types and to minimize
associated with various autoimmune diseases in humans and
the possibility of subsequent hemolytic reactions (neonatal
animals. ANAs are most often measured in dogs suspected of
isoerythrolysis) in newborn animals. This is most frequently
having systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Studies indicate
done in mares that have previously given birth to foals that
that ANAs in dogs are primarily of the IgG type. Canine
developed neonatal isoerythrolysis. It may also be considered
ANAs are heterogeneous and may be directed against various
 in certain breeds of cats where type B blood is common ( Table
 histone and nonhistone extractable antigen components of the
6-1).1,.57,59,64
nucleus but not against native double-stranded DNA.37
Blood Cross-Match Tests
ANA Test
 Blood cross-match tests are used to detect the presence of
An indirect immunofuorescent antibody (IFA) technique is
hemagglutinating and hemolyzing antibodies in the serum of
- e Aed1 (7-g u) usan VN roy asn A so
donor and recipient animals. Suspensions of washed erythro-
 tion of a patient's serum is placed on a glass slide with tissue
cytes are incubated with serum samples, centrifuged, and
cells fixed to the surface. After allowing time for the ANAs
examined for the presence of hemolysis and gross and micro-
 present in the patient's serum to become bound to the nuclei,
scopic agglutination. The major cross-match is used to detect
the slides are rinsed and fuorescein-labeled antibodies directed
antibodies in the recipient's serum that are directed against
 against immunoglobulins of the same species as the patient's
the donor's erythrocytes. The minor cross-match is used to
 are added. The slides are again rinsed and the absence or pres-
detect antibodies in the donor's serum that are directed against
 ence of nuclear fuorescence (which occurs when ANAs are
the recipient's erythrocytes. Autoagglutination or severe
 present) is determined using a fuorescent microscope. Alter-
hemolysis in the patient's blood sample precludes the accurate
 natively, an immunoperoxidase method may be used in place
 performance of cross-match tests.141
of the immunofuorescent one described. Frozen rodent liver
The absence of agglutination or hemolysis in cross-match
sections have been used most frequently as the substrate in
 tests does not indicate that animals have similar blood types.
veterinary medicine, but a human epithelial cell line (HEp-2)
 It indicates only that preexisting antibodies were not detected
and that an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction is highly
reactivity with normal serum and the ease of reading the fuo-
unlikely. A delayed transfusion reaction can still occur if
rescence pattern. Titers above 1/25 and 1/100 are considered
important alloantigen differences are present. The benefit of
the transfusion is short-lived in delayed transfusion reactions
because antibodies made against the donor's erythrocytes
Hepatocyte
TABLE 6-1
Freguency of Blood Type B in Purebred Cats in the
Dog
United States
ANA
Type B Frequency
Breeds
25%-50%
Exotic shorthair, British shorthair, Cornish
Rex, Devon Rex
5%-25%
Abyssinian, Birman, Persian, Himalayan,
Somali, Sphynx, Scottish fold, Japanese
bobtail
Less than 5%
Main Coon cat, Norwegian forest cat,
FITC
 domestic shorthair, domestic longhair
Nucleus
Anti-dog lgG
None
Siamese, Burmese, Tonkinese, Russian
Blue, Oriental shorthair, American
shorthair, Ocicat
FIGURE 6-2
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) test. Sections ofliver are incubated with
aType A frequency is determined by subtracting type B frequency from 100%
test serum and, following washing, the presence of ANA is demonstrated
 because type AB is extremely rare. The table is modified from Andrews' and
using fuorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-labeled antibodies against
based on data published by Urs Giger and coworkers.
immunoglobulins of the species being tested.
180
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 positive in dogs when HEp-2 and rat liver substrates, respec-
form in vitro in stored anticoagulated blood, bone marrow,
tively, are used.67
and joint fuids. The LE cell test is performed by promoting
Systemic autoimmune diseases are characterized by high
 the formation of LE cells by rupturing leukocytes to expose
serum ANA titers. This heterogeneous group of disorders may
their nuclear material either by forcing clotted blood through
be subclassified as SLE or SLE-related diseases (called mixed
a sieve orby mixing anticoagulated blood vigorously with glass
connective tissue disease in humans). Two different nuclear
beads. After the leukocytes have been ruptured, the samples
staining patterns are recognized using HEp-2 cells as sub-
are incubated to allow time for LE cell formation. Buffy-coat
strate in dogs. Dogs with homogeneous nuclear staining and
smears are made, stained, and examined for the presence of
 positive chromosomal staining in mitotic cells are more likely
LE cells. The finding of a single LE cellis considered a posi-
to have SLE, and dogs with speckled nuclear staining and lack
tive test result. With the ready availability of the ANA test,
 of chromosomal staining in mitotic cells are more likely to
which is more sensitive and less labor-intensive to perform
have SLE-related diseases.8?
 than the LE cell test, the latter test is now seldom done in
Propylthiouracil (PTU) treatment in cats can produce
veterinary laboratories. The advantage of the LE cell test is
an immune-mediated disease syndrome characterized by
 that it does not require species-specific reagents.37
anorexia, lymphadenopathy, weight loss, Coombs'-positive
 hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a positive ANA
Tests for Antiplatelet Antibodies
A number of tests have been developed to detect antiplatelet
 induced ANA formation in the serum of some Beagle dogs.4
antibodies. These include a direct immunofuorescence test
The serum ANA test is positive in about one-third of Gordon
using labeled antibodies bound to megakaryocytes and various
setters with symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy and black-
ways of detecting immunoglobulin bound to platelet surfaces.
hair follcular dysplasia, suggesting these may be immune-
 The microscopic detection of immunofuorescence of mega-
karyocytes is a subjective test requiring that a bone marrow
ANAs may also be present in serum from animals with
chronic infammatory infectious, and neoplastic diseases;
 Increased platelet-bound immunoglobulins can be detected
however, titers are usually low. In addition, some healthy cats
 and dogs are weakly ANA-positive 1,3,60,10,136
 and microscopic platelet immunofuorescence asssays.87 Most
antiplatelet antibody in blood is bound to platelets; conse-
Lupus Erythematosus Cell Test
quently direct assays of the patient's platelets are more sensi-
A lupus erythematosus (LE) cell is a leukocyte (usually a
tive than indirect assays using the patient's serum and platelets
neutrophil) with a single large reddish-purple amorphous
from a healthy control animal.?2 Unforrunately direct assays
 inclusion that nearly flls the cytoplasm of the cell (Fig. 6-3).
 of platelets should be done within 24 hours after blood sample
This inclusion represents the nucleus of a damaged leukocyte
 collection. Platelets naturally have some immunoglobulin
that has been opsonized by ANA and complement and
adsorbed to their surfaces. The amount of platelet-bound
 phagocytized by an intact leukocyte. LE cells occasionally
immunoglobulin can increase with time after sample collec-
tion; consequently false-positive tests can be a significant
problem with these assays.15 Positive test results may also
occur when immune complexes are adsorbed to platelets.
False-negative tests may occur if antibodies have eluted from
platelets during processing. Since these assays are generally
designed to identify IgG on platelets, a false-negative test may
result if IgM rather than IgG antibodies are bound to plate-
lets. 132 False-negative tests may occur if assays are done affer
immunosuppressive therapy is initiated.12 At this time
none of the tests for antiplatelet antibodies are as readily avail-
able and as cost-effective as the DAT for antierythrocyte
antibodies.
PRIMARY IMMUNE-MEDIATED
DISORDERS
Some degree of immune-mediated cellular destruction occurs
FIGURE 6-3
in many infectious, parasitic, neoplastic, infammatory, and
drug-induced diseases.104 Disorders presented in this section
Lupus erythematosus (LE) cell. Buffy coat smear of an LE cell test
 demonstrating a LE cell that is a neutrophil containing phagocytized
do not appear to be secondary to other diseases but represent
homogeneous nuclear material.
 primary immune-mediated disorders.
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
181
Transfusion Reactions
Neonatal Isoerythrolysis
 Alloantigens vary in their potential to cause hemolytic trans-
Animals with neonatal isoerythrolysis (NI) are healthy at
fusion reactions when mismatched blood is given. Many allo-
birth but develop hemolytic anemia within a few hours to a
antigens are weak (do not induce antibodies of high titer) or
few days after they ingest colostrum. Historically, Aa and Qa
induce antibodies that do not act at normal body temperafure.
have been the most common antigens associated with neona-
Fortunately only a few alloantigens appear to be important in
tal isoerythrolysis in foals. Mares negative for one of these
producing hemolytic disease in animals.
antigens develop antibodies against them and transfer these
 DEA 1.1 antibody-antigen interactions result in most of
antibodies to their foals through colostrum. Hemolysis occurs
the acute hemolytic transfusion reactions in dogs, but trans-
 The dams become sensitized to these foreign erythrocyte anti-
4,03 and an unclassifed common antigen?3 on dog erythro-
 gens from leakage of fetal erythrocytes through the placenta
cytes. A blood type termed Dal has been reported to be
lacking in some Dalmatian dogs but is present in a high per-
 same blood type during a previous parturition. Generally
centage of dogs other than Dalmatians. Dalmatians lacking
the first foal born is unaffected, but subsequent foals carrying
the Da/ antigen are likely at risk of delayed, and possibly acute
the same foreign antigen(s) will likely develop hemolytic
 hemolytic transfusion reactions if transfused with Dal antigen-
 anemia. Other alloantigens associated with neonatal isoeryth-
 positive blood. 150
rolysis in foals include Db, Dg, Pa, Qb, Qc, and a combination
Incompatibilities in the AB blood group of cats has been
of Qa, Qb, and Q.14,% Neonatal isoerythrolysis has been
recognized to cause transfusion reactions.
s$,56.76 The A and B
reported in mule foals because of an erythrocyte antigen not
alloantigens (blood types) result from the expression of two
different alleles at the same gene locus, with A being domi-
 NI can occur in type A kittens born to primiparous type
nant over B.1 Cats rarely express both type A and type B
 B queens because all adult type B cats naturally have high
antigens (type AB) on erythrocytes. The frequency of blood 
 anti-A antibody titers. NI appears to be an important cause
 types varies with location and breed of cat. From 0.3% (North-
of neonatal death ("fading kitten syndrome") in purebred cats
east) to 4.7% (West Coast) of domestic short- and long-hair
from breeds with high frequencies of type B blood (see Table
cats in the United States are type B,but up to 50% of purebred 
cats of certain breeds in the United States are type B.f A blood
binuria, pale mucous membranes, icterus, lethargy, weakness,
 group antigen termed Mik has been reported in domestic
tachypnea, tachycardia, collapse, and death. Tail-tip necrosis
shorthair cats that is capable of inducing a hemolytic transfu-
may occur in surviving kittens as a result of cold-acting IgM
sion reaction when Mik-positive RBCs are transfused into a
 antibodies or localized thrombus formation.15
Mik-negative recipient cat that has naturally occurring anti-
NI has been recognized in pigs, with antibodies usually
Mik alloantibodies in its plasma.150
 directed against allantigens of the E blood group.14 Natu-
Aa and Qa are the most immunogenic alloantigens in
rally occurring neonatal isoerythrolysis has not been reported
 horses and presumably the most likely to cause a hemolytic
in cattle, but it occurs in some calves born to cows previously
vaccinated for anaplasmosis or other vaccines of bovine origin
hemolysis when transfused with A-positive blood.10
 containing erythrocyte membranes. 3
 For most blood groups in animals, antibody formation
 Blood typing of prospective breeding animals can be done
occurs only following prior exposure to different erythrocyte
to minimize the possibility of NI in offspring. The possibility
alloantigens via transfusion, pregnancy, or vacination with
of offspring developing NI can be evaluated by cross-matching
Ausnbsu tsusaue dnora poq urureuos sonond
the sire's erythrocytes with the dam's serum during pregnancy.
 adverse transfusion reactions to unmatched erythrocytes gen-
If the potential for NI is identifed prior to parturition, colos-
erally do not occur at the time of the first blood transfusion.
 tum can be withheld from the offspring until a cross-match
However, the AB and Mik groups in cats and the A group in
 can be done between the erythrocytes of the ofspring and the
pigs are characterized by "naturally occurring" antibodies (i.e.,
serum of the mother. If an incompatibility is present, the
antibodies that occur in plasma in the absence of prior expo-
neonatal animal can be foster-fed for 2 days, allowing it to
nurse from the mother after antibodies can no longer be
hemolytic transfusion reactions can occur at the time of the
absorbed as a result of gut closure.6
first blood transfusion. This is especially true in the case of
 B-positive cats, which have naturally occurring anti-A anti-
Primary Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia
bodies of high hemolytic titer In contrast, cats with type A
The binding of antibodies and/or complement to erythrocyte
blood have weak anti-B antibodies in their blood. Type B
 pue saeqdroeu Aq sisoolerd un insan us saens
blood transfusions given to type A cats do not result in severe
some case, complement activation and intravascular hemoly-
intravascular hemolysis, but the transfusion is not efficacious
sis. IMHA may be primary (also called autoimmune hemo-
because the transfused erythrocytes are phagocytized and
lytic anemia) or it may occur secondarily to rickettsial,
removed within a few days.19
bacterial, protozoal, viral, or hemoplasma infections; neoplasia
182
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
but a monocytosis may also be present. Moderate to marked
Vaccination with combination vaccines has been incriminated
leukocytosis with a left shift indicates probable ischemic
 as a trigger of IMHA in dogs,3 but subsequent studies were
 necrosis within tissues—including liver, kidney, heart, lung,
not able to verify this association.224 In an autoimmune
and  spleen—attributable  to  thromboembolic  disease  or
response, antibodies are directed against self antigens on
anemic hypoxia.101
erythrocytes. In  secondary immune-mediated  disorders,
 Thrombocytopenia is present in about 60% of dogs with
the immune response is directed against foreign antigens or
this disorder, but only about one-fourth have platelet counts
 altered self antigens, with inadvertent erythrocyte injury.
below 50 × 10°/μL. The thrombocytopenia generally appears
A diagnosis of IMHA is made if autoagglutination (per-
to result from increased platelet utilization. The prothrombin
sisting affter saline washing of erythrocytes) is present, a posi-
time (PT) is prolonged in about one-third of cases, and the
tive DAT test is measured, or fow cytometry for erythrocyte
activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is prolonged
surface immunoglobulin is positive.104 A diagnosis of primary
in about half of the cases. In addition, fibrin degradation
IMHA is reached by ruling out other disorders known to have
products are offten increased in plasma. It appears that many
concomitant IMHA.
 dogs with primary IMHA are in a hypercoagulable state at
About two-thirds of dogs with IMHA appear to have
 the time of diagnosis, with disseminated intravascular coagu-
primary IMHA.5.125 In contrast, IMHA in noncanine species
 lation (DIC) and multiorgan venous thrombosis (especially
is usuall a secondary, rather than a primary, disorder.?8 Feline
 pulmonary thrombosis) being common sequelae, which may
leukemia virus (FeLV) and Mycoplasma baemofelis are most
result in death.
 commonly associated with IMHA in cats.42.35
In some instances the concurrent thrombocytopenia also
 Results from multiple studies of many dogs with primary
appears to be autoimmune in origin (Evans syndrome).78
IMHA have been summarized.* Primary IMHA is typically
Primary IMHA may also be part of SLE, a multisystemic
seen in middle-aged dogs (average age 6 years), with intact
autoimmune disease.53,140
and neutered female dogs, neutered male dogs, and cocker
Primary IMHA is much less common in cats than in dogs.
spaniel dogs being overrepresented. Autoagglutination is
 Kohn et al.* have reported findings from 19 cats with primary
reported to occur in about 60% and the DAT is positive in
IMHA. Affected cats were typically young (median age 2
o si sis  ad  so  i
years). The anemia was generally severe (median hematocrit
 present in about 75% of dogs with primary IMHA. Although
12%) and often macrocytic (median MCV 56 fL). An abso-
the presence of spherocytosis strongly suggests that
an
 lute reticulocytosis was reported in less than half of the cases.
immune-mediated process is present, other causes
of
In contrast to dogs, a leukocytosis was present in only 10% of
spherocytosis—including exposure to venoms, zinc tfoxicity,
cats, and about 30% of cats exhibited a lymphocytosis. Throm-
 transfusion of stored blood, and hereditary disorders—must
 bocytopenia occurred in about 40% of the cats with primary
be ruled out. Spherocytes are accurately recognized only in
 IMHA, and PT and/or APTT times were prolonged in 30%
dogs because the degree of central pallor is naturally less in
of the cats evaluated. Hyperbilirubinemia occurred in nearly
other domestic animals.
70% of cats, with hyperglobulinemia reported in about half of
Anemia in IMHA is often severe, with a mean hematocrit
the cats with primary IMHA.
value of about 15%. About two-thirds of dogs with primary
 IMHA have an absolute reticulocytosis. However, a regenera-
Primary Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia
tive response to this hemolytic anemia may be lacking if the
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT) occurs when
onset of anemia is acute or if antibodies and/or complement
immunoglobulin (primarily IgG) is bound to the surface of
are directed against reticulocytes or bone marrow precursor
platelets, resulting in the premature removal of platelets by
cells.* Hyperbilirubinemia is present in about 75% of cases
macrophages. The presence of IMT is detected by measuring
and bilirubinuria is present in nearly all cases. Intravascular
immunoglobulin bound to the patient's platelets (direct
hemolysis, as evidenced by hemoglobinemia with hemoglo-
assays) or by measuring immunoglobulin in a patient's serum
binuria, generally occurs in less than 20% of cases. In most
 that is capable of binding to platelets collected from a healthy
cases of primary IMHA in dogs, increased IgG antibodies are
animal of the same species (indirect assay). Direct assays are
bound to the erythrocytes, but in some cases IgM and/or
more sensitive than indirect assays for detecting IMT (see
complement are also bound to the erythrocytes. IgM antibod-
"Tests for Antiplatelet Antibodies," above).
ies and/or complement are most likely involved if autoag-
 IMT may be primary (autoimmune), or it may occur sec-
 glutination or intravascular hemolysis is present.?8
ondarily to bacterial, viral, protozoal, or helminth infections;
 A leukocytosis (mean total leukocyte count about 32 ×
 neoplasia; or drug administration.* In primary IMT, autoan-
10°/μL) is present in more than 80% of dogs with primary
tibodies react to normal platelet antigens. Glycoprotein (GP)
 IMHA. This increase in total leukocyte count is primarily
 IIb and/or IIla have been recognized as target antigens in
the result of neutrophilia (often with a left shift),
some dogs.?1 The GP IIb/IIla complex is the fibrinogen
*References 22, 24, 78, 83, 97, 116, 125, 149.
*References 10, 26, 29, 35, 40, 63, 72, 88, 92, 123.
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
183
receptor essential for normal platelet aggregation. This may
and ecchymotic hemorrhages, epistaxis, hematuria, and
help explain the platelet dysfunction that has been measured
hemoptysis. Lethargy is common. Thrombocytopenia is
in dogs with primary IMT.? Secondary IMT can occur if
 generally marked, and moderate to severe anemia is also
immune complexes are absorbed by platelets, if antibodies are
 generally present. ?.1s
produced against a foreign antigen bound to platelets, or if
Megakaryocyte numbers are usually increased in the
antibodies are reacting
g to platelet antigens altered in the
bone marrow in response to the thrombocytopenia, but
 course of the disease.120
rare(
cases   of  amegakaryocytic  thrombocytopenia   have
Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia has been reported
been reported in dogs and cats that were believed to be
in newborn horses,2 mules,22 and pigs.$0 In this disorder,
immune-mediated 52,89,159
thrombocytopenia develops in the neonate following
the
 Primary Immune-Mediated Neutropenia
ingestion of colostrum containing antibodies against the new-
born's platelets. A syndrome of ulcerative dermatitis, throm-
Primary (also termed idiopathic) immune-mediated neutro-
 bocytopenia, and neutropenia has been described in neonatal 
 penia (IMN) appears to be uncommon in dogs and rare in
foals under 4 days of age. Although the etiology was not
determined, the authors suggested a possible relationship
 other causes of neutropenia. Animals may present with fever 
between colostral antibodies or some other factor in the colos-
and lethargy or may be asymptomatic. In these latter cases,
 trum and the abnormalities present. 112
 neutropenia may be identifed during a routine hematologic
 A diagnosis of primary IMT is made after ruling out other
 evaluation as part of an annual physical examination or prior
potential causes of IMT. In the absence of an antiplatelet
 to anesthesia. Some animals may also exhibit other evidence
sl NI Areud jo sisouap aadunsard e ‘ssi Apoqu
 of immune-mediated disease including nonseptic meningitis,
 nonerosive polyarthritis, vascultitis, and thrombocytope-
therapy alone or in combination with immunosuppressant
 nia.31.14 Neutropenia is often severe (less than 500 neutrophils
 drugs (including vincristine, azathioprine, cyclophosphamide)
 per microliter) without toxic cytoplasm in asymptomatic
te NI ym sie u ud sq Aeu sisoioudui V s,sop
association with primary IMHA in what has been termed
 Granulocytic hyperplasia with few mature neutrophils is most 
likely to be present in the bone marrow, but granulocytic
is important to recognize that animals with IMHA may have
hypoplasia or aplasia may occur when antigens on early neu-
accompanying thrombosis or DIC, which may account for the 
 concomitant thrombocytopenia.24 Primary IMT may also be 
A number of diagnostic tests (including fow cytometry,
 a component of SLE, to be discussed subsequently.88
 immunofuorescence, leukoagglutination, and radioimmuno-
 Although uncommon in animals, primary IMT is diag-
asssay) have been developed to detect increased antineutrophil
nosed most often in dogs, in which it occurs about twice as
-e ar ju ae sisai sss iu ist'sioe
often in females as in males. It can occur at any age but is seen 
able and need further study to demonstrate their clinical use-
most commonly in middle-aged dogs, with an increased inci-
fulness. Consequently a diagnosis of IMN is generally made
dence reported most often in cocker spaniels, miniafure and
by excluding other causes of neutropenia. A substantial
toy poodles, Old English sheep dogs, golden retrievers, and 
increase in neutrophil numbers in blood within 1 to 3 days
-d  sd sa srs 
after beginning immunosuppressive treatments with cortico-
lems in the absence of other signs of illness, but some animals
steroids provides retrospective evidence for an IMN.
present with lethargy and weakness aftributable to anemia.
Gingival bleeding, cutaneous and mucosal petechial and
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
ecchymotic hemorrhages, hematochezia or melena, epistaxis,
Systemic autoimmune diseases are characterized by high
hematuria, and ocular hemorrhages are common types of
serum ANA titers. This heterogeneous group of disorders may
hemorrhage observed. Fever occurs in a low percentage of 
be subclassified as SLE or SLE-related diseases (called mixed
 cases, and lymphadenopathy is uncommon, but splenomegaly
 connective tissue disease in humans). This latter category is
may be recognized in about half of the cases.120 Platelet counts
largely characterized by musculoskeletal disorders, lethargy
in primary IMT (less than 30 × 10′/μL in 80% of cases) are
 and/or fever. Dogs with SLE also often exhibit polyarthritis
 generally lower than counts measured in secondary IMT.120
but are more likely to have glomerulonephritis and hemato-
Thrombocytopenia may be the only abnormal finding in the 
logic disorders than are dogs with SLE-related diseases.69
complete blood count (CBC),but about half of the dogs with 
ANA-positive musculoskeletal disorders described in German
primary IMT have an anemia (median HCT 31%) and 40%
shepherd and Nova Scotia duck-tolling retriever dogs may be
 of cases have a leukocytosis (median total leukocytes 19 X
considered SLE-related diseases.6869 Criteria for these sub-
10′/μL), with a neutrophilia (sometimes with a left shift) and
classifications are not clearly established in animals. Proposed
 monocytosis. PT and APTT tests are normal.120 
criteria for a diagnosis of SLE are given in Box 6-1.13s.138
 Primary IMT is less often recognized in cats than in dogs.
SLE is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized by the
 Cats have generaly presented with evidence of hemorrhage
 production of a variety of autoantibodies (especially antinu-
including gingival bleeding, cufaneous and mucosal petechial
clear antibodies) that result in immune-mediated injury of
184
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
chemoattractants. The ability to phagocytize microbes can
BOX 6-1
be determined microscopically. Microbial phagocytosis and
Diagnostic Criteria for Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
killing can be assayed by bacterial cultrure after bacteria, serum,
and neutrophils are incubated together. Lysosomal enzymes
Major signs
can be assayed following neutrophil lysis. The nitroblue tetra
 Polyarthritis
zolium (NBT) reduction test and the chemiluminescence test
 Glomerulonephritis
detect the presence of the oxidant burst needed for normal
Skin lesions
bacterial killing.
 Polymyositis
 In addition to the classic assays discussed above, many
Thrombocytopenia
assays using fow cytometry have been developed. These assays
Hemolytic anemia
include measurement of increased F-actin as evidence of neu-
Leukopenia
trophil activation, measurement of surface adhesion molecules
Minor signs
using adhesion molecule-specific monoclonal antibodies,
Fever of unknown origin
 phagocytosis of fuorescently conjugated particles, and mea-
Central nervous system signs, seizures
surement of reactive oxygen molecules such as the dichloro-
 Oral ulcerations
fluorescein (DCF) assay27 The tests discussed are screening
Lymphadenopathy
tests. More specialized tests are required to demonstrate spe-
 Pericarditis
cific molecular defects.
Pleuritis
Lymphocyte Assays
SLE is diagnosed if two major signs are present with a high ANA titer (e.g..
equal to or greater than 160j or one major sign and two minor signs are
A majority of circulating lymphocytes are T lymphocytes.
present with a high ANA titer. SLE is considered possible if one major sign
Consequently the presence of a normal absolute blood
and a high ANA titer is present or if two major signs are present but the ANA
 lymphocyte count tends to rule out a generalized defect in
titer is low (<160).135,133
 T lymphocyte production. Lymphocyte blastogenic assays are
used to determine the responsiveness of lymphocytes to
various mitogens, which variably stimulate different lympho-
 multiple organs. Abnormal T lymphocyte activation appears
cyte subsets. T lymphocyte function may also be assessed in
 Jo siunoue saissnxa sonpond oi sasoudui g iduond o
vitro using leukocyte migration inhibition assays, cytokine
autoantibodies. However, the exact mechanisms for the devel-
release assays, and cytotoxicity assays. Subpopulations of
opment of SLE remain unclear because the pathogenesis is a
lymphocytes can be quantified using fuorescence labeling
complex multifactorial event, with many abnormalities mea
of surface molecules and fow cytometry.14 For example, using
 sured in the immune system of humans.3
fow cytometry, cats with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
SLE is fairly common in dogs but rare in cats and horses.37
infection have been shown to have reduced populations of
 Possible manifestations of SLE are persistent or recurring
CD4+ T lymphocytes.38
fever, nonerosive polyarthritis, renal disorders, facial or muco-
Serum Immunoglobulin Assays
cutaneous dermatitis, lymphadenopathy and/or splenomegaly,
leukopenia, anemia (often DAT-positive), thrombocytopenia,
A variety of methods may be used to determine whether
polymyositis, and pleuropericarditis.37 A diagnosis of SLE
immunoglobulin deficiencies are present. Routine serum
should be considered when several of these infammatory
protein electrophoresis may be used as a screening test because
processes are recognized in a patient that has a high serum
immunoglobulins account for all of the protein that migrates
ANA titer (see "Tests for Antinuclear Antibodies," above).
in the  region and some of the protein that migrates in the
β region of electrophoretic gels (Fig. 6-4). A low Y-globulin
concentration points to an immunoglobulin (usually IgG)
TESTS FOR IMMUNE DEFICIENCY
 deficiency. Various immunoelectrophoretic techniques can be
DISORDERS
used to make qualitative and quantitative serum immuno-
Neutrophil Function Tests
 globulin measurements. Specific immunoglobulin classes may
Numerous steps are required for neutrophil adhesion, chemo-
be quantified using various methods, including immunofixa-
taxis, phagocytosis, and killing of bacteria; consequently a
tion electrophoresis, radial immunodiffusion, ELISA, and
variety of tests are needed to fully assess neutrophil func-
established using adult animals. Consequently it is important
laboratories but are done in a limited number of research
not to overemphasize seemingly low serum immunoglobulin
laboratories. Adhesion assays measure the ability of neutro-
values in young animals. In dogs, for example, serum IgM
phils to adhere to inorganic materials, including polysaccha-
concentrations may not reach adult reference intervals until
rides or nylon fbers, or biological structures, such as cultured
several months after birth; serum IgG and IgA values may
endothelial cells. Chemotaxis assays measure the ability
not reach adult reference values until such animals are 1 year
of neutrophils to migrate in the direction of various
 of age or older (in the case of IgA).46 Several semiquantitative
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
185
Albumin
 Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
Presuckling
 The production ofT and B lymphocytes is deficient in severe
birth
combined immunodeficiency (SCID) syndromes.
Severe Combined Immunodeficiency Syndrome
in Arabian Foals
SCID is transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait in Arabian
foals. Affected foals have few or no circulating lymphocytes,
+
hypoplasia of the primary and secondary lymphoid organs,
and an inability to produce antibodies due to the absence of
Albumin
mature T and B lymphocytes. Failure to produce mature lym-
phocytes results from a mutation in the gene that encodes for
Postsuckling
the catalytic subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase
13 hours
(DNA-PKCS). This enzyme is required for the gene rear-
 rangement process that produces the antigen receptors on T
and B lymphocytes. NK cell function is normal. The serum of
foals collcted prior to suckling normally contains some IgM,
but this is not the case in SCID foals.11* If affected foals suckle
successfully shortly after birth, they acquire immunoglobulins
?
from the mare and generally appear healthy. Once maternal
immunoglobulins are catabolized, SCID foals become suscep-
FIGURE 6-4
tible to a variety of overwhelming infections by pathogens,
Serum protein electrophoretograms for a foal before and after suckling.
including equine adenovirus, Rbodococcus equi, Pneumocystis
The serum IgG concentration was less than 200 mg/dL before suckling
carinii, and Cryptosporidium parvum. They generally die by 2
 and greater than 800 mg/dL after suckling.
tests—including zinc sulfate turbidity, glutaraldehyde coagu-
Severe Combined Immunodefciency Syndrome in Jack
lation, sodium sulfite precipitation, and immunoassays—have
Russell Terriers
been used to screen for the failure of the passive transfer of
Like Arabian foals, affected Jack Russell pups also have a
immunity via colostrum in neonatal animals.34.148
 defect in the DNA-PKCS gene that appears to be transmitted
as an autosomal recessive trait. Affected pups have profound
lymphopenia, decreased serum immunoglobulins, and hypo-
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
plasia of allymphoid organs. These SCID dogs generally die
DISORDERS
between 8 and 14 weeks of age.102
Clinical Signs
Animals with immunodeficiencies generally suffer from recur-
X-linked Severe Combined Immunodeficiency
rent and chronic infections. Common conditions that may be
Syndrome in Dogs
present include respiratory infections, diarrhea, dermatitis,
 An X-linked SCID syndrome has been recognized in Basset
pyoderma, otitis, and growth retardation. Infections with
Hound and Cardigan Welsh Corgi dogs.72.iAffected male
-odsopda pue ssounud se yons susruearo susunroddo
dogs fail to thrive; exhibit increased susceptibilities to bacte-
ridium species, also suggest the presence of an immunodefi-
 rial, viral, and protozoal pathogens; lack palpable peripheral
 a s    s 
lymph nodes, and generally die by 5 to 6 months of age unless
increased susceptibility to bacterial infections, and animals
they are housed in a germ-free environment.13 Absolute
with T lymphocyte defects typically have increased suscepti-
blood lymphocyte counts are generally decreased or in the
bility to viral, fungal, and protozoal infections. Animals with
low-normal range because T lymphocyte numbers are low.
neutrophil defects generally have cutaneous and systemic
NK cell production is also reduced, but B lymphocyte counts
 infections with pyogenic bacteria.46
aisudsan ae ssoudi a pooq u pasu sq r
to T lymphocyte-dependent mitogens but respond to T
Inherited Neutrophil Defects
lymphocyte-independent mitogens. B lymphocytes exhibit
A number of inherited defects of neutrophils have been
 normal IgM production, but isotype class switching does not 
 described. These include the Chediak-Higashi syndrome in
occur; consequently IgG and IgA concentrations are markedly
several animal species, β2-integrin adhesion molecule defi-
reduced in blood.? Mutations of the common y-chain gene
ciencies in dogs and cattle, bactericidal defects in dogs, and
that encodes for essential components of interleukin (IL)-2,
cyclic hematopoiesis in gray collie dogs. These disorders are
IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, and IL-15 receptors have been shown to
discussed in Chapter 5.
186
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Selective Immunoglobulin Defciencies
Serum Immunoglobulin Deficiencies
A number of selective immunoglobulin deficiencies have been
 A heterogeneous group of disorders can result in reduced
 described in domestic animals. These include IgM deficiency
serum immunoglobulins in humans and animals. The specific
in horses and dogs,46.117 IgA deficiency in dogs,3646 IgG def-
 defect that produces these abnormalities in animals is gener
ciency in a foal,2 and IgG, deficiency in cattle.51
ally unknown.
Immunodeficiency in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels
Common Variable Immunodeficiency
Adult Cavalier King Charles spaniels with Pneumocystis pneu-
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) in humans is
monia have been described with low (about 40% of normal)
characterized by reduced immunoglobulin (IgG, IgA, and/or
serum IgG concentration, normal serum IgA concentrations,
IgM) concentrations in serum and increased susceptibility
and increased serum IgM concentrations. The authors specu-
to infection. Several genetic defects have been reported
late that a defect might exist in the ability of antigen-activated
to result in this phenotype in humans. Each defect
B lymphocytes to switch immunoglobulin class from IgM
disrupts B lymphocyte differentiation, maturation, and/or
to IgG. 147
function.2s Symptoms generally do not develop until young
 adulthood, but they may develop in children as young as 5
X-linked Agammaglobulinemia in Foais
years old.61
A possible X-linked agammaglobulinemia has been described
 CVID has been reported in adult horses (mean age about
 in thoroughbred and standard-bred foals that have no identi-
11 years) with fever, persistent, multifocal bacterial infections
fiable B lymphocytes in blood. IgG, IgM, and IgA are low or
(including pneumonia, meningitis, and septicemia), markedly
absent, but T lymphocyte function appears to be normal.46
decreased concentrations of IgM, moderately to markedly
decreased concentrations of IgG, and variably decreased con-
Immunodefciency in Weimaraner Dogs
centrations of IgA in serum resulting from markedly reduced
A poorly defined immunodeficiency disorder has been
described in young (median age 4 months) Weimaraner dogs
Hematology findings included variable or persistent lympho-
that is characterized by chronic, recurrent infammation in
penia and frequent neutrophilia and hyperfibrinogenemia
various tissues, including bowel, skin, and the central nervous
associated with infections. Lymphocyte proliferation assays
system. Metaphyseal osteopathy is also often present. Low
generally revealed decreased responses to both B and T
concentrations of immunoglobulin (primarily IgG and less
lymphocyte mitogens. The etiology of equine CVID is
sns ss ss pue ssd ae (in roe in u
unknown.
a concomitant neutrophil function defect.3249.6
 A late-onset immunodeficiency has been reported in Shar-
pei dogs that is similar to CVID in humans. Increased sus-
Transient Hypogammaglobulinemia in Neonates
ceptibility to infection beginning at about 3 years of age is
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia may occur in young
reported. Serum IgA and IgM concentrations are low in most
animals if the onset of IgG and IgA production by the neonate
dogs, and serum IgG concentration is low in some. Abnor-
is delayed following the disappearance of maternal antibodies
malities in T as well as B lymphocyte function are demon-
at about 2 months of age. Deficient animals are susceptible to
 strated in some dogs.126
 q ss  r n s 
CVID has been reported in seven young (less than 1 year
functional at about 6 months of age.46
old) miniature dachshund dogs with Pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia. Abnormal findings included a lack of B lympho-
T Lymphocyte Immunodeficiency
cytes in lymph nodes, decreased serum concentrations of all
I Lymphocyte Immunodeficiency in Growth Hormone-
immunoglobulins measured, and abnormal responses ofblood
Deficient Dogs
lymphocytes to mitogens.?3
An inbred family of Weimaraner dogs has been described
with a fatal wasting syndrome, retarded growth, persistent
Fell Pony Syndrome
infections, and anemia beginning at about 6 weeks of age.
A primary immunodeficiency syndrome has been described
 These pups had abnormalities in growth hormone metabolism
in Fell ponies. Affected foals typically become ill at 2 to 4
and in thymus-dependent immune function. The thymus was
weeks of age. They lose body mass and develop chronic infec-
small and depleted of T lymphocytes. B lymphocyte function
tions with multiple systemic signs, including fever, diarrhea,
appeared to be normal, with serum immunoglobulin concen-
mucopurulent ocular and/or nasal discharges, and broncho-
trations within reference intervals 128,129
 pneumonia. Lymphopenia and severe normocytic normochro-
mic anemia with marrow erythroid hypoplasia are typically
Hypotrichosis with Thymic Apiasia in Cats
present.131 Serum IgA and igM concentrations are consis-
This autosomal recessive disease results in lack of hair growth
tently low and serum IgG concentration is sometimes low.
(nude kittens), lack of thymic development, and profound
B lymphocyte numbers are markedly reduced in blood, lymph
immunodeficiency in Birman kittens. Kittens fail to thrive,
nodes, spleen, and bone marrow.
succumb to infections, and die within a few weeks.25
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
187
Lethal Acrodermatitis in English Bull Terriers
to provide the necessary protection against bacterial infections
 Acrodermatitis in English bull terriers is an autosomal reces-
(especially septicemia).4.127,14 The reader may refer to “Serum
sive disease that is reported to result from impaired absorption
Immunoglobulin Assays," above, for tests used to detect the
and/or metabolism of zinc. Afected dogs have growth
failure of passive transfer. Reference values for plasma IgG
retardation and develop hyperkeratosis, parakeratosis, skin 
 in neonatal animals vary depending on the species being
 infections, diarrhea, and pneumonia. T lymphocyte function
 analyzed and the method used. In general, serum IgG con-
is impaired and there is lymphocyte depletion in the T
centrations below 400 mg/dL are considered inadequate, con-
lymphocyte area within lymphoid tissues. Serum zinc and
centrations from 400 to 800 mg/dL are considered marginal,
 copper concentrations are usually low, but zinc supplementa-
and concentrations above 800 mg/dL are considered sufficient
tion is not effective and the dogs generally die within 15
when measured in foals 1 to 2 days after birth. Serum IgG
concentration is considered adequate in calves if serum IgG
concentrations exceed 1000 mg/dL.14
 Complement Deficiency in Brittany Spaniel Dogs
An inherited deficiency of the third component of comple-
ment (C3) has been reported as an autosomal recessive trait
REFERENCES
in Brittany spaniel dogs. Homozygous affected animals suffer 
from recurrent sepsis, pneumonia, pyometra, and renal disease.
1. Andrews GA. Red blood cell antigens and blood groups in the dog and cat In: Feldman
 Humoral immune responses to both T lymphocyte-dependent
BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:767-773.
and T lymphocyte-independent antigens are defective in
2. Attaelmannan M, Levinson SS. Understanding and identifying monoclonal gammopa-
affected dogs.
thies. Chin Chem. 2000;46:1230-1238.
3. Aucoin DP, Rubin RL, Peterson ME, et al. Dose-dependent induction of anti-
Viral Immune Deficiency Disorders
native DNA antibodies in cats by propylthiouracil. Arthritis Rheum. 1988;31:688-
692.
A number of viral immune deficiency disorders have been 
4. Balazs T, Robinson CJ, BalterN.Hydralazine-induced antinuclear antibodies in beagle
recognized in animals, a few of which are listed here. Feline
dogs. Toxicol Appl Phammacol 1981;57:452-456.
5. Balch A, Mackin A. Canine immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: pathophysiology.
Aq pasnes si (saiv) suorpuss Auyapounun panbse
clinical signs, and diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Vet. 2007;29:217-225.
FIV. Infected cats may be asymptomatic for months to years
6. Barker RN. Anemia associated with immune responses.In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain
before signs of severe chronic infammatory or neoplastic dis-
NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams
eases are observed 134 Increased susceptibility to infectious
& Wilkins; 2000:169-177.
7. Barker RN, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Elson CJ. Red cell-bound immunoglobulins and com-
agents is associated with neutropenia and/or lymphopenia and
 plement measured by an enzyme-linked antiglobulin test in dogs with autoimmune
decreased numbers of CD4+ T 1ymphocytes.137.142 A similar
haemolysis or other anaemias. Res Vet Sci. 1993;54:170-178.
-n us y sd u pn uq sy srs
8. Bell TG, Butler KL, Sill HB, et al. Autosomal recessive severe combined immunodefi-
 ciency of Jack Russell terriers. J Vet Diagn invest. 2002;14:194-204.
 nodeficiency virus (SIV) infections.41
 9. Bianco D, Armstrong PJ, Washabau RJ. Presumed primary immune-mediated throm-
FeLV is a potent immunosuppressive virus. There is
bocytopenia in four cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2008;10:495-500.
an early loss of Th lymphocyte function followed by a
10. Bloom JC, Thiem PA, Sellers TS, et al. Cephalosporin-induced immune cytopenia in 
the dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil- and platelet-associated IgG fol-
 progressive depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes and eventually
lowing treatment with cefazedone. Am J Hematol. 1988;28:71-78.
panlymphoid depletion.3 Lymphopenia is generally not
11. Blum JR, Cork LC, Morris JM, et al. The clinical manifestations of a genetically
determined deficiency ofthe third component of complement in the dog. Cin immuno!
mmwnopathol. 1985;34:304-315.
when animals become ill with FeLV-induced AIDS.105
12. Bohnhorst JO, Hanssen l, Moen T. Immune-mediated fever inthe dog. Occurrence of 
 FeLV-positive cats are predisposed to a variety of secondary
antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, tumor necrosis factor and interleukin-6 in
serum. Acta Vet Scand. 2002;43:165-171.
infections.
13.BowingATRedbloodelantiensandblod groups in thehorsenFeld
Other infectious diseases found to induce secondary
Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematolgy. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lip-
immune deficiencies of T and/or B lymphocytes include
pincott Wiliams & Wilkins; 2000:774-777.
canine distemper virus,13 fetal equine herpesvirus I infec-
14. Boyle AG, Magdesian KG, Ruby RE. Neonatal isoerythrolsis in horse foals and a mule
foal: 18 cases {1988-2003). / Arm Vet Med Assoc. 2005;227:1276-1283.
 tion,11l and bovine viral diarrhea virus in calves.82
ews r suaniy uewg po sianll oma ui sisoiau di lel or pooman 'Hy aipia 9l
Animm Pract. 1998;9:88-89.
Failure of Passive Transfer of Immunoglobulins
16. Brown CD, Parnell NK, Schulman RL, et al. Evaluation of clinicopathologic features,
response to treatment, and risk factors associated with idiopathic neutropenia in
 Failure of passive transfer of immunoglobulins is an acquired
dogs: 11 cases (1990-2002). JAmm Vet /Med Assoc. 2006;229:87-91.
immunodeficiency disorder. Prior to suckling, newborn
17. Brown MR, Rogers KS. Neutropenia in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 261
cases. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2001;37:131-139.
domestic animals have extremely low amounts of immuno-
18. Bucheler J. Fading kitten syndrome and neonatal isoerythrolysis. Vet Clin North Am
globulin in their plasma. Colostrum is rich in IgG and IgA
Small Anim Pract. 1999;29:853-870.
but also contains some IgM and IgE. Colostral immuno-
19. Bucheler J, Giger U. Alloantibodies against A and B blood types in cats. Vet Immunol
 globulins (especially IgG) can be absorbed intact through an
mwnopathol. 1993;38:283-295.
20. Buechner-Maxwell V, Scott MA, Godber L, et al. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocyto-
 animal's small intestine during the first day of life.14 If insuf-
penia in a quarter horse foal. J Vet Intem Med. 1997;11:304-308.
ficient or poor-quality colostrum is produced, the intake of
21. Buntain B. IgG immunodeficiency in a half-Arabian foal with salmonellosis. Vet Med
colostrum is inadequate, or if there is a failure of intestinal
Small Anim Clin. 1981;76:231-234.
absorption, the neonate may not obtain sufficient antibodies
in dogs with cyclophosphammide. / Vet Intem Med. 2000;14:456-462.
188
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 23. Callan MB, Jones LT, Giger U. Hemolytic transfusion reactions in a dog with an
 52. Gaschen FP. Smith Meyer B. Harvey JVw. Amegakaryocytic thrombocrytopenia
622-2/z:6966l pa// wa0/ 1a/ 7 ua6pue uowwo3 e 0n Apognueole
and immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia in a cat. Comp Haematol int. 1992;2:
24. Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L. Prognostic factors for mortality and thromboembolism
175-178.
in canine immune-mediated hemolytic anemmia: a retrospective study of 72 dogs.
 53. Gershwin LJ. Antinuclear antibodies in domestic animals. Ann N Y Acad Sci
 Vet Intem Med. 2002;16:504-509.
2005;1050:364-370.
eiseide awu yrim sisouodayu jenuabuon ie ia g bbis n uuewnens i iesen 9z
 54. Gershwin LJ. Bovine inmmunoglobulin E. Vet Immunol immunopathol. 2009;132:
in nine birman kittens. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1994;30:600-602.
2-6.
 26. Clabough DL, Gebhard D, Flaherty MT, et al. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in
 55. Giger U, Akol KG. Acute hemolytic transfusion reaction in an Abyssinian cat with
horses infeted with equine infectious anemia virus. / Virol. 1991;65:6242-6251.
blood group type B. J Vet Intern Med 1990;4:315-316.
 27. Comazi S. Evaluation of neutrophil function. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's
 56. Giger U, Bucheler J. Transfusion of type-A and type-B blood to cats. J Am Vet Med
Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:1114-1122.
Assoc. 1991;198:411-418.
sadha pooig a pue yjo anuenauu pue Aauanbaly do uosiaed r jalayana 'n jabig 29
sons and contrasts. Annu Rev /mmunol. 2009;27:199-227.
in feline breeds of the United States. J Hered. 1991;82:15-20.
29. Cortese L, Sica M, Piantedosi D, et al. Secondary immune-mediated thrombocytope-
 58. Giger U, Casal ML. Feline colostrum-friend or foe: maternal antibodies in queens and 
nia in dogs naturally infeted by Leishmania infantum. Vet Rec. 2009;164:778-782.
kittens. / Reprod Fertil Suppl. 1997;51:313-316.
30. Corthay A. How do regulatory T cells work? Scand J Immunol. 2009;70:326-336.
59. Giger U, Griot-Wenk M, Bucheler J, et al. Geographical variation of the feline blood
 31. Couto CG. Immune-mediated neutropenia. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
type frequencies in the United States. Feline Pract. 1991;19:21-27.
 Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincot Williams & Wilkins;:
60. GinelPJ, Lucena R.Investigation ofantinuclear antibodies in canine atopic dermatitis.
2000:815-818.
J Vet /ed A Physiol Pathol Chin M/ed. 2001;48:193-198.
 32. Couto CG, Krakowka S, Johnson G, et al. In vitro immunologic features of Weimaraner
 61. Glocker E, Ehl S, Grimbacher B. Common variable immunodeficiency in children. Curr
dogs with neutrophil abnormalities and recurrent infections. Vet Immunol immuno-
Opin Pediatr. 2007;19:685-692.
pathol. 1989;23:103-112.
 62. Goggs R, Boag AK, Chan DL. Concurrent immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia and 
 33. Crispin JC, Liossis SN, Kis-Toth K, et al. Pathogenesis of human systemic lupus
severe thrombocytopenia in 21 dogs. Vet Rec. 2008;163:323-327.
 erythematosus: recent advances. Trends AMor Med. 2010;16:47-57.
 63. Gould SM, Mclnnes EL. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia associated with Angio-
-anseaw pue shesse algeliene Aeisawwon any jo uonenjen3 s ananbig y slnea t
strongylus vasorum infetion in a dog. J Smal Anim Pract. 1999;40:227-232.
ment of serum total protein concentrationvia refractometry forthe diagnosis of failure
 64. Griot-Wenk ME, Giger U. Feline transfusion medicine-Blood types and their clinical
of passive transfer of immunity in foals. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2005;227:1640-
inportance. Vet Chin North Amm Small Anim Pract 1995;25:1305-1322.
1645.
 65. Hale AS. Canine blood groups and their importance in veterinary transfusion medi-
 35. Davis WM. Hapten-induced immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in a dog. J Am Vet
cine. Vet Chin North Amm Small Anim Pract 1995;25:1323-1332.
Med Ass0c. 1984;184:976-977.
 66. Hansen P, Clercx C, Henroteaux M, et al. Neutrophil phagocyte dysfunction in a
 36. Day MJ. Possible inmmunodeficiency in related rottweiler dogs. J Small Anim Pract.
weimaraner with recurrent infections. J Small Anim Pract. 1995;36:128-131.
1999;40:561-568
 67. Hansson H, Trowald-WVigh G, Karlsson-Parra A. Detection of antinuclear antibodies
 37. Day MJ. Systemic lupus erythematosus. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds.
yewny pue anss jaiepo osyedwo as bop u auasaongounww apuiq
 Schaim's Veterinary Hematoogy 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Vvilkins;
epithelial-2 cells as antigenic substrate. / Vet Intern Med. 1996;10:199-203.
2000:819-826.
68. Hansson-Hamlin H, Liliehook l. A possble systemic rheumatic disorder in the Nova
 38. de Parseval A, Chatterji U, Sun P, et al. Feline immunodeficiency virus targets acti-
Scotia duck tolling retriever. Acta Vet Scand. 2009;51:16.
vated CD4+ T cells by using CD134 as a binding receptor. Proc Nat Acad Sci U S A.
69. Hansson-Hamlin H, Lilliehook I, Trowald-Wigh G. Subgroups of canine antinuclear
2004;101:13044-13049.
antibodies in relation to laboratory and clinical findings in immune-mediated disease.
aat ui uounshp liaai jadiau aissaid pue Ajea vi ao 'rn luala 6e
Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:397-404.
leukemia virus-induced immunodeficiency. JAcquirimmune Defic Syndr.1992;5:1188-
70. Hartnett BJ, Somberg RL, Krakowka S, et al. B-cell function in canine X-linked severe 
1194.
combined immunodeficiency. Vet /mmunol lmmunopathol. 2000;75:121-134.
 40. Dircks BH, Schuberth HJ, Mischke R. Underlying diseases and clinicopathologic vari-
71. Harvey JV. The erythrocryte: physiology. metabolism and biochemical disorders. In:
 ables of thrombocytopenic dogs with and without platelet-bound antibodies detected
Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals.
by use of a flow cytometric assay: 83 cases (2004-2006). J/ Am Vet Med Assoc.
Bth ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:173-240.
2009;235:960-966.
72. Helfand SC. Neoplasia and irmune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Vet Clin North Am
41. Dua N, Reubel G, Moore PF, et al. An experimental study of primary feline immuno-
Small Animm Pract 1988;18:267-270.
 deficiency virus infection in cats and a historical comparison to acute simian
73. Henthorn PS, Somberg RL, Fimiani VM, et al. IL-2R gamma gene microdeletion dem-
and human immunodeficiency virus diseases. Vet immunol lmmunopathol. 1994:
 onstrates that canine X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency is a homologue of
43:337-355.
the human disease. Genomics. 1994;23:69-74.
42. Dunn JK. Searcy GP. Hirsch VM. The diagnostic significance of a positive direct
74. Hofmann-Lehmann R, Holznagel E, OssentP, et al. Parameters of disease progression
antiglobulin test in anemic cats. Can / Comp MMed. 1984;48:349-353.
in long-term experimental feline retrovirus feline immunodeficiency virus and feline 
43. Duval D, Giger U. Vaccine-associated immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in the dog.
leukemia virus) infections: hematology. clinical chemistry. and lymphocyte subsets.
J Vet Intem MMed. 1996;10:290-295.
Clin Diagn Lab Immunol 1997:4:33-42.
44. Fecteau G, Smith BP, George LW. Septicemia and meningitis inthe newborn calf Vet
75. Hoyt PG, Gill MS, Angel KL, et al. Corticosteroid-responsive thrombocytopenia in two
Chin North Amm Food Animm Pract. 2009;25: 195-208.
beef cows. J/ Arm Vet Med Assoc. 2000;217:717-720.
45. Feldman BF, Handagama P. Lubberink AA. Splenectomy as adjunctive therapy for
76.Hubler M, Kalin S, Hagen A et al. Feline nenatal iserythrolysis in two littes.
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and hemolytic anemia in the dog. JAm Vet Med
/ Small Anim Pract. 1987;28:833-838.
Assoc. 1985;187:617-619.
77. Hurcombe SD, Mudge MC. Hinchcliff KV. Clinical and clinicopathologic variables in
46. Felsburg PJ. T cell immunoglobulin, and complement immunodeficiency disorders.
adult horses receiving blood transfusions: 31 cases ↑1999-2005). JAm Vet Med Assoc.
In Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA:
2007;231:267-274
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:400-405.
78. Jackson ML, Kruth SA. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemmia and thrombocytopenia in
47. Fidel JL, Pargass IS, Dark MJ, et al. Granulocytopenia associated with thymoma in a
the dog: a retrospective study of 55 cases diagnosed from 1979 through 1983 at the
domestic shorthaired cat. J/Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:210-217.
Western College of Veterinary Medicine. Can Vet J/. 1985;26:245-250.
48. Famminio MJ, Tallmadge RL, Salles-Gomes CO, et al. Common variable immunodefi-
79. Jezyk PF, Felsburg PJ, Haskins ME, etal. X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency
ciency in horses is characterized by B cell depletion in primary and secondary lym-
in the dog. Clin Immunol Immunopahol. 1989;52:173-189.
 phoid tissues. / Clin lmmunol. 2009;29:107-116.
80. Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, Kay-Smith WE, et al. Lethal acrodermatitis in bullterriers.
49. Foale RD, Hertage ME, Day MJ. Retrospective study of 25 young weimaraners with
J Ar Vet /Med Assoc. 1986;188:833-839.
low serum immunoglobulin concentrations and inflammatory disease. Vet Rec.
 -sip snoajui ui sian 1AJonelnal goo pue too uewnh Hl yoyuao 'vs uansoor 18
2003;1 53:553-558.
eases and vaccination. Hum Immunol. 2008;69:760-770.
 50. Forster LM. Neonatal aloimmune thrombocytopenia, purpura, and anemia in 6 neo-
 B2. Kelling CL, Steffen DJ, Topliff CL, et al. Comparative virulence of isolates of bovine
natal piglets. Can Vet J. 2007;48:855-857.
viral diarrhea virus type llin experimental inoculated six-to nine-month-old calves.
 51. Francoz D, Lapointe JM, Wellemans V, et al. Immunoglobulin G2 deficiency with
Anm / Vet Res. 2002;63:1379-1384.
transient hypogammaglobulinemia and chronic respiratory disease in a 6-month-old
 83. Klag AR, Giger U, Shofer FS. Idiopathic immune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs:
Holstein heifer. J/ Vet Diagn nvest. 2004;16:432-435.
42 cases f1986-1990). /Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;202:783-788.
CHAPTER 6 = Immunohematology
189
84. Kohn B, Linden T, Leibold Ww. Patelet-bound antibodies detected by a flow cytometric
115. Peterson ME, Hurvitz Al, Leib MS, et al. Propylthiouracil-associated hemolytic anemia,
assay in cats with thrombocytopenia. / Feline Med Surg. 2006;8:254-260.
thrombocytopenia, and antinuclear antibodies in cats with hyperthyroidism. JAm Vet
85. Kohn B, Weingart C, Eckmann V, et al. Primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Med Ass0c. 1984;184:806-808.
in 19 cats: diagnosis, therapy. and outcome {1998-2004). J Vet Intem Med.
116. Piek CJ, Junius G, Dekker A, et al. Idiopathic immune-mediated hemolytic anemia:
2006;20: 159-166.
treatment outcome and prognostic factors in 149 dogs. J Vet lntem Med.
B6. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS. Platelet dysfunction associated with immune-
2008;22: 366-373.
mediated thrombocytopenia in dogs. J Vet Intem Med. 1994;8:323-327.
117. Plechner AJ. IgM deficiency in 2 Doberman Pinschers. Moo Vet Pract. 1979;60:150.
87. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS, et al. Comparison of microscopic and flow
-nww lensoo jo ani yim Auaiapounww paugwo i angn 'r aiddod dll
-aunw buey jo paadsns shop ui Apognue aaeid jo uoaiap anawoaa
noglobulins transfer in foals. Vet Rec. 1976;99:44-46.
mediated thrombocytopenia. Am J Vet Res. 1994;55:1111-1114.
119. Pullen RP. Somberg RL, Felsburg PJ, et al. X-linked severe combined immuno-
B8. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS, et al. Detection of antiplatelet antibody with 
deficiency in a family of Cardigan Welsh corgis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
a platelet immunofluorescence assay. J Vet Intem Med. 1994;8:36-39.
1997;33:494-499.
B9. Lachowicz JL, Post GS, MoroffSD, etal. Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia-
120. Putsche JC, Kohn B. Primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in 30 dogs ↑1997-
four cases and a literature review. J/ Smal Anim Pract. 2004;45:507-514.
2003)1. / Arm Animm Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:250-257.
 90. Lewis DC. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC.
121. Quigley KA. Chelack BJ, Haines DM, et al. Application of a diret flow cytometric
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
 owau panepaw-aunww! yi shop u Aesse anuasaongounwwi aoia
Wilkins; 2000:807-814.
anemia and comparison to the direct antiglobulin test. J Vet Diagn lnvest.
 91. Lewis DC, Meyers KM. Studies of platelet-bound and serum platelet-bindable immu-
2001;13:297-300.
noglobulins in dogs with idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura. Exp Hematol.
122. Ramirez S. Gaunt SD, McClure JJ, et al. Detection and effects on platelet function
1996;24: 696-701.
 of anti-platelet antibody in mule foals with experimentally induced neonatal alloim-
 92. Lewis DC, Meyers KM, Callan MB, et al. Detection of platelet-bound and serum
mune throm bocytopenia. / Vet Intem Med. 1999;13:534-539.
 platelet-bindable antibodies for diagnosis of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in
paeipaw-aunwwi paneosse pue ewoiesoudw r yaaa 'ss uosha 'sn taae 2l
dogs. / Arm Vet Med Assoc. 1995;206:47-52.
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 93. Lobetti R. Common variable immunodeficiency in miniature dachshunds affected with
1984;184: 313-317.
 Pneumonocystis carinii pneumonia. J/ Vet Diagn lnvest. 2000;12:39-45.
124. Reimann KA. Bull RV, Crow SE, et al. Immunologic profiles of cats with persistent,
 94. Lubas G, Ciaini F, Gavazza A. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia and hemolytic 
naturally  acquired
feline leukemia virus infection. Am J Vet Res.
anemia fEvans' syndrome) in a horse. Equine Pract. 1997;19:27-32.
1986;47:1935-1939.
 95. Luther DG, Cox HU, Nelson WO. Screening for neonatal isohemolytic anemia in
125. Reimer ME, Troy GC, Warnick LD. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: 70 cases 
calves. Amm / Vet Res. 1985;46:1078-1079.
{1988-1996). / Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1999;35:384-391.
 96. Macleay JM. Neonatal isoerythrolysis involving the Qc and Db antigens in a foal.
126. Rivas AL, Tintle L, Argentieri D, et al. A primary immunodeficiency syndrome in Shar-
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2001;219:79-81, 50.
Pei dogs. Clin /mmunol Immunopathol. 1995;74: 243-251.
97. McAlees TJ. mmune-mediated haemolytic anaemia in 110 dogs in Victoria, Australia.
127. Robinson JA. Allen GK. Green EM, et al. A prospective study of septicaemia in
Aust Vet J. 2010;88:25-28.
colostrum-deprived foals. Equine Vet J. 1993;25:214-219.
 98. McCullough S. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: understanding the nemesis.
128. Roth JA, Kaeberle ML, Grier RL, et al. Improvement in clinical condition and thymus 
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2003;33:1295-1315.
morphologic features associated with growth hormone treatment of immunodeficient
99. McEwan NA, McNeil PE, Thompson H, et al. Diagnostic features, confirmation and
dwarf dogs. Arm / Vet Res. 1984;45:1151-1155.
disease progressionin 28 cases of lethal acrodermatitis of bull terriers. JSmalAnim
129. Roth JA, Lomax LG, Altszuler N, et al. Thymic abnormalities and growth hormone 
Pract. 2000;41:501-507.
deficiency in dogs. Am / Vet Res. 1980;41:1256-1262.
aad po oaa aa m  aia  o  n 0
130.
.Schobesberger M, Summerfield A, Dohe MG, et al. Canine distemper virus-induced 
antibody in three horses with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. J Am Vet Med 
depletion of uninfected lymphocytes is associated with apoptosis. Vet immunol /mmu-
Assoc. 2004;224:83-87, 53.
nopathol. 2005;104: 33-44.
101. McManus PM, Craig LE. Correlation between leukocytosis and necropsy findings in
131. Scholes SF, Holliman A, May PD, et al. A syndrome of anaemia, immunodeficiency
dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemmia: 34 cases {1994-1999). J Am Vet Med
 and peripheral ganglionopathy in Fell pony foals. Vet Rec. 1998;142:128-134.
Assoc. 2001;218:1308-1313.
132. Scott MA, Kaiser L, Davis JM, et al. Development of a sensitive immunoradiometric
102. Meek K, Kienker L, Dallas C, et al. SCID in Jack Russell terriers: a new animal model 
assay for the detection of platelet surface-associated immunoglobulins in thrombo-
of DNA-PKcs deficiency. J /mmunol. 2001;167:2142-2150.
cytopenic dogs. Arm J Vet Res. 2002;63:124-129.
103. Melzer KJ, Wardrop KJ, Hale AS, et al. A hemolytic transfusion reaction due to DEA
133. Sellon DC. Blood transfusions in large animals. In: Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC.
4 alloantibodies in a dog. J/ Vet lntem Med. 2003;17:931-933.
104. Morley P, Mathes M, Guth A, et al. Anti-erythrocyte antibodies and disease associa-
Wilkins; 2000:849-854.
tions in anemmic and nonanemic dogs. / Vet Intem Med. 2008;22:886-892.
134. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML, Persik MT, et al. Prospective hematologic and clinico-
105.
 Ogilvie GK, Tompkins MB, Tompkins WA. Clinical and immunologic aspects of FeLV-
pathologic study of asymptomatic cats with naturall acquired feline immunodefi-
induced immunosuppression. Vet Microbiol. 1988;17:287-296
ciency virus infection. / Vet lntern Med. 1995;9:133-140.
106. Overmann JA, Sharkey LC, Weiss DJ, et al. Performance of 2 microtiter canine
135. Smee NM, Harkin KR, Wikerson MJ. Measurement of serum antinuclear antibody
Coombs' tests. Vet Chin Pathol. 2007;36:179-183.
titer in dogs with and without systemic lupus erythematosus: 120 cases {1997-2005].
107. Ovrebo BJ, Hanssen I, Moen T. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)in Gordon setters with 
J Arm Vet Med Assoc. 2007;230:1180-1183.
symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy and black hair follicular dysplasia. Acta Vet
136. Smith BE, Tompkins MB, Breitschwerdt EB. Antinuclear antibodies can be detected
Scand. 2001;42:323-329.
in dog sera reactive to Bartonella vinsoni subsp.berkhoffi, Ehrlichia canis, or Leish
108. Pedersen NC. A review of immunologic diseases of the dog. Vet lmmuno lmmuno-
mania infantum antigens. J Vet Intem Med. 2004;18:47-51.
pahol 1999;69:251-342.
137.
Sparkes AH, Hopper CD, Millard WG, et al. Feline immunodeficiency virus infetion.
109. Pellegrini-Masini A, Bentz Al, Johns IC, et al. Common variable immunodeficiency in
Clinicopathologic findings in 90 naturally occurring cases. J Vet Intern Med.
three horses with presumptive bacterial meningitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
1993;7:85-90.
2005;227:114-122, 87.
138. Stull JV, Evason M, Carr AP, et al. Canine immune-mediated polyarthritis: clinical
110. Penedo MCT. Red blood cell antigens and blood groups in the cow, pig. sheep. goat,
and laboratory findings in 83 cases in western Canada {1991-2001). Can Vet J.
and llama. In: Feldman BF, ZinkI JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology.
2008;49:1195-1203.
5th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wvilkins; 2000:778-782.
139. Suter SE. Severe combined immunodeficiency. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
111. Perkins G, Ainsworth DM, Erb HN, et al. Clinical, haematological and biochemical
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wile-Blackwell;2010.
adas y paedwo uoau! lsnsadiay auinba eeuoau y sieo ui shupu
sas iad pa g  i o aa l pei 
 and premature foals. Equine Vet J. 1999;31:422-426
Elsevier; 2009.
112. Perkins GA, Miller WH, Divers TJ, et al. Ucerative dematitis, thrombocytopenia, and
141. Tocci LJ, Ewing PJ. Increasing patient safety in veterinary transfusion medicine:
neutropenia in neonatal foals. J Vet Intem Med. 2005;19:211-216.
an overview of pretransfusion testing. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio).
113. Perkins MC, Canfield P, Churcher RK, et al Immune-mediated neutropenia suspected 
2009;19:66-73
in five dogs. Aust Vet J. 2004;82:52-57.
142. Tompkins MB, Nelson PD, English RV, et al. Early events in the immunopathogenesis 
114. Peryman LE, McGuire TC, Crawford TB. Maintenance of foals with combined immu-
of feline retrovirus infections. J Am Vet AMed Assoc. 1991;199:1311-1315.
nodeficiency: causes and control of secondary infections. Am J/ Vet Res. 1978;39:
143. Traub-Dargatz JL, McClure JJ, Koch C, et al. Neonatal isoerythrolysis in mule foals.
1043-1047.
J Arm Vet /ed Assoc. 1995;206:67-70.
190
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
144. Uchida Y, Moon-Fanelli AA. Dodman NH, et al. Serum concentrations of zinc and
152. Weiss DJ, Henson M.Pure white cell aplasia in a dog. Vet Cin Pathol
copper in bull teriers with lethal acrodermatitis and tail-chasing behavior. Am J Vet
2007;36:373-375.
Res. 1997;58: 808-810.
153. Weiss DJ, Walcheck B. Neutrophil function. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JVV, Bruss ML,
145. Vargo CL, Taylor SM, Haines DM. Immune mediated neutropenia and thrombocyto-
eds. Cinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego, CA: Academic
 penia in 3 giant schnauzers. Can Vet J. 2007;48:1159-1163.
Press; 2008:331-350.
146.
Wardrop KJ. The Coombs' test in veterinary medicine: past, present, future. Vet Clin
Pathol 2005;34:325-334.
defect in VD)J recombination and DNA-dependent protein kinase activity. Proc Nat 
147. Watson PJ, Wotton P, Eastwood J, et al. Immunoglobulin deficiency in Cavalier King
Acad Sci U S A. 1995;92:11485-11489.
Charles Spaniels with Pneumocystis pneumonia. J Vet Intem Med. 2006;20:523-
155. Wilkerson MJ, Davis E, Shuman WV, et al. lsotype-specific antibodies in horses and
527.
dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J/ Vet intem Med. 2000;14:190-196.
148. Weaver DM, Tyler JVv, VanMetre DC, et al. Passive transfer of colostral irmuno-
156. Wilkerson MJ, Shuman V. Alterations in normal canine platelets during storage in
 globulins in calves. J/ Vet Jntem /Med. 2000;14:569-577.
149.
lens sioey ansouoid po uonenje3 ie ia 'r ydiopuey 'vs Jauan l alyua 
157. Wilson EM, Holcombe SJ, Lamar A, et al. Incidence of transfusion reactions and 
rates, and treatment protocols for inmmune-mediated hemolytic anemia in dogs: 151
retention of procoagulant and anticoagulant factor activities in equine plasma. J/ Vet
cases f1993-2002). / Armm Vet Med Assoc. 2005;226:1869-1880.
ntem Med. 2009; 23:323-328.
150. Weinstein NM, Blais MC, Harris K, et al. A newly recognized blood group in domestic
158. Wondratschek C, Weingart C, Kohn B. Primary irmmune-mediated thrombocytopenia
762-28z1z200z pa/ wau/ a/ 7 ua6ue 1a3 pa1 1 a4n se3 jie4ious
in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2010;46:12-19. 
151. Weiss DJ. Evaluation of antineutrophil IgG antibodies in persistently neutropenic
159. Zini E, Hauser B, Meli ML, et al. Imnune-mediated erythroid and megakaryocytic
dogs. / Vet Intern MMed. 2007;21:440-444.
aplasia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2007;230:1024-1027.
CHAPTER
EVALUATION OF HEMOSTASIS:
COAGULATION AND PLATELET
DISORDERS
Hemostasis depends on vascular integrity, platelet numbers
degranulated platelets (Fig. 7-2, B).237 Platelets typically
and function, and coagulation. Vascular integrity is deter-
stain uniformly purple with the new methylene blue wet
 mined in large measure by the health of endothelial cells and
preparation (Fig. 7-3).
their extracellular matrix. Damage to vessel walls can result in
Newly formed platelets have higher RNA content and
hemorrhage and/or activation of platelets and coagulation.
have been termed reticulated platelets. They cannot be quanti-
When arteries are severed, there is a transient refex vasocon-
fied by morphology but can be counted using fow cytometry
striction that slows the loss of blood and allows some time for
the platelet plug to begin forming and coagulation to com-
 Thrombocytes in nonmammalian species have nuclei and
 mence, which eventually result in the formation of a stable
 are much larger than those of mammals. They have a high
thrombus.
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N:C) ratio and are often oval or
elongated with light blue or nearly colorless cytoplasm in
stained blood flms (Figs 7-4, A, 7-5). Cytoplasmic vacuoles
BLOOD PLATELETS
may be present at one or both ends of a cell. Granules are
(THROMBOCYTES)
 usually not apparent. When thrombocytes are more round in
Normal Morphology
 shape, they can be difficult to differentiate from lymphocytes.
Blood platelets (thrombocytes) in mammals are small round-
Like mammalian platelets, thrombocytes appear clumped on
 to-oval anucleated cell fragments (thin discs when unstimu-
blood flms when they are activated (Fig. 7-4, B).
lated) that form from proplatelet cylinders of megakaryocyte
 sede us id ( re ss ueos
 Platelet Life Span and Counts in Blood
 blue, with many small reddish-purple granules when visualized
 Mean platelet life spans of 4 to 6 days have been reported in
using routine blood stains (Fig. 7-1, A,B). Equine platelets
 often stain poorly with Wright-Giemsa stain (Fig. 7-1, C), but
 increased from a mean of 5.5 days to a mean of 8 days after
they generally stain better with Diff-Quik (Fig. 7-1, D).
splenectomy in dogs, suggesting that the spleen is especially
Domestic cats (and other members of the Felidae family)
normally exhibit greater variation in platelet size (2 to 6 μm
Platelet senescence is associated with changes that have char-
or larger) than seen in other domestic animals or humans
acteristics of apoptosis, including increased surface phospha-
(2 to 4 μm). This size variability in cats may be related to
tidylserine (PS), which may promote their removal from
an altered M-loop region in β1-tubulin compared with 
circulation by macrophages.49
other mammals. The presence of these larger platelets
 Normal platelet counts vary depending on the species, with
(Fig. 7-1, E) results in higher mean platelet volumes (MPVs)
 minimal reference values as low as 100 x 10’/μL in horses and
in healthy cats than in other domestic animals. Feline platelets
maximal reference values as high as 800 × 10’/μL in several
appear especially sensitive to activation during blood sample
 domestic animal species.26 The numbers normally present in
collection and handling, resulting in degranulated platelet
 blood greatly exceed those needed for adequate hemostasis.
aggregates, which may be overlooked by an inexperienced
Thrombocyte counts are much lower in nonmammalian
observer (Fig. 7-2, A). Some of the precipitated cryoglobulin 
species than they are in mammals. In most avian species,
recognized in blood from a cat with a monoclonal cryoglobu-
thrombocyte counts range between 20 x 102/μL and 30 X
linemia has also been found to resemble aggregates of
10²/μL.221
191
192
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 7-2
Degranulated platlet aggregateversus cryoglobulin globules in stained
blood flms. A, Aggregate of activated and degranulated platelets in
blood frm a cat. Onlya single platelet in the upper left of the aggregate
still contains visible granules. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Blue-staining
homogeneous globules of cryoglobulin in blood from an American
domestic shorthaired cat with multiple myeloma and an IgG monoclonal
Cryoglobulinemia. The precipitated globules sometimes mimic
the
 present at the bottom between two erythrocytes. Wright stain.
B,Photograph ofa stained blood flm from a 1999 ASVCP slide review case
submittedbyStokolJBe,FHckfordGesselndJBing
E
FIGURE 7-1
Normal platelet morphology in stained blood films from domestic
animals. A, Aggregate of platelets in blood from a dog. Wright-Giemsa
stain. B, Aggregate of platelets in blood from a cow. Wright-Giemsa
stain. C, Three pale-staining platelets in blood from a horse. Wright-
Giemsa stain. D, Five platelets in blood from a horse. Diff-Quik stain.
E, Aggregate of platelets in blood from a cat dermonstrating the presence
of large platelets and the variation in platelet size that is characteristic
of this species. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 7-3
Platelet Metabolism
Mild thrombocytosis following splenectomy in blood from a dog. Plate-
lets appear as small purple cells and erythrocytes appear as unstained
As in other blood cells, glucose is the major energy source for
ghosts. Single small Heinz bodies in many erythrocytes appear as baso-
platelets. In contrast to anucleated erythrocytes, platelets have
philie “dots." Reticulocytes are present at top right and bottom right. An
mitochondria and consequently utilize the Krebs cycle and
Anaplasma platys morula is present in a platelet in the bottom left part
oxidative phosphorylation. Little of the pyruvate produced by
 Of the image. New methylene blue wet mount stain.
glycolysis is metabolized through the Krebs cycle in resting
platelets, but oxidative metabolism, as well as glycolytic
horses, domestic mammals have a well-developed canalicular
 metabolism, is markedly increased when platelets are activated
system that is continuous with the surface membrane (Fig.
to meet increased needs for adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
 7-7).46 Microtubules and microflaments are present and com-
 production. Biochemically, platelets have often been com-
posed of a variety of contractile proteins including actin,
pared with white skeletal muscle. They have active anaerobic
myosin, and related proteins. Microtubular coils help to main-
glycolysis and synthesize and utilize large amounts of glyco-
 tain the discoid shape of resting platelets.46 Changes in actin
 gen.402 Platelets have a dense tubular system analogous to the
filament conformation and the organization of associated pro-
calcium ion (Ca2t) sequestering sarcoplasmic reticulum
teins are required for platelet shape change, spreading, aggre-
 present in skeletal muscle (Fig. 7-6). Except for ruminants and
 gation, secretion, and clot retraction.46
CHA PT E R 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
193
B
FIGURE 7-4
Morphology of thrombocytes in bird blood films. A, Lymphocyte (top leff) and thrombocyte (bottom rigbt)
in blood from an Amazon parrot. B, Aggregate of thrombocytes in blood from a macaw. Wright-Giemsa
stairi.
DB
DTS
M
MT
CS
MI
FIGURE 7-5
M
DTS
Three thrombocytes (top leff) and a polychromatophilic erythrocyte
(bottom rigbt in blood from an Amazon parrot. Wright-Giemsa stain.
CS
G
DB
FIGURE 7-6
Platelet ultrastructure. DB, dense bodies; M, mitochondria; MT, micro-
 Adenine nucleotides are present in metabolic and storage
tubules; DTS, dense tubular system; G, granules; CS, canalicular system.
 pools within platelets. As in other cells, ATP accounts for
most of the adenine nucleotide in the metabolic pool. The
ATP in this pool provides energy for cell functions. In addi-
 ADP/ATP ratio is about 1.5 in dense granules. In addition
tion to energy needed for normal homeostatic processes,
to adenine nucleotides, these dense bodies contain consider-
platelets expend large amounts of energy during the release
 able amounts of serotonin, Ca²t, inorganic polyphosphates,
reaction and aggregation, to be discussed later The storage
and smaller amounts of other molecules, which are all secreted
pool of adenine nucleotides is contained within dense gran-
 outside the platelets during the release reaction (degranula-
ules (also called dense bodies or 8-granules), which contain
tion).427The contents of α-granules and some of the contents
about two-thirds of the total adenine nucleotides in the cell.
of lysosomes are also secreted when platelets are activated.
In contrast to the cytoplasm, where ATP predominates, the
 Some of the contents of c-granules are synthesized by
194
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
molecules, thereby inhibiting local antithrombin activity and
 promoting coagulation.?
 Finally, the presence of platelets helps maintain normal
vascular integrity in some manner. Vascular endothelium is
thin, fragile, and leaky in animals with low platelet counts
(thrombocytopenia).284 Platelets help protect vessels from
 bleeding during infammation in a way that is not dependent
on the formation ofa platelet plug.14 The relationship between
platelets and endothelial cells is complex and poorly under-
stood, but platelet granules have a variety of vasoactive mol-
ecules that might promote the integrity of the endothelial
barrier. Sphingosine-1 phosphate, a phospholipid product of
 platelets, is one sustance that appears fo be an important
mediator protecting the vascular barrier.451
FIGURE 7-7
 Transmission electron photomicrograph of a small and a large platelet
fom the blood of a healthy cat collected into EDTA. Granules and an
extensive canalicular system are visible.
PRIMARY HEMOSTASIS
Courtesy of Charles F Simpsom.
Vascular Phase
 Primary hemostasis consists of a vascular phase and a platelet
phase. Following the severing of vessels, a reflex vasoconstric-
tion temporarily retards blood fow, allowing time for forma-
megakaryocytes and others are taken up from the plasma.
tion of the platelet plug to begin and coagulation to commence.
 rd e s a sa s so n
The damage or removal of endothelial cells exposes the subcel-
might include adhesive proteins (von Willebrand factor
lular matrix, resulting in platelet adhesion. Following vessel
[vWF], fbrinogen, fibronectin, thrombospondin), coagulation
injury, tissue factor (TF) on subendothelial adventitial cells
factors (factors V, VII, XI and XII), protease inhibitors (plas-
activates coagulation.46 Although platelet plug formation and
minogen activator inhibitor, tissue factor pathway inhibitor,
coagulation are discussed below in separate sections, it is
C2-antiplasmin), CXC chemokines (platelet factor 4 [PF4]
important to realize that these processes are interrelated.
and β-thromboglobulin), P-selectin (CD62P), glycoprotein
Thrombin generated during coagulation is one of the agonists
(GP) receptors GPIb/IX/V (CD42) and GPIIb/IIla (CD41/
that activates platelets, and coagulation occurs on the surface
 CD61), and other components, including chemotactic, mito-
of activated platelets in vivo, which greatly accelerates the
genic, and vascular permeability factors. Platelets also contain
 Platelets express various glycoprotein molecules on their
Platelet Phase
surfaces that are needed for normal adhesion (platelet to
 In response to vessel wall injury or exposure to foreign sur-
faces, platelets rapidly undergo the processes of adhesion,
binding). The glycoprotein complex GPIb/IX/V is especially
shape change, secretion, and aggregation through a complex
important for the adhesion of platelets to vWF that is bound
series of coordinated processes that culminate in the forma-
to the subendothelial matrix. The GPIIb/IIa complex (Cuβ
tion of a precisely located platelet plug. Because of the rapidity
 integrin) is essential for normal platelet aggregation, which is
 of intracelular responses and synergy between secondary
messenger systems, it is not possible to organize the various
Platelets have several functions in hemostasis. The frst is
effector systems into a clearly defined temporal sequence.
the formation of a platelet plug at the site of vessel injury.
 Reciprocal activation of effector systems also makes it difficult
 Formation of a platelet plug alone is suffcient to stop bleeding
to define a clear sequence of events.271
from an injury to a small vessel. Second, platelet activation
results in the translocation of negatively charged phospholip-
Platelet Adhesion
ids (primarily PS) from the inner surfaces to the outer surfaces
 Optimal platelet adhesion requires the binding of the platelet
 of platelets. These aminophospholipids bind certain coagula-
 surface glycoprotein GPIb/IX/V complex to vWF molecules
tion factors in close proximity on platelet surfaces, thereby
on the surface of the subendothelium. The GPIb/IX/V
complex does not bind circulating vWF; it binds only vWF
 PF4 (CXCL4) from their α-granules, which binds to heparin-
molecules that have been immobilized within the extracellular
like molecules on endothelial surfaces near the activated
 matrix, where vWF is bound primarily to collagen. It appears
platelets. This binding displaces antithrombin (also called
 that the conformation of vWF changes upon binding to the
 antithrombin II), which also binds to these heparin-like
extracellular matrix, so that it readily binds to the GPIb
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
195
subunit of the GPIb/IX/V complex on platelets, especially
prolongs the circulation time of FVII1.513 These two factors 
when shear force is applied, as occurs when fowing blood is
are controlled by different genes and are synthesized indepen-
exposed to the subendothelial surface (Fig. 7-8).21
dently. vWF, previously referred to as factor VIII :R (related
vWF is a component of the factor VIII:vWF macromo-
antigen),is encoded by an autosomal gene and synthesized by
lecular complex (Fig. 7-9). It circulates as a series of disulfde-
endothelial cells and megakaryocytes (in some species). FVIII,
bonded polymers with a molecular weight of up to 20 X
 also referred to as antihemophilic factor is an X-linked gene
10? kDa in blood. vWF polymers bind to factor VI1 (FVIII),
product that is synthesized primarily in the liver (probably by
a smaller protein (molecular weight 285 kDa) that functions
 as a procoagulant.7 In humans, about 1 molecule of FVIII
binds per 50 monomers of vWF. Binding of FVIII to vWF
Although vWF appears to be the most important factor
 in the extravascular matrix for platelet adhesion under fow
conditions, other factors can promote platelet adhesion.
Thrombospondin-1 is an alternate substrate to vWF for
binding to platelet GPIb under high shear conditions. Under
(VWF)
static conditions with low shear, platelets adhere directly to
 collagen in the subendothelium using GPVI and c2β (GPIa-
Platelet Activation
 The adhesion of platelets to the extracelular matrix under
Extracellular
Platelet
matrix
shear conditions and their binding to collagen and other
strong agonists, including thrombin generated during
coagulation, result in the activation of phospholipase C
(PLC) in the platelet membrane (Fig. 7-i0). PLC cleaves
a unique membrane phospholipid, phosphatidylinositol,
4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2), into inositol triphosphate (IPs) and
GPIb/IX/V
1,2-diacylglycerol (DAG). IP; diffuses through the cytoplasm
and binds to a calcium channel receptor in the dense tubular 
FIGURE 7-8
system, which stimulates the release of calcium ions.271 The
von Willebrand factor (vWF) is needed for optimal adhesion of platelets
rise in the cytosolic concentration of calcium results in a
to the subendothelial matrix under fow conditions. vWF binds to a
cascade of intracellular changes and activity Calcium ions and
glycoprotein complex GPIb/IX/V receptor on the platelet surface.
DAG bind to and activates calcium diacylglycerol guanine
nucleotide exchange factor I (CaDAG-GEFI), which acti-
vates the Rap1b GTPase through the exchange of bound
X-chromosome
Autosome
Liver
Endothelial cells
Agonists
Megakaryocytes
Collagen 
Phospholipase C
Thromboxane A2
 activation 
[High thrombin]  
vWFmonomer
IP3
PIP2
DAG
FVIII
vWF polymer
Dense tubular
Protein kinase C
system
activation
Ca2+
Platelet effects
Shape change
Factor Vlll:vWF complex
 Secretion
Aggregation
FIGURE 7-9
Factor VII (FVIII) and vWF are produced by different genes and cir-
FIGURE 7-10
culate bound together as a high-molecular-weight complex. vWF mono
Overview of the activation of phospholipase C and the resultant platelet
mers are producedby endothelial ell and megakaryocytes and assemble
effects. PIP2, phospholipid phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate;
into polymers, which bind about 1 FVII molecule per 50 vWF
IP, inositol triphosphate; DAG, 1,2-diacylglycerol; Ca²t, calcium ions.
monomers.
(See text for more details.)
196
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
GDP for GTP. Activated Rap1b promotes the conforma-
tional change and activation of the GPIIb/IIla integrin, so
effect by stimulating cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
 oi seade ose -ee ushoua sq nn ne 
synthesis in platelets. Agonists tend to counteract this effect
increases in intracellular calcium ions to signaling pathways 
by lowering platelet cAMP concentrations.24.27 Activated
that regulate the synthesis of thromboxane A, (TxA) and
endothelial cells also suppress platelet reactivity by increasing
 release of granules.33 Inherited defects in CalDAG-GEFI lead
the rate of nitric oxide (NO) synthesis. NO inhibits platelet
to defects in platelet function and to bleeding in affected dogs
activation by  activating intracellular  guanylate cyclase,
and cattle.44 Intracellular calcium ions and DAG together
which leads to the formation of cyclic guanosine monophos-
work to activate protein kinase C isoforms, which phosphory-
late other molecules. Taken together, these reactions and
vasodilators 264,336
others, including phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K), stim-
ulate platelets in various ways, resulting in TxAz synthesis,
Change in Platelet Shape
shape change, integrin activation, secretion, aggregation, and
 The discoid shape of resting platelets is maintained by circum-
ferential bundles of microtubules beneath the platelet mem-
Phospholipase Az is also activated, which stimulates the
brane and an extensive network of short actin filaments,
 hydrolysis of phospholipids (especially phosphatidylcholine)
forming a membrane skeleton. Following binding to vWF and
from the dense tubular system, causing the release of
collagen, platelets are activated, the microtubular coils reorga-
 arachidonic acid. Arachidonic acid is subsequently metabo-
nize into linear arrays, and actin disassembles and reassembles
lized to TxAz by the cyclooxygenase enzyme pathway (Fig.
as platelets form flopodia and spread 46271 Negatively charged
 7-11).271 Phospholipase Az (in conjunction with an acetyl-
 phospholipids and glycoprotein receptors are also exposed on
transferase) is also involved in generating platelet-activating
the surface. Platelets have surface receptors for various suben-
factor (PAF, 1-alkyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine),
 dothelial components including collagen, fbronectin, laminin,
and thrombospondin.31 The collagen receptor (o2β integrin)
can be produced not only by activated platelets but also
functions both in adhesion and as an agonist receptor that
activates platelets.46
an important proinfammatory mediator that has multiple
effects beyond platelet activation.218,293.314
Platelet Secretion
 Epinephrine does not function as an agonist by itself but
 Platelet secretion (release or degranulation) requires energy-
potentiates platelet activation and secretion induced by other
dependent contractile mechanisms. Granules are crushed
agonists. Platelets from some dogs do not respond to TxAz in
together (fusion and dissolution) by a surrounding web of
vitro owing to impaired TxAz-G protein coupling, but this
microtubules and microfilaments. The contents of dense
 defect is normalized by pretreatment with epinephrine.44
bodies and granules are discharged into the open canalicular
 Platelet activation is inhibited by prostacyclin (prostaglan-
system, which is continuous with the platelet surface.427
din I, or PGI). When stimulated by agonists including
 Ruminant, equine, and elephant platelets have minimal cana-
thrombin and PAF, endothelial cells produce increased
 licular systems; granules and dense bodies primarily discharge
amounts of PGl, as a product of arachidonic acid metabolism
their contents by fusing with the external platelet mem-
brane.46,145 Contraction of individual platelets and the platelet
aggregate facilitates the discharge of material into surround-
ing plasma. ADP, serotonin, and calcium released from dense
Membrane phospholipids
 Phospholipase A2
(-) Inhibited by cAMP
Platelet Aggregation
ADP, TxAz, thrombin, and PAF are important agonists that
Arachidonic acid
 promote platelet aggregation. Serotonin is also an important
Cyclo-oxygenase
agonist in some species. Optimal platelet aggregation requires
(-) Inhibited by aspirin 
fbrinogen and Ca2+. The actions of these agonists result in the
 Endoperoxides (PGG2 and PGH2)
increased exposure and activation of GPIIb/IIla, a β:-integrin
platelet surface receptor that binds to fibrinogen (Fig. 7-12).
Thromboxane
 Prostacyclin
Aggregation occurs when symmetric fibrinogen molecules
synthetase
synthetase
bind to exposed receptors on adjacent platelets. vWF also
Thromboxane A2
Prostacyclin (PGl2)
 e s e  ed s
Platelets
 Endothelium
cient to stop bleeding from small vessels. As discussed further
FIGURE 7-11
on, the bleeding-time test, which measures the time needed
Activation of phospholipase Az and the generation of thromboxane Az
to form the platelet plug, is dependent on platelet numbers
(TxAz) in platelets and prostacyclin in endothelial cells.
and function.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
197
TxA2
PAF
ADP
Fibrinogen
Thrombin
Fibrin.
FIGURE 7-12
Primary factors involved in platelet aggregation. TxAz, thromboxane Az, PAF, platelet activating factor;
ADP, adenosine diphosphate.
Platelet Procoagulant Activity
Phospholipids are asymmetrically located in the plasma
membrane of resting cels, including platelets, because of the
presence of the Mg-ATP-dependent enzymes fippase and
foppase. Negatively charged aminophospholipids are concen-
trated more in the inner leafet of the platelet membrane
because of an inward-directed pump for PS and phosphati-
dylethanolamine known as aminophospholipid translocase or
fippase. Neutral phospholipids, including phosphatidylcho-
line and sphingomyelin, are transported to the outer mem-
brane leafet of platelets by foppase activity??
The activation of platelets by agonists results in the calcium-
 dependent activation of scramblase (an enzyme that promotes
unspecific bidirectional redistribution of phospholipids across
 the bilayer) and inhibition of fippase activities. The net result
is that negatively charged phospholipid (primarily PS) is
FIGURE 7-13
translocated from the internal leafet to the external leafet of
 Scanning electron photomicrograph of a small aggregate of platelets
 the plasma membrane.173,279 Negatively charged aminophos-
exhibiting prominent flopodia formation.
pholipids on the surface of activated platelets have been
termed “platelet factor 3" or “platelet procoagulant activity."
 The translocation of PS to the surface of activated platelets
expressing PS, activation-dependent adhesion molecules, and
accelerates coagulation because positively charged Ca?+ binds
to the negatively charged phospholipids and to the negatively
bind to and activate leukocytes and endothelial cells,
charged carboxyl groups of coagulation factors. Binding of
coagulation factors to platelets not only brings them together
 let activation ultimately results in platelet changes that appear
 to enhance interactions but also helps to protect them from
 to be proinfammatory and broadly consistent with cell
inhibitors.271
necrosis.2ss
 Platelet activation results not only in enhanced reactivity
 PS is also exposed on the surface of platelets undergoing
toward other platelets—forming platelet aggregates (Fig.
 apoptosis via a pathway different from that for platelet
 7-13) and prompting enhanced reactivity toward leukocytes,
activation. This PS exposure presumably promotes platelet
thus forming platelet-leukocyte aggregates-but also in the
clearance under steady-state conditions. Whether this has
shedding of microparticles (microvesicles) from the platelet
 any relevance to thrombin generation in vivo remains to
surface 36s,54s These microparticles have procoagulant activity,
be determined.2ss
198
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
implies that coagulation can be induced by either the extrinsic
SECONDARY HEMOSTASIS
or the intrinsic pathway. It does not show the importance of
Overview
 the extrinsic pathway in activating the intrinsic pathway or
Secondary hemostasis is composed of coagulation and con-
that coagulation is a cellular or at least membrane-bound
solidation of the temporary hemostatic platelet plug into a
event.368
 definitive hemostatic plug. Coagulation is an enzymatic
Coagulation factors have been given one or more names
process involving the conversion of proenzymes to active
 and also assigned a Roman numeral. Fibrinogen (factor I),
enzymes. Some activated coagulation factors are themselves
prothrombin (factor II), TF or tissue thromboplastin (factor
enzymes, and others (factors V and VIII) are cofactors that
III), and Ca?+ (factor IV) are usually referred to by their
combine in complexes fo generate specific enzymatic activi-
names. Other factors are more often referred to by their
ties. A series of enzymatic reactions, each producing active
numbers. There is no factor VI. All factors except Ca²t are
enzymes, results in an amplification of the original stimulus
proteins, most of which are synthesized in the liver. All factors
to initiate coagulation. Ca²+ ions are required for multiple
 except TF are normally present in the circulation.
reactions in coagulation. The final product of coagulation is
Vitamin K is required for the synthesis of functional factors
the formation of cross-linked fbrin strands around and, to a
 II, VII, IX, and X, as well as protein C and protein S. Follow-
lesser extent, through the platelet plug, making it stronger and 
 ing synthesis of the protein molecules in the liver, a vitamin
 decreasing the likelihood that rebleeding will occur.
 K-dependent carboxylation (via glutamyl carboxylase) of
Coagulation has classically been divided into intrinsic
 glutamic acid residues on these molecules is required for them
and extrinsic coagulation pathways (Fig 7-14), with both
to bind Ca²t and become functional (Fig. 7-15). Cats and
(X) X rosey ym uuiq Amqd uou e huzn
sheep that have Y-glutamyl carboxylase deficiencies have
 This presentation of coagulation events is useful in dividing
 bleeding episodes because of low vitamin K-dependent coag-
coagulation into components in order to study their relation-
 Dicumarol-type  anticoagulant
ships and interpret diagnostic test results, but it is not accurate
drugs, including warfarin and brodifacoum,inhibit the vitamin
from a physiologic point of view. The classic presentation
K epoxide (or oxido) reductase (VKOR) enzyme complex
needed to recycle vitamin K, resulting in the production of
Initiation of Coagulation (Activation of the Extrinsic
Pathway or Tissue Factor Pathway)
Intrinsic
A small amount (about 1%) of factor VII (FVII) in blood is
Activated platelets
activated (FVIIa). Coagulation is initiated in vivo when blood
HMK
PK
containing FVIla comes in contact with TF on the surface of
Xll
→ Xlla
Extrinsic
cells or cell membranes (i.e., microparticles from cells) (Fig.
X1
Xla
Tissue factor
7-16).77 TF is a glycoprotein that depends on its association
HMK
+
Ca+
Vlla
X
IXa
+
Ca+
十
Vlla)
Ca+
Precursor
Native
coagulant
coagulant
Xa
factor
factor
Va
+CO2
Glutamic
CH2
Ila (Thrombin)
acid
residues
?HO
H一
-COOH
|a (Fibrin,loose)
Vitamin K
Vitamin K
HOOC
hydroquinone
epoxide
COOH
Xlla)
Fibrin (tight)
?
2
FIGURE 7-14
VitaminK
A diagram of the classical coagulation cascade. HMK, high-molecular-
weight kininogen, PK, prekallikrein, VII, coagulant component of the
FIGURE 7-15
FVIII complex, Ca,calcium ions. Roman numerals refer to coagulation
Vitamin K cycle resulting in the -carboxylation ofglutamic acid residues
factors with these numbers, and an associated *a"indicates that the factor
in coagulation proteins. Enzymes include vitamin K -glutamyl carbox-
is activated. The circled coagulation factors are activated by thrombin.
ylase (1) and vitamin K epoxide reductase (2) and (3). Dicumarol-type
Activated platelets express negatively charged phospholipids (primarily
anticoagulant drugs, including warfarin and brodifacoum, inhibit the
phosphatidylserine) on their surfaces.
vitamin K epoxide reductase, resulting in inactive coagulation proteins.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
199
The TF-FVIIa complex on membrane surfaces activates
additional amounts of FVII to FVIIa, which generates larger
TF-expressing cell
amounts of the TF-FVIla complex on membranes. This
complex activates factor IX (FIX) and FX to FIXa and FXa
va
respectively. Although not optimal, FXa can directly activate
some factor V (FV) to FVa, and the combination of FXa with
cofactor FVa forms a complex called prothrombinase on the
2
surfaces of TF-bearing cells, which converts prothrombin to
Xla
 thrombin. The activation of this tissue factor pathway in vivo
Activated platelet
fuinctions to rapidly generate trace amounts of thrombin;
however, the small amount of thrombin generated results in
minimal fibrin formation. Coagulation generally begins on
the surface of TF-bearing perivascular cels, but it is com-
Platelet
vWWF
 pleted on the surface of activated platelets.467
Allla
Amplification of Coagulation
FIGURE 7-16
 Following vessel injury, platelets bind via vWF to the suben-
Cell-based model of coagulation. Roman numerals refer to coagulation
 dothelial exracellular matrix near the TF-bearing cells that
factors with these rumbers, and an associated “a" indicates that the factor
is activated. (1) Initiation of coagulation begins on tissue factor (TF)-
activate coagulation. Platelets are activated by this binding
bearing cells such as subendothelial fbroblasts exposed by vessel injury.
under shear conditions. Thrombin produced by activation of
Reactions shown on the surface of this TF-bearing cel generate small
 the tissue factor pathway also activates platelets by binding to
amounts ofthrombin (Ila) and activated factorIX(IXa) that diffuse away
thrombin receptors (see Fig. 7-16), including protease-
from the cell. (2) Amplification of coagulation results from thrombin's
activated receptors (PARs) and GPIb/IX/V.4 Following acti-
activation of platelets and coagulation factors. Thrombin activates plate
lets near TF-bearing cells by binding to thrombin receptors (TR) on the
vation, platelets produce agonists—including TxA2, PAF, and
surface of platelets.Platelets can alsobe activated by binding to collagen
ADP—which, together with thrombin, induce platelet aggre-
and von Willebrand factor (WF) in the extracellular matrix in the area
 gation and platelet plug formation. Platelet activation also
of the TF-bearing cells (not sbown). Factors V and XI from plasma, or
results in the exposure of negative phospholipids (platelet
possibly from platelet granules (shown with “?" in the figure), bind to the
procoagulant) on the platelets surfaces. Some coagulation
surface of activated platelets and are activated to Va and XIa by thrombin.
The action of thrombin also results in dissociation of factor VII from
factors in platelet granules (including FV and FXI, at least in
vWF and activation of factor VIII to VIIa. (3) Propagation of coagula-
 some species) are also deposited on platelet surfaces after
tion occurs when activated factors generated in the initiation and ampli-
platelet activation and secretion.
fication phases of coagulation assemble in complexes on the surfaces of
The vWF/FVII complex binds to activated platelets, and
activated platelets, which have phosphatidylserine expressed on their
surfaces. The activation of factor XII may also contribute to the activation
thrombin cleaves a portion of the FVIlI molecule to form
of factor XI on the surface of activated platelets (not shown). Factor XIa
activated FVIIIa. FVIII activation results in the dissociation
activates factor IX to IXa, and some IXa may also difuse to activated
 of this molecule from vWF.37 FVIIa remains bound to plate-
platelets from TF-bearing cells. Factor IXa combines with factor VIIIa
 lets because activated platelets express distinct binding sites
to activate factor X, and Xa combines with Va to form a complex that
for FVIIla (see Fig. 7-16). Thrombin also activates FV to FVa.
cleaves prothrombin (II) to generate a burst of thrombin that converts
fbrinogen to fibrin (not showm).
This cofactor not only circulates in blood but may also be
present in platelet granules and may be deposited on activated
platelet sufaces following granule secretion.24Finall, throm
bin activates FXI to FXIa, which is also bound to the surfaces
with negatively charged phospholipid (most notably PS) to
bind FVII/FVIla. TF is not expressed on unstimulated blood
phase of coagulation, activated platelets have negatively
or endothelial cells but it is constitutively expressed on the 
charged phospholipids, FVa, FVIIla, and FXIa, present
surface of many other cell types that are not normally in
on their surfaces, priming them for rapid propagation of
contact with the circulation. This includes cell types surround-
coagulation (see Fig. 7-16).243
ing vessels as well as parenchymal cells in a variety of tissues, 
such as brain, heart, ng, and kidey
Propagation of Coagulation
Following vessel injury, TF on subendothelial adventitial
(Activity of the Intrinsic Pathway)
cells—such as adventitial fibroblasts, pericytes, and smooth
Factor Xll Activation of Factor XI
muscle cells—activates coagulation. TF expression can also be
A long-held consensus mechanism for the activation of coag-
induced in blood monocytes and possibly endothelial cells by
ulation in vitro (contact activation) is shown in Figure
endotoxin and/or infammatory cytokines. TF has been
reported on activated platelets; but, if present, this may come
with an anionic, wettable surface (including blood collction
from the transfer of microparticles from activated monocytes
tubes made of glass) and undergoes autoactivation, which
or other cells to platelets.173,397
 generates a small amount of active FXII (FXIIa). FXIla may
200
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
following binding to polyphosphates on the surfaces of plate-
lets. This FXII activation promotes both coagulation and the
XI
have additional effects on coagulation. Polyphosphates are
reported to enhance thrombin-mediated FV activation, and
their incorporation into fbrin fibers is reported to make them
more resistant to lysis.
Coagulation
Thrombin Activation of FXI
FXI binds to activated platelets via HMK and is believed to
tPA release
primarily be activated in vivo by thrombin initially generated
HMK
BK
→Fibrinolysis
by the activation of the tissue factor pathway. However, some
FXI activation may also occur as a result of FXla on activated
FIGURE 7-17
 platelets, and FXI may be autoactivated by FXIa 80,154 Because
Contact activation of coagulation occurs in vitro when factor XlI (FXII)
FXI deficiency results in only mild bleeding in animals and
comes in contact with foreign surfaces (such as the glass of blood col-
humans (compared with the severe bleeding that occurs with
lection tubes). FXII autoactivates to active FXII (FXIIa), and FXIIa may
 oi redde pou ssop II (ssiup Iad pue Xi
autohydrolyze additional FXII to FXIIa. FXIIa also interacts with
prekallikrein (PK), which is bound to high-molecular-weight kininogen
a major role in early fbrin generation. FXla is postulated to
(HMK). Reciprocal interactions with FXIIa and prekallikrein generate
be part of a positive feedback loop that sustains thrombin
a FXIla fragment and kalikrein (K) respectively FXIIa also activates
generation through FIX activation to subsequently generate
factor XI (FXI), which is bound to HMK. Factor XIa then activates
Factor IX (not sbowm), which propagates the intrinsic pathway of coagu-
on TF-bearing cells can detach and bind to nearby activated
lation. Kalikrein generates bradykinin (BK) from HMK and BK stimu-
platelets and promote coagulation on platelet surfaces (see Fig.
lates the release of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) from endothelial
cells, which activates fibrinolysis. Contact activation is also believed to
7-16).271 Thus FIX is activated by both FXIa and the TF-FVIIa
occur on activated platelets that have secreted negatively charged poly
complex. In contrast,little of the FXa generated byTF-bearing
phosphates on their surfaces.
cells becomes bound to activated platelets, because FXa that
dissociates from the TF-binding cells is rapidly inactivated by
 the antithrombin and tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI)
autohydrolyze FXII to produce more FXIla. In addition,
present in blood. FIXa is not inactivated by TFPI and only
FXIla interacts with prekallikrein, which is bound to high-
slowly inactivated by antithrombin.467
molecular-weight kininogen (HMK). Reciprocal interactions
FIXa combines with cofactor FVIIla on activated platelet
between FXIla and prekallikrein generate an active fragment
surfaces to form a complex sometimes called tenase that acti-
of FXIIa (FXIIf) and kallikrein respectively. FXIIa activates
vates FX (Figs. 7-16, 7-18).18 FVa that is bound to platelet
factor XI (FXI), which is also bound to HMK, which propa-
surfaces functions as a cofactor for FXa and forms a complex
 gates the intrinsic pathway of coagulation.182 Some aspects of
called prothrombinase on the surfaces of activated platelets.
this model of contact activation (especially the interactions
This complex converts large amounts of prothrombin to
of these proteins with foreign surfaces) have been
thrombin. The thrombin thus formed is released from platelets
challenged 514
 and converts fbrinogen to fibrin monomers, these polymerize
 Because people, cats, and dogs with FXII deficiency exhibit
spontaneously by hydrogen bonding to form unstable non-
no hemorrhagic tendencies and some marine mammals, birds,
 cross-linked fbrin polymers around the platelet plug (see Fig.
 and reptiles naturally lack this factor, it has generally been
7-18).
accepted that FXII activation is of little importance to normal
 hemostasis in vivo.18 However, FXII is acknowledged to be
Stabilization of the Thrombus
important in the plasma kallikrein-kinin system. FXIIf-
 The last step in fbrin polymerization involves the formation
 generated kalikrein converts HMK to bradykinin, which
of covalent cross-links between fibrin monomers. Factor XIII
causes vasodilation, increased vascular permeability, and
(FXIll, fibrin stabilizing factor) is activated by thrombin. The
-nus ose uuyapeg sysudsar roeuuu ue siduond
FXIIla formed is a Ca?+-dependent transglutaminase that
lates the release of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) from
catalyzes the formation of covalent bonds between lysine and
endothelial cells, which promotes fbrinolysis, as discussed
 glutamine residues of different monomers. Cross-linked fibrin
further on.12 FXIIf activates complement (C1r) in addition
is an insoluble protein polymer that stabilizes the platelet
to generating kallikrein.275
plug.1s Thrombin also activates a thrombin-activatable fibri-
Although FXII is apparently not essential for normal
nolysis inhibitor (TAFI) that makes the fbrin formed more
hemostasis, it may play a role in the growth of thrombi
resistant to lysis (see “Fibrinolysis," below).328 Finally, the
incorporation of polyphosphates from the dense granules
platelets results in the secretion of dense granule contents,
secreted by platelets into fibrin fibers is reported also to make
which include polyphosphates. FXII appears to be activated
fibrin more resistant to lysis.80
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
201
 Coagulation
Fibrin
Anticoagulation
action
Protein S
Thrombir
Protein C
Inactivates
Va and Vllla
APC
Platelet
Inactivates
 Endothelial cell surface
PAI-1
Fibrinolytic
Increases
Fibrinogen
 action
tPA activity
FIGURE 7-19
  i su   d  s
factors with these numbers, and an associated *a"indicates that the factor
FIGURE 7-18
is activated. TM, thrombomodulin; EPCR, endothelial protein C recep-
tor; APC,activated protein C; PAI-1,plasminogen activator inhibitor 1;
Assemblyfcoagulation factorsonanactivated platelt surface,primrily
tPA, tissue plasminogen activator.
 Roman numerals refer to coagulation factors with these rumbers, and ann
associated “a" indicates that the factor is activated. The fibrin that is
forrmed is deposited on the activated platelet.
activity. This 1 :1 thrombin:thrombomodulin complex acti-
vates both protein C and TAFI, discussed under *Fibrinoly-
Inhibitors of Thrombus Formation
 sis,"below. Protein C is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein
Once a thrombus composed of platelets and fibrin is formed
that circulates in an inactive form. It binds to an endothelial
 over an area of vascular injury, the coagulation process must 
 protein C receptor (EPCR), which enhances its activation by
be terminated to prevent thrombotic occlusion of normal
the thrombin : thrombomodulin complex. Activated protein C
areas of the vasculature adjacent to the injury. Endothelial cells
dissociates from EPCR and interacts with protein S (a vitamin
 are especially important in limiting, by various mechanisms,
 K-dependent cofactor) to inhibit coagulation by proteolyti-
thrombus formation to the site of injury Unstimulated
cally degrading FVa and FVIIla on the surfaces of activated
platelets do not adhere to the surface of healthy vascular
platelets. Although the physiologic significance of its effect
endothelial cells because these endothelial cells possess throm
is unclear, activated protein C can also promote fbrinolysis
 boresistant properties.
by  inactivating  the  plasminogen  activator  inhibitor 1
(PAI-1) 156,157
Inhibition of Platelet Aggregation
 Endothelial cells synthesize and release PGI2 and NO, power-
Tissue Factor Pathway Inhibitor
ful vasodilators that inhibit platelet aggregation. Endothelial
TFPI is synthesized by endothelial cells, and most TFPI is
cells also inhibit platelet function by virtue of an ectoenzyme
associated with the endothelium. FXa and the TF-VIIa
(Ecto-ADPase/CD39/NTPDase) that has adenosine diphos-
 complex are inhibited by the bivalent TFPI formerly called
 phatase (ADPase) activity and can degrade ADP released
 the lipoprotein-associated coagulation inhibitor.137 Protein S
from activated platelets.264
 is a cofactor for the TFPI system, in addition to the protein
 C anticoagulant pathway. 2
Antithrombin
 Endothelial cells synthesize heparan sulfate proteoglycans,
Platelet-Secreted Inhibitors
which are tightly associated with the endothelium and accel-
 In addition to their potent roles in promoting coagulation,
erate the inactivation of coagulation factors by antithrombin,
platelets secrete coagulation inhibitors, including protease
the major thrombin inhibitor.461 In addition to thrombin,
nexin-1 (inhibits thrombin), protease nexin-2 (inhibits FXIa),
antithrombin inhibits other proteases, including factors IXa,
d  di eu s ssu s-o  I pe
Xa, XIa, and XIIa.18s
 the propagation of thrombosis beyond a site of injury.516
Protein C Anticoagulant Pathway
Additional Coagulation Inhibitors
Endothelial cells express the membrane protein thrombo-
 C-Protease inhibitor (&-antitrypsin), C1-esterase inhibitor,
modulin on their surfaces (Fig. 7-19). Thrombin binds
 and C-macroglobulin are less important inhibitors of throm-
to thrombomodulin, which inhibits thrombin's procoagulant
bus formation.
202
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIBRINOLYSIS
ANTICOAGULANTS
Fibrinolysis is activated by the release of tPA from damaged
Coagulation is prevented in blood samples by using either
endothelium. The amount of tPA available to stimulate fibri-
Ca²+ chelators (ethylenediaminetetraacetate [EDTA]  and
 nolysis may be increased by activated protein C inactivating
citrate) or heparin in blood collection tubes. EDTA is the
 PAI-1.156 Plasminogen coprecipitates with fibrin as a throm-
 preferred anticoagulant for complete blood count (CBC)
bus forms. Conversion of plasminogen to plasmin by tPA is
determinations in most species. Minimal sample dilution
accelerated in the presence of fbrin (Fig. 7-20).377 Plasmin is
occurs following mixing with EDTA, and blood flms pre-
not a highly specific enzyme, but its affinity for fbrin helps
 pared by using this anticoagulant exhibit optimal staining
to limit its action. Plasmin-catalyzed hydrolysis of fibrin
with routine blood stains. Blood from nonmammals has
results in the formation of fibrin degradation products (fbrin
often been collected for hematology studies using heparin
(rather than EDTA) as an anticoagulant because the blood of
Inhibitors of fbrinolysis also occur in plasma. Endothelial
some birds (ratites) and some reptiles (chelonians) has been
cells produce PAI-1, which inhibits tPA. TAFI is activated by
reported to hemolyze when collected with EDTA. This is
 the thrombin-thrombospondin complex. It removes carboxy-
clearly not a universal problem in birds and reptiles.22 The
terminal lysine groups from fbrin, resulting in decreased
 disadvantage of heparin is that leukocytes do not stain as
 binding of plasminogen and tPA to fbrin and consequently
well and platelets (thrombocytes) usually clump more than in
 decreased generation of plasmin. This slows but does not
blood collected with EDTA.
 Sodium citrate has generally been the preferred anticoagu-
tion and fibrinolysis is summarized in Figure 7-21.
lant for collecting plasma for coagulation tests and for collect-
C-Antiplasmin inhibits free plasmin, but plasmin bound
ing platelets for platelet function tests &4363 However, hirudin
to fbrin is protected. c-Macroglobulin inhibits activated
(a leech-derived direct thrombin inhibitor) performed better
protein C and may inhibit plasmin to some extent. It also
than citrate as an anticoagulant in a whole-blood impedance
inhibits some activated coagulation factors.
 Fibrinolysis occurs more readily in capillaries than in the
diluted by 10%. If platelet counts are done, they must be cor-
systemic circulation. A much higher density of endothelial
rected for this dilution. However, platelet aggregates form
 cells is found in capillaries. Consequently thrombomodulin-
more readily in dog blood collected in citrate, resulting
 mediated protein C activation and thrombin clearance are
in lower automated platelet counts than in blood collected in
 greater in capillaries than in large vessels.44 In addition, tPA
EDTA.4s Citrate is also the anticoagulant typically used in
release is greater in capillaries, and there may be less antiplas-
solutions for blood colection and storage for transfusions.3
min available to inhibit fibrinolysis. Rapid fibrinolysis 
of
The binding of heparin to antithrombin greatly accelerates
thrombi in large vessels could be life-threatening, but fibrino-
the inhibition of thrombin by antithrombin, thereby inhibit-
lysis is likely important in maintaining the integrity of capil-
ing coagulation. FIXa, FXa, and the VIla-TF complex also
lary beds.
appear to be inhibited by the antithrombin-heparin complex.
Protein C
activation
Plasma
Thrombus
TAFI
Thrombin
Plasminogen
activation
Plasminogen
tPA
Coagulation
Platelets
 Plasmin
 Plasmin
factors
 Soluble
Fibrin —
products
Antiplasmins
VIlI
V
Fibrinogen
XIII
Activation
aggregation
Fibrinogen
Degradation
Xla
Vllla
va
Fibrin
Xllla
Fibrinogenolysis
Fibrinolysis
FIGURE 7-21
Actions of thrombin. Roman numerals refer to coagulation factors with
FIGURE 7-20
these numbers, and an associated “a" indicates that the factor is activated.
Actions of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) and plasmin.
TAFI, thrombin-activatable fbrinolysis inhibitor.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 
203
Heparin is used as an anticoagulant for CBCs in species
difficult to determine with certainty because there is a high
where EDTA results in hemolysis. Lithium heparin is utilized
 incidence of an asymptomatic inherited thrombocytopenia
as an anticoagulant when plasma (rather than serum) is used
with macrothrombocytes in this breed. Although overlap
for clinical chemistry profles. Heparin is often added to iso-
occurs, platelet counts below 100 × 102/μL suggest the homo-
tonic salt solutions used to fush intravenous lines and may be
zygous state, with intermediate counts (about 200 × 10°/μL)
injected to inhibit blood coagulation in vivo. Heparin is not
expected in the heterozygous state and platelet counts above
recommended for platelet counts because platelets tend to
 250 x 102/μL generally present in unaffected dogs.127 Platelet
clump when blood is collcted in heparin.23
counts determined using impedance counters are erroneously
low in Cavalier King Charles spaniels with macrothrombo-
cytes because these counters cannot differentiate large plate-
SCREENING TESTS FOR
lets from small erythrocytes. 34
HEMOSTATIC DISORDERS
Mean Platelet Volume
No single diagnostic test evaluates all hemostatic components.
The mean platelet volume (MPV) is the average volume of a
 Consequently several hemostatic tests are usually done to
single platelet recorded in femtoliters (fL). Within the normal
 determine the nature of a hemostatic disorder.
ranges of platelet counts and MPVs, there is an inverse cor-
relation between platelet count and MPV and a direct correla-
Platelet Count
tion between MPV and megakaryocyte ploidy (i.e., larger
 Platelet counts are usually performed using blood collected
with EDTA as the anticoagulant. The presence of platelet
tion between platelet counts and MPVs has also been reported 
clumps can result in erroneously low platelet counts. Stained
 in cats and dogs but not in horses, cattle, or goats.4$
 blood films should be examined each time platelet counts are
 MPV determinations vary considerably with the instru-
done to verify that low platelet counts, determined manually
 ment and anticoagulant used for the assay424 Impedance cell
 or by machine, are valid. Factors used to estimate platelet
counters can accurately determine the MPV in whole blood
numbers vary depending on the microscope used, method of
from dogs and horses but not in whole blood from cats. Cell
 blood flm preparation,and area of the flm examined; however,
counters that count and size platelets using laser fow cytom-
the formula given below generally provides a reasonable
 etry may be able to accurately measure the MPV in whole
platelet estimate.
blood collection in cats, resulting in spuriously high MPV
 Platelets per microliter
values.s1 Of domestic animal species, cats had the highest
= number of platelets per 100x oil field × 20,000
MPVs (mean 11 fL), followed by dogs (mean 7.2 fL), horses
(mean 5.0 fL), cattle (mean 4.8 fL), and goats (mean 4.2 fL)
Cat platelets are larger than those of the other domestic
when blood was collected with sodium citrate and assayed
animals; consequently it is not possible for impedance
 using the same automated analyzer (Series 810, Baker Instru-
counters (such as the Coulter Counter S+4 and the Abbott
 ments Corp., Allentown, PA).4 These values would be some-
Cell-Dyne 3500) to accurately separate cat platelets from
what different if EDTA were used as the anticoagulant or if
n ssqs
 a different analyzer were used for the assays.
laser fow cytometry (such as the Siemens Advia 120) are able
 Results from studies on the effects of anticoagulants and
to count cat platelets more accurately in whole blood. Unfor-
 storage conditions on MPV are contradictory The MPV was
tunately platelet aggregates form readily during blood collec-
reported to be higher when dog blood was collcted with
tion in cats; as a result, spuriously low automated platelet
EDTA versus citrate as the anticoagulant in an early study217
counts will often be present. Platelet aggregate formation is
but the MPV was reported to be lower when dog blood
decreased in cat blood collected in citrate, theophylline, ade-
was collected with EDTA versus citrate as the anticoagulant
 nosine, and dipyridamole (CTAD) vacuum tubes (BD Diag-
 in a more recent study.4ss No change in MPV was found
in EDTA-anticoagulated dog blood stored for a day in
Platelet counts in healthy greyhounds, Polish Ogar dogs,
one study,520 but increases in MPV have been reported
 and Cavalier King Charles spaniels are generally lower than
 with storage of EDTA-anticoagulated dog blood in other
those measured in other dog breeds. The mean platelet count
in Polish Ogar dogs was 167 × 102/μL, compared with 344 ×
MPV during storage have also been reported.17 These differ-
107/μL for dogs of other breeds in Poland.34 Using an imped-
 ences may be explained by the variable effects of anticoagu-
ance counter (Abbott Cell-Dyne 3500), the reference interval
lants on platelet activation and shape and by the various ways
(mean ± 2 standard deviations) determined for platelet counts
in Greyhounds was 90,000 to 290,000/μL, compared with a
A high MPV value suggests the presence of increased
reference interval of 140,000 to 380,000/μL for dogs of 
 thrombopoiesis.112311 Interestingly, the MPV increased in
other breeds.44s The lower limit of the reference interval for
mice within 8 hours after the production of thrombocyto-
platelet counts in Cavalier King Charles spaniels has been
penia, but 40 hours were required before increased
204
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
done in close proximity to the animal being evaluated. The
reported to be increased in some dogs with nonimmune-
ACT requires a special collection tube containing siliceous
 mediated regenerative thrombocytopenial43 as well as in
earth and a method to maintain collection tubes at 377C.
infammatory conditions that result in enhanced platelet
Blood is collected into prewarmed tubes and maintained at 
utilization/destruction.36654 However, the MPV can also be
37°C until clotting has occurred. With the use of an auto-
high in animals with myeloid neoplasms and, in cats, with
mated coagulation timer, the ACT is usually less than 200
seconds in horses, less than 180 seconds in cattle,43 1ess than
Cavalier King Charles spaniel dogs with inherited macro-
thrombocytopenia have higher MPV values because of the
Investigators using MAX-ACT tubes (Helena Laboratories,
Beaumont, TX) indicate that the ACT in normal cats and
 macrothrombocytopenia has also been reported in a pug dog
dogs should be less than 85 seconds.4$3 A positive correlation
with the May-Hegglin anomaly (see Fig. 5-24), as discussed
has been reported between ACT and C-reactive protein in
 in Chapter 5.164
 dogs; consequently the investigators suggested that the ACT
Although the MPV is expected to be increased in response
might be used as a screening test to access underlying infam-
to thrombocytopenia, normal or even decreased MPVs have
 been associated with dogs and humans with immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia (IMT), presumably because of the pres-
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
ence of platelet fragments (as opposed to the formation of
The activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) test is also
used to evaluate the intrinsic and common pathways (see Fig
 not rule out enhanced thrombopoiesis, especially in primary
7-22). It is usually measured using plasma prepared from
IMT in dogs.143 In fact, most dogs with an increased reticu-
blood collected with 3.2% sodium citrate as the anticoagulant
lated platelet count do not have an increased MPV.400
in a 9:1 blood to citrate mixture. Assays should generally be
-r  r s  oi pr   s
done within an hour of sample collection, although the
thyroid cats and slightly lower in hypothyroid dogs than in
samples are stable for at least 6 hours when kept refriger-
euthyroid animals.4 Dogs with phosphofructokinase def-
ciency of erythrocytes and skeletal muscle have mildly
-e ne srazee e-jo-ud sissod e sus
increased MPVs with normal platelet counts.
able that measure APTT using nonanticoagulated whole
blood or citrate-anticoagulated whole blood5o4 Reference
Bleeding Time
The buccal mucosal bleeding time test consists of penetration
healthy animal of the same species can be measured at the
of the buccal mucosa with a sharp blade, which results in a
free fow of blood and measurement of the time required for
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
using a disposable spring-loaded lancet. The buccal mucosal
pathway
pathway
bleeding time is done to evaluate platelet function in animals
HMK-PK
anss! 
with normal or near-normal platelet counts. Since this test is
XII
factor
expected to be prolonged in animals with low platelet counts,
HMK-XI
ACT
IX
MPL + Ca2+
it provides no additional information in animals already
APLT +Ca²+
PT
 known to have severe thrombocytopenia.263 Platelet function
APTT
VIl
VII
abnormalities include inherited and acquired abnormalities of
 the platelets themselves, as well as deficiencies in the proteins
Common
pathway
required for normal platelet adherence (vWF) and aggrega-
X
lation defects are present as long as platelet numbers and
V
function are normai. 67 Ifleft undisturbed, bleeding will usually
APLT + Ca2+
Prothrombin
stop in less than 4 minutes in healthy dogs and less than 3
 Fibrinogen 
C
repeat bleeding times varying by as much as 2 minutes.49
XIII
 Bleeding times may be longer in animals with prominent
Fibrin
anemia, resulting in low blood viscosity,3,ss The template
bleeding time in horses has poor reproducibility and may be
FIGURE 7-22
 as long as 14 minutes in healthy horses.454
Components of the classical coagulation cascade as evaluated using acti-
vated clotting time (ACT), activated partial thromboplastin time
Activated Clotting Time
(APTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin clotting time (TCT)
tests. Roman numerals refer to coagulation factors with these rumbers.
The activated clotting time (ACT) test evaluates the intrinsic
HMK, high-molecular-weight kininogen, PK, prekallikrein, Ca2t,
and common coagulation pathways (Fig. 7-22). It must be
calcium ions; APLT, activated platelets.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
205
same time as that of a control. The APTT is likely to be
increase seems to be most consistent in ruminants and
prolonged if the patient's time is 30% longer than the
horses43,14925,44,5 Fibrinogen is increased with hyeraden
control's time.
The presence of an antiphospholipid antibody (lupus anti-
Fibrinogen concentrations may be low, normal, or high
coagulant) can cause prolonged APTTs. This appears to
 in  animals  with  disseminated intravascular coagulation
account for the longer APTTs reported in healthy Bernese
(DIC),23,144.482 Although fbrinogen is consumed in forming
 Mountain dogs compared with other breeds.376,378 Antiphos-
thrombi, conditions that cause DIC may also stimulate
pholipid antibodies are discussed under “Acquired Coagula-
tion Disorders," below.
been reported in some horses and dogs with hemangiosar-
The APTT is artifactually prolonged if the plasma-to-
coma.
anticoagulant ratio is inappropriately low, as occurs if insuf-
coagulation or DIC.
ficient blood is collected into a vacuum tube containing
Fibrinogen is synthesized in the liver; consequently plasma
 premeasured citrate solution or if erythrocytosis (e.g., severe
fibrinogen may be low in some animals with liver failure. The
dehydration) is present. The APTT may be shortened some-
venoms of pit vipers, including rattlesnakes, have thrombin-
what in infammatory conditions with a high fibrinogen con-
like activities that cleave fibrinogen and produce a defibrino-
 centration because the addition of fibrinogen to citrated
 genation syndrome where blood collected for analysis in the
 plasma in dogs resulted in a slight but significant shortening
of the APTT.301
under “Snake Venoms," below. Afbrinogenemia has been
described in a Bichon Frise dog. This condition was believed
Prothrombin Time
to have been acquired as a result of an antifibrinogen antibody
The prothrombin time (PT) test is used to evaluate the extrin-
-nsun poo sdm ea panbse uaoq saeq keu ie
sic and common pathways (see Fig. 7-22). It is usually mea-
 sions.54 Inherited fbrinogen deficiencies have been reported
 sured using plasma prepared from blood collected with 3.2%
in dogs, cats, goats, and a lamb68,162
sodium citrate as the anticoagulant in a 9:1 blood to citrate
The heat precipitation test is a practical test for the estima-
mixture. Assays should generally be done within an hour of
tion of fibrinogen (see Chapter 2), but it is not sensitive
sample collection, but they are stable for at least 6 hours when 
enough to differentiate low-normal from low fibrinogen
values when determinations are made by subtraction of total
 protein values measured with a refractometer. More accurate
are available that measure PT using nonanticoagulated whole
values can be obtained by ocular micrometry (Millar's tech-
blood or citrate-anticoagulated whole blood.34 Reference
nique), but somewhat more time is required and a microscope
intervals vary with the methods used.24.183 The PT from a
with a calibrated ocular micrometer is needed.37 The Millar
healthy animal of the same species can be measured at the
technique has been automated in a hematology analyzer
 same time as that of a control. The PT is likely to be prolonged
(QBC Vet Autoreader IDEXX) and results compare favorably
if the patient's time is 30% longer than the control's time. The
 PT may be shortened somewhat in infammatory conditions
Fibrinogen is most accurately measured using coagulation-
with a high fibrinogen concentration because the addition of
based assays, the most common of which is a thrombin-
fibrinogen to citrated plasma in dogs resulted in a slight but
significant shortening of the PT.301
 This method involves measuring the rate of fibrinogen-to-
fbrin conversion in diluted samples in the presence of excess
Thrombin Clotting Time
 thrombin. Under these conditions, the fibrinogen content in
 The thrombin clotting time (TCT) test is initiated by adding 
plasma is rate-limiting, and the fibrinogen concentration is
thrombin. It is used as an assay for quantitative and/or qualita-
 inversely proportional to the clotting time. Consequently the
tive fibrinogen disorders. The TCT utilizes citrated plasma,
clotting time is used to measure fbrinogen concentration by
like the PT and APTT tests, and sample handling is similar
 comparing the patient's clotting time with a standard curve
to that for those tests. As expected, the addition of fibrinogen
 of clotting time versus fibrinogen concentration. Hemolysis
to citrated plasma in dogs and rats resulted in a substantial
and lipemia result in falsely decreased fibrinogen concentra-
shortening of the TCT.3 The TCT reference interval will
 tions,24 as do high concentrations of fibrin degradation prod-
depend on the method used.24
ucts (as occurs in DIC).333
Fibrinogen
Fibrin(ogen) Degradation Products
Fibrinogen is needed for normal platelet-to-platelet binding 
and D-Dimer Assays
 during platelet aggregation, and it is the precursor of fbrin in
FDP Assays
blood coagulation. Fibrin deposited in tissues provides scaf-
The fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDP) tests provide
folding for infammatory cells, fbroblasts, and endothelial
 evidence of fibrinolysis in vivo. FDPs produced by fibrinolysis
cells. Plasma fbrinogen is an acute-phase protein, which
increases with infammatory diseases in all species14*; but this
which may occur as a sequela to DIC, especially in dogs.480
206
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Antibody-based kits for the measurement of FDPs in human
 Healthy horses are reported to have D-dimer values of 551
 serum and plasma have been developed.42 Fortunately several
to 875 μg/L of plasma when measured by enzyme-linked
 assays have sufficient cross-reactivity to be used for domestic
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). In contrast, dogs and humans
animals, but test results can vary depending on the kit
generally have values below 250 μg/L. Consequently higher
used. Positive FDP tests occur in animals with fbrinolysis
cutoff concentrations (e.g-, greater than 1000 μg/L) are
secondary  to thromboembolism  (localized thrombosis)
required in horses before a positive test result is reported.486
 and DIC and in those with fbrinogenolysis (e.g, Eastern
Although the sensitivity of the D-dimer test was only about
diamondback rattlesnake  envenomation)3026  Increased
50% for horses with colic-associated DIC, it was better than
plasma FDP values have also been reported in dogs with
sensitivities determined for FDP assays.4$6 The D-dimer test
was positively associated with a diagnosis of sepsis in foals but
 FDP concentrations could not be reproduced by experimental
was not considered a good predictor of DIC in these animals.?
 injection of blood in dogs.33 The half-life of FDPs in the
 The D-dimer test was also positively associated with enteritis
circulation in humans is about 5 hours; consequently a
 or peritonitis in adult horses with colic, and nonsurvivors had
 positive FDP test indicates recent or ongoing fibrinolysis or
significantly higher D-dimer values than did survivors.97
fibrinogenolysis.cs
 The D-dimer test has not been adequately evaluated in
 In addition to DIC and thromboembolism, a plasma FDP
cats 29.48 An immunoturbidimetric assay did not appear to
 test was sometimes positive in dogs with a variety of condi-
accurately measure D-dimers in cat plasma.$ When D-dimer
tions, including neoplasia, immune-mediated hemolytic
concentrations were measured in plasma using a semiquanti-
anemia, pancreatitis, gastric dilatation-volvulus, heat stroke,
tative latex agglutination test (Accuclot D-Dimer, Sigma
severe trauma, sepsis, protein-losing nephropathy,liver disease,
Diagnostics), 8 of 12 cats with DIC and 16 of 36 sick cats
hyperadrenocorticism, and chronic heart failure.42 Somewhat
without DIC were positive. Based on these findings, this
increased FDP values have been associated with intense exer-
D-dimer test was considered to be of limited value for the
diagnosis of DIC in cats.497
be due to improper collection and handling of samples. This
Thromboelastography
plasma nor serum FDP assays appear to be sensitive enough
 Thromboelastography (TEG) utilizes special analyzers to
 to be used as diagnostic tests for DIC in horses.4$6
 detect and continuously display changes in viscoelastic prop-
D-Dimer Assays
Instruments measure the initiation time (R, or clot time) in
When plasmin cleaves soluble fbrin (or fbrinogen), FDP
minutes for the amplitude of the tracings to go from O to
fragments X, Y, D,and E are produced. When plasmin cleaves 
2 mm, clot kinetics (K, or clot formation time) in minutes for
the tracing to go from 2 to 20 mm amplitude, the slope (o.
duced. These cross-linked oligomers (X-oligomers) vary in
's     o  7 u (e
molecular weight. They contain a D-dimer epitope, which is
produced by FXIla-mediated_ cross-linking of fbrin and
exposed by plasmin cleavage.477 The D-dimer tests utilize
monoclonal antibodies against a human D-dimer epitope.
Traditional FDP assays cannot distinguish between fibrinoly-
Hypercoagulable
sis and fibrinogenolysis. A positive D-dimer test indicates the
Normal
 presence of fbrinolysis. This test is not affected by hemolysis
Hypocoagulable
 and is stable for at least 2 days at room temperature and at
Secondary fibrinolysis
least 1 month with frozen samples.52
 Compared to FDP assays, the latex agglutination D-dimer
 assay is reported to have similar or slightly better sensitivity
and specificity for the diagnosis of DIC and thromboembo-
DIC, plasma D-dimer values are increased with a variety of
disorders in dogs, including neoplasia, immune-mediated
disease, infammation, liver disease, renal failure, postoperative
FIGURE 7-23
animals with internal hemorrhage presumably result from
Thromboelastograph tracings using canine kaolin-activated blood and a
 Haemoscope TEG instrurment. Tracings of normocoagulable, hypoco-
fbrinolysis of clots that form after bleeding has occurred.
 Although DIC or thromboembolism may have also been
agulable, hypercoagulable, and secondary fibrinolytic states are shown.
present in some of these disorders, it is important to recognize
Redrawn fromKolA,Borjesson DL.Application of thromboelastography
that the D-dimer test is specifc for fibrinolysis. It is not spe-
tbromboelastometry to veterinary medicine. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;
cific for DIC or localized thromboembolism.
39:405-416.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 
207
maximal amplitude (MA) in mm, and clot lysis (%) at 30 and
immunoturbidometric methods.76,320 Results are reported as
 60 minutes. TEG studies the combined effects of soluble and
 percent of control mean. Dogs with vWF antigen less than
cellular components of coagulation, which provides a more
 50% are generally considered positive and dogs with vWF
 global evaluation of hemostasis than occurs when components
 antigen greater than 70% are generally considered negative,
of coagulation are studied independently. In light of the com-
with intermediate values being unclassified; however, these
plexity of this system, it is not surprising that a number of
values can differ based on the tests used.76 There is substantial
factors can influence test results. Preanalytic variables include
temporal variation in individual dogs, making identification
venipuncture technique, storage time, storage temperature,
 of carrier animals difficult.39 Consequently repeated tests of
 and in vitro hemolysis. Platelet counts, fbrinogen concentra-
the same animal may be necessary to obtain a reliable estimate
tion, and HCT can produce changes in TEG tracings.
292,301
 of vWF concentration. High-molecular-weight vWF poly-
High HCTs result in TEG tracings indicating that a hypo-
 mers are required for normal platelet adhesion. Polymeric
coagulable state is present, as has been reported for grey-
distribution of vWF is determined by protein immunoelec-
hounds.512 Conversely, low HCTs result in TEG tracings 
 trophoresis and labeling with anti-vWF probes. 9
indicating that a hypercoagulable state is present. It is unclear
whether these are simply in vitro artifacts or truly refect an
Antithrombin
effect of erythrocyte numbers or blood viscosity on hemostasis
Plasma antithrombin can be measured using chromogen
in vivo.292
assays.320 It may be decreased in hypercoagulable states
With standardized methods, care to minimize preanalytic
variables and knowledge of the factors that can infuence
DIC:,23, 357,532
protein-losing nephropathies and  enteropa-
results, TEG may be a sensitive procedure that can supple-
ment information gained from other hemostatic tests. Its
Antithrombin is increased in cats with various disease condi-
greatest potential appears to be in recognizing hypercoagu-
tions, suggesting that it behaves as an acute-phase protein in
lable and hypocoagulable states, which may result in more
evidence of hyperfibrinolysis, but so far D-dimer concentra-
PIVKA (Proteins Induced by Vitamin K Absence
tions have correlated poorly with TEG clot lysis results in
or Antagonism)
veterinary medicine.22
The PIVKA test (Thrombotest, Accurate Chemical and Sci-
entific Corp., Westbury, NY) is a simple, sensitive coagulation
SPECIALIZED TESTS FOR
test that was developed to monitor humans treated with war-
farin; it has been recommended for use in the diagnosis of
HEMOSTATIC DISORDERS
von Willebrand Factor
 PT test that utilizes a particular tissue thromboplastin and
von Willebrand Factor (vWF) is a glycoprotein composed of
  s  r  s on d 
polymers of various molecular weights. This factor is required
standard PT test. The PIVKA test is not specific for vitamin
for normal platelet adhesion; consequently it is assayed when
 K deficiency. It may be prolonged with various defects in the
a defect in platelet function is suspected. Inherited vWF
 extrinsic and/or common pathways.95,44 The PIVKA test does
 deficiency (von Willebrand disease) is especially common in
not offer any advantage over the PT test in the diagnosis of
certain dog breeds (e.g, Doberman pinschers). Thus this
 rodenticide toxicities, because PT tests are consistently mark-
factor may be measured prior to surgery or in the reproduction
 edly prolonged in these disorders.1 However, the PIVKA
of dogs from breeds in which the disease is prevalent.6? Some 
 test might be helpful in identifying subtle coagulation abnor-
investigators have indicated that hypothyroidism may result
malities of the extrinsic or common pathways, because PT
 in decreased vWF concentrations in the plasma of dogs,14 but
 tests designed for humans may lack sensitivity for the detec-
others have been unable to confrm this relationship.399
tion of coagulopathies in certain animal species.9s
In addition, thyroid treatment did not increase plasma vWF
in euthyroid dogs with von Willbrand disease.236 vWF is
Reticulated Platelet Count
 increased by interleukin-6 (IL-6) injection in dogs and may
Reticulated platelets are newly formed platelets (less than 1
increase in plasma as an acute-phase protein during infam-
day old in dogs) that contain increased amounts of ribonucleic
 acid (RNA).123 Reticulated platelets have enhanced responses
with pregnancy,320 endotoxemia,38 sepsis,437 and after exercise
 to agonists, which may promote the maintenance of hemosta-
and epinephrine infusion.34 IL-11 also promotes vWF syn-
 sis in regenerative thrombocytopenias.407432 Humans with
thesis in dogs.3 Desmopressin (1-deamino-8-D-arginine
 thrombocytosis and high reticulated platelet counts were more
likely to develop thrombosis than were individuals with
concentration in plasma by stimulating the release of vWF
 thrombocytosis and normal reticulated platelet counts.431 It is
stored in endothelial Weibel-Palade bodies.344
 not clear whether the high reticulated platelet count enhances
vWF antigen concentration in plasma is generally quanti-
 the likelihood of thrombus formation or simply refects
fied using ELISAs, but this may also be done using
 enhanced platelet turnover in these patients.
208
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Reticulated platelets have been quantifed by detecting
toward other platelets.2 In addition, the measurement of a
fuorescence in thiazole orange-stained platelets using a fow
decrease in mean platelet component (MPC) concentration
cytometer. Unfortunately this assay is not usually available in
using automated
hematology analyzers suggests platelet
clinical settings. Reference intervals vary considerably depend-
activation.36,4ss,551
 a husn sh u panses uaoq say sieed pen
Platelet Function Analyzer
PLT-O channel of a Sysmex XT2000iV hematology analyzer
A platelet function analyzer (PFA-100) has been validated for
(Sysmex, Kobe, Japan).400 A negative proportional bias was 
use in animals. It is essentially an in vitro modified bleeding
found with this instrument compared with fow cytometry
time test that uses citrated plasma and depends on platelet
using a FACS scan cytometer (BD Biosciences). Reticulated
adhesion, secretion, and aggregation. Blood is drawn at a high
platelet counts determined with both methods were increased
shear rate through an aperture coated with agonists. The
in a population of thrombocytopenic dogs that did not have
closure time is recorded as the time required for the aperture
 increased MPVs, indicating that reticulated platelet counts are
to be occluded with platelet aggregates and for the blood fow
 more sensitive in identifying increased thrombopoiesis than
to stop.4? The closure time is prolonged in dogs with throm-
are MPVs.
bocytopenia, with longer times occurring in animals with
Analogous to the use of reticulocyte counts in determining
lower platelet counts. The closure time is also prolonged in
the cause of an anemia, an increased percentage of reticulated
 dogs with von Willebrand disease and inherited platelet func-
platelets in a thrombocytopenic animal suggests that the
tion defects.83 It is prolonged in dogs treated with aspirin but
thrombocytopenia results from increased platelet destruction
not in those with coagulopathies (coumarin toxicity and
or consumption and not from decreased platelet produc-
FVIII deficiency)31 Like the buccal mucosal bleeding
time,39.$s the closure time is longer in dogs with lower HCTs.
within the reference interval in animals with thrombocytope-
A decrease of HCT from 40% to 30% resulted in a significant
nia resulting from decreased platelet production.$29
prolongation of the closure time, which was prolonged even
 In contrast to regenerative anemias, in which increases in
more with further decreases in HCT. This effect of HCT
absolute reticulocyte counts are expected, absolute reticulated
limits the clinical applicability of the PFA-100 in anemic
platelet counts (reticulated platelets per microliter) are not
animals. 351
typically increased in regenerative thrombocytopenias, espe-
cially when platelet counts are below 50 ×10/μL329.529,.42 This
Platelet Aggregation
lack of an increase in the absolute reticulated platelet count
Platelet aggregation is evaluated in aggregometers following
in blood may be explained if reticulated platelets are destroyed
the addition of various agonists (e.g, ADP, thrombin, and
or consumed at the same rate as nonreticulated platelets.
collagen). Optical platelet aggregation or light-transmission
Absolute reticulated platelet counts may be increased in reac-
aggregation is measured in platelet-rich plasma using a spec-
tive thrombocytosis, as has been demonstrated in dogs given
 trophotometer. As platelets aggregate, the sample becomes
IL-6 experimentally.408
Samples should be assayed on the same day they are col-
a recorder attached to the spectrophotometer. Whole-blood
lected. Surprisingly, the percentage of reticulated platelets
platelet aggregation is measured using electrical impedance.
increases after 24 hours of storage in the refrigerator or at
p  sp oi  ee sed pee 
room temperature.400.466
 ance increases. 49s
Platelet Function
Platelet Secretion
 The bleeding time test, discussed earlier in this chapter, is an
Platelet secretion is examined by measuring the release of
 in vivo platelet function test. Specialized platelet function tests
 contents from dense granules after agonist stimulation.342 The
are typically done in specialized diagnostic hemostasis labo-
Whole Blood Lumi-Aggregometer (Chrono-Log Corpora-
ratories or research laboratories.
tion, Havertown, PA) has been validated for use in dogs.273 It
measures the platelet aggregation and secretion of ATP simul-
Flow Cytometry
taneously. Assays are time-sensitive. Whole-blood samples
Platelet activation can be measured using fow cytometry.
must stand 60 minutes at room temperature after blood col-
-dusordoe ro aue huuq oys sr A uxu
lection for platelets to become responsive, and assays should
ids (primarily PS) on activated platelets; consequently,
be completed within 3 hours of blood collction.273
 increased annexin V binding on platelets indicates platelet
 activation. An increase of P-selectin (CD62P) or fbrinogen
Antiplatelet Antibody
on the surface of platelets as well as the presence of platelet-
Increased platelet-bound immunoglobulins are most often
leukocyte aggregates and platelet microparticles have also
detected in animals using fow cytometry,20,3.541 Most anti-
 platelet antibody in blood is bound to platelets; consequently
formation of platelet-leukocyte aggregates correlates with
direct assays of the patient's platelets are more sensitive than
enhanced reactivity of platelets toward neutrophils as well as
indirect assays using serum from the patient and platelets
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
209
from a healthy control animal.313 Unfortunately, direct
Spontaneous hematomas and hemorrhage into body cavi-
 assays of platelets should be done within 24 hours after blood
fies, including hemarthrosis, are more likely to result from
sample collection. Platelets naturally have some immuno-
 coagulation defects than from vascular defects or platelet
 globulin adsorbed to their surfaces. The amount of platelet-
abnormalities.7 Acute hemothorax, hemoabdomen, or both
bound immunoglobulin can increase with time after sample
have been reported in aged (more than 15 years old) horses
collection; consequently false-positive tests can be a signif-
 treated with phenylephrine for nephrosplenic entrapment of
cant problem with these assays.541 Positive test results may
the large colon. Vessel rupture may have occurred because
occur when immune complexes are adsorbed to platelets as
 of drug-induced hypertension combined  with reduced
well as when antiplatelet antibodies are present. Refer to
vessel compliance or elasticity in the aged horse.16α Acute
Chapter 6 for more information concerning antiplatelet
 hemoabdomen and acute hemorrhage in other tumor sites
antibodies.
may occur in dogs with hemangiosarcomas that rupture
spontaneously.
Specific Coagulation Factors
 Some greyhounds bleed excessively affer surgery, but the
 The measurement of fbrinogen is discussed earlier in this
cause has not been identified. Defects in primary and second-
chapter. Assays for other specific coagulation factors are done
ary hemostasis have not been identified, but alterations in
in a few specialized diagnostic and hemostasis research
fibrinolysis may be present.3s
laboratories including the Comparative Coagulation Labo-
ratory, Animal Health Diagnostic Center, College of Veteri-
nary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York Plasma 
PLATELET DISORDERS
samples from humans or animals with known coagulation
 Abnormal Platelet Morphology
factor deficiencies are used in modified PT and APTT
Macrothrombocytes
fimes of factor-deficient plasma by the plasma being tested is
Platelets that are as large as erythrocytes or larger in diameter
proportional to the activity of the specific factor being ana-
 are called macrothrombocytes or macroplatelets (Fig. 7-24,
lyzed for in the test sample. Chromogenic assays are also
A-E). Cats have large, variably sized platelets, with some in
 available for some coagulation factors.
normal cats as large as erythrocytes (see Fig. 7-1, E).4 The
 presence of frequent macrothrombocytes in a thrombocyto-
penic animal suggests that enhanced thrombopoiesis is present
CLINICAL SIGNS OF
(Fig. 7-24, A-C), but macrothrombocytes may also be present
HEMOSTATIC DISORDERS
in thrombocytopenic animals with myeloid neoplasms (Fig.
7-24, D-E)25 Macrothrombocytes develop in cats with FeLV
If bleeding is excessive or unexplained, a defect in one or more
 infections.54 Macrothrombocytes may be present in non-
of the components of hemostasis may be present. The type of
thrombocytopenic animals that have recently recovered from
hemorrhage observed may give some clue about the narure of
thrombocytopenia (Fig. 7-25, A,B).
the defect or defects present. Diffuse cutaneous or mucosal
Macrothrombocytes are present in Cavalier King Charles
discoloration, resulting from hemorrhage and edema, suggests
spaniel dogs with inherited macrothrombocytopenia (Fig.
the presence of a vascular defect, as may occur with vasculi-
7-26), discussed later in this chapter.74.127 A second inherited
tis.4i8 Petechial and ecchymotic cutaneous and/or mucosal
disorder with macrothrombocytes (see Fig. 5-24) and throm-
hemorrhages and epistaxis are suggestive of thrombocytope-
bocytopenia has also been described in a pug dog with the
nia. Spontaneous bleeding due to uncomplicated thrombocy-
May-Hegglin anomaly (see Chapter 5 and later in this chapter
topenia occurs less often in cats than in dogs. Unless there is
 for more information).14
 a concomitant platelet function abnormality, coagulopathy, or
vasculopathy spontaneous bleeding seldom occurs in cats with
Activated Platelets
platelet counts above 30 × 10’/μL, and it may not occur in
Partially activated platelets are no longer discs (Fig. 7-27, A)
but have thin cytoplasmic processes extending from a spheri-
likely to occur in thrombocytopenic animals if trauma or 
cal cell body (Fig. 7-27, B). When platelets are more fully
 inflammation is present.14 The presence of an inherited plate-
 activated, their granules are crushed together by a surrounding
let defect is suspected in a young animal with epistaxis,
web of microtubules and microflaments (Fig. 7-27, C). This
mucosal bleeding, unexplained petechial and ecchymotic
 central aggregate of platelet granules may be mistaken for a
hemorrhages, or when excessive bleeding occurs when teeth 
nucleus (Fig. 7-24, C; Fig. 7-27, C). Platelet aggregates offen
are shed.44 Mucosal hemorrhage, cutaneous bruising, and pro-
form following platelet activation in vitro. If degranulation
longed bleeding from surgical or traumatic wounds are typi-
occurs, aggregates may be diffcult to recognize as platelets,
cally seen in dogs with vWD, but petechiae do not appear to
appearing as light-blue material on stained blood flms
be a sign of vWD in dogs. Sites of mucosal bleeding include
(Fig. 7-2, A; Fig. 7-28). The presence of platelet aggregates
 gingival hemorrhage, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, hematuria,
should be recorded because the platelet count may be errone-
prolonged estral bleeding, and epistaxis.69
ously decreased.
210
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
E
FIGURE 7-25
FIGURE 7-24
Rebound thrombocytosis after therapy in a dog with immune-mediated
Macrothrombocytes in stained blood films. A, Macrothrombocytes in
thrombocytopenia. A, Thrombocytopenia (platelets = 20 x 10°/μL) and
blood from a dog with a regenerative irmmune-mediated thrombocyto-
regenerative anemia prior to therapy Polychromatophilic erythrocytes, a
penia. The intenise basophiia suggests that these may be reticulated
metarubricyte (bottom), and two neutrophils are present. B, Thrombocy-
platelets. B, Macrothrombocyte in blood from a dog with a thrombocy-
tosis (platelets = 950 × 10°/μL) with several macrothrombocytes in blood
tosis associated with chronice iron-deficiency anemia. C, Macrothrombo-
a week after beginning prednisone therapy. Wright-Giemsa stain.
cyte with aggregated granules, which may be mistaken for a nucleus in
blood, from a cat with an abdominal abscess and toxic left shift in the
blood. D, Macrothrombocyte with centrally located granules in blood
fom a cat with myelodysplastic syndrome. E, Macrothrombocyte (left)
that it is the only intracellular infectious agent described in 
and metamyeloctye (rigbt) in blood fom a dog with chronic myeloid
leukemia. Wright-Giemsa stain.
humans or animals to specifically infect platelets. A. platys 
poq u sied un susu a se ee ssn
flms are stained with Wright-Giemsa or new methylene blue
(Fig. 7-31, A-D). Similar-appearing inclusions have been seen
Hypogranular Platelets
 in platelets from a cat.447
Hypogranular platelets may result from platelet activation and
Ultrastructurally, organisms range from 350 to 1250 nm in
secretion,but they have also been seen in animals with myeloid
diameter, are round, oval, or bean-shaped; and are surrounded
neoplasms (Fig. 7-29, A-C) 81,22 Hypogranular platelets must 
by a double membrane. Infected platelets may contain one to
be differentiated from cytoplasmic fragments from other cells,
three single membrane-lined vacuoles with 1 to 15 organisms
 as may occur with leukemic lymphomas (Fig. 7-30).523
platelets by adhering to the platelet surface followed by endo-
Anaplasma platys Infection
cytosis. Therefore the vacuolar membrane is probably derived
Anaplasma platys (previously Ebrlichia platys) is a rickettsial
from the external platelet membrane. Repeated binary fission
parasite that specifically infects platelets and causes infectious
 of organisms within the vacuole results in the formation of a
cyclic thrombocytopenia in dogs.27 This agent is unique in
morula.229
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
211
 The prepatent period is 1 to 2 weeks following experimen-
in acute-phase proteins and immunoglobulins and slightly
tal injection with infected blood. Cyclic parasitemia and con-
decreased albumin may be present in serum samples.16
comitant thrombocytopenia occur at 1 to 2 week intervals
Infected dogs in the United States usually do not exhibit
(Fig. 7-33). Parasitized platelets are easily found during the
evidence of illness. Mild fever may occur at the time of the
initial parasitemia, but subsequent parasitemias have decreas-
initial parasitemia. Minimal or no evidence of hemorrhage is
ing percentages of parasitized platelets, making the recogni-
 present in most cases, but epistaxis, petechiae, and ecchymosis
tion of morulae within platelets diffcult. Platelet counts
of the mucous membranes have been reported. Prominent
usually remain below 20,000/μL for only 1 or 2 days, before
uveitis has also been reported in one case. Although infection
rapidly increasing.27 Mild normocytic normochromic anemia
with U.S. isolates of A. platys seldom results in serious disease,
may also be present. Based on serum iron and bone marrow
 significant clinical signs have been reported in infected dogs
studies, decreases in the hematocrit may be attributed to the
outside the United States.227
anemia of inflammatory disease. Slight to moderate increases
Diagnosis of infection with this agent can be made by
observing organisms within platelets, but this is difficult unless 
daily samples are taken, and even then, less than 1% of plate-
lets may be infected. An IFA test for antibodies against A.
 platys has been developed, but it probably cross-reacts to some
degree with other rickettsial (especially Anaplasma species)
 organisms. The Snap 4Dx (IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., MA)
has a component to identify dogs previously exposed to A.
 phagocytopbilum, which cross-reacts with A. platys. These Ana-
 plasma species can be differentiated using PCR and 16S rRNA
gene sequencing.
Thrombocytopenia
Thrombocytopenia denotes decreased numbers ofblood plate-
lets. Primary causes of thrombocytopenia include decreased
production, increased platelet utilization in thrombus forma-
fion, and increased destruction. The distinction between these
causes is not always clear and the pathogenesis of thrombo-
 cytopenia associated with infectious agents (viral, rickettsial,
bacterial, and protozoal) appears to be multifactorial. Less
FIGURE 7-26
likely causes of thrombocytopenia include sequestration and
e uog uy pooq e u (u) dannau e pue ( aoquoae
 Cavalier King Charles spaniel with inherited macrothrombocytopenia.
acute massive external hemorrhage. Bone marrow examina-
Wright-Giemsa stain.
tion can be helpful in the differential diagnosis of
FIGURE 7-27
Resting versus activated platelet morphology in stained blood films. A, Unstimulated platelet morphology in
blood from a dog. Platelets appear as round to oval discs without flopodia formation or centralized granules.
B, Aetivated platelet in blood from a dog with prominent filopodia formation. C, Activated platelet in blood
from a cat with centralized granules and flopodia formation.
212
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 7-28
FIGURE 7-30
Thrombocytosis in blood from a cat withlarge aggregates ofdegranulated
 Basophilic cytoplasmic fragment (far rigbt) and macrothrombocyte (far
 platelets, which resulted in a spuriously high total leukocyte count when
lefty in blood from a dog with acute lymphoblastic leukemia. The frag-
assayed using an impedance hematology analyzer. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 ment might be confused with a hypogranular platelet. Wright-Giemsa
stairl.
B
C
C
D
FIGURE 7-29
FIGURE 7-31
Hypogranular platelets in stained blood films. A, Platelet with granules
Anaplasma platys morulae in platelets from dogs. A-C, Platelets each
(top left) and a hypogranular platelet (rigbt) in blood from a dog with
containing an A. platys morula, which stain dark-blue, in contrast to the
chroric myeloid leukemia. B, Hypogranular platelet in blood from a dog
 normal magenta-staining granules. Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Platelet
with erythroleukemia (AML-M6Er). C, Hypogranular macrothrombo-
containing an A. platys morula, with multiple subunits visible. New
 cyte in blood from a dog with chronic myeloidleukemia. Wright-Giemsa
methylene blue wet mount preparation.
stainn.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
213
20
10
10
20
30
40
50
Days
FIGURE 7-33
Parasitemic and thrombocytopenic episodes in three young dogs infected
intravenously with Anaplasma platys organisms at time 0.
 Thrombocytopenia is often recognized in cats infected
with FeLV and less often in those infected with feline immu-
B
marrow generally reveals the presence of a myelodysplastic
syndrome or less often leukemia.177.24
FIGURE 7-32
The replication of viruses in megakaryocytes may contrib-
Transmission electron photomicrographs of dog platelets each contain-
ute to the development of thrombocytopenia in some viral
ing an A. platys morula. Platelet granules and canalicular system are also
visible. A, Platelet with a membrane-lined vacuole containing seven
 horses infected with equine infectious anemia virus, but the
visible organisms. B, Platelet with a membrane-lined vacuole containing
 mechanism has not been determined.121
four visible organisms.
Most IMTs result from increased platelet destruction in
FromHarueyJWSimpon CF,GaskinJM.Cyclictbrombocytopeniainduced
 the circulation, but rare cases of amegakaryocytic thrombocy-
by a Rickettsia-like agent in dogs. J Infect Dis. 1978;137:182-188.
topenia that were believed to be immune-mediated have been
recombinant human thrombopoietin (TPO) can result in a
persistent thrombocytopenia in animals  when antibodies
made against the recombinant TPO also neutralize the
thrombocytopenia, especially in the absence of accompanying
endogenous TPO of the species receiving treatment. The sub-
coagulation abnormalities.
sequent lack of endogenous TPO results in decreased platelet
production.122
Decreased Platelet Production
 Platelet counts cycle in gray collie dogs with inherited
 Thrombocytopenia is a consistent finding with hypoplastic
cyclic hematopoiesis because of intermittently decreased
 and aplastic bone marrow. It is also often present in myelo-
platelet production. However, thrombocytopenia is minimal,
phthisic disorders characterized by the replacement of normal
if present at all, because the decreased production is short
hematopoietic cells with abnormal ones. Examples include
relative to platelet life spans.216
myeloid neoplasms, lymphoid neoplasms, and multiple
myeloma. Thrombocytopenia may also sometimes be present 
Increased Platelet Utilization
secondary to the extensive metastasis of lymphomas, carcino-
Increased platelet utilization (consumption) occurs in associa-
mas, and mast cell tumors (see Chapters 4 and 9 for more
fion with DIC and thromboembolism (discussed later), with
details concerning these disorders).
 hemangiosarcoma in dogs with or without DIC,215 and with
214
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 The  administration of granulocyte-monocyte colony-
vascular injury associated with certain infammatory condi-
stimulating factor (GM-CSF) and macrophage colony-
tions, some infammatory cytokines, most notably PAF,
stimulating factor (M-CSF) to dogs results in a shortened
 promote platelet aggregation.380.5s
-e kq Xuadde renuadooqu pue uds al aned
 Thrombocytopenia may be present following envenom-
cyte and/or macrophage activation may be a mechanism of
nents of venom may directly induce platelet activation and
increased platelet destruction observed in a variety of infam-
aggregation. Platelet activation and aggregation may also
matory diseases in which these endogenous cytokine concen-
occur in response to vessel injury induced by components of
trations in plasma are increased.
venom.43 The hematologic effects are discussed under “Snake
In addition to increased erythrocyte phagocytosis, increased
Venoms, later in this chapter.
 phagocytosis of platelets may occur with the hemophagocytic
syndrome (macrophage activation syndrome), which is char
Increased Platelet Destruction
acterized by greater than 2% hemophagocytic macrophages in
bone marrow.*
302,517This syndrome develops secondary to some
The presence of increased immunoglobulin on the surfaces of
platelets can result in increased phagocytosis of platelets and
infectious, neoplastic, and immune-mediated conditions, but
subsequent thrombocytopenia. IMT can be either primary
 an underlying disease may not always be identified 517,25
or
 secondary.
Autoantibodies  are  （
directed
against
Thrombocytopenia is often present in dogs and cats with
platelet-specific epitopes in primary IMT, which has also
hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma, where phagocytosis of
been called autoimmune thrombocytopenia or idiopathic
platelets may occur along with erythrocytes.*
thrombocytopenia purpura (ITP). Primary IMT is uncom-
 mon in dogs and rare in other species (see Chapter 6 for more 
Sequestration of Platelets
 information about primary IMT).
Sequestration of platelets in an enlarged spleen may result in
Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia has rarely been
thrombocytopenia. Platelet counts decreased in dogs when
reported in newborn horses, mules,22 and pigs.16 Analogous
to neonatal isoerythrolysis, this disorder 
occurs
when
Causes of splenomegaly include hereditary hemolytic anemias,
maternal antibodies against paternal epitopes on the surface
immune-mediated diseases, infections, infammation, splenic
of neonatal platelets are passively transferred to the neonate
 congestion (including use of anesthetics or tranquilizers),
in colostrum.
splenic torsion, and infltrative diseases.304.476 Increased plate-
Secondary IMT results from the exposure of hidden or
let utilization or destruction also contributes to the develop-
altered antigens on platelet surfaces, the binding of external
ment of thrombocytopenia in some of these disorders. When
 antigens to platelets (e.g., drugs), or the adsorption of antigen-
splenomegaly results in increased removal of platelets and/or
other blood cells by the spleen, the term bypersplenism may be
IMT may occur in association with various drugs,40.129 infec-
hypothermia, and this decrease has been attributed to seques-
mediated disorders, such as systemic lupus erythematosus
 tration of platelets in the liver.414
(SLE).143,295
The intravenous infusion of unfractionated heparin induces
Massive External Hemorrhage
a mild thrombocytopenia in some horses,35936i In contrast,
 Because of platelet storage in the spleen and/or lungs, acute
platelet counts did not decrease following the intravenous
hemorrhage usually causes minimal decreases in blood platelet
administration of low-molecular-weight heparin.39
The
counts. Platelet counts seldom decrease below 100 × 10°/μL
mechanism has not been determined in horses, but heparin-
because of acute hemorrhage alone, although counts have
 induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) appears to be immune-
decreased to as low as 30 × 107/μL in dogs with massive
mediated in humans. In humans, platelet activation results in
hemorrhage secondary to anticoagulant rodenticide toxic-
the release of PF4/CXCL4, which binds to endothelial cells,
ity3124s7 It may be that these platelets aggregated at sites of
displacing antithrombin bound to heparan sulfate. The admin-
hemorrhage. If so, platelet utilization could have contributed
istration of heparin results in the displacement of PF4 into
to the development of thrombocytopenia in addition to plate-
the circulation, where it forms large multimolecular complexes
let loss in blood. Thrombocytopenia may be accentuated in
with heparin. These PF4/heparin complexes elicit antibody
animals with hemorrhage if a large transfusion of packed
formation in a small percentage of patients receiving ongoing
heparin therapy The antibody-PF4-heparin complex binds to
transfusions can have a dilution effect on platelet numbers in
Fc receptors on the platelet surface and induces platelet activa-
blood. Platelet counts may be increased in animals with
tion, aggregation, and the release of procoagulant micro-
chronic hemorrhage, especially when it results in iron-
particles, which may lead to thrombosis in humans.
deficiency anemia.226
*References 106, 116, 143, 202, 209, 313.
*References 117, 170, 174, 251, 289, 362
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
215
Infections and Thrombocytopenia
 decreased platelet production with some viral infections,
Thrombocytopenia often occurs in association with infectious
including parvovirus in dogs and cats,503.549 FIV177193 and
agents, especially those present in blood. The pathogenesis of
FeLV_193,459
thrombocytopenia may be multifactorial and is not always
Evidence of decreased marrow production plus evidence of
understood. Vascular injury and/or adsorption of immune
increased platelet utilization or destruction has been provided
complexes to platelet surfaces may be involved with some
for canine distemper virus,15 equine infectious anemia (EIA)
infectious agents.1 Direct effects on platelets have been sug-
swine fever virus,26,151 and bovine viral diarrhea (BVD)
Ebrlicbia canis infections decrease platelet
virus.475,5s3 Transient thrombocytopenia has been reported
 production,
although immune-mediated platelet destruction also contrib-
within 2 days of dogs being vaccinated with vaccines contain-
utes to the thrombocytopenia in ehrlichiosis.209,519
ing a modifed distemper virus 32,415
A variety of cytokines are released in response to infectious
 Bluetongue virus causes thrombocytopenia in sheep, but
agents and some of them have effects on circulating
the mechanism has not been described.334 The thrombocyto-
 penia in equine viral arteritis may be in response to endothelial
 contrast, IL-10 and IFN-αinhibit platelet production.472 PAF
 promotes platelet aggregation, which results in thrombocyto-
with DIC.
bocytopenia by activating macrophages and enhancing their
 Thrombocytopenia is common in association with bacterial
phagocytosis of platelets19167,32,396
 infections, especially when bacteria and/or endotoxin are
Thrombocytopenia is usually present with acute protozoal
 present in blood.* Thrombocytopenia is common in dogs with
(Babesia, Theileria, Cytauxzoon species) infections of erythro-
cytes, but thrombocytopenia is not generally present with
hemotrophic Myoplasma or Anaplasma infections of erythro-
Thrombocytopenia
 has  been  reported
 with  hepatic
cytes (see Chapter 4 for more information). Thrombocytope-
abscesses in dogs, leptospiros in dogs,1% tularemia in
nia is a common finding in rickettsial (Ebrlichia, Anaplasma,
and Neorickettsia) infections of leukocytes (see Chapter 5 for
more information). Rickettsia rickettsii invades and replicates
 directly with platelets and contribute to the production of
within endothelial cells, resulting in vessel damage and vascu-
thrombocytopenia.
litis, followed by activation of platelets and coagulation;
 Thrombocytopenia may also occur secondary to dissemi-
however, overt DIC rarely occurs.20 Increased amounts of
nated fungalinfections, eseciallywith hisolasmsis108463
immunoglobulin bound to platelets suggest an immune-
mediated component of the thrombocytopenia in R rickettsii
Drug- and Chemical-Induced Thrombocytopenia
infections.20 A. platys specifically infects dog platelets and
 Most drug- and chemical-induced thrombocytopenias result
causes a cyclic thrombocytopenia (see previous discussion
from either toxic effects on the bone marrow or the ability of
above under “Anaplas ma platys Infection"). Whereas an initial 
the compounds to fuinction as haptens, inducing secondary
 thrombocytopenia may develop primarily as a consequence of
immune-mediated destruction of platelets. Drugs and chemi-
 direct injury to platelets by replicating organisms, immune-
cals that have been reported to cause thrombocytopenia—-and 
mediated mechanisms of platelet removal may be more
often also leukopenia and/or anemia—include cancer chemo-
therapeutic agents (carboplatin, cisplatin, cyclophosphamide,
Infections with various African Trypanosoma species con-
lomustine, fuorouracil, deoxycoformycin, doxorubicin), anti-
microbials (cephalosporins, sulfonamides, dapsone, griseo-
Thrombocytopenia has been associated with Sarcocystis species 
fulvin),40 38, 502,526
nonsteroidal  2
anti-infammatory
drugs
in pigs,2 cattle,17l and a dog. Accompanying coagulopathies
 in pigs and cattle indicated the presence of DIC.
Thrombocytopenia is commonly recognized in dogs with
leishmaniasis. The presence of platelet-bound IgG
and
IgM in thrombocytopenic dogs suggests that a secondary
stimulant dextroamphetamine and amphetamine (Adder-
IMT is present.116 However, some dogs with leishmaniasis
all),$39
 phenobarbital,256 the antiviral drug ribavirin,530 the
 have accompanying coagulopathies consistent with DIC.50s
 antipsoriasis cream calcipotriol, the angiotensin-converting
Thrombocytopenia is recognized in about one-third of
 enzyme inhibitor captopril,47 and various toxins (phenol,
the dogs with Hepatozoon canis infection,2 but platelet
fuoroacetate, Macrozamia seeds, trichothecenes, and bracken
counts are more often increased in Hepatozoon americanum
fern)_109,189,347,401,410
 infections.322
 Thrombocytopenia occurs in association with various viral
*References 32, 55, 60, 64, 110, 180, 207, 505, 526.
infections. The thrombocytopenia has been attributed to
References 176, 212, 213, 360, 436, 528.
216
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Neoplasia and Thrombocytopenia
to abnormal proplatelet formation. 12 The identification of the
The pathogenesis of thrombocytopenia associated with neo-
genetic defect allows for a separation ofCavalier King Charles
 plasia varies and cannot always be identified 103,2os Thrombo-
dogs clear of the defect (platelet count 336 ± 148 × 10²/μL,
cytopenia occurs with a variety of tumor types but is most
MPV 12 ± 2 fL, mean ± SD) from heterozygous affected
common in lymphomas and hemangiosarcomas in dogs and
(platelet count 196 ± 64 × 10°/μL, MPV 16 ± 3 fL, mean ±
SD) dogs and homozygous affected (platelet count 74 ± 36 X
There is a lack of production of platelets in primary neoplasia
10°/μL, MPV 28 ± 6 fL, mean ± SD) dogs.127
of bone marrow, including myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),
 Macrothrombocytopenia has been described in a pug dog
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), acute lymphoblastic leu-
with the May-Hegglin anomaly, which is characterized by a
triad of leukocyte inclusions (see Chapter 5 for discussion),
topenia and neutropenia are less common in chronic
thrombocytopenia, and macrothrombocytes (see Fig. 5-24). It 
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) than in ALL, at least in part
results from a mutation in the MYH9 gene, which encodes for
 because bone marrow is not typically replaced by neoplastic
the heavy chain of nonmuscle myosin IIA. The presence of
cells in CLL to the extent that occurs in ALL.4% Metastatic
macrothrombocytes is most likely associated with defective
lymphomas and mast cell tumors can sometimes have sub-
fragmentation of proplatelets formed by megakaryocyte cyto-
stantial bone marrow infiltrates that might result in decreased
plasmic projections.
64
Pseudothrombocytopenia
Platelets may be consumed within some tumors, includ-
It is essential that a blood film estimation of platelet numbers
ing  hemangiosarcoma   and   hemophagocytic
histiosar-
be done as a quality control measure for each automated plate-
let count The presence of platelt aggregates can result in erro-
have significant bone marrow infltrates, which could result
 e  d n
 in decreased platelet production. Tumors generate prothrom-
when platelets are activated during the collection and handling
botic environments capable of the activation of platelets
of blood samples. EDTA-dependent pseudothrombocytope-
and coagulation by expressing TF, releasing procoagulant
nia, resulting from platelet aggregation, has been reported in
microparticles, and secreting cytokines that make the endo-
 pseudothrombocytopenia is present,such platelet aggregation
 promote thrombus formation have been described in canine
may be prevented by the collction of blood samples using
lymphoma.4 The sluggish blood fow and contorted vesses
citrate instead ofEDTA as the anticoagulant. However, citrate
in tumors may also enhance the thrombogenic environment
should not replace EDTA as the preferred anticoagulant for
 of tumors.242 Not surprisingly, thrombosis and DIC
are
platelet counts, at least in dogs, because platelet aggregates
 common sequelae to neoplasia in animals.158,163.208.34
form more readily in blood from dogs collected in citrate,
Immune-mediated platelet destruction has been reported
resulting in lower automated platelet counts than in blood
with some tumors, especially lymphomas.* Immune-mediated
platelet destruction might account for the greater prevalence
 reported in cats if whole blood platelet counts are performed
of thrombocytopenia in dogs with leukemic T lymphocyte
using electronic cell counters because cat platelets are large and
high-grade
e  lymphomas versus those with leukemic
B
difficult to separate from erythrocytes based on cell volumes.
lymphocyte high-grade lymphomas. Alternatively, these T
 Some healthy Cavalier King Charles spaniels and a pug
lymphocyte neoplasms might have more pronounced bone
dog with the May-Hegglin anomaly have macrothrombocy-
marrow infltrates than B lymphocyte neoplasms.496
topenia. Platelet counts are low when manual platelet counts
Platelets may be lost through tumor-induced hemorrhage.
are done, but they are generally even lower when they are
 However, the platelet count is not generally significantly
determined with electronic cell counters because some of the
reduced unless there is an acute, severe hemorrhage, as may
macrothrombocytes are too large to be counted as platelets by
Xcur when hemangiosarcomas ruprure.103
automated cell counters.164.394
Inherited Thrombocytopenia
Abnormalities in Platelet Function
Macrothrombocytes are present in Cavalier King Charles
Acquired Defects in Platelet Function
spaniel dogs with inherited macrothrombocytopenia (see Fig.
 In addition to causing thrombocytopenia, antiplatelet anti-
 7-26).74 Dogs with this defect do not exhibit increased bleed-
bodies may reduce platelet function.24 This reduced function
ing tendencies, presumably because the total platelet mass in
may be explained by the finding that GPIIb/IIla (fibrinogen
 blood is not decreased.506 A mutation in β-1 tubulin has been
 receptor) and GPIb-IX (part of vWF receptor complex) are
identified in these dogs; it was suggested that this could result
 in unstable c-β-tubulin dimers within protoflaments, leading
This reduced function could also explain why thrombocyto-
penic cats with platelet-bound antibodies appear more likely
to bleed at a given platelet count than thrombocytopenic cats
*References 143, 232, 278, 290, 295,426.
without platelet-bound antibodies.290
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
217
FDPs released during fbrinolysis may reduce platelet func-
 and life-threatening hemorrhage (see Chapter 5 for more 
tion by antagonizing fibrinogen binding to GPIIb/Ila.201
information). 1 The Kindlin-3 protein is critical in the pathway
Human patients with markedly elevated immunoglobulins
 of β-integrin activation in both leukocytes and platelets. A
(paraproteins)—as occurs with multiple myeloma, Walden-
 deficiency of Kindlin-3 prevents GPIIb/IIla integrin activa-
strom's
macroglobulinemia,  and  benign 
monoclonal
tion in platelets, which results in impaired platelet aggregation
 gammopathy—-have increased tendencies to bleed. Although 
 and a prolonged buccal bleeding time.51
the mechanisms are poorly understood, defects in platelet
 Several platelet storage-pool disorders have been reported
to result in bleeding tendencies in animals. Platelet-dense
Defects resulting in reduced platelet function may occur in
 granule defects have been reported in pigs and American
association with uremia and liver disease,S8,354.4 Bile acids
inhibit platelet aggregation and may contribute to the reduced
 occurs in Persian cats, three breeds of cattle, blue foxes, killer
 platelet function reported in liver disease.3
whales, and Aleutian mink as part of the inherited Chediak-
Decreased platelet function can also occur following the
Higashi syndrome. Animals with Chediak-Higashi syndrome
administration of nonsteroidal anti-infammatory drugs, such
have partial albinism with defects in the granules of several
as aspirin and phenylbutazone, which inhibit TxAz synthe-
tissues including skin, leukocytes, and platelets (see Chapter
 5 for more information).20 A mutation in the CHS1/LYST
developed in humans that may also be used for treating
 gene is responsible for Chediak-Higashi syndrome in Japa-
nese black cattle3 Platelets from gray collie dogs with cyclic
number of drugs—including antihistamines, calcium channel
hematopoiesis appear to have storage-pool and signal-
blockers, halothane, isofurane, some barbiturates, and certain 
 transduction defects, but bleeding is not of clinical signifi-
antibioticsmay interact with platelets and interfere with
cance in this disorder Cyclic hematopoiesis in dogs results
from a mutation in the AP3B1 gene (see Chapter 5 for more
also be reduced in various myeloid neoplasms with abnormal
information).340
platelet formation. Decreased platelet function has been
Activated platelets normally translocate PS to their sur-
reported in association with some infectious agents.17 This
faces (platelet procoagulant), which greatly accelerates coagu-
might be explained if platelets are activated in vivo and become
ation in vivo. A family of German shepherd dogs has been
 hypofunctional when tested in vitro.
recognized with intramuscular hemorrhage, hyphema, epi-
 staxis, and prolonged bleeding with cutaneous bruising after
Inherited Platelet Function Defects
surgery. Although platelet phospholipid content was normal,
Several inherited platelet defects (termed thrombopathy or
 platelets from these dogs had diminished PS exposure on their
thrombopathia) have been reported in animals;, these can
surfaces and a failure of microvesiculation when stimulated by
cause excessive mucosal bleeding, epistaxis, petechial and 
platelet agonists.7 These are the characteristics of Scott syn-
ecchymotic hemorrhages, and excessive bleeding following
drome in humans; however, the molecular defect or defects
minor trauma or when shedding of teeth occurs. Animals with
 are unknown.71 Although this is a platelet defect, the nature
these disorders usually have normal platelet counts and normal
of the bleeding, especially the deep muscle bleeding, is more
platelet morphology.
 suggestive of a coagulopathy. This clinical presentation can be
Deficiencies in the GPIIb subunit of the GPIIb/IIIa
attributed to the inability of the platelets to support coagula-
fibrinogen receptor on the surface of platelets result in bleed-
tion. Platelet function tests (including bleeding time) were
ing diatheses in Great Pyrenees and Otterhound dogs and in
normal because increased negative phospholipids on the
 thoroughbred, quarter horse, Peruvian Paso, and Oldenbourg
 surface of platelets is not required for platelet adhesion and
horses. These defects appear to be homologous to Glanzmann's 
 aggregation. Routine coagulation tests (including PT and
thrombasthenia in humans.4 A defect in the ADP receptor 
APTT) were also normal because these tests are performed
P2Y12 has recently been reported in a Greater Swiss Moun-
 in citrate plasma without platelets.7 The phospholipid needed
tain dog that had life-threatening hemorrhage following
for these coagulation tests is included in the reagents used for
elective surgery.4s
the assays. Neither the PFA-100 analyzer nor a TEG analyzer
 Not only does a deficiency in the amount of the GPIIb/
could identify this defect. These dogs exhibited decreased acti-
 IIla on platelets impair platelet function, but defects in the
 vated platelet microparticle release by fow cytometry in fresh
signaling pathway or pathways that activate this integrin mol-
blood, but this assay cannot be used as a screening test in
ecule also result in platelet function defects. This includes
day-old blood because platelet activation artifacts preclude
mutations in the gene encoding calcium diacylglycerol guanine
 overnight storage for next-day analysis.73
nucleotide exchange factor I (CalDAG-GEFI), which have 
resulted in thrombopathies in Basset hounds, Spitz dogs,
Von Willebrand Disease
Landseer (European-Continental type) dogs, and Simmental
Von Willebrand disease (vWD) is a heterogeneous inherited
cattle.47,50
bleeding disorder resulting from quantitative and/or qualita-
A mutation in the Kindlin-3 gene in a German shepherd
 tive defects of vWF. It is by far the most common bleeding
dog  resulted in  increased 
  susceptibility  to  infection
disorder in dogs, having been recognized in more than 50
218
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
breeds. vWD is classifed into three general types, based on
vWF concentration in plasma, the multimeric structure of
vWF, and clinical severity. Type 1 vWD has a low vWF con-
centration (less than 50% of normal) in plasma, but the mul-
timeric structure of vWF is normal. Type 1 vWD appears to
be transmited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable
penetrance. Mildly affected dogs may exhibit no bleeding
tendency Most type 1 dogs that bleed have less than 20% of
normal vWF concentration in plasma. Type 2A (the only type
2 subtype described in animals to date) vWD dogs have low
plasma vWF concentrations, with a disproportionate loss
of high-molecular-weight polymers. Type 3 vWD dogs
have virtually no vWF in plasma. In addition, FVIII in
plasma may be mildly decreased in dogs with type 3 vWD.
 Dogs with types 2 and 3 vWD have severe bleeding tenden-
cies. Types 2 and 3 vWD are transmitted as autosomal reces-
sive traits.69
FIGURE 7-34
 Type 1 vWD is common in several breeds—including the 
u    e  po u si
 Doberman pinscher, German shepherd, golden retriever,
 poodle, Pembroke Welsh corgi, and Shetland sheepdog——but
matophilic erythrocytes are present. A monocyte (botom) and two neu-
additional breeds are also affected. Type 2A vWD has been
trophils are also present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
reported in the German short-haired pointer and German
wire-haired pointer. Type 3 vWD has been reported in Dutch
Kooikers, Scottish terriers, and Shetland sheepdogs, with 
 radic cases in other breeds. vWD has also been found in pigs
(1 ad) ssroy ueiqery ue (e adk) ies uekepeuH e (e adk)
a quarter horse (type 2A), thoroughbreds (type 2A), and a
Simmental calf (type 2A).69 Animals with vWD have pro-
 longed bleeding times because vWF is needed for normal
platelet adhesion to the subendothelium. The ADP/collagen
closure time is also prolonged when tested with a platelet
function analyzer (PFA-100, Dade-Behring).3$2 Decreased
vWF concentrations may result in decreased FVIII activity
because the binding of FVIlI to vWF prolongs the half-life
of FVIII in the circulation. However, the decrease in FVIII is
 usually not suffcient to result in a significant prolongation of
the APTT.69423
FIGURE 7-35
Thrombocytosis
Marked thrombocytosis in blood from a dog diagnosed with essential
Tbrombocytosis refers to the presence of platelet counts above
thrombocythemia. A basophil (bottom) and neutrophil (top rigbt) are also
the reference interval (Fig. 7-34). When a high platelet count
 present. Wright stain.
results from a clonal proliferation of megakaryocytes, it is
called essential thrombocythemia (Fig. 7-35).
Photograph ofa stained bloodflm from a1987 ASVCPslide revierw case
submitted by C. P Mandell, N. C. Jain, and J. G. Zinkl.
The spleen stores about one-third of the total platelet mass
in humans, and splenic contraction results in increased blood
platelet counts following C-adrenergic stimulation or exercise
appears to be the main mediator of infammation-induced
in animals,169316 and other studies have not.26934.3 Splenc-
 tomy can also result in a thrombocytosis, which can last for
bopoiesis by increasing TPO synthesis and release into
several months.429,515
plasma.277
 Reactive thrombocytosis may occur when TPO concentra-
 Thrombocytosis may also occur in association with acute
anemia.253 Recombinant erythropoietin induces thrombocy-
with  various infammatory and neoplastic conditions in
as erythrocytosis was reported in a horse with a hepatoblas-
IL-1, IL-3, GM-CSF, and IL-11—might be involved, IL-6
toma and increased plasma erythropoietin concentration.195
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
219
Plasma TPO has been reported to be increased in humans
also be described as thrombophilia ora prethrombotic state320
with hepatoblastoma,29 but TPO was not measured in the
Platelet hyperreactivity (e.g., increased IL-6 and PAF genera-
 equine case. Thrombocytosis has also been reported in two
cats with erythrocytosis secondary to a unilateral renal adeno-
centrations of coagulation factors (e.g., hyperfibrinogenemia
carcinoma.2s Plasma erythropoietin values were within refer-
 in response to infammation),211 decreased concentrations of
ence intervals but considered inappropriately high in view of
 coagulation inhibitors (e.g., decreased antithrombin second-
the increased erythrocyte mass. Both the erythrocytosis and
the thrombocytosis resolved following surgical removal of the
 increased plasminogen activator inhibitor, as an acute-phase
affected kidney.
 Thrombocytosis is often present in animals with chronic
 produce a hypercoagulable state. Acquired and inherited
protein C
 deficiency appears to enhance coagulation in
e a  r d  s
may in part be related to stimulation of megakaryopoiesis by
 the finding of increased thrombin-antithrombin complexes is
a high erythropoietin concentration in plasma,3
318 but the
 an indirect measure of thrombin generation and provides evi-
 mechanism has not been clearly defined.274
 dence of a hypercoagulable state 483.99
A single intravenous injection of vincristine in experimen-
 Dogs with hyperadrenocorticism tend to be in a hyperco-
tal dogs induced a transient mild decrease in platelet counts
agulable state. Levels of coagulation factors II, V, VII, IX, X,
followed by a moderate increase in counts, with peak platelet
 XII, fibrinogen, and thrombin-antithrombin complexes were
counts observed 8 days after drug administration.323 Other
significantly increased, and antithrombin was significantly
antineoplastic drugs, including doxorubicin, have been
 decreased in plasma from dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
reported to cause both thrombocytopenia and thrombocyto-
classifed as hypercoagulable using TEG. This has included
drug dosage or a rebound thrombocytosis to an earlier throm-
about 50% of dogs with malignant neoplasia,2% a majority of
bocytopenia or whether they are attributable to other, unknown
Septic foals are often hypercoagulable with a strong likeli-
hyperadrenocorticism,214 but the administration of glucocor-
 hood of developing DIC.* Horses with colic resulting from
ischemic or infammatory gastrointestinal disease may develop
 in dogs.41 Thrombocytosis has been reported in hyperthyroid
 a hypercoagulable state as evidenced by decreased antithrom-
cats in one study434 while no hyperthyroid cats were reported
bin and protein C levels and increased thrombin-antithrombin
 to have a thrombocytosis in another study.4%0
complexes in plasma.4?? However, TEG failed to identify a
 Platelet counts may be spuriously elevated if erythrocyte
similar group of horses with colic as hypercoagulable even
fragments, cytoplasmic fragments of nucleated cells, lipemia,
though conventional coagulation tests supported that classi-
fication.146 Nearly half of the cats with hypertrophic cardio-
Thus it is important that stained blood flms be examined to
myopathy were classified as hypercoagulable based on
 determine if a true thrombocytosis is present.
 Thrombocytosis may be present in animals with myeloid
Hypercoagulable animals may develop localized thrombo-
neoplasms, including 
g  essential  thrombocythemia,  acute 
 sis or DIC. There is overlap in laboratory test resulrs from
megakaryoblastic leukemia, CML, and possibly primary
 animals with these disorders. Consequently it can be difficult
to determine, using laboratory tests alone, whether an animal
thrombocythemia has been diagnosed in animals with persis-
is prethrombotic or has already progressed to a thrombotic
 tent markedly elevated platelet counts, typically in excess of
 state. Physical findings and diagnostic imaging are especially
1 × 10°/μL (see Fig. 7-35), for which a cause for a reactive
 important in diagnosing localized thrombosis.211 Several
thrombocytosis could not be identified. Platelet morphology
hemostatic test abnormalities are required to make a diagnosis
is typically normal; however, increased MPVs have been
of DIC (see subsequent discussion).
reported in two dogs believed to have thrombocythemia.147
Essential thrombocythemia may be viewed as the platelet
Thromboembolism (Localized Thrombosis)
counterpart of primary erythrocytosis (see Chapter 9 for more
 The pathogenesis of thrombosis may involve endothelial acti-
information).
vation or injury; altered blood fow (turbulence or stasis);
changes in coagulation factors, fbrinolytic factors, or their
 inhibitors; and platelet activation. Large-vessel thrombosis
COAGULATION DISORDERS
 may occur in association with immune-mediated, infectious,
Acquired Coagulation Disorders
 and traumatic vascular injury133; neoplasia (especially heman-
Hypercoagulable State
giosarcoma in dogs); sepsis, endotoxemia (primarily horses);
The increased tendency for coagulation to occur without clini-
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (common in dogs)*s,
cal signs or laboratory evidence of thrombosis is termed a
hypercoagulable state. An increased risk of thrombosis may
nocorticism; glucocorticoid therapy, acute pancreatic necrosis;
220
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 Disseminated intravascular
BOX 7-1
coagulation
Conditions That May Result in
Disseminated Intravascular
Coagulation
Consumption of
 Fibrin deposits
Septicemia (various Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria)
platelets and 
in
 coagulation factors
microcirculation
Viremia (infectious canine hepatitis, feline infectious peritonitis,
African swine fever, hog cholera, African horse sickness) 
Secondary
 Protozoal parasites (babesiosis, trypanosomiasis, sarcocystosis,
fibrinolysis
leishmaniasis, and cytauxzoonosis)
 Metazoal parasites (heartworms and lungworms) 
Marked tissue injury (heatstroke, trauma, and surgical
》
 Bleeding 
Ischemic
RBC damage
procedures)
Potentiation
 Intravascular hemolysis
tendency
 tissue injury
 and hemolysis
of shock
 Obstetric complications
 Malignancy (hemangiosarcoma, disseminated carcinomas,
FIGURE 7-36
leukemia, lymphomal 
Pathophysiology of disseminated intravascular coagulation. RBC, red
Traumatic shock
blood cell.
Liver disease
Pancreatitis
DIC when these cells are in contact with blood.48 Thrombin
 Gastric dilatation-volvulus and abomasal displacement
generated by the TF pathway also activates platelets, which
 Toxins (snake and insect venoms, aflatoxin, and insecticides)
results in the translocation of negative phospholipids to plate-
let surfaces and platelet aggregation. Increased numbers of
thrombocytosis246; heart disease (vegetative endocarditis, diro-
microparticles (microvesicles) released by stimulated platelets,
monocytes, endothelial cells, tumor cells, and apoptotic cells
liver disease (cats); and indwelling intravenous catheters.*
 promote widespread thrombosis, because they express proco-
When thrombus formation is localized, platelet counts,
agulant PS and sometimes also TF on their surfaces. Micro-
coagulation tests, and FDP values may be normal. Several
particles from platelets appear to be especially important in
 studies suggest the D-dimer test is more sensitive than FDP
tests (especially serum-based tests) for the diagnosis of throm-
The formation of thrombi in vessels can result in tissue
boembolism in dogs.374.479 While the D-dimer test does not
hypoxia and organ damage (Fig. 7-36). The consumption of
have sufficiently high positive predictive value to rule in
coagulation factors and platelets in the formation of these
thromboembolism or DIC in dogs, its high sensitivity results
thrombi create a tendency for hemorrhage. This propensity to
 in a sufficiently high negative predictive value to help rule out
bleed is increased by subsequent fibrinolysis, which not only
breaks down thrombi but also produces FDPs that interfere
with normal platelet aggregation and fbrin polymeriza-
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation
 DIC is a syndrome in which diffuse thrombosis and secondary
uncommon in horses and cats.48 DIC can result in shock, and 
fbrinolysis occur in small vessels. It is not a primary disorder
shock can potentiate DIC, resulting in a vicious cycle of
but rather a sequela to other diseases. DIC may occur with
events. DIC often occurs as a life-threatening event causing
disorders where TF is exposed on cell surfaces, widespread
 organ failure and/or hemorrhage, but it may also occur in a
vascular injury is present, widespread platelet activation occurs, 
 chronic form without severe clinical signs.
blood fow is reduced, or there is impaired removal of activated
 There are no uniformly accepted criteria for the diagnosis
coagulation factors by the liver. Conditions that may induce
 of DIC. Traditional criteria for diagnosing DIC in animals
DIC are shown in Box 7-1.48 Undoubtedly other disorders 
include the finding of two or more of the following abnor-
can be added to this list.
malities: thrombocytopenia, prolonged coagulation time (PT
 DIC is generally initiated by the disseminated presentation
or APTT), hypofbrinogenemia, decreased antithrombin
of TF in blood. This may involve widespread tissue injury,
activity, and increased D-dimer or FDP concentrations.480
especially endothelial injury, that results in the exposure ofTF
Others have recommended finding at least three abnormal
on subendothelial cells and parenchymal cells. Proinfamma-
 hemostatic parameters including thrombocytopenia, pro-
 tory cytokines produced in various infectious and noninfec-
tious infammatory disorders may stimulate the exposure of
 D-dimers, and erythrocyte fragmentation.S36 A multiple
TF on blood monocytes and possibly on endothelial cells.
logistic regression model has been developed to diagnose DIC
Some neoplastic cells also express TF, which can promote
in dogs using results from PT, APTT, D-dimer, and fbrino-
 The APTT is more often prolonged than is the PT in DIC.
*References 206, 211, 268, 307, 374, 384, 452.
Mild to moderate thrombocytopenia is a consistent finding in
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
221
dogs but a less consistent finding in cats and horses with
resulted in watery and slightly hemorrhagic diarrhea, followed
by death in 5 or 6 days. These pups had necrotic lesions in the
 the fbrinogen concentration may be normal or increased in 
liver and bacterial emboli in the kidney at necropsy. The
DIC when underlying infammation is present. Antithrombin
 primary cause of death was microvascular thrombosis caused
is generally low in dogs and horses with DIC.480 Antithrom-
by the bacteria, leading to renal and multiple organ failure.
bin may also be low in some cats with DIC, but it is often
Urine output was reported to be decreased and serum urea
normal or even increased because it appears to be an acute-
nitrogen was increased prior to death, but unfortunately
phase protein in cats.? D-dimer concentration is a sensitive 
 CBCs were not performed $21
ss3[ e sI 11 1nq (aisod 96001-0%s2) saop u1 OI 10g 1s31
The atypical form of HUS in humans occurs secondary to
sensitive test for DIC in horses (about 50%).48 About two-
 various diseases including pneumococcal pneumonia, human
thirds of the cats with DIC had positive D-dimer tests in a
immunodeficiency virus infection, chemotherapeutic and
 small study.4?7 The D-dimer test appears to be more sensitive
immunosuppressive drugs, malignancy, SLE, and antiphos-
than FDP tests in the diagnosis of DIC in dogs and
pholipid syndrome. Atypical HUS involves complement
horses.479.486 Extensive local intravascular coagulation
1may
dysregulation.161
 occur in some dogs with hemangiosarcoma. Laboratory find-
HUS has rarely been reported in animals. Several cases
 ings in these cases are similar to those seen in DIC, making
in dogs appear similar to the typical HUS reported in
differentiation of DIC from local intravascular coagulation 
difficult.
tinal signs has been observed in greyhounds.1s The disorder
 Schistocytes may be seen with DIC, where they can be
is characterized by thrombocytopenia, anemia, azotemia, and
formed by the impact of erythrocytes with fibrin strands
 a cutaneous vasculopathy in addition to a renal glomerular
in fowing blood (see Fig. 4-53).42s Schistocytes are most
vasculopathy. Skin lesions were characterized by hemorrhages,
often seen in dogs but can also be seen in other species
fbrinoid arteritis, and thrombosis. Renal lesions included per-
with DIC.252.497
acute glomerular necrosis particularly involving afferent arte-
When animals with DIC are assayed using TEG, they may
rioles, with intravascularcoagulation in glomerularcapillaries.87
appear hypercoagulable, normocoagulable, or hypocoagulable.
Ultrastructural examination of glomerular capillaries from
The hypocoagulable state presumably develops when con-
affected greyhounds revealed endothelial swelling, detach-
sumption of platelets and fbrinogen limits additional coagu-
ment, and necrosis, with platelet adhesion, platelet aggrega
 lation. Hypocoagulable dogs with DIC are more likely to die
tion,and fbrin deposition. Noetiologic agents or electron-dense
than hypercoagulable dogs.
 deposits typical of immune complexes were observed.23 The
feeding of raw beef contaminated with E. coli has been sug-
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome
 Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) is a thrombotic micro-
renal vasculopathy syndrome has been reported in a Great
angiopathy consisting of thrombocytopenia, microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia, and acute renal failure. In humans, HUS is
HUS—characterized by hemolysis, thrombocytopenia,
classified as either typical (diarrhea-associated) or atypical
 azotemia, oliguria, and thrombotic microangiopathy involving
(nondiarrheal) HUS.
glomeruli—was diagnosed in a postpartum mare with endo-
The typical form accounts for more than 90% of the human
metritis. An E. coli 0103:H2 was isolated from the mare's
cases. It occurs most commonly in children and follows gas-
uterus and gastrointestinal tract. A similar presentation has
trointestinal infections with enterohemorrhagic Escherichia
 also been diagnosed in a postparfum cow with severe suppura-
coli (predominantly serotype O157:H7), which produces
 tive endometritis.43s A disorder resembling the renal compo-
Shiga toxin. Shiga toxin is also produced by Shigella dysente-
 nent of the HUS was diagnosed in two horses with acute renal
riae type 1. These organisms colonize the intestinal tract and
failure and necrotizing vascuolpathy with marked fibrin depo-
release Shiga toxin into the blood; it then disseminates
sition in the renal glomeruli.367 Atypical HUS was also con-
throughout the body and binds to receptors on endothelial
sidered a possibility in three cats treated with cyclosporine
cells. Bacteremia is rarely recognized. Shiga toxin is inter-
after renal transplants.11
nalized by receptor-mediated endocytosis. It activates and
 damages endothelial cells, which then triggers platelet adhe-
Antiphospholipid Antibody
sion, thrombus formation, and leukocyte-dependent infam
 Healthy Bernese Mountain dogs are reported to have pro-
mation. Microthrombi are found most often in renal glomeruli,
longed APTTs compared with other breeds. This appears
the intestinal tract, the brain, and the pancreas.276 Children 
to result from a high prevalence of an antiphospholipid anti-
with E. coli O157:H7 infection appeared to be in a hyperco-
body (lupus anticoagulant) in the plasma of these dogs.376
agulable state prior to developing HUS, indicating that accel-
The
 presence of antiphospholipid antibodies (antibodies
erated thrombogenesis and inhibition of fbrinolysis precede
against phospholipids, phospholipid-binding proteins, and
renal injury and presumably cause acute renal failure.* A non-
phospholipid-protein  complexes) is  associated  with an
O157:H7 strain of E. coli, which caused HUS and death in a
increased risk of thrombosis in humans (antiphospholipid
child, was inoculated orally into 40-day-old dogs, where it
 syndrome). The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies
222
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 appears to prime platelets and endothelial cels for activation,
vernal grass hay.417,441 The discovery of dicumarol toxicity led
but a triggering event such as an infection, trauma, or
to the development of warfarin and related compounds that
surgery may be required for thrombosis to occur.413 The
are now used as rodenticides and as therapeutic anticoagu-
importance of antiphospholipid antibodies in promoting.
ants. Animals that consume anticoagulant rodenticides
thrombosis in animals requires further study. The presence of
 develop life-threatening bleeding disorders characterized by
y hop e u pairodan uaaq seq iueqneosuue adki-sndn e
ou e inq sisan Lid pue d pauond aipa
TCT29131233,370.547 The PT test is generally reported to be
nephrotic syndrome, pulmonary thromboembolism, and
hemolysis.488
more sensitive than the APTT test in the recognition of early
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity because of the short half-
Liver Disease
life of FVII in the circulation,72 but the APTT was prolonged
The liver is the primary site for the synthesis of coagulation
earlier and was more pronounced than the PT in horses with
factors. Consequently, generalized liver disease may result in
experimental brodifacoum toxicity.41
prolonged PT and APTT and an increased bleeding tendency
Vitamin K-deficient animals and humans developed
due to decreased circulating coagulation factors.* Because of
further reduction in the vitamin K-dependent coagulation
these synthetic functions and the vascular nafure of the liver,
factors when treated with vitamin E. Studies suggest that
-iod oi rod suop Aenausa ae sisi huusaos uoeneo
vitamin E interferes at the vitamin K-dependent carboxyl-
forming liver biopsies. Liver disorders may also contribute to
the development of DIC, as has been reported in infectious
β-lactam antibiotics and salicylate may also interfere with
vitamin K metabolism.23.331
tion defect of aflatoxicosis is primarily due to reduced hepatic
A 4-week-old standardbred colt presented with life-
 synthesis of coagulation factors except when hepatic necrosis
threatening bleeding and vitamin K-dependent coagulation
factor deficiencies. The colt responded to vitamin K therapy
toxemia augments afatoxin B1 toxicity, with the combined
with a return of coagulation tests to normal, but the foal failed
substances more likely to initiate DIC than afatoxin B1
to thrive and was euthanized at 9 weeks of age.3 It was not
 alone.321
determined if this was an inherited or a noninherited con-
genital vitamin K deficiency, as occurs in some human
Vitamin K Deficiency
infants.492
Vitamin K is essential in a carboxylation reaction that results 
in the formation of active coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
Snake Venoms
X as well as protein C and protein S (Fig. 7-15).105 Vitamin
Elapid snakes—including coral snakes, cobras, mambas, sea
K deficiency may occur in malabsorptive syndromes, including
bile duct obstruction, or from sterilization of the intestine by
contrast, vipers—including rattlesnakes, copperheads, and 
cottonmouths—have primarily hemotoxic venom. However,
to be present in at least some cats with hepatic lipidosis, severe
these characterizations of venoms by type of snake are not
infammatory bowel disease, and severe infammatory bowel
consistent. For example, some elapid snakes have hemotoxins
disease associated with cholangiohepatitis, because these
 animals had prolonged coagulation tests that shortened fol-
 damages the circulatory system and muscle tissue and causes
lowing vitamin K therapy.?" Bilirubin cholelithiasis and extra-
swelling, hemorrhage, and necrosis. Viper venoms contain
hepatic bile duct obstruction have resulted in prolonged
various components that can promote or inhibit hemostatic
coagulation times in pyruvate kinase-defcient cats,24.509
at
mechanisms, including coagulation, fibrinolysis, platelet func-
least in part related to decreased vitamin K absorption.
tion, and vascular integrity.43# The venoms of many species of
 Vitamin K deficiency resulting in hemorrhage and death has
snakes contain one or more components that induce hemor-
been reported in cats fed commercial canned diets high in
rhage (hemorrhagins) through damage to vessel walls.250
salmon or tuna.489
 Some snakes have venom that can induce DIC, which is
 Sweet clover and sweet vernal grasses contain coumarin,
followed by bleeding.1 Several snakes have venom that acti-
which is converted to the toxin dicumarol by the action of
vates prothrombin. Other snakes have venom that activates
 several mold species when the grasses are improperly pro-
FX and/or FV.2s0
cessed under high moisture conditions. Dicumarol in these
 The venoms of pit vipers (subfamily Crotalidae) have
 moldy feedstuffs inhibits VKOR, which provides vitamin K
thrombin-like activities that can clot fbrinogen in vitro, but
hydroquinone  for the carboxylation of select glutamic
these enzymes do not exhibit all of the effects of thrombin.
acid residues of the vitamin K-dependent proteins.477 Conse-
 They generally cleave only fbrinopeptide A from fibrinogen
quently dicumarol toxicity can result in hemorrhage in cattle
(a few, like the water moccasin, cleave only fibrinopeptide B),
 and other species consuming moldy sweet clover and sweet
and they do not activate FXIII, so cross-linking of fbrin does
 posse e s  suosu
release of tPA from endothelial cells and activation of the
*References 36, 94, 299, 315, 411, 416, 501.
fbrinolytic system in vivo. This rapid fibrinolysis is associated
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders 
223
with a massive production of circulating fibrin degradation
at which time major bleeding can occur. Different genetic
defects have been recognized in Holstein and Japanese black
 blood that remains unclottable for as long as 3 days in human
cattle.68,185
patients who do not receive antivenom after being bitten by
eastern diamondback rattlesnakes.283
Factor IX and Factor Vill Deficiencies
Thrombocytopenia may also be present after pit viper
Both of these deficiencies result in severe bleeding disorders
envenomation because some venoms activate platelets and
and are transmitted as X chromosome-linked recessive traits;
because platelets may be activated in response to damage to
consequently, these disorders are usually recognized in male
the endothelium.142,20,43,543
 animals. FIX deficiency (hemophilia B) has been identifed in
Some snakes have components in their venoms that appear
many breeds of dogs and in British short hair, Siamese-cross,
to have anticoagulant properties by preventing the formation
 and domestic shorthaired cats.6819 FVIII deficiency (hemo-
of the prothrombinase complex on activated platelet surfaces.
philia A, classical hemophilia) has been recognized in many
 Several snake venoms (including the southern copperhead)
breeds of dogs, cats, and horses, as well as in Hereford cattle
activate protein C, which inhibits coagulation and promotes
and a newborn alpaca 68.135,23,346
fibrinolysis. The venom of some snakes may indirectly stimu-
late fbrinolysis by blocking fibrinolytic inhibitors, such as
Factor Vll Deficiency
 C2-antiplasmin and C2-macroglobulin. Many snake venoms
FVII deficiency has been recognized in multiple breeds of
have components that can either induce or inhibit platelet
 dogs but appears most commonly in laboratory beagles, where
aggregation, including phospholipases, which are ubiquitous
in snake venoms.250
FVII deficiency is usually discovered fortuitously when coagu
lation screening reveals a prolonged PT. Affected dogs gener-
Hereditary Coagulation Disorders
ally do not have a history of bleeding, but they may experience
An inherited coagulation factor deficiency is considered when
bruising or prolonged bleeding following surgery or post-
unexplained hemorrhage occurs or hemorrhage is protracted
after surgery. Although rare, hereditary coagulation defects
(one affected dog had only 0.4% normal activity) seems para-
are recognized much more often in dogs than in other
 doxical given the importance of the factor in initiating coagu-
domestic animal species. The likelihood that a coagulation
lation, but apparently little activity is required to initiate
 defect will result in clinically significant hemorrhage varies
coagulation.184
with the nature of the defect.68
Defects in the Common Coagulation Pathway
Factor Xll and Prekallikrein Deficiencies
 FX deficiency results in severe bleeding episodes in dogs. It
FXII deficiency occurs most often in cats (domestic short-
has been reported in American cocker spaniels, a Jack Russell
haired, domestic long-haired, Siamese, Himalayan) but has 
terrier, and a domestic shorthaired cat. In American cocker
also been recognized in dogs (miniature poodle, Chinese Shar 
spaniels, this defciency results in stilborn pups or fatal bleed-
Pei).6 Animals with FXIl deficiency have markedly pro-
 ing episodes in the neonatal period. 18s
longed APTT and ACT tests, but they do not have a bleeding
Prothrombin (factor II) deficiency has been reported in
 disorder. Although FXII is not essential for normal hemosta-
English cocker spaniel and boxer dogs 6823 Bleeding episodes
sis, it may play a role in the growth of thrombi under patho-
 are generally mild.
logic conditions.10042s
Fibrinogen (factor I) deficiency causes mild to severe
Like animals with FXII deficiency, dogs (Chinese Shar Pei,
bleding episodes. Inheried deficiencies have been reported
German shorthaired pointer, Shih Tzu), horses (Belgian 
in dogs, cats, goats, and a lamb6,162FV and FXII defciencies
horses, miniature horses), and cattle with prekallikrein def-
have not been reported in animals.
ciency have prolonged APTTs but generally do not exhibit an
increased bleeding tendency682832 Excessive hemorrhage
Vitamin K-Dependent Coagulopathies
was reported after castration of a Belgian horse with prekal-
Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathies have been recognized
likrein deficiency.18 However, it is possible that the bleeding
in Devon Rex cats, Rambouillet sheep, a Labrador retriever
episode was not caused by this deficiency but simply prompted
dog, and a 4-week-old standardbred colt.* Affected cats and
hemostatic testing of an otherwise asymptomatic deficiency
sheep are deficient in the enzyme Y-glutamyl carboxylase (see
because two prekallikrein-deficient siblings of this animal did
Fig. 7-15), resulting in reduction in the activities of prothrom-
 not have histories of bleeding.
bin, FVII, FIX, and FX Some animals exhibit minimal
bleeding tendencies, but fatal hemorrhagic episodes have
FactorXI Deficiency
 occurred in some affected cats. Peripartrurient hemorrhage and
 Hemorrhage associated with this deficiency in cattle (Hol-
death generally occur in lambs with this disorder. Although a
stein, Japanese black cattle), dogs (Kerry blue terrier, English
springer spaniel),and cats (domestic shorthaired) is generally
mild until a deficient animal is subjected to trauma or surgery,
*References 18, 267, 324, 330, 336, 473.
224
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 hereditary defect was suspected in the Labrador dog, a specific
the extrinsic pathway (i.e., FVII deficiency), or early anti-
cause was not determined. Either a deficiency in Y-glutamyl
 coagulant rodenticide toxicity in some species.
carboxylase or a deficiency in the VKOR complex would be
6. Normal platelet count, APTT, and PT with a negative FDP
consistent with the clinical and laboratory findings in this
test in the presence ofableedingdithesisThis profle suggests
dog.63 It is unknown whether the colt had an acquired neo-
 a platelet function defect or vascular injury. A concomitant
 natal vitamin K deficiency or a hereditary defect in vitamin K
prolonged bleeding time suggests a platelet function abnor-
recycling.336
mality is present. Inherited platelet abnormalities or vWD
could be present. vWD is diagnosed by measuring vWF in
 plasma by specialized laboratories. Some cases with severe
INTERPRETATION OF
vWF deficiency exhibit slightly prolonged APTT test
HEMOSTATIC TEST PROFILES
results due to decreased FVIII in plasma.
The utilization of a number of hemostatic tests concomitantly
helps differentiate causes of hemorrhage, including simple
thrombocytopenia; DIC; vWD; vasculitis; rodenticide
REFERENCES
 toxicity; liver disease; and inherited defects of the intrinsic,
extrinsic, and common coagulation pathways. Examples of
1. Abdullah R. Hemostatic abnormalities innephrotic syndrome. Vet Clin North Am Small
 hemostatic test profles and their interpretations are given
Anim Pract 1988;18:105-113.
below.
2. Abrams K. Yunusov MY, Slichter S, et al. Recombinant human macrophage
colony-stim ulating 
 factor-induced thrombocytopenia in dogs. Br J Haematol.
1. Thrombocytopenia woith normal APTT, PT, and FDP tests.
2003;121:614-622
Thrombocytopenias without abnormalities in coagulation
3. Adam F, Villiers E, Watson S, et al. Clinical pathological and epidemiological assess-
tests generally result from lack of production or enhanced
ment of morphologically and immunologically confirmed canine leukaemmia. Vet Comp
Onco. 2009;7:181-195
platelet destruction. Bone marrow biopsies are needed to
4. Alexandrakis MG, Passam FH, Moschandrea IA, et al. Levels of serum cytokines and
determine whether there is an abnormality in platelet pro-
acute phase proteins in patients with essential and cancer-related thrombocytosis.
duction by megakaryocytes. Generalized marrow hypopla-
Armm / Chin 0ncol. 2003;26:135-140.
5. Alison R, Williams P, Lansdowne J, et al. Fatal hepatic sarcocystosisin a puppy with
sia and aplasia are more common than pure amegakaryocytic
eosinophilia and eosinophilic peritoneal effusion. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:353-357.
thrombocytopenias, which are rare in animals. Myelo-
-woa pue suawsene ialaeld-aiayooids ieia isor 'o uosiay 'ay idninit 9
phthisis resulting from marrow neoplasia can also result
bocytopenia in murine relapsing fever borreliosis. Blood. 2003;102:2843-2850
7. Arepally GM. Ortel TL. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia. Annu Rev Med.
in thrombocytopenia. Enhanced platelet destruction is
2010;61:77-90.
 the most common cause of thrombocytopenia, occurring
8. Armengou L, Monreal L, Tarancon l, et al. Plasma D-dimer concentration in sick 
as a result of a primary or secondary immune-mediated
newborn foals. / Vet /ntem Med. 2008;22:411-417.
 9. Arochl, Harrus S. Retrospective study ofthe epidemiological, clinical, haematological
process.
and biochemical findings in 109 dogs poisoned by Vipera xanthina palestinae. Vet
2. Thrombocytopenia with prolonged APTT and PT test results
Rec. 1999;144:532-535.
and a positive FDP test.This profle suggests a consumption
10. Aroch I, Segev G, Klement E, et al. Fatal Vipera xanthina palestinae envenomation in
16 dogs. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2004;46:268-272.
of both platelets and coagulation factors, as occurs in DIC.
11. Aronson LR, Gregory C. Possible hemolytic uremic syndrome inthree cats after renal
Plasma antithrombin concentration is generally low when
transplantation and cyclosporine therapy. Vet Surg.199;28:135-140.
measured. All four abnormalities listed will not be present
12. Arraga-Alvarado C, Palmar M, Parra O, et al. Ehrlichia platys{Anaplasma platys) in
dogs from Maracaibo, Venezuela: anultrastructural study of experimental and natural
in every animal with DIC. Of these assays, the PT test is
infections. Vet Pathol. 2003;40:149-156.
most likely to be normal.
13. Atwell RB, Thornton JR, Odlum J. Suspected drug-induced thrombocytopenia associ-
3. Normal platelet count, prolonged APTT and PT test results
ated with levamisole therapy in a dog. Aust Vet J. 1981;57:91-93.
14. Avgeris S, Lothrop CD Jr, McDonald TP. Plasma von Willebrand factor concentration
and α negative FDP test. This profle suggests either multi-
and thyroid function in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1990;196:921-924.
ple coagulation defects, as can occur in rodenticide toxicity
15. Axthelm MK. Krakowka S. Canine distemper virus-induced thrombocytopenia. Am J
Vet Res. 1987:48:1269-1275.
and liver disease, or much less likely, an inherited defect in
 the common pathway. Platelet counts may be decreased in
platys. Amm J Vet Res. 1988;49:1014-1016.
animals subsequent to marked blood loss associated with
17. Baker DC, Green RA. Coagulation defects of aflatoxin intoxicated rabbits. Vet Pathol
1987;24:62-70.
rodenticide toxicity. Inexplicably, serum FDP concentra-
18. Baker DC, Robbe SL, Jacobson L, et al. Hereditary deficiency of vitamin-K-dependent
 tions have been reported to be increased in some dogs with
coagulation factors in Rambouillet sheep. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 1999;10:75-80.
anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity. Collection of blood
19. Baker GR, Levin J. Transient thrombocytopenia produced by administration of
from a heparinized IV line should also be considered as a
macrophage colony-stimulating factor: investigations of the mechanism. Blood.
1998;91:89-99.
factitious cause of this hemostatic profle.
20. Baneth G. Hepatozoon canis infetion In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases ofthe
4. Normal platelet count and PT, prolonged APTT, and a nega
Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:698-705.
 21. Barrows PL, Prestwood AK. Green CE. Experimental Sarcocystis suicanis infections:
tive FDP test. This profle suggests an inherited defect in
disease in growing pigs. Amm / Vet Res. 1982;43:1409-1412.
the intrinsic pathway, an inappropriately low plasma to
22. Barton MH, Morris DD, Norton N, et al. Hemostatic and fibrinolytic indices in neonatal
 anticoagulant ratio, or hemoconcentration.
foals with presumed septicemia. / Vet Intem Med. 1998;12:26-35.
5. Normal platelet count and APTT, prolonged PT, and a nega-
 23. Bateman SW, Mathews KA. Abrams-Ogg AC, et al. Diagnosis of disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation in dogs adrmitted to an intensive care unit. J/Am Vet Med Assoc.
tive FDP test. This profle suggests an inherited defect in
1 999;215:798-804.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
225
 24. Bauer N, Eralp O, Moritz A. Reference intervals and method optimization for variables
 53. Bowen DJ, Clemmons RM, Meyer DJ, et al. Plateletfunctional changes secondary to
reflecting hypocoagulatory and hypercoagulatory states in dogs using the STA
hepatocholestasis and elevation of serum bile acids. Thromb Res. 1988;52:649-654.
Compact automated analyzer. / Vet Diagn lnvest. 2009;21:803-814.
54. Boyce JT, Kociba GJ, Jacobs RM, et al. Feline leukemia virus-induced thrombocyto-
25. Baumgarten A, Wilhelmi M, KalbantnerK, et al. Measurement of platelet aggregation
penia and macrothrombocytosis in cats. Vet Pathol. 1986;23:16-20.
in ovine blood using a new impedance aggregometer. Vet Cin Pathol. 2010;
55. Brady CA, Otto CM, Van Winkle TJ, et al. Severe sepsis in cats: 29 cases {1986-1998).
39:149-156.
J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;217:531-535.
 26. Bautista MJ, Gomez-Villamandos JC, Carrasco L, et al. Ultrastructural pathology of
 56. Brainard BM, Epstein KL, Lobato D, et al. Effects of clopidogrel and aspirin on platelet
the bone marrow in pigs inoculated with a moderately virulent strain (DR'78) of
aggregation, thromboxane production, and serotonin secretion in horses. / Vet lntem
African swine fever virus. Histol Histopathol. 1998;13:713-720.
ed, 2011;25:116-122.
 27. Bay JD, Scot MA, Hans JE. Reference values for activated coagulation time in cats.
 57. Brandt E, Ludwig A, Petersen F, et al. Platelet-derived CXC chemokines: old players
Am J/ Vet Res. 2000;61:750-753.
in new games.Immno Rev. 2000:177:204-216.
 28. Beale KM, Altman D, Clemmons RR, et al. Systemic toxicosis associated with aza-
58. Brassard JA, Meyers KM, Person M, et al. Experimentallyinduced renal failure in the
thioprine administration in domestic cats. Am / Vet Res. 1992;53:1236-1240.
 29. Bedard C, Lanevschi-Pietersma A, Dunn M. Evaluation of coagulation markers in the 
59.BrazzllrjessonDLEvaluation of plasma anthrombinactiy and -dimr
 plasma of healthy cats and cats with asymptomatic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Vet
concentration in populations of healthy cats, clinically ill cats, and cats with cardio-
Chin Pathol. 2007;36:167-172.
myopathy. Vet Chin Pathol 2007;36:79-84.
30. Bell VVR Jr. Defibrinogenating enzymes. Drugs. 1997;54(Suppl 3):18-30.
 60. Breitschwerdt EB. Infectious thrombocytopenia in dogs. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet.
31. Bennett JS, Berger BV, Bilings PC.The structure and function of platelet integrins.
1988;10:1177-1190.
/ Thromb Haemost. 2009;7(Suppl 11:200-205.
 61. Breitschwerdt EB. Feline bartonellosis and cat scratch disease. Vet Immunol Imm-
 32. Bentz Al, Wilkins PA, MacGillivray KC, et al. Severe thrombocytopenia in 2 thorough-
nopathol. 2008;123:167-171.
 bred foals with sepsis and neonatal encephalopathy. J Vet Intem Med. 2002:
 62. Breitschwerdt EB, Nicholson WL, Kiehl AR, et al. Natural infections with Borrelia
16:494-497.
spirochetes in two dogs in Florida. / Chin Microbiol. 1994;32:352-357.
33. Bergmeier W, Stefanini L. Novel molecules in calcium signaling in platelets. /Thromb
63.
Soey uoneinbeon suapuadap-y uwenin le na W eyzie 'tf vewjadny 's jauuag 
Haemost. 2009;7(Suppl 1:187-190.
deficiency. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2009;35:439-446.
34. Bessman JD. The relation of megakaryocyte ploidy to platelet volume. Am J Hematol.
64. Brianceau P, Divers TJ. Acute thrombosis of limb arteries in horses with sepsis: five
1984;16:161-170.
cases {1988-1998). Eguine Vet J. 2001;33:105-109.
35. Bessman JD, Wiliams LJ, GilmerPRJr. The inverse relation of platelet size and count
 65. Brommer EJP, Engbers J, Larse AVD, et al. Suvival of fibrinogen degradation prod-
in normal subjects, and an artifact of other particles. Am J Clin Pathol.
ucts in the circulation afer thrombolytic therapy for acute myocardial infarction.
1981;76:289-293.
Fibrinolysis. 1987;1:149-153.
 36. Biourge V, MacDonald MJ, King L. Feline hepatic lipidosis: pathogenesis and nutri-
66. Brooks AC, Menzies-Gow NJ, Wheeler-Jones CP, et al. Regulation of platelet activat-
tional management. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1990;12:1244-1258.
ing factor-induced equine platelet activation by intracellular kinases. JVet Phamaco
 37. BlaisdelFS, Dodds WJ. Evaluation of two microhematocrit methods for quantitating
Ther. 2009;32:189-196.
plasma fibrinogen. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1977;171:340-342.
 67. Brooks M, Catalfamo J. Buccal mucosa bleeding time is prolonged in canine models 
 38. Blaise GA, Parent M, Laurin S, et al. Platelet-induced vasomotion of isolated canine
of primary hemostatic disorders. Throm Haemost. 1993;70:77-780.
coronary arery in the presence of halothane or isoflurane. J Cardiothorac Vasc
68.Brooks MB.Hereditary coagulopathies.In:WeissDJWardropKJedsSchalms
Anesth. 1994;8:175-181.
Veterinary Hematology. 6th ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell 2010:661-667.
39. Blajchman MA, Bordin JO, Bardossy L, et al. The contribution of the haematocrit
69. Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL. Von Willebrand disease. In: Weiss DU, Wardrop KJ, eds.
to thrombocytopenic bleeding in experimental animals. Br J Haematol.
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:612-618.
1994;86:347-350.
70. Brooks MB. Catalfamo JL, Brown HA, et al. A hereditary bleeding disorder of dogs
40. Bloom JC, Thiem PA, Sellers TS, et al. Cephalosporin-induced inmmune cytopenia in
Caused by a lack of platelet procoagulant activity. Blood. 2002;99:2434-2441.
the dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil-, and platelet-associated lgG
71. Brooks MB, Catalfamo JL, Etter K, et al. Exclusion of ABCA-1 as a candidate gene for
following treatment with cefazedone. Am J Hematol. 1988;28:71-78.
 canine Scott syndrome. J/ Thromb Haemost. 2008;6:1608-1610.
41. Boermans HJ, Johnstone I, Black WD, et al. Clinical signs, laboratory changes and
72.Brooks MB,De Laforcade A.Acquired coagulopathies.In: Weiss Du, Wardrop KJ
toxicokinetics of brodifacoum in the horse. Can / Vet Res. 1991;55:21-27.
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames. IA: Wiley-Blackwell;
42. Boisvert AM, Swenson CL, Haines CJ. Serum and plasma latex agglutination tests
2010:654-660.
roeg v ta/ sbop lAlleu ui sianpoid uopepejbap (uabojuuq jo uopaanap jof
73. Brooks MB, Randolph J, Warner K, et al. Evaluation of platelet function screening
2001;30:133-140.
tests to detet platelet procoagulant deficiency in dogs with Scott syndrome. Vet Clin
 43. Borges AS, Divers TJ, Stokol T, et al. Serum iron and plasmafibrinogen concentrations
Pathol. 2009;38:306-315.
as indicators of systemic inflammatory diseases in horses. J Vet lntern Med.
74. Brown SJ, Simpson KW, BakerS, et al. Macrothrombocytosis in cavalier King Charles
2007;21:489-494.
spaniels. Vet Rec. 1994;135:281-283.
44. Boudreaux MK. Inherited intrinsic platelet disorders. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ,
75.
.Buechner-Maxwell V, Scott MA, Godber L, et al. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocyto-
eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:
penia in a quarter horse foal. J Vet Intem Med. 1997;11:304-308.
619-625.
76. Burgess H Wood D. Valiation of avon Wibrand factor antigen enzyme-inkd
 45. Boudreaux MK. P2Y12 receptor gene mutation in a Greater Swiss Mountain dog
inmmunosorbent assay and newly developed collagen-binding assay. Can J Vet Res.
{abstract). Vet Chin Pathol. 2010;39:557.
2008;72:420-427
46. Boudreaux MK. Platelet structure. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veteri-
77. Burnier L, Fontana P, Kwak BR, et al. Cell-derived microparticles in haemostasis and 
nary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:561-568.
vascular medicine. Thromb Haemost. 2009;101:439-451.
 47. Boudreaux MK., Catalfamo JL, KIlok M. Calcium-diacylglycerol guanine nucleotide
78. Burstein SA, Peng J, Friese P. et al. Cytokine-induced alteration of platelet and
hemostatic function. Stem Cells. 1996;14(Suppl 1):154-162.
Transl Res. 2007;150:81-92.
79. Butenas S, Mann KG. Blood coagulation. Biochemisty (Mosc). 2002;67:3-12.
48. Boudreaux MK, Ebbe S. Comparison of platelet number, mean platelet volume and 
B0. Caen J,Wu Q. Hagemanfactor, platelets and polyphosphates: arlyhistory and recent
platelet mass in five mammalian species. Comp Haematol nt. 1998;p:16-20.
connection. J/ Thromb Haemost. 2010;B:1670-1674.
 49. Boudreaux MK, Osborne CD, Here AC, et al. Unique structure of the M loop region
B1. Cain GR, Feldman BF, Kawakami TG, et al. Platelet dysplasia associated with mega-
 of beta-tubulin may contribute to size variability of platelets in the family felidae.
karyoblastic leukemia in a dog. JAm Vet MMed Assoc. 1986;188:529-530.
Vet Clin Pathol 2010;39:417-423.
B2. Callan MB, Bennett JS, Phillips DK, et al. Inherited platelet &-storage pool disease
 50. Boudreaux MK, Schmutz SM, French PS. Calcium diacylglycerol guanine nucleotide
in dogs causing severe bleeding: An animal model for a specific ADP deficiency.
 exchange factorI CaIDAG-GEFI gene mutations in a thrombopathic Simmental calf.
Thromb Haemmostas. 1995;74:949-953.
Vet Pathol. 2007:44:932-935.
 83. Callan MB, Giger U. Assessment of a point-of-care instrument for identification of 
 51. Boudreaux MK, Wardrop KJ, Kiklevich V, et al. A mutation in the canine Kindlin-3 
 primary hemostatic disorders in dogs. Am J Vet Res. 2001;62:652-658.
 gene associated withincreased bleeding risk and susceptibility to infections. Thromb
B4. Callan MB, Shofer FS., Catalfamo JL. Effects of anticoagulant on pH, ionized calcium 
Haemost. 2010;103:475-477.
concentration, and agonist-induced platelet aggregation in canine platelet-rich 
 52. Boutet P, Heath F, Archer J, et al. Comparison of quantitative immunoturbidimetric
plasma. Amm J Vet Res. 2009:70:472-477.
and semiquantitative latex-agglutination assays for D-dimer measurement in canine
85.
Cambridge H, Lees P, Hooke RE, et al. Antithrombotic actions of aspirin in the horse.
 plasma. Vet Chin Pathol. 2009;38:78-82
Equine Vet J. 1991;23:123-127.
226
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B6. Carlstrom LP, Jens JK, Dobyns ME, et al. Inadvertent propagation of factor Vll defi-
115. Corigan JJ Jr. The efect of vitamin E on warfarin-induced vitamin K deficiency. Ann
ciency in acanine mucopolysaccharidosis type Iresearch breeding colony. Comp Med.
N Y Acad Sci. 1982;393:361-368.
2009;59:378-382.
116. Cortese L, Sica M, Piantedosi D, et al. Secondary immune-mediated thrombocytope-
87. Carpenter JL, Andelman NC, Moore FM, et al. Idiopathic cutaneous and renal glo-
nia in dogs naturally infeted by Leishmania infantum. Vet Rec. 2009;164:
merular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol 1988;25:401-407.
778-782.
B8. Carr AP, Panciera DL, Kidd L. Prognostic factors for mortality and thromboembolism
117. Court EA, Earnest-Koons KA, Barr SC, et al. Malignant histiocytosis in a cat. JAm 
in canine immune-mediated hemolytic anemia: a retrospective study of 72 dogs.
Vet MMed Assoc. 1993;203:1300-1302.
J Vet Intem Med. 2002;16:504-509.
118. Cowan LA, Hertzke DM, Fenwick BW, et al. Clinical and clinicopathologic abnormali-
89. Carasco L, Madsen LV, Salguero FJ, et al. Immune complex-associated thrombocy-
ties in Greyhounds with cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy: 18 cases 
topenic purpura syndrome in sexuall mature Gotingen minipigs. / Comp Pathol.
1992-1994). J/ Amn Vet Med Assoc. 1997;210:789-793.
2003;128:25-32.
119. Cowgill LD, James KM, Levy JK, et al. Use of recombinant human erythropoietin for
90. CarrickJB, Morris DD, Moore JN.Administration of areceptorantagonistforplatt-
management of anemia in dogs and cats with renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
activating factor during equine endotoxaemia. Equine Vet J. 1993;25:152-157.
1998;212:521-528.
91. Casella S, Giannetto C, Fazio F, et al. Assessment of prothrombin time, activated
120. Cowles BE, Meyers KM, Wardrop KJ, et al. Prolonged bleeding time of Chediak-
 partial thromboplastin time, and fibrinogen concentration on equine plasma samples
Higashi cats corrected by platelet transfusion. Thromb Haemost. 1992;67:708-712.
 ui nap uond Aewnd t ie ia rs isinuoi ry dope ai po il
92. Castoldi E, Hackeng TM.Regulation of coagulation by protein S.Curr Opin Hematol.
thrombocytopenia of equine infectious anemia. J Virol. 1996;70:7842-7850.
2008;15:529-536
122. Dale DC, Nichol JL, Rich DA, et al. Chronic thrombocytopenia is induced in dogs
93. Cavaillon JM. Cytokines and macrophages. Biomed Phammacother. 1994;
by development of cross-reacting antibodies to the MpL ligand. Blood.
48:445-453.
1997;90:3456-3461.
94. Center SA, Elston TH, Rowland PH, et al. Fulminant hepatic failure associated with
123. Dale GL, Friese P, Hynes LA, et al. Demonstration that thiazole-orange-ositive plate-
oral administration of diazepam in 11 cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
lets in the dog are less than 24 hours old. Blood. 1995;85:1822-1825.
1996;209:618-625.
124.Daltatiftl
 95. Center SA, Warner K, Corbett J, et al. Proteins invoked by vitammin K absence and 
dogs. Exp Hemmatol 1996;24:518-523.
 clotting times in clinically ill cats. / Vet lntem Med. 2000;14:292-297.
125. Dan K. Gomi S. Inokuchi K, et al. Effects of interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor
 96. Ceron JJ, Carli E, Tasca S, et al. Evaluation of EDTA hematology tubes for collection 
on megakaryocytopoiesis: mechanism of reactive thrombocytosis. Acta Haemato.
of blood samples for tests of secondary hemostasis in dogs. Am J Vet Res.
1995;93:67-72.
2008;69:1141-1147.
126. Davidson BL, Rozanski EA, Tidwell AS, et al. Pulmonary thromboembolism in a
 97. Cesarini C, Monreal L, Armengou L, et al. Association of admission plasma D-dimer
heartworm-positive cat. J/ Vet lntem /Med. 2006;20:1037-1041.
concentration with diagnosis and outcome in horses with colic. J Vet lntern Med.
127. Davis B, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Schuller S, et al. Mutation in beta1-tubulin correlates 
2010;24:1490-1497.
with macrothrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J Vet lntern Med.
 98. Chandler WVL, Jelacic S, Boster DR, et al. Prothrombotic coagulation abnormalities 
2008;22:540-545.
preceding the hemolytic-uremic syndrome.NEngl JMed. 2002;346:2332.
128. Davis CE. Thrombocytopenia: a uniform complication of African trypanosomiasis. Acta
99. Chantrey J, Chapman PS, Patterson-Kan JC. Haemolytic-uraemic syndrome in a dog.
Trop. 1982;39:123-133
J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med. 2002;49:470-472.
129. Davis WM. Hapten-induced immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in a dog. J Am Vet
100. Cheng Q, Tucker El, Pine MS, et al. A role forfactor Xlla-mediated factor XI activation
ed Ass0c. 1984;184:976-977.
 in thrombus formation in vivo. Blood. 2010;116:3981-3989.
130. De Gopegui RR, Espada Y, Vilafranca M, et al. Paraprotein-induced defective haem-
101. Cheng T, Mathews KA, Abrams-Og AC, et al. Relationship between assays ofinflam-
stasis in a dog with lgA (kappa-light chain) forming myeloma. Vet Clin Pathol.
mation and coagulation: a novel interpretation of the canine activated clotting time.
1994;23:70-71.
Can J Vet Res. 2009;73:97-102.
131. de Laforcade AM, Freeman LM, Shaw SP, et al. Hemostatic changes in dogs with
102. Chilton FH, Cluzel M, Triggiani M. Recent advances in our understanding of the bio-
naturally occurring sepsis. J Vet /ntem Med. 2003;17:674-679.
chemical interactions between platelet-activating factor and arachidonic acid. Lipid's.
132. de Laforcade AM, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM, et al. Serial evaluation of protein C and
1991;26:1021-1027.
antithrombin in dogs with sepsis. J Vet Intem Med. 2008;22:26-30.
103. Chisholm-Chait A. Mechanisms of thrombocytopenia in dogs with cancer. Comp Cont
133. de Sousa-e-Silva MC, Tomy SC, Tavares FL, et al. Hematological, hemostatic and
Ed Pract Vet. 2000;22:1006-1012.
wa areus sngat snssnp seiog A panui saueinsip Asaua eu
104. Chrisman CL, Hopkins AL, Ford SL, et al. Acute flaccid quadriplegia in three cats with
in dogs. Humm Exp Toxicol. 2003;22:491-500.
suspected coral snake envenomation. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1996;32:343-349.
134. Deitschel SJ, Kerl ME, Chang CH, et al. Age-associated changes to pathogen-
105. Chu PH, Huang TY, Wiliams J, et al. Purified vitamin K epoxide reductase alone is
associated molecular pattern-induced inflammatory mediator production in dogs.
sufficient for conversion of vitamin K epoxide to vitamin K and vitarin K to vitamin
J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2010;20:494-502.
KH2. Proc Nat Acad Sci V S A. 2006;103:19308-19313.
135. Del Piero F. Equine viral arteritis. Vet Pathol. 2000;37:287-296.
106. Clabough DL, Gebhard D, Flaherty MT, et al. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
136. Del Piero F, Wilkins PA, Lopez JV, et al. Equine viral arteritis in newborn foals: clini-
in horses infected with equine infectious anemia virus. J Virol. 1991;65:6242-
cal, pathological, serological., microbiological and immunohistochemical observa-
6251.
tions. Equine Vet J. 1997;29:178-185.
107. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in cats: 12 cases
137. DelGiudice LA, White GA. The role of tissue factor and tissue factor pathway inhibitor
{1981-1986). J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1987;190:1445-1448.
in health and disease states. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antoniol. 2009;19:23-29.
108.
Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in dogs: 12 cases 
138. DellOrco M, Bertazzolo V, Pagliaro L, et al. Hemolytic-uremic syndrome in a dog.
{1981-1986). J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1988;193:1443-1447.
Vet Chin Pathol 2005;34:264-269.
109. Collcchio-Zuanaze R. Sakate M, Langrafe L, et al. Hematological and biochemical 
139. Dereszynski DM, Center SA, Randolph JF, et al. Clinical and clinicopathologic features
 profiles and histopathological evaluation of experimental intoxication by sodium fluo-
of dogs that consumed foodborne hepatotoxic aflatoxins: 72 cases {2005-2006). /Am 
roacetate in cats. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2010;29:903-913.
Vet MMed Assoc. 2008;232:1329-1337.
110. Constable PD, Schmall LM, Muir WWW ll, et al. Respiratory, renal, hematologic, and
-Uon jawp-a auuen po Apns anadsona y le ia 3 poyei 's ang '3 isnymaa otl
serum biochemical effects of hypertonic saline solution in endotoxemmic calves. Am J
centrations measured using an inmmunometic *Point-of-Care" test. J Small Anim
Vet Res. 1991;52:990-998.
Pract: 2008;49:344-348.
111. Cook AK, Cowgil LD. Clinical and pathological features of protein-losing glomerular
141. DiBartola SP, Tarr MJ, Parker AT, et al. Clinicopathologic findings in dogs with renal
disease in the dog: a review of 137 cases {1985-1992l. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
amyloidosis: 59 cases ↑1976-1986). J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1989;195:358-364.
1996;32:313-322.
142. Dickinson CE, Traub-Dargatz JL, Dargatz DA, et al. Rattlesnake venom poisoning in
112. CorashL, Chen HY, Levin J, et al. Regulation of thrombopoiesis: effets of the degree
horses: 32 cases 1973-1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1996;208:1866-1871.
 of thrombocytopenia on megakaryocyte ploidy and platelet volume. Blood.
143. Dircks BH, Schuberth HJ, Mischke R. Underlying diseases and clinicopathologic vari-
1987;70:177-185.
ables of thrombocytopenic dogs with and without platelet-bound antibodies detected
113. Corl CM, Gandy JC. Sordillo LM. Platelet activating factor production and proinflam-
by use of a flow cytometric assay: B3 cases {2004-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
matory gene expression in endotoxin-challenged bovine mammary endothelial cells.
2009;235:960-966.
J Dairy Sc. 2008;91:3067-3078.
144. Dolente BA, Wilkins PA, Boston RC. Clinicopathologic evidence of disseminated 
114. Corrigan JJ Jr. Coagulation problems relating to vitamin E. Am J Pediatr Hematol
intravascular coagulation in horses with acute colitis. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2002:
Oncol. 1979;1:169-173.
220:1 034-1038.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
227
145. Du Plessis L, Stevens K. Blood platelets of the African elephant. J Comp Pathol.
-oway jof ewseld auuen palos po Aageis ie ia 'f onos  upien ' oaueny 8l
2002;127: 208-210.
stasis testing. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:204-207.
146. Dunkel B, Chan DL, Boston R, et al. Association between hypercoagulability and
179. Furlanello T. Tasca S, Caldin M, et al. Artifactual changes in canine blood following
dereased survival in horses withischemic or infammatory gastrointestinal disease.
storage, detected using the ADVIA 120 hematology analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol.
 Vet ntern Med. 2010;24:1467-1474.
2006;35:42-46.
147. Dunn JK, Heath MF, Jefferies AR, et al. Diagnosis and hematologic features of
180. Galarneau JR, Fortin M, Lapointe JM, et al. Citrobacter freundi septicemia in two
probable essential thrombocythemia in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 1999;28:131-
dogs. J Vet Diagn lnvest. 2003;15:297-299.
138.
181.
Gaschen FP, Srmnith Meyer B. Harvey JVV. Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and 
148. Eckersall PD. Proteins, proteomics, and the dysproteinemias. In: Kaneko JJ, Havey
immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia in a cat. Comp Haematol Int. 1992;2:175-178.
JV, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals. Bth ed. San Diego.
182.
.Gebbink MF, Bouma B, Maas C, et al. Physiological responses to protein aggregates:
CA: Academic Press:; 2008:117-155.
fibrinolysis, coagulation and inflammation {new roles for old factors). FEBS Lett.
149. Eckersall PD. Conner JG. Bovine and canine acute phase proteins. Vet Res Commun.
2009;583: 2691-2699.
1988;12:169-178.
183. Geffre A, GrollierS, Hanot C, et al. Canine reference intervals for coagulation markers 
i paneinosse anens alqenbeonadh 1e ia 'y asseid oo son 'Wl suap3 o1
using the STA Satellite(R) and the STA-R EvolutionR) analyzers. J Vet Diagn invest.
 a deficiency of protein C in a thoroughbred colt. J Vet ntem Med. 1993;7:190-
2010;22:690-695.
193.
184. Gentry PA. Comparative aspects of blood coagulation. Vet J 2004;168:238-251.
151. Edwards JF, Dodds WJ, Slauson DO. Coagulation changes in African swine fevervirus
185.
5. Gentry PA, Burgess H, Wood D. Hemostasis. In: Kaneko JJ, Harvey JV, Bruss ML
infection. Amr / Vet Res. 1984;45:2414-2420.
eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animais. Bth ed. San Diego, CA: Academic
152. Edwards JF, Dodds WJ, Slauson DO. Megakaryocytic infection and thrombocytopenia
Press; 2008:287-330.
in African swine fever. Vet Pathol. 1985;22:171-176.
186. Geor RJ, Jackson ML, Lewis KD, et al. Prekalikrein deficiency in a family of Belgian
153. el-Sayed MS.Effects of exercise on blood coagulation, fibrinolysis and platelet aggre-
horses. / Arm Vet AMed Assoc. 1990; 197:741-745.
gation. Sports ΛMed. 1996;22:282-298.
187. George FD. Microparticles in vascular diseases. Thromb Res. 2008;122(Suppl 1:
154. Emsley J, McEwan PA, Gailani D. Structure and function of factor Xl. Blood.
S55-S59.
2010;115: 2569-2577.
188. Gerber B, Taboada J, Lothrop CD Jr, et al. Determination of normal values using an
155.
 ErtenliI, Kiraz S, Ozturk MA, et al. Pathologic thrombopoiesis of rheumatoid arthritis.
U! uojesdde si! pue awj uopejnbeon paieApe jof Jaw uopeinbeon paewone
Rheumato /nt 2003; 23:49-60.
dogs with hemophilia. J/ Vet Intem Med. 1999;13:433-436.
156.
 Esmon CT. Protein C pathway in sepsis. Ann Med 2002;34:598-605.
19.GiegeTL CoeaSSTabada,t al.Phenl poisonini three dgs.AAnm
157. Esmon CT. Inflammation and the activated protein C anticoagulant pathway. Semin
Hosp Assoc. 2000;36:317-321.
Thromb Hemost. 2006;32(Suppl 1:49-60.
190. Giger U. Differing opinions on value of PIVKA test. J Am Vet Med AssOC.
158.
 Estrin MA, Wehausen CE, Jessen CR, et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
2003;222:1070-1071
in cats. / Vet Intem Med 2006;20:1334-1339.
191. Gilio K, Munnix IC, Mangin P, etal. Non-redundantroles of phosphoinositide 3-kinase
wju feus r bop e u Aajxon jonodiien le 1a 's nse11 'y uosdwis '1 uey 691
 snqwojyn pue bujeubis nalaneld panpu-iA uaoidosjb ui eaq pue eydje swjojos!
Pract 1998;39:581-586.
formation. / Biol Chem. 2009;284:33750-33762.
160. Farrar ET, Washabau RJ, Saunders HM. Hepatic abscesses in dogs: 14 cases ↑1982-
192. Glaspy JA. Hemostatic abnormalities in multiple myeloma and related disorders.
1994). J/ Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1996;208:243-247.
Hematol Dncol Clin North Am. 1992;6: 1301-1314.
161. Favaloro EJ. Hemolytic uremic syndrome. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010;36:573-574.
-yapounwwi auil jo Ansjwayaoig wnjas pue Aoloewah y uuewieh s yaialg 26l
162. Fecteau G, ZinkI JG, Smith BP, etal. Dysfibrinogenemia orafibrinogenemia in a Border
ciency virus-infected and feline leukemia virus-infected cats. J Vet intem Med.
Leicester lammb. Can Vet J. 1997;38:443-444.
2009;23:552-558.
163. Feldman BF, Madewell BR, ONeill S. Disseminated intravascular coagulation: anti-
194.
-woun ui abeujoway sanpu uonewweul je ta'g oqjen g aoN-ul-oh '1 abiaog 
thrombin, plasminogen, and coagulation abnormalities in 41 dogs. J Am Vet Med 
bocytopenia. Blood. 2008;111:4958-4964.
ASSOC. 1981;179:151-154.
195. Gold JR, Warren AL, French TW, et al. What is your diagnosis? Biopsy impression
164. Flatland B, Fry MM, Baek SJ, et al. May-Hegglin anomaly in a Pug dog. Vet Clin Pathol.
d un ia  panquno bue e ui ssew aay e po jeaws
2011;40: 207-214.
2008;37:339-343.
165. Folts JD. Inhibition of platelet activityin vivo by amlodipine alone and combined with
196. Goldstein RE, Lin RC, Langston CE, et al. Influence of infecting serogroup on clinical
aspirin. Int J/ Cardiol 1997;62(Suppl 2):S111-S117.
features of leptospirosis in dogs. J/ Vet Intem /Med. 2006;20:489-494.
166. Forster LM. Neonatal allimmune thrombocytopenia, purpura, and anemia in 6 neo-
197.
.Gomez-Villamandos JC, Salguero FJ, Ruiz-Villaor E, et al. Classical swine fever:
natal piglets. Can Vet J. 2007;48:855-857.
pathology of bone marrow. Vet Pathol. 2003;40:157-163.
167. Francois B, Trimoreau F, Vignon P, et al. Thrombocytopenia in the sepsis syndrome:
198. Goodman RA, Breitschwerdt EB. Clinicopathologic findings in dogs seroreactive to
role of hemophagocytosis and macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Am J/ Med.
Bartonela henselae antigens. Am J Vet Res. 2005;66:2060-2064.
1997;103:114-120.
199.
1.Goree M, Catalfamo JL, Aber S, et al. Characterization of the mutations causing 
hemophilia B in 2 domestic cats. J/ Vet Intem AMed. 2005;19:200-204.
rhage in five aged horses. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 2010;237:830-834.
 200. Gorski J, Luka K, Czestochowska E. Plateletfunction and survival inmultiple myeloma.
Haematologia (Budap). 1993;25:131-135.
 sequestration of megathrombocytes. Br J Haematol. 1975;31:255-262.
201.
 Gouin I, Lecompte T, Morel MC, et al. n vitro effect of plasmin on human platelet
wau ta/ 7 hen e ui sisoonsiy sueubien lena 'g uewyonon 'r suanans 7 uewaay ozl
function in plasma. Inhibition of aggregation caused by fibrinogenolysis. Circulation.
MMed. 1995;9:171-173.
1992;85:935-941.
 171. Frelier PF, Lewis RM. Hematologic and coagulation abnormalities in acute bovine
-ous yi paneiosse euadoaogoyn panepaw-aunwul ia sauu 's pinog zoz
sarcocystosis. Amm / Vet Res. 1984;45:40-48.
strongylus vasorum infertion in a dog. J/ Small Anim Pract. 1999;40:227-232.
172. French TV, Harvey JV. Canine infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia Ehrlichia platys 
 203. Green RA, Kabel AL. Hypercoagulable state in three dogs with nephrotic syndrome:
infection in dogs). In: Woldehiwet Z, Ristic M, eds. Rickettsial and Chamydia Dis-
181:914-917.
204.
Greene CE, Barsanti JA, Jones BD.Disseminatedintravascular coagulation complicat-
Thromb Res. 2010;125{Suppl 1):S46-S48.
ing aflatoxicosis in dogs. Comell Vet. 1977;67:29-49.
174. Friedrichs KR, Young KM. Histiocytic sarcoma of macrophage origin in a cat:
205.GreeeCEBreitschwetERockyMutain spoedfeermurine typsl
case report with a literature review of feline histiocytic malignancies and comparison
disease, rickettsialpox, and Q fever. In: Greene CE, ed. nfectious Diseases of the Dog 
with canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:121-
and Cat 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders EIsevier; 2006:232-245.
128.
 206. Griffin A, Callan MB, Shofer FS, et al. Evaluation of a canine D-dimer point-of-care 
175. Fry MM. Acquired platelet dysfunction. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schaim's
test kit for use in samples obtained from dogs with disseminated intravascular
Veterinary Hematojogy. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wviley-Blackwell; 2010:626-631
coagulation, thromboembolic disease, and hemorrhage. Am J Vet Res.
 uissaddns moew uoq aaas y Ajx noon-  uew  A 9l
2003;64:1562-1569.
a dog. Vet Hum Toxicol. 2004;46:178-180.
 207. Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Corbett WT, et al. Epidemiologic survey of thrombo-
177. Fujino Y, Horiuchi H, Mizukoshi F, et al. Prevalence of hematological abnormalities 
cytopenia in dogs: a report on 987 cases. Vet Clin Pathol. 1991;20:38-43.
and detection of infected bone marrow cells in asymptomatic cats with feline immu-
208.
.Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Corbett WT, et al. Thrombocytopenia associated with
nodeficiency virus infection. Vet Microbiol. 2009;136:217-225.
neoplasia in dogs. J/ Vet Intern Med. 1994;8:400-405.
228
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 209. Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB, Perkins PC, et al. Platelet-associated immunoglobulin
240. Hinchcliff KVV, Kociba GJ, Mitten LA. Diagnosis of EDTA-dependent pseudothrombo-
fantiplatelet antibody in canine Rocky Mountain spotted fever and ehrlichiosis. JAm
cytopenia in a horse. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:1715-1716.
Animm Hosp Assoc. 1999;35:56-61.
241. Hisasue M, Okayama H, Okayama T, et al. Hematologic abnormalities and outcome
210. Hackett TB, Wingfield WE, Mazzaferro EM, et al. Clinical findings associated with
of 16 cats with myelodysplastic syndromes. J/ Vet Intem Med. 2001;15:471-477.
prairie rattlesnake bites in dogs: 100 cases f1989-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 242. Ho-Tin-Noe B, Goerge T, Wagner DD. Platelets: guardians of tumor vasculature.
2002;220:1675-1680.
Cancer Res. 2009;69:5623-5626.
211. H
Hackner SG, Schaer BD. Thrombotic disorders. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
 243. Hoffman M. A cell-based model of coagulation and the role of factor Vlla. Blood Rev.
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:6-678.
2003;17(Suppl 1:S1-S5.
 212. Hahn KA, McEntee MF, Daniel GB, et al. Hematologic and systemic toxicoses associ-
 244. Hoffman M, Monroe DM ll: A cell-based model of hemostasis. Thromb Haemost.
 ated with carboplatin administration in cats. Am J/ Vet Res. 1997;58:677-679.
2001;85:958-965.
 213. Hahn KA, Rohrbach BVW, Legendre AM, et al. Hematologic changes associated with
 245. Hogan DF, Andrews DA, Green HW, et al. Antiplatelet efects and pharmacodynamics
of clopidogrel in cats. JArm Vet Med Assoc. 2004;225:1406-1411
214. H
Hammer AS. Thrombocytosis in dogs and cats: a retrospective study. Comp Haematol
246. Hogan DF, Dhaliwal RS. Sisson DD, et al. Paraneoplastic thrombocytosis-
nt. 1991;1:181-186.
induced systemic thromboembolism in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1999;35:
 215. Hammer AS. Couto CG, Swardson C, et al. Hemostatic abnormalities in dogs with
483-486.
hemangiosarcoma. J Vet Intem Med. 1991;5:11-14.
 247. Holland M, Stobie D, Shapiro W. Pancytopenia associated with administration of 
216.
 Hammond WP, Dale DC. Lithium therapy of canine cyclic hematopoiesis. Blood.
captopril to a dog. / Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1996;208:1683-1686.
1980;55:26-28.
248. Holloway S, Senior D, Roth L, et al. Hemolytic uremic syndrome in dogs. JVet lntern
 217. Handagama P. Feldman BF, Kono CS, et al. Mean platelet volume artifacts: the
//ed. 1993;7:220-227.
effect of anticoagulants and temperature on canine platelets. Vet Cin Pathol.
249. Holloway SA, Parry BVw. Obsevations on blood coagulation after snakebite in dogs
1986;15(4):13-17.
and cats. Aust Vet J. 1989;66:364-366.
 218. Hardie EM, Kruse-Elliott K. Endotoxic shock. Part I: A review of causes. J Vet ntern
 250. Hutton RA, Warel DA. Action of snake venom components on the haemostatic
Med. 1990;4:258-266
system. Blood Rev. 1993;7:176-189.
 219. Hargis AM, Feldman BF. Evaluation of hemostatic defects secondary to vascular
 251. Ide K, Setoguchi-Mukai A, Nakagawa T, et al. Disseminated histiocytic sarcoma with
tumors in dogs: 11 cases {1983-1988). J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1991;198:891-894.
excessive hemophagocytosis in a cat. / Vet Med Sci. 2009;71:817-820.
 220. Harper MT, Poole AV. Diverse functions of protein kinase C isoforms in platelet
 252. Irmak K, Sen l, Col R, et al. The evaluation of coagulation profiles in calves with
activation and thrombus formation. / Thromb Haemost. 2010;8:454-462.
suspected septic shock. Vet Res Commun. 2006;30:497-503.
221.
Harr KE. Overview of avian hemostasis. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schaim's
 253. Jackson CWw, Simone JV, Edwards CC. The relationship of anemia and thrombocyto-
Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:703-707
sis. / Lab Chin MMed. 1974;84:357-368.
 222. Harr KE, Raskin RE, Heard DJ. Temporal effects of 3 commonly used anticoagulants
 254. Jackson ML, Searcy GP, Olexson DVV. The effect of oral phenylbutazone on whole
pue smenew wony saidwes pooiq u! salqejen lesjwayaoig pue ajbojoieway uo
blood platelet aggregation in the dog. Can J Commp Med. 1985;49:271-277.
Burmese pythons. Vet Cin Pathol. 2005;34:383-388.
pau A esaaed aeneosapauas suoser 
223. Harrell K. Bleeding time. In: Vaden SL, Knoll JS, Smith PVWK, et al, eds. Blackwel's
2010;116:2011-2018.
Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures. Ames,
 256. Jacobs G, Calvert C. Kaufman A. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in three dogs
IA: Wiley-Blackwell 2009:98-100.
treated with anticonvulsants. / Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998;212:681-684.
 224. Harvey AM, Holt PE, Barr FJ, et al. Treatment and long-term follow-up of extrahepatic 
 257. Jacobs RM, Boyce JT, Kociba GJ. Flow cytometric and radioisotopic determination
biliary obstruction with bilirubin cholelithiasis in a Somali cat with pyruvate kinase
se paai-s eaanal aat pue se eou ui a iens alaed jo
deficiency. J Feline Med Surg. 2007;9:424-431.
Cytometry. 1986;7:64-69.
225.
Harvey JW. Myeloproliferative disorders in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
 258. Jacobsen S, Nielsen JV, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, et al. Acute phase response to surgery
Anim Pract. 1981;11:349-381.
of varying intensity in horses: a preliminary study. Vet Surg. 2009;38:762-769.
 226. Harvey JVV. Iron metabolism and its disorders In: Kaneko J, Harvey JV, Bruss ML,
 259. Jacoby RC. Owings JT. Ortega T, et al. Biochemical basis for the hypercoagulable
eds. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals Bth ed. San Diego, CA: Academic
state seen in Cushing syndrome. Arch Surg. 2001:136:1003-1006.
Press; 2008:259-285
260. Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1993.
 227. Harvey JV. Thrombocytotropic anaplasmosis {A. platys [E. platys] infection). In:
 261. Jarvis GE, Evans RJ. Endotoxin-induced platelet aggregation in heparinised equine
Greene CE, ed. lnfectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 4th ed. St. Louis: Saunders 
whole blood in vitro. Res Vet Sci 1994;57:317-324.
Elsevier, 2011: in press.
 262. Jelkmann VW. The role ofthe liver in the production of thrombopoietin compared with
 228. Harvey JV, French TW, Meyer DU. Chronic iron deficiency anemia in dogs. JAmAnim
Hosp Assoc. 1982;18:946-960.
 263. Jergens AE Turrentine MA, Kraus KH, et al. Buccal mucosa bleeding times of healthy
dogs and of dogs in various pathologic states, including thrombocytopenia, uremia,
like agent in dogs. / Infect Dis. 1978;137:182-188.
and von Willebrand's disease. Am J Vet Res. 1987:48:1337-1342.
230. Healy PJ, Sewell CA. Exner T, et al. Haemophilia in Hereford cattle: factor Vll defi-
264. Jin RC, Voetsch B, Loscalzo J. Endogenous mechanisms of inhibition of platelet func-
ciency. Aust Vet J. 1984;61:132-133.
tion. Microcirculation. 2005; 12:247-258.
231. H
 Heilmann E, Friese P, Anderson S, et al. Biotinylated platelets: a new approach to
 265. Johne J, Blume C, Benz PM, et al. Platelets promote coagulation factor Xll-mediated 
 the measurement of platelet life span. Br J Haematol. 1993;85:729-735.
proteolytic cascade systems in plasma. Biol Chem. 2006;387:173-178.
232.
W yon ug al 'euadosogwoyn paneipaw-aunwwi pue eiseidoan os pueiah 
 266. Johns I, Stephen JO, Del PF, et al. Hemangiosarcoma in 11 young horses. / Vet lntern
Small Anim Pract 1988;18:267-270.
ed. 2005;19:564-570.
233.
Heller J, Mellor DJ, Hodgson JL, et al. Elapid snake envenomation in dogs in New 
 267. JohnsonJS, Soute BA OlverCS, etal.Defective gamma-glutamy carboxylase activity
South Wales: a review. Aust Vet J. 2007;85:469-479.
and bleeding in Rambouillet sheep. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:726-732.
234.
Herman F. Magyar K. Filep JG. In vivo antiaggregatory action of platelet-
 268. Johnson LR, Lappin MR, Baker DC. Pulmonary thromboembolism in 29 dogs: 1985-
activating factor in beagle dogs: role for prostacyclin. Thromb Haemos. 1991:
1995. / Vet lhntern MMed. 1999:13:338-345.
65:296-299.
 269. Johnstone IB, Viel L, Crane S, et al. Hemostatic studies in racing standardbred horses
235.
 Hertzke DM, Cowan LA, Schoning P. et al. Glomerular ultrastructural lesions of
with exercise-induced pulmonary hemorrhage. Hemostatic parameters at rest and
idiopathic cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds. Vet Pathol.
after moderate exercise. Can J Vet Res. 1991;55:101-106.
1995;32:451 -459.
270. Jordan HL, Grindem CB,Breitschwerdt EB Thrombocytopenia in cats: a retrospective
study of 41 cases. / Vet lntem Med. 1993;7:261-265.
hermostatic analytes in Doberman Pinschers with von Willebrand disease. J/ Vet lntem
271.J
Jurk K, Kehrel BE. Platelets: physiology and biochemistry. Semin Thromb Hemost.
ed. 2005;19:523-527.
2005;31:381-392.
 237. Hickford FH, Stokol T, VanGessel YA, et al. Monoclonal immunoglobulin G cryoglobu-
 272. Jutkowit LA, Rozanski EA, Moreau JA, et al. Massive transfusion in dogs: 15 cases
linemia and multiple myeloma in a domestic shorthair cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
↑1997-20011. J Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 2002;220:1664-1669.
2000;217:1029-1033.
uawainseaw snouennwis jof suoipuos jewndo  obeny 'w zanbupy  aunr 2z
 238. Hidebrandt E, Suttie JV. Indirect inhibition of vitammin K epoxide reduction by salicy-
of platelet aggregation and ATP secretion in canine whole blood. Res Vet Sci.
late. / Phanm Pharmacol. 1984;36:586-591.
2000;68:27-32.
239.
9. Hill BL, Zenoble RD, Dodds WJ. Prothrombin deficiency in a cocker spaniel. JAm Vet
 274. Kadikoylu G, Yavasoglu I, Bolaman Z, et al. Platelet parameters in women with iron 
Med Assoc. 1982;181:262-263.
deficiency anemia. / Natl Med Assoc. 2006;98:398-402.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
229
 275. Kaplan AP. Enzymatic pathways in the pathogenesis of hereditary angioedema: the
 307. Laurenson MP, Hopper K. Herrera MA, et al. Concurrent diseases and conditions in
0 ro     1o a
dogs with splenic vein thrombosis. J Vet Intern Med. 2010;24:1298-1304.
 276. Karpman D, Sartz L, Johnson S. Pathophysiology of typical hemolytic uremic syn-
 308. Lees GE, McKeever PJ, Ruth GR. Fatal thrombocytopenic hemorrhagic diathesis 
drome. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2010;36:575-585.
associated with dapsone administration to a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 277. Kaser A, Brandacher G, Steurer W, et al. Interleukin-6 stimulates thrombopoiesis
1979;175:49-52.
through thrombopoietin: role in inflammatory thrombocytosis. Blood. 2001;98:
309. Lenting PJ, Van Mourik JA, Metens K. The life cycle of coagulation factorVll in view
2720-2725.
of its structure and function. Blood. 1998;92:3983-3996.
 278. Keller ET. Immune-mediated disease as a risk factor for canine lymphoma. Cancer.
310. Lester GD, AllemanAR, Raskin RE, et al. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leuke-
1992;70:2334-2337.
mia in three horses. J/ Vet lntem Med. 1993;7:360-363.
 279. Key NS. Analysis of tissue factor positive microparticles. Thromb Res. 2010;125
311.
.Levin J, Levin FC, Hull DF Ill, et al. The effects of thrombopoietin on megakaryocyte-
fSuppl 1:S42-545.
CFC, megakaryocytes, and thrombopoiesis: with studies of ploidy and platelet size.
280.
 Khan I, Zucker-Franklin D, Karpatkin S. Microthrombocytosis and platelet fragmenta-
Blood. 1982;60:989-998.
tion associated with idiopathic/autoimmune thrombocytopenia. Br J Haematol. 1975;
 312. Lewis DC, Bruyete DS, Kellerman DL, et al. Thrombocytopenia in dogs with antico-
31:449-460.
agulant rodenticide-induced hemorrhage: eight cases {1990-1995). / Am Anim Hosp
 281. Kingston JK. Bayly VM, Selon DC, et al. Effects of sodium citrate, low molecular
Assoc 1997;33:417-422
-nua pue bupuig uaboujqy uojebaibbe uo l3 upuejbeisoid pue 'uueday nybiam
313. Lewis DC, Meyers KM, Callan MB, et al. Detection of platelet-bound and serum
meration of equine platelets. Am J Vet Res. 2001;62:547-554.
 platelet-bindable antibodies for diagnosis of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in 
 282. Kingston JK, Bayly WM, Sellon DC, et al. Measurement of the activation of equine
dogs. J Amm Vet MMed Assoc. 1995;206:47-52.
 platelets by use of fluorescent-labeled annexin V, anti-human fibrinogen antibody.
 314. Lien DC, Worthen GS, Henson PM, et al. Platelet-activating factor causes neutrophil
and anti-human thrombospondin antibody. Am / Vet Res. 2002;63:513-519.
 accumulation and neutrophil-mediated increased vascular permeability in canine
 283. Kitchens CS. From ETOH to FAB: the medicalization of therapy for pit viper envenom-
trachea. Amm Rev Respir Dis. 1992;145:693-700.
ation. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 2001;112:117-135.
 315. Lisciandro SC, Hohenhaus A, Brooks M. Coagulation abnormalities in 22 cats with
284.KithensCSWeissLUtrastructural hanges ofendothelium associatedwith thm
9-1zl866l pa wau ia/ 7 aseasip ja bun3o Aesneu
bocytopenia. Blood. 1975;46:567-578.
 316. Ljungqvist U. Platelet response to adrenalin infusion in splenectomised and non-
 285. Klainbart S, Segev G, Loeb E, et al. Resolution of renal adenocarcinoma-induced
 splenectomised dogs. Acta Chir Scand. 1971;137:291-297.
secondary inappropriate polycythaemia after nephrectomy in two cats. J Feline Med
 317. Lobetti RG, Joubert K. Retrospective study of snake envenomation in 155 dogs from
Surg. 2008;10:264-268.
the Onderstepoort area of South Africa. J S Afr Vet Assoc. 2004;75:169-172.
 286. Kline JA, Williams GV, Hernandez-Nino J. D-dimer concentrations in normal preg-
318. Loo M, Beguin Y. The effect of recombinant human erythropoietin on platelet
nancy: new diagnostic thresholds are needed. Cin Chem. 2005;51:825-829.
counts is strongly modulated by the adequacy of iron supply. Blood. 1999;93:
 287. Kociba GJ, Caputo CA. Aplastic anemia associated with estrus in pet ferrets. J/ Am 
3286-3293.
Vet MMed Assoc. 1981;178:1293-1294.
319. Lott MG,Baenhrst N,Hys ADet al.Kineti distribution, ad sit f
 288. Kociba GJ, Ratnoff OD, Loeb WF, et al. Bovine plasma thromboplastin antecedent 
destruction of canine blood platelets with In-111 oxine. J Nucl Med. 1980;21:
fFactor XI) deficiency. J/ Lab Chin Med. 1969;74:37-41.
36-40.
289.
 Kohn B, Arnold P, Kaser-Hotz B, et al. Malignant histiocytosis of the dog: 26 cases 
 320. Lubas G, Caldin M, Winberg B, et al. Laboratory testing of coagulation disorders. In:
{1989-1992). Kieintierpraxis. 1993;38:409-424.
Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA:
290. Kohn B, Linden T, Leibold V. Patelet-bound antibodies detected by a flow cytometric
Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:1082-1100.
assay in cats with thrombocytopenia. J Feline Med Surg. 2006;8:254-260.
321.Luyendyk JP, Copple BL, Barton CC, et al. Augmentation ofaflatoxin B1hepatotoxicity
 291. Kohn B, Weingart C, Giger U. Haemorrhage in seven cats with suspected anticoagu-
by endotoxin: involvement of endothelium and the coagulation system. Toxicol Sci.
lant rodenticide intoxication. / Feline Med Surg. 2003;5:295-304.
2003;72:171-181
292. Kol A, Borjesson DL Application of thromboelastography/thromboelastometryto vet-
 322. Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson NA, Craig TM. Hepatozoon americanum infection. In:
erinary medicine. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010:39:405-416.
Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders
 293. Komura E, Matsumura T, Kato T, et al. Thrombopoietin in patients with hepatoblas-
 Elsevier; 2006:705-711.
toma. Stem Cells 1998:16:329-33.
 323. Mackin AJ, Allen DG, Johnston IB. Effets of vincristine and prednisone on
 294. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS. Platelet dysfunction associated with immune-
 platelet numbers and function in clinically normal dogs. Am / Vet Res. 1995;56:
100-108.
 295. Kristensen AT, Weiss DJ, Klausner JS, et al. Detection of antiplatelet antibody with
324.
 -neo joeins suapuadap-y ue ie ia 'si ape3 'ra uose '3r uosipe 
a platelet immunofluorescence assay. J/ Vet Intem Med. 1994;8:36-39.
lopathy in Devon Rex cats. J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1990;197:1495-1497.
 296. Kristensen AT, Winberg B, Jessen LR, et al. Evaluation of human recombinant tissue
 325. Maratea KA, Snyder PV, Stevenson GV. Vascular lesions in nine Gotingen minipigs
factor-activated thromboelastography in 49 dogs with neoplasia. J Vet Intern Med.
with thrombocytopenic purpura syndrome. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:447-454.
2008;22:140-147.
326. Marconato L, Bettini G, Giacoboni C, et al. Clinicopathological features and outcome
 297. Kuehn NF. Gaunt SD. Hypocellular marrow and extramedullary hematopoiesis
for dogs with mast cell tumors and bone marrow involvement. J Vet lntem Med.
in a dog: hematologic recovery after splenectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1986;
2008;22:1001 -1007.
188:1313-1315.
327. Marks SL. The buccal mucosal bleeding time. J Am Animm Hosp Assoc.
 298. Kulkarni S, Woollard KJ, Thomas S, et al. Conversion of platelets from a proaggrega-
2000;36: 289-290.
bueinba Aepeds ul dbd jo ajoj :ad/rouaud anisaupe Aozewweuioid e on Ao1
 328. Martinelli I, Bucciarelli P, Mannucci PM. Thrombotic risk factors: basic pathophysiol-
 988l-628t01l200z p00g bupea1ds pue uoisaupe ldonau
ogy. Crit Care MMed. 2010;38:S3-S9.
 299. Kummeling A, Teske E, Rothuizen J, et al. Coagulation profiles in dogs with congenital
 329. Maruyama H, Yamagami H, Watari T, et al. Reticulated platelet levels in whole blod
portosystemic shunts before and after surgical attenuation. J Vet lntern Med.
and platelet-rich plasma of dogs with various platelet counts measured by flow
2006;20:1319-1326.
cytometry. J Vet Med Sci. 2009:71:195-197.
 300. Kunieda T, Ide H, Nakagiri M, et al. Localization of the locus responsible for
330. Mason DJ, Abrams-Ogg A. Allen D, et al. Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy in a
Chediak-Higashi syndrome in catle to bovine chromosome 28. Anim Genet. 2000;31:
 black Labrador Retriever. / Vet ntern Med. 2002;16:485-488.
87-90.
 301. Kurata M, Sasayama Y, Yamasaki N, et al. Mechanism for shortening PT and APTT in
epoxide reductase activity associated with antibiotic-induced coagulopathy. Biochem
dogs and rats-effect of fibrinogen on PT and APTT. J Toxicol Sci. 2003;28:439-443.
Phanma00l 1989;38:2693-2701.
302. Kuzmanova Sl. The macrophage activation syndrome: a new entity, a potentiallyfatal
332. McAnulty JF, Rudd RG. Thrombocytopenia associated with vaccination of a dog
complication of rheumatic disorders. Folia ed (Plovdiv). 2005;47:21-25.
with a modified-live paramyxovirus vaccine. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1985;186:
 303. Lachowicz JL, Post GS, MoroffSD, etal. Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia-
1217-1219.
four cases and a literature review. J/ Smal Anim Pract. 2004;45:507-514.
 333. McCaw DL, Jergens AE, Turrentine MA, et al. Effect of internal hemorrhage on 
 304. Lander H, Lloyd JV, Schultz BG. Studies of platelet survival and behavior in sheep.
fibrinfogen) degradation products in canine blood. Am J Vet Res. 1986:47:
 Lab Chin /ed. 1965;66:887.
1620-1621.
 305. Lara-Garcia A. Couto CG, lazbik MC, et al. Postoperative bleeding in retired racing 
saeua jeioaey daus ui uoaui sni anuania d pino 's lo e
greyhounds. J Vet Intem Med. 2008;22:525-533.
 and detection by polymerase chain reaction. Aust Vet J. 1994;71:97-101.
 306. Laste NJ, Harpster NK. A retrospective study of 100 cases of feline distal aortic
335. McConnico RS. Copedge K, Bischoff KL. Brodifacoum toxicosis in two horses. J Am
thrommboembolism: 1977-1993. / Amm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1995;31:492-500.
Vet /Med Assoc. 1997;211:882-886.
230
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 336. McGorum BC, Henderson IS, Stirling D, et al. Vitamin K deficiency bleeding in a
368. Morrissey JH, Pureza V, Davis-Harison RL, et al. Blood clotting reactions onnanoscale
Standardbred colt. J/ Vet Intem Med. 2009;23:1307-1310.
phospholipid bilayers. Thromb Res. 2008;122(Suppl 1:S23-S26.
uae siney pue uoneien jenodwal le ia 'Hr yosuian 'Wy siaan 'r jason 69g
antibody in three horses with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. J Am Vet Med
measurement of canine von Wvillebrand factor. Am / Vet Res. 1996;57:1288-1293.
Assoc. 2004;224:83-87, 53.
370. Mount ME, Kim BU, Kass PH. Use of atest for proteins induced by vitamin K absence
338. McMillan R. The pathogenesis of chronic immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Semin
or antagonism in diagnosis of anticoagulant poisoning in dogs: 325 cases ↑1987-19971.
Hemmatol. 2007;44:S3-S11.
J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 2003;222:194-198.
339.
Mellor PJ, Roulois AJ, Day MJ, et al. Neutrophilic dermatitis and immune-mediated
371. Mudge MC, MacDonald MH, Owens SD, et al. Comparison of 4 blood storage 
haematological disorders in a dog: suspected adverse reaction to carprofen. / Small
methods in a protocol for equine pre-operative autologous donation. Vet Surg.
Anim Pract. 2005;46:237-242.
2004;33:475-486.
340. Meng R, Bridgman R, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al. Neutrophil elastae-processing defect
372. Nash RA. Burstein SA. Storb R. et al. Thrombocytopenia in dogs induced by
in cyclic hematopoietic dogs. Exp Hemato. 2010;8:104-115.
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor: increased destruction of circulat-
 341. Meyer J, Delay J, Bienzle D. Clinical, laboratory, and histopathologic features of
ing platelets. Blood 1995;86:1765-1775.
equine lymphoma. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:914-924.
 373. Neer TM, Hedlund CS. Vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy in a dog with bile and
 342. Meyers KM, Holmsen H, Seachord CL. Comparative study of platelet dense granule
constituents. Am / Physiol. 1982;243:R454-R461.
 374. Nelson OL, Andreasen C. The utility of plasma D-dimer to identify thromboembolic
343.
 Meyers KM, Lindner C, Katz J, et al. Phenylbutazone inhibition of equine platelet 
disease in dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2003;17:830-834.
function. Amm / Vet Res. 1979;40:265-270.
 375. Nesheim M, Fittman DD, Giles AR, et al. The effect of plasma von Willebrand factor
 344. Meyers KM, Wardrop KJ, Dodds VJ, et al. Effect of exercise, DDAVP, and epineph-
on the binding of human factor Vll to thrombin-activated human platelets. J Bior
-l upue sopewouu xadwoe pueq uo/e auuoau
Chem. 1991;266:17815-17820.
lebrand factor deficient Doberman pinscher dogs. Thromb Res. 1990;57:97-108.
376. Nielsen L, Winberg B, Kjelgaard-Hansen M, et al. The presence of antiphospholipid
antibodies in healthy adult Bernese Mountain dogs fabstract. Vet Clin Patho.
trait in the Polish ogar dog. Por / Vet Sci 2009;12:523-525.
2010;39:546.
 346. Miesner MD, Anderson DE. Factor-Vll deficiency in a newborn alpaca. J Vet lntem 
 377. Nieuwenhuizen W. Fibrin-mediated plasminogen activation. Ann N Y Acad Sci.
/Med. 2006; 20:1248-1250.
2001;936:237-246
 347. Mills JN, Lawley MJ, Thomas J. Macrozamia toxicosis in a dog. Aust Vet J.
 378. Nikolic NL, Winberg B, Kjelgaard HM, et al. Prolonged activated prothromboplastin 
1996;73:69-72.
time and breed specific variation in haemostatic analytes in healthy adult Bernese
 348. Mischke R. Optimization of coagulometric tests that incorporate human plasma for
Mountain dogs. Vet J. 2011: in press.
determination of coagulation factor activities in canine plasma. Am J Vet Res.
-y pue uopelip ajualds sasnen uaAsensoid le 1a 'A ylo 'llyeznsien 'y lyanbon 62
2001;62:625-629.
matological change in dogs. Clin Exp Phammacol Physiol. 2006;33:81-88.
 349. Mischke R. Acute haemostatic changes in accidentally traumatised dogs. Vet J.
spiouesosja pue apixo snju jo suawanlonul eia 'N ewous'1 yeznsie 'y yanbon 08
2005;169:60-64.
in platelet-activating factor-induced haemodynamic and haematological effects in 
350. Mischke R, Junker J, Deegen E Sensitivity of commercial prothrombintime reagents
dogs. Br J Pharmacol. 1996;118:941-950.
to detect coagulation factor deficiencies in equine plasma. Vet J 2006;
leua snouen ui salgnjedow jo alou pue uogauny A epal 'A yyezo 's ennwon l8g
171:114-119.
settings. 7hromb Res. 2008:123:8-23.
 351. Mischke R, Keidel A. Influence of platelet count, acetylsalicylic acid, von WVillbrand's
 382. Norman EJ, Barron RC, Nash AS, et al. Evaluation of a citrate-based anticoagulant
disease, coagulopathies, and haematocrit on results obtained using a platelet func-
with platelet inhibitory activity for feline blood cell counts. Vet Clin Pathol.
 tion analyser in dogs. Vet J. 2003;165:43-52.
2001;30:124-132.
 352. Mischke R, Keidel A. Influence of platelet count, acetylsalicylic acid, von Willebrand's 
shunon nalaneid panewoe molpo aualeaald leia st ysen 'oy uoeg r3 uewon 8
disease, coagulopathies, and haematocrit on results obtained using a platelet func-
in cats: comparison with prevalence of thrombocytopenia based on blood smear
tion analyser in dogs. Vet J. 2003;165:43-52.
estimation. Vet Clin Pathol. 2001;30:137-140.
 353. Mischke R, Menzel D, Wolling H. Comparison of different methods to measure
 384. Norris CR, Griffey SM, Sami VF. Pulmonary thromboembolism in cats: 29 cases 
fibrinogen concentration in canine plasma with respect to their sensitivity towards 
{1987-1997). / Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 1999;215:1650-1654.
the fibrinogen degradation products X, Y and D. Haemostasis. 2000;30:131-138.
 385. Northern J Jr, Tvedten HV. Diagnosis of microthrombocytosis and immune-mediated
 354. Mischke R, Schulze U. Studies on platelet aggregation using the Born method in
18/ w/ 7 t686l-286ll sasen 8g :eluadonaoqwoyn 4i s6op ui ejuadoaogwouy
normal and uraemic dogs. Vet J. 2004;168:270-275.
ed Ass0c. 1992;200:368-372.
355.
 Mischke R, Wolling H, Nolte I. Detection of anticoagulant activities of isolated canine
3B6. Novotny MJ, Turrentine MA, Johnson GS, et al. Experimental endotoxemia increases
fibrinogen degradation products X, Y, D and E using resonance thrombography. Blood
plasma von Willebrand factor antigen concentrations in dogs with and without free-
Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2004;15:81-88.
radical scavenger therapy. Circ Shock. 1987;23:205-213.
356.
Mitchell JA, Ali F, Bailey L, et al. Role of nitric oxide and prostacyclin as vasoactive
 387. Nunez A, Gomez-Vilamandos JC, Sanchez-Cordon PJ, et al. Expression of proinflam-
-1tlcaaooz ros4a dxg wnaynoua aya Aq paselal sauowoy
matory cytokines by hepatic macrophages in acute classical swine fever. J Comp
357. Monreal L Angles A, Espada Y, et al.Hypercoagulation and hypofibrinolysis in horses
Pathol 2005;133:23-32.
with colic and DIC. Equine Vet J Suppl. 2000;32:19-24.
 388. Nylander S, Mattsson C. Lindahl TL. Characterisation of species differences in the 
358.
Monreal L, Villatoro AJ, Hooghuis H, et al. Clinical features of the 1992 outbreak of
platelet ADP and thrombin response. Thromb Res. 2006;117:543-549.
equine viral areritis in Spain. Equine Vet J. 1995;27:301-304.
 389. O'Keefe DA, Schaeffer DJ. Hematologic toxicosis associated with doxorubicin admin-
359.
Monreal L, Villatoro AJ, Monreal M, et al. Comparison ofthe effects of low-molecular-
istration in cats. J/ Vet lntern Med. 1992;6:276-282.
weight and unfractioned heparin in horses. Am J Vet Res. 1995;56:1281-1285.
390. O'Rourke ST. Folts JD. Albrecht RM. Inhibition of canine platelet aggregation by
 360. Moore AS, London CA, Wood CA, et al. Lomustine fCCNU) for the treatment of
barbiturates. / Lab Chin Med. 1986;108:206-212.
resistant lymphoma in dogs. / Vet Intem Med. 1999;13:395-398.
shunon lan poolg buneinauja ui sabueya uanaun le ta'N ewojus 'y j4anbon 'A !lo 16e
361.
Moore BR, Hinchcliff KV. Heparin: a review of its pharmacology and therapeutic use
with adrenergic stimulation to the canine spleen. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol.
 in horses. J Vet Intern Med. 1994;8:26-35.
2002;29:53-59.
362.
Moore PF, Affolter VK, Vernau W. Canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: a
392. Okawa T, Yanase T, Shimokawa MT, et al. Prekalikrein deficiency in a dog. J Vet
proliferative disorder of CD11d+ macrophages. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:632-645.
Med Sci 2011;73:107-111.
 363. Morales F, Couto CG, lazbik MC. Effects of 2 concentrations of sodium citrate on
 393. Olsen EH McCain AS. Merricks EP. et al. Comparative response of plasma VVVF in
coagulation test results, von Willbrand factor concentration, and platelet function
dogs to up-regulation of VWF mRNA by interleukin-11 versus Veibel-Palade body
in dogs. J Vet Intem Med. 2007;21:472-475.
release by desmopressin DDAVP). Blood. 2003;102:436-441.
 364. Morit A, Walcheck BK, Deye J, et al. Effects of short-term racing activity on platelet
 394. Olsen LH, Kristensen AT, Qvortrup K, et al. Comparison of manual and automated 
and neutrophil activation in dogs. Amm / Vet Res. 2003;64:855-859.
methods for determining platelet counts in dogs with macrothrombocytopenia. J Vet
365.
Moritz A, Walcheck BK, Weiss DJ. Flow cytometric detection of activated platelets 
Diagn Invest. 2004;16:167-170.
in the dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2003;32:6-12.
 395. Omotainse SO, Anosa VO. Leucocyte and thrombocyte responses in dogs experimen-
 366. Moritz A, Walcheck BK, Weiss DJ. Evaluation of flow cytometric and automated
tally infected with Trypanosoma brucei. Rev Elev Med Vet Pays Trop. 1995;48:
W aseasp Aotewweu y shop ui sialaield paepe jo uogaiap jop spoura
254-258.
/ Vet Res. 2005;66:325-329.
 396. Oren H, Duman N, AbaciogluH, et al. Association between serum macrophage colony-
 367. Morris CF, Robertson JL, Mann PC, et al. Hemolytic uremic-like syndrome in two
stimulating factor levels and monocyte and thrombocyte counts in healthy. hypoxic,
horses. / Am Vet MMed Assoc. 1987;191:1453-1454.
and septic term neonates. Peoiatrics. 2001;108:329-332.
CHA PT E R 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
231
397. Osterud B.
3. Tissue factor expression in blood cells. Thromb Res. 2010;125{Suppl
429. Richardson EF, Brown NO. Hematological and biochemical changes and results of
1/:S31-S34.
aerobic bacteriological culturing in dogs undergoing splenectomy. J Am Anim Hosp
 398. Otto CM, Rieser TM, Brooks MB, et al. Evidence of hypercoagulability in dogs with
Assoc. 1996;32:199-210.
parvoviral enteritis. J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 2000;217:1500-1504.
430. Riley JH, Lassen ED. Activated coagulation times in normal cows. Vet Clin Pathol.
399.
 Panciera DL, Johnson GS. Plasma von Willebrand factor antigen concentration and
1979;8: 31-33.
buccal mucosal bleeding time in dogs with experimental hypothyroidism. J Vet lntem
431. Rinder HM, Schuster JE, Rinder CS, et al. Correlation of thrombosis with increased
ed. 1996;10:60-64
platelet turnover in thrombocytosis. Blood. 1998;91:1288-1294.
400. Pankraz A. Bauer N, Moritz A Comparison of flow cytometry with the Sysmex
432. Rinder HM, TraceyJ, Recht M, et al. Differences in platelet alpha-granule release
XT2000iv automated analyzer for the detection of reticulated platelets in dogs. Vet 
 between normals and immune thrombocytopenic patients and between young and 
Chin Pathol. 2009;38:30-38.
old platelets. Thromb Haemost. 1998;80:457-462.
 401. Parent-Massin D. Haematotoxicity of trichothecenes. Toxicol Lett. 2004;153:75-81.
433. Ritt MG, Rogers KS, Thomas JS. Nephrotic syndrome resulting in thromboermbolic
402. Parise LV, Smyth SS, Shet AS, et al. Platelet morphology biochemistry. and function.
sossh dsoy wjuywtr bop e u uoge nbeon jejnseae nui paneuwassip pue aseasip
In: Lichtman MA, Beutler E, Kipps TJ, et al, eds. Wiliams Hematology. 7th ed. New
1997;33:385-391
York: McGraw-Hill; 2006:1587-1663.
434.
19 o Apns apaadsoal e sen ui sisonaogwoul s jaasel s uiddel 'y ozzi 
403. Parker MT, Collier LL, Kier AB, et al. Oral mucosal bleeding times of normal cats and
cases (2000-2005). / Feline MMed Surg. 2007;9:319-325.
cats with Chediak-Higashi syndrome or Hageman trait factor Xll deficiencyl. Vet Clin
435. RobyKA, Bloom JC, Becht JL. Postpartum hemolytic-uremic syndrome in a cow. JAm
Pathol. 1988;17/11:9-12.
Vet /Med Assoc. 1987;190:187-190.
404. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective
436. Rodman LE, Farnell DR, Coyne JM, et al. Toxicity of cordycepin in combination with
study. Vet Clin Pathol 2005;34:341-352.
poot oxof sop ajbeaq ui uiwjjos/xoap-.z jonigui aseueap ausouape aya
 405. Pawlinski R, Mackman N. Cellular sources oftissue factor in endotoxemia and sepsis.
Pharmacol. 1997;147:39-45.
Thromb Res. 2010;125(Suppl 1:S70-S73.
437. Rogers CL, Rozanski EA. Von Willebrand factor antigen concentration in dogs with
406. Pearson JD. The control of production and release of haemostatic factors in the
sepsis. J Vet Intem Med. 2010;24:229-230.
endothelial cell Bailieres Clin Haematol. 1993;6:629-651
438. Rojnuckarin P. Snake venom and haemostasis; an overview. Asia-Pacifc Oncology &
407. Peng J, Friese P. Heilmann E, et al. Aged platelets have an impaired response to
Haematology. 2008;1:93-96.
thrombin as quantitated by P-selectin expression. Blood. 1994;3:161-166.
439. Rotermund A, Peters M, Hewicker-Trautwein M, et al. Cutaneous and renal glomeru-
 408. Peng J, Friese P, Wolf RF, et al. Relative reactivity of platelets from thrombopoietin-
lar vasculopathy in a great dane resembling 'Alabama rot' of greyhounds. Vet Rec.
and interleukin-6-treated dogs. Blood. 1996;87:4158-4163.
2002;151: 510-512.
409. Pereira J, Soto M, Palomol, et al. Platelet aging in vivo is associated with activation
440. Rozanski EA, DrobatzKJ, Hugher D, et al. Thrombotest(PIVKA) test results in 25 dogs
of apoptotic pathways: studies in a model of suppressed thrombopoiesis in dogs.
with acquired and hereditary coagulopathies. / Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio).
Thromb Haemost. 2002;87:905-909.
1999;9:73-78.
 410. Perez-Alenza MD, Blanco J, Sardon D, et al. Clinico-pathological findings in cattle 
441. Runciman DJ, Lee AM, Reed KF, et al. Dicoumarol toxicity in cattle associated with
exposed to chronic bracken fern toxicity. N Z Vet J. 2006;54:185-192.
ingestion of silage containing sweet vernal grass {Anthoxanthum odoratum). Aust Vet
411. Peterson JL, Couto CG, Weman ML. Hemostatic disorders in cats: a retrospective
J. 2002;80:28-32.
study and review of the literature. / Vet lntem MMed. 1995;9:298-303.
 442. Russell KE, Perkins PC, Grindem CB, et al. Flow cytometric method for detecting thia-
 zole orange-positive freticulated! platelets in thrombocytopenic horses. Am J Vet Res.
thrombocytopenia, and antinuclear antibodies in cats with hyperthyroidism. JAm Vet
1997;58:1092-1096.
Med Assoc. 1984;184:806-808.
443. Russell KE, Perkins PC, Hoffman MR, et al. Platelets from thrombocytopenic ponies
 413. Pierangeli SS, Chen PP, Raschi E, et al. Antiphospholipid antibodies and the antiphos-
 acutely infected with equine infectious anemia virus are activated in vivo and hypo-
pholipid syndrome: pathogenic mechanisms. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2008;34:236-250.
functional. Virology. 1999;259:7-19.
 414. Pina-Cabral JM, Ribeiro-da-Silva A. Meida-Dias A. Platelet sequestration
444.
.Sagripanti A, Carpi A. Antithrombotic and prothrombotic activities of the vascular
during hypothermia in dogs treated with sulphinpyrazone and ticlopidine-reversibility
 endothelium. Biomed Pharmacother. 2000;54:107-111.
 445. Sakai M, Watari T, Miura T, et al. Effects of DDAVP administrated subcutaneously
 415. Pineau S, Belbeck LW, Moore S. Levarmisole reduces the thrombocytopenia associ-
in dogs with aspirininduced platelet dysfunction and hemostatic impairment due to
ated with myxovirus vaccination. Can Vet J. 1980;21:82-84.
chronic liver diseases. J Vet Med Sci 2003;65:83-B6.
 416. Prins M, Schellens CJ, van Leeuwen MWV, et al. Coagulation disorders in dogs with
446. Sanchez-Cordon PJ, Nunez A. Salguero FJ, et al. Lymphocyte apoptosis and throm-
hepatic disease. Vet J. 2010;185:163-168.
bocytopenia in spleen during classical swine fever: role of macrophages and cyto-
417. Puschner B, Galey FD, Holstege DM, et al. Sweet clover poisoning in dairy cale in
kines. Vet Pathol. 2005;42:477-488.
California. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1998;212:857-859.
447. Santarem VA, Laposy CB, Farias MR. Ehrlichia platys-like inclusions and morulae in
418. Pusterla N, Watson JL, Affolter VK, et al. Purpura haemorrhagica in 53 horses. Vet
 platelets of a cat fabstract). Braziian J Vet Sci 2000;7:130.
Rec. 2003;153:118-121.
paneiosse-ialaield pue suoieuanuon ialaneld  uosial onnaeg 'ys oioues 8
 419. Putsche JC, Kohn B. Primary immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in 30 dogs ↑1997-
IgG in greyhounds. J/ Vet Intem Med. 2007;21:107-112.
2003). J/ Amm Anim Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:250-257.
449.
. Sato l, Anderson GA, Parry BVV. An interobserver and intraobserver study of buccal
 420. Radvanyi-Hofmann H, Roussi J, Launay JM, et al. Characterization of a thrombopathy
mucosal bleeding time in Greyhounds. Res Vet Sci 2000;68:41-45.
jewah y Aay inony Auolon bid e bunoage (aseasip lood abejons enlap ada)
 450. Schaffner A. Augustiny N. Otto RC. et al. The hypersplenic spleen. A contractile 
1992;34:133-140.
reservoir of granulocytes and platelets. Arch /ntem MMed. 1985;145:651-654.
421. Ragan HA. Platelet agglutination induced by ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid in blood
451. Schaphorst KL, Chiang E, Jacobs KN, et al. Role of sphingosine-1 phosphate in the
-2 1 7  6id a e w saes
enhancement of endothelial barrier integrity by platelet-released products. Am J
422. Ramirez S. Gaunt SD, McClure J, et al. Detection and effects on platelet function
Physiol Lung Cel/ Mol Physiol. 2003; 285:L258-L267.
of anti-platelet antibody in mule foals with experimentally induced neonatal alloim-
452.
.Schemerhorn T, Pembleton-Corbett JR, Kornreich B. Pulmonary thromboembolism in
mune thrombocytopenia. / Vet Intem Med. 1999;13:534-539.
cats. / Vet lntern Med. 2004;18:533-535.
 453. See AM, Swindells KL, Sharman MJ, et al. Activated coagulation times in normal
in a Thoroughbred mare and foal. J Vet lntern Med. 2001;15:63-66.
cats and dogs using MAX-ACT tubes. Aust Vet J. 2009;87:292-295.
424. Reardon DM, Hutchinson D, Preston FE, et al. The routine measurement of platelet 
454.
.Segura D, Monreal L. Poor reproducibility of template bleeding time in horses. J Vet
volume: a comparison of aperture-impedance and flow cytometric systems. Clin Lab
Intem MMed 2008;22:238-241
Haematol. 1985;7:251-257.
 455. Segura D, Monreal L, Armengou L, et al. Mean platelet component as an indicator
425.F
Rebar AH, Lewis HB, DeNicola DB, et al. Red cellfragmentation in the dog an edito-
of platelet activation in foals and adult horses. J Vet Intem Med. 2007;21:
rial review. Vet Pathol 1981;18:415-426.
1076-1082.
 426. Reef VB, Dyson SS. Beech J. Lymphosarcoma and associated immune-mediated
456.
Sellon DC, Levine JF, PalmerK, et al. Thrombocytosis in 24 horses ↑1989-1994). / Vet
hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia in horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
Intem Med. 1997;11:24-29.
1984:184:313-317.
457.
.Sheafor SE, Couto CG. Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity in 21 dogs. JAmAnim Hosp
427. RenduF, Brohard-Bohn B. The platelet release reaction: granules' constituents, secre-
Assoc. 1999;35:38-46.
tion and functions. Platelets. 2001;12:261-273.
458. Shelly SM. Causes of canine pancytopenia. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet 1988;10:9-16.
 428. Renne T, Gailani D. Role of Factor Xll in hemostasis and thrombosis: clinical implica-
459. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML. Hematologic abnormalities associated with retroviral 
tions. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2007;5:733-741.
infections in the cat. Semin Vet Med Surg /Smal Anim). 1995;10:220-233.
232
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
460. Sheridan WP, Hunt P, Simonet S, et al. Hematologic effects of cytokines. In: Rermick
492. Suzuki S, Iwata G, Sutor AH. Vitamin K deficiency during the perinatal and infantile 
DG, Friedland JS, eds. Cytokines in Health and Disease. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel
period. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2001;27:93-98.
Dekker, Inc.: 1997:487-505.
493. Sykes JE, Kitteson MD, Chomel BB, et al. Clinicopathologic findings and outcome in
461.
 Shimada K, Kobayashi M, Kimura S, et al. Anticoagulant heparin-ike glycosamino-
dogs with infective endocarditis: 71 cases f1992-2005). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 glycans on endothelial cell surface. Jpn Circ J. 1991;55:1016-1021.
2006;228:1735-1747
462. Shinozaki K, Kawasaki T, Kambayashi J,et al. Species differences in platelet aggrega
 494. Tamzali Y, Guelfi JF, Braun JP. Plasma fibrinogen measurement in the horse: com-
tion induced by platelet-activating factor (PAF). Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol.
parison of Millar's technique with a chronometric technique and the QBC-Vet Auto-
1992;14:663-665.
reader. Res Vet Sci 2001;71:213-217.
463. Singh K, Flood J, Welsh RD, et al. Fatal systemic phaeohyphomycosis caused by
495. Tarnow I, Kristensen AT. Evaluation of platelet function. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ
Ochroconis galopavum in a dog ICanis familaris). Vet Pathol. 2006;43:988-992.
eds. Schalm's
Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell;
464. Sinnott VB, Otto CM. Use of thromboelastography in dogs with immune-mediated
2010:1123-1132
hemolytic anemia: 39 cases {2000-2008). J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio)
 496. Tasca S, Carli E, Caldin M, et al. Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytometric
2009;19:484-488.
immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases 2002-
465.
Skowronek AJ, Lafranco L, Stone-Marschat MA. et al. Clinical pathology and
2006). Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:2-12.
hemostatic abnormalities in experimental African horsesickness. Vet Pathol.
497. TholenI, Weingart C, Kohn B.Concentration of D-dimers in healthy cats and sick cats
1995;32:112-121
with and without disseminated intravascular coagulation {DIC). J/ Feline Med Surg.
466.
 Smith RIll, Thomas JS. Quantitation of reticulated platelets in healthy dogs and in 
2009;11:842-846.
nonthrombocytopenic dogs with clinical disease. Vet Chin Pathor. 2002;31:26-32.
uiuogaias aneydsoudun auisouape pue uopebaibbe iajaneld 'sy siaboy 'sr sewoul 86t
467. Smith SA. The cell-based model of coagulation. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antoniol.
dogs with untreated multicentric lymphoma. / Vet Intem MMed. 1999;13:319-322.
2009;19:3-10.
 499. Topper MJ, Prasse KV. Use of enzyme-linked irmmunosorbent assay to measure
468.
Smith SA. Overview of hemostasis. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veteri-
thrombin-antithrombin Ill complexes in horses with colic. Am J Vet Res. 1996;57:
456-462.
469. Smith SA, Tobias AH, Jacob KA, et al. Arterial thromboembolism in cats: acute crisis
Uu sueea aseyd-ane sesuad uoneojo ssu asd rJaddo 
t un uidse asop-mol 4im suawa6euew wjan-buol pue (lo0z-66h sasen zzl u!
horses with colic. Am J/ Vet Res. 1998;59:542-545.
Cases. J/ Vet lntem Med. 2003; 17:73-83.
 501. Toulza O, Center SA, Brooks MB, et al. Evaluation of plasma protein C activity for
470. Snyder TA, Watach MJ, Litwak KN, et al. Platelet activation, aggregation, and life
detection of hepatobiliary disease and portosystemic shunting in dogs. JAm VetMed
ins seou uu saap isisse jenuan mo lexe m paeidwi saien uueds
Assoc. 2006;229:1761-1771.
2002;73:1933-1938.
Aisuasady im shop otui supuy jeun ieia 'roi 'y joyuea  Jauedal 209
e :sbop ui Aaigixonoaw panpu-uabos3 'le 1a '0 euni '8 naznyoo '8h seuos l2t
associated with administration of potentiated sulfonamides. J Vet Intem Med.
review. Can Vet J. 2009;50:1054-1058.
2003;17:647-652.
472. Sosman JA, Verma A, Moss S, et al. Interleukin 10-induced thrombocytopenia in 
503. Truyen U, Addie D, elakS, et al.Feline panleukopenia ABCD guidelines on preven-
normal healthy adult volunteers: evidence for decreased platelet production. Br J
tion and management. J Feline Med Surg. 2009;11:538-546.
Haematol. 2000;111:104-111.
Jo JazAeue uoeinbeon ae-jo-nujod e po uoenjen3 n jabig 'a sau6nH 7 buas1 t09
473.
n le po Aaiap ea e ia 'o yose 'n yn a nos 
measurement of prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time, and acti-
K-dependent blood coagulation factors due to a defective vitamin K-dependent 
vated cloting time in dogs. Am J/ Vet Res. 2001;62:1455-1460.
carboxylase in Devon Rex cats. Thromb Haemost 1992;68:521-525.
-doaap ui joney buene nalaneld jo alou "e ia tn mos y juenoly 'y elynsl 909
474.
Southwood LL, Schott HC, Henry CJ, et al. Disseminated hemangiosarcoma in the
ment of thrombocytopenia and neutropenia in dogs with endotoxemia. Am / Vet Res.
horse: 35 cases. J/ Vet lntern Med. 2000;14:105-109.
1999;60:216-221.
475.
 Spagnuolo M, Kennedy S. Foster JC, et al. Bovine viral diarrhoea virus infection in 
Joy nuno ialaed on Joads s!lalaield e ia ' wos '1ooya ' uapal 9o
 bone marrow of experimentally infected calves. J/ Comp Pathol. 1997;116:97-100.
assessing platelet status in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vet Chin Pathol.
476.
 Spangler WL, Kass PH. Splenic myeloid metaplasia, histiocytosis, and hypersplenism 
2008;37:266-271.
in the dog (65 cases). Vet Pahol. 1999;36:583-593.
 507. Ulutas PA, Musal B,Kiral F, et al. Acute phase proteinlevels in pregnancy and oestrus 
477. Stafford DVW. The vitamin K cycle. J Thromb Haemost. 2005;3:1873-1878.
cycle in bitches. Res Vet Sci 2009;86:373-376.
478.
Stevenson C. Schwan T. Borrelia hermsi spirochetemia in a dog fabstract). Vet Clin
508. Valladares JE, Ruiz De Gopegui R, Riera C, et al. Study of haemostatic disorders
Pathol 2010;39:524.
gi866l ios ia/ sag shop ajbeag ui siseiuewusial panpu Alenuawuadxa u!
479.
la/ shop ui sapiosip soqwaogwoya po sisoubep ayajof Jawip-0 ewseld l loyons 
195-198.
Chin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2003;33:1419-1435
 509. van GC, Savary-BatailleK, Chiers K, et al. Bilirubin cholelithiasis and haemosiderosis
480. Stokol T. Disseminated intravascular coagulation. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
in an anaemic pyruvate kinase-deficient Somali cat. J Small Anim Pract.
2008;49:479-482.
481.
 Stokol T. Essential thrombocythemia and reactive thrommbocytosis. In: Weiss DJ,
 510. Vannucchi Cl, Mirandola RM, Oliveira CM. Acute-phase protein profile during gesta-
Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell;:
tion and diestrous: proposal for an early pregnancy test in bitches. Ani Reprod Sci
2010:605-611.
2002;74:87-99.
482. Stokol T, Brooks M. Diagnosis of DIC in cats: is it time to go back to the basics?
 511. Vaziri ND. Thrombocytosis in EPO-treated dialysis patients may be mediated by EPO 
 Vet /ntem Med. 2006;20:1289-1290
rather than iron deficiency. Am / Kidney Dis. 2009;53:733-736.
483. Stokol T, Brooks M, Rush JE, et al. Hypercoagulability in cats with cardiomyopathy.
 512. Vilar P, Couto CG, Westendor N, et al. Thromboelastographic tracings in retired
/ Vet Intem M/ed. 2008;22:546-552.
racing greyhounds and in non-greyhound dogs. J Vet lntem Med. 2008;22:374-
484. StokolT, Brooks MB, Erb HN, et al. D-dimer concentrations in healthydogs and dogs
379.
with disseminated intravascular coagulation. Am / Vet Res. 2000;61:393-398.
 513. Vlot AJ, Koppelman SJ, van den Berg MH, et al. The affinity and stoichiometry of 
485.
-ein pue -io3 ui sianaweied alaeid po uosiedwo  Ne qie '1 loos
binding of human factor VI to von W/illebrand factor. Bood. 1995;85:3150-3157.
anticoagulated blood in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:148-154.
 514. Vogler EA. Siedlecki CA. Contact activation of blood-plasma coagulation. Biomateri-
486. StokolT, Erb HN, De Vilde L, et al. Evaluation of latex agglutination kits for detection
als. 2009;30:1857-1869.
of fibrinfogen} degradation products and D-dimer in healthy horses and horses with
515. Waldmann TA, Weissman SM, Berlin N. The effect of splenectomy on erythropoiesis
severe colic. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:375-382.
in the dog. Blood. 1960;15:873-883.
487. Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, et al. Development of bone marrow toxicosis
 516. Walsh PN. PMatelets: yin and yang. Blood. 2010;115:1-2.
after albendazole administration in a dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
517. Walton RM, Modiano JF, Thrall MA, et al. Bone marow cytological findings in 4 dogs
1997;210:1753-1756.
and a cat with hemophagocytic syndrome. J Vet Intem Med. 1996;10:7-14.
488. Stone MS, Johnstone IB, Brooks M, et al. Lupus-type "anticoagulant* in a dog with
 518. Walz PH, Steficek BA, Baker JC, et al. Effect of experimentally induced type ll bovine
hemolysis and thrombosis. J/ Vet lntern Med. 1994;8:57-61.
viral diarrhea virus infection on platelet function in calves. Am J Vet Res.
489.
StriekerMJ, Morris JG, Feldman BF, etal. Vitamin K deficiencyin cats fedcommercial
1999;60:1396-1401.
fish-based diets. J/ Smal Anim Pract. 1996;37:322-326.
519. WanerT, LeykinI, ShinitskyM, et al. Detection of platelet-bound antibodies in beagle
490. Sulivan P, Gompf R, Schmeitzel L, et al. Altered platelet indices in dogs with hypo-
dogs after artificial infection with Ehrlichia canis. Vet immunol Immunopathol.
thyroidism and cats with hyperthyroidism. Am J Vet Res. 1993;54:2004-2009.
2000;77:145-150.
491. Sumann G, Fries D, GriesmacherA, etal Blood coagulation activation and fibrinolysis
 520. Waner T, Yuval D, Nyska A. Electronic measurement of canine mean platelet volume.
during a downhill marathon run. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2007;18:435-440
Vet Clin Pathol. 1989;18:84-86.
CHA PT ER 7 = Evaluation of Hemostasis: Coagulation and Platelet Disorders
233
 521. Wang JY, Wang SS. Yin PZ. Haemolytic-uraemmic syndrome caused by a non-0157:
 537. Winberg B. Jensen AL, Johansson Pl, et al. Thromboelastographic evaluation of
H7 Escherichia coli strain in experimentally inoculated dogs. J Med Microbiol.
hemostatic function in dogs with disseminated intravascular coagulation. / Vet lntem
2006;55: 23-29.
ed. 2008;22:357-365.
522.
Watson AD, Wilson JT, Turner DM, et al. Phenylbutazone-induced blood dyscrasias
538.Winberg B,JensenAL Rozanski E,et al. Tissue factor activated thromboelastography
suspected in three dogs. Vet Rec. 1980;107:239-241.
correlates to clinical signs of bleeding in dogs. Vet J. 2009;179:121-129.
m paeiosse uoeawe awsedo iea 'tr urws iaaaon 'sjasia cs
539WilcoxRussellKHematologic changes asociated withAdderalltoxicity in a
lymphoid leukemmia in ruinants: interference with electronic determination of plate-
dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:184-189.
let concentration. Vet Pathol. 1989;26:177-178.
 540. Wilkerson MJ, Johnson GS, Stockham S, et al. Afibrinogenemia and a circulating 
 524. Weiss DJ. New insights into the physiology and treatment of acquired myelodysplas-
antibody against fibrinogen in a Bichon Frise dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:148-155.
tic syndromes and aplastic pancytopenia. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract.
 541. Wikerson MJ, Shuman W. Alterations in normal canine platelets during storage in
2003;33:1317-1334.
EDTA anticoagulated blood. Vet Clin Pahol. 2001;30:107-113.
 525. Weiss DJ. Hemophagocytic syndrome in dogs: 24 cases {1996-2005). JAm Vet Med
542. Wikerson MJ, Shuman W, Swist S, et al. Platelet size, platelet surface-associated
Assoc. 2007;230:697-701.
IgG. and reticulated platelets in dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Vet 
526.
Weiss DJ, Evanson OA. Aretrospective study of feline pancytopenia. Comp Haematol
Clin Pahol. 2001;30:141-149.
Int. 2000;10:50-55
 543. WilleyJR, Schaer M. Eastern diamondback rattlesnake Crtalus adamanteus) enven-
 527. Weiss DJ, Evanson OA, McClenahan D, et al. Shear-induced platelet activation and
platelet-neutrophil aggregate formation by equine platelets. Am J Vet Res.
 544. Wills TB, Wardrop KJ. Pseudothrombocytopenia secondary to the effects of EDTA in
1998;59:1243-1246
a dog. / Armm Animm Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:95-97.
 528. Weiss DJ, Evanson OA. Sykes J. A retrospective study of canine pancytopenia. Vet
 545. Wills TB, Wardrop KJ, Mevers KM. Detection of activated platelets in canine blood
Clin Pathol. 1999;28:83-88.
by use of flow cytometry. Arm / Vet Res. 2006;67:56-63.
529.
 Weiss DJ, Townsend E. Evaluation of reticulated platelets in dogs. Comp Haematol
 546. Woods JP, Crystal MA, Morton RJ, et al. Tularemia in two cats. JArm VetMed Assoc.
Int. 1998;8:166-170.
1998;212:81-83.
 530. Weiss RC, Cox NR, Boudreaux MK. Toxicologic efferts of ribavirin in cats. J Vet
 547. Woody BJ, Murphy MJ, Ray AC, et al. Coagulopathic effects and therapy of brodi-
 Phammacol Therap. 1993;16:301-316.
facoum toxicosis in dogs. J/ Vet Intem Med. 1992;6:23-28.
531.
Weiss RC. Dodds WJ. Scott FVW. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in
 548. Yilmaz Z, Eralp O, licol YO. Evaluation of platelet count and its association with 
experimentally induced feline infectious peritonitis. Am J Vet Res. 1980:41
plateletcrit, mean platelet volume, and platelet size distribution width in a canine 
663-671.
model of endotoxemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:159-163.
 532. Welch RD, Watkins JP. Taylor TS, et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
saa jeoed yi shop ui saoid pidino uoesaeeun s inas z zew b9s
associated with colic in 23 horses {1984-1989). / Vet lntern Med. 1992;6:29-35.
J/ Small Anim Pract. 2007;48:643-650.
533.
 -suen jeubis pue wsiogenaw pidin je ia 'Wl aaun 'sg uewjawwiz '3y Aapey
uo shjnsai snounds pue snunon snounds le ia 'r pieiag ' analnauag 'W lyrapuez o99 
duction in endothelial cells. Prog Lipid Res. 1990;29:45-63.
haematology analysers: a review. Part I: platelets. int / Lab Hematol 2007;29:4-20.
 534. Whitney MS, Schwan TG, Sultemeier KB, et al. Spirochetemia caused by Borrelia 
 551. Zelmanovic D, Hetherington EJ. Automated analysis of feline platelets in whole blood,
turicatae infection in 3 dogs in Texas. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:212-216.
including platelet count, mean platelet volume, and activation state. Vet Clin Pathol.
535. Wigton DH, Kociba GJ, Hoover EA. Infectious canine hepatitis: animal model for 
1998;27: 2-9.
viral-induced disseminated intravascular coagulation. Blood. 1976;47:287-296.
 552. Zini E, Hauser B, Meli ML, et al. Immune-mediated erythroid and megakaryocytic
 536. Winberg B, Jensen AL, Johansson Pl, et al. Development of a model based scoring
aplasia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2007;230:1024-1027.
system for diagnosis of canine disseminated intravascular coagulation with indepen-
553. Zorio E, Gilabert-Estelles J, Espana F, et al. Fibrinolysis: the keyto new pathogenetic
 dent assessment of sensitivity and specificity. Vet J. 2010;185:292-298.
mechanisms. Curr Med Chem. 2008;15:923-929.
CHAPTE
R
BONE MARROW EXAMINATION
REASONS TO EXAMINE
controlled by placing a suture in the skin incision and applying
BONE MARROW
 pressure over the biopsy site. Postbiopsy infection is also a
Bone marrow evaluation is indicated when peripheral blood
proper techniques are used. The major contraindication to
abnormalities are detected. The most common indications are
bone marrow aspiration and core biopsies is when they are
persistent neutropenia, unexplained thrombocytopenia, poorly
unnecessary (e.g., the anemia is regenerative or the cause of 
regenerative anemia, or a combination thereof. Examples of
 the neutropenia is recognized to be sepsis).
proliferative abnormalities in which bone marrow examina-
tion may be indicated include persistent thrombocytosis or
leukocytosis, abnormal blood cel morphology, or the unex-
SITES FOR BONE
plained presence of immature cells in blood (e.g., nucleated
MARROW BIOPSY
erythroid cells in the absence of polychromasia or a neutro-
 philic left shift in the absence of infammation).
Young animals have active (red) marrow throughout most
 Bone marrow is sometimes examined to stage neoplastic
skeletal bones. Active marrow recedes from long bones as
conditions (lymphomas and mast-cell tumors); to estimate the
adulthood is reached, because the bone marrow space expands
adequacy of body iron stores; to evaluate lytic bone lesions;
faster than the blood volume as the animal grows.53 Once
and to search for occult disease in animals with fever of
animals stop growing, blood cell numbers must be maintained,
unknown origin, unexplained weight loss, and unexplained
 but increased production to accommodate growth is no longer
malaise. Bone marrow examination can also be useful in deter-
required. As hematopoietic cells disappear, the marrow space
mining the cause of a hyperproteinemia when it occurs sec-
is replaced by fat (yellow marrow) and is in a resting state.
ondarily to multiple myeloma, lymphoma, leishmaniasis, and
Hematopoietic cells may expand back into long bones if
systemic fungal diseases. It may also reveal the cause of a
 needed, as might occur in response to anemia Active marrow
hypercalcemia when associated with lymphoid neoplasms,
remains in the fat bones (vertebrae, sternum, ribs, and pelvis)
multiple myeloma, or metastatic neoplasms to bone.
and proximal ends of the humerus and femur in adults.53
In veterinary medicine, bone marrow aspirates are done
 more frequently than core biopsies. Aspirates are easier, faster,
lium
and less expensive to perform than are core biopsies. Bone
The iliac crest is often used as a site to aspirate/biopsy marrow
marrow core biopsies require special needles that cut a solid
 in dogs and is sometimes used in cats.2.3 The biopsy needle
core of material, which is then placed in fixative, decalcifed,
is positioned so that it enters the greatest prominence of the
embedded, sectioned, stained, and examined microscopically
iliac crest, parallel to the long axis of the wing of the ilium
by a pathologist. Core biopsy sections provide a more accurate
(Fig. 8-1). The wing of the ilium may also be aspirated at its
way of evaluating marrow cellularity and examining for meta-
central depression, which is caudal and ventral to the iliac
 static neoplasia than do aspirate smears, but cell morphology
crest. The tuber coxae has been used as a site for bone marrow
is more diffcult to assess.
collection in young horses, but adequate marrow samples
 There are few contraindications for bone marrow aspirates
cannot be obtained from this site in adult horses because of
and core biopsies. Restraint, sedation, and anesthesia (when
a lack of active marrow.58
used) generally pose more risks for the patient than the biopsy
procedure itself. Postbiopsy hemorrhage is a potential compli-
Proximal Femur
cation in patients with hemostatic diatheses, but it rarely
For small cats and toy breeds of dogs, in which the ilium is
occurs. Hemorrhage may occur after the biopsy of animals
especially thin, the marrow may be aspirated from the head
with monoclonal hyperglobulinemias, but it is easily
of the proximal femur by way of the trochanteric fossa (see
234
CHAPTER 8 - Bone Marrow Examination
235
FIGURE 8-1
FIGURE 8-2
 Bone marrow biopsy site for the iliac crest and proximal femur.
Bone marrow biopsy site for the proximal humerus.
From Grindem CB. Bone marow biopsy and evaluation. Vet Clin N Am
From Grindem CB. Bone marrow biopsy and eualuation. Vet Clin N
Small Anim Pract. 1989:19:669-696, as modifed from Harvey JW Bone
Am Small Anim Pract. 1989:19:669-696, as modijfed from Harvey
marrow aspiration biopsy. NAVC Clinician's Brief. 2004;February:
JW Bone marrow aspiration biopsy. NAVC Clinicians Brief. 2004;
44-47.
February:44-47
Fig. 8-1).2953 This site is not suitable for obtaining a core
Proximal Ribs
biopsy.
The proximal (dorsal) ends of the ribs have been used for
 bone marrow aspirates in large animals, although the bone is
Proximal Humerus
difficult to penetrate with biopsy needles in adults and
Aspiration of marrow from the cranial side of the proximal
end of the humerus is also commonly done in small animals,
pneumothorax or uncontrolled hemorrhage when ribs are
 especially in those that are obese.? This site has also been
biopsied.s
recommended for use in calves.47 The greater tubercle is pal-
pated, and the needle is inserted into the fat area on the
Other Sites
craniolateral surface of the proximal humerus distal to the
Aspirates/biopsies may be taken from other bone marrow sites
tubercle (Fig. 8-2).
if specifc lesions are identifed using diagnostic imaging.
These are done to identify the nature of the lesion, rather than
Sternum
to evaluate hematopoiesis.
In large dogs, the third, fourth, or ffth sternebra can be
 aspirated/biopsied53 The colection of marrow from the
sternum poses the risk of inadvertent penetration of the
TECHNIQUE OF BONE
 thorax and damage to structures in the thoracic cavity. A short
MARROW ASPIRATION
biopsy needle (preferably with an adjustable guard) should be
used, and care should be taken to remain in the center of these
 The needle used to aspirate marrow must have a removable
bones to minimize the risk of pneumothorax, uncontrolled
stylet, which remains in place until the marrow cavity is
hemorrhage, or cardiac laceration. Although there is also some
 entered to prevent obstruction of the needle's lumen with
risk to the person collecting sternal marrow from standing
cortical bone. A 16- or 18-gauge needle (Rosenthal, Illinois
large animals, the sternum (third or fourth sternebra) is the
sternal, or Jamshidi) between 1 and 1.5 inches long is satisfac-
preferred site for collecting high-quality aspirates/biopsies
tory (Fig. 8-3).
from adult horses, cattle, sheep, and llamas. Sternebrae are
The usefulness of bone marrow aspirate cytology as a
identifed by palpating ribs to their articulations with the
diagnostic aid depends on the proper collection of the
sternum.47
bone marrow sample and preparation of high-quality marrow
236
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
because it reduces the chance of clotting before a smear is
 prepared and allows time to prepare multiple smears that may
be needed for special stains. Additionally, the ability to collect
bone marrow particles in anticoagulated samples, prior to
 smear preparation, increases the likelihood of getting suff-
cient particles to make an accurate interpretation of the aspi-
rate smear. An EDTA-containing solution can be prepared by
adding 0.35 mL of sterile saline to a 7-mL EDTA tube, which
yields a 2.5% or 3% EDTA solution, depending on whether
the tube contains dry EDTA or EDTA dissolved in water.
About 0.5 mL of this EDTA solution is drawn into the
syringe using a regular needle prior to aftaching the syringe
to the bone marrow aspiration needle.3 Although smears
need not be made immediately when collected with EDTA,
they should be prepared within minutes after collection,
because bone marrow cells (especially granulocytic cells)
FIGURE 8-3
degenerate rapidly.
Bone marrow aspiration needle.An 18-gauge Illinois bone marrow aspi-
About 1 mL of marrow is aspirated into the syringe con-
ration needle with stylet in place and adjustable guard to limit the depth
taining EDTA. Following mixing, the contents are expelled
of penetration.
into a petri dish. It is important for accurate bone marrow
evaluation that smears contain marrow particles (stroma and
smears. In most cases with dogs and large animals, only local
associated cells). Marrow particles appear as small white
anesthesia is needed for aspiration biopsies. However, tran-
grains (fecks) in the blood-contaminated aspirate material.
quilization is offen used, especially in patients that resist posi-
The particles tend to loosely adhere to the bottom of the petri
tioning by manual restraint. Bone marrow aspirates are offen
dish when it is tilted. The particles are collected by pipette
 done under light anesthesia in cats. Collction sites are pre-
(Fig. 8-4, F) or a hematocrit capillary tube to use for smear
 pared by clipping the hair and scrubbing the skin with anti-
 preparation.
septic soap preparations (Fig. 8-4, A). A local anesthetic is
 To concentrate particles in blood-contaminated aspirates,
injected under the skin and down to the periosteum overlying
aspirated material can be placed on one end of a glass slide,
the site to be aspirated, and a small skin incision is made with
which is then held vertically (Fig. 8-5, A). Particles tend to
a scalpel blade to facilitate passing the needle through the skin
stick to the slide while blood runs off A second glass slide is
(Fig. 8-4, B). Sterile needles and gloves are always used, but
placed across the area of particle adherence, perpendicular
the aspiration site is generally not draped. If general anesthesia
to the first slide. After marrow spreads between the slides
is required for other procedures, bone marrow aspiration may
(Fig. 8-5, B), they are pulled apart in the horizontal plane.
be scheduled at the same time to minimize the stress on the
Rather than use a perpendicular glass slide to spread the
animal.
bone marrow particles, a square 22- by 22-mm 1.5-mm thick
 To enter the marrow space, moderate pressure is applied to
coverslip may be used in the same manner (Fig. 8-6, A). This
the needle (with the stylet locked in place) as the needle is
 produces both a coverslip and a glass slide preparation. Alter-
rotated in an alternating clockwise-counterclockwise motion
natively, one might consider using the two-coverslip method
(Fig. 8-4, C). Once the needle is firmly embedded into the
 described for blood films in Chapter 2. The lighter weight of
bone, it is usually within the marrow cavity. The stylet is then
a top coverslip puts less pressure on particles than a top glass
 removed (Fig. 8-4, D) and a 10- to 20-mL syringe is attached
slide does. Consequently the use of coverslips may decrease
to the needle (Fig. 8-4, E). Vigorous negative pressure should
 the rupturing of nucleated cells, which happens more readily
 be applied by rapidly pulling the plunger back as far as pos-
in samples collected with EDTA in saline compared with
sible. If no anticoagulant is added to the syringe, the negative
samples collected without an anticoagulant.3 If a marrow
pressure is released, and the complete assembly is rapidly
aspirate contains particles without excessive blood contamina-
removed for smear preparation as soon as a few drops appear
 tion, one can place the aspirated material in the middle of a
 in the syringe. If marrow does not appear in the syringe, the
slide and place a second slide on top of it; the slides are then
stylet is replaced and the needle is repositioned for another
slid apart horizontally, as shown in Figure 8-6, B.
aspiration attempt.
 Bone marrow aspirate preparations from dead animals are
 If no anticoagulant is used, smears must be prepared within
usually of poor quality, even when collected soon after death.
seconds after bone marrow collection, because bone marrow
 Once clots have formed, cells will be lysed during aspiration
clots rapidly. Smears prepared once clotting begins cannot be
 and smear preparation. If marrow is to be collected from an
evaluated, because most of the nucleated cells will be lysed
animal that is to be euthanized, it is recommended that the
during smear preparation. We prefer to collct bone marrow
animal be anesthetized for marrow collection, followed by
into a syringe that contains EDTA as an anticoagulant,
administration of the euthanasia solution.
CHAPTER 8 · Bone Marrow Examination
237
FIGURE 8-4
Bone marrow aspiration procedure. A, The biopsy site over the fat area on the craniolateral surface of the
proximal humerus distal to the greater tubercle is prepared by clipping the hair and scrubbing the skin with
antiseptic soap. B, A small skin incision is made with a scalpel blade to facilitate passing the needle through
the skin. C, Moderate pressure is applied to the needle (with the stylet locked in place) as the needle is rotated
in an alternating clockwise-counterclockwise motion. D, Once the needle is firmly embedded into the bone,
u a o pe s i  as   a aes pe (sad j de u 
 into a petri dish. A pipette is then used to collect particles to be used in preparing smears.
All of the above from Harvey JW. Bone marrow aspiration biopsy. NAVC Clinician's Brief. 2004;February:44-47.
238
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
P
FIGURE 8-5
stick to the slide while contarminating blood runs off and may be wicked away by absorbent material. B, A
zontal plane and quickly air-dried.
If bone marrow is collected at necropsy, the marrow mate-
Bone marrow aspirate smears are often submitted for stain-
rial should be mixed with a solution containing albumin
ing and evaluation by a clinical pathologist. Unfixed aspirate
before a smear is made to decrease cell lysis. One method
smears should not be mailed in a package that also contains
recommends collecting bone marrow from an opened bone
tissue in formalin, because the formalin vapors will interfere
using a paintbrush and placing it on a piece of parafilm next
with the staining quality of cells in the aspirate smears.
to a drop of 22% bovine serum albumin solution. The paint-
brush is then dipped in the albumin solution and mixed with
the marrow material prior to smear preparation.47 Another
TECHNIQUE OF BONE MARROW
method recommends mixing marrow collected from the
CORE BIOPSY
 cadaver with a 5% solution of bovine serum albumin (prepared
 in physiologic saline), followed by smear preparation.
Core biopsies are essential if there are repeated dry taps (e.g-
Smears are stained with a Romanowsky-type blood stain
failure to collct marrow particles by aspiration). Dry taps may
such as Wright, Giemsa, or a combination thereof. Satisfac-
be the result of technical error, but they can also occur when
tory results can usually be obtained with the Diff-Quik stain,
the marrow is packed with cells, as when a leukemia is present,
a rapid modifed Wright stain. The appropriate staining
and they usually occur when myelofbrosis is present. Dry taps
time(s) for the stain or stains being used is determined with
 or poor-quality samples are common when marrow aspirates
experience. Thicker smears will require longer staining times.
are attempted on very young animals, even though the marrow
 About twice the time is required for staining bone marrow
 is generally highly cellular. Core biopsy sections provide a
 smears compared to blood flms. Smears containing marrow
more accurate way of evaluating marrow cellularity and exam-
 particles wil have blue-staining material on them, which is
ining  f
for myelofbrosis, granulomatous diseases involving
visible grossly (Fig. 8-7). When examined microscopically,
bone r
marrow, or 1
 metastatic neoplasia than do aspirate
particles contain blood cell precursors and stromal elements
smears.12.s Core biopsies are also needed to diagnose vascular
(Fig. 8-8). Fat is dissolved away during alcohol fxation,but it
abnormalities (edema and hemorrhage) and acute infamma
is represented in particles by the presence of variably sized
 tion (fbrin deposition and focal neutrophilic infiltrates).74 To
unstained circular areas.
maximize information concerning bone marrow composition,
If adequate smears are available, one smear should be 
we recommend collecting aspirate and core biopsy samples at
stained using the Prussian blue procedure for iron. In contrast
the same time. Even when a core biopsy is not planned, it is
 to other species, healthy cats typically lack stainable iron in
advisable to have a core biopsy needle available in case a dry
their marrow aspirates. If leukemia is present, additional
tap should occur.
special stains may be needed to help differentiate the type of
Preparation of the animal and the site for a bone marrow
leukemia.
core biopsy is the same as that described earlier for a marrow
CHAPTER 8 - Bone Marrow Examination
239
A
FIGURE 8-7
Two stained bone marrow smears are shown. The scant blue-staining
material in the bottom smear indicates that only a few, small marrow
particles are present. The abundant blue-staining material in the top
B
3
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 8-6
d ys fuss  suedad ius adse mou uo
s sse e uo ped si lai paendse go dop e asad ae sa
and a coverslipis placedon top of the aspirated material at a right angle
to the glass slide as shown. After the aspirate material spreads betweenl
the slide and coverslip, the coverslip is slid smoothly from the glass slide
in a horizontal plane at a right angle to the glass slide,and both coverslip
and glass slide are air-dried. This technique has been recommended for
bone marrow aspirates collected with EDTA in saline because the lighter
weight of a coverslip is less likely to result in cell lysis from frictional
forces than the heavier weight of the glass slide. B, Assuming sufficient
particles are present, a drop of aspirated material is placed in the center
of a glass slide and a second glass slide is placed on top of the aspirated
material on the first slide as shown. After the aspirated material spreads
between the slides, they are quickly pulled apart in a horizontal plane,
and both slides are rapidly air-dried.
aspirate. Core biopsies require the use of special needles
designed to cut a solid core of material. Jamshidi bone marrow
FIGURE 8-8
biopsy needles, 11 to 13 gauge and 3 to 4 inches long, are used 
Normal bone marrow aspirate smear from a dog. Variably sized unstained
in our veterinary hospital (Fig. 8-9). Depending on the species
circular areas indicate where fat was dissolved away during alcohol fixa-
and size of the animal, core biopsies may be taken from the
fion. The large cells present are megakaryocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
wing of the ilium, head of the humerus, or sternum. Core
biopsies and aspirates should be taken from distantly located
sites to ensure that one collection does not result in disruption
(Fig. 8-10, B) and the needle is advanced using the same
of the area where the other sample is being collected. Collec-
clockwise-counterclockwise motion (Fig. 8-10, C). If possible,
tion from two separate sites should also increase the likeli-
the needle should be advanced 1 inch to get suffcient material
hood of identifying tumor metastasis.12
for evaluation. Once the needle has been advanced to its
With the stylet locked in place, moderate pressure is
maximal depth, several 360-degree twists are made and it is
applied to the needle as it is rotated in an alternating clockwise-
withdrawn. The core within the needle is pushed out using a
counterclockwise motion (Fig. 8-10, A). Once the needle
wire, which accompanies the needle. This is done by placing.
is frmly embedded into the bone, the stylet is removed
 the wire in the tip of the needle and forcing the core out of
240
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
formalin vapors will interfere with the staining quality of cells
in the exfoliative cytology preparations.
MORPHOLOGIC
IDENTIFICATION OF CELLS
This discussion focuses primarily on the morphologic appear-
ance of cells in aspirate smears stained with Wright-Giemsa,
but examples of core biopsy sections stained with H&E are
sre huruieis-anq se readde sared mo paiussand os
in aspirate smears when viewed grossly (see Fig. 8-7). When
examined microscopically, they contain blood cell precursors,
vessels, reticular cells, macrophages, and plasma cells
(see Fig. 8-8). Fat is dissolved away during alcohol fixation,
but it is represented in particles by the presence of variably
FIGURE 8-9
sized, unstained circular areas. Most particles in normal
Bone marrow core biopsy needl. An 11-gauge Jamshidi core bone
 animals are composed of one-third to two-thirds cells (see
marrow biopsy reedle with stylet in place, wire used to push the core
Figs. 8-8, 8-11).
biopsy from the needle, and container with formalin fixative.
Megakaryocytic Series
Courtesy ofHeather Wamsley.
Megakaryoblasts are the earliest recognizable cell in this
series. They have a single nucleus and deeply basophilic cyto-
plasm (Fig. 8-12, A). This cell type is not recognized in most
the handle end of the needle (Fig. 8-10, D). Because the tip
normal aspirate smears because it occurs in small numbers and
of the needle is tapered, pushing the core out through the tip
is difficult to differentiate from other blast cells. Promega-
would add crush artifacts to the core.
karyocytes, which have two or four nuclei and deeply baso-
 The head of the femur is not used for core biopsies because
philic cytoplasm, are easily recognized (Fig. 8-12, A, B). These
a core of material does not stay in the needle when it is with-
cells are much larger than leukocytes or nucleated erythroid
drawn. Because core biopsy needles are larger than aspirate
 precursor cels. Subsequent nuclear reduplications result in
needles, the wing of the ilium in cats is generally too thin to
progressively larger basophilic megakaryocytes (Fig. 8-12, C).
allow for the collection of a core sample parallel to its long
Nuclei in basophilic megakaryocytes are joined into a lobu-
axis, as is typically done in dogs. However, core biopsies may
lated mass, making it difficult to count the number of nuclear
be collcted from the ilium in cats by making two or three
perpendicular punch biopsies completely through the most
staining cytoplasmic granules imparts a pink color to the
dorsal aspect of the wing of the ilium. The short cores that are
cytoplasm characteristic of mature (granular) megakaryocytes
 obtained have cortical bone on both ends. Multiple cores are
(Fig. 8-12, D). Megakaryocytes are gigantic and vary from 50
needed to obtain suffcient material for evaluation.
 to 200 μm in diameter, with larger cells having greater nuclear
If attempts to aspirate bone marrow have resulted in dry
ploidy.
taps or poor-quality smears, the core biopsy may be gently
Erythrocytic Series
rolled between two glass slides (Fig. 8-10, E) or across a single
glass slide using the tip of the needle and then stained in the
Morphologic changes that occur as cells of the erythroid series
same manner as aspirate smears. These roll preparations are
undergo maturation include diminution in size, decrease in
generally of lower quality than aspirate smears. In particular,
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N: C) ratio, progressive nuclear con-
the number of megakaryocytes and amount of stainable iron
densation, and the appearance of red cytoplasmic color as
present is generally underrepresented. After one or more roll 
hemoglobin is synthesized and accumulates within the cyto-
preparations are made, the core is placed in fixative (Fig. 8-10,
plasm (Fig. 8-13).
F) and submitted to a surgical pathology service, where it is
 decalcified, embedded, sectioned, stained with hematoxylin
Rubriblasts
and eosin (H&E) and possibly other stains, and examined
The earliest recognizable cell type in the erythroid series is the
microscopically by a pathologist (Fig. 8-11). Fixatives other
rubriblast. This is a relatively large cell with a high N:C ratio
than formalin are sometimes preferred; consequently the sur-
and intensely basophilic cytoplasm resulting from the pres-
gical pathology service should be consulted prior to sample
ence of many polyribosomes. The nucleus of the rubriblast is
collection. Unfixed aspirate smears, core roll preparations, or
usually almost perfectly round and the chromatin is finely
other exfoliative cytology preparations should not be mailed
 granular, containing one or more pale blue to medium blue
in the same package with formalin-fixed tissue because the
nucleoli (see Fig. 8-13, A).
CHAPTER 8 · Bone Marrow Examination
241
D
E
FIGURE 8-10
 s   u  o pdde s sd p  d ad m  
in place) as the needle is rotated in an alternating clockwise-counterclockwise motion. B, Once the needle is
frmly embedded into the bone, the needle cap (if present and stylet are removed. C, The needle is again
advanced using the same clockwise-counterclockwise motion. If possible, the needle should be advanced one
inch to get sufficient material for evaluation. D, The core within the needle is pushed out onto a glasslide
using a wire accompanying the needl. This is done by placing the wire in the tip of the needle and forcing
sese sd    
second glass slide. It will subsequently be stained with a routine blood stain such as Wright-Giemsa. F, After
one or more roll preparations are made, the core is placed in fixative.
All of tbe aboue from Harvey JW Bone marrow core biopsy. NAVC Clinicianis Brief. 2004;October:32-35.
242
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
ribosomes results in the formation of mature erythrocytes
with red-staining cytoplasm (see Fig. 8-13, F).
Granulocytic Series
Morphologic changes that occur as cells of the granulocytic
series undergo mafuration include slight diminution in size,
decrease in N:C ratio, progressive nuclear condensation,
changes in nuclear shape, and the appearance of cytoplasmic
granules. The background (i.e., nongranular) cytoplasm's color
changes from gray-blue to light blue to nearly colorless in
a  o s  sd 
(see Fig. 8-13).
Myeloblasts
 The first recognizable cells in the granulocytic series are called
 pnr se se dde si I ad si
FIGURE 8-11
with round to oval nuclei, which are generally centrally located
Low-power image of a normal bone marrow core biopsy from a dog. The
 in the cell. The N:C ratio is high (greater than 1.5), and the
bone marrow core biopsy has been fixed, decalcified, sectioned, and
nuclear outline is usually regular and smooth (see Fig. 8-13,
stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Pink-staining trabecular
G). Nuclear chromatin is finely stippled, containing one or
       ie s si 
more nucleoli or nucleolar rings. The cytoplasm is generally
indicate where fat was dissolved away during fixation. The large cells
present are megakaryocytes.
moderately basophilic (gray-blue in color) and not as dark as
that of rubriblasts. Primary granules begin to form in late
myeloblasts; consequently some of these cells may contain a
a ss-us us (s un sss ad) m
Prorubricytes
in the cytoplasm. Such cells may be classified as type II myelo-
When nucleoli are no longer visible and slightly coarser chro-
      i sn
 matin clumping is present, the cell is classified as a prorubri-
magenta-staining granules have been classified as type II
cyte (see Fig. 8-13, B). The N:C ratio is generally slightly less 
myeloblasts (Fig. 8-14, A).37
than in rubriblasts.
Promyelocytes (Progranulocytes)
Basophilic Rubricytes
Large numbers of magenta-staining primary granules are
The next cell type in the erythroid series is the basophilic
visible within the cytoplasm of promyelocytes,but nucleoli are
rubricyte. These cells still have blue cytoplasm but they are
no longer visible (see Fig. 8-13, H). Promyelocytes may be
smaller than prorubricytes, have lower N:C ratios, and have
somewhat larger than myeloblasts because of their more
 nuclear condensation into light and dark areas, giving the
abundant cytoplasm.
nucleus a cartwheel appearance (see Fig. 8-13, C).
Myelocytes
Polychromatophilic Rubricytes
 Primary, magenta-staining granules characteristic of promy-
The combined presence of hemoglobin (red) and ribosomes
(blue) accounts for the reddish-blue cytoplasm characteristic
 granules that characterize neutrophils, eosinophils, and
of polychromatophilic rubricytes. They also tend to be smaller
basophils appear at this stage. Myelocytes still have round
than basophilic rubricytes and have more nuclear condensa-
nuclei, but they are generally smaller with more nuclear
tion (see Fig. 8-13, D).
condensation and have lighter blue cytoplasm than promyelo-
cytes. It is diffcult to visualize the secondary granules
Metarubricytes
within neutrophilic myelocytes because of their neutral stain-
The most mature nucleated erythroid cell type is the small
ing characteristics (see Fig. 8-13, I). Eosinophilic myelocytes
metarubricyte (see Fig. 8-13, E). Its nucleus is dark (pyknotic),
 and basophilic myelocytes are identified by their characteristic
with few or no clear areas; its cytoplasm is usually polychro-
granules (see Fig. 8-13, M,Q; Fig. 8-14, B,C). The large sec-
matophilic but may be red (normochromic).
yq readde Aeu sdouso sunb u snua Arepu
before becoming bright red as the cell matures (see Fig. 8-14,
Polychromatophilic Erythrocytes (Reticulocytes)
B). Eosinophil granules are generally round in animals except
When the metarubricyte nucleus is lost, a reticulocyte is
cats, where they are rod-shaped. Cat basophilic myelocytes are
formed. Reticulocytes formed from polychromatophilic meta-
also distinctive, having a mixture of dark-purple and light-
rubricytes will appear as polychromatophilic erythrocytes (see
lavender round to oval granules that typically fll the cyto-
Fig. 8-13, F). Continued hemoglobin synthesis and loss of
plasm (see Fig. 8-14, C).
CHAPTER 8 = Bone Marrow Examination
243
B
FIGURE 8-12
Megakaryocyte developmental stages in bone marrow aspirate smears from dogs. A, Megakaryoblast with
single nucleus (far leff), promegakaryocyte with two nuclei (bottom lef),promegakaryocyte with four nuclei
(top rigbt), and a megakaryocytic cell with six nuclei that may be considered intermediate between a promega-
s  s r g     s e pe o
myeloid and erythroid precursors. C, Basophilic megakaryocyte with blue cytoplasm and multiple fused nuclei.
karyocytes develop. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Metamyelocytes
Segmented Granulocytes
Once nuclear indentation and condensation become readily
The final stage in granulocyte development is the segmented
apparent, precursor cells are no longer capable of division.
 or mature granulocyte. The nuclear membrane is no longer
Precursors with kidney-shaped nuclei are called metamyelo-
 smooth and the nuclear width becomes irregular and seg-
 cytes. Nuclei with slight indentations extending less than 25%
ments into two or more lobes in these cells. The nuclear
into the nucleus are still classified as myelocytes. Like myelo-
chromatin is moderately to densely clumped, and the back-
cytes, the granules may be neutrophilic, eosinophilic, or baso-
 ground cytoplasm is often colorless in neutrophils but may
philic in staining characteristics (see Fig. 8-13, JN,R).
appear faintly blue or faintly pink (see Fig. 8-13, L). Nuclei
of eosinophils and basophils are generally less segmented than
Band Cells
the nuclei of neutrophils, and specifc granules can be identi-
Cells with thinner rod-shaped nuclei with smooth parallel
fied in their cytoplasm (see Fig. 8-13, PT).
sides are called bands (see Fig. 8-13, K,O,S). No area of the
nucleus has a diameter less than two-thirds the diameter of
Monocytic Series
any other area of the nucleus. Band cell nuclei twist to conform
 The monocytic series consists of monoblasts, promonocytes,
to the space within the cytoplasm, and horseshoe or S-shaped 
and monocytes. They account for a small percentage of total
nuclei are common.
 marrow cells and cannot be reliably differentiated from early
244
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
G
R
FIGURE 8-13
Maturation of erythroid and granulocytic cells in Wright-Giemsa-stained bone marrow aspirate smears from
dogs. A, Rubriblast with intensely basophilic cytoplasm. The rucleus has finely clumped chromatin and
contains at least three circular nucleoli. B, Prorubricyte with intensely basophilic cytoplasm and finely clumped
nuclear chromatin. Nucleoli are not seen. C, Basophilic rubricyte with blue-staining cytoplasm and coarsely
clumped nuclear chromatin. D, Polychromatophilic rubricyte with bluish-red (polychromatophilic) cytoplasm
and coarsely clumped nuclear chromatin. E, Metarubricyte with polychromatophilic cytoplasm and a dark
pyknotic nuleus. F, Polychromatophilic erythrocyte (reticulocyte)formed after nuclear extrusion eft and a
mature erythrocyte (rigbt). G, Myeloblast with blue cytoplasm lacking clearly visible granules. The nucleus
     u   s e  p  s
containing many magenta-staining granules. The nucleus has finely clumped chromatin without visible
rucleoli. I, Neutrophilic myelocyte with light-blue cytoplasm and a round rnucleus exhibiting moderately
clumped chromatin. Neutrophilie granules do not stain. J, Neutrophilic metamyelocyte with light-blue cyto-
u ai ' se yi m u pa  su pe e pe si
with segmented nucleus and nearly colorless cytoplasm. M, Eosinophilic myelocyte with a round nucleus and
arge numbers of eosinophilic grarules in the cytoplasm. N, Eosinophilic metamyelocyte with a kidney-shaped
rucleus and eosinophilic granules in the cytoplasm. O, Band eosinophil with eosinophilic granules in the
cytoplasm. P, Mature eosinophil. Q, Basophilic myelocyte with a round nucleus and purple granules in the
cytoplasm. R, Basophilic metamyelocyte with kidney-shaped nucleus and purple grarules in the cytoplasm.
 su s  oseq am  se a un sa nd m os p 
 purple granules in the cytoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 granulocytic cell, except for promyelocytes, which have
Macrophages
 numerous magenta-staining granules. Monoblasts resemble
 Macrophages are large cells with abundant cytoplasm and
myeloblasts except that their nuclear shape is irregularly round
nuclei that are round to oval in shape with finely clumped
to convoluted in appearance (Fig. 8-15, A). Promonocytes
 chromatin (Fig. 8-16, A). The cytoplasm of macrophages gen-
 are similar in appearance to myelocytes and metamyelocytes 
erally contains vacuoles and phagocytized material such as
(Fig. 8-15, B). Monocytes in bone marrow are identical to
 pyknotic nuclear debris, hemosiderin, and, rarely, erythrocytes
those seen in peripheral blood (Fig. 8-15, C).
 and leukocytes (Fig. 8-16, B). Hemosiderin in macrophages
CHAPTER 8 - Bone Marrow Examination
245
B
C
A
FIGURE 8-14
Myeloid precursor cells in bone marrow. A, Type II myeloblast from a dog containing rumerous magenta-
staining granules in the cytoplasm. Three nucleoli are visible within the nucleus. B, Eosinophilic myelocyte
from a horse with a round nucleus and many large round granules in the cytoplasm. The granules stain bluish
rather than having the bright red color that is characteristic of mature eosinophils. C, Basophilic myelocyte
from a cat with a round rucleus and a mixture of purple and light lavender granules in the cytoplasm. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
B
C
FIGURE 8-15
Monocyte development in dog bone marrow. A, Monoblast with basophilic cytoplasm and kidney-shaped
nucleus containing nucleoli. B, Presumptive promonocyte with convoluted nucleus and basophilic cytoplasm.
C, Monocyte with convoluted nueleus and lighter-blue cytoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
appears gray to black when stained with routine blood stains.
 low numbers of lymphoblasts and prolymphocytes, as well as
Although nucleated erythrocyte precursors develop around
reactive lymphocytes, may be present (see Fig. 8-16, A).
central macrophages in the marrow, these erythroid islands are
rarely seen in aspirate smears (Fig. 8-17) because they are
Plasma Cells
 casily disrupted during aspiration and smear preparation.
Plasma cells are larger, have a lower N:C ratio, and have
 greater cytoplasmic basophilia than resting lymphocytes. The
Lymphocytes
 presence of a prominent Golgi apparatus may create a pale
 Most bone marrow lymphocytes are small, with morphology
 perinuclear area (Golgi zone) in the cytoplasm (see Fig. 8-18,
identical to that seen in blood (Fig. 8-18, A, B). However,
C). They typically have eccentrically located nuclei with coarse
lymphopoiesis normally occurs in bone marrow; consequently,
 chromatin clumping in a mosaic pattern. Plasma cells may
246
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 8-16
Macrophages in bone marrow aspirates from dogs. A, Foamy macrophage containing a lysed, phagocytized
erythrocyte in the cytoplasm (left), prolymphocyte or possible lymphoblast with a single nucleolus in the
 plasm also contains nuclear debris and gray-staining material consistent with hermosiderin. Wright-Giemsa
stairn.
A
B
FIGURE 8-17
Erythroid islands in bone marrow aspirate smears. A, Erythroid island in bone marrow aspirate from a cat.
A central macrophage with phagocytized material is surrounded by developing nucleated erythroid cells. Pale
spots in some erythrocytes are Heinz bodies. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Erythroid island in bone marrow
aspirate from a dog. A central macrophage with phagocytized red-staining ruclear material is surrounded by
developing nucleated erythroid cell. The cytoplasm of the macrophage stains dark blue,indicating the pres-
 ence of large amounts of hemosiderin. Prussian blue stain.
rarely contain bluish or sometimes pinkish inclusions (Russell
 immunoglobulin and other glycoproteins.1836 This appears to
bodies) within the cytoplasm. These inclusions are usually
 result from a defect in processing or transport of these pro-
round (see Fig. 8-18, D, E), but they may be needle-like
teins.1α Plasma cells filled with Russell bodies have been called
(see Fig. 8-18, F) or appear to coalesce, filling the cytoplasm 
Mott cells. The cytoplasm of some plasma cells may stain
with material (see Fig. 8-18, G). These inclusions are com-
reddish, especially at the periphery of the cell. These plasma
posed of dilated rough endoplasmic reticulum containing
cells have been called flame cells (see Fig. 8-18, H).82
CHAPTER 8 - Bone Marrow Examination
247
A
B
C
D
A, Smalymphocyte. B, Large granular lymphocyte (botom left) and mitotic, polychromatophilie rubricyte
(op rigbt) C, Three plasma ces with voluminous, deeply basophili cytoplasm, ecentric nuclei, and pale
Golgi zones in their cytoplasm.The nuclei exhibit coarse chromatin clumping in a mosaic pattern.This image
is of lower magnification than the other images in this figure. D, A plasma cell containing large numbers of
small bluish inclusions (Russell bodies) within the cytoplasm.
E, A plasma cell containing large bluish inclusions (Russell bodies) within the cytoplasm. F, A plasma cell
with cytoplasm flled with blue-staining needle-like inelusions. G, A plasma cell with cytoplasm flled with
turquoise-staining material. H, A plasma cell with cytoplasm that stained red at the periphery (fame cell).
Wright-Giemsa stain.
Osteoclasts
area (Golgi zone) may be visible in the central part of the
Osteoclasts are multinucleated giant cells that phagocytize
cytoplasm.
Superficially,  osteoblasts appear similar  to
bone. They may be confused with megakaryocytes; however,
plasma cells, but they are larger and have less-condensed
the nuclei present in osteoclasts are clearly separate (Fig. 8-19,
nuclear chromatin. Osteoblast nuclei are round to oval in
A), in contrast to the fused nuclear material present in mega-
shape, have reticular chromatin, and may have one or
 karyocytes. The cytoplasm stains blue and often contains vari-
two nucleoli.  Osteoblasts generally occur  in  groups
ably sized magenta-staining granular material associated with
lining trabecular surfaces (see Fig. 8-20, A,B) and tend to
the removal and digestion of bone (Fig. 8-19, B). Osteoclasts
remain in small groups when present in aspirate smears (see
are rarely seen in marrow aspirates from adult animals, but
Fig. 8-21, A,B).
they may be present in disorders in which lysis of bone is 
 increased, such as the hypercalcemia of malignancy.49 When
observed in histologic sections, they are located near bony
Mitotic Figures
surfaces (Fig. 8-20, A). Osteoclasts are consistently found in
The bone marrow is actively producing new blood cells at all
aspirates or in core biopsies from young growing animals in
times, but mitosis itself is a brief part of the cell cycle. Con-
which bone remodeling is active (Fig. 8-20, B).
sequently mitotic cells normally account for less than 2% of
all nucleated cells in bone marrow (Figs. 8-18, B; 8-22, A,B).
Osteoblasts
The origin of some mitotic cells may be identified by the
Osteoblasts are relatively large cells with eccentric nuclei
characteristics of the cytoplasm——for example, the presence of
and foamy basophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 8-21, A,B). A clear
hemoglobin or granules (see Fig. 8-22, A, B).
248
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 8-19
Osteoclasts in bone marrow from dogs.A, Multinucleated osteoclast in bone marrow aspirate. B, Multinucle-
ated osteoclast in bone marrow aspirate. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 8-20
Osteoclasts and osteoblasts in bone marrow histopathology sections from dogs. A, Osteoclast (mulinucleated
cell on rigbt) and osteoblasts (line of adjacent cells on left along trabecular bone in a core bone marrow biopsy
fom a dog with generalized marrow hypoplasia secondary to severe chronic ehrlichiosis. B, Large multinucle-
ated osteoclasts (rigbt, top leff and top center) and many osteoblasts lining the trabeculae in a young growing
dog with ongoing osification and bone remodeling. Bone and osteoid at the periphery of the trabeculae are
 pink, while the remaining central cartilage is pale. Decalified bone, H&E stain.
B, Courtesy of Rose E. Raskin.
Miscellaneous Cells and Free Nuclei
reduced or absent (Fig. 8-24). Ruptured stromal cells account
Vascular and connective tissue cells are usually ruptured
for some of the free nuclei found in bone marrow smears (see
during aspiration and smear preparation, although low 
Fig. 8-22, C-E). Free nuclei also come from various other
numbers of intact cells may occasionally be seen (Fig. 8-23,
bone marrow cells, especially in smears made from clotted
A,B). Stromal cells are more obvious in aplastic bone marrow
marrow, in thin smears, or in thin areas of smears where
 aspirates in which normal blood cell precursors are markedly
excess forces have destroyed the cells. Free nuclei from
FIGURE 8-21
Clusters of osteoblasts in bone marrow aspirates from dogs. A, Five osteoblasts with eccentric nuclei and
voluminous cytoplasm. B, Large clump of osteoblasts with eccentric ruclei and voluminous cytoplasm.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
E
FIGURE 8-22
Mitotic cells,free nuclei, and a mast cell in bone marrow aspirates from dogs. A, Mitotic polychromatophilic
rubricyte. B, Mitotic promyelocyte with numerous magenta-staining granules. C, Partially ruptured cell
demonstrating the appearance of free nuclear material (top rigbt). D, Reddish staining material is a free rucleus
with some open spaces. The blue inclusion is a nucleolus. E, Reddish staining material is a free rucleus in
which the chromatin is dispersed in a lacelike manner. This appearance has been called a basket cell even
though it has no cytoplasm. F, Mast cell with round eccentric nucleus (left part ofcell) and purple granules in
the cytoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain.
250
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 8-23
Stromal cells in bone marrow aspirate smears from dogs. A, Spindle-shaped stromal cells with “wispy" cyto-
plasm. B, An elongated stromal cell with “wispy"cytoplasm (left), a type II myeloblast with magenta-staining
sd e pe u u q e fa sa an u snu s e pe s seo
cell (botfom). Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Mast-cell precursors are produced in the bone marrow, but
mature mast cells are seldom seen in normal bone marrow.11
Mast cells are round cells with round nuclei. They typically
have large numbers of purple granules in the cytoplasm (see
Fig.8-22, F).
ORGANIZED APPROACH TO
BONE MARROW EVALUATION
Smears and core biopsy sections should be scanned with low-
power objectives fo gain an appreciation of the overall cellu-
larity and determine the adequacy of megakaryocyte numbers.
Normal marrow appears heterogeneous. If some or all of a
marrow smear or core section appears homogeneous, an
abnormal population of cells is probably present. Regional
FIGURE 8-24
 infltrates of neoplastic cells are more easily appreciated in
Residual stroma with three plasma cells (below and left of center)in bone
 core sections than in aspirate smears.
marrow from a dog with aplastic anemia secondary to severe chronic
 As a general rule, erythroid precursors are smaller, have
ehrlichiosis. Variably sized unstained circular areas indicate where fat was
dissolved away during alcohol fxation. The black-staining material is
more nearly spherical nuclei with more condensed nuclear
hemosiderin. Wright-Giemsa stain.
chromatin, and have darker cytoplasm than do granulocyte
precursors at  similar maturational  stages.  Consequently
smaller and darker cells, observed by scanning marrow smears
 at low power, are usually erythroid precursors unless lympho-
 metarubricytes have been called hematogones. The term basket
cytes are increased in numbers, and the larger, paler cells are
cell has been used to refer to free nuclei in which the chroma-
usually granulocyte precursors. Identification of specifc cell
tin is dispersed in a lacelike manner (see Fig. 8-22, E).
types is more difficult in core biopsy sections compared with
Adipocytes vary in size and number in bone marrow.
aspirate smears; consequently sections may be stained with
 Although normal marrow contains many adipocytes, these
Giemsa and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) in addition to H&E
cellsreadily ruprure during sample collection and smear prep-
in an attempt to identify the cell types present.
-red moureu ui salonsea sarel se readde saisodipy uoene
Complete 500-cell differential cell counts from several
ticles after the fat has been removed during smear fixation (see
normal domestic animal species are given in Table 8-1 to
Figs. 8-8, 8-11).
 provide information concerning the normal distribution of
CHAPTER 8 = Bone Marrow Examination
251
TABLE 8-1
 Bone Marrow Differential Cell Counts in Some Domestic Animal Species
Cell Type
Dogs (n = 6 }
Cats ( = 7}a
Horses ( = 4)
Cattle (=3}
Myeloblast
0.4-1.1
0-0.4
0.3-1.5
0-0.2
Promyelocyte
1.1-2.3
0-3.0
1.0-1.9
0-1.4
Neutrophilic myelocyte
3.1-6.1
0.6-8.0
1.9-3.2
2.8-3.4
Neutrophilic metamyelocyte
5.3-8.8
4.4-13.2
2.1-7.3
2.8-6.2
Neutrophilic band
12.7-17.2
12.8-16.6
6.8-14.7
4.6-8.4
Neutrophil
13.8-24.2
6.8-22.0
9.6-21.0
11.2-22.6
Total eosinophilic cells
1.8-5.6
0.8-3.2
2.8-6.8
2.8-3.8
Total basophilic cells
0-0.8
0-0.4
0-1.5
0-1.0
Rubriblast
0.2-1.1
0-0.8
0.6-1.1
0-0.2
Prorubricyte
0.9-2.2
0-1.6
1.0-2.0
0.4-1.2
Basophilic rubricyte
3.7-10.0
1.6-6.2
4.5-11.1
4.8-8.4
Polychromatophilic rubricyte
15.5-25.1
8.6-23.2
14.7-26.0
23.0-36.4
Metarubricyte
9.2-16.4
1.0-10.4
11.4-19.7
9.2-16.8
M: E ratio
0.9-1.76
1.21-2.16
0.52-1.45
0.61-0.97
Lymphocytes
1.7-4.9
11.6-21.6
1.8-6.7
3.6-6.0
Plasma cells
0.6-2.4
0.2-1.8
0.2-1.8
0.2-1.2
Monocytes
0.4-2.0
0.2-1.6
0-1.0
0.4-2.2
Macrophages
0-0.4
0-0.2
0
0-0.8
*Values for cats, horses and cattle from Jain, 1993.3
n = Number of animals evalu ated.
cells. The time required to perform such counts (up to 1 hour)
will be that the estimate of overall marrow cellularity will be
precludes their use in clinical practice. Either a modified dif-
ferential count is performed or mental estimates concerning
possible to accurately estimate the marrow cellularity.
the distribution of cells may be made. Because veterinary
 The overall cellularity of bone marrow decreases with age
students and residents are trained in our laboratory and infor-
because of a loss of skeletal bone mass, resulting in increased
mation from our cases may be published, we routinely perform
 a modified differential, as shown in Appendix 1. Others may
 growing animals, where cells must be produced not only to
compensate for normal cell turnover, but also to respond to
erythroid maturation index (EMI) and myeloid mafuration
growth of the cardiovascular system. Marrow cellularity
 index (MMI).33 Trained professionals, who regularly examine
decreases with age because the ratio of bone marrow space to
bone marrow aspirate smears, typically examine the bone
blood volume increases.
marrow in a systematic manner, make a number of judgments
 Marrow can become hypercellular when one or more cell
based on their knowledge of the normal appearance of bone
 types exhibit increased proliferation in response to peripheral
marrow, and record their finding in narrative form as pre-
needs, as occurs in response to anemia (erythroid hyperplasia)
sented here.
 or purulent infammation (granulocytic hyperplasia). The
marrow may also become hypercellular secondary to dysplastic
Cellularity
or neoplastic proliferations of marrow cells or from infltration
 The cellularity of bone marrow is estimated by examining the
 of neoplastic cells from peripheral tissues (e.g., a metastatic
 proportion of cells versus fat present in particles. Normal cel-
lymphoma). Defects in either the progenitor cells or the
lularity varies between 25% and 75% cells, depending on the
bone marrow microenvironment necessary for their survival
age of the animal (Fig. 8-25, A,B).32 If the particles are com-
 and proliferation can result in hypocellular marrow (Fig.
posed of more than 75% cells, the marrow is interpreted as
8-27, A,B).
hypercellular (Fig. 8-26, A,B), and if the particles are com-
posed of more than 75% fat, the marrow is interpreted as
Megakaryocytes
hypocellular (Fig. 8-27, A,B). Unfortunately the cellularity of
 The frequency and morphology of megakaryocytes should
the marrow is not uniform. Some marrow particles may have
be evaluated by scanning areas of aspirate smears containing
normal or high cellularity (Fig. 8-28, A) and others may have
particles at low power using a 10x objective. Most large
low cellularity (Fig. 8-28, B) in the same aspirate smear,
particles should have several associated megakaryocytes (Fig.
because of patchy differences in cellularity (Fig. 8-29). Obvi-
 8-30), and normally 80% to 90% of megakaryocytes are of the
ously the more particles one can evaluate, the more likely it
 granular, mature type.s Megakaryocytes are not evenly
252
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 8-25
Normal cellularity in bone marrow from a horse. A, Bone marrow aspirate smear from a horse. No mega-
karyocytes are visible in this field. The unstained circular areas represent adipocytes dissolved away during
alcohoi fxation. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Bone marrow section from a core biopsy collected from the same
horse as the aspirate shown in (A). The unstained circular areas represent adipocytes dissolved away during
fxation. Low magnification with H&E stain.
FIGURE 8-26
Increased cellularity in bone marrow from a horse with hemolytic anemia which may have been secondary to
alymphoid neoplasm.A, The increased cellularity visible in an aspirate smear resulted primarily from erythroid
hyperplasia. The M: E ratio was 0.16. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Bone marrow section from a core biopsy col-
lected from the same horse as the aspirate shown in (A). The large cell near the center is a megakaryocyte.
Clear areas indicate that a small amount of fat was present. Low magnification with H&E stain.
distributed in bone marrow; consequently it is diffcult to
 low-power field, megakaryocyte numbers are likely normal;
estimate megakaryocyte numbers accurately in bone marrow
 and if greater than 15 are seen per low-power field, mega-
 aspirate smears. Multiple fields containing particles should be
 karyocyte numbers are considered increased.4s Others have
scanned to determine an average number of megakaryocytes 
suggested slightly diffrent reference values, with less than 3
per feld. Examination of between 20 and 25 felds is required
 megakaryocytes per low-power field suggesting megakaryo-
to achieve a coefficient of variation of 20%. According to one
cytic hypoplasia and more than 10 to 20 megakaryocytes per
study, if less than 5 megakaryocytes are seen per low-power
low-power field suggesting megakaryocytic hyperplasia.30
field using the 10x objective, megakaryocyte numbers are
These guidelines apply only for particle-rich marrow aspirates
considered low. If 5 to 15 megakaryocytes are seen per
because megakaryocytes tend to be associated with particles
FIGURE 8-27
Low cellularity in bone marrow from a cat with aplastic anemia. A, Low cellularity in a bone marrow aspirate
lected from the same cat as the aspirate shown in (A). The red-staining material is trabecular bone. Low
magnification with H&E stain.
FIGURE 8-28
Variable cellularity in a bone marrow aspirate smear from a dog with Ebrlicbia canis infection. A, High cel-
lularity in one large marrow particle. B, Low cellularity in a different particle present in the same bone marrow
aspirate smear as shown in (A). Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 8-29
FIGURE 8-30
Variable cellularity in a section from a bone marrow core biopsy collected
from the same dog as the aspirate particles shown in Figure 8-28 (A)
a dog. Wright-Giemsa stain.
and (B). H&E stain.
254
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 in aspirate smears. Megakaryocyte numbers will be lower in
TABLE 8-2
 marrow aspirates of poor quality. Abnormal megakaryocyte
morphology (e.g., increased numbers of promegakaryocytes or
Normal Myeloid-to-Erythroid Ratios in Some
the presence of dwarf megakaryocytes) should be noted when
 Domestic Animal Species
present.
Species
Range
Mean
Dog
0.75-2.53
1.25
Erythroid Cells
Cat
1.21-2.16
1.63
The maturation and morphology of the erythroid series should
Horse
0.50-1.50
0.93
be evaluated to determine if it is complete (frequent polychro-
Cow
0.31-1.85
0.71
matophilic erythrocytes should be present) and orderly. There
Sheep
0.77-1.68
1.09
is generally a progressive increase in numbers with each stage
Pig
0.73-2.81
1.77
of development, from low numbers of rubriblasts (generally
Values from Jain, 1993.33
less than 1%) to high numbers of polychromatophilic rubri-
cytes, which may account for one quarter of all nucleated cells
 in the bone marrow.3 Metarubricytes are numerous but gen-
 erally not as numerous as polychromatophilic rubricytes.
basophilic series should be recorded. An increase in one or
Jo os paaoxa iou op Aensn saiqnrord pue siseqan
both of these celines is usually associated with inflammatory
 all nucleated cells. if the proportion of these immature cells
conditions that result in increased numbers of eosinophils or
is increased, this finding should be noted. An increase in
basophils in blood and/or tissues. They may also be increased
mature as well as immature cells of the erythroid series is
 in association with some myeloid neoplasms.
expected in response to anemia. If immature erythroid cells
are increased and later stages are not, it suggests that a pro-
Myeloid-to-Erythroid Ratio
liferative abnormality is present. Additional abnormal mor-
A myeloid-to-erythroid (M:E) ratio (also referred to as a
phologic findings that should be recorded include megaloblastic
cells, frequent binucleated cells, and pleomorphic nuclei.
500 cells and dividing the number of granulocytic cells,
 Because reticulocytes are rarely released into blood in
including mature granulocytes, by the number of nucleated
response to anemia in horses, reticulocyte counts can be done
erythroid cells. Alternatively, this ratio may be estimated by
 in bone marrow aspirates from horses to assist in the differ-
experienced professonals. Normal M:E ratios in some
ential diagnosis of anemia Greater than 5% reticulocytes sug-
domestic animals are given in Table 8-2. Dilution of a bone
 gests a regenerative response to anemia.58
marrow aspirate with blood can result in a falsely high M:E
ratio, especially if a substantial neutrophilia is present in blood.
Granulocytic Cells
The distribution of granulocytic cells should be evaluated to
Lymphocytes
determine whether the series is complete (i.e., a normal
 Specific comments are in order regarding the number and
number of mature granulocytes are present) and orderly. There
morphology of lymphocytes. Small lymphocytes generally
is generally a progressive increase in numbers with each stage
account for less than 10% of all nucleated cells in normal
of development, from low numbers of myeloblasts (often less
pue zs'esaop Aureay suos u tl yoer Aeu Aoy inq 'seue
than 1%) to high numbers of mature neutrophils, which may
 20% in some healthy cats.36.66 Low numbers of lymphoblasts
account for nearly one-quarter of all nucleated cells in the
and prolymphocytes may be present, but they are difficult to
bone marrow.36 Myeloblasts and promyelocytes generally do
differentiate from rubriblasts and prorubricytes. Small lym-
not exceed 5% of all nucleated cells. If the proportion of these
phoid follicles may be present in both normal and diseased
immature cells is increased, this finding should be noted.
animals examined by histopathology269
An increase in mature as well as immature cells of the
 Increased numbers of mature lymphocytes may be seen in
 myeloid series is expected in infammatory disorders resulting
bone marrow from animals with chronic lymphocytic leuke-
in granulocytic hyperplasia. If immature granulocytic cells
mia (CLL), and increased numbers of small lymphocytes have
are increased and later stages are not, it indicates that either
been reported in the bone marrow of cats and dogs with
more mature cells have been depleted in the marrow granu-
erythroid  aplasia  and immune-mediated nonregenerative
locyte pool, as occurs in acute infammation, or that a prolif-
erative abnormality is present.? Morphologic abnormalities
phocytes have also been reported in cats with a thymoma or
such as large cell size and vacuolated cytoplasm should be
cholangiohepatitis.71 Lymphocytes in the bone marrow from
reported.
cats with CLL tended to be somewhat larger, with cleaved or
Total eosinophilic cells usually account for less than 6% of
lobulated nuclei, compared with lymphocytes in bone marrow
 all nucleated cells in the marrow, with basophilic precursors
from cats with a reactive lymphocytosis. When examined by
 generally accounting for less than 1% of all nucleated cells.
-ul oun aziuano on papui saiooqdui Xaooqedois
Higher numbers of eosinophilic cells have been reported in
phoid aggregates (primarily B lymphocytes) in cats with a
llamas.? The increased representation of the eosinophilic or
reactive lymphocytosis. In contrast, proliferating lymphocytes
CHAPTER 8 - Bone Marrow Examination
255
(predominantly T lymphocytes) were diffusely distributed in
 be seen in association with immune-mediated neutropenia or 
the bone marrow of cats with a thymoma and cats and dogs
when increased marrow apoptosis is present, as occurs in
with CLL.54.71
Increased numbers of prolymphocytes and/or lympho-
 seen with the hemophagocytic syndrome.7 Macrophages may
 contain phagocytized cellular debris in response to marrow
kemia or a metastatic lymphoma.54 Glucocorticoid treatment 
results in the movement of recirculating lymphocytes from 
dead cells not coated with antibody or complement because
 blood to bone marrow,719 but the percentage of lymphocytes
 of the presence of scavenger receptors on their surfaces that
in the marrow does not appear to increase,
 possibly because
are capable of recognizing altered carbohydrate and/or phos-
glucocorticoids can concomitantly decrease the population
pholipid moieties.64
of proliferating lymphocytes normally present within the
Other Cell Types
marrow.12
 Comments should always be made concerning the cell types
Plasma Cells
listed above, if only to report that they are present in normal
Plasma cells tend to be concentrated within particles on bone
 numbers with normal morphology. Comments are generally
 marrow smears. This uneven distribution prevents accurate
made only concerning cell types listed below when they are
 sss squ m ui ssad araa ae a n
 present in increased numbers.
2% of all nucleated cells).32 When plasma cells exceed 3% of
 Mitotic figures are increased when the proportion of cells
total nucleated cells, they are considered to be increased. In 
undergoing replication in the bone marrow is increased.
Mitotic figures may be somewhat increased in myeloid or
plasma cells can occur in the bone marrow in dogs and cats
erythroid hyperplasia, but they are more consistently
with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, immune-mediated
 increased in acute myeloid and acute lymphoblastic leukemias.
 Dramatically increased numbers of mitotic erythroid cells
also increased in bone marrow in response to some infectious
occur within the first few hours after the administration of
 agents, including E. tanis and visceral leishmaniasis (as high
vincristine (Fig. 8-31), and increased numbers of mitotic
as 25% plasma cells) in dogs and feline infectious peritonitis
fgures have been reported in animals with congenital
 in cats.54 Increased plasma cels have been reported in rare
dyserythropoiesis.34.62
 cases of myelodysplasia in dogs.7 Increased percentages of
Osteoclasts and osteoblasts are commonly seen in bone
 plasma cells have been described associated with estrogen-
marrow aspirates of young growing animals but are rarely
induced marrow damage in dogs*; however, it is unclear if the
seen in normal adult animals. Increased numbers of osteo-
number of plasma cels is truly increased or if the percentage
clasts and osteoblasts may be seen in adult animals when
is only increased relative to the decreased number of hemato-
bone remodeling is increased, as in disorders with increased
poietic cells.
parathyroid
1 concentrations, and in association with
Mononuclear Phagocytes
Monocytes and their precursors comprise a small portion
(less than 3%) of bone marrow cells. They are difficult to dif-
ferentiate from early granulocytic cells. Increased numbers of
monocyte precursors may be present in response to infam-
matory conditions, but the occurrence of high numbers of
monoblasts indicates that a myeloid neoplasm is present.
Macrophages generally do not exceed 1% of total nucleated
cells in the bone marrow of normal animals. Macrophages
may be increased in the bone marrow with necrotic, granulo-
matous infammatory, and neoplastic (histiocytic sarcoma)
macrophages in conditions such as leishmaniasis, histoplas-
mosis, mycobacteriosis, and cytauxzoonosis.14,15,22.30
Prominent phagocytosis of nucleated and/or anucleated
erythrocytes by macrophages may occur in association with
primary or secondary immune-mediated anemias,76 blood
parasites (e.g., Babesia, Cytauxzoon, Leishmania, Trypanosoma,
FIGURE 8-31
and hemoplasma species)2,3042 hemophagocytic histiocytic
Four mitotic polychromatophilic erythroid cells are present in bone
marrow from a dog 6 hours after an intravenous vincristine treatment.
blood transfusion,3 and in acquired and congenital dyseryth-
The largest cell in the center is an eosinophilic metamyelocyte. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
256
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 8-32
Bone marrow aspirate from a dog demonstrating the appearance of hemosiderin with Wright-Giemsa and
Prussian blue stains. A, Hemosiderin is visible as black globules in the bottom right. A mature megakaryocyte
 megakaryocyte is present at the left edge. Prussian blue stain.
Mast cells are rarely seen in the bone marrow from normal
domestic animals, but they may occur in dogs with aplastic
in some infammatory conditions. The administration of
interleukin-3 and interleukin-6 together, but neither factor
alone, results in marrow mast-cell development in rats. ° Mast
cells may also occur in the marrow of animals with metastatic
likely in noncutaneous systemic mastocytosis, as occurs most
frequently in cats.17,73941.50
Increased numbers of reticular stromal cells suggest that
stromal hyperplasia and/or myelofbrosis is present. A core
biopsy is essential to confrm these suspicions.
Metastatic cells from nonhematopoietic sarcomas or car-
cinomas are rarely recognized in bone marrow biopsies but
should be reported when present.73
FIGURE 8-33
Stainable lron
Lack of stainable iron (hemosiderin) in a bone marrow aspirate from a
Hemosiderin appears gray to black when stained with routine
dog with chronic iron-deficiency anemia. Two megakaryocytes are visible
in the upper portion of the image. Prussian blue stain.
blood stains. It may be seen within macrophages or as free
material from ruptured macrophages (Fig. 8-32, A). The
 Prussian blue stain is used to evaluate bone marrow hemosid-
erin stores. Smears may be sent to a commercial laboratory
Determination of stainable iron in bone marrow is used as
for this stain, or a stain kit can be purchased and applied
a measure of total body iron stores. 1023 A lack of stainable
in-house (Harleco Ferric Iron Histochemical Reaction Set,
 iron is consistent with iron deficiency (Fig. 8-33); however,
#6498693, EM Diagnostic Systems, Gibbstown, NJ). When
negative iron staining is not necessarily predictive of iron
this stain is applied, iron-positive material stains blue, in con-
deficiency26 Cats normally lack stainable iron in their
 trast to the dark pink color of the cell and background (Fig.
 marrow.?31 Stainable iron may be absent in dogs and humans
8-32, B). Stainable iron is easily found in normal marrow
with polyeythemia vera.569 In addition, some cattle (espe-
aspirates from most domestic mammals including llamas as
cially younger animals) lack stainable iron in the marrow even
long as particles are present.3 Using the Prussian blue stain, a
though marrow iron can be demonstrated by a chemical
 good-quality marrow aspirate smear with at least nine parti-
assay.1 Cattle that lack stainable iron generally have lower
cles has been recommended to adequately access marrow
marrow iron concentrations when these are measured chemi-
hemosiderin stores in macrophages.3s
cally than cattle with a positive iron stain. Similarly, recently
CHAPTER 8 · Bone Marrow Examination
257
FIGURE 8-34
FIGURE 8-35
Increased stainable iron (bhue-staiming material) in a bone marrow aspi-
bone marrow aspirate from a norrmal aged horse. Prussian blue stain.
rate from a dog with a hemolytic anemia. Prussian blue stain.
FIGURE 8-36
s  i e   q u  p  a pa
syndrome (MDS). A, Aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat with MDS. A left shift in both granulocytic
and erythroid series is present. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Postmortem bone marrow section from the same cat
with MDS as presented in (A). Several megakaryocytes are present in the central area and in the lower left
of the image. H&E stain. C, Prominent stainable iron (blue-staining material) in a postmortem bone marrow
section collected from the same cat with MDS presented in (A) and (B). Prussian blue stain.
258
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 weaned dogs have little or no stainable iron in their marrow,
13. Canfield PJ. Watson ADJ. Ratcliffe RCC. Dyserythropoiesis. sideroblasts/
 presumably refecting low iron stores at the end of the nursing
siderocytes and hemoglobin crystallization in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1987;161:
 period2s Stainable iron in the marrow tends to increase with
21-28.
14. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in cats: 12 cases 
 advancing age in humans, dogs, horses, and cattle.10,23,3 This 
{1981-1986). J Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1987;190:1445-1448.
phenomenon appears to be especially prominent in old horses,
15. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in dogs: 12 cases
{1981-1986). J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1988;193:1443-1447.
which can have marked amounts of stainable iron present in
16. Cook SD, Skinner HB, Haddad RJ. A quantitative histologic study of osteoporosis
 the bone marrow (Fig. 8-34). Stainable iron in bone marrow
 produced by nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism in dogs. Clin Orhop Relat Res.
is generally increased in animals with hemolytic anemia
1983;105-120.
17. Davies AP, Hayden DV, Klausner JS, et al. Noncutaneous systemic mastocytosis and
(Fig. 8-35) and dyserythropoiesis, in which phagocytosis of
mast celleukemia in a dog: case report and literature review. J/Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
1981;17:361-368.
anemia resulting from decreased erythrocyte production,
18. El-Okda M, Ko YH, Xie SS, et al. Russellbodies consist of heterogenous glycoproteins
in B-cel lymphoma cells. Amm / Chin Pathor. 1992;97:866-871
 including the anemia of infammatory disease.21 The presence
19. Fauci AS. Mechanisms of corticosteroid action on lymphocyte subpopulations. l. Redis-
of stainable iron is considered an abnormal finding in cats and
tribution of circulating T and B lymphocytes to the bone marrow. immunology.
may be detected in some animals with myeloid neoplasms
1975;28:669-680.
 20. Felchle LM, McPhee LA, Kerr ME, et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus and bone 
(Fig. 8-36, A-C), hemolytic anemias, or after blood
marrow necrosis in a dog. Can Vet J. 1996;37:742-744.
 21. Feldman BF, Kaneko JJ, Farver TB. Anermia of inflammatory disease in the dog: ferro-
kinetics of adjuvant-induced anemia. Arm / Vet Res. 1981;42:583-585.
Interpretation
 22. Foglia MV, Restucci B, Pagano A, et al. Pathological changes in the bone marrow of
dogs with leishmaniosis. Vet Rec. 2006;158:690-694.
The final step in evaluating a bone marrow aspirate is to
 23. Franken P, Wensing T. Schotman AJ. The concentration of iron in the liver, spleen and
 provide an interpretation of the cytologic findings in light of
 plasma, and the amount of iron in bone marrow of horses. Zentraibi Veterinarmed A.
the history, clinical fndings, CBC, and results from other
1981;28:381-389.
yodai asen ien eui ubyo aheydoew jo ewoes aaosh Wy buno dy syaupa tz
diagnostic tests and procedures. For example, a high M:E
with a literature review of feline histiocytic malignancies and comparison with canine
ratio could indicate the presence of either increased granulo-
 hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:121-128.
 25. Fry MM, Kirk CA. Reticulocyte indices in a canine model of nutritional iron deficiency.
cytic cells or decreased erythroid cells. Examination of CBC
Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:172-181.
results from blood collected at the same time, as well as an
26. Ganti AK, Moazzam N, Laroia S, et al. Predictive value of absent bone marrow iron
estimate of the overall cellularity, usually allows the correct
stores in the clinical diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia. in Vivo. 2003;17:389-392.
27. Garner FM, Lingeman CH. Mast-cell neoplasms in the domestic cat. Pathor Vet.
 interpretation to be made. Bone marrow examination gener-
1970;7:517-530.
 ally provides information concerning the pathogenesis
of
28. Gaunt SD, Pierce KR. Effect of estradiol on hematopoietic and marrow adherent cells
abnormalities recognized in blood, and sometimes a specific
of dogs. Arm J Vet Res. 1986;47:906-909.
 29. Grindem CB. Bone marrow biopsy and evaluation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract.
 diagnosis can be made.
1989;19:669-696.
30. Grindem CB, Tyler RD, Cowell RL. The bone marrow. In: Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth
JH, et al, eds. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and Cat. 3rd ed. St.
REFERENCES
Louis: Mosby Elsevier; 2008:422-450.
 31. Harvey JW. Myeloproliferative disorders in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract. 1981;11:349-381.
1. Alleman AR, Harvey JVy. The morphologic effects of vincristine sulfate on canine bone
32. Havey JV. Canine bone marrw. normal hematopoiesis, biopsy techniques, and cell
marrow cells. Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22:36-41.
identification and evaluation. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1984;6:909-926.
2. Altman DH, Meyer DJ, Thompson JP, et al. Canine IgGz myeloma with Mott and flame
33. Hoff B, Lumsden JH, Valli VE. An appraisal of bone marrow biopsy in assessment of 
cells. J Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1991;27:419-423.
sick dogs. Can J/ Comp Med. 1985;49:34-42.
-ueis pue Abojona moew auog jo uoenien3 o uassen 'oi soag an uaseaiput 8
34. Holland CT, Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, Allan GS. Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and
able iron content in healthy adult lamas. Vet Clin Pathol. 1994;23:38-42.
cardiac disease in three related English springer spaniels. J Vet lntem Med.
 4. Andrews CM. The preparation of bone marrow smears from femurs obtained at
1991;5:151-159.
autopsy. Comp Haematol Int. 1991:1:229-232.
 35. Hughes DA, Stuart-Smith SE, Bain BJ. How should stainable iron in bone marrow films 
 5. Berggren PC. Aplastic anemia in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1981;179:1400-1402.
be assessed? / Chin Pathol. 2004;57:1038-1040.
6. Binhazim AA, Chapman WL Jr, Latimer KS, et al. Canine leishmaniasis caused by
 36. Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematoogy. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger; 1993.
Leishmania leishmania infantum in two Labrador retrievers. J Vet Diagn invest.
37. Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al. Proposed criteria forclasification of acute myeloid
1992;4:299-305.
leukemia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol. 1991;20:63-82.
 7. Bloemena E, Weinreich S, Schellekens PTA. The influence of prednisolone on the
 38. Jasper DE, Jain NC. The influence of adrenocorticotropic hormone and prednisolone 
recirculation of peripheral blood lymphocytes in vivo. Clin Exp immunol. 1990;80:
upon marow and circulating leukocytes in the dog. Am J Vet Res. 1965;26:844-850.
460-466.
39. Khan KN, Sagartz JE, Koenig G. et al. Systemic mastocytosis in a goat. Vet Pathol.
8. Bloom JC, Thiem PA, Sellers TS, et al. Cephalosporin-induced immune cytopenia in the
1995;32:719-721.
 dog: demonstration of erythrocyte-, neutrophil-, and platelet-associated IgG following 
 40. Kuehn NF, Gaunt SD. Clinical and hematologic findings in canine ehrlichiosis. J Am 
treatment with cefazedone. Am / Hematol. 1988;28:71-78.
Vet //ed Assoc. 1985;186:355-358.
9. Blue JT. Myelofibrosis in cats with myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myelogenous
 41. Liska VVD, MacEwen EG, Zaki FA, et al. Feline systemic mastocytosis: a review and
leukemia. Vet Pathol. 1988;25:154-160.
results of splenectomy in seven cases. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1979;15:589-597.
10. Blum JV, Zuber U. Iron stores of liver, spleen and bone marrow, and serum iron
42. Longan-Henfrey LL, Anosa VO, Wells CV. The role of the bone marrow in bovine try-
concentrations in female dairy cattle in relationship to age.
.Res Vet Sci
panotolerance.l Macrophage function in Trypanosoma congolense-infected cattle.
1975;18:294-298.
Commp Haematol Int. 1999;9:208-218.
11. Bookbinder F, Butt MT, Harvey HJ. Determinationof the number of mast cells in lymph
43. Maluche HH, Matthews C, Faugere MC, et al. 1,25-Dihydroxitamin D maintains bone 
node, bone marrow, and buffy coat cytologic specimens from dogs. J Am Vet Med
cell activity, and parathyroid hormone modulates bone cell number in dogs. Endocrinoj-
Assoc. 1992;200:1 648-1650.
ogy. 1986;119:1298-1304.
12. Brunning RD, Bloomfield CD, McKenna RWV, et al. Bilateral trephine bone marow
44. Marconato L, Bettini G, Giacoboni C, et al. Clinicopathological features and outcome 
biopsies in lymphoma and other neoplastic diseases. Ann lntem Med. 1975;B2:
for dogs with mast cell tumors and bone marrow involvement. J Vet intem Med.
365-366.
2008;22:1001-1007
CHAP TER 8 = Bone Marrow Examination
259
45. Mischke R, Busse L, Bartels D, et al. Quantification of thrombopoietic activity in bone 
 63. Stokol T, Blue JT. Pure red cell aplasia in cats: 9 cases {1989-1997]. J Am Vet Med
marrow aspirates of dogs. Vet J 2002;164:269-274.
AssOc. 1999;214:75-79.
 46. Moore PF, Affolter VK, Vernau V. Canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: a pro-
aaw slian adn jall uo siodaa jauas rl iaag uen ' ensdiai 
liferative disorder of CD11d+ macrophages. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:632-645.
the in vivo uptake of oxidatively damaged red cells in mice. Blood.
47. Moritz A, Bauer NB, Weiss DJ, et al. Evaluation of bone marrow. In: Weiss DJ,
2000;95:2157-2163.
Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell;
 65. Thiele J, Zankovich R, Schneider G, et al. Primary fessential thrombocythemia versus
2010, 
polycythemia vera rubra. A histomorphometric analysis of bone marrow features in 
48. Mylonakis ME, Koutinas AF, Leontides LS. Bone marow mastocytosis in dogs with
trephine biopsies. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 1988:10:375-382.
myelosuppressive monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canisl a retrospective study. Vet
66. Tyler RD, Cowell RL, Meador V. Bone marrow evaluation. In: August JR, ed. Consuita-
Chin Pahol. 2006;35:311-314.
 tions in Feline Intemal Medicine 2. Philadelphia: Saunders; 1994:515-523.
49. Norrdin RVw, Powers BE. Bone changes in hypercalcemia of malignancy in dogs. J Amm
67. Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, et al. Bone marrow mast cel hyperplasia in
Vet Med Assoc. 1983;183:441-444.
dogs with aplastic anemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:106-111.
 50. O'Keefe DA. Couto CG. Burke-Schwartz C, et al. Systemic mastocytosis in 16 dogs.
6B. Walton RM, Modiano JF, Thrall MA, et al. Bone marrow cytological findings in4 dogs
J Vet Intem MMed. 1987;1:75-80.
 and a cat with hemophagocytic syndrome. / Vet intem Med. 1996;10:7-14.
 51. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective 
69. Weiss DU. Histopathology of canine nonneoplastic bone marrow. Vet Clin Pathol.
study. Vet Chin Pathol. 2005;34:341-352.
1986;15(2): 7-11.
 52. Penny RH, Carlisle CH. The bone marrow of the dog: a comparative study of biopsy
ss 1a/ w7 t00z-966 sa591t sop u sis0au m0ew 38 1 ssia 02
material obtained from the iliac crest, rib and sternum. J Small Anim Pract.
2005;227:263-267.
1970;11:727-734.
71. Weiss DJ. Differentiating benign and malignant causes oflymphocytosis in feline bone
 53. Perman V, Osborne CA, Stevens JB. Bone marrow biopsy. Vet Clin North Am.
marrow. / Vet lntem Med. 2005;19:855-859.
1974;4:293-310.
72. Weiss DJ. A retrospective study of the incidence and classification of bone marrow
 54. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Histopathology of canine bone marow in malignant lympho-
disorders in cats {1996-2004). Comp Chin Pathol. 2006;14:179-185
proliferative disorders. Vet Pathol. 1988;25:83-88.
73. Weiss DJ. Aretrospective study ofthe incidence and the classification of bone marrow
 55. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Prevalence of leukemic blood and bone marrow in dogs with
disorders in the dog at a veterinary teaching hospital {1996-2004). / Vet lntem Med.
multicentric lymphoma. J/ Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1989;194:1427-1429.
2006;20:955-961.
 56. Raza A, Mundle S, Itikhar A, et al. Simultaneous assessment of cell kinetics and
74. Weiss DJ. Acute bone marrow stromal injury in the dog. J Comp Pathol.
programmed celldeathin bone marrow biopsies of myelodysplastics reveals extensive
2007;16:223-228.
apoptosis as the probable basis for ineffective hematopoiesis. Am J Hematol
75. Weiss DUJ. Hemophagocytic syndrome in dogs: 24 cases {1996-2005). J/ Am Vet Med
1995;48:143-154.
Assoc. 2007;230:697-701.
 57. Rozman C, Reverter JC, Feliu E, et al. Variations of fat tissue fractions in abnormal
76. Weiss DJ. Bone marrow pathology in dogs and cats with non-regenerative immune-
human bone marrow depend both on size and number of adipocytes: a stereologic
mediated haemolytic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Pathol.
study. Bl00d. 1990;76:892-895.
2008; 138:46-53.
58. Russell KE, Sellon DC, Grindem CB. Bone marrow in horses indications, sample han-
77. Weiss DJ, Greig B, Aird B, et al. Inflammatory disorders of bone marrow. Vet Clin
dling, and complications. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1994;16B:1359-1365.
Pathol. 1992;21:79-84
 59. Schalm OWw, Lasmanis J. Cytologic features of bone marw in normal and mastitic
78. Weiss Du, Lulich J. Myelodysplastic syndrome with sideroblastic differentiation in a
Cows. Arm / Vet Res. 1976;37:359-363.
dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1999;28:59-63.
60.
 Sheridan WP, Hunt P, Simonet S, et al. Hematologic effects of cytokines. In: Remick
79. Weiss DJ, Raskin RE, Zerbe C. Myelodysplastic syndrome in two dogs. J Am Vet Med
DG, Friedland JS, eds. Cytokines in Heaith and Disease. 2nd ed. New York: Marcel
Assoc. 1985;187:1038-1040.
Dekker; 1997:487-505.
B0. Weiss DJ. Reidarson TH. Idiopathic dyserythropoiesis in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol.
yi panajulen e ui sisojsau mojew auog je ia 'leusen 'N ebeueius 'lepowus '19
1989;18:43-46.
feline leukemia virus. J Vet Med Sci. 2000;62:113-115.
81.
slsensoawoy wngje bop ayn u! auoq u sabueys panelal-ab rd Aay 'v3 swe
62. Steffen D, Ellitt GS, Leipold HV, et al. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progressive
J Orthop Res. 1984;2:8-14.
alopecia in Polled Hereford calves: hematologic, biochemical, bone marrow cytologic.
B2. ZinkI JG, LeCouteur RA, Davis DC, et al. “Flaming" plasma cells in a dog with lgA
electrophoretic, and flow cytometric findings. / Vet Diagn invest. 1992;4:31-37.
multiple myeloma. Vet Clin Pathol. 1983;12(3):15-19.
CHAPTE
R
DISORDERS OF BONE MARROW
GENERALIZED INCREASES IN
and/or distributions are present (see Fig. 8-36, A-C). Primary
HEMATOPOIETIC CELLS
erythrocytosis (polycythemia vera) may sometimes exhibit a
generalized marrow hyperplasia 23.50
se uma uno un s ay si mu su
because cells must be produced in response to the growth
GENERALIZED DECREASES IN
of the cardiovascular system, as well as to compensate for
HEMATOPOIETIC CELLS
 normal cell turnover. Marrow celularity decreases with age
because the ratio of bone marrow space to blood volume
Hypocellular/Aplastic Bone Marrow
increases.
 Bone marrow is generally considered to be hypocellular when
 Bone marrow is generally considered to be hypercellular
less than 25% ofthe space consists of hematopoietic cell 18
when more than 75% of the space consists of hematopoietic
 This estimate is easily performed in core bone marrow biopsy
cells.168 This estimate is easily performed in core bone marow
specimens but is more challenging in bone marrow aspirate
biopsy specimens, but is more challenging in bone marrow
smears that have variable amounts of blood contamination.
aspirate smears that have variable amounts of blood contami-
In aspirate smears, the cellularity is generally determined
nation. In aspirate smears, the cellularity is generally deter-
by examining as many marrow particles as possible and esti-
 mined by examining as many marrow particles (spicules) as
mating the area occupied by hematopoietic cells versus the
possible and estimating the area occupied by cells versus the
area occupied by fat. However, it should be recognized that
area occupied by fat.
s   n pr r ro  r
disorders, including acute marrow injury with necrosis and
lines exhibit increased proliferation in response to peripheral
edema, gelatinous transformation of bone marrow, and
 needs or demands. For example, both erythrocytic and granu-
myelofbrosis.
locytic cell lines may be increased in immune-mediated
When all hematopoietic cell types—-erythrocytic, granulo-
hemolytic anemia (IMHA) in dogs, in which animals often
cytic, and megakaryocytic—are markedly reduced or absent,
exhibit a regenerative anemia with accompanying leukocytosis
the marrow is said to be aplastic; anemic animals with general-
J snso ues eierdrady sisorerea o s e pue
ized marrow aplasia are said to have an aplastic anemia (Fig.
 immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT) is present. In a
9-3, A,B). Stromal cells (adipocytes, reticular cells, endothelial
retrospective study of dogs, panhyperplasia of bone marrow
cells, and macrophages), plasma cels, and some lymphocytes
are still present in aplastic bone marrow samples (Fig. 9-3, C).
tumors, lymphomas, and blood loss anemia.5o Hypercellular-
Macrophages typically contain increased amounts of hemo-
ity was exhibited in bone marrow from a dog that had blood-
siderin because storage iron is not utilized for erythrocyte
loss iron deficiency anemia with an associated thrombocytosis
production (Fig. 9-3, C,D). Mast cells may also be present
(Fig. 9-1) and from a dog that had inherited erythrocyte
in moderate numbers in aplastic bone marrow samples in
phosphofructokinase deficiency with an accompanying neu-
dogs (Fig. 9-3, C).4,32,482 The peripheral blood is character-
trophilia (Fig. 9-2). Panhyperplasia has been reported in the
ized by a nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia, and
bone marrow of cats with IMHA, IMT, and feline leukemia 
thrombocytopenia.
virus(FLV)-associated anemiaS7 Although rare,generalized
When only one cell line is reduced or absent, more restric-
marrow hyperplasia may occur in response to cytopenias in
tive terms, such as granulocytic bypoplasia or erytbroid aplasia.
blood resulting from hypersplenism.423$23 Generalized hyper-
are used to describe the abnormalities present. Hypocellular
cellular marrow may be present in some animals with myelo-
or aplastic bone marrow is associated with markedly reduced
 dysplastic disorders, but abnormalities in cell morphology
numbers of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells. The
260
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
261
suppression in humans with aplastic anemia.5o A primary
immune-mediated reaction directed against hematopoietic
precursor cells has also been proposed as a cause of aplastic
 Drug-induced causes of aplastic anemia or generalized
a horse104,t
 trimethoprim-sulfadiazine  administration  in
trichloroethylene-extracted soybean meal in cattle44"; albenda-
fenbendazole administration in a dog14; griseofulvin toxicity
in cats and possibly a dog4
tion.341741s Meclofenamic acid and quinidine have also been
 incriminated as potential causes of aplastic anemia in dogs.
FIGURE 9-1
 Other drugs are believed to be myelosuppressive, causing
Hypercellular core bone marrow biopsy from a dog with iron-deficiency
multiple cytopenias, but bone marrow was not evaluated to
cytosis. H&E stain.
e sede u sa  ss uaosa snoxg
 in dogs, as can high levels of endogenous estrogens produced
by
Sertoli cell, interstitial cell, and granulosa cell
 potential of inducing myelotoxicity in dogs.Ss Ferrets have
induced ovulations and may remain in estrus for long periods
of time when not bred. This prolonged exposure to high
endogenous estrogen concentrations can result in aplastic
anemia. 30,236
 Parvovirus infections can cause erythroid hypoplasia as
animals may not become anemic because of the long life spans
of erythrocytes. Thrombocytopenia is mild or absent because
megakaryocytes may still be present in the bone marrow (Fig.
9-4,A,B). Either affected pups die acutely or the bone marrow
returns rapidly to normal before anemia can develop. In con-
trast to its effects in pups, parvovirus is reported to have a
minimal effect on erythroid progenitors in adult dogs.54 Only
FIGURE 9-2
myeloid hypoplasia was reported during histologic examina-
Hypercellular core bone marrow biopsy from a dog with erythrocyte
tion of bone marrow from parvovirus-infected viremic cats in
phosphofructokinase deficiency A megakaryocyte is present (lower leff).
early studies2$2.2ss however, in a later study,generalized marrow
H&E stain.
 aplasia has been reported in naturally infected cats that died.53
 Although some degree of marrow hypoplasia and/or dys-
plasia often occurs in cats with FeLV infections, true aplastic
nature of the abnormalities resulting in deficient stem cells
anemia is not a well-documented sequela.39 Hypocellular
and progenitor cells is usually unknown.
bone marrow has been reported in experimental cats coin-
The majority of cases of aplastic anemia in humans are
fected with FeLV and feline parvovirus.277
idiopathic; however, viruses, chemicals, and idiosyncratic reac-
Aplastic anemia with resulrant pancytopenia and depletion
tions to certain drugs have been associated with some human
 of lymphoid tissues has been reported in neonatal calves in
cases.228 Most cases of aplastic anemia in humans appear to
 Europe. Prominent clinical signs included mucosal petechial
be mediated by a T lymphocyte immune reaction against 
 hemorrhages, cutaneous bleeding, melena, and high fever. A
hematopoietic stem cells. A drug or virus may trigger the
 viral etiology was suspected, but viral isolation was not suc-
 expansion of cytotoxic T lymphocytes, resulting in the destruc-
cessful. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays for bovine
tion of hematopoietic stem cells. Interferons (especially
viral diarrhea (BVD), bluetongue, and epizootic hemorrhagic
interferon-y) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) produced
by these cells can induce apoptosis in CD34+ hematopoietic
Dogs with acute Ebrlichia canis infections may recover
progenitor cells, which may contribute to hematopoietic
 spontaneously or develop chronic disease, which generally
262
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-3
Hypocellular bone marrow aspirate smears and core biopsy sections from dogs.A, Generalized hypocellularity
 in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a dog with estrogen-induced aplastic anermia. Stromal cells and fat
predominate. The circular purple objects are mast cells and the black globular material is hemosiderin. Wright-
Giemsa stain. B, Generalized hypocellularity in a section from a bone marrow core biopsy collected from a dog
with an idiopathic aplastic anemia. H&E stain. C, Purple-staining mast cells (fop) and brown- to black-staining
hemosiderin in the same aspirate smear ofbone marrow collected from the dog with estrogen-induced aplastic
anemia presented in (A). Wright-Giemsa stain. D, Blue-staining hemosiderin in an aspirate smear of bone
marrow from the same dog with estrogen-induced aplastic anemia presented in (A) and (C). Prussian blue stain.
 involves some degree of marrow hypoplasia. Although rare,
to a mare that was treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
aplastic anemia may develop in association with severe chronic
for severe placentitis for 1 to 2 months before she gave birth
ehrlichiosis in dogs59331 Erythroid and megakaryocytic
(Fig. 9-5). Aplastic anemia in a 14-day-old Holstein calf may
hypoplasia has been reported in two cats with E. canis-like
have also developed in utero, although the calf was treated for
infections.S
diarrhea with sulfamethazine 5 days before examination. 1° An
Hypocellular bone marrow has been reported in a dog with
in utero toxic insult was suspected in a 9-week-old Clydesdale
splenomegaly and marked extramedullary hematopoiesis,
foal with aplastic anemia.317
nds s i ts re  i pr 
Generalized bone marrow hypoplasia, with myeloid and
lated that the spleen might have produced cellular or humoral
inhibitors of hematopoiesis in the bone marrow.
hypoplasia, has been reported in eight young standardbred
 Congenital aplastic anemia, renal abnormalities, and skin 
lesions have been reported in newborn foals whose dams were
the marrow microenvironment, one or more growth factors,
treated for equine protozoal myeloencephalitis with sulfon-
or pluripotent stem cels were suggested as possible causes.
 amides, pyrimethamine, folic acid, and vitamin E during preg-
Hypocellular bone marrow has been reported in a Holstein
 nancy.46& Aplastic anemia was present at birth in a foal born
calf with congenital chondrodysplastic dwarfism.337
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
263
FIGURE 9-4
Hypocellular bone marrow aspirate smear and core bone marrow biopsy section from a leukopenic dog with
acute parvovirus infection. A, Stromal cells and fat predominate in an aspirate smear, but a megakaryocyte is
reduced in the core bone marrow biopsy, normal numbers of megakaryocytes remain. H&E stain.
4
+
sufficient energy in the form of ATP. Cells swell and burst
3
after losing their ability to regulate osmotic balance. A variable
infammatory response occurs secondary to the release of
intracellular contents. In contrast, mitochondrial function is
less affected and ATP concentrations are higher in cells
undergoing apoptosis (physiologic cell death). The nuclear
chromatin condenses, the nucleus rounds up into a single
dense sphere (pyknosis) or fragments into multiple dense
spheres (karyorrhexis), and the cell shrinks by as much as 30%.
Soon after the process is begun, the cell is recognized and
phagocytized by macrophages. Cytoplasmic contents are not
shed externally; therefore, there is no release of proinfamma-
tory mediators. A third form of cell death, called autophagy-
associated cell death, occurs when cells do not receive sufficient
nutrients for extended periods of time and therefore digest
 available internal substrates and die.196
FIGURE 9-5
Necrosis may be caused by ischemia resulting from damage
Bone marrow section from a 4-day-old foal with aplastic anemia that
 or disruption of the microcirculation or by direct damage to
was pancytopenic (hematocrit, 11%, total leukocyte count, 0.4 × 10°/μL;
the proliferating hematopoietic cells. Edema (amorphous
platelets, 85 x 10′/μL) at birth. The dam was treated with trimethoprim-
 proteinaceous material between hematopoietic cells), hemor-
sulfamethoxazole for severe placentitis for 1 to 2 months before birth.
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow contains only rare hemato-
rhage, and acute infammation may also be present as a result
of increased vascular permeability following vessel injury517
poietic cells (smaller, darker round cells), as well as a low number of
macrophages containing brown pigment (hemosiderin) and lipid
 Necrosis may be recognized antemortem (Fig. 9-6, A), but it
vacuoles. Red decalcified bone (top leff and bottom), H&E stain.
is most often recognized when histologic samples are exam-
ined postmortem (Figs. 9-6, B, and 9-7, A) because it is a
Idiopathic aplastic anemia has also been reported in
transient event that often has a focal distribution.
 The appearance of necrosis varies depending on the time
 and myeloid aplasia with normal megakaryocyte numbers has
course and cause.1s When histologic sections are examined,
initial lesions exhibit altered staining of hematopoietic cells
with indistinct cellular outlines (see Fig. 9-6).5o0 Hemorrhage
Acute Bone Marrow Injury and Necrosis
Two major forms of cell death, necrosis and apoptosis, are 
Later, the areas of necrosis become hypocellular as the cells
recognized. Necrosis refers to a form of cel death and degen-
lyse and are replaced by amorphous granular eosinophilic
eration secondary to the inability of mitochondria to generate
debris. This stage of necrosis must be differentiated from
264
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-6
Necrosis in the bone marrow of a FeLV-negative pancytopenic cat. A, The background in an antemortem
bone marow aspirate smear appears granular and bluish to purple in color, the remaining cells are impossble
section. The circular pink areas represent necrotic cells in which the rucleus is no longer visible. Most remain-
ing cells with visible nuclei appear to be granulocytic cells. H&E stain.
fbrin, edema, and collection artifact. A Fraser-Lendrum stain
The cause of bone marrow necrosis may not always be
for fibrin can be helpful in this regard.5 Macrophages, many
of which contain phagocytized celular debris, occur in
increased numbers in necrotic marrow. Myelofbrosis occurs
Gelatinous Transformation of Bone Marrow
subsequently to necrosis, similar to the healing process that
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow (mucoid degen-
occurs in other damaged tissues.18,19,.513
 eration, serous atrophy of fat) involves morphologic changes
Aspirate smears from necrotic marrow may be confused
 in bone marrow that combine the loss of hematopoietic cells
with smears resulting from poor-quality sample collection or
and the atrophy of fat with the deposition of gelatinous sub-
 staining techniques. Marrow particles may appear elongated
stances in the marrow spaces. Aspirated bone marrow has a
bluish to purple in color. The remaining cells are difficult to
material present. This material appears as a pink background
classify because of morphologic changes caused by degenera-
in bone marrow aspirate smears stained with routine blood
tion (see Fig. 9-6, A). Nuclei appear smudged and cytoplasmic
stains (Fig. 9-8, A) and in histologic sections stained with
 margins are usually ill defined. When visible, the cytoplasm is
H&E (Fig. 9-8, B). Although the composition may vary
basophilic and sometimes vacuolated.1ss39 Often only free
somewhat, the material is composed of acid mucopolysac-
nuclei or nuclear fragments are seen. Macrophages with
charides, mainly hyaluronic acid, which stain strongly with
Alcian blue at pH 2.5 (Fig. 9-8, C). The Alcian blue-
 Disorders that have been reported in association with
positive staining is lost when samples are pretreated with
 marrow necrosis in animals include septicemia and/or endo-
bovine testicular hyaluronidase.* Routine fixation in 10%
toxemia 032023feline infectious peritonitis$3 1 FeLV infec-
neutral-buffered formalin is not ideal for staining acid muco-
polysaccharides. Material is better preserved for optimal stain-
Ebrlichia canis infection in dogs,520 drug administration
ing by fixation in 10% acid formalin with 70% alcohol.28
(including  chemotherapeutic a
[dogs],
Edema may resemble gelatinous transformation in H&E-
agents, estradiol
phenobarbital, mitotane, carprofen, metronidazole, colchicine,
stained sections, but edematous fuid does not stain with
fenbendazole, and cephalosporin antibiotics),36,1s,19,503.517
 Alcian blue.40
nonre-
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow in humans is
generative
IMHA,512
2  systemic  lupus  erythematosus in
 generally associated with severe malnutrition accompanying
disorders such as neoplasia, alcoholism, anorexia nervosa,
and chronic renal disease in cats treated with recombinant
 infectious diseases (including acquired immunodeficiency
erythropoietin (EPO) or blood transfusions.51 Multifocal
syndrome [AIDS], maldigestion, chronic heart failure, and
bone marrow necrosis and fbrosis was recognized in a
metabolic disorders. Long bones are more likely to exhibit
horse with an equine herpesvirus-2 infection (see Fig. 9-7).
 gelatinous transformation than fat bones.482 Widespread
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
265
FIGURE 9-7
Bone marrow section from a 12-year-old Warmblood gelding with mul-
tifocal necrosis. A, A focus of necrosis in the marrow space, which is
fanked by large syncytial cells. B, A multinucleated syncytial cell con-
taining eosinophilic intranuclear inclusions. Similar cells with intra-
nuclear inclusions were also present in the lungs,liver,and gastrointestinal
 asu  p sss  as  
positive for equine herpesvirus-2. H&E stain.
involvement may result in anemia, leukopenia, and less often
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow has also been
recognized in cachexic cats suffering from chronic diseases
(including chronic renal disease and oral or gastric ulcers) and
chronic anorexia.513 Bone marrow from cats with gelatinous
transformation may still contain fat (see Fig. 9-8). Other
FIGURE 9-8
reports of gelatinous transformation of bone marrow in
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow from a cat with cancer-
animals include starvation in reindeer, 21* fuoride intoxication
induced cachexia. A, Aspirate bone marrow smear containing gelatinous
 in calves,∞1 diet restriction in male Gottingen minipigs,41 and
material. Wright stain. B, Bone marrow section. H&E stain. C, Bone
an emaciated miniature horse.28
marrow section. Alcian blue stain.
Myelofibrosis
Courtesy of Julia Blue.
Myelofbrosis is suspected when repeated attempts at marrow
aspiration are unsuccessful or a poor-quality aspirate is
obtained that contains some spindle-shaped cells (Fig. 9-9).
266
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-9
A cluster of stromal cels is present in a smear prepared from a bone
marrow aspirate attempt from a dog with a nonregenerative anemia. The
presence of a few stromal cells in a specimen acquired during an unsuc-
cessful attempt to collect bone marrow particles by aspiration suggested
the possibility of fibrosis, which was confirmed by core biopsy and
histopathology. Wright-Giemsa stain.
A definitive diagnosis can be made only by examining histo-
logic sections of bone marrow.
Fibrous tissue consists of variable amounts of actively pro-
liferating fibroblasts, reticulin fibers, and dense collagenous 
connective tissue.5o The term myelofbrosis is used when
there is an apparent excess of reticulin/collagen fbers in
B.
bone marrow that is produced by activated and/or proli-
ferating marrow reticular cell.4s Low levels of myelofbrosis
may be definitively recognized only by using special stains
(Fig. 9-10, A-C).
Type I collagen forms thick fbrils, while type II collagen
forms thin fbrils. Reticulin fibers are visible as argyrophilic
fibers in histologic sections of tissues stained using silver
impregnating methods, such as Gomori stain (see Fig. 9-10,
 B)37 Reticulin fbers are primarily composed of individual
oo i sd jo sunq s ro sy uoo i ada
fbrils that surround a core of type I fbrils. These fibrils are
imbedded in a matrix of glycoproteins and glycosaminogly
cans; silver stains appear to bind to this matrix rather than the
 collagen fibrils themselves. 247 When present in normal marrow,
reticulin fbers are located primarily in perivascular and peri-
trabecular areas.48* Larger collagen fbers composed primarily
of type I collagen with less interfibrillar material are stained
FIGURE 9-10
using a trichrome stain such as Masson trichrome (see Fig.
Myelofibrosis in a bone marrow core biopsy from a dog with ALL
9-10, C). Few or no collagen fibers are visible using trichrome
(CD3*, CD79-, CD4-, CD8). Hematologic findings included a hema-
stains in normal bone marrow.2474ss The term reticalin fbrosis
tocrit of 44%, a totalleukocyte count of 1.9 x 10/μL with 0.8 x 10%/μL
is used when argyrophilic fbers are increased in number and
neutrophils, and a platelet count of 65 × 10°/μL. Attempts to aspirate
bone marrow resulted in dry taps.A, The marrow was hypercellar, and
size; and the term collagen fibrosis is used when trichrome-
most of the cells were neoplastic lymphocytes. Cells appear to form lines,
positive fbers are present. Some fbrotic marrows also have
suggesting fbrosis. H&E stain.B, Black reticulin fbers are visible fol-
increased vascularization, which results in increased amounts
lowing staining of the section with Gomori stain. C, Bluish collagen
of type IV collagen in basement membranes.37 Reticulin fibro-
fbers are visible following staining of the section with Masson trichrome
sis may be present without collagen fbrosis, but collagen
stairn.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
267
FIGURE 9-11
Myelofibrosis in bone marrow core biopsies from dogs. A, Myelofibrosis in a bone marrow section from a
core biopsy collected from a dog with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Reticular cells and collagen are
readily visible at the top and to the right next to the darker pink trabecular bone. Hematopoietic cells (primarily
erythroid precursors) are concentrated to the left. H&E stain. B, Myelofibrosis in a bone marrow section from
a core biopsy collected from a dog with a poorly regenerative anemia. Hematopoietic cells are present in linear
arrangements, separated by pale eosinophilic extracellular collagenous material at the bottom of the field.
H&E stain.
fibrosis is almost never revealed by trichrome staining without
 Prominent myelofbrosis has been documented in animals
increased reticulin.247
When myelofbrosis is extensive, it is recognized in sec-
lymphoproliferative neoplasms,51 non-marrow-origin neo-
tions stained with H&E (Fig. 9-11, A,B; Fig. 9-12, A,B). In
plasia,$1 drug treatment (phenobarbital, phenylbutazone, and
these instances, marrow sections contain little or no fat.
colchicine),sis
 Hematopoietic cells may be present in linear arrangements,
and dogs with inherited pyruvate kinase deficiency.
170,416
separated by palely eosinophilic extracellular collagenous
It has also been described  as resulting from unknown
material (see Fig. 9-11, B). Areas of marked myelofbrosis
consist of fbroblasts and extracellular matrix, with no remain-
 Marked myelofibrosis has been reported as a congenital
 ing hematopoietic cells (see Fig. 9-12). Increased hemosiderin 
 (presumably inherited) disorder in young pygmy goats that
is offten present in bone marrow samples with prominent
also had megakaryocytic hyperplasia and dysplasia.62 Mye-
myelofbrosis (see Fig. 9-11, B; Fig. 9-12),37,488
lofbrosis has been described in a family of poodles with
Primary myelofbrosis (previously known as myelofibrosis
laboratory and clinical findings similar to pyruvate kinase
with myeloid metaplasia or agnogenic myeloid metaplasia) in 
 defciency,372 but defnitive studies were not performed to
humans is a clonal myeloproliferative neoplasm. It is charac-
 eliminate the possibility that these animals had pyruvate
terized by a proliferation of megakaryocytes and granulocytes,
 ia pasodd q s in m se auip 
myelofbrosis, extramedullary hematopoiesis (especially in the 
fbrosis, like cirrhosis, occurs in response to damage caused by
spleen), and anemia with increased nucleated erythrocytes and 
 iron overload in pyruvate kinase-deficient dogs.S51 However,
immature neutrophils in blood (called leukoerythroblastic 
factors associated with marked erythropoiesis may contribute
anemia in human hematology).454 A similar syndrome has not
 to the development of myelofibrosis. Extremely high pharma-
 been described in animals, although myelofbrosis may be
 cologic doses of recombinant human EPO elicited both
 present in animals with various myeloid neoplasms.
marked erythropoiesis  and  myelofibrosis  in experimental
 Myelofbrosis appears to be a sequela to marrow injury, 
dogs.19
 including necrosis, vascular damage, infammation, and neo-
With the exception of dogs with inherited hemolytic
plasia 51 It is postulated that these disorders result in the
u a  squ m se se
 direct or indirect production of cytokines capable of stimulat-
erative anemia. Blood leukocyte counts and platelet counts are
 often normal or increased in idiopathic cases of myelofbrosis,
which is produced by a number of cell types including mega-
but they may be decreased, especially when collagen fibrosis
karyocytes and platelets, may be the most important factor in
this regard. 247
in animals with concomitant myeloid neoplasms.
268
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 9-12
Myelofibrosis in a postmortem bone marrow section from a cat with chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
A, Trabecular bone is located at the left edge. Reticular cells and collagen dominate the field although some
hematopoietic precursors are present. The orange globular material is hemosiderin. H&E stain. B, Reticular
cells and collagen (turquoise fibers) dominate the feld, although some hematopoietic precursors are present.
 The orange globular material is hemosiderin. Masson trichrome stain.
Generalized Osteosclerosis/Hyperostosis
 osteoclast anion exchanger prevents bone resorption due to
Osteosclerosis refers to a thickening of trabecular (spongy)
 the lack of acidification of the resorption lacunae 315
 bone, and byperostosis refers to a widening of cortical (compact)
Osteosclerosis and myelofbrosis have been described in a
bone from appositional growth of osseous tissue at endosteal
 dog with erythroid hypoplasia.1s Osteosclerosis and non-
and/or periosteal surfaces. Osteopetrosis is a form of osteo-
 regenerative anemia have been reported in cats infected with
sclerosis resulting from decreased bone resorption secondary
FeLV, although it was suggested that these disorders occurred
to decreased numbers and/or abnormal function of osteo-
 independently.12 Osteosclerosis and myelofbrosis occur in
 dogs with erythrocyte pyruvate kinase deficiency and in
ostosis, the space available for hematopoiesis decreases. The
poodles with clinical and laboratory findings similar to those
xa ro rennasodky readde keu seds moureu Sununeuat
fbrosis. Anemia occurs more often than thrombocytopenia or
anemia in dogs with pyruvate kinase deficiency is regenerative,
leukopenia. A variety of inherited, metabolic, infammatory,
although the magnitude of the reticulocyte count may be
and neoplastic disorders have been reported to cause general-
 lower as marrow pathology becomes more severe.372.416
ized osteosclerosis in humans.536
Generalized osteosclerosis/hyperostosis is suspected when
ABNORMALITIES OF THE
increased difficulty is encountered in the manual advancement
ERYTHROID SERIES
of biopsy needles into bone and marrow aspirates cannot be
obtained. Osteosclerosis can potentially be recognized using
Erythroid Hyperplasia
core biopsies, but the presence of increased bone relative to
Erythroid hyperplasia is reported when the bone marrow cel-
marrow space may simply be reflective of the area of bone the
hlarity is normal or increased, the absolute neutrophil count
needle has entered. Antemortem diagnosis of generalized
is normal or increased, and the myeloid:erythroid (M:E)
osteosclerosis and/or hyperostosis is usually made using diag-
ratio is low (Fig. 9-13, A-C). If the marrow is hypocellular
nostic imaging.
and/or the absolute neutrophil count is low, a low M:E ratio
Osteopetrosis has been described in dogs, cats, and horses 
indicates that granulocytic hypoplasia is present.
with mild to severe nonregenerative anemia.3124122341,344
 Approximately 4 days are required from the time an experi-
Thrombocytopenia and neutropenia are less likely to be
mental animal is made anemic by phlebotomy for a peak
reticulocyte response to occur in blood because this is the time
marrow necrosis have been reported in beef calves naturally
required for reticulocytes to be produced following stimula-
 infected with BVD virus.414 Osteopetrosis occurs as an inher-
ited disorder in Angus calves, which are typically aborted late
throid precursors can increase in bone marrow within i2
 in gestation.26s A defect in the gene that produces the SLC4A2
hours after EPO stimulation,47 but several days are probably
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
269
FIGURE 9-13
Erythroid hyperplasia in bone marrow from a horse with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. A, The large
 d   e res   e     s
stain. B, Higher magnification of a bone marrow aspirate smear with increased rumbers of polychromatophilic
erythrocytes (reticulocytes), indicating that the erythroid response is effective. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Core
 a a go ian  eu sd si aru au ie a s Asdoq mu 
stairn.
required after hemorrhage or hemolysis has occurred before
erythroid hyperplasia is prominent enough to result in a low
 ratio is often within the reference range.3° Rubriblasts and
 M : E ratio. Bone marrow examination is generally not needed
prorubricytes are usually increased slightly in animals with
in anemic animals with an absolute reticulocytosis unless
effective erythroid hyperplasia; however, the predominant
 other cytopenias are also present.
nucleated erythroid cells remain rubricytes and metarubri-
Horses rarely release reticulocytes from the bone marrow
cytes 12 Many polychromatophilic erythrocytes (reticulocytes)
even when an increased production of erythrocytes occurs.
should be present in bone marrow aspirates when the ery-
 Consequently, bone marrow evaluation is often needed to
throid hyperplasia is effective (see Fig. 9-13, B). A reticulocyte
 determine whether an appropriate response to anemia is
count may be done in the bone marrow aspirate to assist in
present in a horse. If the marrow cellularity is normal or
this assessment. Bone marrow reticulocyte counts above 5%
 increased and the neutrophil count is normal or increased, an
provide evidence for an effective regenerative response in
M:E ratio below 0.5 suggests that a regenerative response to
horses.404
anemia is present (see Fig. 9-13).404
 Ineffective erythroid hyperplasia may occur in severe iron
 Erythroid hyperplasia may be effective (increasing hema-
 deficiency,171 cobalamin deficiency in Border Collies (Fig.
tocrit and/or reticulocytosis) or ineffective. Effective erythroid
9-14),324 folate deficiency in a cat (Fig. 9-15),330 certain
hyperplasia occurs in response to hemolytic or blood-loss
 anemia. It also occurs in response to primary or secondary
 sis,191.41 and in dogs and cats with nonregenerative IMHA
270
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-14
FIGURE 9-16
Hypercellular bone marrow core biopsy section with ineffective erythroid
Erythroid hyperplasia ina bone marrow aspirate smear from a dog with
hyperplasia and increased hemosiderin (golden granules) from a Border
a nonregenerative, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. The presence of
Collie with cobalamin deficiency H&E stain. Occasional binucleation
megaloblastic rubricytes in the absence of polychromasia is consistent
and some oval nuclei and nuclear blebbing were seen in rubricytes and
with ineffective erythropoiesis. Wright-Giemsa stain.
metarubricytes in a bone marrow aspirate smear (not sbown). The hema-
tocrit was 22% with a metarubricytosis (6.7 × 10/μL) and normal
absolute reticulocyte count in blood.
Selective Erythroid Hypoplasia or Aplasia
Photograph of a bone marrorw core biopsy section from a 2009 ASVCP slide
Erythroid hypoplasia is reported when the bone marrow cel-
review case submitted by C. Flint, C. McBrien, J. Fyfe, and M. Scott.
lularity is normal or decreased, the absolute neutrophil count
is normal or decreased, and the M:E ratio is high (Fig. 9-17).
When the M: E ratio exceeds 75:1 and morphologic abnor-
malities are not present in other cell lines, the terms selective
erythroid aplasia or pure red cel aplasia are used.512 If the
marrow is hypercellular and/or the absolute neutrophil count
 is high, a high M:E ratio indicates that granulocytic hyper-
plasia is present.
 Selective erythroid aplasia occurs as either a congenital or
acquired disorder in humans. Congenital erythroid aplasia in
humans (Diamond-Blackfan anemia) appears to represent a
heterogeneous group of genetic disorders.73271 Approximately
40% of cases are associated with other congenital defects,
especially malformations of the head and upper limbs.
Acquired erythroid aplasia in humans may occur in associa-
 tion with disorders including B-19 parvovirus infection, pro-
liferative disorders involving large granular lymphocytes,
anti-EPO antibodies (primarily from treatment with recom-
binant EPO), thymomas, and myelodysplastic syndrome
FIGURE 9-15
(MDS). Erythroid aplasia has also been reported in humans
in association with the administration of many drugs as well
aspirate smear from a cat with folate deficiency. Wright stain.
as with autoimmune diseases, various hematopoietic neo-
 plasms, solid tumors, infections, vascular diseases, pregnancy,
Courtesy of Sherry Myers.
and severe renal failure.408
 Acquired selective erythroid hypoplasia or selective ery-
throid aplasia occurs in dogs and cats when an immune
response is directed against early erythroid precursor cells
metarubricytes and reticulocytes, as well as other pathologic
events that may be present (including vascular injury, infam-
antibody- or  cell-mediated  mechanisms  that  completely
mation, macrophage activation, myelodysplasia, myelofbro-
inhibit erythroid production or result in a maturation arrest
sis), apparently results in ineffective erythropoiesis.447.912
at various stages of erythroid maturation (Fig. 9-18).
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
271
FIGURE 9-18
 m aqg es e  u ise  Pi
a dog with systemic lupus erythematosus, which included a Coombs-
positive nonregenerative anemia. Most of the erythroid cell were rubri-
blasts or prorubricytes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
cell-mediated immune mechanisms may be important in the
 pathogenesis of these disorders 44,447512?
Erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia is a common finding in
 animals with MDS and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) that
have prominent proliferative abnormalities in granulocytic
reported to be a rare sequela to vaccination against parvovirus
FIGURE 9-17
in dogs.10 High doses of chloramphenicol cause reversible
Erythroid aplasia in bone marrow from a dog. A, Bone marrow aspirate
erythroid hypoplasia in some dogs4" and erythroid aplasia in
smear with a complete lack of erythroid precursors. Black material is
cats (Fig. 9-21).47 Erythroid aplasia, together with mega-
hemosiderin. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Bone marrow core biopsy lacking
karyocytic aplasia and neutrophilic hyperplasia, is seen in early
erythroid precursors. Part of a megakaryocyte is visible in the upper right
corner. H&E stain.
have congenital erythroid aplasia based on histopathologic
examination of bone marrow at necropsy but the M:E ratio
was normal when aspirate smears were examined several days
Phagocytosis of early erythroid precursor cells may sometimes
be recognized in selective erythroid hypoplasia (Fig. 9-19,
ently occurs at regular intervals in gray Collie dogs with
 A-C). An immune-mediated attack might be targeted against
inherited cyclic hematopoiesis, but it does not cause anemia
a maturation-associated antigen, resulting only in the destruc-
because it is of short duration and followed by a period of
tion of erythroid precursors in the marrow, or at a common
 erythroid hyperplasia.1251,413
 antigen on precursors and mature erythrocytes, which would
 Selective erythroid hypoplasia or aplasia occurs in cats
result in the destruction of precursors in the bone marrow and
 infected with FeLV subgroup C but not in those infected only
concurrent erythrocyte destruction in the circulation.447 The
with subgroups A or B (Fig. 9-22, A,B).398 The cel surface
classification of these disorders as being immune-mediated is
receptor for FeLV-C is called FLVCR. This receptor has been
largely based on positive responses to immunotherapy, but
 demonstrated to be a heme exporter.376 Free heme is toxic to
some animals have positive Coombs and/or antinuclear anti-
 cells, and it appears that the binding of FeLV-C to FLVCR
body (ANA) tests. In addition, antibodies in the serum of
 on rubriblasts inhibits heme export from these cells, resulting
some dogs with selective erythroid aplasia have been reported
 in their destruction.26 This exporter can also export protopor-
 to inhibit erythropoiesis in bone marrow culrures.4?? Finally,
phyrin IX and coproporphyrin and appears to be important
increased numbers of small lymphocytes in the bone marrow
 in heme recycling by macrophages. The plasma protein hemo-
of cats (and some dogs) with selective erythroid hypoplasia
 pexin facilitates the export of heme from tissues and the
 and selective erythroid aplasia (Fig. 9-20) suggest that
 transport of heme to the liver.546
272
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 9-19
Phagocytosis of nucleated basophilic erythrocyte precursors ina bone marrow aspirate smear from a dog with
nonregenerative immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. A maturation arrest was present, with few cells more
mature than prorubricytes seen. A, Vacuolated macrophage containing a basophilic erythrocyte precursor,
hemosiderin, and debris in the cytoplasm. B, Macrophage containing a phagocytized basophilic erythrocyte
precursor in its cytoplasm (rigbt side). The nucleus of the macrophage is on the left side, and the dark material
in the cytoplasm above the rucleus is hemosiderin. C, A phagocytized basophilic erythrocyte precursor has
displaced the nucleus of the macrophage to the top left. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 9-20
FIGURE 9-21
Selective erythroid aplasia in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from
Selective erythroid aplasia in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a
a Coombs-positive, 8-month-old Maltese dog. Small lymphocytes
at given chloramphenicol at a high therapeutic dosage for 9 days.
accounted for 15% of all nucleated cells. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
Marked erythroid hypoplasia has been reported in
A mild to moderate nonregenerative anemia often accom-
 panies chronic inflammatory and neoplastic disorders. The
Antibodies made against this human recombinant glycopro-
cause of this anemia of infammatory disease (anemia of
tein apparently cross-react with the animals' endogenous 
chronic disease) is mulifactorial and only partially under-
EPO.
stood. Abnormalities that can contribute to the anemia
 Erythroid production is reduced in chronic renal disease189
include the production of infammatory mediators that
 and endocrine deficiencies (hypopituitarism, hypoadrenocor-
directly or indirectly inhibit erythropoiesis, decreased serum
ticism, hypothyroidism, and hypoandrogenism) but is not
iron, shortened erythrocyte life spans, and blunted EPO
usually pronounced enough to result in an M:E ratio in the
response to the anemia.17i The M:E ratio is typically high in
marrow that is increased above the reference interval.
clinical cases of the anemia of infammatory disease in dogs
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
273
FIGURE 9-22
Marked erythroid hypoplasia in bone marrow from a FeLV-positive cat. A, A left shift in granulocytic cells
with some giantism is also visible in a bone marrow aspirate smear Wright-Giemsa stain.B, Megakaryocytic
hypoplasia and erythroid hypoplasia are demonstrated in a bone marrow biopsy section. H&E stain.
FIGURE 9-23
Erythroid hypoplasia in bone marrow from dogs with the anemia ofinfammatory disease. A, Mild erythroid
hypoplasia and granulocytic hyperplasia in an aspirate smear. Black-staining material near the center of the
image is hemosiderin. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Erythroid hypoplasia and increased hemosiderin (orange.
 staining material) in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy. Two mature megakaryocytes are present. H&E
stain.
(Fig. 9-23, A,B),18 not only because of deficient erythropoiesis
 bridging, nuclear and cytoplasmic asynchrony, maturation
 arrest, and siderotic inclusions.
Megaloblastic erythroid cells are larger than normal, with
Dyserythropoiesis
a more stranded arrangement of chromatin and abundant
 The term dyserytbropoiesis is used to refer to various disorders 
 parachromatin, giving a pronounced light and dark pattern to
 in which abnormal erythrocyte maturation and/or morphol-
the nucleus (Fig. 9-24, A-E). The cytoplasm is generally abun-
ogy is associated with ineffective erythropoiesis. Erythroid
dant and hemoglobin synthesis may be present at earlier
abnormalities that may be present include megaloblastic cells,
stages of development than typically seen (e.g, nuclear and
abnormal nuclear shapes, premature nuclear pyknosis, nuclear
 cytoplasmic asynchrony). Rubricytes and metarubricytes may
fragmentation, multinucleated cells, internuclear chromatin
 be macrocytic without prominent nuclear abnormalities (Fig.
274
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
F
C
D
FIGURE 9-25
Trinucleation and nuclear lobulation in erythroid precursors in bone
marrow aspirate smears from dogs. A, Trinucleation from a dog with
lymphoma and mild dyserythropoiesis. Prior chemotherapy was not
listed in the medical record. B, Lobulated nucleus in a polychromato-
philic rubricyte from the same dog with mild dyserythropoiesis as
presented in (A). C, Lobulated nucleus in a polychromatophilic meta-
rubricyte from a dog 1 day after treatment with vincristine. D, Lobulated
rucleus in a polychromatophilic metarubricyte from the same vincristine-
treated dog as presented in (C).
FIGURE 9-24
Megaloblastic erythroid cells in bone marrow aspirate smears. A, Mega-
megaloblastic abnormalities in the bone marrow. Serum
loblastic erythroid precursor from a cat with erythroleukemia (AML-
folate and Bz2 values are normal in this hereditary poodle
M6). B, Megaloblastic erythroid precursor from a cat with AML-M2.
C, Megaloblastic erythroid precursor in an aspirate smear of bone
macrocytosis.6,410,514
marrow from a FeLV-positive cat with MDS. D, Megaloblastic erythroid
Multinucleated erythroid cels (Fig. 9-25, A) have been
 precursor from a cat with MDS. E, Macrocytic polychromatophilic
reported in animals with myeloid neoplasms2030931953 and in
MDS. F, Macrocytic orthochromatic metarubricyte (eft) from a horse
Nuclear lobulations, pyknosis, and/or fragmentation may
with MDS. Wright-Giemsa stain.
occur in animals with myeloid neoplasms,$426 acquired and
ment with drugs that interfere with DNA synthesis, including
9-24, F). These morphologic abnormalities are most often
 antimetabolites (e.g., azathioprine, hydroxyurea, cytosine ara-
 seen in animals with myeloid neoplasms.* Megaloblastic
binoside), alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide), folate
erythropoiesis occurs most commonly in ill cats with FeLV
antagonists (e.g., methotrexate), and plant alkaloids (e.g., vin-
infections, but it has also been reported in cats with feline
cristine) (Fig. 9-25, B-D).5.3 Internuclear chromatin bridging
immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infections.42 Megaloblastic
has been reported in cattle with congenital dyserythropoiesis
erythroid cells have been reported in the marrow of cats with
natural and experimentally induced folate deficiency (see Fig.
 Maturational arrests at various stages of erythroid develop-
9-15)3304 Finally, some miniature and toy poodles exhibit
ment, with a resultant lack of polychromatophilic erythro-
a nonanemic macrocytosis, metarubricytosis, and/or ery-
cytes,may occur in acquired myeloid neoplasms,3 in congenital 
throcytes with multiple Howell-Jolly bodies and variable
dyserythropoiesis,41 and in some drug-induced disorders
in nonregenerative IMHA, especially in dogs (see Fig.
*References 88, 107, 181, 185,309,319.
9-16) 216,43447 A nonregenerative immune-mediated anemia
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
275
with erythroid maturation arrest has also been reported in a
ferret.2 Asynchrony of nuclear and cytoplasmic maturation,
ABNORMALITIES OF THE
GRANULOCYTIC SERIES
in which hemoglobinization precedes nuclear maruration,
may occur in acquired myeloid neoplasms as well as in con-
Granulocytic Hyperplasia
 genital dyserythropoiesis 207.441
 Granulocytic hyperplasia is reported when the bone marrow
 Iron-positive basophilic stippling has been reported in
cellularity is normal or increased, the hematocrit is normal or
 (srs en s  n
 increased, and the M: E ratio is high. If the marrow is hypo-
cellular and/or the hematocrit is low, a high M:E ratio sug-
idiopathic dyserythropoiesis (including infammatory disor-
 gests that erythroid hypoplasia is present. Because neutrophilic
ders),67172 and the use of drugs/chemicals, including chlor-
cells are usually much more numerous than eosinophilic
amphenicol (Fig. 9-26, A,B), hydroxyzine, lead, zinc, and an 
or basophilic cells in bone marrow, the term granulocytic
oxazolidinone antibiotic.169174276,36s
byperplasia generally indicates the presence of neutrophilic
hyperplasia. Eosinophilic and/or basophilic hyperplasia may
accompany neutrophilic hyperplasia, but they rarely account
 for increased M: E ratios on their own.
Neutrophilic Hyperplasia
Neutrophilic hyperplasia may be effective or ineffective. Effec-
five neutrophilic hyperplasia results in a peripheral neutro-
philia, with or without a left shift. It occurs in response to
various hematopoietic growth factors, with granulocyte-
 colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) being most important. 1
Two or more days are required from the time of growth factor
stimulation until neutrophilic  hyperplasia is prominent
A
B
enough to increase the M:E ratio outside of the reference
 interval.11,152
FIGURE 9-26
 Neutrophilic hyperplasia occurs most frequently in response
Siderotic (iron-positive) metarubricytes in an aspirate smear of bone
 to bacterial infections, but it may also occur in response to
marrow from a dog receiving chloramphenicol therapy. A, Blue granules
in the cytoplasm indicate the presence of iron. B, Siderotic metarubricyte
immune-mediated infammatory disorders, necrosis, chemical
(leff). Because the iron-positive granules circle the rucleus, it may be
called a ringed sideroblast in human hematology. Prussian blue stain.
The natural release or injection of recombinant G-CSF,
9
FIGURE 9-27
from a dog with neutrophilia and nonregenerative anemia secondary to immune-mediated polyarthritis.
Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Neutrophilic hyperplasia and erythroid hypoplasia in a bone rmarrow section from
a core biopsy collected from a cat with marked mature neutrophilia and nonregenerative anemia, for which a
cause was not determined. H&E stain.
276
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
granulocyte/macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-
molecules.14,334 Granulocyte hyperplasia also follows cyclic
CSF), and interleukin (IL)-3 result in peripheral neutrophilia
episodes of neutrophilic hypoplasia in gray Collie dogs with
cyclic hematopoiesis.72,93
Extreme neutrophilic hyperplasia in bone marrow and periph-
 Marked neutrophilic hyperplasia and concomitant ery-
eral neutrophilia have been reported as a paraneoplastic syn-
throid and megakaryocytic aplasia occur during the first 3
drome in dogsand cats with tumors that produce hematopoietic
weeks after the injection of a toxic dose of estrogen in dogs
growth factors. 102,23,421,.465
(Fig. 9-29).so1 This is followed by generalized hypoplasia or
 The proportions of myeloblasts and promyelocytes are gen-
aplasia and death or slow recovery.
erally not increased out of proportion to more mature neutro-
Neutrophilic hyperplasia is present in animals with chronic
philic cells in animals with ongoing neutrophilic hyperplasia
myeloid leukemia (CML). The percentage of immature
(Fig. 9-27, A,B). Myeloblasts did not exceed 6% of all nucle-
neutrophilic cells is increased, but the percentage of myelo-
ated cells in 14 cats with myeloid hyperplasia20s However,
blasts does not exceed 20% of all nucleated cells. Dysplastic
myeloblasts may be increased substantially following early
changes are also typically present in one or more marrow cell
 asa s a  s  r
lines.
83,157,167,215,368
there is a concomitant depletion of mature neutrophils (Fig.
 Ineffective neutrophilic hyperplasia refers to the occurrence
 of a persistent neutropenia with neutrophilic hyperplasia in
cytes in bone marrow may be decreased in animals with
the bone marrow (Fig. 9-30). Increased numbers of immature
infammation and accompanying granulocytic hyperplasia
 granulocyte precursors and decreased numbers of mature neu-
because cytokines such as G-CSF, IL-1, and TNF-α (either
 trophils are typically present within the marrow. Ineffective
directly or indirectly) result in increased release of neutrophils
 neutrophilic hyperplasia frequently occurs in MDS and acute
from the marrow, in addition to stimulating the proliferation
myeloid leukemia (AML) 39,167 It is especially common in
of neutrophil precursors.1 Evidence of cytoplasmic toxicity.
neutropenic cats with FeLV and/or FIV infctions 27,39293.426
 including vacuolation of early neutrophilic precursors, may
 Immune-mediated neutropenia may result in secondary
also be present (see Fig. 9-28, A).
 neutrophilic hyperplasia in response to the premature removal
 seue u ussad q au esedrady sdonn
 of blood neutrophils. Immune-mediated neutropenia in dogs
has been characterized by having granulocytic hyperplasia
with or without a modest left shift is usually present in
with decreased numbers of band and segmented neutrophils
dogs and cattle with deficiencies in β2 integrin adhesion
B
FIGURE 9-28
Neutrophilic hyperplasia with a toxic left shift in the neutrophilic cells in bone marrow from a dog with a
severe leukopenia and neutropenia (1.4 and 0.2 x 10/μL, respectively) in blood. The M: E ratio (7.7: 1) and
fequency of plasma cells (18%) were increased. A, Toxic neutrophilic precursors in a bone marrow aspirate 
smear. Discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles were apparent in early neutrophilic precursors, and foamy (less distinet)
vacuolation was present in metamyelocytes and band neutrophils. A single rubricyte (fop rigbt of center), a
s  a  s asq  aq  e u s  p  sd 
in (A). Trabecular bone is located on the right and a megakaryocyte is present in the top left. H&E stain.
Sepsis was considered likely and antibiotic therapy was initiated. The total leukocyte count and total neutrophil
count were 7.3 and 5.1 x 10°/μL, respectively, 2 days later.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
277
FIGURE 9-29
FIGURE 9-30
Neutrophilic hyperplasia and erythroid hypoplasia in an aspirate smear
-sueu esedod ppue eid nu au
() ud s ue e s  p e u mu uqg
rate smear of bone marrow from a persistently leukopenic FIV-infected
injection for misrmating. Wright-Giemsa stain.
cat. Fewer band and mature neutrophils were present than normal.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 9-31
marrow from a cat with marked peripheral eosinophilia, probably associated with a hypereosinophilic syn-
drome. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Eosinophilic hyperplasia in a bone marrow core biopsy section collected
from a cat with lymphocytic-plasmacytic gastritis and peripheral eosinophilia. H&E stain.
 However, neutrophilic hypoplasia may be present when more
 increased IL-5 production.238 The injection ofrecombinant IL-2
immature neutrophilic precursors are eliminated 310,359.43.526
resulted in a peripheral eosinophilia in dogs and cats that was
 Neutropenia has been reported in dogs treated with anti-
likely mediated by IL-5 production byT lymphocytes. 1728.467
convulsants that had neutrophilic hyperplasia and orderly
Eosinophilia may accompany parasitic diseases, especially
maturation in the marrow, suggesting a peripheral destruction 
those caused by nematodes and fukes. It is more likely to be
 of neutrophils.204
 present when intestinal nematodes are migrating within the
body than when they are only located within the intestine3s
Eosinophilic Hyperplasia
 Eosinophilia may occur in association with infammatory
 Eosinophilic hyperplasia is generally present in bone marrow
 conditions of organs that normally contain numerous mast
when eosinophilia is present in blood (Fig. 9-31, A,B; Fig.
 cells, such as the skin, lungs, intestine, and uterus. It may be
9-32)209406 Eosinophilia occurs in disorders that result in
 present in animals with immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated
278
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-32
FIGURE 9-33
 u mu suqjo ieus aese ue u eiedady dous
Basophilic hyperplasia in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat
horse with an abdominal mast cell tumor and marked peripheral eosino-
with AML-M2.Four basophilic myelocytes (one upper leff, tbree rigbf
philia. Some of the granules in the eosinophilic myelocytes stain bluish-
red. Wright-Giemsa stain.
a promyeloyte is present at bottom left. Wright-Giemsa stain.
allergic hypersensitivity reactions, such as feabite allergies and
also be present in CML, where neutrophilia predomi-
feline asthma. Although not usually present, eosinophilia may
occur in animals with mast cell tumors (see Fig. 9-23) and
 proliferative neoplasm with marked thrombocytosis.320
rarely in animals with other tumor types.49 Refer to Chapter
 5 for more detailed information concerning disorders causing
Basophilic Hyperplasia
eosinophilia.
 Basophilic hyperplasia is generally present in bone marrow
Marked eosinophilia with extensive eosinophilic organ
when peripheral basophilia is present.209 Basophilia usually
infiltrates in animals (primarily cats) and humans has been
accompanies eosinophilia, and like eosinophilia, basophilia is
classified as either a chronic eosinophilic leukemia or hyper-
 generally associated with IgE-mediated disorders, including
cosinophilic syndrome.* However, it has been diffcult to sepa-
 parasitic infestations (especially with nematodes and fukes)
rate this collection of heterogeneous disorders into two distinct
entities. Prominent eosinophilic left shifts in bone marrow,
blood, and organ infltrates are more likely to occur in animals
 Basophilia may occur in some animals with mast cell
pasouaeip saop ui pue *sadki snosueinsuou Areud 'sroun
 shifting in eosinophil precursors within the bone marrow may
with essential thrombocythemia106,1,194,320 It has also been
occur in reactive disorders.8
 reported in dogs with pulmonary lymphomatoid granuloma-
With the use of new molecular and genetic diagnostic
techniques, it appears that most human cases of hypereosino-
cerning disorders that cause basophilia.
philic syndrome are neoplastic rather than reactive disor-
A marked basophilic left shift is present in the blood and
ders.20,351422 This same phenomenon may be recognized in
bone marrow of dogs with basophilic leukemia,280.28.311 and
veterinary medicine as additional molecular and genetic tech-
increased numbers of basophilic precursors may rarely be
 present in the bone marrow of cats with myeloid neoplasms
eosinophilic syndrome in Rotweiler dogs was considered to
 be a reactive process, because mean serum IgE concentrations 
from mast cell neoplasia with mastocytemia (sometimes called
were markedly high, no karyotype abnormalities were identi-
mast cell leukemia). Mast cells have round nuclei and baso-
fied on cytogenetic analysis, and one dog underwent sponta-
phils have segmented nuclei 14,9, 180.456
neous remission.211.,4s5
Increased numbers of eosinophils may be present in bone
Granulocytic Hypoplasia
 marrow samples from cats with MDS and AML even in the
Granulocytic hypoplasia is reported when the bone marrow
cellularity is normal or decreased, the hematocrit is normal or
*References 16, 145, 200, 212, 242, 256, 327,342, 358, 420, 459, 538.
*References 4, 45, 96, 113, 345, 367.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
279
FIGURE 9-34
Granulocytic hypoplasia in bone marrow aspirate smears from cats. A, Granulocytic hypoplasia of unknown
etiology in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from an FeLV-negative FIV-negative neutropenic cat with
normal hematocrit and platelet count. B, Granulocytic hypoplasia of unknown etiology in an aspirate smear
of bone marrow from a FeLV-negative cat with severe neutropenia. The hematocrit and platelet counts were
normal. Most cells present are nucleated erythrocyte precursors. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Selective Neutrophilic Hypoplasia or Aplasia
Selective neutrophilic hypoplasia may be immune-mediated,
drug-induced (which may be a secondary immune-mediated
disorder), inherited, or idiopathic in humans.*
 Ineffective neutrophil production is present in humans
with chronic idiopathic neutropenia The M:E ratio in the
bone marrow is low and there is a prominent left shift in the
 granulocytic series. The presence of activated T lymphocytes
producing proapoptotic mediators including IFN- and Fas-
ligand—-is believed to contribute to the impaired survival of
 granulocytic progenitor cells in the bone marrow. The balance
between prosurvival and proapoptotic mediators may be
altered further by an increased local production of the hema-
topoietic inhibitors TNF-c and TGF-β1 and decreased levels
of the anti-infammatory cytokine IL-10.350 A similar mecha-
nism has been described in idiopathic aplastic anemia in
FIGURE 9-35
humans.297
 s aq  m q e  eo n
 Most dogs with immune-mediated neutropenia have neu-
from a dog 6 days after therapy with vincristine, L-asparaginase, and
prednisone was initiated for a mediastinal tumor. Two megakaryocytes
 trophilic hyperplasia in the bone marrow; but some exhibit
and many erythroid precursors are present. The orange-staining globular
neutrophilic hypoplasia and two dogs had a complete lack
material is hemosiderin. H&E stain.
of neutrophil precursors in the marrow (pure white cell
aplasia).56310,3s,483 26 Neutropenia that was believed to have
 been immune-mediated was described in a cat with a thymoma.
increased, and the M: E ratio is low. If the marrow is hypercel-
A left shift was present, and the M: E ratio was approximately
lular and/or the hematocrit is low, a low M:E ratio indicates
1:1, which is slightly low for cats (see Table 8-2).121 Neutro-
the presence of erythroid hyperplasia. Because neutrophilic
 philic hypoplasia with a maturational arrest in the neutrophilic
 cells are normally much more numerous than eosinophilic or 
series may occur when autoantibodies recognize antigenic
basophilic cells in bone marrow, the term granulocytic bypopla-
determinants expressed not only by mature neutrophils but
siα indicates the presence of neutrophilic hypoplasia (Fig.
9-34, A,B; Fig. 9-35). Eosinophilic hypoplasia and/or baso-
Cytotoxic drugs used to treat immune-mediated diseases
philic hypoplasia may accompany neutrophilic hypoplasia, but
 and cancer typically result in generalized marrow injury, but in
few basophil precursors are normally present in bone marrow,
making an interpretation of basophilic hypoplasia difficult.
*References 12, 32, 68, 75, 221, 350, 501.
280
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 some cases injury to the neutrophilic series is more severe than
surface of circulating neutrophils, resulting in an immune-
injury to the erythroid or megakaryocytic series. Azathioprine
mediated premature destruction of these cells.
 can produce neutropenia resulting from selective neutrophilic
 Neutrophilic hypoplasia occurs in the bone marrow of neu-
hypoplasia in some cats.26 Experimental studies in cats have
 tropenic cats and dogs with parvovirus infections.4325s2s.370
 also demonstrated that doxorubicin can sometimes produce
Such infections in pups can also cause a severe erythroid
neutropenia without anemia or thrombocytopenia, but the
hypoplasia, but animals usually do not become anemic because
investigators did not examine bone marrow to determine
 of the long life span of erythrocytes.39s
Transient neutrophilic hypoplasia in the marrow with
Many drugs have been reported to cause neutropenia in
resultant transient peripheral neutropenia occur at 12- to
 humans, and neutrophilic hypoplasia is commonly present in 
14-day intervals in gray Collie dogs with inherited cyclic
 bone marrow.32 Griseofulvin is a fungistatic antibiotic that has
been reported to cause neutropenia in cats with dermatophyte
 nic phase, myeloblasts and promyelocytes are present, but later
infections but not in experimental cats without dermatophyte
 stages of neutrophil development are absent and the M:E
 infections Fig. 9-36).178,24s FIV-infected cats appear tohave an
 increased risk of developing griseofulvin-induced toxicity.424 In
stages increase until the neutrophilic series is complete, the
these cases, bone marrow evaluation has revealed evidence of
M:E ratio is high, and the number of neutrophils in blood is
neutrophilic hypoplasia. Methimazole treatment has been
normal or increased.284413 Overallmarrow cellularity is fairly
reported to cause neutropenia in hyperthyroid cats, but bone
constant, because the oscillations of granulopoiesis and eryth-
marrow findings were not given.
361 Transient methimazole-
ropoiesis occur in a reciprocal manner24 A similar repetitive
pattern of neutrophilic hypoplasia follwed by neutrophilic
 humans.323 Lithium carbonate can cause neutrophilic hypopla-
hyperplasia has been described in cats with FeLV-induced
sia with maturational arrest and neutropenia in cats.
cyclic hematopoiesis.453 Cyclic neutropenia has been produced
Neutropenia has been reported in animals given recombi-
experimentally in dogs using continuous low-dose cyclophos-
 phamide treatment, but bone marrow was not examined.326
 apparently occurs because the recipient develops antibodies
Familial neutropenia and thrombocytopenia have been
that react not only against the foreign recombinant protein
but also against the recipient's endogenous G-CSF. Marked
aplasia and megakaryocytic hypoplasia237 Erythroid matura-
 neutrophilic hypoplasia occurred when canine recombinant
sm eiy po aips nqpr sm 
 G-CSF was injected into rabbits2 but not when recombinant
believed to be present in half of the horses. Chronic (possibly
human G-CSF was injected into dogs, although the dogs
 congenital) neutropenia has been described in a young dog
with G-CSF deficiency. Bone marrow aspiration biopsy
 speculated that the antibody was bound to G-CSF on the
 revealed a maturational arrest at the promyelocyte-myelocyte
stage.250
 A decreased M: E ratio may be present when there is an
 increased demand for neutrophils and depletion of the post-
mitotic maturational and storage pool of the bone marrow, as
may occur with septicemia and endotoxemia.s8 These altera-
 tions may appear as a maturational arrest with cytoplasmic
toxicity.
Dysgranulopoiesis
The term dysgranulopoiesis refers to various disorders in which
abnormal  granulocyte  maturation  and/or  morphology  is
present.Dysgranulopoiesis often results in ineffective granulo-
 poiesis and a peripheral neutropenia. Neutrophilic abnormali-
ties that may be present in bone marrow include increased
numbers of myeloblasts (Fig. 9-37); maturational arrest in
the neutrophilic series (Fig. 9-38); giant metamyelocytes,
bands, and mature neutrophils (Figs. 9-39 and 9-40); multi-
nucleated cells (Fig 9-41,A,B); abnormal mitosis (Fig. 9-41, C);
FIGURE 9-36
abnormal granulation; hyposegmented neutrophils (pseudo-
Granulocytic hypoplasia with maturational arrest of granulocyte precur-
Pelger-Huet); hypersegmented neutrophils (Fig. 9-41, D), and
sors in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a severely neutropenic cat
 neutrophils with bizarre nuclear shapes (see Figs. 9-40 and
that had been treated with griseofulvin and prednisone for skin lesions.
9-41, E).*
Increased rumbers of small lymphocytes are also present. Slight neutro-
  s  sd   m q ru  
lowing cessation of drug treatments. Wright-Giemsa stain.
*References 39, 88, 167, 185,208, 319, 382, 507, 528, 530.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
281
FIGURE 9-37
FIGURE 9-39
Increased rumbers of myeloblasts (the six largest cells) in an aspirate
Giant band neutrophils in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat
smear of bone marrow from a horse with MDS. Myeloblasts accounted
with MDS. Wright-Giemsa stain.
for 9% of all nucleated cells in the marrow. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 9-38
FIGURE 9-40
Maturational arrest in neutrophil development at the myelocyte-
Idiopathic dysgranulopoiesis with giant neutrophil precursors with
metamyelocyte stage in an aspirate smear ofbone marrow from a FeLV-
 abnormal nuclear morphology in some cells and cytoplasmic vacuolation
negative neutropenic cat with MDS. Erythroid precursors are absent in
'adoued ym lop e ug ies ise mi soq e u siao u
this field. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Dysgranulopoiesis generally occurs in animals with MDS
Various drugs may result in dysgranulopoiesis. Experimen-
and AML. It is most common in cats with FeLV and/or FIV
tal studies have shown that lithium treatment causes a neu-
infections.* Immune-mediated neutropenia can result in 
 tropenia in cats as a result of a neutrophilic maturational arrest
increased numbers of neutrophilic precursors in the proliferat-
in the bone marrow.? Maturational arrests in both the neu-
ing pool relative fo the number of neutrophilic precursors in
 trophilic and erythroid series have been reported in the bone
 marrow of neutropenic anemic dogs treated with a cephalo-
with an inherited malabsorption of cobalamin may have neu-
sporin antibiotic.27 Dysgranulopoiesis and mild erythroid
 tropenia with hypersegmented neutrophils in the blood and
hypoplasia have been reported in the marrow of cats given
megaloblastic changes in the neutrophilic cell line in the bone
valacyclovir, an antiviral drug designed for the treatment of
marrow.13$,139
herpesvirus infections.34 Last, an antipsychotic clozapine-
related drug resulted in neutropenia with a lef shift in myeloid
*References 27, 39, 185, 293, 426, 429.
 and erythroid cell in the bone marrow of dogs.274
282
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
D
FIGURE 9-41
from a dog with idiopathic dysgranulopoiesis. B, Trinucleated granulocytic precursor in blood from a cat with
MDS. C, Abnormal mitotic cell in blood from a cat with MDs. D, Hypersegmentation in a dog with
from an FIV-infected leukopenic cat. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B,Courtesy ofRose Raskin.
The injection of recombinant G-CSF can have profound
reported in animals with dysgranulopoiesis.2 When neutro-
effects on bone marrow morphology Recombinant G-CSF
phils begin to proliferate after a period of neutrophilic aplasia,
shortens the cell cycle in neutrophil precursors, stimulates
myeloblasts and promyelocytes predominate early (Fig. 9-43),
three to four extra divisions in the mitotic neutrophil pool,
followed progressively by the appearance of the later stages of
and shortens the neutrophil maturational time in the
 development (Fig. 9-44),93,413.43 When an animal is examined
-nau roy panean suenq ui shupuy siooieuaH zmoireu
 prior to the production of mature neutrophils, the appearance
 tropenia with G-CSF included a neutrophilia with a promi-
of a maturational arrest is present (see Fig. 9-43). Over-
nent left shift, toxic cytoplasm, circulating myeloblasts (less
      ss 
than 2%), dysplastic neutrophils (hyposegmentation, hyper-
ture release of mature neutrophils can also give the impression
segmentation, and ring nuclei), and a peripheral metarubri-
 of a maturational arrest.
cytosis. Granulocytic hyperplasia with marked increases in
 Bone marrow toxicity (myelotoxicity) is induced by strong
 promyelocytes and myelocytes was present early in therapy,
septic and nonseptic infammatory conditions as well as by
but the M:E ratio and the relative distribution of neutrophil
some drugs. Although all bone marrow cell lines may be
stages normalized over time during therapy.411 Similar find-
affected, evidence of toxicity is most apparent in neutrophilic
ings are expected in dogs and cats treated with recombinant
precursors.39 Cytoplasmic basophilia and foaminess can be
G-CSF (Fig. 9-42).137
seen in later stages of neutrophil development in the bone
The early recovery stage from neutrophilic aplasia/
marrow, as is seen in circulating toxic neutrophilic cells. In
hypoplasia can exhibit some of the morphologic abnormalities
contrast, discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles may be present in
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
283
FIGURE 9-42
FIGURE 9-44
Increased myeloblasts and promyelocytes in a bone marrow aspirate
Intense granulocytic proliferative response with marked left shift in a
smear from a persistently neutropenic dog treated with recombinant
Moeu auoq ainne ue on fupuodsai ien e wo aiedse mou auoq
G-CSF twice (1 and 2 days) before this aspirate was taken. The total
leukocyte count and neutrophil count at the time of the bone marrow
d pe (s d m ssu ip d 
aspiration were 1.2 and 0.1 x 10°/μL, respectively. The M:E ratio was
 d s e  pe  
0.8:1, and 41% of all rucleated cells present were myeloblasts and pro-
presented with a panytopenia (hematocrit, 8%, neutrophil count, 1.4x
myelocytes. The absolute neutrophil count was within the reference inter-
10°/μL; total leukocyte count,2.5 × 10°/μL; and platelets, 17 x 10°/μL),
val 2 days later.
toxic degenerative left shift, and life-threatening hemorrhaging, with a
markedly prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time. FeLV and
     s 
blood transfusion. Hematology findings 2 days later included a hemato-
crit of 21%, neutrophilic cell count and totalleukocyte count of 6.5 and
9.7 × 107/μL, respectively, and a platelet count of 69 × 10°/μL. The cause
of the bone marrow insult was not determined. A toxin was not identi-
fied, but the client had treated the cat for several days with an unknown
antihistamine and cefadroxil for respiratory signs prior to presentation.
myeloblasts and promyelocytes. These vacuolated precursors
may have lobulated nuclei suggestive of monocyte precursors
(Fig. 9-45, A,B).152 Discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles in
neutrophilic precursors have also been reported with drugs,
including chloramphenicol, metronidazole, and cyclophos-
phamide.465os The experimental administration of recombi-
nant G-CSF to cats resulted in not only a marked increase
in the mitotic granulocytic pool but also in variable vacuola-
tion of granulocytic precursors, large granules in promyelo-
cytes,and visible granules in myelocytes and metamyelocytes.37
Additional nuclear abnormalities—including hyposegmenta-
FIGURE 9-43
fion, hypersegmentation, ring-formation, and binucleation-
may also be present in myelotoxicity. Giant neutrophils with
a dog recovering rom diethylstilbestrol-induced bone marrow toxicosis.
nuclear abnormalities are most often seen in cats.209.391
Approximately 95% of myeloid cells are early (proliferating) precursors;,
pe sis   ae t ss I a ae  s g
ABNORMALITIES OF
cells incapable of division (metamyelocytes,bands and segmented cell)
MEGAKARYOCYTES
comprise less than 5% of the myeloid cells. The blood neutrophil count
was 0.1 x 10°/μL, and the M:E ratio was 15:1. The blood neutrophil
Megakaryocytic Hyperplasia
count was 3.0 x 107/μL when rechecked 2 weeks later. Modified Wright
Megakaryocyte number, ploidy, and size increase in bone
stairl.
marrow within a few days following a thrombocytopenia
Pbotograph of a bone marrow smear from a 2009 ASVCP slide review case
resulting from premature destruction or utilization of platelets
submitted by C. Mastrorilli, E. Welles, J. Seay, and K. McIlwaine.
 in blood (Fig. 9-46, 4,B).2s Although other growth factors
284
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
and secondary IMT, ongoing intravascular coagulation, hyper-
splenism, and vascular injury Various viral, rickettsial, bacte
rial, protozoal, and fungal agents and therapeutic drugs result
in platelet destruction or utilization and subsequent mega-
karyocytic hyperplasia (Fig. 9-47). E. canis infection is a
common cause of thrombocytopenia in dogs in the southern
occurs in severe chronic ehrlichiosis, megakaryocytic hyper-
plasia is present early in the disease when immune-mediated
platelet destruction largely accounts for the thrombocytope-
nia16,30 Chapter 7 offers more information about the patho-
 genesis of thrombocytopenic disorders in animals.
Megakaryocytic hyperplasia is also present in disorders
with accompanying thrombocytosis, including iron-deficiency
anemia (see Fig. 9-1), some chronic infammatory conditions,
and essential thrombocythemia, which is a myeloproliferative
neoplasm characterized by a persistent, markedly increased
karyocyte morphology appears normal when examined by
ight microscopy (Fig. 9-48, A,B).
Selective Megakaryocytic Hypoplasia or Aplasia
Selective amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia is a rare syn-
drome in humans, in which it occurs as a congenital defect or
an acquired defect in adults. Congenital amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia generally results from genetic mutations
karyocytic thrombocytopenia in humans appears to be an
immune-mediated disorder.47 Idiopathic amegakaryocytic
thrombocytopenia is also rare in adult dogs and cats, in which
it is presumed to be immune-mediated (Fig. 9-49).* It has
FIGURE 9-45
 been reported in a quarter horse foal with associated IMHA.437
Apparent maturational arrest in the neutrophilic series in bone marrow
Familial  neutropenia  and  thrombocytopenia  have been
fom a dog with a severe leukopenia and neutropenia, 1.1 and 0.1 x
reported in eight horses with severe neutrophilic hypoplasia/
10°/μL,respectivelyMarked cytoplasmic toxicity anda deenerative l
aplasia and megakaryocytic hypoplasia237
shift of neutrophilic cells were present in blood. A, Toxic neutrophilic
Various drugs may induce thrombocytopenia as a result of
precursors in a bone marrow aspirate smear. Discrete cytoplasmic vacu
 marrow suppression. Usually marrow suppression is general-
oles were apparent in early neutrophilic precursors. The M:E ratio was
about 2: 1, but it was difficult to differentiate toxic granulocytic precur-
 eapserp aeyads aq aeu srore inq a
sors from monocytic precursor cell in bone marrow. Lymphocytes (19%)
example, dapsone treatment has been associated with amega-
and plasma cells (15%) were increased. Wright-Giemsa staini. B, Vacu-
karyocytic thrombocytopenia in a dog,261 and megakaryocytic
olated neutrophilic precursors with marked left shift (few cels more
  s aq  aq n e  s  n
treated with ribavirin, a broad-spectrum antiviral agent.532
dog presented in (A). A megakaryocyte is located at the bottom right.
H&E stain.Sepsis was consideredlikely and antibiotic therapy was initi
Dysmegakaryocytopoiesis
ated. The blood total leukocyte and total meutrophilic cell counts were
17.4 and 12.7 x 10°/μL, respectively, when measured 2 days later. A
Dysmegakaryocytopoiesis refers to the presence of maturational
regenerative left shift with 3+ cytoplasmic toxicity was present in blood
and/or morphologic abnormalities in megakaryocytic cells
reutrophilic cells at that time.
Apparent maturational arrests with early stages (e.g-, pro-
dysplastic process, but rather may result from immune-
 have synergistic effects, these changes are largely the result of
mediated reactions against megakaryocyte antigens (see Fig.
increased thrombopoietin, which also accelerates the rate of
9-46, A).220 Dysplastic abnormalities that may be present in
megakaryocyte maturation. Most megakaryocytes are mature
bone marrow include asynchronous mafuration resulting in
in animals with megakaryocytic hyperplasia, but increased
the formation of dwarf granular megakaryocytes with single
numbers of promegakaryocytes and basophilic megakaryo-
cytes are often recognized. Thrombocytopenic disorders in
which megakaryocytic hyperplasia is expected include primary
*References 143, 189, 219, 249, 329, 537, 552.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
285
FIGURE 9-46
Megakaryocyte morphology and numbers in bone marrow aspirate smears, before and after therapy,from a
dog with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. A, Mature megakaryocytes were absent prior to therapy. Most
megakarycyte precursors present were promegakaryocytes bicleated cellat lft),but somebasophilicmega
same dog 1 week after prednisone therapy was begun. The image of this second aspirate smear was taken at
lower magnification. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Asynchronous maturation and anisokaryosis of megakaryo-
cytes have been reported in a Cavalier King Charles spaniel
 information about this disorder.
Emperipolesis
Megakaryocytit emperipolesis refers to the movement of blood
cells (neutrophils, erythrocytes, and lymphocytes) within
megakaryocytes (Fig. 9-52, A,B).412 Emperipolesis differs
北
from phagocytosis in that entering cells exist temporarily
within the cell. The mechanism and significance of this finding
remain to be defned. Increased emperipolesis has been
reported in humans with various conditions including active
blood loss, carcinomas, myeloid neoplasms, non-Hodgkin
 lymphoma, idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura, and reac-
tive th2rombocytosis.69,109,32,40s
FIGURE 9-47
 Emperipolesis occurs at low levels in young rats but is
Asdoqo eus mou uqe  drdi
common in aged rats, and the incidence is markedly increased
 collected from a thrombocytopenic dog with disseminated intravascular
in animals with hyperplastic bone marrow secondary to
coagulation that developed 1.5 weeks after treatment for occult heart-
chronic suppurative or neoplastic  lesions.260  I
Increased
worm disease. H&E stain.
emperipolesis has been produced experimentally in animals in
which thrombopoiesis is increased by phlebotomy,463 IL-6
 or multiple nuclei (Fig. 9-50, A-C) and large megakaryocytes
with nuclear abnormalities including hypolobulation, hyper-
(LPS) injections.46 Studies with LPS indicate that emperi-
lobulation, or multiple round nuclei (Fig. 9-51, 4,B) Mega-
polesis is at least partly dependent on interactions between
karyocytic dysplasia may occur in association with IMT and/
 adhesion molecules on leukocytes and megakaryocytes.460
or IMHA s02,518 lymphoma,02 and following drug administra-
 Emperipolesis has been reported in dogs with leishmaniasis
tion,276,532but it most frequently occurs in MDS and AML.*
nonspecific response to increased thrombopoietin.10 Inter-
-u um susuro mnmsdnn msndos jo uoezu
*References 39, 167, 309, 466, 502, 507, 530.
 karyocytes has also been reported in a cat.3
286
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-48
Megakaryocyte hyperplasia in bone marrow from a cat with essential thrombocythemia and a platelet count
of 1.4 x 10%/μL. A, Aspirate smear with many megakaryocytes. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Section from a core
biopsy with many megakaryocytes. H&E stain.
in inflammatory conditions with increased monocyte produc-
tion and in some myeloid neoplasms.3 Monocyte precursors
are markedly increased in two forms of AML. When myelo-
blasts as well as monoblasts are increased, the term acute
myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4) may be used. When only
monoblasts are increased, the disorder is classified as acute
monocytic leukemia (AML-M5).210
Reactive Macrophage Hyperplasia
Macrophage hyperplasia occurs in the bone marrow in
response to a variety of systemic viral, bacterial, fungal, and
protozoalinfectious agents (Fig. 9-53,4,B).S39 Organisms that 
may be visualized in bone marrow macrophages include Myco-
latum (Fig.9-55),787933 Leishmania donovani(Fig.9-53,A,B;
FIGURE 9-49
Megakaryocyte aplasia in a hypercellular aspirate smear ofbone marrow
Fig. 9-58,4,B; Fig. 9-59; Fig. 9-60, A,B),132,15423.431 and Phi-
from a thrombocytopenic cat with associated immune-mediated hemo-
alemonium obovatum.433
lytic anemia. Only one megakaryocyte was seen when multiple smears
Macrophages may be increased in the marrow and
were scanned. Megakaryocytes were not seen in sections ofbone marrow
 contain phagocytized cellular debris in response to marrow
collected at necropsy. Wright-Giemsa stain.
necrosis195,391.503
 or increased apoptosis, as may occur in
dyserythropoiesis,31 immune-mediated destruction of hema-
ABNORMALITIES OF
topoietic cells (Figs. 9-61, 9-62), or hematopoietic neoplasia
(Fig. 9-63)387.3 Increased numbers of vacuolated macro-
MONONUCLEAR PHAGOCYTES
phages may be seen in some inherited lipid storage diseases
Monocytic Hyperplasia
(Fig. 9-64).57,84.164
Monocyte precursors are normally present in low numbers in 
the bone marrow, and they are diffcult to differentiate from
Phagocytosis of Blood Cells and Their Precursors
neutrophilic precursors based on morphology alone. Conse-
Phagocytosis of blood cells is rare in the bone marrow of
normal animals and generally involves only mature erythro-
ssouo te ie paziuaosan jou si eiseldody susououu pue
cytes. Phagocytosis of blood precursor cells is considered
hyperplasia often accompanies granulocytic hyperplasia in
response to various infammatory cytokines and growth
Text continued on p.292
CHA PT ER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
287
B
FIGURE 9-50
 Dwarf megakaryocytes in bone marrow aspirate smears from animals with myeloid neoplasms. A, Binucleated
dwarf megakaryocyte from a dog with CML. Magenta-staining granules in the cytoplasm and lack ofintense
a dog with MDS. C, Dwarf megakaryocyte from an FeLV-positive, thrombocytopenic cat with MDS. Large
but the cell has a single nucleus and is much smaler than normal. Wright-Giemsa stain.
A
FIGURE 9-51
Dysmegakaryocytopoiesis in bone marrow from a cat with a glucocorticoid-responsive thrombocytopenia.
Erythrocyte and leukocyte parameters were normal in blood, and the FeLV test was negative. A, Mature
s e e  s   e  r  s   
Dwarf megakaryocytes with separate nuclei were also present (not shown). Wright stain. B, Megakaryocytic
hyperplasia in a core biopsy section. Megakaryocytes vary considerably in size and have multiple separate
nuclei. H&E stain. The thrombocytopenia resolved following glucocorticoid therapy.
Courtesy ofJeff Sirninger.
288
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-52
Megakaryocytic emperipolesis in bone marrow aspirate smears. A, Emperipolesis of neutrophils in a mega-
karyocyte from a cat with essential thrombocythemia. B, Emperipolesis of a neutrophil in a megakaryocyte
 proplatelet process from a dog. Modifed Wright stain.
From Scott MA, Friedrichs KR. Megakaryocyte podograpby. Vet Clin Pathol 2009;38: 135.
FIGURE 9-53
Increased numbers of macrophages and plasma cells in bone marrow from a dog with disseminated leishmani-
asis. A, Three intact macrophages are flled with Leisbmania donovami organisms. Many blue-staining plasma
cells are also present in this aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Macrophages containing L domovani
organisms (dark dots) in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy. A megakaryocyte is present at the right
side.H&E stain.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
289
FIGURE 9-54
S   si  ss  n
A, M. avium organisms appear as unstained rods in the cytoplasm of a
 macrophage. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, M. auvum organisms appear as
red-staining rods in the tytoplasm of a macrophage. Modified acid-fast
FIGURE 9-55
stairn.
 in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat with disseminated his-
p  an   fg ) sso ag sida
to this cell or other macrophages present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
FIGURE 9-56
FIGURE 9-57
Multinucleated macrophage containing many Leisbmania donovani
Early Cytauxzoon felis schizont development within a macrophage in an
-s yim sop e uo moiu auoq jo ieus anendse ue un susuano
         r 
seminated leishmaniasis. These protozoal organisms are identified by a
“ribons"of darker blue material with reddish inclusions represent pro-
distinctive bar-shaped kinetoplast in the cytoplasm which stains similar
toplasm of the infectious agent without definable nuclei. he macrophage
to the rucleus. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 n          s
Giemsa stainl.
290
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-58
Intermediate Cytaxzoon felis schizont development within macrophages. A, A macrophage containing a
developing schizont in ann aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat with cytauxzoonosis is shown at a much
lower magnification than the macrophage in Figure 9-57. Separation of nuclear and cytoplasmic material has
occurred. The nucleus of the macrophage is eccentrically located at the bottom edge of the cell. B, Transmis-
sion electron microscopy of a macrophage with an intermediate schizont. With development, there has been
a progressive branching and elongation oflobules until the enlarged tortuous schizont fils thehost cell, which
has also become progressively larger. Concentrations of karyoplasm begin to occur beneath the surface mem-
branes ofthe illous-like elongations ofthe schizont,and many nuclei canbe visualized as concentrated areas
ofkaryoplasm become membrane bound At this stage,the parasite appears to contain multiple multinucleated
structures. These have been called cytomeres in the past; however, they are not separate structures but lobules
B,From Simpson CF, Harvey JW, Lawman MJP Murray J,Kocan AA,Carlisle JW. Ultrastructure of schizonts in
the liver ofcats with experimentally induced cytauxzoonosis.AmJVet Res.1985;46:384-390.
FIGURE 9-59
Transmission electron microscopy of Cytauxzoonfels merozoites forming as everted sacculations from schizont
lobules in areas oflobule membrane adjacent to schizont nuclei.
From Simpson CF,Harvey JW,Lawman MJP Murray J,Kocan AA,Carlisle JW Ultrastructure of schizonts in the
liver of cats with experimentally induced cytauxzoonosis.Am J Vet Res.1985;46:384-390.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
291
FIGURE 9-60
Completion of Cytauxzoon felis schizont development within macrophages. A, A macrophage in an aspirate
smear of bone marrow from a cat with cytauxzoonosis shown at the same magnification as in Figure 9-58,
A. Nuclei of hundreds of individual merozoites appear as small dots. The nucleus of the macrophage is eccen-
trically located at the bottom left edge of the cell. B, Transmission electron photomicrograph ofa macrophage
following completion of schizogony The cytoplasm of the host macrophage is flled with mature merozoites.
The rucleus of the macrophage with a large nucleolus is located at the bottom center of the image. A residual
body in the cytoplasm (sigbtly lft of center constitutes the remains of the schizont. Following release by the
Aq sa aa su pe u as e us snu r 
endocytosis (not shown).
B, From Simpson CF, Harvey JW, Lawman MJP, Murray J, Kocan AA, Carlisle JW Ultrastructure ofschizonts in
the liuer of cats with experimentally induced cytauxzoomosis.AmJVet Res.1985;46:384-390.
FIGURE 9-61
FIGURE 9-62
Two large macrophages filled with phagocytized cellular material and
Two macrophages with phagocytized cellular material (primarily nuclei)
vacuoles in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from an anemic cat with
-    e  m aqo rs anse  
ineffective erythropoiesis. Erythroid hyperplasia was present in bone
tive anermia and erythroid hyperplasia in the bone marrow. Wright-
Giemsa stain.
stairn.
292
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-63
FIGURE 9-64
 Binucleated macrophage with phagocytized cell and nuclear debris in a
 Two vacuolated macrophages in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from
bone marrow aspirate smear form a dog with ALL. Neoplastic cells are
a cat with inherited Niemann-Pick type C disease.
also located within and outside the macrophage. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Photographofa stained bone marrow smeaxfrom a 1993ASVCPslide review
case submitted by D. E. Brown and M. A. Thrall.
B
FIGURE 9-65
Macrophages with phagocytized clls in bone marrow aspirate smears. A, Macrophage with phagocytized
erythrocytes and a nucleus (lef from a cat with ineffective erythropoiesis. B, Marophage with phagocytized
erythrocytes and platelets from a cat with cytauxzoonosis. C, Macrophage with phagocytized leukocytes from
a leukopenic cat with MDS.
abnormal and implies increased cell destruction or death 
 The production of cytokines—such as IFN-y, TNF-α, IL-1,
within the marrow (Fig. 9-65, A-C). Increased phagocytosis   IL-12, and/or IL-18—either directly or indirectly through the
 of blood cells and/or their precursors, primarily erythroid
 production of growth factors such as macrophage-CSF
cells, may be observed in primary or secondary immune-
(M-CSF) and GM-CSF will stimulate the production and
mediated disorders.270 However, increased phagocytosis of
blood cells and/or their precursors may also be observed sec-
 Pronounced macrophage activation can result in the hemo-
ondary to various infctious and neoplastic diseases43,72.4
phagocytic syndrome (macrophage activation syndrome),
 The production of increased amounts of inflammatory cyto-
which is characterized as an acute, severe clinical event in
kines, especially by excessive T lymphocyte activation, has 
humans, with fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia
been proposed as a likely mechanism for increased macro-
 due to uncontrolled phagocytosis of blood cells and/or their
phage activation and increased phagocytosis of blood cells.
 precursors.28248 Icterus and diarrhea have also been reported
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
293
in some dogs with this syndrome.511 The hemophagocytic
histiosarcoma. The cell of origin is the interstitial dendritic
syndrome is a secondary phenomenon that can sometimes
cell, which expresses leukocyte surface molecules CD1,
mask an underlying immune-mediated, infectious, or neoplas-
 CD11c/CD18, and major histocompatibility complex class II
tic disease.70,392474
(MHC-II).3 Although neoplastic macrophages in hemo-
Recommended hematologic criteria for classifying an
phagocytic histiocytic sarcoma express MHC-II, they have
animal as having the hemophagocytic syndrome include pan-
 low and/or inconsistent expression of CD1 and CD1ic and
cytopenia or bicytopenia with increased numbers of benign-
 express CD11d instead of CD11c.322 A lack of prominent
appearing macrophages in bone marrow (a minimum of 2%
erythrophagocytosis in a histiocytic tumor suggests that the
of all nucleated cells) that have phagocytized blood cells and/
 neoplasm is of dendritic cell origin; however, surface markers
or their precursors.511 This syndrome has been associated with
 may be required to make a definitive diagnosis.
 infections, immune-mediated disorders, and hematopoietic
Although much less common than in dogs, histiocytic
neoplasms, but an underlying disease may not always be
 neoplasms are recognized in cats and a horse.° Histiocytic
 Schistocytes and activated monocytes
 disorders in cats have been classified as feline progressive
may also be present in blood.491
histiocytosis, feline pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis,
and the feline histiocytic sarcoma complex.61,321 Several cases
Histiocytic Sarcoma
of histiocytic sarcoma (malignant histiocytosis) have been
The term bistioryte is used to describe cells of both the mac-
reported in cats that appear similar to hemophagocytic his-
rophage and dendritic cell series.77 Canine histiocytic diseases
tiosarcoma in dogs, although the accompanying anemia is
 have been classified into the histiocytoma complex, reactive
histiocytosis, and the histiocytic sarcoma complex. The histio-
phage origin of the hemophagocytic neoplastic cells has been
cytic sarcoma complex includes localized histiocytic sarcoma,
demonstrated in cats.8s.,134
 disseminated histiocytic sarcoma, and hemophagocytic histio-
cytic sarcoma. Localized and disseminated histiocytic sarco-
 mas are ofinterstitial dendritic cellorigin, and hemophagocytic
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF
histiosarcoma originates from macrophages.321 Disseminated
BONE MARROW
histiocytic sarcoma and hemophagocytic histiosarcoma have 
been classifed as malignant histiocytosis in the past. The
 Infammatory disorders of bone marrow are seldom recog-
morphology of the neoplastic histiocytes varies from mature
nized because inflammatory cells—including neutrophils,
histiocytes to anaplastic histiocytes (Fig. 9-66, A-C).
eosinophils,
monocytes, macrophages, lymphocytes, and
Anaplastic features which may be present include moderate
plasma cells—are normally present in bone marrow, making
to marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis, with moderate
recognition of infammation difficult in aspirate smears.
to  abundant  lightly  basophilic  vacuolated cytoplasm.
 Increased numbers of neutrophils, eosinophils, and monocytes
Nuclei are round, oval, or reniform with prominent nucleoli.
 in bone marrow usually represent increased production to
Bizarre mitotic fgures and multinucleated giant cells may be
 meet peripheral demands rather than infammation within the
 present. Histiocytic sarcomas are most common in Bernese
 marrow. Core biopsies are generally needed to make a diag-
Mountain dogs, Rottweilers, Golden Retrievers, and Flat-
 nosis of infammation in the bone marrow, but it is rarely
Coat Retrievers 3.322
 diagnosed because the multifocal distributions of the lesions
 Canine hemophagocytic histiosarcoma is a proliferative
 are easily missed using a small biopsy needle. Recognition of
disorder of CD11d+ macrophages originating in the spleen
infammation within the marrow is increased if biopsies are
 and possibly bone marrow that spreads rapidly to the liver and
 collected from lesions identified using diagnostic imaging
lngs. Laboratory findings in most cases of canine hemo-
techniques. Infammation in the bone marrow has been clas-
 phagocytic histiosarcoma include a Coombs-negative regen-
 sifed into the various categories discussed below.524
 erative anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and
hypocholesterolemia.  Neoplastic macrophages appear _as
Acute Inflammation
infltrates in the spleen, liver, bone marrow, and lungs. The
Lesions are characterized by circumscribed infiltrates of
macrophages often contain phagocytized erythrocytes and/or
mature neutrophils (Fig. 9-68, A). Some of these microab-
hemosiderin (Fig. 9-67, A, B) and are accompanied by areas of
scesses have necrotic material in their centers. Vascular dilata-
extramedullary hematopoiesis in affected tissues. Cellular
tion, fbrin exudate, and hemorrhage may also be present.
atypia may be more pronounced in the spleen than it is in the
 Acute infammation is generally associated with bacterial
bone marrow.322
 infection. 129,214,524
 Nonhemophagocytic  disseminated   histiocytic
csarcoma
may originate in the spleen, lymph nodes, lungs, bone marrow,
Fibrinous Inflammation
skin (especially of the extremities), or periarticular tissues of
 Fibrin exudation without accompanying infammatory cells
the limbs, followed by widespread metastasis. These tumors
 has been called fibrinous infammation. Fibrin, which typi-
are more likely to appear as masses, in contrast to the
 cally appears as small tangled pink fbrils in bone marrow
more diffuse infiltrates typically seen in hemophagocytic
 sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), must be
294
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-66
Bone marrow from a dog with histiocytic sarcoma. Neoplastic cells were also present in the liver and spleen
at necropsy A, Histiocytic proliferation with marked anisocytosis and anisokaryosis in an aspirate smear he
cytoplasm of each cell contains prominent vacuolation. Erythrophagocytosis was not a prominent feature in
this case. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, A large trinucleated histiocyte with prominent cytoplasmic vacuolation in
an aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. C, Histiocytic proliferation with marked anisocytosis and aniso-
karyosis in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy The cytoplasm of each cell contains prominent vacuola-
tion. A cluster of erythroid precursors is located in the upper right corner. H&E stain.
differentiated from edema and necrotic debris, which appear
 as pink homogeneous material. Special stains, including the
 gates are infrequently recognized in bone marrow sections of
Frazier-Lundrum stain, may be used to identify fbrin.512
dogs and cats; their presence may be the result of chronic
Fibrinous inflammation has been recognized in animals
immune stimulation (Fig. 9-69).524
with disseminated intravascular coagulation and systemic
 Increased numbers of small lymphocytes and/or plasma
vasculitis.524
cells may be present in various immune-mediated disorders
including immune-mediated neutropenia, IMHA, and IMT.*
Chronic Inflammation/Hyperplasia
Chronic infammation consists of proliferations or infiltra-
Chronic Granulomatous Inflammation
tions of plasma cells, lymphocytes, and/or mast cells. Prolif-
Macrophage infltrates characterize chronic granulomatous
erations of plasma cells and/or lymphocytes have been
infammation (see Fig. 9-68, B). Both diffuse macrophage
reported in the bone marrow of dogs with chronic renal
disease and in dogs with myelofbrosis.524 Plasma cells are
increased in bone marrow in response to some infectious
agents, including E. canis and visceral leishmaniasis in dogs 
*References 310, 359, 383, 446, 504, 507, 512, 525.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
295
B
FIGURE 9-67
Aspirate bone marrow smears from a dog with hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma.A, Macrophage prolifr
gray-black hemosiderin are visible in the cytoplasm of multiple cells. One large macrophage at left center is
flled with hemosiderin. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Macrophage proliferation with cells containing large
amounts of hemosiderin (diffuse and granular blue-staining cytoplasm). Prussian blue stain.
FIGURE 9-68
Pyogranulomatous infammation in postmortem bone marrow sections from a dog with unknown etiology
A, Focal area of neutrophilic inflammation (microabscess). Trabecular bone is located at the right edge of the
image. B, Macrophages and neutrophils are distributed throughout this section of bone marrow. H&E stain.
Hyperplasia" section in this chapter. A granuloma is a site of
occurs in animals, especially in association with mycobacterio-
chronic infammation characterized by the presence of various
 sis (Fig. 9-70, A,B) and fungal infections such as coccidiomy-
monocytic cells (monocytes, macrophages, epithelioid cells,
cosis, penicilliosis (Fig. 9-71, A,B), aspergillosis (Fig. 9-72,
and multinucleated giant cells) arranged in compact masses.
A-C), blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, and Phi-
 Fibrosis and variable numbers of neutrophils and eosinophils
may also be present. When neutrophilic infammation is
pue snuadsy juaiss oi aqudassns arou sq oi readde saop
also prominent, the term pyogranulomatous infammation is
 Phialemonium infections than other dog breeds.433 A specific
used (see Fig. 9-68, A,B). Multifocal granulomatous or
 etiology cannot always be determined.65
296
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-69
A small lymphoid follicle around a longitudinal section of a vessel (left
of center) in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy collected from a
dog. H&E stain.
日
FIGURE 9-71
Core bone marrow biopsy from a lytic/proliferative lesion in the humerus
of a Collie dog. A, Mary large epithelioid macrophages are filled with
phagocytized swollen fungal hyphae. Hyphae with clear cell walls and
no discernible internal structure predominated. Neutrophils, eosinophils,
 and fbrocytes are also present. B, Higher magnification demonstrating
the swollen fungal hyphae in macrophages. A Peicillium species was
cultured from the lesion. H&E stain.
Photograph of a bone marrow core biopsy from a 2OO8 ASVCP slide review
case submitted by K.Miyakawa,C.Swerson, L.Mendoza, B.Steficek, M.
Seavey, F Gomes, and C. Warzee.
HEMATOPOIETIC NEOPLASMS
Hematopoietic neoplasms arise from the bone marrow, lymph
 nodes, spleen, or thymus. They are classified as either lym-
phoid or myeloid neoplasms. The term leukemia is used when
FIGURE 9-70
neoplastic cells are seen in the blood and/or bone marrow. An
Bone marrow from a cat with disseminated Mycobacterium avium infec-
exception is the neoplastic proliferation of plasma cells in
tion.A, Bone marrow aspirate smear with three macrophages filled with
bone marrow (multiple myeloma), which is not referred to as
Mycobacterum organisms, which appear as linear unstained structures.
a leukemia. Blood leukocyte counts may be low, normal, or
Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Bone marrow core biopsy containing macro-
phages flled with unstained Mycobacterium organisms. Clusters of
high in animals with leukemia. The term acute is used to
 plasma cell are present between macrophages. Trabecular bone is present
 describe leukemias in which a predominance of blast cells
 in the bottom right. H&E stain.
occurs in the bone marrow; the term chronit is used for
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
297
FIGURE 9-72
Pyogranulomatous infammation from a lytic lesion in the proximal humerus of a dog with aspergillosis
A, Aspirate smear containing lysed cells, degenerate neutrophils, macrophages, a reactive fibroblast (top rigbt),.
and septate fungal hyphae (botfom leff quadrant). Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Section of a core biopsy contains
numerous macrophages and fewer reutrophils. Vague outlines of fungal hyphae (round to ovoid to bulbous,
sharply demarcated clear spaces, often with eosinophilic centers can alsobeidentifedH&E stainC, Numr-
 ous branching septate argyrophilic fungal hyphae visible in a core biopsy section. GMS stain.
 leukemias in which there is a predominance of maturing cells
neoplasms.381 The development of monoclonal antibodies
in blood and bone marrow. The progression of disease is
usually rapid (weeks to months) in acute leukemias and slow
for the classification of cells using immunophenotype analysis.
(months to years) in chronic leukemias.
Many antibodies are available for use in dogs, but
 Precursor cells for mast cell tumors and histiocytic sarco-
 limited panels are available in other domestic animals.303
Antibodies bound to cells are detected using fuorescent or
usually develop from more differentiated cells in the periph-
enzymatic labels. Assays may be performed on exfoliative
eral tissues. Consequently they are typically not included with 
cytology preparations or paraffn-imbedded tissue biopsies,
myeloid neoplasms, even though some cases of noncutaneous
using immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry,
systemic mastocytosis and hemophagocytic histiocytic sarco-
 respectively. Immunophenotyping is also performed in fuid
mas might qualify as hematopoietic neoplasms.
 samples using fow cytometry, where it has been especially
Although this book focuses on the morphologic appear-
useful in identifying lymphoid cell types.18 Antibodies have
ance of neoplastic hematopoietic cells, it is not possible to
 recently been developed for use in identifying granulocytic
differentiate some cell types, especially blast cell and lympho-
 and monocytic lines in dogs,but there remains a need for early
 erythroid markers.487 Panels of antibodies have been validated
have improved the quality of diagnosing hematopoietic neo-
for use in the differential diagnosis of acute leukemias in
 dogs (Table 9-1).6.487 In addition, clonality assays have been
298
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
developed that can be used to differentiate reactive from neo-
TABLE 9-1
plastic disorders.18,183
Antibodies Used to Phenotype Leukemia in Dogs
General Leukocyte Markers
CD45
All leukocytes
LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
CD11a
All leukocytes
The term lympboma denotes a solid tumor or tumors of neo-
Acute Leukemia Marker
plastic lymphocytes located outside of the bone marrow. The
CD34
Stem cells/early progenitor cells
term lymphoid leukemia indicates a neoplastic condition of
lymphocytes present in bone marrow and/or blood that is not
Lymphoid Markers
associated with a solid tumor. Lymphoid leukemias are further
CD3
T lymphocytes
classified as acute or chronic, depending on the maturity of
CD4
T lymphocytes, neutrophils, monocytes
the cells involved. When neoplastic cells are present in the
CD5
T lymphocytes, subset of B lymphocytes
blood of an animal with a lymphoma, the terms leukemit
CD8
Cytotoxic T lymphocytes
CD11d
LGLs, macrophages in spleen and marrow
lympboma or ympbosarcoma celleukemia have been used, but
CD21
B lymphocytes at a later stage than CD79a
the former term is preferred. Metastasis from bone marrow to
CD79a
B lymphocytes
lymphoid tissues and from lymphoid tissues to bone marrow
is common. Consequently it may be difficult to differentiate
Myeloid Markers
a true leukemia from a lymphoma with leukemia in animals
CD11b
Granulocytes, monocytes, macrophages
with advanced stages of disease. The measurement of CD34
CD11c
Granulocytes, monocytes, dendritic cells
on neoplastic cells may help differentiate acute lymphoblastic
CD14
Monocytes
 leukemia (ALL) from leukemic lymphoma in dogs. Neoplas-
CD41/61
Megakaryoblasts
tic cells in dogs with ALL are typically positive, and neoplastic
CD61
Megakaryoblasts
MPO
Neutrophils, monocytes
cells in the blood of dogs with leukemic lymphoma are usually
MAC387
Neutrophils, monocytes/macrophages
negative.2,146.485
NSA
Neutrophils
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
From Villiers E, Baines S, Law AM, et al. Identification of acute myeloid leu-
 Neoplastic lymphoblasts and/or prolymphocytes are present
kemia in dogs using flow cytometry with myeloperoxidase, MAC387, and a
in the bone marrow of animals with ALL (Fig. 9-73, A,B;
canine neutrophil-specific antibody. Vet Clin Pathof. 2006;35:55-71.
Fig. 9-74, A,B; Figs. 9-75, 9-76). Neoplastic cells are also
CD, cluster of differentiation antigen; MPO, myeloperoxidase; NSA, neutrophil
usually present in blood (see Figs. 5-60, 5-61) with or without 
specific antibody; LGL, large granular lymphocyte.
FIGURE 9-73
ALL in bone marrow from a dog. A, Lymphoblasts with dark-blue cytoplasm and indistinet nucleoli in arl
aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Lymphoblasts in a core biopsy section. The orange material present
is hemosiderin. H&E stain.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
299
FIGURE 9-74
ALL in bone marrow from a dog. A, Lymphoblasts with dark-blue cytoplasm and indistinct rucleoli in an
aspirate smear. Lymphoblasts were not visible in blood from this animal. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Lympho-
blasts in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy section. The orange materal present is hemosiderin H&E
stainn.
FIGURE 9-75
FIGURE 9-76
Lymphoblasts with dark-blue cytoplasm and indistinet nucleoli in anl
Lymphoblasts, often with visible nucleoli, in a roll preparation from a
aspirate smear of bone marrow from a cat with ALL. A minority of
core biopsy from a horse with ALL. Wright-Giemsa stain.
neoplastic cells had cytoplasmic vacuoles. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 an absolute lymphocytosis. A moderate to marked nonregen-
hematopoietic lineages without the use of special stains and/
erative anemia with thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia is
or surface markers. Compared with myeloblasts, lymphoblasts
tend to exhibit more condensed chromatin and less prominent
 recognized in horses and dogs diagnosed with ALL by bone
nucleoli.283
 Most cases of ALL in cats have a T lymphocyte phenotype
 present in ALL exhibit decreased nuclear chromatin conden-
and most are FeLV positive,279so7 but FIV positive FeLV
sation  and  increased cytoplasmic basophilia 
acompared
 negative cats with ALL have been reported 193.26,3 Neoplas-
tic cells from dogs with ALL may be of the T lymphocyte,
 not be visible in the nuclei of these neoplastic cells and, when 
 present, may be diffcult to visualize. Other abnormalities-
B lymphocyte ALL (CD79at and/or CD21t) has been identi-
including increased anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, and nuclear
fied more often than T 1ymphocyte ALL (CD3+).2462,48s Like
pleomorphism—may also  be  present.  Lymphoblasts  are
 generally diffcult to differentiate from blast cells of other
 However, neoplastic cells in dogs with acute large granular
300
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
lymphocytic (LGL) leukemia (see Fig. 5-59) are typically
from dogs with CLL are negative for CD34, and lymphocytes
CD34, and the neoplasm appears to originate in the spleen
from dogs with ALL are usually positive 462,48s Lymphocytes
 present in the LGL type of CLL have red- or purple-staining
   s    
(generally focal) granules within light-blue cytoplasm (see
lymphoma.462
Fig. 5-58). These cells also have condensed nuclear chromatin,
but they are generally larger, with more cytoplasm and lower
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic (N:C) ratios, than cells present in
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is reported most often
 in older animals .42 The clinical presentation varies, but dogs
LGL leukemia in dogs behave like CLL and progress slowly
and cats with CLL are often asymptomatic when diagnosed.
 over several years, some cases behave like an aggressive form
 A lymphocytosis (6 × 10°/μL to over 200 × 102/μL) involving 
normal-appearing  lymphocytes is  consistently  present  in
form of CLL involve neoplastic T lymphocytes in dogs, but
blood (see Figs. 5-56, 5-57,5-58),s,263,29,542 Mild to moderate
cells of the LGL form of ALL in dogs may be of either the
 anemia is generally present. Moderate thrombocytopenia
T lymphocyte or the NK cell lineage.
304,485
may be present at times, but neutropenia is generally not
 Bone marrow examination of animals with CLL often
seen.2.462542 The nuclear chromatin is more condensed in CLL
 reveals increased numbers of normal-appearing lymphocytes
cells than in those of ALL. In contrast with ALL, most cats
(Fig. 9-77, A,B; Fig. 9-78, A,B; Fig. 9-79); however, the
with CLL are FeLV-negative.279
extent of the neoplastic infltration is generally less than that
 T lymphocyte CLL is more common than B lymphocyte
seen in ALL. Bone marrow may contain some reactive lym-
phocytes (see Fig. 9-69), which must be differentiated from a
neoplastic lymphoid infltrate. CLL of the B lymphocyte type
appears to originate in the bone marrow; consequently lym--
 Dogs with CLL of the B lymphocyte type often have an
phocyte infiltrates are consistently present with this type of
 accompanying monoclonal gammopathy that is typically of
CLL. In contrast, T lymphocyte development requires pro-
the immunoglobulin M (IgM) type.
136,263,281,283 An IgG mono-
cessing by the thymus and T lymphocyte CLL appears to
clonal gammopathy has also been reported in a horse with
develop outside the marrow (i.e., in the spleen) with secondary
CLL.5
Non-LGL types of CLL are composed of normal-
 needed to identify the cell type involved; however, the coex-
appearing small to medium-sized lymphocytes with scant
istence of a monoclonal gammopathy with CLL indicates
amounts of light-blue cytoplasm. Immunophenotyping for
 neoplasia of a B lymphocyte type, while the presence of cyto-
CD34 can be performed in cases where there is a question
r0 d ssoydl 1 ixs e sissans sana srusd
concerning the maturity of the lymphocytes. Lymphocytes
FIGURE 9-77
Bone marrow from a dog with CLL. A, Infltrate of small lymphocytes with condensed nuclear chromatin
cially in the lef balfof the image/ in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy. Two megakaryocytes are present
in the upper right corner. H&E stain.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
301
B
FIGURE 9-78
Bone marrow from a dog with B lymphocyte CLL.A, Infiltrate of small lymphocytes with condensed nuclear
chromatin and minimal cytoplasm in an aspirate smear. A monoclonal hyperglobulinemia is also present in
  uss m a e u si s go  p a us ei  s
 core biopsy Trabecular bone is located at upper left and a rmegakaryocyte is present at bottom center. H&E
stairl.
 recent text for a comprehensive discussion of lymphomas in
animals.479
 Based on abnormal morphology, neoplastic cells are recog-
nized in the blood of about one-quarter to one-half of the
remaining cases, neoplastic lymphocytes may be absent from
blood or may not have sufficiently abnormal morphology to
be recognized. Bone marrow infiltrates may sometimes be
recognized in animals even when neoplastic cells are not
Core biopsies offer the advantage that small infltrates of
ymphoid cells that would be dispersed during bone marrow
aspiration and smear preparation can be recognized with his-
topathology. Lymphoid infltrates in the bone marrow of dogs
with lymphomas are most often paratrabecular in location.
Focal infiltrates must be differentiated from benign lymphoid
FIGURE 9-79
follicles, which have well-defined borders and are composed
primarily of small mature lymphocytes (see Fig. 9-69). Neo-
bone marrow from a cat with CLL. Wright-Giemsa stain.
plastic aggregates are generally larger, with poorly defned
borders, and cells within these aggregates are ofen large and
 immature in appearance.33
Lymphomas
Lymphomas involving LGLs have been primarily reported
Lymphomas are solid tumors of neoplastic lymphocytes that
 in cats, in which they generally ocrur as intestinal lymphomas
develop outside of the bone marrow. They may be classified
that metastasize to various other organs, including the
by the anatomic site involved (e.g., alimentary, thymic, cutane-
spleen, liver, lymph nodes, blood, and bone marrow (Fig.
ous, multicentric), by location of neoplastic cells within lymph
nodes (e.g., diffuse, follicular, marginal zone, T zone), by cell
 those seen in normal LGLs in blood. They appear blue,red, or
morphology (e.g., large cell, lymphoblastic, large granular), by
 purple with Wright-Giemsa stain but may not stain well with
cell type (e.g., B lymphocyte, T lymphocyte, NK cel), or 
Diff-Quik stain.i31 In some cases the granules appear eosino-
combinations of these categories.* The reader is referred to a
philic in H&E-stained sections; in others, they are difficult to
identify with H&E. The neoplastic cells appear to originate from
 intraepithelial lymphocytes, and most of these tumors appear to
*References 63, 314, 479, 480, 484, 486.
 be composed of cytotoxic T lymphocytes.24.396
302
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
B
FIGURE 9-80
Metastatic lymphoma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Infiltrate of variably sizedlymphoblasts in an aspirate
smear. A mitotic cell is present at bottom center. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Diffuse infiltrate of variably sized
lymphoblasts in a bone marrow section from a core biopsy Trabecular bone is located along the left edge of
the image. H&E stain.
FIGURE 9-81
Metastatic lymphoma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Infiltrate of variably sizedlymphoblasts in an aspirate
smear. The lymphoblasts have round nuclei and scant amounts of cytoplasm. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Focal
stairn.
Two cases of LGL lymphoma have been reported in
horses,15s,240 Neoplastic cells were recognized in the blood of
Multiple Myeloma
one horse and in the bone marrow of the other.
 Multiple myeloma (plasma cell myeloma) is a B lymphocyte
tumor of the bone marrow that manifests as a proliferation of
Multiple Myeloma and Other Immunoproliferative
plasma cells It is a rare tumor in dogs,29,300 cats,312,36 and
Neoplasms
Any cell type in the normal B lymphocyte maturational
monoclonal IgG or IgA immunoglobulin is usually secreted
pathway may become neoplastic and produce an immuno-
by the tumor, resulting in a monoclonal hyperglobulinemia,
globulin. The nature of a lymphoproliferative disorder is deter-
which can be recognized using serum protein electrophore-
mined by the stage at which B lymphocyte maturation is
sis 1503 The type of immunoglobulin produced can be iden-
arrested.
tified using
g immunoelectrophoresis and quantifed using
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
303
methods such as single radial immunodiffusion. Biclonal pro-
Sometimes, only a component of an immunoglobulin mole-
tsd si (s y r s  
recognized more frequently if capillary zone electrophoresis is
Rarely, a multiple myeloma secretes no visible monoclonal
 protein that is recognizable by conventional serum protein
 Biclonal-appearing proteins during serum protein electropho-
electrophoresis282296; however, monoclonal immunoglobulin
resis may result from two plasma cell clones, one plasma cell 
 proteins may be identifiable using more sensitive methods.419
Focal lytic or diffuse osteoporotic bone lesions may be recog-
nized using survey radiography, and a Bence Jones proteinuria
(immunoglobulin light chains in urine) may be present.
Increased numbers of plasma cells are usually identifed in
routine bone marrow biopsies of animals with multiple
myeloma (Fig. 9-83, A,B; Fig. 9-84, A,B; Figs. 9-85, 9-86). In
some cases, it is necessary to biopsy lytic bone lesions to
 demonstrate the plasma cell infiltrates. The morphology of the
neoplastic cells can vary from normal-appearing mature
plasma cells to large immature pleomorphic plasma cell with
diffuse chromatin, abundant cytoplasm, and an increased
 mitotic index. Multiple nuclei may be present. The cytoplasm
 generally appears light blue to dark blue when Romanowsky-
type blood stains are used; but in rare instances the cytoplasm
of the neoplastic cells is filled with Russell bodies (Mott cells)
 or it stains red (fame cells), especially at the periphery of the
the blood stain used (Fig. 9-87, A-C).
Plasma cell neoplasia presents quite differently in cats than 
marrow tumors with limited metastasis (multiple myeloma)
or solitary extramedullary tumors with limited metastasis
FIGURE 9-82
(extramedullary plasmacytoma), as are seen in dogs and
Infiltrate of large granular lymphocytes in an aspirate smear of bone
humans, plasma cell tumors in cats are much more likely to
 exhibit metastasis whether they begin within or outside of the
lymphocytes. The granules in these cells are larger than those seen in the
granular lymphocytes that normally circulate in blood. Wright-Giemsa
bone marrow. As a result, the term myeloma-related disorders
stairi.
has been used in regard to these coditions in cats.312 Cats with
FIGURE 9-83
Multiple myeloma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Infltrate of plasma cells with basophilic cytoplasm and
eccentric nuclei in an aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Infiltrate of plasma cells with eccentric nuclei,
exhibiting coarsely clumped chromatin in a characteristic mosaic pattern, in a section of bone marrow collected
as a core biopsy H&E stain.
304
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-84
Multiple myeloma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Infiltrate of plasma cells with eccentric nuclei and abundant
basophilic cytoplasm containing pale Golgi zones in an aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Infiltrate of
 plasrma cel with abundant cytoplasm rear trabecular bone in a core biopsy section. H&E stain.
FIGURE 9-85
FIGURE 9-86
Infiltrate of plasma cells with eccentric nuclei and basophilic cytoplasm,
Infiltrate of five plasmacytoblasts with intensely basophilic cytoplasm in
containing pale Golgi zones, in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from
an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a dog with multiple myeloma.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
a characteristic mosaic pattern. Two binucleated plasma cell are present.
Wright-Giemsa stain.
myeloma-related neoplasms are typically FeLV and FIV
involve light-chain proteinuria and thrombocytopenia. Lytic
negative.
lesions in bone were reported as common in one study3$6 and
Cats with bone marrow plasmacytosis typically have hyper-
rare in another study.312 Low numbers of plasma cells may be
globulinemia and paraproteinemia, with an IgG paraprotein
found in the blood of some affected cats but rarely in high
occurring about twice as often as an IgA paraprotein. Most
enough numbers to justify use of the term plasma cell
 paraproteinemias appear to be monoclonal by serum protein
leukemia.356,458
electrophoresis, but some appear biclonal. Plasma cell infl-
 Cats have been reported to have noncutaneous extramed-
trates are generally present in abdominal organs, especially the
ullary plasma cell tumors with infltrates of plasma cells in
spleen and liver, when animals are initially diagnosed. Atypical
 multiple organs, with no detectable bone marrow involve-
plasma cel morphology, nonregenerative anemia, and hypo-
ment. These cats have hyperglobulinemia and systemic
cholesterolemia are common, and a moderate number of cases
illness similar to cats with documented bone marrow
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
305
A
B
FIGURE 9-87
Bone marrow from a dog with multiple myeloma and a biclonal hyperglobulinemia migrating in the gamma
      si  s  s d s  s
of plasma cels with ecentric nuclei and abundant basophilic cytoplasm containing pale Golgi zones in an
aspirate smear. A binucleated plasma cell is present near the center. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Infltrate of
plasma cells with eccentric ruclei and abundant cytoplasm in an aspirate smear. These cells have been called
Hame cells because of their red-staining cytoplasm. A binucleated plasma cellis present near the bottom left
corner. Diff-Quik stain. C, Infiltrate of plasma cells with eccentric nuclei and abundant cytoplasm in a section
of bone marrow collected as a core biopsy. H&E stain.
plasmacytosis.312 It has been proposed that these plasma cell
cats behave like those of dogs,2? but others are much more
 neoplasms develop as primary extramedullary tumors.313 Cats
 aggressive, producing a paraprotein and quickly metastasizing
with mature plasma cell neoplasms survive longer than cats
(Fig. 9-88, A,B),312
with anaplastic plasma cell neoplasms 313
Other B Lymphocyte Neoplasms
Extramedullary Piasmacytoma
Any cell type in the B lymphocyte maturational pathway may
In addition to the metastasis of multiple myeloma from bone
become neoplastic and produce an immunoglobulin. The
marrow, extramedullary plasma cell tumors (plasmacytomas)
 nature of a lymphoid neoplasm is determined by the stage at
may arise as primary tumors of soft tissues. They occur most
which B lymphocyte maturation is arrested. Other B
frequently as solitary tumors in the skin or the mouths of dogs
lymphocyte neoplasms—including multicentric lymphomas,
but have also been reported in various gastrointestinal
 B lymphocyte CLL (discussed previously), and primary
macroglobulinemia—may produce monoclonal hyperglobu-
biclonal hyperglobulinemia203 472 and in dogs rarely metasta-
linemias.2? Lytic bone lesions are generally absent in these
size to distant sites.268.472 Some cutaneous plasmacytomas in
 disorders, even when bone marrow infltrates are present. In
306
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-88
n so e se psid   in e u m aq u usdou n esd sd
A monoclonal IgA hyperglobulinemia was also present. A, Basophilic plasmacytoid blast cell infiltrate in an
aspirate sear milablast cells were peset ilood, skin,g,andiverightGima stain,Mk
 infltrate of plasmacytoid blast cell ini a postmortem bone marrow section. H&E stain.
MYELOID NEOPLASMS
The classification of myeloid neoplasia (formerly termed
myeloproliferative disorders) is continually changing in human
medicine based on expanded phenotype analyses, cytogenetic
analyses, and the prognosis and response to therapy of these
various neoplasms.454 Until more molecular tools become
available and large studies can be performed, myeloid neo-
plasms in animals will continue to be largely classified based
ing and phenotype markers to help differentiate primitive
Myeloid neoplasms are characterized by the clonal prolif-
eration of one or more of the nonlymphoid marrow cell lines
(granulocytic, monocytic, erythrocytic, or megakaryocytic).*
They are subclassified as MDS, AML, and myeloproliferative
FIGURE 9-89
neoplasms (MPNs).176,436516 AML is characterized by a block
Infiltrate of basophilic lymphoid cells in an aspirate smear of bone
in differentiation/maturation, but an ongoing ability of
marrow from a dog with macroglobulinemia (IgM hyperglobulinemia)
neoplastic cell to survive and proliferate (see Table 9-2).
 Neoplastic cells were also present in the spleen but not in the lymph
nodes. Wright-Giemsa stain.
In contrast, MDS is characterized by both impaired
survival of neoplastic cells (increased apoptosis) and impaired
differentiation/maturation of these cells. Both AML and
MDS have been shown to be clonal abnormalities in cats. 182
MPNs exhibit increased proliferation/survival of neoplastic
humans, primary (Waldenstrom) macroglobulinemia is char
cells and relatively normal differentiation/maturation, at least
acterized as a lymphoplasmacytic neoplasm that produces an
initially.343 Myeloid neoplasms have been associated with a
IgM monoclonal protein. The marrow aspirate is often of low
variety of genetic mutations in humans. It is suggested that
cellularity, but the core biopsy is generally hypercellular and
MDS progresses to AML following a second genetic muta-
tion that allows blast cells to survive and proliferate (Table
9-2) and that MPN progresses to AML following a second
 and lymphoid tissues rather than the bone marrow may have
neoplastic infltrates.478
*References 39, 167, 208, 210, 223, 380.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
307
TABLE 9-2
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
 Myeloid Neoplasms
The term myelodysplasia is used when more than 10% of the
cells in one ormore bone marrowcllines are dysplastic51s
MDS
AML
MPN
Differentiation/maturation
Impaired
Impaired
Normal
(nonneoplastic). The term MDS is generally used as a synonym
→Y
Proliferation/survival
Impaired
Preserved
Increased
for primary myelodysplasia. MDS consists of a heterogeneous
→→→
 group of neoplastic disorders that are characterized by periph-
eral cytopenias (especially nonregenerative anemia and throm-
Modified from Nimer SD. Myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2008;111:
bocytopenia)withnormalorhypercelular,dysplastic-appearing
484 1-4851.
MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; MPN, myelo-
 nized.547 This ineffective hematopoiesis results from defective
proliferative neoplasms. Arrows indicate where a second genetic mutation
could result in the progression to AML.
maturation  and  (
 extensive  apoptosis  of  hematopoietic
nism of gene-directed cellular self-destruction in which intra-
 genetic mutation that results in impaired differentiation and
maturation of neoplastic cells (see Table 9-2).343 In addition
Recognizable apoptotic cells with fragmented nuclei exist for
 to further genetic mutations, alterations in the bone marrow
 only 10 to 15 minutes before they are removed by phagocytic
 microenvironment and abnormalities in the immune system
cells337 In addition to genetic abnormalities in hematopoietic
appear to contribute to the pathogenesis of various subtypes
stem cells/progenitor cells, abnormalities in the bone marrow
of myeloid neoplasms.206
microenvironment (including increased cytokine secretion by
Neoplastic transformations in myeloid neoplasms usually
macrophages), immune deregulation, and other factors con-
occur in hematopoietic stem cells/pluripotent progenitor
tribute to the appearance and behavior of MDs.206.23 As in
cell3o8.38s Although the proliferation of one cell type may
human MDS, a clonal proliferation of hematopoietic cells has
predominate, a marrow cell line is seldom singly affected.
 been identifed in two-thirds ofcats with MDS,indicating that
Morphologic or functional disorders of other cell lines can
MDS maybe considered a preleukemic state ofAML in cats.133
usually be detected. In addition, some myeloid neoplasms
Based on criteria recommended by the Animal Leukemia
appear to evolve into one another. For example, MDS with
 Study Group in 1991, the percentage of blast cells (myelo-
 excessive proliferation of nucleated erythrocytes (MDS-Er) in
blasts, rubriblasts, or megakaryoblasts) in bone marrow should
cats may evolve into erythroleukemia (AML-M6) and even-
 be less than 30% of all nucleated cells in MDS, and a diagnosis
tually AML-M1 or AML-M2,173.27 and dogs with CML
of AML should be made when the percentage of nonlymphoid
 may have a "blast crisis" that develops into AML 24.38
blast cells equals or exceeds 30% of all nucleated celis.21 This
 Cats with myeloid neoplasms are generally infected with
 percentage of blast cells was also used as a cutoff value to dif-
ferentiate MDS from AML in humans at that time. However,
mentally shown to cause myeloid neoplasms in dogs.
417,466
the World Health Organization (WHO) has since decreased
Myeloid neoplasms are rare in domestic animal species other
this cutoff value differentiating MDS and AML from 30%
than cats and dogs, and their causes are unknown.
blasts to 20% blasts for humans.454 This has generated consid-
 Excluding primary erythrocytosis and essential thrombo-
erable debate concerning how best to treat human patients
cythemia, abnormalities that may be present in the blood of
who have between 20% and 30% blast cells in their bone
animals with myeloid neoplasms include a nonregenerative
marrow, because this group appears to include some patients
anemia with erythrocyte macrocytosis, anisocytosis, and/or
with advanced MDS, some with *smoldering"AML, and some
poikilocytosis, nucleated erythrocytes out of proportion to the
with early stages ofclassic AML 33 Nonetheless,there appears
number of reticulocytes present and /or nucleated erythrocytes
 to be a consensus among veterinary clinical pathologists to
ropue aq sie ianu paun ro paenqot y
decrease the cutoff vaue fo 20% for animals as well23.505
hypogranular platelets, and immature granulocytes and/or
 FeLV and probably FIV infections can produce MDS in
 abnormal granulocyte morphology (large size, hyposegmenta-
cats,* although some cats with MDS have negative tests for
tion, hypersegmentation). Nonlymphoid blast cells may be 
 these viruses.2s The experimental infection of cats with a
present in blood, depending on the type of myeloid neoplasm 
 FeLV variant that had three tandem direct 47-bp repeats in
and stage of development. The platelet count is frequently low
 the upstream region of the enhancer (URE) in the long ter-
but may be normal or high. The total leukocyte counts and
 minal repeat (LTR) of the proviral sequence resulted in MDS
absolute neutrophil, monocyte, eosinophil, and basophil
 in some cats and AML in others. In addition, analysis of the
counts vary from low to high, depending on the type of
proviral sequences obtained from 13 cats with naturally occur-
myeloid neoplasm that is present. Although a preliminary
ring MDS revealed that they also had the characteristic URE
diagnosis of a myeloid neoplasm can sometimes be made
repeats in the LTR.182
based on hematologic fndings, a defnitive diagnosis and clas-
sification requires bone marrow evaluation.208
*References 27, 39, 185, 293, 426, 429.
308
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-90
FIGURE 9-91
Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with MDS. Three megaloblastic rubri-
Dyserythropoiesis in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a horse with
cytes, two mitotic figures, and a left shift in the neutrophilic series is
MDS. A megaloblastic rubricyte is present at the far left, and a macro-
 present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
cytic metarubricyte with peanut-shaped rucleus is present at the right
center. A mitotic figure is present near the bottom right. Wright-Giemsa
stairn.
Evidence of dyserythropoiesis, dysgranulopoiesis, and/or
dysmegakaryocytopoiesis is present in the marrow of animals
with MDS* Erythroid abnormalities that may be present
 In animals, MDS has been classified into three subtypes
include increased numbers of rubriblasts, mafurational arrest,
based on blood and bone marrow fndings 238 MDS with
megaloblastic cells, abnormal nuclear shapes, premature
erythroid predominance in the bone marrow (M:E ratio
nuclear pyknosis, nuclear fragmentation, multinucleated cells,
nuclear and cytoplasmic asynchrony, and siderotic inclusions
ously diagnosed as erythremic myelosis would now be placed
(Figs. 9-90, 9-91). Neutrophilic abnormalities that may be
in this category as long as the number of blast cells in the
 present include increased numbers of myeloblasts, matura-
marrow was less than 20% of all nucleated cells. Cases with
tional arrest in the neutrophilic series (Fig. 9-92), giant
refractory anemia and an M:E ratio above 1, with or without
metamyelocytes, band and mature neutrophils, abnormal
other refractory cytopenias, may be described as myelodys-
 granulation such as large primary granules, hyposegmented
neutrophils (pseudo-Pelger-Huet), hypersegmented neutro-
Myeloblasts account for less than 5% of all nucleated cells
phils, and neutrophils with bizarre nuclear shapes. Increased
in this subtype. When myeloblasts are increased (5%-19% of
numbers of eosinophilic cells are also commonly observed
bone marrow nucleated cells), the term myelodysplastit
with MDS in cats2s.29 Megakaryocytic abnormalities that
syndrome-exress blasts (MDS-EB) may be used.23
 may be present include dwarf granular megakaryocytes with
 Dogs and cats with MDS may subsequently develop
single or multiple nuclei and large megakaryocytes with
AML,* and FeLV-positive cats with MDS may also develop
nuclear abnormalities including hypolobulation, hyperlobula-
lymphoid neoplasms.287 It is unknown what percentage of
tion, or multiple round nuclei (see Fig. 9-50, B,C). Some cats
MDS cases represents a preleukemic state. Extended and
with MDS have stainable iron in their marrow (see Fig. 8-36,
 costly supportive care is generally required for the survival of
C).37,286
animals with MDS, and many such animals die or are eutha-
Additional abnormalities that may be present in blood
nized before sufficient time has elapsed for an acute leukemia
 include a nonregenerative anemia with erythrocyte macrocy-
to develop. Longitudinal studies of animals with MDS are
tosis, anisocytosis, and/or poikilocytosis, nucleated erythro-
limited; however, it appears that high blast percentages as well
cytes (metarubricytosis) out of proportion to the number of
as the presence of multiple cytopenias and marked dysplastic
reticulocytes present, nucleated erythrocytes with lobulated or
fragmented nuclei, thrombocytopenia, large bizarre platelets,
recovery is rare, animals with MDS may recover spontane-
 immature granulocytes, and abnormal granulocyte morphol-
ously,
, as occurred in a FeLV-positive cat that became
ogy (large size, hyposegmentation, hypersegmentation). The
FeLV-negative.269
 total leukocyte counts and absolute neutrophil counts vary
MDS must be differentiated from secondary myelodyspla-
from low to high.18s,.208
sia, which may be associated with immune-mediated disorders
*References 38, 39, 107, 167, 181, 185, 426, 429, 466, 505, 518, 528.
+References 39, 88, 107, 181, 185, 286.
*References 88, 173,286, 287, 309, 466, 471, 530.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
309
B
FIGURE 9-92
Maturational arrest in neutrophil development at the myelocyte-metamyelocyte stage in bone marrow from
a neutropenic dog with MDS. A, No mature neutrophils and only one band neutrophil are present in this
aspirate smear. Erythroid precursors are absent in this field. The M:E ratio was 19. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B, Maturational arrest in neutrophil development in a core biopsy section. H&E stain.
(IMHA and IMT), lymphoid neoplasms (lymphoma, multi-
ple myeloma), myelofibrosis, drugs that interfere with DNA
Ifblast cells account for less than 20% of ANCs and dysplastic
synthesis (antimetabolites, alkylating agents, folate antago-
 changes are present, a diagnosis of MDS is made. Some cases 
nists, and plant alkaloids),heavy metal toxicity (lead and zinc),
 of erythroleukemia (AML-M6) are exceptions to these guide-
antibiotics (cephalosporins, chlorampenicol, oxazolidinone),
lines, as discussed further on. Cytochemistry, immunocyto-
anticonvulant drugs, and hydroxyzine.* Dyserythropoiesis also
diu oi psn sq reu suae oyoadsseu pue s
occurs in association with some idiopathic and hereditary
identify the type or types of blast cell present. Several sub-
disorders discussed earlier in this chapter. Blast cells rarely
types of AML have been recognized in animals.* In addition
exceed 5% of all nucleated cells in the bone marrow in second-
to quantifying cells as a percentage of ANC, they may also be
ary myelodysplasia and often exceed 5% in MDS. Dysplastic
quantifed based on the total nonerythroid cells (NECs),
features are generally more pronounced and affect more than 
which is determined by subtracting the nucleated erythroid
one cell line in MDS compared to secondary myelodysplasia.
cells from the ANC count.380
However, morphology alone is ofen not suffcient to differ-
 entiate these disorders.350s,58
AML-M1
 Myeloblastic leukemia without maturation is designated as
Acute Myeloid Leukemias
AML-M1. Myeloblasts (primarily type I myeloblasts) account
A classification system for AML in dogs and cats has been
for 90% or more of NECs. Type I myeloblasts appear as large
developed by the American Society for Veterinary Clinical
round cells with round to oval nuclei that are generally cen-
Pathology Animal Leukemia Study Group.210 It was adapted
trally located in the cell. The N:C ratio is high (greater than
from the French-American-British (FAB) system established
1.5) and the nuclear outline is usually regular and smooth.
by a National Cancer Institute workshop for use in humans. 71
 Nuclear chromatin is finely stippled, containing one or more
AML was diagnosed when the percentage of nonlymphoid
 nucleoli or nucleolar rings. The cytoplasm is generally mod-
hematopoietic blast cells in the bone marrow equaled or 
erately basophilic 21 Differentiated granulocytes (promyelo-
exceeded 30% of all nucleated cells (ANCs) excluding lym-
cytes through mature neutrophils and eosinophils) and
phocytes, macrophages, plasma cells, and mast cells. This per-
 monocytes account for the remaining NECs.
centage has been decreased to 20% for humans in the most
recent WHO classification scheme, and there appears to be a
AML-M2
consensus to do so in veterinary medicine as well; that change
Myeloblastic  leukemia  with  maturation   is  designated
has been accepted for this text.223
AML-M2. Myeloblasts account for 20% to 89% of NECs
Dyserythropoiesis, dysgranulopoiesis, and/or dysmega-
(Fig. 9-93, A,B; Fig. 9-94, A-C; Figs. 9-95, 9-96, A,B). In
karyocytopoiesis are also usually present, with megaloblastic
addition to type I myeloblasts, variable numbers of type II
*References 38, 97, 174,276, 512, 518.
*References 208, 210, 223, 308, 374, 380.
310
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-93
Bone marrow aspirate smears from a cat with AML-M2.A, Proliferation of myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and
myelocytes. Approximately 35% of all nucleated cells were myeloblasts. Few band or mature neutrophils were
 present and rare erythroid precursors were recognized. Wright-Giermsa stain. B, Proliferation of myeloblasts,
promyelocytes, and myelocytes. The strongly peroxidase-positive nature of the cells present rules out a lym-
phoproliferative disorder and indicates that these cells are granulocytic precursors. Peroxidase stain.
FIGURE 9-94
Bone marrow from a dog with AML-M2. A, Proliferation of myeloblasts, with nucleoli easily visible in many
of these cells were peroxidase-positive, ruling out a lymphoproliferative disorder. Peroxidase stain. C, Prolifera-
tion of myeloblasts in a core biopsy section. H&E stain.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
311
myeloblasts containing a few (less than 15) small, magenta-
AML-M3
staining granules in the cytoplasm may be present. Differenti-
 Promyelocytic leukemia has not been reported in animals.
ated granulocytes account for 10% or more of NECs and
 In humans, the predominant cels involved are abnormal-
monocytic cells account for less than 20% of NECs. Increased
appearing promyelocytes with folded, reniform, or bilobed
marrow basophil and/or eosinophil precursors may be seen in
nuclei. Type III myeloblasts may also be present in this dis-
some cats with myeloid neoplasms (see Fig. 9-33), and vari-
 order These cells have distinct nucleoli and abundant cyto-
ants of AML-M2 with basophilic differentiation and eosino-
plasm  containing 
many  magenta-staining  cytoplasmic
philic differentiation have been reported in cats and classified
 q sr oi ee s i a snas
with asynchronous cytoplasmic maturation. Low numbers of
these cells may be present in cats with AML.208
AML-M4
 Acute myelomonocytic leukemia is diagnosed when com-
bined numbers of myeloblasts and monoblasts equal or
exceed 20% of ANCs and differentiated granulocytes and
monocytes each account for 20% or more of NECs. Mono-
 blasts resemble myeloblasts except that their nuclear shape is
irregularly round to convoluted in appearance (Figs. 9-97,
A,B). A clear area in the cytoplasm, representing the Golgi
zone, is often observed, especially near the site of nuclear
 indentation. The N:C ratio is high but may be somewhat
lower than that in myeloblasts.153,184.210
AML-M5
 Acute monocytic leukemia is diagnosed when monoblasts are
increased but myeloblasts are not (Figs. 9-98, 9-99). It may
be separated into subtypes depending on the maturity of the 
monocytic cells present. Little maturation to monocytes is
present in M5a, with monoblasts and promonocytes account-
FIGURE 9-95
ing for 80% or more of all NECs. When 20% to 79% of NECs
are monoblasts and promonocytes and maturation to mono-
Proliferation of myeloblasts and promyelocytes in an aspirate smear of
 cytes is prominent, the leukemia is classifed as M5b. Granu-
bone marrow from a dog with AML-M2. Many of the cells contain
primary magenta-staining granules. Wright-Giemsa stain.
locytes account for less than 20% of NECs.
A
FIGURE 9-96
Bone marrow from a horse with AML-M2. A, Increased numbers of myeloblasts (large round cells with
medium-blue cytoplasm) in an aspirate smear. The smaller and more darkly staining cells present are erythroid
center. H&E stain.
312
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-97
Bone marrow from a dog with AML-M4.A, Proliferation of myeloblasts (generally round nuclei) and mono-
blasts (frequently indented nuclei) in an aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Proliferation of myeloblasts
 and monoblasts in a core biopsy section. H&E stain.
FIGURE 9-98
FIGURE 9-99
Proliferation of monoblasts (frequently indented ruclei) in an aspirate
Proliferation of monoblasts (frequently indented nuclei) in an aspirate
smear of bone marrow from a dog with acute monocytic leukemia
smear of bone marrow from a dog with acute monocytic leukemia
(AML-M5a). Wright-Giemsa stain.
(AML-M5b). Wright-Giemsa stain.
AML-M6
that is devoid of granules. The nucleus of a rubriblast is usually
Erytbroleukemia is a term used to describe myeloid neoplasms
almost perfectly round and has finely stippled chromatin with
one or more distinct nucleoli.
 contrast to the subtypes of AML discussed previously, the
M:E ratio is less than 1 in AML-M6, and blast cells (myelo-
AML-M7
 blasts, monoblasts, and megakaryoblasts combined) may not
 Megakaryoblastic leukemia is diagnosed when megakaryo-
equal or exceed 20% of ANCs, but they will equal or exceed
blasts account for 20% or more of ANCs or NECs in bone
20% of the NECs (Fig. 9-100). The designation AML-M6Er
marrow (Fig. 9-103, A,B)* Nuclei of megakaryoblasts are 
 is used when the M:E ratio is less than 1 and rubriblasts are
nearly as round as rubriblast nuclei, but their cytoplasm is
 included with myeloblasts, monoblasts, and megakaryoblasts
typically less basophilic. Additional features that are typically
in the blast count to equal or exceed 20% of ANCs. In some
cases most of the blasts present appear to be rubriblasts (Figs.
 9-101, 9-102). Rubriblasts have deeply basophilic cytoplasm
*References 9, 60, 80, 81, 316, 451.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
313
FIGURE 9-100
FIGURE 9-102
Increased myeloblasts and rubriblasts in an aspirate smear of bone
Rubriblasts in an aspirate smear ofbone marrow from a cat with AML-
marrow from a cat with AML-M6. Wright-Giemsa stain.
M6Er. Wright-Giemsa stain.
Acute Undifferentiated Leukemia
Acute undifferentiated leukemia (AUL) is diagnosed when
 the blast cells cannot be identified with certainty using routine
blood stains or cytochemical markers (Fig. 9-104). This term
may be used as a temporary category in some cases, pending
the use of specialized cell markers. As more cellular markers
are developed, the percentage of cases classified as AUL will
decrease. The hallmark of AUL is the presence of blast cells
with broad cytoplasmic pseudopods and/or some magenta-
staining cytoplasmic granules.2 Cats with a myeloid neo-
plasm previously referred to as reticuloendotheliosis may be
included in this category. However, some cases previously
diagnosed as reticuloendotheliosis would now be included in
AML-M6Er, because the blast cells present had deeply baso-
philic cytoplasm without granules and nuclei that were char-
acteristic of those present in rubriblasts.167
FIGURE 9-101
Rubriblasts in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a dog with eryth-
Peripheral Blood Findings
roleukemia with erythroid predominance (AML-M6Er). Several free
Peripheral blood findings for AML are similar to those
nuclei (basket cells) are also present. Wright-Giemsa stain.
 described previously for MDS except that blast cells and a
leukocytosis are more likely to be present in the circulation in
present in some cells include binucleation/multinucleation,
AML. Moderate to severe nonregenerative anemia with
multiple discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles, cytoplasmic projec-
thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia is generally present.2.462
tions (blebs), cytoplasmic fragments, and sometimes purple
Leukopenia occurs in nearly one-third of AML-M2 cats.208
granules. Some differentiation with dysplastic multinucleated
A monocytosis is generally prominent in M4 and M5 types
megakaryocytes is also generally present. Using immunocyto-
of AML. Additionally, a minority of animals with AML-M7
chemical staining or fow cytometry, blast cells may be iden-
have a thrombocytosis while most have a thrombocytopenia,
tified as megakaryoblasts. Megarkaryoblasts are generally
positive for vWF, CD41 (GPIIb), CD61 (GPIIla), and
Freqvency in Animal Species
AML is seen most commonly in cats, with myeloblastic leu-
tently present in dogs. Other common hematologic findings
kemia (M1 and M2 combined) being most common.20s
include metarubricytosis, thrombocytopenia, and variable
Myelomonocytic leukemia (AML-M4) and monocytic leuke-
numbers of megakaryoblasts in the blood. Metastasis to the
spleen and lymph nodes is common.81
 Although rare, most horses reported with AML have had
314
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-103
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML-M7) in bone marrow from a dog. A, Predominance of megakaryoblasts
and abnormal megakaryocytes in an aspirate smear. Wright-Giemsa stain. B, Predominance of megakaryo-
blasts and abnormal megakaryocytes in a core biopsy section. H&E stain.
between these disorders is that high numbers of one or more
blood cell types occur in MPNs and cytopenias frequently
occur in MDS.
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
CML is a rare disorder in animals, occurring primarily in
dogs.* A BCR-ABL chromosomal abnormality (Raleigh
chromosome) has recently been reported in dogs with CML
that is similar to the Philadelphia chromosome abnormality
found in most human CML.4 CML presents with a high
 total leukocyte count (typically greater than 50,000/μL) with
a marked neutrophilic left shift in blood. Increased numbers
of monocytes, eosinophils, and/or basophils may also be
present. Myeloblasts are either absent or present in low
mumbers in blood. Nucleated erythrocytes are often found in
 blood in the presence of a nonregenerative anemia. Platelet
FIGURE 9-104
counts may be low, normal, or increased. If monocytes pre-
Predominance of blast cells in an aspirate smear of bone marrow from a
dominate, a diagnosis of chronic monocytic leukemia or
cat with an AUL in which the neoplastic cells could not be classified
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia may be considered.
with certainty Wright-Giemsa stain.
 Granulocytic hyperplasia is present in bone marrow with
or without erythroid and megakaryocytic hypoplasia The per-
either 
AML-M4or
AML-M5.407H
Erythroleukemia
centage of immature granulocytic cells is increased but the
(AML-M6 and AML-M6Er combined) has been reported
 percentage of myeloblasts does not exceed 20% of all nucle-
primarly in cats.28 Megakaryoblastic leukemia (AML-M7)
ated cells (Fig. 9-105). Dysplastic changes are typically also
is rare, being reported primarily in dogs.81 AML is rarely
 present in one or more marrow cell lines.
reported in cattle 457,541
CML must be differentiated from severe infammatory
leukemoid reactions. The presence of cytoplasmic toxicity,
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms
increased infammatory plasma proteins, and physical evi-
MPNs (formerly termed cbronit myeloproliferative disease) are
dence of infammation suggests that a leukemoid reaction is
 neoplastic proliferations of hematopoietic cells resulting in
 present. The presence of myelodysplasia suggests that CML
high numbers of differentiated cells in blood. Like those with
is present. In some canine cases, CML has been recognized
MDS, animals with MPN have less than 20% blast cells in
to terminate in a blast crisis, in which maturation of
the bone marrow, with few or no blast cells in the blood.
 Dysplastic changes may be present in both disorders, but they
 tend to be more noticeable in MDS. The major diffrence
*References 157, 167, 215, 264, 368, 461.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
315
FIGURE 9-105
FIGURE 9-106
Granulocytic hyperplasia with a left shift in an aspirate smear of bone
Increased rnumbers of basophils and blast cells in an aspirate smear of
marrow from a dog with CML. Wright-Giemsa stain
bone marrow from a dog with basophilic leukemia. Basophils accounted
for nearly half and blast cells in this hypercellular marrow preparation.
Courtesy of Rose E.Raskin.
granulocytic cells is greatly diminished and blast cells pre-
erythrocytes in blood.231 In contrast to polycythemia vera in
cytic leukemia332 and chronic monocytic leukemia may be
 humans, granulocyte and platelet numbers are generally not
considered variants of CML.240 It should be noted that a
increased is s4 The bone marrow is hyperplastic with orderly
dog diagnosed with chronic monocytic leukemia had a chro-
maturation of cells. Erythroid hyperplasia may be accompa-
 mosomal translocation producing a BCR-ABL gene hybrid
like that previously reported in CML in dogs.
some cases.
decreased secondary to erythroid hyperplasia.231,306548 Marrow
Eosinophilic Leukemia
iron stores may be low, presumably as a result of increased
 Eosinophilic leukemia is a variant of CML in which eosino-
demands for erythrocyte production.
philic cells predominate in blood and marrow. Differentiation
of eosinophilic leukemia and hypereosinophilic syndrome in
Essential Thrombocythemia
cats can be difficult. Hypereosinophilic syndrome is character-
Essential thrombocythemia is a MPN that is characterized by
ized by a mature eosinophilia with frequent involvement of
persistent, markedly increased (usually above 1 x 10°/μL)
the intestines. Prominent eosinophilic left shifts in the bone
platelet counts and megakaryocytic hyperplasia in the bone
marrow and blood as well as organ infltrates are more likely
marrow (Fig. 9-48, A,B) in the absence of iron deficiency,
to occur inanimals with esinophilicleukemia4. 20,342,452.47,
recovery from severe hemorrhage, rebound from a thrombo-
however, some left shifting in eosinophil precursors within the
cytopenia, splenectomy an underlying chronic infammatory
bone marrow may occur in reactive disorders.358
mately half of the cases in humans have a somatic point
Basophilic Leukemia
mutation that causes a constitutive activation of the JAK2
Basophilic leukemia is a variant of CML in which basophilic
 gene.116 In humans, the HCT is normal, megakaryocytes
cells predominate in blood and marrow. It has rarely been 
 appear large and mature, stainable iron is present in the
marrow, and no myelodysplasia or myelofibrosis is seen. Some
in animals represented misdiagnosed cases of systemic mas-
 of the cases reported as essential thrombocythemia in animals
tocytosis with mastocytemia. Basophilic leukemia is charac-
differ from these criteria and may represent other forms of
terized by a marked basophilia with many immature basophilic
myeloid neoplasms.
cells in the blood and bone marrow (Fig. 9-106).
NONHEMATOPOIETIC
Primary Erythrocytosis
NEOPLASMS
Primary erythrocytosis (polycythemia vera) in adult dogs and
cats is considered to be a MPN that is characterized by an
Nonhematopoietic neoplasms of bone marrow develop in
autonomous (EPO-independent) proliferation of erythroid
 other tissues and metastasize to the marrow. A metastasis to
precursor cells, resulting in high numbers of mafure
bone marrow may be relatively common, but it is rarely
316
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-107
Mast cell infiltrates in bone marrow aspirate smears from a dog with a metastatic mast cell tumor. A, Mast
cell infiltrate (sligbtly below center at rigbt and leff edges). B, Three mast cells with round nuclei and purple
granules are located diagonally from top right to bottom left. Wright-Giemsa stain.
diagnosed because the multifocal distributions of neoplastic
 infiltrates are easily missed when a small biopsy needle is used.
Recognition of metastatic neoplasms within the marrow is
increased if biopsies are collected from lesions identified with
 the use of diagnostic imaging techniques.371
Mast Cell Tumors
 Mast cells are round cells with round nuclei. They typically
have large numbers of purple granules in the cytoplasm,
although the granules may not stain with Diff-Quik or other
water-based Wright stains. Mast cell precursors are produced
 in the bone marrow but rarely develop into mast cels there.42
 Rather, these precursors leave the marrow, circulate in blood,
and migrate into tissue sites, where they develop into
mast cells.126
Mast cell tumors originating in the skin, spleen, and other
peripheral sites may metastasize to bone marrow; conse-
FIGURE 9-108
quently bone marrow examination may be a part of staging
 Metastatic adenocarcinoma in a bone marrow aspirate smear from a dog
this neoplasm (Fig. 9-107, 4,B),29434 Bone marrow metastasis
Cohesive clusters of basophilic epithelial cells. Wright-Giemsa stain.
(as evaluated using bone marrow aspirate smears) was recog-
nized in less than 5% of 157 dogs with primary cutaneous
mast cell tumors.113 Most dogs with mast celtumor metas-
Metastatic Neoplasms
 tasis to bone marrow have one or more peripheral cytopenias
 Metastatic carcinomas are rarely recognized in routine bone
(anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia). Other hematologic
abnormalities that may be present include leukocytosis,
identified more commonly at necropsy or in instances where
eosinophilia, and basophilia.1324 In addition tobone marrow
biopsy needles are directed at bone lesions identified with the
metastasis, these dogs generally have metastasis to other
 organs, especially the spleen and liver 294 Bone marrow involve-
metastasis often present with clinical signs such as pain and
ment is more likely in noncufaneous systemic mastocytosis, as
lameness attributable to skeletal involvement. Metastasis
occurs most frequently in cats. 9,140,230,272,34s
occurs most frequently in the axial skeletal and proximal long
Mast cells may occur in the bone marrow of dogs with
bones, with about 10% of the metastases occurring below the
aplastic anemia of various etiologies.332489 They may also be
elbow and stife. Prostate, mammary, and lung are the most
 present in some inflammatory conditions 307.423?
frequent sites for the primary fumors that metastasize to the
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
317
FIGURE 9-109
Metastatic adenocarcinoma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Cohesive clusters of basophilic epithelial cells in
an aspirate smear. The origin could not be determined even after necropsy examination. Wright-Giemsa stain.
B, Metastatic foci of neoplastic epithelial cells (rigbt) in a core biopsy section. The remaining marrow is
hypocellular with myelofbrosis. H&E stain.
B：
FIGURE 9-110
Metastatic melanoma in bone marrow from a dog. A, Cohesive neoplastic melanocytes with moderate aniso-
u s s  s e s
 melanocytes infiltrating the bone marrow in a biopsy section. H&E stain.
FromKimDY,RoyalAB,VillamilJA.Disseminatedmelanoma ina dog withinvolvementofthe leptomeninges and
bone marrow. Vet Pathol. 2009;46:80-83.
marrow, but the primary site can be difficult or impossible to
preferred to aspirate smears in the diagnosis of metastatic
identify (carcinoma of unknown origin).&2
The morphology of cells observed varies with the tumor
A metastatic melanoma to bone marrow was diagnosed in
type present. A disseminated adenocarcinoma, diagnosed in a
a dog evaluated for lameness (Fig. 9-110, A,B). The primary
 dog using a routine bone marrow biopsy, appeared as cohesive
 site appeared to be the leptomeninges.232 Other tumors that
clusters of epithelial cells exhibiting morphologic abnormali-
have metastasized to bone marrow in dogs include mesothe-
ties. Abnormalities that may be present in metastatic adeno-
lioma434 and nephroblastoma.144
carcinomas include anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, high N:C
ratios, coarse nuclear chromatin, multiple nucleoli, deeply
Sarcomas of Bone
basophilic cytoplasm, discrete cytoplasmic vacuoles, mitotic
 Bone tumors often spread into the marrow space. Osteosar-
fgures, and the formation of acini.i7 Histologic sections are
coma is a common bone tumor of dogs that is easily diagnosed
318
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
FIGURE 9-111
Aspirate smears from a lytic bone lesion from a dog with osteosarcoma. A, A large multinucleated osteoclast
(rigbt) and osteoblasts with eccentric nuclei. B, Cluster of osteoblasts with eccentric round to oval nuclei
containing prominent rucleoli. Wright-Giemsa stain.
using exfoliative cytology of biopsy material collected from 
e auog y aneiosse euadoed e ia 'd ala 'g nenay r uuww 0l
bone lesions (Fig. 9-111, A,B). Malignant osteoblasts are
aplasia in a Holstein heifer. Can Vet J. 1996;37:493-495.
11. Anderson TD. Cytokine-induced changes in the leukon. Toxicol Pathol.
 polygonal to fusiform, with abundant foamy basophilic cyto-
1993;21:147-157.
plasm. Nuclei are often eccentrically located and variable in
12. Andres E, Federici L, Weitten T, et al. Recognition and management of drug-induced 
size, exhibiting coarse chromatin patterns and multiple nucle-
blood cytopenias: the example of drug-induced acute neutropenia and agranulocyto-
oli. These cells produce osteoid; consequently they may contain
sis. Expert Dpin Drug Saf. 2008;7:481-489.
13. Angel KL, Spano JS, Schumacher J, et al. Myelophthisic pancytopenia in a pony mare.
reddish granules in the cytoplasm and may be found embed-
J Arm Vet /ed Assoc. 1991;198:1039-1042.
ded in an eosinophilic osteoid matrix. Variable numbers of
14. Antognoni MT, Spaterna A. Lepri E, et al. Characteristic clinical haematological and
 nonneoplastic osteoclasts are also usually present.122
histopathological findings in feline mastocytoma. Vet Res Commun. 2003;27(Suppl
11:727-730.
 Chondrosarcomas of bone appear similar to osteosarcomas
15. Arai M, Darmen J, Lewis A, et al. The use of human hematopoietic growth factors
on exfoliative cytology except that they are usually associated
{rhGM-CSF and rhEPO) as a supportive therapy for FIV-infected cats. Vet lmmunol
mmwnopathol. 2000;77:71-92.
with more eosinophilic matrix material than are osteosarco-
16. Arochl, Perl S, Markovics A. Disseminated eosinophilic disease resembling idiopathic
mas. Other potential bone tumors that might be diagnosed
hypereosinophilic syndrome in a dog. Vet Rec. 2001;149:386-389.
by aspirate or core biopsy include fbrosarcomas, hemangio-
17. Atkins CE, DeFrancesco TC, Miller MV, et al. Prevalence of heartworm infetion
sarcomas, liposarcoma, and giant-cel tumors of bone,122.492
in cats with signs of cardiorespiratory abnormalities. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
1998;212:517-520.
18. Avery AC.Immunophenotyping and determination of clonality In: Weiss DU, Wardrop
KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell;
REFERENCES
2010:1133-1140.
19. Bader R, Bode G, Rebel W, et al. Stimulation of bone marrow by administration 
of excessive doses of recombinant human erythropoietin. Pathol Res Pract.
1. Abkowitz JL, Holly RD. Cyclic hematopoiesis in dogs: studies of erythroid burst-
1992;188:676-679
forming cells confirm an early stem cell defect. Exp Hematol. 1988;16:941-945.
ldouisoa 'awopus aldouisoanaday suredoipi uaaag dysuonelay ra uieg oz
 2. Adam F, Villiers E, Watson S, et al. Clinical pathological and epidemiological assess-
leukemia, and systemic mastocytosis. Am J/ Hemato. 2004;77:82-85.
ment of morphologically and immunologically confirmed canine leukaemia. Vet Comp
21. Bain PJ, Alleman AR, Sheppard BJ, et al. What is your diagnosis? An 18-month old 
Ohcol. 2009;7:181-195.
spayed female boxer dog. Vet Clin Pathor. 1997;26:55.
 3. Affolter VK, Moore PF. Localized and disseminated histiocytic sarcoma of dendritic
22. Ballmaie M, Gemeshausen M. Advances inthe understanding of congenital amega-
Cell origin in dogs. Vet Pathol. 2002;39:74-83.
karyocrytic thrombocytopenia. Br J Haematol. 2009:146:3-16.
4. Allan GS, Watson AD, Duff BC, et al. Disseminated mastocytoma and mastocytemia
 23. Barton MH, Sharma P, LeRoy BE, et al. Hypercalcemia and high serum parathyroid
in a dog. JAmm Vet Med Assoc. 1974;165:346-349.
hormone-related protein concentration in a horse with multiple myeloma. J Am Vet 
 5. Alleman AR, Harvey JVV. The morphologic effects of vincristine sulfate on canine 
/Med Assoc. 2004;225:409-413, 376.
bone marrow cells. Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22:36-41
 24. Bass MC, Schultze AE. Essential thrombocythemia in a dog: case report and literature
 6. Alison RVV, Brunker JD, Breshears MA, et al. Dendritic cell leukemia in a golden
review. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1998;34:197-203.
retriever. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:190-197.
 25. Bass MC, Schultze AE. Essential thrombocythemia in a dog: case report and literature
7. Alsaker RD, Laber J, Stevens JB, et al. A comparison of polychromasia and reticulo-
review. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1998;34:197-203.
cyte counts in assessing erythrocyte regenerative response in the cat. JArm Vet Med
 26. Beale KM, Altman D, Clemmons RR, et al. Systemic toxicosis associated with aza-
Assoc. 1977;170:39-41.
 8. Altman DH, Meyer DJ, Thompson JP, et al. Canine lgGz myeloma with Mott and 
 27. Beebe AM, Gluckstern TG, George J, et al. Detection of feline immunodeficiency virus 
flame cells. / Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1991;27:419-423.
infection in bone marrow of cats. Vet /mmunol /mmunopahol. 1992;35: 37-49.
 9. Ameri M, Wilkerson MJ, Stockham SL, et al. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in a
 28. Beeler-Marfisi J, Menoyo AG, Beck A, et al. Gelatinous marow transformation and 
German Shepherd dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:39-45.
hematopoietic atrophy in a miniature horse stallion. Vet Pathol. 2011;48:451-455.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
319
29. Berggren PC. Aplastic anemia in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1981;179:
 61. Busch MD, Reilly CM, Luff JA, et al. Feline pulmonary Langerhans cell histiocytosis
1400-1402.
with multiorgan involvement. Vet Pathol. 2008;45:816-824.
 30. Bernard SL, Leathers CV, Brobst DF, et al. Estrogen-induced bone marow depression
62. Cain GR, East N, Moore PF. Myelofibrosis in young pygmy goats. Comp Haematol Int.
in ferrets. Am / Vet Res. 1983;44:657-661.
1994;4:167-172.
31. Berry CR, House JK, Poulos PP, et al. Radiographic and pathologic features of osteo-
63. Callanan J, Jones BA,Ivine J, et al. Histologic claification and immunophenotype
petrosis in two
Peruvian Paso foals. Veterinary Radiology and Ultrasound.
-nww aual panbe Aeuawuadxa pue Ajeineu y sien u sewoesoudwl jo
1994;35:355-361.
nodeficiency virus infections. Vet Pathol. 1996;33:264-272.
32. Bhatt V, Saleem A. Review: Drug-induced neutropenia-pathophysiology, clinical fea-
64. Canfield PJ, Churh DB, RussIG. Myeloproliferative disorderinvolving the megakaryo-
10  7    p8 's
cytic line. J Small Anim Pract. 1993;34:296-301.
33. Bianco D, Armstrong PJ, VWashabau RJ. Presumed primary immune-mediated throm-
65.
.Canfield PJ, Malik R, Davis PE, et al. Multifocal idiopathic pyogranulomatous bone
bocytopenia in four cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2008;10:495-500.
disease in a dog. / Small Anim Pract. 1994;35:370-373.
66. Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ. Investigations of bone marrow dyscrasia in a poodle with
with different immunoglobulin isotypes in two cats. Vet Pathol. 2000;37:364-
macrocytosis. J Comp Pathol. 1989;101:269-278.
698
67. Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, Ratcliffe RCC. Dyserythropoiesis, sideroblasts/siderocytes
 35. Binhazim AA, Chapman WL Jr, Latimer KS, et al. Canine leishmaniasis caused by
and hemoglobin crystallization in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1987;16{1:21-28.
Leishmania leishmania infantum in two Labrador retrievers. J Vet Diagn invest.
68. Capsoni F, Sarzi-Puttini P, Zanella A. Primary and secondary autoimmune neutropenia.
1992;4:299-305.
Arthrtis Res Ther. 2005;7:208-214.
 36. Bloom JC, Lewis HB, Sellers TS, et al. The hematopathology of cefonicid- and
69.
9.Cashell AW, Buss DH. The frequency and significance of megakaryocyticemperipole-
cefazedone-induced blood dyscrasias in the dog. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1987;90:
sis in myeloproliferative and reactive states. Ann Hematol. 1992;64:273-276.
143-155.
 70. Chang CS, Wang CH, Su IJ, et al. Hematophagic histiocytosis: a clinicopathologic
37. BlueJT. Myelofibrosis in cats with myelodysplastic syndrome and acute melogenous
analysis of 23 cases with special reference to the association with peripheral T cell
leukemia. Vet Pahor. 1988;25:154-160.
lymphoma. J/ Formos MMed Assoc. 1994;93:421-428.
 38. Blue JT. Myelodysplasia: differentiating neoplastic from nonneoplastic syndromes of
71. Cheson BD, Cassileth PA, Head DR, et al. Report of the National Cancer Institute-
inefective hematopoiesis in dogs. Toxicol Pathol. 2003;31(Suppl:44-48.
sponsored workshop on definitions of diagnosis and response in acute myeloid leu-
 39. Blue JT, French TVV, Kranz JS. Non-lymphoid hematopoietic neoplasia in cats: a
kemia. / Chin Oncol. 1990;8:813-819.
retrospective study of 60 cases. Comell Vet. 1988;78:21-42.
72. Cheville NF. The gray collie syndrome. J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1968;152:620-630.
40. Bohm J. Gelatinous transformation of the bone marrow: the spectrum of underlying
73. Chiabrando D, Tolosano E. Diamond blackfan anemia at the crossroad between ribo-
diseases. Am / Surg Pathol. 2000;24:56-65.
some biogenesis and heme metabolism. Adv Hemato. 2010;2010:790632.
 41. Bollen P. Skydsgaard M. Restricted feeding may induce serous fat atrophy in male
74. Chickering WR, Brown J, Prasse KW, et al. Efects of heterologous antineutrophil
Gottingen minipigs. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2006;57:347-349.
antibody in the cat. Am / Vet Res. 1985;46:1815-1819.
 42. Bookbinder PF, Butt MT, Harvey HJ. Determination of the number of mast cells in
 75. Chickering WR, Prasse KW. Immune-mediated neutropenia in man and animals: a
lymph node, bone marrow, and buffy coat cytologic specimens from dogs. / Am Vet
review. Vet Clin Pathol. 1981;10f11:6-16.
Med Assoc 1992;200:1648-1650.
76. Ciaramella P, Oliva G, Luna RD, et al. A retrospective clinical study of canine leish-
43. Boosinger TR, Rebar AH, DeNicola DB, et al. Bone marow alterations associated with
maniasis in 150 dogs naturally infected by Leishmania infantum. Vet Rec.
 canine parvoviral enteritis. Vet Pathol. 1982;19:558-561.
1997;141:539-543.
44. Borgatti A. Plasma celltumors. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary
77. Cline MJ. Histiocytes and histiocytosis. Blood 1994;84:2840-2853.
Hematology, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:511-519.
78. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in cats: 12 cases
 45. Bortnowski HB, Rosenthal RC. Gastrointestinal mast cell tumors and eosinophilia in
{1981-1986). / Amm Vet Med Ass0c. 1987;190:1445-1448.
two cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1992;28:271-275.
79.
9. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD. Disseminated histoplasmosis in dogs: 12 cases 
46. Bounous Dl, Latimer KS, Campagnoli RP, et al. Acute myeloid leukemmia with baso-
{1981-1986). J Ar Vet /Med Assoc. 1988;193:1443-1447.
philic differentiation (AML, M-2B) in a cat. Vet Clin Pathor. 1994;23:15-18.
B0. Colbatzky F, Hermanns V. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in one cat and two dogs.
47. Brazzell JL, Weiss DJ. A retrospective study of aplastic pancytopenia in the dog: 9
Vet Pathol 1993;30:186-194.
cases {1996-2003) Vet Chin Pathol. 2006;35:413-417.
B1. Comazi S, Gelain ME, Bonfanti U, et al. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in dogs:
48. Brearley MJ, Jeffery N. Cryptococcal osteomyelitis in a dog. J Smal Anim Pract
a report of three cases and review of the literature. J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc.
1992;33:601-604.
2010;46:327-335.
49. Breen M, Modiano JF.Evolutionarilyconseved cytogenetic changes in hematological
 82. Cooley DM, Waters DJ. Skeletal metastasis as the initial clinical manifestation of
malignancies of dogs and humans-man and his best friend share more than compan-
metastatic carcinoma in 19 dogs. / Vet Intem MMed. 1998;12:288-293.
ionship. Chromosome Res. 2008;16:145-154.
B3. Cooper BJ, Watson ADJ. Myeloid neoplasia in a dog. Aust Vet J. 1975;51:150-154.
50. Breitschwerdt EB, Abrams-Ogg AC, Lappin MR, et al. Molecular evidence supporting
B4. Cork LC, Munnell JF, Lorenz MD. The pathology of feline Gve gangliosidosis. Amm J
Ehrlichia canis-like infection in cats. J/ Vet intern Med. 2002;16:642-649.
Pathol. 1978;90:723-734.
 51. Bremner KC. The reticulocyte response in calves made anaemic by phlebotomy. Aust 
 85. Cortese L, Paciello O. Papparella S. Morphological characterisation of malignant
/ Exp Biol Med Sci. 1966;44:251-258.
histiocytosis in a cat. Folia Morphol /VWarsz). 2008;67:299-303.
 52. Breuer V, Darbes J, Hermanns W, et al. Idiopathic myelofibrosis in a cat and in three
B6. Cotter SM. Anemia associated with feline leukemia virus infection. J Am Vet Med 
dogs. Comp Haematol Int. 1999;9:17-24.
Assoc. 1979;175:1191-1194.
 53. Breuer W, Stahr K, Majzoub M, et al. Bone-marrow changes in infectious diseases
87. Court EA, Earnest-Koons KA, Barr SC, et al. Malignant histiocytosis in a cat. J Am
 and lymphohaemopoietic neoplasias in dogs and cats-a retrospective study. J Comp
Vet /Med Assoc. 1993;203:1300-1302.
Pathol. 1998;119:57-66.
B8. Couto CG. Kallet AJ. Preleukemic syndrome in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
54. Brock KV, Jones JB, Shull RM, et al. Effect of canine parvovirus on erythroid progeni-
1984;184:1389-1392.
tors in phenylhydrazine-induced regenerative hemolytic anemia in dogs. Am J/ Vet
B9. Cowgill ES, Neel JA, Ruslander D. Light-chain myeloma in a dog. J Vet intem Med.
Res. 1989;50:965-969.
2004;18:119-121
 55. Brockus Cw. Endogenous estrogen myelotoxicity associated with functional cystic
90. Cowgil LD, James KM, Levy JK, et al. Use of recombinant human erythropoietin for
ovaries in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;27:55-56.
management of anemmia in dogs and cats with renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
 56. Brown CD, Parnell NK, Schulman RL, et al. Evaluation of clinicopathologic features.
1998;212:521-528.
response to treatment, and risk factors associated with idiopathic neutropenia in
91. Cruz Cardona JA, Milner R, Alleman AR, et al. BCR-ABL translocation in a dog with
dogs: 11 cases {1990-2002). JAm Vet Med Assoc. 2006;229:87-91.
chronic monocytic leukemia. Vet Cin Patho 2011:40:40-47.
57. Brown DE, Thrall MA, Walkley SU, et al. Feline Niemann-Pick disease type C. Am J
92. Cullor JS, Smith W, Zinkl JG, et al. Hematologic and bone marrow changes after
Pathol. 1994; 144:1412-1415.
short- and long-term administration of two recombinant bovine granulocyte colony-
 58. Brown MR, Rogers KS. Neutropenia in dogs and cats: a retrospective study of 261
stimulating factors. Vet Pathol. 1992;29:521-527.
cases. J/ Amm Animm Hosp Assoc. 2001;37:131-139
 93. Dale DC, Alling DW, Wolff SM. Cyclic hematopoiesis: the mechanism of cyclic neu-
 59. Buhles WC Jr. Huxsoll DL, Hildebrandt PK. Tropical canine pancytopenia: role of
aplastic anaemia in the pathogenesis of severe disease. J Comp Pathol.
 94. Darbes J, Majzoub M., Breuer W, et al. Large granular lymphocytic leukemia/
1975;85:511 -521.
lymphoma in six cats. Vet Pathol. 1998;35:370-379.
 60. Burton S. Miller L, Horney B, et al. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia in a cat. Vet
 95. Dascanio JJ, Zhang CH, Antczak DF, et al. Differentiation of chronic lymphocytic 
Chin Pathol. 1996;25:6-9.
leukemia in the horse. A report of two cases. J/ Vet lntern Med. 1992;6:225-229.
320
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 96. Davies AP, Hayden DVV, Klausner JS, et al. Noncutaneous systemic mastocytosis and 
126. Fodinger M, Fritsch G, Winkler K, et al. Origin of human mast cells: development from
mast celleukemiain a dog: case report and iterature review. JAmAnim Hosp Assoc.
transplanted hematopoietic stem cells after allogeneic bone marrow transplantation.
1981;17:361-368.
Blood. 1994;84:2954-2959.
97. Deldar A, Lewis H, Bloom J, et al. Cephalosporin-induced changes in the ultrastruc-
127.F
Foglia MV, Restucci B, Pagano A, et al. Pathological changes in the bone marrow of
ture of canine bone marrow. Vet Pathol. 1988;25:211-218.
dogs with leishmaniosis. Vet Rec. 2006;158:690-694.
 98. Dhote R, Simon J, Papo T, Detournay B, et al. Reactive hemophagocytic syndrome in
128. Ford SL, Raskin RE, Snyder, PS. Clinical implications of feline bone marrow
adult systemic disease: report of twenty-six cases and literature review. Arthritis
dysplasia—a retrospective study of 16 cats fabstract). J Vetlntem Med. 1998;12:226.
Rheum. 2003;49:633-639.
129. Fossum TW. Hulse DA. Osteormyelitis. Semin Vet Med Surg Smal Anim.
99. Dieringer TM, Brown SA, Rogers KS, etal. Effects oflithium carbonate administration
1992;7:85-97.
to healthy cats. Amm / Vet Res. 1992;53:721-726.
130. Fox LE, Ford S, Allman AR, et al. Aplastic anemia associated with prolonged high-
100. Dodds WJ. Immune-mediated diseases of the blood. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med.
dose trimethoprim-sulfadiazine administration in two dogs. Vet Clin Pathol
1983;27:163-196.
1993;22:89-92.
101. D
 Doige CE. Bone and bone marrow necrosis associated with the calf form of sporadic
131. Franks PT, Havey JW, Mays MC, et al. Feline large granular lymphoma. Vet Pathol.
 bovine leukosis. Vet Pathol. 1987;24:186-188.
1986;23:200-202.
102. Dole RS, MacPhail CM, Lappin MR. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis with mature neutro-
132. Franks PT, HarveyJV, Shields RP, et al. Hematological findings in experimental feline
philia in a cat with pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma. J Feline Med Surg.
cytauxzoonosis. J/ Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 1988;24:395-401.
2004;6:391-395.
133. Freeman L, Stevens J, Loughman C,et al. Malignant histiocytosis ina cat. JVet ltern
103. Douglas VK, Tallman MS, Cripe LD, et al. Thrombopoietin administered during induc-
ed. 1995;9:171-173.
-jow juaisuenn sanpui ewaynal piojaw ane yim suaied ot Adejaypowaya uo
134. Friedrichs KR, Young KM. Histiocytic sarcoma of macrophage origin in a cat: case
phologic changes that may resemble chronic myeloproliferative disorders. Am J/ Cin
report with aliterature revwof feline histiocytic malignancies andcomparison with
Pathol. 2002;117:844-850.
canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:121-128.
104. Dunavant ML, Murry ES. Clinical evidence of phenylbutazone induced hypoplastic
135. Fry MM, Vernau W, Pesavento PA, et al. Hepatosplenic lymphoma in a dog. Vet 
anemia. In: Kitchen H, Krehbiel JD, eds. Proceedings First International Symposium
Pathol. 2003;40:556-562.
 on Equine Hematology. Golden, CO: American Association of Equine Practitioners;
136. Fujino Y, Sawamura S, Kurakawa N, et al. Treatment of chronic lymphocytic leukae-
1975:383-385.
mia in three dogs with melphalan and prednisolone. J Small Anim Pract.
105. Dunn JK, Doige CE, Searcy GP, et al. Myelofibrosis-osteosclerosis syndrome
2004;45:298-303.
associated  with
h erythroid hypoplasia in a dog. J Small Anim Pract.
137. Fulton R. Gasper PV, Ogilvie GK, et al. Effect of recombinant human granulocyte
1986;27:799-806.
106. Dunn JK, Heath MF, Jefferies AR, et al. Diagnosis and hematologic features of
1991;19:759-767.
6 y    o  e essa a
138. Fyfe JC, Giger U, HallCA, et al. Inherited selective intestinal cobalamin malabsorption
138.
107. Durando MM, Alleman AR, Harvey JVV. Myelodysplastic syndrome in a quarter horse
ha uen jo uodiosgeiew aalas pauu ieia n jabig 'dd aazar 'r ad l
gelding. Equine Vet J. 1994;26:83-85.
giant schnauzers. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1989;25:533-539.
108.
 Durham SK, Dietze AE. Prostatic adenocarcinoma with and without metastasis to
140. Garner FM, Lingeman CH. Mast-cell neoplasms in the domestic cat. Pathor Vet.
bone in dogs. J Am Vet /Med Assoc. 1986;188:1432-1436.
1970;7:517-530.
109. Dzieciol J, Lemancewicz D, Kloczko J, et al. Megakaryocytes emperipolesis in bone
141. Garon CL, Scot MA, Selting KA, et al. Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in a cat.
marrow of the patients with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Folia Histochem Cytobiol.
J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1999;35: 464-470.
2001;39(Suppl 2:142-143.
142. Gary AT, Kerl ME, Wiedmeyer CE, et al. Bone marrw hypoplasia associated with
110. Edwards DF, Parker JVv, Wvikinson JE, et al. Plasma cell myeloma in the horse. A
fenbendazole administration in a dog. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2004;40:224-229.
 case report and literature review. J/ Vet Intem AMed. 1993;7:169-176.
143. Gaschen FP. Smmith Meyer B. Harvey JVW. Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia
111.
Eldor A, Hershko C, Bruchim A. Androgen-responsive aplastic anemmia in a dog. JAm
and immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia in a cat. Comp Haemator Int.
Vet MMed Assoc. 1978;173:304-305.
1992;2:175-178.
112. Ellis JA, West KH, Cortese VS, etal. Lesions and distribution ofviral antigen following
144. Gasser AM, Bush WVV, Smith S, et al. Extradural spinal, bone marrow, and renal
an experimental infection of young seronegative calves with virulent bovine virus 
nephroblastoma. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2003;39:80-85.
diarrhea virus-type ll. Can J Vet Res 1998;62:161-169.
145. Gelain ME, Antoniazzi E, Bertazzolo V, et al. Chronic eosinophilic leukemia in a
113. Endicott MM, Charney SC, McKnight JA, et al. Clinicopathological findings andresults
 of bone marrow aspiration in dogs with cutaneous mast cell tumours: 157 cases
454-459.
{1999-2002). Vet Commp Oncol. 2007;5:31-37.
en pue sadaud nean e a  oe  i  lag 9
114. English RV, Breitschwerdt EB, Grindem CB, et al. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome and
antigen expression in different subtypes of canine lymphoma by flow cytometry. Vet
myelofibrosis in a dog. J/Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;192:1430-1434.
mmwnol lmmunopathol. 2008;121:179-188.
115. Evans RJ, Jones DRE, Gruffydd-Jones TJ. Essential thrombocythaemia in the dog and
147. Gentilini F, Calzolari C, Buonacucina A, et al. Different biological behaviour of 
Cat: a report of four cases. / Small Animm Pract. 1982;23:457-467.
26-28:g'sooz yosug duog ia/ shop oa ui ewaungojboisew wonsuapien
116. Fabris F, Randi ML Essential thrombocythemia past and present. Intem Emerg Med.
148. Giger U, Boxer LA, Simpson PJ, et al. Deficiency of leukocyte surface glycoproteins 
2009;4:381-388.
Mo1, LFA-1, and Leu M5 in a dog with recurrent bacterial infections: an animal model.
117. Facchini RV, Bertazzolo W, Zuliani D, et al. Detection of biclonal gammopathy by
Blood. 1987;69:1622-1630.
capillary zone electrophoresis in a cat and a dog with plasma cell neoplasia. Vet Clin
149. Gilmore GL, DePasquale DK, Fischer BC, et al. Enhancement of monocytopoiesis by
Pathol 2010;39:440-446.
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor: evidence for secondary cytokine effects in vivo.
Exp Hematol. 1995;23:1319-1323.
Diergeneeskd. 2004;129:360-364.
150. Giraudel JM, Pages JP, Guelfi JF. Monoclonal gammopathies in the dog: aretrospec-
119. Felchle LM, McPhee LA, Kerr ME, et al. Systemic lupus erythematosus and bone 
tive study of 18 cases f1986-1999) and literature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
marrow necrosis in a dog. Can Vet J. 1996;37:742-744.
2002;38:135-147.
120.
Fenger CK, Bertone JJ, Biller D, et al. Generalied medullary infarction of the long
151. Gold JR, Warren AL, French TV, et al. What is your diagnosis? Biopsy impression
bones in a horse. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;202:621-623.
smear of a hepatic mass in a yearling Thoroughbred filly. Vet Clin Pathol.
121. Fidel JL, Pargass IS, Dark MJ, et al. Granulocytopenia associated with thymoma in a
2008;37:339-343.
domestic shorthaired cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2008;44:210-217.
152. Gossett KA, MacWilliams PS, Cleghorn B. Sequentia morphological and quantitative
122.
changes in blood and bone marrow neutrophils in dogs with acute inflammation. Can
Meinkoth JH, DeNicola DB, eds. Diagnostic Cytology and Hematology of the Dog and
J/ Comp Med. 1985;49:291-297.
Cat, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby Elsevier; 2008:210-214.
153. Graves TK, Swenson CL, Scott MA. A potentially misleading presentation and course
123.
Finco DR, Duncan JR, Schall WD, et al. Acetamminophen toxicosis in the cat. J Am Vet
of acute myelomonocytic leukemia in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
ed Assoc. 1975;166:469-472
1997;33:37-41.
124. Fine DM, Tvedten H. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
154. Greene CE, Meinkoth J, Kocan AA. Cytauxzoonosis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious
1999;214:1809-1812.
Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 3rd ed. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier; 2006:716-722.
125. Fine DM, Tvedten HWV. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a dog. JAm Vet Med Assoc.
155. Grindem CB. Classification of myeloproliferative diseases. In: August JR, ed. Consul-
1999;214:1809-1812, 1791.
tations in Feline Medicine 3. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.: 1997:499-508.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
321
156. Grindem CB, Roberts MC, McEntee MF, et al. Large granular lymphocyte tumor in a
187. Hoenig M. Multiple myeloma associated with the heavy chains of immunoglobulin A
horse. Vet Pathol 1989;26:86-88.
in a dog. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1987;190:1191-1192.
157. Grindem CB, Stevens JB, Brost DR, et al. Chronic myelogenous leukaemia with 
188. Hoenig M. Six dogs with features compatible with myelonecrosis and myelofibrosis.
meningeal infiltration in a dog. Comp Haematol Int. 1992;2:170-174.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1989;25:335-339.
158.0
 Grindem CB, Stevens JB, Perman V. Cytochemmical reactions in cells from leukemic 
189. Hoff B, Lumsden JH, Valli VE. An appraisal of bone marrow biopsy in assessment of 
dogs. Vet Pahol. 1986;23:103-109.
sick dogs. Can J Comp Med. 1985;49:34-42.
159. Gruntman A, Nolen-Vvalston R, Parry N, et al. Presumptive albendazole toxicosis in
190. Hoff B, Lumsden JH, Valli VEO, et al. Myelofibrosis: review of clinical and pathological
12 alpacas. / Vet Intern MMed. 2009;23:945-949.
features in fourteen dogs. Can Vet J. 1991;32:357-361.
160. Hahn KA, Matlock CL. Nasal adenocarcinoma metastatic to bone in two dogs. J Am 
191. Holland CT, Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, et al. Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and
Vet Med Assoc. 1990;197:491-494.
cardiac disease in three related English springer spaniels. J Vet intem Med.
161. HammerAS, Couto CG, Getzy D, etal. Essential thrombocythemia in acat. J Vetntem
1991;5:151-159.
Med. 1990;4:87-91
192. Hoover EA, Kociba GJ. Bone lesions in cats with anemia induced by feline leukemia
162. Hammond WP, Csiba E, Canin A, et al. Chronic neutropenia. A new canine model
virus. / Natl Cancer nst. 1974;53:1277-1284.
Bueinws-Auojon arhnoinueni uewny A paanpu!
 farctor. J Clin lnvest.
193. Hopper CD, Sparkes AH, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, et al. Clinical and laboratory findings in 
1991;87:704-710.
cats infected with feline immunodeficiency virus. Vet Rec. 1989;125:341-346.
163. Handagama PJ, Feldman BF. Drug-induced thrombocytopenia. Vet Res Commun.
194. Hopper PE, Mandell CP, Turrel JM, et al. Probable essential thrombocythemia in a
1986;10:1-20.
dog. J Vet Intem MMed. 1989;3:79-85.
164. Hanichen T. Breuer W. Hermanns W. Lipid storage disease. Lab Anim Sci.
195.
. Hoshi H, Weiss L. Rabbit bone marrow after administration of saponin. Lab lnvest.
1997;47:275-279.
1978;38:67-80.
165. Harmon DC, Weitzman SA, Stossel TP. The severity of immune neutropenia correlates
196. Hothkiss RS, Strasser A. McDunn JE, et al. Cell death. N Engl J Med.
with the maturational specificity of antineutrophil antibodies. Br J Haemator.
2009;361:1570-1583.
1984;58: 209-215.
197. Hotston Moore A, Day MJ, Graham MWA. Congenital pure red blood cell aplasia
166. Harrus S, Waner T, Weiss DJ, et al. Kinetics of serum antiplatelet antibodies in
{Diamond-Blackfan anaemia) in a dog. Vet Rec. 1993;132:414-415.
experimental acute canine ehrlichiosis. Vet immunol immunopatho. 1996;51:
198. Houston DM, Taylor JA. Acute pancreatitis and bone marrow suppression in a dog
13-20.
 given azathioprine. Can Vet J. 1991;32:496-497.
167. Harvey Jv. Myeloproliferative disorders in dogs and cats. Vet Clin North Am Small
199. Hughes K, Scase TJ, Ward C, et al. Vincristine overdose ina cat: clinical management,
Anim Pract. 1981;11:349-381
use  of  calcium 
n folinate, and pathological lesions. J Feline Med Surg.
168. Harvey JV. Canine bone marrow: normal hematopoiesis, biopsy techniques, and cell
2009;11:322-325.
identification and evaluation. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet. 1984;B:909-926.
 200. Huibregtse BA, Turner JL. Hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic leukemia: a
169. Harvey JVV. Unpublished studies. 2000.
170. Harvey JV. Pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis, and clinical implications of erythro-
201. Hurvit Al, Kehoe JM, Capra JD, et al. Bence Jones proteinemia and proteinuria in a
cyte enzyme deficiencies in dogs. cats, and horses. Vet Clin Pathol. 2006;35:
dog. / Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1971;159:1112-1116.
144-156.
 202. Huvitz Al, MacEwen EG, Middaugh CR, et al. Monoclonal cryoglobulinemmia with 
171. Harvey JVv. The erythrocyte: physiology, metabolism and biochemical disorders. In:
Kaneko JJ, Harvey JV, Bruss ML, eds. Clinical Biochemisty of Domestic Animals,
203. Jackson MW, Hefand SC, Smedes SL, et al. Primary lgG secreting plasma cell tumor
Bth ed. San Diego, CA: Academic Press; 2008:173-240.
in the gastrointestinal tract of a dog. J Ar Vet Med Assoc. 1994;204:404-406.
172. Harvey JV, Clapp WL, Yao Y, et al. Microcytic hypochromic erythrocytes containing
204. Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kaufman A. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in three dogs
siderotic inclusions, Heinz bodies, and hemoglobin crystals in a dog fabstract. Vet 
treated with anticonvulsants. J/Am Vet Med Assoc. 1998;212:681-684.
Chin Pathol. 2007;36:313-314.
 205. Jacobs RM, Couto CG, Wellman ML. Biclonal gammopathy in a dog with myeloma
173. Harvey JV, Shields RP Gaskin JM. Feline myeloproliferative disease. Changing
and cutaneous lymphoma. Vet Pathol. 1986;23:211-213.
manifestations in the peripheral blood. Vet Pathor. 1978;15:437-448.
206. Jadersten M, Hellstrom-Lindberg E. New clues to the molecular pathogenesis of
174. Harvey JVV, Wolfsheimer KJ, Simpson CF, et al. Pathologic sideroblasts and sidero-
myelodysplastic syndromes. Exp Cell Res. 2010;316:1390-1396.
207.JainNC.Scham's Veterinary Hematlogy4thed.Philadelphia Lea&Febiger
1985;14/11:36-42.
1986.
175. Hasler AH. Giger U. Serum erythropoietin values in polycythemic cats. J Am Anim
 208. Jain NC. Classification of myeloproliferative disorders in cats using criteria proposed
Hosp Assoc. 1996;32:294-301.
-696ll sasen l8l po Apnas annaadsoal e dnoug Apns eiwaexna7 lewus ayn Aq
176. Helfand SC, Kisseberth WC. General features of leukemia and lymphoma. In: Weiss
1992). Comp Haematol Int 1993;3:125-134.
DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Scham's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-
 209. Jain NC. Essentials of Veterinary Hematology. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger: 1993.
Blackwell; 2010:455-466.
 210. Jain NC, Blue JT, Grindem CB, et al. Proposed criteria for classification of acute 
177. Helfand SC, Soergel SA, MacWVilliams PS, et al. Clinical and inmmunological effects 
of human recombinant interleukin-2 given by repetitive weekly infusion to normal
 211. James FE, Mansfield CS. Clinical remission of idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome
dogs. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 1994;39:84-92.
in a Rottweiler. Aust Vet J. 2009;87:330-333.
178. Helton KA, Nesbitt GH, Caciolo PL. Griseofulvin toxicity in cats:literature and report 
 212. Jensen AL, Nielsen OL. Eosinophili leukaemoid reaction ina dog. JSmal Anim Pract.
of seven cases. J/ Ar Anim Hosp Assoc. 1986;22:453-458
1992;33:337-340.
179. Henson KL, Alleman AR, Fox LE, et al. Diagnosis of dissemminated adenocarcinoma by
213. Johansson AM, SkidellJ,LiliehookI, et al. Chronic granulocytic leukemia in a horse.
 bone marrow aspiration in a dog with leukoerythroblastosis and fever of unknown
J Vet Intern MMed. 2007;21:1126-1129.
origin. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;27:80-84.
214. Johnson KA. Osteomyelis in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med AssoCc.
eui eiwaynal lian isew ad-anssn annauuon 'e na 'A eyoeiny 'l euon 'A esexh ol
1994;204:1882-1887.
dog. J/ Vet /Med Sci. 2000;62:187-190.
 215. Joiner GN, Fraser CJ, Jardine JH, et al. A case of chronic granulocytic leukemia in a
181. Hirsch V, Dunn J. Megaloblastic anemia in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
dog. Can / Commp Med. 1976;40:153-160.
1983;19:873-880.
216. Jonas LD, Thrall MA, Weiser MG. Nonregenerative fom of immune-mediated hemo-
182. Hisasue M, Nagashima N, Nishigaki K, et al. Myelodysplastic syndromes and acte
lytic anemia in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1987;23:201-204.
 myeloid leukemia in cats infected with feline leukemia virus clone33 containing a
 217. Jordan HL, Cohn LA, Armstrong PJ. Disseminated Mycobacterium avium complex 
unique long terminal repeat. Int J Cancer. 2009;124:1133-1141.
infection in three Siamese cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1994;204:90-93.
183. Hisasue M, Nishigaki K, Katae H et al. Clonality analysis of various hematopoietic
 218. Josefsen TD, Sorensen KK, Mork T, et al. Fatal inanitionin reindeer {Rangifer tarandus 
disorders in cats naturally infected with feline leukemia virus. J Vet Med Sci.
tarandus: pathological findings in completely emaciated carcasses. Acta Vet Scand.
2000;62:1059-1065.
2007;49:27.
184. Hisasue M, Nishimura T, Neo S, et al. A dog with acute myelomonocytic leukemia.
 219. Joshi BC, Jain NC.Detection of antiplatelet antibody in serum and on megakaryocytes
J Vet MMed Sc. 2008;70:619-621
in dogs with autoimmune thrombocytopenia. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1976;681-
185. Hisasue M. Okayama H. Okayama T. et al. Hematologic abnormalities and
685.
outcome of 16 cats with myelodysplastic syndromes. J/ Vet lntem Med. 2001;15:
 220. Joshi BC, Jain NC. Experimental inmunologic thrombocytopenia in dogs: a study of
471-477.
thrombocytopenia and megakaryocytopoiesis. Res Vet Sci. 1977;22:11-17.
186. Hodgkins EM, Zinkl JG, Madewell BR. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia in the dog. JAmm 
221.
1. Julia A, Olona M, Bueno J, Revilla E, et al. Drug-induced agranulocytosis: prognostic 
Vet /Med Assoc. 1980;177:704-707.
factors in a series of 168 episodes. Br / Haematol. 1991;79:366-371.
322
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 222. Junt T, Schulze H, Chen Z, et al. Dynamic visualization of thrombopoiesis within bone 
 257. Lautzenhiser SJ, Walker MC, Goring RL. Unusual IgM-secreting multiple myeloma in
marrow. Science. 2007;317:1767-1770.
a dog. / Am Vet MMed Assoc. 2003;223:645-648, 636.
-ou pionaw jof shaiew sounod ie ia oa janag 'o azuaia ' jaddonr 2z
 258. Lavoie JP, Morris DD, Zinkl JG, et al. Pancytopenia caused by marrow aplasia in a
plasms: a comparative review of the literature and goals for future investigation. Vet
horse. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1987;191:1462-1464.
Pathol. 2011;48:182-197.
259. Ledieu D, Palazi X, Marchal T, et al. Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia with erythro-
224. Kariya K, Konno A, Ishida T. Perforin-like immunoreactivity in four cases of lymphoma
phagocytosis and thrombosis in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2005;34:52-56.
of large granular lymphocytes in the cat. Vet Pathol. 1997;34:156-159.
260. L
Lee KP. Emperipolesis of hematopoietic cells within megakaryocytes in bone marrow
225.
Kaushansky K. Historical review: megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis. Blood.
of the rat. Vet Pathol. 1989;26:473-478.
2008;111:981-986.
 261. Lees GE, McKeever PJ, Ruth GR. Fatal thrombocytopenic hemorrhagic diathesis
226.
Keel SB, Doty RT, Yang Z, et al. A heme export protein is required for red blood cell 
associated with dapsone administration to a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
    1 
1979;175:49-52.
227.
Kelton DR, Holbrook TC, Giliam LL, et al. Bone marrow necrosis and myelophthisis:
 262. Lees GE. Sautter JH. Anemia and osteopetrosis in a dog. J Am Vet Med AssOC.
manifestations of T-celymphoma in a horse. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:403-408.
1979;175:820-824.
228.
Keohane EM. Acquired aplastic anemia. Clin Lab Sci. 2004;17:165-171.
229.
 Kerbauy DB, Deeg HJ. Apoptosis and antiapoptotic mechanisms in the progression
J Armm Vet MMed Assoc. 1986;:189:214-217.
 of myelodysplastic syndrome. Exp Hematol. 2007;35:1739-1746.
 264. Leifer CE, Matus RE, Patnaik AK, et al. Chronic myelogenous leukemia in the dog
230.
 Khan KN, Sagartz JE, Koenig G, et al. Systemic mastocytosis in a goat. Vet Pathol.
J Ar Vet /Med Assoc. 1983;183:686-689.
1995;32:719-721
 265. Leipold HVW, Cook JE. Animal model: osteopetrosis in Angus and Hereford calves.
 231. Khanna C, Bienzle D. Polycythemiaverainacat: bone marw culture inerythropoietin-
Armm / Pathol. 1977;86:745-748.
deficient medium. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1994;30:45-49.
266. L
232.
wanoi nm bop e ui ewelaw paieuassla tr el 'at eo xa wiy 
Eguine Vet J. 1993;25:471-473.
 of leptomeninges and bone marrow. Vet Pathol. 2009;46:80-83.
267. Lester GD, Allman AR, Raskin RE, et al. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leuke-
233. Kim DY, Taylor HWV, Eades SC, et al. Systemic AL amyloidosis associated with mul-
mia in three horses. J/ Vet Intem Med 1993;7:360-363.
 tiple myeloma in a horse. Vet Pathol. 2005;42:81-84.
268. Lester SJ, Mesfin GM. A solitary plasmacytoma in a dog with progression to a dis-
 234. Kipps TJ. Macroglobulinemia. In: Beutler E, Lichtman MA, Coller BS, Kipps TJ, eds.
seminated myeloma. Can Vet J. 1980;21:284-286.
Wiliams Hematology, 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1995:1127-1131.
 269. Lester SJ, Searcy GP. Hematologic abnormalities preceding apparent recovery from
235.
Kocan AA, Kocan KM, Blouin EF, et al. A redescription of schizogony of Cytauxzoon
feline leukemia virus infection. J/Am Vet Med Assoc. 1981;178:471-474. 
felis in the domestic cat. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1992;653:161-167.
270. Lewis HB, Rebar AH. Bone Marrow Evaluation in Veterinary Practice. St. Louis:
236.
 Kociba GJ, Caputo CA. Aplastic anemia associated with estrus in pet ferrets. JAm
Ralston Purina Co.: 1979.
Vet /ed Assoc. 1981;178:1293-1294.
 271. Lipton JM. Diamond blackfan anemia: new paradigms for a *not so pure* inherited 
 237. Kohn CV, Swardson C, Provost P, et al. Myeloid and megakaryocytic hypoplasia in
red cell aplasia. Semin Hematol. 2006;43:167-177.
related standardbreds. / Vet Intern Med. 1995;9:315-323.
272. Liska WD, MacEwen EG, Zaki FA, et al. Feline systemic mastocytosis: a review and
238. Kouro T, Takatsu K. IL-5- and eosinophil-mediated inflammation: from discovery to
results of splenectomy in seven cases. / Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1979;15:589-597.
therapy. Int /mmunol. 2009;21:1303-1309.
273.L
Lord Bl. Myeloid cell kinetics in response to haemopoietic growth factors. Bailires
239.
Kraje AC, Patton CS, Edwards DF. Malinant histiocytosis in 3 cats. / Vet Intern Med.
Clin Haematol 1992;5:533-550.
2001;15:252-256.
274. Lorenz M, Evering WE, Provencher A, et al. Atypical antipsychotic-induced neutrope-
240.
Kramer J, Tornquist S, Efle J, et al. Large granular lymphocyte leukemia in a horse.
nia in dogs. Toxicor Appl Pharmacol. 1999;155:227-236.
Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22:126-128.
 275. Lukaszewska J, Lewandowski K. Cabot rings as a result of severe dyserythropoiesis
241.
Kramers P, Fluckiger MA, Rahn BA, et al. Osteopetrosis in cats. J Smal Anim Pract.
in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2008;37:180-183.
1988;29:153-164.
276. Lund JE, Brown PK. Hypersegmented megakaryocytes and megakaryocytes with mul-
 242. Kueck BD. Smith RE. Parkin J, et al. Eosinophilic leukemia: A myeloproliferative
tiple separate nuclei in dogs treated with PNU-100592, an oxazolidinone antibiotic.
disorder distinct from the hypereosinophilic syndrome. Hematol Pathol.
Toxicol Pathol 1997;25:339-343.
1991;5:195-205
pasnen Ana po awoupuAs axl-euadoynalued le ta'yJabiadsuaua '1lansen Hzn 27
 243. Kuehn NF, Gaunt SD. Clinical and hematologic findings in canine ehrlichiosis. J/Am
by co-infetion with FeLV and feline panleukopenia virus. Vet mmunol mmunopathol.
Vet /Med Assoc. 1985;186:355-358.
1995;46:21-33.
 244. Kuehn NF, Gaunt SD. Hypocellular marrow and extramedullary hematopoiesis
 278. Macdonald D, Gordon AA, Kajitani H, et al. Interleukin-2treatment-associated eosino-
in a dog: hematologic recovery after splenectomy. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
philia is mediated by interleukin-5 production. Br J Haematol 1990;76:168-173.
1986;188:1313-1315.
 279. MacEwen EG. Feline lymphoma and leukemias In: WVithrow SJ, MacEwen EG, eds.
 245. Kunkle GA, Meyer DU. Toxicity of high doses of griseofulvin in cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc. 1987;191:322-323.
 280. MacEwen EG, Drazner FH, McClelland AJ, et al. Treatment of basophilic leukemia in
 246. Kupanoff PA, Popovitch CA, Goldschmidt MH. Colorectal plasmacytomas: a retrospec-
a dog. / Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 1975;166:376-380.
tive study of nine dogs. / Am Animm Hosp Assoc. 2006;42:37-43.
 281. MacEwen EG, Hurvitz Al, Hayes A. Hyperviscosity syndrome associated with lympho-
 247. Kuter DJ, Bain B, Mutti G, et al. Bone marrow fibrosis: pathophysiology and
cytic leukemia in three dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1977;170:1309-1312.
clinical significance of increased bone marrow stromal fibres. Br J Haematol.
282.[
 MacEwen EG, Patnaik AK, Hurvitz Al, et al. Nonsecretory multiple myeloma in two 
2007;139:351-362
dogs. / Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 1984;184:1283-1286.
248. Kuzmanova Sl. The macrophage activation syndrome: a new entity, a potentiall fatal
 283. MacEwen EG, Young KM. Canine lymphoma and lymphoid leukemias. In: Withrow 
complication of rheumatic disorders. Folia Med (Plovdiv). 2005;47:21-25.
SJ, MacEwen EG, eds. Smal Animal Clinical Oncology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
249.
LachowiczJL, PostGS, Moroff SD, et al. Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia-
Co.: 1996:451-479.
four cases and a literature review. J/ Small Anim Pract. 2004;45:507-514.
 284. Machado EA, Jones JB, Aggio MC, et al. Ultrastructural changes of bone marrow in
 250. Lanevschi A, Daminet S, Niemeyer GP, et al. Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
Canine cyclic hematopoiesis {CH dogl. A sequential study. Virchows Arch Pathol Anat.
deficiency in a rottweiler with chronic idiopathic neutropenia. J Vet intern Med.
1981;390:93-108.
1999;13:72-75.
 285. Madewell BR. Hematologic and bone marow cytological abnormalities in 75 dogs
i ienns apaoua pue sisaiodoyia eta 'g siaqweuo 'ar sauor oy abuen isz
with malignant lymphoma. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1986;22:235-240.
dogs with cyclic hematopoiesis. Am J Vet Res. 1976;37:331-334.
28MadeweJainNCWelleREHematlgicabmalit preeinmlid
 252. Langheinrich KA, Nielsen SVw. Histopathology of feline panleukopenia: a report of 65
leukemia in three cats. Vet Pathol. 1979;16:510-519.
cases. JAmm Vet MMed Assoc. 1971;158:863-872.
 287. Maggio L, Hoffman R, Coter SM, et al. Feline preleukemia: an animal model of human
 253. Lappin MR, Latimer KS. Hematuria and exteme neutrophilic leukocytosis in a dog
disease. Yale / Biol Med. 1978;51:469-476.
with renal tubular carcinoma. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;192:1289-1292.
 288. Mahaffey EA, Brown TP, Duncan JR, et al. Basophilic leukaemia in a dog. J Comp
254. Larroche C, Mouthon L. Pathogenesis of hemophagocytic syndrome HPS). Autoimmun
Pathol 1987;97:393-399.
Rev. 2004:3:69-75.
 awopuas aaobeydowan je ia 'o zawey zanad y sewen esos  znn nilen 687
255.
Larsen S, Flagstad A, Aalbaek B. Experimental panleukopenia in the conventional cat.
Vet Pathol. 1976;13:216-240.
290. Majzoub M. Breuer V. Platz SJ, et al. Histopathologic and immunophenotypic
 256. Latimer KS, Bounous Dl, Collatos C, et al. Extreme eosinophilia with disseminated
characterization of extramedullary plasmacytomas in nine cats. Vet Pathol.
eosinophilic granulomatous disease in a horse. Vet Cin Pathol. 1996;25:23-26.
2003;40:249-253.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
323
 291. Malka S, Hawkins MG, Zabolotzky SM, et al. Immune-mediated pure red cell aplasia
a yr aese Auaa ue r a  ueo te
in a domestic ferret. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2010;237:695-700.
anemia and methylmalonic aciduria in a border collie. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
 292. Mandell CP, Goding B, Degen MA, et al. Spurious elevation of serum potassium in
1999;35:392-395.
tWo cases of thrombocythemia. Vet Chin Pathol. 1988;17:32-33.
 325. Morgan RV. Blood dyscrasias associated with testiculartumors in the dog. JAm Anim
 sabueya lenbojoieway wai-buon 'le ia 7n uasjapad 33 jabieds d lapue 26z
Hosp Assoc. 1982;18:970-975.
cats experimentally infeted with feline immunodeficiency virus (FV). Comp Haemato!
326. Morley A. Stohlman F. Cyclophospharide-induced cyclical neutropenia: an animal
Int 1992;2:8-17.
model of human periodic disease. N Engi J Med. 1970;12:643-646.
 294. Marconato L, Betini G, Giacoboni C, et al. Clinicopathological features and outcome
327. Morris DD, Bloom JC, Roby KA, et al. Eosinophilic myeloproliferative disorder in a
for dogs with mast cell tumors and bone marrow involvement. J Vet lntem Med.
horse. / Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 1984;185:993-996.
2008;22:1001-1007.
328. Muhury M, Mathai AM, Rai S, et al. Megakaryocytic alterations in thrombocytopeni:
 295. Marcos R, Santos M, Malhao F, et al. Pancytopenia in a cat with visceral leishani-
a bone marrow aspiration study. Jnoian J/ Pathol AMicrobior. 2009;52:490-494.
asis. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:201-205.
329. Murtaugh RJ, Jacobs RM. Suspected irmmune-mediated megakaryocytic hypoplasia
 296. Marks SL, Moore PF. Taylor DW, et al. Nonsecretory multiple myeloma in a dog:
or aplasia in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1985;186:1313-1315.
immunohistologic and ultrastructural observations. / Vet Intem Med. 1995;9:50-54.
 330. Myers S, Wiks K, Giger U. Macrocytic anemia caused by naturally occurring folate-
297.
 Marsh JC. Bone marrow failure syndromes. Cin Med. 2005;5:332-336.
deficiency in the cat (abstract). Vet Clin Pathol. 1996;25:30.
 298. Matus RE, Leifer CE. Immunoglobulin-producing tumors. Vet Clin North Am Small
 331. Mylonakis ME, Day MJ, Siarkou V, et al. Absence of myelofibrosis in dogs with 
Anim Pract. 1985;15:741-753.
myelosuppression induced by Ehrichia canis infection. J Comp Pathol.
 Matus RE, Leifer CE, MacEwen EG. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in the dog: a review 
2010;142:328-331
of 30 cases. /Armm Vet Med Assoc. 1983;183:859-862.
 332. Mylonakis ME, Koutinas AF, Leontides LS. Bone marrow mastocytosis in dogs with
 300. Matus RE, Leifer CE, MacEwen EG, et al. Prognostic factors for multiple myeloma in
myelosuppressive monocytic ehrlichiosis (Ehrlichia canis): a retrospective study. Vet
the dog. J/ Armn Vet Med Assoc. 1986;188:1288-1292.
Clin Pathol. 2006;35:311-314.
301.
Maylin GA, Eckerlin RH, Krook L. Fluoride intoxication in dairy calves. Comell Vet.
333.
.Naessens J. Bovine trypanotolerance: a natural ability to prevent severe anaemia and
1987;77:84-98.
 302. McCandlish IAP, Munro CD, Breeze RG, et al. Hormone producing ovarian tumour in
334. Nagahata H, Kehrli ME Jr, MurataH, et al. Neutrophil function and pathologic findings
the dog. Vet Rec. 1979;105:9-11.
in Holstein calves with leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Am J Vet Res.
 303. McClure JT, Young KM, Fiste M, et al. Immunophenotypic classification of leukemia
1994;55: 40-48.
in 3 horses. J/ Vet Intem Med. 2001;15:144-152.
 335. Nagahata H, Nochi H, Tamoto K, et al. Characterization of functions of neutrophils
304. McDonough SP. Moore PF. Clinical, hematologic. and immunophenotypic
from bone marrow of cattle with leukocyte adhesion deficiency. Am J Vet Res.
characterization of canine large granular lymphocytosis. Vet Pathor. 2000;37:
1995;56:167-171
637-646.
336. Nagashima N, Hisasue M, Higashi K, et al. Bone marrow colony-forming unit assay
 305. McDonough SP. Moore PF. Clinical, hematologic. and immunophenotypic
in cats with naturally occurring myelodysplastic syndromes. int J Hematol.
characterization of canine large granular lymphocytosis. Vet Pathoi. 2000;37:
2001;73:453-456.
637-646.
337. Naito K, Maruyama M, Dobashi K, etal. Congenital chondrodysplastic dwarfism with
 306. McGrath C. Polycythemia vera in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1974;164:1117-1122.
dyshematopoiesis in a holstein calf. / Vet Med Sci 2002;64:937-939.
 307. McManus PM. Frequency and severity of mastocytemia in dogs with and
338.NashRASchueningFAppelbaumFetal.Moleulaoning andinviealin
without mast cell tumors: 120 cases {1995-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1999:
of canine granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. Blood. 1991;78:
215:355-357.
930-937.
 308. McManus PM. Classification of myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review. Vet Clin
 339. Nash RA. Schuening FG. Seidel K, et al. Effect of recombinant canine granulocyte-
Pathol. 2005;34:189-212.
 aslauno Jae Aanoal analodoneway uo jonel bunenws-Auojn abeydoinew
 309. McManus PM, Hess RS. Myelodysplastic changes in a dog with subsequent acute
lethal total body irradiation. Blood. 1994;83:1963-1970.
myeloid leukemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 1998;27:112-115.
340. Nasisse MP, Dorman DC, Jamison KC, et al. Effects of valacyclovir in cats infected
 310. McManus PM, Litwin C, Barber L. Immune-mediated neutropenia in 2 dogs. J Vet 
with feline herpesvirus. Am J Vet Res. 1997;58:1141-1144.
Intem Med. 1999;13:372-374.
341.
-t2z986l 71a/ veg s0f o u1 sis0nadon0 99 oueely 'Nd uonen 
 311. Mears EA. Raskin RE, Legendre AM. Basophilic leukemia in a dog. J Vet lntem Med.
 342. Ndikuwera J. Smith DA. Obwolo MJ, et al. Chronic granulocytic leukaemia/
1997;11:92-94.
eosinophilic leukaemia in a dog? J/ Small Anim Pract. 1992;33:553-557.
 312. Mellor PJ, Haugland S, Murphy S, et al. Myeloma-related disorders in cats commonly 
343. Nimer SD. Myelodysplastic syndromes. Blood. 2008:;111:4841-4851.
 present as extramedullary neoplasms in contrast to myeloma in human patients: 24
344.
.O'Brien SE, Riedesel EA, Miller LD. Osteopetrosis in an adult dog. JAm Anim Hosp
cases with clinical follow-up. / Vet lntern Med. 2006;20:1376-1383.
Assoc. 1987;23:213-216.
pue 'ejwayaonsiyounww! 'sibojoyiedosiH 1e 1a 'y ynjws s puej6neh 'rd Jollan d1e
345. O'Keefe DA, Couto CG, Burke-Schwartz C, et al. Systemic mastocytosis in 16 dogs.
Aewd jo auapia jung sapiosi paeai-eoaw aual po sisjeue oos
J Vet Intern Med. 1987:1:75-80.
extramedullary development in the cat. Vet Pathol. 2008;45:159-173.
346. O'Keefe DA, Schaeffer DU. Hematologic toxicosis associated with doxorubicin admin-
314.Meer,DelaJ, Binzle D.Cinicallabratoryand histopathlgic featurf
istration in cats. / Vet Intem Med 1992;6:276-283.
equine lymphoma. Vet Patho. 2006;43:914-924.
 347. O'Toole D, Tharp S, Thomsen BV, et al. Fatal mycobacteriosis with hepatospleno-
 315. Meyers SN, McDaneld TG, Swist SL, et al. A deletion mutation in bovine SLC4A2
megaly in a young dog due to Mycobacterium avium. J Vet Diagn lnvest.
is associated with osteopetrosis in Red Angus cattle. BMC Genomics. 2010:
2005;17:200-204.
11:337.
348. Obradovich JE, Ogilvie GK, Powers BE, et al. Evaluation of recombinant canine granu-
 316. Michel RL, O'Handley P, Dade AVV. Megakaryocytic myelosis in a cat. JAm Vet Med 
locyte colony-stimulating factor as an inducer of granulopoiesis. J Vet lntem Med.
Assoc. 1976;168:1021-1025.
1991;5:75-79.
 317. Milne EM, Pyrah ITG, Smith KC, et al. Aplastic anemia in a Clydesdale foal: a case
 349. Ozon C, Marty P. Pratlong F. et al. Disseminated feline leishmaniosis due to Leish-
report. / Equine Vet Sci. 1995;15:129-131
mania infantum in Southern France. Vet Parasitol. 1998;75:273-277.
318. Mischke R, Hoinghaus R, Lutkefels E, et al. Immunocytological confirmation of bone
350. Palblad J, Papadaki HA.Chronic idiopathic neutropenias and severe ongenital
marrow metastases in a dog with cholangiocarcinoma. J Small Anim Pract.
neutropenia. Curr Opin Hematol 2008;15:B-14.
2003;44:411-414.
 351. Pardanani A, Verstovsek S. Hypereosinophilic syndrome, chronic eosinophilic leuke-
 319. Miyamoto T Horie T, Shimada T, et al. Long-term case study of myelodysplastic
mia, and mast cell disease. CancerJ. 2007;13:384-391.
syndrome in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1999;35:475-481.
352. Pardon B, Steukers L, Dierick J, et al. Haemorrhagic diathesis in neonatal calves: an
320.
Mizukoshi T, Fujino Y, Yasukawa K, et al. Essential thrombocythemmia in a dog. J Vet
emerging syndrome in Europe. Transhound Emerg Dis. 2010;57:135-146.
Med Sci. 2006;68:1203-1206.
 353. Park HM, Doster AR, Tashbaeva RE, et al. Clinical, histopathological and immunohis-
 321. Moore PF. Histiocytic proliferative diseases. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schaim's 
wbelg ta/ r bop e ui ejwaynal anselqoeyebaw jo asen e ui sbupuy lenwayao1
Veterinary Hematology, 6th ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:540-549.
Invest: 2006;18:287-291.
322.
 Moore PF, Affolter VK, Vernau WV. Canine hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma: a
 354. Parker WH, McCrea CT. Bracken (Pteris aquina)poisoning of sheep in the Noth York 
proliferative disorder of CD11d+ macrophages. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:632-645.
moors. Vet Rec. 1965;77:861-865.
323.
 Moreb J, Shemesh O, Manor C, et al. Transient methimazole-induced bone marow
355.
.Parsons JC, Bowman DD, Grieve RB. Pathological and haematological responses of
aplasia: in vitro evidence of a humoral mechanism of bone marrow suppression. Acta
cats experimentally infected with Toxocara canis larvae. Int J Parasitol.
Haematol 1983;69:127-131.
1989;19:479-488.
324
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
 356. Patel RT, Caceres A, French AF, et al. Multiple myeloma in 16 cats: a retrospective
391. Rebar AH. General responses of the bone marrow to injury. Toxicor Pathol.
study. Vet Chin Pathol. 2005;34:341-352
1993;21:118-129.
 357. Perdue BD, Collier MA, Dzata GK, et al. Multisystemic granulomatous inflammation
 392. Reiner AP, Spivak JL. Hematophagic histiocytosis. A report of 23 new patients and a
in a horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1991;198:663-664.
review of the literature. Medicine (Baltimore). 1988;67:369-388.
358.
Perkins M, Watson A. Successful reatment of hypereosinophilic syndrome in a dog.
393.P
Rinkardt NE, Kruth SA. Azathioprine-induced bone marrow toxicity in four dogs. Can
Aust Vet J. 2001;79:686-689.
Vet J. 1996;37:612-613.
 359. Perkins MC, Canfield P, Churcher RK, et al. Immune-mediated neutropenia suspected
394.P
Risti B, Flury RF, Schaffner A. Fatal hematophagic histiocytosis after granulocyte-
in five dogs. Aust Vet J. 2004;B2:52-57.
 jueubiew apej6-ybiu jof Adejaypowaya pue jonsej bupejnwgs-Auojon abeydoise
 360. Peterson JL, Couto CG. Lymphoid leukemias. In: August JR, ed. Consuitations in Feline
lymphoma. Clin Invest. 1994;72:457-461.
Internal Medicine 2. Philadelphia: WV.B. Saunders; 1994:509-513.
395.P
Robinson WF, Wilcox GE, Fowler RLP. Canine parvoviral disease: experimental repro-
361.
Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Hurvitz Al. Methimazole treatment of 262 cats with hyper-
la/ speow jo asen e woy panelos! snjoned e yr wof aaua aun jo uoanp
thyroidism. J Vet lntern Med. 1988;2:150-157.
Pathol 1980;17:589-599.
362.
Peterson ME, Randolph JF. Diagnosis of canine primary polycythemia and manage-
396.P
Roccabianca P, Vernau W, Caniatti M, et al. Feline large granular lymphocyte LGL)
ment with hydroxyurea. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1982;180:415-418.
lymphoma with secondary leukemia: primary intestinal origin with predomminance of
363.
 Phillips B. Severe, prolonged bone marrow hypoplasia secondary to the use of carbo-
a CD3/CDB(alphaMalpha) phenotype. Vet Pathol. 2006;43:15-28.
platin in an azotemmic dog. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1999;215:1250-1252.
aq snsiaa sdog moew auoq q ewoui sa po sise l laa 
364.
Piercy RJ, Swardson CJ, Hinchcliff KWV. Erythroid hypoplasia and anemia following
marrow aspiration. Ann Chin Lab Sci. 1974;4:193-197.
administration of recombinant human erythropoietin to two horses. J Am Vet Med
398.P
Rojko JL, Hartke JR, Cheney CM, et al. Cytopathic feline leukemia viruses cause 
Assoc. 1998;212: 244-247.
apoptosis in hemolymphatic cells. Prog Mor Subcell Biol. 1996;16:13-43.
 365. Plier M. Unpublished studies. 2000.
 399. Rojko JL, Olsen RG. The immunobiology of the feline leukemmia virus. Vet lmmunol
366. Pohlman LM. Basophils, mast cells, and their disorders. In: Weiss DU, Wardrop KJ,
immunopathol. 1984;6:107-165.
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames. IA: Wiley-Blackwell
400.F
awng pa 'y yiy ul uoissaiddnsojaw panpu Adenaynowaun oe leunuasoy 
2010:290-297.
Veterinary Therapy X. Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders;
 367. Pollack MJ, Flanders JA, Johnson RC. Disseminated malignant mastocytoma in a dog.
1989:494-496.
J Arm Animm Hosp Assoc. 1991;27:435-440.
 401. Rossi G. Gelain ME, Foroni S, et al. Extreme monocytosis in a dog with chronic
368.
Pollet L, Van Hove V, Mattheeuws D. Blastic crisis in chronic myelogenous leukaemia
monocytic leukaemia. Vet Rec. 2009;165:54-56.
in a dog. / Small Anim Pract. 1978;19:469-475.
 369. Postorino NC, Wheeler SL, Park RD, et al. A syndrome resembling lymphomatoid
treated with griseofulvin. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1991;198:429-431.
 granulomatosis in the dog. / Vet Intem Med. 1989;3:15-19.
 403. Ruslander DA. Gebhard DH, Tompkins MB, et al. Immunophenotypic characterization 
370.
Potgieter LN, Jones JB, Patton CS, et al. Experimental parvovirus infection in dogs.
of canine lymphoproliferative disorders. in Vivo. 1997;11:169-172.
Can / Comp Med. 1981;45:212-216.
404. Russell KE, Sellon DC, Grindem CB. Bone marrow in horses: indications, sample
 371. Powers BE, LaRue SM, W/ithrow SJ, et al. Jamshidi needle biopsy for diagnosis of
bone lesions in small animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;193:205-210.
405. Sahebekhtiari HA, Tavassoli M. Marrow cell uptake by megakaryocytes in routine
 372. Prasse KV, Crouser D, Beutler E, et al. Pyruvate kinase deficiency anemia with
bone marrow smears during blood loss. Scand / Haematol. 1976;16:13-17.
terminal myelofibrosis and osteosclerosis in a beagle. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
406. Sakai N, Johnstone C, Weiss L. Bone marrow cells associated with heightened 
1975;166:1170-1175.
eosinophilopoiesis: an electron microscope study of murine bone marrow stimulated
 373. Prater MR, De Gopegui RR, Burdette K, et al. Bone marrow aspirate from a cat with
by Ascaris suum. Am J/ Anat. 1981;161:11-32.
cutaneous lesions. Vet Clin Pathol 1999;28:52-58.
407. Savage CJ. Lymphoproliferative and myeloproliferative disorders. Vet Clin Noth Am
 374. Prihirunkit K, Narkkong NA. Apibal S. Acute monoblastic leukemia in a FeLV-positive
Equine Pract. 1998;14:563-578.
cat. / Vet Sci. 2008;9:109-111.
408. Sawada K, Hirokawa M, Fujishima N. Diagnosis and management of acquired pure 
 375. Pusterla N, Stacy BA. Vernau W, et al. Immunoglobulin A monoclonal gammopathy
red cell aplasia. Hematol Oncol Chin North Am. 2009;23:249-259.
in two horses with multiple myeloma. Vet Rec. 2004;155:19-23.
409. Schalm OV. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia in the dog. Can Pract. 1975;2:37-45.
376.
Jaodxa away uewny e po uoenynuapl 'le ia 'ln uonbuujo 'z bues '9r Aajbino 
410. Schalm OW. Erythrocyte macrocytosis in miniature and toy poodles. Can Pract.
that is essential for erythropoiesis. Cel. 2004;118:757-766.
1976;3(6):55-57.
377. Rakich PM, Latimer KS, Weiss R, et al. Mucocutaneous plasmacytomas in dogs: 75
411. Schmitz LL, McClure JS, Litz CE, et al. Morphologic and quantitative changes in
cases {1980-19871. / Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1989;194:803-810.
blood and marrow cells following growth factor therapy. Am J Clin Pathol.
378.
 Ramaiah SK, Seguin MA, Carwile HF, et al. Biclonal gammopathy associated with
1994;101:67-75.
immunoglobulin A in a dog with multiple myeloma. Vet Clin Pathol. 2002;31:83-89.
 412. Scott MA, Friedrichs KR. Megakaryocyte podography. Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:135.
379.F
Randolph JF, Center SA, Kalfelz FA, et al. Familial nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia
 413. Scott RE, Dale DC, Rosenthal AS, et al. Cyclic neutropenia in grey collie dogs.
in poodles. Arm / Vet Res. 1986;47:687-695.
rsanor qer sisalodonnuein donau pewouge jo anuapina lenngannsein
380.
Raskin RE. Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small
1973;28:514-525.
Anim Pract. 1996;26:1023-1042.
414. Scruggs DV, Flemming SA, Maslin WR, et al. Osteopetrosis, anemia, thrombocytope-
381.
a sa dess 
nia, and marrow necrosis in beef calves naturally infected with bovine virus diarrhea
Hematology, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:1141-1156.
virus. / Vet Diagn lnvest. 1995;7:555-559.
382.
Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Myelodysplastic changes in a cat with myelomonocytic leu-
415. Scruggs DV, Fleming SA, Maslin WR,et al. Osteopetrosis, anemia, thrombocytopenia.
kemia. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1985;187:171-174.
and marrow necrosis in beef calves naturally infected with bovine virus diarrhea virus.
 383. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Histopathology of canine bone marrow in malignant lympho-
/ Vet Diagn invest 1995;7:555-559.
 proliferative disorders. Vet Pathol 1988;25:83-88.
 416. Searcy GP. Tasker JB, Miller DR. Animal model: pyruvate kinase deficiency in dogs.
 384. Raskin RE, Krehbiel JD. Prevalence of leukemic blood and bone marrow in dogs with
Arm / Physiol. 1979;94:689-692.
multicentric lymphoma. JAr Vet MMed Assoc. 1989;194:1427-1429.
 417. Seed TM, Carnes BA, Tolle DV, et al. Blood responses under chronic low daily dose
 385. Raskind WH, Steinmann L, Najfeld V. Clonal development of myeloproliferative dis-
shp e pae sasdsa ead euae e
orders: clues to hematopoietic differentiation and multistep pathogenesis of cancer.
progression to either aplastic anemia or myeloproliferative disease. Leuk Res.
Leukemia. 1998;12:108-116.
1989;13:1069-1084.
386. Rawlings CA. Clinical laboratory evaluations of seven heartworm infected beagles:
418. Seed TM, Kaspar LV. Changing patterns of radiosensitivity of hematopoietic progeni-
during disease development and following treatment. Comell Vet 1982:72:49-56.
-oidojaw on jo ejwaue asede ot jaupia auojd sbop paeipei Ajeuoys wo siot
 387. Raza A, Mundle S, Iftikhar A, et al. Simultaneous assessment of cell kinetics and
liferative disease. Leuk Res. 1990;14:299-307.
 programmed cell death in bone marrow biopsies of myelodysplastics reveals exten-
 419. Seelig DM, Perry JA, Avery AC, et al. Monoclonal gammopathy without hyperglobu-
sive apoptosis as the probable basis for ineffective hematopoiesis. Arm / Hematol.
linemia in 2 dogs with IgA secretory neoplasms. Vet Clin Pathol. 2010;39:447-453.
1995;48:143-154.
420. Sharifi H, Nassiri SM, Esmaelli H, et al. Eosinophiic lekaemiaina cat. JFelne Med
388. Reagan WJ. A review of myelofibrosis in dogs. Toxicol Pathol. 1993;21:164-169.
Surg. 2007;9:514-517.
389. Reagan WJ, Murphy D, Battaglino M, et al. Antibodiesto canine granulocyte colony-
421. Sharkey LC, Rosol IJ, Grone A, et al. Production of granulocyte colony-stimulating
stimulating factor induce persistent neutropenia. Vet Pathol. 1995;32:374-378.
e U! sewouiajen Aq Jojey buejnwps-Auojon abeydojnew-apaojnuei pue jorsey
 390. Reardon MJ, Pierce KR.Acute experimental canine ehrlichiosis.l. Sequential reaction
dog and a cat with paraneoplastic leukocytosis. J Vet lntem Med. 1996;10:
of the hemic and lymphoreticular systems. Vet Pathol. 1981;18:48-61.
405-408.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
325
422. Sheikh J, Weller PF. Clinical overview of hypereosinophilic syndromes. Jmmunoy
452. Swenson CL, Carothers MA, Wellman ML, et al. Eosinophilic leukemia in a cat with 
Allergy Chin North Am. 2007;27:333-355.
naturally acquired feline leukemia virus infection. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
9-60886l 2a n p ug dwog eadd auuen po sanen s Aus 2t
1993;29:467-501.
 424. Shelton GH, Grant CK, Linenberger ML, et al. Severe neutropenia associated with
 453. Swenson CL, Kociba GJ, O'Keefe DA, et al. Cyclic hematopoiesis associated with
 griseofulvin therapy in cats with feline immunodeficiency virus infection. J/ Vet lntem
feline leukemia virus infection in two cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1987;191:93-96.
Med. 1990;4:317-319.
454. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harrs NL, et al. WHO Classification of Tumours of Haema-
 425. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML, Abkowitz JL. Hematologic abnormalities in cats
uo yaeasay jo Auabt leuogeusaul auey vof7 sanssf proyou pue sgaod
seropositive for feline immunodeficiency virus. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
Cancer; 2008.
1991;199:1353-1357.
455. Sykes JE, Weiss DJ, Buoen LC, et al. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome in 3
 426. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML, Grant CK, et al. Hematologic manifestations of feline
Rottweilers. / Vet Intem Med. 2001;15:162-166.
immunodeficiency virus infection. Blood. 1990;76:1104-1109.
 456. Takahashi T, Kadosawa T, Nagase M, et al. Visceral mast cel tumors in dogs: 10
427.
 Sherding RG, Wilson GP, Kociba GJ. Bone marrow hypoplasia in eight dogs with 
cases {1982-1997). J Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 2000;216:222-226.
Sertoli cell tumor. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1981;178:497-501.
 457. Takayama H, Gejima S. Honma A, et al. Acute myeloblastic leukaemia in a cow.
428. Sheridan WvP, Hunt P, Simonet S, et al. Hematologic effets of cytokines. In: Rermick
J Comp Pathol. 1996;115:95-101.
DG Friedland JS, eds. Cytokines in Health and Disease, 2nd ed. New York: Marcel
 458. Takeuchi Y, lizuka H, Kanemitsu H, et al. Myeloma-related disorder with leukaemic 
Dekker Inc.: 1997:487-505.
progression in a cat. / Feline Med Surg. 2010;12:982-987.
429.S
she3 unn uo Apnns lenibojonewau f le 1a '1 enusen 'N ebeueus '1 epowjus 
459. Takeuchi Y, Matsuura S, Fujino Y, et al. Hypereosinophilic syndrome in two cats.
with myelodysplastic syndrome. J/ Vet Med Sci 2000;62:59-64.
J Vet Med Sci 2008;70:1085-1089.
 430. Shimoda T, Shiranaga N, Mashita T, et al. Bone marrow necrosis in a cat infected
- u saan Lsiln aao usu I en ' az  eel 0
with feline leukemia virus. / Vet Med Sci. 2000;62:113-115.
induced megakaryocytic emperipolesis in the rat bone marow. Vet Pathorl.
431.S
 Simpson CF, Harvey JVV, Lawman MJ, et al. Ultrastructure of schizonts in the
1997;34:463-466.
liver of cats with experimentally induced cytauxzoonosis. Am J Vet Res.
461. 
i eiwaxnal snouabojaw suonua jo sisoubelo 'le ia 'ir anig '1 loyois nr sueel 
1985;46:384-390.
a dog using morphologic, cytochemical, and flow cytometric techniques. Vet Cin
432. Sippel WVL. Bracken fern poisoning. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1952;121:9-13.
Pathol. 2001;30:19-24.
 433. Smith AN, Spencer JA, Stringfellow JS, et al. Disseminated infection with Phiasemo-
 462. Tasca S. Carli E. Caldin M, et al. Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytometric
nium obovatum in a German Shepherd dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2000;216:
immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic neoplasia: 210 cases {2002-
708-712.
2006). Vet Clin Pathol. 2009;38:2-12.
463. Tavassoli M. Modulationof megakaryocyte emperipolesis by phlebotomy: megakaryo-
1989;100:97-101.
cytes as a component of marrow-blood barrier. Blood Celis. 1986;12:205-216.
 435. Smith JE, Agar NS. The effect of phlebotomy on canine erythrocyte metabolism. Res
Jo uoaldap anssh pue sisalodoua ssegojeban os uassnwsey 'ns uauaul t9t
Vet Sci. 1975;18:231-236.
folic acid in the cat. Am / Vet Res. 1978;39:1205-1207.
436. Snyder LA. Acute myeloid leukemia. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's Veteri-
 465. Thompson JP, Christopher MM, Elison GV, et al. Paraneoplastic leukocytosis associ-
nary Hematology, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:475-482.
ated with a rectal adenomatous polyp in a dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc.
437.S
 Sockett DC, Traub Dargatz J, Weiser MG. Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia and
1992;201:737-738.
thrombocytopenia in a foal. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1987;190:308-310.
aad saaoeebaow bue ie a i paas s uan 'a allol 9
Y :sbop ui AaiaixonojaAw panpui-uabons3 1e 1a '0 eunl '8 njAaznyoo '8H senuos 8gt
leukemia in three dogs exposed to 2.5 R/day gamma radiation. Vet Pathorl.
review. Can Vet J. 2009;50:1054-1058.
1983;20:111-114.
439.
 Sparkes AH, Hopper CD, Millard WG, et al. Feline immunodeficiency virus infection.
 467. Tompkins MB, Novotney C, Grindem CB, et al. Human recombinant interleukin-2
pa wau ia r sasen bunno Aenneu o6 u! sbupuy ajboounedou
induces maturation and activation signals for feline eosinophils in vivo. J Leukoc Bio.
1993;7:85-90.
1990;48:531-540.
440. Stahl CP. Zucker Franklin D. Evatt BL, et al. Effects of human interleukin-6 on
468. Toribio RE, Bain FT, Mrad DR, et al. Congenital defects in newborn foals of mares
megakaryocyte development and thrombocrytopoiesis in primates. Blood.
treated for equine protozoal myeloencephalitis during pregnancy. J Am Vet Med
1991;78:1467-1475.
Assoc. 1998;212:697-701.
441. Steffen DJ, Elliott GS, Leipold HV, et al. Congenital dyserythropoiesis and progres-
sive alopecia in Polled Hereford calves: hematologic, biochemical, bone marrow
plasma from foals infected with equine infectious anemia virus. Blood. 1997;90:
cytologic, electrophoretic. and flow cytometric findings. J Vet Diagn lnvest.
2357-2363.
1992;4:31-37.
470. Toth SR, Nash AS, McEwan AM, et al. Chronic eosinophilic leukaemia in blast crises
 442. Stenberg PE, McDonald TP, Jackson CV. Disruption of microtubules in vivo by
in a cat negative for feline leukaemia virus. Vet Rec. 1985;117:471-472.
vincristine induces large membrane complexes and other cytoplasmic abnormalities
U sbuipu lenbojoiewau pue jenbojuiedosh 0 aer 3o suouo s ynl lt
 in megakaryocytes and platelets of normal rats like those in human and Wistar
myeloid leukemia induced by a new feline leukemia virus isolate. Vet Pathor.
1986;23:462-470.
86-102.
 443. Stockham SL, Ford RB, WVeiss DU. Canine autoimmune hemolytic disease with delayed
 of the colon and rectum in a dog. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:406-409.
 473. Tristano AG. Acquired amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenic purpura: review of a not 
-aui paneunwassp yi awoupus aobeydowaeh rd lapuaddeis ' sneuions tht
very well-defined disorder. Eur J/ Intem /Med. 2005;1 6:477-481.
vascular coagulation in a dog. J Small Animm Pract. 1998;39:203-206.
 474. Tristano AG. Macrophage activation syndrome: a frequent but under-diagnosed
 445. Stokol T. Essential thrombocythemia and reactive thrombocytosis. In: Weiss DJ,
complication associated with rheumatic diseases. Med Sci Monit. 2008;14:
Wardrop KJ, eds. Schaim's Veterinary Hematology, Bthed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell;:
RA27-RA36.
2010:605-611.
475. Trowald-Wigh G, Hakansson L, Johannisson A, et al. Leucocyte adhesion protein 
446. Stokol T, Blue JT. Pure red cellaplasia in cats: 9 cases ↑1989-1997]. JAm Vet Med
AssOc. 1999;214:75-79.
476. Ulich TR, Del Castillo J, Yin S, et al. The erythropoietic effets of interleukin B and 
447. Stokol T, Blue JT, French TV. Idiopathic pure red cell aplasia and nonregenerative
erythropoietin in vivo. Exp Hematol. 1991;19:29-34.
immune-mediated anemmia in dogs: 43 cases {1988-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc.
477. Ulich TR, del Castillo J, Busser K, et al. Acute in vivo effects of IL-3 alone and in
2000;216:1429-1436.
combination with IL-6 on the blood cells of the circulation and bone marrow. Am J
 448. Stokol T, Randolph JF, Nachbar S, et al. Development of bone marrow toxicosis after
Pathol. 1989;135:663-670.
albendazole administration in a dog and cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1997;210:
478. Vail DM. Plasma cell neoplasms. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG, eds. Small Animal
1753-1756.
Clinical Oncology. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.: 1996:509-520.
 449. Strafuss AC, Sautter JH. Clinical and general pathologic findings of aplastic anemia
479. Valli VE. Veterinary Comparative Hematopathology. Ames, IA; Blackwell Publishing:
associated with S-dichlorovinyl)-L-cysteine in calves. Am J Vet Res. 1967;28:
2007.
25-37.
480. Valli VE. Myint MS. Barthel A. et al. Clasification of canine malignant 
ym bop pazuwat e uieiseldoday moew auog ie ia rg anes 'os neg 'rdy ssans 0
lymphomas according to the World Health Organization criteria. Vet Pathol. 2011:48:
an interstitial cell tumor. J Am Vet //ed Assoc. 1992; 200:1346-1348
198-211.
451. Suter SE, Vernau V, Fry MM, et al. CD34+, CD41+ acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
 481. van den Hoven R, Franken P. Clinical aspects oflymphosarcoma in the horse: a clinical
in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 2007;36:288-292.
report of 16 cases. Equine Vet J. 1983;15:49-53.
326
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
482. Vande Berg BC, Malghem J, Lecouvet FE, et al. Distribution of serouslike bone marrow
 515. Weiss DJ. Drug-induced blood cell disorders. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
 changes in the lower limbs of patients with anorexia nevosa: predominant involve-
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell 2010:98-105.
ment of the distal extremities. AJR Amm J Roentgenol. 1996;166:621-625.
 516. Weiss DJ. Myelodysplastic syndromes. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds. Schalm's
483.
Vargo CL, Taylor SM, Haines DM. Immune mediated neutropenia and thrombocyto-
Veterinary ematorogy, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:467-474.
 penia in 3 giant schnauzers. Can Vet J. 2007;48:1159-1163.
517.V
Weiss DJ. Myelonecrosis and acute inflammation. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
484. Vernau W, Jacobs RM, Valli VEO, et al. The immunophenotypic characterization of
Schalm's Veterinary Hematoogy, Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell 2010:106-111.
 bovine lymphomas. Vet Pathol. 1997;34:222-225.
 518. Weiss DJ, Aird B. Cytologic evaluation of primary and secondary myelodysplastic
485.
Vernau WV, Moore PF. An inmunophenotypic study of canine leukemias and prelimi-
syndromes in the dog. Vet Cin Pathol. 2001;30:67-75.
nary assessment of clonality by polymerase chain reaction. Vet lmmunol Immuno-
519. Weiss DJ, Armstrong PJ. Secondary myelofibrosis inthree dogs. JAm VetMed Assoc.
pathol. 1999;69:145-164.
1985;187:423-425
486.
Vernau W, Valli VEO, Dukes TV, et al. Classifiation of 1,198 cases of bovine 
 520. Weiss DJ, Armstrong PJ, Reimann K. Bone marrow necrosis in the dog. J Am Vet
lymphoma using the National Cancer Institute Working Formulation for human
ed Assoc. 1985;187:54-59.
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Vet Pathol 1992;29:183-195.
 521. Weiss DJ, Christopher MM. Idiopathic aplastic anemia in a dog. Vet Cin Pathol.
487. Viliers E, Baines S, Law AM, et al. Identification of acute myeloid leukemia in dogs
1985;14/2):23-25.
using flow cytometry with myeloperoxidase, MAC387, and a canine neutrophil-
 522. Weiss DJ, Evanson OA. A retrospective study of feline pancytopenia. Comp Haemato!
specific antibody. Vet Cin Pathol. 2006;35:55-71.
Jnt. 2000;10:50-55.
488.
-yojaAw auuen po sasen uanas jo saneat lenbojouiedoguo 'yr uung 'r3 sJa
 523. Weiss DJ, Evanson OA, Sykes J. A retrospective study of canine pancytopenia. Vet
brosis and the posible relationship between the histological findings and prognosis.
Clhin Pahol. 1999;28:83-88.
Vet Rec. 1999:145:222-228.
 524. Weiss DJ, Greig B. Aird B, et al. Inflammatory disorders of bone marrow. Vet Clin
489. Walker D, Cowell RL, Clinkenbeard KD, et al. Bone marrow mast cell hyperplasia in
Pathol. 1992;21:79-84.
dogs with aplastic anemia. Vet Clin Pathol. 1997;26:106-111.
 525. Weiss DJ, Henson M. Pure white cell aplasia in a dog. Vet Cin Pathol
490.
Walsh KM, Losco PE. Canine mycobacteriosis: a case report. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc.
2007;36:373-375.
1984;20:295-299.
526. Weiss DJ, Henson M. Pure white cell aplasia in a dog. Vet Cin Pathol
491.
Walton RM, Modiano JF, Thrall MA, et al. Bone marow cytological findings in 4 dogs
2007;36:373-375.
and a cat with hemophagocytic syndrome. J/ Vet lntem Med. 1996;10:7-14.
 527. Weiss DJ, Klausner JS. Drug-associated aplastic anemia in dogs: eight cases ↑1984-
492.
Wang Fl, Liang SL, Eng HL, et al. Disseminated liposarcoma in a dog. / Vet Diagn
1988). J/Amm Vet /Med Assoc. 1990;196:472-475.
nvest. 2005;17:291-294.
 528. Weiss DJ, Lulich J. Myelodysplastic syndrome with sideroblastic differentiation in a
493. Ward MV, Mountan PC, Dodds WJ. Severe idiopathic refractory anemmia and leuko-
dog. Vet Clin Pathol. 1999;28:59-63.
 penia in a horse. Calif Vet. 1980;12:19-22.
 529. Weiss DJ, Miller DC. Bone marrow nerosis associated with pancytopeniain a cow.
494.
Waters DJ, Prueter JC. Secondary polycythemia associated with renal disease in the
Vet Pathol 1985;22:90-92.
dog: two case reports and review of literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
530. Weiss DJ, Raskin RE, Zerbe C. Myelodysplastic syndrome in two dogs. JAm VetMed
1988;24:109-114.
Assoc. 1985;187:1038-1040.
495.
Watson AD. Chloramphenicol toxicity in dogs. Res Vet Sci. 1977;23:66-69.
531.1
Weiss DJ, Reidarson TH. Ildiopathic dyserythropoiesis in a dog. Vet Cin Pathol.
496. Watson AD. Further obsevations on chloramphenicol toxicosis in cats. Am / VetRes.
1989;18:43-46.
1980:41:293-294.
532. Weiss RC, Cox NR. Boudreaux MK. Toxicologic effects of ribavirin in cats. J Vet
497.
Watson AD, Middleton DJ. Chloramphenicol toxicosis in cats. Am J Vet Res.
Phanmacol Ther 1993;16:301-316.
1978;39:1199-1203.
533. Wellman ML. Lymphopraliferative disorders of large granular lymphocytes. Lake
498. Watson AD, Wilson JT, Turner DM, et al. Phenylbutazone-induced blood dyscrasias 
 Buena Vista, FL: Proc 15th ACVIM Forum; 1997:20-21.
suspected in three dogs. Vet Rec. 1980;107:239-241.
534. Wellman ML, Couto CG, Starkey RJ, et al. Lymphocytosis of large granular lympho-
499.
Weiss DJ. Antibody-mediated suppression of erythropoiesis in dogs with red blood
cytes in three dogs. Vet Pathol 1989;26:158-163.
cell aplasia. Amm J Vet Res. 1986;47:2646-2648.
 535. Wellman ML, Hammer AS, DiBartola SP, et al. Lymphoma involving large granula
500.
Weiss DJ. Histopathology of canine nonneoplastic bone marrow. Vet Clin Pathol.
lymphocytes in cats:
:11cases f1982-1991l.J Am Vet MedAssoc.
1986;15/2):7-11
1992;201:1265-1269.
501.
Weiss DJ. Leukocyte response to toxic injury. Toxicot Pathol. 1993;21:135-140.
 536. Whyte MP. Skeletal disorders characterized by osteosclerosis or hyperostosis. In:
 502. Weiss DJ. Selective dysmegakaryopoiesis in thrombocytopenic dogs {1996-2002)
Avioli LV, Krane SM, eds. Metabolic Bone Disease and Clinicaly Related Disorders,
Comp Clin Pathol. 2004;13:24-28.
3rd ed. San Diego, CA: Acadermic Press; 1998:697-738.
503.
Weiss DJ. Bone marrow necrosis in dogs: 34 cases {1996-2004). JArm VetMed Assoc.
537. Wiliams DA, Maggio Price L. Canine idiopathic thrombocytopenia: clinical observa-
2005;227:263-267
tions and long-term follow-up in 54 cases. JAm Vet Med Assoc. 1984;185:660-663.
 504. Weiss DJ. Differentiating benign and malignant causes of lymphocytosis in feline
538. Wilson SC, Thomson-Kerr K, Houston DM. Hypereosinophilic syndrome in a cat. Can
bone marrow. / Vet intem Aed. 2005;19:855-859.
Vet J. 1996;37:679-680.
505.
Weiss DU. Recognition and classification of dysmyelopoiesis in the dog: a review.
539. Woda BA. Sullian JL. Reactive histiocytic disorders. Am J Clin Pathol.
J Vet Intem MMed. 2005;19:147-154
1993;99:459-463.
 506. Weiss DJ. Sideroblastic anemia in 7 dogs f1996-2002). J Vet intem Med.
 540. Wods PR, CampbellG, Cowell RL. Nonregenerative anaemia associated with admin-
2005;19:325-328.
istration of recombinant human erythropoietin to a thoroughbred racehorse. Equine
507.
Weiss Du. A retrospective study of the incidence and classification of bone marrow
Vet J. 1997;29:326-328.
disorders in cats {1996-2004). Comp Chin Pathol 2006;14:179-185.
 541. Woods PR, Gossett RE, Jain NC, et al. Acute myelomonocytic leukemia in a calf.
 508. Weiss DJ. A retrospective study of the incidence and the classification of bone
J Amm Vet Med Assoc. 1993;203:1579-1582.
marrow disorders in the dog at a veterinary teaching hospital {1996-2004). / Vet lntem
 542. Workman HC. Vernau W. Chronic lymphocytic leukemmia in dogs and cats: the veteri-
Med. 2006;20:955-961.
nary perspective. Vet Chin North Am SmallAnim Pract. 2003;33:1379-1399.
509.
Weiss DU. Evaluation of dysmyelopoiesis in cats: 34 cases ↑1996-2005). J Am Vet
Aeinpawenxa jeno auuen iol enep lens r lisuen sy shano 'z au 2t9
Med Assoc. 2006;228:893-897.
plasmacytomas: a retrospective analysis f1996-2006). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
510.
Weiss DJ. Feline myelonecrosis and myelofibrosis: 22 cases {1996-2006). Comp Cin
2008;44:75-81.
Pathol. 2007;16:181-185.
544. Wykes PM, Withrow SJ, Powers BE, et al. Closed biopsy for diagnosis of long bone 
 511. Weiss DJ. Hemophagocytic syndrome in dogs: 24 cases {1996-2005). J Am Vet Med
tumors: accuracy and results. J/ Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1985;21:489-494.
Assoc. 2007;230: 697-701.
 545. Yamada O, Tamura K, Yagihara H, et al. Light-chain multiple myeloma in a cat. J Vet 
512. Weiss DJ. Bone marrow pathology in dogs and cats with non-regenerative imune-
Diagn lnvest. 2007;19:443-447.
mediated haemolytic anaemia and pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Pathol.
546. Yang Z Philips JD, Doty RT, et al. Kinetics and specificity of feline leukemia virus
2008;138:46-53.
subgroup C receptor (FLVCR) export function and its dependence on hemopexin. JBiol
 513. Weiss DU. Chronic inflammation and secondary myelofibrosis.In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop
Chenm. 2010;285:28874-28882.
KJ, eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames, IA: Wiley-Blackwell
 547. Yoshida Y, Oguma S, Uchino H, et al. Refractory myelodysplastic anaemias with
2010:112-117.
hypocellular bone marrow. J Clin Pathol. 1988:41:763-767.
514. Weiss DJ. Congenital dyserythropoiesis. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ, eds.
 548. Young KM, MacEwen EG. Canine myeloproliferative disorders and malignant 
Schalm's Veterinary Hematology. Bth ed. Ames. IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010:
histiocytosis. In: Withrow SJ, MacEwen EG. eds. Small Animal Clinical Oncology.
196-198.
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Co.: 1996:495-509.
CHA PTER 9 = Disorders of Bone Marrow
327
 549. Young KM, Meadows RL. Eosinophils and their disorders. In: Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ,
 552. Zini E, Hauser B, Meli ML, et al. Immune-mediated erythroid and megakaryocytic 
eds. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Bth ed. Armes, IA: Wiley-Blackwell; 2010,
aplasia in a cat. J/ Am Vet Med Assoc. 2007;230:1024-1027.
550.
Young NS, Calado RT, Scheinberg P. Current concepts in the pathophysiology and
 553. Zinkl JG, Cain G, Jain NC, et al. Haematological response of dogs to canine recom-
treatment of aplastic anemia. Blood. 2006;108:2509-2519.
binant granulocyte colony stimulating factor frcG-CSF). Comp Haematol Int.
551.Z
 Zaucha JA, Yu C, Lothrop CDJ, et al. Severe canine hereditary hemolytic anemia
1992;2:151-156.
treated by nonmyeloablative marrow transplantation. Bio Blood Maow Transplant.
 554. Zinkl JG, LeCouteur RA, Davis DC, et al. “Flaming" plasma cells in a dog with lgA
2001;7:14-24.
multiple myeloma. Vet Clin Pathol. 1983;12(3):15-19.
APPENDI
X
TABLES
 Example of Bone Marrow Evaluation and Interpretation
Evaluation of Bone Marrow Aspirate Smear
Table 1. Reference Intervals for Hematology Values in
13% Immature myeloid
4% Immature erythroid
Domestic Animals
cellsa
cellsb
Table 2. Variations in Reference Intervals for Hematology
63% Mature myeloid cells
13% Mature erythroid cells
Values by Age: Beagle Dogs, 3 to 14 Years Old
 1% Eosinophilic cells
4% Lymphocytes
 Table 3. Erythrocyte Changes during Pregnancy in Beagles,
<1% Monocytoid cells
<1% Plasma cells
 Brittany Spaniels, and Labrador Retrievers
M:E ratio = 4.5
Table 4. Hematology Values for Growing Healthy Beagle
 Dogs from Birth to 8 Weeks of Age
 Multiple particles were present and their cellularity appeared
Table 5. Hematology Values for Growing Healthy Kittens
to be increased. Megakaryocyte number appeared normal,
from Birth to 17 Weeks of Age
and most were mature. The myeloid series was left-shifted,
Table 6. Erythrograms of Foals up to 1 Year of Age
with a depletion of mature neutrophils. The erythroid series
Table 7. Leukograms of Foals up to 1 Year of Age
was complete, with orderly maturation, but a decreased
amount of polychromasia was present. Lymphocytes,
plasma cells, and macrophages were present in normal
EXAMPLE OF BONE MARROW
numbers. Hemosiderin was not observed, but this is a
EVALUATION AND
normal finding in cats. Erythrophagocytosis and leuko-
INTERPRETATION
 phagocytosis were rarely observed.
Interpretation: Granulocytic hyperplasia with abnormal
Patient: A 9-year-old castrated male mixed-breed cat.
maturation.
History: Decreased appetite, lethargy, and weight loss were
 Comment: An increased M:E ratio in a severely leukopenic,
recognized 2 weeks ago. The referring veterinarian diag-
 mildly anemic animal with hypercellular marrow and dis-
ordered myeloid maturation is most likely secondary to
nosed severe periodontal disease. Four teeth were pulled
 and antibiotic therapy was initiated. The animal had inter-
FIV infection in this cat. This pattern could also be detected
mittent fever, exhibited variable anorexia, became dehy-
-o rass rae srd rr e np ai
 drated, and was referred to the University of Florida Small
cytic depletion, although this is less likely based on the
history. If the animal is in a recovery phase from neutro-
Animal Hospital for evaluation.
Clinical Findings: The cat was lethargic, slightly dehydrated,
 penia, the leukocyte count should increase in the peripheral
blood within a few days.
and thin, with a dry hair coat. The gums were hyperemic
in association with continuing periodontal disease.
s  o  
included a hematocrit of 27% and total leukocyte count of
1300/μL, most of which were lymphocytes. Platelets were
not counted but numbers appeared normal during stained
"Immature myeloid cells include myeloblasts and promyelocytes. Mature
blood flm examination. Erythrocyte morphology was
myeloid cells include neutrophilic myelocytes, neutrophilic metamyelocytes,
normal. Urinalysis and clinical chemistry values were
neutrophilic bands, and mature neutrophils.
Immature erythroid cells include rubriblasts and prorubricytes.Mature ery
within normal limits. The FeLV test was negative but the
throid cells include basophilic rubricytes, polychromatophilic rubricytes, and
 FIV test was positive.
me tarubricytes.
328
APPENDIX I · Tables
329
TABLE
7
Dogsa
Cats?
Horsesa
Cowsb
Pigs
Goats
Test
Units
(N= 130)
(N = 45)
(N = 70)
(58)
[66)
(NR)
Hematocrit
%
40-56
34-51
30-44
22-32
34-44
22-38
RBC
×10%/μL
5.7-8.3
7.4-10.4
6.6-11.0
5.1-7.6
6.4-8.4
8.0-18.0
Hemoglobin
7p/6
14-20
11-16 
11-16 
8-12
10-14
8-12
MCV
fL
64-74
42-52
38-51
38-50
49-59
16-25
MCH
P9
22-26
13-17
13-19
14-18
NR
5.2-8.0
MCHC
7P/6
33-38
30-33
35-39
36-39
29-33
30-36
RDW
(%]
11-14
13-16
16-21
16-20
15-24
NR
Reticulocytes
×103/μL
8-65
8-57
0
0
NR
0
 Platelets
×103/μL
134-396
160-502
100-308
193-637
211-887
300-600
MPV
fL
10-15
10-22
5.9-9.9
4.5-7.5
NR
NR
Icterus index
Units
5
5
5-20
2-15
5
2-5
 Plasma protein?
7p/6
6.0-8.0
6.2-8.0
6.0-8.0
7.0-8.5
6.0-8.0
6.0-7.5
Fibrinogene
7p/6u
100-400
100-300
100-400
300-700
100-500
100-400
Total leukocytes
×102/μL
5.0-13.0
5.4-15.4
5.6-11.6
4.9-12.0
15.6-38.9
4.0-13.0
x103/μL
0-0.3
0-0.3
0-0.1
Rare
NR
Rare
 Neutrophils
×103/μL
2.7-8.9
2.3-9.8
2.6-6.7
1.8-6.3
3.0-17.4
1.2-7.2
Lymphocytes
×102/μL
0.9-3.4
0.9-5.5
1.1-5.7
1.6-5.6
7.7-20.4
2.0-9.0
Monocytes
×103/μL
0.1-0.8
0-0.8
0-0.7
0-0.8
0.6-3.4
0-0.6
 Eosinophils
×10/μL
0.1-1.3
0-1.8
0-0.6
0-0.9
0.1-2.3
0.1-0.7
Basophils
×103/μL
0-0.1
0-0.2
0-0.2
0-0.3
0.1-0.3
0-0.1
 RBC, red blood cell count; MCV, mean cell volume; MCH, mean cell hemoglobin; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration; RDvW, red blood cell distibution
width; MPv, me an platelet volume; NR, not reported.
Data from adult dogs, cats, and horses were determined at the University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine. Total leukocyte counts, erythrocyte param-
eters, and platelet values were measured from healthy adult animals of both sexes and various breeds using an Advia 120 hematology analyzer. Greyhounds
and other sighthounds were excluded. Thoroughbred and quarter horses in equal numbers accounted for about 90% of the hot-blooded horses studied. Reticu-
locyte counts represent the minimum and maximum values measured from 58 dogs and 41 cats. The Advia 120 counts primarily aggregate reticulocytes in cats.
These automated platelet counts are lower than reference values reported for manual platelet counts in dogs (200-500 × 10°/μl) and cats (300-800 × 10/μl).
Leukocyte differential counts were performed manually by classifying 200 leukocytes in each stained blood film.
Measurements from bovine leukemia virus-negative adult dairy cows in mid-lactation were performed using an Advia 120 hematology analyzer and manual
differential leukocyte counts. (From George JV, Snipes J, Lane VM. Comparison of bovine hematology reference intervals from 1957 to 2006. Vet Clin Pathol.
2010;39:138-148.)
Measurements from crossbred grower pigs weighing between 30 and 50 kg were performed using an Advia 2120 hematology analyzer. (From Klem TB, Bleken E.
 Morberg H, Thoresen Sl, Framstad T. Hematologic and biochemical reference intervals for Norwegian crossbred grower pigs. Vet Clin Patho. 2010;39:221-226.)
The goat population sampled and hematology analyzers) used were not given. The hematocrits were determined using microhematocrit tubes and leukocyte
differential counts were determined by examining stained blood films. (From Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger;
1986.)
Total protein, fibrinogen, and icterus index values were determined using manual methods. (From Jain NC. Schalm's Veterinary Hematology 4th ed. Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger; 1986.)
330
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
TABLE 2
 Variations in Reference Intervals for Hematology Values by Age: Beagle Dogs, 3 to 14 Years Old
Laboratory Test?
3Years
6 Years
9 Years
12 Years
14 Years
RBC (×10°%/μL)
6.6-7.8
6.5-7.6
5.9-7.4
6.1-7.3
5.7-7.1
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
15-18
16-18
14-18
14-17
14-17
PCV (%)
43-50
44-49
38-50
40-49
40-47
 Band neutrophils/μL
0
0
0-63
0-68
0-54
Segmented neutrophils/μL
3944-9287
3605-7724
4207-7217
4724-9587
4464-10,255
Lymphocytes/μL
2185-3318
1334-2467
1667-2702
1676-2658
1628-2453
Monocytes/μL
101-769
173-626
149-620
181-521
189-688
Eosinophils/μL
208-1010
217-500
275-711
99-721
201-408
 Basophils/μL
0
0-70
0-102
0
From Lowseth LA, Gillett NA, Gerlach RF, et al. The effects of aging on hematology and serum chemistry values in the beagle dog. Vet Clin Pathof. 1990;19:13-19.
RBC, red blood cell count; PCV, packed cell volume.
"Limits represent the 1Oth and 90th percentile values.
APPENDIX I · Tables
331
TABLE 3
Erythrocyte Changes during Pregnancy in Beagles, Brittany Spaniels, and Labrador Retrievers
GESTATION WEEK 1
GESTATION WEEK 8
LACTATION WEEK 8
Brittany
Labrador
Brittany
Labrador 
Brittany
Labrad or
Beagles
Spaniels
Retrievers
Beagles
Spaniels
Retrievers
Beagles
Spaniels
Retrievers
RBC (x10/μL)
Mean
7.2
6.2
7.3
5.1
5.0
5.6
7.0
5.6
6.7
Range
6.2-9.2
5.2-7.2
5.5-9.1
4.1-6.1
4.1-6.0
4.4-6.8
5.8-8.2
4.4-6.8
5.7-7.7
PCV (%)
Mean
47
43.3
50
34.3
33.0
38.2
46.6
40.8
44.1
Range?
38.4-54.6
38.5-48.1
42.4-57.6
39.2-50.8
25.2-40.8
30.4-46.0
39.2-54.0
32.8-48.8
36.1-52.1
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
Mean
17.2
15.9
18.1
12.3
11.8
13.9
16.5
14.7
15.9
Rangea
15.2-19.2
14.1-17.7
15.3-20.9
10.3-14.3
9.2-14.4
11.7-16.1
13.9-19.1
11.7-17.7
13.1-18.7
MCV (fL)
Mean
66.6
70.3
69.2
67.3
72.6
67.9
67.3
73.3
65.9
Range?
59.2-76
59.7-80.9
50.6-87.8
60.7-73.6
58.6-86.6
52.9-82.9
60.7-73.6
63.1-83.4
55.8-76.0
MCHC (g/dL)
Mean
36.8
36.6
36.2
36
36.4
36.8
35.5
36
36.1
Rangea
30.6-43
34.4-38.8
34.2-38.2
31.2-40.8
34.6-38.2
31.8-41.4
31.7-39.4
33.0-39.0
32.7-39.5
From Allard RL, Carlos AD, Faltin EC. Canine hematological changes during gestation and lactation. Comp Anim Pract. 1989;19:3-6.
RBC, red blood cell count; PCV, packed cell volume; MCV, mean cell volume; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration.
"Range is ±2 SD.
332
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
10.3-12.5 (11.2)
 mean cell hemoglobin concentration; NRBC, nucleated red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell
31-39 (34.8)
12.7-17.3 (15)
8Weeks
4.5-5.9 (4.9)
0-0.3 (0.08)
6.2-11.8 (8.5)
3.1-6.9 (5.0)
it't).
(0.4)
0-1 (0.2)
0
0.5-2.7 
0-1.2
12.6-26.7 (16.3)
4.3-5.1 (4.7)
4.2-17.6 (9.0)
2.8-16.6 (5.7)
6 Weeks
0.5-2.7 (1.1)
(0.5)
20
5.5
0'0
0
0.1-1.9 
4 Weeks
3.6-4.9 (4.1)
(90'0] ≤'0-0
3.7-12.8 (7.2)
0-0.15 (0.011
8
 beagle dogs ab Anim si.1973;23.690.
0-4 (1.2)
0.3-1.5 (0.8
232
0-0.7 (
8.6-11.6 (9.7)
6.7-15.1 (11.2)
3.5-4.3 (3.8)
7-37 (31.7)
1.4-9.4 (5.1)
2.1-10.1 (5.0)
3 Weeks
1.4 (0.7)
[20) 6'0-200
[9'1) 6-0
0253
0.
0-0
0.1-1
8 Weeks of Age
2
3.1-15. 1 (11.7)1 
9-11 (10.0)
3.2-10.4 (5.2)
2 Weeks
3.4-4.4 (3.9)
(0.6)
(2.0)
81.5
15
0'0
0.2-1.4 
9-0
0.08-1
from Birth to 
3
-17.5 (12.9)
-52 (40.5)
3.8-15.2 (7.4)
3.6-5.9 (4.6)
1.3-9.4 (4.3)
0-0.2 (0.01)
11 (4.0)
-23(14.1
-2.5 (1.1)
-2.8 (0.8)
Healthy Beagle Dogs f
profile 
cell volume;
10.4-1
0.2-2
 bone
4.7-5.6 (5.119
14-17 (15.2)
4.4-15.8 (8.6)
(2.3)
0.2-2.2 (0.9)
 (0.4)
Birth
0'0
0-1.3
 hemogram a
3
Hematology Values for Growing h
(7ml/o x) slludonnau pauawas
Band neutrophils (×10%/μL)
Hematology Parameter
TABLE 4
Eosinophils (×10°/μL)
RBC/100 WBC
RBC (x10%/μL)
MCV (fL)
APPENDIX I · Tables
333
16-17 Weeks
(7.60-8.68]
(17.46-21.94]
(10.2-11.9)
(32.7-37.1)
(40.1-46.1)
(12.7-14.3)
0.0-33.2)
(6.58-10.82)
(90'0-0'0)
(0.62-1.38)
8.14
11.0
43.1
13.5
31.6
0.16
9.74
(7.90-11.
0.02
1.00
12-13 Weeks
(6.97-7.89)
(9.5-10.7]
(29.9-36.3]
(40.9-48.1)
-14.51
(29.5-32.11
29.921
(0.01-0.27)
(7.46-14.54)
(5.24-15.68)
(0.85-2.25)
80'0
(60'0-0'0)
44.5
10.1
13.7
31.3
10
0.15
11.0
8
15
(12.9-1
234
(16.
8-9 Weeks
(6.77-7.13)
(9.4-10.2)
1.9-34.71
(46.0-49.6)
(13.7-14.5)
3.7-30.31
(19.9-27.46)
(0.0-0.30)
18-13.821
(6.75-13.59)
(0.0-0.23)
(1.66-2.90)
6.95
9.8
47.8
29.5
23.68
0.12
11.0
10.17
0.11
2.28
3
28
6-8 Weeks
(60′ / -50'9)
-32.41
(43.6-47.6)
(14.19-21.95)
(88'0-90'0)
(4.69-8.81)
(6.45-12.73)
(8.5-9.7)
[80'0-0'0)
(0.68-1.48)
6.57
45.6
6.75
696
1.08
0.02
190'0-0'0)
29.8
13.9
(29.9-31.
18.07
0.22
0.01
2
Hematology Values for Growing Healthy Kittens from Birth to 17 Weeks of Age
4-6 Weeks
(13.7-16.0)
(14.71-20.19)
(5.43-6.35)
(8.0-9.2)
.5-28.71
(43.0-48.2)
(30.7-33.11
(0.08-0.32)
(6.27-12.87)
(4.87-7.95)
(0.97-1.97)
5.89
8.6
27.1
14.8
31.9
17.45
0.20
9.57
6.41
0'0
1.47
5
2-4 Weeks
(4.47-4.87)
(24.9-28.1)
(51.5-56.3)
(17.2-20.4)
(31.0-34.0)
(12.89-17.73)
(8.3-9.1)
(0.03-0.19)
(5.38-8.46)
(5.38-7.74)
(0.0-0.06)
(1.08-1.72)
*"Values expressed as mean and trange). Range calculated from mean ±2 SD.
26.5
53.9
18.8
15.31
6.92
6.56
33.0
0.02
1.40
0-2 Weeks
(4.81-5.7)*
(10.9-13.3)
1.9-38.71
3.6-71.21
1.9-36.11
(8.53-10.81)
(0.02-0.10)
(4.60-7.32)
(2.69-4.77)
3.73
(80'0-0'0)
(0.10-1.82)
5.29
960
(0.0-0.04)
35.3
67.4
23.0
9.67
90'0
96"
0.01
0.02
12.1
3
2
Band neutrophils (×10/μL)
Hematology Parameter
TABLE 5
Lymphocytes (×10°/μL)
Neutrophils (×10/μL)
Monocytes (x10%/μL)
Eosinophils (x10/μL)
Hemoglobin (g/dL)
Basophils (x10/μL)
RBC (×10%/μL)
WBC (x10/μL)
MCHC (g/dL)
MCH (pg)
PCV (%)
MCV (fL)
334
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
TABLE6
Erythrograms of Foals up to 1 Year of Age
PCV
Hb
RBC
MCV
MCHC
Age
[%6)
(7p/6)
(×10/μL)
(fL)
[%]
<12 Hours
43±3
15.4 ± 1.2
10.7 ± 0.8
40±2
36±2
1 day
40±3
14.2 ± 1.1
9.9± 0.6
41±3
35± 2
3 days
38±3
14.1 ± 1.3
9.6 ± 0.7
39±2
37 ± 1
1 week
35±3
13.3 ± 1.2
8.8± 0.6
39±2
38 ±1
2 weeks
34±3
12.6 ± 1.4
8.9± 0.9
38±2
38 ±1
3weeks
34±3
12.6 ± 1.1
9.2± 0.6
37 ± 2
37 ±1
1 month
12.5 ± 1.2
9.3 ± 0.8
36±1
37 ± 1
2 months
37 ± 4
13.6 ± 1.5
10.8 ± 1.7
35±2
37±1
3 months
36±2
13.4 ± 0.9
10.5 ± 0.9
35±1
37 ± 2
4 months
36±3
13.4 ± 1.1
10.4 ± 0.9
34 ± 1
38 ± 2
5 months
35±3
12.7 ± 1.2
10.2 ± 0.6
35±2
37 ± 2
6 months
34±2
12.2 ± 0.8
9.5 ± 0.7
36±2
36 ±1
9 months
36±3
12.6 ± 1.0
9.4± 0.8
39±2
35 ± 1
12 months
36±3
13.3 ± 1.0
9.5 ± 0.7
38±2
37 ± 2
From Harvey JVV, Asquith RL, McNulty PK, et al. Hae matology of foals up to one year old. Eguine Vet J. 1984;16:347-353.
Values expressed asmean ±1SD.
PCV, packed cell volume; Hb, hemoglobin; RBC, red blood cell count; MCV, mean cell volume; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration.
APPENDIXI · Tables
335
TABLE 7
Leukograms of Foals up to 1 Year of Age
Total WBC
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Eosinophils
Basophils
Age
(×10′/μL)
(x10/μl)
(x10/μL)
(x10/μL)
(x10/μl)
(x10/μL)
<12 hours
9.5 ± 2.44
7.94 ± 2.22
1.34 ± 0.60
0.19 ± 0.12
0
0.002 ± 0.007
1 day
8.44 ± 1.77
6.80 ± 1.72
1.43 ± 0.42
0.19 ± 0.10
0.11 ± 0.027
0.003 ± 0.010
3 days
7.55 ± 1.50
5.70 ± 1.44
1.45 ± 0.36
0.32 ± 0.13
0.045 ± 0.062
0.032 ± 0.046
1 week
9.86 ± 1.79
7.45 ± 1.55
2.10 ± 0.63
0.27 ± 0.11
0.028 ± 0.042
0.058 ± 0.069
2weeks
8.53 ± 1.68
6.00 ± 1.54
2.22 ± 0.45
0.24 ± 0.13
0.063 ± 0.063
0.012 ± 0.021
3weeks
8.57 ± 1.90
5.66 ± 1.64
2.59 ± 0.63
0.22 ± 0.10
0.078 ± 0.066
0.026 ± 0.032
1 month
8.14 ± 2.02
5.27 ± 2.00
2.46 ± 0.45
0.29 ± 0.17
0.121 ± 0.148
0.016 ± 0.032
2 months
9.65 ± 2.13
5.70 ± 1.88
3.46 ± 0.63
0.31 ± 0.15
0.092 ± 0.092
0.018 ± 0.039
3months
11.69 ± 2.51
6.43 ± 1.96
4.73 ± 1.21
0.38 ± 0.19
0.184 ± 0.181
0.018 ± 0.028
4 months
10.18 ± 1.99
4.78 ± 1.36
4.70 ± 1.31
0.32 ± 0.17
0.353 ± 0.319
0.018 ± 0.027
5 months
10.07 ± 2.29
4.60 ± 1.90
4.92 ± 1.48
0.27 ± 0.12
0.272 ± 0.152
0.010 ±0.027
6 months
9.03 ± 1.13
4.00 ± 0.84
4.53 ± 0.74
0.23 ± 0.11
0.247 ± 0.150
0.014 ± 0.024
9 months
8.68 ± 1.19
3.82 ± 0.78
4.39 ± 1.10
0.22 ± 0.10
0.234 ± 0.232
0.021 ± 0.024
12 months
9.19 ± 1.36
4.28 ± 0.81
4.27 ± 1.13
0.20 ± 0.12
0.339 ± 0.221
0.019 ± 0.037
From Harvey JW, Asquith RL, McNulty PK, et al. Haematology of foals up to one year old. Eguine Vet J. 1984;16:347-353.
Values are expressed as mean ±1 SD.
APPENDI
X
ALGORITHMS
1. Anemia, regenerative
 5. Leukocytosis or normal leukocyte count with abnormal
 2. Anemia, poorly regenerative or nonregenerative
differential
3. Erythrocytosis
 6. Platelet/coagulation factor deficiencies
4. Leukopenia
336
APPENDIX II = Algorithms
337
:G, gastrointestinal;
marrow.
RBC, Red blood cell; MCV, mean cell volume:
Il hemoglobin concentration;
the reference
increase
sed
nemol
decreased
defects, ulcers)
3. Anapiasma (ruminants)
mean cell
 Examine for RBC parasites
Reticulocytosist (increased polychromasia)
norses
REGENERATIVE ANEMIA*,t+
dens
exceptinhorses
 (horse),
icaceae (cattle),
Heinz bodlies!*
immune-mediated
autoimmune,
rye (cattle)
Positive
Decreased
Bras
Direct Coombs' test
*6
 Normal or increased MCV
destruction?
Serum protein 
Negative
Hereditary
Normal to increased 
RBC
treatment,
Acanthocytes
234
5
cavity
123
338
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Increased MCV
1
ai
s in Cu deficiency in
Decreased MCV
Anemiaof
MCV, Mean cell volume; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; RBC, red blood cell; NRBC, nucleated red blood cell.
2
广
ymphoproliferative
Blasts in blood
Confirmwith
diseases
inflammatory
Increasec
Anemia of
disease
 Lymphoproliferative
Myelophthisis
-mediated (suspected)
Total neutrophils
6. Bracken fern (cattle)
 Decreased 
2
utazone,
noprm1-
examination,
())
ue
?.
3
N
+
disease
oxicity
1. Anemia of
RBC aplasia
Selective
Normal
34
+
APPENDIX II = Algorithms
339
ERYTHROCYTOSIS(POLYCYTHEMIA)
Hematocrit increased 
Altered fluid balance
No evidence of altered fluid balance 
(plasma protein usually normal)
 Relative erythrocytosis
Relative erythrocytosis
 Absolute erythrocytosis
 Splenic contraction
Tissue PO2
(Plasma protein usually
(Plasma protein normal 
increased)
or decreased)
Decreased
Normal
Dehydration
Increased vascular
 1. External fluid loss
permeability
Secondary erythrocytosis
Primary erythrocytosis
 2. Water deprivation
(Decreased Pao2)
(Normal Pa02)
Plasma erythropoietin
normal or decreased 
1. Cardiac/pulmonary
1. Renal disease
insufficiency
(neoplasia, cysts)
2. Methemoglobinemia 
↑ Erythropoietin
↑ Erythropoietin
340
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
LEUKOPENIA*
Decreased total leukocytes
Absolute neutrophil count
Normalt
Decreased
Absolute lymphopenia
 Mature neutropenia
Predominantly
1. Marrow hypoplasiat
immature neutrophils
 No immature neutrophils
 Immature neutrophils
a. Estrogen toxicity (dogs and ferrets)
1. Acute overwhelming
 1. Loss of lymphocyte-
Acute inflammation
b. Ehrlichiosis (chronic in dogs)
 bacterial infection 
rich lymph
c. Chemical intoxication 
2. Viral diseases (i.e..
2. Altered lymph node
 d. Idiosyncratic drug reactions
parvovirus, FeLV, FIV)
 architecture (e.g..
e. Cancer chemotherapy
multicentric lymphoma)
f. Viral diseases (FeLV, parvovirus, dog and cat)
 3. Hereditary T iymphocyte deficiency
g. Cyclic neutropenia (gray collie dog)
2. Myelophthisis
a. Myeloproliferative disorders
 FeLV, Feline leukemia virus; F/V, feline immunodeficiency virus.
b. Lymphoproliferative disorders 
*Bone marrow examination is recommended in patients with a
c. Tumor metastasis
persistent leukopenia.
 3. Increased margination 
fOccurs only in animals where absolute lymphocyte counts normally
a. Endotoxemia
 exceed absolute neutrophil counts (ruminants, occasionally horses).
b.Shock
Marrow hypoplasia frequently involves more than one celline.
4. Increased removal
Anemia and/or thrombocytopenia are often present.
 a. Immune-mediated 
 b. Hypersplenism 
APPENDIX II = Algorithms 
341
sy osle 6op e  z7
monocvtosis
Absolute
corticoids
glucocorticoids
Imcreasec
corticism,
therapy)
2. Hypersensitivty
m
Parasites
(rare)
1
(Bone marrow
examination]
With blasts
neoplasia
lymphopenia
3. Loss of lymphocytes,
Absolute
oletion of
Tmcreased
nyper
ction.
Mature
Lep
iral
E2i
CEone marow
With blasts
ymphocvtosis
Absolute
{mours)
1. Chronic
llation
Stirm
2.n
Absolute.
heoplasia
With left shift
inflammation
ucocorticoid therapy)
lammation
Chronic
Mature
2
342
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
Common pathway
安
intrinsic factor (VIll,
1. Extrinsic (VIl) +
antagonists effect 
factors (ll, Ill, XI, )
Liverinsufficieno
Rattlesnake
nvenomation
administration
Prolonged
Prolonged
3
5
APTT
 Extrinsic factor 
antagonism
Normal
 Prothrombin time
 Normal
1. Intrinsic factor
Prolonged
von Willebrand's
disease types I.
Decreased or
abnormal 
Normal
APTT
11, 111)
bleeding time
Normal
Prolonged
PLATTORTCPAGUNATION
Thrombopathy
Normal
1. Acquired
Platelet count
Positive
 envenomation
Prolonged
2
FDPs
depletion with
intrinsic factor
rels
Platelet 
lev
Prolonged
APTT
and
1
2i
DIC,
Ehrlichia
1. Platelet
 Prothrombin time
depletion
Normal
Decreased
MO
1. Low-grade
 Splenomegaly (sequestration)
Prolonged
DIC
Normal
APTT
4. Massive external
associated with
vascular injury
Decreased
Normal
destruction 
emorrhage
1. Immune-
mediated
marrow
5
APPENDIX
CASE STUDIES
CASE 1: ESTROGEN-INDUCED
wound. The subcutaneous hemorrhages resulted from the
APLASTIC ANEMIA
 thrombocytopenia. Bone marrow evaluation revealed that the
pancytopenia present resulted from a lack of bone marrow
Patient: German shepherd dog, spayed female, 10 years of age
precursor cells. When erythroid precursors, granulocyte pre-
History: Urinary incontinence began about a month earlier.
cursors, and megakaryocytes are markedly reduced or absent,
The referring veterinarian treated the dog with diethylstil-
the term aplastic anemia is used. The lymphocyte count was
bestrol (DES), increasing the dosage to 3 mg orally once
normal because most lymphocytes in blood enter from lymph
- as  pssd sn a  a 
nodes and spleen rather than from the bone marrow. The
ment of estradiol cypionate (ECP) of unknown dose was 
reticular cells, macrophages, and plasma cells in the bone
also given 2% weeks before referral. The animal was
marrow were considered to be normal residual cells. Mast cells
-d paues-pooq jo surelduos Areud e ym paa
are rare in bone marrow of normal animals but are sometimes
neal area.
-u nq issd  sq de  s
Physical examination: Slightly depressed with normal hydra-
ment changes potentiate their development.
tion, mucous membrane color, pulse rate, respiratory rate,
and temperature. Moderate dental tartar and gingivitis
Comment
were present. An open wound was present on the lateral
 The dog was given a blood transfusion and antibiotic therapy
aspect of the left stife. Isolated ecchymotic hemorrhages
was begun. Epistaxis began 5 days later. The HCT was 27%.
were observed on the ventral abdomen.
A bone marrow aspirate collected at that time was again
aplastic. A second blood transfusion was given. Marked hema-
Notable Laboratory Findings
turia occurred 3 days later and the owner decided to have the
Hematology: Hematocrit (HCT), 23% with normal erythro-
 dog euthanized. The aplastic anemia in this dog resulted from
cyte indices; platelet count, 6000/μL; neutrophil count,
 the prior administration of high doses of estrogens. ECP is
500/μL; lymphocyte count, 2000/μL; monocyte count,
 much more toxic to canine bone marrow than is DES. Experi-
100/μL; eosinophil count, 0/μL; erythrocyte morphology
 mental studies have indicated that aplastic anemia develops
1+ echinocytosis and moderate rouleaux; lymphocyte mor-
 about 3 weeks after toxic doses of estrogen are given, in agree-
 phology, frequently reactive
ment with the time course of this case. Only dogs and ferrets
 Clinical chemistry: Not done
have been reported to develop estrogen-induced aplastic
Bone marrow: Aspirate and core biopsies were markedly
 anemia. In addition to iatrogenic estrogen toxicity, dogs with
hypocellular. The marrow particles present in aspirate
endogenous hyperestrogenism (Sertoli cell tumor, interstitial
smears consisted primarily of reticular cells, macrophages,
cell tumor, seminoma of the testicle, and granulosa cell tumor
plasma cells, and mast cells. Low numbers of erythroid
 of the ovary) can develop aplastic anemia, as can ferrets with
precursor cells and even lower numbers of granulocytic
protracted estrus.
precursor cells were present. No megakaryocytes were
observed. Large amounts of stainable iron were present.
REFERENCES
Assessment
Kociba GJ, Caputo CA. Aplastic anemia associated with estrus in pet ferrets. J Am Vet
The anemia in this dog was considered nonregenerative
ed Assoc. 1981;178:1293-1294.
because no polychromasia was seen in the stained blood flm.
Miura N, Sasaki N, Ogawa H, et al. Bone marrow hypoplasia induced by administration of 
 The reactive lymphocytes indicated increased antigenic stimu-
estradiol benzoate in male beagle dogs. Jpn J Vet Sci 1985;47:731-739.
dsoh wju/wzr bop aya u siownt jeinansan ynim panejaosse seisenasap poola Ay uebion 
lation, probably related to the profound neutropenia and open
AssoC. 1982;18:970-975
343
344
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
CASE 2: ACUTE LYMPHOBLASTIC
Assessment
LEUKEMIA
 In the absence ofidentifiable peripheral tumors, a presumptive
diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia was made. The
 Patient: Quarter horse, gelding, 15 years of age
severe neutropenia and anemia were explained by the replace-
History: Intermittent unilateral epistaxis for 4 months and
ment of normal marrow precursor cells with neoplastic cells.
weight loss for 2 months
The normal platelet count was unexplained, as was the long
Physical examination:
Pale
 mucous membranes, tachy-
history of intermittent epistaxis. The increased fibrinogen
cardia, temperafure 103.8°F
concentration suggested  the presence of  concomitant
Notable Laboratory Findings
infammation.
Hematology: HCT, 12% with normal erythrocyte indices; 
Comment
fibrinogen, 1000 mg/dL; platelets, 142,000/μL; neutrophil
 The horse was euthanized. Multiple submucosal hematomas
count, 400/μL; lymphocyte count, 2200/μL; monocyte
were present in the maxillary sinuses, and mesenteric and
count, 100/μL; erythrocyte morphology, 2+ anisocytosis;
sublumbar lymph nodes were enlarged. As in the antemortem
lymphocyte morphology, 5% of lymphocytes were moder-
biopsy, the bone marrow was diffusely flled with sheets of
 ately large with fine nuclear chromatin and scant basophilic
 neoplastic lymphocytes. Lymphoid infiltrates were present in
cytoplasm
the spleen, liver, kidney, and lymph nodes. Moderate extra-
Urinalysis: Normal
medullary hematopoiesis was present in the spleen; conse-
 Clinical chemistry: Unremarkable
quently some of the blood platelets may have originated in
Coggins' test: Negative
the spleen. It is also possible that some bone marrow sites, not
Coagulation tests: Prothrombin time (PT) and activated
evaluated during the antemortem biopsy or necropsy, con-
 partial thromboplastin (APTT) normal
 tained megakaryocytes. The necropsy findings were more
 Platelet function tests: Normal platelet aggregation and
supportive of a diagnosis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
 normal von Willebrand factor concentration
than of lymphoma with secondary leukemia.
 Bone marrow biopsy: Replacement of normal marrow cells
with a monotonous population of moderately large lym-
 phocytes with fine nuclear chromatin and scant basophilic
REFERENCE
cytoplasm similar to those present in blood. Indistinct
 nucleoli were visible in some cells. As expected, these neo-
Lester GD, Alleman AR, Raskin RE, et al. Pancytopenia secondary to lymphoid leukemia in
 plastic cells were peroxidase-negative.
three horses. / Vet lntem Med. 1993;7:360-363.
 Endoscopy: Normal nasopharynx, guttural pouch, and upper
trachea
APPENDIX III - Case Studies
345
massive fea infestation was believed to be the major source
CASE 3: 1RON-DEFICIENCY
of blood loss in this dog. Some blood loss may have also
ANEMIA
occurred in the feces, but whipworms alone do not cause
enough hemorrhage to result in iron-deficiency anemia. The
Patient: Irish setter dog, female, 13 years of age
 increased RDW indicates that there is increased variation in
History: Weakness, anorexia, and weight loss for a week;
erythrocyte volumes. In iron-deficiency anemia, this results
unable to walk at presentation
from a mixture of normocytic erythrocytes and microcytic
 Physical examination: The dog was depressed, emaciated,
approximately 8% dehydrated, and nonambulatory because
erythrocytes formed after iron becomes limiting for erythro-
 cyte development. The absolute reticulocyte count was not
of extreme weakness. Pale mucous membranes, ocular and
 nasal discharges, excessive dental tartar, otitis externa, and
appropriately increased, indicating that decreased iron avail-
ability is limiting the bone marrow response to the anemia.
 large numbers of feas were present. The rectal temperature
The normal total plasma and serum protein concentrations in
was 99.6°F.
a dehydrated animal suggest that the concentration will be 
Notable Laboratory Findings
low-normal or decreased after rehydration. Serum proteins are
synthesized more rapidly than erythrocytes; consequently the
Hematology: HCT, 11%; mean cell volume (MCV), 52 fL;
 total plasma protein concentration may be normal in animals
mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), 30 g/dL;
red cell distribution width (RDW), 20%; reticulocyte count, 
with chronic blood loss. A majority of dogs with iron defi-
 80,000/μL; total plasma protein, 6.8 g/dL; platelet count,
diency anemia have a thrombocytosis, as in this case. The
neutrophilia, lymphopenia, monocytosis, and eosinopenia are
532,000/μL; band count, 3300/μL; neutrophil count,
likely the result of stress (endogenous glucocorticoid release),
24,800/μL; lymphocyte count, 500/μL; monocyte count,
3600/μL; eosinophil count, O; erythrocyte morphology, 1+
but the significant left shift and the magnitude of the neutro-
 philia indicate that a concomitant infammatory response is
polychromasia, 2+ anisocytosis, 2+ hypochromasia
Clinical chemistry: urea nitrogen, 29 mg/dL; creatinine,
also present. The slightly increased urea nitrogen concentra-
tion is probably prerenal and secondary to dehydration.
1.0 mg/dL
Serum iron assays: Serum iron, 16 μg/dL (reference interval
Comment
84 to 233 μg/dL); total iron-binding capacity (TIBC),
 The dog was given a whole blood transfusion (two units) and
462 μg/dL (reference interval 284-572 μg/dL; and ferri-
 treated with intravenous lactated Ringer's solution to correct
tin, 140 μg/L (reference interval 80 to 800 μg/L)
Fecal Hotation: Tricburis eggs
the dehydration. The following day the HCT was 34%, total
plasma protein was 6.2 g/dL, rectal temperature was 101.5°F,
 and marked clinical improvement was apparent. The animal
Assessment
was also treated for feas and given an anthelmintic, and the
The presence ofa severe microcytic hypochromic anemia indi-
 client was instructed on appropriate fea-control measures for
cates chronic iron deficiency The low serum iron, normal
 the dog's environment. Oral iron therapy was not considered
serum TIBC, and low-normal serum ferritin concentrations
essential because of the amount of iron present in the trans
support the diagnosis of iron deficiency Serum ferritin con-
fused blood.
centration generally correlates well with total body iron
content, but ferritin is an acute-phase reactant protein that
increases during infammation. Consequently serum ferritin
REFERENCE
 might have been lower in the absence of the infammation
documented in the physical examination. Iron deficiency is
Harvey JV, French TW, Meyer DJ. Chronic iron deficiency anemia in dogs. JAmAnim Hosp
almost always the result of blood loss in adult animals. The
Assoc. 1982;18:946-960.
346
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
the animal's regenerative bone marrow response. The increased
CASE 4: MYCOPLASMA
total plasma protein concentration is the result of increased
HAEMOFELIS INFECTION
 globulin concentrations and could represent an infammatory
reaction to the blood parasite. The slightly increased bilirubin
Patient: Domestic shorthaired cat, castrated male,2 years of age
concentration is attributable to the increased erythrocyte
History: Presented for evaluation of deformed carpus, which
destruction accompanying these erythrocyte parasites. The
was present when the client acquired the cat as a stray
slightly increased ALT may refect hypoxic injury to the liver.
 Physical examination: Deformity of carpus secondary to trau-
matic luxation, alopecia over pinna secondary to dermato-
Comment
Doxycycline and glucocorticoid therapy was initiated and the
splenomegaly
cat was discharged. The client was told that the M. baemofelis
infection should respond to therapy but that the cat would
Notable Laboratory Findings
 probably remain FIV-positive, which would likely result in
Hematology: HCT, 13%; MCV, 86 fL; MCHC, 33% total
increased susceptibility to bacterial infections at a later date.
plasma protein, 8.3 g/dL; platelet count, normal; leukocyte
Concurrent infections of M. baemofelis and FeLV generally
counts, normal; nucleated erythrocytes, 1400/μL; erythro-
result in more severe clinical signs and more severe anemia
cyte morphology, 1+ anisocytosis, 2+ polychromasia, 4+;
than occurs when a cat is infected with either agent alone. In
Mycoplasma baemofelis organisms
contrast, concurrent infection with M. baemofelis and FIV
Clinical chemistry: Bilirubin, 0.4 mg/dL; alanine aminotrans-
 does not appear to cause more severe anemia than does infec-
ferase (ALT), 143 units/L; globulin, 5.8 g/dL
 tion with M. baemofelis alone. Consequently the regenerative
 Serology: Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), negative; feline
anemia in this cat is attributable primarily to the M. baemofelis
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), positive
infection.
Assessment
The anemia was regenerative based on the degree of polychro-
REFERENCE
masia present. Reticulocyte counts may not be accurate when
high numbers of M. baemofelis organisms are present. The
Harvey JVV. Hemotrophic mycoplasmosis hemobartonellosis) In: Greene CE, ed. infectious
 macrocytosis and nucleated erythrocytes are consistent with
Diseases of the Dog and Cat 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders EIsevier; 2006:252-260.
APPENDIX III - Case Studies
347
of endotoxin, which results in increased margination of neu-
CASE 5: VAGINAL TEAR
trophils, may also have contributed to this leukogram. The
lymphopenia and eosinopenia probably resulted from the
Patient: Standard-bred horse, female, 10 years of age
 endogenous release of glucocorticoids. The slightly decreased
History: Dystocia resulting in a vaginal tear and displacement 
plasma protein concentration probably resulted from the peri-
of intestines into the vagina. Attempts to repair the lacera-
tonitis with protein movement into the abdominal cavity The
tion on the farm were initially unsuccessful because of
 increased serum AST activity was atributed to tissue injury.
hemorrhage and straining. Xylazine was administered as
an analgesic and sedative, the intestines were replaced into
Comment
 the abdomen, and the laceration was sutured.
 The abdomen was lavaged with large volumes of saline solu-
 Physical examination: The horse was uncomfortable, exhibit-
fion containing penicillin and streptomycin and the horse was
ing evidence of pain, but otherwise appeared normal.
treated with intravenous penicillin and intravenous fuids.
Laboratory analyses were done again on day 3.
Notable Laboratory Findings (Day 1)
Hematology: HCT, 38%; total plasma protein, 6.0 g/dL,
Notable Laboratory Findings (Day 3)
fbrinogen, 300 mg/dL; platelet count, normal; metamy-
Hematology: HCT, 42%; total plasma protein, 7.1 g/dL;
elocyte count, 100/μL; band count, 600/μL; neutrophil
fibrinogen, 700 mg/dL; platelet count, normal; band count,
count, 2400/μL; lymphocyte count, 600/μL; monocyte
200/μL; neutrophil count, 900/μL; lymphocyte count,
count, 200/μL; eosinophil count, 0/μL; neutrophilic mor-
300/μL; monocyte count, 200/μL; eosinophil count, 0/μL; 
phology, 2+ toxicity.
 neutrophilic morphology, 2+ toxicity.
Clinical chemistry: Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 506
Clinical chemistry: AST, 795 units/L.
units/L.
Abdominal fuid: HCT, 3%; protein; 2.9 g/dL; nucleated cell 
 Abdominal fuid: HCT, 8%; protein, 4.0 g/dL; nucleated cell
count, 33,800/μL; most nucleated cells present were toxic
count, 13,100/μL; most nucleated cells present were toxic
neutrophils.
neutrophils.
 Microbiology: No bacterial growth was obtained from the
Assessment
abdominal fuid, but antibiotic therapy may have been 
 The abdominal fuid analysis revealed continued evidence of
initiated prior to culture.
 infammation. The toxic neutropenia on day 3 resulted from
peritonitis with movement of neutrophils into the abdominal
Assessment
cavity The lymphopenia and eosinopenia resulted from the
 The abdominal fuid analysis revealed evidence of hemorrhage
endogenous release of glucocorticoids. The fbrinogen
and infammation. The toxic left shift with low-normal neu-
increased in response to infammation. The increased serum
trophil numbers in blood resulted from peritonitis with move-
AST activity was attributed to tissue injury. The horse eventu-
 ment of neutrophils into the abdominal cavity. The absorption
 ally made a full recovery.
348
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
a diagnosis of hypereosinophilic syndrome was made. The
CASE 6: HYPEREOSINOPHILIC
etiology of this syndrome is unknown. Evidence that the
SYNDROME
overproduction of IL-5 may be involved in producing this
disorder has been presented in humans with hypereosinophilic
 Patient: Himalayan cat, castrated male, 5 years of age
syndrome. A marked left shift in the eosinophilic series is
History: Respiratory distress developed 3 days earlier The
expected in cats with eosinophilic leukemia. Eosinophilic leu-
referring veterinarian began treatment with an antibiotic,
kemia was considered unlikely in this cat because most of the
but the condition worsened.
eosinophils in blood and tissues were mature. When present
Physical examination: The cat presented with abdominal res-
in animals, basophilia generally accompanies eosinophilia,
piration and tachypnea. Harsh lung sounds were auscul-
possibly because certain growth factors (most notably IL-5)
tated, the cat was underweight and may have been slightly
stimulate the production of both cell types. The slight neutro-
dehydrated. Enlarged prescapular, axillary, and inguinal
philia and monocytosis present may be associated with the
lymph nodes and splenomegaly were palpated. Papules and
infammation recognized in several tissues. The mild nonre-
scabs on the head and base of the tail were believed to
generative anemia is probably the result of the anemia of
represent a fea-bite allergy The rectal temperature was
infammatory disease. The increased serum protein concentra-
102.6"F.
tion was the result of increased globulins, further supporting
the likelihood of an infammatory reaction.
Notable Laboratory Findings
Hematology: HCT, 29% with normal erythrocyte indices;
Comment
total plasma protein, 8.6 g/dL; platelet count, normal; neu-
The cat was placed in an oxygen cage and treated with ami-
trophil count, 15,600/μL; lymphocyte count, 5100/μL;
nophylline (a bronchodilator) and an antibiotic pending the
monocyte count, 1200/μL; band eosinophil count, 400/μL;
outcome of diagnostic tests. Once a diagnosis of hypereosino-
eosinophil count, 22,300/μL; basophil count, 2100/μL;
 philic syndrome was reached, glucocorticoid therapy was
erythrocyte morphology, normal.
sm ien su pue Aiider paaond suis leru pan
 Clinical chemistry: Total serum protein, 8.1 g/dL; total glob-
discharged with a plan to taper the glucocorticoid dosage as
ulins, 5.9 g/dL.
clinical signs resolved.
Exfoliative cytology: Transthoracic lung aspiration revealed
histiocytic eosinophilic infammation. Increased numbers
 of eosinophils were also present in splenic and lymph node
REFERENCES
 aspirates that appeared to exceed those present in contami-
nating blood.
Huibregise BA, Turner JL. Hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosinophilic leukemia: a com-
parison of 22 hypereosinophilic cats. JAm Anim Hosp Assoc. 1994;30:591-599.
Histopathology: Chronic ulcerative eosinophilic dermatitis.
Swenson CL, Carothers MA, Wellman ML, et al. Eosinophilic leukemia in a cat with
 Parasitology: ELISA heartworm test was negative.
naturally acquired feline leukemia virus infection. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1993:
Thoracic radiograph: Patchy interstitial infltrate.
29:467-501
Weller PF. Bubley GJ. The idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome. Blood. 1994;3:
Abdominal ultrasound: Splenomegaly and slightly thickened
2759-2779.
 loops of bowel.
Assessment
 Based on the magnitude of the eosinophilia and evidence of
cosinophilic infltration and injury in multiple organs,
APPENDIX II = Case Studies
349
CASE 7: PYOMETRA
Comment
 Antibiotic and intravenous fuid therapy was begun after the
 Patient: Rottweiler dog, female, 2 years of age
first blood sample was taken. Epistaxis began on the following
History: Depression, lethargy, fever, and purulent bloody
day and the animal became more depressed.
vaginal discharge for several days; vomited the day of
admission
Notable Laboratory Findings (Day 2)
Physical examination: Moderately depressed, panting respira-
Hematology: HCT, 32% with normal erythrocyte indices;
tion,slightly distended abdomen, dark pink mucous mem-
total plasma protein, 6.4 g/dL; fbrinogen, 400 mg/dL;
branes, rectal temperature 102°F
manual platelet count, 61,000/μL; metamyelocyte count,
800/μL; band neutrophil count, 8400/μL; neutrophil
Notable Laboratory Findings (Day 1)
count, 65,900/μL; lymphocyte count, 2100/μL; monocyte
Hematology: HCT, 48%; total plasma protein, 7.5 g/dL;
count, 7200/μL; eosinophil count, 0/μL; basophil count,
fbrinogen,200 mg/dL; manual platelet count, 180,000/μL;
O/μL; erythrocyte morphology, 1+ echinocytes; leukocyte
band neutrophil count, 3700/μL; neutrophil count,
 morphology, 1+ toxicity of neutrophilic cells and occasional
57,400/μL; lymphocyte count, 7700/μL; monocyte count,
reactive lymhocytes
3700/μL; eosinophil count, 700/μL; basophil count, 0/μL;
Coagulation test: ACT, 150 seconds (reference less than 95
erythrocyte morphology 1+ echinocytes; leukocyte mor-
seconds)
 phology 1+ toxicity of neutrophilic cells and occasional
reactive lymphocytes
Assessment
Clinical chemistry: Unremarkable
 The neutrophilia with toxic left shift and monocytosis were
Coagulation tests: PT, 9 seconds (control, 8 seconds); APTT,
 more pronounced on the second day. The decrease in lympho-
20 seconds (control, 10 seconds); activated clotting time
cyte count and eosinopenia that developed suggested that
(ACT), 105 seconds (reference less than 95 seconds); fibrin
increased endogenous glucocorticold release occurred as the
degradation products (FDP), positive at 1:20 dilution
dog's clinical condition worsened. The decreased HCT on
 Abdominal radiographs: No abnormalities appreciated
the second day was primarily the result of fuid therapy. The
 Abdominal ultrasound: Large, fuid-flled uterus identifed
further decrease in the platelet count and the prolonged ACT
suggested the continuation of DIC.
Assessment
The marked neutrophilia with toxic left shift and monocytosis
Comment
indicated a severe infammatory reaction. The presence of a
Ovariohysterectomy was performed after the blood sample
dilated uterus and purulent vaginal discharge indicated that
was collected on the second day and the dog made an unevent-
the dog had pyometra. The lymphocytosis may have refected
ful recovery.
 antigenic stimulation. The slightly decreased manual platelet
count, prolonged APTT, slightly prolonged ACT, and positive
 FDP test indicated the presence of disseminated intravascular
REFERENCE
coagulation (DIC). Although the PT was normal, this test
 appears to be less sensitive than the APTT in the diagnosis
 Sevelius E, Tidholm A, Thoren-Tolling K. Pyometra in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
of DIC. Fibrinogen is an acute-phase protein that tends to
1990;26:33-38.
increase during infammation; consequently, the normal
fbrinogen value did not rule out DIC.
350
VETERINARY HEMATOLOGY
anemia. The high-normal MCV and low-normal MCHC are
CASE 8: SYSTEMIC LUPUS
consistent with the increased percentage of reticulocytes, and
ERYTHEMATOSUS
the absolute reticulocytosis indicates an appropriate bone
marrow response to the anemia. The low number of nucleated
 Patient: Cocker spaniel dog, male, 4 years of age
erythrocytes is appropriate for the degree of reticulocytosis.
History: Rear-leg lameness associated with bilateral hip dys-
The petechial hemorrhages can be attributed to the severe
 plasia was diagnosed 2 years earlier, and erosive nonseptic
thrombocytopenia. Based on the presence of an immune-
arthritis involving the carpal and tarsal joints was recogn-
mediated hemolytic anemia and a positive ANA test, the
lzed 4 months previously. The HCT and platelet counts
thrombocytopenia was presumed to be immune-mediated.
were normal at that time, but the ANA test was positive 
 The combined presence of immune-mediated anemia and
at 1:100 dilution (reference less than 1:20). The dog has
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia has been termed the
 been treated with aspirin for the preceding 4 months.
 Evans syndrome. The presence of high-normal numbers of
Physical examination: The dog was depressed with pale
 cosinophils suggests that endogenous glucocorticoid release is
mucous membranes. A polyarthropathy was present and all 
 not responsible for the neutrophilia, monocytosis, and lym-
joints were painful. There were multiple raised pigmented
phopenia. The increased total globulins in serum and high-
skin lesions and small petechial hemorrhages on the penis 
normal plasma fibrinogen concentration are consistent with
and abdomen. The rectal temperafure was normal.
infammation, as is the mild neutrophilia with left shift and
monocytosis. Bilirubinuria is common in dogs with hemolytic
Notable Laboratory Findings
anemia even when bilirubinemia is not present because of the
Hematology: HCT, 23%; MCV, 74 fL; MCHC, 33 g/dL;
 low renal threshold for bilirubin in dogs. A presumptive diag-
reticulocyte count, 184,000/μL; total plasma protein,
nosis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) was made based
7.9 g/dL; fbrinogen, 400 mg/dL; manual platelet count,
on the concomitant occurrence of immune-mediated hemo-
8000/μL; band neutrophil count, 600/μL; neutrophil
lytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, nonseptic polyarthritis, and
count, 12,900/μL; lymphocyte count, 700/μL; monocyte
 positive ANA test. The skin lesion may also have been a com-
count, 200/μL; eosinophil count, 1000/μL; nucleated
ponent of this syndrome, but an immune-mediated etiology
erythrocyte count, 500/μL; erythrocyte morphology, 3+
could not be confirmed.
anisocytosis, 2+ polychromasia, 3+ spherocytosis, occa-
sional Howell-Jolly bodies, and autoagglutination of saline
Comment
washed erythrocytes.
 Therapy consisted of glucocoricoid steroids and cyclophos-
Clinical chemisry: Total serum protein, 8.2 g/dL; the total
 phamide. When examined 1 week later, the animal appeared
globulin, 5.6 g/dL.
to be feeling less pain, skin lesions were resolving, the HCT
Urinalysis Specific gravity, 1.042; moderate bilirubinuria.
was 27%, MCV was 77 fL, and platelet count was 1.2 x10%/
Joint fuid: A direct smear from a swollen joint revealed
mL. The resolution of the thrombocytopenia following initia-
increased numbers of nondegenerate neutrophils and
tion of immunosuppressive therapy provides retrospective
macrophages.
evidence that the thrombocytopenia was immune-mediated.
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) test: Positive at 1:320 dilution
It is assumed that the animal had high plasma thrombopoietin
(reference less than 1:20)
values when thrombocytopenic and that the subsequent
Skin biopsy: Histologic lesions were consistent with pemphi-
thrombocytosis occurred as a rebound phenomenon when
 gus foliaceous, an immune-mediated skin disorder, but
premarure platelet destruction was reduced or eliminated by
direct immunofuorescence examination for IgG deposits
immunosuppressive therapy.
in skin was negative.
Assessment
REFERENCE
The presence of autoagglutination of saline-washed RBC-
Grindem CB, Johnson KH. Systemic lupus erythematosus: literature review and report of 
erythrocytes and spherocytosis points to an immune-mediated
42 new canine cases. J/Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 1983;19:489-503.
INDEX
Acquired coagulation disorders (Continued)
Alloantigens, blood group, 178
Abnormal erythrocyte morphology
liver disease,222
 Alloimmune thrombocytopenia, neonatal,
acanthocytes, 66-67
snake venoms, 222-223
182-183
agglutination, 13-14, 59
thromboembolism, 219-220
Amplifcation of coagulation, 199
anisocytosis, 27t, 61-62
vitamin K deficiency, 222
ANA test, 179-180
crystallized hemoglobin, 75
Acquired disorders
Anaplasma spp infection
dacryocytes, 73
defects in platelet function, 216
causing hemolytic anemia, 103
drepanocytes, 73-75
selective erythroid hypoplasia, 270-271
of erythrocytes, 86, 87f
eccentrocytes, 70-71
Acquired immunity, 177
of granulocytes, 140
echinocytes, 65-66
Acrodermatitis, lethal, in English bull terriers,
of neutrophil cytoplasm, 141f 
elliptocytes, 71-73
187
of platelets, 210-211
erythrocyte vesicles, 76-78
Activated clotting time (ACT), 204
Anemia
erythroid loops, 76
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT),
blood-1oss, 106-107
hypochromasia, 27t, 62-63
204-205
bone marrow response to, 60
keratocytes, 67
Activated platelets, 209
clasifcation using erythrocyte indices,99
leptocytes, 70
Acute infammation, bone marrow, 293
diffrential diagnosis, 98
lysed erythrocytes, 76
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 162, 298-
estrogen-induced aplastic,343
nucleated erythrocytes, 78-79
300, 344
hemolytic. See Hemolytic anemia
poikilocytosis, 63-64
Acute monocytic leukemia, 311
iron-defciency, 345
polychromasia, 27t, 59-61
Acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs)
monregenerative. Se Nonregenerative
pyknocytes, 71
acute undiferentiated leukemia, 313
anemia
rouleaux, 14f, 59
AML-M1, 309
physiologic, of neonatal animals, 110-111
schistocytes, 69-70
AML-M2, 309-311
regenerative, 22
spherocytes, 68-69
AML-M3, 311
algorithm, 337f
stromatocytes, 67-68
AML-M4, 311
s. nonregenerative, 99
Abnormal neutrophil morphology
AML-M5, 311
polychromasia in, 60-61
cytoplasmic vacuoles, 144
AML-M6, 312
reticulocyte count corrected for, 92
giant neutrophils, 143
AML-M7, 312-313
Anisocytosis, 27t, 61-62
karyolysis, 144
frequency in animal species,313314
 in bone marrow section, 294f
 phagocytized eosinophil granules, 144
 peripheral blood fndings, 313
Antibodies
pyknosis and karyorrhexis, 144
Acute undifferentiated leukemia, 313
antinuclear antibody tests
stain precipitation, 144
 Adenine nucleotides, in platelet metabolism,
ANA test, 179-180
Abnormal platelet morphology
193-194
lupus erythematosus celltest, 180
activated platelets, 209
Adenocarcinoma, metastatic, 316f-317f
 in phenotyping leukemia in dogs, 298t
Anaplasma platys infection, 210-211
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
Anticoagulants
hypogranular platelets,210
generation of, 51-52
macrothrombocytes, 209
in platelet metabolism, 193-194
237f
Absolute erythrocytosis, 112
Adhesion molecules, 37-38
for CBC, 11-12
Absolute reticulocyte count, 92
Adipocytes, bone marrow, 250
EDTA, 202
Absorption of iron, 54-56
Aged erythrocytes, normal removal of, 57-58
heparin, 202-203
Acanthocytes, 66-67
Agglutination
 Antierythrocyte antibody tests
Accuracy of analytical procedure, vs. test
of aggregate reticulocytes, 61f
direct antiglobulin test or Coombs test,
precision, 6-10
of erythrocytes, 13-14, 59
177-178
Acquired coagulation disorders
Aggregate reticulocytes, 91-92
direct immunofluorescence flow cytometry
antiphospholipid antibody, 221-222
 Algorithms
assay, 178
disseminated intravascular coagulation,
erythrocytosis (polycythemia), 339f
Antigen-presenting cels, basophils as, 128
220-221
leukopenia, 340f
Antiglobulin test, direct, 96
hemolytic-uremic symdrome, 221
 normal or increased total leukocyte count, 
Antinuclear antibody tests
hypercoagulable state,219
341f
ANA test, 179-180
platelet/coagulation factor defciencies,42f
lupus erythematosus cell test, 180
poorly regenerative or nonregenerative
 Antiphospholipid antibody, 221-222
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate
anemia,338f
Antiplatelet antibody tests, 180,208-209
fgures; t, tables; b, boxes.
regenerative anemia, 337f
Antithrombin, 201, 207
351
352
Index
α-Antitrypsin, 201
Biopsy, bone marrow
Bone marrow disorders
Aplasia
core biopsy, 238-240
erythroid series abnormalities, 268-275
megakaryocyte,286f
sites for, 234-235
gelatinous transformation of bone marrow,
selective erythroid, 109, 270-273
Birds, thrombocytes in blood flms, 193f
264-265
thymic, hypotrichosis with, 186
Birman cats, reddish granules in, 137
granulocytic series abnormalities, 275-283
Aplastic anemia
Blast cells, 163-168
hematopoietic cells
congenital, 262
Bleeding time, screening test for hemostatic
generalized decreases in,260-268
estrogen-induced, 343
disorders, 204
generalized increases in, 260
nonregenerative, 60f
 Blood cells 
hematopoietic neoplasms, 296-298
Aplastic bone marrow, 109-110, 260-263
counting and sizing
hypocellular/aplastic bone marrow, 109-110,
Apotransferrin, 56
automated counting, 17
260-263
Artifacts
errors in, 17-18
infammatory, 293-295
resembling infectious agents of erythrocytes,
manual counting, 16-17
lymphoid neoplasms, 298-306
06
quality control, 18
megakaryocyte abnormalities, 283-285
stain precipitation, 144f
and precursors, phagocytosis of, 286-293
mononuclear phagocyte abnormalities,
Aspiration of bone marrow, technique, 235-238
production sites of, 33
286-293
Autoagglutination, of erythroytes,
Blood cross-match tests, 179
myelofibrosis, 265-267
Automated methods
Blood films
myeloid neoplasms, 306-315
 blood cell counting by, 17
bird, thrombocytes in, 193f
nonhematopoietic neoplasms, 315-318
. manual methods, 8-9
preparation
Bone marrow evaluation: organized approach
Autophagy-associated cell death, 263
coverslip method, 19
cellularity, 251
glass-slide method, 18-19
erythroid cells, 254
B
staining procedures
granulocytic cells,254
 B-lymphocyte neoplasms, 305-306
cytochemical stains, 23
interpretation, 258
B-lymphocyte progenitors, 44
iron stains, 22-23
lymphocytes, 254-255
B lymphocytes
new methylene blue “wet mounts,"22
megakaryocytes, 251-254
functions of, 131
reticulocyte stains, 21-22
mononuclear phagocytes, 255
naive, 124
Romanowsky-type stains, 19-20
myeloid-to-erythroid ratio, 254
Babesia spp. infection
Blood films: examination of stained films,
other cell types, 255-256
causing hemolytic anemia, 102
23-30
plasma cells, 255
of erythrocytes, 82-85
 degenerative changes in blood samples, 27
stainable iron, 256-258
Bacteria
erythrocyte morphology, 26
Borrelia ruricatae spirochetes, 30f
phagocytosis of, 126f
infectious agents or inclusions of blood cells,
 Bovine leukemia virus (BLV), 161
seen in blood films, 30
27-28
'u Aauaoyap suauarduos 'ssop rarueds Aueg
 Bactericidal defect, in neutrophils, 148
 leukocyte evaluation, 24-26
187
Band basophils, 21f, 151
 miscellaneous cells and parasites in blood,
 Buccal mucosal bleeding time test, 204
Band cells, 243
28-30
Buffy coat
Band eosinophils, 149-150
platelets, 26-27
erythrocyte ghosts above, 16f
 Band neutrophils, 135f, 155f, 281f
Blood-loss anemias, 106-107
quantitative analysis (QBC), 17
Bartonella spp. infection, of erythrocytes, 90
Blood typing, 178-179
width of, 15
Basophil counts, high, 18
Blood volume, calculation of, 11
Burr cells, 66f
Basophilia, 151
Bone, sarcomas of, 317-318
Burst-forming-unit erythrocyte (BFU-E), 38,
foamy, 137, 138f
Bone marrow
41
 Basophilic hyperplasia, 278
aspiration technique,235-238
Basophilic leukemia, 315
core biopsy technique, 238-240, 241f 
C
 Basophilic rubricytes, 242
differential cell counts in domestic animals,
Cabot rings, 82, 84f
Basophilic stippling, 80, 83f-84f
251t
Canalicular system, platelet, 194f
 Basophils
evaluation and interpretation, 328
Candidatus Mycoplasma spp.infection,
 band basophils, 21f, 151
homing of HSCs and HPCs to, 37
88-89
functions of, 128
neutrophilic compartments in, 42f
Capillaries, fibrinolysis in, 202
kinetics of, 124
organization of, 33-34
Cats
 morphology, 151
reasons for examining, 234
AB blood group incompatibilities, 181
production of, 43
response to anemia, 60
AML in, 313-314
Beagle dogs
sites for biopsy, 234-235
bone marrow differential cell counts, 251t 
hematology values, 332t
 Bone marrow: morphologic identification of
hematology values for growing healthy
reference intervals for hematology values,
cells
kittens, 333t
330t
erythrocytic series, 240-243
hypereosinophilic syndrome, 348
Bilinubin, 57-58
lymphocytes, 245
hypotrichosis with thymic aplasia in, 186
Binucleated macrophages, with nuclear debris,
macrophages, 244-245
increased erythrocyte osmotic fragility in,
292f
megakaryocytic series, 240
105
Biochemistry of normal erythrocytes
 miscellaneous cels and free nuclei,
Myoplasma haemofelis infection, 88, 345
ATP generation, 51-52
248-250
PK deficiency, 105
2,3DPG pathway, 52
mitotic fgures, 247
 prenatal development,sites of hematopoiesis,
iron metabolism, 54-57
monocytic series, 243-244
34f
membrane structure and function, 50-51
osteoblasts, 247
purebred,blood type B frequency in, 179t
methemoglobin formation and reduction, 54
osteoclasts, 247
reddish granulation in neutrophils, 137
oxidant injury, 52-54
plasma cells, 245-246
selective erythroid hypoplasia, 271
Index
353
Cattle
Common myeloid progenitor (CMP), 35, 36f 
Distemper inclusions, 86-87, 140, 141f
 bone marrow differential cell counts, 251t
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID),
580G
dairy, postparturient hemoglobinuria, 106
186
AML in, 313-314
hereditary spherocytosis,105
Complement deiciency in Brittany spaniel
'ui eruarnal adhouaud oi pasn saipogie
Cavalier King Charles spaniels,
dogs, 187
298t
immunodeficiency in, 186
Complete blood count (CBC), anticoagulants
bone marrow difrential cellcounts,251t
CD4+ T lymphocytes, 130
for, 11-12
cyclic hematopoiesis, 148
CD8+ T lymphocytes, 130-131
Composition of blood, 11, 12f
erythrocyte changes during pregnancy,
Cell aggregation, 11-12
Contact activation of coagulation,0f
331t
counting erors due to, 17
Coombs test, 96, 177-178
estrogen-induced anemia, 343
Cellularity, of bone marrow, 251, 253f
Copper deficiency, 108-109
frequency diagram of healthy compared vs.
Change in platelet shape, 196
Core biopsy, bone marrow, 238-240, 241f
diseased dog populations, 4f
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 137-140, 139f,
hypercellular, 261f
Gray collie syndrome, 148
147
Corrected reticulocyte count, 92
Chemical-induced disorders
Coverslip blood-film method, 19
immunodeficiency in, 186
hemolytic anemia, 104
Crenated erythrocytes, 65-66
hereditary stomatocytosis, 106
thrombocytopenia, 215
Critical difference measurements, 9-10
immunodeficiencies in, 186
Chondrosarcomas, of bone, 318
Crystallized hemoglobin, 75, 76f
iron-defciency anemia, 345
Chronic infammation/hyperplasia, bone
Cyclic hematopoiesis, 148
Jack Russell terriers, SCID in, 185
marrow, 294
Cytauxzoon felis infection
PFK deficiency, 105
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), 161-162,
causing hemolytic anemia, 102-103
PK deficiency, 105
300
of erythrocytes, 86
primary IMT in, 183
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), 146,
schizont development, 157f,289f-291f
pyometra, 349
314-315
Cytochemical stains, 23
systemic lupus erythematosus, 350
associated with left shift, 134
Cytochrome-b5 reductase deficiency, 97
X-linked SCID in, 185
Circulating neutrophil pool (CNP), 123-124
Cytograms, erythrocyte, 96
Dohle bodies, 137, 138f
Circulation
Cytokines, role in neutrophil production, 43
Domestic animals
of bone marrow, 34f
Cytoplasm, toxic. See Toxic cytoplasm
anemias resulting from decreased erythrocyte
lymphocyte, 125f
Cytoplasmic vacuoles, 159f
production, 107b
Clinical signs
lymphocyte,158
bone marrow diferential cell counts,
 of hemostatic disorders, 209
neutrophil, 144
251t
 of immunodeficiency disorders, 185
in neutrophilic precursors, 282-283
causes of blood-loss anemias in, 106b
Coagulation
causes of hemolytic anemias in, 101b
amplification of, 199
D
erythrocytosis in, 111b
initiation of, 198-199
D-dimer assays, 206
myeloid-to-erythroid ratio, 254t
propagation of, 199-200
Dacryocytes, 73, 75f
reference intervals for hematology values,
Coagulation disorders: acquired
Degenerative changes in blood samples, 27
329t
antiphospholipid antibody, 221-222
Degranulated platelet aggregate, 192f
Drepanocytes, 73-75, 75f
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
Dendritic cells
 Drug-induced disorders
220-221
environmental signal-presenting, 124
aplastic anemia, 110, 261
hemolytic-uremic syndrome, 221
functions of, 129-130
dysgranulopoiesis, 281
hypercoagulable state, 219
neoplastic, 167
immune-mediated anemia, 104 
liver disease, 222
 production of, 43-44
neutropenia,280
snake venoms, 222-223
Deoxyhemoglobin, 13f, 49-50
thrombocytopenia, 215
thromboembolism, 219-220
Diagnostic tests
Dwarf megakaryocytes, 29f, 287f
vitamin K deficiency, 222
lymphopenia as, 5t
Dyserythropoiesis, 109, 273-275, 308f
Coagulation disorders: hereditary
plasma fibrinogen concentration as, 6, 7t
Dysgranulopoiesis, 280-283
defects in common coagulation pathway,
Dicumarol, 222
Dysmegakaryocytopoiesis, 284-285, 287f
223
Diff-Quik stain, 20
factor IX and factor VIII deficiencies, 223
 Differential diagnosis
E
factor VIl deficiency, 223
of anemia, 98
Eccentrocytes, 70-71, 72f
factor XI defciency, 223
of erythrocytosis, 112
Echinocytes,65-66,70f
factor Xll and prekallikrein deficiencies, 223
Differential leukocyte count, 25-26
Echinoelliptocytes,74f
vitamin K-dependent coagulopathies,
 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (2,3DPG), 49
Effective erythroid hyperplasia, 269
223-224
pathway, 52
Ehrichi spp infection, 140
Coagulation factor deficiencies, 342f
Direct antiglobulin test (DAT), 96,
Electrophoresis, serum protein, 13f
Coagulopathies, vitamin K-dependent, 223-224
177-178
Elliptocytes, 51f, 71-73
Codocytes, 72f
 Direct enzyme-linked antiglobulin test
Emperipolesis,285, 288
Coefficient of variation (CV)
(DELAT), 178
Endothelial cells
affecting results interpretation, 9
Direct immunofuorescen
activated, 125
for leukocyte types, 89
assay, 178
seen in blood films, 28
Collagen fbers, promoting hematopoiesis, 37
Diroflariα immifis microflaria, Wright-Giemsa
English bull terriers, lethal acrodermatitis in,
Colony-forming-unit erythrocyte (CFU-E), 38,
stain, 24f
187
41
Discocytes, 50f, 71f
Eosinopenia, 150-151
Commercial veterinary laboratories, 1
Disease prevalence, predictive values and, 4-6
Eosinophilia, 150
Common coagulation pathway, defects in, 223
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
Esinophilic hyperplasia, 277278
Common lymphoid progenitor (CLP), 35, 36f
220-221
Eosinophilic leukemia, 315
354
Index
Eosinophils
Erythroid islands, 246f
Flow cytometry,platelet activation measured by,
bone marrow, 254
Erythroid l0ops, 76
208
eosinopenia, 150-151
Erythroid progenitors, 38
Foals
eosinophilia, 150
Erythroid series
Arabian, SCID in, 185
functions of, 127-128
abnormalities
erythrograms, 334t
granules,phagocytized,144
dyserythropoiesis, 273-275
leukograms, 335t
kinetics of, 124
erythroid hyperplasia, 268-270
normal, purple granules in neutrophils,
morphology, 148-150
elective erythroid hyperplasia or aplasia,
137
production of, 43
270-273
X-linked agammaglobulinemia in, 186
Epithelioid macrophages, filled with fungal
bone marrow cells, 240-243
Foamy basophilia, 137, 138f
hyphae,296f
Erythroleukemia, 165f-166f, 312
Folate deficiency, anemia resulting from, 108
Equine infectious anemia (EIA) virus infection,
Erythrophagocytosis, in monocytes, 153
Fragmentation anemia, 104
103
Erythropoiesis
Free nuclei
Eryptosis, 57-58
control of, 41-42
bone marrow, 248-250, 249f
Erythrocyte assays
HPCs and bone marrow microenvironment,
 seen in blood flms, 28, 28f
direct antiglobulin test, 96
38-39
Frequency diagram
EPO assay, 98
maturation of erythroid cells, 39-41
healthy compared with diseased dog
erythrocyte counts, hematocrit, and
nutrients needed for, 39
populations, 4f
hemoglobin content, 90-91
primitive, 38
hypothetical, 3f
erythrocyte volume histograms and
Erythropoietin (EPO), 38-39
Fungal hyphae
erythrocyte cytograms, 96
86 Kesse
in core biopsy section, 297f
 methemoglobin determination, 96-97
 role in control of erythropoiesis, 42f 
epithelioid macrophages filled with,
reticulocyte counts, 91-93
Essential thrombocythemia, 315
296f
serum iron assays, 97-98
Estrogen-induced aplastic anemia, 343
Erythrocyte indices
Estrogen toxicity, 261
G
classification of anemia using, 99
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA),
Gaussian distribution
mean cell hemoglobin, 95
11-12, 202
hypothetical plasma analyte with, 2f
mean cellhemoglobin concentration,
errors in counting due to, 17
overlapping distributions, 3f
94-95
External laboratories, 1
Gelatinous transformation of bone marrow,
 mean cell volume, 93-94
Extracellular matrix (ECM), 33-34,
264-265
red cell distribution width, 95-96
37-38
Giant neutrophils, 135f, 143, 281f
Erythrocyte vesicles, 76-78, 77f
Extramedullary plasmacytoma, 305
Glass-slide biood-flm method, 18-19
Erythrocytes
Extrinsic pathway activation, 198-199
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
anemias
deficiency, in horse, 105
blood-l0ss, 106-107
F
Granulation, toxic, 137
differential diagnosis, 98
Factor VII deficiency, 223
Granules
hemolytic, 99-106
Factor VIII deficiency, 223
cytoplasmic, 158
regenerative vs. nonregenerative, 99
Factor IX deficiency, 223
eosinophilic, phagocytized, 144
 resulting from decreased erythrocyte
Factor XI deficiency, 223
neutrophilic, 137-140
production, 107-111
Factor XII
primary and secondary, 122
autoagglutination, 23f
activation of factor Xl, 199-200
Wright-Giemsa stain, 21f
erythrocytosis, 111-112
deficiency, 223
Granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF),
hypochromic, 64f
False negatives (FNs),3-4
275-276, 280, 282
inclusions of, 79-82
False positives (FPs), 3-4
Granulocytes
infectious agents of, 82-90
Familial erythrocytosis, 112
 distribution of, 254
morphology, 26
Familial neutropenia, 280
maturation of, 40f
abnormal, 59-79
Feathered edge of blood film, 24f
segmented, 243
normal, 49
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
normal
diagnostic test for, 4
Granulocytic hyperplasia,275
biochemistry, 50-57
test results, 5t
Granulocytic hypoplasia, 278-279
functions, 49-50
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 187
Granulocytic series
normal removal of aged erythrocytes,
 Fell pony syndrome, 186
abnormalities
57-58
Femur, proximal, bone marrow biopsy site,
basophilic hyperplasia, 278
nucleated, 17
234-235
dysgranulopoiesis, 280-283
pathologic destruction of, 58-59
Ferritin, serum, 98
eosinophili hyperplasia, 277-278
phagocytized,macrophage with,
Fibrinogen
granulocytic hyperplasia,275
292f
coagulation-based assays for, 205
granulocytic hypoplasia,278-279
Erythrocytosis, 111-112
as diagnostic test for Rhodococcus equi
neutrophilichyperplasia,275277
algorithm, 339f
pneumonia, 6, 7t
selective neutrophilic hypoplasia or aplasia,
primary, 315
measured in hematocrit tube, 16
279-280
Erythrograms, of foals, 334t
Fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDP)
bone marrow cells, 242
Erythroid cells
assays, 205-206
Granulomatous infammation, chronic,
bone marrow, 254
Fibrinolysis, 202
294-295
iron uptake by, 56
Fibrinous infammation, bone marrow,
Gray collie syndrome, 148
maturation of, 39-41, 244f
293-294
 Gross examination of blood samples
megaloblastic, 274f
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) defciency,
erythrocyte agglutination, 13-14
Erythroid hyperplasia, 268-270
erythrocyte, 106
methemoglobinemia, 12-13
Index
355
Growth factors, hematopoietic, 38
Hemolytic anemia (Continued)
Hyperbilirubinemia, 15
Growth hormone, dogs deficient in, 186
oxidants causing, 104
Hypercellularity, with increased hemosiderin,
primary immune-mediated, 181-182
257f
H
regenerative, 99-100
Hypercoagulable state, 219
Haemobartonella organisms. See Heinz bodies
venoms causing, 104
 Hypereosinophilic syndrome, 348
Haptotaxis, 125f
Hemolytic-ure mia syndrome, 221
Hyperostosis, 268
Heinz bodies, 73f, 79-80, 81f
Hemophagocytic syndrome, 293
Hyperplasia
Heinz-body hemolytic anemia, 104
Hemoplasmas, 87-90
basophilic,278
Hematocrit (HCT), 90-91
causing hemolytic anemia, 103
eosinophilic, 277-278
Hematology tests
Hemorrhage, massive external, 214
erythroid, 268-270
accuracy vs.precision, 6-10
Hemosiderin
granulocytic, 275
 automated vs. manual analytical methods,
bone marrow, 256
megakaryocytic, 283-284
8-9
macrophages containing, 295f
monocytic, 286
Tements,9-10
monocytes containing, 156f
neutrophilic, 275-277
cutoff values, 6
neutrophils containing, 23f
reactive macrophage, 286
 predictive values and disease prevalence, 4-6
Hemostasis
Hypersegmentation, 135-136
 sensitivity and speciicity, 3-4
Kreud
 Hypo-osmolality, hemolytic anemia due to, 104
Hematopoiesis
platelet phase, 194-197
Hypocellar bone marrow, 109-110, 260-263
cyclic, 148
vascular phase, 194
Hypochromasia, 27t, 62-63
erythropoiesis, 38-42
secondary
Hypogammaglobulinemia,transient,in
hematopoietic growth factors, 38
amplification of coagulation,199
neonates, 186
hematopoietic microenvironment, 37-38
 inhibitors of thrombus formation, 201
Hypogranular platelets, 210, 212f
 hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells,
initiation of coagulation, 198-199
Hypophosphatemia, hemolytic anemia
34-35
propagation of coagulation,199-200
secondary to, 104-105
homing to marrow, 37
thrombus stabilization, 200
Hypoplasia
leukopoiesis, 42-44
Hemostatic disorders
granulocytic, 278-279
 mesenchymal stem cells, 35-37
clinical signs of, 209
selective megakaryocytic, 284
organization of bone marrow, 33-34
screening tests for,203-207
selective neutrophilic, 279-280
sites of blood cell production, 33
 specialized tests for, 207-209
Hyposegmentation, 134-135
thrombopoiesis, 45
Hemostatic test profles,interpretation of, 224
 Hypotrichosis, with thymic aplasia in cats, 186
Hematopoietic cells
Hemotropic mycoplasmas, 87-90
 generalized decreases in
causing hemolytic anemia, 103
acute bone marrow injury and necrosis,
Heparin
IgM antibodies, antierythrocyte, 15f
263-264
for CBC, 11-12
Lium, bone marrow biopsy site, 234
gelatinous transformation of bone marrow,
errors in counting due to, 17
Immune-mediated disorders
264-265
inhibitory role in coagulation, 202-203
hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
hypocellular/aplastic bone marrow, 260-263
Hepatozoo spp infection, of neutohis,
neonatal isoerythrolysis, 101
myelofibrosis, 265-267
142-143
primary, 101
osteosclerosis/hyperostosis, 268
Hepcidin, 55f, 56
transfusion reactions, 101-102
generalized increases in, 260
Hereditary coagulation disorders
neutropenia (IMN), 147, 276-277
Hematopoietic neoplasms, 296-298
 defects in common coagulation pathway, 223
nonregenerative anemia, 109
Heme synthesis abnormalities, anemia resulting
factor IX and factor VII deficiencies, 223
8t-0st reud siaprosip paepau-aunu
from, 108-109
factor VII deficiency, 223
IMHA, 181-182
 Heme-hemopexin complexes, 59
factor XI deficiency, 223
IMN, 183
Hemoglobin
factor Xll and prekallikrein deficiencies, 223
 neonatal isoerythrolysis, 181
buffering action of, 49-50
vitamin K-dependent coagulopathies,
systemic lupus erythematosus, 183-184
crystallized, 75, 76f
223-224
thrombocytopenia (IMT), 182-183
 spuriously increased values, 17
Hereditary erythrocyte defects, 105-106
transfusion reactions, 181
Hemoglobin-haptoglobin complexes, 58
Histiocytic sarcoma, 293
Immune-mediated disorders: tests for
Hemoglobinuria, postparturient, in dairy cattl,
Histograms, erythrocyte volume,96
antierythrocyte antibodies, 177-178
106
Histoplasmosis, disseminated,9f
antinuclear antibodies, 179-180
Hemolysis, microhematocrit tube demonstrating,
 Hormone deficiencies, nonregenerative anemia
antiplatelet antibodies, 180
16f
resulting from, 108
blood cross-match tests, 179
Hemolytic anemia
Horses
blood typing, 178-179
associated with equine infectious anemia, 103
ALL, 344
Immune system, 177
due to
AML in, 313-314
 Immunodeficiency disorders
 liver failure in horses, 106
bone marrow differential cell counts, 251t
clinical signs, 185
postparturient hemoglobinuria in dairy
erythrocyte FAD deficiency, 106
cattle, 106
G6PD deficiency, 105
dogs, 187
 splenic disorders, 106
lipemia in, 137
failure of passive transfer of immunoglobulins,
erythrocyte parasites, 102-103
liver failure causing hemolytic anemia, 106
187
fragmentation, 104
vaginal tear, 347
inherited neutrophil defects, 185
hereditary erythrocyte defects, 105-106
Howell-Jolly bodies, 79, 79f-81f
serum immunoglobulin deficiencies, 186
hypo-osmolality, 104
severe combined immunodeficiency, 185
hypophosphatemia, 104-105
235
T lymphocyte immunodeficiency, 186-187
idiopathic Heinz body,82f
tests for, 184-185
immune-mediated, 14f, 101-102, 104
126-127
viral immune defciency disorders, 187
356
Index
Immunoglobulins
Interpretation of test results
Leukocytes (Contrinued)
failure of passive transfer of, 187
bone marrow aspirate, 258, 328
 evaluation by examining stained blood film,
serum immunoglobulin assays, 184-185
hemostatic test profles, 224
24-26
serum immunoglobulin deficiencies, 186
relative to reference intervals, 3
functions of, 125-132
 Impedance counters, 17
Intrinsic pathway activation, 199-200
included in erythrocyte measurements, 18
 Imprecision in assay, 7
Iron assays
kinetics, 122-125
Inclusions
serum ferritin, 98
lymphocytes, 156-163
of blood cells, seen in blood films, 27-28
serum iron, 97
mast cells, 151-153
distemper, 86-87
total iron-binding capacity, 98
monocytes, 153-156
lymphocyte, 158
Iron deficiency, 108
neutrophils, 132-148
neutrophil, 137-140
Iron-deficiency anemia, 345
types and numbers in blood, 122
Inclusions of erythrocytes
Iron metabolism
Leukocytosis
 basophilic stippling, 80
iron absorption, 54-56
neutrophilic, 146
Cabot rings, 82
in macrophages, 56-57
primary IMHA with, 182
Heinz bodies, 79-80
plasma iron, 56
Leukograms, of foals, 335t
Howell-Jolly bodies, 79
systemic control of, 56
Leukopenia
siderotic inclusions, 80-82
uptake of iron by erythroid cells, 56
algorithm, 340f
Ineffective erythroid hyperplasia, 269-270
Iron stains, 22-23
nonregenerative anemia with, 109-110
Ineffective neutrophilic hyperplasia, 276,
Isoerythrolysis, neonatal, 14f, 101, 181
nonregenerative anemia without, 108-109
277f
Leukopoiesis
 Infectious agents of blood cells, seen in blood
eosinophil, basophil, and mast cell production,
flms, 27-28
Jack Russell terriers, SCID in, 185
43
 Infectious agents of erythrocytes
lymphocyte and NK cell production,44
Anapiasma spp.,86
neutrophil production, 42-43
个
artifacts resembling, 90
Karyolysis, 144
production of monocytes, macrophages,
Babesia spp., 82-85
Karyorrhexis, 27, 28f, 144
dendritic cells, and osteoclasts, 43-44
Bartonella spp., 90
Keratocytes, 67
Life span of platelets, 191
causing hemolytic anemia, 102-103
Kindlin-3 deficiency, 148, 217
Lipemia
Cytauxzoon felis, 86
Kinetics of leukocytes, 122-125
distemper inclusions, 86-87
Knizocytes, 71f
15
hemotropic mycoplasmas, 87-90
in horse, 137
Tbeileria spp., 86
L
Liver disease, contributing to DIC, 222
Infectious agents of neutrophils
Laboratories, internal vs. external, 1
 Liver failure, causing hemolytic anemia in
and diagnosis of bacteremia, 143
Large granular lymphocytes, infitrate of, 303f
horses, 106
 distemper inclusions, 140
Large granular lymphocytic (LGL)leukemia,
 Lobulated nucleus, 274f
Hepatozoon species, 142-143
300-301
Lupus erythematosus celtest, 180
rickettsial species, 140-142
Laser fow cytometry, 17
Lymphoblasts, 163
Infectious thrombocytopenia,215
Left shifts
in core biopsy section,298f
Inflammation
 disorders associated with
 Lymphocyte assays, 184
associated with left shift, 134
chronic myeloid leukemia, 134
Lymphocytes
 neutrophilia associated with, 145
infammation, 134, 145-146
bone marrow, 245, 254-255
Infammatory disease, nonregenerative aemia
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 134-135
functions of, 130-132
of, 108
morphology of, 133-134
kinetics of, 124-125
 Infammatory disorders of bone
maIrOW
Leishmaniasis, disseminated, 288f
morphology
acute inflammation, 293
Leptocytes, 64f, 70, 71f
 cytoplasmic granules, vacuoles, and
chronic granulomatous infammation,
Lethal acrodermatitis, in English bull terriers,
inclusions, 158
294-295
187
 neoplastic large granular lymphomas,
 chronic infammation/hyperplasia, 294
Leukemia
158-160
fibrinous infammation, 293-294
acute lymphoblastic (ALL), 162, 344
normal, 156-157
Inherited disorders
acute myeloid (AML), 309-314
reactive lymphocytes, 157-158
 defects in platelet function,217
basophilic, 315
tgo uonod
erythrocyte membrane defects, 51
blood 1eukocyte counts in, 296-297
Lymphocytosis, 160-162
thrombocytopenia, 216
chronic lymphocytic (CLL), 161-162
Lymphoid neoplasms 
Inherited disorders of neutrophils, 185
chronic myeloid (CML), 134, 146, 314-315
ALL,298-300
β2 integrin adhesion molecule deficiencies,
in dogs, antibody phenotyping, 298t
CLL,300
148
eosinophilic, 315
lymphomas, 301-302
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 147
multiple myeloma, 302-306
cyclic hematopoiesis, 148
23f
Lymphomas, 301-302
Kindlin-3 deficiency, 148
Leukocyte counts
metastatic, 164f
unknown neutrophil function defects, 148
 manual and automated methods, 8f
Lymphopenia, 162-163
Inhibition of neutrophil production, 43
total, with abnormal differential counts,
as diagnostic test for FIP, 5t
Inhibition of platelet aggregation, 201
341f
Lysed erythrocytes, 76, 77f
Innate immunity, 177
Leukocytes
Lysosomal storage diseases, 137
β, Integrin adhesion molecule deficiencies,
basophils, 151
148
blast cells or poorly differentiated cells,
M
 Internal laboratories, 1
163-168
Macrocytic anemia, hypochromic and
 International System of Units (SI units), 3
eosinophils, 148-151
normochromic,100
Index
357
Macrocytosis, 94
Metarubricytes, 41f, 67f, 70f, 78-79, 78f, 242
Myeloblasts, 165, 242
Macrophage activation syndrome,214
siderotic, 275f
in bone marrow aspirate, 281f
 Macrophage colony-stimulating factor
Metastatic blast cells, 167-168
proliferation, 310f
(M-CSF), 129
Metastatic lymphoma, in bone marrow, 302f
type IL, 311
Macrophages
Metastatic neoplasms, bone marrow, 316-317
Myelocytes, 242
filled with phagocytized cellular material,
Methemoglobin
neutrophilic, 136f
291f
determination, 96-97
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), 307-309
functions of, 129
formation and reduction, 54
Myelofibrosis, 265-267
iron metabolism in, 56-57
Methemoglobinemia, 12-13
 Myeloid neoplasms
marrow, 39, 244-245
toxic, 97
acute myeloid leukemias, 309-314
phagocytosis of erythrocytes, 255
Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, 104
characterization of, 306-307
_production of, 43-44
Microcytic anemia, 94
myelodysplastic syndromes, 307-309
Macroreticulocytes, 93
normochromic/hypochromic,100
myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs),
Macrothrombocytes, 209
Microfilaria, seen in blood films, 29
314-315
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC),
Microhematocrit tube evaluation, 14-16
 Myeloid precursor cells, in bone marrow, 245f
129-130
appearance of plasma, 15
Myeloid-to-erythroid ratio, 254
Manual methods
fibrinogen determination, 16
Myelomonocytic leukemia, 166f
7s. automated methods, 8-9
packed cells, 15
Myeloperoxidase, 127
blood cell counting by, 16-17
plasma protein determination, 15-16
Myelophthisic disorders, 110
used as quality control measures, 18
Micronuclei, 79
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs)
 Marginating neutrophil pool (MNP),
Mirotubules, platelet, 1
basophilic leukemia, 315
123-124
Mitochondrial extrusion, 41f
chronic myeloid leukemia, 314-315
Mast cells
Mitotic cells
cosinophilic leukemia, 315
bone marrow, 249f, 250, 256
bone marrow, 247, 255
essential thrombocythemia, 315
mastocytemia, 152-153
seen in blood films, 28, 28f 
primary erythrocytosis, 315
morphology, 151-152
Monoblasts, 165-166
Myelotoxicity, 282-283
primed, 127-128
Monocytes
production of, 43
functions, 129
N
tumors of, 316
kinetics, 124
Naive lymphocytes, 124
Mastocytemia, 152-153
 morphology, 153-155
Natural killer cells (NK cells)
Maturation
_production, 43-44
functions of, 132
 acute myeloblastic leuke mia with and without,
Monocytic hyperplasia, 286
half-life in circulation, 125
309-311
 Monocytic series, bone marrow cells, 243-244
go uogonpoid
of erythroid cells, 39-41
Monocytosis, 155-156
Necropsy, bone marrow collction at, 238
May-Hegglin anomaly, 140
Monogastric animals, overnight fasting,
Necrosis, bone marrow, 263-264
Mean ± 2 SD, in calculating reference interval,
11-12
Needles
2
Mononuclear leukocytes, 122, 123f
for bone marrow aspiration, 236f
Mean cell hemoglobin (MCH), 95
Mononuclear phagocyte abnormalities
for bone marrow core biopsy, 240f
 Mean cell hemoglobin concentration (MCHC),
histiocytic sarcoma, 293
 Negative feedback, for neutrophil production,
17, 94-95
monocytic hyperplasia, 286
43
Mean cell volume (MCV), 91, 93-94
 phagocytosis of blood cells and precursors,
 Neonatal animals
cutoff values and, 6
286-293
alloimmune thrombocytopenia in, 182-183
 Mean platelet volume (MPV), 203-204
reactive macrophage hyperplasia, 286
physiologic anemia of, 110-111
Megakaryoblastic leukemia, 165f, 167f,
Mononuclear phagocytes,255
transient hypogammaglobulinemia in, 186
312-313
 Morphologic appearance of bone marrow cells
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, 14f, 101, 181
Megakaryoblasts, 166-167, 240
erythrocytic series, 240-243
 Neoplasia
Megakaryocyte-erythrocyte progenitor (MkEP),
lymphocytes, 245
 blood-loss anemias caused by, 106
35, 36f
 macrophages, 244-245
thrombocytopenia and, 216
Megakaryocytes
megakaryocytic series, 240
 Neoplasms
abnormalities
miscellaneous cells and free nuclei, 248-250
hematopoietic, 296-298
dysmegakaryocytopoiesis, 284-285
mitotic figures, 247
histiocytic,293
emperipolesis, 285
monocytic series, 243-244
involving lymphoid cel,158-160
hyperplasia, 283-285
osteoblasts, 247
lymphoid,298-306
selective hypoplasia or aplasia, 284
osteoclasts, 247
myeloid, 306-315
bone marrow, 251-254
plasma cells, 245-246
nonhematopoietic, 315-318
 development of, 45f
Mott cells, 158-160, 160f
Neoplastic dendritic cells, 167
dwarf, 287f
Mucopolysaccharidosis type Vl, 139f
Neutropenia, 146-147
 seen in blood films, 28-29
Multiple myeloma, 302-306
drug-induced,280
Megakaryocytic series, bone marrow cells,
B-lymphocyte neoplasms, 305-306
immune-mediated (IMIN), 276-277
240
 extramedullary plasmacytoma, 305
primary, 183
 Megaloblastic erythroid cells, 274f
Mycobacteriosis, disseminated, 289f
Neutrophilextracellular traps (NETs),127
Megaloblastic rubricytes, 270f, 308f
Myobacterium avium infection, 296f
Neutrophil function tests, 184
 Melanoma, metastatic, 317f
Myoplasma haemofelis infection, 345
Neutrophil percentages,box lots, 9f
Membrane proteins, erythrocyte, 5051
Myxoplasma spp.
Neutrophil precursor cels, 133f
Memory lymphocytes, 124-125
 attached to erythrocytes, 142f
 Neutrophili, 144-146 
 Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC), 35-37
causing hemolytic anemia, 103
Neutrophilic hyperplasia, 275277
Metamyelocytes, 243
hemotropic, 87-90
Neutrophilic precursors, toxic, 284f
358
Index
 Neutrophils
Nucleic acid synthesis disorders, anemia
Platelet counts
containing hemosiderin, 23f
 resulting from, 108
feline, spuriously decreased,1
disorders with left shifts
 Nutrients, needed for erythropoiesis, 39
 manual and automated methods, 8f
 chronic myeloid leukemia, 134
normal, 191
infammation, 134
0
 in screening test for hemostatic disorders, 203
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 134-135
Osmotic fragility, erythrocyte, increased, 105
Platelet disorders
functions of, 125-127
Osteoblasts, 247
abnormal platelet morphology, 209-211
granules and inclusions, 137-140
Osteoclasts, 247, 248f
 platelet function abnormalities
hypersegmentation, 135-136
production of, 43-44
acquired defects, 216
infectious agents
Osteosarcoma, 317-318
inherited defects, 217
and diagnosis of bacteremia, 143
Osteosclerosis, 268
von Willebrand disease, 217-218
distemper inclusions, 140
Overlapping Gaussian distributions, 3-4
pseudothrombocytopenia, 216
Hepatozoon species, 142143
Oxidants
thrombocytopenia, 211-216
rickettsial species, 140-14
thrombocytosis, 218-219
inherited defects, 185
protection against oxidant injury, 52-54
Platelet function
β2 integrin adhesion molecule deficiencies,
Oxygen, Oz affnity of fetal blood, 49
abnormalities in, 216-218
148
tests, 208
Chediak-Higashi syndrome, 147
P
Platelet function analyzer (PFA), 208
cyclic hematopoiesis, 148
Packed cell volume (PCV), 15, 90-91
 Platelet phase of primary hemostasis
Kindlin-3 defciency, 148
Parasites
 change in platelet shape, 196
unknowm neutrophil function defects,
 blood-loss anemias caused by, 106
platelet activation, 195-196
148
erythrocyte, causing hemolytic anemia,
platelet adhesion, 194-195
kinetics of, 122-124
102-103
platelet aggregation, 196
morphologic abnormalities
 8Zt on Supuq Tudouisoa pazuosdo
platelet procoagulant activity, 197
 cytoplasmic vacuoles, 144
Particles, marrow
platelet secretion, 196
giant neutrophils, 143
 prior to preparing blood flm, 238f
Platelets
karyolysis, 144
smears containing, 236,239f
activated,209
phagocytized eosinophil granules, 144
Parvovirus infection, causing marrow hypoplasia,
depletion,342f
pyknosis and karyorrhexis, 144
110, 261
examined in blood film, 26-27
 stain precipitation, 144
Pathophysiology, of intravascular hemolysis,
hypogranular, 210, 212f
 morphology of left shifts, 133-134
58f
life span, 191
neutropenia, 146-147
Pelger-Huet anomaly, 134-135
metabolism, 192-194
neutrophilia, 144-146
Peripheral blood findings, for AMIL, 313
 normal morphology, 191
normal morphology, 132
Peritonitis, septic, 134f
secretion, 208
production of 42-43
Phagocytized eosinophil granules, 144
in thrombocytopenia, 213
toxic cytoplasm, 136-137
Phagocytized erythrocytes, macrophage with,
Poikilocytes, 51f
Dohle bodies, 137
292f
Poikilocytosis, 63-64, 63f
foamy basophilia, 137
Phagocytosis
Polychromasia, 27t, 59-61, 99
toxic granulation, 137
of bacteria, 126
Polychromatophilic erythrocytes, 193f, 242
 New methylene blue
of blood cells and precursors, 286-293
Polychromatophilic rubricytes,242
reticulocyte stain, 81f
of erythrocytes, 57f
Polycythemia, 111-112
"wet mounts, 22
of platelets, 214
algorithm,339f
 Nonerythroid cells, 309-311
Phosphatidylserine (PS), 57, 191, 197
Ponies, Fell pony syndrome, 186
 Nonhematopoietic neoplasms, 315-318
 Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency, 52,
Postparturient hemoglobinuria, in dairy cattle,
mast cell tumors, 316
67f
106
metastatic neoplasms, 316-317
 in dogs, 105
Precision of analytical procedure, vs. test
sarcomas of bone, 317-318
Phospholipase A activation, 196f
accuracy, 6-10
 Nonregenerative anemia
Physiologic anemia, of neonatal animals,
Predictive values
algorithm, 338f
110-111
and disease prevalence, 4-6
immune-mediated, 109
Plants,causing hemolytic anemia, 104
of negative test (PVNT), 5
of infammatory disease, 272-273
Plasma, appearance of, 15
of positive test (PVPT), 4-5
with leukopenia and/or thrombocytopenia,
Plasma cells
cutoff values, 6
109-110
bone marrow, 245-246, 247f, 255
U. regenerative anemia,99
increased, in bone marrow, 294
331t
without leukopenia or thrombocytopenia,
Plasma iron, 56
Prekallikrein deficiency, 223
108-109
Plasma protein, determination of, 15-16
Prekeratocyte, with hole, 68f
Normal erythrocyte biochemistry
Plasmacytoblasts, infiltrate of, 304f
Primary erythrocytosis, 315
ATP generation, 51-52
Plasmacytoma, extramedullary, 305
Primary hemostasis
2,3DPG pathway, 52
Plasmacytosis, 304
platelet phase, 194-197
iron metabolism, 54-57
Platelet activation, 195-196
vascular phase, 194
 membrane structure and function, 50-51
 Platelet agregates
Primary immune-mediated disorders, 180-184
methemoglobin formation and reduction, 54
with filopodia formation, 197f
IMHA, 101, 181-182
oxidant injury, 52-54
Wright-Giemsa stain, 24f
IMN, 183
 Normal lymphocyte morphology, 156-157
 Pla telet aggregation
 neonatal isoerythrolysis, 181
 Normocytic normochromic anemia, 100
inhibition of, 201
 systemic lupus erythematosus, 183-184
 Nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs), 78-79
in platelet phase of primary hemostasis, 196
thrombocytopenia (IMT), 182-183
counted in leukocyte evaluation, 26
test for hemostatic disorders, 208
transfusion reactions, 181
Index
359
Primitive erythropoiesis, 38
Reticulocytes
Signs
Procoagulant activity of platelets, 197
development of, 39-40
clinical
 Progenitor cells, hematopoietic (HPC), 34-35
formed from polychromatophilic
 of hemostatic disorders, 209
and bone marrow microenvironment, 
metarubricytes, 242
of immunodeficiency disorders, 185
38-39
Ribs, proximal, bone marrow biopsy site, 235
for SLE, 184b
homing to marrow, 37
Ricketsial species, infecting granulocytes,
Sinuses, vascular, of bone marrow, 35f-36f
Progranulocytes, 242
140-142
Smallymphocytes, infltrate of 300f-301f
 Promegakaryocytes, 240
 Roll preparations
 Snake venoms, affecting platelet function,
Promyelocytes, 242
of bone marrow aspirate, 240
222-223
 Propagation of coagulation
lymphoblasts in, 299f
Sodium citrate, 202
factor XII activation of factor XI, 199-200
Romanowsky-type stains, 19-20
Specialized tests for hemostatic disorders
thrombin activation of factor Xl, 200
Rouleaux, 14f, 59
antiplatelet antibody, 208-209
Prorubricytes, 242
Rubriblasts, 39, 78f, 166, 240
antithrombin, 207
 Protease nexin-1, 201
Rubricytes, 78-79
PIVKA, 207
Protein C anticoagulant pathway, 201
basophilic, 242
platelet function, 208
 Proteins induced by vitamin K absence or
megaloblastic, 270f, 308f
reticulated platelet count, 207-208
antagonism (PIVKA), 207
 polychromatophilic, 78f
specific coagulation factors, 209
Proteoglycans, 38
Rule-out strategy, 6
von Willebrand factor, 207
Prothrombin time (PT), 205
Specificity of tests, 3-4
Proximal femur, bone marrow biopsy site,
S
Spherocytes, 68-69
234-235
 Sample collection and handling, 11-12
Spherocytosis, hereditary, in cattle, 105
 Proximal humerus, bone marrow biopsy site,
Sarcomas
Spindle-shaped endothelial cells, 29f
235
of bone, 317-318
 Spirochetes, seen in blood films, 30f
Proximal ribs, bone ma
histiocytic, 293
Spleen, contractile, 91
 Prussian blue stain, of bone marrow aspirate
Schistocytes, 69-70
Spleen disorders
smears, 23
 Screening tests for hemostatic disorders
causing hemolytic anemia, 106
 Pseudopod, neutrophil, 126
activated clotting time, 204
mastocytosis, 153f
Pseudothrombocytopenia,216
activated partial thromboplastin time
Spot test, methemoglobin, 14f
Punctate reticulocytes, 91-92
(APTT), 204-205
Stain precipitation, neutrophils with, 144
Pyknocytes, 71, 72f, 74f
bleeding time, 204
Stainable iron, 97
Pyknosis, 27, 28f, 144
D-dimer assays, 206
in bone marrow, 256-258
Pyogranulomatous infammation, bone marrow,
fbrinogen, 205
Staining, Heinz bodies, 81f
295f, 297f
fibrin(ogen) degradation products (FDP)
Staining of blood films
Pyometra, 349
assays, 205-206
cytochemical stains, 23
Pyridoxine deficiency, 94, 108-109
MIPV, 203-204
iron stains, 22-23
 Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency, in cats and
platelet count, 203
new methylene blue “wet mounts,” 22
dogs, 105
prothrombin time (PT), 205
reticulocyte stains, 21-22
thrombin clotting time (TCT), 205
Romanowsky-type stains, 19-20
Q
thromboelastography (TEG),206-207
Stat tests, 1
Quality control, for blood cell counting and
Secondary hemostasis
Stem cells
sizing, 18
amplification of coagulation, 199
hematopoietic (HSC), 34-35
inhibition of thrombus formation, 201
homing to marrow, 37
R
initiation of coagulation,198199
mesenchymal (MSC), 35-37
Raw manual reticulocyte counts, 92
propagation of coagulation,19-200
Sternum, bone marrow biopsy site, 235
 Reactive lymphocytes, 157-158, 159f
thrombus stabilization, 200
Stomatocytes, 67-68
Reactive macrophage hyperplasia 286
 Segmented granulocytes, 243
Stomatocytosis, hereditary, in dogs, 106
Red blood cell (RBC) count, 90-91
Selectins, rolling, 125
Stomatospherocytes, 69f
Red cell distribution width (RDW), 95-96
 Selection of reference animals, 2
Stress reticulocytes, 60f, 93, 99
Red discoloration of plasma, 15
Selective erythroid aplasia, 109, 270-273
Stromal cells, 37
Reduced glutathione (GSH), 53-54
Selective immunoglobulin deficiencies, 186
bone marrow, 248-250, 250f
 Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
Selective megakaryocytic hypoplasia, 284
Superoxide free radicals, generation of, 1f
phosphate (NADPH), 52-53
Selective neutrophilic hypoplasia, 279-280
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 183-184,
 Reference intervals
Sensitivity of tests, 3-4
350
determination of, 2-3
Sequestration of platelets, 214
for hematology values, 329t
Serum ferritin, 98
T
interpretation of test results relative to, 3
Serum immunoglobulin assays, 184-185
T-lymphocyte immunodefciency, 186-187
published, use of, 3
Serum immunoglobulin deficiencies, 186
T-lymphocyte progenitors, 44
selection of reference animals, 2
Serum iron assays, 97-98
T lymphocytes
 Regenerative anemia, 22
Serum proteins, 11
CD4+, 130
algorithm, 337f
electrophoresis, 13f
CD8*, 130-131
Vs. nonregenerative anemia, 99
 Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
naive, 124
 polychromasia in, 60-61
syndromes, 185
Techniques
 Relative erythrocytosis, 111-112
Sézary cells, 163
bone marrow aspiration, 235-238
 Reticulated platelet count, 207-208
Sickle cells, 73-75, 75f
bone marow core biopsy, 238-240, 241f
Reticulin fibrosis, 266-267
Sideroleukocytes. See Hemosiderin
Theileria spp. infection
Reticulocyte counts, 91-93
Siderotic inclusions, 80-82, 140
causing hemolytic anemia, 102
 Reticulocyte stains, 21-22
Siderotic metarubricytes, 275f
of erythrocytes, 86
360
Index
Thrombin
Torocytes, 64f
Vacuum tube, collection of blood directly into,
activation of factor Xl, 200
Total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), 98
12
clotting time (TCT), 205
Total plasma protein (TPP), in conjunction with
Vaginal tear, hematology findings, 347
Thrombocytes. See Platelets
HCT, 92b
Vascular phase of primary hemostasis, 194
Thrombocythemia, essential, 315
Toxic cytoplasm, 26b, 136-137
Venoms
Thrombocytopenia
Dohle bodies, 137
 causing hemolytic anemia, 104
decreased platelet production, 213
foamy basophilia, 137
 snake, affecting platelet function, 222-223
drug- and chemical-induced, 215
toxic granulation, 137
Very low density lipoproteins (VLDLs), 15
increased platelet destruction, 214
Toxic granulation, 137, 138f
Viral infections
increased platelet utilization, 213-214
Toxic left shift, 134f
distemper inclusions, 86-87
infectious, 215
in neutrophilic cells in bone marrow,
immunodeficiency disorders, 187
inherited, 216
276f
thrombocytopenia in association with, 215
massive external hemorrhage, 214
Toxic methe moglobinemia, 97
Vitamin B12, 39
neoplasia and, 216
Transferrin-Fe complex, 54f
Vitamin K
nonregenerative anemia with, 109-110
Transfusion reactions, 181
 coagulopathies dependent on, 223-224
nonregenerative anemia without, 108-109
hemolytic, 101-102
deficiency, 222
primary immune-mediated (IMT), 182-183
PIVKA test, 207
sequestration of platelets, 214
186
 in synthesis of functional factors, 198
Thrombocytosis, 218-219
Trinucleation, in erythroid precursors, 274f
von Willebrand disease, 217-218
rebound, 210f
True negatives (TNs), 3-4
von Willebrand factor, 195f
Thromboelastography (TEG), 206-207
True positives (TPs), 3-4
test for hemostatic disorders, 207
Thromboembolism, 219-220
Trypanosoma spp.
Thrombopoiesis, 45
causing hemolytic anemia, 103
W
Thrombopoietin, 38,45
 seen in blood films, 29-30
Water intoxication, hemolytic anemia and, 104
Thrombosis, localized, 219-220
T. theileri, 30f
Weimaraner dogs, immunodeficiency in, 186
Thromboxane A, 196f
Tumors, of mast cells, 316
Wet mounts, new methylene blue, 22
Thrombus
Wild animals, reference intervals for, 3
formation, inhibitors of, 201
U
Wright-Giemsa stain
stabilization of, 200
Unclassified blast cells, 167
blood films, 20f
Thymic aplasia, hypotrichosis with, in cats, 186
Using published reference intervals, 3
precipitation of, 21f
Thymoma, 161
Tissue factor pathway activation, 198-199
A
X
Tissue factor pathway inhibitor, 201
Vacuolated macrophages, 292f
X-linked agammaglobulinemia in foals, 186
Toll-like receptors, 131
Vacuoles, cytoplasmic, 144, 158, 159f, 282-283
X-linked SCID, in dogs, 185