Handbook of
VETERINARY
NEUROLOGY
MICHAELD.LORENZ
JOANR.COATES
MARCKENT
ELSEVTER
FIFTH EDITION
SALINDERS
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Handbook of
VETERINARY
NEUROLOGY
FIFTH EDITION
MIChaEL D. LorENz, BS, DVm, DaCViM
Professor of Small Animal Internal Medicine
Dean, College of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Center for Veterinary Health Sciences
Oklahoma State University
Stillwater, Oklahoma
JOAN R. COATES, BS, DVM, MS, DACVIM
 Associate Professor of Neurology and Neurosurgery
 Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
MARC KENT, DVM, BA, DACVIM
Associate Professor and Neurologist
Department of Small Animal Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, Georgia
With 261 illustrations
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
HANDBOOK OFVETERINARY NEUROLOGY
ISBN: 978-1-4377-0651-2
Copyright @ 2011, 2004, 1997, 1993, 1983 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the Publisher Details on how to seek permission, further
information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notice
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical
treatment may become necessary.
 Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In
using such inforrmation or methods they should be mindfal of their own safety and the safety of
others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the
most current inforrmation provided (i) on procedures featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each
 product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration
of adrministration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own
experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best
treatment for each individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fallest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors,
assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products,
 instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lorenz, Michael D.
Handbook of veterinary neurology / Michael D. Lorenz, Joan R. Coates, Marc Kent. —- Sth ed.
p.; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4377-0651-2 (hardcover : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary neurology-Handbooks, manuals,
etc. 2. Nervous system—Diseases—DiagnosisHandbooks, manuals, etc. I. Coates, Joan R. II. Kent,
Marc. III. Title.
 [DNLM: 1. Nervous System Diseases—veterinary—Handbooks. 2. Animal Diseases—diagnosis
Handbooks. 3. Neurologic Examination—veterinary—Handbooks. SF 895]
SF895.O44 2012
636.089'680475—dc22
2010034818
Vice President and Publisher: Linda Duncan
Publisher:Penny Rudolph
Senior Developmental Editor: Shelly Stringer
Associate Developmental Editor: Brandi Graham
Publishing Services Manager: Catherine Jackson
Design Direction: Jessica Williarms
Working togcthcr to grow
libraries in developing countries
 Printed in the United States of America
www.elsevier.com | www.bookaid.org
www.sabre.org
FLSFVIFR
BOOK A[I)
Sabre loundation
Last digit is the print mumber:98765 43  21
We dedicate this edition to our mentors who helped train and inspire each of us
 in the discipline of clinical neurology. We are especially indebted to Alexander
deLahmta, John Oliver, Joe Kornegay, and Joe Mayhew who have paved our way
for the fifth edition of the Handbook ofVeterinary Neurology. We are sincerely
grateful to our current and past colleagues who have contimued to foster our knowledge
of veterinary neurology and neurosurgery and who have mentored us during our career
endeavors We dedicate this book to our students, past, present, and future, whose
Curiosity and questions have inspired us to develop better methods of teaching. And,
pauyupusiaunpun uoddns nsufnootooqsyippm
us to spend the extra time required to complete this edition.
PREFACE
The fifth edition of Handbook of Veterinary Neurology has
has been substantially updated to include new diseases
been substantially updated, providing students and
 reported since the fourth edlition was published. It contains 
 more than l000 references.
and large animal neurology. The new edition is in full color,
enhancing the learning experience and providing a stronger
Veterinary Neurology Cases
 knowledge of neuroanatomy. We have continued to use the
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
problem-oriented format from previous editions. The empha-
sis remains on lesion localization because one cannot diagnose
The fifth edition has an accompanying website that can be
what is wrong if one does not know where the lesion[s) is [are)
found at www.veterinaryneurologycases.com. The website
located.
includes Z0 video case studies that correlate to all of the cases
Handbook of Veterinary Neurology is simple and easy to
 presented in Chapters 2 and 15 of the book. Each case study
use by veterinary students and practitioners. Numerous algo-
on the website is presented as a narrated PowerPoint presenta-
tion with videos highlighting important aspects of each case,
 ize lesions and to formulate diagnostic plans. Each chapter has
such as symptoms, lesion localization, and diagnosis.
been extensively reviewed, updated, and heavily referenced.
A unique feature of our book is the Appendix. The
 Michael D. Lorenz
Appendix lists breed-associated, breed-specifc, or inherited
Joan R. Coates
neuromuscular diseases in domestic animals. The Appendix
Marc Kent
vii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are grateful for the assistance of the Elsevier team, Shelly Stringer, Brandi Graham,
 Penny Rudolph, and Rachel MeMullen. We acknowledge the College of Veterinary Medicine
 at Cornell University for permitting use of neurologic images posted to their website.
We would like to especially acknowledge Philip J. Johnson, G. Diane Shelton, and
William F. Fales, who have assisted us with their areas of expertise in preparation of this book.
Finally, we thank all of you, our colleagues, for making the fth edition necessary.
ix
CHAPTER
Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy.
and Neurologic Examination
The objectives in the management of an animal with a
Because chemistry panels are usually available at less cost
problem that may be related to the nervous system are
than individual tests, selection of tests is usually not necessary.
to [l) confrm that the problem is caused by a lesion
Otherwise, the selection of chemistry profles should be based
in the nervous system, (2) localize the lesion in the nervous
on the problems presented. Additions to the database are rec-
system, (3) estimate the severity and extent of the lesion in
ommended for specific problems.
the nervous system, [4) determine the cause or the pathologic
 process or both, and (5) estimate the prognosis with no treat-
ment or with various alternative methods of treatment.
PROBLEM LIST
Many diseases may be accompanied by a complex combi-
nation of clinical signs and laboratory data. Diagnosis of these
A problem list is formulated from information obtained from
diseases may seem impossible. Weed demonstrated the value
the minimum database. For each problem, a diagnostic plan
of starting the diagnostic process by independently listing and
is formulated. A diagnostic plan for a neurologic problem
analyzing all the patient's problemis.l A minimum set of data
includes the following steps:
[minimum database) is necessary to solve any medical prob-
1. The level of the lesion is localized with a neurologic
lem. The minimum database may be modified because of risk,
examination. Confirmation of the lesion may require
cost, or accessibility as balanced against the severity of the dis-
diagnostic imaging.
ease. Priorities should be established for collecting data that
2. The extent of the lesion is estimated both longitudinally
evaluate the most probable causes of a problem. Tests for rare
and transversely (e.g., L4-6 spinal cord segments, left
diseases and those that are dangerous are reserved until last.
Weed's problem-oriented system is eminently suited for
neurologic diagnosis. The steps necessary for the management
BOX 1-1
of a neurologic problem are listed in Box 1-1.
Plan for Neurologic Diagnosis
MINIMUM DATABASE
 Collect minimum database
The initial evaluation of a patient, including a history and a
ldentify problems
physical examination, usually provides evidence that a neuro-
Identify one or more problems related to nervous system
logic problem is present (Table l-1).
Localize level of lesion 
Some problems are difficult to classify, for example, syn-
Estimate extent of lesion within that level
cope versus epileptic seizures, or weakness Qloss of muscle
List most probable causes (rule-outs or differential diagnosis)
Construct diagnostic plan to determine cause or pathologic
physical examination of every patient should include a screen-
injury
ing neurologic examination designed to detect the presence
Determine prognosis with and without therapy
of any neurologic abnormality The screening examination is
 described later in the section on neurologic examination.
Modified from Oliver JE Jr: Localization of lesions in the nervous
The minimum database recommended for an animal with
a neurologic problem is listed in Box 1-2.
1978, WB Saunders.
2
CHAPTER 1 
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
3
TABLE 1-1
BOX 1-2
Clinical Problems in the Nervous System
Minimum Database: Neurologic Problem
Problem
Localization
History
Usually of CNs Origin
 Physical examination
 1. Epileptic seizures
Cerebrum, diencephalon
 Neurologic examination
2. Altered mental status 
 Cerebrum, limbic system,
Clinical pathology:
diencephalon 
 Complete blood count
a. Stupor or coma
 Brainstem reticular activating
Urinalysis
formation
Chemistry profile 
b. Abnormal behavior
Limbic system
 Creatine kinase activity
3. Paresis, paralysis,
See Tables 2-2 to 2-4
 proprioceptive deficit 
 Modifed from Oliver JE Jr: Localization of lesions in the nervous
4. Ataxia
a. Head tilt, nystagmus 
Vestibular system
1978, WB Saunders.
b. Intention tremor,
 Cerebellum
This chapter describes the fundamentals for making a cor-
dysmetria 
 rect neurologic diagnosis. It includes the neurologic history.
c. General proprioceptive
Spinal cord
 deficits, no brain signs
construction of a sign-time graph, neuroanatomy and organi-
zation of the nervous system, and the neurologic examination.
5. Hypesthesia, anesthesia
See Figures 1-36.1-38, and
 Lesion localization is discussed in Chapter 2.
1-39: CN V
Possibly of CNS Origin
1. Syncope
 Usually cardiovascular, meta-
THE HISTORY
bolic
2. Weakness
Traditionally, the history is taken by the veterinarian. Para-
See Figure 2-1 and Table 2-2:
 professional personnel (e.g, registered veterinary technician,
 metabolic or muscular
veterinary assistant, nurse) assist the process by obtaining a
3. Lameness
Orthopedic: see Table 1-5
defined database that is used in conjunction with a problem-
4. Pain, hyperesthesia
oriented medical record system.I If one establishes a minimum
 a. Generalized
Thalamus, meningitis, lesions
 base of necessary information about every patient or about
 affecting multiple joints 
 every patient with a certain problem, then one can obtain that
muscles, bones
 information in a number of ways.
b. Localized
See Figures 1-37 to 1-40: CN V
5. Blindness
Owner-Supplied History
A basic history can be obtained by use of a well-designed ques-
a. Pupils normal
Diencephalon or occipital lobe
tionnaire. The receptionist gives the questionnaire to the cli-
of cerebrum (contralateral)
ent, who completes it in the reception area.A paraprofessional
b. Pupils abnormal
Retina, optic nerve, optic
chiasma
eral medical history is available for review by the veterinarian,
6. Hearing deficit 
who notes important items that may need further clarification.
 a. No vestibular signs
Cochlear labyrinth
Problem-specific owner histories can be used to supplement
b. Vestibular signs
 CN Vlll, vestibular labyrinth,
 the general history.
rostral medulla
7. Anosmia
Nasal passages, CN I
Role of the Veterinarian
8. Urinary incontinence 
The veterinarian should review most of the important parts of
 Pudendal/pelvic nerves,
the history with the client. Misinterpretation of terminology
spinal cord, brainstem (see
a course of events, or clinical signs occurs frequently. The vet-
Chapter 3}
erinarian may need to rephrase questions several times before
receiving a meaningful answer. The manner in which a question
Modified from Oliver JE Jr: Localization of lesions in the nervous
is phrased is important. Questions that imply negligence or igno-
system. In Hoerlein BF, editor: Canine neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia,
rance on the part of the client may lead to defensive answers.
1978, WB Saunders.
 Questions that suggest a correct answer may lead the client to
 interpret events incorrectly. All questions should be framed so 
side). The neurologic examination provides most of this
that the answer “I don't know" is an acceptable alternative; oth-
information, but ancillary diagnostic procedures may be
erwise the client may hypothesize rather than relate facts.?2
 of assistance.
3. The cause of the pathologic process is determined. The
Neurologic History
history is most useful for establishing the class of disease
Signalment
[neoplasia, infectious disease, trauma, and so forth).
The species, breed, age, and sex of the patient may provide impor-
Laboratory, diagnostic imaging, or electrophysiologic
tant clues to the diagnosis. Although few diagnoses can be posi-
tests are usually required to substantiate the diagno-
tively ruled in or out on the basis of the signalment, many diseases
sis. From this information, the clinician can establish a
are more or less likely to occur among certain groups of animals.
prognosis with and without appropriate therapy, based
The prevalence of some diseases varies greatly among spe-
on information available about the disease.
cies and breeds. Many infectious diseases are species specific,
4
PART1
Fundamentals
such as canine distemper, feline infectious peritonitis, and
disease may have been observed to stumble or to have diffi-
equine protozoal encephalomyelitis. Known inherited diseases
culty with stairs for some time before clear manifestations of
must be considered, especially in cases involving multiple off-
paresis were evident.
 spring of the same litter or lineage. The Appendix lists many
 The course ofthe disease as revealed by the sign-time graph
of the diseases with a species or breed predilection. Infectious
provides important information about the cause of the disease
diseases are discussed in Chapter 15.
[see Figure l-1]. Slowly progressive diseases with an unrelent-
 Young animals are more likely to have congenital and inher-
ing course are immediately distinguished from acute diseases.
ited disorders and infectious diseases. Older animals are more
The first step in making an etiologic diagnosis is classifying the
likely to have degenerative and neoplastic diseases. Although
problem as acute or chronic and progressive or nonprogres-
these criteria are not absolute, the probability is much greater
sive. With this information, the problem logically falls into a
that a 8-year-old brachycephalic dog experiencing seizures
group of diseases (Figures l-l and l-2 and Table 1-2).
will have a neoplasm of the central nervous system (CNS)
The neurologic examination can further narrow the choice
rather than a congenital anomaly. In the preliminary assess-
of diseases by indicating whether the problem is focal or dif-
ment, and sometimes in the final assessment, a diagnosis is an
fuse [see Figure l-2). After a general etiologic or pathologic
ordering of probabilities.
diagnosis is considered, the diagnostic plan can be established
so that one can investigate each probable cause [see discussion
Sign-Time Graph
of diagnostic methods in Chapter 4).
Construction of a sign-time graph is useful for evaluating the
course ofa disease [Figure 1-1).
Prognosis
The sign-time graph plots the severity of clinical signs (on
Providing the owner with a reasonably accurate prognosis is
 the vertical axis) against time (on the horizontal axis). A com-
 an essential part of clinical neurology The prognosis is influ-
plete history allows the clinician to construct a graph that has
enced by many variables. The major variables are the location,
pue umep Aensn you s udei3 sun-uais auL g'sdea 1ofeu ou
extent, and cause of the lesion.
entered on the case record. Rather, it is a useful tool for the
The clinical course provides significant insight into the
clinician to construct mentally.
prognosis. Slowly progressive diseases such as neoplastic or
The time of onset of some problems may be exact [e.g.
 an automobile accident), or it may be diffcult to determine,
those that have passed peak severity and are improving [see
as in the case of neoplastic disease. The frst time the client
Figure 1-1).
recognizes a problem must be taken as the starting point.
 Clinical signs are also valuable clues to prognosis. Spinal
 Sometimes seemingly unrelated episodes may be the earliest
cord compression produces signs that vary with increasing
 signs and are recognized as such only as the complete history
compression (Figure 1-3).
unfolds. For example, an animal with degenerative spinal cord
The signs are not related to the location of the tracts in the
spinal cord but do correlate with the diameter of the fbers.
With spinal cord compression, large fibers lose function before
small fibers are affected. Functional recovery is possible until
pain perception is lost. An animal with no response to a pain-
Trauma or Vascular
ful stimulus for more than 48 hours has a low probability of
Anomaly
recovery. Animals that do recover still may have severe motor
deficits.
SIG
The duration of the lesion is also a significant factor in
INICAL:
 prognosis because nervous tissue tolerates injury for only a
short time. Spinal cord compression has been studied more
Ner
thoroughly than most CNS injuries. Spinal cord compression
severe enough to abolish voluntary motor function but not
severe enough to abolish the response to a noxious stimulus
is associated with a reasonably good prognosis for recovery if
decompression is achieved within 5 to 7 days. The longer the
duration of compression, the slower the recovery.
The location and character of the lesion are also important.
TIME
An infarction of the spinal cord can range from mild to severe.
Hgure 1-1 Sign-time graph of neurologic diseases. Progression of
Equally severe lesions have different prognoses, depending on
metabolic, nutritional, and toxic diseases is variable, depending on 
the location. For example, an animal with an infarct primarily
the cause.
affecting gray matter at the Ll segment, with intact sensation
Chronic
Acute
 Progressive
Nonprogressive
一
Progre ssive
Young
Adult
Young 
Adult
 Young 
Adult
(<1 year)
(>1 year)
(<1 year)
(>1 year)
(<1 year)
(>1 year)
Foca!
Diffuse
Focal
Diffuse
Focal
Diffuse
Focal
Diffuse
Focal
Diffuse
Foca!
Diffuse
Anomalous
 Inflammatory Neoplastic Infl ammatory
Anomalous Hare
Traumatic Rare
 Inflammatory 
 Degenerative
 Degenerative
Degenerative
Neoplastic
 Degenerative
Toxic
Traumatic
Vascular
(Abscess)
Metabolic
(Disk Vertebral)
Metabolic
Inflammatory Toxic 
Degenerative
Vascular
Nutritional 
Neoplastic
Inflammatory
(Abscess)
Nutriti onal
(Abiotrophy)
Toxic
Inflammatory
Nutritional
Immunologic
(Abscess)
 Figure 1-2 Classification of neurologic diseases in approximate order of frequency.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
5
to the pelvic limbs, has a reasonably good prognosis. The same
clinical neurology. Although considerable debate exists over
degree of injury at the L5 segment is likely to produce perma-
the amount of neuroanatomy that must be learned, for prac-
nent dysfunction because of destruction of the lower motor
titioners and students, it is much less than the total body of
 neurons supplying the femoral nerve.
information currently available. The following sections present
an overview of the organization and function of the nervous
system.
ANATOMIC AND FUNCTIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF THE NERVOUS
Central Nervous System
SYSTEM-AN OVERVIEW
The CNS consists of the brain and spinal cord. Embryologi-
cally, the CNS develops from ectoderm that forms the neural
Neurologic examination and lesion localization are depen-
tube. The brain is divided into the cerebral hemispheres, brain-
dent on understanding basic concepts of neuroanatomy and
stem, and cerebellum. The five major areas of the brain are
neurophysiology and the terminology commonly used
in
the telencephalon (cerebrum), diencephalon, mesencephalon,
metencephalon, and myelencephalon (Figure 1-4).
TABLE 1-2
Telencephalon (Cerebrum)
This large area includes the lobes of the cerebral hemispheres.
Checklist for Differential Diagnosis
subcortical basal nuclei, olfactory bulbs (cranial nerve I
[CN I], cerebral peduncles, and hippocampus. In general, dis-
Category of Disease
Examples
tinct gross landmarks separating the various lobes are absent.
 D= Degenerative
 Primary axonal degeneration
From a clinical standpoint, lesions cannot be reliably localized
Storage disorders
to a specifie lobe of the cerebrum. The following are the lobes
of the cerebral cortex:
Myelin disorders
Frontal: This lobe includes the neurons responsible for
 Neuronopathy
voluntary motor functions, especially learned or skilled
 Intervertebral disk disease
responses. The major motor pathways are the cortico-
Spondylosis
spinal tracts.
Spondylopathy
Piriform: This lobe is the termination site for tracts that
A = Anomalous
 Congenital defects
relay information for smell.
M = Metabolic
 Nervous system disorders secondary
Parietal: This lobe largely functions for conscious per-
to an abnommality of other organ
ception of touch, pressure, temperature, and noxious
systems (e.g. hypoglycemia,
stimuli.
Temporal: This lobe functions for conscious perception
Uremia, hypoxia, hepatic)
of sound (hearing) and shares some functions with the
N = Neoplastic
Alltumors
parietal lobe.
Nutritional 
All nutritional disorders 
Occipital: This lobe contains vision centers.
 = ldiopathic
Epilepsy
The following are the three types of axons (fbers) from
 Facial nerve paralysis
cortical neurons:
Vestibular dysfunction 
Association
1 fbers: axons that communicate with other
 Trigeminal nerve
neurons in the same cerebral hemisphere.
Immune
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
Projection fibers: axons that leave the cerebrum via the
 Polyradiculoneuritis
internal capsule to enter the brainstem (e.g, the cor-
ticospinal tracts). These fbers have important clinical
Myositis
 Inflammatory
Infectious and noninfectious diseases
application to lesion localization and will be described
 Immune mediated 
further in the section on Motor Functions.
T = Traumatic
 Physical injury
Commissural fbers: axons that cross from one cerebral
hemisphere to the other.
Toxic
 Exposure to all toxic agents (may
 include tetanus and botulism!
Diencephalon
V = Vascular
Infarct 
The diencephalon includes the thalamus and hypothalamus.
Ischemia
The rostral-ventral border is demarcated by the optic chiasm.
Hemorrhage
 The optic tracts lie on the lateral surfaces. The thalamus con-
tains nuclei that receive sensory information from many areas.
Signswith
Fiber Size
Function
Prognosis
Increasing Compression
General
Proprioception
ProprioceptiveDeficits
Good
Voluntary
QQ
Paresis, Paralysis
Fair
Motor
Superficial
Loss of
°
Pain
Cutaneous Sensation
DeepPain
Loss of DeepPain
Poor
Figure 1-3 Progression of signs in spinal cord compression.
6
PART1
 Fundamentals
The ascending reticular activating system [ARAS) arises
CEREBRALCORTEX
in the pons and is responsible for consciousness. The pons
contains motor pathways from the cerebrum that synapse in
TELENCEPHALON
BASAL NUCLEI
the cerebellum. The cerebellum composes the dorsal met-
THALAMUS
encephalon. It coordinates motor activity and helps regulate
DIENCEPHALON
HYPOTHALAMUS
muscle tone.
Myelencephalon (Medulla Oblongata)
MESENCEPHALON
MIDBRAIN
The myelencephalon contains the neurons of CN VI through
Xll (Figure l-5) and central components of the vestibular sys-
CEREBELLUM
tem. Motor tracts [medullary reticulospinal) also arise from
METENCEPHALON
PONS
within this area. The major centers for respiratory and vaso-
 motor [(cardiac) function lie mostly in the medulla.
Forebrain
MYELENCEPHALON
MEDULLA OBLONGATA
The forebrain contains the telencephalon and diencephalon.
 Lesions affecting these areas generaly create contralateral
clinical signs and generally are similar. Forebrain signs include
blindness, depression, seizures, contralateral loss of postural
reactions, and contralateral sensory deficits.
EBELLUM
Midbrain
The midbrain has been described already (see section on
Mesencephalon). Lesions in the midbrain produce abnor-
mal mentation, disorders of ocular movement (nystagmus
[oculocephalic refex] and position (strabismus), dilated
(parasympathetic dysfunction) or constricted (sympathetic
DIENCEPHALON
PONSMEDULLA OBLONGATA
dysfunction) pupil(s), poor or absent pupillary light reflexes,
MESENCEPHALON
gait deficits, and contralateral or ipsilateral postural reaction
Figure 1-4 Segmental organization of the brain. Five major
deficits.
regions are significant clinically: the cerebrum, including the
cerebral cortex, cerebral white matter, and the basal nuclei; the
Hindbrain
diencephalon, including the thalamus and the hypothalamus;
These three structures lie in the caudal cranial fossa [cau-
the brainstem, including the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla
dal to the osseous tentorium) of the skull. The hindbrain
oblongata; the vestibular system, including the labyrinth [periph-
includes the pons, medulla, and cerebellum. The pons and
eral] and the vestibular nuclei [(central] in the rostral medulla;
medulla also contain upper motor neurons responsible for
and the cerebellum. (From Hoerlein BF: Canine neurology, ed 3,
the generation of gait. Lesions in the pons and medulla cause
Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.]
ipsilateral motor and sensory deficits, vestibular dysfunction,
deficits in cranial nerve function [CN V-XIl), and abnormal
mentation. Clinical signs of cerebellar dysfunction include
It serves as the major relay center for afferent [sensory) fibers
incoordination, cerebellar ataxia predominated by hyperme-
 projecting to the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus lies ven-
tria in which there is overflexion of the joints of the limbs
tral to the thalamus and has neuroendocrine and autonomic
 during the swing phase of the gait. The oyerall impression
functions. It connects to the pituitary gland via the infundibu-
is that the animal is overreaching as it advances the limb.
lar stalk
Additionally, intention tremors may be present. Because the
cerebellum has direct connections with the vestibular sys-
Mesencephalon (Midbrain)
tem, cerebellar disorders also can cause signs of vestibular
The mesencephalon contains the neurons for CN Ill (oculo-
dysfunction. Lesions in the cerebellum also can cause men-
motor) and CN IV (trochlear), which innervate extraocular
ace deficits with normal vision; the pathway for this is still
muscles. The rostral and caudal colliculi, located in the tectum
unknown.
(roofj or dorsal aspect of the midbrain, are associated with
visual and auditory reflexes, respectively, and relay informa-
Brainstem
tion to the cerebellum. The centers for pupillary light reflexes
Anatomically, the brainstem contains the diencephalon, mes-
encephalon, metencephalon, and myelencephalon. Func-
motor nucleus of CN IIl) and motor to extraocular muscles
tionally, it includes all structures except the diencephalon.
(oculomotor nuclei of CN IIl) also are located in the dor-
Functionally, most clinicians restrict the brainstem to the pons
sal aspect of the midbrain. Beneath the tectum lies the teg-
and medulla. Clinical signs are those previously described for
 mentum, the origin of the tectotegmentospinal tract, which
the midbrain and hindbrain. Moreover, clinical signs of dien-
a r emed (snn) suonu roou raddn au spaord
cephalic lesions can be indistinguishable from those involving
sympathetic innervations. Finally, centers (red nucleus) for
the telencephalon.
motor control of gait are located here.
Anatomic Organization of the Spinal Cord
Metencephalon
The spinal cord comprises peripheral white matter composed
The metencephalon contains the pons and cerebellum. The
of nerve tracts. The tracts are organized into specific motor
pons contains neurons for CN V (trigeminal), whose axons
[efferent) and sensory (afferent) pathways. Gray matter is
innervate the muscles of mastication. It also provides sensory
located centrally and is composed of interneurons and motor
innervation to the face (maxillary and ophthalmic regions)
neurons that innervate muscle. Specific structures are dis-
 and mandible and is the location of the center for micturition.
cussed in sections on functional organization of the CNS.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
1.0LFACTORY
N.
II.OPTIC N
V!!LACOUSTIC N
COCHLEAR
VESTIBULAR
GLOSSOPHARYNGEALN
X.VAGUS N.
XIl.HYPOGLOSSAL N.
XI.SPINAL
ACCESSORY
Hgure 1-5 The origin and distribution of the cranial nerves in the dog. N, Nerve; OPHTH,
ophthalmic nerve; MAX, maxillary nerve; MAN, mandibular nerve. [From Hoerlein BF: Canine
neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.]
Peripheral Nervous System
 neuronal cell body, its axon, junction between the axon and
The peripheral nervous system contains the axons of the spi-
muscle [neuromuscular junction), and muscle are known as the
nal and cranial nerves and their receptors and effector organs.
lower motor neuron unit (LMN unit). The anatomic distribu-
It includes both general and autonomic components. Peripheral
 tion and function of spinal nerves are discussed later [see section
nerves may contain fbers that are motor, sensory, or both. The
 on lower motor neurons, or LMNs) and in Chapters 3 and 5.
     i  oq  u 
Cranial nerves are further discussed in Chapters 8, 9, and 11.
8
PART1
 Fundamentals
Autonomic Nervous System
Special Visceral Efferent System
The autonomic nervous system contains sympathetic and
Neurons in the special visceral efferent (SVE) innervate stri-
 parasympathetic divisions. It is a multineuron system. Cen-
 ated muscle derived from brachial arch mesoderm. They are
tral neurons are located in the hypothalamus, midbrain, pons,
found in CN V, VIl, IX, X, and XI.
 and medulla. The hypothalamus is the primary center for inte-
 grating autonomic functions. Axons traverse the brainstem to
General Somatic Afferent System
affect autonomic LMNs, referred to as preganglionic neurons,
The general somatic afferent (GSA) system includes sensory
located in the brainstem and spinal cord. Autonomic LMNs
neurons that have receptors in the surface of the head, body.
innervate the smooth muscle of blood vessels and visceral
and limbs. The neurons are located in CN V and all spinal
structures, glands, and cardiac muscle. Sensory fbers from
nerves. It detects touch, temperature, and noxious stimuli.
body viscera are included in the peripheral component.
The LMNs of the sympathetic nervous system are distrib-
Special Somatic Afferent System (SSA)
uted in the thoracolumbar spinal cord segments and generally
This system includes vision and hearing, and neurons are asso-
use the spinal nerves for distribution to muscle and skin. Spe-
diated with CN II and VIIl.
cific nerves control visceral function. The cranial sympathetic
 nerve has considerable importance to clinical neurologists in
General Visceral Afferent System (GVA)
lesion localization. For example, the LMNs of the sympathetic
This system includes sensory neurons from visceral structures
nervous system destined to innervate the eye are located in
of the head, body cavities, and blood vessels. Neurons are
spinal cord segments Tl-3, and these axons leave the spinal
located in CN VIl, IX, and X, and in spinal nerves.
cord associated with roots of the brachial plexus. The cra-
nial sympathetic nerve traverses the thorax and the cervical
Special Visceral Afferert (SVA)
region in association with the vagus nerve [vagosympathetic
This is the system for taste and smell. Taste receptors are asso-
trunk). Axons synapse on neurons in the cranial cervical
dated with CN VIl, IX, and X, and smell is associated with
 ganglion. Axons from these neurons course near the middle
CN I.
ear and are distributed to the head via the vasculature and
other cranial nerves. Of the numerous structures of the head
General Proprioception (GP)
innervated by sympathetic fbers, clinical signs are typically
Proprioception is detection of changes in position of the trunk,
limbs, and head. General proprioception neurons are associ-
the dilator muscle of the pupil, which are carried to the eye
ated with all spinal nerves and CN V.
along with fibers of CN V (ophthalmic branch).
The LMNs of the parasympathetic nervous system are
Special Proprioception (SP)
 located in the brainstem (CN II1, VII, IX, and X) and sacral
This is the vestibular system, and neurons are associated with
 spinal cord segments. The pupillary light reflex is described in
CN VIII.
following sections. The vagus nerve [CN X) is the major motor
,        
nerve for innervation of the muscles of the larynx, esophagus,
scheme is diffcult for students and practitioners to remem-
and thoracic and abdominal viscera (see Chapter 9). The pel-
ber. Therefore we use a scheme that describes function based
vic nerve innervates the detrusor muscle of the bladder [see
 on motor, GP, vestibular, general sensory (touch, temperature,
Chapter 3).
pressure, and response to noxious stimuli), special sensory
[smell, taste, vision, and hearing), cerebellar, and cognitive
Functional Organization of the Central Nervous
 systems. These major systems are described in subsequent
System
sections.
Functionally, the CNS can be classified in several ways, but a
 simple scheme includes motor (efferent), sensory [afferent),
Motor Systems
and autonomic systems (efferent and afferent). The term
The motor system is composed of two divisions, the upper
efferent means conducting away from a center and usually
and lower motor neurons. Lesions of the motor system pro-
indicates motor function. Afferent means conducting toward
duce clinical signs called paresis or paralysis, depending on the
a center and usually indicates sensory function. Neuroanato-
severity or completeness of lesions.
mists may divide the major functions according to a scheme
that relates function to embryologic development. That
Upper Motor Neurons
scheme is presented because the terms are still used in clini-
 UMNs are responsible for initiating voluntary motor func-
cal literature.4
tions and modulating the activity of the LMN units. They are
located in the cerebral cortex and brainstem and are found
General Somatic Efferent System
in both the somatic and autonomic systems. Their axons are
The general somatic efferent (GSE) system includes motor
organized into specific tracts, and they synapse in spinal cord
neurons that innervate voluntary striated muscle of the head
 gray matter on interneurons or directly on LMNs. The UMN
and skeleton. These neurons are found in CN Il, IV, Vl, and
-sAs teprueadenxa pue repruead au ou papiap st uass
Xll and all spinal nerves.
tems (Figure 1-6).
 The pyramidal system allows animals to perform finely
General Visceral Efferent System
 skilled movements but is not necessary for initiation of gait
The general visceral efferent (GVE) system includes motor
in animals. Neurons are located in the frontal/parietal lobe
neurons of the autonomic nervous system. It includes neu-
of the cerebral cortex [caudal cruciate gyrus) and the axons
rons in CN III, VII, IX, X, and (for parasympathetic division)
are contained in the corticospinal tracts. Axons cross in the
XI and all spinal nerves. It includes sympathetic and para-
 pyramids located in the caudal medulla and descend on the
sympathetic divisions. The thoracic and lumbar spinal cord
contralateral side. Axons synapse on LMNs in the spinal cord
regions contain preganglionic neurons for the sympathetic
and cranial nerve LMNs in the brainstem. Lesions of the
division. The cranial (CN III, VIl, IX, and X) and the sacral
motor cortex or section of the pyramids produce little gait
regions contain preganglionic neurons for the parasympa-
 deficit but will cause postural reaction deficits in contralat-
thetic division.
eral limbs.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
6
The extrapyramidal system allows animals to gait and to
motor action and at the same time exerts inhibitory action
initiate voluntary movement. Neurons are located in nuclei in
 on other functions, such as spinal cord reflexes. Animals
all divisions of the brain. Some of the more clinically impor-
with UMN lesions caudal to the midbrain may have exag-
tant motor pathways include the tectospinal, reticulospinal,
gerated reflexes (hyperreflexia) and increased muscle tone
rubrospinal, and vestibulospinal tracts. Caudal to the mid-
(hypertonia].
brain, lesions generally produce signs in ipsilateral limbs and
severe gait deficits. Lesions rostral to the midbrain produce
Signs of Upper Motor Neuron Lesions
signs in contralateral limbs and less gait involvement.
UMN lesions produce a characteristic set of clinical signs cau-
Upper motor neurons may stimulate or inhibit motor
dal to the level of the injury. These signs are summarized in
actions. For instance, the UMN is necessary for voluntary
Table 1-3 and are compared with signs of LMN lesions.
The primary sign of motor dysfunction is paresis. With dis-
ease of the UMN system, the paresis or paralysis is associated
with normal or increased extensor tone and normal or exag-
gerated reflexes. Abnormal reflexes [e.g., a crossed extensor
reflex) may be seen in some cases. Loss of descending inhi-
UMN
bition on the LMN produces these findings. Disuse muscle
atrophy may occur and is slow to appear, is not complete, and
includes the entirety of the affected limb(s) in most cases.
LMN
Because lesions at many different levels of the CNS may
produce UMN signs, localization of a lesion to a specifc seg-
ment usually is not possible when only UMN signs are consid-
Cerebrum
ered. Proper interpretation of UMN signs and other associated
signs, however, allows one to localize a lesion to a region. For
example, UMN paresis of the pelvic limbs indicates a lesion
 Cranial to L4 spinal cord segment. If the lesion were at L4-S2
spinal cord segments, LMN paresis of the pelvic limbs would
-Diencephalon
n s  u are sq  a f srd a
 be caudal to T2 spinal cord segment. Therefore pelvic limb
-Red nucleus
Midbrain
paresis [UMN) with normal thoracic limbs indicates a lesion
Decussation of
between the T'3 and L3 spinal cord segments.
nubrospinal tract
Pons
Lower Motor Neurons
Pyramids-
Medulla oblongata
The lower motor neurons (LMN) connect the CNS with mus-
Decussation
cles and glands. All motor activity of the nervous system ulti-
of
mately is expressed through LMNs. The LMNs are located in
corticospinal tract
all spinal cord segments in the intermediate and ventral horns
of the gray matter and in cranial nerve nuclei (CN II-VIl, IX-
Interneurons
XIl) in the brainstem. The axons extending from these cells
LMN
form the spinal [see Figure l-6) and cranial nerves.
Peripheral nerves
Beioe!
A spinal cord segment is demarcated by a pair of spinal nerves.
Each spinal nerve has a dorsal (sensory) and a ventral (motor)
Hgure 1-6 Neurons in the cerebral cortex and the brainstem
root (Figure 1-7).
send axons to the lower motor neurons [LMNs) in the brainstem
The muscle or group of muscles innervated by one spinal
 and the spinal cord. The upper motor neurons [UMNs) provide
nerve is called a myotome. Myotomes are arranged segmen-
voluntary control of movement. Two of the major voluntary
tally in the paraspinal muscles but are more irregular in the
motor pathways, the corticospinal [pyramidal] pathway and the
limbs. Dysfunction of a specific muscle is localizing to a spinal
corticorubrospinal pathway, are illustrated.
 nerve or a ventral root (Figures l-8 and 1-9). The approximate
TABLE 1-3
Summary of Lower Motor Neuron (LMN) and Upper Motor Neuron (UMN) Signs
LMN: Seg mental Signs
UMN: Long-Tract Signs
Motor function
Paresis to paralysis: flaccid muscles
Paresis to paralysis: spastic muscles
Reflexes
Hyporeflexia to areflexia
Normal to hyperreflexia (especially myotatic
reflexes}
Muscle atrophy
Early and severe: neurogenic; limb contracture
Late and mild: disuse
Muscle tone
Decreased 
 Normal to increased 
Electromyographic changes
Abnormal potentials (fibrillation potentials, no posi-
No changes
tive sharp waves) after 5 to 7 days
Associated sensory signs
Anesthesia of innervated area (dermatomes):
Decreased to absent proprioception,
 paresthesia or hyperesthesia of adjacent areas:
 decreased perception of noxious stimulti
decreased to absent proprioception
 caudal to the lesion
10
PART1
 Fundamentals
relationship of spinal cord segments to vertebrae is illustrated
paresis, but not paralysis, of the affected muscles. The reflexes 
 in Figure 1-8.
may be depressed. Lesions of peripheral nerves are more likely
to cause severe loss of function, and all muscles innervated by
Signs of LMN Lesions
the nerve are affected. The reflexes are usually absent in these
Lesions of the LMN, whether of the cell body, the axon, motor
lesions [see Figure l-9].
end plate, or muscle produce a characteristic group of clinical
Differentiating UMN and LMN signs is extremely impor-
signs summarized in Table 1-3. Signs of LMN lesions are eas-
tant for localizing lesions in the spinal cord and brainstem.
ily recognized on neurologic examination. Paresis or paralysis,
UMN signs localize lesions to spinal cord regions, whereas
loss of muscle tone, and reduced or absence of reflexes occur
LMN signs help localize lesions to specific nerves, nerve roots,
 e   r  a re e
 or spinal cord segments.
atrophy is detectable within l week and becomes severe.Atro-
phy is limited to denervated muscles. Proper interpretation of
Sensory Systems
LMN signs allows the clinician to localize accurately lesions to
In our organizational scheme, sensory systems are divided into
 a specific segment of the CNS from which the affected LMN
general proprioception, general sensory [segmental and long
unit arises. For example, LMN signs affecting the thoracic limb
tract), and special sensory systems.
 are localized to the C6-T2 spinal cord segments, peripheral
nerves, or muscles.
Segmental Sensory Neurons
Most muscles are innervated by nerves that originate in
Sensory neurons are located in the spinal ganglia within the
more than one spinal cord segment. For example, the quad-
dorsal roots along the spinal cord (see Figure 1-7) and in the
riceps muscle is innervated by neurons originating in spinal
 ganglia of CN V. The receptors for temperature, pressure,
cord segments L4-6. Loss of one segment or one root causes
touch, and noxious stimuli (nociception) are located on or
partial loss of the innervation of the muscle. The clinical sign is
near body surfaces. Axons are located in peripheral nerves
and enter the spinal cord via the dorsal roots [see Figure 1-7)].
After entering the spinal cord, axons synapse on interneurons
that stimulate limb fexion and inhibit limb extension in the
ipsilateral limb and facilitate extension and inhibit flexion in
the contralateral limb. This is the sensory component of with-
drawal and crossed extensor reflexes (Figure 1-10). Fibers are
also projected to the brain for conscious perception of sensory
information [Figure 1-11).
The area of skin innervated by one spinal nerve is called
a dermatome. Dermatomes also are arranged in regular seg-
mental fashion, except for some variation in the limbs (Figure
1-12). Alterations in the sensation of a dermatome can be used
to localize a lesion to a spinal nerve or a dorsal root. The area
of skin innervated by the sensory neurons of a named periph-
eral nerve has a different distribution (Figure 1-13), allowing
localization oflesions of peripheral nerves.
Cranial nerve V is the major nerve for facial sensation [see
Figure 1-7 Components of the spinal reflex. A, Muscle spindle.
 Figure l-5). Sensory fibers project to the contralateral cerebral
B, Dorsal root ganglion. C, Ascending sensory pathway in the dor-
cortex.
sal column. D, Ventral horn motor neuron [lower motor neuron]
E, Ventral [motor] root. F, Neuromuscular junction. G, Descend-
Signs of Segmental Sensory Neuron Lesions
 ing motor pathway in the lateral column [upper motor neuron].
Lesions of the sensory neurons also produce characteristic
The dorsal and ventral roots join to form the peripheral nerve.
clinical signs. Segmental sensory signs include [l) anesthesia
[From Oliver JE: Neurologic examination, Vet Med Small Anim
(complete lesion), (2) hypesthesia (decreased perception of
Clin 68:151-154, 1973.]
noxious stimuli, partial lesion), (3) hyperesthesia (increased
02
IV
VI
V
Hgure 1-8 The spinal cord has a segmental arrangement; each segment has a pair of spinal nerves.
The approximate relationship of spinal cord segments and vertebrae in the dog is illustrated here.
Regions of the spinal cord that give rise to characteristic clinical signs when damaged are labeled. I,
C1-5, Upper rmotor neuron (UMN) to all limbs; II, C6-T2, lower motor neuron (LMN) to thoracic,
UMN to pelvic limbs; III, T3-L3, normal thoracic, UMN to pelvic limbs; IV, L4-S2, normal thoracic,
LMN to pelvic limbs; V, S1-3, partial LMN to pelvic limbs, absent perineal reflex, atonic bladder;
VI, caudal nerves, atonic tail.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
11
sensitivity of nociception, irritative lesion], and [4) loss of
General Proprioception
reflexes. Increased or decreased sensation of a dermatome can
 Proprioception means “sense of position." The clinical sign
be mapped by pinching the skin. Mapping the distribution of
of proprioception dysfunction is ataxia (incoordination). Gen-
sensory loss is accurate to within three spinal cord segments.
eral proprioception describes the position of muscles, joints,
Similarly, the alteration of sensitivity in the distribution of a
and tendons because proprioceptors are located in neuromus-
named peripheral nerve localizes the lesion accurately
cular spindles and Golgi tendon organs. Axons project within
peripheral nerves and enter the spinal cord via dorsal roots.
Long-Tract Sensory Pathways
Neurons are located in the spinal ganglia. On entering the
Sensory pathways ofclinical significance include those respon-
spinal cord, axons may [l) synapse directly on alpha motor
sible for general proprioception (position sense) and general
neurons for initiation of extensor reflexes such as the patellar
somatic afferent information (specifically, response to nox-
or knee jerk reflex [monosynaptic refex are) (Figure l-14),
ious stimuli). In animals, two types of fibers relaying informa-
(2) synapse on interneurons to indirectly influence alpha
tion regarding noxious stimuli traverse the spinal cord. Based
s   s  ass () o su r
on the location of receptors, these are called superficial and
afferent fbers via the spinal cord to the brainstem, cerebellum,
deep pathways. Superficial nociceptive pathways [for percep-
and cerebrum (Figure l-15).
tion of discrete noxious stimuli in the skin [e.g., a pinprick]
 Proprioception is transmitted to the cerebellum via spino-
are located primarily in the ventrolateral [primate) or dor-
cerebellar tracts. This information is used by the cerebellum
solateral (cat) portion of the spinal cord, with a relay in the
to regulate muscle tone, posture, locomotion, and equilib-
thalamus. The pathway primarily projects to the contralateral
rium. Lesions involving these tracts have a profound effect
cerebral cortex for conscious recognition of pain. The deep
on gait and may create clinical signs similar to cerebellar dys-
nociceptive pathway [for perception of severe pain in the
function (i.e., truncal swaying, hypermetria). Spinocerebellar
bones, the joints, or the viscera [e.g, a crushing pain]) is a
tracts activate Purkinje neurons in the cerebellum that inhibit
bilateral, multisynaptic system that projects to the reticular
formation, the thalamus, and the cerebral cortex. In general,
for weight bearing. Lesions in spinocerebellar tracts result in
damage must be bilateral and severe to block conscious per-
 overflexion of limbs, known as hypermetria. Clinical signs are
 ception of noxious stimuli distal to lesions.
ipsilateral to lesions.
Spinal nerve
Lumbosacral
 Peripheral nerve
 Muscle innervated 
snxaid
lliopsoas
Femoral 4, 5, 6
Quadriceps
Sartorius
 External obturator
 Pectineus
Obturator (L4), 5, 6
Gracilis
Adductor
Middle gluteal
Cranial gluteal L6, 7, S1
Deep gluteal
Tensor fascia lata 
L5
 Superficial gluteal 
Caudal gluteal L7, (S1, 2)
(Middle gluteal)
L6
Biceps femoris
Sciatic L6, 7, S1, (2)
 Semimembranosus
L7
Semitendinosus
Peroneus longus
S1
Lateral digital extensor
Common peroneal 
Long digital extensor 
S2
Cranial tibial
S3
Gastrocnemius
Popliteus
Tibial
 Superficial digital flexor 
 Deep digital flexor 
 Pudendal S1, 2, 3
Caudal rectal
 External anal sphincter
Flexor reflex: sensory and motor: sciatic nerve
Patellar reflex: sensory and motor: femoral nerve
A
Perineal reflex: sensory and motor: pudendal 
Figure 1-9 A, Segmental innervation from cervical intumescence of thoracic limb muscles in the dog.
Continued
12
PART1
 Fundamentals
Spinal nerve
Brachial
Peripheral nerve
Muscle innervated
 plexus
Suprascapular (C5), 6, 7
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Subscapular C6, 7
Subscapularis 
C6
Biceps brachii
Musculocutaneous C6, 7, 8
Brachialis
Coracobrachialis
Deltoideus
C7-
Axillary (C6), 7, 8
Teres major
Teres minor
(Subscapularis)
C8-
Triceps brachii
Extensor carpi radialis
Radial C7, 8, T1, (2)
Ulnaris lateralis
 Common digital extensor
T1
 Lateral digital extensor
T2
 Fexor carpi radialis
Median C8, T1, (2)
Superficial digital flexor
(Deep digital flexor)
 Flexor carpi ulnaris
>UInar C8,T1, (2)
 Deep digital flexor
Flexor reflex: sensory: varies with area stimulated
motor: musculocutaneous, axillary, median, ulnar, radial
Biceps reflex: sensory and motor: musculocutaneous
B
Triceps reflex: sensory and motor: radial
Hgure 1-9-cont'd B, Segmental innervation from lumbosacral intumescence of pelvic limb
mscles in the dog. [From de Lahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical neurology, ed 3,
St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.)
 Conscious proprioception is carried to the medulla via
of a pinprick) and voluntary motor activity are often lost at
the dorsal columns [fasciculus gracilis [from pelvic limbs]
the same time. Deep pain perception (perception of a strong
and cuneatus [from thoracic l
limbs]), whose fbers first
pinch of a bone or a joint) is the last neurologic function to be
synapse in medullary nuclei [nuclei gracilis and cuneatus,
lost during spinal cord compression. The level of a spinal cord
respectively). Axons from these nuclei cross to the opposite
lesion can be determined if a level ofhypesthesia or anesthesia
side via the deep arcuate fibers and then traverse the brain-
can be detected (Figure 1-16).
stem in the medial lemniscus to the thalamus. Ultimately,
fibers are projected to the contralateral parietal lobe of the
Special Sensory: Vision
cerebral cortex.
The retina serves the function of a digital scanner. It contains
Lesions of these pathways are associated with general
photosensitive cells [rods and cones), bipolar neurons, and
proprioceptive ataxia and delayed responses in the initiation
ganglion cells. Axons from ganglion cells form the optic nerve.
of postural reactions (hopping, knuckling-paw placement).
Just rostral to the ventral diencephalon, the optic nerves join
Lesions rostral and caudal to the midbrain create defcits in
at the optic chiasm. In general, fibers from the medial (nasal)
contralateral and ipsilateral limbs, respectively.
half of the retina cross at the optic chiasm, whereas fbers
fom the lateral (temporal) half of the retina remain ipsi-
Signs of Long-Tract Sensory Lesions
lateral. Post chiasm, fibers continue in bilateral optic tracts
The signs of sensory long-tract lesions are valuable for the for-
located on the caudodorsolateral surface of the diencephalon.
mulation of a prognosis of CNS disorders and for localization.
Most optic-tract fbers involved in vision synapse in the lat-
Spinal cord lesions frequently cause decreased sensation cau-
eral geniculate nucleus of the thalamus; however, about 20%
dal to the level of the lesion. Proprioceptive deficits usually
to 25% of fbers pass over the geniculate nucleus and termi-
are the first signs observed with compressive lesions of the spi-
nate in the pretectal area of the midbrain and participate in
nal cord. Abnormal positioning of the feet and ataxia may be
pupillary light reflexes. Visual fibers project from the lateral
present before any significant loss of voluntary motor activity
geniculate nucleus to the contralateral occipital cortex, where
occurs. Superficial pain perception (the conscious perception
the image is perceived.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
13
UPPER MOTOR
NEURON LESION
NORMAL
Lesion
Upper
Motor
Neuron
Flexor
Contractiony
Contralaterar
Extension
 Not Inhibited
by UMN
Extensor
Contralateral Extensor
nhibition
Inhibition by UMN
Noxious
Noxious
Stimulus
Stimulus
AtoFoot
B
toFoot
FHgure 1-10 Flexor and crossed extension reflexes. A, The animal is positioned in lateral recum-
 bency and a noxious stimulus is applied to a digit. The limb is immediately withdrawn. Sensory
fbers enter the spinal cord through the dorsal root to synapse on interneurons. Flexor motor
neurons are activated, causing flexion of the limb. Simultaneously, inhibitory interneurons cause
relaxation of the antagonistic extensor muscles. Other interneurons cross the spinal cord to acti-
vate contralateral extensor muscles—the crossed extensor reflex. B, The crossed extensor reflex is
mhibited unless damage to UMN systems has occurred. Sensory fibers also project to the brain,
causing a conscious awareness of pain and subsequently a behavioral reaction (A). The reflex is not
dependent on a behavioral reaction. The behavioral reaction may be absent if sensory pathways are
damaged. (From Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987,
WB Saunders.]
Pupillary Light Reflexes
the vestibular nerve to form CN Vll, the vestibulocochlear
Axons that pass over the lateral geniculate nucleus enter the
nerve, which enters the rostral medulla. The cochlear nerve
midbrain and synapse on parasympathetic nuclei in the pre-
neurons are located in nuclei just inside the medulla. Numer-
tectal area. A second neuron then synapses on the parasympa-
 ous pathways and synapses are available for reflex activity and
thetic motor nucleus of CN IIl. This is a bilateral pathway that
 conscious perception of sound. Conscious perception of sound
influences both nuclei. Parasympathetic axons follow CN IIl
is bilateral and resides in the temporal lobes of the cerebral
 and synapse in the ciliary ganglion. The short ciliary nerve syn-
 cortex. These pathways provide little help in localizing lesions
 apses on the iris sphincter muscle, resulting in both direct and
within the brain. Deafness is discussed in Chapter 9.
consensual pupillary light reflexes. Disorders of vision (blind-
ness), pupil size [anisocoria), and ocular movement [nystag-
Vestibular System
mus) and position [strabismus) are discussed in Chapter 1l.
This is a special proprioception system that maintains an ani-
mal's orientation relative to gravity and position in face of
Special Sensory: Hearing
linear or rotatory acceleration or tilting of the head. It main-
The cochlea is the receptor organ for hearing and is located
tains proper position of the eyes, trunk, and limbs relative
in the inner ear. Movement of special hair cells in the cochlea
activates fbers in the cochlear nerve. The cochlear nerve joins
vestibular nuclei of the brainstem and connect to receptors
14
PART1
 Fundamentals
 q  s  s  
Sensory area of
are in relationship to the action required to perform coor-
cerebral cortex
Diffuse throughout the
dinated movements. It contains both efferent and afferent
cerebral cortex
pathways, which enter or leave the cerebellum via three
pairs of peduncles that connect the brainstem to the cerebel-
information related to position of the head, trunk, and limbs.
The most important sensory pathways are the spinocerebel-
lar tracts [unconscious proprioception from the limbs, trunk,
-Thalamus
 and neck), vestibulocerebellar tracts (special proprioception
for head position), and visual and auditory sensation via the
colliculi and tectocerebellar processes. Extrapyramidal motor
information is projected to the cerebellum via the olivary
nuclei located in the caudal medulla. Axons from all areas of
the cerebral cortex project fbers to the cerebellum via the
Reticular
pontine nuclei. Finally, the cerebellum receives motor infor-
formation
mation from the red nucleus [midbrain) and reticular forma-
tion. No efferent cerebellar axons project into the spinal cord
and directly influence the LMNs. The cerebellum exerts its
regulatory functions via efferent fibers that influence UMNs
in the brainstem.
In general, cerebellar disease causes severe ataxia, dysmet-
ria (both hypermetria and hypometria, and affects the rate and
force with which movement is made), tremors [both general-
ized and intention), and sometimes vestibular signs. Because
the cerebellum does not initiate motor action, paresis and
paralysis are not signs of cerebellar disease. Movements may
3 to 5 segments
between synapses
be uncoordinated to the point where severely affected ani-
mals are unable to ambulate but these animals are not paretic
because they can initiate movement and can support their
weight against gravity. Postural reactions and gait can be ini-
tiated, and muscle tone is normal. Cerebellar syndromes are
discussed in Chapters 8 and 10.
Cerebrum: Cognitive Function
Beicel
Sensory and motor functions that involve specifc areas of
Hgure 1-11 The pain pathway in animals is bilateral and multi-
the cerebral cortex have been previously described. The cere-
synaptic [see also Figure 1-15).The deep pain pathway apparently
brum contains areas for cognitive (thought, thinking) func-
has synapses every three to five segments, with projections con-
tion, learned responses, and behavior. Generalized disease of
tinuing cranially on both sides of the spinal cord.
the cerebrum may cause alterations of mental status [dullness,
stupor, coma), loss of learned responses such as house train-
ing, and aimless pacing or walling. Seizures can be a sign of
cerebral disease.
in the inner ear via CN Vll. The receptors for balance are
 located in the semicircular canals. To maintain proper pos-
ture and coordinated (conjugate) eye movements, vestibular
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS
stimuli are projected from vestibular nuclei to the cerebellum
and rostrally via the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) to
      on    s
nuclei of CN IIl, IV, and VI. Motor fbers from vestibular
the nervous system are listed in Table 1-1.
nuclei project to all levels of the spinal cord via vestibulospi-
Seizures always indicate a neuroanatomic localization to
nal tracts and synapse on interneurons in ventral gray matter.
the forebrain, although the problem [etiology) may be second-
 The net effect is facilitation of ipsilateral [same side) exten-
ary to a metabolic or toxic condition. Differentiation between
sor muscles and inhibition of ipsilateral flexor muscles and
seizures and syncope may be difficult and may require word-
contralateral extensor muscles. This is important for mainte-
ing the questions carefully and interpreting the answers even
nance of extensor tone and facilitation of the stretch reflex
more carefully.
mechanism. Both are important components of the animal's
 Stupor and coma are manifestations of abnormal cerebral
antigravity system.
 or brainstem function. Behavioral changes may be caused by
Vestibular syndromes are characterized by ataxia, head tilt,
primary brain abnormalities or may be secondary to environ-
circling, nystagmus, and falling toward the side of the lesion
mental factors.
[Figure 1-17). Vestibular syndromes are classified as peripheral
Paresis and paralysis, signs of primary motor dysfunction,
(inner ear, vestibular nerve) or central (medulla and cerebel-
are caused by a neurologic abnormality. Lameness of musculo-
lum) and are discussed in Chapter 8.
skeletal origin is differentiated from these signs by the physical
and neurologic examinations.
Cerebellum
 Sensory deficits such as loss of proprioception or hypesthe-
The cerebellum functions as a coordinator of movements
sia [decreased sensation] are always a result of an abnormality
that originate in the UMN system. It also functions to help
in the nervous system.
Pain [one's subjective response to a noxious stimulus) may
ity, and eye movements. The cerebellum receives sensory
 be related to neural lesions. For example, nerve-root irritation
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
15
Figure 1-12 Dermatomes of the dog. This illustration represents the results of several studies. Der-
matomes differ among individuals, and overlapping innervation of approximately three segments is
present in most areas. The distribution to thoracic limbs is tentative. From Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF,
Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.]
may cause localized pain and lameness, sometimes called root
The neurologic examination is usually described as
signature. The client's observations may be helpful in localiz-
a complicated process that is wholly separate from the
 ing the animal's pain.A careful physical and neurologic exami-
physical examination. In reality, much of the neurologic
nation is essential to verify the signs.
examination is done as a routine part of the physical exami-
Visual deficits may be caused by an abnormality of the
nation. The examiner needs only to be aware of what is
 eye or of the nervous system. Thorough ophthalmologic
being observed. The addition of a few extra steps completes
 and neurologic examinations are necessary to make a diag-
the examination. A brief description of integration of the
nosis. Historical information may be deceptive in the case
neurologic examination with the physical examination of
of visual abnormalities. Animals in their usual surround-
a small animal patient is presented as an example. This is
-uos aq Aeu Aaun yanou uaaa Aeuu uosuny Aeu sau
followed by detailed discussion of each of the components.
pletely blind.
The process of completing the neurologic examination
 Deficits in hearing usually are not recognized unless they
differs depending on the examiner's routine in a physical
 are bilateral. Bilateral hearing loss is usually caused by abnor-
examination.
malities of the inner ear. Brain lesions causing deafness are
rare.
Efficient Neurologic Examination
 Loss of sense of smell (anosmia) is rarely recognized except
A simple numeric grading scheme may be used to record
 in working dogs. Anorexia occasionally may be associated with
results of the examination. Grades are assigned as follows:
anosmia.
 0 = no response (reflex, reaction); +l = a decreased response;
+2 = a normal response; +3 = an exaggerated response; and +4
= a myotatic reflex with clonus.
NEUROLOGIC EXAMINATION
 1. Observation: Completed while taking the history.
2. Palpation: Usually done early in a physical examination.
In the neurologic examination, the clinician systemati-
3. Postural reactions: Require special tests. Hopping and
cally evaluates the functional integrity of the various com-
proprioceptive positioning (paw replacement) of each
 ponents of the nervous system. The examination can be
iimb are usually all that are necessary. Proprioceptive
conveniently divided into the following parts: observa-
positioning can be done during palpation; when the
tion; palpation; examination of postural reactions, spinal
examiner's hand reaches the foot, the foot is knuckled
reflexes, and cranial nerve responses; and sensory evalua-
under and the response observed.
tion [Box 1-3].
 4. Spinal reflexes: Require special tests. Patellar [quad-
 In every complete neurologic examination, each of these
riceps, knee jerk), extensor carpi radialis, and flexion
reflexes are adequate. If gait and postural reactions are
to the nervous system. An abbreviated neurologic examination
normal, spinal reflexes are usually normal.
might include the items marked with an asterisk in Box 1-3.
5. Cranial nerves [CN): Can be examined during the
 Positive findings on any of these tests indicate the need for a
general physical examination when the head is exam-
more complete neurologic examination. Neurologic responses
ined. While observing the head, the examiner notes
of neonatal dogs are outlined in Table l-4.
symmetry of the face (CN VIl) and symmetry of eye
16
PART1
Fundamentals
CRANIAL
LATERAL
CAUDAL
MEDIAL
Brachiocephalic
LCB-T2
Musculocutaneous
Uinar
Radial
MEDIAL
CRANIAL
CAUDAL
LATERAL
LCFN
CCFN
GN
Saphenous
Sciatic
(tibialand
peroneall
Tibial
Peroneal
Hgure 1-13 A, Cutaneous innervation of the left thoracic limb of the dog. Autonomous zones,
innervated by only one nerve, are shown along with recommended sites for testing of sensation
(dots). The median nerve does not have an autonomous zone. LCB-T2, Lateral cutaneous branch of
the second thoracic nerve. B, Cutaneous innervation of the right pelvic limb of the dog. Autono-
mous zones and testing sites are shown as in A. LCFN, Lateral cutaneous fermoral nerve L3, L4
(L5]; CCFN, caudal cutaneous femoral nerve (L7]), S1-2; GN, genitofemoral nerve L[2), L3-4. [A
is based on Kitchell RL, et al: Electrophysiological studies of cutaneous nerves of the thoracic limb
of the dog, Am J Vet Res 41:61, 1980 and Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Clinical evaluation of the cutane-
ous innervation of the canine thoracic limb, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:939, 1984. B is based on
Haghighi SS, et al: Electrophysiologic studies of cutaneous innervation of the pelvic limb of male
 dogs, Am J Vet Res 52:352, 1991 and Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Cutaneous sensory testing in the dog,
JVet Intern Med 1:128, 1987.)
position and pupils (CN Il, IV, Vl, and sympathetic
eye, observing the pupillary light reflex [CN Il and I).
nerves). A menacing gesture is made at each eye, pro-
The nose and lower jaw are touched or pinched, elicit-
voking a blink (CN II and VIl). The medial and lat-
ing facial or behavioral movements [CN V-maxillary
 e suard aaa yea to ni si snu e
 and mandibular; CN VIl). The temporal and masseter
[CN V-ophthalmic [medial] and maxillary [lateral]
muscles are palpated and the mouth opened, with the
branches; CN VIl). The examiner turns the head from
 examiner noting jaw tone (CN V-mandibular). With
side to side, observing conjugate eye movements [CN
the
 patient's mouth open, while assessing mucous
IIl, IV, Vl, and VII) and then shines a light in each
 membranes and tonsils, the examiner notes symmetry
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
17
EXTENSOR
MOTOR NEURON
Primary
Spindle
Long
//Contralateral
Tract
Flexor
MUSCLE
Touch and
Gamma
Alpha
SPINDLE
Pressure
Efferent
---
Free
Ending
Long
Tract
Tendon
Organ/
MYONEURAL JUNCTION
Hgure 1-14 Myotatic [stretch] reflex. Percussion of the tendon or muscle stretches the muscle
spindle. IA afferent fibers are activated and synapse directly on motor neurons of the muscle. The
motor neuron discharges when a threshold level of excitation is reached. The level of excitation 
of the motor neuron is related to synapses from a variety of sources, as illustrated. The impulse
travels down the axon [alpha efferent) to the neuromuscular junction, causing a release of acetyl-
choline. Acetylcholine binds to receptors on the muscle, causing depolarization and contraction of
the muscle. Gamma motor neurons maintain tension on the muscle spindle regardless of the state
of contraction of the muscle. (From Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurology,
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.)
 of the larynx and pharynx and touches the pharynx,
The animal should be allowed to move around the exami-
 causing a gag refex (CN IX X, and XI). The examiner
 nation room or in an open area while the history is being
 observes symmetry of the tongue and, as the mouth is
taken.5-7
closed, rubs the nose; most animals will lick, illustrat-
ing symmetry of tongue movements (CN XIl). During
Mental Status
 palpation of the animal, the trapezius and brachioce-
Technique. The examiner can obtain a general impression
phalicus muscles are observed for atrophy (CN XI).
of the animal's level of consciousness and behavior by observ-
The only cranial nerve not tested is CN I-olfactory,
ing its response to environmental stimuli or to people. Natu-
which can be assessed by an aversive response to alco-
ral variations such as the aggressive curiosity of puppies, the
hol. It is not tested unless a forebrain deficit is sus-
indifference of older hounds, and the withdrawal of cats must
pected. This assessment of cranial nerves adds less than
be recognized as normal behavior. Overt aggression and fear-
2 minutes to the usual examination of the head.
biting usually can be recognized.
 6. Sensory examination: Hyperesthesia may have been
Anatomy and Physiology. Consciousness is a function of
detected during palpation. Response to noxious stimuli
the cerebral cortex and the brainstem. Sensory stimuli from
can be assessed during flexion reflex testing and cranial
the body, such as touch, temperature, and response to noxious
nerve evaluation. Areas of suspicion are pursued last to
stimuli, and from outside the body, such as sight, sound, and
avoid upsetting the animal early in the examination.
 odors, provide input to the reticular formation. Consciousness
 Testing for deep pain perception (response to noxious
is maintained by diffuse projections of the reticular formation
susan nou si ue an jn Auo su si ns
to the cerebral cortex [Figure l-18).
to superficial stimulation and when there is no motor
This arousal system is termed the ascending reticular acti-
movement.
vating system [ARAS).4 A common cause of decreased levels
 The complete neurologic examination adds only a minimal
of consciousness is a disruption of the pathways between the
amount of time to the total physical examination.
tem, consisting of portions of the cerebrum and diencephalon,
Components of the Neurologic Examination
constitutes the substrate for behavior.
Observation
 Assessment. An animal's mental status may be recorded
During every physical examination, the veterinarian should
 as alert, dull, stuporous, or comatose depending on its level
observe the animal's mental status, posture, and movement.
 of consciousness [see Chapter 12). Behavioral changes
18
PART1
 Fundamentals
may include aggression, fear, withdrawal, and disorienta-
tion. Other signs related to abnormal behavior include
yawning, head pressing, compulsive walking, circling, and
"stargazing."
Cerebral
Dullness, also denoted as obtundation or depression in
cortex
an animal, is characterized by a conscious but inactive state.
The animal is relatively unresponsive to the environment and
tends to sleep when undisturbed. Dullness may be caused
Thalamus
 e e  x s  
or metabolic disorders. When associated with primary brain
[(intracranial) problems, dullness usually indicates diffuse cere-
bral cortical disease or a brainstem lesion.
daais on spuan se reuue ue Aq paynduaxa si rodns
when undisturbed. Innocuous stimuli such as touch or noise
may not cause arousal, but a noxious stimulus causes the ani-
mal to awaken. Stupor usually is associated with partial dis-
 connection of the reticular formation and the cerebral cortex,
Nucleusgracilis
as in diffuse cerebral edema with herniation of the cerebrum
andcuneatus
causing compression of the brainstem.
Coma is a state of deep unconsciousness. The animal can-
Lateralcervical
not be aroused even with noxious stimuli, although simple
nucleus
refexes may be intact. For example, pinching the foot pro-
duces a flexor reflex but does not cause arousal. Coma indi-
cates complete disconnection of the reticular formation and
Proprioceptive
the cerebral cortex. The most common cause in small animals
pathways
is acute head injury with hemorrhage in the pons and the mid-
brain.8 Animals that are unable to stand because of spinal cord
Spinocervical
dysfunction are alert.
tract
Behavioral disorders are often functional, that is, related
to environment and training. Primary brain disease, however,
Lateralspinothalamic
also can cause alterations in behavior. These are indicative of a
tract
cerebral or diencephalic lesion.
General
sensory input
Posture
Technique. Abnormalities in posture may be noticed
while the history is being recorded and the animal is free to
Leisei
move about. Further observations may necessitate moving the
a on pausuen st uoneaiauu Aosuas oeuos sh-l anby
animal to different positions so that its ability to regain normal
 brain through several pathways. General proprioception is a func-
 posture can be evaluated.
tion of the spinomedullothalamic pathway (near the spinocervi-
Anatomy and Physiology. Normal posture is main-
cal tract] for the pelvic limbs and of the fasciculus cuneatus of
the dorsal columns for the thoracic limbs. Pain is transmitted by
from receptors in the limbs and body, the visual system,
several tracts [see also Figure 1-11], including the spinothalamic,
and the vestibular system. Vestibular receptors sense alter-
spinocervical, and spinoreticular tracts and the dorsal columns.
ations in the position of the animal's head in relation to
Conscious perception
edo
1-CE
Hgure 1-16 The cutaneous trunci [panniculus) reflex is the contraction of cutaneous trunci mus-
 cle, producing a skin twitch from stimulation of cutaneous sensory fbers. [From Greene CE, Oliver
JE: Neurologic examination. In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saunders.]
CHAPTER 1 
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
19
BOX 1-3
Neurologic Examination
1. Observation*
Flexor*
Mental status
 Extensor thrust 
Posture
Perineal*
Movement
Crossed extensor
l. Palpation*
Extensor toe
Integument
V. Cranial Nerves
Muscles
Olfactory
Skeleton
Il. Postural Reactions
Oculomotor*
 Proprioceptive
Trochlear
positioning*
Trigeminal*
Wheelbarrowing 
Abducent*
Hopping*
Facial*
 Extensor postural thrust 
Vestibulocochlear
 Hemistanding and 
Glossopharyn-
hemiwalking
geal
Hgure 1-17 A cat with a head tilt and falling, signs typical of
 Placing (tactile)
Vagus*
vestibular disease.
Placing (visual)
Accessory
Sway test
Hypoglossal*
Tonic neck
Vl. Sensation
gravity and detect motion. Sensory information is processed
IV. Spinal Reflexes
Touch
through the brainstem, cerebellum, and cerebrum. The cer-
Myotatic
Hyperesthesia*
ebellum and yestibular system are especially important.
 Pelvic limb
Superficial pain*
The integrated output through motor pathways to the mus
Quadriceps femoris
Deep paint
cles of the neck, trunk, and limbs maintains normal posture.
All domestic animals can maintain an erect posture shortly
muscle*
after birth; however, they vary in their ability to stand and
Cranial tibial muscle
Gastrocnemius
walk.
Assessment
muscle
Head.
. The most common abnormality is a tilt or a twist to
Thoracic limb
one side (see Figure 1-17). Intermittent head tilt, especially
 Extensor canpi radialis
if associated with rubbing of the ear, may be due to otitis
muscle
externa or ear mites. A continuous head tilt with resistance
Triceps
to straightening of the head by the examiner is almost always
 Biceps brachi muscle
due to vestibular system dysfunction. Signs range from tilt-
ing of the head (roll) or turning of the head and neck (yaw)
*Included in a screening examination.
to twisting and rolling of the head, neck, and body. A yaw
+If superficial pain perception is absent.
may indicate brainstem or cerebral disease; a roll or tilt is
usually vestibular in origin. Both must be differentiated from
spasms of cervical muscles caused by spinal cord or nerve
on the thoracic limbs when the pelvic limbs are weak or
root disease.
painful and on the pelvic limbs when the thoracic limbs are
The head and neck may be held in a fixed position when
affected.
cervical pain is present. Dogs with caudal cervical pain and
 Decreased tone in limb muscles is often associated with
weakness of the thoracic limb often arch their back and put
 LMN lesions and causes abnormal posture. The limbs are posi-
 tioned passively, often with the toes knuckled.
off the thoracic limbs.
 Decerebrate rigidity is characterized by extension of all
Trunk. Abnormal posture of the trunk may be associated
four limbs and the trunk. It is caused by a lesion in the rostral
with congenital or acquired lesions of the vertebrae or abnor-
brainstem (midbrain or pons). Opisthotonos may be associ-
mal muscle tone from brain or spinal cord lesions. Deviations
ated with decerebrate rigidity if the rostral lobes of the cer-
in vertebral contour consist of (l) scoliosis, lateral deviation;
(2) lordosis, ventral deviation (swayback); and (3) kyphosis,
and the neck. Mentation is often altered.
dorsal deviation.
Decerebellate rigidity is similar, but the pelvic limbs are
Limbs. Abnormal posture of the limbs includes improper
positioning and increased or decreased extensor tone. A
 lesion of the cerebellum.
wide-based stance is common to all forms of ataxia and is
 Increased tone in the extensor muscles is a sign of UMN
also seen in cases of generalized weakness. Proprioceptive
-3exa ue asnpord Aeu suosst rered (e-I alqe aas aseas
or motor deficits may cause the animal to stand with a foot
gerated straightness in the stifle and hock joints. Decere-
knuckled over. With LMN or UMN lesions, the animal often
brate rigidity is an extreme form of increased extensor tone.
makes repeated attempts to reposition the limb. Uneven
Increased tone in the forelimbs with flaccid paralysis of the
distribution of weight on the limbs may provide a clue
hind limbs is called the Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon and
to
weakness or pain. Animals try to carry most of their weight
is associated with spinal cord lesions between T2 and L4 spinal
20
PART1
 Fundamentals
Cerebral
cortex
Spinal cord
Somatosensory
pathways
VI
B.eine
tion from the spinal cord and cranial nerves. It projects, through thalamic relays, diffusely to the
cerebral cortex, thus maintaining consciousness.
TABLE 1-4
Neurologic Evaluation of the Neonatal Dog
EXPECTED RESPONSE (Age in Days)
Strong
Weak, Variable
Absent or Adultlike
Motor
Crossed extensor reflex
1-16
16-18
18+ (absent)
Magnus
1-17
17-21
21+ (absent)
Neck extension posture
Fexion 1-4
Hyperextension 4-21
 Normotonia 21+
Forelimb placing
4+
2-4
02 (absent)
Hind limb placing
8+
6-8
06 (absent)
Forelimb supporting 
10+
6-19
06 (absent)
Hind limb supporting
15+
11-15
011 (absent)
 Standing on all limbs 
21+
18-21
1-18 (absent)
 Body righting (cutaneous)
1+
0-1
Sensory
Rooting reflex
0-14
14-25
25+ (absent)
Nociceptive withdrawal reflex
0-19
19-23
23+ (adult)
Cutaneous trunci reflex
0-19
19-25
25+ (adult)
Reflex urination
0-22
22-25
25+ (absent)
Visual and Auditory
 Blinking response to light 
16+
4-16
04 (absent)
Visual orientation
25+
20-25
0-20 (absent)
Auditory startle reflex
24+
15-24
0-15 (absent)
 Sound orientation 
25+
18-25
0-18
Modifed from Fox MW: The clinical behavior of the neonatal dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 143:1331-1335, 1963.
cord segments. Increased tone in both extensors and flexors is
Gait
seen in tetanus and strychnine poisoning.
Technique. The gait should be observed with the animal
on a surface that offers adequate traction [carpet, synthetic
Movement
turf, grass).7 Gaits vary among species and breeds, and the
The animal should  be observed  for  abnormal  movements
examiner must be knowledgeable of these differences. Some
while resting and at gait. Careful observation is important
breeds of dogs have been selectively developed for character-
because movement may be the most significant part of the
istic gaits. Because of this breeding, neurologic diseases may
 neurologic examination, especially in large animals, in which
have inadvertently been genetically selected. The gait should
postural reaction testing is more difficult.
be observed from the side and while the animal is moving
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
21
toward and away from the examiner. Each limb should be
the body. A deficit appears as a misplacement or a knuckling
 evaluated while the animal is walling and trotting. The ani-
of the foot that may not occur with every step. The general
mal should be turned in wide, tight circles and should be
 proprioceptive pathways in the spinal cord are in the dorsal
backed up. Large animals are walked up and down a slope
and dorsolateral columns and project to both the cerebellum
 and with the head and neck extended.9 The examiner may
[unconscious) and the cerebral cortex [conscious).
 exaggerate minimal abnormalities in gait by blindfolding the
 Paresis is a deficit of motor function. Affected limbs are
animal.
unable to support weight appropriately. In addition, the
Anatomy and Physiology. The neural organization of gait
affected limbs have inadequate or absent voluntary motion,
and posture is complex, involving all levels of the nervous sys-
which may be described as monoparesis-paresis of one limb;
tem. Limbs are maintained in extension for supporting weight
paraparesis-paresis of both pelvic limbs, tetraparesis or quadri-
paresis-paresis of all four limbs; or hemiparesis-paresis of the
 granimed at the spinal level (Figure 1-19).
thoracic and the pelvic limb on the same side.
Organization of the various gaits used in normal locomo-
The suffix -plegia may be used to denote complete loss of vol-
tion occurs at the brainstem level in the reticular formation,
 oq aeu o as Aq pasn s ue suao Aen
probably in the subthalamic or pretectal areas. Removal of
and sensory loss. In this text, paresis indicates partial deficit of
the input from the forebrain does not abolish the capacity
motor function, whereas paralysis [-plegia) indicates a complete
for locomotion, including all normal gaits (trot, gallop, walk,
loss of voluntary movements. In general, the only difference in
and so forth). Cerebellar regulation of this system makes loco-
the two is the severity of the lesion; the localization is the same.
motion smooth and coordinated. Vestibular input maintains
Paresis only is evident clinically with disruption of the
balance. Cerebral cortical input to the system is necessary for
descending UMN tract originating from caudal to the mid-
purposeful movement, voluntary control, and fine coordina-
brain and spinal cord or with lesions affecting the LMN unit.
Therefore, paresis may be of the UMN or the LMN type [see
An animal with a lesion in the cerebrum or diencephalon
Table l-3), the determination of which is made through evalu-
is able to walk but does not have the precision of move-
ation of the reflexes, and muscle mass and tone.
ment of a healthy animal. However, postural reactions are
A neurologic disease may cause an animal to circle. Cir-
abnormal. Severe rostral brainstem lesions [of the midbrain
cling may range from a tendency to drift in wide circles to
and the pons) cause decerebrate rigidity because the volun-
forced spinning in a tight circle. Circling usually is not a local-
tary motor pathways that inhibit extensor muscle activity
izing sign except that tight circles usually are caused by ves-
are lost. Lesions in the pons or the medulla abolish inte-
tibular or caudal brainstem lesions and wide circles usually
grated locomotion. Acute lesions of the cerebellum produce
are caused by forebrain lesions. A head turn is usually seen
severe incapacitating dysmetria in which the animal may not
with forebrain lesions. The direction of the circling is usually
be able to gait, whereas chronic lesions produce dysmetria
toward the side of the lesion, but exceptions occur, especially
evident in gait.
 in lesions rostral to the midbrain. T'wisting or head tilt associ-
Assessment. Abnormalities of gait may include paresis
ated with circling usually indicates involvement of the ves-
and general proprioceptive, vestibular, or cerebellar ataxia or
tibular system.
lameness as is observed with orthopedic disease.
Ataxia is a lack of coordination without spasticity, pare-
General proprioception, or position sense, is the ability to
sis, or involuntary movements, although each of these condi-
recognize the location of the limbs in relation to the rest of
tions may be seen in association with ataxia. Given the close
anatomic relationship of the UMN tracts with the general
proprioceptive tracts, most naturally occurring lesions affect
both systems.As a result, it is often diffcult to separate ataxia
Cerebral cortex
from paresis in many clinically affected animals. Truncal
Subthalamus
Cerebellum
body. Movement of the limbs is uncoordinated. The feet may
 be crossed or placed too far apart. Ataxia can be exaggerated
Reticular formation
by elevating the head or walking the animal on a slope.Ataxia
Locomotor control
may be caused by lesions of the cerebellum, the vestibular
Midbrain/Pons
system, or the general proprioceptive pathways [see Chap-
ters 2 and 8).
A characteristic of cerebellar dysfunction, dysmetria is
 characterized by movements that are too long (overreaching
or hypermetria) in which there is overflexion of the joints
during the swing phase of the gait or too short (hypometria).
Left thoracic
S.S.
Right thoracic
Goose-stepping is the most common sign of dysmetria. The
limb
S.S.
limb
stride may be abruptly stopped, forcing the animal to lurch
from side to side. Dysmetria of the head and the neck may
 be most apparent when the animal tries to drink or eat and
 overshoots or undershoots the target. Dysmetria usually is
caused by cerebellar or cerebellar pathway lesions and may
be associated with ataxia and intention tremors (see Chap-
ters 2 and 8)
Left pelvic
S.S.
Right pelvic
limb
S.S
limb
Involuntary Abnormal Movement
Hgure 1-19 Schematic diagram of automatic control of loco-
 Technique. Abnormal movements may occur when the
 motion. Spinal stepping reflexes are controlled by the brainstem
animal is at rest or when it is moving and may be intermittent
centers for locomotion. Voluntary control is imposed from the
or continuous. The most frequently recognized movement dis-
cerebral cortex. The cerebellum and other areas coordinate the
order is myoclonus, which if occurs repetitively, appears clini-
 movements. S.S., Spinal stepping circuit in spinal cord.
cally as a tremor (see Chapter 10).
22
PART1
 Fundamentals
Assessment. A tremor is produced by alternating contrac-
Muscles. Muscles are evaluated for size, tone, and strength.
tions of opposing groups of muscles. The oscillatory move-
All muscle groups should be systematically palpated, starting
ments may result in small or large excursions [fne or coarse
with the head, extending down the neck and the trunk, and
tremors). Tremor from neurologic causes must be differenti-
continuing down each limb.
ated from those induced by fatigue, fear, chilling, drug reac-
aasqo  auee aq a ai arsn u sn
tions, or primary muscle disease (see Chapter 10).
and from palpation. Loss of muscle mass [atrophy) is the most
An intention tremor is one that is more pronounced when
frequent finding. Atrophy may indicate LMN disease or disuse.
movements are initiated. It is an important sign of cerebel-
Criteria for differentiating the two are presented in Chapter 2.
lar disease. A continuous tremor usually is associated with an
Localized muscle atrophy, which usually accompanies LMN
abnormality of the motor system.
 disease, is an important localizing sign.
Myoclonus is a coarse, jerking of muscle groups. Myoclonus
Muscle tonus is maintained through the spinal stretch
associated with canine distemper encephalomyelitis is usually
(myotatic) reflex. Alterations in tone, either increased or
a rhythmic jerking of one muscle group, such as the flexors of
decreased, can be detected by palpation and passive manipu-
the elbow or the temporal muscle. The myoclonus of distem-
lation of the limb. Increased tone of the extensor muscles, a
common finding in UMN disease, manifests as increased resis-
describes irregular, purposeless movements that are brief and
tance to passive flexion of the limb.
0 Apoq an jo ared suo uoy uono u auuo uao ie
Muscle strength is difficult to evaluate even in the most
the other. Two forms of myoclonus may be seen in the dog. In
cooperative patients. The extensor muscles can be evaluated
acute encephalitis, the lesion is probably related to destruction
during postural reactions such as hopping, in which the animal
of areas in the basal nuclei. The more common chronic form
must support all of its weight on one limb (see the section
is related to the interneurons or the LMN at the segmental
on hopping in this chapter). The flexor muscles can be evalu-
level. 13 Cataplexy is a sudden, complete loss of muscle tone
ated by comparing the relative strength of pull during a flexor
that causes the animal to fall limp. It is usually seen in associa-
reflex [see the section on the flexor reflex in this chapter].
tion with narcolepsy [see Chapter 13). Athetosis is a "pill roll-
 Loss of muscle strength is usually a sign of LMN disease but is
ing" movement of the hands in people with Parkinson disease.
occasionally observed with UMN disease.
A similar movement disorder has been produced in cats with
lesions of the basal nuclei but has not been described in clini-
Postural Reactions
cal patients.
Ihe complex responses that maintain an animal's normal,
upright position are known as postural reactions. If an animal's
Palpation
weight is shifted from one side to the other, from front to rear,
Technique. After the mental status, posture, and gait of
or from rear to front, the increased load on the supporting
the animal have been assessed, the physical examination is
initiated. Careful inspection and palpation of the musculo-
cles to keep the limb from collapsing. Part of the adjustment
skeletal and integumentary systems should be performed at
in tone is accomplished through spinal reflexes, but for the
one time or on a regional basis in conjunction with other
changes to be smooth and coordinated, the sensory and motor
 parts of the examination. Comparison of one side with
 systems of the brain must be involved.
the other for symmetry is best done as one step in the
Abnormalities of complex reactions such as the hop-
examination.14
ping reaction do not provide precise localizing information
Assessment
because lesions in any one of several areas of the nervous
Integument. Although the skin is not often involved in
system may affect the reaction. The assessment of postural
neurologic disease, careful inspection may reveal clues to the
reactions, however, is an important part of the neurologic
diagnosis. Scars may indicate previous trauma. Worn nails
examination. Minimal deficits in the function of a key com-
may be associated with paresis or with proprioceptive deficits.
ponent such as the cerebrum may cause significant alterations
Coat and eye color may be related to a hereditary abnormality.
in postural reactions that are not detected when one observes
For example, a white coat and blue eyes are associated with
the gait.
deafness in cats. A myelomeningocele may be palpated as it
 Two major types of postural reactions are used. The frst
attaches to the skin in the lumbosacral region. The tempera-
consists of hopping, wheelbarrowing, and extensor postural
ture of the extremities may be significantly lowered with arte-
thrust; these require movement of the limb to correct for
rial occlusion. Dermatomyositis is an inflammatory disease of
displacement of the body and differ only in which limbs are
the skin and muscle of collies and Shetland sheepdogs. Cuta-
tested. Weight bearing occurs, and so weakness has a signif-
neous lesions are present on the face, lips, and ears, and over
cant impact on the performance of the reaction. The second
bony prominences.
type includes proprioceptive positioning and placing: these
Skeleton. Careful palpation of the skeletal system
usually are performed with some support of the animal's
may reveal masses, deviation of normal contour, abnormal
weight. Therefore weakness has less influence on performance.
motion, or crepitation. Tumors involving the skull or the
Both types of reactions are useful. Because the pathways for
vertebral column may be palpable as a mass. The spinous
the postural reactions are similar, interpretation is essentially
processes of the vertebrae should be palpated for irregulari-
the same for all reactions.
ties of contour. Deviations may indicate a luxation, fracture,
The following postural reactions are listed in a sequence
 or congenital anomaly. Depressed or elevated skull fractures
 Convenient for performing an examination. In an initial screen-
 often can be palpated, especially in animals with minimal
ing examination, hopping and proprioceptive positioning
temporal muscle mass. Persistent fontanelles and suture lines
reactions [see Box l-3) should be tested. If they are normal,
in the skull may indicate congenital hydrocephalus. Abnor-
 abnormalities are unlikely to be found in the other reactions.
mal motion or crepitation may be detected in fractures
Proprioceptive Positioning Reaction
and luxations. When vertebral luxations or fractures are
(Foot/Limb Placement Test)
suspected, manipulation should not be attempted because
Technique. This reaction tests more than general pro-
additional displacement may cause serious spinal cord dam-
prioception: light touch and pressure are also evaluated.l5
age. Peripheral nerve injuries may be associated with frac-
Although sensory functions are evaluated, the reactions
tures of the long bones.
described in this section also require motor responses. It is
CHAPTER 1 
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
23
incorrect to assume that abnormalities observed are strictly
should reposition it for normal weight bearing. The first test
due to proprioceptive dysfunction.
is the most sensitive for proprioception in the distal extrem-
The simplest method of evaluation entails flexing the foot
ity, whereas the second test is more sensitive for detecting
so that the dorsal surface is on the floor (Figure l-20).
abnormalities in the proximal portion of the limb. With either
The animal should return the foot to a normal position
method, the examiner should test each foot separately.
       
to
occur in the abnormal position. In large animals, the foot or
mation is carried in the dorsal columns and the spinomedullo.
hoof is placed on a sheet of cardboard that is slowly pulled
thalamic tract in the dorsolateral funiculus of the spinal cord,
laterally. As the limb reaches an abnormal position, the animal
through the brainstem, to the sensorimotor cortex and fbers
that project to the cerebellum [see Figure 1-15). The motor
response is initiated by the cerebral cortex and is transmitted
to the LMN in the spinal cord (see the section on sensation).
Assessment. Because the proprioceptive pathways are
sensitive to compression, abnormalities in proprioceptive
positioning may occur before motor dysfunction [paresis) can
be detected. The response is abnormal if significant paresis
affected. Proprioceptive positioning is less useful in large ani-
mals because many do not respond. Observation of abnormal
positioning of the limbs at rest may be interpreted similarly.?
Some normal dogs will not reposition the paw after it is
knuckled over. In this situation, the hopping reaction should
always be evaluated.
Hopping Reaction
 Technique. The hopping reaction is a reliable postural
reaction test. It evaluates all components involved in voluntary
 limb movements. Normal hopping responses require intact
sensory receptors, peripheral nerves, ascending long tracts in
the spinal cord and brainstem, sensory cortex, UMN systems,
and integration with LMNs in the spinal cord.
Feiel@
The hopping reaction of the thoracic limbs is tested with
Hgure 1-20 Proprioceptive positioning response. Proprioceptive
 one thoracic limb lifted from the ground (Figure 1-21).
function is tested by placing the dorsal surface of the animal's foot
Although it is easy to pick up three limbs in small dogs
on the floor. The animal should immediately replace it to the nor-
and cats, this is not necessary in larger animals. The animal's
mal position. (From Greene CE, Oliver JE: Neurologic examina-
pelvis should be supported sufficiently to increase weight
tion. In Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook of veterinary internal medicine,
bearing on the extended limb. As weight is increased on the
ed 2, Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saunders.]
extended limb, the ability of the animal to maintain full limb
Hgure 1-21 The hopping reaction. The normal animal responds to hopping by quickly replacing
the limb under the body as it moves laterally. Large animals can be tested by picking up one limb
and pushing the body laterally. (From Greene CE, Oliver JE: Neurologic examination. In Ettinger SJ
[ed)]: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saunders.]
24
PART1
 Fundamentals
extension is assessed. With the animal facing away from the
A tonic neck reaction, which causes slightly increased exten-
examiner, the patient's weight is then shifted laterally over
sor tone in the thoracic limbs, is also elicited. When the neck
the limb being tested, and initiation, movement, and support
is extended, subtle abnormalities of the thoracic limbs may be
seen in animals that otherwise appear normal. This reaction
diffcult, and more subtle abnormalities may be detected with
is especially useful for detecting compressive lesions in the
this maneuver. Hopping of the pelvic limbs is accomplished
 caudal cervical region that predominantly cause paraparesis.
by supporting the thorax and lifting one pelvie limb. With the
Assessment. Weakness in the thoracic limbs may be
patient facing toward the examiner, weight is shifted laterally
detected when the wheelbarrowing reaction is tested because
over the limb being evaluated and initiation, movement, and
the animal is forced to carry most of its weight on two limbs
support are assessed. A large animal, such as a giant-breed dog.
while standing on only one limb while moving.
a horse, and a cow, can be tested by lifting one limb and shift-
Slow initiation of movement may be a sign of a propriocep-
ing the weight of the animal so that it hops on the opposite
tive deficit or of paresis that is caused by a lesion of the cervical
limb. Alternatively, large animals can be pulled by the tail or
spinal cord, the brainstem, or the cerebral cortex. Exaggerated
pushed laterally (sway reaction) to elicit movements similar to
movements [dysmetria) may indicate an abnormality of the
the hopping reaction.
cervical spinal cord, the caudal brainstem, or the cerebellum.
 Assessment. The hopping reaction is more sensitive than
Extensor Postural Thrust Reaction
other postural reactions for detecting minor deficits. Poor ini-
Technique. Extensor postural thrust is elicited by support-
tiation of the hopping reaction suggests sensory (propriocep-
ing the animal by the thorax caudal to the thoracic limb and
 tive) deficits, whereas poor follow-through suggests a motor
lowering the pelvic limbs to the floor (Figure l-23).
system abnormality (paresis). Asymmetry is easily seen and
When the limbs touch the floor, they should move caudally
helps to lateralize lesions.
    n     
Wheelbarrowing Reaction
support. As the animal is lowered to the floor, it extends its
Technique. The animal is supported under the abdomen
limbs, anticipating contact. This is a vestibular reaction and
with all of the weight on the thoracic limbs [Figure l-22).
 may be lacking or uncoordinated in animals with lesions of the
The normal animal can walk forward and sideways with
vestibular system.
coordinated movements of both thoracic limbs. The exam-
Assessment. Asymmetric weakness, lack of coordination,
iner should not lift the pelvic limbs so high that the animal's
 and dysmetria can be seen in the extensor postural thrust
posture is grosly abnormal. If movements appear normal,
reaction as in the wheelbarrowing reaction. Extensor postural
the maneuver is repeated with the head lifted and the neck
thrust reaction is difficult or impossible to perform on larger
extended. This position prevents visual compensation, making
animals. In cats, this reaction may be more easily elicited than 
the animal mostly dependent on proprioceptive information.
hopping or proprioceptive placing.
Beisel
Hgure 1-22 Wheelbarrowing with the neck extended. Wheelbarrowing is performed with the
pelvic limbs elevated. The body should be in a position as close to normal as possible. The head may
be elevated to accentuate abnormalities, as illustrated here. [From Greene CE, Oliver JE: Neurologic
Examination. In Ettinger SJ [ed]: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2, Philadelphia,
1982, WB Saunders.]
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
25
Buisu
Hgure 1-24 The tactile placing reaction is elicited with the ani-
Hgure 1-23 The extensor postural thrust reaction. The animal
mal's eyes covered. When the carpus makes contact with the edge
responds by stepping backward when its feet make contact with
of the surface, the animal should immediately place its foot on
the floor. [From Greene CE, Oliver JE: Neurologic examination.
the surface. Similar responses can be elicited from large animals
In Ettinger SJ [ed]: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed
by leading them over a curb or up steps. [From Greene CE, Oliver
2, Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saunders.]
JE: Neurologic examination. In Ettinger SJ [ed]: Textbook of
veterinary internal medicine, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saun-
ders.)
Hemistanding and Hemiwalking Reactions
Technique. The thoracic and pelvic limbs on one side are
held in a less secure or less comfortable position away from
lifted from the ground so that all of the animal's weight is
the body of the examiner.
supported by the opposite limbs. Forward and lateral walking
Anatomy and Physiology. Tactile placing requires touch
 movements are then evaluated.
receptors in the skin, sensory pathways through the spinal cord
Assessment. Abnormal signs may be seen in hemistand-
and the brainstem to the cerebral cortex, and motor pathways
ing and hemiwallking as in the other postural reactions. They
from the cerebral cortex to the LMN of the thoracic limbs.
are most useful in animals with forebrain lesions. These ani-
Visual placing requires normal visual pathways to the cerebral
mals have relatively normal gaits but have deficits of postural
cortex, communication from the visual cortex to the motor
reactions in both the thoracic and the pelvic limbs contra-
cortex, and motor pathways to the LMN of the forelimbs.16
lateral to the side of the lesion. This reaction should be per-
Assessment. A lesion of any portion of the pathway may
formed with caution in large dogs with obvious weakness as
cause a deficit in the placing reaction. Normal tactile plac-
they can easily fall and potentially exacerbate their clinical
ing with absent visual placing indicates a lesion of the visual
signs.
pathways. Normal visual placing with abnormal tactile placing
Placing Reaction
suggests a sensory pathway lesion. Forebrain lesions produce
Technique. Placing is evaluated frst without vision [tactile
a deficit in the contralateral limb. Lesions caudal to the mid-
placing] and then with vision [visual placing). The examiner
brain usually produce ipsilateral deficits.
supports the animal under the thorax and covers its eyes with
Tonic Neck Reaction
one hand or with a blindfold. The thoracic limbs are brought
Technique. With the animal in a normal standing posi-
in contact with the edge of a table at or ventral to the carpus
tion, the head is elevated and the neck is extended. The nor-
(Figure 1-24].
mal reaction is a slight extension of the thoracic limbs and a
 The normal response is immediate placement of the feet on
slight flexion of the pelvic limbs. Lowering the head causes the
 the table surface in a position that supports weight. Care must 
thoracic limbs to fex and the pelvic limbs to extend. Turning
be taken not to restrict the movement of either limb. When
the head to the side causes a slight extension of the ipsilateral
 one limb is consistently slower to respond, the animal should
thoracic limb and a slight flexion of the contralateral thoracic
be held in the examiner's other hand to ensure that its move-
limb. The normal reactions are easy to remember if one con-
 ments are not being restricted.
siders the usual movements of an animal. For example, a cat
 s n     s s  
about to jump onto a table extends the head and the neck,
table surface. Normal animals reach for the surface before the
extends the thoracic limbs, and flexes the pelvic limbs. A dog
carpus touches the table. Peripheral visual fields can be tested
 crawling under a bed lowers the head and the neck and flexes
by making a lateral approach to the table. The veterinarian can
the thoracic limbs as it extends the pelvic limbs for propulsion.
evaluate giant-breed dogs and large animals such as horses and
A horse making a sharp turn leads with the head and the neck,
cows by leading them over a curb or a step, with and without
plants the ipsilateral limb in extension, and flexes the contra-
vision. Some dogs and cats that are accustomed to being held
lateral limb to take a step.17 Tonic eye reactions also may be
may ignore the table. These animals usually respond if they are
observed. They are discussed in the section on cranial nerves.
26
PART1
Fundamentals
Assessment. The tonic neck reactions are initiated by
of the spinal cord. The axons form the motor components of
receptors in the cranial cervical area and are mediated by
peripheral nerves that end on the muscle (the neuromuscular
brainstem reticular formation. The responses are subtle
ein
junction) (see Figure 1-14).
normal animals and often are inhibited volitionally through
The muscle spindle is the stretch receptor of the muscle.
cortical control. Abnormalities in sensory (proprioception)
The spindle has three to five striated muscle fbers (intrafusal
 or motor systems may produce abnormal reactions. Lesions
muscle fbers) at each end, with a nonstriated portion in the
in the cerebellum cause exaggerated tonic neck reactions.
middle (see Figure 1-14). The spindles are located in the belly
 The tonic neck reactions are not usually helpful in detecting
of the skeletal muscle (extrafusal muscle fibers).These sensory
abnormality.
fbers are large and have a spiral ending, called the primary
ending, around the nonstriated portion of each fber. Small
Spinal Reflexes
sensory fibers have secondary endings. Primary endings are of
Examination of the spinal reflexes tests the integrity of the
sensory and motor components of the reflex arc and the influ-
Secondary endings respond primarily to tonic activation (e.g.
ence of descending motor pathways on the reflex. Three kinds
extensor thrust). The small intrafusal muscle fibers ofthe spin-
of reactions may be seen. Absence or depression of a reflex
dle are innervated by small (gamma) motor neurons.
 indicates complete or partial loss of either sensory or motor
Stretching a muscle depolarizes the nerve endings of the
(LMN) components of the reflex a normal reaction indicates
spindle, producing a burst of impulses in the sensory fbers.
that both sensory and motor components are intact; and an
The sensory fibers directly activate the large [alpha) motor
exaggerated response indicates an abnormality in the motor
ssp onu rou ude au r s  ur unu
 pathways [UMN) that normally have an inhibitory influence
impulses through its axon, causing a contraction of the extra-
on the reflex or a deficit that results in paresis of the antago-
fusal muscle fbers of the same muscle. Thus a sudden stretch
nistic muscles is present.
of the muscle causes a refex muscle contraction, as seen in
The examination should be performed with the animal in
the patellar reflex. A more tonic stretch of the muscle causes
lateral recumbency. Muscle tone, previously evaluated with
a slower discharge of sensory activity and a slower, steadier
the animal in a standing position, should be evaluated again
muscle contraction.
at this time. The pelvic limbs are tested frst. Passive manipu-
Contraction of the extrafusal muscle fibers causes relax-
lation of the limb assesses the degree of muscle tone, espe-
ation of the intrafusal fibers because they are parallel. Loss of
cially in the extensor muscles. Spreading the toes with slight
 tension on the intrafusal fibers stops the sensory input from
pressure on the footpads elicits the extensor thrust reflex. The
 the spindle. To prevent this situation from occurring, gamma
myotatic [stretch] reflexes then are evaluated. Routinely, only
motor fibers adjust the length of the intrafusal fibers. Thus ten-
the patellar [knee jerk or quadriceps) reflex is tested. The cra-
sion is maintained on the spindle through the range of motion
 nial tibial and gastrocnemius muscles can also be evaluated,
of the limb.
but the reflexes are more difficult to elicit and quantify. Next,
Gamma motor neuron activation of the intrafusal fbers
the flexor reflex is tested by gently pinching the toes. To main-
also can stretch the primary spindle endings directly and thus
tain cooperation of the patient, the examiner should apply the
can elicit a response indirectly in the alpha motor neuron.
mildest stimulus that elicits a response. If flexion is induced by
Alpha and gamma motor neurons are facilitated or inhib-
touching the foot, one need not crush the toe with a hemostat.
ited by a variety of segmental and long spinal pathways. The
The most predictable myotatic reflex in the thoracic limb is
output of the motor neurons is a summation of their facili-
elicited when the extensor carpi radialis muscle [tendons over
tatory and inhibitory inputs. For example, the motor neuron
the carpus in large animals) is struck, producing a slight exten-
that innervates the quadriceps responds to a sudden stretch
sion of the carpus. The triceps and biceps reflexes are diffieult
by a quick contraction (patellar reflex), but the reaction can
to elicit and evaluate in many normal animals. After examin-
 be modulated by voluntary inhibition (see Figure 1-14). This
ing the limbs on one side, the veterinarian turns the animal
occurs in animals that are nervous and maintain a pronounced
and examines the opposite limbs. With the exception of the
tone in the limb as the examiner is performing the test. In such
flexor reflex, thoracic limb reflexes are inconsistently elicited
 cases, the patellar reflex may appear blunted.
even in normal animals.
 The spindle sensory fibers also facilitate interneurons in the
The perineal reflex is a contraction of the anal sphincter in
spinal cord, which in turn inhibit motor neurons of antagonis-
response to a touch, a pinprick, or a pinch in the perineal area.
tic muscles. This activity is called reciprocal innervation. For
Flexion of the tail may occur simultaneously.
example, spindle sensory fibers from the quadriceps muscle
inhibit antagonistic fexor motor neurons, allowing the limb
Myotatic (Stretch) Reflexes
to extend. Spindle sensory fibers also contribute collaterals to
Patellar (Knee Jerk, Quadriceps) Reflex
ascending pathways, which provide information to the brain
Technique. With the animal in lateral recumbency, the
regarding activity in the muscles.
e Aq pueu ya a im anu au rapun paroddns si qu
Assessment. The patellar reflex is the most reliably inter-
right-handed examiner) and the stifle is flexed slightly (see
preted myotatic reflex. The reflex should be recorded as
Figure 1-14). The patellar ligament is struck crisply with the
10 '(e+) paerassexa (z+) [eurou (1+) passaidap (o] quasqe
plexor. The response is a single, quick extension of the stifle.
Apim Area sasuosan ren (t+] snu um paeraaaex
 The plexor is recommended for performing myotatic reflex
 among species and among breeds within a species. In large
testing, but other instruments such as bandage scissors may be
xa aus s u e yq sss ssr  s
used. Nose tongs or similar heavy instruments are useful for
 should become familiar with these natural variations.
testing large animals. The examiner should use the same type
 Absence [O) of a myotatic reflex indicates a lesion of the
of instruments in each examination to obtain consistent results.
sensory or motor component of the reflex arc—an LMN or
Anatomy
and Physiology. The myotatic or stretch
segmental sign (see Table 1-3). In general, loss of the reflex in
reflexes are basic to the regulation of posture and movement.
one muscle group suggests a peripheral nerve lesion; for exam-
The reflex arc is a simple two-neuron [monosymaptic) path-
ple, a lesion of the femoral nerve. Bilateral loss of the reflex
way. The sensory neuron has a receptor in the muscle spindle
suggests a segmental spinal cord lesion affecting the motor
 and its cel body in the spinal ganglion. The motor neurons
neurons to both limbs located in spinal cord segments L4-6 in
have their cell bodies in the ventral horn of the gray matter
the dog. Ultimately, differentiation between peripheral nerve
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
27
Hgure 1-25 The cranial tibial refex is elicited with the animal in
Hgure 1-26 The gastrocnemius reflex is elicited with the animal
lateral recumbency, with both stifle and hock slightly flexed. The
in the same position as for testing of the cranial tibial reflex. The
cranial tibial muscle is percussed just distal to the stife.
tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle is percussed proximal to the
tarsu1s.
and spinal cord lesions may require assessment of the sensory
examination and the presence or absence of other neurologic
Exaggerated reflexes indicate a lesion cranial to the spinal cord
signs.
segments L6-7.
 Depression [+l) of the reflex has the same significance as
 Gastrocnemius Reflex
absence of the reflex, except the lesion is incomplete. Depres-
Technique. The gastrocnemius reflex is tested after the
sion of the reflex is more common with spinal cord lesions in
Cranial tibial reflex. The tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle
cases in which some, but not all, of the segments (L4-6) are
is struck with the plexor just dorsal to the tibial tarsal bone
affected. Other reflexes also must be tested because general-
(Figure 1-26).
ized depression of reflexes may be seen in polyneuropathies
Slight flexion of the hock is necessary for some tension of
or in abnormalities of the neuromuscular junction [botulism,
the muscle to be maintained. The response is extension of
tick paralysis).
the hock. Contraction of the caudal thigh muscles may also
Animals that are tense and keep the limb in extension com-
occur.
monly have depressed or absent reflexes. Sometimes the reflex
 Anatomy and Physiology. The gastrocnemius is primarily
is hard to elicit in normal dogs in the recumbent or nonrecum-
an extensor of the hock and is innervated by the tibial branch
 bent limb. You only have to elicit the normal reflex one time to
of the sciatic nerve [with origin in the L7-Sl segments of the
be sure the reflex arc is intact.
 spinal cord in the dog).
 Normal (+2) or exaggerated reflexes [+3, +4) and increased
Assessment. The gastrocnemius reflex is interpreted in
tone result from loss of descending inhibitory pathways. The
the same manner as the cranial tibial reflex but is even less
voluntary motor pathways are facilitatory to flexor muscles
reliable.
and inhibitory to extensor muscles. Damage to these pathways
Extensor Carpi Radialis Reflex
releases the myotatic reflex, causing an exaggerated reflex and
Technique. The animal is in lateral recumbency while the
increased extensor tone. Clonus [+4) is a repetitive contrac-
reflexes of the thoracic limb are evaluated. The limb is sup-
tion and relaxation of the muscle in response to a single stimu-
ported under the elbow, with flexion of the elbow and the
lus. Clonus often is seen with chronic (weeks to months) loss
carpus maintained. The extensor carpi radialis muscle is struck
 of descending inhibitory pathways. Clonus has the same local.
with the plexor just distal to the elbow (Figure 1-27).
izing significance as exaggerated reflexes. Bilateral exaggerated
The response is a slight extension of the carpus. The carpus
reflexes most often are associated with damage to descending
must be flexed, and the digits must not touch the floor or the
inhibitory pathways cranial to the level of the reflex. UMN
other limb or the reflex will be mechanically inhibited.19 The
injury causing exaggerated myotatic reflexes also causes pare-
rt ut ynns are puo redren au ssr suun oixa
sis. If gait and postural reactions are normal, the "exaggerated
animals.
reflex" is then likely to be an examiner error or normal for the
Anatomy and Physiology. The extensor carpi radialis
 animal being tested. Exaggerated reflexes should not be over-
muscle is an extensor of the carpus and is innervated by the
interpreted. If gait and postural reactions are normal, the only
radial nerve [with origin in the C7-T'l segments of the spinal
concern is that the reflex be at least normal.
cord in the dog).
Cranial Tibial Reflex
Assessment. The extensor carpi radialis reflex is more
Technique. With the animal in lateral recumbency, the
a u ann nq xaa raed a u ia on i
examiner tests the cranial tibial reflex. The belly of the cranial
recognized in dogs. Absent or decreased reflexes should be
tibial muscle is struck with the plexor just distal to the proxi-
evaluated with caution. Strong reflexes are usually exagger-
mal end of the tibia (Figure l-25). The response is fexion of
ated [+3) and indicate a lesion cranial to C7.
the hock.
Triceps Reflex
Anatomy and Physiology. The cranial tibial muscle is a
Technique. The animal is held in the same position as that
flexor of the hock and is innervated by the peroneal branch
for the extensor carpi radialis reflex. The triceps brachi mus-
of the sciatic nerve [with origin in the L6-7 segments of the
le is struck with the plexor just proximal to the olecranon
spinal cord in the dog).
(Figure 1-28).
 Assessment. The cranial tibial reflex is more difficult to
 The response is a slight extension of the elbow or a visible
elicit in a normal animal than is the patellar reflex. Absent
contraction of the triceps muscle. The elbow must be main-
or decreased reflexes should be interpreted with caution.
tained in flexion for a response to be elicited.
28
PART1 
 Fundamentals
Figure 1-27 The extensor carpi radialis refex is the most reli-
Hgure 1-29 The biceps reflex is elicited with the elbow slightly
able myotatic reflex in the thoracic limb. With the animal in lat-
extended. The examiner's finger is placed on the biceps tendon
eral recumbency and the elbow and carpus flexed, the extensor
proximal to the elbow, and the fnger is percussed.
mscle group is percussed distal to the elbow. The digital extensor
tendons can be percussed at the carpus in large animals.
Assessment. The biceps reflex is diffcult to elicit in the
normal animal. Absent or decreased reflexes should not be
interpreted as abnormal. Flexion of the elbow on the fexor
reflex provides a better assessment of the musculocutaneous
nerve. An exaggerated (+3) reflex is indicative of a lesion cra-
nial to C6.
Flexor (Pedal, Withdrawal) Reflexes
Pelvic Limb
Technique. The animal is maintained in lateral recum-
bency, the same position as that for examination of the myo-
tatic reflexes. A noxious stimulus is applied to the foot. The
normal response is a flexion of the entire limb, including
the hip, stifle, and hock [see Figure 1-10). The least noxious
stimulus possible should be used. If an animal flexes the limb
when the digit is touched, the digit need not be crushed. If a
response is not easily elicited, a hemostat should be used to
squeeze across a digit. Pressure should not be so great as to
injure the skin. Both medial and lateral digits should be tested
Hgure 1-28 The triceps reflex is elicited with the animal in the 
-sd papuaxa auans e u a pinous qul auqu yoea uo
 tendon is percussed proximal to the elbow.
tion when the stimulus is applied to allow the limb to flex.
 The opposite limb also should be free to extend.18
Anatomy and Physiology. The flexor reflex is more com-
Anatomy and Physiology. The triceps brachi muscle
plex than the myotatic reflex. The response involves all of
extends the elbow and is essential for weight bearing in the
the flexor muscles of the limb and thus requires activation
forelimb. Innervation is through the radial nerve [with the ori-
 of motor neurons in several spinal cord segments [see Figures 
gin from spinal cord segments C7-Tl in the dog).
1-9, B and 1-10).
Assessment. The triceps reflex is difficult to elicit in the
The receptors for the flexor refex are primarily free nerve
normal animal. Absent or decreased reflexes should not be
endings in the skin and other tissues that respond to noxious
interpreted as abnormal. Lesions of the radial nerve can be
stimuli, such as pressure, heat, and cold. A stimulus that pro-
 recognized by a loss of muscle tone and an inability to support
duces a sensory discharge in these nerves ascends to the spi-
weight. Exaggerated reflexes are interpreted in the same way
nal cord through the dorsal root. The sensory nerves from the
as for the extensor carpi radialis reflex.
digits of the pelvic limbs are primarily branches of the sciatic
Biceps Reflex
nerve,the superficial peroneal nerve on the dorsal surface, and
Technique. The index or middle finger of the examiner's
the tibial nerve on the plantar surface. The sciatic nerve origi-
hand that is holding the animal's elbow is placed on the biceps
nates from spinal cord segments L6-S1. The medial digit is
and the brachialis tendons cranial and proximal to the elbow.
partially innervated by the saphenous nerve, a branch of the
The elbow is slightly extended, and the finger is struck with
femoral nerve that originates from spinal cord segments L4-6.
the plexor (Figure 1-29).
Interneurons are activated at these segments and at adjacent
 The response is a slight flexion of the elbow. Movement
segments both cranially and caudally. The interneurons acti-
of the animal's elbow must not be blocked by the examiner's
vate sciatic motor neurons, which stimulate flexor muscle
restraining hand. In this case, movement of the skin overlying
contraction [see Figure 1-l0). The net result is withdrawal of
the biceps brachii muscle may be observed.
the limb from the noxious stimulus. Inhibitory interneurons
Anatomy and Physiology. The biceps brachi and brachia-
to the extensor motor neurons also are activated, resulting in
lis muscles are flexors ofthe elbow. They are innervated by the
 decreased activity in the extensor muscles. Relaxation of the
musculocutaneous nerve, which originates from spinal cord
extensor muscles and contraction of the flexor muscles allow
 segments C6-8 in the dog.
complete flexion of the limb.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
29
The flexor reflex is a spinal reflex and does not require any
Extensor Thrust Reflex. The extensor thrust reflex is
 activation of the brain. if an animal steps on a sharp piece
important for maintaining posture and is a component of
of glass, it immediately withdraws the foot before consciously
more complex reactions such as hopping.17
 perceiving pain. If the spinal cord is completely transected
Technique. The reflex may be elicited with the animal in
cranial to the segments that are responsible for the reflex, the
lateral recumbency [the same position as that for the myotatic
 reflex is present even though the animal has no conscious per-
reflex) or with the animal suspended by the shoulders with
 ception of pain.
the pelvic limbs hanging free (Figure l-30).
Assessment. Absence (0) or depression (+1) of the reflex
 The toes are spread, and slight pressure is applied between
indicates a lesion of L6-Sl segments or the branches of the
 the pads. The response is a rigid extension of the limh.19
sciatic nerve. Unilateral absence of the reflex is more likely the
Anatomy and Physiology. The extensor thrust reflex is
result of a peripheral nerve lesion, whereas bilateral absence
initiated by a stretching of the spindles in the interosseous
or depression of the refex is more likely the result of a spi-
muscles of the foot, l6 Simultaneously, the cutaneous sensory
nal cord lesion. A normal [+2) flexor reflex indicates that the
receptors are stimulated. The extensors predominate, forcing
spinal cord segments and the nerves are functional. An exag-
the limb into rigid extension. The sensory fbers are in the
gerated (+3) flexor reflex rarely is seen with acute lesions of
siatic nerve (spinal cord segments L6-S1), and the response
descending pathways. Chronic and severe descending pathway
 involves both femoral and sciatic nerves (spinal cord segments
lesions may cause exaggeration of the reflex. This exaggera-
L4-S1). Excessive stimulation of the flexor reflex sensory
tion is manifested as a sustained withdrawal after release of
fbers (e.g, with a noxious stimulus) causes the fexor reflex to
the stimulus. A mass reflex [+4) occasionally is seen as a sus-
predominate and withdrawal occurs.
tained flexion of both pelvic limbs, with contraction of the tail
Assessment. The extensor thrust reflex is diffcult to elicit
and perineal muscles in response to a stimulus applied to only
in normal animals, especially when they are in lateral recum-
one limb. Exaggerated flexor reflexes usually reflect chronicity
bency Elicitation of the refex generally indicates a lesion
rather than severity of the lesion.
cranial to L4.
The crossed extensor reflex and the conscious perception
Perineal (Bulbocavernosus, Anal) Reflex
of pain also are evaluated while the flexor reflex is performed,
Technique. The perineal reflex is elicited by light stimu-
but these assessments are discussed later.
lation of the perineum with forceps. Noxious stimuli that are
Thoracic Limb
painful usually are not necessary. The reaction is a contrac-
Technique. The thoracic limb flexor reflex is tested in the
tion of the anal sphincter muscle and a flexion of the tail
same manner as the pelvic limb flexor reflex. Cranial and pal-
(Figure l-31).
mar surfaces and medial and lateral digits should be tested.
One can obtain a similar reaction by squeezing the penis
Anatomy and Physiology. Branches of the radial nerve
 or the vulva [bulbocavernosus reflex). If the anal sphincter
innervate the cranial surface of the foot and arise from spinal
appears weak or if the response is questionable, the exam-
cord segments C7-Tl. The medial palmar surface is innervated
iner can insert a gloved digit into the anus because minimal
by the ulnar and median nerves, which originate from spinal
 responses often can be felt in this manner.
 cord segments C8-Tl. The lateral palmar surface and most of
Anatomy and Physiology. Sensory innervation occurs
 the lateral digit are innervated by branches of the ulnar nerve.
through the pudendal nerves and spinal cord segments Sl-2
The organization of the flexor reflex of the thoracic limb is
[sometimes S3) in the dog and the cat. Motor innervation of
similar to that previously described for the pelvic limb. Flexor
the anal sphincter also occurs through the pudendal nerves.
muscles of the thoracic limb are innervated by the axillary.
Tail flexion is mediated through the caudal nerves. The organi-
musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves and by parts of
zation of the reflex is similar to that of the flexor reflex.
the radial nerve. These nerves originate from spinal cord seg-
Assessment. The perineal reflex is the best indication of
ments C6-Tl, with small contributions from C5 and T2 in
the functional integrity of the sacral spinal cord segments and
some animals (see Figure 1l-8, A).
Assessment. Depressed reflexes indicate a lesion of the
( rndr aas s r  m s 
C6-Tl segments of the spinal cord or the peripheral nerves.
Absence (O) or depression [+l) of the reflex indicates a sacral
 Exaggerated reflexes indicate a lesion cranial to C6.
spinal cord or pudendal nerve lesion.
Hgure 1-31 The perineal reflex is a contraction of the anal
Figure 1-30 The extensor thrust reflex is elicited by spreading
sphincter and a ventral flexion of the tail in response to tactile
the phalanges.
stimulation of the perineum.
30
PART1
 Fundamentals
Crossed Extensor Reflex
the section on The Efficient Neurologic Examination at the
Technique. The crossed extensor reflex may be observed
beginning of this chapter. Detection of any abnormalities on
when the flexor reflex is elicited. The response is an extension
the screening examination may be followed by a more com-
 of the limb opposite the stimulated limb.18
plete examination to define the abnormality further.
Anatomy and Physiology. The crossed extensor reflex is a
Ofactory Nerve (CN I). The olfactory nerve is the sensory
part of the normal supporting mechanism of the animal. The
path for the conscious perception of smell.
weight of an animal in a standing position is evenly distrib-
Technique. A behavioral response to a pleasurable or a
ns ps xa si q o fe s a  pnn
noxious odor, either inferred from the history or assessed by
port is required of the opposite limb. The flexor reflex sensory.
direct testing, may be used [Figure l-32).
fibers send collaterals to interneurons on the opposite side of
Alcohol, cloves, xylol, benzol, or cat food containing fish
the spinal cord, which excite extensor motor neurons [see
appears to stimulate the olfactory nerves. Irritating substances
Figure 1-10).
such as ammonia or tobacco smoke cannot be used because
Assessment. The crossed extensor reflex generally is con-
they stimulate the endings of the trigeminal nerve in the nasal
sidered an abnormal reflex except in the standing position. In
mucosa.
the normal recumbent animal, the extension response is inhib-
Anatomy and Physiology. Chemoreceptors in the nasal
ited through descending pathways. Crossed extensor reflexes
 mucosa give rise to axons, which pass through the cribriform
 result from lesions in ipsilateral descending pathways, a sign of
plate to synapse in the olfactory bulb. Axons from the olfac-
UMN disease. The crossed extensor reflex has been considered
tory bulb course through the olfactory tract to the ipsilateral
evidence of a severe spinal cord lesion. However, it is not a
olfactory cortex. Behavioral reactions to odors are controlled
reliable indicator of the severity of the lesion. Animals that are
by connections to the limbic system.
still ambulatory may have crossed extensor reflexes, especially
 Assessment. Deficiencies in the sense of smell are difficult
when the lesion is in the cervical spinal cord or the brainstem.
to evaluate. Rhinitis is the most common cause of anosmia
Extensor Toe (Babinski) Reflex
[loss of olfaction). Tumors of the nasal passages and diseases of
Technique. The animal is positioned in lateral recumbency
the cribriform plate also must be considered. Only rarely are
(the same position as that for the myotatic reflex). The pelvic
 structural lesions such as tumors of importance. Olfaction is
limb is held proximal to the hock, with the hock and the digits
also impaired by inflammatory diseases such as canine distem-
slightly flexed. The handle of the plexor or a forceps is used
 per and parainfluenza virus infection.22
to stroke the limb on the caudolateral surface from the hock
Optic Nerve (CN Im). The optic nerve is the sensory path for
to the digits.
vision and pupillary light reflexes.
The normal animal exhibits no response or a slight fexion
Technique. The optic nerve is tested in conjunction with
of the digits. The abnormal response is an extension and a fan-
the oculomotor nerve [CN Il), which provides the motor
ning of the digits.20
pathway for the pupillary light reflex, and the facial nerve,
Anatomy and Physiology. The extensor toe reflex has
which provides the motor pathway for the menace reflex.
been compared with the Babinski reflex in human beings.2l
Vision can be assessed by observation of the animal's move-
The two reflexes are not strictly analogous because the Babin-
ments in unfamiliar surroundings, avoidance of obstacles,
ski reflex includes elevation and fanning of the large toe, which
and following of moving objects. More objective evaluation
is not present in domestic animals; it is reported to be a sign
requires three tests. The examiner elicits the menace response
of pyramidal tract damage in human beings. The extensor
 by making a threatening gesture with the hand at one eye. The
toe reflex has been produced by lesions in the brainstem.2l
normal response is a blink and, sometimes, an aversive move-
It has been seen clinically in dogs with chronic UMN pelvic
ment of the head (Figure l-33).
limb paresis.20 Acute experimental lesions of the sensorimotor
The visual placing reaction [see the section on postural
cortex, the dorsal columns, the lateral columns, or the ventral
reactions) is an excellent method of assessing vision. The
columns of the spinal cord have not produced an extensor toe
examiner induces the pupillary light reflex by shining a light in
reflex. Some investigators have considered this reflex to be an
each eye and observing for pupillary constriction in both eyes.
abnormal form of the flexor reflex.
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 1l.
Assessment. The extensor toe reflex has been observed in
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and li.
dogs with paralysis of the pelvic limbs associated with exten-
Oculomotor Nerve (CN Ill). The oculomotor nerve con-
sor hypertonus and exaggerated myotatic reflexes. In most
tains the parasympathetic motor fibers for pupillary constric-
tion and innervates the following extraocular muscles: dorsal
 The reflex should be interpreted in the same manner as other
exaggerated reflexes.
Cranial Nerves
Examination of the CNs is an important part of the neurologic
examination, especially when disease ofthe brain is suspected.
An abnormality of a CN constitutes evidence of a specific,
localized area of disease not provided by postural reactions.
The cranial nerve examination is not diffcult, and the most
commonly affected CNs can be evaluated quickly [see Fig-
ure 1-5). The majority of the evaluation of cranial nerves is
done through testing reflexes. Two assessments differ and are
denoted by the term “response": the menace response and
response to noxious stimulation of the nasal mucosa. The term
response is used to specifically imply that the response observed
to the stimulus requires normal forebrain function. This is in
contradistinction to other cranial nerve reflexes, which analo-
gous to spinal reflexes, only need normal functional integrity
of a specific segment of the brainstem to be normal. The gen-
Hgure 1-32 Noxious odors that are nonirritating cause an aver-
eral outline of the cranial nerve examination was discussed in
 sion or licking reaction.
CHAPTER 1 
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
31
medial, and ventral recti and ventral oblique. This nerve also
The fast beat of the nystagmus is in the direction of the
innervates the levator palpebrae muscle of the upper eyelid.
head movement. The eyes should move in coordination with
Technique. The examiner tests the pupillary light reflex
each other [conjugate movements). One can easily test the
by shining a light in the animal's eye and observing for pupil-
rectus muscles by this method.
lary constriction in both eyes [Figure l-34, A). One can assess
A drooping upper lid (ptosis) is indicative of paresis of
 eye movement by observing the eyes as the animal looks in
the levator palpebrae muscle. Lesions of the oculomotor
various directions voluntarily or in response to movements in
nerve cause a fixed ventrolateral deviation (strabismus) of
the peripheral fields of vision. A more direct method is to elicit
the eye and a dilated pupil. In cattle, the eye usually remains
vestibular eye movements [normal nystagmus) by moving the
horizontal regardless of the head position. The function of
head laterally (see Figure 1-34, B).
each of the extraocular muscles can be assessed in the same
manner if the examiner bears this difference in mind. The
functions of the extraocular muscles of large animals have
not been directly established, but presumably they are simi-
lar to the functions of the corresponding muscles in other
species.
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 11.
Assessment. See Chapters Z and 1i.
Trochlear Nerve (CN IV). The trochlear nerve is the motor
 pathway to the dorsal oblique muscle of the eye.
Technique. The trochlear nerve is difficult to assess. Lesions 
may cause a lateral rotation of the eye, which can be seen most
clearly in animals with a horizontal pupil (cow) or a vertical
 pupil (cat) or by ophthalmoscopic examination of the dorsal
retinal vein. A slight deficit is present in dorsomedial gaze.
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters Z and 11.
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and li.
Trigeminal Nerve (CN V). The trigeminal nerve is the
motor pathway to the muscles of mastication and the sensory
Hgure 1-33 The menace response is elicited by making a threat-
 pathway to the face.
eming gesture at the eye, which should result in a blink. The
Technique. The motor branch of the trigeminal nerve is
examiner must avoid creating wind currents or touching the hairs
 in the mandibular nerve and innervates the masseter, tempo-
around the eye, which will cause a palpebral reflex. The sensory
ral, rostral digastric, pterygoid, and mylohyoid muscles. Bilat-
pathway is in the optic nerve and the visual pathway. The motor
eral paralysis produces a dropped jaw that cannot be closed
 pathway is in the facial nerve.
voluntarily. Unilateral lesions may cause decreased jaw tone.
B
Hgure 1-34 A, The pupillary light reflex [PLR) is evaluated by using a bright light source directed 
from a temporal to nasal position and observing for direct and consensual pupillary constriction.
B, Vestibular eye movements are elicited by turning the animal's head from side to side. The eyes
lag behind the head movement and then rotate to return to the center of the palpebral fissure. Both
visual [oculokinetic or physiologic nystagmus] and vestibular pathways are active in this response,
but vestibular pathways predominate and produce these movements in the absence of vision.
[A, from August: Consultations in feline internal medicine, Vol 6, 2010, Saunders.]
32
PART1 
Fundamentals
Hgure 1-35 The palpebral reflex is checked by touching the eye-
Figure 1-36 Tactile stimulation on the head rostral to the ears
ld and observing for a blink. The sensory pathway is in the tri-
tests the sensory branches of the trigeminal nerve. The reactions
geminal nerve; the motor pathway is in the facial nerve.
may be behavioral or refex. Even dull or obtunded and stoic ani-
 mals respond to stimulation of the nasal mucosa.
Atrophy of the temporal and masseter muscles is recognized
by careful palpation approximately l week after the onset of
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and 9.
paralysis. Sensation should be tested over the distribution of
Vestibulocochlear Nerve (CN Vll). The vestibulocochlear
all three branches: ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular. A
nerve has two branches: the cochlear division, which mediates
touch of the skin may be an adequate stimulus in some ani-
hearing, and the vestibular division, which provides informa-
 mals, whereas a gentle pinch with a forceps may be needed in
 tion about the orientation of the head with respect to gravity.
 n e o ssr y e s xaar qaded a s
Technique
the medial canthus of the eye that tests the ophthalmic branch
Cochlear Division. Most tests for hearing are dependent on
(Figure l-35).
behavioral reactions to sound and therefore are subject to mis-
Touching the lateral canthus tests the maxillary branch
 interpretation. No good test exists for unilateral deficits other
 The blink response is dependent on innervation of the muscles
than those involving electrophysiologic systems. Crude tests
by the facial nerve.
involve startling the animal with a loud noise [clap, whistle).
Response to stimulation ofthe nasal mucosa tests the max-
Similar responses may be monitored by an electroencephalo-
 illary and ophthalmic branches and should elicit a response
 gram (EEG) or by observation or direct measurement of the
even in dull or obtunded and stoic animals (Figure l-36).
respiratory cycle. Human audiometry equipment can also be
 Pinching the jaw tests the mandibular branch.
adapted for animals. The most precise equipment involves a
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters Z and 9.
signal-averaging computer, which measures electrical activity
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and 9.
of the brainstem in response to auditory stimuli (brainstem
Abducent Nerve (CN Vl). The abducent nerve innervates
auditory-evoked response [BAER]]. BAER not only detects
the lateral rectus and the retractor bulbi muscles.
auditory deficits but also may indicate the location of the
Technique. Eye movements are tested by the method
lesion (see Chapter 4).
described for the oculomotor nerve. The retractor bulbi mus-
Vestibular Division. Abnormalities of the vestibular system
cles can be tested with a palpebral or a corneal reflex. Nor-
produce several characteristic signs. Most vestibular lesions
mally, the globe is retracted, allwing extrusion of the third
 are unilateral except in congenital anomalies and occasionally
eyelid. Lesions of the abducent nerve cause a loss of lateral
in inflammatory diseases. Unilateral vestibular disease usually
[abducted) gaze and medial strabismus combined with inabil-
produces ataxia, nystagmus, and a head tilt to the side of the
ity to retract the globe.
lesion.7
 Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 1l.
The head tilt should be apparent on observation [see Figure
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and 1l.
1-17). The examiner can accentuate the head tilt by removing
Facial Nerve (CN Vll). The facial nerve is the motor path-
visual compensation or by removing tactile proprioception.
way to the muscles of facial expression and the sensory path-
Vestibular ataxia [an uncoordinated, staggering gait) usually is
way for taste to the palate and the rostral two thirds of the
 accompanied by a broad-based stance and a tendency to fall or
tongue It also provides sensory innervation to the inner sur-
to circle to the side of the lesion.
face of the pinna.
 Nystagmus is involuntary rhythmic movement of the eyes.
Technique. Asymmetry is usually seen in cases of facial
Two forms of nystagmus are recognized. Jerk nystagmus has
paralysis. The lips, eyelids, and ears may droop. The nose may
 a slow phase in one direction and a rapid recovery phase to
be slightly deviated to the normal side, and the nostril may
return. Pendular nystagmus is smal oscillations of the eyes
not fare on inhalation. The palpebral fissure may be slightly
with no slow or fast components. Pendular nystagmus is asso-
widened and fails to close when a palpebral or a corneal reflex
ciated with visual defects and cerebellar diseases. Jerk nys-
is attempted (see Figure l-35). Pinching the lip produces a
tagmus is associated with vestibular and brainstem diseases.
behavioral response, but the lip may not retract. The examiner
can test the animal's sense of taste by moistening a cotton-
Nystagmus should be observed with the head held in varying
tpped applicator with atropine and touching it to the rostral
positions. The direction of the fast component is noted (e.g.)
 part of the tongue. The affected side is tested frst. Normal dogs
left horizontal nystagmus). Jerk nystagmus may be horizontal,
vertical, or rotatory. Forced deviation of the globe [strabismus)
occur as the atropine spreads to normal areas of the tongue.
also may be seen when the head is elevated or lowered. Typi-
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 9.
cally, in small animals, the ipsilateral eye deviates ventrally
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
33
when the head is elevated. Producing eye movements by mov-
and the viscera. The accessory nerve has two roots, cranial and
ing the animal's head from side to side, physiologic nystagmus
spinal. The cranial roots originate in the same nucleus as the
(see the section on CN Il) also tests the vestibular system
vagus and glossopharyngeal nerves, the nucleus ambiguus. As
[see Figure 1-34). Vestibular lesions may alter the direction or
the accessory nerve exits the cranial cavity, fibers join with
may abolish the response. In some cases, the eyes do not move
the vagus to innervate the pharyngeal and laryngeal muscu-
together (dysconjugate movement).
lature. The spinal roots of the accessory nerve are discussed
Lesions of the receptors or the vestibular nerve cause a
separately (see later discussion).
horizontal or rotatory nystagmus that does not change with
Technique. Taste can be evaluated by the method
varying head positions. Lesions of the vestibular nuclei and
 described for CN Vll, although making an accurate assess-
oap aue i snesu asne aeu sans paeose
ment of the caudal part of the tongue is more diffcult. The
that may change that direction with varying head positions.
simplest test for function is to observe the palate and the lar-
We have observed a few relatively rare instances of nystagmus
ynx for asymmetry and to elicit a gag or a swallwing reflex
that changes direction with confirmed peripheral disease and
by inserting a tongue depressor to the pharynx. The laryngeal
no evidence of central disease.
region also can be externally palpated, and a swallowing reflex
Postrotatory nystagmus may help to evaluate vestibular
and tongue movements are observed. Stertorous breath-
disease. As an animal is rotated rapidly, physiologic nystagmus
ing may be observed with laryngeal paralysis. Endoscopic
is induced. When rotation is stopped, nystagmus (postrata-
observation of the larynx is useful in the horse. The laryngeal
tory) occurs in the opposite direction and is observed for a
adductor response [slap test) is performed during endoscopic
short time. The receptors opposite the direction of rotation
observation. The skin caudal to the dorsal part of the scapula
are stimulated more than the ipsilateral receptors because
is slapped gently with the hand during expiration. The nor-
they are farther from the axis of rotation. Unilateral lesions
mal response is brief adduction of the contralateral arytenoid
produce a difference in the rate and duration of postrotatory
cartilage.
nystagmus when the animal is tested in both directions. The
Historical evidence of an inability to swallow may be sug-
test is performed in the following manner: The animal is held
 gestive of an abnormality in CNs IX, X, and XI. The clinician
by an assistant, who rapidly turns 360 degrees 10 times and
should be cautious when examining animals with swallowing
then stops. The examiner counts the beats of nystagmus. After
 problems because dysphagia is one of the signs of rabies.
several minutes, the test is repeated in the opposite direc-
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 9.
tion. Normal animals have three or four beats of nystagmus,
Assessment. See Chapters and 9.
with the fast phase opposite the direction of rotation. Periph-
Accessory Nerve. The spinal roots of the accessory nerve
eral lesions usually depress the response when the animal is
are the motor pathway to the trapezius muscle and parts of
 rotated away from the side of the lesion. Central lesions may
the sternocephalicus and brachiocephalicus muscles.
depress or prolong the response.
Technique. The detection of an abnormality jn an acces-
The caloric test is a specifie test for vestibular function. This
sory nerve injury may be diffcult, except by careful palpation
test has the advantage of assessing each side independently. It
for atrophy of the affected muscles. Passive movement of the
is difficult to perform in many animals, however, and may be
head and the neck may demonstrate a loss of resistance to
unreliable if the patient is uncooperative. Negative responses
lateral movements in a contralateral direction.
occur in many normal animals. The examiner performs the
Anatomy and Physiology. The spinal roots of the acces-
 s  s   
sory nerve arise from fibers in the ventral roots of the C1-7 spi-
 irrigating the ear canal with ice water, and observing for nys-
nal cord segments. The fbers course cranially as the spinal root
tagmus. A rubber ear syringe should be used for the irriga-
of the accessory nerve, which lies between the dorsal and the
tion. Usually, 50 to 100 mL of cold water is adequate, and the
ventral spinal nerve roots and enters the cranial cavity via the
infusion takes approximately 3 minutes. The test should not
foramen magnum. The accessory nerve emerges from the skull
be performed if the tympanic membrane is ruptured or if the
by way of the tympanooccipital fissure and then courses cau-
ear canal is plugged. Nystagmus is induced with the fast phase
dally in the neck to innervate the trapezius and portions of the
away from the side being tested. Warm water also produces
sternocephalicus and brachiocephalicus muscles. These mus-
the same effect, except that the nystagmus is in the opposite
cles elevate and advance the limb and fix the neck laterally.4
direction. Warm water is even less reliable. If the animal resists
Assessment. Lesions of the accessory nerve are either rare
and shakes its head, the response usually is abolished. The test
or rarely recognized. An injury to the nerve in the vertebral
is helpful for the evaluation of brainstem function in coma-
 canal or the cranial cavity probably would be masked by other,
tose animals but has been replaced by the BAER test at most
more severe signs of paresis. The course of the nerve in the
institutions.
neck is well protected by muscle but could be damaged by
Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters Z and 8.
deep penetrating wounds, injections, or contusions. Atrophy
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and 8.
of the affected muscles would be the most obvious sign of
Glossopharyngeal Nerve (CN IX), Vagus Nerve (CN X).
injury. Electromyography (EMG) may be necessary for diag-
and Accessory Nerve (CN Xl). Cranial nerves IX, X, and XI
nosis. Lesions in the vertebral canal should produce other signs
are considered together because of their common origin and
of spinal cord dysfunction.
intracranial pathway. The glossopharyngeal nerve innervates
Hypoglossal Nerve. The hypoglossal nerve is the motor 
the muscles of the pharynx along with some fibers from the
pathway to the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the tongue
vagus nerve. The glossopharyngeal nerve also supplies para-
 and the geniohyoideus muscle.
sympathetic motor fibers to the zygomatic and parotid sali-
Technique. The muscles of the tongue protrude and
vary glands. It is sensory to the caudal one third of the tongue
retract it. Each side is innervated independently. Protrusion is
and the pharyngeal mucosa, including the sensation of taste.
tested by wetting the animal's nose and observing the ability
The vagus nerve innervates the pharynx, the larynx, and the
to extend its tongue forward (Figure l-37).
palate and supplies parasympathetic motor fibers to the vis-
a sdse Aq psa aq ue uoea jo uans au
cera of the body, except for the pelvic viscera, which are inner-
tongue with a gauze sponge. Atrophy can be observed if a
vated by sacral parasympathetic nerves. Gastric abnormalities
lesion has been present for 5 to 7 days.
are common in vagus nerve problems in ruminants. The vagus
 Anatomy and Physiology. See Chapters 2 and 9.
nerve is the sensory pathwayto the caudal pharynx, the larynx,
Assessment. See Chapters 2 and 9.
34
PART1
 Fundamentals
Sensory Testing
touch to deep palpation. Proper palpation causes no reaction
The sensory examination provides information relative to the
in normal areas and a behavioral reaction in areas that are
anatomic location and severity of the lesion. At this point
painful. Animals that are in extreme pain may react regardless
 in the neurologic examination, sensation has been tested
of where they are palpated. Localization of the source of pain
by assessment of the cranial nerves, spinal reflexes, and pro-
in these patients may be more accurate if the animal is sedated
 prioceptive positioning. Sensory modalities still to be tested
before examination. Increased muscle tension may be noticed
include hyperesthesia, superficial pain, and deep pain from the
when the painful area is palpated, even under light anesthesia.
limbs and the trunk.
By placing one hand on the abdomen during palpation of the
Technique. Testing for sensation is usually done last in the
vertebral column, one can detect splinting of the abdominal
examination to avoid losing cooperation of the patient. The
objective of the sensory examination is threefold: [l) map
At the opposite extreme, some hounds may almost let you
areas of increased sensation (hyperesthesia), (2) map any areas
 amputate a leg without flinching.
of decreased sensation (hypesthesia), and (3) ensure that the
Sometimes the animal's reaction can be increased by mash-
animal has a conscious response to a noxious stimulus. The
ing a toe until it reacts. One or two repetitions often overcome
frst two are accomplished by testing for hyperesthesia and
the animal's reluctance to protest, and they then react when
the ability to perceive superficial pain, respectively. Evalua-
you palpate the painful areas. During palpation of the animal
tion of the animal's conscious response to a noxious stimulus
areas of increased sensitivity (hyperesthesia) are noted.
should only be tested in animals that display paralysis. Given
Testing for superficial pain or eliciting the cutaneous trunci
the orderly and predictable manner in which function is lost
(panniculus) reflex is best done with a small hemostat. Gently
with a compressive lesion affecting the spinal cord, an animal
 displaying voluntary movement (even if not able to support
Needles may be applied, but they are less reliable and may
weight or walk) should be able to perceive a noxious stimulus.
cause injury. As in palpating, testing should be done from distal
Always apply the minimum stimulus that elicits a reaction.
Hyperesthesia is an increased sensitivity to stimulation.
For a comprehensive discussion of hyperesthesia and pain, see
Chapter 14. Behavioral reactions to what should be a non-
 pnous s ued, se pardru are snus snxo
done frst from distal to proximal or caudal to cranial. Lesions
of the nervous system decrease sensation caudal or distal to
the lesion, sometimes increase sensation at the lesion site,
and leave sensation normal proximal to the lesion. Therefore
testing from distal to proximal or caudal to cranial goes from
decreased sensation through increased sensation to normal
sensation. The direction can be reversed to define more clearly
 the boundaries of abnormality. The pelvic limbs are palpated
frst, followed by the vertebral column. Beginning with L7 and
 progressing cranially, the examiner squeezes the transverse
processes. Alternatively, one can press each spinous process
frmly. The severity of the stimulus is increased from light
eisaisanady jo seaie aha Aeu uonedied daaa se-l ainby
Minimal response may be detected by simultaneously palpating
adjacent areas for changes in muscle tone [guarding reaction].
Figure 1-39 Gentle pricking or pinching of the skin can be used
to outline the area of hyperesthesia more precisely. Both behav-
ioral reactions and the cutaneous reflex may be elicited. The skin
 are moistened. The tongue should be extended without forced
should be stimulated dorsally and laterally for the examiner to
deviation to the side.
 develop a map of abnormal reactions.
CHAPTER 1
 Neurologic History, Neuroanatomy, and Neurologic Examination
35
to proximal or caudal to cranial. The examiner tests the skin
indicates damage to a sensory nerve or a pathway. Increased
just lateral to the midline and then repeats on a line lateral to
sensitivity may indicate irritation of a nerve or, more com-
the site of the frst evaluation. The opposite side is tested simi-
monly, irritation of adjacent structures (e.g., disk herniation
larly Three responses may be observed: a behavioral response, a
with irritation of meninges).
reflex withdrawal of a limb, or a twitch of the skin [the cutane-
 The cutaneous trunci reflex is most prominent in the "sad-
 ous trunci or panniculus reflex). A behavioral response such as
de" area of the trunk. It cannot be elicited from stimulation
a display of anxiety, an attempt to escape, a turning of the head,
over the sacrum or the neck. The reflex is absent caudal to
cr a vocalization indicates perception of superficial pain. With-
the level of a lesion that disrupts the superficial pain pathway.
drawal of a limb is a reflex and only indicates an intact reflex
For example, a severe compression of spinal cord segment L1
arc [see section on flexor reflexes). The cutaneous reflex is a
results in a normal reflex when stimulation is applied to the
contraction of the cutaneous trunci muscle, causing a twitch of
Tl3 dermatome but no response caudal to that point.
the skin along the dorsal and lateral areas of the trunk. A signif-
When alterations in touch, superficial pain, or hyperes-
icant behavioral response at any step indicates the presence of
thetic areas are found, the pattern of abnormality is care-
sensation, and more severe stimuli are not needed once sensa-
fully mapped. The pattern generally conforms to one of three
tion has been established. If a dog turns and snaps when its toe
possibilities:
is touched, one need not squeeze the toe with a hemostat.23
1. Transverse spinal cord lesions cause an abnormality in
The caudal margins of normal superficial pain can be deter-
all areas caudal to the lesion. The line of demarcation
mined bilaterally. Spinal cord or nerve root lesions produce an
between normal and abnormal areas follows the pattern 
area of hyperesthesia or a transition from decreased to normal
of a dermatome (see Figure l-12).
sensation in a pattern conforming to the dermatomal distribution
 2. Hyperesthesia, reflecting an irritation at a spinal cord
of the nerves [see Figure 1-12). Testing of cutaneous sensation of
segment or a nerve root, follows the distribution of one
the neck is unreliable for localizing cervical lesions. Manipula-
 or more dermatomes but usually no more than three.
tion of the head and the neck and deep palpation of the cervical
 3. Lesions of a peripheral nerve produce a pattern of abnor-
vertebrae are more useful for localizing pain in this area.
mality conforming to the distribution of that peripheral
 A noxious stimulus that elicits any behavioral response is
nerve [see Figure 1-13).
 adequate for determining the presence of deep pain. When a
One of these three patterns localizes the lesion to a periph-
response is diffcult to elicit, a hemostat is used to squeeze a
 eral nerve (e.g, sciatic nerve, radial nerve) or to a spinal cord
 digit. Withdrawal of the limb is not a behavioral response [see
segment accurate to within three segments [e.g., L1-3).
the section on the flexor reflexes).
The presence or absence of pain perception provides an
Anatomy and Physiology. Newer concepts emphasize
 important assessment of the extent of neural damage, espe-
 the integration and interaction of all sensory systems and the
cially in compressive lesions. When nerves are compressed,
effect of descending pathways that modify sensation. The con-
large nerve fibers are the first to lose function. With greater
cepts presented in this section are in general agreement with
compression, small nerve fbers may be affected. In the spinal
current research and are adequate for the clinical interpreta-
cord, loss of function develops in the following sequence: (1)
tion of sensory signs.24-26
loss of proprioception, (2) loss of voluntary motor function,
 Sensory fibers from the skin, the muscles, the joints, and
(3) loss of superficial pain perception, and (4) loss of deep
the viscera enter the spinal cord at each segment by way of the
 pain perception (see Figure 1-3). An animal with a spinal cord
dorsal nerve root. Fibers that innervate the skin are arranged
compression that has lost proprioception and voluntary motor
in regular patterns called dermatomes. A dermatome is the
function (paralyzed) but stil has superficial and deep pain
area of skin innervated by one spinal nerve root. Because of
perception therefore has less spinal cord damage than one that
 overlap, each strip of skin has some innervation from three
has lost all four functions. A loss of deep pain perception indi-
segments.27-31
cates a severely damaged spinal cord and a guarded prognosis.
 Proprioceptive fbers entering the spinal cord may ascend
in the dorsal columns and the spinomedullothalamic tract to
relay information to nuclei in the medulla (see Figure l-15).
REFERENCES
Other fibers synapse on neurons in the dorsal horn of the gray
matter. The neurons then send axons cranially along one of
1. Weed LL: Medical records, medical education and patient 
several named pathways, both ipsilaterally and contralaterally.
care, Chicago, 197l, Year Book Medical Publishers.
 The primary functions of these pathways include unconscious
2. Osborne CA, Low DG: The medical history redefined:
 proprioception and sensitivity to touch, temperature, and
idealism vs. realism, Denver, 1976, AAHA. In Proceedings 
superficial pain.
of the American Animal Hospital Association.
 The deep pain pathway [spinoreticular and propriospinal
3. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: taking the history,
tracts) is interrupted at three- to five-segment intervals to syn-
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:433-434, 1972.
 apse on neurons in the spinal cord gray matter. These neurons
4. de Lahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical neu-
give rise to axons, which rejoin the pathway on the same side
rology, ed 3, St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
or on the opposite side. The deep pain system is bilateral and
5.（
Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: observations on men-
multisynaptic and is composed of smal-diameter unmyelin-
tal status, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:654-659, 1972.
ated fbers [see Figure 1-11].25
6. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: observations on pos-
 The cutaneous trunci or panniculus reflex is a twitch of
ture, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:882-884, 1972.
the cutaneous muscle in response to a cutaneous stimulus.
7. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: observations on
 The sensory nerves from the skin enter by way of the dorsal
movement, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:1105-1106,
root. The ascending pathway is probably the same as that for
1972.
superficial pain. The synapse occurs bilaterally at the C8, T1
8. Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurol-
segments with motor neurons of the lateral thoracic nerve that
ogy, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
innervates the cutaneous trunci muscle [see Figure l-16).4
9. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology: a handbook for vet-
Assessment. Alterations in a sensory modality.
are
erinary clinicians, ed 2, Ames, IA, 2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
described as absent (0), decreased (+1), normal [+2), or
10. Grillner S: Neurobiological bases of rhythmic motor acts
increased (hyperesthesia, +3). Absent or decreased sensation
in vertebrates, Science 228:143-149, 1985.
36
PART1
Fundamentals
1l. Grillner S: Locomotion in vertebrates: central mecha-
21. Hoff H, Breckenridge C: Observations on the mammalian
nisms and reflex interaction, Physiol Rev 55:247-304,
reflex prototype of the sign of Babinski, Brain 79:155-167,
1975.
1966.
12. Willis JB: On the interaction between spinal locomo-
 22. Myers LJ, Nusbaum KE, Swango LJ, et al: Dysfunction of
tor generators in quadrupeds, Brain Res Rev 2:17l-204,
sense of smell caused by canine parainfluenza virus infec-
1980.
tion in dogs, Am J Vet Res 49:188-190, 1988.
13. Breazile JE, Blaugh BS, Nail N: Experimental study of
23. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations-sensation: pain, Vet
canine distemper myoclonus, Am J Vet Res 27:1375-1379,
Med Small Anim Clin 69:607-610, 1974.
1966.
24. Willis WD, Coggeshall RE: Sensory mechanisms of the
 14. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: palpation and inspec-
spinal cord, ed 2, New York, 1991, Plenum Press.
tion, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:1327-1328, 1972.
 25. Willis WD Jr: The pain system: the neural basis of noci-
15. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations-sensation: proprio-
ceptive transmission in the mammalian nervous system,
ception and touch, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 67:295-298,
Basel, Switzerland, 1985, S Karger.
1972.
 26. Willis W, Chung J: Central mechanisms of pain, J Am Vet
16. Holliday TA: The origins of the neurological examination:
Med Assoc 191:1200-1202, 1987.
the postural and atitudinal, placing and righting reactions.
27. Kirk E: The dermatomes of the sheep, J Comp Neurol
 In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Veterinary Medical
134:353-370, 1968.
Forum, San Diego, 1989, American College of Veterinary
28. Bailey C, Kitchell R, Haghighi S, et al: Cutaneous innerva-
 Internal Medicine.
tion of the thorax and abdomen of the dog, Am J Vet Res
17. Roberts TDM: Neurophysiology of postural mechanisms,
45:1689-1698, 1984.
New York, 1967, Plenum Press.
29. Fletcher T, Kitchell R: The lumbar, sacral and coccygeal
18. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations: flexion and crossed
tactile dermatomes ofthe dog,JComp Neurol 128:171-180,
extension reflexes, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 68:383-385,
1966.
1973.
30. Kirk E, Kitchell R, Johnson R: Neurophysiologic maps of
19. Oliver JE: Neurologic examinations-spinal reflexes: exten-
cutaneous innervation ofthe hindlimb ofsheep,AmJ Vet Res
sor thrust refex, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 68:763, 1973.
48:1485-1492, 1987.
 20. Kneller S, Oliver J, Lewis R: Differential diagnosis of pro-
 31. Hekmatpanah J: Organization of tactile dermatomes, C1
gressive caudal paresis in an aged German shepherd dog.
through L4, in cat, J Neurophysiol 24:129-140, 1961.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1l:414-417, 1975.
CHAPTER
Localization of Lesions in the
Nervous System
 n Chapter l, the fundamentals of organizing a diagno-
reflexes of all limbs indicate a lesion cranial to C6. Other find-
 sis, neuroanatomy, and neurologic examination were
ings are used to localize the lesion further. With a lesion cranial
 described. In this chapter, the principles of lesion local-
to C6, one should examine the cranial nerves and mentation
ization will be described using the anatomic information
to rule out brain disease. The sensory examination is further
 described in Chapter 1.
reviewed for possible signs related to the neck (e.g, C1-5).
Using only the information related to LMN and UMN signs
of the limbs, the examiner can localize the lesion to one of the
LOCALIZATION TO A REGION
following regions: [1) the brain, (2) C1-5, (3) C6-T2-brachial
OF THE SPINAL CORD OR THE BRAIN
plexus (thoracic limb), [4) T3-L3, (5) L4-S2-lumbosacral
plexus (pelvic limb), or (6) S3-Cd5.
Upper Motor Neuron (UMN) and Lower Motor
Neuron (LMN) Signs
Examination of the motor system should allow the clinician to
LOCALIZATION TO A SEGMENTAL
localize the lesion to one of five levels of the spinal cord or to
LEVEL OF THE SPINAL CORD
the brain (Figure 2-l and Table 2-1).
Gait and postural reactions detect paresis or paralysis; spi-
Lower Motor Neuron Signs
nal reflexes detect LMN abnormality. The thoracic and pelvic
If LMN signs are present in the limbs, the examiner can local-
limbs should be classified as normal or as exhibiting LMN or
ize the lesion further by identifying the affected muscles. Table
UMN signs [see Table l-3). Briefly, LMN signs are paresis or
2-2 lists spinal cord segments [roots) and peripheral nerves for
paralysis, a loss of reflexes, and a loss of muscle tone. UMN
the most commonly tested reflexes.
 The examiner can localize within two to four segments or
sis), an increase in muscle tone, and normal or exaggerated
to a peripheral nerve if LMN signs are present. Spinal cord
reflexes. Note that with both UMN and LMN signs, paresis
segments do not correlate directly with vertebral levels. When
or paralysis is the primary finding. The status of the reflexes
the examiner has determined the spinal cord level, Figure
distinguishes between the two.
1-8 can be referred to for an estimation of the vertebral level.
The examiner can localize a lesion to a region of the spinal
As a general rule, the sacral segments overlie L5. This can be
cord or the brain by using these findings and the material pre-
remembered because S (for sacral) resembles the number 5.
sented in Figure 2-l, which is an algorithm that explains the
 Peripheral nerve lesions usually cause monoparesis (paresis
logic of the diagnosis. For example, paresis in the pelvic limbs
of one limb) because the most common lesions are the result
with normal thoracic limbs indicates that the brain and spinal
of injury to a limb or a specific nerve. Localization of lesions in
cord as far caudal as T2 are functioning. Therefore, a lesion is
monoparesis is reviewed in Chapter 5. The primary exception
caudal to T2. To determine whether the lesion is in the T3-L3 or
is generalized peripheral neuropathies, which affect all of the
L4-S2 region, the reflexes of the pelvic limb must be evaluated.
limbs. These conditions are discussed in Chapter 7.
If they are normal or exaggerated, the L4-S2 segments must be
functioning and the lesion is between T3 and L3. If the reflexes
Sersory Perception
are decreased or absent, the lesion is in the L4-S2 segments.
Hyperesthesia [increased sensitivity to noxious stimuli) is
Paresis or paralysis of all four limbs indicates a lesion cranial to
a useful localizing sign and may be present with little or no
T3. Reflexes are tested in all four limbs. Normal or exaggerated
motor deficit. The animal's limbs and trunk, especially the
37
38
PARTI
 Fundamentals
Pelvic limbs
Normal
UMN signs
LMNsigns
(See Table 1-5)
(See Table 1-5)
Thoraciclimbs
Thoracic limbs
Normal
UMN
LMN
Normal
UMN
LMN
Normal
UMN
LMN
signs
signs
signs
signs
signs
signs
Rare
Brachial
T2-L3
Brain or
21-90
L4-S2
L4-S2
L4-S2
Brain or
plexus
C1-C5
 and Brain
and
C1-C5
or C1-C5
C6-T2
Normal
1. Recheck;
1. See Table 2-2
1. See Fig.
1. Check cranial
1. See Table 2-2
1. See Table 2-2
Multifocal
 Generalized
motor
pelvic
2.Sensory
1-12
nerves, see
2. Sensory
2. See Fig.1-12
or diffuse
peripheral
function
limbs,
examination,
Table 2-4
examination,_
disease
neuropathy
 of spinal
cranial
see Fig.
2. Sensory
see Fig. 1-12
or myopathy
cord
nerves,
1-9, B; 1-13
examination,
or
other
head and neck
complete
brain
3. See Fig.2-4
spinal cord
function
destruction
(respiration)
Figure 2-1 Localization of lesions based on motor function. UMN, Upper motor neuron; LMN,
lower motor neuron; C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; S, sacral spinal cord segments. [From 
Hoerlein BF: Canine neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.]
usually have decreased sensory perception [see Figures 1-16
TABLE 2-1
 and 1-39). A level of normal or increased sensory perception
can be ascertained by this method. If a spinal lesion is present,
Signs of Lesions in the Spinal Cord
the sensory level should have the conformation of a derma-
tome (see Figure 1-12). Peripheral nerves have a different pat-
Site of Lesion
Sign
tern of sensory distribution [see Figure l-13).
The cutaneous trunci (panniculus) reflex is elicited with a
Cd1-5
LMN-tail
hemostat in the same manner as that just described for detect-
S1-3
UMN—tail
ing hyperesthesia. Cutaneous sensation enters the spinal cord
Pelvic plexus
LMN—bladder
at each segment [dermatomes] and ascends to the brachial
Pudendal nerve
LMN—anal sphincter, urethral
plexus (C8-Tl) to the lateral thoracic nerve, which innervates
external sphincter
the cutaneous trunci (panniculus carnosus) muscle. Contrac-
L4-S2
UMN—tail
tion of the cutaneous trunci muscle causes a skin twitch. A
Lumbosacral plexus
LMN—hind limbs
segmental lesion blocks the ascending afferent stimulus, abol-
UMN or LMN—bladder, anal
ishing the reflex. Pinching the skin in a caudal to cranial direc-
 sphincter
tion identifies the first level at which the reflex can be elicited.
This segment is normal, and the lesion is one segment caudal
T3-L3
UMN—hind limbs, bladder, anal 
to this level. The superficial pain pathways must be damaged
sphincter
to abolish the reflex. Normally the cutaneous trunci reflex is
LMN—segmental spinal muscles
most apparent in the thoracolumbar (saddle) area. A minimal
C6-T2
UMN—hind limbs, bladder 
response is obtained from a stimulus applied to the sacral or
 Brachial plexus
LMN—forelimbs
caudal regions, and no response is obtained from a stimulus
C1-5 or brainstem
UMN—all four limbs, bladder
applied to the cervical region. Cervical spinal hyperesthesia
is assessed by manipulation of the neck and deep palpation
LMN, Lower motor neuron; UMN, upper motor neuron.
of the vertebrae. Although defining the location of the pain
vertebral column, are palpated and manipulated while the
cranial, middle, or caudal cervical segments is usually possible
 examiner observes for signs of pain. Obvious reactions may
include resistance to movement and tensing of the muscles.
Hypesthesia [decreased sensory perception) and anesthe-
If the clinician places one hand on the animal's abdomen
sia [lack of sensory perception) also are good localizing signs.
while squeezing each vertebral segment with the other hand,
Single nerve root lesions usually do not produce a clinically
increased tension of the abdominal muscles may be felt as
detectable area of decreased sensation because of the over-
painful areas are palpated. The skin is pinched with a hemo-
lapping pattern of cutaneous innervation (see Figure l-12).
stat after palpation is completed. A fold of skin is grasped gen-
sa sus us u p q  sor aru n
tly with the hemostat, and the skin is pinched lightly so that
cially in the area of the cauda equina. Lesions of the spinal
no significant behavioral reaction is elicited from normal areas.
cord may result in decreased perception of pain caudal to the
Pinching areas of hyperesthesia may elicit an exaggerated skin
lesion. Determining the level of sensory loss was discussed ear-
twitch or a behavioral response.
lier, and the prognostic implications of the loss of sensation 
The superficial pain examination should be performed in
 are discussed later. A carefully performed sensory examination
 a caudal to cranial direction because areas caudal to a lesion
localizes the lesion to within three segments of the spinal cord
CHAPTER 2
Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
39
TABLE 2-2
Spinal Reflexes
Reflex
Muscle(s)
Peripheral Nerve
Segments*
Myotatic (stretch)
 Biceps brachii
 Musculocutaneous 
(C6). C7-8. (T1)
Triceps brachii
Radial
C7-8. T1. (T2)
Extensor carpi radialis
Radial
C7-8. T1. (T2)
Quadriceps
Femoral
(L3). L4-5. (L6)
Cranial tibial
 Peroneal (sciatic)
L6-7. S1
Gastrocnemius 
Tibial (sciatic)
L6-7.S1
Flexor (withdrawal)
Thoracic limb
Radial, ulnar, median,
C6-T2
 musculocutaneous
Pelvic limb
Sciatic
L6-S1. (S2)
Cutaneous trunci
Cutaneous trunci
Lateral thoracic
C8. T1
Perineal
Anal sphincter
Pudendal
S1-2. (S3)
Modifed with permission from Oliver JE Jr: Localization of lesions in the nervous system. In Hoerlein BF, editor: Canine neurology, ed 3, Phila-
delphia, 1978, WB Saunders.
*Parentheses indicate segments that sometimes contribute to a nerve.
TABLE 2-3
Signs of Lesions in the Brain and Peripheral Vestibular System
Lesion Site
Mental Status
Posture
Movement
Postural Reactions
Cranial Nerves
Cerebral cortex
 Abnormal behavior,   Normal; head turned   Gait normal to slight   Deficits 
Normal (vision
 and mentation,
 toward side of 
hemiparesis
(contralateral)
 may be impaired
seizures
lesion 
(contralateral)
 contralateral side}
Diencephalon
Abnormal behavior 
 Normal
Gait normal to 
Deficits
CN II, abnormal 
(thalamus and 
and mentation,
hemiparesis or
(contralateral)
 pupillary light 
hypothalamus!
endocrine and
tetraparesis
reflex
autonomic
dysfunction
 Brainstem (midbrain,
 Dullness, stupor,
Normal, turning.
Hemiparesis or
 Deficits (ipsilateral
CN III-XII
pons, medulla)
coma
falling
tetraparesis,
or contralaterall
ataxia
Vestibular, central
Normal to
Head tilt, falling 
lpsilateral
 Deficits usually
CN VIll, may involve 
(cranial medulla)
 depressed 
(usually toward
hemiparesis.
ipsilateral 
CN V and Vll:
side of lesion}
vestibular ataxia
 nystagmus
Vestibular.
 Normal
Head tilt, circling.
 No paresis, severe
Normal
 CN VIll, sometimes
peripheral 
falling, rolling 
vestibular ataxia
 CN Vll: Hormer's
syndrome,
nystagmus
Cerebellum
Normal
Wide-based stance
 No paresis; severe
No paresis:
Usually normal.
 or normal unless 
 cerebellar ataxia,
dysmetria
May see
paradoxical
 dysmetria, and 
present
depressed
vestibular dis-
resting and 
menace response
ease is present.
 intention tremors
nystagmus, or
decerebellate
vestibular signs
posture
or to a peripheral nerve. For additional details on pain, see
 apparatus labyrinth) is made on the basis of clinical signs
Chapter 14.
(Table 2-3).
LOCALIZATION IN THE BRAIN
BRAINSTEM
 If the lesion has been localized to the brain, the next step is to
 For our purposes, the functional brainstem includes the mid-
determine what part of the brain is involved. Localization to
brain, pons, and medulla oblongata. Lesions of the brainstem
one of five regions of the brain or to the peripheral vestibular
 produce UMN signs in all four limbs (tetraparesis) or in the
40
PARTI
Fundamentals
Gait abnormal
Gait normal
Asymmetric ataxia
Tetraparesis or
Postural reaction
 Postural reaction
Head tilt 
hemiparesis
deficits
normal
 Proprioception normal 
 Direction of nystagmus 
does not change
Facial paresis
Horner's syndrome
UMN signs
LMN signs
Cerebrum or diencephalon
Neuropathy of
cranial nerves
 See Chapters 9 and 11
 Peripheral vestibular
Brainstem
Generalized LMN
CN I or CN II
See Chapter 8
See Chapter 8
See Chapter 7
See Chapters 9 and 11
Figure 2-2 Localization of lesions causing cranial nerve signs.
 thoracic and pelvic limbs on one side (hemiparesis). The pare-
in the level of consciousness (stupor, coma) because of
sis or paralysis produced by brainstem lesions is obvious both
interference with the ascending reticular activating system
 in the gait and in postural reactions. Cerebral or forebrain
(see Chapter 12).
lesions affect postural reactions with minimal change in gait,
 although compulsive walking and circling may be seen. Brain-
Vestibular System
stem or hindbrain lesions can cause abnormal posture resulting
Vestibular signs may be the result of central (brainstem) or
from vestibular involvement. Cranial nerve signs (CN III-XIl)
peripheral (labyrinth) disease. Distinguishing central disease
are present with larger or extensive brainstem lesions and pro-
from peripheral disease is important because of the differ-
vide important localizing signs (LMN or sensory) (Figure 2-2).
ences in treatment and prognosis. General signs of vestibular
The evaluation of cranial nerves is outlined in Table 2-4 (see
disease include falling, rolling, head tilting, circling, nystagmus,
Chapters 1, 9, 10, and 11).
positional strabismus [deviation of one eye in certain positions
Cranial nerve dysfunction with brainstem disease is ipsilat-
of the head), and asymmetric ataxia (Figures 2-3 and 2-4).
eral to the lesion, whereas motor dysfunction may be ipsilat-
Vestibular ataxia is observed with other signs of vestibular
eral or contralateral, depending on the level and the pathways
dysfunction. Pathologic nystagmus [jerk nystagmus) seen with
involved. The animal's mental status may be altered, especially
vestibular dysfunction can be spontaneous [at rest) or induced
in lesions of the midbrain and the pons, which disrupt the
with change in head position. Jerk nystagmus consists of a
ascending reticular activating system. Signs vary from dullness
slow phase that is followed by a fast phase. The direction of
to coma [see Chapter 12).
the fast phase of nystagmus is noted and recorded as rotary.
horizontal, and vertical. A reliable technique to elicit a patho-
Diencephalon
 (s j e a esuasp  s ss 
Diencephalic lesions (lesions of the thalamus or hypothala-
rapidly flipping it on its back or in larger animals by rapidly
 mus) may produce UMN signs in all four limbs (tetraparesis)
elevating the head. Congenital nystagmus [pendular nystag-
 or in the thoracic and pelvic limbs on one side (hemipare-
mus) and strabismus occur in some breeds of exotic cats as
sis), depending on the symmetry of the lesion. The gait is not 
a result of an anomaly in routing of the visual pathway from
severely affected (similar to cerebral lesions), but postural reac-
the retina to the contralateral visual cortex but cause no visual
tion deficits may be present. The animal may circle in either
impairment.
direction depending upon lesion symmetry. CN II (optic) may
Peripheral lesions involve the labyrinth within the petrosal
be affected in diencephalic lesions with evidence of visual and
bone. Middle-ear lesions [bulla ossea) may produce a head tilt
 pupillary light reflex abnormalities. Space-occupying lesions 
with no other signs, presumably through pressure changes on
(e.g., tumors, abscesses) of the diencephalon also may affect
the windows of the inner ear. Horizontal or rotatory nystag-
CN III, IV, and VI depending on lesion extent (see Table 2-3).
mus may be seen occasionally. Inner-ear disease, which actu-
Cranial nerve signs are ipsilateral to the lesion, whereas pos-
ally involves the receptors and the vestibular nerve, usually
tural reaction deficits can be ipsilateral or contralateral to the
produces one or more of the signs listed earlier in addition to
lesion. It is not uncommon for signs of diencephalic lesions to
the head tilt. In either case, the head tilt is ipsilateral to the
be vague and may include only mentation changes.
lesion. Horner's syndrome (miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos) of
The most characteristic signs of diencephalic lesions are
the ipsilateral eye may be present with either middle- or inner-
related to abnormal function of the hypothalamus and its con-
ear disease in the dog and cat because the sympathetic nerves
pass through the middle ear in proximity to the petrosal bone.
control center for the autonomic nervous system and most
The facial nerve (CN VIl) may be affected in inner-ear disease
e  s  fs   g
as it courses through the petrosal bone in contact with the ves-
distinguishing diencephalic from cerebral lesions is difficult.
tibulocochlear nerve (CN VIl). The primary characteristics of
All sensory pathways of the body, with the exception of
peripheral vestibular disease are an asymmetric ataxia without
those serving olfaction, relay in the thalamus [diencephalon]
deficits in postural reactions and a horizontal, or rotatory, nys-
en route to the cerebral cortex. Clinical signs of lesions in
tagmus that usually maintains a constant direction with differ-
these systems in the diencephalon usually are not localizing.
ent head positions. The quick [jerk) phase of the nystagmus is
A rare generalized hyperesthesia has been described as a result
away from the side of the lesion.
 of an abnormality in the relay nuclei of the pain pathways.
Any signs of brainstem disease in association with ves-
Large lesions in the diencephalon may produce alterations
tibular signs indicate that central involvement is present. The
TABLE 2-4
Cranial Nerves
 Origin or
Number and
Termination in 
Name
Brain
Course
Function
Test
 Normal Response
Abnormal Response  Occurrence
CN I olfactory
 Pyriform cortex 
Nasal mucosa, cribriform
Sense of smell
 Smelling of 
Behavioral reac-
No reaction
Rare: nasal tumors and
plate, olfactory bulbs,
nonirritating 
tion; aversion or
 infections (evaluation 
 olfactory tract, olfactory
volatile substances
interest
difficult)
stria, pyriform cortex
(food)
CN Il optic
Lateral genicu-
 Retina, optic nerve, optic
Vision, pupillary light Menace response,
 Blinks, avoids obsta- No blink, poor avoid- Optic neunitis, neoplasia,
late nucleus
chiasma optic tract, lat-
reflexes
obstacle test and
cles and responds
ance of obstacles,
orbital trauma, orbital
(vision).
eral geniculate nucleus.
behavior, placing 
to visual cues,
no visual placing.
mass
pretectal
optic radiation, visual cor-
reaction, following 
placing good,
direct pupil-
nucleus 
tex, optic tract, pretectal
movement, pupil-
 follows objects,
lary light reflex 
Auednd)
nucleus, parasympathetic 
pupillary light
lary light reflex,
absent, retina or
HAPTER
reflex!
nucleus of CN Ill, oculo-
ophthalmoscopy
reflexes present,
optic disk may be
motor nerve
retina normal
abnomal
CN Ill oculo-
Midbrain.
 Nucleus ventral to mes-
Constriction of pupil; Pupillary size, pupil-
 Pupils symmetric,
Mydriasis, ipsilat-
Orbital lesions, tentorial
7
motor
tegmentum
encephalic aqueduct,
ciliary muscle
lary light reflex,
pupils constrict 
eral, no direct
 herniation, midbrain 
Local
 (level of ros-
exits ventral to mid-
for accommoda-
eye position,
to light, eyes
pupillary reflex,
lesion
tral colliculus)
 brain between cerebral
tion reaction of
eye movements,
centered in 
ventrolateral
peduncles, runs in cav-
lens; extraocular
 physiologic nys-
palpebral fissure,
strabismus,
lization 
ernous and CN Vl, exits 
muscles: dor-
tagmus
eyes move in all
no movement
orbital fissure
sal, ventral, and
directions
except laterally
medical rectus and
(CN VI)
ventral oblique
Lesi
CN IV trochlear Midbrain, teg-
Nucleus ventral to mesen-
Dorsal oblique
Eye position, eye
 Eye centered in
Normal; rotation
 Rare, difficult to evaluate;
mentum (level
cephalic aqueduct, exits 
muscle, rotates
movements,
 palpebral fissure,
may be detected 
reported in polioenceph-
ions
of caudal 
dorsal to tectum, caudal
 dorsal portion of 
 physiologic
eyes move in all 
in animal with 
 alomalacia of cattle, but 
in
colliculus)
to caudal colliculus.
 eye medioventrally
nystagmus
directions 
elliptical pupil or
eyes move
by position of
the
contralateral to origin,
 courses along ridge of
vessels
Nervous
petrosal bone, follows 
course of CN IH
CN V tri-
Motor nucleus:
Motor: Pons, exits at
Motor: Muscles of 
 Motor: Ability To
Closed mouth,
 Jaw hangs open
ldiopathic mandibular
 geminal
Pons
cerebellopontine angle,
 mastication
close mouth, jaw
good jaw tone:
(bilaterall, poor
 paralysis, trigeminal
Syster
ophthalmic.
 Sensory nucleus: 
trigeminal canal of petro- 
 Sensory: Face rostral
tone
no atrophy of
jaw tone, atrophy.
neuritis, cerebellopon-
maxillary.
Pons, medulla.
sal bone, oval foramen.
to ears
Sensory: Palpebral
temporal or mas-
loss of palpebral 
tine angle tumors,nerve
and mandib-
 C1 spinal cord 
 mandibular nerve
reflex, pinch
reflex or behav-
sheath tumors, rabies,
m
seter muscles:
ular nerves
segment
 Sensory: Same except
face, touch nasal
palpebral reflex
ioral response to 
trauma
 trigeminal ganglion in
mucosa
present: behav-
noxious stimulus 
trigeminal canal; oph-
ioral response to 
(check all three 
thalmic, maxillary. and 
noxious stimulus
branches!
mandibular nerves
T
Continued
TABLE 2-4
Cranial Nerves—cont'd
 Origin or
Number and
Termination in
PARTI
Name
Brain
Course
Function
Test
 Normal Response
Abnormal Response  Occurrence
CN VI
Medulla (rostral Medulla, lateral to pyramid, Lateral rectus and 
 Eye position, eye
 Eye moves laterally
 Medial strabismus, 
 Orbital trauma, orbital 
abducent
and dorsal!
Fundamental:
 retractor bulbi
movements
and retracts
lack of lateral
 mass, brainstem 
 muscles, lateral
 corneal reflex
eye movements 
disease
movement of eye.
or retraction of
 retraction of globe 
globe
exits orbital fissure
CN Vll facial
Medulla (rostral 
Motor: Axons leave
Muscles of facial
Facial symmetry.
 Face symmetric:
Asymmetry of
ldiopathic facial paralysis,
and ventrolat-
nucleus, loop around 
expression and
palpebral reflex,
normal move-
face, ptosis, lip
polyneuropathies, inner
eral
abducent nucleus, and 
taste, rostral two
ear movements
ments of lips.
drops, deviation
ear infections, brain-
exit ventrolateral medulla
thirds of tongue,
Taste: Atropine
ears, eyelids:
 of nasal philtrum,
 stem lesions
ventral to CN VIll to
and cutaneous
applied to rostral
palpebral reflex
palpebral reflex
 internal acoustic meatus,
sensation of inner
 two thirds of
present; ears
 absent (check CN
facial canal in petrosal 
 surface of pinna
tongue with cotton
move in response 
V. ears do not
bone, and stylomastoid
swabs
to stimulation
move
foramen to muscles of
 Sensory: Touch inner Taste: Aversive
Taste: No reac-
facial expression
surface of pinna
 reaction immedi-
tion until mouth 
Taste: Solitary tract and 
ately
is closed and
nucleus, medulla follows 
 Sensory: Behavioral
material reaches 
course of trigeminal 
and ear twitch
caudal portion of 
nerve
response
tongue
 Sensory: Geniculate
 Sensory: No behav-
 ganglion and branches
 ioral or ear twitch
from vagus nerve
response
CN VIll vestibu- Vestibular nuclei Inner ear, petrosal bone,
 Equilibrium, hearing 
Vestibular: Posture
Vestibular: Normal
Vestibular: Head tilt, Otitis media and otitis 
locochlear
medulla:
 internal acoustic meatus
and gait, eye
posture and gait,
head twist, cir-
 interma, idiopathic
cochlear 
to medulla (nestibular
movements,
oculocephalic
 cling, nystagmus,
vestibular disease,
nuclei 
nucleil
rotatory and caloric
reflex, normal,
prolonged or
polyneuropathy.
medulla:
tests
brief postrotatory
absent postrota-
brainstem disease
cerebellomed-
 Hearing: Startle 
nystagmus and 
tory nystagmus,
ullary angle.
reaction, elec-
caloric-induced
abnormal or
medulla
trophysiology
rystagmus
absent caloric
(EEG alerting.
 Hearing: Startled 
response
brainstem-evoked 
 reaction to
Hearing: Poor
response!
handclap, evoked 
startle reac-
response present
tion, no evoked
response
CN IX glosso-
Medulla (caudal) Sensory: Solitary tract and 
Sensory and motor
Gag reflex
Swallowing
 Poor gag reflex,
 Rare: common in rabies;
pharyngeal
nucleus
to pharynx and
dysphagia
 brainstem disease
Motor: Parasympathetic,
 palate, parasympa-
ambiguus nucleus, exit
 thetic to zygomatic
together along lateral 
and parotid salivary
surface of medulla, exit 
glands (in CN V):
 through jugular foramen
sensory to carotid
body and sinus
CN X vagus
Medulla (caudall  Same as CN IX
Sensory and motor
Gag reflex, laryngeal Swallowing, cough-
 Poor gag reflex,
Rare, except in laryngeal
to pharynx and
reflex, slap test.
ing, bradycardia
dysphagia, inspi-
 paralysis: polyneuropa-
larynx, thoracic 
oculocardiac reflex
ratory dyspnea,
thy
 and abdominal 
no abduction of
viscera
laryngeal folds.
regurgitation
CN XI
Medulla (caudall  Ambiguus nucleus of
Trapezius and
 Palpate for atrophy
Normal muscles 
Atrophied muscles, Rare
accessory
 and cervical
 medulla and cervical gray
 parts of sterno-
of muscles: EMG
denervation
CHAPTER
spinal cord 
matter, axons run ros-
cephalicus and
trally from cervical cord
 brachiocephalicus
to join cranial roots, exit 
 muscles
jugular foramen 
N
CN Xll hypo-
Medulla (caudall Axons exit medulla lateral
Movements of
Protrusion of tongue
 Tongue protrudes 
Tongue deviates 
 Brainstem disease, poly-
Local
glossal
to pyramid, hypoglossal 
tongue
(wet nose).
 symmetrically and
 to side of lesion,
neuropathy
 canal to tongue
retraction of
 can lick in both 
atrophy, weak
 directions, strong 
withdrawal
lization 
tongue
withdrawal of
tongue 
CN, Cranial nerve; EEG, electroencephalography; EMG, electrornyography.
Lesions i
3
the
Nervous
Syster
m
44
PARTI
 Fundamentals
most important differentiating feature is a deficit in postural
Cerebellum
reactions. Peripheral vestibular disease does not cause paresis
The cerebellum coordinates movements. It controls the rate
or loss of proprioception, whereas central disease frequently
and range of movements without actually initiating motor
does [due to involvement of sensory and motor long tracts
activity. Cerebellar lesions may be unilateral or bilateral,
 in the brainstem). Postural reactions must be evaluated criti-
depending on cause. Characteristic signs include spastic ataxia,
wide-based stance, dysmetria, intention tremor, and no obvi-
deficits in equilibrium, which make the performance of tests
 ous signs of weakness. Cerebellar ataxia is often characterized
such as hopping awkward. An evaluation of proprioceptive
by dysmetria, which denotes stride lengths that are too short
 positioning is an excellent method for diserimination. Altera-
(hypometria) or too long (hypermetria). Head movement
tions in mental status or defcits in CN V and CN VII also are
abnormalities differentiates cerebellar lesions from spinocer-
indicative of central vestibular disease [see Figure 2-3); how-
ebellar tract lesions, which may produce similar signs in the
ever, some polyneuropathies may affect the cranial nerves,
limbs. For example, head dysmetria usually is recognized as
including CN V, VIl, and VIII.
a severe head drop when the head is elevated and suddenly
 Lesions near the caudal cerebellar peduncle may produce
released. Intention tremors are uncoordinated movements
what has been called a paradoxical vestibular syndrome. The
that become much worse as the animal initiates an activity,
signs are usually similar to those of central vestibular disease
such as eating or drinking [see Figure 2-4).8 The animal may
except that the direction of the head tilt is contralateral to the
A      si   o s s 
side of the lesion.6 Additional signs of cerebellar disease, such
even hit the edge of the dish.
as dysmetria and ataxia, may be seen.
Aensn si anq aseasp reaqaras u rnsso Aeu snes 
 Bilateral vestibular disease, which can be peripheral or cen-
 more of a tremor of the globe than the slow-quick [jerk) move-
tral, produces a more symmetric ataxia. The animal wallks with
 ments associated with vestibular disease. Cerebellar nystagmus
the limbs flexed and spread apart to maintain balance. The
is most pronounced as the animal shifts its gaze and fixates on
head often sways with wide excursions from side to side. No
a new field (an intention tremor). A down-beat vertical nystag-
nystagmus is present, and vestibular eye movements are usu-
 mus may be seen upon dorsal extension of the head.
ally absent./
 Acute injury to the cerebellum can cause a decerebellate
flexion in the pelvic limbs, and opisthotonos. Isolated cer-
ebellar trauma is unusual because of the protected location of
Head tilt
the cerebellum. These signs are most pronounced when com-
Asymmetric ataxia
bined with brainstem lesions at the level of the midbrain or
Falling, rolling 
the pons.
Nystagmus
 Positional ventrolateral strabismus 
Lesions of the flocculonodular lobes of the cerebellum pro-
duce signs similar to those of vestibular disease, including loss
 of equilibrium, nystagmus, and tendency to fall (see Chapter 8).
Nystagmus
 Diffuse cerebellar lesions may cause the menace response
Nystagmus
 Horizontal or rotatory
Any direction
to be absent with vision remaining normal.
 Not altered with position of head 
 Altered direction with position of head
Cerebrum
 No postural reaction deficits
 Postural reaction deficits
Cerebral lesions [including the cerebral hemispheres and basal
nuclei) usually cause alterations in behavior or mental status,
CN V, VI, IX, X
seizures, loss of vision with intact pupillary light reflex, con-
± CN vll or Horner's sign
tralateral decrease in facial sensation, and mild contralateral
hemiparesis and defcits in postural reactions.9 Only one or
 Peripheral vestibular disease
Central vestibular disease
two of these signs may be present because the cerebrum is a
Figure 2-3 Algorithm for differentiating central and peripheral
relatively large structure with well-localized functional areas.
vestibular diseases.
Signs are generally contralateral to the lesion.
Ataxia
Gait normal or
Gait abnormal
slightly abnormal
 Postural reaction deficits
Postural reaction deficits
Head involvement
No head invovement 
Cerebral cortex or
diencephalon
UMN signs
No UMN signs
 See Chapters 12 and 13
Brainstem
Symmetric ataxia
Asymmetric ataxia
Ataxia of
Ataxia of pelvic
Central vestibular
Head tremor
No direction change
Headtilt
pelvic limbs and
and thoracic limbs
SeeChapter8
Dysmetria
trunk,thoracic
 and trunk
Truncal ataxia
in nystagmus
limbs normal
Tremor
(facial paresis
Nystagmus
Horner's syndrome)
(possible decrease
menace) response
Pelvic limb paresis
Tetraparesis
See Chapter 6
See Chapter 7
 Cerebellum
 Peripheral vestibular
See Chapter 8
See Chapter 8
Figure 2-4 Algorithm for the diagnosis of ataxia based on gait, head involvement, and motor function of the limbs.
CHAPTER 2
Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
45
Behavioral changes usually reflect a lesion of the limbic
Animals with lesions in this area can stand, walk, and run with
system or the frontal or temporal lobes of the cortex. Frontal-
minimal deficits. The animal's ability for fine discrimination is
lobe lesions often cause a disinhibition that results in exces-
lost, however, and it is unable to avoid obstacles smoothly or to
sive pacing. Compulsive pacing may continue until the animal
perform fine maneuvers, such as walking on the steps of a lad-
walks into a corner and stands with its head pressed against
der. Markedly abnormal postural reactions are found.
the obstruction. If the lesion is unilateral or asymmetric, the
Localization to one of the five regions of the brain is usually
animal may circle. Circling in an animal with a cerebral lesion
adequate for a clinical diagnosis. Cranial nerve signs provide
is usually to the same side as the lesion. The animal's move-
positive evidence for precise localization within the brain-
ment tends to be in large circles. The gait is reasonably nor-
stem. Clinical signs referable to several parts of the nervous
mal, although obstacles may not be perceived. Circling is not
 system indicate diffuse or multifocal disease, such as infection,
a localizing sign because it can be caused by lesions in the
metabolic disorder, or malignant neoplasia (see Chapter 15).
forebrain, brainstem, and vestibular system.
Dullness, stupor, and coma represent decreasing levels of con-
sciousness caused by a separation of the cerebral cortex from the
CASE STUDIES
ascending reticular activating system of the brainstem. Menta-
tion abnormalities are usually more severe with brainstemlesions 
The following case studies use the information presented in
and diffuse cerebrocortical disease [see Chapter 12]. Conscious
chapters l and 2. The reader is encouraged to review the case,
visual perception requires intact visual pathways to the occipi-
localize the lesion[s), and develop a diagnostic plan. Case sum-
tal lobes of the cerebral cortex. Occipital cortical lesions cause
 maries are listed at the end of the case studies section.
blindness with intact pupillary reflexes [see Chapter 11).
Key: 0, Absent; +1, decreased; +2, normal; +3, exaggerated;
The sensorimotor cortex is important for voluntary motor
+4, very exaggerated or clonus: PL, pelvic limb; TL, thoracic
activity but is not necessary for relatively normal gait and posture.
limb; NE, not evaluated.
CASE STUDY 2-1
TURBO
) veterinaryneurologycases.com
 Signalment
Left
Reactions
Right
German shepherd dog, male, 8 years old
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
. History
 CC: seizures and paraparesis
Spinal reflexes
Cluster seizures for l year. Treated with phenobarbital
Left
Reflex, Spinal Segment 
Right
and potassium bromide. One month ago had a seizure and
Quadriceps
developed paraparesis immediately on recovery. Paraparesis
+3
L4-6
+2-+3
 was progressive and somewhat responsive to corticosteroid
Extensor carpi radialis
therapy.
+2
C7-T1
+2
Triceps
: Physical Examination
+2
C7-T1
+2
 Normal except for neurologic signs
Flexion-PL
+2
L5-S1
+2
· Neurologic Examination
Flexion-T'L
Mental status: alert and responsive
+2
C6-T1
+2
 Posture: normal
Absent
Crossed extensor
Absent
Gait: marked paraparesis with ataxia; occasionally crosses
Perineal
front feet
+2
S1-2
+2
Palpation: negative; no perispinal pain noted
Cranial nerves: normal
Postural reactions
Sensory evaluation
Left
Reactions 
4 6!
1. Hyperesthesia: none
 Proprio (positioning) ceptive
 2. Superficial pain perception: normal
+1
PL
+1
 3. Deep pain perception: NE
+2
TL
+2
+2
Wheelbarrowing
+2
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
Hopping
 summary.
+1
PL
+2
+2
TL
+2-+2
Assessment (lesion localization and estimation
Extensor postural
of prognosis!
NE
thrust
NE
Diagnostic plan
NE
Hemistand-hemiwalk
NE
+1-+2
Tonic neck
+1-+2
 Rule-outs
 Placing, tactile
1
NE
PL
NE
2.
NE
TL
NE
3.
 Placing, visual
4.
46
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-2
BIRK
veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
NE
TL
NE
Weimaraner, male castrated, 6 years old
 Placing, visual
NE
PL
NE
- History
NE
TL
NE
CC: Lameness-left pelvic limb; circles to right, leans to
right, and has right head tilt
Spinal refexes
 Referring veterinarian had diagnosed severe degenerative
Left
Reflex, Spinal Segment
Right
joint disease of the left coxofemoral joint. The dog seemed
Quadriceps
to respond to corticosteroids and nonsteroidal antinflam-
+2
L4-6
+ 2-+3
matory drugs. The head tilt and circling have been present
Extensor carpi radialis
for several weeks and are slowly getting worse. Dog has
+2
C7-T1
+2
been referred for total hip replacement surgery.
Triceps
+2
C7-T1
+2
. Physical Examination
Flexion-PL
 Pain and crepitus in right coxofemoral joint
+2
L5-S1
+2
Flexion-TL
. Neurologic Examination
+2
C6-T1
+2
Mental status: Alert and responsive
Absent
Crossed extensor Perineal
Absent
Posture: Right head tilt
+2
S1-2
+2
Gait: Circles and falls to the right; no obvious paresis
at gait
Cranial nerves: normal
 Palpation: Pain and crepitus in right coxofemoral joint
Sensory evaluation
1. Hyperesthesia: none
Postural reactions
 2. Superficial pain perception: normal
Left
Reactions
Right
 3. Deep pain perception: NE
 Proprioceptive
 positioning
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
+2
PL
+2
summary.
+2
TL
+2
+2
Wheelbarrowing
+2
Assessment (lesion focalization and estimation
Hopping
of prognosis!
+2
PL
+1
Diagnostic plan
+2
T'L
+1-+2
 Extensor postural
- Rule-outs
NE
thrust
NE
1.
+2
Hemistand-hemi walk
+1-+2
2.
+2
Tonic neck
+2
3.
 Placing, tactile
4.
NE
PL
NE
CASE STUDY 2-3
DOSSIE BOY
veterinaryneurologycases.com
 Signalment
. Physical Examination
Mixed breed canine, male, 5-6 years old,
 See neurologic examination (performed about 3 days post
onset of signs)
History
CC: comatose condition
· Neurologic Examination*
 Ohtained as stray l year ago Rabies vaccination unknown.
Mental status: Comatose and cannot be aroused
One month ago, coughing and microflaria were found on
 Posture: At times demonstrates opisthotonos and extension
blood smear. Referring veterinarian gave O.5 mL levamisole
of the thoracic limbs
SC. That evening, dog was acutely recumbent and may have
Gait: Severe tetraplegia, limbs are hypotonic
had a seizure. Since then, dog has been in comatose state.
Palpation: Negative
Dog has been given atropine, antibiotics, and fluids prior to
 admission.
Continued
CHAPTER 2
 Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
47
CASE STUDY 2-3
DOSSIE BOY-
cont'd
Postural reactions
+2
L5-S1
+2
Left
Reactions
Right
Flexion-TL
Proprioceptive
+2
C6-T1
+2
positioning
Present
Perineal crossed
Present
0
PL
0
extensor
0
T'L
0
+2
S1-2
+2
0
Wheelbarrowing
0
Hopping
PL
Craniaf nerves
0
0
1. No menace response in either eye
0
TL
0
 2. Horizontal jerk nystagmus
that changes direction
 Extensor postural
depending on which side dog is lying lying on right side,
0
thrust
0
jerk phase is to the right; lying on left side, jerk phase is
0
Hemistand-hemiwalk
0
to the left)
NE
Tonic neck
NE
 3. Normal [+2) palpebral reflexes [CN V and VIl)
 Placing, tactile
 4. Decreased facial sensation (CN V)
NE
PL
NE
 5. Bilateral miosis with pupillary constriction to strong light
NE
T'L
NE
 Placing, visual
Sensory evaluation
NE
PL
NE
1. Hyperesthesia: none
NE
TL
NE
 2. Superficial pain perception: Diffcult to assess; marked
decrease response to noxious stimuli
Spinal reflexes
 3. Deep pain perception present but hard to elicit cerebral
Left
 Reflex, Spinal Segment 
Right
Quadriceps
response
+2-+3
L4-6
+2-+3
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
Extensor carpi radialis
summary.
NE
C7-T1
NE
Triceps
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
NE
C7-T1
NE
ofprognosis!
Flexion-PL
Diagnostic plan
*Dog is comatose and cannot be roused. Severe tetraplegia. Limbs
■ Rule-outs
are hypotonic. Sometimes demonstrates decerebrate posture.
Patellar reflexes are +2-+3. Bilateral miosis with response to light,
2.
 O menace, horizontal nystagmus that changes direction. Response
3.
to noxious stirmuli is reduced.
4.
CASE STUDY 2-4
BRANDY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
Postural reactions: not provided
Malamute-shepherd cross, female spayed approximately
Spinal reflexes: not provided
7-8 years old
Cranial nerves: NE
Sensory evaluation: NE
- History
Since a puppy, dog has been clumsy The signs are not pro-
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
gressive. Dog has been treated by several veterinarians for
summary.
coxofemoral degenerative joint disease. Owner wants to
know what is causing the gait problem in her dog. Local vet-
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
 erinarian sends owner-provided video tape for consultation.
of prognosis)
Diagnostic plan
. Physical Examination
 See neurologic examination
. Rule-outs
. Neurologic Examination
2.
1. Mental status: normal
3.
 2. Posture: base wide; no head tilt or circling
4.
3. Gait: generalized ataxia, truncal ataxia, intention trem-
ors, hypermetria, no paresis 
4. Palpation: NE
48
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-5
RUDY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
NE
PL
NE
Canine, Labrador retriever, male castrated, Z years old
NE
TL
NE
 History
Spinal reflexes
Acute onset of clinical signs. Became base wide in pelvic limbs
Left
Reflex, Spinal Segment
Right
and falling when walking. Taken to RDVM that morning and
Quadriceps
four injections of dexamethasone SP were administered. Spi-
+2
L4-6
0
nal, radiographs were taken but no lesions found. There has
 Extensor carpi radialis
 been no change in neurologic status over the past 3 days. Dog
+2
C7-T1
+2
is not painful and the bladder is easily expressed. Dog has dif
Triceps
ficulty moving his tail.
+2
C7-T1
+2
Flexion-PL
· Physical Examination
+2
L5-S1
0
Pou SUis ss on
Flexion-TL
+2
C6-T1
+2
. Neurologic Examination
Crossed extensor
 Mental status: alert and responsive
0
 Perineal
0
Posture: normal; see gait
+1
S1-2
0
Gait: paraparesis with signs more severe in the right pelvic
limb. Dog dribbles urine and does not move his tail.
Cranial nerves: normal
4. Palpation: normal
Sensory evaluation
 1. Hyperesthesia: none
Postural reactions
 2. Superficial pain perception: normal from all areas except
Left
Reactions
Right
for localized area of hypalgesia in caudal lumbar area on
 Proprioceptive positioning
the right side
+2
PL
0
 3. Deep pain perception: normal
+2
T'L
+2
Wheelbarrowing
 Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
Hopping
summary.
+1
PL
0
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
+2
TL
+2
ofprognosis!
Extensor postural
Diagnostic plan
NE
thrust
NE
 Hemistand-hemiwalk
. Rule-outs
NE
Tonic neck
NE
 Placing, tactile
2.
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
3.
Placing, visual
4.
CASE STUDY 2-6
DUSTY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
: Physical Examination
Whippet, female, 8 years old.
No systemic signs noted
- History
· Neurologic Examination
3 months ago, acute onset of paraplegia. Dog was running
Mental status: normal
and went around a farm building. Dog cried out and when
Posture: normal
owner found Dusty, she was paralyzed in her pelvic limbs
Gait: paraplegia
and in considerable pain. She was seen by local veterinarian
 Palpation: generalized atrophy of lumbar and pelvic limb
who provided symptomatic therapy. Signs are not progres-
muscles
sive and dog is not in pain. Dusty can urinate and defecate
 but has no cerebral control over either. Owner is seeking 
 second opinion and prognosis.
CHAPTER 2
Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
49
CASE STUDY 2-6
DUSTY-
cont'd
Postural reactions
Left
 Reflex, Spinal Segment 
146!8
Left 
Reactions
Right
Quadriceps
Proprioceptive
+2
L5-S1
+2
positioning
Flexion-TL
0
PL
0
+2
C6-T1
+2
+2
T'L
+2
Brisk
Crossed
Brisk
Wheelbarrowing
extensor (PL)
Hopping
NE
Perineal
0
PL
0
+2
S1-2
+2
+2
TL
+2
0
Extensor postural thrust
0
Cranial nerves: normal
NE
Hemistand-hemiwalk
NE
Sensory evaluation
NE
Tonic neck
NE
 Placing, tactile
1. Hyperesthesia: none
 2. Superficial pain perception: poor caudal to T 3; the cutani-
NE
PL
NE
 ous trunci refex is absent behind caudal to Ti3 vertebrae
NE
TL
NE
 3. Deep pain perception: good
 Placing, visual
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
summary.
Spinal reflexes
Left
 Reflex, Spinal Segment 
Right
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
Quadriceps
of prognosis)
+4
L4-6
+4 
Diagnostic plan
 Extensor carpi
radialis
Rule-outs
+2
C7-T1
+2
1
Triceps
2.
+2
C7-T1
+2
3.
 Flexion-PL
4.
CASE STUDY 2-7
ANGEL
veterinaryneurologycases.com
业
· Signalment
+2
Wheelbarrowing
+2
 Feline, DSH, FS, 1 year old 
Hopping
+2
PL
+2
- History
+2
T'L
+2
Cat was left in garage for 3 days while owners were out of
+2
Extensor postural thrust
+2
town. When owners returned home, they noted ataxia, left
NE
Hemistand-hemiwalk
NE
head tilt, and salivation. Another cat at home is fine.
NE
Tonic neck
NE
 Placing, tactile
· Physical Examination
NE
PL
NE
T 103° F, dehydrated 8% and tense abdomen on palpation
NE
TL
NE
 Placing, visual
· Neurologic Examination
NE
PL
NE
Observation
NE
TL
NE
 Mental status: alert; constantly vocalizes
 Posture: Left head tilt and circles to the left; crouched pos-
Spinal reflexes: not examined
 ture and very reluctant to walk. Tends to swing head in wide
Craniaf nerves
excursions from side to side. Occasionally circles to the right.
1. Menace: decreased in right eye; normal in left eye
Gait: asymmetric ataxia; no paresis detected
 2. Left pupil is constricted; slight protrusion of left mem-
Palpation: normal
 brana nictitans
3.1
 Normal pupillary light reflexes
Postural reactions
 4. Normal palpebral reflexes
Left
 Reactions
Right
 5. No spontaneous nystagmus
 Proprioceptive positioning
6. Normal facial sensation
+2
PL
+2
+2
T'L
+2
Continued
50
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-7
ANGEL
cont'd
Sensory evaluation
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
 1. Hyperesthesia: none
of prognosis)
2. Superficial pain perception: normal
Diagnostic plan
 3. Deep pain perception: normal
-Rule-outs
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
1.
summary.
2.
3.
4.
CASE STUDY 2-8
CHLOE
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Gait: Dog is tetraplegic. She can wag her tail voluntarily
Golden retriever, female, 20 months old
and she can lift her head. Voluntary motor movements in
the limbs are weak.
 History
Palpation: Muscle tone is reduced in all limbs.
 Dog presented with severe tetraparesis. Clinical signs devel-
 oped at 10:00 AM on July 10. Dog became weak in all four
Postural reactions
legs and over a period of a few hours, she lost the ability to
Left
Reactions
Right
stand and walk. She has been in excellent health and Chloe is
Proprioceptive
primarily an indoor dog that lives in a rural area and spends
positioning
time outdoors unsupervised. She was eating fne untl 2 days
0
ago. Dog gags, coughs, and retches when eating and drinking.
PL
0
TL
0
Several small "seed' ticks have been noted on the dog. She was
Wheelbarrowing
 in estrus 6 months ago. No treatment has been given. Dog was
Hopping
observed eating a dead rabbit about 2 days before onset of
0
PL
0
clinical signs. Another dog with her has developed similar but
0
TL
0
less severe clinical signs.
0
Extensor postural thrust
0
NE
Hemistand-hemiwalk
NE
· Physical Examination Findings
NE
Tonic neck
NE
Placing, tactile
Vital signs:
T: 101.5° F Pulse: 116 RR: 32 Wt: 28.4 kg.
NE
PL
NE
General
Dog is recumbent and unable to stand.
NE
T'L
NE
appearance
She is very depressed.
Placing, visual
Integument
 Several small ticks are present. No
NE
PL
NE
 engorged ticks are found.
NE
TL
NE
Musculoskeletal
 Mild muscle atrophy present in limbs.
No hyperesthesia is noted.
Spinal reflexes
Circulatory
No abnormalities noted.
Left
Reflex, Spinal Segment 
Right
Respiratory
Rapid shallow respiration noted.
Quadriceps
Digestive
 Ahdomen is distended, nonpainful, and
0-+1/2
L4-6
0
 firm feces are present on rectal palpation.
 Extensor carpi radialis
Genitourinary
Bladder is distended with urine and
0
C7-T1
easily expressed
Triceps
Eyes
Left pupil is normal to dilated. Right
0
C7-T1
0
 pupi is small and third eyelid is
Flexion-PL
prolapsed.
+1/2
L5-S1
+1/2
Ears
Normal
 See neurologic examination
Flexion-TL
Nervous
+1/2
C6-T1
+1/2
Lymph nodes
Normal
None
Crossed extensor
None
Mucous
Normal
Perineal
membranes
+2
S1-2
+2
: Neurologic Examination
Craniaf nerves
Mental status: The dog is alert and responsive to her name.
1. Menace: slightly delayed in left eye and normal in right
She has very shallow respirations.
eye.
Posture: No head tilt is noted. Dog is recumbent.
 2. Pupils: Left pupil is dilated compared to right.
Continued
CHAPTER 2
Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
51
CASE STUDY 2-8
CHLOE
cont'd
3. Pupillary light reflexes: decreased in left eye but normal
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
in right eye.
summary.
4. Palpebral: normal
 5. Facial sensation: normal
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
6. Gag reflex: decreased
of prognosis)
7. Voice: decreased
Diagnostic plan
Sensation: Jocation
 Rule-outs
1. Hyperesthesia: none
1.
 2. Superficial pain perception: +2
2.
3. Deep pain perception: +2
3.
4.
CASE STUDY 2-9
DUFFY
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Reflex, Spinal Segment 
 DSH cat, spayed female, 7 years old
Left
Quadriceps
Right
NE
C7-T1
NE
-History
Triceps
Owner found cat dragging its right pelvic limbs. Cat is inside
NE
C7-T1
NE
and owner denies any possibility of trauma. Signs are not
Flexion-PL
 progressive and cat is normal in all respects.
+2
L5-S1
0
Flexion-TL
· Physical Examination
+2
C6-T1
+2
 Nothing abnormal except monoparesis
Absent
Crossed extensor
Absent
Perineal
. Neurologic Examination
+2
S1-2
+2
Mental status: alert and responsive
Posture: normal
Cranial nerves: normal
Gait: paralysis of right pelvic limb
Sensory evaluation
 Palpation: painful in right caudal thigh
1. Hyperesthesia: very painful in caudal thigh region 
 2. Superfcial and deep pain perception: cat does not per-
Postural reactions
ceive noxious stimuli from the right pelvic paw [tibial
Left
Reactions
Right
 and peroneal nerves). Deep pain is perceived in the dis-
Proprioceptive
 tribution of the superfcial saphenous nerve. Normal per-
positioning
 ception of noxious stimuli from the tail and others of the
+2
PL
0
body.
+2
T'L
+2
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
Wheelbarrowing
Hopping
summary.
+2
PL
0
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
+2
T'L
+2
(sjsouboud jo
+2
Extensor postural thrust
0
Diagnostic plan
NE
Hemistand-hemiwalk
NE
NE
 Tonic neck
NE
- Rule-outs
 Placing, tactile
NE
PL
NE
2.
NE
TL
NE
3.
 Placing, visual
4.
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
Spinal reflexes
 Reflex, Spinal Segment 
Left
Quadriceps
Right
+2
L4-6
+2
Extensor carpi
radialis
52
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-10
BRITTANY
· Signalment
Spinal reflexes
 Brittany spaniel dog, female spayed, 2 years old
Left
 Reflex, Spinal Segment
Right Quadriceps
+2
L4-6
+2-+3
- History
Extensor carpi
Presented a few hours after being injured by an automo-
radialis
bile. At the time of admission, the dog was non ambula-
+2
C7-T1
+2
tory in the pelvic limbs. Depression, bilateral epistaxis, and
Triceps
conjunctival hemorrhage in the right eye were noted. One
+2
C7-T1
+2
hour after admission, the dog was noted to fall on the right
Flexion-PL
thoracic and pelvic limbs and tended to circle to the left.
+2
L5-S1
+2
Thoracic and abdominal radiographs were negative.
Flexion-TL
+2
C6-T1
+2
: Physical Examination: see neurologic
Absent
Crossed extensor
Absent
examination
 Perineal
+2
S1-2
+2
. Neurologic Examination
Examination performed the following morning and after
Cranial nerves
dog was stable and improving.
1. Decreased menace response in right eye but normal pal-
Mental status: Dog is alert and responsive. She explores her
 pebral reflex is present
environment
 2. Decreased perception of noxious stimuli to right side of
Posture: No head tilt is present.
face
Gait: Dog tends to aimlessly walk in wide circles to the left
 3. PLRs are normal and pupils are normal size and equal
and sometimes to the right. No paresis or knuckling of the
paws are noted.
Sensory evaluation
Palpation: normal
1. Hyperesthesia none
2.
 Superficial pain perception: decreased right side of face
Postural reactions
 3. Deep pain perception: normal
Left
Reactions
Right 
Proprioceptive
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
positioning
summary.
+2
PL
+1
+2
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
TL
+1
Wheelbarrowing
of prognosis)
+2
+1
Diagnostic plan
Hopping
+2
PL
+1
. Rule-outs
+2
TL
+1
+2
Extensor postural thrust
+1
1.
+2
Hemistand-hemiwalk
+1
2.
NE
Tonic neck
NE
3.
 Placing, tactile
4.
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
 Placing, visual
NE
PL
NE
NE
TL
NE
CASE STUDY 2-11
LINUS
)veterinaryneurologycases.com
 Signalment
- Physical Examination: see neurologic
Golden retriever, male, 9 years old
examination
- History
· Neurologic Examination
Owner reports progressive diffculty eating and drinking
Mental status: subdued
for several weeks. Dog has trouble closing its mouth and
Posture: normal
is becoming more depressed and lethargic. There is recent
Gait: normal
weight loss and partial anorexia. Owner reports no gait
 Palpation: atrophy of left temporalis muscle
abnormalities.
CHAPTER 2
 Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
53
CASE STUDY 2-11
LINUS-cont'd
Postural reactions: normal
Complete the sections below before reviewing the case
 summary.
Spinal refexes: normal
Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
Cranial nerves
of prognosis)
1. Olfaction is decreased on right side compared to the left
Diagnostic plan
side
2. Diffculty closing mouth; atrophy of left temporalis
 Rule-outs
muscle
1.
 3. Palpebral reflex: absent right eye; normal left eye
2.
 4. Menace response normal left eye; right eye: no blink but
3.
 dog moves head to avoid hand
4.
 5. Facial sensation: decreased on the right side and man-
dible but present on left side
Sensation: location
 1. Hyperesthesia: none
2. Superficial pain perception: decreased right facial area
 3. Deep pain perception: NE
CASE SUMMARIES
CASE STUDY 2-1
ASSESSMENT
· Lesion Localization (anatomic diagnosis
. Rule-outs
and estimation of prognosis)
Seizures [see Chapter 13): Given the dog's age, acquired
1. The neurologic examination is consistent with a bilateral
[secondary] epilepsy is most likely. While there are several
lesion T3-L3. One cannot exclude a caudal cervicallesion.
causes in this category, neoplasia would be a prime rule-out.
2. The seizures are most likely due to a forebrain lesion.
1. Extracranial (metabolic) causes-Complete small ani-
mal profle (see Chapter 4)
· Diagnostic plan
 2. Intracranial causesAdvanced imaging (MR, CT)
 The history supports a progressive myelopathy. Given the
should be performed (see Chapter 4)
history, categories of disease to consider are degenerative,
neoplastic, inflammatory/infectious.
I Case Summary
Myelogram and CT—large disk protrusion at C6-7. Com-
Rule-outs
 pression persists with cervical distraction. Mild compression
Spinal cord disease [see Chapters 6 and 7]
at C5-6 but disappears with distraction. CT of brain reveals
 1. Henson type 2 intervertebral disk disease—Cervical
large mass in left frontal lobe displacing frontal bone of
and TL radiographs, myelography, and CT
 sinus. Owner elected cervical decompressive surgery [ven-
 2. Neoplasia--See type 2 disk disease
tral slot) for the Henson type Z invertebral disk disease and
 3. Degenerative
myelopathy—rule out compressive 
continued to manage the seizures medically. The paraparesis 
myelopathy
 improved but the seizures became increasingly diffcult to
 4. Inflammation—CSF
control.
54
PARTI
Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-2
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (lesion localization and estimation
. Case Summary
of prognosis)
● CSF—Normal
Dog is presented with clinical signs of a vestibular syn-
 CT—-Enhancing mass in right cranial dorsal brainstem
 drome (circling, falling, head tilt). The decreased hopping
and right ventral cerebellum. A meningioma was sus-
reactions on the right side are consistent with "central ves-
pected.
tibular disease." The lesion most likely is located in the right
Pelvic radiographs—severe degenerative joint disease
rostral medulla. The sign-time graph is slowly progressive.
(DJD) ofleft coxofemoral joint
Neoplastic, degenerative, and inflammation are the primary
Treatment—The owner declined surgery for the mass.
 categories to consider. The musculoskeletal problem is most
No follow up was recorded.
likely unrelated to the neurologic signs.
 Final diagnosis—DJS left coxofemerol joint [CFJ); mass
 right cranial dorsal brainstem
: Diagnostic plan
Rule-outs
 1. Neoplasia: MR or CT of the brain is recommended.
 2. Inflammation: CSF; MRI of brain
3. Neurodegenerative disease: brain biopsy, MRI of brain
CASE STUDY 2-3
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
 3. GME—CSF MRI brain
of prognosis)
 4. Brainstem infarction—MRI of brain
Bilateral, severe brainstem and forebrain disease [medulla,
pons, and maybe midbrain). The sign-time graph in this case
. Case Summary
is acute and progressive over a few hours. Inflammation,
CSF and brain scan would be beneficial. Given dog's condi-
toxicity, and vascular infarction are the major categories to
tion, possibility of rabies and poor anesthetic risk, dog was
consider [see Chapters 12, 13, and 15].
 managed symptomatically with fluids. Dog made a wonder-
ful recovery.A vascular lesion affecting the rostral brainstem
: Diagnostic plan
was suspected. Dog did not receive a toxic dose of levami-
sole. Suspect levamisole killed microflaria that caused a
Rule-outs
brainstem vascular occlusion. Rabies was discounted when
1. Rabies [dumb form]—observation and strict rabies pre-
dog began to improve. The dog was treated as a rabies sus-
cautions
 pect for several days. He began to walk in 10 days, remained
 2. Levamisole toxicity—symptomatic therapy
cortically blind and continued to demonstrate forebrain
signs. He was nearly normal in 60 days.
CASE STUDY 2-4
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
. Case Summary
of prognosis)
No diagnostic procedures were performed. Given the his-
 The clinical signs are very suggestive of generalized cerebel-
tory and clinical signs, cerebellar hypoplasia is a reasonable
lar disease. The sign-time graph is nonprogressive. One can
rd  pe ean ou s ara s re
assume the signs were present at birth.
sis is good for this dog. Cerebellar diseases are discussed in
Chapter 8.
: Diagnostic plan
Rufe-outs
1. Cerebellar hypoplasia, MRI of brain 
2. Cerebellar trauma at birth
3. Cerebellar abiotrophy [unlikely since signs are not pro-
gressive)
CHAPTER 2
Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
55
CASE STUDY 2-5
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
 3. Trauma: vertebral fracture or subluxation; lumbosacral
of prognosis)
facture, subluxation spinal radiographs, CT, MRI
The lesion is located L4-S2 and is more severe on the right
side [tends to lateralize]. There are LMN signs in right pel-
· Case Summary
yic limb with normal perception of noxious stimuli the
 CaseSpinal radiographs, myelography, and CT of lumbosa-
limb. This suggests that the lesion is within the ventral gray
cral spine are normal. CSF examination is normal. By exclu-
matter of the spinal cord. The sign-time graph is acute and
sion, spinal cord infarction was the clinical diagnosis. The
 nonprogressive. Traumatic, and vascular categories of disease
dog was given physical therapy and bladder care [assisted
should be considered.
urination with gentle manual expression). Within 10 days,
dog was more than 50% improved. In 90 days, dog was 90%
· Diagnostic plan
improved and urinary incontinence resolved. Spinal cord
 infarction (fibrocartilagenous emboli) is discussed in Chap-
Rule-outs
ters 6 and 7.
 1. Spinal cord infarction: MRI of lumbar spinal cord; rule
 out other etiologies
 2. Intervertebral disk disease: spinal radiographs, myelo-
 gram, CT, MRI
CASE STUDY 2-6
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
 2. Intervertebral disk disease (type 1]: spinal radiographs,
of prognosis)
myelography, CT
The dog has paraplegia with increased reflexes in pelvic
 3. Spinal cord infarction: MRI of spinal cord
limbs and normal thoracic limbs. The lesion is bilateral and
located in spinal cord segments T3-L3. Sensory examination
. Case Summary
furtherlocalizes the lesion to the caudal thoracic spinal cord
After 3 months,
, the dog is stable and may be slightly
segments. The sign-time graph is acute and nonprogressive.
improved. Spinal radiographs are normal. Given the his-
 Disease categories to consider are trauma and vascular. Tho-
tory and clinical signs, it is very unlikely that the dog will
racolumbar spinal cord diseases are presented in Chapter 6.
benefit from more in-depth diagnostic tests. The progno-
 sis for recovery of motor function is poor. The owner was
· Diagnostic plan
 instructed to continue her physical therapy and bladder
care.
Rule-outs
1. Trauma [vertebral fracture/subluxation): spinal radio-
graphs
CASE STUDY 2-7
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
. Case Summary
of prognosis!
Otoscopic examination revealed inflammation of both tym-
The clinical signs are those of a vestibular syndrome [see
 panic membranes. No exudate was apparent in the middle
Chapter 8). The postural reactions are normal, which would
ear. A clinical diagnosis of bacterial otitis media-interna was
support a peripheral vestibular disorder. The signs are bilat-
made. The cat was placed on amoxicillin and rechecked in
eral but much worse on the left side. The left sympathetic
5 days. Cat was clinically improved in 10 days. She had slight
nerve is affected (often found in otitis media-interna)
head tilt to the left but her gait was remarkably improved.
· Diagnostic plan
 The clinical signs are acute and progressive. Categories of
 disease to consider include inflammation, idiopathic, and
toxic.
Rule-outs
1. Bacterial
 otitis media-interna: otoscopic examination,
 skull radiographs, and CT of skull / brain 
 2. Idiopathic feline vestibular disease: exclude other rule-
outs
56
PARTI
Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 2-8
ASSESSMENT
I Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
esophagus with a mixture of air and fluid. Early alveolar
of prognosis!
pulmonary opacity involving the ventral aspects of the
The neurologic examination defines a generalized LMN dis-
right cranial, right middle, and left cranial lung lobes.
order. Given the fndings, one suspects a disease affcting
Radiographic diagnosis: generalized megaesophagus and
motor neurons or motor end plates. The sign-time graph is
 aspiration pneumonia involving the right cranial, right
acute and progressive over several hours. Disease catego-
middle, and left cranial lung lobes.
ries to consider are inflammation and toxicity. Generalized
LMN disorders are discussed in Chapter 7.
. Case Summary
The differential diagnosis included botulism, tick paralysis,
· Diagnostic plan
and polyradiculoneuritis. Organophosphate intoxication
was also considered but excluded early in the case evalu-
Rule-outs
ation.
1. Botulism is the number l rule-out given the combination
Diagnosis: Given the history of multiple dog involve-
of autonomic and LMN involvement
ment, exposure to carrion 4 days before development of
2. Tick paralysis—usually no autonomic involvement. No
clinical signs and the presence of autonomic nervous system
 engorged female ticks found on the dog.
  a  a s  
3. Polyradiculoneuritis-usually no autonomic involvement
several seed ticks were present on the dog, no engorged
female ticks were identified and the dog did not improve
Diagnostic procedures
when ticks were removed. Polyradiculoneuritis does not
1. Assess dog for megaesophagus and aspiration pneumo-
 cause autonomic signs and was deemed less likely.
 nia—thoracic radiographs, CBC
Treatment: Aspiration pneumonia: IV antibiotics (ampi-
2. Assess dog for intestinal ileus and detrusor atony-
cillin, enrofloxacin), terbutaline SC, thoracic coupage and
abdominal radiographs
nasal O2
 3. Assess dog for systemic inflammation-
-CBC
 Regurgitation: metoclopramide SC q8h
4. Rule out any metabolic consequences of vomiting—bio-
 Physical therapy: Passive manipulation of limbs several
 chemical profle, UA
times a day. Sterile indwelling urinary catheter. Manual
 5. Botulism--consider mouse inoculation or immunologic
evacuation of feces and enemas.
testing of feces for botulinum toxin.
 The dog began to impro ve in 6 days. Over several months,
6. EMG
 she gradually recovered normal motor function.
The CBC, biochemical profle, and urinalysis were nor-
 mal. Thoracic radiographs: dlation of entire intrathoracic
CASE STUDY 2-9
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
· Case Summary
of prognosis]
 Radiographs of the pelvis and right pelvic limh were nor-
The lesion is localized to the right lower sciatic nerve involv-
 mal. Evaluation of the heart and lungs were normal. Owner
ing the tibial and peroneal nerves. The sign-time graph is
agreed to surgical exploration of the sciatic nerve in the cau-
acute and nonprogressive. Categories of disease to consider
dal thigh region. A small, dark mass was found around the
 are trauma and vascular. Peripheral nerve disorders are dis-
 sciatic nerve just above the bifurcation into the peroneal
cussed in Chapter 5.
and tibial nerves. The mass was an organized hematoma.
 Following surgery, the cat improved about 50% over the
: Diagnostic plan
next 6 months.
Rule-outs
1. Sciatic nerve trauma: pelvis and right pelvic limb radio-
graphs
 2. Ischemic myoneural necrosis [vascular occlusion]: check
for other evidence of thrombosis [cardiac radiographs,
echocardiography, thoracic radiographs)
CHAPTER 2
 Localization of Lesions in the Nervous System
57
CASE STUDY 2-10
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
The dog should be observed for seizures in the future. Head
of prognosis)
 trauma is discussed in Chapter 12.
The dog has a right forebrain lesion (compare the gait and
with the postural reactions). We know that trauma is the
. Diagnostic plan
etiology in this case. The dog most likely has a contusion
At this point, the dog is recovering following treatment for
affecting the right cerebral cortex. The prognosis is good.
head trauma. No further diagnostics are indicated.
CASE STUDY 2-11
ASSESSMENT
· Assessment (anatomic diagnosis and estimation
· Case Summary
of prognosis)
Owner elected euthanasia. Necropsy revealed a large 
Cranial nerves I (right), V (right and left), and VIl (right)
 expanding meningioma extending from the olfactory tracts
are affected. The sign-time graph is chronic and progressive.
on the right side to the medulla on both sides. Cranial nerves
Categories of disease to consider include neoplasia, degen-
were involved after their exit from the brainstem. This
eration, and inflammation/infection. Prognosis is guarded.
[en adnnu anq ansod pue aes rou au suedx
 nerve involvement. Cranial nerve disorders are discussed in
· Diagnostic plan
Chapters 9 and 11.
Rule-outs
1. Meningioma [and other tumors] affecting base ofbrain-
MRI of brain
 2. Fungal infection-MRI of brain, CSF, serology
3. Abscess-MRI of brain, CSF
4. Neurodegenerative disease—MRI of brain 
REFERENCES
6. Holliday T: Clinical signs of acute and chronic experimen-
tal lesions of the cerebellum, Vet Res Commun 3:259-278,
1. De Lahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical neu-
1980.
rology, ed 3, St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
 7. Holiday TA: Clinical signs caused by experimental lesions
2.1
Willis W, Chung J: Central mechanisms of pain, J Am Vet
in the vestibular system. In Proceedings ofthe Eighth Annual
Med Assoc 191:1200-1202, 1987.
Veterinary Medical Forum, Washington, DC, 1990,American
3. Breazile JE, Kitchell RL:A study of fiber systems within the
 College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
spinal cord of the domestic pig that subserve pain, J Comp 
 8. Kornegay JIN: Ataxia of the head and limbs: cerebellar dis-
Neurol 133:373-382, 1968
eases in dogs and cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1:255-274, 1990.
4. Kennard MA: The course of ascending fbers in the spinal
9.
 Oliver JE: Localization of lesions in the nervous system. In
cord ofthe cat essential to the recognition of painful stimuli, J
Hoerlein BF, editor: Canine neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia,
Comp Neurol 100:511-524, 1954.
1978, WB Saunders.
 5. Tarlov IM: Spinal cord compression: mechanism of paraly-
sis and treatment, Springfield, Ill, 1957, Charles C Thomas.
CHAPTER
Disorders of Micturition
bnormal visceral function may reflect a pathologic
Urinary Bladder
change in the nervous system; however, the importance
The urinary bladder is divided into a neck [trigone} and body.
of nervous control of the viscera is often overlooked.
and serves as a low pressure reservoir. The urinary bladder, also
The classic view of the autonomic nervous system as one
 called the detrusor muscle, consists of three interwoven lay-
with discrete boundaries is giving way to a concept of a more
ers of smooth muscle. Adrenergic and muscarinic cholinergic
 integrated system with no limits. For example, conventional
receptors lie within the detrusor smooth muscle (Figure 3-1)
theory held that the autonomic system controlled functions
 The emptying phase of micturition is mediated by choliner-
that the individual could not modify voluntarily; however, the
gic fibers of the pelvic nerve. The pelvic nerve innervates all
fact that one can regulate blood pressure, heart rate, micturi-
regions of the bladder and conveys both sensory and motor
tion, and many other autonomic activities has been proven.
information.
In conventional theory, the sympathetic (adrenergic) system
Sympathetie fibers found in the pelvic plexus, the pelvic
functions as an antagonist to the parasympathetic (cholinergic)
ganglia, and the urinary bladder serve to enhance the storage
system. This simplistic view, which separates the autonomic
phase of micturition. The preganglionic sympathetic neurons
system from the somatic system, does not explain well-defined
to the bladder are located in the lumbar spinal cord (L2-5 in
 somatovisceral and viscerosomatic reflexes.
the cat, L1-4 in the dog).24-6 The preganglionic fbers course
Problems associated with micturition are common in neu-
as the lumbar splanchnic nerves to synapse with nicotinic cho-
rologic disorders. Other forms of visceral dysfunction tradi-
linergic receptors in the caudal mesenteric ganglion and the
tionally have been the concern of cardiologists and internists,
postganglionic fibers continue as the hypogastric nerve to the
 and these are discussed in books on cardliology and internal
bladder, urethra, and the pelvic plexus (see Figure 3-1). Both
medicine. This chapter reviews the anatomy, physiology, and
α-2
and β-adrenergic (sympathetic postganglionic) synapses
 clinical syndromes of micturition.
have been found on neurons in the pelvic ganglia, in the blad-
der wall, and on the detrusor muscle, especially in the area
of the trigone.78 Stimulation of the β-adrenergic receptors
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
causes detrusor muscle relaxation and allows bladder flling
OF MICTURITION
at constant pressure. Sensory receptors lie within muscle fas-
cicles and connective tissue of the smooth muscle layers. They
The normal function of the lower urinary tract includes both
mediate sensory information conveyed by distention [stretch)
storage and expulsion of urine. Micturition is the reaction that
and pain of the detrusor muscle. The filling threshold triggers
ultimately occurs if a bladder is gradually distended, leading to
the micturition reflex.
the coordinated expulsion of its contents.I Two major reflexes
 Pharmacologic studies have demonstrated that α-adrenergic
are involved in the normal function of the lower urinary tract,
receptors are located primarily in the trigone area, bladder
the detrusor and micturition reflexes. The detrusor reflex is spe-
 neck, and proximal urethra, causing contraction of the smooth
cifically involved with the evacuation of urine in response to
stretch of the bladder whereas the micturition reflex involves
detrusor muscle and cause relaxation of smooth muscle. The
both the storage and evacuation of urine of which the detrusor
reflex plays a role. The micturition reflex is a complex integra-
suggests that the sympathetic pathways can also modulate the
tion of parasympathetic, sympathetic, and somatic pathways
activity of the parasympathetic pathway, but this effect has
extending from the sacral segments of the spinal cord to the
not been demonstrated in naturally occurring sympathetic
brainstem and cerebral cortex.2.3 The components of the mic-
fring.ll-13 Adrenergic innervation of the bladder neck and the
turition reflex are discussed in functional groups before a com-
 trigone has been demonstrated to have major significance in
plete description of the micturition reflex is discussed.
the prevention of retrograde ejaculation.
58
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of Micturition
59
5
16
Pelvicnerve
and plexus
Pudendal nerve
Caudal mesenteric
ganglion
Pelvic ganglia
AChreceptors
βAdrenergic
Receptors
Hypogastric
nerve
Pelvicfloor
muscle
Hgure 3-1 Anatomic organization of the local innervations of the bladder and urethra. Motor inner-
vations are represented by the darker lines; sensory innervations are represented by the lighter lines.
[dog] and L2-5 [cat] and leave the spinal cord as the splanchnic nerves to synapse in the caudal mes-
enteric ganglion. Postganglionic sympathetic fbers [hypogastric nerve] innervate the bladder wall
receptors). These fibers are active during the storage phase of micturition. The preganglionic neurons
for the parasympathetic innervation orginate from S1-3 spinal cord segments. The preganglionic
fibers from S1-3 leave the spinal cord as the pelvic (splanchnic) nerve to synapse in the pelvic gan-
glia located within the bladder wall and innervate the detrusor rmuscle via cholinergic synapses for
bladder contraction during the voiding phase of micturition. The pudendal nerve arises from the
ventral branches of the Sl-3 sacral nerves to supply the striated external urethral sphincter rmuscle.
Sensory innervation—Sensory fibers from the urinary bladder reach the cord via both pelvic [stretch
receptors] and hypogastric [nociceptive receptors] nerves. Sensory input from the urethra reaches
the cord via the pudendal nerve. These pathways ascend to the center for micturition located in the
pons. [Courtesy Dennis P. O'Brien, DVM, PhD, University of Missouri.]
Lesions of the sympathetic pathways apparently do not
located within the body and base of the bladder musculature.
have a major effect on micturition; however, there is increas-
They mediate information conveyed by postganglionic para-
 ing acceptance of the theory that the sympathetic pathways
sympathetic fibers of pelvic nerve. Stimulation causes detrusor
play an important role in animals and humans with lesions
 muscle contraction and bladder emptying.
of the parasympathetic pathways.8.14-16 Evidence for this is
The neuromuscular junction is characterized by a varicos-
supported by patients with neurogenic bladder dysfunction
ity of the axon-containing synaptic vesicles, a thinning of the
complicated by a narrowing of the bladder neck or spasms of
the urethra, which may be helped by α-adrenergic blockade.8
of the detrusor muscle fbers. Excitation of the innervated
muscle cell (pacemaker cell) initiates a spread of excitation
Sensory Pathways from the Urinary Bladder
and contraction through adjacent cells by means of "tight
Sensory fibers originating in the bladder run in both the pelvic
junctions."ll The spread of excitation has also been hypoth-
 and the hypogastric nerves. Stretch receptors in the bladder
esized to occur by diffusion of a neurotransmitter in the extra-
wall give rise to fibers that run through the pelvic nerve into the
cellular space to adjacent detrusor muscle fbers.
sacral spinal cord (Sl-3 in the cat and the dog) and ascend to
Disruption of tight junctions between muscle fbers may
the pontine reticular formation to initiate the detrusorefex.7
occur when the bladder is overdistended (e.g., obstruction of
 Sensory fibers in the hypogastric nerve reach the spinal cord
the urethra). If tight junctions are disrupted, the wave of exci-
tation cannot spread and a flaccid bladder results. Reconnec-
Afferent fibers from both pelvic and hypogastric nerves reach
tion of the junction occurs in l to 2 weeks if the distention is
 the cerebral cortex in the cat, whereas only hypogastric neural
relieved early. If the bladder remains distended too long or if
infection is present, fbrosis develops between the cells, pre-
fibers respond to overdistention of the bladder. Activation of
venting restoration of function.
  d sed s s
bar or sacral spinal cord could abolish micturition, although
Urethral Sphincter
the animal would still perceive overdistention of the bladder
The urethral musculature consists of two sphincters that are
as a painful sensation mediated through the hypogastric nerve.
considered outlets for urine from the urinary bladder.21-24
Internal smooth muscle [internal urethral sphincter) is com-
Motor Innervation of the Urinary Bladder
posed of outer and inner longitudinal and middle circular
 Each motor branch of the pelvic nerve in the bladder wall
layers and begins at the bladder neck and extends distally.
innervates many muscle cells, although not all muscle cells
External striated muscle (external urethral sphincter) is inter-
have direct innervation. Muscarinic cholinergic receptors are
woven with the proximal urethral smooth muscle, but is more
60
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CerebralCortex
Cerebellum
C
D
Pons
Pudendal nerve
(-)
(-)
E
Pelvicnerve
Hypogastricnerve
Figure 3-2 Anatomic organization of micturition. A, Cortical neurons for voluntary control of
micturition (green line). B, Cortical neurons for voluntary control of sphincters (green line). C,
Cerebellar neurons that have an inhibitory influence on micturition. D, Pontine reticular neurons
[center for micturition] that are necessary for the detrusor reflex. E, Afferent [sensory] pathway
(blue line) for the detrusor reflex.F, Preganglionic pelvic [parasympathetic} neuron to the detrusor.
G, Postganglionic pelvic [parasympathetic) neuron to the detrusor. H, Afferent [sensory] neuron
from the urethral sphincter, pudendal nerve. I Efferent [motor] neuron to the urethral sphincter,
pudendal nerve. During voiding the pontine reticular neurons also send descending inhibitory path-
ways (red line) to the hypogastric nerve (J) and the pudendal nerve (l)] to inhibit urethral sphincter
contraction. (From Oliver JE Jr, Osborne CA: Neurogenic urinary incontinence. In Kirk RW, editor:
Current veterinary therapy, VIl, Philadelphia, 1980, WB Saunders.]
 prominent in the distal half of the urethra. Adrenergic and nic-
may abolish voluntary control of the sphincter and may pro-
otinic cholinergic receptors are located on the internal smooth
duce increased sphincter tone, which increases outflow resis-
and external striated muscles, respectively. α-Adrenergic
tance.l Typically, T3-L3 lesions of the spinal cord abolish the
 receptors predominate at the base of the detrusor muscle and
long-routed detrusor reflex and cause increased tone in the
internal sphincter of proximal urethra. They mediate informa-
sphincter.
tion relayed by postganglionic sympathetic fibers, the hypogas-
tric nerve. Stimulation causes contraction of smooth muscles of
Detrusor Reflex
the bladder neck and proximal urethra to counter urine flow
The primary component of micturition is the detrusor [the
 and facilitate bladder filling.
muscle of the urinary bladder) reflex (Figure 3-2). Detrusor
The skeletal muscle surrounding the urethra contains spin-
reflex is a pathway for urination via a brainstem/spinal cord
dlles that discharge in response to stretch, as do other skeletal
reflex arc. As the bladder fills with urine, a slight increase in
muscles. The skeletal muscle in the urethral sphincter is inner-
bladder pressure occurs with each increase in volume until
vated by the_pudendal nerve of the general somatic nervous
the limit of elasticity of the smooth muscle is reached. The
   n   a    
sensory nerve endings in the bladder wall are tension recep-
the urethral branches of the pudendal are located in spinal
tors and are arranged in a series with the muscle fibers. As
cord segments L7-S3 in the dog and the cat, although they are
-pAosus sz's sads oq us pue s ur aud punog
The sensory fibers from the bladder are located in the pelvic
charges ascend in the pudendal nerves to the sacral segments.
nerve and project to the sacral segments of the spinal cord
Monosynaptic activation of the motor neurons is transmitted
[see Figure 3-1).6,18 The sensory discharge ascends in the spi-
back down the pudendal nerve to innervate the nicotinic cho-
nal cord to the pontine reticular formation in the brainstem,
linergic receptors located within these skeletal muscle fbers
centers for micturition [see Figure 3-2, E).26 Integration occurs
[see Figure 3-1). Stimulation causes external sphincter muscle
 at this level, eventually giving rise to activation of descending
contraction, which counters urine fow and facilitates bladder
upper motor neuron [UMN) pathways that stimulate the pre-
flling. Afferent discharge through the pelvic nerves also acti-
vates the pudendal nerve. These pathways produce urethral
of the sacral segments (see Figure 3-2, F and G).
 contraction in response to a sudden stretch, maintaining conti-
The detrusor reflex is mediated through the parasym-
 nence during a cough, a sneeze, and so forth. Voluntary control
pathetic nervous system [sacral spinal cord segments). The
of the urethral sphincter is provided by cortical pathways to
preganglionic parasympathetic neurons are located in seg-
the sacral segments.
ments S1-3 in the cat and the dog.4.17.18They have not been
 Lesions of the sacral segments or the pudendal nerve cause
located precisely in other species, but gross dissections indi-
a hypotonic paralysis of the sphincter. Cortical or spinal lesions
cate that they are in the sacral segments. The preganglionic
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of Micturition
61
A
DFTRUSOR REFLEX
B.
D.
F.
Hgure 3-3 Schematic representation of sequential pressure (A-B) and neural discharges (C-E)
over time during micturition [not drawn to scale). A, Intravesical pressure. B, Urethral pressure.
C, Pelvic nerve. D, Hypogastric nerve. E, Pudendal nerve. F, Bladder volume. (Modified from Jonas U,
Tanagho EA: Studies on vesicourethral reflexes, Invest Urol 12:357-373, 1975; Bradley WE, Teague
CT: Hypogastric and pelvic nerve activity during the micturition reflex, J Urol 101:438-440, 1969.]
neurons discharge and activate postganglionic neurons,
Reflex Integration
The micturition reflex involves a coordinated and sustained
of the pelvic nerves, and in the wall of the bladder. Some
 contraction of the detrusor muscle (the detrusor reflex) along
integration of activity apparently takes place in the ganglia.
with simultaneous relaxation of the urethra.20 Moreover
Ultimately, the postganglionic neurons synapse on detrusor
depending on the size of the bladder, the micturition reflex
muscle fibers and cause a contraction—the detrusor reflex
may also result in urine storage. Pelvic sensory neurons that
[see Figure 3-2].
produce the detrusor reflex also send collaterals to inhibitory
 Integration of the brainstem is necessary for the detrusor
interneurons in the sacral spinal cord.30 The inhibitory inter-
reflex to be coordinated and sustained long enough for bladder
neurons synapse on the pudendal motor neurons, which are
evacuation (see Figure 3-2). Complete lesions of any portion
also in the sacral segments, to reduce motor activity in the
 of this pathway abolish the detrusor reflex and therefore result
pudendal nerves and the periurethral striated muscle (Figure
in a micturition disorder.
3-3, B and E). As the detrusor muscle contracts, the urethra
relaxes, allowing urine to pass. If the long pathways are intact,
Voluntary Control of the Detrusor Reflex
voluntary activation of the pudendal neurons by the cortico-
The sensory pathway to the brainstem that signals distention
spinal pathways can override this effect and block micturi-
of the bladder also sends collaterals to the cerebral cortex [see
tion. Lesions of the long tracts or at the segmental level may
Figure 3-2). Integration at the cortical level allows voluntary
 interfere with reflex integration. Detrusor contraction without
initiation (e.g, in territorial marking) or inhibition [e.g., in
urethral relaxation is called reflex dyssynergia.31
house training) of micturition. The precise location of the
Reflex connections between the pelvic (parasympathetic)
control center of the cerebral cortex is not clear. Stimulation
nerve afferents and the lumbar (sympathetic) motor neurons
 and evoked-response studies indicate that several areas of the
 cortex influence the detrusor reflex.27 Lesions of the cerebral
cortex may cause a loss of voluntary control of micturition
the pelvic motor neuron begins to fre to initiate a detrusor
and may reduce the capacity of the bladder.28 For example,
contraction, the hypogastric nerve becomes silent [see Figure
animals with cerebral tumors may start voiding in the house
3-3, C and D). When the pelvic nerve stops firing as the blad-
for no apparent reason. From the owner's perspective, the
der is emptied, the hypogastric nerve discharges once more.
 Presumably, the effect of the hypogastric nerve is on bladder 
does so in inappropriate places [e.g, cat that voids outside the
relaxation and urethral contraction.
litter box).
Micturition Reflex
Cerebellar Inhibition of the Detrusor Reflex
 Integration of flling, storage, and emptying of the bladder
The cerebellum can inhibit the detrusor reflex [see Figure
with contraction and then relaxation of the sphincters is the
3-2). Stimulation of the fastigial nucleus abolishes detrusor
micturition reflex [see Figure 3-3).5 The following discussion
reflex contraction.29 Lesions of the cerebellum, such as cer-
 presents each of the components for a more complete picture.
rn jo uanbar paseau anpd Aeur esedou rea
Urine is transported from the kidneys to the bladder
ing with a reduced bladder capacity.
through the ureters. Peristaltic waves move the urine into the
62
PARTI
 Fundamentals
 bladder in spurts. Vesicoureteral reflux is prevented by the
 distended, and expressing the bladder manually is diffcult or
oblique course of the ureter through the bladder wall, result-
impossible. The perineal refex is intact. The most common
ing in the formation of a flap valve. The detrusor muscle spirals
cause is compression of the spinal cord, such as occurs with
 around the ureter, assisting in the maintenance of the valve
intervertebral disk herniation, which disrupts the long path-
effect.
ways that are responsible for the detrusor reflex and the UMN
 Initially, the bladder flls without a significant increase in
pathways to the skeletal muscle of the urethral sphincter. Loss
 pressure as the smooth muscle stretches (see Figure 3-3.
A
of voluntary control of micturition occurs with lesions severe
and F). The sympathetic (adrenergic) pathways may assist by
enough to disrupt voluntary motor function of the limbs. In
 qsn  as 
general, as voluntary motor function of the limbs returns, so
relaxation of smooth muscle. If the bladder fills beyond the
does voluntary control of micturition.
normal elasticity of the smooth muscle, pressure increases lin-
early with the increase in volume.
Detrusor Areflexia with Normal Sphincter Tone
 Normally, as the limits of stretch of the smooth muscle are
Lesions of the spinal cord or the brainstem may produce
 approached, stretch receptors in the bladder wall are excited
 detrusor arefexia without causing increased tone in the ure-
and send sensory discharges through the pelvic nerves to the
thral sphincter. Traumatic injuries of the pelvis may damage
sacral spinal cord. These discharges are relayed up the spinal
the pelvic plexus without damage to the pudendal nerve. The
cord to the reticular formation in the pons. The activation of
animal is unable to void, but manual expression can be accom-
 neuronal pools in the pons results in activation of the descend-
plished. Females have a short skeletal sphincter so that even
ing UMN pathways that project to the sacral segments of the
ssx q n   r   
spinal cord. Preganglionic parasympathetic motor neurons in
 Perineal reflexes are intact.
the intermediate horn of the sacral gray matter are activated.
 The motor discharge passes down the pelvic nerves to acti-
Detrusor Areflexia with Sphincter Hypotonia
vate postganglionic neurons in the pelvic ganglia and in the
Lesions of the sacral spinal cord or the nerve roots, such as
wall of the bladder, which in turn activates the bladder smooth
factures of the L6 or L7 vertebra or fibrocartilaginous embo-
muscle (detrusor). The sustained discharge of neurons through
lism (FCE) affection the sacral spinal cord segments, cause a
these pathways produces a coordinated, sustained contraction
loss of the detrusor reflexes and urethral sphincter reflexes
 of the detrusor muscle (see Figure 3-3, A and C).6
and tone. The bladder is easily expressed and may leak urine
The fbers of the detrusor muscle spiral into the neck of the
continuously. Perineal reflexes are diminished or absent. Dys-
bladder and help to maintain continence in the relaxed state.
autonomia (Key Gaskell syndrome) produces clinical signs of
As the fbers contract, the bladder neck is pulled open into
urinary incontinence attributable to loss of parasympathetic
a funnel shape. Simultaneously, sensory discharges from the
and sympathetic innervations.34 Somatic innervation of the
anus [absent perineal reflex} is affected, but generalized pare-
the output of the sympathetic pathway) and to the puden-
sis is not a clinical feature of the disease [see Chapter 15).
dal motor neurons in the ventral horn of the sacral segments
(inhibiting the tonic output in the nerves to the skeletal
Detrusor Areflexia from Overdistention
sphincter) (see Figure 3-3, C to E).
Loss of excitation-contraction coupling in the detrusor muscle
 The result is a coordinated contraction of the bladder and
[detrusor atony) may occur as a result of severe overdistention
a relaxation of the sphincter, which is maintained until void-
of the bladder. Manual expression of the bladder may be dif-
ing is complete [see Figure 3-3, A and B). Sustaining the con-
ficult because the sphincter is normal. The animal may empty
traction also is enhanced by sensory fbers in the urethra that
the bladder partially by abdominal contraction. Attempts to
respond to the flow of urine.
void indicate that sensory pathways are intact and suggest
When the bladder is empty, sensory discharges in the pel-
a primary detrusor muscle abnormality. The most frequent
vic nerve stop. Motor discharges in the pelvic nerve cease and
cause is obstruction of the urethral outflow tract [e.g, cal-
activity in the sympathetic and pudendal nerves returns. The
culij). Detrusor areflexia from overdistention also may occur
 bladder relaxes, and the sphincters close.
because it is too painful to stand or posture to urinate. This
scenario is not uncommon following pelvic fractures and pro-
longed recumbency.
DISORDERS OF MICTURITION
Detrusor Hyperreflexia
The neurogenic disorders of micturition are caused by abnor-
Frequent voiding of small quantities of urine, often without
mal detrusor muscle or sphincter function or both (Table 3-1).
warning, may be caused by partial lesions of the long path-
Detrusor or sphincter activity may be decreased, increased,
ways or of the cerebellum. Inflammation of the bladder (cys-
 or normal. Typical syndromes include inappropriate voiding:
titis) may produce similar signs. Little or no residual urine is
inadequate voiding with an overflow of urine; increased fre-
present, the capacity of the bladder is reduced, and perineal
quency, reduced urinary bladder capacity, or both; and incom-
reflexes are intact.
plete voiding when normal voiding reactions are interrupted
 The so-called UMN bladder as seen in chronic paraplegic
by abrupt contractions of the urethral sphincter. ll
human beings is rare in animals.35 In animals, chronic spinal
cord lesions severe enough to affect voluntary micturition
Clinical Signs
cause detrusor areflexia, not hyperreflexia. The bladder may
The clinical signs of abnormal micturition are summarized in
have small uncoordinated contractions, but these are inad-
Table 3-2.
equate to empty the bladder. Animals with partial lesions,
especially in the recovery phase, may have spastic detrusor
Detrusor Areflexia withSphincterHypertonus
 contractions as they approach normal.
The most frequently recognized disorder of micturition is a
loss of the detrusor reflex with increased tone in the urethral
ReflexDyssynergia
sphincter. Lesions from the pontine reticular formation to
Functional urethral obstruction results from neurogenic or
the L7 spinal cord segments may cause these complications.
 nonneurogenic causes (obstructive calculij). A lesion affecting
The animal is unable to void and the bladder becomes greatly
the UMN pathways is the most common neurogenic cause
TABLE 3-1
Effect of Lesions on the Neural Pathways of Micturition
BLADDER
SPHINCTER
Location of Lesion
Normal Function
Voluntary
 Sustained Detrusor
Tone
Volume
 Residual
Voluntary
 Perineal
 Synergy with
Control
Reflex
Urine
Control
Reflex
Detrusor
Forebrain
Voluntary control
Absent
N
N
↑. N, ↓
None 
Absent
N to ↑ 
N to ↑ 
N
Cerebellum
Inhibition of
Normal, ↑ 
May be
N
None
N
N
N
N
detrusor reflex
 frequency
hyperreflexic
 Brainstem to
Sustained detru-
Absent
None early: small
Atonic early.
十
Absent
N to ↑
N to t
Absent
sacral spinal
sor reflex
unsynchronized
may be t#
cord
contractions late
late
 Partial lesions:
Coordination of
May be
May be present
to l
↑to ↓ 
May be 
N
N to ↑ 
Absent
 brainstem to 
detrusor and 
present
 present
sacral spinal
sphincter
HAPTER
cord (reflex
dyssynergia!
 Sacral spinal 
 LMN to detrusor
Absent
Absent
Absent 
Absent
Absent
3
cord or roots
and sphincter
 Disorders 
Detrusor muscle
Spread of excita-
 Absent
Absent
中
N
N
N
N (impossible
tight junctions)
tion in detrusor
to evaluate}
Modifed from Oliver JE Jr, Oshome CA: Neurogenic urinary incontinence. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy, VI, Philadelphia, 1977, WB Saunders.
I, Increased; I, decreased; N, normal; LMN, lower motor neuron.
of
Micturition
8
64
PARTI
 Fundamentals
TABLE 3-2
Signs of Abnormal Micturition
Attempts
Expression
Perineal
Problem
Voiding
to Void
of Bladder
Residual Urine
Reflex
 Probable Lesion
 Detrusor areflexia.
Absent
No
Difficult 
Large amount
Present
Brainstem to L7
sphincter hyper-
spinal cord 
tonus
 Detrusor areflexia,
Absent 
No
 Possible, some
Large amount
 Present 
Brainstem to L7
 normal sphincter
resistance
 spinal cord
tone
Detrusor areflexia,
Absent 
No
Easy, often
Large to
Absent 
Sacral spinal cord
sphincter
leaks urine
moderate
or nerve roots
areflexia
 amounts 
 Detrusor areflexia
Absent
Yes
 Possible, some
Large amount 
Present
Detrusor muscle 
(overdistention)
resistance
Detrusor
Frequent, small
Yes
 Possible, some
None
Present
 Brainstem to
 hyperreflexia 
quantity 
resistance
L7, partial, or
cerebellum:
also inflamma-
tion of bladder
Reflex dyssynergia
Frequent,
Yes
Difficult 
 Small to large
Present
Brainstem to L7.
spurting.
junoue
 partial lesions
unsustained
Normal detrusor
 Normal, but with 
Yes
Easy
None
May or may
Pudendal nerves,
reflex, incompe-
leakage of urine
not be 
sympathetic
tent sphincter
with stress or
present 
nerves,
full bladder
hormone
deficiency
of reflex dyssynergia, where there is a loss of coordination
during an abdominal press [barking, coughing] or during com-
between the detrusor and the urethral sphincter muscles.31.36
plete rest. The most frequent cause is the lack of sex hormones
The term cdyssynergia refers to simultaneous contraction of
in a neutered animal. Hormone-responsive incontinence has
muscles whose activity is opposite in direction. Often with
been well documented in ovariectomized bitches and less fre-
reflex dyssynergia, normal initiation of voiding is followed by
 quently in neutered male dogs.4l-45 Both are responsive to hor-
interruption of the stream through an involuntary contraction
mone replacement therapy with or without supplementation
of the urethral sphincter. The stream of urine is normal at frst,
with adrenergic agents.A similar clinical picture may be seen in
followed by short spurts, and then by a complete cessation
 some animals that are not responsive to hormone therapy The
of the flow. Frequently the animal continues to strain with
 lesion may be a structural abnormality of the urethra, a loss of
no success. Reflex dyssynergia is seen primarily in male dogs
pudendal innervation, or a loss of sympathetic innervation to
inq uera nou si sisaued au ze'ge'iese u arer u
the urethra.46-48
is presumed to be the result of a partial lesions in the UMN
 pathways causing a loss ofthe normal inhibition of the puden-
Diagnosis
dal nerves during the detrusor reflex. The detrusor reflex is
The minimum database recommended for the evaluation of
-d   m   e m  
 Increased sensory input from abnormal structures inner-
sented in Box 3-1 .The minimum database is designed to reveal
vated by the sacral nerves may also play a role. Examples
 any additional problems and to provide the information neces-
 include prostatic disease, perineal trauma, and surgical wounds
sary to make a diagnosis and to formulate a prognosis. Figure
in this area. Excessive sympathetic stimulation can cause dys-
3-4 outlines the process of establishing a diagnosis. Specific
 synergia. We have observed an abnormality clinically similar
 steps in the process are discussed in the following sections.
to reflex dyssynergia in a male dog recovering from tetanus.
Diagnosis of idiopathic detrusor-urethral sphincter dyssyner-
History
 gia is based on exclusion of pathologic causes of urine outlow
In addition to the usual items in the history the exam-
obstruction.38,39 A dyssynergic-like condlition has been seen in
 iner should obtain some specific information pertinent to
 dogs with a cauda equina lesion.40
micturition.
Previous History. The clinician should determine the
Normal Detrusor Reflex with Decreased Sphincter Tone
 animal's pattern of micturition habits from as early an age as
Loss of normal urethral resistance with a normal detrusor
possible. Age when house trained, frequency of micturition at
reflex causes leaking of urine when voiding is delayed. The
 auaisut aprrd Ae sheu u sue pue sae sno
animal can empty the bladder, but as soon as a small amount
the onset of a problem before the owner's recognition of its
of urine accumulates, leakage occurs. The leakage may occur
signihicance.
CHAPTER 3Disorders of Micturition
65
BOX 3-1
tomic anomalies (e.g., ectopic ureters), loss of urethral resis-
tance, or overflow from an areflexic bladder (see Table 3-2).
Minimum Database for Diagnosis of
Disorders of Micturition
Physical Examination
Observation of the animal may confrm the characteristics of
History
micturition as described in the history. The differences in the
various abnormalities of micturition may be subtle; therefore
Physical examination
the problem described by the owner must be verified by the
Includes: Observation of voiding (stream size, dysuria,
examiner.
duration, urine color), measurement of residual urine.
The presence of a detrusor reflex can be assumed if voiding
palpation of external genitalia, observation of urine scald,
is sustained [see Figure 3-4); however, bladder contractions
abdominal palpation, vaginal examination, rectal palpation
with incomplete voiding are common in neurologic disorders.
(masses, anal sphincter tone, urethra)
Such contractions are not the result of a true detrusor reflex.
 Neurologic examination
- Araa u pam aq arara isnu an rnisan a
 Includes: Evaluation of sphincter reflexes (perineal, bul-
mal with a problem associated with micturition. After the
animal has voided, preferably outside in natural surroundings
bocavernosus), tail tone, low lumbar spinal pain
Clinical pathology
and to avoid any influence of the animal's reluctance because
of house training, the bladder is catheterized and the residual
Includes: Complete blood cell count, urinalysis, urine 
urine is measured. Residual urine should be less than 10% of
 culture, (blood urea nitrogen or creatinine concentration)
 the normal volume. Dogs will have less than 10 mL remaining
Radiologic examination
[0.2 to 0.4 mL/kg) and less than 2 mL remaining in cats.8
Includes: Survey of abdomen and pelvis, contrast
Except for some dogs with prostatic enlargement due to
cystography and urethrography, intravenous pyelogram,
advanced imaging (CT, MRI).
aq  ea a  sso  se aan 
detected when a catheter is passed. A fap can be demon-
 Modifed from Oliver JE Jr, Oshorme CA: Neurogenic urinary
strated only by excretory urethrography.41
incontinence. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy, VI,
 Palpation of the bladder before and after the animal voids
Philadelphia, 1977, WB Saunders.
provides some information regarding bladder tone. The tone
of the detrusor muscle is intrinsic and is not directly related
Signs of abnormality in the nervous system or the urinary
to innervation; however, a normal bladder contracts to accom-
tract and previous trauma are important. Previous surgical
modate the volume of urine present. An overdistended blad-
procedures, especially neurologic, abdominal, or pelvic (e.g.
der with disruption of the tight junctions does not contract.
ovariohysterectomy), should be analyzed in relation to the
A chronically infected bladder is often small and has a thick-
time of onset of the problem.
ened and fibrotic wall. A small, contracted bladder with
History of the Problem. Information regarding the onset
infection may not be the primary problem because bladder
and the chronologic course of the problem allows the exam-
infection is a common sequela of urine retention from neu-
p re ias st um a au-uas e aonsn on au
mining the cause of the disease [see Chapter 1].
incontinence, such as tumors or calculi, may be identified by
Voluntary control of micturition is often best established
palpation, radiography, or ultrasonography47
Manual expression of the bladder provides some informa-
 confirmed by direct observations of the animal in natural
tion regarding urethral sphincter tone. Normally, expression
surroundings [e.g., outside on the grass). If the animal can
of the bladder is more difficult in the male than in the female.
volitionally initiate voiding, the detrusor refex is probably
Urethral sphincter tone is decreased in lesions of the sacral spi-
present. Voluntary control also implies that micturition can be
nal cord, the sacral roots, or the pudendal nerve (lower motor
withheld for a reasonable length of time (house training) and
neuron [LMN] and is increased in lesions between the L7
can be interrupted if necessary. Interruption of micturition is
spinal cord segment and the brainstem [see Table 3-2). The
difficult to evaluate. A dog that is lead-trained can be inter-
sacral spinal cord segments lie within the body of the fth
-iu auo, oi pueuos e pue peal au uo nd e Aq pandn
lumbar vertebra in the dog so that lesions of the vertebrae
vidual interpretation of this interruption is quite subjective.
 from L5-6 caudad can affect the sacral roots. In large animals,
Dyssynergia begins with a normal initiation of voiding fol-
lesions at the level of the midsacrum affect the sacral segments
lowed by a narrowing of the stream and a sudden interruption
and nerve roots.
 of the flow.The animal often strains and may continue voiding
in brief spurts. Dyssynergia must be differentiated from partial
Neurologic Examination
anatomic obstruction [e.g, that is caused by urethral calculi),
The complete neurologic examination is described in
which can be demonstrated by catheterization and urethral
Chapter l. Refexes related to the sacral spinal cord segments 
contrast-enhanced radiography or urethroscopy.
 are especially important in evaluating micturition disorders.
Various types of incontinence may be described by the
The anal and urethral sphincters are innervated by the
owner. Detrusor hyperreflexia, in which the animal voids sud-
pudendal nerve, primarily from sacral segments 1 and 2 but
 denly in inappropriate places without apparent warning, called
occasionally with fibers from S3. Anal sphincter function is
precipitate voiding, is characteristic of cerebellar lesions and
easy to observe or to palpate, whereas the urethral sphincter is
some partial spinal cord or brainstem lesions (see Table 3-2].
evaluated best by electrodiagnostic procedures.
Differentiation between precipitate voiding and loss of nor-
Tone of the anal sphincter can be observed, or the sphincter
mal voluntary micturition, as in forebrain lesions or behavioral
can be palpated with a gloved digit. Two other sacral reflexes
disorders, may be difficult on the basis of the history alone.
also can be evaluated to help assess function of the pudendal
In these instances, other neurologic signs may help localize a
and sacral spinal cord segments. The bulbocavernosus reflex is
lesion to the cerebellum or forebrain. History also may help
 a sharp contraction of the sphincter in response to a squeeze
define the disorder as behavioral in nature (e.g., behavioral
of the bulb of the penis or the clitoris. The perineal reflex is a
66
PARTI
 Fundamentals
Voluntary
No
 control.
voluntary
control -
 No residual
 Residual 
Residual
No residual
urine
urine
urine
urine
Detrusor
Detrusor
Detrusor
Detrusor
Detrusor
reflex
reflex 
reflex 
reflex
reflex
present
present
present 
absent
 present 
Sphincter
 Sphincter
Sphincter
Sphincter
Sphincter
Sphincter
Sphincter
reflex
reflex
reflex
reflex
reflex
reflex
reflex
weak or
present
present
present
present
absent
present
absent
Neurologic
Neurologic
Neurologic
 Neurologic
Neurologic
Neurologic
Neurologic
Neurologic
 Neurologic
Neurologic
examination
examination
 examination  examination
 examination
 examination examination 
examination
 examination
examination
 abnormal
 normal 
 abnormal
 normal or
 normal or
 abnormal
normal
 abnormal
abnormal
 normal
(sphincter,
(cerebellum)
abnormal
 perineal)
 Pudendal
Non-
Cerebellum
Reflex
 Pons to
 Pelvic n.
Sacral
Cerebral
Behavior
nerve
 neurogenic
dyssynergia
L7 spinal
 alone or 
 spinal
 cortex 
incontinence
cord
detrusor
cord
muscle
or
roots
Figure 3-4 Algorithm for diagnosis of disorders of micturition. [From Oliver JE Jr, Osborne CA: Neurogenic urinary incontinence. In Kirk
 RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy, VIl, Philadelphia, 1980, WB Saunders.]
contraction of the sphincter in response to a pinch or pinprick
cmH2O
of the perineal region. The perineal reflex also is used to test
75
sensory distribution in the perineal region. Because each side
1 min.
M
of the perineum can be tested individually, unilateral lesions
48 ml.
 can be identified.
60-
Lesions of the sacral spinal cord, sacral roots, or pudendal
T-1
T-11
T-111
nerves abolish these reflexes, and the anal sphincter is atonic.
45
Frequently, there is a concurrent history of fecal incontinence.
FTHRESH
The history, physical examination, and neurologic exami-
30
L.S
nation provide sufficient data to differentiate neurogenic from
 nonneurogenic bladder disorders and to localize the lesion in
the nervous system if a neurogenic disorder is present [see
15
Tables 3-1 and 3-2). Additional data are necessary for the for-
mulation of diagnosis and prognosis.
Clinical Pathology
Figure 3-5 Cystometrogram of a dog showing segrments of the
The minimum database includes a complete blood cell count,
tonus limb. TI, Resting pressure; TIl, bladder flling pressure
change (smooth rmuscle elasticity); T-Ill, bladder filling pressure
formulation of a prognosis of urinary tract dysfunction, and
change after capacity is reached. Scale indicates time and volume.
each may assist in the diagnosis of nonneurogenic problems
THRESH, Threshold of detrusor reflex; M, maximal contraction;
LS., initial spike, an artifact.
of micturition.
Animals with neurogenic bladder disorders are likely to
[Pressure at inflection - Resting pressure] x 100
 have urinary tract infections. Constant surveillance and apprg-
T-ⅡI=
Volume
priate treatment, when indicated, are imperative if a favorable
 outcome is to be expected.49 Ureteral reflux is also a frequent
(From Oliver JE Jr, Young WO: Air cystometry in dogs under
complication of neurogenic bladder dysfunction. Reflux of
xylazine-induced restraint, Am J Vet Res 34:1433, 1973.]
 infected urine may lead to chronic pyelonephritis and renal
failure.
neurologic problem. Survey abdominal and pelvic radiography
including the entire urethra to assess for bony or soft tissue
Imaging Studies of the Urinary Tract
 abnormalities of the lumbosacral spine and pelvis, and detect
 Radiography and ultrasonography are important for the iden-
 radiopaque urinary calculi. Contrast-enhanced cystourethrog-
tification of nonneurogenic problems for the evaluation of the
raphy, especially when performed in conjunction with cys-
extent of urinary tract disease [which may be a complication
tometry, augments assessment of the functional morphology
 of neurogenic disorders), and for the assessment of the primary
of the lower urinary tract.4l Intravenous pyelogram evaluates
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of Micturition
67
TABLE 3-3
50
Normal Values for Cystometrograms (CMGs)
Using Xylazine for Restraint
Maximum
urethral
Maximum
VALUES OF CMG
pre
closure
urethral
Measurement
Dog
Horse
20 
pressure,
pressure
Tonus limb I
9.7 ± 4.3
1.9 ± 1.6
urethr
Tonus limb I
12.6 ± 12.2
1.0 ± 0.7
10
Intrau
 Bladder
+
Functional profile length →
Threshold pressure
24.4 ± 10.0
22.0 ± 7.5
pressure
 Total profile length
 Threshold pressure
14.4 ± 8.7
14.4 ± 10.6
minus tonus limb I
D
1
2
3
4
6
Threshold volume
206.6 ± 184.4
2554 ± 1087
Distance cm
Figure 3-6 Schematic representation of the urethral closure
 Maximal contraction
77.6 ± 33.8
100.1 ± 5.9
pressure profle. [From Rosin A, Rosin E, Oliver JE Jr: Canine ure-
pressure
thral pressure profle, Am J Vet Res 41:1113-1116, 1980.]
Data from Oliver JE Jr, Young WO: Air cystometry in dogs under
xylazine-induced restraint, Am J Vet Res 34:1433-1435, 1973; and
Clark ES et al: Cystometrography and urethral pressure profles in
[using short-acting anesthetics such as propofol) for urethral
healthy horse and pony mares, Am J Vet Res 48:552-555, 1987.
 catheter placement, allowed to recover, and then a recording
'All values are means ± SD and are given in centimeters of HzO
can be made.68
except for threshold volume, which is given in milliters of air
 Simultaneous measurement of the CMG and urinary flow
(see Figure 3-5].
allows more complete assessment of the function of the blad-
der and urethra, especially in disorders of coordination of
bladder contraction and urethral relaxation.59,70 An electro-
the renal architecture. Ultrasonography assesses integrity of
 magnetic flow transducer records the flow of urine collcted in
the bladder wall and lower urinary tract anatomy. Computed
 a funnel. Intravesical pressure is measured simultaneously. The
tomography gives anatomic detail on bony structures of the
major disadvantage of this technique is the necessity of placing
lumbosacral spine and pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging
two catheters through the abdominal wall into the bladder.
provides detail on soft tissue structures associated with the
Normal dogs have minimal problems, but we have had leak-
spinal cord and pelvic region.
age from cystocentesis with 22-gauge needles in animals with
neurogenic bladders. This procedure must therefore be used
Urodynamic and Electrophysiologic Examinations
with caution.51
Urodynamic and electrophysiologic testing were not included
Electromyography (EMG) of the skeletal muscles of the
in the minimum database described in Chapter l because they
 anal and urethral sphincters and other muscles in the pelvic
currently are not widely available. In some cases, however,
diaphragm provides direct evidence of the status of innerva-
 these tests are needed to make a definitive diagnosis and assist
tion. The perineal or bulbocavernosus reflex also can be tested
with anatomic localization.51
while a recording is being taken directly from these muscles in
The cystometrogram (CMG) measures intravesical pres-
cases in which clinical evaluation is equivocal. To perform this,
sure during a detrusor reflex [Figure 3-5).4l,52-54 A sustained
the animal must be maintained under a light plane of anesthe-
 detrusor reflex is difficult to document clinically in most cases.
sia to evoke the reflex contraction of the anal sphincter.
Additionally, the CMG provides data on threshold volume
An EMG recorded from the anal sphincter while the ure-
 and pressure, capacity, ability ofthe bladder to fll at a normal
thra or the bladder is stimulated with a catheter electrode
 pressure [a measure ofelasticity of the bladder wall], and pres-
is termed an etectromyelograph (EMyG).5l Urethral stimula-
ence of uninhibited bladder contractions (a sign of denerva-
tion evokes a response similar to the bulbocavernosus reflex.
tion). Normal data from the CMG of the dog and horse are
 Stimulation ofthe bladder wall evokes a comparable response,
presented in Table 3-3.
 The urethral pressure profle measures the pressure along
evoked bladder response is diffcult to record in most animals.
the length of the urethra.52,55-50 An EMG of the striated ure-
An EMyG from bladder stimulation provides evidence of the
 thral sphincter can be recorded simultaneously. The maximum
integrity of the pelvic nerves. The main advantages of these
urethral closure pressure and the functional profle length are
evoked tests are the following: [l) the response is objective,
the most important parameters [Figure 3-6). Normal values
[2)] the response can be measured accurately, and (3) the
 are listed in Table 3-4. Stress leak point pressure is a functional
latencies are recorded that provide information about partial
technique used to simulate urethral compliance associated
denervation.
with an external abdominal press.5l
 Averaged somatosensory-evoked responses can be recorded
Ideally, the CMG, urethral pressure profle, and stress leak
from the scalp (cortex) or the spinal cord during stimulation
 point pressure recordings should be performed in awake ani-
of the bladder or the urethra [see the section on the somato-
mals without chemical restraint. However, it is often neces-
sensory-evoked response in Chapter 4). The cortical-evoked
sary to sedate animals due to their fractious nature, difficulty
response is a method of evaluating the sensory pathways.
in catheterizing female animals, or the painful nature of their
Results of these tests are useful for lesion localization. Table
disease. Consequently, measurements are often recorded
3-5 summarizes data provided by physical examination find-
using chemical restraint or general anesthesia. 5254,58,62-67 All
ings and electrophysiologic tests.
anesthetic agents affect these urodynamic tests; however,
The final diagnosis should include [l) location of the lesion
propofol (0.8 mg/kg/min) may have a minimal impact on
in the nervous system, (2) cause of the lesion, (3) functional
UPP recordings, whereas xylazine may be used for CMG
central nervous system (CNS) deficit, and (4) functional defi-
recordings.58 Alternatively, the animal may be anesthetized
cit related to micturition.
68
PARTI
 Fundamentals
TABLE 3-4
Normal Values for Urethral Pressure Profiles
Maximal Urethral Pressure
Maximal Urethral Closure
Functional Profile
Stu dy Animal (Condition)
(cm H0)
Pressure (cm H20)
Length (cm)
Female dogs (xylazine)
35.2 ± 16.2
31.0 ± 15.3
7.2 ± 1.9
Male dogs (xylazine)
42.5 ± 5.3
36.79 ± 5.2
28.3 ± 3.9
Female dogs (medetomidine)
NA
25.4 ± 11.6
6.1 ± 1.1
Male dogs (medetomidine)
23.9 ± 3.2
29.5 ± 6.0
23.4 ± 1.8
Female dogs (no sedation)
90.18 ± 4.48
79.72 ± 4.61
8.68 ± 0.57
Male dogs (no sedation)
109.77 ± 11.52
99.77 ± 11.71
24.00 ± 0.9
Female cats, intact (xylazine)
76.6 ± 26.7
71.4 ± 25
4.4 ± 1.5 
 Female cats, ovariohysterectomized (xylazine)
81.3 ± 31.7
77.5 ± 31.3
5.78 ± 0.9
Male cats (xylazine)
163.2 ± 47.5
161.6 ± 47.1
10.53 ± 0.5
Female horse (xylazine)
43.4 ± 21.6
3.7 ± 1.4
Female horse (no sedation)
49.1 ± 19.4
5.0 ± 1.8
Data sources: Female and male dogs (xylazine)—-Rosin A, Rosin E, Oliver JE Jr: Canine urethral pressure profle, Am J Vet Res 4l:1l 13-lll6.
1980 (values converted frorm mm Hg). Female and male dogs, no sedation—Richter KP, Ling GV: Effects of xylazine on the urethral pressure
profle of healthy dogs, Am J Vet Res 46:1881-1886, 1985. Femmale cats, intact versus ovariohysterectomized (xylazine)Gregory CR, Willits
NH: Electrormyographic and urethral pressure evaluations: assessment of urethral function in fermale and ovariohysterectormized fermale cats, Am
JVet Res 47:1472-1475,1986.Male cats (xylazine)Gregory CR et al: Electromyographic and urethral pressure proflormetry: assessment of
urethral function before and after perineal urethrostormy in cats, Am J Vet Res 45:2062-2065, 1984. Female and male dogs (medetormidine) 
Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Chermosky AM: Results of cystormetry and uretral pressure proflommetry in dogs sedated with rmedetormidine or xyla-
zine, Am J Vet Res 62:167-170, 2001. Female horse, xylazine or no sedation-Clark ES et al: Cystometrography and urethral pressure profiles in
healthy horse and pony mares, Am J Vet Res 48:552-555, 1987.
Values are means ± SD.
TABLE 3-5
Diagnostic Tests of Micturition
 Urethral
Synchrony
Detrusor
 Detrusor Tone
Complete 
Sensation
Resistance/
of Bladder
Test
Reflex
and Capacity
Voiding
to Bladder
Obstruction
and Urethra
Cystometrogram
+
Urethral pressure profile
+
Stress leak point pressure
十
Flow
 Evoked potentials
 Observation of voiding
Palpate bladder
Measure residual urine
Resistance to expression and catheterization 
+, Test evaluates this function or this anatomic component.
 bladder and urethra. 7l-73 Treatment of urinary tract infections
Treatment
 Management of a case depends on the final diagnosis. The
 is described in detail in most general veterinary medical books.
treatment of primary neurologic disease is described through-
out this text. Functional deficits of micturition secondary to
Detrusor Areflexia with Sphincter Hypertonus
 neurologic disease may be temporary or permanent, depend-
Lesions from the pons to the L7 spinal cord segments may
ing on the reversibility of the neurologic lesion and the main-
abolish the detrusor reflex and may produce a UMN-type
tenance of the integrity of the urinary system. If the bladder
is severely infected and secondary fibrosis of the bladder wall
[see Table 3-2). The animal is unable to void, and the bladder
occurs, normal function cannot be restored even if the neuro-
is dliffcult if not impossible to express manually.
logic lesion is corrected. This section presents management of
 The primary consideration in all neurogenic bladder dis-
the urinary tract based on the functional disorder of micturi-
orders is to evacuate the bladder completely at least three
tion. Table 3-6 lists the most common drugs used in the phar-
times daily. When tone in the urethra is exaggerated, manual
macologic management of disorders of micturition.
expression is not only ineffective but also dangerous. Aseptic
Medical therapy includes control of the urinary tract infec-
catheterization is required. Indwelling urethral catheters are
 tion and management of the functional abnormality of the
associated with a higher risk of infection, and their long-term 
CHAPTER 3
 Disorders of Micturition
69
TABLE 3-6
Drugs Used in Treating Disorders of Micturition
Drug Action
Drug
Dosage
Side Effects
Increase detrusor
 Bethanechol 
2.5-15 mg PO or SQ q8h (dog)
 Cholinergic: Gl hypermotility.
contractility
{Urecholine)
1.25-5 mg PO q12h (cat)
bronchoconstriction 
Decrease detrusor
 Propantheline
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO gq8-12h
Anticholinergic: decreased Gl motility.
contractility
(Pro-Banthine)
decreased salivation, tachycardia
Oxybutynin (Ditropan)
0.5 mg PO q8-12h
Increase urethral
 Phenylpropanolamine
1.5 mg/kg P0 q8-12h (dog and cat)
Sympathomimetic: urine retention,
resistance
hypertension
 Diethylstilbestrol
0.1-1 mg/day PO for 3-5 days,
 Estrus, bone marow toxicity
(in female)
then 1 mg/wk (dog)
Testosterone cypionate
 2 mg/kg IM at intervals of weeks
 Caution in animals with prostatic hyperpla-
(male)
to months
 sia, perineal hernia, perianal adenoma
Decrease urethral
 Phenoxybenzamine
0.25-0.5 mg/kg PO q12h 
 Nonspecific α-adrenergic blocker:
resistance
(Dibenzyline)
hypotension
 Prazosin
1 mg/15 kg P0 q8-12h (dog)
 01-adrenergic blocker:
hypotension, salivation, sedation
0.25-0.5 mg q12-24h (cat)
Acepromazine
up to 3 mg IV (dogs)
hypotension, sedation
1-2 mg/kg PO q12-24h (cat)
Diazepam (Valium)
0.25-1 mg/kg P0 q8-12h (dog)
 Centrally acting tranquilizer and skeletal
1-2 mg/kg PO q12h (cat)
muscle relaxant: sedation, hepatocellular
necrosis in cats
Dantrolene
1-5 mg/kg PO q8h (dog)
 Direct acting skeletal muscle relaxant:
0.5-2 mg/kg PO q8h (cat)
weakness, hepatoxicity, vomiting.
hypotension
Modifed from Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
GI, Gastrointestinal; PO, orally, q&h, every 8 hours; SQ, subcutaneous.
use should be avoided if possible.74 Female dogs often are at
higher risks for developing urinary tract infection. Detrusor
may be necessary to prevent further contraction of the ure-
areflexia from overdistention [described later) requires an
thral sphincter.14.71
indwelling urethral catheter or intermittent catheterization.75
Urinalysis is performed weekly or anytime the urine
 An aseptic closed urine collection system is required for all
 appears abnormal. At the first sign of infection, urine is
animals with indwelling urethral catheters. Indiscriminant
obtained for quantitative culture and sensitivity tests.4l
use of antibiotics in animals with indwelling urinary catheters
Appropriate antibiotic therapy should be continued until
should be avoided.
the urinalysis verifies resolution of the problem. Animals
Urethral tone may be reduced pharmacologically with
with urinary tract infections secondary to neurologic dis-
α-adrenergic blocking agents and skeletal muscle relaxants,
ease should be considered to have a “complicated"
'uri-
 nary tract infection and should receive a longer course
benzamine, a nonspecifc a-adrenergic blocking agent,
.is
of therapy than a dog with an "uncomplicated" or simple
sometimes effective at a dosage of 0.5 mg/kg of body weight
urinary tract infection. Caution should be exercised when
daily divided into two doses (small animals). Prazosin is an
ease. In these animals the probability of reinfection is great.
Therefore the chronic use of antibiotic therapy may lead
-o auossarxa rpperq aroaq snuu oe parasrue
 to the development of reinfection with multidrug-resistant
tension is the most common side effect of α-adrenergic block-
 organisms. Animals receiving antinflammatory drugs such
 ing agents. Diazepam is used for relaxation of the striated
as corticosteroids are at increased risk of urinary tract
external urethral sphincter.
infection. In addition, corticosteroids can suppress the
Bethanechol, a cholinergic agent, can be given to stimu-
 inflammatory response to infection. Risk factors for urinary
late bladder contraction. We have not found it effective if
the bladder is areflexic, however. If bladder contractions are
disk disease include females, dogs that cannot ambulate or
present but are inadequate for good voiding, bethanechol in
voluntarily urinate, dogs not administered perioperative
doses of 2.5 to 10 mg given subcutaneously three times daily
cefazolin, and dogs whose body temperature falls to less
may be beneficial. Side effects include increased motility of
than 35° C during anesthesia.49 Asymptomatic infection
the gastrointestinal tract, salivation, and rarely bronchocon-
may go undetected unless urine is cultured repeatedly for
striction. Oral doses of up to 50 mg also may be effective.
microorganisms.
 Because bethanechol is a nonspecifc cholinergic-acting agent
 If the detrusor reflex returns with good voiding of urine,
[also will act on the nicotinic receptors of the preganglionic
the bladder is catheterized or ultrasounded periodically to
70
PARTI
 Fundamentals
ensure that minimal residual urine is present. Voiding is
Detrusor Hyperreflexia
often incomplete in the early stages, and residual urine in
Frequent voiding of small volumes of urine, often without
 quantities of 10 to 20 mL or more can result in a urinary
much warning and with little or no residual urine, is charac-
tract infection.
teristic of detrusor hyperrefexia.&l Partial long-tract lesions
 or abnormalities of the cerebellum may produce these signs.
Detrusor Areflexia With Normal Sphincter Tone
The condition is not usually detrimental to the patient, but
Some lesions of the spinal cord and brainstem may abolish
it may be an early sign of a progressive disease of the nervous
the detrusor reflex without producing hypertonus of the
system. Additionally, it is socially unacceptable in the house
urethral sphincter The bladder can be expressed manually
pet. The condition must be differentiated from the small,
in many of these cases. The urethra of the female dog is short
contracted, irritable bladder associated with chronic cystitis.
 Anticholinergic medication may be of beneft. Propanthe-
Manual expression may be effective even in the context of
line [Pro-Banthine) is used in dosages of 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg
sphincter hypertonus. Manual expression, if adequate, and
of body weight every 8 to 12 hours. The lowest dose should
be tried frst, and the dose should be increased in small
tion than is indwelling urethral catheterization.75 Other
increments until a response is obtained. Oxybutynin may be
aspects of management are the same as when sphincter tone
more effective than propantheline in some cases. Overdos-
is increased.
 a o u u r a  asr  e
side effects characteristic of this group of drugs.81
Detrusor Areflexia With Sphincter Hypotonia
Lesions of the sacral spinal cord or nerve roots produce
Reflex Dyssynergia
a deficit of the LMNs of both the bladder and sphincter.
Initiation of a detrusor reflex with voiding followed by an
Management of the bladder is the same as that described
uncontrolled reflex contraction of the urethral sphincter is
previously.
termed reflex dyssynergia. Partial lesions of the long tracts are
 Constant leakage of urine through an incompetent sphinc-
presumed to be responsible31,37The problemmay be related
ter leads to soiling of the skin, irritation, and ulceration. Fre-
to uninhibited reflexes of the external urethral sphincter [skel-
 quent evacuation of the bladder reduces the problem but does
etal muscle) or to increased tone in the smooth muscle related
not eliminate it. Hydrotherapy, dry and padded bedding, and
 to adrenergic innervation.
 protective emollients are useful adjuncts.
 Limited reports in humans and dogs have not yet provided a
Long-term management of the patient with sphincter
defnitive therapeutic regimen.37.71.72 Skeletal muscle reflexes
atonia is problematic. Surgical reconstruction of the bladder
may be reduced with diazepam [centrally acting muscle relax-
neck and the urethra is sometimes successful. Prosthetic ure-
ant) or dantrolene.7782 Sympathetic [adrenergic) activity can
thral sphincters have been successfully used in people,
,but
be reduced with an α-adrenergic blocking agent.38.78
the cost of these devices currently limits their applicability
in animals.
NormalDetrusorReflexWithDecreased Sphincter Tone
Medical treatment is aimed at increasing urethral closure pres-
Detrusor Areflexia from Overdistention
sure.43.73.83.84 Many incontinent female dogs respond well
Severe overdistention of the bladder can disrupt the tight
to hormonal supplementation.73.83 If hormone therapy is
junctions between the detrusor muscle fibers, which prevents
 ineffective in an animal with normal voiding but leakage, an
excitation-contraction coupling. Neural elements may be
 α-adrenergic stimulating drug, such as phenylpropanolamine in
normal.
combination or alone may be effective.85 The dosage is 1.5 mg/
Complete evacuation of the bladder must be accom-
plished early and maintained for 1 to 2 weeks.7l.72 Manual
Side effects include restlessness and irritability. Surgical
expression is not recommended because of the increased
management using colposuspension, cystourethropexy, and
stress on the detrusor muscle. Intermittent aseptic urethral
catheterization can be performed at least three times a day.
Long-term closed-system indwelling urethral catheterization
 a technique that moves the bladder neck from an intrapelvic to
should be avoided if possible. When necessary, the system
an intraabdominal position to restore continence by transfer-
should be used for several days, followed by intermittent
ring the pressure to the proximal urethra and bladder neck.
catheterization. Function should return in l to 2 weeks.
 Bethanechol may be of benefit, especially if partial contrac-
 tions are present. In some cases of chronic overdistention,
CASE STUDIES
return to function may not occur.
 Frequent urinalysis with cultures when indicated, is man-
 For the folwing cases, the reader should concentrate on the
datory. Infection in the overdistended bladder leads to fibro-
problem related to micturition, even though it may be only a
sis of the detrusor muscle, and adequate function cannot be
part of the total deficit. Using Table 3-2, decide the location of
restored in this case.
the lesion causing the problem.
CASE STUDY 3-1
HANS
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
- Physical Examination
Canine, dachshund, male, 5 years old.
The bladder is large and easily palpated. It cannot be manu-
 ally expressed, even with considerable pressure. The dog
. History
makes no attempt to initiate urination.
The dog became paralyzed in the pelvic limbs last night.
 The dog was alone in a fenced-in backyard when the own-
. Neurologic Examination
ers found him.
Mental status
Alert
Continued
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of Micturition
71
CASE STUDY 3-1
HANS-
cont'd
Gait and posture
: Lesion Localization
Paraplegic
The neurologic examination indicates an UMN paralysis of
 the pelvic limbs and a T3 to L3 myelopathy. The sensory
Postural reactions
examination localizes the lesion to T13-L2. The bladder
Normal in the thoracic limbs and absent in the pelvic limbs
problem can be characterized as detrusor areflexia with
sphincter hypertonia, which is typical of a lesion cranial to
Spinal reffexes
L7. Cystometry confrms detrusor areflexia.
The spinal reflexes are normal in the thoracic limbs. In the
pelvic limbs the patellar reflexes are exaggerated [+3) bilat-
· Diagnosis
erally, and the flexion reflexes are normal (+2). The perineal
The dog has a herniated intervertebral disk, which is decom-
and bulbocavernosus refexes are present. The anal sphinc-
pressed by hemilaminectomy. Seven days after surgery, yol-
ter has good tone. The cutaneous trunci refex is absent cau-
untary movements of the pelvic limbs are seen, and voiding.
dal to Ll.
 begins with minimal pressure of the abdomen.
Cranial nerves
: Diagnostic Plan and Treatment
Normal
Management of the bladder should include intermittent
Spinal palpation
 der expression. Administration of an α-adrenergic blocking
Palpation of the spine reveals paraspinal hyperesthesia from
 agent relaxes the urethral sphincter for easier manual blad-
T'13 to L2.
der expression. Voiding returned to normal in 10 days. Uri-
 nalysis is normal upon discharge.
Sensory evaluation
 Deep pain perception is present in the pelvic limbs
CASE STUDY 3-2
TWINKIE
veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
Cranial nerves
Canine, Pekingese, female, 6 years old.
Normal
- History
Sensory evaluation
The dog suddenly became paralyzed in the pelvic limbs
 No deep pain perception exists caudal to T13.
while playing with the owners' children. When frst seen by
the referring veterinarian 4 hours later, the dog was unable
: Lesion Localization
to ambulate with increased muscle tone in the pelvic limbs,
The dog has LMN paralysis of the pelvic limbs and the
had exaggerated patellar reflexes but decreased flexion
sphincters. This finding indicates a lesion from L4 through
reflexes bilaterally, and no sensation caudal to L4 vertebra.
S3. Initially the lesion spared the L4-6 segments because the
patellar reflex was intact and extension of the limb occurred.
- Physical Examination
The loss of pain perception has progressed from L4 to T13
The dog is seen 12 hours after the onset of paralysis. Urine
 in 8 hours, and the patellar refex has been lost, indicating a
is leaking during the trip to the clinic, and the dog is obvi-
 progressive lesion. Detrusor areflexia and sphincter areflexia
ously in pain. The bladder is large and is easily expressed on
are present, consistent with a lesion of the sacral segments 
palpation.
 of the spinal cord.
· Neurologic examination
· Diagnosis
Mental status
The dog has a herniated disk with ischemic myelomalacia.
The dog is alert and anxious.
: Diagnostic Plan and Treatment
Gait and posture
The prognosis is so poor based on examination findings that
The dog is recumbent and unable to ambulate in the pelvic
no other tests are performed. Cystometry would confrm
limbs.
the detrusor areflexia. The urethral pressure profle would
be expected to show pressures below normal. EMG would
Postural reactions
demonstrate no yoluntary or reflex activity, but fibrillation
 The thoracic limbs are normal. Postural reactions are absent
potentials would not be present this early. If management 
in both pelvic limbs.
were attempted, manual evacuation of the bladder probably
would be effective.
Spinal reffexes
Spinal refexes are absent in the pelvic limbs. The perineal
reflex is absent, and the anal sphincter is dilated.
72
PARTI
 Fundamentals
CASE STUDY 3-3
CHI-CHI
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
: Lesion Localization
Canine, Chihuahua, male, 3 years old.
The seizures indicate abnormality of the forebrain. This
 may represent a primary problem involving the forebrain
.History
or a metabolic problem resulting in seizures. The change in
The dog has had generalized seizures at least three times in
urination habits also could be either forebrain or metabolic
the past Z weeks. The previous medical history is noncon-
(polyuria).
tributory. The dog started urinating in the house within the
past 3 months, although he was well house-trained since a
■ Ruleouts
 puppy The dog has not been administered any medications.
1.1
 Hydrocephalus
2.1
Encephalitis
· Physical Examination
3. Tumor [unlikely)
The skull is dome shaped, and the fontanelle is 1.5 cm in
 4. Idiopathic epilepsy
 diameter. The bladder is empty on palpation.
: Diagnostic Plan
. Neurologic Examination
A laboratory evaluation is indicated to rule out metabolic
Mental status
diseases. Brain imaging would assess presence of a structural
The dog is alert.
lesion in the brain. Cystometry would assess detrusor mus-
 dle function.
Gait and posture
Normal
. Results and Diagnosis
A CBC, chemistry profle, and urinalysis were within nor
Postural reactions
mal limits. Computed tomography confirmed hydrocepha-
The postural reactions are judged to be a bit slow.
lus. The cystometrogram was normal and showed adequate
capacity and a good detrusor reflex. The voiding behavior
Spinal reffexes
was related to cerebral dysfunction.
Normal
 Treatment
Cranial nerves
The dog was treated with corticosteroids and complete
Normal
remission of signs resulted (see Chapter 12 for a discussion
of hydrocephalus).
Sensory evaluation
Normal
REFERENCES
 10. Sundin T, Dahlstrom A, Norlen L: The sympathetic inner-
vation and adrenoreceptor function of the human lower
1. Oliver JE, Selcer RR: Neurogenic causes of abnormal mic-
urinary tract in the normal state and after parasympa-
turition in the dog and cat, Vet Clin North Am 4(3):517-
thetic denervation, Invest Urol 14[4):322-328, 1977.
524, 1974.
11.(
Oliver JE: Disorders of micturition. In Hoerlein BF, editor:
2. Fletcher TF, Bradley WE: Neuroanatomy of bladder-ure-
Canine neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.
thra, J Urol 119:153-160, 1978.
12.
 deGroat WC: Booth AM: Physiology of the urinary blad-
 3. Petras JM, Cummings JF: Sympathetic and parasympa-
der and urethra, Ann Intern Med 92[2):312-315, 1980.
thetic innervation of the urinary bladder and urethra,
13. Sundin T, Dahlstrom A: The sympathetic innervation of
Brain Res 153:363-369, 1978.
the urinary bladder and urethra in the normal state and
4. Oliver JE Jr, Bradley WE, Fletcher TF: Identification of
 after parasympathetic denervation at the spinal root level.
preganglionic parasympathetic neurons in the sacral spinal
An experimental study in cats, Scand J Urol Nephrol
cord of the cat, J Comp Neurol 137[3):321-328, 1969.
7(2):131-149, 1973.
5. Morgan C, deGroat WC, Nadelhaft I: The spinal distri-
14. O'Brien D: Neurogenic disorders of micturition, Vet Clin
 bution of sympathetic preganglionic and visceral primary
North Am Small Anim Pract 18[3):529-544, 1988.
afferent neurons that send axons into the hypogastric
15. O'Brien DP: Disorders of the urogenital system, Semin
nerves of the cat, J Comp Neurol 243:23-40, 1986.
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5[1):57-66, 1990.
6. Oliver JE Jr, Bradley WE, Fletcher TF: Spinal cord rep-
16. Rawlings CA, Coates JR, Purinton PT: Evaluation of a selec-
resentation of the micturition reflex, J Comp Neurol
tive neurectomy model for low urethral pressure inconti-
137(3):329-346, 1969.
nence in female dogs, Am J Vet Res 66:695-699, 2005.
7. Elbadawi A, Schenk EA: A new theory of the innervation
17. Samson MD, Reddy VK: Localization of the sacral
of bladder musculature. Part 4. Innervation of the vesico-
parasympathetic nucleus in the dog, Am J Vet Res
urethral junction and external urethral sphincter, J Urol
43(10):1833-1836, 1982.
111(5):613-615, 1974.
18. Purinton PT, Oliver JE: Spinal cord origin of innerva-
 8. Moreau PM: Neurogenic disorders of micturition in the
tion to the bladder and urethra of the dog, Exp Neurol
dog and cat, Compend Contin Educ Vet 4[1):12-22, 1982.
65{2]:422-434, 1979.
9. Rohner TJ, Raezer DM, Wein AJ: Contractile responses
19. Purinton PT, Oliver JE Jr, Bradley WE: Differences in
of dog bladder neck muscle to adrenergic drugs, J Urol
routing of pelvic visceral afferent fbers in the dog and cat,
105:657-661, 1971.
Exp Neurol 73(3):725-731, 1981.
CHAPTER 3
Disorders of Micturition
73
20. Fowler CJ, Griffths D, deGroat WC: The neural control
44. Holt PE: Urinary incontinence in the bitch due to sphinc-
of micturition, Nat Rev Neurosci 9:453-466, 1970.
ter mechanism incompetence: prevalence in referred dogs
21. Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WE: Histology of the
and retrospective analysis of sixty cases, J Small Anim
canine urethra II. Morphometry of the male pelvic ure-
Pract 26[4):181-190, 1985.
thra, Anat Rec 199(2):187-195, 1981.
 45. Aaron A, Eggleton K, Power C: Urethral sphincter mecha-
22. Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WE: Histology of the
nism incompetence in male dogs: a retrospective analysis
canine urethra. I. Morphometry of the female urethra,
of 54 cases, Vet Rec 139(22):542-546, 1996.
Anat Rec 199(2):177-186, 1981.
46. Keane DP, O'Sullivan S: Urinary incontinence: anatomy,
23. Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WE: Morphometry
physiology, and pathophysiology, Baillieres Clin Obstet
of the male feline pelvic urethra, J Urol 129:186-189,
Gynaecol 14:207-226, 2000.
1983.
47. Lane IF, Lappin MR: Urinary incontinence and congeni-
24. Cullen WC, Fletcher TF, Bradley WE: Morphometry of
tal urogenital anomalies in small animals. In Bonagura
the female feline urethra, J Urol 29:190-192, 1983.
JD, Kirk RW, eds: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIl,
25. Oliver J, Bradley W, Fletcher T: Spinal cord distribution
Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders, pp 1022-1026.
 of the somatic innervation of the external urethral sphinc-
48. Gulford WG, Shaw DP, O'Brien DP: Fecal incontinence,
ter of the cat, J Neurol Sei 10(1):11-23, 1970.
urinary incontinence, and priapism associated with multi-
26. Kuru M, Iwanaga T: Ponto-sacral connections in the
focal distemper encephalomyelitis in a dog, J Am Vet Med
medial reticulospinal tract subserving storage of urine, J
Assoc 197(1):90-92, 1990.
Comp Neurol 127:2-41, 1966.
49. Stifler KS, Stevenson MAM, Sanchez S: Prevalence and
 27. Gjone R, Setekleiv J: Excitatory and inhibitory bladder
characterization of urinary tract infections in dogs with
responses to stimulation of the cerebral cortex in the cat,
surgically treated type l intervertebral disc extrusion, Vet
Acta Physiol Scand 59:337-348, 1963.
Surg 35:330-336, 2006.
50. Lane IF: A diagnostic approach to micturition disorders,
micturition released from cerebral control, Am J Physiol
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 98:49-57, 2003.
115:694-700, 1936.
51. Oliver JE: Urodynamic assessment. In Oliver JE, Hoerlein
29. Bradley WE, Teague CT: Cerebellar influence on the mic-
BF, editors: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB
turition reflex, Exp Neurol 23:399-411, 1969.
Saunders.
30. deGroat WC: Nervous control of the urinary bladder of
 52. Barsanti JA, Finco DR, Brown J: Effect of atropine on
the cat, Brain Res 87:201-211, 1975.
cystometry and urethral pressure profilometry in the dog.
31. Oliver JE: Dysuria caused by refex dyssynergia. In Kirk
Am J Vet Res 49[1):112-114, 1988.
RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy, ed 8, Philadel-
53. Johnson CA, Beemsterboer JM, Gray PR: Effects of vari-
phia, 1983, WB Saunders.
ous sedatives on air cystometry in dogs, Am J Vet Res
32.
 Bradley WE, Timm GW: Physiology of micturition, Vet
49(9):1525-1528, 1988.
Clin North Am 4(3):487-500, 1974.
54. Oliver JE, Young WO:Air cystometry in dogs under xylazine-
33. Augsburger HR, Cruz-Orive LM, Arnold S: Morphol-
induced restraint, Am J Vet Res 34[11):1433-1435, 1973.
ogy and stereology of the female canine urethra corre-
55. Clark ES, Semrad SD, Bichsel P: Cystometrography and
lated with the urethral pressure profle, Acta Anat (Basel)
urethral pressure profles in healthy horse and pony mares,
148[4]:197-205, 1993.
Am J Vet Res 48[4]:552-555, 1987.
34. O'Brien DP, Johnson GC: Dysautonomia and autonomic
56. Kay AD, Lovoie JP: Urethral pressure proflometry in
neuropathies, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
mares, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:212-216, 1987.
32:251-265, 2002.
 57. Gregory CR, Willits NH: Electromyographic and urethral
35. Kaplan SA, Chancellor MB, Blaivas JG: Bladder and
pressure evaluations: assessment of urethral function in
sphincter behavior in patients with spinal cord lesions,
female and ovariohysterectomized female cats, Am J Vet
J Urol 146(1):113-117, 1991.
Res 47[7):1472-1475, 1986.
36. Galeano C, Jubelin B, Germain L: Micturitional reflexes
58. Richter KP, Ling GV: Effects of xylazine on the urethral
in chronic spinalized cats: the underactive detrusor and
pressure profle ofhealthy dogs, Am J Vet Res 46(9):1881-
detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, Neurourol Urodyn 5:45-
1886, 1985.
63, 1986.
59. Rosin A, Rosin E, Oliver J: Canine urethral pressure pro-
37. Barsanti JA, Coates JR, Bartges JW: Detrusor-sphincter
file, Am J Vet Res 41(7):1113-1116, 1980.
dyssynergia, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
60. Rosin AE, Barsanti JA: Diagnosis of urinary incontinence
26(2):327-338, 1996.
in dogs: role of the urethral pressure profle, J Am Vet
38. Diaz Espineira MM, Viehoff FW: Nickel RF: Idiopathic
Med Assoc 178[8):814-822, 1981.
 detrusor-urethral dyssynergia in dogs: a retrospective
61. Rawlings CA, Coates JR, Chernosky A: Stress leak point
analysis of 22 cases, J Small Anim Pract 39[6):264-270,
pressures and urethral pressure profle tests in clinically
1998.
normal female dogs, Am J Vet Res 60(6):676-678, 1999.
 39. Gookin JL, Bunch SE: Detrusor-striated sphincter dyssyn-
62. Oliver JE Jr, Young WO: Evaluation of pharmacologic
ergia in a dog, J Vet Intern Med 10(5):339-344, 1996.
 agents for restraint in cystometry in the dog and cat, Am J
 40. Coates JR: Urethral dyssynergia in lumbosacral syndrome,
Vet Res 34(5):665-668, 1973.
Proc ACVIM, Chicago, pp 299-302, 1999.
63. Rawlings CA, Barsanti JA, Chemosky A: Results of cystom-
41. Barsanti JA: Diagnostic procedures in urology, Vet Clin
etry and urethral pressure proflometry in dogs sedated with
North Am Small Anim Pract 14(1):3-14, 1984.
medetomidine or xylazine, Am J Vet Res 62:167-170, 2001.
42. Arnold S: Relationship of incontinence to neutering. In
 64. Combrisson H, Robain G, Cotard JP: Comparative effects 
Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Kirk's current veterinary
of xylazine and propofol on the urethral pressure profle
therapy Xl: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB
ofhealthy dogs, Am J Vet Res 54[12):1986-1989, 1993.
Saunders.
 65. Gregory SP, Holt PE: Comparison of stressed simultaneous 
43. Gregory SP: Developments in the understanding of the
urethral pressure profles between anesthetized continent
pathophysiology of urethral sphincter mechanism in com-
and incontinent bitches with urethral sphincter mechanism
petence in the bitch, Br Vet J 150(2):135-150, 1994.
incompetence, Am J Vet Res 54[2):216-222, 1993.
74
PARTI
 Fundamentals
66. Straeter-Knowlen IM, Marks SL, Speth RC: Effect of suc-
78. Fischer JR, Lane IF, Cribb AE: Urethral pressure profle
cinylcholine, diazepam, and dantrolene on the urethral
and hemodynamic effects of phenoxybenzamine and
pressure profle of anesthetized, healthy, sexually intact
prazosin in non-sedated male beagle dogs, Can J Vet Res
male cats, Am J Vet Res 55[12):1739-1744, 1994.
67:30-38, 2003.
 67. Barsanti JA, Mahaffey MB, Crowell WA: Cystometry in
79. Arnold S, Chew DJ, Hubler M: Reproducibility of ure-
dogs under oxymorphone and acepromazine restraint,
thral pressure profles in clinically normal sexually intact
Am J Vet Res 45[10):2152-2153, 1984.
female dogs by use of microtransducer catheters, Am J Vet
68. Goldstein RE, Westropp JL: Urodynamic testing in the
Res 54[8):1347-1351, 1993.
diagnosis of small animal micturition, Clin Tech Small
80. Awad SA, Downie JE: The effect of adrenergic drugs
Anim Pract 20:65-72, 2005.
and hypogastric nerve stimulation on the canine ure-
69. Moreau PM, Lees GE, Gross DR: Simultaneous cystom-
thra. A radiologic and urethral pressure study, Invest Urol
 etry and urofowmetry (micturition study) for evaluation
13(4):298-301, 1976.
of the caudal part of the urinary tract in dogs: studies of
81. Lappin MR, Barsanti JA: Urinary incontinence secondary
the technique, Am J Vet Res 44(9):1769-1773, 1983.
to idiopathic detrusor instability: cystometrographic diag-
70. Moreau PM, Lees GE, Gross DR: Simultaneous cystom-
  s om    e si
etry and uroflowmetry (micturition study) for evaluation
cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191[11):1439-1442, 1987.
of the caudal part of the urinary tract in dogs: reference
82. Teague CT, Merrill DC: Effect of baclofen and dantrolene
values for healthy animals sedated with xylazine, Am J
on bladder stimulator-induced detrusor-sphincter dyssyn-
Vet Res 44(9):1774-1781, 1983.
ergia in dogs, Urology 11(5):531-535, 1978.
71. Fischer JR, Lane IF: Medical treatment of voiding dys-
83. Holt PE: Pathophysiology and treatment 
of urethral
function in dogs and cats, Vet Med 98:67-73, 2003.
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the incontinent
72. Lane IF: Diagnosis and management of urinary retention,
bitch, Vet Med Int 3:15-26, 1992.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:25-57, 2000.
 84. Richter KP, Ling GV: Clinical response and urethral pres-
73. Lane IF: Treating urinary incontinence, Vet Med 98:58-
sure profle changes after phenylpropanolamine in dogs
63,2003.
with primary sphincter incompetence, J Am Vet Med
74. Bubenik LJ, Hosgood GL, Waldron DR: Frequency of uri-
Assoc 187(6):605-611, 1985.
nary tract infection in catheterized dogs and comparison
 85. Creed KE: Effect of hormones on urethral sensitivity to
of bacterial culture and susceptibility testing results for
phenylephrine in normal and incontinent dogs, Res Vet Sci 
catheterized and noncatheterized dogs with urinary tract
34(2):177-181, 1983.
infections, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:893-899, 2007
86. Arnold S, Hubler M, Lott-Stolz G: Treatment of urinary
75. Bubenik LJ, Hosgood G: Urinary tract infection in dogs
incontinence in bitches by endoscopic injection of glu-
with thoracolumbar intervertebral disc herniation and
taraldehyde cross-linked collagen, J Small Anim Pract
-sardxa renueu Aq paseueu uoounjsp rappelq Areuun
37(4):163-168, 1996.
sion, indwelling catheterization or intermittent catheter-
 87. Arnold S, Jager P, DiBartola SP: Treatment of urinary
ization, Vet Surg 37:791-800, 2008.
incontinence in dogs by endoscopic injection of Teflon,
76. Khanna OP, Gonick P: Effects of phenoxybenzamine
J Am Vet Med Assoc 195[10):1369-1374, 1989.
hydrochloride on canine lower urinary
tract: clinical
 88. White RN: Urethropexy for the management of urethral
implications, Urology 6(3):323-330, 1975.
sphincter mechanism incompetence in the bitch, J Small 
77. Straeter-Knowlen IM, Marks SL, Rishniw M: Urethral
Anim Pract 42:481-486, 2001.
pressure response to smooth and skeletal muscle relaxants
in anesthetized, adult male cats with naturally acquired
urethral obstruction, Am J Vet Res 56(7):919-923, 1995.
CHAPTER
Confirming a Diagnosis
fter the history has been taken and the physical and
In recent years, disorders of inborn errors of metabolism
neurologic examinations have been completed,
have been identified antemortem through measurement of
list of neurologic problems is made. From this list of
the concentration of organic acids in specimens such as blood
problems, a specific and accurate anatomic diagnosis must be
and urine.2 These disorders are discussed in Chapter 15.
established. Chapters l and Z provide the information nec-
Few specialized laboratory perform these tests. It is important
essary for identifying neurologic problems and for making
to use a laboratory experienced in the evaluation of animal
an anatomic diagnosis. Once an anatomic diagnosis is made,
 samples.
a systematic and ordered list of potential disease processes
that can manifest with problems similar to that of the ani-
mal being examined, a differential diagnosis, is constructed.
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
Chapters 5 through 15 elaborate on each problem in terms
of arriving at a definitive diagnosis through appropriate diag-
Unlike all other body systems, normal neurologic function
nostic tests. The differential diagnosis is ordered from most
is largely predicated on normal structure. As such, for many
likely to least likely diseases. This chapter discusses the tests
neurologic problems much of the diagnostic workup entails
the use of diagnostic imaging to establish the presence of an
 gests references for further reading on techniques and inter-
abnormal structure of the nervous system. For this reason, it is
pretation; and outlines the indications, contraindications, and
essential that an accurate anatomic diagnosis is established so
limitations of the tests.
that the appropriate region of the nervous system is evaluated.
An incorrect anatomic diagnosis may lead to misdiagnosis or
errors in judgment regarding the clinical relevancy of imaging
CLINICAL LABORATORY STUDIES:
findings.
HEMATOLOGY, BLOOD CHEMISTRY
ANALYSIS, AND URINALYSIS
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Availability
Availability
With ever greater frequency, magnetic resonance imaging
All clinical practices have access to routine hematology stud-
 (MRI) is becoming more available to veterinarians in general
ies, chemistry analysis, and urinalysis.
and specialty practice. Imaging centers dedicated to MRI for
small animals are becoming established throughout the United
Indications
States and other parts of the world. Many of these facilities
A laboratory database is required for all ill animals so that
have an onsite board-certified veterinary anesthesiologist to
common diseases are not overlooked and the general status
anesthetize animals and access via telemedicine to board-cer-
of the animal can be assessed. Clinical laboratory studies are
tified radiologists to provide interpretation of studies. In most
osp unq uim siee sunieaa u quedu aeads
instances, prior screening of suitable cases should be done in
ders, seizures, signs of multisystem disease, and where general
 concert with a neurologist to ensure the appropriate region
anesthesia is required for diagnostic procedures or surgery.
[i.e., correct anatomic diagnosis) of the nervous system is
Occasionally, blood gas analysis is required to assess aspects
a jo sneis asepie pe 'uxo reuaa se uns
ready access for those owners willing to pursue diagnostic eval-
patient not appreciated with routine blood chemistry analysis.
uation. MRI units also are becoming more commonplace for
Similarly, concentrations of electrolytes in their ionized states
large and small animal specialty veterinary hospitals depend-
(i.e., ionized calcium) may be useful in assessing the metabolic
ing on the individual hospital's ability to support the expense.
status of the patient.
Likewise, most veterinary schools have MRI capabilities. MRI
75
76
PARTI
 Fundamentals
units vary in their strength and sophistication of software,
Contrast media accomplishes this by altering the local magnetic
which may impact on diagnostic quality. Alternatively, acces-
environment, causing the Tl constant to shorten, which
sibility to MRI may be gained through contracts with an imag-
increases the signal intensity.4 In tissues where contrast media
ing facility for humans or companies providing mobile MRI
may accumulate related to an abnormal vascular supply such as
services.
a tumor, the lesion becomes hyperintense on TlW images (Fig-
As with many imaging procedures, animals must be anes-
ure 4-1). In addition, a variety of sequences have been designed
d  s a t d    Pa
that aim to suppress the signal from certain tissues, such as
ing anesthesia need consideration. Safety in the environment
CSF and fat. Many of these sequences are referred to as "inver-
of an MRI unit is of utmost importance. Inhalant anesthesia
sion recovery" sequences. Fluid attenuated inversion recovery
 delivery systems and monitoring equipment constructed of
(FLAIR) can be obtained as a T2W sequence, which maintains
nonferrous materials [eg, MRI compatible) are available.
the contrast between gray and white matter, yet it suppresses
Alternatively, anesthesia can be maintained using intermittent
the signal from fluid with low or no protein content such as
 boluses or constant rate infusion of anesthetics.
4-2). This sequence allows improved identification of patholo-
Indications
 gies, such as tissue edema, and aids in identifying those lesions
Without question, the advent of MRI in veterinary medicine
anatomically adjacent to areas such as a ventricle.5.6 Short tau
has revolutionized the diagnostic acumen in examining neu-
inversion recovery (STIR) is another sequence with character-
rologic animals. The primary reason for this is related to the
istics of a T2W image, yet the normal hyperintense signal of fat
superior soft tissue contrast that MRI provides, allowing dif-
is suppressed.7 Alternatively, the normal signal intensity of fat
ferentiation of anatomic structures. No other imaging pra-
 can be suppressed on any sequence using a different technique
cedure provides similar soft tissue discrimination along with
[chemical fat suppression pulse). Many times fat suppression
exceptional resolution. Moreover, imaging can be performed
is used in sequences performed after intravenous administra-
in different planes [axial, sagittal, dorsal) without a loss of
tion of contrast media to make lesions more conspicuous. Some
resolution enabling examination of complex anatomic regions.
sequences are designed to highlight blood products as are found
Consequently, MRI is the preferred imaging modality for the
in hemorrhage. One such sequence is called T2*-weighted (T2
assessment of nearly all neurologic problems regardlless of the
site of the lesion [i.e., brain, spinal cord, and to a lesser degree,
the magnetic properties ofhemosiderin, oxy-, deoxy-, and met-
the peripheral nervous system [PNS].
hemoglobin and their location intracellularly or extracellularly
 MRIis based on the magnetic properties ofhydrogen atoms,
to identify areas of accumulation of these blood products in
which are extremely abundant in tissues containing water,
hemorrhage.8 Whereas most sequences take several minutes to
 protein, and lipids. With its unpaired electron, the positively
acquire, sequences taking several seconds are available to allow
charged hydrogen atoms spin around their axis, similar to a
rapid identification of lesions or pathology such as increased
planet, and create small magnetic fields. Placed within the
CSF protein content in meningitis, which is often not observed
external magnetic feld of the MRI unit, the orientation of the
with conventional sequences.? Lastly, sequences can be per-
hydrogen atoms align together, akin to the needle of a com-
formed to investigate functional disturbances, such as blood
pass placed beside a magnet. Energy in the form of a radiofre-
 quency pulse changes the alignment of the atoms. Once the
ing), dynamic contrast enhancement, and MR spectroscopy,
 radiofrequency pulse is removed, the perturbed atoms return
which defines the molecular makeup of a lesion.
ua aseaar os sp ui e uuo snrd r 
 Proper patient positioning is crucial. Animals should be
 a radiofrequency pulse, back to the environment. It is this
positioned with the long axis [i.e., vertebral column) in straight
radiofrequency pulse that helps form the resultant image. The
alignment. Likewise, precise transverse alignment allows for
rate at which this occurs differs for different tissues based on
comparison between affected and normal structures at the
inherent tissue characteristics. Two time constants, termed T1
same anatomic site. Some disease processes necessitate that
and T2, describe this process. The Tl and T2 constants vary
the animal be positioned in a particular manner to observe
between different tissues more greatly than tissue density.
lesions and help define potential surgical interventions. Such
which explains the better soft tissue contrast provided by MRI
 lesions are referred to as dynamic lesions. Repeated imaging
over computed tomography [CT).3 A series of images, called
 of an animal in differing position is often performed in large-
a pulse sequence, can be acquired based or “weighted” on the
breed dogs with caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy or with
Tl or T2 properties, referred to as Tl-weighted (TlW) or
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
T2-weighted (T2W) images. These two image types form the
To effectively communicate the results of imaging studies
backhone of MRI.The resultant images are gray scale images in
with other veterinarians for consultation or referral, a standard
which the degree of relative darkness or lightness is referred to
approach to describe lesions should be performed. One such
as intensity. Dark or relative black areas are called hypointense
approach is described here. Lesions should be characterized
and light or relatively white areas are called hyperintense. Typi-
based on number [single or multiple), intensity (hypointense,
hyperintense, isointense [terms differ based on imaging modal-
identification of anatomic structures. In general, nervous tis-
ity in relationship to an adjacent normal area]), distribution of
 sues are homogeneously gray while structures containing fluids
with low protein content such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) are
[well or poorly defned), anatomic location of the lesion and
hypointense or black. T2W images are capable of delineat-
lesion location in reference to the central nervous system (CNS)
ing gray and white matter structures whereas fluids such as
and meninges [intracranial lesions are considered intraaxial or
CSF are hyperintense or white. Often T2W images are used to
extraaxial based on location within the brain parenchyma or not,
respectively). Lesions affcting the spinal cord are considered
after intravenous administration of gadolinium-based contrast
extradural (outside the dura), intradural/extramedullary (con-
tained within the subarachnoid space), or intramedullary [within
images before administration of contrast media. The use of
the spinal cord parenchyma). Similarly, lesions are characterized
intravenous administration of contrast media can increase the
based on pattern of contrast enhancement. Descriptions should
 conspicuity of a lesion and better defne its borders by creating
detail degree and distribution of contrast enhancement. Finally
 greater contrast between the lesion and surrounding tissue.4
secondary consequences to the surrounding anatomy, such as
CHAPTER 4
Confirming a Diagnosis
77
Hgure 4-1 Magnetic resonance images of the brain of a 10-year old male neutered, mixed-breed
dog that was evaluated for a l-month history of recurrent seizures and a change in mental state. A,
Axial T2W images were obtained at the level of the midbrain. There is a single, well-circumscribed,
lobulated intraaxial mass within the left lateral ventricle of the cerebrum. The mass has a heterog-
enous intensity with areas of hyperintensity and isointensity compared with the normal cerebrum
(black arrow). The mass has expanded the left cerebrum, causing compression of the midbrain. The
ventral portion of the left lateral ventricle is dilated. B, Axial T2W FLAIR image at the same level as
in A. Edema in the overlying cerebrum is more conspicuous as a result of suppression of the signal
intensity in the lateral ventricle (white arrow). C, T1 W image at the same level as in A. The mass is
isointense compared with the normal cerebrum, which makes it difficult to appreciate its borders. D,
T1W images obtained after intravenous administration of a gadolinium-based contrast media. The
mass displays strong, homogeneous contrast enhancement. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.]
compression or distortion of local anatomy, should be character-
animals with severe alterations in sensorium. Before general
ized. Using a combination of sequences depicting lesion char-
 anesthesia for imaging, therapeutic measures should be taken
acteristics combined with contrast enhancement patterns, MRI
may provide a relatively accurate presumptive antemortem
confirmed increases in ICP. For details, see Chapter 12. From
 diagnosis in many cases.
a technical standpoint, whereas generally inconsequential to
-e u pnoane arasaae aq Aeu Anenb sae reue au
Contraindications
mals with a metallic implant, gun shot or pellts, and micro-
There are very few contraindications for MRl. As with all
chips. Animals with cardiac pacemakers or other implantable
 diagnostic procedures that necessitate general anesthesia, the
electronic devices cannot undergo MRI imaging.
clinician must weigh the anesthetic risk to the animal against
the value of the information gained with the imaging pro-
Computed Tomography
cedure. Consequently, before imaging, careful consideration
Availability
should be given to animals that are a poor anesthetic risk. One
The expanded utility of CT in animals beyond its use in evalu-
such risk is increased intracranial pressure. During anesthe-
 ating the nervous system combined with the relative inexpen-
sia, animals with increased intracranial pressure may lose the
siveness of new or refurbished CT units has put the feasibility
ability to compensate with additional increases in intracranial
 of acquiring and maintaining CT technology within the realm
pressure (ICP) from the anesthesia itself leading to deleteri-
of many veterinary specialty practices. As with MRI, access to
ous effects or even death. Intracranial pressure is uncommonly
CT also can be obtained through veterinary imaging centers,
measured in neurologic animals. However, the presence
of
local hospitals or imaging facilities for humans, or through
an increase in intracranial pressure should be considered in
contracts with companies providing mobile CT' services.
78
PARTI
 Fundamentals
allows the operator to center [level) and select the range [win-
dow width) over which the 20 shades of gray are displayed to
 s s  s ai  snss ra 
can be displayed to enhance bone [bone window] or soft tis-
sues [soft tissue window) (Figure 4-4).
 Image interpretation should be done similar to that with
as with MRI, lesion characterization may provide a relatively
accurate presumptive antemortem diagnosis.
 Despite the speed of acquisition and improved soft tis-
sue differentiation obtained with CT, MRI remains the best
A
imaging modality for investigating most neurologic diseases.
However, CT has some advantages over MRI in the evaluation
of bony lesions. For example, CT may provide more useful
information over MRI in cases of vertebral fractures or sub-
luxation where bony details are important. Taking advantage
of the density of dystrophic mineralized intervertebral disk
material, CT can be used in the evaluation of chondrodystro-
phic dogs with suspected intervertebral disk disease [Figures
4-5 and 4-6). The sensitivity of CT in evaluating spinal cord
 disease is improved with the addition of subarachnoid iodin-
1'2 (uderaoau/L) epau senuos pae
Contraindications
Figure 4-2 Sagittal images of the cervical spinal cord of a Brussel
 See contraindications for MRI.
Griffon dog presented for evaluation of GP ataxia and tetraparesis.
A, T2W sagittal image: There is an intramedullary hyperintensity
Radiography
in the spinal cord contained in the C2-4 vertebrae (arrow). B, The 
Availability
hyperintense signal demonstrates suppressions [signal void] (arrows)
 Radiography is the most frequently employed imaging modal-
on FLAIR images consistent with water containing a low pro-
ity. Most veterinary practices have radiographic capabilities
tein content. [Copyright 2010 the University of Georgia Research
adequate for the investigation of neurologic animals Radiogra-
Foundation, Inc.]
phy can be performed with conventional film screen or digital
systems. The benefit to digital radiography over film screen
systems is the ability to acquire diagnostic quality images over
Indications
a wide range of exposures without negatively impacting the
Similar to that which occurs with conventional radiography,
diagnostic quality of the images.l4 Likewise, image quality is
CT is a cross-sectional imaging modality in which images are
not impaired by processing errors that can occur during film
constructed based on the attenuation of x-rays through tis-
development.4 Unfortunately the main drawback to radiogra-
 sue. The main benefit of CT over conventional radiography
phy is the inability to discriminate soft tissues. Nervous tissue
is that with CT there is greater soft tissue differentiation and
essentially has the same opacity as other soft tissues. Lesions
lack of superimposition of overlying structures, which greatly
of nervous tissue such as hemorrhage, tumors, or degenera-
improves the evaluation of complex anatomy such as the cal-
tive lesions are detected only rarely when calcification of the
varia or the vertebral column. l0 An additional benefit to CT is
lesion or lytic change in adjacent bone is present. In general,
that images can be acquired within minutes.
radiographic evaluation of neurologic animals is restricted to
Images are constructed as an x-ray tube rotates 360
identification of lesions involving the vertebral column. Due
degrees around the animal and emits x-ray photons. As these
to the size of large animals, penetration of x-ray photons lim-
pass through the patient, attenuation of x-ray photons occurs
its evaluation to primarily the cervical vertebral column. Even
through absorption and scatter in large part, related to tissue
with definitive identifcation of pathologic changes to the axial
density. Opposite the x-ray tube, detectors absorb the remain-
skeleton, nervous system involvement can only be inferred
ing x-rays and convert them into a digital signal. As the ani-
using plain radiography In addition, radiographs represent the
aan Aerx a ssno um Xua a uano passed st re
m ' o    o 
and detectors, information regarding a cross section or "slice"
limits accurate identification of a lesion affecting the com-
is obtained. Through a process called back projection, com-
plex anatomy of the calvaria or vertebral column. With the
puter-generated images of each slice of the anatomy scanned
increased access to cross-sectional imaging, radiography of the
are constructed. The resultant image is a highly accurate cross-
cranial cavity has been replaced by MRI and CT. As a result,
sectional image displayed in black, white, and shades of gray
radiographic evaluation is primarily performed on the ver-
based on the attenuation of the x-ray beam. Dark or relative
tebral column. The most common radiographic changes and
lual searaum suenuaneodu io asuapodu are seare e
their causes are listed in Table 4-1. Examples of radiographic
 changes associated with specific disease processes are included
Administration of iodinated intravenous or contrast media can
in the discussion of each disease [see Chapters 5 through 15].
improve visualization of pathology. Iodinated contrast media
 Meticulous technique, collmation, and proper patient
accumulation due to a breakdown in the blood-brain barrier
positioning are essential for detection of subtle changes that
or abnormal vasculature of a tumor causes an increase in tissue
are often the key for a diagnosis.l5 Sedation or anesthesia may
density that attenuates the x-ray beam and results in a hyper-
 be necessary for proper positioning. Beyond these aspects,
dense or hyperattenuating lesion.
the only limitation is the interpretive skill of the veterinar-
 The computer is able to define hundreds to thousands of
ian. Interpretive skill is developed through practice. Although
shades of gray, which enables differentiation of tissues. Unfor-
many lesions are obvious with cursory inspection, subtle
tunately the human eye is only able to perceive approximately
changes may be difficult to appreciate. If possible, radiographs
 20 shades of gray.ll Postacquisition manipulation of images
should be made with the lesion in the center of the field of
CHAPTER 4
 Confirming a Diagnosis
79
Hgure 4-3 Axial MRI images of a 16-year-old Jack Russell terrier presented for evaluation of a
change in behavior. Pictures A, C, and E are axial T2W images obtained at the level of the mid-
brain, pons, and rostral medulla oblongata, respectively. Pictures B, D, and F are T2*W images
acquired at the corresponding levels of pictures A, C, and E. While it is difficult to appreciate any
abnormalities in A, C, and E, pictures B, D, and F show multiple variable sized round hypoin-
tense lesions consistent with blood products [i.e., hemorrhage] (black arrows). Additionally, in
picture E, the temporal muscle is hyperintense consistent with edema of the muscle (white arrow).
[Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
view to reduce distortion of anatomy present at the edges of
2. Scan the structures on the radiograph that are not of pri-
the image. An approach to the interpretation of radiographic
mary interest, such as the soft tissue, abdomen, and chest.
evaluation of the vertebral column is as follows:
3.
Systematically evaluate the area of primary interest.
1. Scan the entire radiograph for quality of exposure, posi-
4.
 Scan the entire vertebral column for contour: the ventral sur-
tioning, and the presence of artifacts or motion. Recognize
face of the vertebral bodies, the floor of the vertebral canal, and
the limitations imposed by these factors.
the lamina, articulations, and spinous processes [see Table 4-1).
80
PARTI
 Fundamentals
Hgure 4-4 Computed tomography images of the brain of a 7-year-old male neutered collie dog that
was evaluated for right-sided vestibular dysfunction. Axial images were obtained at the level of the
rostral medulla. There is a single, irregularly contoured extraaxial mass at the level of the left cere-
bellopontine angle. The mass is hyperattenuating compared with normal brain parenchyma. A, The
image is displayed in a soft tissue window [window width 140 and window level 60]. On images
obtained after intravenous contrast, the mass displays strong enhancement (black arrow).Using a
soft tissue window, the lateral ventricles can be appreciated (white arrows). B, The image is displayed
in a bone window [window width 2800 and widow level 350], which highlights the fine detail of
the spongy bone between layers of dense compact bone of the calvaria. Thisis particularly evident in
the parietal bone dorsally and the petrous portion of the temporal bone ventrolaterally. On the bone
window, mineralization of the mass results in a faintly visible appearance (black arrow). [Copyright
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
Figure 4-6 Reconstruction of the CT images of the dog in Fig-
ure 4-5. The lesion occupies the ventral aspect of the vertebral
canal centered over the T12-13 intervertebral disk space (arrow).
Figure 4-5 Axial CT image [bone window] of the caudal end-
[Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
plate of the T12 vertebra of a dachshund presented for paraple-
gia. Within the vertebral canal, there is a hyperattenuating lesion
consistent with herniated disk material (black arrow). The lesion
dysfunction. In particular, animals with suspected or known
extends to the intervertebral foramen on the right (arrowhead).
trauma should undergo radiographic evaluation to defini-
(Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.)
tively establish the existence of fractures or luxations. How-
ever, in the majority of instances, the diagnostic capabilities
5. Scan the entire vertebral column for changes in bone opac-
of plain radiography is limited. The diagnostic capabilities
ity, such as lytic or proliferative changes [see Table 4-1].
are improved with myelography [from injection of iodinated
6.5
Scan the vertebral canal for changes in opacity, especially at
contrast media into the subarachnoid space). Injections of
the intervertebral foramina and the intervertebral disk spaces.
iodinated contrast media are made in either the lumbar area
 7. Compare the size of adjacent intervertebral disk spaces and
at L5-6 or L6-7 or at the cerebellomedullary cistern. In our
foramina and the joint spaces between articular processes.
 experience, compressive lesions are better defined when the
A narrowing of one or more of these spaces is suggestive of
contrast media are injected into the lumbar area. The injec-
intervertebral disk disease.
sisst ised epu a sarj ara pueie anssnd uon
 8. Stand back and scan the vertebral column again. Changes
       
in contour or spacing are sometimes more apparent from a
blocked by compressive lesions and may flow cranially into
distance.
the cranial cavity. Seizures are the most common complication
of myelography. Factors that predispose animals to seizures
Indications
u pue suau adnu  o jo uatm poq pnu
Given the availability, ease in performing, and cost, plain
tions made at the cerebellomedullary cistern.16.17 Latrogenic
radiographic evaluation of the vertebral column should be
trauma or hemorrhage/hematoma formation also can occur
considered in most animals demonstrating signs of spinal cord
which can exacerbate clinical signs.l8 Inadvertent trauma to
CHAPTER 4
Confirming a Diagnosis
81
TABLE 4-1
Radiographic Findings and Interpretation Involving the Vertebrae
Radiographic Change
Possible Causes
Proliferation
 Degenerative: Spondylosis, dural ossification (linear opacity in vertebral canall, diffuse/dis-
 seminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DlSH). caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy.
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
Neoplastic: Primary or metastatic vertebral tumor
Nutritionat: Ankylosing spondylosis, hypervitaminosis A
Inffammatory: Osteomyelitis, discospondylitis (osteomyelitis usually is proliferative and lytic)
Traumatic: Healing fracture
Lysis
Neoplastic: Primary or metastatic vertebral tumor, widening of vertebral canal (spinal cord
tumor, widening of intervertebral foramen (nerve sheath tumor)
Nutritionat: Generalized loss of bone opacity, hypocalcemia, hyperparathyroidism
Inffammatory: Osteomyelitis, discospondylitis (osteomyelitis usually is proliferative and lytic)
Abnormal shape of vertebrae
Degenerative: Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy
Anomalous: Hemivertebrae, spina bifida, fused vertebrae
Traumatic: Fracture
Displacement
Degenerative: Caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy, degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, inter-
vertebral disk hemiation (narrowing of intervertebral disk space, foramen, and facet space)
joint space between articular processes
Anomalous: Hemivertebrae, agenesis/hypoplasia of dens (atlantoaxial luxation)
Neoplastic: Pathologic fractures
Nutritionat: Pathologic fractures
Inffammatory: Pathologic fractures
Traumatic: Fractures, luxations
*Radiographic changes are rarely diagnostic In most cases, advanced imaging is necessary to establish a definitive diagnosis. Definitive diaghosis
based onradiographic changes alone islimited t vertebral fracture orluxation, discospondylitis, or vertebrallysis secondary t neoplaia.
the nervous tissue at the cerebellomedullary cistern can cause
 is a contraindication to spinal tap; hence, myelography should
severe [or worsen) clinical signs and even death.
not be performed in such cases. Because contrast medium is
Masses that occupy space in the vertebral canal (e.g.
irritating, myelography is usually not done in the presence
tumors, abscesses, disc herniations) cause alterations in the
of meningitis except when a focal mass is suspected. When
myelographic contrast column. The extradural, intradural-
the puncture is made for myelography, a CSF analysis should
extramedullary, or intramedullary location can be deter-
be performed before injection of the contrast agent. If the
mined by the type of distortion occurring in the contrast
cell count indicates active inflammation, myelography is not
column (Figures 4-7 and 4-8).19 Evaluating both the lateral
performed unless it is considered essential to diagnosis and
and ventrodorsal views are critical to avoid misdiagnosis. As
treatment.
 an example, asymmetric extradural lesions may cause a pat-
tern similar to of intradural-extramedullary lesions on lateral
Ultrasonography
radiographic views. Similarly, midline extradural lesions may
Because the CNS is contained within bone, there is a limited
appear as intramedullary lesions on ventrodorsal radiographic
role of ultrasonography in the evaluation of the neurologic
views. Focal spinal cord atrophy causes narrowing of the spi-
patients. Ultrasonography can be used when a fontanell of
nal cord with widening of the contrast column. Severe myelo-
the calvaria is persistent or during brain or spinal surgery once
malacia may allow the contrast media to pool in the spinal
cord parenchyma. The central canal may be flled by the con-
cise localization of masses is best accomplished using MRI or
trast medium in some cases, without apparent clinical conse-
CT. However, ultrasonography can be helpful in delineating
quences, particularly when injections are made cranial to L5
lesions at surgery. Masses tend to be hyperechoic and cause
in small dogs.20
shifts in the ventricular system or other local anatomic struc-
Myelography for the diagnosis of lumbosacral lesions is
tures.23 Hydrocephalus can be diagnosed in dogs with persis-
  e se  s a i    
tent fontanelles.25
most dogs. This varies among breed size. In one study, the
spinal cord extended further caudally in dachshunds than in
Cerebrospinal Fluid Analysis
German shepherd dogs.21
Availability
The equipment and technique necessary for collection of CSF
Contraindications
for analysis are not beyond the means of general practitioners.
The same contraindications should be considered for plain
 Clinicians wanting to perform the procedure should acquire
radiography or myelography as with any imaging procedure
training and expertise and perform CSF collection often
enough to maintain confidence and accuracy However, CSF
which radiography can be performed, there are few contrain-
collection is not routinely performed by most veterinarians in
dications associated with obtaining plain radiographs. In ani-
 general practice for several reasons. Although a sensitive test
mals with suspected or confirmed increased ICP, myelography
for detecting abnormalities of the CNS, CSF analysis rarely
82
PARTI
 Fundamentals
Epidural space
Subarachnoid space
 Spinal cord ‘
Extradural mass
Intradural/extramedullary
mass
Intramedullary mass
Figure 4-7 A, Myelogram of a cat with malacia in the spinal cord
caused by an infarct. Note the contrast media pooled in the area
of the malacia (arrowheads). B, Spinal cord showing the area of
 malacia. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foun-
dation, Inc.)
Hgure 4-9 A, Intraoperative ultrasound [US) image in the axial
plane. A dorsal larminectomy has been performed; the surgical site
was filled with saline. The ultrasound probe has been placed in a
sterile sleeve. The normal spinal cord can be seen as a round struc-
ture. Surrounding the spinal cord is the dura, which is hyperechoic.
The central canal is seen as a hyperechoic central area. B, Sagittal
US image of the same dog, the dorsal and ventral aspects of the
dura are hyperechoic and demarcate the spinal cord (small arrows).
Cranially thespinal cord is deviated dorsally by a mass large arrow).
(Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
in performing and analyzing it, and the low frequency in per-
Figure 4-8 Lateral radiographic view of the vertebral column
a u pansar seu anrd erausa u anpaod a suu
at the thoracolumbar junction after administration of iodinated
 procedure being largely performed by veterinarians in specialty
contrast media into the subarachnoid space [myelogram]. There
practice.
is dorsal deviation of the ventral contrast column and attenua-
tion of the dorsal contrast column consistent with an extradural
cisternal puncture. CSF can also be obtained, with somewhat
myelographic patterm. The lesion is consistent with intervertebral
greater diffculty, from the subarachnoid space at L5-6 or L6-7
disk herniation.[Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research
in dogs and at the lumbosacral interspace in cats and large
Foundation, Inc.]
closest to the lesion. Consequently lumbar CSF is more likely
provides a definitive diagnosis. Instead, CSF analysis may help
to disclose abnormalities in animals with thoracolumbar spinal
limit the differential diagnosis by excluding conditions from
cord disease.29
consideration (Table 4-2). Results of CSF analysis most often
 In dogs and cats, CSF is collcted under general anesthesia
are interpreted in light of imaging fndings. Secondly, CSF col-
with the animal intubated to avoid movement of the animal
lection should be performed immediately after imaging studies
during needle placement. In food animals and horses, lumbar
if possible, as contraindication to spinal tap may be apparent on
puncture can be accomplished with sedation and the animal
imaging studies. Lastly, CSF analysis needs to be done imme-
standing. The hair is clipped and the skin is prepared for an
diately after collection. The cells in the fluid begin to degener-
aseptic procedure. The needl (a 22-gauge, 1.5-inch disposable
ate within 30 minutes from time of collection. Consequently.
spinal needl with a stylet for most small animals; a 20-gauge,
the diagnostic information gained from CSF analysis, logistics
3.5-inch needle for most large animals) should be handled
TABLE 4-2
Cerebrospinal Fluid
Disease
Appearance
White Blood Cells* Per mm?   Cell Type
 Protein (mg/dL)
Other
Normal dog
Clear
<5
Mononuclear
<25t
Normal cat
Clear
5
Mononuclear
<25
Normal horse
Clear
9>
Mononuclear
<100
Normal cow
Clear
<10
Mononuclear
<40
Normal pig 
Clear
<30
Mononuclear
<40
 Normal sheep
Clear
<10
Mononuclear
<40
Inflammatory, Noninfectious
 Steroid responsive
Cear to turbid
Increased,
Mostly neutrophils
Increased
Measure lgA levels, serum C-reactive
meningitis arteritis
usually >100 
(nondegenerative appearance)
protein and αz macroglobulin levels
Granulomatous
Cear to turbid
Increase
Mostly mononuclear, sometimes
Increased
 PCR, serology for infectious disease
meningoencephalo-
(wide range)
neutrophils
(e.g. Toxopasma gondil. Neospora
myelitis
caninum, Cryptococcus neoformans.
and conine distemper virus!
Inflammatory. Infectious
Bacterial
Cear to turbid 
Increased, usually >100 
Mostly neutrophils
Increased, usually >100 
 PCR, culture: organisms may be seen
(± degenerative appearance)
Viral
Clear
Increased, usually
 Mostly mononucleart
Increased, usually <100 
 PCR, antibody titer, EM (viral particles)
Fungal
Clear to turbid
Increased variable
 Mixed, Sometimes eosinophils
Increased, usually < 100
 PCR, antibody or antisen titers, culture
Protozoal
Clear
Increased, may be >100
 Mononuclear, sometimes
Increased, usually >100 
 Antibody titer
neutrophils
Parasitic
Clear to
Increased, variable
Mixed, sometimes eosinophils
Increased, usually >100 
Parasitic
CHAPTER
 xanthochromic 
Degenerative, including 
Clear
 Normal to slight increase
 Mononuclear or neutrophilic
Increased, usually <100
 Degenerative, including compression
compression
 sometimes mixed
Neoplastic
Clear
Normal to increased 
 Mononuclear sometimes
Increased, usually <100 
Tumor cells may be seen if tumor
neutrophils
adjacent to subarachnoid space
8
(hematopoietic, ependymoma, choroid
 plexus tumors): PCR for antigen
rmi
 receptor rearrangement (lymphoma)
ing
Traumatic
Xanthochromic
 Normal to increased
RBCs. WWBCs
Increased, variable
Usually contraindicated
Vascular
Xanthochromic
 Normal to Increased 
RBCs, WBCs
Increased, variable
Vascular
Data from Hoerlein BF: Canine neurology: diagnosis and treatment, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders; Kormegay JN: Cerebrospinal luid collection, examination, and interpretation in dogs
ag
and cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 3:85-92, 198l; deLahunta A, Glass EN: Veterinary neuroanatomy and elinical neurology, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2009, Saunders Elsevier; Mayhew IG, Whit-
nosi
lock RH, Tasker JB: Equine cerebrospinal fluid: reference values of normal horses, Am J Vet Res 38:127l-1274, 1977; Bailey CS, Higgins RJ: Cormparison of total white blood cell count and total
protein content of lumbar and cistermal cerebrospinal fluid of healthy dogs, Am J Vet Res 46:1l62-1165, 1985; Bailey CS, Higgins RJ: Characteristics of cistermal cerebrospinal fluid associated with
primary brain tumors in the dog: a retrospective study, JAm Vet Med Assoc 188:414-417, 1986; Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Kass PH, et al: Characteristies of cistermal cerebrospinal fluid associated
with intracranial rmeningiomas in dogs: 56 cases (1985-2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:564-567, 2006; Bohn AA, Wills TB, West CL, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid analysis and maghetic resonance
irmaging in the diagnosis of neurologic disease in dogs: a retrospective study, Vet Clin Pathol 35:315-320, 2006; Windsor RC, Vermau KM, Sturges BK, et al: Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid in dogs with
elitis: a retrospective study, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:418-421, 1986; Windsor RC, Sturges BK, Vermau KM, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid eosinophilia in dogs, J Vet Interm Med 23:275-281, 2009.
White blood cell counts may be normal in anirmals with encephalitis; this is particularly true of some viral and protozoal infections.
83
+Protein is normally higher in lurmbar versus cerebellomedullary CSF and may exceed 25 rmg/dL.
INeutrophils rmay predominate in some viral diseases (eg., feline infectious peritonitis and easterm equine encephalomyelitis).
84
PARTI
 Fundamentals
..
Hgure 4-10 Landmarks for cerebrospinal fluid collection. [From Greene CE, Oliver JE Jr:
Neurologic examination. In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1982, WB Saunders.]
with sterile gloves. For cerebellomedullary puncture, the land-
Total and differential white blood cell (WBC) counts are the
marks for the midline are the external occipital protuberance
most important parts of a CSF analysis. Unless specific steps are
and the spinous process of the axis (C2) (Figure 4-10). The
taken to preserve cells, cell counts must be determined within
needle is inserted on the midline near the cranial border of the
30 minutes of collection because WBCs deteriorate rapidly.
wings of the atlas [Cl). A slight loss of resistance is felt as the
Total cell counts should be done with a hemocytometer.A dif-
needle penetrates the dorsal atlantooccipital membrane and
ferential WBC count and cytologic evaluation is performed on
enters the subarachnoid space. The stylet is withdrawn, and
 a sample prepared using a cytocentrifuge to concentrate cells.
fluid is allowed to flow from the hub of the needl into ster-
Several methods exist for determining the differential count,
ile tubes. Alternatively, once the skin is punctured, the stylet
including sedimentation and centrifugation techniques that
can be removed before advancing the needle. Using this tech-
can be done in practice. Techniques for RBC and WBC counts
nique, there is less risk of iatrogenic injury to the nervous tissue
and differentials are described in the references. The addition
as CSF should flow once the needle enters the subarachnoid
space. With this technique, CSF samples contain little to no
up to 48 hours when samples are stored at 4° C.31 To make an
red blood cell (RBC) contamination. The CSF sample should
11% serum concentration, 30 μL of serum is added to 250 μL
 be divided into two or three aliquots collected in separate
of CSF. Alternatively, a 1:1 mixture of CSF and 6% hydroxy-
tubes. The initial collection may contain RBCs from trauma,
ethyl starch in O.9% NaCl [hetastarch] can be used to preserve
but subsequent aliquots may be devoid of this contamination.
cells in CSF.32 The disadvantage of these techniques is that a
In horses, three or four Z-mL samples should be collected in
separate, undiluted CSF sample also must be submitted for
separate tubes and analyzed. Total protein concentration and
 protein determination.
red cell contamination are significantly lower in samples 2,
 The examiner should observe the appearance of the CSF.
3, and 4, whereas sample 1 may not be suitable for serologic
Hemorrhage caused by the puncture produces a red tinge to
 or cytologic examinations.30 Aspiration of the needlle with a
the fluid that decreases as the fluid continues to flow. WBC
syringe should not performed as this may “draw" the nervous
       
tissue toward the needle, resulting in iatrogenic injury or blood
approximately 1 WBC for each 500 RBCs; however, the valid
contamination.
ity of correction formulas has been questioned.33 High CSF
CHAPTER 4
Confirming a Diagnosis
85
nucleated cell counts and protein concentrations correlate
 Primary degenerative or demyelinating diseases, neoplasia,
with the presence of neurologic disease, even when samples
 infarction, or CNS compression may produce an inerease in
 CSF protein with little or no increase in cells (albuminocyto-
ugation should leave a clear, colorless fluid. A yellowish tinge
logic dissociation) (see Table 4-2).
to the CSF is called xanthochromia and is caused by free bili-
Free blood or xanthochromia may be seen after subarach-
rubin. Previous subarachnoid hemorrhage is the usual cause,
noid hemorrhage. Hemorrhage may be caused by trauma,
although prolonged icterus can produce xanthochromia. Tur-
primary vascular disease, or vascular lesions secondary to
bidity is caused by an increase in the cell content of the fluid
inflammation or neoplasia. Blood contamination may also
to more than 500 cells/mm.29
occur at the time of CSF collection.
 Often changes identified in CSF are nonspecifc. The ability
to identify a definitive diagnosis using CSF can be improved
Contraindications
using a variety of specialized tests, including microbiologic
General anesthesia is required for CSF collection; therefore,
 testing, measurement of antibody or antigen titers, polymerase
if anesthesia is contraindicated, CSF should not be obtained.
chain reaction (PCR) testing, and immunocytochemistry. Due
When the animal is positioned for cerebellomedullary cister-
to the high diagnostic sensitivity and specificity, molecular
nal puncture, the anesthetist should be certain that the airway
techniques, such as PCR and reverse transcription PCR, have
is patent and ventilation is adequate. All animals should be
greatly improved the ability to identify infection in the CNS.
intubated for collection of CSF.
A variety of infectious agents, including bacterial, viral, proto-
Cerebrospinal fluid should not be collected if increased
zoal, and fungal agents, have been identifed using molecular
ICP is suspected. Removal of CSF from the cerebellomedul-
techniques.35 PCR technology can also be used in the diag-
lary cistern or lumbar subarachnoid space causes a pressure
nosis of lymphoma.36 Immunophenotyping of nucleated cells
 gadient, and the cerebrum or cerebellum may be displaced
has been performed on normal canine CSF37 Characterization
caudally. Herniation of the cerebellum through the foramen
of specific immunophenotypes of nucleated cells in CSF can
magnum may lead to apnea and death because of compres-
lead to a definitive diagnosis.38
sion of the medullary respiratory centers or pathways (see
Along with advanced techniques, t
 traditional methods of
Chapter 12). The occipital lobes of the cerebrum may herniate
identifying infectious agents should be pursued in animals
through the tentorial notch and compress the midbrain, with
in which an infectious etiology is considered. If bacterial
resultant pupillary dilation. Either foramen magnum of the
 infection is strongly suspected based on clinical findings or if
cerebellum or transtentorial herniation of the cerebrum may
neutrophils are increased in the CSF, culture and sensitivity
also lead to tetraplegia and stupor or coma because of involve-
testing should be done.Fluid should be obtained in two sterile
 ment of the descending pathways and the reticular activating
 containers, one for laboratory analysis and one for culture.
system, respectively Increased pressure from generalized brain
Titers to agents such as viruses,39.40 fungi,4l and proto-
inflammation, tumors, large abscesses, or intracranial trauma
 zoa42.43 also may be indicated when meningoencephalitis or
also predisposes the animal to brain herniation. The informa-
meningomyelitis is suspected. The CSF titer is compared with
tion obtained from the CSF analysis may not be worth the risk
the serum titer because serum antibodies may cross the blood-
to the animal in these cases. Pressure shifts may occur with
brain barrier in inflammatory diseases. Indirect fluorescent
either cerebellomedullary or lumbar puncture. Herniation of
antibody testing for canine distemper virus may be positive in
the cerebellum, however, compromises the cerebellomedullary
60% to 82% of dogs with noninflammatory and inflammatory
cistern. For this reason, if CSF collection is deemed necessary
distemper, respectively.44
in animals with the potential for herniation, collection from a
 Measurement of CSF protein levels is necessary for a com-
lumbar site is preferred. Steps should be taken to reduce CSF
plete examination. Simple qualitative studies such as the
pressure before collecting fluid (see Chapter 12].
Pandy test are adequate, although quantitative methods are
preferred. The Pandy test can be performed in the practice;
Electrophysiology
it qualitatively estimates globulin concentrations. Quantita-
Availability
tive analysis also can be done in the practice, or the sample
 Electrophysiologic techniques require expensive equipment
can be sent to a reference laboratory Electrophoresis is used
 and extensive training and experience for valid interpreta-
to determine quantitatively the levels of protein fractions or
tion of results. These factors generally limit electrophysiologic
 studies to specialty practices and institutional settings. Elec-
a nonspecific indicator of CNS pathology. Increased albumin
tromyography (EMG), direct nerve stimulation tests, nerve
indlicates a disturbance of the blood-brain barrier, whereas
conduction studies, and evoked potentials are the most widely
significant  increased  immunoglobulin indicates  synthesis
used techniques. Many of the available tests are listed in Table
intrathecally.45-48
 4-3. Unlike other diagnostic tests used in neurology, electro-
physiologic techniques test the functional integrity of the
Indications
peripheral and central nervous systems. The majority of the
 Increased WBC counts and protein levels are expected with
tests evaluate the peripheral nervous system allowing clini-
active CNS inflammatory diseases and in any disease process
cians the ability to document functional abnormalities. Many
that disrupts the blood-brain barrier. In general, the WBCs
electrophysiologic tests are sensitive for identification of func-
are predominantly polymorphonuclear leukocytes in bacterial
tional defects; however, many tests lack specifcity, making
diseases and predominantly lymphocytes in viral diseases. Fun-
it difficult to delineate a definitive diagnosis because many
 gal and protozoal diseases may produce mixed populations of
 disease processes result in abnormal function. Consequently.
leukocytes. An eosinophilic pleocytosis is found in some pro-
electrophysiologic data often complement structural assess-
tozoal, parasitic, or idiopathic diseases such as granulomatous
ment of the nervous system through imaging.
lations of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes (pyogran-
Indications
ulomatous pleocytosis) are characteristic of granulomatous
 Electromyography, the measurement of the electrical activity
 meningoencephalomyelitis of dogs and the neurologic form
of muscle, and direct nerve stimulation and conduction stud-
of feline infectious peritonitis. The CSF may be completely
ies, the measurement of nerve function, are the best diagnos-
 normal in animals with inflammatory diseases.39.4244
tic tools for the evaluation of myopathies and neuropathies.
86
PARTI
 Fundamentals
TABLE 4-3
Electrophysiology*
Test
Indications
Probable Usefulness
 Contraindications
Eectromyography (EMG)
Lower motor neuron (LMN)
High (typically not specific
 None; signs may occasionally
diseases
 but supportive of LMN 
worsen with anesthesia
disorders!
 Direct nerve stimulation,
LMN diseases
High (not specific for disorder)
None; signs may occasionally
 conduction velocity.
worsen with anesthesia
 F-wave test, cord dorsum
potential
 Repetitive nerve stimulation,
Neuromuscular junction
High
 None; signs may occasionally
single fiber EMG
diseases
worsen with anesthesia
Electroretinography
Retinal disease
High
None
 Evoked response (cortical, brain-
Localization of lesions 
Low in most cases
None 
 stem, and spinall
in pathways
 Auditory-evoked response
Test of hearing. location 
High (mainly used to guide
of brainstem lesions
 breeding recommendations 
 or to diagnosis congenital
deafness!
Visual-evoked response
Cortical function 
Low
Somatosensory-evoked
Spinal cord, plexus lesions
Low
response
Urodynamics (cystometrogram,
Neurogenic bladder 
Low
Detrus or muscle atony and 
urethral pressure, sphincter
disorders (see Ch. 3)
overfilling
reflexes)
 Electroencephalography (EEG}
Seizures
Moderate (may be useful
None
(see Ch. 13)
when not certain if abnor-
 mal behavior is related to 
Sleep disorders (see Ch. 13)
Moderate
 Structural brain disease
Low (not specified or sensitive)
CV, Conduction velocity.
testing to specialty practices.
These tests are performed with the same equipment, usually
is resting (resting activity), (3) during muscle contraction (vol-
during the same examination. The information provided by
untary or reflex), and (4) in response to electrical stimulation
 these procedures regarding the location and the extent of
 of a motor nerve (primarily used in testing nerve conduction).
the abnormality may support a presumptive diagnosis. EMG
The basis of EMG involves analysis of insertion activity and
examination entails recording the electrical potential of the
the recognition of three abnormalities occurring at rest, fbril-
extracellular fluid surrounding myofbers using a small gauge,
lation potentials, positive sharp waves, and complex repetitive
Teflon-coated needle (recording electrode) inserted into the
 discharges. The observation of any of these signifies a disorder
muscle. Examination is typically performed under anesthesia.
of the muscle or nerve. However, EMG alone cannot distin-
 In large animals and in certain conditions in small animals,
guish between these pathologies. Importantly, the number of
EMG examination may be performed with heavy sedation.
abnormal potentials observed at rest does not directly trans-
Under anesthesia, voluntary muscle contractions should not
late to degree of dysfunction because with severe fbrosis as an
occur because the muscles are relaxed. Consequently, muscle
endstage of disease, abnormal potentials may not be observed.
fibers are considered electrically silent. During EMG exami-
Mechanical distortion of the muscle membrane by the
nation, the recording needle measures the resting membrane
 insertion of the recording electrode causes the membrane to
potential of myofbers reflected in the extracellular fluid and
depolarize, producing a brief burst of electrical activity (i.e.
 compares these to the extracellular potential measured by a
 insertion activity). A reduction in insertional activity may sig-
reference electrode. As such, the potential difference between
nify a loss of functional myofbers due to fbrosis or severe
the recording and the reference electrode is minimal to none.
atrophy. Increased insertional activity [essentially activity
This is depicted as a horizontal ("flat") line on the tracing.
lasting longer than placement of the needles) signifies myofi-
ber hyperexcitability. Most often this occurs with damage or
between the recording and reference electrode and is mani-
disease affecting the muscle membrane as occurs with myop-
fested as a defection of the tracing. The EMG examination
athies or loss of nerve supply to a muscle (denervation), caus-
includes evaluation of the electrical activity of the muscle at
ing an increase in the excitability of the muscle membrane
the following times: [1) during insertion or movement of the
within 7 to 10 days. In addition, at rest, fibrillation potentials
recording electrode [insertion activity), (2) when the muscle
small triphasic waves, and positive sharp waves are produced
CHAPTER 4
 Confirming a Diagnosis
87
spontaneously. These are produced by indivnidual myofbers
measurement of conduction velocity over small segments,
 depolarizing at random. Complex repetitive discharges are a
mild reductions may not be recorded outside of the wide ref-
 series of abnormal potentials generated by multiple myofbers 
erence range of normal conduction velocity. As the F-wave
in which the complex morphology of each potential is con-
tests a greater length of the nerve, mild reduction in con-
stant. Complex repetitive discharges sound like dive bombers
duction velocity is exaggerated by having to conduct over a
or motorcycles on the speaker of the EMG unit. At one time
longer length of the nerve and therefore will more likely be
thought specific for myopathies, complex repetitive discharges
detected given the more narrow reference range.58 Moreover,
also can occur with neuropathies. Contraction of the muscle
F-ratio, the ratio of conduction velocity proximal to and dis-
voluntarily, by activation of a reflex or by direct stimulation of
tal to the stimulation site can be used to determine whether
a nerve, usually is reduced because of denervation.
the lesion primarily affects the proximal or distal aspect
 Direct nerve stimulation tests and nerve conduction studies
of the nerve.58
 include motor-nerve-conduction (MNCV) or sensory-nerve-
 Repetitive motor nerve stimulation evaluates neuromuscu-
conduction (SNCV) evaluations. For SNCV, the nerve to be
lar transmission. The test involves the generation of a train of
tested is stimulated and a potential is recorded directly from
10 motor nerve stimulations at rates less than 5 Hz; for each
the nerve proximal to the site of stimulation.52 The distance
stimulus a CMAP is recorded. Comparison of the amplitude
between the recording and stimulation sites is divided by the
of the frst CMAP with the amplitudes of subsequent stimuli
latency ofthe potential (the time from stimulation to onset of
is described as a percent difference. A decrement greater than
the recorded potential) to give a conduction velocity in meters
per second (m/s).53 For MNCV, the nerve to be evaluated is
tromyography (SFEMG) also is used to evaluate neuromuscu-
stimulated and the subsequent depolarization of the inner-
lar transmission. Delayed neuromuscular conduction, as with
vated muscles is recorded. The waveform recorded is called
myasthenia gravis, causes latency variability termed jitter.0
the compound muscle action potential (CMAP) or M-wave.
Table 4-4 details the electrophysiologic tests used to evaluate
Measurement of the latency from stimulation to onset of the 
the peripheral nervous system.
CMAP refects the conduction velocity of the nerve, the time
Several electrophysiologic tests require the use of a tech-
required to release ACh from the nerve terminal, and the time
nique termed signal averaging. Signal averaging is a method
required for depolarization of the muscle. To define only the
for eliminating unwanted data and variability in measure-
MNCV, latencies are recorded from two stimulation sites. By
ments. Essentially, multiple measurements of the same evoked
measuring the distance between stimulation sites and divid-
response (the measurement of the depolarization of myo-
  a  si      
fibers, axons, or neurons) are averaged over numerous time
MNCV of that segment of nerve can be obtained. Decreased
points, which provides a mean value at a given time point. In
conduction velocity (MNCV or SNCV) is associated with
doing so, artifacts in recordings are reduced. Typically, various
demyelination.
evoked responses necessitate signal averaging to obtain accu-
The stimulus used is supramaximal to ensure depolar-
rate evaluation. The following are electrophysiologic tests that
ization of all functional axons. Consequently, all functional
use signal averaging.
myofbers will depolarize producing the CMAP. Analysis of
The brainstem auditory-evoked response (BAER) entails
the CMAP amplitude, duration, and area under the curve
the recording of brainstem potentials in response to a noise
 of the waveform is a reflection of functional axon numbers.
[click) stimulus in the ear canal. A signal-averaging computer
With axonal loss, there is a reduction in the amplitude of the
CMAP. Alternatively, a reduction in CMAP can occur with
tory system can be evaluated rapidly and accurately with this
severe muscle disease or atrophy. In dogs, adult MNCV is
technique. Partial hearing loss requires pure tone stimul,
 reached between 6 months to 1 year of age.54 MNCV remains 
which present more diffcult technical problems. Brainstem
stable until age 7 after which there is a gradual decline; by
function also can be evaluated. The recording consists of a
age 10 MNCV is reduced by approximately 10% to 15%.54
series of waves that represent electrical activity at successive
Incats, adult MNCV is reached at approximately3monthsS
levels of the brainstem. A lesion at one level of the brain-
stem blocks the responses at that level and at all succeeding
 For each decrease in degree (Celsius), MNCV decreases 1.7
levels. The BAER has been used most commonly to diagnose
m/s.56 Typically, recordings are measured in the palmar and
inherited unilateral or bilateral deafness in susceptible breeds
plantar interosseous muscles, which are innervated by the
such as the dalmatian.65,66 Brainstem lesions also cause BAER
   r   q  a  u 
abnormalities.57 BAER can confirm a diagnosis of complete
sciatic nerve in the pelvic limb. Recordings from the extensor
loss of brainstem function in brain death.
carpi radialis muscle are used for evaluation of radial nerve
Analogous to the F-wave, cord dorsum potentials can be
function. Stimulation of the ulnar nerve can be performed at
evaluated to assess the functional integrity of the proximal
the axilla, the groove formed by the medial epicondyle of the
sensory nerves, dorsal roots, and dorsal gray matter of the spi-
humerus and olecranon, and medial to the accessory carpal
nal cord.s8 Sensory or mixed nerves are stimulated and the
bone. Stimulation of the sciatic-tibial nerve can be performed
resultant incoming action potential of the sensory axons and
 dorsomedial to the greater trochanter, caudal to the lateral
depolarization of the dorsal gray matter of the spinal cord is
femoral condyle, and caudal to the tibia at the hock. Stimula-
recorded with electrodes placed over the dorsal lamina of the
tion of the radial nerve is performed just proximal and distal
vertebral column at the C7-Tl or L4-5 vertebrae for thoracic
to the elbow.
or pelvic limb nerves, respectively.58 Normative data has been
Nerve stimulation also elicits smaller, more delayed sec-
described in dogs.68 Limited data have been described in clini-
 ondary action potentials in muscle.57 Orthodromic stimula-
cally affected animals. Cord dorsum potentials have been used
tion of sensory fibers produces the H-wave or reflex, whereas
in the assessment of cats with neuropathies related to diabetes
antidromic stimulation of motor fibers produces the F-wave.
mellitus.59
Evaluation of these secondary waves provides information
   i  a
about the integrity of reflex arcs and the nerve roots, respec-
tials recorded from the spinal cord, brainstem, or brain in
tively. Evaluation of the F-wave may allow identification of
subtle abnormalities that may not be detected using nerve
The SEP is used to determine the functional integrity of sen-
conduction tests. With direct stimulation of the nerve and
88
PARTI
 Fundamentals
TABLE 4-4
Electrophysiologic TestingProcedures Used to Evaluate thePeripheral Nervous System
Testing Procedure
Anatomy
Expected Abnormalities
Eectromyography (EMG)*
 Abnormalities with myopathy or neuropathy
Increase insertional activity, Fibrillation
potentials, PSW, CRD
Direct motor nerve
Motor neuropathies/mixed neuropathies
Decreased CV (myelin disorders)
stimulation*
Differentiate disorders of myelin 
Increased duration of CMAP (myelin dis-
Decreased CMAP amplitude (axonal disorders)
orders) from axonal disorders involving
motor nerves
Decreased AUC (axonal disorders)
F-wave testing* (minimal
Ildentification of mild motor neuropathies
Increased minimal latency (neuropathies)
latency and F-ratio}
 Allows assessment of proximal aspect of nerves
(from spinal cord to most proximal aspect
of the nerve which can be directly stimulated!
Calculation of F-ratio
 Allows determination of which aspect of the nerve
Increased F-ratio (proximal nerve disease)
 is most affected (proximal, distal or diffuse)
Decreased F-ratio (distal nerve disease)
Normal F-ratio (diffuse nerve disease)t
Repetitive nerve
Neuromuscular junction
 Decremental reduction in successive CMAP
stimulation*
 Used primarily in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis
Single fiber EMG
Neuromuscular junction
Increased latency variability: jitter
Used primarily in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis 
Direct sensory nerve
Sensory neuropathies/mixed neuropathies
Decreased CV (myelin disorders)
stimulation*
Differentiate disorder of myelin from axonal disorders 
Decreased amplitude (axonal disorders)
 involving sensory nerves
Cord dorsum
 Assessment of the sensory nerve and dorsal gray
Increased latency of the onset and onset to
 potential (CDP)
matter of the spinal cord
peak of the CDP
 PSW, Positive sharp waves; CRD, complex repetitive discharges; CV, conduction velocity; CMAP, compound muscle action potential; AUC, area
under the curve.
*Most commmonly used tests.
+Provided minimal F-wave latency or motor nerve conduction velocity is prolonged, the finding of a normal F-ratio suggests diffuse involvement
of the motor nerve.
sensory function on neurologic examination.72 Recordings
has been largely supplanted by MRI, EEG may still have a role
 are made by measuring the potentials with the shortest laten-
in the diagnosis of seizure activity and monitoring of anticon-
cies [those of the faster pathways [eg., the dorsal and dor-
vulsant effects. The EEG varies with the level of conscious-
solateral funiculi of the spinal cord]). Unfortunately, these
ness. Low voltage and fast activity are seen in the alert animal.
 axons also are the first to be affected even in animals with
Higher voltage and slower activity occur during drowsiness
minimal clinical signs. Therefore, the utility of SEP in assess-
and sleep. Drugs such as sedatives, tranquilizers, and anesthet-
ment of animals with structural CNS lesions is questionable.
ics produce higher voltage and slower activity similar to sleep
 Similar motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) can be recorded
patterns. Results of the EEG may indicate that cerebral disease
from either muscle or the spinal cord in response to either
is present and whether it is focal or diffuse, acute or chronic,
magnetic or electrical stimulation of the motor cortex.73-77
and inflammatory or degenerative.
Limited reports have been performed to evaluate the utility
 The following general principles of EEG changes have been
of MEPs. In dogs and horses, MEP may correlate with severity
listed by Klemm and Hali89.
 of clinical signs.78-80
1. Low voltage, fast activity
y (LVFA), and spikes (very fast
Electroretinography (ERG) is the recording of the electri-
activity) indicate irritation from any cause [usually inflam-
 cal potential of the retina in response to light. The light stimu-
matory disease).
lus may be single or multiple flashes of light. The intensity
 2. High voltage and slow activity [HVSA) suggest neuronal
and frequency of stinulation along with dark or light adapted
 death or compression.
enables assessment of rods and cones.8l The ERG is helpful for
 3. Neither change is diagnostic of a disease but rather reflects
 differentiating diseases of the retina from lesions occurring in
the kind of process occurring (e.g., inflammation or
the visual pathway caudal to the retina [optic nerve, chiasm,
degeneration).
 optic tract, optic radiation, and occipital cortex).82
 4. A focal EEG abnormality indicates a focal cerebral cortical
The visual-evoked response [VER) is the cortical electrical
lesion.
activity that occurs in response to a light stimulus adminis-
 5. A generalized EEG abnormality indicates a diffuse cerebral
tered to the eye. The response provides an objective evaluation
cortical disease or a subcortical abnormality that alters the
of central visual pathways.83,84 Although rarely performed,
activity of the majority of the cerebral cortex.
pattern stimuli, light-emitting diode goggles, or a red flter has
 6. The EEG can change with time, suggesting progression or
made this technique more useful.85,8
resolution of the disease process.
 Electroencephalography (EEG), the graphic recording of
Quantitative electroencephalography provides more objec-
the electrical activity of the cerebral cortical neurons, may be
tive data on the spectral frequency content and amplitudes of
used in assessment of cerebral disease.87,88 Although its utility
the EEG recording.90
CHAPTER 4
 Confirming a Diagnosis
89
 Urodynamics studies includes cystometrography, urethral
REFERENCES
pressure profles, and electrophysiologic testing of bladder and
sphincter reflexes [see Chapter 3 for details).
1. Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, Patterson DF: Screening for
inborn errors of metabolism in dogs and cats, Prog Clin
Contraindications
Biol Res 94:93-116, 1982.
No significant contraindications exist to any of the electro-
2.
 Sewell AC, Haskins ME, Giger U: Inherited metabolic
physiologic tests unless anesthesia or tranquilization is neces-
disease in companion animals: searching for nature's
 sary and is contraindicated.
mistakes, Vet J 174:252-259, 2007.
3. Edelman RR, Warach S: Magnetic
C resonance imaging:
Biopsy
first of two parts, N Engl J Med 328:708-716, 1993.
Availability
4. Kuriashkin IV, Losonsky JM: Contrast enhancement in
 Biopsies of the CNS primarily are confined to the cerebrum
 magnetic resonance imaging using intravenous paramag-
(brain biopsy). Generally, biopsies are performed with CT
netic contrast media: a review, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
guidance.9i-95 Alternatively, ultrasonographic guidance can be
41:4-7, 2000.
used during surgical procedures.23
5. Cherubini GB, Platt SR, Howson S, et al: Comparison
 Biopsies of nerve and muscle can be performed by any
 of magnetic resonance imaging sequences in dogs with
veterinary surgeon; however, the diffculties in obtaining good
multi-focal intracranial disease, J Small Anim Pract
diagnostic samples generally limit this procedure to specialty
49:634-640, 2008.
practices and institutions. Paramount to obtaining a histologic
6. Benigni L, Lamb CR: Comparison of fluid-attenuated
diagnosis is adequate sample submission, proper sample pres-
inversion recovery and T2-weighted magnetic resonance
ervation (i.e., unfixed muscle tissue submitted on ice or nerve
images in dogs and cats with suspected brain disease, Vet
fascicles preserved in glutaraldehyde) and evaluation by a
Radiol Utrasound 46:287-292, 2005.
pathologist specialized in neuropathology.
7. Armbrust LJ, Hoskinson JJ, Biller DS, et al: Low-field
magnetic resonance imaging of bone marrow in the lum-
Indications
bar spine, pelvis, and femur in the adult dog, Vet Radiol
A biopsy or a fine-needle aspirate of lesions in the CNS is
Utrasound 45:393-401, 2004.
used to confirm a diagnosis of an intracranial neoplasia or a
8. Tidwell AS, Specht A, Blaeser L, et al: Magnetic reso-
diffuse encephalopathy, such as viral inflammation or stor-
nance imaging features of extradural hematomas asso-
   ss  yo   s
ciated with intervertebral disc herniation in a dog, Vet
diagnosed antemortem with other procedures. Because of the
Radiol Ultrasound 43:319-324, 2002.
invasive nature of the procedure and potential for morbidity
 9. Pease A, Sullivan S, Olby N, et al: Value of a single-shot
and mortality, it is not generally pursued except with focal
turbo spin-echo pulse sequence for assessing the archi-
lesions identified with CT' or MRI.
tecture of the subarachnoid space and the constitutive
Cytologic diagnosis can be obtained with the use of fine-
nature of cerebrospinal fluid, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 needle aspirate procedures. Fine-needle aspiration of epidural
47:254-259, 2006.
 or spinal cord masses can be accomplished with fluoroscopy.97
10. Perry RL: Principles of conventional radiography and
 Lymphoma may be readly identified using this technique.
fuoroscopy, Vet Clin North Am 23:235-252, 1993.
Fine-needle aspirate also may allow cytologic diagnosis of
11. Tidwell AS, Jones JC: Advanced imaging concepts: a
 intracranial lesions.98.99
pictorial glossary of CT and MRI technology, Clin Tech
Biopsy of a nerve is indicated in neuropathies. Excision of a
Small Anim Pract 14:65-11l, 1999.
few fascicles of a mixed nerve is preferred if a motor neuropa-
12. Sharp NJH, Cofone M, Robertson ID, et al: Computed
thy is suspected, but small sensory nerves may be sampled in
tomography in the evaluation of caudal cervical spon-
many disorders.loo,tol A muscle biopsy usually is performed
dylomyelopathy of the Doberman pinscher, Vet Radiol
simultaneously with a nerve biopsy to differentiate neuropa-
Utrasound 36:100-108, 1995.
thies from myopathies. Proximal and distal muscles should
13. Drost WT, Love NE, Berry CR: Comparison of radiog-
  s rd snan ps aq e
raphy, myelography and computed tomography for the
widely among muscles. Tissues must be handled properly for
evaluation of canine vertebral and spinal cord tumors in
satisfactory histopathologic evaluation. The nerve or muscle
sixteen dogs, Vet Radiol Utrasound 37:28-33, 1996.
specimen must be maintained straight, without excess tension,
14. Armbrust LJ: Digital images and digital radiographic
during fixation. This positioning usually is attained by tying or
 image capture. In Thrall DE, edlitor: Textbook of vet-
 pinning the ends of the nerve to a tongue depressor or using
erinary diagnostic radiology, St Louis, 2007, Saunders
double clamps on the muscle.l10o The histochemical staining
Elsevier.
-sp aiosnu isou azaiore raaq ro asuae o aressa
15. Middleton DL: Radiographic positioning for the spine
eases must be done on unfixed muscle. The pathologist should
and skull, Vet Clin North Am 23:253-258, 1993.
be consulted regarding the proper handling of the tissues
16. Barone G, Ziemer LS, Shofer FS, et al: Risk factors asso-
before obtaining samples.
ciated with development of seizures after use of iohexol
for myelography in dogs: 182 cases [1998), J Am Vet
Confraindications
Med Assoc 220:1499-1502, 2002.
The invasive nature ofthese procedures must be weighed against
17. Lewis DD, Hosgood G: Complications associated with
the benefits of the information to be gained. The brain biopsy
the use of iohexol for myelography of the cervical ver-
does require specialized equipment and expertise. Misdiagnosis
tebral column in dogs: 66 cases [1988-1990), J Am Vet
can result from nondiagnostic samples. A spinal cord biopsy is
Med Assoc 200:1381-1384, 1992.
contraindicated because the procedure causes seriously com-
18. Platt SR, Dennis R, Murphy K, et al: Hematomyelia
promised spinal cord function; however, fine-needle aspiration
secondary to lumbar cerebrospinal fluid acquisition in a
of mass lesions in the vertebral canal is useful and produces
dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:467-471, 2005.
 little damage. Nerve and muscle biopsies are performed more
19. Suter PF, Morgan JP, Holliday TA, et al: Myelography
commonly and do not produce serious deficits if care is exer-
in the dog: diagnosis of tumors of the spinal cord and
cised in the selection of the nerve undergoing the biopsy.
vertebrae, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 12:29-44, 1971.
06
PARTI
 Fundamentals
20. Kirberger RM, Wrigley RH: Myelography in the dog:
39. Thomas WB, Sorjonen DC, Steiss JE: A retrospective
review of patients with contrast medium in the central
evaluation of 38 cases of canine distemper encephalo-
canal, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34:253-258, 1993.
myelitis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:129-133, 1993.
21. Morgan JP, Atilola M, Bailey CS: Vertebral canal and
40. Vandevelde M, Zurbriggen A, Steck A, et al: Studies
spinal cord mensuration: a comparative study ofits effect
on the intrathecal humoral immune response in canine
on lumbosacral myelography in the dachshund and
distemper encephalitis, J Neuroimmunol 1l:41-51,
German shepherd dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 19l:951-
1986.
957, 1987.
41. Berthelin CF, Legendre AM, Bailey CS, et al: Crypto-
22. Finn-Bodner ST, Hudson JA, Coates JR, et al: Ultraso-
coccosis of the nervous system in dogs, part 2: diagnosis
nographic anatomy of the normal canine spinal cord
treatment, monitoring, and prognosis, Prog Vet Neurol
and correlation with histopathology after induced spinal
5:136-146, 1994.
cord trauma, Vet Radiol Utrasound 36:39-48, 1995.
42. Dunigan CE, Oglesbee MJ, Podell M, et al: Seizure activ-
23. Gallagher JG, Penninck D, Boudrieau RJ, et al: Ultra-
ity associated with equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
sonography of the brain and vertebral canal in dogs
Prog Vet Neurol 6:50-54, 1995.
and cats: 15 cases [1988-1993), J Am Vet Med Assoc
43. Munana KR, Lappin MR, Powell CC, et al: Sequential
207:1320-1324, 1995.
measurement of Toxoplasma gondi-specifc antibodies
24. Hudson JA, Cartee RE, Simpson ST, et al: Ultrasono-
 in the cerebrospinal fluid of cats with experimentally
 graphic anatomy of the canine brain, Vet Radiol Ultra-
induced toxoplasmosis, Prog Vet Neurol 6:27-31, 1995.
sound 30:13-21, 1989.
44. Tipold A: Diagnosis of inflammatory and infectious dis-
25. Rivers WJ, Walter PA: Hydrocephalus in the dog: util-
eases of the central nervous system in dogs: a retrospec-
ity of ultrasonography as an alternate diagnostic imaging
tive study, J Vet Intern Med 9:304-314, 1995.
technique, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:333-343, 1992.
45. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M, Vandevelde E, et al: Immuno-
26. Spaulding KA, Sharp NJH: Ultrasonographic imaging
electrophoretic determination of albumin and IgG in
of the lateral cerebral ventricles in the dog, Vet Radiol
serum and cerebrospinal fuid in dogs with neurological
Utrasound 31:59-64, 1990.
diseases, Res Vet Sci 37:101-107, 1984.
27. Kornegay JN: Cerebrospinal fluid collection, examina-
 46. Kristensen F, Firth EC: Analysis of serum proteins and
tion, and interpretation in dogs and cats, Compend Con-
cerebrospinal fluid in clinically normal horses, using
tin Educ Pract Vet 3:85-94, 1981.
agarose electrophoresis, Am J Vet Res 38:1089-1092,
28. Mayhew IG: Collection of cerebrospinal fluid from the
1977.
horse, Cornell Vet 65:500-511, 1975.
47. Rand JS, Parent J, Jacobs R, et al: Reference intervals
29. Thomson CE, Kornegay JN, Stevens JB:Analysis of cere-
for feline cerebrospinal fluid: biochemical and serologic
brospinal fluid from the cerebellomedullary and lumbar
variables, IgG concentration, and electrophoretic frac-
cisterns of dogs with focal neurologic disease: 145 cases
tionation, Am J Vet Res 51:1049-1054, 1990.
(1985-1987]), J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1841-1844,
48. Sorjonen DC: Total protein, albumin quota, and electro-
1990.
phoretic patterns in cerebrospinal fluid of dogs with cen-
30. Sweeney CR, Russell GE: Differences in total protein
tral nervous system disorders, Am J Vet Res 48:301-305,
concentration, nucleated cell count, and red blood cell
1987.
count among sequential samples of cerebrospinal fluid
49. Smith-Maxie LL, Parent JP, Rand J, et al: Cerebrospi-
from horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:54-57, 2000.
nal fluid analysis and clinical outcome of eight dogs with
31. Bienzle D, McDonnell JJ, Stanton JB: Analysis of cere-
eosinophilic meningoencephalomyelitis, J Vet Intern 
brospinal fluid from dogs and cats after 24 and 48
Med 3:167-174, 1989.
hours of storage, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1761-1764,
50. Sorjonen DC: Clinical and histopathological features of
2000.
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs, J Am 
32. Fry MM, Vernau W, Kass PH, et al: Effects of time, ini-
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:141-147, 1990.
tial composition, and stabilizing agents on the results
51. Windsor RC, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, et al: Cerebrospi-
of canine cerebrospinal fluid analysis, Vet Clin Pathol
nal fluid eosinophilia in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:275-
35:72-77, 2006.
281, 2009.
33. Wilson JW, Stevens JB: Effects of blood contamination
52. Redding RW, Ingram JT: Sensory nerve conduction
on cerebrospinal fluid analysis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
velocity of cutaneous afferents of the radial, ulnar, pero-
171:256-258, 1977.
neal, and tibial nerves of the cat: reference values, Am J
34. Hurtt AE, Smith MO: Effects of iatrogenic blood con-
Vet Res 45:1042-1045, 1984.
tamination on results of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in
53. Tuler SM, Bowen JM: Measurement of conduction
clinically normal dogs and dogs with neurologic disease,
velocity of the peroneal nerve based on recordings from
J Am Vet Med Assoc 211:866-867, 1997.
extensor digitorum brevis muscle, J Am Anim Hosp
35. Sellon RK: Update on molecular techniques for diag-
Assoc 26:164-168, 1990.
nostic testing of infectious disease, Vet Clin North Am
54. Swallow JS, Griffiths IR: Age related changes in the
33:677-693, 2003.
motor nerve conduction velocity in dogs, Res Vet Sci
36. Burnett RC, Vernau W, Modiano JF, et al: Diagnosis of
23:29-32, 1977.
canine lymphoid neoplasia using clonal rearrangements
55. Pillai SR, Steiss JE, Wright JC: Age-related changes in
of antigen receptor genes, Vet Pathol 40:32-41, 2003.
 peripheral nerve conduction velocities of cats, Prog Vet
37. Duque C, Parent J, Bienzle D:The immunophenotype of
Neurol 2:95-104, 1991.
 blood and cerebrospinal fluid mononuclear cells in dogs,
 56. Lee AF, Bowen JM: Efect of tissue temperature on
J Vet Intern Med 16:714-719, 2002.
ulnar nerve conduction velocity in the dog, Am J Vet Res
38. Schwartz M, Moore PF, Tipold A: Disproportionally
36:1305-1307, 1975.
strong increase of B cells in inflammatory cerebrospinal
57.
 Sims MH, McLean RH: Use of repetitive nerve stimula-
fluid of dogs with steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis,
tion to assess neuromuscular function in dogs. A test pro-
Vet Immunol Immunopathol 125:274-283, 2008.
tocol for suspected myasthenia gravis, Prog Vet Neurol
1:311-319, 1990.
CHAPTER 4
 Confirming a Diagnosis
91
58. Cuddon PA: Acquired canine peripheral neuropathies,
77. van Ham LML, Mattheeuws DRG, Vanderstraeten
Vet Clin North Am 32:31-62, 2002.
GGW: Transcranial magnetic motor evoked poten-
59. Godde T, Jaggy A, Vandevelde M, et al: Evaluation of
tials in anesthetized dogs, Prog Vet Neurol 6:5-12,
repetitive nerve stimulation in young dogs, J Small Anim
1995.
Pract 34:393-398, 1993.
78. da Costa RC, Poma R, Parent JM, et al: Correlation of
60. Hopkins AL, Howard JF, Wheeler SJ, et al: Stimulated
motor evoked potentials with magnetic resonance imag-
single fibre electromyography in normal dogs, J Small
Anim Pract 34:271-276, 1993.
and without signs of cervical spondylomyelopathy, Am J
61. Holliday TA, Te Selle ME: Brain stem auditory-evoked
Vet Res 67:1613-1620, 2006.
potentials of dogs: wave forms and effects of recording
79. Nollet H, Deprez P, Van Ham L, et al: The use of mag-
electrode positions, Am J Vet Res 46:845-851, 1985.
netic motor evoked potentials in horses with cervical spi-
62. Rolf SL, Reed SM, Melnick W, et al: Auditory brain stem
nal cord disease, Equine Vet J 34:156-163, 2002.
response testing in anesthetized horses, Am J Vet Res
80. Poma R, Parent JM, Holmberg DL, et al: Correlation
48:910-914, 1987.
between severity of clinical signs and motor evoked
63. Strain GM, Olcott BM, Thompson DR, et al: Brainstem
potentials after transcranial magnetic stimulation in
auditory-evoked potentials in Holstein cows, J Vet Intern
large-breed dogs with cervical spinal cord disease, J Am 
Med 3:144-148, 1989.
Vet Med Assoc 221:60-64, 2002.
64. Sims MH, Moore RE: Auditory-evoked response in the
81. Komaromy AM, Smith PJ, Brooks DE: Electroretinog-
clinically normal dog: early latency components, Am J
raphy in dogs and cats. Part I. Retinal morphology and
Vet Res 45:2019-2027, 1984.
physiology, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:343-
65. Holliday TA, Nelson HJ, Williams DC, et al: Unilateral
345, 348-350, 1998.
and bilateral brainstem auditory-evoked response abnor-
 82. Komaromy AM, Smith PJ, Brooks DE: Electroretinog-
malities in 900 Dalmatian dogs, J Vet Intern Med 6:166-
raphy in dogs and cats. Part II. Technique, interpreta-
174, 1992.
tion, and indications, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
66. Strain GM, Kearney MT, Gignac U, et al: Brainstem
20:355-359, 362-366, 1998.
 auditory-evoked potential assessment of congenital deaf-
83. Strain GM, Claxton MS, Olcott BM, et al: Visual-evoked
ness in Dalmatians: associations with phenotypic mark-
potentials and electroretinograms in ruminants with thi-
ers, J Vet Intern Med 6:175-182, 1992.
amine-responsive polioencephalomalacia or suspected
67. Steiss JE, Cox NR, Hathcock JT: Brain stem auditory-
listeriosis, Am J Vet Res 51:1513-1517, 1990.
evoked response abnormalities in 14 dogs with con-
84. Sims MH, Laratta LJ, Bubb WJ, et al: Waveform analysis
firmed central nervous system lesions, J Vet Intern Med
 and reproducibility of visual-evoked potentials in dogs.
8:293-298, 1994.
Am J Vet Res 50:1823-1828, 1989.
68. Cuddon PA, Delauche AJ, Hutchison JM: Assessment of
85. Bichsel P, Oliver JE Jr, Coulter DB, et al: Recording of 
dorsal nerve root and spinal cord dorsal horn function in
visual-evoked potentials in dogs with scalp electrodes, J
clinically normal dogs by determination of cord dorsum
Vet Intern Med 2:145-149, 1988.
potentials, Am J Vet Res 60:222-226, 1999.
86. Sims MH, Laratta LJ: Visual-evoked potentials in cats,
69. Mizisin AP, Shelton GD, Burgers ML, et al: Neurologi-
using a light-emitting diode stimulator, Am J Vet Res
cal complications associated with spontaneously occur-
49:1876-1881, 1988.
ring feline diabetes mellitus, J Neuropath Exp Neurol
 87. Redding RW: Electroencephalography, Prog Vet Neurol
61:872-884, 2002.
1:181-188, 1990.
70. Strain GM, Taylor DS, Graham MC, et al: Cortical
88. Redding RW, Knecht CD: Atlas of electroencephalogra-
somatosensory-evoked potentials in the horse, Am J Vet
phy in the dog and cat, ed, New York, 1984, Praeger.
Res 49:1869-1872, 1988.
89. Klemm WR, Hall CL: Current status and trends in vet-
71. Oliver JE, Purinton PT, Brown J: Somatosensory evoked
erinary electroencephalography, J Am Vet Med Assoc
potentials from stimulation of thoracic limb nerves of
164:529-532, 1974.
the dog, Prog Vet Neurol 1:433-443, 1990.
90. Moore MP, Greene SA, Keegan RD, et al: Quantitative
72. Shores A, Redding RW, Knecht CD: Spinal-evoked
electroencephalography in dogs anesthetized with 2.0%
potentials in dogs with acute compressive thoracolum-
end-tidal concentration of isoflurane anesthesia, Am J
bar spinal cord disease, Am J Vet Res 48:1525-1530,
Vet Res 52:551-560, 1991.
1987.
91. Giroux A, Jones JC, Bohn JH, et al: A new device for ste-
73. Nollet H, Deprez P, van Ham L, et al: Transcranial mag-
reotactic CT-guided biopsy of the canine brain: design,
netic stimulation: normal values of magnetic motor
construction, and needle placement accuracy, Vet Radiol
evoked potentials in 84 normal horses and infuence
Utrasound 43:229-236, 2002.
of height, weight, age and sex, Equine Vet J 36:51-57,
92. Koblik PD, LeCouteur RA, Higgins RJ, et al: CT-guided
2004.
brain biopsy using a modifed Pelorus Mark IlI stereotac-
74. Nollet H, Van Ham L, Deprez P, et al: Transcranial mag-
tic system: experience with 50 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultra-
netic stimulation: review of the technique, basic prin-
sound 40:434-440, 1999.
ciples and applications, Vet J 166:28-42, 2003.
93. Moissonnier P, Blot S, Devauchelle P, et al: Stereotactic
75. Strain GM, Prescott-Mathews JS, Tedford BL: Motor
CT-guided brain biopsy in the dog. J Small Anim Pract
potentials evoked by transcranial stimulation of the
43:115-123, 2002.
canine motor cortex, Prog Vet Neurol l:32l-331,
94. Moissonnier P, Bordeau W, Delisle F, et al: Accuracy
1990.
testing of a new stereotactic CT-guided brain biopsy
76. Sylvestre AM, Cockshutt JR, Parent JM, et al: Magnetic
device in the dog, Res Vet Sci 68:243-247, 2000.
motor evoked potentials for assessing spinal cord integ-
95.Troxel MT, 
Vite CH: CT-guided stereotactic brain
rity in dogs with intervertebral disc disease, Vet Surg
biopsy using the Kopf stereotactic system, Vet Radiol
22:5-10, 1993.
Ultrasound 49:438-443, 2008.
92
PARTI
 Fundamentals
96. Swaim SF, Vandevelde M, Faircloth JC: Evaluation of
99. Vernau KM, Higgins RJ, Bollen AW, et al: Primary canine
brain biopsy techniques in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp
and feline nervous system tumors: intraoperative diag-
Assoc 15:627-633, 1979.
nosis using the smear technique, Vet Pathol 38:47-57,
97. Irving G, McMillan MC: Fluoroscopically guided percu-
2001.
taneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thoracolumbar
100. Braund KG: Nerve and muscle biopsy techniques, Prog
spinal lesions in cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1:473-475, 1990.
Vet Neurol 2:35-56, 1991.
98. Platt SR, Alleman AR, Lanz Ol, et al: Comparison of
101.1
 Braund KG, Walker TL, Vandevelde M: Fascicular nerve
fine-needle aspiration and surgical-tissue biopsy in the
biopsy in the dog, Am J Vet Res 40:1025-1030, 1979.
diagnosis of canine brain tumors, Vet Surg 3l:65-69,
2002.
CHAPTER
Paresis of One Limb
Ihe term monoparesis, or monoplegia, denotes partial or
junction are diffuse [see Chapter 7]). In most cases, unilateral
complete loss of voluntary motor function in one limb,
 spinal cord lesions cranial to T3 cause hemiparesis, and bilat-
resulting from a neurologic lesion. Monoparesis must
eral lesions cause tetraparesis. Unilateral spinal cord lesions
be distinguished from lameness that is due to musculoskel-
caudal to TZ produce paresis or paralysis of the ipsilateral
etal involvement. Severe neural lesions cause characteristic 
pelvic limb, whereas bilateral lesions produce paraparesis or
sensory and motor deficits [see Lesion Localization section].
 paraplegia. Thus in animals with thoracic limb monoparesis
 Peripheral nerve and nerve root compression and neoplastic
 and no involvement of the other limbs, primary consideration
involvement, however, often initially cause lameness and pain
[nerve root signature) suggestive of musculoskeletal disease
 peripheral nerves (Table 5-1). Spinal cord lesions at C6-T2
(Figure 5-l). Results of the neurologic examination must be
confined entirely to the ventral gray matter could cause tho-
reviewed critically in these animals to identify typical deficits.
racic limb monoparesis but more commonly these lesions
Electrodiagnostic testing may be particularly helpful in local-
also involve general proprioceptive [GP) and upper motor
izing lesions to the peripheral nerve or nerve root in such cases
neuron [UMN) pathways to the ipsilateral pelvic limb. Pelvic
[see Chapter 4].
limb monoparesis may occur because of unilateral spinal cord
 Peripheral or spinal nerves may be injured owing to skel-
lesions between the T3 and Sl segments or more commonly
etal fractures or luxations. Thus both systems must be criti-
because of involvement of spinal roots and nerves, or nerves
cally evaluated in animals with monoparesis after trauma. In
 general, the prognosis for recovery is better with skeletal than 
with neurologic injuries.
LESION LOCALIZATION
The basic anatomic and physiologic principles that enable a
clinician to localize lesions based on motor or sensory defi-
cits are presented in Chapter 2. Concepts related to the local-
ization of lesions producing monoparesis or monoplegia are
reviewed here [Figure 5-2).
au oi AInju 1o aseas Aq pasnes st Aensn sisaredouo
lower motor neurons [LMNs) innervating the affected limb.
Thus dysfunction of the motor neuron (motor nerve cell
body), axon [(ventral root, spinal nerve, peripheral nerves),
or neuromuscular endplate results in motor dysfunction and
denervation atrophy. Monoparesis can also be the result of a
lesion affecting specific muscle groups of the thoracic limb.
Monoparesis most commonly occurs because of involve-
ment of axons of either peripheral or spinal nerves but less
frequently results from lesions affecting neuronal cel bodies
involving the left thoracic limb,resulting from cormpression of the
 in the ventral gray matter of the spinal cord. Rarely, monopa-
left C6 nerve root by foraminal entrapment of a laterally extruded
resis is a consequence of a disease process affecting the neu-
disk. The dog held the limb off the floor and had pain when the
romuscular junction. Most disorders of the neuromuscular
limb was manipulated.
94
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
95
Monoparesis
Thoracic limb
 Pelvic limb
Anesthesia,
 Sensory evaluation 
Anesthesia,
 Sensory evaluation
LMN signs
LMN signs
present 
present
Dermatomal
Nerve
Dermatomal
Nerve
UMN
LMN
distribution
distribution
distribution
distribution
signs
signs
(See Fig. 1-12)
(See Fig. 1-13)
(See Fig. 1-12)
(See Fig. 1-13)
present
present
 Spinal nerve,
Peripheral nerve
C6-T2, spinal cord 
 Spinal nerve,
Peripheral
 lpsilateral
L4-S2,
brachial plexus
(See Table 5-1)
gray matter or
lumbosacral plexus
nerve
T3-L3
ventral nerve
(See Table 5-1)
ventral nerve roots
(See Table 5-2)
(See Table 5-2)
roots or
 spinal cord 
gray matter
(See Table 5-2)
Figure 5-2 An algorithm for localization of lesions that produce monoparesis.
TABLE 5-1
Nerves of the Brachial Plexus
Spinal Cord
Cutaneous Sensory
Nerve
Segments*
Motor Function
Distribution
Signs of Dysfunction
Suprascapular
C6.C7
Extension and lateral
None
Little gait abnormality, pronounced
 support of the
 atrophy of supraspinatus and
 shoulder
 infraspinatus muscles (sweeney)
 Brachiocephalicus
C6. C7
 Advance limb
 Cranial surface of
Little gait abnormality, anesthesia 
 brachium 
 of cranial brachium
 Musculocutaneous
C6, C7. C8
 Flexion of the elbow 
 Medial antebrachium 
Little gait abnormality, weakened 
flexion of the elbow; anesthesia
of medial antebrachium
Axillary
C6. C7. C8
 Flexion of the shoulder
 Dorsolateral brachium
Little gait abnormality. decreased
shoulder flexor reflex; anesthesia
 of lateral side of brachium
Radial 
C7, C8, T1. T2
Extension of the elbow,
 Dorsal surface of the
Loss of weight bearing. knuckling
the carpus, and the 
foot and dorsal, and 
of pes, decreased extensor carpi
digits
lateral parts of the
radialis and triceps reflexes.
 antebrachium
 anesthesia of dorsal surface
distal to elbow
 Median and ulnar
C8, T1, T2
 Flexion of the carpus
Palmar surface of 
Little gait abnormality, slight sinking
 and the digits
 the foot; caudal
of the carpus; loss of carpal
antebrachium
flexion on flexor reflex: partial
loss of pain perception of the 
palmar surface of the foot and 
caudal antebrachium
Lateral thoracic
C8. T1
Cutaneous muscle
None
 Absent ipsilateral cutaneous trunci
 of the trunk 
 reflex, normal sensory evaluation
 Sympathetict
T1, T2, T3
 Dilation of the pupil 
None
Miosis, ptosis, enophthalmos, and
 protrusion of third eyelid
*The major spinal cord segments that form the peripheral nerves are italicized and bolded.
+The sympathetic nerve is not considered part of the brachial plexus; however, its nerve fibers travel along the roots of the brachial plexus as they
exit the vertebral column.
96
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
of the lumbosacral plexus. Unilateral T3-L3 spinal cord lesions
sensory neurons in the dorsal spinal ganglion of the injured
cause GP/UMN signs in the ipsilateral limb, whereas lesions
nerve. Self-mutilation can become particularly problematic
between the L4 and S2 spinal cord segments, or spinal nerves
 and necessitate amputation of the involved digits, limb, or tail.
and roots cause LMN signs.
Lesions in the gray matter of the spinal cord at T1-3 segments
 Disease of the spinal or peripheral nerves results in both sen-
or in the roots of the brachial plexus may injure the LMNs of
sory and motor dysfunction distal to the lesion because most
the sympathetic nerve fibers that form the cranial sympathetic
nerves contain both sensory and motor fibers. In contrast, lesions
trunk. Loss of sympathetic stimulation to the ipsilateral eye
confined to the ventral gray matter of the spinal cord produce
 produces signs of miosis, enophthalmos with elevation of the
only motor dysfunction. Unilateral T3 to L3 spinal cord lesions
third eyelid (membrana nictitans), and ptosis (Horner's syn-
 do not cause anesthesia of the affected limb because deep pain
drome). In the horse, miosis is not as obvious and sweating is
seen on the face and neck to the level of C2 on the side of the
(see Chapter 1). Anesthesia occurring in a single affected limb
lesion.5 Horner's syndrome commonly is associated with trau-
therefore suggests peripheral nerve or nerve root involvement. If
matic injuries of the brachial plexus. Similarly, lesions of the
sensory loss cannot be detected in the affected limb, lesions in the
C8-Tl gray matter, nerve roots, or spinal nerves affect the lateral
spinal cord gray matter or the ventral spinal nerve roots should
thoracic nerve, which is the motor component of the cutane-
be considered. Figure 5-2 outlines the localization oflesions that
ous trunci (panniculus) reflex. Therefore, lesions of the brachial
produce monoparesis of the thoracic and pelvic limbs.
plexus may cause LMN paresis of the limb, Horner's syndrome,
The distribution of sensory loss in an affected limb has great
and loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex on the same side.
localizing value because lesions can be pinpointed to a par-
Mononeuropathy refers to a disease or an injury ofa specific
ticular nerve or within two to three spinal cord segments [see
 peripheral nerve or its nerve roots. If a large nerve such as
Figure 1-12).l2 The total area innervated by a particular cuta-
the sciatic or radial nerve is injured, severe monoparesis may
neous nerve is termed its cutaneous area.3 The cutaneous area
occur. In most cases, mononeuropathies result from physical
includes a peripheral overlap zone innervated by other cutane-
injury secondary to compression, laceration, or contusion or
ous nerves and a central autonomous zone innervated solely by
from intramuscular injection of drugs. In addition to motor
that nerve (Figure 5-3). These zones can be detected clinically
dysfunction and atrophy, variable degrees of sensory loss are
using a method termed the “two-step pinch technique." Using
 encountered because peripheral nerves innervating the limbs
a mosquito hemostat, a small fold of skin is lifted and gently
 contain both motor and sensory fbers.
 grasped, activating mechanoreceptors in adjacent cutaneous
Polyneuropathy refers to a disease or an injury of several
peripheral nerves or their nerve roots. The term is generally
stimulating only the autonomous zone of the particular nerve.
used to indicate involvement of many nerves. Those diseases
Either a conscious response or reflex withdrawal indicates
 are described in Chapter 7.
functional integrity of the particular nerve. The degree of sen-
 In regard to monoparesis, polyneuropathy suggests an
 sory loss also influences the prognosis for functional recovery.
injury or a disease of the brachial plexus, the lumbosacral
The pattern of denervation atrophy (see Figure 5-4) facili-
plexus, or the cauda equina. Alternatively, a polyneuropathy
tates localization oflesions to a particular nerve or nerve group.
resulting in monoparesis also may be due to injury or dis-
Tables 5-1 and 5-2 outline the motor and sensory distribution
 ease affecting multiple spinal nerve roots or spinal nerves giv-
of the brachial and lumbosacral plexus and the neurologic
 ing rise to the brachial plexus, lumbosacral plexus, or cauda
 signs associated with lesions in each major nerve.Animals with
equina. As for mononeuropathies, physical injury is the most
peripheral nerve disease or injury also may mutilate the area
common cause of polyneuropathy and subsequent monopa-
normally innervated by the affected nerves.4 This behavior
resis. Occasionally, monoparesis occurs because of neoplas-
 apparently occurs because of dysesthesia (paresthesia) caused
tic involvement of a specific peripheral nerve, nerve root, or
by ectopic excitation of axonal sprouts in the neuroma or
nerve plexus. Resulting clinical signs progress insidiously, in
Cutaneous Areas
Autonormious
Zonie
Overlap area
Hgure 5-4 Left pelvic limb of a 10-year-old Labrador retriever
['nerve root signature) that progressed to monoparesis with asso-
ciated hyporeflexia and neurogenic muscle atrophy. Atrophy of the
biceps femoris and gastrocnemius muscles is shown here. Note the
Individual nerves
dropped hock. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass involv-
 Figure 5-3 A schematic illustrating the cutaneous area innervated
ing the proximal sciatic nerve. A presumptive diagnosis of a nerve
by a nerve to include its overlap zone and autonomous zone.
sheath tumor was made.
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
97
TABLE 5-2
Nerves of the Lumbosacral Plexus
Spinal Cord
Cutaneous Sensory
Nerve
Segments*
Motor Function
Distribution
Signs of Dysfunction
Obturator
L4. L5, L6 
Adduction of pelvic limb 
None
Little gait abnormality. abduction on slick
surface
Femoral
L3, L4, L5, L6
 Extension of stifle,
Saphenous branch
Severe gait dysfunction, no weight bearing.
flexion of hip
supplies medial
decreased or absent patellar reflex, loss of
 surface of limb and 
sensation in medial limb and medial digit
medial digit
Sciatic
L6, L7, S1. S2
 Extension of hip.
Caudal and lateral
Severe gait dysfunction: paw is knuckled,
extension and flexion
 surfaces of limb distal
but weight bearing occurs; hip cannot 
of stifle (see tibial and 
to stifle (see tibial and 
be extended, hock cannot be flexed or
peroneal branches)
 peroneal branches!
extended (in more proximal lesions, hip
 is flexed and drawn toward the midline):
loss of cutaneous sensation distal to stifle
(except for areas supplied by saphenous 
nerve): absent flexor reflex
Peroneal
L6, L7. S1.S2
Flexion of hock,
Cranial surface of limb
Hock is straightened and foot tends to
extension of digits
 distal to stifle
kuckle; loss of sensation on cranial
surface to limb distal to stifle, poor hock 
flexion on flexor reflext
Tibial
L6, L7, S1. S2
 Extension of hock, flexion  Caudal surface of limb
Hock is dropped, loss of sensation on caudal
 of digits
 distal to stifle
surface of limb distal to stiflet
*'The major spinal cord segments that form the peripheral nerves are italicized and bolded.
+Peroneal and tibial nerve paralysis cormmonly occurs in association with each other Signs of peroneal nerve damage tend to predorminate.
contrast to the acute, nonprogressive course typical of physi-
degeneration) and loss of conduction in 3 to 5 days. The endo-
cal injuries. Specifc diseases that cause monoparesis are dis-
neurium and the Schwann cell sheath supporting structures
cussed in greater detail next.
remain intact. Regeneration of the axon usually begins in about
1 week and progresses at a rate of approximately l mm per day
[1 inch per month). Neurotmesis refers to complete severance
DISEASES
of the nerve (physical disruption of the axons and the myelin
sheaths). Regeneration may occur, but neuroma formation is
The disorders or diseases that cause monoparesis and focally
likely. The degree of nerve injury dictates the relative likelihood
affect the LMN system are classified in Table 5-3. This table
of regeneration, with restoration of function being most likely
uses the logic for the formulation of a neurologic diagnosis,
with neurapraxia and least likely with neurotmesis.
discussed in Chapter l. The etiologic categories are organized
 Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies are
according to the DAMNITV scheme described in Table 1-2.
useful for confrming a diagnosis and determining the distribu-
The diseases are further divided into acute nonprogressive,
tion of the nerve injury. Changes on EMG appear about l week
acute progressive, and chronic progressive disease categories
after injury in dogs and 2 weeks after injury in horses [see Chap-
based on the clinical course. The most important disorders
ter 4 for details). The presence of voluntary motor-unit action
 that primarily present as monoparesis or plegia are described
potentials indicates an incomplete injury. The EMG and nerve
in sections of this chapter based on anatomic location.
conduction studies also can be used to monitor the progress of
recovery.
Acute Nonprogressive Diseases, Monoparesis
Sciatic Nerve. The sciatic nerve is a mixed nerve that arises
of the Pelvic Limbs
from spinal cord segments L6-S2 (see Table 5-2]. The sciatic
Peripheral Nerve Injuries
nerve is the extrapelvic continuation of the lumbosacral trunk.
Traumatic peripheral nerve injuries are classified into three cat-
Because caudal lumbar and sacral spinal cord segments lie cra-
egories based on the degree of injury. Neurapraxia refers to tran-
nial to the corresponding vertebrae, nerve fbers that become the
sient interruption of nerve function and conduction, sometimes
sciatic nerve must course caudally before exiting from the verte-
associated with a lesion of the myelin but without physical dis-
bral canal. As a result, these nerve fibers are particularly subject
ruption to the axon and therefore no evidence that Wallerian
to injury from lumbosacral fractures and subluxations, lumbosa-
degeneration exists. Neurapraxia is usually caused by a loss of
cral stenosis, and pelvic or femoral fractures. Traumatic injuries
 blood supply, such as that produced by application of a tourni-
of the lumbosacral area rarely result in a true mononeuropathy
quet or by pressure from the weight of the animal during anes-
because fbers forming the pudendal, pelvic, and caudal nerves
thesia. The condition can last for days to months. Demyelination
 are also injured. In degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, however,
will probably occur if signs persist for more than a few days. A
the L7 nerve root may be entrapped in the L7-S1 foramen, caus-
 period of 3 to 4 weeks is required for remyelination. Axonotme-
ing lameness or monoparesis. Sciatic nerve paralysis is common
sis denotes separation of the axon from the neuronal cell body
in cows during dystocia. Damage to the fbers within the pel-
with subsequent degeneration of the distal axon [Wallerian
vic canal near the ventral surface of the cranial sacrum usually
98
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 5-3
Diseases Causing Paresis of One Limb: Differential Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course
and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
 Acute Nonprogressive
 Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Degenerative
None
Hormer's type I disk disease (6)
 Foraminal stenosis from lumbosacral
disease (6)
disease (6)
Infraspinatus muscle contracture (5)
Anomalous
None
None
None 
Metabolic
None
None
None
Neoplastic (6)
None 
 Lymphoreticular
 Primary—nerve sheath tumor (5)
Hematopoietic
Skeletal
Metastatic
Nutritional
None
None
Inflammatory
None 
Myelitis/meningomyelitis (15)
Myelitis/meningomyelitis (15)
Focal tetanus (10)
Protozoal neuritis (15)
Brachial plexus neuritis (5)
Immune
None 
Brachial plexus neuritis (5)
Toxic
None
None
None 
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
Horner's type I intervertebral disk  None
 Brachial plexus injury (5)
herniation (6)
 Radial nerve injury (5)
Sciatic nerve injury (5)
 Horner's type I intervertebral disk
herniation (6)
latrogenic injury
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous embolism (6)
None
None 
Aterial thromboembolism (6)
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
results in bilateral injury and paraparesis. Occasionally the injury
is asymmetric, involving only the fibers of one sciatic nerve.
After giving offbranches within the pelvis, the major portion
 of the sciatic nerve exits at the greater ischiatic foramen and
 courses caudally to the coxofemoral joint, between and deep
to the tuber ischii and the greater trochanter of the femur. The
nerve then continues distally between the semimembranosus
and biceps femoris muscles. Branches of the sciatic nerve sup-
ply muscles that extend the hip and flex the stifle. Between
the hip and the stifle, the sciatic nerve bifurcates to form the
common peroneal (fbular) and tibial nerves, which supply all
muscles distal to the stifle and provide sensory innervations to
all areas of the foot except the medial digit, which is inner-
vated by the saphenous branch of the femoral nerve.
Injuries below the distal third of the femur cause signs of pero-
neal and/or tibial nerve dysfunction. These injuries are described
later. Damage to the proximal sciatic nerve results in severe
monoparesis because the extensor muscles of the stifle (inner-
 o e u q oiad au go s piasi ia an
vated by the femoral nerve) are the only group that remains func-
peroneal nerve paralysis.
e a  anp  aq   a nn
the stifle to extend related to intact femoral nerve function, the
The sciatic nerve is the major nerve contributing to the
stifle does not flex. The hock and the digits do not extend or flex
because of tibial and peroneal nerve involvement. The animal
the digits, hock, and stifle do not flex when the toes are stim-
stands on the dorsum of the foot, "knuckled over,” and assumes a
ulated. Stimulation of the medial digit or the medial aspect
plantigrade stance; the hock usually is "dropped." Sensation distal
of the distal limb elicits a conscious response and flexion
to the stifle is severely compromised laterally (peroneal), cau-
of the hip due to saphenous innervation, but the remain-
dally (tibial), and cranially (peroneal), but it is preserved medially
der of the joints of the affected limb do not flex. Atrophy
if the saphenous branch of the femoral nerve is intact [see Figure
of the caudal thigh muscles and the muscles distal to the
1-13). The dorsal surface of the foot frequently is ulcerated if the
stifle may be severe. Dogs with nerve entrapment may have
animal drags or walks on the affected paw (Figure 5-5).
severe pain. Self-mutilation also may occur. Clinical deficits
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
66
usually are acute but may be delayed if fbrosis leads to nerve
to injury where it crosses the lateral aspect of the stifle joint.
entrapment.
In large animals, prolonged recumbency may injure the nerve
 The proximal portion of the sciatic nerve is most frequently
at this site. In small animals and calves, injuries usually result
damaged by fractures of the shaft of the ilium, acetabulum,
from intramuscular injection of drugs into or near the nerve.
and proximal femur and during calving injuries in cows.5-9
The foot tends to "knuckle over,” and the hock may be
Proximity of the sciatic nerve to the pelvic bone predisposes
overextended. The cranial tibialis and the digital extensor
it to iatrogenic injury during surgical procedures involving
muscles are atrophied in small animals. Loss of sensation
the ilium, acetabulum, sacroiliac joint, and the coxofemoral
occurs on the dorsal areas of the foot and the cranial surface
joint.l0 latrogenic injury of the sciatic nerve is more common
overlying the hock and the tibia. The flexor reflex is severely
with retrograde placement of intramedullary pins in the femur
depressed when the dorsal aspects of the foot or the digits
and during treatment of pelvic orthopedic diseases.ll-13 Less
are stimulated. Pinching the plantar surface of the digits or
common causes include severe hip dysplasia and total hip
the foot elicits a defnite conscious response, and the fexor
reflex is present, but the animal may not actively flex the hock
iatrogenic injury is determined by the degree of nerve injury
joint. The examiner must exercise care in evaluating the flexor
reflex because some passive flexion of the hock may occur as
sis for return of function is poor if sciatic injuries are complete.
the stifle actively flexes. Although the foot tends to knuckle
Surgical relief of compression injury may be rewarding.
over, the dorsal surface usually does not become so severely
Clinical outcome was studied in one series of 34 dogs with
abraded or ulcerated as it does in more proximal sciatic nerve
nerve injury subsequent to pelvic fractures and dislocations.
lesions [see Figure 5-5). Dogs soon learn to place the foot by
Nerve entrapment was noted at surgery in 13 dogs.9 Return of
 greater flexion of the hip and extension of the stifle. This gives
limb function was considered good or excellent 2 to 16 weeks
the impression of a "high-stepping gait,” which should not
after surgery in ll dogs in which the nerve was decompressed
be confused with hypermetria associated with GP/UMN or
 and internal fixation was applied. Return of function was also
cerebellar lesions. Transfer of tendons of muscles that are not
good to excellent 2 to 12 weeks after injury in 10 of 12 dogs
denervated to affected muscles may be beneficial.20 Horses
peu sdno18 yoq u saop Auen A1aans oarapun 1ou pp 1e
decreased cutaneous sensory loss. The authors suggested that
Tibial Nerve. The tibial nerve supplies the muscles that
 surgery is indicated in dogs with severe pain or "signs of mod-
extend the hock and flex the digits. It provides cutaneous
sensory innervation to the plantar surface of the foot and the
 absence of pain perception suggests severe involvement.
caudal surface of the limb. In most animals, tibial nerve lesions
The sciatic nerve, or the peroneal or tibial nerves along the
occur in association with peroneal nerve injuries, and a mix-
caudal aspect of the femur, can be injured by injections or
ture of neurologic signs occurs. In a pure tibial nerve injury.
femoral fractures. Injected materials intended for the biceps
the hock joint is dropped when the animal walks or supports
femoris or semimembranosus muscles may go instead into
weight (Figure 5-6). The gastrocnemius muscle is atrophied.
the fascial plane between these muscles.17 Injury can occur
Loss of sensation occurs from the plantar aspect of the foot.
from direct laceration of the nerve by the needle, from the
The flexor reflex is severely depressed when the plantar sur-
irritating nature of the agent being injected directly into the
face of the foot is stimulated. Pinching the dorsal surface of the
nerve, or from secondary scarring around the nerve. Injection
foot elicits a definite conscious response when stimulated, and
injuries may be prevented by using another site for intramus-
the flexor reflex is present even though the toes are not flexed.
cular injections, such as the quadriceps or lumbar muscles. The
diagnosis is based on the history (paresis or paralysis typically
occurs immediately after injection) and the lack of another
explanation for the defcits. Establishing a direct cause-and-
effect relationship is usually diffcult but may be important
from a medicolegal standpoint.
Anfu jo Auaass au uo puadap quauaaeueu pue ssuoid
Careful assessment of motor and sensory function determines
whether both peroneal and tibial components are affected.
Functionally, dogs with tibial nerve paralysis can accommo-
date better. If both nerves are affected, sensory evaluation is
important to determine whether the lesion is complete (see
Fig. 1-13). If function remains, especially in the peroneal nerve
distribution, conservative treatment is recommended and a
fairly good prognosis is given. Many of these injuries are due to
neurapraxia or axonotmesis and limb function often returns.
If the lesion is complete, more aggressive treatment may be
indicated. Conservative treatment includes protecting the foot
from injury by using an orthotic or splint and physical therapy
to maintain muscle mass and range of motion.l8 Boots for dogs
are available from several sources such as physical rehabilita-
tion facilities and as advertised in hunting magazines or over
the Internet. Surgical exploration of the nerve with debride-
ment of surrounding tissues, neurolysis, resection of neuromas,
and anastomosis of the nerve segments is indicated with severe
 injuries but requires specialized training to perform.19
 Peroneal Nerve. The peroneal nerve supplies the muscles
Figure 5-6 Bilateral tibial nerve paralysis in a dog resulting from
that flex the hock and extend the digits. It provides cutaneous
sn e sup sql sd a jo ueq adaiun
sensory innervation to the dorsal aspect of the foot and the
procedure. Note the dropped hocks in both pelvic limbs, a result
cranial surface of the hock and the tibia. This nerve is subject
of distal nerve injury of the tibial nerves.
100
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 Isolated tibial nerve injury may follow injections into the thigh
unilateral distribution and produces monoparesis. In horses,
muscles. Large so-called trophic ulcers may develop in the
protozoal encephalomyelitis can produce selective gray mat-
digital pads of small animals because of decreased circulation
ter lesions causing ipsilateral paresis. Pertinent disorders that
produce unilateral spinal cord lesions are discussed in the
not move their limbs to the degree necessary to relieve soft
chapters on pelvic limb paresis (see Chapter 6) and tetrapare-
tissue compression.23 In those animals unsuccessfully treated
sis (see Chapter 7].
conservatively, surgical correction necessitates grafting of skin
from normally innervated cutaneous regions.24
 Acute Nonprogressive Diseases, Monoparesis
Femoral Nerve. The femoral nerve arises from the L3-6
of the Thoracic Limbs
 spinal cord segments and supplies the extensor muscles of the
Peripheral Nerve Irjuries
stifle. The major motor component is from L5.25 The saphe-
Nerves that innervate the muscles of the thoracic limbs and
nous branch of the femoral nerve is the sensory pathway
 clinical signs associated with injuries of these nerves are listed
from the skin on the medial surface of the foot, limb, stifle,
in Table 5-1. Proximal radial nerve injuries cause paralysis of
and thigh. Peripheral injuries to this nerve are not common
the triceps brachii muscle, and extensor muscles of the carpus
because ofits short and well-protected course before innervat-
 and digits. Because the animal is unable to extend the elbow
ing the quadriceps muscle. Rarely, unilateral damage restricted
and carpus, it cannot bear weight or properly place the foot.
to the ventral gray matter of the L4-6 segments results in a
The elbow also is dropped. Injury to the musculocutaneous
neuropathy involving the femoral nerve. Bilateral femoral
nerve causes paralysis of biceps brachii and brachialis muscles
nerve injury has been seen in dogs after extreme extension of
and the animal cannot flex the elbow. Paralysis of the carpal
the hips. With femoral nerve lesions, the stifle cannot be fixed
Anjui aarau reun pue uepau jo ansar e se salosnu soxa
(extended) for weight bearing and the animal usually carries
is more subtle, causing overextension of the carpus during
the affected limb. Lesions involving the peripheral femoral
weight bearing.
nerve cause anesthesia in areas innervated by the saphenous
Evaluation of spinal reflexes helps to identify which muscle
s a  rn a a  ss a r
 groups are funectional. The flexor reflex is useful in assessing
nal cord produce motor dysfunction only. The patellar reflex
muscle strength and identifying partial lesions. Sensory evalu-
is absent or diminished; however, the flexor reflex is normal,
ation is essential to mapping the cutaneous areas of decreased
except for decreased flexion of the hip. The hopping reaction
sensation (see Chapter l). This section discusses injuries to the
is greatly decreased in the affected limb because weight bear-
brachial plexus, and radial and suprascapular nerves because
ing is inhibited. However, if the animal's weight is supported,
injuries to these nerves are more common in clinical practice.
proprioceptive placement should be normal when only the
Trauma to the Brachial Plexus. The nerves of the brachial
femoral nerve is affected.
plexus originate from the C6-T2 spinal cord segments [see
 Femoral neuropathy can be associated with liopsoas muscle
Table 5-1). In addition, the sympathetic nerves that innervate
pathology. The injury can be secondary to bleeding disorders,
as  aa sg a u sunu g ae aa a
ments and travel along the roots of the brachial plexus as they
muscle pathology can be detected using ultrasonography or
exit the vertebral canal. Trauma that abducts and caudally dis-
computed tomography (CT), but magnetic resonance imaging
places the thoracic limb may damage the dorsal and ventral
(MRI) may provide better visualization.28 Tenectomy of the
roots of the brachial plexus.30-34 Typically, the trauma occurs 
muscle insertion can relieve signs of hip pain.
intradurally at the point where the nerve roots arise from the
In large animals, femoral nerve paralysis results in severe
spinal cord (Figure 5-7). Injuries that place severe traction on
monoparesis. The affected limb is poorly advanced and col-
the spinal cord also may damage GP/UMN spinal pathways
lapses during weight bearing. In calves and foals, femoral nerve
involving the ipsilateral pelvic limb. Rarely, the plexus is dam-
paralysis results from trauma during parturition.7.29 Forced
 aged by a direct blow to the shoulder, thus causing contusion 
 x   ,   
or hemorrhage. This lesion is usually not complete.
hip and overstretches the nerve where it enters the quadriceps
The myotomal distribution of the ventral spinal nerve
muscle. Incidence is increased in the heavily muscled cattle
roots varies to some extent from one dog to the next so
breeds.
that the degree of dysfunction induced by any single root
 Obturator Nerve. Injuries to the obturator nerve in dogs
or cats do not cause monoparesis, although the affected limb
may slide laterally when the animal stands on a smooth sur-
face. Obturator paralysis occurs most commonly during partu-
rition in cows. The obturator nerve lies on the medial surface
of the ilium and innervates the adductor muscles of the limb.
Injuries cause marked pelvic limb weakness, especially on slick
surfaces. The limbs may be placed in a wide-based'stance that
is exaggerated as the animal runs. The gait abnormality is less
pronounced with unilateral lesions. Most dystocia-related
injuries in cows also damage branches of the sciatic nerve.7
Spinal Cord Diseases
Unilateral spinal cord lesions caudal to the TZ spinal cord
segment result in monoparesis. Lesions at L4-S2 cause LMN
deficits, whereas those at T3-L3 spinal cord segments cause
GP/UMN signs. Sensory deficits usually also occur. In most
cases, several spinal cord segments are involved, and dysfunc-
tion affects multiple nerves (polyneuropathy). The most com-
Hgure 5-7 The cervical spinal cord from a 3-year-old Labrador
mon cause is infarction caused by fibrocartilaginous embolism
retriever euthanized for brachial plexus avulsion after falling out
and other  vascular-related diseases.(
Occasionally, spinal
of a pickup truck. Note the avulsion of the nerve roots from the
cord trauma, neoplasia, or, more rarely, inflammation has a
spinal cord.
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
101
injury cannot be fully predicted. Injuries have been broadly
The pattern of sensory loss allows more critical clinical deff-
categorized as complete, cranial, and caudal, depending on
nition of the nature of the injury (Figure 5-9).30-32 With com-
the extent of nerve root avulsion.31.32 Complete brachial
plete brachial plexus injuries, pain perception is essentially lost
plexus injuries involve the entire plexus. In Griffths' origi-
distal to the elbow. Bailey30 has provided a detailed descrip-
 nal classification, caudal brachial plexus injuries involve the
tion of sensory deficits in selected incomplete lesions. A cranial
C8 and T'l nerve roots, whereas cranial avulsions involve the
brachial plexus injury involving the C6-8 roots caused a loss
C6 and C7 roots.31,32 Complete and caudal brachial plexus
of cutaneous sensation over the cranial antebrachium distal to
injuries cause paralysis of the triceps brachii muscle so that
the elbow (radial nerve), the lateral and cranial brachium over-
affected dogs cannot extend the elbow or bear weight on the
lying the humerus [axillary and brachiocephalicus nerves), and
limb. Postural reactions and the fexor, extensor carpi radia-
 an area over the cranial aspect of the dorsal spine of the scapula
lis, and triceps brachii reflexes are weak or absent. The paw
[dorsal cutaneous branch of C6). Sensory distribution over the
is knuckled over and dragged (Figure 5-8), potentially caus-
caudal antebrachium, provided through cutaneous branches
ing severe abrasion and ulceration of the dorsal surface. Dogs
of the ulnar nerve, and a portion of the median antebrachium
with caudal avulsions walk with the elbow and shoulder
[musculocutaneous nerve) were spared. A caudal brachial
 fexed. Elbow extensors are spared with cranial avulsions so
 plexus injury involving the C8 and Tl roots and the T2 com-
that the dog can still bear weight on the limb but cannot flex
municating branch to Tl caused loss of sensation cranially and
the elbow or protract the limb. The supraspinatus and infra-
caudally over both the lateral and medial antebrachium (radial
spinatus muscles are atrophied. With each form of brachial
 and ulnar nerves). Although sensation was lost over the lateral
plexus injuries, neurogenic muscle atrophy begins in the dis-
antebrachium, a sizeable medial portion retained sensation
tribution of the denervation in about l week [Video 5-1].
[musculocutaneous nerve). Areas innervated by cutaneous
branches of the axillary and brachiocephalicus nerves over the
Injury of the Tl ventral spinal nerve root affects the pre-
ganglionic sympathetic nerve fbers, resulting in miosis of the
ipsilateral pupil (partial Horner's syndrome).31.3s Other fea-
tures of Horner's syndrome, such as ptosis, enophthalmos, and
protrusion of the membrana nictitans, occur rarely unless the
spinal roots for Tl and T2 or cranial sympathetic trunk also
are involved. Another feature of brachial plexus injury is loss
of the cutaneous trunci reflex ipsilateral to the lesion. This
loss occurs with either complete or caudal injury resulting
from injury of the C8 and Tl ventral spinal nerve roots, thus
interrupting lateral thoracic nerve innervation of the cutane-
 ous trunci (panniculus carnosus) muscle. The reflex is present
on the side of the body contralateral to the lesion such that
stimulation on either side of the trunk elicits a motor response
only on the side opposite the brachial plexus injury. Injuries
that place severe traction on the spinal cord also may cause
damage to GP/UMN pathways. This damage causes pelvic
limb deficits, particularly on the ipsilateral side.
  r     
intact axons recover from temporary conduction block. The
 prognosis for recovery of function, however, is generally poor,
particularly when eibow extensors are denervated.36 The
best prognostic indicator predictive for return of function
after brachial plexus injury is presence of pain perception.35
Corrective orthopedic procedures such as carpal arthrodesis
Figure 5-8 Left brachial plexus injury in a 2-year-old Labrador
or tendon transplantation are not indicated in these cases
retriever, a result of a car accident. Note the knuckled paw and the
but may be helpful in selected cases in which the proximal
branches of the radial and the musculocutaneous nerves are
scapular and triceps muscles.
spared. If such surgery is contemplated, EMG should be done
Medial
Latera
Medial
atera
Hgure 5-9 Maps of sensory loss in cranial, caudal, and total brachial plexus avulsions. (Data from
Bailey CS: Patterns of cutaneous anesthesia associated with brachial plexus avulsions in the dog, J
Am Vet Med Assoc 185:889, 1984.]
102
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
to ensure that the elbow extensors and muscles to be trans-
planted are not denervated.37 Affected animals often develop
severe limb contractures and may mutilate the limb, neces-
sitating amputation.
Bilateral brachial plexus injury occurs in some animals, par-
ticularly when they have fallen from great heights and landed in
a sternal position, severely abducting both thoracic limbs. Bilat-
eral injury of the C5-7 nerve roots may cause diaphragmatic
paralysis due to phrenic nerve involvement. Affected animals
have dyspnea in addition to bilateral thoracic limb paralysis.
 Suprascapular Nerve. Suprascapular paralysis occurs
tures involving the cranial and distal border of the scapula.5.38
 Severe supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscle atrophy occurs,
resulting in a condition termed sweeney. Weight bearing is
usually unaffected; however, in the acute stage of injury, the
stride may be shortened and the shoulder may luxate later-
ally when weight is borne on the limb. Cattle may have this
Figure 5-10 A mixed-breed dog with a distal fracture of the left
p a sus   sn uu oi anpnu
humerus and suspected radial nerve paralysis.
gate with the shoulders. Working draft horses may be injured
from poorly fitting collars. Electromyography is useful to
 ensure that other nerves are not affected. Surgical decompres-
Spinal Cord Diseases
sion of the nerve as it passes around the cranial surface of the
Unilateral spinal cord lesions restricted to the gray matter at
saop quauaaordu snoaueuods f papuauunar si endens
C6-T2 may destroy the motor neurons of the brachial plexus,
not occur.39 Recommendations vary with early versus delayed
resulting in LMN monoparesis while sparing sensory percep-
surgery. Results are probably best with exploration after
tion, depending on the degree of involvement of the dorsal
about 1 month. Waiting for 3 months to ensure that spontane-
horn sensory relay neurons. Lesions at this level usually involve
ous recovery does not occur is an alternative.
the GP/UMN pathways of the ipsilateral pelvic limb, causing
Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle occurs in dogs and
hemiparesis. The most common cause is infarction resulting
     ss    n
from fibrocartilaginous embolism _and other vascular-based
 be trauma to the muscle and possibly to the vasculature or
diseases. Trauma, neoplasia, and inflammation also may cause
the suprascapular nerve supplying the muscle.40 Affected dogs
focal spinal cord disease. Injury to the brachial plexus may be
tend to be working hunting breeds of dog. An understanding
d eesered rsred m eose
the normal function of the infraspinatus muscle helps appre-
if the spinal cord is compressed, contused, tethered, or other-
ciate the gait disturbance that occurs with contracture. The
wise damaged at the time of trauma. Spinal cord diseases are
normal action of the muscle is to externally rotate and abduct
discussed in the chapters on pelvic limb paresis and tetraparesis.
the humerus and flex or extend the shoulder depending on
the position of the joint when the muscle is stimulated. With
Treatment of Nerve Injury
contracture of the muscle, the humerus remains fixed in a
Animals with peripheral nerve injury should be treated with
slightly externally rotated and abducted position. In addition,
short-term antinflammatory dosages of corticosteroids to relieve
the shoulder is fxed in flexion. During the swing phase of
inflammation and swelling. The limb is immobilized to prevent
the gait, the stride of the limb may be slightly shortened. To
further trauma. Nerve decompression or anastomosis is indicated
compensate for the inability to extend the shoulder, there is
if the site of injury is surgically accessible. Long-term manage-
excessive flexion of the elbow and a characteristic “flip" to the
carpus. Additionally, the limb is abducted during the swing
minimize muscle atrophy of the remaining functional muscle
phase [Video 5-2). Transecting the insertion of the infraspina-
groups, and prevention of further trauma to the affected limb.44
tus muscle is beneficial.40
Tendon transplantation and joint arthrodesis are performed
Radial Nerve. The entire radial nerve may be injured by
primarily for distal radial nerve and common peroneal nerve
fractures of the first rib. Fractures of the humerus may injure
injuries in small animals,.20 The most important aspect of long-
the nerve distal to the branches that supply the triceps brachi
 term management is probably prevention of trauma to the distal
muscle. Similarly, application of tourniquets proximal to the
extremity. Commercially available boots and orthotics that help
elbow during declaw or to assist with hemostasis for surgeries
protect the foot are easily applied by the owner and are well
involving the antebrachium or foot, may result in compression
tolerated by the dog. Owners frequently request amputation of
or ischemia to the radial nerve. Typically, the lesion is tran-
the affected limb because of distal extremity trauma. Generally.
s   n e     
ssaun suou g noy paeap aq pnous qu au jo uoneandue
radial nerve injuries occur most commonly during anesthetic
traumatic complications cannot be prevented. This period is suf-
procedures or when the animal is in lateral recumbency on a
ficient to determine whether nerve regeneration will occur. The
hard surface for extended periods.5 Distal radial nerve inju-
owner should be warned that recovery is slow and that amputa-
ries produce less severe gait abnormalities than do brachial
tion is an irreversible solution to the problem.
plexus injuries. The elbow can be extended; however, the foot
Animals with cutaneous areas of anesthesia or hypesthe-
tends to knuckle over when the animal wallks because the
sia [reduced sensory perception) frequently self-mutilate the
extensors of the carpus and the digits are paralyzed (Figure
affected area. In most instances in which there is anesthesia,
5-10). Sensation is lost from the dorsal and cranial aspects of
concurrent paralysis precludes return of limb function. As a
the limb distal to the elbow. Surgical exploration of the injured
result, amputation should be strongly advocated. In animals that
nerve with neurolysis or anastomosis is indicated, especially in
maintain sensory perception and self-mutilate the denervated
distal radial nerve injuries.41,42 Carpal arthrodesis or transposi-
region of the limb, the possible presence of neuropathic pain
tion of a flexor tendon may be helpful.43 Paresthesia may lead
can be empirically treated with gabapentin at 2 to 10 mg/kg
to self-mutilation, however.
orally three times daily.
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
103
 Many peripheral nerve injuries in large animals can be
complete or incomplete and occur bilaterally. The pathogenesis
avoided by proper management when placed in lateral recum-
is assumed to have an immunologic basis. The cases described
bency.5 Adequate padding must be provided at all times, and
in dogs and cats have been related to an allhorsemeat diet or
recumbent animals should be turned at least three times daily.
Excessive traction on limbs should be avoided during anesthe-
 ity has not been established in other cases.
sia, animal restraint and movement, or during fetal extraction.
The weakness manifests as lower motor neuron signs to
Injured limbs should be protected by bandages, splints, or casts.
the thoracic limbs. Pain may or may not be manifested upon
Cattle with obturator nerve paralysis must be kept on a nonslick
limb manipulation. The proximal limb muscles are more
 surface. Hobbles on the pelvic limbs may be helpful. Recumbent
commonly affected. Electromyography and nerve conduction
 animals should be supported with slings whenever possible.
reveal changes consistent with denervation atrophy. Impor-
tantly, abnormalities are not identified in the pelvic limbs
Prognosis
eliminating diffuse LMN disease from consideration. MRI
The prognosis of peripheral nerve injuries depends on the type
 reveals nerve swelling associated with an increase in signal
of damage and the severity of neurologic dysfunction. Nerve
 intensity on T2 weighted images.50 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
fbers that have been contused, compressed, or stretched may
analysis is usually normal or may have elevated protein if the
regain function slowly. Nerves that have been lacerated or
intradural nerve roots are affected. Nerve biopsy shows Wal-
avulsed from their spinal cord attachments, however, seldom
lerian degeneration and necropsy reveals inflammation iso-
regain function. Unfortunately, in routine practice, establish-
lated to the nerve roots and ventral branches of the spinal
 ing which of these situations has occurred is sometimes dif-
nerve.47.49 Some affected animals respond to corticosteroid
ficult at the initial examination. For nerve fibers to regenerate,
administration [along with diet change to a novel source of
the nerve sheath must remain intact. Compressive lesions may
 protein in cases in which an unusual diet is fed) and others
cause demyelination without disrupting the axon. Recovery
begins in about 3 to 4 weeks and continues for 1 to 2 months.
or static.
Axonal regeneration occurs slowly, at a rate of approximately
1 mm per day (l inch a month); however, the nerve sheath
Chronic Progressive Diseases and Monoparesis
must be intact to guide the axon to the denervated muscle.
Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors
The affected muscles may be reinnervated by axonal sprouting
Pathophysiology. Peripheral nerves may be affected pri-
from adjacent intact neurons. Regardless of the repair process
marily or secondarily by neoplasia. Nerve sheath tumors arise
 involved, return to function may take several months and may
from Schwann cells [schwannoma) or connective tissue sur-
 never be complete. As a general rule, reinnervation must occur
rounding the nerves (neurofibroma, neurinoma, neurilem-
 in 12 months or less to be effective. Regeneration for distances
moma). These two tumor tissue types are distinguished in part
greater than 12 inches is therefore unlikely.
because the schwannoma is encapsulated and distinct from the
 In general, the prognosis for functional recovery of ani-
nerve, whereas the neurofbroma is not encapsulated and indis-
mals with severe motor dysfunction and complete anesthe-
tinct from the nerve. However, the distinction is often diffcult
sia is poor. These lesions are usually severe and may involve
to make. Consequently, they are considered collectively under
complete disruption of nerve fibers. Some animals regain
the term nerve sheath tumor 5l Recently, the diagnostic clas-
function; however, the outcome is often unsatisfactory. The
 prognosis is better for animals with partial loss of motor or
sensory function because damage to the axons may be transi-
neurofibrosarcoma and more generally termed, malignant
tory and reinnervation from adjacent, intact nerve fbers is
peripheral nerve sheath tumor. In dogs, nerve sheath tumors
more predictable. In addition, animals with partial dysfunc-
have been reported in various anatomic sites but spinal nerves
tion may learn to compensate by using other, uninvolved
in the caudal cervical and cranial thoracic region, and cra-
muscle groups. In most cases, the distribution and the severity
nial nerves (in particular cranial nerve V; see Chapter 9) are
 of sensory loss are the most important factors in establishing
affected with greater frequency.53 Most nerve sheath tumors
a prognosis.
originate peripherally and then slowly extend proximally to
 If available, an EMG examination that includes nerve con-
involve the spinal cord (Figure 5-11).st.54 As tumors grow
duction studies and evoked potentials is useful for formulat-
  aq snxd  u srau ro 
ing a prognosis and assessing the recovery of peripheral nerve
by the time the dog has clinical signs multiple nerves often
injuries.3745 This technique helps the clinician establish the
are affected. Nerve sheath tumors in the thoracolumbar spinal
 severity and distribution of nerve injury. A total lack of volun-
cord more commonly arise intradurally and compress the spi-
tary motor potentials, an absence of response to nerve stimula-
nal cord initially.54
tion, and evidence of diffuse denervation are highly correlated
Other tumor types may secondarily involve peripheral
with a poor prognosis. The presence of some motor unit activ-
 nerves and nerve roots.34 Meningiomas originating at the out-
ity and patchy denervation suggests that the lesion is not com-
foldings of meninges around the nerve roots may compress or
 plete and that a better chance for nerve regeneration exists.46
invade the root. Bony and soft tissue tumors also may com-
The EMG examination can be repeated periodically over sev-
press nerve roots or peripheral nerves. Lymphoma, particularly
eral months to determine whether reinnervation is occurring.
in cats, may involve peripheral nerves and roots, especially at
 If tendon transplant surgery is contemplated before surgery.
 the cervical intumescence and in the brachial plexus.55
the muscle to be transplanted should be examined with EMG
Clinical Signs. Some nerve sheath tumors affect periph-
to ensure that denervation potentials are absent.
eral nerves in the skin and cause only disfgurement, par-
ticularly true in cattle.56 Other tumors can involve major
Acute Progressive Diseases and Monoparesis
Plexus Neuritis
nating in the brachial plexus typically cause initial thoracic
Monoparesis can rarely be caused by inflammatory disorders,
limb lameness (nerve root signature). Dogs are reluctant to
especially when the inflammation is localized to the plexuses
bear weight on the involved limb and show pain during palpa-
or in the intumescences with myelitis. Reported cases have
tion. Affected dogs are frequently thought to have orthope-
been described as an acute onset of thoracic limb paresis.
dic disease given similar clinical presentations and the greater
When isolated to the brachial plexus, the involvement can be
 prevalence with which orthopedic disease is observed in small
104
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
B
and chronic atrophy of the infraspinatus and supraspinatus muscles. EMG identifed evidence of denervation only in the infraspinatus
and supraspinatus rmuscles. On MRI (T1W imaging), the suprascapular nerve appeared enlarged, had an irregular course, and displayed
contrast enhancement (arrow) (A). During exploratory surgery via a lateral approach to the brachial plexus, the suprascapular nerve was
markedly thickened, irregular shaped, and discolored (B). The nerve was contiguous with the C7 spinal nerve (large arrows). At the level
lesion just deep to the scalenus muscle (asterisk). A malignant nerve sheath tumor was diagnosed histologically. Microscopic evaluation
of the proximal resected edge of the nerve was normal. Immediately postoperatively, the dog had a mild weight-bearing lameness. After
1 month, the lameness resolved. The dog's gait remained normal for 1% years postoperatively. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.]
animals. Eventually, neurologic deficits such as neurogenic
       i  S
muscle atrophy become more pronounced. Tumors gener-
images with varying intensities of contrast enhancement.58.59
 ally are not palpable, but large masses can be identifed in the
With multiplanar imaging, MRI best allows for delineation of
axillary region in some dogs.34 Tumors involving the brachial
 proximal and distal tumor extent.59
plexus often extend proximally to compress the spinal cord
Treatment. Local resection, limb amputation, laminec-
and cause deficits in the opposite thoracic limb and pelvic
tomy, or combinations of these are recommended surgical
limbs. Spinal nerve or nerve root involvement of the caudal
procedures. Tumors within the brachial plexus can be treated
cervical and cranial thoracic regions causes ipsilateral loss of
with local resection.60 Tumors extending into the vertebral
the cutaneous trunci reflex and Horner's syndrome.
canal are explored with a laminectomy and durotomy. Nerve
Diagnosis. Nerve root neoplasia should be suspected in
sheath tumors often are invasive and cannot be resected with-
 animals with chronic progressive monoparesis associated with
 out injuring or removing portions of the involved nerve and
neurogenic muscle atrophy and signs of nerve root signature.
causing substantial neurologic dysfunction. As tumors arising
 s  i f p   r
in the brachial plexus often have extended to other nerves
from 4 to 6 months.53 Orthopedic disease can be excluded
by the time the diagnosis is made, incomplete resection is
by careful examination and radiography of the thoracic limb.
common. Amputation is often the best option. It is impera-
Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasonography are rec-
tive that the proximal extent of the nerve resection [whether
ommended to evaluate for metastatic disease. EMG evidence
with amputation or with local tumor resection) be marked
 of denervation suggests neural involvement in animals with
for microscopic examination at the margin(s) of the resec-
subtle neurologic defcits that otherwise might be thought to
tion. Neoplastic involvement at the margin of the resection
have orthopedic disease. Tumors that reach the vertebral canal
may necessitate re-resection or adjunctive therapy. Palliative
may cause resorption of the bone and enlargement of the inter-
pain management can be instituted using a combination of
vertebral foramen on survey radiographs. Compression of the
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs [NSAIDs) and opioids.
spinal cord causes a characteristic intradural-extramedullary
Gabapentin also can be empirically administered for neura-
 pattern on myelography [see Chapter 4).54 The contrast mate-
pathic pain. Corticosteroids can reduce spinal cord edema.
rial in the subarachnoid space splits at the tumor, resulting in
 Prognosis. Nerve sheath tumors have a high rate of recur-
a so-called golf-tee pattern in which the tumor is the golf ball
rence, and overall long-term prognosis is considered poor.53
and the enlarged contrast columns cranial and caudal to the
 Median survival time of dogs with root and peripheral nerve
mass are the golf tee. Tumors affecting the brachial and lumbo-
involvement is 5 and 12 months, respectively 53 The median 
sacral plexuses and paravertebral area may be detected by CT
relapse free interval of root and plexus-associated tumors were
and MRI but visualization can be difficult early in the disease
1 month and 7.5 months, respectively 53 Early and aggressive
course. CT reveals masses that contrast enhanced to varying
 surgical management may extend survival. Efficacy of radia-
degrees with ring enhancement and hypoattenuation in areas
q  inq seue u umon s Adea ue uon
indicating possible necrosis.57 MRI reveals a multilobulated
beneficial in animals with incomplete resection.
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
105
CASE STUDIES
Key: 0, Absent; +1, decreased; +2, normal; +3, exaggerated; +4,
very exaggerated or clonus: PL, pelvic limb; TL, thoracic limb;
NE, not evaluated.
CASE STUDY 5-1
OLIVER
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
· Lesion Localization
Canine, Weimaraner, male, 6 years old.
 The dog has monoparesis affecting the right thoracic limh
and partial Horner's syndrome of the right eye. Lower motor
. History
neuron signs with sensory deficits in several nerves affect-
The dog was hit by a car Z0 days ago. Since that day, he has
ing only the right TL suggest a lesion of the right brachial
been unable to use the right thoracic limb (T'L). He has been
plexus or spinal nerve or roots contributing to the plexus.
dragging the foot and is unable to advance the limb or bear
A C6-T2 spinal cord lesion is discounted because the right
weight. Open sores have developed on the dorsum of the paw.
pelvic limb is normal.
- Physical Examination
· Differential Diagnosis
No abnormalities were found other than the neurologic prob-
1. Trauma
lems described in the next section. Palpation reveals atrophy
a.
 Brachial plexus injury
 of the triceps, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, biceps brachii, and
 b. Caudal cervical vertebral column injury
flexor carpi radialis muscles of the right thoracic limb.
c. Injury to the nerve roots of the T'l-3 causing Horner's
syndrome
. Neurologic Examination
2. Vascular
Mental status
Alert
· Diagnostic Plan
1. Evaluate the caudal cervical vertebral column with radi-
Gait and posture
 ography or cross-sectional imaging
Posture was normal with exception of the right TL. Gait
 Electromyography can be used to evaluate muscle groups
showed severe paresis of the right thoracic limb. The dog
for evidence of denervation.
drags the limb and the foot with the paw knuckling over.
The dog can bear little weight on the limb.
 Results
 Spinal radiographs were within normal limits. Electromy-
Postural reactions
 ography showed fibrillation potentials and sharp waves in
Absent proprioceptive positioning and hopping in the right
 several muscle groups of the thoracic limb.
thoracic limb.
. Diagnosis
Spinal reflexes
Brachial plexus injury of the right thoracic limb
 The triceps, extensor carpi radialis, and fexor reflexes were
absent in the right thoracic limb. The cutaneous trunci
Treatment
reflex was absent on the right side.
 Protect the foot with a boot. Perform physical rehabilitation
to include range of motion and hydrotherapy. The owners
Cranial nerves
were informed that the prognosis is very poor for functional
The right pupil was constricted but responsive to a light
use of the limb because the nerves, spinal nerves, or roots
stimulus
have been severely injured. Amputation may be needed
in the future. The dog regained partial use of the limb in
Sensory evaluation
6 months; however, he had to wear a boot continually to
 protect the foot. A persistent mild pupil constriction was 
 Deep pain perception—markedly diminished in the right TL.
present in the right eye.
CASE STUDY 5-2
MURRAY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
was given, and the dog was discharged 4 days later. He
 Canine, boxer, male, l year old.
returned 10 months after the initial injury for follow-up
examination, at which time no improvement in the right
- History
 PL was noted.
The dog was hit by a car 1l0 months ago and was treated for
shock and multiple pelvic fractures. The dog was referred
. Physical Examination
2 days after the initial injury because of severe dyspnea.
Negative except for the neurologic problems. Deep ulcers
Massive pleural effusion was treated with chest drains. The
are present in the plantar surfaces of the middle two digital
examination disclosed moderate paresis in the right pelvic
pads; these toes are swollen.
limb (PL) and hypalgesia distal to the stifle. No treatment
Continued
106
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 5-2
MURRAY-
-cont'd
: Neurologic Examination
· Diagnostic Plan
Mental status
1.
 Radiography is used to detect presence of fractures
Alert
2.1
 Electromyography (EMG) can evaluate for evidence of
denervation in muscles.
Gait and posture
Posture was normal with the exception of the right PL.
. Diagnostic Results
Moderate paresis of the right PL, with hyperflexion of the
 Pelvic radiographs revealed multiple pelvic fractures that
stifle; the paw knuckles over and the hock sinks during
are now healed but are displaced. Radiographs of the foot
weight bearing; all other limbs are normal.
revealed bony lysis and proliferation involving the distal
phalanges of the middle digits. EMG revealed diffuse 
Palpation
denervation activity involving the muscles distal to the sti-
Atrophy of the cranial tibialis and gastrocnemius muscle
fle; few fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves in
the gastrocnemius, the semitendinosus, and the semimem-
Postural reactions
branosus muscles combined with nerve conduction studies.
Proprioceptive positioning and hopping are absent in the
there was evidence of reinnervation in some muscles.
right PL.
. Diagnosis
Spinal reffexes
A distal sciatic nerve [peroneal and tibial nerves) injury is a
 The patelar refex is increased in the right pelvic limb. On
result of a pelvic fracture. One may debate the cause of the
testing tap flexor muscle of the right pelvic limb, the hip
nerve injury, that is, a pelvic fracture versus a needle [injec-
and stifle joints flex but no fexion is observed in the hock
tion} injury. The neurologic examination is more consistent
joint. All other spinal reflexes are intact.
with the diagnosis of a needle [injection] injury because
nerve damage usually occurs at the origin of the peroneal
Cranial nerves
and the tibial nerves in the area caudal to the femur. The
Normal
EMG, however, provides evidence that the lesion also is
 more proximal. Denervation of the semitendinosus and
Sensory evaluation
semimembranosus muscles probably is a result of the pelvic
Hyperesthesia—none
fractures because these muscles are rarely affected by injec-
Superficial pain perception—blunted distal to stifle in right PL
 tions in the thigh muscles.
 Deep pain perception—-absent in the two middle toes in
the right PL
 Treatment
 Physical rehabilitation including range-of-motion exercises
· Lesion Localization
was to be performed. The middle two digits are infected,
The dog has monoparesis of the right pelvic limb. The pres-
which requires antibiotic therapy. A boot was fitted on the
ence of LMN signs with sensory deficits distal to the stifle
dog to prevent further trauma. Because the sciatic nerve
localizes the lesion to the distal sciatic nerve involving the
injury is partial and evidence of reinnervation is present,
peroneal and tibial nerves.
the dog may regain functional use of the limb. The dog
regained good use of the limb and the boot eventually was
· Differential Diagnosis
removed.
1. Trauma—fracture, injection injury
2. Vascular—thromboembolism
CASE STUDY 5-3
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Gait and posture
Feline, domestic, female, 7 years old.
 Posture is normal. Gait shows severe paresis of the right TL.
 The cat occasionally drags and knuckles the paw of the right
. History
PL.
Mild lameness was noted in the right thoracic limb 6 to 8
weeks ago. The condition has slowly worsened, and the cat
Postural reactions
is unable to bear weight on the limb. She holds the limb
 Proprioceptive positioning was absent in the right TL and
extended with the paw flexed and is knuckling occasionally
 decreased in the right PL. Hopping was absent in the right
on the right pelvic limh.
TL and decreased in the right PL. Extensor postural thrust
was decreased in the right PL. Visual and tactile placing
: Physical Examination
were absent in the right T'L.The cutaneous trunci reflex was
Normal exceptfor the neurologic problem. Palpation revealed
absent on the right side.
 mild atrophy of the scapular muscles in the right TL
Spinal reflexes
· Neurologic Examination
The patellar reflex was +3 in the right PL. The right exten-
Mental status
sor carpi radialis and triceps reflexes were O to +l; the right
Alert
flexor withdrawal reflex was absent in the right TL.
CHAPTER 5
Paresis of One Limb
107
CASE STUDY 5-3
1o'r0-
cont'd
Cranial nerves
: Diagnostic Results
Mild pupillary constriction was present in the right eye.
Radiographs of the cervical vertebral column and right thg-
 PLRs are normal.
racic limb did not reveal any abnormalities. Myelography
revealed an intradural-extramedullary mass at the right side
Sensory evaluation
of the cord over the C7 and Tl vertebrae. CSF analysis was
Hyperesthesia—present in right axillary space
normal [0 cells, 20 mg/dL protein)].
 Superficial pain perception—normal
 Deep pain perception—normal
. Diagnosis
A nerve sheath tumor of the right brachial plexus is the
: Lesion Localization
most likely diagnosis causing spinal cord compression of
Lower motor neuron signs are present in the right thoracic
C6, C7, C8, and Tl. The history is typical for a primary
limb, and UMN signs are present in the right pelvic limb. In
nerve sheath tumor or secondary tumor such as lymphoma
addition, mild Horner's syndrome is present in the right eye.
 involving the brachial plexus.
A unilateral right C6-T2 spinal cord lesion would explain
these signs. The history suggests that the lesion may have
- Treatment
begun in the brachial plexus and progressed proximally.
Dexamethasone can be administered to lessen the spinal
cord edema and pain. Surgical removal may be possible
· Differential Diagnosis
 but extension into the dura makes complete resection dif-
1. Neoplasia
ficult and will likely cause permanent nerve and spinal cord.
 2. Inflammation
 The right TL was amputated. A hemilaminectomy was per-
formed at C7 for partial mass resection and decompression
· Diagnostic Plan
 of the spinal cord.
Radiography of the cervical spine and right thoracic limb
may detect bony abnormalities or neoplasia.
 MRI or CT/Myelography would evaluate for spinal cord
compression.
CSF analysis would rule out inflammation.
REFERENCES
13. Cockshutt JR, Smith-Maxie LL: Delayed onset sciatic
1. Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Clinical evaluation of the cutane-
impairment following triple pelvic osteotomy, Prog Vet
ous innervation of the canine thoracic limb, J Am Anim
Neurol 4[2):60-63, 1993.
Hosp Assoc 20(11):939-950, 1984.
14. Stanton ME, Weigel JP, Henry RE: Ischiatic nerve paraly-
 2. Haghighi SS, Kitchell RL, Johnson RD: Electrophysiologic
sis associated with the biceps femoris muscle sling: case
studies of the cutaneous innervation of the pelvic limb of
report and anatomical study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
male dogs, Am J Vet Res 52[2):352-362, 1991.
24(4):429-432, 1988.
3. Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Cutaneous sensory testing in the
15. Sorjonen DC, Milton JL, Steiss JE: Hip dysplasia with
dog, J Vet Intern Med 1(3):128-135, 1987.
 bilateral ischiatic nerve entrapment in a dog. J Am Vet
4. Bennett GJ: An animal model of neuropathic pain: a
Med Assoc 197[4):495-497, 1990.
review, Muscle Nerve 16:1040-1048, 1993.
16. Andrews CM, Liska WD, Roberts DJ: Sciatic neurapraxia
 5. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, Iowa,
as a complication in l000 consecutive canine total hip
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
replacements, Vet Surg 37:254-262, 2008.
 6. Chambers JN, Hardie EM: Localization and management
17. Autefage A, Fayolle P, Toutain PL: Distribution of mate-
of sciatic nerve injury due to ischial or acetabular fracture,
rial injected intramuscularly in dogs, Am J Vet Res 51(6):
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:539-544, 1986.
901-904, 1990.
7. Cox VS, Breazile JE, Hoover TR: Surgical and anatomic
18. Levine JM, Fitch RB: Use of an ankle-foot orthotic in a
study of calving paralysis, Am J Vet Res 36:427-430, 1975.
dog with traumatic sciatic neuropathy, J Small Anim Pract
8. Walker TL: Ischiadic nerve entrapment, J Am Vet Med
44:236-238, 2003.
Assoc 178[12):1284-1288, 1981.
19. Granger N, Moissonnier P, Fanchon L: Cutaneous saphe-
9. Jacobson A, Schrader SC: Peripheral nerve injury associ-
nous nerve graft for the treatment of sciatic neurotmesis
ated with fracture or fracture-dislocation of the pelvis in
in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:82-86, 2006.
dogs and cats: 34 cases [1978-1982], J Am Vet Med Assoc
20. Bennett D, Vaughan LC: The use of muscle relocation
190(5):569-572, 1987.
techniques in the treatment of peripheral nerve injuries in
 10. Forterre F, Tomek A, Rytz U: Iatrogenic sciatic nerve
dogs and cats, J Small Anim Pract 17:99-108, 1976.
 (/a1] s a  s 1  
21. Read RA: Probable trophic pad ulceration following trau-
Surg 36:464-471, 2007.
 matic denervation. Report of two cases in dogs, Vet Surg
11. Palmer RH, Aron DN, Purinton PT: Relationship of fem-
15(1):40-44, 1986.
oral intramedullary pins to the sciatic nerve and gluteal
22. Gibbons SE, McKee WM: Spontaneous healing of a tro-
muscles after retrograde and normograde insertion, Vet
phic ulcer of the metatarsal pad in a dog, J Small Anim
Surg 17(2):65-70, 1988.
Pract 45:623-625, 2004.
12. Fanton JW, Blass CE, Withrow SJ: Sciatic nerve injury as
23. Swaim SF, Hanson RR, Coates JR: Pressure wounds
a complication of intramedullary pin fixation of femoral
in animals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 18(3):
fractures, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19[5):687-694, 1983.
203-219, 1996.
108
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
24. Danielson KS, Kent M, Cornell K: Successful treatment of
43. Okin R: Carpal arthrodesis in a cat with radial nerve dam-
a metacarpal trophic ulcer utilizing a neurovascular island
age, Feline Pract 12(4):18-20, 1982.
flap, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45:176-180, 2009.
44. Sherman J, Olby NJ: Nursing and rehabilitation of the
25. Wilson J: Relationship of the patellar tendon reflex to the
neurological patient. In Platt SR, Olby NJ, editors: BSAVA
ventral branch of the fifth lumbar spinal nerve in the dog.
 manual of canine and feline neurology, ed 3, Gloucester,
Am J Vet Res 39:1774-1779, 1978.
UK, 2004, BSAVA
26. Breur GJ, Blevins WE: Traumatic injury of the iliopsoas mus-
45. Cuddon PA, Delauche AJ, Hutchison JM: Assessment of
le in three dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 210(11):1631-1634,
dorsal nerve root and spinal cord dorsal horn function in
1997.
clinically normal dogs by determination of cord dorsum
27. Rossmeisl JH, Rohleder J, Hancock R: Computed tomo-
potentials, Am J Vet Res 60(2):222-226, 1999.
-o au o Anlu sneunen paoadsns jo sainzeay srude.a
46. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: Some studies of the clinical
psoas and pelvic limb musculature of a dog, Vet Radiol
neurophysiology of denervation in the dog, Res Vet Sci
Utrasound 45:388-392, 2004.
17[3):377-383, 1974.
28. Stephnick M, Olby NJ, Thompson RR: Femoral neu-
47. Alexander JW, de Lahunta A, Scott DW: A case of bra-
ropathy in a dog with iliopsoas muscle injury, Vet Surg
chial plexus neuropathy in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
35:186-190, 2006.
10(9):515-517, 1974.
 29. Tryphonas L, Hamilton GF, Rhodes GS: Perinatal femoral
48. Bright RM, Crabtree BJ, Knecht CD: Brachial plexus neu-
nerve degeneration and neurogenic atrophy of quadriceps
ropathy in the cat: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
femoris muscles in calves, J Am Vet Med Assoc 154:801-
14:612-615, 1978.
807, 1974.
 49. Cummings JF, Lorenz MD, deLahunta A: Canine brachial
 30. Bailey CS: Patterns of cutaneous anesthesia associated
 plexus neuritis: a syndrome resembling serum neuritis in
with brachial plexus avulsions in the dog, J Am Vet Med
man, Cornell Vet 63:589-617, 1973.
Assoc 185(8):889-899, 1984.
50. Garosi L, deLahunta A, Summer BA: Hypertrophic neuritis
 31. Griffths IR: Avulsion of the brachial plexus-1. Neuropa-
of the brachial plexus in a cat: magnetic resonance imaging
thology of the spinal cord and peripheral nerves, J Small
and pathologic findings, J Feline Med Surg 8:63-68, 2006.
Anim Pract 15:165-176, 1974.
51. Braund KG: Neoplasia. In Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, May-
32. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID, Lawson DD: Avulsion of the
hew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987,
brachial plexus-2. Clinical aspects, J Small Anim Pract
WB Saunders.
15:177-182, 1974.
 52. Schoniger S, Summer BA: Localized, plexiform, diffuse,
33. Steinberg HS: Brachial plexus injuries and dysfunctions, Vet
and other variants of neurofbroma in 12 dogs, 2 horses 
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 18(3):565-580, 1988.
and a chicken, Vet Pathol 46:904-915, 2009.
34. Wheeler SJ, Jones C, Wright JA: The diagnosis of brachial
53. Brehm DM, Vite CH, Steinberg HS: A retrospective eval-
plexus disorders in dogs: a review of twenty-two cases, J
uation of 5l cases of peripheral nerve sheath tumors in
Small Anim Pract 27:147-157, 1986.
the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31[4):349-359, 1995.
35. Kern TJ, Aromando MC, Erb HN: Horner's syndrome
54. Bradlley RL, Withrow SJ, Snyder SP: Nerve sheath tumors
in dogs and cats: 100 cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet Med
in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:915-921, 1982.
Assoc 195(3):369-373, 1989.
 55. Lane SB, Kornegay JN, Duncan JR: Feline spinal lympho-
36. Faissler D, Cizinauskas S, Jaggy A: Prognostic factors
sarcoma: a retrospective evaluation of 23 cats, J Vet Intern
for functional recovery in dogs with suspected brachial
Med 8(2):99-104, 1994.
plexus avulsion, J Vet Intern Med 16:370, 2002.
56. de Lahunta A, Glass E: Veterinary neuroanatomy and elin-
37. Steinberg HS: The use of electrodiagnostic techniques in
ical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
  's r sd   
57. McCarthy RJ, Feeney DA, Lipowitz AJ: Preoperative
Anim Hosp Assoc 15:621-626, 1979.
diagnosis of tumors of the brachial plexus by use of com-
38. Schneider RK, Bramlage LR: Suprascapular nerve injury in
 puted tomography in three dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
horses, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:1783-1789,
202[2):291-294, 1993.
1990.
 58. Platt SR, Graham J, Chrisman CL: Magnetic resonance
39. Schneider JE, Adams OR, Easley KJ: Scapular notch
imaging and ultrasonography in the diagnosis ofa malignant
resection for suprascapular nerve decompression, J Am
peripheralnervesheathtumorinadog,VetRadiolUtrasound
Vet Med Assoc 187:1019-1020, 1985.
40[4):367-371, 1999.
40. Bennett RA: Contracture of the infraspinatus muscle
 59. Kraft SL, Ehrhart EJ, Gal D: Magnetic resonance imaging
in dogs: a review of 12 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
characteristics of peripheral nerve sheath tumors of the
22[4]:481-487, 1986.
canine brachial plexus in 18 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
41. Knecht CD: The radial-brachial paralysis syndrome in the
48:1-7,2007
dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 154(6):653-656, 1969.
60. Bailey CS: Long-term survival after surgical excision of a
42. Swaim SF: Peripheral nerve surgery in the dog, J Am Vet
schwannoma of the sixth cervical spinal nerve in a dog.
Med Assoc 161[8):905-911, 1972.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:754-756.
CHAPTER
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
ilateral motor dysfunction of the pelvic limbs is termed
produce pelvic limb paresis of the LMN type. Lesions involv-
paraparesis or paraplegia, depending on the severity of
ing spinal cord segments of L4-S3 injure the motor neurons
the motor loss. Loss of proprioception from the pelvic
within the lumbosacral intumescence that form the lumbosa-
limbs results in general proprioceptive (GP) ataxia. In addi-
cral plexus. Abnormalities related to femoral, sciatic, pudendal
tion, loss of pain perception from the pelvic limbs may accom-
and pelvic nerves are encountered in these patients. Pelvic limb
 pany the motor dysfunction. Lesion localization has been
reflexes are depressed or absent, and the muscles may be hypo-
discussed in Chapter Z and is summarized in Figure 6-1. A
tonic. Neurogenic muscle atrophy develops. Sensory dysfunc-
brief review follows.
tion hypalgesia, analgesia) results from an injury to the sensory
neurons and nerve fbers located in this region of the spinal
cord. Abnormalities of visceral function result from an injury to
LESION LOCALIZATION
the motor and sensory neurons that innervate the bladder and
the anus. Lesions involving the caudal segments of the spinal
Animals with pure pelvic limb paresis and GP ataxia have
cord and the cauda equina damage nerve fbers that form the
neurologic disease caudal to the second thoracic spinal cord
siatic, pudendal, pelvic, and caudal nerves. Because the femo-
segment. Lesions in the region of T3-L3 produce GP ataxia
ral nerve is spared, the animal is able to support weight on the
and upper motor neuron (UMN) paraparesis. The pelvic limb
pelvic limbs but will have a plantigrade posture or stance. The
lower motor neurons (LMNs), located in segments L4-S3,
patellar reflex is normal, and pain perception is perceived from
remain intact and are capable of reflex motor activity; how-
 a  a   i a  ia  a
cal signs are related to motor and sensory dysfunction of the
the motor pathways in the spinal cord are damaged. The spinal
involved nerves. Figure 6-2 summarizes lesion localization for
reflexes are normal or exaggerated. Exaggerated reflexes result
 the problem of pelvic limb paresis based on motor signs.
when UMN inhibitory influence on the LMNs is lost. Similarly.
 extensor hypertonus or spasticity also may develop. Ataxia
results from damage to the spinal cord GP pathways, which
DISEASES
transmit position sense signals from receptors in the pelvic
limbs to the brain. Hypalgesia or analgesia caudal to the lesion
The disorders or diseases that affect the spinal cord segments
results from disruption of sensory pathways from the pelvic.
T3-L3 are classified in Tables 6-1 through 6-3. Disorders that
limbs to the brain. Pain perception (nociception) is lost only if
affect spinal cord segments L4-S3 and the cauda equina are
the lesion is bilateral and severe. Voluntary visceral functions
presented in Tables 6-4 through 6-6. Although many of the
(see Chapter 3), such as micturition, may be lost when UMN
diseases are discussed in relationship to specific anatomic
or sensory pathways in the spinal cord are damaged. Muscle
regions of the vertebral column and spinal cord (e.g, T3-L3
atrophy from disuse may develop with time.
 spinal cord segments), many can occur in any location. How-
 In summary, spinal cord lesions in the region ofT3-L3 seg-
 a  q i sir as n   rs
ments result in paresis, GP ataxia, decreased or absent postural
common presentations. These tables are organized according
to the logic used in the formulation of a neurologic diagnosis,
tion, and variable degrees of sensory loss caudal to the lesion.
discussed in Chapter l. After the lesion has been localized to a
Examination of the thoracolumbar dermatomes may be help-
region or segment of the spinal cord, nerve root, spinal nerve,
ful in the localization oflesions to spinal segments within this
or peripheral nerve, consideration is given to the possible etio-
spinal cord region (see Chapter 1).
logic categories that could produce the lesion. The etiologic
 Lesions in the area of L4-S3 or those that involve the cauda
categories are listed in the left-hand column of these tables
equina [the L7 and Sl-2 spinal nerve roots and spinal nerves)
and follow the DAMNIT'V classification scheme described in
109
110
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Pelvic limbs
Normal
UMN signs
LMN signs
(See Table 2-1)
(See Table 2-1)
Thoracic limbs
 Thoracic limbs
 Thoracic limbs
 Normal
UMN
LMN
 Normal 
UMN
LMN
 Normal 
UMN
LMN
signs
signs
signs
signs
signs
signs
Rare
Brachial
T3-L3
Brain or
C6-T2
L4-S2
L4-S2
L4-S2
 Brain or 
plexus
C1-5
and brain
and
C1-5
or C1-5
C6-T2
Normal
1. Recheck;
1.Sensory
1. Sensory
1. Sensory
1.Sensory
1.Sensory
1. Mu ltifocal
1. Generalized
motor
pelvic
examination
 examination
examination
examination
 examin ation 
or diffuse
 peripheral 
function
limbs,
see Fig. 1-13
2. See Tables
head and 
2. See Tables 7-1,
2. See Tables 6-4,
disease
neuropathy
of spinal
cranial
2. See
6-1, 6-2,
neck
7-2, and 7-3
6-5, and 6-6
2. See Chapter 15
 or myopathy
cord
nerves,
Table 5-1
and 6-3 
2. Check cranial
or
 other brain
nerves
complete
function
3.See
spinal cord
2.
 Orthopedic
Chapter 7
destruction
 problem
2.See Chapter 7
3.
See
Chapter7
Figure 6-1 Localization of lesions based on motor function. UMN, Upper motor neuron; LMN,
lower motor neuron; C, cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; S, sacral. (From Hoerlein BF: Canine 
neurology: diagnosis and treatment, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.]
Pelvic limb paresis
sulfate [CS), dermatan sulfate, keratan sulfate [KS), and hyal-
uronic acid. One of the functions of GAGs is to bind water;
No UMN or
UMN signs
LMN signs
 thus concentrations of these proteoglycans are highest in the
LMN signs
 Pelvic limbs
Pelvic limbs
nucleus pulposus. Age-related or pathologic change is associ-
 ated with a progressive decrease in the proteoglycans, resulting
Muscles
Bones, joints
painful
in a decrease in water content within the nucleus and annulus.
painful
The proportion of GAG also change with age: the structure
Rule out
Rule out
T3-L3
L4-S3
of the aggregate changes, the core protein and GAG chains
myopathies
 skeletal
See Tables
See Tables
shorten, and there is an increase in the ratio of KS to CS.
disorder
6-1, 6-2, and 6-3
6-4, 6-5, and 6-6
This common aging process is known as fbroid metaplasia.
 Figure 6-2 Algorithm for the localization of lesions causing pel-
 In chondrodystrophic breeds, these degenerative changes are
vic limb paresis. UMN, Upper motor neuron; LMN, lower motor
accelerated causing early intervertebral disk degeneration. The
neuron.
process of premature disk degeneration is basically a chon-
droid metaplasia of the nucleus pulposus with degeneration
and weakening of the annulus fbrosus.
Table 1-2.The diseases are further divided into acute progres-
 Degenerative intervertebral disk disease (IVDD) is one of
sive, acute nonprogressive, and chronic progressive categories
the most common disorders that produces paraparesis in the
based on historical information or on the clinical course of the
 dog. Disk disease occurs in about 2% of canine patients seen
illness. Most diseases have been included in the tables. The
at teaching hospitals.l.2 It is rarely a problem in cats, horses, or
most important disorders are described in subsequent sections
food animals. Degenerative changes within the disk can result
of this chapter. They are reviewed briefly with an emphasis on
 in IVD herniation. Intervertebral disk herniation may result in
 diagnosis and treatment. Some diseases are discussed in other
 protrusion of the annulus fibrosus or extrusion of the nucleus
chapters, as noted in the tables.
pulposus into the vertebral canal. Basically, two types of disk
degeneration (Hansen types I and II) that result in different
Acute Progressive Diseases, T3-L3
clinical syndromes have been described by Hansen (Figure
Degenerative
6-3).3.4 Hansen type I IVDD occurs primarily in the chon-
Thoracolumbar Intervertebral Disk Disease
drodystrophic (hypochondroplastic) breeds (e.g., miniature
Pathophysiology. The intervertebral disk (IVD) permits
poodle, dachshund, beagle, cocker spaniel, Pekingese, or mixed
stable motion of the spine while supporting and distributing
chondrodystrophic breeds). Type I IVD degeneration in chon-
loads under movement. The annulus fibrosus is a multilayered
drodystrophic breeds develops when the animal is young [i.e.,
ligament that makes up the periphery of the disk and attaches
2 to 9 months of age); in affected dogs, clinical signs develop.
to the hyaline cartilage of the vertebral end plates. Its outer
by the time the animal is 3 to 6 years of age.2.5 Calcifcation of
 collagen layers blend with the ventral and dorsal longitudinal
 snn a m  sa rau  m s
apparent in affected dachshunds at 6 to 18 months of age.6-8
osus. The nucleus pulposus, an embryologic remnant of the
Large nonchondrodystrophic breeds of dog (e.g., Doberman
notochord is the highly hydrated central portion of the disk.
 pinscher, German shepherd dog, and Labrador retriever) also
 The major molecular components of the disk are collag-
 can be affected with Hansen type I IVDD.
 enous and noncollagenous proteins, proteoglycan aggregates,
The process of Hansen type I IVDD leads to a weakened
and glycoproteins. Glycosaminoglycans [GAG) are proteogly-
 annulus that cannot restrain the degenerative nucleus, and
cans composed of repeating units of hexosamines: chondroitin
 normal movements of the vertebral column are suffcient to
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
111
TABLE 6-1
Small Animal Thoracolumbar Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis of T3-L3 Spinal Cord
Disease Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories?
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
Hansen type I IVDD (6}
Hansen type Il IVDD (6)
Hemorrhagic myelomalacia (6)
Degenerative myelopathy (6)
Afghan hound myelinopathy (6)
Spondylosis deformans (6)
Spinal dural ossification (6)
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses (6)
Spinal arachnoid cysts (6)
Disseminated idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (6)
Spinal synovial cysts (6.7)
Axonopathies (7)
Demyelinating diseases (7)
Neuronopathies (7}
Anomalous
None 
None 
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Vertebral malformation (6)
Spinal stenosis (6)
Metabolic
None
None
 Endocrine neuropathies (8)
Neoplastic (6)
None 
Metastatic
Metastatic
Primary
Primary
Vertebral
Vertebral
Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None 
None 
Hypervitaminosis A (cats) (15)
Methionine deficiency (6)
Inflammatory
None 
Rickettsial myelitis (15)
 Feline infectious peritonitis (15)
Bacterial myelitis (15)
 Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (15)
Distemper virus myelitis (15)
Necrotizing meningoencephalomyelitis (15)
Protozoal myelitis (15)
Mycotic myelitis (15)
 Discospondylitis (6)
Vertebral abscess (6)
Epidural empyema (6)
Vertebral physitis
Toxic
None
None
Various toxic neuropathies (7. 15)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
Hemorrhagic myelomalacia (6)
None
Luxations (6)
Intervertebral disk extrusion (6)
Contusions (6)
Intervertebral disk 
extrusion (6)
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous
None 
None
embolism (6)
Aortic thromboembo-
lism (6)
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
initiate acute disk extrusion. The extrusion of nucleus pulpo-
 Both the annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus may protrude
 sus results primarily in an acute, focal compressive myelopa-
but the nucleus pulposus is contained within an intact, but
thy. In some cases a severe progressive myelopathy, known as
degenerate annulus. Acute onset of clinical signs with Hansen
 ascending-descending myelomalacia [(see later discussion), fol-
type I IVDD is less common and compression from this pro-
lows an acute and severe extrusion of the nucleus pulposus.9
trusion results in a slowly progressive focal myelopathy. This
syndrome is discussed in the section on chronic progressive
trophic breeds, such as German shepherd dogs and Labrador
 spinal cord disorders.
retrievers.I.2 Type II IVD develops at a slower rate, and clinical
 Acute noncompressive nucleus pulposus extrusion is a less
signs occur when the animal is 5 to 12 years of age. Fibroid
 common phenomenon but has been better documented with
metaplasia can lead to gradual disk protrusion. True extrusion
the use of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).l0 This type
 of nucleus pulposus into the extradural space does not occur
of IVD injury usually occurs during heavy exertional activ-
 but rather a protrusion or bulge of the annulus fibrosus occurs.
ity associated with peracute compressive types of injuries to
112
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 6-2
Equine Thoracolumbar Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis of T3-L3 Spinal Cord Disease
Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
Degenerative
Spondylosis deformans (6}
myeloencephalopathy (7)
Neuronopathies (7)
Demyelinating diseases (7)
Axonopathies (7)
Anomalous
None
None
Vertebral malformation (6)
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Neoplastic (6)
None
Metastatic
Primary
Primary
Skeletal
Skeletal
Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None
None
Vitamin E deficiency (equine motor
neuron disease) (7}
Inflammatory
None
Herpesvirus 1 (6)
See acute progressive
Protozoal myelitis (6)
West Nile virus (6)
Verminous migration (6)
Mycotic myelitis (6)
Rabies virus (15)
Vertebral osteomyelitis (6)
Toxic
None
None
Various neuropathies (7. 15)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None
None
Luxations (6)
Vascular
Embolic myelopathy (6)
None
None 
Fbrocartilaginous emboli (6)
 Postanesthetic myelopathy
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
the spine. Excessive forces placed on the intervertebral disk
 nonnoxious stimulus. An animal may arch its back kyphotic
may result in expulsion of the nucleus pulposus toward the
posture) and tense its abdominal muscles that can mimic
spinal cord through a rent in the annulus fibrosus. The gelati-
acute abdominal pain in disorders such as pancreatitis (Figure
nous nucleus likely disperses along the floor of the spinal canal
 6-4). Dogs with back pain alone or minimal neurologic deficits
without causing spinal cord compression.
actually can have substantial spinal cord compression.ll Such
Spinal cord damage caused by compressive or concussive
cases typically have a protracted history of pain. Lateralization
myelopathy primarily has been attributed to the mechanical
of the IVD herniation and spinal cord compression often will
derangement of neural tissue and hypoxic changes resulting
cause asymmetry of neurologic defcits. Clinical signs of back
from alterations to the vascular supply. Vascular embarrass-
pain only can progress in order of functional loss: (1) loss of
ment that results in ischemia and edema undoubtedly plays
 general proprioception, (2) loss of voluntary motor function,
 a role in the development of more severe spinal cord degen-
and (3) lastly, loss of pain perception. Loss of bladder function
 eration and the syndrome of ascending-descending myelo-
usually occurs with paraplegia. Sensory examinations, such as
malacia. The severity of the spinal cord lesion is influenced
pinching the skin and palpating the vertebrae, are important
by the amount of compression and its rate of development.
because they may allow the clinician to localize the lesion to
The inflammatory reaction induced by the extruded nucleus
within two or three spinal cord segments. Lesions that affect
pulposus and the diameter of the vertebral canal in com-
the pain [nociception) pathways abolish the cutaneous trunci
parison to the diameter of the spinal cord also are related to
reflex caudal to the lesion. This reflex is normally most appar-
the severity of the clinical signs. Acute extrusions produce
ent when the skin over the thoracolumbar junction is stimu-
more severe spinal cord lesions than do chronic progressive
lated. Students may incorrectly believe that this apparent
extrusions/protrusions. Less severe lesions occur in areas
exaggeration of the skin twitch represents hyperesthesia and
where the vertebral canal is large in relation to the diam-
thus correlates with lesion location. Cooperative animals that
eter of the spinal cord (e.g, the cervical vertebral column).
Cry out or try to bite when an area is palpated or pinched may
Histopathologic changes progress from edema, demyelin-
be experiencing hyperesthesia, and the lesion is usually one or
 ation, and necrosis of myelin and axons to the gross finding
two segments cranial to the point at which the response was
of myelomalacia.
induced. In animals that are analgesic in the pelvic limbs, a
Clinical Signs. In addition to the signs of paresis or paraly-
point or line across the vertebral column, caudal to which the
sis that characterize spinal cord lesions, IVD herniation may
animal is analgesic, should be determined. Likewise, the lesion
 Compress the nerve roots and the meninges, resulting in severe
is usually one or two segments cranial to the point at which
pain and hyperesthesia when the vertebral column is manipu-
the animal frst feels noxious stimuli (e.g., pinching the skin
lated. Hyperesthesia is an exaggerated cerebral response to a
with a hemostat).
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
113
TABLE 6-3
Food Animal Thoracolumbar Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis of T3-L3 Spinal Cord
Disease Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic
Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
 Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
None
Progressive ataxia of Charolais cattle—-B (7}
Degenerative myeloencephalopathy——B, CA (7)
Spondylosis deformans—-All (6)
Arthrogryposis——All (7)
Demyelinating diseases—B (7}
Neuronopathies——B, O (7)
Anomalous
None 
None
Spinal cord malformation—-All (6)
Vertebral malformation—-All (6)
Vertebral canal stenosis—B (6)
Neoplastic (6)
None
Metastatic
 Metastatic
Primary
 Primary
Vertebral
Vertebral
 Hematopoietic
 Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None
None
 Enzootic ataxia, copper deficiency—C, O (15)
Hypervitaminosis A (15)
Inflammatory
None 
Caprine arthritis-
Maedi-visna——O (6)
encephalomyelitis—C (6)
Verminous migration—All (6)
Rabies myelitis—All (15)
Rabies myelitis—All (15)
West Nile virus—CA (6)
Equine herpesvirus 1—CA (6)
Bacterial myelitis—All (15)
Veminous migration—All (6)
Protozoal myelitis (15)
Mycotic myelitis (15)
Vertebral osteomyelitis——All (6)
Toxic
None
None
Various neuropathies (7. 15)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None
None
Luxations (6)
Contusions (6)
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous
None
None
embolism——B. P (6}
Aortic
thromboembolism—B (6}
 Embolic myelopathy
B, Bovine; C, caprine; O, ovine; P, porcine; CA, camelids.
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
 Dogs having peracute or acute thoracolumbar IVD her-
affects the motor neurons of the lumbosacral intumescence
that form the lumbosacral plexus.
"spinal shock" or Schiff-Sherrington postures. These phe-
A syndrome of ascending-descending ischemic necro-
nomena are further discussed in the section on spinal trauma.
sis of the spinal cord may occur with an incidence rate as
It is important to recognize these clinical manifestations to
 a 1q  m so  ol s 
avoid mistakes on localization. Hansen type I thoracolumbar
complete sensory loss.l4,15 This syndrome is also known as
IVD herniations may develop at IVD spaces T9-10 to L7-S1.
 ascending-descending myelomalacia. The syndrome of ascend-
The intercapital ligament usually prevents extrusion of the
nucleus pulposus in the cranial and midthoracic IVDs. More
but vascular lesions leading to severe ischemia probably are
than 65% of type I IVD hermiations occur at sites Tll-12,
important. This syndrome can follow severe acute spinal cord
I12-13, T13-Li, and L1-2.1.2,12 The most common site for
 trauma of any cause and results in complete destruction of
 y a s sp aaq sre ui su l a
the nervous tissue of the spinal cord. The syndrome typically
 space between Ll and L2.13 These areas should be evaluated
begins within the first several days after injury. The clinical
signs result from necrosis of the motor neurons, descending
frequently, IVD herniations in dogs occur caudal to the L3-4
 motor fibers, and ascending sensory fibers. Clinical signs prog-
IVD space. Herniation at these sites produces LMN signs in
 ress as the ischemic necrosis ascends and descends along the
the pelvic limbs because the compressive myelopathy directly
 spinal cord. As the lesion ascends, there is a cranial migration
114
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 6-4
Small Animal Lumbosacral and Cauda Equina Diseases: Differential Diagnosis ofL4-S3 and Caudal
 Spinal Cord Disease Based on Clinical Courses and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None 
Hansen type I IVDD (6)
Hansen type II IVDD (6)
Hemorrhagic myelomalacia (6)
Degenerative myelopathy (6)
Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis (6)
Spondylosis deformans (6)
Neuronopathies (7)
 Anomalous
None
None
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Vertebral malformation (6)
Metabolic
None
None
Endocrine neuropathies (7}
Neoplastic (6)
None
 Metastatic
Metastatic
 Primary
 Primary
Vertebral
Vertebral
Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
Inflammatory
None
Distemper virus myelitis (15}
 Feline infectious peritonitis (15)
 Bacterial myelitis (15)
Distemper virus myelitis (15)
Rickettsial myelitis
Granulomatous
Protozoal myelitis (15)
meningoencephalomyelitis (15)
Mycotic myelitis (15)
Necrotizing meningoencephalomyelitis (15)
Discospondylitis (6}
 Postvaccinal rabies
Vertebral abscess (6)
Epidural empyema (6)
Vertebral physitis (6)
Toxic
None
None
Various neuropathies (7. 15)
Traumatic
 Fractures (6)
Hemorrhagic myelomalacia (6)
None
Luxations (6)
Intervertebral disk extrusion (6)
Contusions (6}
Intervertebral disk extrusion (6)
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous embolism (6)
None
None 
Aortic thromboembolism (6)
 Embolic myelopathy
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
of the line of analgesia and the cut-off of the cutaneous trunci
of tone of the abdominal wall musculature leading to a flac-
reflex. This may be the frst indications of the onset of this
cid abdominal wall when palpated. This syndrome should be
syndrome. Ascending signs of LMN paralysis include a loss of
suspected in all animals that develop ascending analgesia or
intercostal muscle function for respiration and an inability to
descending signs of LMN dysfunction after trauma and severe
remain sternal because of paralysis of the paraspinal muscles.
compression of the spinal cord. There is no treatment for this 
The thoracic limbs may be rigidly extended, and hyperesthe-
syndrome. Once the clinical signs develop, they usually con-
sia may develop in the limbs a few hours before the necrosis
affects the caudal cervical spinal cord. As the lesion progresses
and euthanasia should be performed on affected animals to
cranially, the motor neurons involved in the innervation of
the thoracic limb become affected. Ultimately, LMN
pare-
with greatest frequency in dogs that develop acute paralysis
sis, hypotonia, and sensory loss involving the thoracic limbs
and complete sensory loss. Owners of dogs with complete sen-
develops. Finally, as the lesion ascends into the cervical spi-
sory loss should be warned of this possibility, particularly in
nal cord, there is a loss of the ability to ventilate. Respiratory
cases in which surgical therapy is contemplated.
failure occurs when the necrosis ascends to the level of the
Importantly, these cases can be differentiated from those
fifth and sixth cervical spinal cord segments and thus destroys
 of a focal lesion affecting the L4-S2 spinal cord segments.
the motor neurons of the phrenic nerves. Affected animals can
 In cases with ascending-descending myelomalacia, there is a
die of respiratory failure within 2 to 4 days after the onset
more cranial location of hyperesthesia and a more cranial level
 of clinical signs. As the lesion progresses caudally, there is a
of decreased sensation or point at which there is a loss of the
 sequential loss of the patellar reflex and muscular tone of the
cutaneous trunci reflex than would be expected for a lesion
pelvic limbs, followed by loss of the flexor refex, and ulti-
affecting the L4-S2 spinal segments.
mately loss of anal and urethral sphincter tone. The anus may
 Diagnosis. A tentative diagnosis of thoracolumbar IVDD
be dilated, and the perineal reflex is weak or absent. The blad-
is based on assessment of the clinical signs, breed signalment,
der is usually distended [atonic) and easily expressed because
 and results of the neurologic evaluation. For example, an ani-
of poor tone in the urethral sphincter. In addition, there is loss
 mal with asymmetric paresis and little to no hyperesthesia is
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
115
TABLE 6-5
Equine Lumbosacral and Cauda Equina Diseases: Differential Diagnosis of L4-S5 and Caudal
Disease Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
None
Spondylosis deformans (6)
Neuronopathies (7)]
Demyelinating diseases (7}
Axonopathies (7)
Anomalous
None
None
Vertebral malfommation (6)
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Neoplastic (6)
None 
Metastatic
Primary
Primary
Skeletal
 Skeletal
Hematopoietic 
Hematopoietic
Inflammatory
None
Herpesvirus 1 (6)
Neuritis of the cauda equina (6)
Protozoal myelitis (6)
(see also acute progressive)
Verminous migration (6)
Vertebral osteomyelitis (6)
Mycotic myelitis (6)
Toxic
None
None
Various neuropathies (7. 15)
Sorghum ataxia and cystitis (6)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None
None 
Luxations (6)
Postfoaling paralyses (5)
Vascular
Embolic myelopathy (6)
None
None
Fibrocartilaginous emboli (6)
 Postanesthetic myelopathy
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
more likely to have a vascular infarct than a compressive lesion
the area of the intervertebral foramen. Survey radiography
from IVD herniation. Of utmost importance is the fact that
alone, however, lacks accuracy in identifying the exact loca-
clinical signs related to IVD herniation are clinically indis-
tion of the extruded disk material.
tinguishable from those of a focal spinal cord lesion related
 Myelography or cross-sectional imaging using CT or MRI
to another etiology. Consequently, formulating a presump-
of the spine is required to determine the active site of the
tive diagnosis based on signalment, history, and clinical signs 
compression. The diagnostic procedures requested by the sur-
should be done with caution. Ultimately, defnitive diagnosis 
geon are dependent upon ability to ascertain the lesion site, to
relies on diagnostic tests such as imaging studies. The diagno-
increase the probability of identifying the side of the IVD her-
sis can be suspected by a conventional radiography evaluating
niation, and to rule out other diseases. Myelography has served
for evidence of degenerate disks, but myelography combined
as a standard for diagnosing spinal cord compression in dogs
with IVDD (see Chapter 4). Attenuation of contrast medium-
umn and spinal cord provide the accurate presumptive diag-
within the subarachnoid space occurs at sites of compression
nosis and importantly lesion localization required for surgical
and subarachnoid space occlusion; such patterns are described
intervention.
as extradural,  intradural/extramedullary, and intramedullary
Figure 6-5 demonstrates diagnostic lesions observed on
(Figure 6-6). Lateral, ventrodorsal, and oblique views are use-
survey radiographs of the vertebral column. General anes-
ful for determining the circumferential and longitudinal loca-
thesia or strong sedation provides the necessary relaxation
tion along the vertebral column and extent of the extradural
needed for proper positioning of the dog to allow diagnostic
compression. Longitudinal lesion localization by myelography
radiographs of the vertebral column to be obtained. In our
in thoracolumbar IVDD has nearly 90% accuracy 16. 17 An intra-
hospitals, radiographs are taken when surgical treatment is
medullary pattern associated with spinal cord edema or exten-
being considered. For cases treated by conservative medical
sive hemorhage is more common with acute extrusions and
 procedures, radiographs are not routinely made unless another 
may obscure the site of extradural compression. The extent of
disease, such as discospondylitis, neoplasia, or trauma is to be
spinal cord swelling seen with myelography may assist in estab-
excluded. Survey radiographic changes associated with IVD
herniation include a narrowing or wedging of the IVD space,
showed a significantly worse outcome if the extent of spinal
a narrowing of the space between the articular processes, and
Cord swelling is greater than five times the length of L2.18
a smaller intervertebral foramen as compared with adjacent
 Cross-sectional imaging using MRI and CT has supplanted
spaces. Importantly, the Tl0-Tl1 IVD space is normally nar-
the use of myelography for the evaluation of animals with sus-
row compared with other IVD spaces at the thoracolumbar
pected IVDD. CT can be an adjunctive procedure to myelog-
junction of the spine. Sometimes mineralized disk material
raphy to further delineate lateralization of the extruded IVD
can be visualized in the vertebral canal or superimposed over
 material or used as the sole technique for detecting IVD
116
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
HANSEN
A
Ⅱ
Figure 6-3 Drawings of Hansen type I and type II disk protru-
Figure 6-4 A 2-year-old female spayed dachshund showing a
sions. [From Hoerlein BF: Canine neurology: diagnosis and treat-
kyphotic posture that manifested paraspinal pain on palpation.
 ment, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.]
Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk disease was confrmed with
diagnostics and surgery.
TABLE 6-6
Food Animal Lumbosacral and Cauda Equina Diseases: Differential Diagnosis of L4-S3 and Caudal
Disease Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
 Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
None
Spondylosis deformans—All (6)
Arthrogryposis——All (7)
Neuronopathies—0, B (7}
 Anomalous
None
None 
Spinal cord malformation—All (6)
Vertebral malformation——All (6)
Neoplastic (6)
None
Metastatic
Metastatic
 Primary
 Primary
Vertebral
Vertebral
Hematopoietic 
Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None
None
 Enzootic ataxia, copper
deficiency—C, O (15)
Inflammatory
None
Bacterial myelitis——All (15)
Verminous migration—-All (6)
Vertebral osteomyelitis—-All (7)
Vertebral osteomyelitis——All (7)
Protozoal myelitis——All (15)
Mycotic myelitis—-All (15)
 Rabies virus—All (15)
Toxic
None
None
Various neuropathies (7. 15)
Sorghum ataxia and cystitis——B, O (6)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None 
None 
Luxations (6)
Contusions (6)
 Postcalving paralyses——B (5)
Vascular
Fbrocartilaginous
None 
None
embolism——B, P (6}
Aortic thromboembolism——B (6}
 Embolic myelopathy
B, Bovine; C, caprine; O, ovine; P, porcine; CA, camelids.
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
extrusion. Imaging the spine using CT alone is noninvasive
CT. The attenuation (brightness) of the disk material increases
and performed more quickly with fewer complications than
with the degree of mineralization. Acutely extruded IVD
myelography but experience is needed for accurate interpre-
material typically is recognized as a heterogeneous and hyper-
tation.l9 The lesion extent and lateralization of IVD material
attenuating extradural mass from a combination of disk mate-
can be more distinct on CT' than with myelography alone [Fig-
 rial and hemorrhage.
 ure 6-7). Mineralized disk material and acute hemorrhage are
MRI is superior in the recognition of intraparenchymal
identifed in the vertebral canal using noncontrast-enhanced
pathology and is the standard of care for assessment of acute
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
117
A
Figure 6-5 Lateral thoracolumbar radiograph showing wedging
of the intervertebral space at T12-13. This is a radiographic lesion
 indicative of disk herniation. Mineralized disks are evident at T10-
11, T13-L1, and L1-2. Mineralized disks in situ seldom cause active
disease but are likely to herniate later.
Figure 6-6 Lateral thoracolumbar radiograph and myelogram
of a dog after injection of contrast into the subarachnoid space
at L5-6. An extradural compression of the ventral contrast col-
umn and attenuation of the dorsal contrast column is visualized
at T13-L1.
Figure 6-8 MRI from a 7-year-old German shepherd dog after
L3-4 intervertebral disk extrusion of 2 weeks duration. A, Sagit-
ss e jo Aisuau shauasonay unsuap aeu M [
[ a a    ti a 
nucleus pulposus at the L1-2, L2-3, and L4-5 disk interspaces
and the hypointense to isointense degenerate nucleus pulposus
at the T13-L1, L5-6, L6-7, and L7-S1 disk interspaces. B, Dor-
sal STIR image demonstrating left-sided lateralization of the
extruded intervertebral disk causing displacement of the spinal
cord to the right. C, Transverse image showing lateralization of
the extruded disk material on the left side compressing the spinal
cord to the right. Surgery confirmed a type I intervertebral disk
herniation consisting of extruded nucleus pulposus with presence
of old hemorrhage.
specifc types of pathology. MRI may provide better clarity
than other imaging techniques in detecting hemorrhage asso-
Figure 6-7 Transverse computed tomographic image of a Han-
ciated with IVD herniation. However, timing of MRI in rela-
sen type 1 intervertebral disk extrusion at T13-L1 demonstrating
tion to the onset of the lesion can confound interpretation of
heterogeneous attenuation and opacity ventral to the spinal cord.
signal intensity since rapid changes can occur within areas of
  s od   a s r
spinal cord injury (SCl) in animals (Figure 6-8). Standard-
dogs caused by IVD extrusion. Results of dogs undergoing
ized MRI protocols for intervertebral disk disease use Tl- and
MRI and surgery for IVDD suggest that an area of intramed-
T2-weighted sagittal and transverse imaging over areas of
ullary spinal cord hyperintensity on sagittal TZ-weighted
MR images and at least the length of the L2 vertebral body
disk degeneration based on a decrease in signal intensity (rela-
have a poorer prognosis for functional recovery.24 Success
 s  
images.20 Focal signal void (blackness) within the IVD space or
spinal cord was 100% compared with 55% in those with
 spinal canal may represent mineralization or extruded mineral-
areas of hyperintensity. Moreover, success rates reported
ized nucleus pulposus.2l.22 Acute pathologies of spinal cord tis-
for dogs with areas of hyperintensity and loss of pain per-
ception was 31%, and the success rate in dogs with loss of
 images (relative whiteness) include necrosis, inflammation,
pain perception and hyperintensity greater than three times
 and edema. However, it is diffcult to distinguish among these
the length of the L2 vertebral body was 10% [1/10 dogs).24
118
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Levine et al25 also found that intramedullary spinal cord
confinement is recommended for a 4- to 6-week duration. If sat-
hyperintensity on TZ-weighted MR images was associated
isfactory progres is made, exercise is restricted to a leash for an
with the injury severity and also predictive of the recovery of
 additional 3 weeks. The most common mistake made by owners
the ability to walk long term.
and veterinarians is to administer antinflammatory drugs such
Treatment. Many dogs with IVDD respond at least tem-
as corticosteroids without exercise restriction. Predictably, these
porarily to attentive nursing care that promotes the sponta-
animals return in 36 to 48 hours with severe neurologic signs.
neous healing processes. Because of this finding, citing clear
Ideally, affected dogs should be hospitalized for observation for
cut evidence of the superiority of one therapy over another is
up to 1 week in facilities that have 24-hour monitoring.
 extremely diffcult. The major treatment decision-making pro-
Analgesics or other antiinflammatory drugs should be used
cess centers on the benefit of surgery versus conservative medi-
at home only when the client agrees to cooperate fully with
Cal management. In addition, the relative benefts ofthe various
the instructions for strict cage rest. Prednisone, 0.25 to 0.5
surgical procedures are still being debated. In comparing any
mg/kg of body weight, is given every 12 hours for 72 hours
treatment protocols, the severity and duration of the problem
and then the dosage is gradually tapered until discontinued.
must be recognized as critical factors in recovery, regardless
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can then
 of treatment. When those factors are constant, the litera-
be administered as needed for pain management. However
-g aei suaean aeodde uo ea Aqeuosr s a
NSAIDs and corticosteroids should not be concurrently
summarizes the indications for treatment and the forms of
administered because complications such as gastric ulceration
management currently recommended.
and perforation occur frequently. If the medication is switched
Special consideration for acute SCI is given to medical
from corticosteroids to NSAIDs, a 72-hour "wash out" period
   s u  
is recommended. Furthermore, corticosteroids if continued
section).
longer than 5 to 7 days, can result in increased risk for gastro-
Conservative Therapy. Conservative therapy is indicated
intestinal ulceration and urinary tract infection.26 These dogs
for animals that experience an initial episode of mild neuro-
are already at risk for urinary tract infection with urine reten-
logic dysfunction (e.g., dogs that are ambulatory or have only
tion from a dysfunctional detrusor muscle. Gastrointestinal
mild GP ataxia) or pain alone, with owners who have finan-
protection may be necessary during use of antinflammatory
 cial constraints or for those that have other medical problems
drugs. Acupuncture and muscle relaxants also have been advo-
 precluding general anesthesia and surgery In general, manage-
cated as a treatment for pain management.
 ment consists of pain control and strict confinement. Therapy
 Dogs treated conservatively should be assessed twice daily
A nou anq sssd sureu reu a oddns pinous
for pain control, comfort, bladder emptying, evidence of decu-
inhibit the beneficial inflammatory process induced by the
bital ulceration, and neurologic status. Cases with recurrent
extruded disk material. Analgesics and antinflammatory drugs
episodes of back pain uncontrolled by medication and/or wors-
can be used but only if strict confinement is possible. Impor-
ening of neurologic status should undergo further diagnostics
tantly, relief of pain may promote overactivity in affected dogs.
in an effort to obtain a definitive diagnosis and undergo decom-
Consequently, owners must be cautioned to remain vigilant in
pressive surgery. Physical rehabilitation, weight control, and
continuing to maintain strict exercise restriction despite clini-
avoidance of jumping activities may reduce recurrence rates. If
cal improvement. Overactivity may result in further IVD her-
followed closely, these recommendations can result in consid-
 niation and rapidly worsening clinical signs.
erable improvement; however, the owner must be aware that
The most important aspect of conservative therapy is
future episodes of elinical signs may occur and that the recur-
enforced cage rest, preferably under direct veterinary super-
rence of deficits may be severe. If the animal's signs deteriorate
vision. Animals should not be confined in baby cribs or play-
at any time, decompressive surgery should be considered. Pain
pens because to do so encourages the animal to jump in an
and its control are described in Chapter 14.
 attempt to get out. Confinement at home should be in a small
Success rates for conservative management of ambulatory
pet crate placed in a quiet room where the animal will not be
 dogs with thoracolumbar pain only and/or mild paresis range
disturbed. The animal should be minimally exercised twice a
from 50% to 100%.27-29 Predictably, recovery rates in non-
 day on a leash, away from other dogs or cats. Often strict cage
TABLE 6-7
Outline of Recommendations for Management ofThoracolumbar Intervertebral Disk Disease*
 Prognosis Surgical
Neurologic Classification
Initial Treatment Recommendations
 Prog nosis Medical Management Management
Paraplegia with no deep pain 
<24-48 hr surgical decompression:
<12 hr >5%: >48 hr <5%
<12 hr 45%-76%: >48 hr
perception
>48 hr surgery not recommended
6%-33%
 Paraplegia with deep
 Surgical decompression
50%
86%-89%
pain perception and no
superficial pain perception 
Paraplegia with intact pain
Surgical decompression
51%
79%-96%
 perception
Nonambulatory paraparesis
Surgical decompression 
55%-85%
83%-95%
Ambulatory paraparesis
 Conservative management
55%-85%
83%-95%
Spinal hyperesthesia only
Conservative management
55 %-85%
83%-95%
*Modifed frorm Frankel System (Frankel HL, et al: Paraplegia, 7:179-192, 1969; Levine M, et al: Am J Vet Res 67:283-287, 2006.)
The value of postural reaction in the initial management of closed injuries of the spine with paraplagia and tetraplasia.
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
119
Furthermore, recurrence rates are higher in studies follow-
ing conservative treatment. Retrospective studies of dogs
managed conservatively for presumptive thoracolumbar disk
disease documented 30% to 50% recurrence rates in dogs
with minimal clinical signs (e.g., maintained the ability
to
wallk) .29.31 Dogs with thoracolumbar IVDD that were medi-
cally managed had recurrence within 6 months to l year from
 onset of the initial clinical signs.3l
The absence of pain perception represents a severe, usu-
ally irreparable SCI. Paralyzed animals that have a loss of pain
 perception for 48 hours or longer have a grave prognosis [less
than a 5% chance for recovering the ability to walk) with or
surgery in the face of these odds, the animal should be treated
S      
grave.
 Surgical Therapy._ Indications for surgical management of
 thoracolumbar IVDD include spinal hyperesthesia or paresis
refractory to conservative therapy, recurrence or progression
of neurologic deficits, paraplegia with intact pain perception,
Figure 6-9 A depiction of a hemilaminectomy at L1-2. Note the
removal of the articular processes, pedicles lamina of Ll and L2.
and paraplegia with loss of pain perception for less than 24 to
[From Coates JR, Hoffman A, Dewey CW: Surgical approaches to
48 hours. Ideally, dogs with acute paralysis and lack of pain
the spine. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery,
perception should have immediate decompressive surgery.
ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, WB Saunders.]
However, prolonged loss of pain perception (>48 hours) car-
ries a poorer prognosis and owners should be made aware of
 this before surgery since surgery may not improve the recoy-
ery rate in such cases. Surgery can be performed in dogs with
 diffuse myelomalacia indicates a grave prognosis. The owners
absence of pain perception for up to 48 hours; however, the
 should be informed of the care involved with a dog in a cart
ssead sst nuareraarjo ienb pue a
and warned of ascending/descending myelomalacia. Ideally,
as owners understand this, surgery should be performed with
this discussion should be had with the owners before surgical
 the hope that decompressive surgery may improve the poten-
intervention given the prognosis for regaining the ability to
tial for recovery in ambulatory status. If a paralyzed dog is to
walk in dogs without pain perception. Moreover, absence of
be referred for surgical decompression, principles of medical
visual evidence of myelomalacia does not guarantee functional
 management of acute SCI are followed.
recovery; conversely, functional recovery may still occur in the
The various forms of surgical therapy have been reviewed
 presence of focal myelomalacia. A study reported that durot-
extensively by Hoerlein and in other surgical textbooks.I The
 sd  u de e se au s 
type of decompressive procedure may not affect outcome;
dogs without pain perception that underwent decompressive
however, the ability to retrieve the herniated disk material
surgery caused by IVD extrusion.35
depends on the decompressive procedure. Decompressive
In dogs that are nonambulatory paraparetic or paraple-
procedures for thoracolumbar IVDD include dorsal lami-
gic, decompressive surgery should be performed immedi-
nectomy, hemilaminectomy, and pediculectomy. Hemilami-
nectomy significantly improves retrieval of extruded IVD
and experimental studies that compared the time of onset
material with minimal spinal cord manipulation [Figure 6-9).
[acute vs. chronic) and duration of spinal cord compression
 Hemilaminectomy provides the same degree of decompres-
with the rate of recovery. Experimental studies by Tarlov
sion as dorsal laminectomy and is less frequently associated
et al is demonstrated that acute spinal cord compression with
with a postsurgical constrictive laminectomy membrane. Ped-
 a force suffcient to produce complete sensorimotor paraly-
iculectomy, in which the pedicle of the vertebra is removed
sis can completely recover from the injury if the compression
with preservation of the articular processes, is the least inva-
is less than 2 hours in duration.36.37 Furthermore, the rate of
sive technique and can be used as an adjunct technique in
recovery in Tarlov's study correlated directly with the dura-
cases of a bilateral approach to the vertebral canal. Radical
tion of compression. Gradual compression of the spinal cord
bilateral dorsal laminectomy [removal of pedicles and dorsal
was better tolerated, and irreversible changes developed at a
laminae) has an increased risk of constrictive laminectomy
 slower rate in these animals. Thus early decompressive surgery
pasr jo Aen au yoq uo auanu aasd e aae au
material in 93% of dogs that had hemilaminectomy compared
function and the rate of recovery. Knecht also compared the
with 40% of dogs that had dorsal laminectomy, but initial neu-
outcome of dogs after hemilaminectomy and duration of
rologic recovery after hemilaminectomy was not significantly
clinical signs and showed that a delay before surgery does not
 different compared with dorsal laminectomy.33 Biomechani-
influence outcome in dogs with mild neurologic dysfunction
cal studies have shown that unilateral hemilaminectomy and
but does affect better functional recovery in paraplegic dogs
fenestration do not significantly destabilize a vertebral column
when performed within 12 hours.38 When indicated, spinal
with regards to the application of lateral bending forces.34
cord decompression should be performed without delay. Dogs 
Surgical complications include seroma formation, excessive
treated conservatively with moderate to severe paresis or para-
hemorrhage, incomplete removal of IVD material, constric-
plegia for 24 to 48 hours and then performing surgery if no
tive fibrosis, and rarely instability.
improvement occurs is not recommended. Doing so discounts
 If the patient has loss of pain perception before surgery.
 the experimental data regarding the effects of spinal compres-
a durotomy may be considered to allow visualization of the
 sion over variable periods and the clinical experience of many
spinal cord. A longitudinal incision in the meninges allows
veterinary surgeons.
for visualization of the spinal cord parenchyma to determine
Other clinically based studies in dogs with thoracolumbar
extent of swelling and presence of myelomalacia. Presence of
 disk extrusions have shown that those with a shorter duration
120
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
and the gradual onset of neurologic dysfunction [ess than
and rate of the spinal cord compression. Reported mean time
 48 hours) before surgery have a faster recovery.15,39.40 How-
from postsurgery to ambulatory status varied from 10 days
 ever, a study of 7l paraplegic dogs with intact pain percep-
for dogs experiencing pain alone as a clinical sign or showing
tion demonstrated that although a shorter duration of signs
-uo rao egsaop raadered r sep zs o sisredered
was indeed associated with a shorter recovery time, the rate
studies reported recovery times of 2 to 14 days for dogs that
of onset of clinical signs did not influence the recovery time,
were either ambulatory or nonambulatory paraparetic and
but it did influence the final outcome.4l This relates to the fact
up to 4 weeks for dogs that were paraplegi.52.53 Ruddle et
al reported that 42% of dogs were ambulatory by 2 weeks
for dogs with a lack of pain perception.l5
and 79% were ambulatory by 4 weeks following decompres-
Although controversial, IVD fenestration has been advo-
sion in 218 nonambulatory dogs with intact pain perception 5l
cated as a prophylactic procedure to prevent future extrusions
Patient age and weight also may impact the time required for
at adjacent IVD spaces. Disk fenestration involves making a
ability to ambulate.l14 Generally in a paraplegic dog, if pain
"window" in the annulus and removing the accessible nucleus
perception remains intact or returns shortly after surgery, good
pulposus. This procedure often is performed at the site of the
voluntary motor activity should return within 4 to 5 weeks,
IVD herniation at the time of spinal decompression and is rec-
and the unassisted ability to support weight usually is restored
ommended to prevent continued extrusion of remaining in
within 6 to 8 weeks. Proprioception is the last function to
situ nucleus pulposus. Prophylactic fenestration of other IVD
return. Early decompression hastens the return of neurologic
spaces at the time of decompression typically is performed
function. The quality of recovery depends on the severity of
from Tll-12 to L3-4.
secondary injury to the spinal cord. Animals decompressed in
 General agreement exists that IVD fenestration alone may
the first 24 hours may be walling in the next 24 hours.
benefit some animals by preventing further extrusion at other
Pain perception (nociception) is considered the most impor-
IVD spaces. Fenestration may also produce an acute inflam-
tant prognostic indicator for functional recovery. In general
matory process that stimulates phagocytosis [the resorption
the majority of dogs with intact pain perception, have an
of necrotic disk material) and the formation of fbrosis, which
excellent prognosis, particularly if treated surgically. In gen-
helps to stabilize the disk.42 Percutaneous laser disk ablation
eral, dogs with loss of pain perception for longer than 24 to
has been successfully used as a replacement for surgical disk
48 hours before surgery have a poorer prognosis for return of
fenestration.43 It is indicated for dogs that have multiple epi-
function. Recovery rates for dogs with thoracolumbar IVDD
sodes of pain and no evidence of spinal cord compression.
and absent pain perception range from 0% to 76%.54 Specifi-
Using fuoroscopy, hypodermic needles are placed in the
 cally, the prognosis ranges from 47% to 76% in dogs that lack
nucleus pulposus and a holmium-yttrium-aluminum-garnet
pain perception and have surgical decompression within 12 to
laser is guided through the needle into the IVD. Bartels and
24 hours.14,15,35,39,51.54 If decompressive surgery is delayed by
colleagues44 reported on the outcome and complications asso-
longer than 48 hours after losing pain perception, the progno-
ciated with prophylactic percutaneous laser disk ablation in
sis diminishes to less than 5% 14.15.35
dogs. Of 277 dogs treated, only 5 developed complications
in the perioperative period. These researchers contacted 262
has been associated with a successful outcome to ambulatory
owners 1 to 85 months after the procedure; 76% of these own-
status. In a study of 87 dogs with loss of pain perception, 58%
ers indicated that their dogs were immediately improved, 22%
regained pain perception and the ability to wall.14 In sum-
indicated their dogs were the same, 2% indicated their dogs
mary, dogs with absent pain perception that have surgery
were worse, and 81% reported their dogs had not had any
within 24 hours have a better chance of more rapid and com-
 recurrence of thoracolumbar IVDD.
 plete recovery than those with delay of surgery. Prognosis is
considered poor if pain perception does not return within 4
niation following surgery to range from 0%45 to 24%46 with
weeks after surgery.
 prophylactic fenestration and from 2.7%39 to 42%47 with-
 Supportive Care of the Paraplegic. Supportive care of the
out prophylactic fenestration. Dogs undergoing prophylac-
nonambulatory dog is directed at preventing the development
of decubital ulcers, urinary tract infection, and muscle atrophy.
 et al determined a 4.7% recurrence rate after multiple IVD
 Dogs that undergo physical rehabilitation may have shorter
fenestrations in 265 dogs but commented that prophylactic
recovery times for return of ambulation.5l Physical rehabilita-
fenestration could promote IVD herniation at an adjacent
tion is briefly described in Chapter 14.
nonfenestrated IVD48
 Dogs with thoracolumbar IVDD that are unable to ambu-
 late often will have concomitant upper motor neuron urinary
after surgical decompression is summarized in Table 6-7.
bladder dysfunction. These dogs will require manual blad-
Overall success rates after decompressive surgery for thoraco-
der expression, or intermittent or indwelling urinary bladder
catheterization. Incomplete bladder evacuation and use of
urinary catheters may predispose dogs to urinary tract infec-
 In dogs that are paraplegic with intact pain perception, the
tion (UTn).26 A prospective study in dogs with thoracolum-
prognosis ranges from 79% to 96%.40.41,47-51
bar IVDD determined that the prevalence of UTIs was 30%
However, the success of decompressive surgery may
with higher incidence in dogs that were female and had lower
depend on what criteria are used to define it, length of time
 intraoperative body temperatures.26 Bladder care is further
after the surgery the patient is assessed, and the outcome that
described in Chapter 3.
 the pet owners are wiling to accept. Surgical success may con-
sist of improvement in the patient's neurologic status but still
Inflammatory
may not recover to complete normality. It has been reported
Inflammatory infectious diseases can cause myelitis and men-
that in dogs with loss of pain perception, approximately 40%
ingitis or result in infection of the vertebral body and in the
 of dogs that recovered continued to have fecal incontinence.14
 spinal canal Inflammatory diseases often will cause multifocal
Residual signs such as fecal and urinary incontinence may not
signs (see Chapter 15). In this section, we will emphasize dis-
be acceptable to some pet owners.
 eases that primarily manifest as paraparesis.
As stated above, the rate of return to ambulation and for
Equine Herpesvirus 1 Myeloencephalopathy/Pathogenesis.
functional micturition is highly correlated with the duration
Equine herpesvirus (EHV) myeloencephalopathy is an acute
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
121
progressive neurologic disease that usually affects adult horses
Treatment. No defnitive treatment for this disease exists.
and, less frequently, foals.s57 The neuropathic strain of
Because an immune mechanism may be responsible for pro-
EHV-1 can produce myeloencephalopathy and rarely, EHV-4.
gression of clinical signs, some have suggested the use of anti-
The virus is laterally transmitted by direct contact through
 inflammatory drugs in the acute phase.57 Administration of
inhalation and less frequently by direct contact with fetal and
antiviral drugs may be effective early in the disease course.
placental tissues. The EHV-l infection occurs within groups of
 Many animals recover if given supportive nursing care, includ-
horses, usually in the winter and spring and most commonly
ing catheterization of the urinary bladder and use of a sling
causes respiratory disease, abortion, and stilbirths. Latency.
in recumbent horses. Priorities for management include early.
and reactivation are critical features of the epidemiology of
diagnosis, prevention of further spread, and management of
EHV-1 infection.57 Immunity to the virus is poor, so the virus
clinical cases.52 As the disease is laterally transmitted, manage-
usually persists in latent form and can recrudesce as myelo-
ment practices for containing an outbreak should include clos-
encephalopathy.s8 The virus infects the mononuclear cells,
ing down the hospital, disinfection procedures, and isolation
which disseminate the virus into other tissues including the
of affected horses. An affected horse should remain in isola-
central nervous system (CNS), rather than by direct infection
tion for 21 days after resolution of clinical signs.63 There is no
of the neural tissues. Through cell-associated contact, the virus 
evidence that current vaccines can prevent naturally occurring
enters the CNS via the endothelial cells. Lesions are multifocal
cases of EHV myeloencephalomyelitis.57 A killed intramuscu-
caused by vasculitis following infection of endothelial cells in
lar (IM) vaccine is available that probably provides immunity
the CNS with severe vasculitis followed by thrombosis/infarc-
to the respiratory disease but not to infection of the placenta
or CNS. Therefore vaccinated animals may still have abortions
fuse to multifocal lymphocytic perivascular cuffing, edema,
or neurologic disease. Environmental stressors associated with
infarction, and necrosis throughout the spinal cord white mat-
 transport, management practices, breeding, foaling, weaning.
ter and brain, but clinical signs usually reflect the spinal cord
and castration can result in reactivation of the latent virus.58
lesions.
Equine Protozoal Myeloencephalitis
Clinical Signs. Usually  EHV-1  myeloencephalopathy
 Pathogenesis. Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM)
occurs within l to 2 weeks after outbreaks of upper respiratory
is the most common neurologic disease in horses with mul-
tract infections or abortions. Pregnant mares may be more sus-
tifocal or asymmetric neurologic defcits.56,64 The disease is
ceptible to the development of severe spinal cord lesions and
commonly characterized by either sudden or gradual onset of
may abort if infected in the last trimester of pregnancy. Fever
 pelvic limb paresis and ataxia. Because lesions may be multifo-
is an important physical examination finding. Neurologic signs
cal in the spinal cord or brain, neurologic signs may indicate
develop acutely. In most cases, the clinical signs are those of
involvement of any part of the CNS. EPM is most commonly
 thoracolumbar spinal cord dysfunction. The classic neurologic
caused by the apicomplexan, resembling Sarcocystis neurona. 5
signs are those of a symmetric paresis with the pelvic limbs
A small number of EPM cases have been attributed to infec-
more severely affected than the thoracic limbs.59 Common
tion by Neospora hughesi. The opossum is the definitive host
signs include pelvic limb ataxia, dysuria, flaccid anus and tail,
for S. neurona and harbors the sexual stages of the protozoa
 and loss of sensation around the perineal area. A dog-sitting
within its gastrointestinal tract.6667 Infective sporocysts are
 posture is not unusual. Tetraparesis may be severe if cervical
shed in the feces. After ingestion of the sporocysts by a natural
spinal cord lesions are extensive. Disease progression is vari-
intermediate host, the released merozoites travel in the blood-
able, depending on the severity ofthe initial spinal cord lesions.
stream to skeletal or cardiac muscle tissue to undergo several
Affected horses may recover in 24 to 48 hours, or they may
cycles of asexual reproduction and re-form as sarcocysts. Nat-
progress rapidly to severe tetraplegia or paraplegia. In a few
ural intermediate hosts for S. neurona that have been identi-
cases, seizures occur with involvement of the cerebral cortex
fied include the skunk, raccoon, cat, Pacific harbor seal, and
or cranial nerve dysfunction and vestibular signs with involve-
nine-banded armadillo. The horse is an aberrant dead-end host
ment of the brainstem. Both UMN and LMN signs may be
(the parasite cannot complete its life cycle in horses). The life
noted relative to the site of vascular lesions in the spinal cord.
cycle is completed when opossums eat sarcocyst-infected tis-
Diagnosis. Definitive antemortem diagnosis is difficult.
sue from an intermediate host. Horses are infected after they
Whenever neurologic disease appears to follow outbreaks
ingest sporocysts shed in opossum feces. Following ingestion
of respiratory tract infection or abortion, EHV-l myeloen-
adsns aq isnu ssrofo aseas eiods e edoeuda
smal intestine and enter the circulation. Sporozoites may rep-
Analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) reveals xanthochro-
licate in endothelial cells and release tachyzoites. Tachyzoites
mia and signifcant elevations in protein levels (150 mg/dL
may enter the CNS and provoke an inflammatory response.
or greater) with normal or slightly elevated cell counts. Virus
Moreover, tachyzoites are able to replicate [asexually) in neu-
culture and isolation is considered the gold standard test for
rons and microglial cells. Slowly growing S neurona tachyzo-
making a laboratory diagnosis of EHV-1.57 Presumptive diag-
ites cause progressive loss of neurons and supporting cells, and
nosis is based on serologic test interpretations in conjunction
  ss sn  n  
with the presenting clinical signs. Polymerase chain reaction
dysfunction that refer to a specifc neuroanatomic location.
(PCR) has become the diagnostic test of choice because of
The organism invades and multiplies in the CNS rather than
its high sensitivity and specificity.57 Presence of the virus can
encysting in muscle.
be detected using PCR for the neuropathic strain in the nasal
 Early reports suggested that the disease was most common
mucosa and blood, virus isolation, and seroconversion studies.
 in the eastern United States, but it has been reported in many
Rising serum antibody titers may be observed in horses with
 other locations and may occur anywhere in North America
neurologic disease; however, a sharp rise in antibody titers
with geographic distribution of the opossum.58-70 There is a
occurs during the respiratory phase of the disease some l to 3
bimodal age distribution of 1 to 5 years and older than 13
weeks before the onset of neurologic signs, which complicates
years, which is associated with other risk factors: exposure to
interpretation of serology.50 Techniques using PCR may help
opossums, heavy exercise, breeding, transportation, and herd
to differentiate pathogenicity of strains and EHV-l deoxyri-
environment. 56.71 All breeds are susceptibie to EPM. A higher
bonucleic acid (DNA) in tissues.6l The definitive diagnosis
  saa  a  uaas aa se a jo aag
coupled with presence of vasculitis is made by isolation of the
show, and compete and also in farm and pleasure horses.
virus from nervous tissue.
          
122
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 age-associated immunocompromise. It also appears that spe-
cific immunologic abnormalities may predispose to EPM,
 allowing the parasite to evade the host's immune response and
gain entry into the CNS. Although a majority of horses in a
geographic location that is endemic for S. neurona are infected
by the protozoan, neurologic disease only develops in a minor-
ity [<l%] of infected horses.
Lesions within the CNS are focal or multifocal and usually
are asymmetric. The lesion severity of myeloencephalomenin-
 gitis associated with EPM will vary. The histopathologic lesion
is a nonsuppurative inflammation with a perivascular distri-
bution affecting both gray and white matter. Organisms are
seen in only half the cases. The identification of S. neurona at
histopathology is significantly facilitated using immunohisto-
chemical techniques.
Clinical Signs. No typical presentation or characteristic set
of neurologic signs have been established for EPM, and sym-
metric neurologic disease does not preclude its diagnosis.72 Fre-
 quently, the clinical manifestation of EPM begins with signs of
subtle lameness that are difficult to localize using routine diag-
nostic tests (such as nerve anesthesia and radiography). Gradu-
ally, over the course of several weeks, the clinical signs become
more prominent and a neurologic component becomes more
readly apparent. Clinical signs may develop suddenly and
progress slowly over days to weeks. Rapid progression some-
times also occurs.Asymmetric GP ataxia and paresis of the pel-
vic limbs are the most common manifestations. Because lesions
Figure 6-10 A photo of a horse presumptively diagnosed with
 may be multifocal, however, a mixture of UMN and LMN signs
equine protozoal myelitis. Note the severe atrophy of the left glu-
may be present in the pelvic and thoracic limbs, and brainstem
teal musculature. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research
signs may also be present. Lesions may be selective to involve
Foundation, Inc.]
 only one nudleus or tract in the CNS. If the lesion occurs in the
  s      r
worse than the pelvic limb signs. These animals move with the
thoracic limbs extended forward and the head held low. Asym-
neurona antibodies test result performed on CSF is regarded as
metry of clinical signs is a hallmark of the disease. The clinical
being more likely implicative for an EPM diagnosis (in horses
signs may resemble those observed in the equine wobbler syn-
that are exhibiting neurologic signs) when compared with test
drome and EHV-1 myeloencephalitis; however, the asymmetry
results on plasma. However, it should be noted that antigen-
that is seen helps in the clinical differentiation of protozoal
 specifc antibody can be detected in the CSF of normal horses
myelitis-encephalitis from the other two diseases. Three car-
in which antigen has not been administered intrathecally.74
dinal neurologic manifestations that are highly implicative for
Finally, serum and CSF from normal foals born to seropositive
 EPM include asymmetric signs; multifocal signs; and evidence
of LMN lesion (focal muscle atrophy) (Figure 6-10).73
Blood contamination often will confuse the interpretation of
Diagnosis. Clinical diagnosis of EPM is a challenge and
 presence of antibody in the CSF.
requires  careful  interpretation  of  clinicopathologic  fnd-
 There are presently four commercially available serodi-
 agnostic tests for S. neurona antibodies [and some labs offer
other diseases (such as cervical vertebral trauma or cervical
similar tests for N. hughesi): immunofluorescent antibody test
stenotic myelopathy) from the differential diagnosis. In EPM,
unlike EHV-l encephalomyelitis, few CSF abnormalities
and the western immunoblot (WB). Currently, the generally
occur. Mildly increased concentrations of mononuclear cells
recommended serodiagnostic test to support a diagnosis of
and protein occasionally are found. Cervical spinal radio-
EPM is the IFAT performed on either serum or CSF.76 Results
graphs are normal, differentiating this disease from cervical
suggest that a suffhciently high titer is very strongly correlated
     s
with and predictive for a diagnosis of EPM. Another test eval-
identify multifocal LMN damage, which is more common in
uates for antibodies directed specifically against the SAG-1
this disease than in the others with similar clinical signs.
epitope of S neurona.77 Testing for antibodies against SAG-1
Postmortem evaluation is the gold standard for diagnosis
may yield false-negative results because it has been shown
of EPM. A presumptive diagnosis of EPM is supported by
that some strains of the parasite lack this epitope. Although
 demonstrating antibodies against S. neurona in blood and/or
analysis of serum or CSF using Western blot technology for
in CSF. It should be emphasized that interpretation of these
the presence of antibody to S. neurona used to be the rec-
serodiagnostic tests in both blood and CSF are complicated
 ommended method for determining a presumptive diagnosis,
controversy exists regarding its specifcity.64.78 Its low specifc-
graphic locations in which S. neurona is endemic, positive
ity indicates that false-positive test results are likely78; how-
 antibody titers can be demonstrated in a majority of healthy
horses, in the absence of neurologic signs. These positive anti-
useful in ruling out EPM. Identification of S neurona DNA
body test results are attributed to the widespread extent to
in CSF via PCR is available, but the clinical sensitivity of this
which horses are exposed to S. neurona in their natural envi-
test is poor [usually fails to identify the protozoan in the
ronment: both the plasma and the CSF may contain antibodies
CSF). PCR testing for S. neurona in the CSF is not currently
in the absence of EPM. Therefore, caution must be exercised
recommended but it may be helpful for diagnosis of EPM
when interpreting results of serodiagnostic tests for S. neurona
based on tissue analysis postmortem.54 Diagnosis of EPM is
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
123
also supported by a positive response following institution of
efficacy for specific therapies is unproven. Nursing care should
antiprotozoal treatment 56.64 In many cases, it is not possible
 include proper bedding and nutrition. Preventive manage-
to make a definitive diagnosis of EPM while the patient is
ment practices include vaccination in horses and mosquito
living, and a presumptive diagnosis is given with knowledge
control.
of the diagnostic testing results. Diagnosis of EPM can only
Verminous Migration
be proven with demonstrable lesions in the CNS at necropsy.
Clinical Signs. Onset of parasitic invasion into the neural tis-
Making a necropsy diagnosis is also challenging because the
sue is acute and progressive with waxing and waning periods
size of the examined tissues is substantial in this large animal
of improvement.56 Neurologic signs are usually asymmetric
species.
and may show focal or multifocal distributions and reflect the
Treatment. Treatment of EPM usually includes four strat-
area affected. The pathologies from migration include inflam-
egies: antiprotozoal drugs; antinflammatory drugs; immu-
matory, necrotic, and hemorrhagic processes.
nomodulation; and minimization of stress factors that might
have facilitated protozoal infection of the CNs.56,64 Three
cord of horses has been described.s6,86 The most important of
antiprotozoal drug strategies have been developed, approved
these organisms includes Halicephalobus deletrix, Strongylus vnul-
for use in EPM-affected horses, and marketed. The three
garis, Draschia megastoma, and Hypoderma lineatum. S. vulgaris
 approved drug. products are pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine
Paralaphostrongylus tenius is the most common organism to
combination, nitazoxanide, and ponazuril. Presently, only
cause verminous myelitis in the horse and the one most likely
the ponazuril product is commercially available to veterinar-
to affect the spinal cord.86 Larvae of Hypoderma. spp. (warble
ians. Diclazuril has also been developed and approved for use
fly or heel fly) can also cause verminous meningoencephalitis,
in EPM-affected horses, but has not been marketed. Where
but it usually affects the brain and not the spinal cord with
applicable, the pyrimethamine/sulfadiazine combination and
asymmetric brainstem disease as the most common clinical
nitazoxanide may be available from compounding pharma-
cies. Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs are sometimes
infect the brain. The clinical signs depend on the location of the
administered to EPM-affected horses for a few days to mini-
 parasite and may be asymmetric, focal, or multifocal. Emboliza-
mize debilitating inflammatory reactions to protozoal death
tion of S. vulgaris larvae into spinal or cerebral arteries may pro-
that are sometimes reported at the outset of an antiprotozoal
duce severe acute progressive or nonprogressive clinical signs.
treatment period. Immunomodulators, such as levamisole, are
Bovine. The larvae of Hypoderma bovis migrate through
sometimes advocated for purposes of "stimulating" the host's
the epidural space of cattle.7 Infestation usually occurs dur-
immune responsiveness to S neurona. There was a vaccine
ing the months of July through October. If the larvae die or are
produced for prevention of S. neurona infection but it is no
killed while in the epidural space, a severe immunologic reac-
longer avalable. Preventive management practices include
tion occurs, resulting in SCI. The clinical signs usually appear
removal of dead animals, carrion, and spilled foods around the
in cattle treated with organophosphate insecticides during
premises, which attract opossums.
the period of epidural larva migration. Clinical signs develop
West Nile Virus
acutely hours to days after treatment and usually are caused
Pathogenesis. West Nile virus [WNV) is an ribonucleic
by thoracolumbar spinal cord injury. Prominent signs include
acid (RNA) virus of the Flavivirus genus within the family Fla-
GP ataxia and paresis of pelvic limbs. If the lumbosacral cord
viviridae. WNV occurs worldwide and an outbreak of WNV
is involved, LMN signs may be detected in the pelvic limbs.
occurred in the late 1990s in the northeastern United States
The signs are usually asymmetric.
The diagnosis is based on the history and the clinical signs.87
persistent environment reservoir for this virus is in avian spe-
The CSF changes reflect signs of degeneration (moderate
 ies that are not killed by infection. When active, mosqui-
 increases in protein and cell concentrations). Eosinophils may
toes serve as a vector to transmit the virus from the reservoir
not be present in the CSF. Affected animals should be treated
avian species to susceptible mammalian species [e.g., humans,
with antinflammatory drugs approved for use in food produc-
horses, and others). Horses, humans, and other species are con-
uisar Aroteuureu Arepuosss au aonpar oi sieuue su!
sidered to be dead-end hosts. Dogs and ruminant species are
 If signs develop several days to weeks after organophosphate
less susceptible to infection.80
application, the possibility of organophosphate intoxication
Clinical Signs. The disease can cause severe neurologic
should be considered.
signs and mortality in horses but most infections are subelini-
Ovine,Caprine,
Camelids. Cerebrospinal  nematodiasis
cal and go unrecognized. Horses that develop neurologic signs
caused by the migrating larvae of Parelaphostrongylus tenuis
show multifocal signs that may predominate as spinal cord or
 has been reported in sheep, goats, camelids, and other domes-
brain dysfunction.8l.82 Signs of spinal cord dysfunction usually
tic livestock.87 Cattle appear resistant to infection but llamas
are asymmetric motor and proprioceptive deficits. Intracranial
seem to be the most sensitive to development of disease. The
signs consist of cranial nerve defcits, seizures, and abnormal
disease is endemic in North America where white-tailed deer
mentation. Other clinical signs include pyrexia and muscle fas-
are common. In its natural life cycle, the adult parasite resides
ciculation. Horses may be found acutely recumbent or dead.
in the subarachnoid space of the white-tailed deer. The eggs
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and time of
are removed from the CNS through the venous circulation
year, CSF analysis, and ruling out other differentials. Exposure
and enter the lungs. They are coughed up, swallowed, and
 can be detected by use of serum neutralization assay using
passed in the feces. The larvae are ingested by snails or slugs
early and convalescent serum samples. CSF analysis reveals a
and develop into third-stage larva. When the snail or slug is
marked increase in protein concentration and an increase in
ingested by the aberrant hosts, the larvae are released from
mononuclear cells.83 CSF abnormalities are found in about
the digestive tract and migrate into the CNS. In species other
70% of affected horses. Encephalomyelitis is evident on his-
 than the white-tailed deer, the parasite enters the spinal cord
topathology and more definitive diagnosis is made with virus
and migrates. The aberrant hosts are not equally susceptible to
isolation. A presumptive diagnosis is mainly based on serum
disease produced by P. temuis.87
IgM ELISA and whole blood RT-PCR.84.85
Migration of this parasite through the CNS produces a
Treatment. Treatment of animals with_suspected WNV
variety of clinical signs that include pelvic limb paresis and
ataxia.The clinical course is variable and may include progres-
pies are used to lessen the CNS inflammation but treatment
 sion, stasis, or improvement in clinical signs. Affected animals
124
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
sxa    s     e 
evidence of LMN dysfunction. Serologic tests [ELISA and
to white-tailed deer. Antemortem diagnosis is based on clinical
 agar gel immunodiffusion) can be helpful if positive but does
 signs and CSF analysis. The CSF of these animals usually con-
not confirm the virus. Many affected animals, however, have
tains increased concentrations of protein and cells. A mono-
negative results. Combination of ELISA and PCR testing is
nuclear and eosinophilic pleocytosis is usually encountered.
now thought to be more useful for detection of lentivirus
Successful treatment of clinical CNS parelaphostrongylosis
infections.9l
requires early diagnosis and institution of treatment.87 Treat-
Treatment. The neurologic syndrome is progressive and
ment with diethylcarbamazine,
ivermectin, levamisole,
or
      s  
thiabendazole is recommended. The prognosis is guarded.
directed toward identifying infected animals and minimizing
Minimizing contact with white-tailed deer decreases the larval
transmission between infected dams and offspringand minimiz-
load on the premises. It has been recommended to administer
ing direct contact with infected animals.88 Thus withholding
an avermectin dewormer to camelids on a monthly basis after
 calostrom is effective prevention. Serologic testing and cull
the last hard frost.87
programs can decrease prevalence within a flock or herd.
Porcine. The kidney worm of swine, Stephamurus dentatus,
Discospondylitis and Vertebral Abscess. Several terms
may migrate through the lumbar spinal cord, producing pelvic
are used to describe vertebral infections.92 Discospondylitis
limb paresis and GP ataxia. This organism must be considered
is an infection of the IVD and the adjacent vertebral bodies.
in individual swine that develop acute paraparesis, particularly
 Infection confined to the vertebra is called vertebral osteomy-
swine residing on farms in the southeastern United States.
elitis or spondylitis. Infection when confined only within the
Diagnosis. Confirmation of parasitic encephalomyelitis is
IVD is called infectious diskitis. Vertebral physitis is inflam-
difficult to make. The CSF may contain increased concentra-
mation confined to the physeal zones of the end plate.93 All
tions of eosinophils, neutrophils, macrophages, and red blood
 regions of the spine are prone to develop infections of the IVD
cells.56 It may be mildly to moderately xanthochromic. Defini-
or vertebrae.
tive diagnosis of parasitic encephalomyelitis is made by dem-
 Pathogenesis. Discospondylitis is an IVD infection with
onstrating the parasitic organism and characteristic lesions at
necropsy.
Direct infection can occur from spinal surgery, penetrating
Treatment. In suspected cases of verminous migration,
wound, regional abscessation or migration of foreign mate-
rial [egplant aw]94998Incats,bit wound ascesescan
Empiric therapies with antinflammatory drugs can be used
induce discospondylitis by direct inoculation of bacterial
to decrease the inflammatory response to the dying worms
organisms.9 In dogs, the most common bacterial causes are
and larvae. Recoveries are possible if animals are treated early
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and, occasionally, Streptococ-
 in the disease course. Many animals will have permanent dis-
cus spp, gram negatives, and Brucella canis. 92,95 Because of
ability. Recumbency indicates a poorer prognosis. Prophylactic 
its zoonotic importance, B. canis is an important infectious
therapy is warranted for some parasites.
agent to always consider in discospondylitis.l00-102 Actino-
Ovine and Caprine Lentiviral Encephalomyelitis [Maedi-
myces spp., a flamentous bacteria, often occurs with grass
visna and Ovine Progressive Pneumonia (MVV/OPPV) and 
Caprine Arthritis-Encephalitis Virus (CAE)]
by fungal organisms, including Aspergillus spp., Paecilomyces
Pathogenesis. Lentiviral infections in sheep and goats share
spp, and Coccidioides immitis.92 The most common route
many clinical similarities and are characterized by insidious
 of infection is hematogenous spread of organisms from the
onset and slow progression.88 Ovine and caprine lentiviruses
genitourinary system, oral cavity, heart valves, or skin. Infec-
belong to the family Retroviridae. These infections occur
tion of the IVD and the vertebrae usually occurs secondary
worldwide. The terms maedi [shortness of breath] and visnd
to infection of one of these primary foci. Discospondylitis
[shrinkage or wasting) arise from the original Icelandic descrip-
in dogs often is associated with a urinary tract infection
as     P A Jo s
and bacteremia. With the exception of directly penetrating
The lentiviral infection in goats causes the disease syndrome of
wounds and foreign object migration, discospondylitis infec-
CAE, which manifests as respiratory disease, mastitis, arthritis,
tions usually start in the end plate of a vertebra, with sub-
and encephalomyelitis. Respiratory signs are more common in
sequent spread into the IVD. The blood supply within the
adult sheep, whereas arthritis in adult goats is more common
vertebral end plates consists of capillary beds, with reduced
with CAE virus. The primary mode of transmission is through
blood flow velocity.l03. 104 The pores in the end plate allow
infected milk and colostrum consumed by neonates.89.90
for diffusion of nutrients into the IVD but also provides a
Clinical Signs. Only a few infected animals will manifest
route for organisms to enter the IVD. The minimal vascu-
clinical disease. In sheep with MVV/OPPV, neurologic signs of
lar supply of the IVD further perpetuates infection within
leukoencephalomyelitis rarely occurs and is characterized by
the disk. The infection may involve cervical or thoracolum-
bar vertebrae; however, it most frequently develops in the
more commonly occur in the younger goat.89 More than one
lumbosacral, thoracolumbar, cervicothoracic, and midtho-
kid is affected in most cases. Caprine leukoencephalomyelitis is
characterized by symmetric or asymmetric paraparesis and GP
for discospondylitis in dogs is L7-S1 IVD space.95,105 Lesions 
ataxia. Cranial nerve signs may be observed. Neurologic signs
often are multifocal.
in both species reflect multifocal disease, including involvement
Vertebral abscesses are formed primarily in young or debil-
 of the brain. Histopathology in both ovine/caprine lentiviral
itated large animals.56 An association is often present with
encephalomyelitis includes a periventricular encephalitis and
 omphalophlebitis (navel ill) in calves and foals, tail docking in
widespread demyelination. As in other viral diseases, lesions may
lambs, erysipelas arthritis in swine, pneumonia in cattle, and
develop anywhere in the spinal cord, producing focal or multi-
 aass  s ds  
focal asymmetric neurologic signs. Weight loss, arthritis, pneu-
ria-producing vertebral abscesses in foals include Sabmonella
monitis, and palpation of a firm udder may be present in one or
spp., Streptococus spp, Actinobacillus equli, Eikenella cor-
more animals.
rodens, and Rhodococcus equi 56 In adult horses, Staphylococ-
Diagnosis. The CSF usually contains markedly increased
Cus spp, Brucella abortus, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis are
concentrations of mononuclear cells and modestly increased
reported.56 In cattle, Bacteroides spp. Pasturella spp., Salmo-
 concentrations of protein. Electromyography may indicate
nella spp, Arcanobacterium pyogenes, Fusobacterium spp., and
CHAPTER 6 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
125
L7-S1
T13-L1
C6-C7
T5-T6
30
25
15
10-
A
5
N
T
0
G2-3
C6-7
T5-6
T13L1
L7S1
IntervertebralDiskSpaces
Hgure 6-11 Histogram and schematic of frequency of intervertebral disk space involvement in
56 dogs with discospondylitis evaluated at the University of Georgia, College of Veterinary Medicine
between 1976 and 1981 (solid bars) and 75 affected dogs evaluated at the North Carolina State
University, College of Veterinary Medicine between 1983 and 1990 (hatched bars). Some dogs had
multiple infected sites. Combined data are expressed in the schematic of the vertebral column, with
darker regions identifying areas affected most frequently. (From Kornegay JN: Discospondylitis.
In Slatter DH, editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, WB Saunders.]
 Staphrylococcus spp are the most common bacteria isolated and
disease course. Large-breed dogs with type II IVDD rarely are
the fungus Aspergilus spp.l107.1o8 In pigs, Staphylococcus spp.
in as much pain as those with discospondylitis. Specific neuro-
Streptococcus spp., Arcanobacterium pyogenes, and Erysipelo-
logic signs are related to the site of involvement. Cervical ver-
thrix rhusiopathiae are common. 106
tebral column lesions may cause tetraparesis along with severe
 Neurologic signs develop from encroachment on the spinal
neck pain. Thoracolumbar lesions cause back pain and pelvic
cord or nerve roots by the expanding tissues, causing severe
 limb paresis and general proprioceptive ataxia.
pain and, eventually, paresis. Destruction of the vertebrae may
Diagnosis. A definitive diagnosis is made with conven-
cause spinal instability with secondary compression of the spi-
nal cord. Paresis or paralysis and ataxia caudal to the lesion
radiograph the entire spine to evaluate for multiple lesions.
results from spinal cord compression. The most common find-
Typical radiographic findings include concentric lysis of
ing in large animals is suppurative osteomyelitis and epidural
adjacent vertebral end plates and various degrees of verte-
empyema.56
bral lysis surrounded by bone proliferation (Figure 6-12).
Clinical Signs. Discospondylitis and vertebral abscesses
Vertebral bodies may be shortened, and intervertebral disk
always are suspected in animals with fever, depression,
 spaces may be narrowed. Severely destructive lesions may
anorexia, vertebral pain, and pelvic limb ataxia or paresis.
cause vertebral luxation and spinal cord compression.l10
 Discospondylitis can affect animals of any age. It is more
Occasionally, radiographic abnormalities are not detected
in early lesions. Although typical clinical signs are present,
radiographic evidence of infection may lag behind the onset
males than in females (2:1 ratio) 94,95 In all animals, the usual
of clinical signs for 2 to 3 weeks.92 Radionuclide scintigraphy
 course of clinical signs is chronic and progressive; however, in
or CT and MR imaging may be useful if discospondylitis is
some affected animals signs may develop acutely and progress
strongly suspected and no vertebral lesions are seen on sur-
rapidly. Most animals have systemic signs including anorexia,
vey radiographs.Ill
depression, and pyrexia. Signs of urinary tract infection or
 Affected dogs occasionally have a leukocytosis composed
endocarditis-myocarditis occasionally are detected. Dogs
of neutrophilia and monocytosis on CBC and evidence of
with brucellosis may have signs suggesting this disease [orchi-
tis, epididymitis, abortion, infertility, and so forth).l0-102
endocarditis. The CSF analysis is usually normal, although
 Systemic signs, however, usually are not localizing to any organ
elevations in protein concentration and mononuclear cells are
system.
occasionally encountered. Blood cultures in dogs yield posi-
Frequently encountered clinical signs are directly refer
tive results in about 45% to 75% of dogs with discospondyli-
able to the musculoskeletal and nervous systems.95.i09 The
tis, and urine cultures are positive in about 25% to 50%,95.112
most common presenting sign is pain localized to vertebral
Staphylococcus_ pseudintermedius is the most common bacte-
column.94,95 Other signs include hyperesthesia in the area of
rium isolated.94.95 Results of blood cultures for brucella in
vertebral involvement, stiff gait, and paresis or paralysis if spi-
 dogs are less likely to yield a positive culture.lol The tube
nal cord compression occurs. The syndrome is quite similar
agglutination test is usually positive in dogs affected with
to intervertebral disk disease except animals with discospon-
B. canis. Confrmation of brucellosis should be performed
dylitis frequently are systemically ill and have a more chronic
with IFA or PCR testing. Aspiration of lesions may be
126
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 administration based on culture and sensitivity l15,116
Acute Nonprogressive Diseases, T3-L3
 Acute nonprogressive diseases of the T3-L3 spinal cord seg-
ments are characterized by acute onset and with static clinical
course. Trauma and vascular [see L4-S3] are the most impor-
tant of the various etiologic categories.
T13
Acute Spinal Cord Injury (Thoracolumbar Vertebral Column
Fracture/Luxation)
Pathophysiology. Spinal cord trauma, usually the result of
automobile accidents, is a common neurologic injury. 12l.,122
The incidence is much greater in areas where leash laws are
poorly enforced. Spinal cord trauma is more frequent in large
animals when they are young but may occur in mature ani-
Figure 6-12 Lateral radiograph of the vertebral column of a
5-year-old female German shepherd dog with progressive parapa-
mals as a result of falls, trailer accidents, or overcrowding in
chutes and holding pens. Primary injury to the vertebral col-
resis. Lysis of the caudal end plate ofT12 and the cranial end plate
umm and spinal cord occurs from external or internal causes.
ofT13 is seen. Osteophytes extend from the ventral aspects of the 
External causes include automobile-related injury, falls, fall-
vertebral bodies at the T13-L1 and L1-2 interspaces. A diagnosis 
ing objects, and projectile missile damage; internal causes
of discospondylitis at T12-13 and spondylosis deformans at T13-
L1 and L1-2 was made. (From Kornegay JN: Vertebral diseases
Mechanisms of the primary injury are the direct result of
of large breed dogs. In Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders:
compression, shear, laceration, bending, and distraction.125
contemporary issues in small animal practice, vol 5, New York,
The thoracolumbar vertebral column is the most commonly
1986, Churchill Livingstone.)
injured in the dog and cat. Fractures occur between Tll and
L6 in 50% to 60% of patients after blunt trauma.122.126 Frac-
tures in the thoracic vertebral column may have little dis-
accomplished with fluoroscopic guidance in small animals
placement because of the additional support provided by the
and by direct needle placement in large animals l12 Speci-
ribs, ligamentous support, and epaxial musculature. Fracture
mens [blood, urine, or material aspirated from the affected
or luxation of the thoracolumbar vertebral column are often
IVD space) should be obtained for culture and sensitivity
associated with other systemic injuries: pneumothorax, pul-
testing before antimicrobial therapy is initiated.
monary contusions, orthopedic injuries, urogenital injuries,
 Treatment. Antibiotic therapy is based on susceptibil-
 and diaphragmatic hernia. Approximately 20% of patients
ity testing of bacteria isolated from urine or blood or from
with thoracolumbar vertebral column fractures have a second
infected tissues (see Chapter 15).l13 Antibiotic therapy alone
fracture-luxation.12l, 126 The amount of neural tissue injury is
is suggested unless severe spinal cord compression is present
related to the rapidity and severity of insult, and the amount
or if after 5 days no response to therapy occurs. Prolonged
and duration of compression.
therapy should be continued for at least 8 weeks. Cage rest
 Primary mechanical injury to the neural tissue can subse-
and pain management using NSAIDs are also recommended.
quently lead to secondary biochemical injury (secondary injury
It is important to avoid use of corticosteroids. Compressive
lesions require decompression, curettage, and stabilization in
vascular abnormalities. Primary injury can lead to progressive
addition to long-term antibiotic therapy95.llo Discospondyl-
decrease in perfusion, edema, and necrosis of the injured area
tis of fungal origin or due to brucellosis is difficult to resolve
ofthe spinal cord. Secondary metabolic injury that results from
and warrants a guarded prognosis95.10l Owners should be
ischemia includes abnormal release of excitatory neurotrans-
advised of its zoonotic potential with B. canis infection. Dogs
mitters, abnormal accumulation of intracellular calcium, and
with brucellosis should be neutered.
activation of membrane phospholipases, and production of
Spinal Epidural Empyema
free radicals. Similar pathophysiologic mechanisms underlie
Spinal epidural empyema is a suppurative and septic pro-
primary and secondary brain injury (see Chapter 12). Vascular
cess within the epidural space. Infection results from hema-
mechanisms include ischemia, impaired autoregulation, neu-
rogenic shock, hemorrhage, microcirculatory disruption, vaso-
Empyema in dogs and cats has been associated with disco-
spasm, and thrombosis. Ionic derangements include increased
spondylitis lis.116 osteomyelitis 17 and paraspinal abscessa-
intracellular calcium and sodium, and increased extracellu-
tion.ll4, l18 Cardinal clinical signs are lethargy, fever, anorexia,
lar potassium. Alterations in neurotransmitters concentrations
profound paraspinal pain, and rapidly progressive myelopathy.
include serotonin, catecholamines, and extracellular gluta-
Common clinicopathologic findings are a neutrophilic leuko-
mate, which can potentiate neurotoxicity. The severity of the
cytosis on a CBC and a neutrophilic pleocytosis in the CSF l16
pathologic changes and the degree of recovery are related to
Diagnosis can be aided by myelography, CT, or MRI with iden-
the duration of acute compression as demonstrated in studies
tification of an extradural compression extending over mul-
of animal models. New treatments are aimed at limiting the
rausaar aod eu ason pue reds anu repua
of the injured spinal cord (oscillating field stimulators, poly-
visualization of the severity and extent of changes within the
ethylene glycol, 4-aminopyridine). 127
spinal canal and paraspinal regions.ll4 Surgery is the treatment
This section provides a concise review. The management
of choice for spinal empyema because it allows decompression
of spinal cord trauma has been discussed extensively by oth-
of the spinal cord, drainage of the infected material, and direct
ers. i30-132 Veterinarians have two primary obligations in these
 culture of the organism. Dogs with spinal empyema may have
cases. First, they must diagnose and treat systemic shock,
a good outcome when treated by surgical decompression
major abdominal or thoracic hemorrhage, visceral rupture, or
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
127
ventilation abnormalities. Second, they must be able to give
innervation to the extensor muscles of the thoracic limbs;
 owners accurate prognoses for the animal's recovery of neu-
thus these muscles are disinhibited. Spinal shock is usually
rologic function.
 manifested as flaccidity caudal to the lesion. Likewise, the
First Aid and Emergency Medical Treatment. During the
spinal reflexes are depressed to absent and the bladder may
period of early evaluation and treatment, the animal must be
be flacid with urine retention and sphincter hypotonia 135
restrained to prevent further SCI.l3l If a spinal fracture is sus-
The cause of spinal shock is unclear. A transient decrease
pected, the animal should be secured and immobilized to a
in limb tone may be due to loss of descending supraspinal
back board or rigid stretcher to prevent further injury. Move-
input on the alpha-motor neurons and interneurons along
ment should be discouraged, especially if vertebral fractures
with an increase in segmental inhibition. The duration of spi-
or luxations are suspected. Sedation may be necessary if the
nal shock is proportional to the degree of species encepha-
animal is struggling. Since some sedatives cause hypotension,
 before administering sedative drugs, animals must have the
improper lesion localization. In some cases, this may be diffi-
cardiovascular system stabilized. The animal should be evalu-
cult. Spinal shock should be considered in animals with LMN
 rae   a  it re  a  
sraa se n s e rn m u eer
sternal recumbency.
thesia, the point at which the cutaneous trunci reflex and line
An injury of suffcient force to produce spinal cord trauma
of analgesia are observed) are present cranial to lumbosacral
-ae tel'sel'znu uuaea- raoue u ansar u
intumescence. Neurogenic shock is the systemic complication
nance of a patent airway is of the utmost importance. Uncon-
associated with severe cervical or thoracic spinal cord injury.
scious animals may require endotracheal intubation. Adequate
This syndrome results from sympathetic loss (decreased
ventilation and oxygenation are of great importance because
blood pressure and heart rate resulting from unopposed vagal
tone) and continual vagal tone. Consequence of this phenom-
evidence of respiratory compromise is closely monitored.
enon results in loss of spinal cord blood flow regulation and
especially in patients with cervical SCI. Systemic shock, if
subsequent ischemia. Neurogenic shock should be treated
 present, must be treated. Intravenous isotonic fluids are given
eureu on trona ue u suaar yosand pue Aderan pinp uim
to restore vascular volume. Fluid therapy must be carefully
normal systemic blood pressure. These transient phenomena
monitored to prevent overhydration, but the patient must
 indicate acute and severe SCI but do not determine prognosis.
have fluid volume restored and maintained.
The presence of these signs does not indicate that the lesion
After providing initial treatment aimed at supporting car-
is irreversible. These signs may occur in animals that maintain
diovascular and pulmonary functions, the veterinarian must
 pain perception. Traction injury often is traumatic in origin;
perform a thorough physical examination. Exogenous spinal
common in cats following tail injury and with brachial plexus
injury frequently is associated with multiple organ trauma.
pue reroes au ssaue Auus Anfu Jo ad sui Ainu
Abdominal or thoracic trauma may be difficult to appreciate
coccygeal or spinal nerves of the cervicothoracic spinal cord
immediately after an injury; therefore, visceral function must
segments, respectively.
be monitored for several days. Little benefit exists in success-
Assuming that the skeletal lesion can be stabilized, injured
fully repairing the spinal fracture only to have the animal die
animals are categorized as shown in Table 6-7. The prognosis
several days later from a diaphragmatic hernia or a ruptured
for reversibility of a spinal cord injury depends on severity
urinary bladder; however, spinal cord trauma must be treated
and duration of the compressive force and extent of second-
without delay to improve the odds of recovery.
Neurologic Examination. Most spinal cord injuries are
be anatomically or physiologically transected. Physiologic or
the result of vertebral fracture, vertebral luxation, or trau-
functional transection refers to instances in which all func-
 ss      
tional integrity of the spinal cord is lost (paralysis and absence
neurologic deficits, especially if early treatment has not been
of pain perception), yet the spinal cord remains structurally
provided. The functional status is determined by the neuro-
intact. In most cases, physiologic transection is the most com-
logic examination. Somatosensory-evoked potentials may be
mon cause of irreversibility. Acute compression of the spinal
of benefit to define spinal cord integrity more precisely (see
cord is far worse than gradual compression. Acute experi-
Chapter 4). Localization of the spinal cord lesion and the
mental compression of the spinal cord with a force sufficient
prognosis based on the severity of the injury are determined
to produce paralysis, and loss of pain perception results in
by the neurologic examination. It is important to perform the
issrduos jo uonenp au jt Anu pro reuds aqsaa
neurologic examination with care to prevent further injury
exceeds 4 hours. Most experimental studies documenting
 and displacement of the vertebral column. Cranial nerves, spi-
effective medical therapy of spinal cord trauma indicate that
nal reflexes, spinal palpation (for obvious deformity and areas
treatment must be given in the first hour.
of hyperesthesia), cutaneous trunci reflex, and assessment of
 Presence or absence of pain perception is the most impor-
pain perception can be performed with minimal manipula-
tion of the animal. The vertebral column should be gently pal-
tual response to noxious stimuli applied caudally to the lesion.
pated for alterations in vertebral conformation because these
Most often this is done by squeezing the digits or nailbed
changes have good localizing value. The principles of lesion
with a hemostat. In the absence of pain perception, the
localization were reviewed earlier. Table 6-8 summarizes the
duration of the injury becomes the critical factor related to
 signs of complete spinal cord transection at various levels of
 prognosis (see Table 6-7). The absence of pain perception is
the spinal cord.
a very unfavorable sign, especially in cases of fracture-related
It is important to recognize specifc neurologic examina-
trauma. The prognosis for animals with spinal fractures that
 lack pain perception caudal to the lesion is very poor to
ture is seen as increased extensor tone in the thoracic limbs
hopeless. 14
and flaccidity in the pelvic limbs. This phenomenon is associ-
Imaging Studies. Radiographs of the vertebral column are
ated with lesions affecting the T2 to L4 spinal cord segments.
necessary if surgical treatment is contemplated. Survey radi-
The "border" cells located in the dorsal aspect of the ventral
 ography can determine precise lesion location(s) and extent,
horn of segments Ll-4(5) project an inhibitory innervation
 demonstrate multiple lesions, and help determine an appro-
cranially within the fasciculus proprius to the alpha-motor
neurons in the cervicothoracic intumescence that provide
the surgical procedure needed to decompress and stabilize
128
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 6-8
Signs of Complete Spinal Cord Transection
SIGNS CAUDAL TO LESION
Spinal Cord
Segments
Motor
Sensory
Autonomic
C1-4
Tetraplegia (UMN)
 Anesthesia
Apnea, no micturition 
C5-6
Tetraplegia (UMN), LMN suprascapular
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia—midcervical
Apnea—phrenic nerve, LMN,
nerve
 no micturition 
C7-T2
Tetraplegia or paraplegia (UMN). LMN
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia—brachial
Diaphragmatic breathing only.
 brachial plexus, Hormer syndrome 
plexus
no micturition
T3-L3
 Paraplegia (UMN), Schiff-Sherrington
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia—segmental
 Diaphragmatic, some
syndrome
intercostal and abdominal
respiration depending on
level of lesion, no micturition 
L4-S1
 Paraplegia with LMN lumbosacral
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia—segmental
 No micturition 
plexus S1 = anal sphincter: may be 
atonic
S1-3
 Knuckling of hind foot, paralysis of tail;:
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia—segmental
No micturition, extenal 
anal sphincter atonic
sphincter atonic
Cd1-5
 Paralysis of tail
 Anesthesia, hyperesthesia——segmental
Traction injury may secondarily
damage S1-3
C, Cervical; T, thoracic; L, lumbar; S, sacral; Cd, caudal; LMN, lower motor neuron; UMN, upper motor neuron.
rule out intramedullary spinal cord lesion and extramedullary
compression caused by traumatic IVD herniation or epidural
hematoma, and bony fractures. It is important to keep in mind
 that imaging provides a static representation of displacement
at the time of evaluation and not the actual displacement,
which occurs at the time of injury.
Spinal stability is assessed using the three-compartment
into three compartments defined by anatomic structures. The
 dorsal compartment contains the articular processes, laminae,
pedicles, spinous processes, and interarcuate and interspinous
Figure 6-13 Myelogram of a dog with a subluxation at T12-13.
ligaments. The middle compartment contains the dorsal lon-
The compression of the spinal cord and instability of the vertebral
gitudinal ligament, dorsal annulus, and dorsal vertebral body.
column were not apparent on survey flms.
The ventral compartment contains the remainder of the ver-
tebral body, lateral and ventral aspects of the annulus fbrosus,
nucleus pulposus, and ventral longitudinal ligament. When
two or three compartments are affected or displaced, the frac-
the injury. The initial views are performed over the region in
ture is considered unstable. Disruption of the ventral compart-
question, with subsequent evaluation of the entire vertebral
is es asn u ast q au
column. Radiography is performed with the animal in lateral
Specific Treatment of Acute Spinal Cord Injury. The
recumbency. Two views should be obtained. To minimize
pathophysiology of acute SCI has led to relevant neuroprotec-
patient movement, the ventrodorsal view may be acquired
tive approaches to attenuate the effects of secondary injury.
using a horizontal beam technique. When questionable, fluo-
 Fluid therapy to maintain spinal cord perfusion is most impor-
roscopy may be used for assessing spinal stability during cau-
 tant in management of animals with severe SCl. General medi-
tious spinal manipulation. This should be done with extreme
cal management of patients with spinal trauma should include
caution because the spinal cord can easily be injured.
restoring normal blood pressure, enhancing intravascular vol-
 Myelography or cross-sectional imaging (CT and MRI) is
ume, preventing hypoxemia, and preventing hyperthermia/
used to provide greater three-dimensional evaluation of the
hypothermia in an effort to enhance spinal cord perfusion.
injury, when the radiographic findings do not correlate with
Hypotension will often follow SCI due to multiple factors:
neurologic examination, to evaluate spinal cord swelling in
 interruption to preganglionic neurons of the sympathetic ner-
ds jo ass sssse  o pue s aaiss
vous system resulting in unopposed parasympathetic influence
 cord compression. CT and MRI is useful for further evaluat-
 and bradycardia; spinal shock causing loss of muscle tone and
ing bone and spinal cord tissues, respectively. CT with sagittal
secondary hypovolemia from venous pooling; and blood loss
reconstruction of images or MR images are obtained through
from other associated injuries. Integrity of the circulatory sys-
areas of suspicion based on conventional radiography. CT pro-
tem is monitored with assessment of the heart rate, capillary
vides better definition of spinal canal encroachment by bone
refll time, packed cell volume, total protein, and blood pressure.
fragments and for fractures through laminae and pedicles.
Neuroprotection. Administration of high-dose cortico-
 MRI of the appropriate spinal region will more definitively
steroids is controversial from the standpoint of countering
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
129
Dorsal
Middle
Ventral
Hgure 6-14 A, Depiction of the three-compartment model (dorsal, middle, and ventral] for
assessing spinal instability. B, Disruption of more than one compartment or the ventral compart-
ment alone compromises stability of the vertebral column as shown in the CT transverse image of
a three-compartment T13 fracture.
pathophysiologic mechanisms associated with secondary
Surgical Stabilization. Although some vertebral fractures
injury processes and efficacy still remains to be proven. The
can be managed conservatively, surgery is indicated for fac-
only drug shown to be of benefit in randomized human and
tures or luxations that are unstable [>l compartment) (Figure
laboratory animal clinical trials is methylprednisolone sodium
6-14, B). Goals for spinal fractures/luxation repair are decom-
pression, realignment ofthe vertebrae, and fixation ofinvolved
include inhibition of lipid peroxidation, calcium influx into 
vertebral segments until physiologic/structural fusion occurs.
the neuron, ischemia, axonal dieback, and cytoskeletal degra-
Surgical management often provides a more rapid rate and
 dation, and possession of free-radical scavenging and antin-
a more complete neurologic recovery. Indications for surgical
flanmmatory effects 139,140 In the setting ofacute SCI resulting
stabilization include rapidity of neurologic progression, verte-
-exnt ro sane neuen ot anp uondarad ued jo yoe u
tions of the vertebral column, the administration MPSS
tilation, and intractable pain. If decompression is warranted,
 should be considered. MPSS, 30 mg/kg, is given intravenously
selection of the decompressive procedure should be conserva-
[IV) on presentation, followed by i5 mg/kg IV 4 and 6 hours
tive so as to not further disrupt the integrity of the vertebrae
later and then continuous infusion of 5 mg/kg per hour for
or further compromise stability, but large enough to relieve
24 hours.14l Initiation of the MPSS regimen should not be
compression. Hemilaminectomy is the favored approach for
administered after 8 hours from time of onset because of lack
decompression because any method of fixation can be used
of beneficial effects. Although MPSS remains the standard of
with this procedure and because it creates less instability.
care in humans with acute SCI, the therapeutic efficacy of
Dorsal laminectomy often is used in the lumbosacral region
MPSS has been questioned. Additionally, in humans the use
(Figure 6-15).
of MPSS is associated with an increased rate of sepsis and
There are many methods of internal fixation that are com-
 pneumonia. No scientific randomized controlled clinical trials
monly used to stabilize spinal fractures and the reader is
exist for the use of MPSS in animals. Complications of cor-
referred to other texts and references for in-depth descrip-
ticosteroid therapy in dogs include diarrhea, melena, vomit-
tions of th arius surgical techiques454Themthd
is dependent upon the size of the patient, fracture type, and
administered corticosteroids also are at higher risk for uri-
surgeon preference. The decision as to the method of stabili-
nary tract infection. Dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO) is often
zation is based on imaging findings and on observations made
 recommended, especially for large animals.56 Most controlled
during the surgery. Common techniques used for internal
studies do not indicate efficacy, but the literature is contro-
stabilization include securing flexible plates to the dorsal spi-
versial.l44 In large animals, it is used at an IV dose of l g/kg.
nous processes, vertebral body plating, pins/screws and poly-
10% DMSO in 5% dextrose.
methylmethacrylate (PMMA) (Figure 6-16), articular process
 Conservative Management. Conservative management of
stabilizing, and segmental spinal instrumentation. It also is
spinal fractures consists of strict cage confinement for 6 to 8
important to consider incorporating bone grafting into the
weeks. Indications include minimal neurologic deficits, mini-
procedure to enhance healing. Compression fractures of the
mal vertebral displacement, involvement of a single compart-
vertebral body and fractures of the transverse processes with-
ment of the vertebral canal (with the exception of the ventral
out displacement may still be stable. Fractures of the vertebral
compartment), and lack of significant spinal cord compression.
Using external coaptation with a splint will depend upon the
cesses require reduction and stabilization. Successful outcome
 animal's demeanor, size, and age. Goal of external support is
after surgical fxation depends not only on the severity of the
to provide immobilization of the vertebral segments cranial
SCI but also on the type and strength of fixation, the surgeon's
and caudal to the injured area.I3l External coaptation may not
skill and knowledge of the spinal anatomy, and accuracy of
resist axial compression and is not ideal when there is failure
vertebral column alignment.
of the ventral compartment. It is important to follow princi-
 Prognosis. Prognosis for animals with acute thoracolum-
ples of bandage care when using methods of external support.
bar injury is dependent upon the neurologic examination. The
The patient will need to be turned regularly and kept clean
 prognosis for recovery from a spinal fracture or luxation that
 and dry to prevent urine scalding.
results in paraplegia with loss of pain perception is considered
130
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 be good if pain perception is intact in the tail and digits of the
 pelvic limbs, and perineal sensation is present (as an indica-
sss
that maintain pain perception may still require months to
recover and have residual neurologic deficits including uri-
nary and/or fecal incontinence. Traction injury of sacral nerves
usually results in permanent fecal and urinary incontinence.
Unfortunately, in veterinary medicine, the outcome of the case
often depends on the dedication and financial cooperation of
the owner.
ambulatory during the first week after surgery following severe
SCI. Most remain paretic or paralyzed and require attentive
nursing care and physical therapy and a rehabilitation period.
In general, the procedures for supportive care of the paraplegic
with IVDD should also be followed up after surgery for trau-
matic SCI. Animals should improve within 2 to 3 weeks, and
significant improvement should be seen in a month. Failure
 s s  s   ms 
with permanent spinal cord damage; however, every clinician
encounters a few dogs that regain functional use of the pelvic
limbs when the initial outlook has seemed hopeless. Surpris-
ingly, some cats and dogs regain the ability to wallk without
walking or spinal locomotion" based on intact reflex pathways
associated with the central pattern generators of the spinal
cord.152 Spinal locomotion is dependent on the development
and preparation of the spinal locomotor pattern generators,
 afferent stimulation [of cutaneous receptors), changes in neu-
rochemistry within the spinal cord, and midlumbar spinal
cord input.153
Chronic Progressive Diseases, T3-L3
Chronic progressive diseases of the T3-L3 region are charac-
B
terized by insidious onset and slow progression of the neu-
Figure 6-15 A, Lumbosacral lateral radiograph demonstrating a
rologic signs. Degenerative, anomalous/malformation 
[see
fracture of L6. These injuries entrap the spinal nerve roots that
L4-S3), and neoplastic diseases are the most important of the
form the sciatic, pelvic, pudendal, and caudal nerves. B, Follow-
up postsurgical radiograph of the same dog.The fracture site was
right-hand column of Tables 6-1 through 6-3 may start in the
decompressed, and the nerves in the vertebral canal were freed
T3-L3 spinal cord segments, progression into other regions
from compression. A callus had bridged the fracture site, although
may occur. With long-standing disease, cervical spinal cord
no internal stabilization had been provided
involvement predominates, causing tetraparesis or hemipare-
sis. These problems are discussed in Chapter 7.
Degenerative
Canine Degenerative Myelopathy
Pathogenesis. Canine degenerative myelopathy (DM) was
first described in 1973 by Averill as an insidious, progressive,
GP ataxia and UMN spastic paresis of the pelvic limbs begin-
ning in late adulthood, ultimately leading to paraplegia and
necessitating euthanasia.154 The disease was termed degenera-
tive myelopathy because of its histopathologic nature as a non-
specific degeneration of spinal cord tissue of undetermined
cause. In 1975, Griffiths and Duncan published a series of
cases with signs of hyporeflexia and nerve root involvement,
Figure 6-16 Survey lateral thoracolumbar radiograph demon-
and they termed the condition chronic degenerative radiculo-
strating use of polymethylmethacrylate and screws for stabiliz-
myelopathy.tss Though most ofthe dogs in these initial reports
ing a three-compartment T12 compression fracture in a young
bull- dog.
were German shepherd dogs (GSDs), other breeds were rep-
resented. Nonetheless, for many years, DM was considered a
UMN and GP disease in the GSD.156
 In general, the pathology of DM is consistent with a non-
poor l4 One study of 21l dogs and cats with vertebral fractures
infammatory axonal degeneration.154-156 Regional axonal
found minimal difference between medical and surgical man-
loss in the spinal cord is severe in many DM-affected dogs
with complete loss of axonal and myelin profles and replace-
rate for conservative management on selective cases.147-149
ment by large areas of astrogliosis. 54-158 Lesion distribution
 Dogs with cervical vertebral column injury may respond well
involves the spinal cord myelin and axons in all funiculi but
to external coaptation techniques.l5o Although considerable
affects the midthoracic to caudal thoracic region most exten-
displacement may occur, results of spinal stabilization tend to
sively.154-155,158There is a tendency for increased lesion severity
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
131
1mm
Hgure 6-17 Histopathology using Luxol fast blue with periodic acid-Schiff counter-staining of
the thoracic spinal cord from a normal and degenerative myelopathy (DM]-affected dog. Note
the severity of pallor in the white matter of the DM-affected dog. (Courtesy PA March Cummings
School of Veterinary Medicine at Tufts University.]
within the dorsal portion of the lateral funiculus involving the
GSDs.172 Awano et all59 used a genome-wide association and
peripheral and deeper white matter tracts154-156,158 and in the
determined a missense mutation in the superoxide dismutase
1 [SOD1) gene. Mutations in the SODI gene are known to
verse and longitudinal extent of spinal cord lesions also paral-
lel the severity of the neurologic defcits. 158 The more severely
is also known as Lou Gehrig disease. The disease derives its
affected dogs show significantly greater axonal degeneration
name from the combined degeneration of UMNs and LMNs
and loss in the thoracic spinal cord segments and progression
motor neurons projecting from the brain and spinal cord. The
to the cervical and lumbar spinal cord. is8 Characterization of
Greek derivation of amyotrophy means "muscles without
 a s s     a
nourishment." Lateral is the location within the spinal cord
Johnston et ali157 described abnormalities in the red nucleus
of axonal disease and sclerosis refers to diseased axons being
and lateral vestibular nucleus of the brainstem, and in the lat-
replaced by sclerosis or “scar" tissue. Equine motor neuron dis-
eral (dentate) and fastigial nucleus of the cerebellum. Despite
ease also resembles human ALS and is further discussed in
these findings, clinical signs related to intracranial lesions are
Chapter 7. Dogs testing homozygous for the mutation are at
uncommon.
risk for developing DM. Some dogs are homozygous for the
Historically, DM has been considered a disease that results
mutation, but remain free of clinical signs, which suggests age-
solely in GP/UMN deficits. Recently, affected dogs have been
related incomplete penetrance.
indentified in which late in the natural progression of the dis-
Although the clinical signs, disease progression, and genetic
analysis are provocative for considering DM as a canine model
pathology and LMN signs do not become evident until later
ofALS, there remain significant pathologic and clinical differ-
in the disease progression. When examined in earlier reported
ences. These include the absence of any evidence of neuronal
cell body degeneration or loss in the ventral horn of the spinal
cord and the diffuse nature of the axonopathy that involves
romuscular pathology in DM-affected dogs manifesting LMN
sensory tracts and UMN tracts. Studies are underway to fur-
signs,159 Nerve specimens showed nerve fber loss result-
ther describe the neuronal cell body, nerve root, and spinal
ing from axonal degeneration, endoneurial fibrosis, numer-
nerve pathology associated with DM.
ous inappropriately thinly myelinated fbers, and secondary
Signalment. There is no sex predilection. Age of onset
 demyelination. Muscle specimens from dogs with advanced
 of neurologic signs is usually 5 years or older with a mean
DM show excessive variability in myofiber size, with large and
small groups of atrophic fibers typical of denervation. Canine
  r      
 DM may now be most accurately classified as a multisystem
age of onset of 1l years.l68 Histopathologicaly confirmed
central and peripheral axonopathy.
cases of DM have been reported in the following dog breeds:
Immunologic, 160-162 metabolic or nutritional, 163-167 oxida-
GSD, 154-157,159 Siberian1
tive stress, 168 excitotoxic, 169 and genetic mechanisms have
been explored as underlying the pathogenesis of DM. The
Rhodesian ridgeback,159 and mixed breed.154 Other previ-
uniformity of clinical signs, histopathology, age, and breed
 predilections suggest an inherited basis for DM; however, the
histopathologic confirmation include the Irish terrier 155
late onset of disease has made it difficult to collect data from
Kerry blue terrier,I55 Labrador retriever 173 Bernese moun-
parents and siblings to substantiate this theory. Segregation of
tain dog,173 Hovawart,173 Kuvasz,173 collie, 173 Belgian shep-
DM in families has been reported in the Siberian husky, 170
herd, 173 giant schnauzer, 173 soft-coated wheaten terrier,173
Pembroke Welsh corgi6 and Chesapeake Bay retriever.71
mastiff 173 borzoi 73and Great Dane.176 Recently, we have
Familial DM also occurs in the Rhodesian ridgeback and
been able to histopathologically confirm DM in the Bernese
boxer. Clemmons et al reported a point mutation in hypervari-
mountain dog, standard poodle, Kerry blue terrier, Cardi-
able region 2 of DLA-DRB1 in GSDs with DM and offers a
gan Welsh corgi, golden retriever, wire fox terrier, American
 DNA test for DM based on this allele.17la Others were unable
Eskimo dog, soft-coated wheaten terrier, and pug [Zeng—
to confrm a correlation between this mutation and DM in
publication pending).
132
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Clinical Signs. Progressive, asymmetric UMN paraparesis,
and decreases in amplitudes. A reduction in the proximal and
 distal motor nerve conduction velocities has been observed. 159
are key clinical features of DM. The clinical course of DM
can vary after the presumptive diagnosis with a mean time
empiric with lack of evidence-based medicine approaches.
for disease duration of 6 months in larger dog breeds 154 155,157
Although it is hypothesized that DM is an immune-mediated
-edeed Aioternquuu on ssaiaod spaanq sp sare is
neurodegenerative   (
disease,i
immunosuppressive   therapies
resis within 6 to 9 months from onset of clinical signs. Pet
using corticosteroids have shown no long-term benefts in halt-
 owners usually elect euthanasia when the dogs can no longer
survival data from 22 DM-affected dogs that received varying
tance. Smaller dog breeds can be cared for by the pet owner
degrees of physiotherapy. Dogs that received intensive physio-
therapy had significantly longer survival times compared with
PWC was 19 months.l68 As a result of a longer survival time,
dogs that received moderate or no physiotherapy. Physio-
affected PWCs often have signs of thoracic limb paresis at the
therapy and principles of physical rehabilitation may improve
time of euthanasia.
the quality of life for the DM-affected pet and pet owner.l0
Early Disease. The earliest clinical signs of DM are GP
 Overall the long-term prognosis of DM is poor.
ataxia and mild spastic paresis in the pelvic limbs. Worn nails
 Other Specific Axonal and Myelin Degenerative Disorders.
and asymmetric pelvic limb weakness are apparent upon
Myelinopathies, axonopathies, and neuronopathies can pres-
physical examination. Asymmetry of signs at disease onset is
ent initially with progressive signs of paraparesis that even-
tually affect the thoracic limbs. Many of these disorders are
abnormalities are consistent with UMN paresis localized in
breed-specific and inherited. Summaries of these degenerative
the T3 to L3 spinal cord segments. 154 Patellar reflexes may be
conditions are further described in Chapter 7. Primary myelin
normal or exaggerated to clonic; however, hyporeflexia of the
 degenerative disorders can be classified as hypomyelination
patellar reflex has also been described in dogs at similar disease
and dysmyelination (leukodystrophy or myelinolytic diseases)
stage.l5s Flexor [withdrawal) reflexes may also be normal or
and clinical signs are manifested in the pelvic limbs most
show crosed extension [suggestive of chronic UMN dysfunc-
severely. Disorders of hypomyelination often have tremor
pue sisaredered Aroteinqueuou on ssaiaoid saop uayo (uon
and are discussed in Chapter l0. Dysmyelination refers to
 are euthanized during this disease stage.
when myelin synthesis or function is defective and cannot be
Late Disease. If the dog is not euthanized early, clinical
maintained. Myelinolysis is a degeneration and destruction
signs will progress to LMN paraplegia and ascend to affect
 or necrosis of the spinal cord myelin. Clinical signs often are
the thoracic limbs.154.168,173.174 Flaccid tetraplegia occurs in
acute and rapidly progressive, causing paraplegia and eventu-
dogs with advanced disease.159,168174 The paresis becomes
ally affect the thoracic limbs.
more symmetric as the disease progresses. LMN signs emerge
In 1973, Cockrell et all8l described a demyelinating spinal
as hyporeflexia of the patellar and withdrawal reflexes, flac-
cord disease in related, young Afghan hounds. The age at onset
cid paralysis, and widespread muscle atrophy beginning in the
varied from 3 to 13 months, and the clinical course was 2 to
pelvic limbs as the dogs become nonambulatory, 159,174 Wide-
6 weeks. Affected dogs progressed rapidly from pelvic limb
spread and severe loss of muscle mass occurs in the appendic-
ataxia and spastic paresis to paraplegia within 7 to 10 days.
ular muscles in the late stage of DM. Most reports attributed
Spinal reflexes were usually normal or exaggerated. In some
loss of muscle mass to disusel54.155168,170.174 but flaccidity
 dogs, mild thoracic limb defcits were detected. The disorder
progressed to tetraplegia and death from respiratory failure
Cranial nerve signs include swallowing difficulties and inability
in 2 to 6 weeks. Severe destruction of myelin and necrosis
to bark9,67Urinary and fcal cntnnceusulaesad
with relative sparing of axons was found in the ventral, lat-
also until the latter disease stage with paraplegia 154,168,170.173
eral, and sometimes dorsal funiculi. The lesions were promi-
Diagnosis. Accurate antemortem diagnosis is based on
nent in spinal cord segments C5-L3 and can extend into the
pattern recognition of the progression of clinical signs fol-
brainstem. The most severe changes were found in the cranial
lowed by a series of diagnostic steps to exclude other dis-
thoracic spinal cord. The pathogenesis is unknown and the
 orders.177.178 Neurodiagnostic techniques for evaluation of
 disease is thought to have an autosomal recessive inheritance
spinal cord disease include CSF analysis, electrodiagnostic
patten. There is no effective treatment. Similar disorders,
testing, and spinal cord imaging procedures. A presumptive
which vary in onset, have been reported in Leonbergers,2
diagnosis of DM often is made based on lack of clinically rel-
miniature poodle, 183 and Dutch kooiker dog.184 Degenerative
evant compressive myelopathy as determined by MRI. If MRI
 myeloencephalopathies that are inherited or caused by toxins
is unavailable, CT/myelography can also be used. MRI is espe-
and nutritional-related disorders occur in other species (see
Chapter 7).185
 neoplasia and evidence of extradural compressive myelopathy.
Type Il Intervertebral Disk Disease
Unfortunately, imaging often reveals IVD herniation, which
Pathogenesis. Hansen type II disk disease occurs primarily
 can confound a diagnosis of DM. The clinician must be guided
in older (5 to 12 years of age), large-breed, nonchondrodys-
by clinical experience to evaluate for rapidity of disease pro-
trophic dogs. Similar IVD protrusions are sometimes seen in
gression, presence of paraspinal hyperesthesia, and amount
smaller dogs and in cats.2.186 The pathologic change within
of spinal cord compression to account for the severity of the
the intervertebral disk is a fbroid degeneration and a weaken-
myelopathy.
[ed quaay t(e-g anaig aas] snne resrp an jo s
CSF analysis can help rule out meningitis. Abnormalities
IVD protrusion produces a dome-shaped mass that eventually
Early in the progression of DM, no abnormal spontaneous
tate meninges and nerve roots. The neurologic signs and spinal
activity is detected by electromyography (EMG) and nerve
cord lesions are those of a compressive myelopathy.
conduction velocities are within normal limits.I59 Later in the
 Clinical Signs. As with type IIVD herniation, clinical signs
disease course, EMG reveals multifocal spontaneous activity
relate to the region of the spinal cord affected. Intervertebral
in the distal appendicular musculature. Recordings of com-
disk herniation involving spinal cord segments T3-L3 result
pound muscle action potentials (M waves) from stimulation
 in UMN signs, whereas IVD herniations involving segments
of the tibial and ulnar nerves have shown temporal dispersion
caudal to L3 can produce LMN signs to the pelvic limbs. The
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
133
cutaneous trunci reflex may be decreased caudal to the level
of the lesion. The presence of hyperesthesia on spinal palpa-
tion has great localizing value. Importantly, the clinical signs
are similar to other common spinal cord disorders that result
in chronic progressive clinical signs. Other common condi-
tions include degenerative myelopathy and spinal neoplasia.
Consequently, definitive diagnosis or exclusion of other condi-
tions cannot be made solely based on clinical signs. Despite
this, several findings may increase the index of suspicion for
Hgure 6-18 Spondylosis of the lumbar vertebrae was an inci-
esthesia in the area of the IVD herniation may be present, in
dental finding in this dog. These changes seldom cause neurologic
contrast to the lack of hyperesthesia in degenerative myelopa-
signs.
thy. However, many dogs with type II IVDD are not painful
presumably because of the slow progression of the syndrome.
Likewise, voluntary micturition may be affected by the com-
pressive myelopathy, whereas micturition usually remains
normal in the early stages of degenerative myelopathy.
Diagnosis. Conventional radiography cannot provide a
 definitive diagnosis, although suggestive changes may be seen.
 Increased opacity in the interverterbral foramen and narrow-
ing of the disk space are not consistently present in type II IVD
protrusions. Myelography, CT, or MRI is usually necessary to
demonstrate the compressive nature of the disk in question.
It is not uncommon to find multiple disk spaces affected.
 Dogs may also have concurrent disease such as degenerative
myelopathy or degenerative lumbosacral stenosis.
Hgure 6-19 A lateral radiograph of the thoracolumbar spine from a
Treatment. Patients with early and mild signs may respond
6-year-old male boxer demonstrating disseminated idiopathic spinal
 temporarily to antinflammatory drugs such as corticosteroids
-Uods aupuq snonnuo jo sisisuos ym (Hsi sisosoadiay
or NSAIDs; however, the signs may recur and progressively
dylosis and bony proliferation of thearticular processes.The neuro-
logic examination was normal.
 medically, but decompressive surgery with removal of the IVD
protrusion is more satisfactory in most cases. Decompressive
surgery may be indicated for dogs with paresis. Surgery should
deformans has higher prevalence and heritability in the boxer
be performed early to prevent further neurologic deteriora-
breed.193
1so 1e u Poo on Tey s Aiaa1ns m sisouaond aui 'uon
The lesions often are incidental findings on radiography
dogs regain normal neurologic function. There is a greater risk
and do not compress the associated neural tissues. Osteophyte
with dogs with chronic disk disease being transiently worse
formation within the vertebral canal in dogs is very rare and
after surgery. All owners should be cautioned that concurrent
seldom, if ever, results in spinal cord or nerve root compres-
degenerative myelopathy is always a risk.
sion.19l, 194 The condition in dogs may be present anywhere in
Spinal Dural Ossification. Dural ossification, also known
the spine but is most common in the caudal thoracic and cau-
as ossifying pachymeningitis, is a common radiographic or nec-
dal lumbar vertebrae.l9l As with dural ossification, clinicians
ropsy finding in middle-aged or older large-breed dogs (Figure
must search for other causes of the neurologic signs before
 6-18).187 Plaques of bone develop on the inner dural surface
assuming that spondylosis is the cause. Spondylosis occasion-
 in response to an unidentified factor and are often identified
ally causes spinal and nerve root pain, especially after exercise.
in association with vertebral spondylosis. The disease usually
An association may exist between radiographically apparent
 affects the cervical and lumbar areas. The bony plaques are of
spondylosis and type II IVDD.195 However, the presence of
little clinical importance except in rare cases in which they
 spondylosis at a disk space is not proof of disk protrusion. It
entrap a nerve root or cause pain. Rarely, large dural plaques
also is frequently seen at the L7-Sl disk space in dogs and
cause local spinal cord edema, necrosis, or fibrosis. Radiographs
may be associated with stenosis of the vertebral canal or inter-
 are useful for establishing the diagnosis. Myelographic, CT, or
vertebral foramina that produce pain and LMN signs [see the
MRI evidence of compression warrants exploratory decom-
 degenerative lumbosacral stenosis section) 14.196,197
pression of the lesion. Medical treatment is usually directed
In large animals (bulls, pigs, and horses), spondylosis defor-
toward pain management. Clinicians should make every
mans is more often associated with clinical signs of limited ver-
attempt to find other causes for the neurologic signs before
tebralmvement,neck and back pain,and ataxia19999
 assuming that dural ossification is the cause.
Spondylosis occurs at low prevalence in horses with back
Spondylosis Deformans (Hypertrophic Spondylosis).
pain.l98 Bulls with spondylosis may have an acute onset of
 This noninfectious, nonseptic condition is a common find-
paraplegia or paraparesis.192
ing during routine radiographic or necropsy examinations.
Other Vertebral Lesions Causing Compressive Myelopathy
Spondylosis deformans is characterized by the formation of
Disseminated  Idiopathic Skeletal  Hyperostosis (DISH).
     s    
DISH refers to extensive ossification through the axial and
o ss   og  
appendicular skeleton, including the vertebrae in dogs and
used to describe this condition because investigators believed
-rrd e Aq Pazanr sT rapros sui lozoosie
that inflammation produced the bony reaction. Further work
tive bony response to minor stresses. The cause is unknown.
suggested that the condition was a noninflammatory pro-
Radiographic signs are characterized by a flowing ossifica-
cess associated with degeneration of the annulus fbrosus of
tion primarily located at the ventrolateral aspect of the spine,
the intervertebral disk.il The term spondylosis deformans is
extending for at least four contiguous vertebrae (Figure 6-19).
therefore preferred. Spondylosis occurs in most species but
The interspinous ligaments also may be ossified as well as
is most frequent in dogs, bulls, and pigs.56,190,192 Spondylosis
extraspinal ligamentous attachments. Clinical signs of gait
134
PARTHIT
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
C
Hgure 6-20 A, Multiple cartilaginous exostoses affecting the vertebrae of a young dog. Note the
cystlike structures within the vertebrae. B, Radiograph of a cystlike bone lesion in the rib of the
same dog. These bony, bullae-like structures are diagnostic of multiple cartilaginous exostoses.
C, Myelogram demonstrating severe spinal cord compression from L4 to L6. Occasionally, these
lesions undergo malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma.
abnormalities reflect the effects of periarticular involvement
 of the axial and appendicular skeleton. Decompressive surgery
may be indicated in severe cases of spinal cord compression.
Solitary or Multiple Cartilaginous Exostoses. Multiple
cartilaginous exostoses, also known as osteochondromatoses,
osteocartilaginous exostoses, and multiple osteochondromas,
are conditions that occur in dogs, cats, and horses.202-205 The
disease is a benign proliferation of cartilage and bone that
affects the bones formed by endochondral ossification. Lesions
may be found as a single [solitary) lesion or as multiple lesions.
 In addlition to the appendicular skeleton, lesions may develop
in the vertebral bodies or the spinous processes [Figure 6-20,
  a    e  s 
A small percentage of cartilaginous exostoses may undergo
Hgure 6-21 Myelogram from a 5-year-old dachshund with pro-
 gressive paraparesis demonstrating a contrast-flled diverticulum
malignant transformation into chondrosarcomas or osteosar-
in the dorsal subarachnoid space at the level of the T12-13 inter-
be inherited in the dog and horse.204.207
vertebral disk space.
 Clinical signs in dogs appear during the period of active
bone growth and thoracolumbar vertebral involvement is
frequent. Pain or loss of neurologic function develops when
maturity is reached and continue to progress. Solitary lesions
adjacent structures are compressed or distorted by the boney
typically affect older cats and are more commonly associated
lesions. Spinal cord compression with neurologic deficits
with joints of the appendicular skeleton. Multiple cartilaginous
caudal to the lesion is common (see Figure 6-20, C) in dogs.
exostoses affects young adult cats.29 The disease is associated
Compressive lesions in the cervical spine may produce pro-
with feline leukemia virus. A type C viral particles, suggestive
gressive tetraparesis.205 Radiographically the bony exostoses
of FeLV or feline sarcoma virus, have been identified in bony
are characterized as variably sized radiopaque lesions with
 lesions.2l0 In both dogs and cats, treatment involves surgical
large radiolucent areas.204,205 Vertebral lesions tend to be cir-
decompression.
cular. Radiography provides strong supportive evidence of the
Spinal Arachnoid Cysts. Spinal arachnoid cysts or diver-
diagnosis. CT or MRI can aid in further characterization of
ticula consist of accumulations of CSF within a focal area of
the lesion extent.208 However, a defnitive diagnosis of solitary
the subarachnoid space [Figure 6-21).2ll,212 Arachnoid cysts
or multiple cartilaginous exostoses is based on microscopic
involving the spinal cord can cause a progressive compressive
examination to differentiate the condition from vertebral neo-
myelopathy. Arachnoid cysts occur in the cervical and thoraco-
plasia. In dogs, the exostoses apparently stop growing after
lumbar spinal cord. Large-breed dogs appear to develop cervi-
physeal closure.
cal lesions more frequently, whereas small-breed dogs develop
Although microscopically identical, the disease in cats
lesions more frequently in the thoracolumbar region.212 This
differs from that in dogs. In cats, lesions occur after skeletal
disorder has been more commonly reported in rottweilers.2l1
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
135
aonu au tz'eiz'siea u nno osie ss proure peuas
removal of the proliferative tissue alleviates spinal compres-
signs reflect the region of spinal cord affected. In the thora-
 sion. The prognosis is good depending on the severity and
columbar region, clinical signs and course may be protracted
duration of neurologic signs.
over weeks to years. Most dogs develop UMN paraparesis and
Compressive Myelopathy in Shiloh Shepherd Dogs. An
urinary incontinence. In the cervical region, neurologic signs
unusual degenerative joint disease that affects the articular
include GP ataxia and tetraparesis. The lesions can be delin-
 processes ofthe thoracolumbar spinal cord has been described
in Shiloh shepherd dogs.22l Clinical signs develop from 9
MRI is more sensitive in detecting associated spinal cord syrin-
weeks to 16 months of age and include GP ataxia and UMN
paraparesis. Proliferative lesions involving the articular pro-
decompression and removal or draining the cyst with fenestra-
cesses from Tll to L2 were observed radiographically and
tion or marsupialization of the dura mater.2lt,212 Prognosis is
were responsible for a dorsal compressive myelopathy. Sur-
good for young dogs and for dogs treated soon after the onset
 gery was beneficial in two cases and not beneficial in one case.
of clinical signs.2 11,212
One dog partially responded to medical treatment consisting
to
of exercise restriction and a reduced protein diet. The disease
occur in young, large-breed dogs in the cervical vertebral col-
may be inherited.
umn2l6-218 but involve the thoracolumbar vertebral column in
 older, large-breed dogs.219,220 These extradural synovial cysts 
Neoplasia of the Spine and Spinal Cord
 or ganglion cysts arise from the articular facets. Pathogenesis
General Description
is thought to be a result of excessive motion placing biome-
Pathogenesis. Tumors affecting the vertebrae, meninges,
chanical stress on the vertebral articulations, which predis-
nerve roots, or spinal cord may result in neurologic signs. Col-
poses the joint to osteoarthritis and synovial cyst formation.
lectively, these tumors are often referred to as spinal tumors.
Histopathology consists of fibrous connective tissue with a
 Tumors are classified according to anatomic location and his-
synovial cell ining. Diagnosis is based on evidence of degen-
tologic tumor type as primary, secondary (metastatic), or those
erative joint disease of the articular processes. Spinal cord
that arise from adjacent structures and secondarily invade the
 compression is detected using myelography, CT/myelography.
vertebral column (e.g, prostatic tumors, hematopoietic, or
and MRl. Attenuation of subarachnoid contrast is recognized
skeletal). Anatomic location with respect to the spinal cord
medial to the articular processes (hourglass appearance). Sur-
includes extradural, intradural-extramedullary, or intramed-
gical decompression is indicated when neurologic function is
ullary (Table 6-9). In general, the most common tumors are
progressive and in cases of refractory pain. Laminectomy and
extradural that secondarily compress or invade the spinal
TABLE 6-9
Characteristics of Vertebral and Spinal Cord Tumors
TUMOR LOCATION
Ch aracteristic
Extradural
 Intradural/Extramedullary
Intramedullary
Frequency
50%
35%
15%
Tumor types
 Bone tumors
 Neurofibromas
Gliomas
Metastatic tumors 
Meningiomas
Ependymomas 
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Astrocytoma
 Nephroblastomas
 Metastatic
Rate of growth
Rapid
Slow
Usually slow
Clinical signs
Pain
Early severe
Early, variable
Unusual, late
 Paresis
Early, rapidly progressive.
Late, slowly progressive, may
Early asymmetric: late, rapidly
Usually bilateral
be unilateral
 progressive, usually bilateral
 Sensory evaluation
Usually intact until late
Usually intact until late
 Usually intact until late
Course
 Acute onset, rapid progression
Very slow progression
Insidious onset, rapid
 progression
Diagnosis
CSF
Increased protein, normal cells
Increased protein, normal cells
Increased protein, normal cells,
may be xanthochromic
Radiography
 Skeletal lesions if bone
Possibly large intervertebral
 Possible widened vertebral
foramen (neurofibroma)
canal
Myelography
Extradural compression
Variable, may be cupping of
Widened spinal cord,
contrast column
attenuated contrast column
MRI
 Extradural compression
Variable
Widened spinal cord 
Hyperintensity in spinal cord 
 Hyperintensity in spinal cord 
 Hyperintensity in spinal cord
from edema
from edema, mass in
 from edema and mass
 intradural space
 Modified with permission from Prata RG: Diagnosis of spinal cord turmors in the dog, Vet Clin North Am 7:165-185, 1977.
136
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 6-10
Differential Diagnosis for Progressive Spinal Cord Disorders in Dogs
INFLAMMATION
Hansen Type Il
Intervertebral Disk
Ch aracteristic
Spinal Cord Tumor
 Degenerative Myelopathy Meningitis and Myelitis Discospondylitis
Disease
Age
Adult too old
>8 yr
Any
Any
Middle age-
-older
Progression
Usually slow
Slow
Variable
Variable
Slow
Focal signs 
Yes, unless
T3-L3, not painful;
Sometimes early.
Yes, may be
Yes, may or may
 metastatic;
L4-S3 and TL with
later progresses
mutifocal; usually
 not be painful 
 may be painful 
 LMN signs later in 
 to other areas:
 painful
disease
frequently painful
Imaging survey
 Sometimes
 Normal, frequently 
Normal
Characteristic,
May be normal.
radiography
 vertebral 
have spondylosis
osteomyelitis
 frequently have
changes
because of age and 
spondylosis
breed 
because of age
and breed
Myelography.
Defines extent:
Normal
Nommal spinal
May demonstrate
Extradural
CT, MRI
cord tissue
extradural
compression at
 intradural,
hyperintensity on 
compression,
disk space
 intramedullary
MRI
hyperintensity in
 bone on MRI, bony 
ysis on CT
CSF
Increased 
 Normal protein
 Increased protein,
Variable, may be
Increased protein
 protein,
(variable), normal
 increased cells
normal
(variable).
 normal cells 
cells
nomal cells 
cord, spinal nerve roots, or spinal nerves. Most tumors slowly
 Treatment. In general, treatment involves surgery, radia-
compress the spinal cord, producing signs similar to those of
tion therapy, and chemotherapy, alone or in variation com-
degenerative myelopathy and type II disk disease [Table 6-10).
 binations depending on anatomic location, extent of disease,
Despite this, many affected animals have an acute onset of
and histologic tumor type. A decompressive laminectomy
neurologic signs. Extradural tumors frequently cause signs of
procedure by itself will relieve clinical signs associated with
paraspinal pain, often before significant paresis occurs.22,223
 compression. However, complete excision is often not feasible.
Intradural-extramedullary tumors are usually meningiomas
Surgical resection is a viable option for some extradural and
or nerve sheath tumors and may be painful. Paraspinal pain
usually is not a clinical feature of intramedullary spinal cord
medullary tumors also can be resected using a myelotomy
tumors. Sudden onset of neurologic dysfunction may be seen
 procedure. More often, surgical resection is used to provide
with intramedullary neoplasms affecting the spinal cord, pre-
decompression. Radiation therapy may be used for tumors
sumably when blood vessels are compromised. Some tumors
not surgically accessible or as an adjunct to partial surgical
such as lymphoma may embolize arteries of the spinal cord.
Certain tumors occur more commonly in specific regions of
tumors.236 Corticosteroids are used as palliative therapy to
the vertebral column and spinal cord. Meningiomas224,225 and
reduce peritumoral edema and are also used with definitive
nerve sheath tumors226 comimonly occur in the cervical region,
therapies [e.g., in conjunction with surgery].
whereas lymphoma in cats22728 and spinal nephroblastoma
 Primary Spinal Cord Tumors. Tumors affecting the spinal
(neuroepitheliomas)229 occur in the thoracolumbar region. In
 cord may be primary or secondary. Anatomically, these tumors
dogs, meningiomas are the most common primary spinal cord
tumor. Although secondary in origin, lymphoma is the most
masses.22,237-239 Intradural/extramedullary tumors may arise
common tumor to affect the spinal cord in cats.227.230
from nerve roots [nerve sheath tumors) or from meninges
(meningiomas). Nerve sheath tumors, including schwannomas
tumors that are lytic. Sometimes an enlarged vertebral canal or
and neurofibromas, arise from nerve roots or peripheral nerves.
intervertebral foramina as a result of osteonecrosis form slow
 d u  m   s s 
expansile tumors within the vertebral canal or intervertebral
 invade or compress the spinal cord, resulting in asymmetric
foramen, respectively. Myelography or CT/myelography is
neurologic signs caudal to the lesion. These tumors are further
useful for delineating extradural, intradural extramedullary.
described in Chapter 5.
and intramedullary involvement. MRI is the gold standard
Meningioma. Meningiomas usually grow slowly and
imaging modality for evaluation and characterization of ver-
 cause progressive compression of the spinal cord. The aver-
tebral and spinal cord tumors.23l Analysis of CSF for spinal
age age in dogs with meningiomas is 9 years (range, 5 to
cord tumors often is nonspecific and reveals albuminocyto-
-are aq ot t sap aae n z(srea 
logic dissociation.232
dogs, no breed predilection exists.240 Spinal meningiomas are
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
137
the most common primary spinal cord tumors in cats older
However, MRI is much more sensitive in determining pres-
than 8 years of age.227 The clinical signs refect the spinal cord
ence and lesion extent. The prognosis is poor because these
region involved. Paraspinal pain or signs of radicular pain may
tumors are generally inoperable, although newer microsurgical
be evident. The clinical course usually resembles that of type
techniques may allow resection in some cases.252
II disk disease or degenerative myelopathy. Myelography
or
Skeletal (Vertebral) Tumors. Vertebral tumors may be
MRI is necessary for detection of extramedullary spinal cord
         
 compression.224.241 With MRI, these tumors are isointense to
cent structures.253 Generally, as the tumors grow into the
vertebral canal, the spinal cord is compressed slowly, produc-
T2-weighted (T2W) images, and demonstrate strong, uniform
ing signs of a slowly progressive myelopathy. Occasionally
contrast enhancement.230 These lesions should be surgically
the tumor causes considerable vertebral destruction without
explored because many meningiomas can be completely or
spinal cord compression. With severe vertebral involvement,
partially removed and therefore may be associated with pro-
the vertebrae may fracture, resulting in acute spinal cord
compression and therefore an acute presentation. Vertebral
saop ut leaians suoord o Aaune pasn aq Aeu Adeian
tumors are usually painful because of periosteal and, perhaps.,
with incompletely excised tumors. Treatment with surgery
meningeal and nerve root irritation. Primary vertebral tumors
 and radiation therapy can result in a fair to excellent prog-
include osteomas, osteosarcomas, fibrosarcomas, hemangio-
nosis.224 Surgical results are guarded when meningiomas are
sarcomas, chondromas, chondrosarcomas (Figure 6-24), and
associated with intumescence involvement and tumors with
hematopoietic tumors, such as plasma cell tumors (Figure
ventral location and invasion of the spinal cord.241
6-25) and lymphoma.223,23s In small-breed dogs, osteosar-
Nephroblastoma. Spinal nephroblastoma (neuroepitheli-
comas will commonly metastasize to the axial skeleton.253
oma) is a unique intradural-extramedullary tumor that affects
Conventional radiography of the spine is usually diagnostic
the T10-L2 spinal cord segments and has been reported in
for vertebral involvement but cytologic or histologic confr-
mation is necessary for defnitive diagnosis. Other imaging
predisposed 243 Myelography shows an intradural extramedul-
modalities, such as CT or MRI, may provide more informa-
lary patten but MRI may be more sensitive for determining
tion on lesion location and extent.223,231 Treatment is usually
palliative, although total vertebra removal with vertebral col-
In most instances, spinal nephroblastoma occurs as a solitary
umn fixation has been advocated for certain primary vertebral
lesion without renal involvement. Primary renal involvement
tumors.254 Malignant tumors may be surgically debulked and
is assessed by abdominal radiography and ultrasound.245 Early
then treated with radiation therapy; this approach is also usu-
detection is important for surgical resection. Prognosis is con-
ally palliative.235
sidered guarded if the tumor has invaded the spinal cord tissue.
 In some cases, gross resection is possible and can be associated
 with long-term remission of clinical signs.
Intramedullary
 Tumors. Primary intramedullary tumors
originate from within the spinal cord tissue and include astro-
Metastatic tumors can metastasize to the spinal cord.25t Initial
signs may be unilateral; however, as the tumor grows,
s.bilat-
eral signs develop. Myelography can detect presence of these
tumors based on a focal intramedullary pattern (Figure 6-23).
B
Figure 6-22 A, Sagittal T2W MRI from a 1-year-old Great Dane
with progressive paraparesis demonstrating an intradural isodense
Hgure 6-23 A, Lateral radiograph of a dog with progressive
mass over the L1 and L2 vertebrae. B, Transverse T1W postcon-
lower motor neuron paraparesis, constipation, and urinary incon-
trast image demonstrating homogeneous contrast enhancement of
tinence. Note the enlarged vertebral canal of L4 and L5. These
the mass and compressing the spinal cord to the right. The mass
changes are characteristic of expanding intramedullary tumors. B,
was histopathologically confrmed as a nephroblastoma after sur-
Spinal cord section from the same dog, which was affected with
gical resection. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research
an intramedullary tumor. The expanding tumor produced the
Foundation, Inc.]
radiographic changes in A.
138
PARTHI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 6-26 An extradural mass confirmed causing severe com-
pression of the thoracolumbar spinal cord from a young cat with
progressive paraparesis. Histopathology confirmed the mass to be
lymphoma.
and pathologic fracture or direct compression by the neo-
plastic mass. Spinal radiography, CT/myelography, and MRI
assist with determining a suspected diagnosis, localization, and
lesion extent. These tumor types are confirmed by cytology or
histopathology. Treatment usually is palliative.
Lymphoma. Lymphoma involving the vertebral canal and
but is uncommon in dogs257 and horses.258 Spinal lymphoma
of cattle is caused by the bovine leukosis virus. Spinal lym-
male cats that test positive for FeLV may be at risk for spinal
Figure 6-24 A, Lateral radiograph of a 10-year-old golden
lymphoma.228,25s Median age for cats with spinal lymphoma
 ed   r assd  
urinary retention. Note the lysis of the lamina extending into the
has been reported to be less than Z years and 4.5 years by oth-
ers.227,228 The reason for the higher median age of cats with
dorsal spinous process of L6. B, Transverse CT image demonstrat-
ing the extensive osseous mass in the vertebral canal. A CT-guided
spinal lymphoma in later studies could be due to increased
biopsy confirmed chondrosarcoma.
testing for FeLV and reduced incidence.
 These secondary tumors grow in the vertebral canal and are
 often located in the epidural space. Tumor growth within the
vertebral canal produces a compressive myelopathy. Several
segments of the spinal cord may be involved, but lesions in
the cat and cattle are most common in thoracolumbar seg-
ments (Figure 6-26). Spinal lymphoma must be considered in
any cat or in older cows with a history of progressive neuro-
logic dysfunction of the pelvic limbs.256 However, lymphoma
must be differentiated from other spinal tumors, IVDD, and
 the neurologic form of feline infectious peritonitis in cats with
paraparesis.
In addition to pelvic limb GP ataxia and paresis, regional
phoma can be acute in onset. Radiographs are usually normal.
Myelography, CT, and MRI may reveal extensive compression
because the tumor may fill the vertebral canals of several ver-
Figure 6-25 Lateral thoracolumbar radiograph of a 9-year-old
tebrae. Analysis of the CSF yields variable results. The CSF is
rottweiler with paraspinal pain at the thoracolumbar junction
normal when the tumor is outside the meninges. In some ani-
dernonstrating rmultiple areas of bone lysis in the T13 vertebra.
mals, the CSF may contain malignant lymphocytes and may
 These changes are characteristic for a plasma cell turmor.
have increased protein concentrations. Samples taken from
the subarachnoid space in the lumbar spinal cord may be more
dliagnostic when the thoracolumbar spinal cord is affected.232
In addition, PCR for analysis of antigen receptor rearrangement
Metastatic Tumors. Malignant tumors can metastasize or
 can be used to detect the presence of neoplastic lymphocytes
 arise in adjacent anatomic structures and secondarily invade the
in CSF259
vertebrae and spinal cord. A variety of carcinomas and sarco-
 Lymphoma that is multicentric in origin requires full sys-
temic examination to include CBC, biochemistry screening,
 In dogs, mammary tumors, prostatic adenocarcinomas, thyroid
radiography, abdominal ultrasound, retroviral screening, and
carcinomas, and hemangiosarcomas are the tumors that most
 lymph node and bone marrow aspirate.257 The safest and
frequently metastasize to the vertebrae. Vertebral plasma cell
most reliable method of obtaining a diagnosis of multicen-
tumors also may involve one or more vertebrae, sometimes
    s     
producing multifocal signs.236 Lymphoma and hemangiosar-
confirmation of lymphoma in another visceral organ.227.20
the spinal cord.25l Spinal cord tumors can also be a result of
Histopathology/cytology of tissue collected by fluoroscopi-
spread in the CSF (drop metastasis) from other CNS locations,
cally guided percutaneous fine-needle aspiration of epidural
such as choroid plexus tumors, histiocytic tumors, and glioma
masses or surgical biopsy will establish a definitive diagnosis
of the spinal involvement.262 Combination therapy involv-
eral, neurologic signs related to vertebral tumors result from
ing chemotherapy radiation therapy, and surgical excision
spinal cord compression secondary to vertebral instability
may result in remission in some cats.228,255,260 Corticosteroids
CHAPTER 6 
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
139
may temporarily alleviate some of the clinical signs caused by
edema and spinal cord compression and induce a temporary
remission. In general, prognosis for spinal lymphoma in cats
is poor.
Acute Progressive Diseases, L4-S3
The acute progressive diseases that affect the caudal lumbar
 and sacral spinal cord segments are listed by etiologic category
in Tables 6-4 through 6-6. Most of these diseases have been
 discussed in the previous sections that considered T3-L3 dis-
 orders. Remember that some of these degenerative diseases
of the axons and myelin initially occur as pelvic limb paresis
but may progress to involve the cervical spinal cord. Tetrapa-
resis [tetraplegia) may develop as the disease progresses [see
Chapter 7).
Hgure 6-27 Vertebral body fracture and luxation of L7 in this
3-year-old mixed-breed dog produced sciatic nerve injury, tail
Acute Nonprogressive Diseases, L4-S3
anesthesia, and bladder atony. Prognosis is poor with the severity
Trauma and vascular are the most important of the various
of neurologic signs.
etiologic categories. In this section, diseases described are
factures involving the lumbosacral, sacral, and sacrococcy-
 geal vertebral column, fibrocartilaginous embolism, and aortic
Sacrocaudal  (Coccygeal)  Vertebral  Fracture/Luxation.
thromboembolism.
Sacral and caudal (coccygeal) fractures are common, espe-
      o     
Trauma
tle.56,259 Sacrocaudal vertebral luxation can occur with
 tail
Fracture/Luxation of the Pelvis, and Caudal Lumbar, Lum-
restraint in horses and cattle. The syndrome in cats is usually
bosacral, and Sacrococcygeal Vertebral Column. Pelvic
caused by a traction injury at the sacrocaudal junction. Injury
fractures, caudal lumbar fractures, and lumbosacral sublux-
to the cauda equina and the sacral spinal cord results in loss of
ations are very common skeletal injuries in animals. Traumatic
innervation to the tail, perineum, anal sphincter, and urinary
lesions in this area may involve the termination of the spi-
bladder. Functional assessment of the anal sphincter affords a
nal cord or the cauda equina. These injuries may compress
good indirect assessment of bladder function; however, some
or entrap the roots of the sciatic, pelvic, and pudendal nerves,
animals have normal anal sphincter function with no bladder
resulting in severe neurologic dysfunction of the pelvic limbs,
function. The mechanism is not clear but may indicate intra-
urinary bladder, and anal sphincter (Figure 6-27). The diag-
pelvic injury to the pelvic nerves. Diagnosis is made by clini-
nosis and management of sciatic nerve injury are discussed in
cal signs and radiography. Tail amputation is recommended to
Chapter 5.
prevent further traction injury to the lumbosacral spinal cord.
Sacral and Pelvic Fractures. The assessment of sacral and
Animals with absent pain perception (complete denervation)
pelvic fractures or lumbosacral subluxations must include a
to the perineum with lack of anal sphincter, bladder, and ure-
neurologic evaluation of the pelvic limbs, the external anal
 thral function have a grave prognosis. Cats that do not become
sphincter, and the urinary bladder and urethral sphincter
continent within l month have a poor prognosis for regaining
function. The prognosis for recovery is much better in ani-
urinary function (see Chapter 3 for management of neuro-
mals with normal neurologic function. Fractures medial to
genic bladder).269
the sacral foramina [axial) frequently result in urinary or fecal
incontinence, or both, loss of perineal sensation, and tail anal-
Vascular
gesia 263 Fractures lateral to the sacral foramina (abaxial frac-
Fbrocartilaginous Embolic Myelopathy and Spinal Cord
tures) more frequently result in pelvic limb deficits.
Infarction. Although fibrocartilaginous embolism can affect
Caudal Lumbar Fractures. Fractures of the L6 and L7 ver-
any spinal cord segment, it occurs most frequently in the cau-
tebrae are common where the vertebral column caudal to the
dal lumbar area and less frequently in the midcervical to cau-
facture/luxation is displaced cranioventrally I2l The spinal
dal cervical spinal cord. For this reason, we have elected to
cord terminates cranially, so only spinal nerve roots and spinal
discuss it with the other L4-S3 disorders. Fibrocartilaginous
nerves [cauda equina) occupy this region. Neurologic signs
embolism has a brief progressive course [a few hours) and
reflect damage to the sciatic, sacral, pelvic, and caudal nerves.
    s a 
Diagnosis is based on radiographic findings. Myelography or
 as a nonprogressive disease.
CT/MRI may be necessary to further establish spinal cord,
 Pathogenesis. Although emboli to the CNS can develop
spinal nerve root, or spinal nerve compression or damage. Spi-
from a variety of sources such as endocarditis, sepsis, and
nal instability is assessed based upon the degree of vertebral
fat, the most common form causing spinal cord infarction is
damage.136
a fibrocartilaginous material that histochemically stains in a
 Treatment can involve conservative management or surgi-
manner similar to nucleus pulposus. The cause of this disease
cal stabilization. Conservative treatment can be successful if
is unknown. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy occurs
neurologic deficits are mild and there is little to no instabil-
and humans.270-276 Fibrocartilaginous material found in arte-
fixation involving pins or screws and polymethylmethacrylate
rioles and veins of the meninges and spinal cord results in an
for management of caudal lumbar vertebral fractures have
ischemic necrotizing myelopathy (Figure 6-28). Exactly how
been reported.13l,146,15l,265-267 External spinal fixation has
this material is distributed into the circulation of the spinal
been used successfully to facilitate stability and healing.268
cord is not known, but several theories have been proposed.
A dorsal laminectomy can evaluate for compression and spi-
Most of these are based on the belief that fbrocartilaginous
nal nerve root or spinal nerve integrity. Although considerable
emboli originate from the intervertebral disks. The most prob-
displacement may occur, the results of stabilization tend to be
able mechanism is herniation of the nucleus pulposus into the
good if pain perception and micturition are intact.
body of the vertebrae, followed by entrance into an internal
140
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 6-29 A, Sagittal T2W MRI of the lumbar spine from a
sity in the spinal cord at the level of the L1-2 intervertebral disk
space. B, Transverse T2W MRI at the same level demonstrating
asymmetric hyperintensity in the spinal cord. A presumptive diag-
nosis of fbrocartilaginous ermbolism was made. (Copyright 2010
Figure 6-28 Adjacent sections of spinal cord from the lumbar
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
intumescence from a Great Dane with acute asymmetric para-
plegia resulting from histologically confrmed fbrocartilaginous
embolism. Note the right side of the spinal cord is markedly
affected limbs. Absence of spinal hyperesthesia distinguishes
necrotic and contains hemorrhage.
embolic myelopathy diseases in which there is compression,
such as Hansen type I IVDD, neoplasia, or vertebral fractures
and disease processes in which there is inflammation such as 
vertebral venous plexus and then into an arteriovenous anas-
meningomyelitis.
tomosis. The material could then enter the spinal cord in arter-
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on history, clinical findings,
ies, veins, or both.270.273
and exclusion of other causes. No definitive antemortem diag-
 Larger-breed dogs have been studied most intensely, but
nostic procedure exists for fbrocartilaginous embolic myelop-
spinal cord infarction occurs in smaller-breed dogs as well.
athy. The diagnosis is supported by evidence that rules out the
A breed predisposition may exist for miniature schnau-
presence of spinal cord compression. Survey radiography and
myelography findings are usually within normal limits. The
embolism occurs more frequently in nonchondrodystro-
myelogram may show a slight swelling of the spinal cord for
phic breeds. Interestingly, chondrodystrophic breeds with
the frst few days. The CSF may contain a slight increase in
a predisposition for Hansen type I disk disease are affected
protein. MRI has become the imaging modality of choice for a
infrequently.281
presumptive diagnosis while excluding other causes. The MRI
Clinical Signs. The key clinical features of fbrocartilagi-
findings are characterized by focal, intramedullary, hyperin-
nous embolism are acute onset, nonprogressive course [except
  s  i s   a a
for the frst few hours), and nonpainful, asymmetric pare-
sis.272,282The clinical signs develop acutely and progress rapidly
a segment of the spinal cord overlying an IVD in which the
within l to 2 hours from initial pain to unilateral or bilateral
nucleus pulposus has undergone degenerative changes result-
paralysis. Spinal hyperesthesia may be present at onset of signs
 ing in a loss of signal intensity on T2W images. The severity
but is absent after the clinical signs stabilize. Trauma is not in
of clinical signs is associated with the presence and extent of
 the history, but dogs are frequently reported to be exercising at
the lesion on MR1.283,284 Animals should be evaluated for con-
the time of onset. Asymmetry is not found in every case but is
 ditions such as hypertension and hypothyroidism that might
a valuable sign when present. Asymmetry is explained by the
 predispose to CNS vascular occlusion and infarction.
frequency of unilateral branches of the central branch of the
Treatment. Corticosteroid therapy
for fibrocartilaginous
ventral spinal artery. Lateralization of signs is very suggestive
embolism is considered controversial. Corticosteroids such
 of fibrocartilaginous embolism because spinal cord compres-
as methylprednisolone sodium succinate are aimed largely at
sion generally causes bilateral signs. Although asymmetry may
reducing spinal cord edema and inflammation. However, a
be present in disease processes that result in comipression (e.g.
study revealed lack of significant association with corticosteroid
IVD herniation), the asymmetry rarely is strikingly disparate
as is often the case in a fbrocartilaginous embolism. With a
be noted within a few days, but functional recovery may require
fbrocartilaginous embolism, it is not uncommon to have one
several weeks. Although rest is advocated, physical rehabilita-
pelvic limb lack voluntary motor ability while the contralat-
eral limb displays minimal deficits. Despite this presentation,
 Prognosis. The clinical signs of complete paralysis, loss of
bilateral signs also occur in a fibrocartilaginous embolism. The
pain perception, or LMN involvement have been associated
degree and character of the neurologic deficit correspond to
the site and the extent of the spinal cord infarction. Infarction
an infarcted area of the spinal cord that innervates the limbs or
of gray matter of an intumescence may cause LMN signs in
bladder, the deficit is likely to be permanent. Because recovery
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
141
from white matter damage is more likely to occur, animals
Sacralfacetosteophyte
with UMN deficits have better prognoses. Animals with func-
tional recovery in 2 weeks seem to have a better prognosis.22
Severity of neurologic signs and lesion extent on MRI are asso-
ciated with outcome in dogs with ischemic myelopathy.284
Many dogs, especially smaller dogs, make satisfactory recover-
ies, so early euthanasia is discouraged.
Aortic Thromboembolism (lschemic Neuromyopathy).
Thromboembolism of the aorta or iliac arteries occurs with
moderate frequency in cats and occasionally in dogs and horses.
 In cats it is associated with cardiomyopathy.28s.286 Thrombi
extend from the aorta into the iliac arteries. Vasoactive sub-
stances are believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of the
ischemic changes. Clinically the syndrome is characterized by
 an acute onset with little progression. Pelvic limb pain and
paralysis are common. The femoral pulses are weak or absent
and the distal limbs are cool. Distal limb muscles are affected
more than proximal muscles. Pain perception may be absent
as a consequence of the ischemic neuromyopathy. Creatine
kinase is markedly elevated early on after the embolic episode.
Although functional recovery may be possible, recurrences are
common, and cardiomyopathy must be considered.286 In cats
that survive, the average length for long-term survival is 1l
months.286 Surgical removal of the thrombus may improve
L7 osteophyte
recovery, but its efficacy is controversial. In dogs, the aortic
Figure 6-30 Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. Compromise of
thromboembolism may occur secondary to a hypercoagulable
 intervertebral foramen by articular osteophytes that have formed
state associated with protein-losing nephropathies or hyper-
on facet and vertebral body. (From Chambers JN: Degenerative
adrenocorticism. A similar syndrome is seen in performance
horses. Associations with Strongylus vulgaris arteritis, throm-
lumbosacral stenosis in dogs, Vet Med Rep 1:166-180, 1989.]
  r     
sively demonstrated.56
Chronic Progressive Diseases, L4-S3
Interarcuatelig.
Degenerative
Degenerative Lumbosacral Stenosis (Cauda Equina Syn-
drome). Compression of the cauda equina at the lumbosacral
articulation is relatively common and has been reported in
dogs of various ages and breeds.287 Degenerative lumbosacral
large-breed dogs, such as GSDs, Labrador retrievers, border
collies, or crossbreeds were affected more frequently.289-293
The male:female ratio in GSDs is 2:1.290,291 Sometimes DLSS
in dogs is not recognized because of occurrence of other mus-
culoskeletal problems in these breeds.294-296
 Pathogenesis. Stenosis of the lumbosacral canal is caused
by a combination of anatomic factors causing compression of
the cauda equina.287,294,297,298 Stresses on the annulus fbro-
sus lead to proliferative changes and IVD protrusion. This is a
 Hansen type II IVD degeneration with addlitional changes in
the articulations and vertebral end plates. Narrowing of the
        
When osteophytes are around the foramen, the L7 spinal
Fgure 6-31 Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. Compression of
nerve is entrapped (Figure 6-30). In some cases yentral dis-
placement of the sacrum occurs relative to L7, further nar-
the cauda equina in a sagittal plane by the combined effects of
rowing the vertebral canal. Proliferation of the soft tissues of
disk herniation and ventral folding of the interarcuate ligament.
the joints, annulus fibrosus, and interarcuate ligament further
Note how extension would increase the compression. (From
contributes to the compression. Extension of the joint causes
Chambers JN: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs, Vet
additional folding of these tissues, thereby increasing pressure
Med Rep 1:166-180, 1989.)
 on the nerve roots (Figure 6-31). 197
Predisposing factors for DLSS include congenital verte-
 bral abnormalities.299 The high incidence in GSDs suggests a
 DLSS.300.30l Additionally, smaller facet angles of the joints of
developmental predisposition, even though the clinical signs
the lumbosacral articular processes may be a predisposing fac-
tend to occur in older dogs. Lumbosacral transitional verte-
tor.292 A related common initiating factor for the degenera-
brae are congenital abnormalities of the spine with the ver-
tive changes is probably abnormal motion at the lumbosacral
tebrae having characteristics of both spinal segments and can
be symmetric or asymmetric. In dogs, lumbosacral transitional
cumulative microtrauma, resulting in proliferation of fbrous
      q  
connective tissue and osteophytes. A few animals appear to
142
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
have a narrow canal with shortened pedicles, suggesting a
 lumbosacral extension and response to hip manipulation and
developmental stenosis.303
enable the examiner to distinguish degenerative lumbosacral
 Clinical Signs. The most common clinical sign of DLSS
stenosis from hip dysplasia.
is caudal lumbar pain. Dogs may experience difficulty rising.
 Diagnosis. Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis must be
and at this stage the clinical signs are easily confused with hip
differentiated from disease syndromes with similar clinical
dysplasia or other orthopedic disorders. Recurring lameness of
signs. These disorders include various causes of compression,
 one or both pelvic limbs is common. Dogs may stand with
such as trauma and neoplasia; inflammatory diseases such as
the pelvic limbs tucked under the caudal abdomen presum-
 discospondylitis and spinal empyema (abscesses); orthopedic
 ably to flex the lumbar vertebral column and lessen nerve
diseases, such as arthritis, hip dysplasia, and cranial cruciate
root compression. The owner frequently reports that the dog
disease; and spinal cord diseases, such as degenerative myelop-
does not jump or has difficulty climbing stairs. Exercise often
athy and IVDD. Correct localization is a critical frst step in
exacerbates the signs with vascular engorgement within the
establishing a diagnosis as it rules out most of these diseases.
foramen, and further worsening the nerve compression, neu-
Those that affect the cauda equina require addlitional diagnos-
tic tests. Electromyography can be a valuable tool for map-
orthopedic problems, including hip dysplasia and stifle disease,
 ping the distribution of denervation and localizing the lesion
are often suspected. Because these breeds also commonly have
to specific nerve roots.306,307
hip dysplasia, the primary problem is frequently not identified
Survey radiography is useful to rule out other causes of
initially. Pelvic limb paresis is unusual unless the condition is
DLSS [e.g., discospondylitis and vertebral neoplasms). Abnor-
advanced. If the disease progresses to paraparesis, the weak-
ness involves the muscles innervated by the sciatic nerve, caus-
ing decreased extension of the hock leading to a plantigrade
transitional vertebrae,309 spondylosis, 196 subluxation, sclero-
 stance. Only in the latter disease stage are signifcant postural
sis of the end plates, and bony proliferation of the articular
reaction deficits present.A few animals appear to have pares-
processes. Stress radiography (extension and flexion) has
thesia in the tail or perineal region and may lick or chew the
been used to identify underlying instability of the LS junc-
affected area. Frequently the owner may notice an altered tail
tion. Controversy still exists as to the significance of these
carriage.
radiographic signs.A recent retrospective study of spondylosis
 Abnormalities in urination and fecal incontinence are com-
deformans found higher rates of spondylosis at sites with type
monly associated with clinical signs attributed to compression
II IVD protrusions.l95 However, other studies have shown
 of the sacral nerves. 305 The anal sphincter may be atonic, and
that spondylosis deformans is not consistently associated with
the perineal reflex may be weak or absent. The urinary incon-
clinical signs of DLSS.310 Dogs with evidence of transitional
tinence is of the LMN type with overflow incontinence. The
bladder is faccid and distended as a result of a poor detrusor
have increased risk for development of DLSS. However,
reflex. The sphincter tone is still maintained since innervation
results of a recent study suggested that specifc radiographic
by the hypogastric nerve remains intact.
abnormalities may be of limited use to identifying working
Early in the disease course, the examination indicates
dogs that may be at risk for developing DLSS.310 Myelography
lameness without paresis, normal to marginally slow pos-
is a contrast procedure mainly used to rule out other causes
tural reactions, and normal spinal refexes. In some animals
of compressive myelopathies cranial to L4. Discography and
with paresis related to loss of sciatic innervation, the patellar
epidurography are other contrast procedures that have been
reflexes appear brisk due to loss of resistance from the flexors
used in the past before cross-sectional imaging become avail-
innervated by the sciatic nerve. The withdrawal reflex remains
able to evaluate for dynamic and compressive lesions within
 intact until the condition is severe. The key to clinical diagno-
sis is localization of hyperesthesia in the lumbosacral region.
CT and MR imaging have the advantage of better bone
and soft tissue resolution, respectively. Transverse, dorsal
examiner must elicit pain from the lumbosacral region with-
and sagittal planes provide determination of lesion extent.
out causing pain from the hip or stile joints. The examiner
Both flexed and extended views are used to accentuate any
first applies pressure dorsally over the vertebral column. It is
abnormal compression and help establish the presence of
 preferable to start palpation in the cervical region and prog-
a dynamic lesion, which may impact surgical treatment
ress caudally. This establishes the dog's tolerance to palpation
[Figure 6-32). The articular processes, intervertebral disk, and
so that hyperesthesia can be recognized. The typical reaction
foramina also can be evaluated. Abnormalities detected by CT
is increasing anxiety as palpation progresses caudally, with
include:loss of epidural fat, increased soft tissue opacity in the
a significant reaction when the lumbosacral area is pressed.
intervertebral foramen, bulging of the intervertebral disk, the-
Placing the thumbs on the midline, with the fingers on each
cal sac displacement, spondylosis, narrowed vertebral canal,
ilium, allows the examiner direct pressure at the correct loca-
thickened articular processes, and osteophyte formation of
tion without stressing the dog's hips.294 If this fails to elicit a
articular processes in the intervertebral foramen.312-314 MRI
reaction, the tail is elevated with continued pressure on the
is superior to CT with regard to soft tissue definition of the
lumbosacral region. Each pelvic limb can also be extended
associated neural and ligamentous tissues.194.287,292,315 The
caudally to stress the lumbosacral articulation even further.
spinal cord, cerebrospinal fluid, intervertebral disks, ligaments,
Remember, extension of the lumbosacral articulation causes
and nerve roots can be directly visualized. MRI can provide
 maximal compression and pain. Extension of the hips also
 early recognition of intervertebral disk degeneration. Impor-
 may cause pain if hip dysplasia is present; however, abduction
tantly, imaging findings based on CT and MR may be disparate
and rotation of the hips should also cause pain in hip dyspla-
when compared with the severity of clinical signs and predict-
sia but not stress the lumbosacral junction. The animal can
ing the surgical outcome.316 Consequently, imaging fndings
be placed in a laterally recumbent position to minimize stress 
should not be used in formulating the prognosis. See Chapter
placed on the hip and stifle joints and the palpation procedure
 4 and the references for additional discussion and for imaging
is repeated. By rectal palpation, pressure can be applied to the
techniques.
ventral aspect of the lumbosacral IVD space. Motor dysfunc-
 Treatment. The management of DLSS is based on an eval-
tion varies with severity of neural tissue compression. These
uation of the severity and duration of the clinical signs. Indica-
techniques enable comparison between the dog's response to
tions for conservative management include the frst episode of
CHAPTER 6 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, Or Ataxia
143
Hgure 6-32 A, Sagittal T2W MR image of the caudal lumbar spine in extension of a German
shepherd dog with hyperesthesia over the lumbosacral spine demonstrating dorsal and ventral
compression of the cauda equina and loss of hyperintensity of CSF in the thecal sac. Note the IVD
degeneration of the L6-L7 and L7-S1 disk. B, Sagittal T2W MR image from the same dog with the
right 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
clinical signs or when the pain is intermittent. Confined rest
for 4 to 8 weeks and pain management are recommended for
dogs with an initial episode of only pain. The recovery rate
with conservative management is between 24% and 50%.291
Signs often recur when exercise is resumed. Injection of meth-
ylprednisolone sodium acetate injections into the lumbosacral
epidural space results in clinical improvement in 79% and
complete resolution of signs in 53% of affected dogs.293
 Indications for surgical management include failure of
conservative management, severe pain, and severe neuro-
logic deficits [in particular incontinence). Choices of surgical
procedures include dorsal decompression, discectomy, fac-
etectomy, foraminotomy, and fixation-fusion.287 The dorsal
 laminectomy procedure allws decompression and visualiza-
roots can be retracted laterally for visualization of the disk for
annular fenestration. It is important to preserve the articular
processes because sacrifice of these structures may destabilize
the lumbosacral articulation. A lateral approach that mini-
mizes bony removal of the processes has been developed for
foraminotomy.318 Dorsal laminectomy alone provides relief
of pain in most dogs. Short-term outcome success using a
 decompressive laminectomy procedure ranges between 41%
to biomechanical implications associated with decompres-
Hgure 6-33 An intraoperative photograph after performing a
sive procedures. Studies have shown that laminectomy alone
dorsal laminectomy exposing the cauda equina. The inset dem-
does not cause instability of the lumbosacral articulation, but
onstrates mild retraction of the nerve roots exposing annular
the adition of diskectomy reduces stiffness and the further
protrusion of the L7-S1 disk. Note that the articular processes
addition of removal of the articular processes is likely to have
are preserved. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research
devastating consequences to stability of the lumbosacral artic-
Foundation, Inc.]
ulation. Dorsal stabilization procedures include distraction-
fusion, fusion, lag screw articular processes, and Kirschner
pain. Nonsteroidal analgesics may be given to reduce pain dur-
nique is to enlarge the collapsed disk space and interverte-
ing the postoperative period. Prognosis depends on the sever-
a s an mars e ag a  
ity and duration of signs. Dogs with pain as the only sign have
potential to distract but may further weaken and fracture the
an excelent prognosis for complete recovery, although they
articular process if not properly placed.
may experience episodes of discomfort after vigorous exercise.
Postoperative care includes meticulous attention to the
Prognosis. Prognosis is fair to good if clinical signs
maintenance ofbladder function if this is a problem [see Chap-
improve with surgery and with early surgical intervention.
ter 3). Exercise should be restricted for at least 6 weeks. Dogs
 Recurrence rates for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis vary
that become active too early often have recurrent episodes of
144
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 separation of the vertebral bodies, arches, or entire vertebra
is called block vertebrae. Hemivertebra is potentially of clinical
importance. Failure of ossifcation of one half of the verte-
bral body may cause the development of unilateral, dorsal,
or ventral hemivertebra. Unilateral hemivertebra causes sco-
liosis, dorsal hemivertebra causes kyphosis, and ventral hemi-
vertebra causes lordosis [Figure 6-36). A butterfly vertebra
has a sagittal cleft in the vertebral body. These anomalies are
most common in the thoracic vertebral column and rarely
cause clinical signs. Dorsal displacement of a ventral hemiver-
tebra may induce chronic progressive spinal cord compres-
sion. Vertebral intermediates of two adjacent segments of the
vertebrae are called transitional vertebrae. Cervicothoracic
transitional vertebrae have transverse processes that resem-
ble ribs. Thoracolumbar transitional vertebrae may also have
spinous processes resembling ribs, absence of a rib on one
side, or fusion of the last rib like a transverse process. The
major significance is in the location of the correct interspace
in spinal surgery, where the T13-Ll interspace is identifed
as a landmark from which the affected site can be correctly
identified. The last lumbar vertebra may fuse with the first
sacral vertebra bilaterally or unilaterally. Unilateral sacraliza-
tion may cause deviation of the pelvis and possibly nerve root
first sacral vertebra is called humbarization and may lead to
Figure 6-34 Ventrodorsal radiograph of the lumbosacral spine
instability [see DLSS section).
after a dorsal laminectomy and stabilization of the lumbosacral
Vertebral anomalies involving the cervical vertebral col-
spine with screws placed in the articular processes along with
umn such as atlantoaxial subluxation and occipitoatlantoaxial
a bone graft for fusion. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
malformation are discussed in Chapter 7.
Research Foundation, Inc.]
Spina Bifida. Spina bifida is the incomplete closure or
fusion of the dorsal vertebral arches. Spina bifida may affect
 that are younger at time of onset and have mild signs have a
any vertebra but is most common in the caudal lumbar and
 good prognosis with surgical decompression alone; however,
sacral areas. In some cases it occurs in association with protru-
sion of the meninges (meningocele) or the spinal cord and
deficits, and urinary and fecal incontinence for more than a
meninges [meningomyelocele) through the vertebral defect
(spina bifida cystica). These defects are forms of myelodyspla-
 Other reported recurrence rates have varied with relation of
sia also known as spinal dysraphism. Often these meningeal or
activity level of the dog, with the active working dog having a
spinal cord protrusions adhere to the skin where the neuroec-
higher level of recurrence.
toderm failed to separate from other ectodermal structures.
The adhesions may produce a small depression or dimple
Anomalous
in the skin at the site of attachment [Figure 6-37). In some
Vertebral Column and Spinal Cord Malformations. Spinal
cases this defect is open and spinal fluid leaks onto the skin,
 cord and vertebral anomalies are classifed based on embry-
 producing epidermal ulceration (spina bifda aperta). Because
ologic origin of the tissue,323,324 Tissues of mesodermal ori-
 s ns s  psxa ae sa a
 gin are the vertebral body and intervertebral disk. Tissues
develop. In most cases that have been investigated, the caudal
 originating from the ectoderm include the dorsal arch of the
 and some of the sacral nerves are either severely attenuated
vertebra, spinal cord, and meninges. Mesodermal anomalies
or incomplete. Spina bifida manifesta is termed when there
 commonly involve failure of the vertebra to separate or fuse.
 are associated clinical signs. Other associated anomalies may
Malformations involving the spinal cord are referred to as
include myeloschisis, tethering of the distal spinal cord, and
myelodysplasia. There are reviews of vertebral and spinal cord
hydrocephalus.333 Spina bifida is most common in the Manx
cat and the bulldog as a result of sacrocaudal dysplasia but
and horses.30 s6.3 Vertebral/spinal cord anomalies are usu-
can occur in all species.334-337 Rachischisis occurs when the
ally congenital, may have known or unknown inheritance,
vertebral canal is open in its entire length and the spinal cord
are acquired from in utero exposure to toxins or nutritional
is exposed.
deficiencies or excesses, or occur sporadically. Also vertebral
anomalies can result from perinatal trauma during the birth
occulta), to mild, to occasionally severe depending on the
process. In large animals, arthrogryposis can occur second-
severity of the involvement of the spinal cord or the cauda
ary to spinal cord anomalies. Some anomalies are considered
equina. Some animals have signs similar to those of spinal dys-
complex, involving developmental defects of both the ver-
raphism. In the bulldog with spina bifida of the sacrum, clinical
tebra and spinal cord that result in secondary abnormalities
signs often are related to dysfunction in the areas innervated
of the spinal cord and vertebral column. See Table 6-1l for a
by the cauda equina.338 Mild to moderate pelvic limb ataxia
summary of abnormalities and classifcations.
 and paresis may be present. Many animals have decreased
Vertebral Anomalies. Vertebral anomalies of the thoraco-
innervation of the muscles supplied by the sciatic nerve. The
lumbar vertebral column are common in dogs with a screw
limb may be fixed in extension owing to the unopposed con-
tail, such as the English and French bulldogs and the Boston
traction of the quadriceps muscle. Affected dogs consistently
terrier [Figure 6-35) 323 They are reported in other species,
have fecal and urinary incontinence, and pelvic limb paresis
especially the cat.325 Vertebral malformations have been rec-
 u pasearnp aq ae undarad ued uasrd aensn s
 ognized as a global problem in Holstein cattle.332 Incomplete
perineal area and from the distal regions of the pelvic limbs.
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
145
TABLE 6-11
Summary of Vertebral and Spinal Cord Malformations in Domestic Animals
Abnormality
Description
Imaging Characteristics
 Clinical Significance
Vertebral Body (Mesodermal Origin)
Block vertebra
Abnommal segmentation of
 Fusion of adjacent vertebrae
Incidental finding
 somites
Butterfly vertebra
A cleft in the vertebral body
Appears like a butterfly on a
Incidental finding 
causing an indentation
ventrodorsal radiograph
Hemivertebra
Ossification failure of the
Wedge shape of vertebra
Can lead to scoliosis, lordosis.
 vertebral body or displacement 
 and kyphosis with secondary
 of somites
 instability and compressive
myelopathy
Transitional
Characteristics of adjacent 
Lumbarization of T13 or S1.
Incidental finding: lumbosacral 
regions of the vertebral
sacralization of L7
 transitional vertebrae may be
column, which occur at the 
 predisposed to degenerative
cervicothoracic, thoracolumbar.
lumbosacral stenosis
lumbosacral, and sacrocaudal
junctions
Atlantoaxial subluxation
Hypoplasia or aplasia of the
Absence or shortening of
 Can lead to spinal instability and 
 odontoid process (dens)
dens; displacement of the 
compressive myelopathy
axis into the vertebral canal
Occipitoatlantoaxial
 Developmental defect in 
 Fusion of atlas to occipital
Can lead to displacement of
 malformation
 formation of atlanto-occipital
bones and shortening of 
the axis into the foramen 
joint
axis with malformation of
magnum and spinal instability
dens
and compressive myelopathy
 and secondary syrinx
formation
Vertebral Arch and Spinal Cord
Spina bifida occulta
 Bony defect involving only
 Defect of fusion of spinous
Incidental finding 
 incomplete closure of the
process
 vertebral arch; overlying skin is
 normal
Spina bifida cystica 
 Meningocele or
Hemiation of the meninges
Meningomyelocele manifests
 meningomyelocele concurrent
 from the vertebral canal
signs of myelopathy
with bony defect
through the bony defect; 
may see skin dimple or thin
membrane
Spina bifida aperta
The above lesions communicate
 Lack of skin over defect
Leakage of CSF and meningitis 
with the environment 
Rachischisis
Vertebral canal is open over its
Spinal cord is exposed and 
Not compatible with life
entire length
deformed 
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
 Defect in formation of sacral and 
Varying degrees of spina
Neurologic impairment involving
 caudal vertebrae and spinal
 bifida occulta, cystica,
 sacral nerves
 cord segments 
aperta
Syringomyelia
 Syringomyelia—fluid-
Intramedullary fluid 
Can be occult or clinical;
filled cavitation and no 
accumulation
 associated with scoliosis and
communication with central
Chiari malformation 
canal
Hydromyelia
 Dilation of the central canal 
Intramedullary fluid
Can be occult or clinical
accumulation
Other myelodysplasias
Duplication of spinal cord in 
Unknown
Varying degrees of myelopathy
vertebral column—diplomyelia
that may or may not be
 Duplication of vertebral column—-
compatible with life
diastematomyelia
Segmental hypoplasia or aplasia
 Absence of median fissure
146
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 6-36 Sagittal T2W MRI from a young bulldog demon-
strating kyphosis of the thoracic vertebral column and spinal cord.
Note the spinal cord compression at Tl0-11.
B
Spinal dysraphism occurs in several breeds of dogs, cat-
tle, and pigs but has been documented most frequently in
include absence, distention, or duplication of the central
canal. Other changes include hydromyelia, syringomyelia,
and anomalies of the ventral median fissure. Fluid-filled cavi-
tations are commonly observed in dysraphic spinal cords, and
 spinal dysraphism, particularly in the Weimaraner, has been
called syringomyelia. The fluid-filled cysts in the dysraphic
spinal cords of Weimaraners probably result from abnor-
mal vascularization that produces ischemia, degeneration,
and cavitation. The thoracic spinal cord is most commonly
affected. Because dysraphic lesions are the cause of the clini-
cal signs, the term spinal dysraphism is preferred to the term
syringomyelia.
Clinical signs become apparent at 6 to 8 weeks of age.
 pnsd aq rou e o a sase P  no
examination until it is several months old. The classic clinical
Figure 6-35 Composite of radiographic images demonstrating A,
signs include a symmetric hopping gait with the pelvic limbs
(bunny hopping), a crouching posture, and a wide-based
block vertebrae; B, hemivertebra; C, butterfly vertebra; D, sacral
agenesis; E, transitional vertebra of S1.
stance. Postural reactions in the pelvic limbs are abnormal,
and the animal may occasionally knuckle over on the dorsum
of the foot. The postural reactions are depressed. The spinal
reflexes are usually normal, and exaggerated scratch reflexes
Spina bifida without myelomeningocele is not associated with
may be present. Pain perception is usually intact. The neu-
any neurologic deficits.
   i s  s n
Spina bifida can be confirmed by radiography (Figure 6-38).
as the animal matures. Less common clinical signs include
 The presence of meningocele and myelomeningocele can be
abnormal hair streams or hair whorls in the dorsal cervical
determined myelographically or with MR1 (Figure 6-39). MRI
area, kinking of the undocked tail, scoliosis, and depression
provides a more sensitive means of identifying the presence
of the sternum.
and extent of the lesion. No specific treatments are avail-
Diagnosis is based on typical clinical signs and the breed
able for spina bifida. Surgical correction of the tethered spi-
involved. Spinal radiographs and CSF analysis help eliminate
 nal cord can be attempted in animals with intact urinary and
the diagnosis of a treatable disease. Syringomyelia is detected
fecal function [see Figure 6-37, B).33 If there is extensive loss
by MRI. No effective treatment is available. Because the syn-
of normal nerve supply to the bladder and anus, recovery is
drome is probably inherited as a codominant lethal trait in
unlikely in most of these animals. Meningoceles can be closed
the Weimaraner, owners are advised to cease breeding animals
        r n 
that have produced affected puppies.34 1
ingeal infection.
Syringohydromyelia in dogs often is associated with caudal
Spinal  Dysraphism(
(Myelodysplasia). The(
dysraphic
occipital malformation syndrome (COMS—Chiari malforma-
conditions are congenital defects that result from failure of
tion) often will involve mainly the cervical spinal cord and is 
normal closure of the neural tube. They may affect the brain
discussed in Chapter 7.
or spinal cord, often with accompanying abnormalities in the
Sacrocaudal Dysplasia in Manx Cats. The Manx cat has
surrounding bone and other tissues. Those affecting the verte-
been bred selectively to have a bobtail. These tail types have
bral column or the spinal cord in animals include spinal dysra-
been classified as rumpy (no caudal vertebrae), rumpy-riser
phism, diplomyelia (duplicate spinal cord), diastematomyelia
[fusion of several caudal vertebrae), stumpy (several caudal
[duplicate vertebral canal), syringomyelia, spina bifida with or
[uds te(en euu) auo pue (aqou are e aqaa
without meningocele, myelomeningocele, or myeloschisis and
cord anomalies include dysraphism, syringomyelia, menin-
 caudal vertebral hypoplasia (Figure 6-40).
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
147
Figure 6-37 A, Photograph of a tail from a 12-week-old Manx kitten demonstrating a thin epithe-
lial covering of a meningocele, which periodically leaked cerebrospinal fuid. B, An intraoperative
photograph from the cat of a fstulous tract that extended from the skin lying over the caudal
vertebrae into the thecal sac. The sacral nerves were unaffected.
 rsne ue se p aaede s ssuss
of hyperesthesia include tail rubbing and hypersensitivity to
 trait of incomplete penetrance.33s In addition to caudal dys-
touch of the perineal area and are followed by urine scald.
-n osie st epyrq euds ino Aeu eiserdou iees sisus
 ing and constipation. Subsequent LMN signs include poor tail
monly encountered in this breed.
tone, paralysis of the tail, anus, rectum, and bladder. Thus ani-
The neurologic signs are related to abnormal develop-
mals often have fecal and urinary retention that subsequently
ment and tethering of the nerves in the cauda equina as
 cause colic and overflow urinary incontinence. Decreased sen-
the cat grows. The clinical signs are present from birth and
sory perception and anesthesia in the perineal area occur as
 are nonprogressive. These signs include LMN deficits to the
the disease progresses In male horses, pudendal nerve paralysis
anus, the urinary bladder, and the pelvic limbs. Urinary and
results in a dropped penis or the inability to retract the penis
fecal incontinence and fecal retention are major problems.
Hypalgesia to the penis also may occur. Cranial nerves V, VIl,
Undoubtedly a certain degree of spinal dysraphism is pres-
and VIll are frequently affected. Thus signs such as head tilt,
ent in these so-called normal cats. Severely affected cats
nystagmus, and facial paralysis may occur in some horses.
        s
 Diagnosis. If both the cauda equina and cranial nerves are
has also been observed. The diagnosis is based on the breed,
affected, the diagnosis of polyneuritis is highly suspected. If
the clinical signs, and radiographic evidence of sacrocaudal
only the cauda equina is involved, sacral fractures should be
abnormalities [see Figure 6-38]. Therapy is directed at man-
ruled out by rectal palpation and radiography. Abnormal find-
 aging urinary and fecal retention. In some cases the flum
ings on electromyography and eyoked potentials may further
terminale can be dissected free along with the fistulous tract
support a localization to the cauda equina. Collection of spinal
[see Figure 6-37, B).336,342
fluid at the lumbar cistern is often diagnostic of cauda equina
neuritis. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis from the lumbosacral
Inflammatory
space is frequently xanthochromic and reveals moderately
Although discussed in the section on acute progressive T3-L3
spinal cord disease, other inflammatory diseases of the verte-
cells (>l00 cells/mm?). The cytologic composition is mainly
bral column and spinal cord such as discospondylitis (Figure
macrophages, neutrophils, and lymphocytes. High P2 myelin
6-41) can also affect the lumbosacral region of the vertebral
antibody titers can be demonstrated by ELISA, but the test
column.
is not specific for polyneuritis equi.348 Defnitive diagnosis is
Neuritis of the Cauda Equina (Polyneuritis Equi)
based on histopathology.
Pathogenesis. Polyneuritis equi is a severe, slowly progres-
Treatment. No specific
Ic treatment is known and the pri-
sive granulomatous LMN disease that primarily affects adult
mary therapy is palliative. Evacuation of the bladder and
horses. The neuritis of the cauda equina is usually restricted to
bowel may allow the animal to live for prolonged periods;
the caudal spinal nerves and spinal nerve roots. The lesion is a
however, denervation of the genital tract precludes breeding
demyelination with a granulomatous neuritis and meningitis
stallions. The prognosis is usually poor.
involving the extradural components of the sacral and coc-
Sorghum Cystitis and Ataxia
Pathogenesis. A syndrome of ataxia and bladder paralysis
ment may also occur in some cases, hence the term polyneuritis
occurs more frequently in horses, and less often in cattle and
equi 344-346 The lesion resembles allrgic neuritis, and the evi-
sheep that ingest sorghum, Johnson, or Sudan grass. Lesions
 dence suggests that this is an autoimmune polyneuritis.343 As
develop primarily in the lumbar, sacral, and caudal spinal
in coonhound paralysis and Landry-Guillain-Barre syndromes,
cord segments. The histopathology is characterized by focal
a factor such as a virus probably initiates the immune reaction.
axonal degeneration and demyelination with associated lipid-
Although the cause is unknown, a history of vaccination or
laden macrophages. Neurotoxicity is suspected from chronic
sublethal doses of hydrocyanic acid found in plants of the
Clinical Signs. Early signs reflect a slowly progressive,
genus Sorghum. Production of a lathyrogenic principle (nitrile-
symmetric deficit localized to the cauda equina. Clinical signs
related amino acid) has also been postulated 349,350
148
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
A
Figure 6-38 Lateral lumbosacral (A) and ventrodorsal (B) radiographs of a Manx cat with sacrocaudal 
abnormalities. Note the short, malformed sacrum and the absence of caudal vertebrae.
Enzootics of this disease occur in horses of all ages that
deposits occur on the buttocks, the thighs, and the hocks. Male
 graze in sorghum or Sudan grass pastures. The disease usually
horses drip urine from a relaxed and extended penis. Uri-
occurs when the plants are young and rapidly growing, but
 nary incontinence is intensified when the animal is forced to
mature and second-growth plants also have been incriminated.
move suddenly. Postural reaction deficits and hyporeflexia are
Apparently the toxins do not persist in cured hay or silage.
detectable in the pelvic limbs. Clinical signs rarely extend to
Clinical Signs. Although the signs of urinary incontinence
the thoracic limbs, even though brainstem and cerebral corti-
 are most noticeable in many horses, neurologic signs involving
cal lesions have been reported. Pregnant mares may abort, and
the pelvic limbs and tail usually develop first. Signs include
these foals may have severe ankylosis [(arthrogryposis).Arthro-
flaccidity of the anus and tail and pelvic limb ataxia. Occasion-
gryposis also may occur in full-term foals when the dam has
ally, severe LMN paralysis of the pelvic limbs progressively
grazed hybrid Sudan plants.
develops over 24 hours from the first onset of weakness. In
 Diagnosis. The diagnosis is suspected from the history and
mares, clinical signs include continual opening and closing of
the clinical signs. Affected horses have a severe fibrinopuru-
the vulva and dribbling of urine. Urine scald and thick urine
lent cystitis secondary to neurogenic urine retention. Several
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
149
Figure 6-39 A sagittal TW2 MRI from a young bulldog demon-
strating a meningocele over the sacral vertebrae.
Hgure 6-41 A sagittal postcontrast T1W MRI of the lumbo-
sacral vertebral column demonstrating discospondylitis of the
L7-S1 intervertebral disk space. Note the hyperintensity of the
surrounding soft tissues. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.]
Figure 6-40 Caudal region of the vertebral column, spinal cord,
and cauda equina from a 2-year-old female English bulldog with
urinary-fecal incontinence since birth. Portions of the cauda
CSF are found. Protein elevations are slight [60 to 80 mg/dL),
equina extend dorsally into a meningeal sac, and a dorsal longitu-
and cell counts range from 5 to 10 mononuclear cells/μL.
dinal spinal cleft is present. A diagnosis of meningomyelocele with
Urine or serum can be tested for high levels of thiocyanate,
associated myeloschisis was made. [From Kornegay JN: Lesions of
the major detoxification product of cyanide.
the lumbosacral intumescence and cauda equina. In Slatter DH,
Treatment. Treatment involves removing the affected
editor: Textbook of small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1985, WB
horses from pasture and supportive care. Improvement will
Saunders.]
occur slowly over several months. Bladder management
includes catheterization and antibiotic therapy for the uri-
nary tract infection. Horses should not be allowed to graze in
different bacteria have been isolated from the urine of affected
sorghum pastures while the plants are rapidly growing or are
horses. Some animals develop severe ascending pyelonephritis
stunted by drought. Plants are generally safe if they are yellw,
from the chronic cystitis. The sensory loss in the perineum is less
are more than 2 feet tall, or have formed fruiting heads. Pas-
than that from cauda equina neuritis or sacral fracture. Ancil-
tures can be checked periodically to determine the amount of
lary diagnostic tests are of little benefit. Mild changes in the
cyanide present when toxic forage is suspected.
CASE STUDIES
CASE STUDY 6-1
LUCY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
: Physical Examination
Canine, Labrador retriever, female, 6 years old.
No abnormalities were found other than the neurologic
problem described in the next section. The bladder was full
- History
on palpation.
Two days ago, the dog suddenly cried out in pain and devel-
oped paresis in the pelvic limbs. Within 2 hours she became
: Neurologic Examination
totally paralyzed in the pelvic limbs (PLs). No possibility of
Mental status
trauma was evident. The dog developed signs while under
Alert
the owner's observation in the backyard.
Gait
 Paraplegia; thoracic limbs normal
Continued
150
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 6-1
LUCY-
cont'd
Posture
· Diagnostic Plan
 Normal, except gait
1.
 Spinal radiography to rule out bony lesion
2. Myelography/CT or MRI to rule out compressive
Postural reactions
       a 
 Proprioceptive positioning absent in both PLs
infarct is most likely based on lack of paraspinal hyperes-
thesia.
Spinal reflexes
3. CSF analysis to substantiate infarction and rule out
Left PL: patellar reflex decreased and withdrawal reflex
 inflammatory disease processes
decreased with decreased muscular tone of the limb. Mus-
cle tone was increased in the right PL. Spinal reflexes were
: Diagnostic Results
exaggerated in right PL. The perineal and cutaneous trunci
Spinal radiography was within normal limits. Sagittal TZW
reflexes were intact.
MRI sequences revealed intramedullary spinal cord hyper-
intensity extending from the L5 to L7 vertebrae; on axial
Cranial nerves
T2W imaging, the hyperintensity was located in the area of
All normal
the left gray matter of the spinal cord; there was no uptake
 of gadolinium contrast on T'lW imaging.
Sensory evaluation
Hyperesthesia—no pain elicited on spinal palpation
. Diagnosis
Superficial pain perception—intact 
Based on the history, neurologic examination, and MRI
 Deep pain perception—intact 
results, the most likely diagnosis is fbrocartilaginous embo-
lism. This constellation of neurologic examination findings
· Lesion Location
is common for dogs with fbrocartilaginous embolism. The
This lesion localization is diffcult to reconcile in one ana-
 UMN paralysis of the right pelvic limb remains unexplained
tomic region. This dog has paraplegia
A characterized by
by the anatomic location of the lesion.
(1) UMN paralysis in the right PL and (2} LMN paraly-
sis in the left limb. There is no evidence of hyperesthesia.
- Treatment
An asymmetric lesion best explains this localization. Signs
 Physical rehabilitation involving range of motion exercises
in the left PL are consistent with L4-Sl spinal cord seg-
 and hydrotherapy was recommended. Bladder manage-
ments. However, one would expect that similar neurologic
ment required manual expression three times a day. The
findings in the right PL. The lesion has spared spinal cord
 prognosis is guarded to fair based on deep pain perception.
sensory pathways. Likewise, the lesion spared S2-3 as the
If the dog shows improvement in motor function within
perineal reflex was normal. Acute nonprogressive diseases
2 weeks, the prognosis will be good. The dog started to
should be considered.
regain movement in the PLs and voluntary micturition
within l week.
- Differential Diagnosis
 1. Fibrocartilaginous embolism
2. Intervertebral disk disease
CASE STUDY 6-2
GRETEL
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
Posture
Canine, dachshund, female, 7 years old.
Cannot maintain sternal recumbency
- History
Postural reactions
Two days ago the dog had a sudden onset of diffculty walk-
 Postural reactions were absent in both PLs. Postural reac-
ing in the pelvic limbs and within 6 hours became paralyzed
 tions in the thoracic limbs were normal.
 in both pelvic limbs (PLs). When the dog was examined
initially, the PL reflexes were present, but pain perception
Spinal reflexes
was absent in both PLs. The thoracic limbs were normal.
Patellar reflex and flexor withdrawal reflex was absent in
both PLs. The perineal reflex was absent. Anal sphincter
. Physical Examination
tone was greatly reduced. The cutaneous trunci refex was
Urinary incontinence, hematuria, and shallow abdominal
 absent caudal to the T3 vertebra.
respirations are present. The dog cries periodically as if it
were in pain. Palpation revealed hypotonus in both PLs and
Cranial nerves
a flaccid abdomen.
All normal
: Neurologic Examination
Sensory evaluation
Mental Status
Hyperesthesia—present at T2-T3 vertebrae
Apprehensive
Superficial pain perception--absent caudal to the scapula
Deep pain perception—absent caudal to the scapula
Gait
No voluntary movements of PLs; short, choppy steps with
thoracic limbs
CHAPTER 6 
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
151
CASE STUDY 6-2
GRETEL
cont'd
: Lesion Location
. Differential Diagnosis
Motor examination reveals severe bilateral LMN disease in
1. Ascending/descending myelomalacia secondary to spinal
both pelvic limbs and the pudendal nerve. The symmetry
cord compression from type I IVDD
of the signs suggests severe disease in segments L4-S3. The
sensory examination reveals complete analgesia caudal to
: Diagnostic Plan
the shoulders. This finding suggests a severe lesion extend-
None—the history 2
 and neurologic examination findings
ing cranial to the T3 vertebra. In addition, the LMN neu-
 essentially provide a definitive diagnosis. Given the progno-
rons to the abdominal and intercostal muscles are involved.
sis, diagnostics are not pursued.
Therefore, diffuse symmetric disease of the spinal cord
caudal to T3 should be suspected. The history suggests
- Treatment
lesion progression insofar as spinal reflexes in the pelvic
The prognosis is hopeless and euthanasia is recommended.
limbs were present 2 days ago. The lesion involves both
Necropsy revealed severe ascending/descending myeloma-
gray and white matter throughout the spinal cord caudal to
lacia secondary to a herniated disk at Tl3-Ll.
T'3 vertebra.
CASE STUDY 6-3
THOR
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
 Differential Diagnosis
Canine, German shepherd dog, female, 1.5 years old.
1. Type II IVDD
2. Neoplasia
History
 3. Meningomyelitis
Six weeks ago, the dog became lame in the right pelvic
4. Discospondylitis 
limb (PL). Since then, paresis and GP ataxia have gradually
. Diagnostic Plan
left. Three days ago the dog became completely paralyzed
1. Spinal radiography will determine presence of bony lesions,
in both PLs.
such as primary vertebral tumor or discospondylitis
 2. Imaging with myelography/CT or MRI will identify com-
·Physical Examination
 pressive myelopathy; MRI is more sensitive for evaluat-
Findings are normal except for the neurologic problem.
ing the spinal cord and lesion extent.
 3. Cerebrospinal fluid will identify any evidence of menin-
· Neurologic Examination
gomyelitis.
Mental status
Alert
: Diagnostic Results
Spinal radiography and myelography were normal. Myelog-
Gait
raphy disclosed a pattern consistent with an intramedullary
Paraplegia; thoracic limbs normal
lesion at L1-2. CSF contained 1 WBC/mm?, 33.5 mg/dL
 protein.
Posture
 Paraplegia; but otherwise normal
. Diagnosis
Despite the dog's age, the lesion was consistent with a
Postural reactions
spinal cord neoplasm. Other differentials such as myelitis,
 Postural reactions are absent in the PLs. Postural reactions in
intramedullary hematoma, and infarction were considered
the thoracic limbs were normal.
unlikely given the CSF analysis [myelitis and hematoma)
and history [infarction). A presumptive diagnosis of spinal
Spinal reflexes
nephroblastoma was made based on signalment and lesion
 Patelar reflex is exaggerated; flexor reflexes present in both
location. Depending on the invasiveness of these tumors,
PLs. The cutaneous trunci reflex was absent caudal to L2.
 surgery may be performed. In most cases, gross excision
of the tumor is not possible. However, the combination
Craniaf nerves
 of surgery and radiation may provide long-term control in
 All normal
 some cases. Before surgery, MRI may provide greater detail
regarding the extent and invasiveness of the tumor. The
Sensory evaluation
 prognosis is considered guarded.
Hyperesthesia—-paraspinal pain at L2-3
 Superficial pain perception—absent caudal to L2
- Treatment
Deep pain perception—-blunted caudal to L2-3
Corticosteroids were recommended for palliative treatment
of edema and spinal pain. Euthanasia was eventually per-
· Lesion Location
formed. A nephroblastoma at Ll-Z was diagnosed on his-
 The neurologic examination reveals bilateral UMN paraly-
topathology.
sis to both pelvic limbs, suggesting a lesion in spinal cord
segment T3-L3. The clinical course suggests a progressive
disease. Sensory evaluation suggests a lesion at segment L2-3.
152
PART II
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 6-4
UGA
veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
: Lesion Location
Canine, bulldog, male, 7 weeks old
LMN signs with blunted pain perception suggest a bilateral
lesion in the spinal cord segments L6-S2 or in the lumbosa-
- History
 ral plexus. The urinary and fecal incontinence is explained
Since he became ambulatory, the puppy has had a spastic,
 by a lesion in this region. The age and the breed suggest an 
ataxic gait in the PLs. Urinary and fecal incontinence have
 anomalous/congenital abnormality.
been present for at least Z weeks.
· Differential Diagnosis
- Physical Examination
1. Congenital/anomalous
 Urinary incontinence is present. No tone in anal sphincter.
a.
Spina bifida
 There was a small depression over the dorsal, midine area
 b. Spinal dysraphism
 just cranial to sacrum.
2. Trauma
3. Inflammatory [infectious)
. Neurologic Examination
Mental status
· Diagnostic Plan
Alert, responsive
 1. Radiography of the lumbosacral vertebrae to evaluation
for vertebral anomalies
Gait
2.1
 EMG of the perineal muscles
 Ambulatory paraparesis with a bunny-hopping gait; normal
 3. MRI of the lumbosacral vertebral column to detect spinal
 in thoracic limbs
cord anomalies
4. CSF analysis to rule out inflammatory infectious diseases.
Posture
Wide-based stance in the PLs
: Diagnostic Results
Radiographs revealed evidence of spina bifida involving the
Postural reactions
 acrum. MRI was performed and a meningomyelocele was
 Proprioceptive positioning was absent in both PLs. Hopping
 demonstrated. EMG and CSF analysis were not performed.
and extensor postural thrust reactions were decreased in
both PLs. Tactile placing was absent in both PLs,
. Diagnosis
The diagnosis was spina bifida with concurrent myelo-
Spinal reffexes
 meningocele.
Patellar reflex was normal in both PLs. The flexor reflex was
decreased to absent in both PLs. The perineal reflex was
- Treatment
absent. The cutaneous trunci reflex was intact.
None; the owners could not have a dog with urinary incon-
tinence. The dog was euthanized.
Cranial nerves
All normal
Sensory evaluation
Hyperesthesia—none
Superficial pain perception—absent in perineal area
 Deep pain perception—present but decreased in tail
CASE STUDY 6-5
TONTO
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Gait
 German shepherd dog, 7-year-old FS
General proprioceptive ataxia and paraparesis
- History.
Posture
Five months before admission, the dog jumped off a retain-
 Mild kyphosis
 pue ued yeq pamous aus panu sem pue tem su
ficulty moving. which has progressively gotten worse. The
Postural reactions
dog was initially treated for a urinary tract infection after E.
 Proprioceptive positioning is reduced in both PLs. Hopping
 coli was isolated from the urine.
reactions are decreased in both PLs. Thoracic limbs have no
deficits.
: Physical Examination
The dog is thin and vitals were within normal limits.
Spinal reflexes
Patellar reflex was normal to increased in both PLs. The
· Neurologic Examination
cutaneous trunci reflex was intact.
Mental status
Dull
Cranial nerves
All normal
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
153
CASE STUDY 6-5
TONTO
cont'd
Sensory evaluation
 2. Radiography of the vertebral column to evaluate for
Hyperesthesia—marked paraspinal pain in the cranial aspect
bony neoplasms and infection involving the bone and
 of the lumbar vertebral column
disk spaces.
Superficial pain perception—normal
 3. MRI to further assess vertebral column lesions and lesions
Deep pain perception—not assessed
in the spinal cord.
 4. CSF analysis to rule out inflammatory infectious diseases
. Lesion Location
The neurologic examination reveals bilateral UMN parapa-
. Diagnostic Results
resis to both pelvic limbs, suggesting a lesion in spinal cord
 Utrasonography of kidneys revealed pyelonephritis. Survey
segment T3-L3. The clinical course suggests a progressive
radiographs of spine revealed a discospondylitis lesion at
disease. The hyperesthesia suggests a lesion involving the
 Ll-2 IVD space and multiple lesions in the thoracic spine.
cranial lumbar spinal cord segment(s). Structures that may
Serology for Brucella canis was negative. Urinalysis revealed
be involved are those that are pain sensitive, such as the
presence of fungal hyphae. Urine and blood cultures specif-
vertebra, meninges, nerve roots, and disk.
cally for bacteria yielded no growth. Urine was then specifi-
cally cultured for fungal agents and Aspergilus terreus was
. Differential Diagnosis
isolated.
1. Degenerative
a. Hansen type II IVDD
. Diagnosis
2. Neoplasia
A terreus causes disseminated aspergillosis with discospon-
a.Vertebral
body-
—osteosarcoma,
 chondrosarcoma,
dylitis being a common feature. The disease has been most
fibrosarcoma
commonly reported in German shepherd dogs from West-
b. Extradural—metastatic
ern Australia but isolated cases are reported in the United
c. Intradural
extramedullary—meningioma,
nerve
States.
sheath tumor
3. Inflammatory [infectious/noninfectious]
. Treatment
a. Discospondylitis
 Treatment with antifungal agents may slow the disease pro-
 b. Meningomyelitis-GME, bacterial, rickettsial, protozoal
 gression but often long-term prognosis is poor. After diagno-
4. Trauma
sis, the dog continued to deteriorate and the owner elected
euthanasia.
- Diagnostic Plan
1. A systemic workup due to the physical examination
abnormalities.
REFERENCES
10. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, et al: Association of
clinical and magnetic resonance imaging findings with
1. Hoerlein BF: Intervertebral disc disease. In Oliver JE,
outcome in dogs with presumptive acute noncompres-
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology
sive nucleus pulposus extrusion: 42 cases [2000-2007),
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 234[4):495-504, 2009.
2. Hoerlein BF: Intervertebral disc disease. In Hoerlein BF,
11. Sukhiani HR, Parent JM, Atilola MA, et al: Intervertebral
editor: Canine neurology: diagnosis and treatment, ed 3,
disk disease in dogs with signs of back pain alone: 25
Philadelphia, 1978, WB Saunders.
cases [1986-1993), J Am Vet Med Assoc 209(7):1275-
 3. Hansen HJ:A pathologic-anatomical study on disc degen-
1279,1996
eration in dog, Acta Orthop Scand, Suppl 1l:1-117,
12. Gage ED: Incidence of clinical disc disease in the dog.
1952.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11:135-138, 1975.
 4. Hansen HJ: A pathologic-anatomical interpretation of
13. Cudia SP, Duval JM: Thoracolumbar intervertebral
disc degeneration in dogs, Acta Orthop Scand 20:280-
disk disease in large, nonchondrodystrophic dogs: a
293, 1951.
retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(5):
5. Priester WA: Canine intervertebral disc disease-occur-
456-460, 1997.
rence by age, breed, and sex among 8,117 cases, Therio-
14. Olby N, Levine J, Harris T, et al: Long-term functional
genology 6(2-3):293-303, 1976.
outcome of dogs with severe injuries of the thoracolum-
6. Stigen O: Calcifcation of intervertebral discs in the
bar spinal cord: 87 cases [1996-2001), J Am Vet Med
dachshund. A radiographic study of 327 young dogs, Acta
Assoc 22:2762-2769, 2003.
Vet Scand 32[2):197-203, 1991.
15. Scott HW, McKee WM: Laminectomy for 34 dogs with
7. Stigen O: Calcification of intervertebral discs in the
thoracolumbar intervertebral disc disease and loss of
dachshund: a radiographic study of 115 dogs at 1 and 5
deep pain perception, J Small Anim Pract 40:417-422,
years of age, Acta Vet Scand 37(3):229-237, 1996.
1999.
 8. Jensen VF, Arnbjerg J: Development of intervertebral
16. Kirberger RM: Recent developments in canine lum-
disk calcification in the dachshund: a prospective lon-
bar myelography, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
gitudinal radiographic study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
16(7):847-854, 1994.
37:274-282, 2001.
17. Olby NJ, Dyce J, Houlton JEF: Correlation of plain
 9. Griffiths IR: The extensive myelopathy of intervertebral
radiographic and lumbar myelographic findings with
disc protrusions in dogs (ascending syndrome), J Small
surgical findings in thoracolumbar disc disease, J Small
Anim Pract 13:425, 1972.
Anim Pract 35[7):345-350, 1994.
154
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
18. Duval J, Dewey C, Roberts R, et al: Spinal cord swelling
35. Loughin CA, Dewey CW, Ringwood PB, et al: Effect of
 as a myelographic indicator of prognosis: a retrospective
durotomy on functional outcome of dogs with type I tho-
study in dogs with intervertebral disc disease and loss of
racolumbar disc extrusion and absent deep pain percep-
deep pain perception, Vet Surg 25(1):6-12, 1996.
tion, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 18:141-i46, 2005.
19. Olby NJ, Munana KR, Sharp NJ, et al: The computed
36. Tarlov I, Klinger H: Spinal cord compression studies II:
tomographic appearance of acute thoracolumbar inter-
time limits for recovery after acute compression in dogs.
vertebral disc herniations in dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
Arch Neurol Psychiatry 71:271-290, 1954.
41[5):396-402, 2000.
37. Tarlov I, Klinger H, Vitale S: Spinal cord compression
20. Naude SH, Lambrechts NE, Wagner WM, et al: Associa-
studies I: experimental techniques to produce acute and
tion of preoperative magnetic resonance imaging findings
gradual compression, Arch Neurol Psychiatry 70:813-
with surgical features in dachshunds with thoracolum-
819, 1953.
bar intervertebral disk extrusion, J Am Vet Med Assoc
38. Knecht CD: The effect of delayed hemilaminectomy in
23:2702-2708, 2008.
 the treatment of intervertebral disc protrusion in dogs.
21. Besalti O, Ozak A, Pekcan Z, et al: The role of extruded disk
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:449, 1970.
material in thoracolumbar intervertebral disk disease: a ret-
 39. Brown NO, Helphrey ML, Prata RG: Thoracolumbar
rospective study in 40 dogs, Can Vet J 46:814-820, 2005.
disk disease in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 187
22. Besalti O, Pekcan Z, Sirin S, et al: Magnetic resonance
cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:665-672, 1977.
imaging findings in dogs with thoracolumbar interverte-
40. Gambardella PC: Dorsal decompressive laminectomy
bral disk disease: 69 cases [1997-2005), J Am Vet Med
for treatment of thoracolumbar disc disease in dogs: a
Assoc 22:8902-8908, 2006.
retrospective study of 98 cases, Vet Surg 9[1):24-26,
23. Tidwell AS, Specht A, Blaeser L, et al: Magnetic reso-
1980.
nance imaging features of extradural hematomas asso-
41. Ferreira AJA, Correia JHD, Jaggy A: Thoracolumbar
ciated with intervertebral disc herniation in a dog, Vet
disc disease in 7l paraplegic dogs: influence of rate of
Radiol Ultrasound 43:319-324, 2002.
onset and duration of clinical signs on treatment results,
24. Ito D, Matsunaga S, Jeffery ND, et al: Prognostic value
J Small Anim Pract 43:158-163, 2002.
 of magnetic resonance imaging in dogs with paraplegia
42. Shores A, Cechner PE, Cantwell HD, et al: Structural
caused by thoracolumbar intervertebral disk extrusion:
changes in thoracolumbar disks following lateral fenes-
77 cases [2000-2003), J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1454-
tration. A study of the radiographic, histologic, and his-
1460,2005.
tochemical changes in the chondrodystrophoid dog, Vet
25. Levine JM, Fosgate GT, Chen A, et al: Magnetic reso-
Surg 14(2):117-123, 1985
nance imaging in dogs with neurologic impairment due
43. Dickey DT, Bartels KE, Henry GA, et al: Use of the hol-
to acute thoracic and lumbar intervertebral disk hernia-
mium yttrium aluminum garnet laser for percutaneous
tion, J Vet Intern Med 23:1220-1226, 2009.
thoracolumbar intervertebral disk ablation in dogs, J Am
26. Stiffler KS, Stevenson MAM, Sanchez S: Prevalence and
Vet Med Assoc 208[8):1263-1267, 1996.
characterization of urinary tract infections in dogs with
44. Bartels KE, Higbee RG, Bahr RJ, et al: Outcome of and
surgically treated type l intervertebral disc extrusion,
complications associated with prophylactic percutane-
Vet Surg 35:330-336, 2006.
ous laser disk ablation in dogs with thoracolumbar disk
27. Funkquist B: Investigations of the therapeutic and
disease: 277 cases [1992-2001), J Am Vet Med Assoc
 prophylactic effects of disc evacuation in cases of tho-
222(12):1733-1739, 2003.
racolumbar herniated discs in dogs, Acta Vet Scand
45. Black AP: Lateral spinal decompression in the dog: a
19:441-457, 1978.
review of 39 cases, J Small Anim Pract 29[9):581-588,
28. Davies JV, Sharp NJH: A comparison of conservative
1988.
 treatment and fenestration for thoracolumbar interverte-
 46. Knapp DW, Pope ER, Hewett JE, et al: A retrospective
bral disc disease in the dog, J Small Anim Pract 24:721-
study of thoracolumbar disk fenestration in dogs using a
729.1983
ventral approach: 160 cases [1976 to 1986), J Am Anim
29. Levine JM, Levine GJ, Johnson SI, et al: Evaluation of
Hosp Assoc 26:543-549, 1990.
the success of medical management for presumptive
47. Funkquist B: Decompressive laminectomy in thoraco-
thoracolumbar intervertebral disk hermiation in dogs, Vet 
lumbar disc protrusion with paraplegia in the dog.
Surg 36:482-491, 2007.
J Small Anim Pract 11:445-451, 1970.
30. Funkquist B:Thoraco-lumbar disk protrusion with severe
48. Brisson BA, Moffatt SL, Swayne AL, et al: Recurrence
cord compression in the dog II: clinical observations with
of thoracolumbar intervertebral disk extrusion in chon-
special reference to the prognosis in conservative treat-
drodystrophic dogs after surgical decompression with
ment, Acta Vet Scand 3:317-343, 1962.
or without prophylactic fenestration: 265 cases [1995-
31. Mann FA, Wagner-Mann CC, Dunphy ED, et al: Recur-
1999), J Am Vet Med Assoc 224:1808-1814, 2004.
rence rate of presumed thoracolumbar intervertebral
 49. Schulman A, Lippincott CL: Dorsolateral hemilaminec-
disc disease in ambulatory dogs with spinal hyperpathia
tomy in the treatment of thoracolumbar intervertebral
treated with anti-inflammatory drugs: 78 (1997-2000),
disk disease in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
J Vet Emerg Crit Care 17:53-60, 2007.
9(3):305-310, 1987.
32. Horne TRJ, Powers RD, Swaim SF: Dorsal laminectomy
50. Forterre F, Gorgas D, Dickomeit M, et al: Incidence of
techniques in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 171(8):742-
spinal compressive lesions in chondrodystrophic dogs
749, 1977.
with abnormal recovery after hemilaminectomy for
33. McKee WM: A comparison of hemilaminectomy (with
treatment of thoracolumbar disc disease: a prospective
concomitant disc fenestration) and dorsal laminectomy
magnetic resonance imaging study, Vet Surg 39(2):165-
for the treatment of thoracolumbar disc protrusion in
172, 2010.
dogs, Vet Rec 130(14):296-300, 1992.
51. Ruddle TL, Allen DA, Schertel ER, et al: Outcome and
34. Schulz KS, Waldron DR, Grant JW, et al: Biomechanics
prognostic factors in nonambulatory Hansen type I inter-
of the thoracolumbar vertebral column of dogs during
vertebral disc extrusions: 308 cases, Vet Comp Orthop
lateral bending, Am J Vet Res 57(8):1228-1232, 1996.
Traumatol 19:29-34, 2006.
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
155
52. Yovich JC, Read R, Eger C, et al: Modified lateral spinal
73. Furr M, MacKay R, Granstrom D: Clinical diagnosis of
 decompression in 61 dogs with thoracolumbar disc pra-
equine protozoal myeloencephalomyelitis, J Vet Intern
trusion, J Small Anim Pract 35:351-356, 1994.
Med 16:618-621, 2002.
53. Scott HW: Hemilaminectomy for the treatment of tho-
74. Furr M: Antigen-specific antibodies in cerebrospinal fluid
racolumbar disc disease in the dog: a follow-up study of
after intramuscular injection of ovalbumin in horses,
40 cases, J Small Anim Pract 38[11):488-494, 1997.
JVet InternMed 16(5):588-592,2002:Erratumappearsin
54. Anderson SM, Lippincott CL, Gill PJ: Hemilaminec-
J Vet Intern Med 16(6):748, 2000.
tomy in dogs without deep pain perception.A retrospec-
75. Cook AG, Buechner-Maxwell V, Morrow JK, et al:
tive study of 32 cases, CalifVet: 45:24-28, 1991.
Interpretation of the detection of Sarcocystis neurona
55. Pusterla N, David WW, Madigan JE, et al: Equine her-
antibodies in the serum of young horses, Vet Parasitol
pesvirus-l myeloencephalopathy: a review of recent
95[2-4):187-195, 2001.
developments, Vet J 180(3):279-289, 2009 :review.
76. Duarte PC, Ebel ED, Traub-Dargatz J, et al: Indirect
56. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, Iowa,
fluorescent antibody testing of cerebrospinal fluid for
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
diagnosis of equine protozoal myeloencephalitis, Am J
57. Lunn DP, Davis-Poynter N, Flaminio MJBF, et al: Equine
Vet Res 67:869-876, 2006.
herpesvirus-l consensus statement, J Vet Intern Med
77. Crowdus CA, Marsh AE, Saville WJ, et al: SnSAG5 is an
23:450-461,2009.
alternative surface antigen of Sarcocystis neurona strains
58. Allen GP, Bryans JT': Molecular epizootiology, pathogen-
that is mutually exclusive to SnSAGl, Vet Parasitol
esis and prophylaxis of equine herpesvirus-l infection,
158[1-2]:36-43, 2008.
Prog Vet Microbiol 2:78-144, 1986.
78. Daft BM, Barr BC, Gardner IA, et al: Sensitivity and
59. Jackson TA, Osburn Bl, Cordy DR, et al: Equine herpes-
specificity of western blot testing of cerebrospinal fluid
virus l infection of horses: studies on the experimentally
and serum for diagnosis of equine protozoal myelo-
induced neurologic disease, Am J Vet Res 38(6):709-719,
encephalitis in horses with and without neurologic
1977.
abnormalities, J Am Vet Med Assoc 221(7):1007-1013,
60. Kydd JH, Townsend HG, Hannant D: The equine
2002.
 immune response to equine herpesvirus-1: the virus and
79. Ostlund EN, Crom RL, Pederson DD: Equine West Nile
its vaccines, Vet Immunol Immunopathol 1l:1l5-130,
encephalitis, United States, Emerg Infect Dis 7:665-669,
2006.
2001.
61. Allen GP: Development of a real-time polymerase
80. McLean RG, Ubico SR, Bourne D, et al: West Nile virus
 chain reaction assay for rapid diagnosis of neuropatho-
in livestock and wildlife, Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
genic strains of equine herpesvirus-1, J Vet Diagn Invest
267:271-308, 2002.
19:69-72,2007
81. Castillo-Olivares J, Wood J: West Nile virus infection of
62. Allen GP: Epidemic disease caused by equine herpes-
horses, Vet Res 35[4):467-483, 2004.
virus-l: recommendations for prevention and control,
82. Porter MB, Long MT, Getman LM, et al: West Nile virus
Equine Vet Educ 4:177-183, 2002.
encephalomyelitis in horses: 46 cases (2001), J Am Vet
 63. Henninger RW, Reed SM, Saville WJ, et al: Outbreak
Med Assoc 222(9):1241-1247, 2003.
of neurologic disease caused by equine herpesvirus-1
83. Wamsley HL, Alleman AR, Porter MB, et al: Find-
 at a university equestrian center, J Vet Intern Med
ings in cerebrospinal fluids of horses infected with
21(1):157-165, 2007.
West Nile virus: 30 cases [200l), J Am Vet Med Assoc
64. Sellon DC, Dubey JP: Equine protozoal myeloencepha-
221(9):1303-1305, 2002.
litis. In Sellon DC, Long MT, editors: Equine infectious 
84. Kleiboeker SB, Loiacono CM, Rottinghaus A, et al: Diag-
diseases, St Louis, 2007, Elsevier.
nosis of West Nile virus infection in horses, J Vet Diagn
65. Dubey JP, Davis SW, Speer CA: Sarcocystis neurona n. sp.
Invest 16(1):2-10, 2004.
(Protozoa: Apicomplexa), the etiologic agent of equine pro-
85. Porter MB, Long M, Gosche DG, et al: Immunoglobulin
tozoal myeloencephalitis, J Parasitol 77:212-218, 1991
 M-capture enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay testing
66. Dubey JP, Lindsay DS, Saville WJ, et al: A review of Sar-
of cerebrospinal fluid and serum from horses exposed to
cocystis neurona and equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
West Nile virus by vaccination or natural infection, J Vet
(EPM), Vet Parasitol 95:89-131, 2001.
Intern Med 18(6):866-870, 2004.
67. Fenger CK, Granstrom DE, Langemeier JL, et al: Identi-
86. Lester G: Parasitic encephalomyelitis in horses, Com-
fication of opossums (Didelphis virginiana) as the puta-
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 14(i2):1624-1631, 1992.
tive definitive host of Sarcocystis neurona. J Parasitol
87.1
Nagy DW: Parelaphostrongylus temuis and other parasitic
81(6):916-919, 1995.
diseases of the ruminant nervous system, Vet Clin Food
68. Fayer R, Mayhew IG, Baird JD, et al: Epidemiology of
Anim 20:393-412, 2004.
equine protozoal myeloencephalitis in North America
88. Callan RJ, Van Metre DC: Viral diseases of the ruminant
based on histologically confirmed cases. A report, J Vet
nervous system, Vet Clin Food Anim 20:327-362, 2004.
Intern Med 4(2):54-57, 1990.
89. Rowe JD, East NE: Risk factors for transmission and
69. Clark EG, Townsend HGG, McKenzie NT: Equine pro-
methods for control of caprine arthritis-encephalitis
tozoal myeloencephalitis: a report of two cases from
virus infection, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
Western Canada, Can Vet J 22[5):140-144, 1981.
13[1):35-53, 1997.
70. Dorr TE, Higgins RJ, Dangler CA, et al: Protozoal myelo-
90. de la Concha-Bermejillo A: Maedi-visna and ovine pro-
encephalitis in horses in California, J Am Vet Med Assoc
gressive pneumonia, Vet Clin Food Anim 13:13-33,
185(7):801-802, 1984.
1997.
71. Cohen ND, Mackay RJ, Toby E, et al: A multicenter case-
91. de AD, Klein D, Watt NJ, et al: Diagnostic tests for small
 control study of risk factors for equine protozoal myeloen-
ruminant lentiviruses, Vet Microbiol 107[1-2):49-62,
cephalitis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231[12):1857-1863, 2007.
2005:review.
72. Mayhew IG: Measurements of the accuracy of clinical
 92. Thomas WB: Diskospondylitis and other vertebral infec-
 diagnoses of equine neurologic disease, J Vet Intern Med
tions, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:169-182,
5[6]:332-334, 1991.
2000.
156
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
93. Jimenez MM, O'Callaghan MW: Vertebral physitis: a
118. Cherrone KL, Eich CS, Bonzynski JJ: Suspected paraspi-
radiographic diagnosis to be separated from discospon-
nal abscess and spinal epidural empyema in a dog, J Am
dylitis. A preliminary report, Vet Radiol Utrasound
Anim Hosp Assoc 38(2):149-151, 2002:review.
36(3):188-195, 1995.
119. Dewey CW, Kortz GD, Bailey CS: Spinal epidural empy-
94. Hurov L, Troy G Turnwald G: Diskospondylitis in the dog:
ema in two dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34[4):305-308,
27 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 173[3):275-281, 1978.
1998.
 95. Kornegay JN, Barber DL: Diskospondylitis in dogs J Am
120. Nykamp SG, Steffey MA, Scrivani PV, et al: Computed
Vet Med Assoc 177[4):337-341, 1980.
tomographic appearance of epidural empyema in a dog.
96. Kornegay JN: Canine diskospondylitis, Compend Contin
Can Vet J 44(9):729-731, 2003.
Educ Pract Vet 1(12):930-934, 1979.
121. Turner WD: Fractures and fracture-luxations of the lum-
97. Jacob F, Bagley RS, Moore MP, et al: Cervical interver-
bar spine: retrospective study in the dog, J Am Anim
tebral disk protrusion, diskospondylitis, and porcupine
Hosp Assoc 23[4):459-464, 1987.
quill foreign body in a dog, Prog Vet Neurol 7(2):53-55,
122. Selcer RR, Bubb WJ, Walker TL: Management of ver-
1996.
tebral column fractures in dogs and cats: 2ll cases
98. Johnston DE, Summers BA: Osteomyelitis ofthe lumbar
(1977-1985), J Am Vet Med Assoc 198[11):1965-1968,
vertebrae in dogs caused by grass-seed foreign bodies, Vet
1991.
J 47:289, 1971.
123. Rucker NC: Management of spinal cord trauma, Prog
99. Malik R, Lattimer JC, Love W: Bacterial diskospondylitis
Vet Neurol 1[4):397-412, 1990.
in a cat, J Small Anim Pract 31:404-406, 1990.
124. Shores A: Spinal trauma. Pathophysiology and manage-
100. Henderson RA, Hoerlein BF, Kramer TT, et al: Disco-
ment of traumatic spinal injuries, Vet Clin North Am
spondylitis in three dogs infected with, Brucella canis,
Small Anim Pract 22[4):859-888, 1992.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 165(5):451-455, 1974.
125.Janssens LAA: Mechanical and
1pathophysiological
101. Kerwin SC, Lewis DD, Hribernik TN, et al: Diskospon-
aspects of acute spinal cord trauma, J Small Anim Pract
dylitis associated with Brucella canis infection in dogs: 14
32[11):572-578, 1991.
cases [1980-1991), J Am Vet Med Assoc 201(8):1253-
126. Feeney DA, Oliver JE: Blunt spinal trauma in the dog
1257, 1992.
and cat: neurologic, radiologic, and therapeutic correla-
102. Turnwald GH, Shires PK, Turk MA, et al: Diskospondy-
tions, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:664-668, 1980.
litis in a kennel of dogs: clinicopathologic findings, J Am
127. Olby N: Current concepts in the management of acute
Vet Med Assoc 188[2):178-183, 1986.
(1    1   s
103. Turnbull IM: Microvasculature of the human spinal cord,
1999.
J Neurosurg 35(2):141-147, 1971
128. Coughlan AR: Secondary injury mechanisms in acute
104. Crock HV, Goldwass M: Anatomic studies of the circu-
spinal cord trauma, J Small Anim Pract 34:117-122,
lation in the region of the vertebral end-plate in adult
1993.
greyhound dogs, Spine 9:702, 1984.
129. Griffiths IR: Spinal cord blood flow after acute experi-
105.(
Gilmore DR: Lumbosacral diskospondylitis in 21 dogs,
mental cord injury in dogs, J Neurol Sci 27(2):247-259,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:57-6l, 1987.
1976.
 106. Doige C: Discospondylitis in swine, Can J Comp Med
130. Shores A, Braund KG, Brawner WR Jr: Management
44:121-128, 1980.
of acute spinal cord trauma, Vet Med 85[7):724-743,
107. Sherman DM, Ames TR: Vertebral body abscesses
1990.
in cattle: a review of five cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc
131. Bagley RS: Spinal fracture or luxation, Vet Clin North
188(6):608-611, 1986.
Am Small Anim Pract 30:130-153, 2000.
108. Finley GG: A survey of vertebral abscesses in domestic
132. Bagley RS, Silver GM, Connors RL, et al: Exogenous
animals in Ontario, Can Vet J 16:114-117, 1975
spinal trauma: surgical therapy and aftercare, Compend
109. Divers TJ:Acquired spinal cord and peripheral nerve dis-
Contin Educ Pract Vet 22:218-230, 2000.
ease, Vet Clin Food Anim 20:231-242, 2004.
133. Braund KG, Shores A, Brawner WR Jr: The etiology,
110. Davis MJ, Dewey CW, Wallker MA, et al: Contrast radio-
pathology, and pathophysiology of acute spinal cord
graphic finding in canine bacterial discospondylitis: a
trauma, Vet Med 85(7):684-691, 1990.
multicenter, retrospective study of 27 cases, J Am Anim
134. Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Silver GM, et al: Exogenous 
Hosp Assoc 36:81-85, 2000.
   s   
11l. Kraft SL, Mussman JM, Smith T, et al: Magnetic reso-
ment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 21(12):1138-
nance imaging of presumptive lumbosacral discospondy
1144, 1999.
litis in a dog, Vet Radiol Utrasound 39[1]:9-13, 1998.
135.Smith PM, Jeffery ND: Spinal shock—compara-
112. Fischer A, Mahaffey MB, Oliver JE: Fluoroscopically
tive aspects and clinical relevance, J Vet Intern Med
guided percutaneous disk aspiration in 10 dogs with dis
19(6):788-793, 2005.
kospondylitis, J Vet Intern Med 11(5):284-287, 1997.
136.
Shires PK, Waldron DR, Hedlund CS: A biomechanical
113. Gage ED: Treatment of discospondylitis in the dog, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 166[12):1164-1169, 1975.
altered canine thoracolumbar vertebral motion units,
114. Holloway A, Dennis R, McConnell F, et al: Magnetic
Prog Vet Neurol 2:6-14, 1991.
resonance imaging features of paraspinal infection in the
137. Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF, et al: A random-
dog and cat, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50:285-291, 2009.
ized, controlled trial of methylprednisolone or naloxone.
115. Destefani A, Garosi LS, McConnell FJ, et al: Magnetic
in the treatment of acute spinal-cord injury. Results of
resonance imaging features of spinal epidural empyema
the second national acute spinal cord injury study, N
in five dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 49(2):135-140, 2008.
Engl J Med 322(20):1405-1411, 1990.
116. Lavely JA, Vernau KM, Vernau W, et al: Spinal epidural
138. Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Holford TR, et al: Methyl-
empyema in seven dogs, Vet Surg 35(2):176-185, 2006.
prednisolone or tirilazad mesylate administration after
117. Jerram RM, Dewey CW: Suspected spinal epidural
acute spinal cord injury: l-year follow-up. Results of the
empyema and associated vertebral osteomyelitis (physi-
third national acute spinal cord injury randomized con-
tis) in a dog, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 8[2):103-108, 1998.
trolled trial, J Neurosurg 89(5):699-706, 1998.
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
157
139. Hall ED, Wolf DL, Braughler JM: Effects of a single
160. Waxman FJ, Clemmons RM, Johnson G, et al: Progres-
large dose of methylprednisolone sodium succinate
sive myelopathy in older German shepherd dogs. I.
on experimental posttraumatic spinal cord ischemia.
Depressed response to thymus-dependent mitogens,
Dose-response and time-action analysis, J Neurosurg
J Immunol 124(3):1209-1215, 1980.
61(1):124-130, 1984.
161. Waxman FJ, Clemmons RM, Hinrichs DJ: Progressive
140. Faden AI, Salzman S: Pharmacological strategies in CNS
myelopathy in older German shepherd dogs. II. Presence
trauma, Trends Pharmacol Sci 13[1):29-35, 1992.
of circulating suppressor cells, J Immunol 124(3):1216-
141. Braughler JM, Hall ED, Means ED, et al: Evaluation of an
1222, 1980.
 intensive methylprednisolone sodium succinate dosing
162. Barclay KB, Haines DM: Immunohistochemical evidence
regimen in experimental spinal cord injury, J Neurosurg
for immunoglobulin and complement deposition in spi-
67(1):102-105, 1987.
nal cord lesions in degenerative myelopathy in German
142. Boag AK, Otto CM, Drobatz KJ: Complications of meth-
shepherd dogs, Can J Vet Res 58[1):20-24, 1994.
ylprednisolone sodium succinate therapy in dachshunds
163. Wiliams DA, Sharp NJH, Batt RM: Enteropathy associ-
with surgically treated intervertebral disc disease, J Vet 
ated with degenerative myelopathy in German shepherd
Emerg Crit Care 11:105-110, 2001.
dogs, Proc 1st ACVIM Forum 40, 1983.
143. Culbert LA, Marino DJ, Baule RM, et al: Complications
164. Williams DA, Batt RM, Sharp NJH: Degenerative
associated with high-dose prednisolone sodium succi-
myelopathy in German shepherd dogs: an association
 nate therapy in dogs with neurological injury, J Am Anim
with mucosal biochemical changes and bacterial over-
Hosp Assoc 34(2):129-134, 1998.
growth in the small intestine, Clin Sci 66:25, 1984
144. Hoerlein BF, Redding RW, Hoff EJ, et al: Evaluation
165. Fechner H, Johnston PE, Sharp NJH, et al: Molecu-
of dexamethasone, DMSO, mannitol, and Solcoseryl
lar genetic and expression analysis of alpha-tocopherol
in acute spinal cord trauma, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
transfer protein mRNA in German shepherd dogs with
19(2):216-226, 1983.
degenerative myelopathy, Berl Much Tierarztl Wochen-
145. Bruecker KA: Principles of vertebral fracture management,
schr 11:631-636, 2003.
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 11[4):259-272, 1996.
166. Johnston PEJ, Knox K, Gettinby G, et al: Serum
146. Sturges BK, LeCouteur RA: Vertebral fractures and luxa-
α-tocopherol concentrations in German shepherd dogs
tions. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small animal sur-
with chronic degenerative radiculomyelopathy Vet Rec
gery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, WB Saunders.
148:403-407, 2001
147. Carberry CA, Flanders JA, Dietze AE, et al: Nonsurgical
167. Sheahan BJ, Caffrey JF, Gunn HM, et al: Structural
management of thoracic and lumbar spinal fractures and
and biochemical changes in a spinal myelinopathy in
facture luxations in the dog and cat: a review of 17 cases,
twelve English foxhounds and two harriers, Vet Pathol
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25[1):43-54, 1989.
28{2):117-124, 1991.
148. Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ: Small animal spinal disorders:
168. Coates JR, March PA, Oglesbee M, et al: Clinical
 diagnosis and surgery, London, 2005, Elsevier.
 characterization of a familial degenerative myelopa-
 149. Bruce CW, Brisson BA, Gyselinck K: Spinal fracture and
thy in Pembroke Welsh corgi dogs, J Vet Intern Med
luxation in dogs and cats: a retrospective evaluation of 95
21(6):1323-1331, 2007.
cases, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 21:280-284, 2008.
169. Olby NJ, Sharp NJH, Munana KR, et al: Chronic and
150. Hawthorne JC, Blevins WE, Wallace LJ, et al: Cervical
acute compressive spinal cord lesions in dogs are associ-
ated with increased lumbar CSF glutamate levels, J Vet
Anim Hosp Assoc 35(2):135-146, 1999.
Intern Med 13(3):240, 1999:abstract.
 si   r     ssa 
170. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M, Lang J, et al: Degenerative
Steinmann pins and methylmethacrylate, Vet Surg
myelopathy in a family of Siberian husky dogs, J Am Vet
13[4):203-210, 1984.
Med Assoc 183(9):998-1000, 1983.
152. Blauch B: Spinal reflex walking in the dog, Vet Med
17l. Long SN, Henthorn PS, Serpell J, et al: Degenerative
Small Anim Clin 72[2):169-173, 1977.
myelopathy in Chesapeake Bay retrievers, J Vet Intern 
153. Rossignol S, Bouyer L, Barthelemy D, et al: Determi-
Med 23:401-402, 2009.
nants of locomotor recovery in the cat following spinal
17la. Abstract—clemmons et al: FASEB 2006.
cord lesions, Prog Brain Res 143:163-172, 2004.
172. Clark LA, Tsai KL, Murphy KE: Alleles of DLA-DRB1
154. Averill DR Jr: Degenerative myelopathy in the aging
are not unique in German shepherd dogs having degen-
German shepherd dog: clinical and pathologic findings,
erative myelopathy, Anim Genet 39(3):332, 2008.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 162[12):1045-1051, 1973.
173. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doherr MG, et al: Daily
155. Griffths IR, Duncan ID: Chronic degenerative radiculo-
 controlled physiotherapy increases survival time in dogs
myelopathy in the dog, J Small Anim Pract 16[8):461-
with suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet Intern
471, 1975.
Med 20:927-932, 2006.
156. Braund KG, Vandevelde M: German shepherd dog
174. Matthews NS, de Lahunta A: Degenerative myelopa-
myelopathy: a morphologic and morphometric study.
thy in an adult miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Am J Vet Res 39[8):1309-1315, 1978.
186[11):1213-1215, 1985.
157. Johnston PEJ, Barrie JA, McCulloch MC, et al: Central ner-
175. Miller AD, Barber R, Porter BF, et al: Degenerative myelop-
athy in two boxer dogs, Vet Pathol 46[4):684-687, 2009.
tive radiculomyelopathy Vet Rec 146[22):629-633, 2000.
176.1
 Polizopoulou ZS, Koutinas AF, Patsikas MN, et al: Evalu-
158. March PA, Coates JR, Abyad RJ, et al: Degenerative
ation of a proposed therapeutic protocol in 12 dogs
myelopathy in 18 Pembroke Welsh corgi dogs, Vet Pathol
with tentative degenerative myelopathy, Acta Vet Hung
46:241-250, 2009.
56[3):293-301, 2008.
159. Awano T, Johnson GS, Wade CM, et al: Genome-wide
177. Kneller SK, Oliver JE, Lewis RE: Differential diagnosis
association analysis reveals a SODl mutation in canine
of progressive caudal paresis in an aged German shep-
degenerative myelopathy that resembles amyotrophic
herd dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1l:414-417, 1975.
lateral sclerosis, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:2794-
178. Braund KG: Hip dysplasia and degenerative myelopathy
2799, 2009.
making the distinction in dogs, Vet Med 782-789, 1987.
158
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
179. Clemmons RM: Degenerative myelopathy. In Kirk RW,
201. LeCouteur RA: Disease of the spinal cord. In Ettinger
editor: Current veterinary therapy X: small animal prac-
SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal
tice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
medicine, ed 5, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
   n   r  
202.1
 Finnie JW, Sinclair IR: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses
the neurological patient. In Platt SR, Olby NJ, editors:
in a dog, J Small Anim Pract 22[9):597-602, 1981.
BSAVA manual of canine and feline neurology, ed 3,
203. Reidarson TH, Metz AL, Hardy RM: Thoracic verte-
Gloucester, UK, 2004, BSAVA.
bral osteochondroma in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
181. Cockrell BY, Herigstad RR, Flo GL, et al: Myelomalacia
192[8):1102-1104, 1988.
in Afghan hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:362-365,
204. Doige CE: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in dogs, Vet
1973.
Pathol 24(3):276-278, 1987.
182. Oevermann A, Bley T, Konar M, et al: A novel leuko-
 205. Jacobson LS, Kirberger RM: Canine multiple cartilagi-
encephalomyelopathy of Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern
nous exostoses: unusual manifestations and a review
Med 22:467-471, 2008.
of the literature, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32[1]:45-51,
183. Douglas SW, Palmer AC: Idiopathic demyelination
1996.
of brain-stem and cord in a miniature poodle puppy.
206. Green EM, Adams WM, Steinberg H: Malignant transfor-
J Pathol Bacteriol 82:67-71, 1961.
mation of solitary spinal osteochondroma in two mature
184. Mandigers PJ, van Nes JJ, Knol BW, et al: Hereditary
dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(6):634-637, 1999.
kooiker dog ataxia, Res Vet Sci 54:118-123, 1993.
207. Shupe JL, Leone NC, Gardner EJ, et al: Hereditary mul-
 185. Toenniessen JG, Morin DE: Degenerative myelopathy:
tiple exostoses. Hereditary multiple exostoses in horses,
a comparative review, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
Am J Pathol 104(3):285-288, 1981.
17(2):271-283, 1995.
208. Caporn TM, Read RA: Osteochondromatosis of the cer-
186. Heavner JE: Intervertebral disc syndrome in the cat,
vical spine causing compressive myelopathy in a dog.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 159[4):425-427, 1971
J Small Anim Pract 37[3]:133-137, 1996.
187. Morgan JP: Spinal dural ossification in the dog: incidence
209. Pool RR, Harris JM: Feline osteochondromatosis, Feline
and distribution based on a radiographic study, J Am Vet
Pract 5[2):24-25, 1975:28.
Radiol Soc 10:43-48, 1969.
210. Gradner A, Weissenbock H, Kneissl S, et al: Use of latis-
188. Larsen JS, Selby LA: Spondylosis deformans in large
simus dorsi and abdominal extermal oblique muscle for
dogs—relative risk by breed, age and sex, J Am Anim
reconstruction of a thoracic wall defect in a cat with
Hosp Assoc 17[4):623-625, 1981.
feline osteochondromatosis, J Feline Med Surg 10(1):88-
189. Kornegay JN: Vertebral diseases of large breed dogs. In
94, 2008.
Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders [contempo-
211. Rylander H, Lipsitz D, Berry WL, et al: Retrospective
rary issues in small animal practice), New York, 1986,
analysis of spinal arachnoid cysts in 14 dogs, J Vet Intern
Churchill Livingstone.
Med 16[6):690-696, 2002.
190. Romatowski J: Spondylosis deformans in the dog, Com-
212. Skeen TM, Olby NJ, Munana KR, et al: Spinal arachnoid
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8(8):531-536, 1986.
cysts in 17 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:271-282,
191. Morgan JP: Spondylosis deformans in the dog, Acta
2003.
Orthop Scand Suppl 9:61-88, 1967.
 213. Shamir MH, Shahar R, Aizenberg I: Subarachnoid cyst in
192.Weisbrode SE, Monke DR, Dodaro ST, et al: Osteo-
a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33(2):123-125, 1997.
chondrosis, degenerative joint disease, and vertebral
 214. Vignoli M, Rossi F, Sarli G: Spinal subarachnoid cyst in a
osteophytosis in middle-aged bulls, J Am Vet Med Assoc
cat, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(2):116-119, 1999.
181[7):700-705, 1982.
215. Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerlad SF, et al: Cor-
193. Langeland M, Lingaas F: Spondylosis deformans in the
relative imaging findings in seven dogs and one cat with
boxer: estimates of heritability, J Small Anim Pract
spinal arachnoid cysts, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(5):445-
36[4]:166-169, 1995.
452, 1999.
194. Adams WH, Daniel GB, Pardo AD, et al: Magnetic res-
216. Dickinson PJ, LeCouteur RA, Sturges BK, et al: Extradu-
 onance imaging of the caudal lumbar and lumbosacral
ral spinal synovial cysts in two dogs: clinical and patholog-
spine in 13 dogs [1990-1993), Vet Radiol Ultrasound
ical features, J Vet Intern Med 13(3):241, 1999:abstract.
36[1}:3-13, 1995.
217. Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, Lipsitz D: Cervical myelopa-
195. Levine GJ, Levine JM, Walker MA, et al: Evaluation
thy associated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs.
of the association between spondylosis deformans and
J Vet Intern Med 13[3):181-186, 1999.
clinical signs of intervertebral disk disease in dogs: 172
218. Levitski RE, Lipsitz D, Chauvet AE: Magnetic resonance
cases [1999-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:96-100,
imaging of the cervical spine in 27 dogs, Vet Radiol
2006.
Utrasound 40(4):332-341, 1999.
196. Wright JA: Spondylosis deformans of the lumbo-sacral
219. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Berry WL, et al: Extradural
joint in dogs, J Small Anim Pract 21(1):45-58, 1980.
spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs, J Small Anim Pract
197. Mattoon JS, Koblik PD: Quantitative survey radiographic
42:502-509, 2001
evaluation of the lumbosacral spine of normal dogs and
220. Perez B, Rollan E, Ramiro, et al: Intraspinal synovial cyst
dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, Vet Radiol
in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(3):235-238, 2000.
Utrasound 34(3):194-206, 1993.
221. MeDonnell JJ, Knowles KE, de Lahunta A, et al: Tho-
198. Meehan L, Dyson S, Murray R: Radiographic and scin-
racolumbar spinal cord compression due to vertebral
tigraphic evaluation of spondylosis in the equine tho-
process degenerative joint disease in a family of Shiloh
racolumbar spine: a retrospective study, Equine Vet J
shepherd dogs, J Vet Intern Med 17:530-537, 2003.
41:800-807, 2009.
222. Luttgen PJL: Neoplasms of the spine, Vet Clin North Am
Small Anim Pract 22[4):973-984, 1992.
boars, Can J Comp Med 44:382-389, 1980.
223. Morgan JP, Ackerman N, Baley CS, et al: Vertebral
 200. Morgan JP, Stavenborn M: Disseminated idiopathic skel-
tumors in the dog: a clinical, radiologic, and pathologic
etal hyperostosis (DISH) in a dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
study of 6l primary and secondary lesions, Vet Radiol
32(2):65-70, 1991.
Utrasound 21:197-212, 1980.
CHAPTER 6
Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
159
224. Petersen SA, Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, et al: Canine
245. Gasser AM, Bush WW, Smith S, et al: Extradural spinal,
intraspinal meningiomas: imaging features, histopatho-
bone marrow, and renal nephroblastoma, J Am Anim
logic classification, and long-term outcome in 34 dogs,
Hosp Assoc 39:80-85, 2003.
J Vet Intern Med 22[4):946-953, 2008.
246. Neer TM, Kreeger JM: Cervical spinal cord astrocytoma
225. Fingeroth JM, Prata RG, Patnaik AK: Spinal meningio-
in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191[1):84-86, 1987
mas in dogs: 13 cases [1972-1987], J Am Vet Med Assoc
247. Stigen O, Ytrehus B, Eggertsdottir AV: Spinal cord astro-
191(6):720-726, 1987.
cytoma in a cat, J Small Anim Pract 42:306-310, 2001.
226. Brehm DM, Vite CH, Steinberg HS, et al: A retrospec-
248. Wilson RB, Beckman SL: Mucinous oligodendroglioma
tive evaluation of 5l cases of peripheral nerve sheath
of the spinal cord in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
tumors in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31[4):349-
31[1):26-28, 1995.
359,1995.
249. Chaffee VW: Spinal cord ependymoma in a dog, Vet
227. Marioni-henry K, Vite CH, Newton AL, et al: Prevalence
Med Small Anim Clin 72[12):1854-1858, 1977.
of diseases of the spinal cord of cats, J Vet Intern Med
250. Luttgen PJ, Bratton GR: Spinal cord ependymoma: a
18:851-858, 2004.
case report, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 12:788-790, 1976.
228. Lane SB, Kornegay JN, Duncan JR, et al: Feline spinal
251. Waters DJ, Hayden DW: Intramedullary spinal cord
lymphosarcoma: a retrospective evaluation of 23 cats,
metastasis in the dog, J Vet Intern Med 4(4):207-215,
J Vet Intern Med 8{2):99-104, 1994.
1990.
229. Summers BA, de Lahunta A: Unusual intradural extra-
252. Jeffery ND, Phillips SM: Surgical treatment of intramed-
medullary spinal tumours in twelve dogs, J Neuropathol
ullary spinal cord neoplasia in two dogs, J Small Anim
Exp Neurol 45:322, 1986.
Pract 36[12):553-557, 1995.
 230. Petersen SA, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, et al: Spinal cord
253.
Cooley DM, Waters DJ: Skeletal neoplasms of small
disease in dogs with neoplasia arising from the central
dogs: a retrospective study and literature review, J Am
nervous system, J Vet Intern Med 20:735, 2006.
Anim Hosp Assoc 33(1):11-23, 1997.
231. Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Bagley RS, et al: Magnetic reso-
254.
 Chauvet AE, Hogge GS, Sandin JA, et al: Vertebrectomy,
nance imaging features of tumors of the spine and spi-
bone allograft fusion, and antitumor vaccination for the
nal cord in dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40(6):627-633,
treatment of vertebral fbrosarcoma in a dog, Vet Surg
1999.
28(6):480-488, 1999.
232. Thomson CE, Kornegay JN, Stevens JB: Analysis of cere-
255. Spodnick GJ, Berg J, Moore FM, et al: Spinal lymphoma
brospinal fluid from the cerebellomedullary and lumbar
in cats: 2l cases [1976-1989), J Am Vet Med Assoc
cisterns of dogs with focal neurologic disease: 145 cases
200(3):373-376, 1992.
(1985-1987), J Am Vet Med Assoc 196(11):1841-1844,
256. Rebhun WC, de Lahunta A, Baum KH, et al: Com-
1990.
pressive neoplasms affecting the bovine spinal cord,
233. Levy MS, Kapatkin AS, Patnaik AK, et al: Spinal tumors
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:396-400, 1984.
 in 37 dogs: clinical outcome and long-term survival
257. Rosin A: Neurologic diseases associated with lymphosar-
[1987-1994), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33[4):307-312,
coma in ten dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 181(1):50-53,
1997.
1982.
 234. Siegel S, Kornegay JN, Thrall DE: Postoperative irradia-
258. Williams MA, Welles EG, Gailor RJ, et al: Lympho-
tion of spinal cord tumors in 9 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultra-
sarcoma associated with neurological signs and abnor-
sound 37(2):150-153, 1996.
mal cerebrospinal fluid in two horses, Prog Vet Neurol
235. Dernell WS, Van VB, Straw RC, et al: Outcome follow-
3[2):51-56, 1992.
1 s o  sn a J  
259. Burnett RC, Vernau W, Modiano JF, et al: Diagnosis of
1995), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36(3):245-251, 2000.
canine lymphoid neoplasia using clonal rearrangements
236. Rusbridge C, Wheeler SJ, Lamb CR, et al: Verte-
of antigen receptor genes, Vet Pathol 40(1):32-41, 2003.
bral plasma cell tumors in 8 dogs, J Vet Intern Med
260. Noonan M, Kline KL, Meleo K: Lymphoma of the cen-
13(2):126-133, 1999.
tral nervous system: a retrospective study of 18 cats,
237. Gilmore DR: Intraspinal tumors in the dog, Compend
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19[4):497-504, 1997.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 5[1):55-66, 1983.
26l. Mooney SC, Hayes AA, Matus RE, et al: Renal lym-
238. Wright JA: The pathological features associated with spi-
phoma in cats: 28 cases [1977-1984), J Am Vet Med
nal tumours in 29 dogs, J Comp Pathol 95[4):549-557,
Assoc 191(11):1473-1477, 1987.
1985.
262. Irving G, MeMillan MC: Fluoroscopically guided percu-
239. Wright JA, Bell DA, Clayton-Jones DG: The clinical and
taneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy of thoracolumbar
radiological features associated with spinal tumours in
spinal lesions in cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1[4):473-475,
thirty dogs, J Small Anim Pract 20:461-472, 1979.
1990.
240. Luttgen PJ, Braund KG, Brawner WR Jr, et al: A retro-
263. Kuntz CA, Waldron D, Martin RA, et al: Sacral fractures
 spective study of twenty-nine spinal tumours in the dog
in dogs: a review of 32 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
and cat, J Small Anim Pract 21:213-226, 1980.
31(2):142-150, 1995.
 241. MeDonnell JJ, Tidwell AS, Faissler D, et al: Magnetic res-
264. Slocum B, Rudy RL: Fractures of the seventh lumbar
onance imaging features of cervical spinal cord menin-
vertebra in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1l(2):167-
giomas, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:368-374, 2005.
174, 1975.
242. Moissonnier P, Abbott DP: Canine neuroepithelioma:
265. Beaver DP, MacPherson GC, Muir P, et al: Methyl-
case report and literature review, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
methacrylate and bone screw repair of seventh lumbar
29(5):397-401, 1993.
vertebral fracture-luxations in dogs, J Small Anim Pract
243. Summers BA, deLahunta A, McEntee M, et al: A novel
37(8):381-386, 1996.
intradural extramedullary spinal cord tumor in young
266. Ullman SL, Boudrieau RJ: Internal skeletal fixation using
dogs, Acta Neuropathol 75(4):402-410, 1988.
a Kirschner apparatus for stabilization of fracture/luxa-
244. MeConnell JF, Garosi LS, Dennis R, et al: Imaging of a
tions of the lumbosacral joint in six dogs. A modification
spinal nephroblastoma in a dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
of the transilial pin technique, Vet Surg 22[1):1l-17,
44(5):537-541, 2003.
1993.
160
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
267. Weh JM, Kraus KH: Use of a four pin and methylmeth-
288. Newitt ALM, German AJ, Barr FJ: Lumbosacral transi-
acrylate fixation in L7 and the iliac body to stabilize lum-
tional vertebrae in cats and their effects on morphology
bosacral fracture-luxations: a clinical and anatomic study.
of adjacent joints, J Feline Med Surg 11:941-947, 2009.
Vet Surg 36:775-782, 2010.
289.1
Watt PR: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in 18 dogs.
268. Shores A, Nichols C, Rochat M, et al: Combined Kirsch-
J Small Anim Pract 32(3):125-134, 1991.
ner-Ehmer device and dorsal spinal plate fixation tech-
290. Danielsson F, Sjostrom L: Surgical treatment of degener-
nique for caudal lumbar vertebral fractures in dogs, J Am
ative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs, Vet Surg 28(2):91-98,
Vet Med Assoc 195[3):335-339, 1989.
1999.
269. Smeak DD, Olmstead ML: Fractures/uxations of the
291. Ness MG: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in the dog: a
sacrococcygeal area in the cat: a retrospective study of
review of30 cases, J Small Anim Pract 35:185-190, 1994.
51 cases, Vet Surg 14:319-324, 1985.
292. Suwankong N, Meij BP, Voorhout G, et al: Review and
270. Penwick RC: Fibrocartilaginous embolism and isch-
retrospective analysis of degenerative lumbosacral steno-
emic myelopathy, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
sis in 156 dogs treated by dorsal laminectomy, Vet Comp
11(3):287-299, 1989.
Orthop Traumatol 21(3):285-293, 2008.
 271. Cauzinille L: Fibrocartilaginous embolism in dogs, Vet
293. Janssens L, Beosier Y, Daems R: Lumbosacral degenera-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:155-167, 2000.
tive stenosis in the dog. The results of epidural infltration
272. Gandini G, Cizinauskas S, Lang J, et al: Fibrocartilagi-
with methylprednisolone acetate: a retrospective study.
nous embolism in 75 dogs: clinical fndings and factors
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 22[6):486-491, 2009.
 influencing the recovery rate, J Small Anim Pract 44:76-
294. Chambers JN: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in
80, 2003.
dogs, Vet Med Rep 1(2):166-180, 1989.
273. Gilmore DR, de Lahunta A: Necrotizing myelopathy
295.1
 Palmer RH, Chambers JN: Canine lumbosacral diseases.
secondary to presumed or confirmed fbrocartilaginous
Part I. Anatomy, pathophysiology, and clinical presenta-
embolism in 24 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:373-
tion, Compend Contin Edue Pract Vet 13[1):61-69, 1991.
376, 1987.
296.1
 Palmer RH, Chambers JN: Canine lumbosacral diseases.
274. Mikszewski JS, Van Winkle TJ, Troxel MT': Fibrocartilagi-
Part II. Definitive diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis,
 nous embolic myelopathy in five cats, J Am Anim Hosp
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13(2):213-222, 1991.
Assoc 42:226-233, 2006.
297. Chambers JN, Selcer BA, Oliver JE Jr: Results of treat-
275. Benson JE, Schwartz KJ: Ischemic myelomalacia associ-
ment of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs by
ated with fbrocartilaginous embolism in multiple finish-
exploration and excision, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
ing swine, J Vet Diagn Invest 10(3):274-277, 1998
3:130-133, 1988.
276. Jackson W, de Lahunta A, Adaska J, et al: Fibrocartilagi-
298. Lang J, Hani H, Schawalder P: A sacral lesion resem-
 ssr aa i   edo oqa s
bling osteochondrosis in the German shepherd Dog, Vet
Vet Neurol 6[1):16-19, 1995.
Radiol Ultrasound 33[2):69-76, 1992.
277. Hawthorne JC, Wallace LJ, Fenner WR, et al: Fibrocar-
299. Morgan JP, Bailey CS: Cauda equina syndrome in the
tilaginous embolic myelopathy in miniature schnauzers,
dog: radiographic evaluation, J Small Anim Pract 31:69-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:374-383, 2001.
77, 1990.
278. Junker K, van den Ingh TSGAM, Bossard MM, et al:
300. Damur-Djuric N, Steffen F, Hassig M, et al: Lumbosacral
Fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE) of the spinal cord in
transitional vertebrae in dogs: classification, prevalence,
juvenile Irish wolfhounds, Vet Q 22:154-156, 2001.
and association with the sacroiliac morphology Vet
279. Schubert TA: Fibrocartilaginous infarct in a German shep-
Radiol Ultrasound 47:32-38, 2006.
herd dog, Vet Med Sm Anim Clin 75(5):839-842, 1980.
301. Fluckiger MA, Damur-Djuric N, Hassig M, et al:A lumbg-
280. Zaki FA, Prata RG: Necrotizing myelopathy secondary
sacral transitional vertebra in the dog predisposes to cauda
to embolization of herniated intervertebral disk material
equina syndrome, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:39-44, 2006.
in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 169[2):222-228, 1976.
302. Schmid V, Lang J: Measurements on the lumbosacral
281. Grunenfelder Fl, Weishaupt D, Green R, et al: Magnetic
euba epnes tim asoun pue saop ieou u uoun
resonance imaging findings in spinal cord infarction in
compression, J Small Anim Pract 34(9):437-442, 1993.
three small breed dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46:91-96,
303. Morgan JP: Transitional lumbosacral vertebral anomaly
2005.
in the dog: a radiographic study, J Small Anim Pract
282. Cauzinille L, Kornegay JN: Fibrocartilaginous embolism
40[4):167-172, 1999.
of the spinal cord in dogs: review of 36 histologically
304. Jones JC, Hudson JA, Sorjonen DC, et al: Effects of
confirmed cases and retrospective study of 26 suspected
experimental nerve root compression on arterial blood
cases, J Vet Intern Med 10[4):241-245, 1996.
flow velocity in the seventh lumbar spinal ganglion of
283. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, et al: Magnetic reso-
the dog: measurement using intraoperative Doppler
nance imaging fndings and clinical associations in 52
ultrasonography, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37(2):133-140,
dogs with suspected ischemic myelopathy, J Vet Intern
1996.
Med 21(6):1290-1298, 2007.
305. Coates JR: Urethral dyssynergia in lumbosacral syndrome,
284. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, et al: Association of clin-
Proceed 17 ACVIM Forum, Chicago: 299-302, 1999.
ical and magnetic resonance imaging findings with out-
306. Oliver JE Jr, Selcer RR, Simpson S: Cauda equina com-
come in dogs suspected to have ischemic myelopathy:
pression from lumbosacral malarticulation and malfor-
50 cases [2000-2006), J Am Vet Med Assoc 233[1):129-
mation in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 173[2):207-214,
135,2008.
1978.
285. Flanders JA: Feline aortic thromboembolism, Compend
307. Sisson AF, LeCouteur RA, Ingram JT, et al: Diagnosis
Contin Educ Pract Vet 8[7]:473-484, 1986.
of cauda equina abnormalities by using electromyogra-
 286. Laste NJ, Harpster NK: A retrospective study of 100
phy, discography, and epidurography in dogs, J Vet Intern
cases of feline distal aortic thromboembolism: 1977-
Med 6(5):253-263, 1992.
1993, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31(6):492-500, 1995.
308. Hanna FY: Lumbosacral osteochondrosis: radiological
287. De Risio L, Thomas WB, Sharp NJH: Degenerative lum
features and surgical management in 34 dogs, J Small
bosacral stenosis, Vet Clin North Am 30:111-132, 2000.
Anim Pract 42:272-278, 2001.
CHAPTER 6
 Pelvic Limb Paresis, Paralysis, or Ataxia
161
309. Morgan JP, Bahr A, Franti CE, et al: Lumbosacral transi-
330. Denoix JM: Thoracolumbar malformations or inju-
tional vertebrae as a predisposing cause of cauda equina
ries and neurological manifestations, Equine Vet Educ
syndrome in German shepherd dogs: 16l cases [1987-
17:191-194, 2005.
1990), J Am Vet Med Assoc 202[11):1877-1882, 1993.
331. Washburn KE, Streeter RN: Congenital defects of the
310. Steffen F, Hunold K, Scharf G, et al: A follow-up study of
ruminant nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food
neurologic and radiographic findings in working German
Anim Pract 20:413-434, 2004.
shepherd dogs with and without degenerative lumbosacral
332. Agerholm JS, Bendixen C, Andersen O, et al: Complex
stenosis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231[10):1529-1533, 2007.
vertebral malformation in Holstein calves, J Vet Diagn 
311. Selcer BA, Chambers JN, Schwensen K, et al: Epidurog-
Invest 13:283-289, 2001.
raphy as a diagnostic aid in canine lumbosacral compres-
333. Fingeroth JM, Johnson GC, Burt JK, et al: Neuroradio-
sive disease: 47 cases [1981-1986], Vet Comp Orthop
graphic diagnosis and surgical repair of tethered cord
Traumatol 3:97-103, 1988.
syndrome in an English bulldog with spina bifida and
312. Jones JC, Sorjonen DC, Simpson ST, et al: Comparison
myeloschisis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194[9):1300-1302,
between computed tomographic and surgical findings
1989.
 in nine large-breed dogs with lumbosacral stenosis, Vet 
334. Davidson AP: Congenital disorders of the Manx cat,
Radiol Ultrasound 37(4):247-256, 1996.
Southwest Vet 37(2):115-119, 1986.
313. Jones JC, Cartee RE, Bartels JE: Computed tomographic
335. Kitchen H, Murray RE, Cockrell BY: Animal model for
anatomy of the canine lumbosacral spine, Vet Radiol
human disease. Spina bifida, sacral dysgenesis and myelo-
Utrasound 36(2):91-99, 1995.
cele. Animal model: Manx cats, Am J Pathol 68[1):203-
314. Jones JC, Wright JC, Bartels JE: Computed tomographic
206, 1972.
morphometry of the lumbosacral spine of dogs, Am J Vet
336. Plummer SB, Bunch SE, Khoo LH, et al: Tethered spi-
Res 56(9):1125-1132, 1995.
nal cord and an intradural lipoma associated with a
315. de Haan JJ, Shelton SB, Ackerman N: Magnetic reso-
meningocele in a Manx-type cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
nance imaging in the diagnosis of degenerative lumbosa-
203(8):1159-1161, 1993.
cral stenosis in four dogs, Vet Surg 22[1):1-4, 1993.
 337. Kroll RA: Feline spinal cord disease: congenital abnor-
316. Jones JC, Banfield CM, Ward DL: Association between
malities Proceed 10th ACVIM Forum, 265-267, 1992.
 postoperative outcome and results of magnetic reso-
338. Wilson JW, Kurtz HJ, Leipold HW, et al: Spina bifida in
nance imaging and computed tomography in working
the dog, Vet Pathol 16(2):165-179, 1979.
dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, J Am Vet
Med Assoc 216[11):1769-1774, 2000.
mentofthespinalcordinnormalanddysraphicdogs:embry-
317. Cook JR Jr: Decompressive procedures. Indications
onic stage, Am J Vet Res 43(10):1729-1734, 1982.
and techniques, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
340. van den Broek AHM, Else RW,Abercromby R, et al: Spi-
22[4]:917-921, 1992.
nal dysraphism in the Weimaraner, J Small Anim Pract
318. Godde T, Steffen F: Surgical treatment of lumbosacral
32(5):258-260, 1991.
foraminal stenosis, Vet Surg 36:705-713, 2007.
341. Shelton MC: A possible mode of inheritance for spinal
319. De Risio L, Sharp NJH, Olby NJ, et al: Predictors of
dysraphism with a more complete description of the
outcome after dorsal decompressive laminectomy for
clinical syndrome, Ames, IA, 1977, Iowa State University
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs: 69 cases
(thesis/dissertation).
[1987-1997), J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:624-628, 2001.
342. Dorn AS, Joiner RW: Surgical removal of a meningo-
320. Auger J, Dupuis J, Quesnel A, et al: Surgical treatment of
coele from a Manx cat, Feline Pract 6:37-40, 1976.
lumbosacral instability caused by discospondylitis in four
343. Cummings J, de Lahunta A, Timoney J: Neuritis in the
dogs, Vet Surg 29(1):70-80, 2000.
cauda equina, a chronic idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis
321. Slocum B, Devine T: Optimal treatment for degenera-
in the horse, Acta Neuropathol 46:17-24, 1979.
tive lumbosacral stenosis. Traction, internal fixation, and
344. Wright JA, Fordyce P, Edington N: Neuritis of the cauda
fusion, Vet Med Rep 1(2):249-257, 1989.
equina in the horse, J Comp Pathol 97(6):667-675, 1987.
322. Linn LL, Bartels KE, Rochat MC, et al: Lumbosacral ste-
345. Rousseaux CG, Futcher KG, Clark EG, et al: Cauda
nosis in 29 military working dogs: epidemiologic findings
equina neuritis: a chronic idiopathic polyneuritis in two
and outcome after surgical intervention [1990-1999),
horses, Can Vet J 25(5):214-218, 1984.
Vet Surg 32:21-29, 2003.
346. Vatistas NJ, Mayhew IG, Whitwell KE, et al: Polyneuritis
323. Bailey CS: An embryological approach to the clinical sig-
equi: a clinical review incorporating a case report of a
nificance of congenital vertebral and spinal cord abnor-
horse displaying unconventional signs, Prog Vet Neurol
malities, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11(7):426-434, 1975.
2(1):67-72, 1991.
324. Bailey CS, Morgan JP: Congenital spinal malformations, Vet
347. Edington N, Wright J, Patel J, et al: Equine adenovirus 1
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22[4):985-1015, 1992.
isolatedfromcaudaequinaneuritis,ResVetSci37:252-254,
325. Kroll RA, Constantinescu GM: Congenital abnormalities
1984.
of the spinal cord and vertebrae. In August JR, editor:
348. Fordyce PS, Edington N, Bridges GC, et al: Use of an
Consultation in feline internal medicine, ed 2, Philadel-
ELISA in the differential diagnosis of cauda equina
phia, 1994, WB Saunders.
neuritis and other equine neuropathies, Equine Vet J
326. Dennis SM: Congenital defects of the nervous system of
19(1):55-59, 1987.
lambs, Aust Vet J 51[8):385-388, 1975.
349. Morgan SE, Johnson B, Brewer B, et al: Sorghum and
327. Woollen NE: Congenital abnormalities of pigs, Vet Clin
Cystitisataxia syndrome inhorses, Vet HumToxicol32:582,
North Am Food Anim Pract 9:163-181, 1993.
1990.
328. Leipold HW, Cates WF, Radostits OM, et al: Arthrogry-
 350. Van Kampen KR: Sudan grass and sorghum poisoning
posis and associated defects in newborn calves, Am J Vet
 of horses: a possible lathyrogenic disease, J Am Vet Med
Res 31(8):1367-1374, 1970.
Assoc 156:629-630, 1970.
329. Leipold H, Hiraga T, Johnson LW: Congenital defects in
the llama, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 10:410
420, 1994.
CHAPTER
Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
he term tetraparesis [-plegia] (quadriparesis, quadriple-
ascending GP pathways. Other signs of forebrain dysfunc-
gia) refers to partial (-paresis) or complete [-plegia) loss
tion, such as altered mental status, seizures, or blindness, may
of voluntary motor function in all limbs. Paresis may be
be present and may help in lesion localization. Furthermore,
 manifested as an inability to support weight against gravity.
animals with diffuse forebrain disease often have little or no
gait abnormalities, or as postural reaction defcits. The term
gait abnormality once the gait is initiated. Diffuse brainstem
hemiparesis refers to motor dysfunction of two limbs on the
centers coordinate the gait with reinforcement from the fore-
 same side. General proprioceptive [GP) ataxia is a frequently
brain. Consequently, lesions involving the midbrain or struc-
associated problem. Lesion localization is discussed in Chap-
 tures caudal to the midbrain are associated with paresis.
ter 2, summarized in Figure 7-l, and reviewed briefly in this
chapter.
Cervical Spinal Cord
Clinical Signs of Brainstem or Cl to C5 Cervical
Spinal Cord
LESION LOCALIZATION
Lesions involving the brainstem and cervical spinal cord result
 in an abnormal gait because motor pathways from brainstem
Animals with tetraparesis usually have neurologic disease. Dif-
centers to the LMNs of the spinal cord are disrupted. Tetrapa-
fuse muscle or skeletal diseases may result in weakness or gait
resis develops if the lesion is bilateral, and hemiparesis [usu-
 abnormalities which at times are difficult to differentiate from
ally ipsilateral) develops if the lesion is unilateral. Ascending
a true neurologic lesion. Tetraparesis must be differentiated
GP information is altered, resulting in GP ataxia. The GP
ataxia frequently is associated with motor dysfunction (pare-
polyarthritis), or obtundation associated with severe meta-
sis) because of the close anatomic relationship between the
bolic disease (e.g, adrenal insuffciency, hypoglycemia).
ascending GP pathways and the descending upper motor neu-
When initially presented with a tetraparetic animal, the cli-
ron [UMN) pathways, in which a lesion involving one pathway
nician must decide which systems are involved (e.g, nervous,
will affect the other In acute and severe spinal cord injuries
musculoskeletal, or general metabolie). Results of the history.
respiratory dysfunction may be a sequela, with disruption of
physical examination, and laboratory tests usually provide suf-
the descending UMN pathways from the respiratory centers
fcient evidence for the practitioner to make this differentia-
that lie in the medulla oblongata.
tion. In this chapter, primary consideration is given to lesions
Lesions in the brainstem and C1-5 spinal cord segments
involving the central and peripheral nervous systems [CNS
result in UMN paresis of the limbs. As explained in Chapter
and PNS).
2, disruption of UMN signals that inhibit the segmental spi-
nal reflexes results in "release,” or disinhibition, of the LMNs.
 the brainstem, cervical spinal cord, or lower motor neurons 
 Exaggerated reflexes result when UMN inhibitory influence
(LMNs). Lesion localization is based on the decisions outlined
on the LMNs is lost. Similarly, extensor hypertonus or spastic-
in Figure 7-1. Although the motor cortex is important for the
ity also may develop in all limbs. Brainstem and cranial cervi-
performance oflearned reactions and to help initiate gait (see
cal spinal cord lesions are differentiated by examination of the
Chapters l and 2), it does not maintain locomotion in domes-
tic animals. Therefore, most animals with structural disease
abnormalities in the limbs. The brainstem can be described
localized to the forebrain have a normal gait and do not dis-
as a cervical spinal cord that is modified by the presence of
play paresis. Importantly, the contralateral postural reaction
cranial nerve nuclei which are analogous to the LMN neu-
deficits associated with unilateral forebrain lesions should not
rons that contribute to the innervations of the limbs. Evidence
be misinterpreted as paresis. Instead, the postural reaction
of dysfunction in these cranial nerve nuclei in conjunction
deficits with forebrain lesions represent dysfunction of the
with GP ataxia/UMN tetraparesis indicates brainstem disease.
162
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
163
Gait normal or
 slightly abnormal
 Postural reactions 
Gait abnormal
abnormal
Cerebrum or
UMN signs
LMN signs
LMN signs thoracic
diencephalon
 Thoracic and pelvic
 Thoracic and pelvic
limbs
See Chapters 12 and 13
limbs
limbs
UMN signs pelvic limbs
Brainstem
Head
 Generalized LMN 
C6-T2
abnormal*
normal
diseases
See Tables 7-1, 7-2,
See Tables 7-4 and 7-5
and 7-3
Brainstem
C1-C5
See Table 8-1
See Tables 7-1.
7-2, and 7-3
*Brainstem involvement: one or more signs involving the head are present,
e.g., head tilt, nystagmus, cranial nerve signs, seizures, and so forth.
Figure 7-1 Algorithm for the diagnosis of tetraparesis, hemiparesis, and ataxia.
Knowledge of the anatomic location of the cranial nerve
 the axon and its myelin sheath. Myelin is formed by Schwann
nuclei allow localization of a lesion to a specific area of the
cells in the PNS and oligodendrocytes in the CNS. Processes
brainstem [see Chapters 8 through 1l). For example, paresis
from these cells wrap around an axon in a unique multilamel-
associated with vestibular signs, altered mental status, or other
lar structure analogized to a "Swiss roll" as it fuses with the
abnormal cranial nerve functions strongly suggest a lesion in
inner axonal membrane. Schwann cells are aligned along the
the brainstem.
length of the axon and separated by a gap, the node of Ran-
       S S  
C6 to T2 Cervical Spinal Cord
low capacitance within the internodal regions. This allows an
Lesions involving the C6-T2 spinal cord segments result in tet-
electrical impulse to propagate rapidly down the axon, jump-
raparesis and a distinct gait disturbance. In the thoracic limbs,
ing from node to node, a process called saltatory conduction.
LMN signs may be present as the motor neurons forming the
The conduction velocity in myelinated fbers is much faster
brachial plexus are injured, whereas in the pelvic limbs, dis-
than in nonmyelinated fibers. The electrical impulse arriving at
ruption of the GP and UMN pathways result in GP ataxia
the axonal terminal (pre-synapse) results in influx of calcium
and UMN paresis. The thoracic limb gait is characteristic of
and release of a transmitter [chemical transmission) that inter-
LMN paresis [see later). Additional LMN signs in the thoracic
acts with receptors within the postsynaptic membrane of the
limbs are related to dysfunction of the suprascapular, axillary,
effector organ [muscle).
musculocutaneous, radial, median, and ulnar nerves. Thoracic
 An individual peripheral nerve contains a variable mix of
limb refexes may be depressed or absent, and the muscles
nerve fbers, myelinated and unmyelinated. Most nerves in the
may be hypotonic. Neurogenic muscle atrophy subsequently
PNS contain both motor and sensory fbers. Motor axons of
develops. In addition, Horner's syndrome may develop if the
spinal nerves and cranial nerves originate from neuronal cell
LMNs in Tl-3 spinal cord segments that form the sympathetic
  s  r  a m e s
tral horn) and brainstem, respectively. Cell bodies for sensory
also is invariably altered with significant lesions of the C6-T2
fibers are contained within the spinal ganglia or cranial ganglia.
spinal cord segments. Moreover, UMN signs develop in the
Afferent [sensory)] fibers can be myelinated or nonmyelinated.
pelvic limbs because GP and UMN pathways are disrupted as
Efferent [motor) fibers to skeletal muscle are always myelin-
they pass through the caudal cervical spinal cord.
ated. Nonmyelinated fibers, however, comprise the postgangli-
 onic sympathetic fibers supplying smooth muscles and blood
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
vessels.
Anatomy
 Peripheral nervous system diseases result from pathology of
Clinical Signs
the lower motor neuron or motor unit. A motor unit is com-
Tetraparetic animals with LMN signs of the thoracic and pel-
 posed of the neuronal cell body located within the CNS, its
vic limbs can have lesions involving the motor neuron cell
axon, the neuromuscular junction, and associated muscle
bodies [neuronopathies) which are located in the spinal cord,
fibers. A group of myofbers innervated by one neuron is con-
axon [ventral spinal root, spinal nerve, nerve], neuromuscular
 sidered the motor unit. An abnormality in any portion of the
junction (motor end plates), or muscle (see Tables 7-4 and
motor unit can result in clinical signs of neuromuscular dis-
7-5). Neuropathies and neuromuscular junction and muscle
ease—LMN signs. The functional component of the motor
disorders are commonly encountered in animals, whereas neu-
unit involves the reflex arc. The reflex arc consists of a sense
ronopathies are rare. Lesions involving motor neurons, yen-
suo '(uoauea reds u apoq H) uonu quarae ue 'ean
tral nerve roots, or neuromuscular junctions do not produce
 () u r   sss  
altered sensory perception. Neuropathies may cause altered
an effector organ (muscle fber). The classic example of a
 sensory perception, because most nerves contain both motor
reflex arc is the patellar reflex. An all-or-none action potential
and sensory fibers. Animals with LMN signs in the limbs and
is generated in the afferent nerve and modulated centrally to
normal sensory perception usually have a disease of the ventral
 be generated again as an all-or-none potential in the efferent
nerve roots or the neuromuscular junction. Those with epi-
nerve. Transmission of the electrical impulse is conveyed by
sodic neurologic signs [e.g, exacerbated by exercise) usually
164
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
have neuromuscular junction disease involving the motor
Clinical Signs. Cervical spinal pain is the most common
endplate. Occasionally, animals with diffuse muscle disease
clinical sign of acute onset cervical IVDD. Low head and neck
develop episodic LMN dysfunction. Careful muscle palpation,
carriage, neck rigidity, and spasms of the cervical spinal mus-
laboratory tests, electrophysiologic testing, and muscle/nerve
cles are common clinical manifestations of cervical spinal pain
biopsy are usually necessary to differentiate primary muscle
disease from primary neuropathies or neuronopathies.
or neck. Pressure from herniated disk material on the nerve
 Diseases in which episodes of weakness are interspersed
root can cause nerve root ischemia and severe pain. Dogs with
with periods of normalcy are perplexing because many differ-
pain alone as a clinical sign often have some evidence of spi-
ent body systems may be involved. Episodic weakness can be
nal cord compression with diagnostic imaging.9 Pain is often
a clinical sign of cardiovascular, metabolic, or neuromuscular
intermittent and manifests as thoracic limb lameness (root sig-
 disease. The neuromuscular disorders, myasthenia gravis, and
nature or radicular pain; see Chapter 5).l0 Forced movement
several myopathies that may cause episodic weakness will be
of the thoracic limbs may cause considerable pain. Dogs that
discussed. Other systemic and metabolic causes are discussed
are in pain have a stiff, short-strided gait and may cry or whine
in Chapter 15.
if forced to change direction suddenly.Most dogs are reluctant
 or refuse to climb down stairs or jump. These clinical signs
of cervical spinal pain are not pathognomonic for IVDD, but
DISEASES 0F THE SPINAL CORD, C1-T2
instead are similar to those associated with disease processes
such as meningitis and polyarthritis [see Chapters 14 and 15).
The diseases discussed in this chapter include those that com-
 The presence of neurologic signs other than pain strongly
monly affect the cervical spinal cord and those that diffusely
suggests spinal cord compression. Cervical IVD herniation can
affect the LMN system. Diseases that affect the forebrain and
compress the cervical spinal cord causing tetra- or hemipa-
brainstem are discussed in Chapters 8 through 15.This section
resis and GP ataxia of the thoracic and pelvic limbs. Rarely.
is organized according to the anatomic location of the lesion
a massive or acute IVD herniation produces tetraplegia or
 and the course of the disease (acute versus chronic, progres-
hemiplegia and development of the syndrome of ascending-
sive versus nonprogressive). The disorders that affect spinal
descending myelomalacia.l-13 Tetraplegia with loss of pain
 u psd ae se s u z sss pr
perception is not recognized, because respiratory arrest occurs
 7-1. Cervical spinal cord diseases of horses are presented in
with such a lesion. In a study in 32 dogs with cervical IVD
Table 7-2, and those of food animals are listed in Table 7-3.
herniation, fewer than one-third of dogs that were nonambu-
 Diffuse LMN diseases involving neuropathies and myopathies
e uuy ro Are jo sst puadxa Ar
are listed in Table 7-4 and Table 7-5.
sensory perception was encountered even less frequently.14
 In general, thoracic limb spinal reflexes are normal to
Acute Progressive Diseases, C1-T2
hyperreflexic with a Cl-5 spinal cord lesion and hyporeflexic
The acute progressive disorders to involve degenerative diseases
with a C6-T2 lesion. However, spinal reflex evaluations may
 such as intervertebral disk disease and equine degenerative
not be reliable for localization within the cervical spinal cord
myelopathy (see Chapter 6), spinal cord and vertebral column
region. A decreased flexor reflex does not always indicate a
neoplasia [see Chapter 6), and inflammatory noninfectious and
lesion from C6-T2 and can also occur with lesions at Cl-5
infectious diseases (see Chapter 15) are discussed elsewhere.
spinal cord level Is Intervertebral disk protrusions affecting
the cervical spinal cord may also produce ipsilateral Horner's
Degenerative
syndrome as a result of disruption of the descending lateral
 Cervical Intervertebral Disk Disease
tectotegmental spinal tract that controls the sympathetic
 Pathophysiology. The pathophysiology of intervertebral
LMNs located in the Tl-3 spinal cord segments. Other clini-
disk disease (IVDD) is discussed in Chapter 6. Hansen type
cal signs associated with peracute cervical IVD extrusions are
I IVDD in the cervical vertebral column occurs most
fre-
cardiac arrhythmia and respiratory dysfunction. Dysphonia or
quently in the chondrodystrophic breeds (miniature poodle,
respiratory dysfunction can occur if edema and injury extends
dachshund, beagle, cocker spaniel) but can also occur in cer-
 to the caudal brainstem or disrupts the descending respiratory
tain large-breed dogs such as the Doberman pinscher.! The
pathways.l6
incidence of cervical IVDD in dogs is lower than that of thora-
Diagnosis. A presumptive diagnosis is based on clini-
columbar IVDD. About 14% of all IVD herniations in the dog
cal signs and signalment. Imaging studies of the spinal cord
occur in the cervical vertebral column.2 The most common
using myelography and/or computed tomography (CT) and
sites for Hansen type I IVDD in the cervical vertebral column 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are necessary to confirm a
are C2-3 and C3-4 in small-breed dogs and C6-7 in larger-
diagnosis ofIVDD and extent of the lesion [see Chapter 4 and
  r s e e esio r
6). Radiography of the cervical vertebral column can provide
signs in other species, primarily cats and horses.24.5 In older
evidence of in situ disk mineralization and may show narrow-
cats, the cervical vertebral column has been reported as the
ing of the IVD space [Figure 7-3) and rule out other bony
most common site for IVD protrusion, followed by the mid-
lesions. Anesthesia is required for proper positioning of the
to caudal lumbar regions.67 Older, nonchondrodystrophic
cervical vertebral column in a patient. The use of survey radi-
large-breed dogs more commonly have Hansen type II IVDD
 ography alone is an inaccurate means for identifying the site
of the caudal cervical vertebral column.1.8
of IVD herniation.17 Myelography can show attenuation and
Unlike thoracolumbar IVDD, cervical IVD herniations
displacement of the contrast column (Figure 7-4).9 Oblique
less commonly result in compressive myelopathy sufficient to
views may further identify foraminal extrusions. 10
unosse Aeu srosey Areu yanouit sisteed ro ssared asne
CT and MRI (see Figure 7-3) more accurately access lesion
for this finding, the larger diameter of the vertebral canal in
  s  oaruds  gon e x
the cervical vertebral column is probably the most logical
modality of choice, as it allows assessment of the spinal cord.
 explanation. Because of the greater space surrounding the cer-
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) should be obtained to rule out
vical cord, IVD herniations in this area are less likely to result
meningomyelitis.
in focal compressive myelopathy. Likewise, the syndrome of
Treatment. As with thoracolumbar IVDD, dogs may be
ascending-descending myelomalacia rarely results from cervi-
 treated conservatively or surgically (see Chapter 6). Dogs with
 cal IVDD or fracture of the cervical vertebral column.
an initial episode of pain may be treated with conservative
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
165
TABLE 7-1
Small Animal C1-T2 Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course
and Etiologic Categories'
Etiologic Category
 Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
Hansen type I IVDD (6.7)
Hansen type II IVDD (6.7)
Ascending descending
Cervical spondylomyelopathy (7)
myelomalacia (6)
Spondylosis deformans (6)
Myelinolysis (6)
Neuronopathies (7}
Myelinolysis (6)
Dysmyelinating diseases (7)
Axonopathies (7)
Lysosomal storage diseases (8.15)
Extradural synovial cysts (7)
 Anomalous
None
None 
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Vertebral column malfomation (6)
 Atlantoaxial subluxation (7)
Atlantooccipital malformation (7}
Chiari-like malformation (7)
Intra-arachnoid cyst/diverticulum (6)
Neoplastic (6)
None
Primary
 Primary
 Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
Skeletal
Skeletal
Metastatic
Metastatic
Nutritional
None
None 
Hypervitaminosis A (cats) (15)
 Inflammatory
None
 Distemper myelitis (15)
 Feline infectious peritonitis (15)
Bacterial myelitis (15}
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (15)
Rickettsial myelitis (15)
 Steroid-responsive meningitis arteritis (15)
Protozoal myelitis (15)
Mycotic myelitis (15)
Diskospondylitis (6)
Epidural empyema (6)
Vertebral physitis (6)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
 Ascending descending
None
Luxations (6)
myelomalacia (6)
Contusions (6)
Hansen type Ill disk
(9) uoisnuixe 
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous embolism
None
None
(6.7}
Vascular malformations (7)
 Embolic myelopathy (6)
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
 therapy. Many dogs with cervical IVDD respond at least tem-
considerable pain, opioid analgesics and corticosteroids or
porarily to conservative therapy (see next section). Because of
lower risk for severe, permanent neurologic dysfunction, cer-
ter 14). Pain relief must be accompanied by strict confinement
vical IVD extrusion is usually not considered a neurosurgical
because otherwise, the animal may become too active. The
emergency, as is the case with thoracolumbar IVDD. Deci-
owner is instructed to maintain confinement for at least 4 to
sions regarding conservative or surgical therapy are based on
6 weeks, regardless of how much the dog improves. If signs
the clinical signs and chronicity of the problem.
worsen or paresis ensues within the early period of confine-
 Conservative Therapy. Principles of conservative manage-
ment, the dog should be reevaluated for surgery.
ment are described in Chapter 6. Conservative therapy for cer-
 In dogs with cervical IVDD, conservative therapy alone
vical IVDD, as with thoracolumbar IVDD, should be restricted
 often is ineffective and recurrence is common. A possible rea-
to dogs with an initial episode of neck pain. The most impor-
 son for lack of response to strict cage rest is that total immobil-
tant element of the treatment is strict confinement to keep
ity of the cervical vertebral column is diffcult to maintain. It
movement to a minimum. Conservative therapy is attempted
also has been shown in dogs with the presenting sign of cer-
while the dog is monitored for reduction of pain and improve-
vical spinal pain alone that a significant amount of extruded
ment in neurologic status. Collars should be avoided and use
IVD material is often present in the vertebral canal.9 In the
of harnesses encouraged. If the animal is confined but still has
 authors' experience, surgery is recommended when pain is
166
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 7-2
Equine C1-T2 Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course
and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
None
Equine degenerative
Cervical spondylomyelopathy (7)
myeloencephalopathy (7)
Neuronopathies (7}
Demyelinating diseases (7)
Axonopathies (7)
Anomalous
None
None
Vertebral column malformation (6)
Spinal cord malformation (6)
Occipitoatlantoaxial malformation (7}
 Atlantoaxial luxation (7)
Neoplastic (6)
None
Metastatic
Primary
 Primary
Skeletal
Skeletal
Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None
Degenerative myeloencephalopathy (7)
Inflammatory 
None
Herpesvirus (6)
See Acute Progressive
Protozoal myelitis (6)
Verminous migrations (6)
Vertebral osteomyelitis (6)
Mycotic myelitis (6)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None
None
Luxations (6)
 Brachial plexus injury (5)
Vascular
Embolic myelopathy (6)
None
None 
 Fibrocartilaginous emboli (6)
 Postanesthetic myelopathy
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
refractory to pain management for longer than 1 to 2 weeks
Dorsal laminectomy involves dissection of the epaxial
 or when progression of neurologic deficits occurs. There has
musculature and removal of the spinous process and the
been limited information on the success of conservative ther-
laminae.24.25 Dorsal procedures provide spinal cord decom-
 apy for cervical IVDD in dogs. The recurrence rate has been
 pression and access for laterally extruded IVD material, but
reported as 36% in dogs treated conservatively for cervical
access is limited to extruded IVD material located ventral
IVDD.2l More recently, Levine et al. reported that dogs with a
to the spinal cord. A lateral approach has been described
presumptive diagnosis of cervical IVDD had a success rate of
for lateral or intraforaminal IVD extrusions at the C4-5 and
48.9%, with 33% having recurrence of clinical signs and 18%
C5-6 interspaces.26.27 Prophylactic disk fenestration can be
having therapeutic falure.22 Owners must be cautioned that
performed at the time of ventral decompression. Fenestra-
 clinical signs often recur after conservative therapy.
tion alone as a surgical treatment should not be performed,
Surgical. Evidence of severe intractable pain, progression
because the IVD material in the vertebral canal is not
 of paresis, or paresis at the onset of clinical signs are an indi-
removed.28-30
cation for decompressive surgery. The various forms of sur-
Complications associated with cervical spinal surgery
gical therapy have been reviewed extensively by Hoerlein.2
 include excessive hemorrhage from damage to the internal
 In cervical IVDD, decompressive procedures by ventral
or
vertebral venous plexi or vertebral artery and incomplete
dorsal approaches are techniques of choice for removal of
removal of disk IVD material, leading to inadequate decom-
an extruded disk. Selection of the decompressive procedure
pression. In the ventral slot procedure, if the width of the slot
is usually determined by the location of the herniated IVD
qsu uoy 1ans Ae so '(%0 0 %0<] pim oo s
material. The ventral slot technique is commonly performed
Aaans eurds eras suorapun ssoa iguonexnans no a
for IVD material displaced ventral to the spinal cord (Figure
 also are at higher risk for postoperative pneumonia.32 Other
7-5).23 Using identifying landmarks, the ventral tubercle of the
 related risk factors for pneumonia include tetraparesis, long
Cl and the transverse processes of C6 vertebrae, to identify
anesthetic times [>l hour], repeat anesthesias, and postrecov-
  ,  e  a  a  a
ery vomiting.
 into the ventral aspect of the affected IVD and the adjacent
The prognosis for functional recovery after decompres-
cranial and caudal vertebral endplates/bodies of the vertebrae
sion of most cervical IVD extrusions is excellent. Predictors
using a pneumatic dril. Advantages of the ventral decompres-
for recovery outcomes in dogs with cervical IVDD are based
sive technique include minimal muscle dissection, limited
 on site of herniation, ambulatory status, and breed size. In a
need for manipulation of the spinal cord to remove herniated
recent study of 190 dogs with cervical IVDD treated surgically.
disk material, and exposure for prophylactic fenestration of
outcomes were no different for the ambulatory yersus non-
adjacent cervical disks.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
167
TABLE 7-3
Food Animal C1-T2 Spinal Cord Diseases: Differential Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course
and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
 Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Degenerative
None
None
Myeloencephalopathies—B (7}
Spondylosis defommans—all (6)
Athrogryposis—all (7)
Neuronopathies—B, O (7)
Axonopathies—B (7)
Hypo-/demyelinating diseases——B. P. O (7}
Anomalous
None
None
Vertebral column malformations—-all (6)
Occipitoatlantoaxial
malformations——B. O (6)
Spinal cord malformations—all (6)
Chiari-like malformation——B (7}
Neoplastic (6)
None
Primary
 Primary
Hematopoietic
Hematopoietic
 Skeletal
 Skeletal
Metastatic
Metastatic
Nutritional 
None 
None
 Enzootic ataxia, copper deficiency—C, O (15) 
Nicotinic acid deficiency—-P
Inflammatory
None
Caprine arthritis-encephalomyelitis-
Visna-Maedi—O (6.15)
C (6)
Verminous migration—all (6)
Bacterial myelitis—-all (15)
Protozoal myelitis (6.15)
Mycotic myelitis (15)
Vertebral osteomyelitis—-all(6)
Toxic
None
Selenium—P (15)
Traumatic
Fractures (6)
None
None
Luxations (6)
Contusions (6)
Brachial plexus injury(5)
Vascular
 Fibrocartilaginous
None
None
embolism—P (6}
B, Bovine; C, caprine; O, ovine; P, porcine.
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
 99% of dogs had resolution of cervical spinal pain and were
Inflammatory
able to ambulate unassisted. In contrast, another study in 32
Cervical Meningomyelitis. Inflammation of the meninges
 dogs with nonambulatory tetraparesis reported that only 62%
caused by bacterial, viral, ricketsial, or fungal agents or subse-
had a complete recovery. l4 Predictors for recovery included
 quent to idiopathic diseases such as granulomatous meningoen-
 higher likelihood of recovery in small-breed dogs and return
cephalomyelitis [GME), steroid responsive meningitis arteritis
of ambulatory function within 96 hours after surgery. How-
(SRMA), or the meningoencephalitides of unknown etiology.
(MUE), may produce clinical signs that are similar to those of
function but had residual deficits. In contrast to some previous
cervical IVDD (see Chapter 15). Cervical spinal pain is com-
studies, site of IVD herniation was not a significant predictor
mon with meningitis. Involvement of the white or gray matter
of complete recovery.4 In large-breed dogs with Hansen type
of the spinal cord results in GP ataxia, paresis, or paralysis. These
II disk protrusions, recovery may be slow, which necessitates
diseases are sometimes characterized by polysystemic signs and
 physical rehabilitation (see caudal cervical spondylomyelopa-
multifocal neurologic lesions. In many cases, the course becomes
thy). Previous studies have reported dogs with caudal cervical
chronic and progressive after the acute development of neura-
 r   ae sse sr x 
 logic signs. Diagnosis is primarily based on clinical signs, imag-
affected thandogs withcranial cervicalIVDextrusions.334
 ing features, CSF abnormalities, and exclusion of other diseases.
 In large-breed dogs with Hansen type II IVDD and caudal cer-
These disorders are discussed in Chapter 15.
vical spondylomyelopathy, only a 66% success rate following
ventral decompression has been reported.35
Acute Nonprogressive Diseases, C1-T2
 Recurrence of clinical signs after surgery in dogs with cer-
Traumatic
vical IVDD ranges from 10%l to 33%.33 The most common
Cervical Spinal Cord Trauma
clinical sign of recurrence was cervical spinal pain. A second
Pathogenesis. Traumatic compression of the cervical spinal
IVD extrusion at a site distinct from the initial lesion was the
cord, in contrast to that in the thoracolumbar area, is more
 most common reason for recurrence.
likely to cause pain with little motor dysfunction; however,
168
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 7-4
Diffuse Neuropathic and Neuromuscular Junction Diseases of Domestic Animals: Differential
 Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course and Etiologic Categories?
Etiologic Category
Episodic
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Degenerative
None
None
Arthrogryposis—all (7)
Neuronopathies——B, O (7)
Axonopathies——B (7)
Hypo-/demyelinating diseases
B. P. 0 (7)
Some storage diseases (7.8.15)
Anomalous
Congenital myasthenia gravis
None
(NMJ)——Ca, F. B
Metabolic (7.15)
None
None
Diabetes mellitus—Ca, F
Hypothyroidism—Ca
Hyperthyroidism——F
Hyperoxaluria——F
Hyperchylomicronemia——F
Neoplastic
None
Paraneoplastic—Ca (7)
None 
Hematopoietic
Nutritional
None
None
 Enzootic ataxia, copper
deficiency—C, O (15)
Tyrosine/phenylalanine
deficiency——F
 Pantothenic acid deficiency——P
ldiopathic
None
None
ldiopathic polyneuropathy—Ca, F
Stringhalt——E
Inflammatory/immune
Aquired myasthenia
Polyradiculoneuritis
 Chronic inflammatory demyelin-
mediated (7})
gravis-—Ca, F
Polyneuritis
 ating polyneuropathy—Ca, F
Protozoal polyradiculoneuritis 
 Ganglioradiculoneuritis
Toxic (7.15)
None
 Fulminant myasthesia gravis
Heavy metals-lead, mercury.
(NMJ}-Ca
 thallium, antimony, zinc 
Tick paralysis (NMJ)—all
 Insecticides—organophos-
Botulism (NMJ}—all 
phates—F. B
 Drugs—vincristine, cisplatin,
 Other—trichloroethylene,
salinomycin, aminoglycosides
 Nhexane, acrylamide 
Traumatic (all)
None
None
None
Vascular
None
None
None
B, Bovine; C, caprine; Ca, canine; E, equine; F, feline; NMJ, neuromusucular junction; O, ovine; P, porcine.
*Nurmbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
 extensive compression can result in severe motor and sensory
dysfunction. Owing to an increased ratio of vertebral canal to
sis/plegia. Thoracic limb spinal reffexes may be decreased or
spinal cord diameter in the cervical region, clinical signs in
absent with hypotonia. An ipsilateral Horner's syndrome may
dogs with cervical vertebral column trauma more often mani-
follow damage of the Tl-3 spinal cord segments, spinal roots,
fest with cervical spinal pain and postural reaction deficits.36
 or nerves. Animals with monoparesis and LMN signs should
Approximately 70% of cervical vertebral fractures involve the
be suspected to have a brachial plexus injury or avulsion. Inju-
Cl and C2 vertebrae, 10% to 15% are between C3 and C7, and
ries cranial to the C5 spinal cord segment may cause sudden
multiple fractures are not uncommon [Figure 7-6).36.37 A frac-
death through disruption of the respiratory pathways to the
ture between Cl and C5 spinal cord segments results in tetra-
 phrenic and intercostal motor neurons. Tetraplegia with loss of
 paresis/plegia or ipsilateral hemiparesis/plegia. Spinal reflexes
 pain perception caudal to the lesion, therefore, is rare because
 are normal or exaggerated Horner's syndrome is possible with
 affected animals die of respiratory failure.
severe lesions. Severe lesions can also cause respiratory paresis
Diagnosis and Treatment. Diagnosis and management of
or apnea from disruption of descending reticulospinal path-
 spinal cord trauma are discussed in Chapter 6.
ways that control muscles for respiration. Dogs with cervical
 Prognosis. Prognosis is yariable with cervical vertebral
spinal cord injury may require peri- and postoperative ven-
 fractures in dogs, especially for large breeds and those receiv-
tilatory support. A fracture between C6 and T2 spinal cord
ing surgical management. Conservative treatment with neck
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
169
TABLE 7-5
Diffuse Myopathic Diseases of Domestic Animals: Differential Diagnosis Based on Clinical Course
and Etiologic Categories*
Etiologic Category
Episodic
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
 Exercise-induced collapse in
None
Muscular dystrophies—Ca, F. O
 Labrador retrieverst
Myopathy of Pietrain pigs
Other breed-related myopathies—Ca, F
 Some storage diseases
Anomalous
None 
None
Metabolic (7.15)
Hypokalemia—all 
None 
Hypothyroidism——Ca
 Hyperkalemia—all 
Hyperthyroidism——F
Hypocalcemia—all 
Steroid myopathy——Ca, E
Hypercalcemia—all 
Glycogen storage myopathies—Ca, E
Periodic paralysis——E, Ca, F
 Polysaccharide storage myopathy——E
Adrenal insufficiency—all
Mitochondrial, lipid storage
 Malignant hyperthermia
myopathy——Ca, E
syndrome—Ca, P
Myotonic myopathy/dystrophy—Ca, F.
 Recurrent exertional
E, B (10) 
rhabdomyolysis
Neoplastic (6}
None
Paraneoplastic
Paraneoplastic
Nutritional
None
Vitamin E, Se deficiency
Vitamin E, Se deficiency
White muscle disease——E, B
Inflammatory
None
Bacterial myositis—all
 Chronic polymyositis-Ca, F
Protozoal myositis——Ca, F, E
Masticatory muscle myositis—Ca
Immune-mediated polymyositis-
Ca, F
Dermatomyositis—Ca
Extraocular myositis—Ca
Toxic (all)
None
Drugs—trimethoprim sulfa
None
 Snakes, spider, tetanus 
Monensin
Traumatic (all)
Limber tail-——Ca (7)
None 
None
Compartment syndrome (7}
Contusions (6)
Vascular
Ischemic neuromyopathy—Ca, None
None
F (6.7}
B, Bovine; C, caprine; Ca, canine; E, equine; F, feline; O, ovine; P, porcine.
*Numbersin parentheses refer to chapters in which the entities are discussed.
tNow considered synaptic vesicle release abnormality in CNS.
immobilization [external coaptation) is a viable approach for
C6-TZ spinal cord segments frequently result in LMN signs
many dogs with cervical fractures. Hawthorne et al. reported
in the thoracic limbs and GP/UMN signs in the pelvic limbs.
functional recovery in 25 of 28 dogs treated conservatively.37
Similar to involvement of the lumbosacral intumescence, a
Surgical treatment was associated with higher mortality
correlation between poor prognosis and involvement of intu-
(56%). Overall, severity of neurologic deficits (nonambula-
mescences, lesion symmetry, and absence of pain perception
tory) and prolonged interval to referral was associated with
 has been observed.39 Diagnosis and management are discussed
poorer outcome. Early neck immobilization and prompt refer-
in Chapter 6.
ral are recommended.
Chronic Progressive Diseases, C1-T2
Vascular
The chronic progressive diseases include anomalies and other 
Fibrocartilaginous Embolism. This syndrome is described in
 degenerative diseases of the spinal cord. The degenerative spi-
 Chapter 6. The disease can occur in the cervical spinal cord
nal cord diseases often affect the pelvic limbs first but progress
and seems to occur more commonly in small-breed dogs and
to also involve the thoracic limbs. Some degeneration diseases
cats (Figure 7-7).38-42 The clinical signs develop acutely and
may also affect the brain, hence the term degenerative myeloen-
-na oi ued tenTu uoy snou Z o I u Aipider ssraoid
cephalopathy. Malformations, with or without secondary spinal
paresis or hemiparesis if only one side of the spinal cord is
cord compression, affect the cervical vertebrae as elsewhere in
involved. Signs are compatible with acute cervical spinal cord
the vertebral column [see Chapter 6 for a description of these
 compression, except affected dogs often have dramatic asym-
 anomalies). Malformations may be a component of "wobbler"
metry and show lack of paraspinal hyperesthesia. Lesions at
syndrome, which we refer to as cervical spondylomyelopathy.
170
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Primary Degenerative Spinal Cord Disorders
thoracic limbs and possibly the brainstem. Definitive diagnosis
 In general, these disorders are uncommon. Consideration
of these diseases is usually determined by histopathology of
should be given to these disorders based on clinical signs,
the CNS and PNS. Degenerative spinal cord disorders involv-
typical young age of onset, and breed predilection that occur
ing myelinopathy and axonopathy are classified based on their
in many of these degenerative spinal cord diseases. The clas-
histopathologic features (Table 7-7).149
sification scheme for the degenerative spinal cord disorders
Central Myelinopathy. Primary myelin degenerative dis-
of animals are further described in Table 7-6. Many of these
orders can be classified as hypomyelination, dysmyelination
degenerative spinal cord disorders have a breed predisposition
 which may suggest an inherited basis. Initial clinical signs often
elinogenesis, oligodendrocytes are decreased in numbers or
are worse in the pelvic limbs but then progress to involve the
unable to produce functional myelin. These disorders clini-
cally manifest with whole body tremors (see Chapter 10).
Leukodystrophy refers to inherited conditions of younger
animals in which myelin synthesis or function is defective
and cannot be maintained. Leukodystrophies have been
reported inthe dalmation5lLabradorretriever52Scottish
terrier 153.154 bull mastiff 15 and miniature poodle.I56 Onset
is within 3 to 6 months of age. Clinical signs manifest as a
of cerebellar involvement and seizures also may occur. His-
topathology reveals myelin degeneration replaced by severe
astrogliosis or Rosenthal fibers (astrocytic processes) that is
widespread throughout the brain and spinal cord. Leukodys-
trophy has been described in Charolais cattle, with a progres-
sive history of paraparesis leading to tetraparesis recumbency
by 24 months of age.157-159
Myelinolysis is characterized by disintegration of initially
Figure 7-2 A 4-year-old male castrated dachshund shows hori-
 normally formed myelin. These disorders have been described
zontal neck placement. Dog was reluctant to move his neck and
 manifested paraspinal hyperesthesia on neck palpation. Hansen
de64Onset f paraparsis i acute,and there sblateral nd
type I cervical intervertebral disk herniation was confirmed with
symmetrical loss of myelin in all funiculi, with preservation of
diagnostics and surgery.
axons [see Chapter 6).
A
Hgure 7-3 A, Lateral radiograph of cervical vertebral column in 5-year-old mixed-breed dog with
cervical spinal pain. Note narrow intervertebral disk [IVD] space at C4-5 {arrow) and opacified
nucleus pulposus and extrusion into vertebral canal. B, Sagittal T2-weighted image demontrating
heterogeneous intensity of a mass at same IVD space Mass is causing dorsal deviation of spinal cord
and attenuation of dorsal subarachnoid space over C4 and C5 spinal cord segments. Degeneration
of C4-5 IVD is evidenced by decreased intensity compared to other IVD spaces. C, Transverse
imaging showing right-sided lateralization of extruded material displacing spinal cord dorsally and
to the left. Dog responded wellto a ventral slot and removal of extruded nucleus pulposus, typical
for Hansen type I intervertebral disk disease.
CHAPTER 7
Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
171
Figure 7-4 Cervical myelogram of dog, showing narrowing of
C2-3 intervertebral disk (IVD) space and dorsal deviation of spi-
nal cord over C2-3 IVD space. Lesion was not visualized on survey
radiographs. Condition responded to a ventral slot and removal of
extruded IVD material.
 If the type of myelin degeneration cannot be determined,
a more general term, leukoencephalomyelopathy, is used to
classify these degenerative spinal cord disorders that may be
inherited or acquired. Leukoencephalomyelopathies have
been documented in the rottweilerl65 166 and Dutch Kooiker
dog.l67 The age at onset of signs is within a few months to
 over l year. Progression is rapid in the Dutch Kooiker dog but
slow and insidious in the rottweiler. The myelin is affected
Figure 7-5 Depiction of a ventral slot procedure at C2-3 IVD
in all funiculi, with sparing of axons. Spongy degeneration is
space. Slot is rmore extensive in vertebra cranial to disk. Drilling
a nonspecific term used to denote that the affected tissue is
depth is judged by recognition of (A) outer cortical bone, (B)
vacuolated. Vacuolation can be seen in disorders that involve
cancellous bone, and (C) inner cortical bone. Other structures
 separation of the myelin sheath or that involve the neuro-
not easily seen are (D) paired venous sinuses, and (E) dorsal lon-
nal cell body, as in the prion diseases. A spongiform leukoen-
gitudinal ligaments. (From Coates JR, Hoffman A, Dewey CW:
cephalomyelopathy has been reported in the Australian cattle
Surgical approaches to the spine. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook
dog, 168.169 Shetland sheepdog, and Labrador retriever 170.171
of small animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, p
 Onset of signs occur within 2 to 9 months of age and are
1148-1162.)
 progressive. Clinical signs manifest as cerebellar ataxia, sei-
zures, and opisthotonus. There is widespread vacuolation and
myelin degeneration of the spinal cord, brainstem, and cer-
       
ebellum, with involvement of the cerebral white matter in the
CNS and PNS are described as in central-peripheral distal
Labrador retriever. A leukoencephalomyelopathy has been
axonopathy. Central-peripheral axonopathy of young dogs
described in calves of the Murray Grey breed in Australia.172
have been described in the Ibizanhound 149Alaskan husky l3
 Calves manifest ataxia and paresis from birth. Histopathology
boxer, l84-186 Pyrenean mountain dog, 187 and New Zealand
reveals primarily myelin involvement in the brainstem and
Huntaway.l8 y is a central-peripheral axonopathy of older-
spinal cord.
aged dogs [see Chapter 6).
Some lysosomal storage diseases such as globoid cell leuko-
Those limited to the PNS are neuropathies.149 189 Axonal
 dystrophy cause demyelination by buildup of storage material
 degeneration or myelin degeneration may predominate. Sen-
sorimotor neuropathy often shows degenerative changes in
 olite toxic to myelin-forming oligodendrocytes and Schwann
spinal ganglia or in the dorsal horn or ventral horn of the spi-
cells. Other myelin disorders that affect primarily the periph-
nal cord.189,190
eral nerves are discussed in the Lower Motor Neuron section
 Multisystem neuronal degeneration involves axonopathy
of this chapter.
and neuronopathy throughout the CNS and may include neu-
Central Axonopathy. Axonal degeneration results from
ropathy (see also Chapter 8). These have been described in
disease within the neuronal cell body or within the axon itself.
Lesion distributions are variable. Central axonopathy usually
and rottweiler.196
 consists of bilateral and symmetric degeneration of the axon
Neuroaxonal
 Dystrophy. Neuroaxonal
dystrophies
and myelin and affects both sensory and motor tracts of the
(NADs) are primary disorders of axonal transport that occur
spinal cord, with the longest fbers being the most vulnera-
in dogs, sheep, cats, and horses. They can be histopathologi-
 ble.175 Breeds described include Jack Russell and smooth fox
cally distinguished from other diseases by the presence of
terriers,176-178 Scottish terrier 179 and Labrador retriever. 180
spheroids that involve distal or preterminal parts of the axon
Lesions typify diffuse loss of myelinated fbers in the cerebel-
and are found in gray matter with proximity to the neuronal
lar white matter and/or in the dorsal funiculi and pyramidal
cell bodies in the spinal cord and brainstem.l49 These disor-
tracts in the spinal cord. Swollen axons may show neurofla-
ders manifest as a progressive cerebellar ataxia and tetrapare-
ment accumulations. In Brown Swiss cattle, at 5 months of
sis. In dogs, neuroaxonal dystrophy has been described in the
age affected calves develop paraparesis and ataxia, and signs
rottweiler, 197-199 Chihuahua,200 working collie sheepdog,201
p seaaa sooedost suu rao sarard Aisnisu
Jack Russell terrier 202 German shepherd dog,203 and papil-
fuse axonal degeneration in the spinal cord, with spheroids
lon.204,205 NAD has been sporadically described in cats.206-208
[axonal swellings) present in some brainstem nuclei and in the
A progressive ataxia and paraparesis which progressed to
cerebellar granular layer 18l,182
tetraparesis has been described in young Suffolk lambs with
172
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
+
B
Hgure 7-6 A, Lateral radiograph of cervical spine from 1-year-old Rottweiler with fracture of C2
vertebra, displaced craniodorsally. B, Lateral radiograph taken postoperatively demonstrating use of
two plates realigning fracture. C, Ventrodorsal view.
young animals up to 24 months of age. Chronic progressive
forms of the disease have been described. The disease has been
diagnosed in Europe and North America, most commonly in
the northeastern United States213,214 Histopathological, the
disease is characterized by diffuse myeloencephalopathy, with
s s u ss
Degeneration of white matter occurs in all spinal cord funiculi
and also involves the white matter in the sensory (proprio-
ceptive) relay nuclei in the medulla oblongata, consisting of
spheroid formation, astrogliosis, and axonal and myelin loss.
Equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy is clinically indis-
tinguishable from neuroaxonal dystrophy. Lesion distribution
of NAD differs with its lesion confinement to the cuneate and
gracilis nuclei in the brainstem.216,217 A familial tendency to
develop EDM has been observed in the Arabian, thorough-
 bred, Paso Fino, Appaloosa, and standardbred breeds and in
some zebras.218 A similar, potentially familial, form of neu-
roaxonal dystrophy is seen in Morgan horses.2ll The cause
of degenerative myeloencephalopathy is unknown but may
Figure 7-7 Histopathology using Luxol fast blue staining dem-
 involve a complex interaction of many factors. In other spe-
onstrating malacia and tissue loss in ventral gray matter from a
cies, degenerative myeloencephalopathies with similar histo-
 Pembroke Welsh Corgi presenting for acute-onset asyrnmetric
logic findings have been linked to etiologies such as vitamin
hemiplegia. A presumptive diagnosis of fbrocartilaginous embo-
E and copper deficiencies, genetics, and toxins. Risk factors
lism was made. [Courtesy Dr. Gayle C. Johnson.]
associated with EDM include use of insecticides, exposure
to wood preservatives, and frequency of time spent on dirt
with limited exposure to forages containing adequate vitamin
E content.219 Some studies showed evidence of vitamin E
neuroaxonal dystrophy.209 Neuroaxonal dystrophy also has
been described in other breeds of sheep in Australia and New
by others.22l Consequently, the role of vitamin E and other
Zealand.2lo A potentially familial form of neuroaxonal dys-
related cofactors in the development ofEDM remains unclear.
trophy is seen in Morgan horses.2l
The disease must be differentiated from NAD, cervical spon-
Equine Degenerative Myeloencephalopathy
dylomyelopathy, and protozoal myeloencephalitis.
Pathophysiology. Equine
degenerative
myeloencephalo-
Clinical Signs. Signs develop in horses that are younger
pathy occurs in light breeds ofhorses, captive Przewalski horses,
zebras, and a few ruminant species.212 The disease is charac-
include symmetric GP ataxia and UMN paresis in all limbs
terized by acute, progressive, symmetric ataxia and paresis in
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
173
TABLE 7-6
Classification of Myelin, Axonal, and Neuronal Disorders ofthe CNS (Spinal Cord) and PNS
Neuroanatomic Pathology
Specific Description
CNS - Myelopathy/Encephalomyelopathy (see Table 7-7)
Myelinopathy
Hypomyelination
Dysmyelination: leukodystrophy: myelinolytic disorders
Leukomyelopathy
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
Spongy degeneration
Myelin vacuolation
Neuronal vacuolation
Axonopathy—wallerian degeneration, distal axonopathy
Central axonopathy
(dying-back neuropathy). segmental degeneration
Central-peripheral axonopathy
Central-peripheral distal axonopathy
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy
Axonal transport disorder
 Multisystem degeneration
Axonopathy. neuronopathy, and neuropathy
PNS- Neuropathy
Neuronopathy—-degeneration and loss of neurons,
Motor neuronopathy (see Table 7-9)
 neurofibrillary accumulations in neurons
Sensory neuronopathy (see Table 7-10)
Myelinopathy (see Table 7-10)
Segmental demyelination
 Hypomyelination 
Axonopathy (see Table 7-10)
Sensory-motor neuropathy: distal sensory motor:
central-peripheral distal axonopathy 
 Sensory neuropathy
Metabolic neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy (see Chapters 3 and 15)
CNS, Central nervous systemm; PNS, peripheral nervous systerm.
Cutaneous trunci and other reflexes, such as with the slap test,
centers exist during development of the axis and three for
may be decreased. Although the disease is progressive, tetra-
the atlas.223,224 Specifically, the dens of the axis is composed
plegia is rare. The early onset of signs and the marked dispar-
of two ossification centers, of which the cranial bony element
ity in gait deficits between the thoracic and pelvic limbs raise
the index of suspicion for degenerative myeloencephalopathy
over other focal cervical myelopathies.
the atlas and axis have been reported 225.22The normal atlan-
 Diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis of EDM is only made based
toaxial articulation allows rotational and lateral movement.
on histopathologic examination of the spinal cord and brain-
The dens projects from the body of the axis and is bound to
stem. Antemortem diagnosis is difficult. Radiography of the
the ventral arch of the atlas by a strong transverse ligament
cervical vertebral column is useful in excluding cervical spon-
(Figure 7-8). This attachment prevents flexion between the
dylomyelopathy from consideration if rigid criteria are followed
atlas and the axis (Figure 7-9, A). Hypoplasia or aplasia of the
dens causes failure of proper ligamentous development and
E concentrations should be greater than 1.5 mg/mL in normal
horses. Levels in affected horses may be half that or less.210
affected dogs. Joint instability allows the axis to rotate cau-
Analysis of CSF may disclose increased protein concentration,
 dodorsally. The spinal cord is then compressed between the
which lessens the likelihood of protozoal encephalomyelopathy.
axis and the dorsal arch of the atlas [see Figure 7-9, B). Cervi-
Treatment. No specific treatment for EDM exists. Vitamin
cal flexion accentuates the degree of spinal cord compression.
Luxations caused by a fracture or congenital malformation of
of EDM has been associated with cessation of the develop-
the dens tend to produce less severe neurologic signs, because
less compression of the spinal cord occurs. Fractures of the
body of the axis produce neurologic signs similar to those of
ae as u sia reyuaq ad a Aepn ooo
acute traumatic luxation in other regions of the cervical ver-
horses.210 Providing fresh green forage with an adequate vita-
tebral column. Neurologic signs result from acute or chronic
min E content may be better. The prognosis is poor for com-
progressive compressive myelopathy. The congenital disor-
plete resolution of signs, although signs may stabilize.
ders are usually more chronic, with gradual progression of
neurologic signs.
Anomalies
Atlantoaxial subluxation frequently affects young, small/
Atlantoaxial Subluxation
toy breed dogs, but single case reports exist for older-aged
Pathophysiology. Atlantoaxial [AA) subluxation [AA luxa-
and large-breed dogs.230-233 It also has been reported in other
tion, AA instability) usually results from congenital mal-
species [eg, horses, catle, cats, deer34-237 Slowly progre
formation or trauma to the associated bones, joint, and/or
sive subluxation of the atlantoaxial articulation was originally
supporting ligamentous structures involved in the articu-
described in 10 smallbreed dogs.238 These lesions include
lation of the atlas (Cl) and axis (C2). Seven ossification
subluxations with either an intact or a congenitally malformed
Text continued on p.181.
TABLE 7-7
Summary of Degenerative Spinal Cord (SC) Disorders in Domestic Animals
 Disease (Affected Breed
Age of
or Breeds!
Onset
Inheritance Pattern 
 Clinical Features
Histopathology
Reference
PARTI
CNS Hypomyelinopathy
 Canine—dalmatian,
Birth
 X-linked (springer
 Bouncing gait: pendular
Widespread CNS hypomyelination and myelin pallor:
43-49
二
 springer spaniel,
spaniell: AR
nystagmus; tremor:
oligodendrocyte numbers are reduced or absent:
Samoyed, chow
(Bernese
cerebellar ataxia
astrogliosis in some
chow, wweimaraner,
mountain dog!
ical
Lurcher, Bernese
Pro
mountain dog 
Siamese
Birth
 Familial
 Whole-body tremors
Hypomyelination of spinal cord 
50
Swine—Type A I
Birth 
 Acquired from hog
Rhythmic whole-body tremor:
CNS hypomyelinogenesis, cerebellar hypoplasia and
51
lems:
cholera
bouncing gait 
dysplasia
Swine—Type A Il 
Birth 
Acquired unknown
Same as above
 CNS hypomyelinogenesis 
51
viral agent
igns
Swine-—-Type A Ill in
Birth 
X-linked 
 Same as above
CNS hypomyelination; oligodendrocyte reduced in
51.52
Landrace or Landrace
numbers
 and
cross
Swine——Type A IV in
Birth
AR
 Same as above
 CNS hypomyelination; oligodendrocyte degeneration
51.53
 Saddleback pigs
Swine-Type A V
Birth 
Acquired from 
Same as above
 CNS hypomyelination; cerebellar hypoplasia
54
 organophos-
phate
Bovine—Angus
Birth 
Unknown
Unable to stand, tremor
Hypomyelination in medulla, cerebrum, cerebellum, SC
55
 shorthorn 
Jersey
Birth
Unknown
Same as above
Pallor in cerebellum and medulla; failure of axonal
56
development in brainstem
Shorthorn and Hereford 
Birth
Unknown
 Same as above
 Nonspecific changes in central W/M
57
 in Canada
Lambs—hairy fleece
Birth
Unknown
Same as above
 CNS hypomyelinogenesis
58
Myelinopathy
2-7 yr
Acquired from
Progressive GP ataxia and
Myelin degeneration in all funiculi; mild in dorsal funiculi:
59-61
Hound ataxia (foxhound,
 methionine
 spastic paresis in PL
thoracic SC most severely affected; degeneration
beagle, and harrier 
deficiency
 tapers into brainstem
hounds!
 Myelinolytic disorder
2-2.5 yr
Unknown
Slowly progressive paresis
Bilateral symmetric demyelination in all funiculi, most
62
(Leonberger)
 and ataxia, hypermetria
 severe in dorsal parts of lateral funiculus of cervi-
 of TL, increased extensor
cal SC, extending cranially into brain and caudally 
tone, postural reaction
into thoracic SC; lesion encroached in descending 
deficits all limbs, spinal 
motor pathways: lesions in brain were most severe
reflexes intact
 in cerebrospinal tract, tectospinal tract, pyramidal
 decussation, pyramids, medial lemniscus, and spinal
tract of V: myelin loss replaced by gliosis; axons are
preserved
Myelinolytic disorder
6 mos
AR?
Rapidly progressive sym-
 Bilateral and symmetric loss of myelin in all funiculi in
63-65
(Afghan hound)
metric spastic paraparesis
midthoracic SC; lesions extend cranially to midcervi-
and GP ataxia to paraplegia
cal SC that taper to only involve dorsal or ventral
within 7-10 days: spastic
funiculus; fasciculus proprius is usually spared; few
 TL involvement. Spinal
medullary lesions; tissue cavitation in rare cases:
reflexes increased.
vacuolated myelin sheaths, gitter cells; axons are
preserved
Myelinolytic disorder
9wk
Unknown
 Progressive spastic tetrapare-
Extensive loss of myelinated fibers in SC and midbrain:
66
(miniature poodle)
sis to tetraplegia
 bilateral symmetric loss of myelin in SC with sparing
 of fasciculus proprius; axonal integrity maintained
 Rapidly progressive para-
Leukomyelopathy
312 mo
AR
Diffuse leukomyelopathy affecting all funiculi in all
67
HAPTER
(Dutch Kooiker dogs)
 paresis and GP ataxia to
regions; most severe in dorsal and ventral funiculi: 
tetraparesis; spinal reflexes
myelin necrosis and cavitation; axon sparing unknown
increased
t
Leukoencephalomyelop-
1.5 -3.5 yr
Unknown, familial 
 Slowly progressive ataxia
 Bilateral widespread primary demyelination: lesions
68. 69
Tetrapar
athy (rottweiler)
 involving all limbs: UMN 
most severe in dorsal funiculi of cervical SC and 
 paresis with GP propriocep-
extend into thoracic SC; axons are preserved.
tive ataxia
 Spongiform leukoen-
2-9 mo
Maternal mito-
Progressive spastic parapa-
Widespread vacuolation of myelin in subcortical WM,
70.71
aresis,
cephalomyelopathy
 chondrial (mis-
resis and cerebellar ataxia
brain, brainstem, spinal cord, and cerebellum; splitting
(Australian cattle dog
sense mutation
to tetraplegia; tremors:
of myelin sheaths
and Shetland sheep-
cytochrome B}
dysphagia: seizures
dog!
mi
Spongy degeneration
iparesi
4-9 mo 
 Familial
 Cerebellar ataxia and dysmet-
Vacuolation and myelin degeneration in central and
72.73
(Labrador retriever)
ria, paw placement normal,
peripheral nervous systems; lesions prominent in
episodic limb extension
cerebellar peduncles and white matter, cerebral W/M,
and opisthotonos; spinal
and tracts in brainstem and SC; astrocytic prolifera-
and
reflexes intact, generalized 
tion in areas of vacuolation 
muscle atrophy
 Ataxia
Leukoencephalomalacia 
4-18 mo
Familial
Central blindness; normal gait 
 Pallor in corona radiata of cerebrum: tissue necrosis:
74
(Labrador retriever)
to dysmetria TL, ataxia in 
lesions not observed in cerebellar and brainstem 
 PL: cognitive dysfunction
WM: spinal cord not available
Birman cat leukoenceph-
2-6 mo
Familial
Paraparesis: GP ataxia
Vacuolation affecting cerebral cortex, thalamus, caudal
75
colliculus, medulla; wallerian degeneration in SC
Continued
TABLE 7-7
6
Summary of Degenerative Spinal Cord (SC) Disorders in Domestic Animals—cont'd
 Disease (Affected Breed
Age of
or Breeds)
Onset
Inheritance Pattern 
Clinical Features
Histopathology
Reference
PARTI
 American Brown Swiss
Birth 
AR
 Recumbency, limb extension 
 Defective myelination, astrocytosis involving dorsal,
76-78
and Swiss Brown
opisthotonos, tremor
dorsolateral SC funiculi
二
(Braunvieh)
 Progressive spinal
Birth 
AR
Paraparesis and GP ataxia
 Diffuse myelopathy involving dorsal spinocerebellar and
79. 80
myelinopathy in
ventromedian tracts; myelin loss
ical
Murray Grey cattle
 Probl
and Limousin
Leukodystrophies
lems:
Globoid cell leukodystro-
3mo
AR
 Progressive ataxia and
Loss of myelin in brain, spinal cord, and nerves with
81.82
phy (many breeds)
paraparesis; cerebellar
perivascular accumulations of globoid macrophages
(see Table 5-2)
signs; dull mentation:
igns
 blindness reflexes may 
be depressed; euthanasia
 and
within 1 yr
Leukodystrophy
35 mo
AR
 Progressive PL GP ataxia to
Bilateral cavitating lesions in cerebral WM also involving
83
(dalmatian dogs)
 TL: visual deficits; eutha-
caudate nucleus and putamen; loss of myelin with
nized within 4 mo from 
preservation of axons; reactive astrocytosis: midbrain,
onset
cerebellum, medulla are normal; spinal roots and
nerves are normal.
Leukodystrophy
6 mo
Unknown
Progressive PL GP ataxia and
 Perivascular Rosenthal fibers and hypertrophic astro-
84
(Labrador retriever)
paresis, wide-base stance:
cytes in W/M of cerebrnum, basal nuclei and brainstem 
euthanized within 3-10 mo
eukodystrophy
6 mo
Unknown, familial 
 Progressive tetraparesis,
Widespread Rosenthal fibers and astrocytosis through-
85. 86
(Scottish terrier)
ataxia, and head tilt; sei-
out brain and SC
 zures; euthanasia within 
3 mo
Leukodystrophy (bull
6 mo
Unknown
 Slow progressive spastic 
 Areas of myelin pallor throughout the major WM tracts
87
mastiff}
tetraparesis and ataxia:
with minimal astrocytosis; segmental demyelination:
 intermittent whole-body 
ultrastructural abnormalities in oligodendroglia 
 tremors; euthanized at 8
mo to 2 yr
eukodystrophy
3mo
Unknown
 Progressive tetraparesis and 
Widespread Rosenthal fibers and astrocytosis through-
88
(miniature poodle)
GP ataxia, tremors; eutha-
 out brain and SC
nized at 6 mo of age
Leukodystrophy
1-2 yr
AR?
Spastic ataxia in PL and TL
 Primary oligodendrocyte dysplasia; eosinophilic plaques
89-91
(progressive ataxia in
 progressing to recum-
 in W/M of CNS involving cerebellum, internal capsule.
Charolais cattle)
bency: head tremor
 corpus callosum, and SC 
Axonopathy (Central Axonopathy, Central-Peripheral Axonopathy, Central-Peripheral Distal Axonopathy)
Central-peripheral 
>8 yr
Autosomal reces-
 Slowly progressive general
Diffuse myelopathy in all funiculi most severe in dorsal
92-101
axonopathy
sive {SOD1
 proprioceptive ataxia and 
 portion of lateral funiculus and in fasciculus gracilis
Canine degenerative
mutation}
 spastic UMN PL paresis in 
in thoracic SC; loss of axons, moderate astrocytosis:
myelopathy (many
early disease; ascending 
limited SC GM involvement: peripheral nerve involve-
breeds)
tetraparesis and GP ataxia
ment with axonal loss and secondary demyelination 
to tetraplegia and LMN 
signs; euthanasia within 
9mo to 3 yr
Central axonopathy
2-6 mo 
AR
GP ataxia and paresis in PL:
Bilaterally symmetric axon and myelin degeneration in
102-104
Hereditary ataxia
wide-base stance: hyper-
 dorsal part of lateral funiculus and in ventromedial
(smooth fox terrier,
metria TL and PL: intention
 part of ventral funiculus: myelin loss; degeneration of
Jack Russell terrier!
temor; seizures in JRT
spinocerebellar tracts most severe in cervical SC; JRT
also has changes in central auditory pathway. with
 presence of extensive spheroids
Central-peripheral ax0-
8mo-2 yr
AR
Progressive GP and cerebel-
 Diffuse axonopathy of all funiculi of SC, worse in
105
 nopathy (lbizan hound)
lar ataxia; most severe in 
thoracic region: degeneration of ascending and 
HAPTER
 PL: signs progress to TL:
descending tracts: many large spheroids in axons 
hyporeflexia to absence of 
of auditory pathway in trapezoid body: spinal roots
 patellar reflex
showed dilated myelin sheaths: many nerves con-
L
tained excessive endoneurium: encephalopathy and 
Tetra
 neuropathy affecting axons
Central-peripheral 
6-18 wk
AR
Generalized weakness pro-
Bilaterally symmetric axon and myelin of SC in all
106
apar
axonopathy
 gressing to recumbency:
 segments, with astrogliosis replacement: in cranial
iresis,
Hereditary
GP ataxia: LMN signs in TL:
cervical region, areas of degeneration in dorsolateral
encephalomyelopathy
UMN and LMN signs PL: 
and dorsal funiculi: midcervical to midthoracic areas
(Alaskan husky)
 bryngeal paresis
 of degeneration in caudal projecting pathways of
He
ventral and lateral funiculi. Degeneration cranially
3
 extended into medulla and caudal cerebellar pedun-
iparesi
 cle: brainstem and cerebellar nuclei lesions consisting
 of astrocytosis, spheroids, and no neuronal cell body 
abnormalities. Diffuse axonopathy and secondary
demyelination in nerves.
 and
Central-peripheral distal 
515 mo
Unknown
Progressive PL GP ataxia
 Symmetric and bilateral axon and myelin degeneration
107-109
and paresis; loss of paw
in lateral and ventral funiculi of SC; spheroids more
Ataxia
axonopathy
 Progressive axonopathy
replacement: progress
common in WM and cuneate, gracilic, olivary nuclei;:
(boxer)
to TL: decreased spinal
cerebellum and cerebral cortex spared; nerves show
reflexes
 axonal degeneration and demyelination.
Continued
TABLE 7-7
178
Summary of Degenerative Spinal Cord (SC) Disorders in Domestic Animals—cont'd
 Disease (Affected Breed
Age of
or Breeds!
Onset
Inheritance Pattern 
Clinical Features
Histopathology
Reference
PARTI
Central axonopathy (Lab-
35 mo
AR?
 PL affected: initially short-
Axonopathy of all funiculi; aplasia or hypoplasia of
110
strided and collapse: TL
corpus callosum, spina bifida: bilateraly symmetric
二
rador retriever)
stiff: hypermetria allimbs:
degeneration of SC WM in dorsal part of each lateral
head tremors and dysmet-
funiculus invoving spinocerebellar tracts and in fas-
ria late in disease
ciculus gracilis and lesser in ventral funiculus; most
ical
extensive in thoracic SC and decreased in intensity
Prol
in more caudal lumbar and sacral SC; degeneration
cranially into medulla and cerebellar peduncles and
lems:
cerebellum: partial loss of axons and myelin replaced 
by astrogliosis: more extensive loss of larger axons;
 presence of axonal spheroids; spheroids numerous in
granular layer of neurons of cerebellar cortex: no cell 
igns
body lesions in SC: in medulla, cell body degeneration 
 and
was extensive in each olivary nucleus; neurofilament
staining
Central axonopathy
10-12 wk;
Unknown
Tremors and ataxia
Diffuse degeneration of W/M in SC, cerebral W/M, cer-
111
(Scottish terrier)
4to 5 
 ebellum, brainstem: replaced by gliosis; some dystro-
mo
phic axons and spheroids suggest axonal pathology:
secondary demyelination
Central-peripheral 
12 wk 
Unknown
 PL GP ataxia, postural reac-
Diffuse axonal degeneration in dorsolateral, lateral and 
112
axonopathy (Pyrenean
tion deficits, decreased 
ventral WM from medulla to L5: axonal swelling.
mountain dog!
spinal reflexes; nerve
myelin degeneration in CNS and PNS
 conduction slow 
Central-peripheral axo-
8wk
 Familial 
GP ataxia and spastic paresis
Severe degeneration of axons and myelin in SC; degen-
113
nopathy (New Zealand 
in PL, hypermetria, postural
eration most severe in cranial cervical SC within
Huntaway)
reaction deficits, TL are 
dorsal funiculi, ventral medial part of ventral funiculi.
normal; dogs euthanized at
lateral and dorsal part of lateral funiculus involving
 20 mo of age
 spinocerebellar tracts; fiber loss replaced by astrocy-
tosis; nerve showed myelin and axonal degeneration:
changes severe in tibial nerve.
Central-peripheral 
2 to 8 mo
Mitochondrial
GP ataxia, hyporeflexia; dogs
Mild to moderate WM degeneration in SC: degenera-
114. 115
axonopathy; sensory
inheritance
euthanized by 3 yr of age 
tion most severe in fasciculus gracilis and dorsal part
ataxic neuropathy
(tRNATyr muta-
 of lateral funiculus: peripheral nerve showed sensory
(golden retriever)
tion}
fibers loss.
Central-peripheral distal 
810 wk
Sex limited?
 Hypermetria, frequent falling.
 CNS shows loss of myelinated fibers and astrocytosis:
116
axonopathy (Birman
 plantigrade stance, PL>TL
 PNS has degenerating nerve fibers with myelin debris
cat;
and disrupted axons; selective loss of distal parts of
CNS and PNS
Equine degenerative
6 mo-2 yr
Unknown or
GP ataxia: progressive spastic
Loss of myelinated fibers in allfuniculi but most severe
117.118
myeloencephalopathy
familial; vitamin 
 paraparesis to tetraparesis
in dorsal spinocerebellar tract; pronounced astrocyto-
(many pure breeds-
E deficiency
 sis; neuroaxonal degeneration in nucleus thoracicus:
Arabian, thoroughbred,
spheroids inconsistently in brainstem nuclei
 Paso Fino, Appa-
loosa, standardbreds,
Haflingers, clustering!
 Progressive degenera-
5-8 mo
Unknown
Slowly progressive GP ataxia
Primary central axonopathy: spinal cord lesions with
119
tive myeloencepha-
and spastic pelvic limb
 axonal swelling and degeneration:; spongy degenera-
lopathy of Brown
 paresis and dysmetria
tion: patchy loss of Purkinje cells
 Swiss cattle Weaver
 resulting in recumbency in
syndrome
1-3 yr
Encephalomyelopathy in
5-12 mo
Unknown
 Progressive PL GP ataxia.
Bilaterally symmetric, multifocal grayish areas of degen-
120-122
 Simmental and Limou-
wasting and recumbency in
eration in intemal capsule, caudate nucleus, putamen,
sin cattle 
 6 mo: behavior change
brainstem, spinal cord GM
 Congenital axonopathy
1-7 days
Unknown
Recumbency: opisthotonic
Wallerian degeneration in all segments of spinal cord 
123
 in Holstein-Friesian
posture
extending into brainstem
calves (Australia)
Degenerative thoracic
5 mo
Unknown 
GP ataxia, tetraparesis
Degeneration of SC WM 
124
 myelopathy in Merino
sheep
HAPTER
 Degenerative myelo-
Adult 
Unknown
GP ataxia, progressive para-
Myelopathy in all funiculi, most severe in dorsal portion 
125
encephalopathy in
 paresis to tetraparesis
of lateral funiculus and in fasciculus gracilis in thoracic
llamas
SC; loss of axons moderate astrocytosis; limited SC
t
GM involvement: few degenerate neurons in GM:
Tetrapar
 degenerative neurons in brainstem
Neuroaxonal Dystrophy
Rottweiler
1 yr
 Familial
TL hypemmetria: progress 1-2
-eyds snoenu :aydoe sellegeeo pw smous uieia
126-128
aresis,
yr to cerebellar ataxia
oids throughout GM, dorsal horn of SC, vestibular.
 gracilic, cuneate nuclei, lateral and medial geniculate
nuclei, nucleus thoracicus 
Her
Chihuahua
7wk
Familial
No description
 Spheroids predominance in WM
129
emiparesis
Working collie sheepdog 
2-4 mo 
AR?
Hypermetria, wide-base.
Numerous spheroids: mild wallerian degeneration in
130
in New Zealand &
intention tremor, difficulty 
 central cerebellar WM and cerebellar and lateral
Australia
 maintaining balance
vestibular nuclei
 Jack Russell terrier
9 wk
Unknown
 No description
Spheroids in brainstem nuclei and SC GM; absence of
131
 and
septum pellucidum: hypoplasia of corpus callosum:
bilateral hydrocephalus
 Ataxia
 Giant axonal neuropathy
14-16 mo
Unknown 
PL paresis and GP ataxia
 Numerous swollen unmyelinated fibers containing neu-
132. 133
 in German shepherd
progressing to LMN signs:
rofilament; SC distal portions of long tracts, fasciculus 
dog
megaesophagus
gracilis, dorsal spinocerebellar in cranial cervical cord;
 lateral funiculus involved caudal thoracic and lumbar:
nuclei gracilis, cuneatus; spheroids in brainstem, cer-
ebellar vermis; axonal swellings in tibial and recurrent
laryngeal; central-peripheral distal axonopathy
Continued
TABLE 7-7
8
Summary of Degenerative Spinal Cord (SC) Disorders in Domestic Animals—cont'd
 Disease (Affected breed 
Age of
 or breeds!
Onset
Inheritance Pattern 
 Clinical Features
Histopathology
Reference
PARTI
Papillon
13-16 wk
Unknown 
Hypermetria, generalized 
 Spheroids in cerebral and cerebellar cortex; degenera-
134-136
tremors, absent proprio-
tion in axons and myelin in gray and white matter of 
二
ception 
brain and SC
Domestic shorthair
6-9 mo
Unknown or
GP ataxia
Spheroids in brainstem, cerebellum, and SC
137.138
 familial
ical
Merino sheep—Australia
4 mo
Unknown
Tetraparesis, GP ataxia
Spheroids in midbrain, brainstem, cerebellum, and SC
139
Suffolk sheep
Unknown
GP ataxia, tetraparesis
Prob
1.5-5 mo 
Spheroids in GM, SC, brainstem
140
Morgan horse
1 yr
Unknown or
GP ataxia, tetraparesis 
Wallerian degeneration in SC, spheroids in lateral
141. 142
familial
lems:
cuneate nucleus
Multisystem Neuronal Degeneration
Cairn terrier
Unknown
Progressive paresis, ataxia
 Disease affects motor neurons in SC, brainstem,
143-145
5
<5 mo
igns
and brainstem signs, PL
thalamic nuclei with degeneration in the SC WM and
collapse patellar areflexia,
medulla
 and
tetraparesis, hypermetria.
head tremor
Cocker spaniel
10-14 mo
Unknown 
Abnormal gait, tremors, thala-
No SC lesions, pathology widespread in brain: neuronal
146
ymptoms
 mocortical dysfunction,
cell body degeneration and loss with gliosis, axonal 
vestibular signs, abnormal
spheroids in cerebellum and axonal dystrophy
behavior
Golden retriever
3 mo
 Familial
 PL paresis that progressed 
 Severe axonopathy in lateral funiculi of SC; caudal
147
to TL: fine resting muscle
medulla astrogliosis; motor nuclei of CNV had vacu
tremors; short-strided LMN 
oles; motor neuron loss in ventral GM; nerves had 
tetraparesis with no pro-
vacuolated myelin surrounding axons; macrophages.
prioceptive ataxia; reflexes
ventral root had wallerian degeneration; neurogenic 
decreased; generalized 
muscle atrophy: axonopathy and neuronopathy
LMN paresis
Rottweiler
6 wk-8 mo
Unknown
GP ataxia, tetraparesis worse
 Intracytoplasmic neuronal vacuolation prominent in 
148
in PL
deep cerebellar nuclei and nuclei of extrapyramidal
system; vacuolation in dorsal root and autonomic
dorsolateral and ventromedial SC W/M
CNS, Central nervous system; GM, gray matter; GP, general proprioceptive; LMN, lower motor neuron; PL, pelvie limb; PNS, peripheral nervous systerm; SC, spinal cord; TL, thoracic limb; UMN,
upper motor neuron; WM, white matter.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
181
dens and fractures of the axis or atlas. Some congenital mal-
formations that involve the atlas, axis, and occipital bone are
discussed in the next section.
Clinical Signs. Traumatic luxations or fractures involving
the atlantoaxial articulation result in cervical spinal pain and
GP ataxia/UMN tetraparesis. Neurologic signs may be asym-
metric. The onset of clinical signs can be acute or chronic with
a gradual progressive disease course. Temporal relation also
may be associated with episodic bouts of cervical spinal pain
or be static for years, with an acute exacerbation. Dogs with.
congenital lesions usually show signs during the first year of
life; however, older dogs also may develop signs. Often the
onset of clinical signs coincides with minor trauma such as
[u mous nou Aru siop suos anuny u sudun]
signs because adequate vertebral support by other fbrous
and muscular structures prevents Cl-2 subluxation. With age,
these structures may weaken, allowing the axis to rotate cau-
dodorsally and compress the spinal cord.
In the congenital form of the disorder, the initial clini-
cal sign is usually cervical spinal pain. Neurologic signs can
progress from pain alone to minor or severe motor dysfunc-
Neurologic examination findings are consistent with a lesion
affecting the Cl-5 spinal cord segments. Rarely, tetraplegia
Figure 7-8 Ligamentous attachments of the dens. A, Apical. B,
and respiratory compromise/failure may occur. Severe cervi-
Alar. C, Lateral. D, Transverse atlantal. [From Oliver JE Jr, Lewis
cal spinal cord injury may disrupt descending reticulospinal
RE: Lesions of the atlas and axis in dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
pathways for control of respiration, thus necessitating periop-
9:307, 1973.]
erative ventilatory support.239 Respiratory failure occurs when
Beise
Hgure 7-9 A, Drawing of normal atlantoaxial articulation. B, Drawing of atlantoaxial subluxation 
resulting from separation of dens from body of axis. Note dorsal displacerment of axis, compressing
 spinal cord at this level.
182
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 7-10 Lateral radiograph (A) and sagittal T2-weighted MRI (B) of cervical vertebral column
of a 1O-month-old Yorkshire terier with cervical spinal hyperesthesia and atlantoaxial subluxation.
Note marked dorsal luxation of axis relative to atlas, and severe spinal cord compression. C, Ven-
trodorsal view demonstrating presence of a hypoplastic dens.
these pathologic events compromise respiratory pathways.
The displaced axis may be palpated as a firm swelling just cau-
 dal to the occiput.225 Because flexing the neck causes severe
pain and accentuates motor dysfunction, it should be avoided
or done with extreme caution. When atlantoaxial luxation or
fractures are suspected, extension of the neck must be main-
tained and flexion of the neck avoided.225 This is especially
important if the dog is to be sedated or undergo anesthesia,
during which times muscle relaxation may further accentuate
instability and lead to greater compression and worsening of
clinical signs.
Diagnosis. Atlantoaxial subluxation must be suspected
 s rrs r m si  r n  
neck rigidity, and GP ataxia/UMN paresis or paralysis. Spinal
radiography is useful for revealing the Cl-2 malalignment
(Figure 7-10). Survey radiographs should include lateral and
ventrodorsal views and be taken while the animal is awake.
Anesthetized dogs do not maintain cervical muscle tension,
which increases the possibility of neck flexion and severe spi-
nal cord compression. If the survey radiographs reveal minor
displacement, a definitive diagnosis can be made with radio-
s rg isn pae sp  m en sa
fixation.225 Careful and gentle neck flexion may be needed
to demonstrate the luxation. Fluoroscopy also is helpful for
detecting instability and the dynamic effects of the lesion.
Advanced imaging can provide further insight to other bony
and soft-tissue abnormalities. CT provides more detailed bone
resolution. Abnormal conformation of the dens can be seen in
 ozoez ( a) uxns v m spo 
gives excellent soft-tissue resolution of the neural parenchyma
and provides identification of other spinal cord pathologies
[e.g, syringo/hydromyelia and myelomalacia]24l and intra-
axial hemorrhage [see Figure 7-10).242
Treatment. The goal for treatment of AA subluxation is
joint stabilization and fusion.229 A positive correlation exists
Fgure 7-11 Ventrodorsal radiograph demonstrating almost com-
plete absence of dens in dog with atlantoaxial subluxation.
between neurologic recovery and decrease duration of clinical
 signs prior to admission for conservative and surgical treat-
ments.230.243 As a general rule, surgical treatment is the pre-
ferred method of therapy for AA subluxation.
spinal pain or minimal neurologic deficits, had minimal ana-
Conservative. Conservative therapy of AA subluxation
involves exercise restriction with cage rest, external coap-
constraints that prevented surgical options.243 Animals
tation of the cervical vertebral column and head, as well
with immature bone that is not capable of withstanding
 n  r    
treatment option for dogs that show clinical signs of cervical
nal coaptation.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
183
External coaptation by use of cervical spinal splints is a
noninvasive method to promote fibrous ankylosis of the AA
joint. Methods of splint placement vary based on clinician
preference. Types of splints include dorsal, ventral, circumfer-
ential, or soft padded bandage. To be effective, external coap-
tation must incorporate the head and thoracic limbs so as to
eliminate flexion. External splints are usually maintained for 6
to 8 weeks, but the time required for adequate stabilization of
the AA joint is unknown. Bandage changes are necessary every
several days to ensure adequate immobilization. Necropsy and
histopathologic confrmation of fusion of the AA joints after
cervical spinal splinting has not been well described. It is sus-
pected that fbrous tissue proliferation occurs at the articu-
lations, thus providing some stability Complications include
inadequate joint stabilization, corneal ulceration, decubitus
ulcers, dermatitis, and otitis externa secondary to bandage
placement. Dogs with AA subluxation also can have pharyn-
pneumonia, dyspnea, and choking. Owners need to be well
educated about bandage management and care and commit-
ted to frequent evaluations.
Most retrospective studies evaluating conservative therapy
report good outcomes but lack adequate long-term follow-
  I  r    s  
 come was reported in 10 of 16 dogs that had placement of a
cervical spinal splint. Neurologic grade upon admission, radio-
graphic appearance of dens, and age at onset of clinical signs
were not associated with outcome. This study suggested that
use of a cervical spinal splint is a viable treatment option in
young dogs with a first episode of acute onset of clinical signs,
regardless of severity of their neurologic status.243 Other stud-
ies report age as a predictor of outcome, with older dogs hav-
ing poor neurologic recovery.230
Surgical Stabilization. Surgical techniques for stabilization
the most common type of stabilization procedure for treat-
ment of AA subluxation in dogs. Indications for ventral fusion
techniques include chronic history of clinical signs, relapse
of signs from conservative therapy, and bone maturity that is
capable of withstanding implant placement.246 Odontoidec-
一
tomy may facilitate reduction and has been recommended if
Hgure 7-12 A, Lateral and B, ventrodorsal radiograph of
there is dorsal angulation of the dens but usually is not neces-
11-month-old Maltese after stabilization of atlantoaxial sublux-
include transarticular fixation or multiple implants secured
 ation with two threaded pins and polymethylmethacrylate.
with polymethylmethacrylate. A ventral approach to the cra-
nial cervical vertebral column allows adequate visualization of
 complications: reflex gagging, laryngeal paralysis, tracheal col-
the AA joint. The articular cartilage is removed using a blade,
lapse and necrosis, pulmonary edema, pneumonia, respira-
 pneumatic drill-burr, or bone curette. The joint is reduced
tory compromise, and death.250 Other complications include
and aligned, and screws or pins are placed across the Cl-2
permanent torticollis, worsening of neurologic status, and
joint (Figure 7-12).249 A cancellous bone autograft is placed
Horner's syndrome. Complications causing death have been
to facilitate bony fusion. Polymethylmethacrylate may be
Causes of death at time of surgery are usually associated with
implants described include Kirschner wires, threaded pins,
cardiac or respiratory arrest.240 Risk factors that can affect the
cortical screws, plates, and cannulated screws.250 In recent
outcome of surgery for AA subluxation have been studied in
years, several techniques using multiple implants have been
dogs. Dogs younger than 24 months of age and those with
described25l-254 During the postoperative recovery period, an
signs of less than 10 months duration generally had better
external splint may be applied to facilitate fusion and prevent
outcomes.230 Severity of neurologic signs before surgery was
implant breakage It has been recommended that all forms of
 only marginally predictive of a successful outcome. Residual
fixation be supplemented with external coaptation and com-
neurologic signs were detected in a greater percentage of dogs
bined with strict cage confinement for 8 weeks.
following dorsal procedures, but the success rates of both pro-
 Main complications associated with ventral surgical stabili-
cedures were nearly identical.230
zation are death or implant failure.250,255,256 The incidence for
Dorsal wire fixation entails a loop of wire or suture passed
repeat surgery ranges between 8.2% and 19% of cases. 240,255.256
beneath the dorsal arch of Cl and cut and tightened to pro-
Implant failures
 mainly are a result of migration, break-
age, or loss of reduction. Postoperative complications for
ligament also can be used for dorsal stabilization of the AA
AA stabilization most commonly include respiratory-related
652e se uatu se paoar ug su aer ah astu!
184
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Usually there is breakage of the wire or suture; the spinous
process of C2 or the dorsal arch of Cl also may fracture. A
metallic clip positioned around the cranial aspect of the lami-
nae of the atlas and anchored to the axis has also been used
to stabilize luxations.260 Mortality rate has been reported as
16%.2so Dorsal stabilization techniques do not eliminate rota-
tion and shear forces acting across the joint and are more
 prone to failure.26l Complications are usually respiratory fail-
ure or cardiac arrest from spinal cord compression during the
 surgical procedure or after breaking of the wire or suture.
Occipitoatlantoaxial
Malformation. Occipitoatlantoax-
ial malformation is a congenital malformation that includes
fusion of the atlas to the occipital bone; it is reported in horses,
Hgure 7-13 Sagittal T2-weighted MRI of a Griffon Buxellois
lantoaxial  malformations  and  asymmetric atlantooccipital
that presented for persistent scratching of the neck region and
fusion are presumed to be inherited in Arabian horses.264,265
cervical spinal pain. Note herniated cerebellar vermis (arrow) and
Ataxia, tetraparesis, and a stiff neck may be found in neonates
extensive syringohydromyelia extending from C2 to C5 verte-
or in weanling foals. The abnormal cervical articulations usu-
brae. (Photograph by Marc Kent @ 2010, University of Georgia
ally can be palpated. Diagnosis is based on radiography.
Research Foundation Inc.)
Occipitoatlantal Luxations. Traumatic luxations of the
occipitoatlantal articulation are rare. They have been reported
indogs, acat, and a goat26-27Theluxations canemanaged
pathophysiology of CM may be related to the overcrowding
with conservative therapy in which the luxation is manual
of the caudal fossa obstructing the normal flow of CSF across
reduced and a cast with the neck in flexion is applied or with
 the foramen magnum, resulting in abnormal pressure dynam-
surgical stabilization. This rare injury would be expected to
cause death in most cases, but some animals have relatively
a xs r uxa snd e s r nss
minimal neurologic deficits.
With each arterial pulse, the brain moves back and forth, and
Chiari-Like Malformation (Caudal Occipital Malformation
the herniated cerebellum is forced caudally. The CSF pressure
Syndrome) and Syringomyelia
increases, and CSF is redirected into the perivascular channels
Pathogenesis. Syringomyelia is a condition characterized by
along the spinal cord, causing progressive fuid accumulation
 gradual formation of a fluid-flled cavity (syrinx) within the
and syrinx formation.
spinal cord. In many cases, it is difficult to discern that the
The etiology for CM in CKCSs is suspected to have an
abnormal fluid-filled cavity is a syrinx rather than dilated cen-
inherited basis. In the early 1900s, the modern CKCS breed
tral canal or a combination of both. In such cases, the term
was established and line breeding was used extensively.275 The
syringohydromyelia may be applied. In humans, syringomy-
onset of signs of syringohydromyelia occurs in younger dogs
elia may be caused by a several conditions, including abnor-
and the signs are more severe in dogs from more highly inbred
malities of the posterior fossa (Chiari malformation). In dogs.
lines.288 A DNA collection program is underway for future
the observation of similar but not the same exact abnor-
genetic studies of this complex genetic disease.289
malities has led to the term Chiari-like malformation [CM).
Diagnosis. Chiari-like malformation is diagnosed by
Another term usedis caudal occipital malformation syndrome
(COMS). Chiari-like malformation is a hereditary condition,
of the caudal aspect of the brain that includes the cervical spi-
first described in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel (CKCS),
nal cord. Characteristic MRI findings in dogs include attenua-
 that can lead to syringohydromyelia 271 This condition is also
tion of the dorsal subarachnoid space at the cervicomedullary
named occipital dysplasia and caudal occipital malformation.272
junction, rostral displacement of the caudal cerebellum by the
Occipital dysplasia is a malformation of the occipital bone
occipital bone, varying degrees of syringohydromyelia in the
consisting of a variation in the dorsal extent of the foramen
cervical spinal cord, obstructive hydrocephalus, and hernia-
magnum in normal dogs or associated with cranial cervical
tion of the caudal cerebellar vermis.279,292 A “kinked” appear-
spinal cord anomaly,273,274 This also has been described in the
ance of the caudal medulla oblongata has been occasionally
CKCS.275 The anomaly of CM consists of an abnormally small
noted.272 Utrasonography of the craniocervical junction also
caudal fossa, with secondary herniation of the cerebellar ver-
can be used to identify cerebellar herniation and syringomy-
mis through the foramen magnum and subsequent formation
elia but lacks sensitivity.28l
MRI has increased the recognition of CM in the CKCS as
breed predilection for CM in CKCSs and the Griffon Bruxel-
well as in other small and toy breed dogs. A study in which
lois [Brussel Griffon), but other toy and small-breed dogs can
 MRI was used to measure dimensions of the foramen mag-
num in CKCS with CM and syringomyelia showed no appar-
myelia may be high even in the asymptomatic population of
ent correlation between neurologic signs, severity of cerebellar
herniation, and extent of syringohydromyelia.279 The sever-
fied a small caudal fossa in dogs with clinicals signs; however,
ity of clinical signs correlates to the height and width of the
there lacks correlation between a small caudal fossa and devel-
syrinx in affected CKCs.282.293 It has been shown that up to
opment of syringohydromyelia.281,282 The incidence is high
40% of clinically normal CKCSs have syringomyelia evident
for other congenital diseases of the craniocervical junction in
on MR1.282,293 These dogs, however, tend to have a smaller and
dogs with CM, especially the CKCS and Griffon Buxellois.283
less extensive syrinx.Thus,the major factor for dogs becoming
 Syringohydromyelia can be a debilitating neurologic condi-
 symptomatic for CM is still unknown.
tion with signs ranging from severe pain to neurologic deficits
Clinical Signs. Chiari-like malformation can be responsi-
referable to the spinal cord. In a normal state, pulsatile flow of
 ble for clinical signs involving the forebrain, caudal brainstem,
CSF occurs across the foramen magnum from the intracranial
and cervical spinal cord.287,294 The most devastating clinical
subarachnoid space to the cervical spinal subarachnoid space
sign of CM is severe cervical spinal pain. Excessive scratching
during systole and reverses flow direction during diastole. The
 of the ear, neck, or shoulder, vocalization, and facial rubbing
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
185
 also may be the prominent or sole features of CM.27l These
signs are a reflection of paresthesia or neuropathic pain. The
enlarged syrinx is most likely associated with development of
 the neuropathic pain, owing to damage in the dorsal horn of
 the gray matter and alterations in neural processing of sensory
information.287 GP ataxia/UMN paresis consistent with signs
of a Cl-5 lesion or LMN paresis of the thoracic limbs and GP
ataxia/UMN paresis of the pelvic limbs if the syrinx affects the
C6-T2 spinal cord segments. Central vestibular and cerebel-
lovestibular may occur with cerebellar and brainstem involve-
ment. Seizures and other encephalopathic signs are referable
to the secondary obstructive hydrocephalus. Scoliosis also can
 be a secondary phenomenon to syringohydromyelia.295
Treatment. The goals of medical management are pain
control and decreasing CSF production. Combination anal-
Figure 7-14 Parasagittal cut of cervical vertebral column from
gesics are often required for pain management.272.296 Acet-
 7-year-old FS Doberman pinscher with progressive tetraparesis
azolamide and furosemide may be used to decrease CSF
 and severe general proprioceptive [GP] ataxia of pelvic limbs. Spi-
production.297
Corticosteroids  provide  antinflammatory
nal cord is compressed ventrally at both C5-6 and C6-7 by pro-
effects and also decrease CSF production. Recently gabapen-
liferative dorsal annulus fbrosis and dorsal longitudinal ligament
d ou eano psnuaq aaued ro 
[see inset]. Findings are consistent with caudal cervical spondylo-
 ss      
myelopathy of C5-6 and C6-7 intervertebral disk spaces.
 does not prevent further disease progression.
Surgical management is indicated when analgesics are
unable to control the discomfort or when neurologic deficits
 compression. Subsequent studies demonstrated that malfor-
are present and are unacceptable or progressive. Surgery con-
mation of the cervical vertebrae of dogs and horses resulted
sists of decompressing the cerebellum by a suboccipital cra-
niectomy, which enlarges the foramen magnum, and a dorsal
more consistently present in young Great Danes and include
laminectomy of the frst or second cervical vertebra.296,297
narrowing and dorsoventral flattening of the cranial vertebral
A durotomy is also performed at the level of the decompres-
sion sites and resecting any dural bands that constrict the neu-
tebra is usually most severely affected. In young thoroughbred
ral tissue. Decompressive surgery can relieve the pain but may
horses, rottweilers, and basset hounds, these findings are more
not result in resolution of the syringohydromyelia.296,297 Even
common at C3 and C4.303,305,306
with surgery, the clinical signs may not completely resolve, and
 Dogs Cervical spondylomyelopathy has been recognized as
recurrence is possible. A recurrence of clinical signs of up to
a disease in large and giant-breed dogs. The Doberman pinscher
47% can occur within months to years after surgery.
296,297
and Great Dane often are overrepresented, with other breeds
Cranioplasty techniques may provide some benefit for pre-
reported sporadically. Recently the disease also has been thor-
venting recurrence of signs.298
oughly described in young to middle-aged Bernese mountain
Cervical Spondylomyelopathy in Dogs and Horses. The
dogs.307 In dogs, CSM has variable forms which differ between
growing popularity of giant-breed dogs and performance
the Doberman pinscher and the giant breeds. Dobermans
horses during the past 20 years is probably responsible for the
Common pathologic features in affected Doberman pinschers
appears with greater frequency in Great Danes, Doberman
include hypertrophy of the interarcuate and dorsal longitu-
-r uaaq su a ing ssi p pe srsu
dinal ligaments and Hansen type II disk protrusion involving
nized in several other breeds of dogs and horses. Controversy
aus s r rlou rad surean sisixa 
Hansen type II IVDD is common, the term disk-associated
Currently, cervnical spondylopathy,cervical spondylomyelopathy.
wobbler syndrome DAWS)has been proposed3133 In some
cervical vertebral malformation-malarticulation, and cervical ver-
affected dogs, there is remodeling along with abnormal rotation
sunasnisou qoeaddeydoau us q
of the body of the C6 vertebra. An MRI study of Doberman
encompassing the forms of the disease in all affected animals.
pinschers demonstrated that vertebral canal stenosis and wider
Some investigators prefer to group all breeds together, whereas
IVD spaces distinguished CSM affected dogs from clinically
others prefer to characterize each breed separately. Our objec-
normal dogs.314 Stil, clinically normal Doberman pinschers
tive is to describe similarities and differences in the pathologic
had a high incidence of disk degeneration, foraminal steno-
lesions and management of cervical spondylomyelopathy in
sis, and asymptomatic spinal cord compression. The vertebral
the dog and horse and emphasize breed variations.
malformation in Dobermans tends to lead to malarticulation
Pathophysiology. The pathologic
lesions β responsible
and vertebral instability. Apparently as a consequence of the
for the clinical signs in young Great Danes, Doberman pin-
instability, soft tissues that support and strengthen the cervi-
schers, and thoroughbreds form the basic model with which
cal articulations proliferate. In Dobermans, hypertrophy of the
the disease in other animals is compared. In affected animals,
interarcuate ligament, dorsal longitudinal ligament, or dorsal
neurologic signs develop because of progressive spinal cord
annulus may compress the spinal cord at the vertebral articula-
anss-os pue auq teqaaa suunns u uissn
tions. These changes are identified using imaging procedures to
structures. Abnormalities of the midcervical to the caudal
visualize the dynamic compressive lesions [Figure 7-15, A-D).
cervical vertebrae or their articulations (or both) are usually
 s    rao  s 
identifed with imaging studies or at necropsy. Because the
clinical signs at 2 years of age. The pathology includes dorsal and
exact cause is unknown, the term cervical spondylomyelopathry
dorsolateral compression secondary to osteoarthrosis of the artic-
is used broadly to encompass the various vertebral and soft-
ular processes and hypertrophy of the joint capsules and interar
tissue abnormalities.
 Early studies suggested that excessive mobility of the cau-
but the C5-6 and C6-7 sites are most comimon. Osteoarthrosis
dal cervical vertebrae was primarily responsible for spinal cord
has been considered a form of osteochondrosis dissecans.315
186
PARTIIT
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
C
Hgure 7-15 Lateral myelogram with dynamic positioning of caudal cervical spine from a Doberman
with caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy that is severe at C5-6 and mild at C6-7. A, Neutral posi-
tion showing spinal cord is severely compressed ventrally at C5-6 vertebrae and mildly compressed
at C6-7. Compression is rmost likely caused by ligamentous proliferation in this area. B, Traction
 of cervical spine dermonstrating improverment of compression and indicating a dynamic lesion. C,
Extended positioning of cervical spine demonstrating that compression is more pronounced both
dorsally and ventrally (recommended not to perform this view, owing to risk of worsening neurologic
status). D, Flexed positioning of cervical spine, demonstrating improvement of ventral compression.
 The very large head of certain breeds of dogs may exert an
unusual force on the midcervical to caudal cervical vertebrae.
 Great Danes in particular have been selected for a prancing.
high-stepping gait that some consider to be a mild form of
hypermetria. Breeding for this gait actually may select for this
disorder. One study of Great Danes established a relationship
between excessive nutrition and several skeletal changes that
also involved the cervical vertebrae.316 The exact cause of the
disorder awaits further classification.
Horses. Cervical spondylomyelopathy (cervical vertebral
paq pue sae Aue jo sashou u snsso (ao] uneuoieu
but is most common in thoroughbreds of young age.306 Neu-
rologic signs are a result of progressive spinal cord compres-
sion involving structural changes to the vertebral canal and
malformation, the vertebral canal stenosis may be static or
dynamic with flexion or extension of the neck. Malformation
of the articular processes associated with delayed ossification
and osteochondrosis can potentiate vertebral canal stenosis.
Likewise, proliferation of the joint capsules of the articular
Figure 7-16 Transverse CT/myelogram image of C6 vertebra
processes can result in cyst formation, adding to the soft-tissue
 after myelography from a 1.5-year-old male Great Dane with
structures compressing the spinal cord. Other malformations
severe pelvic limb general proprioceptive [GP] ataxia and tetra-
include angular deformity of the vertebral body and extensions
paresis. Note proliferative articular processes causing lateral spinal
of the vertebral arch.317,318 Based on these pathologic abnor-
cord compression more severe on the left.
malities, CVM in horses is classifed into two types.2lo Type I
CVM tends to occur in younger animals, from unweaned foals
Although many, perhaps genetically controlled, factors may
up to 2 years of age. The pathologic changes include vertebral
contribute to cervical spondylomyelopathy, the exact cause
canal stenosis, angular deformity, osteochondrosis, and exten-
is unknown. Many of the large and giant breeds have been
sion of the vertebral arch. The lesions tend to occur between
selected for their size and rapid growth. The disease occurs
C2 and C5. These horses are rapid growing, which supports a
r     i     
nutritional role. There may also be a familial influence. Type II
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
187
CVM tends to occur in older horses [mean age of 8.5 years)
that are male, with warmbloods and the Tennessee Walking
of the articular processes, with subsequent formation of syno-
vial cysts and cranial extension of the vertebral arch involving
the laminae and interarcuate ligament. Trauma also may be a
 predisposing factor. Dynamic vertebral canal stenosis between
C5 and C7 occurs with neck flexion and extension.319 The
 cause of CVM in horses appears to be multifactorial involving
genetic and environmental infuences.320
 Clinical Signs. In most affected Great Danes and young
horses and in some Doberman pinschers, clinical signs develop
at 3 to 18 months of age. Clinical signs develop later in life
 pue sauosund ueaqoa isou u aae jo srea g on  1e
horses with osteoarthrosis of the articular processes. The dis-
pue aae Jo srean g ueu rarea sinono sasiou raunon u asea
at 8 years of age in horses with osteoarthrosis of the articular
 processes.2l0,319 In dogs, there is no sex predilection.
Although the cervical spinal cord is compressed, clinical
signs usually remain more severe in the pelvic limbs in both
dogs and horses. Dogs typically develop mild pelvic limb GP
B
 ataxia that progresses to tetraparesis. Compression of ascend-
 ing proprioceptive pathways is responsible for these neurologic
signs. With increasing compression, involvement of descend-
ing motor pathways causes UMN paresis or paralysis. Ataxia
and paresis in the thoracic limbs may be pronounced in some
cases but are sometimes detected only by careful neurologic
examination in other cases. Forcing the dog to wheelbarrow
with its head extended so that it cannot see the floor accentu-
 ates proprioceptive deficits in the thoracic limbs. Some tetra-
paretic dogs and horses may have LMN paresis in the thoracic
s a     o   s
nal cord causing the stride length to be short and choppy. In
Hgure 7-17 A, Sagittal T2-weighted MRI of cervical vertebral
horses, the abnormalities of the pelvic limbs are usually one
column from &-year-old MC Doberman pinscher with a progres-
grade worse than those of the thoracic limbs.2l0.32l This also is
sive tetraparesis and cervical spinal pain. Note degenerate inter-
often true in dogs.
vertebral disks at C4-5, C5-6, and C6-7. Cervical spinal cord is
 Cervical spinal pain is usually absent unless the disorder
severely compressed at C5-6 and C6-7 intervertebral disk inter-
is associated with cervical IVD protrusion. Extension of the
spaces. B, Lateral cervical radiograph demonstrating mineralized
  iis  s    
opacity of C4-5 and C5-6 intervertebral disks and ventral spon-
incontinence may occur as a late manifestation in dogs. In
dylosis at C6-7 intervertebral disk space. C, Lateral radiograph
some animals, trauma may precede the development of acute
after placement of polymethylmethacrylate plugs in C4-5, C5-6,
signs. Unlike most dogs, most horses have acute ataxia, paresis,
and C6-7 intervertebral disk spaces, with overlaying of autologous
and spasticity of all four limbs. After an initial period of pro-
bone graft.
 gression, the equine dlisease usually stabilizes.
Diagnosis. The diagnosis of cervical spondylomyelopathy
is made using various radiographic and cross-sectional imaging
 compression that may be missed if the neck is imaged only
using CT and MRI.
in normal (neutral) position. This dynamic compression
Dogs. Changes observed on survey radiography in dogs
often is alleviated by flexion or traction [see Figure 7-15,
include the following246,310.32:
B and D). Based on the myelographic results, rational surgi-
1. Changes in shape or opacity, or both, of the interverte-
cal therapy can be instituted. Dynamic (flexion, extension,
bral disk and/or disk space; this change is more common
 and traction) views on myelography or cross-sectional imag-
in the older Doberman pinscher.
ing should be performed with caution. Dynamic imaging
2. Changes in shape or opacity, or both, of the articular
is mandatory in older Doberman pinschers to exclude disk
facets to sclerosis and exostosis
 disease as the primary cause of the neurologic signs. Myelog-
3. Vertebral displacement (subluxation); however, diag-
raphy combined with CT or MRI alone may provide addi-
nosis of subluxation based on survey radiographs is not
tional information, particularly on the degree of spinal cord
definitive because of considerable variability in normal
atrophy.323
's3op
MRI provides more definitive information for soft-tissue
4. Stenosis of the vertebral canal
 structures causing spinal cord compression, as well as showing
5. Malformed or misshapen vertebral bodies [often involv-
ing C6 vertebra)
intensity on TZ-weighted images may suggest gliosis, edema,
6. Misshapen spinous processes
or syrinx formation. The finding of extensive hyperintensity
Myelography can be used to identify minor changes in
in the grey matter of the spinal cord at the site of compres-
vertebral column architecture, compression by soft tissues
sion may portend a poorer prognosis for return of function
(ligamentous structures and disk protrusions), and to define
following surgery. Intervertebral disk degeneration associated
whether the lesion is associated with compression of one
with CSM and other intervertebral disks causing compressive
or multiple sites [see Figure 7-15). Myelograms made with
myelopathy also can be visualized more accurately on MRI
the neck extended often reveal dynamic soft-tissue or bony
(Figure 7-17, A).
188
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Horses. In horses, cervical spondylomyelopathy must be
Success rates for various surgical procedures in dogs with
differentiated from degenerative myeloencephalopathy, pro-
 dynamic CSM have ranged from 70% to 80% to having a 33%
tozoal myeloencephalitis, and other disorders that affect the
spinal cord. Radiography usually indicates combinations of
ery is poor in tetraplegic dogs and guarded in others. Factors
vertebral canal stenosis and osteoarthrosis of the articular pro-
that contribute to poor recovery include (l) irreparable spi
cesses. Correct positioning is critical for accurate assessment
nal cord damage, (2) failure to provide adequate decompres-
 a   n s  s 
sion or stabilization, (3) development of compression at sites
presumptively diagnose CVM. Values lower than the control
adjacent to the initial lesions, and [(4) postsurgical complica-
ap pns au u gze'szs usardo sanepit uendod
mination of the ratio of the minimum sagittal diameter of the
dogs.246 Studies of long-term outcome are lacking. One study
vertebral canal to the sagittal width of the vertebral body had
comparing outcome in two different surgical techniques
a sensitivity and specifcity of ≥ 89% for diagnosis of cervical
in Doberman pinschers with CSM found that 64% of the
spondylomyelopathy325 This finding suggests that vertebral
dogs were euthanized related to cervical spondylomyelopa-
canal stenosis plays a critical role in affected horses. Radiog-
raphy combined with myelography is required for a definitive
dogs with dorsal compression or multiple-site involvement
diagnosis of spinal cord compression with CSM in horses.327.328
undergoing a dorsal laminectomy are transiently worse after
Diagnosis is established by identifying a 50% or greater
surgery, long-term outcome and recurrence rates were com-
decrease in the sagittal diameter of the dorsal and ventral con-
parable to other techniques.337 Regardless of the procedure,
trast columns between affected and unaffected sites.320 Others
surgical results largely depend on the degree of preexisting
report better diagnostic accuracy using a 20% reduction of the
spinal cord damage.
same measurement with the neck in either neutral or flexed
Horses. Conservative therapy for equine cervical spondy-
positions.210.329 CT combined with myelography may further
lomyelopathy is similar to that for dogs. Early in the course of
delineate the compression in horses with osteoarthrosis.319,330
the disease, young horses may improve when fed a balanced,
Therapy. Conservative therapy includes management of
minimal-growth diet, with a goal of retarding bone growth.
pain and strict exercise restriction similar to that involving
This may allw the vertebral canal to enlarge while relieving
conservative management of IVD herniation. Goals of surgery
are to stabilize the vertebrae and decompress the spinal cord.
 agents may transiently improve clinical signs.
s r  isq a uo ssa sns o so
Cervical vertebral interbody fusion using a basket implant
with CSM. Some dogs improve with conservative therapy
device provides intervertebral stability.346 Ventral cervi-
(cage rest, physiatry, and analgesics). Restriction of activity
cal fusion is indicated for horses with spinal cord compres-
 may reduce the dynamic component of spinal cord compres-
sion caused by cervical vertebral instability. This technique
0h on tt u ss u o   s
analgesic and antinflammatory effects. However, there was no
of horses, and up to 62% may return to athletic function.346
 significant difference in outcome for dogs treated conserva-
Dorsal decompression is used to treat stenotic lesions that
tively with or without corticosteroids.309 Corticosteroids are
cause cord compression but is associated with higher risk of
 contraindicated in young, growing animals. A study evaluating
treatment of CSM in Dobermans and other breeds found no
 ment of neurologic status in 40% to 75% of cases.346,347 The
difference in outcome or survival time between dogs treated
conservatively or surgically.309
 Some clinicians feel the best long-term benefts are pro-
depend to some degree on the severity, distribution, and dura-
vided by surgical stabilization or decompression or both. Ven-
tion of cervical cord compression.320
tra1331-33 or dorsa1301,3-37 decompression may be indicated,
Extradural Synovial Cysts. Extradural synovial cysts
 depending on the sites of compression. Dorsal decompres-
associated with the articular processes of the cervical verte-
sion techniques are used in dogs with dorsal or dorsolateral
bral column have been reported in dogs and older horses and
compression and multiple sites of involvement. Distraction-
may cause a compressive myelopathy. Compressive cervical
fusion procedures are used in dogs in which the spinal cord
myelopathy has been reported in young Great Danes and
compression observed with imaging is relieved by traction of
mastiffs and other giant breeds.349,350 Males may be more
the cervical vertebral column [see Figure 7-17, C). Distrac-
common. Age of onset can range from 4 to 36 months of
tion techniques using interbody screws, bone grafts, metallic
age. Dogs will show progressive tetraparesis and GP ataxia
spacers, polymethylmethacrylate, or implants anchored by
before examination. The neurologic signs are suggestive of
cervical myelopathy, and dogs often exhibit cervical spinal
Newer techniques involve locking-plate fixation and inter-
pain. Survey cervical spinal radiographs often reveal degen-
erative joint disease and proliferation of the articular pro-
multiple lesions is particularly problematic. Dorsal laminec-
cesses from C2-3 to C6-7. Myelography is consistent with
tomy extending over the entire area of involvement is associ-
dorsolateral extradural spinal cord compression medial to
the articular processes. Cross-sectional imaging using MRI
Distraction techniques can also be applied to span multiple
or CT often will reveal extensive dorsolateral compres-
adjacent disk spaces [see Figure 7-17, C).339
sion by fluid-filled structures that appear hyperintense on
Surgical complications include implant failure and collapse
T2-weighted MRI. CSF analysis reveals albuminocytologic
of the intervertebral disk space, penetration of implants into
dissociation (increased protein concentrations with nor-
the vertebral canal, failure of fusion and worsening of neuro-
 mal cell count). Dogs are treated by dorsal decompressive
logic deficits. However, distraction techniques can put further
surgery and cyst removal. The diagnosis is confrmed with
stress on adjacent IVD spaces, risking a domino effect whereby
histopathologic analysis, with the synovial cysts constituting
the adjacent IVD space becomes affected as a consequence
the major compressive lesion. Long-term recovery rates are
 of the abnormal forces applied to it as a result of stabiliza-
favorable.349,350
tion.343-345 The plethora of surgical interventions establishes
Neoplastic
animal for the best possible surgical outcome.
See Chapter 6.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
189
DISEASES OF THE NERVES AND NEURONAL
Peripheral neuropathies that involve the motor nerve and
CELL BODY
nerves roots often manifest hallmark signs of LMN disease
with impairment of motor function. Motor neuropathies are
These diseases often cause diffuse LMN signs. Diseases that
characterized by a flaccid paresis or paralysis, postural reaction
 affect one or more components of the LMNs (Figure 7-18)
 deficits, neurogenic muscle atrophy, and reduced to absent
result in hyporeflexic or areflexic flaccid paresis or paralysis.
also can occur. Neurogenic muscle atrophy is rapid and severe,
thesia can be manifested with some diseases. The various dis-
occurring within 1 to 2 weeks from onset of clinical signs,
eases listed in Tables 7-4 and 7-5 can be classified as acute
 progressive, chronic progressive, or episodic. All are charac-
 Neurogenic muscle atrophy results from a loss of the trophic
terized by diffuse symmetric or asymmetric involvement of
influence of the axon on the muscle; denervation results in a
LMNs. The neurologic examination must be done carefully
 loss of this trophism and consequently atrophy develops. As an
  s  a  s s   
aside, muscle atrophy is a clinical feature for wallerian degen-
chronic diseases, LMN signs are subtle. Decreased strength of
eration and axonal degeneration but not for pure myelinopa-
   s   a   xaar x a
thies [axons still remain intact). Tremors also can be a clinical
 stages of the disease course.
feature with some pure myelinopathies.354.355
 Peripheral neuropathies consist of disorders that affect
Gait disturbances are a reflection of weakness and are not
the axon, axonopathies; the Schwann cells or myelin directly.
a result of incoordination. Often animals with lower motor
myelinopathies (dysmyelinating diseases); or both the axons
neuron dysfunction will have a shortened stride and an inabil-
 and Schwann cells, demyelinating diseases. Underlying patho-
ity to support weight, associated with the appendicular and
logic processes of the nerve include wallerian degeneration,
axial musculature. Limb tone is reduced, and flaccidity often
axonal degeneration, and segmental and diffuse myelin degen-
ssod qu gse'squ ieisp au u suaredde aiu suoan
will be crouched, with a tendency for joints to be flexed. Neck
cific but occur in a variety of peripheral nerve diseases. Axonal
flexion also signifies generalized weakness. Dogs with just dis-
degeneration and demyelination specify the underlying patho-
tal polyneuropathy often show a high-steppage or pseudohy-
logic process and location to the peripheral nerve but rarely
 occur as separate disease entities. Motor neuron disorders
response to allow the carpi or tarsi to "flip" forward for limb
 occur when the disease process primarily affects the cell body.
placement. It is not uncommon for polyneuropathy to first
 causing degeneration and loss.
rasuol aui asnesaq sisaredenat arojaq ssaredered se isajueu
Peripheral neuropathies are broadly classified as motor
[sciatic nerve] and more myelinated proprioceptive fibers usu-
neuron disease, motor neuropathy/radiculopathy, sensory neu-
ally are affected first.
ropathy, autonomic neuropathy, and mixed neuropathy. Most
Loss of tendon and flexor reflexes is a sign of peripheral
nerve disease. Early in acute polyneuropathy, reflexes may be
nerves are considered mixed neuropathies that affect motor,
diminished but not absent, but they become more reduced over
sensory, and autonomic nerves in varying degrees. Pathologic
time. Reflexes can be diminished out of proportion to weakness
studies of peripheral neuropathy often show a combination of
because of greater involvement of the large afferent fibers of
demyelination and axonal degeneration. The distal axon of the
muscle spindles. Consequently, the loss of reflexes is a result of
nerve is more sensitive to disease as a result of increased dis-
 greater dysfunction of the afferent limb of the reflex arc.
tance from the cell body and interruption of axonal transport.
Polyneuropathy can also present with multiple cranial
As a consequence, clinical signs such as weakness are worse
nerve deficits. Cranial nerves V, VII, VIll, IX, X, and XI usu-
 in the distal musculature of the limbs. Some peripheral nerve.
 ally are involved. Affected animals may exhibit clinical signs
diseases affecting the axons and myelin have involvement of
of dysphagia, dysphonia, and dyspnea.358 Dyspnea associated
both the CNS and PNS, but clinical signs may predominantly
manifest as disease of the PNS, since the nerve itself is the
sis359 The laryngeal abduetor muscles are innervated by the
 final common pathway Disease differentials for polyneuropa-
recurrent laryngeal nerve, which is one of the longest periph-
thy or neuronopathy consist of a wide spectrum of diseases
eral nerves and thus susceptible to diseases causing neuropa-
(see Table 7-4).
thy. Polyneuropathy needs to be considered as an underlying
thies also cause respiratory compromise if the intercostal and
phrenic nerves are involved.
Acute Progressive Diseases
Inflammatory
Acute Idiopathic Polyradiculoneuritis (Coonhound Paralysis).
This acute neurologic syndrome has been recognized largely in
hunting dogs that have been exposed to raccoons, but it also
has been observed in dogs with no exposure to raccoons.362,363
The disease is remarkably similar to acute polyneuritis in
humans (Landry-Guillain-Barre syndrome). Other inflamma-
tory neuropathies occasionally are reported in dogs and some
other animals, including a cat364,365 and a goat366 (see discus-
sion of chronic polyradiculoneuritis in cats). Polyneuritis equi
Figure 7-18 Schematic of anatomic sites of neuromuscular dis-
(cauda equina neuritis) is relatively common in horses and
ease. (l) Neuronal cell bodies [neuronopathy], (2) peripheral
is discussed in Chapter 6. Chronic polyneuropathies are dis-
nerves [neuropathy), (3) neuromuscular junction [junctionopa-
cussed separately.
thy], and (4) muscles [myopathy]. (From Kornegay JN: Feline
Pathophysiology. Immune-mediated
segmental  demy
neurology [Problems in veterinary medicine series], Philadelphia,
elination and degeneration of axons are found in dogs exposed
1991, JB Lippincott.]
to raccoons. Apparently, a transmissible substance in raccoon
190
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
saliva produces the disease.367 The Landry-Guillain-Barre
the Neuromuscular Junction Diseases section). Table 7-8
 compares the diagnostic features of polyradiculoneuritis, tick
including respiratory infections and influenza vaccinations.
 paralysis, and botulism. Polyradiculoneuritis is suspected when
Postvaccinal polyradiculoneuritis has also been seen in a
no ticks are found on physical examination, and exposure to
 dog.368 The disease affects primarily the ventral roots and spi-
botulinum toxin is not possible. Laboratory and radiographic
nal nerves. Characteristic microscopic lesions include segmen-
studies are normal. Analysis of CSF collected from the lumbar
tal demyelination, degeneration of both myelin and axons,
     s  s
leukocyte infltration, secondary degeneration of the ventral
diculoneuritis is supported by electrophysiologic evidence of
 diffuse denervation of affected muscles. These changes occur
ventral horn of the spinal cord and motor nerve fibers to the
 5 to 7 days after injury of the motor axon. The electromyo-
myofibers is blocked.
 graphic (EMG) abnormalities include increased insertion
Clinical Signs. Neurologic signs develop in some dogs 7
activity, fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves.
to 14 days after raccoon exposure. Early clinical signs include
Evoked potentials are slightly reduced in amplitude and may
pelvic limb paresis and hyporeflexia. Ascending weakness or
be polyphasic but are not as severely affected as with botulism
paralysis develops quickly. Affected dogs become tetraparetic
 or tick paralysis.373 Nerve conduction velocities are reduced
within 24 to 48 hours after the neurologic signs first develop.
later in the course of the disease. F-waves are delayed and
Spinal reflexes are severely depressed or absent. Passive flex-
dispersed after paralysis has developed fully.372 An enzyme-
ion and extension of the limbs reveal severe hypotonus of
linked immunosorbent assay using raccoon saliva as the anti-
affected muscles. Cerebral responses to painful stimuli
are
gen shows some promise as a diagnostic test.374
 normal or exaggerated. Diffuse hyperesthesia is occasionally
Treatment. No specific treatment for polyradiculoneuri-
seen in the paws and along the vertebral column upon 
 pal-
tis exists. Controlled clinical trials using corticosteroids have
pation. Dogs with rapidly progressive disease may develop
not been reported. A study in humans did not show ben-
respiratory paralysis. Cranial nerve involvement is uncommon,
efit of high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone early
in
although the dog's bark may be weak. Swallowing, gag reflex,
Landry-Guillain-Barre syndrome.375 Corticosteroids should
and esophagus are normal. The patient remains alert, respon-
not be used in dogs with polyradiculoneuritis, because they
sive, and afebrile. Defecation, urination, and tail mobility usu-
do not improve clinical signs or shorten the disease course.376
ally are normal because the sacral and caudal nerve roots are
Chronic corticosteroid therapy may cause urinary tract infec-
relatively spared. Muscle atrophy can be detected by direct
tion, further muscle wasting, and delayed healing of decubital
palpation 10 to 14 days after the onset of paresis. Occasionally.
ulcers. Plasmapheresis has been effective in human patients
 the initial clinical signs are detected in the thoracic limbs and
n  s   s ad a o ssr
 other immune-mediated diseases of dogs378 and could be
preferentially involved in some acute forms of polyradiculo-
beneficial in dogs with polyradiculoneuritis. Supportive care
consists of attentive nursing that [l) prevents decubital ulcers
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is suspected based on rapidity
(2) minimizes muscle atrophy and contractures, (3) prevents
of clinical signs. The differential diagnosis should include tick
urinary tract infection, (4) prevents pneumonia, and (5) sup-
 paralysis, botulism, and fulminant myasthenia gravis, because
ports respiratory function. Animals should be kept on padded
these diseases produce clinical signs that are essentially iden-
bedding, turned frequently, and kept clean. Voluntary micturi-
tical to those of the early stages of polyradiculoneuritis [see
tion usually is preserved; however, many dogs cannot produce
TABLE 7-8
Diagnostic Comparison of Acute Progressive Lower Motor Neuron Disorders
Polyradiculoneuritis
Tick Paralysis
Botulism
History
Single case; previous exposure to
 Single case—engorged tick 
 Multiple cases very suggestive:
raccoon in some cases 
 access to carrion or spoiled food
Pathophysiology
Nonsuppurative nerve root
Interference with action
Toxin blocks release of acetyl-
 inflammation and demyelination
potential or blocks release
 choline by altering docking of 
of acetylcholine
 synaptic vesicles
Esophageal motility
Normal
Normal
Reduced to absent
Hyperesthesia
 Frequently present 
Absent
Absent
Anal sphincter tone
Normal 
 Normal
 Reduced to absent 
Autonomic signs
Rare
Rare
Common
Cranial nerve involvement 
 Rare (sometimes CN Vll)
Rare
Usually (often involving tongue and
(pharynx)
 Eectromyography
Fibrillation potentials and positive 
No denervation
Usually no denervation
sharp waves
 Conduction velocity
Normal to decreased 
 Normal to slightly decreased
Normal
Evoked potentials
Reduced
Reduced
 Reduced; decrement of amplitude
 on repetitive stimulation
Special tests
None
None 
 Toxin in feces and serum
Treatment
Supportive
Tick removal
Supportive
Recovery time
36 wk
24-48 hr
2-3 wk
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
191
a normal abdominal press and may fail to empty their bladders
and progressive clinical disease course. These disorders have
completely. Gentle manual expression of the bladder is help-
been mostly described in dogs and cats. Inherited forms have
ful. Physical rehabilitation consisting of muscle massage and
passive manipulation of the limbs is important.379 Hydrother-
9tspsarq rauo rof paisadsns pue azt'saop pueidet uspams
 apy is helpful for preventing muscle atrophy and contractures
Motor neuron disease of young onset has been reported in the
and for keeping the dog clean.
Maine coon and domestic shorthair cats.430.43l An adult onset
uL poo Aensn sT Aaaonau lof sisouaoId su sisou boud
form of unknown cause has been reported in cats.432 Bovine
clinical course is usually 3 to 6 weeks but may be prolonged
spinal muscular atrophy has been reported in Brown Swiss
up to 2 to 4 months or longer.380.38l Improvement begins by
cattle and related breeds and has an autosomal recessive inher-
the third week, and complete recovery may take 6 to 8 weeks.
itance.433-435 Motor neuron disease also has been reported in
 In patients that develop severe muscle atrophy, recovery will
Romney lambs in New Zealand.436
be prolonged and may not be complete. Neurologic signs usu-
Equine Motor Neuron Disease
ally abate in the reverse order of development. Relapses have
Pathogenesis. Equine motor neuron disease is a spontane-
been observed. Some dogs appear to be particularly suscep-
ous motor neuron disease which results from degeneration
tible to recurrences.
of motor neurons in the spinal cord and brainstem.437.438
Protozoal Polyradiculoneuritis. Neospora canimum and
The disease primarily affects horses in the northeastern
Toxoplasma gondi can cause inflammation of the peripheral
United States.439 Various breeds and ages are affected, but
nerves, muscles, and/or CNS.382-385 In the PNS, the spinal
most horses are older than Z years of age. The exact cause is
nerve roots are more severely affected. Neospora caninum
 and T. gondi infections can be distinguished using serologic,
Vitamin E levels were significantly lower in affected horses.441
immunohistochemical, and morphologic criteria 382 Neospora 
Some horses have improved after being allowed on pasture
ao sse  eesne i s 
and given supplemental vitamin E. Lesions are similar to those
of the other spinal muscular atrophies.442 Environmental
L p u  r r  qo seadde eu oo
risk factors include absence of grazing for more than l year
gondi infection.424 Transplacental (vertical) mode of transmis-
and provision of poor-quality hay, dietary deficiency of vita-
puppies, pelvic limb extensor rigidity (genu recurvatum) is a
findings include loss of ventral horn motor neurons supply-
classic feature of pratozoal muscle and nerve infection.383.384
ing the highly oxidative type I muscle fibers. Approximately
-ase ue doaaap uau anq uq ne leu are sdnd paa
metric paraparesis and plantigrade stance.Ataxia and a bunny-
Increased lipopigment in motor neurons and capillary endo-
hopping gait may develop along with hyporeflexia and severe
thelial cells suggest underlying oxidative damage.437 Equine
muscle atrophy in the pelvic limbs. Because infections may be
motor neuron disease has similarities to sporadic amyotrophic
subelinical, evidence of seroconversion 2 or more weeks after
lateral sclerosis [ALS, or Lou Gehrig's disease).444
 Clinical Signs. Characteristic initial signs include weight
for a diagnosis (see Chapter 15). All dogs with clinical neo-
loss, muscle wasting, excessive recumbency, and trembling.
         
Constant shifting of weight in the pelvic limbs, abnormally low
head carriage, and muscle fasciculations reflect muscle weak-
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and serology or PCR
testing. The creatine kinase [CK) is frequently elevated. Elec-
the surface of the incisors in some affected horses. Funduscopic
trophysiologic testing supports evidence of neuropathy and
examination reveals brown streaking which represents abnor-
myopathy. CSF analysis may show a mixed-cell pleocytosis
mal ceroid ipofuscin in the retinal pigmented epithelium.445.446
and increased protein concentration. Muscle and nerve biop-
 Diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and by rul-
sies may show inflammation and presence of bradyzoites in
ing out other diseases. Plasma vitamin E concentrations are
muscle or tachyzoites within the CNS or nerve.
less than 1l mcg/mL.440 Vitamin A levels are usually low nor-
Treatment should include trimethoprim-sulfadiazine [15
mal. Concentrations of muscle-derived enzymes such as CK
mg/kg orally, every 12 hours) and pyrimethamine [l mg/kg
are increased. Spontaneous activity is consistently seen on
Xo y o  1] uu 1o (so  Aaa 
EMG, particularly in the proximal thoracic limbs.447 A tenta-
every 12 hours). Treatment should continue for 4 to 6 weeks.
tive antemortem diagnosis can be established by demonstrat-
Early treatment may be beneficial, but if muscle contracture is
ing degeneration of myelinated axons in biopsy samples of the
 present, recovery is unlikely.
sacrocaudalis dorsalis medialis muscle .448.449
Chronic Progressive Diseases
 Treatment. Treatment consists of supplementing vitamin
Degenerative
E by administering 5000 to 10,000 IU of alpha-tocopherol
Congenital and Inherited Motor Neuronopathies. Motor
daily or grazing the horse on high-quality pasture.449 Exercise
neuronopathies (Table 7-9) are disorders of the ventral horn
should be limited during active disease for 2 to 3 months. Pre-
neurons that cause generalized weakness. These chronic pro-
vention of equine motor neuron disease requires maintaining
 gressive diseases are characterized by progressive degeneration
 adequate intake of vitamin E. Green forages are a major source
 of motor neurons in the gray matter of the ventral horn of the
of vitamin E.450
 spinal cord and nuclei of the brainstem. Progressive denerva-
 Peripheral Myelinopathies. Demyelination is caused by
tion of muscle fbers results in paresis, paralysis, and severe
disease of the Schwann cell or myelin sheath (Table 7-10).
muscle atrophy. The diseases in dogs resemble the inherited
 Demyelination is loss of the myelin sheath along the length of
spinal muscular atrophies of humans. A characteristic fea-
 the internode [segmental demyelination) or near the paranodal
ture of motor neuron disease that differs from peripheral
area (paranodal demyelination). Disease can occur continu-
neuropathy is muscular weakness and fasciculations with
ously (diffuse demyelination) or randomly along the course
muscle atrophy, but preservation of refexes until the disease
of the nerve. In immune-mediated neuropathies, nerves are
is advanced.426 Other clinical signs include tremor, flexion of
damaged by cellular or humoral mechanisms directed against
the neck, and dysphagia. Motor neuron diseases are rare and
various components of myelin. Repeated processes of demy-
usually occur in young growing animals, with an insidious
elination and remyelination also occur with some disease
192
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 7-9
Motor Neuron Disordersin Domestic Animals
Breed and Species
Age of Onset
Inheritance
Clinical Signs
References
Canine
Brittany spaniel (model 
Homozygotes develop 
AD
Homozygotes rapidly progress to tetraplegia and
386-388
of infantile SMA}
clinical signs 6-8
dysphagia (SMA type ll: heterozygotes have
wk: heterozygotes
intermediate and chronic forms. Atrophy first in
develop signs 6 mo
proximal muscles, with signs of PL weakness.
to 2 yr: euthanized 
at 7 yr
Collie
8wk
Unknown
Exercise intolerance, weakness, decreased
389
 patellar reflexes
 Doberman pinscher
4 wk
Unknown
Severe muscle atrophy: paraparesis progressing
390
 to tetraparesis
 English pointer
4.5 to 6 mo
AR
 Acute progressive tetraparesis with LMN signs:
391. 392
distal muscles more severe; tetraplegia:
 accumulation of lipids
German shepherd dog
2 wk
Unknown
Angular limb deformities caused by muscle 
393
atrophy
Griffon Briquet Vendeen
6 wk 
Unknown
 Paraparesis first in extensor muscles then flexors
394
Rottweiler
4 wk 
Unknown:
 Regurgitation and megaesophagus; diminished 
395
familial 
 growth, progresive PL ataxia: LMN signs 
Saluki
9 wk
Unknown 
 Progressive tetraparesis: angular limb deformity
396
in TL: muscle atrophy: neck ventroflexion; fine 
head tremor
Swedish Lapland dog
5 to 7 wk
AR?
Acute recumbency with severe muscle atrophy:
397
 distal limbs
New Zealand dogs-
 3 to 9 mo of age
Unknown
 Acute progressive paraparesis to flaccid
398
collies, pug, dachshund,
tetraparesis; severe muscle atrophy
fox terrier 
Stockard's paralysis-
8to 12 wk
Unknown
Acute-onset paraparesis; distal appendicu-
399
Great Dane x St.
lar muscles affected first, with sparing of 
Bermard x bloodhound 
 paraspinal muscles: priapism
Canine degenerative
 Older than 8 yr 
AR {SOD1
Slowly progressive general proprioceptive ataxia 
400-409
myelopathyt many
mutation)
and spastic UMN PL paresis in early disease:
breeds
ascending tetraparesis and ataxia to tetraplegia
and LMN signs; euthanasia within 9 mo to 3
years: pathology reflects central-peripheral
axonopathy without motor neuron loss 
Feline
Maine coon
4 mo
AR{LIX}-
Tremor: proximal muscle weakness and atrophy
410.411
LNPEP
mutation}
DSH
10 wk
Unknown
 Acute progressive paraparesis to tetraplegia:
412
appendicular muscle atrophy
Bovine
Brown Swiss cattle
3to 4 wk
AR
 Progressive weakness in thoracic and pelvic
413-416
(Bovine spinal muscular
limbs: neurogenic muscle atrophy
atrophy!
Red Danish dairy—related 
Birth to 21 wk
 Familial 
Recumbent
417
to Brown Swiss
German Braunvieh-
3wk
 Familial 
Ataxia, muscle atrophy, recumbency
418
related to Brown Swiss
Ovine
Romney lambs
1 wk
Familial
 Progressive weakness, hyporeflexia
419
Continued
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
193
TABLE 7-9
Motor Neuron Disorders*in Domestic Animals-
cont'd
Breed and Species
Age of Onset
Inheritance
Clinical Signs
References
Equine
Equine motor neuron
15 mo to 25 yr
Familial,
 Progressive tetraparesis, muscle fasciculations,
420-422
disease (thorough-
vitamin E
muscle atrophy, weight loss
breds, standardbreds,
deficiency
quarter horse, Appaloo-
sas, Walking horses,
Arabians, Welsh pony.
Morgan!
 *Disorders characterized by motor neuron loss.
tMutations of the SOD1 gene causing DM in dogs cause some forms of human ALS, which is characterized histopathologically with motor
neuron loss.
metabolic, and toxic disorders. Most reported cases of canine
  )    d 
and defects of the oligodendrocytes. Hypomyelination in the
 PNS is due to primary defects in Schwann cell function.
Schwann Cell Defects. Severe hypomyelination due to
an underlying defect in Schwann cell function involving only
and Tibetan mastiffs,s54-s57 Clinical signs are characterized by
tigrade stance in the pelvic limbs and a bunny-hopping gait.
In the Tibetan mastiff, the disease is called mherited hypertro-
phic neuropathy because successive bouts of remyelination and
u    ssra  a s
Autosomal recessive inheritance is suspected in the Tibetan
 mastiff ss8 and the disease is considered familial in the golden 
retriever. Clinicals signs will stabilize, and some affected dogs
may recover the ability to walk with residual weakness.
Laminin-o2 Deficient Muscular Dystrophy. This disorder
 due to deficiency of laminin αz has been reported in a domestic
shorthair (DSH) and a Siamese cat.559 Laminin az is a large gly-
coprotein found in the basement membrane of muscle, Schwann
cells, and in blood vessels within the brain and other tissues.Age
of onset of clinical signs is 6 months. These cats develop progres-
sive weakness of the spinal and head musculature, with the pel-
vic limbs first affected. The pelvic limbs develop marked atrophy
and rigid contracture which eventually progress to involve the
thoracic limbs. Limbs, spine, and tail are rigid. Moderate trismus
also develops. Laminin αy-deficient muscular dystrophy occurs
sporadically in cats; a genetic predisposition is unknown at this
Figure 7-19 A, A 4-year-old horse with equine motor neuron dis-
time. The prognosis in cats with laminin-α, deficiency is consid-
 ered poor because of its progressive nature.
ease, showing characteristic tucked placement of limbs beneath
torso. Also note decubitus ulcers over bony prominences of pelvic
hherited Distal Sensorimotor Polyneuropathy
limbs from prolonged recumbency. This horse also showed muscle
Pathogenesis. Axonal degeneration results 
'from disease
fasciculations and shifting of weight between limbs B shows black
within the neuronal cell body or of the axon itself These disor-
pigment on surface of incisors from same horse. (Courtesy Philip
ders often are inherited (see Table 7-10) and are distinguished
from idiopathic or toxins based on the age of onset. The age
Johnson.]
of onset in dogs and cats usually is within a few months or
young to middle age. Often the degeneration of the axon and
 processes, such as inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropa-
its myelin sheath begins distally and extends proximally to the
thies. Remyelination can partially restore function. Disrup-
neuronal cell body. The neuron undergoes chromatolysis. This
tion of the myelin sheath will cause the electric current of the.
process has been termed cdying-back neuropathy, distal axonopa-
action potential to dissipate through the internode as a result of
thty, or distal sensorimotor neuropathy. These processes preferen-
increased capacitance and decreased resistance. This will result
tially affect long, large-caliber, myelinated nerve fbers. These
in a longer time to depolarize the next internode, thus prolong-
inherited motor and sensory (mixed) neuropathies affect
ing the conduction time. Conduction failure occurs with severe
motor, sensory, and autonomic nerves in varying degrees. In
demyelination. Diffuse myelinopathy occurs with inherited,
mixed neuropathies, often the clinical signs reflect early motor
194
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 7-10
Inherited and Breed-Associated Motor, Mixed, and Sensory Neuropathies of Domestic Animals
Inheritance Pattern
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
(Mutation)
Clinical Features
 Predominant Neuropathy
Reference
Distal Sensorimotor Polyneuropathies
Canine
Aaskan Malamute poly- 10-18 mo
Suspect AR
 Progressive tetraparesis
Distal sensorimotor
451.452
neuropathy
PL>TL: distal limb mus-
 polyneuropathy
cle atrophy: paraspinal 
hyperesthesia; laryngeal
 mm. paresis
 Dancing Doberman
6-7 yr
Suspect AR
Initial flexion of one PL
 Sensorimotor autonomic 
453
disease
 progressing to opposite
neuropathy
limb and flexion of both.
causing preference of
 dog to sit: progresses
to tetraparesis
Familial German shep- S
9-10 yr
 Familial 
 Paraparesis progressing to Dying-back peripheral
454
herd neuropathy
tetraparesis, PL muscle 
Ayledouoxe
atrophy: hyporeflexia:
increased CK
Distal symmetric
1.5-5 yr
Unknown
 Paraparesis progressing to Dying-back peripheral
455, 456
polyneuropathy
tetraparesis, atrophy of
Ayledouoxe
(Great Dane)
masticatory and distal 
limb muscles 
Progressive axonopathy 5-15 mo
Unknown
 Progressive PL ataxia and 
d Central-peripheral distal
457-459
in boxer
paresis: loss of paw
axonopathy
replacement: progress 
to TL; decreased spinal
reflexes 
Giant axonal neu-
14-16 mo
Unknown
 Plantigrade stance, pro-
Central-peripheral
454, 460-
ropathy in German
 gressive paraparesis to
axonopathy
464
 shepherd dogs
tetraparesis; decreased
sensory perception:
late—megaesophagus,
fecal incontinence,
laryngeal dysfunction 
Bouvier des Flandres
4-6 mo
AD
Inspiratory distress, laryn-
Distal axonopathy:
465-467
Laryngeal paralysis
 geal paralysis unilateral 
degeneration of motor 
 or bilateral, dysphonia
 neuronal cell bodies in
brainstem 
Laryngeal paralysis
4-6 mo
Unknown
Inspiratory distress, laryn-
 Distal axonopathy
468-470
(Siberian husky.
 geal paralysis unilateral
husky cross-breeds,
or bilateral, dysphonia 
 bull terriers Leon-
berger, white 
German shepherd!
Laryngeal paralysis 
2-6 mo
Unknown 
Laryngeal paralysis,
Dying-back distal
187. 471-
polyneuropathy
megaesophagus.
axonopathy
473
complex (dalmatian,
atrophy of laryngeal and 
rottweiler, Pyrenean
appendicular muscles:
mountain dog!
tetraparesis
Inherited polyneuropa-
1-3 yr
Suspect X-linked 
 Distal muscle atrophy.
Distal polyneuropathy
474.475
thy in Leonberger
high-steppage gait,
dogs
reduced flexion of distal
joints, hyporeflexia,
laryngeal paralysis
CHAPTER 7
Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
195
TABLE 7-10
Inherited and Breed-Associated Motor, Mixed, and Sensory Neuropathies of Domestic Animals-cont'd
Inheritance Pattern 
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
(Mutation)
Clinical Features
 Predominant Neuropathy
Reference
Rottweiler distal sen-
1.5-4 yr
Unknown
 Sowly progressive
Dying-back dis-
476
sorimotor polyneu-
paraparesis to tetrapare-
tal sensorimotor
ropathy
sis: hyporeflexia: appen-
 polyneuropathy 
dicular muscle atrophy
Italian Spinoni
8-10 yr
Suspect AR
Weakness, high-steppage [
 Distal symmetric polyneu- 477
 gait in pelvic limbs.
ropathy
 plantigrade stance,
 atrophy of distal limbs 
Feline
Snowshoe cat
Young-2 yr
Unknown
 Paraparesis
Distal axonopathy
478
 Birman cat 
810 wk
 Sex limited?
 Hypermetria, frequent
Central-peripheral distal 
479
falling. plantigrade
Ayledouoxe
 stance, PL>TL
Myelin-Associated Polyneuropathies
Canine
Congenital hypomyelin-  7 wk
Unknown
Bunny-hop gait, crouched I
 Hypomyelination
480.481
ation neuropathy in
 PL, hyporeflexia 
Suspect Schwann cell 
golden retriever
defect 
Hypertrophic neuropa- 
7-10 wk
AR
Rapid onset of generalized Schwann cell defect
482-485
thy (Tibetan mastiff)
weakness, hypotonia,
dysphonia: recumbent
by 3 mo of onset 
Hypertrophic polyneu-
1 yr
Unknown
Tremor, hyporeflexia,
 Peripheral myelin
486
ropathy (DSH)
 sensory deficit
degeneration 
Feline
Laminin αz-deficient
6-12 mo
Unknown
Paraparesis progressing
Lack of laminin-α2 in
487.488
muscular dystrophy
to tetraparesis, trismus,
 Schwann cell basement 
(DSH, Siamese,
severe extensor
membrane
Maine coon!
contracture, and muscle
atrophy
Primary Sensory Neuropathies
Long-haired dachshund 8-12 wk
Unknown 
Mild ataxia, proprioceptive  Distal central-peripheral 
489.490
 deficits, loss of nocicep-
Ayledouoxe
tion, urinary inconti-
nence, self-mutilation 
 English pointer and
2-12 mo
AR
Nociceptive loss in distal
 CNS and primary sensory
491-495
German shorthaired
 limbs, acral changes 
 neuropathy: loss of
 pointer 
and self-mutilation 
 substance P
Jack Russell terrier
6yr
Unknown 
 Proprioceptive deficits,
Primary sensory
496
loss of nociception,
 neuropathy
self-mutilation
French spaniel
3-12 mo
AR
 Self-mutilation of distal
 No light microscopic 
497
extremities, loss of
lesions
nociception
Golden retriever 
 Puppyhood
Mitochondrial
GP ataxia, postural 
Central-peripheral sensory 498, 499,
(tRNATvr muta-
reaction deficits, absent 
 neuropathy
602
tion}
 spinal reflexes
 Breeds (single reports)—golden retriever, rough-coated collie, border collie, Dobemman pinscher, Siberian husky.
498. 500-
whippet, Scottish terrier
504
Continued
196
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 7-10
Inherited and Breed-Associated Motor, Mixed, and Sensory Neuropathies of Domestic Animals-cont'd
Inheritance Pattern
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
[Mutation)
 Clinical Features
 Predominant Neuropathy
Reference
Metabolic Neuropathies
Hyperoxaluria (DSH)
5-9mo
AR (GRHPR muta- Crouched stance,
PNS changes include
505.506
tion}
reluctant to walk,
swollen axons in nerve 
reduced postural
root and ganglia second-
reactions, areflexia
 ary to neurofilament 
 accumulation: deficient 
hepatic enzyme activity
of D-glycerate dehydro-
 genase and glyoxylate 
reductase
Hyperchylomicronemia  4 wk
AR {LPL mutation) Clinical signs reflect
Foraminal nerve compres-  507-514
(Siamese, Himalayan,
 asymmetric focal
sion by lipid granulo-
 Persian, European!
neuropathies affecting
mas; decreased activity
spinal and cranial nerves 
of lipoprotein lipase
 Familial neuropathy and Young to 20 mo 
Familial
Intermittent GP ataxia and  Wallerian degeneration in :
515.516
glomerulopathy of 
paraparesis progressing
 dorsal and ventral nerve
Gelbvieh cattle
to recumbency
roots; minimal fiber
 degeneration in SC:
multifocal myonecrosis
Lysosomal Storage Disorders (see also Table 15-3)
 Fucosidosis (English
6 mo-3 yr
AR (mutation c-L-
 Sow learners, ataxia,
 Gross findings include
517-521
 springer spaniel!
fucosidase)
hypermetria,
enlargement of some
 progressive incoordi-
nerves and nerve roots.
nation, hoarse bark.
 Axonal spheroids and 
 dysphagia, and hearing
swollen neurons in
and visual deficits
CNS: vacuolated mac-
rophages; deficiency of 
 α-L-fucosidase
Globoid cell leuko-
Ca-West Highiand
AR or Unknown 
 Reflect multifocal disease, CNS lesions are confined
522-532
dystrophy (West
white terrier (2-5
(mutation 
progressive parapa-
to white matter in brain
Highland white
mo), cairn terrier
galactosyl-
resis to tetraparesis.
 and spinal cord, with
terrier, cairn terrier.
(2-5 mo), beagle
ceramidase in
cerebellar dysfunction,
 destruction of myelin
beagle, poodle, bas-
(4 mo), poodle
West Highland 
hyporeflexia, muscle
 and infiltration of PAS
set hound, bluetick 
(2 yr). basset
white terrier
atrophy
(+) macrophages
hound, Pomeranian,
hound (1.5-2 yr),
and cairn ter-
(globoid cells): PNS
Irish setter, DSH and 
 blue tick hound 
rier!
 lesions include seg-
 DLH: Dorset sheep!
(4 mo), Pomera-
mental demyelination,
nian (1.5 yr)., frish
 axonal degeneration,
setter (6 mo):
 and accumulation of
F-DSH, DLH (5-6 
macrophages containing
wk): O-Dorset
 globoid cells; deficiency 
(4-18 mo)
of lysosomal enzyme
 galactosyl-ceramidase
Glycogenosis type IV
F-5 mo
AR (mutation
Generalized muscle
 Abnormal accumulation
533-539
(Norwegian forest
E-neonatal
in glycogen
 tremors, bunny-hop
of glycogen in PNS and
cat, quarter horse,
branching
 gait, severe muscle
CNS: loss of axons and
paint horse)
enzyme 1}
atrophy, contracture,
myelin in peripheral
hyporeflexia
nerves. Extensive stor-
age in CNS; deficiency
of glycogen branching
enzyme α-1,4-D-glucan:
α-1,4 glucan 6-glucosyl
transferase
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
197
TABLE 7-10
Inherited and Breed-Associated Motor, Mixed, and Sensory Neuropathies of Domestic Animalscont'd
Inheritance Pattern
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
(Mutation)
Clinical Features
 Predominant Neuropathy
Reference
Mannosidosis (DSH)
F-DSH (7 mo).
AR (mutation α-0-
 Cerebellar ataxia, tremor,
Vacuolated glia and neu-
540-546
DLH, Persian: Mur-
DLH, Persian (8
mannosidase in
corneal opacity, skeletal 
rons in CNS; vacuolated 
ray grey, Aberdeen
Wk): B-Galloway.
Persians!
anomalies, neuropathy:
 macrophages in periph-
Angus!
Murray grey.
 B-cerebellar ataxia,
eral nerves; defective
Aberdeen Angus
aggressiveness
myelin in CNS and PNS;
(birth)
hypomyelination in CNS 
and PNS; deficiency of
α-D-mannosidase
Phenotypic variant
Ca-miniature 
Unknown: AR
Absent postural reac-
Peripheral nerve changes 
547-551
 of Niemann-Pick
 poodle (2-4
Siamese
tions, hypo- to areflexia,
 include widespread
 disease type A
mo): F-Balinese,
hypotonia, fine tremors,
demyelination, with
(miniature poodle,
Siamese (2-3
plantigrade stance
many vacuolated
 Balinese, Siamese,
mo): B-Hereford
macrophages: CNS also
Hereford!
(5 mo)
mildly affected; reduc-
tion in CNS and visceral
lysosomal sphingomy-
elinase activity
AD, Autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; B, bovine; C, caprine; Ca, canine; CK, creatine kinase; E, equine; F feline; GP, general pro-
prioceptive; O, ovine; P, porcine; PL, pelvic limb; SC, spinal cord; TL, thoracic limb.
nerve dysfunction with less obvious signs of sensory nerve
predominant clinical manifestation in the Bouvier des Flan-
dysfunction. Both primary axonal degeneration and wallerian
dres and is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.577.578
 degeneration will cause neurogenic muscle atrophy later in the
 Laryngeal paralysis occurs in a number of other breeds sum-
disease course. These diseases are progressive and relentless.
marized in Chapter 9. A laryngeal paralysis polyneuropathy
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs usually are recognized frst in
complex occurs in dalmatians, 579 rottweiler,580 and Pyrenean
the distal limbs as a consequence of distance of the nerve from
mountain dog.187 Male Leonberger dogs manifest a severe dis-
the cell body. The signs progress to nonambulatory parapare-
tal polyneuropathy and laryngeal paralysis that may be inher-
sis and tetraparesis. Hyporeflexia manifests frst in the distal
ited as an X-linked trait.357
limbs. These disorders manifest as diffuse polyneuropathy that
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on ruling out other acquired
involve the distal appendicular musculature in the Alaskan
Malamute, 50.56t Doberman pinscher [dancing Doberman dis-
 ous activity which includes fbrilation potentials and sharp
waves in the distal and proximal appendicular muscular with
Leonberger,357.567 border collie,568 and rottweiler.569 In the
changes more severe in the distal musculature. Motor nerve
border collie, there was initial sensory nerve dysfunction with
conduction velocities may be slow as a result of the second-
progressive motor nerve dysfunction.
ary demyelination. Nerve and muscle biopsy further assist with
Some inherited distal neuropathies may be asymmetric at
understanding the disease process and ruling out other acquired
onset. A distal neuropathy has been reported in Doberman
Aq pazaeuo ane sasue Xsdorq aiosn u iassapros
pinschers and is termed dancing Doberman disease 562 Pelvic
excessive variability in myofiber size with atrophic fibers of
limb weakness is noted initially. Age of onset varies from 6
both fber types, large and small grouped atrophy, and hyper-
months to 7 years and slowly progresses over years. Typically.
trophy. Fiber type grouping, an indicator of chronicity, may
affected dogs flex one pelvic limb while standing. These dogs
be evident if denervation is followed by reinnervation. Nerve
are unable to stand still, so that the dog alternately flexes each
biopsies show more severe changes in the distal nerve. Abnor-
mal fndings include axonal degeneration, loss of myelinated
Weakness initially develops in the pelvic limbs and progress to
fbers of varying diameter, and axonal necrosis. If nerve regen-
involve the thoracic limbs. Muscle atrophy is especially promi-
eration is occurring, regenerating clusters and sprouts may be
nent in the gastrocnemius muscle. Abnormalities are noted
found. Teased fiber studies may further show axonal degenera-
on EMG while nerve conduction velocities are within normal
tion and evidence of demyelination and remyelination.
Treatment and Prognosis. Treatment is aimed toward
A distal axonopathy, with associated neurogenic muscle
supportive care. In dogs with laryngeal paralysis, "tie-back"
procedures may lessen signs of upper airway obstruction.
halt.570-s572 Affected horses flex one or both pelvic limbs
  r  m   ar
excessively during attempted movement. In contrast to classic
stringhalt, this disease has a seasonal incidence, and affected
 progressive neuropathies
horses may recover spontaneously (see Chapter 10).
Central-Peripheral Distal Axonopathy. Central-periph-
 Since the recurrent laryngeal is a long nerve, laryngeal
eral distal axonopathy is characterized by the presence of
paralysis is often a sequela to the acquired and inherited dis-
axonal degeneration in selected pathways of the CNS and
a e e d ss e (or aas s
  s  sr  o  a
eral neuropathy. These disorders have been well described in
198
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
the Birman cat,582 boxer [progressive axonopathy of boxer
ganglion were observed in the French spaniel.588 Ganglioneu-
dogs), 184-186.583 and German shepherd dog (giant axonal neu-
ritis with involvement of spinal and cranial ganglia has been
described.594,600
lateral funiculi of the spinal cord. Swollen axons contain-
 In cases of sensory neuropathy that involve acral mutila-
ing excessive neuroflaments are present in the spinal cord.
tion, prognosis is considered poor In the absence of a genetic
Pathology of the nerve involves variable axonal loss and sec-
test, the recommendation to prevent recurrence of a recessive
ondary demyelination. Motor and sensory fibers are affected.
disorder is to remove affcted animals and their parents from
Onset of signs in Birman cats is between 8 and 10 weeks of
the breeding program.
age. These cats manifest a plantigrade stance and progressive
 Hereditary neuropathies involving the central and periph-
GP ataxia and paresis in the pelvic limbs. The age at onset var-
eral sensory pathways without nociceptive involvement
ies in boxers. These dogs manifest GP ataxia and paresis in the
will manifest GP ataxia without acral automutilation.590.501
Sensory ataxic neuropathy was recently identifed in golden
tatic reflexes are reduced, but flexor reflexes remain intact.
retrievers.50l These dogs have GP ataxia, postural reaction
Age at onset of signs in German shepherd dogs is between
deficits, and reduced to absent spinal reflexes. Onset of signs
1 and 2 years of age. Clinical signs in these dogs are mani-
occurs during puppyhood and is slowly progressive. Dogs are
fested by a plantigrade stance, and GP ataxia and paresis in
often euthanized by 3 years of age. Histopathology revealed
the pelvic limbs. Spinal reflexes are absent. Megaesophagus,
degeneration of the sensory pathways in both the central and
laryngeal dysfunction, and fecal incontinence manifest late in
 peripheral nervous systems. Pedigree analysis revealed that all
the disease course.
dogs belong to one maternal lineage, and statistical analysis
Sensory Neuronopathy and Neuropathy. An animal with
showed that the disorder is of mitochondrial origin.5ot A dele-
a pure sensory neuropathy may show decreased nociception,
tion in the mitochondrial tRNATyr gene was determined as the
paresthesia, evidence of self-mutilation, and reduced to absent
causative mutation for sensory ataxic neuropathy in golden
retrievers.602
nence may also develop. The absence of weakness and normal.
muscle tone and the ability to support weight provide evi-
Metabolic
dence that the motor fbers are unaffected. In cases of acral
High metabolic demand of the peripheral nerve predisposes to
mutilation, the location often involves the distal extremities
effects associated with endocrine disorders. Storage disorders
and/or facial region. Affected dogs will undergo autoamputa-
 including sphingomyelinosis variant type A, mannosidosis, gly-
tion of nail, digits, and footpads and walk on the mutilated
cogen storage disease type IV, fucosidosis, and globoid cell leu-
paws without showing evidence of pain. Clinical signs are frst
kodystrophy may also have peripheral nerve involvement, and
noted within the frst year of life. Clinical signs of self-muti-
therefore affected animals may display LMN weakness (see
lation have been reported in the long-haired dachshund, 585
also Chapter 15).189
 English and short-haired pointer in North America 586 English
Hypothyroid Neuropathy. Hypothyroidism causes poly-
springer spaniel in Australia587French spaniel58 and in the
neuropathy and myopathy in dogs.376.575.603-506 Nerve pathol
Jack Russell terrier.589
  e e   s 
 Pure sensory nociceptive neuropathies are rare and often
biopsy will show neurogenic atrophy of both type I and II
have an inherited cause [see Table 7-10).l89 Some acquired
Unlike in humans, clinical signs of sensory loss (numbness,
anisms for hypothyroid neuropathy include impaired energy
pain, temperature alterations) associated with polyneu-
metabolism of the motor neuron and alterations in microtu-
u azuor oi as are uo seeu edr
bule assembly and axonal transport.376.608 Myxedematous tis-
sues may be associated with compressive neuropathy as the
 ous breeds: Jack Russell terrier, 589 golden retriever,590 rough-
nerves exit through foramina of the cranium or the interver-
tebral foramina.376
nu Au t s pre ddm snq 
 Clinical Signs. Dogs may have signs of diffuse LMN dys-
ronopathy of autosomal recessive inheritance has been well
function, peripheral or central vestibular dysfunction,509,6l0
described in English pointer dogs in North America,595 in
encephalopathy, Sll,612 and cranial nerve dysfunction [VIL.
short-haired pointers in Czech Republic,586,596 and French
VIII, IX, X).575.604 Peripheral neuropathy is the most common
spaniels.588 Autosomal recessive inheritance is suspected in
of the neurologic signs.575 The paresis may vary in symmetry
the long-haired dachshund.597
and involve one limb or all limbs,575.604.613 Exercise intoler-
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, electrophysiology and
ance may be evidence of myopathic involvement. Hypore-
biopsy. EMG and motor nerve conduction velocities are nor-
flexia may be evident with the polyneuropathy. Clinical signs
mal. Sensory nerve action potential cannot be elicited. Based
of cranial nerve dysfunction include megaesophagus,514 facial
that dogs with acral lick dermatitis may have a mild sensory
 Diagnosis. During the early stages when clinical signs are
axonal polyneuropathy.598 Histologic changes in sensory neu-
vague, the diagnosis is often overlooked. These vague present-
ronopathy with nociceptive loss include decrease neuronal
ing complaints include weakness, intermittent lameness, and
 cell bodies in the spinal ganglia and paucity of myelinated
signs of cranial nerve V, VIl, VIlI, IX, and X dysfunction (see
axons in dorsal roots and peripheral nerves.586 Severe deple-
Chapters 8 and 9). Many affected animals may or may not
tion of both large myelinated and unmyelinated fbers occurs.
have the classical systemic signs of hypothyroidism such as
Reduced density in the nociceptive pathways was observed.
lethargy, weight gain, alopecia, bradycardia, pyoderma, and
In affected English pointers, loss of the sensory neurons was
seborrhea. Blood work abnormalities may include nonre-
associated with reduction of substance P immunoreactivity.599
 generative anemia, hypercholesterolemia, and increased CK
The lesion distribution in long-haired dachshunds and pointer
 and alkaline phosphatase activity.575.605-607 The diagnosis is
dogs is characterized as a distal central-peripheral axonopa-
confirmed by reduced free and total serum thyroxine lev-
thy, although the clinical signs predominate to involve the
els, with an elevation in thyroid-stimulating hormone levels.
sensory nerve.586,595,597 The lesion is confined to the nerve
Electromyography and nerve-conduction studies can fur-
e aaiau u u suissh ieu ue as tassn yer a u
ther characterize the neuropathic or myopathic disease and
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
199
document evidence for both axonal degeneration and demye-
may reverse, but varying degrees of weakness may still per-
lination.575,604,613 Degenerative changes may be seen in nerve
sist. Other anecdotal therapies aimed at countering oxidative
 and muscle biopsy specimens. Hypothyroidism also has been
 stress have been used.627
 associated with acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs.6516 Diag-
Hyperchylomicronemia in Cats. Jones described hyper-
nosis also is based on a positive clinical response to adminis-
chylomicronemia in two related male domestic shorthair
tration oflevothyroxine.613
cats.628 The disease has been subsequently reported in other
Treatment and Prognosis. The rate and degree of recovery
subsequent to levothyroxine treatment depend on the severity
and Siamese cats.634 Affected cats with chylomicronemia
 of the denervation and myopathy In hypothyroid myopathy,
have a clinical phenotype similar to humans with lipoprotein
improvement of systemic signs and weakness after supple-
lipase (LPL) deficiency Hyperchylomicronemia is defined by
mentation is noted within several days.505 Actual improve-
increased concentrations of chylomicrons in plasma caused
  du r u  r  
by a decrease in clearance of the lipoprotein from plasma.635
weeks to months. Animals with severe denervation have a
Lipoprotein lipase regulates lipoprotein metabolism through
 more guarded prognosis for recovery.505,617 Cranial nerve def-
the hydrolysis of triglycerides from chylomicrons and very low
cits associated with megaesophagus and laryngeal paralysis are
density lipoproteins (VLDL) which contribute to the forma-
less likely to inmprove. 575,605
tion of high density lipoproteins (HDL).636
Diabetic Neuropathy
Onset of clinical signs ranges between 4 and 8 weeks of
Pathophysiology. Peripheral neuropathy has been docu-
age. Common clinical signs include fasting hyperlipidemia
mented in association with diabetes mellitus in both cats and
(increase chylomicrons and VLDL), lipemia retinalis, xantho-
dogs.518-621Nerve biopsy studies incats reveals that the distal
 gou rd sn pem
axons are susceptible, and demyelination may predominate
sites for xanthomata formations include pressure points and
over the axonal pathology522623Mereover, the pelvic limbs
 sites where nerves exit the intervertebral or cranial foramina,
causing compressive neuropathy affecting peripheral, cranial.
mechanisms of diabetic neuropathy include metabolic altera-
 and sympathetic nerves. A compressive peripheral neuropa-
tions in the polyol pathway that results in sugar accumulations
thy develops slowly over a course of months, and localization
in the nerve, depletion of myoinositol, impaired sodium-
reflects multifocal disease in the area[s) of nerve compression.
potassium ATPase, growth factor deficiencies, impaired vascu-
Horner's syndrome and tibial and radial nerve paralysis are
most frequently detected.638 Less commonly, systemic signs
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs include LMN parapare-
rx pr pe s t 
sis that may progress to tetraparesis. Hyporeflexia and distal
Most affected cats have a fasting hyperchylomicronemia.
muscle atrophy may occur. Affected cats characteristically
Serum electrophoresis identifes an increase in chylomicrons
have a plantigrade stance and show reluctance to jump (Fig-
and VLDL reflective of reduced LPL activity.628.639
ure 7-20).624 Clinical signs of neuropathy may precede those
Reduced LPL activities have been demonstrated in cats,
ficult to document, sensory nerve dysfunction may result in
lomicronemia in cats has a familial incidence.528,631,634.638 In
paresthesia and hyperesthesia.624 Rarely, autonomic signs such
New Zealand, related affected cats showed an autosomal reces-
 as Horner's syndrome can occur.525
sive inheritance pattern.639 The mutation for the lipoprotein
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is suspected based on demonstrating
lipase gene subsequently has been characterized.639 A low-fat
diabetes mellitus in the presence of signs of neuropathy. Elec-
diet results inresolution of peripheral europathy9632
Hyperoxaluria in Cats. Domestic short-haired cats with
and reduced motor and sensory nerve-conduction velocities.
 D-glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency develop renal failure
Abnormalities in the nerve can be detected both proximally
due to deposition of oxalate crystals in the renal tubules and
 and distally.624 Subelinical electrophysiologic abnormalities
LMN signs.540 Axons of the ventral horn cells of the spinal
may be present in diabetic animals 520,626 Sensory nerves may
cord, ventral roots, and intramuscular nerves are distended
be preferentially involved. Nerve biopsy documents the axo-
with neuroflaments. The cause of the axonal swellings is
nopathy and demyelination.520.622.624
likely due to accumulation of neuroflaments. Clinical signs
Treatment and Prognosis. Therapy is directed toward
are apparent between 5 and 9 months of age. Onset is acute,
control of the diabetes mellitus and other contributing dis-
with development of anorexia, dehydration, and weakness
 orders.503,621 With improved glycemic control, clinical signs
over a few days. Kidneys are painful on abdominal palpation.
Neurologic examination demonstrates a crouched stance with
adduction of the hock joints, tetraparesis, reduced myotatic
and flexor reflexes, and decreased pain perception. Findings on
serum biochemistry analysis reflect acute renal failure. Pedi-
gree analysis was found to give a good fit, with an expected
3:1 ratio for a recessive gene.640 A genetic mutation has been
found in the feline glyoxylate reductase (GRHPR) gene.641
 Prognosis is poor.
Familial Neuropathy and Glomerulopathy of Gelbvieh
 Cattle. Gelbvieh calves clinically present with progressive GP
 ataxia and paresis in the pelvic limbs and progress over 20
nal reflexes become hyporeflexic. Histopathology confrmed
 peripheral neuropathy and a proliferative glomerulopathy
The lesions are most severe in peripheral nerves, dorsal and
ventral spinal nerve roots, and mild in the dorsal fasciculi of
Figure 7-20 A 10-year-old domestic longhair cat diagnosed with
the spinal cord. Multifocal muscle necrosis may develop. Pedi-
diabetes mellitus. Note plantigrade and palmigrade stance suges-
 gree analysis of affected animals from one herd indicated a
tive for diabetic neuropathy. (Courtesy Dennis P. O'Brien.]
strong familial relationship.542
200
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Neoplastic
and nerve biopsy which confrm denervation muscle atrophy
Paraneoplastic Neuropathies. Neoplasia can affect peripheral
and axonopathy with demyelination. Demyelination is the
predominant pathologic finding. Some animals, especially cats,
paraneoplastic ("remote”) effects.544 Paraneoplastic neuropathy
appear to benefit from corticosteroid therapy but then relapse
has been mainly described in dogs645,646 and rarely described in
and continue to worsen. Because of the disease's waxing-wan-
cats547 with lymphoma. Effects on peripheral nerves may be
ing character, the benefit of corticosteroids is not proven.
difficult to distinguish from those caused by side effects of che-
motherapy or irradiation.648 Paraneoplastic effects are thought
Idiopathic
to be inmmune mediated due to antigen mimicry. An inmmune
Idiopathic Polyneuropathy. These diseases are recognized
response is generated when antigens present within the neo-
plasm are shared with the peripheral nerve.544 Subclinical
are relatively uncommon in other species. The chronic neu-
pathologic evidence of peripheral neuropathy has been identi-
 o ssa  s s   s
fed in dogs with distant neoplasia.645 Braund649 documented
several months. Disease progression may be interrupted
combinations of axonal necrosis, demyelination, and remyelin-
by periods of spontaneous improvement. Definition of the
cause of chronic polyneuropathy is often elusive. Better
carcinoma, malignant melanoma, insulinoma, osteosarcoma,
diagnostic techniques, especially electrophysiologic tests
thyroid carcinoma, and mast cell tumors.
and histopathologic assessment of muscle and nerve biopsy
 Many malignant tumor types have been associated with
 samples, have contributed to a greater understanding of this
paraneoplastic neuropathy  Pancreatic β-islet cell tumors
problem.
[insulinoma) has been the most completely documented
example. Other tumor types implicated in paraneoplastic
Toxicity
neuropathy include bronchogenic carcinoma,650.65l gastric
Toxic Neuropathies. Table 7-4 lists some toxins that may
 cause neuropathy. None of these are common. The potential
multiple myeloma.654
for neurotoxicity varies among species. Drug-induced neu-
With β-islet cell tumors, neurologic signs in affected dogs
ropathy has been reported in dogs with use of vincristine, 548
are the result of profound hypoglycemia that affects the
metabolism of the CNS, causing seizures, behavioral abnor-
 results in regression of neurologic signs.
malities, and other signs of forebrain disease [see Chapters
12, 13 and 15). Polyneuropathy can be profound in dogs with
MYOPATHIC DISEASE
with muscle atrophy and reduced spinal reflexes has been
Skeletal muscle is composed of slow (type I) and fast (type II)
 polyneuropathy is unclear. Insulin may have direct neurotoxic
twitch myofibers relatively resistant to fatigue. Cats also have
effects or indirect effects from the hypoglycemia or immune
fast-twitch fatigable myofibers. Myofibers utilize energy from
system. Dogs might benefit from corticosteroid therapy inde-
glycogen in anaerobic conditions. Mitochondrial fatty acid oxi-
pendent of insulin antagonism.659
dation is ideal for sustained exercise requiring endurance. The
Treatment of paraneoplastic 
polyneuropathyinvolves
hallmark clinical sign of myopathy is weakness. Clinical signs
supportive care and addressing the underlying neoplasm.
can be persistent or episodic and exercise induced. Gait often
Immunomodulatory t
therapies i
including corticosteroids,
is stiff and short strided. Cats will show an inability to jump.
immunosuppressants, plasmapheresis, and intravenous immu-
A unique clinical sign to cats is flexion of the neck. General-
ized muscle atrophy can be a feature for some myopathies;
ments directed toward the neoplasm can result in clinical
alternatively, muscle hypertrophy develops in some condi-
inprovement.551,654.659
tions. Likewise, the distribution can be focal or generalized.
Muscle pain (myalgia), failure of muscles to relax [myotonia),
Inflammatory
and sudden muscle contraction [cramp) also suggest muscle
Chronic Idiopathic Polyneuritis (Chronic Inflammatory
disease (see also Chapter 10).673 Proprioception and spinal
Demyelinating Polyneuropathy). This syndrome affects
 reflexes are normal unless the disorder is severe and diffuse.
 In general, myopathies may be a result of inflammation
Early clinical signs involve the pelvic limbs and later over
[myositis) or degeneration. Inflammatory muscle diseases may
several months progress to involve the thoracic limbs. Signs
be infectious or immune mediated and are acute in onset and
of flaccid paresis, muscle atrophy, and hyporeflexia eventu-
often have a progressive clinical disease course.574,675 Degen-
ally result in paralysis in all limbs. The neurologic fndings
erative diseases are either acquired or congenital. Acquired
vary with the stage of the illness. Cranial nerve involvement
cases of degenerative muscle disorders include metabolic-
may manifest with facial paralysis, dysphonia, megaesopha-
related, nutritional, neoplastic, trauma, toxic, and vascular
gus, and laryngeal paralysis. Hypalgesia becomes evident as
are
sensory nerves become involved. The clinical course varies
inherited (see Table 7-11). The most common of the inherited
from several months to years. Pathologic studies suggest that
degenerative myopathies are the muscular dystrophies.80l,802
nonsuppurative inflammation, perhaps with an immune
Acquired myopathies may also be classified based on asso-
basis isresponsible for thedisease.570.67l If the spinal gangia
ciation with exercise and evidence of rhabdomyolysis.578.803
and cranial nerves are affected and causing sensory deficits,
The term rhabdomryolysis is represented by disintegration or
this condition has been called ganglioradiculitis or sensory
dissolution of skeletal muscle associated with urinary excre-
neuronopathry.500
tion of myoglobin. The clinical syndrome of rhabdomyolysis
 Electromyography may show spontaneous activity Motor
consists of myofiber necrosis, muscle pain, limb weakness
nerve conduction velocities are slow and show decreased
markedly elevated CK, and myoglobinuria.578 A common
amplitude of the compound motor action potential. Analy-
pathophysiologic mechanism relates to injury of the sarco-
sis of CSF may show nonspecific finding of increased protein
lemmal membrane or failure of energy utilization causing an
 concentration and cellularity. These changes are suggestive of
increase of intracellular calcium and ultimately destruction
axonal and myelin disease. The diagnosis is made by muscle
of myofibrils and myonecrosis.578 Muscle disorders associated
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
201
with rhabdomyolysis include some degenerative and storage
Diagnosis. Diagnostic suspicion is gained from elevated
myopathies, exercise-related disorders, nutritional, metabolic,
CK levels, abnormal EMG, and testing that excludes infectious
toxic, trauma, and inflammatory diseases. In horses, diseases
 disease.674 Disease confrmation is based on muscle biopsy
such as "tying up," Monday morning disease, azoturia, equine
results revealing mononuclear infltrates and necrosis in skel-
rhabdomyolysis, and equine myoglobinuria—once thought
etal muscle. It is important to rule out paraneoplastic disease
to be a distinct disease syndrome-are now considered com-
through screening procedures such as thoracic radiography and
mon clinical manifestations for different muscle disorders of
abdominal ultrasound. In a study of 200 dogs with inflamma-
different causes.803 Early recognition of rhabdomyolysis is
tory myopathy, 88 dogs were diagnosed with immune-medi-
important because myoglobinuria can cause renal failure and
ated polymyositis, of which 12 dogs subsequently developed
myonecrosis will cause severe electrolyte disturbances.
The signs of diffuse muscle disease are very similar to
lymphoma. Thymoma has been associated with polymyositis
those of polyneuropathies. Because of ambiguities in estab-
in dogs and cats.815.816 Likewise, polymyositis can also occur
lishing the diagnosis of myopathy through clinical signs alone,
concurrently with other underlying immune-mediated dis-
increasing attention should be given to evaluation of serum
CK levels, serology, EMG, metabolic urine and plasma screen-
ing, molecular genetic testing, and muscle biopsy.58l,627,804
 in boxers and Newfoundlands.817 The Newfoundlands had a
When a metabolic myopathy is suspected, screening tests
younger age of onset, with megaesophagus and dysphagia as
should be performed at rest and after exercise. Often more
the predominating clinical signs.
than one diagnostic modality is required to confirm the cause
Treatment. It is essential to determine whether an under-
of an inflammatory myopathy 8os Muscle biopsy is necessary
lying infectious etiology exists. In animals with polymyositis,
to determine presence and characterization of the inflamma-
immunosuppression forms the basis of treatment. Typically.
tory cell infltrate, myonecrosis, and abnormal accumulations.
immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids are given until
Molecular genetic testing is becoming a valuable resource for
remission is achieved. Alternate-day therapy is then instituted
disease when the causative mutation has been defined.806
to maintain remission. Commensurate with improvement in
Myopathies of domestic animals are classified in Table 7-5.
clinical signs, the dosage is gradually tapered.
These disorders are discussed in subsequent sections of this
Treatment can be discontinued in some dogs, without
chapter and further categorized as acute progressive (nonin-
recurrence of signs. Adjunctive immunosuppressive therapy
fectious and infectious inflammatory, metabolie), chronic pro-
often is used in conjunction with corticosteroids when cortico-
 gressive [degenerative, metabolic, nutritional), and episodic
steroids alone are unable to obtain a clinical response, to main-
(metabolie).
tain remission, or when there are severe and intolerable side
effects.8l8 Dogs with megaesophagus may develop aspiration
Acute Progressive Myopathies
pneumonia. Management of these cases is difficult, and the
oereu sraprosp jo dnora e are sauedou aroteue
prognosis for regaining normal esophageal function is guarded.
ized by inflammatory infltrate of skeletal muscle. These disor-
Masticatory Muscle Myositis
ders usually are acute in onset and progressive. Inflammatory
Pathophysiology. Inflammation affecting primarily the mus-
myopathy can be classified focal or generalized, and nonin-
cles of mastication is seen more commonly in dogs than is
fectious or infectious. Focal inflammatory myopathies include
polymyositis.819-82l Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM) is a
 disorders such as masticatory muscle myositis and extraocu-
focal, immune-mediated inflammatory myopathy that affects
lar myositis. Infectious myositis can be focal or multifocal in
the muscles of mastication [temporalis, masseter, pterygoid and
distribution. Causes of generalized inflammatory myopathies
rostral portion of the digastricus).822 Selective involvement of
encompass disorders that are noninfectious [e.g, immune
the masticatory muscles is due to differences in histochemi-
mediated [polymyositis], idiopathic, toxic, paraneoplastic] or
cal and biochemical properties of the masticatory muscles.822
infectious.805
 Antibodies are produced against a specifc myosin isoform in
type 2M fibers of the masticatory muscles.823 The autoimmune
Inflammatory: Noninfectious
reaction may be initiated by a bacterial antigen.804 Cellular
Immune-Medliated Polymyositis. Polymyositis is classifed
infltrates are present in both acute and chronic MMM, whereas 
as diffuse muscle inflammation of immune-mediated ori-
extensive muscle atrophy and myofiber replacement with fatty
tissue are present in the chronic form of this disease.820 Ger-
lupus erythematosus, as a paraneoplastic syndrome, or with
man shepherd dogs may be predisposed, but other large breeds
 some drugs, notably trimethoprim-sulfadiazine in Doberman
usually are affected at a young age.805 Bilateral atrophy of the
 pinschers and D-penicillamine in humans. 574.807-8l0These dis-
masticatory muscles also can be caused by cachexia and pro-
orders have also been described as idiopathic in origin.74,8ll
longed exposure to excessive corticosteroids.804,805,824.825
Clinical Signs. In the acute stages of masticatory muscle
develop polymyositis.8l3 Adult animals are usually affected,
although one report described two 7-month-old German
and painful. The jaw movements may be restricted, termed
wirehaired pointer littermates as being affected.814
trismus. In the chronic phase, marked masticatory muscle atro-
Clinical Signs. Common clinical signs include generalized
phy is seen, and trismus often is present [Figure 7-2l). The
weakness, stiff and stilted gait, generalized and progressive
muscle atrophy is usually, but not always, symmetric.
muscle atrophy, regurgitation from megaesophagus, dys-
 Diagnosis. Diagnosis of masticatory muscle myositis is
phonia, and pharyngeal weakness. Muscle pain or myalgia is
 based on clinical signs and diagnostic testing The gold stan-
not a prominent clinical feature.805 Dogs with polymyositis
dard is histopathologic confrmation of inflammation, atrophy
may be lethargic, pyrexic, and anorexic. Many of these signs
fibrosis, and necrosis involving the muscles of mastication.820
mimic those of chronic polyneuritis or other neuromuscular
 Testing for the presence of circulating antibodies against type
[e.g., myasthenia gravis) disorders. Episodes that are acute
2M myofbers is a noninvasive and sensitive confirmatory
and painful must be differentiated from meningitis and skel-
    a     
etal diseases. The clinical course can be acute or insidious or
 chronic, progressive, and followed by periods of spontaneous
disease to the masticatory muscle group. Imaging with MRI
remission.
 or CT also may assist with diagnosis of canine inflammatory
202
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 7-22 A 3-month-old mixed-breed puppy with extensor
rigidity of pelvic limbs and presumptively diagnosed with proto-
Figure 7-21 A 5-year-old German shorthair pointer with chronic
zoal myositis.
masticatory muscle myositis. Note severe loss of muscle mass of
temporalis and masseter muscles. Examiner was unable to open
mouth owing to trismus from secondary muscle fbrosis.
A combination of clinical signs, serologic or PCR testing for
infectious agents, and immunophenotyping on muscle tissue
are required to identify a specific infectious etiology.805 Defin-
itive diagnosis is made by identification of the organism in a
muscle myositis and polymyositis.805
muscle biopsy. Serologic and PCR testing for infectious disease
Treatment. MMM is treated by immunosuppressive doses
is part of the minimum database in any dog with generalized
 of corticosteroids for 3 to 4 weeks, and then the dosage is
myositis.805
gradually tapered to every other day at the lowest dose until
Protozoal Infection. Protozoal infections are common
remission of clinical signs. Prognosis is good if the disease is
causes of infectious myositis, often without systemic signs of
 treated aggressively in its early stage.819 In chronic cases, other
disease. The distribution in muscle is sporadic and multifocal
with variation in severity of myopathic signs. Infection by N
Extraocular Myositis. Myositis restricted to the extraocu-
 so Ansn pue  i u uoo a st u
lar muscles has been reported in two unrelated golden retriev-
dogs younger than l year of age but also can occur in adult
the acute phase, clinical signs are of bilateral exophthalmos.
 and exhibit rigid pelvic limb extension and muscle atrophy
Fibrosis resulting in restrictive strabismus and enophthalmos
[see also Protozoal Polyradiculoneuritis and Figure 7-22). Cats
 ajo sn s rs   s
more commonly are infected with T. gondii. Myopathic signs
are unaffected. If treated during the acute phase, the disease
are more related to weakness and possible muscle pain.574
responds well to corticosteroid treatment. Surgery may cor-
Along with the myopathy presence of circulating antibodies
rect the restrictive strabismus.830
to infectious agents such as T gondii or N. canimum is sug-
Dermatomyositis. Dermatomyositis   is   an inherited
 gestive of infectious myositis. The clinical response to anti-
immune-mediated disease of the skin, vasculature, and mus-
microbial therapy of some of these dogs alone supports this
contention. Eosinophils are not uncommon in the muscle
dogs.831,832 A case report also exists in the Pembroke Welsh
biopsy specimens from dogs with protozoal infection.805 Anti-
corgi 833 The dermatitis that is most severe on the ears, face,
tail, and distal extremities develops by 6 months of age. Myo-
 8 to 12 hours, or a combination of trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
sitis frequently involves the muscles of mastication and the
and pyrimethamine is recommended. Prognosis is favorable if 
distal appendicular muscles.832 Clinical signs can include
treatment is started early in the disease course.
megaesophagus and dysphagia. Skin and muscle biopsies con-
Hepatozoon canis and H. americanum have been associ-
firm the diagnosis. Histopathology of the muscle is character-
ated with infectious myositis. Clinical signs include severe
ized by perivascular to infltrative mixed-cell inflammatory
muscle pain, muscle atrophy, cachexia, fever, periosteal bone
response. Therapy includes treatment of the skin lesions, vita-
proliferations and severe neurophilic and monocytic leuko-
min E, and immunosuppression. Pentoxifylline, a methylxan-
Cytosis.837,838 Diagnosis is based on identifcation of merozo-
thine derivative that increases the microvascular flow, may also
ites in muscle. PCR testing also is available. Therapy is based
be used.834 Sunlight should be avoided. The prognosis for dogs
 on halting the life cycle with combination therapy including
that are less severely affcted is good. An autosomal-dominant
trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, clindamycin, and pyrimethamine.
      
An antiprotozoal agent, decoquinate, is administered indef-
 mediated pathogenesis is suspected.832 Genetic studies have
 nitely 39 Prognosis is guarded, as relapse frequently occurs.
 established linkage to the phenotype.835
Trypanosoma cruzi usually infects the heart but can cause
Inflammatory: Infectious
tion with Leishmania spp. has been described in dogs with
Infectious Myositis. Clinical signs often are nonspecific and
may include weaknes, muscle atrophy, and myalgia. Increased
Bacterial and Rickettsial Infection. Generalized infectious
serum CK and EMG abnormalities are nonspecifc findings.
 tads   pe  su s
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
203
with renal and hepatic involvement, clinical signs include
nephropathy is a common cause in dogs. Loss of antithrombin
myalgia, myoglobinuria, and fever. Clostridial myositis occurs
secondary to glomerulopathy underlies the pathogenesis. Clin-
following penetrating wounds or iatrogenic procedures44.45
 ical signs are acute in onset. Asymmetric pelvic limb pain and
Severe atrophy and limb rigidity occur. In horses, Streptococcus
paralysis are common. Femoral pulses are weak to absent. Dis-
equi has been associated with a severe and rapidly progressive
tal limb muscles are more severely affected. The limb may be
hypothermic and nail beds cyanotic. Limb muscles are painful
 characterized by vasculitis as a sequela to infection or expo-
 and frm on palpation. The diagnosis is based on clinical signs
sure to Streptococcus spp., Rhodococcus spp., and Corynebacte-
and diagnostic tests. Creatine kinase activity is extremely high.
rium spp.847 Rarely will rickettsial and Borrelia spp. infection
Blood glucose measurements taken from the affected limb are
in dogs cause myositis.805
in unaffected limbs. Supportive care with vasodilators, fluid
Trauma
therapies, and thrombolytic drugs may assist with recovery
 Compartment Myopathy
Anticoagulant therapy is used chronically. Recurrences are not
Postanesthetic Myopathy. Heavy and larger animals have pain
uncommon.
and swelling of groups of muscles and in some cases a com-
 pressive neuropathy after prolonged anesthesia.2l0 The condi-
Chronic Progressive Myopathies
tion is caused, at least in part, by a compartment syndrome
Degenerative
of affected muscles. Prolonged recumbency causes increased
Muscular Dystrophies. The muscular dystrophies are inher-
pressure in the muscle, with subsequent ischemia and necrosis.
ited primary degenerative myopathies (Table 7-11) char-
Treatment includes supporting the animal in a sling, adminis-
acterized by progressive degeneration of skeletal muscle.
tering IV fluids and electrolytes, and providing analgesics for
These are a heterogeneous group of hereditary degenerative
pain relief Massage and passive manipulation of the limbs help
myopathies that are well described in humans, dogs, and
to increase blood flow and reduce the risk of decubital ulcers.
The prognosis is good if the horse is standing. Recumbent ani-
known as Duchenne muscular dystrophy and has wide prev-
mals may develop severe muscle atrophy. Preventative mea-
alence in young boys. Genetic mutations coding for the
sures include careful padding, elevation of the uppermost limb,
dystrophin protein or associated proteins lead to abnormal
and avoidance of hypotension during anesthesia.
formation of the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex which
Limber Tail. This condition is known among people with
lies in the sarcolemmal muscle membrane. Dystrophin
hunting dogs as limp tail, cold tail, and rudder tail. Breeds
is closely associated with other transmembrane proteins,
primarily affected are English pointers and Labrador retriev-
an external protein known as laminin-αz, sarcoglycan, and
ers but also other hunting breeds.848 Typically, dogs acutely
 an s  na  e a
manifest a flaccid tail. The tail is held out horizontally from
common cause of human, canine, and feline muscular dys-
base and then hangs down. Dogs show recovery within a few
trophies.80l Dystrophin defciencies are X-linked, so males
 days to weeks. Major predisposing factors are prolonged cage
manifest clinical signs. However, variations of phenotypic
 transport, changes in climate, and overexertion.849 Treatment
expression occurs among female carriers through a process
usuall consists of rest. The muscle damage is located to spe-
called lyonization, in which the mutant or normal X chromo-
cific muscle groups within the tail, suggestive of compartment
some is inactivated.852-854
syndrome.850
Dystrophin-associated muscular dystrophy of dogs have
Hbrotic Myopathy. Fibrotic myopathy has been docu-
been reported in golden retrievers (Figure 7-23)55857 Irish
mented most frequently in the German shepherd dog, espe-
terriers,858 Samoyeds,859 rottweilers,860 the Belgian Groenen-
daeler shepherd,86l miniature schnauzer, 862Alaskan mala-
 gracilis and semimembranosus/tendinosus muscles are usually
mute,863 wire-haired fox terrier,80l German shorthaired
involved. A tight band is palpated within these muscle groups.
Affected dogs have a distinct lameness detected on gait. One
nese spitz dog,866 Brittany spaniel,867 Labrador retriever,868
 or both pelvic limbs may be affected. The gait is character-
ized by a shortened stride with internal rotation of the foot,
X-linked dystrophin deficient muscular dystrophy has also
external rotation of the hock, and internal rotation of the stifle
been reported in domestic cats.871-873 Dystrophin defciency in
 during the swing phase of the stride. History reveals an acute
dogs and cats is usually slowly progressive, causing generalized
 or insidious onset of lameness. The underlying cause remains
weakness and cardiomyopathy. Pathologic changes of dystro-
unknown, but muscle strain is suspected. Surgical treatments
phic muscle include variation in size of myofibers, combina-
that have been tried include excision of the gracilis muscle and
tion of degenerating and regenerating myofibers, fbrosis, and
semitendinosus tenectomy or tenotomy. Results have been
in some cases calcium deposits. Immunohistochemistry using
disappointing, with temporary relief and recurrence of lame-
antibodies against the muscle membrane proteins will deter-
ness within weeks to months.85t
mine if dystrophin or other dystrophy-associated proteins are
absent or reduced.
Toxic
X-linked Canine Dystrophinopathy. This form of mus-
 Drug and Toxins. Acute onset of necrotizing myopathy may
cular dystrophy is similar to Duchenne muscular dystrophy
be a result of exposure to drugs or toxins [see also Chapter
 a   isaq q   s 
15). These agents exert direct or indirect effects through a
retriever8s6.874 The membrane-associated muscle protein,
variety of mechanisms that include altered metabolism, insta-
dystrophin, is decreased or absent in affected dogs (Figure
 bility of the muscle membrane, secondary hypokalemia, over-
7-24) and humans. The myopathic phenotype is common in
exertion, and ischemia.578 Often severe rhabdomyolysis and
male dogs. Phenotypic variations occur among female car-
myoglobinuria may result from exposure to these toxins.
riers. Genetic mutations have been described in the golden
retriever, 875 rottweiler860 and German shorthaired pointer.864
Vascular
Female carriers of dystrophin mutations show little overt clini-
Ischemic Neuromyopathy. Ischemic neuromyopathy is often
cal evidence of the disease; however, the CK levels are often
secondary to thrombosis ofthe aorta or iliac arteries and occurs
elevated. Still, carriers can manifest variations in histopatho-
more frequently in cats with cardiomyopathy. Protein-losing
logic and expression of dystrophin.852
TABLE 7-11
Breed-Associated Inherited and Degenerative Myopathies and Junctionopathies of Domestic Animals
Inheritance Pattern 
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
[Mutation)
Clinical Features
Predominant Pathology
Reference
PARTI
Muscular Dystrophies
X-linked canine dystrophinopathy
Birth to few
Xlinked (dystrophin 
Pelvic limb stiffness progressive to tet-
Dystrophic changes—vari-
679-697
二
(golden retriever, Irish terrier,
weeks; some
 gene: golden retriever,
raparesis, dysphagia, tongue hyper-
ability of myofiber size,
Samoyed, rottweiler, Belgian
bter onset
rottweiler German
 trophy, neck flexion:; spinal reflexes
degenerating and regen-
Groenendaeler shepherds, miniature
shorthaired pointer!:
eventually become hyporeflexic,
erating fibers, endomysial 
ical
schnauzer, Alaskan Malamute, rat 
some carriers may
muscle atrophy, pseudohypertrophy.
fibrosis: some show
3
terrier, wired-haired fox terrier.
 manifest clinical signs-
trismus, respiratory compromise:
calcium deposits 
German shorthaired pointer,
lyonization
cardiomyopathy: elevated CK
Pembroke Welsh corgi, Japanese 
lems:
spitz dog. Brittany spaniel, Labra-
dor retriever, Cavalier King Charles 
spaniel, Grand Basset Griffon)
igns
X-linked feline dystrophinopathy
36 mo 
X-linked
Neck and shoulder hypertrophy.
 Dystrophic changes
698-700
(DSH)
(dystrophin gene)
tongue enlargement, lingual calcifi-
 and
cation, regurgitation, cardiomyopa-
thy: hepatosplenomegaly
Alpha-dystroglycan deficiency (Devon 3-24 wk
AR (α-dystroglycan gene)
 Neck flexion, high-steppage gate: 
 Dystrophic changes 
701-703
rex, Sphynx}
dog-begging position, weakness in
scapular musculature, dysphagia
Sarcoglycanopathy (Boston terrier.
7-11 mo
AR
Failure to thrive, lethargic, exercise
 Dystrophic changes 
688. 704
cocker spaniel, Chihuahua
 intolerance, CK elevations
Laminin-a.z deficiency (Brittany 
C-young:
AR?
 Paraparesis to rigid tetraparesis; CK
Dystrophic changes:
705-707
springer spaniel mix; DSH, Siamese.
F- 2.5 mo
elevations
demyelination
Maine coon!
Ovine muscular dystrophy (Merino
3 wk-6 mo
AR
Progressive stiffness in all limbs
 Dystrophic degeneration
708. 709
sheep—Australia)
 of type I myofibers
Nond ystrophic Myopathies
 Centronuclear myopathy (Labrador
6 wk-7 mo
AR (PTPLA gene)
Stilted, bunny-hopping gait; atrophy
Variation in myofiber size,
710-714
retriever myopathy. type Il fiber
in proximal limb and temporalis
group atrophy: fiber angu-
deficiency!
muscles; neck flexion; absence of 
lation: type Il myofibers 
 myotatic reflexes: CK mild elevation
 involved; centralized 
nuclei
Bouvier des Flandres dysphagia-
2 yr
Unknown
Dysphagia involving pharyngeal, laryn-
 Dystrophic changes in pha-
715. 716
associated myopathy
geal, and esophageal muscles
ryngeal muscles
Nemaline rod myopathy(C-border
C-10 mo-vary
Unknown
Progressive tetraparesis; muscle atro-
 Myofiber size variation,
717-720
collie, vary: F-DSH: B-Braunvieh x
F-6-18 mo
phy: decreased myotatic reflexes;
centralization of nuclei,
American Brown Swiss)
B-2 wk
increased CK
nemaline rods
Distal myopathy of rottweilers
6wk
Unknown
Distal appendicular muscle weakness,
Myofiber atrophy, necrosis,
721
 plantigrade and palmigrade stance.
fatty deposits
hock flexion; mild increase CK
Inherited myopathy of Great Danes
6 mo
Unknown
Progressive muscle wasting. exercise
Dark-staining areas within
722
 intolerance, tremors, excitement-
myofibers 
 induced collapse; CK elevation
Glycogen Storage Diseases (GsDs)
GSD type I(Pompe's disease; Swed-
3-6 mo
AR
 Progressive weakness, regurgitation,
 PAS-positive deposits in
723-728
 ish Lapland dog: beef shorthorn,
dysphonia
muscle; deficiency of 
Brahman: Corriedale sheep!
alpha-glucosidase activity
GSD type ll(Cori's disease; Akita,
2mo
AR (AGL gene)
 Episodic muscular weakness, lethargy.
 PAS-positive deposits in
729-731
 German shepherd dog, curly-coated 
 exercise intolerance
muscle; deficiency in
retriever)
 the glycogen branching
enzyme
GSD type IV(Andersen's disease:
F-4 mo
AR (GBE1 gene)
Muscle tremors, weakness, contrac-
PAS-positive deposits in
732-736
Norwegian forest cat; quarter and
 E-neonatal
ture: progressive tetraparesis; cer-
muscle: glycogen branch-
paint horse)
ebellar signs; seizures; CK elevation 
 ing enzyme deficiency
GSD type V(McArdle's disease:
Young
AR (myophosphorylase
Exercise intolerance, rhabdomyolysis,
PAS-positive deposits in
737-740
Charolais}
gene}
CK elevation
muscle; myophosphory-
lase deficiency
HAPTER
GSD type Vll (Tarui's disease)
8mo
AR (PFK gene)
Episodic progressive myopathy: CK
 PAS-positive deposits in
741-743
(English springer spaniel, American
elevated
muscle: phosphofructoki-
cocker spaniell
nase deficiency
Tetrapar
Other Metabolic Myopathies
Polysaccharide storage myopathy
5-8 yr
AD (GYS1 gene)
Muscle stiffness, fasciculation, weak-
PAS-positive deposits ±
744-748
(quarter horse, draft horses——Belgian
ness; sweating: reluctance to move:
amylase resistance: gly-
Percheron, warmbloods—Arabians.
rhabdomyolysis; CK elevation
cogen synthase deficiency
iresis,
Morgan, Tennessee Walking
Mtochondrial myopathy(Old English
<1 yr
AR (cytochrome oxidase
Episodic weakness, exercise intoler-
Histochemical evidence of 
749-755
He
sheepdog, Jack Russell terrier, Sus-
Cgene)
 ance, cramping, myalgia, muscle 
"ragged red" fibers, myo-
mi
sex spaniel, Clumber spaniel, German
 atrophy, CK and lactate elevation
 fiber necrosis; pyruvate
iparesi
shepherd dog: Arabian horse!
 dehydrogenase deficiency
Lipid storage myopathy (English
<1 yr
AR
 Episodic weakness, exercise intoler-
Lipid accumulations,
756.757
pointer, cocker spaniel!
ance, cramping, myalgia, muscle
"ragged red" fibers 
atrophy. CK and lactate elevation 
and
Pietrain creeper syndrome
312 wk
AR
 Muscle weakness progressing to
 Atrophy of type I myofibers 
758.759
recumbency; crouched posture with
 in proximal muscles
 Ataxia
 creeping-type gait on flexed limbs
Continueo
忆
TABLE 7-11
Breed-Associated Inherited and Degenerative Myopathies and Junctionopathies of Domestic Animals—cont'd
Inheritance Pattern 
Disease (Breeds)
Age of Onset
(Mutation)
Clinical Features
Predominant Pathology
Reference
PARTI
Myotonic Myopathies
二
Myotonia congenita (Ca-miniature
Birth
Ca-AR (miniature schnau-
Signs begin soon after animals
Myofiber hypertrophy.
760-773
schnauzer, chow chow, Staffordshire
zer, chow chow,
become ambulatory: muscle stiff-
centrally located nuclei,
Staffordshire terrier.
ness, hypertrophy: bunny-hopping
terrier, Australian cattle dog. cocker 
 increased sarcolemmal
ical
spaniel, west Highland white terrier.
 Australian cattle dogl:
 gait, percussion myotonia, regurgi-
 nuclei, myofiber degen-
Great Dane, Jack Russell terrier:
unknown: C-AD or AR
tation, stridor; decreased range of
eration
Prol
F-Siamese, DSH, DLH: E-horse:
(mutation in chloride
motion in jaw
82-84
O-Shropshire; caprine
 channel gene [gCCi-1].,
lems:
 miniature schnauzer, 
 Australian cattle dog:
goat!
igns
O-AR
Myotonic dystrophy (Ca-boxer.
Adult
Unknown 
Muscle hypertrophy and atrophy, stiff
Myofiber size variation, cen-
774-776
 and
 Rhodesian ridgeback; E-foal
gait, percussion myotonia, excessive
 tralization of nuclei, atro-
 salivation: CK elevations 
phy of type ll myofibers:
loss of type I myofibers
Myotonic myopathy in horses (quar-
Birth or first mo
Unknown
Stiffness, hypertrophied and atrophic
 Myofiber size variation
776-778
ter horse, thoroughbred, standard-
muscles: percussion myotonia
bred, Swedish halfbred, Appaloosa,
Arabian, Welsh pony)
Episodic Myopathies
Episodic induced collapse in Labra
7 mo-2 yr
AR (dynamin 1 [DN/M1]
During exercise, dogs hyperventilate,
No abnormalities
779-781
dor retrievers
gene}
develop ataxia, collapse; loss of
Synaptic vesicle abnormality
 patellar reflex
in CNS
Malignant hyperthermia syndrome
Any age
P. C-AR
 Anesthesia, stress-induced rhabdomy-
Myonecrosis
777. 782-786
(dogs, quarter horse, P-Pietrain,
 E-AD (Ryanodine receptor
olysis
 Poland China, Landrace!
[RYR1] gene]
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Adult to 3 yr
E-AD (skeletal muscle
Muscle fasciculation, tremors, recum-
Myonecrosis
787-792
(HyPP)
sodium channel
bency, pharyngeal and laryngeal
(E-quarter horse, American paint, Appa-
[SCN4A] gene}
 dysfunction
bosa, cross-bred; Ca-pit bull!
Congenital myasthenia gravis (Ca
Birth
AR-Jack Russell, smooth
 Episodic exercise intolerance, mega-
 No abnomalities; absence
793-798
 English springer spaniels, dachshund,
fox terrier
esophagus
of acetylcholine receptors
 Jack Russell terrier, smooth fox ter-
rier: F-DSH}
Congenital myasthenia syndrome
Birth
AR {B-epsilon subunit 
 Progressive weakness and recum-
No abnormalities
799. 800
(Ca-Gammel Dansk Honsehund; 
acetylcholine receptor
bency: episodic exercise intolerance
B-Red Brahman!
bovCHRNE gene!
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
207
There is variation in disease severity even with the same
Genetic testing in golden retrievers confrms the disease875
mutation; some pups die near birth, while in others, the dis-
and may be used to identify carriers.878 Thoracic radiography
 ease slowly progresses over months to years. Affected pups are
will reveal asymmetry and undulation of the diaphragm and
weak at birth and may die before a diagnosis is made. Stilted
gastroesophageal hiatal hernia.879 Myocardial involvement is
gait, trismus, muscle atrophy, stunted growth, and drooling
more severe in the golden retrievers compared to other breeds,
may be seen as early as 6 weeks of age. Affected dogs have
and heart failure may occur in older dogs.80 Serum muscle
flexion of the neck. Spinal reflexes, particularly the patellar
 enzymes often are dramatically elevated in affected animals as
reflex, are decreased to absent. Muscle atrophy, kyphosis, and
a result of leakage through the defective muscle membrane;
debilitating muscle contractures subsequently develop (Figure
Aep I se Aea se uaas are ln ooooz ue aeara saniea 
-ae si saosnu jo snora suos jo Audonadauopnasd (
 of age. Complex repetitive discharges are noted on EMG. His-
uted to deposition of adipose and connective tissues, whereas
topathologic changes include myofber necrosis and phagocy-
true hypertrophy occurs in the cranial sartorius muscle.876
tosis, variation in myofiber size, and myofber mineralization.
 Muscles selectively involved include the tongue, masticatory.
Colonies of muscular dystrophy-affected golden retrievers
 and truncal muscles. Muscle hypertrophy causes enlargement
 and cats have been established. Molecular genetic therapies
 ofthe base of the tongue (see Figure 7-25). Trismus may occur
 are currently being studied.
and is caused by hypertrophy of the pharyngeal muscles and
X-Linked Feline Muscular Dystrophy. Male cats with
megaesophagus. Respiratory function also is compromised and
X-linked dystrophin deficiency are affected between 3 and
contributes to exercise intolerance. Rhabdomyolysis can occur
6 months of age.87l-873 Physical features of cats with mus-
on rare occasions.870.877 Signs often stabilize to some extent
cular dystrophy are shoulder and neck muscle hypertrophy.
after 6 months of age in golden retrievers but ultimately prog-
enlargement of the tongue, and interestingly, lingual calcif-
        s
cation. Regurgitation is a common clinical sign secondary to
dysfunction.
esophageal stenosis caused by hypertrophy of the diaphragm
a bunny-hopping stride and develop exercise intolerance.
 Rhabdomyolysis has been associated with general anesthesia
in these cats,882 Gait evaluation often reveals a stiff gait with
adduction of the hocks, bunny hopping, and inability to jump.
Cats may also have hepato- and splenomegaly and dilated car-
are similar to those described in dystrophic dogs. Affected cats
can live with this disease, but stress and inhalant anesthesia
should be avoided. A genetic mutation has been characterized
in the dystrophin gene.84
α-Dystroglycan Deficiency (Spasticity). Another muscular
dystrophy in cats has been recognized in the Devon rex885
and Sphynx886 breeds, which manifest a slowly progressive
myopathy. Age of onset is variable from 3 to 24 weeks of age.
The inheritance pattern in the Devon rex is autosomal reces-
sive.887 Flexion of the neck is the most consistent clinical sign.
These cats show a high-stepping gait of the thoracic limb and
Figure 7-23 Dog with golden retriever muscular dystrophy at
weakness of the scapular musculature. Cats often show exer-
approximately 18 months of age. Note characteristic kyphosis,
tion with exercise and will sit in a "dog begging" position.
plantigrade stance, and temporalis muscle atrophy. (From Sharp
Cats have difficulty swallowing and prehending food, creating
NJH, Kornegay JN, Lane SB: The muscular dystrophies, Semin Vet
airway obstruction and choking. The CK levels are not ele-
Med Surg [Small Anim] 4:133-140, 1989.]
vated. Muscle biopsy show characteristic findings of muscular
Hgure 7-24 Characteristic subsarcolemmal staining patterm of dystrophin in a normal dog (A)
amd relative absence of staining in a littermate affected with golden retriever muscular dystrophy
(B). Several myofibers show focal peripheral staining in B. Marked variation in myofiber size is also
noted in affected dog. Bar = 75 microns in A and 38 microns in B. Immunofluorescence: C-terminal
JD, editors: Current veterinary therapy XI, Philadelphia, 1992, Saunders.]
208
PARTHIT
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
neck. Disease progression can vary in flocks. The CK levels are
within normal limits. The dystrophic degeneration is restricted
to the oxidative type I myofibers.891. 892
Other Nondystrophic Breed-Specific Myopathies
Centronuclear Myopathy (Labrador Retriever Myopathy,
Type ll Fiber Deficiency, Autosomal Recessive Muscular
r re u Ae p s o
ers has been confrmed as centronuclear myopathy.893 Signs
develop between 6 weeks and 7 months of age and are gener-
ally much less severe than those in the X-linked dystrophy.
gait. These dog often show adduction of the hock and car-
pal joints. Muscle atrophy predominates in the proximal limb
muscles and involves the temporalis muscles. Affected dogs
have neck flexion. The myotatic or tendon reflexes, particu-
larly the patellar, are depressed or absent. Signs generally
stabilize by 6 to 12 months of age. Some dogs develop mega
esophagus. The CK levels are usually only slightly elevated.
 Pathologic changes include variation in fiber size, myofiber
 group atrophy, and angular fibers. Central nuclei only become
evident in muscle around 2 to 3 years of age. Type II myof-
m s s u  ad aq u sr
ness often worsens with stress, exercise, and in cold weather;
L-carnitine supplementation (50 mg/kg every 12 hours) may
a  g aq su   sis r a
test is available.893
Bouvier des Flandres Myopathy. Degeneration of the
C
pharyngeal, laryngeal, and esophageal muscles, with normal
Figure 7-25 A 10-month-old male American Staffordshire ter-
rier with muscular dystrophy and showing clinical signs of pro-
Regurgitation occurs beginning around 2 years of age. Muscle
gressively stiff gait and weakness. Dog was having diffculty
biopsy revealed dystrophic changes.899
swallowing, and jaw had trismus. Muscle biopsy revealed histo-
Nemaline Rod Myopathy. This disorder has been reported
pathology consistent with muscular dystrophy. A, Dog in lateral
in young cats, dogs, and calves. Cats developed weakness at
recumbency, demonstrating muscle rigidity. B, Oral examination
6 to 18 months of age.900 Cats were reluctant to move and
revealed hypertrophy of tongue. C, Lateral thoracic radiography
had hypermetria with jerky movements. The skin twitched
demonstrates overinflation and undulating of diaphragm caused
vigorously when two of the cats were examined. Patellar
by muscle hypertrophy.
reflexes were depressed. Flexor reflexes and sensory evalu-
ation were normal. The scapular and gluteal muscle groups
were atrophied. The CK levels were increased, but the EMG
dystrophy. The muscular dystrophy is caused by a deficiency
was normal. Muscle biopsy showed myofber size variation,
in α-dystroglycan protein.886
centralization of nuclei, and fbers contained nemaline rods.
Sarcoglycanopathy. The protein sarcoglycan spans the
Affected cats eventually need to be euthanized. A nemaline
sarcolemmal membrane while bridging dystrophin and the
A   s r  s  
dystroglycan complex. Sarcoglycan deficiencies have been
identified in the Boston terrier,877 cocker spaniel, and Chihua-
Nemaline rods also can be a pathologic finding in various other
hua.80t Clinical signs include failure to thrive, lethargy, and
neuromuscular diseases.506,902
exercise intolerance. The CK levels are elevated. Electromy-
 Distal Myopathy of Rottweilers. At time of ambulation,
ography shows spontaneous activity in various muscle groups.
affected dogs have plantigrade and palmigrade stance, hock
Some dog have abnormalities on echocardiography. Muscle
hyperflexion, and splayed forepaw digits.903 Histopathologic
histopathology is typical for muscular dystrophy, and immu-
changes of muscle include myofiber atrophy and necrosis,
nohistochemistry shows reduction to absence in the various
endomysial fbrosis, and fatty deposits. Plasma and muscle car-
sarcoglycan proteins.
nitine levels are decreased.
Laminin az Deficiency. Laminin-αz is a glycoprotein asso-
 Inherited Myopathy of Great Danes (Previously Known as
ciated with the basal lamina of skeletal muscle and Schwann
Central Core Myopathy). Disease onset is 6 months of age.
cells. This muscular dystrophy has been associated with
Clinical signs include progressive weakness, exercise intoler-
 ance, muscle atrophy, and tremor.904 Hyporefexia may be
 mixed breeda52 and in domestic shorthair, Siamese, and Maine
observed. Other supportive finds of myopathy include ele-
coon cats 59.88 In cats, pelvic limb weaknesstarted at 2.5
vated CK levels and abnormalities on EMG. Muscle biopsy
months of age. Eventually, contracture of the extensor muscles
will reveal presence of dark-staining centrally located cores.
develop. The CK levels are increased, and dystrophic changes
Many dogs are euthanized by l year of age.
 are present in muscle biopsies of affected cats. Immunohisto-
chemical stains revealed absence of laminin αy. The prognosis
Metabolic Myopathy
is poor.
The metabolie myopathies include diseases in which either
Muscular Dystrophy in Merino Sheep. This is an auto-
a primary biochemical defect involving skeletal muscle, or a
somal recessive inherited myopathy of Merino sheep in Aus-
 generalized metabolic or endocrine disorder, causes muscle
tralia.889,850 Clinical signs develop between 3 weeks and 6
dysfunction. Major endocrine myopathies are discussed later
months as progressive stiffness in gait involving all limbs and
in this chapter.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
209
Disorders of Glycogen Metabolism. Given the meta-
muscle weakness. However, CK levels may be elevated. Older
bolic demands necessary for normal function, muscle may be
dogs may develop an episodic progresve myopathy 925
predominantly affected in some of the storage disorders. The
A genetic test is available to identify PFK-deficient dogs and
glycogen storage myopathies result from deficiencies of spe-
carriers.
cific enzymes involved in glycogen formation or metabolism.
Polysaccharide Storage Myopathy
Abnormal glycogen accumulates intracellularly, and skeletal
Pathophysiology. Polysaccharide storage myopathy (PSSM),
musle often is affected. Clinical signs of muscle weakness
also described as "Monday morning disease" or "azoturia,” was
predominate as exercise intolerance, tremor, and collapse.
frst discovered in quarter horses926 but has since been rec-
 Other neurologic signs may manifest as cerebellar ataxia and
 ognized in draft horses (Belgian and Percheron), warmbloods,
 seizures. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, histopathology.
and other breeds such as Arabians, Morgans, and Tennessee
enzymatic testing, and genetic testing is available for some dis-
-  ( 1 I   ' 
orders. Creatine kinase levels are often elevated. Findings of
oughbreds and highest [86%) in the draft-related horses.928
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive deposits in muscle indi-
Although the age at onset is variable, mean age is 5 years in
cate accumulation of glycogen or polysaccharide material.
 quarter horses and 8 years in the draft horses and warmbloods.
Several glycogen storage diseases exist in animals.
Risk factors include irregular exercise regimens, high-grain
Glycogen Storage Disease Type Il (Pompe's disease).
diets, and anesthesia. Histopathologic features in the original
This disorder is cause by a deficiency of α-glucosidase activity
study included presence of vacuoles containing PAS-positive
months of age, affected dogs had progressive weakness, yomit-
autosomal dominant mutation in the glycogen synthase l gene
ing, regurgitation, and dysphonia. Dogs are euthanized before
[GYS1) has been identified.930 However, there is a subset of
18 months of age. Beef shorthorn and Brahman calves also
horses with similar clinical signs that lack the mutation. Thus
have been affected with progressive muscle weakness within
the disease is now referred to as type I PSsSM for horses with
3 months after birth.907-509 Corriedale sheep develop ataxia
abnormal glycogen storage and the GYSl mutation and type
 and lethargy by 6 months of age and acute death within 10
2 PSSM for horses with abnormal glycogen storage and lack-
months.910
ing the GYSl mutation. Overall, the prevalence of the GYSI
Glycogen Storage Disease Type Ill (Cori's Disease). This
mutation in PSSM horses is high in the draft [87%) and quar-
is a disorder in the glycogen debranching enzyme, with an
ter [72%) horses and lower in warmbloods [18%) and other
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. Episodic muscular
breeds [24%).931
weakness was noted as early as 2 months of age in German
 Clinical Signs. The most common clinical signs in quarter
shepherd dogs and Akitas.911,912 Recently a milder form of
 horses include frm painful muscles, stiffness, fasciculations,
the disorder has been identifed in the curly-coated retriever
weakness, sweating, and reluctance to move. Muscle pain
 observed to have exercise intolerance, collapse, andlethargy,913
occurs within 20 minutes and may last for a couple of hours.
 The genetic mutation in the AGL gene has been identified in
Signs are similar in warmbloods. The disease is subelinical in
the curly-coated retriever and a DNA sequence-based carrier
many draft horses. Some horses may have severe rhabdomy-
test has been developed.913
olysis and myoglobinuria.
Glycogen Storage Diseases Type IV (Glycogen Branching
 Diagnosis. A presumptive diagnosis is based on clinical
Enzyme Deficiency [Andersen's Disease]1. In deficiencies in
signs and signalment. Criteria for definitive diagnosis of type
glycogen branching enzyme, cardiac and skeletal muscles and
1 PSSM is based on a muscle biopsy containing abnormal or
the brain are unable to store and mobilize glycogen. Abnor-
increased accumulation of PAS-positive material and pres-
mal glycogen subsequently accumulates in skeletal and cardiac
ence of the GYSl mutation. Other criteria used for diagnosis
 muscle, nerve, and the CNS. Norwegian forest cats with gly-
of PSSM are based on sensitivity to amylase on PAS staining:
cogen storage disease type IV developed clinical disease after
grade 1 (mild, amylase sensitive) and grade 2 (moderate, amy-
  srad ss e sa jo s 
lase resistant). The frequency of the GYSl mutation is higher
 sin u  sm  r
in horses with grade 2 PSSM.93t Muscle biopsy usuall is taken
 limb contracture. The inheritance pattern is autosomal reces-
from semimembranosus or semitendinosus muscle. Other
 supportive evidence for disease includes threefold elevations
 gene results in tissue deposition of an amylopectin-like sub-
in CK and AST activities after exercise. Muscle enzyme activi-
ties may be persistently elevated in the quarter horse.
and paint horses also is an autosomal recessive trait caused by
Treatment. Dietary modification and appropriate lev-
a mutation in the GBEl gene.917 Stillbirths are common. Foals 
els of exercise are crucial to management of PSSM.932 Diets
that survive are weak and develop limb contractures, cardiac
low in carbohydrates and at least 13% in fat may be the most
 abnormalities, and hypoglycemic seizures.918 Most affected
effective way to reduce muscle glycogen.933 Affected horses
foals are euthanized by 8 weeks of age.
 should be kept on pasture with little grain supplementation.
Glycogen Storage Disease Type V (McArdle's Dis-
When starting an exercise program in horses with PSSM, the
ease). Glycogen storage disease type V results from deficiency
owner should include dietary adaptation, restriction of exer-
of myophosphorylase and has been reported in Charolais
cise duration and intensity, and regular exercise that is gradu-
 calves in North America and New Zealand ,919,920 The inheri-
ally introduced and consistent while minimizing days without
tance pattern is autosomal recessive. Calves manifest with
exercise.934 In acute exacerbations, administration of dan-
exercise intolerance and recumbency. A rhabdomyolysis and
trolene may reduce the severity of rhabdomyolysis. Addition-
myoglobinuria develop with repeated attacks. A mutation has
ally, horses should be confined for no longer than 48 hours and
been found in the myophosphorylase gene, and a DNA test is 
then allowed access to free pasture.
available.921,922
Mitochondrial and Lipid Storage Myopathies
Glycogen Storage Disease Type Vll (Tarui's disease).
Pathogenesis. Another subgroup of metabolic myopathies,
Phosphofructokinase  deficiency
)())
the mitochondrial myopathies, has been reasonably well
disease type Vll; Tarui's disease) is inherited as an autoso-
characterized in humans and to a lesser degree in animals
mal recessive trait in English springer spaniels and Ameri-
Inherited enzymatic defects within the mitochondrial elec-
tron-transport [respiratory) chain generally cause dysfunction
at 8 months of age develop hemolytic anemia without overt
 in energy metabolism. Metabolism in fatty acids provides a
210
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
primary energy source for skeletal and cardiac muscle. Carni-
documented in dogs with lipid storage and mitochondrial
tine plays a key role in cellular energy metabolism as a carrier
myopathy.95l Carnitine concentrations also were reduced in
 the plasma and muscle, and affected animals had evidence of
 dria and as a buffer against organic acid accumulations. Most
 increased urinary excretion.
carnitine in the body is found in skeletal and cardiac muscle.
Treatment. A therapeutic regimen for lipid storage and
 Coenzyme Qto plays a role in energy metabolism in the inner
mitochondria as a carrier of electrons within the electron
transport chain.
dogs have shown dramatic improvements following these
Mitochondrial myopathies associated with lactic_ acide-
supplementations517; L-carnitine is neuroprotective through
mia have been reported in the Old English sheepdog 935 Jack
 its antioxidative and membrane stabilizing properties and
Russell terrier, 936 Sussex and Clumber spaniels,937.938 and in
typically administered at a dosage of 50 mg/kg PO twice daily.
a German shepherd dog.939 A pyruvate dehydrogenase def-
 Coenzyme Qio plays a role as an antioxidant and free radical
ciency has been confirmed in the Clumber and Sussex span-
scavenger. A dosage of 100 mg/day has been recommended.818
iels.938,940 The mutation has been identified in Clumber and
ue (os<] i  a i e ed u og
 Sussex spaniels in the pyruvate dehydrogenase phosphatase
lower in carbohydrates (<20%) will lead to a reduction in lac-
1 gene, and a genetic test is available.94l A mitochondrial
tate and improvement of clinical signs.
myopathy with altered cytochrome C oxidase activity and
Endocrine-Related Myopathies
reduced mitochondrial mRNA has been described in Old Eng-
Steroid-lnduced Myopathy in Dogs. Dogs with endogenous
lish sheepdoglttermates3592Mitochonrialmypathyalso
and iatrogenic Cushing's disease resulting from corticosteroid
has been reported in a 3-year-old Arabian mare having muscle
excess develop muscle atrophy and weakness825,952Afct
stiffness myalgia, sweating, and exercise intolerance.943
dogs may have other characteristic signs of hyperadrenocor-
Likely a form of mitochondrial dysfunction, lipid stor-
ticism: polyuria and polydypsia, generalized muscle atrophy.
 age myopathy has been reported in the cocker spaniel and
abdominal distension, bilaterally symmetrical alopecia,
,and
in a litter of English pointers with neurogenic muscular
weakness. Clinical signs may be protracted for years before
atrophy.944,945 Dyserythropoiesis, cardiomegaly, and polymy-
gait abnormalities become apparent; thus the muscle changes
opathy characterized by gross muscle atrophy and histologic
may be subclinical.824 Some dogs develop an associated pseu-
evidence of myofiber size variation and poorly defned inclu-
domyotonic syndrome (see Chapter 10),93 Pelvic limb stiff-
ness may be unilateral or bilateral and eventually may involve
aaq ia nou sey Auedou su jo asnes auapun au ras
e     s  
defined.
d rs     
 Clinical Signs. Dogs with mitochondrial and lipid storage
limb rigidity develops in some dogs. The CK levels can be
myopathies have onset of signs usually within the first year
elevated.952 Complex repetitive discharges that do not wax
of life. Lipid storage myopathies, however, can have an adult
and wane are typical on EMG. The exact biochemical cause
onset. Episodic weakness, exercise intolerance, and cramping
of steroid-induced myopathy is not known. Corticosteroid
are typical signs of clinical presentation. Severe cases may have
excess increases muscle protein catabolism and alters carbo-
myalgia, muscle atrophy, and myoglobinuria. The serum CK
and plasma lactate levels are elevated. Complex repetitive dis-
charges are observed on EMG.
changes include myofiber necrosis, regeneration, and increased
Diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis of mitochondrial and lipid
muscle fat and connective tissue. Nemaline rods and "ragged
 storage myopathies is diffcult and often requires microscopic
red fibers" have been found in type I fibers, suggesting
evaluation of muscle specimens along with complete bio-
chemical and molecular testing. It is important to consult with
erly collect samples. Typical histopathologic changes include
bizarre mitochondria on ultrastructural evaluation and his-
tochemical evidence of "ragged red" fbers.935,936 Intermedi-
   r   r s 
 accumulate within some myofbers. Cytochrome oxidase defi-
ciency has been identified in fibroblast cultures.942
 Lactic acidemia has been associated with lipid storage and
mitochondrial myopathies. Plasma lactate and pyruvate levels
typicaly are elevated at rest and postexercise. Lactic acid is a
byproduct of anaerobic metabolism of glucose. Thus, lactate
levels will be increased even in normal animals after strenu-
ous and prolonged exercise.947 Lactic acidemia results from a
defect in metabolism of pyruvate. Documentation oflactic aci-
 dosis with a normal lactate-to-pyruvate rate is consistent with
a defect in pyruvate dehydrogenase or in one of the enzymes
 of gluconeogenesis. Lactic acidosis in association with a high
lactate-to-pyruvate ratio is found in abnormalities within the
mitochondrial electron transport chain, pyruvate decarbox-
ylase deficiency, or the mitochondrial myopathies. Further
investigation to determine a specific metabolic abnormality
should also include evaluation of urinary organic acid quan-
Hgure 7-26 A 14-year-old FS standard poodle diagnosed with
tification by gas chromatography/mass spectroscopy, plasma
Cushing's disease and demonstrating Cushing's myopathy. Note
amino acid concentrations, and quantification of total, free,
rigid extension in both thoracic and pelvic limbs. Dog ambulated
and esterifed carnitine in plasma, urine, and muscle.98.950
with very stilted gait in all limbs. Complex repetitive discharges
Lactic acidemia and lactic and pyruvic aciduria have been
were observed on EMG.
CHAPTER 7
Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
211
mitochondrial dysfunction.824,902 The muscle weakness will
of vitamin E or selenium,210 occurs most frequently in calves,
 improve in some dogs upon withdrawal of exogenous cortico-
foals, and lambs, less frequently in pigs, and rarely in other
steroids or suppressionofendogenous corticosteroids5Dogs
large animals, dogs, and cats965-969 Vitamin E and glutathi
 e       s g
 one peroxidase function as biological antioxidants and play
steroid levels are decreased. Dogs that improve with appropri-
ate therapy may have persistent complex repetitive discharges
ponent of the enzyme glutathione peroxidase, functions to
on EMG.952
destroy peroxides and thus acts as a cell membrane protectant.
Steroid Myopathy in Horses. Horses with pituitary pars
Although selenium deficiency plays a major factor in devel-
intermedia dysfunction or equine Cushing's disease develop
opment of muscle atrophy, not all selenium-deficient animals
 a myopathy. Morgans and ponies of middle-aged and geriatric
exhibit clinical signs.968 Other risk factors include unaccli-
horses appear to be at higher risk. 954 Common clinical signs
mated exercise, inclement weather, and transport. Acute and
include hirsutism, hyperhidrosis, polydipsia, polyuria, and
chronic forms of the disease occur. The acute form in foals
musle wasting with decreased strength.954 Electromyography
is characterized by sudden death that occurs during exertion
and CK levels are usually within normal limits.955 A nonin-
and is due to cardiac muscle degeneration. Subacute disease
flammatory myopathy with atrophy of type II myofibers and
in foals causes muscular weakness and dysphagia. Foals may
myofiber size variation.955
have pain around the base of the tail and in tissues involving
Hypothyroid Myopathy. Weakness and muscle degenera
the area beneath the mane, tongue, and submandibular region.
tion have been described in hypothyroid dogs.504,607 These
The chronic form is marked by a gradual onset of tetrapare-
 changes are less pronounced than those of the neuropathy
sis in calves 2 weeks of age or older. Lambs develop a stiff
 previously described. Clinical signs suggestive of hypothyroid
gait and tetraparesis at 10 days to Z months of age. Muscles
myopathy include weakness, stiffness, myalgia, and muscle
may be swollen and painful. Other diseases linked to selenium 
wasting. The CK levels may or may not be elevated. Histopa-
 deficiency include mulberry heart disease in piglets, recurrent
thology reveals atrophy of type II myofibers.604.606,607 Other
exertional rhabdomyolysis, and retained placenta in cattle. The
 myopathic changes include predominance of type I myofibers
diagnosis is based on clinical signs, histologic examination of
with chronicity, presence of nemaline rod inclusions, and accu-
biopsy samples from affected muscles, quantitation of gluta-
thione peroxidase levels, and response to therapy.968 The CK
and muscle histopathologic changes have been described as
levels are markedly elevated. Foals can have life-threatening
being subclinical.506.507 Myopathic changes are indicative of
electrolyte abnormalities.970 On necropsy, gross examination
altered energy metabolism and depletion of skeletal muscle
of skeletal muscle degeneration is characterized by symmetric
carnitine concentrations.506 Prognosis for resolution of the
grayish or white streaks that represent necrosis and edema.
myopathic signs of hypothyroidism is excellent with levothy-
Histopathology reveals myonecrosis and regeneration, fbro-
roxine supplementation.
sis, and calcification. Diets should be corrected if selenium
 Foals that are hypothyroid have various neonatal muscu-
deficiencies are found. Supplementation with selenium and
loskeletal abnormalities that include ruptured tendons, angu-
vitamin E is beneficial if the signs are severe. In foals, supple-
lar limb deformities, forelimb contractures, and mandibular
 mentation of the food ration during gestation is paramount to
prognathism.956
Hyperthyroid Myopathy. Hyperthyroidism in cats is asso-
 in horses with steatitis and myodegeneration.968.,971
ciated with muscle weakness in about 15% of cases.957,958
 These cats may show an inability to jump, flexion of the
Episodic Myopathies
neck, and exercise-induced fatigue. Hyperthyroid cats that are
 Exercised-induced weakness often is characteristic of myo-
hypokalemia can manifest severe muscle weakness.
pathic disease.
Splayleg in Piglets. Splayleg, also known as spreadleg, is a
weakness of the adductor muscle in newborn pigs and occurs
Metabolic
jo asne uaun u esad eu u uan ru
Exercise Intolerance and Collapse in Labrador Retrievers.
corticosteroid excess from stress and hormonal imbalance in
This syndrome has been seen with increasing frequency in
Apnis raoue raaamo ogguedou e u ansar Aeu mos a
young Labrador retrievers, especially excitable, hard-driving
determined a delay in spinal cord myelination and found no
evidence of a myopathy.96l Nutritional deficiencies of methi-
between 7 months and 2 years of age. There is no sex or coat
onine and choline are suspected, since supplementation of
color predilection. After 5 to 15 minutes of strenuous exercise,
these amino acids reduces the disease incidence.96l
 dogs hyperventilate, become weak, ataxic, and then collapse.
Pietrain Creeper Syndrome. This autosomal recessive
Prior to exercise, the patellar reflex is normal. However, loss
inherited trait occurs in Pietrain pigs that are susceptible
of the patellar reflex during an episode of exercise-induced
to stress.962,963 Muscular weakness is noted at 3 weeks and
 gait abnormalities or collapse is a consistent finding. Body tem-
peratures are usually severely elevated during episodes but are
crouched posture and a creeping-type gait using flexed limbs.
normal at rest. Inability to regulate body temperature does not
Atrophy of type I myofibers is prominent in proximal muscles.
initiate the episodes.947 At rest, no differences in phenotype
No treatment exists.
(physical or neurologic examination findings) or biochemi-
Myotonic Myopathies. Contraction of muscle that per-
cal testing are evident between affected and normal Labra-
sists after the cessation of voluntary effort or stimulation is
dor retrievers.973 However, following 10 minutes of exercise,
called myotonia (if generalized) or cramp (if localized). Myo-
 several affected dogs showed a significantly decreased Pacoz
tonia results from altered muscle membrane excitability from
and increased heart rate, Paoz, and glucose compared to nor-
inherited abnormalities of ion conductance and acquired
mal dogs.973 Muscle biopsy on histopathology and pre- and
disorders associated with metabolic and toxin-induced dis-
 postexercise lactate and pyruvate concentrations are within
eases.964 Myotonic myopathies are discussed in Chapter 10.
normal limits.
 The diagnosis of exercise intolerance and collapse is made
Nutritional
by ruling out other muscle disorders and cardiovascular dis-
White Muscle Disease. White muscle disease, a degenera-
pdsar saop iso anq sean syoads ou si araui sia
tive myopathy of many species caused by dietary deficiency
well to avoiding strenuous exercise and excitement. The
212
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
exercised-induced collapse has a familial pattern consistent
while under anesthesia.979 Both affected horses were homo-
zygous for the mutation; the prevalence of the mutation is less
mutation was discovered, revealing a mutation in the dynamin
than 1% in the quarter horse population.979 The syndrome of
1 (DNMI) gene encoding for a protein involved in neurotrans-
mission and synaptic vesicle endocytosis.974 Understanding of
odic paralysis and exertional rhabdomyolysis.
the mutation explains the lack of abnormalities on muscle
Dogs. Unlike affected pigs, affected dogs may not dis-
biopsy and that there is a reasonable likelihood for a CNS ori-
play lactic acidosis and extensor rigidity. The most consistent
gin causing the collapse.
sign of malignant hyperthermia in dogs is a slow increase in
 Malignant Hyperthermia Syndrome. Malignant hyper-
Pacoz and body temperature. Elevations in Pacoz may pre-
thermia is not a single disease but a clinical syndrome char-
cede elevations in body temperature. There is no specific
acterized by increases in Paco, elevated body temperature,
cardiac arrhythmias, hyperkalemia, and muscle necrosis.577
calcium-release channel gene (RYR1) has been identifed.980
'sao u Aiarer pue said u Auou arou uaas st aseasp s
The inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant, and a single
cats, or horses. A hypersensitive calcium-release mechanism
copy of the mutant RYR1 is completely penetrant.
-de siaaa unes sseones jo saat u ssnes ie
Recurrent Exertional Rhabdomyolysis. This disorder has
ently initiates the increased muscle activity and hyperther-
 been recognized in racing greyhounds and horses and known
mia.677 Muscle contraction is unopposed, leading to release
as Monday morning disease, tying up, and paralytic myoglobin-
of cations and enzymes into the circulation, increased heat
uria. A similar syndrome in exotic animals is called capture
production, and acidosis. Two types of calcium channels exist
syndrome. The specific cause is unknown. Studies suggest that
for coupling excitation and contraction of muscles. Depo-
the sustained muscle contraction is caused by abnormal regu-
larization frst activates a voltage-gated channel and changes
lation of intracellular calcium. Myoglobinuria is often seen.
its conformation, which in turns opens a second calcium-
The muscles are painful and swollen on palpation. Serum
release channel (ryanodine receptor). Calcium is subsequently
muscle enzyme levels are elevated. Muscle atrophy may per-
released into the cytosol.
sist after recovery. The final events appear to be muscle swell-
The disorder often is subclinical but becomes clinically
ing and necrosis.
evident in anesthetized animals, characterized by elevations
Dogs. Gannon98l has categorized the clinical signs in
in carbon dioxide and body temperature. Anesthetic agents
dogs as hyperacute, acute, and subacute. Predisposing fac-
known to triger malignant hyperthermia include all the
tors include lack of physical ftness, excitement before racing.
volatile anesthetics [(e.g, halothane, isoflurane, sevofurane)
hot and humid conditions, and excessive frequency of run-
and depolarizing neuromuscular agents (e.g., succinylcho-
ning. In the more acute forms of the disease, clinical signs are
line). Dantrolene, a calcium-release channel antagonist has
 observed during the race. The most severe signs include gener-
been shown to reverse clinical signs. Treatment of malignant
alized muscle pain, tachypnea, and myoglobinuria. Death may
  a a s 
occur within 48 hours. In the subacute [milder) form of the
pue suaurar suoos aeurdodde Xderan ping A sualonuep
 disease, muscle pain is confined to the longissimus thoracicus
diuresis.677 Blood gases, CK, glucose and electrolytes should
 re s   t rg aua a iou e ue asn
race. Myoglobinuria is rarely observed in subacute exertional
fluids (O.9% NaCl), insulin, and glucose. Mortality in anesthe-
rhabdomyolysis. The hyperacute and acute forms of the dis-
tized horses, dogs, and cats is high.
ease are treated simiarly Intravenous fluids are given to treat
Pigs (Porcine Stress Syndrome). The trait is apparently
or prevent hypovolemic shock and to aid in renal excretion
of myoglobin. Sodium bicarbonate is added to the fluid to
 Clinical signs are exhibited after stressors such as anesthesia,
combat muscle acidosis and to help prevent precipitation of
 administration of depolarizing muscle relaxants, hot weather,
myoglobin in renal tubules. The patient is cautiously cooled to
 exercise, or restraint. Pigs exhibit stiffness, reluctance to move,
remove excess heat. Precautionary measures to prevent recur-
and dyspnea. Sudden death may occur. Anesthetized pigs
rence may include installation of air conditioning in kennels,
develop muscle rigidity, high body temperature, and tachy-
reduction of body temperature with cool-water baths before
racing, administration of oral bicarbonate-glucose solutions
kalemia, hypercarbia, and increased CK levels. On necropsy.
before kenneling for racing, alkalinization of the urine with
muscles are pale, soft, and liquefed. In all pigs, malignant
sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate, administration of an
hyperthermia is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. A
oral potassium supplement, and reduction in the frequency of
mutation in the calcium-release channel gene (RYRl) has
racing.981
been identified. The condition is recessive in pigs, requiring
Horses. This condition seems to be inherited as an autoso-
 mal dominant trait with variable phenotype in thoroughbred
Halothane may be used diagnostically to detect susceptible
horses82 Horses develop exertional rhabdomyolysis during
 pigs. Reducing stress and selective breeding are recommended
for prevention.
clinically manifest signs of muscle stiffness, shifting hindlimb
Horses. Malignant hyperthermia in horses is characterized
lameness, tachypnea, sweating, muscle pain in the hindquar
by tachypnea, progressive increase in Pacoz even with con-
ters, and have reluctance to move. Lactic acidosis is not associ-
trolled ventilation, and elevated body temperature. The onset 
ated with the pathogenesis. Risk factors include horses that are
 of signs is slower and occurs after long periods of anesthesia.
fed a high-grain diet, female, young, anxious, irregular exer-
cise, and have concurrent lameness.984 Presumptive diagnosis
is based on clinical signs, signalment, increased CK levels post
biopsies reveal evidence of myonecrosis. Diagnosis for malig-
exercise, and muscle biopsy. Histopathologic features include
centrally located nuclei in type ll myofbers, with variable
hyperthermia. Treatment involves preventing these episodes
amounts of necrosis and regeneration.985
by pretreatment with dantrolene before anesthesia. The prog-
 In acute cases, goals are to minimize pain and restore fluid
nosis is poor once a fulminant episode ensues. An autosomal
and electrolyte balances. Administration of dantrolene (2 to 4
dominant mutation in the RYRI gene was found in two quar-
mg/kg IV) may decrease muscle contracture and lessen myo-
ter horses that developed hyperthermia and lactic acidosis
necrosis. In severe cases, hyperkalemia should be managed
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
213
with balanced electrolyte and fluid administration. Since
sn a ssr ue e  o si sisie o
alkalotic, bicarbonate administration is not deemed appropri-
ate. Additional support includes a few days of stall rest, with
 gradual return of exercise and hay diet. Long-term manage-
ment includes modifying the environment, amount of exer-
cise, and diet. A nutritionally balanced diet containing less
than 20% supplied by starch and at least 15% in fat, along with
adequate vitamins and minerals, are key to treating exertional
rhabdomyolysis.934
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis
Pathophysiology. This disease causes episodic muscle weak-
ness and muscle trembling in quarter horses, American paint
horses, Appaloosas, and cross-bred quarter horses. In horses,
hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HyPP) is an autosomal domi-
nant inherited disease caused by a mutation in the alpha sub-
unit ofthe skeletal muscle sodium channel, SCN4A gene.986.990
Figure 7-27 A 7-year-old MC domestic shorthair cat showing
 The lineage of affcted progeny stems from the founder sire,
flexion of neck as a clinical sign of muscular weakness. Blood
 Impressive,988 These horses are well muscled, as there is pref-
work revealed hypokalemia. Clinical signs resolved after potas-
erential selection of this trait. Homozygous animals are more
sium supplementation.
qreaddenn sira  e ar
years of age. Severity of signs is variable, and episodes can last
from minutes to hours; horses are normal between episodes.
 metabolism in muscle and blood fow during exercise become
Exercise and rest and stressful events such as transport, wean-
ing, and anesthesia may precipitate episodes.9l A similar syn-
diseases such as hyperthyroidism and renal dysfunction.995. 000
Hypokalemia itself can induce further renal dysfunction.
 Clinical Signs. Clinical signs range from mild muscle trem-
A similar syndrome involving hypokalemia and episodic
ors to complete recumbency. Prolapse of the nictitans mem-
weakness has been reported in Burmese cats between 2 and 6
 n s is    
months of age l0o. 1002 Clinical signs manifest as neck flexion.
is muscle fasciculation in the shoulders, flank, and neck,93
Clinical Signs. Affected cats have signs of muscular weak-
Severe episodes may include tetany followed by a state of flac-
 ness characterized by neck flexion, episodic weakness affecting
cidity and hyporeflexia. Pharyngeal and laryngeal dysfunction
the pelvic limbs, exercise intolerance, and a stiff gait (Figure
occur from hyperkalemia-induced cardiac standstill.
lethargy may be observed before obvious weakness is noticed.
 Diagnosis. Suspicion for diagnosis is based on breed and
Persistent flexion of the neck is a hallmark feature of this disease.
clinical signs. Currently, the most accurate way to confrm
Diagnosis. Suspicion for the diagnosis is based on low
a diagnosis of HyPP is by genetic testing through a licensed
laboratory.98Before the development of a genetic test, other
concentrations in muscle are much lower than what serum
diagnostic testing procedures were performed. Blood samples
values may reflect. Serum CK levels in these cats is moderately
taken during an episode may show hemoconcentration and
to severely elevated, with an average CK values of 2337 IU/L
hyperkalemia (5.0 to 11.7 mEq/L).986 However, many affected
[normal, 0 to 156 IU/L) 996 Abnormal electromyography can
horses are normokalemic. The CK level usually is within nor-
further support myopathic disease. All affected cats should be
mal limits. Evidence of complex repetitive discharges on EMG
 assessed for underlying renal dysfunction.
is suggestive. A diagnosis also is suggested by inducing signs
Treatment. Clinical signs of myopathy associated with
through administration of potassium chloride (O.1l g/kg orally
hypokalemia often resolve after potassium supplementation.
initially; increase in 0.025 g/kg increments every 48 hours to a
Cats with muscle weakness are treated with oral potassium
total of 0.2 g/kg), but this can cause death.993 Prior to genetic
gluconate at an initial dosage of 2 to 5 mEq orally every 12
testing, EMG combined with induction of signs with KCl gave
hours. Dilution of the potassium gluconate with water is help-
the most accurate diagnosis.
ful to avoid vomiting. Once the serum potassium normalizes
Treatment. Acute episodes should be treated by intra-
continued supplementation is necessary to prevent recurrence.
venous administration of sodium bicarbonate, dextrose,
白r
It is important to avoid metabolic acidosis in chronic supple-
calcium solutions.Diuretic therapy using acetazolamide, 2.2
mentation. Affected cats should be provided diets replete with
mg/kg orally 2 to 3 times daily, may lessen the frequency and
potassium. Some diets can be low in potassum.l003 Rapid cor-
severity of attacks.986 Diuretics will increase renal potassium
rection of dehydration with fluids that are not supplemented
excretion and stimulate insulin secretion. Readily absorb-
with potassium may lead to exacerbation of hypokalemia.
able sources of carbohydrates may be fed to promote insulin
Severely affected cats that are moribund should be given
 potassium chloride (dluted in lactated Ringer's solution) at a
sium [e.g., alfalfa, brome and orchard grasshays, soybean meal,
rate of0.5 to 1 mEq/kg/hr until 3.5 mEq/L is reached. Contin-
and molasses) and irregular feeding need to be avoided.
uous ECG monitoring is recommended to avoid arrhythmias
Hypokalemic Myopathy of Cats
and asystole. Prognosis is good depending upon the underlying
Pathogenesis. Potassium depletion can occur in any species,
cause of the hypokalemia.
causing muscle weakness (see also Chapter 15). A general-
ized polymyopathy associated with hypokalemia of cats has
been well characterized.576.996-998 Mechanisms to account for
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION DISEASES
the weakness are not fully understood. Decreased extracellu-
lar potassium [<3.0 mEq/L) causes an increase in the resting
 Electrical transmission of impulses down the motor nerve is
 membrane potential difference, which leads to the myofber
converted to chemical transmission as the nerve synapses with
the muscle-neuromuscular junction. As the impulse travels to
214
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
          
selective presynaptic receptors and is then translocated into
presynaptic bouton. Increased Ca?+ concentration destabilizes
the presynaptic terminus of the axon. Botulinum toxin pro-
the storage vesicles, which allws fusion of the vesicle to the
duces generalized neuromuscular blockade by inhibiting
presynaptic terminal membrane. The acetylcholine [ACh)-
the release of ACh from the terminals of cholinergic nerve
containing vesicles dock and fuse with the plasmalemma at
fibers.l0l7 Part of the toxin alters a docking and fusion protein
the synaptic cleft region. The process results in exocytosis of
 of synaptic vesicles with the presynaptic membrane, thus pre-
ACh into the synaptic cleft. Nicotinic receptors are located in
venting release of ACh.l018
skeletal muscle. Once released from the presynaptic terminal,
Clinical Signs. The incubation period is less than 6 days.
ACh diffuses to the postsynaptic membrane of the myofber
 Clinical signs are those of a progressive, symmetric, general-
and binds to nicotinic ACh receptors [AChR]. Binding ofACh
ized LMN disorder. Severity varies with the amount of toxin
to these receptors increases Na+ and K+ conductance of the
ingested and ranges from mild generalized weakness to tet-
membrane, and resultant influx of Nat produces a depolar-
raplegia with respiratory failure. Both cranial and spinal nerves
izing potential called the end plate potential (EPP). The EPP
causes depolarization of the adjacent muscle membrane. The
with decreased pupillary light reflexes, decreased jaw tone,
muscle action potential subsequently initiates a muscle con-
decreased gag reflex, decreased tongue movements, decreased
traction. There is an overabundance of available ACh and
palpebral reflexes, and change in bark and vocalization. Mega-
AChR; this excess is referred to as the safety margin of neu-
m sio  ooo o ose a r  sno
romuscular transmission. The safety margin insures that there
botulism. Decreased anal sphincter tone and urinary bladder
will be more than enough ACh available for neuromuscular
function also occur. In dogs, the usual clinical course is less
transmission. At higher concentrations of ACh, the accumula-
than 14 days.
tion of ACh may result in fibrillation of muscle fbers. This is
 Diagnosis. Botulism must be suspected in animals with
 a result of sustained muscle membrane depolarization causing
acute progressive LMN disease. Botulism is especially likely
neuromuscular junction blockade.
when multiple animals are affected. Given the clinical simi-
Disorders affecting the neuromuscular junction are pre-
larities to other acute LMN diseases such as tick paralysis and
synaptic or postsynaptic and sometimes both. These processes
polyradiculoneuritis, a definitive diagnosis of botulism is dif-
may increase or decrease the activity at the NMJ by the fol-
ficult to make [see Table 7-8]. Tick paralysis and polyradiculo-
lowing: [1) increasing or decreasing presynaptic ACh release 
neuritis are sporadic diseases that involve individual animals.
 by altering ACh synthesis, transport, reuptake or presynaptic
EMG studies may help to differentiate botulism from poly-
release; (Z) altering the concentration or duration of ACh in
radiculoneuritis, but some similarity exists, depending on the
the synaptic cleft by altering removal of ACh from the syn-
stage of disease. Electrophysiologic findings in affected humans
aptic cleft; and (3) acting as an ACh agonist or antagonist at
include normal motor nerve conduction velocity, decreased
the NMJ by affecting the interaction between ACh and the
M-wave amplitude, decrement/increment of the M wave
postsynaptic receptor.627, 1004,1005
with slow/rapid repetitive nerve stimulation, respectively.
and increased "jitter” with single fiber EMG.1019 Electrophysi-
Acute Progressive Diseases
ologic evidence of peripheral nerve involvement also has been
Toxic
collected from affected dogs. 1020 Identifcation of toxin in the
Botulism
food, carrion, serum, feces, or vomitus of an affected animal
Pathophysiology. For many years, this disease was suspected
confirms the diagnosis. The organism can be isolated from the
 in dogs but was never documented. Carrion eaters and some
viscera and feces of clinically normal animals.
carnivores, including dogs, were thought to be resistant to bot-
Treatment. Treatment of botulism is largely supportive.
ulism toxin. In 1978 Barsanti and co-workers l006 documented
To be effective, the specifc antitoxin must be administered
an outbreak of type C botulism in foxhounds in Georgia.
before the botulinum toxin binds to receptors at the neuro-
Botulism also has been reported in dogs in Great Britain, the
muscular junction. This approach is rarely possible because
 European continent, and Australia.l007-lo09 Before a detailed
 signs usually are present before the animal is treated. Poly-
description of polyradiculoneuritis was published, many hunt-
valent products that contain type C antitoxin generally are
ing dogs with acute progressive LMN disease were thought
not available. The effcacy of antibiotic therapy has not been
proven. The prognosis for recovery is generally good unless the
on coonhound paralysis, most dogs were believed to have this
dog develops severe, rapidly progressive signs. Ventilatory sup-
 disorder. Both conditions are now known to exist in dogs, but
port may be necessary in some dogs. Mildly affected animals
it can be difficult to make a differential diagnosis.
recover without therapy. 1006
 In large animals, botulism results from ingestion of toxin or
Tick Paralysis
from the contamination of an ulcerated gastrointestinal tract
Pathophysiology. This disease has been recognized world-
with proliferating Clostridium botulimum spores. Outbreaks in
wide, but most in-depth reports have come from the United
horses occur as a result of the ingestion of hay, silage, or water
that has been contaminated by dead rodents.loll The shaker
those of polyradiculoneuritis and botulism. The toxin prob-
foal syndrome occurs most frequently in foals 2 to 5 weeks of
ably comes from the salivary glands of the engorged feeding
age. Foals that are given highly nutritious feed develop gastro-
female ticks. The neurotoxin either inhibits depolarization in
intestinal ulcers. These ulcers are colonized by C botulimum,
the terminal portions of motor nerves or blocks the release
which then produces the offending toxin.l1012-1014 Botulism
of ACh at the neuromuscular junction. The toxin may affect
can also occur from wound infection.1015
both motor and sensory nerve fbers by altering ionic fluxes
 Clinical signs develop when the preformed C. botulimum
that mediate action potential production. In the United States,
Dermacentor andersoni and D. variabilis are the primary ticks
ducing organisms have been identifed. Types A, B, and E are
involved. In Australia, the disease is produced by lxodes holo.
most commonly associated with human disease. Types C and
cyclus, although Ixodes cormuatus and Lxodes hirsti are also
D, found in carrion, cause most cases of botulism in birds and
incriminated.1021
mammals other than humans. Most cases reported in dogs and
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs develop 7 to 9 days after
dar uq se ose g ai ad pasnes are sasiu
attachment of the tick. The earliest clinical sign is marked
 in large animals.l016 The toxin has been shown to bind to
ataxia with rapid progression to paresis, paralysis, areflexia,
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
215
and hypotonus. In the United States, cranial nerve involve-
ment is rare. Nystagmus is occasionally observed. Death can
 phosphates inhibit the action of acetylcholinesterase, resulting
occur from respiratory failure if the ticks are not removed.
in an accumulation of ACh in the synaptic cleft. This leads
Painful stimuli normally are perceived. In Australia, affected
to activation of nicotinic, muscarinic, and CNS cholinergic
dogs or cats develop more severe signs.l02-1024 Asymmetric
synapses. Carbamates are reversible cholinesterase inhibitors
with reactivation of cholinesterase activity when the carba-
 mate insecticide and enzyme separate. Some organophosphate
these animals than in those from the United States. In the
insecticides bind covalently to the enzyme (aging), resulting
Australian syndrome, clinical signs may progressively worsen
in irreversible inhibition. Recovery depends upon resynthesis
even though the ticks have been removed. io2t, 1024 In the US.
of acetylcholinesterase. Cats are especially sensitive to these
syndrome, dramatic improvement follows tick removal.
agents and can develop delayed-onset neuropathy.l032-1034
 Diag nosis. Tick paralysis is diagnosed by rapid improvement
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs of acute organophosphate
after tick removal. In unusual cases, EMG can be used to dif-
toxicity include the effects of muscarinic, nicotinic stimula-
ferentiate this disease from acute polyradiculoneuritis.373 In tick
 tion on the CNS and PNS. These signs develop within minutes 
paralysis, no EMG evidence of denervation exists, but the ampli-
to hours depending upon dose and route of the intoxication.
tude of evoked motor potentials is markedly reduced. Repetitive
Muscarinic signs reflect the parasympathomimetic effects
stimulation does not cause further decrement in the amplitude.
and include hypersalivation, lacrimation, urination, increased
Nerve conduction velocities may be slightly slower than normal,
gastrointestinal motility, miosis, cyanosis, and incontinence.
Signs of nicotinic stimulation of the PNS involve fasciculation,
Treatment. In the United States syndrome, removal of the
tremor, and muscle weakness which usually is generalized.
tick results in marked improvement within 24 hours and com-
Acetylcholine accumulation increases at the neuromuscular
plete recovery within 72 hours. Animals must be examined
junction, causing a depolarization block. CNS signs include
thoroughly for ticks. The areas evaluated should include the
hyperactivity, anorexia, and seizures.
 ear canals and interdigital spaces. Ticks are removed carefully
Diagnosis. Reduced cholinesterase activity (<50%) in
so that the head is not left embedded in the animal's skin.
blood is supportive of exposure in dogs. Evaluation of cho-
Since the toxin is secreted from the salivary glands, failure to
linesterase activity cannot be performed in cats because feline
 remove the head may cause worsening of the clinical signs.
blood contain pseudocholinesterase that is very sensitive to
Given the lack of side effects associated with treatment, all
inhibition by organophosphate.
dogs with an acute onset of diffuse LMN signs should be
 Treatment. Atropine blocks the effects of accumulated
treated with a commercially available ectoparasiticide therapy.
ACh at the muscarinic receptors and is the first-line drug of
The prognosis for complete recovery is good. InAustralian tick
choice. The dose for acute organophosphate toxicity ranges
paralysis, tick removal does not prevent further progression of
from 0.2 to 2 mg/kg. Dramatic cessation of parasympa-
the disease. Hyperimmune dog serum has been advocated to
thetic signs usually is observed within a few minutes after
 prevent death from respiratory failure.1021
administration.
Snake Envenomation. Envenomation by one of three spe-
Diphenhydramine has some antinicotinic effects and
cies of coral snake, Micruroides fulvnus fulvnus [eastern coral
 blocks nicotinic receptor overstimulation. The dose recom-
snake), M. fulvius tenere [Texas coral snake), and M. fulvius
mended ranges from 1 to 4 mg/kg PO every 8 hours.1035
barbouri [South Florida coral snake) is associated with diffuse
Muscle tremors should abolish over time. Pralidoxime chlo-
LMN disease.1027 The coral snake is recognized by its distinct
ride (2-PAM), an enzyme reactivator, acts specifically on the
color pattern of a black nose and a repeating pattern of black,
yellow, followed by red circumferential bands. Envenom-
The recommended dose is 10 to 15 mg/kg IM every 8 to 12
ation has been reported in the dog and cat.l028.l029 Affected
 hours and is used to relieve tremors and other nicotinic signs.
animals develop acute onset of LMN signs within hours of
Therapy should be continued until signs are abolished.
envenomation, but signs may be delayed up to 7 days.l028.1029
Tissue reaction at the site of envenomation varies from mild
Episodic Diseases
to severe. Death due to respiratory paralysis can occur. Clini-
Degenerative/Immune Mediated
copathologic changes include hemolysis and increased CK
Acquired Myasthenia Gravis
levels.to27 Electrophysiology is consistent with neuromus-
Pathophysiology. Myasthenia gravis (MG) (grave muscle dis-
cular blockade.l028 Treatment is directed at supportive care,
 ease) is a disease of the motor end plate and results in progres-
broad-spectrum antibiotics, and monitoring of ventilatory
sive loss of muscle strength with exercise. Myasthenia gravis
capacity. Severely affected animals may need mechanical ven-
can be acquired or congenital. Acquired MG is an immune-
tlation2Withaggressive supportiv care,the prognosis or
mediated disorder in which autoantibodies against nicotinic
recovery is good. The effects of the venom decline over 18
AChR of skeletal muscle result in impairment of neuro-
hours but may last for 7 to 10 days. 1028,1029 There is currently
 no approved antivenin.
post synaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction are
Drug-lnduced Neuromuscular Blockade. Several drugs
decreased. The decreased number of functional AChR reduces
the probability that ACh molecules will react with AChRs
These include aminoglycosides, antiarrhythmic agents, phe-
on the postsynaptic membrane and increases the chance of
 nothiazine, penicillins, and magnesium. It is important to be
failure of neuromuscular transmission, the safety margin is
aware of drug side effects, especially when treating myasthenia
reduced. With repetitive fring of a motor nerve ending, stores
gravis. We observed one animal after aminoglycoside adminis-
ofACh are depleted; the few available AChR are soon bound
tration develop severe muscle weakness and hyporeflexia after
with ACh molecules and desensitized to further stimulation.
 5 days of gentamicin therapy for deep pyoderma. The clinical
Severe muscle weakness and fatigue results.
 signs resolved within 48 hours after the drug was discontinued.
In acquired MG, the α subunit of the nicotinic AChR is
Organophosphate and Carbamate Toxicity
Pathogenesis. Animal poisoning 
from
 organophosphate
nity involves both the antibody response of B cells and the
[chlorpyrifos, diazinon, dichlorvos) and carbamate [aldicarb,
helper T cells with destruction of the neuromuscular junction
methomyl, carbofuran, carbaryl) insecticides commonly results
and complement mediated destruction and simplification
216
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
of the postsynaptic membrane. It has been suggested that
paraneoplastic effect of other tumors such as osteogenic sar-
molecular mimicry of the ACh receptor could initiate the
coma, cholangiocellular carcinoma, anal sac adenocarcinoma,
immune response. The thymus is suspected to be the site
and lymphoma.644.1004.1052,1053
of initiation of the autoimmune response to AChR in MG.
Diagnosis. Standard of care for definitive diagnosis of
Moreover, thymic neoplasms also have been associated with
MG is based on testing for serum autoantibodies to AChR by
MG.816,1038-1040
Acquired MG is one of the most commonly treated neu-
result of above 0.6 nmol/L in dogs and above 0.3 nmol/L in
romuscular diseases in dogs but is less common in cats.1004
A bimodal age of onset [<5 years and >7 years) has been
test should be performed before administering corticosteroids
reported in dogs. Female dogs are at greater risk. Breeds pre-
to prevent false-negative results. About 90% of dogs with
disposed include German shepherd dog, golden retriever, and
acquired MG have AChR antibodies, and approximately 2%
Labrador retriever. A report evaluating relative risk in breeds
of dogs found the Akita to have the highest risk.l04t New-
seronegative may have antibodies against other endplate com-
foundlands and Great Danes may have an inherited predis-
ponents, lack production of antibodies, or the antibodies are
position.0421043The breeds in cats at higher risk include the
lost during the testing procedure.l004 Diagnosis is aided by the
Somalis, Abyssinians, and domestic shorthair.l044 A cranial
exclusion of cardiovascular and metaboli diseases with appro-
mediastinal mass also was commonly associated with acquired
priate laboratory or electrophysiologic tests. Exercise-induced
MG in cats. Cats treated with methimazole for hyperthyroid-
weakness, a decremental response to repetitive nerve stimula-
tion, and a positive response to anticholinesterase drugs sup-
 Clinical Signs. The hallmark clinical feature of MG is
port a presumptive diagnosis of MG.
episodic muscle weakness. The neurologic examination can
 Testing with intravenous edrophonium chloride [Tensilon
be normal when the animal is rested. With exercise, muscle
test) may aid in establishing a presumptive diagnosis of acquired
weakness becomes progressively worse. This phenomenon
is most apparent in the appendicular muscles of the pelvic
nium chloride is an ultra-short-acting anticholinesterase agent.
limbs. Animals become fatigued, develop a shortened stride,
In theory, the drug enables more ACh molecules to be available
and then lie down to rest. Strength returns after rest. The spi-
and interact with the remaining functional ACh receptors. A
nal and cranial nerve reflexes may at frst be intact but with
presumptive diagnosis of acquired MG may be made if a patient
repetitive testing can show fatigue. The most sensitive reflex
responds positively to IV injection of 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg of edro-
to evaluate for fatigue is the palpebral reflex.
phonium after inducing weakness with exercise. A patient that
There are 3 forms of MG that have been described in dogs
demonstrates obvious improvement in muscle strength shortly
 and cats: [1) the focal form which consists of megaesophagus
after edrophonium is considered to have a positive response.
alone or facial and pharyngeal weakness; signs include ptosis of
Due to the short half-life, improvement will only last for a few
the upper eyelids, sialosis, regurgitation of food, and dyspha-
minutes. Care must be exercised in both test performance and
 gial045; (2) the generalized form which presents as tetraparesis
 interpretation of test results. A lack of improvement in muscle
with the pelvic limbs most severely affected; megaesopha-
strength does not eliminate a diagnosis of MG.l004 Moreover.
gus, facial and pharyngeal weakness also may be present;
dogs with other neuromuscular diseases such as polymyositis
and (3) the acute fulminating form presents as acute, rapidly
may have a partial response to edrophonium chloride. Anticho-
progressive, profound generalized muscle weakness, mega-
linesterase drugs are nonspecific-acting cholinergics and stimu-
esophagus, frequent episodes of regurgitation, and respiratory
late both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors. Overstimulation
of these receptors may induce a cholinergic crisis: severe muscle
esophagus and megaesophagus alone are the most common
weakness, vomiting, salivation, and defecation. Accordingly.
 atropine should be given before edrophonium to block musca-
idiopathic megaesophagus or laryngeal paralysis without gen-
rinic receptors only and thereby limit the muscarinic choliner-
eralized muscle weakness have MG.1045
gic effects. Nicotinic receptors are not affected by atropine, and
 In cats, clinicals signs are more variable and include general-
 therefore affected animals can still display a positive response.
ized weakness megaesophagus and dysphagia.l044 About 15%
 Electrophysiologic testing may also provide a presumptive
of cats with acquired MG had only focal disease as opposed
diagnosis of MG. The EMG is usually normal in MG, although
variability in amplitude of motor units and occasional fibril-
not as common in cats because of the increased proportion of
lation potentials may be seen. Analogous to the observation
smooth muscle in the esophagus as compared with the canine
of fatiguing the palpebral reflex with repeated testing, repeti-
tive nerve stimulation is an electrophysiologic test in which
muscle. Other common signs of MG in cats include vomiting/
repeated stimulation of a nerve and the measurement of the
regurgitation, exercise intolerance, dysphagia, change in voice,
amplitude of resultant muscle action potential is performed.
In normal animals, repetitive nerve stimulation at 5 Hz does
neck as a sign of weakness.
not cause any decrement in the amplitude or area of the
Aspiration pneumonia often is a sequela of megaesophagus
evoked muscle action potential.l1oss l0o55 In animals with MG,
 and is a complicating factor when managing treatment for MG.
the amplitudes of the evoked nerve stimulation will decreases
Third-degree atrioventricular block has been reported in dogs
 s  1      1 1 q
with acquired MG, although a cause-and-effect relationship was
studies on large numbers of myasthenic dogs, however, have
not been reported. Any decrement on stimulation is suspect
concurrently with MG. Polymyositis or immune-mediated
for neuromuscular junction disease. If a decrement is demon-
endocrinopathies have been reported in dogs with MG616.1050
strated, administration of edrophonium chloride intravenously
As MG may develop as part of the paraneoplastic syn-
should cause a normal response for a few minutes. Although
drome, affected animals may display clinical signs related to
the decremental response is abnormal in most myasthenic ani-
a primary neoplasm. Thymoma is the most common neo-
mals, both false-positive and false-negative results may occur.
plasm associated with MG in dogs and cats.8l16,l1038 l1o5l The
Single-fiber EMG analysis is reported to be the most defini-
incidence of thymoma associated with MG is higher
in
tive electrodiagnostic test for establishing a diagnosis of MG in
humans and has been studied in normal dogs. 1057 Single-fiber
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
217
EMG measures uniformity of latency times [time from stimu-
Thymectomy should be considered for dogs with thymoma
lus to response) of the compound motor unit action potential
or those that respond poorly to medical therapy.l1040,lo5t.1063
after repeat stimulation over the motor point. In MG, there
AChR antibody levels may persist despite clinical improve-
is variability in latency times which is called jitter [see Chap-
ment after thymectomy. Careful consideration is recom-
ter 4). Often these studies require lengthy anesthesia, which
mended before a thymectomy because of the stress of
should be avoided in dogs with MG.
anesthesia and risks associated with thoracotomy.
 Other supportive diagnostics include thoracic radiography
The ACh receptor antibody titers should be monitored until
to evaluate for aspiration pneumonia, presence of megaesoph-
remission is achieved. The dosage of anticholinesterase drugs and
agus, and evaluation for a cranial mediastinal mass. Abdominal
corticosteroids is gradually decreased and, if possible, discontin-
ultrasound is performed to screen for neoplasia; likewise the
ued. Drastic changes in the therapy should be avoided. There
thorax is screened for metastasis.
is excellent correlation between resolution of clinical signs and
 Treatment. In acquired MG, there are three major modali-
return of AChR antibody titers to less than 0.6 nmol/L.i004
 ties of therapeutic intervention: anticholinesterase therapy.
 It is important to use supportive treatments when other
immunomodulatory therapy, and thymectomy. Once the
complicating factors occur: managing the megaesophagus,
au pius arn i  raq su sia
treatment of aspiration pneumonia, fluid therapy, nutritional
anticholinesterase agents (pyridostigmine bromide, 0.5 to
3 mg/kg, 2 or 3 times daily, orally).l004, 1054, l0s8 Long-acting
port, Gl motility modifiers, and increasing lower esophageal
 anticholinesterase drugs prolong the action of ACh at the neu-
sphincter tone. Drugs that may affect the neuromuscular junc-
romuscular junction by reversibly inhibiting acetylcholinester-
tion transmission should be avoided. Acquired drug-induced
        a 
MG should be considered in hyperthyroid cats after initiation
few days of therapy To avoid overstimulation of ACh recep-
of treatment with methimazole.l044,1064 Intact females should
sauer aaesop an jo pua mot a ie paiens ae shuaed sion
 be spayed, although the anesthesia may exacerbate the MG.
and the dose is gradually increased to effect. Some patients
Prognosis. The prognosis in the early stages is guarded. In
 cannot tolerate the oral form of medication because of fre-
one study, up to 50% of dogs diagnosed with MG were euth-
quent regurgitation from megaesophagus. Instead, intramus-
anized within 2 weeks.l1046 The mortality rate within l year
 cular neostigmine bromide can be administered at 0.4 mg/kg.
from time of diagnosis was 40%.A recent study documented
It is important that the dosages are titrated to an optimal level
the natural disease course in dogs with MG and treated with
 based on changes in muscle strength.
 Excessive amounts of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors result
 into spontaneous remission, suggesting caution with use of
in the accumulation of ACh and cause fbrillation of muscle
 immunosuppression because of its higher mortality risks. Cats
fibers. Paradoxical muscle weakness may occur as a result of
 appear to have a better prognosis for focal or generalized MG
this neuromuscular blockage of the motor endplate. Addition-
than that which has been reported in dogs.l048 It also has been
ally, excessive stimulation of muscarinic receptors also will
noted that cats may respond better to immunosuppressive
cause SLUDD (cholinergic crisis). This may be difficult to dis-
therapy than to anticholinesterase therapy. 1004
tinguish from worsening of the MG (mryasthenic crisis), which
also will reflect as profound muscle weakness. Edrophonium
Anomalies
can be used to differentiate between these conditions. If the
Congenital Myasthenia Gravis. Congenital MG, a rare dis-
patient shows no relief or worsens with edrophonium, most
ease, has been mainly documented in young dogs including
likely excessive acetylcholinesterase inhibitor is the cause. The
anticholinesterase drug should be temporarily discontinued or
 dosage amount and frequency lowered.
describedinfwcats7007Thecongenitalformiscausedby
 The pathophysiology of acquired MG as an autoimmune
a deficiency of AChR at the postsynaptic membrane, without
 disorder implies that immunosuppression may be necessary to
evidence of autoimmunity. Myasthenic syndrome, in which
resolve the underlying disease. However, the use of immuno-
there is a presynaptic defect in the release of ACh, has been
suppressive therapy for acquired MG has been controversial.
Immunosuppression may be contraindicated in patients that
mal recessive inheritance has been determined for the Jack
are at risk for developing or have already developed aspiration
Russell and smooth fox terriers and the Gammel Dansk hon-
pneumonia. Corticosteroid administration also has been asso-
sehund 1068,1072.1073Congenital myasthenia syndrome due to
ciated with muscular weakness in several species and could
a mutation in the gene encoding the epsilon subunit (bov-
further accentuate weakening of a MG patient. The dosage
CHRNE) of the AChR has been documented as an autosomal
of prednisone should be started at a low antinflammatory
 recessive trait in Red Brahman cattle in South Africa.1074
dosage of 0.25 mg/kg once daily and then gradually increased
Diagnosis is based on signalment and clinical signs of
to an immunosuppressive dose. DO NOT start the dose at
fatigue during ambulation. Puppies may have megaesophagus.
immunosuppressive levels, because this could send a patient
There may not be a response to the edrophonium chloride
into a myasthenic crisis. Immunosuppressive doses of predni-
test if there is complete absence of receptors. A biopsy of the
sone, 1 to 2 mg/kg PO twice daily, are administered for 2 to
external intercostal muscle collected origin to insertion can
4 weeks, and the titers are reevaluated. If the titers are within
be used to quantify a reduced number or lack of AChRs at 
the normal reference range, the dose is gradually reduced or
the neuromuscular junction. Since an immune response is not
tapered very slowly every 4 weeks. The ultimate goal is alter-
involved in congenital MG, serologic testing for AChR anti-
nate-day therapy at the lowest dose as clinical signs stabilize.
body is negative and should not be performed.
High-dose corticosteroid therapy also can lead to undesirable
Treatment response depends upon the underlying cause
 side effects such as gastric ulceration, hepatic dysfunction, and
 of congenital MG. If there is a deficiency of AChRs and not
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. Other immunosuppressive
complete absence, anticholinesterase therapy may be effec-
agents [cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine)
tive. However, desensitization to the drug occurs over time.
that modulate T-cell function have been administered alone
The weakness may be progressive, and presence of mega-
 or in combination with corticosteroids, with varying suc-
esophagus will predispose to aspiration pneumonia. There
is a congenital syndrome in the miniature dachshund, which
used in human medicine.1062
resolves with age. 1004
218
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDIES
CASE STUDY 7-1
ASTRO
) veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
indicating a diffuse disease process. Generalized neuropa-
Canine, mixed breed, male, 6 months old
suspected. Although rare, neuronopathy should be consid-
. History
ered.
An acute onset of tetraparesis progressing rapidly to com-
plete paralysis. The dog has been paralyzed for 24 hours
· Differential Diagnosis
 prior to examination.
1. Tick paralysis
 2. Polyradiculoneuritis
- Physical Examination
3.1
 Botulism
No abnormalities were found on physical examination.
 4. Fulminant myasthenia gravis
 5. Polyneuropathy (metabolic, endocrine, toxic)
· Neurologic Examination
Mental Status
· Diagnostic Plan
Alert
1.
S       ae  
should not be overlooked.
Gait
 2. History of exposure to carrion and trash would be impor-
Tetraplegic
tant in ruling out botulism.
 3. Electromyography would be a procedure to perform 5
Posture
to 7 days after hospital admission. This is the time frame
 Unable to support weight or maintain sternal recumbency.
during which denervation would be evident in cases of
The tail could still wag.
polyradiculoneuritis.
 4. CSF analysis may reveal increased protein concentration
Postural Reactions
 and a mild inflammatory response in polyradiculoneuri-
Postural reaction absent in all limbs
tis.
Spinal Reflexes
- Diagnostic Results
The patellar and extensor carpi reflexes were absent. The
After close inspection, a tick was found embedded in the
flexor withdrawal reflexes were severely reduced in all
inner pinna. An engorged female Dermacentor spp. tick was
limbs. All limbs had reduced muscular tone. No muscle
carefully removed, and the dog was also treated with an
 atrophy was appreciated. The perineal and cutaneous trunci
 insecticide.
reflexes were normal.
. Diagnosis
Cranial Nerves
Tick paralysis
 All normal
- Treatment
Sensory Evaluation
Within 12 hours, the dog was able to become sternal; by
Hyperesthesia—no pain elicited on spinal palpation
aosnu suureaar pue Aioteinque sem sop aua 'sinou t7
 Superhcial pain perception—-intact
strength. This is the typical time frame for recovery from
 Deep pain perception—-intact
tick paralysis. Topical insecticide treatment should be per-
formed in all dogs with similar presentation to this case, as
· Lesion Location
ticks may be diffcult to identify, especially in long-haired
Based on reduced to absent spinal reflexes without obvious
dogs.
sensory deficits, the lesion is localized to the lower motor
neuron system-neuromuscular All limbs are affected,
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
219
CASE STUDY 7-2
MILO
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
hemiparesis is characterized by LMN paresis in the thoracic
Canine, Shetland sheepdog, male, 3 years old
limb and UMN paresis in the pelvic limb. The lesion is most
likely affecting the C6-TZ spinal cord segments. This dog
.History
 did not manifest any evidence of paraspinal hyperesthesia,
Seven days prior, the dog had an acute onset of falling to.
which may suggest that compressive or inflammatory dis-
 the right, with paresis of both pelvic limbs and paralysis of
eases affecting pain-sensitive structures (meninges, spinal
the right thoracic limb. There was no history of trauma. The
nerves, or spinal ganglia] are less likely.
clinical signs have not progressed.
· Differential Diagnosis
: Physical Examination
1.
Fibrocartilaginous embolism
Normal
2.
Cervical intervertebral disk disease
3. Myelitis
: Neurologic Examination
4. Trauma
Mental Status
5. Neoplasia
Alert
: Diagnostic Plan
Gait
1. Spinal radiography may be helpful in excluding an obvi-
With assistance, the dog can support weight. Minimal vol-
ous vertebral fracture or luxation. May also provide evi-
untary motor function was present in the right thoracic and
dence of intervertebral disc disease.
 pelvic limbs. Voluntary motor function appears almost nor-
 2. Imaging with myelography/CT or MRI will identify
mal in the left pelvic limb. The left thoracic limb appears
compressive myelopathy; MRI is more sensitive for eval-
to have normal strength and voluntary motor function. The
uating the spinal cord and identifying the extent of the
paw of right thoracic limb remains knuckled over.
lesion.
 3. Cerebrospinal fluid will identify any evidence of menin-
Posture
gomyelitis
 Lateral recumbency
- Diagnostic Results
Postural Reactions
Spinal radiography  was within normal limits. Sagittal
 Proprioceptive positioning is normal in the left thoracic and
 T2-weighted MRI disclosed an intraaxial hyperintensity
pelvic limbs, decreased in the right pelvic limb, and absent
extending from C5 to C7 spinal cord segment. The lesion
in the right thoracic limb. Hopping in the right thoracic and
 was primarily located on the right side of the spinal cord
 on axial plane TZ-weighted images. Analysis of cerebrospi-
pelvic limb was mildly decreased. Hopping in the left tho-
nal fluid obtained from the cerebellomedullary cistern con-
racic limb was normal.
tained 1 WBC/μL and 25 mg/dL protein (reference range <
24 mg/dL).
Spinal Reflexes
In the pelvic limbs, the patellar reflex is exaggerated [+3) on
· Diagnosis
the right and normal on the left [+2). The flexor withdrawal
Based on the findings of the MRI, spinal cord infarction
reflexes are normal in both pelvic limbs. Muscle tone and
presumably caused by a fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE).
muscle mass are normal in the pelvic limbs. In the right tho-
Other supportive evidence includes history of an acute
racic limb, the extensor carpi radialis reflex and the flexor
onset. Additionally asymmetric neurologic deficits and lack
withdrawal refex are decreased. There is decreased muscu-
 of paraspinal support FCE as the etiology.
lar tone in the right thoracic limb. Palpation reveals atrophy
of the right supraspinatus, biceps brachi, and triceps mus-
- Treatment
cles. The flexor withdrawal reflex, muscle tone, and muscle
Based on the presence of voluntary motor function and nor-
mass are normal in the left thoracic limb.
 mal pain perception, the prognosis is favorable for return of
function. Treatment for FCE is supportive care and physi-
Cranial Nerves
 cal rehabilitation. Corticosteroids have not been shown to
All normal
 be of benefit. Rehabilitation included daily exercise in an
underwater treadmill. The dog was placed in an underwater
Sensory Evaluation
treadmill on a daily basis and began to show improved limb
Hyperesthesia—none
movements in the right pelvic limb within 3 days; within 7
 days, the right thoracic limb began to show minimal move-
 Deep pain perception—-not evaluated
ments. One month after the onset, the dog was ambulating
on its own in all limbs but still had residual weakness in the
. Lesion Location
right thoracic limb. The right thoracic limb may always be
There are abnormal postural reactions and paresis in all of
weak because there may be permanent ischemic injury that
the limbs except the left thoracic limb, indicating neurologic
resulted in loss of motor neurons.
dysfunction of these limbs. Despite this, the dog is signif-
cantly worse on the right side; right hemiparesis. The right
220
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 7-3
ARIZONA
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
segments. Other important clinical findings include paraspi-
Canine, miniature poodle, male, ll years old
nal hyperesthesia and the progressive clinical signs.
.History
: Differential Diagnosis
One month ago, lameness developed in the left thoracic
1. Cervical intervertebral disk disease
limb, progresing to both thoracic limbs within 7 days.
2.
Neoplasia
Two weeks later, the dog developed general proprioceptive
3.1
 Meningomyelitis
ataxia of both pelvic limbs, and l week prior to admission,
4. Discospondylitis
the dog progressed to nonambulatory tetraparesis. The dog
does not wag his tail.
 Diagnostic Plan
1. Spinal radiography will determine presence of bony
- Physical Examination
lesions such as a primary vertebral tumor or discospon-
Grade IV/VI holosystolic murmur with loudest intensity
 dylitis. Findings suggestive of intervertebral disk disease
over the cardiac apex suggestive of mitral valve regurgita-
may also be identified.
tion. Lung auscultation revealed crackles.
 2. Imaging with myelography/CT or MRI will identify
compressive myelopathy, MRI is more sensitive for eval-
. Neurologic Examination
uating the spinal cord and identifying the extent of the
Mental Status
lesion.
Alert
 3. Cerebrospinal fluid will identify any evidence of menin-
gomyelitis
Gait
Nonambulatory tetraparesis
. Diagnostic Results
 Spinal radiography revealed in situ mineralization at the
Posture
nucleus pulposus of the C2-3 intervertebral disk. Myelog-
 Sternal recumbency
raphy disclosed a pattern consistent with an extradural
 compressive lesion at C2-3. Prior to injection of iodinated
Postural Reactions
contrast medium, analysis of CSF contained 10 WBC/μL
 Absent in alllimbs
[reference range <5 cels/μL, 40 mg/dL protein (reference
range <24 mg/dL). Cellular differential was 30% neutro-
Spinal Reflexes
 phils, 40% mononuclear cells, and 30% macrophages.
 Patellar reflex and extensor carpi radialis reflexes were exag-
 gerated [+3) on the right side; flexor withdrawal reflexes
: Diagnosis
were intact in all limbs.
Although this dog had other medical problems, diagnos-
tics and surgery were recommended because of the sever-
Cranial Nerves
ity of clinical signs. Had the clinical signs been less severe,
 All normal
evaluation of the heart murmur and crackles would have
 been pursued. Imaging findings are suggestive of Hansen
Sensory Evaluation
type I IVDD. The findings on CSF analysis are typical of a
Hyperesthesia—paraspinal pain on palpation of the cervical
 mild inflammatory response associated with a compressive
 vertebral column
myelopathy.
Superficial pain perception—normal
 Deep pain perception—not evaluated
- Treatment
A ventral slot procedure was performed at the C2-3 IVD
: Lesion Location
 space. A large amount of"chalky” material typical of degenera-
The neurologic examination reveals UMN tetraparesis.
tive IVD material was removed from the vertebral canal. Final
There is no evidence of intracranial disease (ie., abnormal
 diagnosis was a Hansen type I IVD extrusion. After surgery.
mental status or cranial nerve dysfunction). Consequently.
the dog recovered well and was ambulatory with support at
the lesion localization is between the Cl and C5 spinal cord
 discharge. Other concurrent medical conditions were treated.
CASE STUDY 7-4
LUKE
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
- Physical Examination
Canine, toy poodle, male, l year old
The dog was 5% dehydrated. Cranial palpation revealed a
fontanelle.
. History
 Five weeks prior, the dog experienced severe neck pain and
. Neurologic Examination
could not walk up or down the stairs. The dog held the
Mental Status
head slightly flexed, and the neck was stiff One week prior,
 Alert, anticipates pain when neck is touched
the dog bumped his head, cried out in pain, fell down, and
became stiff in all limbs. The dog cries out when the head
Gait
or neck is moved.
 Nonambulatory tetraparesis
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
221
CASE STUDY 7-4
LUKE-
cont'd
Posture
2. Trauma
Extensor rigidity/spasticity in all limbs, and neck is extended.
 3. Meningomyelitis
Postural Reactions
· Diagnostic Plan
Symmetrical abnormalities were observed. Proprioceptive
1. Radiography of the cervical vertebrae to evaluate for ver-
positioning was reduced in the thoracic limbs and absent in
tebral anomalies
the pelvic limbs. Hopping was reduced in the thoracic limbs
 2. MRI of the cervical vertebral column to detect spinal
and absent in the pelvic limbs.
cord anomalies
3.
 CSF analysis should not be performed from the cerebel-
Spinal Reflexes
lomedullary cistern until an atlantoaxial subluxation is
Patellar and extensor carpi radialis refexes were exagger-
ruled out.
ated [+3). The flexor withdrawal reflexes were intact in all
limbs. Muscle tone was increased. No muscle atrophy was
. Diagnostic Results
observed.
Spinal radiography revealed caudal and dorsal displacement
of the spinous process of C2 from the dorsal arch of Cl,
Cranial Nerves
indicative of AA subluxation. An MRI was performed to
 All normal
rule out concurrent or secondary pathology as well as other
 congenital cervical malformations. Aside from spinal cord
Sensory Evaluation
compression at the AA articulation, there was no evidence
 Hyperesthesia—present in the cranial cervical vertebral col-
of additional spinal cord pathology on MRl. Collection of
umn. There was resistance of the neck on lateral manipu-
CSF was not performed.
lation.
Superfcial pain perception—normal
Diagnosis
Deep pain perception—not assessed
The diagnosis was AA subluxation.
: Lesion Location
. Treatment
The neurologic examination reveals UMN tetraparesis with
 Surgical stabilization was recommended. A ventral approach
no evidence of intracranial disease. The clinical course sug-
to the Cl-Z vertebrae was made to perform transarticular
 gests a progressive disease. Taking into account the area of
stabilization. A bone graft was placed between the ventral
paraspinal hyperesthesia and spinal reflexes, lesion location
AA articulation. The dog recovered well from the surgery.
is between the Cl and C5 spinal cord segments. The signal-
A soft-padded bandage was applied for 6 weeks in order
ment highly suggests an anomalous condition such as atlan-
 to minimize neck movement until the joint arthrodesis was
toaxial [A/A) subluxation. With this differential, the neck
complete. Upon recheck examination 6 weeks after the sur-
should not be further manipulated, and neck flexion should
pmous Auderoper pue Tam unenque sem sop su Araa
be avoided at all times.
evidence of bony fusion.
: Differential Diagnosis
1. Congenital/anomalous
a. Atlantoaxial subluxation
b. Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
CASE STUDY 7-5
BORIS
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Gait
Canine, Labrador retriever, mixed-breed, 6-year-old FS
Stiff, short strided in all limbs, and the dog could only ambu-
late a short distance before sitting down.
- History
Four weeks prior to admission, the dog began to walk with
Posture
a stiff gait in all limbs. The owner also noticed muscle atro-
 Mild kyphosis at the thoracolumbar junction
 phy. One week prior to admission, the dog appeared painful
during eating and drinking. There was a copious amount of
Postural Reactions
saliva in the water bowl.
 Postural reactions were normal in all limbs.
. Physical Examination
Spinal Reflexes
 Normal with the exception that the dog is thin.
Spinal reflexes were normal in all limbs. Generalized muscle
 atrophy of the appendicular and epaxial muscles. The tem-
. Neurologic Examination
 poralis and masseter muscles were also severely atrophied.
Mental Status
There was asymmetry in loss of muscle mass in various mus-
Alert
cle groups. There was severe loss of muscle mass of the head
involving those of mastication.
222
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 7-5
BORIS-
cont'd
Cranial Nerves
4. PCR testing for hepatozoonosis [if suggestive based on
Gag reflex was decreased.
minimum database)
5.1
 Edrophonium hydrochloride (Tensilon) testing; provoca-
Sensory Evaluation
tive testing for myasthenia gravis [if suggestive based on
Hyperesthesia—none
 minimum database and electrophysiology)
 Superfcial pain perception—normal
 6. Muscle and/or nerve biopsy will further assist defining
Deep pain perception—not assessed
the character of the disease process [i.e., inflammatory,.
degenerative, endocrine related).
· Lesion Location
 The neurologic examination is suspicious for a diffuse dis-
· Diagnostic Results
order affecting the lower motor neuron unit-neuromuscu-
 CBC, chemistry profle, and urinalysis were within normal
lar system. A key historical fnding in this dog is exercise
limits. The CK levels were 8000 IU/L (normal 51 to 519
 IU/L). Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound were
neuromuscular junction. There appeared to be no fatigue of
within normal limits. The EMG revealed complex repetitive
the reflexes [e.g, palpebral), which makes a disorder of the
 discharges in multiple muscle groups of all the limbs, spine,
neuromuscular junction such as myasthenia gravis less likely
and epaxial muscles. Nerve conduction studies were within
than myopathy. Generalized myopathy can affect any mus-
 normal limits. A muscle biopsy was performed. A joint tap
cle group, including the pharyngeal muscles and esophagus.
 and CSF analysis were still performed to rule out evidence
of inflammatory disease elsewhere. Histopathology of the
· Differential Diagnosis
muscle revealed variation in myofber size and inflamma-
 1. Infectious myositis
tion within the endomysium. Serology for Toxoplasma spp.
 2. Immune-mediated polymyositis
and Neospora canimum were negative.
3. Neuromuscular diseases such as myasthenia gravis; how-
ever the atrophy is not typical for MG.
. Diagnosis
 4. Metabolic, endocrine, toxic
 5. Neoplasia—paraneoplastic syndrome
ferentials for infectious disease and paraneoplastic disease
6. Degenerative
have been ruled out.
· Diagnostic Plan
 Treatment
1. A minimum database (complete blood count, bio-
 Pending serology, the dog was initialy placed on clindamy-
chemical profle, and urinalysis) is performed to identify
cin, 15 mg/kg every 12 hours per os, for presumed prota-
 metabolic disease or to provide evidence for specialized
 zoal myositis. Once serologic tests were negative, treatment
testing to confrm endocrine or toxic disorders. Creatine
 would include immunosuppressive therapy. Prednisone at
 kinase levels should be performed to identify myopathic
 Z mg/kg every 12 hours per os was added. The dog began
disorders.
Sa h e s a   ms 
2. Radiography of the chest and abdominal ultrasound were
however, the side effects were unacceptable to the owner.
performed to rule out paraneoplastic myopathy/neuropathy.
Consequently, azathioprine, l mg/kg every 24 hours, was
 3. Electromyography and direct nerve stimulation tests may
added so the prednisone dose could be reduced to l mg/
help differentiate myopathy from neuropathy and define
kg every other day. This regimen was maintained for 1
which muscles or nerves are affected; rarely provide
month, and then the therapies were slowly decreased over 6
 definitive diagnosis. Repetitive nerve stimulation may
months. The dog continued to improve.
provide evidence of myasthenia gravis.
CASE STUDY 7-6
LILA
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Gait
 Pit bull, female, spayed, 6 years old
 Unable to ambulate
- History
Posture
Four weeks prior to admission, the dog began to walk with
 Sternal recumbency
a stiff gait in the pelvic limbs. One week prior to admission,
the dog appeared to have diffculty walking in all limbs and
Postural Reactions
could not make it to the door the morning of admission.
 Proprioceptive positioning was normal when the dog was
The owner noted undigested food in the yard.
supported.
- Physical Examination
Spinal Reflexes
 During physical examination, the dog demonstrated at wet
Spinal reflexes were intact, but the patellar reflex was dif-
cough.
ficult to assess at times.
. Neurologic Examination
Cranial Nerves
Mental Status
Gag reflex was decreased. The palpebral reflex was reduced
Alert
 after tapping on the lateral canthi a couple of times.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
223
CASE STUDY 7-6
LILA-
cont'd
Sensory Evaluation
: Diagnosis
Hyperesthesia—none
Acquired myasthenia gravis. Confrmation of the diagnosis
Superficial pain perception--normal
can only be performed by evaluating for antibodies against
 Deep pain perception—-not assessed 
the acetylcholine receptor The titer results were above
the normal reference range. This dog had the generalized
: Lesion Location
form of MG evidenced by appendicular limb weakness and
The neurologic examination suggests a neuromuscular
megaesophagus. Chest radiographs did not reveal presence
problem. The exercise intolerance may suggest muscle or
of thymoma, which can be an underlying cause of MG.
neuromuscular junction disease. Fatiguing of the reflexes
 suggest neuromuscular weakness.
 Treatment
In acquired MG, there are three major modalities of
· Differential Diagnosis
therapeutic
1. Degenerative
immunomodulatory therapy, and thymectomy In veteri-
 2. Myasthenia gravis
nary medicine, anticholinesterase therapy is most widely
 3. Myopathy
accepted. Long-acting anticholinesterase drugs prolong the
action of ACh at the neuromuscular junction by revers-
. Diagnostic Plan
ibly inhibiting acetylcholinesterase. The agent most often 
1. A systemic workup because of the physical examination
used is pyridostigmine bromide (Mestinon, 0.5 to 3 mg/kg
abnormalities. Creatine kinase levels were requested.
every 8 to 12 hours by mouth). To avoid overstimulation
2. Radiography of the chest and abdominal ultrasound
of ACh receptors, patients are started at the low end of the
were performed to rule out neoplasia and investigate for
dosage range, and the dose is gradually increased to effect.
megaesophagus and aspiration pneumonia.
 Oral pyridostigmine is available in tablet and syrup form.
3. Tensilon test
Some patients cannot tolerate the oral form of medication
 4. Acetylcholine receptor antibody titer 
because of frequent regurgitation from megaesophagus.
 5. Serology for infectious disease [e.g, Toxoplasma spp,
In these dogs, intramuscular neostigmine bromide can be
Neospora caninum)
administered at 0.4 mg/kg. The dosages are titrated to an
optimal level based on changes in muscle strength.
. Diagnostic Results
This dog responded well to the pyridostigmine bromide.
CBC, chemistry profle, and urinalysis were within normal
Titers were reevaluated monthly and were within the nor-
limits. The CK levels were normal. Thoracic radiographs
mal reference range after 2 months. Spontaneous remission
revealed evidence of megaesophagus but no evidence of
 including resolution of the megaesophagus should be con-
aspiration pneumonia. A Tensilon test was performed by
 sidered. Aspiration pneumonia can be a fatal complication 
 injecting O.1 mg/kg edrophonium chloride IV. An IV cath-
 of megaesophagus.
eter was placed prior to the injection, and atropine 0.02
mg/kg was administered to limit the muscarinic side effects.
One minute after administration, the dog was able to get up
on all limbs and ambulate a short distance.
REFERENCES
1. Cherrone KL, Dewey CW, Coates JR, et al: A retro-
8. Gage ED: Disc syndrome in the large breed of dog.
spective comparison of cervical intervertebral disk dis-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 5:93-98, 1969.
9. Morgan PW, Parent J, Holmberg DL: Cervical pain
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40(4):316-320, 2004.
2. Hoerlein BF: Intervertebral Disc Disease. In Oliver JE,
gaphic findings and surgical implications, Prog Vet
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary Neurol-
Neurol 4(3):76-80, 1993.
ogy, Philadelphia, 1987, W.B. Saunders, pp 321-341.
10. Felts JF, Prata RG: Cervical disk disease in the dog:
3. Dallman MJ, Palettas P, Bojrab MJ: Characteristics of
intraforaminal and lateral extrusions, J Am Anim Hosp
dogs admitted for treatment of cervical intervertebral
Assoc 19:755-760, 1983.
disk disease: 105 cases (1972-1982), J Am Vet Med
11. Waters DJ: Nonambulatory tetraparesis secondary to
Assoc 200(12):2009-2011, 1992.
cervical disk disease in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 
4. Foss RR, Genetzky RM, Riedesel EA, et al: Cervical
25:647-653, 1989.
 intervertebral disc protrusion in two horses, Can Vet J
 12. Olsson SE: The dynamic factor in spinal cord compres-
24:188-191, 1983.
sion: A study on dogs with special reference to cervical
5. Nixon AJ, Stashak TS, Ingram JT, et al: Cervical inter-
disc protrusions, J Neurosurg 15:308-312, 1958.
vertebral disk protrusion in a horse, Vet Surg 13(3):154-
13. Griffths IR: A syndrome produce by dorsolateral
158, 1984.
"explosions" of the cervical intervertebral discs, Vet Rec
6. King AS, Smith RN: Disc protrusions in the cat: Dis-
87:737-741, 1970.
tribution of dorsal protrusions along the vertebral col-
14. Hillman RB, Kengeri SS, Waters DJ: Reevaluation of
umn, Vet Rec 72:335-337, 1960.
 predictive factors for complete recovery in dogs with
7. King AS, Smith RN: Disc protrusions in the cat: Age
nonambulatory tetraparesis secondary to cervical disk
incidence of dorsal protrusions, Vet Rec 72:381-383,
herniation, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45[4):155-163,
1960.
2009.
224
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
15. Forterre F, Konar M, Tomek A, et al: Accuracy of the
34. Fitch RB, Kerwin SC, Hosgood G: Caudal cervical
withdrawal reflex for localization of the site of cervical
intervertebral disk diseases in the small dog: role of dis-
disk herniation in dogs: 35 cases [2004-2007), J Am Vet 
 traction and stabilization in ventral slot decompression,
Med Assoc 232[4]:559-563, 2008.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:68-74, 2000.
16. Bagley RS, Stefanacci JD, Hansen B, et al: Dysphonia
35. Chambers JN, Oliver JE Jr, Bjorling DE: Update on
in two dogs with cranial cervical intervertebral disk
ventral decompression for caudal cervical disk hernia-
extrusion, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29[6]:557-559,
tion in Dobermann pinschers, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1993.
22:775-778, 1986.
17. Somerville ME, Anderson SM, Gill PJ, et al: Accuracy
36. Stone EA, Betts CW, Chambers JN: Cervical fractures
of localization of cervical intervertebral disk extrusion
in the dog: a literature and case review, J Am Anim
or protrusion using survey radiography in dogs, J Am
Hosp Assoc 14(4):463-471, 1979.
Anim Hosp Assoc 37(6):563-572, 2001.
37. Hawthorne JC, Blevins WE, Wallace LJ, et al: Cervi-
18. Drees R, Dennison SE, Keuler NS, et al: Computed
tomographic imaging protocol for the canine cervical
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35(2):135-146, 1999.
and lumbar spine, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50(1):74-79,
38. Abramson CJ, Platt SR, Stedman NL: Tetraparesis in a
2009.
cat with fbrocartilagenous emboli, J Am Anim Hosp
19. Ryan T'M, Platt SR, Llabres-Diaz FJ, et al: Detection of
Assoc 38:153-156, 2002.
spinal cord compression in dogs with cervical interver-
39. Gandini G, Cizinauskas S, Lang J, et al: Fibrocartilag-
tebral disc disease by magnetic resonance imaging, Vet
inous embolism in 75 dogs: clinical findings and fac-
Rec 163[1):11-15, 2008.
tors influencing the recovery rate, J Small Anim Pract
20. Levitski RE, Lipsitz D, Chauvet AE: Magnetic reso-
44:76-80,2003
nance imaging of the cervical spine in 27 dogs, Vet
40. Cauzinille L, Kornegay JN: Fibrocartilaginous embo-
Radiol Ultrasound 40[4):332-341, 1999.
lism of the spinal cord in dogs: review of 36 histo-
21. Russell SW, Griffiths RC: Recurrence of cervical disc
logically confrmed cases and retrospective study of
syndrome in surgically and conservatively treated dogs,
26 suspected cases, J Vet Intern Med 10(4):241-245,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 153:1412-1416, 1968.
1996.
22. Levine JM, Levine GJ, Johnson SI, et al: Evaluation of
41. MacKay AD, Rusbridge C, Sparkes AH, et al: MRI char-
the success of medical management for presumptive
acteristics of suspected acute spinal cord infarction in
cervical intervertebral disk herniation in dogs, Vet Surg
two cats, and a review of the literature, J Feline Med
36(5):492-499, 2007
Surg 7(2):101-107, 2005.
 23. Swaim SF: Ventral decompression of the cervical spinal
42. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, et al: Association of
cord in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 164[5):491-495,
clinical and magnetic resonance imaging findings with
1974.
au  a oi poasns so u an
24. Funkquist B: Decompressive laminectomy for cervical
athy: 50 cases (2000-2006), J Am Vet Med Assoc
disk protrusion in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 3:88-101,
233(1):129-135, 2008.
1962.
43. Duncan ID: Abnormalities of myelination of the central
25. Gill PJ, Lippincott CL, Anderson SM: Dorsal laminec-
nervous system associated with congenital tremor, J Vet
tomy in the treatment of cervical intervertebral disk
Intern Med 1(1):10-23, 1987.
disease in small dogs:a retrospective study of 30 cases, J
44. Duncan ID, Hammang JP, Jackson KF: Myelin mosa-
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32[1):77-80, 1996.
icism in female heterozygotes of the canine shak-
 26. Lipsitz D, Baley CS: Lateral approach for cervical spi-
ing pup and myelin-defcient rat mutants, Brain Res
 nal cord decompression, Prog Vet Neurol 3[1):39-44,
402[1):168-172, 1987.
1992.
45. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF, Wallace ME, et al: Recogni-
27. Lipsitz D, Bailey CS: Clinical use of the lateral cervical
tion of 'trembler', a hypomyelinating condition in the
approach for cervical spinal cord and nerve root disease:
Bernese mountain dog, Vet Rec 120(26):609-612, 1987.
eight cases, Prog Vet Neurol 6(2):60-65, 1995.
46. Kornegay JN, Goodwin MA, Spyridakis LK: Hypomy-
28. Tomlinson J: Tetraparesis following cervical disk fenes-
elination in Weimaraner dogs, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
tration in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):76-77,
72[4):394-401, 1987.
1985.
47. Cummings JF, Summers BA, de Lahunta A, et al: Trem-
 29. Denny HR: The surgical treatment of cervical disc pro-
ors in Samoyed pups with oligodendrocyte deficiencies
trusions in the dog: a review of 40 cases, J Small Anim
and hypomyelination, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 71[3-
Pract 19:251-257, 1978.
4):267-277, 1986.
30. Lincoln JD, Pettit GD: Evaluation of fenestration for
48. Mayhew IG, Blakemore WF, Palmer AC, et al: Tremor
treatment of degenerative disc disease in the caudal
cervical region of large dogs, Vet Surg 14(3):240-246,
J Small Anim Pract 25:551-559, 1984.
1985.
49. Greene CE, Vandevelde M, Hoff EJ: Congenital cere-
31. Lemarie RJ, Kerwin SC, Partington BP, Hosgood G:
brospinal hypomyelinogenesis in a pup, J Am Vet Med
Vertebral subluxation following ventral cervical decom-
Assoc 171(6):534-536, 1977.
pression in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36[4):348-
50. Stoffregen DA, Huxtable CR, Cummings JF, et al: Hypo-
358,2000.
myelination of the central nervous system of two Sia-
32. Java MA, Drobatz KJ, Gilley RS, et al: Incidence of
mese kitten littermates, Vet Pathol 30(4):388-391, 1993.
 and risk factors for postoperative pneumonia in dogs 
51. Bradley R, Done JT: Nervous and muscular systems.
anesthetized for diagnosis or treatment of interverte-
In Leman AD, Straw B, Clock RD, editors: Diseases of
bral disk disease, J Am Vet Med Assoc 235[3):281-287,
Swine, Ames, 1986, Iowa State University Press, pp 73.
2009.
 52. Blakemore WF, Harding JD, Done JT: Ultrastructural
33. Toombs JP: Cervical intervertebral disk disease in dogs
observations on the spinal cord of a Landrace pig with
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 14(11):1477-1487,
congenital tremor type A1II, Res Vet Sci 17(2):174-
1992.
178, 1974.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
225
53. Blakemore WF, Harding JD: Ultrastructural observa-
76. Hafner A, Dahme E, Obermaier G, et al: Spinal dysmy-
tions on the spinal cords of piglets affected with con-
elination in new-born Brown Swiss X Braunvieh calves,
genital tremor type AIV, Res Vet Sei 17(2):248-255,
Zentralbl Veterinarmed B 40:413-422, 1993.
1974.
77.A
Agerholm JS, Andersen O: Ineritance of spinal dysmy-
54. Bolske G, Kronevi T, Lindgren NO: Congenital tremor
elination in calves, Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 42:9-12,
in pigs in Sweden, Nord Vet Med 30:534-537, 1978.
1995.
 55. Young S: Hypomyelinogenesis congenita (cerebel-
78. Nissen PH, Shukri NM, Agerholm JS: Genetic map-
lar ataxia) in Angus-Shorthorn calves, Cornell Vet
ping of spinal dysmyelination in cross-bred American
52[23]:394, 1962.
Brown Swiss cattle to Bovine chromosome ll, Mamm
56. Saunders LZ, Sweet JD, Martin SM, et al: Hereditary
Genome 12:180-182, 2001.
congenital ataxia in Jersey calves, Cornell Vet 42:559
79. Richards RB, Edwards JR: A progressive spinal myeli-
591, 1952.
nopathy in beef cattle, Vet Pathol 23[1):35-41, 1986.
57.1
 Hulland TJ: Cerebellar ataxia in calves, Can J Comp
80. Palmer AC, Jackson PGG: A primary demyelinating
Med 2172-2176, 1957.
disorder of young cattle, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 
58. Physick-Sheard PW, Hopkins JB, O'Connor RD:A bor-
17:457-467, 1991.
der disease-like syndrome in a southern Ontario sheep
81. Fletcher TF, Lee DG, Hammer RF: Ultrastructural fea-
flock, Can Vet J 21:53-60, 1980.
tures of globoid-cell leukodystrophy in the dog, Am J
59. Palmer AC, Medd RK,
, Wilkinson GT: Spinal cord
Vet Res 32[1):177-181, 1971.
degeneration in hound ataxia, J Small Anim Pract
82. Fankhauser R, Luginbuhl H, Hartley WJ: Leukodystro-
25:139-148, 1984.
phie vom typus Krabbe beim hund, Schweizer Archiv
60.1
Palmer AC, Medd
RK: Hound ataxia, Vet Rec
Fur Tierheilkunde 105:198-207, 1963.
122(11):263, 1988.
83. Bjerkas I: Hereditary ‘cavitating'
 leucodystrophy in
61. Sheahan BJ, Caffrey JF, Gunn HM, et al: Structural
Dalmatian dogs, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 40:163-169,
 and biochemical changes in a spinal myelinopathy in
1977.
twelve English foxhounds and two harriers, Vet Pathol
84. McGrath JT: Fibrinoid leukodystrophy (Alexander's
28{2):117-124, 1991
disease). In Andrews EJ, Ward BC, Altman NH, editors:
62. Oevermann A, Bley T, Konar M, et al: A novel leuko-
Spontaneous animal models of human disease Vol. 2,
encephalomyelopathy of Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern
New York, 1979, Academic Press.
Med 22:467-471, 2008.
85. Cox NR, Kwapien RP, Sorjonen DC, et al: Myelo-
63. Cockrell BY, Herigstad RR, Flo GL, et al: Myelomalacia
encephalopathy resembling Alexander's disease
in Afghan hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 16(2):362-365,
a Scottish terrier dog, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 71
1973.
[1-2):163-166, 1986.
64. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Hereditary myelopathy
86. Sorjonen DC, Cox NR, Kwapien RP: Myeloencepha-
of Afghan hounds, a myelinolytic disease, Acta Neuro-
lopathy with eosinophilic refractile bodies (Rosen-
pathol (Berl) 42(3):173-181, 1978.
thal fibers) in a Scottish terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc
65.
Averill DR, Bronson RT: Inherited necrotizing myelop-
190(8):1004-1006, 1987.
athy of Afghan hounds, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
87. Morrison JP, Schatzberg SJ, de Lahunta A, et al: Oligo-
36:734-747, 1977.
dendroglial dysplasia in two bullmastiff dogs, Vet Pathol
66. Douglas SW, Palmer AC: Idiopathic demyelination
43[1):29-35, 2006.
 of brainstem and cord in a miniature poodle puppy.
88. Richardson JA, Tang K, Burns DK: Myeloencephalopa-
J Pathol Bact 8:267-271, 1961
thy with Rosenthal fiber formation in a miniature poo-
67. Mandigers PJJ, van Nes J, Knol BW, et al: Hereditary
dle, Vet Pathol 28[6):536-538, 1991.
Kooiker dog ataxia, Res Vet Sci 54:118-123, 1993.
89. Cordy DR: Progressive ataxia of Charolais cattle-an oli-
68. Gamble DA, Chrisman CL: A leukoencephalomy-
godendroglial dysplasia, Vet Pathol 23[1):78-80, 1986.
elopathy of rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 21(3):274-280,
90. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF, Barlow RM, et al: Progres-
1984.
sive ataxia of Charolais cattle associated with a myelin
69. Wouda W, van Nes JJ: Progressive ataxia due to central
disorder, Vet Rec 91[24):592-594, 1972.
demyelination in Rottweiler dogs, Vet Quart 8:89-97,
91. Blakemore WF, Palmer AC, Barlow RM: Progressive
1986.
ataxia of Charolais cattle associated with disordered
70. Wood SL, Patterson JS: Shetland Sheepdog Leukodys-
myelin, Acta Neuropathol 29(Fasc.2):127-139, 1974.
trophy, J Vet Intern Med 15:486-493, 2001.
92. Averill DR Jr: Degenerative myelopathy in the aging
71. Li FY, Cuddon PA, Song J, et al: Canine spongiform leu-
German shepherd dog: clinical and pathologic findings.
koencephalopathy is associated with a missense muta-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 162(12):1045-1051, 1973.
tion in cytochrome b, Neurobiol Dis 2:135-142, 2006.
93. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: Chronic degenerative radiculo-
72. O'Brien DP, Zachary JF: Clinical features of spongy
myelopathy in the dog, J Small Anim Pract 16[8):461-
degeneration of the central nervous system in two
471, 1975.
Labrador retriever littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
94. Braund KG, Vandevelde M: German shepherd dog
186[11):1207-1210, 1985.
myelopathy-a morphologic and morphometric study.
73. Zachary JF, O'Brien DP: Spongy degeneration of the
Am J Vet Res 39[8):1309-1315, 1978.
95. Awano T, Johnson GS, Wade CM, et al: Genome-wide
Pathol 22:561-571, 1985.
association analysis reveals a SODl mutation in canine
74. Neer TM, Kornegay JN: Leucoencephalomalacia and
degenerative myelopathy that resembles amyotrophic
cerebral white matter vacuolar degeneration in two
lateral sclerosis, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:2794-
related Labrador retriever puppies, J Vet Intern Med
2799,2009.
9(2):100-104, 1995.
96. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doherr MG, et al: Daily
75.
. Jones BR, Alley MR, Shimada A, Lyon M:An encepha-
controlled physiotherapy increases survival time in dogs
lomyelopathy in related Birman kittens, N Z Vet J
with suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet Intern
40[4):160-163, 1992.
Med 20:927-932, 2006.
226
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
97. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M, Lang J, et al: Degenerative
118. Mayhew IG, de Lahunta A, Whitlock RH, et al: Equine
myelopathy in a family of Siberian husky dogs, J Am
degenerative myeloencephalopathy, J Am Vet Med
Vet Med Assoc 183(9):998-1000, 1983.
Assoc 170(2):195-201, 1977.
98. Matthews NS, de Lahunta A: Degenerative myelopa-
119. Stuart LD, Leipold HW: Lesions in bovine progres-
thy in an adult miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc
sive degenerative myeloencephalopathy ("Weaver") of
186(11):1213-1215, 1985.
Brown Swiss cattle, Vet Pathol 22[i):13-23, 1985.
99. Miller AD, Barber R, Porter BF, et al: Degenerative
120. Harper PA, Hartley WJ, Coverdale OR, et al: Multifo-
myelopathy in two boxer dogs, Vet Pathol 46[4):684-
cal symmetrical encephalopathy in simmental calves,
687.2009
Vet Rec 124:122-123, 1989.
100. Coates JR, March PA, Oglesbee M, et al: Clinical
121. Harper PA, Hartley WJ, Fraser GC, et al: Multifocal
characterization of a familial degenerative myelopa-
encephalopathy in limousin calves, Aust Vet J 67:111-
thy in Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs, J Vet Intern Med
112, 1990.
21[6):1323-1331, 2007.
122. Steffen DJ, Vestweber JG, Cash W, et al: Multifocal
101. Long SN, Henthorn PS, Serpell J, et al: Degenerative
 subacute necrotizing encephalomyelpathy in Semmen-
Myelopathy in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, J Vet Intern
tal calves, J Vet Diagn Invest 6:466-472, 1994.
Med 23:401-402, 2009.
123. Harper PAW, Healy PJ: Neurological disease associated
102. Bjorck G, Mair W, Olsson S-E, et al: Hereditary ataxia
with degenerative axonopathy of neonatal Holtein-
in fox terriers, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) (Suppl 1):45-
Friesian calves, Aust Vet J 66:143-146, 1989.
48, 1962.
124. Harper PAW, Plant JW, Walker KH, et al: Progressive
103.1
Hartley WJ, Palmer AC: Ataxia in Jack Russelterriers,
ataxia associated with degenerative thoracic myelopa-
Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 26[1):71-74, 1973.
thy in Merino sheep, Aust Vet J 68[11):357-358,
104.
Wessman A, Goedde T, Fischer A, et al: Hereditary
1991.
ataxia in the Jack Russell terrier - Clinical and genetic
125. Morin DE, Toenniessen JG, French RA, et al: Degenera-
investigations, J Vet Intern Med 18:515-521, 2004.
tive myeloencephalopathy in two llamas, J Am Vet Med
105. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Degenera-
Assoc 204(6):938-943, 1994.
tive diseases of the central nervous system. In Summers
126. Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL, et al: Canine neuroax-
BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, editors: Veterinary
onal dystrophy, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 42[3):286-
296, 1983.
106. Wakshlag JJ, de Lahunta A: Hereditary encephalo-
127.
Chrisman CL, Cork LC, Gamble DA: Neuroaxonal
myelopathy and polyneuropathy in an Alaskan husky.
dystrophy of Rottweiler dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
J Small Anim Pract 50:670-674, 2009.
184[4):464-467, 1984.
107. Griffiths IR, MeCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progressive
128. Evans MG, Mullaney TP, Lowrie CT: Neuroaxonal
 axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of boxer dogs. 3.
dystrophy in a Rottweiler pup, J Am Vet Med Assoc
The peripheral axon lesion with special reference to the
192(11):1560-1562, 1988.
nerve roots, J Neurocytol 15(1):109-120, 1986.
129. Blakemore WF, Palmer AC: Nervous disease in the
108.
 Griffths IR: Progressive axonopathy: an inherited neu-
chihuahua characterised by axonal swellings, Vet Rec
ropathy of Boxer dogs. I. Further studies of the clinical
117[19):498-499, 1985.
and electrophysiological features, J Small Anim Pract
130. Clark RG, Hartley WJ, Burgess GS, et al: Suspected
26[7}:381-392, 1985.
inheirited cerebellar neuroaxonal dystrophy in collie
109. Griffths IR, Duncan ID, Barker J:A progressive axonop-
sheep dogs, N Z Vet J 30(7):102-103, 1982.
athy of Boxer dogs affecting the central and peripheral
131. Sacre BJ, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Neuroaxonal
dystrophy in a Jack Russell terrier pup resembling
110. de Lahunta A, Ingram JT, Cummings JF, et al: Lab-
human infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, Cornell Vet
rador Retriever central axonopathy, Prog Vet Neurol
83[2]:133-142, 1993.
5(3):117-122, 1994.
132. Duncan ID, Griffths IR, Carmichael S, et al: Inher-
111. van Ham L, Vandevelde M, Desmidt M, et al:A tremor
ited canine giant axonal neuropathy, Muscle Nerve
syndrome with a central axonopathy in Scottish terri-
4(3):223-227, 1981.
ers, J Vet Intern Med 8[4):290-292, 1994.
133. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
112. Wright JA, Brownlie S: Progressive ataxia in a Pyrenean
thy, Vet Rec 10:1438-1441, 1977.
mountain dog, Vet Rec 116(15):410-411, 1985.
134. Diaz JD, Duque C, Geisel R: Neuroaxonal dystrophy in
113. Jolly RD, Burbidge HM, Alley MR, et al: Progressive
dogs: case report in 2 litters of Papillon puppies, J Vet
Intern Med 21:531-534, 2007.
away dogs, N Z Vet J 48:188-191, 2000.
135. Franklin RJM, Jeffery ND, Ramsey IK: Neuroaxonal
114. Baranowska I, Jaderlund KH, Nennesmo I, et al: Sensory
dystrophy in a litter of papillon pups, J Small Anim
ataxic neuropathy in golden retriever dogs is caused by
Pract 36(10):441-444, 1995.
a deletion in the mitochondrial tRNAvr gene, PLoS
136. Nibe K, Kita C, Morozumi M, et al: Clinicopathological
Genet 5:1-9, 2009.
features of canine neuroaxonal dystrophy and cerebel-
115. Jaderlund KH, Orvind E, Johnsson E, et al:A neurologic
lar cortical abiotrophy in Papillon and Papillon-related
syndrome in golden reterievers presenting as a sensory
dogs, J Vet Med Sci 69(10):1047-1052, 2007.
ataxic neuropathy,J Vet Intern Med 211:307-1315, 2007.
137. Carmichael KP, Howerth EW, Oliver JE Jr, et al: Neu-
116. Moreau PM, Vallat JM, Hugon J, et al: Peripheral and
roaxonal dystrophy in a group of related cats, J Vet
 central distal axonopathy of suspected inherited origin
Diagn Invest 5[4):585-590, 1993.
in Birman cats, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 82(2):143-
138. Woodard JC, Collins GH, Hessler JR: Feline hereditary
146, 1991.
neuroaxonal dystrophy, Am J Pathol 74[3):551-566,
117. Mayhew IG, Brown CM, Stowe HD, et al: Equine
1974.
degenerative myeloencephalopathy: a vitamin E defi-
139.Hartley
WJ,
Loomis LN: Murrurundi disease:
ciency that may be familial, J Vet Intern Med 1(1):45-
an encephalopathy of sheep, Aust Vet J 57:399-400,
50, 1987.
1981.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
227
140. Cordy DR, Richards WP, Bradford GE: Systemic neu-
163. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Hereditary myelopathy
roaxonal dystrophy in Suffolk sheep, Acta Neuropathol
of Afghan hounds, a myelinolytic disease, Acta Neuro-
8:133-140, 1967.
pathol (Berl) 42(3):173-181, 1978.
141. Beech J, Haskins M: Genetic studies of neuraxonal dys-
164. Douglas SW, Palmer AC: Idiopathic demyelination
trophy in the Morgan, Am J Vet Res 48[1):109-113,
of brain-stem and cord in a miniature poodle puppy.
1987.
J Pathol Bact 82:67-71, 1961
142. Beech J: Neuroaxonal dystrophy of the accessory cune-
165. Gamble DA, Chrisman CL: A leukoencephalomy-
ate nucleus in horses, Vet Pathol 21:384-393, 1984.
elopathy of rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 21(3):274-280.
143. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Gasteiger EL: Multisys-
1984.
temic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in Cairn
166. Wouda W, van Nes JJ: Progressive ataxia due to central
terriers. A case with generalized cataplectic episodes,
demyelination in Rottweiler dogs, Vet Quart 8:89-97,
J Vet Intern Med 5[2):91-94, 1991.
1986.
144. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF: A progressive neuronopa-
167.
Mandigers PJ, van Nes JJ, Knol BW, et al: Hereditary
thy in the young Cairn Terrier, J Small Anim Pract
Kooiker dog ataxia, Res Vet Sci 54:118-123, 1993.
30(2):101-106, 1989.
168. Wood SL, Patterson JS: Shetland Sheepdog Leukodys-
145.
 Zaal MD, van dan Ingh TSGAM, Goedegebuure SA,
trophy, J Vet Intern Med 15:486-493, 2001.
et al: Progressive neuronopathy in two Cairn terrier lit-
169. Li FY, Cuddon PA, Song J, et al: Canine spongiform
ter mates, Vet Quart 19:34-36, 1997.
leukoencephalopathy is associated with a missense
146. Jaggy A, Vandevelde M: Multisystem neuronal degen-
mutation in cytochrome b, Neurobiol Dis 2:135-142,
eration in cocker spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 2(3):117-
2006.
120, 1988.
170. O'Brien DP, Zachary JF: Clinical features of spongy
147. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, de Lahunta A: Mul-
degeneration of the central nervous system in two
Labrador retriever littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Retriever dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:935-939, 2009.
186(11):1207-1210, 1985.
148. Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal
171. Zachary JF, O'Brien DP: Spongy degeneration of the
vacuolation and spinocerebelar degeneration in young
central nervous system in two canine littermates, Vet
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34[4):296-302, 1997.
Pathol 22:561-571, 1985.
149.
 Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Veterinary
172. Richards RB, Edwards JR: A progressive spinal myeli-
Neuropathology, St. Louis, 1995, Mosby, 189-207.
nopathy in beef cattle, Vet Pathol 23(1):35-41, 1986.
150. Duncan ID: Abnormalities ofmyelination of the central
173. Suzuki K, Suzuki Y: Globoid cell leucodystrophy
nervous system associated with congenital tremor, J Vet
[Krabbe's disease): deficiency of glactocerebroside
Intern Med 1(1):10-23, 1987.
beta-galactosidase, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 66:302-
151.1
 Bjerkas I: Hereditary 'cavitating' leucodystrophy in Dal-
309, 1970.
matian dogs, Acta Neuropath (Berl) 40:163-169, 1977.
174. Fankhauser R, Luginbuhl H, Hartley WJ: Leukodystro-
152. MeGrath JT: Fibrinoid leukodystrophy (Alexander's
phie vom typus Krabbe beim hund, Schweizer Archiv
disease). In Andrews EJ, Ward BC, Altman NH, editors:
Fur Tierheilkunde 105:198-207, 1963.
Spontaneous animal models of human disease vol. 2,
175. Cavanagh JB: The significance of the "dying back" pro-
New York, 1979, Academic Press.
 cess in experimental and human neurological disease,
153. Cox NR, Kwapien RP, Sorjonen DC, et al: Myelo-
Int Rev Exp Pathol 3:219-267, 1964.
encephalopathy resembling Alexander's disease in a
176. Hartley Wj, Palmer AC: Ataxia in Jack Russell terriers,
Scottish terrier dog, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 7l[1-2):
Acta Neuropathol [Berl) 26[1):71-74, 1973.
163-166, 1986.
177. Wessman A, Goedde T, Fischer A, et al: Hereditary
154. Sorjonen DC, Cox NR, Kwapien RP: Myeloencepha-
ataxia in the Jack Russell terrier - Clinical and genetic
lopathy with eosinophilic refractile bodies (Rosen-
investigations, J Vet Intern Med 18:515-521, 2004.
thal fibers) in a Scottish terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc
178. Bjorck G, Mair W, Olsson S-E, et al: Hereditary ataxia
190(8):1004-1006, 1987.
 in fox terriers, Acta Neuropath (Berl) (Suppl 1):45-48,
155. Morison JP, Schatzberg SJ, de Lahunta A, et al: Oligo-
1962.
dendroglial dysplasia in two bullmastiff dogs, Vet Pathol
179. van Ham L, Vandevelde M, Desmidt M, et al: A tremor
43[1):29-35, 2006.
syndrome with a central axonopathy in Scottish terri-
156. Richardson JA, Tang K, Burns DK: Myeloencephalopa-
ers, J Vet Intern Med 8[4):290-292, 1994.
thy with Rosenthal fiber formation in a miniature poo-
180. de Lahunta A, Ingram JT, Cummings JF, et al: Lab-
dle, Vet Pathol 28[6]:536-538, 1991.
rador Retriever central axonopathy, Prog Vet Neurol
157. Cordy DR: Progressive ataxia of Charolais cattle-an oli-
5(3):117-122, 1994.
godendroglial dysplasia, Vet Pathol 23[1):78-80, 1986.
181. Stuart LD, Leipold HW: Lesions in bovine progres-
158.1
Millar M, Scholes S, Morris M: Progressive ataxia of
sive degenerative myeloencephalopathy ("Weaver") of
Charolais cattle, Vet Rec 154[12):379, 2004.
Brown Swiss cattle, Vet Pathol 22[1):13-23, 1985.
159. Zicker SC, Kasari TR, Scruggs DW, et al: Progres-
182. Oyster R, Leipold HW, Troyer D, et al: Clinical stud-
sive ataxia in a Charolais bull, J Am Vet Med Assoc
ies of bovine progressive degenerative myeloencephaly
192(11):1590-1592, 1988.
of Brown Swiss cattle, Prog Vet Neurol 2(3):159-164,
160. Oevermann A, Bley T, Konar M, et al: A novel leuko-
1991.
encephalomyelopathy of Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern
183. Wakshlag JJ, de Lahunta A: Hereditary encephalo-
Med 22:467-471, 2008.
161. Averill DR, Bronson RT: Inherited necrotizing myelop-
J Small Anim Pract 50:670-674, 2009.
athy of Afghan hounds, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
184. Griffiths IR, MeCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progres-
36:734-747, 1977.
sive axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of boxer
162. Cockrell BY, Herigstad RR, Flo GL, et al: Myelomala-
dogs. 3. The peripheral axon lesion with special refer
cia in Afghan hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162362-
ence to the nerve roots, J Neurocytol 15[1):109-120,
162365, 1973.
1986.
228
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
185. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID, Barker J: A progressive axo-
206. Carmichael KP, Howerth EW, Oliver JE Jr, et al: Neu-
nopathy of Boxer dogs affecting the central and periph-
roaxonal dystrophy in a group of related cats, J Vet
eral nervous systems, J Small Anim Pract 21(1):29-43,
Diagn Invest 5[4):585-590, 1993.
1980.
207. Rodriguez F, Espinosa de los Monteros A, Morales M,
186. Griffths IR, McCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progressive
axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of Boxer dogs. 2.
termates, Vet Res 138:548-549, 1996.
The nature and distribution of the pathological changes,
208. Woodard JC, Collins GH, Hessler JR: Feline hereditary
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 11:431-446, 1985.
neuroaxonal dystrophy, Am J Pathol 74(3):551-566,
187. Wright JA, Brownlie S: Progressive ataxia in a Pyrenean
1974.
mountain dog, Vet Rec 116(15):410-411, 1985
209. Cordy DR, Richards WP, Bradford GE: Systemic neu-
188. Jolly RD, Burbidge HM, Alley MR, et al: Progressive
roaxonal dystrophy in Suffolk sheep, Acta Neuropathol
-  man  Aou  A
8:133-140, 1967.
away dogs, N Z Vet J 48:188-191, 2000.
210. Mayhew IG: Large Animal Neurology, ed 2, Ames,
189. Coates JR, O'Brien DP: Inherited peripheral neuropa-
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
thies in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
211. Beech J, Haskins M: Genetic studies of neuraxonal dys-
Pract 34:1361-1401, 2004.
tophy in the Morgan, Am J Vet Res 48[1):109-113.
190. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Diseases of
1987.
the peripheral nervous system. In Summers BA, Cum-
212. Toenniessen JG, Morin DE: Degenerative myelopathy:
mings JF, de Lahunta A, edlitors: Veterinary Neuropa-
a comparative review, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
thology, St. Louis, 1995, Mosby, pp 402-501.
17(2):271-283, 1995.
191. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Gasteiger EL: Multisys-
213. Miller MM, Collatos C: Equine degenerative myeloen-
temic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in Cairn
cephalopathy, Vet Clin North Am 13:43-52, 1997.
terriers. A case with generalized cataplectic episodes,
 214. Mayhew IG: Measurements of the accuracy of clini-
J Vet Intern Med 5(2):91-94, 1991.
cal diagnoses of equine neurologic disease, J Vet Intern
192. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF: A progressive neuronopa-
Med 5[6):332-334, 1991.
thy in the young Cairn Terrier, J Small Anim Pract
215. Mayhew IG, de Lahunta A, Whitlock RH, et al: Equine
30(2):101-106, 1989.
degenerative myeloencephalopathy, J Am Vet Med
193.
 Zaal MD, van dan Ingh TSGAM, Goedegebuure SA, et
Assoc 170(2):195-201, 1977.
al: Progressive neuronopathy in two Cairn terrier litter
216. Adam A, Collatos C, Fuenteabla C, et al: Neuroaxonal
mates, Vet Quart 19:34-36, 1997.
dystrophy in a two-year-old quarter horse flly, Can Vet 
194. Jaggy A, Vandevelde M: Multisystem neuronal degen-
J:3743, 1996.
eration in cocker spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 2(3):117-
217. Blythe LL, Craig AM: Equine degenerative myeloen-
120,1988.
cephalopathy. Part I. Clinical signs and pathogenesis,
195. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, et al: Multisystem
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 14(9):1215-1226,
axonopathy and neuronopathy in Golden Retriever
1992.
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:935-939, 2009.
218. Mayhew IG, Brown CM, Stowe HD, et al: Equine
196. Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal
degenerative myeloencephalopathy: a vitamin E def-
vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration in young
ciency that may be familial, J Vet Intern Med 1[1):45-
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34(4):296-302, 1997.
50, 1987.
197. Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL, et al: Canine neuroax-
219. Dill SG, Correa MT, Erb HN, et al: Factors associated
onal dystrophy, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 42[3):286-
with the development of equine degenerative myeloen-
296, 1983.
cephalopathy, Am J Vet Res 51(8):1300-1305, 1990.
198. Chrisman CL, Cork LC, Gamble DA: Neuroaxonal
220. Blythe LL, Craig AM, Lassen ED, et al: Serially deter-
dystrophy of Rottweiler dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
mined plasma α-tocopherol concentrations and results
184[4]:464-467, 1984.
of the oral vitamin E absorption test in clinically normal
199. Chrisman CL: Neurological diseases of Rottweilers:
horses and in horses with degenerative myeloencepha-
neuroaxonal dystrophy and  leukoencephalomalacia,
lopathy, Am J Vet Res 52[6):908-911, 1991.
J Small Anim Pract 33(10):500-504, 1992.
221. Dill SG, Kalfelz FA, de Lahunta A, et al: Serum vita-
200. Blakemore WF, Palmer AC: Nervous disease in the
min E and blood glutathione peroxidase values of
chihuahua characterised by axonal swellings, Vet Rec
horses with degenerative myeloencephalopathy, Am J
117(19):498-499, 1985.
Vet Res 50(1):166-168, 1989.
 201. Clark RG, Hartley WJ, Burgess GS, et al: Suspected
222. Blythe LL, Craig AM: Equine degenerative myeloen-
inheirited cerebellar neuroaxonal dystrophy in collie
cephalopathy Part II. Diagnosis and treatment, Com-
sheep dogs, N Z Vet J 30(7):102-103, 1982.
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 14(12):1633-1637, 1992.
202.
 Sacre BJ, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Neuroaxonal
223.
 Evans HE: Prenatal Development. In Evans HE, editor:
dystrophy in a Jack Russell terrier pup resembling
Miller's Anatomy of the Dog, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993,
human infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, Cornell Vet 
W.B. Saunders Company, pp 32-97.
83[2]:133-142, 1993.
224. Watson AG, Stewart JS: Postnatal ossification centers of
 203. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
the atlas and axis in miniature schnauzers, Am J Vet Res 
thy; some aspects of its clinical, pathological and com-
51[2):264-268, 1990.
parative features, J Small Anim Pract 22(8):491-501,
225.0
Oliver JE Jr, Lewis RE: Lesions of the atlas and axis in
1981.
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 9[3):304-313, 1973.
204. Diaz JD, Duque C, Geisel R: Neuroaxonal dystrophy in
226. Bailey CS:An embryological approach to the clinical sig-
 dogs: case report in 2 litters of Papilln puppies, J Vet
nificance of congenital vertebral and spinal cord abnor
Intern Med 21:531-534, 2007.
malities, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11(7):426-434, 1975.
205. Franklin RJM, Jeffery ND, Ramsey IK: Neuroaxonal
227. Watson AG, de Lahunta A: Atlantoaxial subluxation
dystrophy in a litter of papillon pups, J Small Anim
and absence of transverse ligament of the atlas in a dog.
Pract 36[10):441-444, 1995.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 195[2):235-237, 1989.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
229
228. Evans HE: Arthrology. In Evans HE, editor: Miller's
249. Sorjonen DC, Shires PK:Atlantoaxial instability: a ven-
Anatomy of the Dog, Philadelphia, 1993, W.B. Saun-
tral surgical technique for decompression, fixation, and
ders Company pp 219-257.
fusion, Vet Surg 10(1):22-29, 1981.
229. Cook JR Jr, Oliver JE Jr: Atlantoaxial luxation in the
250. Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ: Atlantoaxial subluxation. In
dog, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 3(3):242-252,
Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ, editors: Small Animal Spinal
1981.
Disorders: Diagnosis and Surgery, ed 2, Edinburgh,
230. Beaver DP, Ellison GW, Lewis DD, et al: Risk factors
2005, Elsevier, pp 161-180.
affecting the outcome of surgery for atlantoaxial sub-
251. Knipe MF, Sturges BK, Vernau KM et al. Atlantoaxial
luxation in dogs: 46 cases [1978-1998), J Am Vet Med
instability in 17 dogs. In Proceedings of the 20th Annual
Assoc 216(7):1104-1109, 2000.
ACVIM Forum Dallas, TX, May 29-June 1, 2002.
231. Huibregtse BA, Smith CW, Fagin BD: Atlantoaxial lux-
252. Sanders SG, Bagley RS, Silver GM, et al: Outcomes and
ation in a Doberman Pinscher, Canine Pract 17(5):7-
complications associated with ventral screws, pins, and
10, 1992.
polymethylmethacrylate for atlantoaxial instability in
232. Hurov L: Congenital atlantoaxial malformation and
12 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:204-210, 2004.
acute subluxation in a mature Basset Hound - surgical
253. Platt SR, Chambers JN, Cross A: A modifed ventral
treatment by wire stabilization, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
fixation for surgical management of atlantoaxial sub-
15(2):177-180, 1979.
luxation in 19 dogs, Vet Surg 33:349-354, 2004.
233. Wheeler SJ: Atlantoaxial subluxation with absence of
254. Schulz KS, Waldron DR, Fahie M: Application of ven-
the dens in a Rottweiler, J Small Anim Pract 33[2):90-
tral pins and polymethylmethacrylate for the manage-
93, 1992.
ment of atlantoaxial instability: results in nine dogs, Vet
234.
 Shelton SB, Bellah J, Chrisman C, et al: Hypoplasia of
Surg 26[4):317-325, 1997.
the odontoid process and secondary atlantoaxial luxation
255. Thomas WB, Sorjonen DC, Simpson ST: Surgical man-
in a Siamese cat, Prog Vet Neurol 2(3):209-211, 1991.
agement of atlantoaxial subluxation in 23 dogs, Vet
235. Slone DE, Bergfeld WA, Walker TL: Surgical decom-
Surg 20(6):409-412, 1991.
 pression for traumatic atlantoaxial subluxation in a
256
Beaver DP, Ellison GW, Lewis DD, et al: Risk factors
weanling filly, J Am Vet Med Assoc 174[1l):1234-
affecting the outcome of surgery for atlantoaxial sub-
1236, 1979.
luxation in dogs: 46 cases [1978-1998), J Am Vet Med
 236. Blikslager AT, Wilson DA, Constantinescu GM, et al:
Assoc 216(7):1104-1109, 2000.
Atlantoaxial malformation in a half-Arabian colt, Cor-
257.
Chambers JN, Betts CW, Oliver JE: The use of nonme-
nell Vet 81[1):67-75, 1991.
tallic suture mterial for stabilization of atlantoaxial sub-
237.
White ME, Pennock PW, Seiler RJ: Atlanto-axial sub-
luxation, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:602-604, 1977.
luxation in five young cattle, Can Vet J 19:79-82, 1978.
258. LeCouteur RA, McKeown D, Johnson J, Eger CE: Stabi-
238. Geary JC, Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF: Atlanto axial sub-
lization of atlantoaxial subluxation in the dog, using the
luxation in the canine, J Small Anim Pract 8:577-582,
nuchal ligament, J Am Vet Med Assoc 177(10):1011-
1967.
1017, 1980.
239. Beal MW, Paglia DT, Griffin GM, et al: Ventilatory fail-
259. McCarthy RJ, Lewis DD, Hosgood G: Atlantoaxial
ure, ventilator management, and outcome in dogs with
subluxation in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases [1991-1999], J Am
17(2):215-227, 1995.
Vet Med Assoc 218:1598-1602, 2001.
260.
 Kishigami M: Application of an atlantoaxial retractor
240. Denny HR, Gibbs C, Waterman A: Atlanto-axial sub-
for atlantoaxial subluxation in the cat and dog, J Am
luxation in the dog: a review of thirty cases and an eval-
Anim Hosp Assoc 20(3):413-419, 1984.
uation of treatment by lag screw fixation, J Small Anim
261.v
van Ee RT, Pechman R, van Ee RM: Failure of the
Pract 26[1):37-47, 1988.
atlantoaxial tension band in two dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
241.
 Sanders SG, Bagley RS, Silver GM: Complications asso-
Assoc 25[6]:707-712, 1989.
ciated with ventral screws, pins, and polymethylmeth-
262. Jaggy A, Hutto VL, Roberts RE, et al: Occipitoatlanto-
acrylate for the treatment of atlantoaxial instability of 8
axial malformation with atlantoaxial subluxation in a
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 14(3):339, 2000.
cat, J Small Anim Pract 32[7):366-372, 1991.
242. Kent M, Eagleson JS, Neravanda D, et al: Intraaxial spi-
263. Watson AG, Hall MA, de Lahunta A: Congenital occip-
nal cord hemorrhage secondary to atlantoaxial sublux-
itoatlantoaxial malformation in a cat, Compend Contin
 ation in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46(2):132-137,
Educ Pract Vet 7(3):245-254, 1985.
2010.
264.
Wilson WD, Hughes SJ, Ghoshal NG, et al: Occipitoat-
243. Havig ME, Cornell KK, Hawthorne JC, et al: Evaluation
lantoaxial malformation in two non-Arabian horses,
of nonsurgical treatment of atlantoaxial subluxation in
J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(1):36-40, 1985.
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:257-262, 2005.
265. Watson AG, Mayhew IG: Familial congenital occipi-
244. Lorinson D, Bright RM, Thomas WB, et al: Atlanto-
toatlantoaxial malformation (OAAM) in the Arabian
axial subluxation in dogs: the results of conservative
horse, Spine 11:334-339, 1986.
 and surgical therapy, Canine Pract 23(3):16-18, 1998.
266. DeCamp CE, Schirmer RG, Stickle RL: Traumatic
245. Gilmore DR: Nonsurgical management of four cases of
atlantoaxial subluxation in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 27[4):415-418, 1991.
Assoc 20(1):93-96, 1984.
267. Crane SW: Surgical managment of traumatic atlanto-
246. Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ: Small Animal Spinal Disor-
occipital instability in a dog, Vet Surg 7[2):39-42,
ders: Diagnosis and Surgery, London, 2005, Elsevier,
1978.
1-379.
268. Lappin MR, Dow S: Traumatic atlanto-occipital luxa-
247. Swaim SF, Greene CE: Odontoidectomy in a dog, J Am
tion in a cat, Vet Surg 12[1):30-32, 1983.
Anim Hosp Assoc 11(5):663-667, 1975.
269. Greenwood KM, Oliver JE Jr: Traumatic atlanto-
248. Johnson SG, Hulse DA: Odontoid dysplasia with atlan
occipital dislocation in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
toaxial instability in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
173(10):1324-1327, 1978.
25[4):400-408, 1989.
230
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
270. Sorjonen DC, Powe TA, West M, et al: Ventral surgical
290. Bagley RS, Silver GM, Kippenes H, et al: Syringomyelia
fixation and fusion for atlanto-occipital subluxation in
and hydromyelia in dogs and cats, Compend Contin
a goat, Vet Surg 12(3):127-129, 1983.
Educ Pract Vet 22:471-479, 2000.
271.1
Rusbridge C: Persistent scratching in Cavalier King
291. Milhorat TH, Johnson RW, Milhorat RH, et al: Clini-
Charles spaniels, Vet Rec 141(7):179, 1997.
copathological correlations in syringomyelia using axial
272. Dewey CW, Berg JM, Stefanacci JD, et al: Caudal
magnetic resonance imaging, Neurosurgery 37(2):206-
occipital malformation syndrome in dogs, Compend
213.1995.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 26[11):886-895, 2004.
292. Dewey CW, Berg JM, Stefanacci JD, et al: Caudal
273. Parker A, Park RD: Occipital Dysplasia in the dog, J Am
occipital malformation syndrome in dogs, Compend
Anim Hosp Assoc 10:520-525, 1974.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 26:886-896, 2004.
 274. Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Tucker RL, et al: Occipital
293. Rusbridge C, Carruthers H, Dube MP, et al: Syringo-
dysplasia and associated cranial spinal cord abnormali-
myelia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels: the relation-
ties in two dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37(5):359-362,
ship between syrinx dimensions and pain, J Small Anim 
1996.
Pract 48[8):432-436, 2007.
275. Rusbridge C, Knowler SP: Hereditary aspects of occipi-
294. Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies JV, et al: Syringo-
tal bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
hydromyelia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, J Am
malformation) in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, Vet
Anim Hosp Assoc 20:34-41, 2000.
Rec 153:107-112, 2003.
295. Bagley RS, Silver GM, Seguin B, et al: Scoliosis and
276. Bynevelt M, Rusbridge C, Britton J: Dorsal dens angula-
associated cystic spinal cord lesion in a dog, J Am Vet 
tion and a Chiari type malformation in a Cavalier King
Med Assoc 211(5):573-575, 1997.
Charles spaniel, Vet Radiol Utrasound 41(6):521-524,
296. Rusbridge C: Chiari-like malformation with syrin-
2000.
  s  r   e
277. Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies JV, et al: Syringo-
term outcome after surgical management, Vet Surg
hydromyelia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, J Am
36(5):396-405, 2007.
Anim Hosp Assoc 36(1):34-41, 2000.
297. Dewey CW, Berg JM, Barone G, et al: Foramen mag-
278. Rusbridge C, Knowler SP: Hereditary aspects of occipi-
num decompression for treatment of caudal occipital
tal bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
malformation syndrome in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
malformation) in Cavalier King Charles spaniels, Vet
227(8):1270-1275, 2005.
Rec 153[4):107-112, 2003.
298. Dewey CW, Marino DJ, Baley KS, et al: Foramen mag-
279. Lu D, Lamb CR, Pfeiffer DU, et al: Neurological signs
num decompression with cranioplasty for treatment of
and results of magnetic resonance imaging in 40 Cava-
caudal occipital malformation syndrome in dogs, Vet
lier King Charles spaniels with Chiari type 1-like mal-
Surg 36(5):406-415, 2007.
formations, Vet Rec 153(9):260-263, 2003.
299. Powers BE, Stashak TS, Nixon AJ, et al: Pathology of
280. Rusbridge C, Knowler SP, Pieterse L, et al: Chiari-like
the vertebral column of horses with cervical static ste-
malformation in the Griffon Bruxellois, J Small Anim
nosis, Vet Pathol 23[4):392-399, 1986.
Pract 50(8):386-393, 2009.
300. Chambers JN: Caudal cervical spondylopathy in the
281.
Couturier J, Rault D, Cauzinille L: Chiari-like mal-
dog: a review of 20 clinical cases and the literature,
formation and  syringomyelia jn normal  Cavalier
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:571-576, 1977.
King Charles spaniels: a multiple diagnostic imaging
301. Trotter EJ, de Lahunta A, Geary JC, et al: Caudal cer-
approach, J Small Anim Pract 49(9):438-443, 2008.
vical vertebral malformation-malarticulation in Great
282.
Cerda-Gonzalez S, Olby NJ, McCullough S, et al:
Danes and Doberman Pinschers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Morphology of the caudal fossa in Cavalier King
168(10]:917-930, 1976.
Charles spaniels, Vet Radiol Utrasound 50[1):37-46,
302. Selcer RR, Oliver JE Jr: Cervical spondylopathy-wob-
2009.
bler syndrome in dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1l:175-
283. Cerda-Gonzalez S, Dewey CW: Congenital diseases of
179,1975.
the craniocervical junction in the dogs, Vet Clin North
303. Lewis DG: Cervical spondylomyelopathy ['wobbler'
Am Small Anim Pract 40:121-141, 2010.
syndrome) in the dog: a study based on 224 cases,
284. Oldfeld EH, Muraszko K, Shawker TH, et al: Patho-
J Small Anim Pract 30[12):657-665, 1989.
physiology of syringomyelia associated with Chiari I
304. Olsson SE, et al: Compression of the spinal cord in
malformation of the cerebellar tonsils. Implications for
Great Danes, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 77(11):1587,
diagnosis and treatment, J Neurosurg 80:3-15, 1994.
1982.
285. Klekamp J: The pathophysiology of syringomyelia - his-
305. Baum F IIl, de Lahunta A, Trotter EJ: Cervical fibrotic
torical overview and current concept, Acta Neurochir
stenosis in a young Rottweiler, J Am Vet Med Assoc
(Wien) 144(7):649-664, 2002.
201(8):1222-1224, 1992.
286.
Gardner WJ: Hydrodynamic mechanism of syringomy-
306.
Wright F, Rest JR, Palmer AC: Ataxia of the Great
elia: its relationship to myelocele, J Neurol Neurosurg
Dane caused by stenosis of the cervical vertebral canal:
Psychiatry 28:247-259, 1965.
comparison with similar conditions in the basset hound,
287. Rusbridge C, Greitz D, Iskandar BJ: Syringomyelia: cur-
Doberman pinscher, ridgeback and the thoroughbred
rent concepts in pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment,
horse, Vet Rec 92[1]:1-6, 1973.
J Vet Intern Med 20(3):469-479, 2006.
307. Eagleson JS, Diaz J, Platt SR, et al: Cervical verte-
288. Rusbridge C, Knowler SP: Inheritance of occipital bone
bral malformation-malarticulation syndrome in the
hypoplasia (Chiari type I malformation) in Cavalier
 Bernese mountain dog: clinical and magnetic resonance
King Charles spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 18[5):673-678,
imaging features, J Small Anim Pract 50(4):186-193,
2004.
2009.
289. Rusbridge C, Knowler P, Rouleau GA, et al: Inherited
308. McKee WM, Butterworth SJ, Scott HW: Management
occipital hypoplasia/syringomyelia in the Cavalier King
of cervical spondylopathy-associated intervertebral disc
Charles spaniel: experiences in setting up a worldwide
protrusions using metal washers in 78 dogs, J Small
DNA collection, J Hered 96(7):745-749, 2005.
Anim Pract 40(10):465-472, 1999.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
231
309. Costa RC, Parent JM, Holmberg DL, et al: Outcome
328. Papageorges M, Gavin PR, Sande RD, et al: Radio-
 of medical and surgical treatment in dogs with cervical
graphic and myelographic examination of the cervi-
spondylomyelopathy: 104 cases [1988-2004), J Am Vet
cal vertebral column in 306 ataxic horses, Vet Radiol
Med Assoc 233[8):1284-1290, 2008.
28[2]:53-59, 1987.
310. VanGundy T: Canine wobbler syndrome. Part I. Patho-
329. Biervliet Jv, Scrivani PV, Divers TJ, et al: Evaluation of
physiology and diagnosis, Compend Contin Educ Pract
decision criteria for detection of spinal cord compres-
Vet 11(2):144-158, 1989.
sion based on cervical myelography in horses: 38 cases
 311. VanGundy TE: Disc-associated wobbler syndrome
[1981-2001), Equine Vet J 36[1):14-20, 2004.
in the Doberman pinscher, Vet Clin North Am Small
330. Moore BR, Holbrook TC, Stefanacci JD, et al: Contrast-
Anim Pract 18[3):667-696, 1988.
enhanced computed tomography and myelography in
312. Trotter EJ: Cervical spine locking plate fixation for
six horses with cervical stenotic myelopathy, Equine
treatment of cervical spondylotic myelopathy in large
Vet J 24[3):197-202, 1992.
breed gogs, Vet Surg 38[6):705-718, 2009.
331. Bruecker KA, Seim HB, Withrow SJ: Clinical evalu-
313. Jeffery ND, McKee WM: Surgery for disc-associated
ation of three surgical methods for treatment of cau-
wobbler syndrome in the dog - an examination of the
dal cervical spondylomyelopathy of dogs, Vet Surg
controversy, J Small Anim Pract :42574-42581, 2001.
18(3):197-203, 1989.
314. Costa RC, Parent JM, Partlow G, et al: Morphologic
332.（
Goring RL, Beale BS, Faulkner RF: The inverted cone
and morphometric magnetic resonance imaging fea-
decompression technique: a surgical treatment for
tures of Doberman pinschers with and without clini-
cal signs of cervical spondylomyelopathy, Am J Vet Res
Doberman pinschers. Part I, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
67[9):1601-1612, 2006.
27[4):403-409, 1991.
315. Lincoln JD: Cervical vertebral malformation/malar-
333. Chambers JN, Oliver JE Jr, Kornegay JN, et al: Ven-
ticulation syndrome in large dogs, Vet Clin North Am
tral decompression for caudal cervical disk herniation
Small Anim Pract 22[4):923-935, 1992.
in large- and giant-breed dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
316. Hedhammer A: Overnutrition and skeletal disease: An
180[4):410-414, 1982.
experimental study in growing Great Dane dogs, Cor-
334. Lyman R: Continuous dorsal laminectomy is the
nell Vet Suppl 51-160, 1974.
procedure of choice, Prog Vet Neurol 2(2):143-146,
317. Mayhew IG, Donawick WJ, Green SL, et al: Diagno-
1991.
sis and prediction of cervical vertebral malformation in
335. Lyman R: Continuous dorsal laminectomy for the treat-
thoroughbred foals based on semi-quantitative radio-
ment of Doberman pinschers with caudal cervical ver-
graphic indicators, Equine Vet J 25(5):435-440, 1993.
tebral instability and malformation, San Diego, 1987,
318. Stewart RH, Reed SM, Weisbrode SE: Frequency and
Abstracts of the 5th Annual Meeting of the Veterinary
severity of osteochondrosis in horses with cervical
Medical Forum, 303-5.
stenotic myelopathy, Am J Vet Res 52[6):873-879,
336. De Risio L, Sharp NJH, Olby NJ, et al: Predictors
1991.
of outcome after dorsal decompressive laminectomy
319. Levine JM, Adam E, MacKay RJ, et al: Confirmed and
for degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs: 69
presumptive cervical vertebral compressive myelopa-
cases [1987-1997], J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:624-628,
thy in older horses: a retrospective study [1992-2004),
2001.
J Vet Intern Med 21(4):812-819, 2007.
337. De Risio L, Munana K, Murray M, et al: Dorsal lami-
320. Stewart RH, Rush BR: Cervical vertebral stenotic
nectomy for caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy: post-
myelopathy. In Reed SM, Warwick MB, Sellon DC, edi-
operative recovery and long-term follow-up in 20 dogs,
tors: Equine Internal Medicine, ed 2, St. Louis, 2004,
Vet Surg 31(5):418-427, 2002.
W.B. Saunders, pp 594-599.
338. McKee WM, Lavelle RB, Richardson JL, et al: Vertebral
321. Reed SM, Bayly WM, Traub JL, et al: Ataxia and paresis
distraction-fusion for cervical spondylopathy using a
 in horses. Part I. Differential diagnosis, Compend Con-
screw and double washer technique, J Small Anim Pract 
tin Educ Pract Vet 3[3):S88-S99, 1981.
31(1):22-27, 1990.
322.
 Sharp NJH, Wheeler SJ, Cofone M: Radiological evalu-
339. Dixon BC, Tomlinson JL, Kraus KH: Modified distrac-
ation of 'wobbler' syndrome-caudal cervical spondylo-
tion-stabilization technique using an interbody poly-
myelopathy, J Small Anim Pract 33:491-499, 1992.
methyl methacrylate plug in dogs with caudal cervical
323.
 Sharp NJH, Cofone M, Robertson ID, et al: Computed
spondylomyelopathy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 208[1):61-
tomography in the evaluation of caudal cervical spon-
68, 1996.
dylomyelopathy of the Doberman pinscher, Vet Radiol
340. Bruecker KA, Seim HB IIl, Blass CE: Caudal cervical
Utrasound 36(2):100-108, 1995.
spondylomyelopathy: decompression by linear traction
324. Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, et al: Mag-
and stabilization with Steinmann pins and polymethyl
netc resonance imaging features of cervical stenotic
methacrylate, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:677-683,
myelopathy in 21 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:20-
1989.
27,2001.
341. Ellison GW, Seim HB, Clemmons RM: Distracted cer-
325. Moore BR, Reed SM, Biller DS, et al: Assessment of
vical spinal fusion for management of caudal cervical
vertebral canal diameter and bony malformations of the
spondylomyelopathy in large-breed dogs, J Am Vet
cervical part of the spine in horses with cervical ste-
Med Assoc 193[4]:447-453, 1988.
notic myelopathy, Ami J Vet Res 55[1):5-13, 1994.
342. Bergman RL, Levine JM, Coates JR, et al: Cervical spinal
326. Hahn CN, Handel I, Green SL, et al: Assessment of
locking plate in combination with cortical ring allograft
the utility of using intra- and intervertebral minimum
for a one level fusion in dogs with cervical spondylotic
 sagittal diameter ratios in the diagnosis of cervical ver-
myelopathy, Vet Surg 37(6):530-536, 2008.
tebral malformation in horses, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
343. Wilson ER, Aron DN, Roberts RE: Observation of a
49[1):1-6, 2008.
secondary compressive lesion after treatment of caudal
327.1
 Neuwirth L: Equine myelography, Compend Contin
cervical spondylomyelopathy in a dog, J Am Vet Med
Educ Pract Vet 14(1):72-79, 1992.
Assoc 205(9):1297-1299, 1994.
232
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
344. Marchevsky AM, Richardson JL: Disc extrusion in a
365. Flecknell PA, Lucke VM: Chronic relapsing polyradicu-
Rottweiler dog with caudal cervical spondylomyelopa-
loneuritis in a cat, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 4l[1):81-
thy after failure of intervertebral distraction/stabilisa-
84, 1978.
tion, Aust Vet J 77(5):295-297, 1999.
366. MacLachlan NJ, Gribble DH, East NE: Polyradiculo-
 345. Rusbridge C, Wheeler SJ, Torrington AM, et al: Com-
neuritis in a goat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 180(2):166-
parison of two surgical techniques for the management
167, 1982.
of cervical spondylomyelopathy in dobermanns, J Small
367. Holmes DF, Schultz RD, Cummings JF, et al: Experi-
Anim Pract 39(9):425-431, 1998.
mental coonhound paralysis: animal model of Guillain-
346. Moore BR, Reed SM, Robertson JT: Surgical treatment
Barre syndrome, Neurology 29(8):1186-1187, 1979.
of cervical stenotic myelopathy in horses: 73 cases [1983-
368. Schrauwen E, Van Ham LML: Postvaccinal acute
1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 203(1):108-112, 1993.
 polyradiculoneuritis in a young dog, Prog Vet Neurol
347.1
 Nixon AJ: Surgical management of equine cervical verte-
6(2):68-70, 1995.
bral malformation, Prog Vet Neurol 2(3):183-195, 1991.
369. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Holmes DF, et al: Coon-
348. Wagner PC, Grant BD, Gallina A, et al: Ataxia and
hound paralysis. Further clinical studies and electron
paresis in horses. Part III Surgical treatment of cervical
microscopic observations, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
spinal cord compression, Compend Contin Educ Pract
56[3):167-178, 1982.
Vet 3(5):S192-S202, 1981.
370.A
Alexander JW, de Lahunta A, Scott DW: A case of
349. Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, Lipsitz D: Cervical myelopa-
brachial plexus neuropathy in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp
thy associated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs, J
Assoc 10(9):515-517, 1974.
Vet Intern Med 13[3):181-186, 1999.
371. Bright RM, Crabtree BJ, Knecht CD: Brachial plexus
350. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Berry WL, et al: Extradural
neuropathy in the cat: a case report, J Am Anim Hosp
 spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs, J Small Anim Pract
Assoc 14:612-615, 1978.
42:502-509, 2001.
372. Cuddon PA: Electrophysiologic assessment of acute
351. Duncan ID: Peripheral neuropathy in the dog and cat,
polyradiculoneuropathy in dogs: comparison  with
Prog Vet Neurol 2(2):111-128, 1991.
Guillain-Barre syndrome in people, J Vet Intern Med
352
de Lahunta A, Glass E: Lower motor neuron-general
12(4):294-303, 1998.
somatic efferent system. In de Lahunta A, Glass E,
373. Chrisman CL: Differentiation of tick paralysis and
editors: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical neurol-
acute idliopathic polyradiculoneuritis in the dog using
ogy, St Louis 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
electromyography, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
353. Braund KG: Neuropathic disorders. In Braund KG, edi-
11:455-458, 1975
tor: Clinical neurology in small animals—Localization,
374. Cuddon PA: Electrophysiology in neuromuscular dis-
diagnosis and treatment, Ithaca, 2003, International
ease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32(1):31-
Veterinary Information Service [www.ivis.org), 2003.
62, 2002.
354. Bagley RS: Tremor syndromes in dogs: diagnosis and
375. Double-blind trial of intravenous methylprednisolone
treatment, J Small Anim Pract 33[10):485-490, 1991.
in Guillain-Barre syndrome. Guillain-Barre Syndrome
355.
Cuddon PA: Tremor Syndromes, Prog Vet Neurol
Steroid Trial Group, Lancet 341[8845):586-590, 1993.
1:285-299, 1990.
376. Cuddon PA:Acquired canine peripheral neuropathies, Vet
 356. Glass EN, Kent M: The clinical examination for neuro-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32[1]:207-249, 2002.
 muscular disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
377. Dyck PJ, Daube J, O'Brien P, et al: Plasma exchange in
32[1):1-29, 2002,
chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneu-
357.
 Shelton GD, Podell M, Poncelet L, et al: Inherited
ropathy, N Engl J Med 314(8):461-465, 1986.
polyneuropathy in Leonberger dogs: a mixed or inter-
378.
 Bartges JW: Therapeutic plasmapheresis, Semin Vet
mediate form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Muscle
Med Surg (Small Anim) 12(3):170-177, 1997.
Nerve 27:471-477, 2003.
379.
 Sherman J, Olby NJ: Nursing and rehabilitation of
358. Jeffery N: Neurological abnormalities of the head and
the neurological patient. In Platt SR, Olby NJ, editors:
face. In Platt SR, Olby NJ, editors: BSAVA Manual of
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Neurology, ed 3,
Canine and Feline Neurology, ed 3, Gloucester, 2004,
Gloucester, 2004, BSAVA, pp 394-407.
Woodrow House, pp 172-188.
380. Duncan ID: Polyradiculoneuritis—Coonhound paraly-
 359. Monnet E: Laryngeal paralysis and devocalization. In
sis revisted Proceedings ACVIM Forum 334-337, 1987.
Slatter DH, editor: Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.
381.
 Blackmore JA, Schaer M: Idiopathic polyradiculoneuri-
ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, Elsevier Science, pp 837-845.
tis and impaired ventilation in a dog: a case report, J Am
360. Thieman KM, Krahwinkel DJ, Sims MH, et al: His-
Anim Hosp Assoc 20(5):487-490, 1984.
topathological confirmation of polyneuropathy in 1l
382. Dubey JP, Carpenter JL, Speer CA, et al: Newly rec-
dogs with laryngeal paralysis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Ognized fatal protozoan disease of dogs, J Am Vet Med
46:161-167, 2010.
Assoc 192(9):1269-1285, 1988.
361. Braund KG, Steinberg HS, Shores A, et al: Laryngeal
383. Cuddon P, Lin DS, Bowman DD, et al: Neospora cani-
paralysis in immature and mature dogs as one sign of
mum infection in English Springer Spaniel littermates.
a more diffuse polyneuropathy, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Diagnostic evaluation and organism isolation, J Vet
194[12):1735-1740, 1989.
Intern Med 6(6):325-332, 1992.
 362. Northington JW, Brown MJ, Farnbach GC, et al: Acute
384. Knowler C, Wheeler SJ: Neospora canimum infection in
idiopathic polyneuropathy in the dog, J Am Vet Med
three dogs, J Small Anim Pract 36[4):172-177, 1995.
Assoc 179(4):375-379, 1981.
385. Ruehlmann D, Podell M, Oglesbee M, et al: Canine
363. Cummings JF, Haas C: Coonhound paralysis: An acute
neosporosis: a case report and literature review, J Am
idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis  in dogs resembling
Anim Hosp Assoc 31(2):174-183, 1995.
Landry Guillain Barre syndrome, J Neurol Sci 4:51-81,
386. Cork LC, Griffn JW, Adams RJ, Price DL: Animal
1967.
model of human disease: motor neuron disease - spinal
364. Lane JR, de Lahunta A: Polyneuritis in a cat, J Am Anim
muscular atrophy and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Am
Hosp Assoc 20:1006-1008, 1984.
J Pathol 100:599-602, 1980.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
233
387. Lorenz MD, Cork LC, Griffin JW, et al: Hereditary spi-
408. Coates JR, March PA, Oglesbee M, et al: Clinical
nal muscular atrophy in Brittany Spaniels: clinical mani-
characterization of a familial degenerative myelopa-
festations, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175[8):833-839, 1979.
thy in Pembroke Welsh Corgi dogs, J Vet Intern Med
388. Cork LC, Griffn JW, Munnell JF, et al: Hereditary
21(6):1323-1331, 2007.
canine spinal muscular atrophy, J Neuropathol Exp
409. Long SN, Henthorn PS, Serpel J, et al: Degenerative
Neurol 38:209-221, 1979.
Myelopathy in Chesapeake Bay Retrievers, J Vet Intern
389
de Lahunta A, Shively JN: Neurofibrillary accumlation
Med 23:401-402, 2009.
in a puppy, Cornell Vet 65:240-247, 1975.
410. He QC, Lowrie C, Shelton GD, et al: Inherited motor
390. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Veterinary
neuron disease in domestic cats: a model of spinal mus-
Neuropathology, St. Louis, 1995, Mosby, 189-207.
cular atrophy, Pediatr Res 57(3):324-330, 2005.
 391. Inada S, Yamauchi C, Igata A, et al: Canine storage
411. Fyfe JC, Menotti-Raymond M, David VA, et al: An
disease characterized by hereditary progressive neura-
~140-kb deletion associated with feline spinal muscular
genic muscular atrophy: breeding experiments and elin-
atrophy implies an essential LIXl function for motor
ical manifestation, Am J Vet Res 47(10):2294-2299,
neuron survival, Genome Res 16(9):1084-1090, 2006.
1986.
412. Vandevelde M, Greene CE, Hoff Ej: Lower motor neu-
392. Inada S, Sakamoto H, Haruta K, et al: A clinical study
ron disease with accumulation of neuroflaments in a
on hereditary progressive neurogenic muscular atrophy
cat, Vet Pathol 13(6):428-435, 1976.
in Pointer dogs, Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 40:539-547,
413. Troyer D, Leipold HW, Cash W, et al: Upper motor
1978.
neurone and descending tract pathology in bovine spinal
 393. Cummings JF, George C, de Lahunta A, et al: Focal spi-
muscular atrophy, J Comp Pathol 107(3):305-317, 1992.
nal muscular atrophy in two German shepherd pups,
414. Hiraga T, Leipold HW, Cash WC, et al: Reduced num-
Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 79(1):113-116, 1989.
 bers and intense anti-ubiquitin immunostaining
of
394. Mandara MT, Meo Ad: Lower motor neuron disease in
bovine motor neurons affected with spinal muscular
the Griffon Briquet Venden dog, Vet Pathol 35[5):412-
atrophy, J Neurol Sei 118[1):43-47, 1993.
414, 1998.
415. Hiraga T, Leipold HW, Vestweber JGE, et al: Cytoskel-
 395. Shell LG, Jortner BS, Leib MS: Familial motor neuron
etal proteins in affected motor neurons in bovine spinal
disease in Rottweiler dogs: neuropathologic studies, Vet
muscular atrophy, Prog Vet Neurol 4(4):137-142, 1993.
Pathol 24[2):135-139, 1987.
416. Nielsen JS, Andresen E, Basse A, Christensen LG, et al:
396. Kent M, Knowles K, Glass E, et al: Motor neuron abi-
Inheritance of bovine spinal muscular atrophy, Acta Vet
otrophy in a saluki, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35(5):436-
Scand 31(2):253-255, 1990.
439, 1999.
417. Agerholm JS, Basse A: Spinal muscular atrophy in calves
397. Sandefeldt E, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Animal
of the Red Danish dairy breed, Vet Rec 134[10):232-
model of human disease. Infantile spinal muscular atro-
235, 1994.
phy, Werdnig-Hoffman diease. Animal model: heredi-
418. Dahme E, Hafner A, Schmidt P: Spinal muscular atro-
tary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland dogs, Am
phy in German Braunvieh calves - comparative neuro-
J Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
pathological evaluation, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
398.1
 Hartley WJ: Lower motor neuron disease in dogs, Acta
17(6):517, 1991.
Neuropathol 2:334-342, 1963.
419. Anderson PD, Parton KH, Collett MG, et al: A lower
399. Stockard CR: An hereditary lethal factor for localized
motor neuron disease in newborn Romney lambs, N Z
motor and preganglionic neurons with a resulting paral-
Vet J 47(3):112-114, 1999.
ysis in the dog, Am J Anat 59:1-53, 1936.
420. Cummings JF, deLahunta A, Fuhrer L, et al: Equine
400.
Averil DR Jr: Degenerative myelopathy in the aging
 motor neuron disease: a preliminary report, Cornell Vet
German shepherd dog: clinical and pathologic findings,
80:357-379, 1990.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 162[12):1045-1051, 1973.
421. Divers TJ, Cummings JE, deLahunta A, et al: Evalua-
401.
 Griffths IR, Duncan ID: Chronic degenerative radiculo-
tion of the risk of motor neuron disease in horses fed a
myelopathy in the dog, J Small Anim Pract 16(8):461-
diet low in vitamin E and high in copper and iron, Am 
471, 1975.
J Vet Res 67[1):120-126, 2006.
402. Braund KG, Vandevelde M: German shepherd dog
422. Divers TJ, Mohammed HO, Cummings JF, et al:
myelopathy-a morphologic and morphometric study,
Equine motor neuron disease: findings in 28 horses and
Am J Vet Res 39(8):1309-1315, 1978.
proposal of a pathophysiological mechanism for the
403. Awano T, Johnson GS, Wade CM, et al: Genome-wide
disease, Equine Vet J 26(5):409-415, 1994.
association analysis reveals a SODl mutation in canine
423. Dubey JP, Koestner A, Piper RC: Repeated transplacen-
degenerative myelopathy that resembles amyotrophic
tal transmission of Neospora caninum in dogs, J Am Vet
lateral sclerosis, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106:2794-
Med Assoc 197(7):857-860, 1990.
2799, 2009.
424. Dubey JP, Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis.
404. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doherr MG, et al: Daily
In Greene CE, editor: Infectious Diseases of the Dog
 controlled physiotherapy increases survival time in dogs
and Cat, 3rd edition, Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier Saun-
with suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet Intern
ders, pp 754-775.
Med 20:927-932, 2006.
425. Barber JS, van Ham L, Polis I, et al: Seroprevalence of
405. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M, Lang J, et al: Degenerative
antibodies to Neospora caninum in Belgian dogs, J Small
 r 's n r j  e u 
Anim Pract 38(1):15-16, 1997.
Vet Med Assoc 183(9):998-1000, 1983.
426. Olby N: Motor neuron disease: inherited and acquired,
406. Matthews NS, de Lahunta A: Degenerative myelopa-
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1403-1418,
thy in an adult miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc
2004.
186(11):1213-1215, 1985.
427. Lorenz MD, Cork LC, Griffn JW, et al: Hereditary
407. Miller AD, Barber R, Porter BF, et al: Degenerative
spinal muscular atrophy in Brittany Spaniels: clinical
myelopathy in two boxer dogs, Vet Pathol 46[4):684
manifestations, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175[8):833-839,
687,2009.
1979.
234
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
428. Inada S, Sakamoto H, Haruta K, et al: A clinical study
448. Jackson CA, de Lahunta A, Cummings JF, et al: Spi-
 on hereditary progressive neurogenic muscular atrophy
nal accessory nerve biopsy as an ante mortem diagnos-
in Pointer dogs, Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 40:539-547,
tic test for equine motor neuron disease, Equine Vet J
1978.
28[3):215-219, 1996.
429. Sandefeldt E, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Animal
449. Divers TJ, de Lahunta A, Hintz HF, et al: Equine motor
model of human disease. Infantile spinal muscular atro-
neuron disease, Equine Vet Educ 13(2):63-67, 2001.
phy, Werdnig-Hoffman diease. Animal model: heredi-
450.
de la Rua-Domenech R, Mohammed HO, Cummings
tary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland dogs, Am
JF, et al: Intrinsic, management, and nutritional factors
J Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
associated with equine motor neuron disease, J Am Vet
430. He QC, Lowrie C, Shelton GD, et al: Inherited motor
Med Assoc 211(10):1261-1267, 1997.
neuron disease in domestic cats: a model of spinal mus-
451. Moe L: Hereditary polyneuropathy of Alaskan mala-
cular atrophy, Pediatr Res 57[3):324-330, 2005.
mutes. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Kirk's Cur-
431. Vandevelde M, Greene CE, Hoff EJ: Lower motor neu-
rent Veterinary Therapy, ed 1l, Philadelphia, 1992,
ron disease with accumulation of neuroflaments in a
W.B. Saunders Co., pp 1038-1039.
cat, Vet Pathol 13(6):428-435, 1976.
452. Braund KG, Shores A, Lowrie CT, et al: Idiopathic
432.
 Shelton GD, Hopkins AL, Ginn PE, et al: Adult-onset
polyneuropathy in Alaskan malamutes, J Vet Intern
motor neuron disease in three cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Med 11(4):243-249, 1997.
212[8):1271-1275, 1998.
453. Chrisman CL: Dancing Doberman disease: clinical find-
433. Dahme E, Hafner A, Schmidt P: Spinal muscular atro-
0661 '06-58:(1]1 lo.naN 1aA 30rd 'sisouaoid pue s3u
phy in German Braunvieh calves - comparative neuro
 454. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
pathological evaluation, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
thy, Vet Rec 10l:438-441, 1977.
17(6):517, 1991.
455. Braund KG, Luttgen PJ, Redding RW, et al: Dis-
434. Nielsen JS, Andresen E, Basse A, et al: Inheritance
tal symmetrical polyneuropathy in a dog, Vet Pathol
of bovine spinal muscular atrophy, Acta Vet Scand
17[4):422-435, 1980.
31(2):253-255, 1990.
456. Henricks PM, Steiss J, Petterson JD: Distal peripheral
435. Troyer D, Leipold HW, Cash W, et al: Upper motor
polyneuropathy in a Great Dane, Can Vet J 28:165-
167, 1987.
nal muscular atrophy, J Comp Pathol 107(3):305-317,
457. Griffiths IR, McCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progressive
1992.
436. Anderson PD, Parton KH, Collett MG, et al: A lower
The peripheral axon lesion with special reference to the
motor neuron disease in newborn Rominey lambs, N Z
nerve roots, J Neurocytol 15(1):109-120, 1986.
Vet J 47(3):112-114, 1999.
458. Griffiths IR: Progressive axonopathy: an inherited neu-
437.1
Divers TJ, Mohammed HO, Cummings JF, et al:
ropathy of Boxer dogs. I. Further studies of the clinical
Equine motor neuron disease: fndings in 28 horses and
and electrophysiological features, J Small Anim Pract
proposal of a pathophysiological mechanism for the
26[7]:381-392, 1985
disease, Equine Vet J 26(5):409-415, 1994.
459. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID, Barker J: A progressive axo-
438. Cummings JF, deLahunta A, Fuhrer L, et al: Equine
nopathy of Boxer dogs affecting the central and periph-
motor neuron disease:a preliminary report, Cornell Vet
eral nervous systems, J Small Anim Pract 21(1):29-43,
80:357-379, 1990.
1980.
439. de la Rua-Domenech R, Mohammed HO, Atwill ER,
460. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR, Carmichael S, et al: Inher-
et al: Epidemiologic evidence for clustering of equine
ited canine giant axonal neuropathy, Muscle Nerve
motor neuron disease in the United States, Am j Vet
4(3):223-227, 1981.
Res 56[11):1433-1439, 1995.
461.
 Duncan ID, Griffths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
440. Mohammed HO, Divers TJ, Summers BA, et al: Vita-
thy; some aspects ofits clinical, pathological and compar-
min E deficiency and risk of equine motor neuron dis-
ative features, J Small Anim Pract 22[8):491-501, 1981.
ease, Acta Vet Scand 49:17, 2007.
 462. Duncan ID, Griffths IR: Peripheral nervous system in
441. Divers TJ, Cummings JE, deLahunta A, et al: Evalua-
a case of canine giant axonal neuropathy, Neuropathol
tion of the risk of motor neuron disease in horses fed a
Appl Neurobiol 5:25-39, 1979.
y 'n PUe Iaddo u a PUe a u u mo 
463. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: The central nervous system in
J Vet Res 67(1):120-126, 2006.
canine giant axonal neuropathy, Acta Neuropath (Berl)
442. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Mohammed HO, et al:
46:169-172, 1979.
Equine motor neuron disease: a new neurologic disor-
464. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID, McCulloch M, et al: Further
der, Equine Pract 13(9):15-18, 1991.
studies of the central nervous system in canine giant
443. Polack EW, King JM, Cummings JF, et al: Quantita-
axonal  neuropathy,  Neuropathol  Appl  Neurobiol
tive assessment of motor neuron loss in equine motor
6:421-432, 1980.
neuron disease (EMND), Equine Vet J 30(3):256-259,
465. Ubbink GJ, Knol BW, Bouw J:The relationship between
1998.
homozygosity and the occurrence of specifc diseases in
444. Green SL, Tolwani RJ: Animal models for motor neu-
Bouvier Belge des Flandres dogs in the Netherlands, Vet
ron disease, Lab Anim Sci 49(5):480-487, 1999.
Quart 14:137-140, 1992.
445.1
 Ris RC, Jackson C, Rebhun W, et al: Ocular manifes-
466. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Bouw J, Hartman W: Heredi-
tations of equine motor neuron disease, Equine Vet J
tary transmission of laryngeal paralysis in Bouviers,
31(2):99-110, 1999.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17(1):75-76, 1981.
446. Verhulst D, Barnett KC, Mayhew IG: Equine motor
467. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Hartman W, Goedegebuure
neuron disease and retinal degeneration, Equine Vet
SA: Spontaneous laryngeal paralysis in young Bouviers,
Educ 13(2):59-61, 2001.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:714-720, 1978.
447. Podell M, Valentine BA, Cummings JF, et al: Electro-
468. O'Brien JA, Hendriks J: Inherited laryngeal paraly-
 myography in acquired equine motor neuron disease,
sis. Analysis in the husky cross, Vet Quart 8:301-302,
Prog Vet Neurol 6[4):128-134, 1995.
1986.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
235
469. Ridyard AE, Corcoran BM, Tasker S, et al: Spontaneous
489. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: A sensory neuropathy affect-
laryngeal paralysis in four white-coated German shep-
ing long-haired dachshund dogs, J Small Anim Pract
herd dogs, J Small Anim Pract 41:558-561, 2000.
23:381-390, 1982.
470. Venker-van Hagen AJ: Laryngeal diseases of dogs and
490. Duncan ID, Griffths IR, Munz M: The pathology of
cats. In Kirk RW, editor: Current Veterinary Therapy
a sensory neuropathy affecting longhaired dachshund
IX Small Animal Practice, ed 7, Philadelphia, 1986,
dogs, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 58[2):141-151, 1982.
W.B. Saunders, pp 265-269.
491. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Simpson ST, McDonald
471. Braund KG, Shores A, Di Pinto N, et al: Laryngeal
JM: Reduced substance P-like immunoreactivity in
paralysis in dalmatians, J Vet Intern Med 6(2):117,
hereditary sensory neuropathy of pointer dogs, Acta
1992.
Neuropathol (Berl) 63[1):33-40, 1984.
472. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, et al: Laryngeal
492. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Braund KG, Mitchell WJ
Jr: Hereditary sensory neuropathy. Nociceptive loss and
tians, Am J Vet Res 55[4):534-542, 1994.
acral mutilation in pointer dogs: canine hereditary sen-
473. Mahony OM, Knowles KE, Braund KG, et al: Laryngeal
sory neuropathy, Am J Pathol 112[1):136-138, 1983.
paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Rottwei-
493. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Winn SS: Acral mutila-
lers, J Vet Intern Med 12[5):330-337, 1998.
tion and nociceptive loss in English pointer dogs. A
474. Shelton GD, Podell M, Sullivan S, et al: Distal, symmet-
canine sensory neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
rical polyneuropathy with laryngeal paralysis in young.
53[2):119-127, 1981.
related Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern.Med 14[3):339,
494. Sanda A, Pivnik L: Die Zehenneckrose bei kurzhaarigen
2000.
Vorstehhunden, Kleintierpraxis 9:76-83, 1964.
475. Shelton GD, Podell M, Poncelet L, et al: Inherited
495. Pivnik L: Zur vergleichenden problematik einiger akro-
 polyneuropathy in Leonberger dogs: a mixed or inter-
dystrophischer neuropathien bei menschen und hund,
mediate form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Muscle
Neurol Neurochir Psychiatr 112:365-37l, 1973.
Nerve 27:471-477, 2003.
496. Franklin RJM, Olby NJ, Targett MP, et al: Sensory neu-
476. Braund KG, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Vallat JM, et al: Dis-
ropathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small Anim Pract
tal sensorimotor polyneuropathy in mature Rottweiler
33:402-404, 1992.
dogs, Vet Pathol 31(3):316-326, 1994.
497. Paradis M, Jaham Cd, Page N, et al: Acral mutilation
477. Schatzberg SJ, Shelton GD: Newly identified neuro-
and analgesia in 13 French spaniels, Vet Dermatol
muscular disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
16[2):87-93, 2005.
Pract 34[6):1497-1524, 2004.
498. Steiss JE, Pook HA, Clark EG, et al: Sensory neuronopa-
478. Matiasek LA, Feliu-Pascual AL, Shelton DG, et al: Axo-
thy in a dog, JAm Vet Med Assoc 190(2):205-208, 1987.
nal neuropathy with unusual clinical course in young
499. Jaderlund KH, Orvind E, Johnsson E, et al: A neurologic
Snowshoe cats, J Feline Med Surg 11(12):1005-1010,
syndrome in golden reterievers presenting as a sensory
2009.
 ataxic neuropathy, J Vet Intern Med 2i1:307-1315,
479. Moreau PM, Vallat JM, Hugon J, et al: Peripheral and
2007.
central distal axonopathy of suspected inherited origin
500. Carmichael S, Griffiths IR: Case of isolated sensory
in Birman cats, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 82(2):143-
trigeminal neuropathy in a dog, Vet Rec 109(13):280
146, 1991.
282, 1981.
480. Braund KG, Mehta JR, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al: Con-
501. Vermeersch K, Ham LV, Braund KG, et al: Sensory
 genital hypomyelinating polyneuropathy in two golden
neuropathy in two border collie puppies, J Small Anim
retriever littermates, Vet Pathol 26[3):202-208, 1989.
Pract 46[6):295-299, 2005.
481. Matz ME, Shell L, Braund K: Peripheral hypomyelin-
502.
Wheeler SJ: Sensory neuropathy in a border collie
ization in two golden retriever littermates, J Am Vet
 puppy, J Small Anim Pract 28:281-289, 1987.
Med Assoc 197(2):228-230, 1990.
503.
Wouda W, Vandevelde M, Oettli P, et al: Sensory neu-
482. Cummings JF, Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, et al: Canine
ronopathy in dogs: a study of four cases, J Comp Pathol
inherited hypertrophic neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol
93(3):437-450, 1983.
(Berl) 53(2):137-143, 1981.
504. van Nes JJ: Electrophysiological evidence of sensory
483. Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, Cummings JF, et al: Canine
nerve dysfunction in 10 dogs with acral lick dermatitis,
inherited hypertrophic neuropathy: clinical and electro-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22[2):157-160, 1986.
diagnostic studies, Am J Vet Res 45(6) :1172-1177, 1984.
 505. McKerrell RE, Blakemore WF, Heath MF, et al: Primary
484.
Cooper BJ, Duncan I, Cummings J, et al: Defective
hyperoxaluria (L-glyceric aciduria) in the cat: a newly
Schwann cell function in canine inherited hypertrophic
recognised inherited disease, Vet Rec 125(2):31-34,
neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 63[1):51-56,
1989.
1984.
506. Goldstein RE, Narala S, Sabet N, et al: Primary hyp-
485. Sponenberg DP, de Lahunta A: Hereditary hyper-
eroxaluria in cats is caused by a mutation in the feline
trophic neuropathy in Tibetan Mastiff dogs, J Hered
GRHPR gene, J Hered 100:S2-S7, 2009.
72:287.1981.
507. Jones BR, Johnstone AC, Cahill JI, et al: Peripheral neu-
486. Dahme E, Kraft W, Scabell J: Hypertrophische poly-
  s  
neuropathie bei der Katze, J Vet Med 34:271-288,
ronaemia, Vet Rec 119(11):268-272, 1986.
1987.
508. Jones BR: Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat,
487. Poncelet L, Resibois A, Engvall E, et al: Laminin alpha2
J Small Anim Pract 34:493-499, 1993.
deficiency-associated muscular dystrophy in a Maine
509. Jones BR: Hyperchlomicronemia in the cat. In Bona-
coon cat. [Review] [19 refs], J Small Anim Pract
gura JD, Kirk RW, editors: Kirk's Current Veterinary
44[12]:550-552, 2003.
Theraphy Xll Small Animal Practice, ed 12, Philadel-
488. O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, Liu LA, et al: Laminin α2
phia, 1995, W.B. Saunders Co., pp 1163-1166.
[(merosin) -deficient muscular dystrophy and demyelin-
510. Jones BR, Wallace A, Harding DRK, et al: Occurence
ating neuropathy in two cats, J Neurol Sci 18:937-943,
of idiopathic, familial hyperchylomicronaemia in a cat,
2001.
Vet Rec 112[543):547, 1983.
236
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
511. Grieshaber TL, McKeever PJ, McKeever PJ, et al: Spon-
534. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Glycogen stor-
taneous cutaneous [eruptive) xanthomatosis in two
age disease type IV: inherited defciency of branching
cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:509-512, 1991.
enzyme activity in cats, Pediatr Res 32(6):719-725)
512.1
Bauer JE, Verlander JW: Congenital lipoprotein lipase
1992.
deficiency in hyperlipemic kitten siblings, Vet Clin
535. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Familial glyco-
Pathol 13:7-1l, 1984.
gen storage disease type IV (GSD IV) in Norwegian
513.1
 Brooks KD: Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia in a cat,
forest cats, Proceed 8th ACVIM Forum 1129, 1990.
Companion Anim Pract 19:5-9, 1989.
536. Sponseller BT, Valberg SJ, Ward TL, et al: Muscular
 514. Sottiaux J: Cas clinique:hyperchylomicronemie primaire
weakness and recumbency in a Quarter Horse colt due
chez un chat, Le Point Véterinaire 18:117-119, 1986.
to glycogen branching enzyme deficiency, Equine Vet
515. Moisan PG, Steffen DJ, Sanderson MW, et al:A familial
Educ 15[4):182-187, 2003.
degenerative neuromuscular disease of Gelbvieh cattle,
J Vet Diagn Invest 14(2):140-149, 2002.
enzyme deficiency in Quarter Horse foals, J Vet Intern
516. Panciera RJ, Washburn KE, Streeter RN, et al:A familial
Med 15(6):572-580, 2001.
 peripheral neuropathy and glomerulopathy in Gelbvieh
538. Wagner ML, Valberg SJ, Ames EG, et al: Allle fre-
calves, Veterinary Pathology 40(1):63-70, 2003.
quency and likely impact of the glycogen branching
517. F
Herrtage ME: Canine fucosidosis, Vet Ann 28:223-227,
enzyme deficiency gene in Quarter horse and Paint
1988.
horse populations, J Vet Intern Med 20(5):1207-1211,
518. Barker CG, Herrtage ME, Shanahan F, et al: Fucosidosis
2006.
in English springer spaniels: results of a trial screening
539. Ward TL, Valberg SJ, Adelson DL, et al: Glyco-
programme, J Small Anim Pract 29(10):623-630, 1988.
gen  branching enzyme
(GBEl) mutation causing
 519. Littlewood JD, Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Neuronal
equine_glycogen storage disease IV, Mamm Genome
storage disease in English springer spaniels, Vet Rec
15(7):570-577, 2004.
112[4):86-87, 1983.
540. Berg T, Tollersrud OK, Walkley SU, et al: Purifcation
520. Skelly BJ, Sargan DR, Winchester BG, et al: Genomic
of feline lysosomal alpha-mannosidase, determination
screening for fucosidosis in English Springer Spaniels,
of its cDNA sequence and identification of a mutation
Am J Vet Res 60(6):726-729, 1999.
causing alpha-mannosidosis in Persian cats, Biochem J
521.
 Smith MO, Wenger DA, Hill SL, et al: Fucosidosis in
328[3):863-870, 1997.
a family of American-bred English springer spaniels, J
541. Blakemore WF: A case of mannosidosis in the cat: clini-
Am Vet Med Assoc 209(12):2088-2090, 1996.
cal and histopathological findings, J Small Anim Pract
522. Selcer ES, Selcer RR: Globoid cel leukodystrophy in
27(7):447-455, 1986.
two West Highland white terriers and one Pomeranian,
542. Cummings JF, Wood PA, de Lahunta A, et al: The clini-
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6(7):621-624, 1984.
cal and pathologic heterogeneity of feline a-mannosido-
 523. Victoria T, Raf MA, Wenger DA: Cloning of the
sis, J Vet Intern Med 2[4):163-170, 1988.
canine GALC cDNA and identification of the muta-
543. Healy PJ, Harper PA, Dennis JA: Phenotypic variation
in bovine a-mannosidosis, Res Vet Sci 49[l):82-84,
land White and Cairn terriers, Genomics (San Diego)
1990.
33(3):457-462, 1996.
544. Maenhout T, Kint JA, Dacremont G, et al: Mannosido-
 524. Wenger DA, Victoria T, Rafi MA, et al: Globoid cell
sis in a litter of Persian cats, Vet Rec 122[15):351-354,
leukodystrophy in Cairn and West Highland White ter-
1988.
riers 90(1):138-142, 1999.
545. Vandevelde M, Fankhauser R, Bichsel P, et al: Heredi-
525.
 Johnson GR, Oliver JE Jr, Selcer R: Globoid cell leuko-
tary neurovisceral mannosidosis associated with a-man-
dystrophy in a Beagle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 167(5):380
nosidase defciency in a family of Persian cats, Acta
384, 1975.
Neuropathol (Berl) 58(1):64-68, 1982.
526. Zaki FA, Kay WJ: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in a
546. Embury DH, Jerrett IV: Mannosidosis in Galloway
miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 163(3):248-
calves, Vet Pathol 22[6):548-551, 1985.
250, 1973.
547.
Wenger DA, Sattler M, Kudoh T, et al: Niemann-
527. Luttgen PJ, Braund KG, Storts RW: Globoid cell leu-
Pick disease: A genetic model in Siamese cats, Science
codystrophy in a Basset hound, J Small Anim Pract
208:1471-1473, 1980.
24:153-160, 1983.
548. Yamagami T, Umeda M, Kamiya S, et al: Neurovisceral
528.1
 MeDonnell JJ, Carmichael KP, McGraw RA, et al: Pre
sphingomyelinosis in a Siamese cat, Acta Neuropathol
liminary characterization of globoid cell leukodystro-
[Berl) 79[3):330-332, 1989.
phy in Irish Setters, J Vet Intern Med 14(3):339, 2000.
 549. Baker HJ, Wood PA, Wenger DA, et al: Sphingomyelin
529.1
McGraw RA, Carmichael KP: Molecular basis of
lipidosis in a cat, Veterinary Pathology 24(5):386-391,
globoid cell leukodystrophy in Irish setters, Vet J
1987.
171[2):370-372, 2006.
550. Somers KL, Royals MA, Carstea ED, et al: Mutation
530. Johnson KH: Globoid leukodystrophy in the cat, J Am
analysis of feline Niemann-Pick Cl disease, Mol Genet
Vet Med Assoc 157(12):2057-2064, 1970.
Metab 79[2):99-103, 2003.
531.1
 Pritchard DH, Naphtine DV, Sinclair AJ: Globoid cell
551. Saunders GK, Wenger DA: Sphingomyelinase defi-
leukodystrophy in polled Dorset sheep, Vet Pathol
ciency (Niemann-Pick disease) in a Hereford calf Vet
17:399-405, 1980.
Pathol 45[2):201-202, 2008.
532. Sigurdson CJ, Basaraba RJ, Mazzaferro EM, et al: Glo-
552. Braund KG, Mehta JR, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al:
boid cell-like leukodystrophy in a domestic longhaired
 Congenital hypomyelinating polyneuropathy in two
cat, Vet Pathol 39:494-496, 2002.
golden retriever littermates, Vet Pathol 26[3):202-
 533. Coates JR, Paxton R, Cox NR, et al: A case presenta-
208, 1989.
tion and discussion of type IV glycogen storage disease
553. Matz ME, Shell L, Braund K: Peripheral hypomyelin-
in a Norwegian Forest cat, Prog Vet Neurol 7(1):5-11,
ization in two golden retriever littermates, J Am Vet
1996.
Med Assoc 197(2):228-230, 1990.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
237
554. Cummings JF, Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, et al: Canine
575. Jaggy A, Oliver JE, Ferguson DC, et al: Neurological
inherited hypertrophic neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol
manifestations ofhypothyroidism: a retrospective study
(Berl) 53(2):137-143, 1981.
of 29 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 8[5):328-336, 1994.
 555. Dahme E, Kraft W, Scabell J: Hypertrophische poly-
576. Stanley BJ, Hauptman JG, Fritz MC, et al: Esophageal
neuropathie bei der Katze, J Vet Med 34:271-288,
dysfunction in dogs with idiopathic laryngeal paralysis: a
1987.
controlled cohort study, Vet Surg 39(2):139-149, 2010.
 556. Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, Cummmings JF, et al: Canine
577. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Hartman W, Goedegebuure
inherited hypertrophic neuropathy: clinical and electro-
SA: Spontaneous laryngeal paralysis in young Bouviers,
diagnostic studies, Am J Vet Res 45(6):1172-1177, 1984.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:714-720, 1978.
 557. Cooper BJ, Duncan I, Cummings J, et al: Defective
578. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Bouw J, Hartman W: Heredi-
Schwann cell function in canine inherited hypertrophic
tary transmission of laryngeal paralysis in Bouviers,
neuropathy Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 63(1):51-56,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17(1):75-76, 1981.
1984.
579. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, et al: Laryngeal
558. Sponenberg DP, de Lahunta A: Hereditary hyper-
paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Dalma-
trophic neuropathy in Tibetan Mastiff dogs, J Hered
tians, Am J Vet Res 55[4):534-542, 1994.
72:287, 1981.
580. Mahony OM, Knowles KE, Braund KG, et al: Laryngeal
559. O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, Liu LA, et al: Laminin α2
paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Rottwei-
[(merosin) -deficient muscular dystrophy and demyelin-
lers, J Vet Intern Med 12(5):330-337, 1998.
ating neuropathy in two cats, J Neurol Sci 18:937-943,
581. Dickinson PJ, LeCouteur RA: Muscle and nerve biopsy
2001.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 32[1):63-102,
560. Braund KG, Shores A, Lowrie CT, et al: Idiopathic
2002.
polyneuropathy in Alaskan malamutes, J Vet Intern
582. Moreau PM, Vallat JM, Hugon J, et al: Peripheral and
Med 11[4):243-249, 1997.
central distal axonopathy of suspected inherited origin
 561. Moe L: Hereditary polyneuropathy of Alaskan mala-
in Birman cats, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 82(2):143-
mutes. In Kirk RW, Bonagura JD, editors: Kirk's Cur-
146, 1991.
rent Veterinary Therapy, ed 1l, Philadelphia, 1992,
583. Griffiths IR: Progressive axonopathy: an inherited neu-
W.B. Saunders Co., pp 1038-1039.
ropathy of Boxer dogs. 1. Further studies of the clinical
562. Chrisman CL: Dancing Doberman disease: clinical find-
and electrophysiological features, J Small Anim Pract
ings and prognosis, Prog Vet Neurol 1(1):83-90, 1990.
26:381-392, 1985.
563.1
 Duncan ID, Griffths IR: Peripheral nervous system in
 584. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
a case of canine giant axonal neuropathy, Neuropathol
thy, Vet Rec 10l:438-441, 1977.
Appl Neurobiol 5:25-39, 1979.
585. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: A sensory neuropathy affect-
564. Duncan ID, Griffths IR, Carmichael S, et al: Inher-
ing long-haired dachshund dogs, J Small Anim Pract
ited canine giant axonal neuropathy, Muscle Nerve
23:381-390, 1982.
4(3):223-227, 1981.
586. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Braund KG, et al: Heredi-
565. Braund KG, Luttgen PJ, Redding RW, et al: Dis-
tary sensory neuropathy. Nociceptive loss and acral
tal symmetrical polyneuropathy in a dog, Vet Pathol
mutilation in pointer dogs: canine hereditary sensory
17[4):422-435, 1980.
neuropathy Am J Pathol 112[1):136-138, 1983.
566. Henricks PM, Steiss J, Petterson JD: Distal peripheral
587. Mason LT: The occurrence and pedigree analysis of a
polyneuropathy in a Great Dane, Can Vet J 28:165-
167, 1987.
spaniel, Proceed Ann Am College Vet Dermatology
567.
 Shelton GD, Podell M, Sullivan S, et al: Distal, symmet-
1523-1524, 1999.
rical polyneuropathy with laryngeal paralysis in young.
588. Paradis M, Cd Jaham, Page N, et al: Acral mutilation
related Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern.Med 14(3):339,
and analgesia in 13 French spaniels, Vet Dermatol
2000.
16(2):87-93, 2005.
568. Harkin KR, Cash WC, Shelton GD: Sensory and motor
 589. Franklin RJM, Olby NJ, Targett MP, et al: Sensory neu-
neuropathy in a border collie, J Am Vet Med Assoc
ropathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small Anim Pract
227(8):1263-1265, 2005.
33:402-404, 1992.
569. Braund KG, Toivio-Kinnucan M, Vallat JM, et al: Dis-
590. Steiss JE, Pook HA, Clark EG, et al: Sensory neuronop-
tal sensorimotor polyneuropathy in mature Rottweiler
athy in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 190(2):205-208,
dogs, Vet Pathol 31[3):316-326, 1994.
1987.
570. Armengou L, Climent F, Shelton GD, et al: Antemor-
591. Carmichael S, Griffiths IR: Case of isolated sensory
tem diagnosis of a distal axonopathy causing severe
trigeminal neuropathy in a dog, Vet Rec 109(13):280
stringhalt in a horse, J Vet Intern Med 24[1):220-223,
282, 1981.
2010.
 592. Wheeler SJ: Sensory neuropathy in a border collie
 571. Huntington PJ, Jeffcott LB, Friend SCE, et al: Austra-
puppy, J Small Anim Pract :28281-28289, 1987.
lian stringhalt - epidemiological, clinical and neurologi-
593. Vermeersch K, Ham LV, Braund KG, et al: Sensory
cal investigations, Equine Vet J 21[4):266-273, 1989.
neuropathy in two border collie puppies, J Small Anim 
572.
 Slocombe RF, Huntington PJ, Friend SCE, et al: Path-
Pract 46(6):295-299, 2005.
ological aspects of Australian stringhalt, Equine Vet J
594. Wouda W, Vandevelde M, Oettli P, et al: Sensory neu-
24[3):174-183, 1992.
ronopathy in dogs: a study of four cases, J Comp Pathol 
573. Gaber CE, Amis TC, LeCouteur RA: Laryngeal paraly-
93(3):437-450, 1983.
sis in dogs: a review of 23 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc
595. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Winn SS: Acral mutila-
186[4]:377-380, 1985.
tion and nociceptive loss in English pointer dogs. A
574. MacPhail CM, Monnet E: Outcome of and postopera-
canine sensory neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
tive complications in dogs undergoing surgical treat-
53[2):119-127, 1981.
ment of laryngeal paralysis: 140 cases [1985-1998),
596.
Sanda A, Pivnik L: Die Zehenneckrose bei kurzhaarigen
J Am Vet Med Assoc 218(12):1949-1956, 2001.
Vorstehhunden, Kleintierpraxis 9:76-83, 1964.
238
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
597. Duncan ID, Griffths IR, Munz M: The pathology of
619. Johnson CA, Kittleson MD, Indrieri RJ: Peripheral neu-
a sensory neuropathy affecting longhaired Dachshund
ropathy and hypotension in a diabetic dog, J Am Vet
dogs, Acta Neuropathol (Berl) 58(2):141-151, 1982.
Med Assoc 183(9):1007-1009, 1983.
598. van Nes J: Electrophysiological evidence of sensory
620. Braund KG, Steiss JE: Distal neuropathy in spontane-
nerve dysfunction in l0 dogs with acral lick dermatitis,
ous diabetes mellitus in the dog, Acta Neuropathol
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22[2):157-160, 1986.
[Berl] 57[4):263-269, 1982.
599.
Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Simpson ST, et al:
621. Kramek BA, Moise NS, Cooper B, et al: Neuropathy
Reduced substance P-like immunoreactivity in heredi-
associated with diabetes mellitus in the cat, J Am Vet
tary sensory neuropathy of pointer dogs, Acta Neuro-
Med Assoc 184[1):42-45, 1984.
pathol (Berl) 63(1):33-40, 1984.
622. Mizisin AP, Shelton GD, Wagner S, et al: Myelin
600. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Mitchell WJ Jr: Gan-
splitting, Schwann cell injury and demyelination in
glioradiculitis in the dog. A clinical, light- and elec-
feline diabetic neuropathy, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
tron- microscopic study, Acta Neuropathol (Berl)
95[2]:171-174, 1998.
60(1-2):29-39, 1983.
623. Mizisin AP, Nelson RW, Sturges BK, et al: Comparable
601. Jaderlund KH, Orvind E, Johnsson E, et al: A neurologic
myelinated nerve pathology in feline and human diabe-
syndrome in golden reterievers presenting as a sensory
tes mellitus, Acta Neuropathol :113431-113442, 2007.
ataxic neuropathy, J Vet Intern Med 21:1307-1315, 2007.
624. Mizisin AP, Shelton GD, Burgers ML, et al: Neurologi-
602. Baranowska I, Jaderlund KH, Nennesmo I, et al: Sensory
cal complications associated with spontaneously occur-
ring feline diabetes mellitus, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 
a deletion in the mitochondrial tRNAPvr gene, PLoS
61:872-884, 2002.
Genet :51-59,2009.
625.
 Holland CT: Bilateral Horner's syndrome in a dog with
603. Towell TL, Shell LC: Endocrinopathies that affect
diabetes mellitus, Vet Rec 160[19):662-664, 2007
peripheral nerves of cats and dogs, Compend Contin
626. Steiss JE, Orsher AN, Bowen JM: Electrodiagnostic
Educ Pract Vet 16(2):157-161, 1994:196.
analysis of peripheral neuropathy in dogs with diabetes
604. Indrieri RJ, Whalen LR, Cardinet GH, et al: Neuro-
mellitus, Am J Vet Res 42[12):2061-2064, 1981.
muscular abnormalities associated with hypothyroid-
627.
 Platt SR, Garosi LS: Neuromuscular weakness and col-
ism and lymphocytic thyroiditis in three dogs, J Am Vet
lapse, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract :341281-
Med Assoc 190(5):544-548, 1987.
341305, 2004.
605.1
 Panciera DL: Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases [1987-
628. Jones BR, Wallace A, Harding DRK, et al: Occurence
1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 204(5):761-767, 1994.
of idiopathic, familial hyperchylomicronaemia in a cat,
606. Rossmeisl JH Jr, Duncan RB, Inzana KD, et al: Longitu-
Vet Rec 112(543):547, 1983.
dinal study of the effects of chronic hypothyroidism on
629. Jones BR, Johnstone AC, Cahill JI, et al: Peripheral neu-
skeletal muscle in dogs, Am J Vet Res 70(7):879-889,
2009.
ronaemia, Vet Rec 119(11):268-272, 1986.
607. Braund KG, Dillon AR, August JR, et al: Hypothyroid
630. Grieshaber TL, McKeever PJ, McKeever PJ, et al: Spon-
myopathy in two dogs, Vet Pathol 18[5):589-598, 1981.
taneous cutaneous (eruptive) xanthomatosis in two
608.
Coates JR: Neurologic manifestations of hypothyroid-
cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:509-512, 1991.
ism, Canine Pract 22[1):27-28, 1997.
631.
609. Higgins MA, Rossmeisl JH, Panciera DL: Hypothyroid-
 deficiency in hyperlipemic kitten siblings, Vet Clin
associated central vestibular disease in 10 dogs: 1999.
Pathol, 137-1l, 1984.
2005, J Vet Intern Med :201363-201369, 2006.
632. Brooks KD: Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia in a cat,
610. Bichsel P, Jacobs G, Oliver JE Jr: Neurologic manifes-
Companion Anim Pract :195-199, 1989.
tations associated with hypothyroidism in four dogs, J
633. Sottiaux J: Cas clinique:hyperchylomicronemie primaire
Am Vet Med Assoc 192[12):1745-1747, 1988.
chez un chat, Le Point Vétérinaire 18:117-119, 1986.
611.
 Chastain CB, Graham CL, Riley MG: Myxedema coma
634. Smerdon T: Hyperchylomicronaemia in a litter of Sia-
in two dogs, Canine Pract 9[4):20-34, 1982.
mese kittens, Bulletin of the Feline Advisory Bureau
612. Vitale CL, Olby NJ: Neurologic dysfunction in hypo-
51-53, 1990.
thyroid, hyperlipidemic Labrador Retrievers, J Vet
635. Jones BR: Hyperchlomicronemia in the cat. In Bona-
Intern Med 21[6)]:1316-1322, 2007
gura JD, Kirk RW, editors: Kirk's Current Veterinary
613. Budsberg SC, Moore GE, Klappenbach K: Thyroxine-
Theraphy XII Small Animal Practice, ed 12, Philadel-
responsive unilateral forelimb lameness and generalized
phia, 1995, W.B. Saunders Co., pp 1163-1166.
neuromuscular disease in four hypothyroid dogs, J Am
636.
 Mayes PA: Lipid transport and storage. In Murray RK,
Vet Med Assoc 202[11):1859-1860, 1993.
Granner DK, Mayes PA, RodwellVW, editors: Harper's
614. Plotnick AN: Megaesophagus and hypothyroidism in
Biochemistry ed 12, Norwalk, 1990, Appleton & Lange.
an english springer spaniel and response to thyroxine
pp 234-248.
supplementation, Canine Pract 2414-2417, 1999.
637.
. Jones BR: Inherited hyperchylomicronaemia in the cat,
615. Kern TJ, Erb HN: Facial neuropathy in dogs and cats: 95
J Small Anim Pract 34:493-499, 1993.
cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet Med Assoc 191(12):1604
638. Watson TDG, Gaffney D, Mooney CT, et al: Inher-
1609, 1987.
616. Dewey CW, Shelton GD, Bailey CS, et al: Neuromus-
lipase function and gene structure, J Small Anim Pract
 cular dysfunction in five dogs with acquired myasthenia
33:207-212, 1992.
gravis and presumptive hypothyroidism, Prog Vet Neu-
639. Ginzinger DG, Lewis MES, Ma Y, et al: A mutation
rol 6(4):117-123, 1995.
Jo sisq enau a st aua asi uaodoi a 
617. Platt SR: Neuromuscular complications in endocrine
chylomicronemia in a colony of domestic cats, J Clin
and metabolic disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small
Invest 97(5):1257-1266, 1996.
Anim Pract 32[1):125-146, 2002.
640. McKerrell RE, Blakemore WF, Heath MF, et al: Primary
618. Wolf AM: Management of geriatric diabetic cats, Com-
hyperoxaluria (L-glyceric aciduria) in the cat: a newly
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 11(9):1088-1093, 1989.
recognised inherited disease, Vet Rec 125(2):31-34, 1989.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
239
641. Goldstein RE, Narala S, Sabet N, Goldstein O, et al:
672. Shores A, Braund KG, McDonald RK: Chronic relaps-
Primary hyperoxaluria in cats is caused by a mutation
ing polyneuropathy in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
in the feline GRHPR gene, J Hered 100:S2-S7, 2009.
23:569-573, 1987.
642. Panciera RJ, Washburn KE, Streeter RN, et al:A familial
673. Shelton GD: Muscle pain, cramps and hypertonicity
peripheral neuropathy and glomerulopathy in Gelbvieh
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1483-1496,
calves, Vet Pathol 40(1):63-70, 2003.
2004.
643. Moisan PG, Steffen DJ, Sanderson MW, et al:A familial
674. Podell M: Inflammatory myopathies, Vet Clin North
degenerative neuromuscular disease of Gelbvieh cattle,
Am Small Anim Pract 32:147-167, 2002.
JVet Diagn Invest 14(2):140-149, 2002.
675.
 Shelton GD: From dog to man: the broad spectrum of
644. Inzana KD: Paraneoplastic neuromuscular disorders, Vet
inflammatory myopathies. [Review] [56 refs], Neuro-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1453-1467, 2004.
muscul Disord 17(9-10):663-670, 2007.
645. Braund KG: Remote effects of cancer on the nervous
676. LeCouteur RA, Dow SW, Sisson AF: Metabolic and
system, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5[4):262-
endocrine myopathies of dogs and cats, Semin Vet Med
270, 1990.
Surg (Small Anim) 4(2):146-155, 1989.
 646. Brown NO: Paraneoplastic syndromes of humans, dogs
677. Brunson DB, Hogan KJ: Malignant hyperthermia: a syn-
and cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17(6):911-916, 1981.
drome not a disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
647.
Cavana P, Sammartano F, Capucchio MT, et al: Periph-
Pract 34:1419-1433, 2004.
eral neuropathy in a cat with renal lymphoma, J Feline
678. Shelton GD: Rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, and nec-
Med Surg 11(10):869-872, 2009.
rotizing myopathies, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
648. Hamilton TA, Cook JRJ, Braund KG, et al: Vincristine-
Pract 34:1469-1482, 2004.
induced peripheral neuropathy in a dog, J Am Vet Med 
679.
 Kornegay JN, Sharp NJH, Camp SD, et al: Early patho-
Assoc 198[4):635-638, 1991
logic features of golden retriever muscular dystrophy:
649. Braund KG, McGuire JA, Amling KA, et al: Peripheral
a model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy 48[3):348,
neuropathy associated with malignant neoplasms in
1989.
dogs, Vet Pathol 24[1):16-21, 1987.
680. Kornegay JN, Tuler S, Miller D, et al: Muscular dystor-
650. Sorjonen DC, Braund KG, Hoff EJ: Paraplegia and sub-
phy in a litter of golden retriever dogs, Muscle Nerve
11:1056-1064, 1988.
tumor in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 180[10):1209-
681. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ, Cummings JF, et al: Pro-
1211, 1982.
gressive muscular dystrophy in a golden retriever dog:
651. Mariani CL, Shelton SB, Alsup JC: Paraneoplastic poly-
light microscope and ultrastructural features at 4 and 8
neuropathy and subsequent recovery following tumor
months, Acta Neuropathologica 71(3/4):301-310, 1986.
removal in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35[4):302-
682. Wentink GH, Meijer AEFH, Linde-Sipman JS, et al:
305,1999.
Myopathy iin an Irish terrier with a metabolic defect
652. Dyer KR, Duncan ID, Hammang JP, et al: Peripheral
of the isolated mitochondria, Zentralblatt fur Veterinar-
neuropathy in two dogs: correlation between clinical,
medizin 21A(Heft 1):62-74, 1974.
electrophysiological and pathological findings, J Small
683. Presthus J, Nordstoga K: Congenital myopathy in a
Anim Pract 27:133-146, 1986.
litter of Samoyed dogs, Prog Vet Neurol 4(2):37-40,
653. Hobbs SL, Cobb MA: A cranial neuropathy associated
1993.
with multicentric lymphosarcoma in a dog, Vet Rec
684. Winand N, Pradham D, Cooper B: Molecular character-
127:525-526, 1990.
ization of severe Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy in
654. Villiers E, Dobson J: Multiple myeloma with associated
a family of rottweiler dogs. Molecular mechanisms of
polyneuropathy in a German shepherd dog, J Small
neuromuscular disease, Tucson [AZ), 1994, Muscular
Anim Pract 39(5):249-251, 1998.
Dystrophy Association.
655. Bergman PJ, Bruyette DS, Coyne BE, et al: Canine
685. Ham LML, Desmidt M, Tshamala M, et al: Canine
clinical peripheral neuropathy associated with pancre-
X-linked muscular dystrophy in Belgian Groenendae-
atic islet cell carcinoma, Prog Vet Neurol 5(2):57-62,
ler Shepherds, Vlaams Diergeneeskundig Tijdschrift
1994.
64(3):102-106, 1995.
656. Braund KG, Steiss JE, Amling KA, et al: Insulinoma and
686. Paola JP, Podell M, Shelton GD: Muscular dystrophy
subclinical peripheral neuropathy in two dogs, J Vet
in a miniature schnauzer, Prog Vet Neurol 4(1):14-18,
Intern Med 1(2):86-90, 1987.
1993.
657. Schrauwen E, Van Ham LML, Desmidt M, et al: Periph-
687. Cardinet GH III, Holliday TA: Neuromuscular diseases
of domestic animals: a summary of muscle biopsies
dog: clinical, pathological, and electrodiagnostic fea-
from 159 cases, Ann N Y Acad Sci 317:290-313, 1979.
tures, Prog Vet Neurol 7(1):16-19, 1996.
688. Schatzberg SJ, Shelton GD: Newly identified neuro-
658. Shahar R, Rousseaux C, Steiss J: Peripheral polyneu-
muscular disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
ropathy in a dog with functional islet B-cell tumor
Pract 34[6):1497-1524, 2004.
and widespread metastasis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
689. Schatzberg SJ, Olby NJ, Breen M, Anderson LV, et al:
187[2):175-177, 1985.
Molecular analysis of a spontaneous dystrophin knock-
659. van Ham L, Braund KG, Roels S, et al: Treatment of a
out' dog, Neuromuscul Disord 9(5):289-295, 1999.
dog with an insulinoma-related peripheral polyneurpa-
690. Wetterman CA, Harkin KR, Cash WC, et al: Hypertro-
thy with corticosteroids, Vet Rec 141:98-100, 1997.
phic muscular dystrophy in a young dog, J Am Vet Med
670. Bichsel P, Oliver JE Jr, Tyler DE, et al: Chronic polyneu-
Assoc 216(6):878-881, 2000.
ritis in a Rottweiler, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191(8):991-
691. Jones BR, Brennan S, Mooney CT, et al: Muscular dys-
994, 1987.
trophy with truncated dystrophin in a family of Japa-
 671. Cummings J, de Lahunta A: Chronic relapsing polyra-
nese Spitz dogs, J Neurol Sei 217(2):143-149, 2004.
diculoneuritis in a dogs: A clinical, light and electron-
692. Van Ham LML, Roels SLMF, Hoorens JK: Congenital
microscopic study, Acta Neuropath (Berl) 28:191-204,
dystrophy-like myopathy in a Brittany Spaniel puppy.
1974.
Prog Vet Neurol 6(4):135-138, 1995.
240
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
693. Bergman RL, Inzana KD, Monroe WE, et al: Dys-
714. Pele M, Tiret L, Kessler JL, Blot S, et al: SINE exonic
trophin-deficient muscular dystrophy in a Labrador
insertion in the PTPLA gene leads to multiple splic-
retriever J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38(3):255-261, 2002.
ing defects and segregates with the autosomal recessive
694. Piercy RJ, Walmsley G: Muscular dystrophy in Cavalier
centronuclear myopathy in dogs. [Erratum appears in
King Charles spaniels, Vet Rec 165(2):62, 2009.
Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jul 1;14(13):1905-6], Hum
695. Klarenbeek S, Gerritzen-Bruning MJ, Rozemuller AJM,
Mol Genet 14(11):1417-1427, 2005.
et al: Canine X-linked muscular dystrophy in a family
715. Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscu-
of Grand Basset Griffon Venden dogs, J Comp Pathol
lar dystrophy, Prog Vet Neurol 5(3):124, 1994.
137[4):249-252, 2007.
716. Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscu-
-sAp u 1oua uy:e na 'as due Nr Aesuoy Hrn dreus 969
lar dystrophy: a familial trait in the bouvier des Flan-
 trophin mRNA processing in golden retriever muscular
dres, Vet Rec 134(17):444-446, 1994.
dystrophy, an animal homologue of Duchenne muscular
717. Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, Gallagher EA: Nemalin
dystrophy, Genomics [San Diego) 13[1):115-121, 1992.
myopathy of cats, Muscle Nerve 9:618-625, 1986.
697.
 Schatzberg S, Olby N, Steingold S, et al: A polymerase
718. Hafner A, Dahme E, Obermaier G, et al: Congenital
chain reaction screening strategy for the promoter of
myopathy in Braunvieh Brown Swiss calves, J Comp
the canine dystrophin gene, Am J Vet Res 60(9):1040-
Pathol 115[1):23-34, 1996.
1046, 1999.
719. Delauche AJ, Cuddon PA, Podell M, et al: Nemaline
698. Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Burgunder JM: Clinical study
rods in canine myopathies: 4 case reports and literature
of a breeding colony affected with hypertrophic feline
review, J Vet Intern Med 12[6):424-430, 1998.
muscular dystrophy, J Vet Intern Med 9(3):207, 1995.
720. Rossmeisl JH Jr, Duncan RB, Inzana KD, et al: Longitudi-
699.
Carpenter JL, Hoffman EP, Ramanul FC, et al: Feline
nal study of the effects of chronic hypothyroidism on skel-
muscular dystrophy with dystrophin deficiency, Am J
etal muscle in dogs, Am J Vet Res 70(7):879-889, 2009.
Pathol 135:909-919, 1989.
721. Hanson SM, Smith MO, Walker TL, et al: Juvenile-
700.
Vos JH, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Goedegebuure SA:
onset distal myopathy in Rottweiler dogs, J Vet Intern
Dystrophy-like myopathy in the cat, J Comp Pathol
Med 12[2):103-108, 1998.
96[3):335-341, 1986.
722. Targett MP, Franklin RJM, Olby NJ, et al: Central
701. Malik R, Mepstead K, Yang F, et al: Hereditary myop-
core myopathy in a Great Dane, J Small Anim Pract
athy of Devon rex cats, J Small Anim Pract :34539-
35[2]:100-103, 1994.
34546, 1993.
723. Walvoort HC, van Nes JJ, Stokhof A, et al: Canine glyco-
702. Martin PT, Shelton GD, Dickinson PJ, et al: Muscu-
lar dystrophy associated with alpha-dystroglycan def-
Lapland dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:279-286, 1984.
ciency in Sphynx and Devon Rex cats, Neuromuscul
724. Walvoort HC, Slee RG, Koster JF: Canine glycogen
Disord 18[12):942-952, 2008.
storage disease type II. A biochemical study of an acid
703.1
 Robinson R: Spasticity in the Devon Rex cat, Vet Rec
alpha -glucosidase-deficient Lapland dog, Biochim Bio-
130:302, 1992.
phys Acta 715(1):63-69, 1982.
704. Deitz K, Morrison JA, Kline K, et al: Sarcoglycan-defi-
725. Dennis JA, Healy PJ: Genotyping shorthorn cattle for
cient muscular dystrophy in a Boston terrier, J Vet Med
generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J 79[11):773-775,
22(2):476-480, 2008.
2001.
705.
 Shelton GD, Ling LA, Guo LT, et al: Muscular dystro-
726.
5. Dennis JA, Healy PJ, Reichmann KG: Genotyping
phy in female dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:240-244, 2001.
Brahman cattle for generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J
706.
 O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, Liu LA, et al: Laminin a2
80(5):286-291, 2002.
[(merosin) -deficient muscular dystrophy and demyelin-
727. Reichmann KG, Twist JO, Thistlethwaite EJ: Clini-
ating neuropathy in two cats, J Neurol Sci 18:937-943,
cal, diagnostic and biochemical features of generalised
2001.
glycogenosis type II and Brahman cattle, Aust Vet J
707.1
 Poncelet L, Resibois A, Engvall E, et al: Laminin alpha2
70[11):405-408, 1993.
deficiency-associated muscular dystrophy in a Maine
728. Manktelow BW, Hartley WJ: Generalized glycogen stor-
coon cat. [Review] [19 refs], J Small Anim Pract
age disease in sheep, J Comp Pathol 85[1):139-145, 1975.
44[12):550-552, 2003.
729.
Ceh L, Hauge JG, Svenkerud R, et al: Glycogenosis type
708. Richards RB, Passmore IK, Bretag AH, et al: Ovine con-
III in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):210-222, 1976.
genital progressive muscular dystrophy: clinical syn-
730.
 Rafiquzzaman M, Svenkerud R, et al: Glycogenosis in
drome and distribution of lesions, Australian Veterinary
the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):196-209, 1976.
Journal 63[12):396-401, 1986.
731. Gregory BL, Shelton GD, Bali DS, et al: Glycogen stor-
709. Richards RB, Lewer RP, Passmore IK, McQuade NC:
age disease type Illa in Curly-Coated Retrievers, J Vet
Ovine congenital progressive muscular dystrophy:
Intern Med 21(1):40-46, 2007.
mode of inheritance, Aust Vet J 65(3):93-94, 1988.
732.
 Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Glycogen storage 
710. Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Hamilton MJ: Inheritance
disease type IV: inherited deficiency of branching enzyme
 of a neuromuscular disorder of Labrador retriever dogs,
activity in cats, Pediatr Res 32(6):719-725, 1992.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 179(4):380-381, 1981.
733. Coates JR, Paxton R, Cox NR, et al: A case presentation
711. 1
 Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Bryan GM, et al: A muscle
and discussion of Type IV glycogen storage disease in a
disorder of Labrador retrievers characterized by defi-
Norwegian Forest cat, Prog Vet Neurol 7(1):5-1l, 1996.
ciency of type II muscle fibers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
734. Fyfe JC, Kurzhals RL, Patterson DF: Feline glycogenso-
169(8):817-820, 1976.
712. McKerrell RE, Braund KG: Hereditary myopathy in
 ing 6 kb of the branching enzyme gene and eliminating
Labrador retrievers: clinical variations, J Small Anim
a exon, Am J Hum Genet 61A251, 1997.
Pract 28:479-489, 1987.
735. Ward TL, Valberg SJ, Adelson DL, et al: Glyco-
713. McKerrell RE, Braund KG: Hereditary myopathies in
gen branching enzyme [GBEl) mutation causing
Labrador retrievers: a morphologic study, J Small Anim
equine glycogen storage disease IV, Mamm Genome
Pract 23:411-417, 1986.
15(7):570-577, 2004.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
241
736. Valberg SJ, Ward TL, Rush B, et al: Glycogen branching
756. Platt SR, Chrisman CL, Shelton GD: Lipid storage
enzyme deficiency in Quarter Horse foals, J Vet Intern
myopathy in a cocker spaniel, J Small Anim Pract
Med 15(6):572-580, 2001.
40:31-34, 1999.
737. Johnstone AC, MeSporran KD, Kenny JE, et al: Myo-
757. Inada S, Yamauchi C, Igata A, et al: Canine storage dis-
phosphorylase deficiency (glycogen storage disease
Type V) in a herd of Charolais cattle in New Zea-
muscular atrophy: breeding experiments and clinical
land: confirmation by PCR-RFLP testing, N Z Vet J
manifestation, Am J Vet Res 47[10):2294-2299, 1986.
52[6):404-408, 2004.
758. Wells GAH, Bradley R: Pietrain creeper syndrome: a
738. Angelos S, Valberg SJ, Smith BP, et al: Myophosphory-
primary myopathy of the pig? Neuropathol Appl Neu-
lase deficiency associated with rhabdomyolysis and
robiol 4[3):237-238, 1978.
exercise intolerance in 6 related Charolais cattle, Mus-
759. Wells GAH, Pinsent PJN, Todd JN:A progressive, famil-
de Nerve 18[7]:736-740, 1995.
ial myopathy of the Pietrain pig: the clinical syndrome,
739. Bilstrom JA, Valberg SJ, Bernoco D, et al: Genetic test 
Vet Rec 106[26]:556-558, 1980.
for myophosphorylase deficiency in Charolais cattle,
760. Beck CL, Fahlke C, George AL: Molecular basis for
Am J Vet Res 59[3):267-270, 1998.
decreased muscle chloride conductance in the myo-
740. Soethout EC, Verkaar ELC, Jansen GH, et al: A direct
tonic goat, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:11248-11252,
Styl polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
1996.
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) test for the myo-
761. Finnigan DF, Hanna WJB, Poma R, et al:A novel muta-
phosphorylase mutation in cattle, JVet Med 49(6):289-
tion of the CLCNl gene associated with myotonia
290, 2002.
hereditaria in an Australian cattle dog, J Vet Intern Med
741.
Giger U, Argov Z, Schnall M, et al: Metabolic myopathy
21(3):458-463, 2007.
in canine muscle-type phosphofructokinase deficiency.
762. Rhodes T'H, Vite CH, Giger U, et al: A missense muta-
Muscle Nerve 11[12):1260-1265, 1988.
 tion in canine ClC-1 causes recessive myotonia congen-
742.
Giger U, Smith BF, Woods CB, et al: Inherited phospho-
ita in the dog, FEBS Lett 45654-45658, 1999.
fructokinase deficiency in an American cocker spaniel, J
763.
Farrow BRH, Malik R: Hereditary myotonia in the
Am Vet Med Assoc 201(10):1569-1571, 1992.
Chow Chow, J Small Anim Pract 22:451-465, 1981
743. Harvey JW, Calderwood MM, Gropp KE, et al: Polysac-
764.
 Shores A, Redding RW, Braund KG, Simpson ST': Myo-
charide storage myopathy in canine phosphofructoki-
tonia congenita in a Chow Chow pup, J Am Vet Med
nase deficiency [type Vll glycogen storage disease], Vet
Assoc 188(5):532-533, 1986.
Pathol 27(1):1-8, 1990.
765.
Vite CH, Cozzi F, Rich M, et al: Myotonic myopathy
744. Valberg SJ, Cardinet GH, Carlson GP, et al: Polysaccha-
in Miniature Schnauzers, J Vet Intern Med 12(3):208,
ride storage myopathy associated with recurrent exer-
1998.
tional rhabdomyolysis in horses, Neuromuscul Disord
766. Shires PK, Nafe LA, Hulse DA: Myotonia in a Staf-
2:351-359, 1992.
fordshire terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183(2):229-232,
745. Valentine BA, Credll KM, Lavoie JP, et al: Severe
1983.
polysaccharide storage myopathy in Belgian and Perche-
767. Hill SL, Shelton GD, Lenehan TM: Myotonia in a cocker
ron draught horses, Equine Vet J 29220-29225, 1997.
spaniel, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31(6):506-509, 1995.
746.
Valentine BA, Cooper BJ: Incidence of polysaccharide
768.
 Lobetti RG: Myotonia congenita in a Jack Russell ter-
storage myopathy Vet Pathol 42:823-827, 2005.
rier, J South African Vet Assoc 80(2):106-107, 2009.
747. McCue ME, Valberg SJ, Miller MB, et al: Glycogen syn-
769.
 Honhold N, Smith DA: Myotonia in the Great Dane,
thase [GYSl) mutation causes a novel skeletal muscle
Vet Rec 119(7):162, 1986.
glycogenosis, Genomics 91:458-466, 2008.
770.
 Steinberg SA, Botelho S: Myotonia in a horse, Science
748.1
McCue ME, Valberg SJ, Lucio M, et al: Glycogen
137979-137980, 1962.
synthase l (GYSl) mutation in diverse breeds with
771. Hickford FH, Jones BR, Gething MA, et al: Congeni-
polysaccharide storage myopathy, J Vet Intern Med
tal myotonia in related kittens, J Small Anim Pract 
22:1228-1233, 2008.
39(6):281-285, 1998.
749. Breitschwerdt EB, Kornegay JN, Wheeler SJ, et al: Epi-
772.
 Toll J, Cooper B, Altschul M: Congenital myotonia in 2
sodic weakness associated with exertional lactic acido-
domestic cats, J Vet Intern Med 12[2):116-119, 1998.
sis and myopathy in Old English sheepdog littermates, J
773. Moore GA, Dyer KR, Dyer RM, et al:Autosomal reces-
Am Vet Med Assoc 201(5):731-736, 1992.
sive myotonia congenita in sheep, Genet Select Evolu-
750. Olby NJ, Chan KK, Targett MP, et al: Suspected mito-
tion 29(3):291-294, 1997.
chondrial myopathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small
774. Simpson ST, Braund KG: Myotonic dystrophy-like dis-
Anim Pract 38(5):213-216, 1997.
ease in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 186(5):495-498,
751.1
 Houlton JE, Herrtage ME: Mitochondrial myopathy in
1985.
the Sussex spaniel, Vet Rec 106(9):206, 1980.
775. Smith BF, Braund KG, Steiss JE, et al: Possible adult
752. Herrtage ME, Houlton JEF: Collapsing Clumber span-
onset myotonic dystrophy in a boxer, J Vet Intern Med
iels 105[14):334, 1979.
12(2):120, 1998.
753. Paciello O, Maiolino P, Fatone G, Papparella S: Mito-
776. Reed SM, Hegreber GA, Bayly WM: Progressive myo-
chondrial myopathy in a German shepherd dog, Vet
tonia in foals resembling human dystrophia myotonica,
Pathol 40(5):507-511, 2003.
Muscle Nerve 11:291-296, 1988.
754. Valberg SJ, Carlson GP, Cardinet GH, et al: Skeletal
777.
Mayhew IG: Large Animal Neurology, ed 2, Ames,
muscle mitochondrial myopathy as a cause of exercise
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
intolerance in a horse, Muscle Nerve 17305-17312,
778. Sarli G, Della Salda L, Marcato PS: Dystrophy-like
1994.
755. Cameron JM, Maj MC, Levandovskiy V, et al: Identi-
779.
Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Shelton GD, et al: Exercise-
fication of a canine model of pyruvate dehydrogenase
induced collapse of Labrador retrievers: survey results
phosphatase 1 deficiency, Mol Genet Metab 90(1):15-
and preliminary investigation of heritability, J Am Anim 
23, 2007.
Hosp Assoc 44(6):295-301, 2008.
242
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
780. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Adams VJ, et al: Evaluations
800. Thompson PN, Steinlein OK, Harper CK, et al: Con-
of Labrador retrievers with exercise-induced collapse,
genital myasthenic syndrome of Brahman cattle in
including response to a standardized strenuous exercise
South Africa, Vet Rec 153(25):779-781, 2003.
protocol, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45(1):3-13, 2009.
801. Schatzberg SJ, Shelton GD: Newly identified neuro-
781. Patterson EE, Minor KM, Tchernatynskaia AV, et al:
muscular disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
A canine DNMl mutation is highly associated with
Pract 34(6):1497-1524, 2004.
the syndrome of exercise-induced collapse, Nat Genet
 802. Shelton GD, Engvall E: Canine and feline models of
40[10):1235-1239, 2008.
human inherited muscle diseases, Neuromuscul Disord
782. Berman MC, Harrison GG, Bull AB, et al: Changes
15:127-138, 2005.
underlying halothane induced malignant hyperpyrexia
803. Aleman M: A review of equine muscle disorders, Neu-
in Landrace pigs, Nature 225:653-655, 1970.
romuscul Disord 18:277-287, 2008.
783.1
 Riedesel DH, Hildebrand SV: Unusual response fol-
804. Shelton GD, Cardinet GH III: Pathophysiologic basis of
lowing use of succinylcholine in a horse anesthetized
canine muscle disorders, J Vet Intern Med 1(1):36-44,
with halothane, J Am Vet Med Assoc 187(5):507-508,
1987.
1985
 805. Evans J, Levesque D, Shelton GD: Canine inflamma-
784. Aleman M, Brosnan RJ, Williams DC, et al: Malignant
tory myopathies: a clinicopathologic review of 200
hyperthermia in a horse anesthetized with halothane, J
cases, J Vet Intern Med 18[5):679-691, 2004.
Vet Intern Med 19[3):363-366, 2005.
806. Fyfe JC: Molecular diagnosis of inherited neuromus-
785. Brunson DB, Hogan KJ: Malignant hyperthermia: a syn-
cular disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
drome not a disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
32:287-299, 2002.
Pract 34:1419-1433, 2004.
807. Werner LL, Bright JM: Drug-induced immune hyper-
786. Roberts MC, Mickelson JR, Patterson EE, et al: Autoso-
sensitivity disorders in two dogs treated with trim-
mal dominant canine malignant hyperthermia is caused
ethoprim sulfadiazine: case reports and drug challenge
 by a mutation in the gene encoding the skeletal mus-
studies, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:783-790, 1983.
dle calcium release channel (RYRi), Anesthesiology
808.
 Giger U, Werner LL, Millichamp NJ, et al: Sulfadiazine-
95(3):716-725, 2001.
induced allergy in six Doberman Pinschers, J Am Vet
787. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Holliday TA, et al: Hyperkale-
Med Assoc 186[5):479-484, 1985.
mic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
809. Krum SH, Cardinet GH, Anderson BC, et al: Poly-
197(8):1009-1017, 1990.
myositis and polyarthritis associated with systemic
788. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Harrold D, et al: Genetic study
lupus erythematosus in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet
170(1):61-64, 1977.
Med Assoc 202[6):933-937, 1993.
810. Grindem CB, Johnson KH: Systemic lupus erythemato-
789. Naylor JM, Robinson JA, Bertone J: Familial incidence
sus: literature review and report of 42 new canine cases,
of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in quarter horses, J
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19(4):489-503, 1983.
Am Vet Med Assoc 200(3):340-343, 1992.
811.
 Smith MO: Idiopathic myositides in dogs, Semin Vet
790. Rudolph JA, Spier SJ, Byrns G, et al: Periodic paralysis
Med Surg (Small Anim) 4(2):156-160, 1989.
in quarter horses: a sodium channel mutation dissemi-
812.
 Kornegay JN, Gorgacz EJ, Dawe DL, et al.: Polymyositis
nated by selective breeding, Nat Genet 2[2):144-147,
in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 176[5):431-438, 1980.
1992.
813. Ginman AA, Kline KL, Shelton GD: Severe poly-
791. Cannon SC, Hayward LJ, Beech J, et al: Sodium chan-
myositis and neuritis in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
235[2):172-175, 2009.
periodic paralysis, J Neurophysiol 73(5):1892-1899,
814. Presthus J, Lindboe CF: Polymyositis in two German
1995.
wirehaired pointer littermates, J Small Anim Pract
792. Jezyk PF: Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in a dog, J
29[4]:239-248, 1988.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:977-980, 1982.
815. Aronsohn MG, Schunk KL, Carpenter JL, et al: Clinical
793. Johnson RP, Watson ADJ, Smith J, et al: Myasthenia
and pathologic features of thymoma in 15 dogs, J Am
in springer spaniel littermates, J Small Anim Pract
Vet Med Assoc 184[11):1355-1362, 1984.
16[10):641-647, 1975.
816. Carpenter JL, Holzworth J: Thymoma in 1l cats, J Am 
794. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Shelton GD, et al: Congenital
Vet Med Assoc 181(3):248-251, 1982.
817. Hankel S, Shelton GD, Engvall E: Sarcolemma-specific
hund dogs, J Vet Intern Med 19(6):920-923, 2005.
autoantibodies in canine inflammatory myopathy, Vet
795. Wallace ME, Palmer AC: Recessive mode of inheritance
Immunol Immunopathol 113(1/2):1-10, 2006.
in myasthenia gravis in the Jack Russell terrier, Vet Rec
818. Kent M: Therapeutic options for neuromuscular dis-
114[14):350, 1984.
eases, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 34:1525-
796. Miller LM, Lennon VA, Lambert EH, et al: Congenital
1551, 2004.
myasthenia gravis in 13 smooth fox terriers, J Am Vet
819. Gilmour MA, Morgan RV, Moore FM: Masticatory
Med Assoc 182[7]:694-697, 1983.
797. Indrieri RJ, Creighton SR, Lambert EH, et al: Myasthe-
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:300-306, 1992
nia gravis in two cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182[1):57-
820. Shelton GD, Cardinet GH IIl, Bandman E: Canine
60, 1983.
masticatory muscle disorders: a study of 29 cases, Mus-
798. Joseph RJ, Carrillo JM, Lennon VA: Myasthenia gravis
e Nerve 10(8):753-766, 1987.
in the cat, J Vet Intern Med 2[2):75-79, 1988.
821. Melmed C, Shelton GD, Bergman R, et al: Masticatory
799. Flagstad A, Trojaborg W, Gammeltoft S: Congenital
muscle myositis: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treat-
myasthenic syndrome in the dog breed Gammel Dansk
ment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 26(8):590
Honsehund: clinical, electrophysiological, pharmaco-
604, 2004.
logical and immunological comparison with acquired
822. Orvis JS, Cardinet GH: Canine muscle fiber types and
myasthenia gravis, Acta Vet Scand 30(1):89-102,
susceptibility of masticatory muscles to myositis, Mus-
1989.
de Nerve 4[4):354-359, 1981.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
243
823. Shelton GD, Bandman E, Cardinet GH: Electropho-
844. Poonacha KB, Donahue JM, Nightengale JR: Clostridial
retic comparison of myosins from masticatory muscles
myositis in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194[1):69-70,
and selected limb muscles in the dog, Am J Vet Res
1989.
46(2):493-498, 1985.
845. Peek SF, Semrad SD, Perkins GA: Clostridial myone-
824. Braund KG, Dillon AR, Mikeal RL, et al: Subclinical
crosis in horses [37 cases 1985-2000), Equine Vet J
35:86-92, 2003.
dog, Vet Pathol 17(2):134-148, 1980.
846.
 Sponseller BT, Valberg SJ, Tennent-Brown BS, et al:
825. Braund KG, Dillon AR, Mikeal RL: Experimental inves-
Severe acute rhabdomyolysis associated with Strep-
tigation of glucocorticoid-induced myopathy in the
tococcus equi infection in four horses, J Am Vet Med
dog, Exp Neurol 68(1):50-71, 1980.
Assoc 227:1800-1807, 2005.
826. Platt SR, MeConnell JF, Garosi LS, et al: Magnetic
847. Pusterla N, Watson JL, Affolter VK, et al: Purpura haem-
resonance imaging in the diagnosis of canine inflamma-
orrhagica in 53 horses, Vet Res 153:118-121, 2003.
tory myopathies in three dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
 848. Hewison C: Frozen tail or limber tail in working dogs,
47(6):532-537, 2006.
Vet Rec 140:536, 1997.
 827. Bishop TM, Glass EN, Lahunta Ad, et al: Imaging diag-
849. Steiss JE: What is limber tail syndrome? Canine Pract
nosis-masticatory muscle myositis in a young dog, Vet
22[5-6):1, 1997.
Radiol Ultrasound 49[3):270-272, 2008.
850. Steiss j, Braund K, Wright J, et al: Coccygeal muscle
828. Reiter AM, Schwarz T: Computed tomographic appear-
injury in English pointers [limber tail), J Vet Intern Med 
ance of masticatory myositis in dogs: 7 cases [1999-
13(6):540-548, 1999.
2006), J Am Vet Med Assoc 231(6):924-930, 2007.
851. Lewis DD, Shelton GD, Piras A, et al: Gracilis or semi-
829.
Carpenter JL，S
Schmidt GM, Moore FM, et
al:
tendinosus myopathy in 18 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
Canine bilateral extraocular polymyositis, Vet Pathol
Assoc 33(2):177-188, 1997.
26(6):510-512, 1989.
852. Shelton GD, Ling LA, Guo LT, et al: Muscular dystro-
830.
Allgoewer I, Blair M, Basher T, et al: Extraocular mus-
phy in female dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:240-244, 2001.
cle myositis and restrictive strabismus in 10 dogs, Vet
853.
Valentine BA, Kornegay JN, Cooper BJ: Clinical elec-
Ophthalmol 3[1):21-26, 2000.
tromyographic studies of canine X-linked muscular
831. Hargis AM, Haupt KH, Prieur DJ, et al: A skin disorder
dystrophy, Am J Vet Res 50(12):2145-2147, 1989.
 in three Shetland sheepdogs: comparison with famil-
854. Lyon M: Sex chromatin and gene action in mammalian
ial canine dermatomyositis in collies, Compend Contin
X-chromosomes, Am J Hum Genet 14:135-148, 1962.
Educ Pract Vet 7[4):306-315, 1985.
855. Kornegay JN, Sharp NJH, Camp SD, et al: Early patho-
832. Haupt KH, Prieur DJ, Moore MP, et al: Familial canine
logic features of golden retriever muscular dystrophy.
dermatomyositis: clinical, electrodiagnostic, and genetic 
a model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy 48(3):348,
studies, Am J Vet Res 46(9):1861-1869, 1985.
1989.
833. White SD, Shelton GD, Sisson A, et al: Dermatomyosi-
856. Kornegay JN, Tuler S, Miller D, Levesque D: Muscular
tis in an adult Pembroke Welsh Corgi J Am Anim Hosp
dystorphy in a litter of golden retriever dogs, Muscle
Assoc 28(5):398-401, 1992.
Nerve 11:1056-1064, 1988.
834. Rees CA, Boothe DM: Therapeutic response to pent-
857. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ, Cummings JF, et al: Pro-
oxifylline and its active metabolites in dogs with familial
gressive muscular dystrophy in a golden retriever dog:
canine dermatomyositis, Vet Therap 4[3):234-241, 2003.
light microscope and ultrastructural features at 4 and
835. Clark LA, Credille KM, Murphy KE, et al: Linkage of
8 months, Acta Neuropathol 71[3/4):301-310, 1986.
dermatomyositis in the Shetland sheepdog to chromo-
858. Wentink GH, Meijer AEFH, Linde-Sipman JS, et al:
some 35, Vet Dermatol 16(6):392-394, 2005.
Myopathy in an Irish terrier with a metabolic defect
836. Braund KG, Blagburn BL, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al:
of the isolated mitochondria, Zentralblatt fur Veterinar-
Toxoplasma polymyositis/polyneuropathy-a new clini-
medizin 21A[Heft 1):62-74, 1974.
cal variant in two mature dogs, J Ami Anim Hosp Assoc
859. Presthus J, Nordstoga K: Congenital myopathy in a
24:93-97, 1988.
litter of Samoyed dogs, Prog Vet Neurol 4(2):37-40,
837. Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson N, Dillon AR, et al:
1993.
Hepatozoonosis in dogs: 22 cases [1989-1994), J Am
860. Winand N, Pradham D, Cooper B: Molecular character-
Vet Med Assoc 210[7):916-922, 1997.
ization of severe Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy in
838. Vincent-Johnson N, Macintire DK, Baneth G: Canine
a family of rottweiler dogs. Molecular mechanisms of
hepatozoonois: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treat-
neuromuscular disease, Tucson (AZ), 1994, Muscular
ment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19[1):51, 1997.
Dystrophy Association.
839.1
 Macintire DK, Vincent-Johnson NA, Kane CW, et al:
861. Ham LML, Desmidt M, Tshamala M, et al: Canine
Treatment of dogs infected with Hepatozoon ameri-
X-linked muscular dystrophy in Belgian Groenendae-
camum: 53 cases [1989-1998), J Am Vet Med Assoc
ler shepherds, Vlaams Diergeneeskundig Tijdschrift
218[1]:77-82, 2001.
64[3):102-106, 1995.
840. Barr SC, Simpson RM, Schmidt SP, et al: Chronic dila-
862. Paola JP, Podell M, Shelton GD: Muscular dystrophy
tative myocarditis caused by Trypanosoma cruzi in two
in a miniature schnauzer, Prog Vet Neurol 4(1):14-18,
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 195(9):1237-1241, 1989.
1993.
841.1
 Berger SL, Palmer RH, Hodges CC, et al: Neurologic
863. Cardinet GH IIl, Holliday TA: Neuromuscular diseases
manifestations of trypanosomiasis in a dog, J Am Vet
of domestic animals: a summary of muscle biopsies
Med Assoc 198(1):132-134, 1991.
from 159 cases, Ann N Y Acad Sci 317:290-313, 1979.
842. Vamvakidis CD, Koutinas AF, Kanakoudis G, et al: Masti-
864. Schatzberg SJ, Olby NJ, Breen M, et al: Molecular anal-
catory and skeletal muscle myositis in canine leishmaniasis
ysis of a spontaneous dystrophin knockout' dog, Neu-
[Leishmania infantum), Vet Rec 146[24):698-703, 2000.
romuscul Disord 9(5):289-295, 1999.
843. Poncelet L, Fontaine M, Balligand M: Polymyositis asso-
865.
Wetterman CA, Harkin KR, Cash WC, Nietfeld JC,
ciated with Leptospira australis infection in a dog, Vet
Shelton GD: Hypertrophic muscular dystrophy in a
Rec 129[2):40, 1991.
young dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216(6):878-881, 2000.
244
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
866. Jones BR, Brennan S, Mooney CT, et al: Muscular
886. Martin PT, Shelton GD, Dickinson PJ, et al: Muscu-
dystrophy with truncated dystrophin in a family of
Japanese Spitz dogs, J Neurol Sei 217(2):143-149,
ciency in Sphynx and Devon Rex cats, Neuromuscul
2004.
Disord 18[12):942-952, 2008.
 867. Van Ham LML, Roels SLMF, Hoorens JK: Congenital
887. Robinson R: Spasticity in the Devon Rex cat, Vet Rec
dystrophy-like myopathy in a Brittany Spaniel puppy.
130:302,1992.
Prog Vet Neurol 6[4):135-138, 1995.
888. Poncelet L, Resibois A, Engvall E, et al: Laminin alpha2
868. Bergman RL, Inzana KD, Monroe WE, et al: Dys-
deficiency-associated muscular dystrophy in a Maine
trophin-deficient muscular dystrophy in a Labrador
coon cat, J Small Anim Pract 44(12):550-552, 2003.
retriever, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38[3):255-261,
889. Richards RB, Passmore IK, Bretag AH, et al: Ovine congen-
2002.
ital progressive muscular dystrophy: clinical syndrome and
869. Klarenbeek S, Gerritzen-Bruning MJ, Rozemuller AJM,
distribution oflesions, Aust Vet J 63(12):396-401, 1986.
et al: Canine X-linked muscular dystrophy in a family
890. Richards RB, Lewer RP, Passmore IK, et al: Ovine con-
of Grand Basset Griffon Venden dogs, J Comp Pathol
genital progressive muscular dystrophy: mode of inheri-
137[4):249-252, 2007.
tance, Aust Vet J 65(3):93-94, 1988.
870. Piercy RJ, Walmsley G: Muscular dystrophy in Cavalier
891. Richards RB, Passmore IK, Dempsey EF: Skeletal mus-
King Charles spaniels, Vet Rec 165[2):62, 2009.
cle pathology in ovine congenital progressive muscular
 871. Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Burgunder JM: Clinical study
dystrophy. l. Histopathology and histochemistry, Acta
of a breeding colony affected with hypertrophic feline
Neuropathol 77(2):161-167, 1988.
muscular dystrophy, J Vet Intern.Med 9(3):207, 1995.
892. Richards RB, Passmore IK, Dempsey EF: Skeletal
872.
Carpenter JL, Hoffman EP, Ramanul FC, et al: Feline
muscle pathology in ovine congenital progressive mus-
muscular dystrophy with dystrophin deficiency, Am J
cular dystrophy. 2. Myofiber morphometry, Acta Neu-
Pathol 135:909-919, 1989.
ropathol 77(1):95-99, 1988.
873.
Vos JH, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Goedegebuure SA:
893. Pele M, Tiret L, Kessler JL, et al: SINE exonic inser-
Dystrophy-like myopathy in the cat, J Comp Pathol
s   s  a   
96[3):335-341, 1986.
defects and segregates with the autosomal recessive
874. Meier H: Myopathies in the dog, Cornell Vet 48:313-
centronuclear myopathy in dogs, Human Mol Genet
330, 1958.
14[11):1417-1427, 2005, [Erratum appears in Hum
875.
 Sharp NJH, Kornegay JN, Camp SD, et al: An error in
Mol Genet 2005;14[13):1905-1906].
dystrophin mRNA processing in golden retriever mus-
894. Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Hamilton MJ: Inheritance
cular dystrophy, an animal homologue of Duchenne
 of a neuromuscular disorder of Labrador retriever dogs,
muscular dystrophy, Genomics [San Diego) 13[1):115-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 179[4):380-381, 1981.
121, 1992.
895. Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Bryan GM, et al: A muscle
 876. Kornegay JN, Cundiff DD, Bogan DJ, et al: The cranial
disorder of Labrador retrievers characterized by defi-
sartorius muscle undergoes true hypertrophy in dogs
ciency of type II muscle fibers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
with golden retriever muscular dystrophy, Neuromus-
169(8):817-820, 1976.
cul Disord 13[6):493-500, 2003.
896. McKerrell RE, Braund KG: Hereditary myopathy in
877.1
Deitz K, Morrison JA, Kline K, et al: Sarcoglycan-
Labrador retrievers: clinical variations, J Smal Anim
deficient muscular dystrophy in a Boston terrier, J Vet
Pract 28:479-489, 1987.
Intern Med 22[2):476-480, 2008.
897. McKerrell RE, Braund KG: Hereditary myopathies in
878. Bartlett RJ, Winand NJ, Secore SL, Singer JT, Fletcher
Labrador retrievers: a morphologic study, J Small Anim
S, Wilton S, et al: Mutation segregation and rapid car-
Pract 23:411-417, 1986.
rier detection of X-linked muscular dystrophy in dogs,
898. Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscu-
Am J Vet Res 57(5):650-654, 1996.
lar dystrophy, Prog Vet Neurol 5(3):124, 1994.
879. Brumitt JW, Essman SC, Kornegay JN, et al: Radio-
899. Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscu-
graphic features of golden retriever muscular dystro-
lar dystrophy: a familial trait in the bouvier des Flan-
phy, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47[6):574-580, 2006.
dres, Vet Rec 134[17):444-446, 1994.
880. Moise NS, Valentine BA, Brown CA, et al: Duchenne's
900. Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, Gallagher EA: Nemalin
cardiomyopathy in a canine model: electrocardiogra-
myopathy of cats, Muscle Nerve 9:618-625, 1986.
hic and echocardiographic studies, J Am Coll Cardiol
901. Hafner A, Dahme E, Obermaier G, et al: Congenital
17:812-820, 1991.
myopathy in Braunvieh Brown Swiss calves, J Comp
881. Gaschen FP, Hoffman EP, Gorospe JRM, et al: Dys-
Pathol 115[1):23-34, 1996.
 trophin deficiency causes lethal muscle hypertrophy in
902. Delauche AJ, Cuddon PA, Podell M, et al: Nemaline
cats, J Neurol Sci 110(1,2):149-159, 1992.
rods in canine myopathies: 4 case reports and literature
882.
Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Seiler G, et al: Lethal peracute
review, J Vet Intern Med 12(6):424-430, 1998.
rhabdomyolysis associated with stress and general anes-
903. Hanson SM, Smith MO, Walker TL, et al: Juvenile-
thesia in three dystrophin-deficient cats, Vet Pathol
onset distal myopathy in Rottweiler dogs, J Vet Intern
35[2):117-123, 1998.
Med 12(2):103-108, 1998.
883. Berry CR, Gaschen FP, Ackerman N: Radiographic
904. Targett MP, Franklin RJM, Olby NJ, et al: Central
and ultrasonographic features of hypertrophic feline
core myopathy in a Great Dane, J Small Anim Pract
muscular dystrophy in two cats, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
35[2]:100-103, 1994.
33(6):357-364, 1992.
905. Walvoort HC, van Nes JJ, Stokhof A, et al: Canine glyco-
884. Winand NJ, Edwards M, Pradhan D, et al: Deletion of
gen storage disease type II:a clinical study offour affected
the dystrophin muscle promoter in feline muscular dys-
Lapland dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:279-286, 1984.
trophy, Neuromuscul Disord 4(5-6):433-445, 1994.
 906. Walvoort HC, Slee RG, Koster JF: Canine glycogen
885. Malik R, Mepstead K, Yang F, et al: Hereditary myopa-
storage disease type II. A biochemical study of an acid
thy of Devon rex cats, J Small Anim Pract 34:539-546,
alpha -glucosidase-deficient Lapland dog, Biochim Bio-
1993.
phys Acta 715(1):63-69, 1982.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
245
907. Dennis JA, Healy PJ: Genotyping shorthorn cattle for
926. Valberg SJ, Cardinet GH, Carlson GP, et al: Polysaccha-
generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet Jl 79(11):773-775,
ride storage myopathy associated with recurrent exer-
2001.
tional rhabdomyolysis in horses, Neuromuscul Disord
 908. Dennis JA, Healy PJ, Reichmann KG: Genotyping
2:351-359, 1992.
Brahman cattle for generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J
927. Valentine BA, Credille KM, Lavoie JP, et al: Severe
80(5):286-291, 2002.
polysaccharide storage myopathy in Belgian and Per-
909. Reichmann KG, Twist JO, Thistlethwaite EJ: Clini-
cheron draught horses, Equine Vet J 29:220-225,
cal, diagnostic and biochemical features of generalised
1997.
glycogenosis type Il and Brahman cattle, Aust Vet J
928. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ: Incidence of polysaccharide
70[11):405-408, 1993.
storage myopathy, Vet Pathol 42:823-827, 2005.
910. Manktelow BW, Hartley WJ: Generalized glycogen
929. Firshman AM, Valberg SJ, Bender JB, et al: Comparison
storage disease in sheep, J Comp Pathol 85[1):139-145,
of histopathologic criteria and skeletal muscle fixation
1975.
techniques for the diagnosis of polysaccharide storage
911. Ceh L, Hauge JG, Svenkerud R, et al: Glycogenosis
myopathy in horses, Vet Pathol 43:257-269, 2006.
type II1 in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):210-222,
930. McCue ME, Valberg SJ, Miller MB, et al: Glycogen syn-
1976.
thase [GYSl) mutation causes a novel skeletal muscle
912. Rafiquzzaman M, Svenkerud R, Strande A, et al: Gly-
glycogenosis, Genomics 91:458-466, 2008.
cogenosis in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):196-209,
931. McCue ME, Valberg SJ, Lucio M, et al: Glycogen
1976.
synthase l (GYSl) mutation in diverse breeds with
913. Gregory BL, Shelton GD, Bali DS, et al: Glycogen stor-
polysaccharide storage myopathy, J Vet Intern Med
 age disease type Illa in Curly-Coated Retrievers, J Vet
22:1228-1233, 2008.
Intern Med 2i(1):40-46, 2007.
932. De La Corte FD, Valberg SJ: Update of equine thera-
914. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Glycogen stor-
peutics: Treatment of polysaccharide storage myopathy.
age disease type IV: inherited deficiency of branching
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 22(8):782-788, 2000.
enzyme activity in cats, Pediatr Res 32(6):719-725,
933. De La Corte FD, Valberg SJ, MacLeay JM, et al: Glu-
1992.
cose uptake in horses with polysaccharide storage
915. Coates JR, Paxton R, Cox NR, et al: A case presenta-
myopathy, Am J Vet Res 60[4):458-462, 1999.
tion and discussion ofType IV glycogen storage disease
934. Valberg SJ: Heritable muscle diseases. In Robinson NE,
in a Norwegian Forest cat, Prog Vet Neurol 7[l):5-11,
Sprayberry KA, editors: Current Therapy in Equine
1996.
Medicine, ed 6, St. Louis, 2009, Saunder/Elsevier, pp
 916. Fyfe JC, Kurzhals RL, Patterson DF: Feline glycogenso-
461-468.
sis type IV is caused by a complex rearrangement delet-
935. Breitschwerdt EB, Kornegay JN, Wheeler SJ, et al: Epi-
ing 6 kh of the branching enzyme gene and eliminating
sodic weakness associated with exertional lactic acido-
a exon, Am J Hum Genet , 1997:61A251.
sis and myopathy in Old English sheepdog littermates, J
917. Ward TL, Valberg SJ, Adelson DL, et al: Glyco-
Am Vet Med Assoc 201(5):731-736, 1992.
gen branching enzyme [GBEl) mutation causing
 936. Olby NJ, Chan KK, Targett MP, et al: Suspected mito-
equine glycogen storage disease IV, Mamm Genome
chondrial myopathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small
15(7):570-577, 2004.
Anim Pract 38[5]:213-216, 1997.
 918. Valberg SJ, Ward TL, Rush B, et al: Glycogen branching
937. Houlton JE, Herrtage ME: Mitochondrial myopathy in
enzyme deficiency in Quarter Horse foals, J Vet Intern
the Sussex spaniel, Vet Rec 106(9):206, 1980.
Med 15(6):572-580, 2001.
938. Herrtage ME, Houlton JEF: Collapsing Clumber span-
919. Johnstone AC, MeSporran KD, Kenny JE, et al: Myo-
iels 105[14):334, 1979.
phosphorylase deficiency(
(glycogen storage disease
 939. Paciello O, Maiolino P, Fatone G, Papparella S: Mito-
Type V) in a herd of Charolais cattle in New Zea-
chondrial myopathy in a German shepherd dog, Vet
land: confirmation by PCR-RFLP testing, N Z Vet J
Pathol 40(5):507-511, 2003.
52(6):404-408, 2004.
940. Shelton GD, van Ham L, Bhatti S, et al: Pyruvate dehy-
 920. Angelos S, Valberg SJ, Smith BP, et al: Myophosphory-
drogenase deficiency in Clumber and Sussex spaniels
lase deficiency associated with rhabdomyolysis and
in the United States and Belgium, J Vet Intern.Med
exercise intolerance in 6 related Charolais cattle, Mus-
14(3):342, 2000.
e Nerve 18[7]:736-740, 1995.
941. Cameron JM, Maj MC, Levandovskiy V, et al: Identi-
921.1
 Bilstrom JA, Valberg SJ, Bernoco D, et al: Genetic test
fication of a canine model of pyruvate dehydrogenase
for myophosphorylase deficiency in Charolais cattle,
phosphatase 1 deficiency, Mol Genet Metab 90(i):15-
Am J Vet Res 59(3):267-270, 1998.
23,2007.
922.
 Soethout EC, Verkaar ELC, Jansen GH, et al: A direct
942. Vijayasarathy C, Giger U, Prociuk U, et al: Canine
Styl polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment
mitochondrial  myopathy associated   with reduced
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) test for the myo-
mitochondrial mRNA and altered cytochrome c oxi-
 phosphorylase mutation in cattle, JVet Med 49(6):289-
dase activities in fbroblasts and skeletal muscle, Comp
290, 2002
Biochem Physiol Comp Physiol 109[4):887-894, 1994.
923. Giger U, Argov Z, Schnall M, et al: Metabolic myopathy
943. Valberg SJ, Carlson GP, Cardinet GH, et al: Skeletal
 in canine muscle-type phosphofructokinase deficiency.
muscle mitochondrial myopathy as a cause of exercise
Muscle Nerve 11[12):1260-1265, 1988.
intolerance in a horse, Muscle Nerve 17:305-312, 1994.
924. Giger U, Smith BF, Woods CB, et al: Inherited phospho-
944. Platt SR, Chrisman CL, Shelton GD: Lipid storage
fructokinase deficiency in an American cocker spaniel, J 
myopathy in a cocker spaniel, J Small Anim Pract
Am Vet Med Assoc 201(10):1569-1571, 1992.
40:31-34, 1999.
925. Harvey JW, Calderwood MM, Gropp KE, et al: Polysac-
945. Inada S, Yamauchi C, Igata A, et al: Canine storage dis-
charide storage myopathy in canine phosphofructoki-
ease characterized by hereditary progressive neurogenic
nase deficiency (type VlIl glycogen storage disease), Vet
muscular atrophy: breeding experiments and clinical
Pathol 27(1):1-8, 1990.
manifestation, Am J Vet Res 47(10):2294-2299, 1986.
246
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
946. Holland CT, Canfield PJ, Watson ADJ, et al: Dyseryth-
967. Ross AD, Gee CG, Jackson ARB, et al: Nutritional
ropoiesis, polymyopathy, and cardiac disease in three
myopathy in goats, Aust Vet J 66[11):361-363, 1989.
related English Springer Spaniels, J Vet Intern Med
968. Lofstedt J: White muscle disease of foals, Vet Clin
5(3):151-159, 1991.
North Am Equine Pract 13[1):169-185, 1997.
947. Matwichuk CL, Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Kass PH, et al:
969. Rensburg IBJV, Venning WJA: Nutritional myopathy
Changes in rectal temperature and hematologic, bio-
in a dog, J South African Vet Assoc 50(2):119-121,
chemical, blood gas, and acid-base values in healthy
1979.
Labrador Retrievers before and after strenuous exer-
 970. Perkins G, Valberg SJ, Madigan JM, et al: Electrolyte 
cise, Am J Vet Res 60(1):88-92, 1999.
disturbances in foals with severe rhabdomyolysis, J Vet
948. Hoffmann G, Aramaki S, Blum-Hoffmann E, et al:
Intern Med 12:173-177, 1998.
Quantitative analysis  for organic acids in biologi-
971. Foreman JH, Potter KA, Bayly WM, et al: Generalized
cal samples: batch isolation followed by gas chro-
steatitis associated with selenium defciency and nor-
matographic-mass spectrometric analysis, Clin Chem
mal vitamin E status in a foal, J Am Vet Med Assoc
35[4]:587-595, 1989.
189[1):83-86, 1986.
949. Ozand PT, Gascon GG: Organic acidurias: a review.
972. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Shelton GD, et al: Exercise-
Part 1, J Child Neurol 6(3):196-219, 1991.
induced collapse of Labrador retrievers: survey results
950.
 Ozand PT, Gascon GG: Organic acidurias: a review.
Part 2, J Child Neurol 6[4):288-303, 1991.
Hosp Assoc 44(6):295-301, 2008.
951. Shelton GD, Nyhan WL, Kass PH, et al: Analysis of
973. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Adams VJ, et al: Evaluations
organic acids, amino acids, and carnitine in dogs with
of Labrador retrievers with exercise-induced collapse,
lipid storage myopathy, Muscle Nerve 21:1202-1205,
including response to a standardized strenuous exer-
1998.
cise protocol, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45[1):3-13,
952. Greene CE, Lorenz MD, Munnell JF, et al: Myopathy
2009.
associated with hyperadrenocorticism in the dog, J Am
974. Patterson EE, Minor KM, Tchernatynskaia AV, et alt
Vet Med Assoc 174[12):1310-1315, 1979.
A canine DNMl mutation is highly associated with
953. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR, Nash AS: Myotonia in canine
the syndrome of exercise-induced collapse, Nat Genet
Cushing's disease, Vet Rec 100:30-31, 1977.
40(10):1235-1239, 2008.
 954. Schott HC: Pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction:
975. Berman MC, Harrison GG, Bull AB, et al: Changes
equine Cushing's disease, Vet Clin North Am Equine
underlying halothane induced malignant hyperpyrexia
Pract 18:237-270, 2002.
in Landrace pigs, Nature 225:653-655, 1970.
955. Aleman M, Watson JL, Williams DC, et al: Myopathy in
976. Fuji J, Otsu K, Zorzato F, et al: Identification of a
horses with pituitary pars intermedia dysfunction (Cush-
mutation in porcine ryanodine receptor associated with
ing's disease), Neuromuscul Disord 16:737-744, 2006.
malignant hyperthermia, Science 253(5018):448-451,
956.1
 McLaughlin BG, Doige CE, McLaughlin PS: Thyroid
1991.
hormone levels in foals with congenital musculoskeletal
 977. Riedesel DH, Hildebrand SV: Unusual response following
lesions, Can Vet J 27(7):264-267, 1986.
use of succinylcholine in a horse anesthetized with halo-
957. Peterson ME, Kintzer PP, Cavanagh PG: Feline hyperthy-
thane, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 187(5):507-508, 1985.
roidism: pretreatment, clinical and laboratory evaluation
978. Aleman M, Brosnan RJ, Williams DC, et al: Malignant
of 131 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:103-110, 1983.
hyperthermia in a horse anesthetized with halothane,
958. Joseph RJ, Peterson ME: Review and comparison of
JVet Intern Med 19[3):363-366, 2005.
neuromuscular and central nervous manifestations of
979. Aleman M, Nieto JE, Magdesian KG: Malignant
hyperthyroidism in cats and humans, Prog Vet Neurol
hyperthermia associated with ryanodine receptor 1
3114-3119, 1992.
(C7360G) mutation in Quarter Horses, J Vet Intern
959. Vogt DW, Gipson TA, Akremi B, et al: Associations of
Med 23[2):329-334, 2009.
sire, breed, birth weight, and sex in pigs with congenital
980. Roberts MC, Mickelson JR, Patterson EE, et al: Autoso-
splayleg, Am J Vet Res 45[11):2408-2409, 1984.
mal dominant canine malignant hyperthermia is caused
960. Jirmanova I: The splayleg disease: a form of congenital
by a mutation in the gene encoding the skeletal mus-
glucocorticoid myopathy? Vet Res Commun 6(2):91-
101,1983.
95(3):716-725, 2001,
961. Szalay F, Zsarnovszky A, Fekete S, et al: Retarded myelin-
981. Gannon JR: Exertional rhabdomyolysis (myoglobin-
ation in the lumbar spinal cord of piglets born with
uria) in the racing Greyhound. In Kirk RW, editor: Cur-
spread-leg syndrome, Anat Embryol 203[1):53-59, 2001.
rent Veterinary Therapy Vll, ed 7, St. Louis, 1980, WB
 962. Wells GAH, Bradley R: Pietrain creeper syndrome: a
Saunders, pp 783-787.
primary myopathy of the pig? Neuropathol Appl Neu-
982. Dranchak PK, Valberg SJ, Onan GW, et al: Inheritance
robiol 4(3):237-238, 1978.
of recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis in Thorough-
963. Wells GAH, Pinsent PJN, Todd JN:A progressive, famil-
breds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:762-767, 2005.
ial myopathy of the Pietrain pig: the clinical syndrome,
983. Valberg SJ, MacLeay JM, Mickelson JR: Exertional
Vet Rec 106[26):556-558, 1980.
rhabdomyolysis and polysaccharide storage myopathy
 964. Vite CH: Myotonia and disorders of altered muscle cell
in horses, Compend Contin Edue Pract Vet 19(9):1077-
membrane excitability Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
1086, 1997.
Pract 32:169-187, 2002.
984. MacLeay JM, Sorum SA, Valberg SJ,et al:Epidemiologic
 965. Anderson PH, Bradley R, Berrett S, et al: The sequence
of myodegeneration in nutritional myopathy of the
olysis in Thoroughbreds, Am J Vet Res 60:1562-1566,
older calf, Br Vet J 133:160-165, 1977.
1999.
966. Maas J, Bulgin MS, Anderson BC, et al: Nutritional
 985. Valberg SJ, Mickelson JR, Gallant EM, et al: Exertional
myodegeneration associated with vitamin E deficiency
rhabdomyolysis in Quarter horses and Thoroughbreds:
and normal selenium status in lambs, J Am Vet Med
one syndrome, multiple aetiologies, Equine Vet J Suppl
Assoc 184:201-204, 1984.
30:533-538, 1999.
CHAPTER 7
 Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
247
986. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Holliday TA, et al: Hyperkale-
1007. Cornelissen JMM, Haagsma J, van Nes JJ: Type C botu-
mic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
lism in five dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:401-404,
197(8):1009-1017, 1990.
1985.
987. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Harrold D, et al: Genetic study
1008. Darke PG, Roberts TA, Smart JL, et al: Suspected botu-
of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet
lism in foxhounds, Vet Rec 99(6):98-99, 1976.
Med Assoc 202(6):933-937, 1993.
1009. Marlow GR, Smart JL: Botulism in foxhounds, Vet Rec
988. Naylor JM, Robinson JA, Bertone J: Familial incidence
111[11):242, 1982.
 of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in quarter horses,
1010. Cummings JF, Haas DC: Coonhound paralysis. An
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200(3):340-343, 1992.
acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis in dogs resem-
989. Rudolph JA, Spier SJ, Byrns G, et al: Periodic paralysis
bling the Landry-Guillain-Barre syndrome, J Neurol Sci
in quarter horses: a sodium channel mutation dissemi-
4[1):51-81, 1967.
nated by selective breeding, Nat Genet 2(2):144-147,
1011. Ricketts SW, Greet TR, Glyn PJ, et al: Thirteen cases
1992.
of botulism in horses fed big bale silage, Equine Vet J
990. Cannon SC, Hayward LJ, Beech J, et al: Sodium chan-
16(6):515-518, 1984.
nel inactivation is impaired in equine hyperkalemic
1012. Swerezek TW: Toxicoinfectious botulism in foals and
periodic paralysis, J Neurophysiol 73[5):1892-1899,
adult horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 176[3):217-220,
1995.
1980.
991. Robertson SA, Green SL, Carter SW, et al: Postanes-
1013. Swerczek TW: Experimentally induced toxicoin-
thetic recumbency associated with hyperkalemic peri-
fectious botulism in horses and foals, Am J Vet Res
odic paralysis in a quarter horse, J Am Vet Med Assoc
41(3):348-350, 1980.
201[8}:1209-1212, 1992.
1014. Kelly AP, Jones RT, Gillick JC, et al: Outbreak of botu-
 992. Jezyk PF: Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in a dog,
lism in horses, Equine Vet J 16(6):519-521, 1984.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:977-980, 1982.
1015. Bernard W, Divers TJ, Whitlock RH, et al: Botulism as
 993. Naylor JM, Jones V, Berry SL: Clinical syndrome and
a sequel to open castration in a horse, J Am Vet Med
diagnosis ofhyperkalaemic periodic paralysis in quarter
Assoc 191(1):73-74, 1987.
horses, Equine Vet J 25[3):227-232, 1993.
1016. Divers TJ, Bartholomew RC, Messick JB, et al: Clostrid-
994. Traub-Dargatz JL, Ingram JT, Stashak TS, et al: Respira-
ium botulimum type B toxicosis in a herd of cattle and a
tory stridor associated with polymyopathy suspected to
group of mules, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188[4):382-386,
be hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in four quarter horse 
1986.
foals, J Am Vet Med Assoc 201[1):85-89, 1992.
1017. Kao I, Drachman D, Price D: Botulinum toxin: Mecha-
995. Guglick MA, MacAllister CG, Breazile JE: Laryn-
nism of presynaptic blockage, Science 193:1256-1258,
gospasm, dysphagia, and emaciation associated with
1976.
hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in a horse, J Am Vet
1018. Coleman ES: Clostridial neurotoxins: tetanus and botu-
Med Assoc 209(1):115-117, 1996.
lism, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 20(10):1089-
 996. Dow SW, Fettman MJ, Curtis CR, et al: Hypokalemia
1097, 1998.
in cats: 186 cases [1984-1987), J Am Vet Med Assoc
1019. Cherington M: Electrophysiologic methods as an
194(11):1604-1608, 1989.
aid in diagnosis of botulism: a review, Muscle Nerve
997.1
 Dow SW, Fettman MJ, LeCouteur RA, et al: Potassium
5(9S):S28-S29, 1982.
depletion in cats: renal and dietary influences, J Am Vet 
1020. van Nes JJ, van der Most van Spijk: Electrophysiologi-
Med Assoc 191[12):1569-1575, 1987.
cal evidence of peripheral nerve dysfunction in six dogs
998. Dow SW, LeCouteur RA, Fettman MJ, et al: Potassium
with botulism type C, Res Vet Sci 40[3):372-376,
depletion in cats: hypokalemic polymyopathy, J Am Vet 
1986.
Med Assoc 191(12):1563-1568, 1987.
1021. Malik R, Farrow BR: Tick paralysis in North America
999. Shelton GD: Disorders of neuromuscular transmis-
and Australia, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
sion, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 4(2):126-132,
21[1):157-171, 1991.
1989.
        '  
1000. Nemzek JA, Kruger JM, V
Walshaw R, et al: Acute
paralysis tick Lxodes holocyclus. 3. Respiratory effects,
onset of hypokalemia and muscular weakness in four
Aust Vet J 64(5):142-144, 1987.
hyperthyroid cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 205(1):65-68,
        '  
1994.
paralysis tick Ixodes holocyclus. 2. Blood-gas and pH,
100l. Mason K: A hereditary disease in Burmese cats mani-
haematological and biochemical findings, Aust Vet J
fested as an episodic weakness with head nodding and
64(5):139-142, 1987.
neck ventroflexion, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:147-
1024. Mlkiw JE, Turner DM, Howlett CR: Infestation in the
151, 1988.
dog by the paralysis tick Ixodes holocyclus. l. Clinical
1002. Jones BR, Swinny GW, Ally MR: Hypokalemic myop-
and histological findings, Aust Vet J 64(5):137-139,
athy in Burmese kittens, N Z Vet J 36:150-151, 1988.
1987.
1003. Leon A, Bain SAF, Levick WR: Hypokalaemic episodic
1025. Holland CT: Asymmetrical focal neurological deficits
polymyopathy in cats fed a vegetarian diet, Aust Vet J
in dogs and cats with naturally occurring tick paralysis
69:249-254, 1992.
[lxodes holocyclus): 27 cases [1999-2006], Aust Vet J
1004. Shelton GD: Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuro-
86[10]:377-384, 2008.
muscular transmission, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
1026. Wheeler SJ: Disorders of the neuromuscular junction,
Pract 32:189-206, 2002.
Prog Vet Neurol 2(2):129-135, 1991.
1005. Dewey CW: Acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs-Part I,
 1027. Peterson ME: Snake bite: coral snakes, Clin Tech Small
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19(12):1340-1353,
Anim Pract 21:183-186, 2006.
1997.
1028. Chrisman CL, Hopkins AL, Ford SL, et al: Acute, flac-
1006. Barsanti JA, Walser M, Hatheway CL, et al: Type C
cid quadriplegia in three cats with suspected coral snake
 botulism in American Foxhounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc
envenomation, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32[4):343-349,
172[7):809-813, 1978.
1996.
248
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
1029. Marks SL, Mannella C, Schaer M: Coral snake envenom-
1051. Klebanow ER: Thymoma and acquired myasthenia
ation in the dog: report of four cases and review of the
gravis in the dog: a case report and review of 13 addi-
literature, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:629-634, 1990.
tional cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28[1):63-69,
1030. Nafe LA: Selected neurotoxins, Vet Clin North Am
1992.
Small Anim Pract 18[3):593-604, 1988.
1052. Moore AS, Madewell BR, Cardinet GH, et al: Osteo-
1031. Dorman DC, Fikes JD: Diagnosis and therapy of neuro-
genic sarcoma and myasthenia gravis in a dog, J Am Vet
toxicological syndromes in dogs and cats: selected syn-
Med Assoc 197(2):226-227, 1990.
dromes induced by pesticides, part 2, Prog Vet Neurol
1053. Krotje LJ, Fix AS, Potthoff AD: Acquired myasthenia
4(4]:111-120, 1993.
gravis and cholangiocelular carcinoma in a dog, J Am
1032. Fikes JD, Zachary JF, Parker AJ: Clinical, biochemical,
Vet Med Assoc 197[4):488-490, 1990.
electrophysiologic, and histologic assessment of chlor-
1054. Shelton GD: Myasthenia gravis: lessons from the past
pyrifos induced delayed neuropathy in the cat, Neuro-
10 years, J Small Anim Pract 39[8):368-372, 1998.
toxicology 13:663-678, 1992.
1055. Malik R, Ho S, Church DB: The normal response to
1033. Jaggy A, Oliver JE: Chlorpyrifos toxicosis in two cats, J
repetitive motor nerve stimulation in dogs, J Small
Vet Intern Med 4(3):135-139, 1990.
Anim Pract 30:20-26, 1989.
1034. Levy JK: Chronic chlorpyrifos toxicosis in a cat, J Am
1056. Sims MH, MeLean RA: Use of repetitive nerve stimula-
Vet Med Assoc 203[12):1682-1684, 1993.
tion to assess neuromuscular function in dogs. A test
1035. Clemmons RM, Meyer DJ, Sundlof SF, et al: Correction
protocol for suspected myasthenia gravis, Prog Vet
 of organophosphate-induced neuromuscular blockade
Neurol 1(3):311-319, 1990.
by diphenhydramine, Am J Vet Res 45[10):2167-2169,
1057. Hopkins AL, Howard JF, Wheeler SJ, et al: Stimulated
1984.
single fibre electromyography in normal dogs, J Small
1036. Lindstrom J, Shelton D, Fujii Y: Myasthenia gravis, Adv
Anim Pract 34:271-276, 1993.
Immunol 42:233-284, 1988.
1058. Shelton GD: How do I treat? Acquired myasthenia gra-
1037. Shelton GD, Cardinet GH, Lindstrom JM: Canine and
vis in the dog and cat, Prog Vet Neurol 1(3):343-344,
human myasthenia gravis autoantibodies recognize
1990.
similar regions on the acetylcholine receptor, Neurol-
1059. Abelson AL, Shelton GD, Whelan MF, et al: Use
ogy 38(9):1417-1423, 1988.
 of mycophenolate mofetil as a rescue agent in the
1038. Atwater SW, Powers BE, Park RD, et al: Thymoma
treatment of severe generalized myasthenia gravis in
in dogs: 23 cases [1980-1991], J Am Vet Med Assoc
three dogs, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 19[4):369-374,
205[7}:1007-1013, 1994.
2009.
1039. O'Dair HA, Holt PE, Pearson GR, et al:Acquired immune-
1060. Dewey CW, Coates JR, Ducote JM, et al: Azathioprine
mediated myasthenia gravis in a cat associated with cystic
therapy for acquired myasthenia gravis in five dogs,
thymus, J Small Anim Pract 32:198-202, 1991.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 35[5):396-402, 1999.
1040. Rusbridge C, White RN, Elwood CM, et al: Treatment
1061. Bexfeld NH, Watson PJ, Herrtage ME: Management of
of acquired myasthenia gravis associated with thymoma
  '     s 
in two dogs, J Small Anim Pract 37[8):376-380, 1996.
Intern Med 20(6):1487-1490, 2006.
104l. Shelton GD, Schule A, Kass PH: Risk factors for
1062. Bartges JW, Klausner JS, Bostwick EF, et al: Clinical
acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs: 1,154 cases [1991-
remission following plasmapheresis and corticosteroid
1995), J Am Vet Med Assoc 211[11):1428-1431, 1997.
treatment in a dog with acquired myasthenia gravis,
1042. Kent M, Glass EN, Acierno M, et al: Adult onset
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196(8):1276-1278, 1990.
acquired myasthenia gravis in three Great Dane litter-
1063. Lainesse MF, Taylor SM, Myers SL, et al: Focal myas-
mates, J Small Anim Pract 49(12):647-650, 2008.
thenia gravis as a paraneoplastic syndrome of canine
1043. Lipsitz D, Berry JL, Shelton GD: Inherited predisposi-
thymoma: improvement following thymectomy, J Am
tion to myasthenia gravis in Newfoundlands, J Am Vet
Anim Hosp Assoc 32(2):111-117, 1996.
Med Assoc 215[7]:956-958, 1999.
1064. Shelton GD, Joseph R, Richter K, Hitt M, et al:
1044. Shelton GD, Ho M, Kass PH: Risk factors for acquired
Acquired myasthenia gravis in hyperthyroid cats
on tapazole therapy, J Vet Intern Med il(2):120,
Vet Med Assoc 216[1):55-57, 2000.
1997.
1045. Shelton GD, Willard MD, Cardinet GH, et al: Acquired
1065. Shelton GD, Lindstrom JM: Spontaneous remission
myasthenia gravis. Selective involvement of esopha-
in canine myasthenia gravis: implications for assessing
geal, pharyngeal, and facial muscles, J Vet Intern Med
human MG therapies, Neurology 57[11):2139-2141,
4(6):281-284, 1990.
2001.
1046. Dewey CW, Bailey CS, Shelton GD, et al: Clinical
1066. Johnson RP, Watson ADJ, Smith J, et al: Myasthenia
forms of acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs: 25 cases
in springer spaniel littermates, J Small Anim Pract
(1988-1995), J Vet Intern Med 11(2):50-57, 1997.
16(10):641-647, 1975.
1047. King LG, Vite CH: Acute fulminating myasthenia gra-
1067. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Shelton GD, LeCouteur RA:
vis in five dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212[6):830-834,
Congenital myasthenia gravis in smooth-haired minia-
1998.
ture dachshund dogs, J Vet Intern Med 19(6):920-923,
1048. Ducote JM, Dewey CW, Coates JR: Clinical forms of
2005.
 myasthenia gravis in cats, Compend Contin Edue Pract
1068. Wallace ME, Palmer AC: Recessive mode ofinheritance
Vet 21(5):440-448, 1999.
 in myasthenia gravis in the Jack Russell terrier, Vet Rec
1049. Hackett TB, Van Pelt DR, Willard MD, et al: Third
114(14):350, 1984.
degree atrioventricular block and acquired myasthenia
1069. Miller LM, Lennon VA, Lambert EH, et al: Congenital
gravis in four dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206(8):1173-
myasthenia gravis in 13 smooth fox terriers, J Am Anim
1176, 1995.
Hosp Assoc 182(7):694-697, 1983.
1050. Levine JM, Bergman RL, Coates JR, et al: Myasthenia
1070. Indrieri RJ, Creighton SR, Lambert EH, et al: Myasthe-
 gravis and hypothyroidism in a dog with meningomy-
nia gravis in two cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182[1):57-
elitis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41(4):247-251, 2005.
60, 1983.
CHAPTER 7
Tetraparesis, Hemiparesis, and Ataxia
249
1071. Joseph RJ, Carrillo JM, Lennon VA: Myasthenia gravis
1073. Miller LM, Hegreberg GA, Prieur DJ, et al: Inheritance
in the cat, J Vet Intern Med 2[2):75-79, 1988.
of congenital myasthenia gravis in smooth fox terrier
1072. Flagstad A, Trojaborg W, Gammeltoft S: Congenital
dogs, J Hered 75[3):163-166, 1984.
myasthenic syndrome in the dog breed Gammel Dansk
1074. Thompson PN, Steinlein OK, Harper CK, et al: Con-
Honsehund: clinical, electrophysiological, pharmaco-
genital myasthenic syndrome of Brahman cattle in
logical and immunological comparison with acquired
South Africa, Vet Rec 153[25):779-781, 2003.
myasthenia gravis, Acta Vet Scand 30[1):89-102, 1989.
CHAPTER
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
taxia is a lack of coordination that may be present
spinocerebellar tracts of the lateral funiculus and in the dorsal
without spasticity, paresis, or involuntary movements.
columns [fasciculus gracilis-from the pelvie limbs; fasciculus
 Paresis, when present, is especially useful in localizing
cuneatus-from the thoracic limbs and neck), which project
lesions. Ataxia is characterized by a broad-based stance and
to the cerebellum and those in the dorsal funiculus that proj-
uncoordinated movements of the head, trunk, or limbs. Lesion
ect to the contralateral somesthetic cerebral cortex. Primary
localization of animals manifesting head and limb ataxia is
neurodegenerative disorders, and compressive and ischemic-
described in Chapter 2 and is summarized in Figure 8-1. A
related injuries will result in damage and loss of these path-
brief review is presented in this chapter.
susceptible to these pathologies.
LESION LOCALIZATION
Vestibular Ataxia
Anatomy
For clinical purposes, ataxia can be classified into three major
The vestibular system detects linear acceleration and rota-
categories: general proprioceptive, vestibular, and cerebellar.
tional movement of the head. This system does not initiate
Clinical signs result when a disease process interferes with the
motor activity; however, its sensory input is used to modify
and coordinate movement. The vestibular system primarily
head, trunk, or limbs. Key neurologic signs that are useful for
controls the muscles involved in maintaining equilibrium,
localizing the lesion may be observed. Figure 8-2 is an algo-
positioning the head, and regulating eye movement.
rithm for the formulation of a differential diagnosis of ataxia.
The peripheral components of the vestibular and cochlear
This algorithm is based largely on a few key differential signs.
systems are encased by the petrous temporal bone containing
For example, abnormal movements of the head or the eyes
a vestibule for the inner ear, hence the name. Receptors for the
indicate that the lesion is not in the spinal cord but rather in
vestibulocochlear system are located within a membranous
the vestibular system, brainstem, or cerebellum.
labyrinth that is encased within a bony labyrinth (semicircu-
lar canals, vestibule, and cochlea). The membranous labyrinth
General Proprioceptive Ataxia
is composed of the cochlear duct, three semicircular ducts, and
Loss of proprioceptive impulses from the limbs and, in some
the otolithic organs [utricle and saccule). The cochlear duct
cases, the trunk produces general proprioceptive [GP) ataxia.
contains the sensory receptors for hearing, the organ of Corti.
For the purpose of localization, abnormalities of general pro-
The semicircular ducts, utrile, and saccule contain sensory
prioception in the limbs are interpreted in exactly the same
receptors for maintaining equilibrium. Perilymph, similar in
way as motor dysfunction [see Chapters 2, 6, and 7). For
constituency to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), separates the bony
example, loss of proprioception in the pelvic limbs with nor-
and membranous labyrinths. The membranous labyrinth is
mal proprioception in the thoracic limbs indicates a lesion cau-
flled with endolymph, which is potassium rich. The endolymph
dal to T2 involving the large diameter, ascending fibers in the
provides a medium by which the receptors of the semicircular
spinal cord or sensory fbers of the peripheral nerve. Further
ducts and otolithic organs can detect changes in head position.
localization is achieved by examining the spinal reflexes and
 Two kinds of receptors are present: maculae in the utric-
 segmental responses to noxious stimuli (e.g., pinching the skin 
uli and sacculi and cristae in the ampullae at the base of the
with hemostats). General proprioceptive ataxia is frequently
semicircular ducts. The maculae are arranged approximately
associated with paresis because the pathways [descending
at right angles to each other They function to detect head
upper motor neuron [UMN] pathways and ascending GP
pathways) for each are closely related anatomically through-
help to maintain equilibrium. Any rotation of the head
out the nervous system. The primary spinal cord pathways
changes the direction of the cristae according to the move-
for transmission of GP information are those located in the
ment of the endolymph. The cristae are in synaptic contact
250
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
251
Gaitevaluation
Gait normal or
Ataxia
slightly abnormal
Postural reaction
deficits
Head involvement 
 No head involvement 
Cerebrum
UMN signs
No UMN signs
or diencephalon
See Chapters
12 and 13
 Brainstem 
Symmetric ataxia
Asymmetric ataxia
Ataxia of pelvic
Ataxia of pelvic
Central vestibular
Head tremor
Head tilt
lim bs and trunk,
limbs and 
 See Figure 8-11
Dysmetria
Nystagmus
thoracic limbs
thoracic limbs
Table 8-3
Truncal ataxia
with no change
normal
and trunk
Tremor nystagmus
in direction with
Normal cranial nerves
change of head
(possible response)
 position
(Facial paresis)
(Horner's sign)
Cerebellum
Pelvic limb
Tetraparesis
See Table 8-4
paresis
 See Figure 7-1
See Figure 6-2
Peripheral
vestibular
See Figure 8-5
and
Table 8-1
Hgure 8-1 Algorithm for the diagnosis of ataxia based on gait, head involvement, and motor
function of the limbs.
Head tilt
Yes*
No*
Ataxia
Yes
No
No
asymmetric
Head tremor
NO
No
Intention
No
No
tremor
 Abnormal Nystagmus
Yes
Sometimes
No
(Tremor-like)
Vertical nystagmus
No
Yes
No
or nystagmus
altered with
 position of head
Proprioceptive
No
Yes*
 Slight
Yes*
placing or postural 
deficits
 Paresis
Yes
No
None to
No
Severe
Abnormal mental 
status (dullness,
No
NC
No
stupor, etc.)
Peripheral
Central
Cerebellart
General 
vestibular
vestibular
Proprioception
(Spinal cord)
Figure 8-2 Algorithm for the diagnosis of ataxia resulting from vestibular, cerebellar, or spinal cord
 disease. Key differential signs. Lesion in the brainstem can cause central vestibular, cerebellar, and
upper motor neuron signs. Lesions involving the cerebellar flocculonodular lobe may cause head
tilt. When the caudal cerebellar peduncle is involved, head tilt may be opposite [paradoxical] the
side of the lesion.
252
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
with the afferent nerve fibers of the vestibular nerve, which
neurologic examination is to determine the neuroanatomic
send impulses to the brainstem. The three semicircular canals
localization as whether the lesion affects the peripheral (sen-
 are oriented in different planes, which allow the receptors to
sory receptors or CN VIll) or central (brainstem) vestibular
 predict loss of balance and maintain equilibrium during move-
system [see Figure 8-2). In general, common clinical signs of
ment regardless of the direction of the movement.
vestibular disease (peripheral or central) are ataxia, head tilt,
 Input to the brain is by way of the vestibular division of cra-
and abnormal nystagmus. These signs may be present alone or
nial nerve (CN) VIll. The vestibular nerve is composed of bipo-
 in combination with each other In general, the determination
lar neurons, with cell bodies located in the vestibular ganglia
of central vestibular disease is made through the observation
contained within the internal acoustic meatus of the petrosal
of other signs that implicate a lesion affecting the brainstem.
bone. The vestibular nerve enters the brainstem at the level of
Signs such as abnormal mentation, postural reaction defcits,
the rostral medulla and caudal cerebellar peduncle in proximity
and other cranial nerve deficits, suggest involvement of the
to CN V and CN VII. The nerve terminates in one of four ves-
 brainstem. Animals not displaying signs suggestive of brainstem
tibular nuclei or in the cerebellum via the cerebellar peduncles.
involvement are considered to have peripheral vestibular dis-
 Pathways from the vestibular nuclei project to other brain-
ease. Despite this, some animals with lesions affecting the cen-
stem nuclei, cerebellum, cerebral cortex, and spinal cord. Ves-
tral vestibular system may not demonstrate signs of brainstem
tibular projections to the motor nuclei of CN IIl, IV, and Vl,
involvement and in doing so appear clinically identical to those
which control eye movements travel by way of the medial
with a disorder affecting the peripheral vestibular system.
longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) in the brainstem. This system
Mentation. Animals with peripheral vestibular disease
controls normal (physiologic) nystagmus, which can be dem-
should have normal mentation. However, in some animals,
onstrated in the normal animal by moving its head from side to
severe disorientation and nausea sometimes makes assessment
side or up and down.As the head is turned to one side, the eyes
of the mental state difficult. Animals with central vestibular
move in a slow direction to the opposite side (slow phase) fol-
disease may be dull or obtunded because of proximity of the
lowed by a jerk movement (fast phase) toward (ipsilateral) the
vestibular nuclei and tracts to the reticular activating system
side of the head turn. The slow phase also is known as the doll's
in the brainstem. Severely affected animals may be stuporous
eye response. The fast phase is akin to the oculocephalic reflex (or
or comatose.
vestibulo-ocular reflex), which provides a compensatory adjust-
Gait and Posture. Presence of a head tilt obviously indi-
ment to keep the eyes fixed on one object. The direction of the
 cates vestibular dysfunction and an asymmetric disease process.
fast phase is always in the same direction of the head move-
Loss of ipsilateral excitatory input to the extensor muscles of
 ssr   s d   
the neck causes the head to tilt to the side of the lesion. In
absent with vestibular dysfunction. This is observed by lagging
subtle cases, blindfolding the animal may accentuate the tilt.
 of the fast phase or dysconjugate eye movements (see Chapter
In most cases, the head tilt is toward the side of the lesion. The
1 1). Other ways of eliciting normal nystagmus are caloric test-
head tilt may vary in severity and may be a residual deficit with
 ing and assessment of postrotary nystagmus. Both are diffcult
resolution of a disease process. Similarly, unilateral vestibular
to perform and interpret and are usually not necessary in the
lesions cause a loss of ipsilateral extensor tone and animals fall
evaluation of vestibular dysfunction. Briefly, with caloric test-
to the side of the lesion. Moreover, because the extensor tone
ing, placement of cool water into the external ear canal pro-
on the contralateral side is no longer inhibited, the increased
duces nystagmus to the opposite side and placement of warm
extensor tone on the contralateral side causes the animal to
water produces nystagmus to the same side (mnemonic-
lean or roll to the side of the lesion.
COWS: cool, opposite; warm, same). This test may be useful
Vestibular ataxia is generally asymmetric unless bilateral
when assessing vestibular function in the comatose animal.
lesions are present. The animal usually falls or drifts toward
Projections to the vomiting center of the brainstem are
 the side of the lesion. Turning in tight circles is usually a sign
important in the development of motion sickness (visual-
of vestibular dysfunction (wide circles accompanied by pro-
vestibular sensory dissociation). The vomiting center is located
pulsive walking without an obvious ataxia suggests forebrain
in the reticular formation of the brainstem and has direct con-
dysfunction ipsilateral to the side the animal circles toward),
nection with the vestibular nuclei. Vomiting is often a clinical
although exceptions may be observed. With circling related to
 sign of acute vestibular dysfunction.
vestibular dysfunction, the movement is usually toward the
The vestibular apparatus also works in close association
side of the lesion, but movement in the opposite direction can
with the cerebellum to maintain balance and coordination.
occur with central vestibular lesions [paradoxical vestibular
Pathways project directly from CN VIl or from the vestibular
disease; see the following discussion). Signs of paresis or pos-
nuclei through the caudal cerebellar peduncle to several areas
tural reaction defcits in the limbs associated with a head tilt
in the cerebellum. Namely the flocculonodular lobe and the
indicate central vestibular disease. Paresis in central vestibular
fastigial nucleus.
disease is caused by injury of the descending UMN tracts that
Vestibular impulses reach the cerebral cortex via the
 oi Aem ioou e snu uasueq an uanorm aod
 medial geniculate nucleus and projection fibers to the cerebral
entiate between central and peripheral yestibular disease is
cortex. These pathways inform the animal of its position dur-
to evaluate the animal critically for evidence of motor dys-
ing movement.
function or GP ataxia. Careful assessment of postural reac-
Vestibular information is transmitted to the somatic mus-
tions, especially proprioceptive positioning and the hopping
cles via the vestibulospinal tracts. These pathways are impor-
response, is the key factor in localizing vestibular lesions. In
tant for the regulation of antigravity muscles of the limbs and
some animals with severe vestibular dysfunction, the only pos-
trunk. Basically, the vestibulospinal tracts facilitate the ipsi-
tural reaction that can be accurately assessed is proprioceptive
lateral extensor muscles and inhibit the ipsilateral flexors and
positioning. Most important, the side of the postural reaction
contralateral extensors.
deficits implicates the side of the lesion in the brainstem. Con-
sequently, postural reactions deficits observed in the right tho-
Signs of Vestibular Dysfunction—Peripheral Versus
racic and pelvic limbs means that the lesion affects the right
Central
side of the brainstem, regardless of the side of the head tilt.
An animal with vestibular dysfunction manifests abnormali-
Strabismus and Nystagmus. When any component of
ties in eye position/movement, head and body position, mus-
the vestibular system is disrupted, strabismus or abnormal
 cle tone, and voluntary motor movements. The purpose of the
nystagmus can occur independently (spontaneously) of head
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
253
movement. When the head is elevated, ventral strabismus is
Dysfunction of other cranial nerves [V-XIl) associated with
often seen ipsilateral to the lesion in either peripheral or cen-
head tilt suggests a central vestibular lesion that involves other
tral vestibular disease. When the head is returned to its normal
 areas of the brainstem. Some syndromes that cause peripheral
position, the strabismus resolves. This type of strabismus is
neuropathy, however, also affect other cranial nerves, includ-
referred to as positional or vestibular strabismus. It is in con-
ing the vestibular nerve. Thus evidence of multiple cranial
 tradistinction to a fixed strabismus in which the abnormal eye
nerve involvement does not necessarily indicate central ves-
tibular disease.
head. Fixed strabismus is observed with lesions affecting CN
 Deafness, more commonly associated with peripheral ves-
III, IV, or VI (see Chapter 1l). Ventral strabismus can be seen
tibular disease, is caused by damage to the tissues for conduc-
with peripheral and central vestibular disease and is therefore
tion (external or middle ear) or sensorineural transmission
not a localizing sign.
[inner ear, organ of Corti, or cochlear nerve) involved in hear-
Animals with vestibular dysfunction often display abnor-
ing. Brainstem lesions affecting the sympathetic pathways
mal nystagmus that is constantly present. This is referred to as
typically affect other structures, and additional signs are seen.
spontaneous (or resting) mystagmus. In some cases, spontaneous
Paradoxical Vestibular Disease. Paradoxical vestibular
nystagmus is absent; however, with changes in head position,
disease is an uncommon presentation of central vestibular dis-
abnormal nystagmus may be induced. This may be referred to
ease in which the clinical signs of vestibular dysfunction are
as positional or inducible nystagmus. Because of visual compen-
directed opposite the side of the anatomic lesion. For example,
sation, spontaneous nystagmus often is the first of the clinical
an animal may display vestibular ataxia directed to the left
signs of vestibular disease to disappear or resolve. Thus a way
with a left-sided head tilt with abnormal nystagmus directed
to induce abnormal nystagmus in an animal suspected to have
to the right, which suggests a left-sided lesion, yet the ana
vestibular disease is to decompensate them. This is accom-
tomic lesion is on the right side. In the case of paradoxical
plished by rapid turning of the head from side to side, tipping
vestibular disease, the determination of the side of the ana-
the nose in a vertical drection, blindfolding or flipping the ani-
tomic lesion is made based on other localizing signs. The most
 mal on its back, size permitting. Hence, positional or induced
useful signs to determine the side of the anatomic lesion are
nystagmus also indicates vestibular dysfunction. Presence of
postural deficits, which occur ipsilateral to the lesion. There-
 abnormal (spontaneous or positional) nystagmus indicates ves-
fore, the side of the lesion in paradoxical vestibular disease is
tibular dysfunction and may be present in central or peripheral
 localized according to the side of the postural deficits. Other
vestibular disease. This can be explained by imbalance of input
cranial nerve deficits, such as CN V or CN VII, also help deter-
being relayed from the sensory receptors in the labyrinth or
mine the side of the anatomic lesion, which also occur on the
CN Vll (peripheral) to and from the vestibular nuclei (cen-
side ipsilateral to the lesion. Paradoxical vestibular disease is
tral). For example, asymmetric sensory input, consisting of
generally caused by lesions that involve the focculonodular
impulses from the normal side (side opposite of the head tilt)
lobes or the caudal cerebellar peduncles.3 An explanation is
combined with absent or reduced impulses from the affected
related to loss of the cerebellar inhibitory influence on the
side into the vestibular nuclei is perceived as head movement;
ipsilateral vestibular nuclei, resulting in relative excessive dis-
thereby causing the eyes to move in the opposite direction
charge (in relationship to the unaffected side in which there is
of the perceived rotation (slow phase toward the lesion) fol-
a relative decrease in the frequency of discharges of discharges;
lowed by a fast reset [fast phase away from the lesion).
the rate of efferent discharges from the normal side appears
Abnormal nystagmus is named according to its orientation
decreased) from the vestibular nuclei forcing the head tilt and
(horizontal, rotatory, or vertical). Additionally, the direction of
loss of balance to the opposite side.4 In sunmary, paradoxical
nystagmus is named in accordance with the direction of the
vestibular disease is the observation of clinical signs opposite
fast phase. In peripheral vestibular disease, the nystagmus may
of the anatomic lesion, which reflects involvement of the cen-
be horizontal or rotatory, with the fast phase or jerk directed
tral vestibular system.
away from the side of the head tilt. The direction of nystag-
Bilateral Vestibular Disease. Bilateral vestibular disease
mus should not change in animals with peripheral vestibular
does not cause a head tilt because of the lesion symmetry. The
disease. With a central vestibular lesion, the nystagmus may
animal often wallks slowly in a crouched position and tends to
 be similar to that described for peripheral lesions; however,
avoid sudden movements, and oten exhibits a characteristic
nystagmus that changes in the direction of the fast phase with
side-to-side swaying of the head. Because of lack of input to
alterations in head position, nystagmus in which the fast phase
the vestibular nuclei on both sides of the brainstem, normal
is directed toward the head tilt, or that is vertical in direction
or physiologic nystagmus is absent and abnormal nystagmus is
strongly suggests a central vestibular lesion, although excep-
not observed. Bilateral vestibular dysfunction more commonly
tions may occur.
occurs with peripheral vestibular diseases and less so with cen-
Cranial Nerves. Due to the proximity of CN Vlll with
tral vestibular diseases.
 CN Vll and the postganglionic sympathetic fbers that inner-
vate the eye, which traverse the middlle ear, the observation of
Cerebellar Ataxia
facial paresis/paralysis and Horner's syndrome (loss of sympa-
Anatomy
thetic innervation to the eye) suggests peripheral vestibular
The cerebellum functions as a major coordinator of motor
disease. The sympathetic nerve courses through the middle
         
ear in dogs and cats and often is affected in otitis media with
performance required to complete the activity. The cerebel-
associated Horner's syndrome (see Chapter 1l1).2 In large
lum receives input through three paired peduncles. The cau-
animals, this is not the case because there is no evidence that
dal cerebellar peduncles carry sensory and proprioceptive
the postganglionic sympathetic fbers pass through the tym-
fbers from the vestibular system, basal nuclei, and spinal
panic bullae in these species. CN VII and CN VII dysfunction
cord. The middle cerebellar peduncles transmit information
without Horner's syndrome may occur with either peripheral
from the cerebral cortex by way of the pons. A few fibers
or central vestibular disease. This is related to the intimate
 relaying proprioceptive information from the head and spi-
anatomic relationship of CN VIIl and CN VI1. CN VII exits
nal cord enter through the rostral cerebellar peduncles. The
the brainstem in close association with the vestibular nerve
majority of fbers leaving the cerebellum travel through the
 and separates from it within the petrosal bone. CN Vll courses
rostral cerebellar peduncle to project to the cerebral cortex,
through the facial canal, which opens into the middle ear.
midbrain, reticular formation, and vestibular nuclei. The
254
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 8-4 Jack Russel terrier puppies with primary cerebellar
 granule cell degeneration. Note the hypermetric gait.
during movement and gaze fixation. Upbeat and downbeat
nystagmus can be induced with a rapid change in head posi-
tion. Menace response may be impaired in animals with diffuse
cerebellar disease, even though vision and facial nerve function
Figure 8-3 A 2-year-old Jack Russell terrier with hereditary spi-
are normal. Anisocoria and alterations in the size of the palpe-
 nocerebellar ataxia. Note the severe truncal cerebellar ataxia.
bral fissure have been observed with cerebellar lesions.3
flocculonodular lobes of the cerebellum are important in
DISEASES
vestibular system activities. Lesions of the flocculonodular
lobe of the cerebellum often can cause paradoxical vestibular
This chapter discusses diseases that commonly affect the
dysfunction [see previous discussion of paradoxical vestibu-
brainstem, cerebellum, and peripheral vestibular system. The
lar dysfunction).3
disorders that produce GP ataxia because of spinal cord dis-
ease are described in Chapters 6 and 7. Diseases with invol-
Signs of Cerebellar Dysfunction
untary movements as the primary sign [e.g., tremor, spasticity)
A disease of the cerebellum or its peduncles results in char-
are discussed in Chapter 10. As in previous chapters, this sec-
acteristic clinical signs. The cerebellum performs below the
tion is organized according to the anatomic location of the
level of consciousness to control muscle movements accu-
lesion and the course ofthe disease [acute versus chronic, pro-
rately, assist in maintaining equilibrium and proprioception,
gressive versus nonprogressive).
and control posture. Therefore, behavior and level of con-
sciousness are not affected by pure cerebellar lesions. Because
Acute Progressive and Nonprogressive Peripheral
 the cerebellum does not initiate motor activity, paresis is not
Vestibular Diseases
 a sign of cerebellar dysfunction unless the brainstem is also
A diagnostic approach to peripheral vestibular disease is out-
affected.
lined in Figure 8-5. A careful history is taken to determine
Gait and Posture. The gait is characterized by symmetric
exposure to ototoxic drugs. Using otoscopic examinations
truncal ataxia (Figure 8-3) and dysmetria, which is commonly
 and imaging studies [radiographic or cross-sectional imaging
manifested as hypermetria (Figure 8-4). Posture at rest and
computed tomography [CT] or magnetic resonance imag-
 during movement is basewide for maintaining position and
ing [MRI] of the external ear canal and the tympanic bulla,
stabilization of the trunk. Cerebellar dysfunction rarely pro-
the clinician must decide whether abnormalities exist. CT is
duces head tilt or circling.
more sensitive for evaluation of middle and inner ear diseases
Animals with acute onset cerebellar disease can develop
than radiography. MRI depicts the inner ear anatomy, espe-
ad
decerebellate posture: opisthotonos, tonic extension of the
cially the hyperintensity of the endolymph on T2-weighted
thoracic limbs, and flexion of the pelvis and pelvic limbs. The
o  s (e a  ()
pelvic limbs may also be extended if the ventral aspect of the
contrast administration can detect inflammatory conditions
rostral lobe of the cerebellum is affected. Spinal reflexes may
of the inner ear. If toxic agents have not been administered,
be exaggerated in the early stages.3 The spasticity decreases
the patient's history is used to place the condition in one
after a few days, and the other signs of chronic lesions, includ-
of two categories: chronic progressive or acute nonprogres-
ing intention tremor ofthe head and cerebellar ataxia, develop
sive. If the initial otoscopic examination or imaging studies
over a period of several weeks to months.
disclose an abnormality, the disorder is classified as inflam-
htention Tremor. Cerebellar tremor occurs with move-
matory or noninflammatory based on the results of myringot-
n   sd  e e ) n
omy, cytology, and culture and antimicrobial susceptibility
 o sansaaans Araa st peau a u paunourd sou si ie
testing_of material obtained from the tympanic bulla. Cer-
ebellar disease. The intention tremor is most obvious when the
tain inflammatory and neoplastic diseases can fall into either
animal attempts a purposeful or goal-directed movement, such
broad category, depending on the propensity of the disease
as eating or drinking. Postural tremor or titubation consists of
to produce detectable lesions that are grossly visible on oto-
rocking movements—forward-backward and side-to-side. Cer-
 scopic inspection or with imaging studies. The etiologic cat-
 ebellar tremors are absent in relaxed or sleep states and are not
egories for peripheral vestibular disease include anomalous,
considered involuntary movements (see Chapter 10). Ocular
neoplastic, inflammatory, idiopathic, and toxic. These disor-
movement disorders occur as clinical signs of cerebellar dis-
ders according to disease onset and progression are outlined
ease.5 Flutter consisting of eye oscillations and dysmetria occurs
in Table 8-1.
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
255
Neurologic Signs of Peripheral
Vestibular Dysfunction
Acute Onset /
Acute Onset /
Chronic Onset
nonprogressive
progressive
Otoscopic examination, +/- myringotomy
(perform after imaging), +/-
 culture and sensitivity; oropharyngeal
examination
Idiopathic
Vestibular
Radiographs, CT/MRI*
Disease
 Otitis interna
 Surgical
Medical Treatment /
Treatment,
 Polyp / Neoplasia /
Supportive Care
etc.
Abscess
Figure 8-5 Algorithm for the diagnostic approach of peripheral vestibular disease.
TABLE 8-1
Etiology of Peripheral Vestibular Disease*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Anomalous
 Congenital vestibular
disease (C. F. B)
Metabolic
Hypothyroidism (7. 15)
Neoplastic (12)
Metastatic
 Primary aural tumors
Ceruminous gland adenocarcinoma
Sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma 
 Squamous cell carcinoma
Bony tumors
Neurofibrosarcoma
Inflammatory (15)
Otitis media/interna (all)
Otitis media interna (all)
Inflammatory polyp (C. F)
Inflammatory polyp (C, F)
ldiopathic
Canine idiopathic
 Feline idiopathic
Toxic (15)
 Ototoxic drugs (topical and systemic)
Traumatic (12)
 Head injury
Temporohyoid osteoarthropathy (E)
Vascular
Cuterebra larval
Migration (F)
C, Canine; F, feline; B, bovine; E, equine.
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are discussed.
Anomalous
was identified histologically in two litters of affected Dober-
Congenital  Vestibular Syndromes.  Congenital  vestibular
 man pinschers.lI Some congenitally affected animals gradually
improve, whereas others have persistent head tilt and deaf-
cats.6 They have been reported in beagles, German shepherd
ness. No effective therapy is known. The pendular nystagmus
 dogs, Doberman pinschers, cocker spaniels, smooth fox ter-
of Siamese cats is caused by an abnormality of the visual path-
ways rather than vestibular disease [see Chapter 1l). Pendular
Burmese, Persian, and Tonkinese cats also have been identi-
 nystagmus of Holstein and Jersey cattle with no other clinical
fed.lo Vestibular signs develop from the time of birth until
 signs could be a similar syndrome.12.13
the animal is several weeks of age. Deafness may accompany
the vestibular disease and may be unilateral or bilateral. The
Metabolic
 pathogenesis of the lesion is unknown. Although most of the
Hypothyroidism  (see Chapter 15). Hypothyroidism can
conditions are assumed to be inherited, a definite pattern of
inheritance has not been identified. Lymphocytic labyrinthitis
Clinical signs may be acute or chronic. Peripheral vestibular
256
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
dysfunction may be related to the signs of polyneuropathy
are specific neurologic signs consistent with peripheral vestib-
associated with hypothyroidism or the myxomatous com-
ular dysfunction. When present in conjunction with signs of
pressive neuropathy and the vestibular nerve exits the skull
otitis externa, a diagnosis of otitis media/interna is presumed.
foramina.6 14 Diagnosis is based on documenting low T4, free.
Occasionally the otitis media/interna can extend into the cra-
T4, and elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Signs of
nial cavity.27.28 In most cases of intracranial extension of otitis
vestibular dysfunction usually resolve within 2 to 4 weeks of
media/interna, signs consistent with central vestibular disease
thyroid supplementation.
are present; however, some cases may only display signs consis-
tent with peripheral vestibular disease. Unilateral facial paraly-
Inflammatory
sis is common because the inflammatory process often extends
 Otitis Media/lnterna
to the facial nerve as it passes through the petrosal bone.29 Oti-
Pathogenesis. The most common cause of peripheral ves-
tis media, with no involvement of the inner ear, does not cause
tibular disease in dogs and cats is an inner ear infection that
vestibular dysfunction. In dogs and cats, Horner's syndrome,
has originated in the external ear canal and progressed into
either complete or partial (miosis alone or with slight eleva-
the middle ear and ultimately affects the inner ear. As such,
tion of the nictitating membrane) can be seen on the affected
infections are often referred to as otitis media/interna. Of 83
side if the sympathetic nerve in the middle ear is involved.2
cases of peripheral vestibular disease in the dog, 49% were
Because the postganglionic fibers of the sympathetic nerve do
attributed to infection.l Similarly in cats, otitis media/interna
not enter the middle ear in large animals, Horner's syndrome is
was suspected in 43% of cats with peripheral vestibular dis-
not seen with otitis media/interna in these species.
ease.I6 Otitis media/interna is also common in food animals
Diagnosis. The diagnosis of otitis media/interna is con-
-junu u Joioey Isu uous isou aui e'sasnoq u jou 1nq
firmed by otoscopic examination and imaging studies. If puru-
nants for otitis media/interna is respiratory infection, but
lent otitis externa is present, cytologic evaluation and culture
other factors include infected milk during suckling and ear
with antimicrobial susceptibility testing of the material in the
mite infestation.17.18
external ear should be performed followed by gentle but thor-
Otitis media/interna in animals is caused most commonly
ough cleaning. Cattle with otitis media/interna frequently have
by bacteria, although yeast and fungal organisms are encoun-
aa iaa   a ro    ' 
tered occasionally. Otitis externa caused by bacteria is the
sedation or anesthesia aids in critical otoscopic examination.
most common cause of otitis media/interna in small animals.!
The tympanic membrane is examined carefully for hyperemia,
The causative bacteria in small animals include Staphylococ-
edema, hemorrhage, and erosion. Fluid in the middle ear makes
Chus spp., Streptococcus spp, Proteus spp, Pseudomonas spp.
suainq saonpord pue anbedo readde uequau suedu au
Pasteurella spp., and Escherichia coli.19 In the absence of otitis
of the membrane into the external ear canal. If the tympanic
externa, alternate routes of infection include retrograde spread
 membrane is ruptured or eroded, fluid is aspirated gently from
via the auditory (eustachian) tubes and hematogenous spread.
the middle ear for cytology and bacteriologic culture. If the
In horses, Streptococcus spp., Actinobacillus spp, and Staphy-
tympanic membrane is intact but abnormal, myringotomy is
lococcus spp. are most frequent. Lambs and cattle more often
performed with a 22-gauge spinal needle of appropriate length
have Pasteurella spp, Streptococcus spp, or Arcanobacterium
or with a sterile myringotomy knife. If aspiration of the middle
ear fails to yield a small quantity of fluid for evaluation, O.25 to
in pigs.2 In pigs and smallruminants, t is not uncommon for
0.5 mL of sterile saline is injected and then aspirated. Cytology
otitis interna to extend through the internal acoustic meatus
 and microbial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing
resulting in meningitis, empyema, and encephalitis.13
are performed. Brainstem auditory evoked response [BAER)
 In dogs, otitis externa can be classified into predisposing.
testing can estimate peripheral and central auditory function.
primary, secondary, and perpetuating causes.22 Predisposing
 Radiographic examination of the skull is a valuable aid in
causes include the confirmation of the pinnae and external ear
the diagnosis and prognosis of chronic otitis media/interna.
canal. Primary causes include etiologies such as ectoparasites,
Radiographic projections include lateral, dorsoventral, “open-
 atopy, food allrgies, foreign bodies, and neoplasia. Primary
mouth,” and oblique views of each tympanic bulla. Positive
etiologies result in the development of secondary infection.
fndings include fluid opacity in the tympanic bulla and exos-
Left untreated, infections become chronic. With chronic infec-
tosis, sclerosis, or erosion in the tympanic bulla (Figure 8-6).
tion, pathologic changes develop within the external ear canal,
Lysis of the bulla or surrounding structures is more often asso-
which perpetuate infection. Breeds of dogs that are predisposed
diated with neoplasia. Despite the presence of otitis media/
to chronic otitis externa [cocker spaniels, poodles, and German
 interna, radiographs may be normal.30
shepherd dogs) are at increased risk of developing otitis media/
 Cross-sectional imaging provides for a more sensitive
interna. Chronic otitis externa with mite or tick infestation can
method of imaging the middle and inner ear than radiogra-
  a  s m e sno o x
phy. Computed tomography findings in otitis media/interna
 brane from the mites and associated inflammatory response. A
include thickening of the tympanic bulla and the presence
primary secretory otitis media (PSOM) has been described in
of soft/luid tissue density within the tympanic bull.31.32
Cavalier King Charles spaniels.23 These dogs have severe head
Proliferation, sclerosis, or lysis of the tympanic bulla may be
and neck pain that may be consequence of a the middle ear that
observed.33 Magnetic resonance imaging findings associated
contains debris within the tympanic bulla consisting of a mucus
with otitis media/interna include observation of material in
plug. Occasionally, otic foreign bodies, such as grass awns, fox-
the tympanic bulla with intermediate signal intensity on T1W
tail awns, or spear grass, predispose dogs to otitis externa with
Ml g-tg'sa M uo Auut uats asuuadu pu
 progression to otitis media/interna. Recurrent episodes are
images obtained after intravenous contrast administration may
reveal peripheral enhancement along the interior of the tym-
rare cause of vestibular and facial nerve signs with temporohy-
the labyrinthine fluid on T2W images may be suggestive of
Clinical Signs. Otitis media/interna may cause the clini-
involvement of the inner ear.37 Meningeal enhancement on
cal signs of vestibular ataxia as discussed earlier. Head shak-
 ing, aural pain, and exudative discharge are often present in
to otitis interna with intracranial extension of the inflamma-
cases of otitis externa. Torticollis, circling, positional ventral
tory process [Figure 8-7).37 Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
strabismus (vestibular strabismus), and abnormal nystagmus
should be performed in cases in which intracranial extension is
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
257
A
Hgure 8-7 A transverse postcontrast T1 W MRI from an 11-year-old
cat with right-side vestibular disease and chronic otitis externa. Note
 the hyperintensity in the bulla with meningeal enhancement in the
ventral aspect of the right brainstem. A bulla osteotomy confirmed
bacterial otitis media/interna.
 for 6 to 8 weeks is recommended. Antibiotics and corticoste-
roids instilled in the external ear canal rarely reach the middle
ear and therefore are seldom useful for resolving the inner ear
infection. Because ototoxic agents can penetrate into the inner
ear from the middle ear, they should be avoided. Unfortu-
nately, this excludes most of the common topical medications
[see subsequent discussion of ototoxicity).4l
 In chronic disease or when medical treatment and in ani-
 mals with worsening of neurologic signs, surgical drainage and
 debridement of the middle ear and the tympanic bulla often
are needed to resolve the infection. Various techniques have
been described. In cats, we prefer the ventral bulla osteotomy
because it affrds the best visibility and exposure for biopsy.
debridement, and drainage.42 In dogs, total ear canal ablation
B
 combined with lateral bulla osteotomy may be required with
Figure 8-6 A, Lateral skull radiograph of a dog with severe otitis
chronic otitis externa and media 43-45 Nasopharyngeal polyps 
media/interna. Note the proliferative bony reaction of the osseous
of the middlle ear may result in recurrent infections and must
bulla (arrows). B, Ventrodorsal skull radiograph of the same dog.
be removed (see subsequent discussion). If there has been
Note the opacity of the right tympanic bulla (arrows). A bulla
intracranial extension of the otitis media/interna, bulla oste-
osteotomy was performed to curette the diseased bone and to
 establish drainage from the middle ear.
otomy should be pursued followed by long-term antibiotic
therapy.27
 Therapy for otitis media/interna must resolve the infection
suspected to evaluate for bacterial meningitis. Such extension
and prevent extension to the brainstem. The prognosis for
may not be accompanied by clinical signs unless it progresses
recovery depends on several factors: [l) the resistance of the
into brain abscessation.27
organism, (2) the chronicity of disease, (3) the extent of bone
 In horses with temporohyoid osteoarthropathy, radiog-
involvement, and (4) the reversibility of the neurologic dam-
raphy may identify stress fractures of the petrosal bone and
age. In chronic otitis interna, neurologic deficits, specifically
periosteal proliferative changes around the bulla and hyoid
the head tilt may be irreversible; however, most animals soon
bones,24.38 However aural, pharyngeal, and guttral pouch
compensate for their vestibular deficits. Facial paralysis is usu-
endoscopy is more reliable than radiography, with CT or MRI
ally irreversible. Resulting keratoconjunctivitis sicca requires
 being the most reliable in confrming a diagnosis.2s On CT,
long-term therapy with artificial tears.
osseous proliferation of the stylohyoid bone and temporohy-
nflammatory Polyp. Inflammatory (aural or nasopha-
oid articulation was the most consistent feature of temporohy-
ryngeal) polyps of the middle ear are suspected in cats with
oid osteoarthropathy.39
peripheral vestibular dysfunction in young cats.46 Cats with
 Treatment. The medical treatment of otitis media/interna
inflammatory polyps may present with stridor, nasal discharge.
consists of a prolonged course of appropriate parenteral and
 sneezing, and occasionally with dyspnea. Inflammatory pol-
topical antibiotics chosen on the basis of culture and anti-
yps are usually unilateral. Polyps can extend into the exter-
    sr s r
nal ear canal or within the nasopharynx. Diagnosis requires
tive for Pseudomonas spp. infection. Initial treatment also
careful examination of the external ear canal and the orophar-
should include thorough cleansing and flushing with sterile
 ynx. Otoscopic examination reveals bulging of the tympanic
saline.40 Penicillinase-resistant penicillins, cephalosporins,
membrane from the fluid or soft tissue mass Skull radiography
chloramphenicol, metronidazole, and high-dose fluoroqui-
may identify a soft tissue opacity in the pharyngeal region or
nolones are often appropriate choices. We prefer long-term
thickening of the osseous bulla secondary to otitis media. CT
bactericidal antibiotic therapy and in chronic cases, therapy
 and MRI are more sensitive than radiography for determining
258
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
the extent of the mass. Increased fluid and soft tissue mass
United States.49 These observations have not been substanti-
are observed in the bulla. Polyps that extend into the exter-
ated in the southern United States, leading some to speculate
nal ear canal or the nasopharynx usually can be removed by
that the syndrome may be caused by Cuterebra fly larvae.50
 gentle traction and avulsion [Figure 8-8). Exploratory surgery
In a review of 75 cases, including two necropsies, one cat had
and ventral bulla osteotomy are required with middle ear
hemorrhage in the labyrinth on the affected side, and the other
involvement (Figure 8-9).47 Appropriate antibiotic therapy
is instituted based on culture and antimicrobial susceptibility
directly involving the vestibular system.49 An analogous syn-
results. Recurrence rate for traction avulsion alone is 30% and
drome has been termed lizard poisoning in some areas and is
less than 8% for those undergoing a ventral bulla osteotomy.48
believed to be related to the ingestion of blue-tailed lizards;
With traction alone, treatment with prednisone for 2 weeks 
however, these lizards are not present in the Northeast, where
 may reduce recurrence, whereas ventral bull osteotomy pre-
the incidence seems high. There is speculation that idiopathic
vents recurrence in most cats.
 process of the peripheral vestibular apparatus, not identified
Idiopathic
on MR1.16
Feline Idiopathic Vestibular Syndrome
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs develop acutely and are usually
Pathogenesis. An acute, idiopathic, nonprogressive peripheral
unilateral, although bilateral involvement has been observed.
vestibular disease has been commonly recognized in cats.16.49
Signs of otitis externa are lacking, and affected cats are usually
Whereas most reports describe this syndrome to have a non-
healthy in all other respects. Cats with unilateral disease develop
progressive disease course, a recent study described most cats
severe head tilt, disorientation, falling, rolling, and abnormal
[69%] affected by presumptive idiopathic vestibular syndrome
nystagmus. In bilateral disease, affected cats have little head tilt
but have difficulty moving because of severe disorientation. The
 or sex predilection. The condition occurs sporadically and is
head may swing in wide excursions from side to side. The cat
not associated with other infectious diseases. The incidence
usually remains in a crouched posture with the limbs widely
seems to be highest in July and August in the northeastern
 abducted and may cry out as ifextremely frightened. Abnormal.
 s  r sr  iu  
reduced or absent bilaterally. Some affected cats vomit and are
anorextic. Importantly, clinical signs are consistent with periph-
eral vestibular without any other neurologic deficits. Affected
animals should not have facial nerve deficits or Horners syn-
drome. The finding of neurologic deficits that are not directly
attributable to the peripheral vestibular system excludes the
diagnosis of feline idiopathic vestibular disease.
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on the clinical signs and
 the absence of evidence supporting a diagnosis ofbacterial oti-
tis externa, media, or interna of other causes.
Treatment. Therapy is mainly supportive. Affected cats
spontaneously improve within 72 hours and are usually nor-
mal in 2 to 3 weeks. Antiemetics are indicated in cats with
nausea but do not ease the vestibular signs. Sedation may be
necessary during the acute phase of the disease to suppress
crying or thrashing. The prognosis for recovery is excellent.
Residual vestibular dysfunction is uncommon.
Canine Idiopathic Vestibular Syndrome
Figure 8-8 A young cat with left-sided peripheral vestibular dis-
Pathogenesis. Acute, idiopathic vestibular syndromes are
ease. Oral examination revealed a nasopharyngeal polyp that was
recognized in older dogs. In a review of 83 cases of peripheral
subsequently removed by gentle traction. (Copyright 2010 Uni-
vestibular disease, 39% were considered idiopathic. The dis-
versity of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
ease is not associated with any known infectious agent. Most
R
Hgure 8-9 A, An intraoperative photograph from a young cat with peripheral vestibular disease
of an inflammatory polyp (white arrow) visualized after a bulla osteotomy. B, The polyps displayed
after surgical excision.
CHAPTER8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
259
 affected doss are older than 5 years of age with a median age
of 12 to 13 years. No breed and sex predilections have been
BOX 8-1
observed.t51
Clinical Signs. Signs develop acutely to peracutely and on
Ototoxic Drugs and Chemicals
occasion may be preceded by vomiting and nausea. As in cats
with idiopathic vestibular syndrome, neurologic signs solely
Antibiotics
reflect peripheral vestibular dysfunction. The observation of
other neurologic deficits excludes canine idiopathic vestibular
Aminoglycosides
syndrome.
Streptomycin
 Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on the clinical signs and
 Dihydrostreptomycin 
the absence of evidence supporting a diagnosis of bacterial oti-
Gentamicin
tis media/interna or other disease. We have seen older dogs with
Neomycin 
peripheral vestibular disease that are hypothyroid and recover
Kanamycin
roidism in Chapters 7 and 15. Because the idiopathic disease
Amikacin 
is usually self-limiting, cause and effect are difficult to prove.
Tobramycin
Treatment. Therapy is symptomatic. Dogs spontaneously
Other
improve in 72 hours and are usually normal in 7 to 10 days.
Polymyxin B
Severely affected dogs may take 3 to 4 weeks to return to nor-
Minocycline
mal. Head tilt may persist in some cases but it usually does not
 interfere with function. The condition may recur.
Erythromycin
Vancomycin 
Toxic
 Chloramphenicol
 Ototoxicity. A large variety of drugs can cause ototoxicity.
affecting vestibular function, hearing, or both. Most of these
Antiseptics
Ethanol 
agents initially cause damage to the receptors and eventu-
lodine and iodophors 
ally cause degeneration of the nerve. Toxicity can occur from
either parenteral or topical therapy3Topical applicatinis
Benzalkonium chloride
probably safe if the tympanic membrane is intact.54 Ototoxic
 Chlorhexidine
agents are listed in Box 8-1.41 The aminoglycoside antibiotics
Cetrimide
are most frequently incriminated in ototoxicity. The signs may
 Benzethonium chloride
be unilateral or bilateral. Risk factors for ototoxicity include
high drug doses, therapy for longer than 14 days, or their use in
Antineoplastics
treating patients with impaired renal function. Patients receiv-
Cisplatin
ing these drugs should be monitored closely for signs of renal
Nitrogen mustard 
toxicity and ototoxicity. In patients with decreased renal func-
Diuretics
tion, dosages are reduced or ideally, these drugs are replaced
 by other nontoxic antibiotics. Vestibular signs usually improve
 Bumetanide 
once the offending ototoxic agents are discontinued; however,
 Ethacrynic acid
deafness may be permanent.
Furosemide
Flushing of the external ear canal is a relatively common pro-
Heavy Metals
cedure in the treatment ofotitis externa. Whereas adverse effects
Arsenic
are rarely encountered, ototoxicity can occur.55 Vestibular dys-
function, facial nerve paresis/paralysis, Homer's syndrome, and
Lead
hearing loss can occur. Ototoxicity may be the result of mechan-
Mercury
ical damage from instruments or aggressive irgation.Ss Add-
Miscellaneous
tionally, translocation of bacteria or bacterial products through
 Ceruminolytic agents
 the external acoustic meatus and into the tympanic bulla may
Detergents 
occur secondary to flushing the ear. Subsequently, bacterial tox-
Quinine
ins may penetrate through an intact round or vestibular window
 Propylene glycol 
to enter the inner ear and lead to ototoxicity.55 The presence of
 inflammation may enhance the penetration into the inner ear.57
Salicylates
Chronic Progressive Peripheral Vestibular Diseases
Data from Mansfield PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats, Compend
Neoplastic
Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:332-337, 1990.
Aural Neoplasms
Pathogenesis. Primary tumors initially can cause peripheral
 carcinomas of unknown etiology, and squamous cell carcinoma
vestibular dysfunction if the tumor originates from or com-
are the most common tumors of the ear.59 Squamous cell car-
presses the vestibular nerve. Tumors arising from the vestibu-
cinoma in cats may arise from the epithelial lining of either
lar nerve [ie., neurofbromas, neurofbrosarcomas, malignant
the middle or inner ear.60 Tumors arising from the tissues of
nerve sheath tumors) rarely develop in this nerve; when pres-
the ear in cats have a higher likelihood of malignancy than in
ent, a slowly progressive course of vestibular disease evolves
asueq au ou moa uen srn asa aenuaag as'so
over several months. More commonly, tumors can arise from
 and central vestibular signs become apparent.
the pinna, externa ear canal, and middle ear and secondarily
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is suspected on visual observation
can cause vestibular dysfunction46Tumrs of the tympanic
and with otoscopic examination. When the mass is exterior
bullae or the labyrinth (fibrosarcomas, chondrosarcomas, osteo-
 diagnosis is made by fine needle aspiration, impression smears,
sarcomas) may destroy structures in the inner ear. Ceruminous
and tissue biopsy. Bony lysis may be seen on skullradiographs.
gland adenocarcinomas, sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma,
CT' or MRI provides greater anatomic detail and is indicated to
260
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 8-10 Transverse pathologic section of brain and cranium (A), survey skull radiograph (B),
and computed tomography image (C) from a 5-year-old female domestic cat with initial signs
of otitis externa and peripheral vestibular disease and subsequent clinical evidence of brainstem
involvement. A mass was palpated at the base of the left ear. A mass has obliterated the left tym-
panic bulla and invaded the calvaria [arrows in A and C]. The left tympanic bulla in B is obscured
compared with the right tympanic bulla, which can be clearly seen (arrowhead). However, the
nature of the underlying lesion is poorly defined in the survey radiograph. The cat was euthanized
and squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed on microscopic examination of the lesion. Bar in A =
1 cm. [From Kornegay JN: Feline neurology, Philadelphia, 1991, JB Lippincott.]
 determine the complete extent of the neoplasm (Figure 8-10).
Central Vestibular Diseases
Lysis of the tympanic bulla, petrous temporal bone, and cal-
 A diagnostic approach to central vestibular (brainstem) dis-
varia may be seen along with soft-tissue proliferation. Contrast
ease is outlined in Figure 8-1l. MRI is the procedure of choice
enhancement may further delineate the extent of the mass.
when evaluating for structural disease in animals with central
 Principles for tumor staging need to be followed for complete
vestibular dysfunction. 16,37 Unlike CT, in which beam harden-
ing artifact can obscure CT examination of the caudal fossa
Treatment. Complete and aggressive surgical resection
of the cranium, MRI provides excellent anatomic evaluation
remains the treatment of choice. In dogs, long-term control is
of the brainstem (see Chapter 4). Cerebrospinal fluid analy-
possible for completely excised tumors.59 For more invasive or
sis is useful for confirming inflammatory disease. Molecular-
infltrative conditions in which a surgical cure is not possible,
based testing techniques and serology assist with diagnosis of
adjunctive therapies, such as radiation therapy, may extend
infectious diseases. Of the various categories outlined in Table
 disease-free intervals and overall survival times. Poor prognos-
8-2, degenerative, metabolic, neoplastic, inflammatory, and
tic indicators in cats include neurologic signs at the time of
vascular conditions are most common. Because of the close
diagnosis, diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma or carcinoma
functional and anatomic relationship between the vestibular
 of unknown cause, and invasion into the lymphatic system.59
nuclei and cerebellum, the signs of central vestibular disease
od e au  Pan qa r asxa m sio
are often observed either concurrently with signs of cerebel-
prognosis.59
lar disease or represent the sole manifestation of a cerebellar
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
261
 Neurologic Signs of Central
Vestibular Dysfunction
Acute Onset
Acute Onset /
Chronic Onset
nonprogressive
progressive
Computed Tomography
MRI
Vascular, Toxic
CSF Analysis
Brain
十
Neoplasia
 Surgical
Treatment,
 Medical Treatment /
Inflammatory
etc.
 Supportive Care
Disease
Hgure 8-11 Algorithm for the diagnostic approach of central vestibular disease.
TABLE 8-2
Etiology of Central Vestibular (Brainstem) Disease
Etiologic Category
 Acute Nonprogressive
 Acute Progressive
 Chronic Progressive
Degenerative (all!
Storage diseases
Neuronopathies (7)
Neuroaxonal dystrophy (7)
Demyelinating diseases (7. 10. 15)
Metabolic
Hypothyroidism (C)
Hypoglycemia (15)
Hypothyroidism (C)
Neoplastic (12)
Metastatic
Primary (12)
 Meningioma 
 Medulloblastoma
Glioma
 Choroid plexus papilloma
Epidermoid cyst
Nutritional (15)
Thiamine deficiency (F. C, E)
ldiopathic
 Intracranial arachnoid cyst/diverticulum 
Inflammatory (15)
Viral
Viral
 Distemper (C)
Distemper (C)
Equine encephalomyelitis
 Feline infectious peritonitis
 Feline infectious peritonitis
Bacterial
Mycotic
Protozoal
Bacterial
Mycotic
Listeriosis (C, B. O, G, Ca)
Granulomatous
Various bacteria
 meningoencephalitis (C)
Pituitary abscess (B, G, O, E)
Rickettsial
Protozoal
Granulomatous meningoencephalitis (C)
Necrotizing encephalitis (C)
Toxic (15)
Lead (C, B}
Lead (C, B}
 Hexachlorophene
Hexachlorophene
Metronidazole (C, F}
vermectin (C)
Traumatic (12)
Head injury
Vascular (12)
Hemorrhage Infarction
B, Bovine; C, canine; Ca, camelid; E, equine; F, feline; G, caprine; P, porcine.
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are discussed.
262
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
lesion, consequently central vestibular diseases are discussed
conditions are most common. Most diseases that affect the
with the cerebellar diseases. The neoplastic and inflammatory
cerebellum are relatively slow in onset, but vascular lesions
 diseases are summarized and discussed in Chapters 12 and 15.
such as infarction of cerebellar vasculature may cause acute,
Localization of lesions to the caudal brainstem has been dis-
nonprogressive clinical signs. Vascular and neoplastic diseases
cussed previously.
are likely to produce other signs of encephalopathy and are
discussed in Chapter 12. Steroid-responsive tremor syn-
Cerebellar Diseases
drome characterized by tremor is discussed in Chapter 10.
The diagnostic approach to cerebellar disease is similar to that
The inflammatory disorders are discussed in Chapter 15. Dis-
of central vestibular disease. Table 8-3 outlines the cerebel-
orders confined to the cerebellum are discussed in the fol-
lar disorders. Of the categories listed, the chronic degenera-
lowing sections. These conditions are largely congenital or
tive conditions, malformations, inflammatory, and vascular 
degenerative.
TABLE 8-3
Etiology of Cerebellar Disease*
Etiologic Category
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative (all)
 Cerebellar cortical degeneration
 Abiotrophies
Multiple system degeneration
Neuroaxonal dystrophies (7)
Axonopathy (7)
Dysmyelinating disease (7. 10. 15) 
Storage diseases (15)
Spongiform encephalopathies (15)
Bovine familial convulsions and ataxia (10)
Doddler syndrome (1) (B)
Anomalous (all)
 Cerebellar malformation
Chiari malformation (7)
Cerebellar hypoplasia inherited
Cerebellar hypoplasia viral induced
Dandy-Walker syndrome
Hypomyelinogenesis (10)
 Intracranial arachnoid cyst/
diverticulum (C, F)
Occipital dysplasia (C, F)
Neoplastic (all) (12)
Metastatic
Primary
 Medulloblastoma
 Choroid plexus papilloma
 Epidermoid cyst
Glioma
Meningioma
Nutritional (15)
See toxic
Inflammatory (15)
Steroid responsive tremor
Distemper
Distemper
syndrome (10)
FIP
FIP
Other viral
 Other viral
Scrapie
Protozoal
Louping ill 
Mycotic
Protozoal
GME
GME
Rickettsial
 Rickettsial
Toxic (15)
lIvermectin 
Lead
Metronidazole
Hexachlorophene
 Organophosphates
Grass staggers (B. O, G)
Alpha-mannosidosis plant (B. O. G)
Traumatic (12)
Head injury
Vascular (12)
Infarction
 Septic emboli
Hemorrhage
C, Canine; F, feline; B, bovine; P, porcine; Ca, camelid; G, caprine; E, equine; FIP, feline infectious peritonitis; GME, granulomatous
encephalomyelitis.
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are also discussed.
CHAPTER 8
 Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
263
cerebellar ataxia [dysmetria), with intention tremors of the head
Cerebellar Degenerative Disorders
and trunk as the predominant signs. Gait deficits in canine cer-
 Primary Cerebellar Cortical Degeneration. In a review of
ebellar abiotrophy of neonates can vary to the extent that the
congenital cerebellar diseases, de Lahunta6l.62 grouped these
affected animal is nonambulatoryeagle dogs83.84 Samoyeds 206
disorders into three categories: [l) in utero or neonatal viral
Jack Russell terriers,Ill and Chow chows72 are able to ambu-
infections; (2) malformations of genetic or unknown cause;
late at the appropriate age but are ataxic. In contrast, Coton de
and (3) degenerative diseases, referred to as abiotrophies. Clin-
Tulears, 87 Rhodesian ridgebacks 93 miniature poodles,92 and Irish
ical signs vary in age of onset, severity, and rate of progression.
setters° are nonambulatory [astasia) and have severe motor
Specifically, neonatal conditions of cerebellar malformation
deficits. The cerebellar cortical degenerations have been most
or degeneration are characterized by signs of cerebellar dys-
thoroughly studied in the Gordon setterl0-1l0 and rough-coated
function from birth or time of frst ambulation.53 Hereditary
clinical signs with the primary cerebellar cortical degenerations
of cerebellar degenerative diseases _that include neonatal,
varies in rate and severity with the different diseases.
juvenile, and adt nset cnditin2These progreiv
 Diagnosis. A presumptive diagnosis is based on when a
 breed at risk or other young, purebred dog develops progres-
sentation and disease distribution. Myelin disorders and spon-
sive cerebellar ataxia. Often there are several dogs affected in
giform encephalopathies also can affect the cerebellum (see
the litter. Magnetic resonance imaging can provide evidence of
Chapters 7, 10, and 15). Tables 8-4 and 8-5 list the congenital
cerebellar atrophy based on increased size of the subarachnoid
 and degenerative disorders occurring in animals. The appendix
space overlying the cerebellum and between the folia (Figure
 also has these diseases listed by breed and species.
8-12) 205.207,208 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis may be helping in
 Pathogenesis. Primary cerebellar cortical degeneration
ruling out other inflammatory or infectious causes. The final
refers to degeneration and loss of Purkinje cels and/or granule
diagnosis is established by histopathologic examination. On
cell neurons. Pathologic processes of cerebellar cortical degen-
examination postmortem, the cerebellum may be smaller in
eration are classified microscopically as atrophy, abiotrophy.
size, which is recognized in the latter disease stage. Variations
and transsynaptic neuronal degeneration.64 Atrophy, a term
in types of neuronal cellloss, extension into the brainstem, and
 s   ss     
distribution within the areas of the cerebellum can be used to
secondary to a primary degenerative process.202 Abiotrophy
establish distinct pathologies for these different breed-related
cerebellar cortical distributions.
the
abiotrophy derives its meaning: a [absence), bio (life), and
affected animals become severely compromised and euthana-
sia is recommended when the animal is unable to ambulate.
refers to anterograde or retrograde neuronal degeneration sub-
Some dogs maintain the ability to ambulate long term. Modi-
 sequent to failure of input to or output from affcted cells.
fication of the home environment and feeding arrangements
 In the cerebellar cortical degenerative disorders in dogs, the
may be necessary to allow for accommodation as the disease
Purkinje cell neurons often are affected more severely with
 progresses. The disorders can offer a spontaneous animal
secondary transsynaptic neuronal degeneration of the granule
model for these neurodegenerative disorders in people. A few
cell neurons. While many of these disorders are presumably
dog colonies have been established for further disease study.
of an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, the underlying
Multiple System Degeneration. Canine multiple 
sys-
 mechanisms of intracellular defect remain undefined. Bernese
tem degeneration is a fatal movement disorder of dogs char-
mountain dogs have a hepatocerebellar degeneration syn-
acterized by degeneration of the basal nuclei. This disease
 drome sugesting an underlying biochemical defect.98
n    h  s i s 
ers.128-130 This disorder was also recently discovered in the
dogs and a few reports exist in cats, horses, cattle, and pigs
Chinese crested dog. 13l Affected dogs are normal until 3 to 6
[see Tables 8-5 and 8-6).13,62, 184,203 Cerebellar cortical atro-
months of age, when they develop a cerebellar ataxia. Signs
phy involving Purkinje cell neuronal degeneration has been
 su  o su zh on g ra ssra
described in the Wiltshire, Merino, Corriedale, Welsh, Border
ment [dyskinesia to akinesia) and postural instability (Figure
Leicester, and Charolais breeds of sheep.204 Cerebellar corti-
8-13). Degeneration of the basal nuclei is visible on MRI as
cal atrophy occurs in cattle breeds that include the Holstein,
 increased signal on T2W images. Histologic characterization
Charolais, Limousin, and Angus. 13.170 Age of onset can vary
includes degeneration of the cerebellar Purkinje neurons
to include neonatal, early, or delayed into adulthood.61,5264
early on in the disease course. If the disease is allowed to
 progress, degeneration also occurs in the olivary nucleus, sub-
lar ataxia beginning between 2 and 6 months of age.62 Dis-
stantia nigra, putamen, and caudate nuclei. The inheritance
 pattern is autosomal recessive and the gene has been mapped
Brittany spaniel, American Staffordshire terrier, old English
to a locus on chromosome l in the Chinese crested dog and
Kerry blue terrier. 131
are reports of delayed onset in cats.124-126 Histopathology in
Other neurodegenerative disorders including the cerebello-
most cerebellar cortical degenerations show Purkinje cell neu-
olivary degenerations consist of multiple neuronal degenera-
ron degeneration and loss with secondary granule cell neuron
tions and axonal degeneration involving the long tracts of the
degeneration.62.69 Primary degeneration of the cerebellar gran-
 spinal cord and cerebellum have been reported in the Cairn
ule cell neurons has been reported in the Bavarian mountain
terrier, cocker spaniel, golden retriever, Rottweiler, and other
dog, Coton de Tulear, border collie, Italian Spinone, Lagotto
breeds (see Chapter 7 and Table 8-4).132-136
Romagnolo, Brittany spaniel, beagle, and Jack Russell terrier.
Neuroaxonal Dystrophy. This disorder of axonal trans-
Clinical Signs. Clinical signs consist of either an insidious or
port affecting multiple systems, including the cerebellum
acute onset. Many animals with cerebellar cortical degeneration
and associated pathways. Signs may be primarily cerebellar
-od ane pue uonenque jo aun ne eup quaedde auoag
in origin in some dogs (rottweilers, collies, Chihuahuas, Jack
gressive. Dogs with cerebellar cortical degeneration show severe
Russell terrier, papillon) and in domestic cats. The disease
*References 87, 97, 100, 103, 104, 111, 112, 114, and 205.
*References 140, 142, 143, 146, 148, and 149.
264
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 8-4
Degenerative Cerebellar Disorders of Dogs and Cats
Diseases
Associated Disease or Breed and (Cell Type!
Onset (lnheritance)
References
Neonatal Syndromes
Viral-induced cerebellar hypoplasia
 Canine herpesvirus
Neonatal (acquired)
65
 Feline panleukopenia
Neonatal (acquired)
66-68
Cerebellar hypoplasia with
Wvire fox terrier
Neonatal (possible)
63.69.70
lissencephaly
Irish setter
Neonatal (possible)
63.69.70
 Samoyed
Neonatal (possible)
71
Cerebellar hypoplasia
Chow chows
Neonatal (AR)
72
 Miniature poodle
Neonatal (unknown)
73.74
St. Bernard
Neonatal (AR?}
75
 Cerebellar agenesis
Poodle
Neonatal (unknown)
74
 Siberian husky
Neonatal (unknown)
76
Vermian hypoplasia, agenesis.
Various breeds—bull terrier, Boston terrier. ↑
 Neonatal (single case)
73.77-80
Dandy-WWaiker
Weimaraner, Dachshund, Beagle, silky
terrier, Labrador retriever, miniature
poodle, mixed breed 
Cat
Neonatal (single case)
81
Abiotrophies
Australian kelpies (P. G}
Neonatal (unknown)
82
Beagle (P. G)
Neonatal (possible)
70.83.84
 Bern running dog (P)
Neonatal (unknown)
85
Bull mastiff (with hydrocephalus) (P. G)
Neonatal (AR?)
86
Coton de Tulear (G?)
Neonatal (AR}
87
 Dachshund mix (P.G)
Neonatal (unknown)
88
Irish setter (P. G and MSD)
Neonatal (AR)
89.90
Labrador retriever
Neonatal (unknown)
91
Miniature poodle (P. G and MSD)
Neonatal (unknown)
92
 Rhodesian ridgeback (coat dilution) (P. G)
Neonatal (familial)
93
Samoyeds
Neonatal (unknown)
63
Cat (P.G}
Neonatal (AR?}
94
Postnatal Syndromes
Primary cortical cerebellar
Akita (P.G)
Young (unknown)
62
degeneration
Airedale terrier (P.G)
Young (possible)
95
 Bavarian mountain dog (G)
Young (unknown)
96
Beagle (G}
Unknown onset 
97
 Bern running dog 
Young (unknown)
85
Bernese mountain dog (hepatocellular) (P)
Early (AR)
98
Bernese mountain dog (P.G)
Early (unknown)
99
Border collie (G or P,G)
Young (AR?)
100.101
Brittany spaniel (P,G)
Late (possible)
102
Brittany spaniel (G)
Adult (possible)
103
Cairn terrier 
Early (unknown)
70
Clumber spaniel
Early (unknown)
70
Cocker spaniel
Early (unknown)
70
Coton de Tulear (immune) (G)
Early (unknown)
104
English bulldog (P,G)
Early (possible)
105
English pointer (P,G)
Early (X-linked)
106
Finnish hamier (P)
Early (unknown)
107
German shepherd dog (P}
Early (unknown)
70
Golden retriever (P.G)
Early (unknown)
70
Gordon setter (P,G)
Adult (AR)
108-110
Great Dane (P,G)
Early (unknown)
70
Jack Russell terrier (G)
Early (AR?)
111
CHAPTER8
 Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
265
TABLE 8-4
Degenerative Cerebellar Disorders of Dogs and Cats-cont'd
Diseases
Associated Disease or Breed and (Cell Type)
Onset (Inheritance)
References
Kerry blue terrier
Early (unknown)
O'Brien, DP
personal 
 communication
ltalian hound (G}
Adult (unknown)
112
Labrador retriever (P,G)
Early (unknown)
70.91.113
Lagotto Ramagnolo (G or P,G)
Early (unknown)
114
Miniature schnauzer (P,G}
Early (unknown)
115
Miniature schnauzer-beagle cross (P,G)
Late (unknown)
116
Mixed breeds (P,G)
70
70
Od English sheepdog (P,G)
Adult (AR}
117
Portuguese Podenco (P,G)
Early (unknown)
118
Rough-coated collie (P,G)
Early (AR)
119
Scottish terrier (P,G)
Early (unknown)
120
 Staffordshire terrier (arylsulfatase G defi-
Adult (AR)
121
ciency) (P.G)
Cats—DSH (P,G}
Early (AR} or Adult 
70,122-124
(unknown)
Samese (P.G}
Adult (unknown)
125
Persian (P,G)
Adult (unknown)
126
Havana brown (hepatic microvascular dys-
Earty (unknown)
127
plasia) (P}
Multiple systems degeneration
Kerry blue terrier
Early (AR)
128-130
(MSD) (extrapyramidal)
 Chinese crested dog 
Early (AR)
131
Multipte neuronal degeneration
Cairn terrier
Early (unknown)
132.133
(with cerebellar signs)
Cocker spaniel
Early (unknown)
134
Golden retriever
Early (Unknown)
135
lrish setter
Neonatal (AR)
89.90
Miniature poodle
Neonatal (unknown)
92
Rottweiler
Early (unknown)
136
 Swedish Lapland reindeer-herd dog
Eary (unknown)
137
Cats-DSH
Early (unknown)
138
Neuroaxonat dystrophy
Rottweiler
Eary-Adult (AR)
139.140
Chihuahua
Early (unknown)
141
Working collie sheepdog
Early (AR)
142
Jack Russell terrier
Earty (unknown)
143
German shepherd dog
Eary (unknown)
144
 Papillon
Early (unknown)
145-147
Cat—DSH
Early (AR)
148.149
Siamese
 Eary (unknown)
150
AR, Autosomal recessive; P, Purkinje neurons; G, granule cell neurons.
has been best characterized in the rottweiler.139,140 Similar
Lysosomal Storage Disorders
lesions, predominantly in the spinal cord, are seen in many
Pathogenesis. Lysosomes are intracellular organelles where
dog breeds, cat, Suffolk sheep, and Morgan horses [see Chap-
catabolism takes place for large molecules, including proteins,
ters 7 and 15). Neurons degenerate with prominent axonal
saccharides, glycogen, nucleic acids, and lipids. Lysosomal storage 
swelling called a spheroid. The swelling represents accumula-
diseases occur when undigested materials accumulate because
tions of the cytoskeleton and can be visualized in the termina-
of an inherited enzyme deficiency or by ingestion of toxin that
tion of the long proprioceptive tracts of the brainstem nuclei.
 inhibits a lysosomal enzyme.209 In neuronal ceroid lipofusci-
The age of onset tends to be within a few weeks to months
 noses, the storage products are proteins and enzyme defects
of ase and insidiously progresses over years; rottweilers and
which are thought to occur in the proteolytic pathways or with
German shepherd doss are usually older than l year of age. All
affected animals have signs of cerebellar ataxia with intention
subunit c of the mitochondrial ATP synthase is the major by-
tremor and some also show concurrent signs of neuropathy
product. The by-products of many lysosomal storage disorders
(LMN paresis). Autosomal recessive or familial inheritance is
accumulate in neural and visceral tissues. These disorders can be
suspected.
neonatal where the buildup of storage product interferes with
266
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 8-5
Congenital and Degenerative Cerebellar Diseases in Large Animals
Diseases
Diseases and Breeds
Inheritance
References
Viral-lInduced Cerebellar Hypoplasia13
 Akabane virus—calves, lambs
151.152
Aino virus—calves
153
Blue tongue virus—calves, lambs 
154-156
Border disease—lambs, kits 
157
Bovine viral diarrhea virus—calves, lambs, kids
158-160
Cache Valley fever
161
Hog cholera virus—piglets 
162
Kasba—calves
163
Rift Valley fever-
-calves, lambs
164
Swine fever—piglets
165
Wesselsbron disease —calves and lambs
166
Cerebellar Malformation
Dandy-Walker
Calves (Ayrshire, Jersey), lambs, kids, foals
13.78.167-171
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
Calves—Ayrshire, Angus, Hereford, shorthorn,
AR (Hereford) or Unknown
172-178
 Jersey, Charolais, Jersey, unknown 
Piglets—Wessex saddleback x large white pis 
Unknown
13.179
 Foals—Paso Fino, thoroughbred 
13
Cerebellar Cortical Degeneration (Abiotrophy)
 Bovine—Holstein, Charolais, Limousin, Angus 
Suspect AR 
180-186
 Bovine familial convulsions and ataxia—Angus
AD with incomplete penetrance
172,183,187,188
and Angus-crossbred, Charolais, Polled 
Hereford
Sheep—Merino, Corriedale, Welsh, Border 
AR or unknown
62,189-192
Leicester, Charolais, Wiltshire, daft lamb dis-
ease type A
Doddler syndrome—(hereditary lethal spasms}-
AR?
193-194
 Hereford, Jersey
 Pigs—Yorkshire
Unknown
13.70
 Equine——Arabian, Gotland pony. Oldenburg.
 AR or unknown
13.195-197
Eriskay pony
Neuroaxonal Dystrophy
Ovine-—Suffolk (1.5-5 mo), Merino (1-4 yr:
Uknown
13.198
4-7 mo}
Equine—Morgan (4 mo). Hafflinger (4 mo)
Uknown 
200,201
AD, Autosomal domminant; AR, autosomal recessive.
normal development of brain function. Most lysosomal storage
(Figure 8-14).202 The ceroid lipofuscinoses are characterized by
diseases, except for the mucopolysaccharidoses exhibit severe
lysosomal storage of autofluorescent lipopigment with neurons
 involvement of the neurons, thus manifest as neurologic signs. In 
 and other cell types. Ultrastructural examination usually reveals
many cases, the brain functions normally until the accumulation
membrane-bound vesicles and in some diseases shows distinc-
 of storage product becomes toxic. The high metabolic demand
tive pathologies.209 The composition of the storage products are
in neurons combined with a lack of cell turnover make them
detected by biochemical analysis and special staining procedures.
 susceptible to early degeneration. Because the cerebellum is very
Atrophy of the cerebral cortex and the cerebellum is a feature
dependent on fast conduction for transmission of sensory infor-
 of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses but not with the other storage
mation and motor output for effcient coordination of move-
 disorders. A large number of murine models and models in dogs
ment, cerebellar signs are often the first signs of storage disease.
s esiszlyr see
Likewise, the cerebellum is very sensitive to myelin disorders
disorders are further reviewed in Table 15-2 and have also been
[see Chapter 7). One of the most well-studied myelin disorders,
reporthca,gats np
globoid cell leukodystrophy, is the result of the buildup of a by-
tance often has been determined as autosomal recessive or is still
product, galactocerebroside, which is specifically derived from
unknown for many of these disorders.
myelin and accumulates in macrophages. A toxic substrate, psy-
 Clinical Signs. Onset of signs often occurs within a few
chosine, destroys the myelin, a feature of this disorder.
months of life but can occur later in life as in the case with
 Microscopic examination of affected tissue reveals
s vacuola-
some of the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses. Disease pro-
tion, whichrepresents lysosomes distended with storage products
 gression is chronic, insidious, and fatal. Clinical signs often
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
267
Figure 8-12 A T2W MRI of cerebellar atrophy from a juvenile
Hgure 8-13 A Chinese crested dog with multiple system degen-
dachshund with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis and cerebellar
eration, which has progressed from cerebellar ataxia to basal nuclei
atrophy demonstrating increased size of the subarachnoid space
degeneration and dyskinesia. As these dogs develop difficulty ini-
tiating movements, they shift weight forward until they begin to
 overlying the cerebellum and between the folia.
fall and then they are able to move forward. (From O'Brien DP,
Coates JR: Brain disease. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Text-
are multifocal and vary from signs of forebrain dysfunction
book of veterinary internal medicine: diseases of the dog and cat,
(blindness and seizures) to cerebellar/vestibular signs. Signs
ed 7, St Louis, 2010, Elsevier.]
often progress to or manifest cognitive abnormalities, ocu-
lar abnormalities, and weakness. Cerebellar signs are clinical
the cerebellum have been characterized by malformation or
features for the gangliosidoses, sphingomyelinoses, manno-
perinatal cellular degeneration of the cerebellum.51.64 Cer-
sidoses, glycogenoses, ceroid lipofuscinoses, and globoid cell
ebellar malformations include aplasia and partial agenesis or
leukodystrophies.209,212,215,216 The mucopolysaccharidoses
hypoplasia, which refers to absence or uniform paucity of
and mucoliposes have clinical features of skeletal and facial
cerebellar tissue, respectively, without evidence of neuronal
malformation.217 Enlargement of visceral organs is apparent
degeneration. Clinical signs are usually nonprogressive and
with some glycogen storage disorders, sphingomyelinoses,
may improve with accommodation. These syndromes are
s srop rs  aassisu pe
usually characterized by symmetric signs and a nonprogres-
sive disease course. Cerebellar hypoplasia is reserved for those
 IV, fucosidosis, and globoid cell leukodystrophy may also have
diseases in which intrinsic or extrinsic factors alter the normal
peripheral nerve involvement and therefore affected animals
development of germinal populations of neuroepithelial cells
may display LMN weakness.219 The neuronal ceroid lipofus-
such as inherited disorders, nutritional deficiencies, and terato-
cinoses have a combination of signs that include behavior
gens.59 The prolonged development of the cerebellum extends
abnormalities, vision loss, cerebellar ataxia, and seizures or myo-
into the postnatal period. Thus exposure to viral agents or tox-
clonuslo Signs of cerebellar ataxia can predominate in some
ins at a precise stage of fetal or early postnatal life damages the
forms of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.2io,220-222
developing cerebellum and results in a cerebellar ataxia from
Diagnosis. Diagnosis is based on signalment, clinical signs,
the time of birth.63
and ruling out other acquired diseases.215 Peripheral blood, bone
Viral-lnduced Cerebellar Hypoplasia
marrow, and CSF may reveal vacuolated leukocytes. Metabolic
Parvovirus. The parvovirus responsible for feline infectious
by-products for some disorders can be measured in the urine.
enteritis (panleukopenia) can produce a variety of cerebellar
As some storage disorders also affect muscles and nerves, biopsy
malformations, including cerebellar hypoplasia. Although not
of these tissues can be useful.219 Peripheral nerve biopsy is per-
formed in globoid cell leukodystrophy.223 Some disorders have
ebellar malformations.25 In utero or perinatal infection of the
 been evaluated using MR1.224 Diagnosis can be made by genetic
brain adversely affects development of the cerebellum. Both
testing for known mutations or confirming the decreased enzyme
the cerebellar granule cell and Purkinje neurons are decreased
activity on tissue biopsies or blood leukocytes. Confirmation of
in number or are lacking. The loss of cellularity is due to the
 diagnosis is based on identifying swollen neurons and that the
cells have a vacuolated appearance [see Figure 8-14), and recog-
Destruction of the external germinal cell layer causes hypo-
nizing other histopathologic features for these disorders.209
plasia of the granule cell layer. Maturing Purkinje neurons also
Treatment. There is no treatment for these spontaneous
may be destroyed.227 The destruction may be so severe that the
 diseases; however, experimental treatment approaches are
size ofthe cerebellar cortex is grossly reduced (hence the term
under study. Therapeutic approaches of the lysosomal storage
diseases are based on the knowledge that lysosomal enzymes
cell and Purkinje neuron layers are reduced microscopically
are secreted and taken up by neighboring cells, thus allwing
(Figure 8-16).The resulting lesions are irreversible.67229 Some
for cell-to-cell exchange. Three general treatment strategies
affected kittens have concomitant cysts, hydrocephalus, or
have been developed: enzyme replacement therapy, cell trans-
hydranencephaly (see Chapter 12).230,231
plantation, and gene therapy.211,213
The number of kittens affected will vary from one kitten,
a portion of the litter, or the entire litter being affected. Sym-
Anomalous
metric, nonprogressive cerebellar signs typically are present in
Cerebellar Malformation. Clinical signs for these neona-
affected kittens at the time of ambulation.Some kittens appear
tal syndromes are present at birth or in the early postnatal
to improve, apparently because of accommodation through
period before normal ambulation. Neonatal conditions of
other senses, such as vision and conscious proprioception. No
268
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
B
Hgure 8-14 Histopathology of brainstem neurons from a Norwegian forest cat with type IV glyco-
gen storage disease. A, Photomicrograph showing swollen neurons with eccentric placement of the
  ss  d ga asa rs  a x rs  
the cytoplasm of neurons periodic acid-Schiff stain; x20). (Courtesy Dr. Kyle Braund].
systemic signs, including sudden death. Rarely, puppies survive
the systemic effects of the virus and develop residual cerebellar
ataxia. The cerebellar ataxia is a residual effect ofthe inflamma-
Akabane Virus. This virus produces severe destruction of
germinal cells in the brains of fetal lambs and calves I5l,152,233
Hydranencephaly also may be seen. The disease has been
observed in Australia, Japan, and Israel. Clinical signs are related
to the cerebral cortical and cerebellar lesions.
Bluetongue Virus. This virus produces severe destruction
of germinal cells in the brains of fetal lambs and calves.154.234
Hydranencephaly and cerebellar atrophy are the usual lesions.
Lambs develop the most severe lesions when infected at 50 to
58 days of gestation.235
Border Disease Virus. This virus is a pestivirus, which
infects lambs, calves, and kids through transplacental transmis-
sion.170 Infection can lead to developmental disturbances of
the brain, including the cerebellum, cause tremors, and affects 
the wool [see Chapter 10).
Hog Cholera Virus. Hog cholera vaccine virus, when admin-
Figure 8-15 Cerebellar hypoplasia in a kitten affected in utero
istered to susceptible pregnant sows, produces numerous lesions
with panleukopenia virus (top). Note the srnall cerebellum, com-
in fetal pigs, including lesions in the cerebellum.t62 The clinical
pared with that of a normal cat (bottom).
signs are those of a diffuse whole-body tremor [see Chapter 10).
hherited Cerebellar Hypoplasia and Dysplasia. Numer
ous breed-specific syndromes and individual cases of cerebel.
systemic signs of feline infectious enteritis are present. Kittens
lar dysplasia or aplasia have been described most frequently in
that are infected with the virus after 2 weeks of age rarely
dogs but also in cats, horses, cattle, pigs, sheep, and other ani
 develop neurologic signs, even though systemic signs may be
mals,61.63,64.170 Cerebellar aplasia has been reported in Sibe-
severe. In addition to the virulent virus, a modifed-live vac-
rian huskies76 and a poodle.74
cine virus also may produce this syndrome. Pregnant queens
Some congenital cerebellar hypoplasias are inherited. Dys-
and kittens less than 3 weeks of age should be given killed
plasia of the cerebral cortex and cerebellar hypoplasia has been
virus vaccines. The presence of nonprogressive signs of strict
cerebellar disease in young kittens strongly suggests a diagnosis
yed, 636970 and Stnard7hIrish seters,ayds and
of cerebellar hypoplasia. No effective therapy for this disease
wire fox terriers also have lissencephaly. Chow chows and
exists. Some kittens can function as pets; however, others have
miniature poodles have pure cerebellar hypoplasia.72-74 The
incapacitating disease and should be euthanized.
cerebellum is symmetrically small as a result of depletion of
 Bovine Virus Diarrhea. Fetal calves infected with this virus
Purkinje and cerebellar granule cells. An inherited cerebellar
between 100 and 200 days of gestation develop severe cerebel-
hypoplasia was reported in the cat and was characterized with
loss of the Purkinje cells in the cerebellar hemisphere.122.123 In
retinal atrophy, optic neuritis, cataracts, and microphthalmia
cattle, cerebellar hypoplasia or aplasia is a presumed autoso-
with retinal dysplasia. At birth, affected calves have symmetric,
mal recessive disorder in Hereford, Shorthorn, Angus, Guern-
nonprogressive cerebellar signs. Some calves improve as they
compensate for the cerebellar disease. No treatment is known.
hypoplasia had depletion of both granule and Purkinje cells 179
The disease can be prevented by vaccinating appropriately.
Canine Herpesvirus. This virus affects puppies less than
2 weeks of age. The disease is characterized by generalized
*References 13, 71, 170, 173,236, and 237
CHAPTER8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
269
RM
Figure 8-16 Photomicrographs of cerebellum from a 6-week-old female kitten with cerebellar
hypoplasia [A) and a normal adult cat (B). The cerebellar folia of the affected kitten are hypoplas-
tic. Note particularly the relative thickness of the molecular cell layers at the center of each figure.
Granule cell and Purkinje cell numbers are reduced in the affected kitten. Hematoxylin and eosin.
Bar = 30 μm in each. [From Kormegay JN: Cerebellar hypoplasia. In August JR, editor: Consulta-
tions in feline internal medicine, Philadelphia, 1991, WB Saunders.]
and brachycephalic breeds are predisposed to intracranial
arachnoid cysts/diverticulum.240 The cerebellum and occip-
ital lobe of the cerebral cortex are often compressed with
occipital lobe compression more likely to be associated with
clinical signs.240 Many are diagnosed as incidental findings
 in dogs.240-242 Vestibulocerebellar signs may develop with
 growth and compression of the surrounding neural tissues.
Diagnosis can be made on MRI or CT and by ultrasonog-
raphy.238,242,243  Surgical decompression and cystoperita-
neal shunt placement are effective treatments for clinically
affected animals.244,245
Occipital Dysplasia. Enlargement of the foramen mag-
num and congenital shortening of Cl, most often seen in
Concomitant hydrocephalus has been observed. In severe
cases, the cerebellum and brainstem are exposed, making
these structures yulnerable to compression and causing
secondary syringohydromyelia akin to Chiari malformation
[see Chapter 7).248 The clinical signs reported included
pain at the craniocervical junction, personality change, and
cerebellar ataxia. Often the clinical signs are more related
to hydrocephalus. Many dogs remain asymptomatic. The
Figure 8-17 Brain from an 8-week-old male dachshund with
diagnosis is confirmed MRI of the cranium and cervical
nonprogressive ataxia and intention tremor. The caudal vermis is
vertebrae. Other causes of the signs should be pursued
hypoplastic. [From Kormegay JN: Congenital cerebellar diseases.
because many normal animals have an enlarged foramen
In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia,
magnum.249 An apparent correlation of the larger opening
1989, WB Saunders.]
and brachycephalic skulls has been noted. Marked variation
in the shape of the foramen magnum was found in a study
of 48 beagle skulls.250 No impairment of function could be
Cerebellar vermian agenesis, akin to Dandy-Walker syn-
attributed to the change. No brain or spinal cord anomalies
drome in humans, has been reported in a number of dog
were found.
 breeds and calves but also in foals, lambs, and kittens (Figure
Metabolic
 may be associated with the vermal defects. Mechanisms
Hypothyroidism. As discussed above, hypothyroidism has
responsible for preferential caudal cerebellar vermis apla-
been associated with vestibulo-cerebellar dysfunction. Causes
sia have not been defined. The primitive caudal medullary
for central vestibular dysfunction have been attributed to
velum may be abnormally impermeable to CSF, thus lead-
infarction of the cerebellum.15.251 However, the pathogen-
 ing to distention of the embryonic fourth ventricle so that
esis in dogs without evidence of infarction remains unknown.
the caudal vermis fails to differentiate properly from the
Hypercholesterolemia or hyperlipidemia is a consistent clini-
metencephalic alar plates. Some of these animals also have
copathologic abnormality in dogs that are hypothyroid with
hydrocephalus.59
signs of central vestibular dysfunction.15.25t Diagnosis is based
Intracranial
Arachnoid 
Cyst/Diverticulum. Intracra-
on documenting low T4, free T4, and elevated TSH. Signs of
nial arachnoid cysts/diverticulum in the quadrigeminal
vestibular dysfunction resolve within 2 to 4 weeks of thyroid
region are subarachnoid fluid accumulations.238.239 Small
supplementation.
270
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
A
Hgure 8-18 An MRI from an 1l-year-old German shepherd dog with nonambulatory tetrapa-
 resis and central vestibular signs. A, T2W sagittal MRI showing a hyperintense mass displacing
the brainstem medulla and cerebellum dorsally. B, A transverse T1 W MRI showing a hypointense
to isointense mass in the left brainstem medulla. C, The same image after intravenous contrast
administration showing homogeneous to heterogeneous enhancement of the mass with irregular
margination and compression of the brainstem to the right. The mass was confirmed as a mesothe-
lial meningioma on histopathology.
Neoplasia
 Primary and Secondary Cerebellar Neoplasms
and cats, pathologic changes include hemorrhage necrosis
Pathogenesis. Primary and metastatic tumors can affect
eral geniculate, and the medial vestibular and oculomotor
Medulloblastomas selectively arise in the cerebellum in all
 species and are most likely to occur in younger dogs and
but MRI may disclose bilaterally and symmetric lesions in
cats.25s.256 Choroid plexus papillmas can occur in any part
affected brainstem nuclei.265,267 Often a presumptive diagno-
of the ventricular system but are most common in the fourth
sis is reached based on dietary history, neurologic examination,
ventricle.257 Gliomas and meningiomas (Figure 8-18) may
occur in the caudal fossa of the cranial cavity (caudal tento-
Most affected dogs and cats respond rapidly to thiamine
rium) affecting the cerebellum, but they are more frequent in
supplementation.
the rostral fossa [rostral tentorium).258,259 Lymphoma affect-
Horses can develop thiamine deficiency after ingestion of
 ing only the cerebellum has been reported in dogs.260
bracken fern and horsetail, which contain thiaminase.268,269
Clinical
Signs. Signs of cerebellar neoplasia usually
Clinical signs include vestibular ataxia, muscle tremors,
progress slowly, but acute exacerbation may follw hemor-
weight loss, inactivity, bradycardia, and obtunded mentation.
rhage, infarction, or obstruction of CSF flow with secondary
Treatment includes thiamine supplementation and removal
increased intracranial pressure.
from abnormal diet and making nutritious forage available
Diagnosis and Treatment. The diagnosis should be made
 Thiamine deficiency in sheep and cattle results in classical
with CT or MRI. Collection of CSF for analysis is contrain-
polioencephalomalacia.
dicated because of the risk of herniation. Surgical resection
of these tumors is difficult because of limited exposure, but
Toxic
 debulking and radiation therapy or chemotherapy can provide
Pants Toxins. Table 15-4 through 15-8 list common plants
an alternative to euthanasia.
and toxins that may cause ataxia, tremors, tetany, and other
signs related, at least in part, to cerebellar involvement. For
Nutritional
a complete discussion, other references should be consulted
Thiamine Deficiency. Thiamine deficiency is rare in dogs and
[see Chapters 10 and 15].13
cats. Most cases are the result of inappropriate preparation of
 Ergotism (Grass Staggers). This acute disorder occurs in
food, inadequate concentration in the diet, or feeding diets
cattle, sheep, and rarely horses that ingest grasses with toxins
high in thiaminases.26l-264 Other proposed causes of thiamine
 deficiency include interference with intestinal absorption,
neurologic signs that occur in specific seasons. Many cattle or
abnormal utilization secondary to liver disease, and increased
 sheep grazing at one time are affcted with signs of ataxia,
requirements.26s Clinical signs include abnormal menta-
 tremor, tetany, and recumbency. Grasses associated with stag-
tion, seizures, dlated unresponsive pupils, opisthotonos,
 gers include rye grass, Dalls grass, Bermuda grass, and canary
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
271
grass.27l The sclerotium of the fungus develops in the seed
Vascular
head of Dallis grass and is present in highest concentrations
Vascular Infarction. Occlusion of the rostral or caudal
during wet summers.272 Affected animals are bright and alert
cerebellar artery causes infarction of the cerebellum and
and gradually recover when removed from toxic pastures.
brainstem, producing signs of paradoxical vestibular or
Severely affected animals may develop extensor rigidity, opis-
acute cerebellar dysfunctions [see also Chapter 12).278-280
thotonus, and clonic convulsions. Control of the disorder is
The disorder is most commonly observed in older dogs. The
achieved by removing grazing livestock before the seed heads
clinical signs are peracute, severe, lateralizing, and nonpra-
develop or by mowing affected pastures to remove the seed
gressive after the first few hours. Neurologic signs include
heads.
acute cerebelar ataxia, head tilt, menace response deficit,
Locoweed. These plants represent the Astragalus and Oxy-
ventral [vestibular) strabismus, mild lateralizing, postural
eensny u dds suosunns pue ruaury yron u dds sdon
defcits, and abnormal nystagmus. Diagnosis is based on
This is known as blind staggers or locoism in foraging animals
MRI of the brain. Diagnostic findings include hyperintense
that include livestock and horses.214 Along with weight loss,
wedge-shaped lesions often in the rostral cerebellum that
aggression, and hyperesthesia cereellar ataxiais a prominent
may extend into the dorsal medulla.280 Lesions display vari-
clinical sign. The alkaloid toxin, swainsonine induces a lyso-
 able enhancement patterns. A specialized imaging technique
somal storage disease, alpha-mannosidosis. Removing the ani-
     r 
mals from the pasture can reverse some of the clinical signs
diagnosis for an infarct [see Chapters 4 and 12). CSF analy-
 but the behavior changes may be permanent.
sis may be normal or reveal mild increases in mononuclear
Metronidazole Toxicity. Metronidazole is an antimicrobial
cells and protein may be present. The lesions correspond
that can cause acute onset cerebello-vestibular signs in dogs
to the distribution of the rostral or caudal cerebellar artery.
and cats.273-276 Clinical signs of toxicosis begin with anorexia
Affected dogs usually improve within 5 to 7 days and may
 and progress rapidly to generalized ataxia, tremor, and central
totally recover. There is no definitive treatment. Affected
vestibular and cerebellar signs. Neurologic signs usually resolve
dogs should be carefully evaluated for renal disease, hyper-
 after discontinuation of the drug. Diazepam and its affects on
adrenocorticism, pheochromocytoma, hypertension,
and
the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptor can promote
hypothyroidism, conditions that predispose to vascular dis-
faster recovery times.277 See Chapter 15 for further discussion.
ease and thrombosis.251,279
CASESTUDIES
CASE 8-1
TIPSY
· Signalment
Sensory evaluation
Canine, Spitz, female, 3 years old.
Normal
. History
· Lesion Location
The owner reports a severe lack of coordination and loss
The dog has generalized symmetric ataxia characterized by
of balance since the dog was 6 weeks old. The clinical signs 
hypermetria in all four limbs. Also there is associated with
have been nonprogressive.
head tremor and intention tremor implicating the cerebel-
lum. No paresis or cranial nerve dysfunction (specifically.
. Physical Examination
vestibular signs) is present. The signs are consistent with
Negative except for the neurologic problem.
 generalized cerebellar disease.
· Neurologic Examination
· Differential Diagnosis
Mental status
1. Cerebellar hypoplasia or other congenital/anomalous
Alert
malformation
 2. Cerebellar abiotrophy
Gait
 3. Degenerative disease [e.g., lysosomal storage disease)
Severe symmetric truncal ataxia; hypermetria/dysmetria in
 4. Inflammatory (infectious vs. noninfectious) disease
all four limbs
. Diagnostic Plan
Posture
1. Cross-sectional imaging may provide
 anatomic evi-
Basewide stance; intention tremor; no head tilt
 dence of a small cerebelum suggestive of hypoplasia or
atrophy.
Postural reactions
 2. CSF analysis will diagnose inflammatory disease; based
Proprioceptive positioning is normal. The dog shows diff-
 on results of culture, serology, and PCR testing for infec-
 culty in coordination of hemistanding and walking.
tious disease
 3. Metabolic screening [analysis of intermediate metabo-
Spinal reflexes
lites in urine)
 Patellar reflex is exaggerated in both pelvic limbs.
 4. Clinical history provides the strongest data for the order
of differential diagnosis
Cranial nerves
 5. Histopathology would provide a definitive diagnosis
Absent menace response OU; normal PLR and pupil size/
symmetry OU; normal palpebral reflex; the dog appears visual
OU, Both eyes.
Continued
272
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE 8-1
TIPSY
cont'd
 Diagnosis
(DNA) can be amplified from archival brains [cerebellum)
A congenital or early postnatal syndrome is suspected
because the signs began at an early age. The signs have been
in utero parvoviral infection might be associated with cer-
nonprogressive, which tends to rule out abiotrophies, degen-
ebellar hypoplasia in dogs.
erative disease [storage diseases], and inflammatory disease.
Based on the early onset of clinical signs and lack of progres-
 Treatment
sion, cerebellar hypoplasia or other malformation is most
likely. MRI would be necessary for presumptive diagnosis;
able. One exception is that intracranial arachnoid cysts/
however, based on treatment options [see later discussion]
diverticula that is occasionally treated surgically. Although
the value of the information provided by MRI needs to be
improvement is unlikely, the dog can function as a pet. The
discussed with the owners. Parvoviral deoxyribonucleic acid
dog should not be bred because the disease may be hereditary.
CASE 8-2
TEDDY
. Signalment
: Lesion Location
Canine, Pekingese, male, Z years old.
 This dog displays a relatively common clinical presentation
 in which both cerebelar [head bob and hypermetria) and
-History
vestibular signs [lack of normal or physiologic nystagmus
 Progressive lack of coordination and falling from side to side
 and positional or induced abnormal nystagmus) are present.
 in past 72 hours. The head swings from side to side and bobs
 The absence of normal nystagmus OU while maintaining
up and down. There is no history of trauma. No other signs 
the ability to move the eyes voluntarily or when abnormal
are present.
nystagmus is induced means that CN III, IV, and VI remain
functional and therefore implicates bilateral involvement of
. Physical Examination
the vestibular system. The presence of ventrolateral strabis-
Normal
mus when the head position is altered also suggests vestibular
 dysfunction. The paresis and postural reaction deficits point
. Neurologic Examination
toward a central vestibular [brainstem) disease. A lesion or
Mental status
a disease process involving the cerebellomedullary junction
Alert, panting
 could cause both cerebellar and central vestibular signs.
Gait
 Differential Diagnosis
 Tetraparesis; unable to stand without support; with support,
1. Encephalitis
 the dog does display severe hypermetria in all four limbs
2. Neoplasia
and truncal ataxia
 3. Infarction
Posture
· Diagnostic Plan
Wide excursions of the head with the head swinging to both
1. CBC, chemistry profle, and UA to rule out polysys-
sides; as well as vertically.
temic disease that could lead to the primary differential
diagnoses.
Postural reactions
 2. Magnetic resonance imaging would be ideal for diagnosis
 Abnormal in all four limbs. Proprioceptive placing deficits
of a structural lesion due to neoplasia or inflammation.
are in all limbs which may be in the right TL and PLs. The
3.
CSF analysis would assist with diagnosis of inflammatory
hopping is decreased in all limbs; worse in the right TL
disease; based on results culture, serology, and polymerase
and PL; with the right PL most severely affected. Tactile
chain reaction (PCR) testing for infectious disease
placing is absent in the PLs and decreased in the TLs.
: Diagnostic Results
Spinal reflexes
MRI was normal. CSF analysis revealed white blood cell
The patellar reflex is exaggerated on both sides and shows
[WBC) count of 380 cells/uL [88% lymphocytes, 12% neu-
lonus on the right side
 trophils), protein concentration 120 mg/dL. Culture of CSF
was negative. Serology for distemper virus, toxoplasmosis,
Cranial nerves
 rickettsial organisms, and Cryptococcus was negative.
Normal or physiologic nystagmus is absent OU. The eyes are
positioned centrally in the palpebral fissures; however, when
 Diagnosis
the head position was altered, a ventrolateral strabismus is 
 Encephalitis of unknown etiology was the diagnosis.
present OD. When the head was elevated, abnormal nys-
tagmus was induced, which was horizontal with fast phase
- Treatment
directed to the left.
While awaiting results of serology, the dog was administered
doxycycline and clindamycin antibiotics with no response.
Sensory evaluation
 The dog was then administered prednisone at immunosup-
Normal
pressive doses for 4 weeks and then the dosage was tapered
very slowly for several months until discontinued.
TL, Thoracic limbs; PL, pelvic limbs; OU, both eyes; OD, right eye; OS, left eye.
CHAPTER8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
273
CASE 8-3
PISTOL PETE
· Signalment
severe depression and altered mental attitude also could be
Feline, domestic shorthair, male, 6 months old.
related to forebrain disease. Inflammation or degeneration is 
 most probable.
History
The cat has been il for 10 days. He is obtunded, disoriented,
. Differential Diagnosis
ataxic, and sleeps most of the time. He has gotten progres-
1. Infectious inflammatory disease
sively worse.
a. Rabies
b. Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
- Physical Examination
 Toxoplasmosis
The cat is dehydrated, thin, and extremely depressed. His
d. Fungal——Cryptococcus
temperature is 102.5° F.
e. Bacterial encephalitis
 2. Thiamine defciency
. Neurologic Examination
 3. Neurodegeneration
Mental status
· Diagnostic Plan: (activated when rabies
 possibility has been minimized)
Gait
1. A CBC, chemistry profle, and UA to evaluate for poly-
 Nonambulatory tetraparesis, when supported in a standing posi-
systemic disease
tion falls to the left and right; both thoracice limbs are extended.
2.
 A CSF analysis would diagnose presence of inflammatory
disease; based on results of culture, serology, and PCR
Posture
testing for infectious disease
Recumbent; slight head tilt to left; the thoracic limbs show
 3. Can observe response to therapy with thiamine adminis-
spasticity
tration
Postural reactions
· Diagnostic Results
 Proprioceptive positioning is decreased to absent in all
The owner was questioned carefully about vaccinating the
limbs. Postural reactions are decreased in all limbs.
cat for rabies, which was done when the cat was 12 weeks of
age. The CSF analysis revealed 200 WBCs [90% segmented
Spinal reffexes
 neutrophils, 10% lymphocytes); protein concentration was
The patellar reflex is increased on both sides. The flexor
 200 mg/dL. Culture ofCSF was negative. Serology for feline
withdrawal reflexes are brisk in alllimbs. A crossed-extensor
infection peritonitis (FIP) IgG was l:560.
 reflex was present in the left thoracic limb
· Diagnosis
Cranial nerves
Noneffusive FIP was suspected based on CSF analysis
 aui im sa oqu pasd sem ssu Aeor
results.
 tion of the fast phase changing with change in head position.
- Treatment
Sensory evaluation
Viral infection of FIP causes damage to the neural tissues
Normal
through secondary immune responses. Corticosteroid treat-
: Lesion Location
 the cat continued to deteriorate. The prognosis is poor and
The predominant signs are those of central vestibular disease
 the owner elected euthanasia. Necropsy and histopathology
[vestibular signs plus postural reaction deficits and abnor-
were suggestive for FIP.
mal mental status implicate a central vestibular lesion). The
CASE 8-4
ELOISE
- Signalment
Gait
Feline, domestic shorthair, female, Z years old.
 Circles to right; asymmetric ataxia; the cat drifts and falls
to the right
- History
The cat developed acute ataxia and lack of coordination. The
Posture
cat developed a head tilt to the right and circling to the right.
Head tilt to the right
Appetite was good. No history of previous ear infection exists.
Postural reactions
. Physical Examination
All within normal limits 
 No abnormalities noted. Otic examination is normal
Spinal reflexes
· Neurologic Examination
All within normal limits 
Mental status
Alert
Continued
274
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE 8-4
ELOISE
cont'd
Cranial nerves
- Diagnostic Results
A ventrolateral strabismus was elicited when the head was
The otoscopic examination was normal. Skull radiography
elevated. Abnormal nystagmus was present with fast phase
was within normal limits. After imaging a myringotomy was
to the left.
performed with a 22-gauge spinal needle and instilling 0.3
mL sterile saline into the tympanic cavity. The fluid was
Sensory evaluation
 aspirated and submitted for cytology and culture. Cytology
Normal
 results were unrevealing.
: Lesion Location
. Diagnosis
The circling, head tilt, asymmetric ataxia, positional stra-
Feline idiopathic vestibular syndrome is the most likely
ad is su yim snsu snouens pue sns
diagnosis. This is a disease is of unknown cause and no
directed to the left suggest a right-sided vestibular lesion.
specifc therapy is known. Recovery usually takes 3 to
The absence of abnormal mental state, paresis, or other
6 weeks.
cranial nerve involvement localizes the lesion to the right
peripheral vestibular system.
 Treatment
Although otitis media interna is unlikely, one still could
· Differential Diagnosis
choose to empirically treat the cat with the appropriate
 1. Acute bacterial otitis media/interna
antibiotics. In this case, the cat was treated with a broad-
2. Trauma
spectrum antibiotic for l0 days while awaiting culture
 3. Idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome by exclusion of dif-
 ferential diagnosis l and 2
The presumptive diagnosis was feline idiopathic vestibular
syndrome.
: Diagnostic Plan
 1. Otoscopic examination
2. Skull radiography, greater sensitivity for identification of
 otitis media/interna with cross-sectional imaging [CT or
MRI)
3. Hematology
CASE 8-5
PIPPIN
- Signalment
Postural reactions
14-year-old female spayed border collie.
 Postural reactions are decreased in all limbs, with deficits
worse on the right side.
- History
Three days ago this dog developed acute nonprogressive
Spinal reflexes
tetraparesis, severe ataxia, right head tilt, and falling to the
Spinal reflexes are intact.
right. The dog has a long-standing history of pelvic limb
lameness and hormone-responsive urinary incontinence
Cranial nerves
 and has been receiving diethylstilbesterone, phenylpropa-
A ventrolateral strabismus in the right eye was elicited upon
 nolamine, and nonsteroidal antinflammatory agents. Medi-
 elevation of the head. Abnormal nystagmus was evident as
cations were stopped 3 days ago, and the dog has steadily
rotary to vertical with the fast phase to the left.
improved.
Sensory evaluation
: Physical Examination
Normal
No abnormalities were detected.
: Lesion Location
· Neurologic Examination
The clinical signs are those of an acute central vestibular
Mental status
syndrome localized primarily to the right side based on
Alert and responsive
postural reactions. The left-sided head tilt is paradoxical to
what one would expect.The presence of paresis detected on
Gait
examination of postural reactions strongly suggests a right-
Reluctant to ambulate. The dog prefers to lie in sternal
sided lesion in the brainstem affecting vestibular nuclei. The
recumbency. During ambulation, the dog was very ataxic in
 marked hypermetria noted in the right thoracic limb sug-
 all limbs with hypermetria of the right TL.
 gests involvement of the cerebellum or cerebellar pedun-
cles. The signs had an acute onset and were not progressive.
Posture
The head is tilted to the left.
CHAPTER 8
 Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
275
CASE 8-5
PIPPIN-
-cont'd
: Differential Diagnosis
administration. CSF analysis was within normal limits. Sero-
 1. Vascular infarction
logic testing for toxoplasmosis and rickettsial organisms was
2. Trauma
negative.
 3. Inflammatory
4. Neoplasia
. Diagnosis
Categories of neurologic disease with these characteristics
- Diagnostic Plan
 include trauma, inflammation [may be progressive), and
1. Complete blood count (CBC), chemistry profle and uri-
infarction. Based on the chemistry profle results, thyroid
nalysis would rule out polysystemic disease.
function testing was performed and results were conclusive
 2. Thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasound would
with hypothyroidism. Hypothyroidism has been associated
rule out metastatic disease.
with secondary infarction. The vascular anatomy of the ves-
 3. MRI of the brain would be the diagnostic procedure of
 sels in the cerebellum makes it more prone to infarction com-
choice in this case to rule out a cerebellar infarct or neo-
pared with other areas of the brain. Hypertension may also
plasia.
be an underlying cause for infarction. Blood pressure mea-
4. CSF analysis would rule out inflammatory disease.
 surements were normal throughout the dog's hospital stay.
5. Serology would assist with diagnosis ofinfectious disease.
- Treatment
 Diagnostic Results
The dog was administered thyroid supplementation and
Chemistry profle revealed hypercholesterolemia. MRI
gradually regained the ability to ambulate without ataxia.
revealed an area of hyperintensity on the TzW images in
Given the history and neurologic findings, infarction of the
the right rostral cerebellum and brainstem [rostral medulla).
right dorsal anterior medulla and cerebellum is the leading 
It was not contrast enhancing after intravenous contrast
rule-out in this case.
REFERENCES
15. Higgins MA, Rossmeisl JH, Panciera DL: Hypothyroid-
associated central vestibular disease in 10 dogs: 1999-
 1. Schunk KL, Averill DRJ: Peripheral vestibular syndrome
2005, J Vet Intern Med 20:1363-1369, 2006.
in the dog: a review of 83 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc
 16. Negrin A, Cherubini GB, Lamb C, et al: Clinical signs,
182(12):1354-1357, 1983.
magnetic resonance imaging findings and outcome in
2. Kern Tj, Aromando MC, Erb HN: Horner's syndrome
77 cats with vestibular disease: a retrospective study,
in dogs and cats: 100 cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet Med
J Feline Med Surg 12:291-299, 2010.
Assoc 195(3):369-373, 1989.
17. Morin DE: Brainstem and cranial nerve abnormalities:
3. Holliday TA: Clinical signs of acute and chronic experi-
listeriosis, otitis media/interna and pituitary abscess
mental lesions of the cerebellum, Vet Sci Commun
syndrome, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 20:
3:259-278, 1980.
243-273, 2004
4. Thomas WB: Vestibular dysfunction, Vet Clin North Am
18. Jensen R, Maki LR, Lauerman LH,et al: Cause and patho-
Small Anim Pract 30(1):227-249, 2000.
genesis of middle ear infection in young feedlot cattle,
5.
Cogan DG, Chu FC, Reingold DB: Ocular signs of cere-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 182[9]:967-972, 1983.
bellar disease, Arch Ophthalmol 100(5):755-760, 1982.
19. Colombini S, Merchant SR, Hosgood G: Microbial flora
6.B
Rossmeisl JH: Vestibular disease in dogs and cats, Vet
and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns from dogs with
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40:81-100, 2010.
otitis media, Vet Dermatol 11(4):235-239, 2000.
7.F
 Bedford PGC: Congenital vestibular disease in the Eng-
20. Jensen R, Pierson RE, Weibel JL, et al: Middle ear infec-
lish cocker spaniel, Vet Rec 105[23):530-531, 1979.
tion in feedlot lambs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 181:805-807,
8. Lee M: Congenital vestibular disease in a German shep-
1982.
herd dog, Vet Rec 113(24):571, 1983.
21. Olson LD: Gross and microscopic lesions of middle and
9.
       
lar disorder in two German shepherd dogs, 57[4):200,
1440, 1981.
1981.
22. Rosser EJ: Causes of otitis externa, Vet Clin North Am
 10. Vernau KM, LeCouteur RA: Feline vestibular disorders.
Small Anim Pract 34:459-468, 2004.
Part Il: diagnostic approach and differential diagnosis,
23. Stern-Bertholtz W, Sjostrom L, Hakanson NW: Primary
J Feline Med Surg l:81-89, 1999.
 secretory otitis media in the cavalier King Charles span-
11. Forbes S, Cook JRJ: Congenital peripheral vestibular
iel: a review of 61 cases, J Small Anim Pract 44(6):253-
dlisease attributed to lymphocytic labyrinthitis in two
256, 2003.
related litters of Doberman pinscher pups, J Am Vet
24. Blythe LL, Watrous BJ, Schmitz JA, et al: Vestibular syn-
Med Assoc 198[3]:447-449, 1991.
 drome associated with temporohyoid joint fusion and
12. McConnon JM, White ME, Smith MC, et al: Pendu-
temporal bone fracture in three horses, J Am Vet Med
lar nystagmus in dairy cattle, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Assoc 185(7):775-781, 1984.
182[8):812-813, 1983.
25. Walker AM, Sellon DC, Cornelisse CJ, et al: Temporo-
13.
 Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, Iowa,
hyoid osteoarthropathy in 33 horses [1993-2000], J Vet 
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
Intern Med 16(6):697-703, 2002.
14. Jaggy A, Oliver JE, Ferguson DC, et al: Neurological
26. Power HT, Watrous BJ, de Lahunta A: Facial and ves-
manifestations of hypothyroidism: a retrospective study
tibulocochlear nerve disease in six horses, J Am Vet Med
of 29 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 8[5):328-336, 1994.
Assoc 183[10):1076-1080, 1983.
276
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
27. Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Kortz GD, et al: Clinical signs,
47. Faulkner JE, Budsberg SC: Results of ventral bulla oste-
 magnetic resonance imaging features, and outcome after
otomy for treatment of middle ear polyps in cats, J Am
surgical and medical treatment of otogenic intracra-
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:496-499, 1990.
nial infection in 1l cats and 4 dogs, J Vet Intern Med
48. Anderson DM, Robinson RK, White RAS: Management of
20(3):648-656, 2006.
inflammatory polyps in37 cats, Vet Rec 147(24):684-687,
28. Spangler EA, Dewey CW: Meningoencephalitis second-
2000.
ary to bacterial otitis media/interna in a dog, J Am Anim
49. Burke EE, Moise NS, de Lahunta A, et al: Review of idio-
Hosp Assoc 36[3):239-243, 2000.
pathic feline vestibular syndrome in 75 cats, J Am Vet
29. Kern TJ, Erb HN: Facial neuropathy in dogs and
Med Assoc 187(9):941-943, 1985.
cats: 95 cases [1975-1985], J Am Vet Med Assoc
50. Glass EN, Cornetta AM, de Lahunta A, et al: Clinical
191(12):1604-1609, 1987.
and clinicopathologic features in 1l cats with Cuterebra
30. Remedios AM, Fowler JD, Pharr JW: A comparison of
larvae myiasis of the central nervous system, J Vet Intern
radiographic versus surgical diagnosis of otitis media,
Med 12[5):365-368, 1998.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:183-188, 1991.
51.
 Blauch B, Martin CL: A vestibular syndrome in aged
31. Love NE, Kramer RW, Spodnick GJ, et al: Radiographic
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:37-40, 1974.
and computed tomographic evaluation of otitis media in
52. Merchant SR, Neer TM, Tedford BL, et al: Ototoxicity
the dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 36[5):375-379, 1995.
 assessment of a chlorhexidine otic preparation in dogs.
32. Detweiler DA, Johnson LR, Kass PH, et al: Computed
Prog Vet Neurol 4(3):72-75, 1993.
tomographic evidence of bulla effusion in cats with
53. Merchant SR: Medically managing chronic otitis externa
sinonasal disease: 200l-2004, J Vet Intern Med 20:
and media, Vet Med 92[6):518-534, 1997.
1080-1084, 2006.
54. Strain GM, Merchant SR, Neer TM, et al: Ototoxicity
33. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Schwarz T: Review of diagnostic
assessment of a gentamicin sulfate otic preparation in
imaging of ear diseases in the dog and cat, Vet Radiol
dogs, Am J Vet Res 56[4):532-538, 1995.
Utrasound 44:137-146, 2003.
55.
Gortel K: Otic flushing, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
34. Allgoewer I, Lucas S, Schmitz SA: Magnetic resonance
Pract 34:557-565, 2004.
imaging of the normal and diseased feline middle ear, Vet
56. Schachern PA: The permeability of the round window
Radiol Ultrasound 41(5):413-418, 2000.
membrane during otitis media, Arch Otolaryngol Head
35. Dvir E, Kirberger RM, Terblanche AG: Magnetic reso-
Neck Surg 113:625-629, 1987.
nance imaging of otitis media in a dog, Vet Radiol Ultra-
57. Cureoglu S, Schachern PA, Rinaldo A, et al: Round win-
sound 41:46-49, 2000.
 dow membrane and labyrinthine pathological changes:
36. Garosi LS, Lamb CR, Targett MP: MRI fndings in a dog
an overview, Acta Otolaryngol 125:9-15, 2005.
with otitis media and suspected otitis interna, Vet Rec
58. Wilson HM: Tumors of the ear. In August JR, editor:
146:501-502, 2000.
Consultations in feline internal medicine, ed 6, St Louis.
37. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Penderis J, et al; Results of mag-
2010, Elsevier.
netic resonance imaging in dogs with vestibular dis-
 59. London CA, Dubilzeig RR, Vail DM, et al: Evaluation
orders: 85 cases [1996-1999), J Am Vet Med Assoc
of dogs and cats with tumors of the ear canal: 145 cases
218(3):385-391, 2001.
[1978-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 208[9]:1413-1418,
38.1
Blythe LL: Otitis media and interna and temporohy-
1996.
oid osteoarthropathy Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
60. Indrieri RJ, Taylor RF: Vestibular dysfunction caused by
13(1):21-42, 1997.
squamous cell carcinoma involving the middle ear and
39. Hilton H, Puchalski SM, Aleman M: The computed
inner ear in two cats, JAm Vet MedAssoc 184[4):471-473,
tomographic appearance of equine temporohyoid osteo-
1984.
arthropathy Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50(2):151-156, 2009.
61. de Lahunta A: Diseases of the cerebellum, Vet Clin
40. Palmeiro BS, Morris DO, Wiemelt SP, et al: Evaluation of
North Am Small Anim Pract 10(1):91-10l, 1980.
outcome of otitis media after lavage of the tympanic bulla
 62. de Lahunta A: Abiotrophy in domestic animals: a review,
and long-term antimicrobial drug treatment in dogs: 44
Can J Vet Res 54[1]:65-76, 1990.
cases [1998-2002], J Am Vet Med Assoc 225[4]:548-553,
63. de Lahunta A: Comparative cerebellar disease in domes-
2004.
tic animals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:8-19,
41. Mansfeld PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats, Compend
1980.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 12(3):331-337, 1990.
r     jo r r  
42. Trevor PB, Martin RA: Tympanic bulla osteotomy
diseases in dogs and cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1(3):255-274,
for treatment of middle-ear disease in cats: 19 cases
1990.
[1984-1991), J Am Vet Med Assoc 202[1):123-128,
65. Percy DH, Carmichael LE, Albert DM, et al: Lesions in
1993.
puppies surviving infection with canine herpes virus, Vet
43. Mason LK, Harvey CE, Orsher RJ: Total ear canal abla-
Pathol 8:37-53, 1971.
tion combined with lateral bulla osteotomy for end-
66. Csiza CK, de Lahunta A, Scott FW, et al: Pathogenesis
stage otitis in dogs. Results in thirty dogs, Vet Surg 17[5):
 of feline panleukopenia virus in susceptible newborn
263-268,1988.
kittens. Il. Pathology and immunofluorescence, Infect
44. Matthiesen DT, Scavelli T: Total ear canal ablation and
Immun 3(6):838-846, 1971.
lateral bulla osteotomy in 38 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
 67. Herdon R, Margolis G, Kilham L: The synaptic organiza-
Assoc 26:257-268, 1990.
tion of the malformed cerebellum induced by perina-
45. Beckman SL, Henry WBJ, Cechner P: Total ear canal
tal infection with the feline panleukopenia virus (PLV),
ablation combining bulla osteotomy and curettage in
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 30:196-205, 1971.
dogs with chronic otitis externa and media, J Am Vet
68. Kilham L, Margolis G, Colby ED: Congenital infec-
Med Assoc 196[1):84-90, 1990
tions of cats and ferrets by feline panleukopenia virus
46. Fan TM, Lorimier LP: Inflammatory polyps and aural
manifested by cerebellar hypoplasia, Lab Invest 17(5):
neoplasia, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
465-480, 1967.
34(2):489-509, 2004.
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
277
69. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Malforma-
93. Chieffo C, Stalis IH, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Cerebellar
tions of the central nervous system. In Summers BA,
Purkinje's cell degeneration and coat color dilution in
Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, editors: Veterinary neuro-
a family of Rhodesian Ridgeback dogs, J Vet Intern Med
pathology, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
8(2):112-116, 1994.
70. de Lahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical
94. Taniyama H, Takayanagi S, Izumisawa Y, et al: Cerebellar
neurology, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
cortical atrophy in a kitten, Vet Pathol 31(6):710-713,
71.c
de Lahunta A, Glass E: Veterinary neuroanatomy and
1994.
clinical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
95. Cordy DR, Snelbaker HA: Cerebellar hypoplasia and
72.B
Knecht CD, Lamar CH, Schaible R, et al: Cerebel-
degeneration in a family of Airedale dogs, J Neuropathol
lar hypoplasia in chow chows, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Exp Neurol 11:324-328, 1996.
15(1):51-53, 1979.
96. Flegel T, Matiasek K, Henke D, et al: Cerebellar cortical
73.
 Oliver JE, Geary JC: Cerebellar anomalies: two cases,
 degeneration with selective granule cell loss in Bavar-
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 60:697-702, 1965.
ian mountain dogs, J Small Anim Pract 48[8):462-465,
74. Kay WJ, Budzynski AZ: Cerebellar hypoplasia and agen-
2007.
esis in the dog, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 29:156, 1970.
 97. TagoY, Katsuta O,Tsuchitani M:Granule celltypecerebel-
75. Franklin RJM, Ramsey IK, McKerrel RLE: An inherited
lar hypoplasia in a beagle dog, Lab Anim 27(2):151-155,
neurological disorder of the St. Bernard dog character-
1993.
ised by unusual cerebellar cortical dysplasia, Vet Rec
98. Carmichael KP, Miller M, Rawlings CA, et al: Clinical,
140:656-657, 1997.
hematologic, and biochemical features of a syndrome
76. Harari J, Miller D, Padgett GA, et al: Cerebellar agen-
in Bernese mountain dogs characterized by hepato-
esis in two canine littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
cerebellar degeneration, J Am Vet Med Assoc 208[8):
182(6):622-623, 1983.
1277-1279, 1996.
77. Kornegay JN: Cerebellar vermian hypoplasia in dogs, Vet
99. Fankhauser R, Freudiger U, Vandevelde M, et al: Pur-
Pathol 23(4):374-379, 1986.
kinjezellatrophie nach Masernvirus-Vakzinierung beim
78. Pass DA, Howell JM, Thompson RR: Cerebellar malfor-
Hund, Schweiz Archiv Neurol Neurochir Psychiatr
mation intwo dogs anda sheep, Vet Pathol18(3):405-407,
112:353-363, 1973.
1981.
100. Sandy JR, Slocombe RF, Mitten RW, et al: Cerebellar
79. Dow RS: Partial agenesis of the cerebellum in dogs.
abiotrophy in a family of border collie dogs, Vet Pathol
J Comp Neurol 72:569-586, 1940.
39:736-739, 2002.
80. Schmid V, Lang J, Wolf M: Dandy-Wallker-like syndrome
101.
Gill JM, Hewland M: Cerebellar degeneration in the
in four dogs: cisternography as a diagnostic aid, J Am
border collie, N Z Vet J 28(8):170, 1980.
Anim Hosp Assoc 28[4):355-360, 1992.
102. Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Kornegay JN, et al: Late-onset
81. Regnier AM, Ducos de Lahitte MJ, Delisle MB, et al:
progressive spinocerebellar degeneration in Brittany
 Dandy-Wallker syndrome in a kitten, J Am Anim Hosp
spaniel dogs, Acta Neuropathol 96[1):97-10l, 1998.
Assoc 29(6):514-518, 1993.
103. Tatalick LM, Marks SL, Baszler TV: Cerebellar abiotro-
82. Thomas JB, Robertson D: Hereditary cerebellar abiotro-
phy characterized by granular cell loss in a Brittany, Vet
phy in Australian kelpie dogs, Aust Vet J 66(9):301-302,
Pathol 30[4):385-388, 1993.
1989.
104. Tipold A, Fatzer R, Jaggy A, et al: Presumed immune-
83. Kent M, Glass E, de Lahunta A: Cerebellar cortical abi-
mediated cerebellar granuloprival degeneration in the
otrophy in a beagle, J Small Anim Pract 4l:32l-323,
Coton de Tulear breed, J Neuroimmunol 1l0(l-2):
2000.
130-133,2000.
84. Yasuba M, Okimoto K, Lida M, et al: Cerebellar cortical
105. Gandini G, Botteron C, Brini E, et al: Cerebellar corti-
degeneration in beagle dogs, Vet Pathol 25[4):315-317,
cal degeneration in three English bulldogs: clinical and
1988.
neuropathological findings, J Small Anim Pract 46(6):
85. Good R: Untersuchungen uber eine Kleinhirnrinde-
291-294,2005
natrophie beim hund, Bern, Switzerland, 1962, Univer-
106. O'Brien DP: Hereditary cerebellar ataxia, Proceed of
sity of Bern (dissertation).
the 1lth ACUIM Forum, Washington DC, pp 546-549,
86. Carmichael S, Griffths IR, Harvey MJ: Familial cerebel-
1993.
lar ataxia with hydrocephalus in bull mastiffs, Vet Rec
107. Tontitila P, Lindberg LA: Ett fall av cerebellar ataxi hos
112(15):354-358, 1983
finsk stovare, Svomen elainLaakarilehti 77:135-138, 1971.
87.
Coates JR, O'Brien DP, Kline KL, et al: Neonatal cer-
108. Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL: Canine inherited
ebellar ataxia in Coton de Tulear dogs, J Vet Intern Med
ataxia, Ann Neurol 9(5):492-498, 1981.
16:680-689, 2002.
109. de Lahunta A, Fenner WR, Indrieri RJ, et al: Hereditary
88. Nesbit JW, Ueckermann JF: Cerebellar cortical atrophy
 cerebellar cortical abiotrophy in the Gordon setter, J Am
in a puppy, J S Afr Vet Assoc 52[3):247-250, 1981.
Vet Med Assoc 177(6):538-541, 1980.
89.8
Sakai T, Harashima T, Yamamura H, et al: Two cases of
110. Steinberg HS, Troncoso JC, Cork LC, et al: Clinical fea-
hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia in a litter of Irish
tures of inherited cerebellar degeneration in Gordon set-
setters, J Small Anim Pract 35[4]:221-223, 1994.
ters, J Am Vet Med Assoc 179(9):886-890, 1981
90. Palmer AC, Payne JE, Wallace ME: Hereditary quadri-
111. Coates JR, Carmichael KP, Shelton D, et al: Preliminary
plegia and amblyopia in the Irish setter, J Small Anim
characterization of a cerebellar ataxia in Jack Russell ter-
Pract 14(6):343-352, 1973.
riers, J Vet Intern Med 10(3):176, 1996.
91. Perille AL, Baer K, Joseph RJ, et al: Postnatal cerebellar
112. Cantile C, Salvadori C, Modenato M, et al: Cerebellar
cortical degeneration in Labrador retriever puppies, Can
granuloprival degeneration in an Italian hound, J Vet
Vet J 32:619-621, 1991.
Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 49[10):523-525, 2002.
 92. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: A study of cerebellar and
113. Bildfell RJ, Mitchell SK, Lahunta AD: Cerebellar cor-
cerebral cortical degeneration in miniature poodle pups
tical degeneration in a Labrador retriever, Can Vet J
with emphasis on the ultrastructure of Purkinje cell
36(9):570-572, 1995.
changes, Acta Neuropathol 75[3):261-271, 1988.
278
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
114. Jokinen TS, Rusbridge C, Steffen F, et al: Cerebellar
134. Jaggy A, Vandevelde M: Multisystem neuronal degenera-
cortical abiotrophy in Lagotto Romagnolo dogs, J Small
tion in cocker spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 2[3):117-120.
Anim Pract 48(8):470-473, 2007.
1988.
115.F
 Berry ML, Blas-Machado U: Cerebellar abiotrophy in a
135. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, et al: Multisystem
miniature schnauzer, Can Vet J 44[8):657-659, 2003.
axonopathy and neuronopathy in Golden retriever dogs.
116.(
Chrisman CL, Spencer CP, Crane SW, et al: Late-onset
J Vet Intern Med 23:935-939, 2009.
cerebellar degeneration in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
136.
 Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal vacu-
182(7):717-720, 1983.
olation and spinocerebellar degeneration in young Rott-
117. S
Steinberg HS, Winkle TV, Bell JS, et al: Cerebellar
weiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34(4):296-302, 1997.
degeneration in Old English sheepdogs, J Am Vet Med
137.
Sandefeldt E, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Animal
Assoc 217(8):1162-1165, 2000.
model of human disease. Infantile spinal muscular atro-
118. van Tongeren SE, van Vonderen IK, van Nes J, et al: Cer-
phy, Werdnig-Hoffman disease. Animal model: heredi-
ebellar cortical abiotrophy in two portuguese podenco
tary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland dogs, Am J
littermates, Vet Q 22:172-174, 2001.
Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
119. Hartley Wj, Barker JSF, Wanner RA, et al: Inherited cer-
138. Resibois A, Poncelet L: Olivopontocerebellar atrophy in
ebellar degeneration in the rough coated collie, Aust Vet 
two adult cats, sporadic cases or new genetic entity, Vet
Pract 8(2):79-85, 1978.
Pathol 41(1):20-29, 2004.
120. van der Merwe LL, Lane E: Diagnosis of cerebellar cor-
139. Chrisman CL, Cork LC, Gamble DA: Neuroaxonal
tical degeneration in a Scottish terrier using magnetic
dystrophy of Rottweiler dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
resonance imaging, J Small Anim Pract 42(8):409-412,
184[4):464-467, 1984.
2001.
140. Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL, et al: Canine neu-
121.(
Olby N, Blot S, Thibaud JL, et al: Cerebellar cortical
roaxonal dystrophy, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 42[3):
degeneration in adult American Staffordshire terriers,
286-296,1983
J Vet Intern Med 18(2):201-208, 2004.
141.
 Blakemore WF, Palmer AC: Nervous disease in the
122. Aye MM, Izumo S, Inada S, et al: Histopathological and
Chihuahua characterised by axonal swellings, Vet Rec
ultrastructural features of feline hereditary cerebellar cor-
117(19):498-499, 1985.
tical atrophy: a novel animal model of human spinocer-
142. Clark RG, Hartley WJ, Burgess GS, et al: Suspected
ebellar degeneration, Acta Neuropathol 96[4):379-387,
  o   
1998.
sheepdogs, N Z Vet J 30(7):102-103, 1982.
123. Inada S, Mochizuki M, Izumo S, et al: Study of heredi-
143. Sacre BJ, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Neuroaxonal
tary cerebellar degeneration in cats, Am J Vet Res 57[3):
dystrophy in a Jack Russell terrier pup resembling
296-301, 1996.
human infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, Cornell Vet
124. Barone G, Foureman P, deLahunta A: Adult-onset cer-
83(2]):133-142, 1993.
ebellar cortical abiotrophy and retinal degeneration in a
144. Duncan ID, Griffths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
domestic shorthair cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:51-54,
thy, Vet Rec 101:438-441, 1977.
2002.
145.
 Diaz JD, Duque C, Geisel R: Neuroaxonal dystrophy in
125.8
Shamir M, Perl S, Sharon L: Late onset of cerebel-
dogs: case report in 2 litters of papillon puppies, J Vet
lar abiotrophy in a Siamese cat, J Small Anim Pract
Intern Med 21:531-534, 2007.
40(7):343-345, 1999.
146. Franklin RJM, Jeffery ND, Ramsey IK: Neuroaxonal dys-
126. Negrin A, Bernardini M, Baumgartner W, et al: Late
trophy in a litter of papillon pups, J Small Anim Pract 
 onset cerebellar degeneration in a middle-aged cat,
36[10):441-444, 1995.
J Feline Med Surg 8(6):424-429, 2006.
147.
 Nibe K, Kita C, Morozumi M, et al: Clinicopathological
127. Carmichael KP, Richey LJ: Cerebellar Purkinje cell
features of canine neuroaxonal dystrophy and cerebellar
degeneration and hepatic microvascular dysplasia in
cortical abiotrophy in papillon and papillon-related dogs,
Havana brown kittens, Vet Pathol 42:689, 2005.
JVet Med Sci 69[10):1047-1052, 2007.
128. de Lahunta A, Averill DRJ: Hereditary cerebellar cor-
148. Carmichael KP, Howerth EW, Oliver JE Jr, et al: Neu-
tical and extrapyramidal nuclear abiotrophy in Kerry
roaxonal dystrophy in a group of related cats, J Vet Diagn
blue terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 168[12]:1119-1124,
Invest 5[4):585-590, 1993.
1976.
149. Woodard jC, Collins GH, Hessler JR: Feline hereditary
129. Montgomery DL, Storts RW: Hereditary striatonigral
neuroaxonal dystrophy, Am J Pathol 74(3):551-566,
and cerebello-olivary degeneration of the Kerry blue ter-
1974.
rier. I. Gross and light microscopic central nervous sys-
150. Rodriguez F, Espinosa de los Monteros A, Morales M,
tem lesions, Vet Pathol 20(2):143-159, 1983.
  ss m  os rx  
130. Montgomery DL, Storts RW: Hereditary striatonigral
termates, Vet Res 138:548-549, 1996.
and cerebello-olivary degeneration of the Kerry blue ter-
151.
Konno S, Moriwaki M, Nakagawa M:Akabane disease in
rier. II. Ultrastructural lesions in the caudate nucleus and
cattle: congenital abnormalities caused by viral infection.
cerebellar cortex, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 43(3):263-
Spontaneous disease, Vet Pathol 19[3):246-266, 1982.
275,1984.
152. Parsonson IM, Della-Porta AJ, Snowdon WA: Con-
131. O'Brien DP, Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, et al: Genetic
 genital abnormalities in newborn lambs after infection
mapping of canine multiple system degeneration and
of pregnant sheep with Akabane virus, Infect Immun
ectodermal dysplasia loci, J Hered 96(7):727-734, 2005.
15(1):254-262, 1977.
132. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Gasteiger EL: Multisys-
153. Tsuda T, Yoshida K, Ohashi S, et al: Arthrogryposis,
temic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in cairn ter-
hydranencephaly and cerebellar hypoplasia syndrome
riers. A case with generalized cataplectic episodes, J Vet
in neonatal calves resulting from intrauterine infection 
Intern Med 5(2):91-94, 1991.
with Aino virus, Vet Res 35[5):531-538, 2004.
133. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF: A progressive neurono-
154. Barnard BJH, Pienaar JG: Bluetongue virus as a cause
pathy in the young
 cairn terrier J Sm Anim Pract
of hydranencephaly in cattle, Onderstepoort J Vet Res
30(2):101-106, 1988.
43(3):155-157, 1976.
CHAPTER8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
279
155. Leipold HW, Dennis SM: Congenital defects of the
174. Saunders LZ,Sweet JD, Martin SM, et al: Hereditary con-
bovine central nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food
genital ataxia in Jersey calves, Cornell Vet 42:559-591,
Anim Pract 3(1):159-177, 1987.
1952.
156. Osburn Bl: Animal model for human disease. Hydra-
175. Allen JG: Congenital cerebellar hypoplasia in Jersey
nencephaly,
 porencephaly,
cerebral cysts,
reti-
calves, Aust Vet J 53[4):173-175, 1977.
nal dysplasia, CNS malformations. Animal model:
176. Edmonds L, Crenshaw D, Selby LA: Micrognathia
bluetongue-vaccine-virus infection in fetal lambs, Am J
and cerebelar hypoplasia in an Aberdeen Angus herd,
Pathol 67(1):211-214, 1972.
J Hered 64[2):62-64, 1973.
157. Nettleton PF, Gilray JA, Russo P, et al: Border disease of
177. Schild AL, Riet-Correa F, Fernandes CG, et al: Cerebel-
sheep and goats, Vet Res 29[3/4):327-340, 1998.
lar hypoplasia and porencephaly in Charolais cattle in
158. Brown TT, de Lahunta A, Bistner Sl, et al: Pathogenetic
Southern Brazil, Ciencia Rural 31(1):149-153, 2001
studies of infection of the bovine fetus with bovine
178. Finnie EP, Leaver DD: Cerebellar hypoplasia in calves,
viral diarrhea virus. I. Cerebellar atrophy, Vet Pathol
Aust Vet J 41:287-288, 1965.
11(6):486-505, 1974.
179.
 Kidd AR, Done JT, Wrathall AE, et al: A new genetically
159. Kahrs RF, Scott FW, de Lahunta A: Congenital cerebellar
 determined congenital nervous disorder in pigs, Br Vet J
hypoplasia and ocular defects in calves following bovine
142:275-285, 1986.
viral diarrhea-mucosal disease infection in pregnant cat-
180. Johnson KR, Fourt DL, Ross RH, et al: Hereditary con-
tle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 156[10):1443-1450, 1970.
 genital ataxia in Holstein-Friesian calves, J Dairy Sci
160. Ward GM: Experimental infection of pregnant sheep
41:1371-1375, 1958.
with bovine viral diarrhea-mucosa disease virus, Cornell
181.
 Kemp J, McOrist S, Jeffrey M: Cerebellar abiotrophy in 
Vet 61[1):179-191, 1971.
Holstein Friesian calves, Vet Rec 136[8):198, 1995.
161. Edwards JF, Livingston CW, Chung SI, et al: Ovine
182. Schild AL, Riet-Correa F, Portiansky EL, et al: Congeni-
arthrogryposis and central nervous system malforma-
tal cerebellar cortical degeneration in Holstein cattle in
tions associated with in utero Cache Valley virus infec-
southern Brazil, Vet Res Commun 25(3):189-195, 2001.
tion: spontaneous disease, Vet Pathol 26[1]:33-39,
183.
Cho DY, Leipold HW: Cerebellar cortical atrophy in a
1989.
Charolais calf Vet Pathol 15[2):264-266, 1978.
162. Johnson KP, Ferguson LC, Byington DP, et al: Multiple
184.
White ME, Whitlock RH, de Lahunta A: A cerebellar
fetal malformations due to persistent viral infection. I.
abiotrophy of calves, Cornell Vet 65[4):476-491, 1975.
Abortion, intrauterine death, and gross abnormalities in
185.
 Mitchell PJ, Reilly W, Harper PAW, et al: Cerebellar abi-
fetal swine infected with hog cholera vaccine virus, Lab
otrophy in Angus cattle, Aust Vet J 70(2):67-68, 1993.
Invest 30(5):608-617, 1974.
186. Woodman MP, Scott PR, Watt N, et al: Selective cer-
163. Miura Y, Kubo M, Goto Y, et al: Hydranencephaly-
ebellar degeneration in a Limousin cross heifer, Vet Rec
cerebellar hypoplasia in a newborn calf after infection of
132(23):586-587, 1993.
its dam with Chuzan virus, Jpn J Vet Sci 52[4):689-694,
187. Barlow RM: Further observations on bovine familial con-
1990.
vulsions and ataxia, Vet Rec 105:91-94, 1979.
 164. Coetzer JAW: Brain teratology as a result of transpla-
188. Barlow RM: Morphogenesis of cerebellar lesions in
cental virus infection in ruminants, J S Afr Vet Assoc
bovine familial convulsions and ataxia, Vet Pathol
51(3):153-157, 1980.
18:151-162, 1981.
165. Done JT, Harding JDJ: The relationship of maternal
189. Harper RAW, Duncan DW, Plant JW, et al: Cerebellar
swine fever infection to cerebellar hypoplasia in piglets,
abiotrophy and segmental axonopathy: two syndromes of
Proc R Soc Med 59:1083-1084, 1966.
progressive ataxia in Merino sheep, Aust Vet J 63:18-21,
166. Coetzer JAW, Theodoridis A, Herr S, et al: Wesselsbron
1986.
disease: a cause of congenital porencephaly and cer-
190. Innes JRM, MacNaughton WN: Inherited cortical cer-
ebellar hypoplasia in calves, Onderstepoort J Vet Res
ebellar atrophy in Corriedale lambs in Canada identical
46(3):165-169, 1979.
with daft lamb disease in Britain, Cornell Vet 40:127-135,
167. Jeffrey M, Preece BE, Holliman A: Dandy-Walker mal-
1950.
      
191. Milne EM, Schock A: Cerebellar abiotrophy in a pedi-
1990.
gree
Charolais sheep flock, Vet Rec 143:224-225,
168. Madarame H, Azuma K, Nozuki H, et al: Dandy-
1998.
Walker malformation in a Japanese black calf Vet Pathol
192. Johnstone AC, Johnson CB, Malcolm KE, et al: Cere-
27(4):296-298, 1990.
 bellar cortical abiotrophy in Wiltshire sheep, N Z Vet J
169.(
Cudd TA, Mayhew IG, Cottrill CM: Agenesis of the
53[4]:242-245, 2005.
corpus callosum with cerebellar vermian hypoplasia in a
193. Gregory DW, Mead SW, Regan WM: Hereditary con-
foal resembling the Dandy-Walker syndrome: pre-mor-
genital lethal spasms in Jersey cattle, J Hered 35:195-
tem diagnosis by clinical evaluation and CT scanning.
200,1944.
Equine Vet J 21(5):378-381, 1989.
194. High JW, Kincaid CM, Smith HJ: Doddler cattle,
170. Washburn KE, Streeter RN: Congenital defects of the
J Hered 49:250-252, 1958.
ruminant nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food
 195. Baird JD, Mackenzie CD:Cerebellar hypoplasia and degen-
Anim Pract 20:413-434, 2004.
eration in part-Arab horse, Aust Vet J 50:25-28, 1974.
171.
Verhaart WJC: Partial agenesis of the cerebellum and
196.
Palmer AC, Blakemore WF, Cook WR, et al: Cer-
medulla and total agenesis of the corpus callosum in a
ebellar hypoplasia and degeneration in the young Arab
goat, J Comp Neurol 77:477-478, 1942.
horse: clinical and neuropathological features, Vet Rec
172.1
Wallace MA, Scarratt WK, Crisman MV, et al: Familial
93(3):62-66, 1973.
convulsions and ataxia in an Aberdeen Angus calf, Prog
197. Bjorck G, Everz KE, Hansen HJ, et al: Congenital cer-
Vet Neurol 7[4):145-148, 1996.
ebellar ataxia in the Gotland pony breed, Zentralbl
173. Innes JRM, Russell DS, Wilsdon AJ: Familial cerebellar
Veterinarmed A 20:341-345, 1973.
hypoplasia and degeneration in Hereford calves, J Pathol
Bacteriol 50:455-461, 1940.
280
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
198. Cordy DR, Richards WP, Bradford GE: Systemic neu-
221. Evans J, Katz ML, Levesque D, et al: A variant form of
roaxonal dystrophy in Suffolk sheep, Acta Neuropathol
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in American bulldogs,
8:133-140, 1967.
J Vet Intern Med 19(1):44-51, 2005.
200. Beech J, Haskins M: Genetic studies of neuraxonal dystro-
222. Wilkie JSN, Hudson EB: Neuronal and generalized
phy in the Morgan, Am J Vet Res 48[1):109-113, 1987.
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Cocker Spaniel, Vet Pathol
201.B
Baumgartner W, Frese K, Elmadfa I: Neuroaxonal dys-
19:623-628, 1982.
trophy associated with vitamin E deficiency in two
223. Vicini DS, Wheaton LG, Zachary JF, et al: Peripheral
Haflinger horses, J Comp Pathol 103:113-119, 1990.
nerve biopsy for diagnosis of globoid cell leukodystrophy
202.S
Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Veterinary
in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 192[8):1087-1090, 1988.
neuropathology, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
224. Cozzi F, Vite CH, Wenger DA, et al: MRI and electro-
203.S
Shichiro I, Masami M, Shuji I, et al: Study of hereditary
 physiological abnormalities in a case of canine globoid
 cerebellar degeneration in cats, Am J Vet Res 57:296-301,
cell leukodystrophy, J Small Anim Pract 39(8):401-405,
1996.
1998.
204. Jolly RD, Blair HT, Johnstone AC: Genetic disorders of
225. Schatzberg SJ, Haley NJ, Barr SC, et al: Polymerase
sheep in New Zealand: a review and perspective, N Z
chain reaction (PCR) amplifcation of parvoviral DNA
Vet J 52[2]:52-64, 2004.
from the brains of dogs and cats with cerebellar hypo-
205.B
Flegel T, Matiasek K, Henke D, et al: Cerebellar cortical
plasia, J Vet Intern Med 17[4):538-544, 2003.
degeneration with selective granule cell loss in Bavarian
226. Kilham L, Margolis G, Colby ED: Cerebellar ataxia and
mountain dogs, J Small Anim Pract 48(8):462-465, 2007.
its congenital transmission in cats by feline panleukope-
206. Cummings JF, Summers BA, de Lahunta A, et al: Trem-
nia virus, J Am Vet Med Assoc 158:888-901, 1971.
ors in Samoyed pups with oligodendrocyte deficiencies
227.
Csiza CK, Scott FW, de Lahunta A, et al: Feline viruses
and hypomyelination, Acta Neuropathol 71(3-4):267-
277,1986.
penia of cats, Cornell Vet 61:423-439, 1971.
207. Henke D, Bottcher P, Doherr MG, et al: Computer-
228.
Csiza CK, de Lahunta A, Scott FW, et al: Spontaneous
assisted magnetic resonance imaging brain morphom-
feline ataxia, Cornell Vet 62:300-322, 1972.
etry in American Staffordshire terriers with cerebellar
229. Carpenter MR, Harter DH: A study of congenital feline
cortical degeneration, J Vet Intern Med 22[4):969-975,
cerebellar malformations: an anatomic and physiologic
2008.
evaluation ofagenetic defects, J Comp Neurol 105:51-93,
208. Thames RA, Robertson ID, Flegel T, et al: Brain mor-
1956.
phometry in dogs using magnetic resonance imaging: the
230. Greene CE, Gorgasz EJ, Martin CL: Hydranencephaly
effect of breed, age and cerebellar degenerative disease,
associated with feline panleukopenia, j Am Vet Med
Vet Radiol Ultrasound , 2010:in press.
Assoc 180(7):767-768, 1982.
209. Jolly RD, Wallley SU: Lysosomal storage diseases of
231.
 Sharp NJH, Davis BJ, Guy JS, et al: Hydranencephaly
animals: an essay in comparative pathology, Vet Pathol
and cerebellar hypoplasia in two kittens attributed
34[6):527-548, 1997.
to intrauterine parvovirus infection, J Comp Pathol
 210. Jolly RD: Comparative biology of the neuronal ceroid-
121[1):39-53, 1999.
lipofuscinoses:an overview,AmJ MedGenet 57:307-311,
232. Scott FW, Kahrs RF, de Lahunta A:Virus induced congen-
1995.
ital anomalies of the bovine fetal. I. Cerebellar degenera-
211. F
Ellinwood NM, Vite CH, Haskin ME: Gene therapy for
tion [hypoplasia) ocular lesions and fetal mummification
lysosomal storage diseases: the lessons and promise of
following experimental infection with bovine viral
animal models, J Gene Med 6:481-506, 2004.
diarrhea-mucosal disease virus, Cornell Vet 63:536-560,
212. March PA: Neuronal storage disorders. In August JR,
1973.
editor: Consultations in feline internal medicine, ed 4,
 233. Narita M, Inui S, Hashiguchi Y: The pathogenesis of
Philadelphia, 2001, WB Saunders.
congenital encephalopathies in sheep experimentally
213. Vite CH: Gene therapy for lysomal storage diseases. In
induced by Akabane virus, J Comp Pathol 89(2):229-
August JR, editor: Consultations in feline internal medi-
240, 1979.
cine, ed 6, St Louis, 2010, Saunders Elsevier.
234. Osburn BI, Silverstein AM, Prendergast RA, et al: Exper-
214. Jolly RD: Lysosomal storage diseases in livestock, Vet
imental viral-induced congenital encephalopathies.
1
Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 9:41-53, 1993.
Pathology of hydranencephaly and porencephaly caused
215.8
 Skelly BJ, Franklin RJM: Recognition and diagnosis of
by bluetongue vaccine virus, Lab Invest 25[3):197-205,
lysosomal storage diseases in the cat and dog, J Vet Intern
1971.
Med 16:133-141, 2002.
235. Osburn Bl, Johnson RT, Silverstein AM, et al: Experi-
216. Evans RJ: Lysosomal storage diseases in dogs and cats,
mental viral-induced congenital encephalopathies.
J Small Anim Pract 30(3):144-150, 1989.
The pathogenesis of bluetongue vaccine virus infection
217. Haskins ME, Bingel SA, Northington JW, et al: Spi-
in fetal lambs, Lab Invest 25[3):206-210, 1971.
nal cord compression and hindlimb paresis in cats
236. Swan RA, Taylor EG: Cerebellar hypoplasia in beef
with mucopolysaccharidosis Vl, J Am Vet Med Assoc
shorthorn calves, Aust Vet J 59[3]:95-96, 1982.
182(9):983-985, 1983.
237. O'Sullivan BM, McPhee CP: Cerebellar hypoplasia of
218. Haskins ME, Otis EJ, Hayden JE, et al: Hepatic stor-
genetic origin in calves, Aust Vet J 51[10):469-471,
 age of glycosaminoglycans in feline and canine models
1975.
of mucopolysaccharidoses I, Vl, and Vll, Vet Pathol
238. Vernau KM, Kortz GD, Koblik PD, et al: Magnetic reso-
29(2):112-119, 1992
nance imaging and computed tomography characteris-
219. Coates JR, O'Brien DP: Inherited peripheral neuropa-
tics of intracranial intra-arachnoid cysts in 6 dogs, Vet
thies in dogs and cats, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Radiol Ultrasound 38[3):171-176, 1997.
Pract 34:1361-1401, 2004.
239. Milner RJ, Engela J, Kirberger RM: Arachnoid cyst in
220.S
Sisk DB, Levesque DC, Wood PA, et al: Clinical and patho-
cerebellar pontine area of a cat: diagnosis by magnetic
logic features of ceroid lipofuscinosis in two Australian
resonance imaging, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 37(1):34-36,
cattle dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 197(3):361-364, 1990.
1996.
CHAPTER 8
Ataxia of the Head and the Limbs
281
240. Matiasek LA, Platt SR, Shaw S, et al: Clinical and mag-
262. Read DH, Harrington DD: Experimentally induced thia-
netic resonance imaging characteristics of quadrigeminal
mine deficiency in beagle dogs: pathologic changes ofthe
cysts in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 21(5):1021-1026, 2007.
central nervous system, Am J Vet Res 47[10):2281-2289,
241.I
Duque C, Parent J, Brisson B, et al: Intracranial arach-
1986.
        
 263. Studdert VP, Labuc RH: Thiamin deficiency in cats and
Med 19(5):772-774, 2005.
dogs associated with feeding meat preserved with sul-
242. Kitagawa M, Kanayama K, Sakai T: Quadrigeminal cis-
phur dioxide, Aust Vet J 68:54-57, 1991.
terna arachnoid cyst diagnosed by MRI in five dogs, Aust
264.
Loew FM: Thiamine deficiency in dogs, Vet Pathol
Vet J 81[6):340-343, 2003.
14:650-653, 1977.
243. Saito M, Olby NJ, Spaulding KA: Identification of arach-
 265. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Platt SR, et al: Thiamine deficiency
noid cysts in the quadrigeminal cistern using ultrasonog-
in a dog: clinical, clinicopathologic and magnetic reso-
raphy, Vet Radiol Utrasound 42:435-439, 2001.
 nance imaging findings, J Vet Intern Med 17:719-723.
244.1
Dewey CW, Krotscheck U, Bailey KS, et al: Craniotomy
2003.
with cystoperitoneal shunting for treatment of intracranial
266. Steenbeck S, Fischer A: Clinically suspected thiamine
arachnoid cysts in dogs, Vet Surg 36(5):416-422, 2007.
 deficiency encephalopathy in two cats fed with a com-
245. Lowrie M, Wessmann A, Gunn-Moore D, et al: Quadri-
mercial cat foot, Tierarztl Prax 35:55-58, 2007.
geminal cyst management by cystoperitoneal shunt in a
267.
 Penderis J, McConnell JF, Calvin J: Magnetic resonance
4-year-old Persian cat, J Feline Med Surg 11(8):711-713,
imaging features of thiamine deficiency in a cat, Vet Rec 
2009.
160:270-272, 2007.
 246. Kelly JH: Occipital dysplasia and hydrocephalus in a toy
268. Evans TR, Evans WC, Roberts HE: Studies on bracken
poodle, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 70(8):940-941, 1975.
poisoning in the horse, Br Vet J 107:364-371, 1951.
247.B
Parker AJ, Park RD: Occipital dysplasia in the dog, J Am
269.
Henderson JA, Evans MA: The antithiamine action of.
Anim Hosp Assoc 10:520-525, 1974.
Equisetum, J Am Vet Med Assoc 120:375-378, 1952.
248. Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Tucker RL, et al: Occipital
270. Plumlee KH, Galey FD: Neurotoxic mycotoxins:
a
dysplasia and associated cranial spinal cord abnormalities
review of fungal toxins that cause neurological disease in 
in two dogs, Vet Radiol Utrasound 37(5):359-362, 1996.
large animals, J Vet Intern Med 8[1):49-54, 1994.
249. Evans HE: Prenatal development. In Evans HE, editor:
271. Scarratt WK: Cerebellar disease and disease character-
Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993,
ized by dysmetria or tremors, Vet Clin North Am Food
WB Saunders.
Anim Pract 20:275-289, 2004.
250. Watson AG, de Lahunta A, Evans HE: Dorsal notch
272.
Tyler JW: Naturally occurring neurologic disease in
of foramen magnum due to incomplete ossification
 calves fed Claviceps sp. infected Dallis grass hay and pas-
of supraoccipital bone in dogs, J Small Anim Pract
ture, Prog Vet Neurol 3:101-106, 1990.
30[12):666-673, 1989.
273. Caylor KB, Cassimatis MK: Metronidazole neurotoxi-
251.
Vitale CL, Olby NJ: Neurologic dysfunction in hypo-
cosis in two cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:258-262,
thyroid, hyperlipidemic Labrador retrievers, J Vet Intern
2001.
Med 21(6):1316-1322, 2007.
274. Dow SW, LeCouteur RA, Poss ML, et al: Central ner-
252. Troxel MT, Vite CH, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Feline intra-
vous system toxicosis associated with metronidazole
cranial neoplasia: retrospective review of 160 cases
treatment of dogs: five cases [1984-1987], J Am Vet Med
[1985-2001], J Vet Intern Med 17:850-859, 2003.
Assoc 195[3):365-368, 1989.
253. Snyder JM, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Canine intra-
275. Olson EJ, Morales SC, McVey AS, et al: Putative metro-
cranial primary neoplasia: 173 cases [1986-2003], J Vet
nidazole neurotoxicosis in a cat, Vet Pathol 42:665-669,
Intern Med 20:669-675, 2006.
2005.
254. Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA, et al: Secondary
276. Saxon B, Magne ML: Reversible central nervous system
intracranial neoplasia in the dog: 177 cases [1986-2003),
toxicosis associated with metronidazole therapy in three
J Vet Intern Med 22:172-177, 2008.
cats, Prog Vet Neurol 4[1):25-27, 1993.
255. Kitagawa M, Koie H, Kanazawa K, et al: Medulloblas-
277. Evans J, Levesque D, Knowles K, et al: Diazepam as a
toma in a cat: clinical and MRI findings, J Small Anim
treatmentformetronidazoletoxicosisindogs:aretrospective
Pract 44:139-142, 2003.
study of21 cases, J Vet Intern Med 17(3):304-310, 2003.
256. Steinberg H, Galbreath EJ: Cerebellar medulloblas-
278. Garosi L, McConnell JF, Platt SR, et al: Clinical and top-
toma with multiple differentiation in a dog, Vet Pathol
 ographic magnetic resonance characteristics of suspected
35[6):543-546, 1998.
brain infarction in 40 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 20(2):311-
 257. Westworth DR, Dickinson PJ, Vernau W, et al: Choroid
321,2006.
plexus tumors in 56 dogs [1985-2007), J Vet Intern Med
279. Garosi L, McConnell JE, Platt SR, et al: Results of diag-
22(5):1157-1165, 2008.
nosticinvestigationsandlong-termoutcomeof33dogswith
 258. Van Winkle TJ, Steinberg HS, DeCarlo AJ, et al: Myxoid
braininfarction [2000-2004),JVet Intern Med 19(5):725-
meningiomas of the rostral cervical spinal cord and cau-
731, 2005.
dal fossa in four dogs, Vet Pathol 31(4):468-471, 1994.
280. MeConnell JF, Garosi L, Platt SR: Magnetic resonance
259. Adamo PF, Clinkscales JA: Cerebellar meningioma with
imaging findings of presumed cerebellar cerebrovascular
paradoxical vestibular signs, Prog Vet Neurol 2(2):137-
accident in twelve dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 46[1):
142, 1991.
1-10,2005
260. Lefbom BK, Parker GA: Ataxia associated with lympho-
sarcoma in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 207(7):922-923,
1995.
261. Read DH, Harrington DD: Experimentally induced thia-
mine deficiency in beagle dogs: clinical observations, Am
JVet Res 42(6):984-991, 1981.
CHAPTER
Disorders of the Face, Tongue,
Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
LESION LOCALIZATION
 pons, the trigeminal nerve courses in the trigeminal canal
within the petrous portion of the temporal bone. Upon leav-
The problems described in this chapter result from dysfunc-
ing the trigeminal canal, the trigeminal nerve divides into its
tion of cranial nerves [CNs} V, VIl, VIII (cochlear), IX, X, XI,
three main branches. The mandibular nerve leaves the cranial
and XIl. Disorders of CN VIll [vestibular] are discussed in
cavity via the oval foramen to innervate the muscles of mas-
Chapter 8, and disorders of the cranial nerves associated with
tication [temporalis, masseter, pterygoids, rostral digastricus,
vision and the eyes are discussed in Chapter ll. The localiza-
and mylohyoideus muscles). Sensation to the surface of the
tion of cranial nerve lesions is presented in Chapters l and
head is supplied by CN V through all branches. The ophthal-
2 and is reviewed briefly in this chapter [see Table 2-4 and
mic nerve innervates the eyelid, nasal mucosa, globe of the
Figure l-5).
eye, and the cornea. The ophthalmic nerve enters the cranial
Lesions affecting cranial nerves may be peripheral [nerve
cavity via the orbital fissure. The maxillary nerve provides sen-
fbers) or central [neurons in the brainstem). Differentiation is
sation to the lateral side of the face overlying the maxilla from
based on the results of a careful neurologic examination and
dagnostics tests such as crosssectional imaging. Clinically.
matic arch. The maxillary nerve receives sensory input from
 peripheral cranial nerve disorders are characterized by specific
the calvaria via the round foramen. The mandibular nerve
 nerve deficits with no evidence of involvement of the brainstem.
provides sensation to the skin of the lower jaw, teeth of the
Cranial nerve dysfunction resulting from brainstem lesions
lower jaw, tongue, and buccal cavity. The ophthalmic nerve
is characterized by isolated or multiple cranial nerve involve-
is the sensory arc of the corneal reflex and, together with the
ment and, more importantly, by specific signs referable to the
maxillary nerve, the palpebral reflex. The cell bodies for the
brainstem, such as ipsilateral postural reaction deficits, paresis
 general somatic afferent (GSA) (sensory) neurons are located
of the ipsilateral limbs, central vestibular disease, and changes
in the trigeminal ganglion within the trigeminal canal. Axons
in mentation. Occasionally, the generalized lower motor neu-
enter the pons to form the spinal tract of the trigeminal nerve,
ron (LMN) diseases may predominantly affect specific cranial
which courses caudally through the medulla to the level of
nerves [e.g, laryngeal paralysis). These diseases usually are
the first cervical spinal cord segment. GSA axons in the spinal
recognized because of other LMN signs in the limbs. In some
tract of the trigeminal nerve synapse on neurons immediately
cases, electromyography (EMG) is needed to establish the
adjacent to the tract in the nucleus of the spinal tract of the
 generalized nature of the LMN disease.
trigeminal nerve. At its rostral end, this nucleus is contiguous
with the pontine sensory nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. From
Cranial Nerve V (Trigeminal Nerve)
these nuclei, axons decussate and extend to the contralateral
Anatomy
thalamus. From the thalamus, GSA information is distributed
The trigeminal nerve (CN V) contains both sensory and
via the internal capsule and corona radiata to the contralateral
motor fibers. The trigeminal nerve is divided into three main
somatosensory cerebral cortex for conscious perception.
branches: ophthalmic, maxillary, and mandibular nerves. All
The anatomic distribution of GSA fbers in CN V is of con-
three branches contain sensory fibers, whereas only the man-
siderable importance in the identification of lesions involving
dibular nerve contains motor fibers. The general somatic effer-
the trigeminal nerve and brainstem. Lesions in the medulla
ent [GSE), neurons [motor) are located in the pons. Axons
involving the spinal tract of CN V result in ipsilateral loss of
emerge from the lateral aspect of the pons and together with
facial sensation but no impairment of the masticatory muscles.
sensory fibers form the trigeminal nerve. After exiting the
 Loss ofboth sensory and motor function ofthe trigeminal nerve
282
CHAPTER 9
Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
283
usually results from pontine lesions affecting cranial nerve
medulla ventral to CN VIll. The facial nerve enters the petro-
nuclei or extramedullary disorders that affect both motor and
sal bone through the internal acoustic meatus on the dorsal
sensory nerve fibers. Loss of motor function with no sensory
side of CN VIll. The nerve emerges from the calvaria through
impairment is associated with discrete lesions in the trigemi-
the stylomastoid foramen to innervate the muscles of facial
nal motor nucleus in the pons or preferential involvement of
 expression. Inflammatory or neoplastic disease involving the
the motor nerve fibers or the muscle of mastication.
inner ear may extend to the facial nerve, resulting in ipsilateral
facial paralysis. The facial nerve is the main motor pathway for
Clinical Signs
the corneal and palpebral reflexes. Lesions of the upper motor
For the reasons just described, facial sensation may be absent
neurons (UMNs) to the facial nucleus may cause abnormal
[analgesia) ipsilateral to lesions involving the trigeminal nerve
facial expression without loss of facial reflexes.3
and brainstem. In addition, corneal and palpebral reflexes may
be diminished because of interference with the sensory arcs
Clinical Signs
of these reflexes. The pinna of the dog [and probably other
Lesions of CN Vll result in ipsilateral facial paresis or paralysis.
 species) is innervated by the facial nerve (CN VI1) on the con-
The lip may droop on the affected side, and food or saliva may
cave surface and by branches of C2 on the convex surface, not
fall from that side of the mouth. In horses, the nasal philtrum
by the trigeminal nerve [Figure 9-1).L.2 Diminished conscious
may deviate to the normal side due to the unopposed muscle
response to facial stimulation can also be caused by lesions of
tone of the facial muscles on the unaffected side. Drooping
 the forebrain. In this case, response to a noxious stimulus is
of the ear may be observed in animals with erect ears (Figure
 decreased (hypalgesia) but usually not totally absent on the
9-5). Closure of the palpebral fissure when performing the
side of the face contralateral to the lesion. This is best appreci-
palpebral and corneal reflexes will be diminished to absent.
ated by noxious stimulation of the nasal mucosa such as with
In small animals, the palpebral fissure may be wider, whereas
stimulation of the nasal mucosa with a hemostat. Importantly.
in large animals ptosis may occur. Exposure keratitis is a com-
palpebral and corneal reflexes are normal with lesions involv-
mon sequela of facial nerve injury in dogs, especially in breeds
ing the forebrain (Figure 9-2). In addition to facial hypalgesia,
that tend to have ectropion or exophthalmic globes. In small
affected animals also demonstrate other signs compatible with
animals with chronic facial paralysis, the palpebral fissure may
forebrain lesions [see Chapter l2). Bilateral involvement of
become narrowed, the nose deviates toward the affected side,
motor nerves results in a “dropped jaw" (mouth open) that
and the ear on the affected side is drawn dorsally as a result
      
 of atrophy of the muscles of facial expression. However, given
jaw muscles are atonic and become atrophic if the paralysis
the normally small-sized muscles of facial expression, the atro-
persists for longer than 7 days. Unilateral motor lesions are
phy may not be evident on visual inspection.
difficult to detect until specific muscle atrophy develops ipsi-
Vestibular signs are commonly associated with facial pare-
laterally (Figure 9-3).
sis or paralysis because of the close anatomic relationship of
the facial and vestibular nerves at the brainstem and in their
Cranial Nerve Vll (Facial Nerve)
course through the petrosal bone. These two locations must
Anatomy
be differentiated because of the difference in prognosis and
The facial
l nerve innervates the muscles of facial expres-
therapy. Lesions at the brainstem result in central vestibular
sion. Its neurons are located in the facial nuclei of the ros-
disease, whereas lesions in the petrosal bone cause periph-
tral medulla [Figure 9-4). Within the medulla, fbers leave the
eral vestibular disease. See Chapter 8 for a discussion of these
facial nuclei and course dorsomedially and around the abdu-
disorders.
cent nucleus. The fibers leave the ventrolateral surface of the
DCB-C2
NO
FN
MaxN
MaxN
DCB-C3
ON
ManN/
VCB-C2
DCB-C2
VCB-C2
Figure 9-1 Areas of cutaneous innervation of the head that are supplied by one nerve [autono-
mous zones]. A, Lateral view. B, Dorsal view. DCB-C2, Dorsal cutaneous branch of the second
cervical nerve; VCB-C2, ventral cutaneous branch of the second cervical nerve; DCB-C3, dorsal
cutaneous branch of the third cervical nerve; FN, facial nerve; MaxN, maxillary nerve, CN V;
ManN, mandibular nerve, CN V; ON, ophthalmic nerve. [From Whalen LR, Kitchell RL: Electro-
physiologic studies of the cutaneous nerves of the head of the dog, Am J Vet Res 44:615, 1983.]
284
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Pull back of head
(conscious)
Stimulus
Sensory
 Stimulus
nucleus of V
To thalamus
Facialnerve
Twitch of
facial muscles
(reflex)
Stimulus
Figure 9-2 Reflex and conscious pain perception pathways of the trigeminal nerve [CNV]. (From
Greene CE, Oliver JE: Neurologic examination. In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary inter-
nal medicine, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.]
Cranial Nerve Vlll (Cochlear Nerve)
Anatomy
The vestibular branch of CN VIll is discussed in Chapter 8. The
tympanic membrane separates the external ear from the middle
ear. Sound waves striking the tympanic membrane vibrate the
membrane and attached auditory ossicles. The auditory ossicles
transmit vibrations from the tympanic membrane across the
middle ear to the oval window of the inner ear. The waveform is
transmitted to the perilymph in the inner ear, moving the basilar
membrane containing the hair cells of the spiral organ. Move-
ment of the hair cells causes release of transmitter, which acti-
vates the cochlear nerve. The bipolar cell bodies of the cochlear
nerve form the spiral ganglion in the petrosal bone. Axons
extend proximally to join the vestibular neurons in the internal
acoustic meatus. They enter the brainstem at the junction of the
 rostral medulla oblongata and pons, terminating on the cochlear
 nuclei. The central pathway is bilateral and multisynaptic. From
the cochlear nuclei, axons project to several brainstem nuclei, in
 particular, the caudal colliculi. Axons from the caudal colliculi
 project to LMN nuclei in the brainstem and cervical spinal cord
Hgure 9-3 Unilateral motor lesions are diffcult to detect until
completing refex arcs involved in auditory function. Addition-
specific muscle atrophy develops ipsilaterally. (Copyright 2010
ally, axons from the caudal colliculi project to the medial genic-
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
ulate nuclei of the thalamus. Conscious perception of sound
is served by the projection from the medial geniculate nuclei
ClinicalSigns
to the temporal lobes of the cerebral cortex [auditory cortex).
Deafness can be classified as either conductive or sensori-
Although the pathway has significant bilateral components, the
neural. Conductive deafness occurs due to lesions of the
 cortical projection is largely from the contralateral ear.4
external or middle ear cavities, whereas inner ear lesions
CHAPTER 9
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
285
Medulla
Nucleus of
Oblongata
CNVI
Lacrimal
Internal
Gland
Acoustic
Meatus
CNVIII
MajorPetrosal
Nerve
Nucleus of
Geniculate
CN VII
Ganglion 
Taste
Stapedius
Boni
Muscle
Chorda
Mandibular and Sublingual Salivary Glands
Tympani
Nerve
Stylomastoid
Foramen
Facial Muscles
Figure 9-4 The facial nerve originates in the medulla oblongata and enters the internal acoustic
meatus of the petrosal bone with vestibulocochlear nerve [CN VIIl). Branches include nerves to
the lacrimal glands, stapedius muscle, mandibular and sublingual salivary glands, and sensory fbers
for taste The major component exits the stylomastoid foramen and innervates the muscles of facial
Expression. Testing for function of the various branches can localize the site of the lesion in facial
paralysis.
lead to sensorineural deafness. Chronic otitis externa or oti-
tis media is the most common cause of conductive deafness.
In sensorineural deafness, receptor cells generally fail to
develop, develop and then subsequently degenerate, or are
damaged. Conductive deafness typically causes partial hear-
 ing loss and only rarely total loss. Lesions of the cochlear
nerve or the receptors cause complete deafness. Unilateral
deafness is difficult to recognize clinically without elec-
trophysiologic tests. Central lesions rarely cause clinically
detectable hearing loss. Tests for hearing are discussed in
Chapter 4.
Cranial Nerve IX (Glossopharyngeal Nerve).
Cranial Nerve X (Vagus Nerve).
and Cranial Nerve Xi (Accessory Nerve)
Anatomy
These cranial nerves are discussed as a group because their
nerve fibers originate from the same medullary nuclei and
because they interact to control pharyngeal and laryn-
 geal motor activity. They originate in the nucleus ambig-
uus in the medulla. The rostral two thirds of this nucleus
are involved in swallowing by means of motor impulses
through the glossopharyngeal and vagus nerves. The cau-
dal nucleus ambiguus controls the laryngeal and esopha-
geal muscles through the accessory and vagus nerves and
branches of the vagus nerves (recurrent laryngeal nerves).
These nerves enter the jugular foramen from within
the
Figure 9-5 A horse with left facial nerve paralysis. Note the
cranial cavity and emerge from the calvaria through the
drooped ear and deviation of the nose to the right.
tympano-occipital fissure.
286
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Clinical Signs
Dysphagia is the primary clinical sign of lesions involving
the rostral nucleus ambiguus or its nerves (glossopharyngeal,
vagus). The gag reflex is absent or depressed. Inspiratory dys-
 pnea from laryngeal paralysis is the primary clinical sign of
lesions involving the caudal nucleus ambiguus or its nerves
(vagus, recurrent laryngeal). Regurgitation may occur as a
 result of megaesophagus.
Cranial Nerve Xll (Hypoglossal Nerve)
Anatomy
This nerve originates from cell bodies in the medulla, exits the
medulla just caudal to the accessory nerve through the hypo-
glossal foramen of the calvaria, and innervates the intrinsic and
 extrinsic muscles of the tongue.
Clinical Signs
With bilateral lesions, paresis or paralysis of the tongue is
the main clinical sign. Affected animals have difficulty with
 the oral phase of swallowing [see later discussion). Affected
animals may also have difficulty with prehension of food or
 q sae ss nr
When protruded, the tongue will deviate toward the affected
side as a result of denervation atrophy and contracture of the
tongue muscles. Often the affected side of the tongue takes on
Figure 9-6 Dog with unilateral lesions. When protruded, the
a wrinkled appearance [Figure 9-6).
tongue will deviate toward the affected side as a result of dener-
vation atrophy and contracture of the tongue muscles. Note the
wrinkled appearance. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
DISEASES
Research Foundation, Inc.]
Bilateral Trigeminal Nerve Lesions
 Idiopathic trigeminal neuropathy that results in acute bilat-
Clinical Signs
eral paralysis of the masticatory muscles has been observed in
The onset of clinical signs is acute or subacute. The jaw hangs
dogs and cats.S.6 Although clinical signs often reflect mandibu-
open [drop jaw), and the mouth cannot be closed voluntarily.
lar nerve dysfunction, concurrent sensory deficits have been
The dog cannot grasp food and has diffculty drinking water.
noted in approximately 35% of affected dogs. 5 Extensive bilat-
Mild dysphagia may be present. Dehydration and drooling are
eral, nonsuppurative inflammation, demyelination, and some
associated signs. Facial hypalgesia or analgesia may be noted.6
axonal degeneration of all portions of the trigeminal nerve and
Corneal ulcerations also can occur. Horner's syndrome is seen
the ganglion, with no brainstem lesions, have been observed at
in some dogs. Affected dogs are alert and responsive and have
necropsy.4 Rarely, sensory deficits isolated to the areas of cuta-
no other detectable neurologic deficits. The clinical signs are
 neous innervation of all the branches of the trigeminal nerve
 suggestive of brainstem paralysis, which is observed with rabies.
without motor deficits have been observed.7 Axonal loss in all
 Until sufficient evidence has been found to exclude rabies, clini-
branches of the trigeminal nerve, in the brainstem in the spinal
 cians should be extremely careful when examining these dogs.
tract of the trigeminal nerve, and trigeminal ganglion was seen
 at necropsy. Panciera et al reported a case of polyradiculo-
Diagnosis
ganglioneuritis in a 9-year-old Airedale terrier with left-sided
A diagnosis of idiopathic trigeminal neuropathy is based on the
Horner's syndrome and left-sided atrophy of the masticatory
clinical signs, the absence of signs indicative of brainstem dis-
muscles. Extensive nonsuppurative inflammation was identi-
ease, and exclusion of other causes. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
fied in the preganglionic and postganglionic segments of the
analysis may reveal a mild to moderate elevation in protein
trigeminal nerve along with scattered degenerative neurons
with a mild lymphocytic and monocytic pleocytosis.6 EMG
in the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve. The lesions
abnormalities may be observed in the muscles of mastica-
were more severe on the left side. Horner's syndrome likely
tion. Bilateral enlargement of the trigeminal nerves has been
occurred due to the close anatomic relationship of the ocu-
observed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The affected
lar sympathetics with the inflamed left trigeminal nerve. In
    
addition, less intense inflammatory lesions were identified in
and had a mixed intensity on T-2 weighted (T2W) images and
spinal nerve roots and in sciatic and radial nerves, consistent 
demonstrated variable contrast enhancement.ll The disease
with polyradiculoneuritis and ganglionitis. The nature of the
should not be confused with masticatory myositis. In the latter
inflammatory response supports the notion that the lesions
disease, the mouth is closed, and the animal resents having its
were immune-mediated.
jaw moved or manipulated. Pain may be associated with muscle
Importantly, i
idiopathic trigeminal neuropathy must be
 palpation in animals in the acute phase of masticatory myositis.
differentiated from other causes of bilateral trigeminal dys-
function. Occasionally, hematopoietic neoplasms such as
Treatment
lymphoma and myelomonocytic leukemia can involve the tri-
No definitive treatment is available. Corticosteroids do not
 geminal nerves bilaterally 9 10 Signs may be limited to involve-
seem to hasten recovery. Affected animals should be given
ment of the trigeminal nerves or may involve other cranial
fluid therapy and enteral caloric support. Esophagotomy or
nerves. Occasionally, head trauma can result in bilateral tri-
 gastrotomy tubes may be beneficial.The clinician should exer-
 geminal paralysis without signs indicative of brainstem injury.
cise caution to prevent aspiration pneumonia, especially in
 suggesting trauma to the mandibular nerves.
dysphagic animals. Performing frequent physical therapy by
CHAPTER 9
Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
287
opening and closing the mouth helps to delay muscle atrophy.
commonly, lesions are found in the proximal trigeminal
Recovery is usually complete in 2 to 3 weeks. Multiple epi-
nerve extending into the adjacent brainstem or in the tri-
sodes may occur in the same dog. The prognosis is good.
geminal ganglion (Figure 9-8). Nerve sheath tumors and
meningiomas are the most common tumors causing this syn-
Unilateral Trigeminal Nerve Lesions
drome. Surgical resection of the neoplastic process has been
Neoplasia affecting the trigeminal nerve produces progres-
reported.l2 Most affected animals are treated palliatively
sive ipsilateral atrophy of the masticatory muscles.l? Ipsi-
with corticosteroids to reduce tumoral edema. Alternatively,
lateral alterations in facial sensation may also be present.
radiation therapy may be considered in affected animals.
Affected dogs tend to be older and are usually presented for
 Recently, Palmer reported a dog with ischemic infarction
examination because of profound unilateral atrophy of the
affecting the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and corti-
temporalis and masseter muscles. MRI is the best imaging
cospinal tracts. I4 The affected dog developed unilateral atro-
modality to identify lesions involving the trigeminal nerve
phy of the masticatory muscles and hemiparesis secondary to
or brainstemll.12 (Figure 9-7). However, caution should be
damage of the motor nucleus of the trigeminal nerve and cor-
ticospinal tracts, respectively.
because the normal trigeminal nerves and ganglia enhance
with contrast administration, whereas elsewhere contrast
Abnormal Facial Sensation
enhancement often suggests pathology 13 Computed tomog-
Hyperesthesia of the face is a common problem in humans but
raphy (CT) can also be used but is less sensitive. Most
is rarely observed in animals. Orofacial pain has been reported
 in cats, particular the Burmese cat.!5 Apparently self-inficted
excoriations were observed on the face. Nonsuppurative
meningoencephalitis that involved the trigeminal nerve and
ganglion was found on necropsy. Hypesthesia [reduced sensa-
tion) is seen with many causes of trigeminal nerve disorders.
Facial Paralysis
The most common disease that produces facial nerve injury is
otitis media/otitis interna (see Chapter 8). Polyneuropathies
also can affect the facial nerve [see Chapter 7].
IdiopathicFacial Paralysis
I'his idiopathic disease occurs in the absence of otitis media/
interna. The clinical signs are similar to those ofhuman facial
neuritis (Bells palsy), the cause of which often is not known.16
 In people, many cases are caused by viral inflammation, with
herpes zoster and herpes simplex viruses suspected. Swelling
of the nerve in the petrosal bone causes compression and isch-
emia, presumably leading to degenerative change.
In a study of 95 cases of facial paralysis in dogs and cats, the
condition was judged idiopathic because of lack of any other
Figure 9-7 A transverse plane T2W MRI of the brain of a dog
findings in 75% of dogs and 25% of cats. 17 Otitis media/interna
with a suspected nerve sheath tumor of cranial nerve V. The
was the most frequently associated disease in dogs. Hypothy-
affected nerve is enlarged and hyperintense (arrows). Note the
roidism was found in some.l8 In dogs, the cocker spaniel has
atrophy of the left temporalis muscle (arrow head). (Copyright
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
are also at greater risk of otitis media or interna than is the
A
B
Hgure 9-8 A, Ventral gross image of a West highland white terrier with a nerve sheath tumor
involving cranial nerve V. The lesion extends into and compresses the pons and medulla oblongata
 B, Transverse section of the brain from A. The massis compressing the medulla oblongata. (Copyright 
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
288
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
general canine population. Biopsy of facial nerves in two cases
 play a role.24 Hemifacial spasms have been reported in dogs
showed nerve fber degeneration and loss of large-diameter
with otitis media/interna and presumed facial neuritis and a
myelinated fibers.19
degenerative lesion of the medulla.25.26 Ipsilateral Horner's
Clinical Signs. Paralysis of the muscles of facial expres-
syndrome has been reported concurrently.25 This condition
 sion usually occurs acutely, is unilateral, and is not associated
may precede signs of facial paralysis. Hemifacial spasm has
with vestibular disease or otitis media/interna (Figure 9-9).
been reported as a consequence of intracranial disease in two
Affected animals are afebrile and have no systemic signs of
dogs.27 Presumptive neoplastic lesions were observed in the
illness. The course is variable; however, the clinical signs are
caudal cranial fossa in one dog and middle cranial fossa in
maximal in 7 days. Recovery takes 3 to 6 weeks. Exposure
the other dog. Although speculative, the lesion in the caudal
keratitis occurs commonly because of improper lubrication
cranial fossa was proposed to be exciting the facial motor
of the cornea. The contralateral nerve may become involved
nucleus directly. The lesion in the middle cranial fossa was
subsequently.19
thought to have resulted in an increased excitement from a
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is made by exclusion of other dis-
lack of UMN inhibition. Hemifacial spasm in this instance
eases that can affect the facial nerve. As otitis media or interna
occurred as a sign of UMN dysfunction. Lesions that iso-
are the most common problems, a thorough otoscopic examina-
late the facial nuclear motor neurons from UMN control can
tion and imaging of the bulla should be performed. MRI is the
 result in hemifacial spasm as a result of the loss of inhibi-
imaging modality of choice. Enhancement of the facial nerve
tory interneuronal activity. The palpebral refex may be
through its course in the temporal bone has been observed in
hyperactive in that spasm of the eyelids may be observed
idliopathic facial paralysis.20 In addition to exclusion of other
when the refex is elicited. This form of hemifacial spasm
diseases, the benefit of MRI is that the extent of enhancement
is associated with other signs of brainstem dysfunction. In
of the facial nerve within the temporal bone may be prognostic.
humans, CT and MRI play a role in the diagnosis.28 Treat-
Dogs with no enhancement recover more quickly than those
ment in humans consists of medical therapy and surgical
with enhancement of a single segment of the facial nerve. Dogs
microvascular decompression.29 Hemifacial spasm must be
with extensive enhancement may not recover. Additionally.
differentiated from contractures secondary to denervation.
hypothyroidism may be associated with facial paralysis; thyroid
Muscular contractures result from denervation atrophy and
function should be critically evaluated.2l Electromyography of
fibrosis, in which case the palpebral reflex should be absent.
the face and other muscles helps to exclude polyneuropathy.
The diagnosis and treatment are the same as described for
Treatment. No specific treatment is known.The prognosis
facial nerve paralysis.
for recovery, with or without therapy, is good. If tear produc-
tion is decreased, artificial tears should be prescribed.
Facial Nerve Trauma
Injury to one or more branches of the facial nerve can occur
Hemifacial Spasm (Constant Contraction
in all species. The most common causes are recumbency dur-
ofthe Muscles of Facial Expression)
ing anesthesia and tight halters in large animals.3.30 Closed
Hemifacial spasm is rarely observed in dogs or cats (Figure
injury to the facial nerve causes varying degrees of neura-
9-10). The condition represents tetany of the facial muscu-
praxia and axonotmesis (Figure 9-1l). Clinical signs caused by
lature. Signs include blepharospasm, 6
elevation of the ear,
neurapraxia usually improve in 2 weeks or less. Axonotmesis
deviation of the nose to the affected side, and wrinkling or
requires regrowth of the axon from the site of injury at an
 displacement of the upper lip. In humans, hemifacial spasm
 approximate rate of l mm per day.
occurs most commonly as a result of compression of the
facial nerve at its exit from the medulla by an ectopic or
Temporohyoid Osteoarthropathy
aberrant vessel in the caudal cranial fossa [posterior inferior
Temporohyoid osteoarthropathy is a condition in middle-
  s  2  r
aged horses in which there is a proliferative osteoarthropathy
to demyelination ultimately resulting in ectopic discharges
and ankylosis of the temporohyoid joint. Although both sides
within the facial nerve.23 Concurrent hypertension may also
are typically affected, clinical signs typically relate to unilat-
eral neurologic signs.31-33 The pathogenesis of the condtion
Figure 9-9 Facial paralysis in a boxer dog. Note the drooping
left upper and lower lip. The left eye has slight ectropion of the
Hgure 9-10 Hemifacial spasm in a dog. Note the deviation of
s e jo i i a 
the nose to the affected side, and displacement of the upper lip.
Foundation, Inc.]
(Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
CHAPTER 9 
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
289
TABLE 9-1
Hereditary Deafness in Animals and Associated
References
Breed
Reference
Canine
Akita
54
 American Staffordshire terrier
54
 Australian heeler
47
 Australian shepherd
47.49
Beagle
78
Border collie
49
Boston terrier
47
Boxer
47
 Bull terrier
49
Figure 9-11 Injury to one or more branches of the facial nerve
 Catahoula
54
can occur in all species. A traumatic facial paralysis on the left side
 Cocker spaniel
47
occurred during restraint. Neuropraxia was suspected because
Collie
46.51
recovery occurred 10 days later.
Dalmatian
48-52, 54, 68. 71-77.
83.84
remains unknown; however, both traumatic and infectious
 Dappled dachshund 
54
etiologies have been proposed.34,35 With behaviors such as
 Doberman pinscher
56.57
forced head jerking, falling, teeth floating, nasogastric intuba-
 Dogo Argentino
44. 54
tion, and vocalization, acute fractures of the petrous tempo-
 English bulldog
47
ral bone can occur, resulting in acute onset of vestibular and
English setter
47.53
facial nerve dysfunction.32.35 Presumptive diagnosis is made
Fox terrier
45
through a combination of typical signalment, history, and signs
Great Dane
46
of CN VlI and VIll dysfunction. Hearing may also be affected
Great Pyrenees
based on brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER) test-
43. 54
ing.36 Rarely CN IX and X also may be involved. The diagno-
 Jack Russell terrier
58
sis is established with endoscopic evaluation of the guttural
Maltese
54
pouch during which visualization of an enlarged proximal
 Miniature poodle
54
stylohyoid bone is detected 3235 Radiography may also be
 Mongrel 
54
used in the diagnosis. Cross-sectional imaging using CT has
 Norwegian dunkerhound
54.78
 Old English sheepdog
47
surgical therapies exist for the treatment of temporohyoid
 Papillon
54
osteoarthropathy. Medical therapy involves supportive care
 Pointer
41
and antinflammatories. Partial stylohyoid ostectomy can be
 Rhodesian ridgeback
54
performed in an attempt to prevent recurrence. In one study
 Rottweiler
42
of 33 affected horses, 70% returned to prior usage, which in
some cases required up to 2 years before maximal improve-
Scottish terrier
45
ment was achieved.32 Despite this, many horses continued to
 Sealyham terrier
45
have neurologic deficits.
 Shetland sheepdog
49
 Shropshire terrier
49
Deafness
Walker foxhound 
40
Most of the information on deafness in animals relates to cats
 West Highland white terrier
54
and dogs. Deafness can be acquired or congenital.
Numerous other breeds
78
 Feline
Acquired Deafness
White, blue eyes
Older animals often have some degree of hearing loss. Loss of
59-65,69, 85-88
Horse
cells in the spiral ganglion appears to be the primary cause.38
67
Llama, alpaca
Attempts have been made to fit dogs with hearing aids, but
66
 training dogs to wear them is diffcult.
Some polyneuropathies, especially that of hypothyroid-
Modified from Oliver JE: Deafness. In Lorenz MD, Cormelius LM,
ism, affect the cochlear nerve.l8 Severe hypoxia may also
editors: Small animal medical diagnosis, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, JB
cause damage to the cochlear nerve or receptors. Neoplasms
Lippincott.
and trauma may cause deafness in rare cases. Toxic agents
and drugs cause progressive cochlear damage (see Table 8-2).
Congenital Sensorineural Deafness
Common agents include aminoglycoside antibiotics, salicy-
Congenital sensorineural deafness occurs in the dog 40-58
lates, loop diuretics such as furosemide, and topicall applied
 antiseptics such as chlorhexidine and cetrimide.39 Severe mid-
tal sensorineural deafness typically is the result of a defect
dle ear infections may cause conduction problems, but tox-
in the end organ (hair cells of the organ of Cortij). Pathology
ins that reach the inner ear may produce receptor or nerve
solely affecting the hair cells has been observed in the Dober
degeneration.
man.57 Affected pups display concurrent signs of vestibular
290
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
dysfunction. An autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance is
breeds, and less commonly the Old English sheepdog and
suggested. Likewise, lesions restricted to the organ of Corti
American cocker spaniel.
and spiral ganglion have been observed in a deaf rottweiler
 In cats, a high prevalence of deafness is observed in white
 pup.42 More commonly, congenital sensorineural deafness
cats with blue irises.8586 In cats, the white gene (W) is auto-
occurs as a consequence of degeneration of the stria vascu-
somal dominant over color. Often, blue irises are present in
laris and secondary loss of neuroepithelial structures known as
white cats. Seventeen registered cat breeds carry the W gene.55
cochlea-saccular degeneration [Scheibe type). The stria vascu-
Like deaf Dalmatian dogs, deaf white cats are born with nor-
laris is the main vascular supply to the cochlea and is respon-
 mal cochlear anatomy with degeneration beginning on post-
sible for endolymph production needed for maintenance of
natal day 5 and rapidly progressing to complete degeneration
the health and function of the hair cells. Degeneration of the
of the organ of Corti by postnatal day 21. Whereas the typical
stria vascularis results in collapse of Reissner's membrane, and
pathologic changes in deaf cats are similar to those observed
ultimately degenerationofhair clls ofthe organofCorti50.68
in deaf Dalmatian dogs, a second type of pathology also has
Loss of neurons in the spiral ganglion also occurs.50.68 An asso-
  s   s   
 ciation with pigmentation, coat color, and iris color has been
Reissner's membrane, the supporting cells of the organ of
 made in affected small and large animals. This has been most
Corti, and the epithelial cells of the basilar membrane, which 
extensively studied in the Dalmatian dog and white cat.61.69
filled the scala media obscuring the stria vascularis and affect-
Normally, melanocytes are found in the stria vascularis.
ing the differentiation of the hair cells. The overall prevalence
Although their exact role is unknown, melanocytes are nec-
 of deafness in client-owned pure-bred cats is approximately
essary to maintain a normal electrical potential through K+
20%.65 The prevalence in experimental colonies of cats is much
ions in the endolymph, which is essential for the health of
the stria vascularis.70 An absence of melanocytes has been
It is unlikely that a pleiotropic effect (one gene with several
phenotypes) of one major gene is responsible for deafness in
is not associated with deafness. In albinism, melanocytes are
white cats with blue irises.88
ae aimrao ia uueiau aonprd on aeun anq nuasaid
Clinically, bilaterally deaf animals demonstrate a decreased
functional in the stria vascularis. In deaf Dalmatian pups, the
behavioral response to noise such as turning, looking, or moy-
inner ear structures are normal from birth up to l to 4 weeks 
ing their ears in relation to sounds. Affected animals are also
of age at which time the degeneration of the stria vascularis
more difficult to rouse from sleep. However, they are normal
Occurs50.68 In general, the earliest development of deafness
in all other regards. Unilaterally deaf animals are difficult to
Occurs at 4 weeks of age. However, in some dogs, deafness may
 detect. Consequently, determination of hearing should not
not develop until 16 weeks of age.48.51,68,71 Deafness may be
be made based on a behavioral response to noise. BAER test-
unilateral or bilateral. The prevalence of deafness in Dalma-
ing is a reliable and effective method of evaluation of hearing.
tians ranges from 16% to 29%, with 21% unilaterally and 7%
Importantly, the BAER can be used to determine unilateral
bilaterally affected.72-77
deafness. The presence of a normal BAER does not exclude
 In Dalmatian dogs, two genes play a role in coat color: the
deafness because a lesion may affect neuroanatomic struc-
S gene (S), which determines the distribution of pigmented
tures involved in hearing [i.e., medial geniculate nuclei and
and nonpigmented areas, and the merle gene (M). Both genes
temporal lobes of the cerebrum) that are not evaluated with
have been associated with deafness.78 Homozygosty for the
the BAER. However, given the site of pathology involved in 
 merle gene [MM) results in an almost white animal with an
 congenital sensorineural deafness, an absent BAER is diagnos-
association for deafness, blindness, and microophthalmia.79
tic for deafness in most dogs with congenital deafness. Thor-
The S gene has 4 alleles, S (nonspotted), s' (lrish spotting),
ough screening of breeding animals from breeds associated
s(piebald), and sw(extreme piebald). While several specific
 with congenital sensorineural deafness should be performed
genes have been investigated, the exact genetic locus or loci
to eliminate affected animals from breeding stocks. Dogs can
 involved in deafness has not been identifed.80-82 Congenital
be tested with BAER at about 5 to 6 weeks of age. The BAER
sensorineural deafness in Dalmatians has been associated with
is normally not present until 3 weeks of age. No treatment is
both the mm and S genes.76 The coat color of Dalmatians is
available for congenital sensorineural deafness.
determined by the expression of the extreme recessive allele
of the piebald gene (s", s") creating the white coat combined
Laryngeal Paralysis
with the a dominant fecking and ticking gene with alleles for
Unilateral and bilateral paresis or paralysis of the laryngeal
either black (B) or brown (b) spot or rarely lemon (ee) or tri-
muscles has been reported in dogs, cats, and horses. Unilat-
eral paralysis results in moderate inspiratory dyspnea and
in patches. Dogs with patches are more likely to have normal
 inspiratory noise. Bilateral paralysis leads to episodes of gag-
S  r a  s  
ging, cyanosis, severe inspiratory dyspnea, and colapse. The
am Te uoq are sdnd ueeea Kn sods jo au
ar a aq par are xu a jo s 
and later develop spots. Irue patches are present at birth. In
rent laryngeal nerve, which consists of branches of the vagus
Dalmatians, blue irises are a strong indication of expression
nerve. The neurons that give rise to the vagus are located in
of the extreme piebald allele (sw, su) of the S gene. Conse-
the caudal portion of the nucleus ambiguus. These neurons are.
quently, Dalmatians with blue irises have a greater prevalence
topographically oriented with those involved in adductors of
of deafness than those with brown irises.8384 In contrast, blue 
the larynx residing dorsally and those involved in abduction of
irises are not associated with deafness in dogs with merle coat
the larynx residing ventrally in the nucleus ambiguus.89 Injury
color.79 Although the exact mode of inheritance of congenital
to these nerve fibers or their cell bodies in the caudal nucleus
sensorineural deafness in Dalmatian dogs is unknown, deaf-
ambiguus results in the clinical signs.
         n n  s
The diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis is relatively straight-
 provides a major contribution to hearing.76.83
forward and is based on the observation of the larynx during
Other dog breeds associated with the piebald allele include
all phases of respiration. Normally, the vocal cords and aryte-
 bull terriers, English setters, and Dogo Argentinos. Dogs with
noid cartilage abducts during inspiration. The observation of
the merle pattern coat color include the collie, Australian
the vocal cords and arytenoids displaying inadequate abduc-
shepherd, Shetland sheepdog, border collie, catahoula leop-
ard dog, Cardigan Welsh corgi, dachshund, and Great Dane
is consistent with a diagnosis of laryngeal paresis or paralysis,
CHAPTER 9
Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
291
respectively. Paradoxical movement of the vocal cords can
inspiratory stridor was 5 months of age, whereas exercise
occur in animals with pronounced inspiratory effort giving the
intolerance was noted at 3 months of age in one dog. Concur-
false impression of motion. Consequently an assistant should
rent megaesophagus was present in one dog. None of the dogs
aid in evaluation by telling the examiner when the animal
had other signs of neuromuscular disease.
inhales and exhales. Observation of laryngeal function in dogs
Rottweilers. Three neurologic diseases—laryngeal paralysis-
and cats is performed by direct visualization per os. Alterna-
polyneuropathy complex (LPPC), neuronal vacuolation, and
ossaop u pauorad uaaq seu Adosurel reseusun Xran
neuroaxonal dystrophy have been associated with laryngeal
Transnasal laryngoscopy is commonly performed in horses,91,92
Utrasonographic evaluation oflaryngeal function has also been
were presented between 1l and 16 weeks of age.l09 The dogs 
were evaluated primarily for inspiratory stridor; however,
examination is performed under sedation or a light plane of
mild to moderate tetraparesis, delayed postural reactions,
anesthesia. The depth of anesthesia and choice of anesthetics
and reduced spinal reflexes also were observed. The onset of
are critical for proper evaluation. For dogs and cats, acceptable
clinical signs occurred between 9 and 13 weeks of age. Mega-
sedatives include acepromazine and butorphanol.95 Accept-
esophagus was observed in one dog with regurgitation. Most
able anesthetics include ketamine alone or in combination
of the affected pups also had lenticular cataracts. One pup
with diazepam, thiopental, or propofol.95 Doxapram, a cen-
had sensorineural deafness based on an absent potentials with
trally acting respiratory stimulant, may aid in the diagnosis of
BAER testing. Electrophysiology consistent with denerva-
  sis
tion potentials was identified in the appendicular muscula-
 and possibly increasing arytenoid cartilage movements.96.97
ture and intrinsic laryngeal musculature along with decreased
compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) with direct
Dogs
nerve stimulation studies. Histologic lesions were consistent
 Congenital and acquired forms oflaryngeal paralysis have been
with neurogenic atrophy of appendicular and intrinsic laryn-
 described in dogs. The acquired form of laryngeal paralysis
geal muscles secondary to axonal degeneration of peripheral
occurs as part of a generalized polyneuropathy or myopathy.98
nerves, including the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Abnormalities
Alternatively, laryngeal paralysis may occur in the absence of
were more severe distally consistent with a distal peripheral
 other neurologic clinical signs in which it is often referred to
neuropathy.
as idiopathic laryngeal paralysis. Congenital causes accounted
 Laryngeal paralysis has also been observed in conjunction
for 21% and 30% of the cases reported in two studies.9,.100
with neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebellar tract degen-
Congenital Laryngeal  Paralysis. Congenital laryngeal
eration in rottweiler dogs lo8 Affected dogs displayed subtle
paralysis most often occurs in conjunction with more diffuse
tetraparesis and general proprioceptive ataxia. Over several
signs of neuromuscular disease [see Chapter 7). Rarely, con-
weeks, progressive weakness and inspiratory stridor were
 genital laryngeal paralysis occurs in isolation.
observed. Histologically, vacuolation was observed in neurons
Bouvier des Flanders. Congential laryngeal paralysis
of the cerebral cortex and in nuclei of the thalamus, midbrain,
in Bouvier des Flandres dogs is inherited as an autosomal
cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord gray matter
dominant trait and results in unilateral or bilaterally laryn-
Additionally, axonal necrosis of the dorsolateral and ventro-
medial white matter of the spinal cord was observed. In the
the dogs ranged in age from 4 months to 7 years of age with
peripheral nervous system, neuronal vacuolation occurred in
most affected dogs being 4 to 8 months of age. The onset of
the spinal ganglia. Denervation atrophy was observed in the
clinical signs occurs between 4 months and 6 months of age.
intrinsic laryngeal muscles and axonal degeneration predomi-
Laryngeal examination revealed bilateral laryngeal paralysis in
nantly affecting the distal aspect ofthe large caliber, myelinated
msaopI u ssTered eaaurelAeraieun pue ssop 87
the affected side always being the left. Three dogs displayed
Muscles innervated by the cranial laryngeal nerves [crico-
slight motion of both arytenoids, whereas three dogs displayed
thyroideus and thyrohyoideus) were normal. Findings were
normal abduction. In the three dogs with normal abduction,
consistent with a dying-back neuropathy. Similar clinicopath-
abnormal adduction was identifed. Three dogs also had pel-
ologic findings were observed in a mixed-breed dog.li2 An
vic limb weakness consistent with neuromuscular disease.
analogous clinicopathologic syndrome has been observed in
Electromyography of the larynx was consistent with denerva-
two, 6-month old boxer puppies. 13 The dogs displayed pro-
sp ue u xue a jo dnoa asnu auo seae jo uon
s Aemre raddn eixene ue sisred qul alad aissr
both normal motor unit potentials and abnormal denervation
and visual deficits. Neurologic findings were consistent with a
 potentials were identifed. Electrophysiologic abnormalities
were present as early as 8 weeks of age. Histologic evaluation
also had ocular abnormalities including microphthalmia, cata-
of the many of the intrinsic laryngeal muscles including the
racts, and retinal dysplasia.
cricoarytenoideus muscle was consistent with denervation
Dalmatian  Dogs. Laryngeal paralysis 
polyneuropathy
atrophy. Evaluation of the recurrent laryngeal nerves revealed
 complex has been reported in Dalmatian dogs.l14 The condi-
wallerian degeneration. Degeneration of the neurons of the
tion was presumed to be an autosomal recessive trait. The age
 nucleus ambiguous also was observed. 103
of onset of clinical signs ranged from 2 months to 6 months
Siberian Husky and Siberian Husky-Alaskan Malamute
of age. One dog was 12 months old at the time of onset of
Crosses. Laryngeal paralysis has been observed in Siberian
clinical signs. Along with typical signs of laryngeal paralysis,
husky dogs and husky crosses.l104,l05 Affected pups were under
6 months of age with some pups demonstrating clinical signs at
treatment. Almost all affected dogs had concurrent neuro-
4 to 8 weeks of age. Bilateral and left-sided unilateral laryngeal
logic defcits consisting of megaesophagus and generalized
 paralysis was observed. Like the Bouvier, degeneration andloss
neuromuscular signs. The onset of other neurologic signs pre-
of neurons in the nucleus ambiguus were observed. Peripheral
ceded, occurred simultaneously, or after the development of
nerves, including the recurrent laryngeal nerves were normal.
laryngeal paralysis. Histologic evaluation revealed denervation
White German Shepherds. Four all-white German
atrophy of the laryngeal and appendicular muscles along with
shepherds with a presumed congenital form of laryngeal
axonal degeneration of recurrent laryngeal nerve and nerves
in
 of the and appendicular musculature. The distal appendicular
 age from 9 months to 2 years. The earliest age of onset of
292
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
preferentially affected. Prognosis was grave. Most affected
paralysis l35 Unlike dogs, idiopathic laryngeal paralysis affects
 dogs die from or are euthanized for aspiration pneumonia.
un u sieed eue eoi ei'se  jo s
cats [<2 years of age) is speculated to be congenital, although
2%2 and 6 months of age. Affected dogs also displayed general-
 re ss sr m  s  
ized weakness and regurgitation. Bilateral and left unilateral
threatening may be treated conservatively by restricted activ-
laryngeal paralysis were observed. Electrophysiology disclosed
ity and remaining indoors.l29 Surgery should be considered in
reduced CMAP with mild reduction in nerve conduction
bilaterally affected cats or those with severe respiratory com-
velocity consistent with an axonopathy. An autosomal pattern
of inheritance was suspected.
Complications include aspiration pneumonia, laryngeal swell-
Acquired Laryngeal Paralysis. Laryngeal paralysis has
aeg yim zi sie gi jo Anis e u any auedu pue su
been associated with chronic polyneuropathy (see Chapter 7),
disease were treated. Of these 12 cats, 5 were treated medi-
-aro pue peat asns yau un aarau snea a o Anu
cally because of concurrent dysphagia, megaesophagus, or
laryngeal cancer. Of the 7 cats treated surgically, 2 died within
Middle-aged to older large and giant-breed dogs, specif-
3 days after surgery, 4 had long-term successful outcomes, and
cally the Labrador retriever, are most commonly affected.
 1 was lost to follow-up,.1 29
Males may be predisposed. In one study, 25% of all dogs
undergoing general anesthesia had some degree of laryngeal
Horses
There are a variety of causes of laryngeal paralysis in the horse.
only 5% of dogs had clinical signs of respiratory obstruction
An underlying cause of laryngeal paralysis is found in only
related to laryngeal paralysis.li8 In addition to respiratory
a small proportion of affected horses. 137.138 Isolated lesions 
signs related to laryngeal paralysis, affected dogs often cough
involving structures associated along the course of the vagus
or gag when eating. Exercise intolerance is common. Impor-
and recurrent laryngeal nerve include guttural pouch disor-
tantly, affected dogs should be carefully evaluated for other
ders, pharyngeal and laryngeal disease, perineural injections of
neurologic deficits. Acquired laryngeal paralysis may be the
irritant drugs and trauma to the neck. As in dogs, laryngeal
most prominent or sole clinical manifestation of an under-
suapun ue jo uoneisajue e aq Aeu ssrou u sissreed
 pea zllsa rprosip rensnau pazerauss au
1on
polyneuropathy or myopathy. In such instances, laryngeal
 neurologic deficits and electrophysiology, concurrent neuro-
paralysis is often observed in conjunction with other signs of
muscular signs are likely related to a distal axonopathy, which
may be progressive. 98 Hypothyroidism may cause polyneu-
geal paralysis can occur secondary to hyperkalemic peri-
noum so aisisaered resaure uansu ymueda
odic paresis. 139, 140 Laryngeal paralysis also may occur as the
an identifiable underlying neuromuscular disease are classi-
result of lead or delayed organophosphate intoxication.137,4l
 fied as idiopathic laryngeal paralysis.
Bilateral laryngeal paralysis may occur with hepatic encepha-
Severely affected dogs are treated by surgical correction
lopathy [HE) in the horse. 142 In such cases, laryngeal paralysis
aimed at enlarging the rim glottis without altering the abil-
ity to close the glottis during swallowing. There are a variety
geal paralysis also has been observed. 143,14
of surgical techniques.l00, 19-125 In general, unilateral aryte-
 In most affected horses, an underlying cause is not identi-
fied, which is referred to as recurrent laryngeal neuropathy
noid lateralization or partial laryngotomy. Postoperatively.
[RLN). Young, mature thoroughbred, hunter types, and draft
most dogs experience improvement or resolution of clinical
to affect horses with a tall and long neck phenotype. Although
complication associated with surgical correction of laryngeal
 observed in foals suggest a hereditary basis.l46
 Pathologic changes are found primarily in the distal portion
 complications with surgical correction and suffer a higher
ofleft recurrent laryngeal nerve but also can be observed in the
mortality rate. I20 Likewise, dogs having had bilateral arytenoid
right recurrent laryngeal nerve.l47 Axonal degeneration with
lateralization had a greater incidence of complications and
demyelination and regeneration are noted pathologically in
mortality than dogs having undergone unilateral arytenoid lat-
the let and, to a lesser degree, in the right recurrent laryngeal
nerves. The recurrent laryngeal nerves appear to be the only
 gas  sq  
nerves affected.l47 However, nerves of the limbs and axons of
may have a lifelong risk for respiratory complications.
the long fiber tracts of the central nervous system (CNS) may
be involved in some animals.148,149 The disease has been char-
Cats
acterized as a distal axonopathy that preferentially affects the
longest and largest fbers. Alternatively, RLN may be a dying-
dogs and horses. Laryngeal paralysis in cats does not have a
back neuropathy beginning distally and progressing to involve
sex or breed predilection. Reported causes oflaryngeal paraly-
the proximal aspect of the nerve.l47 The cause of RLN remains
sis include iatrogenic trauma to the vagus or recurrent laryn-
unknown. However, a neuronal metabolic dysfunction would
geal nerves related to thyroidectomy, surgical correction of
 presumably place distal axons of longer nerves at greater risk
 patent ductus arteriosus and perineural injection of irritating
and also explain the fact that larger horses are predisposed.
chemicals, along with neuromuscular disease, neoplasia, and
Clinical signs relate to upper airway dysfunction. Because
ro apeau Aeu soun zel-az'sisAfered feasuAreT srmedop!
of paralysis of the muscles innervated by the left recurrent
compress the vagus or recurrent laryngeal nerve anywhere
laryngeal nerve, the vocal fold cannot be abducted during
along its course. Laryngeal paralysis has been associated with
inspiration and an audible sound ("roaring") is produced. In
tumors involving the osseous bulla, which may compress the
addition to abnormal respiratory noise, affected horses dem-
vagus nerve exiting the tympano-occipital fissure.l33 In one
 onstrate poor performance and exercise intolerance.
cat, lymphoma was found infltrating the cervical portion
The diagnosis is made by observing abnormal laryngeal
function with transnasal endoscopy. Affected horses are
 cell carcinoma had affected the vagus resulting in laryngeal
graded based on the severity oflaryngeal dysfunction observed
CHAPTER 9
Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
293
endoscopically. There are several different grading schemes
cranial esophagus [oropharyngeal dysphagia), (2) passage of
used in the evaluation of RLN,9l,92, 150 In horses with suspected
the bolus from the cranial esophagus to the gastroesopha-
- u  oa r sr m  
geal junction, (3) disturbances in passage of the bolus from
speed treadmill laryngeal endoscopy may be a more sensitive
the esophagus into the stomach, and (4) mixed swallowing
method of establishing a diagnosis.ist Additionally, unilat-
problems.159
eral atrophy of the muscles of the larynx may be palpable.152
Although some clinical signs are indicative of disorders
Although technically challenging, electrophysiologic testing.
 involving a specifc phase of swallowing, most clinical signs
including EMG and measurement of recurrent laryngeal nerve
are nonspecific. Dogs with oral-stage deficits commonly have
 a  a ss i s a  
a reduced ability to hold food in the mouth or transport
raco-laryngeal refex (TLR), or "slap test," has been used in the
food to the base of the tongue, whereas dogs with pharyn-
diagnosis of RLN. Slapping the horse just caudal to the with-
 geal and cricopharyngeal dysfunction more commonly have
ers should elicit adduction of the contralateral arytenoid carti-
a cough, have aspiration pneumonia, and make repeated
lage It has been used in conjunction with laryngeal endoscopy
unsuccessful attempts to swallow. Other clinical signs include
 and electrophysiology but given a lack of sensitivity, this test
 gagging, diffculty in drinking water or forming a solid bolus,
excessive mandibular or head motion, persistent forceful
usually is efective.3.154,155 In Thoroughbred racing horses,
ineffective swallowing efforts, foaming from the mouth, sali-
performance following surgery improves but not necessarily to
vation, nasal regurgitation, dropping food from the mouth,
predisease status in older animals. 156
coughing, failure to thrive, aspiration pneumonia, and reluc-
tance to eat.159
Dysphagia
 Dysphagia is a common problem in large animals and fre-
The process of swallowing is a complex function that requires
quently results from nonneurologic disorders, such as phar-
normal anatomy and neurologic f
function. Abnormalities
yngitis, objects obstructing the esophagus ["choke"), and
involving anatomy or neurologic function result in swallowing
 disorders referred to as dysphagia. Knowledge of the anatomy
in dysphagia in dogs and cats Importantly, the structural cause
involved in swallowing is important to understanding the
of dysphagia should be eliminated before evaluation of neuro-
clinical signs associated with dysphagia and interpretation of
logic (functional) disorders In general, defnitive identifcation
diagnostic tests. Relevant anatomy includes the mouth or oral
of the affected phase of swallowing in animals with dysphagia
cavity, tongue, pharynx, and esophagus. The oral cavity and
 pharynx serve respiratory and digestive functions. The phar-
tion of the timing and duration of the various phases of swal-
ynx is composed of three areas, the oropharynx [area between
lowing have been described in the dog.162
the soft palate and base of the tongue), the nasopharynx [area
 Neurologic causes of dysphagia include polyneuropathies 
between the soft palate and the ventral aspect of the calvaria
[see Chapter 7], botulism [see Chapter 7]), rabies [see Chapter
extending from the choanae [rostral] to the end of the soft 
15), and other infectious diseases such as listeriosis and pro-
palate [caudal]], and the laryngopharynx [area of the phar-
tozoal encephalitis (see Chapter 15). The following disorders
ynx dorsal to the larynx, which leads to the esophagus). The
are categorized according to which phase of swallowing they
intrapharyngeal opening exists between the oropharynx and
affect.
nasopharynx rostrally and the laryngopharynx caudally. At the
Caudal end of the laryngopharynx is the cricopharyngeus mus-
Oropharyngeal Phases
cle, which serves as the upper esophageal sphincter [UES).
 Disorders involving the oral and pharyngeal phases of swal-
Normal swallowing has been divided into three different
lowing are often the result of disorders involving one or more
phases: oropharyngeal, esophageal, and gastroesophageal.157
cranial nerves. Myasthenia gravis also may selectively affect
The oropharyngeal phase can be further subdivided into
the pharyngeal muscles and the esophagus.163
 oral (prehension and formation of a food bolus), pharyngeal
Guttural Pouch Disease. Infections of the guttural pouch,
(movement of the food bolus to the laryngopharynx), and
usually by Aspergillus spp. or Streptococcus equi, may cause dys-
pharyngoesophageal (movement of the food bolus into the
phagia, epistaxis, nasal discharge, and pain. Horner's syndrome
 proximal esophagus) phases. During the oral phase, food is
and laryngeal and facial paresis may be present. The infection
masticated, formed into a bolus by the tongue compress-
tends to localize in the dorsal wall of the guttural pouch close
ing food against the palate, and moved to the base of the
to the course of the glossopharyngeal nerve, the pharyngeal
tongue. During the pharyngeal phase, peristaltic waves move
branch of the vagus nerve, and the internal carotid artery and
the food to the laryngopharynx, where during the final phase,
closely associated sympathetic nerves.3.4
pharyngoesophageal, the UES relaxes and the food bolus
 Diagnosis is made by endoscopy, radiography, and culture
is moved into the cranial esophagus. These last two phases
of material from the pouch. Treatment with topical antifungal
 proceed with rapid and well-coordinated timing. Within the
agents has not been successful. Surgical removal or cauter-
esophagus, primary and secondary peristaltic waves move the
ization of lesions may be effective. Occlusion of the internal
bolus of food to the lower esophageal sphincter [LES), which
carotid artery may lessen or prevent epistaxis. Mycotic infec-
relaxes allowing the bolus to enter the stomach. Neurologi-
tions have a poorer prognosis than do bacterial infections.3.4
cally, swallowing requires normal function of CNs V, Vll, IX,
Ngropallidal Encephalomalacia. Nigropallidal encepha-
X, Xl, and Xll. The oral phase of swallowing requires the
lomalacia is characterized by acute dysfunction of muscles
normal function of CNs V, VIl, and Xll for prehension, mas-
innervated by the motor fibers of CNs V, VIl, and XIl. It was
tication, and formation of a food bolus. The pharyngeal and
frst described in horses from northern California and south-
pharyngoesophageal phases require normal function of CNs
ern Oregon that grazed on pastures containing large quanti-
IX, X, and Xl. Normal function of the esophagus requires
ties of yellow star thistle (Centaurea solstitialis).l64 Because of
CN X function. Coordinated function of these motor nuclei
the typical clinical signs and the association with yellow star
is under control of the swallowing center located in the
thistle, the disease also is called chewing disease and yellow
medulla between the facial and olivary nuclei l58 Abnormali-
ties in any one phase of swallowing can result in dysphagia.
in horses from Colorado and Utah that grazed on pastures
Consequently, swallowing disorders are classified as problems
containing abundant Russian knapweed (Centaurea repens), a
of (l) bolus formation and passage from the mouth to the
plant related to yellw star thistle.165,166The disease occurs in
294
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
the western United States and in Australia, where the offend-
with the thyropharyngeus muscles forms the UES. Coordinated
ing plants are endemic.
relaxation of this sphincter occurs during the pharyngoesopha-
Bilateral symmetric necrosis develops in the brainstem in
geal phase. Disorders involving the cricopharyngeal muscles,
the region of the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra, both
such as cricopharyngeal dysfunction (CD), include the inabil-
components of the extrapyramidal system. Interestingly, the
disease affects dopaminergic neurons. The toxic principle has
cricopharyngeus muscle as the bolus of food moves caudally
not been definitively identified. However, several substances
 have been isolated from these plants. Glutathione deficiency
Often a combination of abnormalities is present in CD. Clinical
signs consist ofrepeated attempts to swallow, gagging, coughing.
sive excitatory neurotransmitters, such as aspartate and gluta-
and nasopharyngeal reflux, excessive salivation, and regurgita-
mate; and high levels of tyramine, a biologically active amine,
tion, and weight loss. 175 Positive contrast-enhanced videofluo-
may play a role in toxicity 167-169
roscopic evaluation of swallowing liquids and solid food is used
Clinical Signs. Although affected horses range in age from
4 months to 10 years, younger horses are most commonly
time ±SD between closure of the epiglottis and opening of the
 affected.l166 Foals that are nursed by clinically normal mares
UES is 0.09 ± 0.02 second in normal dogs.152 The observation
have been affected and conversely, foals of affected mares
of a delay and/or a complete or partial obstruction in the UES
have remained normal. l66Affected horses are acutely unable
is consistent with CD.
to grasp food or drink water. The mouth is held partially open,
 Cricopharyngeal dysfunction can be acquired or congenital.
the lips are retracted, and rhythmic tongue movements and
Acquired CD oftenoccursin conjunction with other neuromus-
purposeless chewing motions are apparent. 66 Lip and tongue
cular disorders including myasthenia gravis, laryngeal paralysis,
movements are similar to "pill-rolling" movements ofhumans
masticatory myositis, and endocrine-associated neuromuscular
with Parkinson disease. Affected horses are drowsy and have
a fixed facial expression. The facial muscles are hypertonic.
been observed in the cocker spaniel, springer spaniel, minia-
Facial muscle flaccidity and gait impairment do not develop.
ture poodles, and golden retriever dogs.175.176,178 In the golden
Food or water placed in the caudal pharynx can be swallowed.
retriever, CD appears to be a genetic trait although the exact
mode of inheritance is unknown.178
Vll, and Xll. Some horses may improve, but complete recov-
Treatment involves cricopharyngeal myotomy or myec-
ery has not been reported. Most horses die of starvation or
tomy, alone or in combination with thyropharyngeal myot-
aspiration pneumonia.
Diagnosis. The diagnosis is based on history and clinical
signs. The facial hypertonicity and the lack of ataxia or pare-
bate other disorders, especially those involving the pharyngeal
sis differentiate nigropallidal encephalomalacia from other
 phase of swallowing. Successful outcome occurs in younger
diseases. MRI of the brain has been performed in an affected
dogs with congenital CD. Surgery is less successful in older
horse.170 Lesions in the area of the globus pallidus and sub-
dogs and dogs with associated disease processes due to recur-
stantia nigra were observed. On TlW images, a hyperintense
 rence of clinical signs and/or aspiration pneumonia. 176
ring circumscribed the lesions. On T2W images, the lesions
Esophageal Phase. Megaesophagus Esophageal dysfunc-
were hyperintense. Contrast enhancement was not observed.
tion, with or without megaesophagus (ME), results in an
Treatment. No specific treatment is known and the prog-
 inability to transport food from the pharynx to the stomach.
ME involves the loss of esophageal motor function and is char-
prolongs life, allowing time for clinical improvement. Horses
acterized by ineffective esophageal peristalsis and esophageal
should not be allowed to graze on pastures where the offend-
aren pue se u puanayui saop u uus si aoi une
 ing plants are abundant.
Glossopharyngeal Neuralgia. In humans, glossopharyn-
esophagus. The diagnosis is made radiographically [Figure
geal neuralgia is a rare condition of paroxysms of pain in the
9-12). Unless a specific underlying cause is documented, treat-
distribution of the glossopharyngeal nerve.17l On occasion, it
ment of esophageal dysfunction entails feeding the animal
 is associated with cardiac syncope.172 When associated with
with the head elevated. Aspiration pneumonia is a common
autonomic dysfunction such as bradycardia and syncope, the
complication. The prognosis for functional recovery is poor in
eu os se  pr ss
many cases.
A brainstem tumor causing a sensory and autonomic syn-
The causes of esophageal dysfunction may be primary
drome associated with the glossopharyngeal nerve has been
[congenital, idiopathic) or secondary (acquired). Second-
reported.173 A 7-year-old male miniature poodle initially
ary (acquired) esophageal dysfunction is common in gener-
evaluated for cervical spinal pain later progressed to episodes
of syncope and seizures associated with pharyngeal stimula-
gravis, hypothyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism, and intoxi-
tion via palpation and eating. Dysphagia was observed with
 o i (  as   s  s
eating, but not with drinking. Severe bradycardia, cyanosis,
occur in dogs treated with potassium bromide. Withdrawal of
weak pulse pressure, and miotic pupils were observed during
the drug results in resolution of ME. ME may occur alone,
episodes. No EMG or CSF abnormalities were present. Serum
without generalized weakness, in dogs with myasthenia gra-
catecholamine metabolites were low, suggestive of decreased
vis.163 An increased prevalence of acquired ME is reported
sympathetic tone. CT demonstrated a mass in the caudal
 in German shepherd dogs, golden retrievers, Great Danes,
brainstem. Necropsy was not performed. The syndrome
and Irish setters.l8l-183 The diagnosis of acquired ME neces-
was apparently caused by stimulation of the afferents in the
sitates identification of an underlying disorder. In myasthenia
 glossopharyngeal nerves. The afferent stimulation results in
gravis, the diagnosis is made by identifying serum antibodies
activation the carotid sinus reflex via vagal efferents lead-
to acetylcholine receptors. Other causes require document-
 ing to bradycardia, inhibition of vasomotor centers leading
ing an underlying endocrine disorder or toxicity. EMG of the
to peripheral vasodilation and hypotension, and inhibition of
esophageal muscles can be done by passing a stomach tube to
sympathetic output.
define the cervical esophageal wall. The examination should
Cricopharyngeal Dysfunction. An uncommon cause (
of
include representative muscles of the limbs and face to rule
dysphagia involves the cricopharyngeus muscle, which together
out generalized neuropathies and myopathies. The prognosis
CHAPTER 9
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
295
sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia, spinal ganglia,
 and the ventral and intermediate gray matter of the spinal
cord, and numerous brainstem nuclei [CNs III, V, VI, VII, X,
X11).195
Regardless of species, the presumptive diagnosis is based
on history, signalment, and clinical signs. Additionally, phar-
macologic testing of the autonomic nervous system may aid
in establishing a presumptive diagnosis. Ocular pharmacology
typically employs direct-acting and indirect-acting parasym-
pathomimetic drugs. Topical ocular application of a dilute
concentration (O.1%) pilocarpine results in miosis in affected
animals while it causes no changes in pupil size in normal ani-
mals supporting denervation hypersensitivity in dysautonomia.
Similarly, topical ocular administration of physostigmine [an
 indirect-acting parasympathomimetic) results in no change in
pupil size in affected animals and miosis in normal animals
suggesting a lack of postganglionic parasympathetic innerva-
Figure 9-12 Radiographic diagnosis of esophageal dysfunction.
tions in dysautonomia. Similarly, failure of the heart rate to
Arrow highlights dorsal and ventral walls of the esophagus. [Copy-
increase after intravenous injection of atropine (O.02 mg/kg
right 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
in dogs and cats) supports a lack of parasympathetic nervous
innervations to the heart. The heart rate may not increase in
affected animals due to a lack of sympathetic innervations
for acquired ME is guarded and depends on the ability to treat
to the heart. Cardiovascular testing employing direct-acting
the underlying disease.
 Primary [idiopathic) ME occurs frequently in young dogs
 and consequently has been referred to as congenital idiopathic
Schirmer tear testing may disclose a lack of tear production
ME. In cats, idiopathic ME accounts for approximately 20%
implicating loss of parasympathetic innervation to the lacrimal
 of cases.l84 The diagnosis is made by excluding other causes.
glands. Intradermal (ID) injection of histamine in normal ani-
mals results in a skin wheal. Development of a wheal requires
sympathetic innervations to the skin. A lack of wheal forma-
in litters of Newfoundlands, Shar-Peis, and Siamese cats.186-188
 tion after ID histamine injection supports a loss of sympathetic
ME is reported as an inherited disease in miniature schnauzers
tone. Other less commonly employed tests include identifica-
and wire fox terriers. 189, 190 In congenital idiopathic ME, vagal
tion of orthostatic hypotension and measurement of serum
motor nerve function and esophageal motor performance
or urinary catecholamines or their metabolites. Ultimately
 aq o sredde seasp an peasu 1o'teutru q on readde
definitive diagnosis requires histopathologic identification of
consequence of abnormal afferent innervation of the esopha-
gus.192.193 Whereas most affected animals remain affected
 neurons and specifc cranial nerve nuclei and spinal cord gray
lifelong, in some young terriers, improved esophageal motility
matter.
 occurs with age. l85 Likewise, spontaneous resolution of ME
 can occurs suggesting a delay in the development of afferent
Horses (Grass Sickness)
innervation of the esophagus.
Grass sickness is a severe debilitating and almost always
fatal condition in horses. The disease primarily is reported in
Gastroesophageal Phase
Scotland, although cases have also been reported in England,
Esophageal achalasia has been documented in a 5-year-old,
Wales, and the European mainland.196 A clinical and patho-
 logically identical disease has been reported in South Amer-
initial thoracic radiographs were normal, over time esophageal
ica and is referred to as mal seco.197,158 Clinical signs largely
dilation occurred. On fluoroscopic examination of swallowing.
reflect dysfunction of the gastrointestinal tract. Bladder paral-
 the lower esophageal sphincter failed to open. The dog under-
ysis may also occur. Grass sickness is characterized by three
went a distal esophagomyotomy, which resolved the clinical
clinical forms: acute, subacute, and chronic. The acute form is
signs.
characterized by an acute onset [<48 hours) of lethargy, colic
due to severely decreased gut motility resulting in small intes-
Hypoglossal Paralysis
tinal distention and gastric reflux. Affected horses also have
Paralysis of the tongue usually results from neoplastic and
difficulty swallowing, ptosis, muscle tremors, patchy sweat-
inflammatory diseases affecting the medulla. Hypoglos-
ing, and tachycardia. The subacute form [<7 days) presents
sal paralysis is a common sign in rabies. The tongue may be
as a milder condition in addition to colonic impactions and
affected in generalized neuropathies (see Chapter 7). Specific
a "tucked up" stance. The chronic form presents as chronic
 inflammatory disease of the hypoglossal nerve has not been
      s  rs
reported. Bilateral sectioning of the hypoglossal nerves causes
sicca.199
 oral dysphagia [see preceding discussion). 159
Although numerous causes have been speculated includ-
ing insects, fungi, viruses, toxic plants, and bacterial toxins,
Dysautonomia
the definitive cause remains unknown.196 The current most
Dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system has been
plausible explanation is a toxico-infectious etiology resulting
termed dysautonomia. The syndrome has been primarily
reported in the horse, cat, and dog, and rarely in llamas. Clini-
tion with C botulimum leads to production of the neurotoxin,
cal and pathologic similarities exist in all affected species;
[BoNT/C) in affected horses. Supportive evidence is provided
however, there are several clinical signs that differ between
by the fact that C botulimum neurotoxin can be isolated from
 species. Pathologically, the disease is characterized by neuro-
75% of acute and 67% of subacute and chronic cases whereas
so  sau g (ss  
isolation of the neurotoxin is found in only 10% of normal
296
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
    n    
history, clinical signs, and pharmacologic testing of the auto-
IgG antibodies levels to BoNT/C and the surface antigens of
nomic system. Treatment is supportive. Affected cats require
ad urq on reus Aerdpouud  adia uaou 
 intensive care including nutritional support and drug therapy
to improve gastrointestinal and urinary function. The progno-
are in conjunction with certain epidemiologic data. Horses at
sis is guarded for severely affected cats. Prognosis may be bet-
risk tend to be young and/or have had a recent move to a
ter in cats with higher heart rates.212 Approximately 25% to
new location.1 96 Similarly, there is an increased risk if previous
50% of cats may survive with intensive care. Recovery takes
cases, in particular recent cases, have occurred on the farm.
weeks but may require up to a year for complete resolution
Conversely, there is a decreased risk for horses having been
of signs.
exposed to an affected horse, which suggests that low-grade
chronic exposure to the potential cause of the disease may
Dogs
be protective. Additionally, cases tend to occur during spring
As occurs in the horse and cat, dysautonomia in the dog
and summer months. Density of horses, cutting of grasses, soil
 affects animals in a specific geographic region. Most affected
type, and concurrent grazing animals such as cattle may also
 dogs in the United states are primarily from eastern Kansas
and western and southern Missouri 23214 Affected dogs tend
play a role.202
Presumptive diagnosis is made through a combination of
to be younger than 2 years old. Large-breed dogs, includ-
signalment, history, and physical examination findings. Defini-
ing Labrador retrievers, German shorthaired pointers, and
tive diagnosis requires histopathologic identification of neuro-
German shepherds, are among the most common breeds
nal chromatolysis of submucosal and myenteric nerve plexus
affected.213-2is Several risk factors have been identifed.213
[antemortem) or peripheral autonomic ganglia and brainstem
Affected dogs tend to live in more rural environments, spend
nuclei (postmortem). Antemortem diagnosis can be obtained
a greater time outdoors, and have a greater opportunity to
roam unattended than unaffected dogs. Although cases are
general anesthesia and laparotomy, this procedure is associ-
ated with significant risks.203 Treatment is largely supportive.
and April with fewer cases occurring in the summer and early
With intensive supportive and nursing care, some chronically
fall. Clinical signs tend to occur acutely. Vomiting, diarrhea,
affected horses can recover.204
and anorexia are the most common clinical signs. Decreased
anal tone appears to be a common nonautonomic sign in
Cats
dogs. Additional clinical signs reflected autonomic dysfunc-
Dysautonomia in cats, referred to as Key-Gaskell syndrome,
tion affcting the urinary, gastrointestinal, and ocular systems.
was first reported in 1982 in England, where the disease in
Affected dogs may have altered systolic cardiac function based
large part has been confined.2o5 With the exception of Nor-
suais se u euounesp on eus gizudeaopreoua u
way and Sweden, individual reports or small numbers of
in dogs include oculonasal discharge, xanthostoma, decreased
cases have been reported in other European countries, New
tear production, regurgitation, anorexia, weight loss, constipa-
Zealand, and the United States.206,207 Many of the cases in
tion, tenesmus, dysphagia, dysphonia, dysuria, urinary reten-
the United States occurred in cats that had been recently
tion, and mydriasis (Figure 9-13). Radiographic studies often
imported from the United Kingdom.208 Since the late 1980s,
reveal aspiration pneumonia, ME, or a distended stomach,
subsequent reports have declined. Younger cats tend to be
small bowel, or urinary bladder217 Presumptive diagnosis is
affected. In multicat households, both single and multiple cats
based on history, signalment, clinical signs, and pharmacologic
may be affected. The underlying etiology remains unknown.
testing of the autonomic nervous system. Definitive diagno-
However, increased levels of fecal IgA antibodies directed
sis requires histopathologic evaluation. Treatment involves
against C. botulimum C/D neurotoxin, BoNT/C toxoid and IgA
intensive supportive care. Pharmacologic therapy is aimed
directed against surface antigens of C botulinum C/D were
noted in affected cats compared with control cats, suggesting
a similar toxico-infectious etiology involving C. botulimum as
mia, affected cats display signs related to gastrointestinal dys-
function.206,210 Most cats develop clinical signs acutely over a
48-hour period, but other cats become progressively affected
over 7 days. The disease affects indoor and outdoor cats. Signs
 include anorexia, constipation, ME, and consequent regurgi-
tation and weight loss. Affected cats appear dull and lethar-
 gic. Other common clinical signs include dry external nares
and oral cavity, reduced tear production, dllated pupils with
reduced pupillary reflex, and elevated nictitating membranes.
Urinary and fecal incontinence associated with reduced to
absent perineal reflex may be observed. Unlike horses, affected
cats are often bradycardic [<l20 beats/min] and in a few cases
syncope may occur2l0 In a few cases, mild postural reaction
deficits were noted in the pelvic limbs. To aid in assessing
affected cats, a grading system based on clinical signs has been
proposed in which signs are divided into those uncommon or
seen only with dysautonomia and those that occur with other
conditions.2ll Scoring provides for inconclusive, probably,
and positive presumptive diagnosis. Complete blood count,
biochemical profle, and urinalysis largely reflect secondary
Figure 9-13 Dysautonomia in a dog. There is dry crusting of the
dehydration and hypovolemia. Radiographs may disclose ME,
nose as a consequence of xanthostoma and decreased tear pro-
a distended gastrointestinal tract, and enlarged urinary blad-
duction. There is also anisocoria. The left nictitating membrane is
der. Presumptive diagnosis is made through a combination of
elevated compared with the right.
CHAPTER 9
Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
297
at improving urinary and gastrointestinal tract function. The
reveals a mass lesion that extends along the floor of the cranial
 prognosis for affected dogs is poor. Most dogs are euthanized
cavity. In our experience, meningioma and lymphoma are the
based on the severity of clinical signs
most common tumors producing this syndrome. In some cases,
compression of the brainstem may result in paresis and ataxia.
Unilateral Cranial Polyneuropathy
Because of the extensive nature of the tumor and the inacces-
Unilateral tumors extending along the floor of the cranial cav-
-ou sp isou rp oo si sisd i Xras  as
ity may produce chronic compressive polyneuropathy that
therapy and/or radiation treatment may be beneficial.
affects primarily CNs IIl, V, Vll, and VIll. Animals are usually
presented because of unilateral facial nerve paralysis, unilateral
masticatory muscle atrophy, vestibular signs, alone or in com-
CASE STUDIES
bination. Sometimes animals are presented for unilateral pupil-
lary dilation or ventrolateral strabismus. Examination of cranial
Key: 0, Absent; +1, decreased; +2, normal; +3, exaggerated;
nerve reflexes reveals multiple cranial nerve involvement and
+4, very exaggerated or clonus; PL, pelvic limb; TL, thoracic
decreased facial sensation ipsilateral to the lesion. MRI or CT'
limb; NE, not evaluated.
CASE STUDY 9-1
EVA
- Signalment
. Lesion Location
1l year old Australian shepherd female spayed dog
The history is suspicious for upper airway dysfunction such
as laryngeal paresis/paralysis. Given the history of an acute
- History
exacerbation leading to dyspnea and cyanosis, bilaterally
Arendsu Jo Aros aaissaraod yu-a Aexodd
laryngeal paresis/paralysis is suspected. Physical obstruction
stridor. Initially, inspiratory noise was audible only when
from structural disease (ie., neoplasia affecting the airway)
the dog was panting. Over time, the stridor became more
cannot be excluded. Abnormalities appreciated in the pelvic
 audible. The owners have noticed a change in the sound of
limbs are consistent with LMN dysfunction, which together
the dog's bark. In the last 2 to 3 months, the dog has become
with laryngeal paralysis may indicate a diffuse LMN disorder.
exercise intolerant. After a few minutes of walking, the dog
will begin to pant heavily during which time harsh noise
· Differential Diagnosis
is audible during both inspiration and expiration. Twenty-
1.1
Polyneuropathydegenerative
four hours before presentation,
, the dog was taken to an
2.1
Polyneuropathy
—secondary to endocrine or neoplasia
emergency service after exercise for dyspnea and cyanosis.
3.1
 Polymyopathy—-degenerative or inflammatory/infectious
With time and supplemental oxygen, the dog's condition
4. Myasthenia gravis
improved.
: Diagnostic Plan
- Neurologic Examination
 1. MDB including creatine kinase (CK) level—may detect
Mental status
underlying endocrine disorder, inflammatory, or infec-
Normal
tious etiologies
 2. Three view thoracic radiographs—to evaluate for concurrent 
Gait
megaesophagus, exclude structural disease from consider-
Normal
ation (e.g, identify abnomality in the upper airway), and
evaluate for the presence of a primary or metastatic neoplasia
Posture
 3. Direct laryngeal examination under sedation or light
Slightly flexed at the hocks bilaterally
anesthesia to detect the presence of laryngeal paresis/
paralysis or a structural cause of the respiratory noise
Postural reactions
4.1
 Electrophysiologic testing (EMG, direct nerve stimula-
Normal in all four limbs
tion and conduction studies, F-wave evaluation)
 5. Based on result of electrophysiologic tests may consider
Spinal reflexes
nerve or muscle biopsy
Thoracic limbs; normal flexor refex, tone, and muscle
6. Based on results of steps l through 5, may consider
mass-bilaterally; pelvic limbs; +Z patellar, slightly reduced
measurement of antibodies directed at the acetylcholine
flexor reflexes-bilaterally (not flexing at the hock with
receptor [MG titer)
normal strength), mild atrophy of the gastrocnemius and
7. Based on results of steps 1 through 6, may consider pur-
cranial tibialis muscles with normal muscular tone, bilater-
 suing specifc endocrine testing (i.e., hypothyroidism)
 ally. All other spinal reflexes are normal.
· Diagnostic Results
Cranial nerves
1. MDB—normal
 All normal
2.
 Thoracic radiographs—normal
3. Direct laryngeal
 examination—bilaterally
 laryngeal
Sensory examination
paralysis; no evidence of structural disease
Normal
 4. EMG disclosed fibrillation potentials
 and
positive
sharp waves in the muscle distal to the stifle and elbow.
Palpation
Markedly reduced CMAP with motor nerve conduction
Normal
velocity (NCV) of the sciatic-tibial and ulnar nerves.
Continued
298
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 9-1
EVA-
cont'd
Mild prolongation of the minimal latency of the F wave
weakness, the owner opted to pursue surgical correction of
of the sciatic-tibial and ulnar nerves.
the laryngeal paralysis.
. Diagnosis
- Treatment
The electrophysiologic data were consistent with a diffuse
 Unilateral arytenoids lateralization was performed. The dog
axonal disorder primarily affecting the distal portion of the
recovered from surgery uneventfully Despite continued
axon. The owners declined nerve and muscle biopsies; how-
respiratory noise, no further episodes of dyspnea occurred.
sisougourd rood t 'palsadsns sem ssasourd aaneiauasap e taaa
However, the dog continued to progress with LMN weak-
was given. After counseling the owners about the likeli-
ness over the following 6 months.
hood of further decline, which may result in appendicular
CASE STUDY 9-2
OSCAR
-Signalment
Palpation
 9-year-old cat DSH, male castrated
 The cat was painful with pressure applied to the left tym-
 panic bulla and with opening of the mouth.
. History
1-month history of ptosis and miosis OS. Two weeks before
· Lesion Location
presentation, the owner noticed that food would fall out
 CN VlI (peripheral), and loss of sympathetic innervations to
of the cat's mouth on the left side. Additionally when the
the eye OS (Horner's syndrome)
 owner made a noise, the left ear would not move in response 
to noise.
 Differential Diagnosis
 Otitis media/interna
1.
: Neurologic Examination
2. Neoplasia
Mental status
 3. Inflammatory polyp
Normal
· Diagnostic Plan
Gait
1. Otoscopic examination—-to evaluate for evidence of otitis
Normal
externa or neoplasia affecting the external ear canal.
 2. MDB—assess the general health of the cat in preparation
Posture
for CT or MR imaging
Normal
 3. Three view thoracic radiographs—evaluate for the pres-
ence of metastatic disease
Postural reactions
 4. MRI or CT of the head
Normal in all four limbs 
· Diagnostic Results
Spinal reflexes
1. Brown waxy debris in the external ear canals bilaterally
 All normal
2.1
MDB—normal
 3. Thoracic radiographs—normal
Cranial nerves
4. MRI disclosed a contrast enhancing soft tissue mass
Menace response—0 OS (however, the cat would retract
 causing lysis of the left osseous bulla
the eye in response to the menacing gesture), +2 OD;
palpebral reflex—0 OS, +2 OD, response to noxious stimu-
. Diagnosis
lation of the nasal mucosa—normal bilaterally. There was
MRI findings were consistent with a neoplasm affecting the
miosis, ptosis of the dorsal eyelid, elevation of the nictitating
tympanic bulla
membrane OS. The left ear did not move in response to
noise or touch.
 Treatment
Aleft-sided ventral bulla osteotomy was performed. Biopsy
Sensory Examination
was consistent with adenocarcinoma. Postoperatively, the
Normal
 cat underwent radiation therapy.
CASE STUDY 9-3
BEACON
· Signalment
Twenty-four hours before presentation, the dog became
10-year-old Weimaraner, male neutered
lethargic and reluctant to get up and walk. The owner also
noticed an increase in the dog's respiratory rate and effort.
. History
An acute onset of multiple episodes of "vomiting"; episodes
. Neurologic Examination
occurred shortly after eating. The dog would lower its head
Mental status
and undigested food and liquid would passively come out.
Quiet but appropriately responding to stimuli
CHAPTER 9
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
299
CASE STUDY 9-3
BEACON
cont'd
Gait
3. Polymyopathy
Severe exercise intolerance. The dog required assistance to
4. Intoxication (lead, organophosphates)
stand.The gait was short strided and choppy The dog could
only walk 3 to 4 feet and then would lie down.
· Diagnostic Plan
1. MDB including CK level—to identify a systemic disorder
Posture
Aedoauaiod io Ayedonauod e u ansan Aeu ien
When standing, places the thoracic limbs more adducted
and to detect evidence of systemic inflammation [i.e..
under and caudally placed under the thorax. Pelvic limbs
pneumonia)
were slightly flexed at the hock, stifle, and hips, bilaterally.
2.
 Thoracic radiographs-
—to document ME and possible
 aspiration pneumonia
Postural reactions
 3. An edrophonium hydrochloride test (Tensilon test) to
When dog's weight was supported, postural reactions are
 observe for improvement in muscle strength
mildly reduced in all four limbs.
4. Measurement of antibodies directed at the acetylcholine
receptor [MG titer)
Spinal reffexes
 5. Based on results of steps l through 4, consider endo-
Thoracic limbs— +l flexor reflex, normal muscular tone
scopic evaluation of the esophagus to exclude structural
and muscle mass; pelvic limbs- +2 patellar, +l flexor 
causes of esophageal dysfunction [(i.e., esophageal stric-
 reflex, normal muscular tone and muscle mass, bilaterally
ture or neoplasia)
6. Based on results of steps 1 through 4, consider electro-
Cranial nerves
 physiologic testing (EMG, direct nerve stimulation, and
Normal
conduction studies, F-wave evaluation)
 Sensory examination
. Diagnostic Results
Normal
Mild neutrophilic leukocytosis was observed. CK was nor-
mal. Thoracic radiographs disclosed an enlarged, air-filled
Palpation
esophagus from the caudal cervical region through to the
Normal
stomach consistent with ME. There was single round soft
tissue opacity in the cranial mediastinum. An air broncho-
: Lesion location
 gram pattern was observed in the right middle lung lobe.
Signs consistent with diffuse LMN disease: Although the
There was minimal improvement in strength after admin-
owner stated that the dog was vomiting, the description is
istration of edrophonium hydrochloride. The MG titer
more consistent with regurgitation. The episodes are pas-
was 3.41 nmol/L (reference range <0.06 nmol/L), which
sive and not associated with an abdominal effort as is seen
is consistent with acquired myasthenia gravis. Based on the
with vomiting. Regurgitation is indicative of dysphagia
thoracic radiographic findings, acquired myasthenia gravis
associated with the esophageal phase of swallowing consis-
was likely secondary to thymoma.
tent with decreased esophageal motility or ME. Given the
history of frequent episodes of regurgitation, the increased
· Diagnosis
respiratory rate and effort may refect aspiration pneumo-
 Myasthenia gravis secondary to a presumptive thymoma
nia. Appendicular weakness was consistent with diffuse
LMN weakness.
- Treatment
 Despite initiation of parenteral cholinergic drugs and immu-
· Differential Diagnosis
nosuppression, the dog's condition declined. The owner
 1. Myasthenia gravis
elected euthanasia. At necropsy, a thymoma was identified
2. Polyneuropathy
in the mediastinum.
CASE STUDY 9-4
DARLA
- Signalment
Gait
9-year-old Labrador retriever, female spayed
 Mild general proprioceptive ataxia of the right thoracic and
 pelvic limbs
- History
3-month history of atrophy of the temporalis muscle on the
Posture
right
 Normal; occasionally would stand on the dorsum of the foot
 of the right pelvic limb. Mild right head tilt
· Neurologic Examination
Mental status
Postural reactions
Quiet to dull
Markedly delayed in the right thoracic and pelvic limbs;
 normal in the left thoracic and pelvic limbs
Contimued
300
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 9-4
DARLA-
cont'd
Spinal reffexes
· Differential Diagnosis
All normal
1. Neoplasia
2.
Granuloma
Craniaf nerves
 3. Hemorrhage
 Menace response—0 OD, +2 OS; with the left eye covered,
4. Infarction (ischemic]
the dog would track objects with the right eye; palpebral
refex—0 OD, +2 OS; response to noxious stimulation of
: Diagnostic Plan
the nasal mucosa—0 right, +2 left; mild right head tilt, no
1. MBD-
—evaluation of the general health and to identify
abnormal nystagmus, normal physiologic nystagmus, posi-
evidence of systemic involvement of the underlying dis-
tional ventral strabismus OD when the head was elevated.
order
The commissure of the lips on the right was drooping. Pty-
 2. Three view thoracic radiographs—assess for underlying
alism was evident from the right commissure of the lips.
primary or metastatic neoplasm
There was less tone in the lips on the right. The right ear
 3. MRI of the head
did not move in response to noise or touch. No other abnor-
malities were noted.
· Diagnostic Results
1. MDB—stress leukogram
Sensory examination
2.
 Thoracic radiographs-within normal limits
Analgesia of the right nasal mucosa and skin over the maxilla
 3. MRI diselosed a solitary, strongly contrast-enhancing
mass at the level of the right cerebellopontine med-
Palpation
ullary angle. Rostrally, the mass was contiguous with
Severe atrophy of the temporalis and masseter muscles on
an enlarged trigeminal nerve. The mass severely
the right
wnpau rensou pue suod quaseie au passrduos
oblongata.
· Lesion Location
 Signs consistent with deficits in CN V (atrophy of the
·Diagnosis
muscles of mastication and facial analgesia), Vll [facial
 Neoplasia—presumptive trigeminal nerve sheath tumor
paralysis), Vlll on the right (right head tilt and positional
strabismus) nuclei or nerves. However, the change in men-
- Treatment
tal state and ipsilateral postural reaction deficits suggests a
Given the guarded prognosis associated with this neoplasm,
lesion affected the right pons and rostral medulla oblongata.
 the owner declined further therapy.
CASE STUDY 9-5
ABBY
· Signalment
Craniaf nerves
5-year-old cocker spaniel, female spayed
Menace response—0 OD, +2 OS; with the left eye cov-
ered, the dog would track objects with the right eye;
- History
palpebral reflex—0 OD, +2 OS; response to noxious
An acute onset of a right-head tilt, falling, stumbling, and
stimulation of the nasal mucosanormal bilaterally. Mild
circling to the right. One month before presentation, the
right head tilt, spontaneous horizontal nystagmus with
dog had started drooling and dropping food from the right
the fast phase directed to the left. The commissure of
side of the mouth. The owner also noted that the dog was
the lips on the right was drooping and the mucosa was
not blinking the right eye.
right. The right ear did not move in response to noise or
. Neurologic Examination
touch.
Mental status
Normal
Sensory examination
 Normal
Gait
Moderate vestibular ataxia on the right side
Palpation
Normal
Posture
Right head tilt
· Lesion Location
Peripheral CN VII and VIII
Postural reactions
Normal in all four limbs
· Differential Diagnosis
1.
 Otitis media/interna
Spinal reflexes
2. Neoplasia 
All normal
 3. Hypothyroidism
CHAPTER 9
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
301
CASE STUDY 9-5
ABBY-
cont'd
: Diagnostic Plan
4. MRI disclosed a fluid/soft tissue mass of mixed intensity
1. Otoscopic examination
within the right tympanic bulla. There was peripheral
 2. Schirmer tear test 
enhancement of the inner surface of the tympanic bulla.
3. MDB
4. MRI or CT
. Diagnosis
Otitis interna/otitis media
· Diagnostic Results
1. Evidence of chronic proliferative changes to the epi-
- Treatment
 thelium of the external ear canal. There was purulent
Given the chronic proliferative changes of the external ear
 discharge in the right external ear canal obscuring visual-
canal, a total ear canal ablation and lateral bulla osteotomy
ization of the tympanic membrane. Cytologic evaluation
was performed. Postoperatively, the dog was placed on anti-
disclosed degenerative neutrophils with intracellular and
biotics based on culture and sensitivity testing of the material
 extracellular mixed population of bacteria.
of the tympanic bulla. The vestibular dysfunction gradually
2. Schirmer tear test—0 mm OD, 7 mm OS
improved. Facial nerve paralysis remained. The owners also
3. MDB—normal
were instructed to administer artificial tears in the right eye.
CK, Creatine kinase; CMAP, compound muscle action potential; CN, cranial nerve; CT, computed tomography; EMG, electromyography; LMN,
lower motor neuron; MDB, minirmum database; ME, megaesophagus; MG, myasthenia gravis; MRI, maghetic resonance imaging; NCV, nerve
 conduction velocity; OD, right eye; OS, left eye.
REFERENCES
14. Palmer AC: Pontine infarction in a dog with unilateral
involvement of the trigeminal motor nucleus and pyra-
1. Whalen LR, Kitchell RL: Electrophysiologic studies of
midal tract, J Small Anim Pract 48:49-52, 2007.
the cutaneous nerves of the head of the dog, Am J Vet
15. Heath S, Rusbridge C, Johnson N, et al: Orofacial pain 
Res 44:615-627, 1983.
syndrome in cats, Vet Rec 149:660, 2001.
2. Whalen LR, Kitchell RL: Electrophysiologic and behav-
16. Asbury AK, McKhann GM, McDonald WI: Diseases of
ioral studies of the cutaneous nerves of the concave sur-
the nervous system: clinical neurobiology, Philadelphia,
face of the pinna and the external ear canal of the dog.
1986, Ardmore Medical Books.
Am J Vet Res 44:628-634, 1983.
17. Kern TJ, Erb HN: Facial neuropathy in dogs and cats: 95
 3. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Oxford,
cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet MedAssoc 191:1604-1609,
2008, Blackwell.
1987.
4. De Lahunta A, Glass EN: Veterinary neuroanatomy
18. Jaggy A, Oliver JE, Ferguson DC, et al: Neurological
and clinical neurology, ed 3, St Louis, 2008, Saunders
manifestations of hypothyroidism: a retrospective study
Elsevier.
of 29 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 8:328-336, 1994.
 5. Hoelzle RJ: Idiopathic trigeminal neuropathy in a dog.
19. Braund KG, Luttgen PJ, Sorjonen DC, et al: Idiopathic
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:345, 1983.
facial paralysis in the dog, Vet Rec 105:297-299, 1979.
6. Mayhew PD, Bush WW, Glass EN: Trigeminal neuropa-
 20. Couturier L, Degueurce C, Ruel Y, et al: Anatomical
thy in dogs:aretrospective study of29 cases [1991-2000),
study of cranial nerve emergence and skull foramina in
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:262-270, 2002.
the dog using magnetic resonance imaging and computed
7. Carmichael S, Griffths IR: Case of isolated sensory tri-
tomography, Vet Radiol Utrasound 46:375-383, 2005.
geminal neuropathy in a dog, Vet Rec 109:280-282,
21. Jaggy A, Oliver JE: Neurologic manifestations of thy-
1981.
roid disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 8. Panciera RJ, Ritchey JW, Baker JE, et al: Trigeminal and
24:487-494, 1994.
 polyradiculoneuritis in a dog presenting with mastica-
22. Tan NC, Chan LL, Tan EK: Hemifacial spasm and invol-
tory muscle atrophy and Horner's syndrome, Vet Pathol
untary facial movements, QJM 95:493-500, 2002.
39:146-149, 2002.
23.1
Nielsen VK: Pathophysiology of hemifacial spasm: I.
 9. Carpenter JL, King NW Jr, Abrams KL: Bilateral trigem-
 Ephaptic transmission and ectopic excitation, Neurology
 inal nerve paralysis and Horner's syndrome associated
34:418-426, 1984.
with myelomonocytic neoplasia in a dog, J Am Vet Med
24. Oliveira LD, Cardoso F, Vargas AP: Hemifacial spasm
Assoc 191:1594-1596, 1987.
and arterial hypertension, Mov Disord 14:832-835,
10. Pfaff AMD, March PA, Fishman C: Acute bilateral tri-
1999.
geminal neuropathy associated with nervous system lym-
25. Roberts SR, Vainisi SJ: Hemifacial spasm in dogs, J Am
phosarcoma in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:57-61,
Vet Med Assoc 150:381-385, 1967.
2000.
 26. Parker AJ, Cusick PK, Park RD, et al: Hemifacial spasms
11. Schultz RM, Tucker RL, Gavin PR, et al: Magnetic reso-
in a dog, Vet Rec 93:514-516, 1973.
nance imaging of acquired trigeminal nerve disorders in
27.
Van Meervenne SA, Bhatti SF, Martle V, et al: Hemifa-
six dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 48:101-104, 2007.
cial spasm associated with an intracranial mass in two
12. Bagley RS, Wheeler SJ, Klopp L, et al: Clinical features
dogs, J Small Anim Pract 49:472-475, 2008.
of trigeminal nerve-sheath tumor in 10 dogs, J Am Anim
28. Jager L, Reiser M: CT and MR imaging of the normal and
Hosp Assoc 34:19-25, 1998.
pathologic conditions of the facial nerve, Eur J Radiol
13. Pettigrew R, Rylander H, Schwarz T: Magnetic reso-
40:133-146, 2001.
nance imaging contrast enhancement of the trigeminal
29. Kenney C, Jankovic J: Botulinum toxin in the treatment
nerve in dogs without evidence of trigeminal neuropa-
ofblepharospasm and hemifacial spasm, J Neural Transm
thy, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50:276-278, 2009.
115:585-591, 2008.
302
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
30. Renegar WR: Auriculopalpebral nerve paralysis follw-
 53. Sims MH, Shull-Selcer E: Electrodiagnostic evaluation
ing prolonged anesthesia in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
of deafness in two English setter littermates, J Am Vet
174:1007-1009, 1979.
Med Assoc 187:398-404, 1985.
31. Power HT, Watrous BJ, de Lahunta A: Facial and ves-
54. Strain GM: Congenital deafness in dogs and cats, Com-
tibulocochlear nerve disease in six horses, J Am Vet Med
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13:245-250, 1991:252-253.
Assoc 183:1076-1080, 1983.
55.
Suga F, Hattler KW: Physiological and histopathologi-
32. Walker AM, Sellon DC, Cornelisse CJ, et al: Temporo-
cal correlates of hereditary deafness in animals, Laryngo-
hyoid osteoarthropathy in 33 horses [1993-2000], J Vet
scope 80:81-104, 1970.
Intern Med 16:697-703, 2002.
56. Wilkes MK, Palmer AC: Congenital deafness in Dober-
33. Blythe LL, Watrous BJ, Schmitz JA, et al: Vestibular syn-
mans, Vet Rec 118:218, 1986.
drome associated with temporohyoid joint fusion and
57. Wilkes MK, Palmer AC: Congenital deafness and ves-
temporal bone fracture in three horses, J Am Vet Med
tibular deficit in the Doberman, J Small Anim Pract
Assoc 185:775-781, 1984.
33:218-224, 1992.
34. Blythe LL: Otitis media and interna and temporohy-
58. Famula TR, Cargill EJ, Strain GM: Heritability and
oid osteoarthropathy, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
complex segregation analysis of deafness in Jack Russell
13:21-42, 1997.
terriers, BMC Vet Res 3:31, 2007.
35. Divers TJ, Ducharme NG, de Lahunta A, et al: Temporo-
59. Bosher SK, Halpike CS: Observations on the histogen-
hyoid osteoarthropathy, Clin Tech Equine Pract 5:17-23,
esis of the inner ear degeneration of the deaf white cat
2006.
and its possible relationship to the aetiology of certain
36. Aleman M, Puchalski SM, Willams DC, et al: Brainstem
unexplained varieties of human congenital deafness,
auditory-evoked responses in horses with temporohy-
J Laryngol Otol 80:222-235, 1966.
oid osteoarthropathy, J Vet Intern Med 22:1196-1202,
60. Creel D, Conlee JW, Parks TN: Auditory brainstem
2008.
anomalies in albino cats. I. Evoked potential studies,
37. Pease AP, van Biervliet J, Dykes NL, et al: Complication
Brain Res 260:1-9, 1983.
of partial stylohyoidectomy for treatment of temporo-
61. Delack JB: Hereditary deafness in the white cat, Com-
hyoid osteoarthropathy and an alternative surgical tech-
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:609-617, 1984.
nique in three cases, Equine Vet J 36:546-550, 2004.
62.1
 Elverland HH, Mair IW: Hereditary deafness in the cat.
38. Knowles K, Blauch B, Leipold H, et al: Reduction of
An electron microscopic study of the spiral ganglion,
 spiral ganglion neurons in the aging canine with hearing
Acta Otolaryngol 90:360-369, 1980.
loss, Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 36:188-199, 1989.
63.Rebillard G, Rebillard M, Carlier E, et al: Histo-
39. Mansfeld PD: Ototoxicity in dogs and cats, Compend
physiological relationships in the deaf white cat auditory
Contin Educ Pract Vet 12:331-337, 1990.
system, Acta Otolaryngol 82:48-56, 1976.
40. Adams EW: Hereditary deafness in a family of fox-
64.
Wolff D: Three generations of deaf white cats, J Hered
hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 128:302-303, 1956.
33:39-43, 1942.
41. Coppens AG, Gilbert-Gregory S, Steinberg SA, et al:
65. Cvejic D, Steinberg TA, Kent MS, et al: Unilateral
Inner ear histopathology in "nervous Pointer dogs" with
in
severe hearing loss, Hear Res 200:51-62, 2005.
client-owned pure-breed white cats, J Vet Intern Med
42. Coppens AG, Kiss R, Heizmann CW, et al: An original
23:392-395, 2009.
 inner ear neuroepithelial degeneration in a deaf Rottwei-
66. Gauly M, Vaughan J, Hogreve SK, et al: Brainstem
ler puppy, Hear Res 161:65-71, 2001.
auditory-evoked potential assessment of auditory func-
43. Coppens AG, Resibois A, Poncelet L: Bilateral deafness
tion and congenital deafness in llamas (Lama glama) and
in a Maltese terrier and a great Pyrenean puppy: inner
alpacas [L. pacos), J Vet Intern Med 19:756-760, 2005.
ear morphology, J Comp Pathol 122:223-228, 2000.
67. Harland MM, Stewart AJ, Marshall AE, et al: Diagno-
44. Coppens AG, Steinberg SA, Poncelet L: Irnner ear
sis of deafness in a horse by brainstem auditory evoked
morphology in a bilaterally deaf Dogo Argentino pup.
potential, Can Vet J 47:151-154, 2006.
J Comp Pathol 128:67-70, 2003.
68. Anderson H, Henricson B, Lundquist PG, et al: Genetic
45. Erickson F, Saperstein G, Leipold HW, et al: Congenital
hearing impairment in the Dalmatian dog. An audiomet-
defects of dogs—Part 3, Canine Pract 4:40-53, 1977.
ric, genetic and morphologic study in 53 dogs, Acta Oto-
46. Gwin RM, Wyman M, Lim DJ, et al: Multiple ocular
laryngol 232(suppl):231-234, 1968.
defects associated with partial albinism and deafness in
69. Bosher SK, Hallpike CS: Observations on the histologi-
the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:401-408, 1981.
cal features, development and pathogenesis of the inner
47. Hayes HM Jr, Wilson GP, Fenner WR, et al: Canine con-
ear degeneration of the deaf white cat, Proc R Soc Lond
genital deafness: epidemiologic study of 272 cases, J Am
B Biol Sci 162:147-170, 1965.
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:473-476, 1981
70. Steel KP: Inherited hearing defects in mice, Annu Rev
48. Hudson WR, Ruben RJ: Hereditary deafness in the Dal-
Genet 29:675-701, 1995.
matian dog, Arch Otolaryngol 75:213-219, 1962.
71. Mair IW: Hereditary deafness in the Dalmatian dog.
49. I
 Igarashi M, Alford BR, Cohn AM, et al: Inner ear anoma-
Arch Otorhinolaryngol 212:1-14, 1976.
lies in dogs, Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol 81:249-255, 1972.
72. Holliday TA, Nelson HJ, Williams DC, et al: Unilateral and
50. Johnsson LG, Hawkins JE Jr, Muraski AA, et al: Vascu-
bilateral brainstem auditory-evoked response abnormali-
lar anatomy and pathology of the cochlea in Dalmatian
ties in 900 Dalmatian dogs, J Vet Intern Med 6:166-174,
dogs. In Vascular disorders and hearing defects, Univer-
1992.
sity Park, MA, 1973, University Park Press.
73. Strain GM, Kearney MT, Gignac U, et al: Brainsten
51. Lurie MH: The membranous labyrinth in the con-
auditory-evoked potential assessment of congenital deaf-
 genitally deaf collie and Dalmatian dog, Laryngoscope
ness in Dalmatians: associations with phenotypic markers,
58:279-287, 1948.
J Vet Intern Med 6:175-182, 1992.
52. Marshall AE: Use ofbrain stem auditory-evoked response
74. Famula TR, Oberbauer AM, Sousa CA: A thresh-
to evaluate deafness in a group of Dalmatian dogs, J Am
old model analysis of deafness in Dalmatians, Mamm
Vet Med Assoc 188:718-722, 1986.
Genome 7:650-653, 1996.
CHAPTER 9 
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
303
75. Juraschko K, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Nolte I, et al:Analysis
97. Tobias KM, Jackson AM, Harvey RC: Effects of doxa-
of systematic effects on congenital sensorineural deafness
 pram HCl on laryngeal function of normal dogs and dogs
in German Dalmatian dogs, Vet J 166:164-169, 2003.
with naturally occurring laryngeal paralysis, Vet Anaesth
76. Muhle AC, Jaggy A, Stricker C, et al: Further contribu-
Analg 31:258-263, 2004.
tions to the genetic aspect of congenital sensorineural
98. Jeffery ND, Talbot CE, Smith PM, et al: Acquired idio-
deafness in Dalmatians, Vet J 163:311-318, 2002.
pathic laryngeal paralysis as a prominent feature of
77. Wood JLN, Lakhani KH: Prevalence and prevention of
generalized neuromuscular disease in 39 dogs, Vet Rec
deafness in the Dalmatian: assessing the effect of parental
158:17-21, 2006.
hearing status and gender using ordinary logistic and gen-
 99. Greenfield CL: Canine laryngeal paralysis, Compend
eralized random litter effect models, Vet J 154:121-133,
Contin Educ Pract Vet 9:1011-1017, 1987.
1997.
100. Harvey CE, O'Brien JA: Upper airway obstruction sur-
78. Strain GM: Deafness prevalence and pigmentation and
gery. 5. Treatment of laryngeal paralysis in dogs by partial
 gender associations in dog breeds at risk, Vet J 167:23-32,
laryngectomy, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:551-556, 1982.
2004.
10l. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Bouw J, Hartman W: Heredi-
79. Strain GM, Clark LA, Wahl JM, et al: Prevalence of deaf-
tary transmission of laryngeal paralysis in Bouviers, J Am
 ness in dogs heterozygous or homozygous for the merle
Anim Hosp Assoc 17:75-76, 1981.
allele, J Vet Intern Med 23:282-286, 2009.
102. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Hartman W, Goedegebuure A,
80. Brenig B, Pfeiffer I, Jaggy A, et al: Analysis of the 5 region
et al: The source of normal motor unit potentials in sup-
of the canine PAX3 gene and exclusion as a candidate for
posedly denervated laryngeal muscles of dogs, Zentralbl
Dalmatian deafness, Anim Genet 34:47-50, 2003.
Veterinarmed A 25A:751-761, 1978.
81. Mieskes K, Distl O: Evaluation of ESPN, MYO3A,
103. Venkar-van-Heagen AJ: Investigation of pathogenesis of
SLC26A5 and USH1C as candidates for hereditary non-
hereditary laryngeal paralysis in the Bouvier, The Nether-
syndromic deafness [congenital sensorineural deafness)
lands, 1980, University of Utrecht.
in Dalmatian dogs, Anim Genet 38:533-534, 2007.
104.
O'Brien JA, Hendriks J: Inherited laryngeal paralysis.
82. Stritzel S, Wohlke A, Distl O: Elimination of SILV
asa
Analysis in the husky cross, Vet Q 8:301-302, 1986.
candidate for congenital sensorineural deafness in Dal-
105.1
 Polizopoulou ZS, Koutinas AF, Papadopoulos GC, et al:
matian dogs, Anim Genet 38:662-663, 2007.
Juvenile laryngeal paralysis in three Siberian husky x
83. Famula TR, Oberbauer AM, Sousa CA: Complex segre-
Alaskan malamute puppies, Vet Rec 153:624-627, 2003.
gation analysis of deafness in Dalmatians, Am J Vet Res
106. Ridyard AE, Corcoran BM, Tasker S, et al: Spontaneous
61:550-553, 2000.
laryngeal paralysis in four white-coated German shep-
84. Greibrokk T: Hereditary deafness in the Dalmatian: rela-
herd dogs, J Small Anim Pract 41:558-561, 2000.
tionship to eye and coat color, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
107. Bennett PF, Clarke RE: Laryngeal paralysis ina Rottweiler
30:170-176, 1994.
with neuroaxonal dystrophy, Aust Vet J 75:784-786,
85. Bergsma DR, Brown KS: White fur, blue eyes, and deaf-
1997.
ness in the domestic cat, J Hered 62:171-185, 1971.
108. Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal
86. Mair IW: Hereditary deafness in the white cat, Acta
vacuolation and spinocerebellar degeneration in young
Otolaryngol Suppl 314:1-48, 1973.
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34:296-302, 1997.
87.B
 Ryugo DK, Cahill HB, Rose LS, et al: Separate forms of
109. Mahony OM, Knowles KE, Braund KG, et al: Laryngeal
pathology in the cochlea of congenitally deaf white cats,
paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Rottweilers,
Hear Res 181:73-84, 2003.
J Vet Intern Med 12:330-337, 1998.
88. Geigy CA, Heid S, Steffen F, et al: Does a pleiotropic
110. de Lahunta A, Summers BA: The laryngeal lesion in
gene explain deafness and blue irises in white cats? Vet J
young dogs with neuronal vacuolation and spinocerebel-
173:548-553, 2007.
lar degeneration, Vet Pathol 35:316-317, 1998.
89. Gacek RR: Localization of laryngeal motor neurons in
11l. Salvadori C, Tartarelli CL, Baroni M, et al: Peripheral
the kitten, Laryngoscope 85:1841-1859, 1975.
nerve pathology in two Rottweilers with neuronal vacu-
90. Radlinsky MG, Mason DE, Hodgson D: Transnasal laryn-
olation and spinocerebellar degeneration, Vet Pathol
goscopy for the diagnosis of laryngeal paralysis in dogs,
42:852-855, 2005.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 40:211-215, 2004.
112. Salvadori C, Tartarelli CL, Baroni M, et al: Neuronal
91. Hackett RP, Ducharme NG, Fubini SL, et al: The reli-
vacuolation, myelopathy and laryngeal neuropathy in a
 ability of endoscopic examination in assessment of aryte-
mixed-breed dog, J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med
noid cartilage movement in horses. Part I: subjective and
54:445-448, 2007.
objective laryngeal evaluation, Vet Surg 20:174-179,
113. Geiger DA, Miller AD, Cutter-Schatzberg K, et al:
1991.
 Encephalomyelopathy and polyneuropathy associated
92. Rakestraw PC, Hackett RP, Ducharme NG, et al: Aryte-
with neuronal vacuolation in two boxer littermates, Vet
noid cartilage movement in resting and exercising horses,
Pathol 46:1160-1165, 2009.
Vet Surg 20:122-127, 1991.
114. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, et al: Laryngeal
93. Rudorf H, Barr F: Echolaryngography in cats, Vet Radiol
 paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Dalmatians,
Ultrasound 43:353-357, 2002.
Am J Vet Res 55:534-542, 1994.
94. Bray JP, Lipscombe VJ, White RA, et al: Ultrasono-
115. Gabriel A, Poncelet L, Ham Lv, et al: Laryngeal paraly-
graphic examination of the pharynx and larynx of the
sis-polyneuropathy complex in young related Pyrenean
normal dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 39:566-571, 1998.
mountain dogs, J Small Anim Pract 47:144-149, 2006.
95. Jackson AM, Tobias K, Long CD, et al: Effects of various
116. Gaber CE, Amis TC, LeCouteur RA: Laryngeal paraly-
anesthetic agents on laryngeal motion during laryngos-
sis in dogs: a review of 23 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc
copy in normal dogs, Vet Surg 33:102-106, 2004.
186:377-380, 1985.
96. Miller CJ, McKiernan BC, Pace J, et al: The effects of
117. Braund KG, Steinberg HS, Shores A, et al: Laryngeal
doxapram hydrochloride (Dopram-V) on laryngeal
paralysis in immature and mature dogs as one sign of
function in healthy dogs, J Vet Intern Med 16:524-528,
a more diffuse polyneuropathy, J Am Vet Med Assoc
2002.
194:1735-1740, 1989.
304
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
118. Broome C, Burbidge HM, Pfeiffer DU: Prevalence of
139. Traub-Dargatz JL, Ingram JT, Stashak TS, et al: Respira-
laryngeal paresis in dogs undergoing general anaesthesia,
tory stridor associated with polymyopathy suspected to
Aust Vet j 78:769-772, 2000.
be hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in four quarter horse
119. Hammel SP, H
Hottinger HA, Novo RE: Postopera-
foals, J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:85-89, 1992.
tive results of unilateral arytenoid lateralization for treat-
140. Carr EA, Spier SJ, Kortz GD, et al: Laryngeal and pharyn-
ment of idiopathic laryngeal paralysis in dogs: 39 cases
geal dysfunction in horses homozygous for hyperkalemic
[1996-2002), J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:1215-1220, 2006.
periodic paralysis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:798-803,
120. MacPhail CM, Monnet E: Outcome of and postopera-
1996.
tive complications in dogs undergoing surgical treatment
141. Rose RJ, Hartley WJ, Baker W: Laryngeal paralysis in
of laryngeal paralysis: 140 cases [1985-1998), J Am Vet
Arabian foals associated with oral haloxon administra-
Med Assoc 218:1949-1956, 2001.
tion, Equine Vet J 13:171-176, 1981.
121. Payne JT, Martin RA, Rigg DL: Abductor muscle pros-
142. Hughes KJ, McGorum BC, Love S, et al: Bilateral laryn-
thesis for correction of laryngeal paralysis in 10 dogs and
geal paralysis associated with hepatic dysfunction and
one cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:599-604, 1990.
hepatic encephalopathy in six ponies and four horses,
122. Schofield DM, Norris J, Sadanaga KK: Bilateral thyroary-
Vet Rec 164:142-147, 2009.
tenoid cartilage lateralization and vocal fold excision with
143. Abrahamsen EJ, Bohanon TC, Bednarski RM, et al: Bilat-
ysis: 67 dogs [1998-2005), Vet Surg 36:519-525, 2007.
thesia in a horse, J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1363-1365,
123. Smith MM, Gourley IM, Kurpershoek CJ, et al: Evalua-
1990.
tion of a modifed castellated laryngofissure for allevia-
144. Dixon PM, Railton DI, McGorum BC: Temporary bilat-
tion of upper airway obstruction in dogs with laryngeal
eral laryngeal paralysis in a horse associated with general
paralysis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1279-1283, 1986.
anaesthesia and post anaesthetic myositis, Vet Rec
124. Gourley IM, Paul H, Gregory C: Castellated laryn-
132:29-32, 1993.
gofissure and vocal fold resection for the treatment
145. Bohanon TC, Beard WL, Robertson JT: Laryngeal hemi-
of laryngeal paralysis in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
plegia in draft horses. A review of 27 cases, Vet Surg
182:1084-1086, 1983.
19:456-459, 1990.
125. Rosin E, Greenwood K: Bilateral arytenoid cartilage lat-
146. Duncan ID: Determination of the early age of onset of
eralization for laryngeal paralysis in the dog, J Am Vet 
equine recurrent laryngeal neuropathy. 2. Nerve pathol-
Med Assoc 180:515-518, 1982.
ogy, Acta Neuropathol 84:316-321, 1992.
126. Snelling SR, Edwards GA: A retrospective study of
147.1
 Hahn CN, Matiasek K, Dixon PM, et al: Histological and
unilateral arytenoid lateralisation in the treatment of
ultrastructural evidence that recurrent laryngeal neurop-
laryngeal paralysis in 100 dogs [1992-2000), Aust Vet J
athy is a bilateral mononeuropathy limited to recurrent 
81:464-468, 2003.
laryngeal nerves, Equine Vet J 40:666-672, 2008.
127. Burbidge HM, Goulden BE, Jones BR: Laryngeal paralysis
148. Cahili J1, Goulden BE: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia. Part
in dogs: an evaluation of the bilateral arytenoid lateralisa-
I. A light microscopic study of peripheral nerves, N Z Vet
tion procedure, J Small Anim Pract 34:515-519, 1993.
J 34:161-169, 1986.
128. Hardie EM, Kolata RJ, Stone EA, et al: Laryngeal paraly-
149. Cahill JI, Goulden BE:The pathogenesis of equine laryn-
sis in three cats, JAm Vet MedAssoc 179:879-882, 1981.
geal hemiplegia: a review, N Z Vet J 35:82-90, 1987.
129. Schachter S, Norris CR: Laryngeal paralysis in cats: 16
150.1
Ducharme NG, Hackett RP, Fubini SL, et al: The reli-
cases [1990-1999), JAm Vet Med Assoc 216:1100-1103,
ability of endoscopic examination in assessment of ary-
2000.
tenoid cartilage movement in horses. Part I. Infuence
130. White RA, Littlewood JD, Herrtage ME, et al: Outcome
 of side of examination, reexamination, and sedation, Vet
 of surgery for laryngeal paralysis in four cats, Vet Rec
Surg 20:180-184, 1991.
118:103-104, 1986.
151. Morris EA, Seeherman HJ: Evaluation of upper respi-
131. White RN: Unilateral arytenoid lateralisation for the
ratory tract function during strenuous exercise in race-
treatment of laryngeal paralysis in four cats, J Small
horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:431-438, 1990.
Anim Pract 35:455-458, 1994.
152. Cook WR: Diagnosis and grading of hereditary recur-
132. Wells AL, Long CD, Hornof WJ, et al: Use of percutane-
rent laryngeal neuropathy in the horse, J Equine Vet Sci
ous ethanol injection for treatment of bilateral hyper-
8:432-455, 1988.
plastic thyroid nodules in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
153. Hawe C, Dixon PM, Mayhew IG:A study of an electrodi-
218:1293-1297, 2001.
agnostic technique for the evaluation of equine recurrent
 133. Busch DS, Noxon JO, Miller LD: Laryngeal paralysis and
laryngeal neuropathy, Equine Vet J 33:459-465, 2001.
peripheral vestibular disease in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp
154.1
 Fulton IC, Derksen FJ, Stick JA, et al: Treatment of left
Assoc 28:82-86, 1992.
laryngeal hemiplegia in standardbreds, using a nerve
134. Schaer M, Zaki FA, Harvey HJ, et al: Laryngeal hemiple-
muscle pedicle graft, Am J Vet Res 52:1461-1467, 1991.
gia due to neoplasia of the vagus nerve in a cat, J Am Vet
155. Tulleners EP, Harrison IW, Raker CW: Management
Med Assoc 174:513-515, 1979.
of arytenoid chondropathy and failed laryngoplasty
135. Nestor DD, Rosenstein DS: Radiographic diagnosis: laryn-
in horses: 75 cases [1979-1985], J Am Vet Med Assoc
geal paralysis secondary to pulmonary squamous cell car-
192:670-675, 1988.
cinoma in a cat, Vet Radiol Utrasound 45:325-326, 2004.
156. Strand E, Martin GS, Haynes PF, et al: Career racing per-
136. Campbell D, Holmberg DL: Surgical treatment oflaryn-
formance in thoroughbreds treated with prosthetic laryn-
geal paralysis in a cat, Can Vet J 25:414-416, 1984.
goplasty forlaryngeal neuropathy:52 cases (1981-1989),
137. Dixon PM, MeGorum BC, Railton DI, et al: Laryngeal
J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:1689-1696, 2000.
paralysis: a study of 375 cases in a mixed-breed popula-
157.
 Shelton GD: Swallowing disorders in the dog, Compend
tion ofhorses, Equine Vet J 33:452-458, 2001.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 4:607-614, 1982.
138. Goulden BE, Anderson LJ: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia
158. Weisbrodt NW: Neuromuscular
organization
of
part II: some clinical observations, N ZVet J 29:194-198,
esophageal and pharyngeal motility, Arch Intern Med
1981.
136:524-531, 1976.
CHAPTER 9
 Disorders of the Face, Tongue, Esophagus, Larynx, and Ear
305
159. Suter PF, Watrous BJ: Oropharyngeal dysphagias in
180. Washabau RJ, Hall JA: Diagnosis and management of
the dog: a cinefluorographic analysis of experimentally
gastrointestinal motility disorders in dogs and cats, Com-
induced and spontaneously occurring swallowing disor-
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:721-737, 1997.
ders. I. Oral stage and pharyngeal stage dysphagias, Vet
181.
Gaynor AR, Shofer FS, Washabau RJ: Risk factors for
Radiol 21:24-39, 1980.
acquired megaesophagus in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
160. Baum KH, Halpern NE, Banish LD, et al: Dysphagia in
211:1406-1412, 1997.
horses: the differential diagnosis-Part Il, Compend Con-
 182. Harvey CE, O'Brien JA, Durie VR, et al: Megaesophagus
tin Educ Pract Vet 10:1405-1410, 1988.
in the dog: a clinical survey of 79 cases, J Am Vet Med
161.(
Greet T: Dysphagia in the horse, In Pract 11:256-262,
Assoc 165:443-446, 1974.
1989.
183.
 Strombeck DR: Pathophysiology of esophageal motility
162. Pollard RE, Marks SL, Davidson A, et al: Quantitative
disorders in the dog and cat.Application to management
videofluoroscopic evaluation of pharyngeal function in
and prognosis, Vet Clin North Am 8:229-244, 1978.
the dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41:409-412, 2000.
184. Moses L, Harpster NK, Beck KA, et al: Esophageal motil-
163. Shelton GD, Willard MD, Cardinet GH Ill, et al:
ity dysfunction in cats: a study of 44 cases, J Am Anim
Acquired myasthenia gravis. Selective involvement of 
Hosp Assoc 36:309-312, 2000.
esophageal, pharyngeal, and facial muscles, J Vet Intern
185. Bexfield NH, Watson P, Herrtage ME: Esophageal dys-
Med 4:281-284, 1990.
motility in young dogs, J Vet Intern Med 20:1314-1318,
164. Fowler ME: Nigropallidal encephalomalacia in the horse,
2006.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 147:607-616, 1965.
186. Knowles KE, O'Brien DP, Amann JF: Congenital idio-
165. Larson KA, Young S: Nigropallidal encephalomalacia in
pathic megaesophagus in a litter of Chinese Shar-Peis:
horses in Colorado, J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:626-628,
clinical, electrodiagnostic, and pathological findings,
1970.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:313-318, 1990.
166. Young S, Brown WW, Klinger B: Nigropallidal encepha-
187. Schwartz A, Ravin CE, Greenspan RH, et al: Congenital
lomalacia in horses caused by ingestion of weeds of the
neuromuscular esophageal disease in a litter of New-
genus, Centaurea. J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:1602-1605,
foundland puppies, J Am Vet Radiol Soc 17:101-105,
1970.
1976.
167. Tukov FF, Anand S, Gadepalli RSVS, et al: Inactivation
188. Guilford WG: Megaesophagus in the dog and cat, Semin
of the cytotoxic activity of repin, a sesquiterpene lactone
Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:37-45, 1990.
from Centaurea repens, Chem Res Toxicol 17:1170-1176,
189. Cox VS, Wallace LJ, Anderson VE, et al: Hereditary
2004.
esophageal dysfunction in the miniature schnauzer dog.
168. Moret S, Populin T, Conte LS, et al: HPLC determina-
Am J Vet Res 41:326-330, 1980.
tion of free nitrogenous compounds of Centaurea sol-
190. Osborne CA, Clifford DH, Jessen C: Hereditary esopha-
stitialis [Asteraceae), the cause of equine nigropallidal
geal achalasia in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 151:572-581,
encephalomalacia, Toxicon 46:651-657, 2005.
1967.
 169. Roy DN, Peyton DH, Spencer PS: Isolation and iden-
       
tification of two potent neurotoxins, aspartic acid and
motor nerve function and esophageal motor performance
glutamic acid, from yellow star thistle (Centaurea solsti
in dogs with congenital idiopathic megaesophagus, Am J
tialis), Nat Toxins 3:174-180, 1995.
Vet Res 57:906-913, 1996.
170. Sanders SG, Tucker RL, Bagley RS, et al: Magnetic reso-
192. Holland CT, Satchell PM, Farrow BR: Vagal afferent dys-
nance imaging features of equine nigropallidal encepha-
function in naturally occurring canine esophageal motil-
lomalacia, Vet Radiol Utrasound 42:291-296, 2001
ity disorder, Dig Dis Sci 39:2090-2098, 1994.
171. Teixeira MJ, de Siqueira SR, Bor-Seng-Shu E: Glossopha-
193. Holland CT, Satchell PM, Farrow BR: Selective vagal
ryngeal neuralgia: neurosurgical treatment and differ-
afferent dysfunction in dogs with congenital idiopathic
ential diagnosis, Acta Neurochir [Wien] 150:471-475,
megaoesophagus, Auton Neurosci 99:18-23, 2002.
2008:discussion 475.
194. Boria PA, Webster CR, Berg J: Esophageal achalasia and
172. Rushton JG, Stevens JC, Miller RH: Glossopharyngeal
secondary megaesophagus in a dog, Can Vet J 44:232-234,
[vagoglossopharyngeal] neuralgia. A study of 217 cases,
2003.
Arch Neurol 38:201-205, 1981.
195. Pollin MM, Griffiths IR:A review of the primary dysauto-
173. Shores A, Vaughn DM, Holland M, et al: Glossopha-
nomias of domestic animals, J Comp Pathol 106:99-119,
ryngeal neuralgia syndrome in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp
1992.
Assoc 27:101-104, 1991.
196. McCarthy HE, Proudman CJ, French NP: Epidemiology
174. Watrous BJ: Clinical presentation and diagnosis of dyspha-
of equine grass sickness: a literature review [1909-1999],
gia, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 13:437-459,
Vet Rec 149:293-300, 2001.
1983.
197. Araya O, Vits L, Paredes E, et al: Grass sickness in horses
175. Ladlow J, Hardie RJ: Cricopharyngeal achalasia in dogs,
in southern Chile, Vet Rec 150:695-697, 2002.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 22:750-755, 2000.
198. Uzal FA, Robles CA, Olaechea FV: Histopathological
176. Warnock JJ, Marks SL, Pollard R, et al: Surgical man-
 changes in the coeliaco-mesenteric ganglia ofhorses with
agement of cricopharyngeal dysphagia in dogs: 14 cases
"mal seco,” a grass sickness-like syndrome, in Argentina,
[1989-2001), J Am Vet Med Assoc 223:1462-1468, 2003.
Vet Rec 130:244-246, 1992.
177. Bruchim Y, Kushnir A, Shamir MH: L-thyroxine respon-
199. Doxey DL, Milne EM, Gilmour JS, et al: Clinical and
sive cricopharyngeal achalasia associated with hypothy-
biochemical features of grass sickness (equine dysauto-
roidism in a dog, J Small Anim Pract 46:553-554, 2005.
nomia), Equine Vet J 23:360-364, 1991.
178. Davidson AP, Pollard RE, Bannasch DL, et al: Inheri-
200. Hunter LC, Miller JK, Poxton IR: The association of
tance of cricopharyngeal dysfunction in golden retriev-
Clostridium botulimum type C with equine grass sickness:
ers, Am J Vet Res 65:344-349, 2004.
a toxicoinfection? Equine Vet J 31:492-499, 1999.
179. Niles JD, Williams JM, Sullivan M, et al: Resolution of
201. Hunter LC, Poxton IR: Systemic antibodies to Clostridium
dysphagia following cricopharyngeal myectomy in six
botulimum type C: do they protect horses from grass sick-
young dogs, J Small Anim Pract 42:32-35, 2001.
ness [dysautonomia)? Equine Vet J 33:547-553, 2001.
306
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
202. Newton JR, Hedderson EJ, Adams VJ, et al:An epidemio-
211. Sharp NJH: Visceral dysfunction. In Wheeler SJ, editor:
logical study of risk factors associated with the recurrence
Manual of small animal neurology, Cheltenham, 1989,
of equine grass sickness [dysautonomia) on previously
British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
affected premises, Equine Vet J 36:105-112, 2004.
212.
Cave TA, Knottenbelt C, Mellor DJ, et al: Outbreak of
 203. Scholes SF, Vaillant C, Peacock P, et al: Diagnosis of grass
 dysautonomia [Key-Gaskellsyndrome) inaclosedcolonyof
sickness by ileal biopsy, Vet Rec 133:7-10, 1993.
pet cats, Vet Rec 153:387-392, 2003.
 204. Doxey DL, Milne EM, Ellison J, et al: Long-term pros-
213. Berghaus RD, O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, et al: Risk fac-
pects for horses with grass sickness [dysautonomia), Vet
tors for development of dysautonomia in dogs, J Am Vet
Rec 142:207-209, 1998.
Med Assoc 218:1285-1290, 2001.
205. Key TJ, Gaskell CJ: Puzzling syndrome in cats associated
214. Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Nietfeld JC: Dysautonomia
with pupillary dilatation, Vet Rec 110:160, 1982
in dogs: 65 cases [1993-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc
206. Sharp NJ: Feline dysautonomia, Semin Vet Med Surg
220:633-639, 2002.
[Small Anim] 5:67-71, 1990.
215. Longshore RC, O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, et al: Dysau-
207. Kidder AC, Johannes C, O'Brien DP, et al: Feline dysau-
 a a r s aasar e   
tonomia in the Midwestern United States: a retrospective
10:103-109, 1996.
study of nine cases, J Feline Med Surg 10:130-136, 2008.
216. Harkin KR, Bulmer BJ, Biller DS: Echocardiographic
208. Sharp NJH: Feline dysautonomia, Semin Vet Med Surg
evaluationofdogs with dysautonomia, JAm Vet MedAssoc
(Small Anim) 5:67-71, 1990.
235:1431-1436, 2009
209. Nunn F, Cave TA, Knottenbelt C, et al: Association
217. Detweiler DA, Biller DS, Hoskinson J, et al: Radio-
between  Key-Gaskell
syndrome and
infection
by
 graphic findings of canine dysautonomia in twenty-four
Clostridium botulimum type C/D, Vet Rec 155:111-115,
dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:108-112, 2001.
2004.
210. Sharp NJH, Nash AS, Griffiths IR: Feline dysautonomia
(the Key-Gaskell syndrome): a clinical and pathological
study offorty cases, J Small Anim Pract 25:599-615, 1984.
CHAPTER
10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
 nvoluntary movement disorders encompass a wide range
muscle twitches are fused and cannot be distinguished from
of diseases that result from mvoluntary muscle contrac-
 one another.2 In clinical medicine, the term tetanus is gener-
 tions. Many occur in specifie breeds and often an underly-
ally used to describe the disease caused by Clostridium tetani
toxin.
 disorders of involuntary movements are classifed employing
categories based on acceptable medical terminology used in
Tetany
describing the clinical manifestations of abnormal movements.!
Tetany is a condition that is similar to tetanus but character-
The term involumtary movement not only implies muscle
ized by intermittent tonic muscular contractions.
contractions without yolition, but importantly, the muscle
contractions and therefore movements occur in conscious ani-
Rigidity
mals. Abnormal movements are also observed in unconscious
 Rigidity is a descriptive term that is used to convey an
animals or during sleep as occur with seizures or movements
increased resistance to changes in the position or angle of
during rapid eye movement [REM] sleep. Abnormal move-
a single joint or multiple joints [i.e., difficulty in flexing or
ments associated with seizures are discussed in Chapter 13.
extending a joint). This may occur as a consequence of either
Likewise, abnormal movements may be associated with vol-
increased muscular tone, or a mechanical defect involving the
untary movements as occurs with ataxia, abnormal posture,
muscles, tendons, or ligaments such that joint movement is
and intention tremor related to cerebellar disease. Abnormal
restricted [i.e., ankylosis).
movements associated with voluntary movement are dis-
cussed in Chapter 8.
Spasm
A spasm is an involuntary contraction of a muscle or group of
muscles.
TERMINOLOGY AND CLASSIFICATION
Spasticity
Overall, involuntary movement disorders are a result of altera-
Spasticity is a deseriptive term often used for disorders that
tions in either the muscle or nerve membrane potential lead-
have increased muscular tone. Spasticity is characterized by an
ing to hyperexcitability and therefore represent disorders of
 increase in tonic stretch reflexes ("muscle tone") with exagger-
muscle or disorders involving the lower motor neuron (LMN)
 ated myotatic reflexes resulting from hyperexcitability of the
[cell body, axon, or neuromuscular junction).l Several clini-
stretch reflex.2 It is often associated with disturbances involv-
cal syndromes are associated with disorders of muscle (myo-
ing the upper motor neurons [UMNs), resulting in reduced
tonia) and with disorders involving the lower motor neuron,
inhibition of the extensor motor neurons. With UMN disease,
 including tetanus, tetany, myoclonus, and a group of disorders
 paresis or paralysis and increased myotatic and other segmen-
referred to as movement disorders. An overview is presented
tal spinal reflexes occur. Lesion localization for UMN disease
in Box 10-1.
is described in Chapter 2.
Myotonia
Decerebrate and Decerebellate Postures
Myotonia is a clinical sign of sustained muscle contraction
Lesions of the rostral brainstem (midbrain, rostral pons) pro-
after a physiologic, mechanical, or chemical stimulation.
duce a posture called decerebrate rigidity in which all limbs
are extended with increased extensor tone. Forced flexion of
Tetanus
the limb is met with increased resistance to a point, then an
Tetanus is a state of sustained muscular contraction with-
 abrupt loss of resistance and flexion occurs, called the clasp-
out periods of relaxation caused by repetitive stimulation of
knife reflex. If the cerebellum, particularly the rostral lobe, is
the motor nerve trunk at frequencies so high that individual
also damaged the head and neck are extended and the back
307
308
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
BOX 10-1
Classification Scheme for Involuntary
Movement Disorders
 Disorders involving muscle
 Myotonia—the clinical sign of prolonged contraction or
delayed relaxation following stimulation of the muscle
Congential 
Acquired
Disorders involving the neuron
 Tetanus—the clinical syndrome of sustained muscular
contraction without relaxation. Used synonymoushy with 
the disease caused by the toxin produced by Costridium
tetani.
Tetany—similar to tetanus, tetany is the clinical
syndrome of intermittent muscular contractions
Figure 10-1 A 3-year-old FS domestic long hair presented after
a traumatic fall. Note the decerebellate posture. There is opisthot-
 Myoclonus—the clinical manifestation of sudden 
onus. The thoracic limbs are extended and the pelvic limbs are
contraction of a group of muscles followed by its relaxation
flexed
Spontaneous
 Repetitive—sometimes referred to as a tremor
Constant
of a disease process. Pathology of any part of the motor unit
Action-related
may manifest tremors as part of the clinical disease spectrum.
 Postural
Pathologic tremors may be the result of hyperexcitability of
 Episodic
the LMN in which tremors are the manifestation of an invol-
untary movement. Due to their involuntary nature, these con-
Resting
ditions are discussed in this chapter. Alternatively, pathologic
Movement disorders—a variety of abnormal movement:
tremors may occur during voluntary movements. Tremors may
 syndromes often involve complex movements, which
be associated with diseases of the cerebellum, basal ganglia,
may be stereotypic or varied and involve specific body
and related pathways. For example, intention tremors occur
parts or are generalized.
with voluntary (purposeful) movements such as movement of
the head when an animal attempts to eat or drink. Intention
tremors are further described in Chapter 8. Similarly, tremors
is arched (lordosis) in a posture called opisthotonos.3 The pos-
are often observed as a consequence of weakness from neuro-
ture is generally accompanied by increased extensor tone in the
muscular disease. In this instance, fine tremors are observed
limbs. Acute lesions of the cerebellum without damage to the
when the animal is attempting to support its weight against
brainstem cause a posture termed decerebellate rigidiry that is
gravity when standing
 similar to decerebrate posture, but the pelvic limbs are flexed
and uncoordinated movements may occur (Figure 10-1).
Fasciculation
Fasciculation is visible as irregular movements over the surface
Myoclonus
of the affected muscle caused by spontaneous contractions
Myoclonus is the rhythmic movement of the portion of a
of individual motor units suggestive of lower motor neuron
 body that is the result of a sudden involuntary contraction of
 lesion.I Muscle fasciculations do not produce rhythmic limb
 a group of muscles followed by its relaxation. When occurring
or body movements as seen with tremor. Fasciculation is com-
 in a limb, it is appreciated as a rhythmic fexion or extension
 mon in motor neuron disease.
of the affected limb(s). The movement can be further quali-
fed based on its frequency [i.e., rapid or slow) and excursion
Myokymia
[i.e., gross or fine movement). When occurring in a muscle of
Movements associated with myokymia have been described as
the axial skeleton such as the temporalis muscles, it appears as
rippling and vermicular [wormlike and may also appear as trem-
rhythmic muscle contractions.
ors. Myokymia is not affected by motion and can persist during
sleep. Myokymia can be generalized or focal. Neuromyotonia
Tremor
is characterized by muscle stiffness and persistent contraction.!
Tremor is a term that is often used to describe the resultant
involuntary movements of rapid, repetitive myoclonus. The
Dyskinesia
term tremor is applied to the observation of rapid, repetitive
rhythmic fexion of joints, which appears as a vibration or
referred to simply as movement disorders, are described in
shivering that may be diffuse or limited to specific anatomy
humans and nonhuman primates. Most of these disorders have
such as a limb. Tremor can be qualified based on rate and
not been reproduced in quadrupeds, even with experimental
degree of excursion of the joint giving rise to such terms as
lesions in areas thought to or known to cause the disorder in
"fine" or “coarse” tremors with minute or large joint move-
humans or primates. The term dyskinesia denotes abnormal
ments, respectively. As such, tremors may be a normal physi-
 movement and several movement disorders are included in
ologic response. Referred to as physiologic tremors, rapid and
this category.
repetitive fine oscillations may be observed during periods of
Chorea is
s the contraction of random muscles through-
stress [(e.g., a frightened animal) or during periods of hypo-
out the body, occurring at random times and for random
thermia. Conversely, pathologic tremors occur as a consequence
durations.4
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
309
Dystonia is contraction of muscles, either focal or general-
ized, often including antagonist muscles that contract simul-
taneously. In humans, dystonia is frequently described as
twisting on the long axis of the body part.
Athetosis is a slow, writhing movement of the fingers, some-
times described as pill-rolling movements in humans. The
-da rerau m su  s a jo s
lomalacia caused by a plant toxin have been compared with
athetosis. A related movement disorder has been produced in
cats with lesions in the caudate nucleus in which affected cats
 displayed slow kneading movements of the paws and abrupt,
exaggerated movements of the thoracic limbs.5
Ballsmus denotes wild, large-amplitude, irregular limb
pe aoq ajo ais auo u snso uana  sua
is then referred to as hemiballismus. Ballismus is apparently
related to chorea because humans often have ballismus after
a stroke, which then gradually changes to chorea over days.4
Hgure 10-2 A 2-year-old mixed-breed dog that was evaluated for
EXAMinATION, LeSION LoCaliZatION,
diffculty standing up from a lying position, frequently fallingand
AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
a "stiff gait." Myotonic discharges were observed with EMG. Find-
ings were consistent with myotonia congenita. Note the prominent
Although signs may be constant in affected animals, some of
muscular hypertrophy of the proximal limbs and cervical muscles.
the disorders of involuntary movement are episodic in nature.
[Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
As a result, some affected animals may appear normal at
the time of examination making lesion localization difficult.
Hence, a thorough anamnesis is paramount to defining disor-
electrically, or chemically.5 Myotonia displays as muscle stiff-
ders of involuntary movements. Helpful information includes
ness. Muscle stiffness can occur with activity [action myo-
whether the movement was isolated to a single anatomic loca-
tonia) or occur after percussion of the muscle with a reflex
tion or occurred diffusely, whether the movement was trig-
hammer, which results in dimpling of the muscle (percussive
 gered by specifc stimuli, and whether the movement was
myotonia).6 In long-haired animals, the dimple is easily seen
associated with increased muscular tone. Moreover, knowing
on the tongue. With time, the muscles may become hyper-
whether the movement persisted during relaxation or sleep
trophied, especially in the proximal parts of the limbs and in
may help to better define the event. If possible, analyzing video
the neck (Figure 10-2). Electrophysiologically, electromyogra-
recordings of the episodic movements may be helpful when
phy (EMG) reveals complex multiphasic discharges that wax
evaluating affected animals that are normal during examina-
and wane in amplitude over a range of 10 μV to 1 mV, with
tion. Occasionally, the diagnosis of an involuntary movement
a frequency range of 50 to 100 Hz discharges.7 Acoustically
 disorder is supported by excluding from consideration other
the sound produced by myotonic discharges that waxe and
  n s s  n s
wane, which are often likened to an airplane “dive bomber,” or
tant, a seizure disorder should be eliminated as the underlying
revving of a motorcycle engine. Myotonic discharges observed
disease process when evaluating episodic involuntary move-
with EMG may occur in the presence or absence of clinical
ment disorders. Characterization and diagnostic work up for
signs of myotonia.
seizure disorders are described in Chapter 13.
 Based on light microscopic changes observed in muscle,
clinical syndromes that result in myotonia can occur in dis-
ity of the LMN unit and therefore provide the foundation for
orders [l) without obvious muscle pathology [nondystrophic
lesion localization. Lower motor neuron hyperexcitability may
myopathies associated with myotonia) or (2) in conjunction
be caused by an imbalance of facilitation and inhibition on the
with pathologic changes in muscle (dystrophic myopathies
 LMN related to imbalances in excitatory neurotransmitters such
associated with myotonia).
as glutamate, and inhibitory neurotransmitters such as gamma-
The latter may be referred to as muscular dystrophies. His-
aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glycine, respectively. The fir-
torically, the term muscular dystrophy has defined the disease
ing pattern of an individual LMN is determined by synaptic
process involving an abnormality of the dystrophin protein (in
connections from the primary peripheral afferents, descending
humans, Duchenne muscular dystrophy and in dogs, golden
UMN pathways from the brain, and local interneuron connec-
retriever muscular dystrophy). With the development and the
tions. Loss of adequate facilitation causes decreased muscle tone
increased use of molecular techniques, several disorders have
and reflexes typical of LMN disease, (see Chapter 7). Loss of
been identified that may result not only from abnormalities
inhibitory control causes increased fring of the LMN and inter-
in the dystrophin protein but also from other protein asso-
mittent or continuous contraction of the muscles it innervates.
ciated dystrophin-glycoprotein complexes.8 These disorders
 are collectively known as congenital muscular dystrophies.8
The term muscular dystrophy can be applied to any condition
DISORDERS INVOLVING THE MUSCLE
s s  s os  ssr r
MEMBRANE
ing of a pattern of small group muscle necrosis and regenera-
tion associated with a predominance of type l fbers and fber
Disorders involving the muscles:
type grouping Myofber size variation occurs due to myofber
hypertrophy and regenerating fibers. Muscular dystrophies
Congenital Myotonia- General
span a wide spectrum of microscopic changes in muscle rang-
Myotonia is defined as the clinical sign related to prolonged
ing from minimal to quite severe. Congenital muscular dys-
 contraction or delayed relaxation following voluntary stimu-
trophies are discussed in Chapter 7. Often these disorders
lation of the muscle or stimulation evoked mechanically.
result in clinical signs consistent with LMN disease such as
310
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
weakness, reduced to absent reflexes, and muscular atrophy.
eruptions of deciduous and permanent dentition, increased
However, some cases of muscular dystrophy can share clini-
interdental spaces, malocclusions, diffculty opening and clos-
cal similarities including muscle hypertrophy, myotonia, and
ing the mouth, mandibular brachygnathism, protrusion of
electrophysiologic changes with nondystrophic myopathies
the tongue, and flattening of the zygomatic arch. These mal-
associated with myotonia disorders.
formations have not been observed in other affected breeds.
Nondystrophic  myopathies  associated  with  myotonia
The diagnosis is made through recognition of clinical signs
largely reflect diseases associated with abnormal ion channels
 in young animals and exclusion of other conditions result-
(ion channelopathy) that function in muscle. The most well-
ing in similar clinical signs. Electrophysiologic testing may
recognized channelopathy involves chloride channels, but
provide supportive data. EMG is useful to detect the char-
sodium channel disorders can also result in myotonia. In these
acteristic “myotonie" discharges. However, these potentials
 disorders, myofbers appear normal (nondystrophic) micro-
can be confused with a more common abnormality referred
scopically, albeit hypertrophied.
to as complex repetitive discharges, which are observed in
other neuromuscular diseases [see Chapter 4). In dogs, poly-
Nondystrophic Myopathies Associated With Myotonia
 i a  as  r  ar
Myotonia Congenita. Myotonia congenita is caused by
mutation observed in the miniature schnauzer can be per-
abnormal chloride ion transfer across the muscle sarcolemma.
formed. However, not all cases of myotonia congenita relate
Decreased chloride conductance leads to myofiber hyperexcit-
to this mutation; therefore, a negative result does not exclude
ability and spontaneous myofiber action potentials.9 Normally.
the diagnosis. Procainamide or mexiletine may provide some
muscle contraction begins with an action potential spreading
reduction in clinical signs.
across the muscle sarcolemma. This action potential is the
Feline Myotonia Congenita. Affected cats show signs at
result of the influx of sodium through open sodium channels
an early age.23.24 Signs are similar to those in dogs. Distortion
[depolarization). Ultimately, depolarization of the sarcolemma
of the face, elevated nictitating membranes, and ear position
results in an intracytosolic influx of calcium, which drives the
occurred when startled or when hissing. Affected cats show
 contractile elements. For the myofiber to relax, repolarization
some improvement with exercise (warm-up phenomenon).
must occur. In general, repolarization of excitable tissue occurs
Hyperkalemic Periodic Paralysis. Similar to myotonia
as a result of potassium (K+) eflux. Over a cell membrane
 congenita, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HPP) is an ion
as large as that of a myofiber, repolarization due to K+ efflux
channel disorder of muscles.29 However, HPP is the conse-
would result in an extracellular buildup of K+ over time. Such
 quence of a sodium channel defect that results in increased
an a rae uonezielodap quanbasqns ot peapinom dnpng
-sar au u asearu puanbasqns e pue arqeaad unos
mination of the initial action potential, “afterdepolarizations."9
ing membrane potential of muscle cells. This allows K+ to dif-
As a consequence, the muscle becomes unabie to relax due
fuse extracellularly, accounting for the observed hyperkalemia
to continued contractions generated by afterdepolarizations.
causing further depolarization of the muscle cell. As the rest-
To effectively repolarize, chloride ion exchange helps buffer
 ing membrane potential nears threshold, myofbers become
the need for K+ efflux. Myofibers are rich in chloride chan-
hyperexcitable (myotonia). With further depolarization, the
nel 1 (CLC-1) protein, which is composed of two identical
resting membrane potential becomes so abnormal that excit-
protein channels, produced from the CLCN-1 gene.l0 Both
ability and muscle contractions decline. Clinically, this results
channels function together and allow the influx of chloride
in paralysis.
ions through the sarcolemma. Abnormalities in the CLC-1
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis has been observed in the
protein result in impaired chloride ion conductance leading to
quarter horse and a dog (see Chapter 7).30.31 At the onset of
 an inability to relax the muscle.
signs, affected horses display brief episodes of myotonia, mus-
 In humans, myotonia congenita is inherited as an autosomal
cle fasciculation, and elevation of the nictitating membranes.
 dominant (Thomsen disease) or recessive (Becker myotonia)
During episodes, affected horses excessively sweat, have nor-
condition. Myotonia congenita has been studied extensively in
mal to increased muscle tone, and elevated heart and respira-
the goat.9.ll-i3 Affected goats have been erroneously referred
tory rates. Once the episodes are over, the affected animals
to as "fainting goats." Initial studies showed that affected goats
appear normal.
had decreased chloride conductance in myofibers.13 Later, a
defect in the CLC-1 gene in which a substitution of a highly
Acquired Myotonia
conserved alanine residue with proline leading, to decreased
Acquired Myopathy With Characteristics of Myotonia
chloride conductance was documented.9 In addition to the
Several forms of acquired myopathy may have myotonic fea-
 goat, myotonia congenita has been observed in the dog 14-21
tures. Inflammatory myopathy, whether immune mediated
horse, 22 and cat23,24(see Table 10-1].
or caused by an infectious agent such as toxoplasmosis, may
Canine Myotonia Congenita. Myotonia congenita has
have complex repetitive discharges on the EMG and some
been reported most frequently in the chow chow19,25.26 and
increased contraction of the muscles. On occasion, endo-
crine-related myopathy develops that is caused by increased
breeds alshavebeendescribed4-182Clnical signs are smi
circulating corticosteroids with affected dogs displaying clini-
lar in all reports. Although clinical signs are present at birth,
cal signs consistent with myotonia. This has been referred
muscle stiffness is more evident at the time pups begin to
to as pseudomyotonia and has been associated degenerative
walk. In addition to generalized muscle stiffness, signs con-
 changes in muscle.32 The pathophysiology is unknown. Given
sist of diffculty rising, abnormal postures [sawhorse stance
the degenerative changes present in muscle and the lack of
with the limbs abducted), bunny hopping, muscle hypertro-
myotonic discharges, the condition should be referred to as
pseudomyotonia. Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing syndrome)
ous breathing, dysphagia, and regurgitation. With excitement
may be caused by adrenal tumors, pituitary tumors, or exog-
or stimulation, affected dogs can develop profound extensor
enous administration of corticosteroids. Microscopically, the
rigidity causing the dog to fall over and be unable to right
pathologic changes in muscle occur late in the course of
itself Some affected dogs appear to improve with mild to
the syndrome. Often, affected dogs demonstrate mild clini-
moderate exercise ("warm-up"
 phenomenon). Dental and
cal signs typically associated with hyperadrenocorticism. A
craniofacial abnormalities have been observed in affected
 stiff gait or weakness with exercise may be recognized. The
miniature  schnauzers.27  Abnormalities include delayed
pelvic limbs are frequently more obviously affected than the
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
311
thoracic limbs. The pelvic limbs are extended and directed
slightly caudally. Pelvic limb movement is characterized by
TABLE 10-1
decreased flexion of the coxofemoral and stifle joints with
Myotonia Congenita
most of the advancement of the pelvic limbs occurring by
flexion of the hock, giving the impression of paddling move-
ments while wallking. Proximal appendicular muscle hypertro-
Species/Breed
Heredity
References
phy is often pronounced. Microscopic evaluation of muscle
Caprine
 Autosomal dominant or 
9. 11-13
reveals variability in fiber size, increased numbers of nuclei,
recessive
myofber necrosis and atrophy (primarily of type Il fbers),
Canine
and increased amounts of perimysial connective tissue. The
 Miniature schnauzer
 Autosomal recessive
20.27.28
diagnosis of pseudomyotonia related to hyperadrenocorti-
Chow chow
Autosomal recessive (?)
19. 25. 26
cism is made through a combination of clinical signs in the
presence of hyperadrenocorticism, and electrophysiology and
 Staffordshire terrier
Autosomal recessive (?)
18
microscopic evaluation of muscle. In general, signs may persist
 Australian cattle dog
Autosomal recessive
14
 despite resolution of hyperadrenocorticism. Procainamide or
 Cocker spaniel
Unknown
15
 mexiletine may improve clinical signs.33
 West Highland white
Unknown
20
terrier
Drugs and Toxins
Great Dane
Unknown
16
Certain chemicals and drugs have been associated with myo-
 Jack Russell terrier
Unknown
17
tonia related to the effects of chloride conductance. The com-
18
monly used postemergent herbicide 2,4 dichlorophenoxyacetic
Siamese
Unknown
23. 24
acid (2,4 D) may result in myotonia. Experimentally, dogs
Equine
Unknown
administered 2,4 D orally developed gastrointestinal signs and
22
electrophysiologic evidence of myotonia.34 Percussive myoto-
nia was appreciated in the tongue but the gait was unaffected.
In humans, cholesterol-lowering drugs [statins) such as clof-
 brate, simvastatin, and pravastatin may result in myotonia.35
dystrophies are associated with moderate to severe, progres-
sive weakness [see chapter 7].
Dystrophic Myopathies Associated With Myotonia
Myotonia has been associated with dystrophic myopathies
Equine
in the dog, cat, and horse.36-39 Unlike myotonia congenita,
  m e  a A s  s
dystrophic pathologic changes are observed histologically. In
birth.35 Affected foals suffer progressive weakness, difficulty
the dog and cat, the clinical sign of myotonia can be associ-
rising, and a stiff gait. There is increased tone in the limbs with
ated with dystrophin-deficient muscular dystrophy and other
 proximal limb muscle hypertrophy especially in the superficial
congential disorders involving the dystrophin-glycoprotein
gluteal, semimembranosus, semitendinosus, and longissimus
muscles. Percussive myotonia is evident. Electrophysiologi-
 ease predominate. However, electrophysiologic evidence of
cally, myotonic discharges are observed, which persist with
muscle membrane excitability [complex repetitive discharges)
neuromuscular blockade suggesting a primary muscle defect.
along with the clinical observation of myotonia and muscular
Pathologic changes observed in muscle include internalized
hypertrophy (especially in the cat) can be observed. In a few
nuclei, sarcoplasmic masses, and occasional ring fbers. Addi-
instances, microscopic evidence of dystrophic change in mus-
tionally, gonadal hypoplasia and reduced testosterone levels
cle is minimal. In the veterinary literature, these disorders have 
were identifed in one affected foal.36 The condition shares
been termed myotonic dystrophies based on similarities to the
obvious similarities to that observed in humans.
condition in humans. Although the exact pathogenesis in these
cases remains unknown, based on the observed pathology they
Canine
are presumed to be related to other muscular dystrophies.
There are two reported cases of myotonic dystrophy in the
Their inclusion here is based on a similar clinical presentation
dog.3738 Signs developed at 3 to 6 months of age in one dog
  a  s u a  s s
 and 28 months of age in the other. Both affected dogs were
 severe dystrophic microscopic changes typical of most disor-
 young and showed clinical and electrophysiologic abnormali-
 ders involving the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex.
ties similar to affected horses. In one dog, dysphagia resulted
in weight loss due to inadequate caloric intake and progressive
Humans
muscular atrophy, which leads to euthanasia.37 Muscular atro-
 In humans, myotonic dystrophy is a genetic condition. Two
 phy rather than hypertrophy was observed in the affected dogs.
forms are known: DMl and DM2. Affected individuals suffer
from progressive weakness and display clinical signs and elec-
trophysiologic evidence of myotonia.42 DMl is the result of
DISORDERS INVOLVING THE LMN
an expanded repeat of an unstable trinucleotide [CTG) in the
DMPK (myotonic dystrophy protein kinase) gene in chroma-
Pathology of any part of the motor neuron may result in an
-dou uo Tuxnd se umo ose 'Za e beI uos
involuntary muscle contraction or movement. These condi-
tions are divided into four categories: tetanus, tetany, myoc-
chromosome 3q.44 Although not fully understood, it appears
lonus, and conditions referred to as movement disorders.
that the RNA produced by transcription of the expanded
Tetanus, the sustained contraction of muscle, is a single disease
repeat results in the pathophysiology.45 Affected individuals
process related to exposure to the toxin produced by Clos-
may have concurrent cataracts, cardiac, gastrointestinal, and
tridium tetani. Like tetanus, tetany involves contractions of
endocrine disorders.42
muscle; however, between contractions there are periods of
Myotonic dystrophy similar to that in humans has been
relaxation. Clinically, contractions may be described as spasms
observed in the horse and dog36-38 Table 7-1l lists the
or the observation of episodes of muscle spasticity. Myoclonus
hereditary and muscular changes in these animals. Myotonic
is a broad category of diseases that involve a sudden muscle
312
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
contraction followed by relaxation. Disorders involving myoc-
may be delayed for up to 3 weeks in dogs and cats. If the toxin
lonus are grouped according to whether they occur sporadi-
 ascends in a nerve of a limb, that limb shows tetanus first, fol-
lowed by the opposite limb and eventually the entire body. If
based on whether myoclonus occurs constantly or in associa-
the toxin circulates in the blood, signs of tetanus start in the
tion with actions, or posture, or occur episodically or at rest.
head and then become generalized. Elevation of the nictitat-
Lastly, movement disorders are conditions in which there are
ing membrane and contraction of the facial and mastication
 complex movements involving numerous muscle groups of
muscles are seen before development of tetanus in the rest of
multiple limbs.
the body49 (Figure 10-3). Generalized signs include increased
muscle tone and stiffness, usually in all the limbs and in the
Tetanus
muscles of the head. The lips are drawn in an exaggerated
Pathophysiology
"grin" often referred to as ris sardonicus; in erect-eared breeds,
Tetanus is caused by the toxin (tetanospasmin) produced by
the ears are drawn toward each other and the jaws are tightly
C tetani, a spore-bearing anaerobic bacillus.46 The spores are
closed. Other early signs are a stiff gait and tail elevation. In
resistant to most sporicidal agents and can remain viable for
the later stages, the animal is recumbent with extension of all
years.47 The organisms may be found in soil and are common
four limbs and opisthotonus. Signs are enhanced by stimula-
in the feces of many species. Bacteria gain access to the ani-
Asr ug no Aeu yea (ae ro rone) un
mal's tissues through open wounds, proliferate, and produce
complications related to inability to breathe due to rigidity of
 the toxin. Deep wounds with poor oxygenation are most sus-
the respiratory muscles, aspiration pneumonia, or from cardiac
ceptible. The toxin is composed of a heavy (H) and light (L)
arrhythmias.
chain.48 The H chain is responsible for binding to gangliosides
 In some rare cases, signs may stay localized to one limb,
on nerves and subsequent internalization. The toxin ascends
which may confuse the diagnosis. Localized tetanus is seen
via retrograde transport within the axons of nerves to the spi-
more commonly in cats.50 Invariably, clinical signs of localized
nal cord where it transsynaptically invades the inhibitory inter-
tetanus demonstrate as extensor rigidity in a limb. In general,
neurons and then disseminates throughout the central nervous
when localized to the thoracic limb, the limb is directed cau-
system (CNS). The L chain is a metalloprotease, which cleaves
dally, the elbow is extended, and the carpus flexed.5l1
Autonomic effects may include cardiac arrhythmias such
essary for the release of neurotransmitters.48 Ultimately.
as the bradyarrhythmias including atrioventricular blocks, and
tetanus toxin blocks the release of the inhibitory neurotrans-
atrial standstill.49523 Conversely,tachyarrhythmias, including
mitters glycine and GABA. Glycine is the neurotransmitter
supraventricular tachycardia and accelerated idioventricular
for primary inhibitory interneurons such as the Renshaw cell;
arrhythmias, may occur.52 Tachypnea and increased inspiratory
GABA is the inhibitory transmitter for descending pathways.
stridor may occur as a result of laryngeal paralysis.52 Respira-
The result is an uninhibited fring of the LMN. Tetanus toxin
tory failure due to respiratory muscle paralysis may necessitate
can also block sympathetic preganglionic neurons resulting
 mechanical ventilation. Hiatal hernia and megaesophagus may
in autonomic dysfunction. Finally, tetanus toxin may bind
be present and result in regurgitation. Secondary aspiration
directly at neuromuscular junctions and cause neuromuscular
asp ro siserd easue uo ansr eu uunu
facilitation. Although all domestic animals are susceptible to
related to paralysis of muscles involving eating and swallow-
tetanus, horses are most sensitive whereas dogs and ruminants
ing. Some dogs experience urinary retention. Affected animals
are more resistant. Cats appear to be very resistant.
 often are hyperthermic likely due to continuous muscle activ-
ity. Clinicopathologic data reflect nonspecific abnormalities.
Clinical Signs
Affected animals often have elevated creatinine kinase activity
 Clinical signs relate not only to the amount of toxin but also
 as a consequence of sustained muscle activity or recumbency.
to species susceptibility. In dogs, younger dogs appear to be
 at greater risk for developing more severe clinical signs.49 The
Diagnosis
clinical signs of tetanus occur 3 to 10 days after infection but
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical signs and
evidence of infection. EMG has been used to support the
diagnosis St,$4,ss EMG has been particularly helpful in diag-
nosis of focal tetanus. EMG abnormalities include prolonged
insertional activity, and spontaneous continuous motor unit
discharges that occur in both the agonist-antagonistic muscle
pasn aq ue uxo sneat o sran poqnue uns ssdnon
to confirm the diagnosis, but they are rarely used in clinical
practice. Identifying clostridial organisms cytologically or with
culture from infected wounds is supportive of the diagnosis.
However, in many cases, the source of infection is not always
evident. Intraabdominal infections, such as metritis, enteritis,
and abscesses, may be a cause. Infection of the reproductive
tract may cause tetanus localized to the pelvic limbs. Tetanus
has been observed after spaying or neutering. It is possible that
 spores from the environment may penetrate into the healing
surgical wound. Alternatively, infection at the surgical site
such as with uterine stump infections can result in tetanus.52
 In young dogs, the loss of deciduous teeth may also provide a
source of infection.49
Figure 10-3 Elevation of the nictitating membrane and contrac-
tion of the facial and mastication muscles are seen before devel-
Treatment
 opment of tetanus in the rest of the body. Note the muscle tone
Treatment includes wound debridement, systemic adminis-
and stiffness in the head and that the ears are drawn toward each
tration of antibiotics, and potentially administration of anti-
other.
toxin to neutralize unbound, circulating toxin. Historically
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
313
 penicillin was considered the antibiotic of choice in the treat-
ruminants not able to maintain sternal recumbency and eruc-
ment of tetanus. However, the structure of penicillin is similar
tate, and breeds of dogs susceptible to bloat. In young animals
to GABA and therefore it may act as a competitive inhibitor.
surviving the disease, before epiphysial closure is complete,
At high concentrations, penicillins can cause CNS hyperex-
tetanus may cause a variety of growth abnormalities in long
citability and seizures. Although hypothetical, penicillins may
bones.
potentiate inhibition of GABA in tetanus. Consequently, met-
ronidazole has become the drug of choice for treatment of
Prognosis
tetanus because it is bactericidal against C tetani, it is able
The prognosis is usually good for dogs and cats. The prognosis
to penetrate into necrotic tissue, and is effective in anaero-
is best for dogs with less severe clinical signs. In dogs, reported
bic environments. Antibiotics used in the treatment of tetanus
survival rates include 50%, 77%, and 92%.49,52,59 Horses or
include metronidazole [l0 mg/kg of body weight, adminis-
cows that become recumbent have poor prognoses. In a ret-
0000 0n goo] 0 uad (s g Aas Ao a1
rospective study of 20 horses, the mortality rate was 75%.56
IU/kg of body weight, administered intramuscularly [IM] or
Prognosis was best for horses that had been vaccinated with
subcutaneously [SQ] [penicillin K can be administered intra-
toxoid within a year of developing tetanus, that remained
venously; IV] every 6 to 8 hours), tetracycline [22 mg/kg,
ambulatory, able to eat and drink, responded to phenothi-
administered per os (PO) or IV every 8 hours), and clindamy-
azine tranquilizers, and had clinical signs that stabilized in
cin (3 to 10 mg/kg of body weight, administered (PO, IV, or
IM every 8 to 12 hours). Antibiotics should be administered
toxin did better than those that received antitoxin subcutane-
for a minimum of 10 to 14 days.
ously. Immunization with toxoid is recommended in horses.
aunba snuenaue se aqeeae si (iil uxoue snuna
 It is given to newborn foals and boosters are given every few
serum and may be beneficial in treatment. Tetanus antitoxin
 years. Toxoid is given at the time of injury or surgery or before
neutralizes only circulating, unbound toxin. Since clinical signs
parturition.57
are related to toxin already bound and internalized within
 CNS neurons, TAT does not speed recovery. Tetanus antitoxin
Tetany
can be given IM, SQ, or IV. Intravenous administration ofTAT
Tetany shares clinical similarities to tetanus. However, tetany
 gives a rapid increase in circulating antitoxin and is the pre-
is the clinical sign of intermittent increased extensor tone.
ferred route of administration. However, use of TAT intrave-
Tetany may be congenital or acquired as a result of meta-
nously should be done cautiously. A dose of 100 to 1000 IU/kg
bolic disturbances, presumed immune mediated disease, or
is recommended for dogs and 10,000 IU for horses. Intra-
intoxication.
 J   e     s
laxis. An intradermal (ID) test injection of (O.1 to 0.2 mL)
Congenital Tetany
of antitoxin should be performed before IV administration.
Congenital tetany has been observed in cattle, dogs, and
However, animals not demonstrating a skin reaction with
horses. Regardless of the species, clinical signs are similar. At
ID testing still may have an adverse systemic reaction when
birth, affected animals display variable degrees of extensor
treated intravenously.49,56 Likewise, some animals with skin
rigidity in all limbs and opisthotonus. Affected animals may
reactions with ID testing may not develop adverse reactions
not be able to stand or walk without assistance. If capable,
when administered antitoxin intravenously. Pretreatment with
affected animals adopt a sawhorse stance and walk with a stiff
antihistamines and cortico steroids is recommended. Intrave-
gait. With external stimuli, increased extensor rigidity occurs.
nous fluid therapy and epinephrine (0.l mL/kg of 1:10,000
Although these congenital syndromes have been referred to as
dilution) are used in the treatment of anaphylactic reactions.
congenital myoclonus, the clinical picture is dominated by tet-
In horse, intrathecal administration of TAT has been used. In 
 any; therefore, these congenital syndromes are hereto referred
adult horses, a dose between 5000 and 10,000 units has been
to as congenital tetany.
recommended.57 The benefit to intrathecal administration is
Cattle-lnherited Congenital Myoclonus. This syndrome
unknown. In one study, the recovery rate of horses treated
 has also been erroneously described as neuraxial edema.50
A panean asou ut %os ot pasoddo se %/ sem Aeaenu
Healy and colleagues differentiated two syndromes found
or IM.58 However, another study failed to demonstrate a simi-
 in Hereford and Polled Hereford cattle.5l Congenital tetany
lar benefit.56 Intrathecal administration in small animals is not
occurs primarily in Polled Herefords and their crossbreeds. It
 recommended. Instead, the goal of TAT therapy is to prevent
is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait with onset before
further binding of any circulating unbound toxin.
birth. Clinical signs consist of increased extensor tone in all
Sedation may be required to control severe muscle spasms,
limbs, opisthotonus, hyperesthesia, and seizures. Affected
hyperexcitable states, and seizures. Phenothiazine tranquiliz-
animals appear mentally normal. They are unable to stand
ers such as acepromazine or chlorpromazine depress descend-
without assistance. Various external stimuli result in increased
 sd q a  s arxa 
extensor tone. Many of the calves have traumatic lesions of the
not contraindicated in animals with tetanus-induced seizures.
hip joints, suggesting the presence of clinical signs in affected
Phenobarbital is used to control seizures. It can be combined
calves in utero. No histologic lesions are present in the CNS in
with the phenothiazines, but its dose should be reduced.
these animals. A deficiency in functional glycine receptors in
Glycopyrrolate can be used to treat bradycardia. The benzo-
the spinal cord has been identified.62 A nonsense mutation in
diazepines, such as diazepam or clonazepam, may be help-
the α subunit of the glycine receptor resulting in loss of func-
ful because they work though GABA transmission and block
tion and its expression on the cell has been demonstrated.63
polysynaptic reflexes in the medulla and spinal cord.
The second disease, neuraxonal edema, was found in polled
Nursing care must include a quiet environment, frequent
Herefords and Herefords. Clinical signs developed after birth
 turning if the animal is recumbent, and skin cleanliness. Oral
and consisted of dullness, opisthotonus, and recumbency. The
intake may be impossible; hence, parenteral fuids and nutri-
animals had a characteristic histologic evidence of status spon-
ents may be necessary. Nasogastric, esophagotomy, or gastric
giosus of the nervous system. Ketone concentrations were
tubes may be used. Radiographic evaluation of the tho-
high in the urine, with a distinct aroma of burnt sugar. Healy
racic cavity before feeding should be performed to identify
and collagues compared this syndrome with maple syrup
the presence of hiatal hernia, megaesophagus, or aspiration
urine disease in humans, one of several disorders of amino
pneumonia. Abdominal distention should be monitored in
acid metabolism. The disease appears to be inherited as an
314
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
autosomal recessive trait. The exact nature of the amino acid
attempts to flex the limb cause increased tone and clonic con-
abnormality is not known. Neuraxonal edema has also been
tractions of the extensors.70 Secondary osteoarthritis of the hock
reported in conjunction with hypomyelinogenesis in Hereford
may develop. The pathogenesis appears to be an increase in the
calves, but subsequent studies demonstrated that this was only
activity of the gamma efferent system. Sectioning of the dorsal
hypomyelinogenesis.64.65
roots or blocking of the small gamma motor neurons reduces
Labrador Retrievers-Familial Reflex Myoclonus. Con-
the clinical signs.7l Lowered levels of homovanillic acid, the
 genital tetany has been observed in Labrador retriever pups
main metabolite of dopamine, were found in the cerebrospinal
and has many characteristics of the congenital myoclonus of
Hereford cattle.66 The abnormality was recognized in pups at
Xpns auo u pasodord uaaq aaeu suaean snoea zg us
 3 weeks of age. Affected pups were unable to rise without
medical therapy using lithium and copper supplementation was
assistance. Extensor muscle tone was increased in all limbs
associated with a high success rate if used soon after onset of
making evaluation of reflexes difficult, but the neurologic
 signs.73 Partial neurectomy of the tibial nerve at the level of the
examination was otherwise normal. Resistance to manipula-
stifle alleviates clinical signs with few complications in a major-
tion of the limbs or neck was present. Muscles were of normal
ity of affected animals.74
size, and no dimpling occurred with percussion. The char-
Spastic Syndrome of Adult Cattle. Periodic spasticity.
acteristic finding was increased muscle contraction with any
 rampiness, stretches, or standing disease are names given a
tactile or auditory stimulus or with voluntary activity. The
syndrome that affects the extensor muscles of the lumbar
muscle activity included all four limbs, opisthotonus, and con-
region and pelvic limbs. The condition is similar to spastic
tractures of the muscles of facial expression and the muscles of
paresis except that it occurs in older animals and is more epi-
mastication. Episodes of cyanosis occurred during severe and
sodic. Clinical signs are recognized in animals older than 6
 prolonged tetany of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles.67
Laboratory values were normal. Resting EMG was normal.
However, with auditory, tactile, and electrical stimuli, EMG
develop episodic increased extensor tone of the pelvic limbs
showed intermittent bursts of large motor-unit potentials (0.5
and thoracolumbar muscles. The affected limb is raised and
to 15 mV).67 Electrical stimulation resulted in EMG activity
extended caudally or forcefully flexed. With time, the episodes
 in other limbs.67 Normal dogs had no response to the same
increase in severity. Episodes occur when the animal stands up
stimulus. Necropsy revealed mild esophageal dilation, but no
or with movement but are not seen at rest. One or both limbs
 other gross or histologic lesions. A similarity was suggested
may be affected; in the latter case the movements alternate
  aup e s  a  ss a o
from side to side. Evidence for an autosomal dominant inheri-
receptors.56 Clonazepam, diazepam, and phenobarbital ther-
tance with incomplete penetrance is reported.76
 apy resulted in minimal relaxation.56.67 Interestingly, upon
 A similar syndrome has been reported in a Z-year-old blue-
recovery from pentobarbital and inhalant anesthesia, affected
faced Leicester ram.77 Progressive increased extensor tone
 dogs remained refractory to stimulus-induced tetany for 12 to
and tremors were observed in the pelvic limbs. Extensor tone
14 hours.67
 increased with auditory stimuli. Signs remained unchanged for
Horses. Two Peruvian Pasos foals have been reported
6 months.
with clinical signs identical to polled Herefords and Labra-
dor retrievers.58 Foals displayed tetany in response to external
Metabolic Causes ofTetany
stimuli from birth. No histologic abnormalities were observed
The resting membrane and threshold potential of a neuron is
in muscle specimens. The affected foals had approximately
maintained by balances between sodium, potassium, calcium,
40% less functional glycine receptors in the spinal cord than
and chloride.78 Excess or depletion of these electrolytes can
 controls. In comparison, affected Herefords have 80% loss of
alter membrane conductance leading to hyperexcitability.
 glycine receptors, which may account for the greater severity
Hypocalcemia. In the dog, hypocalcemia is a common
 of clinical signs in affected cattle.68 A similar clinical syndrome
cause of tetany. In plasma, calcium exists as ionized (-50%),
occurs in Egyptian Arabian foals born with a color coat dilu-
protein bound (~40%), or chelated (~10%). Only ionized cal-
tion.69 Foals are unable to stand. Histologic lesions are lacking.
cium concentration is biologically active. The distribution of
Pedigree analysis suggests an autosomal recessive inheritance.
as serum protein content, acid-base status, and the presence of
Spasticity Syndromes
anions that act as chelators [e.g., Mg++ or phosphate). Hypo-
As mentioned previously, spasticity is most commonly associ-
calcemia results in tetany when serum total calcium concen-
ated with lesions involving the upper motor neuron system.
trations drop below 6 mg/dL or an ionized concentration of
Increased extensor tone is the result ofa lack of extensor inhi-
approximately 0.6 to 0.7 mmol/L. Although several formulas
e uaaq ose seu auss un a  a jo u
exist for correction of total calcium concentration in hypo-
 to involuntary movement disorders in which the main clinical
proteinemic dogs, these formulas are inaccurate, especially in
sign is tetany. Hence, these syndromes are described here.
animals with renal disease.79 At best, corrective formulas may
Spastic Paresis of Calves. Spastic paresis, also called Elso
guide a crude estimation of ionized calcium levels. Physiologi-
heel and spastic paralysis, occurs in young cattle of many breeds.
cally, calcium ion concentrations control neuronal membrane
Affected calves are typically recognized before 3 to 4 months
permeability to sodium ions. With low calcium concentra-
of age but signs can occur anytime between the ages of l week
tions, there is increased permeability to sodium. Consequently
 and 12 months. The disease is suspected to have a genetic basis
 the nerve becomes hyperexcitable and neuronal discharges are
modified by environmental factors. Clinically, there is increased
capable of developing with little to no stimulus. Regardless
muscle tone in the gastrocnemius and superficial digital flexors
of the cause, clinical signs reflect peripheral nervous system
causing hyperextension of the hock. In severe cases, increased
hyperexcitability resulting in spontaneous discharges of nerve
tone is also present in the biceps femoris, semimembranosus,
fbers resulting in spontaneous muscle contractions. However
semitendinosus, and quadriceps musles. The signs are usu-
CNS hyperexcitability may also play a role. Affected animals
 ally bilateral, but one side is often worse. The pelvic limbs are
display varying degrees of muscle stiffness, fasciculations, and
held caudally in extension, especially at the hock. The limb is
cramping in different muscle groups. In addition, affected
advanced like a pendulum. Some improvement occurs with
animals may display shifting limb lameness, stiff gait, and
walking, but movement never becomes normal. Forceful
decreased activity. Other clinical signs include hyperthermia,
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
315
abnormalities in behavior [aggression, lethargy, vocalization),
tetany. Primary hypoparathyroidism is suspected in a dog
facial rubbing, and painful appearance. Over time, increased
muscle contractions lead to tetany and seizures. In some ani-
presence of normal renal function. Less commonly, secondary
mals, clinical signs are not present at rest, requiring external
hypoparathyroidlism occurs as a result of destruction of the
stimuli or exercise to develop. Hyperventilation secondary to
parathyroid glands related to treatment of thyroid disease or
panting can precipitate tetany.
hyperparathyroidism. Decreased concentrations of intact PT'H
The common causes of hypocalcemia in dogs and cats
in the presence of hypocalcemia substantiate the diagnosis.
include postparturient hypocalcemia, hypoparathyroidism,
Treatment involves administration of vitamin D analogs, such
renal failure, and protein-losing enteropathies.
as dihydrotachysterol, ergocalciferol [vitamin Dz), or calcitriol
Postparturient
Hypocalcemia. Postparturient eclamp-
[1,25 dihydroxycholecalciferol). Approximate dosages ofthese
  s     (  
drugs are dihydrotachysterol, 0.0l mg/kg of body weight daily
days after whelping.80 The exact mechanism of postparturi-
initially followed by 0.02 to 0.03 mg/kg/day as a maintenance
ent hypocalcemia in the bitch is not known; however, calcium
losses from fetal ossification and lactation combined with defi-
to once weekly depending on effect; and calcitriol, 0.03 to
 cient osteoclastic activity or calcium absorption are probably
0.06 mcg/kg/day. Dosing varies between individual animals.
responsible for altered calcium homeostasis. Although some
Therefore, clinicians must individualize the dosage by moni-
dogs become hypoglycemic, low blood glucose probably is not
toring the serum calcium levels twice a week to prevent
important in the production of tetany. Small-breed dogs with
 e i   ra r r
nervous temperaments appear more susceptible to this disor-
established. Calcium supplementation must be administered
der. Nervous dogs may be predisposed because they hyperven-
       i  
tilate during parturition, inducing respiratory alkalosis, which
probability of hypercalcemic toxicity.
favors protein binding of calcium, thus lowering ionized cal-
Chronic Renal Failure. Chronic renal failure may cause
cium concentrations.
hypocalcemia based on ionized calcium concentrations.82.83
 Diagnosis of postparturient hypocalcemia is based on
Despite this, clinical signs related to hypocalcemia are rarely
clinical signs and low ionized calcium concentrations. Treat-
observed. Caution should be exercised when correcting hypo-
ment includes l0% calcium gluconate administered slowly
calcemia in animals with CRF due to the presence of concur-
IV at a dose of 0.5 to 1.5 mL/kg or 5 to 15 mg/kg (over
rent hyperphosphatemia.
10 to 30 minutes) and to effect as individual requirements
 Protein-losing enteropathy. Protein-losing enteropathies
vary; simultaneously heart rate and rhythm are monitored
(PLE) can lead to hypoalbuminemia which affects calcium
for bradyarrhythmias.&l In mildly affected animals or those
concentrations leading to clinical signs of hypocalcemia.84
requiring repeated intravenous administration to correct clini-
-o erq  im s 
cal signs, 10% calcium gluconate [not calcium chloride) can
thyroidism secondary to poor vitamin D absorption in the
 be given subcutaneously. The dose is 60 to 90 mg/kg/day or
intestine or hypomagnesium.85.86
 alternatively the intravenous dose needed to stop clinical signs
can be used.8l Dosages are dlluted with 1 to 4 parts 0.9%
marily in pregnant and lactating cattle pastured on highly fer-
NaCl and then divided and given every 6 to 8 hours subcuta-
tilized, lush spring pastures.This tetany also occurs in pregnant
neously. Animals that continue to have seizures or that remain
and lactating ewes and occasionally in feeder cattle.87 Several
excessively irritable or restless can be mildly sedated with
hypomagnesemic conditions have been described, including
 benzodiazepines. For maintenance therapy, puppies are sepa-
grass tetany, wheat pasture poisoning, milk tetany of calves,
rated from the bitch for 24 hours and supplemented with the
and transport tetany. The basic pathophysiology of each is
bitch's milk or puppy formula. Full nursing is restricted for an
similar and probably is related to decreased dietary intake and
addlitional 48 hours. If posible the puppies should be weaned.
mobilization or increased excretion of magnesium. In addition
Oral calcium lactate or gluconate is given in dosages of 0.5 to
to low dietary magnesium, dietary potassium and sodium con-
2.0 g/day in divided doses.
centration also play a role in the development of grass tetany.88
Eclampsia of Mares. Eclampsia of mares is rarely encoun-
Early signs include restlessness, extreme alertness, and
  z o I ro  r a oe a au s
erent, and even aggressive. Stimulation may induce severe
weaning. Factors that may predispose the animal to eclampsia
signs of tetany, ataxia, and bellowing. Animals may become
in mares include grazing on a lush pasture, strenuous work, and
recumbent with opisthotonus and paddling movements. The
 prolonged transport. Affected mares tend to sweat profusely
sauuy Aroerqe Aq paioddns si Auea ssero jo sisoua
and develop muscle spasticity Rapid respiration, muscular fas-
of hypomagnesemia [<l mg/dL), hypocalcemia [<7 mg/dL),
ciculations, and trismus are evident. The rectal temperature
and high normal levels of potassium. Therapy should correct
is normal or mildly elevated, and the pulse may be rapid and
the immediate ionic imbalance and should supplement the
irregular. Swallowing may be affected. The diagnosis is based
dietary intake of magnesium. Magnesium lactate in a 3.3%
on clinical signs and the presence of reduced serum ionized
solution (2.2 mL/kg), magnesium gluconate in a 15% solu-
calcium concentrations. Treatment with IV calcium solutions
tion [0.44 mL/kg), and magnesium sulfate in a 20% solution
 produces rapid, complete recovery.
(0.44 mL/kg) can be given slowly via intravenous or subcuta-
Hypoparathyroidism. Hypoparathyroidism   results
in
neous routes. Commercial combination solutions may also be
decreased secretion of parathormone (PT'H) with subsequent
used effectively. Magnesium oxide, 1 g/45 kg daily, should be
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. This condition has
force fed or supplied in blocks containing protein supplements
been recognized most frequently in dogs. Hypoparathyroidism
and molasses. Aninals on high-risk pastures should be given
can be divided into primary and secondary causes. Although
magnesium oxide or chloride supplements.
 the exact cause is unknown, primary hypoparathyroidism in
Wheat pasture poisoning is similar to grass tetany, except it
 dogs is likely a primary autoimmune disease. Acute primary
occurs in cattle and sheep that graze on a cereal grain pasture
hypoparathyroidism is characterized by a sudden onset of
during its early growth. Diagnosis and treatment are the same
tetany or seizures or both. A chronic form of the disease is
as those for grass tetany.
associated with recurrent depression, lethargy, anorexia, vom-
Milk tetany occurs in 2- to 4-month-old calves that are fed
 e   n    
only milk. Signs may occur after episodes of diarrhea. Digestive
316
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
disorders may decrease magnesium absorption, thus complicat-
relaxation. The pupils may be fixed and mydriatic. Seizures
raa apnu ss e rp su a 
can be stimulated by touch or noise. Eventually, respiratory
thesia, nervousness, recumbency, and seizures. Repeated attacks
failure and death occurs. Presumptive diagnosis is based on
may occur. Diagnosis is based on the history, clinical signs, and
clinical signs. Although there are many toxins that can cause
 serum magnesium concentrations below 0.7 mg/dL. Calves
similar clinical signs, strychnine intoxication seems to be most
respond to parenteral magnesium ionic therapy. Susceptible
severe and occurs most rapidly. Definitive diagnosis is based
 calves should be given magnesium oxide supplements, 1 g/day.
on toxicologic analysis of stomach contents, urine, blood, or
Transport tetany occurs after stressful events such as trans-
liver tissue. Antemortem, stomach contents and urine are most
portation, vaccination, deworming, adverse weather, and
likely to provide a diagnosis. However, over time stomach con-
tents decline in concentration as the toxin moves out into the
tle and sheep. Dietary reduction in calcium, magnesium, and
intestinal tract. Blood levels may be low as strychnine is readily
potassium coupled with stress produces ionic imbalances that
metabolized or excreted unchanged in the urine.
result in a wide range of clinical signs, from spastic to flaccid
Treatment is directed at limiting absorption and controlling
paralysis. The signs usually begin within 24 hours of the stress
but may be delayed for 72 hours. Early manifestations include
by activated charcoal administration reduces the absorp-
 restlessness, anorexia, and excitement. These signs progress to
tion. Caution should be exercised before inducing vomiting
muscular trembling, teeth grinding, ataxia, and recumbency.
as stimulation may induce seizures. Tetany is controlled with
Opisthotonus, paddling, and coma may develop. Treatment
pentobarbital sodium given intravenously to effect. Six to
consists of parenteral administration of polyionic glucose solu-
12 hours may be necessary to allow for the toxin to be metab-
tions and attentive nursing care.
olized in dogs.9s Caution must be used to prevent overdos-
 Muscle Cramping With Hypoadrenocorticism. Two stan-
ing. Endotracheal intubation and maintenance of respiration
dard poodles were reported with muscle cramping of the
are mandatory. Inhalation anesthesia, benzodiazepines, and
limbs.89 The clinical presentation most closely resembled
sasp sare rof paau au aonpaiot pasn sq uea poueqreoau
tetany and therefore is included here. Both dogs episodically
 of barbiturates. Fluid diuresis promotes renal excretion of the
exhibited acute onset of rigid extension of a single limb lasting
toxin. Acidification of the urine is recommended to enhance
several seconds. Episodes were observed with all limbs. Dur-
elimination, which should be completed in 24 to 48 hours.
ing the episodes, the appendicular muscles were rigid with
 palpable fasciculations. Percussive myotonia was not detect-
Myoclonus
able. EMG was normal in one dog. Both dogs were diagnosed
Myoclonus is the clinical manifestation of a sudden contrac-
with hypoadrenocorticism. At the time of diagnosis, both dogs
tion of a group of muscles followed by its relaxation. Histori-
were dehydrated, hypovolemic, hyponatremic, hypochlore-
 cally, myoclonus has been used to describe contractions of
mic, hyperkalemic, and azotemic. Ionized calcium was normal.
muscle groups that result in a relatively low frequency (slow)
With adequate supplementation of mineralocorticoids, epi-
sodes resolved. The exact cause of the syndrome was undeter-
 of muscle groups of the axial skeleton. The observation of sim-
mined but given resolution with treatment, the episodes were
ilar movements in association with other conditions had led to
likely the result of electrolyte and fluid imbalances.
the use of myoclonus as a descriptive term to qualify events
   si   e s  
Immune-Mediated Causes of Tetany: Stiff Horse
Here, myoclonus is used more broadly to describe a condition
Syndrome
in which contraction followed by relaxation of muscle groups
A syndrome(
 characterized by increased extensor tone in
occurs. As such, myoclonus can be qualified as to the nature
the pelvic limbs, paraspinal muscle contracture, and pain on
of its occurrence (sporadic or repetitive), when occurring
palpation of the affected muscles has been observed in an
repetitively, whether or not cycles of contraction and relax-
 11-year-old horse.90 Similar signs had occurred 1 year prior.
ation occur constantly or episodically, when associated with
Clinical signs improved with corticosteroid therapy. Serum
action/movement or rest or posture. Additionally, myoclonus
autoantibodies directed against glutamic acid decarboxylase, a
 may manifest as fine or gross movements.
cytosolic enzyme, which converts glutamate to GABA in the
In general, myoclonus can occur sporadically or repeti-
nerve terminal, were detected. It was postulated that autoanti-
tively. Sporadic forms are likely benign conditions in which
bodies interfered with the production of GABA, resulting in a
myoclonus may be observed and then not recur for prolonged
loss of function of spinal inhibitory interneurons. The disorder
periods of time giving the impression of an isolated event. Spo-
was thought similar to stiff man syndrome in humans.
radic forms have received little attention in the veterinary lit-
erature. Given the infrequency of each event, the diagnosis of
Toxic Cause of Tetany: Strychnine
sporadic myoclonus is problematic. Often the diagnosis is one
Strychnine is a rodenticide that is sometimes implicated in
of exclusion. Importantly, it may be difficult to differentiate
malicious or accidental poisonings of small animals. It pro-
sporadic myoclonus from simple focal seizures [see Chapter
duces tetanic spasms that are exacerbated by auditory or
13). Therefore the diagnosis of sporadic myoclonus frequently
tactile stimuli. In dogs, intoxication is seen more commonly
entails exclusion of simple partial seizures.
in young, less than 2 years of age, male large-breed dogs in
 As the name implies, repetitive myoclonus is the recurring
cycles of contraction followed by relaxation. Repetitive myoc-
-u ii uum adde Aeu suis au saop uns ui ainsodx
lonus may be constant, episodic, action-related, postural, and
pou p suais 'todar auo u zg'uosaau ae sino 7 on san
resting.
 When appearing as a recurring fine movement, it may be
from 0.3 to 1.0 mg/kg with the lethal dose being 2.0 mg/kg in
 described clinically as a tremor. Consequently, the two terms
cats.94 Clinical signs typically begin with nervousness,restless-
are used synonymously in the _context of rapid, repetitive
 ness, and apprehension rapidly progressing to increased muscle
myoclonus in which rhythmic fexion of joints occur with a
rigidity causing a stiff gait. Increased muscle rigidity quickly
frequency such that they appear as a vibration or shivering
progresses to lateral recumbency with the limbs held in exten-
(fine tremor) or may involve slower more gross movements
sion and opisthotonus. Facial muscle rigidity also occurs. At this
(coarse tremor). These movements may be diffuse or limited
 stage, tetanic seizures occur. Between seizures, there is partial
to specific anatomy such as a limh.
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
317
Constant Repetitive Myoclorus
Canine Distemper. The most widely known disease process
associated with constant myoclonus is secondary to canine
distemper infection. However, constant repetitive myoc-
lonus can occur with other causes of CNS infammation.96
Constant repetitive myoclonus secondary to canine distem-
per virus was recognized and described as early as 1862.97
Any group of muscles may be affected. Frequently myoclo-
100 uV
nus is confned to a fexor group in one limb, but myoclo-
nus involving a combination of muscle groups in more than
one limb, the facial muscles, or the muscles of mastication
10 ms
also can occur. Clinically, the affected dog displays constant,
rhythmic contractions of the affected limb or muscle group.
 Although difficult to appreciate with movement, myoclonus
Hgure 10-4 EMG tracing from the limb of a 2-year-old Jack Rus-
often continues with activity, rest, sleep, or with light anes-
sell terrier with myokymia, which is visualized as rippling skin
thesia. During rest and sleep, the frequency and severity of
movements across the muscle. The EMG reveals rhythmic bursts
the myoclonus lessens. The syndrome may occur before, dur-
of single motor unit potentials appearing as doublets or triplets
ing, or after the overt encephalitis typical of canine distem-
myokymic discharges (arrows). Myokymia sounds like soldiers
per. Most often myoclonus develops after all other clinical
marching during the EMG recording.
sign of infection have resolved.97 Occasionally, myoclonus
is the only clinical signs implicating prior canine distemper
infection. Experimental studies have demonstrated that the
characteristic of equine polysaccharide storage myopathy;
abnormality lies in the spinal cord or brainstem within intrin-
however, its role in shivers is uncertain.l06,107 No treatment
sic neural circuits.98 In some dogs, IV bolus administration of
has been defined.
 lidocaine may stop or reduce the frequency of myoclonus. In
Myokymia. This syndrome is also known as continuous
those demonstrating a response, oral procainamide may pro-
muscle fiber activity or myokymia.l08.109Myokymia denotes
vide continued suppression of myoclonus. Anticonvulsants 
 a specifc clinical phenomenon of rhythmic, undulating, ver-
 have no benefit. Some dogs seem to improve with time. If the
miform [wormlike] or wavelike movements of the skin over-
myoclonus does not interfere with eating or locomotion, the
lying contracting muscle fbers. Movements are continuous
dog can live with it.
and importantly persist during sleep and general anesthe-
Drug Induced. Constant repetitive myoclonus is occa-
sia. Movements can be generalized or affect isolated muscle
sionally observed in other conditions. Drugs including
morphine, etomidate, and propofol can induce constant
can have a progressive course. Affected animals with general-
ized disease may develop hyperthermia, progressive stiffness
as the drugs are metabolized. Rarely, lead toxicity can induce
limb contractures, and collapse. l08 Myokymia likely represents
 myoclonus in dogs.l02 Myoclonus resolves with chelation
the clinical manifestation of motor axon or motor nerve termi-
therapy.
s u (eu se uo ixrdu u
Tic in a Horse. A myoclonic twitch in the thoracic limb
 a variety of etiologies can result in myokymia including Guil-
of an 18-month-old quarter horse occurred after a traumatic
lain-Barre syndrome, multiple sclerosis, radiation plexopathy.
 accident.lo3 The affected limb was paretic. The horse stood
brainstem tumors, timber rattle snake envenomation, and
with the affected limb abducted, slightly flexed at the carpus,
a variety of autoimmune diseases, in particular one directed
and with the toe on the ground and the elbow dropped. A
against voltage-gated potassium channels.ll The etiology has
week after the injury, constant repetitive myoclonus devel-
su uouos aui 1ll-aon 'steo pue sop u pauap uaaq 1ou
oped in the triceps and latissimus dorsi muscles. Myoclonus
been reported in the Jack Russell terrier and other dog breeds
was present when standing or lying, and when asleep but was
and in cats. l08-111
absent under anesthesia. Various drugs were tried; however,
 Diagnosis is based on characteristic appearance of the
 only xylazine resulted in temporary resolution. The myoc-
 movement of the overlying skin. Affected animals may have
lonus progressively decreased in intensity and resolved by
an elevated serum creatinine kinase [CK) activity. Definitive
1l weeks.
diagnosis entails EMG identification of myokymic and neuro-
myotonic discharges. Myokymic discharges are short, rhyth-
Episodic Repetitive Myoclonus
mic, or semirhythmic bursts of doublet, triplet, or multiplets
Shivers. This disorder is seen most often in draft horses;
of motor unit potentials (MUP) occurring at a rate of 5 to 62
however, it has also been reported in a quarter horse and
Hz (Figure 10-4). Neuromyotonic discharges are long bursts
Thoroughbred.l04, l0os The syndrome is characterized by
of MUPs occurring at rates of 150 to 300 Hz that wax and
exaggerated flexion and abduction of one or both pelvic
wane in amplitude. Treatment involves drugs that stabilize
limbs successively.lo5,lo6 The affected limb is held in flex-
the muscle membrane potential. Drugs include phenytoin,
ion and abduction for several seconds. In addition, tremors 
carbamazepine, procainamide, mexiletine hydrochloride, and
may be present in the gluteal and tail muscles. The tail may
corticosteroids. The prognosis is good for focal syndromes as
be raised. The abnormal movements can occur while stand-
muscle activity may not affect the quality of life. Prognosis in
ing but are more pronounced when the animal is made to
 generalized syndromes is guarded because response to therapy
a  r aq  os  ns dn 
is variable.
sodic, postural repetitive tremor The gait may appear stiff
or choppy or may be normal. Affected animals may appear
Action-Related Repetitive Myoclonus
uncomfortable or painful during an episode. Signs are often
Action-related repetitive myoclonus tremors occur with mus-
 present for years and progress slowly to the point of inca-
cular activity but abate at rest. In most cases, clinical signs
pacitation. No lesions have been identifed in nerves 
ár
relate to diffuse muscle tremors that occur rapidly. Most dis-
the CNS.l06 Affected horses may have muscle pathology
orders are either congenital or acquired.
318
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Congenital Action-Related Repetitive Myoclonus
for myelin proteolipid protein, a major protein necessary
CNS Myelin Disorders. Abnormalities involving CNS myelin
for myelination results in diffuse CNS hypomyelination.130
can be broadly categorized into reduced or absent myelin pro-
 In addition to abnormal myelin, there are decreased num-
duction (hypomyelinogenesis, hypomyelination), abnormal
bers of oligodendrocytes.13l Remaining oligodendrocytes are
myelination(
(dysmyelination—leukodystrophy,  myelinoly-
 immature.131
sis), and demyelination. Developmental disorders of normal
Hypomyelination has been reported in two Siamese cat
 myelin cause thinly myelinated and some nonmyelinated
littermates.132 Normal at birth, affected cats developed signs
axons [hypomyelinogenesis] or abnormal myelin [dysmyelin-
within weeks. Action-related myoclonus predominated in the
ation).ll2 Hypomyelinogenesis and dysmyelination can be
clinical syndrome. Diffuse hypomyelination of the spinal cord
inherited in some species and breeds and also occurs second-
was evident at necropsy. Subjectively oligodendrocyte num-
 ary to in utero infection with several viral agents.l12 These
bers were normal.
disorders are distinct from primary demyelinating diseases
 Many animals that are not severely affected improve with
in which myelin develops normally and is later destroyed by
age, but assistance with feeding is usually necessary because
external agents (e.g, canine distemper). Primary demyelinat-
they cannot nurse properly. In Springer spaniels, males do
ing diseases frequently cause cerebellar signs. Demyelination
not show much improvement, but the carrier females are less 
can be secondary to axonal degeneration. These diseases are
severely affected and improve considerably with maturation.
discussed in Chapter 7, which lists the primary disorders of
Chow chow and Weimaraner dogs improve to near normal
myelin development.
with maturity. Sheep and pigs may recover if assisted with
The clinical signs of syndromes Chypomyelination and dys-
nutrition. Cattle may also improve, but the degenerative
myelination) are usually noticed in the first few weeks of life
disease in Herefords is progressive and fatal. No treatment
or as the affected animals begin to walk. The signs are similar
exists.
in all species. Signs consist of action-related repetitive myoclo-
Central Axonopathy. Enlargement of axons in the CNS
nus. When standing or walling, affected animals display what
without dystrophic changes such as spheroids has been asso-
appears as a diffuse coarse (large-amplitude) tremor causing
ciated with diffuse tremors. Secondary to enlarged axons,
the animal to "bounce up and down" in a rhythmic manner.
decreased myelin content, spongy changes, and gliosis are also
In dogs, the pelvic limbs are generally more affected than the
present. A generalized axonopathy occurred in three Scottish
thoracic limbs. Some affected dogs fall frequently, giving the
terriers with generalized tremor and ataxia.133 The dogs had a
impression of ataxia. Severely affected animals may be unable
common sire. Age at presentation was 4 to 5 months, and all
to walk. With sleep or relaxation, the tremor is not present.
were euthanized within 2 months due to progression. Axo-
These congenital disorders of myelination have been exten-
nopathies also have been reported in the quarter horse and
sively studied in the pig, sheep, mouse, and dog.
Holstein-Friesian cattle. 134, 135
The presumptive diagnosis is based on the history, present-
Acquired Action-Related Repetitive Myoclonus
ing signs, and lack of positive fndings on any diagnostic test.
Inflammatory. Steroid-responsive tremor syndrome (SRTS,
Generally more than one animal in the litter is affected. Dis-
idiopathic tremors, little white shakers, idiopathic cerebellitis
tinguishing developmental disorder of myelination from cer-
is an acute, generalized tremor syndrome responsive to gluco-
ebellar disease or demyelination is difficult. Although often
corticoids occurs in young small-breed adult dogs. Initially the
confused with the intention tremor observed with cerebellar
syndrome was observed in small white breeds, such as Maltese,
disease, animals with these developmental disorders do not
poodles, and West Highland white terriers, hence the term litte
display the dysmetria seen with cerebellar disease. Likewise,
white shakers. However, the condition also affects other small
most of the demyelinating diseases are not apparent at such
an early age.
 generalized tremors diagnosed with SRTS based on excellent
Six different myelin disorders have been defined in pigs. I13-118
and rapid response to treatment with prednisone, most dogs
Only two of these--type A-Ill, which is sex-linked in Land-
were 1 to 5 years of age, and all weighed less than 15 kg, and
race, and type A-IV, which is an autosomal recessive trait in
more than 50% of the dogs were nonwhite mixed breeds.138
Saddlebacks—are inherited. Affected pigs develop signs at 2
The tremor worsens with movement, decreases at rest, and
to 3 days of age. Myelin is abnormal in the Saddlebacks, and
is absent during sleep. The disease is nonprogressive after the
oligodendrocytes are reduced in the Landrace. No treatment
first 2 to 3 days. Spontaneous remission may occur. With the
for the inherited forms is known.
exception of tremors, neurologic examination is normal in
In sheep the disorder is called Border disease. Affected
most instances. Less commonly, paraparesis and tetraparesis
lambs have a characteristic hairy fleece and are called hairy
have been observed.137 Other concurrent clinical signs include
shaker lambs.li9, 120 Border disease is caused by a pestivirus
opsoclonus [rapid multidirectional involuntary eye move-
 antigenetically similar to bovine viral diarrhea virus.12l Infec-
ments), head tilt, hypermetria, and decreased menace response.
tion occurs in utero. Infected lambs remain persistently vire-
Although cerebellovestibular signs are uncommon, observation
mic, and antibody negative, and continually excrete virus.121 In
of such signs has implicated the cerebellum as a neuroanatomic
addition to hypomyelination, affected lambs are often stunted
site of origin of the tremors. However, the tremor is more rapid
and may have skeletal deformities. Similar to Border disease in
than usually expected with cerebellar disease and ataxia absent.
sheep, calves born from cows infected with bovine viral diar-
More likely, diffuse inflammation of the CNS accounts for
rhea virus at 100 days' gestation may be born with cerebel-
the tremors. In the few cases in which dogs were necropsied,
lar dysplasia and hypomyelination.122 In addition, Hereford
mild nonsuppurative inflammation of the nervous system, not
 calves have a rare degenerative disorder characterized by neu-
confined to the cerebellum, was found.l39 Speculated causes
 roflament accumulation in neurons. Tremor is a prominent
include viral or immune-mediated inflammatory disease. The
sign seen hours after birth.123
relation to white coat color has led to hypotheses involving a
 Hypomyelination has been observed in several different
relation to tyrosine metabolism; however, these are not albino
 breeds of dog, including the springer spaniel, Weimaraner,
animals. 140
chow chow, Samoyed, lurcher hound, and Bernese mountain
 The diagnosis is made through exclusion of other diseases
dog.124-29 The best studied is the springer spaniel [*shak-
combined with CSF fluid analysis.About 50% of affected dogs
have mild to moderate mixed or mononuclear inflammatory
spaniel, a point mutation in the PLPl gene, which encodes
 changes in the CSF. 138 Treatment is with immunosuppressive
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
319
doses of corticosteroids, diazepam, or both.137,138 In dogs
are affected more frequently than horses. Tremors are often
not responding to immunosuppression, propranolol, a beta-
associated with ataxia, dysmetria, and in some cases seizures.
adrenergic blocker may be effective. The corticosteroids 
The diagnosis is based on clinical signs and identification of
should be given in decreasing doses for 8 to 12 weeks. Stop-
the toxic plant in pastures where affected animals graze. Dallis
ping therapy early may lead to relapse, which may be more
grass and some other similar grasses are infested with Claviceps
diffcult to control. Clinical improvement is expected in 2 to
paspali, which produces a neurotoxin. Phalaris neurotoxicity
3 days but may take up to 10 days to occur. Relapses after
is caused by alkaloids that interfere with serotonin release.
recovery have been seen.
Perennial ryegrass is infested with mycotoxins, and annual rye-
Toxins. Tremors are often associated with toxicosis involv-
grass has a toxin produced by a Corynebacterium.l36 See Table
ing numerous compounds. Therefore the presence of tremors
15-17 for details.
is not pathognomonic for a particular intoxication. In addi-
Heavy-Metal Poisoning Lead is the most common heavy
tion to trenors, clinical signs involving other organ systems
metal causing toxicosis in animals. Gastrointestinal and CNS
are usually present.
signs dominate the clinical picture in most cases. Horses seem
to be more resistant and generally have peripheral neuropa-
through increased release of acetylcholine and increased
thy and respiratory problems.l47 In cats and dogs, vomiting
receptor stimulation  and  subsequent muscular fatigue.
and diarrhea may occur, especially with acute poisoning. Cat-
 a  sn s  s r
tle may bloat and have diarrhea. CNS signs include seizures,
the CNS to cause tremors. In particular neurotoxic agents
blindness abnormal ehavir, and tremors4849Trmors ar
that stimulate the CNS will manifest signs of hyperactiv-
usually associated with chronic low-grade poisoning and prob-
ity, hyperesthesia, muscle tremors and fasciculation,
and
ably are caused by the demyelinating effects oflead. The acute
behavior changes. Toxicants affecting the autonomic
cases often have laminar cerebrocortical necrosis accounting
ner-
  r q si  n s s
for the predominance of cerebral signs. Lead poisoning and
linergic neurotransmission. Stimulation of the cholinergic
 other heavy-metal toxicities, including diagnosis and manage-
neurotransmission will result in bronchoconstriction, muscle
ment, are discussed in Chapter 15.
tremors, exocrine gland stimulation, bradycardia, and other
Hexachlorophene. Hexachlorophene, an ingredient in anti-
CNS effects. Signs of blockade of cholinergic neurotransmis-
septic soaps (pHisoHex), may cause generalized tremors,
sion depend upon the type of cholinergic receptor involved.
especial in young animals. Oral administration of hexa-
Nicotinic blockage results in skeletal muscle paralysis and
chlorophene in an attempt to reproduce the clinical syn-
often tremors. Toxins like bromethalin and hexachlorophene
drome cause vomiting and diarrhea, salivation, tachypnea,
affect myelin causing intramyelinic edema and alter con-
and depression.l50 Clinical cases of hexachlorophene toxicity
duction of the action potential. Discussed here are a select
have resulted from both topical contact and ingestion.150-152
group of compounds in which tremors are the main feature
Lesions are primarily vacuolation of the white matter Treat-
of intoxication.
ment is eliminating exposure and supportive care. Acute
Mycotoxicoses. A mycotoxin, penitrem A is produced by
 intoxication may be helped by osmotic diuresis.15l Dogs often
several Penicillium spp., Aspergillus, and Claviceps. Ingestion
recover with time.
results in severe generalized tremors, opsoclonus, and seizures
Organophosphates and Chlorinated Hydrocarbons. Organc-
 phosphate compounds may cause tremors in some cases of
duction of mycotoxin include mold contamination of cream
chronic intoxication. Tremors usually precede the more
cheese, macaroni and cheese, walnuts, bread, rice, and com-
common findings of seizures and neuromuscular weakness.
Organophosphates potentiate effects of acetylcholine at the
theingestion4The severity of thetremors mayberelatedto
neuromuscular junction by binding acetylcholinesterase.
the amount of mycotoxin ingested. Vomiting often precedes
Tremors and fasciculations associated with muscle weakness
tremors. Affected dogs may be hyperthermic due to mus-
occur as depolarizing neuromuscular junction blockade effects
cular activity. Rarely, ventilatory failure may occur.l43 The
take place.is3 Chlorinated hydrocarbons often produce trem-
presumptive diagnosis is based on observing the ingestion
ors as a major component of toxicity. Fine tremors or fascicu-
of spoiled foods or compost, elimination of other causes of
lations of the muscles may be accompanied by seizures, tonic
tremors, and response to therapy. Definitive diagnosis is made
spasms, and autonomic manifestations. These toxicities are
by measuring penitrem A concentrations in stomach contents.
discussed in Chapter 15.
Treatment is directed at reducing absorption, reducing trem-
Other Tremorogenic Agents. Carbamates, pyrethrins, pyre-
ors, and supportive care. Induction of emesis or gastric lavage
throids, ivermectin, bromethalin, and theobromine may cause
should be considered. The tremors lessen in severity with IV
tremors l38 Pyrethrins and pyrethroid insecticides alter both
bolus of benzodiazepines. In severely affected dogs, bolus
sodium and chloride conductance causing tremors. Class I and
administration of a benzodiazepine drug followed by a con-
 II pyrethrins and pyrethroid compounds act on gated sodium
stant rate infusion may be necessary for several hours. In dogs
channels in nerve and muscle causing persistent depolariza-
not responding to benzodiazepines, pentobarbital sodium
tion and failure of membrane repolarization.154.155 ClassIl
may be required.44Methocarbamol (55 to 200 mg/kg IV) to
 pyrethroids inhibit binding of GABA to the GABAA recep-
effect and at a rate of 2 mL/min) may also be helpful in con-
tor, which prevents influx of chloride. This causes further
trolling tremors. 45 Animals requiring pentobarbital require
membrane depolarization and blockade of action potential
close monitoring due to the respiratory depression associated
and failure of membrane repolarization. Young cats are more
with pentobarbital. Sedated animals that continue to vomit
frequently affected. Clinical signs include hyperexcitability,
are at risk of aspiration pneumonia. Supportive care involves
seizures, and muscle weakness manifesting as tremors and
intravenous fluid therapy and temperature monitoring. Most
fasciculation.156, 157
dogs recover quickly but severely affected animals may take
up to several weeks.l4l Mycotoxins associated with plants in
Postural-Related Repetitive Myoclorus (Tremor)
large animals are discussed in the next section and are listed
As suggested by the name, postural repetitive myoclonus
in Chapter 15.
affects specific muscles involved in weight support. Clini-
Poisonous Plants. Plant toxicoses causing tremors usually
cal signs are present only with weight bearing and are absent
affect multiple animals in a group, are seasonal, and often
 during activity or at rest while lying down [i.e., non-weight
occur late in the growth period of the plants.146 Food animals
bearing).
320
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Postural Repetitive Myoclonus in Geriatric Dogs. A very
These conditions also can be referred to as dyskinesia. The
rapid, fine tremor occurs in the pelvic limbs of some older dogs.
most common clinical presentation is dystonia, a sustained
Occasionally, it also involves the thoracic limbs. The severity
contraction of a group of muscles involving the pelvic limb,
may progress slowly over months to years or remain static. The
which appears as increased extensor tone. Even when allimbs
u  s s  a m  sr s n
are involved, signs often predominate in the pelvic limbs.
weight bearing or during activity, tremors are not observed.
Abnormal movements can be triggered by excitement or exer-
There is preservation of strength and gait. The dogs do not
cise. The pathogenesis may involve a functional or absolute
 appear to be in pain or bothered by the tremor. The diagnosis
 deficiency in neurotransmitters or their receptors as structural
is based on signalment, typical characteristics, and elimination
lesions are usually absent.
 of other causes of tremors. Treatment is unnecessary.
Orthostatic
Postural Myoclonus in Great Danes
Focal Dyskinesia/Dystonia
and Scottish Deerhounds. Orthostatic postural myoclonus
Scotty Cramp. Scottish terriers are affected by an inherited
has been observed in young_otherwise healthy Great Danes
disorder characterized primarily by episodic dystonia primarily
Aensn are sop pa as'ssispunap usss pe
involving the pelvic limbs but also involving the thoracic limbs
under 2 years of age. Fine, rapidly progressive tremors occur
 in severely affected dogs. The syndrome is inherited as a reces-
in all limbs only when the dogs are weight supporting. In
sive trait with variable expression.163.164 Signs occur between
one dog, the thoracic limbs were more affected when eating
l and 3 years of age. Episodes are precipitated by exercise, fear,
while in another dog, the pelvic limbs were more affected
and excitement. With excitement, the pelvic limbs assume a
when attempting to sit. Moreover, the severity of the tremor
hypertonic, extended position or may occasionally display
   n s   
exaggerated flexion of one or both limbs. Thoracic limbs may
become abducted and develop extensor tone. Signs progress
ing weight, when leaning against their owners for support, or
Over several minutes. Severely affected dogs assume lordosis
and may fall into lateral recumbency. The severity varies from
mal. Under anesthesia, EMG and motor nerve studies were
mildly affected to incapacitated. Structural nervous system
normal. However, surface EMG performed in awake, standing
lesions are lacking. A functional deficiency in serotonin modu-
animals demonstrated the presence of repetitive motor unit 
lation of motor neuron function has been postulated.165.166
potentials occurring regularly at a frequency of 13 to 16 Hz.
 n    s a 
Such potentials are absent when affected dogs are in a non-
Drugs such as methysergide or methionine that decrease CNS
weight supporting position (lying down). Using a stethoscope
 over the muscles, low-pitched noise can be heard coinciding
signalment and characteristic clinical signs. Treatment is aimed
with the tremor. Histologic lesions were absent in the muscle
at muscle relaxation or increasing serotonin levels, which
and nerve specimens. The diagnosis is based on signalment,
reduce severity and duration of episodes. Oral diazepam at a
characteristic tremors, and electrophysiologic demonstration
dose of 0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg every 8 hours [or other benzodiaz-
of motor unit potential occurring at a frequency of 13 to 16 Hz
epine derivatives) or acepromazine is most frequently used.
when weight bearing. Treatment consists of benzodiazepines
Recently, fluoxetine, a serotonin reuptake inhibitor was used
or phenobarbital. Given the potential to develop tolerance to
to treat an affected dog.168 The disease is not life threatening
benzodiazepines, phenobarbital therapy may be preferred.158
unless it severely incapacitates the dog.
Hypertonicity in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. This
 Affected piglets displayed a tremor while standing and walking
condition is also known as episodic falling, deer stalking, and
but not when lying down. EMG burst activity in the semiten-
tetany in Cavalier King Charles spaniels. 169 Affected dogs
 dinosus muscles occurred at 14 Hz. Other electrophysiologic
display clinical signs between 1 and 4 years of age. Affected
data were normal. Piglets were sired by a phenotypically
dogs progressively develop pelvic limb dystonia, appearing as
normal boar known to produce offspring with an autosomal
increased extensor tone over several minutes. Thoracic limbs
recessive myopathy. Despite this, histologic lesions were not
may also be involved. Excitement and exercise are associated
identified in the nervous system or muscle of affected piglets.
with development of clinical signs. Although the pathogenesis
Head Tremor. A coarse tremor, often called a "head bob,"
is unknown, the disease is thought to be similar to a human
has been described in the Doberman pinscher, boxer, and Eng-
condition called hyperexplexia, which is a glycine receptor
lish bulldog.I 6l Similar movements were reported in a Shet-
abnormality.170 As the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in
land sheepdog, 162 The tremor usually develops in young dogs.
the spinal cord, glycine affects α-motor neurons. As occurs in
Affected dogs display a rapid, coarse tremor of the neck and
 polled Hereford cattle, abnormalities in glycine or its recep-
head that may oscillate vertically or horizontally. Tremor epi-
tor lead to excitation of α-motor neurons. Diagnosis is based
sodes appear randomly. Some owners feel that affcted dogs
on signalment and characteristic clinical signs. Treatment with
have tremor episodes after prolonged strenuous exercise, but
 a sa azq r r az r
the tremors tend to occur during periods of relaxation. During
control the severity of episodes. The disease is not life threat-
episodes, dogs are responsive and can stand and walk, and in
ening. Syndromes similar to that observed in the Scottish ter-
all other regards the dogs appear normal. The tremor can be
rier and Cavalier King Charles spaniel have been reported in
stopped by getting the dog to change the tone and posture
 the Dalmatian and Norwich terrier in which clinical signs of
 of the neck and head. Neurologic examination and diagnos-
 pelvic limb dystonia have been observed. 17l,172
tic tests, including hematology, biochemistry, thyroid function 
testing, cross-sectional imaging, and CSF analysis are normal.
Dyskinesia/Dystonia
 The tremor may persist for many years and in rare occasions,
Bread-Related
the tremor resolves spontaneously. Treatments with cortico-
Bichon Frise. A movement disorder has been reported in
steroids, anticonvulsants, or benzodiazepines are ineffective
young bichon frise dogs. 173The episodes occur randomly. They
 and unnecessary.
can be precipitated by excitement or occur at rest. The sever-
ity, duration, and frequency vary within an individual dog and
 Movement Disorders (Dyskinesia/Dystonia)
between dogs. Movements may involve the facial musculature
Movement disorders are sudden, involuntary contractions of
and the trunk and limbs. Affected dogs may display unilat-
specific muscle groups that may persist over a period of time
eral facial dystonia resulting in a grimacing expression. Dys-
either at rest or during activity in an awake, conscious animal.
tonia of a single limb may appear as sustained hyperflexion
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
321
or extension of the affected limb. Chorea-like movement of a
worldwide without a known cause.176-178 Afected horses do
limb consisting of rapid flexion and extension of a limb may
 not recover. The second form is referred to as Australian string-
occur. Affected dogs may assume a kyphotic posture due to
halt and occurs in epidemics affecting multiple horses in a single
dystonia of the muscles of the thoracic vertebral column.
area or farm. Cases occur in late sumimer to early fall after a dry
Boxer Dog. A condition similar to that in the bichon frise
or drought season. Affected horses have grazed on poor quality
dog has been observed in young boxer puppies.174 Multiple
pups of both genders were affected. Episodes could be pro-
Zealand, and South and North America.176-182 Many horses
     
         
stereotypic, varying between episodes in a single pup and
a distal axonopathy that is presumed to be related to toxicity
 between different pups. Episodes consisted of combinations
or a metabolic deficiency.l83 An association with ingestion of
of facial, truncal, and limb movements. Facial muscle dystonia
the weed, Hypochoeris radicatahas been proposed.176.179,182,184
resulted in a grimacing expression. Athetosis of the neck mus-
Affected animals should be removed from access to toxic
culature resulted in torticollis. Chorea-like movements of the
plants and rested. Tenectomy of the lateral digital extensor
 limbs consisting of holding up a limb in extension, slapping
a limb toward the ground in rapid succession, or sustained
 hyperflexion of a limb were observed.
region of the digital extensor muscles has been proposed as a
Dancing Doberman. This disease is characterized by inter-
treatment.186
 mittent flexion of one or both pelvic limbs while standing.
 d  a sn s e  aa s
Acquired Dyskinesia/Dystonia
may become affected. Affected dogs develop weakness and
Several drugs have been reported to cause dyskinesia. The
atrophy of the distal pelvic limb musculature. Signs are limited
mechanism by which they cause abnormal movement is
to the pelvic limbs and consist of exaggerated reflexes. Chroni-
cally affected dogs may develop postural reaction deficits.
with dyskinesia in a dog. 187 The clinical signs consist of severe,
EMG may reveal positive sharp waves, fibrllation potentials,
whole body jerking movements that cause the affected dog to
and complex repetitive discharges involving the gastrocnemius 
fall. Intermittent fine tremors of the facial, neck, and shoulder
muscles. In some dogs, histologic study was consistent with
musculature were also observed. The affected dog was agi-
  s s   
tated and restless. Signs gradually diminished and resolved as
 myopathy In others, abnormalities were noted in the spinal
 phenobarbital was tapered and discontinued. Propofol admin-
 cord suggesting underlying or concurrent spinal cord pathology.
istration has been associated with a variety of abnormal move-
Stringhalt. Affected horses display a gait characterized by
ments including opsoclonus (rapid abnormal eye movements)
and myoclonus.99,i88 Clinical signs resolve with discontinua-
being held in flexion for up to several minutes. Signs occur
tion of the drug.
especially during the start of wallking but also occur during
movement. Severity ranges from mild, occurring occasion-
   o    s  
CASE STUDIES
stand without assistance. Rarely, exaggerated flexion of the tho-
Key: 0, Absent; +1, decreased; +2, normal; +3, exaggerated;
racic limbs may occur. Two forms of stringhalt are described.
+4, very exaggerated or clonus; PL, pelvic limb; TL, thoracic
The classic form occurs spontaneously in single individuals
limb; NE, not evaluated.
CASE STUDY 10-1
JACK
- Signalment
Posture
12-year-old Dachshund, female spayed
Normal
. History
Postural reactions
Several month progressive history of a stiff gait. Signs ini-
Although performed stiffly postural reactions are normal.
tially were noticed in the pelvic limbs and have progressed
to affect the thoracic limbs. The dog has a history of poly-
Spinal reflexes
dipsia and polyuria [PD/PU). The dog's hair coat has been
Reduced flexor reflexes due to extensor rigidity, increased
 poor for approximately 1 to Z years.
tone, proximal musculature hypertrophy in all four limbs;
+2 patellar reflexes bilaterally
· Neurologic Examination
Mental status
Cranial nerves
Normal
Normal
Gait
Sensory examination
Stiff gait in the pelvic and thoracic limbs. When advancing
Normal
the thoracic limbs, the dog does not flex normally at the
shoulder and elbow. Likewise, the coxofemoral and stifle
Palpation
joints do not flex adequately when the pelvic limbs are
Proximal muscle hypertrophy, slight paraspinal muscle
advanced. To advance the thoracic limbs, the dog tends to
atrophy
circumduct the limbs. The pelvic limbs are mainly advanced
 through flexion of the hocks.
Continued
322
PART II
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 10-1
JACK-
cont'd
. Lesion Location
Direct motor nerve stimulation tests and conduction
LMN disorder
studies were normal.
· Differential Diagnosis
- Diagnosis
1. Myotonia [acquired)—endocrine related, intoxication
Given the history of PU/PD and abnormalities identified
2. Polymyositis
on the MDB, a low dose dexamethasone suppression test
was performed. Results were consistent with pituitary.
· Diagnostic Plan
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. Based on the finding of
 1. MDB including CK measurement—-assess for endocrine 
hyperadrenocorticism  combined  with  the  examination
disorder
findings and electrophysiologic data, a diagnosis of acquired
 2. Electrophysiologic testing
myopathy with characteristics of myotonia (pseudomyoto-
3. Muscle biopsy
 nia] secondary to hyperadrenocorticism was made.
. Diagnostic Results
 Treatment
 1. Chemistry profle disclosed a mild SAP elevation; UA
 The dog received medical treatment for hyperadrenocorti-
 disclosed isosthenuria
cism (mitotane) and mexiletine for the secondary pseudo-
 2. Electrophysiology: EMG disclosed positive sharp waves,
myotonia. Despite control of the endocrinopathy, clinical
 fibrillation potentials, and complex repetitive discharges
 signs of pseudomyotonia persisted.
in the musculature of the thoracic and pelvic limbs.
CK, Creatine kinase; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; EMG, electromyography, LMN, lower motor neuron; MDB, minimum database; MRI, magnetic
resonance imaging; NPO, nothing per os, PU/PD, polyuria/polydipsia; SAP seru allkaline phosphatase; UA,urinalysis WBC, white blood cell
count
CASE STUDY 10-2
BELLA
- Signalment
Sensory examination
8-month-old Labrador retriever, female spayed
Normal
- History
Palpation
Acute onset of vomiting. Within hours of vomiting, the dog
Normal
developed a change in gait consisting of difficulty rising and
 generalized stiffness when walking. Fourten days before
: Lesion Location
presentation, the dog had undergone a routine ovariohys-
Diffuse LMN disorder
terectomy [OHE) by the referring veterinarian. No compli-
cations were observed from the surgery.
 Differential Diagnosis
1. Tetanus
· Neurologic Examination
 2. Tetany—secondary to intoxication (strychnine or 2,4 D
herbicide)
Mental status
3. Tetany
electrolyte disorder (hypocalcemia)
Normal
· Diagnostic Plan
Gait
1. MDB including CK measurement—assess for underlying
Mild to moderate generalized stiff gait
systemic disorder
2.
 Abdominal and thoracic radiographs—identify underly-
Posture
ing reason for vomiting
Normal, except that the dog's tail was held elevated and
slightly curled up compared with normal. The dog's facial
· Diagnostic Results
muscles were "drawn" caudally, resulting in a grimacing
1.1
MDB—Normal
expression and the dog's ears were positioned more dorsal
2.
 Abdominal radiographs were normal
and medial (adducted) on the head. The nictitating mem-
 3. Thoracic radiographs—-evidence of a hiatal hernia
branes were mildly elevated in both eyes.
: Diagnosis
Postural reactions
 Based on the history of recent OHE surgery and classical
Normal
clinical signs, a presumptive diagnosis of tetanus was made.
Abdominal ultrasonography of the abdomen did not dis-
Spinal reffexes
close any abnormalities consistent with intraabdominal
 Increased musculature tone in all four limbs
infection. With the exception of the healed incision from
OHE, no other wounds or sources of infection were found.
Cranial nerves
The dog's condition rapidly deteriorated to the point of
All normal
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
323
CASE STUDY 10-2
BEI.IA-
cont'd
recumbency, rigid extension of the limbs, and opisthotonus.
auditory stimuli. Metronidazole was administered in case
With any stimuli, signs would worsen.
of an unidentified clostridial infection. After intradermal
skin testing, the dog was administered intravenous equine
- Treatment
tetanus antitoxin. Clinical signs reached maximum inten-
The dog was treated with diazepam, acepromazine, and
sity over 24 hours, remained static for 3 to 4 days, and then
phenobarbital for muscle relaxation and sedation. Cotton
gradually improved. Approximately 10 days after onset, the
balls were placed in the external ear canals to lessen
dog was discharged with minimal clinical signs.
CK, Creatine kinase; LMN, lower motor neuron; MDB, minirmum database; OHE, ovariohysterectomy.
CASE STUDY 10-3
LULU
· Signalment
· Lesion Location
 4-year-old cairn terrier, female spayed
Diffuse CNS disorder
- History
· Differential Diagnosis
Acute onset of generalized constant, repetitive action-
1. Steroid-responsive tremor syndrome ("little white shaker
related myoclonus [tremors). The owners reported that the
syndrome")
tremors would lessen when the dog was resting and was
 2. Intoxication [penitrem A, lead, hexachlorophene, organo-
absent when the dog was sleeping.
phosphates, pyrethrins, carbamates)
3.
Electrolyte disorder (i.e., hypocalcemia)
. Neurologic Examination
 4. Degenerative [i.e., globoid cell leukodystrophy, myelin
Mental status
 disorder, axonopathy]
Normal
· Diagnostic Plan
Gait
1. MDB
 Difficult to discern due to generalized coarse tremor involving
2. MRI
 the body, limbs, and head; no obvious ataxia or weakness appre-
3. CSF analysis 
ciated. However, when dog was excited, tremors worsened to
 4. Measurement of serum lead level
 the point where the dog would occasionally stumble and fall.
. Diagnostic Results
Posture
1. MDB—Normal
Difficult to determine if abnormal. The dog could not
2.1
MRI—Normal
 remain still when standing.
3. CSF—Mild pleocytosis [11 WBC; normal < 5 cells/mcL;
 primarily mononuclear; normal protein content)
Postural reactions
Normal
·Diagnosis
Based on signalment [small-breed dog), typical clinical signs,
Spinal reflexes
exclusion of other disease processes, and mild mononuclear
 All Normal
 pleocytosis in CSF a presumptive diagnosis of steroid-
 responsive tremor syndrome was made.
Cranial nerves
- Treatment
the eyes (opsoclonus)
The dog was started on prednisone [Z2 mg/kg orally twice
daily). Clinical signs gradually improved over 3 days.
Sensory examination
The dosage of prednisone was tapered gradually over
Normal
3 months and then discontinued. No recurrences were
noted.
Palpation
Normal 
CSF, Cerebrospinal fluid; MDB, minimum database; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging: WBC, white blood cell count.
324
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 10-4
KATE
· Signalment
Cranial nerves
 Z-year-old English bulldog, female spayed
Normal
.History
Sensory examination
Acute onset of episodic tremors of the head and neck.
Normal
The owners reported that during each episode the dog
would shake its head as one would do when saying "no."
Palpation
The movement was rapid. Episodes would randomly
Normal
occur multiple times daily. During the episodes, the dog
was responsive and acted otherwise normal. When offered
· Lesion Location
a treat, the tremor would stop temporarily as the dog
Unknown (CNS or PNS)
accepted the treat from the owner but then would resume.
The tremor would also stop if the dog rested with its head
Differential Diagnosis
on the ground.
1. Postural repetitive myoclonus—head tremors
 2. Cerebellar disease [although other signs of cerebellar dis-
· Neurologic Examination
turbance not present)
Mental status
Normal
· Diagnostic Plan
 MDB to exclude underlying systemic disorder
Gait
Normal
. Diagnostic Results
MDBNormal
Posture
Normal
· Diagnosis
Postural repetitive myoclonus—head tremors based on the
Postural reactions
 signalment, history, classical characteristic appearance of the
Normal
movement, and normal neurologic examination.
Spinal reffexes
- Treatment
Normal
None
CNS, Central nervous systerm; MDB, minimum database; PNS, peripheral nervous systerm.
CASE STUDY 10-5
LOGAN
. Signalment
Spinal reflexes
5-year-old golden retrie ver, male castrated
Normal
History
Cranial nerves
Acute history of vomiting and diarrhea, which rapidly pro-
Normal
 gressed to generalized action-related repetitive myoclonus
(tremors). The owners have reported that the dog had been
 Sensory examination
roaming loose unattended hours before developing vomit-
 Normal
ing and diarrhea.
Palpation
- Neurologic Examination
Normal
Mental status
Normal
· Lesion Location
Diffuse CNS
Gait
Normal; obvious coarse tremor involving the entire body.
· Differential Diagnosis
limbs, and head.
1. Intoxication (penitrem A, lead, hexachlorophene,
organophosphates, pyrethrins, carbamates)
Posture
 2. Steroid-responsive tremor syndrome (*"little white shaker
Normal
syndrome")
 3. Electrolyte disorder (i.e., hypocalcemia)
Postural reactions
Normal
Continued
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
325
CASE STUDY 10-5
LOGAN
cont'd
. Diagnostic Plan
. Diagnosis
1. MDB including CK level—assess electrolytes
Upon further discussions with the owners, the dog had had
2. Abdominal radiograph
 a history of dietary indiscretion [eating garbage). Presump-
3. Based on potential for exposure:
tive diagnosis of intoxication of the mycotoxin penitrem
 a. Measurement of penitrem A in stomach contents 
A based on the potential given the history of being loose
b. Measurement of serum lead levels
and unattended, vomiting and diarrhea shortly preceding
c. Measurement of acetylcholinesterase activity in serum
the onset of tremors, and exclusion of other disease pro-
4. Based on results of diagnostic tests 1 and 2 and potential
cesses. Measurement of penitrem A levels was not pursued.
for exposure to intoxicants:
a. MRI
- Treatment
b. CSF analysis
The dog was treated with activated charcoal orally and paren-
teral diazepam and methocarbamol for 24 hours. Additionally.
· Diagnostic Results
the dog was treated with supportive care (NPO and intrave-
1. MDB was normal
nous fluids). Gastric lavage was not performed given the dog's
 2. Abdominal radiographs—normal
mild clinical signs and the risk of aspiration pneumonia associ-
ated with orogastric intubation and lavage.The dog gradually
improved over 48 hours and was discharged from the hospital.
CK, Creatine kinase; CNS, central nervous system; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; MDB, minimum database; MRI, maghetic resonance imaging: NPO,
nothing per os; PU/PD, polyuria/polydipsia; WBC, white blood cell count.
REFERENCES
14. Finmigan DF, Hanna WJ, Poma R, et al: A novel muta-
tion of the CLCNl gene associated with myotonia
1. Lahunta Ad, Glass EN, Kent M: Classifying involuntary
hereditaria in an Australian cattle dog, J Vet Intern Med
muscle contractions, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
21:458-463, 2007.
28:516-518, 520-522, 524-525, 528-529, 2006.
15. Hill SL, Shelton GD, Lenehan TM: Myotonia in a cocker
 2. Dorland WAN: Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary
spaniel, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:506-509, 1995.
Philadelphia, 2007, WB Saunders.
16.1
Honhold N, Smith DA: Myotonia in the Great Dane, Vet
3. Roberts T: Neurophysiology of postural mechanisms,
Rec 119:162, 1986.
New York, 1967, Plenum Press.
17. Lobetti RG: Myotonia congenita in a Jack Russell terrier,
4. Hallet M, Ravits J: Involuntary movements. In Asbury
J S Afr Vet Assoc 80:106-107, 2009.
AK, McKhann GM, McDonald WI, editors: Diseases of
18.8
Shires PK, Nafe LA, Hulse DA: Myotonia in a Stafford-
the nervous system: clinical neurobiology, Philadelphia,
shire terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:229-232, 1983.
1986, Ardmore Medical Books.
19. Jones BR, Anderson LJ, Barnes GR, et al: Myotonia in
5. Liles SL, Davis GD: Athetoid and choreiform hyperki-
related chow chow dogs, N Z Vet J 25:217-220, 1977.
nesias produced by caudate lesions in the cat, Science
20. Vite CH, Melniczek J, Patterson D, et al: Congenital
164:195-197, 1969.
myotonic myopathy in the miniature schnauzer: an
6. Vite CH: Myotonia and disorders of altered muscle cell
autosomal recessive trait, J Hered 90:578-580, 1999.
membrane excitability, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
21.(
Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: Myotonia in the dog: a report of
Pract 32:169-187, 2002.
four cases, Vet Rec 93:184-188, 1973.
7. Kimura J: Electrodiagnosis in diseases of nerve and mus-
22.8
 Steinberg S, Botelho S: Myotonia in a horse, Science
dle—principles and practice, New York, 2001, Oxford
137:979-980, 1962.
University Press.
23. Hickford FH, Jones BR, Gething MA, et al: Congeni-
 8. Schatzberg SJ, Shelton GD: Newly identified neuromus-
tal myotonia in related kittens, J Small Anim Pract
cular disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
39:281-285, 1998.
34:1497-1524, 2004.
 24. Toll J, Cooper B, Altschul M: Congenital myotonia in
9. Beck CL, Fahlke C, George AL Jr: Molecular basis for
2 domestic cats, J Vet Intern Med 12:116-119, 1998.
decreased muscle chloride conductance in the myo-
25.1
Farrow BR, Malik R: Hereditary myotonia in the chow
tonic goat, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93:11248-11252,
chow, J Small Anim Pract 22:451-465, 1981.
1996.
26. Shores A, Redding RW, Braund KG, et al: Myotonia
10. Jentsch TJ: CLC chloride channels and transporters:
congenita in a chow chow pup, J Am Vet Med Assoc
from genes to protein structure, pathology and physiol-
188:532-533, 1986.
ogy, Crit Rev Biochem Mol Biol 43:3-36, 2008.
27. Gracis M, Keith D, Vite CH: Dental and craniofacial
11. Bryant SH: Myotonia in the goat, Ann N Y Acad Sci
findings in eight miniature schnauzer dogs affected by
317:314-325, 1979.
myotonia congenita: preliminary results, J Vet Dent
12. Bryant SH, Lipicky RJ, Herzog WH: Variability of
17:119-127, 2000.
myotonic signs in myotonic goats, Am J Vet Res
28. Rhodes TH, Vite CH, Giger U, et al: A missense muta-
29:2371-2381, 1968.
tion in canine C1C-l causes recessive myotonia congen-
13. Lipicky RJ, Bryant SH: Sodium, potassium, and chloride
ita in the dog, FEBS Lett 456:54-58, 1999.
fluxes in intercostal muscle from normal goats and goats
29. Meyer TS, Fedde MR, Cox JH, et al: Hyperkalaemic
with hereditary myotonia, J Gen Physiol 50:89-111,
periodic paralysis in horses: a review, Equine Vet J 31:
1966.
362-367, 1999.
326
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
30. Jezyk PF: Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in a dog, J Am
53. Panciera DL, Baldwin CJ, Keene BW: Electrocardio-
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:977-980, 1982.
31. Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Holliday TA, et al: Hyperkale-
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:225-227, 1988.
mic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
54. De Risio L, Zavattiero S, Venzi C, et al: Focal canine teta-
197:1009-1017, 1990.
nus: diagnostic value of electromyography J Small Anim
32. Greene CE, Lorenz MD, Munnell JF, et al: Myopathy
Pract 47:278-280, 2006.
associated with hyperadrenocorticism in the dog, J Am
55. Polizopoulou ZS, Kazakos G, Georgiadis G, et al: Pre-
Vet Med Assoc 174:1310-1315, 1979.
sumed localized tetanus in two cats, J Feline Med Surg
33. Swinney GR, Foster SF, Church DB, et al: Myotonia
4:209-212, 2002.
associated with hyper-adrenocorticism in two dogs, Aust
56. Green SL, Little CB, Baird JD, et al: Tetanus in the horse:
Vet J 76:722-724, 1998.
a review of 20 cases [1970 to 1990), J Vet Intern Med
34. Dickow LM, Podell M, Gerken DF: Clinical effects and
8:128-132, 1994.
plasma concentration determination after 2,4-dichloro-
57. Mayhew IG: Toxic disease. Large animal neurology
 phenoxyacetic acid 200 mg/kg administration in the dog.
Oxford, 2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
J Toxicol Clin Toxicol 38:747-753, 2000.
58. Muylle E, Oyaert W, Ooms L, et al: Treatment of tetanus
35. Lossin C, George AL Jr: Myotonia congenita, Adv Genet
in the horse by injections of tetanus antitoxin into the sub-
63:25-55, 2008.
arachnoid space, J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:47-48, 1975.
36. Reed SM, Hegreberg GA, Bayly WM, et al: Progressive
59.
Adamantos S, Boag A: Thirteen cases of tetanus in dogs,
myotonia in foals resembling human dystrophia myo-
Vet Rec 161:298-302, 2007.
tonica, Muscle Nerve 11:291-296, 1988.
60. Harper PA, Healy PJ, Dennis JA: Inherited congenital
37. Simpson ST, Braund KG: Myotonic dystrophy-like
myoclonus of polled Hereford calves [so-called neuraxial
disease in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 186:495-498,
oedema);: a clinical, pathological and biochemical study.
1985.
Vet Rec 119:59-62, 1986.
38. Smith BF, Braund KG, Steiss JE, et al: Possible adult
61. Healy PJ, Harper PA, Dennis JA: Diagnosis of neuraxial
 onset myotonic dystrophy in a boxer, J Vet Intern Med
oedema in calves, Aust Vet J 63:95-96, 1986.
12:120.1998
62. Gundlach AL, Dodd PR, Grabara CS, et al: Deficit of spi-
39. Howard J, Jaggy A, Busato A, et al: Electrodiagnostic 
nal cord glycine/strychnine receptors in inherited myoc-
evaluation in feline hypertrophic muscular dystrophy,
lonus of poll Hereford calves, Science 241:1807-1810,
Vet J 168:87-92, 2004.
1988.
40. Gaschen FP, Hoffman EP, Gorospe JR, et al: Dystro-
63. Pierce KD, Handford CA, Morris R, et al: A nonsense
phin deficiency causes lethal muscle hypertrophy in cats,
mutation in the alphal subunit of the inhibitory glycine
J Neurol Sci 110:149-159, 1992.
receptor associated with bovine myoclonus, Mol Cell
41. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ, Cummings JF, et al: Pro-
Neurosci 17:354-363, 2001.
gressive muscular dystrophy in a golden retriever dog:
64. Duffell SJ: Neuraxial oedema of Hereford calves with
light microscope and ultrastructural features at 4 and 8
and without hypomyelinogenesis, Vet Rec 118:95-98,
months, Acta Neuropathol 71:301-310, 1986.
1986.
 42. Machuca-Tzili L, Brook D, Hilton-Jones D: Clinical and
65. Duffell SJ, Harper PA, Healy PJ, et al: Congenital
molecular aspects of the myotonic dystrophies: a review,
hypomyelinogenesis
of
Hereford calves, Vet Rec
Muscle Nerve 32:1-18, 2005.
123:423-424, 1988.
43. Mahadevan M, Tsilfidis C, Sabourin L, et al: Myotonic
66. Fox JG, Averill DR, Hallett M, et al: Familial reflex myoc-
dystrophy mutation: an unstable CTG repeat in the
lonus in Labrador retrievers, Am J Vet Res 45:2367-
3'untranslatedregionofthe gene, Science 255:1253-1255,
2370,1984.
1992.
67. March PA, Knowles K, Thalhammer JG: Reflex myoclo-
44. Ranum LP, Rasmussen PF, Benzow KA, et al: Genetic
nus in two Labrador retriever littermates: a clinical, elec-
mapping of a second myotonic dystrophy locus, Nat
trophysiological, and pathological study, Prog Vet Neurol
Genet 19:196-198, 1998.
4:19-24, 1993.
45. Day JW, Ranum LP: RNA pathogenesis of the myotonic
68. Gundlach AL, Kortz G, Burazin TCD, et al: Deficit of
dystrophies, Neuromuscul Disord 15:5-16, 2005.
inhibitory glycine receptors in spinal cord from Peruvian
46. Bleck TP: Pharmacology of tetanus, Clin Neuropharma-
Pasos: evidence for an equine form of inherited myoclo-
col 9:103-120, 1986.
nus, Brain Res 628:263-270, 1993.
47. Hagan WA, Bruner DW, Timoney JF: Hagan and
69. Fanelli HH: Coat colour dilution lethal ("lavender foal
 Bruner's microbiology and infectious diseases of domes-
syndrome"): a tetany syndrome of Arabian foals, Equine
tic animals: with reference to etiology, epizootiology.
Vet Educ 17:260-263, 2005.
pathogenesis, immunity, diagnosis, and antimicrobial
70. Denniston JC, Shive RJ, Friedli U, et al: Spastic pare-
susceptibility, Ithaca, NY, 1988, Comstock.
sis syndrome in calves, J Am Vet Med Assoc 152:1138-
48. Coleman ES: Clostridial neurotoxins: tetanus and botu-
1149, 1968.
lism, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:1089-1097,
7l. De Ley G, De Moor A: Bovine spastic paralysis: results
1998.
of surgical deafferentation of the gastrocnemius muscle
49. Burkitt JM, Sturges BK, Jandrey KE, et al: Risk factors
by means of spinal dorsal root resection, Am J Vet Res
associated with outcome in dogs with tetanus: 38 cases
38:1899-1900, 1977.
[1987-2005), J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:76-83, 2007.
72. De Ley G, De Moor A: Bovine spastic paralysis: cere-
50. Baker JL, Waters DJ, DeLahunta A: Tetanus in two cats,
brospinal fluid concentrations of homovanillic acid and
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:159-164, 1988.
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in normal and spastic calves,
51. Malik R, Church DB, Maddison JE, et al: Three cases of
Am J Vet Res 36:227-228, 1975.
local tetanus, J Small Anim Pract 30:469-473, 1989.
73. Arnault GA: Bovine spastic paresis. An epidemiologic,
52. Bandt C, Rozanski EA, Steinberg T, et al: Retrospec-
clinical and therapeutic study in a Charolais practice
tive study of tetanus in 20 dogs: 1988-2004, J Am Anim
in France. Efficacy of lithium therapy, Bovine Pract 18:
Hosp Assoc 43:143-148, 2007.
236-240, 1983.
CHAPTER 10
Disorders of Involuntary Movement
327
74. Vlaminck L, De Moor A, Martens A, et al: Partial tibial
98. Breazile JF, Blaugh BS, Nail N: Experimental study
neurectomy in 1l3 Belgian blue calves with spastic pare-
of canine distemper myoclonus, Am J Vet Res 27:
sis, Vet Rec 147:16-19, 2000.
1375-1379, 1966.
75. Roberts SJ: Hereditary spastic diseases affecting cattle in
99. Brooks DE: Propofol-Induced movement disorders, Ann
New York state, Cornell Vet 55:637-644, 1965.
Emerg Med 51:111-112, 2008.
76. Sponenberg DP, Vleck LDV, McEntee K: The genet-
100. Kona-Boun JJ, Pibarot P, Quesnel A: Myoclonus and uri-
ics of the spastic syndrome in dairy bulls, Vet Med 80:
nary retention following subarachnoid morphine injec-
92-94.1985
tion in a dog, Vet Anaesth Analg 30:257-264, 2003.
77. Kyles KWJ, Sargison ND: Spastic syndrome in a blue-
101. 1
Muir WW IIl, Mason DE: Side effects of etomidate in
faced Leicester ram, Vet Rec 150:380-381, 2002.
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1430-1434, 1989.
78. Shelton GD: Disorders of neuromuscular transmission,
102. O'Brien DP: Lead toxicity in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp
Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 4:126-132, 1989.
Assoc 17:845-850, 1981.
79. Schenck PA, Chew DJ: Prediction of serum ionized cal-
103. Beech J: Forelimb tic in a horse, J Am Vet Med Assoc
cium concentration by use of serum total calcium con-
180:258-260, 1982.
centration in dogs, Am J Vet Res 66:1330-1336, 2005.
104. Davies PC: Shivering in a thoroughbred mare, Can Vet J
80. Drobatz KJ, Casey KK: Eclampsia in dogs: 3l cases
41:128-129, 2000.
[1995-1998), J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:216-219, 2000.
105.1
Deen T: Shivering, a rare equine lameness, Equine Pract
81. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hypocalcemia and primary
6:19-21, 1984.
hypoparathyroidism. Canine and feline endocrinology
106. Valentine BA, de Lahunta A, Divers TJ, et al: Clinical
and reproduction, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.
and pathologic fndings in two draft horses with pro-
82. Barber PJ, Elliott J: Feline chronic renal failure: calcium
gressive muscle atrophy, neuromuscular weakness, and
homeostasis in 80 cases diagnosed between 1992 and
abnormal gait characteristic of shivers syndrome, J Am
1995, J Small Anim Pract 39:108-116, 1998.
Vet Med Assoc 215: 1621, 1661-1665, 1999.
83. Kogika MM, Lustoza MD, Notomi MK, et al: Serum ion-
107. Andrews FM, Spurgeon TL, Reed SM: Histochemical
ized calcium in dogs with chronic renal failure and meta-
changes in skeletal muscles of four male horses with neu-
bolic acidosis, Vet Clin Pathol 35:441-445, 2006.
romuscular disease, Am J Vet Res 47:2078-2083, 1986.
84. Kimmel SE, Waddell LS, Michel KE: Hypomagnesemia
108. Van Ham L, Bhatti S, Polis I, et al: “Continuous muscle
and hypocalcemia associated with protein-losing enter-
fibre activity" in six dogs with episodic myokymia, stiff-
opathy in Yorkshire terriers: five cases (1992-1998),
ness and collapse, Vet Rec 155:769-774, 2004.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:703-706, 2000.
109. Galano HR, Olby NJ, Howard JF Jr, et al: Myokymia and
85. Bush WW, Kimmel SE, Wosar MA, et al: Secondary
neuromyotonia in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1608-
hypoparathyroidism attributed to hypomagnesemia in
1612, 2005.
 a dog with protein-losing enteropathy, J Am Vet Med
110. Walmsley GL, Smith PM, Herrtage ME, et al: Facial
Assoc 219:1732-1734, 2001.
myokymia in a puppy, Vet Rec 158:411-412, 2006.
86. Mellanby RJ, Mellor PJ, Roulois A, et al: Hypocalcaemia
111. Oh SJ, Alapati A, Claussen GC, et al: Myokymia, neuro-
associated with low serum vitamin D metabolite concen-
myotonia, dermatomyositis, and voltage-gated K+ chan-
trations in two dogs with protein-losing enteropathies,
nel antibodies, Muscle Nerve 27:757-760, 2003.
J Small Anim Pract 46:345-351, 2005.
112. Duncan ID: Abnormalities of myelination of the central
87. Sargison ND, Macrae AI, Scott PR: Hypomagnesaemic
nervous system associated with congenital tremor, J Vet
tetany in lactating Cheviot gimmers associated with pas-
Intern Med 1:10-23, 1987.
ture sodium defciency, Vet Rec 155:674-676, 2004.
 113. Done JT: Congenital nervous diseases in pigs: a review,
88. Dua K, Care AD: Impaired absorption of magnesium
Lab Anim 2:207-217, 1968.
in the aetiology of grass tetany, Br Vet J 15l:413-426,
114. Done JT: The congenital tremor syndrome in pigs, Vet
1995.
Annu 16:98-102, 1976.
89. Saito M, Olby NJ, Obledo L, et al: Muscle cramps in two
115.1
Done JT, Woolley J, Upcott DH, et al: Porcine congeni-
standard poodles with hypoadrenocorticism, J Am Anim
tal tremor type All: spinal cord morphometry, Br Vet J
Hosp Assoc 38:437-443, 2002.
142:145-150, 1986.
90. Nollet H, Sustronck B, Deprez P, et al: Suspected case of
116. Emerson JL, Delez AL: Cerebellar hypoplasia, hypomy-
stiff-horse syndrome, Vet Rec 146:282-284, 2000.
elinogenesis, and congenital tremors of pigs, associated
 91. Olsen TF, Allen AL: Causes of sudden and unexpected
with prenatal hog cholera vaccination of sows, J Am Vet
death in dogs: a 10-year retrospective study, Can Vet J
Med Assoc 147:47-54, 1965.
41:873-875, 2000.
117. Harding JD, Done JT, Harbourne JF, et al: Congenital
        
tremor type A 3 in pigs: an hereditary sex-linked cere-
Handbook of small animal practice, New York, 1988,
brospinal hypomyelinogenesis, Vet Rec 92:527-529,
Churchill Livingstone.
1973.
93. Meiser H, Hagedorn HW: Atypical time course of
118. Patterson DS, Sweasey D, Brush PJ, et al: Neurochem-
clinical signs in a dog poisoned by strychnine, Vet Rec
istry of the spinal cord in British Saddleback piglets
151:21-24, 2002.
affected with congenital tremor, type A-IV, a second
94. Atkins CE, Johnson RK: Clinical toxicities of cats, Vet
form of hereditary _cerebrospinal hypomyelinogenesis,
Clin North Am 5:623-652, 1975.
J Neurochem 21:397-406, 1973.
95. Harris WF: Clinical toxicities of dogs, Vet Clin North Am
119. Clarke GL, Osburn Bl: Transmissible congenital demy-
5:605-622, 1975.
elinating encephalopathy of lambs, Vet Pathol 15:68-82,
 96. Tipold A: Diagnosis of inflammatory and infectious dis-
1978.
eases of the central nervous system in dogs: a retrospec-
120. Saperstein G, Leipold HW, Dennis SM: Congenital
tive study, J Vet Intern Med 9:304-314, 1995.
defects of sheep, j Am Vet Med Assoc 167:314-322,
97. Whittier JR: Flexor spasm syndrome in the carnivore. I.
1975.
 Review ofits occurrence in the literature as "canine cho-
121. Nettleton PF, Gilray JA, Russo P, et al: Border disease of 
rea,"Am J Vet Res 17:720-723, 1956.
sheep and goats, Vet Res 29:327-340, 1998.
328
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
122. Otter A, Welchman D de B, Sandvik T, et al: Congeni-
143. Boysen SR, Rozanski EA, Chan DL, et al: Tremorgenic
tal tremor and hypomyelination associated with bovine
mycotoxicosis in four dogs from a single household,
viral diarrhoea virus in 23 British cattle herds, Vet Rec
J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1420, 1441-1444, 2002.
164:771-778, 2009.
144. Lowes NR, Smith RA, Beck BE: Roquefortine in the
123. Rousseaux CG, Klavano GG, Johnson ES, et al: "Shaker"
stomach contents of dogs suspected of strychnine poi-
calf syndrome: a newly recognized inherited neurode-
soning in Alberta, Can Vet J 33:535-538, 1992.
generative disorder ofhorned Hereford calves, Vet Pathol
145.
Young KL, Villar D, Carson TL, et al: Tremorgenic myco-
22:104-111, 1985.
toxin intoxication with penitrem A and roquefortine in
124. Cummings JF, Summers BA, de Lahunta A, et al: Trem-
two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:35, 52-53, 2003.
ors in Samoyed pups with oligodendrocyte deficiencies
146. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, Oxford, UK; Ames,
and hypomyelination, Acta Neuropathol 71:267-277,
Iowa, 2008, Blackwell.
1986.
147.1
 Dollahite JW, Younger RL, Crookshank HR, et al:
125. Griffiths IR, Duncan ID, McCulloch M, et al: Shaking
Chronic lead poisoning in horses, Am J Vet Res 39:
 pups: a disorder of central myelination in the spaniel dog.
961-964, 1978.
Part l. Clinical, genetic and light-microscopical observa-
148. Knecht CD, Crabtree J, Katherman A: Clinical, clinico-
tions, J Neurol Sci 50:423-433, 1981.
pathologic, and electroencephalographic features oflead
126. Kornegay JN, Goodwin MA, Spyridakis LK: Hypo-
poisoning in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:196-201,
myelination in Weimaraner dogs, Acta Neuropathol
1979.
72:394-401, 1987.
149. Zook BC, Carpenter JL, Leeds EB: Lead poisoning in
127. Mayhew IG, Blakemore WF, Palmer AC, et al: Tremor
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 155:1329-1342, 1967.
150. Scott DW, Bolton GR, Lorenz MD: Hexachlorophene
Anim Pract 25:551-559, 1984.
toxicosis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:947-949,
128. Palmer AC, Blakemore WF, Wallace ME, et al: Rec-
1973.
ognition of “trembler," a hypomyelinating condition
151. Thompson JP, Senior DF, Pinson DM, et al: Neurotoxi-
in the Bernese mountain dog, Vet Rec 120:609-612,
cosis associated with the use ofhexachlorophene in a cat,
1987.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1311-1312, 1987.
129. Vandevelde M, Braund KG, Walker TL, et al: Dysmyelin-
152. Bath ML: Hexachlorophene toxicity in dogs, J Small
ation of the central nervous system in the chow chow
Anim Pract 19:241-244, 1978.
dog, Acta Neuropathol 42:211-215, 1978.
153. Jaggy A, Oliver JE: Chlorpyrifos toxicosis in two cats,
130. Nadon NL, Duncan ID, Hudson LD: A point mutation
J Vet Intern Med 4:135-139, 1990.
in the proteolipid protein gene of the "shaking pup"
154. Vijverberg HP, van den Bercken J: Annotation. Action of
interrupts oligodendrocyte development, Development 
pyrethroid insecticides on the vertebrate nervous system,
110:529-537, 1990.
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 8:421-440, 1982.
131. Griffths IR, Duncan ID, MeCulloch M: Shaking pups:
155. de Weille JR, Brown LD, Narahashi T: Pyrethroid modi-
a disorder of central myelination in the spaniel dog. II.
fications of the activation and inactivation kinetics of the
Utrastructural observations on the white matter of the
sodium channels in squid giant axons, Brain Res 512:
cervical spinal cord, J Neurocytol 10:847-858, 1981.
26-32, 1990.
132. Stoffregen DA, Huxtable CR, Cummings JF, et al:
156. Whittem T: Pyrethrin and pyrethroid insecticide intoxi-
Hypomyelination of the central nervous system of two
cation in cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 17:
Siamese kitten littermates, Vet Pathol 30:388-391,
489-495, 1995
1993.
157.1
Hansen SR, Stemme KA, Villar D, et al: Pyrethrins and
133. Van Ham L, Vandevelde M, Desmidt M, et al: A tremor
pyrethroids in dogs and cats, Compend Contin Educ
syndrome with a central axonopathy in Scottish terriers,
Pract Vet 16:707-710, 1994:712.
J Vet Intern Med 8:290-292, 1994.
158. Garosi LS, Rossmeisl JH, de Lahunta A, et al: Primary
134. Harper PA, Healy PJ: Neurological disease associated with
orthostatic tremor in Great Danes, J Vet Intern Med
degenerative axonopathy of neonatal Holstein-Friesian
19:606-609, 2005.
calves, Aust Vet J 66:143-144, 145-146, 1989.
159. Platt SR, De Stefani A, Wieczorek L: Primary orthostatic
135. Seahorn TL, Fuentealba IC, llanes OG, et al: Congenital
tremor in a Scottish deerhound, Vet Rec 159:495-496,
encephalomyelopathy in a quarter horse, Equine Vet J
2006.
23:394-396, 1991.
160. Wissel J, Harlizuis B, Richter A, et al: A new tremor
136. Cuddon PA: Tremor syndromes, Prog Vet Neurol l:
mutant in the Pietrain pig: an animal model of ortho-
285-299, 1990.
static tremor? Clinical and neurophysiological observa-
137. Bagley RS, Kornegay JN, Wheeler SJ, et al: Generalized
tions, Mov Disord 12:743-746, 1997.
tremors in Maltese: clinical findings in seven cases, J Am 
16l. Bagley RS: Tremor syndromes in dogs: diagnosis and
Anim Hosp Assoc 29:141-145, 1993.
treatment, J Small Anim Pract 33:485-490, 1992.
138. Wagner SO, Podell M, Fenner WR: Generalized trem-
162. Nakahata K, Uzuka Y, Matsumoto H, et al: Hyperkinetic
involuntary movements in a young Shetland sheepdog.
211:731-735, 1997.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:347-348, 1992.
139. DeLahunta A, Glass E: Veterinary neuroanatomy and
163. Meyers KM, Padgett GA, Dickson WM: The genetic
clinical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
basis of a kinetic disorder of Scottish terrier dogs, J Hered
140. Parker AJ: How do I treat? “Little white shakers,”" Prog
61:189-192, 1970.
Vet Neurol 2:151, 1991.
164. Clemimons RM, Peters RI, Meyers KM: Scotty cramp:
141. Hocking AD, Holds K, Tobin NF: Intoxication by trem-
a review of cause, characteristics, diagnosis, and treatment,
orgenic mycotoxin (penitrem A) in a dog, Aust Vet J
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:385-388, 1980.
65:82-85, 1988.
165. Andersson B, Andersson M: On the etiology of "Scotty
142. Tiwary AK, Puschner B, Poppenga RH: Using roquefor-
Cramp" and "Splay": two motoring disorders common in
tine C as a biomarker for penitrem A intoxication, J Vet
the Scottish terrier breed, Acta Vet Scand 23:550-558,
Diagn Invest 21:237-239, 2009.
1982.
CHAPTER 10
 Disorders of Involuntary Movement
329
166. Schaub RG, Meyers KM: Evidence for a small functional
179. Araujo JA, Curcio B, Alda J, et al: Stringhalt in Brazilian
pool of serotonin in neurohumoral transmission, Res
horses caused by Hypochaeris radicata, Toxicon 52:190-
Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol 10:29-36, 1975.
193, 2008.
167. Roberts DD, Hitt ME: Methionine as a possible inducer
180. Araya O, Krause A, Solis de Ovando M: Outbreaks of
of Scotty cramp, Canine Pract 13:29-31, 1986.
stringhalt in southern Chile, Vet Rec 142:462-463, 1998.
168. Geiger KM, Klopp LS: Use of a selective serotonin reup-
181. Galey FD, Hullinger PJ, MeCaskill J: Outbreaks of
take inhibitor for treatment of episodes of hypertonia
stringhalt in northern California, Vet Hum Toxicol
 and kyphosis in a young adult Scottish terrier, J Am Vet
33:176-177, 1991.
Med Assoc 235:168-171, 2009.
182. Gay CC, Fransen S, Richards J, et al: Hypochaeris-
169. Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Episodic falling in the cavalier
associatedstringhaltinNorthAmerica,Equine VetJ25:456-
King Charles spaniel, Vet Rec 112:458-459, 1983.
457.1993.
170. Rusbridge C: Neurological diseases of the cavalier King
183. Slocombe RF, Huntington PJ, Friend SC, et al: Patho-
Charles spaniel, J Small Anim Pract 46:265-272, 2005.
logical aspects of Australian stringhalt, Equine Vet J
171. Woods CB: Hyperkinetic episodes in two Dalmatian
24:174-183, 1992.
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:255-257, 1977.
184. Torre F: Clinical diagnosis and results of surgical treat-
172. Furber RM: Cramp in Norwich terriers, Vet Rec 1l5:46,
ment of 13 cases of acquired bilateral stringhalt [1991-
1984[letter).
2003), Equine Vet J 37:181-183, 2005.
173. Penderis J, Franklin RJ: Dyskinesia in an adult bichon
185. Huntington PJ, Seneque S, Slocombe RF, et al: Use of
frise, J Small Anim Pract 42:24-25, 2001.
phenytoin to treat horses with Australian stringhalt, Aust 
174. Ramsey IK, Chandler KE, Franklin RJ: A movement dis-
Vet J 68:221-224, 1991.
order in boxer pups, Vet Rec 144:179-180, 1999.
186. Wijnberg ID, Schrama SE, Elgersma AE, et al: Quan-
 175. Chrisman CL: Dancing Doberman disease: clinical find-
tification of surface EMG signals to monitor the effect of
ings and prognosis, Prog Vet Neurol 1:83-90, 1990.
a Botox treatment in six healthy ponies and two horses
176. Cahill JI, Goulden BE: Stringhalt: current thoughts on
with stringhalt: preliminary study, Equine Vet J 41:
aetiology and pathogenesis, Equine Vet J 24:16l-162,
313-318, 2009.
1992.
187. Kube SA, Vernau KM, LeCouteur RA: Dyskinesia asso-
177. Cahill JI, Goulden BE, Pearce HG: A review and some
 ciated with oral phenobarbital administration in a dog.
observations on stringhalt, N Z Vet J 33:101-104, 1985.
J Vet Intern Med 20:1238-1240, 2006.
178. Huntington PJ, Jeffcott LB, Friend SC, et al: Australian
188. Smedle LE, Duke T, Taylor SM: Excitatory movements
stringhalt: epidemiological, clinical and neurological
in a dog following propofol anesthesia, J Am Anim Hosp
investigations, Equine Vet J 21:266-273, 1989.
Assoc 32:365-368, 1996.
CHAPTER
11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye
Movements
isorders involving the eye are common in veterinary
of decussation and the less vision is binocular. In primates,
practice. Although conscious perception of light
  r  r   s  e a
[vision) is often discussed in isolation, given the inti-
cross, while all the fbers from the lateral half of the retina
mate relationship between vision, autonomic control of the
remain ipsilateral enabling binocular vision. In carnivores, all
 pupil, and voluntary ocular movements, this chapter discusses
of the fbers from the medial retina decussate in addition to
disorders related to these functions together. These complex
approximately half the fibers of the lateral retina. In most her-
functions require integration of multiple areas of the brain
bivores, 80% or more of the fbers cross. In horses, only about
and spinal cord and consequently numerous diseases may
17% of fibers cross.I Almost all the fibers cross in rabbits.
cause visual deficits, abnormal pupil function, or abnor-
Approximately 80% of the axons of each optic tract syn-
mal ocular movements. Imperative to establishing a correct
apse in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus.
 anatomic diagnosis is the integration of fndings related to
 oi u sndo a e noaid suxe Nt a u
vision, pupil size, and function and ability to move the globe
occipital cortex of the cerebrum. Throughout the visual path-
voluntarily.
way, there is a retinotopic organization whereby axons from
specific regions of the retina project to a specific area of the
LGN and also the occipital cortex. The importance of this
LESION LOCALIZATION
retinotopic organization of the LGN and occipital cortex is
exemplified in the Siamese cat (see later discussion).
Vision
The visual pathway is presented in Figures 1l-1 and 11-2 and
Pupillary Light Reflexes
Table 1l-l. Methods of testing vision are discussed in Chapter
Ihe pathway for pupillary light reflexes (PLRs) is outlined and
1. The visual pathway begins with the retina. The outermost
ilustrated in Figures 11-1 and 1l-2 and in Table 11-1. The
layer of the retina is composed of the photoreceptors, den-
methods of testing pupilary reflexes are described in Chap-
dritic processes of the rod and cone neurons. Photoreceptors
ter 1. The afferent limb of the pupillary light reflex is largely
are distributed throughout the retina, but a greater density
the same as for vision. However, axons in the optic tract not
of receptors is located in the area centralis, which is impor-
involved in vision diverge from the visual pathway at the LGN.
tant for acute vision. Excited by light, photoreceptors are in
Rather than synapsing, axons project over the LGN to the pre-
synaptic relationship with the second neurons of the visual
tectal nuclei at the level of the midbrain. The majority of axons
pathway, bipolar neurons. In turn, bipolar neurons interact
ofthe pretectal nuclei cross to synapse on the contralateral gen-
with the third neuron in the visual pathway, ganglion neurons.
eral visceral efferent [GVE, parasympathetic division] neurons
Axons of the retinal ganglion cell neurons coalesce to form the
of the oculomotor nerve [cranial nerve [CN] Il) nuclei, which
optic disc and course in the optic nerve. At the optic chiasm,
provide parasympathetic innervation to the pupil. Some axons
axons originating from the medial (nasal) retina decussate and
of the pretectal nuclei remain ipsilateral. Additionally, axons
continue as the contralateral optic tract. Axons from the lat-
originating from the lateral retina and therefore remaining
eral (temporal) retina remain ipsilateral (do not cross at the
ipsilateral at the chiasm also project to the pretectal nuclei. In
chiasm) and course in the ipsilateral optic tract.
doing so, stimulation of the retina projects to the oculomotor
The degree of decussation of optic nerve fibers at the optic
nerve nuclei bilaterally. Axons from GVE neurons course in
chiasm varies in different species. As a general rule, the more
CN Ill, exit the cranial cavity via the orbital fissure, and syn-
lateral the eyes are placed on the head, the greater the degree
apse in the ciliary ganglion. Postganglionic neurons from the
330
CHAPTER 11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
331
Visual Pathway
Deficits
Pupillary Light Reflex Pathway
Retina
Ipsilateral Blindness
Retina
Optic nerve
Ipsilateral mydriasis 
Ipilateral reduced to absent PLR
Optic nerve
Blindness (OU)
Optic chiasm
Mydriasis (OU)
 Optic chiasm
Reduced to absent PLR (OU)
Contralateral
Ipsilateral mydriasis
 Optic tractt
Blindness
 Light directed into the eye ipsilateral to lesion
Pretectal nucleus
 Lateral geniculate nucleus
 Normal pupil (OU)
Reduced to absent PLR (direct)
Parasympathetic
(thalamus)
Normal PLR (OU)
 Normal PLR contralateral eye 
nucleus of 
Optic radiation
(consensual)
oculomotor nerve
Occipital cortex (cerebrum)
 Light directed into the eye
 Oculomotor nerve (CN Ill)
contralateral to lesion
Ciliary ganglion
 Normal PLR in the eye contralateral
Ciliary nerves
to lesion (direct)
 Constrictor muscle of pupil
 Reduced to absent PLR in the eye
ipsil ateral to lesion (consensual)
'asuodsal aouau pue (spalgo ou buidung "a'l) doeuaq yhnoui ssasse uoisia .
tBilateral lesion may affect PLR bilaterally
Figure 11-1 Deficits from a unilateral lesion of the visual and pupillary light reflex (PLR) pathways.
As can be deduced from the discussion above, evaluation
of the menace response and pupillary light reflex is critical in
determining an anatomic diagnosis in an animal with visual
dysfunction. Unilateral lesions involving the retina or optic
nerve result in an ipsilateral absent menace response, mydriasis,
 and decreased or absent PLR. Unilateral lesions involving the
optic chiasm typically produce bilateral absence of the men-
ace response, mydriasis, and decreased or absent PLR. Unilat-
eral lesions caudal to the optic chiasm, affecting the optic tract
LGN, optic radiation, or occipital lobe of the cerebrum result in
a contralateral absent menace response with normal pupil size
and PLR. As a general rule with unilateral lesions in the optic
tract, stimulation of the contralateral retina with a bright light
provides enough stimulus to activate the lateral retina [whose
axons remain ipsilateral at the chiasm). The ispilateral projec-
tions from the lateral retina of the affected eye combined with
the projections from the unaffected eye provide ample activa-
tion of both pretectal nuclei and therefore both oculomotor
nerve nuclei to maintain a normal PLR with unilateral lesions
caudal to the optic chiasm. Lesions involving the optic tract,
LGN, optic radiation, or occipital lobe of the cerebrum cause
loss of one half of the visual field, referred to as hemianopsia.
The visual field can be defined as the image of the environment
that is projected on to the retina when fixed in one position.
 Figure 11-2 Pathways for vision and the pupillary light reflex
Therefore, objects or light from the right side of the animal will
pathway. 1, Retina/optic nerve; 2, orbit [cranial nerve [CN] II,
stimulate the medial aspect of the retina of the right eye and the
III); 3, optic chiasma; 4, optic tract; 5, lateral geniculate nucleus
lateral aspect of the retina of the left eye. Despite this, lesions
[thalamus); 6, optic radiation; 7, occipital cortex; 8, parasympa-
 auo sip rens u ansa Ae ue a on repne
thetic nucleus of CN II [midbrain]; 9, CN III (oculomotor].
the contralateral eye. This may be a reflection of the greater 
percentage of axons from the retina that cross at the chiasm.
ciliary ganglion innervate the constrictor muscle of the pupil
Additionally, axons from the retina also project to a wide
via the short ciliary nerve. Stimulation results in constriction
array of brainstem nuclei, in particular the rostral colliculus.
of the pupil. Ultimately, there is bilateral input to the pretec-
The rostral colliculi are involved in the coordination of head
 tal nuclei and therefore bilateral projections to the autonomic
   a    
division of CN Il nuclei. As a result, light directed into one
with visual input. From the rostral colliculi, axons project
eye results in constriction of both pupils. Constriction of the
directly or indirectly to the cerebrum, cerebellum, and spinal
pupil in response to light directed in that eye is referred to as
 cord. This allows for visual tracking of objects and moving the
the direct response. Constriction of the contralateral pupil is
eye to ensure light focuses on the area centralis for acute vision.
referred to as the consensual or indirect response. The ana-
Caution must be exercised in the interpretation of visual
tomic organization of the afferent limb of the PLR provides
deficits. Because the examiner must rely on motor or behav-
 multiple means for input of afferent information allowing.
ioral reactions, several tests should be used to confrm an
minimal stimulation for normal function and preservation of
impression that an animal has visual dysfunction. See Chapter
function in many disease processes.
1 for details.
332
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 11-1
Signs of Lesions in the Visual and Pupillary Light Reflex Pathways
Lesion Location
Vision/Menace Response
Pupil Size
Pupillary Light Reflexes
 Retina/optic nerve (unilateral 
Absent on affected side
 Usually mydriasis of 
When testing affected eye
lesion}
the affected side*
Direct PLR—reduced to absent 
Consensual-reduced to absent 
When testing the unaffected eye
 Direct PLR—normal
Consensual-reduced to absent 
Bilateral retina/optic
Absent in both eyes
 Bilateral mydriasis
 Absent in both eyes
nerve/optic chiasm
Unilateral optic tract, lateral 
 Absent in contralateral
Normal in both eyes 
Normal in both eyes
geniculate nucleus, optic
eye*
radiation, occipital cortex
 Normal in ipsilateral eye
Midbrain (bilaterall parasympa-
Normal in both eyes 
 Bilateral mydriasis
 Absent in both eyes
thetic nucleus of CN IIIt
Unilateral CN III
Normal in both eyes 
 Mydriasis of the affected side
When testing affected eye
 Normal in contralateral eye
Direct PLR—reduced to absent 
Consensual-normal
When testing the unaffected eye
Direct PLR—normal
Consensual-reduced to absent
Sympathetic innervation to the 
Normal in both eyes
 Constricted on affected side
Normal in both eyes
eye
and does not dilate in dark
Normal on contralateral side
and dilates in dark
CN, Cranial nerve.
*Depending on the degree of room light, may appear normal; in bright light, may receive enough input from contralateral eye to maintain normal
pupil size.
fLesions affecting the midbrain would result in severe changes in mental state (see Chapter l2); the change in mental state differentiates mid-
brain lesion from CN III lesion.
+Depending on how menace response is tested, loss of vision occurs in nasal retina (temporal feld) with partial sparing in temporal retina (nasal
fieldj. See Figure 11-2.
 Lesions of CN Ill (including the ciliary ganglion and the
[enophthalmos), narrowing of the palpebral fissure (ptosis),
short ciliary nerves) or of the constrictor muscle of the pupil
and elevation of the third eyelid.2 Sweating of the ipsilateral
 cause ipsilateral loss of PLR and mydriasis without affecting
face, increased skin temperature, and hyperemia of the nostril
vision. Bilateral lesions are unusual except in lesions of the
and conjunctiva occur in horses.3 This cluster of signs is called
 brainstem. Lesions of the pretectal nucleus or the parasympa-
Horner's syndrome.
thetic nucleus of CN Il cause loss of pupillary constriction.
Differentiation of preganglionic and postganglionic lesions
Sympathetic control of the dilator muscle of the pupil
using pharmacologic testing may be possible in the first few
is illustrated in Figure 1l-3 and Tables 1l-l and 1l-2. Note
weeks of Horner's syndrome. Denervation hypersensitivity
that these pathways originate in the hypothalamus, and axons
  ns  sassr axa s
course ipsilaterally down the brainstem and cervical spinal
cord via the lateral tectotegmental tracts (midbrain) to syn-
rect-acting agents require an intact postganglionic neuron for
apse on lower motor neurons [LMNs) located in the interme-
 an effect. Instillation of 1% hydroxyamphetamine, an indirect-
diate gray matter of the spinal cord segments Tl through T3.
acting agent, causes good dlation ofa normal eye, an eye with a
This is considered the UMN pathway. It provides facilitatory
preganglionic lesion, or one with an UMN neuron lesion, but it
input. Preganglionic [first order neuron) fibers leave the spinal
causes minimal dilation of an eye with a postganglionic lesion.
cord with roots of the brachial plexus. In the thorax,
,fibers
Instillation of 1% phenylephrine, a direct-acting agent, causes
compose the cranial sympathetic trunk, which courses crani-
minimal dlation of a normal eye or one with a preganglinic
ally in the neck with the vagus nerve [vagosympathetic trunk)
lesion but good dilation of an eye with a postganglionic lesion.4.5
synapsing in the cranial cervical ganglion located near the
Unfortunately, pharmacologic testing is often unreliable.6
tympanic bulla. Postganglionic [second-order neuron) sym-
 pathetic axons then follw other cranial nerves to innervate
Dazzle Reflex
structures in the head. Sympathetic activation is produced by
 s  a sa a  s si  a e 
emotional reactions such as fear and rage. Sympathetic nerves
completely closes the palpebral fissure. This is referred to as the
also innervate smooth muscle in the periorbital fascia and the
dazzle reflex. Although not well defined, the anatomic path-
eyelids, including the third eyelid in some species. Lesions
ways involve the retina, optic nerve, and tract to the level of
of this pathway result in a constricted pupil (miosis), slight
the LGN. From the LGN, axons project to the rostral colliculi 
retraction of the globe because ofloss of tone in the periorbita
from which tectonuclear pathways stimulate CN Vll for eyelid
CHAPTER 11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
333
Midbrain
T1-3
Spinal cord
Tectotegmental
spinal pathway
-Ramus communicans
Vagosympathetic
trunk
Trigeminal
Cranialcervicalganglion
ganglion
Tympanic
bulla
Hgure 11-3 Pathway of sympathetic innervation of the eye. [From Greene CE, Oliver JF Jr:
Neurologic examination, In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary medicine, ed 2, 1982,
Philadelphia, WB Saunders.]
closure. Because the pathway does not involve the cerebrum,
 eye position include paralysis of gaze in a direction related to
 animals that are blind from cerebral disease maintain this reflex,
a muscle or a group of muscles, strabismus, or globe deviation.
while animals with lesions involving the afferent pathway (ret-
 Abnormalities of eye movement include loss of normal nystag-
ina, optic nerve, and tract to the level of the LGN, and rostral
 mus (conjugate eye movements with movement of the head)
colliculi) or the efferent pathway (CN VIl) lack this reflex.
and abnormal nystagmus.
When the globe is fixed in a deviated position [strabis-
Anisocoria
mus), regardlless of head position, a lesion of CN IIl, IV, or
Anisocoria or unequal pupils may be caused by ocular or neu-
VI is suspected. Lesions of the trochlear nerve (CN IV) may
rologic disorders. Ocular diseases include abnormalities of the 
cause slight rotation of the globe, which is diffcult to evaluate
 iris, cornea, lens, or retina. Ocular pain, especially if uveitis is 
in animals that have a round pupil. Lesions of CN III and VI
 present, causes miosis. Atrophy of the iris results in mydriasis.
cause ventrolateral and medial strabismus, respectively. Sev-
Increased intraocular pressure also causes mydriasis. Unilateral
eral weeks after an injury, the globe may return to its normal
blindness from a retinal disorder may cause only a mild dila-
midposition, but loss of movement occurs dorsally, medially.
tion of the affected eye in dogs and cats because of weaker
and ventrally with a lesion of CN Ill and laterally with a lesion
consensual stimulation. Moving a light source from eye to eye
of CN VI (see Figures 1l-4 and 1l-5). Positional strabismus
(the swinging "flashlight" test), the pupil of the affected eye
[disconjugate deviation of the eye in certain head positions)
will constrict when light is directed into the unaffected eye.
is characteristic of lesions of the vestibular system. Typically.
When the light is swung to the affected eye, the pupil of the
the eye ipsilateral to the vestibular abnormality is ventrally
affected eye will dilate.
deviated in the palpebral fissure when the nose is elevated.
In this case, eye movements can be elicited in all directions
Eye Movements
by appropriate movements of the head (normal nystagmus),
The extraocular eye muscles are innervated by CN II (ocu-
demonstrating that all extraocular muscles are functional (see
lomotor), CN IV (trochlear), and CN VI (abducent) (Figure
Chapter 8). In food animals, both eyes tend to maintain a
1l-4). Eye movements are controlled by UMNs from the cere-
horizontal position; therefore, they are ventrally placed when
 bral cortex and through brainstem vestibular reflexes. The eye
the head is elevated, although the affcted side may be more
muscles normally act in a synergistic or an antagonistic man-
deviated relative to the normal side. If CNs II1, IV, and VI are
 ner to provide coordinated conjugate movements. Testing of
affected, the eye remains in a normal position within the orbit.
 eye movements is discussed in Chapter 1. Abnormalities of
However, normal nystagmus will be absent.
334
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 in origin (e.g., turning the head rapidly). The visual and vestib
TABLE 11-2
ular types are called jerk nystagmus because ofthe slow phase
to one side followed by the fast or rapid recovery movement
Clinical Signs Expected With a Unilateral Lesion
[jerk). The direction of the nystagmus is named according to
Involving the Sympathetic Innervations to the Eye
the direction of the fast component. Abnormal (pathologic)
nystagmus is named by the direction of the movement (hori-
Site of the Lesion
Clinical Signs
zontal, vertical, or rotatory) and by any change in direction
Lateral tectotegmental tract Ipsilateral GP ataxia/UMN 
with varying head positions. Jerk nystagmus that is horizontal
deficits to the thoracic and
a m  i r  r  r 
pelvic limbs
head positions is indicative of peripheral vestibular disease but
 T1-3 spinal cord segment
Ipsilateral LMN deficits to the 
may be seen in central disease. Vertical jerk nystagmus or with
nystagmus in which the direction of the fast phase changes
thoracic limb and ipsilateral 
with varying head positions is associated with central vestibu-
GP ataxia/UMN deficits to the
lar brainstem lesions [including lesions of the flocculonodular
pelvic limb 
lobe of the cerebellum) (Figure 1l-6; see also Chapter 8).
Brachial plexus lesion
Ipsilateral LMN deficits to the
A less frequent form called pendular nystagmus consists of
thoracic limb and normal
small oscillations of the eye that do not have fast and slow
pelvic limb 
components. Pendular nystagmus usually occurs with cerebel-
Vagosympathetic trunk
Ipsilateral laryngeal paralysis*
lar disease and is most pronounced during fixation of the gaze.
Postganglionic extension 
 Ipsilateral CN Vll and VIII
It may also be seen in animals with congenital visual deficits.
(tympanic bulla)
deficits (facial paralysis and 
Pendular nystagmus is seen in the Siamese cat, other Asian cat
vestibular dysfunction!
breeds, and dairy cows. One large survey of cows in New York
State reported an incidence of 0.51% in several breeds. 12 It has
 Orbital fissure/retrobulbar
Ipsilateral CN Il, IV, V (oph-
also been reported as a familial problem in Ayrshire bulls.13
extension
thalmic branch), Vl deficits 
Except for lesions of the globe and the orbit, most diseases
(ptosis of the upper eyelid.
affecting the visual system produce other clinical signs that
paralysis of the extraocular
 are related to abnormal function of surrounding structures.
eye muscles, analgesia to the
For example, masses affecting the optic chiasm or the optic
medial canthus of the eye)
tracts usuall affect the forebrain, specifeally related to the
hypothalamus. Lesions of CN IIl, CN IV, or CN VI cause
CN, Cranial nerve.
other signs related to the brainstem. Lesions of the occipital
‘Laryngeal paralysis may occur if the lesion affects the GVE fbers of
lobe affects other cerebral functions. The combination of signs
the CN V (vagus).
helps define the location of the lesion (see Chapter 2).
Conjugate and Disconjugate Eye Movements
Conjugate eye movements require coordination of the three
DISEASES
cranial nerves and their muscles. The pathway responsible for
this coordination is the medial longitudinal fasciculus [MLF),
 Diseases causing blindnes, pupilary abnormalities, and ocular
which runs in the center of the brainstem and conveys affer-
movement disorders are listed in Tables 1l-3 through 1l-5. The
ent information from the vestibular nuclei to the nuclei of
history and the physical and neurologic examinations should
CN Il, CN IV, and CN VI for ocular movements. Lesions in
 provide the clinician with a list of the most probable diseases
 several anatomic areas can result in an absence of normal nys-
to be considered. Most of the diseases presented in the figures
tagmus with the globe remaining in a central position without
are also discussed in other chapters. Only those that are related
strabismus [ophthalmoplegia). Lesions of the MLF may cause
 primarily to the visual system are discussed here. Many disor-
disconjugate movements or, more commonly, a lack of eye
ders affect multiple anatomic locations in the visual system.
However, this may be difficult to appreciate clinically. For the
moplegia; paralysis of the extraocular musculature). Lesions of
 purposes of discussion, diseases are grouped based on their pri-
  e     s a  
mary clinical effect. Therefore, disorders are divided into those
that produces hemorrhage in the center of the brainstem (see
aso () ue s ndo no aarau sndo sa a (l) sa
Chapter 12). Similarly, a lesion affecting CN IIl, CN IV, and
involving the LGN, optic radiations, or occipital lobe of the
CN VI nuclei, their respective nerves, or extraocular muscles
cerebrum despite an often multifocal pathologic distribution.
will result in external ophthalmoplegia. Referred to as cav-
ernous sinus syndrome, lesions involving the cavernous sinus
Disorders of the Eye (Retina), Optic Nerve.
[connected, paired venous sinuses located ventrally in the
and chiasm
middle cranial fossa) may affect CN IIl, CN IV, and CN VI
Degenerative Diseases
and sensory and autonomic functions of the ocular structures
Retinal Dystrophy. Retinal dystrophies are degenerative dis-
given the close anatomic relationship between these CNs and
 orders that result in a loss of photoreceptors. The most well
the cavernous venous sinus.78 Diagnosis involves magnetic
studied are a group of inherited canine retinal dystrophies
J ()  ando o (  uus
known as progressive retinal atrophy (PRA).l4 In general,
the head.9.lo External ophthalmoplegia also has been reported
affected animals develop progressive blindness. Initially, the
from thyroid adenocarcinoma invading the cavernous sinus
rod cell photoreceptors deteriorate causing night blindness
intracranially and affecting the three cranial nerves.ll
but with time, cone cell function declines resulting in daytime
blindness. Most dogs are affected at an early age; however, late
Nystagmus
onset forms also exist. Clinically, there is an absent menace
Nystagmus is involuntary rhythmic movement of the eyes.
response, mydriasis, and decreased to absent PLR, bilaterally
 Normal nystagmus [also known as physiologic nystagmus or
Funduscopic examination reveals a hyperreflective tapetum
doll's eye refex) may be visual in origin [i.e., watching tele-
secondary to retinal atrophy, attenuation of the retinal vascu-
phone poles go by from a moving car), or it may be vestibular
lature, and atrophy of the optic disc. In some dogs, secondary
CHAPTER 11
 Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
335
cataracts develop. Most forms of PRA display autosomal reces-
12 known causative mutant genes involved in PRA [PDE6,
sive pattern of inheritance; however, there are also X-link and
RPE65, PDE6, RPGR, RHO, CNGB3, PRCD, RPGRIP1,
dominantly inherited forms. Autosomal recessive PRA has
VMD2, RD3, STK38L, and NPHP4). 17
been observed in the Abyssinian cat.15 Affected kittens display
Retinal degeneration and an adult onset cerebellar abiotro-
 the same clinical signs and examination findings as affected
phy has been observed in a 4-year-old cat.1& The affected cat
dogs. PRA is uncommon in horses, but the thoroughbred
displayed progressive signs of cerebellar disease over several
horse may be predisposed.l6 The diagnosis is based on clinical
years in addition to bilateral blindness, mydriatic pupils, and
examination. Electroretinogram [ERG) may provide support-
absent PLR. Funduscopic examination revealed diffuse hyper-
ive data. Importantly, whereas ERG may not provide a defini-
reflectivity of the tapetum lucidum and attentuation of the ret-
tive diagnosis, it does help eliminate other disease processes
inal vasculature. Histologically, there was a loss of rod and cone
from consideration. Definitive diagnosis may be obtained in
photoreceptors. In the cerebellum there was a loss of Purkinje
 some breeds using avalable DNA tests.l4 In dogs, there are
neurons and granular cell neurons. The cause was unknown.
Dorsal oblique
Medial rectus
Dorsal oblique (CN IV)
(CN III)
Dorsal rectus 
 Dorsal rectus (CN IIl)
Lateral rectus
Lateral rectus (CN VI)
Ventral rectus
Ventral rectus (CN IlI)
Ventral oblique
Ventral oblique (CN Ill)
A
B
C
D
Figure 11-4 A, Functional anatomy of the extraocular muscles. Directions of strabisrmus following
B, paralysis of the oculomotor neurons; C, paralysis of the abducent neurons; and D, paralysis of the
trochlear neurons. CN Il, Oculomotor nerve; CN IV, trochlear nerve; CNVI, abducent.
336
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Anomalies
Two congenital abnormalities are worth mention despite
 Retinal and Optic Nerve Aromalies. Primary retinal anoma-
having limited clinical effects on vision. Both conditions
lies are relatively common in dogs but are less common in
are discussed here given their effect on eye position and
nystagmus.
plasia, collie eye anomaly/syndrome, and various forms of reti-
Siamese Cat Syndrome. Siamese, Birman, and Hima-
nal dysplasia. The types of anomaly and the breeds affected
layan cats have a congenital defect entailing the routing of
 are listed in several reviews and other textbooks.15.19-21 While
axons involved in the visual system. The defect is related to
many anomalies do not affect vision, some cause blindness and
a mutation at the albino locus for coat color that leads to
in some cases nystagmus and pupillary abnormalities.
 an imperfect tyrosinase-negative albinism.27 In Siamese cats,
Optic nerve hypoplasia and aplasia has been observed in
some axons originating from the lateral [(temporal] retina
a number of species.22-25 In the dog, the shih tzu and minia-
incorrectly decussate at the chiasm rather than remaining
ture poodle are commonly affected breeds,23.26 Optic nerve
ipsilateral.28,29 In fact, in most normal cats the medial (nasal)
hypoplasia may affect one or both eyes. Clinical signs relate
retina with axons that project to the contralateral LGN is
to blindness, mydriasis, and absent PLR in the affected eye.
sharply demarcated with limited overlap from the lateral
 Some dogs may retain vision. Funduscopic examination reveals
retina with axons that project to the ipsilateral LGN. In Sia-
decreased size or absence of the optic disc. A variety of mal-
mese cats, this line of demarcation is less distinct with greater
formations affecting the posterior segment of the eye may
 overlap.28,29 The consequence of this misrouting of axons
coexist.23 Secondary changes include retinal detachment and
is that there is a disruption of the retinotopic organization
vitreal hemorrhage. Optic nerve aplasia occurs less commonly.
of the LGN with visual information that should normally
 Development of normal retinal vasculature depends on normal
remain ipsilateral, projecting to the contralateral LGN. Two
 development of the retina. Consequently in animals with optic
patterns of adaptations (named based on the location of the
nerve aplasia, the fundus is devoid of retinal vasculature.23
investigating laboratory where they were initially described)
in the occipital cortex have developed to accommodate this
defect.30 In the Midwestern pattern, there is suppression of
the information from the misdirected lateral retina, whereas
 in the other, Boston pattern, there is a reorganization of the
projections to the cerebral cortex.30 As a consequence of
both adaptations, vision is less binocular and therefore has
decreased acuity.3l Initially born with normal eye position,
medial strabismus develops to compensate for the misdi-
rected axons of the visual system.32 Similarly, pendulous
nystagmus is often present, likely related to the abnormal
development of vision. Medial strabismus has been reported
in several breeds of cattle, apparently as an inherited trait in
some.33
Belgian Sheepdog Syndrome. An autosomal reces-
sive developmental abnormality has been observed in the
Belgian sheepdog in which there is a congenital lack of an
optic chiasm.34 As a result, there is no decussation of axons
from the medial retina and all axons project to the ipsilat-
eral LGN. Although affected dogs retain vision, abnormal
nystagmus is present. The nystagmus varies considerably
Figure 11-5 A cocker spaniel with CN II deficit OD. Despite
within and between individual dogs.35 Affected dogs may
minimal strabisrmus, ptosis of the dorsal eyelid and mydriasis
display horizontal or vertical nystagmus, which may occur
implicate dysfunction of CN II (both GSE and GVE (parasym-
pathetic) innervations. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.)
Jerk Nystagmus
Pendular Nystagmus
Head tilt 
Head tilt 
 Normal Vision
 Abnormal Vision
Horizontal / Rotary
Any direction nystagmus 
No change with varying head
 Spontaneous changes without 
Fast phase opposite
Vertical
position
 varying head position 
direction of head tilt
 Direction of the fast phase can
 No signs of vestibular dysfunction
No signs of vestibular dysfunction
No change with varying
change with varying head
Head position
positions
 Congential 
 Congenital blindness
CVD
Cat: Asian breeds*
PVD
Cattle: Dairy
See Chapter 8
Retina / Optic nerve
Figure 11-6 Nystagmus. 'Vision appears normal clinically, however, nystagmus may develop from abnormal visual acuity related to con-
genital disturbance in the retinotopic organization ofthe visual pathway.27 PVD,peripheral vestibular dysfunction; CVD, central vestibular
dysfunction
CHAPTER 11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
337
TABLE 11-3
Etiology of Blindness*
Disease Categ ory
 Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
 Degenerative
Storage diseases (R, C) (8. 15)
Retinal dystrophy/degeneration (R)
Demyelinating diseases (O. X. C) (7. 8. 15)
Anomalous
Hydrocephalus (C) (12)
Hydrocephalus (C) (12)
Optic nerve hypoplasia (O)
Retinal dysplasia (R)
Cerebral malformations (C) (12)
Colobomaf (O)
 Collie eye syndromet (R)
Metabolic
Hyperthermia (C) (15)
Hypoglycemia (C) (12)
Hypoglycemia (C) (12)
Hypoxia (C) (12)
Hepatic encephalopathy (C) (12)
Hepatic encephalopathy (C) (12)
Neoplastic (12)
 Lymphoma/Hematopoietic
 Primary (12)
neoplasia (R)
Meningioma (O, X. C)
Melanoma (R)
Gliomas (O, X. C)
Ependymoma (C)
Choroid plexus papilloma (C)
Secondary (12)
Metastatic (R, O, X, C)
 Pituitary adenoma (O, X, C)
Lymphoma/hematopoietic 
neoplasia (R, O, X. C)
Calvaria (O, X. C)
Nutritional
Thiamine deficiency—— ruminants 
Hypovitaminosis A (R, O)
(0)(12)
Taurine deficiency—cats (R}
Inflammatory/
Canine distemper (R, O. X, C)
Canine distemper (R, O, X, C)
infectious (15)
Feline infectious peritonitis
Feline infectious peritonitis (R, O. X, C)
(R, O. X. C)
Toxoplasmosis (R. C)
Toxoplasmosis (R, C)
Systemic mycoses (O, X. C)
Thromboembolic
Bacterial infections (O, X, C}
 meningoencephalitis-
GME/Necrotizing encephalitides-
bovine (R, C)
dogs (O, X. C)
Bovine vinus diarrhea (R. O)
Protothecosis (C)
Systemic mycoses (O, X. C)
Immune mediated (O)
Bacterial infections (O, X, C)
Toxic (15)
Lead and other heavy metals (C)
Lead and other heavy metals (C)
Hexachlorophene (C)
Hexachlorophene (C)
Traumatic
 Retinal detachment
Edema (O, X, C)
 Retinal hemorrhage
Hemorrhage (O, X., C)
Edema (O, X, C)
Hemorrhage (O, X. C)
Vascular
Infarcts (R, C})
Hemorrhage (R, O, X, C)
R, Retina; O, optic nerve; X, optic chiasm; C, optic tract and cerebral cortex.
'Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are discussed.
tCollie eye syndromme and coloboma typically do not affect vision.
disconjugate nystagmus is sometimes referred to as see-saw
duration of the disturbance, blindness may be temporary or
nystagnus.36
permanent.
Metabolic Syndromes
Nutritional
The retina is highly dependent on oxygen to support its
Vitamin A Deficiency. A derivative of vitamin A, 1l-cis-retinal
combines with opsin to form rhodopsin, the pigment in rod
hypoxia, ischemia, or other metabolic dysfunction may also
cells that is necessary for vision. Deficiency of vitamin A is
affect vision. However, adverse affects to other body systems
rare, affecting calves and captive raised exotic cats more than
predominate given the wide spectrum of effects caused by
ar uaaq seu v siou as'seue uud
these metabolic derangements. Depending on the degree and
in feedlot cattle fed grain that was deficient in vitamin A and
338
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 11-4
Etiology of Pupillary Abnormalities
Disease Category
Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Degenerative
Hypoplasia of optic nerve (O)
 Retinal dystrophy (R)
Retinal dysplasia (R}
Hydrocephalust (12)
Coloboma (O)#
Collie eye syndrome (R}t
Metabolic
 Diffuse metabolic abnormalities
Neoplastic
 Rostrotentorial tumort (12)
Nutritional 
 Thiamine deficiency—dogs and
cats (15)
ldiopathic
 Pupillotonia/Pourfour du Petit syndrome
 Dysautonomia (9. 15)
Anisocoria/Dyscoria— cats (FeLV associated)
Inflammatory/
 Retrobulbar abscess
Infectious (15)
Several infectious diseases (15)
Middle ear infections (8)
Toxic
 Organophosphates
Leadt (15)
Traumatic
 Brainstem hemorrhage (12)
Hematomat (12)
Cerebral edemat (12)
 Brachial plexus lesions (5)
R, Retina; O, optic nerve; FeLV, feline leukemia virus.
 Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are discussed.
tSigns referable to the oculommotor nerve are secondary to tentorial hermiation. More commonly associated with acquired hydrocephalus.
tCollie eye syndromme and coloboma typically do not affect vision unless extensive involvement of the optic nerve.
TABLE 11-5
Etiology of Ocular Movement Disorders*
 Disease Category  Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Degenerative
Storage diseases (R, C) (8. 15)
Demyelinating diseases (O. C) (7. 8. 15)
Anomalous 
Hydrocephalus (C) (12)
Hydrocephalus (C) (12)
 Strabismus with optic pathway
anomalies—cats 
Neoplastic
Any tumor affecting the brainstem,
cerebellum, vestibular system, or
CN III, IV. VI (8. 12.)
Nutritional
 Thiamine deficiency—dogs
Inflammatory/
and cats (15)
infectious
Any disease affecting the brain-
 stem, cerebellum, vestibular
system, or CN II, IV. VI (8. 15)
Toxic
Hexachlorophene (15)
Traumatic (12)
Lesions of the brainstem, cerebellum,
vestibular system, or CN Ill, IV. VI
Vascular (12)
Lesions of the brainstem, cerebellum,
vestibular system, or CN Il, IV. VI
CN, Cranial nerve.
 *Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which entities are discussed.
calves born from cattle grazed on foliage deficient in vitamin
A.39-4l In addition to blindness from abnormal rod cell func-
erally and is related to the role of vitamin E as an antioxidant.
tion, compression of the optic nerve occurs secondary to abnor-
Regardless of the species, funduscopic examination reveals 
mal skeletal growth of the calvaria. Affected calves also have
central retinal degeneration and patchy brown pigmentation 
increased intracranial pressure and communicating hydroceph-
of the retina (lipofuscin accumulation). Experimentally, vita-
 alus from abnormal development of the arachnoid villi.4l
min E deficiency consistently results in visual defects in dogs.42
Vitamin E Deficiency. Vitamin E deficiency results in reti-
 Naturally occurring hypovitaminosis E has been reported in a
nal degeneration and lipopigment accumulation beginning in
 group of hunting dogs fed a deficient diet.43 Retinal pigment
CHAPTER 11
 Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
339
epithelial dystrophy (RPED) has been reported in a number
 among the infectious diseases that cause optic neuritis. Granu-
of breeds of dog including the English cocker and Briard.44.45
lomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) can affect the
 Funduscopic examination is identical to dogs with vitamin E
deficiency. Although not fully understood, dogs with RPED
underlying condition; however, in many cases an underlying
have abnormally low serum vitamin E levels unrelated to diet
etiology is not identified. Edema and inflammation may lead
 or malabsorption.46 Similarly, approximately 40% of horses
to permanent loss of function of the nerve. In cases without
with equine motor neuron disease, a disorder likely related
an infectious etiology, early treatment should include cortico-
to abnormal antioxidant properties possibly due to abnormal
steroids at an immunosuppressive dosage. Adjunctive therapy
vitamin E metabolism, have observable lipofuscin accumula-
using cytosine arabinoside or cyclosporine may provide long-
tion in the retina despite rare visual defcits (see Chapter 7).47
term control. Other supportive therapies or antibiotic therapy
Taurine Deficiency. Cats have an obligate need for taurine
are given as indicated by the animal's condition. Prognosis for
in their diet due to an inability to synthesize it. Feline central
return of vision is guarded to poor. In one report of 12 dogs
retinal degeneration (FCRD) can be produced by diets that
with optic neuritis, 7 remained alive, 5 were permanently
are deficient in the amino acid taurine.48 Classically, fundu-
blind, and 2 had partial vision.57
scopic examination reveals a horizontal, linear area of hyper-
Sinusitis of the sphenopalatine sinuses in the horse can
reflectivity.49 Cats that are exclusively fed commercial dog
 compress the optic nerve, resulting in optic nerve atrophy.58
food develop FCRD.38
A similar disease process has been reported in the dog and
cat.59 Affected animals displayed abnormalities involving both
Neoplasia
vision and PLR. In addition, exophthalmos was observed in
Neoplasia affecting the eye, optic nerve, or chiasm is com-
some animals. The presumptive diagnosis was based on MRI
monly encountered in dogs and cats.50 Lymphoma can involve
findings, CSF analysis, and response to antibiotics. Typical MRI
 all portions of the globe or optic nerves. Neoplasms also can
findings consisted of loss of the normal hyperintense signal on
arise in adjacent anatomic areas and extend into the orbit.
Tl-weighted images of the bone marrow and enlargement of
 This is observed with tumors involving the nasal cavity and
the sphenoid bones. In addition, there was marked enhance-
paranasal sinuses. A variety of primary neoplasms also occur
ment of the sphenoid bones and meninges of the ventral por-
in the retrobulbar area. In dogs, orbital meningioma has been
tion of the brain. Cerebrospinal fuid analysis varied among
reported.5I The average age ofaffected dogs is 9 years, with no
animals; however, a marked neutrophilic pleocytosis with
breed or sex predilection. Clinical signs relate to a retrobulbar
intracellular bacteria was observed in one case. Long-term
mass, including exophthalmos, orbital swelling, and prolapsed
treatment with antibiotics resulted in resolution of clinical
globe. Visual deficits are common. Long-term success can
signs.
be achieved with surgical resection. Postoperatively, average
follow-up time is 1.5 years, with some dogs surviving much
Toxic
longer. Local recurrence can occur and may cause visual def-
Enrofloxacin has been associated with retinal degeneration
cits in the contralateral eye. In cats, squamous cell carcinoma,
 in cats.50 Signs develop acutely, often within a few days of
lymphoma, and melanoma are most commonly reported.52
initiating antibiotic therapy but may take up to 12 weeks
Ocular fbrosarcoma can develop after trauma, leading to
to develop. Signs consist of bilateral blindness, mydriasis
blindness.53 Extension along the optic nerve to the chiasm can
and decreased PLR. Funduscopic examination reveals tape-
 affect vision in the contralateral eye.
tal hyperrefectivity and attenuation of retinal vasculature.
Tumors of the pituitary gland can cause visual-field deficits
Dosages known to cause the retinal degeneration range from
fom compression of the optic chiasm; however, most pitu-
4.6 mg/kg per os (PO) administered once daily to 27 mg/kg
jopeisu snureeou  ouesrop mora soun re
spreading out rostrally and caudally. Therefore, signs of visual
but may occur if the drug is discontinued promptly. The
 dysfunction occur when masses are quite large.54
mechanism of toxicity is unknown. Factors such as increas-
ing dosage and age of the cat may play a role.6l Other qui-
Idiopathic
nolones may also cause toxicity, consequently caution should
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration syndrome [SARDS)
 be exercised when using fluoroquinolones in cats, especially
causes acute blindness, mydriasis, and decreased PLR.55 Affected
older cats.
dogs typically have acute bilateral blindness. Early in the disease
Several cows developed retinal degeneration secondary
course on the fundus, pupil size, and PLR may appear normal.
to a chemical sealant containing acrylamide. Exposure to the
With time, retinal atrophy results in hyperrefectivity of the
chemical occurred after an accidental environmental contam-
tapetum lucidum, mydriasis, and decreased to absent PLR. Dogs
ination of the water supply. Retinal and optic nerve axonal
with SARDS also may display signs consistent with Cushing
degeneration was observed.62
disease.55 The ERG reveals absence of a response of the retina,
which helps differentiate SARDS from other disorders. There is
Trauma
no effective treatment.
Any portion of the visual system can be affected by trauma.
Most injuries affect the CNS caudal to the chiasm. In horses,
Inflammatory
trauma can result in injury to one or both optic nerves.63
 Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve. Sudden
With head trauma, the brain may shift caudally in the cranial
blindness may be noticed if both eyes are affected. Papill-
cavity. This places traction on the optic nerves, which are
 edema and vascular congestion are seen on funduscopic exam-
fixed in place within the optic canals resulting in stretching
ination if that portion of the nerve is affected. Atrophy of the
(tethering) of the nerves.
disc is noted as the process resolves. Chorioretinitis may also
be present. ERG can help to differentiate primary retinal dis-
Disorders Involving the Optic Tract, LGN, Optic
ease from optic nerve disease. The diagnostic workup should
Radiations, or Occipital Lobe
include MRI and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. Serologic
Degenerative
testing for infectious disease should be pursued based on
An abnormality of the intracellular enzyme systems causes
the presence of systemic involvement, MRI, and CSF analy-
 an accumulation of the products of metabolism in the neu-
sis. Canine distemper, toxoplasmosis, and cryptococcosis are
rons [neuronal storage diseases). Affected neurons function
340
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 abnormally and eventually die. This group of diseases is listed
Extorsion ofthe globe, supposedly from damage to the troch-
in Tables 11-2 through 1l-4 as storage diseases [see Chapters
lear nucleus (CN IV), is seen in this syndrome, but the patho-
8 and 15). Because neurons of higher metabolic demand are
genesis is not clear. An excess of thiaminase in the rumen,
more susceptible, the retina, the lateral geniculate nucleus,
producing an acute thiamine deficiency, commonly underlies
and the occipital cortex are the most common targets in the
this condition. However, other causes of PEM include lead
visual system. Cranial nerve nuclei usually are not affected
toxicity, water deprivation/hypernatremia, and sulfur associ-
 until late in the disease. The diseases are hereditary, progres-
 ated PEM.65 Thiamine deficiency in small animals, primarily
sive, and invariably fatal. Presumptive diagnosis is made by
in cats, causes hemorrhages and malacia in the brainstem. Eye
assessment of the history, knowledge of the breed selectivity.
movements and pupillary light reflexes may be affected (see
and exclusion of other diagnoses. Antemortem diagnosis may
Chapter 15).
be established by identifcation of abnormal organic acids in
the urine or blood. Definitive diagnosis can be made through
Inflammatory
DNA testing, which is available for a number of storage dis-
eases. Frequently, definitive diagnosis is made at necropsy via
quently affect the visual system. Lesions often affect the retina
 histologic evaluation of the CNS. Antemortem brain biopsy
and visual pathways in the CNS. Common infectious diseases
can be performed in some cases. Likewise, biopsy of tissues 
include canine distemper, feline infectious peritonitis, toxo-
other than brain may provide a diagnosis in some of the sys-
plasmosis, rickettsial diseases, systemic mycoses, and thrombo-
temic storage diseases.
embolic meningoencephaltis38.6-58 Presumptive diagnosis is
 Demyelinating diseases as an example, globoid cell leuko-
based on clinicopathologic data including MRI, CSF analysis,
dystrophy, is caused by an enzymatic deficiency of galactocer-
and where available, serology and measurement of antibody
ebrosidase activity resulting in an intracellular accumulation
titers in CSF, or PCR testing of infectious diseases. Evidence
of psychosine, a toxic metabolite to myelin forming oligoden-
 of fundic infammatory lesions (chorioretinitis) can support
drocytes and Schwann cells. Signs of cerebellar and spinal cord
the diagnosis.
dysfunction (UMN signs, proprioceptive deficits) are charac-
Granulomatous
S meningoencephalomyelitis,
s， necrotizing
teristic of the clinical syndrome. However, the visual pathways
leukoencephalitis, and necrotizing meningoencephalitis are
[optic nerve, optic tract, optic radiation) may be affected.
suspected immune-mediated inflammatory diseases. Visual
deficits are commonly observed in affected dogs. In addition,
eases (e.g, canine distenper virus), which can also affect the
an ocular form of GME may predominantly affect the optic
visual pathways [see Chapters 7 and 8].
nerves.69
Anomalies
Toxic
Hydrocephalus may be the result of a congenital anomaly
Heavy-metal poisoning, especially lead poisoning, may pro-
often in small and toy breed dogs or may be secondary to mass
duce cortical blindness. Toxins that affect the brainstem or
lesions or inflammation leading to obstruction of the ventricu-
lar system and secondary ventricular dilation. Enlargement of
(see Chapter 15).
the lateral ventricles may compress the optic radiation and
the occipital cortex resulting in visual deficits. Hydrocepha-
Trauma
lus should always be considered in young, small or toy breed
Any portion of the visual system can be affected by trauma.
dogs with blindness, normal PLR, and normal pupil size. A
Assessing mental state along with oculomotor nerve function
 diagnosis of hydrocephalus requires MRI or CT. In young
is of primary importance in evaluating an animal with head
dogs with a persistent fontanelle, ultrasonography may be per-
injury. Initially, miosis may be observed as a result of dam-
formed through the fontanelle to visualize ventriculomegaly
age to inhibitory UMN function to the oculomotor nerve.
(see Chapter 12).
These UMNs are located in the cerebrum. With increased
brain swelling, tentorial herniation of the occipital lobes com-
Metabolic Syndromes
presses the oculomotor nerve nucleus in the midbrain. As a
Metabolic-related diseases that affect cerebral cortical func-
result, a fixed, dilated pupil usually ipsilateral to the hernia-
    s   
tion (if it is unilateral) occurs. A paralysis of the extraocular
reflexes. Examples include hypoglycemia, hepatic encepha-
muscles that produces a ventrolateral strabismus follows the
lopathy, and uremia. Acute metabolic problems such as
mydriasis. Hemorrhage in the brainstem also produces abnor-
mal pupils. Midbrain hemorrhage may cause fixed, dilated
most severely. Cortical blindness frequently follows severe
pupils if the oculomotor nucleus is destroyed with the sym-
hypoxic episodes such as cardiac arrest [see Chapters 12 and
pathetic pathway intact, but in most cases the pupils are fixed
15). It is not uncommon for animals that are postictal to have
and midposition because both sympathetic and parasympa-
 blindness with normal pupil size and pupillary light reflexes
thetic pathways are affected. Serial assessment of pupillary
(Chapter 13).
function, together with mental status, motor function, and
other cranial nerve function is important for evaluation of
Neoplasia
animals with head trauma. Bilateral, fixed, dilated, or midpo-
Visual defcits commonly occur with intracranial tumors.64
sition pupils along with severe obtundation from the time of
Consequently, visual pathway abnormalities are often helpful
  r  sr ss s 
for localizing intracranial tumors. Neoplasia of the CNS is dis-
cussed in Chapter 12.
a developing tentorial herniation that may be treatable (see
Chapter 12).
Nutritional Deficiencies
Polioencephalomalacia (PEM) of ruminants is character-
Vascular
ized by cerebral necrosis and edema. Signs of cerebral dys-
 Feline ischemic encephalopathy related to Cuterebra larval
function, including blindness, are noted. The pupillary light
infection may cause contralateral vision loss?0 (see Chapter
reflexes are usually normal, unless edema has caused tento-
12). Similarly, cerebral infarction in dogs may affect the visual
rial herniation with compression of the oculomotor nerves.
system.
CHAPTER 11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
341
 Disorders Involving Pupil Function
chronic otitis media or otitis interna; brachial plexus avul.
Dysautonomia
 sion; intracranial and intrathoracic neoplasia; and vigorous
Dysautonomia is a diffuse degeneration of the autonomic ner-
ear cleaning.6.80 The condition is thought to be idiopathic in
vous system; its cause is unknown7l-76 (see Chapters 9 and
42% to 55% of cases.680 Horner's syndrome spontaneously
15). The clinical signs include dysuria, bladder distention,
au uo supuadaa og'saseo Jo aaeuanrad sarel e u saarosar
decreased anal tone, mydriasis with absent pupillary light
specific cause, time to resolution varies but on average resolu-
reflexes, elevated membrane nictitans, intestinal ileus, vomit-
tion occurs in approximately 8 weeks.80
ing or regurgitation, xerostomia, decreased tear production,
 Horner's syndrome with no detectable cause was found
and dry nose. Animals are visual, and the menace response
in 62 golden retrievers in a 6-year period.8l The lesion was
is normal. Definitive diagnosis necessitates histologic identi-
of the preganglionic neuron based on pharmacologic testing.
fication of chromatolytic degeneration of autonomic ganglia,
The investigators reported only 25 cases of Horner's syndrome
 brainstem nuclei, and lateral and ventral horns of the spinal
in other breeds in the same period. Of those, 20 had specific
cord. Presumptive diagnosis involves identification of auto-
diseases causing the signs. In horses, Horner's syndrome can
nomic dysfunction. Denervation hypersensitivity of the iris
secondarily result from intravenous injections in the neck, cer-
muscle can be detected in many dogs by instilling 0.1% pilo-
vical trauma, neoplasia, and ligation of the carotid artery for
carpine in one eye and observing for miosis. The test is positive
treatment of guttural pouch mycosis.82-85 Most of the cases
in 85% to 100% of affected dogs.73.74 Intradermal histamine
result from surgical or external trauma.
(0.05 mL of 1:10,000 histamine) produces a wheal, but the
expected flare response is often blunted in affected dogs.73
Other Pupil Abnormalities
Administration of atropine [0.02 mg/kg administered intrave-
Diffuse forebrain disease of acute onset such as that with trau-
nously) is not predictable for increasing heart rate.73 Schirmer
u au snd sn ee sn ue an ueq 
tear testing may detect decreased tear production in many
likely mechanism relates to loss of UMN inhibition on the
 affected dogs. The prognosis for recovery is poor. Although the
parasympathetic oculomotor neurons. Brain herniation also
cause is unknown, toxico-infectious etiology may underlie the
affects pupil size and is discussed in Chapter 12.
disease [see Chapters 3, 9, and 15).
Pourfour du Petit Syndrome
Pupillotonia
Pupil dilation, widened palpebral fissure, exophthalmos, and
retraction of the nictitating membrane were observed in three
ai aq ot nun st a sssan iensusu ue 
cats immediately after the tympanic bulla was flushed with
mediated. Primary abnormalities of the visual and oculo-
saline for the treatment of otitis media.86 Visual, facial nerve,
motor pathways must be excluded. Only one case has been
 and vestibular deficits were not noted. The signs were consis-
reported.77
eye. Signs resolved within hours in one cat and days in another.
Horner's Syndrome
Horner's syndrome developed 4 days later and eventually
Horner's syndrome can result from a lesion affecting any
resolved in the third cat. The syndrome resembled a similar
aspect of the pathway supplying sympathetic innervation to
condition in humans called Pourfour du Petit syndrome.
the eye (Figure 1l-3 and Table 1l-2). Horner's syndrome is
not associated with visual deficits. Localization is dependent
Dyscoria
on associated clinical signs. For example, lesions involving the
Dyscoria is an abnormally shaped pupil. Oftentimes, dyscoria
is associated with structural abnormalities of the pupil. The
(GP) ataxia/UMN signs to the thoracic and pelvic limbs. A
development of dyscoria involves either the medial or lateral
lesion involving the Tl-T3 spinal cord segments cause ipsi-
branch of the short ciliary nerves of one eye. In cats, the pupil
lateral GP ataxia/UMN signs in the pelvic limb and LMN
will take on "D" or "reverse D" shape. Feline leukemia virus
signs in the thoracic limb. Horner's, as a result of disruption
and lymphoma have been associated with dyscoria in cats.87,88
of the descending UMN axons (lateral tectotegmental spinal
Reduced PLR has been associated with feline immunodef-
tracts) in the cervical spinal cord or the intermediate gray mat-
ciency virus.89 The exact pathogenesis is unknown but may be
ter of the Tl-T3 spinal cord segments, is commonly observed
related to a CNS lesion rather than peripherally affecting the
 in animals secondary to fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopa-
 parasympathetic branches of CN Ill or the iris.89
thy. 78,79 Injury or neoplasia of the brachial plexus may cause
 monoparesis and Horner's syndrome on the same side. Middle
Toxins
ear disease is frequently associated with Horner's syndrome
Organophosphates and carbamates are acetylcholinesterase
in dogs because the sympathetic fibers pass through the tym-
 inhibitors that produce severe miosis along with other signs
panic bulla. Guttural pouch infections may cause Horner's
that include salivation, gastrointestinal signs, urination, and
syndrome in horses. In dogs and cats, the most common causes
muscle fasciculation and weakness.
of Horner's syndrome include head, neck, or chest trauma;
342
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDIES
CASE STUDY 11-1
ARES
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Neurologic Examination
Eye Position and Movement
Menace response
Fixed ventrolateral strabismus OD; normal eye position OS;
Normal OU
normal nystagmus OS
Pupif size
. Assessment
 Mydriatic pupil OD; Normal pupil size OS
Right oculomotor nerve [CN IIl) lesion. The unilateral clini-
cal signs suggest a lesion after the nerve leaves the brain-
Pupillary fight reffexes (PLR)
stem. The nuclei are only millimeters apart, and lesions at
 Reaction
this level usually affect both sides. Both the GVE (parasym-
Shine light
OS
OD
pathetic inmervation] and GSE [voluntary motor function]
OS
+
are affected as evidenced by mydriasis/lack of PLR and fixed
OD
 strabismus, respectively.
CASE STUDY 11-2
GOLIATH
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Neurologic Examination
Eye Position and Movement
Menace response
 Normal eye position OU; normal nystagmus OU
Normal OS; absent OD
. Assessment
Pupil size
Right optic nerve or retinal lesion. A funduscopic exami-
 The right pupil is mydriatic compared to the left pupil
nation may help differentiate a lesion between these two
 anatomic localizations. An electroretinogram may be neces-
PLR
 sary if no retinal lesions are visible. MRI may be necessary to
Reaction
identify a lesion affecting the optic nerve.
Shine light
OS
OD
OS
+
+
OD
CASE STUDY 11-3
LINCOLN
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Neurologic Examination
 Assessment
Menace response
The findings are consistent with a lesion affecting either the
Absent OU
white matter of the optic radiations or occipital cortex of
 the cerebrum bilaterally. Consideration should be given to
Pupil size
a bilateral optic tract lesion or bilateral lateral geniculate
Normal OU
nuclei; however, lesions at these anatomic locations may
affect PLR pathways. Etiologies may include degenerative
PLR
disease, anomalous [hydrocephalus, congenital lesions of
Normal OU
the cerebrum), metabolic, or toxic disorders; neoplastic or
Reaction
inflammatory (infectious or noninfectious) diseases do not
 Shine light
OS
OD
typically have symmetric deficits. Signalment, history, and
OS
+
cil.
other aspects of the neurologic examination may help fur-
OD
+
+
ther refine the differential diagnosis.
Eye Position and Movement
Normal eye position OU; normal nystagmus OU; the ani-
mal does not follow moving objects
CHAPTER 11
Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
343
CASE STUDY 11-4
MARVEL
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Neurologic Examination
Eye Position and Movement
Menace response
Medial strabismus OS; normal eye positions OD; dorsal and
Normal in both eyes
ventral movements can be elicited OS by moving the head;
 normal nystagmus OD
Pupil size
Normal OU
 Assessment
Left abducent nerve (CN VI) lesion. Isolated lesions of CN
PLR
VI are rare. In a clinical case, other signs of brainstem disease
Normal OU
may be present.
 Reaction
Shine light
OS
OD
OS
+
+
OD
×
CASE STUDY 11-5
SPIKE
veterinaryneurologycases.com
: Neurologic Examination
· Assessment
Menace response
Bilateral retina or bilateral optic nerve lesions, or a lesion
Absent OU
affecting the optic chiasm. This situation is one in which
lesions affecting both retinas or optic nerves are more com-
Pupil size
mon than a single lesion affecting the chiasm. Retinopathies
Mydriatic OU
and optic neuropathies are seen more often than are pri-
mary lesions of the optic chiasm.
PLR
Reaction
Shine light
OS
OD
OS
OD
Eye Position and Movement
Normal eye position OU; normal nystagmus OU; the ani-
 mal does not follow moving objects 
CASE STUDY 11-6
TUNA
) veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Neurologic Examination
 Assessment
Menace response
There are two possible anatomic explanations to account
Normal OU
for the observed deficits. [l) A lesion affecting the MLF or 
vestibular system bilaterally. The MLF is the tract connect-
Pupil size
ing the vestibular nuclei to the nuclei of CN Il, IV, and VI.
Normal OU
(2) Alternatively, a lesion could exist that affects the CN III,
IV, and VI bilaterally. In this case, one would expect there to 
PLR
 be an abnormality in the PLR, bilaterally. Other neurologic
Reaction
deficits may help differentiate between these two anatomic
Shine light
OS
OD
sites. With a lesion affecting the MLF, one would expect
OS
+
十
a severe change in mental state [ie., stupor or coma; see
OD
十
Chapter 12). Typical lesions that affect the MLF include
 severe brainstem lesions, such as a hemorrhage or tumor.
Eye Position and Movement
Multiple cranial neuropathies include inflammatory (infec-
The eyes are in the normal midposition, but no vestibular
tious or noninfectious) disease, neoplastic disease (lym-
eye movements can be elicited.
phoma or other infltrative tumor), or idiopathic conditions.
CN, cranial nerve; GSE, general somatic efferent; GVE, general visceral efferent; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; MRI, maghetic resonance
imaging; OD, right eye; OS, left eye; OU, both eyes.
344
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
REFERENCES
24. Gelatt KN: Congenital ophthalmic anomalies in cattle,
Mod Vet Pract 57:105-109, 1976.
1. Timney B, Macuda T: Vision and hearing in horses, J Am
25. Cutler TJ, Brooks DE, Andrew SE, et al: Disease of the
Vet Med Assoc 218:1567-1574, 2001
equine posterior segment, Vet Ophthalmol 3:73-82,
2. van den Broek AHM: Horner's syndrome in cats and
2000.
dogs: a review, J Small Anim Pract 28:929-940, 1987.
26. Kern TJ, Ris RC: Optic nerve hypoplasia in three minia-
3. Sweeney RW, Sweeney CR: Transient Horner's syndrome
ture poodles, J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:49-54, 1981.
following routine intravenous injections in two horses, J
 27. Johnson BW: Congenitally abnormal visual pathways of
Am Vet Med Assoc 185:802-803, 1984.
Siamese cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13:374-
4. Neer TM: Horner's syndrome: anatomy, diagnosis, and
378, 1991.
causes, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:740-746,
 28. Cooper ML, Pettigrew JD: The retinothalamic pathways 
1984.
in Siamese cats, J Comp Neurol 187:313-348, 1979.
5. De Resio L: Second order Horner's syndrome in a cat, J
29. Stone J, Campion JE, Leicester J: The nasotemporal divi-
Fel Med Surg 11:714-716, 2009.
sion of retina in the Siamese cat, J Comp Neurol 180:783-
6. Kern TJ, Aromando MC, Erb HN: Horner's syndrome
798, 1978.
in dogs and cats: 100 cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet Med
 30. Shatz CJ, LeVay S: Siamese cat: altered connections of
Assoc 195:369-373, 1989.
visual cortex, Science 204:328-330, 1979.
7. Rossmeisl JH Jr, Higgins MA, Inzana KD, et al: Bilateral
31. Kalil RE, Jhaveri SR, Richards W: Anomalous retinal
cavernous sinus syndrome in dogs: 6 cases [1999-2004), J
pathways in the Siamese cat: an inadequate substrate for
Am Vet Med Assoc 226:1105-1111, 2005.
normal binocular vision, Science 174:302-305, 1971.
8. Theisen SK, Podell M, Schneider T, et al: A retrospective
32. Blake R, Crawford ML: Development of strabismus in
study of cavernous sinus syndrome in 4 dogs and 8 cats, J
Siamese cats, Brain Res 77:492-496, 1974.
Vet Intern Med 10:65-71, 1996.
 33. Power EP: Bilateral convergent strabismus in two Friesian
 9. Fransson B, Kippenes H, Silver GE, et al: Magnetic reso-
cows, Ir Vet J 41:357-358, 1987
nance diagnosis: cavernous sinus syndrome in a dog, Vet
34. Williams RW, Garraghty PE, Goldowitz D: A new visual
Radiol Ultrasound 41:536-538, 2000.
system mutation: achiasmatic dogs with congenital nys-
10. Hernandez-Guerra AM, Del Mar Lopez-Murcia
M,
tagmus, Abstr Soc Neurosci 17:187, 1991.
 Planells A, et al: Computed tomographic diagnosis of uni-
35. Dell'Osso LF, Williams RW: Ocular motor abnormalities
lateral cavernous sinus syndrome caused by a chondrosar-
 in achiasmatic mutant Belgian sheepdogs: unyoked eye
coma in a dog: a case report, Vet J 174:206-208, 2007.
movements in a mammal, Vision Res 35:109-116, 1995.
 11. Lewis GT, Blanchard GL, Trapp AL, et al: Ophthalmo-
36. Dell'Osso LF, Williams RW, Jacobs JB, et al: The congeni-
plegia caused by thyroid adenocarcinoma invasion of the
tal and see-saw nystagmus in the prototypical achiasma of
cavernous sinuses in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 canines: comparison to the human achiasmatic prototype,
20:805-812, 1984.
Vision Res 38:1629-1641, 1998.
12. McConnon JM, White ME, Smith MC, et al: Pendular
37. Yu DY, Cringle SJ: Oxygen distribution and consumption
nystagmus in dairy cattle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:812-
within the retina in vascularised and avascular retinas and
813, 1983.
in animal models of retinal disease, Prog Retin Eye Res
13. Nurmio P, Remes E, Talanti S, et al: Familial undulatory
20:175-208, 2001.
nystagmus in Ayrshire bulls in Finland, Nord Vet Med
 38. Aguirre GD, Gross SL: Ocular manifestations of selected
34:130-132, 1982.
systemic diseases, Compend Contin Educ Vet 2:144-153,
14. Lin CT, Gould DJ, Petersen-Jonest SM, et al: Canine
1980.
inherited retinal degenerations: update on molecular
39. Booth A, Reid M, Clark T: Hypovitaminosis A in feedlot
genetic research and its clinical application, J Small Anim
cattle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1305-1308, 1987.
Pract 43:426-432, 2002.
40. Divers TJ, Blackmon DM, Martin CL, et al: Blindness and
15. Narfstrom K: Hereditary and congenital ocular disease in
convulsions associated with vitamin A deficiency in feed-
the cat, J Feline Med Surg 1:135-14l, 1999.
lot steers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1579-1582, 1986.
16. Cutler TJ, Brooks DE, Andrew SE, et al: Disease of the
41. Hill B, Holroyd R, Sullivan M: Clinical and pathologi-
equine posterior segment, Vet Ophthalmol 3:73-82,
cal findings associated with congenital hypovitaminosis
2000.
A in extensively grazed beef cattle, Aust Vet J 87:94-98,
17. Beltran WA: The use of canine models of inherited reti-
2009.
nal degeneration to test novel therapeutic approaches, Vet
42. Ris RC, Sheffy BE, Loew E, et al: Vitamin E deficiency
Ophthalmol 12:192-204, 2009.
retinopathy in dogs, Am J Vet Res 42:74-86, 1981.
18. Barone G, Foureman P, deLahunta A:Adult-Onset cerebel-
43. Davidson MG, Geoly FJ, Gilger BC, et al: Retinal degen-
lar cortical abiotrophy and retinal degeneration in a domes-
eration associated with vitamin E defciency in hunting
tic shorthair cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:51-54, 2002.
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:645-651, 1998.
19. Barnett KC: Inherited eye disease in the dog and cat, J
44. Bedford PGC: Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
Small Anim Pract 29:462-475, 1988.
[CPRA): a study ofthe disease in the briard, J Small Anim
20. Whitley RD: Focusing on eye disorders among purebred
Pract 25:129-138, 1984.
dogs, Vet Med 83:50-63, 1988.
45. McLellan GJ, Cappello R, Elks R, et al: Clinical and path-
21. Maggs DJ, Miller PE, Ofri R, et al: Slatter's fundamentals
 ological observations in English cocker spaniels with pri-
of veterinary ophthalmology, ed 4, St Louis, 2008, Saun-
mary metabolic vitamin E deficiency and retinal pigment
ders Elsevier.
epithelial dystrophy Vet Rec 153:287-292, 2003.
22. Barnett KC, Grimes TD: Bilateral aplasia of the optic
46. McLellan GJ, Elks R, Lybaert P, et al: Vitamin E deficiency
nerve in a cat, Br J Ophthalmol 58:663-667, 1974.
in dogs with retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy, Vet Rec
23. da Silva EG, Dubielzig R, Zarfoss MK, et al: Distinctive
151:663-667, 2002.
histopathologic features of canine optic nerve hypoplasia
47. Ris RC, Jackson C, Rebhun W, et al: Ocular manifesta-
and aplasia: a retrospective review of 13 cases, Vet Oph-
tions of equine motor neuron disease, Equine Vet J 31:99-
thalmol 11:23-29, 2008.
110, 1999.
CHAPTER 11
 Blindness, Anisocoria, and Abnormal Eye Movements
345
48. Hayes KC, Carey RE, Schmidt SY: Retinal degeneration
69. Adamo PF, Adams WM, Steinberg H: Granulomatous
associated with taurine deficiency in the cat, Science
meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs, Compend Contin
188:949-951, 1975.
Educ Pract Vet 29:678-690, 2007.
49. Leon A, Levick WR, Sarossy MG: Lesion topography and
70. Wiliams KJ, Summers BA, de Lahunta A: Cerebrospinal
new histological features in feline taurine deficiency reti-
cuterebriasis in cats and its association with feline isch-
nopathy, Exp Eye Res 61:731-741, 1995.
emic encephalopathy Vet Pathol 35:330-343, 1998.
50. Attali-Soussay K, Jegou JP, Clere B: Retrobulbar tumors
71. EdneyATB, Gaskell CJ, Sharp NJH: Waltham symposium
in dogs and cats: 25 cases, Vet Ophthalmol 4:19-27, 2001.
no. 6: feline dysautonomia-an emerging disease, J Small
51. Mauldin EA, Deehr AJ, Hertzke D, et al: Canine orbital
Anim Pract 28:333-416, 1987.
meningiomas: a review of 22 cases, Vet Ophthalmol 3:11-
72. Guilford WG, O'Brien DP, Alert A, et al: Diagnosis of
16,2000.
dysautonomia in a cat by autonomic nervous system func-
52.
Willis MA, Wilkie DA: Ocular oncology, Clin Tech Small
tion testing, J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:823-828, 1988.
Anim Pract 16:77-85, 2001.
73. Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Nietfeld JC: Dysautonomia
53. Barrett P, Merideth R, Alarcon F: Central amaurosis
in dogs: 65 cases [1993-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc
induced by an intraocular, posttraumatic fbrosarcoma in
220:633-639, 2002.
a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:242-245, 1995.
74. Longshore RC, O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, et al: Dysau-
54. Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, Breitschwerdt EB, et al:Acute
tonomia in dogs: a retrospective study, J Vet Intern Med
 blindness associated with intracranial tumors in dogs
10:103-109, 1996.
and cats: eight cases [1984-1989), J Am Vet Med Assoc
75. Pollin M, Sullivan M: A canine dysautonomia resembling
199:755-758, 1991.
the Key-Gaskell syndrome, Vet Rec 118:402-403, 1986.
 55. Montgomery KW, van der Woerdt A, Cottrill NB: Acute
76. Presthus J, Bjerkas I: Canine dysautonomia in Norway, Vet
 blindness in dogs: sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Rec 120:463-464, 1987.
syndrome versus neurological disease [140 cases, 2000-
77. Gerding PA, Brightman AH, Brogdon JD: Pupillotonia in
2006), Vet Ophthalmol 11:314-320, 2008.
a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1477, 1986.
56. Nafe LA: Canine optic neuritis, Compend Contin Educ
78. MacKay AD, Rusbridge C, Sparkes AH, et al: MRI char-
Pract Vet 3:978-981, 1981.
acteristics of suspected acute spinal cord infarction in
57. Fischer CA, Jones GT: Optic neuritis in dogs, J Am Vet
two cats, and a review of the literature, J Feline Med Surg
Med Assoc 160:68-79, 1972.
7:101-107,2005.
58. Barnett KC, Blunden AS, Dyson S
SJ, et al: Blindness,
79. Cauzinille L: Fibrocartilaginous embolism in dogs, Vet
optic atrophy and sinusitis in the horse, Vet Ophthalmol
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 30:155-167, 2000:vii.
11(suppl 1):20-26, 2008.
80. Morgan RV, Zanotti SW: Horner's syndrome in dogs
59. Busse C, Dennis R, Platt SR: Suspected sphenoid bone
and cats: 49 cases [1980-1986], J Am Vet Med Assoc
 si on     
194:1096-1099, 1989.
 one cat, Vet Ophthalmol 12:71-77, 2009.
 81. Boydell P: Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in the golden
60. Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al:
retriever, J Small Anim Pract 36:382-384, 1995.
82. Green SL, Cochrane SM, Smith-Maxie L: Horner's syn-
Ophthalmol 4:99-106, 2001.
drome in ten horses, Can Vet J 33:330-333, 1992.
6l. Wiebe V, Hamilton P: Fluoroquinolone-induced retinal
83. Bacon CL, Davidson HJ, Yvorchuk K, et al: Bilateral
degeneration in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 22l:1568-
Horner's syndrome secondary to metastatic squamous cell
1571, 2002.
carcinoma in a horse, Equine Vet J 28:500-503, 1996.
62. Godin AC, Dubielzig RR, Giuliano E, et al: Retinal and
84. Milne JC: Malignant melanomas causing Horner's syn-
optic nerve degeneration in cattle after accidental acryl-
drome in a horse, Equine Vet J 18:74-75, 1986.
amide intoxication, Vet Ophthalmol 3:235-239, 2000.
 85. Murray MJ, Cavey DM, Feldman BF, et al: Signs of sym-
63. Martin L, Kaswan R, Chapman W: Four cases of traumatic
 pathetic denervation associated with a thoracic melanoma
optic nerve blindness in the horse, Equine Vet J 18:133-
 in a horse, J Vet Intern Med 1l:199-203, 1997.
137, 1986.
86. Boydell P: latrogenic pupillary dilation resembling Pour-
64. Bagley RS, Gavin PR, Moore MP, et al: Clinical signs asso-
four du Petit syndrome in three cats, J Small Anim Pract
ciated with brain tumors in dogs: 97 cases [1992-1997), J
41:202-203, 2000.
Am Vet Med Assoc 215:818-819, 1999.
87. Brightman AH IIl, Ogilvie GK, Tompkins M: Ocular dis-
 65. Gould DH: Polioencephalomalacia. J Anim Sci 76:309-
ease in FeLV-positive cats: 1l cases [1981-1986), J Am
314, 1998
Vet Med Assoc 198:1049-1051, 1991.
66. Ellett EW, Playter RF, Pierce KR: Retinal lesions asso-
88. Nell B, Suchy A:"D-shaped" and "reverse-D-shaped" pupil
ciated with induced canine ehrlichiosis: a preliminary
 in a cat with lymphosarcoma, Vet Ophthalmol 1:53-56,
report, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 9:214-218, 1973.
1998.
67. Gelatt KN, Whitley RD, Samuelson DA, et al: Ocular
89. Phillips TR, Prospero-Garcia O, Puaoi DL, et al: Neuro-
manifestations of viral diseases in small animals, Compend
logical abnormalities associated with feline immunodefi-
Contin Educ Pract Vet 7:968-977, 1985.
ciency virus infection, J Gen Virol 75:979-987, 1994.
68. Martin CL: Retinopathies of food animals. In Howard JL,
editor: Current veterinary therapy: food animal practice,
Philadelphia, 198l, WB Saunders.
CHAPTER
12
Stupor or Coma
ltered states of consciousness are always related to
Stuporous: The animal appears to be asleep when undis-
abnormal brain function. Assessment of an animal's
turbed but can be aroused by strong stimulation, espe-
level of consciousness, often referred to as mentation,
cially noxious stimuli. No clear boundary separates
mental state, or sensorium, is a crucial yet frequently under-
dullness, obtundation, and stupor.
appreciated aspect of a thorough neurologic examination.
 Comatose: The animal is unconscious and does not respond
While animals in stupor or coma are readily identified, subtle
to any stimulus except for reflex activity. For example,
changes in mental state may not be easily recognized. How-
a strong toe pinch may elicit a flexion reflex or may
ever, in some instances, identification of a subtle change in the
increase extensor posturing but does not cause a behay-
mental state may be the only clue that helps to establish an
ioral reaction such as crying, biting, or turning the head.
intracranial neuroanatomic localization. This has an enormous
Vegetative: The animal lacks awareness of the environment
impact on the differential diagnosis and diagnostic workup
but shows arousal. Brainstem function is present, but
of an affected animal. Consequently, clinicians should devote
forebrain responses are absent.!
adequate time to critically assess the mental state of every
Brain dead: The animal is in a coma, is apneic, lacks all
neurologic animal.
 brainstem reflexes, and has electrocerebral silence.
Nomenclature involving abnormal mental states is often
confusing because the terminology is not based on objective
criteria. Instead, terms extend beyond simple medical analysis
LESION LOCALIZATION
and encompass the clinician's subjective interpretation of an
animal's behavioral response. Confounding this assessment is
 Consciousness or mental state is maintained by sensory stim-
the effect caused by the animal being in an unfamiliar envi-
uli that act through the ascending reticular activating system
  i      n
[ARAS) on the cerebral cortex (Figure 12-1). The ARAS is
may behave differently in the hospital environment. This is 
a group of neurons that extend to the caudal diencephalon
 especially true for cats. In some cases, the pet owner may play
from the medulla oblongata.2 Sensory information originating
a critical role in an accurate assessment of the mental state.
from the spinal cord or cranial nerve afferents projects to the
In the end, the determination of an abnormal mental state
ARAS, which in turn projects to the thalamus and ultimately
requires careful integration ofbehavior, owner assessment, and
to the cerebral cortex. In fact, all sensory pathways have col-
the impact of an unfamiliar environment and stimuli.
lateral input to the ARAS of the pons and the midbrain. The
For clinical purposes, the following definitions are adequate:
ARAS projects diffusely to the cerebral cortex, maintaining a
Normal. The animal is alert, responds to external stimuli,
 u sss r n ae jo a
is aware of its surroundings, and responds to commands
tical neurons.3 A balance is maintained between the ARAS
as expected.
 and an adrenergic system that projects from nuclei in the
Dull: The animal is lethargic and less responsive to its
midbrain and the diencephalon, which may be considered
environment but still has the capability to become
 asgo  s u s gs as 
responsive in a normal manner. Most sick animals are
systems can produce signs ranging from hyperexcitability to
depressed.
coma. Narcolepsy, a syndrome of sleep attacks, is discussed in
Disoriented, confused: Although the animal can respond
Chapter 13.
to its environment, it may do so in an inappropriate
 Decreasing levels of consciousness indicate abnormal func-
manner.
tion of the cerebrum or brainstem, causing interference with
Obtunded: The animal is mild to moderately less wake-
the cerebrocortical activation by the ARAS. Stupor and coma
ful or less responsive to the environment or external
are caused by (l) diffuse, bilateral forebrain (cerebrum and
stimuli.
diencephalon) lesions; (2) metabolic or toxic encephalopathies;
346
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
347
and [3) disorders affecting the brainstem, in particular, the
in the diencephalon also cause in a similar signs. The pupillary
midbrain and pons.
light reflex may be abnormal if the lesion involves the optic
 An anatomic diagnosis can be made on the basis of mental
chiasm. The animal may also have other signs of endocrine
status, motor function, and brainstem reflexes. Of particular
disease.
importance are neuro-ophthalmologic signs (vision, pupils,
 In its most severe form, diffuse forebrain involvement
and eye movements) (see Chapter ll and Table 12-1). Altera-
produces the chronic vegetative state, wherein the animal
tions in the respiratory pattern may be correlated with levels
has brainstem reflexes but no behavioral reactions. Signs of
of brainstem abnormalities, but they are less reliable than the
inflammation involving the meninges (meningitis) may also
other signs.
be present and include pain on palpation of the head and the
Diffuse bilateral forebrain disease usually does not produce
neck, rigidity of the neck muscles, and resistance to flexion of
localizing signs, although some inflammatory processes may
the neck. Infection, immune-mediated inflammation, or blood
be somewhat asymmetric. With diffuse cerebral disease, vol-
 in the subarachnoid space can cause meningeal inflammation.
untary motor activity and postural reactions may be absent
Metabolic or toxic encephalopathies usually depress cerebral
or severely depressed. Rhythmic walking movements, reflect-
functions early, whereas brainstem functions are affected later.
ing brainstem and spinal cord activity, may be elicited if the
Importantly, metabolic or toxic encephalopathies do not pro-
 animal is suspended in a normal standing posture. Vision and
 duce focal or lateralizing signs. Signs are generally the same as
the menace responses may be absent, although the pupillary
those of diffuse cerebral lesions but may have other compo-
light reflexes [PLR) are normal. Normal or Physiologic nystag-
nents, depending on the cause. For example, barbiturates also
mus is normal, but the animal does not follow moving objects.
can cause depression of the spinal reflexes; organophosphate
Normal pupil size and vestibular eye movements indicate
 insecticides can cause muscle fasciculation, peripheral neuropa-
 an intact brainstem, whereas the loss of vision and voluntary
thy, and autonomic signs; and a number of toxins can cause
motor activity indicates abnormal forebrain function. Lesions
seizures. Specifc entities for toxins are discussed in Chapter 15.
Disorders affecting the brainstem cause alteration in mental
state in conjunction with dysfunction of brainstem reflexes.
Lesions may be focal resulting in asymmetric signs. In general,
bilateral or diffuse lesions involving the brainstem result in
severe obtundation, stupor, or coma. There are a variety of dis-
Cerebral
ease processes that can affect the brainstem. In most instances,
cortex
the disease process [tumor, infection, inflammation, infarction)
 directly impacts the brainstem. However, in certain instances,
 brainstem dysfunction is the result of compression related to
herniation (displacement) of the cerebrum or cerebellum
Spinalcord
The calvaria form an inelastic case around the brain. Within
Somatosensory
the cranial cavity exists only brain parenchyma, cerebrospinal
pathways
fluid (CSF), and blood. The volume of these components deter-
of one or more of these intracranial constituents, there must be
Hgure 12-1 Reticular activating system. The reticular activating
a corresponding decrease in volume of the others. For example,
 -ss oss iso  ind saaianan ansq a jo ass
with brain swelling, there may be compression of the ventricles
 tems. Diffuse projections from the reticular activating system to
lessening the volume of CSF within the cranial cavity. More-
the cerebral cortex maintain consciousness.
over, certain pathologies, such as a tumor, abscess, hematoma, or
TABLE 12-1
Signs of Lesions Causing Stupor and Coma
Lesion 
Motor Function
Vision
 Pupils
Eye Movements
Diffuse bilateral fore-
 Tetraparesis: postural deficits,
Absent
Normal
Normal: however, animal
brain disease
reflexes are normal
does not track objects 
Metabolic or toxic
Tetraparesis: postural deficits,
Absent
Normal or
Normal; however, animal
encephalopathy
reflexes may be depressed
 pinpoint in size
 does not track objects,
Responsive
particularly if in coma
PLRs
Bilateral lesions of
 Tetraparesis: postural
Absent with caudal
Dilated or 
Ventrolateral strabismus;
rostral brainstem*
 deficits, reflexes are
 tentorial herniation:
midposition,
 decreased vestibular
exaggerated,increased exten-
 present in primary
 absent PLRs
eye movements 
sor tone (decerebrate rigidity)
 brainstem lesions
Unilateral compression
Hemiparesis or tetraparesis:
 Present: may be con-
Dilated, ipsilateral
lpsilateral ventrolateral
of rostral brainstem*
postural deficits, reflexes 
 tralateral loss with
strabismus, decreased
 are exaggerated, increased
caudal tentorial
vestibular eye
extensor tone on affected 
herniation
movements
side
PLRs, Pupillary light reflexes.
'More severe signs are expected with intra-axial lesions compared to extra-axial lesions that result in compression
348
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
B
Hgure 12-2 Caudal view of the brains of two dogs sectioned at the midbrain. A, Normal brain.
Note the patent mesencephalic aqueduct. B, Caudal tentorial herniation has occurred in which
the cerebrum has herniated caudally through the tentorial notch (arrows) causing compression of
the rostral colliculi and obstruction of the mesencephalic aqueduct. [Copyright 2010 University of
Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
of the cerebrum under the tentorium cerebelli. The shift in
intracranial contents may stretch fibers of CN Il. Similarly.
compression on the midbrain may disrupt the neurons from
the parasympathetic nucleus of CN Ill to cause pupillary dila-
tion or the tectotegmental tract comprising the upper motor
neurons (UMNs) of the sympathetic pathway to cause pupil.
lary constriction. Disruption of both the parasympathetic and
 sympathetic pathways results in a midposition pupil. In some
cases, pupil constriction precedes pupillary dilation as result
of disruption of the cerebral UMN input that normally inhib.
its CN II1.9 Mydriasis or miosis in conjunction with abnormal
mental status indicates impending deterioration of the animal.
 In both cases, rapid assessment and treatment are imperative.
DISEASES
The causes of stupor and coma are classified according to
the presence or absence of focal or lateralizing signs and the
Figure 12-3 Axial T2W image of the brain of a mixed-breed dog.
onset and progression. Accordingly, diseases are categorized as
As in Figure 12-2, B, there is caudal tentorial herniation of the
 m s e is a  r m ss
cerebrum (arrows] resulting in compression of the rostral colliculi
gressive history, acute onset with nonprogressive history, and
[Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
   r      s
acute or chronic onset (Table 12-3).
edema, also must be accommodated. Since the cranial cavity is
rigid, increased volume of the intracranial constituents can be tol-
Focal or Lateralizing Signs
erated to a certain degree but beyond this there is a rapid increase
Acute Progressive
in ICP.7 Increased ICP can cause displacement of the cerebral
Traumatic brain injury (TBl).
hemisphere[s) caudally under the tentorium cerebell, resulting
 Pathophysiology. Head injuries in dogs and cats are most often
in compression of the brainstem? (Figures 12-2 and 12-3). Other
the result of motor vehicle crashes.l0. ll In horses, direct blows
types ofherniations also can occur. Unilateral masses cause a her-
to the frontal region, collsion with a solid object, or impact to
niation on the same side, whereas diffuse cerebral edema usually
 i     s     
causes a bilateral herniation. If the ICP continues to rise, or if
mon causes of TB1. I2 Pathophysiologically, TBI can be divided
the mass starts in the caudotentorial compartment [caudal cra-
into primary and secondary injury. Primary TBI occurs at the
nial fossa), the cerebellum may herniate through the foramen
time of injury. The terms that are commonly used in describ-
magnum, compressing the medulla oblongata. The respiratory
ing TBI are defined in Box 12-l. The clinical differentiation of
pathways are blocked, resulting in death.
concussion from contusion is not clear and has no significance
The signs of brainstem compression from tentorial her-
for clinical management. Concussions represent physiologic
niation are outlined in Table 12-2. Masses that compress the
disruptions of cells and are completely reversible. Contusions
brainstem usually cause similar signs. Abnormal pupil size and
cause structural disruption of cells and tracts and may not be
 r     
reversible. Fractures of the calvaria may result in laceration of
or disruption of the tectum and tegmentum of the midbrain
brain parenchyma or disruption of the vasculature of the brain
 or meninges leading to hematoma formation. Often intracranial
changes are one of the earliest detectable signs of herniation
hemorrhage and edema develop as part of the primary insult.
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
349
TABLE 12-2
Signs of Progressive Bilateral Caudal Tentorial Herniation
Level
Mental State
 Pupils
Eye Movements
Motor Function
Respiratory
Initial onset 
Dull/Obtunded
 Small, responsive 
Normal
Tetraparesis: postural
 Normal
deficits
Increased severity
 Severe obtundation 
Midposition,
Normal
 Tetraparesis: postural
 Cheyne-Stokes
or stupor
responsive
deficits,
respiration 
 Reflexes are normal 
 or exaggerated
Severe midbraint
Stupor or Coma
Dilated or 
 Decreased, possible 
 Decerebrate rigidity.
Hyperventilation
compression
midposition,
ventrolateral
tetraplegia
decreased
 strabismus
 Reflexes are normal 
responsive
 or exaggerated
Pontine
Coma
Pinpoint or
 Absent, ventrolateral
 Same as with
 Rapid shallow
compressiont
midposition
strabismus
midbrain
respirations
unresponsive
compression
Medullary
Coma
Dilated,
 Absent, ventrolateral
 Same as with
 Irregular to apnea,
compressiont
 unresponsive
 strabismus
 midbrain 
 slow pulse 
compression
 Modifed from Oliver JE Jr: Neurologic emmergencies in small animals. Vet Clin North Amm 2:341-357, 1972.
*With unilateral lesions, ipilateral deficits in pupil size, pupillary light reflex, and motor function would be expected.
+Difficult to distinguish clinically.
subarachnoid, or intraaxial (parenchymal) location. The most
glycemia. Secondary brain injury develops quickly following
common locations for intracranial hemorrhage are subarach-
the initial injury and may cause irreversible central nervous
noid and intraaxial. In humans, diffuse axonal injury (DAI)
system (CNS) pathology Medical treatment for TBI is directed
is the result of specifc forces applied to the head during the
 at preventing or decreasing the severity of the secondary injury.
injury.l3 Although DAI is a histologic diagnosis, it is suspected
Assessment. A thorough physical examination is impera-
in cases in which the mechanism of injury is consistent with
tive to establish the existence of concurrent or contributing
the development of DAl, severe neurologic deficits are present,
factors that may impact the nervous system. Animals involved
 and there is no focallesion observed on computed tomography
are saunu ueao aidnnu aeu uayo suaas senen u
[CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) despite evidence of
attention and treatment of concurrent injuries are necessary
brain swelling. 4 At the present time, DAI is poorly described
for a successful outcome. A complete and thorough neurologic
in veterinary medicine but is likely to exist. In addition to these
examination should be performed in all animals experiencing
primary injuries, brain edema often develops.
trauma, regardless of whether or not overt neurologic deficits
Three types of brain edema may occur, cytotoxic, vasogenic,
are observed. Differentiation of the signs of diffuse and focal
or interstitial. Cytotoxic edema results from fluid accumula-
CNS lesions from the signs of tentorial herniation is discussed
tion in neurons and astrocytes secondary to cellular hypoxia
 earlier Differentiation between acute brainstem hemorrhage
that disrupts cell membrane function. Vasogenic edema results
 and tentorial herniation is summarized in Table 12-4.
from damage to the blood-brain barrier (BBB), and the fluid
Treatment. The treatment of traumatic brain injury cannot
accumulation is extracellular. Resolution of vasogenic edema
 be separated from the management of the animal as a whole
is the focus of most antiedema therapies. The third type of
 because multiple organ injuries are common. Moreover, many
edema, interstitial, occurs in hydrocephalus. Cerebral edema
 of the treatments used to stabilize systemic disturbances have
effects that are beneficial in limiting the secondary effects of
after head injury.
TBI. Consequently, treatment can be divided into therapies
These primary injuries may result in increased ICP. As
 aimed at correction of extracranial derangements and thera-
a result of increased ICP, alterations in cerebral blood flow
pies directed at correction of intracranial alterations.
(CBF) and brain metabolism develop, which may exacerbate
 The priorities for assessment of an animal presented to
brain edema. Abnormalities in CBF and metabolism lead to
the veterinary clinic are (l) assessment of oxygenation and
secondary brain injury. Other possible biochemical events cen-
ventilation, (2) assessment ofhemodynamic status, [3) assess-
tral to the development and progression of secondary injury
include increases in intracellular calcium concentrations, free
and lesion localization, (5) medical or surgical treatment for
radical production, and excitotoxicity related to glutamate.l3
sis suuasm g ued ru (g) pue Anu raonu
Hyperglycemia, a sympathoadrenal response, may occur in
 In general, treatment is focused on maintaining CBF, which
dogs and cats following TBI.15 The degree of hyperglycemia
is tightly regulated in normal animals. In a process of pres-
may be associated with increased mortality rates or decreased
sure autoregulation, CBF remains constant through a wide
prognosis, but the exact relationship is not known. Hyperglyce-
range of mean arterial pressures [MAPs). During times when
mia may potentiate neurologic injury by increasing free radical
MAP is outside the range of pressure autoregulation, CBF
production, cerebral edema, excitatory amino acid (glutamate)
becomes solely related to MAP.i6 Consequently, arterial pres-
release, and cerebral acidosis.15 Likewise, hypoglycemia
1can
s pue unadoa u ansr  u os moq ss
have deleterious effects on neuronal function. Consequently.
of the brain while pressures above 150 mm Hg may exacerbate
350
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 12-3
Etiology of Stupor and Coma
Condition
Acute Nonprogressive
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Focal or Lateralizing Signs
Neoplastic (12)
Secondary
 Primary brain tumors 
Metastatic
 Meningiomas
Lymphoma
Gliomas
 Pituitary
Calvarial tumors (MLO)
Inflammatory/infectious (15)
Meningoencephalomyelitis
Meningoencephalomyelitis
Meningoencephalomyelitis
Traumatic (12)
 Intraaxial hemorrhage
 Epidural, subdural hematoma
 Subdural hematoma
vascular (12)
Infarction
No Focal or Lateralizing Signs
Degenerative (15)
Storage diseases (8. 15)
Anomalous
 Brain malformations
Acquired hydrocephalus
Congenital hydrocephalus
Metabolic (15)
Hydroencephaly 
Hypoglycemia (15)
 Brain malformations
 Intracranial 
 Electrolyte imbalances
Intraarachnoid
Liver failure; hepatic
cyst/diverticulum
encephalopathy (15)
 Renal failure {15}
Diabetic coma
Adrenal disorders
Thyroid disorders
Acid-base disorders
Hypothyroid coma (15)
Heat stroke
Hypoxia
Equine hypoxic/ischemic
encephalopathy
Inborn errors of metabolism
Neoplasia
Pituitary, hypothalamic tumors
Nutritional (15)
Thiamine deficiency
ldiopathic (13)
 Postictal seizure
Narcolepsy
Inflammatory / infectious (15)
 Meningoencephalomyelitis
Meningoencephalomyelitis
Meningoencephalomyelitis
Toxic (15)
Heavy metals
Water intoxication
Barbiturates
Plants
Carbon monoxide
Salt poisoning
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Enterotoxemia
Traumatic
Cerebral edema
Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which conditions are discussed.
hemorrhage and edema.17 Although CBF cannot be easily
within the cranial cavity, which increases ICP. From this under
assessed in clinical practice, CBF depends heavily on cerebral
standing of the cerebral vascular physiology,it becomes evident
perfusion pressure (CPP), which can be indirectly assessed.
 that the most important aspects of assessment and treatment of
Cerebral perfusion pressure is determined by the formula: CPP
TBI involve assessment and normalization of oxygenation, ven-
= MAP - ICP. From this equation, it is clear that MAP plays a
tilation, and hemodynamic parameters such as blood pressure.
substantial role in CPP. Consequently, measures that support
Specific treatments should initially be directed at correction
MAP positively affect CPP. A second aspect in the regulation
 of extracranial derangements. Standard protocols for treating
of CBF is chemical autoregulation related to partial pressure
hypovolemic shock or hypotension are recommended. Fluid
 of carbon dioxide (Pacoz). Cerebral vasculature is responsive
therapy should be vigorous if shock is present, but excessive
to CO, concentration. Vasodilation occurs with increased CO2
fluid therapy should be avoided because it can contribute to
concentration, whereas vasoconstriction occurs with decreased
cerebral edema. Supplemental oxygenation should be pro-
 CO, concentration. In states of severe hypocapnia, ischemia 
vided in animals experiencing hypoxemia. Supplemental
can develop secondary to vasoconstriction, which exacer-
 oxygenation may be provided in the form of nasal cannulas
en ose eudesradsu Krasrauonu uerq Arepuosas saeq
or oxygen cages. In severely anemic animals, red blood cell
 transfusion may be necessary to provide adequate Oz carrying
Paco, increases, vasodilation results in increased blood volume
 capacity. Careful and judicious use of analgesics should be
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
351
BOX 12-1
TABLE 12-4
Comparison of Acute Brainstem Hemorrhage
Terminology of Head Injury
with Tentorial Herniation After Head Injury
Concussion: Transient loss of consciousness without
structural lesions 
Feature
Contusion: Pathologic alterations in the brain including
Compared
 Brainstem Hemorrhage Tentorial Herniation
edema, petechial hemorrhage, disruption of nerve fibers,
Onset 
 Immediate or early
Delayed
 and so forth 
Course
Usually static
 Progressive
Coup and Contrecoup: Injuries at the point of impact (coup)
 Mental status 
 Coma, stupor if small 
 Obtundation, pro-
and at the opposite pole of the brain (contrecoup)
lesion
 gressing to coma
Cerebral Edema: An increase in intracellular/cytotoxic (gray
Pupils
 Poor to unresponsive 
 Miosis, progressing
matter) and extracellular/vasogenic (white matter) fluid,
 midposition, may
to midposition and 
 present in most head injuries 
be dilated if a small 
 unresponsive
Hemorrhage:
lesion
Eoidurat: Bleeding between the dura and the calvaria, usu-
Eye
Absent 
 Normal progressing to 
 ally caused by a fracture with laceration of a meningeal
movements
unresponsive
artery
 Motor function  Tetraplegia
Normal or tetraparesis 
 Subdurat: Bleeding between the dura and the arachnoid
 Decerebrate posture
 or hemiparesis
layers of the meninges, usually caused by disruption of
progressing to 
the bridging veins, so it develops slowly
plegia with
 Subarachnoid: Bleeding into the subarachnoid space,
 decerebrate posture
Usually caused by disruption of the veins or the arteries
 of the arachnoid; relatively common in animals
Intraaxiaf(parenchymal): Bleeding into the tissue of the
Mannitol, a nonmetabolizable 6-carbon polyalcohol, is an
 brain, usually caused by disruption of the parenchymal
 osmotic diuretic that can lower ICP likely through two mecha-
 vessels; relatively common in animals
nisms. Mannitol increases plasma volume, which produces the
Diffuse axonal injury: disruption of axons secondary to
 rheologic effect of decreasing the hematocrit and blood viscos-
specific forces applied to the head during trauma: in
ity, which improves CBF—ultimately causing vasoconstriction
 humans, identified based on type of trauma involved,
related to autoregulation, which decreases ICP.l8 The second
 presence of diffuse edema without a primary lesion (i.e.,.
mechanism is a reduction in intracellular water related to an
osmotic effect, which ultimately reduces brain volume.19
hemorrhage!
Mannitol may also act as a free radical scavenger.?20 Its use is
Calvarial fractures:
contraindicated in dehydration, hypovolemia, anuria,
Linear: Fractures of the calvaria that are not displaced
and
hyperosmolality,2l It is used with caution in animals with con-
Depressed: Fractures of the calvaria that encroach on the
current heart failure. A 20% mannitol solution is administered
brain
at a dosage of 0.5 to l.0 g/kg of body weight, administered
Compound (open): Fractures of the calvaria that have a
intravenously (IV) over 15 to 20 minutes. It can be repeated
 laceration of the skin
every 4 to 6 hours. Mannitol will precipitate in solution at
cool temperatures. Consequently, mannitol should be warmed
and administered through a flter to remove potential pre-
cipitates. Given the diuretic and osmotic effects of mannitol,
 careful monitoring of the hydration status and serum sodium
o Pr d on s ru rars  p
concentration should be done to prevent dehydration. This is
especially important with repeated use. Administration of furo-
the clinician's ability to adequately assess the mental state of
semide (0.7 mg/kg IV 15 minutes after mannitol administra-
 affected animals. Therefore, a careful balance between provid-
tion) may prolong the beneficial effects of mannitol.22.23
ing adequate pain relief without obscuring objective monitor-
Hypertonic saline [HT'S, 7.5% NaCl) can also be used to
 ing of the level of consciousness must be reconciled.
 reduce ICP. The effects of HTS are similar to those of manni-
The patient should be appropriately evaluated for thoracic
tol. Hypertonic saline has a rheological effect similar to man-
and abdominal injuries. Radiography and ultrasonography
nitol that increases CBF. By reducing intracellular water, HTS
(US) are useful aids in the diagnosis of a variety of thoracic
 decreases endothelial cell volume, which increases capilary
and abdominal injuries. The extent of the injuries must be
diameter and it reduces red blood cell size, which ultimately
determined and addressed.
increases CBF.l4 Intracranial pressure also is decreased by a
The nervous system should then be evaluated as described
reduction of cerebral edema by an osmotic effect. Although
previously (see Chapters l and 2). Evaluations of the level
there is no clear beneficial effect of HT'S over mannitol, HTS
of consciousness, pupillary function and eye movements, dys-
may be preferred over mannitol given its ability to expand the
function of other CNs, and motor function are adequate for
intravascular volume to greater extent than mannitol, which
 the assessment of the level and the extent of damage to the
CNS. Serial neurologic examinations are imperative because
it has less of a diuretic effect than mannitol. Hypertonic saline
worsening of the neurologic status should prompt further
may be used in animal refractory to the effects of mannitol.
 diagnostic and therapeutic interventions.
Hypertonic saline is administered intravenously at a dosage of
     s oe s n
4 mL/kg of body weight.
 declining in the face of correction of systemic disturbances,
In animals requiring mechanical ventilation, hyperventila-
treatment directed at lowering ICP should be instituted.
tion to maintain a normal to slightly low Paco2 (30 to 35 mm Hg)
352
PARTIIT
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 12-4 Axial CT image of the brain of a Labrador retriever
Hgure 12-5 Axial T2*W (GRE) image of the brain of a Boston ter-
that sustained head trauma. There is a fracture of the left parietal
rier that sustained head trauma.There are multiple signal voids (black
bone (large arrow). Within the cranial cavity, there is a large, hyper-
areas) that are consistent with hemorrhages. Some of the hemor-
 attenuating mass consistent with an epidural hematoma [outlined
rhages are likely subdural (white arrow)] and others are intraparenchy-
by arrowheads), which is displacing the brain as evidenced by
mal (smal black arrous). (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
deviation of the lateral ventricles (small arrows). (Copyright 2010
Research Foundation, Inc.]
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
 and closed as early as possible. Surgical evacuation of intracra-
may be used to reduce ICP through vasoconstriction of the
nial hemorrhage has been performed. The main indication to
intracranial vasculature. 17,24
consider surgical evacuation of intracranial hemorrhage is lack
In recumbent animals, maintaining the head elevated
of response or rapid decline in the face of appropriate medical
approximately 30 degrees above the rest ofthe body may help
therapy to improve CBF and reduce ICP.
reduce ICP by promoting venous drainage.17 Care must be
Stuporous or comatose animals require more critical assess-
taken to not compress the jugular veins.
ment and care, and have a worse prognosis. Animals with
Seizures may occur anytime fllowing TBl Seizures should
severe alterations in consciousness [stupor or coma) are more
 be controlled with intravenous diazepam at a dose of 0.5 to 1.0
likely to have lesions affecting the brainstem than cerebrum.
mg/kg of body weight. It can be repeated at 5- to 10-minute
Brainstem hemorrhage usually can be differentiated from ten-
intervals for three or four doses. Injectable phenobarbital may be 
torial herniation from the time course of the neurologic signs
required in some cases, but it may increase CNS depression. See
[see Table 12-4). Intraaxial brainstem hemorrhage, which usu-
 Chapter 13 for additional information on seizure management.
ally occurs in the midbrain or the pons, often produces coma
After the patient is stabilized, frequent monitoring of the
imimediately after the trauma. Little or no improvement
severity of signs is imperative. The use of a standardized coma
usually occurs in this case. Tentorial herniation may develop
scale is useful for comparison between examinations. The ani-
from cerebral edema [usually bilateral) or from rostrotentorial
mal should be observed closely for 24 to 48 hours for progres-
hemorrhage. The progression of signs is usually characteristic
sive signs. In stable animals, imaging studies may be performed
[see Table 12-2). Animals with brainstem hemorrhage rarely
to establish the existence of fractures of the calvaria and pathol-
recover, and those that do usually have severe neurologic def-
ogy affecting the brain. Due to the complexity of the calvaria,
cits. Tentorial herniation must be managed early with aggres-
plain radiography is diffcult to interpret, which may lead to
sive measures to decrease ICP to be successful. Severe tentorial
underdiagnosis or overdiagnosis of calvarial fractures. Cross-
herniation with compression and distortion of the brainstem
sectional imaging studies (CT or MRI) provide a more detailed 
produces multiple small brainstem hemorrhages (Duret hem-
evaluation of the brain and calvaria. However, cross-sectional
orrhages) that may be irreversible. In addition, increased intra-
imaging does require general anesthesia. Consequently, cross-
cranial pressure transmitted to the caudal fossa may produce
sectional imaging should only be pursued in stable animals.
cerebellar herniation through the foramen magnum, causing
The clinician must balance the value of the information gained
death by interference with the medullary respiratory centers.
with imaging against the risk of general anesthesia to the ani-
 Management of the comatose patient must include main-
mal. (See Chapter 4 for information regarding cross-sectional
taining hydration and nutrition; regulating body temperature;
 m s  d A s  (
providing adequate ventilation (including hyperventilation
Although CT provides excellent delineation of calvarial
in the early stages); preventing decubital ulcers by frequent
 defects, soft tissue injury to the brain may not be appreciated
changes in recumbency, meticulous cleaning of the skin, and
d s  e s o s r a s 
cushioning; and maintaining urinary and fecal elimination.
formed rapidly often taking seconds to minutes (Figure 12-4).
Management of the comatose patient can be time-consuming
 MRI provides detailed imaging of the brain. Edema, hemor-
and expensive but is rewarding when successful.
rhage,resenefrainiatinndcalvarial its a
Equine Head Trauma. Two types of cranial fractures in
observed with MR1 (Figure 12-5). Although MRI is preferred
horses result in serious brain injury.25 Frontal bone fractures
over CT for imaging of the brain, the major disadvantage of
result from direct impact and are often open, depressed frac-
MRI is that imaging does require substantial time to perform.
tures with direct cerebral laceration and hemorrhage from
 In the end, surgical intervention is rarely necessary so imaging
the fracture fragments. Neurologic signs include contralateral
is not commonly pursued. Fractures are infrequently treated
blindness, facial hypalgesia, depression, compulsive wander-
surgically. However, open skull fractures shouid be debrided
ing toward the side of the lesion, and generalized seizures.
CHAPTER 12 
Stupor or Coma
353
TABLE 12-5
MRI Findings in Brain Tumors
Ischemic Infarction
Signai intensity
T1W
T2W
T2W FLAIR
 Contrast Enhancement
DWI
ADC Map
Hypo
Hyper
Hyper
 Noncontrast enhancing
Hyper
Hypo (acute)
Mild to moderate (rare)
Hyper (chronic)
Marked enhancement (rare)
Anatomic Location 
Vascular Supply
Clinical Signs
Cerebellum
Rostral
Rostral cerebellar artery (branch off
Ipsilateral cerebellovestibular signs, decerebellate posture
caudal communicating artery!
Occasionally episodic vestibular signs
Caudal
Caudal cerebellar artery (branch off 
lpsilateral hemiparesis, postural deficits 
basilar artery!
Forebrain
Cerebrum
 Rostral, middle, or caudal artery
Abnormal mental state; contralateral postural deficits,
Cerebral cortex 
(depending on location)
hemiparesis,t and menace response deficits
Caudate nucleus/internal
 Striate arteries
 Same as with cerebral cortex
capsule
Diencephalon (Thalamus)
Perforating artery (proximal, distal,
Abnormal mental state 
caudall (branch of basilar or caudal
lpsilateral or contralateral hemiparesis or tetraparesis:
communicating artery
lpsilateral or contralateral postural deficits
 Occasionally head tilt/turn, nystagmus
Hemorrhagic Infarction
Time
State of Hb
Cellular Location
Signal Intensity
T1W
T2W
T2'w ipresence of
signal void)
<24 hr
OxyHb
Intra
Iso
Slightly hyper
None
1-3 days
DeoxyHb
Intra 
Iso to Hypo 
Hypo
Present
>3 days
MetHb
Intra 
Hyper
Hypo
Present
>7 days
MetHb
Extra
Hyper
Hyper
None 
>2 wk
 Hemosiderin 
Intra 
Hypo
Hypo
Present
Modified from Garosi L, McConnel JF Platt SR, et al: Clinical and topographic magnetic resonance characteristics of suspected brain infarction
in 40 dogs. J Vet Interm Med 20:311-321, 2006 and Bradley WG Jr: MR appearance of hemorrhage in the brain, Radiology 189:15-26, 1993.
Iso, Isointense; hypo, hypointense; hyper, hyperintense; OxyHb, oxyhemoglobin; Deoxy Hb, deoxyhemoglohin; MetHb, methemoglohin Intra,
intracellular; Extra, extracellular.
+Hemiparesis and postural deficits are transient. Typically resolve within l-2 days of onset.
Intensity is compared with normal brain parenchyma.
Development of anisocoria or mydriasis with decreased PLR
In some cases, trauma to the poll or frontal area may cause
may indicate increasing ICP and risk of caudal tentorial her-
 bilateral blindness with mydriatic, unresponsive pupis. This
niation. Loss of consciousness and development of mydriatic,
injury results from damage to the optic nerves or optic chiasm.
unresponsive pupils indicate herniation of the occipital lobes
The prognosis for recovery of vision is poor.
of the cerebrum under the tentorium cerebelli.
Radiographs of the head or cross-sectional imaging are
Basilar fractures occur when horses flip over backward and
 required to determine the type, location, and displacement
strike the poll. These fractures result in compression and hemor-
of fractures and fracture fragments. Depressed, comminuted
rhage of the brainstem. Occipital bone fractures may lacerate the
fractures of the frontal and parietal bones are readily identi-
basilar artery and venous sinuses and produce massive hemor-
fed radiographically, Petrous temporal bone fractures are dif-
rhage into the cranial cavity, guttural pouch, or inner ear. Neuro-
ficult to identify, and multiple oblique views are necessary to
logic signs include coma that lasts from minutes to days. Horses
identify the fracture line. Absence of an obvious fracture line
that regain consciousness demonstrate depression, vestibular dys-
radiographically does not preclude a diagnosis of basilar skull
function, facial nerve paralysis, tetraparesis, and hemorrhage from
facture. Hemorrhage from the guttural pouch, nose, or exter-
the nostrils and ear. Leakage of CSF or blood from the external
ear canal is evidence of petrous temporal bone fracture. Epistaxis
evidence of a basilar fracture.
may result from fracture of the cribriform plate, basisphenoid/
Medical treatment is similar to that in dogs and cats; hyper
basioccipital bones, or hemorrhage into the guttural pouch.
osmolar fluids (mannitol or HTS), furosemide, corticosteroids,
354
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) may be used. Broad-spectrum
antibiotics that cross the blood-brain and blood-CSF bariers
BOX 12-2
 are indicated for basilar skull fractures, petrosal bone fractures,
and open frontal bone fractures. Cefotaxime is bactericidal, has
Small Animal Coma Scale*
broad-spectrum antibacterial activity, and penetrates into the
 CSF in good concentrations [see Chapter 15). Surgical therapy
may be indicated for horses with depressed frontal fractures
Neurologic Function Assessed
Score
that penetrate nervous tissue and open fractures that commu-
Motor Activity
nicate with nervous tissue. Animals that deteriorate in the face
Normal gait, normal spinal reflexes
6
of appropriate medical therapy also may be surgical candidates.
Hemiparesis, tetraparesis, or decerebrate activity
However, without imaging, appropriate surgical intervention
5
Recumbent, intermittent extensor rigidity
4
may be diffcult to ascertain. Even with correct surgical interven-
tion, the prognosis for horses requiring surgery remains poor6
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity
3
 Prognosis. Based on the coma scale used in assessing humans
Recumbent, constant extensor rigidity with
2
[Glasgow Coma Scale], amodifed Glasgow Coma Scale [MGCS)
opisthotonos
has been developed for use in small animals (Box 12-2).27 The
Recumbent, hypotonia of muscles, depressed or
animal's status in each of three categories—motor activity, brain-
 absent spinal reflexes
stem reflexes, and level of consciousness-is assessed. Proposed
prognosis has been ascribed to three categories based on the total
Brainstem Reflexes
score; category I [score of 3 to 8) indicates a grave prognosis, cat-
Normal PLR and physiologic nystagmus 
 egory Il[scores of9 to 14) indicates a poor to guarded prognosis,
Slow pupillary light reflexes and normal to reduced
and category Ill (scores of 15 to 18) indicates a good progno-
 physiologic nystagmus
 sis. In a retrospective application of the MGCS, score predicted
Bilateral unresponsive miosis with normal to reduced 
4
 probability of survival in the frst 48 hours in a linear fashion
 physiologic nystagmus
with a 50% survival rate being observed in dogs with a score of
Pinpoint pupils with reduced to absent physiologic
3
8.28 Unfortunately, the MGCS does not take into account con-
nystagmus
Unilateral unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to
2
or effects of treatment. Consequently, the prognosis for animals
 absent physiologic nystagmus
with TBI likely depends on multiple factors.
As with small animals, the prognosis for horses with TBI
 Bilateral, unresponsive mydriasis with reduced to
 likely is dependent on the severity of the clinical signs. In one
absent physiologic nystagmus
study of 34 horses, 62% survived to discharge; risk factors for
Level of Consciousness
nonsurvivors included elevated packed cell volume (PCV)
Occasional periods of alertness, responsive to
6
[40% [nonsurvivors] vs. 33% [survivors], recumbency lasting
environment
more than 4 hours, and basilar fractures. 2 Horses that survive
 may return to normal function. Some horses are able to return
Depression or delirium, capable of responding to
5
 to their intended use despite persistent neurologic deficitis.12
environment but response may be inappropriate
Stupor, responsive to visual stimuli 
4
Acute Nonprogressive
Stupor, responsive to auditory stimuli 
3
Infarction
Stupor, responsive only to repeated noxious stimuli 
2
   e s  a s
Coma, unresponsive to repeated noxious stimuli
which necessitates an adequate blood supply. A reduction in
 blood supply results in insuffcient delivery of oxygen and glu-
Assessment
cose that creates an anoxic state and leads to neuronal ischemia
Good prognosis
15-18
and death. Infarctions also are known as strokes or cerebrovas-
Guarded prognosis
9-14
cular accidents. Brain infarctions can be produced by disrup-
Grave prognosis
3-8
tion of the vasculature leading to a hemorrhagic infarction or
by occlusion of the vasculature leading to ischemic infarction.
Modified from Shores A: Craniocerebral trauma. In Kirk RW, editor:
Occlusion of an intracranial blood vessel may occur due to a
Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
thrombus or an embolus. Cerebral vasospasm is a temporary con-
Neurologic function is assessed for each of the three categories and
striction of an intracranial artery, producing transient ischemia.
a grade of 1 to 6 is assigned according to the descriptions for each
Vasospasm is difficult to document clinically. Transient loss of
grade. The total score is the surm of the three category scores.
consciousness due to inadequate cerebral perfusion [syncope)
is usually caused by a cardiac arrhythmia, not by vasospasm [see
spotted fever that cause thrombocytopenia and vasculitis.33
Chapter 13). Typically, brain infarctions result in an acute to
Angiostrongylus vasorum infection also may cause intracranial
peracute onset of neurologic signs. In most instances, signs are
hemorrhage in dogs.34-35 Systemic coagulation disorders such as
nonprogressive. However, in some animals, deterioration may
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) and idiopathic
represent the development of edema or an enlarging hematoma.
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) usually are recognized by sys-
 Hemorrhage in the brain is usually due to trauma. All other
temic signs.37 Intraventricular hemorrhage has been observed
causes of hemorrhage combined have a much lower incidence.
Hemorrhage-producing stroke syndromes are seen most often
ary to yascular malformations.39,40 Occasionally, intracranial
with neoplasms that have compromised an artery. Various pri-
hemorrhage occurs without an underlying cause.39.41
mary and metastatic tumors have been associated with hem-
In comparison to hemorrhagic infarction, ischemic infarc-
crrhage.29 Among metastatic tumors, hemangiosarcoma is
classifications schemes have been proposed, which are based
seen on examination of the brain with inflammation as the pri-
 on etiology, anatomic location within the brain, affected vas-
mary problem, but other changes predominate.32 The excep-
culature, and diameter of the affected vasculature. Occlusion
tions to this occurs with infections such as Rocky Mountain
of a small-diameter vessel affects a small amount of brain
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
355
BOX 12-3
Etiology of Vascular Disease in the Brain
Hemorrhage infarction
Trauma
Infectious disease (15)
Rickettsial, viral, parasitic (Angiostrongylus vasorum)
Toxins (warfarin) (15)
Neoplasia (12)
Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
 ldiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Intracarotid injections (equine)
 Equine hypoxic/ischemic encephalopathy
Vascular anomalies
Ischemic infarction
Septic emboli (endocarditis, septicemia, thromboembolic
meningoencephalitis) (15)
Neoplasia (metastases) (12)
 Parasites (Cuterebra larval migration, Dirofiaria immitis/ (15)
 Arteriosclerosis, vasospasm, vascular insufficiency, heart
failure
Figure 12-6 Dorsal view of a gross specimen of brain of a rottwei-
 Emboli secondary to surgery (air, fat, clot)
ler. There are multiple dark lesions in the cerebral cortex bilaterally
Commonly encountered secondary diseasest
and in the caudal right cerebellar hemisphere. Microscopic evalua-
 Chronic kidney disease
tion was consistent with metastatic hemangiosarcoma. (Copyright
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
 Untreated hyperadrenocorticism 
 Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism
parenchyma resulting in a lacunar infarct and typically occurs
 Pheochromocytoma 
in the thalamus, whereas occlusion of a large diameter vessel
affects a greater amount of brain parenchyma resulting in a
Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which the conditions
territorial infarct and typically occurs in the cerebrum or cer-
are discussed.
ebellum.42 In dogs, both lacunar and territorial infarcts occur.
+From Garosi L, McConnell JE, Platt SR, et al: Results of diagnostic
Anatomically, the cerebellum is most commonly affected fol-
investigations and long-term outcorme of 33 dogs with brain
lowed by the cerebrum and thalamus.43
infarction (2000-2004), J Vet Interm Med 19:725-731, 2005 and
Concurrent illness is often present in affected dogs. Chronic
Vitale CL, Olby NJ: Neurologic dysfunction in hypothyroid, hyper-
renal disease, pheochromocytoma and hyperadrenocorticism are
lipidermic Labrador retrievers, J Vet Interm Med 21:1316-1322, 2007.
common concurrent illnesses although their exact relationship.
with the development of infarction is unknown.44 The cause of
suspected brain infarction is MRI. Differentiation between
 most vascular lesions is unknown.44 Primary vascular changes,
hemorrhagic and ischemic infarction can be made based on
such as arteriosclerosis, are rare in animals.29,45 Atherosclero-
MRI characteristics (Table 12-5). Although MRI may accu-
sis can be produced with atherogenic diets and may be more
rately identify both ischemic and hemorrhagic infarcts, MRI
may not help ascertain an underlying etiology. For example, a
    q s  
hemorrhage infarct secondary to metastatic lesions may appear
lesions in Labrador retrievers.47 Fibrocartilaginous emboli from
similar to hemorrhagic infarcts secondary to another cause.
degenerating intervertebral disks cause infarction in the spinal
on
cord; however, involvement of the medulla oblongata has been
T2-weighted (T2W) and T2W fluid attenuated inversion
 observed.48 Infarcts can also occur from septic emboli secondary
recovery images and are hypointense on Tl-weighted (Tl W)
to bacterial valvular endocarditis.49 Cardiac disease should be
images in comparison to normal brain tissue.43 Although most
considered in small animals with suspected cerebral infarctions.
lesions do not enhance after intravenous contrast administra-
Metastatic neoplasia or parasites, including the microflaria of
 p  pu s s  rn
Diroflaria immitis, are less common causes of vascular occlusion
In addition to imaging characteristics, topography plays an
a out paonponut aq Aeuu siop poorq 1o 'sey Ty is'os'saop u!
important role in the presumptive diagnosis. Lesions occur in
circulation during surgical procedures. Air emboli are of particu-
the distribution of certain arterial blood vessels such as those
lar concern during vascular surgery of the head and the neck.
involving the cerebellum (rostral or caudal cerebellar arter-
The causes of infarction are listed in Box 12-3.
ies), caudate nucleus (perforating arteries), and the median
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis (TEME) is an acute
and paramedian aspect of the thalamus (caudal perforat-
disease of cattle that is characterized by infarcts produced by
ing arteries).43 As with infarction in other organs, lesions are
septic emboli. Disseminated coagulopathy may develop sub-
typically well-circumscribed and occasionally wedge shaped.
sequently. The disease is caused by Histophilus somni and usu-
Diffusion weighted MRI (DWI) has been designed to iden-
ally is seen in feedlot cattle. Cerebral signs predominate, but
tify ischemic infarctions soon after onset when conventional
 brainstem infarcts may produce focal signs (see Chapter 15).
imaging sequences may not appear abnormal. DWI is an imag
Assessment. Presumptive diagnosis is based on the history
 ing modality that detects the restriction of molecular move-
 and clinical signs in affected animals combined with imag-
ment of water that occurs with cytotoxic edema secondary
ing findings. The imaging modality of choice in animals with
to infarction. Combining information from DWI with another
356
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
B
Figure 12-7 A, Axial T2W image of the brain of a dog with
an ischemic infarction of the right caudate nucleus and adja-
cent white matter of the internal capsule (arrow). B, Dorsal
plane DWI image. The lesion is hyperintense on DWI images
[arrow). C, Dorsal plane ADC mapping image. The lesion is
hypointense on ADC mapping (arrow). These characteristics
are consistent with an acute ischemic infarction. The affected
-u Oioz auado] Kiae Sueioad e Aq paddns si eane
versity of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
sequenced derived from the DWI sequence, the apparent dif-
 Treatment. Management of the unconscious animal is dis-
fusion coeffcient map (ADC map), ischemic infarction can be
cussed in the section on trauma in this chapter. Less severe
accurately identified. With DWI and ADC mapping, ischemic
lesions are usually not life threatening; however, the amount
infarctions appear hyperintense and hypointense, respectively
of residual damage likely depends on the size and location of
(Figure 12-7).
the lesion. Lesions involving the cerebellum and brainstem are
Hemorrhagic infarction can also be accurately identifed
likely to result in more severe clinical signs than those involv-
with MRI (Figure 12-8). Imaging characteristics are related
ing the cerebrum or thalamus. Anticoagulants generally are
to the reduction-oxidation state of iron and the oxygen con-
not given unless a hypercoagulable state can be identified.
tent of hemoglobin. As extravasated blood progresses from
 xa a u  sa srd a e
oxyhemoglobin to deoxyhemoglobin to methemoglobin and
neurologic damage and the underlying etiology. Most animals
fnally to hemosiderin, the Tl W and T2W imaging character-
with ischemic infarction recover with supportive care.44 In
istics observed change due to the magnetic properties of iron,
some cases, affected dogs die or are euthanized due to lack of
which affects the magnetic feld of the tissue around it cre-
improvement or as a result of concurrent illnesses.44
ating an artifact on MR images.52 Gradient images [referred
Feline Ischemic Encephalopathy
to as GRE or T2*W images) take advantage of this effect,
Pathophysiology. Feline ischemic encephalopathy is a dis-
allowing identification of lesions not conspicuous on conven-
tinct syndrome of cerebral myiasis related to Cuterebra lar-
tional imaging sequences. Hemorrhagic infarction also can be
val migration through the cerebrum.53.54 It is believed that
identified with CT. Extravasated blood present in hemorrhage
the instar [first stage larva) gains entrance to the brain via
migration through the nasal cavity and cribriform plate.54
to normal brain tissue.4l
There is no breed or sex predilection. Young to middle-aged
CHAPTER 12
 Stupor or Coma
357
Hgure 12-8 A, Axial T2W image of the brain of a mixed-breed dog at the level of the caudate nuclei.
There is a well-circumscribed, ovoid hypointense massin the right cerebrum at the level of the centrum
semiovale. The lesion is surrounded by edema. B, Axial T2*W (GRE) images of the lesion is hypoin-
with an intraaxial hemorrhage. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
indoor-outdoor cats develop acute or peracute neurologic def-
Cits during the months from July to September.S354
Clinical Signs. Typically, affected cats display signs consis-
tent with a unilateral (focal) lesion involving the forebrain.
Neurologic signs consist of seizures, unilateral blindness, cir-
cling, abnormal mental state and behavior, with contralateral
postural reactions deficits, menace response deficits, and facial
respiratory disease such as sneezing or nasal discharge shortly
prior [= 48 hours).53 Abnormal body temperature (hyper- or
hypothermia) is observed in most affected cats. 53
Assessment. Presumptive antemortem diagnosis is based
 on clinical suspicion and MRI findings. Hyperintensities on 
   aq     s 
frontal/parietal lobes. Lesions occur in the topography of the
vasculature supplied by the middle cerebral artery (Figures 12-9
and 12-10). Also, parasitic tracks may be observed extending
from the cribriform plate through the olfactory bulbs and tracks.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis may reveal a mixed pleocytosis
including eosinophils.53 Definitive diagnosis necessitates gross
or microscopic identification of the parasite at postmortem. Five
characteristic histologic features define the disease process: [1)
parasitic tracks, (2) superficial laminar necrosis of the cerebrum,
(3) cerebral infarction, (4) subependymal and subpial changes
such as astrogliosis and (5) identification of the parasite.54
Hgure 12-9 Chronic infarction of the left cerebral hemisphere
Treatment. Cats surviving the first 48 hours after the onset
 of a cat (arrow). (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research 
of neurologic signs generally improve over time. Blindness and
Foundation, Inc.)
abnormal behavior may persist. Treatment consists of support-
ive care. Corticosteroids may help reduce the inflammatory
response. Additional proposed empirical therapies include
secondary tumors may arise from surrounding structures, such
ivermectin, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and antihistamines.53
as the nose, ear, calvaria, pituitary gland, or vertebrae and may
The benefit of these therapies is unproven. Cuterebra larval
affect the nervous system by invasion or compression of neural
migration has occasionally been reported in the dog.55 Similar
tissue. In this chapter, tumors affecting the brain are discussed.
clinicopathologic findings have been observed.
Peripheral nerve and spinal cord tumors were discussed in
Chapters 5 and 6, respectively.
Chronic Progressive
 Pathogenesis. In general, tumors affect the function of
Primary Brain Tumors. Neoplasia that affects the nervous
the nervous system by (l) the compression of nervous tissue,
 system is classifed into two groups: primary and secondary
(2) invasion of the nervous tissue, (3) interference with circu-
tumors. Primary tumors arise from structures that normally
lation and subsequent development of vasogenic edema, and
are found in the cranial cavity, vertebral canal, or peripheral
[4) disturbance of CSF circulation. Increased intracranial pres-
nerves. Secondary tumors metastasize to the CNS from a
sure resulting from the combination of the mass effect of the
primary tumor located distant from the CNS. Alternatively
tumor, vasogenic edema, and CSF accumulation may cause
358
PART!
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
boxer, Boston terrier, and other brachycephalic breeds appear
predisposed to the development of glial tumors.56,76-78 More-
over, the golden retriever, Labrador retriever, German shep-
Rostral cerebrala.
herd, and boxer dogs are breeds most comimonly affected
by secondary tumors.3l The most common secondary tumor
in dogs is hemangiosarcoma, while in cats the most com-
mon secondary tumor is lymphoma.31.65 Pituitary tumors
- Middle cerebral a.
discussion).
 Most dogs with primary brain tumors are 5 years of age,
of cats with primary brain tumors is 1l.3 years.65 Dogs and
cats with meningioma are significantly older than those with
m shop ui snno eauu shon ueq Ard rao
a mean age of 1l.l years versus a mean age of 8.0 years for
Caudal cerebral a.
other tumors while meningioma occurs in cats with a mean
age of 12.2 years versus 8.2 years with other primary brain
tumors.65.66 The mean age of dogs with secondary brain
Arepuoas uiim sie Jo ae ueau auL ig'sreaA g'6 sI sioun
 tumors is the same as for primary brain tumors.65
Clinical Signs. The clinical signs depend on the loca-
tion of the tumor (Iable 12-6). In addition to signs related
to the location of the lesion (see Table 12-6), signs due to
increased intracranial pressure (depression, papilledema) are
frequently present.80 Sites of predilection for tumors are given
Figure 12-10 Areas of the brain supplied by the cerebral arteries.
in Table 12-7.
α, Artery. (From Evans HE, Christensen GC: Miller's anatomy of
The majority of primary brain tumors are located ros-
the dog, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1979, WB Saunders.]
tral to the tentorium cerebell 65.66 Consequently, primary
brain tumors often cause clinical signs consistent with a
focal lesion involving the forebrain. The most common clini-
 brain herniation. Herniation of the cingulate gyrus, herniation
cal signs include seizures and a change in mental state or
of the cerebrum ventral to the tentorium cerebelli, or hernia-
behavior.55.66748l Blindness from compression of the optic
 tion of the cerebellum into the foramen magnum may occur.
nerves does not occur frequently, but it can occur.82 Other
In most cases, primary tumors usually grow slowly, rarely
signs include propulsive cireling with preservation of gait, con-
metastasize to other areas of the body, and produce chronic,
tralateral deficits in postural reactions, menace response, and
progressive clinical signs. A noted exception to this is with
facial hypalgia. Tumors involving the brainstem caudal to the
choroid plexus tumors in which metastasis along the CNS
tentorium cerebelli result in an abnormal mental state, gait
can occur. 56-60 Occasionally, vascular involvement may lead to
deficits such as vestibular, cerebellar, or general proprioceptive
infarction or hemorrhage that results in acute neurologic defi-
ataxia, ipsilateral postural reaction deficits, and ipsilateral defi-
cits. CNS metastasis of sarcomas and carcinomas are the most
cits in cranial nerve function. On occasion, dogs with intracra-
nial neoplasia may display neck pain.83 Clinical signs may be
sive biologically with a median duration of clinical signs to
present from 1 to 3 months before presenting for evaluation;
diagnosis and median duration of clinical signs to death both
however, affected animals may display clinical signs for much
being 21 days3l (Figure 12-11).
longer periods of time.65,66,8l Secondary brain tumors such as
 Incidence. An accurate estimate of the incidence of brain
sis eou asne Aru rda io aeasp nse
tumors in animals is unknown. In one report, a rate of 14.5
Alternatively, secondary brain tumors arising from structures
and 3.5 per 100,000 dogs and cats are at risk, respectively.62 In
neighboring the brain may invade the cranial cavity and cause
  s     s  sr r
clinical signs related to their effect on the adjacent nervous
2.8% and 2.2% in dogs and cats, respectively.63,64 Brain tumors
tissue. Pituitary tumors in animals tend to expand dorsally
 are infrequently reported in food animals and horses. Conse-
into the hypothalamus, producing changes in mental state, sei-
 quently, the following discussion pertains to dogs and cats.
   oa  na  s e 's
oe    d  ns 
early stages. Nasal tumors that invade may be associated with
seizures and abnormal mentation.84 Affected animals may
meninges, specifcally the arachnoid cap cells and arachnoid
display clinical signs of nasal disease, epistaxis and discharge.
brain
which may be continuous or transient. Occasionally, respira-
tumors are the glial tumors: astrocytoma and oligodendro-
tory signs may be lacking.
s e se  A s  d ggsg ea
 Diagnosis. The diagnosis begins by exclusion of other
mass. In cats, meningioma may be found as an incidental fnd-
disease processes that may result in similar clinical signs.
 ing, occur as multiple meningiomas, or occur concurrent with
 om     s s
 another tumor type.55 In dogs, multiple meningiomas occur
of asymmetric neurologic deficits or those solely displaying
uncommonly.68 Likewise, multiple tumor types occurring
vague signs, mentation changes, or seizures. A complete blood
simultaneously in dogs are uncommon.59. 70
count, chemistry profle, and urinalysis should be performed
The golden retriever and boxer appear predisposed to the
to exclude extracranial disease as a primary or concurrent dis-
ease process. Three view thoracic radiographs should be per-
 sq  g r s e se
formed to evaluate for metastatic disease. Thoracic radiograph
resented include Labrador retriever, Scottish terrier, Old
abnormalities such as metastatic lesions from a concurrent or
English sheepdog, Doberman pinscher, and dolichocephalic
unassociated neoplastic processes may be observed in approx-
breeds such as the German shepherd dog and collie.7l-76 The
imately 20% of dogs with primary brain tumors.56 Thoracic
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
359
Figure 12-11 A, Axial T2W image of the brain of a Labrador retriever at the level of
the medulla oblongata. In the left occipitallobe ofthe cerebrum there is an single, well.
circumscribed mass that displays heterogeneous signal intensity (areas of hypointen-
sity and isointensity] surrounded by hyperintensity in the white matter [perilesional
edema). B, T2*W (GRE) images in which the mass has areas that are hypointense
consistent with areas of hemorrhage. C, Gross cross section of the left occipital lobe
of the cerebrum. The rmass is primarily composed of tissue with areas of hemorrhage.
Microscopic evaluation of the mass disclosed adenocarcinoma. The dog had a history
of prostatic carcinoma for over a year before developing the single metastasis in the
brain. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
radiographic abnormalities may be present in 54% of dogs
with secondary tumors in which 72% of the abnormalities
TABLE 12-6
 represent a metastatic pattern.3l
Common Sites and Signs of Brain Tumors
The most important diagnostic step in the evaluation of
animals in which a brain tumor is suspected is cross-sectional
Site
Signs
imaging. Imaging may provide a relatively accurate presump-
tive diagnosis. MRI is the imaging modality of choice. Imaging
Cerebrum
Seizures, abnormal behavior, normal gait.
characteristics of a lesion such as the location, the size and
 propulsive circling. contralateral postural
shape, the border defnition (well defned vs. poorly defined
borders), intensity ofthe lesion, and the degree ofenhancement
reaction deficits, contralateral menace
response, and facial sensory deficits 
(strong enhancement versus no enhancement) and pattern of
Pituitary-
 Behavioral, autonomic, and endocrine
contrast enhancement (homogeneous, heterogeneous, periph-
a r sns A (u ] a 
hypothalamus
signs: polyuria, polydipsia, anorexia
(Table 12-7; Figures 12-12 through 12-14). However, nonne0-
Changes in sleeping and behavior
plastic lesions share similarities with a variety of neoplasms,
 patterns; later visual deficits
therefore a definitive diagnosis cannot be based entirely on
Brainstem
Abnormal gait and ipsilateral postural
 imaging characteristics. Definitive diagnosis requires histologic
reaction and cranial nerve (CN) deficits
 or cytologic evaluation. Specimens for microscopic evaluation
 Cerebellopontine 
 Ipsilateral CN V, CN Vll, and CN VIll
may be obtained surgically via craniectomy or through CT-
angle
deficits, ipsilateral hemiparesis
guided biopsy procedures.85,86
 CSF analysis may provide limited information in the diag-
nosis of primary brain tumors. Tumors may cause an increased
ICP, which is a contraindication for CSF collection. As with
 any disease process, the risks of CSF collection should be
360
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 12-7
Magnetic Resonance Features in Canine Brain Tumors
Intraaxial/
Postcontrast
Extramedullary  Anatomic Location(s)
Shape
T1w Inten sity
T2W Intensity
Intensity
Mening
E
Olfactory
 Distinct margin
Iso-
Hyper-
Intense 
 Cerebral convexities 
Dural tail
Hyper-
Iso-
Homogeneous
CP angle
Cystic (occasionally)
Hypo-
Mixed
Basilar/Tentorial
Cerebellar convexity
Oligo
Rostrotentorial
 Distinct margin
Hypor
Hyper-
Mild enhancing
Piriform lobe
Round to ovoid
Ring enhancing
Internal capsule
Astro
Rostrotentorial
Ilrregular margins 
lso-
Hyper-
None to mild
Intemal capsule
Ilrregular shape
Heterogeneous
Thalamus
CPT
Rostrotentorial
Globular
Hypo-
Hyper-
Intense 
Intraventricular
 Papilliform
Iso-
 Homogeneous 
Homogeneous
Lateral/3rd ventricle (75%)
Hyper-
 Heterogeneous 
Homogeneous
4th ventricle (25%)
Ventriculomegaly
Homogeneous 
Metastasis-Carcinoma
GBM
 Rostrotentorial
 Distinct margins
Iso- to hypo-
Hyper-
Ring enhancing
Cerebrum
 Round to ovoid
Iregular/ill-distinct
 Epend 
Rostrotentorial
 Distinct margins 
Hypo-
Hyper-
Intense
Homogeneous
Pit
E
Middle cranial fossa
 Distinct margins
Iso- to hypo-
Hyper-
Intense
Sella turcica
Round to ovoid
Homogeneous
Extend dorsally
LSA
Multifocal
Indistinct margins
Iso-
Hyper-
Moderate
Heterogeneous 
 Based on: Kraft SL, Gavin PR, DeHaan C, et al: Retrospective review of SO canine intracranial tummors evaluated by magnetic resonance imaging.
primary neoplasia: 173 cases (1986-2003), J Vet Interm Med 20:669-675, 2006; Troxel MT, Vite CH, Massicotte C, et al: Magnetic resonance
PJ, Vermau W, et al: Choroid plexus turmors in 56 dogs (1985-2007), J Vet Interm Med 22:1157-1165, 2008; Lipsitz D, Higgins RJ, Kortz GD,
et al: Glioblastoma multiforme: clinical findings, maghetic resonance imaging, and pathology in five dogs, Vet Pathol 40:659-669, 2003; Vural SA,
Besalti O, Ihan F, et al: Ventricular ependymoma in a German shepherd dog, Vet J 172: 185-187, 2006.
Mening, Meningioma; oligo, oligodendroglioma; astro, astrocytoma; CPT, choroid plexus tumor; GBM, glioblastomma multiforme; Epend, ependymoma;
Pit, pituitary; LSA, lymphoma; intensity is compared with normal brain parenchyma. Iso, isointense; hypo, hypointense; hyper, hyperintense.
Bold text denotes most commmonly encountered signal intensity.
weighed against the potential diagnostic value of CSF analy-
sis. In most dogs with primary brain tumors, CSF analysis is
normal or contains increased protein content with a normal
WBC count, which is referred to as albuminocytologic disso-
mas.87 Neutrophilic pleocytosis may occur in 19% to 25% of
dogs with intracranial meningiomas.87,88 Neutrophilic pleocy-
 in the caudal cranial fossa. Pleocytosis may portend a worse
prognosis.75
Treatment and Prognosis. Treatment can be divided into
 palliative and definitive therapy. Palliative therapy is directed
at controlling the secondary consequences of the tumor in an
effort to alleviate clinical signs. Palliative therapy is not aimed
at controlling or eliminating the tumor. For animals with brain
Figure 12-12 A sagittal T2W image of the brain of a cat. There is
 tumors, palliative therapy is often focused on controlling vaso-
a large dorsal extradural mass with a broad based attachment to
 genic edema and seizures. Prednisone (0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg/day)
the calvaria that is compressing the cerebrum. The lesion is consis-
may be effective at reducing vasogenic edema. If improvement
tent with a meningioma. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
-mo ao panpar Aenpea aq Aeu aaesop a paarasqo s
Research Foundation, Inc.]
est effective dosage to control signs. In acutely affected animals,
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
361
intravenous formulations of corticosteroids, such as methyl-
In animals with suspected or confirmed increased ICP,
prednisolone or prednisolone sodium succinate or dexametha-
intravenous hypertonic fluids may be used to reduce ICP (see
 sone sodium phosphate, may be used untl the animal is able to
section on traumatic brain injury). Corticosteroids may also
receive oral medication. Mannitol or HTS administration is also
alleviate increased ICP by reducing CSF production and sta-
effective in rapidly reducing vasogenic edema. In animals expe-
bilizing the endothelial membrane. In animals with ventricu-
riencing seizures, anticonvulsants also should be administered.
lomegaly involving the lateral ventricles related to obstruction
Phenobarbital or potassium bromide is effective at control-
 ling seizures; however, animals with intracranial neoplasia may
cranial pressure and improve clinical signs (see Hydrocephalus 
experience excessive sedation with these drugs. Levetiracetam
section). Median survival for dogs receiving palliative treat-
may also be used to control seizures without sedative effects.
6a'sa'suuou Z o I Aiaeuxordde si shoun uenq rog quu
[See Chapter 13 for details regarding anticonvulsant therapy)
Longer survival times may occur depending on tumor size and
location, severity of clinical signs, response to palliative ther-
apy, and the owner's willingness to continue therapy.
 Definituve therapy consists of surgery, radiation therapy, and
may provide longer control of clinical signs. Surgical resection
entails craniectomy. Surgical approaches to the canine brain
have been defined and can be applied to the cat.90-92 The cri-
teria for successful surgery include [1) a solitary, noninvasive
tumor; (2) tumors located on or near the surface rostral to
  r  r  
on MRI; (5) a careful and complete surgical resection or deb-
uking; and (6) an intensive anesthetic monitoring and post-
operative care regimen. Meningiomas are most likely to meet
these requirements. Consequently, most data regarding surgi-
cal intervention and prognosis involve meningiomas. In dogs
with meningioma affecting the cerebrum, the median survival
time with surgery alone is 7 months.93 Shorter survival times
for dogs with meningioma treated by surgical resection alone
also have been reported; however, this may reflect the influ-
small tumors located rostral and those dogs with minimal
clinical signs are likely to experience longer survival times.
Similarly, the completeness of gross resection has a positive
Figure 12-13 A dorsal T1W image of the brain of a golden
impact on survival. Several techniques can be used to improve
retriever after intravenous contrast administration. There is a well
the extent of resection and visualization during surgery, which
circumscribed, strongly and uniformly enhancing mas in the right
leads to longer survival times. Intraoperative use of an ultra-
frontal/olfactory lobe of the cerebrum. Microscopic evaluation
sound surgical aspirator, an instrument that can ablate tumor
disclosed a meningioma. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
tissue while sparing yasculature and minimizing damage to
Research Foundation, Inc.]
normal brain parenchyma, enables a more complete gross
B
Figure 12-14 A, Axial TW image of the brain of an American bulldog at the level of the
thalamus. There is a well-circumscribed, uniformly hyperintense intraaxial mass in left piriform 
lobe of the cerebrum. Secondary compression of the thalamus and lateral ventricle on the left is 
evident. B, Gross section of the brain of the same dog. The mass is affecting the piriform lobe of
the cerebrum and displacing the left hemisphere to the right. Microscopic evaluation disclosed
 an oligodendroglioma. [A, Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.
B, Courtesy Alexander deLahunta, DVM, PhD.]
362
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
resection.96 Intraoperative ultrasound may provide better
tumors.Ill.l12 Secondary brain tumors such as lymphoma may
 delineation of a lesion not grossly apparent on visual inspec-
be treated with multidrug protocols.
tion.97 Using a surgical aspirator, the median survival time in
Secondary Tumors
CNS Lymphoma
assisted tumor resection may provide improved visualization
Pathophysiology. Lymphoma may involve the CNS, peripheral
nervous system, or both. In dogs, primary CNS lymphoma
 Using intraoperative endoscopy to help visualize margins and
(lymphoma confined to the CNS) does not appear to be com-
areas of incompletely resected tumor, the median survival
mon.66 More commonly involvement of the CNS occurs as 
 s  s toi s   s 
part of multicentric disease. The presentation of CNS lym-
dogs with tumors located rostral to the tentorium cerebelli
phoma is similar in cats.6s.i3 One specific presentation,
is 2104 days, whereas median survival for dogs with tumors
intravascular lymphoma in which neoplastic lymphocytes are
located caudal to the tentorium cerebelli is 702 days).98 If
confined within blood vessels without circulating or extravas-
accessible by craniectomy, surgery is the treatment of choice
cular celular infltration, has a predilection for the CNs.l14
for cats with meningioma. Long-term survival is commonly
 In one study, the rottweiler dog appears overrepresented
 obtained with surgery alone. The median survival time for cats
in cases of CNS lymphoma.31 Most cats with LSA are domes-
with cerebral meningioma is 2l months.l00 However, many
tic short-haired cats. The median age of affected dogs was 7.4
cats live longer than 2 years postoperatively l00. 101
was 4 years old.366,l15 The median age of affected cats ranges
or as sole treatment. As adjunctive therapy, dogs receiving
from 7 to 10.5 years of age.65.113 Few cats test positive for
  r i   n
feline leukemia virus. 5.113
times than with surgery alone.75.93 In dogs with meningioma
Clinical Signs. In most affected animals, clinical signs sug-
treated with surgery followed by radiation therapy,the median
survival time is 16.5 months.93 Several factors may influence
survival with surgery and radiation for meningioma. Proliferat-
Common clinical signs include seizures, vestibular dysfunc-
ing cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) staining can be used to calcu-
tion, and changes in mental state.3l,66,l15 Neck pain as a con-
sequence of lymphoma solely affecting the meninges also has
reflect the radiosensitivity ofthe tumor.l02 In dogs treated with
-sp Aeu euudu renseaenu pim saogi paodau uaag
surgery and radiation for cerebral meningioma, low PFpcNA
 play clinical signs and MRI findings consistent with ischemic
was associated with a 9 times greater control of tumors. In one
infarction.ll7 In some affected dogs, no neurologic signs may
study, the median duration of progression free survival (time
be present despite CNS involvement.3l Affected dogs fre-
to recurrence of signs or death) was 30 months, with dogs with
 quently have lymphadenopathy.ll5 Similar signs are observed
low PFpcNA having both a l- and Z-year survival rate of 93%
in cats; however, affected cats also may have signs of cranial
versus a 1- and 2-year survival rate of 62% and 42%, respec-
tively, in dogs with high PFpcNA. The extent and intensity of
sis discloses malignant lymphocytes, whereas fewer cats have
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression also
has been associated with prolonged survival in dogs treated
approximately 50% of dogs with lymphoma have multifocal
with surgery and radiation for cerebral meningioma.lo3 In one
CNS involvement typically affecting the cerebrum or thala-
study, the overall median survival was 14.6 months. However,.
mus as common sites.31.66
 sxa d  e m sn   n 
 Teatment. Treatment includes multidrug chemotherapy pro-
VEGF, a median survival time was 25 months versus a median
tocols. Often drugs that cross the BBB such as lomustine or cyto-
survival time of 14.7 months for those dogs with high VEGF
sine arabinoside are included in protocols. Cranial or craniospinal
expression.l103
radiation therapy and intrathecal cytosine arabinoside have also
As a sole treatment, radiation therapy also can be used to
 been used.lis Survival times in dogs have not been well estab-
Ks q ss aq iou   s ueq en
lished. In two studies of cats treated with corticosteroids alone,
Typically, radiation therapy is performed on a daily or every
the median survival was 21 and 35 days.65 In cats treated with
other day basis. Most protocols are designed to deliver a total
chemotherapy and radiation,median survival was 125 days3
radiation dose of46 to 48 Gy in 2.0 to 4.0 Gy fractions. Hypo-
Too few studies exist detailing long-term survival with treatment
fractionated or course-fractionated dosing protocols also have
to define optimal therapy in affected animals. Despite this, che-
to'shn uq Ared jo quan au u pazn uaan
 motherapy and radiation therapy likely play a role in treatment.
Alternatively, radiosurgery using a stereotactic system allows
Pituitary Tumors
for a single fraction [l0 to 15 Gy] of radiation to be delivered
Pathophysiology. Tumors arising from the pituitary gland
through multiple portals, which allows suffcient tumor dosing
may result in neurologic deficits, endocrine dysfunction, or
yet minimizes the amount ofradiation to the surrounding nor-
both. In dogs, pituitary tumors are the second most com-
mal tissue thereby reducing the potential for radiation damage
mon secondary brain tumor observed.3l Based on size,
to normal tissues.lo5 Radiosurgery necessitates computerized
-  sru o p q  s 
planning based off of a stereotactic headframe construct. 105
rotumors. The size of the normal pituitary gland of dogs is
The median survival for dogs with brain tumors treated
approximately 4 to 6 mm in height, 6 to10 mm in length, and
with radiation therapy alone range from 4.7 months to 23.3
Ard u jo zis imuu 6 on s
gland of cats is approximately 3.2 mm in height, 5.4 mm in
reflects differences in radiation therapy protocols, tumor types,
length, and 5 mm in width. Arbitrarily, tumors larger than
size and location of tumors, and clinical signs.
10 mm in height or those extending dorsally above the sella
There are few reports detailing the use of chemotherapy for
turcica are considered macrotumors.120 Histologically, pitu-
primary brain tumors in animals. Hydroxyurea [30 to 50 mg/
itary tumors are usually adenomas or adenocarcinomas, which
kg 3 days a week) has been used in the treatment of menin-
occur in equal frequency.3l Subclassification is based on the
gioma in dogs 96,l10 Preliminary data suggest that hydroxyurea
cell of origin. Likewise, in cats pituitary tumors are the second
most commonly encountered secondary brain tumor In dogs,
-ut ie eare aoejns Apoq jo zu/au og on os] auisnuo
breed and sex predlection are not observed.12l In cats, a male
vals of 6 to 8 weeks) also has been used for dogs with brain
predilection is observed 122-124
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
363
Clinical Signs. Neurologic signs develop out of a conse-
 the calvaria, cardiomyopathy, and glomerulopathies also may
quence of compression or invasion of the tumor dorsally into
be observed.124 Unfortunately, assays for feline GH are not
the hypothalamus and diencephalon resulting in abnormal
widely available.123 The anabolic consequences of excessive
 I re m s n  ae 
on the lesion extent, additional neurologic signs include cir-
I; also known as somatomedin C), which is produced by the
cling, ataxia, cranial nerve defcits involving vestibular, facial,
liver I23 Consequently, IGF-I serves as a biologic surrogate for
in
GH concentrations and measurement of serum IGF-I con-
humans blindness occurs commonly with pituitary tumors,
centrations are used to establish the existence of acromegaly.
in dogs and cats visual deficits rarely occur due to anatomic
Unfortunately, elevated IGF-1 levels have been documented in
differences, including an incomplete diaphragma sella and fre-
cats receiving long-term insulin for diabetes mellitus without
acromegaly 138 Additionally, normal IGF-1 has been reported
blindness can occur.&2 Nonspecific signs such as lethargy and
 in a cat with acromegaly.139 Ultimately, the definitive diagno-
anorexia also may be present.
sis of acromegaly requires cross-sectional imaging in conjunc-
 Pituitary tumors often cause endocrine disorders as many
tion with endocrine testing.
tumors remain functionally active. In dogs, hyperadrenocor-
 Assessment. The diagnosis ofa pituitary tumoris established
ticism is the most commonly encountered endocrine disor-
with cross-sectional imaging. Dogs with PDH that develop
der. Central diabetes insipidus and diabetes mellitus [DM)
neurologic signs should undergo cross-sectional imaging.136
also have been reported in dogs with pituitary tumors.130-134
Approximately 80% to 85% ofdogs with hyperadrenocorticism
which another cause is not identified, those that display physi-
cal characteristics along with elevated IGF-I levels, or those
definition, dogs with PDH have pituitary tumors. The preva-
that develop neurologic signs should undergo cross-sectional
approximately 30%.136 Moreover, approximately 50% of dogs
with PDH develop neurologic signs suggestive of a macrotu-
easily identifable. In the normal pituitary gland, a central area
mor at a mean of 7 months (range 0.5 to 24 months) from
ofhyperintensity may be observed on MRI in 64% of dogs.119
a diagnosis of PDH.36 Interestingly, the presence or absent
Although unknown, the increased signal intensity may repre-
of neurologic signs in dogs with PDH does not predict the
sent vasopressin [antidiuretic hormone) since a decrease in the
presence of a pituitary tumor I26 Furthermore, the size of the
tumor does not consistently correlate with the presence of
Typically, tumors are well circumscribed and demonstrate
neurologic signs. I36 In cats, acromegaly (hypersomatotropism)
strong, uniform contrast enhancement (Figure 12-15). CT can
in which excessive growth hormone (GH) secretion leads to
also be used in the diagnosis of pituitary tumors.ll8 With CT.
DM is the most commonly encountered concurrent endocrine
pituitary tumors typically demonstrate similar characteristics
 disorder 122, 124 Hyperadrenocorticism can also occur in cats. 122
and patterns of contrast enhancement as observed with MRI.
Animals with signs suggestive of an endocrine disorder and
 In addition to standard imaging procedures, dynamic imaging
neurologic signs should undergo appropriate testings because
[MRI or CT) in which rapid imaging of the pituitary is per-
therapy often entails treatment of the endocrine dysfunction
formed during IV contrast administration can be used in the
along with definitive therapy directed toward control of the
diagnosis of pituitary tumors and may increase the sensitivity
pituitary tumor. In dogs, testing of the pituitary adrenal axis
 of identifying microadenomas.14. 145
should include low-dose dexamethasone suppression test or
Treatment—Radiation Therapy. Dogs. Radiation therapy is
ACTH stimulation.l37 Additional tests may include a urinary
the optimal treatment for dogs with pituitary tumors. Radi-
cortisol to creatinine ratio, high dose dexamethasone suppres-
ation therapy can result in a decrease in the size of a pitu-
 sion test, serum ACTH concentration, and abdominal Us.I137
itary tumor. 146.147 In one study of dogs with pituitary tumors
In cats, DM occurs in all cats with acromegaly. In addition,
treated with RT, the median survival time was not reached
mandibular prognathism, broadening of the frontal bones of
because dogs lived longer than the study period.12l The mean
Hgure 12-15 A, Axial T2W images of the brain of a Boston terrier at the level of the pituitary gland.
There is enlargement of the pituitary gland consistent with a macrotumor. B, Nine months after initial
imaging, repeated images show growth of the pituitary macrotumor. Microscopic evaluation was con-
sistent with a pituitary adenoma. (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
364
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
survival time was 1045 days compared with a median and
synthetic somatostatin or L-deprenyl does not appear to be
mean survival of 359 days and 551 days, respectively, in dogs
effective.124,152,153
'I  m en u s d 
 Tratment—Surgery. Several techniques for transsphenoi-
3-year survival estimates for dogs treated with RT were 93%,
dal hypophy-sectomy have been described in dogs.154-156
87%, and 55%, respectively.12l In another study of dogs with
Similar techniques have been used in cats.157 Postoperatively.
pituitary tumors having undergone RT, median survival time
dogs must be supplemented with corticosteroids, thyroxine,
was 1308 days with deaths related to tumor or radiation com-
 plications.l06 Despite these prolonged survival times, shorter
times also have been reported, which may reflect variation
Diabetes insipidus is usually transient but may require life-
in tumor biology or the presence and severity of neurologic
long therapy. 158 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca may also occur. 158
Dehiscence of the incision in the soft palate occurs more
unclear. The presence or absence of neurologic signs did not
commonly in cats.l57 Currently, availability of the proce-
u  s  s   s 
large number of dogs has been limited to a single institution.
signs in which the median and mean survival times were
 Pe Had   ot  ss ae is a u
355 days and 477 day, respectively 120 Less severe neurologic
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, 155 dogs [85%) went into
 impairment was associated with longer survival times.120 In
endocrine remission, with 119 dogs (77%) maintaining long-
addition, endocrine active tumors (i.e., those with hyperadre-
term remission.159 The 1-, 2-, 3-, and 4-year estimated survival
nocorticism) had longer survival times than those with endo-
rates were 86%, 83%, 80%, and 79%, respectively. An enlarged
 crine inactive tumors.l20 Radiation therapy does not appear
(s] sop eg ui auaeu Aq pauanop sem pueia Aen
to predictably control endocrine function in dogs because
that achieved remission suggesting a utility for surgery even in
-peradau rog aderau eau anbar on snuuo saop Aue
dogs with macrotumors. Fourteen dogs died within 4 weeks
postoperatively. In dogs achieving remission, 36 dogs (23%)
resolution of endocrine dysfunction, recurrence of hyperadre-
experienced recurrence after a median of 16 months likely as
 nocorticism may occur months after RT:l20.147 Complications
a result of the presence of residual pituitary tissue postopera-
associated with RT for pituitary tumors include hearing loss,
tively. Factors that influenced survival and risk of recurrence
vestibular dysfunction, facial paralysis, and seizures. 120.147,148
included age, pituitary size, endocrine factors, and thickness of
 In eight untreated dogs with pituitary tumors that developed
the sphenoid bone. Fewer cats have been treated with trans-
neurologic signs, mean survival time was 14l days with five
sphenoidal hypophysectomy I57,160.16l In one report of seven
dogs surviving less than Z months. 125
cats, two died of concurrent disease, five were alive 6 months
Cats. As in dogs, RT' appears to be the treatment of choice
postoperatively; all experienced remission of PDH with two
A im    s A im seo 
cats also experiencing a resolution in DM.157
tumors treated with RT, clinical signs have consisted of DM
Tumors of the Calvaria. The two most common tumors
secondary to acromegaly without concurrent neurologic signs.
that affect the calvaria are osteosarcoma [OSA] and multi-
 e se zh    ss i e a 
lobulated tumor of bone (multilobulated osteochondrosar-
 se 1o s Xi(91-1 a) (o] 
All cats had significant reduction in insulin requirements
soft tissue or bony mass easily palpable on the head. Severe
r x  s J  e 
facial or ocular deformity may occur with tumors affecting
lution of DM allowing discontinuation of insulin therapy.
the frontal bone or orbit. Definitive diagnosis requires histo-
 Although only a few reports exist detailing RT for the treat-
logic evaluation. Cross-sectional imaging is warranted when
considering definitive treatment such as surgery or radiation
to treatment and overall survival times have been similar to
therapy. Information regarding treatment and survival of
cats without neurologic signs.l49,15l Medical therapy for cats
dogs with OSA affecting the calvaria is derived from stud-
with acromegaly treated with exogenous administration of
ies detailing tumors involving multiple anatomic areas of the
13
Hgure 12-16 A, Axial CT image of the brain of a terrier mix. There is a large mass on the left parietal
bone that has resulted in bone lysis of the calvaria. The mass extends into the cranial cavity. B, Axial
CT image obtained after craniectomy for mass removal. Microscopic evaluation was consistent with
 a multilobulated tumor of bone. [Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
365
axial skeleton. Similar to appendicular OSA, affected dogs
the dosage should be attempted. Ultimately, the least amount
tend to be large breed dogs such as the German shepherd,
of corticosteroids should be used to control clinical signs in
Labrador retriever, and golden retriever, with a median age
conjunction with antimicrobial drugs. See Chapter 15 for a
of 9 years.162-164 At the time of presentation, the prevalence
complete discussion of inflammatory diseases.
of metastatic disease ranges from 11% to 18%.163-16s When
Metabolic Diseases. The brain is the most energy demand-
combined with those dogs developing metastasis after diagno-
Xiddns snonuuos e uo spuadap pue Apoq au u ueaio su!
sis, the overall metastatic rate for OSA involving the skull is
of glucose and oxygen for normal function. It is protected
 40%.164 Treatment involves surgery along with chemotherapy
from toxic substances by the BBB and requires a balance of
electrolytes and neurotransmitters for appropriate excitabil-
die or are euthanized due to local recurrence. 163,164 Median
ity of the neurons. Alterations in brain metabolism can cause
 severe clinical signs ranging from depression to coma and from
ue (siop rs u erans ras] uatam apnu sr
tremors to seizures. The most common metabolic problems
completeness of resection. 163
causing stupor or coma are listed in Table 12-3. Hypogly-
 Multilobulated tumor of bone occurs in large-breed dogs
cemia is discussed in Chapter 15. Hepatic encephalopathy,
with a median weight of 29 kg and a median age of 8 years.166
uremic encephalopathy, and diabetic coma are discussed in
 P g's ai e u sns o 
Chapter 15.
of bone demonstrates characteristic imaging features. With CT;
Heat Stroke. Heat stroke is an acute failure of the heat-
MLO is characterized as a round to ovoid mass consisting of a
regulating mechanisms of the body that results in a body
nonhomogeneous bone density with well-defned margins and
temperature exceeding 40° C [105° F).174.175 High ambient
a granular appearance along with bony lysis of the calvaria. 168
temperature, high humidity, and poor ventilation are the incit-
  e  a d   
ing factors. Brachycephalic breeds of dogs are especially sus-
intensity consisting of areas of hypointensity and hyperin-
ceptible. A long-haired coat, obesity, and high fever may also
tensity on T2W images, and demonstrates nonhomogeneous
predispose the animal to heat stroke.
contrast enhancement (peripheral enhancement with 
cen-
 The primary mechanism for dissipation of heat in dogs and
tral areas of strong uniform enhancement and areas without
cats is panting. The airflow is unidirectional—-in through the
 enhancement).169 Unlike OSA, metastasis at the time of pre-
 ans sr a giu a  a e u
 sentation is uncommon with MLO.166 Surgery is the treatment
of the nasal turbinates promotes heat exchange. Prolonged
of choice in tumors deemed resectable. In dogs with massive
panting causes respiratory allkalosis that later is modifed by
tumors, resection results in large calvarial defects necessitat-
metaboli acidosis, presumably from inereased muscular activ-
 ing cranioplasty. Multiple techniques have been employed
ity or dehydration. If hyperthermia continues, cerebral edema
using methylmethacrylate or titanium mesh to accomplish
and DIC occur frequently, either of which can cause death.
 r  ss o 
Although all of the CNS is involved, the neurons of the cere-
m ssop Jo raquu sare e u su ens pue sauuy ie
bral cortex and the cerebellum seem most susceptible to per-
MLO.166 173 All dogs were treated with surgery. Given the df
ficulty in obtaining complete margins, local recurrence was
the clinical signs and elevation of the body temperature.
47% and 58% of affcted dogs. Median time to local recur-
 The three major objectives of treatment are to reduce body
rence was 14 months and 26 months. Metastatic disease devel-
temperature, prevent cerebral edema, and manage DIC if it
oped in 56% and 58% of dogs. In two studies, dogs treated
develops. The body temperature is decreased by administration
with surgery alone or in combination with chemotherapy or
of cool intravenous fluids or bathing the animal in cold or iced
radiation therapy, had an overall median survival time of 21
water. The rectal temperature should be monitored continu-
months and 26 months.166.173 Histologic grade and degree of
ously or at 10-minute intervals. To prevent hypothermia, cool-
 resection were prognostic factors for survival. 166
ing is stopped when the rectal temperature reaches 39.5° C
[103° F). Iced-water enemas may be used in refractory cases,
No Focal or Lateralizing Signs
but they prevent accurate monitoring of body temperature.
AcuteProgressive
 If the animal shows evidence of cerebral edema, especially
Inflammation (see Chapter 15). Inflammatory disease of the
 if signs of tentorial herniation are present [see Table 12-2).
-    rsr a aq  
mannitol or HT'S should be administered intravenously. Coag-
 inflammation (i.e., granulomatous meningoencephalomy-
ulation function should be monitored and addressed if abnor-
elitis). Inflammatory disease of the CNS often results in an
mal. Hemorrhagic diarrhea, petechiae, or excessive bleeding
abnormal mental state. Stupor or coma results from a direct
from venipuncture sites may signify thrombocytopenia or the
effect on neurons, cerebral edema, increased ICP, hypoxia
onset of DIC. Fluids should be given intravenously to main-
from vasculitis, or systemic metabolic abnormalities.
tain cardiac output and renal function. Overhydration must
Viral agents tend to have a greater effect on the nervous tis-
be avoided.
sue. Vasculitis is common with rickettsial and some viral infec-
The animals should be monitored carefully for at least
tions. Bacterial and fungal agents produce a greater meningeal
reaction. Formulation of a diagnosis requires analysis of CSF
can be prevented. The prognosis with heat stroke is relatively
 analysis for cell counts, protein content, microbiologic testing.
good if treated early (i.e., before signs of cerebral edema or
antibody or antigen titers, and PCR testing (see Chapter 4).
DIC develop).
The management of animals with stupor or coma second-
Hypoxia. Hypoxia is an inadequate supply of oxygen for
 ary to inflammatory disease includes treatment of the primary
normal brain function. Arterial oxygen tension levels below
 disease, if possible, management of increased ICP, and sup-
 50 mm Hg are detrimental to brain function. Increased levels
pression of the inflammatory response. Increased ICP from
of carbon dioxide have a profound effect on cerebral blood
cerebral edema and CNS inflammation should be treated with
 flow [see Traumatic Brain Injury section). Because no oxygen
corticosteroids. Whereas suppression of the immune system
reserves are present in the brain, merely a few minutes of
 by corticosteroids in an animal with an infectious disease may
hypoxia can cause irreversible damage. More than 10 minutes
seem counterintuitive, the consequences of not treating the
of hypoxia will produce neuronal death. The cerebral cortex
increased ICP and CNS inflammation are worse, namely, death.
 and cerebellum are most susceptible to hypoxic damage, and
After an initial response to corticosteroids, rapid tapering of
the lower brainstem is most resistant.
366
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
The most frequent causes of hypoxia in animals are anes-
from acute toxicity likely depends on the severity. In most ani-
thesia accidents, cardiopulmonary failure, suffocation, smoke
mals, the respiratory tract also is involved. Treatment is mainly
inhalation, paralysis of respiration, carbon monoxide poi-
 supportive and is aimed at correction of respiratory pathology.
soning, cyanide poisoning, and near drowning. Despite the
hypotension, and hypoxemia. Fluid therapy and supplemen-
 almost universal use of inhalation anesthesia with controlled
tal oxygen should be provided. Although not widely available,
ventilation, complications of anesthesia are common. Cardiac
hyperbaric oxygen chambers may aid in recovery of affected
arrhythmias, overdoses of the anesthetic agent, improper intu-
animals by increasing the elimination rate of CO.
bations, and faulty apparatuses are but a few of the problems
Equine Hypoxic and Ischemic Encephalopathy. Equine
encountered. Meticulous attention to detail in the administra-
hypoxic and ischemic encephalopathy (neonatal maladjust-
tion and the monitoring of anesthesia is essential.
ment syndrome, peripartum asphyxia syndrome, dummy foal)
Heart, lung, and peripheral circulatory failure rival anes-
has been recognized for many years in newborn foals. Ischemic
 thesia and are also frequent causes of hypoxia. Heart and lung
 or hypoxic damage of many organs is the suspected cause. 192
disease may cause a mild to severe hypoxemia. If the condition
Neurologic abnormalities usually develop within 24 hours
 does not cause unconsciousness, the danger of cerebral dam-
after birth but may occur up to a week postpartum.The sever.
age is low. Hypotensive shock may cause profound decreases
ity of neurologic signs depends on the degree and duration of
in cerebral blood flow and cerebral hypoxia, which may lead
hypoxia. Mild signs include loss of attentiveness toward the
to irreversible neuronal loss. A primary concern in the man-
 mare, jitteriness, and hyperalertness. More severe signs include
 agement of hypotensive shock is the restoration of blood pres-
irregular respirations, apnea, random intermittent tongue
sure, ventilation, and oxygenation. Management of the various
protrusions and sucking behavior, drooling, strabismus, and
forms of cardiopulmonary failure, however, is beyond the
  s   s s s
scope of this text.
behavior; others may wander aimlessly, may be depressed or
xi sieuue u uaqord quanbag ssal e st ueons
stuporous, and may circle in one direction.192
panu u Aiadsa sn jo uendse ane ssnes jo sad
Generalized seizures are a common finding. Vocalizations
or anesthetized animals; aspiration of foreign bodies; and near
of severely affected foals may sound like a dog's bark [barker
drowning. Although many animals experiencing near drown-
foals), and this sign is often accompanied by generalized sei-
 ing have loss of consciousness, and an abnormal mental state
zures. The most severely affected foals may be comatose and
including stupor or coma, neurologic dysfunction may not
completely hypotonic, showing seizures and apnea.192 Patha-
impact survival. 1 79
logically, ischemic necrosis of the cerebral cortical neurons,
Paralysis of respiration may occur with lesions of the CNS
multifocal areas of brain and meningeal hemorrhages, and
between the medullary respiratory centers and the origin of
edema are observed in affected foals.193, 194
the phrenic nerve at C5-7 spinal cord segments [sometimes
 In addition to the CNS signs, other signs of systemic organ
C4). Occasionally, ventilatory failure is severe enough to
failure may be present. Renal hypoxia produces elevated
serum creatinine levels, oliguria, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia,
respiratory center directly, or it may interrupt the descend-
and hypochloridemia. Gastrointestinal signs include colic,
ing pathway in the cervical spinal cord and produce the same
ileus, bloody diarrhea, and gastric reflux. Cardiac signs include
effect: apnea. Lesions in the lower cervical spinal cord (C7) or
arrhythmia, tachycardia, murmur, hypotension, and general-
the cranial thoracic region may block these UMN pathways
ized edema. Icterus may develop in foals with hypoxic liver
to the intercostal lower motor neurons, but the intact phrenic
injury.
pathway allows diaphragmatic ("abdominal") breathing to
The diagnosis is based on the characteristic clinical signs of
occur. The most common cause of this lesion is trauma. Occa-
multiple organ dysfunction occurring within 24 to 48 hours
sionally, cervical intervertebral disk herniation may also impair
of birth. Septic meningitis (see Chapter 15) may cause simi-
respiration.l8l Generalized lower motor neuron (LMN) dis-
lar neurologic signs. CSF is normal in foals with hypoxic and
ease also may cause respiratory paralysis through its effect on
ischemic encephalopathy, and neutrophilic pleocytosis and
both the intercostal and phrenic nerves [see Chapter 7).
elevated protein concentrations are typical CSF findings in
Carbon Monoxide. Carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning
foals with septic meningitis.
occurs occasionally in animals exposed in house fires.182,183
 Treatment is supportive. Phenobarbital and diazepam may
CO preferentially and competitively binds to hemoglobin,
be used to control seizures. The prognosis is poor for severely
forming carboxyhemoglobin. CO has 200 to 230 times greater
sssrse
affected foals that survive the first few days may regain vision
ing, the O carrying capacity of Hb is reduced, which leads to
 and suckling ability, and some make complete recoveries.192
hypoxemia and hypoxia. In addition to displacing O2, the Hb
Hypertensive Encephalopathy
 molecule undergoes a conformational change, which causes
Pathophysiology. The prevalence of hypertension (HT) has
a greater affnity for oxygen at heme sites not binding CO.
T     r  
which shifts the O-dissociation curve to the left.l8s The shift
systolic blood pressure ranges between 1l8 to 162 mm Hg
in the Oz-dissociation curve to the left further impairs O2
 delivery. l85 Affected animals typically have bright red mucous
sure values range from 131 to 154 mm Hg.197-199 Many fac-
membranes and rapid, shallow respiration. In dogs, CO toxic-
tors can alter the measurement of blood pressure including
ity results in ataxia, menace response deficits, loss of conscious-
technical reasons such as the type of recording device, cuff
ness, alterations in mental state, head tremors, twitching, and
size, and operator skill, and patient factors such as size and
demeanor of the animal. Although the prevalence of hyper-
are divided into acute and delayed toxicity. Delayed toxicity
tension in healthy animals has not been definitively estab-
involves a myelinopathy affecting the cerebral deep white
lished, estimates in dogs range from 0.5% to 10% while in
matter such as the centrum semiovale, periventricular white
cats an estimate of 2% has been reported.197 In cats evalu-
matter, and the corpus callsum symmetrically l89-19l Recov-
ated for signs related to HT or for evaluation of disease asso-
ery from delayed toxicity is possible.189 Acute toxicity involves
ciated with HT, a 30% prevalence of HT was found.200 In
neuronal necrosis ofthe pallidum, substantia nigra, cerebellum,
dogs, the prevalence of HT may be as high as 93% and 87%
and the hippocampus and demyelination and necrosis of the
with such diseases as renal disease and hyperadrenocorticism,
 deep white matter of the cerebral hemispheres. 190 Recovery
respectively.197
CHAPTER 12 
Stupor or Coma
367
There are three main etiologic classifications for HT: white
Treatment. Immediate treatment is reserved for animals
coat, secondary, and idiopathic hypertension. White coat
with severe hypertension that have neurologic abnormalities.
In dogs, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors are the drug
ondary to activation of the sympathetic nervous system asso-
of choice for the treatment of HT.223 In cats, amlodipine besyl
ciated with fear, excitement, or anxiety.201 While white coat
ate, a calcium channel blocker is the drug of choice for HT:223
hypertension does not cause a clinical problem, it does com-
 In acute HT, subcutaneous hydralazine has been effective
plicate definitive documentation of HT. Secondary hyperten-
 at reducing blood pressure without significant risk of hypoten-
sion develops as a consequence of systemic disease. In cats,
sion.206.223 While parenteral hypotensive medications such as
secondary HT is commonly associated with renal disease and
nitroprusside may be preferable in the setting of severe hyper-
tensive encephalopathy, the use of parenteral hypotensive
associated withrenal disease and hyperadrenocorticism.197.209
medications is associated with significant risk of hypotension
Idiopathic HT is defined as the presence of HT in the absence
and therefore requires continuous, direct arterial blood pres-
of other disease conditions associated with HT: It has also been
sure measurement.
 called primary or essential hypertension. Although the preva-
 Inborn Errors of Metabolism. These are diseases that inter-
lence of idiopathic HT is unknown in dogs, approximately
fere with function at the biochemical level or lead to death of
20% of cats with HT are consider idiopathic.203.210
neurons. Some are caused by a deficiency in a key enzyme
Chronic systemic hypertension has a variety of pathologic
causing buildup of byproducts [e.g., lysosomal storage dis-
 consequences, referred to as end organ or target organ dam-
eases) and neuronal dysfunction (see Chapter 15). Diagnosis
of these diseases is based on suspicion in cases of young, pure-
heart, and nervous system.2ll In the kidney, TOD leads to
bred animals and exclusion of other diseases that may have
an accelerated decline in renal function and proteinuria.
similar clinical signs. Chemistry profles with abnormalities in
Hypertension can exist at any stage of renal disease including
lactic acid, anion gap, bicarbonate, and glucose may raise the
non-azotemic animals. 197 In the eye, HT leads to hyperten-
index of suspicion for these disorders. Elevated ketone con-
sive retinopathy and choroidopathy, which commonly causes
centrations may be identified in urinalysis. The urine can be
blindness.203,205,210,212-215 In the heart, HT may result in car-
screened for organic acid abnormalities. Typically, brain MRI
diomegaly and left ventricular hypertrophy205.210.214,216 In the
demonstrates diffuse and symmetric changes that predomi-
nervous system, HT may result in a hypertensive encephalop-
nate in the gray or white matter. Some of these diseases can be
athy205.207.208,210.217 Neurologic signs have been reported in
managed with dietary adjustments.
As  u zsos  s jo   
 Organic acidurias are characterized by presence of abnor-
 in hypertensive dogs, 3 of 14 dogs had developed neurologic
mal organic acids as a result of an error in a metabolic pathway.
signs.218
Maltese dogs from a family with malonic aciduria developed
 Neurologic signs reflect forebrain and vestibular dys-
seizures and stupor24Hypoglyemia, aidosis andketonuria
function. Signs of forebrain involvement include seizures
were identified. The clinical signs resolved after the diet was
and changes in mentation, whereas vestibular dysfunction
altered to feed one that was high in carbohydrate and low in
includes head tilt, vestibular ataxia, and abnormal nystag-
fat.224 Cobalamin (vitamin B2) is a necessary cofactor for the
Krebs cycle. Cobalamin deficiency has been associated with
weakness, ataxia, tremors, episodes of the paraparesis, and
methylmalonic aciduria and encephalopathic signs in cats
with a deficiency of intrinsic factor necessary for cobalamin
The pathophysiology ofhypertensive encephalopathy likely
absorption.225226 Similar signs were reported in cats with
gastrointestinal disease, which also interfered with cobalamin
Edema develops when the autoregulatory capacity of the
absorption.227 D-lactic acidosis also has been reported in cats
brain vasculature is exceeded leading to hyperperfusion and
with gastrointestinal disease. Bacterial overgrowth led to the
breakdown ofthe BBB, which leads to edema.219,22l In experi-
overproduction of the D-isoform oflactic acid.228
mentally induced acute HT in cats, coning of the vermis of the
 cerebellum, cerebellar herniation into the foramen magnum,
olism that affects humans and Staffordshire bull terriers.229
rostral displacement of the colliculi, and widening and flatten-
 In Staffordshire bull terriers, neurologic signs developed
ing of the cerebral gyri develop as a consequence to increased
between 4 months and 7 years of age. Four of six dogs had
intracranial pressure.217 With chronic HT, there is hypertrophy
chronic progressive disease, and two dogs experienced an
and hyperplasia of the smooth muscle of the brain vasculature
acute onset of seizures between 4 and 6 months of age.29
from chronic vasoconstriction.2l0 These degenerative changes
Neurologic signs include seizures, ataxia, dementia, and head
 predispose to microhemorrhages.2l0 Multifocal cerebral arte-
tremor. Levels of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid and lysine were
riosclerosis with hemorrhages has been observed in naturally
elevated in urine, CSF, and plasma. MRI disclosed symmetri-
 Occurring HT in cats.205
cal and extensive polioencephalopathy suggestive of a meta-
Assessment. A diagnosis of HT encephalopathy is sug-
bolic or toxic disorder. CSF analysis was normal. A mutation
in the dehydrogenase that metabolizes L-2-hydroxyglu-
-sp ueqao jo suais suensuap (  o1 on 091
taric acid has been described.230 No definitive treatment is
function alone or in combination with vestibular dysfunc-
available.
tion. As most cases are considered secondary hypertension,
 Nutritional Diseases. Thiamine deficiency may cause stu-
 affected animals should also be screened for an underlying
 por or coma, especially in ruminants. Polioencephalomalacia,
condition. Cross-sectional imaging should be considered in
a symmetric laminar necrosis of the cerebral cortex, occurs in
 animals not demonstrating neurologic improvement concur-
cattle, sheep, and goats. Increased ICP is common. Thiamine
rent with a reduction in systolic blood pressure. Moreover,
deficiency is discussed in Chapter 15.
cross-sectional imaging helps rule out other disease pro-
cesses that may result in similar neurologic signs. Although
Chronic Progressive
not documented in animals, abnormalities associated with
Degenerative Diseases. Storage diseases, which are inherited
HT in humans consist of hyperintensities on T2W images in
degenerative diseases with accumulation of metabolic prod-
the white matter of the cerebrum.219 Similar lesions may be
ucts in neurons, can cause depression or stupor. The animal
 present in the brainstem.222
may be in a coma terminally Other signs, such as cerebellar
368
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
ataxia or seizures, are more common in the early stages of the
small undifferentiated structure, which encompasses the mes-
disease (see Chapters 8 and 15).
encephalic aqueduct. The hindbrain subdivides rostrally into
 Anomalous Conditions. The nervous system has been
the metencephalon and caudally into the myelencephalon.
reported as the most frequently affected organ system by
The metencephalon develops further to become the pons
 congenital defects.23l Malformations of the CNS are often
and cerebellum. The myelencephalon forms into the medulla
caused by abnormalities of morphogenesis that include
oblongata. After primary neurulation, the neuroblasts pro-
defects in neural tube closure and abnormalities in neuro-
liferate, differentiate into neurons, and migrate. Most of the
nal migration. Other malformations result from an altered
reported developmental anomalies usually occur during this
inductive influence controlled by specific genes of a region-
stage of development.
 ally specifed mesoderm.232 Programmed cell death refers to
Neural tube defects result in brain or spinal cord malforma-
a process by which cells die during normal development,
 tions and occur early in gestation as a direct result of defec-
is an expression of terminal differentiation, and involves
tive closure or reopening of the neural tube. Nomenclature of
new gene expression. This process is critical for achieving
 neural tube closure defects provides a description of the type
 correct population size and proper morphogenesis of brain
and location ofthe defect. Neural tube defects are classified as
structures. Table 12-8 summarizes common malformations
open if neural tissue is exposed or covered only by membrane,
of the forebrain. Cerebellar malformations are described in
or as closed if the defect is covered by normal skin. Neural
Chapter 8.
tube defects also are divided into cranial (brain) and caudal
Early in development, the embryo consists of three germ
(terminal spinal cord) types. Caudal defects represent anoma-
cell layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The out-
lies associated with the secondary neurulation process, which
ermost layer, ectoderm, becomes the epidermal, neural and
produce the neural tube in the sacral and coccygeal regions
skeletal, and connective tissues of the head. The mesoderm
[see Chapter 6). Embryologic abnormalities of the neural tube
becomes muscle and skeletal tissues and is divided into
often are accompanied by secondary bony defects.
somites. Each somite separates into dermatomal, myotomal,
Neural crest cells are condensations of neuroepithelium
 and sclerotomal regions. The endoderm forms into structures
that form dorsal to the neural tube and give rise to periph-
and lining of the respiratory and alimentary tracts.
eral and autonomic nervous systems, the adrenal medulla,
The neural tube is the progenitor of the CNS and is sur-
and pigmentary cells. In the cranial region, the population
rounded by the axial skeleton. Precise timing of embryogene-
of neural crest cells is quite large. Cranial neural crest cells
sis must occur for successful neural tube development.233 The
are a prerequisite for folding of the neural tube and migrate
cephalic portion of the neural tube is delineated into three
from the neural folds early in embryogenesis.233These neural
primary vesicles: forebrain (prosencephalon), midbrain [mes-
crest cells become the mesenchyme of the face and base of
encephalon), and hindbrain (rhombencephalon).234 The fore-
the calvaria. The cells also contribute to the spiral septum
brain expands to form the prosencephalon that develops into
in the outflow tract of the heart; therefore agents affecting
paired telencephalic and optic structures, the diencephalon
this tissue migration process are likely to cause defects of the
and third ventricle. The telencephalon subsequently becomes
face and heart.
the cerebrum and lateral ventricles. The midbrain remains a
 Major differentials for congenital cranial and brain malfor-
mations include prenatal or perinatal exposure to infectious
diseases and toxins. Some conditions are inherited. Teratogens
TABLE 12-8
are external factors that adversely affect embryonic devel-
Classification ofForebrain Malformations
Commonly recognized teratogens include toxins, drugs, viral
in Domestic Animals
infections, oversupplementation and undersupplementation
of nutrients and environmental factors (e.g, radiation expo-
Congenital Defect
 Description
sure and maternal hyperthermia). The CNS is sensitive to
teratogenic insult throughout prenatal and early postnatal
Hydrocephalus
Communicating/noncommunicating 
development.23s For many congenital nervous system defects,
(obstructive)
the cause is diffcult to determine, thus is unknown. Other
Internal/external
diseases that can mimic congenital defects include lysosomal
Hydrocephalus ex-vacuo
storage diseases, inborn errors of metabolism, and other inher-
(compensatory)
ited degenerative disorders [see Chapters 8 and 15).
Congenital
Hydrocephalus
Pathophysiology. Hydrocephalus is the presence of excessive
Hydranencephaly/Porencephaly
CSF within the brain or cranial cavity. CSF flows from the
 Primary neural tube
 Exencephaly/anencephaly
lateral ventricles through the interventricular foramina to
defects 
Craniorachischisis (cranium bifidum)
the third ventricle. It continues caudally through the mesen-
 Primary axial
Encephalocele
cephalic aqueduct to the fourth ventricle and into the sub-
mesodermal
Meningocele
arachnoid space through the lateral apertures of the fourth
defects 
Craniofacial mesodermal defects
ventricle. In the subarachnoid space, most of the fluid moves
Cleft palate
around the brainstem into the rostrotentorial compartment.
Disorders of forebrain
 Holoprosencephaly
Most of the absorption occurs through the arachnoid villi in
the dorsal sagittal sinus. Absorption also can occur via venous
induction
Arrhinencephaly
 and lymphatic drainage around spinal and cranial nerves. Most
Cyclopia
of the CSF is produced by the choroid plexus in the lateral,
Agenesis of corpus callosum
third, and fourth ventricles, but a substantial portion is also
Microencephaly
produced by the ependyma lining the ventricles, vasculature
Disorders of neuronal 
Lissencephaly/pachygyria
of the leptomeninges, and pia overlying the brain and spinal
migration
Polymicrogyria
cord. Production of CSF is independent ofhydrostatic pressure
Heterotopia
within the ventricles. However, production of CSF is depen-
dent on osmotic pressure, an aspect used in the treatment of
CHAPTER 12
 Stupor or Coma
369
Hgure 12-17 A, Axial T2W images of the brain of a bulldog with severely dilated lateral ventricles.
The third ventricle was also dilated and contained a lesion that extended into the mesencephalic
aqueduct (arrow). B, Two months after placement of a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt, the ven-
tricular dilation has resolved. The VP shunt can be observed penetrating the left parietal lobe of the
cerebrum as it courses toward the lateral ventricle (arrow). (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia
Research Foundation, Inc.]
hydrocephalus. Overproduction of CSF by choroid plexus
factors. In calves, vitamin A deficiency can result in decreased
tumors is rare.
absorption of CSF via the arachnoid villi and consequent
Hydrocephalus can be categorized based on the location
hydrocephalus.240 Deformities of the temporal bone can
of excessive CSF and pathogenesis. When CSF accumulates
obstruct CSF flow, producing hydrocephalus. In foals, a variety
within the ventricular system, it is known as internal hydroceph-
of neurologic signs may be seen.241 Some foals may be normal
alus. When CSF accumulates within an enlarged area of the
behaviorally and neurologically. Other foals may display signs
subarachnoid space, it is referred to as external hydrocephalus.
such as depression, dementia, and seizures. Inherited condi-
Additionally, excessive CSF may be the result of obstruction
tions have been reported in a number of dairy and beef cattle
to flow [noncommunicating or obstructive hydrocephalus),
breeds.242 Ingestion of plants like Veratrum califormicum and
 decreased absorption, or increased production [communicating
Astragalus spp. by ewes and cows has been shown to cause
hydrocephalus). Hydrocephalus also may occur secondary to
hydrocephalus in lambs and calves.243,244
loss or destruction of CNS parenchyma. Secondary ventricular
Congenital hydrocephalus in dogs and cats is usually rec-
dlation or expansion of the subarachnoid space occurs in order
ognized in the very young animal. The increase in intracranial
to occupy the void created by the absence of CNS parenchyma.
volume occurs before the sutures of the calvaria have closed,
The term hydrocephalus ex vacuo or secondary hydrocephalus
allowing for enlargement of the cranial cavity In most animal
describes this process. Based on etiology, hydrocephalus may
species, the enlargement of the head, the open sutures and
 be acquired or congenital. Hydrocephalus may be seen in any
persistent fontanelles, and the poor development of the ani-
 species and is more often congenital than acquired.
mal may be recognized shortly after birth.
Communicating hydrocephalus from decreased absorption
Climical Signs Affected dogs are usually taken to the vet-
 of CSF is usually the result of inflammation of the meninges.
 erinarian when they are between Z and 3 months of age, some-
Inflammation is usually caused by infectious diseases such as
times when they are older. Palpation of the skull may reveal
oxcurs with viral infections like canine distemper or feline
the persistent sutures and fontanelles. The prominent frontal
infectious peritonitis viruses but may be secondary to sub-
areas encroach on the orbits, causing ventrolateral deviation of
 arachnoid hemorrhage or to the presence of foreign materials
the eyes (Figure 12-18). Oculomotor nerve function (pupils
such as radiographic contrast materials that are injected in the
and eye movements) (see Chapter ll) is usually normal, indi-
subarachnoid space.236 Congenital absence of the lateral aper-
cating that the eye deviation is mechanical, not neurologic,
tures also has been documented.237 Communicating hydro-
in origin. The widening of the skull is detected by palpation
cephalus has been observed in dogs with ciliary dyskinesia.238
of the parietal area, where the space between the skull and
A lack of CSF flow due to dysfunction of the cilia of the epen-
the zygomatic arch is narrowed. Additionally, the width of the
dyma is thought to explain the development of hydrocephalus.
cranium may extend beyond the zygomatic arches. Head pain
Noncommunicating hydrocephalus secondary to obstruction
may be evident in some animals when the head is palpated.
of CSF flow occurs frequently. Although obstruction can be
 Puppies and kittens with hydrocephalus usually are smaller
present at any site, most commonly it is located at the mesen-
and less developed than their littermates. They are often dull
 suer npane a jo sue npne eua
have episodic behavioral changes such as aggression or confu-
complete absence to stenosis. Obstruction of the aqueduct also
sion, and frequently have seizures [see Chapter 13). Because
 can be secondary to inflammation, infection, or compression by
their mental development is poor, they do not learn as read-
a mass. For example, brainstem tumors that cause obstruction
ily as their littermates. Visual deficits with normal PLRs are
of the aqueduct produce hydrocephalus239 (Figure 12-17).
common because of damage to the optic radiation and the
Hydrocephalus is a common malformation in domestic
occipital cortex [see Chapter 11). Motor function may range
animals and most cases of hydrocephalus that are seen in vet-
from an almost normal gait to severe tetraparesis. Occasion-
 erinary practice are congenital. The disorder may be caused
ally, asymmetric signs may occur. Despite the fact that ventric-
 by environmental (toxic, infectious, deficiencies) or genetic
ular enlargement is limited to the lateral ventricles, episodes
370
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 12-18 A, A young Pekingese dog with congenital hydrocephalus. Note the large, domed
head, which is characteristic. B, A young Maltese terrier with congenital hydrocephalus. Ventrolat-
eral strabismus is the result of encroachment of the orbits by the frontal bones. [Copyright 2010
University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
 of vestibular dysfunction can occur. Papilledema may be seen
TABLE 12-9
 on fundic examination in a small percentage of cases. Hydro-
Breeds of Dogs at Increased Risk of
cephalus can lead to abnormal hypothalamic function. Hypo-
dipsic hypernatremia, possibly as a result of pressure atrophy
Hydrocephalus
of hypothalamic osmoreceptors, has been observed.245.246
 In dogs, too few studies of congenital hydrocephalus have
Maltese
    
Yorkshire terrier
tistically significant correlation between breed, size, and body
English bulldog
weight of the dam and hydrocephalus has been demonstrated
Chihuahua
Lhasa apso
sia of the mesencephalic aqueduct, but others do not.237,249
Pomeranian
In addition to hydrocephalus, other prevalent abnormalities
Toy poodle 
include the formation of diverticula and clefts in periventricu-
 Cairn terrier
Boston terrier
Pug
resent a response to necrotic tissue.237 Alternatively, the pres-
Pekingese
 of an underlying etiologic agent. 250
Ventricular enlargement without clinical signs is a common
Data from Selby LA, Hayes HM, Becker SV: Epizootiologic features
finding in some toy breeds, especially Chihuahuas, Yorkshire
of canine hydrocephalus, Am J Vet Res 40:411414, 1979.
terriers, and Maltese dogs. A kennel of Chihuahuas was stud-
ied by Redding.25l Subclinical hydrocephalus was common.
is unlikely that the behavioral signs in these dogs are directly
Behavioral changes could be correlated with abnormal elec-
 related to the concurrent hydrocephalus.
trical encephalography (EEG) in many instances. A selective
External hydrocephalus is the accumulation of CSF in the
breeding program in which the EEG was used to screen breed-
subarachnoid space. Often present as a consequence of CNS
ing animals reduced the incidence of hydrocephalus. Redding
parenchymal loss, external hydrocephalus as a primary entity
concluded that the dogs had a compensated hydrocephalus
fluid analysis disclosed pleocytosis and elevated protein con-
could be decompensated by relatively mild changes such as
 tent in all affected animals. Bacterial meningoencephalitis was
trauma or infection. Redding also observed a high incidence
suspected in the dog and may have played a role in one cat.
of enlargement of the foramen magnum (occipital dysplasia)
Successful outcome occurred following surgical placement of
in these dogs. Whether this abnormality is related to the cause
a CSF shunting device [see later discussion).
of hydrocephalus or whether it is secondary to increased ICP
Based on clinical signs alone, hydrocephalus in the adult
is unknown. The clinical signs were related to the [l) age
animal is more diffieult to recognize. In animals having
at onset, (2) degree of imbalance between production and
reached skeletal maturity, the size of the cranial cavity remains
absorption of CSF, and (3) location of the defect [communi-
normal because the sutures have fused before the increase in
cating or noncommunicating).
ICP. The clinical signs develop more rapidly and are more
Simpson252 studied a series of hydrocephalic Maltese dogs.
 Fewer than 20% had seizures, with most seizures occurring
duction and absorption of CSF. Seizures are a frequent sign
during the first year oflife. Behavioral problems were the most
in the early stages. Dullness, which may progress to stupor or
frequent findings. Learned responses such as house training
coma, is common. Because hydrocephalus in the adult is usu-
were difficult or impossible to achieve in 75% of the dogs.
ally secondary to inflammation or a mass signs of the primary
 Bull terriers affected with complex focal seizures also have
problem may predominate early in the course of the disease.
Complete obstruction of the CSF causes a rapidly progressive
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
371
hydrocephalus, which may cause tentorial herniation, cerebel-
inner surface of the calvaria is absent. The cranial cavity may
lar herniation, or both.
 have a ground-glasslike appearance.
 Assessment. The presumptive diagnosis of hydrocephalus
 Given the wide variation and size and morphology of the
 in the young animal is relatively straightforward if the charac-
canine head, ventricular dimensions likely vary among breeds.
teristic signs are present. Although the clinical signs of severe
Ventricular size, symmetry, and volume have been reported
   rsss e s
in a few breeds using MRI and US.258-263 Ventricular size has
 duce a more subtle picture. Behavioral changes or seizures
osn sn aie o s s's on dn sua  aup raag
may be the only complaint. In most cases, ancillary studies are 
nographic evaluation via the bregmatic fontanelle.264
necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
Analysis of the CSF may be useful for identifying an etio-
 The definitive diagnosis can be confrmed with imaging pra-
logic diagnosis. Caution should be exercised before perform-
 cedures. Magnetic resonance imaging is the imaging modality
 ing a CSF collection in animals with suspected inereased ICP
of choice because it not only allows identification of ventricular
(see Chapter 4). Therapeutic measures directed at lowering
or subarachnoid dilation but also because it allows identifica-
 intracranial pressure should be performed before pursuing a
tion of an underlying etiology (e.g., mass obstructing CSF flow)
spinal tap. In rare instances, CSF can be obtained by a ven-
or existence of concurrent disease (e.g., meningoencepha-
 tricular tap under general anesthesia.
litis). This is particularly important in the evaluation of ani-
Treatment. The treatment ofhydrocephalus depends on the
mals in which ventriculomegaly is a common finding, such as
cause of the disorder and the status of the animal. Acquired
in toy breed dogs. In congenital hydrocephalus, MRI discloses
hydrocephalus in the adult animal requires resolution of the
enlarged ventricles containing fluid with MRI characteristics
inciting factor. An inflammatory disease may cause permanent
consistent with CSF (Figure 12-19). Ventriculomegaly is often
reduction of absorptive capacity, and the hydrocephalus must
confined to the lateral ventricles and may be asymmetric. Sec-
be managed separately. Treatment involves medical, surgical,
ondary parenchymal changes may be observed. Frequently.
or combined therapies. Affected animals usually are in one of
the periventricular white matter is hyperintense compared
the following three categories: [l) mild to severe static signs,
  s       
(2) acute with rapidly progressive signs [in an animal that was
ventricular white matter are more conspicuous on T2W fluid
previously normal or previously static tearing of parenchyma
attenuated inversion recovery sequences and likely represent
may be associated with sudden decline in neurologic status or
interstitial edema. Although less sensitive in discrimination of
may exhibit a chronicity of several days237), and (3) chronic
 Jo siso a  pasn aq ose e  'sns o
 progressive deterioration.
cephalus. In young animals or those with persistent fontanelles,
Animals with mild signs that are static may not require
US using a persistent fontanelle as an acoustic window can be
treatment. Animals with severe static or acute progressive
used in the diagnosis of hydrocephalus.256,257 The main ben-
 signs indicate a poor prognosis and the need for intensive
 paau a inoim aad aq ueo in ie si s jo iya
treatment aimed at reducing CSF production and vaso-
sedation or general anesthesia, thereby allowing examination
genic or interstitial edema. Unfortunately, animals with
of very young animals with little to no morbidity. However, US
severe static signs are unlikely to improve. Initial therapy is
lacks the sensitivity in discriminating a primary or concurrent
directed at medical treatment. Hyperosmolar fluids (man-
disease process. Following US examination, MRI or CT should
nitol or HTS) can be given to reduce CSF production and
 be performed in affected animals before pursuing therapeutic
vasogenic edema in severely affected animals. Furosemide
interventions, especially surgical treatments. Radiography
of
[(0.7 mg/kg intravenously given 15 minutes after comple-
the head can confrm persistent suture lines and fontanelles.
tion of the mannitol infusion) may be administered to pro-
In congenital hydrocephalus, thinning of the calvaria with loss
long the effect of mannitol. Hyperosmolar fluids can be
 of the normal digitate impressions of the cerebral gyri on the
repeated as needed every 4 to 6 hours based on clinical
signs. Before administration of hyperosmolar fluids or furo-
semide, assessment of hydration is necessary. If possible,
these drugs should not be used in dehydrated animals. Cor-
ticosteroids also may be administered at an antinflamma-
tory dosage (prednisone 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg) to reduce CSF
production and interstitial edema. Anticonvulsant drugs
[i.e., phenobarbital] should be used if needed. Animals dis-
playing improvement should be considered for the same
long-term treatment as provided for chronic progressive
cases.
Animals with chronic progressive deterioration of hydro-
cephalus, as indicated by the history and serial neurologic
examinations, may be treated medically or surgically. Although
   san  ss ds  
clinical signs, owners must be made aware that the animal will
not likely be totally normal. Following initial therapy, if the
 neurologic status prevent the animal from functioning as a pet,
 continued treatment should not be considered. Medical treat-
ment as defined above usually is tried first. Clinical improve-
Figure 12-19 Axial T2W image of the brain of a Maltese terrier
dosage of corticosteroids should be reduced by half after 1
at the level of the thalarmus. The lateral ventricles are extremely
week. After another week, corticosteroids are given once every
dilated as is the third ventricle. There is severe loss of the overly-
other day. If signs are stable, medication may be discontinued
ing cerebral cortex. The gyrations of the cerebral cortex are not
and repeated only as signs develop. Many animals stabilize
evident. A cleft is evident in the periventricular white matter
in remission and only occasionally require medication. Oth-
[arrow). (Copyright 2010 University of Georgia Research Foun-
ers require continuous medication. Low-dose, alternate-day
dation, Inc.]
therapy can be used for extended periods without problems.
372
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Acetazolamide, a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, can be used to
during viral infection. Hydranencephaly in kittens has been
reduce CSF production. The dosage is 10 mg/kg orally every 6
reported as a distinct disease entity secondary to in utero
to 8 hours. Acetazolamide should be used short term. Electro-
feline parvovirus infection (feline panleukopenia virus).270
lyte and acid-base status should be monitored. Acetazolamide
However, cerebellar hypoplasia more commonly occurs with
alone or in combination with corticosteroids or other diuret-
this infection. Bluetongue virus, bovine viral diarrhea virus,
ics can cause metabolic acidosis and hypokalemia.26s Alter-
Cache Valley virus, Akabane virus, and others have been
natively, omeprazole [0.7 mg/kg/day or 10 mg/day for dogs
reported to cause hydranencephaly in ruminants.242,271-274
<20 kg or 20 mg/day for dogs >20 kg), H+/K+ pump inhibitor
Cranial Mesodermal Defects. Development of head and
can be used alone or in combination with other medications
facial structures is induced by brain growth.234 Development
to reduce CSF production.266 The objective of medical treat-
of the axial skeleton begins when sclerotomal components
ment is to provide remission of signs with the least possible
 of the mesodermal somites migrate around the neural tube
amount of medication.
 soon after closure has been completed. In the cranial region,
Surgical treatment is reserved for animals that require
only the calvaria are formed by axial mesoderm. Primary axial
medical therapy to maintain clinical remission yet experience
mesodermal defects are a result of abnormal bony mesoder-
side effects that achieve only partial remission with medical
mal development without a persistently open neural tube.235
therapy, or that cannot be stabilized medically. Surgical treat-
Encephaloceles and cranial meningoceles consist of a protru-
ment entails placement of a CSF drainage device (shunt) that
sion of brain or meninges through the calvarial defect. Preg-
sure valve and reservoir to the peritoneal cavity. Such shunts
produce kittens with cranium bifidum and meningoencepha-
are used in humans and can be used in animals. Ultralow pres-
locele of varying severity.275 Cranial malformations in Bur-
sure valves should be used in dogs and cats (Figure 12-20).
mese cats is linked to continuous selection since the 1970s for
The major disadvantages of surgery are the expense and the
a rounded, brachycephalic facial appearance. These selection
postoperative complications. The complications include the
need to replace the tubing as the animal grows, and occlusion
deformities.276 The inheritance pattern is autosomal domi-
of the tubes by fbrous tissue, choroid epithelium, or epen-
nant with incomplete expression.277 The genetic defect causes
 dyma, and infection.267 The shunts can be very effective for
abnormal migration of neural crest cells. Affected kittens have
 long-term control of clinical signs. 268
varying severities of telencephalic meningoencephalocele and
Hydranencephaly/Porencephaly. Hydranencephaly and
hydrocephalus. Heterozygotes also express a range of facial
 porencephaly are congenital cavitary anomalies of the brain
dimensions.
resulting from failure of cell growth or necrosis. In hydran-
Cleft palate is one of the most common gross anatomic
encephaly, loss of the neuroepithelial cells reduces the thick-
 defects in neonatal kittens and can be associated with other
ness of the cerebrum to a thin layer of glial and meningeal
Cranial anomalies.278 Cleft palate alone has been reported as a
cells.234 As a result, CSF flls the defect because the defect
fetal anomaly when queens were dosed with diphenylhydan-
is contiguous with the lateral ventricles but not completely
 toin or griseofulvin
lined by ependyma. In some animals, the defect is limited
Disorders of Forebrain Induction. The cerebral cortical neu-
to a portion of the cerebrum. In severe cases, the cerebral
rons undergo maximal development late in the third trimes-
hemispheres are reduced to fluid-filled sacs. An anatomic
ter and during the frst two weeks of postnatal growth.235
distinction from hydrocephalus is that the head is of normal
Disorders associated with abnormal development of the
prosencephalon are termed holoprosencephaly, arrhinen-
multiple discrete cystic defects in the cerebrum, which may
cephaly, and cyclopia.269 Holoprosencephaly refers to a
or may not communicate with the ventricles or subarach-
single, nondivided cerebrum over the diencephalon. Holo-
noid space.
auu suno e u poar uaaq seu Xieudaouasord
Hydranencephaly and porencephaly often are associ-
schnauzer with abnormal mentation, seizures, and an inabil-
ated with secondary destructive processes that represent
ity to house train.279 The affected dog also had adipsia and
hypoplasia and secondary atrophy in early and later stages
developed hypernatremia. At necropsy, there was absence or
of brain development, respectively.269 In utero viral infec-
reduction in midline forebrain structures (ie., corpus callo-
tions have been implicated as a cause of hydranencephaly
 sum), incomplete separation of paired structures [i.e., lateral
s  e  u 
lesion distribution depends upon the stage of embryogenesis 
gross anatomic findings have been observed on brain MRI
in other dogs with adipsia.280 Arrhinencephaly refers to lack
of development of the olfactory region. Holoprosencephaly
with cyclopia has been reported in lambs when their dams
have been exposed to V. californicum.243 Agenesis of the
 corpus callosum has been reported in domestic animals and
usually is accompanied by other defects. Clinical signs are
referable to the forebrain. Kittens born from a queen exposed
to griseofulvin developed agenesis of the corpus callosum
and cyclopean malformation with anophthalmia and absence
of optic nerves.275
Disorders of Neuronal Migration. Brain malformations can
be caused by abnormalities in neuronal migration. Neuronal
migration begins near the periventricular zone. One hypoth-
esis is that during migration, neuroblasts establish synaptic
Figure 12-20 Lateral radiograph of a Chihuahua with congenital
contacts and organize into layers from the ventricle to the
hydrocephalus obtained postoperatively after ventriculoperito-
pial surface of the cortex. Simultaneously, apoptosis and glial
neal [VP) shunt placement is visualized entering the cranial cavity
cell proliferation and differentiation occur. Cerebral cortical
and coursing subcutaneously to the abdominal cavity. [Copyright
migrational abnormalities can be grouped into three catego-
2010 University of Georgia Research Foundation, Inc.]
ries: lissencephaly/pachygyria [lack or partial lack of gyri and
CHAPTER 12 
2Stupor or Coma
373
sulci), polymicrogyria [extensive folds of cerebral cortex),
barbiturates, tranquilizers, narcotics, or avermectins may pro-
and heterotopia (disorganized gray matter in inappropriate
places).28l
have been given deliberately or may have been ingested acci-
 Lissencephaly (agyria and pachygyria) are reflected by
dentally. Occasionally, barbiturate intoxication has occurred
gross abnormalities of the cerebral cortical surface and by
after ingestion of a carcass of an animal euthanized by barbi-
microscopic thickening of the cortical laminae/layers. Agyria
turate overdose. A comparison of the signs of coma caused by
implies absence of gyri whereas pachygyria implies reduced
drugs with those of coma caused by structural changes in the
numbers of broadened gyri. The lesions are caused by arrest
brain is provided in Table 12-l. Spinal reflexes and respira-
neuroblast migration. Lissencephaly with microencephaly has
tions are depressed more severely by sedative drugs than by
been reported in ruminants, cats, and several dog breeds (Lhasa
most structural lesions, whereas pupillary responses are less
apso, Irish setter, wire fox terrier, Samoyed).269 Affected ani-
affected.
mals manifest abnormal behavior and seizures. Lissencephaly
Most animals that are toxic from CNS depressants can be
 can be identifed with MR1.282
 saved with proper management. If the animal is not in a coma,
 Polymicrogyria is a disorder of cerebrocortical develop-
attentive nursing is usually all that is necessary. Gastric lavage
ment resulting in increased numbers of small, disorganized
and activated charcoal are useful if the drug was recently
 ingested. Maintenance of adequate respiration is the most
has been reported in standard poodles and cattle. 283.284 Clini-
 important consideration for an animal in a coma. Mechanical
cal signs refect the area of cerebrocortical involvement but
ventilation may be necessary for animals hypoventilating in a
 often manifest with blindness with normal PLRs and pupil
coma.
 size and seizures.
 Diuresis is promoted by the intravenous administration
Other anomalies of the brain may cause alterations in
of glucose or mannitol. Urine output must be monitored
mental status. Some are so grossly abnormal that they are not
through an indwelling urethral catheter. The excretion
1of
usually compatible with life. Others are more typically charac-
many agents (e.g., barbiturates) is dependent on the rate of
terized by seizures and are discussed in Chapter 13.
urine formation. Hydration and acid-base balance must be
Toxic Disorders. A large number of toxic agents may
maintained. Periodic evaluation of serum electrolytes and
produce stupor and coma, especially in the terminal stages
blood gases is of great benefit in the management of persis-
[see Chapter 15). An overdose of certain drugs, including
tent coma.
CASE STUDIES
CASE STUDY 12-1
HEATH
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Reffex
2 year old male castrated Labrador retriever
Normal in all four limbs
- History
Cranial nerve examination
 The owner witnessed the dog being hit by a car. Immedi-
Decreased palpebral OS when stimulated at the medial can-
ately after the accident, the dog was recumbent and non-
 thus of the eye; normal palpebral reflex when stimulated at
responsive. After 10 minutes, the dog became somewhat
the lateral canthus of the eye; mydriasis OS; absent normal
responsive but remained obtunded. The dog was taken
 nystagmus OS; present OD
directly to an emergency clinic.
 Normal menace response OU
Light directed OS, PLR absent OS; consensual present OD
. Physical Examination
 Light directed OD, PLR present OD; consensual absent OS
 The dog's heart rate and respiratory rate were high. Mucous
membrane color was pale and the CRT was less than
Sensory evaluation
Z seconds. Auscultation of the chest cavity was normal. The
Normal
abdomen was nonpainful. There were no obvious fractures
or luxations involving the appendicular skeleton. There
I Laboratory Examination
were mild skin abrasions on the left side of the dog's face.
 PCV = 48%, TS = 7.2 g/dL; electrolytes were normal.
 Chest and abdominal radiographs were normal.
· Neurologic Examination
Mentation
 Assessment
The dog was responsive but obtunded.
The dog's abnormal mentation suggests an intracranial
lesion. The dog's gait and postural reaction defcits sug-
Gait
gest a lesion at or caudal to the midbrain; postural reaction
With support the dog was ambulatory with a relatively nor
deficits would suggest a right-sided lesion. However, such
mal gait.
 abnormalities also may occur with acute lesion involy-
ing the forebrain; if related to a forebrain lesion, deficits
Postural reactions
would be contralateral to the lesion and therefore suggest
 Abnormal in the right TL and PLs
a left-sided lesion. The decreased palpebral reflex and a
Continued
374
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 12-1
HEATH-
cont'd
normal menace response were consistent with CN V dys-
once the dog has become systemically stable. If the dog's
function; specifically the ophthalmic branch. Mydriasis
neurologic condition does not improve once cardiovascular
and abnormal PLR OS with a normal menace response
support has been provided or declines in the face of such
is consistent with CN Ill dysfunction. Finally, the findings
 support, intravenous mannitol or hypertonic saline should
of an abnormal palpebral reflex OS, an absence of normal
be administered for the treatment of increased intracranial
nystagmus OS with normal nystagmus present OD, and no
pressure.
other signs of vestibular dysfunction are consistent with a
 In the present case, the dog received 90 mL/kg of crystal-
lesion affecting CN IIl, IV, VI, and the ophthalmic branch
 loid fluids intravenously over the first 30 minutes. The dog's
ofCn V.
mentation improved. Once stabilized, CT was performed,
Utimately there are several possible neuroanatomic
which revealed a large extradural hematoma at the level of
localizations that can be made in this case.
the thalamus on the left (see Figure 12-4). Additionally, a
(1)A single lesion ventral to the forebrain at the level of
left-sided fracture of the calvaria was evident that extended
the orbital fissure
from the parietal bone at the level of the zygomatic arch
(2) Multifocal disease, affecting several areas of the brain-
 rostrally to the orbital fssure. The mentation, gait, and pos-
stem to account for the multiple cranial nerves affected
tural reaction defcits were thought to relate to the hema-
Given the dog's history, the only disorder to consider in
toma directly or through secondary compression of the
 this case is traumatic brain injury.
midbrain. The CN deficits were thought to be related to the
fracture through the orbital fssure. The following day a left-
 Treatment
sided rostrotentorial craniectomy was performed to remove
Treatment should initially be directed at stabilizing the
 the hematoma. Recovery from surgery was uneventful. The
dog's systemic condition. Assessment of ventilation, oxygen-
 dog made steady improvement postoperatively. Four weeks
ation, and the cardiovascular system should be performed.
after the trauma, the dog was normal except for persistent
The dog should be treated for systemic shock if indicated.
cranial deficits involving CNs II, IV, VI, and the ophthalmic
Repeated neurologic examination should be conducted
branch of CN V OS.
CASE STUDY 12-2
SCOTTY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
· Laboratory Examination
A 3-year-old male castrated DSH cat
The complete blood cell count (CBC) revealed a mild
neutrophilic leukocytosis. Chemistry profle and urinalysis
- History
[UA) were normal.
The owner reported an acute onset of abnormal mentation.
The cat experienced generalized seizures. Since the onset of
 Assessment
abnormal mentation, the cat has been circling to the right.
Neuroanatomic localization is consistent with a right-sided
Two days before the onset of neurologic signs, the owner
forebrain lesion. Acute disorders that result in asymmetric
reported that the cat had been excessively sneezing. The cat
 neurologic deficits should be considered in this case. The pri-
has access to the outdoors. No other medical problems were
mary differential diagnoses include vascular, trauma, inflam-
reported. The cat is current on vaccinations.
matory, and neoplastic diseases. For vascular disorders, the
acute onset of forebrain signs in conjunction with a history of
. Physical Examination
sneezing and hypothermia is consistent with feline ischemic
Normal except for a rectal temperature of 99° F
encephalopathy secondary to cuterebra larval migration.
Although there is no history of trauma, the cat does have
· Neurologic Examination
access to the outdoors and could have sustained a traumatic
Mentation
brain injury Despite the lack of systemic signs of illness or
Obtunded
inflammation, inflammatory [primarily infectious etiologies
in cats) disease should be considered. Although the cat is
Gait
young and has an acute history, neoplasia is a remote possi-
Normal; circling to the right
bility Lymphoma occurs in young cats and is often associated
with acute onset of signs. The asymmetric deficits exclude
Postural reactions
degenerative, metabolic, and toxic disorders from consider-
Abnormal in the left TL and PLs
 ation. The acute onset of signs excludes anomalous disorders.
MRI disclosed a lesion affecting the right caudate
Reflexes
nucleus and adjacent white matter, right olfactory/frontal
 All normal
and parietal cerebral cortex. The MRI characteristics were
consistent with ischemic infarction. CSF analysis revealed a
Cranial nerve examination
neutrophilic pleocytosis.
Absent menace response OS; normal pupil size and PLR OU,
The cat was treated with corticosteroids with the inten-
 decreasedresponse to stimulation (hypalgesia) of the left nares
tion of reducing vasogenic edema secondary to the infarction
and the inflammatory response noted in the CSF analysis.
Sensory evaluation
Approximately 3 weeks after the onset of neurologic signs,
 Normal except for the nasal hypalgesia
the cat was normal.
CHAPTER 12
 Stupor or Coma
375
CASE STUDY 12-3
MAX
)veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
 Assessment
 9-year-old male castrated golden retriever
The abnormal mentation suggests an intracranial lesion. The
 normal gait with presence of normal postural reactions sug-
.History
gest that the lesion is affecting the forebrain. The absent
The owner reports a chronic progressive change in behavior
a  ss e m s s ssi s
over the course of 6 weeks. Initially the dog seemed lethar-
right forebrain. Consequently, the neuroanatomic diagnosis
gic. Over time, the dog began to wander aimlessly in the
is consistent with a right-sided forebrain lesion.
house. He seemed to be sleeping more than normal. In the
The dog's history is consistent with a chronic progressive
last week, the dog had stopped responding to its name being
disorder. Given the dog's age, breed, neuroanatomic local-
called. Additionally, the dog has experienced two general-
ization, neoplasia [primary or secondary [metastatic]] is the
ized seizures in the last Z weeks.
most likely differential diagnosis. The lack of systemic signs
of illness and the lack oflaboratory examination abnormali-
. Physical Examination
ties reduces the likelihood of secondary [metastatic) dis-
Normal
ease. Inflammatory disease (infectious and noninfectious)
should also be considered. The lack of systemic signs of
· Neurologic Examination
illness and the focal nature of the neurologic deficits make 
Mentation
these etiologies of lesser priority. The asymmetry in the
Obtunded
neurologic examination excludes degenerative, metabolic,
and toxic disorders. Although trauma and vascular disorders
Gait
are associated with asymmetric neurologic deficits, the lack
Normal
of history and chronicity exclude these etiologies, respec-
tively.
Postural reactions
MRI was performed. A large, extraaxial lesion was
Normal in all four limbs
observed in the right olfactory/frontal lobe of the cerebrum
with vasogenic edema affecting the white matter of the
Reffexes
internal capsule. The lesion has MRI characteristics consis-
Normal in all four limbs
d sm r n  au im u
formed and the mass removed. Microscopic evaluation of
Cranial nerves
the mass was consistent with meningioma. The dog's neu-
Absent menace OS; normal pupil size and PLR, OS
rologic signs resolved; however, he continued to have inter-
mittent seizures, which were controlled with anticonvulsant
Sensory
medication.
Normal
: Laboratory Examination
The CBC, chemistry profle, urinalysis [UA) were normal.
Chest radiographs were normal.
CASE STUDY 12-4
LEAH
veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
· Physical Examination
8-year-old Female spayed English bulldog
Normal with the exception of mild muscle wasting of the
epaxial, temporal, and appendicular musculature.
History
 Six weeks before presentation, the owner noted an acute
: Neurologic Examination
onset of lethargy. The dog was evaluated by the referring vet-
Mentation
erinarian. No physical or neurologic abnormalities were noted.
Dul/obtunded
Laboratory examinations, CBC, and chemistry profle were
normal. The following day a CT of the head was performed.
Gait
No lesions were identified. CSF analysis revealed a mild
Normal: Tendency to circle to the right but not consistently
increase in protein content with normal WBC. The dog was
started on prednisone therapy (0.5mg/kg orally per day). The
Postural reactions
dog remained lethargic for approximately 4 weeks, after which
Normal in all four limbs
time the owner noted a 2-week progressive worsening of the
lethargy, intermittent circling to the right, and a recent onset
Reflexes
of aggressive behavior [i.e., the dog would growl when petted).
TL, normal; PL, normal
Continued
376
PARTIIT
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 12-4
LEAH-
cont'd
Cranial nerve examination
phosphatase enzyme induction, and reduced urine specific
All normal
mary liver disorder should be considered. Specialized liver
Sensory
function tests such as preprandial and postprandial bile acid
Normal
concentrations and a fasting serum ammonia level would be
: Laboratory Examination
focal forebrain lesions that should be considered are neopla-
CBC revealed a mild neutrophilic leukocytosis and mild
sia and inflammatory disorders. Anomalous, traumatic, and
lymphopenia.
vascular causes are excluded based on age, lack of history.
Chemistry profle was normal except for increased SAP
and the chronic progressive nature, respectively.
(548 U/L; normal = 10-119 U/L)
 MRI of the brain was performed and disclosed hydro-
cephalus involving both lateral ventricles and the third
normal.
ventricle. A contrast enhancing mass lesion consistent with
Chest radiographs were normal
neoplasia was identified within the third ventricle. The
mass lesion extended into and obstructed the mesence-
 Assessment
phalic aqueduct, which resulted in an obstructive hydro-
 As in case 12C, the abnormal mentation suggests an intracra-
cephalus. Clinical signs were thought to reflect increased
 nial lesion. The normal gait and postural reactions suggest a
 intracranial pressure secondary to obstructive hydrocepha-
neuroanatomic diagnosis of a forebrain lesion. Without evi-
lus. Consequently, a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt was
 dence of asymmetry a diffuse forebrain disease should be
placed into the left lateral ventricle of the cerebrum in an
suspected. However, a focal structural disease also needs to
effort to relieve intracranial pressure [see Figure 12-17].
be considered. Therefore a list of differentials should include
The dog experienced an acute and dramatic improvement
diseases that affect the forebrain diffusely and focal lesions.
in her neurologic deficits after surgery. As is relatively
Although the initial onset of clinical signs was acute, chronic
common, the dog had several recurrences of clinical signs
progressive disorders should be the primary consideration at
related to malfunction of the VP shunt [obstruction of the
this time. Diffuse disorders that affect the forebrain include
shunt), which necessitated repeated surgeries to repair the
degenerative, metabolic diseases, and some intoxications
 device. Additionally, the dog underwent radiation therapy
[(i.e., lead toxicity, ethylene glycol). Degenerative disorders
for the mass lesion in the third ventricle. Despite the ini-
[i.e., storage diseases] typically occur in younger animals.
tial complications with the VP shunt, the dog did well fol-
The laboratory data are consistent with exogenous cortico-
lowing radiation therapy. The long-term prognosis remains
steroid administration (i.e., stress leukogram, Serum alkaline
unknown.
REFERENCES
11. Streeter EM, Rozanski EA, Laforcade-Buress AD,
et al: Evaluation of vehicular trauma in dogs: 239
1. Cartlidge NEF: States of altered consciousness. In Swash
cases [January-December 200l), J Am Vet Med Assoc
M, Kennard C, editors: Scientific basis of clinical neurol-
235:405-408, 2009.
ogy, Edinburgh, 1985, Churchill Livingstone.
12. Feary DJ, Magdesian KG, Aleman MA, et al: Traumatic
2. deLahunta A, Glass E: Diencephalon. Veterinary neu-
   -6a] s5  s   1
roanatomy and clinical neurology, ed 3, St Louis, 2009,
Med Assoc 231:259-266, 2007.
Saunders Elsevier.
13
 Greve MW, Zink BJ: Pathophysiology of traumatic brain
3.5
 Shute CC, Lewis PR: The ascending cholinergic reticu-
injury, Mount Sinai J Med 76:97-104, 2009.
lar system: neocortical, olfactory and subcortical projec-
 14. Helmy A, Vizcaychipi M, Gupta AK: Traumatic brain
tions, Brain 90:497-520, 1967.
injury: intensive care management, Br J Anaesth 99:32-
4. Hendricks JC, Morrison AR: Normal and abnormal sleep
42, 2007.
in mammals, J Am Vet Med Assoc 178:121-126, 1981.
15. Syring RS, Otto CM, Drobatz KJ: Hyperglycemia in
5.
Siegel JM, Tomaszewski KS, Nienhuis R: Behavioral
dogs and cats with head trauma: 122 cases (1997-1999),.
states in the chronic medullary and midpontine cat,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1124-1129, 2001.
Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 63:274-288,
16. Shapiro HM: Intracranial hypertension: therapeutic and
1986.
anesthetic considerations, Anesthesiology 43:445-471,
6. Kaitin KI, KilduffTS, Dement WC: Evidence for exces-
1975.
sive sleepiness in canine narcoleptics, Electroencepha-
17. Hopkins AL: Head trauma, Vet Clin North Am Small
logr Clin Neurophysiol 64:447-454, 1986.
Anim Pract 26:875-891, 1996.
7. Milhorat TH: Cerebrospinal fluid and the brain edemas,
18. Knapp JM: Hyperosmolar therapy in the treatment of
ed New York, 1987, Neuroscience Society of New York.
severe head injury in children: mannitol and hypertonic
8. Kornegay JN, Oliver JE Jr, Gorgacz EJ: Clinicopatho-
saline, AACN Clin Issues: Advanced Pract Acute Crit
logic features of brain herniation in animals, J Am Vet
Care 16:199-211, 2005.
Med Assoc 182:1111-1116, 1983.
19. Rangel-CastillaL,GopinathS,RobertsonCS:Management
9. deLahunta A, Glass E: Lower motor neuron: general
of intracranial hypertension, Neurol Clin 26:521-541,
visceral efferent system. Veterinary neuroanatomy and
2008.
clinical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
20. Bullock R: Mannitol and other diuretics in severe neu-
10. Kolata RJ, Kraut NH, Johnston DE: Patterns of trauma
rotrauma, New Horiz 3:448-452, 1995.
in urban dogs and cats: a study of 1,0o0 cases, J Am Vet
21. .
 Jandrey KE: Using mannitol to treat traumatic brain
Med Assoc 164:499-502, 1974.
injuries, Vet Med 94:717-721, 724-725, 1999.
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
377
22. Roberts PA, Pollay M, Engles C, et al: Effect on intra-
44. Garosi L, McConnell JE, Platt SR, et al: Results of diag-
cranial pressure of furosemide combined with varying
nostic investigations and long-term outcome of 33 dogs
 doses and administration rates of mannitol, J Neurosurg
with brain infarction (2000-2004), J Vet Intern Med
66:440-446, 1987.
19:725-731, 2005.
23. Wilkinson HA, Rosenfeld SR: Furosemide and manni-
45. Detweiler DK, Ratcliffe HL, Luginbuhl H: The signifi-
tol in the treatment of acute experimental intracranial
cance ofnaturally occurring coronary and cerebral arterial
hypertension, Neurosurgery 12:405-410, 1983.
disease in animals, Ann N Y Acad Sci 149:868-881, 1968.
24. Proulx J, Dhupa N: Severe brain injury Part IL.Therapy.
46. Patterson JS, Rusley MS, Zachary JF: Neurologic mani-
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 20:993-1006, 1998.
festations of cerebrovascular atherosclerosis associated
25. MacKay RJ: Brain injury after head trauma: pathophysi-
with primary hypothyroidism in a dog, J Am Vet Med
ology, diagnosis, and treatment, Vet Clin North Am
Assoc 186:499-503, 1985.
Equine Pract 20:199-216, 2004.
47. Vitale CL, Olby NJ: Neurologic dysfunction in hypo-
26.B
Rayner SG: Traumatic cerebral partial lobotomy in a
thyroid, hyperlipidemic Labrador retrievers, J Vet Intern 
thoroughbred stallion, Aust Vet J 83:674-677, 2005.
Med 21:1316-1322, 2007.
27.5
Shores A: Craniocerebral trauma. In Kirk RW, editor:
48. Axlund TW, Isaacs AM, Holland M, et al: Fibrocartilagi-
Current veterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB
nous embolic encephalomyelopathy of the brainstem
Saunders.
and midcervical spinal cord in a dog, J Vet Intern Med
28. Platt SR, Radaell ST, McDonnell J: The prognos-
18:765-767, 2004.
tic value of the modified Glasgow coma scale in head
49. Cook LB, Coates JR, Dewey CW, et al: Vascular enceph-
trauma in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:581-584, 2001.
alopathy associated with bacterial endocarditis in four
29.B
 Fankhauser R, Luginbuhl H, MeGrath JT': Cerebrovascu-
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:252-258, 2005.
lar disease in various animal species, Ann N Y Acad Sci
50. Patton CS, Garner FM: Cerebral infarction caused by
127:817-860, 1965.
heartworms (Diroflaria immitis) in a dog, J Am Vet Med
30. Waters DJ, Hayden DW, Walter PA: Intracranial lesions
Assoc 156:600-605, 1970.
in dogs with hemangiosarcoma, J Vet Intern Med 3:222-
51. Segedy AK, Hayden DW: Cerebral vascular accident
230.1989
caused by Dirofiaria immitis in a dog, J Am Anim Hosp
31. Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA, et al: Secondary
Assoc 14:752-756, 1978.
 s 1    1 
52.
 Bradley WG Jr: MR appearance of hemorrhage in the
JVet Intern Med 22:172-177, 2008.
brain, Radiology 189:15-26, 1993.
32. Braund KG, Brewer BD, Mayhew IG: Inflammatory.
53. Glass EN, Cornetta AM, deLahunta A, et al: Clinical and
infectious, immune, parasitic, and vascular diseases. In
clinicopathologic features in 1l cats with Cuterebra lar-
Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary
vae myiasis of the central nervous system, J Vet Intern
neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, Saunders.
Med 12:365-368, 1998.
33. Rutgers C, Kowalski J, Cole CR, et al: Severe Rocky
54. Williams KJ, Summers BA, deLahunta A: Cerebrospinal
Mountain spotted fever in five dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
cuterebriasis in cats and its association with feline isch-
Assoc 21:361-369, 1985.
emic encephalopathy, Vet Pathol 35:330-343, 1998.
34. Denk D, Matiasek K, Just FT, et al: Disseminated angio-
55. Tieber LM, Axlund T'W, Simpson ST, et al: Survival of a
strongylosis with fatal cerebral haemorrhages in two
 suspected case of central nervous system cuterebrosis in
dogs in Germany: a clinical case study, Vet Parasitol
 a dog: clinical and magnetic resonance imaging findings,
160:100-108, 2009.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42:238-242, 2006.
35. Garosi LS, Platt SR, McConnell JF, et al: Intracranial haem-
 56. Cantile C, Campani D, Menicagli M, et al: Pathological
orrhage associated with Angiostrongylus vasorum infection
and immunohistochemical studies of choroid plexus car-
in three dogs, J Small Anim Pract 46:93-99, 2005.
cinoma of the dog, J Comp Pathol 126:183-193, 2002.
36. Wessmann A, Lu D, Lamb CR, et al: Brain and spinal
57. Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, Chauvet AE: Magnetic resonance
cord haemorrhages associated with Angiostrongylus vaso-
 imaging ofa choroid plexus carcinoma and meningeal car-
rum infection in four dogs, Vet Rec 158:858-863, 2006.
cinomatosis in a dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:246-250,
37.B
 Putsche JC, Kohn B: Primary immune-mediated throm-
1999.
bocytopenia in 30 dogs [1997-2003), J Am Anim Hosp
58. Patnaik AK, Erlandson RA, Lieberman PH, et al: Cho-
Assoc 44:250-257, 2008.
roid plexus carcinoma with meningeal carcinomatosis in
38. Dunn KJ, Nicholls PK, Dunn JK, et al: Intracranial haem-
a dog, Vet Pathol 17:381-385, 1980.
orrhage in a Doberman puppy with von Willebrand's
59. Westworth DR, Dickinson PJ, Vernau W, et al: Choroid
disease, Vet Rec 136:635-636, 1995.
plexus tumors in 56 dogs [1985-2007], J Vet Intern Med
39. Joseph RJ, Greenlee PG, Carrillo JM, et al: Canine cere-
22:1157-1165, 2008.
brovascular disease: clinical and pathological fndings in
60. Zaki FA, Nafe LA: Choroid plexus tumors in the dog,
17 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:569-576, 1988.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:328-330, 1980.
40. Thomas WB, Adams WH, MeGavin MD, et al: Magnetic
61. Fenner WR: Metastatic neoplasms of the central nervous
     
system, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 5:253-261,
rhage secondary to cerebral vascular malformation in a
1990.
dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:371-375, 1997.
62. Vandevelde M: Brain tumors in domestic animals. In Pro-
41. Tidwell AS, Mahony OM, Moore RP, et al: Computed
 ceedings of a conference on brain tumors in man and
tomography of an acute hemorrhagic cerebral infarct in
animals: an overview, Research Triangle Park, NC, 1984.
a dog, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 35:290-296, 1994.
63.
 Zaki FA: Spontaneous central nervous system tumors in
42. Rovira A, Grive E, Alvarez-Sabin J: Distribution territo-
the dog, Vet Clin North Am 7:153-163, 1977.
ries and causative mechanisms of ischemic stroke, Eur
64. Zaki FA, Hurvitz Al: Spontaneous neoplasms of the
Radiol 15:416-426, 2005.
central nervous system of the cat, J Small Anim Pract
43. Garosi L, McConnell JF, Platt SR, et al: Clinical and top-
17:773-782, 1976.
ographic magnetic resonance characteristics of suspected
65. Troxel MT, Vite CH, Winkle TJ, et al: Feline intracranial
brain infarction in 40 dogs, J Vet Intern Med 20:311-
neoplasia:retrospective review of 160 cases [1985-2001],
321,2006.
J Vet Intern Med 17:850-859, 2003.
378
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
66. Snyder JM, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Canine intra-
87. Bailey CS, Higgins RJ: Characteristics of cisternal cere-
brospinal fluid associated with primary brain tumors
Intern Med 20:669-675, 2006.
in the dog: a retrospective study, J Am Vet Med Assoc
67.5
 Summers BA, Cummings JF, DeLahunta A: Tumors of
188:414-417, 1986.
the central nervous system. Veterinary neuropathology.
88. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Kass PH, et al: Characteristics
St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
of cisternal cerebrospinal fluid associated with intracra-
68. McDonnell JJ, Kalbko K, Keating JH, et al: Multiple
nial meningiomas in dogs: 56 cases [1985-2004], J Am
meningiomas in three dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Vet Med Assoc 228:564-567, 2006.
43:201-208, 2007.
89. Turrel JM, Fike JR, LeCouteur RA, et al: Radiotherapy
69. Alves A, Prada J, Almeida JM, et al: Primary and second-
of brain tumors in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:82-86,
ary tumours occurring simultaneously in the brain of a
1984.
dog, J Small Anim Pract 47:607-610, 2006.
90. Klopp LS, Simpson ST, Sorjonen DA, et al: Ventral sur-
70. Stacy BA, Stevenson TL, Lipsitz D, et al: Simultaneously
 gical approach to the caudal brain stem in dogs, Vet Surg
 occurring oligodendroglioma and meningioma in a dog.
29:533-542, 2000.
J Vet Intern Med 17:357-359, 2003.
91. Glass EN, Kapatkin A, Vite C, et al: A modifed bilateral
71. Sturges BK, Dickinson PJ, Bollen AW, et al: Magnetic
 transfrontal sinus approach to the canine frontal lobe
resonance imaging and histological classification of
and olfactory bulb: surgical technique and five cases,
intracranial meningiomas in 112 dogs, J Vet Intern Med
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 36:43-50, 2000.
22:586-595, 2008.
92. Oliver JE: Jr: Surgical approach to the canine brain, Am
72. Sessums K, Mariani C: Intracranial meningioma in dogs
J Vet Res 29:353-378, 1968.
and cats: a comparative review, Compend Contin Educ
93. Axlund TW, McGlasson ML, Smith AN: Surgery alone
Vet Pract 31:330-339, 2009.
or in combination with radiation therapy for treatment
73. Adamo PF, Forrest L, Dubielzig R: Canine and feline
of intracranial meningiomas in dogs: 3l cases [1989-
meningiomas: diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis, Com-
2002), J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1597-1600, 2002.
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 26:951-965, 2004.
94. Kostolich M, Dulisch ML: A surgical approach to the
74. Bagley RS, Gavin PR, Moore MP, et al: Clinical signs asso-
 canine olfactory bulb for meningioma removal, Vet Surg
ciated with brain tumors in dogs: 97 cases [1992-1997],
16:273-277, 1987.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:818-819, 1999.
 95. Niebauer GW, Dayrell-Hart BL, Speciale J: Evaluation
75. Heidner GL, Kornegay JN, Page RL, et al: Analysis of
of craniotomy in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
survival in a retrospective study of 86 dogs with brain
198:89-95, 1991.
tumors, JVet Intern Med 5:219-226, 1991.
96. Greco JJ, Aiken SA, Berg JM, et al: Evaluation of intra-
76. LeCouteur RA: Current concepts in the diagnosis and
cranial meningioma resection with a surgical aspirator
treatment of brain tumours in dogs and cats, J Small
in dogs: 17 cases [1996-2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc
Anim Pract 40:411-416, 1999.
229:394-400, 2006.
77.（
Gavin PR, Fike JR, Hoopes PJ: Central nervous system
97. Gallagher JG, Penninck D, Boudrieau RJ, et al: Ultra-
tumors, Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 10:180-189,
sonography of the brain and vertebral canal in dogs
1995.
and cats: 15 cases (1988-1993), J Am Vet Med Assoc
78. Braund KG: Neoplasia of the nervous system, Compend
207:1320-1324, 1995.
Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:717-722, 1984.
98. Klopp LS, Rao S: Endoscopic-assisted intracranial tumor
79. Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Vernau KM, et al: Granu-
removal in dogs and cats: long-term outcome of 39 cases,
lar cell tumor of the canine central nervous system: two
J Vet Intern Med 23:108-115, 2009.
cases, Vet Pathol 38:620-627, 2001.
99. Klopp LS, Ridgway M: Use of an endoscope in mini-
80. Palmer AC, Malinowski W, Barnett KC: Clinical signs
mally invasive lesion biopsy and removal within the skull
including papilloedema associated with brain tumours
and cranial vault in two dogs and one cat, J Am Vet Med
in twenty-one dogs, J Small Anim Pract 15:359-386,
Assoc 234:1573-1577, 2009.
1974.
100. Gordon LE, Thacher C, Matthiesen DT, et al: Results of
81. Foster ES, Carrillo JM, Patnaik AK: Clinical signs of
craniotomy for the treatment of cerebral meningioma in 
tumors affecting the rostral cerebrum in 43 dogs, J Vet 
42 cats, Vet Surg 23:94-100, 1994.
Intern Med 2:71-74, 1988.
101. Gallagher JG, Berg J, Knowles KE, et al: Prognosis after
82. Davidson MG, Nasisse MP, Breitschwerdt EB, et al:
surgical excision ofcerebral meningiomas in cats: 17 cases
Acute blindness associated with intracranial tumors in
(1986-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:1437-1440,
dogs and cats: eight cases [1984-1989), J Am Vet Med
1993.
Assoc 199:755-758, 1991.
102. Theon AP, Lecouteur RA, Carr EA, et al: Influence of
83. Coates JR, Dewey CW: Cervical spinal hyperesthesia as
tumor cell proliferation and sex-hormone receptors on
a clinical sign of intracranial disease, Compend Contin
effectiveness of radiation therapy for dogs with incom-
Educ Pract Vet 20:1025-1037, 1998.
pletely resected meningiomas, J Am Vet Med Assoc
84. Smith MO, Turrel JM, Bailey CS, et al: Neurologic
216:701-707, 2000.
abnormalities as the predominant signs of neopla-
103. Platt SR, Scase TJ, Adams V, et al: Vascular endothelial
 a  P       
 growth factor expression in canine intracranial menin-
[1973-1986], J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:242-245,
giomas and association with patient survival, J Vet Intern
1989.
Med 20:663-668, 2006.
85. Koblik PD, LeCouteur RA, Higgins RJ, et al: CT-guided
104. Brearley MJ, Jeffery ND, Phillips SM, et al: Hypofrac-
brain biopsy using a modified Pelorus Mark IlI stereotac-
tionated radiation therapy of brain masses in dogs: a ret-
tic system: experience with 50 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultra-
rospective analysis of survival of 83 cases [1991-1996], J
sound 40:434-440, 1999.
Vet Intern Med 13:408-412, 1999.
86. Koblik PD, LeCouteur RA, Higgins RJ, et al: Modifica-
105. Lester NV, Hopkins AL, Bova FJ, et al: Radiosur-
tion and application of a Pelorus Mark IIl stereotactic
 rg ss ee ers e ssn Aras
system for CT-guided brain biopsy in 50 dogs, Vet Radiol
diation of brain tumors in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Utrasound 40:424-433, 1999.
219(1550):1562-1567, 2001.
CHAPTER 12 
Stupor or Coma
379
106. Bley CR, Sumova A, Roos M, et al: Irradiation of brain
127. Kipperman BS, Feldman EC, Dybdal NO, et al: Pituitary
tumors in dogs with neurologic disease, J Vet Intern Med
tumor size, neurologic signs, and relation to endocrine
19:849-854, 2005.
107. Evans SM, Dayrell-Hart B, Powlis W, et al: Radiation ther-
nocorticism: 43 cases [1980-1990), J Am Vet Med Assoc
apy of canine brain masses, J Vet Intern Med 7:216-219,
201:762-767, 1992.
1993.
128. Moore SA, O'Brien DP: Canine pituitary macrotumors
108. Spugnini EP, Thrall DE, Price GS, et al: Primary irradia-
Compend Contin Edue Vet Pract 30:33-37, 2008:40.
tion of canine intracranial masses, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
129. Capen CC, Martin SL, Koestner A: Neoplasms in the
41:377-380, 2000.
adenohypophysis of dogs. A clinical and pathologic
109. Thrall DE, Larue SM, Powers BE, et al: Use of whole
study, J Am Vet Med Assoc 4:301-325, 1967.
ass ie on p e se era o
130. Ferguson DC, Biery DN: Diabetes insipidus and hyper-
tumours uniformly: a phase Ill trial in canine brain
adrenocorticism associated with high plasma adrenocor-
masses, Int J Hyperthermia 15:383-398, 1999.
ticotropin concentration and a hypothalamic/pituitary
110. Tamura S, Tamura Y, Ohoka A, et al: A canine case of
mass in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:835-839,
skull base meningioma treated with hydroxyurea, J Vet
1988.
Med Sci 69:1313-1315, 2007.
131. Goossens MM, Rijnberk A, Mol JA, et al: Central diabetes
111. F
Fulton LM, Steinberg HS: Preliminary study of lomus-
insipidus in a dog with a pro-opiomelanocortin-producing
tine in the treatment of intracranial masses in dogs fol-
pituitary tumor not causing hyperadrenocorticism, J Vet
lowing localization by imaging techniques, Semin Vet
Intern Med 9:361-365, 1995.
Med Surg [Small Anim) 5:241-245, 1990.
132. Goossens MM: Diabetes insipidus in a dog with an alpha
112. Jung DI, Kim HJ, Park C, et al; Long-term chemotherapy
MSH-producing pituitary tumor, Vet Q 16 suppl 1, 61s,
with lomustine of intracranial meningioma occurring in
1994.
a miniature schnauzer, J Vet Med Sci 68:383-386, 2006.
133. van Keulen LJ, Wesdorp JL, Kooistra HS: Diabetes mel-
113. Noonan M, Kline KL, Meleo K: Lymphoma of the cen-
litus in a dog with a growth hormone-producing aci-
tral nervous system: a retrospective study of 18 cats,
dophilic adenoma of the adenohypophysis, Vet Pathol
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 19:497-504, 1997.
33:451-453, 1996
114. McDonough SP, Van Winkle TJ, Valentine BA, et al:
134. Harb MF, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, et al: Central dia-
Clinicopathological and immunophenotypical features
betes insipidus in dogs: 20 cases [1986-1995), J Am Vet
of canine intravascular lymphoma [malignant angioen-
Med Assoc 209:1884-1888, 1996.
dotheliomatosis), J Comp Pathol 126:277-288, 2002
135. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine hyperadrenocorti-
115. Rosin A: Neurologic diseases associated with lymphosar-
 cism. Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction,
coma in ten dogs, JAm Vet Med Assoc 181:50-53, 1982.
ed 3, St Louis, 2004, Saunders.
 116. Britt JO Jr, Simpson JG, Howard EB: Malignant lym-
136. Nelson RW, Ihle SL, Feldman EC: Pituitary macroad-
phoma of the meninges in two dogs, J Comp Pathol
enomas and macroadenocarcinomas in dogs treated with
94:45-53, 1984.
mitotane for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism:
117. Kent M, Delahunta A, Tidwell AS: MR imaging fndings
13 cases [1981-1986), J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1612-
in a dog with intravascular lymphoma in the brain, Vet
1617, 1989.
Radiol Ultrasound 42:504-510, 2001.
137.
 Peterson ME: Diagnosis ofhyperadrenocorticism in dogs.
118. van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Voorhout G, Meij BP: Imaging
Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 22:2-11, 2007.
of the pituitary gland in dogs with pituitary-dependent
138. Starkey SR, Tan K, Church DB: Investigation of serum
hyperadrenocorticism, Mol Cell Endocrinol 197:81-87,
IGF-1 levels amongst diabetic and non-diabetic cats,
2002.
J Feline Med Surg 6:149-155, 2004.
119. Kippenes H, Gavin PR, Kraft SL, et al: Mensuration of the
139. Norman EJ, Mooney CT: Diagnosis and management of
normal pituitary gland from magnetic resonance images
diabetes mellitus in five cats with somatotrophic abnor-
in 96 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:130-133, 2001.
malities, J Feline Med Surg 2:183-190, 2000.
120. Theon AP, Feldman EC: Megavoltage iradiation of pitu-
 140. Peterson ME: Acromegaly in cats: are we only diagnosing
itary macrotumors in dogs with neurologic signs, J Am
the tip of the iceberg?, J Vet Intern Med 21:889-891,
Vet Med Assoc 213:225-231, 1998.
2007.
121. Kent MS, Bommarito D, Feldman E, et al: Survival, neu-
141. Bertoy EH, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: Magnetic
rologic response, and prognostic factors in dogs with
resonance imaging of the brain in dogs with recently
pituitary masses treated with radiation therapy and
diagnosed but untreated pituitary-dependent hyperad-
untreated dogs, J Vet Intern Med 21:1027-1033, 2007.
renocorticism, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:651-656, 1995.
122. Elliott DA, Feldman EC, Koblik PD, et al: Prevalence of
142. Duesberg CA, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: Mag-
pituitary tumors among diabetic cats with insulin resis-
netic resonance imaging for diagnosis of pituitary mac-
tance, J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1765-1768, 2000.
rotumors in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:657-662,
123. Hurty CA, Flatland B: Feline acromegaly:a review of the
1995.
syndrome, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 41:292-297, 2005.
143. Teshima T, Hara Y, Masuda H, et al: Relationship
124. Peterson ME, Taylor RS, Greco DS, et al: Acromegaly in
14 cats, J Vet Intern Med 4:192-201, 1990.
the pituitary posterior lobe on Tl-weighted MR images
125.S
 Sarfaty D, Carrillo JM, Peterson ME: Neurologic, endo-
in dogs, J Vet Med Sci 70:693-699, 2008.
crinologic, and pathologic findings associated with large
144. Tyson R, Graham JP, Bermingham E, et al: Dynamic
pituitary tumors in dogs: eight cases (1976-1984), J Am
computed tomography of the normal feline hypophy-
Vet Med Assoc 193:854-856, 1988.
sis cerebri (Glandula pituitaria), Vet Radiol Ultrasound
126. Wood FD, Pollard RE, Uerling MR, et al: Diagnostic imag-
46:33-38, 2005.
ing findings and endocrine test results in dogs with pitu-
145. Van der Vlugt-Meijer RH, Meij BP, Voorhout G:
itary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism that did or did not
Dynamic helical computed tomography of the pituitary
have neurologic abnormalities: 157 cases [1989-2005),
gland in healthy dogs, Vet Radiol Utrasound 48:1 18-124,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:1081-1085, 2007.
2007.
380
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
146. Goossens MM, Feldman EC, Theon AP, et al: Efficacy of
165. Hardy WDJ, Brodey RS, Riser WH: Osteosarcomas of
cobalt 60 radiotherapy in dogs with pituitary-dependent
the canine skull, J Am Vet Radiol Soc 8:5-16, 1967.
hyperadrenocorticism, J Am Vet MedAssoc 212:374-376,
166. Dernell WS, Straw RC, Cooper MF, et al: Multilobu-
1998.
lar osteochondrosarcoma in 39 dogs: 1979-1993, J Am
147. Dow SW, LeCouteur RA, Rosychuk RAW, et al:
Anim Hosp Assoc 34:11-18, 1998.
Response of dogs with functional pituitary macroadeno-
167. Gallegos J, Schwarz T, McAnulty JF: Massive midline
mas and macrocarcinomas to radiation, J Small Anim
 occipitotemporal resection of the skull for treatment of
Pract 31:287-294, 1990.
multilobular osteochondrosarcoma in two dogs, J Am
148. Mauldin GN, Burk RL: The use of diagnostic comput-
Vet Med Assoc 233:752-757, 2008.
pue suues u Aderaui uoneper pue Auderaouon pazie
168. Hathcock JT, Newton JC: Computed tomographic char-
feline hyperadrenocorticism, Probl Vet Med 2:557-564,
acteristics of multilobular tumor of bone involving the
1990.
cranium in 7 dogs and zygomatic arch in 2 dogs, Vet
149. Brearley MJ, Polton GA, Littler RM, et al: Coarse frac-
Radiol Ultrasound 41:214-217, 2000.
tionated radiation therapy for pituitary tumours in cats:
169. Lipsitz D, Levitski RE, Berry WL: Magnetic resonance
a retrospective study of 12 cases, Vet Comp Oncol
imaging features of multilobular osteochondrosarcoma
4:209-217, 2006.
in 3 dogs, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 42:14-19, 2001.
150. Dunning MD, Lowrie CS, Bexfeld NH, et al: Exogenous 
170. Bordelon JT, Rochat MC: Use of a titanium mesh for
insulin treatment after hypofractionated radiotherapy in
cranioplasty following radical rostrotentorial craniec-
cats with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly, J Vet Intern
tomy to remove an ossifying fibroma in a dog, J Am Vet
Med 23:243-249, 2009.
Med Assoc 231:1692-1695, 2007.
151. Kaser-Hotz B, Rohrer CR, Stankeova S, et al: Radiother-
171. Bryant KJ, Steinberg H, McAnulty JF: Cranioplasty by
apy of pituitary tumours in five cats, J Small Anim Pract
means of molded polymethylmethacrylate prosthetic
43:303-307, 2002
reconstruction after radical excision of neoplasms of the
152. Morrison SA, Randolph J, Lothrop CD Jr: Hyperso-
skull in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 223(59):67-72,
matotropism and insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus in a
2003.
cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:91-94, 1989.
172. Moissonnier P, Devauchelle P, Delisle F: Cranioplasty
153. Abraham LA, Helmond SE, Mitten RW, et al: Treat-
after en bloc resection of calvarial chondroma rodens in
ment of an acromegalic cat with the dopamine agonist
two dogs, J Small Anim Pract 38:358-363, 1997.
L-deprenyl, Aust Vet J 80:479-483, 2002.
173. Straw RC, LeCouteur RA, Powers BE, et al: Multilobular
154. Axlund TW, Behrend EN, Sorjonen DC, et al: Canine
osteochondrosarcoma of the canine skull: 16 cases [1978-
hypophysectomy using a ventral paramedian approach,
1988), J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1764-1769, 1989.
Vet Surg 34:179-189, 2005.
174. Kornegay JN, Mayhew IG: Metabolic, toxic, and
155. Meij BP, Voorhout G, van den Ingh TS, et al: Trans-
nutritional diseases of the nervous system. In Oliver
sphenoidal hypophysectomy in beagle dogs: evaluation
JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurol-
of a microsurgical technique, Vet Surg 26:295-309,
ogy, Philadelphia, 1987, Saunders.
1997.
175.
 Schall WD: Heat stroke. In Kirk RW, ed: Current vet-
 156. Niebauer GW, Eigenmann JE, Van Winkle TJ: Study of
erinary therapy Vll, Philadelphia, 1980, Saunders, pp.
long-term survival after transsphenoidal hypophysec-
202-205.
tomy in clinically normal dogs, Am J Vet Res 51:677-
176. Schmidt-Nielsen K, Bretz WL, Taylor CR: Panting in
681, 1990.
dogs: unidirectional air flow over evaporative surfaces,
157. Meij BP, Voorhout G, Van Den Ingh TS, et al: Transs-
Science 169:1102-1104, 1970.
phenoidal hypophysectomy for treatment of pituitary-
177.
 Mehta AC, Baker RN: Persistent neurological deficits in
dependent hyperadrenocorticism in 7 cats, Vet Surg
heat stroke, Neurology 20:336-340, 1970.
30:72-86, 2001.
178. Krum SH, Osborne CA: Heatstroke in the dog: a poly-
158. Hanson JM, van't HM, Voorhout G, et al: Effcacy of
systemic disorder, J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:531-535,
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy in treatment of dogs
1977.
with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, J Vet 
179. Heffner GG, Rozanski EA, Beal MW, et al: Evaluation of
Intern Med 19:687-694, 2005.
freshwater submersion in small animals: 28 cases [1996-
159. Hanson JM, Teske E, Voorhout G, et al: Prognostic fac-
2006), J Am Vet Med Assoc 232:244-248, 2008.
tors for outcome after transsphenoidal hypophysectomy
180. Beal MW, Paglia DT, Griffin GM, et al: Ventilatory fail-
in dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism,
ure, ventilator management, and outcome in dogs with
J Neurosurg 107:830-840, 2007.
cervical spinal disorders: 14 cases [1991-1999), JAm Vet
160. Abrams-Ogg AC, Holmberg DL, Stewart WA, et al:
Med Assoc 218:1598-1602, 2001.
Acromegaly in a cat: diagnosis by magnetic resonance
181. Kube S, Owen T, Hanson S: Severe respiratory compro-
imaging and treatment by cryohypophysectomy, Can
 mise secondary to cervical disk herniation in two dogs.
Vet J 34:682-685, 1993.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:513-517, 2003.
161. Blois SL, Holmberg DL: Cryohypophysectomy used
182. Drobatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke expo-
 in the treatment of a case of feline acromegaly, J Small
sure in dogs: 27 cases [1988-1997], J Am Vet Med Assoc
Anim Pract 49:596-600, 2008.
215:1306-1311, 1999.
162.1
Dickerson ME, Page RL, LaDue TA, et al: Retrospective
183. Drobatz KJ, Walker LM, Hendricks JC: Smoke expo-
analysis of axial skeleton osteosarcoma in 22 large-breed
sure in cats: 22 cases [1986-1997], J Am Vet Med Assoc
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:120-124, 2001.
215:1312-1316, 1999.
163. Hammer AS: Prognostic factors in dogs with osteosarco-
184. Rodkey FL, O'Neal JD, Collison HA, et al: Relative
mas ofthe flat or irregular bones, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
affinity of hemoglobin S and hemoglobin A for carbon
31:321-326, 1995.
monoxide and oxygen, Clin Chem 20:83-84, 1974.
 164. Heyman SJ, Diefenderfer DL, Goldschmidt MH, et al:
185. Roughton F, Darling F: The effect of carbon monoxide
Canine axial skeletal osteosarcoma. A retrospective study
on oxy-hemoglobin dissociation curve, Am J Physiol
of116 cases [1986 to 1989), Vet Surg 21:304-310, 1992.
141:17-31, 1944.
CHAPTER 12
Stupor or Coma
381
186. Fitzgerald KT, Flood AA: Smoke inhalation, Clin Tech
207. Gregory CR, Matthews KG, Aronson LR, et al: Central
Small Anim Pract 21[4): 205-214, 2006.
nervous system disorders after renal transplantation in
187.B
Farrow CS: Smoke inhalation in the dog: current con-
cats, Vet Surg 26:386-392, 1997.
cepts of pathophysiology and management, Vet Med
208. Mathews KG, Gregory CR: Renal transplants in cats: 66
Small Anim Clin 70(4): 404-414, 1975.
cases [1987-1996), JAm Vet Med Assoc 211:1432-1436,
188. Jackson CB, Drobatz K: Neurologic dysfunction associ-
1997.
ated with smoke exposure in dogs, J Vet Emerg Crit Care
 209. Ortega TM, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: Systemic
12:193, 2004.
arterial blood pressure and urine protein/creatinine ratio
189. Mariani CL: Full recovery following delayed neurologic
in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, J Am Vet Med Assoc 
signs after smoke inhalation in a dog, J Vet Emerg Crit
209:1724-1729, 1996.
Care 13:235-239, 2003.
210. Uchino M, Haga D, Nomoto J, et al: Ocular lesions 
190. Lapresle J, Fardeau M: The central nervous system and
associated with systemic hypertension in cats: 69 cases
carbon monoxide poisoning. IIl. Anatomical study of
[1985-1998), J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:695-702,
brain lesions following intoxication with carbon monox-
2000.
ide [22 cases), Prog Brain Res 24:31-74, 1967.
211. Bartges JW, Willis AM, Polzin DJ: Hypertension and
191.(
Ginsberg MD, Myers RE, MeDonagh BF: Experimen-
renal disease, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
tal carbon monoxide encephalopathy in the primate. II.
26:1331-1345, 1996.
Clinical aspects, neuropathology, and physiologic corre-
212. Turner JL, Brogdon JD, Lees GE, et al: Idiopathic hyper-
lation, Arch Neurol 30:209-216, 1974.
192.
Vaala WE: Peripartum asphyxia, Vet Clin North Am
associated with a high-salt diet, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Equine Pract 10:187-218, 1994.
26:647-651, 1990.
193. Palmer AC, Leadon DP, Rossdale PD, et al: Intracranial
 213. Stiles J, Polzin DJ, Bistner SI: The prevalence of reti-
haemorrhage in pre-viable, premature and full term
nopathy in cats with systemic hypertension and chronic
foals, Equine Vet j 16:383-389, 1984.
renal failure or hyperthyroidism, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 194. Palmer AC, Rossdale PD: Neuropathological changes 
30:564-572, 1994.
associated with the neonatal maladjustment syndrome
in the thoroughbred foal, Res Vet Sci 20:267-275,
and medical findings, J AmAnim Hosp Assoc 22:615-621,
1976.
1986.
195. Brown SA, Langford K, Tarver S: Effects of certain vaso-
215. Sansom J, Dunn KA, Smith KC, et al: Ocular disease
active agents on the long-term pattern of blood pres-
associated with hypertension in 16 cats, J Small Anim 
sure, heart rate, and motor activity in cats, Am J Vet Res
Pract 35:604-611, 1994.
58:647-652, 1997.
216. Henik RA, Stepien RL, Bortnowski HB: Spectrum of
196. Mishina M, Watanabe T, Fuji K, et al: Non-invasive
M-mode echocardiographic abnormalities in 75 cats
 blood pressure measurements in cats: clinical signif-
with systemic hypertension, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
cance ofhypertension associated with chronic renal fail-
40:359-363, 2004.
ure, J Vet Med Sci 60:805-808, 1998.
217. Brown CA, Munday JS, Mathur S, et al: Hypertensive
197. Brown S, Adkins R, BagleyA, etal:Guidelines for theiden-
encephalopathy in cats with reduced renal function, Vet
tification, evaluation, and management of systemic hyper-
Pathol 42:642-649, 2005.
tension in dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med 21:542-558,
218. Jacob F, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, et al: Association
2007.
between initial systolic blood pressure and risk of devel-
198. Bodey AR, Michell AR: Epidemiological study of blood
oping a uremic crisis or of dying in dogs with chronic
pressure in domestic dogs, J Small Anim Pract 37:116-
renal failure, J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:322-329, 2003.
125, 1996.
 219. Hinchey J, Chaves C, Appignani B, et al: A reversible
199. Chalifoux A, Dallaire A, Blais D, et al: Evaluation of the
posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome, N Engl J Med
arterial blood pressure of dogs by two noninvasive meth-
334:494-500, 1996.
ods, Can J Comp Med 49:419-423, 1985.
- S  a 'r   e ' n o
200.S
Sparkes AH, Caney SM, King MC, et al: Inter- and intra-
ment in hypertensive encephalopathy: a report of two
individual variation in Doppler ultrasonic indirect blood
cases and literature review, Eur Neurol 57: 223-226,
pressure measurements in healthy cats, J Vet Intern Med
2007.
13:314-318, 1999.
221. Johansson BB: The blood-brain barrier and cerebral
201. Belew AM, Bartlett T, Brown SA. : Evaluation of the
blood flow in acute hypertension, Acta Med Scand
white-coat effect in cats, J Vet Intern Med 13:134-142,
Suppl 678:107-112, 1983.
1999.
222.
 Bartynski WS: Posterior reversible encephalopathy syn-
202. Bodey AR, Sansom J: Epidemiological study of blood
drome, Part l: fundamental imaging and clinical features,
pressure in domestic cats, J Small Anim Pract 39:567-
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 29:1036-1042, 2008.
573.1998
223. Acierno MJ, Labato MA: Hypertension in renal disease:
203. Elliott J, Syme HM, Rawlings JM, et al: Feline hypertension:
diagnosis and treatment, Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
clinical findings and response to antihypertensive treatment
20:23-30, 2005.
in 30 cases, J Small Anim Pract 42:122-129, 2001.
224. O'Brien DP, Barshop BA, Faunt KK, et al: Malonic acid-
204. Kobayashi DL, Peterson ME, Graves TK, et al: Hyperten-
uria in Maltese dogs: normal methylmalonic acid con-
sion in cats with chronic renal failure or hyperthyroid-
centrations and malonyl-CoA decarboxylase activity in
ism, J Vet Intern Med 4:58-62, 1990.
fbroblasts, J Inherit Metab Dis 22:883-890, 1999.
205. 1
Littman MP: Spontaneous systemic hypertension in
225. Ruaux CG, Steiner JM, Williams DA: Metabolism of
24 cats, J Vet Intern Med 8:79-86, 1994.
amino acids in cats with severe cobalamin deficiency.
 206. Andrew E, Kyles CRG, John D, et al: Management of
Am J Vet Res 62:1852-1858, 2001.
hypertension controls postoperative neurologic disorders
226. Vaden SL, Wood PA, Ledley FD, et al: Cobalamin def-
after renal transplantation in cats, Vet Surg 28:436-441,
ciency associated with methylmalonic acidemia in a cat,
1999.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1101-1103, 1992.
382
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
227. Simpson KW, Fyfe J, Cornetta A, et al: Subnormal con-
247. Higgins RJ, Vandevelde M, Braund KB: Internal hydro-
centrations of serum cobalamin [vitamin Bi2) in cats with
cephalus and associated periventricular encephalitis in
gastrointestinal disease, J Vet Intern Med 15:26-32, 2001.
young dogs, Vet Pathol 14:236-246, 1977.
228.B
Packer RA, Cohn LA, Wohlstadter DR, et al: D-lactic
248. Selby LA, Hayes HM Jr, Becker SV: Epizootiologic fea-
acidosis secondary to exocrine pancreatic insufficiency
tures of canine hydrocephalus, Am J Vet Res 40:411-413,
in a cat, J Vet Intern Med 19:106-110, 2005.
1979.
229. Abramson CJ, Platt SR, Jakobs C, et al: L-2-Hydroxyglu-
249. Sahar A, Hochwald GM, Kay WJ, et al: Spontaneous
 taric aciduria in Staffordshire bull teriers, J Vet Intern 
canine hydrocephalus: cerebrospinal fluid dynamics,
Med 17:551-556, 2003.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 34:308-315, 1971.
230. Penderis J, Calvin J, Abramson C, et al: L-2-hydroxyglu-
250. Wouda W, Vandevelde M, Kihm U: Internal hydro-
taric aciduria: characterisation of the molecular defect in
cephalus of suspected infectious origin in young dogs,
a spontaneous canine model, J Med Genet 44:334-340,
Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 28:481-493, 1981.
2007.
 251. Hoerlein BF: Canine neurology: diagnosis and treatment,
231. Priester WA, Glass AG, Waggoner NS: Congenital
ed 3, Philadelphia, 1978, Saunders.
 defects in domesticated animals: general considerations,
252. Simpson ST: Hydrocephalus. In Kirk RW, editor: Cur-
Am J Vet Res 31:1871-1879, 1970.
rent yeterinary therapy X, Philadelphia, 1989, WB
232. MeLone DG: The biological resolution of malformations
Saunders.
of the central nervous system, Neurosurgery 43:1375-
253. Dodman NH, Knowles KE, Shuster L, et al: Behavioral
1380. 1998
changes associated with suspected complex partial sei-
233. DeSesso JM, Scialli AR, Holson JF: Apparent lability of
zures in bull terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:688-691,
neural tube closure in laboratory animals and humans,
1996.
Am J Med Genet 87:143-162, 1999.
 254. Dewey CW: External hydrocephalus in a dog with sus-
234. Noden DM, deLahunta A: Central nervous system and
pected bacterial meningoencephalitis, J Am Anim Hosp
eye. In Noden DM, deLahunta A, editors: The embry-
Assoc 38:563-567, 2002.
ology of domestic animals: developmental mecha-
255. Dewey CW, Coates JR, Ducote JM, et al: External
nisms and malformations, Baltimore, 1985, Williams &
hydrocephalus in two cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
Willins.
39:567-572, 2003.
235. Noden DM, deLahunta A: Causes of congential mal-
256. Hudson JA, Simpson ST, Buxton DF, et al: Ultrasono-
formations. In Noden DM, deLahunta A, editors: The
graphic diagnosis of canine hydrocephalus, Vet Radiol
embryology of domestic animals: developmental mecha-
31:50-58, 1990.
nisms and malformations, Baltimore, 1985, Wiliams &
257. Rivers WJ, Walter PA: Hydrocephalus in the dog: util-
Wilkins.
ity of ultrasonography as an alternate diagnostic imag-
236. Braund KG: Degenerative and developmental disorders.
ing technique, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28:333-343,
In Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veteri-
1992.
nary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, Saunders.
 258. Esteve-Ratsch B, Kneissl S, Gabler C: Comparative eval-
237. Wunschmann A, Oglesbee M: Periventricular changes
uation of the ventricles in the Yorkshire terrier and the
associated with spontaneous canine hydrocephalus, Vet
German shepherd dog using low-field MRI, Vet Radiol
Pathol 38:67-73, 2001.
Utrasound 42:410-413, 2001.
 238. Dhein CR, Prieur DJ, Riggs MW, et al: Suspected ciliary
259. Haan CE, Kraft SL, Gavin PR, et al: Normal variation in
dysfunction in Chinese Shar-Pei pups with pneumonia,
 size of the lateral ventricles of the Labrador retriever dog
Am J Vet Res 51:439-446, 1990.
 as assessed by magnetic resonance imaging, Vet Radiol
239. Cox NR, Shires A, MeCoy CP, et al: Obstructive hydro-
Utrasound 35:83-86, 1994.
cephalus due to neoplasia in a Rottweiler puppy, J Am
260. Ki S, Uzuka Y, Taura Y, et al: Magnetic resonance imag-
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:335-338, 1990.
ing of the lateral ventricles in beagle-type dogs, Vet
240. van der Lugt J, Prozesky L: The pathology of blind-
Radiol Ultrasound 38:430-433, 1997.
ness in new-born calves caused by hypovitaminosis A,
261.:
 Spaulding KA, Sharp NJH: Ultrasonographic imaging
Onderstepoort J Vet Res 56:99-109, 1989.
of the lateral cerebral ventricles in the dog, Vet Radiol
241. DeBowes RM, Gift L: Common malformations and con-
Utrasound 31:59-64, 1990.
genital abnormalities of the central nervous system. In
262. Vite CH, Insko EK, Schotland HM, et al: Quantification
Robinson NE, editor: Current therapy in equine medi-
of cerebral ventricular volume in English bulldogs, Vet
cine, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders.
Radiol Ultrasound 38:437-443, 1997.
 242. Washburn KE, Streeter RN: Congenital defects of the
263. Vullo T, Korenman E, Manzo RP, et al: Diagnosis of
ruminant nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food
se 
Anim Pract 20:413-434, 2004:vii.
quantitative MR1, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 38:277-281,
243.B
 Binns W, Shupe JL, Keeler RF, et al: Chronologic evalua-
1997.
tion of teratogenicity in sheep fed Veratrum californicum,
264. Jaderlund KH, Hansson K, Berg AL, et al: Cerebral ven-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 147:839-842, 1965.
tricular size in developing normal kittens measured by
244. Rousseaux CG: Congenital defects as a cause of peri-
ultrasonography, Vet Radiol Utrasound 44:581-588,
natal mortality of beef calves, Vet Clin North Am Food
2003.
Anim Pract 10:35-51, 1994
265. Haskins SC, Munger RJ, Helphrey MG, et al: Effect of
245.1
DiBartola SP, Johnson SE, Johnson GC, et al: Hypo-
acetazolamide on blood acid-base and electrolyte values
dlipsic hypernatremia in a dog with defective osmoreg-
in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 179:792-796, 1981.
ulation of antidiuretic hormone, J Am Vet Med Assoc
266. Javaheri S, Corbett WS, Simbartl LA, et al: Different
204:922-925, 1994.
effects of omeprazole and Sch 28080 on canine cerebro-
246. Dow SW, Fettman MJ, LeCouteur RA, et al: Hypodipsic
spinal fluid production, Brain Res 754:321-324, 1997.
hypernatremia and associated myopathy in a hydroce-
267.
 Browd SR, Ragel BT, Gottfried ON, et al: Failure of cere-
phalic cat with transient hypopituitarism, J Am Vet Med
brospinal fluid shunts: part I: obstruction and mechani-
Assoc 191:217-221, 1987.
cal failure, Pediatr Neurol 34:83-92, 2006.
CHAPTER 12
2Stupor or Coma
383
268. Filgueiras Rda R, Martins Cde S, de Almeida RM, et al:
276. Zook BC, Sostaric BR, Draper DJ, et al: Encephalocele
Long-term evaluation of a new ventriculoperitoneal
and other congenital craniofacial anomalies in Burmese
shunt valve system in a dog, J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San
cats, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:695-70l, 1983.
Antonio) 19:623-628, 2009.
277. Noden DM, Evans HE: Inherited homeotic midfacial
 269. Summers BA, Cummings JF, DeLahunta A: Malforma-
malformations in Burmese cats, J Craniofac Genet Dev
tions of the central nervous system. Veterinary neuropa-
Biol Suppl 2:249-266, 1986.
thology, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
278. Lawler DF, Monti KL: Morbidity and mortality in neo-
270.8
 Sharp NJ, Davis BJ, Guy JS, et al: Hydranencephaly and
natal kittens, Am J Vet Res 45:1455-1459, 1984.
cerebellar hypoplasia in two kittens attributed to intra-
279. Sullivan SA, Harmon BG, Purinton PT, et al: Lobar holo-
uterine parvovirus infection, J Comp Pathol 121:39-53,
 prosencephaly in a miniature schnauzer with hypodipsic
1999.
hypernatremia, J Am Vet Med Assoc 223[1778):1783-
271. Osburn Bl, Johnson RT, Silverstein AM, et al: Experi-
1787, 2003.
mental viral-induced congenital encephalopathies. II.
280. Jeffery ND, Watson PJ, Abramson C, et al: Brain malfor-
 The pathogenesis of bluetongue vaccine virus infection
mations associated with primary adipsia identified using
in fetal lambs, Lab Invest 25:206-210, 1971.
magnetic resonance imaging, Vet Rec 152:436-438,
272. Osburn Bl, Silverstein AM, Prendergast RA, et al: Exper-
2003.
imental viral-induced congenital  encephalopathies.
281. Greenfeld JG, Love S, Louis DN, et al: Malformations.
Pathology of hydranencephaly and porencephaly caused
Greenfield's neuropathology, ed 8, London, 2008, Hodder 
by bluetongue vaccine virus, Lab Invest 25:197-205,
Arnold.
1971.
282. Saito M, Sharp NJH, Kortz GD, et al: Magnetic reso-
273. Trautwein G, Hewicker M, Liess B, et al: Studies on
 nance imaging features of lissencephaly in 2 Lhasa Apsos,
 transplacental transmissibility of a bovine virus diarrhoea
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:331-337, 2002.
(BVD) vaccine virus in cattle. Il. Occurrence of central
 283. Jurney C, Haddad J, Crawford N, et al: Polymicrogyria in
nervous system malformations in calves born from vac-
standard poodles, J Vet Intern Med 23:871-874, 2009.
cinated cows, Zentralbl Veterinarmed B 33:260-268,
284. Read DH: Congenital polymicrogyria in Murray Grey
1986.
calves. From Proceedings, Palmerston North, New Zealand
274. Parsonson IM, Della-Porta AB, Snowdon WA, et al: Con-
Veterinary Association, pp. 69-75, 1983.
 genital abnormalities in foetal lambs after inoculation of
285. Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck WB: Clinical and diag-
pregnantewes withAkabanevirus,Aust Vet J51:585-586,
nostic veterinary toxicology, ed 3, Dubuque, Iowa, 1985,
1975:[letter].
Kendall/Hunt.
275. Scott FW, deLahunta A, Schultz RD, et al: Teratogenesis
 in cats associated with griseofulvin therapy, Teratology
11:79-86, 1975.
CHAPTER
13
Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
The term seizure has been broadly defined as a sudden,
and has the same appearance each time, it is likely a seizure.
 transient, abnormal phenomenon of a motor, sensory.
Isolated motor activity such as forced turning of the head or
 autonomic, or psychic nature resulting from a transient
clonic jerks of muscle groups are commonly signs of seizure
dysfunetion of part or all of the brain.! Additionally, a sei-
activity.
zure can be defined as the clinical manifestation of excessive
 Several disorders can be misinterpreted as a seizure. Own-
hypersynchronous neuronal activity.2 Epilepsy is a disorder of
ers frequently confuse syncope or acute signs of vestibular
the brain that is characterized by recurring, unpredictable sei-
dysfunction with seizures. Syncope is a transient loss of con-
zures.? A seizure has several components. The actual seizure
sciousness caused by ischemia of the brain and can be difficult
is called the ictus. The ictus usually lasts for l to 2 minutes,
to differentiate from true seizures. The most common cause of
but variation is considerable. Ictus in animals involves dysfunc-
syncope in animals is cardiac arrhythmia. In many cases, the
tion of one or more of the following: [l] alteration of muscle
history is usually indicative of syncope rather than seizures.
tone or involuntary movement; (2) disturbance of the auto-
nomic nervous system [e.g., salivation, urination, defecation];
exercise. In some instances, syncope may occur during urina-
(3) loss or derangement of consciousness; and (4) automatisms
tion, defecation, or coughing. Knowledge of a prior cardiac
(repetitive movement) or paroxysms of behavior [also known
disease may raise the index of suspicion for syncope. Simi-
     r 
larly, given the prevalence of heart disease commonly associ-
ysms of behavior may be expressed clinically as repetitive,
ated with syncope in certain breeds [i.e., boxer and Doberman
abnormal stereotypic actions or behaviors, respectively, such
pinscher), signalment also may help direct attention to a
as aggression, restlessness or anxiety demonstrated as escap-
thorough cardiac evaluation to help exclude syncope from 
ing behaviors or attention seeking, licking, chewing, and whin-
consideration. Auscultation of the heart combined with evalu-
ing or shaking that demonstrate a response to anticonvulsant
ation of an electrocardiogram, Holter monitor recordings.
therapy.3.4
thoracic radiographic and echocardiographic imaging may dis-
 A prodrome (preictal) period may occur within hours pre-
 close the problem. Similarly, an acute or peracute presentation
ceding ictus during which the animal may display altered
of vestibular dysfunction also can be confused with seizures.
behavior. Animals may hide, appear nervous, or seek out their
Affected animals usually display persistent signs consistent
owners during this time. Also preceding ictus, an aura, ste-
with disturbances of the vestibular system [see Chapter 8).
reotypic motor, behavioral, or autonomic changes occurring
 Narcolepsy is a disorder of the brain that is marked by sud-
seconds to minutes before the ictus, may be observed and sig-
den recurring attacks of sleep. Given its abrupt onset and tran-
nifies the onset of ictus.5 Differentiation between prodrome
sient nature, confusion with a seizure is possible. Narcolepsy is
and aura can be diffcult. After the seizure, postictal period the
discussed at the end of this chapter. Disorders of involuntary
animal may return to normal in seconds to minutes or may be
movement also need to be differentiated from a seizure, in
restless, lethargic, confused or disoriented; display hunger or
particular, those seizures that do not alter consciousness [see
thirst; urinate or defecate; or be blind for minutes to hours.
Chapter 10). Likewise, certain behavioral disorders [e.g., tail
The aura and the postictal phase do not have any relationship
chasing) are associated with stereotypic actions. If possible,
to the severity or the cause of the seizures.5
having an owner record an event on video may allow for
 Most importantly seizures are defined as a “clinical mani-
 proper classification of the event. If the diagnosis of seizure
festation" of an abnormal action or behavior. Seizures are
cannot be made with certainty, a thorough diagnostic workup
identified and classified on observations and interpretations of
aimed at identifying an underlying etiology associated with
behavior and activity displayed by the affected animal. Careful
seizures should be pursued. In cases in which diagnostic test-
questioning ofthe owner is required to determine whether the
ing fails to uncover an underlying cause of seizures, a trial with
episode described is actually a seizure. If the event is repetitive
an anticonvulsant drug may be warranted.
384
CHAPTER 13
Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
385
The generation of a seizure, epileptogenesis, has traditionally
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
been ascribed to a single, isolated group of neurons called a
seizure focus. Epileptogenesis can also occur from hyperex-
Seizures are always a sign of abnormal cerebral or thalamic
citable neurons that are a part of a group of interconnected
function. Epileptic seizures can be dichotomously divided into
and widely spread neurons called neural networks.ll.15 One
those that originate from discharges in a circumscribed part of
such network, the thalamocortical network, is involved in the
the brain (a seizure focus) or those that result from discharges
that appear from the very start to involve both cerebral hemi-
doses of penicillin intramuscularly (IM), behavioral and EEG
spheres, bilaterally and synchronously.6 Once initiated, focal
evidence [slow wave discharges [SWDs]] of seizures develop
discharges may subsequently spread to other parts of the brain
that were thought to originate in the thalamus and subse-
resulting in a generalized cerebral disturbance. The initiation
 quently spread bilaterally to the cerebral cortex in a process
 and propagation of the seizure focus is responsible for the
       
clinical manifestation, which defines the seizure type [see Clas-
challenged by studies in which identical SWDs in the thala-
sification; Box-1). Electroencephalography (EEG) allows obser-
mus could be recorded despite the induction of a seizure focus
vation of the electrical events of the cerebral cortex occurring
in the cerebral cortex.l8 Such experiments have led to the idea
during a seizure or between seizures (interictal). The hallmark
that abnormal activity of any group of neurons within a neural
of a seizure focus is massive depolarization.7 From experimen-
network may be responsible for the development and spread
tal models of seizures, recordings made from microelectrodes
of a seizure (Figure 13-l). The clinical manifestation of the
within neurons in a seizure focus disclose activity characterized
seizure may reflect not only the function but also the distribu-
by large-amplitude, prolonged membrane depolarizations with
tion of the neural network throughout the brain.
associated high-frequency bursts of spikes, termed paroxysmal
Abnormal neuronal activity causing seizures may occur sec-
depolarization shifts.8 Clinically, paroxysmal depolarizations
Inso Aeu io (roun uerq "8a) uoisal feinsnns e oi Arepuo
may result in interictal activity, which clinically can be appreci-
in the absence of structural lesions and simply reflect changes
ated on the EEG9,l0 Interictal EEG activity consists of spike
 in neurotransmitters and their receptors.15 Among many pos-
discharges, spike waves, and spike-and-slow wave complexes.ll
sible neurotransmitters, alterations in glutamate and gamma-
Ictal EEG activity can take on many forms, including those
aminobutyric acid (GABA) are fundamental to the paroxysmal
observed during the interictal period or sleep, or as repeti-
depolarization shifts that initiate seizures,l9 Mechanistically.
tive stereotyped waveforms such as a 3-Hz spike-and-wave
seizures may develop from an imbalance between excitatory
 pattern or paroxysms that alternate between repetitive spike
and inhibitory mechanisms that favor the sudden onset of
discharges and spike-and-slow wave discharges.II In dogs with.
excitation. Glutamate and GABA are the primary excitatory
epilepsy, interictal EEG abnormalities occur in 65% to 86% of
and inhibitory neurotransmitters, respectively. Multiple cellu-
dogs, many of which display focal abnormalities.12-14 Interpre-
lar receptors exist for each agent. There are two main types
tation of EEG recordings requires considerable expertise and
of glutamate receptors, inotropic (iGluR), which function as a
specialized equipment. Although not frequently performed,
calcium ion channels, and metabotropic glutamate (mGluR)
EEG recording may be of value in cases in which it is diffcult
which work via a second messenger system that when activated
to discern the nature of the event as a seizure or help in the
increase sodium and calcium influx resulting in depolariza-
assessment of anticonvulsant therapy in severely affected ani-
mals. Recent technology has improved to allow for telemetry
tors, GABAA and GABAg receptors. Once activated, GABAA
 recording so animal restraint may not be necessary.
receptors, directly linked to an ion channel, allow the influx
IL
Hgure 13-1 Spread of seizure activity from a focal area to the entire cerebrum. A, paroxysmal
depolarization shift in a neuron. B, Spread of activity to surrounding neurons. C, propagation of
seizure activity to other cortical areas by axonal conduction. D, Generalization of seizure activity
 through the diencephalon. (From Olive JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology.
 Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.]
386
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
of chloride ions, which hyperpolarize neurons while GABAp
or the direct impact of excitatory neurotransmitters on the
receptors work via a second messenger system to increase potas-
myocardium.43
 sium conductance and decrease calcium conductance, which
aptic inhibition. Excessive activation of glutamate receptors or
CLASSIFICATION
defective inhibition of GABAA and GABAg receptors plays fun-
damental roles in the pathogenesis of epilepsy.24 In dogs with
The classification of seizures involves both etiology and seizure
untreated epilepsy, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations
type [Box 13-1). The following discussion of classification and
of GABA are reduced, whereas CSF concentrations of gluta-
terminology of seizures has been adopted from those used in
mate are increased compared with normal dogs.25.26 Moreover,
humans.44.4s Some of the terminology has been modified so
dogs with low CSF concentrations of GABA have a reduced
seue o pdde Aaeudoidde aru aq ues suan nen
response to anticonvulsant therapy.27 With the advent of novel
anticonvulsant drugs targeting different aspects of neurotrans-
Etiology-Based Classification of Seizures
mission, in the future it may be possible to tailor anticonvulsant
Primary epilepsy is used to describe seizures that have an
therapy based on a knowledge of seizure epileptogenesis.
unknown cause. Additionally, primary epilepsy implies that 
Abnormalities in neurotransmitters also may cause struc-
there is a known or strongly suspected underlying hereditary
tural pathology of the brain. Excessive amounts of glutamate
basis predicated on a high prevalence in a specific breed.
are released during seizures. As a result, seizure-associated
Idiopathic epilepsy is used to describe seizures where an
neuronal damage may occur, termed excitatory neurotoxicity
underlying cause cannot be identifed Idiopathic epilepsy can
in which specifc neuronal populations, such as hippocampal
be used to classify seizures in a wide range of clinical scenarios.
neurons, display a selective vunerability.28 Excessive gluta-
 For example, idiopathic epilepsy may be used akin to primary
mate causes neuronal loss by increasing intracellular calcium
epilepsy in some animals in which the age, neurologic exami-
nation findings are identical to those observed in primary epi-
 neuronal loss occurs even when the initiating seizure focus
 is located distant from the hippocampus. In the majority of
breeding studies, a hereditary basis cannot be established. In
this case, idiopathic epilepsy implies a "disease unto itself' and
and loss of neurons in the same topography as occurs with
not an unknown cause.44 In other cases, an underlying disease
experimentally induced glutamate excitatory neurotoxicity.30
process may be strongly suspected but is not identified through
However, it remains unclear whether neuronal loss represents
dagnostic tests. An example might be a geriatric dog in which
the inciting cause of temporal lobe epilepsy or a perpetuat-
a brain tumor may be suspected yet a lesion is not observed
ing factor once pathology is established.3t Similar neuronal
with cross-sectional imaging. The implication is quite differ-
loss in the hippocampus has been observed in dogs with epi-
ent as an underlying disorder may exist and with time become
evident. Consequently, depending on the signalment, history,
is unknown. In one study of dogs with refractory epilepsy,
and neurologic examination, careful monitoring may reveal
 neuronal loss in the hippocampus was not evident.34 How-
 changes with time that dictate further diagnostic testing.
ever, neuronal necrosis in the hippocampus and piriform lobe
Symptomatic epilepsy is used to describe seizures, in which
occurs in cats.35 Abnormalities secondary to seizures may be
an underlying pathologic or structural disease of the brain
 detected clinically using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
(intracranial) is identified.44
Seizure-related abnormalities observed on MRI consist of
 Reactive seizure is applied when a metabolic or toxic cause
hyperintensities on TZ-weighted images (T2W) in areas simi-
is determined and the brain itself is normal. These seizures
lar to those affected by excitatory neurotoxicity.36 On MRI,
have an extracranial cause and occur as a reaction to the
the lesions have characteristics consistent with edema in a
insult.46 Given that metabolic or toxic insults infrequently
distinctive topography affecting the temporal and piriform
result in unpredictable, recurrent seizures, reactive seizures
lobes of the cerebrum.36 Lesions also may be observed in the
 are not considered a form of epilepsy, per se.
cingulate gyri. The changes typically resolve between 10 to
 The importance of classifying seizures based on etiology is
16 weeks following seizures.36 The lesions likely represent
 that it allows for a more specifc differential diagnosis. Specific
cytotoxic edema.37 Although the lesions are transient based
causes of seizures are described in detailed below and in Tables
 on MRI, degenerative histologic changes in neurons may still
13-l and 13-2.
be present.38 In the end, the significance of reversible T2W
 In addition to an etiology-based classification, seizures can
hyperintensities in animals is unknown.
 also be categorized based on the seizure type or clinical mani-
Seizures also may have systemic effects. Most commonly,
festation as generalized, focal, or focal onset with secondary gen
eralization. Within each category, several clinical presentations
exist [see Box 13-1].
cardiogenic pulmonary edema affecting the caudodorsal
lung fields has been observed in association with seizures.40
Generalized Seizures
Rarely, hemoptysis may occur.4l Although the pathogenesis
Generalized seizures are subdivided into tonic-clonic [for-
 of noncardiogenic edema is unknown, it may involve sys-
merly known as grand mal), tonic or clonic alone, myoclonic,
temic hypertension, which causes increased left ventricular
atonic, and absence [formerly known as petit mal). Signs with
afterload, diminished left ventricular outflow and then pul-
 generalized seizures begin bilaterally, often symmetrically, and
involve an alteration in consciousness at some point during
Frequent monitoring of respiratory function should be per-
ictus. The most common generalized seizure is the tonic-clonic
formed. If hypoxemic, affected animals should receive oxy-
seizure. The animal falls and becomes unconscious.4 The tonic
 gen supplementation. In rare instances, mechanical ventilation
phase involves rigid extension of the limbs and opisthotonos
may be necessary. Edema usually does not respond to diuretic
lasting a brief period of time [10 to 30 seconds) during which
therapy. In addition, myocardial infarction also has been asso-
time respirations may stop (apnea). Following the tonic phase,
ciated with seizures in dogs; however, the clinical impact of
the clonic phase involves uncoordinated, purposeless, jerking
this remains unclear.42 Although unknown, myocardial infarc-
movements of the limbs. The clonic phase may alternate with
tion may develop as a result of increased sympathetic tone
tonic activity. Additionally, chewing movements with the lips
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
387
 drawn back are common. Autonomic activity may start in the
animals are unconscious. Although consciousness is difficult
tonic or clonic phase of the ictus and may include mydriasis,
to determine in animals, it is frequently measured in terms of
salivation, urination, defecation, and piloerection. Automa-
responsiveness, attentiveness, or by the presence of disorienta-
tisms such as running or paddling movements of the limbs
tion. The ictus usually lasts l to 2 minutes. The postictal phase
also may occur. During the tonic and clonic activity, most
 may last a variable time period during which the animal may
BOX 13-1
Classification of Seizures Based on Clinical Signs
Etiolog y-Based Classification
Primary or ldiopathic Epilepsy
Dog: age of onset between 1 and 5 years
Related to a disease process in and of itself
Normal PE and NE
Does not infer "cause not identified""
 Normal interictal behavior
Possibly related to imbalance of excitatory and inhibitory
 No abnormalities identified on diagnostic tests
influences on susceptible neuronal population
Defined or suspected genetic or familial
 predisposition
Cats: rare
Horses: Arabian foals (familial juvenile onset)
Catte: Brown Swiss and Swedish Red cattle
Symptomatic Epilepsy (Secondary; acquired)
Intracranial in origin 
Related to an identifiable structural or pathologic lesion 
Reactive Seizures (Extracranial; metabolic/toxic)
 Extracranial in origin related to a metabolic or
A reaction to an extracranial cause
toxic disorder
Seizure Types- Based on Clinical Signs
Generalized:
Bilateral, symmetrical motor movements with autonomic dysfunction, and altered consciousness implicating bilateral cerebral
invovement from the onset of the seizures
Tonic-clonic: Most common presentation of a generalized epileptic seizure
Tonic phase: abrupt fall to lateral recumbency: increased extensor tone in allimbs and opisthotonos (initial phase)
Clonic: purposeless, jerking movements of the limbs (follows tonic phase)
Autonomic signs common (mydriasis, salivation, urination, defecation)
Altered or loss of consciousness: judged based on responsiveness and attentiveness
 Tonic: Uncommon: increased extensor tone and opisthotonos as the sole manifestation
 Clonic: Uncommon: jerking movements of the limbs as the sole manifestation
 Atonic: Loss of tone
 Myoclonic: Uncommon
Spontaneous or in response to stimuli (visual, light, soundl: repetitive contractions of muscles
Most commonly affecting the head, neck, and thoracic limbs
Absence: Rare
Altered or loss of consciousness without motor movements (need EEG recording to identify)
Focal:
Clinical manifestation limited to a focal area of the head or body implicating involvement of a focal region of the cerebral cortex
Qualified based on whether or not consciousness is altered 
Simple: No alterations in consciousness
Complex: Altered or loss of consciousness
Characterized by one or a combination of the following:
Motor disturbance: focal or isolated anatomic part or muscle group (i.e., facial muscles or single limb)
Autonomic disturbance: mydriasis, vomiting, salivation, urination, defecation 
Automatisms/paroxysms of behavior: repetitive, stereotypic movements or behaviors
Licking. chewing. rubbing of the face, head turning. shaking. "fly biting"
 Fear, anxiety, attention seeking, aimless wandering. aggression, whining
Focal seizure with secondary generalization:
Focal seizure during onset suggesting focal area of the brain involved but subsequently evoves to involve bilateral motor distur-
bances implicating bilateral cerebral cortical involvement
 Often considered the aura: by definition, the aura is considered the onset of ictus
Most common presentation of primary epilepsy in dogs
 Requires careful observations to identify partial seizure onset; often missed by owners
388
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 13-1
Causes of Seizures Based on Etiologic Classification
Classification
Frequent Causes
Diagnostic Tests
Reactive seizures
The following apply to all these differentials:
Metabolic (15)
History. PE/NE findings, potential for exposure
Liver or renal disease 
Presence of interictal abnormalities (common)
Eectrolyte (Na, Ca, Mg)
When present, neurologic deficits—symmetric 
Hypoglycemia
Endocrine 
Minimum database (MDB)
Toxic disorders (15)
CBC, chemistry profile, UA
Heavy metals, pesticides
 Based on MDB specialized testing
rodenticides, poisonous plants, drugs,
 Blood ammonia, preprandial and postprandial bile
antifreeze
acids
Disinfectants, methylxanthines 
 Serum cholinesterase activity
llicit drugs, medications 
Blood gas, urine, organic acids
Animal-related poisoning (toad, spiders)
Specific testing to identify a toxin
5-Hydroxytryptophan
 Response to therapy
Tetanus (10)
Nutritional (15)
Thiamine
Symptomatic epilepsy
The following apply to all these differentials:
Degenerative (15)
Signalment, history. PE/NE findings 
Storage diseases (A)
Presence of interictal abnormalities (common)
 Neuronal ceroid lipofucinosis
When present, neurologic deficits—asymmetric
Leukodystrophies
MDB is normal
 Metachromatic leukodystrophy
Cross-sectional imaging (MRl or CT}
 Mitochondrial encephalopathy
CSF analysis
Inborn errors of metabolism
Serology. PCR testing. microbiology—infectious
Spongiform encephalopathy
Organic acid testing of urine—degenerative
 Multiple system neuronal degeneration
Developmental/anomalous (12)
Hydrocephalus 
Lissencephaly
Porencephaly, hydranencephaly
Polymicrogyria
Agenesis of corpus callosum 
Dandy-Walker syndrome
 Chiari-like malformation
Intracranial arachnoid cyst/diverticulum
Inflammatory/lnfectious (15)
 Infectious
 Bacterial: any type
Viral: canine distemper virus (D), FIP (C).
rabies (A)
IBRV (B), viral encephalomyelitis (E).
FIV (C)
Feline panleukopenia (C)
 Protozoal: toxoplasmosis or neosporosis
Mycotic: cryptococcosis, coccidicidomyco-
sis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis
 Rickettsial: RMSF, ehrlichiosis
Noninfectious (D)
Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
Necrotizing encephalitides
Neoplastic (12)
Traumatic (12)
Vascular (12)
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
389
TABLE 13-1
Causes of Seizures Based on Etiologic Classification*cont'd
Classification
Frequent Causes
Diagnostic Tests
Primary or idiopathic
epilepsy
Signalment, history, age of onset, familial incidence
Normal PE/neurologic examination
 Normal interictal behavior 
No abnormalities identified 
Imaging of the brain—normal
CSF analysis—normal
 Genetic testing or pedigree analysis
Modified from Oliver JE Jr: Seizure disorders in companion animals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:77-86, 1980.
CBC,Complete blood cell count; CSF cerebrospinal fuid; CT, computed tomography, FPfeline infectious peritonitis RVinfectiousbovine
rhinotracheitis virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NE, neurologic examination; PCR, polymerase chain
reaction; PE, physical examination; RMSF, Rocky Mountain spotted fever; UA, urinalysis.
[A), all species; (B), bovine (C), cat; (E), equine.
*Numbers in parentheses refer to chapters in which disease classes are discussed.
TABLE 13-2
Common Causes of Seizures Based on Age of Onset
AGEt
 Younger Than 1 Year of Age
Between 1 and 5 Years of Age
 Older Than 5 Years of Age
Degenerative
Primary epilepsy*
Neoplasia*
 Storage diseases (glycogen, lysosomall
 Older age onset degenerative 
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
disorders
 Multiple system degeneration
Metabolic or endocrine
 Metabolic or endocrine
 Mitochondrial encephalopathy
 Electrolyte disorders
 Electrolyte disorders
Inborn error of metabolism 
Hepatic (acquired disease)
Hepatic (acguired disease)
Spongiform encephalopathy
 Renal (acquired disease)
 Renal (acquired disease)
 Metachromic leukodystrophy
 Endocrine hypoglycemia
 Endocrine—hypoglycemia
Developmental/Anomalous*
Inflammatory/noninfectious
 Pancreatic β-islet tumor 
Hydrocephalus
GME, necrotizing encephalitides
 Inflammatory
Lissencephaly
Infectious—any type
Toxic
 Porencephaly, hydranencephaly
Toxic
Trauma
 Polymicrogyria
Trauma
Vascular
 Dandy-Walker syndrome
Vascular
 Chiari-like malformation 
Intracranial arachnoid cyst/diverticulum
Metabolic
Hepatic (congenital portosystemic shunt,
microvascular dysplasia)
Renal (congenital disease)
Hypoglycemia
 Neonatal asphyxia
 Nutritional—thiamine deficiency
Infectious*
Bacterial: any type
Viral: canine distemper virus, FIP, rabies
 Protozoal, parasitic, rickettsial, fungal
Toxic
Trauma
 Modified from Oliver JE Jr: Seizure disorders in companion animals, Commpend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:77-86, 1980.
'Denotes the most common etiologies for the age group.
tPrirmarily relates to dogs but can be used as a guicdeline for other species.
390
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
rest followed by a return to normal activity or may include
hypersalivation, dysphagia, salivary gland enlargement, and
confusion, disorientation, restlessness and pacing, hunger or
esophageal spasms can occur.60.61
thirst, defecation or urination, and blindness, which can persist
Automatisms or paroxysms of abnormal behavior are
for up to 24 hours or longer. Abnormalities that persist longer
than 24 hours may reflect a structural lesion of the central
seconds before ictus, these are considered an aura and by defi-
nervous system (CNS).
nition are part of the ictus regardless of the development of
 In cats, generalized tonic-clonic seizures can be violent.47
other characteristic signs of seizures. However, automatisms
Cats may be propelled into the air or have such violent
and paroxysms of abnormal behavior can be the sole manifes-
movements that they traumatize themselves [contusions,
tation of the seizure activity without involving consciousness
excoriations, avulsion of nails, and biting the tongue). Milder
motor function, or autonomic disturbances. Automatisms or
forms of generalized seizures in cats are characterized by
 paroxysms of abnormal behavior may include a wide array of
mydriasis, facial twitching, and, less frequently, salivation
repetitive activities. These include chewing, licking (into the
and urination.
air or directed at a specific body part), aimless wandering or
Tonic, atonic, or clonic seizures alone occur uncommonly.4
restlessness, attention-seeking behavior or avoidance/escaping
Myoclonic seizures have been observed in the miniature wire
behavior aggression, rage, or biting at imaging objects ['fly bit-
haired dachshund, beagle, and basset hound dogs in associa-
tion with Lafora disease.48-53 Clinical signs involved repeti-
may be having focal sensory seizures in the visual cortex simi-
tive, brief myoclonic jerking of the head, neck, and thoracic
lar to focal sensory seizures that occur in humans; however,
 limbs and are frequently strong enough to cause the animal
sensory disturbances cannot be truly identified in animals.
Similarly, fly biting may be considered a focal seizure involving
clonic jerks may occur spontaneously or in response to stimuli
such as visual (passing a hand in front of the face of the dog).
may represent a form of obsessive-compulsive behavior rather
ight, or sound.48.52 Most affected dogs are between 6 and 9
than a seizure.64
 years of age at onset. Presumptive diagnosis of Lafora disease
 In the bull terrier, behavioral changes such as compulsive
is suggested by the clinical signs; however, definitive diagnosis 
tail chasing, rage, trances, preoccupations, fears, hyperactiy-
requires histologic identification of intracellular accumula-
ity, sound sensitivities, and phobias may be seizure activity.65
tions of polyglucosan (Lafora bodies) in muscle, liver, skin, or
Electroencephalogram abnormalities include multiple epilep-
brain.5l in affected miniature wire-haired dachshunds, a three
tic spikes characterized by high-amplitude, low-frequency dis-
copy repeat within the Epmb2 gene resulting in a decreased
expression of the laforin protein appears to underlie the dis-
 demonstrated on computed tomography (CT) imaging. Clini-
ease.5s Affected dogs respond minimally to anticonvulsant
cal signs develop at 6 to 13 months of age and occasionally in
drugs. Depending on the frequency and severity, affected dogs
older dogs. The syndrome in bull terriers may reflect an inher-
 can maintain a normal quality of life.
ited form of temporal lobe epilepsy.
 Absence seizures are very uncommon in animals and more
Focal seizures occur in cats.47,66,67 They are characterized
likely not easily recognized. They are characterized by a brief
by lack of response to sensory stimuli and often show a trance-
(seconds) loss of contact with the environment and lack motor
like state. Unilateral facial twitching, turning the head to one
activity. Variations in humans include minor motor compo-
side, and repetitive movements of one limb can be observed.
nents such as facial twitching, loss of postural tone, and auto-
Bizarre behavior, such as inappropriate hissing, growling, run-
nomic activity. As in humans, absence seizures are associated
ning blindly into objects, and compulsive behavior, such as
with a characteristic EEG pattern [4-Hz spike-wave com-
self-chewing, biting, and circling, have been observed in asso-
 plexes).56 Unless these attacks are frequent or the owner is
ciation with facial twitching and salivation.
very observant, they go unrecognized.
Focal Seizures With Secondary Generalization
Focal Seizures
Focal seizures with secondary generalization is the most com-
A focal seizure develops in a discrete area of the brain [sei-
mon presentation ofseizures in dogs with primary or idiopathic
 zure focus) that is responsible for producing a particular clini-
epilepsy.3-5 In several studies, focal seizures with secondary
cal sign.57 Focal seizures may or may not be associated with
generalization were observed in 80% to 90% of primary or
alterations in consciousness. Simple focal seizures do not affect
idiopathic epileptic dogs.3-5,46.,68-70 In most instances, the onset
consciousness, whereas complex seizures do.58 In addition to
of ictus is marked by an aura that defines ictus as beginning
consciousness focal seizures are categorized based on the pres-
with a focal seizure onset. Within seconds to minutes, the ictus
ence of motor, autonomic, or automatisms and paroxysms of
e volves to include bilaterally symmetric disturbances in motor
abnormal behavior. Signs may occur alone or in various combi-
movements, autonomic dysfunction, and altered conscious-
nations. Frequently, focal seizures are recognized by motor dis-
ness typical of generalized seizures. Most cases require close
turbances. Movements are restricted to one part of the body.
observation to recognize signs consistent with an aura, which
    a    a  s 
is essential for indentifying focal seizure onset.
seizure onset is one of the key features differentiating focal
sard are sazas ro enog sanzias pazes 
Status Epilepticus (SE) and Cluster Seizures
to arise from a seizure focus near a primary motor area in the
Historically, SE was defined as a condition in which a seizure
frontal cortex on the contralateral side of the observed motor
persists for a sufficient length of time or is repeated frequently
disturbance. Animals with focal motor seizures are more likely
enough to produce a fixed and enduring epileptic condition.
to have localized EEG abnormalities during interictal periods
Current definition in veterinary medicine implies SE is a sei-
than are those with generalized seizures. Focal autonomic
zure that persists for more than 5 minutes or two or more
sequential seizures without a full recovery to consciousness.
autonomic disturbance may occur in conjunction with motor
Cluster seizure (CS) is defined as increased frequency of sei-
movements. Autonomic disturbances may show the classical
zures within a day or few days. Cluster seizure also can be
signs of mydriasis and salivation or involve visceral activity
defined as more than two seizures in a 24-hour period. If sei-
such as diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal discomfort, which
may correlate with lesions of the limbic system.59 Rarely
stop the seizures is needed.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
391
DISEASES
BOX 13-2
 Seizures can be caused by any process that alters normal neu-
Breeds With Idiopathic Epilepsy
ronal function. The differential diagnoses are listed for each
etiologic classification of seizures. The most likely diseases
Genetic Factor Proved or Highly Suspected
within each category should be considered based on signal-
Beagle72
ment, physical and neurological examination findings, and
 Belgian tervuren69.71.74
results of diagnostic tests [see Tables 13-l and 13-2].
 Bernese mountain dog76
Primary and Idiopathic Epilepsy
Border collie78
The gross structure of the brain in animals with primary or
Dachshund13
idiopathic epilepsy has no demonstrable pathologic lesion.
 English springer spaniel80 
The cause may be genetic (primary) or unknown (idiopathic).
 Finnish spitz dog83
The incidence in dogs has been estimated at 1% to 2%.13
German shepherd dog (Alsatian)73
Although primary and idiopathic epilepsy occurs in a num-
Golden retriever82
ber of species, the most comprehensive studies have been
 Irish wolfhound77
those of humans and dogs.3-5,13,46,5368-84 Most importantly.
Keeshond75
to establish a diagnosis, affected animals must have a normal
 Labrador retriever70.
neurologic examination and remain normal during the interic-
 Logotto Romagnolo dog79 
tal period. In addition, other systemic and brain abnormalities
are not detected with diagnostic tests. From a clinical perspec-
 Standard poodles84
tive, idiopathic epilepsy is a diagnosis of exclusion. The breed,
Vizsla81
 Arabian foal88
 ing hereditary basis especially if a familial history of seizures
 Aberdeen Angus cattle90 
exists. The finding of idiopathic seizures without an underly-
 Brown Swiss cattle86
ing cause does not necessarily rule in or out a genetic cause.
 Swedish Red cattle86
Only careful breeding studies or pedigree analysis can prove a
 pattern of inheritance.
High Incidence of Seizure Disorders
The most common seizure type in dogs with primary and
Boxer
idiopathic epilepsy is a focal seizure with secondary general-
 Cocker spaniel
ization-5669,84owever, sme studies, generalized, tni-
Collie 
clonic seizures were the most commonly observed seizure
Irish setter
 Miniature schnauzer
incidence has been recognized in many breeds. Domestic ani-
Saint Bernard
mals and breeds known to have a genetic basis for epilepsy are
Siberian husky
listed in Box 13-2.
 In a dog with primary or idiopathic epilepsy, the frst sei-
Wire fox terrier
70 Early onset of seizures has been described in two Labrador
retriever puppies with seizures at 2 months of age born from
a breeding of two Labrador retrievers with primary epilepsy.85
some affected dogs may present for seizures refractory to anti-
Three puppies of a litter of 10 had seizures beginning at 8 to 9
convulsant drugs without any other abnormalities detectable
weeks of age. Eventually, 5 of 8 surviving pups had seizures. In
 on examination or routine diagnostic testing.89
a large beagle colony, 29 dogs had their first seizure at a mean
A hereditary syndrome characterized by recurrent sei-
 age of 30 months (range, 11 to 70 months).72
zures and the gradual development of cerebellar ataxia
Based on the strict definition of primary epilepsy in which
occurs in purebred and crossbred Aberdeen Angus cattle.
 evidence of a pattern of inheritance must exist, primary epi-
The seizures start in young calves but decline in frequency
lepsy in cats is rare.47,67 However, in 25% of cats presenting for
in those that survive to approximately 15 months of age.
seizures, a cause of seizures is not identifed and therefore may
Most cattle are clinically normal by 2 years of age. Patho-
 be referred to as idiopathic epilepsy.66
logic changes have been found in the Purkinje cells of the
cerebellum.90
and Swedish Red cattle.86
 Primary epilepsy is uncommon in horses.87 Ajuvenile onset
Developmental
primary epilepsy has been reported in Arabian foals.88 The
Disorders related to neuronal migration and some forms
median age of onset was 2 months [range 2 days to 6 months),
of cranial malformations are apt to induce seizures. Brain
 with affected horses spontaneously recovering between 2.5 to
9 months.88
hydrocephalus, Dandy-Walker syndrome, hydranenceph-
aly, lissencephaly, Chiari-like malformation, intracranial
Symptomatic Epilepsy
intraarachnoid cyst, polymicrogyria and agenesis of the cor-
Degenerative
pus callosum.9l Disorders in this group may or may not be
Deficiency in a key enzyme can cause abnormalities in meta-
Aq Asdada seor u pussusp are nq pu
bolic pathways with the accumulation of metabolic byprod-
the presence of demonstrable pathologic changes in the brain.
ucts within the neurons. These conditions are referred to as
Hydrocephalus is the most common developmental disorder
storage diseases. Storage diseases may produce seizures as part
that causes seizures (see Chapter 12; Tables 13-l and 13-2)
of the clinical syndrome [see Chapters 8 and 15). Although
Lissencephaly is a developmental disorder involving a defect
most animals with degenerative disease have an abnormal
 in neuronal migration in which there is an absence of cerebral
neurologic examination or display interictal abnormalities,
gyri and sulci, a thickened cerebral cortex, and an absence of
392
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
osde reseuT u paodau uaaq seu ll eo'za'eneper zuoroo au
Reactive Seizures
dogs, wire fox terriers, and Irish setters, and in one cat.92.93
 In addition to seizures, affected animals may have behavioral
Metabolic
Failure of one of the major organs and a variety of endocrine
abnormalities along with visual and proprioceptive defcits.
MRI characteristic of the brain closely mirror gross necropsy
disorders may produce alterations in the electrolytes or glu-
cose or the accumulation of toxic products, which results in
findings. 94 Hydranencephaly/porencephaly is a malforma-
 seizures [(see Tables 13-1 and 13-2). Hypoglycemic syndromes
tion consisting of fluid-flled cavitations of the cerebrum that
and hepatoencephalopathy are the most common diseases in
usually communicate with the lateral ventricle or the sub-
this category The major metabolic disorders are discussed in
arachnoid space. This condition is usually a consequence of
Chapter 15.
viral infection in utero altering neuronal development and
migration.
Nutritionat
Inflammatory/lnfectious
Seizures may be the terminal manifestation of a number of
Any inflammatory or infectious disease has the potential to
nutritional disorders. The B complex vitamins are most fre-
cause seizures if it affects the brain. The most prevalent dis-
quently incriminated. Thiamine deficiency causes polioen-
eases are listed in Tables 13-l and 13-2. Canine distemper
cephalomalacia in ruminants, which is discussed in Chapter
15. Thiamine deficiency in dogs and cats causes hemorrhage
virus is probably the most common infectious cause of sei-
zures in dogs. Seizures may appear without any noticeable
and necrosis of specifc brainstem nuclei. Antemortem diag-
 clinical illness or may occur long after a clinical illness has
nosis may be established with clinicopathologic testing and
been resolved.
MRI.104
 Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis (GME) and
 Animals that are fed most commercial diets do not develop
the necrotizing encephalitides are a common noninfectious
thiamine deficiencies. Dogs that are fed only cooked meat
 inflammatory cause of seizures in dogs. Pathologic features
develop a variety of neurologic signs including seizures. Early
 consist of a nonsuppurative, necrotizing meningoencephalitis
treatment with thiamine reverses the clinical progression of
with a predilection for the cerebrum in the pug and Maltese
the disease. Thiamine deficiency in cats has been attributed
to fish-based cat foods that contain thiaminase or inappra-
riers, but brainstem signs are more commonly manifested.97
priately prepared foods.los Supplementation with thiamine
Young dogs are predisposed and are usually 6 months of
eliminates the problem. Cats typically have a syndrome that is
characterized by flexion of the head and neck, ataxia, behav-
of generalized or focal seizures. Definitive diagnosis of the
ioral changes, mydriasis, seizures, and eventually coma. Given
the absence of side effects associated with thiamine adminis-
on a histopathologic diagnosis. A nonsuppurative menin-
tration, supplementation should be given in suspected cases.
goencephalomyelitis was reported as a common cause of
A dose of 50 to 100 mg is given intravenously (IV) the first
seizures in cats from Canada.47 The diagnosis of inflamma-
day; thereafter, daily intramuscular injections are given until
tory or infectious CNS disease requires CSF examination,
a response is obtained or another diagnosis is established 106
 CSF serology, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, and
cross-sectional imaging. Inflammatory and infectious CNS
Toxic
diseases are discussed in Chapter 15.
Many toxins affect the CNS and most can cause seizures.
Toxins induce seizures through a number of different mecha-
Neoplastic
nisms: increased excitation, decreased inhibition, and interfer-
 Intracranial neoplasia, either primary or secondary [metastatic
 ence with energy metabolism.107
or extension into the cranial cavity), can cause seizures. The
 The diagnosis usually depends on the history, identification
 seizure activity is caused by an abnormality in neurons adja-
 of the toxic substance from analysis of body tissues, urine, or
cent to the neoplasm that are compressed or distorted or that
 intestinal contents, and the response to treatment.
have an insuffcient blood supply. Seizures may be the frst sign
 Lead toxicity is common in animals.lo8 Other clinical
 of brain tumor.98 A neurologic deficit may not be apparent
signs may include dullness, tremor, and ataxia, which some-
until weeks to months after the onset of seizures, especially if
times are associated with gastrointestinal signs. Seizures
the mass is located in the rostral aspect of the cerebrum.98,99
are often associated with behavioral signs. Peripheral blood
Neoplasia as a cause of seizures is relatively common in dogs
changes may include nucleated erythrocytes (red blood cells
and cats older than 5 years of age, and the incidence increases
[RBCs]] and basophilic stippling of RBCs without anemia or
with mild anemia lo8 Blood lead determination is diagnostic.
seizures should be considered to have a tumor until proved
Calcium ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (CaETA) may be
otherwise. MRI is the diagnostic imaging modality of choice.
Neoplasia is discussed in Chapter 13.
neurologic signs. Succimer [meso 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic
acid) has been used successfully in the treatment oflead tox-
Traumatic
icity in dogs and cats at 10 mg/kg orally every 8 hours for 10
Seizures may be seen immediately after acute traumatic brain
days.110-112
-n red] Anu unau ia jo ansa au se Anu
Strychnine causes a tonic seizure that is exacerbated by
matic brain injury). Posttraumatic seizures may occur weeks
stimulation. The animal remains conscious unless respiration
to several years after a head injury. Posttraumatic seizures may
stops. Strychnine blocks inhibitory interneurons, glycine, in
be focal or generalized, depending on the location of the brain
the spinal cord, causing a release of motor neuron activity.
lesion. An epileptic focus likely develops secondary to a neu-
Organophosphate and chlorinated hydrocarbon insecti-
ronal injury. The pathogenesis is incompletely understood but
cides are common causes of seizures.
 likely represents a change in neurotransmitter concentrations,
Seizures induced by the toxin produced by the Bufo mari-
modulation of neurotransmitter receptors, changes in ion
nus toad have been reported.ll3 Although several species of
channels, and the creation of aberrant neural connections at
Bufo toads exist worldwide, most reports in the United States
the site of the initial injury. l03 Treatment is directed at control-
are from southern Florida, Colorado, Arizona, Texas, and
ling the seizures.
Hawaii. The incidence was highest during warm months of the
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
393
year. In addition to seizures, neurologic signs include stupor
MDB, clinical suspicion, and potential of exposure to toxins.
ataxia, nystagmus, extensor rigidity, and opisthotonos. Hyper-
Information from the MDB yields one of three findings: [1)
 emic oral mucous membranes and ptyalism are common find
a defnitive diagnosis, (2) posible cause of the seizures that
pue spuel3 pnored s peoi au uoy pasealai st urxot auL sau!
 requires further tests to confrm, or (3) no suggestion of the
is readily absorbed through the oral mucosa. Intoxication may
cause.
be fatal. The oral cavity should be lavaged with water. Diaz-
Following exclusion of extracranial causes, diagnostics
 epam is used to control seizures and extensor rigidity. IV fluids
 directed at identifying an intracranial cause of seizures should
and diuretics are given to promote urinary excretion of the
be pursued. Intracranial causes include degenerative diseases,
toxin. Overall mortality is low in animals treated within a few
anomalous or developmental disorders, encephalitis (infec-
hours of intoxication.
tious or noninfectious), neoplasia [primary or secondary brain
 In dogs, 5-hydroxytryptophan toxicosis has been reported
tumors), traumatic injuries, and vascular disorders. Magnetic
 as a cause of seizures.ll4 It is a precursor to serotonin, a com-
resonance imaging is the diagnostic imaging modality of
mon CNS neurotransmitter. The signs in dogs are similar to
choice for evaluation of animals with seizures. In addition to
-e u 'snu  paqsap  aus oras, a
cross-sectional imaging, CSF analysis should be performed.
tion to seizures, neurologic signs include depression, tremors,
 Importantly, CSF analysis should be performed in animals
hyperesthesia, transient blindness, and ataxia. Gastrointesti-
with normal brain structure on imaging studies as meningo-
nal signs include vomiting, diarrhea, ptyalism, and abdominal
encephalitis may be present despite normal imaging. Because
pain. Hyperthermia is also a common finding. Signs develop
 a sa s u  i s
CSF analysis are important in determining the cause of sei-
 dietary supplements containing the agent. Treatment includes
zures in this species. The most common causes of seizures in
decontamination [induction of emesis, gastric lavage, and oral
cats is structural brain disease, such as meningoencephalitis,
administration of activated charcoal), IV fluid therapy, ther-
moregulation, and parenteral administration of anticonvulsant
animals, diagnostic testing for intracranial disease is more
 drugs (diazepam or phenobarbital). The serotonin antagonist
limited based on availability of imaging facilities capable of
cyproheptadine administered at a dose of 1.1 mg/kg admin-
performing MRI or CT; however, CSF analysis may provide
istered orally or rectally every l to 4 hours may be useful as
insight into the seizure etiology.
adjunct therapy.114
 Disorders of toxicity are further discussed in Chapter 15.
 Plan for Management
quently must evaluate an animal without ever observing the
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF
seizure. As a result, the determination of whether or not the
SEIZURES
affected animal has had a seizure is based on the veterinarian's 
 interpretation of an owner's observations. Consequently, the
Regardless of the underlying etiology, most affected animals
nr e apnu isnu pue aare uayen aq isnu Aros
-is unsu zias osa jo ro reus e a
description of the animal's actions (movements, responsive-
 n  u     
ness, behavior, presence of autonomic signs) during the seizure
underlying etiology. Therefore all affected animals should
and seizure frequency, duration, and severity The frst goal is
undergo a similar testing protocol in an attempt to establish
to determine that the animal has had a seizure.
a definitive diagnosis that ultimately impacts on the plan for
Animals that have had only one isolated seizure should
management. Ideally, diagnostics are performed in a specific
undergo a thorough physical and neurologic examination. As
order to first rule out reactive seizures [extracranial causes)
 detailed above, an MDB should be completed for every animal
followed by procedures to rule out symptomatic epilepsy
that has a seizure. However, further diagnostics beyond an MDB
(intracranial causes). Only after excluding extracranial and
may not be performed based on the level of concern felt by
intracranial causes can a diagnosis of primary or idiopathic epi-
the owner and veterinarian. For example, in dogs having had a
lepsy be presumed. Ultimately, the extent to which a complete
single seizure that are between l and 5 years of age, with a nor-
 diagnostic workup is performed will depend on the desire of
mal physical and neurologic examination, and a normal MDB, a
the animal's owner to pursue testing, fnancial constraints,
wait and see approach may be considered given the possibility
clinicopathologic findings, and availability of diagnostic tests.
of primary or idiopathic epilepsy. Despite the low likelihood of
diagnosing a structural brain lesion, MRI should stil be consid-
Diagnostic Evaluation
ered in such cases, if for no other reason than to be definitive in
 In animals with an isolated single seizure, the minimum data-
exclusion of an underlying brain abnormality In dogs younger
base [MDB) should consist of a complete blood count, chem-
than l year or older than 5 years, a complete diagnostic evalua-
istry profle, and urinalysis to rule out extracranial causes, such
tion should be performed even after a single seizure in an effort
as metabolic, toxic, and nutritional disorders. The diagnostic
to identify a definitive etiology. All cats with seizures regardless
workup based on etiologic classification of seizures is pre-
of number, frequency, severity, or duration should undergo diag-
sented in Box 13-3. Based on results of the MDB, specialized
nostic testing since reactive seizures or symptomatic seizures
tests may be needed to diagnose specific metabolic conditions 
underlie the cause of most seizures in cats.47.67
 suggested by the MDB. For example, increased liver enzymes,
 Recommendations for instituting administration of anti-
hypoalbuminemia, hypoglycemia, 
 decreased blood urea
 convulsant drugs depend on factors such as the underlying eti-
nitrogen along with microcytic, hypochromic anemia suggest
ology, seizure frequency, severity, and duration. Ultimately, the
hepatic dysfunction in which case measurement of serum
decision to initiate treatment depends on the need to control
 ammonia concentration or preprandial and postprandial bile
seizures to avoid detrimental secondary effects (intracranial or
acid concentrations may be pursued. Likewise, concurrent,
systemic) and improve the quality of life of the animal. This
nonneurologic clinical signs along with a history compatible
decision must be balanced to weigh in the side effects of the
medications and owner's ability to comply and manage the
tests to identify a toxin as the underlying cause [see Chapter
financial constraints
15). The extent to which in-depth metabolic testing or toxin
 In most animals with symptomatic epilepsy (intracranial
screening is pursued will vary depending on results of the
disease), anticonvulsant drugs should be strongly considered.
394
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
BOX 13-3
Anamnesis and Diagnostic Testing for Animals
Exhibiting Seizures
 Symmetric deficits—more commonly associated with reac-
tive seizures
Asymmetric deficits-more commonly associated with symp-
Signalment, History, Seizure Description, and
tomatic seizures
Physical/Neurologic Examination
 Patient profile
Diagnostic Testing to Identify the Etiology of Reactive
 Species, breed, age, sex
Seizures
History
 Qinical pathology
 Immunizations: type, date, by whom
CBC
Environment
Chemistry profile
Age at onset
Urinalysis
 Description of ictus
Others as indicated (e.g. blood ammonia, preprandial and
 Description of seizure: general, focal, or focal onset with
postprandial bile acid levels, endocrine testing!
secondary generalization
Testing for specific metabolic or endocrine disorders 
 Duration of ictus 
Testing for specific toxins
Severity
Diagnostic Testing to Identify the Etiology of 
 Postictal description
Symptomatic Epilepsy
Other factors: time of day, association with exercise, food.
Testing is pursued afterexclusion of reactive epilepsy
sleep, or stimuli
Imaging
Previous or present illness or injury
 Thoracic radiographs (in dogs and cats 25 years to evaluate
Behavioral changes
for metastatic lesions)
 Physical examination
 Abdominal ultrasonography (based on other clinical pathologic
 Complete examination of systems, including specifically:
data)
Musculoskeletal: Size, shape of skull, evidence of
Magnetic resonance Imaging (MRl)
trauma, atrophy of any muscles
Computed tomography, if MRl is not available
 Cardiovascular: Color of mucous membranes, evidence
 CSF analysis: Cell count, total and differential; protein concen-
of amhythmias, murmurs 
 tration
 Funduscopic examination 
Based on suspicion, additional testing of CSF
Neurologic examination
 Bacterial cultures, measurement of antibody or antigen con-
Note time of last seizure; if it was within 24-48 hr and neu-
centrations, PCR testing
rologic examination is abnommal, repeat in 24 hr (may
 EEG (requires expertise and specialized equipment)
represent transient postictal disturbance)
The presence of interictal neurologic deficits excludes 
primary epilepsy from consideration
CBC, Complete blood cell count; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
 In most cases of symptomatic epilepsy, the underlying pathol-
Failure to control seizures in animals receiving adequate
n e s r    
therapy [see Plans for Treatment section) necessitates a com-
Therefore the likelihood of recurrent seizures remains high.
plete diagnostic workup to rule out an underlying etiology
Consequently, anticonvulsant drugs are advisable even when
This is particularly true in animals with idiopathic epilepsy in
only a single seizure has been observed. With metabolic or
which there is a strong suspicion of an underlying pathology
toxic disorders, if the underlying condition can be eliminated,
that was not identified with initial diagnostic testing. In these
 anticonvulsant therapy may not be necessary. Occasionally.
animals, reevaluations may reveal an underlying disease that
 short-term anticonvulsant therapy may be needed until the
 originally was not evident. The development of interictal neu-
underlying disease is corrected. After correction of the under-
rologic signs or any change in neurologic signs also indicates
lying metabolic or toxic insult, anticonvulsant drugs may be
a reappraisal of the need for a complete evaluation. Similarly,
slowly tapered in attempt to discontinue medication. How-
animals experiencing a dramatic change in the frequency.
ever, when the underlying cause cannot be reversed, anticon-
severity, or duration of seizures that have been previously well
vulsant drugs may be required long term. In the absence of a
controlled should undergo a complete diagnostic workup after
definitive diagnosis (primary or idiopathic epilepsy), anticon-
 determining that there have been no changes in serum con-
vulsant therapy is recommended in dogs and cats when single
centrations of anticonvulsant drugs or drug therapy (reduction
seizures occur more than once_ every 6 weeks, when cluster
in dosing, skipped doses, or error in dose calculation). Some
seizures (two seizures within 24 hours) occur, or if SE has
breeds have primary or idiopathic epilepsy that is difficult to
been observed. Anticonvulsant therapy also should be initi-
control. The most common examples are German shepherd
 ated in animals having SE or cluster seizures even if it is repre-
 dogs, Saint Bernards, Labrador retrievers, and Irish setters.I5
 sents the onset of seizures in animals without any prior history
For any animal, poor seizure control despite adequate anticon-
of seizures.
juean aul sisouaord paprens r sisasans Adera quesna
 Reevaluation of diagnostic testing in animals undergoing
can be altered by changing the amount and frequency of drug
appropriate therapy is warranted under several circumstances.
dosage or the drug type, or by combining medications.
CHAPTER 13
Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
395
medications. For these drugs, a therapeutic serum concentra-
Treatment
tion should be established. Therapeutic serum concentrations
Successful treatment depends heavily on client education
are based on studies evaluating the concentration at which the
and diligence. Treatment failures are usually the result of (1)
majority of affected animals experienced seizure control. As
progressive disease, (2) refractory seizures, or [3) inadequate
individual variation occurs, it is possible that some animals can
client education or poor client compliance leading to sub-
be controlled at serum concentrations below reported thera-
therapeutic drug concentrations. Clients need to understand
 peutic ranges whie others require concentrations be main-
the importance of frequent monitoring for successful seizure
tained at the high end of the therapeutic range. Consequently.
control.
adjustments in dosage should not be made solely on serum
 The most important aspect of a successful outcome is the
drug concentrations. Instead, adjustments in medications
understanding by the client that successful treatment consists
should be made based on the assessment of the seizure con-
of (l) a reduction in the frequency of seizures, (2) a reduction
trol in addition to the serum drug concentration and drug side
in the duration of seizures, or (3) a reduction in the severity
effects. Serum concentrations of an anticonvulsant drug only
of seizures. Although complete elimination of seizures is cer-
should be performed once the drug has reached steady state
tainly a goal, it is not a realistic expectation for most animals.
levels. The measurement of the serum drug concentration is
This is particularly true for breeds of dogs that are commonly
important in certain circumstances. (1) Serum drug concen-
refractory to treatment.ll5
tations should be measured in those animals experiencing
A realistic goal for most dogs with primary epilepsy is no
unexpected or severe side effects, particularly if the animal is
more than one seizure every 6 weeks. Depending on the initial
receiving a low dosage. (2) Finding a high serum concentration 
frequency of seizures, animals' tolerance to the side effects of
in an animal treated with a low dosage may suggest abnor-
 anticonvulsant drugs, and the underlying cause, more frequent 
mal drug metabolism. (3) Serum drug concentration also
seizures may be acceptable in some animals.
should be measured in those animals receiving high dosages
The client should be given the folowing guidelines for
treating animals with seizures regardless of cause:
 considered. In doing so, determining whether the serum drug
1. Medication is required for life. Do not decrease dosages
concentration is in the therapeutic range is critical. In poorly
rapidly or too soon after seizure control is achieved.
 controlled animals with a low serum drug concentration, the
Dose adjustments should only be made in consultation
dosage should be increased to reach a therapeutic concentra-
with a veterinarian.
tion. Additionally, knowing the serum drug concentrations
2. Do not judge the efficacy of the medication for at least
may help predict the likelihood of developing irreversible side
 4 weeks; longer periods may be needed to assess effcacy
effects [e.g, hepatotoxicity with phenobarbital).l16
 depending on the drug half-life.
Although anticonvulsant treatment should be considered
3. Do not change or discontinue the medication suddenly.
 as a lifelong therapy, discontinuation of anticonvulsant drugs
SE may follow.
may be considered in animals that are seizure free for 1 to
4. No single drug or combination of drugs works in all
 2 years. Gradual tapering of anticonvulsant drugs should be
cases. Adjustments in the dosage, the schedule, or the
done over a 6-month period or longer. Owners need to be
combination of drugs probably will be required. Finding
 aware that as serum drug concentration declines, seizures may
the right combination usually occurs by trial and error,
recur. In some instances, discontinuation of anticonvulsant
 but monitoring therapeutic serum levels helps to elimi-
 drugs can be successful.
nate the guesswork.
5. Good seizure control is more difficult to achieve in
Anticonwulsant Drug Therapy
some large-breed dogs.
Most of the commonly used anticonvulsant drugs (phenobar-
6. The severity of seizure disorder in cats is not a good pre-
bital, potassium bromide, and diazepam) increase GABA-acti-
dictor of outcome.
vated chloride channels, act to modulate sodium or calcium
Once the decision has been made to initiate therapy, there
channels, or reduce glutamate-mediated excitation.l17-120
are several anticonvulsant drugs available for use. A protocol
In some instances, the exact mechanism of action remains
for the treatment of seizures is outlined in Figure 13-2. For the
unknown. Table 13-3 lists anticonvulsant drugs used in the
 majority of dogs and cats with primary or idiopathic epilepsy.
treatment of seizures.
phenobarbital is the drug of choice based on efficacy, conve-
Most dogs with primary epilepsy can be controlled with
nience of the dosing regimen, minimal drug side effects, and
a single anticonvulsant drug. Approximately 20% to 40% of
dogs with primary epilepsy require a second anticonvulsant
used as an initial anticonvulsant drug in dogs. In humans, the
selection of an anticonvulsant therapy is made based on sei-
a  a  p e a s
zure symptomatology, EEG, seizure mechanism, and genetic
anticonvulsant combination is based on familiarity with the
factors. Unfortunately, veterinary medicine has not achieved
medications and their side effects combined with financial
the same level of sophistication. While certain underlying eti-
constraints of owners and the potential for synergistic adverse
ologies may dictate drug choices [e.g, animals with hepatic
effects. Ultimately, no single combination of anticonvulsant
disease should not be treated with drugs requiring hepatic
 drugs will provide control for every animal. In some animals,
  s  r   
seizure control is not possible without serious adverse effects
established. Based on control of seizures, additional medica-
which impact health and quality of life regardless of therapy.
tions may be added. Before initiating adjunctive anticon-
Phenobarbital. Phenobarbital (PB) is the initial drug of
vulsant drugs, suffcient time must be alltted to determine
choice for reating seizures in dogs and cats 2l-24 PB is effec-
whether or not seizures have been controlled. Moreover, ade-
tive, inexpensive, and convenient for administration. The usual
 quate serum drug concentrations should be achieved before
starting dosage is 2.5 mg/kg orally twice daily. The dose range
establishing lack of efficacy and poor seizure control.
is 2.2 to 4.4 mg/kg orally twice daily The drug can be given
 In general, anticonvulsant drugs are initiated at the low end
orally or via intramuscular (IM) or IV injection. Some dogs
of the dose range regardless of the medication. The need to
may require 5 mg/kg orally twice a day to achieve therapeu-
adjust the dosage is primarily based on seizure control. Mea-
tic blood levels. Absorption and excretion differ considerably
surement of the serum drug concentration is available for some
among individuals, and this is especially important in cats. A
396
PARTII
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Phenobarbital 2.2-4.4 mg/kg P0 q12 ht
 Initial dosage
(low end of the doserange)
Measure serum concentrationt
in 2-4 weeks
If seizures remain
If seizures
poorly controlled
well controlled
High
 if serum concentration
High
 if serum concentration
serum concentration 
below or low to mid 
serum concentration 
below or low to mid
> 40 μg/mL
therapeutic range
> 40 μg/mL
therapeutic range
If severe
f few to no
If severe
If few to no
If severe
 side effects
side effects 
side effects
 side effects
side effects
Increase dosage
Monitor seizure
(20%-25%)
control
 Consider combination
 drug therapy to allow
 Measure serum concentrations
 Consider evaluation
reduction in PB dosage
Measure CBC, Chem, UA
of drug metabolism
(see Table 13-7)
-at 3 months
 -then every 6 months
Hgure 13-2 Protocol for initiating AED in dogs with suspected or confirmed primary epilepsy.
q, Every; h, hours; PB, phenobarbital; CBC, complete blood count.
'Similar protocol can be used in cats with suspected or confirmed idiopathic or probable
symptomatic epilepsy.
tSimilar protocol can be used:
If an AED other than PB is used.
If already on phenobarbital and initiating KBr therapy [see text).
If already on combination therapy and initiating third AED.
tTiming of the measurement of serum AED concentration varies with different drugs
(see Table 13-3)
lower dosage may be used if seizures are infrequent and occur
 dosage. Importantly, with chronic administration, a new, lower
as single episodes. Higher dosages are recommended if seizures 
serum concentration develops over time as a result of autoin-
 are frequent or tend to occur in clusters or SE. Ultimately, the
duction [more rapid metabolism due to the drug's induction
dosage is adjusted according to seizure control, side effects,
of the cytochrome P450 system).129 As a result, serum concen-
and serum concentrations. After achieving seizure control on a
trations evaluated after chronic administration may be lower
stable dosage, PB concentrations should be monitored every 6
than those measured at the beginning of therapy. Diet may also
months to avoid toxicity.117
impact PB metabolism. Dogs fed a low-protein or low-protein
PB undergoes hepatic metabolism but approximately one
and low-fat diet have a more rapid elimination of PB.132 Simi-
third of the drug is excreted unchanged by the kidneys.126
 larly, renal elimination of PB may be enhanced by allkalinizing
Peak concentration is typically reached 4 to 8 hours after oral
the urine resulting in lower serum concentrations. 137
administration.127 Bioavailability is approximately 90% 128 The
 In dogs and cats, the therapeutic range for PB is 15 to 45
halflife [t/2) of PB in dogs ranges from 32 to 89hours. 127.129.
133 Elimination tyz may be more rapid in beagle dogs [32
centration can be performed at any point during the day In a
hours).127,134 Half-ife in cats and horses is 34 to 43 hours and
study of 33 dogs treated with twice daily PB, 91% of all sam-
ples taken at 0 (trough), 3, and 6 hours posttreatment were
state concentration is reached after approximately 5.5 half-
within the therapeutic range,
, varying less than 30% among
lives. Consequently, to ensure that the serum concentration is
samples.138 Only standard blood collection tubes should
evaluated after achieving steady state concentrations, measure-
be used in collection; using serum separation blood collec-
 ments in the dog should not be performed until approximately
tion tubes containing a clot activator may artificially lower
3 weeks after starting the medication or after a change in
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
397
TABLE 13-3
Anticonvulsants Commonly Used in Domestic Animals
Therapeutic Serum
Time to Steady State
Drug
Dosage (mg /kg!
Concentration (mg/mL)
Half-Life (hr)
[days)
Phenobarbital
2.2-5 q12h (D)
15-45 mg/dL (D)
32-89 h (D)
10-18 (D)
1-2 q12h (C)
10-20 mg/dL (C)
34-43 h (C)
10-14 (C)
5 q24h (H)
14-25 h (H)
3-6 (H)
Potassium bromide
22-40 q24h or divided
100-300 mg/dL
25 (days)
120
_evetiracetam
10-20 q8h (D,C)
 5 to 45 μg/mL
2.3-4h (D,C)
1-2
Zonisamide
4-8 q12h
10 to 60 μg/mL
17 (D)
3-4
5-10 q24h
33 (C)
7-8
Gabapentin 
10 q8h
4 to16 mg/L
3-4
1
Pregabalin
4 q8h 
2.8- 8.2 μg/mL
3-4
1
Felbamate
20 q8h
 30-100 mg/L
4-6
1-2
q, Every; h, hour; D, dog, C, cat, H, horse.
Unless specifically stated, information pertains to dogs.
dogs treated with PB alone or in conjunction with potassium
 discontinuation of PB treatment. Hepatic enzyme induction
bromide (KBr) develop hypertriglyceridemia, which is likely
must be taken into account when dogs are monitored for
attributable to delayed clearance of chylomicron, reduced
 hepatotoxicity. However, presence of bilirubinuria, bilirubine-
lipoprotein lipase activity, or hepatic very low density lipopro-
mia, and hypoalbuminemia, and increased concentrations of
tein (VLDL) overproduction.40 It is unclear if this is related
 preprandial or postprandial bile acids are the best indicators
to an overweight body condition, an idiosyncratic reaction to
for possible hepatotoxicity Serum ALT' activity that is consis-
PB, or a multifactorial process. l40 However, caution should be 
tently above the normal reference range is also an indicator for
 exercised when interpreting PB concentrations in the presence
 possible hepatotoxicity.
 Life-threatening neutropenia and thrombocytopenia have
falsely elevate PB measurements.140
been reported in dogs receiving acute and chronic administra-
 One of the main side effects is sedation. Sedation may
tion of PB.143,144 Cytopenias typically resolve when the drug
occur within the frst and second week of therapy but usu-
is discontinued. Although the exact mechanism is unknown,
ally disappears in the subsequent l to 2 weeks of treatment.
most likely the cytopenias reflect a toxicity of the bone mar-
Sedation tends to be more severe in older dogs or large-breed
row rather than an immune-mediated process directed at cir-
culating cells as bone marrow necrosis and myelofbrosis also
 dogs with brain tumors, also may experience profound seda-
have been associated with PB administration. 145. 146
tion even with low doses. In dogs with brain tumors in which
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis has been reported in
the mental state is already severely affected, initiating therapy
 association with chronic PB administration.147 Although
at a lower dosage [l mg/kg) than the normal may be advisable
superficial necrolytic dermatitis is typically associated with
unless seizures are frequent. Alternatively, medications such
a hepatopathy, affected dogs may not have clinicopathologic
as levetiracetam, which have minimal sedative effects, may be
findings indicative of a hepatic dlisorder. 147 Although discon-
used instead of PB. Polyphagia, polydipsia, and polyuria are
tinuation of PB is advised, skin lesions may not resolve. Der-
seen in most patients. Occasionally hyperactivity, restlessness,
 and even aggression may be noted.
 cat, reported lesions resolved with discontinuation ofthe drug.
Hepatotoxicity with PB can occur.Il6 Whether this rep-
A movement disorder has been observed in a dog receiving
PB.l49 The signs consist of severe, whole body jerking move-
syncratic drug reaction is still unknown; however, dogs with
ments that would cause the affected dog to fall. The affected
 serum concentrations at the high end of the therapeutic range
dog displayed agitation, restlessness, and intermittent fine
or above [>35 μg/mL) are at greater risk. Several studies in
tremors. Resolution of signs occurred with discontinuation of
normal dogs and dogs with epilepsy, have documented that
the drug.
 PB induces hepatic enzyme production, primarily involving
 Several studies have demonstrated the effects oflong-term
in
PB treatment on the thyroid and pituitary-adrenal axis of nor-
the absence of liver failure.l4l When serum target levels were
mal and epileptic dogs.14l, 150-154 Short-term use [<3 weeks)
maintained within the range between 20 and 40 pg/mL with
 of PB is not associated with changes in total thyroxine (TT4).
a dosage of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours, both ALP and alanine
free T4 (fT4), or thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) levels. 50
aminotransferase (ALT) are increased following 29 weeks of
However, with chronic PB administration, T'T4 and fT4 concen-
administration. These increases result in enzyme activity of
trations can be reduced to levels consistent with hypothyroid-
ALP above the normal reference range, whereas ALT activity
ism, whereas TSH concentrations remain normal to slightly
is at the high end of the reference range. Gamma-glutamyl
transferase (GGT) may be transiently increased. Aspartate
that PB causes increased clearance of T4 while suppressing
transaminase [AST), bile acids (BAs), and bilirubin are not
the secretion of TSH.I5s Complicating this is the occurrence
affected. Enzyme induction does not occur in the cat. Moder-
of euthyroid sick syndrome in dogs with idiopathic epilepsy.
ate hepatomegaly may be detected on abdominal radiographs,
 In one study, approximately 38% of dogs with idiopathic epi-
but hepatic ultrasonography is usually normal.l42 Hepatic
  s sr s r  
og sm g on g m u on uar sa
sick syndrome, which was independent of the occurrence of
398
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
seizure activity. 155 In another study, TT4 concentrations were
As a consequence of the prolonged ti/z, steady state con-
lower when measured within 24 hours of a seizure in com-
centrations may not be reached until approximately 120 days.
parison to measurements obtained at a time not associated
Although measurement of serum concentration of KBr should
with a seizure.152 In summary, dogs on PB therapy may have
not be performed until after reaching steady state, 75% and
test results consistent with hypothyroidism, despite not being
95% of steady state levels are reached at 30 days and 60 days.
hypothyroid. The effect is probably dose related because dogs
respectively.l62 The therapeutic range for serum concentra-
with PB levels below 15 μg/mL developed few or no changes
tion of KBr is 100 to 300 mg/dL.157,160,166 In one study, the
in T4 of fT4 concentrations. Chronic PB administration does 
mean serum concentration for dogs achieving seizure control
not influence the pituitary-adrenal axis when evaluated with
with PB and KBr was 162 mg/dL (ranging from 50 to 288 mg/
adenocorticotropichormone [ACTH) stimulation or low dose
dL).Is9 The mean serum concentration was higher, approxi-
dexamethasone suppression testing.154
mately 200 mg/dL, for those dogs in which PB could even-
Animals that cannot be controlled with adequate levels
of PB may require adjunctive drug therapy. In dogs, PB is
alone, a mean serum concentration of 190 mg/dL was needed
commonly combined with potassium bromide. Phenobarbi-
to achieve seizure control. 159Therefore, dogs treated with KBr
tal is continued while other drugs are added to the regimen.
 alone may require serum concentrations between 200 and 350
Other anticonvulsant drugs can be used in combination
mg/dL to achieve adequate control.157,159,162 When used in
with PB; however, their efficacy has not been thoroughly
conjunction with PB, dosing at 30 to 40 mg/kg orally once daily
studied.
should achieve a steady state concentration of 100 to 200 mg/
Potassium Bromide. Potassium bromide (KBr) is a safe
dL; when used as a sole agent, dosing at 30 mg/kg orally twice
and effective anticonvulsant in dogs. It can be used alone
daily may be needed to achieve a median concentration of 245
mg/dL.l62 As with phenobarbital, unless seizure frequency is
refractory to phenobarbital, the addition of KBr reduces sei-
high, initiation of therapy should begin at the low end of the
s3op paiean jo %0z o1 %0s Aaeuixordde u Asuanbay ainz
dose range. Increases in dosages should be based on seizure
with approximately 21% to 26% attaining seizure-free sta-
control and serum concentrations. After achieving seizure con-
tus.125.i58. 159 Potassium bromide also can be used in dogs with
trol on a stable dosage, KBr concentrations should be moni-
unacceptable side effects or those experiencing hepatotoxicity
tored every 6 months to prevent toxicity.125. 167
related to PB.157 Approximately 20% of dogs receiving KBr
Similar to PB, side effects include polyphagia, polydipsia,
are able to have PB eventually discontinued while maintain-
and polyuria.17,125,157,168Toxicity (bromism) is associated
ing seizure control.159 In combination with PB, 72% of dogs
experience a 50% or greater reduction in PB dosage.159 In
with characteristics of upper motor neuron or lower motor
45% percent of these dogs, no seizures were observed with PB
concentrations below 20 μg/mL thereby greatly reducing the
tion ranging from sedation to stupor also can occur. In severely
 potential for PB hepatotoxicity. 159
affected animals, mydriatic pupils with incomplete pupillary
The starting dose of KBr is 22 to 40 mg/kg orall per day.
toxicity include development of renal dysfunction, inadequate
of the dosage is dictated by the animal and owner's ability to
monitoring, and iatrogenic dosing errors.167 In cases of mild
tolerate side effects.ll7 In the dog, the tv2 of KBr is approxi-
signs of toxicity, the dosage of KBr should be reduced by 25%
to 50%. With moderate to severe toxicity, diuresis with 0.9%
ty/2 the dosage can be given once daily. Potassium bromide
NaCl is used to reduce serum concentrations; care should
should be given with food to avoid nausea. If nausea occurs,
 be exercised when reducing serum concentrations rapidly as
the daily dosage can be divided and given twice daily, In some
recurrence of seizures may occur.
dogs, nausea may necessitate changing to sodium bromide,
 An association between KBr therapy and pancreatitis has
which may be less irritating to the gastric mucosa.157 In such
 ssat %st aq nous aorq nos jo sesp a 'sasy
o e q o p q su s
potassium bromide.157 Potassium bromide is not marketed as
unknown whether pancreatitis is a direct result of KBr or related
a drug. Instead, chemical (analytic) grade KBr can be obtained
to dietary indiscretion_ caused by polyphagia associated with
and formulated into a solution. If prepared under appropriate
sterile conditions, sodium bromide can be administered intra-
lishing a definitive diagnosis of pancreatitis, the risk of develop-
venously. Standards for veterinarians and compounding phar-
 ing pancreatitis due to KBr administration remains unknown.
 macies can be obtained from the United States Pharmacopeia
 Pigmentation, erythematous dermatitis, and nodular/pus-
at www.usp.org.
 KBr is excreted unchanged in the urine predominantly by
toxicity is uncommonly observed in dogs. Megaesophagus also
 glomerular fltration. Extensive competition between bro-
    m an s u aao  s
mide and chloride occurs in the renal tubules. Consequently,
esophageal dysfunction resolves with discontinuation of KBr.
the rate of elimination of bromide varies directly with chlo-
 Pseudohyperchloridemia can occur depending on the ana-
ride intake. The greater the chloride intake, the greater the
lytic method used to measure serum chloride concentrations.
renal elimination rate of bromide.16l.l163 As a result, diet plays
In some methods, total halide concentration, chloride and bro-
 s    r  
mide versus chloride alone, are used, which falsely elevates
trations.16t.164 Diets low in salt (NaCl) content can predis-
chloride measurements. Unfortunately, the degree of pseudo-
pose to toxicity. Therefore, dogs should be maintained on a
hyperchloridemia cannot be used to predict bromide serum
constant diet to prevent fluctuations in serum bromide con-
concentrations.172
centrations. More importantly, KBr should be avoided in dogs
KBr should not be used in cats. In one study, cats treated
with renal dysfunction to prevent toxicity related to reduced
with KBr developed coughing, a bronchial pattern on thoracic
renal eliminiation.l65 If KBr therapy is necessary, dogs with
radiographs, and eosinophilic inflammation alone or in com-
renal dysfunction should be treated initially with at least
bination with neutrophilic inflammation in bronchoalveolar
half the recommended dosage with close monitoring for
lavage specimens.73 Eight of 17 treated cats developed tox-
 adverse effects along with frequent measurement of serum
icity, whereas only 7 of 14 treated cats experienced seizure
concentrations.157
control.173
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
399
Levetiracetam (Keppra). Levetiracetam is a relatively new
analogue of GABA, its mechanism of action is via blockade
 o a u asn g ena aaq s i ls
 and preventing synaptogenesis of the αy8-subunit of the volt-
Cat.174.175 The recommended dosage for dogs and cats is 20
mg/kg orally every 8 hours. A parenteral formulation is avail-
glutamate-mediated neurotransmission and may also increase
able and safe for IV and IM injection.176 The bioavailability of
 IM and oral administration is nearly 100%.176 The maximum
40% of the drug is metabolized by the liver to N-methylgaba-
serum concentration following IM administration occurs
in
pentin with the remainder being excreted unchanged by the
approximately 40 minutes, which combined with bioavail-
ability and lack of tissue damage associated with IM injection
ability in dogs ofabout 80%.189The serum therapeutic range is
4 to 16 mg/mL. Side effects consist of ataxia and sedation.190
The mechanism of action of levetiracetam is unique. It does not
Few studies have been done to evaluate the efficacy for
appear to work directly through GABAergic facilitation, inhibi-
tion of Na+ channels, or modulation of low voltage activated
a 50% reduction in seizure frequency l90 In another study.
Ca2t currents.177 Instead its binding site in the brain appears to
affected dogs experienced an increase in the interictal period
 be a specific synaptic vesicle protein (SVA2), which is involved
despite no significant change in seizure frequency; 3 of 17
in modulation of neurotransmitter release, reuptake, and recy-
dogs became seizure free.19
cling.175.177 Approximately one third of the drug undergoes
Pregabalin (Lyrica). Like gabapentin, the mechanism of
renal excretion related to the glomerular fltration rate. Active
action of pregabalin is through blockade of αy8-subunit of volt-
asnssn jo ae e u sazu Aq pazopu ose s np
age-gated T-type calcium channel, thereby reducing glutamate,
the dog, the t2is short, ranging from2.3to4hours.19176,178.79
norepinephrine, and substance Pll8 Little data are available
Halflife is similar in the cat.174 The serum therapeutic concen-
on its use in dogs. Based on pharmacologic data, pregabalin is
tration in dogs and cats is unknown; however, in humans the
therapeutic concentrations are 5 to 45 pg/mL.
At this dosage, no side effects are observed. In a study of ll dogs
 Few studies have been done in dogs and cats. In dogs with
undergoing treatment with PB or KBr alone or combination, the
addition of pregabalin resulted in improved seizure control with
15 [60%) dogs had a 50% reduction in seizure frequency at
 a median reduction in seizure frequency of 50%; in seven dogs
a dosage of 10 to 20 mg/kg orally three times daily 175 Inter-
with cluster seizures, all had a reduction in seizures per clus-
 estingly, recurrence of seizure frequency developed at 4 to 8
ter.1 93 Most dogs had serum pregabalin concentrations ranging
months in some dogs, suggesting tolerance to the drug 175 The
from 2.8 to 8.2 μg/mL, which is similar to therapeutic concen-
only reported side effect is sedation.175,176 In a study of 10 cats,
trations in humans. I93 Efficacy still remains to be determined.
20 mg/kg orally three times daily was associated with a 50%
Felbamate. Felbamate enhances sodium channel inactiva-
reduction in seizure frequency in 7 of 10 cats.174 In those cats
tion, enhances GABA activity, and reduces glutamate-medi-
responding, seizure frequency decreased by 92%. Mild self-
ated excitation. Felbamate has a high bioavailability with oral
limiting anorexia and lethargy were observed in one cat.174
administration in adult dogs, has a short ti/2 of 4 to 6 hours
Zonisamide (Zonegran). Zonisamide is a synthetic sulfon-
amide-based anticonvulsant. In the dog, the recommended
uwrine unchanged.194,195 In dogs,the dosage is 20 mg/kg every
dosage is 10 mg/kg orally twice daily.l80 Zonisamide has sev-
8 hours. Felbamate has a wide safety margin. It has been pri-
eral different mechanisms of action, including blockade of
marily used to treat focal seizures in dogs In a study evaluating
T-type calcium channels and voltage-gated sodium channels,
six dogs with focal seizures, all dogs experienced improved sei-
enhancement of GABA function, and modulation of a number
of other neurotransmitters (dopamine, serotonin, and acetyl-
Side effects are uncommon but may include blood dyscrasias
choline).t8l Additionally, it may provide neuroprotection as a
and hepatotoxicity.196
free radical scavenger l&l The drug undergoes hepatic metabo-
 Benzodiazepines. Diazepam is the most commonly used
lism via microsomal enzymes with approximately 10% of the
drug in this class. It is used in the treatment of isolated seizures,
drug being excreted by the kidneys unchanged.l82 The oral
SE, and cluster seizures. It also can be used as an add-on drug
bioavailability in dogs is 68%. In the dog, the tuv2 is 17 hours
for maintenance seizure therapy. However, with better choices
with steady state concentrations reached at 7 days.182 Once at
of anticonvulsant drugs available, benzodiazepines are not
steady state, the difference between the maximum and mini-
uq    r sn a
mum serum concentrations is 40%.1 82 Therapeutic serum con-
enhance the activity of GABA. Diazepam has a rapid onset of
centrations range between 10 and 40 μg/mL.180 Concurrent
action when given parenterally to both dogs and cats. In dogs.
phenobarbital administration alters the pharmacokinetics of
the duration of action is very short, and tolerance can rapidly
zonisamide, resulting in lower serum concentrations, shorter
develop, making it less useful as a maintenance drug for epi-
t1/2, and less bioavailablity.183
 In a study using zonisamide in 12 dogs treated with PB alone
or in combination with KBr, 7 of 12 dogs [58%] experienced a
longer half-life in cats, and tolerance is not as common in this
species, making it a more effective drug for management. How-
had a median of 84% reduction in seizure frequency.l80 Two
ever, fatal idiosyncratic hepatic necrosis has been associated
 dogs became seizure free. In another study, 8 out of 10 dogs
with oral administration of diazepam in cats.20l Consequently.
 responded to zonisamide, experiencing an 82% reduction in
oral benzodiazepines should be carefully monitored in cats.
seizure frequency. 184 Side effects were minimal. Six out of 12
 Clorazepate is a benzodiazepine and used as an adjunctive
 dogs experienced side effects, including mild ataxia, lethargy.
therapy with PB for seizure control in dogs. Clorazepate is
 and keratoconjunctivitis sicca l80 Zonisamide may also lower
converted to N-desmethyldiazepam in the acidic environment
thyroxine levels.182 In dogs given high dosages (75 mg/kg/day)
of the stomach.124 Both chemicals are active components of
for l year, side effects were limited to biochemical abnormali-
the drug. The dosage range is 2 to 4 mg/kg orally every 12
 ties such as decreased albumin and increased ALP.184
hours. Clorazepate may increase PB concentrations in the
Gabapentin (Neurontin). Gabapentin has been used to
 serum, usually within 1 month after initiating therapy.202
treat seizures in dogs. The recommended dosage is 10 mg/kg
Clonazepam, a longer-acting benzodiazepine, is effective
orally three times daily. Although gabapentin is a structural
 for short-term control of refractory seizures. The beneficial
400
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
effect seems to last for only a few months. Hepatotoxicity can
weighing 17.4 kg [28.3 1b) or less.209 One or more episodes of
be a problem in dogs receiving clonazepam for longer than a
SE were predictive of future episodes. The mean life-span of
few months. The dosage is 0.5 mg/kg orally twice daily,
 dogs that experienced SE was 8.3 years compared with 11.3
Vagal Nerve Stimulation. In a 13-week study evaluating
years in epileptic dogs with no history of SE.209
10 dogs, a 50% reduction in seizure frequency was observed
 A protocol for the treatment of SE is presented in Figure
 in 4 of 9 dogs.203 A reduction in frequency was only observed
13-3. The same protocol can be used for treatment of clus-
in the last 4 weeks of the study. Morbidity associated with
ter seizures when the seizures occur with relatively high fre-
surgical  implantation  included  intraoperative  bradycar-
quency. The following proposed treatment protocol mainly
dia and transient Horner's syndrome postoperatively in 2
pertains to animals in which the underlying etiology is known
 dogs.203 The vagus nerve carries general visceral efferent and
or suspected to be due to idiopathic epilepsy. A similar
afferent axons. Afferent information projects to the solitary
approach can be used in animals with other etiologies. Ani-
nucleus, which in turn diffusely projects to cerebral corti-
mals with reactive seizure treatment also should focus on cor-
cal and subcortical neurons. Experimentally, stimulation of
rection of the underlying cause. The choice of anticonvulsant
the vagus nerve results in desynchronization of EEG pat-
used in animals with reactive seizures is dictated based on the
terns. It is hypothesized that stimulation of the vagus nerve
presence of organ dysfunction and its impact on anticonvul-
may inhibit the development of hypersynchronous neuronal
 sant metabolism.
activity.
Concurrent with therapy directed at controlling seizures
 is the correction of any systemic derangements. An IV cath-
eter is immediately placed. Following this, affected animals
STATUS EPILEPTICUS AND CLUSTER
should have baseline physiologic parameters assessed such as
SEIZURES
heart rate, rhythm, respiratory rate and effort, temperature,
blood pressure, and assessment of respiratory function [arte-
The most commonly accepted definition of SE is continu-
rial blood gas or pulse oxymetry). Clinicopathologic testing
ous seizure activity lasting 5 minutes or two or more discrete
should include PCV/TS, blood glucose, and electrolytes. If
possible assessment of renal function and hepatic disease also
ness. In two studies, the prevalence of SE in dogs admitted
should be performed. In animals in which such testing identi-
to veterinary hospitals was 0.44% and 0.7%.204.205 CS can be
fies or supports an underlying cause of reactive epilepsy, more
defined as two discrete seizures within a 24-hour period in
 specialized tests may be necessary (see previous discussion).
which there is complete recovery of consciousness between
 Benzodiazepines, propofol, and pentobarbital can be used
 seizures. SE is a serious, life-threatening emergency necessi-
in the treatment of SE. Diazepam is the drug of choice for ini-
tating prompt medical attention. Likewise, CS occurring rap-
idly and in excessive numbers per cluster event can also have
range from 0.5 to 2 mg/kg IV, per rectum (PR), or intranasally
 profound physiologic consequences. As a result, the approach
(IN) zio.2ll Midazolam can also be used. The dosage of mid-
and management of these two conditions are discussed in this
azolam is 0.066 to 0.22 mg/kg IV or IM.212 In animals not hav-
section.
ing received anticonvulsant drugs before SE or severe clusters
The basis for the development of SE involves a failure of
PB should be given concurrent with benzodiazepines. Initial
mechanisms that normally stop a seizure.206 This may reflect
dosage of PB is 2 to 4 mg/kg IV, which can be repeated every 30
persistent and excessive excitation or a lack of recruitment
minutes or after subsequent seizures up to a cumulative dosage
of inhibition.206 The pathologic consequences of SE can be
of 20 mg/kg.124 Alternatively a loading dose can be calculated
divided into systemic and neurologic. Systemically, animals
using the following formula: Total mg to be given IV = Body
may experience hypertension (early) and hypotension (late),
weight (kg) x0.9 L/kg (volume of distribution of PB) x (15 μg/
tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, hypoglycemia, acidosis, and
mLj.l17 The main drawback to bolus administration of a load-
hyperthermia.39 Many of these abnormalities reflect increased
ing dose of phenobarbital is severe sedation. In animals already
circulating catecholamines.39 Ultimately, these systemic dis-
receiving phenobarbital, the amount of phenobarbital needed
turbances can lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation
to reach a higher serum drug concentration can be calculated
(DIC) and cardiopulmonary arrest. The main neurologic con-
based on knowledge of the current dose and serum drug con-
sequence to SE is neuronal loss.207 Moreover, many of the
centration. The amount of phenobarbital to be administered to
reach a new higher drug concentration is based on the formula:
Although there are many mechanisms by which neuronal
Desired concentration/current concentration x current
damage occurs in SE, underlying most is excitatory neurotox-
total mg of PB given per day = new mg of PB needed to
icity related to glutamate.
achieve the new higher concentration.l17
As with isolated seizures, the causes of SE are primary, idio-
Diazepam can also be administered as a constant rate infu-
pathic, and symptomatic epilepsies and reactive seizures. In
sion (CR1) (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg/hr). Midazolam also can be
addition, inadequate serum anticonvulsant concentrations also
given as a CRI. Intravenous propofol bolus also can be given
may underlie SE. In dogs with SE, primary or idiopathic epi-
to gain seizure control as an initial drug or more commonly
lepsy accounts for 27% to 37%, symptomatic epilepsy accounts
in animals not responding to diazepam. An initial bolus of
for 32% to 39%, and reactive seizures account for 7% to 22%
 propofol at 4 to 6 mg/kg IV is administered at a rate of 25%
of the dose every 30 seconds to avoid apnea.213 In animals
202'so7'to2sopJo %2 0% u aqissod ou sm 1posp a.mz
having recurrent seizures, a CRI of propofol at 0.1 to 0.6 mg/
Interestingly, inadequate or low anticonvulsant serum concen-
kg/min can be used. In general, CRI administration of diaz-
trations accounted for approximately 6% of cases, suggesting
epam or propofol should be continued for 6 to 8 hours. After
that SE can occur despite appropriate management.204 In two
a CRI is initiated and seizures are controlled, the rate can be
studies, SE was the initial presentation of a seizure disorder in
tapered to the lowest effective rate that limits seizure. Alter-
42% to 44% of dogs.204.208 In another study, the risk of devel-
natively, pentobarbital can be dosed at 3 to 15 mg/kg IV to
oping SE was nearly three times more likely with intoxication
effect. 124 However, many animals have excessive movements
than any other cause of epilepsy.205 In dogs with primary or
that mimic seizure activity while recovering from pentobar-
idiopathic epilepsy, the risk of developing SE was greater for
bital. Similar movements also can occur during recovery from
dogs weighing 28.9 kg (63.6 lb) or more compared with dogs
 propofol anesthesia.2l4 As a result, animals recovering from
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
401
 Obtain Venous Access
 Stop seizure immediately
 Diazepam 0.5-2.0 mg/kg Iv, PF
Midazolam 0.066-0.22mg/kg Iv, IM, IN 
Or
Propofol 4-6 mg/kg IV given in 25% increments q 30sec until sz stops
Assess physiologic parameters
Obtain MDB
HR, RF,rectal temperature
Mucous membrane color, CRT
Electrolytes
PCV /TS
(Na, K, Ca, Mg)
Oxygenati on (pulse oxyimetry, aBG)
Glucose
If MDB and Physiologic Parameters
Blood pressure
 Renal / Liver function 
are Normal
Acid/Base status
Give PB 2-4 mg/kg IV
Identify underlying cause
(Reactive seizures)
 Monitor for recurrence
Correct
abnormalities
Pursue specialized testing to
 confirm Dx based on 
▼
suspicion
If seizures recur
No recurrence
 Continue maintenance
Cycle can be
PB treatment
repeated after
Treat underlying
 each seizure until
Give BZD bolus as before
disea se
a total dosage of
Give PB 2-4 mg/kg IV
 20 mg/kg of PB is
reached.t
Give BZD bolus as before
 Monitor for recurrence
Monitor seizures
If recurrence of seizures
Give PB 2-4 mg/kg IV; continue in 2-
may need to consider
 4 mg/kg increments to total 20mg/kg
anticonvulsant
cumulative dosage or until seizures 
 Choice is based on underlying 
Seizuresrec
are controlled.
suspected or confirmed disease
Start CRI of one of the following:
process
Diazepam (0.25-0.5 mg/kg/h)
Give BZD bolus as before
Propofol (0.1-0.6 mg/kg/min)
Give PB 2-4 mg/kg IV
Rate is titrated to iowest needed
Hgure 13-3 Treatment protocol for status epilepticus or an episode of frequent cluster sei-
Zures.' IV, Intravenously; PR, per rectum; IM, intramuscularly; IN, intranasally; q, every; sec, sec-
onds; h, hour; min, minute; sz, seizure; MDB, minimum database; Na, sodium; K, potassium; Ca,
calcium; Mg, magnesium; Dx, diagnosis; HR, heart rate; RR, respiratory rate; CRT, capillary refll
time; PCV, packed cell volume; TS, total solids; aBG, arterial blood gas; BZD, benzodiazepine; PB,
phenobarbital; AED, antiepileptic drug; CRI, constant rate infusion.
*Protocol is for the use in dogs not receiving AED therapy. Similar protocol could be used in
dogs currently on phenobarbital. Protocol could be used in cats.
tIf dog is already taking phenobarbital and serum concentration and dosage known, can cal-
pentobarbital or propofol anesthesia need to be carefully
Animals undergoing treatment for SE require inten-
assessed to ensure that movements are related to recovery
sive supportive care and monitoring. Often systemic abnor-
and not seizure activity. In one report, ketamine [5 mg/kg IV
malities are present and reflect the secondary effects of SE.
bolus followed by 5 mg/kg/hr CRi) was used in a dog with SE
Treatment directed at correction of derangements identified
a marked reduction in the abnormal EEG pattern suggesting
help protect against neuronal damage and prevent further
efficacy. The authors postulated that the effects were due to
antagonism of N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptors,
initiated. Animals with severe obtundation, stupor, or coma,
thereby reducing glutamate excitation.
may require intubation and mechanical or hand ventilation.
Animals administered CRI of medications to control sei-
 In animals with hypoxemia, supplemental oxygen should be
zures can become excessively sedated or anesthetized. Addi-
 provided via face mask or nasal cannula. Once the seizures
tionally, many of these drugs often depress respiratory and
are controlled and systemic abnormalities corrected, intensive
cardiovascular functions. Consequently, all animals receiving
supportive and nursing care is crucial for successful outcome.
CRI require intensive monitoring of the depth of sedation or
The median duration of hospitalization for dogs with SE is
anesthesia. In addition the eyes should be lubricated; manual
43 hours.204 Ultimately, in animals in which seizures are not
expression, intermittent catheterization, or maintaining an
controlled by 6 hours after admission or dogs with recurrence
indwelling urinary catheter to evacuate urine may be neces-
 sary; and padded bedding with frequent changes in recum-
 Per-rectum (PR) administration of benzodiazepine drugs
 bency is needed to prevent pressure sores. Some animals may
has been used to effectively treat cluster seizures in the hospi-
 require intubation and mechanical ventilation.
tal or home setting and to prevent the development of SE.2l1
402
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Alternatively, midazolam can be administered IV, PR, or IN
O asuodsar u paauas s uiauodh zz'tnus oi sasuodsar
but also IM. Owners are given the injectable formulation of
emotional stimuli and feeding, which may explain the clinical
diazepam to give at a dose of 0.5 to 2.0 mg/kg PR or IN. Once
presentation in affected animals.222 In addition to the awake-
 drawn up into a syringe, the needle is removed and the drug is
sleep cycle, hypocretin modulates feeding behavior and neuro-
administered via teat cannula. Alternatively, an enteral feeding
endocrine functions affecting metabolism.20
catheter can be cut short and used to administer the drug. The
 In the dog, both inherited and sporadic (cause unknown)
drug is given after an initial generalized seizure and when a sec-
cases of narcolepsy have been documented. The inherited
 ond or third seizure occurs within 24 hours of the frst seizure.
form is the result of a mutation in the hypocretin receptor
Benzodiazepines are well absorbed from the rectum [diaz-
2 gene.23 Dogs with the inherited form have normal CSF
-Pu) esosnu Teseu 1o (%6/ 01 %1s Jo Aan1qeee1q ueda
concentrations ofhypocretin 1. In sporadic cases, the clinical
azolam; bioavailabiity of 80%) reaching peak concentration
signs of narcolepsy are related to reduced hypocretin concen-
quickly (diazepam PR; approximately 15 minutes and mid-
 trations.224 In the Labrador retriever and Doberman pinscher.
narcolepsy is autosomal recessive with full penetrance.225,226
 tration of diazepam PR at home in dogs with cluster seizures
A familial form also exists in the dachshund.227 Clinical signs
receiving adequate doses of anticonvulsant drugs reduces the
s g se aea se daap  pa a um sio 
total number of seizures, number of cluster seizure events, and
of age. Age of onset in sporadic cases is more variable. In
 number of seizures per cluster in affected dogs.21l
most sporadic cases the underlying cause is unknown. In
humans, autoimmune destruction of hypocretin-secreting
neurons is postulated based on the finding of low CSF
NARCOLEPSY AND CATAPLEXY
hypocretin concentrations. Moreover, there is a strong asso-
ciation between narcolepsy and specifc human leukocyte
Narcolepsy is a chronic sleep disorder characterized by excessive
haplotypes involved in a predisposition for autoimmune dis-
-uns o asuodsar u auo apsnu jo sso uappns e) Axadee pue
haplotypes in sporadic cases.228 Moreover, affected dogs do
ulation).218 Although hallucinations are impossible to determine
in animals, excessive sleepiness and abnormal sleep patterns have
    e  ar a s x
 been documented in dogs, 219 Despite this, most affected animals
are recognized because of cataplexy (partial or complete).
Brahman bull, horses, and ponies.231-235
The physiology of sleep has been extensively studied. The
the cerebrum, diencephalon, and a number of nuclei in the
stimulation. Eating is the most common precipitating factor in
midbrain and pons. Sleep is characterized by two states: rapid
reported cases.When the dog starts to eat, it suddenly appears
eye movement (REM) and nonrapid eye movement [nREM)
weak, with the limb buckling and the head and neck droop-
sleep.220 Non-REM sleep is further subdivided into four cat-
ing, which rapidly progresses to collapse and lying motion-
 egories based on EEG patterns, one of which is referred to
less.236,237 Occasionally dogs may take a few steps and appear
as slow-wave sleep (SWS).220 Normally, sleep begins with a
very weak and uncoordinated.236,237 During the episodes, the
transition from the awake state to nREM. The EEG pattern
animal's eye may remain open and even track objects.236,237
during SWS is characterized by slow, large amplitude waves.
Noise, shaking, or other stimuli may arouse the animal, and
 This coincides with decreased body temperature, heart rate,
  de  o   sn in 
and respiratory rate. The EEG pattern during REM sleep is
stimulation, such as petting or shaking, may prevent the attack.
characterized by high-frequency, low-amplitude waves simi-
The episodes often are repeated many times a day.238.239
lar to that observed when awake. Concurrently, there is an
A diagnosis usually is made by observation of the charac-
increase in body temperature, heart rate, and respiratory rate,
teristic signs if cataplexy is a prominent part of the syndrome.
along with movements of the eyes. Paradoxically, there is ato-
 In the absence of cataplexy, the disorder is diffcult to rec-
nia of most of the postural muscles during REM sleep.
ognize. EEG is the only available diagnostic test in animals
 Both adrenergic and cholinergic neurons are active during
not exhibiting cataplexy. A food-elicited cataplexy test can be
the awake state. During the transition to nREM sleep, adren-
used to identify dogs displaying mild cataplexy. The test is per-
ergic neurons cease activity while cholinergic neurons remain
formed by placing 10 pieces of food in a row, 14 inches apart.
active but at a reduced activity level. With the transition to
oas st  ss u Po a a  sho rn
 REM, adrenergic neurons remain inactive; however, choliner-
dogs with cataplexy take longer.237 The test can also be used
gic neurons increase to maximum activity level similar to that
to monitor therapy Additionall, pharmacologic agents can be
observed when awake. In addition to their diffuse projection
used to elicit or inhibit attacks.A provocative test is using phy-
to the thalamus and cerebrum, cholinergic neurons project
sostigmine (0.025 to 0.1 mg/kg IV), a cholinergic drug that
to the medulla oblongata, resulting in spinal cord inhibition
crosses the blood-brain barrier. Acetylcholine concentrations
accounting for the atonia in REM sleep. This transition from
increase and clinical signs are elicited.237 Conversely, atropine
nREM to REM occurs cyclically during periods of sleep.
(0.1 mg/kg IV) can be used to decrease the likelihood of clini-
Another neuronal system using a neuropeptide called
cal signs.237 Similarly, yohimbine, an αz-antagonist, suppresses
hypocretin is involved in awake-sleep cycles. These neurons
are located exclusively in the hypothalamus and diffusely proj-
rather than blocking postsynaptic receptors.240
ect to the cerebrum and to the brainstem, where they have a
Treatment with tricyclic antidepressants increases adrener-
facilitatory effect. 22l Hypocretin secretion increases during
gic activity by inhibiting reuptake of norepinephrine. The most
wakeful states and decreases during sleep. Thus hypocretin
commonly used drugs include imipramine (0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg
plays a critical role in the coordination of sleep and wakeful-
three times daily) or desipramine [3 mg/kg orally twice daily).
ness.220 In general, narcolepsy occurs as a result of either a
 In dogs demonstrating partial response, methylphenidate [Rit-
reduced hypocretin concentration or an absence or decrease in
alin, 5 to 10 mg two or three times daily) can be used adjunc-
functional receptors.220 Without hypocretin [decreased hypo-
tively. Although elimination of clinical signs may not always be
cretin l concentrations or hypocretin receptor 1 function),
possible, most affected dogs show improvement with therapy.
narcoleptic animals are unable to stay awake and have altered
enough to have a good quality of life.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
403
CASESTUDIES
CASE 13-1
CHARLES
veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
: Laboratory Examination
Canine, Labrador retriever, male castrated, Z years old
The complete blood cell count [CBC), chemistry profle,
urinalysis [UA] was normal.
- History
The dog has received all vaccinations on schedule and has
 Assessment
had no major medical problems. The owner has reported
The description of the seizure is consistent a focal onset
that the dog had the first occurrence of a seizure approxi-
with secondary generalization. Based on the dog's signal-
mately Z months ago. In the past Z weeks, the dog has had 3
ment, normal physical and neurological examinations,
more seizures. All seizures appeared similar The last seizure
normal interictal behavior, and normal MDB, idiopathic
was observed the night prior to examination.
epilepsy should be considered in this dog. Primary epilepsy
The owner describes the seizures as follows: The dog
would necessitate demonstrating a familial history despite
seemed somewhat apprehensive and restless for approxi-
the documented occurrence of primary epilepsy in this
mately 30 minutes. Suddenly the dog sat down and gradu-
 breed. Moreover, consideration should be given to perform-
ally arched the head and the neck dorsally and to the right.
The left thoracic and pelvic limb flexed up to the body
 out symptomatic epilepsy. However, likelihood of identify-
which caused the dog to fall over. Once in lateral recum-
 ing an intracranial abnormality is low.
bency, all four limbs became rigid and then began making
The seizures are frequent enough
1 necessitate therapy.
jerking movements. After about 30 seconds he started mak-
The initial anticonvulsant medication of choice is pheno-
ing running movements of the limbs and chewing move-
barbital. An initial dosage for beginning phenobarbital is 2-3
ments of the mouth. During this time, there was excessive
mg/kg orally twice daily. Steady state serum concentrations
salivation and the dog urinated. The movements stopped
can be measured in 2-4 weeks after initiation of treatment.
after about l minute. In about 2-3 minutes, the dog was able
Based on steady state serum concentrations, side effects,
to get up. He seemed a little disoriented for a few minutes,
and seizure control, the dosage of phenobarbital should be
and then he gradually returned to normal.
tailored to control seizures. Once control is established,
Other than the seizures, the dog appeared healthy and
routine monitoring of CBC, chemistry, urinalysis, and serum
normal to the owner.
drug levels should be performed every 6 months.
: Physical and Neurologic Examinations
 No abnormalities are found.
CASE 13-2
BRUTUS
D
veterinaryneurologycases.com
- Signalment
: Laboratory Examination
Canine, German Shepherd, male castrated, 5 years old
Chemistry profle disclosed increased alkaline phosphatase
[SAP; 467 U/L; normal 12-122 IU/L} and alanine transfer-
- History
ase [ALT; 135 IU/L; normal 8-108 IU/L).
The dog has a 3-year history of seizures; seizures consist of
The CBC and UA were normal.
generalized and focal onset with secondary generalization
Serum phenobarbital serum concentration was 32 mg/
seizure types. At the initial onset of the occurrence of sei-
dL (therapeutic range 15-45 mg/dL).
zures, physical and neurologic examinations were normal.
An MDB was performed and was normal. The dog was initi-
 Assessment
 ated on phenobarbital at 3mg/kg orally twice daily. During
At the time of onset, the dog's signalment, examination
the initial 6 months of therapy, the phenobarbital serum 
findings, and MDB results were consistent with idiopathic
concentrations were monitored. Based on the serum con-
epilepsy. Moreover no systemic or new neurologic abnor-
centration and seizure frequency, the dosage was adjusted
malities have developed which lends support to the classif-
to gain seizure control. After that time, the seizures were
cation of idiopathic epilepsy. Several options can be pursued
controlled for approximately Z years. During those Z years,
in this time.
the phenobarbital dosage was increased on two occasions. In
 Knowledge of the phenobarbital serum concentration in
the last 6 months, the dog has had more frequent seizures.
this dog is extremely useful. The concentrations are within
In the last Z months, the dog has had an average of 3-4 sei-
the therapeutic reference range, the dog is not exhibiting side
zures per month. The dog's current phenobarbital dosage
effects [sedation, polydypsia, or polyuria, or biochemically
is 5 mg/kg orally twice daily. The dosage of phenobarbital
 abnormalities indicative of hepatic dysfunction); however, sei-
has not changed in 6 months. The owner reports no health
 zures are not controlled. Consequently, increasing the pheno-
problems other than seizures.
barbital dosage by 20% to 25% may helpregain seizure control.
The main drawback is that serum concentration is approaching
· Physical and Neurologic Examinations
that which may result in hepatic injury. Alternatively, begin-
No abnormalities are found.
ning adjunctive therapy with potassium bromide (KBr) may
provide seizure control and ultimately allow the dosage of
phenobarbital to be reduced once control is established.
Continued
404
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE 13-2
BRUTUS
cont'd
 Consideration should be given to performing additional
owners should be made aware of the likelihood of a normal
diagnostic tests. The recent change in seizure frequency
MRI study.
may herald the development of a new disease process. The
Treatment with KBr was initiated at 30mg/kg orally once
changes observed on the MDB are consistent with pheno-
daily. With the addition of KBr, seizure control was attained.
barbital-induced increased liver enzyme activity; therefore
As with phenobarbital, dose adjustments in KBr are made
the seizures are not likely to be reactive seizures [due to an
based on seizures control and steady state serum concen-
extracranial cause). To exclude the development of symp-
trations. Given the long half life of KBr in dogs, steady
tomatic epilepsy (and intracranial disorder), magnetic reso-
 state concentrations are not reached until approximately
nance imaging [MRl) of the brain may be pursued. As this
120 days. Despite this the drug is usually effective before
was not a part of the initial diagnostic workup at the onset
reaching steady state. The owner did not choose to perform
of seizures, this is not an unreasonable option. However, the
further diagnostic testing in this case. The addition of KBr
helped gain control of the seizures.
CASE 13-3
MICCA
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Chemistry profile
Canine, Yorkshire Terrier, female intact, 9 months old
Result
Units
Normal 
Units
Urea Nitrogen
8
mg/dL
10-30
mg/dL
- History
Creatinine
0.7
mg/dL
0.5-1.5
mg/dL
The owners report that in the month before presentation,
Total Protein
5.7
g/dL
5.2-7.3
g/dL
the dog has had several episodes of anorexia which lasts for
Albumin
2.2
g/dL
2.5-4.2
g/dL
1 to l1 days each. In addition, the dog has been lethargic.
Alk Phos
73
U/L
13-122
U/L
Occasionally, the dog will pace aimlessly in the house or will
ALT
147
U/L
12-108
U/L
stand and stare at the wall or out into space. During these
Glucose
68
mg/dL
77-120
mg/dL
periods, she is less responsive. Three hours before presenta-
Urinalysis
tion, the dog ate, began pacing around the room, and had a
Specifice gravity 1.015;
seizure. The dog suddenly fell into lateral recumbency with
its limbs paddling. The dog urinated and defecated. The sei-
Cytological evaluation revealed ammonium biurate crystals.
zure lasted for approximately Z minutes. After the seizure,
the dog was extremely lethargic. She bumped into objects as
 Assessment
 Lesion Location: Forebrain (based on the neurologic exami-
she walked. The dog has received all vaccinations, deworm-
ing, and heartworm prophylaxis on schedule. The dog is not
nation and observation of seizures)
 allowed outside unattended.
 Based on the description, the classification of the seizure
type is consistent with generalized seizures. Etiologically, reac-
. Physical Examination
tive seizures are most likely given the abnormalities identifed
 The dog was smallin stature and had a thin body condition
on the laboratory examination, the abnormalities identified
 on neurological examination, and the presence of abnormal
score.
ns A ae eep e  snzis o rd r
 gestive of hepatic dysfunction. Measurement of fasting serum
. Neurological Examination:
 ammonia concentration and preprandial and postprandial bile
Mental Status: Dull to obtunded
Gait: Normal
acid levels confirmed an underlying liver disorder. Treatment
Posture: Normal
for hepatic encephalopathy was initiated [see Chapter 15].
 In this dog, further consideration should be given initiation
 Postural reactions: Normal in all four limbs
 of an anticonvulsant drug. Although there is no drug of choice
Spinal reflexes: Normal
for dogs with hepatic disease requiring anticonvulsants, phe-
Cranial nerves: Absence menace response OU; normal PLR
and pupil size OU. Reduced response to noxious stimulation
nobarbital and benzodiazepine drugs should be avoided as
 of the nasal mucosa; no other abnormalities were noted.
they undergo hepatic metabolism. Alternatively, KBr or leve-
 Sensory examination: Normal
tiracetam can be used as these drugs do not undergo hepatic
Palpation: Normal
metabolism. Other drugs that undergo hepatic metabolism
 include zonisamide and gabapentin; therefore these drug are
not recommended in dogs with hepatic disease.
. Laboratory Examination (values not listed
 In the present case, the dog was initiated on KBr along
are normal!
with therapy for hepatic encephalopathy. Further diagnos-
HCT
30%
tics disclosed a signal extrahepatic anomalous vessel arising
MCV
63 f (66-77 )
from the portal vein. Consequently, the dog underwent sur-
MCHC
30 g/dL (32-36 g/dl)
gical ligation of the portosystemic anomalous vessel. Post-
operatively, the dog remained seizure-free for 6 months at
which time it was gradually tapered off of KBr.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
405
CASE 13-4
SASHA
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Despite what may be considered an acceptable interictal
Canine, Mixed breed, female spayed, 4 years old
period [episodes of seizures approximately every 6 weeks)
in this dog, seizure activity occurs as cluster seizures, which
- History
has required emergency evaluation and hospitalization. At
The dog has a l year history of generalized seizures. At the
the current dosage of phenobarbital, the serum concentra-
time of onset of seizures, physical and neurologic examina-
tion is within the therapeutic range. As there has not been
tions and MDB were normal. Cross-sectional imaging and
a change in the dosage or dosing regime, this concentra-
collection of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for analysis were no
tion represents a steady state concentration. Consequently.
pursued. Initially, seizures occurred every 3-4 weeks. Based
increasing the dosage of phenobarbital may increase
on the seizure frequency, the dog was treated with pheno-
the likelihood of developing toxicity without providing
barbital. In an attempt to gain control of the seizures, the
improved seizure control. The most probable explanation
dosage of phenobarbital was slowly increased to 3.2 mg/kg
for the inerease in SAP concentration is induction by phe-
orally twice daily. Over the course of the last 6 months, the
nobarbital given the lack of other findings consistent with
dog has experienced 4 episodes of cluster seizures which
hepatotoxicity.
necessitated evaluation and hospitalization at an emergency
There are two possible changes that can be made to
veterinary hospital. The last cluster seizure occurred three
 improve seizure control in this dog. First, the addition of
weeks ago. At that time, phenobarbital serum concentration
KBr therapy, may help with no only an increase in the inter-
was 30ug/dL. There has been no change in the dosage or
ictal period (i.e., decrease the frequency of seizures), it may
dosing regime of phenobarbital in the last month. No other
 also reduce the number of seizure that occur per cluster.
health problems have been observed.
Therefore KBr may be initiated in this case at 30mg/kg
orally per day. The dosage can be tailored based on seizure
: Physical and Neurologic Examinations
control, side effects, and serum concentrations.
 No abnormalities are found.
Secondly, the owners can be instructed on how to admin-
ister benzodiazepines per rectum (PR) at home during a
· Laboratory Examination
duster seizure. The parentral formation of diazepam can
With the exception of increases in SAP (351 IU/L; normal
 be administered PR. Diazepam at a dosage of 0.5-2.0 mg/
range 12-122 IU/L) no other abnormalities were identified.
kg is drawn up and administered PR via a teat cannula or
an enteral feeding catheter cut to approximately a 3-5-cm
. Assessment
length. Alternatively midazolam can be administered at 0.2
The likely etiologic classification for the seizures in this dog
mg/kg intranasally. Administration of a benzodiazepine is
 is idiopathic epilepsy. Although cross-sectional imaging and
 done at the time of the frst seizure and can be repeated for
CSF analysis are necessary to rule out symptomatic epilepsy.
up to 3-4 times in a 24-hour period. The use of diazepam
idiopathic epilepsy remains most probable given that there
 PR in dogs is associated with a decrease in the number of
has been no development of systemic or new neurologic
duster seizure events as well as the number of seizures that
 abnormalities.
occur per cluster.
CASE 13-5
SAMMY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
. Physical and Neurologic Examinations
 Feline, DSH, female spayed, Z years old
No abnormalities are found.
History
· Laboratory Examination
The cat has a 6-month history of generalized seizures. At
 No abnormalities are found.
the onset of seizures, the cat had 3 seizures in 1 week, which
prompted initial evaluation. At the onset ofseizures, physical
 Assessment
and neurologic examinations, MDB, MRI of the brain, and
 Symptomatic epilepsy is the most common etiologic clas-
CSF analysis were normal. Treatment with phenobarbital at
 sification for seizures in cats. Consequently, seizure activity
2.2 mg/kg was started. Over several months, the dosage was
 in every cat should prompt a thorough diagnostic work up
gradually increased based on poorly controlled seizures. The
 in order to rule out reactive seizures and symptomatic epi-
cat continues to have frequent seizures. The current seizure
lepsy. Without knowledge of a familial history or pedigree
frequency is a single seizure every 2-3 weeks. The current
 analysis, primary epilepsy is not a consideration. A specific
dosage of phenobarbital is 4mg/kg. No changes in pheno-
cause of seizures was not identifed in this cat, therefore the
barbital dosage or dosing regime have occurred in the last 4
most probable etiologic classification of seizure is idiopathic
weeks. The current serum phenobarbital concentration is 34
epilepsy.
 g/dL. No other health problems have been observed. Vac-
 Treatment was started with phenobarbital, which is the
cinations are current. The cat is kept strictly indoors and is
 initial drug of choice for most cats. Despite this, seizure con-
the only cat in the household.
trol remains poor. As symptomatic epilepsy is common in
cats, consideration should be given to reevaluation of diag-
nostic tests. However, without an acute change in seizure
Continued
406
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE 13-5
SAMMY-
cont'd
control or the development of systemic or neurologic defi-
 pregabalin. Only levetiracetam and zonisamide have been
cits, repeat of previous diagnostics are likely to be normal.
evaluated in cats. In this case, levetiracetam at 20mg/kg
To obtain seizure control, adjunctive anticonvulsant
orally three times daily was started. The addition of leve-
medication should be initiated. In cats, there is not rou-
tiracetam resulted in control of seizures. The owners were
tinely used adjunctive therapy. Unlike dogs in which KBr is
advised to continue to monitor the seizure frequency, sever-
commonly prescribed adjunctively, KBr in cats is associated
ity, and duration because in dogs the loss of seizure control
with frequent adverse side effects. As a result, KBr should
has been observed 4-8 months after beginning levetiracetam
not be used in cats. There are limited choices of anticon-
suggesting tolerance to the drug. Long term control of sei-
vulsants to be used adjunctively with phenobarbital in cat.
zures with levetiracetam has not been evaluated in cats.
Choices include levetiracetam, zonisamide, gabapentin, or
CASE 13-6
TOBY
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
main consideration for this dog. The MDB and the fact that
Canine, mixed breed, male castrated, 7 years old.
the dog appears well supervised without access to intoxi-
cants make reactive seizures unlikely. The dog is outside of
. History
the age range that idiopathic epilepsy typically begins.
The dog has had a recent onset of seizures. The owner
The owners should be advised that a more thorough
describes the seizures as follows: seizure have occurred
diagnostic work-up should be pursued. Beyond the MDB,
 during the evenings. The dog has been at rest and without
thoracic radiographs should be performed to exclude the
warning will extend all four limbs and develop opisthotonus
possibility of metastatic disease. Consideration should be
that lasts for approximately 15-20 seconds. Then the dog
given evaluating the abdominal cavity [i.e., radiographs or
develops violent jerking movements with its limbs. The dog.
ultrasonography). Ultimately, imaging of the brain should
typically urinates during the seizure. During the seizure, the
be performed. The gold standard imaging modality for the
dog is unresponsive to the owner. After the seizure the dog
brain is MRI. In instances where MRI is not available, CT
 remains quite for 1-2 hours and then returns to normal
may be pursued.
 The initial seizure occurred 3 months before presenta-
 In this dog, thoracic radiographs were normal. Abdomi-
tion. This isolated seizure was followed l month later by
 nal imaging was not pursued. MRI of the brain disclosed an
two seizures in week. At that time an MDB was performed
extra-axial, strongly and uniformly enhancing mass affecting
and was normal. The dog was initiated on phenobarbital at
the left olfactory/frontal lobes of the cerebrum. The imag-
ing characteristics were consistent with a meningioma.
nobarbital, the dog experienced three seizures over 2 days.
As in this dog, lesion often affects the olfactory/frontal
lobes of the cerebrum with minimal impact on the dog. The
The dog behaves normally between seizures. The dog is only
 most common neurologic signs related to a lesion in this
allowed outside in a fenced in yard or walked on a leash.
 area of the brain are changes in mentation and seizures. As a
There has been no exposure to toxins.
result, a thorough diagnostic work-up should be pursued in
all dogs over the age of 5 years that develop seizures.
· Physical and Neurologic Examinations
A transfrontal craniotomy was performed for excision
No abnormalities are found.
of the tumor. Postoperatively, the dog underwent radiation
 therapy. Phenobarbital was continued throughout the dog's
I Laboratory Examination
 treatment to control seizures.
The CBC, chemistry profle, and UA were normal.
. Assessment
 Based on the owner's description, the dog is experiencing
generalized seizures. Despite the normal physical and neu-
rologic examinations, symptomatic epilepsy should be the
REFERENCES
4. Licht BG, Licht MH, Harper KM, et al: Clinical presen-
tations of naturally occurring canine seizures: similarities
1.(
Gastaut H: Dictionary of epilepsy, ed, Geneva, 1973,
to human seizures, Epilepsy Behav 3:460-470, 2002.
World Health Organization.
 5. Berendt M, Gram L: Epilepsy and seizure classification
2. Fisher RS, van Emde Boas W, Blume W, et al: Epilep-
in 63 dogs: a reappraisal of veterinary epilepsy terminol-
tic seizures and epilepsy: definitions proposed by the
ogy, J Vet Intern Med 13:14-20, 1999.
International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) and
 6. Gloor P, Fariello RG: Generalized epilepsy: some of its
the International Bureau for Epilepsy (IBE), Epilepsia
cellular mechanisms differ from those of focal epilepsy.
46:470-472, 2005.
Trends Neurosci 11:63-68, 1988.
3. Berendt M, Gredal H, Alving J: Characteristics and phenom-
7. Gorji A, Speckmann EJ: Epileptiform EEG spikes and
 enology of epileptic partial seizures in dogs: similarities with
their functional significance, Clin EEG Neurosci 40:230-
human seizure semiology, Epilepsy Res 61:167-173, 2004.
233,2009.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
407
8. Speckmann EJ, Elger CE: Introduction to the neuro-
31. Aroniadou-Anderjaska V, Fritsch B, Qashu F, et al: Pathol-
physiological basis of the EEG and DC potentials. In
ogy and pathophysiology of the amygdala in epileptogen-
Niedermeyer E, Lopes da Silva FH, editors: Electroen-
esis and epilepsy, Epilepsy Res 78:102-116, 2008.
cephalography: basic principles, clinical applications, and
32.
 Montgomery DL, Lee AC: Brain damage in the epileptic
related felds, Baltimore, 1987, Urban & Schwarzenberg.
beagle dog, Vet Pathol 20:160-169, 1983.
9. Bleck TP, Klawans HL: Convulsive disorders: mecha-
33. Yamasaki H, Furuoka H, Takechi M, et al: Neuronal
nisms of epilepsy and anticonvulsant action, Clin Neuro-
loss and gliosis in limbic system in an epileptic dog, Vet
pharmacol 13:121-128, 1990.
Pathol 28:540-542, 1991.
10. F
 Russo ME: The pathophysiology of epilepsy, Cornell Vet
34. Buckmaster PS, Smith MO, Buckmaster CL, et al:
71:221-247, 1981.
Absence of temporal lobe epilepsy pathology in dogs
11. Klass DW, Westmoreland BF: Electroencephalography:
with medically intractable epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med
general principles and adult electroencephalograms. In
16:95-99, 2002.
Daube JR, editor: Clinical neurophysiology, Philadel-
35. Fatzer R, Gandini G, Jaggy A, et al: Necrosis of hippo-
phia, 1996, FA Davis.
campus and piriform lobe in 38 domestic cats with sei-
12. Berendt M, Hogenhaven H, Flagstad A, et al: Electro-
zures: a retrospective study on clinical and pathologic
encephalography in dogs with epilepsy: similarities
findings, J Vet Intern Med 14:100-104, 2000.
between human and canine findings, Acta Neurol Scand
36. Mellema LM, Koblik PD, Kortz GD, et al: Reversible
99:276-283, 1999.
magnetic resonance imaging abnormalities in dogs fol-
13. Holliday TA, Cunningham JG, Gutnick MJ: Compara-
lowing seizures, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 40:588-595,
tive clinical  and electroencephalographic  studies of
1999.
canine epilepsy, Epilepsia 11:281-292, 1970.
37. Chan S, Chin SS, Kartha K, et al: Reversible signal
 abnormalities in the hippocampus and neocortex after
prolonged seizures, AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 17:1725-
fndings, J Small Anim Pract 39:23-29, 1998.
1731, 1996.
15. Dichter MA: Emerging concepts in the pathogenesis of
38. Sloviter RS: Hippocampal epileptogenesis in animal
epilepsy and epileptogenesis, Arch Neurol 66:443-447,
models of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy with hippocam-
2009.
pal sclerosis: the importance of the "latent period" and
16.F
 Blumenfeld H: The thalamus and seizures, Arch Neurol
other concepts, Epilepsia 49[suppl 9):85-92, 2008.
59:135-137, 2002.
39. Platt SR, MeDonnell JJ: Status epilepticus: clinical fea-
17.F
Futatsugi Y, Riviello JJ Jr: Mechanisms of generalized
tures and pathophysiology, Compend Contin Educ Pract 
absence epilepsy, Brain Dev 20:75-79, 1998.
Vet 22:660-669, 2000.
18. Avoli M, Gloor P: Interaction of cortex and thalamus in
40. Drobatz KJ, Saunders HM, Pugh CR, et al: Noncardiogenic
spike and wave discharges of feline generalized penicillin 
pulmonary edema in dogs and cats: 26 cases [1987-1993],
epilepsy, Exp Neurol 76:196-217, 1982.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 206:1732-1736, 1995.
19.5
Sierra-Paredes G, Sierra-Marcuno G:
Extrasynaptic
41. James FE, Johnson VS, Lenard ZM, et al: Severe hae-
GABA and glutamate receptors in epilepsy, CNS Neurol
moptysis associated with seizures in a dog, N Z Vet J
Disord Drug Targets 6:288-300, 2007.
56:85-88, 2008.
20.B
 Bowie D: Ionotropic glutamate receptors & CNS disor-
42. King JM, Roth L, Haschek WM: Myocardial necrosis sec-
ders, CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets 7:129-143, 2008.
ondary to neural lesions in domestic animals, J Am Vet
21. Moldrich RX, Chapman AG, De Sarro G, et al: Gluta-
Med Assoc 180:144-148, 1982.
43. Kent M, Reiss C, Blas-Machado U: Elevated cardiac tro-
in epilepsy, Eur J Pharmacol 476:3-16, 2003.
ponin I in a dog with an intracranial meningioma and
22. Bormann J:The "ABC" of GABA receptors, Trends Phar-
evidence of myocardial necrosis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
macol Sci 21:16-19, 2000.
46:48-55, 2010.
23. Nutt D: GABAA receptors: subtypes, regional distribu-
44. Engel J: A proposed diagnostic scheme for people with
tion, and function, J Clin Sleep Med 2:S7-S11, 2006.
epileptic seizures and with epilepsy: report of the ILAE
24. McCormick DA,(
Contreras D: On the cellular and
task force on classification and terminology, Epilepsia
network bases of epileptic seizures, Annu Rev Physiol
(Series 4) 42:796-803, 2001.
63:815, 2001.
 45. Engel J: Report of the ILAE classification core group.
25. Ellenberger C, Mevissen M, Doherr M, et al: Inhibitory
Epilepsia 47:1558-1568, 2006.
and excitatory neorotransmitters in the cerebrospinal
46. Podell M, Fenner WR, Powers JD: Seizure classification
fuid of epileptic doss, Am J Vet Res 65(8):1108-1113,
in dogs from a nonreferral-based population, J Am Vet
2004.
Med Assoc 206:1721-1728, 1995.
26. Loscher W, Schwartz-Porsche D: Low levels of gamma-
47. Quesnel AD, Parent JM, McDonell W, et al: Diagnostic
aminobutyric acid in cerebrospinal fluid of dogs with
evaluation of cats with seizure disorders: 30 cases [1991-
epilepsy, J Neurochem 46:1322-1325, 1986.
1993), J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:65-71, 1997.
27. Podell M, Hadjiconstantinou M: Low concentrations
48. Fitzmaurice S, Rusbridge C, Shelton GD, et al: Familial
of cerebrospinal fluid GABA correlate to a reduced
myoclonic epilepsy in the miniature wirehaired dachs-
response to phenobarbital therapy in primary canine
hund, 200l, American College of Veterinary Internal
epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med 13:89-94, 1999.
Medicine.
28.0
 Olney JW, Price MT, Samson L, et al: The role of specifc
49. Gredal H, Berendt M, Leifsson PS: Progressive myoclo-
ions in glutamate neurotoxicity, Neurosci Lett 65:65-71,
nus epilepsy in a beagle, J Small Anim Pract 44:511-514,
1986.
2003.
29. Fountain NB, Lothman EW: Pathophysiology of status
50. Jian Z, Alley MR, Cayzer J, et al: Lafora's disease in an
epilepticus, J Clin Neurophysiol 12:326-342, 1995.
epileptic basset hound, N Z Vet J 38:75-79, 1990.
30.5
Sloviter RS:The functional organization of the hippocam-
51.
 Schoeman T, Williams J, Wilpe E: Polyglucosan storage
pal dentate gyrus and its relevance to the pathogenesis of
disease in a dog resembling Lafora's disease, J Vet Intern
temporal lobe epilepsy, Ann Neurol 35:640-654, 1994.
Med 16:201-207, 2002.
408
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
52. Webb AA, McMillan C, Cullen CL, et al: Lafora disease
73. Falco MJ, Barker J, Wallace ME: The genetics of epilepsy
as a cause of visually exacerbated myoclonic attacks in a
in the British Alsatian, J Small Anim Pract 15:685-692,
dog, Can Vet J 50:963-967, 2009.
1974.
53.B
Hegreberg GA, Padgett GA: Inherited progressive epi-
74. Van Der Velden NA: Fits in Tervuren shepherd dogs: a
lepsy of the dog with comparisons to Lafora's disease of
presumed hereditary trait, J Small Anim Pract 9:63-70,
man, Fed Proc 35:1202-1205, 1976.
1968.
54.1
Davis KE, Finnie JW, Hooper PT: Lafora's disease in a
75.
Wallace ME: Keeshonds: a genetic study of epilepsy and
dog, Aust Vet J 67:192-193, 1990.
EEG readings, J Small Anim Pract 16:1-10, 1975.
55. Lohi H, Young EJ, Fitzmaurice SN,
N, et al: Expanded
76. Kathmann I, Jaggy A, Busato A, et al: Clinical and
repeat in canine epilepsy, Science 307:81, 2005.
 genetic investigations of idiopathic epilepsy in the Ber-
56. Redding RW: Electroencephalography. In Oliver JE,
nese mountain dog, J Small Anim Pract 40:319-325,
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology.
1999.
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
77. Casal ML, Munuve RM, Janis MA, et al: Epilepsy in Irish
57.0
Oliver JE: Seizure disorders in companion animals,
wolfhounds, J Vet Intern Med 20:131-135, 2006.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:77-85, 1980.
78. Hulsmeyer V, Zimmermann R, Brauer C, et al: Epilepsy
58. Thomas WB: Idiopathic epilepsy in dogs, Vet Clin North
in border collies: clinical manifestation, outcome, and
Am Small Anim Pract 30:183-206, 2000:vii.
mode of inheritance, J Vet Intern Med 24:171-178, 2010.
59. Breitschwerdt EB, Breazile JE, Broadhurst J: Clinical
79. Jokinen TS, Metsahonkala L, Bergamasco L, et al: Benign
and electroencephalographic findings associated with
familial juvenile epilepsy in Lagotto Romagnolo dogs, J
ten cases of suspected limbic epilepsy in the dog, J Am
Vet Intern Med 21:464-471, 2007.
Anim Hosp Assoc 15:37-50, 1979.
80. Patterson EE, Armstrong PJ, O'Brien DP, et al: Clinical
60.
 Gibbon Kj, Trepanier LA, Delaney FA: Phenobarbital-
 description and mode of inheritance of idiopathic epi-
Responsive ptyalism, dysphagia, and apparent esopha-
lepsy in English springer spaniels, J Am Vet Med Assoc
geal spasm in a German shepherd puppy, J Am Anim
226:54-58,2005.
Hosp Assoc 40:230-237, 2004.
81. Patterson EE, Mickelson JR, Da Y, et al: Clinical charac-
61. Stonehewer J, Mackin AJ, Tasker S, et al: Idiopathic
teristics and inheritance of idiopathic epilepsy in vizslas,
phenobarbital-responsive hypersialosis in the dog: an
J Vet Intern Med 17:319-325, 2003.
unusual form of limbic epilepsy? J Small Anim Pract
82. Srenk P, Jaggy A: Interictal electroencephalographic
41:416-421, 2000.
findings in a family of golden retrievers with idiopathic
62. Crowell-Davis SL, Lappin M, Oliver JE: Stimulus-
epilepsy, J Small Anim Pract 37:317-321, 1996.
responsive psychomotor epilepsy in a Doberman pin-
83. Vitmaa R, Cizinauskas S, Bergamasco LA, et al: Mag-
scher, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 25:57-60, 1989
netic resonance imaging findings in Finnish spitz dogs
63.
Cash WC, Blauch BS: Jaw snapping syndrome in eight
with focal epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med 20:305-310,
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:709-710, 1979.
2006.
64. Rusbridge C: Neurological diseases of the cavalier
84. Licht BG, Lin S, Luo Y, et al: Clinical characteristics and
King Charles spaniel, J Small Anim Pract 46:265-272,
mode of inheritance of familial focal seizures in standard
2005.
poodles, J Am Vet Med Assoc 231:1520-1528, 2007.
65. Dodman NH, Knowles KE, Shuster L, et al: Behavioral
85.
Gerard VA, Conarck CN: Identifying the cause of an
changes associated with suspected complex partial sei-
zures in bull terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 208:688-691,
Vet Med 86:1060-1061, 1991.
1996.
 86. Chrisman CL: Epilepsy and seizures. In Howard JL, edi-
66. Schriefl S, Steinberg TA, Matiasek K, et al: Etiologic
tor: Current veterinary therapy: food animal practice,
classification of seizures, signalment, clinical signs, and
Philadelphia, 1981, WB Saunders.
outcome in cats with seizure disorders: 91 cases [2000-
87. Mittel L: Seizures in the horse, Vet Clin North Am
2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:1591-1597, 2008.
Equine Pract 3:323-332, 1987.
67. Barnes HL, Chrisman CL, Mariani CL, et al: Clini-
88. Aleman M, Gray LC, Williams DC, et al: Juvenile
cal signs, underlying cause, and outcome in cats with
idiopathic epilepsy in Egyptian Arabian foals: 22 cases
[1985-2005), J Vet Intern Med 20:1443-1449, 2006.
225:1723-1726, 2004.
89. Platt S, McGrotty YL, Abramson CJ, et al: Refractory
68. Berendt M, Gredal H, Pedersen LG, et al: A cross-sec-
  e  i r e  s si
tional study of epilepsy in Danish Labrador retrievers:
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 43:163-167, 2007.
prevalence and selected risk factors, J Vet Intern Med
90. Barlow RM: Morphogenesis of cerebellar lesions in
16:262-268, 2002.
bovine familial convulsions and ataxia, Vet Pathol
69. Berendt M, Gullov CH, Christensen SL, et al: Prevalence
18:151-162, 1981.
and characteristics of epilepsy in the Belgian shepherd
91.
 Coates JR, Bergman RL: Seizures in young dogs and cats:
variants Groenendael and Tervuren born in Denmark
pathophysiology and diagnosis, Compend Contin Educ
1995-2004, Acta Vet Scand 50:51, 2008.
Pract Vet 27:447-459, 2005.
70. Heynold Y, Faissler D, Steffen F, et al: Clinical, epide-
92. Greene CE, Vandevelde M, Braund K: Lissencephaly in
miological and treatment results of idiopathic epilepsy in
two Lhasa Apso dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:405-
54 Labrador retrievers: a long-term study, J Small Anim
410,1976.
Pract 38:7-14, 1997.
 93. Braund K: Degenerative and developmental diseases. In
71. Berendt M, Gullov CH, Fredholm M: Focal epilepsy in
Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary
the Belgian shepherd: evidence for simple Mendelian
neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
inheritance, J Small Anim Pract 50:655-661, 2009.
 94. Saito M, Sharp NJH, Kortz GD, et al: Magnetic reso-
72. Bielfelt SW, Redman HC, McClellan RO: Sire- and sex-
nance imaging features oflissencephaly in 2 Lhasa Apsos,
related differences in rates of epileptiform seizures in
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43:331-337, 2002.
a purebred beagle dog colony, Am J Vet Res 32:2039-
 95. Cordy DR, Holliday TA:A necrotizing meningoenceph-
2048, 1971.
alitis of pug dogs, Vet Pathol 26:191-194, 1989.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
409
96. Stalis IH, Chadwick B, Dayrell-Hart B, et al: Necrotiz-
119. Isoherranen N, Yagen B, Soback S, et al: Pharmacoki-
ing meningoencephalitis of Maltese dogs, Vet Pathol
netics of levetiracetam and its enantiomer (R)-alpha-
32:230-235, 1995.
ethyl-2-oxo-pyrrolidine acetamide in dogs, Epilepsia
97. Tipold A, Fatzer R, Jaggy A, et al: Necrotizing encephalitis
42:825-830, 2001.
in Yorkshire terriers, J Small Anim Pract 34:623-628, 1993.
120. Jensen AA, Mosbacher J, Elg S, et al: The anticonvul-
98. Foster ES, Carrillo JM, Patnaik AK: Clinical signs of
sant gabapentin [neurontin) does not act through
tumors affecting the rostral cerebrum in 43 dogs, J Vet
 gamma-aminobutyric acid-B receptors, Mol Pharmacol
Intern Med 2:71-74, 1988.
61:1377-1384, 2002.
99. Bagley RS, Gavin PR, Moore MP, et al: Clinical signs
121. Farnbach GC: Serum concentrations and effcacy of phe-
associated with brain tumors in dogs: 97 cases [1992-
nytoin, phenobarbital, and primidone in canine epilepsy.
1997), J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:818-819, 1999
J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:1117-1120, 1984.
100.5
Snyder JM, Lipitz L, Skorupski KA, et al: Secondary
122.
Schwartz-Porsche D, Loscher W, Frey HH: Therapeutic
intracranial neoplasia in the dog: 177 cases [1986-2003),
efficacy of phenobarbital and primidone in canine epi-
JVet Intern Med 22:172-177, 2008.
lepsy: a comparison, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 8:113-1i9,
101. Snyder JM, Shofer FS, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Canine intra-
1985.
cranial primary neoplasia: 173 cases [1986-2003), J Vet
123. Frey HH: Use of anticonvulsants in small animals, Vet
Intern Med 20:669-675, 2006.
Rec 118:484-486, 1986.
102. Troxel MT, Vite CH, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Feline intra-
124. Lane SB, Bunch SE: Medical management of recurrent
cranial neoplasia: retrospective review of 160 cases
seizures in dogs and cats, J Vet Intern Med 4:26-39,
[1985-2001), J Vet Intern Med 17:850-859, 2003.
1990.
103.F
Prince DA, Parada I, Scalise K, et al: Epilepsy follow-
125.1
 Podell M, Fenner WR: Bromide therapy in refractory canine
ing cortical injury: cellular and molecular mechanisms
idiopathic epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med 7:318-327, 1993.
as targets for potential prophylaxis, Epilepsia 50(suppl
126. Frey HH: Anticonvulsant drugs used in the treatment of
2):30-40,2009
epilepsy, Probl Vet Med 1:558-577, 1989.
104. Garosi LS, Dennis R, Platt SR, et al: Thiamine deficiency in
127.
 Al-Tahan F, Frey HH: Absorption kinetics and bioavail-
 a dog: clinical, clinicopathologic, and magnetic resonance
imaging findings, J Vet Intern Med 17:719-723, 2003.
J Vet Pharmacol Ther 8:205-207, 1985.
105.5
 Singh M, Thompson M, Sullivan N, et al: Thiamine defi-
128. Pedersoli WM, Wike JS, Ravis WR: Pharmacokinetics of
ciency in dogs due to the feeding of sulphite preserved
single doses of phenobarbital given intravenously and
meat, Aust Vet J 83:412-417, 2005.
orally to dogs, Am J Vet Res 48:679-683, 1987.
106.(
 Oliver JE: Seizure disorders and narcolepsy In Oliver JE,
129. Frey HH, Kampmann E, Nielsen CK: Study on combined
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology.
treatment with phenobarbital and diphenylhydantoin,
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
Acta Pharmacol Toxicol (Copenh) 26:284-292, 1968.
107.(
 O'Brien D: Toxic and metabolic causes of seizures, Clin
130. Frey HH, Loscher W: Pharmacokinetics of anti-epileptic
Tech Small Anim Pract 13:159-166, 1998.
drugs in the dog: a review, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 8:219-
108.1
Morgan RV, Moore FM, Pearce LK, et al: Clinical and
233, 1985.
laboratory findings in small companion animals with
131. Ravis WR, Nachreiner RF, Pedersoli WM, et al: Pharma-
lead poisoning: 347 cases [1977-1986], J Am Vet Med
cokinetics of phenobarbital in dogs after multiple oral
Assoc 199:93-97, 1991.
administration, Am J Vet Res 45:1283-1286, 1984.
109. Kornegay JN, Mayhew IG: Metabolic, toci, and nutri-
132. Maguire PJ, Fettman MJ, Smith MO, et al: Effects of diet
tional diseases of the nervous system. In Oliver JE,
 on pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital in healthy dogs J
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology.
Am Vet Med Assoc 217:847-852, 2000.
Philadelphia, 1987, Saunders.
133. Yeary RA: Serum concentrations of primidone and its
110. Knight TE, Kent M, Junk JE: Succimer for treatment
metabolites, phenylethylmalonamide and phenobarbital,
of lead toxicosis in two cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
in the dog, Am J Vet Res 41:1643-1645, 1980.
218(1936):1946-1948, 2001.
134. Frey HH, Gobel W, Loscher W: Pharmacokinetics of
111. F
Knight TE, Kumar MS: Lead toxicosis in cats—a review,
primidone and its active metabolites in the dog, Arch Int
J Feline Med Surg 5:249-255, 2003.
Pharmacodyn Ther 242:14-30, 1979.
112. Ramsey DT, Casteel SW, Faggella AM, et al: Use of
135. Duran SH, Ravis WR, Pedersoli WM, et al: Pharmaco-
orally administered succimer [meso-2,3-dimercaptosuc-
kinetics of phenobarbital in the horse, Am J Vet Res
cinic acid) for treatment oflead poisoning in dogs, J Am
48:807-810, 1987.
Vet Med Assoc 208:371-375, 1996.
136. Ravis WR, Duran SH, Pedersoli WM, et al:A pharmaco-
113. Roberts BK, Aronsohn MG, Moses BL, et al: Bufo mari-
kinetic study of phenobarbital in mature horses after oral
nus intoxication in dogs: 94 cases [1997-1998), J Am Vet
dosing, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 10:283-289, 1987.
Med Assoc 216:1941-1944, 2000.
137.
 Fukunaga K, Saito M, Muto M, et al: Effects of urine pH
114. Gwaltney-Brant SM, Albretsen JC, Khan SA: 5-Hydroxy-
modification on pharmacokinetics of phenobarbital in
tryptophan toxicosis in dogs: 21 cases (1989-1999), J
healthy dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31:431-436, 2008.
Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1937-1940, 2000.
138. Levitski RE, Trepanier LA: Effect of timing of blood col-
115.
Holliday TA: Seizure disorders, Vet Clin North Am
lection on serum phenobarbital concentrations in dogs
Small Anim Pract 10:3-29, 1980.
with epilepsy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 217:200-204, 2000.
116. Dayrell-Hart B, Steinberg SA, VanWinkle TJ, et al: Hep-
139. Boothe DM, Simpson G, Foster T: Effects of serum sepa-
atotoxicity of phenobarbital in dogs: 18 cases [1985-
ration tubes on serum benzodiazepine and phenobarbi-
1989), J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:1060-1066, 1991.
tal concentrations in clinically normal and epileptic dogs.
117.F
Podell M: Antiepileptic drug therapy, Clin Tech Small
Am J Vet Res 57:1299-1303, 1996.
Anim Pract 13:185-192, 1998.
140. Kluger EK, Malik R, llkin WJ, et al: Serum triglyceride
118. Luszczki JJ: Third-generation antiepileptic drugs: mech-
concentration in dogs with epilepsy treated with pheno-
anisms of action, pharmacokinetics and interactions,
barbital or with phenobarbital and bromide, J Am Vet
Pharmacol Rep 6i:i97-216, 2009.
Med Assoc 233:1270-1277, 2008.
410
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
141. Gieger TL, Hosgood G, Taboada J, et al: Thyroid func-
161. Trepanier LA, Babish JG: Effect of dietary chloride con-
   r  a   
tent on the elimination of bromide by dogs, Res Vet Sci
phenobarbital administration, J Vet Intern Med 14:277-
58:252-255, 1995.
281,2000.
162. March PA, Podell M, Sams RA: Pharmacokinetics and
142. Muller PB, Taboada J, Hosgood G,et al: Effects of long-
toxicity of bromide follwing high-dose oral potassium
bromide administration in healthy beagles, J Vet Phar-
Intern Med 14:165-171, 2000.
macol Ther 25:425-432, 2002.
143. Jacobs G, Calvert C, Kaufman A: Neutropenia and
163. Czerwinski AL: Bromide excretion as affected by chlo-
thrombocytopenia in three dogs treated with anticon-
ride administration, J Am Pharm Assoc Am Pharm Assoc
vulsants, J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:681-684, 1998.
(Baltim) 47:467-471, 1958.
144. Khoutorsky A, Bruchim Y: Transient leucopenia, throm-
164.
Shaw N, Trepanier LA, Center SA, et al: High dietary
bocytopenia and anaemia associated with severe acute
chloride content associated with loss of therapeutic
phenobarbital intoxication in a dog, J Small Anim Pract
serum bromide concentrations in an epileptic dog, J Am 
49:367-369, 2008.
Vet Med Assoc 208:234-236, 1996.
145. Weiss DJ: Bone marrow necrosis in dogs: 34 cases [1996-
165. Nichols ES, Trepanier LA, Linn K: Bromide toxicosis
2004), J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:263-267, 2005.
secondary to renal insufficiency in an epileptic dog, J Am 
146.1
Weiss DJ, Smith SA: A retrospective study of 19 cases
Vet Med Assoc 208:231-233, 1996.
of canine myelofbrosis, J Vet Intern Med 16:174-178,
166. Boothe DM: Anticonvulsant therapy in small animals,
2002.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 28:411-448, 1998.
147. March PA, Hilier A, Weisbrode SE, et al: Superficial
167. Rossmeisl JH, Inzana KD: Clinical signs, risk factors, and
necrolytic dermatitis in 1l dogs with a history of pheno-
outcomes associated with bromide toxicosis (bromism]
barbital administration [1995-2002), J Vet Intern Med
in dogs with idiopathic epilepsy, J Am Vet Med Assoc
18:65-74,2004.
234:1425-1431, 2009.
148. Ducote JM, Coates JR, Dewey CW, et al: Suspected
 168. Podell M, Fenner WR: Use of bromide as an antiepileptic
hypersensitivity to phenobarbital in a cat, J Feline Med
drug in dogs, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 16:767-
Surg 1:123-126, 1999.
774, 1994.
149. Kube SA, Vernau KM, LeCouteur RA: Dyskinesia associ-
169. Steiner JM, Xenoulis PG, Anderson JA, et al: Serum
ated with oral phenobarbital administration in a dog, J
pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity concentrations in
Vet Intern Med 20:1238-1240, 2006.
dogs treated with potassium bromide and/or phenobar-
150. Daminet S, Paradis M, Refsal KR, et al: Short-term
bital, Vet Ther 9:37-44, 2008.
influence of prednisone and phenobarbital on thyroid
170. Gaskill CL, Cribb AE: Pancreatitis associated with potas-
function in euthyroid dogs, Can Vet J 40:4ll-415,
sium bromide/phenobarbital combination therapy in
1999.
epileptic dogs, Can Vet J 41:555-558, 2000.
151. Gaskill CL, Burton SA, Gelens HC, et al: Effects of phe-
171.
Hess RS, Kass PH, Shofer FS, et al: Evaluation of risk
nobarbital treatment on serum thyroxine and thyroid-
factors for fatal acute pancreatitis in dogs, J Am Vet Med
stimulating hormone concentrations in epileptic dogs, J
Assoc 214:46-51, 1999.
Am Vet Med Assoc 215:489-496, 1999.
172. Rossmeisl JH Jr, Zimmerman K, Inzana KD, et al:
152.(
Gaskill CL, Burton SA, Gelens HC, et al: Changes in
Assessment of the use of plasma and serum chloride
serum thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone con-
 concentrations as indirect predictors of serum bromide
centrations in epileptic dogs receiving phenobarbital for
concentrations in dogs with idiopathic epilepsy, Vet Clin
 one year, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 23:243-249, 2000.
Pathol 35:426-433, 2006.
153. Kantrowitz LB, Peterson ME, Trepanier LA, et al: Serum
173. Boothe DM, George KL, Couch P: Disposition and
total thyroxine, total triodothyronine, free thyroxine,
clinical use of bromide in cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc
and thyrotropin concentrations in epileptic dogs treated
221:1131-1135, 2002.
with anticonvulsants, J Am Vet Med Assoc 2l4:1804-
174. Bailey KS, Dewey CW, Boothe DM, et al: Levetirace-
1808, 1999.
       1 
154. Muller PB, Wolfsheimer KJ, Taboada J, et al: Effects of
with suspected idiopathic epilepsy, J Am Vet Med Assoc
 long-term phenobarbital treatment on the thyroid and
232:867-872, 2008.
adrenal axis and adrenal function tests in dogs, J Vet
175. Vollk HA, Matiasek LA, Lujan Feliu-Pascual A, et al: The
Intern Med 14:157-164, 2000.
 efficacy and tolerability of levetiracetam in pharmacore-
155. 1
 Daminet S, Ferguson DC: Influence of drugs on thyroid
sistant epileptic dogs, Vet J 176:310-319, 2008.
function in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 17:463-472, 2003.
176. Patterson EE, Goel V, Cloyd JC, et al: Intramuscular, intra-
156.
von Klopmann T, Boettcher IC, Rotermund A, et al:
venous and oral levetiracetam in dogs: safety and pharma-
Euthyroid sick syndrome in dogs with idiopathic epi-
cokinetics, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31:253-258, 2008.
lepsy before treatment with anticonvulsant drugs, J Vet
177. Lynch BA, Lambeng N, Nocka K, et al: The synaptic ves-
Intern Med 20:516-522, 2006.
icle protein SV2A is the binding site for the antiepileptic
157. Trepanier LA: Use of bromide as an anticonvulsant for dogs
drug levetiracetam, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101:9861-
with epilepsy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:163-166, 1995.
9866, 2004.
158.8
Schwartz-Porsche D, Jurgens U: Efficacy of potassium
178. Benedetti MS, Coupez R, Whomsley R, et al: Compara-
 bromide against canine epilepsy unresponsive to other
 tive pharmacokinetics and metabolism of levetiracetam,
treatments, Tierarztl Prax 19:395-40l, 1991.
a new anti-epieptic agent, in mouse, rat, rabbit and dog.
159. Trepanier LA, Van Schoick A, Schwark WS, et al: Ther-
Xenobiotica 34:281-300, 2004.
apeutic serum drug concentrations in epileptic dogs
179. Dewey CW, Bailey KS, Boothe DM, et al: Pharmacokinet-
treated with potassium bromide alone or in combina-
ics of single-dose intravenous levetiracetam administration
tion with other anticonvulsants: 122 cases [1992-1996],
in normal dogs, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 18:153-157, 2008.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1449-1453, 1998.
180. Dewey CW, Guiliano R, Boothe DM, et al: Zonisamide
160.1
 Ducote JM: Potassium bromide, Compend Contin Educ
therapy for refractory idiopathic epilepsy in dogs, J Am
Pract Vet 21:638-639, 1999.
Anim Hosp Assoc 40:285-291, 2004.
CHAPTER 13
 Seizures, Narcolepsy, and Cataplexy
411
181. Biton VMD: Clinical pharmacology and mechanism of
201. Center SA, Elston TH, Rowland PH, et al: Fulminant
action of zonisamide, Clin Neuropharmacol 30:230-
hepatic failure associated with oral administration of diaz-
240.2007.
epam in 11 cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:618-625, 1996.
182. Boothe DM, Perkins J: Disposition and safety of
202. Dewey CW, Barone E, Smith K, et al: Alternative anti-
zonisamide after intravenous and oral single dose and
convulsant drugs for dogs with seizure disorders, Vet
oral multiple dosing in normal hound dogs, J Vet Phar-
Med 99:786-793, 2004.
macol Ther 31:544-553, 2008.
203. Munana KR, Vitek SM, Tarver WB, et al: Use of vagal
183.
 Orito K, Saito M, Fukunaga K, et al: Pharmacokinetics of
nerve stimulation as a treatment for refractory epilepsy
zonisamide and drug interaction with phenobarbital in
in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:977-983, 2002.
dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 31:259-264, 2008.
204. Bateman SW, Parent JM: Clinical fndings, treatment,
184. Walker RM, DiFonzo CJ, Barsoum NJ, et al: Chronic
and outcome of dogs with status epilepticus or cluster
toxicity of the anticonvulsant zonisamide in beagle dogs,
seizures: 156 cases [1990-1995), J Am Vet Med Assoc
Fundam Appl Toxicol 11:333-342, 1988.
215:1463-1468, 1999.
185.(
Czapinski P, Blaszczyk B, Czuczwar S: Mechanisms of
205. Zimmermann R, Hulsmeyer Vl, Sauter-Louis C, et al:
action of antiepileptic drugs, Curr Top Med Chem 5:3-
Status epilepticus and epileptic seizures in dogs, J Vet
14, 2005.
Intern Med 23:970-976, 2009.
186. Klugbauer N, Marais E, Hofmann F: Calcium channel
206. Lowenstein DH, Alldredge BK: Status epilepticus, N
alphaZdelta subunits: differential expression, function,
Engl J Med 338:970-976, 1998.
and drug binding, J Bioenerg Biomembr 35:639-647,
207. Fountain NB, Lothman EW: Pathophysiology of status
2003.
epilepticus, J Clin Neurophysiol 12:326-342, 1995.
187. Eroglu C, Allen NJ, Susman MW, et al: Gabapentin
 208. Platt SR, Haag M: Canine status epilepticus:a retrospec-
receptor alpha2delta-l is a neuronal thrombospondin
tive study of 50 cases, J Small Anim Pract 43:151-153.
receptor responsible for excitatory CNS synaptogenesis,
2002.
Cell 139:380-392, 2009.
209. Saito M, Munana KR, Sharp NJ, et al: Risk factors for
188. Vollmer KO, von Hodenberg A, Kolle EU: Pharmacoki-
development of status epilepticus in dogs with idio-
netics and metabolism of gabapentin in rat, dog and man,
 pathic epilepsy and effects of status epilepticus on out-
Arzneimittelforschung 36:830-839, 1986.
come and survival time: 32 cases [1990-1996], J Am Vet
189. Radulovic LL, Turck D, von Hodenberg A, et al: Disposi-
Med Assoc 219:618-623, 2001.
tion of gabapentin (neurontin) in mice, rats, dogs, and
210. Platt SR, Randell SC, Scott KC, et al: Comparison of
monkeys, Drug Metab Dispos 23:441-448, 1995.
plasma benzodiazepine concentrations following intra-
190. Platt SR, Adams V, Garosi LS, et al: Treatment with gab-
nasal and intravenous administration of diazepam to
apentin of 1l dogs with refractory idiopathic epilepsy.
dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:651-654, 2000.
Vet Rec 159:881-884, 2006.
211.
 Podell M: The use of diazepam per rectum at home for
191. Govendir M, Perkins M, Malik R: Improving seizure
the acute management of cluster seizures in dogs, J Vet
control in dogs with refractory epilepsy using gabap-
Intern Med 9:68-74, 1995.
entin as an adjunctive agent, Aust Vet J 83:602-608,
 212. Platt SR, McDonnell J: Status epilepticus: patient man-
2005.
 agement and pharmacologic therapy, Compend Contin
192. Salazar V, Dewey CW, Schwark W, et al: Pharmacoki-
Educ Pract Vet 22:722-729, 2000.
netics of single-dose oral pregabalin administration in
 213. Steffen F, Grasmueck S:Propofol for treatment of refrac-
normal dogs, Vet Anaesth Analg 36:574-580, 2009.
tory seizures in dogs and a cat with intracranial disorders,
193. Dewey CW, Cerda-Gonzalez S, Levine JM, et al: Pre-
J Small Anim Pract 41:496-499, 2000.
 214. Smedile LE, Duke T, Taylor SM: Excitatory movements
mide, or a combination of phenobarbital and potassium
in a dog following propofol anesthesia, J Am Anim Hosp
bromide for treatment of dogs with suspected idio-
Assoc 32:365-368, 1996.
pathic epilepsy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 235:1442-1449,
215. Serrano S, Hughes D, Chandler K: Use of ketamine for
2009.
the management of refractory status epilepticus in a dog.
194. Adusumalli VE, Yang JT, Wong KK, et al: Felbamate
J Vet Intern Med 20:194-197, 2006.
pharmacokinetics in the rat, rabbit, and dog, Drug Metab
216. Mealey KL, Boothe DM: Bioavailability of benzodiaz-
Dispos 19:1116-1125, 1991.
epines following rectal administration of diazepam in
195. Yang JT, Adusumalli VE, Wong KK, et al: Felbamate
dogs, J Vet Pharmacol Ther 18:72-74, 1995.
metabolism in the rat, rabbit, and dog, Drug Metab Dis-
217. Papich MG, Alcorn J: Absorption of diazepam after its
pos 19:1126-1134, 1991.
rectal administration in dogs, Am J Vet Res 56:1629-
196. Ruehlmann D, Podell M, March P: Treatment of partial
1636, 1995
  e   is  
218. Nishino S, Mignot E: Pharmacological aspects ofhuman
dogs, J Small Anim Pract 42:403-408, 2001.
and canine narcolepsy, Prog Neurobiol 52:27-78, 1997.
197. Frey HH, Philippin HP, Scheuler W: Development of
219. Mitler MM, Dement WC: Sleep studies on canine nar-
tolerance to the anticonvulsant effect of diazepam in
colepsy: pattern and cycle comparisons between affected
dogs, Eur J Pharmacol 104:27-38, 1984.
and normal dogs, Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 
198.8
Scherkl R, Kurudi D, Frey HH: Clorazepate in dogs: tol-
43:691-699, 1977.
erance to the anticonvulsant effect and signs of physical
220. Taheri S, Zeitzer JM, Mignot E: The role of hypocretins 
dependence, Epilepsy Res 3:144-150, 1989.
(orexins) in sleep regulation and narcolepsy, Annu Rev
199.8
Scherkl R, Scheuler W, Frey HH: Anticonvulsant effect
Neurosci 25:283-313, 2002.
of clonazepam in the dog: development of tolerance
221. Overeem S, Mignot E, van Dijk JG, et al: Narcolepsy:
and physical dependence, Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther
clinical features, new pathophysiologic insights, and
278:249-260, 1985.
future perspectives, J Clin Neurophysiol 18:78-105,
200. Scherkl R, Kurudi D, Frey HH: Tolerance to the anticon-
2001.
vulsant effect of clorazepate and clonazepam in mice,
 222. Nishino S: Narcolepsy: pathophysiology and pharmacol-
Pharmacol Toxicol 62:38-41, 1988.
ogy, J Clin Psychiatry 68(suppl 13)13:9-15, 2007.
412
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
223. Lin L, Faraco J, Li R, et al: The sleep disorder canine
232. Strain GM, Olcott BM, Archer RM, et al: Narcolepsy in a
narcolepsy is caused by a mutation in the hypocretin
Brahman bull, J Am Vet Med Assoc 185:538-541, 1984.
[orexin) receptor 2 gene, Cell 98:365-376, 1999.
233. Lunn DP, Cuddon PA, Shaftoe S, et al: Familial occur-
224.B
 Ripley B, Fujilki N, Okura M, et al: Hypocretin levels in
 rence of narcolepsy in miniature horses, Equine Vet J
sporadic and familial cases of canine narcolepsy, Neuro-
25:483-487, 1993.
biol Dis 8:525-534, 2001
234. Dreifuss FE, Flynn DV: Narcolepsy in a horse, J Am Vet
225.B
Foutz AS, Mitler MM, Cavalli-Sforza LL, et al: Genetic
Med Assoc 184:131-132, 1984.
factors in canine narcolepsy, Sleep 1:413-421, 1979.
235. Bathen-Nothen A, Heider C, Fernandez AJ, et al: Hypo-
226. Baker TL, Foutz AS, MeNerney V, et al: Canine model
 Cretin measurement in an Icelandic foal with narcolepsy.
of narcolepsy: genetic and developmental determinants,
J Vet Intern Med 23:1299-1302, 2009.
Exp Neurol 75:729-742, 1982.
236. Tonokura M, Fujita K, Nishino S: Review of pathophysi-
227. B
Hungs M, Fan J, Lin L, et al: Identification and functional
ology and clinical management of narcolepsy in dogs, Vet
analysis of mutations in the hypocretin [orexin) genes of
Rec 161:375-380, 2007.
narcoleptic canines, Genome Res 11:531-539, 2001.
237. Coleman ES: Canine narcolepsy and the role of the ner-
228. Wagner JL, Storb R, Storer B, et al: DLA-DQBl alleles 
vous system, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2l:641-
and bone marrow transplantation experiments in narco-
650, 1999.
leptic dogs, Tissue Antigens 56:223-231, 2000.
238. Katherman AE: A comparative review of canine and
229.8
Schatzberg SJ, Cutter-Schatzberg K, Nydam D, et al: The
human narcolepsy, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
2:818-822, 1980.
old Weimaraner with narcolepsy, J Vet Intern Med 18:
239.
Mitler MM, Soave O, Dement WC: Narcolepsy in seven
586-588,2004.
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:1036-1038, 1976.
 230. Cantile C, Baroni M, Arispici M: A case of narcolepsy-
 240. Nishino S, Haak L, Shepherd H, et al: Effects of central
cataplexy
 associated with distemper encephalitis,
alpha-2 adrenergic compounds on canine narcolepsy, a
Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 46:301-308, 1999.
 disorder of rapid eye movement sleep, J Pharmacol Exp
231. Knecht CD, Oliver JE, Redding R, et al: Narcolepsy in
Ther 253:1145-1152, 1990.
a dog and a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:1052-1053,
1973.
CHAPTER 14
nimals do feel pain, and yet this point has been argued
nse reuue ue yeu sumouy c'asuodsa, inyued, e isnf uen
for many years. For a review of the entire spectrum of
ally has the sensations associated with hyperpathia would be
animal pain, the Colloquium on Recognition and Allevia-
diffcult if not impossible. Allodynia is pain resulting from a
tion of Animal Pain and Distress and the textbooks specifically
nonnoxious stimulus to normal skin. Because we are often
addressing pain management in domestic animals are recom-
assessing "painful" responses from structures other than skin,
mended.! This chapter reviews the pathophysiology of pain,
this term is not used often.
some diseases that have pain as the primary clinical sign, and
the symptomatic treatment of pain. Definitions of the terms
related to the description of pain are essential to communica-
NEUROANATOMIC BASIS FOR PAIN
tion. Kitchell2 has provided an excellent working definition:
(NOCICEPTION)
"Pain in animals is an aversive sensory and emotional expe-
rience [(a perception), which elicits protective motor actions,
The nociceptive pathway includes peripheral nociceptors,
results in learned avoidance, and may modify species-specifc
nerve fbers; spinal cord and brain pathways; and central
 traits of behavior, including social behavior." In other words.
processing areas in the brainstem, thalamus, and cerebrum
pain is not nociception but is the conscious experience of
(Figure 14-1). Nociception consists of three distinct processes:
nociception, which is only partly determined by the stimulus-
[1] transduction, which is the translation of a noxious stimulus
induced activation of afferent neural pathways.23 Nociception
is the detection of tissue damage by specialized receptors
a  ssndu arau jo uaedd au si um usu
induced by a noxious [noxious means "injurious") stimulus.
receptors into the central nervous system (CNS); (3) modula-
 It is also incorrect to refer to painful stimuli or pain recep-
tion, which involves facilitation or inhibition by neurons and
tors, pathways, or fbers. Thus we use the terms noxious stimuli,
interneurons of the spinal cord. The perception of a noxious
nociceptors, nociceptive pathways, and so on.
stimulus is the result of integration of the projection pathways 
 Formal definitions in human medicine for types of pain have
to the thalamus and cerebrum to produce the final conscious
been developed by the Subcommittee on Taxonomy of the
subjective and emotional experience of pain.5 Specific phar-
International Association for the Study of Pain [Table 14-1).4
macologic therapies can modify the response.
 In brief hyperesthesia (hyperalgesia) denotes an increased sen-
There are specifc types of sensory receptors: mechanore-
sitivity of nociceptive fibers to normal stimulation. It has often
ceptors for touch and pressure; nociceptors and thermoreceptors
been used to designate an unpleasant response to a nonnox-
for harmful stimuli (noxious, and heat or cold, respectively);
ious stimulus.2 We use the term more generically than others
chemoreceptors for detecting chemical changes [taste, smell,
because of the diffculty in truly knowing whether the animal
visceral [e.g., Oz, pH, osmolality); and photoreceptors [rods,
perceives pain. Throughout this book, we use the term hyper-
esthesia to mean a behavioral reaction of the animal indicating
 a specific sensory organ that detects the stimulus based on
that the stimulus was unpleasant despite the fact that we con-
modality of stimulus [pressure, noxious, temperature, chemi-
sider the stimulus to be nonnoxious. The most common usage
cal, or light), location of the sensory unit, and the intensity and
is in describing an animal's response to palpation that does
duration of the stimulus.
not evoke a reaction in a normal animal but causes an aversive
 Impulses from mechanoreceptors for touch, vibration, and
reaction in an affected animal.
general proprioception are transmitted by large myelinated A-α
Hyperpathia denotes an unpleasant painful response to a
and A-β fbers. These fibers ascend ipsilaterally in the dorsal col-
noxious stimulus, especially if repeated, and is characterized
umns of the spinal cord to the medulla to synapse in the gracilis
by delay, overreaction, and aftersensation.2 This term has been
and cuneate nuclei of the brainstem. The second order neu-
used frequently in veterinary medicine but is far more specific
rons then decussate and ascend in the medial lemniscus to end
413
414
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
stimulus). The nociceptors of the skin have been studied in
TABLE 14-1
the most detail, but nociception clearly occurs from many
Nomenclature Used for Description of Pain
other somatic and visceral structures. Nociceptors are usu-
ally silent unless stimulated and require more intense stimuli
inHumans
than do other types of receptors [e.g., those with high thresh-
old for stimulation). Response to stimuli is proportional to
Term
 Definition
the intensity of the stimulus. Impulses from nociceptors are
Types of Pain
transmitted into the CNS by A-8 fibers and C fbers. The
Hyperalgesia
 Exaggerated pain response from a normally
A-8 fbers are thinly myelinated and faster conducting [12
 noxious stimulus—-increased sensitivity.
to 30 m/sec) that transmit impulses from mechanoreceptors,
 nociceptors, and cold receptors that mediate the response
 lower pain threshold
 Abnormaly noxious and exaggerated reac-
to noxious stimuli. The A-8 fbers provide more discrimina-
Hyperpathia
tive information to the CNS. The A-8 nerve terminals can
tion to all stimuli; related to hyperalgesia
 be nociceptive or nonnociceptive and are composed mainly
Hyperesthesia
 Exaggerated perception of touch stimulus
of low-threshold mechanoreceptors. The C fibers are unmy-
Allodynia*
 Abnormal perception of pain from a normally
elinated and slower conducting (O.5 to 2 m/sec) fbers that
 nonnoxious mechanical or themmal stimu-
 mainly transmit impulses associated with noxious stimuli and
lus (delay in perception)
temperature. Most C fber nociceptors are high threshold and
Dysesthesia*
 Any abnormal sensation described as
polymodal.
 Transmission of nociception also is classified as fast and slow
unpleasant by patient 
Paresthesia*
 Spontaneous abnormal sensation that is not
pain.57 Fast pain is associated with A-8 nociceptive fbers and
slow pain is transmitted by the C nociceptive fibers. The initial
 unpleasant 
noxious stimulus often causes a sharp, pricking, and localized
Causalgia*
 Burning pain in distribution of one or more
 sensation (fast pain or first pain), which is followed by a dull,
 peripheral nerves
intense, diffuse, burning, and unpleasant sensation [slow pain
Types of Sensory Loss
or second pain)
Hypoalgesia
 Decreased sensitivity and higher threshold 
At the tissue level, chemical mediators act to further mod-
ulate the nociceptors. Tissue injury causes the release of brady-
(Hypalgesia)
 to noxious stimuli
kinin and prostaglandins that sensitize or activate nociceptors,
Anesthesia
 Reduced perception of all sensation
which in turn releases substance P and calcitonin gene-related
 Analgesia
 Reduced perception of noxious stimulus
peptide. Substance P causes degranulation of mast cells and
histamine release, which further activates nociceptors. Sub-
'Symptoms used to describe pain in humans but diffcult to recog-
stance P and calcitonin gene-related peptide also cause extrav-
nize as clinical signs in animals.
 asation of plasma and dlation of blood vessels resulting in
edema.
 In the CNS of domestic animals, the nociceptive pathways
Perception (Brain)
are multisynaptic, bilateral, and resistant to injurious pro-
cesses. 3 These nociceptive fbers generally enter the spinal cord
through the spinal ganglia [without synapsing) and dorsal
 root and synapse in the dorsal horn of the gray matter within
Modulation (Spinal Cord)
Projection
specific laminae (Rexed laminae). This convergence of noci-
ceptive pathways in the spinal cord may be one of the mecha-
nisms of referred pain.3 Importantly, the nociceptive input is
"gated" by a wide variety of substances and transmitters that
can increase or decrease the frequency of fring in neurons that
relay the nociceptive signal. The synaptic transmitter secreted
by afferent fibers of fast pain is glutamate via the N-methyl
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and the transmitter of slow
 pain is substance P. The gray matter contains projection neu-
rons, propriospinal (segmental transmission) neurons,
， and
interneurons. Interneurons modulate and transmit informa-
tion a short distance within the spinal cord. An example is
Figure 14-1 Schematic demonstrating the neural pathways for
 interneurons for protective reflexes such as the flexor reflex in
pain transduction, transmission, modulation, and perception of
which stimulation of a single digit innervated by a few sensory
noxious stimuli.
fibers contained in a single spinal cord segment results in the
activation of motor neurons contributing to the sciatic nerve,
in the contralateral ventral nucleus of the thalamus and from
 which are located over several spinal cord segments.
there are relayed to the somatosensory cortex at the cerebrum.
 Projection neurons relay sensory information to the brain.
Some pathways for discriminative aspects of noxious stimuli
Most axons from these neurons immediately decussate and
also travel in the dorsal column system. Fibers mediating touch
 ascend in the spinal cord, mainly in the lateral spinothalamic
and proprioception from the head are relayed from the main
and spinoreticular tracts and some in the spinocervicothalamic
 sensory and mesencephalic nuclei of the trigeminal nerve.
and spinomesencephalic tracts. Some axons remain ipsilateral
Nociceptive fbers are generally "free nerve endings,"
during their ascent. The relative significance and location of
although the endings are never completely free of surround-
these tracts differ between species. For example, a major part
ing structures that terminate in the skin, subcutaneous tis-
of the spinothalamic tract is in the dorsal portion of the lateral
sue, periosteum, joints, muscles, and viscera.3.6.7 Nociceptors
funiculus in cats, compared with the ventral portion of the
and thermoreceptors may be specifie to one kind of stimulus
lateral funiculus in primates and pigs.3 The spinoreticular and
or polymodal (those responding to more than one kind of
spinomesencephalic tracts probably have less discriminative
CHAPTER 14Pain
415
capacity than the spinothalamic tracts. These spinal tracts syn-
touch of the skin, whereas some large breed dogs such as an
apse on the caudal lateral ventral nucleus of the thalamus and
 older Labrador retriever or those with a docile personality such.
ultimately project to the somesthetic areas of the cerebrum.
as a basset hound may not respond even to frm pinching of
Although the majority of perceptive function for nociception
the skin. However, animals reliably respond to strong noxious
lies within the cerebrum, some perception may occur within
stimulation of the periosteum such as applying pressure with a
the thalamus.8
forceps across a digit.
The majority of nociception from the head is carried in
In general, pain is clinically evaluated as acute or physiologic
nerve branches of the trigeminal (V) nerve. The majority of
[nociceptive) pain and chronic or pathologic. Clinical pain also
these fibers synapse in the caudal aspect of the nucleus of the
can be further classifed as mflammatory pain or neuropathic
 trigeminal nerve and then route through the trigeminal and
pain, depending on the underlying disease and anatomic struc-
medial lemnisci and quintothalamic tract to the ventral caudal
tures involved.5 Acute pain has a sudden onset and dissipates
medial nucleus of the thalamus and cerebrum.
during healing. The animal may feel a pinch, poke, or sharp
Afferent A-8 and C fibers from visceral structures reach the
pain. Acute pain is very localized and transient, and serves as a
CNS via the sympathetic [splanchnic) and parasympathetic
protective mechanism (e.g., perception of stimulus during the
flexor withdrawal reflex). Chronic pain is described as intense
afferents through the thoracic and lumbar dorsal roots and
and unrelenting, resulting in extended discomfort. Chronic pain
is characteristic of musculoskeletal and neurologic disorders and
facial (VIl), glossopharyngeal (IX), and vagus [X) nerves; the
has no beneficial role. This type of pain may persist long after
T3 to lumbar (L4-5) dorsal roots; and the sacral nerve roots.
recovery from the inciting injury and is often refractory to com-
Vagal and splanchnic afferent fibers terminate in the nucleus
 mon analgesic agents (e.g, opiates, nonsteroidal antinfamma-
tractus solitarius, where integration of sensory information is
tory drugs [NSAIDs]. Neuropathic pain occurs with injury to
 projected to the thalamus.
neural tissue and represents abnormalities in transmission and
somatosensory processing in the peripheral or CNS. Some dis-
pue Arpueurandpou oq ssedosua sassond asea
MECHANISMS OF PAIN
neuropathic pain mechanisms. Surgical procedures and many
 inflammatory and ischemic disease processes create pathologic
Stimulation of nociceptors causes two kinds of reactions. Super-
pain through one or both of these mechanisms. Neoplasms can
ficial sensation assessed by stimulation of superficial nocicep-
infltrate, and/or compress neural tissue and tissue innervated
tors, such as those in the skin, is discriminative, allowing precise
with nociceptors or cause unlocalizable pain through paraneo-
localization of the stimulus. Commonly referred to as pain
plastic effects. l0 Pain associated with chemotherapy and radiation
 perception, [deep pain perception) assessed by stimulation of
 may result from induced axonal injury and vascular compromise.
nociceptors in muscle, joints, and bone is motivational, caus-
 ] q        
Inflammatory (Physiologic, Acute,
There are fewer A-8 fibers in the deeper structures so there is
or Nociceptive] Pain
little fast or sharp pain. Superficial sensation may be diffcult to
Inflammatory pain is associated with tissue damage either
assess because some animals may not respond, whereas others
of visceral or somatic origin.2 Acute pain caused by tissue
respond strongly. This variability is often observed in normal
 inflammation results in abnormal (overreactive, hyperalge-
animals, which makes interpretation in affected animals dif-
sia] responses to noxious stimuli [lowered threshold to nox-
ficult. For example, normal small and toy breed dogs such as
ious stimuli). This type of pain depends on activation of high
the Chihuahua often display a vigorous response to even light
threshold receptors (nociceptors). Pain relates to ongoing
Pain
Somatic
Visceral
 Superficial pain
Deep pain
First pain
 Second pain
 Connective tissue,
Viscera
bones, joints, muscles 
Skin
Intestinal torsion/
Pinprick, pinching.
Muscle spasm, joint 
distention, kidney
abrasion
 disease, fractures
stones
Hgure 14-2 Quantities and origin of pain.
416
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
 activation of primary afferents of somatic and visceral end
sensitization enables low-intensity stimuli and low-thresh-
organs. Pain arises from increased tissue swelling and ten-
old sensory fibers to thereby induce pain as a result of these
 sion due to fuid accumulation and presence of inflammatory
 changes in sensory processing within the spinal cord.5 Cen-
mediators. Inflammation causes release of different cytokines,
tral sensitization or wind-up contributes to postinjury hyper-
histamine, prostaglandins, bradykinins, nitric oxide neuropep-
sensitivity and is considered the main mechanism underlying
tides, and neurotrophic factors into the inflamed area. These
hyperalgesia and allodynia. The perception of pain is more
 inflammatory mediators initiate transmission of nociception
 intense and more difficult to manage once wind-up has taken
from cutaneous areas and within the dorsal horn. The verte-
place. Moreover, a persistent nociceptive or inflammatory pain
bral column and nerve roots [radicular pain] are common sites
state through peripheral and central sensitization can develop
 affected by mechanical and inflammatory disorders. Nocicep-
into a neuropathic pain state. Since it is easier to prevent sensi-
tors are located in the dura mater, nerve roots, outer annular
tization, preemptive analgesia should be used before the pain
fbers of the disk, periosteum and cancellous layers of bone,
starts.
facet aspect of joints, joint capsule, and paraspinal ligaments,
 In addition, a nerve injury can contribute to acute and
muscles, and aponeuroses. Examples of somatic pain include
 chronic states of neuropathic pain through disinhibition. The
surgical procedures, trauma, ischemia, osteoarthritis, cancer,
onset of pain of nerve origin is delayed. Inhibitory interneu-
and abscessation. Visceral pain is associated with torsion, dis-
rons within the dorsal horns modulate the transmission of
 tention, obstruction, and ischemia of visceral structures.
nociception within the spinal cord and projection pathways
to and within the brain. Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
Neuropathic Pain
and GABA receptors modulate the inhibition. Blockage of this
 Neuropathic pain results from disease and dysfunction of
GABA-mediated inhibition facilitates pain transmission. In
the peripheral and/or central nervous systems and represents
abnormalities in transmission of nociceptive information that
expressed that decrease the analgesic effects of endogenous
sraogoed su zilanu au jo ansar au se padoaa
and exogenous opioids.
type of pain is described as a perception that is greater than
the apparent noxious stimulus. In human medicine, notable
Central Pain
descriptions for neuropathic pain include evidence of a sen-
Central pain is poorly understood and described as pain initiated
sory deficit, burning pain, pain to light stroking of the skin, and
or caused by a primary lesion or dysfunction in the CNS.ll Cen-
attacks of pain without provocation. Neuropathic pain occurs
tral pain was originally observed with lesions of the thalamus
spontaneously and pain that is stimulus independent or stim-
(thalamic pain) but also can occur in lesions affecting the lami-
ulus-evoked.ll In neuropathic pain, stimuli that are normally
nae of the dorsal horn. This phenomenon is thought to occur in
are pe io (eruapoe) inyued se pasuaadxa are nued 1ou
animals with syringohydromyelia [see Chapter 7).13 Humans
normally painful but experienced as more painful than usual
characterize central pain as burning, aching, pricking, or radiat-
(hyperalgesia). Any nonnoxious sensory stimuli, enough to
ing that is paroxysmal, varies in intensity, and is poorly localized.
     r    
Referred and Radicular Pain
 unrecognized in animals, the term causalgia is used for severe
Neural mechanisms underlying referred pain are complex. Pain
persistent pain (burning) that results from nerve trauma. Neu-
can be referred from a nociceptive focus in muscle, nerve, or
ropathic pain can be generated at the site of injury or referred.
viscera. Radicular pain is localized to the distribution of one or
Common causes of neuropathic pain include nerve transec-
more nerve roots and is often exacerbated by Valsalva maneu-
tion and compression of neural tissue. Nerve roots are more
        
susceptible to compression because of lack of appreciable epi-
pressure or positions that stretch the affected nerve roots [see
neurium and perineurium, and an intact blood-nerve barrier.
Figure 5-l). Nerve root lesions also can cause paresthesias and
Nerve roots also are bathed in cerebrospinal fluid; thereby.
numbness localized to dermatomal distributions [see Chapter
 they are exposed to inflammatory processes in the meninges.
5). Examples of paresthesias include polyradiculoneuritis and
Mechanisms of neuropathic pain evolve from a dynamic
the acral mutilation seen in some sensory neuropathies [see
reorganization of neural circuitry following injury. Peripheral
Chapter 7). When pain is referred, it is usually to a structure
and central sensitization lower the threshold for nociception.5
that develops from the same embryonic segment or derma-
 Sensitization can occur in the CNS and at peripheral sites.
tome as the structure from which the pain originates. Visceral
 Peripheral sensitization [sensory organ) involves upregulation
and deep somatic pain can be referred but not superficial pain.
of sodium ion channels in primary afferents and abnormal
Somatic and visceral pain fbers converge on the same second-
responses to endogenous cytokines, prostaglandins, brady-
order neurons in the laminae of the dorsal horn and then proj-
kinins, and neurotransmitters. This causes an overall direct
ect to the thalamus and cerebrum. The convergence-projection
excitatory effect on the nociceptive system. Inflammation or
theory of referred pain coupled with plasticity in the CNS
trauma may induce peripheral sensitization upon exposure
proposes that noxious stimuli transmitted by one group of
 of nerve terminals with reduced pain threshold to sensitizing
nociceptors can increase activity in CNS neurons that receive
agents.
input from another group of nociceptors, thus the brain can-
 Central sensitization occurs with increased neuronal exci-
not distinguish whether the origin of the stimulus came from
 tation in the spinal cord arising from ongoing spontaneous
 the viscera or area of nociceptive focus. 14
activity of peripheral nociceptors and increased activity and
responses in ascending nociceptive pathways. Central sen-
sitization occurs within dorsal horn neurons secondary to
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
several mechanisms that involve inflammatory mediators,
altered gene expression, receptors, and neurotransmitters.
The methods for evaluating an animal's ability to perceive
This process, termed wind-up, leads to a hyperactivity in the
noxious stimuli are discussed in Chapter 1. Recognition of
CNS and has been proposed as an explanation of the per-
the signs of pain in animals is important for diagnosis, and
 sistent and unrelenting nature of chronic pain. The temporal
for appropriate and humane care. The perception of noxious
 and spatial summation effects of neuroexcitatory input from
stimuli is similar in most mammalian species. However, the
noxious stimuli produce a prolonged sensitization. Central
behavioral response to noxious stimuli depends on the species,
CHAPTER 14Pain
417
approaches. Temporally pain can be static, progressive, inter-
TABLE 14-2
 mittent, and recurrent. The owners can best provide informa-
Clinical Signs of Pain in Domestic Animals
 tion on behavior alterations and factors that provoke pain. Loss
 of house training in dogs and cats may occur as pain increases.
Localization of pain is accomplished by a combination of
Species
Clinical Signs of Pain 
observation, palpation, and manipulation. Localization deter-
Canine
 Acute pain: facial expressions (unchanged, wincing.
mines whether the pain is focal, multifocal, diffuse, or referred.
anxious): may distance themselves; avoidance
Diffuse or multifocal pain is usually caused by meningitis,
reaction or aggression; vocalization in acute
polymyositis, polyarthritis, diffuse skeletal disease, or more
pain; attempt to escape. Chronic pain: depres-
rarely cancer (typically metastatic). Neurologic and orthope-
dic examinations of an animal with spinal or musculoskeletal
sion, withdrawn, reluctance to move. Abdominat
hyperesthesia determine lesion localization and extent. It is
pain: praying position, sterma recumbency. tense
important to complete the nonpainful components of these
in abdomen, reluctance to move. Soinat pain:
examinations before performing palpation or manipulation of
periods of recumbency, short stride, kyphosis,
 an area that is painful or suspected to be painful. Both superf-
stiffness, reluctance to move neck or trunk.
cial sensation and pain perception [or deep pain] are used clin-
 Physiologic signs: tachypnea, panting. tachycardia,
ically to localize lesions. Testing for pain perception is the most
 dilated pupils, hypertension 
 important for assessment of prognosis in severe neural lesions.
Feline
Acute pain: anxious facial expression, flinching.
growling. cowering. aggression, attempt to
Observation
escape, hunched position. Chronic pain: lack
One must recognize nonspecific behavioral indicators that are
present in animals that are painful.5.7 When posible, obser-
of activity, inappetence, dullness, avoidance.
vation should be done from a distance. Painful animals are
Abdominat pain: sternal recumbency. hunched,
less likely to interact with humans and explore their environ-
tense in abdomen. Spinat pain: reluctance to
ment. Some animals may become anxious, restless, and vocal-
move, stiffness, kyphosis, short stride.
ize. Animals may outwardly respond with aggression or show
 Physiorogic signs: tachypnea, tachycardia, dilated
timidness and fear. Dogs may show avoidance behavior but
pupils, hypertension
show aggression during attempts to handle or restrain. Cats
Equine
Acute pain: escape or attack reaction, kick or bite
of interaction can be associated with acute or chronic pain in
at source of pain, restless, distressed, agitation.
 Chronic pain: dullness, stand with head down,
 dogs and cats. In general, dogs and cats with spinal pain often
tucked up appearance, inappetence, avoidance
show reluctance to move or change position. Reluctance to
lying down is observed in dogs with acute abdominal or spinal
behavior with other horses. Abcominal pain:
pain. Horses often respond violently to acute pain by gallop-
restlessness, kicking at belly, glancing at flank.
ing, kicking, or biting. In cases of severe pain, the horse will
rolling. lying down and getting up. Limb pain:
be restless, tachypneic, agitated, and sweat copiously Espe-
lameness, shifting of weight, lifting of leg. dis-
cially in colic, the horse will glance at the flank with frequent
pacement of weight, reluctance to move.
lying down, rolling, and getting up. With chronic and persis-
 Physiologic signs: tachypnea, tachycardia, sweating 
tent pain, the horse will appear dull, stand tucked, or stand away
Bovine
Acute: inappetence, dullness, grunting. bellowing.
from other horses or in the corner of a stall In ruminants, signs
teeth grinding, cessation of cudding. Chronic:
of pain are often subtle. Animals may bellow or bleat, become
reluctance to move, reduced grooming, separa-
separated from the herd, grind teeth excessively, and become
tion from herd. Abdominal pain: flank kicking.
dull. Ruminants with abdominal pain will have cessation of
repeat lying down and getting up
cudding, inappetence, flank watching and kicking, tachycardia,
 and tachypnea. Pigs in pain become more tolerant to handing.
Ovine
Teeth grinding. head pressing. subtle changes in 
 Pigs also may become inappetent, not drink, shiver, and have
behavior
piloerection.
Caprine
 Stop grooming. resent handling. vocalization (bleat-
 During examination the animal may manifest specific
 ing, cryingl, cessation of cudding, inappetence,
postures that may relieve pain. Posture of an animal in pain
flank watching. kicking 
from spinal disease is typically guarded, which is refected
Swine
 Inappetence, vocalization (grunting, short high
by muscle stiffness and spasms. Animals with thoracolumbar
pitch), move more slowly, more tolerant to han-
pain often have a kyphotic posture [see Figure 6-4). An animal
ding. shivering. piloerection
the neck in a fixed position, and show reluctance to move
[see Figure 7-2). Muscle palpation can reveal increased tone
breed, age, disease, injury process, and duration.7 Many ani-
and intermittent spasms/jerks. The gait of an animal in pain
mals give little outward indication that they are in pain,
may be stilted or stiff and have a shortened stride length. Ani-
although we recognize that the physical abnormality must
mals with joint, muscle, or meningeal pain often appear to be
be painful. For example, a dog with a fractured limb often
"wallking on eggshells" and will shift weight to the thoracic
shows little outward sign of pain and suffering, but we know it
    s     s
radicular pain (nerve root signature). Animals with low lum-
with severe pain show one or more of the following signs as
bar pain often have the pelvie limbs tucked under the caudal
described in Table 14-2.
abdomen to flex the spine and lessen nerve root compression
When obtaining the history, the clinician should assess time
[see Figure 14-3). Other signs of myelopathy such as general
 of onset, temporal progression, associated behaviors and fac-
 proprioceptive ataxia and UMN paresis/plegia may be pres-
tors that relieve or provoke the pain. Determining the mode of
ent concurrently with spinal hyperesthesia. Meningitis alone
onset for whether the pain is acute [hours to days) or chronic
results in slight or no evidence of postural reaction or motor
[weeks to months) will assist with differentials and treatment
deficits. Animals with muscle and joint pain often have no
418
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
neurologic deficits but physical discomfort may be associ-
semimembranosus, and gastrocnemius muscles in the pelvic
 ated with decreased flexor withdrawal reflexes and postural
limb and triceps and carpal flexor muscles in the thoracic limb
reaction deficits. In these instances, pain may be elicited with
are good examples of muscle groups that can be evaluated
manipulation of the limbs.
without applying pressure to the bones or joints. Palpation of
the head, muscles of mastication, mandible, and opening the
Palpation
Evaluating for presence hyperesthesia is the final part of the
 Paraspinal hyperesthesia is evaluated by deep palpation of
neurologic and orthopedic examinations and useful for local-
the paraspinal musculature. During the palpation process, it is
ization. Joint and muscle pain are assessed during palpation
best for the clinician to start distally and move toward the site
 and evaluating range of motion. The joints of the limbs are
of the suspected lesion. Generally, spinal cord disease causes
flexed and extended to elicit a painful response. Palpation
sensory deficits caudal to the lesion, hyperesthesia at the lesion
  s  sr o   o
site, and normal sensory function cranial to the lesion. Palpating
identifies muscular pain. The quadriceps, semitendinosus,
from caudal to cranial maximizes the ability of the examiner
to recognize the abnormal area. If an abnormality is identi-
fied, the palpation can be done in the reverse direction to help
 pinpoint the location. In large animal species, the examiner
should palpate the entire dorsum, lateral neck, and trunk, start-
ing at the head.15,16 Due to the presence of extensive wool,
 palpation in sheep and camelids is challenging for detecting
abnormalities. During palpation, the examiner should evaluate
for symmetry, heat, swelling, atrophy, and pain. Clinical signs
of hyperesthesia include flinching of the ears, twitching of the
 spinal musculature, and outward behavior signs of discomfort.
Palpation of the vertebral column is performed by applying
pressure with one hand on the spinous processes or squeez-
ing the articular or transverse processes, depending on the size
of the animal and examiner (Figure 14-4). Placement of the
other hand beneath the abdomen of small animals while pal-
 pating detects increased tension in the muscles as painful areas
are approached. Placement of the hand beneath the area of
the trunk being evaluated provides addlitional support and pre-
Figure 14-3 A dog with pain in the caudal lumbar vertebral
vents smaller sized animals from lying down. Direct palpation
of the proximal ribs may also be helpful in recognizing tho-
column and degenerative lumbosacral stenosis. Note the slightly
flexed position of the pelvis.
racic vertebral hyperesthesia, such as that in discospondylitis.
6
D
Hgure 14-4 A, Deep palpation of the thoracic vertebral column. Manipulation of the cervical
vertebral column next positioned in lateral flexion (B) of the neck, extended (C), and fexed (D)
positions.
CHAPTER 14
Pain
419
 The vertebral column of the cervical region is deeply located
caregivers currently use scales adapted for humans. Whereas
to the epaxial musculature, making it diffcult to apply direc-
  a ar n e a   
tion pressure to the spinous processes. When palpating the
asd susn Aq pansu si ued su u red r
cervical vertebral column, it is best to apply pressure on the
data and subjective behavioral observation. Physiologic vari-
lateral aspect of the neck near the transverse processes. Dif-
ables that can be studied and quantifed include heart and
fuse paravertebral pain is a prominent finding in meningitis but
respiratory rates; rectal temperature; packed cell volume; and
may predominate in the cervical spinal region. Some animals
serum concentrations of glucose, cortisol, norepinephrine,
with intracranial disease may manifest neck pain, presumably
and epinephrine. The stress associated with pain may cause
 due to stretching and stimulation of nociceptors within the
increases in heart and respiratory rates and systolic blood pres-
 dura and cerebral vasculature, or to central pain mechanisms.17
sure. In cats recovering from ovariohysterectomy, increased
Careful palpation  can distinguish between  vertebral
cortisol concentrations and increased systolic blood pressure
and abdominal pain. However, some animals are so pain-
were the best indicators of postoperative pain.2l.22
ful that localization is impossible. Sedation may allow for a
The three scales used in animals and humans are the
more accurate examination. Visceral disorders and peritoni-
simple descriptive scale (SDS), numeric rating scale (NRS).
tis cause severe abdominal pain. Vertebral or meningeal pain
 and visual analog scale [VAS). The SDS allows the observer
 also causes splinting of the abdomen and a painful response
to rate subjectively the degree of pain from no pain to very
when palpating the abdomen. If a painful response also occurs 
severe pain. The NRS is similar to the SDS, except numeric
when palpating the vertebral column, the pain is usually not
values are assigned to behavioral observations such as vocal-
of abdominal origin.
ization, movement, and agitation.23 The NRS is commonly
 Manipulation of the limbs and palpation of individual
modified to include numeric values assigned to physiologic
joints are used to identify joint pain. Careful palpation of
data. A modifed NRS has been described that includes physi-
 ss psns aa u   s
ologic data, response to palpation, activity, mental status, pos-
joint from muscle pain. The stifle, hock, elbow, and carpus are
ture, and vocalization.24The VAS is a simple scale comprising
good examples.
a straight line [usually 100 mm long) with the limits of the
 The vertebral column can also be manipulated to elicit hyper-
scale written at each end. The observer, or with humans, the
esthesia if palpation is unsuccessful; presence of hyperesthesia
 patient, marks the line at the point that refects the degree of
may be more accurately assessed by careful flexion, extension,
pain observed or perceived. Although the VAS is subject to a
and lateral manipulations of the neck (see Figure 14-4). The
great deal of variation, it is believed to be more sensitive than
animal may manifest a painful response and resistance to move-
either the NRS or SDS in human patients. In veterinary med-
ment. Palpation of the lumbosacral joint or hyperextension of
icine, some variations of SDS or NRS are commonly used.
 the hip accentuates canal stenosis and nerve root compression,
 The accuracy of pain-rating scales is usually established by
causing a painful response. However, hip extension is not a good
comparing scores with indicators of stress such as increased
test for differentiating hip pain from lumbosacral pain. Exten-
heart rate and increased concentrations of plasma cortisol.25
sion and lateral movements of the tail also can elicit pain in
Regardless of the scale used, significant variability exists
an animal with disease of the caudal lumbar vertebral column.
among trained observers in describing the degree of pain
Additionally, during rectal palpation, digital presure can be
applied on the ventral aspect of lumbosacral joint to elicit pain.
Assessment of the Perception of Noxious Stimuli
 Superfcial sensation is evaluated during cutaneous testing
using a skin pinch or prick (Figure 14-5). The sensory branch
p r sud ag passsse rmy st sau reniu jo
 matomal distribution [see Chapter 5). The autonomous zone
is the region of skin innervated by one nerve, a specific branch
of a nerve, or nerve root.l8-20 Testing of superficial sensation
by stimulation of the skin of an autonomous zone helps iden-
tify dysfunction of specific nerves, nerve roots, or spinal cord
segments (see Chapter 5). Superficial sensation of the limbs
is perceived by the examiner as a behavioral response while
 performing the flexor withdrawal reflex.
 If a superficial sensation is absent, and there is also an absence
of voluntary motor functions, pain perception is then assessed.
Pain perceptionis evaluated by placing hemostats across the digits,
applying gradually inereasing amounts of pressure, which stimu-
lates nociceptors of the periosteum of the digit, and observing
for a behavioral response [see Figure 14-5). Most importantly a
flexor withdrawal reflex of the limbs by itself is not an indicator
of pain perception; the animal must show a behavioral response.
Stated another way, the presence or absence of pain perception is
solely based on the presence or absence ofa behavioral response.
 Loss of pain perception is considered a poor prognostic sign.
METHODS OF MEASURING PAIN
B
It is extremely difficult to determine the degree of pain an ani-
mal is experiencing, although it is well accepted that animals
Hgure 14-5 Demonstration of superficial sensation (A) and pain
S         
[deep] perception (B).
420
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 14-3
Differentials for Clinical Pain Associated With the Nervous and Musculoskeletal Systems
inDomesticAnimals
Diferential Category
Nociceptive/lnflammatory Pain
Neuropathic Pain 
Degenerative
 Degenerative joint disease (axial and
IVDD (Hansen type I and Ill, cervical spondylomyelopathy.
 appendicular skeleton}
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis, paraspinal cysts 
Anomalous
Axial/appendicular skeletal malformation 
Spinal malformation, caudal occipital malformation syndrome
(Chiari-like malformation), syringohydromyelia, atlantoaxial
instability
Metabolic
Hyperparathyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism 
Neoplastic
 Primary and metastatic neoplasms of
Malignant nerve sheath tumor, intracranial mass, extradural,
bone, joint, muscle, spine, meninges 
intradural/extramedullary. intramedullary (less likely) spinal
cord tumors, vertebral/cranial tumors, metastatic tumors,
paraneoplastic
Nutritional
Hypervitaminosis A
Inflammatory (lnfec-
Osteoarthritis, osteomyelitis, hypertro-
Meningitis, epidural empyema
tious/Noninfectious)
 phic osteodystrophy. infectious and 
noninfectious meningitis, discospon-
dylitis, epidural empyema, myositis,
polymyositis
Immune
Osteoarthritis, myositis, systemic lupus
Chronic osteoarthritis
erythema, rheumatoid disease
ldiopathic
Spinal arachnoid cyst/diverticulum
 Feline spinal hyperesthesia syndrome
Traumatic
Fracture, Hansen type I IVDD
Spinal fracture, Hansen type I IVD extrusion, neuroma, nerve
avulsion, syrinx
Vascular
Osteonecrosis
Ischemic neuromyopathy, extradural hemorrhage
Adapted from Coates JR: Treatment of animals with spinal pain. In Bonagura JD, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis, 2008,
Elsevier.
animals experience in the postoperative period.26 Chronic
steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis.35-40 A vasculitis and
Pnb riense au aq r ssue se uns u
 through use of kinematic, pressure mats, and accelerometer
canine pain syndrome.41-43
technologies.
 Regardless of the cause of meningitis, the potential for the
inflammatory process to extend to the nervous tissue is always
DISEASES
enous spread from infections in other parts of the body; by
direct extension from adjacent structures including sinuses,
Table 14-3 lists neurologic diseases that frequently cause
eyes, or ears; and from direct trauma including surgery and
clinical pain. Most of these are discussed in other chapters, as
CSF collection.27.30 The organisms spread through the CSF
indicated in the table. Determining the underlying cause for
to both spinal and intracranial meninges. Vasculitis is com-
mon, especially in rickettsial infections and immune-mediated
appropriate treatment strategies and pain management. Disor-
disease.31.4s The resulting encephalitis, myelitis, or encepha-
 ders associated with chronic pain are often difficult to manage
lomyelitis causes other clinical signs such as seizures, paresis,
compared with those associated with acute pain. Spinal and
 ataxia, or altered mental status. That helps localize the disease
 musculoskeletal pain occurs in those diseases associated with
 process to a specific anatomic region of the CNS. Cranial and
compression, inflammation, or trauma that activate nocicep-
 spinal nerves may be affected. As a consequence of inflam-
tive receptors. Primary sensory neuropathies are discussed in
mation, communicating hydrocephalus may develop because
Chapter 7. The only neurologic disease that frequently causes
of reduced absorption of CSF in the subarachnoid space and
 pain without other neurologic signs is meningitis.
through the venous sinuses.46,47 Occlusion of the CSF flow
within the ventricles may also cause obstructive hydrocephalus.
Meningitis
Pathogenesis
Clinical Signs
Inflammation of the meninges, or meningitis, may be caused
 Animals with meningitis are systemically ill.48.49 The onset is
usually acute, and signs are progressive. The animals may be
protozoal, and rickettsial organisms.27-30 A complete list is in
lethargic and reluctant to eat. Many animals, especially dogs,
the tables in Chapter 15. In addition, immune-mediated dis-
have rigidity with generalized pain that seems worse in the
eases can cause meningitis, as can some diseases of unknown
cervical spinal region. In large animals, common clinical signs
crigin, such as meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown eti-
include hyperesthesia, stiffness in the neck, muscle tremors,
somnolence, seizures, and blindness. 16.49 Palpation of the ver-
ized by an eosinophilic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),34 and a
tebral column and head usually causes the animal to splint the
CHAPTER 14Pain
421
muscles and appear uncomfortable, in contrast to palpation of
 a o   s   s 
PAIN MANAGEMENT
Relief of pain in animals was often ignored in the past. Greater
In dogs, two thirds of the cases have focal neurologic deficits.48
awareness of the signs associated with pain has resulted in
more aggressive management.l The key component in pain
Diagnosis
management is to determine the cause of pain to the full-
A complete blood count, biochemical profle, and urinalysis
est extent and institute a treatment plan that has established
provide a minimum database. A neutrophilie leukocytosis may
safety and efficacy. The ultimate goals are to reduce pain and
improve function and quality of life. An effective treatment
 animals, neonates frequently have a neutropenia.16 Magnetic
plan provides acceptable analgesia with few side effects. In vet-
resonance imaging of the brain can reveal meningeal enhance-
erinary medicine, a treatment plan may include clinical inter-
ventions, and pharmacologic and rehabilitative approaches
singly or in combination. Effcacy, tolerability, cost, and safety
and polymerase chain reaction have been useful in detecting
need consideration with any type of pharmacologic therapy.
various infectious agents.29,30.53 Please refer to Chapter 15 for
  sae asr s  sa
further discussion of diagnostic testing results.
pain.6.7,50.61 Routes of administration may factor into effective
pain control and include oral, parenteral (intravenous, intra-
Treatment
muscular, subcutaneous), epidural, transdermal, transmucosal,
Treatment of infectious diseases involves mainly antimicro-
 and local/regional nerve blocks.l0 Considerations should also
bials and is discussed in Chapter 15. Treatment of noninfec-
be given for short- and long-term pain management. With lack
tious diseases requires immunosuppression and is discussed in
 of multicenter, randomized, controlled studies in veterinary
Chapters 12 and 15.
medicine, regimens for pain management often are empiri-
cally based.
Feline Hyperesthesia Syndrome
 Identification of mechanisms underlying signal transduc-
Pathogenesis
tion and transmission and processing of noxious stimuli has
 Feline hyperesthesia syndrome is an episodic disorder, also
led to the development of drugs that target chemical media-
known as "rollng skin disease."54,55 It is a diagnosis of exclu-
tors of pain.5 Steroidal and nonsteroidal antinflammatory
sion and may not have a single identifying cause. Age of onset
drugs (NSAIDs) are effective for inflammation; opioids, αz-
is young to middle age. Affected cats tend to be compulsive.
agonists modulate excitatory and inhibitory neuronal activity;
A proposed trigger is displacement disorder, which represents
and local anesthetics suppress electrical impulses. Nonopioid
an alternative to two other conflicting behaviors.56 Environ-
drugs act at the nociceptor level and alter transduction pro-
mental factors often relate to stress. Hormone alterations in
cesses of pain. Opioids alter transmission and perception of
compulsive disorders have been associated with increased lev-
 pain in the CNS. Various pharmacologic regimens most often
 els of dopamine and opiates and reduced levels of serotonin.57
are based on complementary mechanisms of action that need
Abnormal electromyography (EMG) activity and vacuolar
to be combined in a rational fashion.5 For chronic pain, com-
r      
bination therapy, or multimodality therapies may be more
syndrome.58
effective than a single agent. The NSAIDs appear to have syn-
ergistic effects with opioids and may allow for lower dosage
Clinical Signs
of both.5.62 Common analgesic agents that include glucocor-
Affected cats stare at their flank and tail and then attack or exces-
ticoids, NSAIDs, opioids, αz-agonists, and other psychotropic
sively groom those areas. Severe alopecia and dermatitis may
 drugs are summarized among the domestic animals in Tables
result. Cats may have mydriasis, hallucinate and run around the
14-4 through 14-10. There are no FDA-approved analgesics
home, act irritable, and vocalize. Behavior changes include calm
for food-producing animals; all medications are extralabel use.
cats becoming aggressive and aggressive cats displaying increased
 affection. The episodes may be induced by stroking the cats
Corticosteroids
along the trunk, which may induce seizure activity in some cats.
Inflammatory pain can be alleviated through the antinflam-
 matory actions of corticosteroids. These mechanisms of action
Diagnosis
 suppress aspects of the inflammatory response by reduction
 Diagnosis is based on clinical signs and ruling out dermato-
of leukocyte numbers, phagocytosis, migration of neutrophils
logic, musculoskeletal, and other neurologic and behavioral
 and antigen presenting and processing Effects of corticoste-
 disorders. 54 Focal seizure and underlying pain or paresthesia
roids are mediated by a variety of corticosteroid receptors
 also need to be considered.
effects of corticosteroids is through inhibition of phospholi-
Treatment
pase activity, which converts membrane-released phospholip-
 Treatments are empirical. Behavior modification is focused on
ids to arachidonic acid. Prostaglandins and leukotrienes lower
creating a stable and consistent home environment. Pharmaco-
 the nociceptive threshold, increasing sensitivity to substances
logic interventions include behavioral modifying medications
that cause pain.
such as serotonin reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants,
Specific  neurologic (
disease processes vary widely in
and benzodiazepines.59 Anticonvulsant therapy using pheno-
e uenqo on puerdu st ll egsaesn piorasos redo
barbital may have some effect. Gabapentin may modify neu-
confirmatory diagnosis before corticosteroid usage. The ini-
ropathic pain. Carnitine and coenzyme Q may have effects
tial rapid improvements without a differential diagnosis
on the vacuolar myopathy. Drug trials may be necessary to
can be misleading and unsupervised chronic use of corti-
 determine which drug or combination has the greatest effects.
costeroids without monitoring can lead to deleterious side
Dosages should be titrated to effect to prevent side effects.
effects.54 Protocols with high-dose regimens should not be
Prognosis depends upon the owner's expectation and underly.
combined with other antinflammatory regimens. For com-
ing cause. Successful therapy should be reduction in frequency
pressive spinal cord disease, dexamethasone or prednisone
 and severity of clinical signs.
has been administered at antinflammatory doses to control
422
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 14-4
Analgesic Agents for Dogs
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
Corticosteroids
Prednisone 
Generic
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO
12-12h 
 PU/PD, polyphagia, weight 
gain, Gl ulceration 
Dexamethasone
Generic
0.07-0.15 mg/kg IV,
12-24h
Same as above
SC. PO
NSAIDS
Gl, renal, and some hepatic 
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
10-25 mg/kg PO
12-24h
Cautiously, Gl, bleeding 
Acetaminophen
Generic
10-20 mg/kg PO
12h
Cautiously, Gl, hepatoxicity
Deracoxib
Deramaxx
1-2 mg/kg PO
24h
G1
Etodolac 
 Etogesic, Lodine
10-15 mg/kg PO 
24h
GI
Firocoxib
 Previcox
5 mg/kg PO
24h
15
Carprofen 
 Rimadyl 
4 mg/kg. SC, IV once:
12h
 Gl, hepatotoxicity
2-2.2 mg/kg PO
Ketoprofen 
Orudis KT.
1-2 mg/kg PO, SC: IV once or
24h (use up to 
Extralabel use; Gl,
Ketofen
g24h (max 3 days)
5 days)
 renal effects
Meloxicam
Metacam 
0.1 mg/kg PO, SC; use 0.2
24h
G1
mg/kg IV, SC, PO for 
 single dose loading 
Piroxicam
Feldene
0.3 mg/kg PO
48h
Gl, renal effects 
Tepoxalin
10 mg/kg PO 
24h
Gl, hepatopathy.
 renal effects 
Opioids
 Buprenorphine 
Buprenex
0.005-0.02 mg/kg IV, IM,
4-8h
Respiratory depression
transmucosal
Butorphanol
Torbugesic.
0.2-1 mg/kg. IV, IM, SC, PO
Parenteral
Vomiting, sedation
 Torbutrol, Stadol
q2-6h:
 PO q4-8h 
Codeine 
Generic
0.5-1 mg/kg PO
4-6h
Sedation, dysphoria
 Fentanyl citrate
Sublimaze:
10-40 μg/kg. IV, IM, SC
Parenteral q2h:
 Respiratory depression,
 Duragesic:
50 μg/10-20 kg transdermal
Transdermal 
 hypoventilation
 generic
 3-6 μg/kg/h CRI
03-5 days
Hydromorphone 
 Dilaudid; generic
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC, IV, IM 
2-6h
Vomiting
Meperidine
Demerol
 310 mg/kg IM
PRN
Not recommended for I V use.
Sedation, hypotension
Methadone
Dolophine 
0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV, IM, SC
2-4h
 Sedation, minimal histamine
 release, mild vomiting
Morphine sulfate 
Generic
0.1-1.0 mg/kg IV, IM, SC 
 Parenteral
Histamine release-hypoten-
q2-6h: 
sion, IV; respiratory and CNS
PO q8h 
 depression
Nalbuphine 
Nalbuphine
0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC
3-4h
 Sedation
Oxycodone 
Percocet (with
 0.1-0.3 mg/kg PO
8-12h
Sedation
 acetaminophen!
Oxymorphone
Numorphan
0.03-0.2 mg/kg IV, IM, SC
 Repeat dosing 
 Respiratory and CNS depres-
with % dose
sion, hypotension, brady-
q1-2h
cardia, auditory sensitivity.
increased intracranial
pressure
Pentazocine
Talwin
 1-4 mg/kg IM
2-4h
Salivation, sedation 
 2-6 mg/kg PO
 Tramadol
Ultram
2-4 mg/kg PO
6-12h
Sedation, anorexia
CHAPTER 14
Pain
423
TABLE 14-4
Analgesic Agents for Dogs—cont'd
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
αz-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine HCl Dexdomitor 
500 μg/m2 IM:
PRN
Sedation, arrhythmias, brady-
375/m2, IV
cardia, respiratory depression
Xylazine
 Rompun; Generic
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
12h 
 Sedation, arrhythmias, brady-
IV. IM, SC
cardia, respiratory depression
Local (Epidural)
Anesthetics
Bupivacaine
Marcaine
1 mL/10 cm:
1-2.5 mg/kg epidural 
Lidocaine
Generic, Xylocaine
3-5 mg/kg
Mepivacaine
Carbocaine
34.5 mg/kg
q30sec until
absent 
reflex; not 
to exceed 8
mg/kg
Morphine
Generic
0.1-1 mg/kg
Other Drugs
Amitriptyline
!
1-4 mg/kg PO
12-24h
 Sedation, psychosis.
 anticholinergic, seizure
Gabapentin 
Generic, Neurontin
3-10 mg/kg PO
8-24h
Sedation 
 Pregabalin 
Lyrica
0.3-4 mg/kg PO
8h
Ketamine (anesthetic
Ketaset, Vetalar
5-7 mg/kg. IV
Usually as anesthetic agent,
agent!
5 μg/kg/min, CRI
 increased intracranial pres-
sure, seizures
 Dosages adapted from Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A: Pain management in animals London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaymor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain managerment, ed 2, St Louis, Mosby/Elsevier, 2009.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intrarmuscular; IV, intravenous; CRI, constant rate infusion; PRN, as necessary.
Tissue Injury
Phospholipids
Phospholipase Inhibitors
COx-1 and 2 Inhibitors
Phospholipase
 Glucocorticoids 
Aspirin
Arachidonic Acid
Carprofen
Etolac
 Ketoprofen
 Cyclo-oxygenase - 1
Lipoxygenase
LOX Inhibitors
Cyclo-oxygenase - 2
Ketoprofen
 Tepoxalin 
COX-2 > 1 Inhibitors 
Carprofen
Meloxicam
Deracoxib
Tepoxalin
Firocoxib
Prostaglandins
Leukotrienes
Thromboxanes
 Prostacyclin
 Inflammation
Hgure 14-6 Schematic depicting pharmacologic inhibitors of arachidonic acid metabolisrm and
the cyclo-oxygenase [COX) and lipoxygenase (LOX] pathways. [From Coates JR: Treatment of
animals with spinal pain. In Bonagura JD, editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis,
2008, Elsevier.)
424
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 14-5
Analgesic Agents for Cats
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
Corticosteroids
Prednisolone
Generic
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO
12-12h
 Minimal, short-term
Dexamethasone
Generic
0.07-0.15 mg/kg IV, SC, PO
12-24h
 Minimal, short-term
NSAIDS
 Gl renal, and some hepatic
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
40.5-81 mg/cat PO
48-72h
 Anorexia, Gl, bleeding 
Carprofen 
Rimadyl 
1-4 mg/kg SC 
once
 Extralabel use; Gl, hepatotoxicity 
Ketoprofen 
Orudis KT.
1-2 mg/kg PO, SC: IV once 
24h (use up to 5 days)
 Extralabel use; Gl, renal effects
Ketofen 
 or q24h (max 3 days)
Meloxicam
Metacam
0.025 mg/kg. PO; use 
g24 for 1-2 days: then
Gl, vomiting, anorexia
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg. PO,
0.025 mg/kg 2-3 times/
 SC, IV as single dose
week, PO
Vomiting. histamine release.
Opioids
hypotension
Buprenorphine
Buprenex
0.005-0.02 mg/kg IV, IM,
4-8h
 Respiratory depression
SC
Butorphanol
Torbugesic
1.5 mg/kg IV, IM, SC, PO 
Parenteral q2-4h: PO q6h
Vomiting, sedation, excitement
Fentanyl citrate 
Sublimaze:
5-10 μg/kg IV, IM, SC 
Parenteral q2h:
 Respiratory depression and 
Duragesic:
12.5-25 μg/cat, transdermal 
 Transdermal q3-5days
hypoventilation 
 generic
patch
 0.3 μg/kg/min CRI
Hydromophone
 Dilaudid: 
0.1-0.2 mg/kg SC, IV, IM 
2-6h
Vomiting. dysphoria, hyperthermia
 generic
Morphine
Generic
 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC 
Parenteral q4-6h:
Hypotension, vomiting. CNS and
PO q8h
respiratory depression, hyper-
excitability
Oxymorphone
Numorphan 
0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV.
Repeat dosing with % dose 
 Respiratory and CNS depression.
IM. SC
q1-2h
hypotension, hyperexcitability
Tramadol
 Ultram 
1-4 mg/kg PO
12h
 Sedation
αz-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine 
Dexdomitor
40 μg/kg IM (sedation/
PRN
 Sedation, arrhythmias,
HCI
analgesia) or 5-10 μg/kg
 bradycardia, respiratory
IV. IM
depression
Rompun;
0.1-0.5 mg/kg
12h 
 Sedation, arrhythmias, bradycar-
 generic
IV. IM, SC 
dia, respiratory depression
Other Drugs
 Amitriptyline
Elavil
2.5-5 mg/cat PO
24h
 Sedation, psychosis, anticholin-
ergic
Gabapentin
Generic, Neu- 
310 mg/kg PO
8-24h
 Sedation
rontin
Pregabalin
Lyrica
0.3-4 mg/kg PO 
8h
Sedation
Ketamine 
Ketaset,
 0.1-1.0 mg/kg IV, IM
CRI for 24h
 Usually as anesthetic agent
Vetalar
 5 μg/min CRI
Dosages adapted from Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A: Pain management in anirmals, London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain management, ed 2, St Louis, 2009,Elsevier.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV intravenous; CRI, constant rate infusion; PRN, as necessary.
inflammatory response and pain and to reduce spinal cord
of the immune response that underlies these diseases. Grad-
edema. Concurrently, strict cage rest is important to pre-
ual taper of the drug dosage is instituted according to the
vent excessive activity in animals with spinal disease. Only
 patient's overall condition.
 short-term antinflammatory regimens of prednisone are
recommended. Immunosuppressive regimens are used for
Nonsteroidal Antiinflammatory Drugs
immune-mediated disease [e.g., polymyositis, polyarthritis,
The NSAIDs are most often used for treatment of pain
vasculitis, meningitis, encephalitis, or myelitis). The allevia-
 oe a inq su a m piose
tion of pain is secondary to the primary goal of suppression
useful in noninflammatory conditions and chronic pain.
CHAPTER 14 
Pain
425
TABLE 14-6
Analgesic Agents for Horses
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
Corticosteroids
Dexamethasone
Generic
0.01-0.15 IV. IM
Daily
Laminitis, immunosuppression
Prednisone
Generic
0.25-1 mg/kg PO
12-24h
 Laminitis, immunosuppression
NSAIDS
Minimal 
Acetylsalicylic
Generic
25 mg/kg PO (loading): 
12h (loading): then daily
Gl ulceration, renal effects 
acid
10 mg/kg daily
Carprofen
Rimadyl
0.5-1.1 mg/kg PO
Daily 4-9 days
Gl ulceration, renal effects 
Flunixin
1.1 mg/kg PO, IV
Daily up to 5 days
 Gl ulceration, renal effects 
 meglumine 
Ketoprofen
Orudis KT.
2.2 mg/kg IV. IM 
 Daily up to 5 days 
 Gl ulceration, renal effects
 Ketofen 
Phenylbutazone
 Butazolidin
 4.4 mg/kg PO (loading:
 After loading use q24h for 2-4  Gl ulceration, renal effects 
2.2 mg/kg
days then every other
day
Opioids
Buprenonphine
Buprenex
0.01-0.04 mg/kg IV
once
Ataxia, disorientation 
Butorphanol 
Torbugesic
0.02-0.1 IV:
2-4h 
 Excitement, ataxia,
0.04-0.2 IM
 disorientation
Fentanyl
Sublimaze:
0.01-0.02 mg/kg IV:
once
 Excitement,
 citrate
 Duragesic:
 100 g/h transdermal
 increased activity
Generic
per 450 kg 
Meperidine 
 Demerol 
0.2-1 mg/kg IM 
1-2h 
Anaphylaxis if
given IV, excitement, increased 
activity
Morphine
Generic
0.03-0.1 mg/kg IV
4h
Excitement, twitching, shaking.
0.1 mg/kg IM
stereotypy
Oxymorphone
Numorphan
0.001-0.002 mg/kg IV
once
Excitement,
 increased activity
 Pentazocine
Talwin
0.5-1 mg/kg
once
Excitement,
 increased activity
αz-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine Dexdomitor
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV.
once
 Cardiovascular
depression, ataxia
Xylazine
:undwoy
0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV: 
 Cardiovascular
Generic
1-2 mg/kg IM 
 depression, ataxia
Local (Epidural)
Anesthetics
Lidocaine 
Generic,
0.16-0.45 mg/kg
2-3h
Ataxia
 Xylocaine
Xylazine
 Rompun 
0.03-0.35
3-5h
Ataxia
Dosages adapted from Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A: Pain management in anirmals, London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain managerment, ed 2, St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous, IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; CRI, constant rate infusion; PRN, as necessary.
The antinflammatory properties of NSAIDs are primarily
 transmission after tissue injury.52.65 Arachidonic acid also is
due to inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase [COX) isoenzymes 1
and 2, which synthesize prostanoids from arachidonic acid
 pate as inflammatory mediators.
(Figure 14-6). COX-1 is constitutive, whereas COX-2 is
 There are now many subclasses of NSAIDs used in human
induced by growth factors, cytokines, and tumor promoters.
and veterinary medicine. Some NSAIDs have both COX-l and
COX-2 is synthesized by macrophages and inflammatory cells
COX-2 inhibitory effects [aspirin, ketoprofen, etolac), whereas 
in the presence of tissue injury and inflammation. Secondary
 others selectively inhibit COX-2 or are COX-1 sparing [(car-
profen, meloxicam, deracoxib, tepoxalin, firocoxib).65 As
 mission in the peripheral and central nervous systems. COX-2
 COX-2 appears to play a greater role in nociceptive transmis-
is involved to a greater degree than COX-1 in noceceptive
sion, drugs that spare COX-l should be effective and have
426
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 14-7
Analgesic Agents for Cattle
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
NSAIDS
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
50-100 mg PO
12h
   
Carprofen
Rimadyl
 1.4 mg/kg SC, IV 
Single dose
Withdrawal: 21 days
Flunixin
 Banamine
1.1-2.2 mg/kg IV
Daily for 5 days 
Withdrawal: Milk—72 hr: 
meglumine 
meat-4 days 
Ketoprofen 
Orudis KT.
3 mg/kg IV
Daily up to 3 days
Withdrawal: Milk-24 hr: 
Ketofen
meat—7 days
Meloxicam
Metacam 
 0.5 mg/kg SC, IV
Single dose
Withdrawal: milk—5 days: meat—15 days
Bradycardia, respiratory depression: high
Opioids
 doses cause excitement
Butorphanol 
Torbugesic,
0.02-0.25 mg/kg IV, SC
4h
Withdrawal: Milk—72 hr:
 Stadol 
Meat—4 days
Morphine
Generic
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV,
4h
No withdrawal
 SC: 0.1 mg/kg
epidural q12h 
Buprenonphine
Buprenex
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM, SC 8-12h
αz-Agonists
Xylazine
 Rompun
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM:
Once
Withdrawal: Milk—24 hr: 
0.05-0.15 mg/kg
meat—7 days: Brahman
IV: 0.05-0.07
 sensitive: FDA—not approved: 
 mg/kg epidural
analgesia short lived
Detomidine
Dormosedan
10-40 IV, IM, epidural 
Once
Withdrawal: Milk—24 hr:
meat—7 days
Local Anesthetics
Lidocaine
Generic
Up to 250 mL/500
Once
No withdrawal
kg animal for 
regional blocks 
Lidocaine
Generic
 0.2 mg/kg epidural 
1h 
No withdrawal
Xylazine
Rompun
0.05 mg/kg
2-3h
See above
 Dosages adapted from Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A: Pain management in animals, London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain management, ed 2, St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
SC, Subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; FDA, Food and drug administration.
*There are no FDA-approved pain medications for cattle, all medications are extralabel use.
fewer adverse effects. Inhibition of COX isoenzymes may cause
Opioid Analgesics
arachidonic acid metabolites to enter the lipoxygenase (LOX)
An opioid is a natural or synthetic drug that has opiate-like activ-
pathway and increase the inflammatory effects of leukotri-
ities through its interaction with opiate receptors of a target cell.
enes. Some NSAIDs have been shown to inhibit both COX
Most defined opiate receptors are located in the brain and spinal
and LOX (ketoprofen and tepoxalin). Most NSAIDs undergo
 cord. Various opiate receptors mediate specife opioid effects.
hepatic metabolism and are eliminated through the enterohe-
Opioid analgesics are classified into various groups based on
patic circulation or by renal clearance. Adverse reactions associ-
their pharmacologic activity, potency, and clinical use. Type and
ated with NSAIDs occur in the gastrointestinal tract, liver, and
dosage of opioid selection varies upon severity of pain. Opioid
kidney Other side effects may include coagulopathy, inhibition
analgesics modify pain perception and behavioral reactions, and
of healing, and altered bone formation. The plethora of differ-
relieve anxiety and distress. Pharmacologic opiates supplement
ent NSAIDs available for use in animals, especially dogs and
 the natural activity of endogenous opiates and suppress neurons
 cats, provides the practitioner with a choice for the most appra-
in the spine and medulla that transmit pain.5l A pure opioid
priate NSAID that will best complement pain management
agonist binds to one or more types of receptors to cause certain
while minimizing patient side effects.65 Response to a specific
effects [e.g, analgesia, respiratory depression). A partial agonist
 NSAID may vary with each individual patient and the type of
binds to a receptor but gives less of an effect than a pure agonist.
e d a ar o readde pu sap vsn au JI gue
alternative NSAID or adjunctive use of a different class of anal-
type to cause an effect at one but no effect at another. An opioid
 gesic needs consideration. Concurrent use of other NSAIDs or
 antagonist binds to one or more receptor types but causes no
corticosteroids provides no additional therapeutic beneft but
effect or may competitively displace an agonist from the recep-
does increase the potential for adverse reaction. A "washout"
tor. Effectiveness of pharmacologic opiates may vary with route
 period [48 to 72 hours) should be allowed before administering
of administration: parenteral, epidural, rectal, oral, and transder-
a different NSAID.
mal drug delivery (fentanyl patch). Direct delivery of opioids to
CHAPTER 14
Pain
427
TABLE 14-8
Analgesic Agents forSheep and Goats*
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
NSAIDS
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
50-100 mg/kg PO
4-12h
 Unknown for goats
Carprofen
 Rimadyl 
1.5-2.0 mg/kg SC, IV 
24h
Hunixin meglumine
 Banamine 
1-2 mg/kg SC, IV
 Once or daily
Ketoprofen 
Orudis KT. Ketofen
2-3 mg/kg IV, IM 
Once up to 5 days
Agitation, compulsive 
Opioids
 chewing at high doses
Buprenonphine
Buprenex
0.005-0.010 mg/kg IV,
4h—sheep:
IM
12 hr—goat 
 Butorphanol
Torbugesic, Stadol
 0.5 mg/kg SC, IM 
2-3h PRN
Meperidine 
 Demerol 
2 mg/kg IM, IV
2h
Use unknown in goats 
Morphine 
Generic
0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM 
2h, PRN
αz-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine 
 Dexdomitor
0.01 mg/kg IV
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
depression, reduced Gl motility
Rompun
Sheep—0.05-0.1
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
 mg/kg IV, 0.1-0.3 IM:
depression, reduced
Goat—0.02-0.5 IV.
Gl motility 
0.05-0.5 IM
Dosages adapted frorm Flecknell P, Waterrman-Pearson A: Pain management in anirmals, London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain managerment, ed 2, St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous; PRN, as necessary.
*'There are no FDA-approved pain medications for food-producing animals; all medications are extralabel use.
TABLE 14-9
Analgesic Agents for Camelids
Comments and Side
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Effects
Gastrointestinal, renal,
NSAIDS
and some hepatic
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
50 mg/kg. PO
12-24h
Carprofen
Rimadyl 
1-2 mg/kg. PO
24h
 Hunixin meglumine 
Banamine
1-2 mg/kg. SC, IV
24h
Ketoprofen
Orudis KT, Ketofen 
2-3 mg/kg IV, IM 
 24h up to 3 days
Opioids
Morphine
Generic
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM
4h 
 Reduced Gl motility
 Butorphanol
Torbugesic
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM in alpacas:
PRN
 Reduced Gl motility
 0.02-0.05 mg/kg IV, IM in llamas 
Buprenonphine
Buprenex
0.01 mg/kg IM 
PRN
Reduced Gl motility
α2-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine 
Dexdomitor
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
depression, reduced
Gl motility
Xylazine
 Rompun;
Llamas: 0.075-0.1 mg/kg IV; 0.15-0.2
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
(standing seda-
 generic
mg/kg IM, SC.
depression, reduced 
tion}
Alpacas: 0.1-0.15 mg/kg IV: 0.2-0.3
Gl motility 
mg/kg IM, SC
 Dosages adapted from Abrahamsen EJ: Chemical restraint anesthesia, and analgesia for camelids. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract 25:455-
494, 2009.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intrarmuscular; IV, intravenous; PRN, as necessary.
428
PARTI
 Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 14-10
Analgesic Agents for Swine
Drug
Trade Name
Dosage and Route
Frequency
Comments and Side Effects
NSAIDS
Acetylsalicylic acid
Generic
10 mg/kg PO
4h
Gl, bleeding
Carprofen
Rimadyl 
2-4 mg/kg SC, IV, PO 
24h
Hunixin meglumine 
Banamine
1-2 mg/kg IM, PO
24h
Ketoprofen 
Orudis KT, Ketofen
1-3 mg/kg IM 
once
Meloxicam
Metacam
0.4 mg/kg IM
Once
Withdrawal: 5 days
Opioids
 Sedation
Buprenophine
Buprenex
 5-10 μg/kg IV
6-12h
Butorphanol 
Torbugesic
0.1-0.3 mg/kg IM
4h
Fentanyl citrate
 Sublimaze:
 200 μg/kg IV
Intraoperatively
 Pigs require higher doses
 Duragesic: generic
Morphine
Generic
0.2-1.0 mg/kg IM
4h
Pentazocine
Talwin
2 mg/kg IM, IV 
4h
Meperidine
Demerol 
2 mg/kg IM, IV 
2-4h 
α2-Agonists
Dexmedetomidine 
Dexdomitor
Undetermined,
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
epidural use
depression, reduced 
in research 
Gl motility 
Xylazine
 Rompun: generic
0.5-3 mg/kg IM 
Once
 Bradycardia, respiratory
(standing sedation)
 depression, reduced Gl motility
Dosages adapted frorm Flecknell P, Waterrman-Pearson A: Pain management in anirmals, London, WB Saunders/Harcourt, 2000. In Gaynor JS, Muir
WW: Handbook of veterinary pain management, ed 2, St Louis, 2009, Elsevir.
PO, Per os; SC, subcutaneous; IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
*'There are no FDA-approved pain medications for pigs, all medications are extralabel use.
the spinal cord (epidural anesthesia) is used to produce effective
neuropathic pain disorders. The mechanism of action is unclear.
 analgesia for surgical procedures. Opioids are more effective for
Gabapentin and pregabalin are analogs of gamma-aminobutyric
 postsurgury or with trauma and are considered less effective for
acid (GABA), the major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS.
apord Aeuu sisuose amd are en sproido gued oruedona
Gabapentin may alter voltage-gated calcium channels. The bind-
more effective pain control than agonist-antagonist opioids.
ing action of the drug leads to a decrease in intracellular calcium
 Tolerance to opiate effects may develop during repeated and
 es Arxa su u u um xnu un
 chronic administration. Side effects that vary among species may
[e.g., glutamate, substance P).66 Unlike many analgesics, gabap-
include altered consciousness, including dysphoria; excitement;
   r a q   si 
 bradycardia; respiratory depression; autonomic signs; and pant-
renal clearance. In veterinary patients, gabapentin has been used
ing in dogs. Some of the opioids (meperidine and morphine) can
empirically for management of refractory neuropathic pain.
cause histamine release with IV administration. Effects of hista-
mine release include vasodilation and hypotension. Opioids will
Miscellaneous Agents
have excitatory effects in cats and horses, and its administration
Muscle relaxants (e.g., diazepam, methocarbamol) can be
should be combined with tranquilizers.
administered for musculoskeletal pains that cause muscle
spasm. Other psychotropic drugs include tranquilizers and ket-
Other Analgesic Agents
amine. The tranquilizers, including phenothiazine derivatives,
α-Agonists
 benzodiazepines, and butyrophenones, are primarily useful in
Xylazine and medetomidine are centrally acting and possess
reducing anxiety associated with pain. They may potentiate the
sedative, muscle relaxant, and analgesic properties. Recep-
effects of other analgesic agents but should not be given alone
 in the treatment of pain. Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic
synaptically on the nociceptive neurons in the dorsal horn of
 and is not generally used for the management of chronic pain.
the spinal cord. Analgesic effects are enhanced when used in
combination with opioids. Cardiovascular side effects include
Acupuncture
bradycardia, hypotension, and decreased cardiac output.
Acupuncture is still controversial, although substantial evi-
dence exists for its benefts in treating pain. If it is used for
Anticonvulsants
 pain relief, and not as a substitute for correction of the cause
 In humans, the mainstay for chronic treatment of neuropathic
 of pain, it is appropriate.67.68
pain is tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants.ll Anal-
gesic actions of antidepressant drugs are most likely related to
Summary
effects on endogenous pathways that modulate nociceptive
The issue of pain management is an important dimension in
transmission.5 The anticonvulsant, gabapentin, has been exten-
veterinary medicine. The willingness to provide pain interven-
sively investigated and proven to be effective for a variety of
tion should be a routine practice. Considerable evidence exists
CHAPTER 14
Pain
429
that preemptive pain management can be effective in decreas-
exercises and weight shifting using balls. Proper exercise regi-
ing the development of chronic pain states and is beneficial to
 n sr pe im on siop sosa u
the health, recovery, and well-being of our veterinary patients.
status. If possible, dogs should be exercised outdoors, with a
towel used as a sling. Cavaletti rails assist with limb placement
and developing stride. Having the patient walk on a mattress
CARE OF THE NEUROLOGIC PATIENT
can also improve balance and coordination. Assistive devices
such as boots, dog carts, or slings may be useful for long-term
Physical Rehabilitation
rehabilitation.
Physical rehabilitation in large and small animals is integral
in management of medical and surgical-related neurologic
Bladder Management
 diseases, enhancement of neuroregenerative processes, and
Many neurologic lesions disrupt voluntary micturition, result-
 providing pain relief69,70 Disuse and immobilization can
ing in urinary incontinence, retention cystitis, and bladder
cause loss of muscle mass and debilitating joint contracture.
atony. Urinary bladders should be manually expressed or emp-
Physical rehabilitation during recovery from neurologic dis-
tied by intermittent catheterization at least three times a day.
orders is important not only for strengthening and increasing
Urinary tract infections should be treated with appropriate
flexibility but also pain reduction and improvement in qual-
    e  rn  s
ity of life.7l Use of physiotherapy in dogs with degenerative
agents to assist micturition.
tation protocols are individually tailored to meet patients'
Supportive Care of a Recumbent Small Animal
needs during the recovery process. Owners and veterinarians
 Supportive care to involve the psychologic and physical well-
 are encouraged to seek out facilities and certified individuals
being is especially important in the recumbent patient. Bed-
 that specialize in physiotherapy and physical rehabilitation.
ding should be supportive enough to evenly distribute the
Passive Range of Motion
decubitus ulcers.74 Absorbent materials (lamb's wool, diaper
Rehabilitation in immediate postoperative and recumbent
pads) need to overlie supportive materials [air, foam mat-
patients begins with massage and passive range of motion
tresses). The patient will need to be rotated on a frequent
(ROM). Joints of limbs are extended and flexed through
basis (e.g., every 4 hours). Cleanliness is critical to prevent
normal ROM 5 to 10 minutes several times a day. Active
fecal and urine scalding. Cryotherapy of the surgical incision 
 ROM includes swimming and standing exercises. The goal
m iau ou  usu sn un sep ieraass rf pdde s
 e o q usd u u s n  on s
to touch. An ice pack covered with a towel to protect the skin
tion of the body weight. Static and mechanical forms of
ssa on Ap sn ar snuu oz on oi rof pdde st
stretching techniques are performed in conjunction with
Aeld ues osie Aderauoph quauseueu ued roy pue euapa
ROM exercises to prevent fibrosis and contracture of joints
a role in increasing circulation of the limb vasculature and
and muscles. This process can be initiated with carts and
prevention of decubitus ulcers. Having the pet owner, veteri-
hydrotherapy.
 narian, and technicians intimately involved with the postop-
Other modalities of physical therapy and supplemen-
erative care is important in the patient's overall well-being
tal therapies that complement mobility therapies include
and quality of life.
thermal, electrical stimulation, massage, ultrasonographic,
acupuncture, and weight loss.73 Superficial and deep heat
Supportive Care of a Recumbent Large Animal
therapy also can be instituted to reduce muscle spasm and
Horses and cattle are especially prone to develop secondary
complications caused by recumbency. Self-trauma, decubital
to selected muscle groups that undergo atrophy.73 Neuromus-
ulceration, myopathy, neuropathy, pneumonia, malnutrition,
cular electrical stimulation increases muscle strength, joint
colic, and urinary tract infections are common complications
stability, and ROM and decreases muscle spasm and pain.
in recumbent horses. Cattle are also prone to bloat.
Horses and cattle should be protected from self-trauma.
Hydrotherapy
 Limbs should be wrapped with thick layers of sheet cotton or
Exercises performed in water or whirlpools are very effective
quilted limb wraps. The head should be protected with a padded
for relaxing contracted muscles, maintaining joint mobility.
and properly fitted helmet. Tranquilizing agents such as chloral
and stimulating circulation in atrophied muscles. Hydrother-
hydrate, detomidine, and xylazine may be required early in the
apy also will help to keep the patient clean. Water buoyancy
course of treatment. These agents may hamper neurologic eval-
aids in rehabilitation of weak muscles and painful joints by
uation and may produce hypotension. To the greatest extent
minimizing the amount of weight bearing on joints while
possible, large animals should be maintained in sternal recum-
 generating the gait cycle. Muscles and limbs should be exer-
bency because this position improves ventilation and peripheral
cised passively. Underwater treadmills will further assist with
circulation. Hay bales make good props for this purpose. Slings
walking motions and provide resistance to enhance muscle
and overhead hoists may be helpful, but horses must be moni-
 strengthening and proprioception.
tored continually to prevent injury and asphyxiation.
Exercise
mized by distributing pressure; applying pads over pressure
Exercise can be passive or active, depending on the degree
points; using liberal amounts of clean, dry bedding; and turn-
 of neurologic dysfunction. Gait training exercises encourages
ing the patient every 2 hours. Because eye injuries are com-
more ambulation to affected limbs. Massage and passive ROM
mon, the eyes should be examined two or three times a day.
are continued to stimulate muscle tone and delay muscle con-
Padded helmets are useful in preventing eye injuries. Artifcial
tracture. As the patient begins to ambulate without assistance,
tears and triple antibiotic ointment should be applied when
therapeutic exercises includes standing and more dynamic
patients cannot lubricate their corneas.
ambulation activities that serve to enhance ROM, muscle
 Impaction of the large or small colon and rectum is a
strength, balance, and overall daily function. Proprioceptive
common complication. Water should be offered frequently.
neuromuscular training improves the awareness and use of
and a highly digestible diet of quality hay and pellted feeds
limbs at rest and in motion. This is facilitated using standing
is recommended. Pelleted feed should contain ground alfalfa,
430
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
bran, and psyllium. Water should be given by nasogastric
21. Smith JD, Allen SW, Quandt JE, et al: Indicators of post-
intubation if a horse has trouble drinking and swallowing.
operative pain in cats and correlation with clinical criteria,
Laxative agents such as mineral oil, dioctyl sodium sulfosuc-
Am J Vet Res 57(11):1674-1678, 1996.
cinate, and magnesium sulfate can be provided on a regular
 22. Smith JD, Allen SW, Quandt JE: Changes in cortisol con-
basis.
centration in response to stress and postoperative pain in
Urine retention should be evaluated by observation and
client-owned cats and correlation with objective clinical
rectal palpation. Urinary bladder catheterization is best
variables, Am J Vet Res 60(4):432-436, 1999.
accomplished using an aseptic closed system. The use of pro-
23. Conzemius MG, Hill CM: Correlation between subjec-
phylactic urinary antibiotics is contraindicated. Pneumonia
tive and objective measures used to determine sever-
and pleuritis are fatal complications in recumbent horses.
ity of post operative pain in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Frequent turning is the best way to prevent pulmonary
210:1619-1622, 1999.
complications.
24. Firth AM, Haldane SL: Development of a scale to eval-
uate postoperative pain in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
214(5):651-659, 1999.
REFERENCES
25. Holton LL, Scott E, Nolan AM, et al: Relationship between
physiological factors and clinical pain in dogs scored using
1. Colloquium on recognition and alleviation of animal
a numerical scale, J Small Anim Pract 39:469-474, 1998.
pain and distress, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1184-1298,
26. Holton LL, Scott EM, Nolan AM, et al: Comparison of
1987.
three methods used for assessment of pain in dogs, J Am
2. Kitchell RL: Problems in defining pain and peripheral
Vet Med Assoc 212:61-66, 1998.
mechanisms of pain, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191(i0):1195-
1199.1987
bacterial meningitis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
3. Wilis WD, Chung JM: Central mechanisms of pain, J Am
16(1):45-54, 1994.
Vet Med Assoc 191[10):1200-1202, 1987.
28. Meric SM: Canine meningitis. A changing emphasis, J Vet
4. Mersky H, Bogduk N: Classification of chronic pain, Seat-
Intern Med 2[1):26-35, 1988.
tle, 1994, LASP.
29. Radaelli ST, Platt SR: Bacterial meningoencephalomyeli-
5. Muir WW, Woolf CJ: Mechanisms of pain and their thera-
tis in dogs: a retrospective study of 23 cases [1990-1999).
peutic implications, J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1346-1356,
J Vet Intern Med 16[2):159-163, 2002.
2001.
30. Kent M: Bacterial infections of the central nervous system.
6. Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A: Pain management in
 In Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and
animals, London, 2000, WB Saunders/Harcourt.
cat, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier.
7. Gaynor JS, Muir WW: Handbook of veterinary pain man-
31. Schatzberg SJ: Idiopathic granulomatous and necrotizing
agement, St Louis, 2009, Mosby/Elsevier.
inflammatory disorders of the canine central nervous sys-
 8. de Lahunta A, Glass E: Veterinary neuroanatomy and elin-
tem, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40(l):101-
ical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
120, 2010:[review].
9. Willis WD, Al-Chaer ED, Quast MJ, et al: A visceral pain
32. Higginbotham Mj, Kent M, Glass EN: Noninfectious
pathway in the dorsal column of the spinal cord, Proc Natl
 inflammatory central nervous system diseases in dogs,
Acad Sci U S A 96:7675-7679, 1999.
Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet 29[8):488-497, 2007.
10. Ogilvie GK, Moore AS: Oncologic pain in dogs: preven-
33. Smith-Maxie LL, Parent JP, Rand J, et al: Cerebrospinal
tion and treatment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
fluid analysis and clinical outcome of eight dogs with
28:776-785, 2006.
eosinophilic meningoencephalomyelitis, J Vet Intern Med
11. Truini A, Cruccu G: Pathophysiologic mechanisms of neu-
3(3):167-174, 1989.
ropathic pain, Neurol Sei 27:S179-S182, 2006.
 34. Windsor RC, Sturges BK, Vernau KM, et al: Cerebrospinal
12. Campbell JN, Meyer RA: Mechanisms of neuropathic
fluid eosinophilia in dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:275-281,
pain, Neuron 52:77-92, 2006.
2009.
13. Lu D, Lamb CR, Pfeiffer NE, et al: Neurological signs and
35. Bathen-Noethen A, Carlson R, Menzel D, et al: Con-
results of magnetic resonance imaging in 40 cavalier King
centrations of acute-phase proteins in dogs with ste-
Charles spaniels with Chiari type I-like malformations,
roid responsive meningitis-arteritis, J Vet Intern Med
Vet Rec 153:260-263, 2003.
22(5):1149-1156, 2008.
14. Portenoy RK: Basic Mechanism. In Portenoy RK, Kanner
36. Schwartz M, Carlson R, Tipold A: Selective CDlla
RM, editors: Pain management: theory and practice [con-
upregulation on neutrophils in the acute phase of ste-
temporary neurology series), Philadelphia, 1996, FA Davis.
roid-responsive meningitis-arteritis in dogs, Vet Immunol 
15. Constable PD: Clinical examination of the ruminant
Immunopathol 126(3/4):248-255, 2008.
nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
37. Tipold A, Jaggy A: Steroid responsive meningitis-arteritis
20:185-214, 2004.
in dogs: long-term study of 32 cases, J Small Anim Pract 
16. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, Iowa,
35:311-316, 1994.
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
38. Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ: An update on steroid responsive
17. Coates JR, Dewey CW: Cervical spinal hyperesthesia as a
meningitis-arteritis, J Small Anim Pract 51(3):150-154,
clinical sign of intracranial disease, Compend Contin Educ
2010.
Pract Vet 20(9):1025-1037, 1998.
39. Lowrie M, Penderis J, Eckersall PD, et al: The role of acute
18. Kuhn RA: Organization of tactile dermatomes in cat and
 phase proteins in diagnosis and management of steroid-
monkey, J Neurophysiol 16:169-182, 1953.
responsive meningitis arteritis in dogs, Vet J 182(1):125-
19. Kitchell RL, Canton DD, Johnson RD, et al: Electrophysi-
130, 2009.
ologic studies of cutaneous nerves of the forelimb of the
40. Lowrie M, Penderis J, McLaughlin M, et al: Steroid
cat, J Comp Neurol 210[4):400-410, 1982.
responsive meningitis-arteritis: a prospective study of
20. Bailey CS, Kitchell RL: Cutaneous sensory testing in the
potential disease markers, prednisolone treatment, and
dog, J Vet Intern Med 1(3):128-135, 1987.
long-term outcome in 20 dogs (2006-2008), J Vet Intern
Med 23[4):862-870, 2009.
CHAPTER 14Pain
431
41. Brooks PN: Necrotizing vasculitis in a group of beagles,
of cats with feline hyperesthesia syndrome, J Vet Intern
Lab Anim 18:285-290, 1984.
Med 13[3):238, 1999:[abstract).
42. Harcourt RA: Polyarteritis in a colony of beagles, Vet Rec
59. Overall KL: Pharmacologic treatments for behavior prob-
102[24):519-522, 1978.
lems, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27(3):637-
43. Snyder PW, Kazacos EA, Scott-Moncrieff JC, et al: Patho-
665, 1997.
logic features of naturally occurring juvenile polyarteritis
60. Benson GJ, Thurmon JC: Species difference as a consider-
in beagle dogs, Vet Pathol 32[4):337-345, 1995
ation in alleviation of animal pain and distress, J Am Vet
44. Webb AA, Muir GD: The blood-brain barrier and its
Med Assoc 191[10):1227-1230, 1987.
role in inflammation, J Vet Intern Med 14(4):399-411,
61. Jenkins WL: Pharmacologic aspects of analgesic drugs in
2000.
animals: an overview, J Am Vet Med Assoc 191(10):1231-
45. Greene CE, Breitschwerdt EB: Rocky Mountain spotted
1240. 1987.
fever, murine typhus like disease, rickettsial pox, typhus,
62. Mathews KA: Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesics:
and Q fever. In Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of
a review of current practice, J Vet Emerg Crit Care 12:89-
the dog and cat, ed 3, St Louis, 2006, Elsevier.
97,2002.
46. Thomas WB: Hydrocephalus in dogs and cats, Vet Clin
63. Platt SR, Abramson CJ, Garosi LS: Administering corti-
North Am Small Anim Pract 40(1):143-159, 2010.
costeroids in neurologic diseases, Compend Contin Educ
47. Coates JR, Axlund TW, Dewey CW, et al: Hydroceph-
Pract Vet 27:210-221, 2005.
alus in dogs and cats, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
64. Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ: Glucocorticoid therapy.
28(2):136-145, 2006.
Pharmacology, indications, and complications, Vet Clin
48. Tipold A: Diagnosis of inflammatory and infectious dis-
North Am Small Anim Pract 27(2):187-213, 1997.
eases of the central nervous system in dogs: a retrospective
65.(
Curry SL, Cogar SM, Cook JL: Nonsteroidal antinflam-
study, J Vet Intern Med 9(5):304-314, 1995.
matory drugs:areview, JAmAnim HospAssoc 41:298-309,
 49. Fecteau G, George LW: Bacterial meningitis and enceph-
2005.
alitis in ruminants, Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract
66. Eroglu C, Allen NJ, Susman MW, et al: Gabapentin
20:363-377, 2004.
receptor alpha2 delta-l is a neuronal thrombospondin
50. Mellema LM, Samii VF, Vernau KM, et al: Meningeal
 receptor responsible for excitatory CNS synaptogenesis,
 enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging in 15 dogs
Cell 139[2):380-392, 2009.
and 3 cats, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 43(1):10-15, 2002.
67. Janssens LAA: Acupuncture treatment for canine tho-
51. Tipold A, Pfister H, Zurbriggen A, et al: Intrathecal syn-
raco-lumbar disk protrusions. A review of 78 cases, Vet
thesis of major immunoglobulin classes in inflammatory
Med Small Anim Clin 78(10):1580-1585, 1983.
diseases of the canine CNS, Vet Immunol Immunopathol
68. Martin BB Jr, Klide AM: Use of acupuncture for the treat-
42(2):149-159, 1994.
ment of chronic back pain in horses: stimulation of acu-
52. Tipold A, Vandevelde M, Zurbriggen A: Neuroimmuno-
puncture points with saline solution injections, J Am Vet
logical studies in steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis in
Med Assoc 190(9):1177-1180, 1987.
dogs, Res Vet Sei 58(2):103-108, 1995.
69. Olby N, Halling KB, Glick TR: Rehabilitation for the
53. Barber RM, Li Q, Diniz PPVP, et al: Evaluation of brain
neurologic patient, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
tissue or cerebrospinal fluid with broadly reactive poly-
35:1389-1409, 2005.
merase chain reaction for Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Spotted
70. Millis DL: Physical therapy and rehabilitation of neuro-
Fever Group Rickettsia, Bartonella, and Borrelia species in
logic patients. In Bonagura JD, Twedt DC, editors: Kirk's
canine neurological diseases [109 cases), J Vet Intern Med
current veterinary therapy XIV, St Louis, 2008, Elsevier.
24(2):372-378, 2010.
71. Sherman J, Olby NJ: Nursing and rehabilitation of the
54. Ciribassi J: Feline hyperesthesia syndrome, Compend
neurological patient. In Platt SR, Olby NJ, editors: BSAVA
Contin Educ Pract Vet [116):12l, 2009.
 manual of canine and feline neurology, ed 3, Gloucester,
55.
 Shell LG: Feline hyperesthesia syndrome, Feline Pract
UK, 2004, BSAVA.
22[6}:10, 1994.
72. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doherr MG, et al: Daily con-
56. Luescher UA, McKeown DB, Halip J: Stereotypic or
 trolled physiotherapy increases survival time in dogs with
obsessive-compulsive disorders in dogs and cats, Vet Clin
suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet Intern Med
North Am Equine Pract 21(2):401-413, 1991.
20:927-932, 2006.
57. Saxena S, Bota RG, Brody AL: Brain-behavior relation-
73. Steiss JE, Levine D: Physical agent modalities, Vet Clin
ships in obsessive-compulsive disorder, Semin Clin Neu-
North Am Small Anim Pract 35:1317-1333, 2005.
ropsychiatry 6:82-101, 2001.
74. Swaim SF, Hanson RR Jr, Coates JR: Pressure wounds in
58. March PA, Fischer JR, Potthoff A, et al: Electromyo-
animals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 18[3):203-219,
 graphic and histological abnormalities in epaxial muscles
1996.
CHAPTER
R15
Systemic or Multifocal Signs
here are many inflammatory, infectious, and degenera-
encephalopathies and dysautonomia. Congenital refers to a
tive diseases that produce multifocal central nervous
disease or malformation present at birth. It includes conditions
system [CNS) signs and often simultaneous systemic
that may be genetic or a result of exposure to toxins, malnu-
disease.These disorders are categorized as multifocal, systemic,
or diffuse diseases. Initially, some of these diseases may start
inherited and conversely, not all inherited conditions are con-
with focal CNS signs, but they progress to affect other areas.
 genital. The congenital malformations are discussed in Chap-
ter 12 for the cerebrum and in Chapter 8 for the cerebellum.
 Breed predlection and stereotypic clinical presentation
LESION LOCALIZATION
Careful study of affected litters and pedigrees is required to
The key to recognition of these diseases is a neurologic exami-
 determine the inheritance pattern. Selection processes used
 nation that indicates the involvement of two or more parts of
by breeders include inbreeding, linebreeding, and outerossing.
the nervous system that are not closely related anatomically.
While selecting for a particular trait, inbreeding and linebreed-
The most obvious example is an abnormality in both the brain
ing practices result in a reduction of genetic variability and
and the spinal cord. All the possible combinations of signs of
an increase in homozygous and recessive traits. Simple inheri-
diffuse or multifocal diseases are too extensive to list, but Box
tance (Mendelian) patterns have served as the basis for deter-
15-1 lists some of the more common ones.
mining modes of inheritance of many genetic disorders. Many
Anytime abnormalities identified on the neurologic exam-
of these hereditary diseases have an autosomal recessive inher-
ination cannot be attributed to a single lesion, a multifocal
itance pattern. Dominant traits are more easily eliminated
neuroanatomic localization should be made. Etiologically, this
from the breeding pool of a breed by not breeding affected
 group of diseases becomes more likely.
dogs. Determining inheritance pattern is more difficult for
polygenetic and complex traits. Polygenetic inheritance refers
to when proper development relies on sequential activation
DISEASES
of genes or for traits of variable penetrance that result in a
The major disease categories that produce systemic or multi-
are determined by the interaction between environment and
focal signs are degenerative, metabolic, nutritional, inflamma-
polygenetic predisposition. Having an understanding of the
tory, toxic, and sometimes neoplastic and vascular disorders.
hereditary basis for these degenerative diseases is important
 Diseases that are primarily skeletal in origin are mentioned
but not discussed. Neoplastic and vascular disorders of the
by selective breeding:; (2) they may be confused with condi-
 brain are further discussed in Chapter 12. Asymmetry often is
tions of nongenetic origin, such as viral diseases, and (3) they
associated with inflammatory, immune-mediated, neoplastic,
can serve as excellent models of similar human diseases.
and ischemic disorders. Diffuse and symmetric involvement
is seen with degenerative, metabolic, and toxic disorders. The
Differential Diagnosis
acute or chronic onset and the rate of progression may be of
Many of these diseases have a similar clinical history and
some help in establishing the diagnosis [Table 15-1).
 course. Clinical signs of conditions like the lysosomal storage
diseases and some metabolic encephalopathies are delayed
Degenerative Diseases
until the animal is older [usually within a few months after
Many degenerative diseases that are systemic or multifocal
birth) because ofthe time required for build up of byproduct.
are either congenital and/or hereditary. However, the cause
Abiotrophies, disorders of premature neuronal degeneration,
is still unknown for some of the spongiform and metabolic
and other degenerative diseases affecting the axons and myelin
432
CHAPTER 15
Systemic or Multifocal Signs
433
BOX 15-1
TABLE 15-1
Etiology of Systemic Diseases
Examples of Systemic or Multifocal Signs
Cassification
Acute Progressive
Chronic Progressive
Lower motor neuron (LMN) signs (more than one location,
may include cranial nerves): diffuse LMN diseases, poly-
Degenerative  Myelinolytic disorders  S
 Storage disease,
neuropathy (see Chapter 7)
abiotrophy
Brain and spinal cord signs: pelvic limb paresis and seizures
Metabolic
Hepatic
Hepatic 
Systemic disease and CNS signs: fever, anorexia, ataxia, or
 encephalopathy
encephalopathy
seizures
Hypoglycemia
 Endocrine disease
 Generalized pain: meningitis
 Endocrine disease
Cerebral cortex and brainstem: cerebrum seizures and cra-
Renal disease
nial nerve deficits, blindness, severe gait deficits, head
Neoplastic
 Metastatic
 Primary metastatic
tilt, circling
 Nutritional
 Methionine deficiency
 Hypovitaminosis
Forebrain: blindness with normal pupils (may be seen with 
Hypervitaminosis
brain swelling. hydrocephalus) (see Chapter 11}
Inflammatory
 Infectious and 
Infectious (usually
Cerebellum and paresis: head tremor, ataxia, severe gait
noninfectious
viral and
deficits, paresis
 noninfectious 
 Ascending paralysis: pelvic limb paresis progressing to
Toxic
Most toxins
Heavy metals 
 tetraparesis (focal cervical spinal cord lesion must be
Other toxins, chrome 
(1no peinu
exposure
Modified with permission from Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG:
Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
can manifest signs within a few months or late in life. These
 disorders are often insidious and progressive. However, some
diseases such as the storage and myelin disorders can have
an acute onset once the neuron or myelin reaches a critical
Storage Disorders
threshold of dysfunction.
Storage disorders are characterized pathologically by the
The findings on neurologic examination may indicate a
accumulation of metabolic products in cells (Table 15-2 and
predominance of signs referable to the forebrain, cerebellum,
Figure 15-1).
spinal cord, or neuromuscular junction. These findings, and
A genetically based deficiency of a key enzyme causes
the age and breed of the animal, should suggest a small num-
accumulation of the product in neurons, glia, or other cell
ber of possibilities. Early in the disease course, neuronal cell
types. The effects of the disease may be caused by the accu-
body diseases often can be differentiated from demyelinating
mulation of the product or may be a direct result of the
 diseases. Proprioceptive positioning is commonly affcted in
metabolic disturbance. Because the clinical signs and the
demyelinating diseases but is rarely involved in the early stages
 progression of the disease depend on the pathologic process,
 of neuronal disease. Neuronal cell body, diseases [storage dis-
many of the conditions present in a similar fashion with mul.
ease, abiotrophy) are more likely to have forebrain or cerebel-
tifocal CNS signs and sometimes also with peripheral neurop-
lar involvement. Axonal and myelin diseases of the sensory
 athy. Two groups are commonly recognized: neuronal storage
and motor tracts of the spinal cord are more likely to have
diseases, in which the product accumulates in neurons, and
 general proprioceptive [GP) ataxia and paresis of an upper
leukodystrophies.2 In general, leukodystrophy refers to inher-
motor neuron [UMN) type. If the nerve or neuronal cell body
is involved, signs of LMN weakness predominate. Weakness is
 or function is defective and cannot be maintained and may
not a predominant feature of pure demyelinating or cerebellar
include storage disease pathogenesis. Globoid cell leukodys-
disorders. However, limb and whole body tremor is a feature
trophy is a storage disease caused by a deficiency of galacto-
of myelin and cerebellar diseases.
cerebroside activity, resulting in intracellular accumulation of
The degenerative diseases also must be differentiated
a metabolite toxic to myelin-forming oligodendrocytes and
from inflammatory (infectious and noninfectious), neoplas-
Schwann cells (Figure 15-2).
tic, and toxic disorders. Specifc diagnostic tests are avaiable
The storage byproducts usually can be found in the
for most of these conditions and are discussed later in this
lysosomes of neurons. Lysosomal storage diseases are char-
chapter.
acterized by accumulation of sphingolipids, glycolipids, oligo-
This section on degenerative diseases will focus on those
saccharides, or mucopolysaccharides within lysosomes.3 The
 that are multifocal (storage disorders) or have an unknown
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses involve the accumulation of
etiology. The metabolic encephalopathies that are of primary
hydrophobic proteins but the pathogenesis remains unclear
brain origin are discussed in Chapter 12. Other degenera-
[see Figure 15-1].3
tive disorders involving the spinal cord and brain [myeloen-
The storage diseases are rare, but several have been reported
cephalopathies), which predominate as spinal cord diseases,
 in domestic animals.2 Most have been recognized in specific
are discussed in Chapters 6 and 7. Those that present pri-
breeds of dogs or cats.34 Animals are usually normal at birth,
marily with LMN signs that involve the axon, myelin,
,and
but they fail to grow normally. Signs typically occur within the
the neuronal cell body (motor neuron) are discussed also
frst few months of life but may be delayed until adulthood
 s  s   ssra  r 
with some conditions such as some of the neuronal ceroid
include (1) storage disorders, [2) abiotrophies, (3) multiple
lipofuscinoses.5 Many of the storage disorders affect multiple
system degenerations, and (4) degenerative disorders that
 organs and regions of the nervous system. Others affect only
are of unknown cause.
the myelin and only neurologic signs occur. Often neurologic
TABLE 15-2
4
Lysosomal Storage Disorders in Domestic Animals
Storage Disease
 Disease Subgroup
[Human Disease)
 Enzyme Deficiency
Species- Breed (age at onset)
 Clinical Signs; Diagnosis
Inheritance
Reference
PARTI
Glycoproteinoses
Fucosidosis
α-L-Fucosidase
C-English springer spaniel (6 mo-3
 Cerebellar ataxia, behavioral change,
AR
215-219
二
yr}
dysphonia, dysphagia, seizures:
 DNA testing, enzyme assay
Mannosidosis
α-D-mannosidase
F-DSH (7 mo). DLH, Persian (8
 Cerebellar ataxia, tremor, corneal
AR
220-226
ical
(α-Mannosidosis)
Wk): B-Galloway, Murray gray.
opacity, skeletal anomalies,
I Problems:
Aberdeen Angus (birth)
neuropathy: B-cerebellar ataxia,
aggressiveness; urine screening.
enzyme assay. DNA testing
Mannosidosis
β-D-Mannosidase
B-Salers: G-Anglo nubian (birth-1
Cerebellar ataxia, recumbency, skull 
AR
227:228
(β-Mannosidosis)
yr}
 and limb deformities; urine screen-
ing. enzyme assay
igns
Lafora disease
α-Glucosidase
C-Beagle (5-9 mol, basset hound
Myoclonic seizures, dullness: muscle AR
229-235
(3 yr)., poodle (9-12 yr), wire-
biopsy, DNA testing
 and
haired miniature dachshund (5-8
yr): F-DSH
Oligosaccharidoses
Glycogenoses
GSD type 1 
Glucose-6-phosphatase C-Silky terrier, Maltese, other toy
Weakness, seizures, stupor: urine
AR?
236,237
(von Gierke dis-
breeds (weeks): F-DSH
 screening
easel
GSD type 2
α-Glucosidase
C-Swedish Lapland dog (1.5 yr):
Ataxia, muscle weakness, exercise
AR
238-246
(Pompe disease)
F-DSH: B-beef shorthorn, Brah-
 intolerance, cardiac; muscle/liver
man (3-9 mo): O-Corriedale (6
 biopsy, urine screening
mo}
GSD type 3 
Amylo-1,6-glucosidase
C-German shepherd (2 mo).
Lethargy, exercise intolerance,
AR
247.248
(Cori disease)
curty-coated retriever (lffA)(1 yr)
 organomegaly: muscle/liver biopsy,
 DNA testing
GSD type 4
Branching enzyme
F-Norwegian forest cat (5 mo)
Cerebellar ataxia, muscle weakness,
AR
249-251
(Andersen disease)
tremor, neuromuscular, organo-
megaly: muscle biopsy, enzyme
 assay, DNA testing 
GSD type 5
Myophosphorylase
B-Charolais (weeks)
Exercise intolerance
AR
252
GSD type7
 Phosphofructose 
 C-English springer spaniel(8-12
 Exercise intolerance
AR
253,254
(Tarui disease)
kinase
mo}
Mucolipidosis
Mucolipidosis Il
N-acetylglucosamine-1-  F-DSH
Facial dysmorphism, dullness, retinal, Unknown 
255,256
{l-cell disease)
 phosphotransferase
 ataxia; DNA testing
Sphingolipidoses
GM1-gangliosidosis β-D-Galactosidase
C-Beagle cross (47 mo), Por-
C, F-Cerebellar ataxia, comeal cloud-
AR
257-264
type 1
tuguese water dog (4-5 mo).
ing. tremor, seizures, paralysis,
(Norman-Landing 
 English springer spaniel (4-5
skeletal, facial dysmorphism: B.
disease!
mol. Alaskan husky. Shiba dog:
 O-ataxia, recumbency: enzyme
F-DSH(2-3 mol: B-Friesian
 assays, DNA testing 
(birth): O-Coopworth Romney (1
mo), Suffolk (4 mo)
GM1-gangliosidosis
β-D-Galactosidase
F-Siamese, Korat (7 mo), DSH;
Same; O-rapid progression
AR
265-267
type 2
O-Suffolk (4-6 mo)
(Derry disease)
GM2-gangliosidosis 
 β-N-acetyl hexosamini-
C-German shorthair pointer (6-12
 Cerebellar ataxia; urine screening:
Unknown
268,269
(Tay-Sachs disease)
dase A (α-subunit)
mo}
enzyme assay
(Variant B)
GM2-gangliosidosis
 β-N-acetyl hexosamini-
C-Golden retriever: toy poodle,
Same; S-cerebellar ataxia, weakness
Unknown
270-274
(Sandhoff disease)
dase B (β-subunit)
F-DSH-Japan, Korat, Burmese-
(Variant O)
Europe (2-3 mo): S-Yorkshire
GM2AB-gangliosi-
GM2 activator protein 
C-Japanese spaniel (18 mol:
Same
Unknown
275.276
dosis
 deficiency
F-Korat(18 mo)
(Bernheimer-Seitel-
berger disease!
(Variant AB)
Galactosialidosis
Galactosialidosis with
C-Schipperke (5 yr)
Cerebellar ataxia
Unknown
278
 α-neuraminidase 
HAPTER
Glucocerebrosi-
β-D-Glucocerebrosidase 
C-Sydney silky dog (6-8 mo):
 Cerebellar ataxia; enzyme assay;
AR(S)
279-281
dosis
O-unknown; S-unknown 
biopsy
(Gaucher disease)
Globoid cell leuko-
 β-D-galactosyl cerami-
C-WWest Highiand white terrier
 Cerebellar ataxia, tremor, paraparesis,
AR or
282-292
dystrophy
dase (accumulation
(2-5 mo), Cairn terrier (2-5 mo).
 neuropathy: muscle/nerve biopsy.
unknown
Syster
{Krabbe disease)
of psychosine}
beagle (4 mo), poodle (2 yr).
enzyme assay: DNA testing
basset hound (1.5-2 yr). blue
tick hound (4 mo), pomeranian
mic
(1.5 yr). frish setter (6 mo):
9
F-DSH, DLH (5-6 wk): O-Dorset 
Multifocal
(4-18 mo)
Metachromatic
Arylsulfatase A
F-DSH (2 wk)
Progressive motor dysfunction.
Unknown
293
leukodystrophy
seizures, opisthotonus, neuropathy
Sphingomyelinosis
Sphingomyelinase
C-Miniature poodle (2-4 mo):
 Cerebellar ataxia, tremor, paraparesis,
Unknown,
294-298
 (Niemann-Pick dis-
F-Balinese, Siamese (2-3 mo):
neuropathy: biopsy
AR-Sia-
B-Hereford (5 mo)
igns
ease type A)
mese
Continued
TABLE 15-2
6
Lysosomal Storage Disorders in Domestic Animals-cont'd
Storage Disease
Disease Subgroup
(Human Disease)
Enzyme Deficiency
Species- Breed (age at onset)
Clinical Signs; Diag nosis
Inheritance
Reference
PARTI
(Niemann-Pick dis-
 Cholesterol esterifica-
C-Boxer (9 mo): F-DSH(2-4 mo)
C-Cerebellar ataxia, hepatomegaly.
Unknown
299.300
ease type C)
 tion deficiency
neuropathy: F-cerebellar ataxia,
二
hepatic; enzyme testing. DNA
testing 
ical
Mucopoly-
saccharidoses
I Problems:
MPS1
α-L-iduronidase
C-Plott hound (3-6 mo), mixed-
 Growth retardation, facial deformity.
AR
301.302
(Hurler syndrome)
breed (3-6 mo): F-DSH(10 mo)
lameness, corneal opacity, cardiac;
urine screening, enzyme testing.
 DNA testing
MPS II
303
lduronate-2-sulfate
C-Labrador retriever (5 yr)
Cerebellar ataxia, exercise intoler-
AR
igns
sulfatase
 ance, cormeal opacity, facial
dysmorphism: urine screening.
 and
enzyme assay
MPS III (A, B, D)
 Sulfamidase A-heparin 
C- Huntaway dog (lllA) (18 mo).
 Cerebellar ataxia, tremor, retinal
AR
304-312
sulphamidase B-N-
Schipperke (I1B)(3 yr) wire-
degeneration, corneal opacity:
acetyl-alpha-D-
haired dachshund (1lIA) (3):
G-weakness; urine screening.
gucosaminidase
B-breed unknown-Australia (ll1B)
 enzyme assay, DNA testing
C-acetylCoA-alpha-
(2 yr): G-nubian (1lID) (birth)
gucosaminide
Nacetyltransferase
D-N-acetylglucos-
 amine 6-sulphatase
MPS VI
 N-acetylgalactosamine 
CMiniature pinscher (6 mo):
Growth retardation, facial deformity.
AR
313-315
(Maroteaux-Lamy
 4sulfase (arylsulfa-
F-Siamese cat, DSH (4-7 mo)
cormeal opacity. spinal fusion; urine
disease!
tase B}
screening, enzyme testing. DNA
testing 
MPS VII
β-D-glucouronidase
C-Mixed breed: F-DSH
 C-Paraparesis, cardiac: F-growth
AR
316.317
(Sly syndrome)
retardation, facial defommity, cor-
neal opacity. spinal fusion, cardiac:
 urine screening, enzyme testing.
 DNA testing
Proteinoses Ceroid
Al-Visual deficits, cerebellar
Lipofuscinoses
ataxia, myoclonus, seizures of
(Batten Disease)
varying degree; tissue biopsy
(autofluorescence)
CLN 1
 Palmitoyl protein 
C-Dachshund (mo)
AR(S)
Katz ML
 thioesterase I
personal com-
munication
CLN 2
Tripeptidylpeptidase
C-Dachshund (4-5 mo)
AR
318
CLN 4 (not con-
Unknown
C-Tibetan terrier (4-6 yr)
AR
319.320
firmed}
CLN 5 
Soluble lysosomal
C-Border collie (2 yr): O-borderdale
AR
321-323
membrane protein
(15 mo): B-Devon (12 mo)
CLN 6
 Endoplasmic reticulum 
C-Australian shepherd (1-2 yr)
Unknown 
324-327
membrane protein
O-South Hampshire (3 mol.
or AR {O)
Merino (7 mo)
CLN8
 Membrane protein of 
C-English setter (2 yr)
AR
328,329
the endoplasmic
reticulum 
CSTD
Cathepsin D
C-American bulldog (2-4 yr):
AR
330-332
O-White Swedish tandrace
 CLN4 (Kuf's
 Arylsulfatase G
C-American Staffordshire terrier
AR
335,334
disease!
(>1 yr variable)
Unknown
C-Australian cattle dog (1-2 yr).
Unknown
335-356
HAPTER
Australian shepherd (more than
 one NCL), Chihuahua (2 yr).
cocker spaniel (1.5-6 yr), collie.
 dachshund (4.5 yr), dalmatian
(6 mo-1 yr), golden retriever
Syster
(2 yr), Japanese retriever (3
yr), Labrador retriever, minia-
mic
ture schnauzer, poodle, Polish
lowland sheepdog (0.5-4.5
yr), saluki (2 yr), spitz, Welsh
Multifocal
corgi (6-8 yr): F- Siamese cat,
Japanese DSH, European DSH
(<1 yr): B-beefmaster (12 mo).
Devon (12 mo), Holstein (adult):
O-Rambouillet (4 mo): G-nubian
(4 mo): E-lcelandic × Peruvian
igns
paso
Modifed from Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders, Table 6-1; Mayhew IG: Large Animal Neurology, Armes, IA, 2009 Wiley-Blackwell,
Table 30-2.
AR, Autosomal recessive; AR(S), autosormal suspect; CLN, ceroid lipofuscinosis; CTSD, cathepsin D gene; GSD, glycogen storage disease; GM, gangliosidosis; MPS, rmucopolysaccharidosis.
 Breeds in italics signify mutation discovered; C, canine; F, feline; B, bovine; O, ovine; S, swine; G, goat; E, equine.
438
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 15-1 Bovine neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Luxol fast blue stain of the cerebellar cortex of
a Devon cow with intense storage evident in Purkinje cells (arrow). [Courtesy Cornell University
College of Veterinary Medicine.]
Figure 15-2 Canine globoid cell leukodystrophy. Note large
Hgure 15-3 Folium from a dog with cerebellar cortical abiotro-
globoid cells in white matter of cerebral cortex. The cells are flled
phy. The cerebellar cortex is almost devoid of Purkinje neurons.
with myelin breakdown products. (Courtesy Cornell University
A single purkinje neuron is visible (arrow). Subjectively there
College of Veterinary Medicine.]
are few granule cell neurons than normal. Gliosis is also pressent
(1 0x mag). Right inset, Higher magnification of a purkinje neuron.
Lef inset, Folia are smaller than normal.
signs include cerebellar ataxia, myelopathy, and encephalopa-
thy Cerebellar signs are often the first sign of storage diseases
because of the complex integration of the fast conducting sen-
small molecule, gene, and cell-based therapies may have value
 sory and motor pathways [see Chapter 8).4 The cerebellum also
in some conditions and have only been used experimentally in
is particularly sensitive to disorders affecting myelin. Seizure
affected animals.3.6 Genetic testing may be available for some
events that occur with some storage disorders usually manifest
of these disorders. Colonies of animals for some of these dis-
 at the end stage of the disease process. Storage disorders for
eases have been established at research institutions.
which seizure activity is a predominant clinical feature include
 ceroid lipofuscinosis, glycoproteinoses, and leukodystrophies.4
Abiotrophies and Other Degenerative Diseases
Most of the diseases that have been studied have a reces-
The normal neuron is not capable of dividing and reproducing
sive mode of inheritance, and so only a portion of the litter is
itself but has the capacity to survive for the life of the ani-
affected (see Table 15-2). Lysosomal storage diseases will have
    s  s 
signs in other organs including the retina. Skeletal and facial
malformations are prominent in the mucopolysaccharidoses.
degeneration of the neuronal cell body can primarily involve
 In general, lysosomal storage disorders tend to be slowly pro-
the neurons of the cerebellum, cerebrum, nerve, or multiple
 gressive and lead to the animal's death.4 Enzyme replacement,
 systems (Figure 15-3; see Chapters 7 and 8).
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
439
The multisystem disorders are further characterized as to
the primary site of the degenerative process—cell body, axon,
myelin, and so forth that also involve other anatomic regions
of the CNS or the peripheral nervous system (PNS). Clinical
signs relate to the predominant region of the nervous system
affected. The motor neuron degenerations are rare and usually
 Oxcur in young growing animals with an insidious and progres-
sive clinical disease course of neuromuscular weakness and
 generalized LMN signs (see Chapter 7). Myelin disorders cause
  d  sss   e 
nopathies occur with inherited, metabolic, and toxic disorders.
Primary cerebellar cortical degeneration refers to degeneration
and loss of Purkinje cells and/or granule cells. Pathologic pro-
cesses of cerebellar degeneration are classified microscopically
as atrophy, abiotrophy, and transsynaptic neuronal degenera-
tion. Atrophy, a term that lacks specificity, refers to loss of cer-
ebellar mass often as a result of a degenerative process (Figure
Fgure 15-4 Sagittal T2W MRI from the dog in Figure 15-3.The
15-4).2.8
cerebellum is small. There is atrophy of the folia as evidenced by
Cerebellar degenerative disorders cause clinical signs of
mcrease amount of cerebrospinal fluid overlying the folia as well
cerebellar ataxia and intention tremor [see Chapter 8). The
as within the fourth ventricle.
progression of these abiotrophies and degenerative processes is
generally slow [over months) but unrelenting. Like the storage
diseases, they are rare, usually inherited, and in most instances
eventually fatal. The course of disease is usually insidious but
Wyoming in 1988 and continues to be reported in Missouri
can be rapid.
and surrounding states.17-19 The etiology is still unknown but
 Multisystem Neuronal Degenerations. These disorders
a toxico-infectious etiology resulting from Clostridium botuli-
often frst cause cerebellar cortical degeneration and later
mum type CD has been proposed in horses. Acute or subacute
involve other neuronal populations. A multisystem degen-
autonomic neuropathy of people is similar to the animal forms
eration in rottweilers characterized by neuronal vacuolation
and studies suggest an immune-mediated basis for this disease.
has been recognized in young rottweiler dogs.9 Affected dogs
 In dogs, dysfunction of the parasympathetic nervous sys-
develop progressive GP ataxia, tetraparesis, cerebellar dysfunc-
tem predominates, although signs related to the sympathetic
tion, and laryngeal paralysis. Intracytoplasmic vacuoles are
 nervous system may be present as well.20 The disease is most
prominent in the cerebellar nuclei and other brainstem nuclei
common in young adult free-roaming dogs [median age of
and ganglia. There is bilaterally symmetric degeneration in the
 18 months) and tends to affect medium- to large-breed dogs.
spinal cord. Young Cairn terriers show a progressive GP ataxia,
Many affected dogs are from rural environments but the dis-
tetraparesis, and erebellar signs. Histopathologyreveals neu
ron degeneration in the spinal cord, brainstem, and thalamus,
nel environments. The peak incidence in Missouri is from late
and degenerative changes in the tracts of the spinal cord and
winter to early spring. The following clinical signs develop and
brainstem. A multisystem degeneration recognized in young
are progressive over Z to 3 weeks. All signs may not be present
cocker spaniels manifests cerebellovestibular and forebrain
in all dogs.
signs.!l Histopathology shows widespread neuronal degen-
 Dysuria, distended urinary bladder: The pelvic nerve is a
eration in the cerebellum and brain with presence of swollen
 parasympathetic nerve that innervates the detrusor muscle.
 axons. Recently, a multisystem degeneration has been described
Detrusor muscle dysfunction is a common finding.
 in golden retrievers that show tremor, progressive tetraparesis,
Mydriasis and absent pupillary light reflexes: Pupillary
and generalized LMN signs. 2 The spinal cord had changes con-
constriction is a function of the parasympathetic fbers con-
sistent with axonopathy; there was loss of cranial nerve motor
tained in the oculomotor nerves.
nuclei; and nerves had evidence of Wallerian degeneration.
 Elevated third eyelid: This sign is present in about 50% of
Multisystem degenerations also involve the basal ganglia,
cases, suggesting some dysfunction of the sympathetic ner-
such as the caudate nucleus and substantia nigra, that cause
vous system.
 movement disorders similar to Huntington and Parkinson dis-
 Dry mucous membranes, decreased tear production: Dry
ease in humans. These disorders have been recognized in Kerry
mouth, nose, and eyes are common findings. Secretions
 blue terriers and Chinese crested dogs.13.14 In these breeds,
are largely the function of the parasympathetic nervous
cerebellar ataxia begins between 3 and 6 months of age. As
system.
the basal nuclei degenerate, affected dogs have increasing dif-
Vomiting, regurgitation: Megaesophagus is a common
fculty initiating movements and maintaining balance. These
finding. The vagus nerve (parasympathetic) innervates the
disorders are autosomal recessive and have been linked to a
esophagus and stomach and plays a major role in esopha-
locus on chromosome 1.14
geal and gastric motility.
Dysautonomia. In veterinary medicine, the term dysauto-
Decreased anal (perineal) reflex: The external anal sphinc-
nomia refers to acute or subacute idiopathic panautonomic
ter is innervated by the pudendal nerve, a general somatic
failure involving both the parasympathetic and sympathetic
efferent nerve. This is the only sign of somatic dysfunction.
 Intestinal ileus: Distention of the intestinal tract is a less
and ll. It is a progressive degenerative disease of the gan-
common finding. Constipation and diarrhea may be seen in
glia of the autonomic nervous system. The general somatic
some dogs.
efferent system is not affected except for involvement of the
Weight loss, muscle wasting, and decreased appetite
anal sphincter. Dysautonomia was frst recognized in horses
 Gait, postural reactions, and spinal reflexes are not affected
in Scotland (grass sickness) and then described in cats in the
Dysautonomia also has been reported in cats but no clear
United Kingdom and Europe in the early 1980s.15.16 Dysauto-
nomia was first described in dogs from southwest Missouri and
similar to dogs.
440
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Dysautonomia should be suspected from the cluster of
 the pathogenesis include (l) ammonia as the primary putative
clinical signs. Although myasthenia gravis and botulism cause
neurotoxin, although other synergistic toxins may be involved;
some of these signs, the presence of weakness in the skeletal
[2) disorders of aromatic amino acid metabolism resulting
muscles is not observed in dysautonomia. One of the best
from alterations in monoamine neurotransmitters; (3) disor-
clinical procedures for confirming dysautonomia is to dem-
ders of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) or glutamate; and
onstrate denervation hypersensitivity to the pupils. Pilocar-
[4) increased cerebral concentrations of an endogenous ben-
pine ophthalmic solution [l%] is diluted to a concentration
zodiazepine-like substance.23 Ammonia is probably the most
of 0.05% with normal saline. One to two drops are placed in
important toxic substance, although the level of ammonia in
 one eye and the pupils are observed every 15 minutes. Dogs 
the blood does not necessarily correlate with the severity of
with dysautonomia have rapid pupillary constriction com-
the CNS disturbance.24
pared with normal dogs who either do not respond at all or
Cinical Signs. Most animals with liver disease severe
show delayed responses. If no response is seen in 90 minutes,
enough to produce HE have other clinical signs indicative
the test is repeated with 1% pilocarpine. Unless parasympa-
 of hepatic failure, such as vomiting, anorexia, weight loss,
tholytic drugs [atropine) or toxins are present, rapid pupil-
retarded growth, ascites, polyuria-polydipsia, and sometimes
lary constriction should occur. Lack of innervation causes an
icterus. The neurologic signs are frequently worse after feed-
upregulation of the postsynaptic receptors with denervation
 ing, especially if high-protein food is given. The release of
supersensitivity in neurotransmission.
nitrogenous materials into the portal circulation exacerbates
Thoracic radiographs frequently show megaesophagus and
the signs. Obtundation that may progress to stupor and coma
 abdominal radiographs reveal distention of the urinary bladder
 is the most common neurologic sign. Other signs of forebrain
and sometimes intestinal ileus. Unless detrusor atony is pres-
 involvement such as behavior change, continuous pacing and
ent from prolonged detrusor paralysis, dogs may void urine in
head pressing, blindness, and seizures also are common. Fre-
response to low doses of bethanechol.
quently, the clinical picture is that of a waxing and waning
No definitive treatment is available. Symptomatic therapy
diffuse encephalopathy. The postural reactions and reflexes
 includes bethanechol, pilocarpine to increase tear produc-
are only minimally involved except when the animal is nearly
tion and to reduce photophobia from dilated pupils, meto-
comatose. The cranial nerves are not markedly affected except
dlopramide to stimulate gastrointestinal motility, and frequent 
that vision may be impaired [decreased menace response with
evacuation of the bladder. The mortality rate in canine dysau-
 tonomia is approximately 90%. There are isolated reports of
especially in cats.
 dogs developing partial recovery.
A variety of factors can precipitate the neurologic signs of
HE in an animal with marginal liver function (Table 15-3).
Metabolic Disorders
Any source of protein in the digestive tract is a com-
Normal nervous system function depends on a closely regu-
mon cause. Hemorrhage in the gastrointestinal (Gl) tract,
lated environment. Conversely, homeostasis is coordinated by
p aenirard Aeuu oste sir Aie pasearu io 'uoednsuon
the nervous system through the neuroendocrine, autonomic,
crisis. Alterations in fluids, electrolytes, or pH may increase
and somatic systems. Systemic disorders altering homeostasis
 often have profound effects on the nervous system.
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a complex metabolic disor-
TABLE 15-3
der resulting from abnormal liver function.
Management of Hepatic Encephalopathy (HE)
 Pathophysiology. HE has been reported in four types
 of liver disease: (1) severe parenchymal liver damage, either
 Factors That Exacerbate HE
Manag ement of HE
acute or chronic [cirrhosis, neoplasia, toxicosis); (2) anoma-
lous portal venous circulation (rare in large animals); (3)
 Increased dietary protein 
Low-protein, low-fat diet 
microvascular (
dysplasia, and (4) congenital urea-cycle
and fatty acids
 enzyme deficiencies (rare) .22 Parenchymal liver diseases other
 Bacterial production of
Diet, antibiotics
than cirrhosis (fatty infltration, chronic active hepatitis, and
ammonia in large bowel 
so forth) usually do not cause hepatic encephalopathy except
 Constipation leading to
Diet, laxatives, enemas in acute
in the terminal stages of the disease. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids in
certain plants such as Senecio spp. and Crotalaria spp. cause
bacterial production of 
lactulose
parenchymal liver damage and hepatic encephalopathy in
ammonia in large bowel 
herbivores. Parenchymal disease severely reduces the capacity
Gastrointestinal
Monitoring and treatment of
hemorrhage
ulcers, bleeding disorders,
tosystemic yenous shunts divert a significant portion of the
hookworms, whipworms
portal blood past the liver into the vena cava. Potentially toxic
Hypokalemia, hypovolemia.
Monitoring and correction
substances that normally are absorbed from the gastrointes-
 alkalosis—aggravated by 
 of fluid and electrolyte
tinal (Gl) tract and detoxifed in the liver enter the systemic
diuretics
 imbalance, use of potassium-
circulation. Similar to portosystemic venous shunting, the
sparing diuretics with caution
pathophysiology in microvascular dysplasia involves shunt-
 18 100 0
Transfusion of stored blood
 Use fresh blood
within the liver vasculature on a microscopic level. Urea-cycle
 enzyme deficiencies prevent the metabolism of ammonia to
 Sedatives, narcotics,
Use depressant drugs with
urea.
anesthetics
extreme caution (in lowest 
The metabolic changes that cause the clinical syndrome of
possible dosages), and 
hepatic encephalopathy result from failure of the liver to (1)
monitor carefully
remove toxic products of gut metabolism and (2) synthesize
Infections, fever
 Monitoring and supportive
factors necessary for normal brain function.22 The exact cause
treatment
ofhepatic encephalopathy is unknown, but current theories of
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
441
the blood and tissue ammonia levels. Decreased renal func-
to the liver is adequate. Partial occlusion of the shunt may
tion reduces elimination of ammonia and other metabolites.
 be effective. Seizures and neurologic complications following
Fever and infection cause increased tissue catabolism and
PSS attenuation have been well documented.3334 Potential
increased nitrogen release. Stored blood for transfusions may
risk factors for neurologic complications include older dogs
have an excess of ammonia. Depressant drugs directly affect
sgsuas sosazrod pue sedarenxa aaus uim sao pes
the brain and frequently are metabolized in the liver. The
For details of the management of hepatic encephalopathy, the
frst evidence of hepatic dysfunction often is slow recovery
reader should consult the references.2324,32,35,36-39
from anesthesia. Diuretics used to treat ascites may cause HE
through their effect on potassium, renal output of ammonia,
Ketonemic Syndromes
and alkalosis.
Ketosis. These diseases occur primarily in ruminants and
 A range of clinicopathologic abnormalities may be pres-
are characterized by hypoglycemia and the accumulation of
ent, depending on the cause. Microcytosis with normochro-
ketones in body fluids. Conditions that have been recognized
mic erythrocytes, ammonium biurate crystals in the urine, and
include bovine ketosis [acetonemia) and pregnancy toxemia
lowered cholesterol, blood glucose, and vitamin K dependent
of cattle, sheep, and goats. Unlike most monogastric animals,
clotting factor levels may be seen with liver failure. Frequently.
 serum albumin and serum urea nitrogen levels are low. Paren-
gluconeogenesis of volatile fatty acids [acetic, propionic, and
chymal disease often causes elevations in liver enzymes, such
butyric acids). Nearly 50% of the glucose in a cow is normally
as serum alanine aminotransferase [ALT), aspartate aminotrans-
derived from dietary propionic acid that is converted to glu-
ferase [AST), and allkaline phosphatase (ALP). These enzymes
cose in the gluconeogenic pathway. Reduction of propionic
usually are not elevated significantly in portacaval shunts.25
acid production in the rumen can result in hypoglycemia and
Hepatic dysfunction may be confirmed with tests such as the
the subsequent mobilization of free fatty acids and glycerol
anmonia tolerance test or preprandial and postprandial serum
from fat stores. The liver has a limited ability to use these fatty
acids because the levels of oxaloacetate are low. Acetyl coen-
nography (US) is a sensitive indicator ofliver size, but the defin-
 zyme A therefore is not incorporated into the tricarboxylic
itive diagnosis of anomalous portal vein circulation requires
acid cycle and is converted into the ketone bodies acetoacetate
 US, contrast-enhanced radiography or computed tomography.
and B-hydroxybutyrate. When the production of ketones by
(CT), or nuclear medicine. Depending on the experience of
 the liver exceeds peripheral use, pathologic ketosis results.
the operator, abdominal US has a sensitivity of about 80% and
 Both ketosis and primary hypoglycemia are involved in the
a specificity of about 65% for the detection of extrahepatic
 development of the clinical signs. The most common signs
portosystemic shunts (PSS). The sensitivity for detection of
include depression, partial to complete anorexia, weight loss,
 and decreased milk production. The neurologic signs pres-
using technetium-99m sulfur colloid (TeSC) is used to evaluate
ent in some cows include ataxia, apparent blindness, saliva-
liver size and shape. Transcolonic TeSC procedures have been
tion, tooth grinding, excessive licking, muscle twitching, head
described for the diagnosis of macrovascular shunts in dogs, cats,
pressing, and hyperesthesia. Cows may charge blindly if they
and potbellied pigs.29,30 Biopsy is required for confrmation of
are disturbed.
parenchymal disease.
The diagnosis of bovine ketosis is based on the presence
 The successful medical management of HE depends on
of elevated ketone levels in blood and millk with concomitant
the cause of the liver disorder and the degree of liver mal-
hypoglycemia. The odor of ketones may be perceived on the
function. Animals with marginal liver function may be man-
breath and in the urine. The immediate therapy is an IV injec-
aged by reducing the sources of nitrogenous products in the
tion of glucose, followed by oral administration of 125 to 250
GI tract [see Table 15-3]. A high-carbohydrate, low-fat, low-
g of propylene glycol twice a day. Corticosteroids are also ben-
protein diet with high biologic value is indicated. If dietary
eficial in cows that are not septic. Cows with severe neurologic
management alone is inadequate, then oral, nonabsorbable
signs can be treated with 2 to 8 g of chloral hydrate orally
antibiotics [such as neomycin) may be given to reduce the
twice a day for 3 to 5 days.
bacterial flora that split urea. Mild laxatives or lactulose [a
Pregnancy/Toxemia. Pregnancy toxemia is a condition
nonabsorbable disaccharide) may be helpful3.32In addition
 that is closely related pathophysiologically to bovine ketosis. It
to its laxative effects, lactulose creates an acid environment
occurs in ewes during the last 6 weeks of pregnancy, when the
in the colon that allows NHs to be trapped as NH4+ in the
 demand for glucose by developing fetuses is large. Pregnancy
gut lumen.
toxemia occurs in pastured or housed beef cows during the
 Acute crises ofhepatic encephalopathy require more vigor-
last 2 months of pregnancy. Overweight cows or those bearing
ous treatment. Protein sources must be removed completely.
twin calves are especially susceptible. In ewes and cows, the
Enemas and laxatives are used to remove all nitrogenous
basic cause is nutrition insuffcient to maintain normal blood
material from the GI tract. Sedative drugs, methionine, and
glucose concentrations when fetal glucose demands are high.
diuretics are discontinued. Sources of GI hemorrhage are cor-
Hypoglycemia precipitates the ketosis, as has been described
rected if they are present. Administration of antibiotic aimed
earlier in this section.
at altering the Gl bacterial flora in an attempt to reduce
In sheep, clinical signs may develop in a flock and may
ammonia production should be considered. Antibiotics can be
extend for several weeks. Ewes become depressed and develop
given parenterally or as a retention enema in animals unable to
weakness, ataxia, and loss of muscle tone. Terminally, recum-
receive oral medications. Dehydration, hypokalemia, and alka-
bency and coma develop. Neuromuscular disturbances include
[ay Aderau pi (ai snouaenu ym paseueu are sisot
fine muscle tremors of the ears and the lips. In some cases, sei-
 output must be maintained to eliminate nitrogenous products.
zures develop."Stargazing" postures and grinding of the teeth
Oxygen therapy may be necessary, especially in cases of coma.
are common. The neurologic signs in cattle include depression,
 a  s r s 
excitability, and ataxia. The diagnosis of pregnancy toxemia is
from pyrrolizidine toxicity is poor.
based on the history, clinical signs, and presence of ketosis and
Specific treatment of the cause is instituted, if possible.
hypoglycemia.
   s r r  
 In sheep, flock treatment consists of increasing the availabil-
 enzyme deficiencies cannot be treated specifcally. Portosys-
ity of glucose precursors in the diet or drenching affected ewes
temic shunts may be corrected surgically if portal circulation
twice daily with 200 mL of a warm 50% glycerol solution. The
442
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
anabolic steroid trenbolone acetate also is benefcial given in
 or muscles directly. Pituitary lesions may cause signs of hor-
30-mg doses administered intramuscularly (IM). Induction of
 monal and forebrain dysfunction if the disease extends into
 parturition or fetal removal by cesarean section also may be
the hypothalamus [Figure 15-5).
needed to reduce the metabolic drain on the ewe. Cattle are
 In this section, specific endocrine and metabolic diseases
treated by the method described for bovine ketosis. Pregnancy
that produce prominent neurologic signs of weakness are dis-
toxemia can be prevented by ensuring adequate nutrition dur-
ing pregnancy.
any or constant, repetitive myoclonus [tremor] are discussed
in Chapter 10. Readers should seek other textbooks for in-
Renal Failure
 depth descriptions of each disorder.
The terminal stages of renal failure may cause tetany or sei-
 Many endocrine and metabolic diseases cause electrolyte
zures. Chronic renal disease may be associated with vomiting.
disorders that result in weakness because they affect neuro-
diarrhea, anorexia, muscle wasting, and weakness. Encepha-
 muscular functions. With certain conditions, clinical signs
lopathy, polyneuropathy, and polymyopathy have been seen
improve with rest and are exacerbated by exercise. The term
in humans with chronic renal disease, especially those receiv-
  s  e a s s a
ing hemodialysis. Renal encephalopathy has been reported
Chapter 7).
in cows and dogs.40-42 Alterations in parathyroid hormone
levels and electrolyte metabolism, especially calcium and
Hypocaicemia
potassium, may cause signs that are related to the nervous
Parturient Paresis. Parturient paresis, or milk fever, is a hypo-
calcemic metabolic disorder that occurs in mature dairy cows,
can have a primary neurotoxic effect and secondarily cause
sows, sheep, and, rarely, horses, usually within 48 hours of par-
hypercalcemia.
turition. The affected cows are usually older than 5 years of
age, and incidence is increased in the heavy milk producers
Endocrine Disorders
eodu Aeuare are smos Arep Aue parq Aasrar pue
Endocrine disorders that affect electrolyte and glucose homeo-
cemic at parturition, and any factor that decreases the meta-
stasis may produce neurologic signs in affected animals. Hor-
bolic adjustment to this hypocalcemia may cause paresis. Such
monal excess or deficiency may affect the function of nerves
factors include milk yield versus calcium mobilization from
A
Figure 15-5 A, Older toy poodle showing head pressing behavior from pituitary macroadenoma.
B, Brain from dog in A.Note mass at the base of the hypothalamus arising from the pituitary gland.
C, Cross section of brain from B. Note the large mass invading the hypothalamus.
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
443
bone and gut, the ratios of calcium to phosphorus in the diet,
Dihydrotachysterol (DHT) is a synthetic vitamin D that is
anorexia and decreased intestinal motility, and dietary pH.
active in the absence of PTH. The loading dose is 0.03 mg/kg
 The onset of parturient paresis [stage 1) is often missed and
daily administered orally for 3 to 4 days.46 The maintenance
is characterized by apprehension, anorexia, ataxia, and limb
dose is 0.01 to 0.02 mg/kg per day. Calcitriol is a vitamin
stiffness. Stage 2 is marked by progressive muscular weakness,
D analog that is used to treat subacute and chronic hypo-
recumbency, and depression. The head is usually turned to the
calcemia in dogs. The initial dose is 10 to 15 ng/kg twice
fank, and an S-shaped curvature of the neck may be present.
a day for 3 to 4 days. Then the dose is reduced to 2.5 to
Other signs include dilated pupils, decreased pupillary light
7.5 ng/mg twice a day. Animals should be closely monitored
reflexes, reduced anal reflex, decreased defecation and urina-
because hypercalcemia may be a complication of vitamin
tion, no ruminal motility, protrusion of the tongue, and fre-
D therapy, especially when supplemental calcium salts are
quent straining.
administered.46
 Stage 3 occurs in about 20% of cases and is characterized
by lateral recumbency; severe depression or coma; subnormal
Diabetes Mellitus
temperature; a weak, irregular heart rate; and slow, irregular,
Diabetes mellitus may result in a variety of neurologic signs.
shallow respirations. The pupils are dilated and unresponsive
Insulin defciency results in failure of glucose transport into
muscle and adipose tissue. An early sign of diabetes mel-
hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and hypomagnesemia.
ltus may be exercise intolerance and weakness. As insulin
With prolonged anorexia, serum sodium and potassium levels
may decrease.
increase in lipolysis and serum fatty acids. The ensuing
Intravenous calcium salts (Ca, l g per 45 kg of body
metabolic acidosis results in depressed cerebral function
weight) are usually effective. Calcium borogluconate is com-
that culminates in coma and death. In the untreated keto-
monly used; a 25% solution contains 10.4 g of calcium per
acidotic dog or cat, hyperkalemia can cause flaccid muscles
500 mL. Milk fever can be prevented in susceptible cows or
 by depressing neuromuscular and cardiovascular functions.
herds by the administration of vitamin D or its analogs or by
With therapy and correction of the acidosis, potassium ions
the manipulation of the prepartum dietary calcium and phos-
reenter cells, and hypokalemia may be a complication that
phorus levels.
fosters muscle weakness and depression. In some animals,
Dogs and Cats. Hypocalcemic syndromes are well doc-
the hyperglycemia may be severe, even though acidosis is
oq u et(ot raideu aas ose) seo ue sao ui panuam
absent. This syndrome is called hyperosmolar nonketotic
 species, primary hypoparathyroidism is a documented cause
coma. Clinical signs result from the hyperosmolar effects of
of chronic hypocalcemia. In cats, hypoparathyroidism is
glucose on the cerebral cortex. Diabetic animals, especially
 sometimes caused by inadvertent surgical resection of the
cats, may also develop neuropathy with associated LMN
parathyroid glands during thyroidectomy for the treatment
signs [see Chapter 7].
of hyperthyroidism. Hypocalcemia may be associated with
The comatose diabetic animal is a difficult therapeutic
chronic renal disease in dogs and cats. It is the major biochemi-
 challenge. The clinician must exercise great care in perform-
cal abnormality in dogs with eclampsia and may be observed
ing insulin, acid-base, electrolyte, and fluid therapy. Interested
in animals receiving blood transfusions containing calcium-
readers should consult other texts for an in-depth discussion
chelating anticoagulants. Enema solutions that contain phos-
of the diagnosis and management of the diabetic patient.
phate may cause hypocalcemia in cats. lonized hypocalcemia
 occurs in critically ill dogs; especially dogs with sepsis.44
Hypothyroidism
When the total serum calcium concentration falls below 6
Deficiencies of thyroxine result in a marked decrease in fore-
to 7 mg/dL (ionized <0.6 to 0.7 mmol/L), the clinical signs
brain function and basal metabolic rate. Severely hypothyroid
of hypocalcemia are likely to occur.45 Hypocalcemia increases
dogs may become obtunded or may appear dull and unre-
membrane hyperexcitability by decreasing the membrane
 sponsive. Coma also known as myxedema coma may occur
 n       
in severe cases.47-49 A very low voltage electroencephalogram
muscle contractions are the most common clinical signs, but
(EEG) usuall is seen. The forebrain signs improve dramati-
some dogs develop muscle weakness early in the disease.
cally after replacement thyroid medication. Polyneuropathy
Hypocalcemia should be investigated when the total serum
and myopathy have been recognized in dogs without the
calcium concentration is less than 7.0 mg/dL and the serum
albumin concentration is normal. Serum ionized calcium con-
ropathy include laryngeal paralysis, vestibular dysfunction,
 centrations help to confrm the diagnosis. Once the diagnosis
and paresis involving various peripheral and cranial nerves
of hypocalcemia is confirmed, the underlying cause should
[Figure 15-6) 50.52 Hypothyroidism may cause hyperlipidemia
be identified. The diagnosis of both eclampsia and iatrogenic
and atherosclerosis, conditions that are risk factors for CNS
hypoparathyroidism is usually obvious from the history and
infarction.50
physical findings. Primary hypoparathyroidism may be con-
The fact that the animal has a polyneuropathy rather than
firmed through parathormone (PTH) assays conducted at spe-
 a single problem may be defined by electromyography (EMG)
cialized laboratories.
or other electrodiagnostic tests. Measurement of free thyrox-
 Animals experiencing seizures should be given 10% cal-
ine and thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH) concentrations or
cium gluconate solution IV at a dose of 0.5 to 1.5 mL/kg.
 The dosage should be slowly infused over a 10- to 20-minute
-dns uu pro on m psr se as yo 
period, and the heart rate and Q-T interval should be closely
plementation, but weeks to months may be required for nerve
monitored with an electrocardiogram (ECG) recording. The
function to recover.55
calcium dose can be repeated every 6 to 8 hours as a bolus
injection.
Hyperadrenocorticism
Oral maintenance therapy is instituted when the total
Hyperadrenocorticism [Cushing disease/syndrome) occurs in
serum calcium concentration is consistently less than
dogs, horses, and cats. In dogs and horses, pituitary adenomas
7.0 mg/dL. Calcium gluconate or calcium lactate is adminis-
that hypersecrete adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH) are
tered orally in doses of 1 to 4 g for dogs and 0.5 to 1.0 g for
the most common cause, but functional cortisol-secreting
cats. In parathyroid deficiency, vitamin D therapy is required.
adrenal tumors also produce this syndrome in dogs and
444
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hypercalcemic Syndromes
An increased concentration of serum calcium may result in
neuromuscular, cardiovascular, and renal dysfunction. Hyper-
calcemia [>14 mg/dL) increases membrane threshold (mak-
ing it more difficult to depolarize the membrane) resulting
in hypoexcitability of the muscle membrane. CNS reflex and
response activities and muscles become sluggish and weak.
Hypercalcemia decreases the Q-T interval of the ECG and
decreases myocardial function. Hypercalcemia impairs renal
concentrating ability. In prolonged hypercalcemia, mineraliza-
tion of soft tissue may occur. The syndrome ofhypercalcemic
nephropathy is well documented in animals and culminates in
chronic renal failure. In dogs calcium levels above 12.5 mg/dL
may result in hypercalcemic signs Ionized calcium concentra-
tions should be measured to confrm hypercalcemia. In some
cases, muscle weakness may be worse during exercise.
Several causes of hypercalcemia exist, including primary
hyperparathyroidism, paraneoplastic syndromes, vitamin D
rodenticide intoxication, hypoadrenocorticism, and iatro-
Figure 15-6 Older cocker spaniel dog with myxedematous hypo-
thyroidism and facial nerve paralysis.
from autonomously functioning parathyroid adenomas. These
tumors secrete PTH in the presence of increasing serum cal-
cium concentrations. Certain nonendocrine tumors such as
lymphosarcoma, anal sac adenocarcinoma, squamous cell car-
cats. The clinical signs are caused by the metabolic effects
cinoma, and thymoma secrete substances with PTH-like actiy-
of hypercortisolemia. Generalized muscle weakness result-
ity that results in hypercalcemia.52-64 This syndrome is called
ing from the catabolic effects of glucocorticoids is a com-
the hypercalcemia of malignancy and is the most common
mon finding. Some dogs develop muscle degeneration,
cause for hypercalcemia in dogs and cats.54 Rodenticides that
known as steroid-induced myopathy [see Chapters 7 and 10).
contain analogues of vitamin D promote increased absorption
This condition produces spontaneous muscle contractions
 of calcium and may produce hypercalcemia. 5
(pseudomyotonia) and a stiff gait.
 The symptomatic therapy of hypercalcemia includes IV
Pituitary adenomas [macroadenomas) may create neuro-
diuresis with 0.9% saline and furosemide. Corticosteroids also
logic signs by growth and expansion into the hypothalamus
 are beneficial because they promote the renal excretion of cal-
cium. Clinicopathologic data for the diagnosis of lymphoma
enomas are usually yague and include depression, confusion,
should be obtained before administration of corticosteroids as
circling, ataxia, and seizures.57 Macroadenomas are more
these drugs can induce remission confounding the diagnosis
 common in older, large-breed dogs. Pituitary tumors causing
of lymphosarcoma. Salmon calcitonin may also be given to
hyperadrenocorticisms may be present without causing neu-
decrease serum calcium concentrations.56
rologic signs. 57
 In dogs and cats, hyperadrenocorticism is confirmed
Hyperkalemia
with screening tests such as the low-dose dexamethasone
Increased serum concentrations of potassium (>6.5 mEq/L)
suppression test, the ACTH stimulation test, or the urine
decrease the resting membrane potential causing an increase
in membrane excitability. Eventually, the muscle is unable
corticism is differentiated from functional adrenocortical
to repolarize and the muscle fatigues. Excessive extracellular
 ssars sx srr   sr
potassium causes cardiac flaccidity and decreases the con-
or ACTH assay or both. Similar tests and measurement of
duction of impulses through the atrioventricular (AV) node.
 increased plasma ACTH concentrations are useful in the diag-
Thus, heart rate and cardiac output may be severely depressed.
nosis of equine Cushing disease.58 Abdominal US may also be
Hyperkalemia therefore manifests as generalized weakness
helpful in the diagnosis of adrenal gland disease. Macroadeno-
that may worsen with exercise.
mas can be accurately diagnosed with MRI or CT:59 In dogs.
Adrenal Insufficiency. Hyperkalemia may occur secondary
pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism is usually treated
to severe acidosis; however, the usual cause is adrenal insuff-
medically with mitotane or trilostane.60 Mitotane causes
ciency. Adrenal insufficiency, a chronic immune-mediated adre-
necrosis of the adrenal cortex, primarily the zona fasciculata
nalitis, may result in aldosterone deficiency secondary to atrophy
and reticularis, and results in markedly decreased cortisol
of the zona glomerulosa. Hyperkalemia and hyponatremia con-
production. If the dosage is carefully monitored, aldosterone
tribute to the typical signs of depression, anorexia, vomiting.
secretion is much less affected. Side effects include vomit-
diarrhea, weakness, bradycardia, and hypotension secondary
ing, diarrhea, anorexia, weight loss, and depression. Trilostane
to decreased cardiac output. The disease responds well to fluid
reduces synthesis of cortisol, aldosterone, and adrenal andro-
 therapy and replacement adrenocortical hormone therapy.
gens. It also can be used in dogs, cats, and horses for pitu-
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis. Hyperkalemic periodic
itary and adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. It is well
 paralysis (HPP), an episodic syndrome of muscular weakness
tolerated and has fewer side effects than mitotane. However,
and fasciculations, occurs in young, adult quarter horses [see
it may not produce long-term control of clinical signs. Read-
 Chapter 7).57 This is an autosomal dominant inherited disease
ers are encouraged to consult internal medicine textbooks or
caused by a genetic mutation in the α-subunit of the equine
veterinary drug handbooks for dosages and correct regimens
adult sodium-channel gene.68 It is associated with marked
for each drug. In dogs and cats with pituitary macrotumors,
      
treatment also is directed at control of the pituitary mass [see
serum activity of enzymes derived from muscle. The episodes
Chapter 12). Adrenalectomy is recommended for adrenocor-
occur spontaneously or can be induced by administration of
tical neoplasia
 potassium chloride orally. Electromyographic changes include
CHAPTER 15 Systemic or Multifocal Signs
445
fibrillation potentials, positive sharp waves, and complex repet-
hsulinoma. Adult-onset hypoglycemia usually is caused
itive discharges. Histologic changes in muscle are minimal but
by a functional tumor of the pancreatic β-islet cells com-
may include vacuolation of type-2b fbers or mild degenera-
monly called insulinomas.72-74 Excessive insulin produces an
tive changes. Hyperkalemia or normokalemia may occur during
increased transfer of blood glucose into the nonneuronal cel-
episodes. Intravenous administration of calcium, glucose,
or
lular compartments, resulting in hypoglycemia and abnormal
bicarbonate results in recovery. Administration of acetazol-
CNS metabolism. Although insulinomas are relatively rare,
amide, 2.2 mg/kg orally every 8 to 12 hours, prevents the epi-
 increasing awareness has resulted in more frequent diagnosis.
sodes. Decreasing the potassum content of the feed may also
Most insulinomas in dogs have metastasized to the local lymph
be effective. This can be done by feeding oat hay, feeding grain
 a a q sas rao ue ( aaes) a ro (l sas) ao
two to three times daily, and providing free access to salt.5
definitive diagnosis is made. In addition to hypoglycemia, insu-
linomas may also induce peripheral neuropathies [see Chapter
Hypokalemia
7]. Other neoplasms [e.g, leiomyosarcoma) also may induce
Decreased serum concentrations of potassium decrease the
hypoglycemia.75
activity of skeletal muscle because the membranes are hyper-
Seizures associated with insulinomas are more frequently
polarized. In other words, decreased extracellular potassium
related to exercise, fasting (or, conversely, eating), and excite-
causes a decrease in membrane sensitivity by increasing the
ment. Other signs such as weakness, facial and muscle trem-
resting membrane potential. Muscle weakness and even paral-
ors, disorientation, and behavioral changes are also common.
   s   r  
 The signs are episodic until ireversible neuronal damage
diuretic therapy, vomiting, diarrhea, alkalosis, excessive miner-
occurs. LMN paresis can be detected in dogs with peripheral
alocorticoid therapy for adrenal insufficiency, renal failure, and
neuropathies.
diabetic ketoacidosis. Hypokalemic myopathy is well docu-
Blood glucose concentrations after a l2-hour fast are
mented in cats with renal failure, in cats with chronic anorexia,
usually below normal [<60 mg/dL). Longer fasts (24 to 48
and in cats receiving low-potassium diets. Most patients
hours) may be necessary in some cases, but animals should be
respond well to potassium supplementation (see Chapter 7).
monitored closely during this time. serum insulin levels are
more specific for making a diagnosis.76 Serum insulin concen-
Hypoglycemia
trations are near zero when serum glucose concentrations are
Hypoglycemia causes altered CNS function similar to that
associated with hypoxia. The blood glucose concentration is
measured when the blood glucose concentrations are below
of prime importance for normal neuronal metabolism because
60 mg/dL. Normal or increased serum insulin concentrations
 glucose oxidation is the primary energy source. No glycogen
in hypoglycemic dogs are strongly suggestive of insulinoma.
stores are present in the CNS. Glucose enters nervous tissue
by noninsulin dependent transport mechanisms. Hypoglyce-
ive of an insulinoma. The glucagon tolerance test may be used
mia at glucose concentrations less than 40 mg/dL can precipi-
as an alternative procedure, but it carries a greater risk of pro-
tate signs of hypoglycemia. Neurologic signs of hypoglycemia
found hypoglycemia during the test. Abdominal ultrasonogra-
are manifested by dullness, hypothermia, weakness, seizures,
phy, CT, or MRI may detect pancreatic masses in some cases
and coma. Factors responsible for clinical signs include rate
and help localize the lesion for surgical resection.
of decrease, level, and duration of hypoglycemia. The severity
The management of patients in coma and status epilepti-
of the CNS signs may be related more to the rate of decrease
cus is discussed in Chapters 12 and 13, respectively. Surgical
than to the actual concentration of glucose. Sudden drops in
removal of the tumor is indicated when the patient's condi-
glucose levels are more likely to cause seizures, whereas slowly
tion has stabilized. The reported incidence of malignancy
developing hypoglycemia may cause weakness, paresis, behav-
ranges from 56% to 82%; therefore the prognosis is poor even
ioral changes, or stupor.
with successful removal of the pancreatic focus.72.73 Animals
 Neonatal Hypoglycemia. Studies in puppies have shown
with insulinoma should be fed several small meals each day.
that during hypoglycemia, lactic acid is not only incorporated
Diets high in simple sugars should be avoided. Symptomatic
into the perinatal brain but also consumed to the extent that
 treatment with glucocorticoids such as prednisolone, given at
the metabolite can support up to 60% total cerebral energy
a dosage of 0.25 to 0.50 mg/kg per day, help to normalize
required for metabolic processes.69 Although the neonatal
the blood glucose concentration because of their antinsulin
brain can readily metabolize ketone bodies, lack of body fat
effects. Streptozotocin is effctive in dogs with even meta-
and prolonged time necessary to produce ketones prevent this 
static disease. Concurrent saline diuresis should be given to
mechanism from protecting neonates from acute hypoglyce-
prevent renal toxicity. Seizures may persist because of prior
mia. Hypoglycemia in young animals may be secondary to
malnutrition, parasitism, stress, or some GI abnormality. Pup-
normalized.76
pies are frequently extremely depressed or comatose. Serum
glucose should be determined, and IV glucose is administered
Nutritional Disorders
immediately (2 to 4 mL of 20% glucose per kilogram of body
 Nervous system disorders caused by nutritional deficiencies
weight). Diazepam often will have no effect on halting hypo-
or excesses are uncommon in companion animals, but they
glycemic seizures. Continued signs of stupor or coma indicate
are more common in food animals. Severe malnutrition can
brain swelling and are treated with hypertonic solutions [see
cause a variety of abnormalities that are related to multiple
Chapter 12). Dietary regulation, including tube feeding if nec-
deficiencies.
essary, must be established to maintain normoglycemia.
 Hypoglycemia in puppies also occurs because of immature
Vitamin A Deficiency
 hepatic enzyme systems, deficiency of glucagon, and deficiency
Deficiencies in vitamin A can produce night blindness Hypo-
of gluconeogenic substrates. Fatty liver syndrome causes hypo-
vitaminosis A in young animals may cause excessive thicken-
glycemia in toy breed puppies at 4 to 16 weeks ofage.70 Persis-
ing of the skull and the vertebrae with secondary compression
tent and recurrent hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, acidosis, and
of nervous tissue [especially of the cranial nerves as they pass
ketosis suggest a glycogen storage disorder.7 Liver and muscle
through the foramina). Decreased absorption of CSF may
biopsies are required to make a definitive diagnosis. The man-
result in communicating hydrocephalus.77 Skull malforma-
 agement of these cases is frequently unsuccessful.
tion and cerebellar herniation have been reported in exotic
446
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
cats fed a vitamin A-deficient diet.78 Hypovitaminosis A is
repeated IM daily until a response is obtained or another diag
rare or rarely recognized in companion animals but has been
nosis is established.
reported in food animals 77-80 Blindness in cattle with vitamin
Polioencephalomalacia (symmetric necrosis of the cere-
 bral cortex) is caused by thiamine deficiency in young rumi-
Papiledema occurs in adult animals secondary to increased
nants (feedlot calves and lambs). The defciency results from
CSF pressure, which is secondary to decreased absorption.
increased breakdown of thiamine in the rumen by thiaminase-
Photoreceptor abnormalities, especially affecting the rods,
secreting bacteria or from sulfur toxicity. Animals have usually
lead to night blindness. Similar changes occur in growing
 been moved from a marginal pasture to a lush pasture, are in
calves, but, in addition, the optic nerves are compressed by
a feedlot, or have had some similar change in feeding patterns.
narrowing of the optic canals, resulting in ischemia and direct
Feedlot diets high in sulfates decrease thiamine production in
interference with the nerve.
the rumen and may inhibit the production of ATP. Animals
 younger than 2 years of age are most commonly affected.86
VitaminEDeficiency
Clinical signs are primarily forebrain in origin and include
A noninflammatory myopathy may be produced by vitamin E
depression, pacing, head pressing, blindess, ataxia, teeth grind-
 deficiency; however, vitamin E deficiency is rare in companion
ing, opisthotonos, and seizures. Dorsomedial strabismus has
animals. Calves and sheep have a myopathy associated with a
been attributed to trochlear nerve (cranial nerve [CN] IV)
deficiency in vitamin E and selenium. Swine may die suddenly
paralysis. Increased intracranial pressure is common and may
because of degeneration of cardiac muscle. Retinal degenera-
lead to transtentorial herniation. Symmetric laminar cortical
tion may occur secondary to vitamin E deficiency (see Chap-
necrosis is the most prominent pathologic finding (Figure 15-7).
 ter 11). Low vitamin E biood levels have been associated with
 Edema of the brain with flattening of the gyri may be pres-
 degenerative myeloencephalopathy and motor neuron disease
ent. Measurement of transketolase, the thiamine-dependent
 in horses (see Chapter 7).82,83
coenzyme, is helpful for making a diagnosis. Autofluorescence
of the cut surface of the cerebral cortex under ultraviolet light
Vitamin B Complex-Thiamine Deficiency
may assist diagnosis [see Figure 15-7].
(Polioencephalomalacia)
The condition should be treated with thiamine, 250 to
Deficiencies in B vitamins can cause pathologic changes in both
1000 mg administered IV or IM for 3 to 5 days. Corticoste-
the CNS and PNS. Thiamine deficiency has been reported in
roids should be given if CNS signs are severe. Severely affected
 animals may have permanent cortical damage.88
 gresses from anorexia to paraparesis, tetraparesis seizures and
Niacin and riboflavin deficiencies are less common, but
because animals with thiamine deficiency also may have
were found in multiple sites in the brain and the spinal cord,
 deficiencies in these vitamins, multiple B-complex prepara-
with the most severe lesions in the brainstem. Animals treated
tions are indicated. The diet should be corrected to prevent
with thiamine recovered. A peripheral neuropathy with LMN
recurrences.
 paralysis can occur.84
Cats with thiamine deficiency often have characteristic ven-
Vitamin A Toxicity
tral fexion of the head and the neck, sometimes causing the
Paf seo u Parodar uaaq aaeu v uu jo siaaal paseaou
mandible to touch the sternum. Vestibular ataxia and seizures
predominantly liver diets. Hypertrophic vertebral bone for-
  s ae s   s q 
mation causes ankylosing spondylosis, usually of the cervical
B Aq paonord sem shop u Auayap auia saop u nno ye
vertebrae but in some cases extending to the lumbar region.
diet consisting entirely of cooked meat or a specific thiamine-
The clinical signs relate primarily to the rigidity of the vertebral
deficient diet.87 Cat foods with fsh as the primary ingredient
column. A compressive neuropathy occurs in severely affected
contain thiaminase, which destroys thiamine in the diet.79
cats. Dietary correction stops the progression of the spondylosis
Treatment should be instituted immediately for any ani-
but does not significantly reduce the existing spondylosis that is
mal suspected of having thiamine deficiency. In dogs and
present. Antinflammatory and analgesic drugs have been rec-
cats, 50 to 100 mg of thiamine should be given IV and then
Figure 15-7 Polioencephalomalacia in a calf. There is acute cortical necrosis evidenced by locally
extensive softening and discoloration (leff image) and highlighted by fluorescence under ultraviolet
light. [Courtesy Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
447
Toxic Disorders
and inflammatory disorders are most commonly confused
Toxicities causing CNS dysfunction are common in both small
with toxicosis.
and large animals. Many cause biochemical changes and are
 Toxins can cause imbalances of neurotransmitter in the
 potentially reversible, whereas others produce structural dam-
 CNS to cause tremor In particular neurotoxic agents that stim-
 age. The more common toxicants are listed in Table 15-4.
ulate the CNS will manifest signs of hyperactivity, hyperes-
Toxicologic disorders, including those caused by poisonous
thesia, muscle tremor and fasciculation, and behavior changes.
plants, are discussed in detail in several texts.79,89,90 A helpful
 Toxicants affecting the autonomic nervous system induce
information resource about toxic agents and treatment proto-
clinical signs by interference with cholinergic neurotransmis-
cols is the ASPCA's National Animal Poison Control Center
sion. Stimulation of the cholinergic neurotransmission will
(http://www.napcc.aspca.org).
result in bronchoconstriction, muscle tremors, exocrine gland
stimulation, bradycardia, and other CNS effects. Toxins may
Diagnosis
exert effects at the neuromuscular junction through increased
A history of exposure to a toxin is the most important factor
release of acetylcholine and increased receptor stimulation
in establishing the diagnosis in cases of poisoning. Neurologic
and subsequent muscular fatigue. Blockade of cholinergic neu-
signs of intoxication include (l) seizures; (2) depression or
 rotransmission depends upon the type of cholinergic receptor
coma; (3) tremors, ataxia, and paresis; and (4) LMN signs. Ani-
involved. Muscarinic receptor blockade causes CNS depres-
mals that show any of these four signs must be considered as
sion. Nicotinic receptor blockade results in skeletal muscle
possible poisoning victims until proved otherwise. Metabolic
 paralysis and often tremor. Toxins such as bromethalin and
TABLE 15-4
Common Toxicants
Use
Toxicant
Primary Effect
Pesticides
 Chlorinated hydrocarbons
CNS stimulation
Organophosphates
 Binding of acetylcholinesterase
Carbamates
 Binding of acetylcholinesterase 
 Pyrethrins
 Blocking of nerve conduction and GABA inhibition
Metaldehyde
CNS stimulation
Arsenic
Gl irritation
Rodenticides
Strychnine
 Blocking of inhibitory interneurons (glycine)
Thallium
 Gl irritation, CNS stimulation, peripheral neuropathy, skin lesions 
α-Naphthylthiourea (ANTU)
Gl irritation, pulmonary edema, depression,coma
Sodium fluoroacetate (1080}
CNS stimulation
Warfarin
Anticoagulation
Zinc phosphide
 Gl irrtation, depression
Phosphorus
 Gl irritation, CNS stimulation, coma
Cholecalciferol
CNS depression, cardiac depression
Bromethalin
Acute—CNS stimulation; chronic—CNS depression
Herbicides and fungicides
Numerous
 Gl irritation, CNS depression, some are stimulants
Heavy metals
Lead (see arsenic and thallium)
 Gl irritation, CNS stimulation or depression (see above)
Drugs
Narcotics
CNS depression
Amphetamines
CNS stimulation
 Barbiturates
 CNS depression 
Tranquilizers
CNS depression 
Aspirin
Gl irritation, coma
Marijuana
Abnomal behavior, depression
Anthelmintics
Gl irritation, CNS stimulation
Ivermectin
 Depression, tremors, ataxia, coma
Garbage
Staphylococcal toxin
 Gl irritation, CNS stimulation
 Botulinum toxin 
LMN paralysis
 Poisonous plants 
Various
Various
Antifreeze
Ethylene glycol
Gl irritation, CNS stimulation, renal failure
 Detergents and disinfectants
Hexachlorophene
CNS stimulation or depression, tremors
Phenols
Gl irritation, CNS degeneration
Animal origin
Snake bite
Necrotizing wound, shock, CNS depression
Toad (Bufo spp.)
Digitoxin-like action, CNS stimulation 
 Black widow spider
Initial signs—spasms, pain tremor initally: later signs-
LMN paralysis
Lizards
Gl irritation, CNS stimulation or depression
Tick paralysis (Dermacentor
LMN paralysis
 spp. (xodes in Australia)
448
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
hexachlorophene affect myelin causing intramyelinic edema
The clinical signs may be suffcient for the clinician to
and alter conduction of the action potential.
establish a presumptive diagnosis [e.g, intoxication from
When an animal shows signs suggestive of poisoning, the
 strychnine and organophosphates). Other agents, such as lead
 owner must be questioned carefully to find a possible source.
and drugs, may require laboratory confirmation (Tables 15-5
Animals in status epilepticus must be treated immediately
through 15-8) or tissue analysis.
and the history must be obtained later (see Chapter 
13).
 Direct questions regarding agents that are capable of produc-
Toxicants Causing Seizures
ing the signs must be asked. Owners usually are aware of com-
The most common sign of poisoning in small animals is sei-
mon agents such as insecticides and rodenticides, but they may
zures [see Table 15-5). The CNS is primarily or secondarily
have difficulty identifying a source of lead poisoning and may
involved with a variety of toxic substances. Dorman reported
be reluctant to admit a source of illicit drug intoxication.
that seizures occurred in 8.2% of all cases of suspected
TABLE 15-5
Common Toxicants Causing Seizures
Toxicants
Diag nosis
Management
Prognosis
Organochlorines
 Exposure: muscle fasciculations common: 
Removal of toxicant—washing.
 Poor with seizures
laboratory confirmation difficult
gastric lavage; sedation or
anesthesia with barbiturates
 Organophosphates
Exposure; salivation, diarrhea, constricted
 Removal of toxicant:; atropine:
Good if treated early
and carbamates
 pupils, muscle weakness; blood cholinester-
pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM)
ase level decreased; tissue analysis poor
(not for carbamates)
 Pyrethrins
Exposure: tremor, salivation, ataxia, seizures:
Removal of toxicant; sedation 
Good if treated early 
analysis of tissues
Strychnine
Exposure; tetany without loss of conscious-
 Removal of toxicant—gastric
Good if treated early 
ness, increased by stimulation or noise:
bvage or emesis; sedation-
laboratory analysis of stomach contents,
 barbiturates: respiratory
urine, tissues
 SUupport if needed
 Bromethalin
 Exposure: high dose—excitement, tremor,
Removal of toxicant—-activated  Fair if treated vigorously
seizures; low dose —tremor, depression,
charcoal; corticosteroids,
 for several days
ataxia
mannitol
Sodium fluoroacetate 
 Exposure; seizures are clonic and severe:
Removal of toxicant; 
 Poor with seizures
(1080)
 laboratory confirmation difficult
sedation—barbiturates
 Thallium
Exposure; Gl signs, seizures only in severe
Removal of toxicant: diphenyl-
 Poor with seizures, fair
poisonings: laboratory analysis of urine and
thiocarbazone (Dithion) early.
 with other signs, good 
tissues
ferric ferrocyanide (Prussian
with treatment 
bue) late late
Lead
 Exposure (may be difficult to document):
 Removal of toxicant; calcium
Good with treatment
 chronic intoxication may cause intermit-
ethylenediaminetetraacetic
tent seizures, behavioral change, tremor, Gl
acid, 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic
signs: blood lead level >0.4 ppm: basophilic
acid
stippling. nucleated red blood cells (RBCs)
with no anemia
Staphylococcal toxin
Exposure to garbage; severe Gl signs: isolation
 Removal of toxicant: sedation 
Poor with seizures:
 of toxins and testing in laboratory animals
animals usually die
laboratory animals
 rapidly
Toad (Bufo spp.-
 Exposure; severe buccal irritation
Wash mouth; sedation-
 Fair if treated within
 reported only in
anesthesia
 15-30 min, otherwise
southem Floridal
poor
Amphetamines
Exposure to prescription or "street" drugs;
 Removal of toxicant; sedation
Good if treated early
hyperactivity, dilated pupils; analysis of urine
ar anesthesia-
barbiturates
Metaldehyde
Exposure to snail bait; tremor, ataxia, salivation:
Removal of toxicant; seda-
 Fair if treated early
seizures are tonic, similar to strychnine, but
 tion or anesthesia; support 
 not changing with stimuli; laboratory analysis
respiration
 of stomach contents
 Caffeine and other
 Ataxia, tachycardia, seizures, coma; laboratory
Removal of toxicant; sedation,
Fair with treatment
methylxanthines
 analysis of stomach contents and tissues
fluids
Zinc phosphide
 Exposure to rodenticide: behavioral changes,
Removal of toxicant; oral and 
Poor
hysteria followed by seizures; Gl irritation:
intravenous bicarbonate:
analysis of stomach contents and tissues
sedation—barbiturates
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
449
TABLE 15-6
Common Toxicants Causing Behavioral Changes, CNS Depression, or Coma
Toxicants
Diagnosis
Management
 Prognosis
Drugs-narcotics,
 Degree of depression depends on dose;
 Removal of toxicant, narcotic antago-
 Good with treatment
barbiturates, tranquil-
source of pharmaceuticals or "street"
nists, diuresis, support respiration
 izers, marijuana
drugs: laboratory analysis of blood or
urine
α-Naphthylthiourea 
 Exposure: pulmonary edema; depression
 Removal of toxicant, treatment of 
Poor
(ANTU}
 and coma terminal; laboratory analysis
pulmonary edema
of stomach contents and tissues
Ethylene glycol
 Exposure; Gl irritation, renal failure; oxalate IV ethanol (30%) with sodium bicar-
 Poor with coma, fair to 
crystals in urine
bonate; alternative for dogs-
 good if treated early
4methylpyrazole
Cholecalciferol
 Exposure: depression, weakness, cardiac
 Removal of intoxicant; IV saline diure-
Fair with treatment
depression, renal failure
sis, furosemide, corticosteroids
Many poisons produce
coma terminally
TABLE 15-7
Common Toxicants Causing Tremor, Ataxia, or Paresis
s
Diagnosis
Management
Prognosis
Hexachlorophene
Exposure; usually young. nursing animal; large dose
Removal of toxicant,
 Fair: may be residual
causes Gl irritation, severe depression; chronic
supportive care
effects
exposure causes cerebellar signs and CNS edema
 treatment for cerebral 
 edema
Lead
Chronic lead poisoning may produce cerebellar
See Table 15-5
Good
signs and dementia (see Table 15-5)
Organophosphates
 Chronic low doses (flea collars, dips) may produce
See Table 15-5
Good
tremor and weakness (see Table 15-5)
Organochlorines
Low-dose exposure may produce weakness and
See Table 15-5
Fair to good
muscle fasciculation (see Table 15-5)
Tranquilizers
Ataxia common with tranguiliers (see Table 15-5)
None needed
Good
Marijuana
 Behavioral changes and ataxia common
 Removal of toxicant 
Good 
Ergot alkaloids 
Cattle and other herbivores grazing on Dallis grass 
Removal from pasture
Good
or ryegrass; ataxia, uncoordinated gait 
Nitro-bearing plants
 Cattle, sheep, horses; ataxia, weakness or
 Removal from pasture 
 Fair in ruminants:
fe.g.. Astragalus spp..
hyperexcitability. death 
may be perma-
locoweed!
nent CNS damage
Yellow star thistle
Horses have an acute onset of rigidity of muscles of
No treatment known 
Poor
mastication and involuntary movement of the lips:
ataxia, circling. and pacing may occur; lesions are
necrosis of the globus pallidus and substantia nigra
toxicosis.9l Toxins induce seizures through a number of dif-
strychnine may be confused with hypocalcemic tetany seen in
ferent mechanisms: increased excitation, decreased inhibi-
lactating animals of all species or in tetanus. Intravenous cal-
tion, and interference with energy metabolism.92 The animal
 cium provides immediate relief in cases of hypocalcemia. The
may show [status epilepticus) or cluster seizures [e.g., from
term tetamus is associated with the toxic effects of Clostridium
 s s  n  rms  si  
mittent seizures [e.g, from lead). Animals in status epilepti-
soning and generally causes more continuous contraction of
cus must be treated immediately [see Chapter 13).
the muscles. Seizures from other agents produce clonus [alter-
Tetany. The tetany produced by strychnine is differ-
nating flexion and extension).
entiated from the seizures produced by other agents in this
 hsecticides. Organophosphates may be distinguished
group. Tetany is a period of sustained muscular contraction
 a  ia  a aq s 
with intermittent periods of relaxation. Despite the severe
 nomic nervous system, producing profuse salivation, con-
muscle contractions, the animal is conscious. Tetany caused by
stricted pupils, and diarrhea. Organochlorines frequently
450
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 15-8
Common Toxicants Causing LMN Signs
Toxicants
Diagnosis
Man ag ement
Prognosis
Botulinum toxin
 Exposure to contaminated food,
 See Chapter 7
Good
carrion, and so forth; ascending
LMN paralysis (see Chapter 7)
Tick paralysis (Dermacentor
 Presence of ticks; ascending LMN
 Removal of ticks
Good in the United 
spp., Ixodes species
 paralysis (see Chapter 7)
(see Chapter 7)
 States of America:
in Australia}
poor in Australia 
 Drug reaction (nitrofurantoins,
Exposure; rare in animals
 Removal of source
Fair
doxorubicin, vincristine)
Cyanide (from Sorghum
 Cauda equina syndrome with dysuria,
Removal from pasture: no
May improve after
spp. grass)
flaccid anus and tail, prolapsed 
 treatment available
removal from
penis; may progress to paraplegia:
 source; residual
Usually occurs in horses
 deficits common
Organophosphates
Chronic exposure may cause LMN 
Removal of source; atropine
Fair to poor
 signs; axonopathy affecting pelvic
and pralidoxime if acute signs 
limbs first 
present: no treatment for
 peripheral neuropathy
Heavy metals (lead, arsenic.
Chronic exposure, rare in animals
See Table 15-5
See Table 15-5
mercury, thallium!
(see Table 15-5)
Industrial chemicals
Not reported in animals: presumably
 Removal from source
Unknown
(acrylamide, carbon disulfide.
could cause distal axonopathy
 polychlorinated biphenyls)
produce fine-muscle fasciculations, even between seizures.
per day for 6 months. l0l The neurologic signs resolved within
Pyrethrins and pyrethroid insecticides alter both sodium and
days of drug withdrawal and supportive treatment. In dogs,
chloride conductance causing tremor and seizures. The seizure
doses as low as 67.3 mg/kg of body weight per day for 3 to
may be preceded by tremors, ataxia, salivation, and other signs.
14 days caused neurotoxicity l00 In a report of five dogs, two
Class I and Il pyrethrins and pyrethroid compounds act on
were euthanized because of severe CNS disease, and three
voltage-gated sodium channels in nerve and muscle, causing
recovered after several months.l100 Most dogs recover within
persistent depolarization and failure of membrane repolariza-
7 to 14 days. Diazepam may be effective in treatment of the
tion. Class Il pyrethroids also inhibit binding of GABA to the
neurologic signs because it facilitates the effects of GABA, a
GABAA receptor, which prevents influx of chloride.
potent inhibitory neurotransmitter.102 Diazepam, 0.43 mg/kg
Miscellaneous Stimulants. Ingestion of products contain-
PO every 8 hours for 3 days, decreased response time from
ing caffeine and other methylxanthines, including chocolate,
4.25 days for untreated dogs to 13.4 hours for treated dogs.
 may also cause seizures. Metaldehyde, a common snail bait,
 In addition, the time to recovery was reduced from 1l days to
can cause continuous seizures.9l Both bromethalin and hexa-
38.8 hours.102
 chlorophene are toxins that result in intramyelinic edema and
vermmectin. Ivermectin is widely used as an antiparasitic
demyelination. Bromethalin is a rodenticide that uncouples
 agent and heartworm preventative It is also used in higher doses
oxidative phosphorylation depleting cellular ATP.93,94 Clinical
for the treatment of sarcoptic and demodectic mange in dogs. In
signs include ataxia; conscious proprioceptive deficits; paresis/
most breeds of dogs, ivermectin has a wide margin of safety. Col-
o reroy rodns on ssaraord ue ium uosardap sissrered
les, Australian shepherds, Shetland sheepdogs, and Old English
generalized seizures; decerebrate posture; and vocalization.
sheepdogs have an increased sensitivity to ivermectin and related
 Metronidazole. Central nervous system signs oflead intox-
compounds. These breeds have a genetic mutation that results
The seizures are intermittent. The differential diagnosis of sei-
an important neuroprotective role in the blood-brain barrier in
zure disorders is discussed in Chapter 13. Laboratory analysis
that it enhances the transport of drugs from the CSF back into
of the blood for evidence of lead is diagnostic. If the blood
circulation. Ivermectin is a GABA agonist that inhibits activity
lead values are in the high normal range and lead poisoning is
 at presynaptic and postsynaptic neurons in the CNS. Clinical
signs of ivermectin neurotoxicity include depression, disorien-
levels is diagnostic. Other toxicants causing seizures are seen
infrequently.
zures, and coma.104-107 Clinical signs are dose dependent in that
 Metronidazole is an antimicrobial, antiprotozoal agent that
susceptible breeds rarely develop clinical signs at 6 μg/kg once
is lipophilic readily penetrating the blood-brain barrier and
 a month, which is the standard dose for heartworm prevention.
oste st anup aul zoi-oou'steo pue saop u Aaiixoionau sasne
 Doses exceeding Z00 μg/kg may cause clinical signs in suscep-
used in the chronic treatment of inflammatory bowel disease.
tible breeds and doses above 400 μg/kg may cause death.105
Neurologic signs include seizures, tremors, ataxia, blindness,
The recovery period may take more than 3 weeks. There is no
hyperactivity, and vestibular dysfunction. Doses of metroni-
 specific anecdote for ivermectin toxicity. Three adult horses
dazole reported to be toxic in cats ranged from 1ll mg/kg of
developed neurologic signs 18 hours after oral administration of
body weight per day for 9 weeks to 58 mg/kg of body weight
 ivermectin paste. l08 Signs included depression, ataxia, drooping
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
451
of the lips, mydriasis, decreased pupillary light reflexes, absent
[e.g., nitrofurans and chemotherapeutic drugs and some
menace responses and muscle fasciculations. Two horses recov-
chronic toxicities [such as lead, organophosphate, and arsenic
 ered following symptomatic therapy.
poisoning) can produce peripheral neuropathies. Other signs
usually predominate, however.
Toxicants Causing Behavioral Change, Stupor,
or Coma
Toxic Plants
 Stupor or coma may be seen with almost any poison in the
Toxic plants causing neurologic syndromes of herbivores are
terminal stages. Drugs such as narcotics, barbiturates, and tran-
 summarized in Table 15-9.
quilizers most frequently cause stupor or coma and also may
 cause behavioral changes in smaller doses (see Table 15-6).
Treatment
 Some other agents such as chlorpyrifos and lead also can pro-
Removal of the toxic substance is the most important part of
 duce behavioral changes with chronic intoxication.9, lo9 The
   s     
the animal through the skin, such as insecticides, should be
accidental overdosing with an antiepileptic drugs or ingestion
removed by thorough washing and rinsing. Ingested agents
by an animal of its owner's tranquilizers). Reports of animals
 may be removed by inducing emesis, performing gastric lavage.
that have ingested illicit drugs are not uncommon, and the
or administering laxatives or enemas. Diuresis may promote
owner is usually reluctant to admit the source of the intoxica-
excretion when absorption has occurred. Activated charcoal
tion in these cases. Laboratory analysis of blood or urine may
is an effective adsorbing agent.ll4 Electrolyte imbalances and
be necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
other secondary metabolic disorders are treated symptom-
Leukoencephalomalacia (Moldy Corn Toxicity). Leuko-
atically and by managing the underlying disease process. Sta-
encephalomalacia is caused by the mycotoxin fumonisin B1
tus epilepticus is a life-threatening emergency and must be
found in contaminated corn. The toxin creates a severe lique-
 treated accordingly (see Chapter 13).
factive necrosis and degeneration of the cerebrum, brainstem,
Specific treatments for the various toxicities are outlined
and spinal cord. The disease has a worldwide distribution and
in Tables 15-5 through 15-9. The reader should consult the
typically occurs in the late fall through early spring. Neuro-
references for details.79,89,90.115 Toxins causing spasticity can
logic (most common) and hepatoxic syndromes are recog-
 be counterbalanced with use of muscle relaxants. Diazepam
nized. Clinical signs develop 3 to 4 weeks after daily ingestion
[0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg IV or per rectum) is a centrally acting
of contaminated corn. The onset of clinical signs is rapid with
muscle relaxant and can relieve acute-onset tremor disorders.
death occurring in 2 to 3 days. The CNS signs are similar to
However, diazepam should be avoided in cats with organo-
other equine encephalopathies. The hepatotoxic syndrome
 phosphate toxicity as it may potentiate muscle tremor, and
is associated with swelling of the lips and nose, somnolence,
other muscarinic signs. Methocarbamol also a centrally act-
severe icterus, petechia of mucous membranes, abnormal
ing muscle relaxant can be administered. Often a dark, quiet
breathing, and cyanosis. Diagnosis is based on histopathology.
room is necessary to remove external stimuli associated with
Analysis for the toxin in feed is recommended. There is no
CNS stimulants (strychnine, bromethalin, etc.). Frequent
treatment and mortality is high.
patient monitoring and other measures of supportive care
are important. Fluid therapy maintains electrolyte concentra-
Toxicants Causing Tremors, Ataxia, and Paresis
tion and normovolemia. Oxygenation, blood pressure, elec-
 Chronic organophosphate poisoning from flea collars and top-
trolytes, and glucose should be monitored. In severe cases
  s s  sr   s
of respiratory muscle weakness, assisted ventilation may be
suggestive of cerebellar disease or muscle weakness [see Table
necessary.
15-8). The finding of weakness is not consistent with pure cer-
ebellar disease, so when both are present, poisoning must be
Inflammatory Diseases
 considered.l to Organophosphates bind acetylcholinesterase to
The inflammatory diseases of the nervous system are caused
cause muscle weakness through effects on the neuromuscular
 a a ro s d P sn 
junction [see Chapter 7) and have direct CNS effects causing
ated. Canine distemper, feline infectious peritonitis, equine
seizure. Tremor and fasciculation associated with muscle weak-
protozoal myeloencephalitis, West Nile encephalomyelitis,
ness occur as a depolarizing neuromuscular junction blockade
alphaviral encephalomyelitis, and bacterial infections, includ-
effect take place.Atropine is used to counteract the muscarinic
effects of the organophosphate. Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM)
common infectious causes of CNS inflammatory disease.
 Some fungal diseases are common in endemic areas. Most of
complex and freeing the enzyme. Hexachlorophene toxicity
the other diseases are relatively uncommon. Infectious dis-
eases are discussed in many textbooks. l16-12l Granulomatous
Severe depression may follow. The usual source has been
meningoencephalomyelitis,  steroid-responsive meningoen-
repeated washing of the bitch's mammary glands with a soap
cephalitis, and other breed-specific meningoencephalitides
containing hexachlorophene. Bathing young dogs or cats of
are common noninfectious or immune causes of CNS inflam-
-uss aun pasnpord seu ose deos auaudorouoexau u aae Aue
matory disease. The differential diagnosis is discussed in the
drome. Hexachlorophene is rarely available now.
next section. The more common inflammatory diseases are
Metaldehyde poisoning, which produces tremor and ataxia
outlined in Tables 15-10 to 15-17.
 progressing to depression and coma, is seen frequently in areas
where the substance is used for snail bait. Chronic lead poi-
Principles of Diagnosis
soning (see Chapter 10) and numerous plant toxicities cause
Most of the inflammatory diseases are characterized by an
tremor and ataxia (Table 15-7). Mycotoxins also can cause
acute onset. All are progressive, and some are chronic-pro-
severe tremors and seizures in dogs [see Chapter 10].
gressive. Diffuse or multifocal involvement is characteristic
of most of the diseases in this group, but localized signs also
Toxicants Causing LMN Signs
occur. The minimum database (see Chapters l and 4) may
Botulism and tick paralysis cause generalized LMN paralysis
 provide evidence of systemic infection (e.g, alterations in
by blockade of the neuromuscular junction (see Table 15-8).
white blood cell [WBC] count), although many primary CNS
 These conditions are discussed in Chapter 7. Some drugs
 inflammatory diseases do not produce a systemic response.
Text continued on p. 462.
PART II
TABLE 15-9
 Problems:
Examples of Several Plant (and Fungal) Toxicoses of Domestic Herbivores That Can Result
in Syndromes Characterized by NeurologicSigns
Plant
Species Affected
 Neurologic Signs
Pathophysiology
Neural Legions
Treatment
Prognosis
Ryegrass
 Sheep, cattle.
Ataxia, tremor, tetany
 Penitrem and fumi tremor-
 Secondary Purkinje cell
 Diazepam
Good
igns
horses
 genic mycotoxins from
degeneration
Penicillium spp.
and
Phalaris spp.
Sheep, cattle
Ataxia, tremor, weak-
Dimethyltryptamine alkaloids
Neuronal pigmentation 
?Diazepam
Poor
 act as monoamine oxidase
(indole melanins)
ness, seizures
 inhibitors
ymptoms
Paspalum, Dallis grass
Cattle, sheep
Ataxia, tremor
 Claviceps paspali ergot alka-
Good
loids probably neurotoxic
Swainsona spp. and
Sheep, cattle,
Weight loss, ataxia.
 Indolizidine alkaloid 
Neuroaxonal dystrophy.
 Reserpine (loco-
Fair to very
locoweeds
horses
aggressiveness
 (swainsonine) induces
 neurovisceral storage
weed!
good
 α-mannosidosis
 products
Sorghum spp.
Horses, cattle,
 Ataxia, bladder paraly-
 Possibly HCN or lathyrogenic 
 Spinal cord degeneration 
 Poor to fair
sheep
sis
toxins
Solanum esuriale
Sheep
 Exercise intolerance.
Unknown (suspected toxin in 
 Spinal cord fiber degenera-
Poor
weakness, arched
S. esuriale)
 tion: myopathy
back (humpyback)
Solanum fastigiatum.
Cattle
 Cerebellar ataxia,
"cer-
 Suspected induction of 
Purkinje cell vacuolation 
Poor
S. dimidiatum, S.
ebellar seizures"
 gangliosidosis
and degeneration
kwebense
Cycad palms
Cattle, goats,
 Ataxia, recumbency 
 Possibly toxic glycosides.
 Spinal cord degeneration
Poor
horses
 cycasin and macrozamin
Melochia pyramidata
Cattle
 Ataxia, recumbency
Unknown
 Spinal cord and nerve
Poor
一
degeneration
Tribulus terrestris
Sheep
 Asymmetric pelvic limb
 Possibly neuromuscular
None
Poor
weakness
process
Karwinskia humboid-
Goats
Hypermetria, weak-
Unknown
 Peripheral neuropathy.
Poor
tiana
ness
central neuroaxonal
dystrophy, myopathy
Nardoo fern, Marsilea
Sheep
Depression, blindness,
 Probably a thiaminase
 Polioencephalomalacia
Thiamine
Good if early
drummondii
convulsions
 Birdsville indigo, indigo-
Horses
Weight loss, ataxia.
Arginine antagonist alkaloids:
None 
Arginine-rich feeds
Good
fera linnaei
weakness
 indospicine, canavine
(gelatin, Lucerne)
Mexican fireweed.
Cattle
 Blindness (nephrosis.
 Saponins, alkaloids, oxalates:
Polioencephalomalacia
Poor
Kochia scoparia
hepatitis)
 possibly thiaminase
Buckeye, Aesculus
Cattle
Staggering, convul-
 Glycosides and alkaloids
Unknown
Fair
spp.
 sions
described
 Helichrysum argyros-
Sheep, cattle
 Peripheral blindness,
Unknown
Patchy status spongiosus,
Fair for life.
phaerum
nystagmus, weak-
white matter
poor for
ness
vision
Yellow star thistle.
Horses
Depression, pacing.
Uknown
Nigropallidal encephaloma-
Tube feed
 Poor, starve
Centaurea soistitialis
 dystonia of muscles
lacia
of prehension,
 mastication, and
deglutition
Modifed frorm Kormegay JN, Mayhew IG: Metabolic, toxic, and mutritional diseases of the nervous system. In Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology Philadelphia, 1987.
WB Saunders.
全
HAPTER
15
 Systemic or
r Multifocal
igns
TABLE 15-10
Bacterial Diseases of the Nervous System
Disease
Cause
Incidence
 Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
PARTI
 Meningitis
Staphylococcus.
Variable, but
Generalized or localized (especially 
Usually acute onset, 
CSF (protein often 
 Antibiotics according to
 Pasteurella.
 generally
cervical hyperesthesia; degree
 but may be chronic;
>200 mg/dL,
sensitivity: ampicillin.
others 
of illness variable; temperature
prognosis good with
increased cells, pri-
trimethoprim,
二
uncommon
and white blood cell (WBC)
early treatment
marily neutrophils).
 chloramphenicol
count may be normal count may
 culture and sensitiv-
be normal
ity testing 
ical
 Meningoencephalo-
As in meningitis
Uncommon
 As in meningitis, plus signs of brain
Usually acute: prognosis
 Same as meningitis:
 Same as for meningitis;
Problems:
myelitis
or spinal cord disease; often
 good with early treat-
 EEG may indicate 
 seizures—diazepam,
includes blindness, seizures,
ment, but neurologic 
encephalitis; cross-
phenobarbital; acute 
ataxia, cranial nerve deficits 
deficits are common 
 sectional imaging
cerebral edema—man-
 nitol, hypertonic saline 
Abscess
As in meningitis 
Rare
 May have focal signs or focal
May be chronic:
 Same as in meningo-
Same as for meningoen-
5
signs plus signs of meningitis or
 progression may be
 encephalitis
 cephalitis
igns
meningoencephalitis 
rapid once signs are
 and
obvious
Vertebral
Staphylococ
Moderately
 Pain, usually focal; may have
 Chronic, may become
Radiography, cross-
Antibiotics, preferably
spinal cord compression: usually
 sectional imaging.
S
 osteomyelitis,
cus, Brucella
frequent in 
 acute when spinal 
 bactericidal; curet-
dogs
ymptoms
discospondylitis 
canis, others 
clinically ill, often over weeks to
cord is compressed 
Brucella serology:
tage, decompres-
(see Chapter 6)
months
blood and urine cul-
sion if spinal cord is
 ture and sensitivity
compressed
Tetanus
Clostridium
Rare except
 Extensor rigidity of allimbs, often 
Acute onset, often lasts 
Signs, history, isola-
 Penicilin, metronidazole,
tetani
 in horses
with opisthotonos; contraction of 
1-2 wk, animals may
 tion of organism 
tetanus antitoxin,
facial muscles, prolapsed nictitat-
die: prognosis fair if
from wound
tranquilizers or
ing membrane; usually infected 
treated
muscle relaxants;
wound; toxin blocks glycine
quiet environment:
release
treat wound, nursing 
Botulism 
Clostridium
Sporadic
 LMN-type paralysis. often begin-
Acute onset, lasts about
Serum, fecal analysis,
 Enemas and laxatives 
botulinum
ning with pelvic limbs, progress-
 2 wk; good prognosis
history. EMG, and
early, supportive care.
ing to tetra- paresis in less than
 unless respiratory
 nerve conduction
antitoxin usually not 
 24 hr: caused by toxin blocking 
 paralysis is present 
velocity
effective
neuromuscular transmission 
early
Thromboembolic
Histophilus
Cattle,
 Fever, depression, blindness, lack
Acute progressive: fair
History, CSF
 Antibiotics, vaccine 
meningoencepha-
somni
 primarily
 of coordination, cranial nerve
 prognosis with early
(increased protein,
available
litis
young in 
signs, seizures
 treatment
 increased neutro-
feedlot 
phils), culture
Listeriosis
Listeria monocy-
 Sporadic in
 Depression, asymmetric ataxia 
 Acute progressive in 
History, signs, CSF
Antibiotics (penicil-
togenes
ruminants 
and paresis, cranial nerve signs,
 sheep and goats.
(increased protein,
 lin, sulfonamides,
central vestibular signs
 more chronic in cattle:
increased mononu-
tetracyclines) for 2-4
poor prognosis if CNS
clear cells), histopa-
wk
signs are present
 thology, fluorescent
antibody, isolation 
of organism 
TABLE 15-11
Mycotic and Actinomycetes Infections of theNervous System
Course and
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Prognosis
Diag nostic Tests
Treatment
Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcus
Low: primarily in eastern
 Nose and sinuses usually are
Chronic: 
 Cytology and culture of 
traconazole, flucon-
neoformans
and midwestern
 infected, with extension 
 guarded 
exudates, serology, anti-
United States but not 
to brain: ocular lesions and
prognosis
gen test, CSF (increased 
reported throughout 
blindness common: CNS
 protein, increased cells,
United States
involvement common 
 neutrophils and mono-
nuclear cells, possibly
organisms}
Blastomycosis
 Blastomyces
Low: primarily in eastern
 Rarely involves CNS: pyo-
Chronic: poor
 PCR, serology, cytology
Amphotericin B,*
dermatitidis
and midwestern 
 granulomatous encephalitis or
prognosis
 5-fluorocytosine,
United States 
 single or multifocal granu- 
ketoconazole, itra-
lomas: frequently involves 
conazole, fluconazole
lungs, skin, and eyes
Histoplasmosis
Histoplasma
Low, primarily in central 
CNS involvement uncommon:
 Chronic;
 PCR, serology, cytology
Amphotericin B.*
capsulatum
 United States
 involves reticuloendothelial
guarded
5-fluorocytosine,
 cells of most viscera
prognosis
ketoconazole, itra-
conazole, fluconazole
Coccidioidomycosis
Coccidioides
 Can be relatively com-
 CNS involvement uncommon:
 Chronic: poor
PCR, serology. cytology
Amphotericin B.*
immitis
mon in endemic areas
 pulmonary infection common
5-fluorocytosine.
prognosis
of southwestern
ketoconazole, itra-
APTER
United States
conazole, fluconazole
Nocardiosis
Nocardia sp.
Low throughout United 
Systemic disease, signs similar
Chronic: poor
Smears, cultures, CSF
 Penicillin, sulfon-
States
to canine distemper, respira-
prognosis
(increased protein,
amides, trim-
tory or cutaneous forms;
 increased cells, neutro-
ethoprim
CNS abscesses and vertebral
phils}
yster
osteomyelitis reported
Actinomyces sp.
 Similar to nocardiosis
 Chronic: poor
 Penicillin, clindamycin,
mic
Actinomycosis
Low throughout United 
 Similar to nocardiosis
States
prognosis
erythromycin, linco-
9
mycin
Multifocal
Paecilomycosis
 Paecilomyces sp.
Rare
 Disseminated form of disco-
 Chronic: poor
Culture, biopsy
None
 spondylitis
prognosis
Aspergillosis
 Aspergillus sp.
 Primarily in large animals 
 Encephalitis can develop after
 Chronic: poor
Culture, CSF, cytology
Amphotericin B.*
immunosuppression or gut-
prognosis
5-fluorocytosine,
tural pouch infection 
ketoconazole, itra-
conazole, fluconazole
Phaeohyphomy-
Cladosporium sp.
Rare
 Encephalitis with granulomas
Chronic: poor
Culture, biopsy
 Amphotericin B.*
ns
cosis
has been reported in dogs 
prognosis
5-fluorocytosine,
and cats 
ketoconazole, itra-
conazole, fluconazole
Itraconazole and fluconazole have been used effectively in some cats with cryptococal encephalitis and are the preferred treatment. Data for other fungal CNS infections are largely lacking.
TABLE 15-12
6
Protozoal Diseases ofthe CNS
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis  Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
PARTI
Toxoplasmosis
Toxoplasma
 Common infection but 
 Clinical manifestations usually
 Chronic; fair to poor 
 Serology, cocysts in
Sulfonamides, pyri-
gondil
 infrequent clinical 
associated with another
prognosis
 stool (cats), biopsy.
methamine, clinda-
 problem
disease or immunosup-
 CSF (increased pro-
mycin
=
 pression: CNS, eyes, lungs,
tein, mononuclear
 gastrointestinal tract and 
 cells and neutro-
 skeletal muscles often
phils}
ical
 affected
Uknown frequency.
 Chronic progres-
 CSF, biopsy, isolation 
 Sulfonamides, pyri-
3
Neosporosis
Neospora cani-
 Similar to toxoplasmosis:
num
cases of toxoplasmosis
 ascending paralysis of limbs 
sive; fair to poor
 of organism,
methamine, clinda-
lems:
reported in past were
with extension of the pelvic
prognosis
serology
mycin are probably
sometimes Neospora;
 Imbs is frequent in young 
effective if given
reported in dogs and
PUPS
early
5
rarely in cats, cattle.
igns
and horses
Babesia spp.
Parasite of red blood cells:
Diminazene, phenami-
 and
Babesiosis
Rare in United States 
Acute to chronic:
Peripheral blood
rarely causes CNS disease.
 poor prognosis
 smears, serology
dine, or imidocarb 
hemorrhage: more severe
S
ymptoms
with other infections, such
as Ehrlichia
Encephalitozoonosis
Encephalitozoon
 Rare: primarily affects
Acute encephalitis, ataxia.
 Acute: poor prog-
 Serology, culture,
None
cunicull
dogs <2 mo old 
 tremors, behavioral
nosis
histopathology
changes
Trypanosomiasis
Trypanosoma
 Rare in United States
 Parasite of red blood cells:
 Chronic, fair progno-
 Peripheral blood
127.0
rarely causes CNS disease
 sis with treatment 
smears
 Equine protozoal 
Sarcocystis
 Fairly common in horses
 Systemic, multifocal, involv-
 Chronic, progres-
CSF: Western blot,
 Pyrimethamine, trime-
 myeloencephalitis
neurona
ng almost any part of the
 sive: guarded
ELISA, IFA, and 
thoprim-sulfonamide.
(Sarcocystis
nervous system: commonly
 prognosis; treat-
PCR
 diclazuril, ponazuril, 
falcatula!
spinal cord, cauda equina,
ment may be
nitazoxanide
 and cranial nerve signs
effective
Coccidiosis
Several species
Common enteric, rare 
Enteric coccidiosis is reported 
Variable
 Fecal identification,
 Sulfonamides, ampro-
CNS, several species
to cause CNS signs in some
 organism in muscle
lium
of animals affected
cases; Sarcocystis spp. may
 biopsy or necropsy
cause myopathy
Hepatozoonosis
Hepatozoon
Rare: dogs
Muscle pain and gait abnor-
 Chronic: guarded
Biopsy. PCR
 Possibly sulfonamides.
canis
malities may be seen
prognosis
 pyrimethamine (effi-
cacy not known?
TABLE 15-13
Viral Diseases of the CNS
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
 Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
Prevention
Multiple
Species
Rabies
Rhabdovirus
Variable: all
Initially behavioral changes;: rapid 
Acute, progresses to
Necropsy: FA of 
None
Vaccine
mammals
 progression to either furious or dumb
 death in 3-10 days 
brain
Rare: more
form; atypical variants are common 
from onset 
common
in large animals (colic in horses and
in cats
 tenesmus in cattle)
 Furious: restlessness, wandering, biting.
 aggression, seizures
Dumb: severe depression, pharyngeal
and hypoglossal paralysis, progressive 
paralysis
 Paratytic: Ascending paralysis: pro-
 gresses to include other brain signs 
 Postvaccinal: Inadequate attenuated
Acute, progressive.
Necropsy: FA
None
Use proper
virus: rare: progressive ascending
poor prognosis
vaccine
paralysis to diffuse CNS signs
Pseudorabies
Herpesvirus
 Rare; eradi-
 Swine: subclinical in adults; neonates:
 Acute: progression
Necropsy: FA on
None
Avoid contact with
infected swine
cated in 
seizures, tremors, ataxia, death
to death in 1-2 
 brain and spinal
HAPTER
domestic
 Other animals: excitement, intense pru- 
days
cord
swine in 
ritus and self-mutilation at site of viral
 United
entry: rapid progression to coma and
States
death; contact with swine
Syster
Dogs
Canine distemper 
Morbillivirus
Common:
Acute: young dogs; systemic illness:
Acute to chronic:
CSF. FA on CSF.
Supportive:
Vaccine
dogs.
respiratory and gastrointestinal signs:
 poor prognosis
 serology. Histopa-
anticonvul-
mic
Also large
 CNS: acute seizures
thology
sants
cats.
Chronic: Young or mature dogs. Demy-
9
Multifocal
raccoons,
 elination of cerebellum, cerebral
ferrets,
peduncles, optic nerves and tracts.
marine
and spinal cord. May begin with
mammals
focal signs and progress to multifo-
cal lesions. CNS signs occur weeks
to months after systemic illness or
igns
without systemic signs.
Old dog encephalitis: Mature or older
dogs. Necrosis of cerebral gray mat-
ter. Forebrain signs predominate.
Postvaccinat: see chronic distemper
1-2 wk postvaccina-
See distemper
None
 tion; acute and
progressive
Continued
TABLE 15-13
8
Viral Diseases of the CNS-
cont'd
Prevention
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
Prevention
PARTI
Infectious canine 
Canine
Rare
Affects vascular endothelium, which
Acute to chronic
Clinical pathology
 Supportive
Vaccine
hepatitis
adenovi-
may cause CNS signs: primarily
profile (liver)
二
rus type I
affects liver, kidney, and lung. Can 
cause hepatoencephalopathy
Canine
Canine her-
Sporadic:
 In utero or early postwhelping expo-
Acute progressive to
Vrus isolation; histo-
Supportive
 Colostrum: hyper-
herpesvirus
pesvirus
neonates 
sure: polysystemic signs: depression,
death
pathology
immune serum
ical
and
 diarhea, rhinitis, coma, opisthotonus,
Prol
young
seizures
seiddnd
lems:
Cats
Feline infectious 
Coronavirus
Relatively
 Effusive form (wet);: diffuse, fibrinous
Slowly progressive:
Neutrophilic leuko- 
Supportive
Vaccine: margin-
5
peritonitis
common
 peritonitis
 eventually fatal
 cytosis: increased
ally effective.
igns
in cats 
 Noneffusive (dry) form: disseminated
 serum globulins:
Isolate infected
 pyogranulomatous lesions in viscera,
CSF: mixed
cats
 and
CNS, and eye. CNS signs can be focal
pleocytosis and 
or disseminated. Meningeal involve-
 increased protein
 ment and secondary hydrocephalus 
are common.
Feline panleuko-
Parvovirus
Sporadic:
In utero or early postnatal CNS infection
Present at birth:
Necropsy
None
Vaccine
penia
 neonatal
causing cerebellar hypoplasia (see 
nonprogressive
cats
Chapter 8}
Feline leukemia
Retrovirus
Common:
Epidural lymphoma causes spinal cord
Chronic progressive
Imaging. CSF,
Combination
Vaccine
vrus (FLV)
cats
signs: diffuse brain disease may be
ELISA, FA, PCR
chemo-
present:; systemic involvement and 
therapy
immunosuppression are common 
Feline immuno-
Lentivirus
 Rare for
Behavioral signs
Chronic
 ELISA, histopathol-
None
Vaccine
 deficiency virus
neuro-
ogy
(FIV)
logic
signs
 Feline paramyxo-
Paramyxovi-
Rare
Similar to canine distemper; demyelin-
Chronic progressive
Virus isolation
None
None
virus
rus
ation; myoclonus reported
Horses
Encephalomyelitis 
Togavirus
Variable:
Depression, fever, anorexia, ataxia, pac-
 Acute progressive;
 CSF: serology: virus
Supportive
Vaccine mosquito
(vWestern, East-
(alphavi-
 sporadic
ing, and circling: cranial nerve involve-
 guarded prognosis 
 isolation; histopa-
 control
ern, Venezue-
ruses)
outbreaks
 ment in some cases 
thology
lan}
 in United 
States
West Nile virus
Togavirus
Variable
Fever, paresis, ataxia, and muscle
Acute progressive:
CSF: plaque reduc-
Supportive
Vaccine
(flavivirus)
out-
 fasciculations. Lesions most severe
 guarded prognosis 
 tion neutralization
breaks:
 in spinal cord; usually asymmetric and 
tests (PRNTs):
horses.
multifocal. Abnormal mentation and 
lgM capture
birds and
cranial nerve abnormalities occur in 
ELISA test
humans:
 44% to 67% of affected horses.
some-
times
other
species
including
dogs and 
cats
Equine herpes-
Equine her-
Variable
Upper respiratory infection, abortion,
Acute progressive:
CSF, serology
Supportive
Vaccine ± isolation
virus
pesvirus
ataxia, urinary incontinence, paresis.
fair to good prog-
Acyclovir
1 (EHV 1)
signs more severe in pelvic limbs.
nosis
 sometimes cranial nerve signs
Equine infectious
Retrovirus
Rare CNS
Behavioral changes, blindness, ataxia.
Chronic progressive
Coggin test
Supportive
None
anemia (EIA)
signs
weakness
Cattle
Infectious bovine
Bovine her-
Rare form
 Calves <6 wk of age most susceptible.
Acute progressive:
CSF: virus isolation:
Supportive
Vaccine
minotracheitis
 pesvirus
of IBR
Fever, depression, respiratory signs.
fatal
FA: immunoper-
(1BR) 1 and 5
types 1
salivation, ataxia, circling. nystagmus,
oxidase: histo-
 and 5
 blindness, coma
 pathology
HAPTER
Malignant 
Herpesvinus 
Sporadic
 Adult cattle: depression, blindness, pac-
Acute progressive to
Histopathology
Supportive
None
catarrhal fever
ing, seizures, death; nasal and ocular
death 
discharge
Swine
 Systemic 
 Enteroviral
 Enterovinus 
Variable
 Pelvic limb paresis and ataxia, paralysis.
Acute progressive:
Virus isolation, serol-
 Supportive
Vaccine
encephalomy-
 seizures
recovery or death
ogy
elitis
in 1-3 wk
Hemagglutinating 
Coronavirus
Sporadic
Young swine: depression, ataxia, sei-
CNS form is acute
Serology: virus isola-
None
None
encephalomy-
 zures, hyperesthesia
 tion 
Multifocal
elitis virus
 Porcine para-
Paramyxovi-
Rare
Nursing piglets: depression, ataxia, sei-
Acute progressive:
Viral isolation: histo-
None
None
myxovirus
rus
 zures, weakness, tremor, blindness.
fatal
 pathology
and panophthalmitis
Continued
igns
460
TABLE 15-13
Viral Diseases of the CNS-
cont'd
Prevention
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
 Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
Prevention
PARTI
Sheep and
Goats
二
Visna, maedi
Lentivirus
Variable:
Visna: ataxia, pelvic limb paresis:
Chronic progressive:
CSF, virus isolation,
None
 Culling carriers.
sheep
 progressive to tetraparesis; facial
fatal in 1-2 yr
 serology. histopa-
chronically
infected sheep
>2 yr old;
tremors, blindness
thology
ical
horizontal 
 Maedi: progressive pneumonia
transmis-
Problems:
sion
Louping ill (ovine
Togavirus
Ireland; tick 
 Ataxia of head, trunk, and limbs. Rabbit 
 Acute progressive;
Serology. virus isola-
Supportive
Vaccine
encephalomy-
vector
hopping gait, blindness, seizures 
 50% fatal
 tion, presence of
elitis)
(lxodes).
ticks
5
Young
igns
sheep:
some-
 and
times
horses.
wildlife
ymptoms
and other
nants
Caprine arthritis-
Retrovirus
Kids 2-6 mo
 Persistent asymptomatic infection in 
Acute to chronic 
Agar gel immuno-
None
 Culling chronically 
encephalitis
(lentivirus)
old (virus
 adults. Progressive ataxia and paresis
 progressive: fatal
diffusion (AGID)
infected adults: 
vrus (CAE
shed in 
worse in pelvic limbs, tremors,
in kids 
blood 
heat treat colos-
virus)
colos-
opisthotonus. Evidence of arthritis,
trum
trum}
 pneumonia, and mastitis (hard bag) in 
herd.
Border disease
Pestivirus
Lambs 
In utero infection before 50 days of
 Chronic: persistent
PCR, serology
None 
Remove persis-
(hairy shaker
(similar to
(trans-
 gestation. Hairy wool, tremors of
infections
tently infected 
lamb)
BVD of
mission 
head and neck, ataxia. Flock history of
animals
cattle}
 is vertical
 abortion, infertility, deformed lambs.
and
Goats: abortion and muffied fetus.
horizon-
 Cattle: early abortion
tal). Can
affect 
 goats and
cattle
TABLE 15-14
Richettsial and Chlamydial Diseases of the CNS
Disease
Cause
Incidence
 Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
 Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
 Rocky Mountain 
 Rickettsia
 Fairly common in
Meningitis, ataxia, other 
 Acute: good prognosis 
History of ticks, signs:
Doxycycline,
spotted fever
rickettsil
endemic areas of
 CNS signs, can look like
with treatment
thrombocytopenia,
 chloramphenicol 
United States; dogs 
 canine distemper 
serology
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichia canis
 Rarely CNS signs 
Meningitis, encephalitis 
 Acute to chronic; good
 Pancytopenia, thrombo-
Doxycycline.
in dogs 
 prognosis if treated 
cytopenia, serology
 chloramphenicol 
early
 Salmon poisoning 
Neorickettsia
Rare, Pacific Northwest 
 Depression and convulsions
 Acute; fair to good prog-
History of eating
Doxycycline.
terminally: paresis of 
nosis if treated early 
 salmon, fluke eggs
 chloramphenicol 
heiminthoeca
United States
HAPTER
pelvic limbs less com-
in feces
mon; nonsuppurative
meningoencephalitis 
Sporadic bovine
Chiamydia
 Sporadic, young
 Respiratory disease,
 Acute progressive:
History. signs, CSF
Tetracycline, tylosin
encephalomyelitis 
psittaci
cattle
 polyarthritis, diffuse cere-
 mortality approximately
(increased protein,
Syster
(Buss disease)
bral signs
50%
increased mononu-
clear cells), serology
 Rare, except in
 Depression, meningitis
Acute to chronic (poorly
 Antibodies to B. burg-
 Third-generation
mic
Neuroborreliosis
Borrelia
(Lyme disease)
burgdorferi
endemic areas
characterized!
dorferi(especially in
cephalosporins,
9
CSF}
tetracyclines 
Multifocal
igns
462
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
TABLE 15-15
Parasitic Diseases of the CNS
Clinical Signs and
 Course and 
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Pathology
Prognosis
Diagnostic Tests
Treatment
Dirofilariasis
Dirofilaria
 Rare, areas with
 CNS signs rare:
 Acute onset;
 Blood smear or
None proven
immitis.
heartworm
 microfilaria or 
prognosis
 serology to
microfilaria
disease
migrating adult
guarded
confirm heart-
 or aberrant 
heartworms may
worm disease,
adult
cause infarction:
CSF (increased
seizures and
 eosinophils
other cerebral
suggestivel.
signs
difficult to prove
antemortem
arva
Toxocara canis
Rare
Granulomas in brain 
 Acute or
 None, necropsy
migrans
and other
 or spinal cord
chronic:
 species
from migrating 
prognosis
larvae; signs
 depends on 
related to loca-
severity of
tion of lesion
signs
Cuterebro-
Cuterebra spp.
Rare
CNS signs depend 
 Acute to 
 None, necropsy
None
sis
on location of
chronic:
lesion
guarded
prognosis
Coenurosis
Coenurus spp.
Rare; most often
CNS signs depend 
Acute to
None, sheep have
Surgical
 reported in 
 on location of
chronic;
softening of 
removal in 
sheep
lesion
poor prog-
skull that can 
sheep
nosis
be palpated or
 seen on radio-
graphs
TABLE 15-16
Immune-Mediated Diseases of the CNS
 Clinical Signs and
Course and
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Pathology
 Prognosis
Diag nostic Tests
Treatment
Coonhound 
Probable
Fairly high in
Ascending LMN paraly-
 Acute onset, lasts
History. EMG,
Supportive 
paralysis
immune 
some areas:
 sis: may last approxi-
approximately
nerve
reaction to 
dogs
 mately 6 wk; ventral
6 wk: good
 conduction 
transmissible
 roots and peripheral
 prognosis with 
studies
agent in rac-
 nerves have segmen-
good nursing
coon saliva or
tal demyelination and 
environment 
 some axon loss
Postvaccinal
 CNS tissues in 
Rare—these
Ascending paralysis:
 Acute onset,
None
None
rabies
vaccine
vaccines are
demyelination from 
progressive;
no longer 
 immune reaction to 
 poor prognosis
Used
 myelin in brain-origin 
vaccines
 Therefore, positive fndings in laboratory data are useful, but
and fungal infections. Characteristic cell changes are increased
negative findings do not rule out infectious disease. Focal def-
mononuclear cells in viral diseases; increased neutrophils in
cits should be investigated according to the location of the
bacterial diseases; increased numbers of both mononuclear
lesion (see Chapters 5 through 15).
cells and neutrophils in mycotic and protozoal diseases and
Analysis of CSF is a useful test for establishing the diagno-
feline infectious peritonitis; and increased numbers of mono-
sis of inflammatory disease [see Chapter 4). Increases in CSF
nuclear cells, neutrophils, and some eosinophils in parasitic,
 protein concentrations range from low (50 to 100 mg/dL) in
fungal, and immune-mediated diseases. Exceptions are com-
chronic viral diseases to very high (>300 mg/dL) in bacterial
mon. For example, chronic bacterial infections may cause a
TABLE 15-17
Unclassified (noninfectious) Inflammatory Diseases of the CNS in Dogs and Cats
Disease
Cause
Incidence
Clinical Signs and Pathology
Course and Prognosis
Diag nostic Tests
Treatment
 Steroid-responsive
Unknown
 Uncommon. Dogs less 
Severe cervical hyperesthesia from
Acute and progres-
 CSF: neutrophilic 
Immunosuppressive
 Meningitis-Arteritis
than 2 yr of age.
 inflammation of meninges and 
sive; fair to good
pleocytosis and 
doses of predni-
(SRMA)
Large-breed dogs:
arteries. Sometimes associated
prognosis
increased protein;
sone
boxers, Bermese
with immune-mediated polyar-
increase lgA in 
 mountain dogs 
thritis.
 serum and CSF
Necrotizing vasculitis 
Unknown
Likely a severe form
Severe necrotizing vasculitis of the
 Acute progressive:
CSF: see SRMA
See SRMA
of SRMA. Seen
 meninges, especially in cervical
 guarded prognosis
 in young beagles,
region. Signs similar to SRMA
 Bermese mountain
 but more likely to have paresis.
dogs and German 
 Spinal cord infarction reported in 
short-haired pointers 
 Bernese mountain dogs
Pyogranulomatosis 
Unknown
 Rare; reported in point-
Mixed mononuclear-neutrophil infil-
 Acute progressive:
 CSF: neutrophilic pleo-
 See SRMA: some
 meningoencephalo-
ers
 tration of meninges and paren-
 guarded to poor 
cytosis: histopathol-
dogs respond to
myelitis
chyma of brain and spinal cord.
prognosis
ogy
antibiotics 
 Severe cervical pain, atrophy of
 cervical muscles, mild ataxia
 Granulomatous
Unknown:
 Relatively common in 
Granulomatous infiltrates in
 Chronic progressive:
CSF: presence of mac-
Prednisone,
meningoencephalo-
probably
 small-breed dogs
meninges, perivascular spaces.
 guarded progno-
rophages is useful:
 cytosine arabi-
myelitis (GME)
type IV
and brain parenchyma. Lesions
 sis, relapses are
 histopathology, MRI
 noside, cyclo-
APTER
hypersensi-
may be disseminated, focal,
common
sporine, other
tivity
or multifocal. Signs depend on 
immunosuppres-
 lesion distribution. Cervical pain
sants
is common
Necrotizing meningo-
Unknown:
Rare disease reported
Lymphoplasmacytic perivascu-
 Chronic progressive:
CSF (lymphocytic pleo-
See GME: responds
yster
encephalitis (NME):
possibly
 in young pugs.
 lar infiltrates in cerebrum and 
 poor prognosis 
 cytosis, increased 
 poorly to immuno-
necrotizing leukoen-
immune 
Maltese, Peking-
meninges. Multifocal necrosis 
protein): MRI
suppressants
mic
cephalitis (NLE)
mediated 
ese, Chihuahua,
in cerebrum. Seizures and other
Yorkshire terrier.
forebrain signs. Brainstem signs
9
shih-tzu, French bull-
 occur more with NLE.
 Multifocal
dog: West Highland
white terrier, Boston
terrier Japanese
 Chin, miniature
pinscher
Feline polioencephalo- 
Unknown
 Pelvic limb paresis, tremors,
 Chronic progressive:
Histopathology: some
igns
Rare
None
 myelitis 
hyperesthesia. Spinal cord neu-
poor prognosis
cats have leukopenia
rons and white matter primarily
and nonregenerative
affected; brain lesions are scat-
anemia
tered 
463
464
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
mononuclear cell response, especially increases in macro-
brain, permitting high concentrations to be achieved within
 phages, whereas some viral diseases cause increased neutro-
nervous tissue.
phils in the CSF. The presence ofa few neutrophils in the CSF
 Regulation of CSF solutes occurs at the choroid plexus.
is not necessarily abnormal. The only cell whose presence in
 Plasma dialysate that flters through fenestrated capillaries is
the CSF seems consistently abnormal is the macrophage. The
selectively secreted by choroid epithelial cells. Certain CSF
CSF can be normal in CNS inflammation.
constituents also are actively reabsorbed by the choroidal epi-
 Clinical suspicion of an infection is an adequate indication
thelial cell, which tends to clear these substances from the
for bacterial and fungal cultures and bacterial sensitivity tests.
CSF and from nervous tissue. This active transport system for
The presence of antibodies in the CSF to specifc viruses or to
weak organic acids removes drugs such as penicillin and gen-
other infectious agents provides evidence of infection because
tamicin. Inflammation may block this system, allowing drug
        r 
concentrations in the nervous tissue to increase. In addition,
with systemic infection but without CNS disease [also see
inflammation may increase the permeability of endothelial
Chapter 4).92 In CSF samples contaminated by blood (hem-
 membranes to certain antibiotics, allowing these drugs to pen-
 orrhage), serum albumin and antibody concentrations should
etrate nervous tissue in cases of disease. In the normal ani-
be compared with concentrations in the CSF. When the level
mal, these antibiotics penetrate poorly. As the inflammation
of CSF antibodies exceeds that of serum, CNS infection is
decreases, penetration of the antibiotic also decreases.
more likely. Inflammation may increase the permeability of
the blood-brain barrier, allowing serum antibodies to leak into
Antimicrobial Agents in Treating Infections
the CSF.
Antimicrobiocidal agents are grouped by their capacity to
achieve concentrations in CSF suffcient to inhibit microor-
Principles of Medical Treatment
s ahil aei t der jo poad au nuano susuea
Medical treatment is most commonly indicated for infections
these drugs relative to achievable concentrations in CSF.
involving the nervous system. Physical therapy also is neces-
Microbicidal drugs are preferred to microbiostatic drugs
sary for rehabilitation [see Chapter 14). Seizures [see Chapter
whenever possible. Antibiotics such as the aminoglycosides
 13) and other diseases requiring specific treatment are covered
diffuse poorly, even in the presence of inflammation. Intrathe-
 in the descriptions of the diseases. The management of CNS
 cal administration may be required for adequate CSF concen-
edema resulting in increased intracranial pressure is discussed
trations to be achieved, but this route is rarely used in animals
in Chapter 12 in the section on brain trauma. Management of
because of the necessity for anesthesia with each injection.
 pain is reviewed in Chapter 14.
Placement of intraventricular catheters can facilitate the injec-
 Effective therapy for CNS infections depends on the iden-
tion of drugs into the CSF.
tification of the cause and selection of the appropriate anti-
hfectious Inflammatory Disease
microbial agent. Identification is based on CSF analysis in
Bacterial Infections (See Table 15-10}
which the organism may be observed (albeit rarely), culture
Bacterial Meningoencephalomryelitis. The pathogenesis, patho-
 and when available, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test-
physiology, and implications of treatment of bacterial men-
ing, and measurement of antibody or antigen titers. Selection
       
 of the appropriate antimicrobial agent depends on two prin-
reviewed.l00 Bacteria must be able to survive in the intravas-
ciples: [l) the agent must be efective against the microbial
cular space, penetrate the blood-brain barrier, and colonize
  (   a  as  
 in the meninges or CSF. Breakdown of the blood-brain bar-
be delivered to, and must penetrate, the CNS. Unfortunately,
rier causes exudation of albumin into the CSF and facilitates
anatomic and physiologic barriers to successful therapy for
the development of brain or spinal cord edema. Experiments
 CNS infections exist, especially when certain drugs are used.
in rats suggest that bacteria in the CSF elicit the release of
The combined effects of these obstacles create a functional
 d a  s a la
blood-brain barrier.
the development and progression of clinical signs. i2s Experi-
The combined functions of the CNS capillaries and the
 mental studies in rabbits reveal that the inflammatory process
choroid plexus create a barrier to the movement of drugs from
causes brain edema, probably secondary to loss of cerebrovas-
cular autoregulation, direct cytotoxicity, and increased CSF
Discrepancies between serum and CNS drug concentrations
outflow resistance.l0i
occur because of two factors: those promoting drug accumu-
u nrrn u ar a sg as
lation in the CNS (the secretory selectivity of the choroid
tions. Rapidly acting bactericidal therapy delivered into the
plexus) balanced against those preventing drug accumulation
CSF is mandatory because only bactericidal therapy is associ-
[the special anatomy of CNS capillaries and drug effux pumps
ated with a cure in humans and experimental animal models.
such as P-glycoprotein). In capillaries outside the CNS, drugs
Rapid destruction of bacteria could release high concentra-
 and other agents pass from the blood through clefts between
tions of inflammatory bacterial toxins (lipopolysaccharides),
endothelial cells and through fenestrations in the capillary
which might exacerbate the inflammatory process 25-128
basement membrane. In the CNS, capilary endothelial cells
These studies also suggest that adjunctive therapy with
are joined by tight junctions that seal the intercellular clefts.
antinflammatory agents may be beneficial in bacterial men-
The capillary basement membrane has no fenestrations and
ingitis.lol In animals with experimental Streptococcus pneu-
glial cell foot processes surround the capillaries helping create
moniae meningitis, methylprednisolone reduced CSF outflow
a barrier to diffusion.
resistance and both methylprednisolone and dexamethasone
 In the CNS, a drug must penetrate an inner bimolecular
reduced brain edema.lol Pretreatment with dexamethasone
lipid membrane, the endothelial cell cytoplasm, an outer lipid
followed in 15 to 20 minutes with third-generation cephalo-
membrane, and a basement membrane and then traverse the
sporins resulted in decreased inflammatory mediator release
glial fot processes. I22 Penetration of a drug is largely a func-
in laboratory animals with Haemophilus influenzae CNS
tion ofits endothelial membrane solubility. Membrane solubil-
infections.127 Several controlled studies in children with
ity is favored by (l) a low degree of ionization at physiologic
bacterial meningitis demonstrated the benefits of adjunctive
pH, (2) alow degree of plasma protein binding, and (3) a high
corticosteroid therapy, especially when corticosteroids were
administered 15 to 20 minutes before bactericidal antibi-
highly lipid-soluble drugs bind strongly to tissue sites in the
otic therapy l28 In these studies, dexamethasone was given
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
465
TABLE 15-18
Antimicrobial Drugs: Ability to Penetrate the Blood-Brain Barrier
Good
Intermediate
Poor
Microbicidal
Trimethoprim
Penicillin Gt
 Penicillin G Benzathine
Moxalactam
Ampicillint 
Cefotaxime
Methicillint
Cephalosporinss
Ceftazidime 
Nafcillint 
Aminoglycosides
Metronidazole
Carbenicillint
Enrofloxacin
 Oxacillin 
Vancomycin
Microbistatic
Chloramphenicol
Tetracycline
Amphotericin B
Sulfonamides
Flucytosine 
Erythromycin 
soniazid
Clindamycin
Minocyclinet
Doxycyclinet
Rifampin 
other nitroimidazoles, furazolidone, nitrofurazone, and other nitrofuans, sulfonamide drugs in lactating dairy catle (except approved use of sulfa-
dimethoxine, sulfabrormomethazine, sulfaethoxypyridazine), fluoroquinolones, glycopeptides (http://www.fda.gov).
+High intravenous doses are needed to achieve the rmaximal effect.
Lipid-soluble tetracyclines that achieve higher concentrations in CSF than do other tetracyclines.
sFirst and second generation, may be effective early in bacterial meningitis; concentrations dramatically decrease with repair of the blood-brain
barrier.
Il Penetration in the face of inflarmmation is unpredictable.
15 to 20 minutes before cefotaxime therapy and was contin-
critically ill patients. Bartonella sp. may also cause CNS disease
ued every 6 hours for 4 days.
in dogs. 132 Anaerobic bacteria isolated from dogs and cats with
Other antinflammatory agents that might be useful
CNS infection include Bacteroides, Fusobacterium, Peptostrepto-
include indomethacin, pentoxifylline, and superoxide dis-
coccus, and Eubacterium. 13
mutase. Specific monoclonal antibodies have shown prom-
 Definitive treatment of bacterial meningitis is based on
ise in experimental models of bacterial meningitis, especially
isolation of the organism from the CSF and determination of
when dexamethasone is also administered 129
its antibiotic sensitivity. Other diagnostic tests include serol-
Although these studies may have therapeutic implications
 ogy and PCR testing. The identification and elimination of
the source of infection are imperative to successful treatment.
ies regarding these species have not been published. Further-
Blood and urine cultures may be useful to identify the caus-
more, these studies involve specific neurotrophic bacteria in
ative agent. Pending the outcome of CSF cultures, the initial
humans that may behave differently than the agents produc-
 antibiotic therapy in small animals is based on clinical find-
ing meningitis in animals. Ultimately, the use of corticosteroids
ings of concomitant infection and the most likely causative
in animals with confrmed or suspected CNS infection should
agent present. Broad-spectrum bacteriocidal antibiotics that
be done judiciously and with caution. Despite the obvious
penetrate the CSF are chosen.
counterintuitive rationale for their use, corticosteroids may be
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide combinations and enrofloxa-
beneficial to reduce edema and alleviate clinical signs. When
cin are good initial choices. Both are available to veterinar-
used, the dosage of corticosteroids should be tailored to the
ians, penetrate the CSF in good concentrations, cover a broad
  sis   n ssu e i
spectrum of bacterial agents, and are not expensive compared
sible, rapid tapering of the dosage should be prescribed based
with third-generation cephalosporins. Enrofloxacin has greater
on continued response to therapy in an effort to restrict the
activity against gram-negative bacteria and very little activity
administration of corticosteroids to short-term usage.
Bacterial   Meningoencephalomyelitis  in  Dogs
pue
concurrently to provide anaerobic and gram-positive cover
Cats. Bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis is not common in
age. For animals unable to receive oral medications, parenteral
dogs and cats. It usually occurs in association with bacteremia
formulations of enrofloxacin and clindamycin hydrochloride
secondary to endocarditis, urinary tract infections, and pulmo-
are available. The dose for enrofloxacin in dogs is 2.5-5.0
nary infections. Critically ill patients may have added risk of
mg/kg PO, IM, SC, IV every 12 hours. Enrofloxacin should be
CNS infection. Meningitis may also occur from extension of
used with care in dogs 2 to 12 months of age to avoid cartilage
infection in structures adjacent to the nervous system, such as
damage. The dose of enrofloxacin in cats is 5 mg/kg once a
the nasal passages, sinuses, and internal ears as well as direct
day PO or 2.5 mg/kg IM every 12 hours. Rare incidence of
penetration into the CNS such as occurs with bite wounds.
retinal toxicity in cats have been reported at doses >15 mg.kg/
Aerobic bacteria associated with bacterial meningitis in dogs
day. The dose for clindamycin in dogs and cats is 3-1l mg/kg
and cats include Pasteurella multocida, Staphylococcus Pseud-
PO, IV, IM SC every 8 hours. Gastroenteritis is the most com-
intermedius, Streptococcus spp., and Escherichia coli 124.130.131
mon side effect of clindamycin therapy in dogs and cats. The
Uncommonly, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, and Klebsiella
initial dose for trimethoprim-sulfonamides is 30 mg/kg every
organisms may be the causative agents. These gram-negative
12 hours for 5 to 7 days and then 15 mg/kg every 12 hours for
10 to 14 days.
466
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Third-generation cephalosporins such as cefotaxime and
ceftazidime penetrate the CSF in good concentrations and
are effective against many resistant gram-negative bacteria 135
They are usually effective against anaerobes but have reduced
activity against gram-positive cocci. Ceftiofur, approved for
use in animals, does not cross the blood-brain barrier unless
inflammation is present, and, in this regard, is similar to the
the cause of the meningitis, the third-generation cephalospo-
rins are the drugs of choice.
 Meningitis caused by gram-positive bacteria may respond
to high doses of aminopenicillins. 13l Many isolates of S. Pseud-
intermedius and S. aureus secrete beta lactamase, which inac-
tivates most aminopenicillins. Aminopenicillins combined
with clavulanic acid and lactamase-resistant penicillins such
as methicillin or oxacillin are better choices for staphylococ-
cal infections. Rifampin is bactericidal, readily penetrates the
 also effective against many gram-negative bacteria. Bacterial
Hgure 15-8 Suppurative meningitis in a calf Note the cloudy
resistance to rifampin develops readily, especially when it is
 and thickened meninges that tend to obscure engorged (inflarned)
given as a single agent. For staphylococcal infections, rifampin
blood vessels (arrow). (Courtesy Dr. Roger Panciera, Oklahoma
is best combined with β-lactam antibiotics. The human dose
State University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
of 10 mg/kg daily produces a concentration in canine serum
four times that required in people to inhibit bacteria but also
causes adverse side effects in dogs. A dose less than 10 mg/kg
 but are less so than the third-generation cephalosporins pre-
daily is recommended, but defnitive pharmacologic studies 
viously described.
have not been published.l36 Rifampin also may be useful in
Adjunctive antinflammatory therapy and other support-
treating chronic abscesses and pyogranulomatous infections.
ive care are used in foals with progressive neurologic dysfunc-
 a n sq    e s 
tion. Corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 0.15 mg/kg q6h IV)
bapenem family of antibiotics. It has broad-spectrum activ-
are used with caution in septic foals because corticosteroid
ity against most gram-positive and gram-negative aerobes and
 therapy can cause rapid bacterial dissemination.l40 Dimethyl
anaerobes. Imipenem is useful in the treatment of nosocomial
sulfoxide [l g/kg IV q24h) may help to reduce CNS inflam-
 gram-negative infections that do not respond to other antibi-
Anju uoisnjradar isuese ioaord pue ruapa pue uoneu
otic regimens. 135,137 After intravenous administration, imipe-
when cerebral ischemia is present. Mannitol (0.25 to 1.0 g/
 nem penetrates the CSF in good concentrations.
kg IV q24h) helps reduce CNS edema. Plasma transfusions
 Occasionally, systemic infection with Brucella canis extends
(1 to 2 L IV) and enteral hyperalimentation may be indicated.
to the nervous system. While most animals are euthanized due
Diazepam (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg every 15 minutes) or phenobar-
to zoonotic issues, brucellosis can be treated with combination
bital (10 to 20 mg/kg IV q8h) or both can be given to control
of streptomycin and minocycline. Streptomycin should be
seizures.ll5
administered for 2 weeks by parenteral injection. Minocycline
Bacterial Meningoencephalomyelitis in Cattle. Bacte-
should be given orally for 4 weeks in combination with the
rial meningitis is the most common CNS disease in neonatal
2-week course for streptomycin.138,139 It is diffcult to eradi-
cate brucella infections in animals.
associated with failure of passive transfer of colostral antibod-
Bacterial Meningoencephalomyelitis in Horses. Bacterial
ies. A presumptive diagnosis of bacterial meningitis with failure
meningitis occurs most commonly in septicemic foals that do
of passive transfer is based on presence of omphalophlebitis
 or septic arthritis, fever and signs suggestive for meningoen-
mary sites of infection include the Gl tract, lung, and umbi-
cephalomyelitis [obtundation, tetraparesis, hyperesthesia, and
licus. Pneumonia, peritonitis, hypopyon, septic arthritis, and
multiple cranial nerve deficits) (Figure 15-8).
omphalophlebitis are common. Extension to the brain and
Neutrophilic pleocytosis and increased protein are present
 spinal cord frequently occurs if treatment is not aggressive.
in the CSF of 60% to 70% of affected calves. Mononuclear
The diagnosis of meningitis in foals is confirmed by cyto-
pleocytosis may be present in chronic disease. The identifica-
logic evaluation and bacterial culture of the CSF. A neutro-
tion of bacteria in the CSF is less than 50% of cases exam-
philic pleocytosis is typical, and cell counts may exceed 1000
ined. E. coli is the organism most frequently responsible in
cells/uL (normal <5 cells/uL).142.143 The total CSF protein
clinical cases.ll9 Isolates may be resistant to trimethoprim-sul-
level is usually more than l00 mg/dL. E. coli and Klebsiella
fonamides, and many, if not most, are now resistant to triple
spp. are the most frequently isolated organisms. 42,143
sulfonamide drugs. Other bacterial agents include Salmonella
 Although definitive antibiotic therapy is based on bacterial
sp. and Arcanobacterium pyogenes. Most affected calves die or
culture and antimicrobial sensitivity testing, initial empiric
 are euthanized, usually within 2 to 3 days after diagnosis and
therapy is based on the assumption that gram-negative
initiation of therapy.
enteric bacteria are the most likely cause. Third-generation
Treatment of bacterial meningitis in calves is diffcult and
cephalosporins are the antimicrobials recommended in foals.
the mortality rate is high.144 Selection of antimicrobial drugs
These include cefotaxime sodium [40 mg/kg IV q8h) and
is based on culture and sensitivity of bacteria from the CSF;
ceftazidime (50 mg/kg IV q12h). Ceftiofur (2 to 4 mg/kg IV
 however, their use is often empirical. The antimicrobial regi-
ql2h) is available to veterinarians but does not penetrate the
pue anesau-ura isureae unnoads peonq aq pinous uau
CSF in normal horses. Although very expensive, these antibi-
gram-positive bacteria. Although trimethoprim-sulfonamides
otics can rapidly sterilize the CSF and may shorten the total
and triple sulfonamide drugs are frequently chosen to treat
 treatment time and thus reduce overall costs of therapy.140
bacterial meningitis in calves, studies indicate an emerging
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide combinations may be effective
resistance of gram-negative bacteria to these drugs. Ampicillin
CHAPTER 15
 Systemic or Multifocal Signs
467
As with the neurotrophic bacteria that infect people, H.
somni possesses several virulent factors [mucopolysaccharide
capsule, outer membrane proteins, and endotoxin concen-
trated in the cell wall) that enhance its penetration into, and
subsequent injury to, the CNS. H. somni colonizes the small
vessels of the meninges, brain, and spinal cord. Fibrin thrombi
and brain infarction cause the neurologic signs. The most
effective antibiotics for TEME include the aminopenicillins,
ceftiofur, oxytetracycline, and florfenicol. Al are approved
for use in food animals and penetrate the CSF when active
inflammation is present. Parenteral oxytetracycline is used for
 non-CNS infections. Treatment of animals that progress to
recumbency is often not effective. When a case is suspected,
the other animals in contact should be closely monitored to
 detect and treat at the early disease stage.
Listeriosis (Circling Disease). Listeria monocytogenes is a
resistant and ubiquitous bacterium that causes CNS disease in
people and domestic animals (listeriosis, circling disease, silage
-n q  sr a e sp ro op 
mitted in silage and other feed. Food-borne infection is com-
mon in humans. Outbreaks usually occur in the winter. In
cattle and sheep, the organism penetrates the oral mucosa via
wounds and is transmitted to the brain in a retrograde fash-
ion via the trigeminal nerve. Signs related to infection of the
rostral medulla [trigeminal, facial, and vestibulocochlear nerve
dysfunction) are common. Although meningitis and encepha-
litis are the classic manifestations of listeriosis in ruminants
spinal cord disease, abortion, and mastitis also occur. Clinical
signs of encephalitis are often more severe in small ruminants.
The most useful antemortem diagnostic test is CSF analysis.
Characteristic findings include increased protein concentra-
tion and nucleated cell count with mononuclear cells predom-
B
inating. Definitive diagnosis is made by histopathology. Gross
Figure 15-9 A, Extensive hemorrhages in the cerebral cortex are
 necropsy findings are not very remarkable. Histopathology
typical gross lesions of thromboembolic meningoencephalomyeli-
reveals multifocal areas of necrosis with infltrations of macro-
tis. B, Note the multiple hemorrhagic lesions seen in cross section
phages and neutrophils. Diagnosis is confrmed by isolation of
of the brain in A. (A and B, Courtesy Dr. Roger Panciera, Okla-
the organism from body fluids or tissues. Warm or cold enrich-
homa State University College of Veterinary Medicine.)
ment methods are used to isolate the organism but immuno-
histochemistry is more successful than bacteriologic culture
for detecting L monocytogenes in brain tissue. Treatment is ini-
[10 to 20 mg/kg IV q8h) has been used in combination with
tiated early and involves long-term parenteral antibiotic ther-
other antimicrobials. Although expensive, the third-genera-
apy (penicillin, ampicillin, amoxicillin, or oxytetracycline),
tion cephalosporins [such as ceftiofur, 5 to 10 mg/kg IV or
Prevention is aimed a limiting fecal contamination of the feed
IM ql2h) are rational empiric drugs for treatment. Because of
from ruminants and wildlife.
their cost, the use of these drugs may not be economically fea-
Bacterial Brain Abscess. Brain abscesses are more com-
sible in many cases. Adequate amounts of colostrum and early
 mon in large animals than in dogs and cats. Neurologic signs
recognition and treatment of bacterial infections is essential
relate to the specific location of the abscess and compres-
for prevention of bacterial meningitis in calves.
sion or necrosis of surrounding neurologic structures. Large
Thromboembolic Meningoencephalitis (TEME). Histo-
   n   r  s
philus somni (formerly Haemophilus somnus) is the major
mass. Increased intracranial pressure, cerebral edema, and
cause ofTEME in cattle.145 Exposure to this organism is wide-
brain herniation may occur (Figure 15-10).
spread, and up to 25% of cattle may harbor serum antibodies
The pituitary abscess syndrome has been described in cat-
to the organism. H. somni persists in the urinary and repro-
tle, goats, sheep, and swine (Figure 15-11).148
ductive tracts of cattle and is shed in urine and reproductive
The anatomy of the rete mirabilis and its close associa-
secretions. The disease is most common in weaned calves, and
tion to the pituitary gland may explain the predilection for
outbreaks ofTEME occur 1 to 2 weeks after cattle arrive at the
pituitary abscesses in cattle. The primary clinical signs include
feedyard.146 Bronchopneumonia is the most common form of
depression, ataxia, blindness, absence of the pupillary light
hemophilosis, but arthritis, myelitis, retinitis, myocarditis, lar-
reflex, dysphagia, dropped jaw, head pressing, bradycardia
yngitis, otitis media or otitis interna, and conjunctivitis also
nystagmus, and strabismus. The CSF may contain increased
occur. TEME usually follows the occurrence of pneumonia by
total protein concentrations and pleocytosis. Bacterial cultures
1 to 2 weeks. Morbidity is low, and mortality is high. Diag-
of CSF are usually negative. Arcanobacterium pyogenes and Pas-
nosis is based on history and physical examination. Changes
teurella multocida are most commonly isolated from abscesses
in CSF refect a bacterial infection that often is hemorrhagic.
-o as a m ss rn e u a su ie
Necropsy findings provide a definitive diagnosis with presence
isms occurs in about 50% of cases. The mortality rate is nearly
of hemorrhagic infarcts in the brain and spinal cord. Histol-
100%, and successful therapy is rare.
 ogy reveals vasculitis, thrombosis, and neutrophilic infltrates
In horses, brain abscesses are usually caused by Streptococ-
(Figure 15-9).
Cus equi, but other streptococci are occasionally isolated. 149
468
PARTI
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 15-10 Large brain abscess in a sheep. [Courtesy Cornell
University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
Hgure 15-12 Multifocal cryptococcosis in a dog. Note the thick-
ened meninges (black arrows) and extension of the infection into
the brain surface (red arrow).
be chosen. Cephalosporin, methicillin, or oxacillin is usually
effective. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 4 to 6
weeks. If medical treatment is not successful, surgery is recom-
mended to obtain a biopsy and culture. Animals with severe
 paresis may require decompression. In B. canis discospondyli-
tis, therapy is expensive and may not eradicate the infection 
effectively Streptomycin-minocycline combinations are used
as described for meningitis. l14 Affected dogs should be neu-
 tered and isolated from other dogs.
Mycotic Infections (see Table 15-11)
The more common mycotic infections of the CNS are caused
by Cryptococcus neoformans, Blastomyces dermatitidis, and Coc
cidioides immitis. They produce polysystemic disease, includ-
(Figure 15-12).
Figure 15-11 A large and destructive pituitary abscess in a cow
(black arrow). Inset figure shows abscess extending into the hypo-
of the organism in the CSF or other body secretions. Treat-
thalamus. [Courtesy Cornell University College of Veterinary
 ment regimens are similar for the various deep mycotic agents,
Medicine.]
as discussed below.
Therapy
Cryptococcal Meningitis. For many years the mainstay of
The prognosis is generally poor. If diagnosed by CT, success-
therapy for the deep mycotic pathogens has been amphoteri-
ful surgical drainage is possible.l50 Brain abscesses are rare in
cin B.This drug is poorly absorbed from the GI tract and must
dogs and cats but may result from extension of purulent oti-
be given IV for a full therapeutic effect. Amphotericin B dif-
tis media/interna, rhinitis, sinusitis, open skull fractures, and
fuses poorly into the CSF. For this reason, although amphoter-
foreign-body penetration of the brain. The causative agents are
icin B has value in fulminating systemic infections, agents such
usual Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp, and Pasteurella
as itraconazole and fluconazole are preferred for cryptococcal
spp. Anaerobes may also be isolated in some cases. Localiza-
meningitis. Several therapeutic regimens of amphotericin B
tion of the abscess with CT or MRI may allow surgical drain-
have been described.
Flucytosine, when combined with amphotericin B, acts
useful for gram-positive infections. Clindamycin and metroni-
synergistically in vitro against C. neoformans. It achieves satis-
 dazole may be given in anaerobic infections. A guarded prog-
factory concentrations in the CSF. The oral dose of flucytosine
nosis should be made.
is 50 to 75 mg/kg every 8 hours. 153,154 The rate of relapse is
Cats may have meningitis secondary to abscesses that are
considerably lower with the combined therapy. Side effects
caused by anaerobic bacteria. Penicillin or amoxicillin is effec-
include leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, vomiting, and diarrhea.
tive and reasonable in cost. Clindamycin or metronidazole is a
Successful management of cryptococcal meningitis has
 been reported with the azole and triazole antifungal com-
cal drainage of intracranial infections should be considered.
pounds 130. 13t At usual concentrations achieved in the plasma
these compounds are considered fungistatic, but at higher
Discospondylitis (also see Chapter 6)
concentrations they may be fungicidal.iss The azoles and tri-
The most common cause of bacterial discospondylitis in dogs
azoles inhibit synthesis of ergosterol in the fungal cell mem-
is Staphylococcus pseudintermedius; occasionally Brucela canis
brane. Ketoconazole, itraconazole, and fluconazole have been
organisms are the source.l52 The disease may be associated
studied in dogs and cats. All are well absorbed from the GI
with urinary tract infection and bacteremia. In staphylococ-
tract. Absorption of itraconazole is enhanced by food in the
cal discospondylitis, penicillinase-resistant antibiotics should
intestinal tract.
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
469
Ketoconazole does not penetrate the CSF in adequate con-
may occur through ingestion of any of the three life stages of
centrations to be effective, and yet reports exist of success
the muscle, CNS, liver, lung, and eye. A variety of clinical signs
especially when combined with flucytosine.i57 Ketoconazole
may occur, including uveitis, retinitis, myositis, pneumonia,
therapy is associated with hepatic dysfunction, elevated liver
and encephalitis. The diagnosis of clinically active toxoplasma
enzymes, and suppression of endogenous steroid synthesis. It
infection is based on suggestive clinical signs, demonstration of
has a slow onset of action, and in life-threatening conditions
ketoconazole is often combined with amphotericin B to pro-
immune testing for antibodies or antigen in serum, ocular fluid,
vide immediate fungicidal activity in all tissues except the eye
or CSF. Although several immunologic tests are commercially
and the CNS. The dose of ketoconazole for dogs and cats is 10
available, the T. gondii-specific immunoglobulin M (IgM) and
to 15 mg/kg daily.
IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) are most
 Itraconazole has a broad spectrum of activity against many
often used in dogs and cats. IgM levels tend to increase within
fungal organisms and has been effective in the treatment of
2 to 4 weeks of infection but are negative by 16 weeks.168 IgM
Cryptococcal meningitis in cats,158 In systemic blastomyco-
titers more than l:256 indicate recent or active infection. A
sis, itraconazole produces a cure rate equal to or greater than
fourfold increase in IgG titers also indicates recent or active
that of combined therapy with ketoconazole and ampho-
disease. Both IgG and IgM titers can be assessed in samples
tericin B. Itraconazole is less toxic than ketoconazole but is
of CSF and compared with serum concentrations of albumin,
 more expensive. Fluconazole is a bistriazole compound with
IgG, and IgM. When the levels in CSF exceed those in serum,
broad-spectrum antifungal activity. It is well absorbed from
active or recent CNS infection should be suspected.
the Gl tract and has a bioavailability greater than 90%.156 It
 Clindamycin hydrochloride is the primary antimicrobial
penetrates into the meninges and CSF with or without inflam-
selected to treat clinical toxoplasmosis in dogs and cats. The
mation. Fluconazole is the drug of choice in the treatment of
dose in cats is 12.5 to 25 mg/kg orally or IM every 12 hours.
cryptococcal meningitis in humans and is used in dogs and cats 
Z1 AIa NI 1o Ae1o yau Oz 01 01 sI saop u asop au
with mycotic infections of the CNS. Serious side effects are
hours. Although clindamycin does not adequately penetrate
uncommon. The recommended dose in dogs and cats for both
the CSF of humans, the drug may penetrate the CSF of cats
itraconazole and fluconazole is 10 mg/kg daily divided twice
in suffcient levels to be effective for neurologic disease.169
assuas e jo unnosr u puaq suu g ozrog 
Transient vomiting is a common side effect in some cats. Cats
The successful resolution of cryptococcal meningitis and optic
should be treated for at least 4 to 5 weeks.
 Neosporosis. Neosporosis is caused by the protozoan
dose was 5 mg/kg per day and the horse was treated for 197
Neospora caninum. Natural infections have been reported
days.160
 in dogs and calves. The muscles and the CNS are the most
Coccidioidal Meningitis. Coccidioides immitis is not sus-
common sites of infection. Affected animals typically develop
ceptible to the synergistic activity of combined amphotericin
nonsuppurative encephalomyelitis, polyradiculoneuritis, and
B and flucytosine therapy but may respond to ketoconazole
myositis. A positive diagnosis is based on demonstration of the
administered at 10 mg/kg every 24 hours for 9 to 12 months.136
organism in blood, CSF, or tissues. A fluorescent antibody test
Although in some cases treatment resolved the clinical signs,
can detect N. caninum-specific antibodies. Clinical experience
recurrences were common when treatment was discontinued.
 e      m
Similar results were found in a few cases treated with itracon-
should be tried early in the course of ilness. Sulfadiazine may
azole and fluconazole 16l
also be effective [see also Chapter 7).67
Other Systemic Fungal Infections. Histoplasma capsu
Equine Protozoal Myeloencephalitis (EPM). EPM
is
latun,Blastomyces dermatitidis Aspergillus spp,Candida
described in Chapter 6 because clinical signs commonly
spp., and Sporothrix schencki occasionally are involved in
manifest as spinal cord dysfunction. It is the most common
meningitis. Treatment is the same as for cryptococcosis and
neurologic disease in horses with multifocal or asymmetric
 Coccidioidomycosis.162-165
neurologic deficits. Infection of the CNS may occur anywhere,
but the spinal cord is most commonly affected.170-173 EPM is
Actinomycetes Infections (see Table 15-1)
most commonly caused Sarcocystis neurona. A small number
Tuberculous Meningitis. Although it is nearly nonexistent in
of EPM cases have been attributed to infection by Neospora
hughesi The opossum is the definitive host for S neurona and
primates. Most of the antituberculous drugs readily penetrate
harbors the sexual stages of the protozoa within its gastroin-
the CNS. A combination of isoniazid and ethambutol is sug-
testinal tract. Natural intermediate hosts for S. neurona that
gested. Other effective drugs include rifampin, ethionamide,
have been identified include the skunk, raccoon, cat, Pacific
 pyrazinamide, and cycloserine.
harbor seal, and nine-banded armadillo. The horse is an aber-
 Nocardiosis. The drugs of choice have been triple sulfon-
rant dead-end host. Horses are most likely infected by fecal-
amides or trimethoprim-sulfa combinations. Their in yitro
oral transmission. The diagnosis and treatment of EPM are
effect, however, has not been duplicated in vivo. The drugs
discussed in Chapter 6.
taken to prevent nephrotoxicity. Alternative drugs include
Viral Infections
minocycline,_ amikacin, and erythromycin combined with
The viral diseases causing encephalomyelitis are summarized
ampicillin. 166
in Table 15-13. Viral infection of the CNS may fit into one of
Actinomycosis. The drug of choice is ampicillin given IV
three categories: [l) viral invasions resulting in inflammation
 at 10 to 20 mg/kg every 6 hours. 166 Therapy is continued with
(viral meningitis, encephalitis, encephalomyelitis, or poliomy-
clindamycin, chloramphenicol, or minocycline.
elitis); (2) postinfectious, noninflammatory encephalopathic
states; and (3) postinfectious and postvaccinal inflammatory
Protozoan Infections (see Table 15-12)
states ("old dog” encephalitis, perhaps polyradiculoneuritis,
Toxoplasmosis. Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular coc-
 brachial plexus neuropathy).
cidian parasite that produces systemic infection in dogs and
 Rabies. Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus that results in a
cats and occasionally in other domestic animals. Cats are the
fatal encephalomyelitis in mammals. Common sources of infec-
 definitive host and pass oocysts in the feces. In cats infection
tion include bites from skunks, bats, raccoons, foxes, and coyotes.
470
PART!!
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Figure 15-13 Brain from a horse with rabies. Note the prominent
Hgure 15-14 Dog with pseudorabies. Note the extensive self-
Negri bodies (arrows) in a neuron. [Courtesy Cornell University
mutilation of the head secondary to severe pruritus. (Courtesy
College of Veterinary Medicine.]
Dr. Joan Coates.]
The virus is transmitted via infected saliva [animal bites, con-
tamination of wounds) and is transmitted by retrograde axonal
 transport to the brain and spinal cord. Lesions in the nervous
system are most severe in the midbrain, cervical spinal cord, and
 cranial nerve ganglia and include perivascular cuffs of plasma
cells and lymphocytes. The Negri body, found in neurons, is the
classical inclusion body of rabies virus [Figure 15-13).
Three forms of rabies have been described in domestic ani-
mals: furious, dumb, and paralytic. Initially, infected animals
 often develop behavioral changes with rapid progression to one
of the three forms. The furious form is characterized by rest-
lessness wandering, aggression, and seizures. The dumb form
-odu pue Teasusreud sisreed aaissasod Xq paziaeeus!
glossal paralysis, depression, and head pressing. The paralytic
form occurs more commonly in large animals than in dogs and
cats. It is a progressive ascending paralysis that may begin as a
shifting leg lameness. In cattle, the most common clinical signs
are salivation,ellwing, aggressiveness, paresis/paralysis and
Hgure 15-15 Canine distemper encephalomyelitis. Cerebellar
folial white matter with perivascular lymphocytes and plasma
straining. Colic, aggressiveness, hyperesthesia, and ataxia are
cells, numerous macrophages and vacuolated neuroparenchyma.
common clinical signs in horses. Sheep will commonly mani-
fest hyperesthesia, tremors, and salivation. Goats and pigs also
[Courtesy Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
manifest mainly aggressiveness, hyperexcitability, and squeal-
ing. It is important to keep in mind that rabies can clinically
present with any neurologic sign.
 Diagnosis is based on viral isolation and histopathology.
 Definitive diagnosis is a positive fluorescent antibody test
There is no effective treatment. Pseudorabies has been eradi-
performed on brain tissue. There is no effective treatment.
cated from domestic swine in the United States.
Infected animals and those suspected to be infected should be
Canine Distemper Virus. Canine distemper is a com-
euthanized and brain submitted for fluorescent antibody (FA)
mon polysystemic disease of dogs that may infect the CNS.
examination. Given the human health hazard, FA examina-
The virus is also pathogenic in ferrets, raccoons, big cats, and
tion of the brain should be pursued in every suspected case in
other animal species. There are three neurologic syndromes.
which there has been significant risk of exposure to humans.
Acute distemper occurs in susceptible young dogs and respira-
If uncertainty exists, a state health offcial should be contacted
tory and digestive signs predominate. Neurologic signs may
for advice. Vaccines are available and very effective in domes-
occur later in the clinical course but many dogs die before
tic animals. Despite their efficacy, rabies infection can occur in
these signs develop. Seizures are the most common neu-
vaccinated animals.172
rologic manifestation. Lesions most commonly represent a
Pseudorabies. Pseudorabies [Aujeszky disease, mad itch)
polioencephalomyelitis.
is caused by a neurotrophic α-herpesvirus. The virus can be
 Chronic distemper encephalomyelitis occurs in young
latent or subclinical in adult swine and pigs are thought to
dogs that survive the acute stages of the disease and in mature
be the source of infection in other animal species. After a pig
dogs without signs of system disease. Chronic distemper is a
bite, the virus enters the skin and travels to the brain or spinal
multifocal  severe  demyelinating  meningoencephalomyeli-
cord by retrograde axonal transport. The incubation period
tis. Lesions are most common in the cerebellum, cerebellar
is 90 to 156 days. Piglets show seizures, tremors, ataxia, and
peduncles, cervical spinal cord, optic tracts, and periventricu-
death. In other species, severe pruritus, dermal abrasions,
lar white matter (Figure 15-15).
swelling, and alopecia develop at the site of virus inoculation
Clinical signs include progressive and severe ataxia, pare-
[Figure 15-14].
sis, depression, and generalized or "chewing gum" seizures
Other signs include ataxia, paresis, circling, aggression,
(focal seizures involving biting movements of the mandible).
depression, and seizures.
Constant repetitive myoclonus, twitching of temporal or
CHAPTER 15
5 Systemic or Multifocal Signs
471
asymmetric and multifocal. Abnormal mentation and cranial
nerve abnormalities occur in 44% to 67% of affected horses.173
See Chapter 6 for discussion of diagnosis and treatment.
Western, Eastern, and Venezuelan Equine Encephalo-
myelitis (WEE, EEE, VEE). A group of mosquito-transmit-
ted alphaviruses cause encephalomyelitis in horses [Eastern,
Western, and Venezuelan equine encephalomyelitis). Descrip-
  'ss s  a  aq  
a number of other mammalians, including dogs, cats, cattle,
single-stranded enveloped RNA viruses, Alphavirus genus of
the family Togaviridae. Birds are involved in application of the
disease. Susceptible horses, usually younger, show clinical signs
2 to 3 weeks after viral infection of birds. Times for peak infec-
tion are June to August in the southern states and September
in the northern states. The clinical signs include mild to severe
pyrexia, anorexia, stiffness, propulsive walking, depression,
hyperesthesia, aggression, and excitability.179 Obtundation is
Figure 15-16 Neurologic feline infectious peritonitis with exten-
the most common clinical sign and seizures occur in one third
sive periventricular inflammation and protein effusion into the
of the cases. Neurologic signs are variable and occur as dif-
ventricular lumen. (Courtesy Cornell University College of Vet-
fuse or multifocal forebrain disease with brainstem and spinal
 cord involvement. The signs are peracute to acute in onset
erinary Medicine.]
and progressive. Mortality rates are highest with EEE. Histo-
 pathology reveals gray matter predominance with multifocal
appendicular muscles, occurs in some dogs and is supportive
to diffuse meningoencephalomyelitis. Diagnosis is made via
of the diagnosis. Distemper virus may cause chorioretinitis and
serology (CF HI, SN, and IgM capture ELISA). Results of CSF
optic neuritis and visual deficits may develop.
analysis are distinctive and reveal very high protein concentra-
Old dog encephalitis is a rare form of canine distemper that
tions and severe neutrophilic pleocytosis. Treatment is mostly
 appears to be a manifestation of chronic viral infection after
supportive care, which includes corticosteroids or nonsteroi-
years of latent brain infection. The clinical signs result from
dal antinflammatory agents and physical therapy. Long-term
necrosis of cerebral gray matter and are typical of other fore-
u      
brain disorders.
recovery Efficacious vaccines are available but twice yearly
The diagnosis of canine distemper is based on positive
vaccination is recommended. Mosquito control is important 
FA tests on neural tissue, cerebrospinal fluid cells (infected
in reducing risk of infection.
lymphocytes), or other lymphoid tissues. Other supporting
 Antiviral Therapy. Few reports address the use of antiviral
findings include ophthalmologic evidence of chorioretinitis,
    n e so 
inhibits the enzyme thymidine kinase and thus inhibits deoxy-
myoclonus.
ribonucleic acid (DNA) synthesis. This effect is 20O times
There is no definitive treatment. Seizures can be managed
greater for the viral enzyme than for the enzyme in mamma-
with anticonvulsants drugs such as phenobarbital but control
lian cells. 0 Acyclovir can be given orally and intravenously. It
is difficult. Vaccines are highly protective against both system
penetrates into the CSF and aqueous humor at 30% to 50%
and neurologic signs.
of the plasma concentration. In human herpes encephalitis,
Feline Infectious Peritonitis Virus (FIP). The noneffusive
the IV dose is 10 mg/kg every 8 hours. The dose should be
(dry) form of FIP virus includes neurologic signs in some cats.
reduced with renal failure because the drug is excreted in the
The FIP virus induces a vasculitis involving the meninges,
urine. Encephalopathy is a rare side effect with high doses.
ependymal lining, and choroid plexus (Figure 15-16).
Foscarnet is effective against herpesvirus, cytomegalovi-
Characteristic histopathologic lesions are a pyogranuloma-
rus, and the human immunodeficiency virus. It penetrates the
tous meningoencephalitis and lymphoplasmacytic periventric-
CNS in good concentrations. 180
ulitis. The lesions are most severe around the third ventricle
 of the brain resulting in an obstructive hydrocephalus. Ataxia
The Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies (TSE)
related to vestibular dysfunction is the most common neu-
The TSE are a group of slowly progressive, neurodegenerative
rologic sign. Intention tremor and fine head tremor have
diseases of the CNS. The group includes bovine spongiform
been associated with cerebellar and meningeal disease. Fore-
encephalopathy (BSE, mad cow disease), scrapie in goats and
brain, cerebellar, and thoracolumbar spinal cord signs are also
sheep, chronic wasting disease in elk and deer, transmissible
common. Signs are slowly progressive and eventually fatal.
mink encephalopathy, and feline spongiform encephalopa-
Affected cats frequently have an anterior uveitis.
thy. The cause is a particle in which nucleic acids have not
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, presence of ocular
been demonstrated. These particles may represent infectious
lesions, cytology of abdominal effusion if present, and CSF
proteins derived from the normal host. Normal prion pro-
analysis (neutrophilic-lymphocytic pleocytosis and increased
teins (PrP) are located in nervous system membranes and are
protein). There is no effective treatment.
suspectable to proteases. Abnormal PrP are protease resistant
Equine Herpesvirus-1 (EHV-1). Equine herpesvirus type 1
(PrP-res). Protease resistant prions accumulate in the neurons
 causes a diffuse multifocal myeloencephalopathy and is dis-
and interfere with cell function and cause vacuole formation
cussed in detail in Chapter 6.
(Figure 15-17). There is a long latency period before clinical
West Nile Virus. West Nile virus is a flavivirus that causes
signs develop. The TSE are reportable diseases.
acute polioencephalomyelitis in birds, horses, and humans and
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE). BSE was frst
reported in dairy cattle in the United Kingdom. Infection was
cinicalsigns arever paresis, ataxia andmusce fascculaton.7
tied to the consumption of meat and bone meal contaminated
The lesions are most severe in the spinal cord and are usually
with BSE-infected nervous tissue. BSE has been sporadically
472
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
Hgure 15-17 Spongiform change [vacuoles] in the caudal brainstem gray matter of a cow with
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (left image) and large vacuoles in a large neuron [right image].
[Courtesy Cornell University College ofVeterinary Medicine.]
reported in Canada and a few cases have been reported in
unclear if this is a true example of transmissible spongiform
the United States. The incubation period can be long [2 to 8
years). The clinical signs include nervousness, aggression, fre-
8-month-old female domestic shorthair cat that had a Z-week
 quent licking at the muzzle, muscle fasciculations, and brux-
history of generalized ataxia and lethargy.l82 Neurologic
ism. Cows are hypersensitive to external stimuli. Locomotor
examination also revealed head tilt, cervical spine ventroflex-
signs include ataxia, hypermetria, paresis, falling, and recum-
ion, tetraparesis, tremor, and visual defcits. Histopathology
bency. There is no antemortem diagnostic test. Postmortem
revealed generalized vacuolation of the gray matter of the
diagnosis includes histopathology, immunohistochemistry, and
brain and spinal cord.
Western blot or ELISA on the brain. There is no treatment or
vaccine. Human TSE, variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, has
Rickettsial Infections (see Table 15-14)
anss pros ieuds pue uenq jo uonduunsus oi pautl uag
The agents that cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF)
from BSE-infected cattle
 and canine ehrlichiosis may cause meningitis and encephali-
Scrapie. Scrapie is a TSE that affects sheep and goats. The
prion is transmitted by ingestion or direct or indirect contact
Both diseases are transmitted by ticks and are limited to areas
with infected placenta and birth fluids. The incubation is l to
harboring the appropriate vector. Dogs with RMSF may have
7 years with clinical signs usually present at 2 to 5 years of
acute cervical pain and minimal signs related to brain or spinal
age. Scrapie is most common in black-faced sheep (Suffolk,
cord disease. Dogs with neurologic ehrlichiosis usually have
Cheviot, Hampshire). These breeds are geneticaly suscep-
signs related to brainstem or spinal cord lesions. CSF may be
tible to the prion proteins. In addition to the signs described
 normal or reveal increased protein and a mixed pleocytosis. 183
for cattle, sheep develop tremors, pruritus, wool break, and
Confirmation of ehrlichiosis may be difficult in some dogs and
inducible nibbling reflex. When startled, sheep may tremble
is based on serologic tests and isolation of the organism. 185
 and fall down in a seizure. The signs progress slowly to recum-
Treatment is with tetracycline, minocycline, or doxycycline.
bency and death (6 weeks to 1 year). The clinical signs in goats
Doxycycline is preferred because it penetrates the CSF in
are similar. About 33% of infected goats regurgitate rumen
good concentrations. For doxycycline, a dose is 5 to 10 mg/kg
contents.
every 12 hours IV or orally.
The antemortem diagnosis of scrapie is based on clinical
signs and third eyelid biopsy for immunohistochemistry
of
Parasitic Infections
Parasitic disease of the nervous system is uncommon. The most
of brain (vacuolation of gray matter) and immunohistochem-
common parasitic diseases are summarized in Table 15-15.
istry of brain and/or lymphoid tissue. There is no treatment.
The disease can be prevented by selecting ewes and rams that
Noninfectious Inflammatory Diseases
are genetically resistant to scrapie and by maintaining closed
Immune Mediated Diseases
herds.
Polyradiculoneuritis [see Chapter 7] is probably an immune-
Feline Spongiform Encephalopathy. Spongiform enceph-
mediated reaction to a transmissible agent in raccoon saliva.
ea-  ses ur rouan asne ot parodar uaaq seu Auedoe
Postvaccinal rabies is rare (see Table 15-13). Both conditions
old spayed female domestic shorthair cat presented for a
are summarized in Table 15-16.
4-month history of progressive aggressive behavioral changes.
Meningoencephalomyelitis of Unknown Etiology (MUE)
fuse vacuolation of the neuropil and neuronal cell bodies most
(see Table 15-17)
marked in the frontal lobe of the cerebral cortex. Due to the
Several nonseptic inflammatory diseases may respond to
lack of plaques, which are associated with transmissibility, it is
medical therapy.l86,187.188 The causes of these diseases are
CHAPTER 15
Systemic or Multifocal Signs
473
Hgure 15-19 Perivascular cuffs of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
Figure 15-18 Canine juvenile polyarteritis [steroid responsive men-
histiocytes in the cerebral white matter of a dog. These lesions are
ingitis-arteritis). Note the prolific arterial inflammation with neutro-
phils. (Courtesy Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine.]
not currently known, but immune-mediated mechanisms
Granulomatous Meningoencephalomyelitis (GME)
 are suspected. Accordingly, corticosteroids and other immu-
GME is a common nonseptic inflammatory disease that affects
nosuppressive drugs may be beneficial with certain diseases.
 Differentiating these diseases from bacterial or viral infections
Females are more often affected.l88 The exact cause is
is difficult because the clinical signs and CSF findings may be
unknown, but studies of inflammatory cells in dogs with
similar with both types of inflammation [see Chapter 4).
GME suggest a T cell-mediated delayed type of hypersensi-
tivity.198 Neurologic signs may be acute or chronic. Clinically.
Steroid-Responsive Meningitis-Arteritis(SRMA)
GME has been characterized into three clinical presenta-
Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis occurs in large-breed
is
dogs, usually less than 2 years of age (Figure 15-18).
a common finding. About 50% of affected dogs have focal
Cervical spinal hyperesthesia occurs in more than 90% of
signs referable to the forebrain, and about 50% have fore-
affected dogs. Neutrophilic leukocytosis with left shift and
brain and brainstem disease.196 Central vestibular signs are
fever occurs in two thirds of affected dogs. Boxers, Bernese
common manifestations of acute disease. I97 Rarely, involve-
mountain dogs, beagles, weimaraners, and Nova Scotia duck
ment of the peripheral nervous system may be observed.20l
tolling retriever dogs may be predisposed to this disease.87-193
A definitive diagnosis is based on histopathologic exami-
Dogs with noninfectious, nonerosive, idiopathic immune-
nation of the CNS. Microscopically, the hallmark of GME
mediated polyarthritis (IMPA) commonly have spinal pain,
 is perivascular cuffs of granulomatous inflammation (Figure
15-19).202
Analysis of CSF usually reveals marked increases in protein
Presumptive antemortem diagnosis is based on a combi-
and neutrophils. Bacterial cultures from the CSF are negative.
nation of signalment, anamnesis, clinicopathologic data, and
IgA concentrations are increased in both the plasma and the
exclusion of other disease capable of producing similar clini-
CSF. Measurement of acute phase proteins in CSF may also
cal signs. Since the definitive diagnosis of GME necessitates
aid in the diagnosis and management of affected dogs.194.195
histologic evaluation of CNS tissue, the term meningoen-
Most dogs respond dramatically to prednisone, 2 to 4 mg/kg
 cephalomyelitis of unknown etiology (MUE) has been used to
every 24 hours. 194 In dogs not responding to prednisone alone,
describe dogs without a definitive diagnosis.
additional immunosuppressive therapy may be needed. Once
The diagnosis of MUE should be pursued in a logical
the signs are controlled, the dose of prednisone is decreased
manner (see Chapter 4). Briefly, minimum database (com-
to alternate-day therapy, and then the total dose is gradually
plete blood count, chemistry profle, and urinalysis) often
reduced over months. Relapses are common when the cortico-
discloses nonspecific abnormalities. Analysis of CSF is criti-
steroid dose is too low or is discontinued.
cal to establishing a presumptive antemortem diagnosis.
Mononuclear pleocytosis, activated macrophages, occasion-
Necrotizing Meningeal Vasculitis
ally neutrophils, and rarely mast cells with increases in pro-
Necrotizing meningeal  vasculitis is  a  severe  form  of
tein content are common CSF abnormalities. Cross-sectional
SRMA.186.187,194 Necrotizing vasculitis also occurs in young
imaging also is important in the diagnostic workup. MRI of
dogs, especially beagles, Bernese mountain dogs, and Ger-
the brain is the imaging modality of choice. With MRI, mul-
man shorthaired pointers. Although the prognosis in affected
tifocal hyperintensities on T2-weighted and fluid attenu-
beagles is guarded, other breeds may respond well to predni-
sone at 2 to 4 mg/kg every 24 hours using the aforementioned
the white matter are observed. Enhancement patterns vary
reducing-dosage regimen.
on Tl-weighted sequences after administration of contrast
474
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
media. A focal space occupying mass or abnormalities
involving the optic nerves may be observed in animals with
the focal or ocular forms, respectively.203 Abnormal findings
from CSF analysis and MRI of the brain can be found in
other forms of MUE. Therefore, the value in pursuing these
diagnostics tests is not only in documenting abnormali-
ties but in excluding other disease processes; the greatest
consideration. Given the treatment of GME is centered on
immunosuppression, misdiagnosis may be devastating in
animals with infectious disease. Therefore, depending on
the clinician's index of suspicion, further diagnostic testing
aimed at the identification of an infectious etiology may be
warranted. Likewise, CNS lymphoma may occur with clini-
cal signs of multifocal signs and have MRI findings and lym-
phocytic pleocytosis that are difficult to differentiate from
GME. PCR for the antigen receptor rearrangements may be
useful in the diagnosis of CNS lymphoma.
Figure 15-20 Brain from Maltese dog treated for intractable sei-
 Response to prednisone therapy is highly variable. Some
Zures. Note the laminar loss of cortical tissue (black arrows) and
dogs respond to prednisone [2 to 4 mg/kg every 24 hours,
cribriform changes in the white matter (green arrows). These are
using the aforementioned reducing-dosage regimen), but
the lesions of necrotizing meningoencephalitis. [Courtesy Comell
relapses and progression of neurologic signs are common in
University College ofVeterinary Medicine via Dr. R. Higgins, Uni-
many dogs. Cytosine arabinoside, given as a single agent or
versity of California, Davis.]
in combination with prednisone, is a more effective treat-
ment.204,205 In one study of 10 dogs treated with cytosine
 arabinoside and prednisone, all dogs achieved partial or com-
French bulldog, Chihuahua, and shih-tzu.2ll NME is most
plete remission and the median survival time was 53l days;
common in the pug and Maltese and NLE is most common in
five dogs were still alive at the end of the study.206 Cytosine
Yorkshire terriers and French bulldogs. In pugs, the mean age
arabinoside is administered in cycles. Each cycle consists of
of onset of clinical signs is 18 months (range 4 to 113 months).
administering the drug at a dose of 50 mg/m? given subcuta-
 Females are more commonly affected than males. Most pugs
neously twice a day for 2 consecutive days. Cycles are initially
with NME have a mononuclear pleocytosis.
repeated every 3 weeks. With time, gradual lengthening of
As with GME, definitive diagnosis requires histopathologic
the interval between cycles can be done. In severely affected
evaluation of the brain. Gross evaluation of the brain in dogs
with NME discloses abnormalities limited to the gray/white
stant rate infusion over 2 days may be benefcial.207 To moni-
matter junction of the cerebrum [Figure 15-20).
tor for myelosuppression, a CBC should be performed 10 to
Microscopically, the lesion affects gray and white matter,
14 days following the first course of treatment and every 2
meninges, and choroid and consists of inflammatory infltrate
to 3 months throughout the course of therapy. Cyclosporine
composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages. In
may also be effective in treating GME. Two protocols have
addition, areas of liquefactive necrosis and cavitation occur.
In dogs with NLE, gross lesions predominate in the deep
at 10 mg/kg every 24 hours for 6 weeks. The dose was then
white matter of the cerebrum and thalamus. Similar to NME
reduced to 5 mg/kg per day. Prednisone was also adminis-
inflammation composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
tered at 2 to 4 mg/kg daily for 3 to 4 weeks. In another proto-
macrophages exist along with necrosis and cavitation of the
col, cyclosporine was administered at 3 to 10 mg/kg every 12
white matter. Typical white matter lesions involve the thala-
hours. Serum cyclosporine levels were followed but the drug
 mus, internal capsule, centrum semiovale, and corona radiata.
was not detected in the CSF, even in dogs with good clinical
Although there are gross anatomic differences in the dis-
response. In one study of 10 dogs treated with cyclosporine
tribution of the lesions in NME and NLE, these diseases may
 and prednisone, all dogs responded and the median survival
represent a spectrum of a single disease process rather than
time was 930 days.208 Procarbazine has also been used as an
separate entities. In fact, although NME or NLE has been
 adjunctive therapy combined with prednisone.209 The dos-
reported to affect specifc breeds, occasionally NLE has been
 age administered was 25 to 50 mg/m2 orally once daily. The
observed in a breed normally thought to be affected with
 combination of procarbazine and prednisone in 21 dogs pro-
NME and vice versa.212.213
vided a median survival time of 14 months. Seven dogs expe-
based on signalment (specifically breed), clinicopathologic data,
gastroenteritis. Other immunosuppressive drugs used in the
and exclusion of other disease processes that may result in simi-
treatment of GME include mycophenolate mofetil (20 mg/kg
lar clinical signs. Importantly, a relatively accurate presumptive
orally twice daily) and leflunomide [1.5 to 4.0 mg/kg orally
diagnosis can be made based on MRI findings. Magnetic reso-
once daily).210
nance imaging characteristics and topography of the lesion mir-
Radiation treatment is effective for dogs with focal
rors the gross and histologic fndings (Figure 15-21),212.213
GME 173 The prognosis for survival is better for dogs with
Treatment is pursued using the same drug combinations as
focal disease.196
with GME. Overal, the prognosis is guarded depending on
the severity of elinical signs and extent of necrosis of the brain.
Necrotizing Meningoencephalitis (NME) and Necrotizing
The mean survival time in one study was 93 days.211
Leukoencephalitis (NLE)
These breed-specific diseases are seen most commonly in
Eosinophilic Meningoencephalomyelitis (EME)
young adult dogs. They are fatal disorders that cause a nonsup-
Eosinophils are rarely found in CSF. When the percentage is
purative inflammation and necrosis of the brain. Variants have
less than 5%, it is a nonspecific finding and can be found in
been reported in the pug, Yorkshire terrier, Maltese, Pekingese,
several CNS disorders. When eosinophil counts exceed 20%,
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
475
an eosinophilic pleocytosis exists and the most common
causes are parasitic migration, cryptococcosis, neosporosis, and
idiopathic EME. Idiopathic EME occurs in both large- and
 small-breed dogs with a median age of 3.5 years.214 There is
no gender bias and about 75% of dogs respond to prednisone
therapy (0.33 to 1 1 mg/kg q12h).
CASE STUDIES
Key: 0, Absent; +1, decreased; +2, normal; +3, exaggerated;
+4, very exaggerated or clonus: PL, pelvic limb; TL, thoracic
limb; NE, not evaluated.
Figure 15-21 Axial T2W image of the brain of an adult Dachs-
hund dog with meningoencephalitis of unknown origin. There is
excessive hyperintensity of the white matter [internal capsule,
centrum semiovale, and corona radiate] of the left cerebrum
[(arrows). There is also edema in internal capsule of the right cere-
brum (arrowhead).
CASE STUDY 15-1
CASEY
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Cranial nerves
 Mastiff, female spayed, 1.5 years old
 Pupils are dilated and do not respond to strong light source.
- History
Sensory evaluation
 Clinical signs began several days ago. Dog has experienced
Normal
vomiting, diarrhea, dry eyes and nose, urinary incontinence,
and weight loss. All vaccinations are current.
· Lesion Localization
Generalized disease of autonomic nervous system
· Physical Examination Findings
 Dog is dul and dehydrated. The bladder is distended and
· Differential Diagnosis
easily expressed. Gas-filled intestinal loops can be palpated.
 1. Dysautonomia
 Both eyes are very dry and the planum nasale is dry and
2. Botulism
crusted. Both pupils are widely dlated and do not respond
to a strong light source. Third eyelids are prolapsed.
· Diagnostic Plan
Dilute pilocarpine in left eye [immediate constriction];
. Neurologic Examination
poor wheal and flare to intradermal histamine phosphate
Mental status
injection.
Dull
. Diagnosis
Gait and posture
Dysautonomia
Normal
- Treatment
Postural reactions
Dilute pilocarpine in each eye daily. Cisapride was adminis-
Normal
tered twice a day to promote esophageal motility.
Spinal reflexes
Outcome
Normal except the perineal reflex is weak and anal tone is
This case responded poorly to treatment,
reduced.
476
PARTII
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 15-2
MCCOY
veterinaryneurologycases.com
. Signalment
Sensory evaluation
 Pus, female spayed, 3 years old
Normal
. History
· Lesion Localization
Two months prior to presentation, the dog was brought in
 Forebrain based on seizures
because of a paralyzed tail. A cauda equina syndrome was
Left cranial medulla based on vestibular signs and postural
presumptively diagnosed and the dog seemed to respond to
deficits
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs. On this visit, the dog
 Retina/optic nerves bilateral based on reduced menace
was seen for severe ataxia. Owner declined diagnostic test-
 responce and absent PLRO
ing and the dog was placed on prednisone and doxycycline.
Three days later, the dog's condition had worsened and sei-
· Differential Diagnosis
zures developed. The dog was treated with phenobarbital
1. Viral encephalitis 
and referred. All vaccinations are current.
 2. Pug dog encephalitis 
 3. Protozoal encephalitis
: Physical Examination Findings
4. Rickettsial encephalitis 
See neurologic examination.
· Diagnostic Plan
: Neurologic Examination
CSF and immunocytochemistry analysis; cross-sectional
Mental status
imaging and serology
 Dull and poorly responsive to auditory stimuli
. Results
Gait and posture
CSF: mild increase in protein; normal cell count; CSF cells
Unable to stand without assistance. She is very ataxic and
positive on immunofluorescent antibody for canine dis-
falls both left and right. Left head tilt is present.
temper; MRI and serology not performed
Postural reactions
. Diagnosis
1. Proprioceptive placing: normal in left front leg and very
 Canine distemper encephalomyelitis
 depressed in all other limbs
2. Hopping: +1 in thoracic limbs and 0 in pelvic limbs
· Treatment
 Euthanasia
Spinal reflexes
1. Patellar: +3 in both limbs
2. Withdrawal: normal
Craniaf nerves
Menace response: reduced
Palpebral reflex: normal
Pupils: very dilated and no PLRs absent
Vertical nystagmus
CASE STUDY 15-3
RASCAL
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Posture
 Abyssinian cat, male castrated, l year old
Normal
History
Gait
The cat had severe paraparesis. Clinical signs began 3 weeks
 Severe paraparesis. The tail is paralyzed.
 ago with lameness of the right thoracic limb that was
managed with NSAIDs. Weakness and ataxia also became
Postural reactions
evident in the pelvic limbs. Muscular atrophy developed
 Hopping and proprioceptive defcits are noted in both pel-
rapidly in the pelvic limbs. The cat has had two episodes of
vic limbs. Hopping is decreased in the right thoracic limb.
 pyrexia and anorexia. Vaccinations are current.
Spinal reflexes
. Physical Examination
Spinal reflexes are increased in all limbs except the left pel-
The rectal temperature is normal. Cat is thin with general-
vic limb where the patellar reflex is absent and hock flexion
ized muscle atrophy. Enlarged popliteal lymph nodes are
is decreased during flexion. Perineal reflex is absent.
present.
Cranial nerves
. Neurologic Examination
 The menace response is reduced and the pupils are widely
Mental status
dilated (medication to examine retinas). Pupillary light reflexes
Alert and responsive
 cannot be evaluated due to administration of cycloplegic drugs.
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
477
CASE STUDY 15-3
RASCAL
cont'd
Palpation
· Diagnostic Plan
 The urinary bladder is distended.
1. CBC
 2. Fine-needle lymph node biopsy
Sensory evaluation
 3. Thoracic and LS radiographs
Hyperesthesia is noted in the LS region. Noxious stimuli are
4. MRI
 poorly perceived from the tail.
5. CSF analysis
: Lesion Localization
■ Results
At least two and maybe three spinal cord lesions are pres-
Fundic examination revealed severe bilateral chorioretinitis.
ent. In addition, disease of multiple spinal nerves (neuritis)
Lymph node aspirate isolated histoplasma organisms. Radio-
 or muscle may also be present to explain the generalized
e r u p s   o s
muscle atrophy.
etal lesions. Cross-sectional imaging and CSF analysis not 
1. T3-L3 based on paraparesis and increased spinal
 performed.
reflexes
 2. Left L4-S2 based on absent patellar and flexor reflexes
. Diagnosis
 3. Cauda equina based on sensory examination of tail
 Histoplasmosis with myelitis and neuritis (likely fungal
and decreased perineal reflex
granulomas)
: Differential Diagnosis
- Treatment
There are multifocal lesions making inflammatory disease
 Itraconazole [cat greatly improved and regained ability to
much more likely than degenerative or neoplastic processes.
urinate)
 1. Protozoal myelitis-neuritis [toxoplasmosis and neo-
sporosis)
 2. Mycotic myelitis-neuritis [eryptococcosis, histoplas-
 mosis, blastomycosis, aspergillosis)
3. FIP
 4. Lymphoma
CASE STUDY 15-4
SADIE
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
Sensory evaluation
Boxer, 9-month-old female intact
thoracolumbar and cervical vertebral column.
. History
The dog has a Z-day history of anorexia, decreased activ-
: Lesion Localization
ity, and stiff gait. There is no history of trauma. She lives in
There are no findings suggestive of intramedullary spinal
northeastern Kansas, is well vaccinated, and eats a premium
 cord disease, especially with the presence of paraspinal pain.
dog food. The dog was examined in early September.
 The hyperesthesia suggests disease involving the TL and
cervical vertebra or meningeal disease. Muscles and joints
- Physical Examination Findings
also have pain sensitive fbers.
The abnormalities include a stiff gait and rectal temperature 
of 104.5° F. Ticks are present on the dog.
· Differential Diagnosis
1. Steroid responsive meningitis-arteritis
· Neurologic Examination
2.1
 Rickettsial (RMSF) meningitis
Mental status
3.
GME
Responsive to her environment
4. Discospondylitis
5. Metastatic neoplasia
Gait and posture
 6. Intervertebral disk disease
 Discomfort evident when handled or picked up. A stiff gait
7. Polymyositis
and reluctance to walk are noted. There is no head tilt cir-
 8. Polyarthritis
 cling, or ataxia.
· Diagnostic Plan
Postural reactions
1.
 CBC, biochemical profle, UA
Normal
2.
 Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound to rule-
out metastatic disease; spinal radiography
Spinal reflexes
 3. Serology: RMSF and Ehrlichia canis
Normal
4. CSF analysis
Cranial nerves
Normal
478
PART II
Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
CASE STUDY 15-4
SADIE-
cont'd
 Results
. Diagnosis
1. The primary abnormality on the CBC was a platelet
 Given the clinical signs and the presence of ticks, RMSF
count of 90,000. The biochemical profle and UA were
 meningitis was suspected.
normal.
2. Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound within
- Treatment
normal limits;
 Dog was placed on oral doxycycline. The dog dramatically
 3. Negative serology for RMSF and Ehrlichia canis
responded to treatment. Convalescence RMSF titers were
 4. No CSF analysis was performed
1:256.
CASE STUDY 15-5
VICTOR
D
veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
 Differential Diagnosis
 Miniature schnauzer, intact male, 14 months old
1. Rickettsial encephalitis 
2.
Viral encephalitis
- History
 3. Meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown origin
The dog has been anorexic and lethargic for the past Z
 4. Fungal encephalitis
days. He vomited one to two times in last 48 hours. Dog
5.
 Toxoplasmosis/neosporosis
has right head tilt, circles and falls to the right, and bumps
 6. Hepatoencephalopathy
into objects on the right side. Owners report that the dog
is reluctant to open his mouth and whines when his mouth
· Diagnostic Plan
is opened. Another veterinarian also found a mild fever and
1. Fundic examination
modest thrombocytopenia [165,000 platelets/μL).
2.
 CBC, biochemical profle, UA
3.1
 Bile acids
· Physical Examination Findings
4.
 Abdominal radiographs/ultrasonography
The liver was not palpable on abdominal palpation. Rectal
 5. MRI
temperature at admission was 103.2° F.
6. CSF analysis
. Neurologic Examination
Results
Mental status
1. CBC: platelets 162,000 (200,00 to 500,000 cells/μL);
 Dull, confused, and disoriented
CK 501 (22 to 491); ALT 76 (3 to 69)
2. UA: normal
Gait and posture
 3. Abdominal radiographs: small liver
Right head tilt; drifts and falls to the right, right hemiparesis,
4. Ble acids: pre-5.3; postprandial 23.8 (5 to 23)
circles both directions but mostly to the right side. Visual
5. CSF: WBC-488; RBC173; Total protein-94.39;
deficits are suspected on right side.
 cytology-—100% lymphocytes
 6. PCR and serology for Ehrlichia: negative
Postural reactions
7. Toxoplasma gondi and Neospora canimum: negative titers
Very decreased on the right side
(IFA) at 1:50
 8. MRI not performed
Spinal reflexes
All spinal reflexes are intact
· Diagnosis
 Meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology; possibly GME
Cranial nerves
Menace response: OD—absent; OS—normal
 Treatment
 Palpebral reflex: normal
 Initially chloramphenicol and prednisone was administered.
PLR: intact
The dog was maintained on an immunosuppressive dose of
 Physiologic nystagmus is intact. There is no pathologic nys-
prednisone.
tagmus but a ventrolateral strabismus is observed in the
right eye
Outcome
Facial sensation: normal
1.
 Recheck l month: Improved
Swallowing/gag: normal
2.1
Recheck Z months: Much improved
Tongue movement: normal
3. Recheck 3 months: Signs in remission. The dog devel-
oped severe iatrogenic Cushing. The dose of prednisone
Sensory perception
was reduced to every other day Other immunosuppres-
Normal
 sive agents [e.g., cytosine arabinoside] were considered.
· Lesion Localization
Left cerebral cortex; right brainstem [rostral medulla-
central vestibular disease)
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
479
CASE STUDY 15-6
OTTO
 veterinaryneurologycases.com
· Signalment
: Lesion Localization
 Miniature schnauzer, male, 16 weeks old
 The prominent clinical signs localized to the cerebellum.
 Dog probably has either brainstem and/or cervical spinal
- History
cord lesion to explain the postural reaction deficits.
Otto developed clinical signs at 8 weeks of age and signs
have progressively worsened. There are no other clini-
· Differential Diagnosis
cal signs. He eats, drinks, and is growing normally. Owner
1.
 Cerebellar abiotrophy
describes clumsy gait and falling right and left.
2.1
 Lysosomal storage disease
3.
 Canine distemper virus
· Physical Examination Findings
4. Other infectious inflammatory disease
 No abnormalities found except for neurologic examination
findings.
· Diagnostic Plan
1. CSF analysis
. Neurologic Examination
Mental status
rickettsial agents.
 Alert and responsive 
3. MRI
 4. Urine organic acid screening
Gait and posture
 There was a base wide stance. Gait showed severe cerebellal
Results
ataxia, hypermetria, and falling to right. Intention tremors
1. CSF: Normal
were evident upon eating.
2.
 Serology results were for negative infectious agents
 3. MRI and urine screening not performed
Postural reactions
+1 hopping in left thoracic and pelvic limbs.
- Treatment
No treatment was administered because dog most likely has
Cranial nerves
a neurodegenerative disease
Normal
 Outcome
Spinal reflexes
Dog developed rapid progression of neurologic signs and
Patellar reflex on left side is +3. All other reflexes are nor-
was euthanized at 6 months of age. Necropsy and histopa-
mal.
thology confrmed cerebellar abiotrophy with degenerative
lesions also in the brainstem.
Sensory evaluation
Normal
REFERENCES
10. Zaal MD, van dan Ingh T, Goedegebuure SA, et al: Pro-
gressive neuronopathy in two Cairn terrier litter mates,
1. Baker HJ, et al: The gangliosidoses: comparative features
Vet Q 19:34-36, 1997.
and research applications, Vet Pathol 16:635-649, 1979.
11. Jaggy A, Vandevelde M: Multisystem neuronal degenera-
2. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Degenera-
tion in cocker spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 2[3):117-120,
tive diseases of the central nervous system. Veterinary
1988.
neuropathology, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
12. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, et al: Multisystem axo-
3. Jolly RD, Wallkley SU: Lysosomal storage diseases of
nopathy and neuronopathy in golden retriever dogs, J
animals: an essay in comparative pathology, Vet Pathol
Vet Intern Med 23:935-939, 2009.
34:527-548, 1997.
 13. deLahunta A, Averill DR: Hereditary cerebellar cortical
 4. Skelly BJ, Franklin RJM: Recognition and diagnosis of
and extrapyramidal nuclear abiotrophy in Kerry blue ter-
lysosomal storage diseases in the cat and dog, J Vet Intern
riers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:1119-1124, 1976.
Med 16:133-141, 2002.
14. O'Brien DP, Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, et al: Genetic
5. Jolly RD: Comparative
biology(
of neuronal ceroid-
mapping of  canine multiple  system  degeneration
lipofuscinoses (NCL): an overview, Am J Med Genet 
and ectodermal dysplasia loci, J Hered 96:727-734,
57(2):307-311, 1995.
2005.
6. Ellinwood NM, Vite CH, Haskin ME: Gene therapy for
15. Pool WA: "Grass disease" in horses, Vet Rec 8:23-30,
lysosomal storage diseases: the lessons and promise of
1928.
animal models, J Gene Med 6:481-506, 2004.
16. Key TJ, Gaskell CJ: Puzzling syndrome in cats associated
7. de Lahunta A: Abiotrophy in domestic animals: a review,
with pupillary dilatation, Vet Rec 110:160, 1982.
Can J Vet Res 54:65-76, 1990.
17. Wise LA, Lappin MR:A syndrome resembling feline dys-
 8. Kornegay JN: Ataxia of the head and limbs: cerebellar
autonomia [Key-Gaskell syndrome) in a dog, J Am Vet 
diseases in dogs and cats, Prog Vet Neurol 1:255-274,
Med Assoc 198:2103-2106, 1991.
1990.
18. Berghaus RD, O'Brien DP, Thorne JG, et al: Incidence of
9. Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal vacu-
canine dysautonomia in Missouri, USA, between Janu-
 olation and spinocerebellar degeneration in young Rott-
ary 1996 and December 2000, Prev Vet Med 54(4):291-
weiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34[4):296-302, 1997.
300,2002.
480
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
19. Harkin KR, Andrews GA, Nietfeld JC: Dysautonomia
39. Lawrence D, Bellah JR, Diaz R: Results of surgical man-
in dogs: 65 cases [1993-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc
agement of portosystemic shunts in dogs: 20 cases [1985-
220(5):633-639, 2002.
1990), J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1750-1753, 1992.
20. Longshore RC, O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, et al: Dysau-
40. Dunigan C, Tyler J, Valdez R, et al: Apparent renal
tonomia in dogs: a retrospective study, J Vet Intern Med
encephalopathy in a cow, J Vet Intern Med 10:39-41,
10:103-109, 1996.
1996.
21. Kidder AC, Johannes C, O'Brien DP, et al: Feline dysau-
41. Wolf AM: Canine uremic encephalopathy, J Am Anim
tonomia in the Midwestern United States: a retrospective
Hosp Assoc 16:735-738, 1980.
study of nine cases, J Feline Med Surg 10(2):130-136,
42. Abramson CJ, et al: L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria in
2008.
Staffordshire bull terriers, J Vet Intern Med 17:551-556,
22. Hardy RM: Pathophysiology of hepatic encephalopathy.
2003.
Semin Vet Med Surg 5:100-106, 1990.
43. Allison RW, Mienkoth JH, Rizzi TE: Abnormalities of
23. Maddison JE: Hepatic encephalopathy: current concepts
the standard biochemical profile. In Lorenz MD, Neer
of the pathogenesis, J Vet Intern Med 6:341-353, 1992.
TM, Demars PL, editors: Small animal medical diagnosis,
24. Bunch SE: Hepatic encephalopathy, Prog Vet Neurol
ed 3, Ames, Iowa, 2009, Wiley Blackwell.
2:287-296, 1992.
44. Holowaychuk MK, et al: Ionized calcium in critically ill
25. Center SA, Magne ML: Historical, physical examination,
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:509-513, 2009.
and clinicopathologic features of portosystemic vascu-
45. Kornegay JN: Hypocalcemia in dogs, Compend Contin 
lar anomalies in the dog and cat, Semin Vet Med Surg
Educ Pract Vet 4:103-110, 1982.
5:83-93, 1990.
 46. Plumb DC: Plumbs veterinary drug handbook, ed 5,
 26. Center SA, et al: Evaluation of twelve-hour preprandial
Ames, Iowa, 2005, Blackwell.
and two-hour post prandial serum bile acids concentra-
47.1
 Kelly M, Hill J: Canine myxedema stupor and coma,
tions for diagnosis of hepatobiliary diseases in dogs, J Am
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:1049-1057, 1984.
Vet Med Assoc 199:217-226, 1991
 48. Kelly MJ: Canine myxedema stupor and coma. In Kirk
27. Center SA, Erb HN, Joseph SA: Measurement of serum
RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy X: small animal
bile acids concentrations of hepatobiliary disease in cats,
practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:1048-1054, 1995.
49. Panciera DL: Hypothyroidism in dogs: 66 cases [1987-
28. Holt DE, Schelling CG, Saunders HM, et al: Correlation
1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 204:761-767, 1994.
 of ultrasonographic findings with surgical, portographic,
50. Vitale CL, Olby NJ: Neurologic dysfunction in hypo-
and necropsy findings in dogs and cats with portosys-
thyroid, hyperlipidemic Labrador retrievers, J Vet Intern
temic shunts: 63 cases [1987-1993), J Am Vet Med
Med 21:1316-1322, 2007.
Assoc 207:1190-1193, 1995.
51. Rossmeisl JH Jr, Duncan RB, Inzana KD, et al: Longitu-
29. Koblik PD, et al: Use of 99m technetium-pertechnetate
dinal study of the effects of chronic hypothyroidism on
as a screening test for portosystemic shunts in dogs, J Am
skeletal muscle in dogs, Am J Vet Res 70(7):879-888,
Vet Med Assoc 196:925-930, 1990.
2009.
30. Koblik PD, Hornof WJ: Transcolonic sodium pertechne-
52. Schwartz BC, Sallmutter T, Nell B: Keratoconjunctivitis
tate Te 99m scintigraphy for diagnosis of macrovascular
sicca attributable to parasympathetic nerve dysfunction
portosystemic shunts in dogs, cats, and pothellied pigs:
associated with hypothyroidism in a horse, J Am Vet
176 cases [1988-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:729-
Med Assoc 233:1761-1766, 2008.
733, 1995.
53. Nelson RW, et al: Serum free thyroxine concentrations
31. Tyler JW: Hepatoencephalopathy. Part Il: pathophysi-
in healthy dogs, dogs with hypothyroidism, and euthy-
ology and treatment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
roid dogs with concurrent illness, J Am Vet Med Assoc
12:1260-1270, 1990.
198:1401-1407, 1991.
32. Taboada J: Medical management of animals with por-
54. Peterson ME, Gamble DA: Effect of nonthyroid illness
tosystemic shunts, Semin Vet Med Surg 5:107-119,
on serum thyroxine concentrations in cats: 494 cases
1990.
[1988), J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1203-1208, 1990.
33. Matushek KJ, Bjorling D, Mathews K: Generalized
55. Jaggy A, et al: Neurologic manifestations ofhypothyroid-
motor seizures after portosystemic shunt ligation in dogs:
ism: a retrospective study of 29 dogs, J Vet Intern Med
five cases [1981-1988), J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:2014-
8:328-336, 1994.
2017.1990.
56. Sarfaty DS, Carillo JM, Peterson ME: Neurologic, endo-
34. Hardie EM, Kornegay JN, Cullen JM: Status epilepticus 
crinologic, and pathologic fndings associated with large
after ligation of portosystemic shunts, Vet Surg 19:412-
pituitary tumors in dogs: eight cases [1976-1984], J Am
417, 1990.
Vet Med Assoc 193:854-856, 1988.
35. Tisdall PL, Hunt GB, Youmans KR, et al: Neurological
57. Wood FD, et al: Diagnostic imaging findings and endo-
dysfunction indogs following attenuation of congenital
crine test results in dogs with pituitary-dependent
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts, J Small Anim Pract
hyperadrenocorticism that did or did not have neuro-
41:539-546, 2000.
logic abnormalities: 157 cases [1989-2005], J Am Vet
36. Johnson C, Armstrong P, Hauptman J: Congenital porto-
Med Assoc 231:1081-1085, 2007.
systemic shunts in dogs: 46 cases [1979-1986], J Am Vet 
58. Love S: Equine Cushing's disease, Br Vet J 149:139-153,
Med Assoc 191:1478-1483, 1987.
1993.
37. Matushek KJ, Bjorling D, Mathews K: Generalized
59. Duesberg CA, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging for
 diagnosis of pituitary macroadenomas in dogs, J Am Vet
five cases [1981-1988), J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:2014-
Med Assoc 206:657-662, 1995.
2017, 1990.
60. Barker EN, Campbell S, Tebb AJ, et al: A comparison
38. Van Gundy TE, Boothe HW, Wolf A: Results of surgical
of the survival times of dogs treated with mitotane or
management of feline portosystemic shunts, J Am Anim
trilostane for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism,
Hosp Assoc 25:55-62, 1990.
J Vet Intern Med 19[6):810-815, 2005.
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
481
61. Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hypercalcemia and primary
84. Anderson Wl, Morrow LA:Thiamine deficiency enceph-
hyperparathyroidism. In Canine and feline endocrinol-
alopathy with concurrent myocardial degeneration and
 ogy and reproduction, Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.
polyradiculoneuropathy in a cat, Cornell Vet 77:251-
62. Harris CL, et al: Hypercalcemia in a dog with thymoma,
257,1987.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:281-284, 1991.
85. Houston DM, Hulland TJ:Thiamine deficiency in a team
63. Klausner JS, et al: Hypercalcemia in two cats with squa-
of sled dogs, Can Vet J 29:383-385, 1988.
mous cell carcinoma, J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:103-105,
 86. Rammell C, Hill J: A review of thiamine deficiency and
1990.
its diagnosis, especially in ruminants, N Z Vet J 34:202-
64. Messinger JS, Windham WR, Ward CR: Ionized calcium
204, 1987
in dogs: a retrospective study of 109 cases [1998-2003],
87. Read DH, Harrington DD: Experimentally induced thia.
J Vet Intern Med 23:514-519, 2009.
mine deficiency in beagle dogs: pathologic changes ofthe
65. Foosbee SK, Forrester SD: Hypercalcemia secondary to
central nervous system, Am J Vet Res 47:2281-2289,
cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicosis in two dogs, J Am
1986.
Vet Med Assoc 196:1265-1268, 1990.
88. Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, 2009,
66. Dougherty SA, Center SA, Dzanis DA: Salmon calcito-
Wiley-Blackwell.
 nin as adjunct treatment for vitamin D toxicosis in a dog.
89. Osweiler GD, Carson TL, Buck WB, et al: Clinical and
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1269-1272, 1990.
diagnostic veterinary toxicology, ed 3, Dubuque, Iowa,
67. Spier SJ, et al: Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in horses,
1985, Kendall/Hunt Publishing.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1009-1017, 1990.
 90. Grauer GF, Hjelle JJ: Toxicology. In Morgan RV, editor:
68. Rudolph JA, et al: Periodic paralysis in quarter horses:
Handbook of small animal practice, New York, 1988,
a sodium channel mutation disseminated by selective
Churchill Livingstone.
breeding, Nat Genet 2:144-147, 1992
91. Dorman DC: Toxins that include seizures in small ani-
69. Atkins CE: Disorders of glucose homeostasis in neonatal
mals. In the Proceedings of the 8th ACVIM Forum,
and juvenile dogs:hypoglycemia (Part I), Compend Con-
McGuirk SM ed. Washington DC, 361-364, 1990.
tin Educ Pract Vet 6:197-206, 1984.
92. O'Brien DP:Toxic and metabolic causes of seizures, Clin
70. van der Linde-Sipman JS, van den Ingh TS, van Toor AJ:
Tech Small Anim Pract 13:159-166, 1998.
Fatty liver syndrome in puppies, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
93. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Buck WB: : Bromethalin toxi-
26:9-12, 1990.
cosis in the dog. Part I: clinical effects, J Am Anim Hosp
71. Atkins CE: : Disorders of glucose homeostasis in neona-
Assoc 26:589, 1990.
tal and juvenile dogs:hypoglycemia (Part I), Compend
94. Dorman DC, Parker AJ, Dye JA, et al: Bromethalin neu-
Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:353-364, 1984.
rotoxicosis in the cat, Prog Vet Neurol 1:189, 1990.
72. Elie MS, Zerbe CA: Insulinoma in dogs, cats, and ferrets,
95. Bratton GR, Kowalczyk DF: Lead poisoning. In Kirk RW,
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 17:51-59, 1995.
editor: Current veterinary therapy X: small animal prac-
73. Caywood DD, et al: Pancreatic insulin-secreting neo-
tice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
plasms: clinical, diagnostic, and prognostic features in 73
96. Dollahite JW, et al: Chronic lead poisoning in horses, Am
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:577-584, 1988.
J Vet Res 39:961-964, 1978.
74. Hawks D, Peterson ME, Hawkins KL: Insulin-secreting
97.2
Zook BC, Carpenter JL, Leeds EB: Lead poisoning in
 pancreatic (islet cell) carcinoma in a cat, J Vet Intern
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 155:1329-1342, 1969.
Med 6:193-196, 1992.
98. Knecht CD, Crabtree J, Katherman A: Clinical, clinico-
75. Dyer DR: Hypoglycemia: a common metabolic manifes-
pathologic, and electroencephalographic features oflead
tation of cancer, Vet Med 87:40-47, 1992.
poisoning in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:196-201,
76. Chrisman CL: Postoperative results and complications
1979.
of insulinomas in dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:677-
 99. Nicholls TJ, Handson PD: Behavioural change associated
684, 1980.
with chronic lead poisoning in working dogs, Vet Rec
77. Frier H, et al: Formation and absorption of cerebrospinal
112:607. 1983.
fluid in adult goats with hypo and hypervitaminosis A,
100. Dow SW, et al: Central nervous system toxicosis asso-
Am J Vet Res 35:45-55, 1974.
ciated with metronidazole treatment of dogs: five cases
78. Baker JR, Lyon DG: Skull malformation and cerebellar
(1984-1987), J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:365-368, 1989.
herniation in captive African lions, Vet Rec 19:154-156,
101. Caylor KB, Cassimatis MK: Metronidazole neurotoxi-
1977.
cosis in two cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:258-262,
79. Kornegay JN, Mayhew IG: Metabolic, toxic, and nutri-
2001.
tional diseases of the nervous system. In Oliver JE,
102. Evans J, et al: Diazepam as a treatment for metronida-
Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary neurology
zole toxicosis in dogs: a retrospective study of 2l cases, J
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
Vet Intern Med 17:302-310, 2003.
80. van Donkersgoed J, Clark EG: Blindness caused by hypo-
103. Mealy KL: Role of P-glycoprotein in the blood-brain bar-
vitaminosis A in feedlot cattle, Can Vet J 29:925-927,
rier. In the Proceedings of the 19th ACVIM Forum, Dav-
1988.
enport D, Paradis MR, eds. Denver, 396-398, 2001
81. Anderson Wl, et al: The ophthalmic and neuro-ophthal-
104. Nelson OL, et al: Ivermectin toxicity in an Austra-
mic effects of a vitamin A deficiency in young steers, Vet 
lian shepherd dog with MDRl mutation associated
Med 86:1143-1148, 1991
with ivermectin sensitivity in collies, J Vet Intern Med
82. Mayhew I, et al: Equine degenerative myeloencephalop-
17:354-356, 2003.
athy: a vitamin E deficiency that may be familial, J Vet
105. Hopper K, Aldrich J, Haskins SC: Ivermectin toxicity in
Intern Med 1:45-50, 1987.
17 collies, J Vet Intern Med 16:89-94, 2002.
83. Dill SG, et al: Serum vitamin E and blood glutathione
106. Kenny PJ, et al: Retinopathy associated with ivermec-
 peroxidase values of horses with degenerative myeloen-
tin toxicosis in two dogs, J Am Vet Assoc 233:279-284,
cephalopathy, Am J Vet Res 50:166-168, 1989.
2008.
482
PARTIl Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
107. Merola V, Khan S, Gwaltney-Brant S: Ivermectin toxico-
129. Saez-Llorens X, Jafari HS, Severien C, et al: Enhanced
sis in dogs: A retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
attenuation of meningeal inflammation and brain edema
45:106-111, 2009.
by concomitant administration of anti-CD 18 monoclo-
108. Swor TM, Whittenburg JL, Chaffn MK: Ivermectin
nal antibodies and dexamethasone in experimental Hae-
toxicosis in three adult horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
mophilus meningitis, J Clin Invest 88:2003-2011, 1991.
235:558-562,2009.
130. Radaelli ST, Platt SR: Bacterial meningoencephalomy-
109. Jaggy A, Oliver JE: Chlorpyrifos toxicosis in two cats, J
Vet Intern Med 4:135-139, 1990.
1999), J Vet Intern Med 16:159-163, 2002.
110. Farrow BRH: Tremor syndromes in dogs. In the Proceed-
131. Kornegay JN, Lorenz MD, Zenoble RD: Bacterial
ings ofthe 6th ACVIM Forum, Pigeon G ed. Washington
meningoencephalitis in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
DC, 57-60,1988.
173:1334-1336, 1978.
11l. Bath ML: Hexachlorophene toxicity in dogs, J Small
132. Cross JR, et al: Bartonella-associated meningoradiculo-
Anim Pract 19:241-244, 1978.
  'sio e  snd o sep pue s
112. Scott DW, Bolton GR, Lorenz MD: Hexachlorophene
Intern Med 22:674-678, 2008.
toxicosis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:947-949,
133. Dow SW, et al: Central nervous system infection associ-
1973.
ated with anaerobic bacteria in two dogs and two cats, J
113. Thompson J, Senior D, Pinson D, et al: Neurotoxicosis
Vet Intern Med 2:171-176, 1988.
associated with the use of hexachlorophene in a cat, J
134. Bahri LE, Blouin A: Fluoroquinolones: a new fam-
Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1311-1312, 1987.
ily of antimicrobials, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
114. Dorman de: Initial management of toxicosis. In the Pro-
13:1429-1434, 1991.
ceedings of the 8th ACVIM Forum, McGuirk SM ed.
135. Orsini JA, Perkons S: New beta-lactam antibiotics in
Washington DC, pages 419-422:1990.
critical care medicine, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
115. Hamir A, Sullivan N, Handson P, et al: A comparison
16:183-186, 1994.
of calcium disodium ethylene diamine tetraacetate (Ca
136. Frank LA: Clinical pharmacology of rifampin, J Am Vet
EDTA) by oral and subcutaneous routes as a treatment
Med Assoc 197:114-117, 1990.
of lead poisoning in dogs, J Small Anim Pract 27:39-43,
137. Haskins SC: Management of septic shock, J Am Vet Med
1986.
Assoc 200:1915-1924, 1992.
116. Munana KR: Encephalitis and meningitis, Vet Clin North
138. Greene CE: Infectious diseases affecting the nervous sys-
Am (Small Anim Pract) 26:857-874, 1996.
tem. In Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders, New
117. Kent M: Bacterial infections of the CNS. In Greene CE,
York, 1986, Churchill Livingstone.
editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, Phila-
139. Carmichael LE, Greene CE: Canine brucellosis. In
delphia, 2006, Elsevier.
Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat,
118. Tipold A, Vandevelde M: Neurologic diseases of sus-
ed 3, Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier.
 pected infectious origin and prion disease. In Greene CE,
140. Moore BR: Update on equine therapeutics: bacterial
editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, Phila-
meningitis in foals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
delphia, 2006, Elsevier.
17:1417-1420, 1995.
119. Braund KG, Brewer BD, Mayhew IG: Inflammatory,
141. Morris DD, Rutkowski J, Lloyd KC: Therapy in two
infectious, immune, parasitic, and vascular diseases. In
cases of neonatal foal septicemia and meningitis with
Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veterinary
cefotaxim96 sodium, Equine Vet J 19:151-154, 1987.
neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
142. Santschi EM, Foreman JH: Equine bacterial meningitis.
120. Greene CE, Appel MJ: Canine distemper. In Greene CE,
Part I, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1l:479-483,
editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, Phila-
1989.
delphia, 2006, Elsevier.
143. Foreman JH, Santschi EM: Equine bacterial meningitis,
12l. Bagely RS: Multifocal neurological disease. In Ettinger
Part I1, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1l:640-644,
S, Feldman E, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal
1989.
medicine, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2005, Elsevier.
144. Green SL, Smith LL: Meningitis in neonatal calves: 32
122. Milhorat TH: Cerebrospinal fluid and the brain edemas,
cases [1983-1990), J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:125-128,
New York, 1987, Neuroscience Society of New York.
1992.
123. Webb AA, Muir GD:The blood-brain barrier and its role
145. Harris FW, Janzen ED: The Haemophilus somnus dis-
in inflammation, J Vet Intern Med 14:399-411, 2000.
ease complex [Haemophilosis): a review, Can Vet J
124. Fenner WR: Bacterial infections of the central nervous
30:816-822, 1989.
system. In Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the
146. Donkersgoed JV, Janzen ED, Harland RJ: Epidemiologi-
dog and cat, Philadelphia, 1990, WB Saunders.
cal features of calf mortality due to haemophilosis in a
125. Quagliarello V, Scheld WM: Bacterial meningitis: patho-
large feedlot, Can Vet J 31:821-825, 1990.
genesis, pathophysiology, and progress, N Engl J Med
147. Blenden DC, Kampelmacher EH, Torres-Anjel MJ: Lis-
327:864-872, 1992.
teriosis (zoonosis update), J Am Vet Med Assoc 1:79-84,
126. Scheld WM, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid outflow resistance
1990.
 in rabbits with experimental meningitis: alterations with
148. Perdizet JA, Dinsmore P: Pituitary abscess syndrome,
 penicillin and methylprednisolone, J Clin Invest 66:243-
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8:311-318, 1986.
253,1980.
149. Raphel CF: Brain abscess in three horses, J Am Vet Med
127. Mustafa MM, et al: Modulation of inflammation and
Assoc 180:874-877, 1982.
cachectin activity in relation to treatment of experimen-
150. Allen JR, Barbee DD, Boulton MD: Brain abscess in a
tal Haemophilus influenzae type B meningitis, J Infect
horse: diagnosis by computed tomography and success-
Dis 160:818-825, 1989.
ful surgical treatment, Equine Vet J 19:552-555, 1987.
128. Odio CM, et al: The beneficial effects of early dexameth-
151. Greene CE: Abscesses and pyogranulomatous inflamma-
asone administration in infants and children with bacte-
tion caused by bacteria. In Greene CE, editor: Infectious
rial meningitis, N Engl J Med 324:1535-1541, 1991.
diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2006,
Elsevier.
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
483
152. Kornegay JN: Diskospondylitis. In Slatter DH, editor:
174. Tyler JW, et al: West Nile virus encephalomyelitis in a
Textbook of small animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1993,
sheep, J Vet Intern Med 17:242-244, 2003.
WB Saunders.
175. Wamsley HL, et al: Findings in cerebrospinal fluids of
153. Malik R, et al: Cryptococcosis. In Greene CE, editor:
horses infected with West Nile virus: 30 cases [2001),
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, Philadelphia,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 221:1303-1305, 2002.
2006, Elsevier.
176. Przelomski MM, O'Rourke E, Grady GF, et al: Eastern
154. Cook JR, Evinger JV, Wagner LA: Successful combina-
equine encephalitis in Massachusetts: a report of 16
 tion chemotherapy for cryptococcal meningoencephali-
cases, 1970-1984, Neurology 38:736-739, 1988.
tis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:61-64, 1991.
177.Farrar MD, Miller DL, Baldwin CA, et al: Eastern
155. Hill PB, Moriello KA, Shaw SE: A review of systemic
equine encephalitis in dogs, J Vet Diagn Invest 17:
antifungal agents, Vet Dermatol 6:59-66, 1995.
614-617,2005
156. Heit MC, Riviere JE: Antifungal therapy: ketoconazole
178. Walton TE: Arboviral encephalomyelitides of live-
and other azole derivatives, Compend Contin Educ Pract
stock in the Western Hemisphere, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Vet l:21-31, 1995.
200:1385-1389, 2000.
157. Mikiciuk MG, Fales WH, Schmidt DA: Successful treat-
179. Del Piero F, Willkins PA, Dubovi EJ, et al: Clinical patho-
ment of feline cryptococcosis with ketoconazole and flu-
logic immunohistochemical, and virologic findings of
cytosine, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:199-201, 1990.
     
158. Medleau L, Jacobs GJ, Marks MA: Itraconazole for the
Pathol 38:451-456, 2001.
treatment of cryptococcosis in cats, J Vet Intern Med
180. Gilman AG, et al: Antiviral agents. In Goodman, Gilman,
9:39-42, 1995.
editors: The pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New
159. Legendre A, Berthelin C: How do I treat central nervous
York, 1990, Pergamon Press.
system cryptococcosis in dogs and cats?, Prog Vet Neurol
181. Leggett MN, Dukes J, Pirie HM:A spongiform encepha-
6:32-34, 1995.
lopathy in a cat, Vet Rec 127:586, 1990.
160. Hart KA, et al: Successful resolution of cryptococcal
182.
Vidal E, Montoliu P, Anor S, et al: A novel spongiform
meningitis and optic neuritis in an adult horse with
1 oral
degeneration of the grey matter in the brain of a kitten,
fluconazole, J Vet Intern Med 22:1436-1440, 2008.
J Comp Pathol 131:98, 2004.
161. Greene RT, Troy GC: Coccidioidomycosis in 48 cats: a
 183. Meinkoth JH, et al: Morphologic and molecular evidence
retrospective study [1984-1993), JVet Intern Med 2:86-
 of a dual species ehrlichial infection in a dog presenting
91, 1995
with inflammatory central nervous system disease, J Vet
162. Clinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD: Disseminated
Intern Med 12:389-393, 1989.
histoplasmosis in dogs: 12 cases [1981-1986), J Am Vet
184. Maretzki CH, Fisher DJ, Greene CE: Granulocytic
Med Assoc 193:1443-1447, 1988.
ehrlichiosis and meningitis in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
163. Sharp NJH, Sullivan M: Use ofketoconazole in the treat-
205:1554-1556, 1994.
ment of canine nasal aspergillosis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
185. Neer TM, et al: Consensus statement on ehrlichial dis-
194:782-786, 1989.
ease of small animals from the infectious disease study
164. Miller PE, Miller LM, Schoster JV: Feline blastomycosis:
group of the ACVIM, J Vet Intern Med 16:309-315,
a report of three cases and literature review [196l to
2002.
1988), J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:417-424, 1990.
186. Meric SM: Canine meningitis: a changing emphasis, J Vet
165. Hodges RD, et al: Itraconazole for the treatment of his-
Intern Med 2:26-35, 1988.
toplasmosis in cats, J Vet Intern Med 8:409-413, 1994.
187. Tipold A: Diagnosis of inflammatory and infectious dis-
166. Edwards DF: Actinomycosis and nocardiosis. In Greene
eases of the central nervous system in dogs:a retrospec-
CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3,
tive study, J Vet Intern Med 9:304-314, 1995.
Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier.
188. Granger N, Smith PM, Jeffery ND: Clinical findings and
167. Dubey JP, Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis.
treatment of non-infectious meningoencephalomyelitis
 In Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and
in dogs:a systematic review of 457 published cases from
cat, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier.
1962-2008, Vet J , 2009.
168. Lappin MR, Greene CE, Winston S, et al: Clinical feline
189.Webb AA, Taylor SM, Muir GD: Steroid-responsive
toxoplasmosis:  serologic diagnosis and  therapeutic
meningitis-arteritis in dogs with noninfectious, nonero-
management of 15 cases, J Vet Intern Med 3:139-143,
sive, idiopathic, immune-mediated polyarthritis, J Vet
1989.
Intern Med 16:269-273, 2002.
169. Dubey JP, Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis.
190. Tipold A, Schatzberg SJ: An update on steroid respon-
In Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and
sive meningitis-arteritis, J Small Anim Pract , 1999.
cat, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier.
191. Behr S, Cauzinille L: Aseptic suppurative meningitis in 
170. Fenger CK: PCR-based detection of Sarcocystis neurona:
juvenile boxer dogs: retrospective study of 12 cases, J Am
implications for diagnosis and research. In Proceedings of
Anim Hosp Assoc 42:277-282, 2006.
the 12th American College of Veterinary Internal Medi-
192. Snyder PW, Kazacos EA, Scott-Moncrieff JC, et al:
cine Forum, 550-552, 1994.
Pathologic features of naturally occurring juvenile poly-
171. Fenger CK: Update on the diagnosis and treatment of
arteritis in beagle dogs, Vet Pathol 32:337-345, 1995.
equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM).  In
the
193. Redman J: Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis in the
Proceedings of the 13th ACVIM Forum, DeNovo R,
Nova Scotia duck tolling retriever, Vet Rec 151:712, 2002.
Hoeppner Ck eds. Lake Buena Vista, FL, 597-599, 1995.
194. Penderis ML, et al: Steroid responsive meningitis-arte-
172. Murray KO, Holmes KC, Hanlon CA: : Rabies in vac-
ritis: a prospective study of potential disease markers,
cinated dogs and cats in the United States, 1997-2001, J
prednisolone treatment, and long-term outcome in 20
Am Vet Med Assoc 235:691-695, 2009.
dogs [2006-2008), J Vet Intern Med 23:862-870, 2009.
173. Porter MB, et al: West Nile virus encephalomyelitis in
195.1
Bathen-Noethen A, Carlson R, Menzel D, et al: Con-
horses: 46 cases [2001], J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1241-
centrations of acute-phase proteins in dogs with ste-
1247, 2003.
roid responsive meningitis-arteritis, J Vet Intern Med
22:1149-1156, 2008.
484
 PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
196. Munana K, Luttgen PJ: Prognostic factors for dogs with
215. Herrtage ME: Canine fucosidosis, Vet Ann 28:223-227,
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis: 42 cases
1988.
[1982-1996), J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1902-1906,
216. Barker CG, Herrtage ME, Shanahan F, et al: Fucosidosis
1998.
in English springer spaniels: results of a trial screening
197. Demierre S, et al: Correlation between the clinical course
programme, J Small Anim Pract 29[10):623-630, 1988.
of granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis in dogs and
217. Littlewood JD, Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Neuronal
the extent of mast cell infltration, Vet Rec 148:467-472,
storage disease in English springer spaniels, Vet Rec
2001.
112[4):86-87, 1983.
198. Kipar A, Baumgartner W, Vogil C: Immunohistochemi-
218. Skelly BJ, Sargan DR, Winchester BG, et al: Genomic
cal characterization of inflammatory cells in brains of
screening for fucosidosis in English springer spaniels, Am
dogs with granulomatous meningoencephalitis, Vet
J Vet Res 60(6):726-729, 1999.
Pathol 35:43-52, 1998.
219. Smith MO, Wenger DA, Hill SL, et al: Fucosidosis in a
199. Cuddon PA, Smith-Maxie L: Reticulosis of the central
family of American-bred English springer spaniels, J Am 
nervous system in the dog, Compend Contin Educ Pract
Vet Med Assoc 209[12):2088-2090, 1996.
Vet 6:23-29, 1984:32.
220. Berg T, Tollersrud OK, Walkley SU, et al: Purification 
200. Smith JS, deLahunta A, Ris RC: Reticulosis of the visual
of feline lysosomal α-mannosidase, determination of its 
system in a dog, J Small Anim Pract 18:643-652, 1977.
cDNA sequence and identification of a mutation caus-
201. Fliegner RA, Holloway SA, Slocombe RF: Granuloma-
ing α-mannosidosis in Persian cats, Biochem J 328{3]:
tous meningoencephalomyelitis with peripheral nervous
863-870, 1997.
system involvement in a dog, Aust Vet J 84:358-361,
 221. Blakemore WF: A case of mannosidosis in the cat: clini-
2006.
cal and histopathological findings, J Small Anim Pract
202. Braund KG, Vandevelde M, Walker TL, et al: Granulo-
27(7):447-455, 1986.
matous meningoencephalomyelitis in six dogs, J Am Vet
222. Cummings JF, Wood PA, de Lahunta A, et al: The clini-
Med Assoc 172:1195-1200, 1978.
cal and pathologic heterogeneity of feline a-mannosido-
203. Talarico LR, Schatzberg SJ: Idiopathic granulomatous
sis, J Vet Intern Med 2(4):163-170, 1988.
 and necrotising inflammatory disorders of the canine
223. Healy PJ, Harper PA, Dennis JA: Phenotypic variation in
central nervous system: a review and future perspectives,
bovine a-mannosidosis, Res Vet Sci 49(1):82-84, 1990.
J Small Anim Pract , 2009.
224. Maenhout T, Kint JA, Dacremont G, et al: Mannosido-
204. Cuddon PA, Coates JR, Murray M: New treatments
sis in a litter of Persian cats, Vet Rec 122[15):351-354,
for granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis. In the
1988.
Proceedings of the 2Oth ACVIM Forum, Davenport D,
 225. Vandevelde M, Fankhauser R, Bichsel P, et al: Hereditary
Lester GD eds. Dallas, 319-321, 2002.
neurovisceral mannosidosis associated with a-mannosi-
 205. Smith PM, et al: Comparison of two regimens for the
dase deficiency in a family of Persian cats, Acta Neuro-
treatment of meningoencephalomyelitis of unknown eti-
pathol 58(1):64-68, 1982.
ology, J Vet Intern Med 23:520-526, 2009.
226. Embury DH, Jerrett IV: Mannosidosis in Galloway
 206. Zarfoss M, Schatzberg S, Venator K, et al: Combined
calves, Vet Pathol 22[6):548-551, 1985.
cytosine arabinoside and prednisone therapy for menin-
227. Bryan L, Schmutz S, Hodges SD, et al: Bovine b-manno-
goencephalitis of unknown aetiology in 10 dogs, J Small
sidosis: pathologic and genetic findings in Salers calves,
Anim Pract 47:588-595, 2006.
Vet Pathol 30(2):130-139, 1993.
207. Ruslander D, Moore AS, Gliatto JM, et al: Cytosine
228. Shapiro JL, Rostkowski C, Little PB, et al: Caprine
 arabinoside as a single agent for the induction of remis-
b-mannosidosis in kids from an Ontario herd, Can Vet J
sion in canine lymphoma, J Vet Intern Med 8:299-301,
26(5):155-158, 1985.
1994.
229. Cusick PK, Cameron AM, Parker AJ: Canine neuro-
208. Adamo PF, Rylander H, Adams WM: Ciclosporin use
nal glycoproteinosis—Lafora's disease in the dog, J Am
 in multi-drug therapy for meningoencephalomyelitis
Anim Hosp Assoc 12:518-521, 1976.
of unknown aetiology in dogs, J Small Anim Pract 48:
230. Gredal H, Berendt M, Leifsson PS: Progressive myoc-
486-496, 2007.
lonus epilepsy in a beagle, J Small Anim Pract 44(11]:
209. Coates JR, Barone G, Dewey CW, et al: Procarbazine as
511-514, 2003.
adjunctive therapy for treatment of dogs with presump-
231. Hall DG, Steffens WL, Lassiter L: Lafora bodies asso-
tive antemortem diagnosis of granulomatous meningo-
ciated with neurologic signs in a cat, Vet Pathol 35(3):
      5
218-220, 1998.
Med 21:100-106, 2007.
232. Jian Z, Alley MR, Cayzer J, et al: Lafora's disease in an
210. Schatzberg SJ: Idiopathic granulomatous and necrotiz-
epileptic Basset hound, N Z Vet J 38(2):75-79, 1990.
ing inflammatory disorders of the canine central ner-
233. Kaiser E, Krauser K, Schwartz-Porsche D: Lafora dis-
vous system, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40:
ease [progressive myoclonus epilepsy) in the basset
101-120, 2010.
hound. Early diagnosis by muscle biopsy, Tierarztl Prax
21l. Levine JM, et al: Epidemiology of necrotizing meningo-
19(3):290-295, 1991.
encephalitis in pug dogs, J Vet Intern Med 22:961-968,
234. Moreau PM, Vallat Jm, Hugon J, et al: Lafora's disease
2008.
in basset hounds. In the Proceedings of the 8th ACVIM 
212. Higginbotham MJ, Kent M, Glass EN: Noninfectious 
Forum, McGuirk SM ed. Washington DC, 1045-1049,
inflammatory central nervous system diseases in dogs,
1990.
Compend Contin Edue Pract Vet 29:488-497, 2007.
235. Webb AA, McMillan C, Cullen CL, et al: Lafora disease
213. Young BD, et al: Magnetic resonance imaging charac-
as a cause of visually exacerbated myoclonic attacks in a
teristics of necrotizing meningoencephalitis in pug dogs,
dog, Can Vet J 50(9):963-967, 2009.
J Vet Intern Med 23:527-535, 2009.
236. Brix AE, Howerth EW, McConkie-Rosell A, et al: Gly-
214. Windsor RC, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid eosinophilia in
cogen storage disease type Ia in two littermate Maltese
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:274-281, 2009
puppies, Vet Pathol 32(5):460-465, 1995.
CHAPTER 15  Systemic or Multifocal Signs
485
237. Bardens JW, Bardens GW, Bardens B: Clinical observa-
257. Muller G, Alldinger S, Moritz A, et al: GMl-gangliosi-
tions on a Von Gierke-like syndrome in puppies, Allied
dosis in Alaskan huskies: clinical and pathologic findings,
Vet 32:4-7, 1961.
Vet Pathol 38[3):281-290, 2001.
238. Walvoort HC, Koster JF, Reuser AJ: Heterozygote detec-
258. Shell LG, Potthoff AI, Carithers R, et al: Neuronal-vis-
tion in a family of Lapland dogs with a recessively inher-
ceral GM; gangliosidosis in Portuguese water dogs, J Vet
ited metabolic disease: canine glycogen storage disease
Intern Med 3[1):1-7, 1989.
type I1, Res Vet Sei 38[2):174-178, 1985.
259.
Alroy J, Orgad U, DeGasperi R, et al: Canine GMI-
239. Walvoort HC, Slee RG, Koster JF: Canine glycogen stor-
gangliosidosis. A clinical, morphologic, histochemical,
age disease type II. A biochemical study of an acid alpha-
and biochemical comparison of two different models,
glucosidase-defcient Lapland dog, Biochim Biophys
Am J Pathol 140(3):675-689, 1992.
Acta 715[1):63-69, 1982.
260.
 Yamato O, Ochiai K, Masuoka Y, et al: GMl gangliosido-
240. Walvoort HC: Glycogen storage disease type II in the
sis in Shiba dogs, Vet Rec 146[17):493-496, 2000.
Lapland dog, Vet Q 7(3):187-190, 1985.
261.
 Yamato O, Kobayashi A, Satoh H, et al: Comparison of
241. Sandstrom B, Westman J, Ockerman PA: Glycogenosis
polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
of the central nervous system in the cat, Acta Neuro-
polymorphism assay and enzyme assay for diagnosis of
pathol 14:194-200, 1969.
GMl-gangliosidosis in Shiba dogs, J Vet Diagn Invest
242. Dennis JA, Healy PJ, Reichmann KG: Genotyping
16[4):299-304, 2004.
Brahman cattle for generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J
262. Read DH, Harrington DD, Keenan T'W, et al: Neuronal-
80(5):286-291, 2002.
visceral GMl gangliosidosis in a dog with beta-galactosi-
243. Reichmann KG, Twist JO, Thistlethwaite EJ: Clini-
dase deficiency, Science USA 194[4263):442-445, 1976.
cal, diagnostic and biochemical features of generalised
263. Murnane RD, hern-Rindell AJ, Prieur DJ: Ovine GM1
glycogenosis type II and Brahman cattle, Aust Vet J
gangliosidosis, Small Rumin Res 6(1-2):109-118, 1991.
70(11):405-408, 1993.
264. Donnelly WJC, Sheahan BJ: Bovine, GM1 gangliosidosis:
244. Dennis JA, Moran C, Healy PJ:The bovine α-glucosidase
 an inborn lysosomal disease, Vet Sci Commun 1[1):65-
gene: coding region, genomic structure, and mutations
74, 1977.
that cause bovine generalized glycogenosis, Mammn
265. Baker HJ Jr, Lindsey JR, McKhann GM, et al: Neuronal
Genome 11(3):206-212, 2000.
GMl gangliosidosis in a Siamese cat with beta-galactosi-
245. Dennis JA, Healy PJ: Genotyping shorthorn cattle for
dase defciency, Science 174[4011):838-839, 1971.
generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J 79[11):773-775,
266. De Maria R, Divari S, Bo S, et al: Beta-galactosidase def-
2001.
ciency in a Korat cat: a new form of feline GMl-ganglio-
246. Manktelow BW, Hartley WJ: Generalized glycogen stor-
sidosis, Acta Neuropathol 96[3):307-314, 1998.
age disease in sheep, J Comp Pathol 85[1):139-145,
267. Dial SM, Mitchell T'W, LeCouteur RA, et al: GM-gan-
1975.
gliosidosis (type I) in three cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
247. Gregory BL, Shelton GD, Bali DS, et al: Glycogen stor-
30(4):355-360, 1994.
age disease type Illa in curly-coated retrievers, J Vet
268. Singer HS, Cork LC: Canine (
GM2 gangliosidosis:
Intern Med 2i[1):40-46, 2007.
morphological and biochemical analysis, Vet Pathol
248. Rafiquzzaman M, Svenkerud R, Strande A, et al: Gly-
26[2):114-120, 1989.
cogenosis in the dog, Acta Veterinaria Scand 17(2):196-
269.1
 Bernheimer H, Karbe E: Morphological and neurochem-
209, 1976.
249. Coates JR, Paxton R, Cox NR, et al:A case presentation
the dog. Evidence of a GM2-gangliosidosis, Acta Neuro-
and discussion of Type IV glycogen storage disease in a
pathol 16:243-261, 1970.
Norwegian forest cat, Prog Vet Neurol 7(1):5-11, 1996.
270.1
Neuwelt EA, Johnson WG, Blank NK, et al: Character-
250. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Glycogen storage
ization of a new model of Gmz-gangliosidosis (Sandhoff s
disease type IV: inherited deficiency of branching enzyme
disease) in Korat cats, J Clin Invest 76[2):482-490, 1985.
activity in cats, Pediatr Res 32(6):719-725, 1992
271. Yamato O, Matsunaga S, Takata K, et al: GM2-
251. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van winkle TJ, et al: Familial glycogen
 gangliosidosis variant O (Sandhoff-like disease) in a fam-
storage disease type IV (GSD IV) in Norwegian forest
ily of Japanese domestic cats, Vet Rec 155(23):739-744,
cats (NWFC). In the Proceedings of the 8th ACVIM
2004.
Forum, McGuirk SM ed. Washington DC, 1129, 1990.
272. Bradbury AM, Morrison NE, Hwang M, et al: Neurode-
252. Johnstone AC, MeSporran KD, Kenny JE, et al: Myophos-
 generative lysosomal storage disease in European Bur-
phorylase deficiency (glycogen storage disease Type V) in
mese cats with hexosaminidase β-subunit deficiency, Mol
a herd of Charolais cattle in New Zealand: confirmation
Genet Metab 97[1):53-59, 2009.
by PCR-RFLP testing. N Z Vet J 52(6):404-408, 2004.
 273. Kosanke SD, Pierce KR, Bay WW: Clinical and biochem-
253. Smith BF, Stedman H, Rajpurohit Y, et al: Molecular
ical abnormalities in porcine GMZ-gangliosidosis, Vet
basis of canine muscle type phosphofructokinase def-
Pathol 15(6):685-699, 1978.
ciency, J Biol Chem 271(33):20070-20074, 1996.
274. Cummings JF, Wood PA, Wallley SU, et al: GMZ gan-
254. Harvey JW, Calderwood MM, Gropp KE, et al: Polysac-
gliosidosis in a Japanese spaniel, Acta Neuropathol
charide storage myopathy in canine phosphofructoki-
67(3/4):247-253, 1985.
nase deficiency [type Vll glycogen storage disease), Vet
275. Ishikawa Y, Li SC, Wood PA, et al: Biochemical basis
Pathol 27(1):1-8, 1990.
of type AB Gmz gangliosidosis in a Japanese spaniel, J
255. Bosshard NU, Hubler M, Arnold S, et al: Spontaneous
Neurochem 48(3):860-864, 1987.
mucolipidosis in a cat: an animal model of human I-cell
276. Knowles K, Alroy J, Castagnaro M, et al: Adult-onset
disease, Vet Pathol 33[1):1-13, 1996.
lysosomal storage disease in a Schipperke dog: clinical,
256. Giger U, T'cherneva E, Caverly J, et al: A missense point
morphological and biochemical studies, Acta Neuro-
mutation in N-acetylglucosamine-l-phosphotransferase
pathol 86[3):306-312, 1993.
causes mucolipidosis II in domestic shorthair cats, J Vet
277.1
Hartley WJ, Blakemore WF: Neurovisceral glucocer-
Intern Med 20:781, 2006.
ebroside storage [Gaucher's disease) in a dog, Vet Pathol
10(3):191-201, 1973.
486
PART Il Clinical Problems: Signs and Symptoms
278. Water NS, Jolly RD, Farrow BRH: Canine Gaucher
301. Wilkerson MJ, Lewis DC, Marks SL, et al: Clinical and
disease: the enzymic defect, Aust J Exp Biol Med Sci
morphologic features of mucopolysaccharidosis type II
57(5):551-554, 1979.
in a dog: naturally occurring model of Hunter syndrome,
279. Jolly RD, Wallkley SU: Lysosomal storage disease of
Vet Pathol 35[3):230-233, 1998.
animals: an essay in comparative pathology, Vet Pathol
302. Jolly RD, Ehrlich PC, Franklin RJM, et al: Histological
34(6):527-548, 1997.
diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis IILA in a wire-haired
280. Selcer ES, Selcer RR: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in
dachshund, Vet Rec 148[18):564-567, 2001.
two West Highland white terriers and one Pomeranian,
303.
 Jolly RD, Allan FJ, Collett MG, et al: Mucopolysacchari-
Compend Contin Ed Pract Vet 6(7):621-624, 1984.
dosis IILA (Sanfilippo syndrome) in a New Zealand Hunt-
281. Victoria T, Rafi MA, Wenger DA: Cloning of the canine
away dog with ataxia, N Z Vet J 48(5):144-148, 2000.
GALC cDNA and identification of the mutation causing
304. Jolly RD, Johnstone AC, Norman EJ, et al: Pathology
globoid cell leukodystrophy in West Highland white and
of mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA in Huntaway dogs, Vet
Cairn terriers, Genomics 33[3):457-462, 1996.
Pathol 44(5):569-578, 2007.
282. Wenger DA, Victoria T, Rafi MA, et al: Globoid cell leu-
305.
 Yogalingam G, Pollard T, Gliddon B, et al: Identification
kodystrophy in Cairn and West Highland white terriers
of a mutation causing mucopolysaccharidosis type IILA
90[1):138-142, 1999.
in New Zealand Huntaway dogs, Genomics 79(2):150-
283. Johnson GR, Oliver JE Jr, Selcer R: Globoid cell leu-
153, 2002.
kodystrophy in a beagle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 167(5):
306. Ellinwood NM, Wang P, Skeen T, et al:A model of muco-
380-384, 1975.
polysaccharidosis IHIB (Sanfilippo syndrome type IIB):
284. Zaki FA, Kay WJ: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in a min-
N-acetyl-alpha-D-glucosaminidase deficiency in Schip-
iature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 163(3):248-250,
perke dogs, J Inherit Metab Dis 26(5):489-504, 2003.
1973.
307.1
Karageorgos L, Hill B, Bawden MJ, et al: Bovine
285. Luttgen PJ, Braund KG, Storts RW: Globoid cell leu-
mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIB, J Inherit Metab Dis
kodystrophy in a basset hound, J Small Anim Pract 24:
30(3):358-364, 2007.
153-160, 1983.
308. Hoard HM, Leipprandt JR, Cavanagh KT, et al: Determi-
286. McDonnell JJ, Carmichael KP, McGraw RA, et al: Pre-
      
liminary characterization of globoid cell leukodystrophy
charidosis IIID, J Vet Diagn Invest 10(2):181-183, 1998.
in Irish Setters, J Vet Intern Med 14(3):339, 2000.
309. Jones MZ, Alroy J, Boyer PJ, et al: Caprine mucopolysac-
287. McGraw RA, Carmichael KP: Molecular basis of glo-
charidosis-lID: clinical, biochemical, morphological and
boid cell leukodystrophy in Irish setters, Vet J 171(2):
immunohistochemical  characteristics,  J  Neuropathol
370-372, 2006.
Exp Neurol 57(2):148-157, 1998.
288. Johnson KH: Globoid leukodystrophy in the cat, J Am
310. Fischer A, Carmichael KP, Munnell JF, et al: Sulfamidase
Vet Med Assoc 157[12):2057-2064, 1970.
deficiency in a family of dachshunds: a canine model of
289. Pritchard DH, Naphtine DV, Sinclair AJ: Globoid cell
mucopolysaccharidosis ILA (Sanflippo A), Pediatr Res
leukodystrophy in polled Dorset sheep, Vet Pathol
44(1):74-82, 1998.
17:399-405, 1980.
311. Neer TM, Dial SM, Pechman R, et al: Mucopolysac-
290. Sigurdson CJ, Basaraba RJ, Mazzaferro EM, et al: Glo-
charidosis VI in a miniature pinscher, J Vet Intern Med
boid cell-like leukodystrophy in a domestic longhaired
9[6):429-433, 1995.
cat, Vet Pathol 39:494-496, 2002.
312. Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M: A case of mucopolysac-
291. Blakemore WF: Neurolipidoses: examples of lysosomal
charidosis VI in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19(6):
storage diseases, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
891-896, 1983.
10(1):81-90, 1980.
313. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, et al: The pathology
292.Wenger DA, Sattler M, Kudoh T, et al: Niemann-
of the feline model of mucopolysaccharidosis Vl, Am J
Pick disease: a genetic model in Siamese cats, Science
Pathol 101(3):657-674, 1980.
208:1471-1473, 1980.
314. Ray J, Haskins ME, Ray K: Molecular diagnostic tests for
 293. Yamagami T, Umeda M, Kamiya S, et al: Neurovisceral
ascertainment of genotype at the mucopolysaccharidosis
sphingomyelinosis in a Siamese cat, Acta Neuropathol
type V11 locus in dogs, Am J Vet Res 59(9):1092-1095,
79(3):330-332, 1989.
1998.
294. Baker HJ, Wood PA, Wenger DA, et al: Sphingomyelin
315. Haskins ME, Otis EJ, Hayden JE, et al: Hepatic stor-
lipidosis in a cat, Vet Pathol 24(5):386-39i, 1987.
age of glycosaminoglycans in feline and canine mod-
295. Somers KL, Royals MA, Carstea ED, et al: Mutation
els of mucopolysaccharidoses I, Vl, and VIl, Vet Pathol
analysis of feline Niemann-Pick Cl disease, Mol Genet
29(2):112-119, 1992.
Metab 79(2):99-103, 2003.
316. Awano T, Katz ML, O'Brien DP, et al: A frame shift
296. Saunders GK, Wenger DA: Sphingomyelinase deficiency
mutation in canine TPPl (the ortholog of human CLN2)
(Niemann-Pick disease) in a Hereford calf Vet Pathol
in a juvenile dachshund with neuronal ceroid lipofusci-
45[2):201-202, 2008.
nosis, Mol Genet Metab 89[3):254-260, 2006.
297. Lowenthal AC, Cummings JF, Wenger DA, et al: Feline
317. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Riis RC, et al: Neuropatho-
sphingolipidosis resembling Niemann-Pick disease type
logic changes in a young adult Tibetan terrier with sub-
C, Acta Neuropathol 81(2):189-197, 1990.
clinical neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Prog Vet Neurol
298. Kuwamura M, Awakura T, Shimada A, et al: Type C
1(3):301-309, 1990.
Niemann-Pick disease in a boxer dog, Acta Neuropathol
318. Katz ML, Narfstrom K, Johnson GS, et al: Assessment
85(3):345-348, 1993.
of retinal function and characterization of lysosomal
299. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, et al: The pathol-
storage body accumulation in the retinas and brains of
ogy of the feline model of mucopolysaccharidosis I, Am
Tibetan terriers with ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Am J Vet Res
J Pathol 112(1):27-36, 1983.
66:67-76, 2005.
300. Shull RM, Munger RJ, Spellacy E, et al: Canine a-L-
319. Melville SA, Wilson CL, Chiang CS, et al: A mutation
iduronidase deficiency. A model of mucopolysaccharidosis
in canine CLN5 causes neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in
1, Am J Pathol 109[2):244-248, 1982.
border collie dogs, Genomics 86:287-294, 2005.
CHAPTER 15
6Systemic or Multifocal Signs
487
320. Taylor RM, Farrow BR: Ceroid-lipofuscinosis in border
337. Jolly RD, Sutton RH, Smith RIE, et al: Ceroid-lipofusci-
collie dogs, Acta Neuropathol 75(6):627-631, 1988.
nosis in miniature Schnauzer dogs, Aust Vet J 75[1):67,
321. Harper PA, Walker KH, Healy PJ, et al: Neurovisceral
1997.
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in blind Devon cattle, Acta Neuro-
338. Modenato M, Marchetti V, Barsotti G, et al: Neuro-
pathol 75(6):632-636, 1988.
nal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Chihuahua, Annali della
322. O'Brien DP, Katz ML: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
Facolt+a di Medicina Veterinaria di Pisa 60:215-224,
in 3 Australian shepherd littermates, J Vet Intern Med
2007.
22[2):472-475, 2008.
339. Sisk DB, Levesque DC, Wood PA, et al: Clinical and
323. Tammen I, Houweling PJ, Frugier T, et al: A missense
pathologic features of ceroid lipofuscinosis in two Aus-
mutation [c.184C > T) in ovine CLN6 causes neuronal
tralian cattle dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 197[3):361-364,
 ceroid lipofuscinosis in Merino sheep whereas affected
1990.
South Hampshire sheep have reduced levels of CLN6
340. Goebel HH, Bilzer T, Dahme E, et al: Morphological stud-
mRNA, Biochim Biophys Acta 1762[10):898-905, 2006.
ies in canine (Dalmatian) neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis,
324.Cook RW, Jolly RD, Palmer DN, et al: Neuronal
Am J Med Gen (Suppl 5):127-139, 1988.
ceroid lipofuscinosis in Merino sheep, Aust Vet J 80(5):
341. Vandevelde M, Fatzer R: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis
292-297, 2002.
in older dachshunds, Vet Pathol 17(6):686-692, 1980.
325. Mayhew IG, Jolly RD, Pickett BT, et al: Ceroid-lipofusci-
342. Bildfell R, Matwichuk C, Mitchell S, et al: Neuronal
nosis [Batten's disease): pathogenesis of blindness in the
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a cat, Vet Pathol 32[5):485-488,
ovine model, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 11:273-290,
1995.
1985.
 343. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: An adult case of canine
326. Katz ML, Khan S, Awano T, et al: A mutation in the
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Acta Neuropathol 39:43-
CLN8 gene in English setter dogs with neuronal ceroid-
51, 1977.
lipofuscinosis, Biochem Biophys Res Commun 327:
344. Kuwamura M, Nakagawa M, Nabe M, et al: Neuronal
541-547, 2005.
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Japanese domestic shorthair
327. Koppang N: The English setter with ceroid-lipofusci
cat, J Vet Med Sci 71(5):665-667, 2009.
nosis: a suitable model for the juvenile type of ceroid-
 345. Green PD, Little PB: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscin storage
lipofuscinosis, Am J Med Genet Suppl 5:117-126, 1988.
in Siamese cats, Can J Comp Med 38[2):207-212, 1974.
328. Awano T, Katz ML, O'Brien DP, et al: A mutation in
346. Harper PA, Walker KH, Healy PJ, et al: Neurovisceral
the cathepsin D gene (CTSD) in American bulldogs
ceroid-lipofuscinosisinblindDevoncattle,ActaNeuropathol
with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Mol Genet Metab
75[6):632-636, 1988.
87[4):341-348, 2006.
347. Fiske RA, Storts RW: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in
329. Evans J, Katz ML, Levesque D, et al: A variant form of
Nubian goats, Vet Pathol 25[2):171-173, 1988.
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in American bulldogs, J
 348. Umemura T, Sato H, Goryo M, et al: Generalized lipo-
Vet Intern Med 19(1):44-51, 2005.
fuscinosis in a dog, Jpn J Vet Sci 47[4):673-677, 1985.
330. Tyynela J, Sohar I, Sleat DE, et al: A mutation in the
349. Jolly RD, Palmer DN, Studdert VP, et al: Canine ceroid-
ovine cathepsin D gene causes a congenital lysosomal
lipofuscinoses: a review and classification, J Small Anim
storage disease
with profound
 neurodegeneration,
Pract 35:299-306, 1994.
EMBO J 19(12):2786-2792, 2000.
331. Olby N, Blot S, Thibaud JL, et al: Cerebellar cortical
animals; an essay in comparative pathology, Vet Pathol
degeneration in adult American Staffordshire terriers, J
34[6):527-548, 1997.
Vet Intern Med 18[2):201-208, 2004.
351. Pickett JP, Lindey DM, Boosinger TR, et al: Stationary
332. Abitbol M, Thibaud JL, Olby NJ, et al: A canine arylsul-
night blindness in a collie, Prog Vet Comp Ophthalmol
fatase G (ARSG) mutation leading to a sulfatase defi-
1(4):303-308, 1991.
ciency is associated with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis,
352. Pickett P, Dyer K, Saunders O, et al: Ocular manifes-
Proceed Nat Acad Sci 107:14775-14780, 2010.
tation of ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a spitz dog, Vet Pathol
 333. Jolly RD: Comparative biology of the neuronal ceroid-
29:469, 1992.
lipofuscinoses: an overview, Am J Med Genet 57:307-
353. Edwards JF, Storts RW, Joyce JR, et al: Juvenile-onset
311, 1995.
 neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in Rambouillet sheep, Vet
334. Appleby EC, Longstaffe JA, Bell FR: Ceroid-lipofusci-
Pathol 31[1):48-54, 1994.
 nosis in two Saluki dogs, J Comp Pathol 92[3):375-380.
354. Woods PR, Storts RW, Shelton M, et al: Neuronal ceroid
1982.
lipofuscinosis in Rambouillet sheep: characterization of
335. Cho DY, Leipold HW, Rudolph R: Neuronal ceroidosis
the clinical disease, J Vet Intern Med 8[5]:370-375, 1994.
[ceroid-lipofuscinosis) in a blue heeler dog, Acta Neura-
355. LeGonidec G, Kuberski T, Daynes P, et al: A neurologic
pathol 69[1-2):161-164, 1986.
disease ofhorses in New Caledonia, Aust Vet J 57:1944-
336. Cantile C, Buonaccorsi A, Pepe V, et al: Juvenile neu-
1945, 1981.
ronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis [Batten's disease] in a poodle
356. Url A, Bauder B, Thalhammer J, et al: Equine neuronal
dog, Prog Vet Neurol 7(3):82-87, 1996.
ceroid lipofuscinosis, Acta Neuropathol 10l:410-414,
2001.
APPENDIX
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-
Associated Neurologic and Muscular
Diseases in Domestic Animals
BOVINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
Aberdeen angus 
 Cerebellar degeneration/abiotrophy
8
S
1.716
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
S
2. 704.708
Epilepsy
13
Y
3
Mannosidosis
8.15
Y
4-6. 787
 Angus & shorthom
Hypomyelination
10
Y
7.8
Ayrshire
Cerebellar degeneration
8
Y
9.10
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
10
Cerebellar malformation (Dandy Walker)
8
S
701-703
 Ayrshire cross
 Atlanto-occipital malformation 
7
11
Beefmaster
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
12
 Neuronal lipodystrophy
15
 Brahman
Glycogenosis (type Il!
7.15
V
13. 803-805
Myasthenia gravis (congenital!
7
V
1045
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
14
Brown Swiss
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
15-17
 Degenerative myeloencephalopathy
7
S
15-17. 899
Epilepsy
13
18
 Spinal muscular atrophy
7
934-936
Charolais
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
19. 710. 715
Leukodystrophy
7.15
6. 20-23
 Cerebellar degeneration and epilepsy
13
6
Glycogenosis (type V)
7.15
S
813.1009
Myelodysplasia
6
24. 25
Charolais cross
Atlanto-occipital malformation 
7
11
Devon
 Atlanto-occipital malformation 
了
26
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
12.27
Galloway
Mannosidosis
15
28
Guermsey
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
29
Hereford 
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30
Cerebellar hypoplasia
6, 30, 31, 705, 709
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
6
Epilepsy
13
32
Hydrocephalus
12
33-35
488
APPENDIX 11
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
489
BOVINE DISEASES-cont'd
Breed
Disease
Ch apter
Inherited
References
Hypomyelination
8. 10
8. 36
 Neuronal degeneration
7
Y
37.38
Gangliosidosis (Niemann-Pick)
8.15
S
843
Spinocerebellar degeneration 
7
37
Holstein-Friesian
Atlanto-occipital malformation 
>
39. 40
 Atlantoaxial luxation
7
S
39
Cerebellar brainstem malformation 
8
41
 Cerebellar degeneration/abiotrophy
8
T
6, 30, 42. 712-714
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
43. 711
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
8.15
S
879
Gangliosidosis GM
8.15
4, 44-47. 824
Hypomyelination 
8. 10 
555
 Myopathy of diaphragmatic muscles
V
556
 Spinal dysraphism
6
48
 Spongiform degeneration 
12
49
Vertebral malformation 
6
U
647
Jersey
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
6. 721.722
 Cerebellar hypoplasia/abiotrophy
8
S
706.707
 Hypomyelination 
8. 10
V
8.50
Limousin
Epilepsy
13
6
Limousin cross
 Neuronal degeneration 
15
V
51. 52. 717
Murray grey
 Dysmyelinopathy 
7.15
V
53.54
Mannosidosis
15
Y
5
Norwegian red poll 
Pelvic limb paralysis
6
V
52
 Polled Hereford 
 Congenital myoclonus (neuraxial edema)
10.15
Y
55-59
 Neuronal degeneration
8. 15 
Y
60. 722
 Polled shorthorn 
Congenital myoclonus (neuraxial edema)
10. 15
Y
557
Red Danish
 Congenital paralysis
Y
61
Salers
B-Mannosidosis
15
Y
62. 63. 790
 Shorthorm 
 Cerebellar degeneration
8.15
Y
6
 Cerebellar hypoplasia 
8
Y
6, 30, 64. 65
Glycogenosis
7.8.15
Y
6, 66, 67. 806
Hydrocephalus 
12
Y
33. 34.68
Hypomyelination
8. 10 
8.36
 Retinal dysplasia
11
Y
69
Simmental
Neuronal degeneration
15
Y
51.52
 Spongiform myelopathy
558
Swedish red
Epilepsy
13
70
Various
 Arthrogryposis
7
71
 Cerebellar brainstem malformation
8
72
Myelodysplasia
6
73.74
 Neurofibromatosis
15
75
Y, Yes; S, suspected.
CANINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
 Inherited
References
Afghan hound
Myelopathy
6
Y
76-79
Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69
Airedale terrier
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
80-82
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30. 660
Congenital myasthenia gravis
7
Y
83
Akita
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30. 665
Congenital vestibular disease
8
S
84
Deafness
9
Y
730
Glycogenosis (type Ill!
7.15
S
809.1006
 Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
U
1036
Aaskan husky
Encephalomyelopathy
Y
900
Gangliosidosis GM1
15
S
818
 Aaskan malamute
Muscular dystrophy
7
S
985
Peripheral neuropathy
7
Y
552. 942
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69
American bulldog
Ceroid lipofuscinosis 
15
S
868. 869
 Australian cattle dog
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
V
85. 870
Continued
490
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
CANINE DISEASES-cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
 Inherited   References
 Dermatomyositis 
7
551
Myotonia congenita
10
Y
752
 Portosystemic shunt 
13. 15
559
Australian heeler
Deafness
9
Y
86
Australian kelpie
Cerebellar degeneration
8
Y
551. 656
 Australian shepherd dog
Chorioretinal dysplasia 
71
Y
69
Ceroid lipofuscinosis (CLN 6)
8.15
862
Deafness
9
86.87
Basenji
Coloboma
11
Y
69
Basset hound
Cervical malformation 
7
S
88-90
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
15
S
91
Glycoproteinosis (LaFlora's disease)
13.15
S
92.795-797
 Bavarian mountain dog
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
S
666
Beagle
Agenesis vemis cerebellum 
8
S
93. 654. 655
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30, 84, 657. 658
 Congenital vestibular disease
8
94.95
Deafness
9
745
Epilepsy
13
Y
81. 96-105
Gangliosidosis GM
15
Y
45. 46.106
 Globoid cell leu kodystrophy 
15
S
107
Glycoproteinosis (LaFlora's disease)
13. 15
S
92, 96. 97. 108. 793
 Necrotizing vasculitis
15
Y
553
 Retinal degeneration
11
V
69
 Retinal dysplasia
11
69
Beagle-schnauzer cross
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
551
 Bedlington terrier 
Retinal dysplasia
11
Y
69. 81.109
Belgian sheepdog
Muscular dystrophy
7
Y
573. 984
(Groenendaeler shepherd dog)
Belgian Tervuren
Epilepsy
13
Y
81. 98. 382. 765. 767
 Belgian Malinois
Lumbosacral stenosis
6
S
646
 Berm running dog
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30
 Bernese mountain dog 
Aggression
110
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
84. 667. 668
Epilepsy
13
S
768
Hypomyelination 
10
111
Leukodystrophy
15
560
Malignant histiocytosis 
15
112
 Necrotizing vasculitis
561
 Bichon frise
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
 Blue heeler
Ceroid lipofuscinosis 
15
113.114
 Bluetick coonhound 
 Globoid leukodystrophy
15
81.115
Border collie
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
116. 669
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
84, 117. 118, 861
Deafness
9
87
Epilepsy
13
S
770
 Retinal degeneration
11
69. 81. 109
 Sensory neuropathy
7. 14 
119. 948
Borzoi
Cervical vertebral malformation
7
120
Boston terrier
Deafness
9
Y
86
Gliomas
12
75.121.122
Hemivertebrae
6
人
81,123,124
Hydrocephalus
12
P
125.126
Muscular dystrophy
7
S
996
Myelodysplasia
6
Y
123
 Pituitary tumors
12. 15
S
75
Vermian hypoplasia
8
136
 Bouvier des Flandres
Laryngeal paralysis
9
Y
127.128
 Muscular dystrophy
7
S
1001.1002
Boxer
Axonopathy
1
Y
129, 130, 901, 902, 954
Deafness
Y
86
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
615
 Ependymoma
12
75
Seizures
13
H
763. 778
Glioma 
12
S
75.121.122
Myositis (immune mediated)
7
U
976. 968
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
491
 CANINE DISEASES- cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
 Inherited   References
 Pituitary tumors
12
S
75
Sensory neuronopathy
1
Y
551
 Sphingomyelinosis
15
562
 Spondylosis deformans
6
S
622
Briard
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69.109
Brittany
Cerebellar degeneration
8
131. 671. 672
Muscular dystrophy
7
563.995
 Motor neuropathy 
7
Y
132. 133
 Retinal dysplasia 
11
69
Sensory ganglioradiculitis
14
551
 Bull mastiff
Cerebellar and neuronal degeneration
8
Y
134
 Cervical vertebral malformation
7
135
Leukodystrophy
7
U
889
Bull terrier
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
136
Deafness
9
人
81. 87. 137. 138
Hyperkinesis
10
139
Laryngeal paralysis
9
551
 Cairn terrier
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
8
 Globoid cell leukodystrophy
7.8.15
81. 140-144. 834. 835
Hydrocephalus 
12
P
126
Neuronal degeneration (multisystem)
7.8
S
145.
146. 692. 904. 905
Cardigan WWelsh corgi
 Degenerative myelopathy
7
611
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69. 81
Catahoula
Deafness
9
551.730
Cavalier King Charles spaniel
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
7
Y
908-911. 913-916
 Muscular hypertonicity
7.10
Y
147-149
Muscular dystrophy
7
S
990
Chesapeake Bay retriever
 Degenerative myelopathy
6
604. 611. 612
 Retinal degeneration
11
69
Chihuahua
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
V
873
Hydrocephalus
12
P
81,126,150
Muscular dystrophy
7
S
696
Neuroaxonal dystrophy 
7
151
 Chinese crested dog
 Multisystem degeneration 
8
691
 Chondrodystrophic breeds 
Intervertebral disk disease
6
S
152-158. 601
Chow chow
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
S
30.159
Hypomyelination
10
Y
161-164
Myotonia congenita
10
165-171
Qumber spaniel
Cerebellar degeneration
15
30
Mitochondrial myopathy
7
551, 1017.1019
Cocker spaniel
Aggression
110. 172
Cerebellar degeneration 
8.15
8
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis 
15
173
Congenital vestibular disease
8
S
84.94
Deafness
9
S
86
Esophageal hypomotility 
Y
174.175
 Facial paralysis
9
S
176.177
Hydrocephalus 
12
81
Mitochondrial myopathy
7
Y
1046
 Muscular dystrophy
7
969
Myopathy (lipid storage)
7
1020
Myotonia congenita
10
S
753
Neuronal degeneration 
7
178
 Phosphofructokinase deficiency
7
Y
564, 814, 815, 1010
myopathy
 Portosystemic shunt 
12
565
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69. 81.109
Retinal dysplasia 
11
Y
69. 109
Seizures
13
H
763.778
Collie
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30.179.180
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
S
870.
 Chorioretinal dysplasia
11
Y
69.109
 Collie eye syndrome
11
Y
69.109
Deafness
9
181.729
Dermatomyositis
7
Y
167. 182-187. 977
Continued
492
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
CANINE DISEASES-cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited  
Referen ces
Seizures
13
H
763. 778
Myelodysplasia
6
188
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
Y
180
Neuronal degeneration 
7
189
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
109
Sensory ganglioradiculitis
10
551
Corgi
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis 
15
566
Corgi, Pembroke
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
603. 610. 611
Dermatomyositis 
7
U
978
Muscular dystrophy
7
S
969
 Coton de Tulear
Cerebellar degeneration/abiotrophy
8
S
659. 673
Corgi, Welsh
Sensory ganglioradiculitis
7
551
Curly coated retriever
Glycogenosis (type Ill!
7
S
808
 Czech spotted dog
Epilepsy
13
Y
98. 288
Dachshund
Cerebellar hypoplasia 
8
136
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
190
Epilepsy
13
191
Esophageal hypomotility
13
174.175
Glycoproteinosis (LaFlora's disease)
15
S
798
Dachshund, dappled
Deafness
9
730
 Dachshund, longhaired
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
192.858
 Sensory neuropathy
7
Y
193. 194. 955
 Dachshund, miniature 
Myasthenia gravis (congenital!
7
S
1041
 Dachshund, miniature,
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69. 109
longhaired
Dachshund, wire-haired
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS Ill) 
8.15
845. 852
Dalmatian 
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
566. 874
 Deafness
9
Y
81. 86. 87. 137.138. 181. 195-
200. 730. 739-744. 746. 747
 Globoid cell leukodystrophy 
15
81
Hyperkinesis
10
S
201
Hypomyelination 
10
人
202
Leukodystrophy
7.15
Y
203
Myelodysplasia
6
S
204
Polyneuropathy, laryngeal paralysis 
7.9
567
Doberman pinscher
Aggression
205
Cervical spondylomyelopathy
7
88-90. 206-212. 917. 921. 922
Congenital vestibular disease 
8
84. 94. 95
Deafness
9
213. 731
Distal polyneuropathy
7
214
Hemivertebrae
6
215
Myositis (immune mediated)
7
971-974
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
Y
216-220
Sensory neuropathy/dancing doberman
7
S
221.943
disease
Dogo Argentino
Deafness
9
Y
727.730
 Dolichocephalic breeds 
Meningioma
15
75.222
 Dutch kooiker dog 
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
7
S
577.578. 892
 English bulldog
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
674
Deafness
9
S
86
Hemivertebrae
6
Y
81,123, 124
Hydrocephalus
12
P
81, 125, 126
Myelodysplasia
6
Y
81, 188, 223-225, 649
 Vertebral canal stenosis
6
226
English pointer
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
675
10
Hyperkinesis
Y
227-229
Motor neuropathy
7
S
930
Myopathy
7
1021
Sensory neuropathy
7
Y
81. 194, 230-232
English setter
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
233-236. 866. 867
Deafness
9
Y
86.238
English springer spaniel 
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
551
Epilepsy
13
S
772
Fucosidosis
7.8.15
Y
371-377. 779-783
Gangliosidosis GM
15
Y
239.820
 Myasthenia gravis (congenital)
7
S
1040
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
493
CANINE DISEASES- cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
Referen ces
 Phosphofructokinase deficiency
7
Y
240, 241, 814, 815
myopathy
Polymyopathy, dyserythropoiesis
7
242
Sensory neuropathy
7.14
Y
956
Fnnish harrier
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
Y
30.243
Fnnish spitz 
Epilepsy
13
Y
775
Foxhound 
Deafness
9
Y
81. 244. 723
Myelinopathy
6
S
609
Fox terrier
Axonopathy (central)
7
S
898
Myasthenia gravis (congenital)
7
Y
167. 245, 246. 1044
Deafness
9
81.728
 Spinocerebellar degeneration
7.8
S
81
French bulldog
Hemivertebrae
6
81.123
 French spaniel 
 Sensory neuropathy
7.14
S
957
Gammel Dansk honsehund 
Myasthenia gravis 
7
Y
569.1043
 German shepherd dog
Aggression
S
205
Cerebellar degeneration 
84. 551
Congenital vestibular disease
8
S
84.94. 95. 247
 Degenerative myelopathy 
6
S
248-257, 602-608, 611, 613,
614. 617
Epilepsy
13
Y
81. 98. 270
Esophageal hypomotility 
9
174. 175. 258-260
Giant axonal neuropathy
7
Y
261-265. 944
Glycogenosis (type Ill!
7.15
Y
551.1006
Lumbosacral stenosis
6
S
266-268. 624-646
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
7
1036
Myelodysplasia
6
269
Myopathy (fibrotic)
7
979
Myopathy (mitochondrial)
7
1018
Myositis (masticatory)
7
970
 Peripheral neuropathy
7
570
 Spondylosis deformans 
6
618-624
German shorthaired
Gangliosidosis GM2
15
4. 44-46. 271. 827. 828
pointer
Hemivertebrae
6
272
 Muscular dystrophy 
7
986
Necrotizing vasculitis 
14
551
 Sensory neuropathy
7. 14 
959
German wire-haired pointer
Myositis (immune mediated)
7
975
Golden retriever
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
566.870
Epilepsy
13
S
774
Gangliosidosis GM2
15
S
828a. 828b
 Horner syndrome 
11
571
Hydrocephalus and hypertrichosis
12
S
554
 Multisystem axonopathy
7.8
693
Muscular dystrophy (x-linked)
7
Y
167. 273276. 980, 981. 993. 994
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
1036
Myotonia
10
S
166
Peripheral hypomyelination
938. 939
 Retinal degeneration 
Y
69. 81.109
 Sensory neuropathy
7. 14 
277.960
 Gordon setter
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30. 278-281
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69.81. 109
Great Dane
Central core myopathy
7
572
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
8.652
 Cervical spondylomyelopathy
7
S
7. 88-90, 206-212, 282-284, 917.
918
Deafness
9
Y
729
Esophageal hypomotility
9
S
175. 258, 285. 286
Extradural synovial cysts
7
927.928
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
<
1037
Myotonia congenita 
10
551.754
Neuropathy (distal)
945. 946
Retinal dysplasia 
11
69. 81.109
 Spondylosis deformans
6
618-624
Continued
494
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
CANINE DISEASES- cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited  
Referen ces
Great Dane cross
 Neuronal degeneration 
7
Y
287
Great Pyrenees
Deafness
9
Y
726. 730
Greyhound
Exertional rhabdomyolysis 
7
1027
Esophageal hypomotility 
G
260
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69
Griffon Bruxellois
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
7
912. 916
Ibizan hound
Axonopathy (central and peripheral)
7
S
885
Italian greyhound 
Cerebellar degeneration
8
677
Irish setter
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30, 84,661, 662
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
S
30
Seizures
13
H
763.778
Esophageal hypomotility
S
286
 Globoid cell leukodystrophy
15
S
836. 837
 Hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia
7
Y
30, 81. 661. 662
Lissencephaly
13
S
30
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69. 81. 109
Irish terrier
Muscular dystrophy 
7
Y
167, 289. 993
Myopathy
7
982
Irish wolfound 
Epilepsy
13
769
Fibrocartilageous embolism 
6
289a
 Portosystemic shunt 
12
575
Jack Russell terrier
 Cerebellar degeneration
7.8
81. 292. 676
Deafness
9
Y
732
Myasthenia gravis (congenital)
7
V
167. 290, 291. 1042
Myopathy (mitochondrial)
7
1015
Myotonia congenita
10
755.762
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
576
 Sensory neuronopathy
7.14
551. 958
 Spinocerebellar ataxia 
7
292. 897
Japanese spaniel
Gangliosidosis GM2
15
294.833
Japanese spitz
Muscular dystrophy
1
988
Japanese retriever
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
293
Keeshond 
Epilepsy
13
Y
81. 98. 295
Kerry blue terrier
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30
 Degenerative myelopathy
6
611
 Multisystem degeneration 
8
296-298
Labrador retriever
Axonopathy
7
V
579
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
136
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
P
299. 678
Centronuclear myopathy
7
166, 300-306, 989, 999. 1000,
1047
Congenital 1 tetany
10
S
309
Epilepsy
13
S
764. 766
Exercise intolerance-collapse syndrome
1
S
1023.1024
Fibrinoid encephalopathy (Alexander
7.12
551. 886
disease!
Leu koencephalomalacia
7.12
580
Lumbosacral stenosis
6
631. 633-637
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS Il)
15
S
865
Muscular dystrophy
7
Y
989
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
7
1036
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
Y
216, 218-220, 307. 308
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69. 81.109
Retinal dysplasia
11
69. 81.109
 Spongiform (myelin) degeneration
12
310.311
Lagotto Romagnolo
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
679
Epilepsy
13
S
771
Lapland dog
Glycogenosis (type Il)
7.15
Y
312,313.802
Neuronal degeneration
7
Y
81.314. 315
Lhaso apso
Hydrocephalus
12
P
126, 316, 317
Lissencephaly
13
S
318. 319
Leonberger
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
6.7
616
Polyneuropathy
1
929. 947
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
495
CANINE DISEASES- cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
 Inherited  
References
Lurcher
Hypomyelination 
10
S
162.164.320
Maltese
Deafness
6
Y
726. 730
Glycogenosis (type l)
7.15
S
799
Hydrocephalus
12
V
126, 321. 322
 Portosystemic shunt 
12. 15
559
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
Miniature pinscher
 Mucopolysaccharidosis
15
551. 853
Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69.81. 109
Miniature schnauzer
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
S
680
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
566. 872
Myotonia (congenital)
10
Y
757.761. 762
Seizures
13
H
763.778
Esophageal hypomotility
9
174. 175. 323, 324
 Muscular dystrophy
7
581
Mixed-breed dogs
Cerebellar brainstem malformation 
8
72. 654. 655
Deafness
9
Y
730
Gangliosidosis GM2
15
325
 Mucopolysaccharidosis 
15
Y
326. 856
Newfoundland
Esophageal hypomotility
9
Y
175.327
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
7
1038
Myositis (immune mediated)
7
976
New Zealand huntaway dog
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS Ill)
15
S
846-848
Myopathy/axonopathy
7
903
Norwegian dunkerhound
Deafness
9
Y
745
Norwegian elkhound 
Retinal degeneration
11
69. 81.109
Od English sheepdog
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
S
681
Deafness
9
Y
86.328
Myopathy (mitochondrial)
7
551. 1014
Papillon
Deafness
9
Y
730
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7.8
582. 697. 698
Pekingese
Hydrocephalus
12
P
126
Pott hound
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS 1)
15
Y
326.329
 Pointer 
Deafness
9
Y
724
 Neurogenic muscular atrophy 
7
Y
330-332
 Retinal degeneration
69. 81.109
 Pomeranian
 Globoid cell leu kodystrophy
15
333
Hydrocephalus
12
P
126
 Poodle
Agenesis vemis cerebellum 
8
G
334
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
S
334. 335
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
S
871
Degenerative myelopathy
<
S
336
Globoid cell leukodystrophy 
15
Y
81.337
Glycoproteinosis (Laflora's disease)
13
S
92
Sphingomyelin lipidosis
15
Y
338
 Poodle, miniature or toy
 Retinal degeneration
11
69. 81. 109
 Poodle, miniature
 Cerebellar degeneration 
7
551
Deafness
9
Y
730
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
611
Fibrinoid encephalomyelopathy
15
551. 663
[Alexander disease)
Leukodystrophy
7
890
 Poodle, standard 
 Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
611
Epilepsy.
13
776
Neonatal encephalopathy
12.13
583b
Polymicrogyria and hydrocephalus
12
583
 Poodle, toy
Hydrocephalus
12
P
126, 322
Sphingomyelinosis
8.15
338
Portuguese Podengo 
Cerebellar abiotrophy
8
684
 Portuguese water dog 
Gangliosidosis GM1
15
339.819
Pug
 Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
611
Encephalitis 
15
584-586
Esophageal hypomotility 
259
Hemivertebrae
6
123
Hydrocephalus 
12
P
126. 317
Pyrenean mountain dog 
 Central axonopathy
>
340
Continued
496
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
CANINE DISEASES- cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited 
Referen ces
 Sensory neuronopathy
7
551
 Rat terrier
Muscular dystrophy
7
987
 Redbone coonhound 
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69. 81. 109
 Rhodesian ridgeback 
 Cerebellar abiotrophy
8
S
664
 Cervical spondylomyelopathy
7
917
Deafness
9
Y
730
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
615a
Myotonic myopathy
10
551
Rottweiler
Cervical spondylomyelopathy 
7
917
Deafness
9
Y
725
Distal sensory neuropathy
7
587
Laryngeal paralysis (polyneuropathy)
7.9
952
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
15
Y
341. 342. 891
 Motor neuron disease 
7.8
346-348
Myopathy (distal)
1
1005
Muscular dystrophy
7
551.983
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
Y
342-345. 907
Neuronal vaculation 
8
S
694
Retinal dysplasia
11
69.109
Spinal dysraphism
6
349
Saint Bermard
Cerebellar hypoplasia
12
653
Seizures
13
H
763.778
Saluki
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
350
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69. 81.109
Spongiform degeneration
12
351
Samoyed
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30.84
Cerebellar hypoplasia/lissencephaly
8
S
652
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
Hypomyelination
10
162. 164, 352
Muscular dystrophy
588
Myasthenia gravis
7
1036
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
69.81. 109
Spongiform degeneration 
12
S
353
Schipperke
Galactosialidosis
15
590
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS Ill)
15
S
849
Scottish terrier
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8
S
683
Deafness
9
81.728
Leukodystrophy
7
354. 887
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
589
Sensory ganglioradiculitis
551
Scotty cramp
10
81. 355-362
Sealyham terrier
Deafness
9
Y
728
Retinal dysplasia
69. 81.109
 Shetland sheepdog
Dermatomyositis
7
167.363. 977
Leukoencephalomyelopathy
7
893. 894
 Retinal degeneration 
11
Y
69. 81.109
 Chorioretinal dysplasia
11
69. 81.109
 Shiba dog
Gangliosidosis (GM)
15
821. 822
Shropshire terrier 
Deafness
9
87
 Siberian husky
Cerebellar hypoplasia 
8
364
Degenerative myelopathy 
6
365
Seizures
13
H
763.778
Laryngeal paralysis 
9
Y
366
Sensory neuropathy
7
221
Silky terrier
Agenesis vermis cerebellum
8
93
Glucocerebrosidosis
15
Y
367.368
 Spongiform degeneration
12
S
369
 Soft-coated Wheaton terrier
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
611
Spitz
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
S
880
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
 Springer spaniel
Aggression
S
110. 205
Congenital myasthenia gravis 
7
Y
167.370
Fucosidosis
15
Y
371-377
Glycogenosis
15
Y
551
Hypomyelination 
10
√
162. 164.378
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
497
CANINE DISEASES-cont'd
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited 
Referen ces
 Retinal degeneration 
11
69. 81. 379
Retinal dysplasia
11
Y
69. 109
 Staffordshire terrier
Cerebellar abiotrophy
8
Y
684
 Myotonic myopathy
10
551.756
Deafness
9
Y
730
Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
615a
Sussex spaniel
Myopathy (mitochondrial)
S
551, 1016, 1019
Swedish Lapland dog
Glycogenosis (type 2)
15
S
800-802
Motor neuron disease
1
Y
695
Terrier cross
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
381. 877
Tibetan mastiff
Hypertrophic neuropathy
7
383-386, 940
Tibetan spaniel
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
109
Tibetan terrier
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
591. 859. 860
 Retinal degeneration
7#
Y
69.109. 387
Toy breeds
 Atlantoaxial luxation
1
S
81. 388-392
Hydrocephalus
12
P
126
 Occipital dysplasia
8
S
393. 394
Various
Cartilaginous exostoses
6
395-398
Vizsla
Epilepsy
13
S
773
WWest Highland white terrier
Deafness
9
Y
730
 Globoid cell leukodystrophy
15
V
81. 142-144, 333, 399, 834, 835
Myotonic myopathy
10
551.758
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
Weimaraner
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
136
Hypomyelination
10
162, 164, 400-402
 Spinal dysraphism
6
81, 403408, 648
Whippet
Sensory neuropathy
14
221
Wire fox terrier
 Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
S
30
 Degenerative myelopathy
6
S
611
Esophageal hypomotility 
174.175. 258, 260. 286, 409
 Lissencephaly
S
30
 Muscular dystrophy
7
969
Seizures
13
H
763. 778
Yorkshire terrier
Steroid responsive tremor syndrome
10
551
Hydrocephalus
12
V
126
Necrotizing encephalitis
15
592
 Portosystemic shunt 
12
575
Retinal dysplasia
11
69, 81.109
Yugoslavian sheepdog
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
551
Y, yes; P, probable; S, suspected, H, high incidence of seizures.
CAPRINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
Goats
Myotonia
10
Y
300,410,411
Nubian 
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
416. 417
Mannosidosis
15
Y
412-414. 791
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS Ill)
8. 15 
Y
850. 851
Angora
Atlantoaxial luxation
415
EQUINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
Appaloosa
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
7
S
1031-1035
Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
418
Night blindness 
11
S
69
Retinal degeneration, nyctalopia
11
Y
69
 Arabian
 Atlanto-occipital malformation
7
Y
419-421
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30, 422-424. 701
Cerebellar dysplasia
8
422.423
Storage myopathy
7
1011. 1013
Continued
498
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
 EQUINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
 Inherited
References
Arabian foals
 Epilepsy
13
S
425.777
Belgian
Storage myopathy
7
S
1012.1013. 1029
Donkey
Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
426
 Gotland pony
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30. 427
Horses
 Atlanto-occipital malformation
7
419, 428, 429
Cartilaginous exostoses
6
430. 431
 Cervical spondylomyelopathy
7
S
284. 419. 421. 432-436. 923-926
Deafness
9
Y
737
Degenerative myeloencephalopathy
7
S
418, 426, 437, 438
 Distal neuropathy
7
949-951
Myotonia
10
439
lcelandic x Peruvian Paso
15
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
S
883. 884
Miniature horses
Narcolepsy
13
593
Morgan
 Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
418
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
440. 441
 Storage myopathy
7
1012. 1013. 1029
Oldberg
 Cerebellar degeneration 
8.15
51
Paint
Glycogenosis (type IV}
7
1007.1008
 Paso Fino
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
701
Percheron
 Storage myopathy
7
1012.1013
Przewalski's horse
 Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
418
Quarter horse
Glucogenosis (type IV)
7
1007.1008
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
7
S
1031-1035
 Storage myopathy
7
1011
 Shetland ponies 
 Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
S
421
Standardbred 
Muscular dystrophy
7
Y
442
Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
418
Suffolk draft horses 
Narcolepsy/cataplexy
13
S
421
Thoroughbred 
Cerebellar dysplasia
8
443. 701
Cervical vertebral malformation
7
S
419, 421, 435, 444-447
Tennessee walking horse
 Storage myopathy
7
1012. 1013. 1027
Thoroughbred (and others)
Exertional rhabdomyolysis
7
S
1028.1030
Laryngeal paralysis
9
448-460
Various
 Peripartum asphyxia syndrome
12
461
Welsh pony
Myeloencephalopathy
7.15
462
Zebra
 Cervical spondylomyelopathy
7
462
Degenerative myeloencephalopathy
7.15
S
418. 617
Y, Yes; S, suspected.
FELINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
Abyssinian
Glucocerebrosidosis
15
Y
463.464
 Myasthenia gravis 
1039
 Retinal degeneration
11
Y
109
 Retinal dysplasia
11
Y
109
Balinese
Sphingomyelin lipidosis
15
465
Birman
Distal central peripheral axonopathy
Y
551.953
Spongiform encephalopathy
12
594
Burmese
 Congenital vestibular disease
S
84. 94. 95
Encephalocele
12
Y
466. 467
Gangliosidosis (GM2)
15
S
831
Cats (white, blue eyes)
Deafness
9
196. 468-475. 733-736. 738.
748-751
Devon rex
 Muscular dystrophy
7
574. 997
Domestic
Atlanto-occipital-axial malformation
7
476
 Cartilaginous exostoses
6
475
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
30. 84. 685-687
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
475. 477-479
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
S
876. 878
Degenerative myelopathy
6
480
Gangliosidosis GM1
15
Y
4.44-46. 826
Gangliosidosis GM2
15
Y
45, 46, 481. 482, 830
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
8.15
V
4. 483. 838
APPENDIX 1T
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
499
FELINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
Glycogenosis
15
Y
4.484
Glycoproteinosis {LaFlora's disease)
15
S
794
Hyperlipoproteinemia
7
S
964.965
Hyperoxaluria-associated polyneuropathy
7
Y
551.967
Hypochylomicronemia 
7
961-963. 966
Laryngeal paralysis 
9
485-487
Leukodystrophy
15
Y
488.489
Lissencephaly
13
490
Mannosidosis
8. 15
V
491, 492. 786
 Meningioma
15
S
75. 121. 493-495
Motor neuron disease
932. 933
Mucolipidosis
15
816. 817
 Mucopolysaccharidosis
15
496, 497. 854. 855. 857
 Muscular dystrophy
7
595-597. 941. 991. 992. 998
 Myasthenia gravis
7
551.1039
Myotonia (congenital)
10
759.760
 Nemaline rod myopathy
7
1003. 1004
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
598
 Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
498, 699. 700
 Neuronal degeneration 
7
499
Olivopontocerebellar degeneration
8
30. 696
 Retinal degeneration
11
69
Sphingomyelin lipidosis
15
500, 501. 841. 844
Egyptian Mau 
Spongiform (myelin) degeneration
12
Y
502
Havana brown
Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
690
Himalayan 
Esophageal hypomotility
503
Neuropathy. hyperchylomicronemia
7
Y
962-964
Korat 
Gangliosidosis GM1
15
Y
44-46. 825. 829
Laryngeal paralysis 
9
486
Maine coon
 Motor neuron disease
7
S
932
Manx
Myelodysplasia
6
123. 504-507. 650. 651
 Norwegian forest cat
Glycogenosis (type IV}
15
V
508. 810-812
 Persian
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
689
Laryngeal paralysis
9
486
Mannosidosis
8. 15
509-511. 784. 786. 788. 789
Neuropathy, hyperlipoproteinemia
7
Y
965
Siamese
Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
688
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
512
 Congenital vestibular disease
S
84. 94. 95
Esophageal hypomotility
S
175
Gangliosidosis GM
15
44-46. 77
Hydrocephalus
12
475
Hypomyelination
10
599
Mucopolysaccharidosis
15
513-519
Myasthenia gravis
7
551
Myotonia congenita
10
759.760
Muscular dystrophy
1
941. 998
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
8
498.700
Neuropathy, hyperchylomicronemia
7
966
 Optic pathway anomaly
11
69
Sphingomyelin lipidosis
15
520, 521. 839, 840, 842, 844
Strabismus
11
475
Somalis
Myasthenia gravis (acquired)
7
1039
Sphynx
Muscular dystrophy
7
997
Y, Yes, S suspected.
OVINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Chapter
Inherited
References
 Border Leicester
Cerebellar degeneration
8
522
Charolais
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
S
719
Coopworth
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
1
Y
523
Corriedale
Cerebellar degeneration
8
Y
30.718
Glycogenosis (type 1}
15
Y
524
Continued
500
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
OVINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
 Chapter
Inherited
References
Merino
Agenesis vermis cerebellum 
93
Anencephaly
12
525
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
526
Ceroid leukodystrophy (CLN 6)
15
Y
863. 864
Muscular dystrophy
7
Y
527-529
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
526
Thalamic cerebellar neuropathy
8
600
Polled Dorset
Globoid cell leu kodystrophy
15
Y
530
 Rambouillet 
 Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
531.8
881.882
Romney lambs
Motor neuropathy 
7
S
937
Sheep
Arthrogryposis
7
532.533
Atlantoaxial luxation 
7
534
Cerebellar hypoplasia
8
532
Glucocerebrosidosis 
15
Y
24
Glucogenosis
15
807
Hydrocephalus
12
532
Hypomyelination
10
532
Myelodysplasia
6
532
South Hampshire
Ceroid lipofuscinosis
15
Y
12. 865
Suffolk
 Congenital myopathy
7
Y
527.535
Gangliosidosis GM,. GM2
15
Y
536. 823
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
7
Y
523.537
Welsh mountain
 Cerebellar degeneration
8
Y
30. 703
Wiltshire
Cerebellar degeneration/abiotrophy
8
S
720
Various
Agenesis vermis cerebellum
8
532
Cerebellar brainstem malformation
13
72.532
Y, Yes. S, Suspected.
PORCINE DISEASES
Breed
Disease
Ch apter
Inh erited
References
 British saddleback
Hypomyelination 
7. 10
Y
538
Landrace
Hypomyelination
7. 10
Y
538-540
Malignant hyperthermia (PSS)
7
Y
541-545. 1025. 1026
 Pietrain
Malignant hyperthermia (PSS)
7
Y
541. 1025. 1026
Myopathy. hypertrophy
7
Y
546.1022
Poland China
Malignant hyperthermia (PSS)
7
Y
541. 545. 1025. 1026
Saddleback—large white
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
547
Swine
Encephalocele
12
548
Glucocerebrosidosis
15
S
24
Hydrocephalus
12
540
Lissencephaly
13
548
Yorkshire
Cerebellar degeneration 
8
Y
30. 701
Gangliosidosis GM2
8. 15
Y
44, 46. 549. 832
 Neuronal degeneration 
7
S
550
Y, Yes; S, suspected.
REFERENCES
6. Barlow R: Genetic cerebellar disorders in cattle. In
 Rose FC, Behan PO, editors: Animal models of neuro-
1. Barlow R: Morphogenesis of cerebellar lesions in
logical disease, Kent, UK, 1980, Pitman Medical.
bovine familial convulsions and ataxia, Vet Pathol
7.
 Young S: Hypomyelinogenesis congenital (cerebellar
18:151-162, 1981.
ataxia) in angus shorthorn calves, Cornell Vet 52:84-
2. Edmonds L, Crenshaw D, Selby LA: Micrognathia
93, 1962.
 s aa    rera 
8.1
 Braund KG: Degenerative and developmental diseases.
J Hered 64:62-64, 1973.
In Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG, editors: Veteri-
3. Barlow RM, Linklater KA, Young GB: Familial convul-
nary neurology, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
sions and ataxia in angus calves, Vet Rec 83:60-65, 1968.
 9. Jennings A, Summer G: Cortical cerebellar disease in
4. Jolly RD, Hartley WJ: Storage diseases of domestic ani-
an Ayrshire, Vet Rec 63:60, 1951.
mals, Aust Vet J 43:1-8, 1977.
10.1
 Howell J, Ritchie H: Cerebellar malformations in two
5. Healy PJ, Cole AE: Heterozygotes for mannosidosis in
Ayrshire calves, Pathol Vet 3:159-168, 1966.
angus and Murray grey cattle, Aust Vet J 52:385-386.
11.1
 Boyd J, MeNeil P:Atlanto-occipital fusion and ataxia in
1976.
the calf Vet Rec 120:34-37, 1987.
APPENDIX 1 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
501
12. Mayhew I, Jolly R: Ovine ceroid lipofuscinosis. Pro-
38. Rousseaux CG, Klavano GG, Johnson ES, et al:A newly
 ceedings of the Fourth ACVIM Forum, Washington,
recognized neurodegenerative disorder of horned Her-
DC, 1986, American College of Veterinary Internal
eford calves, Can Vet J 24:296-297, 1983.
Medicine.
39.
Watson AG, et al: Occipito-atlanto-axial malformation
 13. O'Sullivan BM, et al: Generalised glycogenosis in Brah-
with atlanto-axial subluxation in an ataxic calf J Am
man cattle, Aust Vet J 57:227-229, 1981.
Vet Med Assoc 187:740-742, 1985.
14. Strain GM, et al: Narcolepsy in a Brahman bull, J Am
40. Leipold HW, et al: Congenital defect of the atlanto-
Vet Med Assoc 185:538-541, 1984.
 occipital joint in a Holstein Friesian calf Cornell Vet
15. Aitchison S, et al: Ultrastructural alterations of motor
62:646-672, 1972.
cortex synaptic junctions in Brown Swiss cattle with
41.1
Hiraga T, Abe M: Two calves of Arnold-Chiari malfor-
weaver syndrome, Am J Vet Res 46:1733-1736, 1985.
mation and their craniums, Jpn J Vet Sci 49:651-656,
16. Baird JD, Sarmiento UM, Basrur PK: Bovine progres-
1987.
sive degenerative myeloencephalopathy ("weaver syn-
42.
White ME, Whitlock RH, de Lahunta A: A cerebellar
drome") in Brown Swiss cattle in Canada: a literature
abiotrophy of calves, Cornell Vet 65:476-491, 1975.
review and case report, Can Vet J 29:370-377, 1988.
43.1
 Umemura T, et al: Histopathology of congenital and
17. Stuart LD, Leipold HW: Lesions in bovine progres-
perinatal cerebellar anomalies in twelve calves, Jpn J
sive degenerative myeloencephalopathy ("weaver") of
Vet Sci 49:95-104, 1987.
Brown Swiss cattle, Vet Pathol 22:13-23, 1985.
44. Baker HJ, et al: Animal models of human ganglioside
18. Atkeson FW, Ibsen HL, Eldridge E: Inheritance of an
storage diseases, FASEB J 35:1193-1201, 1976.
epileptic type character in Brown Swiss cattle, J Hered
45.1
 Baker HJ, et al: Feline gangliosidoses as models ofhuman
34:45,1944.
lysosomal storage diseases. In Desnick RJ, Patterson DF,
19. Cho DY, Leipold HW: Cerebellar cortical atrophy in a
Scarpelli DG, editors: Animal models of inherited meta-
Charolais calf Vet Pathol 15:264-266, 1978.
bolie diseases, New York, 1982, Alan R Liss.
 20. Palmer AC, et al: Progressive ataxia of Charolais cattle
46.1
 Baker Hl, et al: The gangliosidoses: comparative features
associated with a myelin disorder, Vet Rec 91:592-594,
and research applications, Vet Pathol 16:635-649, 1979.
1972.
47.
 Donnelly WJC, Sheahan BJ, Rogers TA: GM gangliosi-
21. Montgomery D, Mayer J: Progressive ataxia of Charo-
dosis in Friesian calves, J Pathol 11l:173-179, 1973.
lais cattle, Southwest Vet 37:247-250, 1986.
48.1
 e       i
22.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 5:5488-5491, 1983.
godendroglial dysplasia, Vet Pathol 23:78-80, 1986.
49.
Wells G, et al: A novel progressive spongiform enceph-
23.
alopathy in cattle, Vet Rec 121:419-420, 1987.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1590-1592, 1988.
50.
 Saunders LZ, et al: Hereditary congenital ataxia in Jer-
24. Done JT: Developmental disorders on the nervous sys-
sey calves, Cornell Vet 42:559-591, 1952.
tem in animals, Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 2l:69-114,
51.
 Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology: a handbook for
1977.
veterinary clinicians, Philadelphia, 1989, Lea & Febiger.
 25. Leipold HW, et al: Spinal dysraphism, arthrogryposis 
52.
de Lahunta A: Abiotrophy in domestic animals: a
and cleft palate in newborn Charolais calves, Can Vet J
review, Can J Vet Res 54:65-76, 1990.
10:268-273, 1969.
53.
Richards R, Edwards J: A progressive spinal myelinopa-
26. McCoy D, et al: Stabilization of atlantoaxial sublux-
thy in beef cattle, Vet Pathol 23:35-41, 1986.
ation secondary to atlantooccipital malformation in a
54.
Edwards JR, Richards RB, Carrick MJ: Inherited pro-
Devon calf Cornell Vet 76:277-286, 1986.
gressive spinal myelinopathy in Murray Grey cattle,
27.
 Harper PAW, et al: Neurovisceral ceroid-lipofuscinosis in
Aust Vet J 65:108-109, 1988.
 blind Devon catle, Acta Neuropathol 75:632-636, 1988.
55.1
Healy P, Harper P, Dennis J: Diagnosis of neuraxial
28. Embury DH, Jerrett IV: Mannosidosis in Galloway
oedema in calves, Aust Vet J 63:95-96, 1986.
calves, Vet Pathol 22:548-551, 1985.
56.1
 Duffell S: Neuraxial oedema of Hereford calves with
29.E
Palmer AC, Smith GF, Turner S: Cataplexy in a Guern-
and without hypomyelinogenesis, Vet Rec 117:95-98,
sey bull, Vet Rec 106:421, 1980.
1986.
30. de Lahunta A: Comparative cerebellar disease in
57.1
 Donaldson C, Mason R: Hereditary neuraxial oedema
domestic animals, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
 in a poll Hereford herd, Aust Vet J 61:188-189, 1984.
8:8-19. 1980.
58.1
 Healy PJ, Harper PAW, Bowler JK: Prenatal occurrence
31. O'Sullivan BM, McPhee CP: Cerebellar hypoplasia of
and mode of inheritance of neuraxial oedema in poll
genetic origin in calves, Aust Vet J 51:469-471, 1975.
Hereford calves, Res Vet Sci 38:96-98, 1985.
 32. Strain GM, Olcott BM, Turk MA: Diagnosis of primary
59.
 Gundach AL, et al: Deficit of spinal cord glycine/
generalized epilepsy in a cow, J Am Vet Med Assoc
strychnine receptors in inherited myoclonus of poll
191:833-836, 1987.
Hereford calves, Science 241:1807-1810, 1988.
33.(
Greene HJ, Leipold HW, Hibbs CM: Bovine congenital
60. Harper P, et al: Maple syrup urine disease in calves:
defects: variations of internal hydrocephalus, Cornell
a clinical, pathological and biochemical study, Aust Vet
Vet 64:596-616, 1974.
J 66:46-49, 1989.
34. Leech RW, Haugse CN, Christoferson LA: Congenital
61.1
 Innes JRM, Saunders LA: Comparative neuropathol-
hydrocephalus, Am J Pathol 92:567-570, 1978.
ogy, New York, 1962, Academic Press.
35.A
Axthelm MK, Leipold HW, Phillips RM: Congenital
62.
Abbitt B, et al: B-Mannosidosis in twelve Salers calves,
internal hydrocephalus in polled Hereford cattle, Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:109-113, 1991.
Med Small Anim Clin 76:567-570, 1981.
63.
 Jolly RD, et al: β-Mannosidosis in a Salers calf: a new
36.B
Hulland TJ: Cerebellar ataxia in calves, Can J Comp
storage disease of cattle, N Z Vet J 38:102-105, 1990.
Med 21:72-76, 1957.
64.
 Swan R, Taylor E: Cerebellar hypoplasia in beef short-
37. Rousseaux CG, et al: "Shaker" calf syndrome: a newly
horn calves, Aust Vet J 59:95-96, 1982.
recognized inherited neurodegenerative disorder 
of
65.
O'Sullivan B, McPhee C: Cerebellar hypoplasia of
horned Hereford calves, Vet Pathol 22:104-111, 1985.
genetic origin in calves, Aust Vet J 51:469-471, 1975.
502
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
66. Richards RB, et al: Bovine generalized glycogenosis,
91. Luttgen PJ, Braund KG, Storts RW: Globoid cell leu-
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 3:45-56, 1977.
kodystrophy in a basset hound, J Small Anim Pract
67. McHowell J, et al: Infantile and late onset form of
24:153-160, 1983.
generalized glycogenosis type II in cattle, J Pathol
92.
Cusick PK, Cameron AM, Parker AJ: Canine neuro-
134:266-277, 1981.
nal glycoproteinosis: Lafora's disease in the dog, J Am
68. Greene HJ, et al: Internal hydrocephalus and reti-
Anim Hosp Assoc 12:518-521, 1976.
nal dysplasia in shorthorn cattle, Ir Vet J 32:65-69,
93.1
 Pass DA, Howell JM, Thompson R: Cerebellar malfor-
1978.
mation in two dogs and a sheep, Vet Pathol 18:405-407,
 69. Slatter D: Fundamentals of veterinary ophthalmology.
1981.
Philadelphia, 198l, WB Saunders.
 94. Lane SB: Vestibular disease in companion animals,
70. Chrisman CL: Epilepsy and seizures. In Howard JL,
Pedigree Forum 6:11-16, 1987.
editor: Current veterinary therapy: food animal prac-
95.
 Chrisman CL: Disorders of the vestibular system,
tice, Philadelphia, 198l, WB Saunders.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 1:744-757, 1979.
71. Russell RG, Oteruelo FT: Ultrastructural abnormalities
96.
Hegreberg GA, Padget GA: Inherited progressive epi-
of muscle and neuromuscular junction differentiation
lepsy of the dog with comparisons to Lafora's disease
in a bovine congenital neuromuscular disease, Acta
of man, FASEB J 35:1202-1205, 1976.
Neuropathol 62:112-120, 1983.
97.1
Edmonds HL, et al: Spontaneous convulsions in beagle
 72. Van den Akker S: Arnold-Chiari malformation in ani-
dogs, FASEB J 39:2424-2428, 1979.
 mals, Acta Neuropathol [suppl 1):39-44, 1962.
98.1
 Holliday TA: In Frey HH, Janz D, editors: Handbook of
73. Boyd JS: Unusual case of spina bifida in a Friesian cross
experimental pharmacology Epilepsy in animals, vol.
calf Vet Rec 116:203-205, 1985.
74, Berlin, 1985, Springer-Verlag.
74.
Wasserman C: Myelodysplasia in a calf Mod Vet Pract
99.1
Biefelt SW, Redman HC, Broadhurst J: Sire and sex-
67:879-883, 1986.
related differences in rates of epileptiform seizures in
75. Luginbuhl H, Fankhauser R, MeGrath JT: Spontane-
a purebred beagle dog colony, Am J Vet Res 32:2039-
ous neoplasms of the nervous system in animals, Prog
2048, 1971.
Neurol Surg 2:85-164, 1968.
100. Montgomery DL, Lee AC: Brain damage in the epilep-
76. Averill DR, Bronson RT: Inherited necrotizing myelop-
tic beagle dog, Vet Pathol 20:160-169, 1983.
athy of Afghan hounds, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
101.1
Edmonds HL Jr, et al: Spontaneous convulsions in bea-
36:734-747, 1977.
gle dogs, FASEB J 38:2424-2428, 1979.
77.B
Baker HJ, et al: Neuronal GMl gangliosidosis in a
102.1
 Redman HC, Wilson GL, Hogan JE: Effect of chlor-
Siamese cat with B-galactosidase deficiency, Science
 promazine combined with intermittent light stimula-
174:838-839, 1971.
tion on the electroencephalogram and clinical response 
78. Cockrell BY, et al: Myelomalacia in Afghan hounds,
of the beagle dog, Am J Vet Res 34:929-936, 1973.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:362-365, 1973.
103.1
Redman HC, Weir JE: Detection of naturally occurring
79. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Hereditary myelopa-
neurologic disorders of beagle dogs by electroencepha-
thy of Afghan hounds: a myelinolytic disease, Acta
lography, Am J Vet Res 30:2075-2082, 1969.
Neuropathol 42:173-181, 1978.
104.1
 Redman HC, Hogan JE, Wilson GL: Effect of intermittent
80. Cordy DR, Snelbaker HA: Cerebellar hypoplasia and
light stimulation singly and combined with pentylene-
degeneration ina family ofAiredale dogs, JNeuropathol
tetrazol on the electroencephalogram and clinical re-
Exp Neurol 11:324-328, 1952.
sponse of the beagle dog, Am J Vet Res 33:677-685, 1972.
81.E
Erickson F, Leipold HW, MeKinley J: Congenital
105.
Wiederholt WC: Electrophysiologic analysis of epilep-
defects in dogs. Part 2, Canine Pract 14:51-61, 1977.
tic beagles, Neurology 24:149-155, 1974.
 82. Dow RW: Partial agenesis of the cerebellum in dogs,
106.1
 Read DH, et al: Neuronal-visceral GM gangliosido-
J Comp Neurol 72:569-586, 1940.
sis in a dog with B-galactosidase deficiency, Science
83. Duncan ID, Griffths I: Neuromuscular diseases. In
194:442-445, 1976.
Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders, New York,
107.
 Johnson GR, Oliver JE, Selcer R: Globoid cell leuko-
1986, Churchill Livingstone.
dystrophy in a beagle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:380-
84. de Lahunta A: Veterinary neuroanatomy and clinical
384, 1975.
neurology, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
108.
 Tomchick T: Familial Lafora's disease in the beagle dog.
85. Sisk DB, et al: Clinical and pathologic features of ceroid
FASEB J 32:8-21, 1973.
lipofuscinosis in two Australian cattle dogs, J Am Vet
109.
 Barnett KC: Inherited eye disease in the dog and cat,
Med Assoc 197:361-364, 1990.
J Small Anim Pract 29:462-475, 1988.
86. Hayes HM, et al: Canine congenital deafness: epide-
110.
Voith VL: Diagnosis and treatment of aggressive behav-
miologic study of 272 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
ior problems in dogs. In Proceedings of the 47th Annual
17:473, 1981.
Meeting of the American Animal Hospital Association,
87. 1
 Igarashi M, et al: Inner ear anomalies in dogs, Ann Otol
1980.
Rhinol Laryngol 81:249-255, 1972.
 111. Palmer A, et al: Recognition of "trembler,”" a hypomy-
88. Shores A: Canine cervical vertebral
1 malformation/
elination condition in the Bernese mountain dog, Vet
malarticulation syndrome,
 Compend Contin Educ
Rec 120:609-612, 1987.
Pract Vet 6:326-333, 1984.
112.1
Rosin A, Moore P, Dubielzig R: Malignant histiocy-
89.1
Wright F, Rest JR, Palmer AC:Ataxia of the Great Dane
tosis in Bernese mountain dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
caused by stenosis of the cervical vertebral canal: com-
188:1041-1046, 1986.
parison with similar conditions in the basset hound,
113.
Cho D, Leipold H, Rudolph R: Neuronal ceroidosis
Doberman pinscher, ridgeback and the thoroughbred
[ceroid-lipofuscinosis) in a blue heeler dog, Acta Neu-
horse, Vet Rec 92:1-6, 1973.
ropathol 69:161-164, 1986.
90. Denny H, Gibbs C, Gaskell C: Cervical spondylopathy
114.
Wood PA, et al: Animal model: ceroidosis [ceroid-lipo-
in the dog: a review of thirty-five cases, J Small Anim
fuscinosis) in Australian cattle dogs, Am J Med Genet
Pract 18:117-132, 1977.
26:891-898, 1987.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
503
115. Boysen BG, Tryphonas L, Harries NW: Globoid cell
139. Brown S, et al: Naloxone-responsive compulsive tail
leukodystrophy in the bluetick hound dog. 1. Clinical
chasing in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:884-886,
manifestations, Can Vet J 15:303-308, 1974.
1987.
116.(
Gill JIM, Hewland ML: Cerebellar degeneration in the
140. Kurtz HJ, Fletcher TF: The peripheral neuropathy of
border collie, N Z Vet J 8:170, 1980.
canine globoid-cell leukodystrophy (Krabbe type),
117. 7
Taylor RM, Farrow BRH: Ceroid lipofuscinosis in bor-
Acta Neuropathol 16:226-232, 1970.
der collie dogs, Acta Neuropathol 75:627-631, 1988.
141.1
Howell JM: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in two dogs.
118.
 Studdert VP, Mitten RW: Clinical features of ceroid lipo
J Small Anim Pract 12:633-642, 1971.
fuscinosis in border collies, Aust Vet J 68:137-140, 1991.
142.1
 Fletcher TF, Kurtz HJ, Low DG: Globoid cell leukodys-
1l9. Wheeler SJ: Sensory neuropathy in a border collie
trophy [Krabbe type) in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
puppy, J Small Anim Pract 28:281-289, 1987.
149:165-172, 1966.
120.
Jaggy A, et al: Hereditary cervical spondylopathy [wob-
143.1
McGrath JT, et al: A morphologic and biochemi-
bler syndrome) in the borzoi dog, J Am Anim Hosp
cal study of canine globoid cell leukodystrophy,
Assoc 24:453-460, 1988.
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 28:171, 1969.
121. Hayes KC, Schiefer B: Primary tumors in the CNS of
144.
 Suzuki Y, et al: Studies in globoid leukodystrophy:
carnivores, Pathol Vet 6:94-116, 1969.
 enzymatic and lipid findings in the canine form, Exp
122. Hayes HM, Priester WA, Pendergrass TW: Occurrence
Neurol 29:65-75, 1970.
 of nervous-tisue tumors in cattle, horses, cats and dogs.
145.1
 Palmer AC, Blakemore WF: Progressive neuronopathy
Int J Cancer 15:39-47, 1975.
in the cairn terrier, Vet Rec 123:39, 1988.
123. Bailey CS: An embryological approach to the clinical
146.
 Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Moore J: Multisystemic
significance of congenital vertebral and spinal cord ab-
chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in a cairn terrier
normalities, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1l:426-434, 1975.
pup, Cornell Vet 78:301-314, 1988.
124. Morgan JP: Congenital anomalies of the vertebral
147.
Wright J, et al: Muscle hypertonicity in the cavalier
 column of the dog: a study of the incidence and sig-
King Charles spaniel: myopathic features, Vet Rec
nificance based on a radiographic and morphometric
118:511-512, 1986.
study, J Am Vet Radiol Soc 9:21-29, 1968.
148. Jones BR, Johnstone AC: An unusual myopathy in a
125. de Lahunta A, Cummings JF: The clinical and electro-
dog, N Z Vet J 30:119-121, 1982.
encephalographic features of hydrocephalus in three
149.1
Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Episodic falling in the
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 146:954-964, 1965.
cavalier King Charles spaniel, Vet Rec 112:458-459,
126. Selby L, Hayes H, Becker S: Epizootiologic features of
1983.
canine hydrocephalus, Am J Vet Res 40:411-413, 1979.
150. Few AB:The diagnosis and surgical treatment of canine
127.
Venker-van Haagen AJ, Bouw J: Hartman W: Heredi-
hydrocephalus, J Am Vet Med Assoc 149:286-293,
tary transmission of laryngeal paralysis in young Bouvi-
1966.
ers, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:75-76, 1981.
151.
 Blakemore W, Palmer A: Nervous disease in the Chi-
128. Venker-van Haagen AJ, Hartman W: Goedogebuure SA:
huahua characterised by axonal swellings, Vet Rec
Spontaneous laryngeal paralysis in young Bouviers,
117:498-499, 1985.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:714-720, 1978.
152.1
 Hansen HJ: A pathologic-anatomical study on disk
129. Griffiths I: Progressive axonopathy of boxer dogs.
. In
 degeneration in the dog, Acta Orthop Scand Suppl 11,
 Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Veterinary Medical
1952.
Forum, San Diego, 1987, American College of Veteri-
153.
 Ghosh P, et al: A comparative chemical and histochem-
nary Internal Medicine.
ical study of the chondrodystrophoid and nonchon-
130. Griffths IR, Duncan ID, Barker J:A progressive axonop-
drodystrophoid canine intervertebral disc, Vet Pathol
athy of boxer dogs affecting the central and peripheral
13:414-427, 1976.
nervous system, J Small Anim Pract 21:29-43, 1980.
154.1
Priester W: Canine intervertebral disc disease: occur-
131. LeCouteur RA, Kornegay JN, Higgins RJ: Late onset
rence by age, breed, and sex among 8,117 cases, The-
progressive cerebellar degeneration of Brittany spaniel
riogenology 6:293-303, 1976.
dogs. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Veterinary
155.1
 Brown N, Helphrey M, Prata R: Thoracolumbar disk
Medical Forum, Washington, DC, 1988, American Col-
disease in the dog: a retrospective analysis of 187 cases,
lege of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:665-672, 1977.
132. Cork LC, et al: Hereditary canine spinal muscular atro-
156.1
Hoerlein B: Comparative disk disease: man and dog.
phy, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 38:209-221, 1979.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:535-545, 1979.
133. Lorenz MD, et al: Hereditary muscular atrophy in Brit-
157.1
 Hoerlein B: Intervertebral disc protrusions in the dog.
tany spaniels: clinical manifestations, J Am Vet Med
I. Incidence and pathological lesions, Am J Vet Res
Assoc 175:833-839, 1979.
51:260-283, 1953.
134.
Carmichael S, Griffths IR, Harvey MJA: Familial cer-
158.
Braund
KG:
Intervertebral
disk
disease.
In
ebellar ataxia with hydrocephalus in bull mastiffs, Vet 
Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders, New York,
Rec 112:354-358, 1983.
1986, Churchill Livingstone.
135. Raffe M, Knecht C: Cervical vertebral malformation
159.1
 Knecht CD, et al: Cerebellar hypoplasia in chow chows,
in bull mastiffs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:593-594,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:51, 1979.
1978.
160.
 Knecht C, et al: Cerebellar hypoplasia in chow chows,
136.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 15:51-53, 1979.
Pathol 23:374-379, 1986.
161.
Vandevelde M, et al: Dysmyelination of the central ner-
137.
Hudson W, Ruben R: Hereditary deafness in the
vous system in the chow chow dog, Acta Neuropathol
Dalmatian dog, Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
42:211-215, 1978.
75:213-219, 1962.
162.1
 Duncan I: Congenital tremor and abnormalities of
138. Anderson H, Henricson B, Lundquist P, et al: Genetic
myelination. In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Veteri-
hearing impairment in the Dalmatian dog, Acta Oto-
nary Medical Forum, San Diego, 1987, American Col-
laryngol Suppl 232:1-34, 1968.
lege of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
504
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
163. Vandevelde M, et al: Dysmyelination in chow chow
191. Holliday TA, Cunningham JG, Gutnick MJ: Compara-
dogs: further studies in older dogs, Acta Neuropathol
tive clinical and electroencephalographic studies of
55:81-87, 1981.
canine epilepsy, Epilepsia 11:281-292, 1971.
164. Duncan I: Abnormalities of myelination of the cen-
192.
Vandevelde M, Fatzer R: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscino-
tral nervous system associated with congenital tremor,
sis in older dachshunds, Vet Pathol 17:686-692, 1980.
J Vet Intern Med 1:10-23, 1987.
193.1
 Duncan ID, Griffiths IR, Munz M: The pathology of
165. Shores A, et al: Myotonia congenita in a chow chow
 a sensory neuropathy affecting long haired dachshund
pup, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:532-533, 1986.
dogs, Acta Neruopathol 58:141-151, 1982.
166.
 Braund KG: Identifying degenerative and developmen-
194.1
 Braund KG: Identifying degenerative peripheral neu-
tal myopathies, Vet Med 81:713-718, 1986.
ropathies in pets, Vet Med 88:352-380, 1987.
167. Shelton G, Cardinet H: Pathophysiologic basis of canine
195.
 Johnsson L, et al: Vascular anatomy and pathology of
muscle disorders, J Vet Intern Med 1:36-44, 1987.
the cochlea in Dalmatian dogs. In Darin de Lorenzo AJ,
168.
 Farrow BRH: Canine myotonia. In the Proceedings of
editor: Vascular disorders and hearing defects, Univer-
the 6th ACVIM Forum. Washington, DC, 1988.
sity Park, Md, 1973, University Park Press.
169.
Nafe LA, Shires P: Myotonia in the dog. In the Pro-
196.
 Suga F, Hattler K: Physiological and histopathological
ceedings of the Znd ACVIM Forum. Washington DC,
 correlates of hereditary deafness in animals, Laryngo-
1984.
scope 80:80-104, 1970.
170.
 Jones BR, et al: Myotonia in related chow chow dogs.
197.1
Marshall A: Use of brain stem auditory-evoked
N Z Vet J 25:217-220, 1977.
response to evaluate deafness in a group of Dalmatian
171.
Farrow BRH, Malik R: Hereditary myotonia in the
dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:718-722, 1986.
chow chow, J Small Anim Pract 22:451-465, 1981.
198.
 Ferrara ML, Halnan CRE: Congenital brain defects in
172. Mugford RA: Aggressive behavior in the English cocker
the deaf Dalmatian, Vet Rec 112:344-346, 1983.
spaniel, Vet Ann 24:310-314, 1984.
199.1
Mair IWS: Hereditary deafness in the Dalmatian dog.
173. Nimmo Wilkie JS, Hudson EB: Neuronal and gener-
Arch Otol 212:1-14, 1976.
alized ceroid-lipofuscinosis
s in a cocker spaniel, Vet
 Branis M, Burda H: Inner ear structure in the deaf
Pathol 19:623-628, 1982.
and normally hearing Dalmatian dog, J Comp Pathol
174. Clifford DH, Malek R: Diseases of the canine esopha-
95:295-299, 1985.
gus due to prenatal influence, Am J Dig Dis 14:578-
201.
Woods CB: Hyperkinetic episodes in two Dalmatians,
602, 1969.
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:255-257, 1977.
175. Clifford DH: Esophageal achalasia, Comp Pathol Bull
202.
Greene CE, Vandevelde M, Hoff EJ: Congenital cere-
10:2-3, 1978.
 brospinal hypomyelinogenesis in a pup, J Am Vet Med
176. Kern TJ, Erb HN: Facial neuropathy in dogs and cats:
Assoc 171:534-536, 1977.
95 cases [1975-1985), J Am Vet Med Assoc 191:1604-
203.
 Bjerkas I: Hereditary “cavitating" leukodystrophy in
1609, 1987.
Dalmatian dogs, Acta Neuropathol 40:163-169, 1977.
177.
Braund KG, et al: Idiopathic facial paralysis in the dog.
204.
Neufeld JL, Little PB: Spinal dysraphism in a Dalma-
Vet Rec 105:297-299, 1979.
tian dog, Can Vet J 15:335-336, 1974.
178. Jaggy A, Vandevelde M: Multisystem neuronal degen-
205.
Houpt KA: Aggression in dogs, Compend Contin Educ
eration in cocker spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 2:117-120,
Pract Vet l:123-128, 1979.
1988.
206.
 Seim H: Ventral decompression and stabilization for
179. Hartley WJ, et al: Inherited cerebellar degeneration in
the treatment of caudal cervical spondylomyelopathy
the rough coated collie, Aust Vet Pract 8:79-85, 1978.
in the dog. In Proceedings of the Fifth Annual Veteri-
180.
 Clark RG, et al: Suspected neuroaxonal dystrophy in
nary Medical Forum, San Diego, 1987, American Col-
collie sheep dogs, N Z Vet J 30:102-103, 1982.
lege of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
181.
 Lurie M: The membranous labyrinth in the congeni-
207.1
Lyman R: Continuous dorsal laminectomy for treat-
tally deaf collie and Dalmatian dog, Laryngoscope
ment of Doberman pinschers with caudal cervical ver-
58:279-287, 1948.
tebral instability and malformation. In the Proceedings
182. Hargis AM, Haupt KH, Hegreberg GA, et al: Famil-
of the 5th ACVIM Forum. San Diego, 1987.
ial canine dermatomyositis, Am J Pathol 116:234-244,
208.
1984.
caudal cervical spondylo-myelopathy with emphasis
183.
 Haupt KH, et al: Familial canine dermatomyositis:
on the Doberman pinscher, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
clinical, electrodiagnostic, and genetic studies, Am J
18:241-251,1982.
Vet Res 46:1861-1869, 1985.
209.1
 Read R, Robins G, Carlisle C: Caudal cervical spon-
184. Hargis A, et al: Postmortem findings in four litters of
dylo-myelopathy (wobbler syndrome) in the dog: a
dogs with familial canine dermatomyositis, Am J Pathol
review of thirty cases, J Small Anim Pract 24:605-621,
123:480-496, 1986.
1983.
185. Hargis A, et al: Prospective study of familial canine der-
2l0. Trotter E, et al: Caudal cervical vertebral malforma-
matomyositis, Am J Pathol 123:465-479, 1986.
tion-malarticulation in Great Danes and Doberman
186.
Hargis AM, et al: Dermatomyositis: familial canine der-
pinschers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:917-930, 1976.
matomyositis, Am J Pathol 120:323-325, 1985.
211.
Mason T: Cervical vertebral instability [wobbler syn-
187.
Kunkle GA, et al: Dermatomyositis in collie dogs,
drome) in the dog, Vet Rec 104:142-145, 1979.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 7:185-192, 1985.
212.1
 Raffe M, Knecht C: Cervical vertebral malformation:
188.
Wilson JW, et al: Spina bifida in the dog, Vet Pathol
a review of 36 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 16:881-
16:165-179, 1979.
883, 1980.
189.
de Lahunta A, Shively GN: Neurofibrillary accumula-
213.
Wilkes M, Palmer A: Congenital deafness in Dober-
tion in a puppy, Cornell Vet 65:240-247, 1975.
mans, Vet Rec 118:218, 1986.
190. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: An adult case of canine
214.
 Chrisman CL: Distal polyneuropathy of Doberman
neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Acta Neuropathol
pinschers. In the Proceedings of the 3rd ACVIM
39:43-51, 1977.
Forum. San Diego, 1985.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
505
215. Leyland A: Ataxia in a Doberman pinscher, Vet Rec
239. Alroy J, et al: Neurovisceral and skeletal GMl ganglio-
116:414-415, 1985.
sidosis in dogs with B-galactosidase deficiency, Science
216. Baker TL, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of narcolepsy
229:470-472, 1985.
in animals. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary ther-
240.
Giger U, Argov Z: Metabolic myopathy in phospho-
apy Vl: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1983, WB
fructokinase deficient English springer spaniels. In the
Saunders.
Proceedings of the 5th ACVIM Forum. San Diego,
217. Bowersox S, et al: Brain dopamine receptor levels ele-
1987.
vated in canine narcolepsy, Brain Res 402:44-48, 1987.
241.
 Giger U, Roudebush P: Inherited phosphofructokinase
218. Kaitin KI, KilduffTS, Dement WC: Evidence for exces-
 deficiency in English springer spaniels causes hemo-
sive sleepiness in canine narcoleptics, Electroencepha-
lytic disorder with hemolytic crises. In the Proceedings
logr Clin Neurophysiol 65:447-454, 1986.
of the 5th ACVIM Forum. San Diego, 1987.
219.
 Foutz AS, Mitler MM, Dement WC: Narcolepsy, Vet
242.1
 Holland CT, et al: Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy.
Clin North Am 10:65-80, 1980.
and cardiac disease in three related English springer
220. Bakr TL, et al: Canine model of narcolepsy:genetic and
spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 5:151-159, 1991.
developmental determinants, Exp Neurol 75:729-742,
243.
 Tontitila P, Lindberg LA: ETT Fall av cerebellar ataxi
1982.
hos finsk stovare, Svoman Elainlaakarilehti 77:135,
221.
Wouda W, et al: Sensory neuronopathy in dogs: a study
1971.
of four cases, J Comp Pathol 93:437-450, 1983.
244. Adams EW: Hereditary deafness in a family of fox-
222. Patnaik A, Kay W, Hurvitz A: Intracranial meningioma:
hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 128:302-303, 1956.
a comparative pathologic study of 28 dogs, Vet Pathol
245. J
 Jenkins WL, Van Dyk E, McDonald CB: Myasthenia
23:369-373, 1986.
gravis in a fox terrier ltter, J S Afr Vet Assoc 47:59-62,
223. Parker AJ, et al: Spina bifida with protrusion of spinal
1976.
cord tissue in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:158-
 246. Miller LM, et al: Congenital myasthenia gravis in 13
160, 1973.
smooth fox terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:694-
224.
 Parker AJ, Byerly CS: Meningomyelocele in a dog, Vet
697, 1983.
Pathol 10:266-273, 1973.
247.
 Lee M: Congenital vestibular disease in a German
225. Kornegay JN: Congenital and degenerative diseases
shepherd dog, Vet Rec 113:571, 1983.
of the central nervous system. In Kornegay JN, editor:
248.1
Braund KG, Vandevelde M: German shepherd dog
Neurologic disorders, New York, 1986, Churchill
myelopathy: a morphologic and morphometric study.
Livingstone.
Am J Vet Res 39:1309-1315, 1978.
226. Knecht C, Blevins W, Raffe M: Stenosis of the thoracic
249.
Williams DA, Sharp NJH, Batt RM: Enteropathy
spinal canal in English bulldogs, J Am Anim Hosp
associated with degenerative myelopathy in German
Assoc 15:182-183, 1979.
shepherd dogs. In the Proceedings of the lst ACVIM
227.B
Klein E, et al: Adenosine receptor alterations in
Forum. New Orleans, 1983.
nervous pointer 
dogs: a preliminary report, Clin
250.
Waxman FJ, et al: Progressive myelopathy in older
Neuropharmacol 10:462-469, 1987.
German shepherd dogs. I. Depressed response to
 228. Murphree OD, Dykman RA: Litter patterns in the off-
thymus-dependent mitogens, J Immunol 124:1209-
 spring of nervous and stable dogs. I. Behavioral tests,
1215.1980.
J Nerv Ment Dis 141:321-332, 1965
251. Waxman FJ, Clemmons RM, Hinrichs DJ: Progres-
229. Dykman RA, Murphree OD, Ackerman PT: Litter pat-
sive myelopathy in older German shepherd dogs. I1.
terns in the offspring of nervous and stable dogs. I1.
 Presence of circulating suppressor cels, J Immunol
Autonomic and motor conditioning, J Nerv Ment Dis 
124:1216-1222, 1980.
141:419-431, 1966.
252. Averill DR: Degenerative myelopathy in the aging Ger-
230. Cummings JF, et al: Reduced substance P-like immuno-
man shepherd dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 162:1045-
1051, 1973
dogs, Acta Neuropathol 63:33-40, 1984.
253.
 Griffths IR, Duncan ID: Chronic degenerative radicu-
231.
Cummings JF, et al: Animal model of human disease:
lomyelopathy in the dog, J Small Anim Pract 16:461-
hereditary sensory neuropathy: nociceptive loss and
471, 1975.
acral mutilation in pointer dogs: canine hereditary sen-
 254. Braund KG: Hip dysplasia and degenerative myelopa-
sory neuropathy, Am J Pathol 112:136-138, 1983.
thy: making the distinction in dogs, Vet Med 82:82-89,
232. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Winn SS: Acral mutila-
1987.
tion and nociceptive loss in English pointer dogs, Acta
255.(
 Clemmons RM: Degenerative myelopathy. In Kirk RW,
Neuropathol 53:119-127, 1981.
editor: Current veterinary therapy X: small animal
233. Koppang N: Canine ceroid-lipofuscinosis in English
practice, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunders.
setters, J Small Anim Pract 10:639-644, 1970.
256.
Williams DA, Prymak C, Baughan J: Tocopherol (vita-
234. Watson B, Watson G: Electroretinograms in English
min E) status in canine degenerative myelopathy. In
setters with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Invest Oph-
the Proceedings of the 3rd ACVIM Forum. San Diego,
thalmol Vis Sci 19:87-90, 1980.
1985.
235.
Armstrong D, Koppang N, Jolly R: Ceroid-lipofuscinosis,
257.
 Amanai H: Leukomyelodegeneration in two aged Ger-
Comp Pathol Bull 12:2-4, 1980.
man shepherd lttermates: patho-morphological obser-
236. Armstrong D, Koppang N, Nilsson S: Canine hereditary
vations, Jpn J Vet Res 35:121, 1987.
ceroid lipofuscinosis, Eur Neurol 2l:147-156, 1982.
258.
 Clifford DH, Pirsch JG: Myenteric ganglial cells in dogs
237. Jasty V, et al: An unusual case of generalized ceroid-
with and without hereditary achalasia of the esopha-
lipofuscinosis in a cynomolgus monkey, Vet Pathol
gus, Am J Vet Res 32:615-619, 1971.
21:46-50, 1984.
259.
 Boudrieau RJ, Rogers WA: Megaesophagus in the dog?
238. Sims MH, Shull-Selcer E: Electrodiagnostic evaluation
a review of 50 cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:33-40,
of deafness in two English setter littermates, J Am Vet
1985.
Med Assoc 187:398-404, 1985.
506
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
260. Clifford DH, Gyorkey F: Myenteric _ganglial cells in
283. Olsson S, Stavenhorn M, Hoppe F: Dynamic compres-
dogs with and without achalasia of the esophagus,
 sion of the cervical spinal cord: a myelographic and
J Am Vet Med Assoc 150:205-211, 1967.
pathologic investigation in Great Dane dogs, Acta Vet
261.I
 Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
Scand 23:65-78, 1982.
thy, Vet Rec 101:438-441, 1977.
284. Wright F, Rest J, Palmer A: Ataxia of the Great Dane
262. Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: Peripheral nervous system in
caused by stenosis of the cervical vertebral canal: com-
a case of canine giant axonal neuropathy, Neuropathol
parison with similar conditions in the basset hound,
Appl Neurobiol 5:25-39, 1979.
Doberman pinscher, ridgeback and the thoroughbred
263. Duncan ID, Griffths IR: Canine giant axonal neuropa-
horse, Vet Rec 92:1-6, 1973.
thy: some aspects of its clinical, pathological and com-
285.
 Strombeck DR, Troya L: Evaluation of lower motor
parative features, J Small Anim Pract 22:491-501, 1981.
neuron function in two dogs with megaesophagus,
264. Griffths IR, et al: Further studies of the central ner-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:411-414, 1976.
vous system in canine giant axonal neuropathy, Neuro-
286.
pathol Appl Neurobiol 6:421-432, 1980.
ity disorders in the dog and cat, Vet Clin North Am
265. J
 Julien JP, et al: Giant axonal neuropathy: neuro-
8:229-244, 1978.
flaments isolated from diseased dogs have a normal
287.
 Stockard C: An hereditary lethal factor for localized
polypeptide composition, Exp Neurol 72:619-627,
motor and preganglionic neurons, Am J Anat 59:1-53,
1981.
1936.
266. Jaggy A, Lang J, Schawalder P: Cauda equina syndrom
288.
Cunningham JG, Farnbach GC: Inheritance and
beim Hund, Schweiz Arch Tierheillkd 129:171-192,
idiopathic canine epilepsy, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1987.
24:421-424, 1988.
267. Oliver J, Selcer R, Simpson S: Cauda equina compres-
289.
Wentink GH, et al: Myopathy with a possible reces-
sion from lumbosacral malarticulation and malforma-
sive X-linked inheritance in a litter of Irish terriers, Vet
tion in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 173:207-214,
Pathol 9:328-349, 1972.
1978.
289a.Junker K, van den Ingh TSGAM, Bossard MM, et al:
268. Lenehan T: Canine cauda equina syndrome, Compend
Fibrocartilaginous embolism of the spinal cord (FCE)
Contin Educ Pract Vet 5:941-951, 1983.
in juvenile Irish Wolfhounds. Vet Q 22:154-156, 2001.
269.
Clayton HM, Boyd JS: Spina bifida in a German shep-
290.
 Palmer AC, Goodyear JV: Congenital myasthenia in
herd puppy, Vet Rec 112:13-15, 1983.
the Jack Russell terrier, Vet Rec 103:433-434, 1978.
270. Falco MJ, Barker J, Wallace ME: The genetics of epilepsy
291.
Willkes MK, et al: Ultrastructure of motor endplates
in the British Alsatian, J Small Anim Pract 15:685-692,
 in canine congenital myasthenia gravis, J Comp Pathol
1974.
97:247-256, 1987.
27l. Karbe E: Animal model of human disease: GM2 gan-
292.
 Hartley WJ, Palmer AC: Ataxia in Jack Russell terriers,
gliosidosis (amaurotic idiocies) types I, II, and IIl. Ani-
Acta Neuropathol 26:71-74, 1973.
mal model: canine GM2 gangliosidosis, Am J Pathol
293.
Umemura T, et al: Generalized lipofuscinosis in a dog.
71:151-154, 1973.
Jpn J Vet Sci 47:673-677, 1985.
272. Kramer JW, et al: Characterization ofheritable thoracic
294.
Cummings JF, et al: GM2 gangliosidosis in a Japanese
hemivertebra of the German shorthaired pointer, J Am
spaniel, Acta Neuropathol 67:247-253, 1985.
Vet Med Assoc 181:814-815, 1982.
295.
Wallace ME: Keeshonds: a genetic study of epilepsy
273. Kornegay JN: Golden retriever myopathy. In the Pro-
and EEG readings, J Small Anim Pract 16:1-10,
ceedings of the Znd ACVIM Forum. Washington, DC,
1975.
1984.
296.
de Lahunta A, Averill DR: Hereditary cerebellar cor-
 274. Kornegay JN: Golden retriever myopathy In Kirk RW,
      
blue terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:1i19-1124,
practice, Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
1976.
275.
 Kornegay JN: Golden retriever muscular dystrophy. In
297.1
Montgomery D, Storts R: Hereditary striatonigral and
the Proceedings of the 6th ACVIM Forum. Washington,
 cerebello-olivary degeneration of the Kerry blue terrier,
DC, 1988.
Vet Pathol 20:143-159, 1983.
276. Valentine B, et al: Progressive muscular dystrophy in a
298. Montgomery D, Storts R: Hereditary striatonigral and
 golden retriever dog: light microscope and ultrastruc-
cerebello-olivary degeneration of the Kerry blue terrier
tural features at 4 and 8 months, Acta Neuropathol
II. Ultrastructural lesions in the caudate nucleus and
71:301-310, 1986.
cerebellar cortex, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 43:263-
277. Steiss JE, et al: Sensory neuropathy in a dog, J Am Vet
275, 1984.
Med Assoc 190:205-208, 1987
 299. Perille AL, et al: Postnatal cerebellar cortical degenera-
278.
Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL: Canine inherited
tion in Labrador retriever puppies, Can Vet J 32:619-
ataxia, Ann Neurol 9:492-499, 1981
621, 1991.
279.
 de Lahunta A, et al: Hereditary cerebellar cortical abi-
300.
 Atkinson JB, LeQuire VS: Myotonia congenita, Comp
otrophy in the Gordon setter, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Pathol Bull 17:3-4, 1985.
177:538-541, 1980.
301.
 McKerrell RE, Braund KG: Hereditary myopathy of
280. Steinberg S, et al: Clinical features of inherited cere-
Labrador retrivers. In Kirk RW, editor: Current vet-
bellar degeneration in Gordon setters, J Am Vet Med
erinary therapy X. Small animal practice. Philadelphia,
Assoc 179:886-890, 1981.
1989, WB Saunders, pp 820-822.
281. Troncoso JC, Cork LC, Price DL: Canine inherited
302.1
ataxia: ultrastructural observations, J Neuropathol Exp
Labrador retrievers with type II muscle fiber deficiency.
Neurol 44:165-175, 1985.
Am J Vet Res 48:1332-1336, 1987.
 282. Hedhammer A, et al: Overnutrition and skeletal dis-
303.1
 Braund KG: Labrador retriever myopathy. In the Pro-
ease: an experimental study in growing
 Great Dane
ceedings of the 6th ACVIM Forum. Washington, DC,
dogs, Cornell Vet 64(suppl 5):1-60, 1974.
1988.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
507
304. McKerrell R, Braund K: Hereditary myopathy in Lab-
328. Coulter DB:A dog with a partial merle coat, white iris,
rador retrievers: clinical variations, J Small Anim Pract
      
28:479-489, 1987.
1982.
305. McKerrell R, Braund K: Hereditary myopathy in
329.
 Shull RM, et al: Animal model of human disease:
Labrador retrievers: a morphologic study, Vet Pathol
canine alpha-iduronidase deficiency. A model of muco-
23:411-417, 1986.
polysaccharidosis I, Am J Pathol 109:244-248, 1982.
306.A
Amann JF, Laughlin MH, Korthuis RJ: Muscle hemo-
330.1
 Inada S, et al: Canine storage disease characterized by
dynamics in hereditary myopathy of Labrador retriev-
hereditary progressive neurogenic muscular atrophy:
ers, Am J Vet Res 49:1127-1130, 1988.
breeding experiments and clinical manifestation, Am J
307.
 Shores A, Redding R: Narcoleptic hypersomnia syn-
Vet Res 47:2294-2299, 1986.
drome responsive to protriptyline in a Labrador
331. Inada S, et al: A clinical study on hereditary progressive
retriever, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 23:455-458, 1987.
neurogenic muscular atrophy in pointer dogs, Jpn J Vet
308. Katherman AE: A comparative review of canine and
Sci 40:539-547, 1978.
human narcolepsy, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
332.1
 Izumo S, et al: Morphological study on the hereditary
2:818-822, 1980.
neurogenic amyotrophic dogs: accumulation of lipid
309. Fox JG, et al: Familial reflex myoclonus in Labrador
compound-like structures in the lower motor neuron,
retrievers, Am J Vet Res 45:2367-2370, 1984.
Acta Neuropathol 6l:270-276, 1983.
310. O'Brien DP, Zachary JF: Clinical features of spongy
333.
 Selcer ES, Selcer RR: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in
 degeneration of the central nervous system in two
two West Highland white terriers and one Pomeranian,
Labrador retriever littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:621-624, 1984.
186:1207-1210, 1985.
334.
Oliver JE, Geary JC: Cerebellar anomalies: two cases,
311. Zachary JF, O'Brien DP: Spongy degeneration of the
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 60:697, 1965.
central nervous system in two canine littermates, Vet
335.1
 Kay WJ, Budzilovich GN: Cerebellar hypoplasia and
Pathol 22:561-571, 1985.
agenesis in the dog, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 29:156,
312. Walvoort HC, et al: Canine glycogen storage disease
1970.
type Il: a clinical study of four affected Lapland dogs, J
336. Matthews NS, de Lahunta A: Degenerative myelopa-
Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:279-286, 1984.
thy in an adult miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc
313. Mostafa IE:A case of glycogenic cardiomegaly in a dog.
186:1213-1214, 1985.
Acta Vet Scand 11:197-208, 1970.
337.
Zaki F, Kay WJ: Globoid cell leukodystrophy in a
314.
 Sandefeldt E, et al: Hereditary neuronal abiotrophy in
miniature poodle, J Am Vet Med Assoc 163:248-250,
the Swedish Lapland dog, Cornell Vet 63:1-7l, 1973.
1973.
315. Sandefeldt E, et al: Hereditary neuronal abiotrophy in
338. Bundza A, Lowden JA, Charlton KM: Niemann-Pick
Swedish Lapland dogs, Am J Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
disease in a poodle dog, Vet Pathol 16:530-538, 1979.
316. Schmahl W, Kaiser E: Hydrocephalus, syringomyelia,
339.
 Shell LG, et al: Neuronal visceral GMl gangliosidosis
and spinal cord angiodysgenesis in a Lhasa apso dog.
in Portuguese water dogs. In the Proceedings of the 6th
Vet Pathol 21:252-254, 1984.
ACVIM Forum. Washington, DC, 1988.
317. Sahar A, et al: Spontaneous
s canine hydrocephalus:
340.
Wright JA, Brownlie S: Progressive ataxia in a Pyre-
cerebrospinal fluid dynamics, J Neurol Neurosurg Psy-
nean mountain dog, Vet Rec 116:410-411, 1985.
chiatry 34:308-315, 1971.
341.(
Gamble DA, Chrisman CL: A leukoencephalomyelop-
318. Greene CE, Vandevelde M, Braund K: Lissencephaly
athy of Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 21:274-280, 1984.
 in two Lhasa apso dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:405-
342.
Chrisman C: Neuroaxonal dystrophy and leukoen-
410, 1976.
cephalomyelopathy of Rottweiler dogs. In Kirk RW,
319. Zaki FA: Lissencephaly in Lhasa apso dogs, J Am Vet
editor: Current veterinary therapy IX: small animal
Med Assoc 169:1165-1168, 1976.
practice, Philadelphia, 1986, WB Saunders.
320. Mayhew IG, et al: Tremor syndromes and hypomyelin-
343.
Chrisman CL, Cork LC, Gamble DA: Neuroaxonal
ation in lurcher pups, J Small Anim Pract 25:551-559,
dystrophy of Rottweiler dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
1984.
184:464-467, 1984.
321. Simpson ST: Hydrocephalus in the Maltese dog: Elec-
344. Cork LC, et al: Canine neuronaxonal dystrophy, J Neu-
ropathol Exp Neurol 42:286-296, 1983.
ceedings of the 4th ACVIM Forum. Washington, DC,
345.1
Evans MG, Mullaney TP, Lowrie CT: Neuroaxonal
1986.
dystrophy in a Rottweiler pup, J Am Vet Med Assoc
322.
 Simpson ST, et al: Hydrocephalus. In Proceedings of
192:1560-1562, 1988.
the 5th ACVIM Forum. San Diego, 1987.
346.
 Shell L, Jortner B, Leib M: Familial motor neuron dis-
323.
Cox VS, et al: Hereditary esophageal dysfunction in
ease in Rottweiler dogs: neuropathologic studies, Vet
the miniature schnauzer dog, Am J Vet Res 4l:326-
Pathol 24:135-139, 1987.
330, 1980.
347.
       'i 
324. Clifford DH, et al: Management of esophageal acha-
in two Rottweiler littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
lasia in miniature schnauzers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
190:878-880, 1987.
161:1012-1020, 1972.
348.
 Shell LG: Spinal muscular atrophy in Rottweiler pups. In 
325.
Rotmistrovsky RA, et al: GM2 gangliosidosis in a
the Proceedings of the 6th ACVIM Forum. Washington,
mixed-breed dog, Prog Vet Neurol 2:203-208, 1991.
DC,1988.
326. Shull RM, et al: Morphologic and biochemical stud-
349.
 Shell LG, et al: Spinal dysraphism, hemivertebra, and
ies of canine mucopolysaccharidosis I, Am J Pathol
stenosis of the spinal canal in a Rottweiler puppy, J Am
114:487-495, 1984.
Anim Hosp Assoc 24:341-344, 1988.
327. Schwartz A, et al: Congenital neuromuscular esopha-
 350. Appleby EC, Longstaffe JA, Bell FR: Ceroid lipofusci-
geal disease in a litter of Newfoundland puppies, J Am
nosis in two Saluki dogs, J Comp Pathol 92:375-380,
Vet Radiol Soc 17:101-105, 1976.
1982.
508
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
351. Luttgen PJ, Storts RW: Central nervous system sta-
375. Kelly WR, et al: Canine α-L-fucosidosis: a storage disease
tus spongiosus. In the Proceedings of the 5th ACVIM
of Springer spaniels, Acta Neuropathol 60:9-13, 1983.
Forum. San Diego, 1987.
376. Littlewood JD, Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Neuronal
352. Cummings J, et al: Tremors in Samoyed pups with oli-
storage disease in English springer spaniels, Vet Rec
 godendrocyte deficiencies and hypomyelination, Acta
112:86, 1983.
Neuropathol 71:267-277, 1986.
377.1
 Keller CB, Lamarre J: Inherited lysosomal storage
353. Mason RW, Hartley WJ, Randall M: Spongiform degen-
disease in an English springer spaniel, J Am Vet Med
eration of the white matter in a Samoyed pup, Aust Vet
Assoc 200:194-195, 1992.
Pract 9:11-13, 1979.
378.
Griffths IR, et al: Shaking pups: a disorder of central
354. Sorjonen D, Cox N, Kwapien R: Myeloencephalopathy
myelination in the spaniel dog. Part 1. Clinical, genetic,
with eosinophilic refractile bodies (Rosenthal fibers) in
and light microscopical observations, J Neurol Sci
a Scottish terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1004-1006,
50:423-433, 1981.
1987.
379.
Slatter D: Fundamentals of veterinary ophthalmology.
355. Meyers KM, et al: Hyperkinetic episodes in Scottish
Philadelphia, 198l, WB Saunders.
terrier dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 155:129-133, 1969.
380.
Erickson F, Leipold HW, McKinley J: Congenital
356.
 Robert DD, Hitt ME: Methionine as a possible inducer
defects in dogs. Part 2, Canine Pract 14:51-61, 1977.
of Scotty cramp, Canine Pract 13:29-31, 1986.
381.
Hoover D, Little P, Cole W: Neuronal ceroid-lipofusci-
357.
 Meyers KM, et al: Muscular hypertonicity, Arch Neurol
nosis in a mature dog, Vet Pathol 21:359-361, 1984.
25:61-67, 1971
382.
Van der Velden A: Fits in Tervuren shepherd dogs: a
358. Meyers KM, Schaub RG: The relationship of serotonin
presumed hereditary trait, J Small Anim Pract 9:63-70.
to a motor disorder of Scottish terrier dogs, Life Sci
1968.
14:1895-1906, 1974
383.
 Cummings J, et al: Canine inherited hypertrophic neu-
359. Meyers KM, Padgett GA, Dickson WM: The genetic
ropathy, Acta Neuropathol 53:137-143, 1981.
basis of a kinetic disorder of Scottish terrier dogs,
384.
Cooper BJ, et al: Defective Schwann cell function in
J Hered 61:189-192, 1970.
canine inherited hypertrophic neuropathy, Acta Neu-
360. Meyers KM, Dickson WM, Schaub RG: Serotonin
ropathol 63:51-56, 1984.
involvement in a motor disorder of Scottish terrier
385.
 Cooper BJ, et al: Canine inherited hypertrophic neu-
dogs, Life Sci 13:1261-1274, 1973.
ropathy: clinical and electrodiagnostic studies, Am J
361.
Andersson B, Andersson M: On the etiology of "Scotty
Vet Res 45:1172-1177, 1984.
cramp” and "splay"—two motoring disorders common in
386.
 Cummings J, de Lahunta A: Hypertrophic neuropathy
the Scottish terrier breed, Acta Vet Scand 23:550-558,
in a dog, Acta Neuropathol 20:325-336, 1974.
1982.
387.1
 Millichamp NJ, Curtis R, Barnett KC: Progressive reti-
362. Clemmons RM, Peters RI, Meyers KM: Scotty cramp:
nal atrophy in Tibetan terriers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
a review of cause, characteristics, diagnosis and treat-
192:769-776, 1988.
ment, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:385-390,
388.
Geary JC, Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF: Atlanto-axial sub-
1980.
luxation in the canine, J Small Anim Pract 8:577-582,
 363. Hargis A, et al: Post-mortem findings in a Shetland
1967.
sheepdog with dermatomyositis, Vet Pathol 23:509-
389.
Oliver JE, Lewis RE: Lesions of the atlas and axis in
511, 1986.
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 9:304-313, 1973.
364. Harari J, et al: Cerebellar agenesis in two canine litter-
390.
 Ladds P, et al: Congenital odontoid process separation
mates, J Am Vet Med Assoc 182:622-623, 1983
in two dogs, J Small Anim Pract 12:463-471, i970.
365. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M: Degenerative myelopathy in
391.
Cook JR, Oliver JE: Atlantoaxial luxation in the dog.
a family of Siberian husky dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 3:242-252, 1981.
183:998-1000, 1983.
392.
 Downey RS: An unusual cause of tetraplegia in a dog.
366.B
Reinke JD, Suter PF: Laryngeal paralysis in a dog, J Am
Can Vet J 8:216-217, 1967.
Vet Med Assoc 172:714-716, 1978.
393.
 Bardens JW: Congenital malformations of the foramen
367.
 Hartley WJ, Blakemore WF: Neurovisceral glucocere-
magnum in dogs, Southwest Vet 18:295-298, 1965.
broside storage [Gaucher's disease) in a dog, Vet Pathol
394.
 Parker AJ, Park RD: Occipital dysplasia in the dog.
10:191-201, 1973.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 10:520-525, 1974.
368.
Van De Water N, Jolly R, Farrow B: Canine Gaucher
395.
Gee B, Doige C: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in a
disease: the enzymatic defect, Aust J Exp Biol Med Sci
litter of dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:53-59, 1970.
57:551-554, 1979.
396.
 Bichsel P, et al: Solitary cartilaginous exostoses associ-
369. Richards RB, Kakulas BA: Spongiform leukoencepha-
 ated with spinal cord compression in three large-breed
lopathy associated with congenital myoclonia syn-
dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:619-622, 1985.
drome in the dog, J Comp Pathol 88:317-320, 1978.
397.
Doige C: Multiple cartilaginous exostoses in dogs, Vet
370. Johnson RP, et al: Myasthenia in Springer spaniel lit-
Pathol 24:276-278, 1987.
termates, J Small Anim Pract 16:64i-647, 1975.
398.
 Acton CE: Spinal cord compression in young dogs due
371. T
Taylor R, Farrow B, Healy P: Canine fucosidosis: clini-
to cartilaginous exostosis, Calif Vet 41:7-26, 1987.
cal findings, J Small Anim Pract 28:291-300, 1987.
399.
Vicini DS, et al: Peripheral nerve biopsy for diagnosis
372.A
Abraham D, et al.: The enzymic defect and storage
of globoid cell leukodystrophy in a dog, J Am Vet Med
products in canine fucosidosis, Biochem J 221:25-33,
Assoc 192:1087-1090, 1988.
1984.
400.1
 Kornegay JN: Dysmyelinogenesis in dogs. In the Pro-
373.
Alroy J, Ucci AA, Warren CD: Human and canine
ceedings of the 3rd ACVIM Forum. San Diego, 1985.
fucosidosis: a comparative histochemistry study, Acta
401.
Neuropathol 67:265-271, 1985.
Acta Neuropathol 72:394-40l, 1987.
374. Hartley WJ, Canfield PJ, Donnelly TM: A suspected
402.
Comont PSV, Palmer AC, Williams AE: Weakness
 new canine storage disease, Acta Neuropathol 56:225-
 associated with myelopathy in a Weimaraner puppy,
232, 1982.
J Small Anim Pract 29:367-372, 1988.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
509
403. McGrath JT: Spinal dysraphism in the dog, Pathol Vet
429. Wilson WD, et al: Occipitoatlantoaxial malforma-
Suppl 2:1-36, 1965.
tion in two non-Arabian horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
404.（
Gieb LW, Bistner SI: Spinal cord dysraphism in a dog.
187:36-40, 1985.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 150:618-620, 1967.
430.
 Shupe JL, et al: Hereditary multiple exostoses, Am J
405. Engel HN, Draper DD: Comparative prenatal develop-
Pathol 104:285-288, 1981
ment of the spinal cord in normal and dysraphic dogs:
431.1
 Maciulis A, et al: High resolution chromosome banding
embryonic stage, Am J Vet Res 43:1729-1734, 1982.
analysis of horses with hereditary multiple exostosis,
406. Engel HN, Draper DD: Comparative prenatal develop-
J Equine Vet Sci 5:284-286, 1985.
ment of the spinal cord in normal and dysraphic dogs:
432.1
 Powers B, et al: Pathology of the vertebral column of
fetal stage, Am J Vet Res 43:1735-1743, 1982.
horses with cervical static stenosis, Vet Pathol 23:392-
 407. Botelho SY, et al: Electromyography in dogs with con-
399,1986.
 genital spinal cord lesions, Am J Vet Res 28:205-212,
433.
 Alitalo I, Karkkainen M: Osteochondrotic changes in
1967.
the vertebrae of four ataxic horses suffering from cer-
408. Confer AW, Ward BC: Spinal dysraphism: a congeni-
vical vertebral malformation, Nord Vet Med 35:468-
tal myelodysplasia in the Weimaraner, J Am Vet Med
474, 1983.
Assoc 160:1423-1426, 1972.
434.
Wagner P, et al: Surgical stabiization of the equine cer-
409.(
Osborne CA, Clifford DH, Jessen C: Hereditary esoph-
vical spine, Vet Surg 8:7-12, 1979.
ageal achalasia in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 151:572-
435.S
 Steel j, Whittem J, Hutchins D: Equine sensory ataxia
581, 1967.
("wobbles"): clinical and pathological observations in
410. Bryant SH: Altered membrane potentials in myotonia.
Australian cases, Aust Vet J 35:442-449, 1959.
 In Bolis L, Hoffman JF, Leaf A, editors: Membranes and
436.
Wagner P, et al: Evaluation of cervical spinal fusion as a
diseases, New York, 1976, Raven Press
treatment in the equine “"wobbler” syndrome, Vet Surg
411. Bryant SH: Myotonia in the goat, Ann N Y Acad Sci
8:84-88.1979.
317:314-325, 1979.
437.1
 Mayhew I, et al: Equine degenerative myeloencepha-
412. Healy P, Sewell C: The use of plasma mannosidase
lopathy: a vitamin E deficiency that may be familial,
activity for the detection of goats heterozygous for
J Vet Intern Med 1:45-50, 1987.
B-mannosidosis, Aust Vet J 62:286-287, 1985.
438. Mayhew IG, et al: Equine degenerative myeloencepha-
413. Fankhauser R: Hydrocephalus Studien, Schweiz Arch
lopathy, J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:195-20l, 1977.
Tierheilkd 101:407-416, 1959.
439.
Steinberg S, Bothelo S: Myotonia in a horse, Science
414.
Healy PJ, et al: B-Mannosidase deficiency in Anglo
137:979, 1962
Nubian goats, Aust Vet J 57:504-507, 1981.
440.1
 Beech J: Neuroaxonal dystrophy of the accessory cune-
415. Robinson WF, et al: Atlanto-axial malarticulation in
ate nucleus in horses, Vet Pathol 21:384-393, 1984.
Angora goats, Aust Vet J 58:105-107, 1982.
441.1
 Beech J, Haskind M: Genetic studies of neuroaxonal
416. Luttgen PJ, Storts RW: Ceroid lipofuscinosis in Nubian
dystrophy in the Morgan, Am J Vet Res 48:109-113,
 goats. In the Proceedings of the 4th ACVIM Forum,
1987.
San Diego, 1987.
442.
 Roneus B: Glutathione peroxidase and selenium in the
417.
Fiske RA, Storts RW: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in
blood of healthy horses and foals affected by muscular
Nubian goats, Vet Pathol 25:171-173, 1988.
dystrophy Nord Vet Med 34:350-353, 1982.
418. Mayhew J, Brown C, Trapp A: Equine degenerative
443.1
Poss M, Young S: Dysplastic dlisease of the cerebel-
myeloencephalopathy. In the Proceedings of the 4th
lum of an adult horse, Acta Neuropathol 75:209-211,
ACVIM Forum, Washington, DC, 1986.
1987.
419. Mayhew IG, et al: Spinal cord disease in the horse, Cor-
444.
 Grant B, et al: Surgical treatment of multiple level cord
nell Vet 68(suppl 6):1-207, 1978.
compression in the horse, Equine Pract 7:19-24, 1985.
420. Watson AG, Mayhew IG: Familial congenital occipi-
445.
 Rooney J: Equine incoordination. I. Gross morphology.
toatlantoaxial malformation (OAAM) in the Arabian
Cornell Vet 53:411-422, 1963.
horse, Spine 11:334-339, 1986.
446.
Fraser H, Palmer A: Equine incoordination and wobbler 
421. Smith JM, DeBowes RM, Cox JH: Central nervous sys-
disease of young horses, Vet Rec 80:338-355, 1967.
tem disease in adult horses. Part II. Differential diagno-
447.
 Falco M, Whitwell K, Palmer A: An investigation into
sis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 9:771-780, 1987.
the genetics of “wobbler disease" in thoroughbred
422. Duncan I: Congenital tremor and abnormalities of
horses in Britain, Equine Vet J 8:165-169, 1967.
myelination. In the Proceedings of the 5th ACVIM
448.
 Duncan I: Some aspects of the neuropathy of equine
Forum, San Diego: 869-873, 1987.
laryngeal hemiplegia. In the Proceedings of the 5th
423. Fraser H: Two dissimilar types of cerebellar disorder in
ACVIM Forum, San Diego, 1987.
the horse, Vet Rec 78:608-612, 1966.
449.
Cole CR: Changes in the equine larynx associated with
424.E
 Palmer AC, et al: Cerebellar hypoplasia and degenera-
laryngeal hemiplegia, Am J Vet Res 7:69-77, 1946.
tion in the young Arab horse: clinical and neuropatho-
450.
 Duncan ID, et al: The pathology of equine laryngeal
logical features, Vet Rec 93:62-66, 1973.
hemiplegia, Acta Neuropathol 27:337-348, 1974.
425. Mayhew I: Seizures disorders. In Robinson NE, edi-
451.
Hillidge C: Interpretation of laryngeal function tests in
tor: Current therapy in equine medicine, Philadelphia,
the horse, Vet Rec 118:535-536, 1986.
1983, WB Saunders.
452.
Cahill JI, Goulder B: The pathogenesis of equine laryn-
426. Scarratt WK, et al: Degenerative myelopathy in two
geal hemiplegia: a review, N Z Vet J 35:82-90, 1987.
equids, J Equine Vet Sci 5:139-141, 1985.
453.
Tulleners EP, Harrison IW, Raker CW: Management
427.
Bjorck G, et al: Congenital cerebellar ataxia in the
 of arytenoid chondropathy and failed laryngoplasty
Gotland pony breed, Zentralbl Veterinarmed A 20(A):
in horses: 75 cases [1879-1985), J Am Vet Med Assoc
341-354,1973.
192:670-675, 1988.
428. Mayhew IG, Watson AG, Heissan JA: Congenital
454.
Cahill JI, Goulden B: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia. Part
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation in the horse, Equine
II. An electron microscopic study of peripheral nerves,
Vet J 10:103-113, 1978.
N Z Vet J 34:170-175, 1986.
510
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
455. Cahill JI, Goulden B: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia. Part
480. Mesfin GM, Kusewitt D, Parker A: Degenerative
1. A light microscopic study of peripheral nerves, N Z
myelopathy in a cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 176:62-64,
Vet J 34:161-169, 1986.
1980.
456. Cahill J, Goulden B: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia.
481.
Cork LC, Munnell JF, Lorenz MD: The pathology of
 Part V. Central nervous system pathology, N Z Vet J
feline GM2 gangliosidosis, Am J Pathol 90:723-734,
34:191-193, 1986.
1978.
457.(
Cahill J, Goulden B: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia. Part
482.
 Cork LC, et al: GM2 ganglioside lysosomal storage dis-
IV. Muscle pathology, N Z Vet J 34:186-190, 1986.
ease in cats with hexosaminidase defciency, Science
458. Cahill J, Goulden BE: Equine laryngeal hemiplegia.
196:1014-1017, 1977.
Part Il. A teased fibre study of peripheral nerves, N Z
483.
 Johnson KH: Globoid leukodystrophy in the cat, J Am
Vet J 34:181-185, 1986.
Vet Med Assoc 157:2057-2067, 1970.
459.
 Baker GJ: Laryngeal hemiplegia in the horse, Compend
484.
Sandstrom B, Westman J, Ockerman PA: Glycogenosis
Contin Educ Pract Vet 5:S61-S67, 1983.
of the central nervous system in the cat, Acta Neuro-
460. Koch C: Diseases of the larynx and pharynx of the
pathol 14:194-200, 1969.
horse, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 2:573-580,
485.
Cribh A: Laryngeal paralysis in a mature cat, Can Vet J
1980.
27:27,1986.
461.
Vaala W: Diagnosis and treatment of prematurity and
486.
White R, et al: Outcome of surgery for laryngeal paral-
neonatal maladjustment syndrome in newborn foals,
ysis in four cats, Vet Rec 117:103-104, 1986.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8:211-226, 1986.
487.
Hardie EM, et al: Laryngeal paralysis in three cats, J
462. Montali R, et al: Spinal ataxia in zebras: comparison
Am Vet Med Assoc 179:879-882, 1981.
with the wobbler syndrome of horses, Vet Pathol
488.
Fatzer R: Leukodystrophische Erschrankungen im
11:68-78, 1974
Gehirn junger Katzen, Schweiz Arch Tierheilikd
463. Van den Berg P, Baker M, Lange A:A suspected lyso-
117:641-648, 1975.
somal storage disease in Abyssinian cats. Part I. Genetic,
489.1
 Hegreberg GA, Thuline HC, Francis BH: Morphologic
clinical and clinical pathological aspects, J S Afr Vet
      s
Assoc 48:195-199, 1977.
1971.
464. Lange AL, Brown JMM, Maree CC: Biochemical stud-
490.
 Oliver JE, Hoerlein BF, Mayhew IG: Veterinary neurol-
ies on a lysosomal storage disease in Abyssinian cats,
ogy, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.
Onderstepoort J Vet Res 50:149-155, 1983.
491.
 Blakemore W: A case of mannosidosis in the cat: clini-
465.
Baker H, et al: Sphingomyelin lipidosis in a cat, Vet
cal and histopathological findings, J Small Anim Pract 
Pathol 24:386-391, 1987.
27:447-455, 1986.
466. Sponenberg DP, Graf-Webster E: Hereditary meningo
492.
Walkley SU, Blakemore WF, Purpura DP: Alterations in
encephalocele in Burmese cats, J Hered 77:60, 1986.
neuron morphology in feline mannosidosis, Acta Neu-
467. Zook B, et al: Encephalocele and other congenital cra-
ropathol 53:75-79, 1981.
niofacial anomalies in Burmese cats, Vet Med Small
493.1
 Braund KG, Ribas JL: Meningiomas of the central ner-
Anim Clin 78:695-701, 1983.
vous system in dogs and cats. In the Proceedings of the
468. Rebillard M, Rebillard G, Pujol R: Variability of the
4th ACVIM Forum, Washington, DC, 1986.
hereditary deafness in the white cat, I, Physiol Hear
494.1
Lawson DC, Burk RL, Prata RG: Cerebral meningioma
Res 5:179-187, 1981
in the cat: diagnosis and surgical treatment often cases,
469. Rebillard M, Pujol R, Rebillard G: Variability of the
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:333-342, 1984.
hereditary deafness in the white cat, II, Histol Hear Res
495.1
 Braund K, Ribas J: Central nervous system menin-
5:189-200, 1981.
giomas, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8:241-248,
470. Elverland HH, Mair IWS: Hereditary deafness in the
1986.
cat, Acta Otolaryngol 90:360-369, 1980.
496. Haskins ME, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a domestic
471.
Faith RE, Woodard JC: Waardenburg's syndrome,
short-haired cat: a disease distinct from that seen in the
Comp Pathol Bull 5:3-4, 1973.
Siamese cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:384-387, 1979.
472.
Coulter DB, Martin CL, Alvarado TP: A cat with white
497.1
 Haskins ME, et al: The pathology of the feline model of
fur and one blue eye, Calif Vet 34:11-14, 1980.
mucopolysaccharidosis: 1, Am J Pathol 112:27-36, 1983.
473. Delack JB: Hereditary deafness in the white cat, Com-
498.1
Woodard JC, Collins GH, Hessler JR: Feline heredi-
pend Contin Educ Pract Vet 6:609-616, 1984.
tary neuroaxonal dystrophy, Am J Pathol 74:551-560,
474.
Creel D, Conlee JW, Parks TN: Auditory brainstem
1974.
anomalies in albino cats. I. Evoked potential studies,
499.
Vandevelde M, Greene C, Hoff E: Lower motor neuron
Brain Res 260:1-9, 1983.
 disease with accumulation of neuroflaments in a cat,
475.
 Saperstein G, Harris S, Leipold HW: Congenital defects 
Vet Pathol 13:428-435, 1976.
in domestic cats, Feline Pract 6:18-41, 1976.
500.
 Percy DH, Jortner BS: Feline lipidosis, Arch Pathol Lab
476. Watson AG, Hall MA, de Lahunta A: Congenital occip-
Med 92:136-143, 1971.
itoatlantoaxial malformation in a cat, Compend Con-
501.
 Cuddon PA, Higgins RJ, Duncan ID: Feline Niemann-
tin Educ Pract Vet 7:245-254, 1985.
Pick disease associated polyneuropathy. In the Pro-
477.(
Carpenter M, Harter D: A study of congenital feline
ceedings of the 6th ACVIM Forum, Washington, DC,
 cerebellar malformations: an anatomic and physiologic
1988.
evaluation of agenetic defects, J Comp Neurol 105:51-
 502. Kelly DF, Gaskell CJ: Spongy degeneration of the
94, 1956.
central nervous system in kittens, Acta Neuropathol
478. Csiza C, et al: Spontaneous feline ataxia, Cornell Vet
35:151-158, 1976.
62:300-322, 1972.
503.
Clifford DH, et al: Congenital achalasia of the esopha-
 479. Herndon R, Margolis G, Kilham L: The synaptic orga-
gus in four cats of common ancestry, J Am Vet Med
nization of the malformed cerebellum induced by
Assoc 158:1554-1560, 1971.
perinatal infection with the feline panleukopenia virus
504.
 Davidson AP: Congenital disorders of the Manx cat,
(PLV), J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 30:196-205, 1971.
Southwest Vet 37:115-119, 1986.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
511
505. Kitchen H, Murray RE, Cockrell BY: Animal model
529. Richards RB, et al: Ovine congenital progressive
for human disease, spina bifida, sacral dysgenesis and
muscular dystrophy: mode of inheritance, Aust Vet J
myelocele, Am J Pathol 68:203-206, 1972.
65:93-94, 1988.
506.H
Hall JA, Fettman MJ, Ingram JT: Sodium chloride
530.1
 Pritchard DH, Napthine DV, Sinclair AJ: Globoid cell
depletion in a cat with fistulated meningomyelocele,
leukodystrophy in polled Dorset sheep, Vet Pathol
J Am Vet Med Assoc 192:1445-1448, 1988.
17:399-405, 1980.
507. Leipold HW, et al: Congenital defects of the caudal
531.
Woods PR: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in Ram-
vertebral column and spinal cord in Manx cats, J Am
 bouillet sheep. In the Proceedings of the 9th ACVIM 
Vet Med Assoc 164:520-523, 1974.
Forum, New Orleans, 1991
508. Fyfe JC, et al: Familial glycogen storage disease type
532.
 Saperstein G, Leipold HW, Dennis SM: Congenital
IV (GSD IV) in Norwegian forest cats (NWFC), J Vet
defects in sheep, J Am Vet Med Assoc 167:314-322,
Intern Med 4:127, 1990.
1974.
509. Maenhout T, et al: Mannosidosis in a litter of Persian
533. Whittington RJ, et al: Congenital hydranencephaly and
cats, Vet Rec 122:351-354, 1988.
 arthrogryposis of Corriedale sheep, Aust Vet J 65:124-
510. Jezyk PF, Haskins ME, Newman LR: Alpha mannosi-
127, 1988.
dosis in a Persian cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1483-
534. Parish S, Gavin P, Knowles D: Quadriplegia associated
1485, 1986.
with cervical deformity in a lamb, Vet Rec 1l4:196,
511. Vandevelde M, et al: Hereditary neurovisceral man-
1984.
nosidosis with associated mannosidase deficiency in
Nisbet DI, Renwick CC: Congenital myopathy in
a family of Persian cats, Acta Neuropathol 58:64-68,
lambs, J Comp Pathol 71:177, 1961.
1982.
536.1
 Prieur DJ, Ahern-Rindell AJ, Murnane RD: Animal
512. Green P, Little P: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscin storage in
model of human disease: ovine GMl gangliosidosis,
Siamese cats, Can J Comp Med 38:207-212, 1974.
Am J Pathol 139:1511-1513, 1991
513.
 Cowell KR, et al: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat, J Am
537.
Cordy DR, Richards WPC, Bradford GE: Systemic
Vet Med Assoc 169:334-339, 1976.
neuroaxonal dystrophy in Suffolk sheep, Acta Neuro-
514. Langweiler M, Haskins ME, Jezyk PF: Mucopolysac-
pathol 8:133-140, 1967
charidosis in a litter of cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
538.
 Done J: The congenital tremor syndrome in pigs, Vet
14:748-751, 1978.
Ann 16:98-102, 1975.
 515. Haskins ME, et al: Spinal compression and hindlimb
539.
   e  a s
paresis in cats with mucopolysaccharidosis: Vl, J Am
animals, Vet Bull 8:441-450, 1974.
Vet Med Assoc 182:983-985, 1983.
540.
 Done JT: Congenital nervous diseases of pigs: a review,
516. Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M: A case of mucopolysac-
Lab Anim 2:207-217, 1968.
charidosis VI in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:891-
541.
 Chambers J, Hall RR: Porcine malignant hyperthermia
896, 1983.
[porcine stress syndrome],
. Compend Contin Educ
517. Jezyk P, Haskins M, Patterson DF: Mucopolysacchari-
Pract Vet 9:F317-F322, 1987.
dosis in a cat with arylsulfatase B deficiency: a model
542.B
 Eikelenboom G, Minkema D: Prediction of pale, soft
of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, Science 198:834-836,
and exudative muscle with a non-lethal test for the
1977.
halothane-induced porcine malignant hyperthermia
 518. Haskins ME, et al: The pathology ofthe feline model of
syndrome, Neth J Vet Sci 99:421-426, 1974.
mucopolysaccharidosis Vl, Am J Pathol 101:657-674,
543. Lucke JN, Hall GM, Lister D: Malignant hyperthermia
1980.
in the pig and the role of stress, Ann N Y Acad Sci
519. Haskins ME, Jezyk PF, Desnick RJ, et al: Animal
317:326-337, 1979.
model of human disease mucopolysaccharidosis VI.
544.
 Sybesma W, Eikelenboom G: Malignant hyperthermia
Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome arylsulfatase B-deficient
in pigs, Neth J Vet Sci 2:155-160, 1969.
mucopolysaccharidosis in the Siamese cat, Am J Pathol
545.
Steiss JE, Bowen JM, Williams CH: Electromyographic
105:191-193, 1981.
 evaluation of malignant hyperthermia-susceptible pigs,
520.(
Chrisp CE, et al: Lipid storage disease in a Siamese cat,
Am J Vet Res 42:1173-1176, 1981
J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:616-622, 1970.
546.
Wells GAH, Pinsent PJN, Todd JN: A progressive,
 521. Snyder S, Kingston R, Wenger D: Animal model of
familial myopathy of the Pietrain pig: the clinical syn-
human disease: Niemann-Pick disease. sphingomyeli-
drome, Vet Rec 106:556-558, 1980.
nosis of Siamese cats, Am J Pathol 108:252-254, 1982.
547.1
 Kidd A, et al: A new genetically-determined congenital
522. Terlecki S, et al: A congenital disease oflambs clinically
nervous disorder in pigs, Br Vet J 142:275-285, 1986.
similar to "inherited cerebellar cortical atrophy" (Daft
548.
Vogt D, et al: Congenital meningocele-encephalocele
lamb disease), Br Vet J 134:299-308, 1978.
in an experimental swine herd, Am J Vet Res 47:188-
523.
 Nuttall WO: Ovine neuroaxonal dystrophy in New
191, 1986.
Zealand, N Z Vet J 36:5-7, 1988.
549. Read WK, Bridges CH: Cerebrospinal lipodystrophy in
524. Manktelow CD, Hartley WJ: Generalized glycogen stor-
swine, Pathol Vet 5:67-74, 1968.
age disease in sheep, J Comp Pathol 85:139-145, 1975.
550.1
 Higgins RJ, et al: Spontaneous lower motor neuron dis-
525.
 Dennis SM, Leipold HW: Anencephaly in sheep, Cor-
ease with neurofbrllary accumulation in young pigs,
nell Vet 62:273-281, 1972.
Acta Neuropathol 59:288-294, 1983.
526. Harper P, et al: Cerebellar abiotrophy and segmental
551.
 Coates JR, Kline KL: Congenital and inherited neu-
axonopathy: two syndromes of progressive ataxia of
rologic disorders in dogs and cats. In Kirk RW, editor?
merino sheep, Aust Vet J 63:18-21, 1986.
Current veterinary therapy Xll: small animal practice,
527.
McGavin: Progressive ovine
muscular
dystrophy,
Philadelphia, 1995, WB Saunders.
Comp Pathol Bull 6:3-4, 1974.
552.1
Moe L: Hereditary polyneuropathy of Alaskan mala-
528. Richards R, et al: Ovine congenital progressive mus-
mutes. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy
cular dystrophy: clinical syndrome and distribution of
XI: small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB
lesions, Aust Vet J 63:396-401, 1986.
Saunders.
512
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
553. Snyder PW, et al: Pathologic features of naturally
577. Mandigers PJJ, et al: Hereditary myelopathy in the
occurring juvenile polyarteritis in beagle dogs, Vet
Dutch Kooiker dog. In Proceedings of the European
Pathol 32:337-345, 1995.
Society of Veterinary Neurology, 7th Annual Sympo-
554.J
Jones BR, Alley MR, Batchelor B: Hydrocephalus and
sium, Suffolk, UK, 1993.
hypertrichosis in golden retriever dogs, Vet J 44:38-39,
578.1
1996.
thy in Kooiker dogs, Res Vet Sci 54:118-123, 1993.
555.
 Bethlehem M, Gruys E, Elving L: Congenital tremor in
579.
de Lahunta A, et al: Labrador retriever central axonop-
Holstein Friesian cattle, Vet Q 14:54-56, 1992.
athy, Prog Vet Neurol 5:117-122, 1994.
-   A    '  
580. Neer TM, Kornegay JN: Leukoencephalomalacia and
phragmatic muscles in Holstein-Friesian cattle, Acta
cerebral white matter vacuolar degeneration in two
Neuropathol 90:339-346, 1995.
related Labrador retriever puppies, J Vet Intern Med
557.
9:100-104, 1995.
horn calves, Aust Vet J 69:143-144, 1992.
581.1
 Paola JP, Podell M, Shelton GD: Muscular dystrophy in
558. Hindmarsh M, Harper PAW: Congenital spongiform
miniature schnauzers, Prog Vet Neurol 4:14-18, 1993.
myelopathy of Simmental calves, Aust Vet J 72:193-
582.1
Franklin RJM, Jeffery ND, Ramsey IK: Neuroaxonal
194, 1995.
dystrophy in a litter of papillon pups, J Small Anim
 559. Tisdall PLC, et al: Congenital portosystemic shunts in
Pract 36:441-444, 1995.
Maltese and Australian cattle dogs, Aust Vet J 7l:174-
583. van Winkle TJ, et al: Blindness due to polymicrogyria
178, 1994.
and asymmetrical dilation of the lateral ventricles in
560. Weissenbock H, Obermaier G, Dahme E: Alexander's
standard poodles, Prog Vet Neurol 5:66-71, 1994.
disease in a Bernese mountain dog, Acta Neuropathol
583a. Jurney C, Haddad J, Crawford N, et al: Polymicrogyria
91:200-204, 1996.
in standard poodles, J Vet Intern Med 23[4):871-874,
561. Meric S, Child G, Higgins R: Necrotizing vasculitis of
2009.
the spinal pachyleptomeningeal arteries in three Ber-
583b.Chen X, Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, et al: A neonatal
nese mountain dog littermates, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
encephalopathy with seizures in standard poodle dogs
22:459-465, 1986.
with a missense mutation in the canine ortholog of
562. Kuwamura M, et al: Type C Niemann-Pick disease in a
ATF2, Neurogenetics 9(1):41-49, 2008.
boxer dog, Acta Neuropathol 85:345-348, 1993.
584.
Cordy DR, Holliday TA: A necrotizing meningoen-
563.
van Ham LML, Roels SMMF, Hoorens JK: Congenital
cephalitis of pug dogs, Vet Pathol 26:191-194, 1989.
dystrophy-like myopathy in a Brittany spaniel puppy.
585.
 Kobayashi Y, et al: Necrotizing meningoencephalitis in
Prog Vet Neurol 6:135-138, 1995.
pug dogs in Japan, J Comp Pathol 110:129-136, 1994.
564. Giger U, et al: Inherited phosphofructokinase defi-
586.
 Kornegay JN: Breed-associated meningitis. In the Pro-
 ciency in an American cocker spaniel, J Am Vet Med
 ceedings of the 9th ACVIM Forum, New Orleans, 1991.
Assoc 201:1569-1571, 1992.
587.
 Braund KG, et al: Distal sensorimotor polyneuropathy in
565. Rand JS, Best SJ, Mathews KA: Portosystemic vascular
mature Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 31:316-326, 1994.
shunts in a family of American cocker spaniels, J Am
588.
 Presthus J, Nordstoga K: Congenital myopathy in a lit-
Anim Hosp Assoc 24:265-272, 1988.
ter of Samoyed dogs, Prog Vet Neurol 4:37-40, 1993.
566. Jolly RD, et al: Canine ceroid lipofuscinoses: a review
589.
van Ham L, et al: A tremor syndrome with a cen-
and classification, J Small Anim Pract 35:299-306,
tral axonopathy in Scottish terriers, J Vet Intern Med
1994.
8:290-292, 1994.
567. Braund KG, Shores A, Cochrane S, et al: Laryngeal
590.1
 Knowles K, et al: Adult-onset lysosomal storage disease
paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Dalma-
in a schipperke dog: clinical, morphological and bio-
tians, Am J Vet Res 55:534-542, 1994.
 chemical studies, Acta Neuropathoi 86:306-312, 1993.
568. Holland CT, et al: Dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy,
591.
 Alroy J, et al: Adult onset, lysosomal storage disease in
and cardiac disease in three related English springer
a Tibetan terrier: clinical, morphological and biochemi-
spaniels, J Vet Intern Med 5:151-159, 1991.
cal studies, Acta Neuropathol 84:658-663, 1992.
569. Flagstad A: Development of the electrophysiological
592.
Tipold A, et al: Necrotizing encephalitis in Yorkshire
pattern in congenital myasthenic syndrome, Prog Vet 
terriers, J Small Anim Pract 34:623-628, 1993.
Neurol 4:126-134, 1993.
593.I
 Lunn DP, et al: Familial occurrence of narcolepsy in
570. Furuoka H, et al: Peripheral neuropathy in German
miniature horses, Equine Vet J 25:483-487, 1993.
shepherd dogs, J Comp Pathol 107:169-177, 1992.
594.
 Jones BR, et al: An encephalomyelopathy in related
571. Boydell P: Idiopathic Horner's syndrome in the golden
Birman kittens, N Z Vet J 40:160-163, 1992.
retriever, J Small Anim Pract 36:382-384, 1995.
595.
Cuddon PA: Feline neuromuscular diseases. In Kirk R,
572.
Targett MP, et al: Central core myopathy in a Great
Bonagura J, editors: Kirk's current veterinary therapy:
Dane, J Small Anim Pract 35:100-103, 1994.
small animal practice Xl, Philadelphia, 1992, WB
573.
. van Ham L, et al: A congenital myopathy resembling
Saunders.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy in a litter of Belgian
596.
Gaschen FP, Haugh PG, Swendrowski MA: Hyper-
Groenedaeler shepherds. In Proceedings of the Euro-
trophic feline muscular dystrophy: a unique clini-
pean Society of Veterinary Neurology, 6th Annual
cal expression of dystrophin deficiency, Feline Pract
Symposium, Rome, 1992.
22:23-27, 1994.
574. Malik R, et al: Hereditary myopathy of Devon rex cats,
597.
Carpenter JL, et al: Feline muscular dystrophy with dys-
J Small Anim Pract 34:539-546, 1993.
trophin deficiency, Am J Pathol 135:909-919, 1989.
575. Maddison JE: Hepatic encephalopathy, current concepts
598.
 Bildfell R, et al: Neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a cat,
of the pathogenesis, J Vet Intern Med 6:341-353, 1992.
Vet Pathol 32:485-488, 1995.
576. Sacre BJ, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Neuroaxonal
599.
 Stoffregen DA, et al: Hypomyelination of the central
dystrophy in a Jack Russell terrier pup resembling
nervous system of two Siamese kitten littermates, Vet
human infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, Cornell Vet
Pathol 30:388-391, 1993.
83:133-142, 1993.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
513
600. Bourke CA, Carrigan MJ, Dent CHR: Chronic loco-
616. Oevermann A, Bley T, Konar M, et al: A novel leuko-
 motor dysfunction associated with a thalamic cerebel-
encephalomyelopathy of Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern
lar neuropathy in Australian Merino sheep, Aust Vet J
Med 22:467-471, 2008.
70:232-233, 1993.
617.
 Toenniessen JG, Morin DE: Degenerative myelopathy:
601. Priester WA: Canine intervertebral disc disease: occur
a comparative review, Compend Contin Educ Pract
rence by age, breed, and sex among 8,117 cases, The-
Vet 17(2):271-283, 1995.
riogenology 6(2-3):293-303, 1976.
 618. Larsen JS, Selby LA: Spondylosis deformans in large
602. Johnston PEJ, Barrie JA, McCulloch MC, et al: Central
dogs—relative risk by breed, age and sex, J Am Anim
 nervous system pathology in 25 dogs with chronic degen-
Hosp Assoc 17(4):623-625, 1981,
erative radiculomyelopathy, Vet Rec 146[22):629-633,
619.
 Kornegay JN: Vertebral diseases of large breed dogs. In
2000.
 Kornegay JN, editor: Neurologic disorders (contempo-
603. March PA, Coates JR, Abyad RJ, et al: Degenerative
rary issues in small animal practice), New York, 1986,
myelopathy in 18 Pembroke Welsh corgi dogs, Vet
Churchill Livingstone.
Pathol 46:241-250, 2009.
620.1
Romatowski J: Spondylosis deformans in the dog.
604. Barclay KB, Haines DM: Immunohistochemical evi-
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 8[8):531-536, 1986.
dence for immunoglobulin and complement deposi-
621.
 Morgan JP: Spondylosis deformans in the dog, Acta
tion in spinal cord lesions in degenerative myelopathy
Orthop Scand Suppl 9:61-88, 1967.
in German shepherd dogs, Can J Vet Res 58[1):20-24,
622.
 Langeland M, Lingaas F: Spondylosis deformans in the
1994.
boxer: estimates of heritability, J Small Anim Pract
605. Williams DA, Sharp NJH, Batt RM: Enteropathy
36[4):166-169, 1995.
associated with degenerative myclopathy in German
623.
Wright JA: Spondylosis deformans of the lumbo-sacral
Shepherd dogs. In the Proceedings of the lst ACVIM
joint in dogs, J Small Anim Pract 21(1):45-58, 1980.
Forum, New orleans, 40, 1983.
624.
Mattoon JS, Koblik PD: Quantitative survey radio-
606. Williams DA, Batt RM, Sharp NJH: Degenerative
graphic evaluation of the lumbosacral spine of normal
myelopathy in German shepherd dogs: an associa-
dogs and dogs with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis,
tion with mucosal biochemical changes and bacte-
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34[3):194-206, 1993
rial overgrowth in the small intestine, Clin Sci 66:25,
625.1
De Risio L, Thomas WB, Sharp NJH: Degenerative
1984:(abstract).
lumbosacral stenosis, Vet Clin North Am 30:11l-132,
607. Fechner H, Johnston PE, Sharp NJH, et al: Molecu-
2000.
lar genetic and expression analysis of alpha-tocopherol
626. Newitt ALM, German AJ, Barr FJ: Lumbosacral transi-
transfer protein mRNA in German shepherd dogs with
tional vertebrae in cats and their effects on morphol-
degenerative myelopathy, Berl Much Tierarzl Wochen-
Ogy of adjacent joints, J Feline Med Surg 1l:941-947,
schr 116:31-36, 2003.
2009.
608. Johnston PEJ, Knox K, Gettinby G, et al: Serum
627.
Watt PR: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in 18 dogs.
α-tochopherol concentrations in German shepherd
J Small Anim Pract 32(3):125-134, 1991.
dogs with chronic degenerative radiculomyelopathy.
628.1
Danielsson F, Sjostrom L: Surgical treatment of
Vet Rec 148:403-407, 2001.
 degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs, Vet Surg
609. Sheahan BJ, Caffrey JF, Gunn HM, et al: Structural
28(2):91-98, 1999.
 and biochemical changes in a spinal myelinopathy in
629.1
 Ness MG: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in the
twelve English foxhounds and two harriers, Vet Pathol
dog: a review of 30 cases, J Small Anim Pract 35:185-
28(2):117-124, 1991.
190, 1994.
610. Coates JR, March PA, (
Oglesbee M, et al: Clinical
630.
 Suwankong N, Meij BP, Voorhout G, et al: Review and
 characterization of a familial degenerative myelopa-
retrospective analysis of degenerative lumbosacral ste-
thy in Pembroke Welsh corgi dogs, J Vet Intern Med
nosis in 156 dogs treated by dorsal laminectomy, Vet
21(6):1323-1331, 2007.
Comp Orthop Traumatol 21(3):285-293, 2008.
611. Bichsel P, Vandevelde M, Lang J, et al: Degenerative
631.
 Janssens L, Beosier Y, Daems R: Lumbosacral degenera-
myelopathy in a family of Siberian husky dogs, J Am
tive stenosis in the dog. The results of epidural infltra-
Vet Med Assoc 183(9):998-1000, 1983.
tion with methylprednisolone acetate: a retrospective
612. Long SN, Henthorn PS, Serpell J, et al: Degenerative
study, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 22[6):486-491,
myelopathy in Chesapeake Bay retrievers, J Vet Intern
2009.
Med 23:401-402, 2009.
632.
 Chambers JN: Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in
613. Clark LA, Tsai KL, Murphy KE:Alleles of DLA-DRB1
dogs, Vet Med Rep 1(2):166-180, 1989.
 are not unique in German shepherd dogs having degen-
633.1
 Palmer RH, Chambers JN: Canine lumbosacral diseases.
erative myelopathy, Anim Genet 39(3):332, 2008.
Part I. Anatomy, pathophysiology, and clinical presen-
614. Kathmann I, Cizinauskas S, Doherr MG, et al: Daily
tation, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13(1):61-69,
controlled physiotherapy increases survival time in
1991.
 dogs with suspected degenerative myelopathy, J Vet
634. Palmer RH, Chambers JN: Canine lumbosacral dis-
Intern Med 20:927-932, 2006.
 eases. Part II. Defnitive diagnosis, treatment, and prog-
615. Miller AD, Barber R, Porter BF, et al: Degenerative
nosis, Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13(2):213-
myelopathy in two boxer dogs, Vet Pathol 46[4):684-
222, 1991.
687, 2009.
635.
 Chambers JN, Selcer BA, Oliver JE Jr: Results of treat-
615a. Awano T, Johnson GS, WAde CM, et al: Genome-wide
ment of degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs by
association analysis reveals a SOD I mutation in canine
exploration and excision, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
degenerative myelopathy that resembles amyotrophic
3:130-133, 1988.
lateral sclerosis. Proceedings of the National Academy
 636. Lang J, Hani H, Schawalder P: A sacral lesion resem-
of Sciences of the United States of America 106:2794-
bling osteochondrosis in the German shepherd Dog.
2799,2009.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 33(2):69-76, 1992.
514
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
637. Morgan JP, Bailey CS: Cauda equina syndrome in
656. Thomas JB, Robertson D: Hereditary cerebellar abiot-
the dog: radiographic evaluation, J Small Anim Pract
rophy in Australian kelpie dogs, Aust Vet J 66(9):301-
31:69-77, 1990.
302, 1989.
638. Damur-Djuric N, Steffen F, Hassig M, et al: Lumbosa-
657. Kent M, Glass E, de Lahunta A: Cerebellar cortical abi-
cral transitional vertebrae in dogs: classification, preva-
otrophy in a beagle, J Small Anim Pract 41:321-323,
lence, and association with the sacroiliac morphology.
2000.
Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:32-38, 2006.
658. Yasuba M, Okimoto K, lida M, et al: Cerebellar corti-
639. Fluckiger MA, Damur-Djuric N, Hassig M, et al:A lum-
cal degeneration in beagle dogs, Vet Pathol 25[4):315-
bosacral transitional vertebra in the dog predisposes to
317, 1988.
cauda equina syndrome, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 47:39-
659.
Coates JR, O'Brien DP, Kline KL, et al: Neonatal cere-
44,2006.
bellar ataxia in Coton de Tulear dogs, J Vet Intern Med
640. Schmid V, Lang J: Measurements on the lumbosacral
16:680-689, 2002.
wnba epneo wim asou pue shop reu u uoung
660.1
 Nesbit JW, Ueckermann JF: Cerebellar cortical atrophy
compression, J Small Anim Pract 34(9):437-442,
in a puppy, J S Afr Vet Assoc 52[3):247-250, 1981.
1993.
661.
Sakai T, Harashima T, Yamamura H, et al: Two cases
641. Morgan JP: Transitional Iumbosacral vertebral anomaly
of hereditary quadriplegia and amblyopia in a litter of
in the dog: a radiographic study, J Small Anim Pract
Irish setters, J Small Anim Pract 35[4):221-223, 1994.
40[4]:167-172, 1999.
662.1
 Palmer AC, Payne JE, Wallace ME: Hereditary quad-
 642. Morgan JP, Bahr A, Franti CE, et al: Lumbosacral tran-
riplegia and amblyopia in the Irish Setter, J Small Anim 
sitional vertebrae as a predisposing cause of cauda
Pract 14(6):343-352, 1973.
equina syndrome in German shepherd dogs: 16l cases
663.
Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: A study of cerebellar
[1987-1990], J Am Vet Med Assoc 202[11]:1877-
 and cerebral cortical degeneration in miniature poodle
1882, 1993.
pups with emphasis on the ultrastructure of Purkinje
643. Steffen F, Hunold K, Scharf G, et al: A follow-up
cell changes, Acta Neuropathol 75[3):261-271, 1988.
study of neurologic and radiographic findings in work-
664.
 Chieffo C, Stalis IH, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Cerebellar
ing German shepherd dogs with and without degen-
Purkinje cell degeneration and coat color dilution in a
erative lumbosacral stenosis, J Am Vet Med Assoc
family of Rhodesian ridgeback dogs, J Vet Intern Med
231[10):1529-1533, 2007.
8(2]):112-116, 1994.
644.
Godde T, Steffen F: Surgical treatment of lumbosacral
665.
de Lahunta A: Abiotrophy in domestic animals: a
foraminal stenosis, Vet Surg 36:705-713, 2007.
review, Can J Vet Res 54[1):65-76, 1990.
645. De Risio L, Sharp NJH, Olby NJ, et al: Predictors of
666.1
 Flegel T, Matiasek K, Henke D, et al: Cerebellar cortical
outcome after dorsal decompressive laminectomy for
degeneration with selective granule cell loss in Bavar-
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis in dogs: 69 cases
ian mountain dogs, J Small Anim Pract 48[8):462-465,
(1987-1997), J Am Vet Med Assoc 2i9:624-628,
2007.
2001.
667. Carmichael KP, Miller M, Rawlings CA, et al: Clini-
646. Linn LL, Bartels KE, Rochat MC, et al: Lumbosacral
cal, hematologic, and biochemical features of a syn-
stenosis in 29 military working dogs: epidemiologic
drome in Bernese mountain dogs characterized by
findings and outcome after surgical intervention, Vet
hepatocerebellar degeneration, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Surg 2003(32):21-29, 1990-1999.
208(8):1277-1279, 1996.
647. Agerholm JS, Bendixen C, Andersen O, et al: Complex
668.1
 Fankhauser R, Freudiger U, Vandevelde M, et al: Pur-
vertebral malformation in Holstein calves, J Vet Diagn
kinjezellatrophie nach Masernvirus-Vakzinierung beim
Invest 13:283-289, 2001.
Hund, Schweiz Archiv Neurol Neurochir Psychiatr
648. van den Broek AHM, Else RW, Abercromby R, et al:
112:353-363, 1973.
  r  a   r
669.
 Sandy JR, Slocombe RF, Mitten RW, et al: Cerebellar
Pract 32[5):258-260, 1991.
abiotrophy in a family of border collie dogs, Vet Pathol
649. Fingeroth JM, Johnson GC, Burt JK, et al: Neuroradio-
39:736-739, 2002.
graphic diagnosis and surgical repair of tethered cord
670.
Carmichael KP, Miller M, Rawlings CA, et al: Clini-
syndrome in an English bulldog with spina bifida and
cal, hematologic, and biochemical features of a syn-
myeloschisis, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194(9):1300-1302,
drome in Bernese mountain dogs characterized by
1989.
hepatocerebellar degeneration, J Am Vet Med Assoc
650. Plummer SB, Bunch SE, Khoo LH, et al: Tethered spi-
208(8):1277-1279, 1996.
nal cord and an intradural lipoma associated with a
671.1
 Higgins RJ, LeCouteur RA, Kornegay JN, et al: Late-
meningocele in a Manx-type cat, J Am Vet Med Assoc
203(8):1159-1161, 1993.
tany spaniel dogs, Acta Neuropathol 96[1):97-101,
651. Dorn AS, Joiner RW: Surgical removal of a meningo-
1998.
cele from a Manx cat, Feline Pract 6:37-40, 1976.
672. Tatalick LM, Marks SL, Baszler TV: Cerebellar abiotro-
652.
de Lahunta A, Glass E: Veterinary neuroanatomy and
 phy characterized by granular cell loss in a Brittany, Vet
clinical neurology, St Louis, 2009, Saunders Elsevier.
Pathol 30[4):385-388, 1993.
653. Franklin RJM, Ramsey IK, McKerrel RLE: An inherited
673.
 Tipold A, Fatzer R, Jaggy A, et al: Presumed immune-
neurological disorder of the St. Bernard dog character-
mediated cerebellar
 granuloprival  degeneration  in
ised by unusual cerebellar cortical dysplasia, Vet Rec
the Coton de Tulear breed, J Neuroimmunol llo(1-
140:656-657, 1997.
2):130-133,2000.
654. Dow RS: Partial agenesis of the cerebellum in dogs,
674.
Gandini G, Botteron C, Brini E, et al: Cerebellar cor-
J Comp Neurol 72:569-586, 1940.
tical degeneration in three English bulldogs: clinical
 655. Schmid V, Lang J, Wolf M: Dandy-Wallker-like syn-
and neuropathological fndings, J Small Anim Pract
drome in four dogs: cisternography as a diagnostic aid,
46(6):291-294, 2005.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 28[4):355-360, 1992.
APPENDIX 1 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
515
675. O'Brien DP: Hereditary cerebellar ataxia. In the Pro-
695. Sandefeldt E, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Animal
ceedings of the 1lth ACVIM Forum, Washington DC:
model ofhuman disease. Infantile spinal muscular atro-
546-549, 1993.
phy, Werdnig-Hoffman disease. Animal model: heredi-
676. Coates JR, Carmichael KP, Shelton D, et al: Prelimi-
tary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland dogs, Am
nary characterization of a cerebellar ataxia in Jack Rus-
J Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
sell terriers, J Vet Intern Med 10(3):176, 1996.
696.1
 Resibois A, Poncelet L: Olivopontocerebellar atrophy
677. Cantile C, Salvadori C, Modenato M, et al: Cerebel-
in two adult cats, sporadic cases or new genetic entity.
Vet Pathol 41(1):20-29, 2004.
J Vet Med A Physiol Pathol Clin Med 49[10):523-
697. Diaz JD, Duque C, Geisel R: Neuroaxonal dystrophy
525,2002
in dogs: case report in 2 litters of papillon puppies,
678. Bildfell RJ, Mitchell SK, de Lahunta AD: Cerebellar
J Vet Intern Med 21:531-534, 2007.
cortical degeneration in a Labrador retriever, Can Vet J
698.1
 Nibe K, Kita C, Morozumi M, et al: Clinicopathological
36(9):570-572, 1995.
features of canine neuroaxonal dystrophy and cerebel-
679. Jokinen TS, Rusbridge C, Steffen F, et al: Cerebel-
lar cortical abiotrophy in papillon and papillon-related
lar cortical abiotrophy in Lagotto Romagnolo dogs,
dogs, J Vet Med Sci 69(10):1047-1052, 2007.
J Small Anim Pract 48(8):470-473, 2007.
699.
Carmichael KP, Howerth EW, Oliver JE Jr, et al: Neu-
680. Berry ML, Blas-Machado U: Cerebellar abiotrophy
roaxonal dystrophy in a group of related cats, J Vet
in a miniature schnauzer, Can Vet J 44[8}:657-659,
Diagn Invest 5[4):585-590, 1993.
2003.
700. Rodriguez F, Espinosa de los Monteros A, Morales M,
681. Steinberg HS, Winkle TV, Bell JS, et al: Cerebellar
et al: Neuroaxonal dystrophy in two Siamese kitten lit-
degeneration in Old English sheepdogs, J Am Vet Med
termates, Vet Res 138:548-549, 1996.
Assoc 217(8):1162-1165, 2000.
701.1
Mayhew IG: Large animal neurology, ed 2, Ames, Iowa,
682. van Tongeren SE, van Vonderen IK, van Nes J, et al:
2009, Wiley-Blackwell.
Cerebellar cortical abiotrophy _in two Portuguese
702.J
 Jeffrey M, Preece BE, Holliman A: Dandy-Walker mal-
podengo littermates, Vet Q 22:172-174, 2001.
   5   
683. van der Merwe LL, Lane E: Diagnosis of cerebellar cor-
1990.
tical degeneration in a Scottish terrier using magnetic
703. Washburn KE, Streeter RN: Congenital defects of the
resonance imaging, J Small Anim Pract 42[8):409-412,
ruminant nervous system, Vet Clin North Am Food
2001.
Anim Pract 20:413-434, 2004.
684. Olby N, Blot S, Thibaud JL, et al: Cerebellar cortical
704.
Wallace MA, Scarratt WK, Crisman MV, et al: Familial
 degeneration in adult American Staffordshire terriers,
convulsions and ataxia in an Aberdeen angus calf Prog
J Vet Intern Med 18[2):201-208, 2004.
Vet Neurol 7(4):145-148, 1996.
685. Aye MM, Izumo S, Inada S,et al: Histopathological and
705. Innes JRM, Russel DS, Wilsdon AJ: Familial cerebel-
ultrastructural features of feline hereditary cerebel-
lar hypoplasia and degeneration in Hereford calves,
lar cortical atrophy: a novel animal model of human
J Pathol Bacteriol 50:455-46l, 1940.
spinocerebellar degeneration, 
Acta Neuropathol
706.
 Saunders LZ, Sweet JD, Martin SM, et al: Hereditary
96[4]:379-387, 1998.
congenital ataxia in Jersey calves, Cornell Vet 42:559-
686. Inada S, Mochizuki M, Izumo S, et al: Study ofheredi-
591, 1952.
tary cerebellar degeneration in cats, Am J Vet Res
707.
 Allen JG: Congenital cerebellar hypoplasia in Jersey
57(3):296-301, 1996.
calves, Aust Vet J 53[4):173-175, 1977.
687.B
Barone G, Foureman P, de Lahunta A: Adult-onset cer-
708.1
Edmonds L, Crenshaw D, Selby LA: Micrognathia
ebellar cortical abiotrophy and retinal degeneration
and cerebelar hypoplasia in an Aberdeen angus herd,
in a domestic shorthair cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
J Hered 64(2):62-64, 1973.
38:51-54, 2002.
709. Innes JRM, Russell DS, Wilsdon AJ: Familial cerebel-
688. Shamir M, Perl S, Sharon L: Late onset of cerebel-
 lar hypoplasia and degeneration in Hereford calves,
lar abiotrophy in a Siamese cat, J Small Anim Pract
J Pathol Bacteriol 50:455-461, 1940.
40(7):343-345, 1999.
710.
Schild AL, Riet-Correa F, Fernandes CG, et al: Cer-
689. Negrin A, Bernardini M, Baumgartner W, et al: Late
ebellar hypoplasia and porencephaly in Charolais cat-
onset cerebellar degeneration in a middle-aged cat,
tle in Southern Brazil, Ciencia Rural 31[1]:149-153,
J Feline Med Surg 8(6):424-429, 2006.
2001.
690. Carmichael KP, Richey LJ: Cerebellar Purkinje cell
711.
 Finnie EP, Leaver DD: Cerebellar hypoplasia in calves,
degeneration  and  hepatic  microvascular 
dyspla-
Aust Vet J 41:287-288, 1965.
sia in Havana Brown kittens, Vet Pathol 42:689,
712.
Johnson KR, Fourt DL, Ross RH, et al: Hereditary con-
2005:[abstract).
genital ataxia in Holstein-Friesian calves, J Dairy Sci
691. O'Brien DP, Johnson GS, Schnabel RD, et al: Genetic
41:1371-1375, 1958.
mapping of canine multiple system degeneration and
713.
 Kemp J, McOrist S, Jeffrey M: Cerebellar abiotrophy in
ectodermal dysplasia loci, J Hered 96[7):727-734,
Holstein Friesian calves, Vet Rec 136[8):198, 1995.
2005.
714.
Schild AL, Riet-Correa F, Portiansky EL, et al: Congen-
692. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Gasteiger EL: Multisys-
ital cerebellar cortical degeneration in Holstein cattle
temic chromatolytic neuronal degeneration in cairn
in southern Brazil, Vet Res Commun 25[3):189-195,
terriers. A case with generalized cataplectic episodes,
2001.
J Vet Intern Med 5(2):91-94, 1991.
715.
Cho DY, Leipold HW: Cerebellar cortical atrophy in a
693. da Costa RC, Parent JM, Poma R, et al: Multisystem
Charolais calf Vet Pathol 15[2):264-266, 1978.
axonopathy and neuronopathy in Golden retriever
716.1
 Mitchell PJ, Reilly W, Harper PAW, et al: Cerebellar abi-
dogs, J Vet Intern Med 23:935-939, 2009.
otrophy in angus cattle, Aust Vet J 70(2):67-68, 1993.
694. Kortz GD, Meier WA, Higgins RJ, et al: Neuronal vacu-
717.
Woodman MP, Scott PR, Watt N, et al: Selective cer-
olation and spinocerebellar degeneration in young
ebellar degeneration in a Limousin cross heifer, Vet Rec
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Pathol 34[4):296-302, 1997.
132(23):586-587, 1993.
516
APPENDIX 1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
718. Innes JRM, MacNaughton WN: Inherited cortical cere-
740. Strain GM, Kearney MT, Gignac U, et al: Brainstem
bellar atrophy in Corriedale lambs in Canada identical
auditory-evoked potential assessment of congenital
with daft lamb disease in Britain, Cornell Vet 40:127-
deafness in Dalmatians: associations with phenotypic
135,1950.
markers, J Vet Intern Med 6:175-182, 1992.
719. Milne EM, Schock A: Cerebellar abiotrophy in a pedi-
741. Famula TR, Oberbauer AM, Sousa CA: A threshold
gree Charolais sheep flock, Vet Rec 143:224-225,
model analysis of deafness in Dalmatians, Mamm
1998.
Genome 7:650-653, 1996.
720.
 Johnstone AC, Johnson CB, Malcolm KE, et al: Cer
742. Juraschko K, Meyer-Lindenberg A, Nolte I, et al: Anal-
ebellar cortical abiotrophy in Wiltshire sheep, N Z Vet
ysis of systematic effects on congenital sensorineural
J 53{4):242-245, 2005.
deafness in German Dalmatian dogs, Vet J 166:164-
721. Gregory DW, Mead SW, Regan WM: Hereditary con-
169,2003
743. Muhle AC, Jaggy A, Stricker C, et al: Further contribu-
200, 1944.
tions to the genetic aspect of congenital sensorineural
722. High JW, Kincaid CM, Smith HJ: Doddler cattle,
deafness in Dalmatians, Vet J 163:311-318, 2002.
J Hered 49:250-252, 1958.
744.
Wood JLN, Lakhani KH: Prevalence and prevention
723.
Adams EW: Hereditary deafness in a family of fox-
of deafness in the Dalmatian: assessing the effect of
hounds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 128:302-303, 1956.
 parental hearing status and gender using ordinary logis-
724. Coppens AG, Gilbert-Gregory S, Steinberg SA, et al:
tic and generalized random litter effect models, Vet J
154:121-133, 1997.
severe hearing loss, Hear Res 200:51-62, 2005.
745.
 Strain GM: Deafness prevalence and pigmentation and
725.
Coppens AG, Kiss R, Heizmann CW, et al: An original.
gender associations in dog breeds at risk, Vet J 167:23-
inner ear neuroepithelial degeneration in a deaf Rott-
32,2004.
weiler puppy, Hear Res 161:65-71, 2001.
746. Famula TR, Oberbauer AM, Sousa CA: Complex seg-
726. Coppens AG, Resibois A, Poncelet L: Bilateral deafness
regation analysis of deafness in Dalmatians, Am J Vet
 in a Maltese terrier and a great Pyrenean puppy: inner
Res 61:550-553, 2000.
ear morphology, J Comp Pathol 122:223-228, 2000.
747.
 Greibrokk T: Hereditary deafness in the Dalmatian:
727. Coppens AG, Steinberg SA, Poncelet L: Inner ear
relationship to eye and coat color, J Am Anim Hosp
 morphology in a bilaterally deaf Dogo Argentino pup.
Assoc 30:170-176, 1994.
J Comp Pathol 128:67-70, 2003.
748.
 Bergsma DR, Brown KS:White fur, blue eyes, and deaf-
728. Erickson F, Saperstein G, Leipold HW, et al: Congenital
ness in the domestic cat, J Hered 62:171-185, 1971.
defects of dogs - Part 3, Canine Pract 4:40-53, 1977.
749.
Mair IW: Hereditary deafness in the white cat, Acta
729. Gwin RM, Wyman M, Lim DJ, et al: Multiple ocular
Otolaryngol Suppl 314:1-48, 1973.
defects associated with partial albinism and deafness in
750.1
 Ryugo DK, Cahill HB, Rose LS, et al: Separate forms 
the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:401-408, 1981.
of pathology in the cochlea of congenitally deaf white
730. Strain GM: Congenital deafness in dogs and cats,
cats, Hear Res 181:73-84, 2003.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet 13:245-250,
751.
Geigy CA, Heid S, Steffen F, et al: Does a pleiotropic
1991:252-253.
gene explain deafness and blue irises in white cats? Vet
731.1
Wilkes MK, Palmer AC: Congenital deafness and ves-
J 173:548-553, 2007.
tibular deficit in the Doberman, J Small Anim Pract
752.1
 Finnigan DF, Hanna WJ, Poma R, et al: A novel muta-
33:218-224, 1992.
tion of the CLCNl gene associated with myotonia
732. Famula TR, Cargill EJ, Strain GM: Heritability and
hereditaria in an Australian cattle dog, J Vet Intern
complex segregation analysis of deafness in Jack Rus-
Med 21:458-463, 2007.
sell terriers, BMC Vet Res 3:31, 2007.
753.1
Hill SL, Shelton GD, Lenehan TM: Myotonia in a
733. Bosher SK, Hallpike CS: Observations on the histogen-
cocker spaniel, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:506-509,
esis of the inner ear degeneration of the deaf white cat
1995.
and its possible relationship to the aetiology of certain
754.
 Honhold N, Smith DA: Myotonia in the Great Dane,
unexplained varieties of human congenital deafness,
Vet Rec 119:162, 1986.
J Laryngol Otol 80:222-235, 1966.
755.
 Lobetti RG: Myotonia congenita in a Jack Russell ter-
734. Rebillard G, Rebillard M, Carlier E, et al: Histo-phys-
rier, J S Afr Vet Assoc 80:106-107, 2009.
iological relationships in the deaf white cat auditory
756.
 Shires PK, Nafe LA, Hulse DA: Myotonia in a Stafford-
system, Acta Otolaryngol 82:48-56, 1976.
shire terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:229-232, 1983.
735.1
Wolff D: Three generations of deaf white cats, J Hered
757.
Vite CH, Melniczek J, Patterson D, et al: Congenital
33:39-43, 1942.
myotonic myopathy in the miniature schnauzer: an
736. Cvejic D, Steinberg TA, Kent MS, et al: Unilateral
autosomal recessive trait, J Hered 90:578-580, 1999.
 and bilateral congenital sensorineural deafness in cli-
758.
Griffiths IR, Duncan ID: Myotonia in the dog: a report
ent-owned pure-breed white cats, J Vet Intern Med
of four cases, Vet Rec 93:184-188, 1973.
23:392-395, 2009.
759.
Hickford FH, Jones BR, Gething MA, et al: Congeni-
737. Harland MM, Stewart AJ, Marshall AE, et al: Diagnosis
tal myotonia in related kittens, J Small Anim Pract
of deafness in a horse by brainstem auditory evoked
39:281-285, 1998.
potential, Can Vet J 47:151-154, 2006.
760.
Toll J, Cooper B, Altschul M: Congenital myotonia in 2
738.B
Bosher SK, Hallpike CS: Observations on the histo-
domestic cats, J Vet Intern Med 12:116-119, 1998.
logical features, development and pathogenesis of the
761.
Gracis M, Keith D, Vite CH: Dental and craniofacial
inner ear degeneration of the deaf white cat, Proc R
findings in eight miniature schnauzer dogs affected by
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 162:147-170, 1965.
myotonia congenita: preliminary results, J Vet Dent
739. Holliday TA, Nelson HJ, Williams DC, et al: Unilat-
17:119-127,2000.
eral and bilateral brainstem auditory-evoked response
762.1
 Rhodes TH, Vite CH, Giger U, et al:A missense muta-
abnormalities in 900 Dalmatian dogs, J Vet Intern Med
tion in canine ClC-l causes recessive myotonia con-
6:166-174, 1992.
genita in the dog, FEBS Lett 456:54-58, 1999.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
517
763. Thomas WB: Idiopathic epilepsy in dogs, Vet Clin
784. Berg T, Tollersrud OK, Wallley SU, et al: Purification
North Am Small Anim Pract 30:183-206, 2000:vii.
of feline lysosomal α-mannosidase, determination of
764. Berendt M, Gredal H, Pedersen LG, et al: A cross-sec-
its cDNA sequence and identification of a mutation
tional study of epilepsy in Danish Labrador retrievers:
causing α-mannosidosis in Persian cats, Biochem J
prevalence and selected risk factors, J Vet Intern Med
328(3):863-870, 1997.
16:262-268, 2002.
785. Blakemore WF:A case of mannosidosis in the cat: clini-
765. Berendt M, Gullov CH, Christensen SL, et al: Preva-
cal and histopathological fndings, J Small Anim Pract
lence and characteristics of epilepsy in the Belgian
27(7):447-455, 1986.
shepherd variants Groenendael and Tervuren born in
786.
Cummings JF, Wood PA, de Lahunta A, et al: The clini-
Denmark 1995-2004, Acta Vet Scand 50:51, 2008.
cal and pathologic heterogeneity of feline a-mannosi-
766. Heynold Y, Faissler D, Steffen F, et al: Clinical, epide-
dosis, J Vet Intern Med 2[4):163-170, 1988.
miological and treatment results of idiopathic epilepsy
787.
Healy PJ, Harper PA, Dennis JA: Phenotypic variation in
in 54 Labrador retrievers: a long-term study, J Small
bovine a-mannosidosis, Res Vet Sci 49[1):82-84, 1990.
Anim Pract 38:7-14, 1997.
788.
 Maenhout T, Kint JA, Dacremont G, et al: Mannosido-
767. Berendt M, Gullov CH, Fredholm M: Focal epilepsy in
sis in a litter of Persian cats, Vet Rec 122[15):351-354,
the Belgian shepherd: evidence for simple Mendelian
1988.
inheritance, J Small Anim Pract 50:655-661, 2009.
789.
Vandevelde M, Fankhauser R, Bichsel P, et al: Heredi-
768. Kathmann I, Jaggy A, Busato A, et al: Clinical and
tary  neurovisceral  mannosidosis  associated   with
 genetic investigations of idiopathic epilepsy in the
α-mannosidase deficiency in a family of Persian cats,
Bernese mountain dog, J Small Anim Pract 40:319-
Acta Neuropathol 58[1):64-68, 1982.
325,1999.
790.1
 Bryan L, Schmutz S, Hodges SD, et al: Bovine b-man-
769. Casal ML, Munuve RM, Janis MA, et al: Epilepsy in
nosidosis: pathologic and genetic findings in Salers
Irish wolfhounds, J Vet Intern Med 20:131-135, 2006.
calves, Vet Pathol 30[2):130-139, 1993.
770. Hulsmeyer V, Zimmermann R, Brauer C, et al: Epi-
791.
Shapiro JL, Rostkowski C, Little PB, et al: Caprine
lepsy in border collies: clinical manifestation, out-
b-mannosidosis in kids from an Ontario herd, Can Vet
come, and mode of inheritance. J Vet Intern Med
J26(5):155-158, 1985.
24:171-178, 2010.
793.
Gredai H, Berendt M, Leifsson PS: Progressive
771. J
Jokinen TS, Metsahonkala L, Bergamasco L, et al:
myoclonus epilepsy in a beagle, J Small Anim Pract
 Benign familial juvenile epilepsy in Lagotto Romag-
44[11):511-514, 2003.
nolo dogs, J Vet Intern Med 21:464-471, 2007.
794.1
Hall DG, Steffens WL, Lassiter L: Lafora bodies
772.B
Patterson EE, Armstrong PJ, O'Brien DP, et al: Clinical
associated with neurologic signs in a cat, Vet Pathol
description and mode of inheritance of idiopathic epi-
35(3):218-220, 1998.
lepsy in English springer spaniels, J Am Vet Med Assoc
795.
Jian Z, Alley MR, Cayzer J, et al: Lafora's disease in an
226:54-58, 2005.
epileptic basset hound, N Z Vet J 38(2):75-79, 1990.
773. Patterson EE, Mickelson JR, Da Y,et al: Clinical charac-
796.1
Kaiser E, Krauser K, Schwartz-Porsche D: Lafora dis-
teristics and inheritance of idiopathic epilepsy in vizs-
ease (progressive myoclonus epilepsy) in the basset
las, J Vet Intern Med 17:319-325, 2003.
hound. Early diagnosis by muscle biopsy, Tierarztl Prax
19(3):290-295, 1991.
findings in a family of golden retrievers with idiopathic
797. Moreau PM, Vallat JM, Hugon J, et al: Lafora's disease
epilepsy, J Small Anim Pract 37:317-321, 1996.
in Basset hounds. In the Proceedings of 8th ACVIM
775.
Vitmaa R, Cizinauskas S, Bergamasco LA, et al: Mag-
Forum, Washington DC: 1045-1049, 1990.
netic resonance imaging findings in Finnish spitz dogs
798.
Webb AA, MeMillan C, Cullen CL, et al: Lafora disease 
with focal epilepsy, J Vet Intern Med 20:305-310, 2006.
as a cause of visually exacerbated myoclonic attacks in
776. Licht BG, Lin S, Luo Y, et al: Clinical characteristics
a dog, Can Vet J 50(9):963-967, 2009.
and mode of inheritance of familial focal seizures in
799.1
Brix AE, Howerth EW, McConkie-Rosell A, et al: Gly-
standard poodles, J Am Vet Med Assoc 23l:1520-
cogen storage disease type Ia in two littermate Maltese
1528, 2007.
puppies, Vet Pathol 32(5):460-465, 1995.
777. Aleman M, Gray LC, Williams DC, et al: Juvenile
800.
Walvoort HC, Koster JF, Reuser AJ: Heterozygote
idiopathic epilepsy in Egyptian Arabian foals: 22 cases
detection in a family of Lapland dogs with a recessively
(1985-2005), J Vet Intern Med 20:1443-1449, 2006.
inherited metabolic disease: canine glycogen storage
778.（
Coates JR, Bergman RL: Seizures in young dogs and
disease type II, Res Vet Sci 38(2):174-178, 1985.
cats: pathophysiology and diagnosis, Compend Contin
801.
Walvoort HC, Slee RG, Koster JF: Canine glycogen
Educ Pract Vet 27:447-459, 2005.
storage disease type I. A biochemical study of an acid
779. Herrtage ME: Canine fucosidosis, Vet Ann 28:223-
alpha-glucosidase-deficient Lapland dog, Biochim Bio-
227, 1988.
phys Acta 715(1):63-69, 1982.
780. Barker CG, Herrtage ME, Shanahan F, et al: Fucosidosis
802.
Walvoort HC: Glycogen storage disease type II in the
 in English springer spaniels: results of a trial screen-
Lapland dog, Vet Q 7(3):187-190, 1985.
ing programme, J Small Anim Pract 29[10):623-630,
803.1
Dennis JA, Healy Pj, Reichmann KG: Genotyping
1988.
Brahman cattle for generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet
781. Litlewood JD, Herrtage ME, Palmer AC: Neuronal
J 80(5):286-291, 2002.
storage disease in English springer spaniels, Vet Rec
804. Reichmann KG, Twist JO, Thistlethwaite EJ: Clini-
112[4):86-87, 1983.
cal, diagnostic and biochemical features of generalised
782. Skelly BJ, Sargan DR, Winchester BG, et al: Genomic
glycogenosis type II and Brahman cattle, Aust Vet J
 screening for fucosidosis in English springer spaniels,
70[11):405-408, 1993.
Am J Vet Res 60(6):726-729, 1999.
805.1
 Dennis JA, Moran C, Healy PJ:The bovine α-glucosidase
783. Smith MO, Wenger DA, Hill SL, et al: Fucosidosis in
gene: coding region, genomic structure, and mutations
 a family of American-bred English springer spaniels,
that cause bovine generalized glycogenosis, Mamm
J Am Vet Med Assoc 209[12):2088-2090, 1996.
Genome 11(3):206-212, 2000.
518
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
806. Dennis JA, Healy PJ: Genotyping shorthorn cattle for
825. De Maria R, Divari S, Bo S, et al: Beta-galactosidase
generalised glycogenosis, Aust Vet J 79[11):773-775,
deficiency in a korat cat: a new form of feline GM-
2001.
gangliosidosis, Acta Neuropathol 96[3):307-314,
807. Manktelow BW, Hartley WJ: Generalized glycogen
1998.
storage disease in sheep, J Comp Pathol 85[1):139-
826. Dial SM, Mitchell TW, LeCouteur RA, et al: GM-
145, 1975.
gangliosidosis [type II) in three cats, J Am Anim Hosp
 808. Gregory BL, Shelton GD, Bali DS, et al: Glycogen stor-
Assoc 30[4):355-360, 1994.
age disease type Illa in curly-coated retrievers, J Vet
827.
Singer HS, Cork LC: Canine GMz gangliosidosis:
Intern Med 21[1):40-46, 2007.
morphological and biochemical analysis, Vet Pathol
809. Rafiquzzaman M, Svenkerud R, Strande A, et al: Gly-
26(2):114-120, 1989.
cogenosis in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):196-209,
828.1
 Bernheimer H, Karbe E: Morphological and neuro-
1976.
chemical investigations of two types of amaurotic idi-
810. Coates JR, Paxton R, Cox NR, et al: A case presenta-
ocy in the dog. Evidence of a GMz-gangliosidosis, Acta
tion and discussion of Type IV glycogen storage disease
Neuropathol 16:243-261, 1970.
in a Norwegian forest cat, Prog Vet Neurol 7(1):5-11,
828a.Matsuki N, Yamato O, Kusuda M, et al: Magnetic
1996.
resonance imaging of GM2-gangliosidosis in a golden
811. Fyfe JC, Giger U, Van Winkle TJ, et al: Glycogen stor-
retriever, J Vet Intern Med 46:275-278, 2005.
 age disease type IV: inherited deficiency of branching
828b. Yamato O, Matsuki N, Satoh H, et al: Sandhoff disease
enzyme activity in cats, Pediatr Res 32[6):719-725,
in a golden retriever dog, J Inherit Metab Dis 25:319-
1992.
320, 2002.
           
829.1
Neuwelt EA, Johnson WG, Blank NK, et al: Char-
cogen storage disease type IV (GSD IV) in Norwe-
acterization of a new model of GMz-gangliosido-
gian forest cast. In the Proceedings of the 8th ACVIM
sis [Sandhoffs disease) in korat cats, j Clin Invest
Forum, Washington DC: 1129, 1990.
76(2):482-490, 1985.
813. Johnstone AC, MeSporran KD, Kenny JE, et al: Myo-
830. Yamato O, Matsunaga S, Takata K, et al: GMz-ganglio-
phosphorylase deficiency[
(glycogen storage disease
sidosis variant O (Sandhoff-like disease) in a family of
Type V) in a herd of Charolais cattle in New Zea-
Japanese domestic cats, Vet Rec 155[23):739-744,
land: confirmation by PCR-RFLP testing, N Z Vet J
2004.
52[6):404-408, 2004.
831.1
 Bradbury AM, Morrison NE, Hwang M, et al: Neurode-
814. Smith BF, Stedman H, Rajpurohit Y, et al: Molecu-
generative lysosomal storage disease in European Bur-
lar basis of canine muscle type phosphofructokinase
mese cats with hexosaminidase β-subunit deficiency.
deficiency, J Biol Chem 271[33):20070-20074,
Mol Genet Metab 97[1):53-59, 2009.
1996.
832. Kosanke SD, Pierce KR, Bay WW: Clinical and bio-
815. Harvey JW, Calderwood MM, Gropp KE, et al: Poly-
chemical abnormalities in porcine GM2-gangliosidosis,
saccharide storage myopathy in canine phosphofruc-
Vet Pathol 15(6):685-699, 1978.
tokinase deficiency (type Vll glycogen storage disease),
833.1
 Ishikawa Y, Li SC, Wood PA, et al: Biochemical basis
Vet Pathol 27(1):1-8, 1990.
of type AB GM2 gangliosidosis in a Japanese spaniel,
816. Bosshard NU, Hubler M, Arnold S, et al: Spontaneous
J Neurochem 48[3):860-864, 1987.
mucolipidosis in a cat: an animal model ofhuman I-cell
834.
Victoria T, Raf MA, Wenger DA: Cloning of the canine
disease, Vet Pathol 33(1):1-13, 1996.
GALC cDNA and identification of the mutation caus-
 817. Giger U, Teherneva E, Caverly J, et al: A missense point
ing globoid cell leukodystrophy in West Highland white
mutation in N-acetylglucosamine-l-phosphotransfer-
and cairn terriers, Genomics 33(3):457-462, 1996.
ase causes mucolipidosis II in domestic shorthair cats,
835.
Wenger DA, Victoria T, Raf MA, et al: Globoid cell
J Vet Intern Med 20:781, 2006.
leukodystrophy in Cairn and West Highland White ter-
818. Muller G, Alldinger S, Moritz A, et al: GMl-gangliosi-
riers, J Hered 90(1):138-142, 1999.
 dosis in Alaskan huskies: clinical and pathologic fnd-
836.
 McDonnell J, Carmichael KP, McGraw RA, et al: Pre-
ings, Vet Pathol 38[3):281-290, 2001.
liminary characterization of globoid cell leukodystro-
819. Shell LG, Potthoff Al, Carithers R, et al: Neuronal-
phy in Irish setters, J Vet Intern Med 14(3):339, 2000.
visceral GMl gangliosidosis in Portuguese water dogs.
837.1
McGraw RA, Carmichael KP: Molecular basis of
J Vet Intern Med 3(1):1-7, 1989.
globoid cell leukodystrophy in Irish setters, Vet J
820. Alroy J, Orgad U, DeGasperi R, et al: Canine GM1-
171(2):370-372, 2006.
 gangliosidosis. A clinical, morphologic, histochemical,
838.
Sigurdson CJ, Basaraba RJ, Mazzaferro EM, et al: Glo-
boid cell-like leukodystrophy in a domestic longhaired
Am J Pathol 140(3):675-689, 1992.
cat, Vet Pathol 39:494-496, 2002.
821.
Yamato O, Ochiai K, Masuoka Y, et al: GMl gangliosi-
839.
Wenger DA, Sattler M, Kudoh T, et al: Niemann-
dosis in Shiba dogs, Vet Rec 146[17):493-496, 2000.
Pick disease: a genetic model in Siamese cats, Science
822. Yamato O, Kobayashi A, Satoh H, et al: Comparison of
208:1471-1473, 1980.
 polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
840. Yamagami T, Umeda M, Kamiya S, et al: Neurovisceral
polymorphism assay and enzyme assay for diagnosis of
sphingomyelinosis in a Siamese cat, Acta Neuropathol
GMl-gangliosidosis in Shiba dogs, J Vet Diagn Invest
79(3):330-332, 1989.
16[4):299-304, 2004.
841.1
 Baker HJ, Wood PA, Wenger DA, et al: Sphingomyelin 
823. Murnane RD, Hern-Rindell AJ, Prieur DJ: Ovine GM
lipidosis in a cat, Vet Pathol 24[5):386-391, 1987.
gangliosidosis, Small Rumin Res 6[1-2):109-118,
842.
 Somers KL, Royals MA, Carstea ED, et al: Mutation
1991.
analysis of feline Niemann-Pick Cl disease, Mol Genet 
824. Donnelly WJC, Sheahan BJ: Bovine, GM gangliosi-
Metab 79[2):99-103, 2003.
dosis: an inborn lysosomal disease, Vet Sci Commun
843.
 Saunders GK, Wenger DA: Sphingomyelinase def-
1(1):65-74, 1977.
ciency (Niemann-Pick disease) in a Hereford calf Vet
Pathol 45[2):201-202, 2008.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
519
844. Lowenthal AC, Cummings JF, Wenger DA, et al: Feline
861. Melville SA, Wilson CL, Chiang CS, et al: A mutation
sphingolipidosis  resembling  Niemann-Pick disease
in canine CLN5 causes neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
type C, Acta Neuropathol 81(2):189-197, 1990.
in border collie dogs, Genomics 86:287-294, 2005.
844a. Wilkerson MJ, Lewis DC, Marks SL, et al: Clinical and
862.
O'Brien DP, Katz ML: Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
morphologic features of mucopolysaccharidosis type II
in 3 Australian shepherd littermates, J Vet Intern Med
in a dog: naturally occurring model of Hunter syn-
22(2):472-475, 2008.
drome, Vet Pathol 35(3):230-233, 1998.
863.
 Tammen I, Houweling PJ, Frugier T, et al: A missense
845. Jolly RD, Ehrlich PC, Franklin RJM, et al: Histologi-
mutation (c.184C > T) in ovine CLN6 causes neuronal
cal diagnosis of mucopolysaccharidosis IIA in a wire-
 ceroid lipofuscinosis in merino sheep whereas affected
haired dachshund, Vet Rec 148[18):564-567, 2001.
South Hampshire sheep have reduced levels of CLN6
846. Jolly RD, Allan FJ, Collett MG, et al: Mucopolysacchari-
mRNA, Biochim Biophys Acta 1762[10):898-905,
dosis IIIA (Sanflippo syndrome) in a New Zealand
2006.
huntaway dog with ataxia, N Z Vet J 48(5):144-148,
864.
Cook RW, Jolly RD, Palmer DN, et al: Neuronal ceroid
2000.
lipofuscinosis in merino sheep, Aust Vet J 80(5):292-
847. Jolly RD, Johnstone AC, Norman EJ, et al: Pathology
297, 2002.
of mucopolysaccharidosis IILA in huntaway dogs, Vet
865.
Mayhew IG, Jolly RD, Pickett BT, et al: Ceroid-lipo-
Pathol 44(5):569-578, 2007.
fuscinosis (Batten's disease): pathogenesis of blind-
848. Yogalingam G, Pollard T, Gliddon B, et al: Identification
ness in the ovine model, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
of a mutation causing mucopolysaccharidosis type IIIA
11:273-290, 1985.
in New Zealand huntaway dogs, Genomics 79(2):150-
866.1
 Katz ML, Khan S, Awano T, et al: A mutation in the
153, 2002.
CLN8 gene in English setter dogs with neuronal
849. Ellinwood NM, Wang P, Skeen T, et al: A model of
 ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Biochem Biophys Res Commun
mucopolysaccharidosis IIIB (Sanflippo syndrome type
327:541-547, 2005.
IIB): N-acetyl-alpha-D-glucosaminidase deficiency in
867.1
 Koppang N: The English setter with ceroid-lipofusci-
schipperke dogs, J Inherit Metab Dis 26(5):489-504,
nosis: a suitable model for the juvenile type of ceroid-
2003.
lipofuscinosis, Am J Med Genet Suppl 5:117-126,
850. Hoard HM, Leipprandt JR, Cavanagh KT, et al: Deter-
1988.
mination of genotypic frequency of caprine mucopoly-
868. Awano T, Katz ML, O'Brien DP, et al: A mutation in
saccharidosis IIID, J Vet Diagn Invest 10(2):181-183,
 the cathepsin D gene (CTSD) in American buldogs
1998.
with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Mol Genet Metab
851. Jones MZ, Alroy J, Boyer PJ, et al: Caprine muco-
, 2006:(in press).
polysaccharidosis-IID: clinical, biochemical, mor-
869. Evans J, Katz ML, Levesque D, et al: A variant form
phological and immunohistochemical characteristics,
 of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in American bulldogs,
J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 57(2):148-157, 1998.
J Vet Intern Med 19(1):44-51, 2005.
852. Fischer A, Carmichael KP, Munnell JF, et al: Sulfami-
870.
 Jolly RD: Comparative biology of the neuronal ceroid-
dase deficiency in a family of dachshunds: a canine
lipofuscinoses: an overview, Am J Med Genet 57:307-
model of mucopolysaccharidosis IILA (Sanflippo A),
311, 1995.
Pediatr Res 44[1):74-82, 1998.
871.
Cantile C, Buonaccorsi A, Pepe V, et al: Juvenile neuro-
853. Neer TM, Dial SM, Pechman R, et al: Mucopolysac-
nal ceroid-lipofuscinosis [Batten's disease] in a poodle
charidosis VI in a miniature pinscher, J Vet Intern Med
dog, Prog Vet Neurol 7(3):82-87, 1996.
9(6):429-433, 1995.
872.
Jolly RD, Sutton RH, Smith RIE, et al: Ceroid-lipo-
854. Breton L, Guerin P, Morin M: A case of mucopoly-
fuscinosis in miniature schnauzer dogs, Aust Vet J
saccharidosis VI in a cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
75[1}:67, 1997.
19(6):891-896, 1983.
873.1
Modenato M, Marchetti V, Barsotti G, et al: Neuro-
855. Haskins ME, Aguirre GD, Jezyk PF, et al: The pathol-
nal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Chihuahua, Annali della
Facoltia di Medicina Veterinaria di Pisa 60:215-224.
Am J Pathol 101 (3):657-674, 1980.
2007.
856. Ray J, Haskins ME, Ray K: Molecular diagnostic tests 
874. Goebel HH, Bilzer T, Dahme E, et al: Morphologi-
for ascertainment of genotype at the mucopoly-
cal studies in canine (Dalmatian) neuronal ceroid-
saccharidosis type VIl locus in dogs, Am J Vet Res
lipofuscinosis, Am J Med Gen (suppl 5):127-139, 1988.
59(9):1092-1095, 1998.
875.
Vandevelde M, Fatzer R: Neuronal ceroid-lipofusci-
857. Haskins ME, Otis EJ, Hayden JE, et al: Hepatic stor-
nosis in older dachshunds, Vet Pathol 17(6):686-692,
age of glycosaminoglycans in feline and canine models
1980.
of mucopolysaccharidoses I, Vl, and Vll, Vet Pathol
876. Bildfell R, Matwichuk C, Mitchell S, et al: Neuronal
29(2):112-119, 1992.
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a cat, Vet Pathol 32[5):485-
858. Awano T, Katz ML, O'Brien DP, et al: A frame shift
488, 1995
mutation in canine TPPl (the ortholog of human
877. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: An adult case of canine
CLN2) in a juvenile dachshund with neuronal ceroid
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Acta Neuropathol
lipofuscinosis, Mol Genet Metab 89(3):254-260, 2006.
39:43-51, 1977.
859. Cummings JF, de Lahunta A, Ris RC, et al: Neuro-
878.1
 Kuwamura M, Nakagawa M, Nabe M, et al: Neuronal
pathologic changes in a young adult Tibetan terrier
ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Japanese domestic shorthair
with subclinical neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Prog
cat, J Vet Med Sei 71(5):665-667, 2009.
Vet Neurol 1[3):301-309, 1990.
879.
 Jolly RD, Wallley SU: Lysosomal storage diseases of
860. Katz ML, Narfstrom K, Johnson GS, et al: Assessment
animals: an essay in comparative pathology, Vet Pathol
of retinal function and characterization of lysosomal
34(6) :527-548, 1997.
storage body accumulation in the retinas and brains of
880.1
 Pickett P, Dyer K, Saunders O, et al: Ocular manifesta-
Tibetan terriers with ceroid-lipofuscinosis, Am J Vet
tion of ceroid-lipofuscinosis in a Spitz dog, Vet Pathol
Res 66:67-76, 2005.
29:469,1992.
520
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
881. Edwards JF, Storts RW, Joyce JR, et al: Juvenile-onset
903. Jolly RD, Burbidge HM, Alley MR, et al: Progressive
neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis in Rambouillt sheep.
myelopathy and neuropathy in New Zealand hunt-
Vet Pathol 31(1):48-54, 1994.
away dogs, N Z Vet J 48:188-191, 2000.
882.
Woods PR, Storts RW, Shelton M, et al: Neuronal ceroid
904.1
Palmer AC, Blakemore WF: A progressive neuronop-
lipofuscinosis in Rambouillet sheep: characterization of
athy in the young cairn terrier, J Small Anim Pract
the clinical disease, J Vet Intern Med 8[5):370-375, 1994.
30(2):101-106, 1989.
883. LeGonidec G, Kuberski T, Daynes P, et al: A neuro-
905.
Zaal MD, van dan Ingh TS, Goedegebuure SA, et al:
logic disease of horses in New Caledonia, Aust Vet J
 n  n  r 
57:1944-1945, 1981
mates, Vet Q 19:34-36, 1997.
884. Url A, Bauder B, Thalhammer J, et al: Equine neuronal
906.
Cork LC, Troncoso JC, Price DL, et al: Canine neuroax-
ceroid lipofuscinosis, Acta Neuropathol 10l:410-414,
onal dystrophy, J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 42[3):286-
2001.
296, 1983.
885. Summers BA, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Veterinary
907.
 Chrisman CL: Neurological diseases of Rottweilers:
neuropathology, St Louis, 1995, Mosby.
neuroaxonal dystrophy and leukoencephalomalacia,
886. McGrath JT: In Andrews EJ, Ward BC, Altman NH,
J Small Anim Pract 33(10):500-504, 1992.
editors: Spontaneous animal models of human disease,
908.1
 Bynevelt M, Rusbridge C, Britton J: Dorsal dens angu-
Fibrinoid leukodystrophy [Alexander's disease), vol 2,
lation and a Chiari type malformation in a cavalier King
New York, 1979, Academic Press.
Charles spaniel, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 41(6):521-524,
887. Cox NR, Kwapien RP, Sorjonen DC, et al: Myeloenceph-
2000.
alopathy resembling Alexander's disease in a Scottish
909.1
Rusbridge C, MacSweeny JE, Davies JV, et al: Syringa-
terrier dog, Acta Neuropathol 71[1-2):163-166, 1986.
hydromyelia in cavalier King Charles spaniels, J Am
888. Sorjonen DC, Cox NR, Kwapien RP: Myeloencepha-
Anim Hosp Assoc 36(1):34-41, 2000.
lopathy with eosinophilic refractile bodies (Rosen-
910.1
 Rusbridge C, Knowler SP: Hereditary aspects of occipi-
thal fibers) in a Scottish terrier, J Am Vet Med Assoc
tal bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
190(8):1004-1006, 1987.
malformation) in cavalier King Charles spaniels, Vet 
889. Morrison JP, Schatzberg SJ, de Lahunta A, et al: Oli-
Rec 153[4):107-112, 2003.
godendroglial dysplasia in two bull mastiff dogs, Vet
911. Lu D, Lamb CR, Pfeiffer DU, et al: Neurological signs
Pathol 43(1):29-35, 2006.
and results of magnetic resonance imaging in 40 cava-
890.
 Richardson JA, Tang K, Burns DK: Myeloencepha-
lier King Charles spaniels with Chiari type 1-like mal-
lopathy with Rosenthal fiber formation in a miniature
formations, Vet Rec 153[9):260-263, 2003.
poodle, Vet Pathol 28(6):536-538, 1991.
912.1
 Rusbridge C, Knowler SP, Pieterse L, et al: Chiari-like
891.1
Wouda W, van Nes JJ: Progressive ataxia due to cen-
malformation in the Griffon Bruxellois, J Small Anim
tral demyelination in Rottweiler dogs, Vet Q 8:89-97,
Pract 50(8):386-393, 2009.
1986.
913.1
 Rusbridge C, Knowler SP: Hereditary aspects of occipi-
892. Mandigers PJ, van Nes JJ, Knol BW, et al: Hereditary
tal bone hypoplasia and syringomyelia (Chiari type I
Kooiker dog ataxia, Res Vet Sci 54:118-123, 1993.
malformation) in cavalier King Charles spaniels, Vet
893.1
Wood SL, Patterson JS: Shetland sheepdog leukodys-
Rec 153:107-112, 2003.
trophy, J Vet Intern Med 15:486-493, 2001.
914. Couturier J, Rault D, Cauzinille L: Chiari-like
 894. Li FY, Cuddon PA, Song J, et al: Canine spongiform leu-
malformation and syringomyelia in normal cavalier
koencephalopathy is associated with a missense muta-
King Charles spaniels: a multiple diagnostic imag-
tion in cytochrome b, Neurobiol Dis 21:35-42, 2006.
ing approach, J Small Anim Pract 49(9):438-443,
895. O'Brien DP, Zachary JF: Clinical features of spongy
2008.
degeneration of the central nervous system in two
915.
Cerda-Gonzalez S, Olby NJ, McCullough S, et al:
Labrador retriever littermates, J Am Vet Med Assoc
Morphology of the caudal fossa in cavalier King
186(11):1207-1210, 1985.
Charles spaniels, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 50(1):37-46,
 896. Zachary JF, O'Brien DP: Spongy degeneration of the
2009.
central nervous system in two canine littermates, Vet
916. Cerda-Gonzalez S, Dewey CW: Congenital diseases of
Pathol 22:561-571, 1985.
the craniocervical junction in the dogs, Vet Clin North
897. Wessman A, Goedde T, Fischer A, et al: Hereditary
Am Small Anim Pract 40:121-141, 2010.
ataxia in the Jack Russell terrier—clinical and genetic
 917. Lewis DG: Cervical spondylomyelopathy ("wobbler"
investigations, J Vet Intern Med 18:515-521, 2004.
syndrome) in the dog: a study based on 224 cases,
898. Bjorck G, Mair W, Olsson SE, et al: Hereditary ataxia in
J Small Anim Pract 30[12]:657-665, 1989.
fox terriers, Acta Neuropathol [suppl 1):45-48, 1962.
918.
 Olsson SE, et al: Compression of the spinal cord in
899.(
Oyster R, Leipold HW, Troyer D, et al: Clinical stud-
Great Danes, Vet Med Small Anim Clin 77(11):1587,
ies of bovine progressive degenerative myeloencephaly
1982:[abstract].
of Brown Swiss cattle, Prog Vet Neurol 2[3):159-164,
919. Baum F Ill, de Lahunta A, Trotter EJ: Cervical fibrotic
1991.
stenosis in a young Rottweiler, J Am Vet Med Assoc
900. Wakshlag J, de Lahunta A: Hereditary encephalomy-
201(8):1222-1224, 1992.
elopathy and polyneuropathy in an Alaskan husky,
920.1
 Eagleson JS, Diaz J, Platt SR, et al: Cervical vertebral
J Small Anim Pract 50:670-674, 2009.
malformation-malarticulation syndrome in the Ber-
901. Griffiths IR, McCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progressive
nese mountain dog: clinical and magnetic resonance
axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of boxer dogs. 3.
imaging features, J Small Anim Pract 50(4):186-193,
The peripheral axon lesion with special reference to
2009.
the nerve roots, J Neurocytol 15[1):109-120, 1986.
921.
Costa RC, Parent JM, Holmberg DL, et al: Outcome
902. Griffiths IR, McCulloch MC, Abrahams S: Progressive
of medical and surgical treatment in dogs with cervi-
axonopathy: an inherited neuropathy of boxer dogs. 2.
cal spondylomyelopathy: 104 cases [1988-2004], J Am
The nature and distribution of the pathological changes,
Vet Med Assoc 233[8):1284-1290, 2008.
Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol 11:431-446, 1985.
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
521
922. Costa RC, Parent JM, Partlow G, et al: Morphologic
940. Sponenberg DP, de Lahunta A: Hereditary hyper-
 and morphometric magnetic resonance imaging fea-
trophic neuropathy in Tibetan mastiff dogs, J Hered
tures of Doberman pinschers with and without clini-
72:287, 1981.
cal signs of cervical spondylomyelopathy, Am J Vet Res
941.
 O'Brien DP, Johnson GC, Liu LA, et al: Laminin α2
67(9):1601-1612, 2006.
(merosin)-deficient muscular dystrophy and demyelin-
923. Moore BR, Reed SM, Biller DS, et al: Assessment of
ating neuropathy in two cats, J Neurol Sci 189:37-43,
vertebral canal diameter and bony malformations of
2001.
the cervical part of the spine in horses with cervi-
942. Braund KG, Shores A, Lowrie CT, et al: Idiopathic
cal stenotic myelopathy, Am J Vet Res 55[1):5-13,
   s   
1994.
Med 11[4):243-249, 1997.
924. Hahn CN, Handel I, Green SL, et al: Assessment of
943.
Chrisman CL: Dancing Doberman disease: clinical
the utility of using intra- and intervertebral minimum
findings and prognosis, Prog Vet Neurol 1[1):83-90.
sagittal diameter ratios in the diagnosis of cervical ver-
1990.
tebral malformation in horses, Vet Radiol Ultrasound
944.1
Duncan ID, Griffiths IR, Carmichael S, et al: Inher-
49(1) :1-6, 2008.
ited canine giant axonal neuropathy, Muscle Nerve
925.
 Neuwirth L: Equine myelography, Compend Contin
4[3):223-227, 1981.
Educ Pract Vet 14(1):72-79, 1992.
945.1
Braund KG, Luttgen PJ, Redding RW, et al: Dis-
926. Papageorges M, Gavin PR, Sande RD, et al: Radio-
tal symmetrical polyneuropathy in a dog, Vet Pathol
graphic and myelographic examination of the cervi-
17(4):422-435, 1980.
cal vertebral column in 306 ataxic horses, Vet Radiol
946.1
 Henricks PM, Steiss J, Petterson JD: Distal peripheral
Ultrasound 28[2):53-59, 1987.
polyneuropathy in a Great Dane, Can Vet J 28:165-
 927. Levitski RE, Chauvet AE, Lipsitz D: Cervical myelopa-
167, 1987.
thy associated with extradural synovial cysts in 4 dogs,
947.
Shelton GD, Podell M, Sullivan S, et al: Distal, symmet-
J Vet Intern Med 13(3):181-186, 1999.
928. Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Berry WL, et al: Extradural
related Leonberger dogs, J Vet Intern Med 14(3):339,
spinal synovial cysts in nine dogs, J Small Anim Pract 
2000:(abstract).
42:502-509, 2001.
948. Harkin KR, Cash WC, Shelton GD: Sensory and motor
929. Shelton GD, Podell M, Poncelet L, et al: Inherited
neuropathy in a border collie, J Am Vet Med Assoc
polyneuropathy in Leonberger dogs: a mixed or inter-
227(8):1263-1265, 2005.
mediate form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, Muscle
949.
Armengou L, Anor S, Climent F, et al: Antemortem
Nerve 27:471-477, 2003.
diagnosis of a distal axonopathy causing severe string-
930. Inada S, Sakamoto H, Haruta K, et al: A clinical study
halt in a horse, J Vet Intern Med 24[1):220-223, 2010.
on hereditary progressive neurogenic muscular atrophy
950.1
 Huntington PJ, Jeffcott LB, Friend SCE, et al: Austra-
in pointer dogs, Nippon Juigaku Zasshi 40:539-547,
lian stringhalt—epidemiological, clinical and neurolog-
1978.
ical investigations, Equine Vet J 21[4):266-273, 1989.
931. Sandefeldt E, Cummings JF, de Lahunta A: Animal
951.
Slocombe RF, Huntington PJ, Friend SCE, et al: Patho-
model ofhuman disease. Infantile spinal muscular atro-
logical aspects of Australian stringhalt, Equine Vet J
phy, Werdnig-Hoffman diease. Animal model: heredi-
24(3):174-183, 1992.
tary neuronal abiotrophy in Swedish Lapland dogs, Am
952. Mahony OM, Knowles KE, Braund KG, et al: Laryn-
J Pathol 82:649-652, 1976.
 geal paralysis-polyneuropathy complex in young Rott-
932. He QC, Lowrie C, Shelton GD, et al: Inherited motor
weilers, J Vet Intern Med 12[5):330-337, 1998.
neuron disease in domestic cats: a model of spinal mus-
953.1
 Moreau PM, Vallat JM, Hugon J, et al: Peripheral and
cular atrophy, Pediatr Res 57(3):324-330, 2005.
central distal axonopathy of suspected inherited ori-
933. Vandevelde M, Greene CE, HoffEJ: Lower motor neu-
gin in Birman cats, Acta Neuropathol 82(2):143-146,
ron disease with accumulation of neuroflaments in a
1991.
cat, Vet Pathol 13(6):428-435, 1976.
954.
 Griffths IR: Progressive axonopathy: an inherited neu-
934. Dahme E, Hafner A, Schmidt P: Spinal muscular atro-
ropathy of boxer dogs. 1. Further studies of the clinical
phy in German Braunvieh calves - comparative neuro-
and electrophysiological features, J Small Anim Pract 
pathological evaluation, Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol
26:381-392, 1985.
17(6):517, 1991.
955.1
 Duncan ID, Griffiths IR: A sensory neuropathy affect-
935. Nielsen JS, Andresen E, Basse A, et al: Inheritance
ing long-haired dachshund dogs, J Small Anim Pract
of bovine spinal muscular atrophy, Acta Vet Scand
23:381-390, 1982.
31(2):253-255, 1990.
956.1
 Mason LT: The occurrence and pedigree analysis of a
       7 '  966
hereditary sensory neuropathy in the English springer
neurone and descending tract pathology in bovine spi-
spaniel, Proc Ann Am College Vet Dermatol 15:23-24,
nal muscular atrophy, J Comp Pathol 107(3):305-317,
1999.
1992.
957. Paradis M, Jaham CD, Page N, et al: Acral mutilation
937. Anderson PD, Parton KH, Collett MG, et al: A lower
and analgesia in 13 French spaniels, Vet Dermatol
motor neuron disease in newborn Romney lambs, N Z
16(2):87-93, 2005.
Vet J 47(3):112-114, 1999.
958.1
 Franklin RJM, Olby NJ, Targett MP, et al: Sensory neu-
938. Braund KG, Mehta JR, Toivio-Kinnucan M, et al:
ropathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small Anim Pract
Congenital hypomyelinating polyneuropathy in two
33:402-404, 1992.
golden retriever littermates, Vet Pathol 26[3):202-
959.
 Sanda A, Pivnik L: Die Zehenneckrose bei kurzhaari-
208, 1989.
gen Vorstehhunden, Kleintierpraxis 9:76-83, 1964.
939. Matz ME, Shell L, Braund K: Peripheral hypomyelin-
960.
 Jaderlund KH, Orvind E, Johnsson E, et al: A neuro-
ization in two golden retriever littermates, J Am Vet
logic syndrome in golden retrievers presenting as a
Med Assoc 197[2):228-230, 1990.
sensory ataxic neuropathy, J Vet Intern Med 21:i307-
1315, 2007.
522
APPENDIX1
Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
961. Jones BR, Wallace A, Harding DRK, et al: Occurrence
982. Wentink GH, Meijer AEFH, Linde-Sipman JS, et al:
of idiopathic, familial hyperchylomicronaemia in a cat,
Myopathy in an Irish terrier with a metabolic defect
Vet Rec 112(543):547, 1983.
of the isolated mitochondria, Zentralbl Veterinarmed
962. Jones BR, Johnstone AC, Cahill JI, et al: Peripheral neu-
21A:62-74, 1974.
983. Winand N, Pradham D, Cooper B: Molecular character-
ronaemia, Vet Rec 119(11):268-272, 1986.
ization of severe Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy
963.
Grieshaber T'L, McKeever PJ, McKeever PJ, et al:
in a family of Rottweiler dogs. Molecular mechanisms
 Spontaneous cutaneous [eruptive) xanthomatosis
in
of neuromuscular disease, Tucson, l994, Muscular
two cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 27:509-512, 1991.
Dystrophy Association.
 964. Bauer JE, Verlander JW: Congenital lipoprotein lipase
984.1
Ham LML, Desmidt M, Tshamala M, et al: Canine
deficiency in hyperlipemic kitten siblings, Vet Clin
X-linked muscular dystrophy in Belgian Groenendae-
Pathol 13:7-11, 1984.
ler shepherds, Vlams Diergeneeskundig Tijdschrift
965.
 Brooks KD: Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia in a cat,
64(3):102-106, 1995.
Companion Anim Pract 19:5-9, 1989.
985.
Cardinet GH Ill, Holliday TA: Neuromuscular diseases
 966. Smerdon T: Hyperchylomicronaemia in a litter of
of domestic animals: a summary of muscle biopsies
Siamese kittens, Bull Feline Advisory Bureau 5l-53,
from 159 cases, Ann N Y Acad Sci 317:290-313, 1979.
1990.
986.
Schatzberg SJ, Olby NJ, Breen M, et al: Molecular
 967. McKerrell RE, Blakemore WF, Heath MF, et al: Primary
analysis of a spontaneous dystrophin “knockout" dog.
hyperoxaluria (L-glyceric aciduria) in the cat: a newly
Neuromuscul Disord 9[5):289-295, 1999.
recognised inherited disease, Vet Rec 125(2):31-34,
987.
Wetterman CA, Harkin KR, Cash WC, et al: Hyper-
1989.
trophic muscular dystrophy in a young dog, J Am Vet
968. Podell M: Inflammatory myopathies, Vet Clin North
Med Assoc 216(6):878-881, 2000.
Am Small Anim Pract 32:147-167, 2002.
988. Jones BR, Brennan S, Mooney CT, et al: Muscular dys-
 969. Schatzberg SJ, Shelton GD: Newly identifed neuro-
trophy with truncated dystrophin in a family of Japa-
muscular disorders, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
nese spitz dogs, J Neurol Sci 217(2):143-149, 2004.
Pract 34(6):1497-1524, 2004:(review).
989.1
 Bergman RL, Inzana KD, Monroe WE, et al: Dys-
970. Evans J, Levesque D, Shelton GD: Canine inflamma-
trophin-deficient muscular dystrophy in a Labrador
tory myopathies: a clinicopathologic review of 200
retriever, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38[3):255-261,
cases, J Vet Intern Med 18(5):679-691, 2004.
2002.
971.
Werner LL, Bright JM: Drug-induced immune
990. Piercy RJ, Walmsley G: Muscular dystrophy in cavalier
hypersensitivity disorders in two dogs treated with
King Charles spaniels, Vet Rec 165(2):62, 2009.
trimethoprim sulfadiazine: case reports and drug
991.
Gaschen F, Gaschen L, Burgunder JM: Clinical study
challenge studies, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:783-
of a breeding colony affected with hypertrophic
790, 1983.
feline muscular dystrophy, J Vet Intern Med 9(3):207,
972. Giger U, Werner LL, Millichamp NJ, et al: Sulfadia-
1995:(abstract).
zine-induced allergy in six Doberman pinschers, J Am
992.
Vos JH, van der Linde-Sipman JS, Goedegebuure SA:
Vet Med Assoc 186(5):479-484, 1985.
Dystrophy-like myopathy in the cat, J Comp Pathol
973. Krum SH, Cardinet GH, Anderson BC, et al: Poly-
96(3):335-341, 1986.
myositis and polyarthritis associated with systemic
993.
Meier H: Myopathies in the dog, Cornell Vet 48:313-
lupus erythematosus in a dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc
330, 1958.
170(1):61-64, 1977.
994.
 Sharp NJH, Kornegay JN, Camp SD, et al: An error in
 974. Grindem CB, Johnson KH: Systemic lupus erythema-
dystrophin mRNA processing in golden retriever mus-
tosus: literature review and report of 42 new canine
cular dystrophy, an animal homologue of Duchenne
cases, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19[4):489-503, 1983.
muscular dystrophy, Genomics 13(1):115-12l, 1992.
975. Presthus J, Lindboe CF: Polymyositis in two German
995.
Shelton GD, Ling LA, Guo LT, et al: Muscular dys-
wirehaired pointer littermates, J Small Anim Pract
trophy in female dogs, J Vet Intern Med 15:240-244,
29[4):239-248, 1988.
2001.
976. Hankel S, Shelton GD, Engvall E: Sarcolemma-specific
996.1
Deitz K, Morrison JA, Kline K, et al: Sarcoglycan-
autoantibodies in canine inflammatory myopathy, Vet
deficient muscular dystrophy in a Boston terrier, J Vet 
Immunol Immunopathol 113(1/2):1-10, 2006.
Intern Med 22(2):476-480, 2008.
977. Hargis AM, Haupt KH, Prieur DJ, et al:A skin disorder
997.1
Martin PT, Shelton GD, Dickinson PJ, et al: Muscu-
in three Shetland sheepdogs: comparison with familial
canine dermatomyositis in collies, Compend Contin
ciency in Sphynx and Devon rex cats, Neuromuscul
Educ Pract Vet 7[4):306-315, 1985.
Disord 18(12):942-952, 2008.
978.1
White SD, Shelton GD, SissonA, et al: Dermatomyosi-
998.1
Poncelet L, Resibois A, Engvall E, et al: Laminin
tis in an adult Pembroke Welsh corgi, J Am Anim Hosp
alpha2 deficiency-associated muscular dystrophy in a
Assoc 28(5):398-401, 1992.
Maine coon cat, J Small Anim Pract 44[12):550-552,
979. Lewis DD, Shelton GD, Piras A, et al: Gracilis or semi-
2003:[review].
tendinosus myopathy in 18 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp
999. Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Hamilton MJ: Inheritance
Assoc 33(2):177-188, 1997.
ofa neuromuscular disorder ofLabrador retriever dogs,
980. Kornegay JN, Sharp NJH, Camp SD, et al: Early patho-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 179[4):380-381, 1981.
logic features of golden retriever muscular dystrophy:
1000.1
 Kramer JW, Hegreberg GA, Bryan GM, et al: A muscle
a model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy 48(3):348,
disorder of Labrador retrievers characterized by defi-
1989.
ciency of type II muscle fibers, J Am Vet Med Assoc
 981. Kornegay JN, Tuler S, Miller D, et al: Muscular dystro-
169(8):817-820, 1976.
phy in a litter of golden retriever dogs, Muscle Nerve
1001.
 Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscular
11:1056-1064, 1988.
dystrophy, Prog Vet Neurol 5(3):124, 1994:(abstract).
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
523
1002. Peeters ME, Ubbink GJ: Dysphagia-associated muscu-
1024. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Adams VJ, et al: Evaluations
lar dystrophy: a familial trait in the Bouvier des Flan-
of Labrador retrievers with exercise-induced collapse,
dres, Vet Rec 134(17):444-446, 1994.
including response to a standardized strenuous exercise
1003. Cooper BJ, de Lahunta A, Gallagher EA: Nemaline
protocol, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45[1):3-13, 2009.
myopathy of cats, Musle Nerve 9:618-625, 1986.
1025.1
Berman MC, Harrison GG, Bull AB, et al: Changes
1004. Delauche AJ, Cuddon PA, Podell M, et al: Nemaline
underlying halothane induced malignant hyperpyrexia
rods in canine myopathies: 4 case reports and literature
in Landrace pigs, Nature 225:653-655, 1970.
review, J Vet Intern Med 12(6):424-430, 1998.
1026. Fuji J, Otsu K, Zorzato F, et al: Identification of a muta-
1005. Hanson SM, Smith MO, Walker TL, et al: Juvenile-
tion in porcine ryanodine receptor associated with malig-
onset distal myopathy in Rottweiler dogs, J Vet Intern
nant hyperthermia, Science 253(5018):448-451, 1991.
Med 12(2):103-108, 1998.
1027.
Gannon JR: Exertional rhabdomyolysis (myoglobinuria)
1006.
Ceh L, Hauge JG, Svenkerud R, et al: Glycogenosis type
in the racing greyhound. In Kirk RW, editor: Current vet-
III in the dog, Acta Vet Scand 17(2):210-222, 1976.
erinary therapy VIl, ed 7, St Louis, 1980, WB Saunders.
1007. Ward TL, Valberg SJ, Adelson DL, et al: Glyco-
1028.1
 Dranchak PK, Valberg SJ, Onan GW, et al: Inheritance
gen branching enzyme (GBEl) mutation causing
of recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis in thorough-
equine glycogen storage disease IV, Mamm Genome
breds, J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:762-767, 2005.
15[7):570-577, 2004.
1029.
Valberg SJ, MacLeay JM, Mickelson JR: Exertional
1008. Valberg SJ, Ward TL, Rush B, et al: Glycogen branching
rhabdomyolysis and polysaccharide storage myopa-
enzyme deficiency in quarter horse foals, J Vet Intern
  i     
Med 15(6):572-580, 2001.
19(9):1077-1086, 1997.
1009. Angelos S, Valberg SJ, Smith BP, et al: Myophos-
1030. MacLeay JM, Sorum SA, Valberg SJ, et al: Epide-
phorylase deficiency associated with rhabdomyolysis
miologic analysis of factors influencing exertional
 and exercise intolerance in 6 related Charolais cattle,
rhabdomyolysis in thoroughbreds, Am J Vet Res
Muscle Nerve 18(7]):736-740, 1995.
60:1562-1566, 1999.
1010. Giger U, Argov Z, Schnall M, et al: Metabolic myopa-
1031.5
Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Holliday TA, et al: Hyperkale-
thy in canine muscle-type phosphofructokinase defi-
mic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet Med Assoc
ciency, Muscle Nerve 11(12):1260-1265, 1988.
197(8):1009-1017, 1990.
1011. Valberg SJ, Cardinet GH, Carlson GP, et al: Polysaccha-
1032.
Spier SJ, Carlson GP, Harrold D, et al: Genetic study
ride storage myopathy associated with recurrent exer-
of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in horses, J Am Vet
tional rhabdomyolysis in horses, Neuromuscul Disord
Med Assoc 202(6):933-937, 1993.
2:351-359, 1992.
1033. Naylor JM, Robinson JA, Bertone J: Familial incidence
1012. Valentine BA, Credille KM, Lavoie JP, et al: Severe
of hyperkalemic periodic paralysis in quarter horses,
polysaccharide storage myopathy in Belgian and Per-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 200(3):340-343, 1992.
cheron draught horses, Equine Vet J 29:220-225, 1997.
1034. Rudolph JA, Spier SJ, Byrns G, et al: Periodic paralysis
1013. Valentine BA, Cooper BJ: Incidence of polysaccharide
in quarter horses: a sodium channel mutation dissemi-
storage myopathy, Vet Pathol 42:823-827, 2005.
nated by selective breeding, Nat Genet 2(2):144-147,
1014. Breitschwerdt EB, Kornegay JN, Wheeler SJ, et al: Epi-
1992.
sodic weakness associated with exertional lactic acido-
1035. Cannon SC, Hayward LJ, Beech J, et al: Sodium chan-
sis and myopathy in Old English sheepdog littermates,
      
J Am Vet Med Assoc 201(5):731-736, 1992.
periodic paralysis, J Neurophysiol 73(5):1892-1899,
1015. Olby NJ, Chan KK, Targett MP, et al: Suspected mito-
1995.
chondrial myopathy in a Jack Russell terrier, J Small
1036. Shelton GD, Schule A, Kass PH: Risk factors for
Anim Pract 38[5]:213-216, 1997.
acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs: 1,154 cases [1991-
1016. Houlton JE, Herrtage ME: Mitochondrial myopathy in
11      
the Sussex spaniel, Vet Rec 106[9):206, 1980.
1997.
1017.
 Herrtage ME, Houlton JEF: Collapsing clumber span-
1037.
 Kent M, Glass EN, Acierno M, et al: Adult onset
iels, Vet Rec 105[14):334, 1979.
acquired myasthenia gravis in three Great Dane litter-
1018. Paciello O, Maiolino P, Fatone G, et al: Mitochondrial
mates, J Small Anim Pract 49[12):647-650, 2008.
myopathy in a German shepherd dog, Vet Pathol
1038.1
 Lipsitz D, Berry JL, Shelton GD: Inherited predisposi-
40(5):507-511, 2003.
tion to myasthenia gravis in Newfoundlands, J Am Vet 
1019. Shelton GD, van Ham L, Bhatti S, et al: Pyruvate dehy-
Med Assoc 215(7):956-958, 1999.
drogenase deficiency in clumber and Sussex spaniels
1039.
Shelton GD, Ho M, Kass PH: Risk factors for acquired
in the United States and Belgium, J Vet Intern Med
myasthenia gravis in cats: 105 cases [1986-1998), J Am
14(3):342, 2000.
Vet Med Assoc 216[1]:55-57, 2000.
1040. Johnson RP, Watson ADJ, Smith J, et al: Myasthenia in
myopathy in a cocker spaniel, J Small Anim Pract
springerSpaniellittermates,JSmallAnimPract 16(10):641-
40:31-34, 1999.
647. 1975.
1021. Inada S, Yamauchi C, Igata A, et al: Canine storage dis-
1041.1
 Dickinson PJ, Sturges BK, Shelton GD, et al: Congenital 
 ease characterized by hereditary progressive neurogenic
 myastheniagravisinsmooth-hairedminiaturedachshunddogs.
muscular atrophy: breeding experiments and clinical
J Vet Intern Med 19(6):920-923, 2005.
manifestation, Am J Vet Res 47[10):2294-2299, 1986.
1042.1
Wallace ME, Palmer AC: Recessive mode of inheri-
1022. Wells GAH, Bradley R: Pietrain creeper syndrome:
tance in myasthenia gravis in the Jack Russel terrier.
a primary myopathy of the pig? Neuropathol Appl
Vet Rec 114[14):350, 1984.
Neurobiol 4[3):237-238, 1978.
1043.1
 Flagstad A, Trojaborg W, Gammeltoft S: Congenital
1023. Taylor SM, Shmon CL, Shelton GD, et al: Exercise-
myasthenic syndrome in the dog breed Gammel Dansk
induced collapse of Labrador retrievers: survey results
Honsehund: clinical, electrophysiological, pharmaco-
and preliminary investigation of heritability, J Am
logical and immunological comparison with acquired
Anim Hosp Assoc 44(6):295-301, 2008.
myasthenia gravis, Acta Vet Scand 30(1):89-102, 1989.
524
APPENDIX 1
 Congenital, Inherited, or Breed-Associated Neurologic and Muscular Diseases
1044. Miller LM, Hegreberg GA, Prieur DJ, et al: Inheritance
1047. Pele M, Tiret L, Kessler JL, et al: SINE exonic insertion
of congenital myasthenia gravis in smooth fox terrier
in the PTPLA gene leads to multiple splicing defects
dogs, J Hered 75[3):163-166, 1984.
and segregates with the autosomal recessive centronu-
1045. Thompson PN, Steinlein OK, Harper CK, et al: Con-
clear myopathy in dogs, Hum Mol Genet 14[13):1905-
 genital myasthenic syndrome ofBrahman cattle in South
1906,2005.
Africa, Vet Rec 153[25):779-781, 2003.
1046. Cameron JM, Maj MC, Levandovskiy V, et al: Identi-
fication of a canine model of pyruvate dehydrogenase
phosphatase 1 deficiency, Mol Genet Metab 90(1):15-
23,2007.
NDE
EX
A
Acquired myasthenia gravis (Continued)
Analgesics
Abducent nerves (CN VI)
prognosis of, 217
α2- agonists, 422t-428t, 428
assessment technique, 32
signs of, 216
analgesic types
I-0ie Kyedoru painboy
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
 local anesthetics, 422t-423t, 425t-426t
 summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
Acquired myotonia, 310-311
anticonvalsants, 422t-424t, 428
Abiotrophy
Acquired tremors
corticosteroids, 421-424, 422t-425t, 423f
from chlorinated hydrocarbons, 319
definition of, 414t
breeds associated with, 264t-266t
canine cerebellar cortical, 438-440,
from drugs, 321
glucocorticoids, 421-424, 422t-425t
head trermors, 320
438f-439f
nonsteroidal antinflarmmatory drugs
from heavy-rmetal poisoning. 319
(NSAIDs), 422t-428t, 423f, 424-426
definition of 263
signs of, 438-440, 438f-439f
from hexachlorophene, 319
opioids, 422t-428t, 423f, 426-428
Abscesses
mycotoxicoses, 319
Andersen's disease, 204t-206t, 209
orthostatic postural myoclonus, 320
bacterial brain, 454t, 467-468
Anesthesia
characteristics and treatment of 454t
from poisoning, 316
 definition of 414t 
 from poisonous plants, 319
 and lesion localization, 37-39, 38f
discospondylitis vertebral, 124-126, 125f,
130f
postural repetitive myoclonus, 319
and self-rmutilation, 102-103
 Absence seizures, 386-390, 387b
from strychnine poisoning, 316
Anisocoria, 333
 Accessory nerves (CN XI)
 toxicosis tremors, 319
Anormalous diseases; See also DAMNITV
 acquired laryngeal paralysis, 292
tremorogenic agents, 319
classification schermes
Acrylamide, 339
causing ataxia, 255, 255t, 261t
anatomy of, 285
Actinomycetes infections, 455t, 469
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t,
assessment of, 33
 clinical signs, 286
actinomycosis, 455t, 469
267-269
dysphagia (swallowing disorders]
nocardiosis, 455t, 469
coma or stupor, 368, 368t
cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
tuberculous meningitis, 455t, 469
examples of, 5t
involving spinal cord, 1llt-115t
esophageal phase, 294-295
gastroesophageal phase, 295
Acute brainstem hermorrhage
causing paresis of one limhb, 98t
with tentorial hermiation, 349, 351t
glossopharyngeal phase dysfunction,
 and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
294
 Acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis,
255t
guttural pouch disease, 293
189-191, 190t
Anosmia
Acute noncompressive nucleus pulposus
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
nigropallidal encephalormalacia,
extrusion,111-112
localization possibilities with, 3t
293-294
 oral and pharyngeal phases, 293-295
Acute progressive motor neuron disorders,
Anticonvulsants
 pharyngoesophageal phase dysfunction,
189-191, 190t
benzodiazepines, 399-402
Acute progressive myopathies, 201-203
294
drugs and characteristics of, 422t-424t, 428
laryngeal paralysis in cats, 292
Acute spinal cord injury, 126-130, 128t
felbamate, 397t, 399
laryngeal paralysis in dogs, 290-293
Afferent fibers
gabapentin, 397t, 399
Bouvier des Flanders, 291
 thalarmus as relay center for, 5-6, 6f
levetiracetam, 397t, 399
congenital laryngeal paralysis, 291
Afferent system
 phenobarbital, 395-398, 397t
in Dalrmatians, 291-292
definition of, 8
potassium bromide, 397t, 398
 in Pyrenean mountain dogs, 292
Agenesis
pregabalin, 397t, 399
 in Rottweilers, 291
cerebellar, 264t-265t
zonisamide, 397t, 399
 in Siberian huskies/Alaskan rmalamutes,
 of corpus callosum, 391-392
Antifreeze
Aggression
toxic disorders from, 447t
291
 in White German Shepherds, 291
as defining mental status, 17-18
Antimicrobial drugs.
Akabane virus, 268
to penetrate blood-brain barrier, 465t
 laryngeal paralysis in horses, 292-293
Allodynia
surmmmary of techniques, 41t-43t
Aortic thrormboembolism, 141
Acoustic nerves
definition of, 413, 414t
Arachidonic acid metabolism, 421-424, 423f
origin and distribution illustration,
Az- agonists, 422t-428t, 428
7f
Arachnoid cysts
and vestibular ataxia, 250-253, 251f
Amputation
 spinal, 134-135, 134f
with nerve sheath turmors, 104
Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS)
Acquired laryngeal paralysis, 292
Acquired myasthenia gravis, 215-217
Anal reflexes, 29, 29f
definition of, 17-18, 20f
diagnosis and treatment of, 216-217
Anal sphincter
function and illustration of 6
pathophysiology of 215-216
examination of, 65-66
and stupor or coma, 346-348, 347f
Page numbers followed by findicate fgures;t, tables; b, boxes.
525
526
INDEX
 Ascending-descending ischemic necrosis
Ataxia {Continued)
Bacterial infections (Continued)
syndrorme, 113-114
degenerative myeloencephalopathy.
 causing inflammmatory spinal diseases,
Ascending-descending myelomalacia,
169-188
120-126
113-114.
diffuse myopathic diseases, 169t
listeriosis, 454t, 467
Association fibers
diffuse neuropathic diseases, 168t
causing stupor or coma, 365
functions of, 5
equine degenerative myeloencephalopa-
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
Ataxia
thy, 172-173
(TEME), 454t, 467, 467f
algorithms for diagnosing, 251f
equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
 Bacterial meningitis
assessment of, 21
extradural synovial cysts, 188
in horses, 454t, 466
cerebellar diseases causing, 262-27l, 262t,
fibrocarilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
Bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis, 454t,
264t-266t
food animal diseases, 167t
464-467
cerebellar malformations, 262t, 266t,
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 171-172,
Ballismus, 309
267-269
174t-180t
Basal muclei, 5, 6f
 congenital and degenerative large
occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
Batten disease, 434t-437t
animal, 266t
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation, 184
Behavior changes
inherited cerebellar hypoplasia and
small anirmal spinal cord diseases, 165t
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
dysplasia, 268, 269f
surmmary of 174t-180t
with seizures, 384
 intracranial arachnoid cyst/diverticulum,
syringomyelia,184-185,185f
from toxic disorders, 449t, 451
269
toxin disorders causing, 270-271, 259,
Belgian sheepdog syndrome, 336
lysosomal storage disorders, 265-267,
449t, 451
Benzodiazepines, 399-402
268f
vascular infarction causing, 271
Bethanechol, 69, 69t
rmltiple system degeneration, 263,
vestibular, 13-14, 32-33
Biceps brachi muscle reflexes, 19b, 28, 28f
264t-265t,267f
Athetosis, 22
Bichon Frise movement disorder, 320-321
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 263-265.
definition of, 309
Bilateral tibial nerve paralysis, 99-100, 99f
264t-266t
Atlantoaxial articulation
Bilateral trigerminal nerve lesions, 286-287
 occipital dysplasia, 269
fractures of, 173-184, 181f
Bilateral vestibular disease, 253
primary and secondary cerebellar
Atlantoaxial subluxation, 173-184, 181f-182f
Bladder
neoplasms, 270, 270f
characteristics of, 145t
 anatomy and physiology of, 58-62,
 primary cerebellar cortical degeneration,
Atonic seizures, 386-390, 387b
59f-60f
263, 264t-266t, 267f
Atrophy
effects of lesions on, 63t
viral-induced cerebellar hypoplasia,
definition of 263
management in neurologic patients, 429
267-268, 268f
Auditory system
micturition disorders, 62-70, 63t
characteristics of, 250-254
evaluation of neonatal, 20t
paralysis, 147-149
classification of 250
Aujeszky disease, 457t-460t, 470, 470f
voiding (See micturition)
cerebellar ataxia, 253-254
Aura, 384
Bladder paralysis, 147-149
general proprioceptive [GP) ataxia, 250
Aural neoplasms
Blindness
vestibular ataxia, 250-253
causing ataxia, 259-260, 260f
etiology of, 337t
diseases causing
Autormatism
localization possibilities with, 3t, 330-334
aural neoplasms, 259-260, 260f
with seizures, 384, 387b, 390
night and vitamin A deficiency, 445-446
brainsterm disorders, 260-262, 261f,
Autommobile accidents
Block vertebrae
261t
spinal traumma, 126-130, 139, 139f
characteristics of, 145t, 146f
canine idiopathic vestibular syndrome,
traumatic brain injuries, 348
Blood chemmistry analysis, 75
258-259
Autonommic nervous system (ANS)
Blood glucose
central vestibular diseases, 260-262,
dysautonomia
hypoglycemmia, 445
261f 26lt
in cats, 296
Blood-brain barrier
chronic progressive peripheral vestibu-
description of 295-297
antimicrobial drugs to penetrate, 465t
lar diseases, 259-260
in dogs, 296-297, 296f
description and function of, 450, 464, 466
congenital vestibular syndrome, 255
grass sickness, 295-296
Blue tongue virus, 268
hypothyroidism, 255-256
in horses, 295-296
Border disease virus, 268
idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome,
Key-Gaskell syndrome, 296
Botulism
258
and seizures, 384
characteristics of, 214, 454t
inflammatory polyps,257-258, 258f
syrnpathetic and parasympathetic
pathophysiology, clinical signs and
neoplastic disorders, 259-260
divisions of, 8
treatment, 190, 190t, 214
otitis media interma, 256-257, 257f
Autonomous zone, 96, 96f
versus polyradiculoneuritis or tick
ototoxicity, 259
Autosormal recessive muscular dystrophy.
paralysis, 190t
 peripheral vestibular diseases, 254-259.
204t-206t,208
Bouvier des Flanders, 291
255f, 255t
Axonopathy
Bouvier des Flanders myopathy, 204t-206t,
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40-44, 40f,
peripheral nervous system (PNS), 170,
208
44f
173t, 194t-197t
Bovine ceroid-lipofuscinosis, 433-438, 434t-
localization origin possibilities, 3t
surmrmary of, 174t-180t
437t, 438f
metabolic disorders causing, 269
Axons
Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE),
sorghurm cystitis and, 147-149
actions of 163
463t, 471-472, 472f
spinal cord diseases associated with
functions in cerebral cortex, 5
Bovine verminous migration, 123
atlantoaxial subluxation, 173-184,
and LMN-associated involuntary
Bovine virus diarrhea, 268
181f-182f
movements, 307
Bovines
caudal occipital malformation
Azoturia, 204t-206t, 209
 caring for recumbent, 429-430
syndrome, 184-185
clinical signs of pain in, 417t
 central myelinopathy, 170-171,
B
examples of toxic plants affecting,
173t-180t
Babinski reflex, 30
452t-453t
cervical intervertebral disk (IVDD)
Bacterial brain abscess, 454t, 467-468
listing of breed-associated diseases See
disease, 164-167, 170f-171f
Bacterial infections
Appendix
 cervical meningomyelitis, 167
bacterial brain abscess, 454t, 467-468
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
cervical spondylormyelopathy, 169-188,
bacterial meningitis in horses, 454t, 466
192t-193t
185f-187f
bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis, 454t,
pain management for, 421-428, 426t
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185
464-467
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
INDEX
527
Boxer rmovement disorder, 321
Canine degenerative myelopathy, 130-132
Central myelinopathy, 170-171, 173t-180t
Brachial plexus
dlinical signs of, 132
Central nervous systemm (CNS)
nerves of, 95t
diagnosis of 132, 136t
bacterial diseases of, 454t
trauma causing rmonoparesis, 95t, 100,
pathogenesis, 130-131
components of, S-6, 6f
100f-101f
signalment,131
development of, 5-6
Bradycardia
treatrment of 132
functional organization of 8
cranial nerves associated with, 41t-43t
Canine distemper virus
hypomyelinopathy
Brain
signs of 457t-460t, 470-471, 470f
 characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
areas supplied by cerebral arteries, 358f
Canine globoid cell leukodystrophy.
174t-180t
bacterial abscesses, 454t, 467-468
433-438, 438f
immune-mediated diseases of, 462t, 472
and comma/stupor, 346-348, 347f
Canine herpesvirus, 268
lesion symptoms, 39t
 computed tomography (CT) images of.
Canine idiopathic vestibular syndrome,
lymphoma, 362
80f
258-259
mycotic diseases of, 455t
etiology of vascular disease in, 355b
Canine myotonia congenita, 310, 31lt
myelopathy/encephalomyelopathy, 170,
five major regions of, 5-6, 6f
Canine myotonic dystrophy, 311
173t-180t
illustration of ataxia in, 269f
Canines
parasitic diseases of 462t, 472
lesion localization signs, 39, 39t, 41t-43t
linical signs of pain in, 417t 
problems associated with, 3t
 magnetic resonance images of, 77f
distemper virus, 457t460t, 470-471,
protozoal diseases of, 456t
neuronal migration disorders, 372-373
470f
rickettsial and chlammydial diseases of,
segmental anatomic organization of, 5-6, 6f
herpesvirus, 268
461t
Brain dead
listing of breed-associated diseases See
viral diseases of, 457t-460t
definition of, 346
Appendix
Central nervous system hypormyelinopathy
Brain edema
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
three types of, 349-357
192t-193t
174t-180t
 Brain hermorrhage
pain management for, 421-428, 422t-423t
Central pain, 416
causing comma or stupor, 353t,354,
Caprine arthritis-encephalitis virus (CAE),
Central vestibular diseases
355f-356f, 355b
124
causing ataxia, 260-262, 261f 261t
Brain pathways
 Caprine lentiviral encephalommyelitis, 124
Central-peripheral distal axonopathy
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
Caprine verminous migration, 123
174t-180t, 194t-197t, 197-198
Brain tumors, 357-364
Caprines
Centromuclear myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
calvaria tummors, 364-365
linical signs of pain in, 417t
Cerebellar agenesis, 264t-265t
in cerebellum, 353t, 357f
listing of breed-associated diseases See
Cerebellar ataxia, 253-254
clinical signs and diaghosis of, 358-359
Appendix
Cerebellarcortical degeneration, 266t
CNS 1yrmphoma, 362
Carbon monoxide poisoning, 366
Cerebellarhypoplasia, 264t-265t, 267-268,
causing coma or stupor, 33t, 356, 356f
Cartilaginous exostoses, 134, 134f
268f
See brain turmors
Cataplexy, 22, 402
Cerebellar hypoplasia with lissencephaly.
comrmon sites of, 359t
Cats
264t-265t
incidence of 357-358
hyperchylomicronemia, 194t-197t, 199
Cerebellar malformations, 266t, 267
MRI's of, 357f, 359f-361f 360t
hyperoxaluria, 194t-197t, 199
causing ataxia, 262t, 266t, 267-269
pathogenesis of 357-358
laryngeal paralysis in, 292
Cerebellar neoplasia, 270
pituitary tumors, 362, 363f
listing of breed-associated diseases See
Cerebellopontine angle
treatment of 360-361
Appendix
as commrmon brain tumor site, 359t
Brainsterm
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
Cerebellum
and coma/stupor, 346-348, 347f
192t-193t
anatomy and physiology of, 6, 6f, 14
as common brain tumor site, 359t
pain managerment for, 421-428, 424t
brain tumors in, 353t, 357f
and decerebratepostures3073080
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
congenital and degenerative diseases of,
disorders causing ataxia, 260-262, 261f, 
Cattle
266t
261t
caring for recumbent, 429-430
diseases of, 14
functions and components of, 6, 6f
examples of toxic plants affecting.
lesion localization signs, 39t, 44, 44f
lesionlocalization signs, 3945,39t,40f
452t-453t
Cerebral arteries
4lt-43t
listing of breed-associated diseases See
 brain areas supplied by, 358f
neurons in, 9-10, 9f, 9t
Appendix
Cerebral cortex
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
anatomy and function of, 5, 6f
reflexes, 354, 354b
192t-193t
and comma or stupor, 346-348, 347f
 Brainstem auditory evoked response
pain managemment for, 421-428, 426t
lesion symptoms, 39t
(BAER), 32, 86t, 87, 288-290
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
neurons in, 9-10, 9f, 9t
Brainsterm reflexes
 Cauda equina diseases
and seizures, 385-386
 assessing with MGCS in small anirmals,
cauda equina syndrome, 141-144, 141f,
Cerebral cortex lobe
354, 354b
143f
 associated with pain, 5
Bulbocavemosus reflexes, 29, 29f, 65-66
 DAMNITV classification scheme
Cerebral edema
Butterfly vertebrae
 for food animal lumbosacral and cauda
definition of, 351b
characteristics of 145t, 146f
equina diseases, 116t
from heat,349t,365
for small animal lumbosacral and cauda
Cerebral hemispheres
C
equina diseases, 114t
lobes of, 5
Calvaria
Caudallumbar fractures, 139
Cerebral lesions
fractures, 351b
Caudal occipital malformation syndrome
causing stupor or coma, 44-45
function of 347-348
{COMS), 146, 184-185
Cerebral peduncles, 5
tumors of 364-365, 364f
Caudal vertebral hypoplasia, 146, 149f
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis
Calvarial fractures
Causalgia
analysis variables, 83t
defnition of, 351b
definition of, 414t
availability, 81-85
Camelids
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels hypertonic
collection methods/landmarks, 81-85, 84f
pain management for, 421 -428, 427t
ity, 320
for diagnosis confirrmation, 81-85, 83t, 84f
Camelids verminous migration, 123-124
Cell body
indications and contraindications, 85
Canine cerebellar cortical abiotrophy.
and LMN-associated involuntary
Cerebrovascular accidents
438-440, 438f-439f
movements, 307
description and causes of brain, 354
528
INDEX
Cerebrum
Cochlear nerves (Contimued)
Computed tomography (Continued)
anatomy and function of 5, 6f
deafness, 289-290, 289t
for diagnosis confirmation, 77-78, 80f,
and cognitive function, 14
ternporohyoid osteoarthropathy,
81t, 82f
as common brain tumor site, 359t
288-289
image examnple, 80f
lesionlocalization signs445
hearing function of 13
indications/benefits, 78
in nociception process, 413-415,414f
tympanic membrane, 284
science and technology of, 78
Cervical intervertebral disk (IVDD) disease,
Coma
Concussions
164-167, 170f-171f
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
versus contusions, 348
Cervical intumescence
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
definition of, 351b
segmental innervation from, 9-10, 1lf-12f
as defning mental status, 1718
Conductive deafness, 284-285
Cervical meningormyelitis, 167
definitions associated with, 346
Congenital and degenerative large animal
Cervical spinal hyperesthesia,
, 173-184, 182f
diseases/conditions causing
disorders
Cervical spondylormyelopathy, 169-188,
brain hemorrhage, 353t, 354, 355f-356f
and ataxia, 266t
185f-187f
355b
Congenital and inherited motor
Chermicals
brain tumors, 353t, 356, 356f See brain
neuropathies, 191, 192t-193t, 193
_causing ataxia, 259t
tumors
Congenital cerebellar diseases
Chemoreceptors
equine head trauma, 352-353
 in larger animals, 266t
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
feline ischemic encephalopathy, 356
Congenital disorders
Chemotherapy
focal or lateralizing signs, 348, 349t
myotonia congenita,310,311t
for brain turmors, 361-362
head injuries, 348, 350t, 351b, 352f
Congenital laryngeal paralysis, 291
for secondary tumors, 362-364
infarction,354,355f-357f 355b
Congenital myasthenia gravis, 217
Chiari malformations, 146
ischermic infarction, 353t, 354-355,
Congenital sensorineural deafness, 289-290,
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185,
355f-356f 355b
289t
391-392
no-focal orlateralizing signs, 365-367
Congenital vestibular syndrorme
Chlarmydial infections, 461t, 472-475
 progressive bilateral caudal tentorial
causing ataxia, 255
Chlorinated hydrocarbons, 319, 447t
hermiation, 349t
Chondromas
traumatic brain injury (TBI), 348, 350t,
Consciousness
vertebral, 137, 138f
351b, 352f
assessing level of 17-18, 20f
Chondrosarcomas
etiology of 350t
assessing with MGCS in small animals,
vertebral, 137, 138f
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 351, 354
354, 354b
Chorea, 308
lesion localization, 346-348
and coma or stupor, 346-348, 347f
Choroid plexus papillomas, 270
anatomic origins and signs of, 347f, 347t
definitions associated with, 346
Chronic degenerative radiculormyelopathy.
ascending reticular activating system
loss with seizures, 384, 387b, 390
130-131
[ARAS), 346-347, 347f
Contrecoup
Chronic idiopathic polyneuritis, 200
brain activity and, 346-348, 347t
definition of, 351b
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating
brain sterm disorders, 346-348, 347t
Contusions
polyneuropathy, 200
identifying causes of, 346-347, 347t
definition of, 351b
Chronic pain,415,415f
levels of consciousness decreased,
Convergence-projection, 416
Chronic progressive peripheral vestibular
346-347, 347f
Coonhound paralysis, 189-191, 190t, 462t
diseases
metabolic diseases associated with, 347,
Coordination
causing ataxia, 259-260
347t
assessment of 21
Circling
toxic encephalopathies, 347, 347t
lack of (See ataxia)
as defining mental status, 17-18
turmors, abscesses, hematomma or edema,
Cord dorsum potential (CDP), 87, 88t
description of anirmal, 21
347-348
Cori's disease, 204t-206t, 209
disease, 454t, 467
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40, 40f
Comeal reflexes, 283, 283f
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40-44, 40f
localization origin possibilities, 3t
Cortical neurons
and vestibular system, 13-14
no-focal or lateralizing signs, 365-367
axons from, 5
Circling disease
anommalous conditions, 368, 368t
Cortical-evoked responses
causes and rmanifestations of, 454t, 467
degenerative diseases, 367-368
during micturition examinations, 67, 68t
characteristics and treatment of, 454t
diffuse diagnoses, 368
Corticosteroids
Clinical signs
hydrocephalus, 368-369, 369f-371f,
 drugs and characteristics of, 421-424,
sign-time graphs, 4,4f
370t
422t425t, 423f
Clonic seizures, 386-390, 387b
hypertensive encephalopathy, 366
Coughing
Cluster seizures (CS)
inborn errors, 367
 cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
classification of, 390
inflammation, 350t, 365
Coup
description and treatment of, 400-402,
metabolic diseases, 350t, 365
defnition of, 351b
401f
thiamine deficiency, 367
COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitors, 421-424,
CN I; See olfactory nerves
from toxic disorders, 449t, 451
423f
CN II; See optic nerves
Comatose
Cramping, 211
CN IIl; See oculomotor nerves
definition of 346
Cranial mesodermal defects, 372
CN IV; See trochlear nerves
Cormmissural fibers
Cranial nerves;See individual nerves
CN IX; See glossopharyngeal nerves
functions of, 5
 anatormic locations and functions of 5-6,
CN V; See trigeminal merves
Compartment myopathy, 203
6f
CN VI; See abducent nerves
Complex seizures, 387b, 390
assessment techniques, 7f 30-33
CN VII; See facial nerves
Compound muscle action potential
associated with ataxia, 253
CN VIII; See acoustic nerves
(CMAP), 87
grading during physical exam, 15, 20t
CN X; See vagus nerves
Cormpressive myelopathy
I to XII (See CN I to CN XI1)
CN XI; See spinal accessory nerves
in Shiloh Shepherds, 135
lesion localization signs, 39-45, 39t, 40f,
CN XII; See hypoglossal nerves
vertebrallesions causing, 133-135
41t43t
Coccidioidal meningitis, 455t, 469
Compulsive pacing/walking
 origin and distribution of (dog example),
Coccygeal fractures/luxations, 139
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
7f
Cochlear nerves (CN VIII)
 as defining mental status, 17-18
summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
anatomy of 284
Computed tomography (CT)
techniqassssing7f30f
clinical signs, 284-285
availability of 77
unilateral cranial polyeuropathy, 297
disorders of
to diagnose IVDD, 114-118, 117f
Cranial tibial muscle reflexes, 19b, 27, 27f
INDEX
529
Cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
Degenerative diseases; See also DAMNITV
Diabetic neuropathy, 194t-197t, 199
Crossed extensor reflex, 30
classification schemes
Diagnoses
Cryptococcal meningitis, 455t, 468-469
abiotrophies, 438-440, 438f-439f
differential (See DAMNITV classification
Cushing's disease, 204t-206t, 210-211, 210f,
affecting eyes,334-33,337t,339340
schermes}
443-444
and brainstem diseases/ataxia, 261t
Diagnosis confirmation
Cutaneous nerve zones
canine degenerative myelopathy, 130-132
with cerebrospinal fluid analysis, 8l-85,
and rmonoparesis, 96,96f
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t,
83t, 84f
and sensory loss,96,96f
263-267, 264t-265t
with computed tomography (CT), 77-78,
Cutaneous trunci (panniculus) reflex, 12,
dysautonommia, 439-440
80f 81t, 82f
18f, 38
examples of, 5t
diagnostic imaging, 75-89
Cystometrograms (CMGs)
of eyes, 334-335
electrophysiology, 85-89, 86t, 88t
description and example of, 66f, 67
involving spinal cord, 11lt-115t
laboratory studies, 75
normal values for, 67t
mltisystem neuronal degeneration, 439
with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
Cytotoxic ederma, 349-357
overview and types of, 432-440, 433t
75-77, 77f-79f
causing paresis of one limb, 98t
with radiography,78-81, 81t, 82f
D
primary myelin classifications, 132
with ultrasonography, 81, 82f
Dalmatians
storage disorders, 433-438, 433t-437t, 438f
urinalysis hematology and blood
deafness tendencies in, 289-290, 289t
causing stupor or coma, 367-368
chermistry analysis, 75
laryngeal paralysis in, 291-292
Degenerative intervertebral disk disease
Diagnostic imaging, 75-89
DAMNITV classification schemes
{IVDD);, 110-120, 116f See also thora-
Diagnostic plans
for ataxia, 255t, 261t-262t
columbar intervertebral disk disease
components of neurologic, 2-3
for blindness and other ocular disorders, 
 Degenerative lumbosacral stenosis (DLSS),
laboratory studies and diagnostic imaging.
337t-338t
141-144, 141f 143f
75-89
description and components of, 5t
pain with, 141-144, 141f 143f
Diarrhea
for nociceptive/inflammatory pain versus
Degenerative myeloencephalopathy.
bovine virus, 268
neuropathic pain, 420t
169-188
Diencephalon
for paresis of one limb diseases, 98t
Degenerative myelopathy
anatomy and functions of, 5-6, 6f
for seizures, 388t-389t
characteristics versus other disorders, 136t
lesion localization signs, 39t, 40
for spinal cord injuries
classified as rmultisysterm central and
Differential diagnoses; See DAMNITV
for equine lumbosacral and cauda
 classification schemes
equina diseases, 115t, 166t
 Degenerative spinal cord disorders
Diffuse axonal injuries
for equine thoracolumbar spinal cord
surmrmary of 174t-180t
definition of, 351b
diseases, 11lt, 165t
 Denervation atrophy
Diffuse myopathic diseases, 169t
for food anirmal lumbosacral and cauda
 and monoparesis, 96, 96f
Diffuse neuropathic diseases, 168t
equina diseases, 1l6t, 167t
Dens
 Diffuse signs;,. See rmaltifocal signs
for food animal thoracolumbar spinal
 lgamentous attachments of 18lf
Digits; See also peripheral nervous system
cord diseases, 113t, 167t
Depression
(PNS}
for small animal lumbosacral and cauda
as defining mental status 17-18
tibial nerves affecting, 99-100, 99f
equina diseases, 114t, 165t
from toxic disorders, 449t, 451
Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 128-129 
for small animal thoracolumbar spinal
Dermatomes, 10, 15f
 Direct nerve stimulation
cord diseases, 11lt, 165t
Dermatomyositis, 202
 PNS evaluation procedures, 88t
for stupor and coma, 350t
Detrusor areflexia
types of 87
for tetraparesis, hemiparesis and ataxia,
with normal sphincter tone
usage parameters, 86t
164, 165t, 168t
clinical signs of, 62, 64t
Discospondylitis
 Dancing Doberman disease, 194t-197t, 197,
diagnosing, 64-67, 66f, 67t-68t
characteristics and treatment of 454t
321
treatment of, 70
characteristics versus other disorders,
 Dandy-Walker syndrome
from overdistention
136t
breeds associated with, 264t-265t
clinical signs of, 62,
.64t
illustration of, 149f
and seizures, 391-392
diagnosis of, 64-67, 66f, 67t-68t
multifocal signs of, 468
Dazzle reflex, 332-333
treatment of, 70
Discospondylitis vertebral abscesses,
Deafness
with sphincter hypertonus
124-126, 125f 130f
 abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
clinical signs of, 62, 64t
 Diseases; See also DAMNITV classification
acquired, 289
treatment of, 68-70
schemes
classification of, 284-285
with sphincter hypotonia
 pain associated with different,
cochlear nerves (CN VII1) and, 289-290,
clinical signs of, 62, 64t
420-421
289t
diagnosis of, 64-67, 66f, 67t-68t
 signs and symptomms of (See multifocal
congenital sensorineural, 289-290
treatment of, 70
signs)
 tendencies in Dalrmatians and white cats,
Detrusor hyperreflexia
 steps in managing neurological, 2
290
taking histories regarding, 65
Disks; See intervertebral disks
 Decerebellate postures
treatment of, 70
Disorientation
description and illustration of, 307-308,
Detrusor muscle
 as defining mental status, 17-18
308f
anatomy and physiology of, 58-62,
definition of, 346
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40-44,
59f-60f
 Disserminated idiopathic skeletal
40f
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
hyperostosis (DISH), 133-134, 133f
Decerebellate rigidity
micturition disorders, 62-70, 63t
Distal axonopathy, 193-197, 194t-197t
assessment of, 19
sensory pathways from,59,9f
Distal myopathy of Rottweilers, 204t-206t,
 Decerebrate postures
Detrusor reflex
208
description and illustration of, 307-308,
 anatomy and physiology of 58, 60-61, 60f
 Distal sensorimotor neuropathy, 193-197,
308f
cerebellar inhibition of 60f, 61
194t-197t
 Decerebrate rigidity
clinical signs of abnormal, 62-64, 63t-64t 
 Distemper virus
assessment of 19
function of, 58-62
canine, 457t-460t, 470-471, 470f
 Deep pain perception
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
and seizures, 392
assessment of 415-416, 415f
voluntary control of, 58-62, 60f
 Doberman pinschers
 Degenerative cerebellar diseases
Diabetes mellitus
cervical spondylormyelopathy, 185-188,
in larger animals, 266t
description and signs of, 443
185f-187f
530
INDEX
Dogs
Eclampsia
Equine herpesvirus (EHV) myeloencepha-
 canine distemper virus, 457t-460t,
postparturient, 315
lopathy, 120-121
470-471, 470f
Efferent system
Equine herpesvirus type l (EVH-1 ).
canine herpesvirus, 268,457t-460t
definition of, 8
457t460t, 471
cervical spondylommyelopathy, 185-188,
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Equine hypoxic and ischermic encephalopa-
185f-187f
 principles and usefulness of, 86t, 88
thy, 366
infectious canine hepatitis, 457t-460t
Electromyelograph (EMyG), 67
Equine lumbosacral and cauda equina
laryngeal paralysis in, 290-293
Electromyography (EMG), 85-89, 86t, 88t
diseases, 115t
listing of breed-associated diseases [See
definition of, 85-86
Equine motor neuron disease, 191,
Appendix)
of micturition function, 67, 68t
192t-193t, 193f
motor neuron diseases in, 19l-200,
PNS evaluation procedures, 88t
Equine myotonic dystrophy, 311
192t-193t
science and technology, 86-87
Equine protozoal myeloencephalitis (EPM)
pain managerment for, 421-428, 422t423t
usage parameters, 86t
signs of, 456t, 469
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
 Electrophysiology, 85-89
 Equine protozoal myeloencephalomyelitis
Dorsal wire fixation, 183-184
brainstem auditory evoked response
(EPM), 121-123, 122f
Drug therapy
{BAER],86t,87
Equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
for pain( See analgesics)
for diagnosis confration,8589,86t, 8t
Equine thoracolumbar spinal cord diseases,
 Drug-induced neurormuscular blockage, 215
direct nerve stirmulation
11lt
Drugs
 PNS evaluation procedures, 88t
Equine verminous migration, 123-124
 acquired tremors frorn, 321
types of, 87
Equines
causing ataxia, 259t
usage parameters, 86t
clinical signs of pain in, 417t
toxic disorders from, 447t-449t
electromyography (EMG), 85-89, 86t, 88t
head trauma causing coma or stupor,
and toxins causing myotonia311
definition of, 85-86
352-353
Dullness
 PNS evaluation procedures, 88t
listing of breed-associated diseases (See
 and cerebral lesions, 44-45
science and technology, 86-87
Appendix)
as defining mental status, 1718
usage parameters, 86t
motor neuron diseases in, 19l-200,
definition of, 346
evoked response tests, 86t, 87
192t-193t, 193f
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f
repetitive nerve stimmulation, 86t, 87, 88t
pain managerment for, 421-428, 425t
Durotomy, 119
Electroretinography, 86t, 88
 Etiologies;,. See also DAMNITV classification
Dying-back neuropathy, 193-197, 194t-197t
Endocrine disorders
schemes
Dysautonomia
description and signs of, 442, 442f
Etiology-based seizures
in cats, 296
myopathic diseases
classification of, 386, 387b
defnition of, 341
hypothyroid myopathy, 204t-206t, 211
Evoked response tests, 86t, 87
description of 295-297
Pietrain creeper syndrome, 204t-206t,
Examinations;. See also neurological
in dogs, 296-297, 296f
211
examinations
grass sickness, 295-296
splayleg in piglets, 204t-206t, 211
initial, 2, 3b
in horses, 295-296
steroid myopathy in horses, 204t-206t,
Exercise
Key-Gaskell syndrome, 296
211
for neurologic patient, 429-430
signs of, 439-440
 Endocrine-related myopathic diseases
Exercise intolerance/collapse in Labs,
Dyscoria, 341
211-212
Dysesthesia
Pietrain creeper syndrome, 204t-206t, 211
 Extensor carpi radialis rmuscle reflexes, 19b,
definition of, 414t
splayleg inpiglets204t-206t11
27, 28f
causing mutilation behavior, 96
steroid myopathy in horses, 204t-206t,
Extensor thrust reflexes, 19b, 29, 29f
Dyskinesia
211
Extensor toe reflex, 30
definition and classification of 308-309,
Enrofloxacin, 339
Extradural synovial cysts, 188
308b
Eosinophilic meningoencephalomyelitis
Extraocular muscles
Dysrmetria, 3t, 21
(EME), 474-475
functional anatomy illustration, 335f
Dysmyelination
Epidural anesthetics
Extraocular myositis, 202
affecting pelvic limbs,132
for dogs, 422t-423t, 428
Extrusion, 1l0, 116f
description of 170-171, 318
for horses and cattle, 425t-426t, 428
Eye movements
Dysmyelinopathy
 Epidural hermorrhages
abnormal, 333, 335f-336f
characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
definition of, 351b
conjugate/disconjugate, 334
170-171, 174t-180t
Epilepsy
Eyes
Dysphagia
breeds with idiopathic, 391b
 and abducent nerve assessment, 32
and cranial nerves IX, X, and XI
dassification of, 386, 387b
abnormal movements, 333, 335f-336f
cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
definition of, 384
conjugate/disconjugate, 334
esophageal phase, 294-295
Epileptic seizures
blindness etiology, 337t
gastroesophageal phase, 295
localization origin possibilities, 3t
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
Epileptogenesis, 385
examination and grading of 15-17
guttural pouch disease, 293
Episodic falling, 320
idiopathic syndromes, 339
 nigropallidal encephalomalacia,
Episodic myopathies
indicating coma or stupor, 347t
293-294
exercise intolerance/collapse in Labs,
inflarmmatory disorders, 339
 oral and pharyngeal phases, 293-295
211-212
optic nerve atrophy, 339
 pharyngoesophageal phase dysfunction,
hyperkalermic myopathy of cats, 213
optic neuritis, 339
294
hyperkaleric periodic paralysis, 213
lesion localization, 330-334
Dystonia, 320
malignant hyperthermia syndrome, 212
 abnormal eye movements, 333.
definition of, 309
recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis,
335f-336f
 Dystrophic myopathies, 311
212-213
anisocoria, 333
Dystrophin
Equilibrium
conjugate/disconjugate eye movements,
characteristics and illustration of, 207, 207f
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
334
Equine degenerative myeloencephalopathy.
dazzle reflex, 332-333
E
172-173
nystagmmus, 334, 336f
Ears
Equine encephalormyelitis, 457t-460t, 471
pupillary light reflexes (PLRs),
 and vestibulocochlear nerves assessment,
Equine head trauma
330-332, 331f 332t
32
causing coma or stupor, 352-353
vision, 330, 331f 332t
INDEX
531
Eyes {Continued)
Felbarmate, 397t, 399
Fungicides
metabolic syndromes, 337, 337t
 Feline central retinal degeneration (FCRD),
toxic disorders from, 447t
neoplasia, 337t, 339
339
F-wave tests, 87, 88t
mutritional-related disorders, 337-339,
Feline hyperesthesia syndrome
337t
pain with, 421
G
taurine, 339
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIP)
Gabapentin, 397t, 399
vitamin A, 337-339
signs of 457t-460t, 471, 471f
Gag reflex; See also glossopharyngeal nerves
vitamin E, 338-339
Feline ischermic encephalopathy
(X)
ocular movement disorder etiology, 338t
ausing coma or stupor, 356
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
and oculomotor nerve assessment, 7f,
vision loss with, 340
examination and grading of 15-17
30-31
Feline myotonia congenita, 310, 311t
Gait
and optic nerve (CN II)
Feline spongiform encephalopathy, 463t,
algorithrm for diagnosing ataxia based on, 44f
anatomy and physiology of, 7f, 30
472
anatomy and physiology of, 21, 21f
assessment technique, 30, 31f
Felines
brachial plexus nerve dysfunction
summary of characteristics, 4lt43t
linical signs of pain in, 417t
affecting, 95t
 pathway of sympathetic innervation of,
hyperchylomicronemia, 194t-197t, 199
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
333f,334t
hyperoxaluria, 194t-197t,199
disturbances with peripheral neuropathies,
 pupillary abnormalities etiology, 338t
laryngeal paralysis in, 292
189-200
retina, optic nerve and chiasm diseases/
listing of breed-associated diseases See
evaluation algorithm, 163f
anomalies, 334-337
Appendix
hindbrain components responsible for, 6, 6f
 Belgian sheepdog syndrome, 336
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
indicating pain, 417-418, 417t
medial strabismus, 336
192t-193t
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f 39t,
optic nerve hypoplasia,36
pain management for, 421-428, 424t
40-44, 40f
Siamese cat syndrome, 336
 Fermoral nerve injuries
locomotion schematic, 2lf
 signaling progressive bilateral caudal
mausing monoparesis, 97t, 100
monoparesis evahuation, 21
tentorial hermiation, 349t
 Fermoral nerve paralysis, 100
symnptoms associated with cerebellar
sudden acquired retinal degeneration
 Fermoral neuropathy, 100
dysfunction, 254, 254f
sydrome (SARDS), 339
Fenestration, 120
technique for assessing, 20-21, 21f
toxic substances to
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy.
with vestibular ataxia, 252-253
acrylamide, 339
139-141, 140f
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)
enrofloxacin, 339
Fibrocartilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
 alterations and seizures, 385-386
trauma to, 338t, 339-340
Fibrosarcomas
and pain, 416
 and vestibulocochlear nerves assessrment, 32
vertebral, 137, 138f
Gastrocnermius muscle reflex, 19b, 27, 27f
Fibrotic myopathy, 203
Gelbvieh cattle
 First aid and emergency medical treatment
familial neuropathy and glomerulopathy.
Face
with spinal cord trauma, 127
194t-197t, 199
 metencephalon control of, 6
Fexor and crossed extension reflexes, 10,
General proprioception (GP)
Facial expression
13f
assessment of, 21
anatomical components controlling, 283,
Flexor reflexes
description of, 8
283f 285f
mmuscles, nerves and segments associated
General proprioceptive deficit
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
with, 37-39, 39t
localization origin possibilities, 3t
Facial nerve paralysis
technique for assessing, 1lf-13f 28-30
General proprioceptive (GP) ataxia
causes and types of, 287-288
Fluid attenuated inversion recovery
causing ataxia, 250
illustration of horse with, 285f
(FLAIR). 76
General somatic afferent (GSA) system, 8
Facial nerves (CN VII)]
Focal or lateralizing signs
General somatic efferent (GSE) system, 8
anatommy of 283,283f, 285f
of stupor or comma, 348, 349t
General visceral afferent (GVA) system, 8
Focal seizures
General visceral efferent (GVE) systerm, 8
associated with ataxia, 250-253, 251f
dassification of, 387b, 390
Generalized seizures
clinical signs, 283, 285f
with secondary generalization
classifcation of 386-390, 387b
disorders of
classification of, 387b, 390
Geriatric dogs
abnormal facial sensation, 287
Food animal diseases, 167t
postural repetitive myoclonus in, 320
facial paralysis, 287-288
Foot
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 351t,
hemifacial spasms, 288, 288f
 tibial nerves affecting, 99-100, 99f
354
idiopathic facial paralysis, 287-288, 288f
Forebrain
modifed for small animals, 354, 354b
trauma,288,289f
disorders of, 372
Gliomas
unilateral cranial polyneuropathy, 297
functions and components of, 6, 6f
 affecting cerebellum, 270
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
malformations, 368t
Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
summary of techniques, 4lt-43t
Fractures
 acquired laryngeal paralysis, 292
Facial sensation
atlantoaxial articulation, 173-184, 181f
anatomy of, 28s
abnormal, 287
caudal lumbar, 139
assessment of 33
Falls
cervical spine, 167-169, 172f
clinical signs, 286
as lesin localization sig, 39t, 40-44, 40f,
fixation of spinal, 129
dysphagia (swallowing disorders)
351t, 354
causing monoparesis, 94
cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
and vestibular systerm, 13-14
sacral or lumbosacral, 139
esophageal phase, 294-295
Familial neuropathy and glormerulopathy.
sacrococcygeal vertebral column, 139,
gastroesophageal phase, 295
194t-197t, 199
139f
glossopharyngeal phase dysfunction,
of Gelbvieh cattle, 194t-197t, 199
spinal cord, 139, 139f
294
Familial reflex myoclonus, 314
"Free nerve endings,", 414
guttural pouch disease, 293
Fasciculation
Frontal lobes
nigropalidal encephaloralacia,
definition and classification of, 308, 308b
functions of, 5
293-294
Fear
Fungal infections
oral and pharymgeal phases, 293-295
 as defiming mental status, 17-18
central nervous system (CNS), 455t
pharyngoesophageal phase dysfunction,
Fecal incontinence
coccidioidal meningitis, 455t, 469
294
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
cryptococcal meningitis, 455t, 468-469
laryngeal paralysis in cats, 292
(DLSS), 141-144, 141f, 143f
causing stupor or comma, 365
laryngeal paralysis in dogs, 290-293
532
INDEX
Glossopharyngeal nerve (Contimued)
Head tilting
Herbicides
Bouvier des Flanders, 291
 description and ilhustration of, 19-20, 19f
toxic disorders from, 447t
 congenital laryngeal paralysis, 291
Head tremors, 320
Herbivores
in Dalmatians, 291-292
Hearing
exarmples of toxic plants, 452t-453t
in Pyrenean mountain dogs, 292
abnormalities indicated by loss of 14-15
Hereditary spinocerebellar ataxia, 254, 254f
in Rottweilers, 291
anatomy and physiology of, 13
Hexachlorophene, 319
 in Siberian huskies/Alaskan malarmutes,
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
Hindbrain
291
deficits
functions and components of, 6, 6f
 in White German Shepherds, 291
localization possibilities with, 3t
Hippocampus, 5
laryngeal paralysis in horses, 292-293
and vestibulocochlear nerves assessment,
Histogram
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
32
and schematic of discospondylitis, 125f
summary of techniques, 4lt-43t
Hearing loss; See deafness
Histories
Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 294
Heat stroke
 of micturition pattems/house training.
Glucocorticoids
causing stupor or coma, 365
64-65
drugs and characteristics of, 421 -424,
Heavy-metal poisoning, 319, 340, 447t-448t
types of examination, 3-5
422t-425t
Hemangiosarcormas
Hock
Glutamate
vertebral, 137, 138f
tibial nerves affecting, 99-100, 99f
alterations and seizures, 385-386
 Hermatology studies
Hog cholera virus, 268
Glycogen metabolism/storage disorders,
for diagnosis confirmation, 75
Homer syndrome, 40, 253, 332, 341, 351t, 354
204t-206t, 209
Hematomma
Horses
Glycoproteinoses, 434t-437t
with traumatic brain injury, 348
caring for recumbent, 429-430
Goats
Hematopoietic tumors
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 185-188,
examples of toxic plants affecting.
vertebral, 137, 138f
185f-187f
452t-453t
Hemifacial spasms, 288, 288f
clinical signs of pain in, 417t
listing of breed-associated diseases [See
Hemilaminectomy, 119,119f
examples of toxic plants affecting.
Appendix)
Hemiparesis
452t-453t
pain management for, 421-428, 427t
algorithm for diagnosis 163f
grass sickness, 295-296
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
laryngeal paralysis in, 292-293
Goose-stepping, 21
brainstem lesions, 162-163, 163f
listing of breed-associated diseases (See
 Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis
 cervical spinal cord lesions, 162-163,
Appendix)
(GME), 473-474
163f
motor neuron diseases in, 19l-200,
and seizures, 392
lesion localization, 162-164
192t-193t, 193f
Grass sickness, 295-296
as lesinlocalizatin sign,39-45,39t,40f
pain managerment for, 421-428, 425t
Grass tetany, 315
 peripheral nervous system (PNS) lesions,
viral diseases in, 457t-460t 
Gravity
163-164, 173t
House training, 64-65
and vestibular systerm, 13-14
spinal cord diseases associated with
Hydranencephaly
Great Danes
atlantoaxial subluxation, 173-184,
associated with seizures, 391-392
cervical spondylommyelopathy, 185-188,
181f-182f
classification of, 368t
185f-187f
caudal occipital malformation
definition of 372
orthostatic postural myoclonus in, 320
syndrome, 184-185
Hydrocephalus
Guttural pouch disease, 293
central myelinopathy, 170-171,
associated with seizures, 391-392
173t-180t
dog breeds with higher risks of, 369, 370t
H
cervical intervertebral disk (IVDD)
causing stupor or coma, 368-369,
 Hansen type I intervertebral disk disease
disease, 164-167, 170f-171f
369f-371f 370t
{IVDD)
cervical meningomyelitis, 167
and vision problems, 337t, 340
and paresis, 110-120, 111t, 164-167
cervical spondylormyelopathy, 169-188,
Hydrormyelia, 145t
Hansen type II intervertebral disk disease,
185f-187f
Hydrotherapy
110-111, 111t, 116f 132-133
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185
characteristics versus other disorders, 136t
degenerative myeloencephalopathy,
Hypalgesia
clinical signs of 132-133
169-188
definition of, 414t
diagnosis and treatment of, 133
diffuse myopathic diseases, 169t
Hyperadrenocorticism
Head
diffuse neuropathic diseases, 168t
description and signs of, 443-444
assessment of 19-20, 19f
equine degenerative
Hyperalgesia
ataxia, 250
myeloencephalopathy, 172-173
definition of 413, 414t
Head injuries
equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
Hypercalcemic syndrormes
causing coma or stupor, 348, 350t, 351b,
extradural synovial cysts, 188
description and signs of, 444
352f
fibrocarilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
Hyperchylomicronermia
focal and lateralizing signs of, 348-365,
food animal diseases, 167t
in cats, 194t-197t, 199
349t-350t
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 171-172,
Hyperesthesia
Glasgow Coma Scale, 35lt, 354
174t-180t
assessing, 8, 34f
in horses, 352-353
occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
definition of, 413, 414t
proghoses, 354
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation, 184
localization possibilities with,3t
terrminology associated with, 351b
srmall anirmal spinal cord diseases, 165t 
Hyperkalemia
treatment of 349
surmrmary of 174t180t
description and signs of, 444-445
Head pressing
syringommyelia, 184-185, 185f
Hyperkalemic myopathy of cats, 213
as defning mental status, 1718
Hemivertebrae
Hyperkalermic periodic paralysis (HPP), 213,
Head tilt
characteristics of, 145t, 146f
310
 algorithm for diagnosing ataxia based on,
Hemorrhages
Hyperoxaluria
44f
definition of, 351b
in cats, 194t-197t, 199
to evaluate vestibulocochlear nerve, 32
Hemorrhagic infarctions
Hyperpathia
as lesion localizatin sig,39t,40-44,40f,
characteristics of 353t, 354, 355f, 355b,
definition of, 413, 414t
44f
356
Hypersensitivity
localization origin possibilities, 3t
Hepatic encephalopathy (HE)
and lesion localization, 37-39
with vestibular ataxia, 251f 252-253
description and signs of, 440
Hypertension
 and vestibular system, 13-14, 19f
rmanagemment of, 440t
hypertensive encephalopathy, 366
INDEX
533
Hypertensive encephalopathy, 366
 Immune-mediated diseases
Involuntary movement disorders
causing stupor or coma, 366
 of central nervous systerm (CNS), 462t,
acquired tremors, 318-320
Hypesthesia, 102-103
472
breed-associated dyskinesias
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
 Immune-mediated polymyositis, 201
Bichon Frise movement disorder,
and lesion localization, 37-39, 38f
Inbom errors
320-321
localization origin possibilities, 3t
causing stupor or coma, 367
Boxer movement disorder, 321
Hypoadrenocorticism muscle cramping.
Incontinence
Cavalier King Charles Spaniels hyperto-
316
 taking histories regarding, 65
nicity, 320
Hypoalgesia
Infarctions
dancing Doberman, 321
definition of, 414t
causing coma or stupor, 354, 355f-357f,
dystonias, 320
 Hypocalcemia
3556
episodic falling, 320
description and signs of, 442-443
description and causes of brain, 354
scotty cramp, 320
and tetany, 314-315
of spinal cord and proghoses, 4-5
string halt horse disorder, 321
Hypogastric nerves, 59-60, 59f
 Infections; See also bacterial, fungal and viral
classification of 308b
Hypoglossal nerves (CN XII)
infections
definitions associated with, 307-309,
anatormy of 286,286f
associated with seizures, 388t-389t, 392
308b
assessmnent technique,3, 34f
 Infectious canine hepatitis, 457t-460t
immune-mediated tetany, 316
hypoglossal paralysis, 295
 Infectious diseases
LMN-associated, 311-314
origin and distribution ilustration,
.7f
causing eye problems, 337t, 340
metabolic causes of, 314-316
surmrmary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
Infectious myositis, 202-203, 202f
muscle-associated myotonia, 307, 308b,
Hypoglossal paralysis, 295
Inflammation
309-311
Hypoglycemia
causing stupor or coa, 350t, 365
myoclonus, 316-318
description and signs of, 445
Inflammatory diseases, 451-472; See also
spastic paresis of adult cattle and calves.
Hypokalemia
DAMNITV classification schemes
314
description and signs of, 445
affecting eyes, 337t, 339-340
spasticity syndrormes, 314
Hypomagnesemia tetany, 315-316
associated with seizures, 388t-389t, 392
technique for assessing, 19b, 21-22
Hypometria, 21
bacterial infections, 454t, 464-468
tetany, 313-316
Hypomyelination, 170-171
blood-brain barrier, 450
toxin-associated, 316, 319
affecting pelvic limbs, 132
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t
Involuntary moverments
Hypomyelinogenesis, 318
diagnosing and treating,451-464
assessing abnormal, 21-22
Hypormyelinopathy
examples of, 5t
definitions associated with, 307-309, 308b
 characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
involving spinal cord, 11lt-115t
and seizures, 384
174t-180t
ausing paresis of one limb, 98t
techmique for assessing, 19b, 21-22
Hypoparathyroidism, 315
and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
 Ipsilateral hemiparesis
Hypoplasia
255t, 262t
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f
caudal vertebral, 146, 149f
causing vestibular ataxia,255t,256-258
 Ischermic infarction
Hypothalarmus
Inflammatory pain, 415-416
causing coma or stupor, 353t, 354-355,
anatomy and functions of, 5-6, 6f
versus neuropathic pain, 420t
355f-356f 355b
lesion symptoms, 39t, 40
 Inflammatory polyps
description and causes of brain, 353t, 354
Hypothermia, 308
causing ataxia, 257-258, 258f
 Ischemic neurommyopathy, 203
Hypothyroid myopathy, 204t-206t, 211
 Inflammatory vertebral colurmn/spinal cord
Hypothyroid neuropathy, 194t-197t,
diseases, 147-149, 149f
J
198-199
 Inherited cerebellar hypoplasia/dysplasia
 Jack Russell terriers
Hypothyroidism
causing ataxia,268,269f
cerebellar dysfunction in, 254, 254f
causing ataxia, 255-256
 Inherited congenital myoclonus, 313-314
Jaw
description nd signs of443444
Inherited distal polyneuropathy,193197,
 examination and grading of 15-17
hypothyroid neuropathy, 194t-197t,
194t-197t
 Jerk nystagrmus
198-199
Inherited hypertrophic neuropathy, 193
description and illustration of 334, 336f
 Hypotonic paralysis of sphincter, 60
Inherited motor neuropathies, 191, 192t-
as lesion localization sign,40-44
Hypoxia
193t, 193
and vestibulocochlear nerves assessment,
definition and causes of, 365-366
Inner ear
32
and vestibular system, 13-14, 19f
Joints
I
Integummentary system
detecting pain in, 417-419
Ictus
assessrment of 19b, 22
nigidity, 307, 308b
characteristics of, 384
Intention tremors
tremors, 308, 308b
Idiopathic diseases; See also DAMNITV
associated with cerebellar dysfunction,
classification schermes
254, 254f
K
and blindness, 337t, 339
brain illustration, 269f
Ketonemic syndrormes
examples of, 5t
localization origin possibilities t
description and signs of, 441
and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
Interstitial edema, 349-357
Key-Gaskell syndrome, 296
255t, 262t
Intervertebral disk fenestration, 120
Knee jerk reflexes, 17f 26-27
causing vestibular ataxia,255t,258-259
Intervertebral disk hemiation, 1l0-120,
Kyphosis
Idiopathic epilepsy
11lt
 thoracic vertebral column and spinal cord,
associated with seizures, 387b, 388t-389t,
 Intervertebral disk (IVDD) disease
146f
391, 391b
cervical, 164-167, 170f-171f
Kyphotic postures, 116f
Idiopathic facial paralysis, 287-288, 288f
Intraxial hemorrhages
Idiopathic feline vestibular syndrome,258
definition of 351b
L
Idiopathic polyneuropathy, 200
 Intracranial arachnoid cyst/diverticulum
Laboratory tests
Imaging studies
causing ataxia, 269
for diagnosis confirmation, 75
science and technology of, 76-77
Intracranial hemorrhages
Labrador retriever myopathy, 204t-206t,
for spinal cord, 127-128, 128f-129f
with traumatic brain injury, 348
208
 Irmrmune systerm diseases; See also DAM-
 Intracranial intraarachnoid cysts
Labrador retrievers
NITV classification schermes
associated with seizures, 391-392
familial reflex myoclomus in,314
examples of, 5t
 Intrarmedullary tumors
illustration of brain tumor in, 359f
causing paresis of one limb, 98t
of spinal cord, 137, 137f
myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
534
INDEX
Lameness; See monoparesis
Leukomyelopathy
Lordosis, 307-308
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
Lower motor neurons (LMNs)
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
170-171, 174t-180t
associated movement disorders, 31l-314
(DLSS), 141-144, 141f 143f
Level of consciousness
familial reflex myoclonus, 314
chue to musculoskeletal disorders, 94
assessing, 17-18, 20f
inherited congenital myoclonus,
indicating pain, 417-418, 417t
assessing with MGCS in small animals,
313-314
localization possibilities with, 3t
354, 354b
tetanus, 312-313, 312f
with monoparesis, 94, 94f
and coma or stupor, 346-348, 347f
tetany, 313-316
Laminectomy, 82f 119
definitions associated with, 346
autonomic units, 8
with nerve sheath turmors, 104
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), 35lt, 354
diseases of (See nerve and neuronal cell
Laminin αz defciency, 204t-206t, 208
loss with seizures, 384, 387b, 390
body diseases)
 Larminin-αz deficient muscular dystrophy.
Levetiracetam,397t,399
disorders
193
L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria,367
diagnostic comparison of 190t
 Laryngeal paralysis
 Limb amputation
function and illustration of, 9-10, 9f 9t
in cats, 292
with nerve sheath tumors, 104
lesion localization signs, 37-39, 38f, 38t
in dogs, 290-293
Limbs; See also pelvic lirmbs
motor units, 163-164
Bouvier des Flanders, 291
 amputation with nerve sheath tumors, 104
and paresis, 163-164
 congenital laryngeal paralysis, 291
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
signs of lesions, 10, 1lf-12f
in Dalmatians, 291-292
assessment of, 19-20
unit components, 7
 in Pyrenean mountain dogs, 292
ataxia, 250
Lower urinary tract
in Rottweilers, 291
examination and grading of 15-17
 normal function of, 58-62
 in Siberian huskies/Alaskan malammutes,
lesion localization signs in, 37-39, 38f
Lumbosacral diseases
291
paresis of one
 for equine lumbosacral and cauda equina
 in White German Shepherds, 291
acute nonprogressive diseases causing.
_diseases, 115t
in horses, 292-293
97-100
for food animal lumbosacral and cauda
Laryngealparalysis-polyneuropathy cormplex
acute progressive diseases causing, 103
equina diseases, 116t
(LPPC), 291
algorithm for thoracic/pelvic limb, 95f
for srmall animal lumbosacral and cauda
Larynx; See also glossopharyngeal nerves
brachial plexus nerve trauma, 95t, 100,
equina diseases, 114t
(X)
100f
Lumbosacral fractures, 139
 examination and grading of 15-17
causes of, 94-96, 95f
Lumbosacral intumescence
vagus nerves (CN X)
chronic progressive diseases causing.
segmental innervation from, 9-10,
assessrment of, 33
103-104
11f-12f
Lead poisoning
cutaneous nerve zones, 96, 96f
 Lurmbosacral plexus nerves
causing blindness, 340
denervation atrophy, 96, 96f
injuries causing monoparesis, 97t
causing seizures, 388t-389t, 392-393
diseases that cause, 97-104, 98t
and rmuscle innervation, 9-10, 1lf-12f
toxic disorders from, 447t448t
lesion localization, 94-97, 95f
Luxations
Lentiviral infections, 124
lumbosacral plexus nerves, 97t
causing monoparesis, 94
Lesions
musculoskeletal lameness/pain, 94, 94f
spinal cord, 139, 139f
associated with monoparesis, 37-39
nerve root signature, 94, 94f
Luxol fast blue
associated with stupor and coma, 347t
peripheral nerve sheath tumors causing.
with periodic acid-Schiff counterstaining,
and bladder/sphincter voluntary control,
103-104, 104f
131f
63t
plexus neuritis, 103
Lymphoma
differential diagnosis checklist, 4-5, 5t
prognosis, 103
and monoparesis, 103-104
differentiating UMN versus LMN, 10
treatment of nerve injuries, 102-103
vertebral, 137, 138f
evaluating during initial examination, 2-3,
 postural reaction tests (See postural
Lysosomal storage disorders
3b
reactions)
causing ataxia,265-267,268f
localization
tibial nerves affecting, 99-100, 99f
in dommestic animals, 433-438, 433t-437t,
in brain, 39, 39t, 41t-43t
Lissencephaly
438f
in brainstem, 39-45, 40f, 41 t43t
associated with seizures, 391-392
types and characteristics of, 194t-197t
in cerebellurm, 44, 44f
description of, 373
in cerebrurm, 44-45
Listeriosis
M
cranial nerve summmary of 4lt-43t
causes and manifestations of 454t, 467
Mad itch, 457t-460t, 470, 470f
in diencephalon, 39t, 40
Lobes
Maedi, 124
for monoparesis, 94-97, 95f
of cerebral cortex, 5, 6f
 Maedi-visna and ovine progressive
 in segmental level of spinal cord, 37-39,
Local anesthetics
pneumonia (MVV/OPPV), 124
39t
for dogs, 422t-423t, 428
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
in spinal cord region, 37, 38f, 38t,
drugs and characteristics of 422t-423t,
availability of, 75-76
109-149, 110f
425t-426t
of brain tumors and vascular conditions,
upper (UMN) and lower (LMN) motor
for horses and cattle, 425t-426t, 428
85,353t,355b
neuron signs, 10, 37-39, 38f 38t
Local resections
contraindications, 77
in vestibular systerm, 40-44, 44f
of nerve sheath turmors, 104
to diagnose IVDD, 115-118, 117f
 and pain assessment techniques, 34-35, 34f
Localization
for diagnosis confirmation, 75-77,
proghoses factors, 4-5, 5t
of lesions
77f-79f
and seizures, 385-386
in brain, 39, 39t, 41t-43t
imaging examples,77f-79f
spinal cord segments T-3-L3, 109-149,
in brainstem, 39-45, 40f, 41t-43t
indications for 76-77
 11lt-113t
in cerebellum, 44, 44f
science and technology of, 76-77
Leukodystrophy
in cerebrum, 44-45
 Malignant hyperthermia syndrome, 212
affecting pelvic limbs, 132
cranial nerve surmrmary of 4lt-43t
Mandible
canine globoid cell, 433-438, 438f
in diencephalon, 39t, 40
 metencephalon control of, 6
characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
to segrmental level of spinal cord, 37-39,
Mandibular nerves
170-171, 174t-180t
39t, 109-149, 110f
branch of trigeminal nerve, 282-283
definition of, 170-171
in spinal cord region,37,38f 38t
Mannitol, 351
Leukoencephalormyelopathy
upper (UMN) and lower (LMN) motor
Manx cats
characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
neuron signs, 37-39, 38f 38t
sacrocaudal dysplasia in, 146-147,
171, 174t-180t
in vestibular systerm, 40-44, 44f
147f-148f
INDEX
535
Mastication
Metabolic diseases (Continued)
Monoparesis (Continued)
axons controlling, 6
hypomagnesemia tetany, 315-316
brachial plexus nerve trauma, 95t, 100, 100f
and trigerminal nerve assessrment, 31 -32,
hypothyroidism, 443, 444f
causes of, 94-96, 95f
32f
ketonemic symdrormes, 441
cutaneous nerve zones, 96, 96f
 Masticatory muscle myositis (MMM).
causing paresis of one limb,98t
denervation atrophy, 96, 96f
201-202, 202f
and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
diseases that cause, 97-104, 98t
Maxillary nerves
255t,262t
pelvic limb nonprogressive diseases,
branch of trigemminal nerve, 282-283
postparturient hypocalcermia, 315
97-100
McArdle's disease, 204t-206t, 209
renal failure, 442
 peripheral nerve injuries, 95t, 97-103,
Mechanoreceptors
causing seizures, 388t-389t, 392
97t, 98f
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
ausing shupor or coma, 350t,365
spinal cord diseases, 100,102
Medial strabisrmus, 336
causing vestibular ataxia, 255-256, 255t
thoracic limmb injuries, 95t, 100-102
Medications
Metabolic neuropathies, 194t-197t
lesion localization, 37-39, 94-97, 95f
 acquired trermors from, 321
Metabolic syndromes
lumbosacral plexus nerves, 97t
causing ataxia, 259t
affecting eyes, 337, 337t, 340
musculoskeletal lameness/pain, 94, 94f
for pain (See analgesics)
Metastatic tumors
nerve root signature, 94, 94f
toxic disorders from, 447t-449t
carcinomas, 138-139
pain with,94, 94f
and toxins causing myotonia, 311
hemangiosarcormas, 138-139
 peripheral nerve injuries causing
to treat micturition disorders, 69t
lymphorma, 138-139, 138f
femoral nerve injuries, 97t, 100
Medulla
marmmary turmors, 138-139
obturator nerve injuries, 97t, 100
 anatomy and physiology of, 6, 6f
prostatic adenocarcinomas, 138-139
peroneal merve injuries, 97t, 99
lesion symptoms, 39-45, 39t
of spinal cord, 138-139
sciatic nerve injuries, 97-98, 97t
Medulloblastomas
vertebral plasma cell tumors, 138-139
tibial nerve injuries, 97t, 99-100
cerebellar, 270
Metencephalon
prognosis, 103
Megaesophagus (ME), 294-295
anatormy and functions of, 6, 6f
treatment of nerve injuries, 102-103
Meningiomas
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate
Motor activity
affecting cerebellum, 270
(MPSS), 128-129
 assessing with MGCS in small anirmals,
Metronidazole toxicity, 271
354,354b
of spinal cord, 136-137
Micturition
 metencephalon control of 6
Meningitis
anatomy and physiology of, 58-62, 60f
Motor function; See also rmotor system
characteristics of, 454t
detrusor reflex, 58, 60-61, 60f
 algorithm for diagnosing ataxia based on,
characteristics versus other disorders, 136t
micturition reflex, 58, 61-62, 61f
44f
illustration of suppurative, 466f
reflex integration, 6l, 61f
assessment of 21
pain with,420-421
urethral sphincter, 59-6059f
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
Meningoencephalitis
urinary bladder, 58-59, 59f
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
necrotizing. 473-474
diaghostic tests of, 68t
indicating coma or stupor, 347t
Meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology
disorders of 62-70, 63t
localization of lesions based on, 37, 38f
(MUE), 472-473, 463t
clinical signs of, 62-64, 63t
signaling progressive bilateral caudal
Meningoencephalomyelitis, 454t, 463t
diagnoses of, 64-67, 66f, 67t-68t
tentorial hermiation, 349t
brain image of, 463t, 475f
treatment of, 68-70, 69t
Motor neuron disorders
eosinophilic, 463t, 474-475
medications, 69t
anatomic schematic of, 189f
granulormatous, 463t, 473-474
minimum diagnostic database, 64-67,
characteristics of, 191, 192t-193t
 Meningormyelocele
65b, 68t
overview of, 189-200
illustration of 149f
signs of abnormal, 64t, 65b
Motor neuropathies
Mental status; See also coma or stupor
voluntary control, 63t, 65
congenital and inherited, 191, 192t-193t,
 and cerebral lesions, 44-45
Micturition reflex
193
definitions associated with, 346
anatomy and physiology of, 58, 61-62, 61f
inherited and breed-associated, 193-197,
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
194t-197t
signaling progressive bilateral caudal
Midbrain
Motor system
tentorial herniation, 349t
and corma/stupor, 346-348, 347f
evaluation of neonatal, 20t
technique for assessing, 17-18
functions and components of, 6, 6f
lower motor neurons (LMNs), 9-10, 9f, 9t
Mental status alterations
llustration of 348f
upper motor neurons {UMNs), 8-9, 9f, 9t
localization origin possbilities 3t
lesion symptoms, 39-45, 39t
Motor units
Mentation
Milk fever, 442-443
of lower motor neurons, 163-164
with vestibular dysfunction, 252-253
Milk tetany, 315-316
Motor vehicle accidents
Merino sheep, 204t-206t, 208
Minirmum databases
spinal trauma, 126-130, 139, 139f
Mesencephalon
for laboratory diagnosis confirmation, 75
and traurmatic brain injuries, 348
anatomy and functions of, 6, 6f
for seizure evaluation, 393
Motor-nerve-conduction (MNCV) tests, 87
Metabolic diseases, 433t, 440-445; See also
 Minirmum diagnostic database
Mouth
 DAMNITV classification schermes
components of, 2, 3b
 examination and grading of, 15-17
causing ataxia, 269
for micturition, 64-67, 65b, 68t
Moverments; See also gait
and brainstem diseases/ataxia, 261t
 Mixed neuropathies
 as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f, 44
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t, 269
inherited and breed-associated, 193-197,
techniques for assessing, 20
diabetes rmellitus, 443
194t-197t
Mucolipidosis, 434t-437t
endocrine disorders, 442, 442f
Modified Glasgow Coma Scale (MGCS)
Mucopolysaccharidoses, 434t-437t
examples of, St
for srmall animals, 354, 354b
Multifocal signs
hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 440, 440t
Modulation
of actinomycetes infections, 455t, 469
hyperadrenocorticism, 443-444
 in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
actinomycosis, 455t, 469
hypercalcemic syndromes, 444
Mononeuropathy, 96
nocardiosis, 455t, 469
hyperkalernia,444-445
Monoparesis
tuberculous meningitis, 455t, 469
hypoadrenocorticism muscle cramping.
 acute nonprogressive diseases causing
of bacterial infections
316
peripheral nerve injuries, 95t, 97-103,
bacterial brain abscess, 454t, 467-468
hypocalcemmia, 314-315, 442-443
97t, 98f
bacterial meningitis in horses, 454t, 466
hypoglycemia,445
algorithm for thoracic/pelvic limb, 95f
bacterial meningoencephalormyelitis,
hypokalermia, 445
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
454t, 464-467
536
INDEX
Multifocal signs {Contimued)
Multifocal signs (Continued)
Myelinolytic diseases
listeriosis, 454t, 467
feline spongiform encephalopathy, 463t,
affecting pelvic limbs, 132
thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
472
Myelinopathy
(TEME), 454t, 467, 467f
scrapie, 463t,472
peripheral nervous system (PNS), 170,
of Chlamydia infections, 46lt, 472-475
of viral infections
173t, 194t-197t
of degenerative diseases, 432-440, 433t
canine distemper virus, 457t-460t,
Myelitis
abiotrophies, 438-440, 438f-439f
470-471, 470f
characteristics versus other disorders,
dysautonomia, 439-440
equine herpesvirus type l (EHV-1),
136t
rrmaltisystem neuronal degeneration, 439
457t-460t, 471
Myelodysplasia, 146, 146f 149f
storage disorders, 433-438, 433t-437t,
feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIP),
Myelography, 81, 82f
438f
457t-460t, 471, 471f
Myelopathy
discospondylitis, 468
pseudorabies, 457t-460t, 470,470f
indicating pain, 417-418,417t
of eosinophilic meningoencephalormyelitis
rabies, 457t-460t, 469-470, 470f
Myoclonic seizures, 386-390, 387b
{EME).474-475
West Nile virus, 457t-460t, 471
Myoclonic tics
examples of commmon, 432-475, 433b
Western, Easterm, and Venezuelan
in horses, 317
of granulomatous meningoencephalomy-
equine encephalomyelitis (WEE,
Myoclonus, 316-318
elitis (GME), 473-474
EEE, and VEE), 457t-460t, 471
action-related, 317-318
of inflammmatory diseases, 451-472
Multilobulated osteochondrosarcoma
assessrment of 2l-22
bacterial infections, 454t, 464-468
(MLO)
central axonopathy, 318
blood-brain barrier, 450
of calvaria, 364-365, 364f
CNS myelin disorders, 318
diagnosing and treating, 451-464
Multiple cartilaginous exostoses, 134, 134f
definition and classification of 308, 308b
meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology
Multiple systerm degeneration
episodic repetitive myoclonus, 317
(MUE),463t,472-273
causing ataxia,263,264t-265t, 267f
myokymia, 317
of metabolic diseases, 433t, 440-445
 Multisystem central and peripheral
tics in horses, 317
diabetes mellitus, 443
axonopathy, 130-135
tremors, 317
endocrine disorders, 442, 442f
 Multisystem neuronal degeneration,
Myokymia
hepatic encephalopathy (HE), 440,
174t-180t
definition and classification of 308, 308b
440t
sighs of, 439
Myopathic diseases, 200-213
hyperadrenocorticism, 443-444
Muscle strength
acute progressive myopathies, 201-203
hypercalcemic syndromes, 444
assessment of 19b, 22
compartment myopathy, 203
hyperkalernia,444-445
Muscle tone
derrmatormyositis, 202
hypocalcemmia, 442-443
assessmment of 19b, 22
endocrine-related
hypoglycermia,445
changes and seizures, 384
hypothyroid myopathy, 204t-206t, 211
hypokalemia,445
aslesinlocalizatin sign,37,
Pietrain creeper syndrome, 204t-206t,
hypothyroidism, 443, 444f
Muscles; See also involuntary moverments
211
ketonemic syndrormes, 441
assessment of 19b, 22
splayleg in piglets, 204t-206t, 211
renal failure, 442
associated with spinal reflexes, 37-39, 39t
steroid myopathy in horses, 204t-206t,
of mycotic (fungal) infections
canial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
211
coccidioidal meningitis, 455t, 469
llustration of innervation, 9-10, 1lf-12f
episodic myopathies
cryptococcal meningitis, 455t, 468-469
innervation, 9-10,10f-12f
 exercise intolerance/collapse in Labs,
of necrotizing leukoencephalitis (NLE),
Muscular dystrophies, 203-208, 204t-206t,
211-212
446
207f-208f
hyperkalemic rmyopathy of cats, 213
of necrotizing rmeningeal vasculitis, 473
α-dystroglycan deficiency, 204t-206t,
hyperkalermic periodic paralysis, 213
of necrotizing meningoencephalitis
207-208
malignant hyperthermia symdrome, 212
(NME), 438f, 474
dystrophin-associated, 203, 204t-206t
recurrent exertional rhabdormyolysis,
of mutritional disorders, 433t, 445-446
laminin αz defciency, 193, 204t-206t, 208
212213
polioencephalomalacia, 446, 446f
in Merino sheep, 204t-206t, 208
extraocular rmyositis, 202
thiamine defciency, 446, 446f
ovine,204t-206t,207
flbrotic myopathy, 203
vitamin A deficiency, 445-446
sarcoglycanopathy, 204t-206t, 208
glycogen metabolisrm/storage disorders,
vitamin A toxicity, 446
spasticity,204t-206t,207-208
204t-206t,209
vitarmin B complex-thiarmine deficiency.
x-linked canine dystrophinopathy.
glycogen storage diseases (GSD)
446, 446f
203-207, 204t-206t
types and breeds associated with,
vitamin E deficiency, 446
x-linked feline, 204t-206t, 207
204t-206t
of protozoan infections, 456t, 469
Mutilation
imrmune-mediated polymyositis, 20l
 equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
anesthesia, 102-103
infectious myositis, 202-203, 202f
(EPM), 456t, 469
behavior with peripheral nerve injuries, 96
ischemic neuromyopathy,203
neosporosis, 456t,469
cue to dysesthesia, 96
lipid storage myopathy, 204t-206t,
toxoplasmosis, 456t, 469
with paresthesia, 96
209-210
of rickettsial infections
self-rmutilation, 102-103
masticatory muscle myositis (MMM),
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF),
M-waves, 87
201-202,202f
461t, 472
Myasthenia gravis
metabolic myopathies, 204t-206t
of steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis
acquired, 215-217
mitochondrial myopathy, 204t-206t,
(SRMA), 465t, 473
congenital, 217
209-210
of toxic disorders, 447-451, 447t,
Mycotic (fungal) infections
Monday morming disease, 204t-206t, 209,
452t-453t
central nervous systerm (CNS), 455t
212-213
and behavior changes, 449t, 451
ccidioidal meningitis455t,49
muscular dystrophies, 203-208,
and coma, 449t, 451
cryptococcal meningitis, 455t,468-469
204t-206t,207f-208f
and depression, 449t, 451
Mycotoxicoses, 319
α-dystroglycan deficiency, 204t-206t,
and seizures, 448-451, 448t
Myelencephalon
207-208
toxic plants, 451-472, 452t-453t
functions and illustration of, 6, 6f
dystrophin-associated, 203, 204t-206t
and tremor ataxia,r paresis,449t,41
Myelin sheath
larminin α deficiency, 204t-206t, 208
of transmissible spongiform encephalopa-
actions of 163
in Merino sheep, 204t-206t, 208
thies (TSEs), 463t, 471-472
Myelin-associated polyneuropathies,
ovine, 204t-206t,207
bovine spongiform encephalopathy
191-193, 194t-197t
sarcoglycanopathy, 204t-206t, 208
{BSE), 463t, 471-472, 472f
Myelinolysis, 170-171, 318
spasticity, 204t-206t, 207-208
INDEX
537
Myopathic diseases (Continued)
Neoplasia (Continued)
Neuritis of cauda equina, 147
x-linked canine dystrophinopathy,
and monoparesis, 103-104
Neuroaxonal dystrophy
203-207, 204t-206t
causing paresis of one limb, 98t
causing ataxia, 263-265, 264t-266t
x-linked feline, 204t-206t, 207
 and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
description and manifestations of,
mutritional myopathies
255t, 262t
171-172, 174t-180t, 266t
white muscle disease, 211
causing vestibular ataxia, 255t, 259-260
in rottweilers, 291
other nondystophic breed-specific
Neoplasms
Neuroblastormas
myopathies
affecting cerebellum, 270
of spinal cord, 137, 137f
autosomal recessive rmuscular dystrophy.
aural, 259-260, 260f
Neurofibrormas, 103-104
204t-206t,208
of spinal cord, 135-139,135t
Neurologic diagnosis
 Bouvier des Flandres myopathy.
intramedullary tumors, 137, 137f
plan for, 2, 2b
204t-206t, 208
meningiormas, 136-137
Neurologic diseases; See nerve and neuronal
centronuclear myopathy, 204t-206t,
metastatic tumors, 138-139
cell body diseases
208
neuroblastommas, 137, 137f
classification of, 4f
distal myopathy of Rottweilers.
skeletal vertebral tumors, 137, 138f
micturition. (See mmicturition)
204t-206t, 208
Neosporosis
sign-tie graphs of 44f
Labrador retriever myopathy.
sighs of, 456t, 469
Neurologic examinations
204t-206t, 208
Nerve and neuronal cell body diseases
abbreviated version, 15, 19b
nemaline rod myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
acute idiopathic polyradiculoneuritis,
categories of 15-35, 19b
overview of, 200-213
189-191, 190t
components of 17-35, 20t
polysaccharide storage myopathy.
acute progressive motor neuron disorders.
cranial nerves, 7f, 30-33, 30f-32f
204t-206t, 209
189-191, 190t
flexor reflexes, 1if-13f, 28-30
toxin-induced, 203
anatomic schematic of 189f
gait, 20-21, 21f
trauma, 203
botulism, 190, 190t
involuntary abnormal movement, 19b,
Myositis
central-peripheral distal axonopathy.
21-22
dermatomyositis, 202
194t-197t, 197-198
rmental status, 17-18
extraocular, 202
chronic idiopathic polyneuritis, 200
movement, 20
infectious, 202-203, 202f
chronic inflammatory demyelinating
myotatic (stretch) reflexes, 15-36, 17f,
masticatory muscle, 201-202, 202f
polyneuropathy,200
19b, 26-28, 27f-28f
Myotatic (stretch) reflexes
congenital and inherited motor
observation, 15,17
diagram illustrating, 17f
neuropathies, 191, 192t-193t, 193
palpation, 19b, 22
 muscles, nerves and segments associated
coonhound paralysis, 189-191, 190t
poshural reactions, 19b, 22-26, 23f, 25f
with, 37-39, 39t
diabetic neuropathy, 194t-197t, 199
posture, 18-20, 19f 19b
and spasticity, 307
 equine motor neuron disease, 191,
reflexes, 19b, 20t
technique for assessing/grading, 15-36,
192t-193t, 193f
sensory exarmination, 34-35, 34f
17f, 19b, 26-28, 27f-28f
familial neuropathy and glomerulopathy,
spinal reflexes, 19b, 26, 27f-28f
Myotomes, 9-10, 10f-12f
194t-197t, 199
grading scheme, 15-17
Myotonia, 211
hyperchylomicronermia in cats, 194t-197t,
history-taking during,35
acquired myopathy, 310-311
199
for micturition disorders, 65-66
acquired myotonia, 310-311
hyperoxaluria in cats, 194t-197t, 199
minimmum database, 2-3, 3b
canine myotonia congenita, 310, 31lt
hypothyroid neuropathy, 194t-197t,
neonatal evaluation, 20t
definition and classification of, 307, 308b
198-199
problerm list derived frorm, 2-3, 3t
drugs and toxins causing, 311
idiopathic polyneuropathy, 200
for spinal cord injuries, 127, 128t
dystrophic myopathies, 311
inherited distal polyneuropathy,193-197,
 Neurologic patient care
feline myotonia congenita, 310, 311t
194t-197t
bladder management, 429
hyperkalermic periodic paralysis (HPP),
inherited motor neuropathies, 191,
physical rehabilitation, 429
310
192t-193t, 193
recurmbent care for large anirmals, 429-430
myoclonus, 316-318
lysosormal storage disorders, 194t-197t
recumbent care for small anirmals, 429
myotonia congenita, 310, 311t
metabolic neuropathies, 194t-197t
Neurologic system
myotonic dystrophy, 311
motor neuron disorders, 191, 192t-193t
plan for diaghosing diseases of, 2, 2b
Myotonia congenita, 310, 31lt
myelin-associated polyneuropathies,
problems and associated localization, 3t
Myotonic dystrophy, 311
191-193, 194t-197t
signs of abnormalities, 3t, 14-15
paraneoplastic neuropathies, 200
steps in rmanaging diseases of, 2
N
peripheral myelinopathies, 191-193,
Neurological diseases; (See nerve and 
Narcolepsy, 384, 402
194t-197t
neuronal cell body diseases)
Necrotizing leukoencephalitis (NLE), 446
primary sensory neuropathies, 194t-197t
 Neurommuscular diseases
Necrotizing meningeal vasculitis, 473
sensory neuronopathy and neuropathy.
 anatomic schematic of 189f
Necrotizing meningoencephalitis (NME).
194t-197t,198
Neurormuscular junction diseases, 213-217
438f, 474
tick paralysis, 190, 190t
acquired myasthenia gravis,215-217
Nemaline rod myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
toxic neuropathies, 200
diagnosis and treatment of 216-217
Neonatal dogs
Nerve fibers
pathophysiology of, 215-216
 neurological examination of, 20t
in nociception process 413-415, 414f
proghosis of, 217
 Neonatal syndromes
Nerve impulses
signs of 216
 causing degenerative cerebellar disorders.
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
botulism, 214
264t-265t
Nerve root neoplasia, 103-104
congenital myasthenia gravis, 217
 Neoplasia; See also DAMNITV classification
Nerve root signature, 94, 94f
drug-induced neuromuscular blockage, 215
schermes
 and monoparesis, 94, 94f
episodic,215-217
associated with seizures, 388t-389t, 392
Nerve sheath tumors
and LMN-associated involuntary
causing ataxia, 259-260
diagnosis of, 104
movements, 307
brain tummors, 357-364, 357f-359f
and monoparesis, 103-104
organophosphate and carbarmate toxicity.
359t-360t
 treatment and prognosis, 104
215
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t, 270
Neural (nociception) pathways
snake envenormation, 215
examples of, 5t
for pain, 413-415,414f
tick paralysis, 214-215
in eyes, 339
 Neural tube defects
 Neuronal degeneration
involving spinal cord, 11lt-115t
dassification of 368
multisystem, 174t-180t
538
INDEX
 Neuronal migration
 Normal detrusor reflex
Olfactory nerve (Continued)
disorders of 372-373
with decreased sphincter tone, 64
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
 Neuronal vacuolation
 Norrmal rmental status
surmrmary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
 in rottweilers, 291
definition of 346
Oligosaccharidoses glycogenoses,434t-437t
Neuronopathy
Nose
Ophthalmic nerves
peripheral nervous system (PNS), 170.
examination and grading of 15-17
branch of trigerminal nerve, 282-283
173t, 194t-197t
Noxious stimuli
Opioids
Neurons
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
drugs and characteristics of, 422t-428t,
in cerebral cortex, 9-10, 9f, 9t
definition of, 413
423f, 426-428
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
Opisthotonos, 19, 307-308
and seizures, 385-386, 385f
Numeric rating scale (NRS)
Optic nerve (CN II)
 Neuropathic pain, 416
of pain, 419-420
anatomy and physiology of, 7f, 30
versus nonciceptive/inflammatory pain,
Nutritional disorders, 445-446; See also
assessment technique, 30, 31f
420t
 DAMNITV classification schermes
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
 Neuropathies; See also nerve and neuronal
and cerebellar disease/ataxia, 262t, 270
surmmmary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
cell body diseases
of eyes, 337-339, 337t
Optic nerve hypoplasia, 336
 congenital and inherited motor, 191,
involving spinal cord11lt115t
Organic aciduria, 367
192t-193t, 193
ausing paresis of one limb, 98t
Organophosphate and carbamate toxicity.
distal sensorimotor, 193-197,194t-197t
and peripheral vestibular disease/ataxia,
215
dying-back, 193-197, 194t-197t
262t
Orthostatic postural myoclonus, 320
femoral, 100
polioencephalomalacia, 446, 446f
Osteomas
hypothyroid, 194t-197t, 198-199
causing seizures,388t-389t,92
vertebral,137,138f
inherited hypertrophic, 193
thiamine defciency, 446, 446f
Osteosarcomma
inherited motor, 191, 192t-193t, 193
vitamin A deficiency, 445-446
of calvaria, 364-365, 364f
metabolic, 194t-197t
vitamin A toxicity, 446
vertebral, 137, 138f
mixed, 193-197, 194t-197t
vitamin B cormplex-thiamine deficiency.
Otitis media interna
rmotor, 191, 192t-193t, 193
446,446f
causing ataxia, 256-257, 257f
 peripheral, 189-200
vitamin E deficiency, 446
Ototoxicity, 259
Neuroprotection
white muscle disease, 211
Overlap zone, 96, 96f
for spinal cord injury, 128-129
Nutritional myopathies
Ovine
Neurotransmitters
white muscle disease, 211
clinical signs of pain in, 417t
alterations with traurma, 126
Nystagmus
listing of breed-associated diseases [See
and seizures, 385-386, 385f
description and illustration of, 334, 336f
Appendix)
Night blindness, 445-446
as lesion localization sign, 40-44
motor neuron diseases in, 19l-200,
 Nigropallidal encephalormalacia, 293-294
localization origin possibilities, 3t, 334, 336f
192t-193t
Nocardiosis, 455t, 469
spontaneous or resting,253
 Ovine and caprine lentiviral encephalomy-
Nociception
with vestibular ataxia, 251f, 252-253
elitis, 124
definition of 413
and vestibular system, 13-14, 32-33
Ovine verminous migration, 123-124
description of pain, 413-415, 414f
Owner-supplied histories, 3
Nociceptive pain
0
versus neuropathic pain, 420t
Observation, 15, 17
P
Nociceptive pathways
when examining and evaluating animals,
Pacing/walking
definition of 413
417-418, 418f
compulsive
Nociceptors
Obtundation
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
definition of, 413
as defining mental status, 17-18
as defining mental status, 17-18
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
definition of, 346
Pain
No-focal or lateralizing signs, 365-367
Obturator nerve injuries
 abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
anomalous conditions, 368, 368t
causing monoparesis, 97t, 100
assessment techniques, 34-35, 34f
of coma or stupor, 365-367
Ohturator paralysis, 100
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
degenerative diseases, 367-368
Occipital dysplasia, 184
clinical signs in domestic animals, 41 7t
diffuse diagnoses, 368
causing ataxia, 269
definitions associated with, 413, 414t
hydrocephalus, 368-369, 369f-371f, 370t
Occipital lobes
with degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
hypertensive encephalopathy, 366
functions of, 5
(DLSS), 141-144, 141f 143f
inbom errors, 367
Occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
diseases which cause, 420-421, 420t
inflammation, 350t, 365
Occipitoatlantoaxial malformation
feline hyperesthesia syndrorme, 421
metabolic diseases, 350t, 365
characteristics of, 145t
meningitis, 420-421
thiamine deficiency, 367
pathophysiology,184
examining and evaluating in animals,
 Nondystophic breed-specific myopathies
Ocular moverment disorders
416-419
autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy,
clinical signs, 417t,420t
204t-206t, 208
Oculomotor functions
observation, 417-418, 418f
 Bouvier des Flandres myopathy.
midbrain control of 6
pain perception tests, 419, 419f
204t-206t, 208
Oculomotor nerve (CN III)
palpation, 418-419, 418f
centromuclear myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
anatomy and physiology of, 7f, 30-31
superficial sensation tests, 419, 419f
distal myopathy of Rottweilers,
assessment technique, 30-31, 31f
importance of recognizing signs of,
204t-206t, 208
 and blindness, anisocoria, abnormal eye
416-419
Labrador retriever myopathy, 204t-206t,
movements, 330
and lesion localization, 37-39
208
lesion localization, 330-334, 332t
localization possibilities with, 3t
nemaline rod myopathy, 204t-206t, 208
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
 management of (See pain rmanagement)
 Noninfectious inflammatory diseases, 472
summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
measurement methods, 419-420
Nonprogressive diseases
Older animals
 mechanisms and origins of, 415-416, 415f
 involving pelvic limbs, 97-100
types of disorders prevalent in, 4
central, 416
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
Olfactory bulbs, 5
inflammatory, 415-416
(NSAIDs)
 Olfactory nerve (CN I)
neuropathic, 416
drugs and characteristics of, 422t-428t,
anatomy and physiology of 7f, 30
radicular, 416
423f, 424-426
assessment technique, 30, 30f
referred, 416
INDEX
539
Pain {Conrinued}
Paresis (Contimued)
Pelvic limbs (Contimued)
 medications (See pain managerment)
lesion localization, 162-164
irnaging studies, 127128,128f12
with monoparesis, 94, 94f
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f 39-45,
neurologic examination, 127, 128t
neural (nociception) pathways for,
39t, 40f
thoracolumbar vertebral column
413-415, 414f
localization origin possibilities,3t
fracture/luxation, 126-130
neuroanatomic basis for, 413-415
 peripheral nervous system (PNS) lesions,
C-T-e- ssasp asisd ane
and neurologic patient care
163-164, 173t
[degenerative]
bladder management, 429
spinal cord diseases associated with
acute noncompressive mucleus pulposus
physical rehabilitation, 429
atlantoaxial subluxation, 173-184,
extrusion, 111-112
recumhent care for large animals,
181f-182f
ascending-descending ischemic necrosis
429-430
caudal occipital malformation
syndrome, 113-114
recumbent care for small animals, 429
syndrome, 184-185
ascending-descending myelomalacia,
with thoracolurmbar intervertebral disk 
central myelinopathy, 170-171,
113-114
disease
173t-180t
degenerative intervertebral disk disease
management of 118-120, 118t
cervical intervertebral disk (IVDD)
(IVDD), 110, 116f
types of, 413,414t
disease, 164-167, 170f-171f
 equine lumbosacral and cauda equina
Pain management
Cervical meningomyelitis, 167
diseases, 115t
acupuncture, 428
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 169-188,
Hansen type I and II IVD degeneration,
analgesic types
185f-187f
110-120, 111t
αz- agonists, 422t-428t, 428
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185
IVD hermiation, 110-120, 111t
 analgesic types
degenerative ryeloencephalopathy.
thoracolumbar intervertebral disk dis-
local anesthetics, 422t-423t,
169-188
ease, 110-120, 111t
425t-426t
diffuse myopathic diseases, 169t
T3-L3 spinal cord disease, 110-126,
anticonvulsants, 422t-424t, 428
diffuse neuropathic diseases, 168t
11lt
corticosteroids, 421-424,422t-425t, 423f
 equine degenerative
T4-S3 and caudal spinal cord diseases,
glhucocorticoids, 421-424, 422t-425t
myeloencephalopathy, 172-173
114t
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
acute progressive diseases {L4-S3),
(NSAIDs), 422t-428t, 423f,
extradural synovial cysts, 188
114t-116t, 139
424426
fibrocartilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
algorithm for evaluating, 95f
opioids, 422t-428t, 423f 426-428
food animal diseases, 167t
algorithm forlesion localization, 110f
goals and importance of 421,428429
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 171-172,
chronic progressive diseases, L4-S3
for small and large animals
174t-180t
cauda equina syndrome, 141-144, 141f,
carmelids, 421-428, 427t
occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
143f
cats, 421-428, 424t
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation, 184
degenerative lumbosacral stenosis
cattle, 421-428, 426t
small anirmal spinal cord diseases, 165t
(DLSS), 141-144, 141f, 143f
dogs, 421-428, 422t-423t
summary of 174t-180t
inflarmmatory vertebral column/spinal
horses, 421-428, 425t
syringomyelia, 184-185, 185f
cord diseases, 147-149, 149f
sheep and goats, 421-428, 427t
from toxic disorders, 449t, 451
myelodysplasia, 146, 146f, 149f
swine, 421-428, 428t
Paresthesia
neuritis of cauda equina, 147
surmmary of 428-429
causes of 416
polyneuritis equi, 147
Pain perception
definition of, 414t 
sacrocaudal dysplasia (in Manx cats),
assessment of, 415-416, 415f
causing rmutilation behavior, 96
146-147, 147f-148f
with spinal trauma, 127
Parietal lobes
sorghum cystitis and ataxia, 147-149
tests, 419, 419f
functions of, 5
spinabifda14414645t,14
Palate
Paroxysms
spinal cord malformations, 144147,
vagus nerves (CN X)
with seizures, 384, 387b, 390
145t, 146f
assessment of, 33
Partial anatomic obstruction
spinal dysraphism, 146, 146f, 149f
Palpation
 taking histories regarding, 65
vertebral anomalies, 144, 145t, 146f
grading during physical exam, 15, 20t
Parturient paresis, 442-443
vertebral column malformations,
technique, 19b, 22
 Passive range of motion
144-147, 145t, 146f
when examining and evaluating animals,
 of neurologic patient, 429-430
chronic progressive diseases,T3-L3.
418-419, 418f
Patellar reflexes, 17f, 26-27, 163-164
130-139, 136t
Palpebral reflexes, 283, 283f
Paws
canine degenerative rmyelopathy.
Panniculus reflex, 12, 18f
 examination and grading of, 15-17
130-135
Paradoxical vestibular disease, 253
replacement, 15
cartilaginous exostoses, 134, 134f
Paralysis; See also paresis; pelvic lirmbs
tibial nerves affecting, 99-100, 99f
compressive rmyelopathy (in Shiloh
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
Pedal reflexes, 11f-13f 28-30
Shepherds), 135
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f
Pediculectomy, 119
disserminated idiopathic skeletal
localization origin possibilities, 3t
Pelvic fractures, 139
hyperostosis (DISH), 133-134,
Paralytic myoglobinuria, 204t-206t, 209,
 Pelvic limb flexor reflex
133f
212-213
sciatic nerve involvement with, 98-99
Hansen type II disk disease, 116f,
Paraneoplastic neuropathies, 200
Pelvic limmb reflexes, 11f-12f, 19b, 28-29,
132-133
Paraparesis-paresis
66-86
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
Pelvic limbs
134f
Paraplegia; See also pelvic limbs
acute nonprogressive diseases (L4-S3)
other myelinopathies, axonopathies, and
Parasites
aortic thromboembolism, 141
neuronopathies,132
infections, 462t, 472
fibrocartilaginous embolic rmyelopathy.
spinal arachnoid cysts,134-135,134f
verminous migration, 123124
139-141, 140f
spinal dural ossification, 133, 133f
Paresis; See also pelvic limmbs
fractures, 139, 139f
spinal synovial cysts, 135
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
spinal cord infarction, 139-141
spondylosis deformans Chypertrophic
algorithm for diagnosis, 163f
trauma, 139,139f
spondylosis), 133, 133f
assesing during gait evaluation, 21
acute nonprogressive diseases {traumma)
tye Ilintervertebral disk disease, 11f
assessrment of, 21
acute spinal cord injury, 126-130, 128t
132-133
brainsterm lesions, 162-163, 163f
first aid and emergency medical
diseases, 109-149, 111t
cervical spinal cord lesions, 162-163, 163f
treatment, 127
inflarmmatory disorders
540
INDEX
Pelvic limbs {Continued)
Pesticides
Postural reactions (Continued)
discospondylitis vertebral abscesses,
toxic disorders from, 447t-448t
proprioceptive positioning reaction, 19b,
124-126, 125f, 130f
Pharynx; See also glossopharyngeal nerves (IX)
22-23, 23f
equine herpesvirus (EHV) myeloen-
examination and grading of 15-17
technique for assessing, 19b, 22-26, 23f, 25f
cephalopathy, 120-121
vagus nerves (CN X), 33
tonic neck reactions,19b,25-26
equine protozoal
Phenobarbital, 395-398, 397t
wheelbarrowing reactions, 19b, 24, 25f
myeloencephalommyelitis (EPM).
Photoreceptors
Postural repetitive myoclonus, 319
121-123,122f
 in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
Postures; See also postural reactions
lentiviral infections, 124
Physical rehabilitation
 anatomy and physiology associated with,
rhinopneumonitis, 120-121
in neurologic patients, 429
18-20
spinal epidural empyema, 126
Physiologic pain, 415, 415f 
assessment and grading of 19-20, 19b
verminous migration, 123-124
Pietrain creeper syndrome, 204t-206t, 211
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
vertebral abscesses, 124-126, 125f,
Piriform lobes
indicating pain, 417-418, 417t
130f
functions of, 5
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f
vertebral infections, 124-126
Pituitary tumors, 362, 363f
postural reaction tests (See postural
West Nile Virus (WNV), 123
Pituitary-hypothalamus
reactions)
lesion localization, 109, 110f
as commmmon brain tumor site, 359t
 symptoms associated with cerebellar
monoparesis (See monoparesis)
Plant toxins
dysfunction,254,254f
nonprogressive diseases, 97-100
causing ataxia, 250
technique for assessing, 18-20, 19f, 19b
reflexes, 11f-13f, 28-30
examples of, 452t-453t
with vestibular ataxia, 252-253
turmors neoplasms of spinal cord,
Plasma cell tumors
Postvaccinal rabies, 462t
135-139,135t
vertebral, 137, 138f
Potassium bromide, 397t, 398
intramedullary tumors, 137, 137f
Plexus neuritis
Pourfour du Petit syndrome, 341
meningiommas, 136-137
and monoparesis, 103
Pregabalin, 397t, 399
metastatic tumors, 138-139
Poisonous plants, 447t, 449t, 451472,
Preganglionic neurons, 8
neuroblastormas, 137, 137f
452t-453t
Primary and secondary cerebellar neoplasms
skeletal vertebral turmors, 137, 138f
 and acquired tremors, 319
causing ataxia, 270,270f
Pendular nystagmmus, 334, 336f
Poisons
Primary cerebellar cortical degeneration
Perception
 and acquired tremors, 316
causing ataxia, 263, 264t-266t, 267f
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
causing blindness, 340
 Primary cerebellar granule cell degeneration,
Perceptual response, 127
toxic disorders from, 447t-448t
254, 254f
Perineal reflexes
Polioencephalomalacia (PEM)
Primary epilepsy
description of 29, 29f
and blindness, 340
associated with seizures, 387b, 388t-389t,
and micturition, 65-66
signs of, 446, 446f
391, 391b
rmuscles, nerves and segrments associated
 Polymicrogyria
 treatment protocol, 396f
with, 3739, 39t
associated with seizures, 391-392
 Primary myelin degenerative disorders
 Peripheral myelinopathies, 191-193,
description of, 373
classification of 132
194t-197t
Polyrmyositis
Primary sensory neuropathies, 194t-197t
 Peripheral nerve injuries
immune-mediated, 201
Problem lists
femoral nerve injuries, 97t, 100
Polyneuritis equi, 147
from minirmum database, 2-3, 3t
obturator nerve injuries, 97t, 100
Polyneuropathy, 96
 Prodrome periods, 384
peroneal nerve injuries, 97t, 99
Polyradiculoneuritis
Prognoses
prognosis of 103
acute idiopathic, 189-191, 190t
 assessing with MGCS in small animals.
sciatic nerve injuries, 97-98, 97t
versus botulism or tick paralysis, 190t
354, 354b
tibial nerve injuries, 97t, 99-100
protozoal, 190t, 191
defining in clinical neurology, 4-5
treatment of, 102-103
Polysaccharide storage rmyopathy, 204t-206t,
Progressive bilateral caudal tentorial
Peripheral nerves
209
hemiation, 349t
associated with spinal reflexes, 37-39,39t
Pons
signs of, 349t
injuries (See peripheral nerve injuries)
 anatomy and physiology of 6, 6f
Projection fibers
lesions, 37-39
and coma stupor, 346-348,347f
functions of, 5
mononeuropathy and polyneuropathy, 96
lesion symptoms,39-45,39t
Proprioception
and muscle innervation, 9-10, 1if-12f
Porcine verminous migration, 124
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
 and pain, 416
Porcines
 Proprioception deficit
 Peripheral nervous system (PNS)
listing of breed-associated diseases [See
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
anatomy of 163
Appendix)
localization origin possibilities, 3t
components of 7
Porencephaly
Proteinoses ceroid lipofuscinoses, 434t-437t
diseases and paresis, 163-164
assification of 368t
Protozoal polyradiculoneuritis, 190t, 191
lesion symptoms, 39t
definition of, 372
Protozoan infections, 456t, 469
neuronopathy, myelinopathy, axonopathy.
 Postnatal syndrommes
equine protozoal myeloencephalitis
170, 173t, 194t-197t
ausing degenerative cerebellar disorders,
(EPM), 456t, 469
 Peripheral neuropathies; See also peripheral
264t-265t
neosporosis, 456t, 469
nerve injuries
Postparturient hypocalcemia, 315
protozoal polyradiculoneuritis, 190t, 191
breeds associated with, 192t-193t
Postural reactions
toxoplasmosis, 456t, 469
overview of, 189-200
 algorithm for diagnosing ataxia based on,
Protrusion, 1l0, 116f
 Peripheral nociceptors
44f
Pseudorabies
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
extensor postural thrust reaction, 19b, 24,
signs of 457t-460t, 470,470f
Peripheral sensitization
25f
Psychic disturbances
and pain, 416
foot limb placerment test, 19b, 22-23, 23f
with seizures, 384
Peripheral vestibular apparatus (labyrinth)
grading during physical exam, 15, 20t
Puerperal tetany, 315
lesion localization to, 39, 39t
hemistanding and hemiwalking reactions,
Pupillary light reflex
 Peripheral vestibular diseases
196, 25
examination and grading of 15-17
algorithm for diagnosing, 255f
Pupillary light reflexes
causing ataxia, 254-259, 255f 255t
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f 39t,
anatomy and physiology of, 13
Peroneal nerve injuries
40-44, 40f
midbrain control of, 6
causing monoparesis, 97t, 99
placing reactions, 19b, 25, 25f
and oculomotor nerve assessment, 7f, 30-31
INDEX
541
Pupillary light reflexes (PLRs)
Reflexes {Continued)
Schiff-Sherrington phenomenon
pathways and testing, 330-332, 331f 332t
indicating pain, 417-418, 417t
with acute spinal cord injury, 127
Pupillotonia, 341
myotatic (stretch) reflexes
clinical manifestations of 113
Pupils
diagrarn illustrating. 17f
description of 19-20
abnormalities
technique for assessing/grading, 15-36,
Schwann cells 
 description and types of, 341
17f, 19b, 26-28, 27f-28f
actions of, 163
localization possibilities with3t
patellar, 17f2627,16314
defects, 193
indicating coma or stupor, 347t
spinal
Schwannoma, 103-104
signaling progressive bilateral caudal
components of 10f 19b
Sciatic nerve injuries
tentorial hermiation, 349t
grading during physical exam, 15, 20t
causing monoparesis, 97-98, 97t
Pyrenean mountain dogs
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f
Scottish deerhounds
laryngeal paralysis in, 292
muscles, nerves and segments associated
 orthostatic postural myoclonus in, 320
with,37-39,39t
Scotty cramp, 320
Q
stretch, 19b
Scrapie, 463t, 472
Quadriceps fermoris rmuscle reflexes, 19b,
techniques for assessing, 19b, 26,
Secondary injury theory, 127
26-28
27f-28f
Segmental innervation
Quadriparesis-paresis
techniques for assessing, 19b, 20t
description and illustration of, 9-10, 1l1f-12f
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
withdrawal
Segmental level of spinal cord
as defining rmental status, 17-18
lesion localization signs, 37-39, 39t
R
description of, 11f-13f 28-30
Segrmental sensory neurons
Rabies
muscles, nerves and segments associated
description and illustration of, 10, 10f
postvaccinal, 462t
with, 37-39, 39t
lesion signs, 10-11 
signs of, 457t-460t, 469-470, 470f
Rehabilitation
Segrments
Rachischisis
for neurologic patient, 429-430
 associated with spinal reflexes, 37-39, 39t
characteristics of, 145t
Renal failure
Seizure disorders
Radial nerve trauma
 description and signs of, 442
breeds susceptible to, 391b
causing rmonoparesis, 102, 102f
Repetitive moverments
Seizures
Radiation therapy
with seizures, 384
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
for brain turmors, 361-362
Repetitive nerve stirmulation, 86t, 87, 88t
anticonvulsant drug therapy, 395-400,
for pituitary tummors, 363-364
Respiratory function
396f, 397t, 401f
for secondary tumors, 362-364
signaling progressive bilateral caudal
breeds susceptible to, 391b
Radicular pain, 416
 tentorial hemiation, 349t 
causes of 352, 386, 388t-389t
Radiography
Respiratory paralysis, 366
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
to diagnose IVDD, 114-118, 117f
Response
classification of 386-390, 387b
for diagnosis confirmation, 78-81, 81t, 82f
 and cranial nerve assessment, 30-33
etiology-based, 386, 387b
 Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, 402
Retina
focal seizures, 387b, 390
abnormal movements during, 307
degeneration with vitammin defciency,
focal seizures with secondary
Reactive seizures
337-339, 337t
generalization, 387b, 390
description and treatment of 386, 387b,
Retina dystrophies, 334-335
generalized seizures, 386-390, 387b
388t-389t, 392-393, 394b
Retractor bulbi rmuscles
status epilepticus (SE) and cluster
 Recumbent care
and abducent nerve assessment, 32
seizures, 390
for large anirmals, 429-430
Rhabdomyolysis
cluster seizures (CS), 400-402, 401f
for srmall anirmals, 429
recurrent exertional, 212-213
definition of, 384
 Recurrent exertional rhabdomyolysis,
Rhabdovirus, 457t-460t, 469-470, 470f
00cae go suauaeueu pue sisouaep
212-213
Rhinopneumonitis 120-121
394b
Referred pain, 416
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus, 123
diseases associated with
Reflex arc
Rickettsial infections
infections, 388t-389t, 392
 defining neuron motor unit, 163-164
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF).
inflammatory diseases, 388t-389t, 392
 Reflex dyssynergia, 61
461t, 472
neoplasia, 388t-389t, 392
clinical signs of, 62, 64t
Rigidity
 primary and idiopathic epilepsy, 387b,
diaghosis of, 64-67, 66f, 67t-68t
definition and classification of 307, 308b
388t-389t, 391, 391b
taking histories regarding, 65
Rodenticides
symptomatic epilepsy, 387b, 388t-389t,
treatment of, 70
 toxic disorders from, 447t
391-392, 394b
 Reflex integration
Rostral brainsterm
toxins, 388t-389t, 392-393
 anatomy and physiology of, 61, 61f
lesions and decerebrate postures, 307-308,
trauma, 352, 388t-389t, 392
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
308f
lcalization origin posibilities 3t
Reflexes
Rottweilers
pathophysiology of385-386,385f
assessing with MGCS in small anirmals,
distal myopathy of 204t-206t, 208
reactive seizures, 386, 387b, 388t-389t,
354, 354b
laryngeal paralysis in, 291
392-393, 394b
brainstem, 354, 354b
status epilepticus (SE), 400-402, 401f
components of spinal, 10f, 19b
S
frorm toxic disorders, 448-451, 448t
cormeal, 283, 283f
Sacral fractures, 139
treatment guidelines, 393-400
and cranial nerve assessment, 30-33
Sacrocaudal dysgenesis
types of, 386-390, 387b
cranial tibial rmuscle, 19b, 27, 27f
characteristics of, 145t, 146f
Self-mutilation
dazzle, 332-333
Sacrocaudal dysplasia (in Manx cats),
anesthesia, 102-103
detrusor
146-147, 147f-148f
behavior with peripheral nerve injuries, 96
 anatomy and physiology of, 58, 60-61,
Sacrocaudal vertebrae
chue to dysesthesia, 96
60f
fractures/luxation, 139
with paresthesia, 96
cerebellar inhibition of 60f, 61
 Sacrococcygeal vertebral column
Sensation
 clinical signs of abnormal, 62-64,
fractures of 139, 139f
 abnormalities indicated by loss of 14-15
63t-64t
Salivary glands
Sensitivity
function of, 58-62
vagus nerves (CN X)
 and lesion localization, 37-39
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
assesstment of, 33
Sensorineural deafness, 284-285
voluntary control of, 58-62, 60f
Saltatory conduction, 163
Sensory deficits
flexor and crossed extension, 10, 13f
Sarcoglycanopathy, 204t-206t, 208
 abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
542
INDEX
 Sensory exammination
Sormatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs),
Spinal cord diseases {Continued)
techniques, 34-35, 34f
86t, 87-88
DAMNITV classification scheme
Sensory loss
 Somatosensory-evoked responses
for food animal lumbosacral and cauda
map of brachial plexus, 101f
during micturition examinations, 67,68t
equina diseases, 116t
with monoparesis, 96
Sorghum cystitis and ataxia, 147-149
for food animal thoracolumbar spinal
types of, 414t
Spasrms
cord diseases, 113t
 Sensory neuronopathy
 definition and classification of 307, 308b
for srmall animal lumbosacral and cauda
and neuropathy, 194t-197t, 198
Spastic paresis
equina diseases, 114t
 Sensory neuropathies
of adult cattle and calves, 314
for small animal thoracolumbar spinal
inherited and breed-associated, 193-197,
Spasticity
cord diseases, 11lt
194t-197t
definition of, 307
causing monoparesis,100102
Sensory pathways
syndrommes, 314
Spinal cord infarction, 139-141
general proprioception, 11-12
 Special proprioception (SP)
Spinal cord injury
general somatic afferent,1l
description of, 8
compressive or concussive myelopathy,
long-tract, 11-12
 Special sensory systems
112
from urinary bladder, 59,59f
hearing, 13
first aid, 127
 Sensory receptors
pupillary light reflexes, 13
inaging studies, 127-128
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
vision, 12
neurologic examination,118t,127,128t
Sensory systerms
Special somatic afferent (SSA) system, 8
pathophysiology, 126-127
 anatomy and physiology of, 35
Special visceral efferent (SVE) system, 8
prognosis of, 129-130
assessment techniques, 34-35, 34f
Specific visceral afferent (SVA) systerm, 8
treatment of 128-129, 130f
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
Sphincter
 conservative management of 129, 130f
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
effects oflesions on, 63t
neuroprotection, 128-129
divisions of, 10
Sphingolipidoses, 434t-437t
Spinal cord malformations, 144-147, 145t,
evaluation of neonatal, 20t
Spina bifda, 144-146, 145t, 147f
146f
examination and grading of, 17
Spinal accessory nerves
 Spinal cord segrments L4-S2
hearing, 13
 origin and distribution illustration, 7f
disorders affecting,109-149,114t116t
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
 Spinal arachnoid cysts, 134-135, 134f
Spinal cord segments T-3-L3
pupillary light reflexes, 13
Spinal cord
disorders affecting, 109-149, 11lt-113t
vision, 12
 anatomic organization of, 6
 Spinal cord transection
 Sensory-nerve-conduction tests, 87
lesion localization signs, 37, 38f 38t
signs of complete, 127, 128t
Sheep
lesions
Spinal cord tummors
examples of toxic plants afecting.
severity of, 112
characteristics versus other disorders, 136t
452t-453t
malformations, 144-147, 145t, 146f
Spinal dural ossification, 133, 133f
listing of breed-associated diseases [See
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
Spinal dysraphism, 146, 146f, 149f
Appendix)
regions versus segments, 10
Spinal epidural empyema, 126
motor neuron diseases in, 191-200,
segrments of, 9-10, 10f
Spinal fractures
192t-193t
surmmary of rmalforrmation characteristics,
fixation of, 129
pain managerment for, 421-428, 427t
145t
Spinal nerves
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
tumors, 136t
and rmuscle innervation, 9-10, 1lf-12f
Short tau inversion recovery (STIR), 76
Spinal cord compression
Spinal reflexes
Siamese cat syndrome, 336
llustration of, 146f
components of, 10f, 19b
 Siberian huskies/Alaskan malarmutes
progression of signs in,45, 5f
grading during physical exam, 15, 20t
laryngeal paralysis in, 291
Spinal cord diseases
as lesion localization sign, 37, 38f
Signalment, 3-4
associated with tetraparesis, hemiparesis,
 rmuscles, nerves and segments associated
Signs and symptoms, See mmltifocal signs
ataxia
with, 37-39,39t
Sirmple descriptive scale (SDS)
atlantoaxial subluxation, 173-184,
stretch,19b
of pain, 419-420
181f-182f
techniques for assessing, 19b, 26, 27f-28f
Simple focal seizures, 387b, 390
caudal occipital malformation syn-
Spinal synovial cysts, 135
 Skeletal vertebral turmors
drome,184-185
Splayleg in piglets, 204t-206t, 211
 of spinal cord, 137, 138f
central myelinopathy, 170-171, 173t-
Spondylitis
Skeleton
180t
definition of, 133
assessment of 19b, 22
cervical intervertebral disk {IVDD)
Spondylormyelopathy
Sleep
disease, 164-167, 170f-171f
cervical, 169-188, 185f-187f
abnormal movements during, 307
Cervical meningomyelitis, 167
Spondylosis deformans (hypertrophic
cataplexy, 22, 402
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 169-188,
spondylosis), 133, 133f
and comma/stupor, 346-348, 347f
185f-187f
Spongy degeneration
myokymia during, 308
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185
 characteristics and breeds susceptible to,
narcolepsy, 384, 402
degenerative myeloencephalopathy.
171, 174t-180t
 Small anirmals
169-188
Stance
modified Glasgow Coma Scale (MGCS)
diffuse myopathic diseases, 169t
 as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40-44, 40f
for, 354, 354b
"Stargazing"
spinal cord diseases, 165t
equine degenerative myeloencephalopa
as defining mental status, 17-18
Smell
thy, 172-173
 in sheep 441
 abnormalities indicated by loss of, 14-15
equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
Startle reaction
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
extradural synovial cysts, 188
 cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
and olfactory nerve (CN I)
fibrocarilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
Status epilepticus (SE)
anatomy and physiology of, 7f, 30
food animal diseases, 167t
classification of, 390
 assessment technique, 30, 30f
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 17l-172,
description and treatment of, 400-402,
summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
174t-180t
401f
Snake envenomation, 215
occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
Steroid myopathy in horses, 204t-206t, 211
Somatic pain
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation, 184
Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis
assessment of, 415-416, 415f
small anirmal spinal cord diseases, 165t
(SRMA), 465t, 473
Somatic sensory innervation
surmmary of 174t-180t
Steroid-responsive tremor syndrome (SRTS),
illustration of 18f
syringommyelia, 184-185, 185f
318-319
INDEX
543
Stiff horse syndrome, 316
Swallowing disorders (Continued)
Tetraparesis (Contimued)
Storage diseases, 367-368
gastroesophageal phase, 295
spinal cord diseases associated with (See
 Storage disorders
glossopharyngeal neuralgia, 294
spinal cord diseases)
in domestic animals, 433-438, 433t-437t,
guttural pouch disease, 293
caudal occipital malformation
438f
migropalidal encephalomalacia, 293-294
syndrorme, 184-185
Strabismus
 oral and pharyngeal phases, 293-295
central myelinopathy, 170-171,
with vestibular ataxia, 251f, 252-253
Swine
173t-180t
Stretch reflex
dinical signs of pain in, 417t
cervical intervertebral disk (IVDD)
diagram illustrating, 17f
listing of breed-associated diseases (See
disease, 164-167, 170f-171f
muscles, nerves and segments associated
Appendix)
cervical meningomyelitis, 167
with, 37-39, 39t
pain managerment for, 421-428, 428t
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 169-188,
 Stringhalt horse disorder, 321
viral diseases in, 457t-460t
185f-187f
Strokes
Sympathetic innervation
Chiari-like malformations, 184-185
 description and causes of, 354
of eye, 333f 334t
degenerative myeloencephalopathy.
Strychnine poisoning, 316, 388t-389t,
Symptomatic epilepsy
169-188
392-393, 447t
associated with seizures, 387b, 388t-389t,
difuse myopathic diseases, 169t
Stupor; See also coma
391-392, 394b
 abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
Syncope
 equine degenerative myeloencephalopa-
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
abnormalities indicated by, 14-15
thy, 172-173
as defining mental status, 1718
localization possibilities with, 3t
equine spinal cord diseases, 166t
diseases conditions causing
versus seizures, 384
extradural synovial cysts, 188
brain hemmorrhage, 353t,354, 355f-356f
Syringohydrormyelia,184, 184f
fbrocartilaginous embolism, 169, 172f
355b
Syringoyelia,145t,146,184185
food animal diseases, 167t
brain tumors, 353t, 356, 356f (See brain
Systermic diseases
neuroaxonal dystrophy, 17l-172,
tumors)
etiology of 433t
174t-180t
equine head trauma,352-353
Systemic shock,126-127
occipitoatlantal luxations, 184
feline ischemic encephalopathy, 356
Systermic signs; See rmltifocal signs
occipitoatlantoaxial malformation, 184
focal or lateralizing signs, 348, 349t
srmall anirmal spinal cord diseases, 165t
head injuries, 348, 350t, 351b, 352f
T
surmrmary of, 174t-180t
infaretion, 354, 355f-357f, 355b
Tactile placing, 19b, 25, 25f
syringomyelia, 184-185,185f
ischemic infarction, 353t, 354-355,
Tail
Thalarmus
355f356f, 355b
 and lesion localization, 37-39, 38f, 38t
 anatomy and functions of 5-6, 6f
no-focal or lateralizing signs, 365-367
Taste
and comma stupor, 346-348, 347f
 progressive bilateral caudal tentorial
assessment of, 33
lesion symptorms, 39t, 40
hemiation, 349t
Taurine, 339
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
traumatic brain injury (TBI), 348, 350t,
Tauri's disease, 204t-206t, 209
and seizures, 385-386
351b, 352f
Telencephalon
Thermoreceptors
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40, 40f
 anatomy and function of 5, 6f
 in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
localization origin possibilities, 3t
Thiarnine deficiency
Stuporous
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
signs of, 446, 446f
definition of, 346
Temporal lobes
 causing stupor or coma, 367
Subarachnoid hemorrhages
fuanctions of, 5
Thoracic limb reflexes, 19b
definition of, 351b
Temporohyoid osteoarthropathy, 288-289
Thoracic limbs
 Subdural hemorrhages
Tetanospasmin, 312-313
algorithm for evaluating, 95f
definition of, 351b
Tetanus
brachial plexus trauma, 95t, 100,
 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
characteristics and treatment of, 454t
100f-101f
syndrome (SARDS), 339
definition and classification of, 307, 308b
injuries causing monoparesis, 95t, 100-102
Suffocation, 366
symptoms and movements associated
lesion localization signs, 39t, 40-44, 40f
 Superficial sensations
with, 312-313, 312f
monoparesis (See rmonoparesis)
assessment of 415-416, 415f
Tetany
radial nerve trauma, 102, 102f
tests, 419, 419f
definition and classification of, 307, 308b
reflexes, 19b, 29, 29f
Suppurative meningitis, 466f
LMN-associated, 313-316
suprascapular nerve paralysis, 102
Suprascapular nerve paralysis
metabolic causes of
Thoracolumbar diseases
causing monoparesis, 102
 hypoadrenocorticism muscle cramping.
 DAMNITV classification schemes
Surgery
316
for equine thoracolurbar spinal cord
for brain tummors, 361-362
hypocalcemia, 314-315
diseases, lllt
for pituitary tumors, 363-364
hypomaghesemia tetany, 315-316
for food animal thoracolumbar spinal
Swallowing disorders
 postparturient hypocalcemia, 315
cord diseases, 113t
and cranial nerve damage, 33
Tetraparesis
for small animal thoracolumbar spinal
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
algorithm for diagnosis, 163f
cord diseases, 1llt
and cranial nerves IX, X, and XI
assessing during gait evaluation, 21
Thoracolumbar intervertebral disk disease,
cricopharymgeal dysfunction, 294
brainstem lesions, 162-163, 163f
110-120, 111t
esophageal phase, 294-295
cervical spinal cord lesions, 162-163,
clinical signs of 112-114
gastroesophageal phase, 295
163f
diagnosis of, 11lt-113t, 114-118, 117f
glossopharyngeal phase dysfunction,
lesion localization, 162-164
differential diagnoses of 11lt
294
as lesinlocalizatin sign,3945,39t,40f
food animal diseases, 113t 
guttural pouch disease, 293
myopathic diseases causing (See
 paraplegic support care, 120
nigropallidal encephalormalacia,
myopathic diseases)
pathophysiology of, 110-112
293-294
 nerve and neuronal cell body causes of
prognosis, 118t, 120
oral and pharyngeal phases, 293-295
(See nerve and neuronal cell body
spinal cord segments T3-L3, 109-149.
 pharyngoesophageal phase dysfunction,
diseases)
11lt-113t
294
neurommuscular junction diseases causing
treatment of 118-120, 118t
cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
(See neurormuscular junction diseases)
conservative therapy, 118-119
dysphagia,293-295
 peripheral nervous systerm (PNS) lesions,
surgical therapy, 119-120
esophageal phase, 294-295
163-164,173t
types of110-120,11213t
544
INDEX
Thoracolurmbar vertebral column fracture/
Transduction
huxation, 126-130
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
assessment of 19-20
Thoroughbred horses
Transrmissible spongiform encephalopathies
ataxia,250
cervical spondylomyelopathy, 185-188,
{TSEs), 463t, 471-472
Tuberculous meningitis, 455t, 469
185f-187f
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE),
Tumors
Three-compartment concept, 128, 129f
463t, 471472, 472f
cerebellar, 270
Thromboembolic meningoencephalitis
feline spongiform encephalopathy,463t,
causing monoparesis, 103-104
(TEME)
472
of spinal cord, 135-139, 135t-136t
characteristics and treatment of 454t
scrapie, 463t,472
unilateral cranial polymeuropathy, 297
description and illustration of, 355, 454t,
Transrmission
and vision problems, 337t, 340
467, 467f
 in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
Two-step pinch technique,96, 96f
Tibial nerve injuries
Transport tetany,316
causing monoparesis, 97t, 99-100
Trapezius rmuscles
Tympanic membrane
Tick paralysis, 190, 190t, 214-215
accessory nerves (CN XI)
 and cochlear nerves (CN VII1), 284
Tongue
assessment of 33
Type II intervertebral disk disease, 116f,
cranial nerves associated with, 4lt-43t
Trauma;. See also DAMNITV classification
132-133
examination and grading of 15-17
schermes
hypoglossal merve (CN XII)
associated with seizures, 388t-389t, 392
anatomy of 286, 286f
 brain injuries (See traurmatic brain injuries
 Utrasonography
assessment technique, 33, 34f
(TBIs))
for diagnosis confrmation, 8l, 82f
hypoglossal paralysis, 295
to eyes, 338t,339-340
Uncontrolled movements, See ataxia
summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
facial nerve, 288, 289f
Unilateral cranial polyneuropathy, 297
Tonic seizures, 386-390, 387b
involving spinalcord,11lt115t
Unilateral trigerminal nerve lesions, 287, 287f
Tonic-clonic seizures, 386-390, 387b
causing paresis, 203
Upper motor neurons {UMNs)
Tonsils
causing paresis of one limb, 98t
anatomy and physiology of 6, 6f
 examination and grading of 15-17
 peripheral nerve injuries
function and illustration of, 8-9, 9f, 9t
Touch
femoral nerve injuries, 97t, 100
lesionlocalizatin signs,3739,38f t
 cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
obturator nerve injuries, 97t, 100
signs of diseases lesions, 9, 9t, 19-20
in nociception process, 413-415, 414f
peroneal nerve injuries, 97t, 99
spasticity associated with, 307
and sensory system assessment techniques,
sciatic nerve injuries, 97-98, 97t
Urethra
34-35, 34f
tibial nerve injuries, 97t, 99-100
anatomy and physiology of, 58-62, 59f-60f
Toxic disorders; See also DAMNITV
and peripheral vestibular disease ataxia,
micturition disorders, 62-70, 63t
classification schermes; toxins
255t,262t
Urethral pressure profle, 67,67f 68
and ataxia, 259
spinal cord, 126-130, 139, 139f
Urethral sphincter
and behavior changes, 449t, 451
Traumatic brain injuries (TBIs)
anatomy and physiology of, 58-62,
and cerebellar disease ataxia, 262t,
causing coma or stupor, 348, 350t, 351b,
59f-60f
270-271
352f
effects of lesions on, 63t
and coma, 449t, 451
focal and lateralizing signs of 348-365.
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
and depression, 449t, 451
349t-350t
micturition disorders, 62-70, 63t
exposure,5t
Glasgow Coma Scale, 35lt, 354
Urinalysis
involving spinal cord, 11lt-115t
in horses, 352-353
for diagnosis confirmation, 75
manifestations and types of, 447-451,
prognoses, 354
curing micturition disorder treatment, 69
447t, 452t-453t
terminology associated with, 351b
Urinary bladder
causing paresis of one lirmb, 98t
treatment of 349
anatomy and physiology of, 58-62,
and peripheral vestibular disease ataxia,
Traummatic diseases; See also DAMNITV
59f-60f
255t,262t
 classification schermes
histories and exams, 64-67, 65b
and seizures, 388t-389t, 392-393,
physical injuries causing, St
micturition disorders, 62-70, 63t
448-451, 448t
Tremorogenic agents, 319
sensory pathways from, 59, 59f
causing stupor or coma, 373
Tremors
Urinary incontinence
from toxic plants, 451-472, 452t-453t
assessment of 21-22
localization possibilities with, 3t
and treor, ataxiaorparesis 449t45
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40f, 44
Urinary tract
causing vestibular ataxia, 255t, 259, 259t
localization origin possibilities, 3t
imaging studies of, 66-67
Toxic neuropathies, 200
frorm toxic disorders, 449t, 451
minimum data to evaluate, 66
Toxic plants, 447t, 451-472, 452t453t
Triceps rmuscle reflexes, 14-15, 19b, 28f
 normal function of 58-62
Toxicosis tremors, 319
Trigeminal nerves (CN V)
Urinary tract infections (UTIs)
Toxin-induced myopathic diseases, 203
anatomy of 282-283
treatment of, 68-70, 69t
Toxins; See also toxic disorders
assessing, 31-32, 32f
Urination
affecting yes37t,339341
branches of 282-283
 problerns with degenerative lumbosacral
associated with involuntary movement
inical signs83,283f284
stenosis (DLSS), 141-144, 141f 143f
disorders
diseases involving
taking histories regarding, 65
chlorinated hydrocarbons, 319
bilateral trigeminal nerve lesions,
Urine
drugs, 321
286-287
micturition reflex,61-62
heavy-metal poisoning, 319
unilateral trigemminal nerve lesions, 287,
Urodynamics, 67, 68t, 86t
hexachlorophene, 319
287f
mycotoxicoses, 319
lesion localization, 282-286
V
poison, 316
and nociception, 415
Vagal nerve stimulation
poisonous plants, 319
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
for seizures, 400
strychnine, 316
summmary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
Vagus nerves (CN X)
toxicosis tremors, 319
Trochlear functions
acquired laryngeal paralysis, 292
tremorogenic agents, 319
midbrain control of, 6
anatomy of, 285
causing ataxia, 259
Trochlear nerve (CN IV)
assessment of, 33
causing seizures, 388t-389t, 392-393,
assessrment of, 31
clinical signs, 286
448-451, 448t
midbrain control of, 6
dysphagia (swallowing disorders)
Toxoplasmosis
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
cricopharyngeal dysfunction, 294
sighs of, 456t, 469
summary of characteristics, 4lt43t
esophageal phase, 294-295
INDEX
545
Vagus nerves {Continued)
Vertebral body
Visna, 124
gastroesophageal phase, 295
 surmmary of malformation characteristics,
Visual defects
glossopharyngeal phase dysfunction,
145t
diseases causing, 337t, 339-340
294
Vertebral column malformations, 144-147,
Visual placing, 19b, 25, 25f
guttural pouch disease, 293
145t, 146f
Visual systerm
nigropalidal encephalomalacia,
Vertebral infections, 124-126
evaluation of neonatal, 20t
293-294
Vertebral osteomyelitis
Visual-evoked response (VER) tests, 86t, 88
 oral and pharyngeal phases, 293-295
characteristics and treatment of, 454t
Vitamin A deficiency
 pharyngoesophageal phase dysfunction,
Vestibular ataxia, 32-33, 250-253
affecting eyes, 337-339, 337t
294
Vestibular systerm
signs of, 445-446
laryngeal paralysis in cats, 292
anatomy and physiology of, 13-14
Vitamin A toxicity
laryngeal paralysis in dogs, 290-293
lesion localization signs, 39t, 40-44, 44f
signs of, 446
Bouvier des Flanders, 291
localization possibilities with, 3t
Vitamin B complex-thiamine deficiency
congenital laryngeal paralysis, 291
Vestibulocochlear nerves (CN VII)
signs of 446, 446f
inDalmatians,291-292
assessrment of, 32
Vitamin E deficiency
in Pyrenean mountain dogs, 292
associated with ataxia, 250-253, 251f
affecting eyes, 337t, 338-339
in Rottweilers, 291
cochlear and vestibular divisions of 32
signs of, 446
 in Siberian huskies Alaskan malamutes,
and hearing, 13
Voiding
291
summary of techniques, 4lt-43t
 taking histories regarding, 65
 in White German Shepherds, 291
Veterinarians
history-taking by,3
W
laryngeal paralysis in horses, 292-293
origin and distribution illustration, 7f
Viral infections, 457t-460t
Weakness
summary of characteristics, 4lt-43t
canine distemper virus, 457t-460t,
localization possibilities with, 3t
unilateral cranial polyneuropathy, 297
470-471, 470f
Weed's problem-oriented diagnosis plan, 2.
Vascular disorders; See also DAMNITV
equine herpesvirus type l (EHV-1).
2b
classification schemes
457t460t, 471
West Nile Virus, 123, 457t-460t, 471
affecting eyes, 337t, 340
feline infectious peritonitis virus (FIP),
Western, Eastem, and Venezuelan equine
and cerebellar disease ataxia, 262t,
457t-460t, 471, 471f
encephalomyelitis (WEE, EEE, and
271
pseudorabies, 457t-460t,470,470f
VEE),457t-460t, 471
etiology of brain, 355b
rabies, 457t-460t, 469-470, 470f
White Gerrman Shepherds
infarctions and ataxia, 271
causing shupor or coma, 365
 larymgeal paralysis in, 291
involving spinal cord, 11lt-115t
viral-induced cerebellar hypoplasia, 266t,
White matter
causing paresis of one limb, 98t
267-268,268f-269f
of spinal cord, 6
and peripheral vestibular disease ataxia,
West Nile virus, 457t-460t, 471
White muscle disease, 21l
255t,262t
Westem, Eastem, and Venezuelan equine
Wide-based stance
from trauma, 126
encephalomyelitis (WEE, EEE, and
as lesion localization sign, 39t, 40-44, 40f
types of, 5t
VEE), 457t-460t, 471
Wind-up, 416
Vascular infarctions
Viral-induced cerebellar hypoplasia,
Withdrawal reflexes
and ataxia, 271
264t-266t, 267-268, 268f-269f
as defining mental status, 17-18
Vasogenic edemma, 349-357
Visceral pain
description of 11f-13f 28-30
Vegetative
assessrment of, 415-416, 415f
muscles, nerves and segments associated
definition of, 346
Vision
with, 37-39, 39t
Ventral fusion, 183, 183f
 abnormalities indicated by loss of 14-15
Ventral hom neurons
anatomy and physiology of, 12
Y
disorders of, 191
assessment techniques, 30, 31f
Yawning
Ventral slot procedure, 166, 171f
cerebral cortex lobe associated with, 5
 as defining rmental status, 17-18
Vermian hypoplasia, 264t-265t
indicating coma or stupor, 347t
Young animals
Verminous migration, 123-124
loss
types of disorders prevalent in, 4
Vertebrae
and cerebral lesions, 44-45
 radiographic findings interpretations of,
diseases causing, 337t, 339-340
Z
81t
and oculormotor nerve assessment, 7f 30-31
Zonisamide, 397t, 399
Vertebral abscesses, 124-126, 125f, 130f
and optic nerve (CN II)
Vertebral anormalies, 144, 145t, 146f
anatomy and physiology of, 7f, 30
Vertebral arch
assessment technique, 30, 31f
surmmary of malforrmation characteristics,
summary of characteristics, 4l t43t
145t
pathways and testing, 330, 331f 332t