Copyrighted Material
ACOMPREHENSIVESTEP-BY-STEPGUIDE
TOALLTYPESOFOPHTHALMICSURGICALTECHNIQUES
VETERINARY
SURGERY
EDITEDBY
KIRKN.GELATT·JANICEP.GELATT
INCLUDESACCESSTO WEBSITE
SAUNDERS
FEATURESVIDEO CLIPS OFSURGICALPROCEDURES
ELSEVIER
Copyrighted Material
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
VETERINARY OPHTHALMIC SURGERY
Commissioning Editor: Robert Edwards
Development Editor: Veromiha Wathins
Project Manager: Joarmah Duncan
Designer: Stewart Larhing
lllustration Manager: Merlym Harvey
Illustrator: Chartwell
VETERINARY
OPHTHALMIC
SURGERY
KIRK N. GELATT vMD
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists; Emeritus Distinguished
 Professor of Comparative Ophthalmology, Department of Small Animal Clinical
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, USA
and
JANICE PETERSON GELATT MFA
Gainesville, FL USA
ELSEVIER
SAUNIERS
ELSEVIER
SAIUNIDH:RS
@ 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical including hotocopying, recording or any infomatin storage and retrieval system,without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the
Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency. can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher
(other than as may be noted herein)-
[SBN 978-0-7020-3429-9
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our
understanding. changes in research methods. professional practices. or medical treatment may become
necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and
using any information, methods. compounds, or experi ments described herein. In using such information 
 Or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for whom
they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most
aq on jonpoid yoea jo iaimpoejnuew ayn kq (u) ro pameaj sainpanord uo (t) papraoid uogewroju! juaimo
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of
their patients. to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and
to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products Jiability, negligence or
otherwise. or from any use or operation of any methods. products. instructions. or ideas contained in the
material herein.
your source for books,
ELSEVIER
 journals and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.comIwww.bookaid.org Iwww.sabre.org
isous
BOOKAID Sabre Foundation
from sustalnable foresls
ELSEVIER
Printed in China
Contributors
Dennis E. Brooks, DVM PhD Dipl ACVO
Bernhard M. Spiess, DVM Dr Med Vet Dipl ACvO and ECVO
University of Florida
University of Zurich
College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Ophthalmology
 Department of Small Animal and Large Clinical Sciences
Zurich
Gainesville
Switzerland
FL,USA
R. David Whitley, DVM MS Dipl ACVO
Douglas W. Esson, DvM Dipl ACVO
lowa State Lniversity
Eye Care for Animals
College of Veterinary Medicine
Tustin
 Department of Clinical Sciences
CA, LISA
Ames
IA, LSA
Brian C. Gilger, DVM MS Dipl ACVO
Department DOCS
David A. Wilkie, DVM MS Dipl ACVO
College of Veterinary Medicine
Ohio State Lniversity
North Carolina State LIniversity
College of Veterinary Medicine
Raleigh
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
NC, LISA
OSU Veterinary Hospital
Columbus
Caryn E. Plummer, DVM Dipl ACVO
University of Florida
OH, USA
College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Gainesville
FL, LISA
vii
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the new contributors to this book.
ophthalmic surgery fo1 all animal species. We also would
including Drs Dennis E. Brooks, Douglas W. Esson, Brian
like to acknowledge the comparative ophthalmology faculty
C. Gilgel, Caryn E. Plummel, Bernhard M. Spiess, R.
membeis and residents, and Edward O. MacKay, PhD, and
David Whitley and David A. Wilkie. We would like to
Tommy Rinkosky, MS, at the College of Veterinary Medicine,
also thank Mr Robert Edwards, Commissioning Edito1,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA fo1 their
and Ms Veronika Watkins, Development Edito1, ElsevieI
assistance and support.
Limited, for the opportunity to publish this new edition on
When the two volumes (Volume 1: Extraocular procedures,
 sde s a go s () (s 
and Volume 2: Coineal and intraocular procedures) of the
tear systems; (7) surgical procedures fo1 the conjunctiva
Handbook of Small Animal Ophthaimic Surgery were published
and the nictitating membrane; (8) surgery of the cornea
in 1994 and 1995, 1espectively, they were part of a hand
and sclera; (9) surgical procedures of the anterio1 chamber
book series published by Pergamon Press, Oxford, UK.
and anterior uvea; (10) surgical procedures for the glauco-
Because of their popularity, they were out of print within 4
mas; (11) surgical procedures of the lens and cataract; and
years. We were then presented with the opportunity to
(12) vitreoretinal surgery. Each of the surgery chapters is
update and consolidate these two handbooks into a single
divided into the relevant surgical anatomy, indications for
text, Fundamentals of Small Animal Ophthalmic Surgery, which
 surgery or other medical therapies, the available surgical
was published in 2001 by Butterworth-Heinemann. Next,
procedures, the postoperative management, success rates,
we were presented with a third challenge - to develop a
and postoperative complications followed by any modifica-
comprehensive, all-species ophthalmic surgery text,
, based
tions for large animals and special species. Further reading
on the previous texts, which could be used by veterinary
OI selected references are included for each chapter for read-
ophthalmologists as well as interested veterinary surgeons
ers interested in consulting the original publications in all
and practitioners worldwide.
animal species.
Prior to the two first handbooks, the texts devoted to oph-
 Each chapter contains infoimation that can benefit the
thalmic surgery in animals were limited. The most 1ecent
 s     
books were the Stereoscopic Atlas of Ophthalmic Surgery of
ophthalmic surgery and who are attempting to expand
        
and/or improve their surgical skills. This text also contains
MO, USA, 1973). the Atlas of Veterinary Ophthalmic Surgery
surgical information fo1 the veterinary ophthalmologist in
by Stephen Bistner, Gustavo Aguire, and George Batik
training
　o1 the
practicing  veterinary
yophthalmologist
(WB Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, USA, 1977), and Surgical
wishing to consult a surgical text for the most recent
Management of Ocular Disease edited by Mark Nasisse (VeteI-
information.
inary Clinics of North America, WB Saunders, Philadelphia,
s e o  a si an s jo nas a 
PA, USA, 1997).
website
 (www.Gelattonline.com) of actual eye surgeries
 Most current information on ophthalmic surgery has been
 performed in clinical patients. These videos will be arranged
published in comprehensive
veterinary ophthalmology
by eye tissue and will follow the same format described
texts, and in the crush for space, descriptions are limited to
and illustrated in the text. The videos will be periodically
brief summaries of the actual surgical techniques. Since
 augmented, so new videos may be added at any time.
1994, our Handbook of Small Animal Ophthalmic Surgery
Any veterinarian is invited to submit ophthalmic surgery
 s ai as ssns  (h  I s)
videos (on a CD) directly to me (my address is below). If the
Ophthalmic Surgery, are the only textbooks devoted to eye
video is accepted by the author(s) of the associated chapter
surgery in animals. Only these ophthalmic surgery textbooks
and the Publisher, it will be added to the website. This presents 
focus on all the dimensions of small animal ophthalmic sur-
a unique opportunity for all readers of this text to become
gery, stressing the pre-, intra-, and postoperative details.
actively involved and part of our effort to expand and improve
This text, Veterinary Ophthalmic Surgery, consists of all of
veterinary ophthalmic surgery fo1 all animal species. A gratis
the different types of extraocular and intraocular surgical
copy of the book will be offered for each successful video.
procedures that are utilized by veterinarians and veterinary
 ophthalmologists. The base or model species for all of the
surgical procedures is the most popular small animal species
Kirk N. Gelatt, VMD
presented to veterinarians worldwide - the dog and cat. In
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists,
Emeritus Distinguished Professor of Comparative
large animals and special species to describe any modifica-
Ophthalmology. P.O. Box 100126
tions of these procedures as well as possible new techniques
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, College of
that have evolved to these species. A considerable amount of
Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL
this new information is on the equine species.
32610-0126, USA
The text is divided into 12 chapters: (1) surgical instru-
and
mentation; (2) the operating room; (3) anesthesia for
Janice Peterson Gelatt, MFA
ophthalmic surgery: (4) surgery of the orbit; (5) surgery of
Gainesville, FL, USA
CHAPTER
Surqical instrumentation
Kirk N. Gelatt
Chapter contents
Introduction
 Surgical instruments for ophthalmic surgeries
11
Design of ophthalmic instruments
Instrument care, storage, and sterilization 
13
 Ophthalmic surgical instruments
2
 Ophthalmic sutures and needles
14
Adaptations for large animals and special species
ophthalmic surgeries
11
Introduction
than needle holders are used for the small ophthalmic
sutures, and these thumb forceps should be of high quality.
Since the 1960s magnification has had a major influence
on advances in ophthalmic surgery and instrumentation. With
Design of ophthalmic instruments
ously deemed quite satisfactory were viewed as inregular, and
wound apposition as imperfect. The standard ophthalmic sur-
 A large assortment of standard and microsurgical instruments
gical instruments, as observed under 10-20x magnification,
is available to the veterinarian contemplating coineal and
were too large and impaired the surgeon's view of the surgical
intraocular surgery. The basic design of these instruments
field. Forceps were viewed to compress and occasionally tear
includes several common construction features that facilitate
tissues. The standard ophthalmic needle holders grasped the
their intended use. The standard ophthalmic instruments
smaller needles poorly, often flattening the curved needles.
are usually about 120-140 mm long the miciosurgical
 a e i is n a a m 
instruments are about 100 mm long (20-30% smaller).
tom of the operating microscope limited both the number
These limitations are related to two factors. First, the instnl-
and the size of ophthalmic instruments. As a result, a second
a  a o a as a  s
type of ophthalmic instrument evolved - smaller instruments 
and manipulated. Secondly, the working distance of most
for microsurgery.
     s s 
While surgical instrumentation for extraocular procedures
 s a     oh  a
partially utilizes general surgical instruments, surgical instrl-
too large, inadvertent contact and the resultant contamina-
ments for conjunctival, corneal, and intraocular surgical
tion with the bottom of the operating microscope may occur.
procedures require an investment in both standard size
The diameters of the handles of most of the ophthalmic
and microsurgical ophthalmic instruments. Both the stan-
spatulas and knives are about 6-7 mm. The width of the
dard and microsurgical ophthalmic instruments are small
handles of the larger needle holders, scissors, and thumb
and delicate in comparison to the general surgical instru-
forceps is about 10-12 mm. The shape of these instruments
ments. Long-term use and optimal surgical results with these
also directly influences their use. Instruments with 5-6 mm
ophthalmic instruments necessitate prudent care and use.
diameter handles often have 1ounded o1 four o1 six sides
The investment in the standa1d, microsurgical or a combi-
 to permit convenient rotation o1 turning of the handle while
nation of ophthalmic instrumentation varies with theil pre-
grasping the instrument. Instruments that are flat o1 expand
 ssu n s a  j se 
in only one direction, like corneoscleral scissors o1 the dif-
the coineoscleral and conjunctival scissors, and needle
ferent thumb forceps, have handles that are flat o1 selrated
holders; these instruments should be the best available.
for grasping with the fingers and limited to no rotation.
If microsurgical instruments are selected, tying forceps rather
To facilitate grasping and manipulation of these small
Surgical instrumentation
instruments without slipping the handles are usually
Ophthalmic surgical instruments
selrated, knurled or six-sided to accommodate and limit
placement of the fingers on these gripping areas. If these
irregular surfaces are too small, the grasp of the instrument
specific tasks and functions. As a result, a considerable
may be less than secure. If these selrated areas are too large.
choice of standard and microsurgical ophthalmic instr
the large finger placement area may actually limit manipula
ments is available. A certain number of these instruments
tion and even snag sutures during tying. All ophthalmic
are essential and recommended for different small and large
instruments are constructed from high-quality stainless steel
animal ophthalmic surgeries. For convenience, instruments
01 now more often from titanium, with dull surfaces to
fo1 the different ophthalmic surgical procedures are listed
minimize light reflections.
later in the chapter. They include:
Thumb forceps and scissois for coineal and intraocular
procedures are usually hinged with different mechanisms to
Table 1.2
- instruments for orbital surgeries
1
facilitate their opening. The three most common hinges
Table 1.3 - instruments for eyelid surgeries
·
include the X-hinge, the vertical pin hinge, and the bar hinge
Table 1.4
 - instruments for conjunctival and coineal
(Fig. 1.1). The common X-hinge for scisso blades o1 needle
surgeries
pue 'sud io smas lus aq paot ansn si sdn ipio
Table 1.5 - instruments for intraocular and cataract
often the handles converge to become spring mechanisms
surgeries
that maintain the instrument in an open position. With verti-
·
Box 1.1 - instruments for vitreoretinal surgeries.
cal pin hinges, as in iris scissors, the hinge pin is deformed as
These instruments are presented in further detail.
the scissor blade is closed to act as a spring device to open the
 blades upon release. The bar hinge is typical of most thumb
Eyelid specula
forceps, and consists of the junction of the base of both
handles; tension of these handles closes the forceps blades
a  s ae i o  a  a
and release results in the forceps tips opening. All of these
exposure of the conjunctiva, coinea, and globe. The ideal
hinges are very delicate and, if extended too far, can easily
eyelid speculum should be strong enough to retract the eye-
bend or break.
lids to the maximal amount possible, but sufficiently light-
Most of the standard and microsurgical ophthalmic instrl-
a e 1ao an o ass   on n
ments are designed for a single purpose. Hence, the standard
The most versatile eyelid speculum for small animals is the
      
wire type. For most breeds of dogs and cats, the Barraquel
several instruments. Occasionally, these instruments
are
wi1e speculum is preferred with 14 mm blades and an over-
designed to perform two o1 more functions. One example
 all length of 40 mm (Fig. 1.2). The pediatric size Barraquer
is the tying thumb forceps. Its tip usually includes teeth
speculum may be useful in young and smaller animals; its
(1 x 2) which permit grasping of the cornea and/or conjunc-
blades are 11 mm and overall length is 34 mm.
tiva. Just proximal to its tip is a flat tying platform to grasp
   e s     
sutures during tying and construction of knots. These multi-
may be necessary. Eyelid specula, such as the Guyton-Park
ple purpose forceps are usually heavily used during corneal
o ' s jo n a pe s  )
and intraocular surgical procedures and can easily become
(15 o1 16 mm blades and overall length of 75-82 mm), and
malaligned.
Williams (10 mm blades and overall length of 90 mm) can
 During microsurgery, the tips of the ophthalmic instru-
provide maximum exposure of the palpebral fissure (Fig. 1.3).
ments are often the only parts of these instruments that
Sometimes for the lid speculum to conform to the eyelid and
are visible. In addition, many microsurgical instruments
palpebral curvatures of the horse and cow, the arms of the spec-
possess angled tips to facilitate their use at higher magnifica-
ula are bent slightly. With all eyelid specula, the blades should
tions, and minimize obstruction of the surgical field.
extend beneath the eyelid margins fo1 several millimeters to
adequately retract the eyelids and reduce the possibility of
dislodgement. In some species, like the avian species, the palpe-
O-9 n o- as e pue 's A aie sa p snss l
 silk suture is placed in each eyelid to keep the lids open.
A
B
c
Fig. 1.1 The different hinge mechanisms used for ophthalmic instruments:
Fig. 1.2 The pediatric and adult size wire eyelid specula by Barraquer. These
(A) X-type; (B) vertical pin; (C bar hinge
inexpensive lid specula are the most versatile and durable for small animals.
Ophthalmic surgical instruments
(Table 1.1). In selecting these tissue forceps, one should
handle them individually and use those forceps that feel'
the most comfortable.
Eyelid/chalazion forceps
Highly specialized forceps have been developed fo1 entro-
pion and chalazion surgery. The chalazion forceps have an
open and a solid plate on the fellow tips (Fig. 1.5). These
 aie s i a so io ie ia a  sd
versatile as they can be inserted in the palpebral fissure with
Fig. 1.3 The Williams eyelid speculum is reserved for large breeds of dogs
the oval in either the vertical o1 horizontal axis. With the
and large animals to retract the eyelids.
forceps clamped to the eyelid, a small lid tumor or chala-
zion can be excised while pressure from the special plates
maintains hemostasis and exact positioning of the eyelid
Tissue forceps
margins and mass.
The different types of ocular tissue have resulted in the
development of a large selection of tissue forceps with
Conjunctival forceps
- s s a  san as   
dles, springs, and bar hinge (Fig. 1.4). The handles of these
 Forceps to manipulate the bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva
forceps are usually flat with serrations or knurling on the
    r   s
with 1 x 2 teeth are most useful to grasp the conjunctiva
ally have angled tips, and are about two-thirds the total
during most manipulations. Excessive tension of the con-
length of standard ophthalmic instruments. The arms of
junctival tissues with the small tips will often create small
these forceps are hinged at the base, and this hinge provides
tears or ‘button-holes' of the conjunctival mucosa. These
sufficient tension to maintain the tips about 5-10 mm
small breaks in the conjunctival mucosal surface are not
apart. Upon digital compression, the tissue forceps tips
usually important, but may be significant in certain grafting
should completely and perfectly contact each other. The tips
procedures. The tips of the von Graefe tissue forceps possess
 p  r  e a sa  jo
10-14 fine teeth and generally accommodate considerable
surgeon's view during surgery.
tension of the conjunctival mucosa or the leading edge of
The major difference of the ophthalmic tissue forceps
the nictitans before tearing is evident (Fig. 1.6). Unfortu-
is their tips, which have highly specialized indications
nately, the von Graefe tips are too large for miciosurgical
lated with serrated tips, devoid of any teeth; however, slip-
page of the tips from the mucosa is likely.
Bar hinge
Corneal, limbal, and scleral forceps
The coinea, sclera, and limbus represent the fibrous tunics
Springs
of the globe and are remarkably tough tissues to incise,
manipulate, and suture. As a result, the tips of the coineal
Jo ad aos ssssod aeia sdg ias 
teeth. Generally the tips consist of either splay-tooth
O1
dog-tooth designs. These types of tips successfully grasp
and hold these tissues. Modifications of these tips, such as
the closed-cups (von Mandach forceps) and open-cups
Handles
(Pierse type), are less traumatic to the cornea, but permit
limited lateral slippage.
Suture and tying forceps
Special forceps have been developed to facilitate suture
manipulation and tying during microsurgery. The tying of
Shafts
small diameter sutures requires suture tying forceps but not
the standard or microsurgery needle holder which allows 
these very small diameter sutures to easily slip within the
X-hinge
 needle holder jaws. The surgeon's fingers cannot be used as
the sutures are too small and often too short. The standard
lips
suture-tying forceps is either the straight or curved model with
1 x 2 teeth o1 without teeth. The smooth platforms of both
Fig. 1.4 Components of ophthalmic forceps include: tips, shaft, handles,
tips have rounded edges to accommodate the sutures and pre-
 springs and bar/x-hinge.
vent any suture breakage or etching (Fig. 1.7). The platforms
Surgical instrumentation
 Table 1.1 Tips of tissue forceps used for corneal and intraocular surgery
Tip design
Designated
Appearance
Tip design
Designated
Appearance
tissue(s) or use
tissue(s) or use
Von Graefe
 Conjunctiva/nictitans
ajnsdes sua7 
 Extra ca psular
 Grasp/tear anterior
lens capsule
1 x 2 teeth
 Cornea/conjunctiva
Splay
Intra ca psular
Grasp/hold anterior
 ajnsde sual
Dog-toothed 
Anterior capsulorhexis
 Colibri style tip 
Cornea/conjunctiva
Intraocular
Grasp/remove lens 
uonelnbue
capsule and fragments 
 Serrations
Cornea/conjunctiva
Combination 1 x
 Cornea/conjunctiva 
2 teeth tying 
 and tying sutures
 platform 
 Tying platforms
 Tying small sutures
must meet perfectly flush to permit suture manipulation and
grasp during tying. These forceps are designed for the very
small size ophthalmic sutures (6-0 to 12-0). The addition of
1 × 2 teeth to the tip of the Harm-type suture-tying forceps
permits these forceps to both grasp corneal or conjunctival
Fig. 1.5 The Francis chalazion (top) and Desmarres entropion (bottom)
sdaoy ayae aul 'sdaoy (woo) e pue (do) uoexy aae g'l d
forceps have specialized tips consisting of an oval to round ring and a solid
have wide jaws with multiple fine teeth that can grasp the eyelid and 
oval to circular tip. The ring base is used to surround the surgical site, and 
conjunctiva without tearing. The cilia forceps have smooth surface jaws that
the solid base is used to protect deeper tissues including the eye.
 permit grasping of fine cilia.
Ophthalmic surgical instruments
surgery in the dog and cat. Intracapsular lens forceps are
used to grasp and hold the anterior lens capsule during
Iemoval of the entire lens with its capsules (see Table 1.1).
The forceps have slender shafts and tips to enter the anterio1
chamber and pupil. The shafts are also curved or angled to
traverse the pupil and facilitate grasping of the anterior lens
capsule. Within the tip is a 2.0-2.5 mm cup to grasp, but
not tear, the central anterior lens capsule.
q 'is  e  a s ra a
their tips possess either four or five, or five or six, fine teeth
Fig. 1.7 Tying forceps have shafts with smooth platforms to provide flat
-de sual ioaiue au jo uood jeuan e ieai pue dsei o
surfaces to grasp fine suture material during tying. Some tying forceps have
combination shafts with distal 1 × 2 teeth to grasp tissues, and a more 
       r'i   
proximal smooth tying platform to grasp sutures. Top: O'Gawa-Castroviejo
capsule, the remainder of the lens cortex and nucleus are
tying forceps; bottom: Castroviejo suturing forceps.
Expressed o1 removed by phacoemulsification.
Phacoemulsification has largely replaced the standard
tissues as well as assist in the tying of sutures, and decreases
extracapsula1 cataract techniques in most animal species in
the time and effort during wound apposition.
most countries, and circular tearing of the anterior capsule
A unique design, the Colibri style, has been used with
sufficiently large to accommodate the insertion of an intra
many tissue forceps to incorporate a tying platform. Often
ocular lens (IOL) has become standard. The most frequently
these Colibri-type forceps, with a characteristic angled shaft,
used forceps for continuous anterio1 capsulectomy o1 capsu-
have tips with teeth to assist in the grasping of corneal and
lorhexis is the Utrata instrument. The Utrata forceps has val-
  m s s (i ) sns 
 d n as s a e s  
d a r a a s d n  a n no
from the two tips to grasp the anterior lens capsule. For
can be used as smooth forceps.
additional information on the Utrata forceps, see Chapter 11
on surgery of the lens and cataract.
Iris forceps
The animal iris and ciliary body tissues are highly friable
Intraocular lens instrumentation
and vascular. Excessive traction with tissue forceps on the
With the advent of intraocular lenses (IOLs) in humans and
iris results in frequent tearing and hemorrhage. Iris forceps
animals, special IOL forceps shaped as either tissue forceps
s   a s   n l  
 pas are sari asau adoiaaap uaaq a siosis i
very small teeth. To facilitate anterior chamber manipula-
grasp the IOL or its haptic loop, and facilitate the placement
tions, the tips and shafts of these forceps are quite slender
of the IOL within the capsular bag o1 in the posterior cham-
 and delicate.
 i aui aep iou op sd asau ie suodui s il ia
its surface during insertion. Both hard (polymethylmetha-
Anterior lens capsule forceps
crylate (PMMA) and acrylic) and foldable (silicone and
hydrogel) [OLs have been available fo1 the dog fo1 several
B piou pue ds oi padoap uaaq aey sda liads
years, but only recently for the horse and cat.
grasp and tear the anterior lens capsule during cataract
Several IOL instnuments have been developed to position
and manipulate IOLs within the anterio1 chamber, the poste-
nio1 chamber, and the capsular bag. Most IOLs in the dog are
placed in the capsular bag after all cataractous material has
been removed. Placement of the IOL usually requires a
special forceps; another instrument is used to rotate or dial
the IOL into its final position. The IOL hook and lens manip-
ulator possess different tips, with single or forked prongs.
that can push the IOL haptics into the final position.
With the introduction of the 1ecent soft o1 foldable IOLs
111
forceps to fold or roll the IOL during insertion through the
corneal incision and into the capsular bag. or an injecto1
 Or insertor were introduced. Each foldable IOL has a specific
instrument to insert that particular type of IOL.
HOSKIN
Intraocular forceps
33
and remove tissues or foreign bodies within the anterior
Fig. 1.8 The distinctive Colibri forceps have a characteristic angled shaft.
chamber,
 posterior chamber, and within the vitreous
yi yaaan z x 1 ww s'o - sdaoy uonexy leauion janbeueg-uewnoui :doi
(Fig. 1.9). The intraocular forceps have 1.5-2.0 mm jaws
a 6 mm tying platform; middle: Troutman-Barraquer corneal fixation 
forceps - 0.5 mm 1 × 2 teeth; bottom: Pierse type Colibri forceps (0.03 mm 
and long shafts. The shafts are also small in diameter (20 g
Pierse type tips).
needle diameter; 0.89 mm) to accommodate insertion into
Surgical instrumentation
Fig. 1.9 The intraocular forceps is designed to be
inserted through a very small opening. Insert
shows the different available tip types.
the diffrent compartments of the globe. The Rappazzo
both. The handles are ribbon style, ring type, or flat serated
    r  's  sn r
spring-type handles; the latte1 types are more expensive. My
45° angulation. The Storz intraocula1 forceps has 1.5 mm
preference is the versatile Steven's tenotomy scissors with
cup-shaped oval jaws. Both of these intraocular forceps are
slightly curved, blunt-tipped blades. Conjunctival scissors
used in animals to grasp and remove portions of the ante-
with blunt tips tend to reduce the likelihood of producing
nio1 lens capsule and portions of the lens cortex and nucleus.
button-holes' o1 small full-thickness defects in the bulbar
conjunctiva during preparation of conjunctival flaps.
 These scissors may also be used to cut sutures. As most
Scissors
types of ophthalmic suture are very small, one pair of scis-
Because of the different ocular tissues, several specific types
sors within each surgical pack just to cut sutures is recom-
of scissors have been developed. No single scissors can per-
mended. The scissors to cut sutures often have pointed
foim adequately on the wide range of ocular tissues that one
- o pausus as aq uo  'sdn deu pu
commonly confronts. As a result, specific-use scissors have
junctival tissue scissois.
been designed for the conjunctiva, cornea, coineosclera, inis,
and intraocula1 tissues. Coineal and coineoscleral scisso1s
are available as either standard size or microsurgical scissors.
Corneal scissors
The overall length of the scissors' ring handles is about 100-
Coineal scissors are available as either standard size O1
110 mm, and the blades are about 18-20 mm long.
- aie seaoo ien pue op aseag sadn eins
cult to cut, these scissors should be of high quality to ensure
Conjunctival scissors
precise incisions and minimal tissue trauma. Periodic sharp-
ening of these scissors may ensure long-term use. A large
Conjunctival scissors include tenotomy, strabismus, eye,
selection of coineal scissors is available (Fig. 1.11). These
conjunctival, and utility types, and are available with either
straight or curved tips (Fig. 1.10). The tips are also varied
scissors can be used as a universal type or as pairs (right
and lefft). The mirror-image pair types of corneal scissors
with both sharp (pointed) and blunt, o1 a combination of
complement each other, and are used to extend coineal inci-
sions in opposite directions. The standard scissors range in
total length from about 100 to 120 mm long.
Fig. 1.10 Selected scissors for conjunctival tissues with either straight or
Fig. 1.11 Castroviejo corneal section scissors (right and left) for keratectomy
curved blades with sharp or blunt tips. Top: Knapp straight strabismus 
and keratoplasty. These scissors with curved blades are to cut the cornea or
scissors; middle: Steven's straight tenotomy scissors; bottom: Steven's curved
limbus; the lower blade is slightly longer to retain the scissors within the
tenotomy scissors.
 anterior chamber during cutting.
Ophthalmic surgical instruments
Microsurgical coineal scissors are about 90 mm long. The
Iris scissors
tips may be straight, slightly curved, o1 angled. Both tips
The animal inis is a very ffiable and vascula1 tissue, which
s si  d o a no ' pa go aq 
upon incision will often hemorrhage extensively. As a result,
beneath the coinea can be 0.5-1.0 mm longer to maintain
incision of the iris often necessitates cautery before o1 after
the scissor tip within the anterior chamber as multiple cuts
cutting to seal these vessels. Iris scissors are small and deli-
are perfoimed. Corneal scissors used for keratoplasty possess
cate, and are designed to cut the iris on a flat surface. As
tips that are quite curved (5 mm radius) and short as the
these scissors must be very sharp, their use should be limited
  s r    
aq sa a soss s sss r ao h oin
6-8 mm diamete1. Coineal scissois used at the limbus have
Vannas, DeWecke1, and Barraquel, as well as the traditional
       
O1
ophthalmic scissors with ring o1 curled handles (Fig. 1.13).
obliquely. For most coineal incisions, vertical rather than
Their tips are usually pointed and slightly angled. The
oblique incisions are preferred, unless the incision is close
specialized Vannas and Barraquer iris scissors are quite small
to the limbus. To achieve a vertical cut, the lower blade of
(54 mm long): the DeWecker iris scissors are 114 mm long.
the coineal scissors is hinged to contact the inside of the
They can be easily inserted into the anterior chamber to per-
concavity of the upper blade.
form a dorsal iridectomy o1 sphincterotomy. Because of the
increased vascularity of most animal basal inides, incision/
Corneoscleral or corneal section cataract scissors
excision of the inis is usually performed with the involved
Corneoscleral scissors are the larger coineal scissors that are
part of the structure extended from the anterior chamber
used at the limbus. Corneoscleral scissors, like coineal scis-
 OI avoiding the basal iris. Limited electrocautery may be nec-
soIs, are available as either standard o1 microsurgical types
essary to obtain complete hemostasis after incision of the
(Fig. 1.12). These scissors are usually self-opening with the
iris and before repositioning into the anterior chamber.
flexible handles functioning
as springs
and loosely
connected at their ends. Some of these types of scissors have
Intraocular scissors
one rigid handle and the opposite flexible handle to main-
With efinement of intraocular surgical techniques, smallscis-
-o o ls sod do e  sa sss a 
so1s were developed to cut intraocular tissues often through
els look like regular scissors with straight handles.
small corneal, limbal, or scleral incisions, or the pupil. There
Standard coineoscleral scissors are about 100-120 mm
long, and have slightly angled and curved tips. The tips
are two basic types: 1) standard ophthalmic scissors that can
be inserted through a complete corneal o1 corneoscleral inci-
are about 12-20 mm long and often the bottom blade is
0.5-1.5 mm longer to maintain the tip within the anterior
sion with 10-15 mm long and very slender blades; and 2)
intraocular scissors constructed like the intraocular forceps
chamber duning repeated cuts of the limbus. In most co1-
with a shaft diameter of about 1.0 mm (the outside diameter
neoscleral o1 cataract section scissors the lower blade cuts
 of a 20 g hypodermic needle). The intraocular scissors' han-
against the convex curve of the upper blade, producing an
- a no 'adi azaas-nae 'ad suds aq A sa
oblique cut.
tional rigid curled handles (Fig. 1.14). The tips are usually
These scissors are used to cut the coinea, limbus, and
ad aue e all no siosss enai e asop pue aud
sclera, to perform keratoplasty, and often in animals to enter
The blades of scissois inserted through 2 o1 3 mm coineal o1
the anterio1 chamber during cataract surgery. For maximum
limbal incisions range from 1 to 3 mm long.
flexibility. a slightly angled curved right and left pai1 of
More recently a subtype of intraocular scissors has been
coineal section scissors is recommended. As most cataract
developed to insert through limbal o1 coineal incisions
surgery in animals uses a clear coineal incision for entry into
      an  
the anterior chamber, these scissors should be of high
lotomy scissors possess either straight o1 slightly angled
quality for maximum durability.
Fig. 1.12 Castroviejo corneal section cataract scissors (right and left) for
Fig. 1.13 Special scissors for cutting the iris. Top: Banaquer iris scissors
'sngwil no eauon Aayduad aun ie ageuo jouaue aun oui Anua
bottom: McPherson-Vannas curved iris scissors.
Surgical instrumentation
Fig. 1.14 Intraocular scissors: Storz intraoculan
scissors; the straight blades are 3.0 mm long and 
pointed. lnsert: close-up of the cutting blades
pointed blades of 5-11 mm long. The tips of these scisso1s
chopper fo1 medium and large dogs (4 mm tip). Fo1 safety.
e on p uoy i pe dus  a isn
-o ao oi snnu an o paasi si d sdo an
capsulotomies or capsulectomies.
thickness. Some canine cataract cortices and nuclei are too
hard to 'chop' or possess insufficient room for the instrument
Instruments used during phacoemulsification
to pass between the anterior lens capsule and adjacent cortex,
and are not amenable to this technique. Additional infoima-
When phacoemulsification was first introduced in the 1970s
tion on chop techniques is found in Chapter 11.
by Kelman, the phaco surgery involved one larger coineoscl-
eral incision for the phaco handpiece (which provided the
Knives
ultrasonic energy and aspiration) and a separate smaller
incision about 90° to the larger incision to insert the infu-
The dog and cat coinea, limbus, and sclera are very tough
sion needle (balanced salt solution fo1 the anterio1 chamber
tissues, and will dull most stainless steel knives after only a
shou ue uo aoq e o Ae Aq papid sem
few incisions. As a result, disposable blades are usually
employed to ensure a sharp and atraumatic incision. The
e      o i 
Beaver o1 BD Nos 6400, 6500, and 6700 microsurgical
humor; 2) infusion to regulate the amount of irrigating
blades (Bectin, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes,
solution delivered to the phaco site; and 3) phaco (ultra-
NI) are the most often used (Fig. 1.15). The Beaver No.
sonic) energy to fragment and break down the lens material
6400 blade with the traditional shape is used to incise the
through a single incision.
coinea, limbus, and sclera. As an alternative, the BeaveI
New instrments (quick chopper, nucleus segmenter, pre-
No. 6700 blade has a more pointed tip and is used for the
chopper, etc.) have now been developed to assist phacoe-
same incisions. The Beaver No. 6500 blade is pointed and
mulsification by stabilizing as well as chopping (incise and
used to incise the full-thickness of the coinea, limbus, and
divide) the hard lens nucleus, and these instruments are
sclera. The Beaver keratomes are preferred to incise the coI-
generally inserted through a second smaller coineal incision,
nea and the anterior lens capsule during cataract surgeries
returning to the bimanual phacoemulsification of the
in small animals. This blade is arrow-shaped, and as it is
1970s. They are also inserted into the lens nucleus to lift
pushed through the coinea o1 limbus, both of its sides incise
as well as support lens fragments toward the phaco tip fo1
the full-thickness coineal, limbal o1 scleral tissues. The inci-
fragmentation. An example is the Steinert nuclear chopping
sions tend to self-seal, but in animals they are often apposed
by sutures.
end (1.5 mm) sharpened on its inner edge. This creates the
The larger Bard-Parker'M Nos 11 (pointed) and 15 scalpel
chop of the nucleus while maintaining contact of the chop-
blades and handle are not designed as microsurgical instrl-
per with the nucleus; deep penetration of the nucleus is
ments. They ale feserved fo1 eyelid and orbital surgeries in
avoided, thus preventing posterior capsule penetration.
both small and large animals.
Another intralens instrument is similar to a wire hook
Warren (see Further reading) modified the Nagahara tech-
nique used in humans for the dog. This procedure uses the
phaco tip to impale and, with high vacuum, hold the lens
nucleus while a chopper is hooked at the lens equator and
pulled centrally, splitting the nucleus along its natural cleav-
HFAVIE
age planes. By dividing the nucleus into quadrants or smal-
ler parts using the chop technique, and combined with the
phacoemulsification ‘divide and conquer technique, phaco
time and energy are significantly reduced, as is corneal
endothelial cell damage.
Since the dog's lens is larger than the human, Warren
Fig. 1.15 Beaver" or BD microsurgical blades (Bectin, Dickinson and 
recommends using the human instrument for small dogs
Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ): Left: top, No. 6400; middle, No. 6500. Right:
(1-2 mm tip) and has modified the Chang combination
top, No. 6700; middle, keratome. Bottom: Beaver or BD scalpel handle.
Ophthalmic surgical instruments
Diamond knives were introduced several years ago, as a
Spatulas/retractors/loops
Ieusable scalpel blade and handle. This knife is used for co1-
neal, limbal, and scleral incisions. A micrometer has been
These instruments are essential for specific functions dul-
added to some types of diamond knives to control the
ing intraocular surgery. They include the cyclodialysis spat-
length of the blade, and to perform corneal refractive sul-
ula, inis and extraocular muscle hooks, and the lens loop.
gery. The diamond blade shape ranges from an angle, to
The cyclodialysis spatula is used bluntly to create a space
spear-like to 1ounded, and is 1.0-3.0 mm wide. These
between the sclera and the underlying iris and ciliary body
high-cost blades are very sharp, and must be carefully used,
fo1 the treatment of glaucoma (Fig. 1.17). This instrument
cleaned, and stored.
is about 120-140 mm long with a 1ound to square selrated
or knurled handle. Its tip is about 0.5-1.0 mm wide and
Although a corneal dissector and restricted depth knife are
10-15 mm long with a blunt, rounded, or sharp end. This
not scalpel blades per se, these instruments are used to
bluntly separate the corneal stromal layers. The corneal
same design has also been incorporated into a cannula. This
instrument can also be used to manipulate the iris, lens cap-
separators, like the Martinez and Gill corneal dissecto1
knives, are used to dissect the different layers of the coineal
sules, and vitreous.
 The iris hook is designed to retract the pupillary aspects of
as aap aissd jo i  aa ai e 
the iris. These hooks are about 120-140 mm long, and are
aration of the coinea and coineal penetration.
constructed of either stainless steel or a nylon-like material
(Delrin). These hook tips have a 1-3 mm curved end that
Needle holders
is 1-4 mm wide and dull. Sharp o1 pointed inis hooks are
Needle holders are very important in ophthalmic surgery, as
not recommended as tearing of the dog and cat iris will usu-
ally cause hemorrhage.
considerable time is consumed during the apposition of su1-
gical incisions. Needle holders are available as either the
The muscle or strabismus hook is similar to the iris hooks.
standard models or the smaller microsurgical
1types
only the tip is much larger (Fig. 1.18). The instrument tip is
angulated at 90° to facilitate placement under the extraocular
(Fig. 1.16). Their tips are also divided into delicate, fine,
medium, and heavy duty. The standard size needle holders
muscles. These instruments are also used to rotate the globe.
are about 120-130 mm long, and the microsurgical types
 The lens loop is another vital instrument for lens and cata-
are about 100 mm long. The most common shape is similar
ract removal in small animals. The lens loop is positioned to
to that of the corneal and corneoscleral scissors with flexible
slide the cataract and lens material from the coineal or co1-
selrated o1 knurled handles which are joined to provide a
neoscleral wound. With its handle shaped like the iris and
spring mechanism that automatically maintains the needle
muscle hooks, the lens loop's tip is designed as a circula1-
holder tips in the open position. Ophthalmic needle holders
to-oval solid spoon or loop (Fig. 1.19). The overall size of
are designed to be held as a pencil.
these tips 1anges from 0.3 to 6 mm wide and 7 to 15 mm
 For general extraocular surgery, the Castroviejo needle
long
holder with flat serrated handles and a lock is often used.
The jaws are about 9 mm long and may be straight or gently
curved. For microsurgery involving the cornea, the Storz 01
Barraquer needle holder with curved jaws and no locks is
preferred. All of the ophthalmic needle holders are designed
for only the small ophthalmic needles and sutures. Large
s   oit   ss  saa
these needle holder's jaws, rendering the instrument useless;
hence, these instruments are not useful for tying the very
fine ophthalmic sutures (special tying forceps are used
instead). The straight to curved tips are 7-16 mm long.
and their surfaces may be smooth or serrated.
Fig. 1.17 Top: Two different cyclodialysis spatulas used for glaucoma and 
lens surgeries. The flat blade should be about 10 mm long and 1 mm wide,
and has diferent angulations. Bottom: Cyclodialysis spatula combined with a
Gnnula for injection into the anterior chamber.
Fig. 1.18 The strabismus or muscle hook is placed under the extraocular
muscle to facilitate identification of the insertions as well as rotate the globe.
Fig. 1.16 Top: Smaller microsurgical needle holder (made of titanium and
Top: Von Graefe strabismus hook; bottom: Jameson muscle hook has a 6 mm
109 mm long) with no lock and curved 9 mm fine jaws. Bottom: Standard 
hook with a 2 mm bulbous tip and a flat serrated handle. The tip may also be
Castroviejo needle holder (130 mm long) with lock and curved 9 mm jaws.
used for scleral depression during examination of the peripheral fundus
 Surgical instrumentation
Fig. 1.19 The lens loop is used to facilitate sliding the lens from the eye.
The loop may be different sizes and shapes. Top: New Orleans lens spoon
Suol ww tel e uo uoods paun Apuois huol ww tl × apm ww e e sey
flat serrated handle; bottom: Gills-Welsh modified lens loop with a 6 x
7 mm loop.
Cannulas for intraocular injections
Special cannulas are necessary for coineal and intraocular
surgery. With a reusable silicone bulb or anterior chamber
irrigator and cannula, lactated Ringel's or saline solution is
occasionally sprayed on the corneal and conjunctival sul-
Fig. 1.21 Ophthalmic cannulas may vary in diameter, length, shape, and 
faces to provide essential moisture (Fig. 1.20). These cannu-
purpose. Top: Air injection cannula (27 g); middle: Castroviejo cyclodialysis
las range in size from 19 to 27 g. This same system is also
Gnnula (21 g); bottom: Bracken anterior chamber cannula. The latter two 
used to Ie-inflate the anterior chamber with ai1 o1 fluids
Gannulas are used to inject solutions; for viscoelastics larger bore (18-19 g)
once the coineal or limbal surgical wound has been
needles are necessary.
apposed (Fig. 1.21). The cannulas may also be shaped as
cyclodialysis spatulas, providing for two functions. Special
cannulas to inject air or solutions have specially constructed
9
ends, such as olive tips, side ports, and hooks. To inject the
more viscid viscoelastic solutions, a slightly larger diameter
cannula may be necessary.
Calipers
During corneal, transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation, cyclo-
cryothermy, intraocular surgenies, intravitreal injections, and
retinal detachment surgeries, distances between intraocular
tissues and the exact size of tissues are very important.
mmniimui
Several types of caliper are available that can be sterilized
and should be part of the standard surgery instrument pack.
These instruments permit measurements up to 20 mm in
1 mm o1 0.5 mm increments. The Jameson and Castroviejo
calipers are the most frequently used (Fig. 1.22)
Fig. 1.22 Calipers for measurements during corneal and ocular surgeries.
Top: Castroviejo; bottom: Jameson.
Rings
    e   o  
include the external Flieringa and modified stainless steel
single and double rings, and fo1 intraocular use, the new
capsular rings to insert within the capsular bag to expand
the equatorial capsule. While the human elliptical cornea
is about 7 x 8 mm in diameter, dog and cat corneas are con-
siderably larger (dog: 16 x 15 mm; cat: 17 x 16 mm).
Larger Flieringa rings, which are fortunately available, must
ae iaiae uu z-o aun sie pue sop ioy pas a
recommended.
 Flieringa rings are attached around the cornea or limbus
with four to six non-absorbable simple interrupted sutures
to prevent globe and anterior chamber collapse as during
Fig. 1.20 Silicone bulb and cyclodialysis cannula to irrigate the anterior
keratoplasty. These rings are removed once the corneal
chamber with lactated Ringer's solution, balanced salt solution or saline.
wound has been apposed.
10
Surgical instruments for ophthalmic surgeries
Capsula1 tension rings have been introduced recently to
Table 1.2 General surgical instruments for orbital surgeries
expand the capsular bag after phacoemulsification and to
facilitate insertion of an IOL. U-shaped, capsular tension
 Instrument
Purpose
rings are available in 12.5, 13.5 and 14.5 mm diameters
for the dog.
 Allis tisue forceps
 Hold and position tissues 
 Bard-Parker'" handle and blades
Incise the eyelids
Adaptations for large animals and special
 Bishop-Harmon forceps, 
 Grasp the conjunctiva and nictitans
species ophthalmic surgeries
toothed 
Cannula: 19 g 
Irrigation of the external eye
As the veterinary ophthalmologist may be confronted with
Enucleation scissors, large, curved
Incise the optic nerve
animal species that range in size from an elephant to a
 Eyelid speculum, wire
 Retract the lids and maintain the
the size of the patient's eye and sometimes available anes-
palpebral fissure
thesia. Fortunately, the elephant eye is similar in size to
Wet field or disposable cautery
 Hemostasis
the horse, but fo1 the parakeet even a 25 o1 27 g needle is
very large.
Jameson muscle hook
 Manipulate the extraocular muscles
 Fo1 the larger animal species, the standard soft tissues sur-
 Metzenbaum scissors, medium
Incise and separate the orbital tissues 
gical instruments are used for orbital and eyelid surgeries.
For conjunctival grafts, corneal and intraocular surgeries,
 Mosquito forceps (2 curved, 
 Grasp tissues and for hemostasis
2 straight)
either the standard ophthalmic o1 microsurgical instruments
are used. If the operating microscope is used, microsurgical
 Needle holder, medium 
 Grasp and manipulate needle
ophthalmic instruments are 1ecommended. Needle type
 Saline cup, small
 Hold saline for moistening of tissues 
and suture selection are identical for all species.
 Silicone bulb for irrigation 
Ilrrigate the external eye
Surgical instruments for ophthalmic surgeries
Tenotomy scissors, curved
 Incise the conjunctiva and nictitans 
Towel clamps (4 large, 4 small)
 Maintain the surgical drapes
As ophthalmic surgeries are generally confined to certain
ocular tissues, the development of specific surgical packs is
Iecommended. Surgical packs are designed to limit the
Straight Mayo scissors, usually 6" (152 mm) long, are indi-
r  s e r  ss o 
the number of times an instrument requires cleansing. auto-
cated fo1 cutting sutures, especially sutures larger than 4-0.
claving, and non-surgical manipulations. Highly specialized
A good quality Mayo-Hegar needle holder is excellent fo1
 ophthalmic instruments are best individually wrapped and
needles and suture sizes (4-0 to 2-0) that are used for the
 sterilized, and used only when necessary.
 pasn a ae sdar nss uospv pue us au
orbital, eyelid, and conjunctival tissues, but the smaller
Recommended instruments
ophthalmic fixation forceps may be less traumatic fo1 these
for orbital surgeries
tissues. The Bard-Parker'M scalpel handle, with the Nos 10
and 15 surgical blades, is used to incise orbital and eyelid
Although the majority of extraocular surgical procedures can
tissues in small and large animals. The Beaver knife handle
be performed with general soft tissue instruments, the
with several types of surgical blade (usually the Nos 6400
investment in ophthalmic surgical instruments will not only
and 6500 microsurgical blades) is the most common knife
rapidly repay the surgeon the initial purchase costs, but also
fo1 the ocular tissues of animals.
provide greater success rates for all patients. General soft tis-
sue surgical instruments are used for most orbital surgical
A few general surgical instruments are usually part of any
corneal or intraocular surgical instrument pack. At least four
procedures and some of the more extensive eyelid surgeries
small (bulldog) towel clamps, and four larger towel clamps,
(Table 1.2). Orbital surgery may also 1equire some orthope-
dic instruments to transect and reappose the zygomatic arch
small thumb foiceps, small curved Metzenbaum scissois,
and a small needle holder are used initially to improve
in many animal species. Small Allis tissue forceps can be
exposure of the coinea and globe, and to perform the lateral
used to grasp and retract the orbital and eyelid tissues. The
canthotomy. The microsurgical instruments should not be
small Halsted mosquito forceps with straight and curved
used fo1 the eyelids; these large tissues will eventually bend
jaws are used for hemostasis by control of point bleeders,
and disable these delicate instruments.
especially of the orbit, eyelids, and conjunctivas. The larger
Kelly and Crile hemostatic forceps with either straight o1
curved jaws permit grasping of larger areas of tissue and
Recommended instruments for eyelid
are especially useful for orbital surgery. The curved Metzen-
and conjunctival surgeries
baum scissors, especially the smaller types, are indicated
fo1 most of the delicate orbital and eyelid tissue dissections.
The Metzenbaum scissors should not be used to cut sutures
can be performed with general surgical instrumentation, sey.
The heavy-duty Mayo dissecting scissors are useful fo1 cut
eral instruments have been developed for specific lid surgi-
ting the dense connective tissues of the orbit in large dogs.
cal manipulations. As a result, a special eyelid surgery pack
Surgical instrumentation
 Table 1.3 Surgical instruments for eyelid surgeries
 Table 1.4 Surgical instruments for conjunctival and corneal
surgeries
Instrument
Purpose
Instrument
Purpose
Towel forceps (4 large, 4
 Secure the drapes to the patient
 small)
Instruments for both surgeries
Wire eyelid speculum
Retract the lids and expose the
Towel clamps (8)
 Secure surgical drapes
(Barraquer)
 conjunctiva/nictitans
Small curved Mayo scissors (Mayo/
Lateral canthotomy
 Small curved Mayo scissors
 Perform lateral canthotomy
Metzenbaum)
(unequaziawl/onew)
 Stainless steel cup
 Hold saline/lactated Ringer's
 Stainless steel cup 
 Hold saline/lactated Ringer's solution for
solution
ocular irrigation
 Silicone bulb and cannula 
 Periodically moisten the eye
 Silicone bulb and cannula
 Periodically moisten the eye
Wire lid speculum (adult/pediatric:
 Retract eyelid/expose cornea
 Entropion/chalazion 
With an oval-to-round ring and solid
 Barraquer)
forceps
 base plate. Designed to clamp and 
stabilize the lid
 Small needle holder
 Suture lateral canthotomy
Cilia forceps
With smooth tips designed to epilate
Tissue forceps: tooth/smooth
Grasp conjunctiva/cornea
the cilia
(Adson)
 Bishop-Harmon forceps
 Both serrated and 1 × 2 teeth tips.
Beaver'" scalpel handle (Nos 6400
Incise cornea
 Good general tissue forceps
 and 6500 microsurgical blades)
 Lid plate
 Plastic or stainless steel. Holds the lids
 Tenotomy (Steven's) scissors
 Cut conjunctiva/sutures 
taut and protects the cornea from
 Castroviejo needle holder
Use with 5-0 to 10-0 sutures
surgical manipulations
For corneal surgeries
Beaver'" scalpel handle
Use Beaver No. 6400 or 6700
microsurgical blade to incise eyelid
 Corneal section scissors (right/left 
 Cut cornea/limbus/sclera 
(1ed 
 Standard needle holder
 Standard size recommended to
 Martinez or Gill dissector
Bluntly separate corneal
(Castroviejo/Barraquer) 
accommodate the larger needles and 
stromal layers
suture sizes. Some prefer holders with a
lock device
 Calipers 
Operative measurements
 Tenotomy scissors 
 Two different sizes recommended. Blunt
 Cyclodialysis spatula
 Manipulate iris, lens, vitreous
(Steven's) curved/straight 
tips preferred 
 Disposable ophthalmic cautery
 Hemostasis/cut iris
Corneal trephines (5-9 mm)
 For keratoplasty
may be utilized using the standard size ophthalmic surgical
 Microsurgery needle holder
For keratoplasty
instruments (Table 1.3).
and limbal surgeries. The instrumentation for corneal grafts
Recommended instruments
is not extensive but very specific. Because dog and cat corneas
for corneal surgeries
are very tough, coineal scissors and trephines must be very
sharp.
For corneal and intraocular surgery in small animals, a num-
ber of instruments are essential. Often, a combination of
the standard and microsurgical ophthalmic instruments is
Recommended instruments for intraocular
included in a standard surgical pack. The coineal instrument
surgeries and cataract extractions
pack should have a limited number of instruments. Addi-
tional infrequent use but essential ophthalmic instruments
- oq -s  d o s 
are individually packaged and sterilized, and can be used
coma, cataract, and lens 1emoval surgical procedures is sum-
as needed. As the basic pack instruments are repeatedly
marized in Table 1.5. More instruments are necessary for
lens and cataract surgeries than for glaucoma and anterior
cleaned and sterilized, these instruments can be subjected
to considerable wear.
uveal surgical procedures. The selection of these instruments
should serve only as a guide; individual preferences fo1
A list of surgical instruments for a typical coineal surgical
specific instruments, based on shape and size, vary.
modate all of the surgical procedures, except for partial
and full-thickness corneal grafts (keratoplasty) including
Instruments for vitreoretinal surgeries
bulbar and palpebral conjunctival grafts.
, corneoconjunc-
tival and corneoscleral transpositions, superficial and deeper
Current training of veterinary ophthalmologists is simila1 to
keratectomies, partial and full-thickness corneal lacerations,
human ophthalmology, and provides broad exposure to
Iemoval of partial and full-thickness corneal foreign bodies,
animal eye diseases and surgery in all animal species during
12
Instrument care, storage, and sterilization
 Table 1.5 Surgical instruments for intraocular surgery in animals
Box 1.1
 Recommended instruments and materials for
vitreoretinal surgeries*
Instrument
Purpose
Towel clamps (4 large, 4 small)
 Secure surgical drapes
General
 Good quality operating microscope.
 Small curved Mayo scissors
Lateral canthotomy
Viewing system for the posterior segment: Machemer irrigating 
 Saline cup 
 Hold saline/lactated Ringer's
lens, other sew-on ring sets, or non-contact Blov system. A more
 solution
expensive wide-angle system is available. Both systems can be
used in dogs. These systems use indirect ophthalmoscope
 Silicone bulb and cannula (cannula:
 Periodically moisten the eye
principles (which invert the ocular fundus appearance) and may
19 g/25 g)
require an inverter for use.
 Eyelid speculum (adult/pediatric) 
 Retract eyelid/expose cornea 
Vitrectomy system with light-illuminating sources, electrocautery.
and air infusion. Newer units may also have ultrasonic
 Small needle holder
 Suture lateral canthotomy
fragmentation and silicone oil pumps. The vitrectomy unit is
Tissue forceps: toothed/smooth (Adson)
 Grasp conjunctiva/cornea
 usually a guillotine-type cutter on the side of a 20 g blunt tube.
 Tying forceps with teeth
 Grasp cornea/sutures
Instruments
 Beaver scalpel handles (Nos 6400,
Incise cornea/limbus/sclera
Microvitreoretinal (M/vR) blades (20 g)
6500, and 6700 microsurgical blades
High-viscosity infusion tubes (4 mm cannula)
 and keratome)
 Scleral plugs and plug holder
Light pipes
Tenotomy scissors (Steven's)
Cut conjunctiva
 Electrocautery sets
Utility scissors (Steven's tenotomy)
 Cut sutures
Vitreous scissors and forceps
 Corneoscleral scissors (right/left pair)
Incise cornea/limbus/sclera
 Silicone-tipped 20 g needles
 Charles (fluted) needle and handle
Iris scissors
Incise iris
 Laser endocoagulation system
 Extracapsular lens forceps
 Grasp anterior lens capsule
 PFCLs (perfluorocarbons)
Capsulectomy forceps (Utrata)
 Silicone oil (1000-5000 cSt)
 Tear/remove anterior lens 
(capsulorhexis)
alnsden
*Recommended by Vainisi Sl, Wolfer JC 2004 Veterinary Qphthaimoiogy 7:291-306.
Lens loop 
 Slicde lens from eye
 For more information, see Chapter 12.
 Cyclodialysis spatula 
sanssq ane.edas
Muscle hook (Jameson)
 Rotate globe/cataract
surgery
specialized instruments are necessary, and are expensive
 Needle holder (standard/microsurgery)
 Suturing
(Box 1.1). Additional information on these instniments
Other
and thei1 use is available in Chapter 12.
Calipers 
 Operative measurements
Instrument care, storage, and sterilization
 Disposable cautery (sterile)
 Hemostasis/cut iris 
 Intraocular forceps
 Grasp/remove lens capsule/
The investment in a complete and high-quality set of co1-
fragments
neal and intraocular instruments can be considerable. These
 Intraocular scissors
 Cut anterior lens capsule
instruments, if carefully used, cleaned and stored, can last a
very long time. Special instrument trays are available for
Vannas capsulotomy scissors 
 Cut anterior lens capsule
both sterilized instruments ready fo1 use o1 for long-term
Intraocular lens forceps/hook
 Position or dialintraocular lens
storage as non-sterile instruments. All of these instriments
should be maintained in individual compartments within
these trays and not allowed to contact each other. The deli-
a 3-year residency. Further specialization in human ophthal-
cate tips of these instruments should be covered and pro.
mology (often termed fellowships) occurs following their
tected with old nubber or plastic tubing. Fo1 cleaning. the
residencies, and provides physicians with in-depth training
ultrasound cleaner provides the safest and most thorough
in, for instance, coinea, glaucoma, retina, and neuro-oph-
method to remove all blood, tears, and other salt-containing
thalmology. Clinical fellowships have yet not developed in
residues. The ophthalmic instruments should be individu-
ally placed in and removed from the ultrasound unit to
ocular areas or even species.
avoid any damage. Jostling these instruments together will
Vitreoretinal surgeries require additional training for veter-
potentially cause irreversible damage and bend the tips
inary ophthalmologists, and most performing this type of
 and dull the cutting edges. After thorough cleaning, the
surgery have been trained in medical schools. With a limited
instruments should be ai1 dried. Both steam and ethylene
number of veterinary vitreoretinal surgeons available, this
gas are used for ophthalmic instrument sterilization. The
-la l la xa pe mau e siasaidai Ans po ad
flash steam cycle may gradually dull the cutting instruments'
edges.
Surgical instrumentation
 Table 1.6 Characteristics of sutures for animal ophthalmic surgery
Suture type
Suture size
Ocular tissues
Non-absorbable
Nylon (monofilament)
5-0 to 12-0
 Eyelid skin, cornea, sclera 
Silk (braided)
 5-0 to 7-0
 Eyelid skin, conjunctiva, cornea, limbus 
 Polye ster 
5-0 to 7-0
Eyelid skin, limbus
Polypropylene
5-0 to 10-0
 Eyelid skin, cornea
Absorbable
Chromic catgut
2-0 to 4-0
 Subcutaneous tissues, subconjunctival tissues, fascial layers
 Polyglactin 910 (braided and monofilament)
 5-0 to 8-0
 Subconjunctival tissues, cornea, sclera, limbus
5-0 to 7-0
Subcutaneous tissues, subconjunctival tissues, cornea, sclera, limbus
Polydioxanone
5-0 to 7-0
Subcutaneous tissues, subconjunctival tissues, cornea, sclera, limbus
each knot. As these sutures are fairly stiff, suture contact
Ophthalmic sutures and needles
o s   n  a 
 e n    ss s s
The general nule stating that the strength of the suture
parotid duct transposition when these sutures are inserted
ad osie snss uns a e po
with a flamed or blunted end into the duct's lumen to facil-
to ophthalmic sutures. For surgery of the orbit, suture size
itate detection and handling. The Dacron polyester suture is
approximates that of general soft tissue surgery, with 2-0 to
more pliable than the nylon o1 polypropylene, but its knots
5-0 absorbable sutures used for ligation and closure of the
tend to loosen. Buried sutures involving the nictitating
deeper orbital fascial tissues. Skin closure is usually with
membrane may be either absorbable o1 non-absorbable
non-absorbable 3-0 to 5-0 nylon, polypropylene, polyesteI,
depending on the procedure.
Dacron, or silk. For surgery of the eyelids, 3-0 to 5-0 sutures
Absorbable sutures are most frequently used for the dee
are recommended, with the absorbable sutures buried and
pe1 layers of the eyelids, all layers of the conjunctiva and
the skin apposed with non-absorbable 3-0 to 5-0 single
nictitating membrane, and the cornea. Our preference is
internupted sutures. Most conjunctival and corneal sutures
polyglactin (Vicryl; Ethicon, Somerville, NI), a multifila-
are absorbable (to eliminate the need for suture removal),
mentous suture, with strength and resorption rates that
and 5-0 to 8-0 in size to minimize tissue reaction
approximate surgical gut (about 6 weeks). This suture, dyed
The different ophthalmic sutures and their characteristics
violet, is non-antigenic and produces minimal tissue reac-
are listed in Table 1.6. Often the choice of the skin sutures
tion. Uncoated polyglactin is associated with excessive tissue
is personal preference and nearly always the non-absorbable
g  sn sn an o ns  
type. However, in some exotic small animals, skin suture
additional ties are indicated for knot security. Polyglactin
Iemoval may be impractical because of restraint,
and
sutures are stable in septic wounds, and can be used in
absorbable subcutaneous o1 skin sutures are employed. Silk
infected corneas.
skin sutures are usually black, soft and pliable; if suture con-
In general, reverse cutting semicircular needles are recom-
tact with the eye ocurs, s
significant ocular iritation is
mended for the majority of extraocular surgical procedures.
unlikely. Unfortunately, silk sutures are braided and bacteria
 Skin closure generally employs conventional cutting nee-
can penetrate the sutures, hence suture removal should be
dles; the subcutaneous and deeper orbital fascial layers are
performed 10-14 days postoperatively. When nylon 
and
 apposed using spatula and taper needles. Corneal and scleral
polypropylene monofilament are employed for skin sutures,
tissues require reverse cutting needles, and the G-6 semicir-
surgeon and square knots are usually combined to secure
cular needle is the most useful.
 Further reading
Boothe HW: Suture materials, tissue
Gelatt KN, Gelatt IP: Handbook of Small Animal
Kohn R: Textboor of Ophthalmic Plastic and
adhesives, staplers. and ligating clips.
Ophthalmic Surgery. Vol 2: Corneal and
Reconstructive Surgery. Philadelphia, 1988.
In Slatter D. editor: Textbooh of Small
Intraocular Procedures. Oxford. 1995.
lea and Febiger. pp 2-55.
Animal Surgery, ed 3. vol 1.
Pergamon Press. pp 1-14.
Merkley DF. Wagner SD: Surgical instruments.
Philadelphia, 2003. WB Saunders.
Gelatt KN, Gelatt IP: Small Animal Ophthalmic
In Bojrab Ml. editor: Current Techniques in
pp 235-243.
Surgery, Oxford, 2001. Butterworth-
Small Animal Surgery, ed 3. Philadelphia.
Gelatt KN, Gelatt JP: Handbook of Small Animal
Heinemann. pp 1-16.
1990. Lea and Febiger. pp 3-33.
Ophthatlmic Surgery. Vol 1: Extraocular
 Grevan VL: Ophthalmic instrumentation. Vet
Nasisse MP: Principles of microsurgery. Vet Clin
Procedures, Oxford, 1994. Pergamon Press,
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 27:963-986.
North Am Small Anim Pract 27:98-1010.
pp 1-10.
1997.
1997.
Further reading
Smeak DD: Selection and use of currently
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. vol 2. Ames. Warren C: Phaco chop technique for cataract
available suture material. In Bojrab MJ.
2007, Blackwell, pp 563-617.
surgery in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol
editor: Current Techmiques in Small Animal
Troutman RC: Microsurgery of the Anterior
7:348-351. 2004.
Surgery. ed 3. Philadelphia, 1990. Lea and
Segment of the Eye. St Louis, 1974. CV
Wilkie DA. Colitz CMH: Surgery of the canine
Febiger. pp 34-39.
Mosby. pp 96-115.
lens. In Gelatt KN. editor: Veterinary
Stades FC. Gelatt KN: Diseases and surgery of
Ophthalmology. ed 4. vol 2. Ames. 2007.
 the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Blackwell. pp 888-931.
CHAPTER
2
The operating room
Kirk N. Gelatt
Chapter contents
Introduction
17
Electroepilation
26
 Magnification
18
Cryotherapy
26
Illumination
20
Laser therapy
27
 Chairs for microsurgery
20
 Perioperative drugs
30
 Patient preparation
21
Patient recovery/restraint
31
 Basic operative approach
22
Subpalpebral medication systems
32
Hemostasis
25
Introduction
eye surgical pack is used to drape the surgical area, expose
the globe, perform the lateral canthotomy, and appose the
The operating room for extraocular surgeries is usually
surgical wound. The external eye instrument pack should
the standard operating room with more specialized illumi-
contain small towel clamps, a small saline bowl, a silicone
nation. Limited magnification, provided by head loupes
irrigator for solutions to keep the cornea and conjunctiva
and spectacle-mounted telescopes, is usually sufficient for
moist, a few small hemostats, ophthalmic tissue forceps.
surgeries of the orbit, eyelids, nasolacrimal system, nictitat-
strabismus, utility o1 tenotomy scissors fo1 ocular tissues
ing membrane and conjunctiva. However, in the operating
and sutures, small serrated and 1 x 2 teeth thumb forceps.
Ioom where coineal and intraocula1 surgeries are routinely
knife handle and blades, and one or more eyelid specula.
performed, in addition to the operating microscope, spe-
 The minor intraocular surgical pack provides the essen-
cial instruments often include the phacoemulsification unit,
tial surgical instruments for corneal, glaucoma, and iris-
ophthalmic cautery, cryotherapy, laser instrumentation, and
ciliary body surgeries. The instnuments in this pack can
retinal detachment surgery instrumentation.
also be used to perform conjunctival grafts, superficial kera-
Depending on the number and type of ophthalmic sur-
tectomies, and primary closure of coineal ulcerations, and
gical procedures perfoimed daily o1 weekly, the composi-
to treat partial to full-thickness corneal lacerations with an
tion of the operating environment will vary. The operating
iris prolapse. This pack contains exclusively ophthalmic
micioscope is the largest single investment, but will last fo1
instruments, with small selrated, 1 x 2 teeth and tying
a very long time with proper care. To the full-time veterinary
forceps, curved and straight ocular scissors, cyclodialysis
ophthalmologist, the operating microscope is indispensable
spatula, standard and micro-ophthalmic needle holder, co1-
fo1 corneal and intraocular surgeries in all animal species.
neal and anterior chamber irigator, and portable battery-
A cabinet is maintained within the operating room for
powered cautery unit. Special ophthalmic instruments, such
ophthalmic surgery, with special sterile instruments, individ-
de a sosss s e las en e s
ually wrapped, and 1eady fo1 use. I prefer limited numbers
sterile and 1eady fo1 use, should be available within the
of ophthalmic instruments alranged as external, mino1,
operating room.
and major intraocular surgical packs. Another method
The major intraocular surgical packs provide the instrl-
i  o aa sd  a a 
mentation for cataract and lens removal, and posterio1
Additional special instruments, individually wrapped and
segment diseases (mainly vitreous). The instruments in this
sterile, can be opened when needed; this reduces the wear
pack include coineal section (cataract o1 coineoscleral) scis-
and tear of cleaning and sterilization on instruments used
sors, different types of tissue and tying forceps, the lens loop
     r   
and spoon, cyclodialysis spatula, cautery unit, two o1 more
2
 The operating room
cannulas, extracapsular lens forceps, forceps for tearing
of the anterior lens capsule (capsulorhexis), and one o1
two different size needle holders. Other instruments, indi-
vidually wrapped and sterile, should include iris scissors,
intraocular scissors, and intraocular forceps. Some backup
instruments should be available in case contamination o1
malfunction of instruments occurs during the surgical
procedure.
 Tables 1.2-1.5 and Box 1.1 list the different instruments
fo1 the varying ophthalmic surgeries. For more specialized
surgeries,
such as retinal
detachment surgeries (see
Table 1.5). instruments are often wrapped and sterilized
separately.
Magnification
For nearly 40 years veterinary ophthalmic surgery has been
progressively 1efined, and microsurgical procedures peI-
foimed under the operating microscope, that started in the
Fig. 2.1 Binocular magnifier loupe.
early 1980s, are now commonplace for surgery of the cornea
and intraocular structures. Microsurgery for human oph-
These units permit accommodation for different interpu-
thalmology started slowly in the 1950s by Perrit. The fi1st
pillary distances, allow use of prescription glasses, and can
be elevated when not in use (Fig. 2.2). Although these
and featured coaxial illumination. Important refinements
units are lightweight, use for several hours when attached
by Barraquer (XY mechanism) and Troutman (motorized
to spectacles can be very tiring.
Zoom) defined the basic components of the modern operating
microscope. The development of microsurgical instruments,
sutures, and needles also stimulated the concurrent require-
Operating microscopes
ment for magnification. Surgical procedures of the extra
Most veterinarians interested in coineal, intraocular, and
ocular tissues including the orbit, eyelids, nasolacrimal,
vitreoretinal surgeries will eventually invest in an operat-
and tear systems are still traditionally non-microsurgical;
 sn pe si nd auo ao 
however, microsurgery involving the conjunctiva, coinea,
operating microscope, corneal and intraocular surgeries
and intraocular tissues has become common because of
the small ophthalmic needles and sutures, and the need
thalmic instruments and very small 7-0 to 12-0 sutures can
fo1 exact apposition of the involved tissues. Initial use of
be easily manipulated with some magnification. The micro-
the operating microscope may be somewhat frustrating
and may prolong the surgical procedure. However, with
apposition enhance the possibility of successful surgeries.
patience and practice, the veterinarian will quickly appreci-
 Operating microscopes can be portable and attached to
ate the advantages of corneal and intraocular surgeries
either a table or floor base with casters. Table units are the
 performed under magnification.
least expensive, usually provide observation for only the su1-
geon, and changes in focus require manual adjustments
(Fig. 2.3). Stationary ceiling-mounted operating micro-
Head-mounted magnifiers
scopes are used infrequently in veterinary ophthalmology
The exact requirements for magnification vary and are often
because of the need for portability between operating
influenced by the surgical patient load and the different
types of ophthalmic surgical procedure performed. The
simplest and least expensive magnification device is the bin-
ocular magnifier loupe worn on the head (Fig. 2.1). These
head loupes can be used over prescription glasses. The head
loupe is available in a number of different magnifications.
Generally the lower magnifications are the most versatile
because at the higher magnifications the focal length of
the loupe is reduced, thereby limiting the working distance
between the surgeon and the operating field. For instance,
the head loupe with the 1.5x magnification has a focal
length of 51 cm; the 1.75 x magnification has a focal length
of 35.5 cm; the 2x magnification is in focus at 25.5 cm; and
the 2.5x magnification has a focal length of 20.5 cm.
[ndividual telescope magnifiers are 
 another low-cost
alternative, and are generally recommended. They can be
added to head loupes or attached directly to spectacles.
Fig. 2.2 Telescope magnifier loupe.
18
Magnification
Support arm
tb floor or
ceiling mount
Assistant
Primary
Observer tube
surgeon
for video or
surgeon
 35 mm camera
Base microscope with
built-in light system 
Fig. 2.5 Standard components of the operating microscope for ophthalmic
Fig. 2.3 Portable table-mounted operating microscope. Unit weighs 9 kg
microsurgery.
and can be clamped to the surgery table. Working distance is 20 cm.
Iooms. Most veterinarians use the floor-based operating
are also controlled by a foot pedal. This allows slight adjust-
( ) ao n ais Aa aie ya sdos
 ments on magnification and/or focus without interrupting
The operating microscope has several standard parts
surgery.
(Fig. 2.5). The base and mount are usually quite heavy and
As with the head-mounted magnifiers, the magnification
vary depending on whether the unit is table, floor or ceiling
of the operating field is variable and inversely related to
mounted. Various supporting arms permit adjustment of the
the focal length. The range of working distance between
 operating microscope's main body over the patient's eye and
the patient's eye and the base of most operating microscopes
angulation of the scope to the surgical field. With a large
is 125-500 mm, with 200-250 mm the most common dis-
footplate that contains several switches, the surgeon can
tance. The larger microscopes provide for dual observations
laise and lower the main body of the operating microscope
for the surgeon and an assistant, and often an additional
to permit motorized coarse and fine focus of the surgical
observer 01 camera (35 mm o1 digital SLR cameras o1 video
field. The scope's main body consists of the focus and zoom
systems, and a beam splitter that permits observation of the
 n s n a  a e 
surgical field by the surgeon and assistant surgeon, and
the focus up and down, and change the magnification
often a video reco1der o1 35 mm o1 digital camera. The fine
 io s  s ()
focus of the surgical field and zoom o1 magnifying system
vary, but generally range from 3x to 15x or 20x. Most
Fig. 2.4 Floor-based operating microscope.
 Unit provides for viewing by the surgeon,
assistant surgeon, video recorder, TV and digital
camera.
19
2
 The operating room
 scopes have built-in zoom systems that permit immediate
prolonged and intense illumination of the ocular fundus.
changes in magnification during surgery. Other models have
The minimum level of illumination to adequately perfoim
different fixed steps of magnifications that require manual
the surgery is the best guide.
changes. With the operating microscopes with different
Because of the magnification, positioning of the eye for
fixed magnifications, parfocalization is important to avoid
surgery is important. With 10x to 20x magnification the
marked variations in focus during changes in magnification.
depth of field is limited. As a result, the dog or cat is placed
To accommodate changes in both magnification and
in dorsal recumbency, the head is stabilized by a U-shaped
focus, the center of the surgical field should be in the middle
vacuum pillow o1 sandbags, and the operated eye is posi-
of the microscope's field, and the surgical area should be 1el-
tioned in the center of the operating microscope's field, with
atively level. Hence, the animal eye is carefully positioned so
the cornea, anterior chamber, iris, and lens surfaces within
that the entire cornea, anterior chamber and iris surface are
focus. Other species, for instance the horse, are placed in lat-
at the same levels of focus. Resolution of surgical field is
optimal in the center of the scope's optical system. Changes
to position the head so that the eye is parallel to the
in the amount of magnification directly influence the size of
operating microscope and the different areas of the cornea
the surgical field. With the 12.5x eyepiece, the 125 mm
   n         
objective provides a surgical view of about 20 mm diameter;
operating microscope, surgery in different places on the co1-
with the 200 mm objective the surgical view is 33 mm diam
nea or elsewhere will require intermittent changes in focus
eter; with the 300 mm objective, the surgical view is 50 mm
throughout the entire surgery. To simplify the optics of the
diameter; and with the 500 mm objective, the surgical view
 operating microscope, maintaining both the scope and the
is about 80 mm diameter. The most comfortable magnifica-
patient in a vertical plane (rather than at an angle) will per-
tion and working distance is generally in the 175x range.
mit the majority, if not all, of the surgical field to remain in
Although higher magnifications may provide additional
simultaneous focus.
details, they reduce the working space as well as the depth
of field.
 The magnification also influences the depth of the surgical
llumination
field; as magnification increases, the depth of the field
decreases. During cataract surgery in the dog o1 cat, some
Adequate illumination is essential for ophthalmic surgery.
change in the operating microscope focus should be anti-
The dark ocular tissues, especially the anterior uvea, require
cipated. Initially at least one area of focus is the coinea
high intensity focal illumination for visibility. Traditional
and the incision into the anterio1 chamber, and later a sec-
sources of light fo1 ophthalmic surgery include overhead
ond area of focus is the anterior lens for tearing and removal
of the anterior lens capsule. The magnification may need to
portable and ceiling-mounted ‘cool lamps' that filter the
be changed further to permit visualization of the posterio1
majority of infrared light waves that dry the tissues, used
lens capsule. I recommend the lower range of magnifica-
for both extraocular and intraocular surgical procedures;
tion for the surgeon initially which accommodates longer
and direct and fiberoptic light systems that are routed
working distances between the operating microscope and
through the operating microscope during microsurgery.
the patient's eye, and greater depth of the surgical field for
 Small focal operating and examining lamps that are head
most coineal and intraocular surgeries. This usually permits
mounted may also be considered; however, because of thei1
visualization of the entire eye and the palpebral fissure.
weight, they are generally used for only short periods of
With experience, the higher magnification o1 the zoom fea-
time. Many different models of each illumination system
ture of the microscope can be used, but generally with the
are available; choice of the surgical lamp is also influenced
surgical field no smaller than the cornea. Some operating
by the anticipated frequency of use and costs. As a general
microscopes possess sterile caps fo1 both the objectives (to
nule, once the ocular tissues are illuminated during ophthal-
    n s 
    n on n  
and the focus of each objective) and the base of the micro-
junctival surfaces with sterile 0.9% saline o1 balanced salt
scope (however, as a general rule, if the surgical instnl-
solution should be performed to prevent corneal and con-
 junctival epithelial damage.
instrument table, it is discarded and a new instrument
substituted)
-d a (i s omi jo An are ss url
Chairs for microsurgery
mary light system is incorporated into the operating micro
si e aa a jo uon an ud ao
All coineal and intraocular surgical procedures in small ani-
especially helpful during surgery in the posterior chamber
mals are performed with the surgeon and assistant surgeon
and in the vitreous space; and 2) an ancillary light system
seated on adjustable stools with casters (Fig. 2.6). The height
mounted next to the operating microscope body that directs
of the stools should be adjustable to accommodate differ-
light to the eye at a slight angle. These light systems also
ent surgeons as well as the height of the operating table
function as a reserve; if one bulb malfunctions, the surgical
and the patient. The recommended operating room chais
field will continue to be illuminated. Both systems should
can be adjusted with a hydraulic activated foot pedal, per-
have heat-absorbing filters to shield the eye as much as pos-
sible. Often the main and accessory light systems possess
In some stools the back rest can be rotated 180° and moved
rheostats, permitting independent changes in the inten-
to the front of the surgeon to provide arm rests during
   d    
        
20
 Patient preparatior
purpose. The contact lens is removed immediately befo1e
surgery along with any hair and debris from surgical
preparation.
 Cleansing and disinfection
The eyelids and adjacent orbital skin are cleaned and
prepared for corneal and intraocular surgery. A mild anti-
septic solution containing aqueous 0.5% povidone-iodine
is the recommended ocular surface disinfectant for all
ophthalmic surgical procedures. Chlorhexidine diacetate
(0.05% and 0.5%) is toxic to the canine eye and causes
chemosis, coineal epithelial edema, and coineal erosions.
Howeve1, chlorhexidine gluconate (0.05%) with 4% iso-
propyl alcohol is both a safe and effective antimicrobial
disinfectant for the dog's cornea and conjunctiva.
Both povidone-iodine and chlorhexidine aie bactericidal.
The 0.5% aqueous dilution of povidone-iodine produces
rapid broad-spectrum antimicrobial effects against the com-
monly isolated Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epider-
midis, α-hemolytic Streptococcus sp., and Escherichia coli.
as
well as many fungi and viruses in the dog. At effective anti-
microbial dilutions, such as the 0.5% level, povidone-
iodine does not cause coineal epithelial edema, corneal
Fig. 2.6 Adjustable stool for ophthalmic surgery. Stool height is adjusted by
epithelial sloughing. eyelid edema, or conjunctival irritation
the foot-operated hydraulic control, and the back rest can be rotated for use
in the dog. After at least two 1-minute cleansing periods
as an arm support.
with povidone-iodine, the eyelids, conjunctiva, and coinea
are liberally flushed with sterile 0.9% saline o1 balanced salt
stockinet. The operating chairs fo1 the surgeon and assistant
solution. Sterile cotton-tipped swabs are used to remove any
surgeon should be comfortable and help to avoid fatigue
remaining exidates and hai1 from the conjunctival fornices
that can adversely impact surgery.
and surfaces, and the ophthalmic surgical site is ready fo1
draping.
The 5% povidone surgical scrub, which contains 4.5%
Patient preparation
 alcohol, provides an excellent geimicidal preparation of
the facial skin (as for parotid duct transposition), but cannot
Preparation of the skin of the eyelids and conjunctiva differs
safely be used for the eyelids. This preparation is toxic to the
from that of most other general surgical procedures. During
corneal epithelium, producing a generalized loss of this
cleansing and preparation of the eyelid skin, these agents
layer (essentially a chemical superficial keratectomy).
often contact the coinea and conjunctiva. As a lesult, solu-
Most corneal and intraocular surgeries are performed with
tions such as iodine in alcohol (Lugol's solution) and iso-
the pre-existing ophthalmic condition requiring medication
in
within the operating room. Accordingly, the eye is often
general surgery are avoided as they are very toxic to the
medicated immediately preoperatively, during the operative
corneal and conjunctival epithelia, and cause immediate
procedure, and following surgery. Often the preoperative
epithelial sloughing.
condition o1 the immediate postoperative inflammation
can be substantially reduced as a result of this perioperative
Clipping of hair and eye protection
medication of the eye and adjacent structures. Recent studies
in dogs indicate that bacterial contamination of the anterior
The hair and eyelashes are carefully clipped with small elec-
chamber occurs in about 30% of dogs undergoing cataract
tric hair clippers. The eyelashes may be coated with petro-
surgery, and topical as well as systemic antibiotics should
be administered. Antibiotic therapy for full-thickness co1-
small sharp scissors. While 1emoving the hair of the eyelids
neal perforations and lacerations is often administered du1
 and adjacent skin about the orbit, one should avoid creating
ing the surgical correction in the solutions used to irrigate
any nicks and abrasions as these wounds can cause unneces-
the external ocular surfaces, and for re-establishment of the
anterior chamber after repair of the corneal defect. Fortu-
Several different strategies have evolved to protect the eye
nately, bacterial endophthalmitis is very rare in the dog after
during surgical preparation of the eyelids and/or conjunc-
intraocular surgery.
tiva. Liberal amounts of ophthalmic cintment or petroleum
  a i en a  pe a  
Head positioning
eyelid hair. Hairs that fall onto the cornea and conjunctiva
become embedded in the petroleum jelly, which is carefully
The majority of coineal and intraocular surgical procedures
Iemoved later with sterile cotton swabs. A 1eusable plastic
are perfoimed with the small animal patient in dorsal
contact lens coated with ointment can also be used for this
recumbency. If head-mounted magnifiers are woin, the
21
2
The operating room
Irrigation
To prevent drying of the conjunctival and coineal sur-
faces during ophthalmic surgery, small volumes of sterile
0.9% saline, balanced salt solution, lactated Ringer's solu-
tion, o1 other physiologic solutions are used intermittently
to moisten the ocular tissues. Both the pH and tonicity of
these solutions should approximate the tear and aqueous
humor fluids. Inadequate levels of moisture provided dul-
ing eye surgery will result in unnecessary corneal epithelial
damage and possible limitations on the use of certain classes
of medications postoperatively.
OLYMPICVAC-PAC.
Se.N.4282日
MPICMEDIC
Sponges/swabs
To assist with hemostasis and removal of material during
ophthalmic surgery, small sterile cotton swabs are used
Fig. 2.7 Vacuum U-shaped pack for ophthalmic surgery.
routinely for corneal surgeries, and for the extraocular
aspects of intraocular surgeries. For use inside the anterior
chamber during intraocular procedures and full-thickness
corneal surgical procedures, disposable cellulose sponges 
dog may be positioned in lateral recumbency. Ropes and
(often triangular  S
shaped) are recommended. Cotton
adhesive tape are used to position the animal's legs.
swabs are avoided during intraocular surgical procedures
Although the duration of most ophthalmic surgical pro-
because some of the small cotton fibers may loosen and
cedures is less than 1 h, a circulating water heating pad
enter the anterior chamber, increasing the intensity of
between the patient and the surgery table reduces the possi-
postoperative anterior uveitis.
bility of hypothermia. It is important to place the animal's
- n s l     
Basic operative approach
cost sandbags can be used to maintain the head in the
desired position. An alternative superior scheme uses a vac-
For corneal and intraocular surgeries, exposure of the entie
uum bead-filled U-shaped pack for stabilizing the head
cornea and anterior segment is preferred. In most small
(Fig. 2.7). The patient's head is positioned on the vacuum
animals under general anesthesia, the globe rotates down-
pack, and the pack is manipulated to provide the selected
ward and inward. This may be advantageous for corneal
head position. Once the proper position is achieved, vac-
and anterior segment surgeries involving the dorsal and do1-
     a    si 
solateral regions, but not when access and visibility of the
removed, the pack becomes very rigid, holding the head in
entire cornea and anterior segment are necessary. With less
a fixed position. Release of the vacuum postoperatively
than adequate surgical exposure, the duration of surgery is
causes the pack to return to a soft and moldable structure.
prolonged and the procedure may be more difficult to
perform.
Draping
Once surgical preparation of the eye and associated stric-
 Retrobulbar injections in dogs
tures is complete, the area is carefully draped for surgery.
Simultaneous use of both paper (barrier) and 1eusable cloth
-odxa iuasaid a aqo rae pue eaoo au oi ssa
(to absorb any moisture) drapes is recommended. Plastic
sure problems in small animals, especially in certain breeds
drapes with self-adherent backings and nubber dental dam
of dog. Fortunately, the lateral and dorsolateral aspects of
the dog orbit are incomplete, and accommodate retrobulbar
cal site. Cloth drapes are used to absorb the irigation solu-
injections. Injections of sterile O.9% saline can enhance
tions, but unfortunately allow contamination with the other
the presentation of the cornea and globe, but only with
non-sterile surfaces of both patient and operating table.
some risk.
Paper o1 barrier drapes repel all moisture and prevent con-
The injection is performed with the dog under general
tamination from the other areas, and are most often used.
anesthesia with the objective of forcing the globe further
Oul standard draping procedure is to position four small
rostrad or forward in the orbit, o1 to turn the globe and
surgical towels about the surgical site to absorb the irri-
improve exposure of a selected area of the coinea and/or
gation solutions, and secure them with small bulldog towel
anterior segment. The amount of sterile saline injected is
clamps. An additional large paper drape with a small hole
ascertained as the injection is performed and the response
to provide adequate surgical exposure is placed over these
of the globe to the space-occupying solution. The hypoder-
towels and secured with additional towel clamps. As with
mic needle may be inserted caudal to the junction of the
-ape apoid oi pauisap si bundeip 'anaoid qeoins Aue
lateral orbital ligament and dorsal aspects of the zygomatic
quate exposure of only the operative site and a barrier to
arch (Fig. 2.8). The needle is directed towards the retrobul-
the adjacent non-sterile areas.
bar space in a ventromedial direction toward the opposite
22
Basic operative approach
With gas inhalation general anesthesia and often neuromus-
cular blocking agents and forced ventilation, retrobulbar
nerve blocks in the horse are infrequent.
In the Beige method, an 8-10 cm, 18 g needle is inserted
caudal to the supraorbital process of the frontal bone near
the supraorbital foramen. The long needle is directed ven-
tromedial (about 40° from the vertical) and slightly caudal
toward the area of the orbital fissure where 15-20 mL of
local anesthetic is injected (see Chapter 3).
[n Lichenstern's method, an 8-10 cm, 18 g needle is
inserted 1.5 cm caudal to the middle of the supraorbital
process. The needle is directed toward the opposite last
upper premolar tooth. The taut extraocular muscles' fascial
cone may be felt as the needle penetrates it. Approximately
20 mL of local anesthetic is injected near the orbital fissure
(see Chapte1 3).
As a third method, the lateral and medial canthal routes
may be used to inject about 10-15 mL of local anesthetic
at each site.
Of the large animal species, intraocular surgery is performed
Fig. 2.8 An 8 cm, 22 g hypodermic needle is inserted dorsal to the
most often in the hoise. As this species has considerable scleral
zygomatic arch and caudal to the lateral orbital ligament, and directed
elasticity (low scleral rigidity), sizeable 1etrobulbar injections
toward the opposite mandibular joint in the dog. A variable volume of sterile
  e  d a   
saline can be injected in the animal under general anesthesia to force the
likelihood of vitreous prolapse during cataract surgery.
globe forward.
Retrobulbar injections in cattle
mandibular joint. The solution may be injected in the lateral
aspects of the extraocular muscle cone, o1 immediately cau-
Because of inherent problems associated with general
dal to the globe and within the retrobulbar muscle mass.
anesthesia in cattle, as well as economics, regional nerve
Injections external to the retrobulbar muscle cone will rotate
blocks are common in this species. In fact, most orbital, eye-
the globe laterally: injections immediately behind the globe
lid, conjunctival, and corneal surgery is performed with
will push the globe forward. The volume injected should
regional injectable anesthesia. Of the three different 1outes
be limited to produce the desired outcome but not result
for orbital injections of regional anesthesia in the cow.
in undue pressure and distortion of the globe.
i.e., Peterson's, Schreibel's, and Hare's, Peterson's is the
Another injection site is ventral to the anterior zygomatic
most common in America, but somewhat more difficult.
arch and 1ostrad to the vertical portion of the ramus of
A relatively simple method in cattle, the four-point block,
the mandible (see Chapter 3). The hypodermic needle, afteI
uses more local anesthetic than the Peterson method, and
passing the ramus of the mandible, is directed toward the
delivers retrobulbar anesthetic through the dorsal, medial.
orbital fissure. Injections exteinal to the 1etrobulbar muscle
lateral, and ventral conjunctival foinices directly into the
cone in the orbital floor and the medial orbit wall are possi-
letrobulba1 space (see Chapter 3).
ble with this method, and can be used to shift the globe
 [n Peterson's regional nerve block, an 8-10 cm, 18-20 g
dorsally.
needle is inserted at the posterior angle of the zygomatic
Retrobulbar injections can also be perfoimed with curved
arch and lateral orbital rim, and directed anterior of the co1-
hypodermic needles directed through the conjunctiva O1
onoid process of the mandible and inferomedially to the
the eyelids to deposit solution beside o1 caudal to the globe.
pterygopalatine fossa near the foramen orbitorotundum.
The volume and position of the injection within the orbit 
After aspiration
1 (avoiding the internal maxillary artery).
will shift the eye accordingly. With the use of neuromuscular
15-20 mL of local anesthetic is injected. Successful retrobul-
   sa ri 's 
ba1 nerve block is shown as mydriasis, lack of globe mobil-
necessary.
ity, and loss of corneal sensation. The palpebral nerve is
blocked by placing 5-10 mL of local anesthetic subcutane-
 ously along the dorsal zygomatic arch.
Retrobulbar injections in cats
Retrobulbar injections in the cat are not recommended
Complications of retrobulbar injections
proper positioning of the injection.
Retrobulbar injections require care, and can induce retrobul-
bar hemorhage. The animal orbit contains large veins and
venous plexuses, and hemorrhage sufficient to produce
Retrobulbar injections in horses
additional pressure of the globe, and even enter the subcon-
Retrobulbar local anesthetic injections have been described
junctival spaces, fortunately occurs infrequently. Aspiration
in the horse by Berge and Lichenstern. The posterior orbit
immediately prior to the injection of local anesthetic mini-
and entry of the critical cranial nerves in the horse is about
mizes this complication. If this occurs, surgery should be
delayed until the hemoirhage has reabsorbed.
23
2
The operating room
Inadvertent puncture of the globe with the needle is rare,
These wire rings are attached to the limbus or 1-4 mm
but a serious complication. The retrobulbar saline is usually
posterio1 to the limbus with four o1 more simple interrupted
leabsorbed within 30-60 min. With the use of intravenous
4-0 silk sutures to maintain the coineal wound during
neuromuscula1 blocking drugs, use of retrobulbar injections
suigery and apposition, as well as to prevent collapse of
to manipulate the globe is less common and may be
the anterior chamber and globe. As the canine and feline
redundant.
coineas measure 16 x 15 mm and 17 x 16 mm, 1espec-
A few cases of cattle have been reported to suffer respira
tively, a selection of the larger ring sizes is recommended.
tory collapse and sudden death after the Peterson retrobul-
These rings are used to maintain the shape and relative size
ba1 block, presumably from accidental anesthetic injection
of the anterior portion of the globe. Although these rings
within the optic nerve meninges or the cerebrospinal space.
can adequately stabilize the anterior globe of the dog and
      n    
necessary to position the ring. The large Flieringa rings
Stay sutures
(12-24 mm) are recommended when full-thickness kerato-
Silk stay sutures (usually 4-0), placed in the limbus, deep sub-
plasty is performed in small animals to maintain the coineal
conjunctival tissues, and dorsal rectus muscle insertion, may
curvature and the anterior chamber depth.
be used to turn and/or pull the globe forward prior to corneal
and intraocular surgeries. After placement of the sutures in
General anesthesia/neuromuscular
the ocular tissues, the opposite end of the stay suture is
blocking agents
attached to the eyelid speculum, surgical drape or towel
 ' s a n  s e n r '
Most general inhalational anesthetics cause the globe to
stay sutures may be superior to a single suture. Dependent
Iotate down and inward, and decrease exposure to the eye.
on the site of the stay suture, the globe may be rotated to
As a result, stay sutures are frequently used to stabilize and
the desired position. As with retrobulbar injections, traction
Iotate the globe outward to improve surgical exposure.
by these stay sutures on the anterior segment may distort
However, there are limits to the traction created by these
the globe because of the lower ocular rigidity in the dog
sutures, and sometimes the surgical exposure is less than
and cat. Possible complications of this method include tear-
satisfactory.
ing of the tissues by the stay suture, usually associated with
The administration of neuromuscular blocking agents,
excessive traction, and rarely penetration of a thin sclera.
once general anesthesia has been stabilized, provides the
Stay sutures can also be used to retract the nictitating
optimal exposure of the dog's globe, and has become the
membrane from the surgical field. The suture is placed full-
standard for most dog and equine corneal and intraocular
thickness around the nictitans cartilage, just beneath its lead
surgeries. With paralysis and loss of all extraocular muscle
ing margin, and extended to and secured to a towel clamp
isse si ean a a s as a pai an
01 hemostat anchored in the adjacent drape. The tension
The globe also becomes somewhat hypotonic, usually negat-
me snu a oo on  si an s an 
ing the administration of intravenous osmotic agents to
from the surgical site but with no distortion of the globe.
lower intraocular pressure. In fact, parenteral osmotics are
not recommended when neuromuscular blocking agents
are used for cataract surgery in dogs, because the eye may
Flieringa or Flieringa-LeGrand fixation rings
become too soft. The drug-induced paralysis may also reduce
The Flieringa rings consist of a single ring or two different
the impact or weight of the retrobulbar tissues on the poste-
sizes of stainless steel wire rings that are attached to each
nior segment, and decrease the tendency for forward vitreous
other (Fig. 2.9). Single ring sizes range from 12 mm to
 so  n s n  rs
 22 mm in 1 mm increments. The double Flieringa ring is
horses. Neuromuscular blocking agents cause paralysis, but
available in two sizes: 1) small (pediatric): 14 mm inner
are not anesthetics. It is imperative that the level of gen-
 21 :e) ae (7  u ino  1 ue u
eral anesthesia be sufficient and closely monitored during
o ssxa  s a  o   p  l
use of these neuromuscular blocking agents. The section on
23 mm diameter are also easy to self-construct.
these agents in Chapter 3 provides additional information
and dosage.
Lateral canthotomy
The lateral canthotomy procedure is probably the most
frequently performed ophthalmic surgery in animals and
is often used prior to corneal and intraocular surgeries.
Incision of the lateral canthotomy temporarily increases
the size of the palpebral fissure and facilitates surgical expo-
sure of the globe. In many breeds of dogs with prominent
eyes and for most cats, a lateral canthotomy for most oph-
thalmic surgical procedures is not necessary. However, in
many mesocephalic and nearly all dolichocephalic breeds
of dogs, the lateral canthotomy is indicated. Lateral can-
aun on saunans alls zybia Aa paypee ag uen shuu ehuually aul 6rz d6i
limbus in small animals to stabilize the anterior segment of the globe and
thotomies can cause postoperative swelling of the lateral
 prevent collapse of the anterior chamber.
canthus and limited discomfort. With the recent use of
24
Hemostasis
manipulations may be limited. With time and exposure,
the bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva can become edema-
tous and swollen, limiting further the surgical exposure.
Attempts to improve access to the globe with lateral canthot-
 omy, retrobulbar injections, and stay sutures are usually less
than satisfactory. Excessive pressure on the globe, associated
with suture or instrument traction on the anterior globe, 01
injections of solutions behind the posterior globe, may col-
(A)
B
lapse and distort the globe, increasing the difficulty and
Fig. 2.10 Lateral canthotomy increases exposure of the cornea and globe.
duration of the intraocular surgery.
(a) After placement of the eyelid speculum to ascertain exposure, the lateral
canthus is incised by curved Mayo or Metzenbaum scissors for 5-15 mm.
The length depends on the breed and the required amount of exposure.
Hemostasis
(b) Two-layer closure includes: tarsoconjunctiva with 4-0 to 6-0 simple 
continuous absorbable sutures and the orbicularis oculi-skin layer with
Maintenance of adequate hemostasis is essential fo1 all oph-
40 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The first suture (simple
thalmic surgical procedures. Uncontrolled intraoperative
interrupted; simple mattress) is carefully placed near the eyelid margin.
bleeding wili diminish the visualization of critical ophthal-
neuromuscular blocking agents during ophthalmic surgery
mic structures. Any volume of blood retained within the sur-
in small animals and the horse, the indications and need
gical wound may retard wound healing, increase scarring.
for lateral canthotomy are more limited.
and cause immediate distortion of the postoperative wound.
After insertion of an eyelid speculum, the palpebral fis.
 Intraocular hemorrhage is also unacceptable, and may pro-
sure is maximized and the surgical exposure ascertained.
mote the formation of synechiae and pupillary and preiridal
If additional exposure is necessary, a lateral canthotomy is 
inflammatory membranes. Hemostasis for most coineal and
perfoimed with curved Mayo o1 Metzenbaum scissois
intraocular surgical procedures 1elies on direct pressure on
(Fig. 2.10a). The lateral canthal eyelid is incised for 5-15
the small bleeders, point electrocautery, and intraocular
mm, but the incision should not extend beyond the lateral
adrenaline (epinephrine). Temporary clamping of the larger
orbital ligament. Hemorrhage is usually negligible. Point
       
hemostat is rarely necessary.
mosquito forceps may be used to slightly crush the tissues
prior to the incision to control hemorrhage but is not
Electrocautery
usually necessary.
At the conclusion of surgery, the lateral canthotomy is
Electrocautery units are employed primarily to coagulate
'sop jo spaaiq isou ul sairuns jo siakel oml Aq pasodde
blood vessels for hemostasis in ophthalmic surgery in small
in toy breeds, however, a single layer of sutures will suffice.
'snss rejnoo jo sun au io pasn nou aie inq 'sieue
The palpebral conjunctiva, submucosal fascia, and tarsus are
except occasionally the bleeding iris. Unfortunately, cutting
apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interupted absorbable
sutures (Fig. 2.10b). The exteinal layer of closure, consisting
and therefore constitutes a critical limitation for ophthalmic
 of the orbicularis oculi muscle and lid skin, is apposed with
surgery. Generally, the small electrocautery units are most
4-0 simple inteinupted non-absorbable sutures. The first
adequate and safest for ophthalmic surgery.
suture is carefully placed at the eyelid margin and has the
 Several battery-powered portable cautery units are avail-
greatest tension on it. Occasionally this suture is a modified
able (Fig. 2.1la,b) as well as AC units (Fig. 2.11c) that pro-
interrupted mattress pattein. The skin sutures are removed at
vide wet-field cautery. The hand-held units are inexpensive,
 7-10 days postoperatively.
battery powered, and possess small microtips. The batteries
The most frequent postoperative complications after lat-
   a n   a
eral canthotomy include dehiscence of the first one or two
and 1eplaced immediately before surgery. Wet-field cautery
sutures, usually within the first week, and malalignment of
units are effective in the presence of blood, have limited
the area. [n eyes with lateral canthotomies, postoperative
systemic effects, and do not require patient grounding.
Td a  s do e s
formed with care to prevent undue tension on the healing
Local adrenaline (epinephrine)
lateral canthus and sutures. Routine use of the E-collar in
small animals also helps in the maintenance of the lateral
The addition of 1:100 000 adrenaline (epinephrine) to
  s    s 
moistened cotton swabs can be used for hemostasis asso-
tear the sutures from the lateral canthus. [n the event of
ciated with small bleeders during conjunctival and coineal
local dehiscence, the wound edges are refreshened and
surgery; however, the concurrent use of halothane as an
 apposed by additional sutures.
inhalational anesthetic may preclude its use. If adrenaline
(epinephrine) is used for hemostasis in ophthalmic surgery.
   rn r   i 
Problems with enophthalmia
modalities cannot be used, and is used at higher concentra-
 sop jo saai se ue aie ui sans ro
tions (1:1000). If adrenaline (epinephrine) is expected to be
be more difficult because of enophthalmia and limited
used for hemostasis, as during the repair of a full-thickness
exposure of the globe. As a result, surgery must be per-
corneal laceration with iris prolapse, isoflurane should be
formed with the globe recessed in the orbit and certain
the inhalational anesthetic.
25
2
 The operating room
AARONR
A
B
C
Fig. 2.11 Examples of portable and battery-powered hand-held ophthalmic cautery units. (a) Hand-held battery-power cautery unit. Unit can be steam
sterilized and the batteries placed in the unit just before surgery. (b) Disposable battery-powered cautery. (c) Wet-field coagulator. Unit may be AC or battery-
powered.
Electroepilation
of mainly collagen fibers, are 1elatively unaffected by cryo-
therapy. The cryoadhesion developed between a cryoprobe
and lens necessitates only direct contact, and with the more
Electroepilation o1 electrolysis is used to treat canine disti
powerful units can occur even in the presence of aqueous
chiasis, trichiatic lashes, and ectopic cilia. The objective is
humor and vitreous.
to provide low levels of direct current to the hair follicle
and destroy the germinal hair cells. For the most effective
-     s  
neal and intraocular surgical procedures in small animals,
electrolysis, accurate placement of the electrolysis needle
the primary indications include the treatment of distichiasis
is paramount. Electrolysis is primarily employed when
and small eyelid tumors, cryoextraction of subluxated,
only a few distichia require treatment. Good magnification,
 anteriorly and posteriorly luxated lenses, transscleral cyclo-
illumination, and stabilization of the eyelid margin are
cryotherapy for the partial destruction of the ciliary body
important considerations.
for treatment of glaucoma, and chorioretinal cryotherapy
All electrolysis units have a very fine needle that can
fo1 treatment of localized retinal teais and detachments.
be inserted directly into the hai1 follicle. Afte1 15-30 s of
There are several different types of cryo-instruments.
low milliamperage (2-4 mA) small bubbles will appear at
Aa  are sa a o ae u a
Those units that use CO2 (-78°C), nitrous oxide (-89°C),
and liquid nitrogen (-195°C) are the most versatile. Some
hydrogen released by the electrolysis of the basal hair cells.
cryounits consist of a gas tank and hose, a base unit (often
With removal of the electrolysis needle, the offending dis-
with tank pressure and probe temperature dials), and a
tichia will usually be withdrawn. Occasionally small cilia
hand-held probe (Fig. 2.13). The Frigitronics and Cabot
forceps are necessary to epilate the distichia after electrolysis.
Medical cryo-instruments, as well as the Brymill portable
Inadequate electrolysis can result in recurrence of the disti-
 i s a   a a ti ) s
chia. Excessive electrolysis can result in inflammation and
fibrosis of the eyelid margin.
inary ophthalmology. For accurate cryotherapy, monitoring
of the tissue temperature around the cryoprobe is useful
Electrolysis is also less successful when multiple distichiae
fo1 eyelid procedures.
emerge from a single orifice, which unfortunately is quite
frequent. The insertion of the electrolysis needle into each
hair follicle is not usually possible and regrowth is common.
Additional information on electroepilation can be found in
Chapter 5.
 Several portable electroepilation units are available, and
because of the low levels of current necessary they are usu-
DOLBYLEVEL
ally battery powered. Units that provide 2 o1 4 mA are safe
and the least likely to produce excessive electrolysis
(Fig. 2.12). Larger units that consist of the base and battery.
manually controlled rheostat, milliamperage gauge, and the
hand-held microstylet provide the most consistent results.
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy in veterinary ophthalmology offers another
therapeutic modality for certain ophthalmic disorders. Cryo-
therapy offers two unique characteristics: 1) selective destric-
tion of noimal and neoplastic tissues; and 2) increased
adhesion that develops between the cryoprobe and ocular
tissues. Ocular tissues sensitive to cryodestruction include
the corneal epithelium and endothelium, all intraocular
blood vessels, ciliary body epithelium, uveal pigment cells,
 and the retina. The corneal stroma and sclera, consisting
Fig. 2.12 Small battery-powered epilation unit.
26
Laser therapy
Fig. 2.13 Liquid nitrogen unit for ophthalmic use.
(a) Base unit for the cryotherapy. (b) Cryoprobes.
Top: cataract, straight; bottom: glaucoma, curved.
B
A
The tip of the small probe is usually covered with a thermal
probes (tip diameter 3-5 mm) are the most useful. Probe tip
shield to prevent damage or adhesion to adjacent tissues
temperature during cryotherapy should rapidly achieve and
during the cryotherapy. There are usually several different selec-
maintain temperatures ranging from - 30°C for cryoadhesion
to -80°C to -90°C fo1 cryodestruction. Fo1 cyclocryotherapy.
     i a d 
  o  e  si  
epithelial destruction of the ciliary body at -20°C to -30°C,
the probe tip temperature must be at least -70°C to -90°C.
Fo1 treatment of distichiasis and eyelid neoplasms, and
cyclocryotherapy for end-stage glaucoma, lower cost hand-
held portable liquid nitrogen units are useful. These units 
have a generous assortment of open (spray) and closed
cryoprobes fo1 ophthalmic use.
Laser therapy
Laser therapy was first introduced in human ophthal-
mology in the 1960s, and quickly these ophthalmologists
recognized the benefits of the laser. The eye is an ideal organ
for laser therapy with its tissues and media usually clear, and
MINI
the target tissues usually heavily pigmented. Laser use was
fiist 1eported in veterinary ophthalmology in the 1980s,
once the laser units became considerably smaller, portable,
and less expensive.
Laser basics
Lasers emit light energy: this energy is transmitted to the
target tissues, and absorbed selectively by pigmented tissues.
Fig. 2.14 A less expensive hand-held portable cryounit with variable open
There are several types of commercial lasel, and each emits
 (spray) and closed probes can be used for extraocular use and transscleral
energy of specific wavelengths. Each ocular tissue absorbs
Cyclocryothermy.
a particulal range of wavelength. The cornea absorbs short
27
2
 The operating room
ultraviolet wavelengths (200-313 nm) and greate1 than the
mode o1 in the pulsed mode, which can change the tissue
longer infrared wavelengths (1400-10 000 nm). The lens
damage they cause. Using the Nd:YAG laser in the continu-
absorbs ultraviolet wavelengths (315-400 nm), thus pro-
ous mode causes theimal photocoagulation; the same laser
tecting the retina from haimful ultraviolet rays from the
in the pulsed mode (either Q-switching with nanosecond
sun. The blue, blue-green, yellow, red, and near-infrared
pulses or mode-locking with picosecond pulses) produces
spectrum of wavelengths (400-1400 nm) pass through the
a photodisruptive effect.
sclera and clear coinea, aqueous humor, lens, and vitreous
and
Current ophthalmic lasers
hemoglobin).
Three ocular pigments absorb the majority of laser energy
Ophthalmic lasers curently commercially available include
delivered to the eye; they include melanin, hemoglobin, and
the COz, excimel, argon, tunable dye, Nd:YAG, and diode.
xanthophyll (in the human macula). Melanin within the
Their characteristics and veterinary ophthalmic use are sum-
uveal tract and retinal pigment epithelia absorbs the visible
marized in Table 2.1. Of these instruments, the diode laser
and infrared wavelengths (400-1400 nm), and absorption
is the laser most frequently used by the veterinary ophthal-
increases as the laser wavelength decreases. Within the retina
mologist; its tissue damage is caused by photocoagula-
there may be different absorptions by the individual retinal
tion (Fig. 2.15). The second most frequently used laser is
tissues: 1) short or blue wavelengths are absorbed better by
the Nd:YAG lasel used in both the contact and non-contact
the inner retinal layers: 2) yellow wavelengths are absorbed
mode; this unit is also shared with veterinary surgeons
       
(Fig 2.16).
The diode laser has a shorter wavelength
wavelengths in the infrared red range penetrate the sclera
(810 nm) than the Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm) which allows
better; and lastly, 4) the longer the wavelength, the greateI
improved melanin absorption, but less transscleral transmis-
the tissue transmission.
sion than the Nd:YAG laser. Diode transscleral transmission
can be increased by use in the contact mode. The diode laser
Laser delivery
also peimits transcoineal, transpupillary, and intravitreal
(endoscopic laser) energy delivery.
From the laser source, the eneigy is delivered to the ocular
     s   s
Laser applications
using a number of transscleral probes in the contact or
non-contact mode, as with the neodymium:yttrium alumi-
In the specialty practices of veterinary ophthalmology
num garnet (Nd:YAG) laser. It may also be delivered by
world-wide, the diode laser is the most frequently used
endoprobes within the eye, the indirect ophthalmoscope
instrument. Its advantages include high absorption of its 
with laser attachment for transcoineal and transpupillary
energy by melanin, portability (small and lightweight),
transmission, the slit-lamp biomicroscope, and 
as an
and low cost. Less frequently used lasers include the Nd:
adapter to the operating microscope.
- d-s q no ad  Aq a 
scope) and COz; the latter is used for the treatment of
Laser choice
adnexal, conjunctival, and episcleral lesions in small ani-
mals and the horse. Experimental laser refractive surgery or
Choice of laser by the veterinary ophthalmologist is depen-
 h q op a u paad aaq su sina
dent on its range of clinical use (target ocular tissues
doubtful that it will become useful clinically.
The diode, Nd:YAG, and CO, lasers have been used to treat
tissue damage (thermal photocoagulation, photodisrup-
tion, photoablation, and/o1 photochemical), portability.
cess. These lasers are less invasive, faster, excellent for hemo-
and cost. Lasers can also be used in the continuous wave
stasis, and less technically difficult. The result is charring and
 Table 2.1 Lasers used in veterinary ophthalmology
Laser type
Wavelength (nm)
Tissue damage
Clinical use
Excimer
193
 Photoablation
 Epithelial and anterior stroma keratopathies, LASIK
Argon
488-514
 Photocoagulation
 Retinal photocoagulation, iridotomy, iridoplasty, sclerostomy
Diode
810
 Photocoagulation
Cyclophotocoagulation, retinal photocoagulation, iridotomy,
sclerostomy
(apow snonupuos) DAA:PN 
901
uogeln6eosooud 
 Cyclophotocoagulation, capsulotomy, cataract surgery
Nd:YAG (Q-switched or mode
1084
 Photodisruption
 Retinal photocoagulation, iridotomy, sclerostomy,
locked)
hyaloidotomy
CO2
10 600
uogelqeooud
 Blepharoplasty, conjunctival carcinoma, punctoplasty
Modified from Gilmour MA 2002 Lasers in ophthalmology. In: Bartels KE (ed.) Lasers in Medicine and Surgery. WB Saunders, Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal
Practice 32:649-672
28
Laser therapy
20007500
25
A
B
aul (e) Ahojowleynydo Aeuuanan ui wansss dejndod asowu aun s! wansis iasel apop aul sl'z dbi
base unit is small and portable. (b) The diopexy hand probe for retinopexy (left); a separate hand
 probe is necessary for transscleral cyclophotocoagulation (right). (c) The unit can also be mounted
on an indirect ophthalmoscope for transpupillary retinopexy. (Photographs courtesy of lridex
Corporation, Mountain View, CA USA)
C
Both diode and Nd:YAG lasers have been used fo1 syne-
chiotomy, capsulotomy, iridotomy for pupillary block glau-
coma, and hyaloidotomy for malignant glaucoma with
variable success. Experimentally, the diode laser deliveied
by the direct ophthalmoscope system in the normal dog
-  is sa s d ad n 
scopically. Laser therapy of canine opacified posterio
n  o o  e  s a
lasers. For additional information, see Chapter 10.
Both diode and Nd:YAG lasers have been used to treat
large uveal cysts (dogs and horses) and cystic corpora nigra
(horses) which have the potential to interfere with vision.
These cysts deflate during lasering, and may detach and fall
into the ventral anterio1 chamber. Variable fibrin and slight
hemorrhage are possible minor complications.
Both diode and Nd:YAG lasers have been used in dogs and a
few horses to treat primary intraocular neoplasia. Laser energy
can be delivered transsclerally, transcoineally o1 by a sterile
dwel-as aun jo aed se panunowu algele 5! asel 5sA:pn aul 9l'z *6
fber inserted through the opposite pars plana into ciliary body
a4l saqoud puey 4aim zjun aseg e se jo uoge.asnl sin ui se adonsouojwoig
tumors. Use of laser therapy fo1 canine intraocular tumors is
former is used for transpupillary iridotomy, hyaloidotomy, and synechiotomy;:
influenced directly by the following facts: 1) most canine intra-
'uogelnbeosonoydopro (eiapssue.n ioy pasn s! lamel aua
ocular tumors involve the anterior uvea; and 2) the metastatic
(5 sdeqad) mo A are So asai ry s
contraction of the pigmented mass, and low levels of recu1-
 One study in dogs using the Nd:YAG laser to treat both
Ience. The diode laser delivery systems include indirect oph-
ciliary body and iridal tumors suggested that success was
thalmoscope with a 20 D lens, operating microscope adapter,
influenced mainly by the extent o1 size of the tumor and less
and either the glaucoma or transscleral non-contact probe.
by tumol pigmentation. Melanomas in the 1etriever breeds
Lasel cyclophotocoagulation is commonly used by veteri-
primary involve the anterior iris surface, and are quite
nary ophthalmologists fo1 treatment of canine, feline, and
successfully treated by either the Nd:YAG or diode laser.
equine glaucomas. The transscleral and recent endoscopic
Additional information is available in Chapter 9.
laser photocoagulation methods attempt to partially destroy
Laser therapy is a mainstay for the treatment of vitreoret-
 ro soane aai pue sssand ooq r a
inal diseases, for which the preferred laser is the diode, with
mation rates. Exact placement of the laser probe during the
its
energy delivery transsclerally, transpupillary, and
by
transscleral methods is essential fo1 ciliary body ablation,
endophotocoagulation during pars plana retinal detach-
and is addressed in the endoscopic method by diectly
ment surgery. Diode laser o1 cryotherapy is used to perform
Ietinopexy, either prophylactically or for the treatment of
laser therapy fo1 the different glaucomas and species are
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment surgery. For additional
available in Chapter 10.
infoimation, see Chapter 12.
29
2
 The operating room
Laser safety
 Table 2.2 Drugs to support corneal and intraocular surgical
As laser energy is potentially hazardous to veterinary
procedures*
ophthalmologists and thei1 staff, several safety precautions
are essential. As each laser emits its own range of wavelength
Agent
Purpose
energy, all precautions must be based on the selected laser.
 Antifibrin agents
Heparin (1-2 IU/mL) mixed in all 
Laser safety eyewear must be woin whenever laser use occurs.
topical and intraocular irrigating
When lasering an eyelid lesion, the patient's eye must be pro-
 solutions (usually lactated 
tected with a non-reflective stainless steel or lead eye shield.
Ringer's). To prevent fibrin
Any window within the laser room should be shuttered and
formation during surgery
doors locked with dead-bolts when the laser is in use.
Tissue plasminogen activator
(intracameral): 25 μg to treat
fibrin and blood clots (up to 10-
Perioperative drugs
14 days old)
 Antibiotics (add to the irrigating 
 Penicillin G (1000-4000 IU/mL)
Several drugs should be available in the ophthalmic
solution for topical and 
Chloramphenicol (1-2 mg)
operating room for corneal and intraocular surgical proce-
intracameral use)
dures in animals (Table 2.2). These drugs may be adminis-
 Anti-inflammatory agents
a ui aai pe 'ins iae pue aiaq Aeio ai
-n pasn sinp l Aans un iaqr roaue
Corticosteroids:
1.0% prednisolone for topical
 ssd   s n  n
use
delivered topically may be placed on the cornea by an
 Methylprednisolone and/or
operating technician. Drugs injected into the anterior cham-
triamcinolone for
ber or elsewhere should be administered by the surgeon.
 subconjunctival injections
    s  s  
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
available to the veterinary ophthalmic surgeon include anti-
agents for topical use:
fibrin drugs, antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents, miotics 
and mydriatics, irrigating solutions, and viscoelastic sub-
 Flurbiprofen and suprofen
  ne     
 Control of pupil
      
Miotics:
 Topical 1% to 2% pilocarpine
injected subconjunctivally beneath the bulba1 conjunctiva.
Fibrin is an undesirable sequela of anterior uveitis in small
 Intracameral 1:100 acetylcholine
animals, and often occurs after the anterior chamber has
chloride
been entered. The two most useful antifibrin drugs are hep
 Mydriatics:
arin and tissue plasminogen activator. Heparin (1-2 [U/mL)
   n     
 Topical 1% tropicamide and 1%
solutions, thus impairing fibrin formation as the surgical
atropine
procedure is performed.
 Subconjunctival atropine
If intraocular hemorrhage occurs, the administration of
Intracameral 1:1000 adrenaline
irrigating solutions with heparin is temporarily stopped to
(epinephrine)
permit clotting. Heparin irrigating solutions can often be
resumed later in the surgical procedure. Later the blood clot
Topical and intracameral sterile 
 Saline, balanced salt solution,
di q paoai aua 1o eil aq Ae
irrigating solutions
 and lactated Ringer's solution 
In the event that excessive fibrin or clot formation occurs
 Intraocular hemostasis
Intracameral 1:1000 adrenaline
postoperatively, tissue plasminogen activato1 (tPA) may be
(epinephrine)
injected. tPA is a clot-specific fibrinolytic agent developed
Viscoelastic compounds 
1% sodium hyaluronate
by gene cloning: it foims a complex with fibrin, activating
plasminogen into plasmin that lyses fibrin, fibrinogen, and
 2% hydroxypropyl
 other procoagulant proteins into soluble by-products. As a
methylcellulose
result, the fibrin clot breaks down and is reabsorbed. tPA
 4% sodium chondroitin sulfate
ju I [enpaipu ul sasop ar sz ul uazoy pauieueu si
 plus 3% sodium hyaluronate
syringes ready for injection into the anterio1 chamber, usu-
ally several days after corneal and intraocular surgeries when
*All intracameral drugs should be sterile, without preservatives, and for single use
excessive fibrin has formed. tPA injections appear effective
for injection into the anterior chamber.
in dissolving most fibrin clots in the anterio1 chamber that
are less than 7-14 days' duration and in all species.
infection may be present (with full-thickness corneal lacera-
topical route as well as by intracameral injection. Topical
tions or corneal ulcerations), or added to the irrigating
antibiotics are the standard ophthalmic solutions and oint-
solutions used throughout the entire surgical procedure.
ments, and are usually instilled on the coinea at the con-
The concentrations of intracameral antibiotics must be very
clusion of corneal and intraocular surgeries. Intracameral
low to avoid direct damage to the corneal endothelium,
antibiotics may be injected into the anterio1 chamber when
and broad spectrum to provide maximum effectiveness.
30
Patient recovery/restraint
Preoperative treatment with topical and systemic anti-
 chamber during corneal and intraocular surgeries. They are
biotics to temporarily sterilize the conjunctival and coineal
available, ready for use during surgery, in 1 mL and 2 mL
surfaces is not usually successful. In one study, bacterial
sterile syringes. These agents are designed to coat and pro-
contamination of the anterior chamber of the dog during
tect the coineal endothelium during phacoemulsification
cataract surgery occurred in about 30% of the treated eyes.
and the insertion of an IOL, fill and maintain the anterior
These bacteria, usually staphylococcal species, undoubtedly
chamber, expand the capsula1 bag for IOL implantation,
contribute to the intensity of postoperative anterior uveitis
and temporarily increase intraocular pressure. They are also
in small animals after intraocular surgeries. As a result, topi-
Useful to maintain the anterior chamber during the repair of
cal and systemic antibiotics are usually administered fo1 a
full-thickness corneal lacerations. These agents can also be
iadoisd siep Z-s ro pue Aiaeadoand sep ma
used to manage miosis, intraocular hemorrhage, posterio1
capsular tears, and vitreous presentation.
reader should consult ophthalmic pharmacology texts for
Viscoelastic agents are divided, based on their physical
recommended doses.
properties, into: 1) cohesive (high viscosity/molecula1
Anti-inflammatory drugs are essential to control the post-
weight); and 2) dispersive (low viscosity/molecular weight).
operative inflammations that occur after the dog or cat ante-
Cohesive agents tend to aggregate and remain togethel.
nior
 chamber has been opened. Topical and systemic
 Dispersive agents tend to occupy the available space and
corticosteroids are usually administered to treat antelio1
spread apart. Cohesive agents are better to create space,
uveitis that can occur after coineal and intraocular surgeries.
expand the capsular bag, dilate pupils, and move tissues.
Corticosteroids
may be injected  subconjunctivally
to
In contrast, the dispersive viscoelastics are better to coat su1-
provide an additional route to treat the severe forms of
gical instruments, and corneal endothelium and epithelium,
anterio1 uveitis. Topical and systemic non-steioidal anti-
partition trouble areas, and tamponade posterio1 capsular
inflammatory agents are also administered pre- and perio-
tears. The supeicohesive viscoleastics may contribute more
to postoperative ocular hypertension. The dispersive viscoe-
lastics remain longer in the anterior chamber after injection,
anterior chambel, prostaglandins 1eleased from the uveal
and offer better protection of the coineal endothelium dul-
tissues stimulate a rapid miosis, breakdown of the blood-
ing phacoemulsification.
aqueous barrier, and the formation of fibrin in the aqueous
Selected viscoelastics include: Healon@ (Pharmacia-Upjohn),.
humo1. These non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents in the
a cohesive viscoelastic; Viscoat (Alcon Laboratories), a disper-
dog appear very useful in the maintenance of a widely
sive viscoelastic; Healon Gv (Pharmacia-Upjohn), a super-
dilated pupil during and after lens removal.
cohesive viscoelastic; and DuoVisc (Alcon Laboratories),
In intraocular surgery, control of the pupil may be critical
a combined cohesive and dispersive viscoelastic.
during the surgical piocedure and in the postoperative
 Although not listed in Table 2.2, a new group of drugs has
period. Miotics to constrict the pupil may be administered
 Iecently been added for use in the ophthalmic operating
-  o (dod - ) ioi
  n   s  
ally with 1:100 acetylcholine chloride when an immediate
tively and postoperatively fo1 the different antiglaucoma fil-
miosis is necessary. Intracameral miotics should be sterile,
tering and anterior chamber shunt surgeries. Excessive
single use, and free of preservatives.
fibrous capsule formation often surounds and eventually
Constriction of the pupil may be an immediate complica-
impairs the egress of aqueous humo1 through these surgical
tion during surgical entry of the anterior chamber. Pre- and
fistulae. Freshly mixed mitomycin C has been used in dogs
perioperative topical mydriatics and non-steroidal anti-
intraoperatively during different glaucoma surgical pro-
inflammatory agents assist in the maintenance of a widely
cedures to prolong their function. Additional details on
dilated pupil during surgery. Intracameral adrenaline (epi-
mitomycin C can be found in Chapter 11.
nephrine) (1:10oo) may also be injected to induce an
immediate mydriasis when the anterio1 chamber has been
Patient recovery/restraint
opened. As some adrenaline (epinephrine) is absorbed sys-
isoflurane is the recommended general anesthetic. Atropine
Several methods have been developed by veterinarians to
sulfate may also be injected subconjunctivally at the conclu-
  s d    s 
sion of intraocular surgery to help achieve mydriasis during
 nique most useful after most types of small animal ophthal-
mic surgery is the application of an Elizabethan collar
is still possible.
(Fig. 2.17). These collars effectively prevent the animal from
Sterile isotonic solutions are maintained in the ophthal-
touching the eyelids, adjacent orbital areas, and the eye with
mic operating room to irrigate coineoconjunctival surfaces,
either front or back paws, as well as from rubbing the opera-
and lavage the anterior chamber during intraocular sur-
tive site on the floor or other objects. The Elizabethan collar
geries. The most frequently used solutions are sterile 0.9%
is available commercially manufactured from plastic, nylon
saline for topical use and lactated Ringer's solution for intra-
OI cardboard materials, or can be self-constructed from card-
cameral use. Sometimes other drugs, such as heparin and
board, X-1ay film, o1 from plastic buckets or waste baskets.
antibiotics, are added to these solutions during corneal
Stronger materials, such as plastic collars, l
buckets,
and intraocular surgeries.
  so so r i e 'sia m 
u Aquoo pasn aie sinp jo sdnonn jeuonpe om
cardboard or X-ray film collars may be used for smaller dogs
small animal and equine ophthalmic surgery. Viscoelastic
and cats. For a self-constructed Elizabethan collar, the collar
 agents are very viscid solutions used to maintain the anterior
31
2
The operating room
[n horses, eyelid, conjunctival, and corneal sutures can
also cause postoperative discomfort. Unprotected, the horse
can rub the surgical wound sufficient to cause wound
dehiscence and marked swelling. loss of hair and open
skin wounds. There are several methods to prevent oI
minimize this self-induced trauma; they include a neck
cradle, cross-tying the hoise, and preferably a face mask
with hard eye cups to protect either the light or left, 01
both eyes.
As moisture can collect under these masks,
frequent cleaning and drying the area can markedly prolong
their use.
Subpalpebral medication systems
Subpalpebral medication systems were developed for small
Fig. 2.17 A self-constructed or commercially available Elizabethan collar is
animals and horses nearly 40 years ago, and have been
an effective deterrent against self-mutilation after ophthalmic surgery. The
employed 1outinely in horses. These systems consist of
collar should extend 4-8 cm beyond the animal's nose and utilized until the
eyelid/lateral canthotomy sutures have been removed.
tubing with or without a footplate that is placed in the ani-
mal's dorsal, dorsolateral or ventral conjunctival fornix
(Fig. 2.18), and continued through the eyelid to terminate
nose. The collar is secured to the neck with gauze bandage
on the animal's forehead or upper neck. The subpalpebral
tied loosely. Excellent alternatives are plastic buckets O1
system permits medication with solutions of the small
waste baskets. A circle is cut from the bottom of the con-
animal's eye while covered with a complete temporary tal-
tainer sufficient to slide over the head and fit loosely about
solrhaphy. This system also provides fo1 a 1eliable system
the neck. A leather o1 gauze bandage collar is threaded
to deliver medications to the horse eye which is painful
through four or more holes punched in the base of the con-
and difficult to treat as frequently as necessary.
tainel to secure the device to the animal's neck. The Elizabe-
The system can be self-constricted from silicone OI
than collal, commercial or self-constructed, should fit tight
polyethylene tubing with footplates (Fig. 2.19), and is
enough to prevent its dislodgement, but loose enough to
available commercially (often 1eferred to as one-hole sys-
prevent any breathing and eating problems.
tems). Simple silicone tubing may also be used and placed
Other restraint methods include hobbles for the front
into the conjunctival fornix through two holes in the upper
paws, and/or covering the front paws with bandages or
   e  s    
socks. Small animals can still rub the postoperative eye with
horse's nasolacrimal duct via the false nostril. As topical
these devices. Short-term postoperative sedation and tran-
medications may persist in the horse's nasolacrimal duct,
quilization may also be used to calm a dog or cat, but their
this route may be associated with greater systemic absorp-
use is usually restricted to only a few days.
tion of topical ophthalmic drugs, especially atropine.
A
B
 onui snaynsaue (eool yo 7w s-e aoalun) pawoyad s! ypolg auau jeiquoeidns ayl (e) asioy buipueas aun ui waass jeiqadledqns e jo zuawaneld gl'z dbid
the subcutaneous tissues above the supraorbital foramen) to provide local anesthesia and akinesia of the central upper eyelid. The cornea is anesthetized with a
few drops of topical anesthetic. Alternate sites include the lateral canthus and central ventral conjunctival fornix. (b) A 12-14 g hypodemic needle is inserted
piiaa aua aun zixa on xiuiog lengunjuon (esiop aun onu pue piladdn lenuan aun ypeauag
32
Subpalpebral medication systems
C
C
ayl (p) xiuuoy jaddn aya uuaim aneidiooy aun bulaeal aipaau ayn yhnoun pue onu! papeayn Ainyaien s! buigna egadjedgns ayl (2) pauos rgl'z dbid
subpalpebral tubing is attached to the patient's skin with either sutures or hospital tape, and usually terminates in the neck region (where the medications can
be injected). As the footplate can migrate towards the limbus from the intermittent eyelid movements, its position within the fornix is checked daily. This 
scheme allows convenient and reliable delivery of medications to horses at any daily frequency.
a face mask is used to prevent dislodgement and rubbing of
the system. The medication solutions are placed in a small
essu se aa   a u paa e as
 The administration of topical drugs in horse ensures deliv.
ery of the drug(s) to the eye and reduces the possibility of
injury to the treatment personnel. The powerful orbicularis
oculi muscle can gradually move the subpalpebral footplate
toward the limbus and peripheral coinea. If the footplate
touches the cornea, ulceration can result. As a preventive
measure, daily inspection of the footplate position is recom-
mended. Suture tension above the upper eyelid on the sub-
palpebral system, as well as a silicone disk glued to the
tubing external to the lid surface, are also possible. Place-
ment of the subpalpebral system in the lower conjunctival
foinix is another strategy.
Because knowledge of drug interactions is unknown, oph-
thalmic medications are mixed only during injections into
the system. Battery-powered and micro-osmotic pumps have
been used to deliver medications in very low volumes con-
tinuously and need further research.
Complications in horses with home-made subpalpebral sys-
tems, constructed from polyethylene tubing, depend on the
Experience of the nursing staff, construction of these systems,
and the duration of their use. The commercial systems are con-
Fig. 2.19 Footplate of a polyethylene subpalpebral system placed in the
structed of silicone tubing, the silicone footplates are larger
dorsolateral conjunctival fornix in a dog. With the footplate within the
conjunctival fornix, direct contact and damage to the cornea is avoided. As
and glued to the end of the tubing. and the systems are more
contractions by the orbicularis oculi will gradually force the footplate toward
flexible and resistant to breakage and leaks. These subpalpeb-
the cornea, daily inspection of the footplate is recommended. The
ral systems are often used to deliver topical medications to
lewjue Aue ui aa ue jo uogenipawu leidon spjuwuad wanss leqadjedqns
an equine patient's eye for several weeks. As with any catheter
species covered by a complete temporary tarsomhaphy.
system used for several weeks in horses, local wound care and
disinfection of the subpalpebral lid site is recommended.
[n small animals the system is placed while the animal
One study involving 150 horses reported the advantages
is still under general anesthesia. In the horse, the standing
and relative safety of subpalpebral medication systems. The
patient is either sedated or the system placed at the
key is close daily inspection of the system footplate, and co1-
conclusion of surgery.
rection of any positional changes as the powerful orbicularis
When the subpalpebral system is used in small animals, an
oculi muscle forces it toward the limbus and cornea. It must
Elizabethan collar is also recommended to prevent the animal
lemain safely within the conjunctival fornix to prevent any
from dislodging the system. In horses, a soft or hard cup with
direct coineal contact and damage.
33
2
 The operating room
[n the same study, mino1 complications (34%) included
ranged from 1 to 14 weeks. Complications were noted in
mild lid swelling, tearing of the system, and loss of the
cnly 15 patients and included coineal ulceration (4 horses),
injection cap (end of the tubing where topical medications
lid swelling (5 horses), conjunctival irritation (2 horses),
 e s s j l a a
leaking tubing (2 horses), catheter loss (1 horse), and lid
and may, in part, be associated with selfinduced trauma
abscess (1 horse).
by the patient. More severe complications (24%) included
None of these complications prevents reimplantation of
premature tubing removal, focal infection of the eyelid.
another subpalpebral system if the eye disease requires
loss of the footplate, and corneal ulceration (1 eye in
150 horses).
a subpalpebral system fo1 in pain and difficult horses is
 [n another study involving 101 hoises using home-made
unreliable at best, dangerous for the nursing staff, and
silicone systems, the duration of the subpalpebral systems
generally not possible long term (several weeks).
Further reading
Preoperative preparation and general
 Magrane WG: Cryosurgical lens extraction: uses
cyclophotocoagulation in glaucoma
Boes DA. Lindquist TD. Fritsche TR. Kalina RE:
and limitations, J Small Amim Pract 9:71-73.
therapy. In Berlin MS, editor: Lasers in
Effects of povidone-iodine chemical
1968.
Ophthatmology. Ophchatmology Clinics of
 preparation and saline irrigation on the
 Merideth RE, Gelatt KN: Cryotherapy in
North America, vol 6. Philadelphia, 1993.
perilimbal flora. Ophthalmology
veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North
WB Saunders. pp 449-472.
99:1569-1574. 1992.
Am: Small Anim Pract 10:837-846. 1980.
Gilger BC. Davidson MG, Nadelstein B. et al:
Boothe HW: Antiseptics and disinfectants. Vet
Roberts SM. Severin GA, Lavach JD:
Neodymium:ytrium aluminum garnet laser
Clin North Am: Small Anim Pract
 Cyclocryotherapy - Part Il. Clinical
treatment of cystic granula iridica in horses:
28:233-248. 1998.
comparison of liquid nitrogen and
eight cases [1988-1996). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Fowler ID. Schuh JCL: Preoperative chemical
nitrous oxide cryotherapy on glaucomatous
211:341-343. 1997.
preparation of the eye: a comparison of
eyes. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:828-833.
Gilmour MA: Lasers in ophthalmology. In
chlorhexidine diacetate, chlorhexidine
1984.
Bartels KE. editor: Lasers in Medicine and
gluconate, and povidone-iodine. I Am Anim
West CS. Barrie KP: The use of cryosurgery in a
Surgery,Veterinary Clinics of North America:
Hosp Assoc 28:451-457, 1992.
veterinary ophthalmology practice. Semin
Small Arnimal Practice, vol 32. Philadelphia,
Gelatt KN, Gelatt IP: Handbooh of Small Animal
Vet Med Surg 3:77-82. 1988.
2002. WB Saunders. pp 649-672.
Ophthalmic Surgery, Extraocular procedures,
 Wheeler CA. Severin GA: Cryosurgical epilation 
Lin CP: Laser-tissue interactions: basic
vol 1, Oxford, i994. Pergamon, pp 11-21.
 for the treatment of distichiasis in the dog
 principles. In Berlin MS, editor: Lasers in
Gelatt KN. Gelatt IP: Handbooh of Small Animal
and cat. J Am Arim Hosp Assoc 20:877-884.
Ophthalmology, Ophthatmology Clinics of
Ophthalmic Surgery, Corneal and intraocular
1984.
North America, vol 6. Philadelphia. 1993.
procedures, vol 2. Oxford. 1995. Pergamon.
WB Saunders. pp 381-392.
Lasers
pp 15-30.
 Nasisse MP, Davidson MG: Laser surgery in
 Roberts S. Severin GA, Lavach JD: Antibacterial
 Bacharach J. Lee DA: lridotomy. trabeculoplasty
 veterinary ophthalmology: perspectives and
 and trabecular ablation. In Berlin MS. editor 
potential. emin Vet MedSurg (SmallAnim)
 activity of dilute povidone-iodine solutions
used for ocular surface disinfection in dogs.
Lasers in Ophthalmology,Ophthalmology Clinics
3:52-61. 1988
Am J Vet Res 47:1207-1210. 1986.
of North America, vol 6. Philadelphia. 1993.
Nadelstein B, Davidson MG, Gilger BC: Pilot
WB Saunders. pp 425-436.
study on diode laser iridotomy in dogs.
Electrosurgery/electroepilation
Bosniak SL, Ginsberg G: Laser eyelid surgery:
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
Greene JE: Electrosurgery. In Bojrab Ml, editor:
evaluating the therapeutic options. In
6:230-232. 1996
Current Techniques in Small Animal Surgery.
Berlin MS,editor Lasers in Ophthalmology
Nasisse MP. Davidson MG, Olivero DK, et al:
ed 3. Philadelphia, 1990. Lea and Febiger.
Ophthalmology Clinics of North America.
pp 40-41.
vol 6. Philadelphia. 1993. WB Saunders.
canine intraocular tumors. Progress in
Halliwell wH: Surgical management of canine
pp 479-490.
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
distichia. J Am Vet Med Assoc 150:874-879.
 Brinkman MC, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG.
3:152-157. 1993.
1967.
 et al: Neodymium:YAG laser treatment of
Rosolen SG, Ganem S. Gross M, et al: Refractive
iris bombe and pupillary block glaucoma.
Lawson DD: Canine distichiasis. J Small Anim
corneal surgery on dogs: preliminary results
Pract 14:469-478. 1973.
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
of keratomileusis using a 193 nanometer
Ophthalmology 2:13-19. 1992.
Excimer laser, Veterinary and Comparative
Long RD: Treatment of distichiasis by
conjunctival resection. J Small Anim Pract
Cook CS: Surgery for glaucoma, Vet Clin North 
Ophthalmology 5:18-24. 1995.
32:146-148. 1991.
Am: Small Anim Pract 27:1109-1129. 1997.
 Sapienza JS. Miller TR, Gum GG, et al: Contact 
Cook CS. wilkie DA: Treatment of presumed
 transscleral cyclophotocoagulation using a
Stades FC. Gelatt KN: Diseases and surgery of
 iris melanoma in dogs by diode laser
neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser
the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN, editor:
 photocoagulation: 23 cases. Vet Ophthalmol
in normal dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2007.
2:217-225, 1999.
Comparative Ophthalmology 2:147-153. 1992.
Blackwell. pp 563-617.
 English RV, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG: Carbon 
Shieh E. Boldy KL, Garbus J: Excimer laser
Cryotherapy
 dioxide laser ablation for treatment of
keratectomy in the treatment of corneal
Chambers ED, Slatter DH: Cryotherapy (N2O)
limbal squamous cell carcinomas in horses.
opacities. Progress in Veterinary and
 of canine distichiasis and trichiasis: an
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:439-442. 1990.
Comparative Ophthalmology 2:75-79. 1992.
experimental and clinical report, J Small
 Fankhauser F. Fankhauser-Kwasniewska S.
 Sullivan TC, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG, et al:
Anim Pract 25:647-659. 1984.
England C. van der Zypen E: Laser
 Photocoagulation of limbal melanoma in
34
Further reading
dogs and cats: 15 cases (1989-1993). I Am
obtained in an experimental model. I Small
ofthe14th Annual MeetingoftheAmerican
Vet Med Assoc 208:891-894. 1996.
Amim Pract 37:371-375. 1996.
Association of Equine Practitioners, 1968.
Vainisi Sl. Packo KH: Management of giant
Skuta GL: Antifibrotic agents in glaucoma
p 324.
retinal tears in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
filtering surgery. Int Ophthalmol Clin
Myrna KE, Herring IP: Constant rate infusion
206:491-495. 1995.
33:165-182. 1993.
for topical ocular delivery in horses: a pilot
Whigham HM, Brooks DE. Andrew SA, et al:
Taylor MM. Kern TJ., Riis RC: Intraocular
study, Vet Ophthalmol 9:1-6. 2006.
 Treatment of equine glaucoma by
 bacterial contamination in canine cataract
Schoster IV: Revisiting ocular lavage systems for
 transscleral neodymium:yttrium aluminum
surgery. Vet Pathol 29:475. 1992.
the horse. In Proceedings of the 36th Anmual
garnet laser cyclophotocoagulation:
Ward DA, Ferguson DC. Ward SL. Green K.
Meeting of the American Association of Equine
a retrospective study of 23 eyes of 16 horses.
Kaswan Rl: Comparison of the blood-
Practitioners. 1990. pp 575-583.
Vet Ophthalmol 2:243-250. 1999.
aqueous barrer stabilizing effects of steroidal
Schoster IV: The assembly and placement of 
 and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents
ocular lavage systems in horses. Vet Med
 Perioperative ophthalmic drugs
in the dog. Progress in Veterinary and
87:460-471. 1992.
Gerding P. Essex-Sorlie D, Vasaune S. Yack R:
Comparative Ophthalmology 2:117-124. 1992.
Sweeney CR, Russell GE: Complications
 Use of tissue plasminogen activator for
Wilkie DA. Willis AM: Viscoelastic materials in
associated with use of a one-hole
intraocular fibrinolysis in dogs. Am J Vet Res
veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Ophthalmol
subpalpebral lavage system in horse: 150
53:894-896. 1992.
2:147-153. 1999.
cases [1977-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Gerding PA, Mclaughlin SA, Brightman AH,
211:1271-1274. 1997.
 Subpalpebral medication
 Essex-Sorlie D, Helper LC: Effects of
White SL: Construction and placement of a
intracameral injection of viscoelastic
Blair MJ. Gionfriddo JR. Polazzi LM, et al:
subpalpebral lavage system for medication
solutions on intraocular pressure in dogs.
 Subconjunctivally implanted micro-
of the eye. In Proceedings of the 43rd Anmual
Anm J Vet Res 50:624-628. 1989.
osmotic pumps for continuous ocular
Meeting of the American Association of Equine
Jampol LM, Jain S. Pudzisz B, Weinreb RN:
treatment in horses, Am J Vet Res
Practitioners. 1997. pp 160-162.
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
60:1102-1105. 1999.
Whitley RD. Lavach JD, Gelatt KN: Subpalpebral
Cataract surgery. Arch Ophchalmol
Brooks DE: Use of an indwelling nasolacrimal
 lavage system for administering frequent
112:891-894. 1994.
cnnula for the administration of
topical medications to the equine eye. Florida
Johnson RN. Balyeat E. Stern WH: Heparin
medication to the eye. British Veterinary
Veterinary Jourmal 8: 10-14. 1979.
 prophylaxis for intraocular fibrin.
Journal:EquineOphthatmology Supplement
Ophthalmology 94:597-601. 1987.
2:135-137. 1983.
Restraint
Liesegang Tl: Viscoelastic substances in
 Frauenfelder H. Mcllwraith W: Placement of a
Hazra S. De D. Roy B, et al: Use of ketamine,
ophthalmology. Surv Ophthalmol
 subpalpebral catheter in a standing horse.
 xylazine and diazepam anesthesia with
43:268-293. 1990.
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 74:724-728. 1979.
retrobulbar block for phacoemulsification
Martin C. Kaswan R, Gratzek A, Champagne E.
Gelatt KN: Postoperative medications in horses
in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 11:255-260. 2008.
 Salisbury MA. Ward D: Ocular use of tissue
and dogs. Vet Med 62:1165-1172. 1967.
Hendrix DVH: Eye examination techniques in
 plasminogen activator in companion
Gelatt KN: Blepharoplastic procedures in
horses. Clinical Techniques in Equine Practice
animals. Progress in Veterinary and
horses. J Amr Vet Med Assoc 151:27-44, 1967.
4:2-10. 2005.
Comparative Ophthalmology 3:29-36. 1993.
Gelatt KN: A modified subpalpebral system for 
Lavach Dj. Roberts SM, Severin GA: Current
Millichamp N). Dziezyc J: Comparison of
the horse. Journal of Equine Medicine and
 sade ro aa u sia
 flunixin meglumine and flurbiprofen for
Surgery 3:141-143. 1979.
Clin North Am LargeAnim Pract 6:435-449.
control of ocular irritative response in dogs.
Gelatt KN. Peterson JE. Myers V. McClure R:
1984.
Am J Vet Res 52:1452-1455. 1991.
Continuous subpalpebral medication in
 Rubin LF. Gelatt KN: Analgesia of the eye. In
Nasisse MP. Cook CS. Harling DE: Response of
the horse. I Am Armim Hosp Assoc 8:35-37.
Soma LR, editor: Textbooh of Veterinary
 the canine corneal endothelium to
1972.
Anesthesia, Baltimore, 1971, Williams and
intraocular irrigation with saline solution.
Giuliano EA, Maggs Dl. Moore CP, et al:
Wilkins. pp 489-499.
balanced salt solution, and balanced salt
 Inferomedial placement of a single-entry
Seim HB. Creed JE. Smith KW: Restraint
solution with glutathione. Am J Vet Res
 subpalpebral lavage tube for treatment of
 techniques for prevention of self-trauma.
47:2261-2265. 1986.
equine eye disease, Vet Ophthalmol
In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current Techmiques
Roze M. Thomas E, Davot JL: Tolfenamic acid
3:153-156. 2000.
in Small Animal Surgery. ed 3.
in the control of ocular inflammation in the
Martin B, Severin G: Topical medication of the
Philadelphia. 1990, Lea and Febiger.
dog: pharmacokinetics and clinical results
eye using a subpalpebral tube. In Proceedings
pp 42-49.
35
CHAPTER
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
Kirk N. Gelatt
Chapter contents
Introduction
37
Local or regional eyelid injections/nerve blocks
43
 Ophthalmic effects of general anesthetics
37
 Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in animals
44
 Preanesthetic medications
39
Choice of general anesthetic for selected ophthalmic
Injectable general anesthetics
40
surgical procedures
47
 Inhalational general anesthetics
40
 ADAPTATIONS FOR LARGE ANIMALS AND SPECIAL
Neuromuscular blocking agents
SPECIES
41
Ophthalmic drug and anesthetic drug interactions
42
Horse
47
Systemic diseases and general anesthesia
43
Cattle
48
Introduction
and the resistance of the fibrous tunics, e.g., the coinea and
sclera, to pressure. The different drugs administered to tran-
The advances in veterinary anesthesia have paralleled those
quilize, sedate, and/or anesthetize animals may affect IOP
in veterinary ophthalmic surgery, and have resulted in less
directly by influencing the aqueous humo1 dynamics, or indi-
anesthetic risk, and improved patient care and management.
rectly by causing hypercapnia, changes in extraocular muscle
Studies in different animal species, including humans, sug-
tone, hypoxemia, and hypothermia. Most general anesthetics
gest frequent similar ophthalmic responses to tranquilizers,
lower IOP through actions on the central nervous, respira-
narcotic analgesics, dissociative anesthetics, inhalational
tory, and circulatory systems. The reduction in IOP is also
general anesthetics, and neuromusculal relaxants; however,
lelated directly to the depth of general anesthesia. Most gen-
species differences can occur. Combinations of critical peri-,
eral anesthetics seem to lower IOP by an increase in the 1ate
intra-, and postoperative topical and systemic dnugs are com-
of aqueous humor outflow. Dnugs that directly cause ocular
mon in veterinary ophthalmic patients, and should be
hypotension can also produce ocular hypertension second-
accommodated by the choice of general anesthetic agents
ary to respiratory depression and acidosis that sometimes
and protocols. At the same time, concurrent general anesthe-
occurs with prolonged general anesthesia.
sia and ophthalmic needs must avoid drug selections that are
As a general observation, dnugs that produce an abrupt
contraindicated or incompatible when used simultaneously.
increase in arterial blood pressure will result in a moderate
A significant number of ophthalmic patients are old and
increase in IOP. This elevation in IOP is usually transient as
may have other diseases that may influence the choice of
the aqueous humor dynamics rapidly readjust and return to
general anesthetics. In this chapter the impact on the eye
normal levels of IOp. The major percentage of the resistance
and associated structures of dnugs administered as part of
of aqueous humo1 outflow is determined by the episcleral
general anesthesia will be summarized.
venous pressure. Drugs that produce marked increases in cen-
tral venous pressure and episcleral venous pressure can also
Ophthalmic effects of general anesthetics
temporarily elevate IOp. The increased central venous pres-
sure may also expand the anterior and posterior uveal vascu-
la1 beds, indirectly increasing IOP. Expansion of the uveal
Intraocular pressure
vascular channels may produce pressure on the vitreous
[ntraocular pressure (IOP) results from a relative equilib-
when the globe has been opened, and force the vitreous, its
rium between aqueous formation, aqueous humor outflow,
patellar fossa, and even the lens toward the anterior chamber.
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
Drug-induced changes in extraocular muscle tone can
Oculorespiratory cardiac reflex
influence [OP. As most animal species have lowel scleral
ligidity than humans, relaxation of the extraocula1 and
The oculocardiac o1 oculorespiratory cardiac reflex was fi1st
retrobulbar muscles markedly decreases the pressure of
-n a  a n sss o 
neous but independent reports. The afferent aspect of this
   so  ol   nos
reflex is carried in the long and short ciliary nerves, the cili-
thought to be directly related to the increase in extraocular
ary ganglion, and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal
muscle tone. In lightly anesthetized dogs, intravenous
nerve via the gasserian ganglion to the tigeminal sensory
administration of succinylcholine can result in a short-
nucleus. Short internuncial fibers within the reticular forma-
term elevation in IOP. This 5-10 min elevation in IOP is
tion connect the trigeminal sensory nucleus to the visceral
thought to be related to the unusual sensitivity of the
motor nucleus of the vagus nerve and its descending nerve
extraocular muscles to succinylcholine, and the initial
to complete the efferent limb to the heart. The afferent limb
muscle fasciculations that occur during the onset of the
of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve does
drug's action. When the insertions of the extraocular mus-
not appear to be unique. Intraorbital stimulation of the
cles are severed in the cat, succinylcholine administration
third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves will also produce con-
does not change IOP.
sistent respiratory prolongation, but more variable cardiac
Animals, in general, possess lower ocular rigidity than
responses.
humans. As a result, when either the cornea or the sclera
is incised and IOP released, the entire globe tends to col-
oculorespiratory cardiac reflex (documented in dogs, cats,
lapse. The sclera in both the dog and cat possesses elastic
horses, and birds), and whether the cardiac, the respiratory.
fibers, in addition to the major complement of collagen,
01 a combination of both components occurs. In addition to
and as a result the sclera lacks rigidity. When the globe is
op au se yns saads aos u eiipi panu au
collapsed, corneal and intraocular surgical procedures are
the concurrent 1espiratory depression can be more pro-
more difficult to perform. The level of iOP in animals with
found. The reflex may be initiated by a number of ophthal-
low ocular rigidity also enhances the effects of retrobulba1
mic manipulations, including ocular pressure massage fo1
muscle tone. Once the globe has collapsed, extraocular
glaucoma, intraorbital injections of local anesthetics (which
muscle tone may become of greater concein,
，tending
are also used to block this reflex), surgical traction of the
to distort and displace forwaid the vitreous, lens, and ante-
extraocular muscles, and manipulations of the eyelid mus-
nior uvea.
des. In dogs under general anesthesia, neuromuscular
blocking agents, and controlled ventilation, only the cardiac
portion of this reflex can be appreciated.
Corneal drying and exposure
There may be some individual animal variations relative
Corneal abrasions, drying of the cornea, conjunctival irita-
to the oculorespiratory cardiac reflex in the dog and cat,
tion, and reduced tear foimation have been associated with
with only some animals demonstrating this 1eflex consis-
general anesthetics in humans and animals. Ketamine in
tently. The primary effect in the cat seems to be respiratory:
a oe  ie m o aa s s
in the dog. respiratory depression is the dominant response.
individual roles of reduced tear formation rates and loss of
but bradycardia can develop. To manage the oculorespira-
the protective blink reflex have not been differentiated.
tory cardiac reflex, a number of strategies have been devel-
Hence, in cats undergoing ketamine anesthesia the corneas
 oped. To diminish o1 completely block the vagal effect on
should be protected by copious amounts of ophthalmic
the heart, intravenous atropine is the standard treatment.
petroleum-based bland ointment and/or the eyelids closed
Unfortunately, atropine administration yields inconsistent
temporarily by tape.
lesults. Consequently, the rationale to administer parenteral
 The same applies in dogs, and petroleum-based bland
atropine preoperatively in dogs differs among veterinary
ointment should be applied to both eyes, depending
anesthesiologists. One school 1ecommends against the 1ou-
on the type of ophthalmic surgery. The rate of aqueous
tine administration of parenteral atropine preoperatively. If
tear formation in dogs, as determined by Schirmer's tear
bradycardia develops during the surgical procedure, surgery
test, after combinations of subcutaneous atropine, intra-
is temporarily halted and atropine is administered intrave-
venous thiamylal sodium, and halothane o1 methoxyflu-
nously. Other veterinary anesthesiologists continue to 1ec-
Aq pue uu ol um %oz inoqe Aq panpai sem aui
ommend routine use of preoperative parenteral atropine to
97% after 60 min. Another study has indicated that sub-
prevent the potential oculorespiratory cardiac 1eflex from
cutaneous atropine reduces Schirmel's tea1 test levels in
developing.
-se p iae u o ie ss inoqe Aq saop ieou
Unfortunately.
intravenous atiopine may not only
tration. In dogs and cats with reduced levels of tear foima
-d ae a ose ie o ae  ai  an a
tion, the administration of parenteral and/or topical
sibility of ventricula1 dysrhythmias. The intravenous dose of
atropine can abruptly lower Schirmel's tear test levels to
atropine to treat and/o1 prevent the oculorespiratory cardiac
zero, and initiate the clinical signs of keratoconjunctivitis
reflex in the dog seems critical. In children, although the
sicca.
prophylactic use of parenteral atropine seems to lower the
Although the topical effects of general anesthetics have
incidence of the oculocardiac reflex, it has also been asso-
s s ra      
ciated with severe and prolonged ventricular dysrhythmias.
petroleum-based bland ointment is applied liberally
to
Low levels (0.015 mg/kg IV) of atropine in dogs with an
protect the corneoconjunctival surfaces during prolonged
experimentally induced oculorespiratory cardiac 1eflex may
general anesthesia.
actually enhance Iespiratory depression. Higher doses of
38
Preanesthetic medications
atropine (0.023-0.04 mg/kg) may eliminate the b1adyca1dia
progressive mydriasis with deep general anesthesia. For con-
but prolong the apnea. Of these two complications, clinical
junctival and coineal surgical procedures, pupil size is often
management of apnea with controlled ventilation is the
adjusted preoperatively depending upon the concurrent
most feasible solution. An alternative to atropine in the
ophthalmic disease. Often the pupil is dilated. Dnug-
dog is glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg IV, usually given in two
induced iridocycloplegia helps reduce the pain associated
divided doses; often the second dose is not necessary) which
with preoperative anterior uveitis, and pupil dilatation
appears as effective in preventing the oculorespiratory car-
reduces the likelihood of posterior synechiae foimation.
diac reflex but produces tachycardia.
In the event of corneal and intraocular surgery, control of
Under most circumstances, if the oculorespiratory cardiac
pupil size may become critical. Maximum mydriasis is essen-
reflex develops during ophthalmic surgery, surgery is sus-
tial fo1 cataract extraction; preoperative pupillary dilatation is
pended for several minutes and the depth of general anesthesia
usually achieved with 0.3% scopolamine combined with
is increased. Less aggressive surgery is then slowly resumed
10% phenylephrine, 1% atropine, 01 a combination of 1%
while the respiratory and cardiac rates are carefully monitored.
atropine and 10% phenylephrine. Topical non-steroidal
Fortunately, the onset of the oculorespiratory cardiac reflex
anti-inflammatory agents, such as 0.03% sodium flurbipro-
is usually in the early aspects of surgery, and in intraocular
fen, can also assist in the maintenance of pupillary dilatation.
surgical procedures before critical manipulations have begun.
Prostaglandins appear to be released when the anterior
chamber is entered surgically and initiate strong miotic activ-
ity. Endocapsular phacoemulsification of canine cataracts
Eye position
lequies maximal mydriasis. Without the combination of
During the induction of general anesthesia most injectable
topical mydriatics, topical and parenteral corticosteroids,
and inhalational anesthetics produce a downward and
and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, the microsurgi-
inward rotation of the eye that limits access to the cornea,
cal refinements and higher success rates fo1 canine cataract
anterior chamber, and anterior segment. As the globe is
surgery would not have been possible.
1otated ventromedially, the nictitating membrane simulta-
neously protracts to nearly cover the coinea. Some degree
Extraocular muscular tone
of enophthalmia also develops, decreasing further the expo-
j pue ae a uj ains i o pe a aijo ais
 The extraocular muscles are well developed in the dog and,
breeds of dogs, access to the eye is already limited, and these
in addition to the four rectus and two oblique extraocular
drug effects can severely compromise surgical exposure of the
muscles, include the retractor oculi muscle that inserts onto
eye. This poor positioning of the globe can handicap the
the sclera under the rectus muscle insertions and behind the
surgeon by impairing observation of the entire coinea and
globe's equator. This bulk of extraocular muscles may pro-
anterior segment,
 increasing the difficulties of surgical
duce pressure and indent the posterior segment of the globe.
even with optimal general anesthesia. The extraocular mus-
Several strategies have been developed to correct the ota-
 cle pressure, combined with the low scleral rigidity of the
m ose s asoda  ao a po 
 dog. seems to be more important once the anterior chamber
general anesthetics. Unfortunately, most of these remedies
 has been entered, as during cataract and lens removal. [f
general anesthetics also increase central venous pressure,
ative risks. Sutures may be placed in the anterior sclera o1 the
additional orbital pressure on the globe may develop from
rectus muscle insertions, and anchored to the eyelid specula
the extensive venous plexuses within the orbit.
01 drapes. Scleral clips may be used similarly. Retrobulbar
 [n the cat, the effects of the extraocular muscles during
injections with saline positioned directly into the extraocular
general anesthesia seem less important than in the dog. This
muscle cone to push the eye forward, or exteinal to the
may be caused by the poorly developed cat extraocular mus-
extraocular muscle cone to turn the globe, may also produce
dles and the limited orbital space. As a result, increased pres-
noticeable inward compression of the posterior segment and
sure on the posterior segment is less important and does not
additional pressure on the vitreous body. The animal coinea
appear to be a problem clinically.
and sclera unfortunately lack rigidity, unlike humans and pri-
Several strategies have been developed to address the
mates in general, and with traction or compression these
when the anterior chamber has been entered surgically.
val and corneal surgery, the distortion of the globe associated
Neuromuscular blocking agents have now become routine
with these procedures may be inconsequential. However,
greatly reducing extraocular muscle tone, these agents result
ventable pressure on the globe, in whole or in part, should
in optimal eye position for microsurgery.
be avoided. Administration of the different neuromuscular
a rexa r aau a eda se se 
Preanesthetic medications
tions to manipulate the position of the globe for surgery.
Pupil size
Preanesthetic medications are designed to facilitate a smooth
sd     s  
Pupil size has been used historically to monitor the depth of
drug-related complications. The controversial routine use of
general anesthesia. Without local control by topical mydria-
parenteral atropine as an anticholinergic agent has already
tics o1 miotics, pupil size may vary from marked dilatation
been discussed. Parenteral glycopyrrolate (0.01 mg/kg [M)
to pinpoint in the lighter levels of general anesthesia, to
is preferred because of fewer cardiac effects.
39
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
 Sedatives and tranquilizers are often employed preopera-
minimize salivation. After general anesthesia is sufficiently
tively, especially before intraocular surgery. Both sedatives
deep to permit intubation, general inhalational anesthesia
and tranquilizers lower IOP, probably by increasing the out-
may be initiated for longer duration surgeries.
flow of aqueous humor. Among the phenothiazine tranqui-
There are other injectable agents that are now used as
lizers, acepromazine maleate is the most frequently
induction agents for small animals, and experiences with
recommended. Acepromazine maleate (0.03-0.1 mg/kg
some of these agents, such as propofol, midazolam, and Tel-
[M} is frequently utilized, not only because of the resultant
azol, have been excellent. Propofol, as an induction agent,
tranquilization, but also for its anti-arrhythmogenic effect
has a recommended intravenous dose in small animals of
associated with the stabilization of the myocardium against
6 mg/kg. and then to effect, and has largely replaced the bar-
catecholamine stimulation and arrhythmogenic agents. The
biturates. After rapid, smooth and excitement-free onset of
phenothiazine tranquilizers also possess an anti-emetic
general anesthesia, the duration is also relatively short
action perioperatively. Both postoperative vomiting and
(range 2.5-9 min). Usually administered as a slow bolus
retching in humans can elevate IOP indirectly by abrupt
injection (to avoid apnea) fo1 the induction of inhalational
venous pressure increases. The same effect probably occurs
anesthesia, propofol can be injected 1epeatedly; however, its
in dogs.
short duration of effect requires several injections for rela-
Xylazine is not recommended perioperatively in ophthal-
tively short periods of time. Recovery after propofol is usu-
mic patients because it can cause vomiting and severe brady-
ally very rapid, and excitement free. Propofol is thought to
cardia. Acepromazine may slightly prolong the recovery from
 d a  u r ol 
general anesthesia, hypothermia, and arterial hypotension,
agent world-wide in small animals, and the sole general
but usually provides a smoother, less traumatic recovery.
anesthetic fo1 many short-term ophthalmic procedures.
Most narcotics seem to slightly lower IOP in those animal
Propofol (2,6-disopropylphenol) is only soluble in wateI,
species studied. The two major advantages of narcotics are
and is mixed immediately before use. It comes in sterile
  (  s id aie s as (i 
glass ampoules and without preservatives. It fits a two-
be chemically antagonized if drug reversal is necessary.
compartment open model, with rapid distribution from
Unfortunately, most of these agents except for meperidine
the plasma into the tissues and rapid metabolic clearance
are also potent vagotonic and respiratory depressants. Use
from plasma. It is metabolized by conjugation primarily
of narcotic derivatives prio1 to and following ophthalmic
by the liver and kidney. It is administered as an intravenous
surgery has become more frequent. Occasionally, if the post-
bolus at doses that range from 2.5 mg/kg (sedated dog) to
operative recovery becomes traumatic, parenteral narcotics
8 mg/kg (unsedated dog) to allow tracheal intubation and
are quite effective, probably because of the analgesic effects.
the initiation of inhalational anesthesia. Propofol's anesthe-
sia is quite brief; in unsedated dogs recovery is only 15 min.
Propofol can also be used for the maintenance of anesthe-
Injectable general anesthetics
n  s n  s 
 bolus. Propofol has minimal analgesic effects, and drugs
 Most barbiturates lower IOP in animals. This ocular hypo-
with analgesic effects, such as opiates, should be adminis-
tension seems to result from depression of the diencepha-
tered concurrently. Propofol lowers IOP in humans, and
lon, an increased facility of aqueous humor outflow, and
( po aap e) sop u paodai aag ose siu aa si
relaxation of the extraocular muscles. Ultrashort-acting bar-
Midazolam is a water-soluble benzodiazepine. It does not
biturates, such as thiopental and thiamylal (8-12 mg/kg IV)
induce anesthesia when used alone; hence midazolam is
 l n  a e   
often combined with ketamine, or one of the ultrashort-
administration of these drugs seems to be related to relaxa-
acting thiobarbiturates (thiamylal o1 thiopental) to induce
sonbe un asau ue pue sasnu renoenxa a jo uon
general anesthesia. Telazol consists of equal parts of a disso-
humor outflow rather than from arterial blood pressure
ciative agent, tiletamine, and a benzodiazepine, zolazepam.
changes. As these agents are potent respiratory depressants,
Once in solution, Telazol has a limited shelf-life of 4 days
endotracheal intubation should follow immediately after
at 1oom temperature and 14 days at 4°C. The recommended
barbiturate administration. Intubation should be standard
dose fo1 dogs is 6.6-13.2 mg/kg IM or SC, and fo1 cats 9.7-
protocol in all ophthalmic surgical patients. Inteimittent
15.8 mg/kg IM or SC. After deep intramuscular injection of
and often copious lavage of the coineal and conjunctival
Telazol, onset of anesthesia is within 2-5 min and the recov-
surfaces during surgery may exit the nasolacrimal system
ery to walking requires 3-5 h. Induction of anesthesia with
and accumulate in the mouth and pharynx.
Telazol is usually smooth, but recovery can be traumatic.
Ketamine may be an exception to the rule for injectable
anesthetics. Elevated IOP has been associated with keta-
 Inhalational general anesthetics
mine, with increased tone of the extraocular muscles in
humans. Ketamine, recommended for the cat, has been
Ieported to either not change or increase IOP in the cat by
All of the available inhalational general anesthetics lower
10%. Ketamine, used alone, is not recommended for the
IOP. The extent of ocular hypotension is directly related to
dog because of its tendency to produce seizures. Ketamine,
the depth of general anesthesia. The lowering of IOP after
a dissociative anesthetic, may be injected intramuscularly
 inhalational anesthetics seems to result from collective drug
        
actions on the respiratory, circulatory, and central nervous
is often combined with diazepam in dogs to reduce the pos-
systems. The changes in arterial pressure associated with
sibility of seizures and produce muscular relaxation. An
inhalational anesthetics do not seem to lower the IOP per
anticholinergic, such as atropine, is also administered to
se, but central venous pressure can be important. Changes
40
Neuromuscular blocking agents
in blood gases and the methods of ventilation may also
influence [OP. Some of these agents may also lower IOP
by increasing the facility of aqueous humor outflow. Pio-
longed general anesthesia with changes in blood pH and
other complications may actually increase IOP. For instance,
experiments in dogs with increased inspired COz indicate
that IOP may rise afte1 initial depression. Hypoventilation
that leads to hypercapnia and hypoxemia can eventually
lesult in elevation of IOP.
 asad a  sin sas ao rno
reduction in IOP after inhalational general anesthetics may
be substantial. Methoxyflurane in humans can lower IOP
 by 15-25%. Halothane-induced ocular hypotension in chil-
A
dren may be of greater magnitude in glaucomatous eyes
than in normal eyes, but with more variability. Methoxyflu-
rane in dogs presented for cataract surgery lowers IOP an
average of 11 mm Hg with a range of 5-20 mm Hg.
[soflurane is the most frequently used inhalational general
anesthetic for veterinary ophthalmic surgery (dog, cat, and
horse most frequently). and has largely replaced halothane
during the last decade. Halothane produces rapid induc-
tion and recovery associated with dose-ielated depression
of the central nervous system. When combined with pre-
anesthetics, such as acepromazine, the need for halothane
is reduced. Halothane produces more depression of cardiac
B
function than methoxyflurane, and causes more cardiac dys-
rhythmias than isoflurane. Halothane causes higher cardiac
Fig. 3.1 Position of the canine eye under general anesthesia (a) before and
(b) after the administration of neuromuscular blocking agents. Note the
sensitivity to catecholamines; lidocaine (2-4 mg/kg IV in
improved exposure of the cornea and globe.
dogs and 1-2 mg/kg IV in cats) can be used to treat these
arthythmias. If adrenaline (epinephrine) is planned for
leading to hypercarbia and hypoxemia, IOP may increase.
hemostasis during ophthalmic surgery, isoflurane should
be selected over halothane. Halothane is a poor analgesic.
 In contrast, succinylcholine administered intravenously can
elevate IOP in several animal species including the dog
and is usually combined with nitrous oxide.
Isoflurane is now preferied to halothane. The drug is non-
and cat (Fig. 3.2). The transient increase in IOP occurs
almost immediately after succinylcholine administration,
flammable at anesthetic concentrations, is highly stable, and
and appears to be directly associated with initial contraction
is not broken down by sunlight. Isoflurane has a faster onset
 of the extraocular muscles during the depolarization pro-
of action and recovery because of its low blood solubility.
cess. In humans, reported sensations after administration
Like halothane, isoflurane depresses cardiovascular function
of succinylcholine include a feeling of increased orbital
in a dose-dependent manner, but is less arrhythmogenic
pressure, vertigo, and diplopia. The effect on IOP by paren-
than halothane. Isoflurane may be used in patients with
        
anesthesia at the time succinylcholine is administered. In
liver. At this time, isoflurane is recommended as the general
unanesthetized persons, the average elevation of IOP after
anesthetic of choice for most aged and debilitated small ani-
mal patients. Sevoflurane is also becoming popular in many
succinylcholine administration was 15 mm Hg. In light
levels of general anesthesia after succinylcholine administia-
veterinary practices world-wide.
tion, [OP is usually increased 2-4 min later; during deep
general anesthesia IOp is not affected. The period for drg-
Neuromuscular blocking agents
Telated elevation in IOP is usually 5-6 min.
Neuromuscular blocking agents have recently been added
Effect of succinylcholine on
50
to the general anesthetic protocol for ophthalmic patients to
IOP in the dog 
improve exposure of the cornea and eye during intraocular
Drug
30
dogs produces relaxation of all of the extraocular muscles,
and within 30-60 s causes the eye to 1etum to its normal axis
20
Control
from the ventromedial deviation associated with most general
10
anesthetic agents (Fig. 3.1). In cats administered succinylcho-
line, the globe may assume a superolateral divergent position.
01:0 60:0 80020:0 90:0 50:0 00:0000 20:0 10:0 000
Neuromuscular blocking agents have the potential to
n= 5 eyes
Minutes
influence IOP depending on thei1 mechanism of action. In
humans, d-tubocurarine lowers [OP by 1elaxation of the
Fig. 3.2 The effect of IV succinylcholine on intraocular pressure (IOP) (mm
extraoculal muscles; howevel, if the patient hypoventilates,
Hg) in dogs under light general anesthesia.
41
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
Studies in normal cats suggest that succinylcholine not
inhalational general anesthetic is administered at sufficient
only elevates IOP an average of 10-12 mm Hg, but also
levels to maintain unconsciousness and analgesia. Without
causes a forward displacement of the lens and iris when
adequate ventilation, these agents may cause respiratory aci-
the anterior chamber is open. In an extracapsular cataract
dosis within as short a time as 5 min.
extraction, any forward displacement of the iris, lens, and
Most general anesthetics cause a ventromedial rotation
presumably the vitreous is a cause for concern. If this effect
 of the globe, and local attempts to improve exposure of the
occurs during the latter part of extracapsula1 cataract extrac-
eye have significant limitations and complications. After the
 a ream e si adin s n un a 'uo
administration of neuromuscular relaxants, the globe position
increased pressure generated with the vitreous body.
While succinylcholine acts as a depolarizing neuromuscular
[OP appears low. With pancuronium (0.06 mg/kg IV), the
agent, members of the non-depolarizing relaxants, including
ocula1 changes persist fo1 about 20-30 min following drug
d-tubocurarine, gallamine triethiodide, and pancuronium
administration. The relaxation of the extraocular muscles
bromide, have not been associated with a drug-related eleva-
releases the normal pressure on the globe, and the forward dis-
tion in IOP. Newer neuromuscular blocking agents used
placement of the vitreous, lens, and anterior uvea is minimal.
clinically, such as pancuronium bromide, vecuronium, and
Use of these neuromuscular blocking agents may contrib-
atracunum l
besylate,
have shorter
dose-related
effects
ute directly to improved cataract surgery results in dogs.
(Table 3.1). As inactivation of these neuromuscular blocking
Once the anteriol chamber is surgically entered, and the
majority of the cataract removed via extracapsular extraction
concurrent use of potent topical anticholinesterase miotics
O1 phacoemulsification, the forward displacement o1 central
in glaucomatous patients, such as echothiophate iodide and
protrusion of the posterior lens capsule within the pupil is
demecanium bromide, is contraindicated. Drgs available
Ieduced as much as possible (Fig. 3.3). With reduced vitre-
fo1 1eversal of these neuromuscular relaxants include edro-
ous pressure on the posterio1 lens capsule, posterio1 lens
phonium, neostigmine, and pyridostigmine.
capsule tears during surgery are kept to a minimum.
 The neuromuscular blocking agents include atracurium,
Neuromuscular blocking agents that provide about 20-
     
40 min of muscle relaxation are the most useful (see
late has minimal cardiovascular effects at recommended doses,
q i iie an ae s as (ie a
has a relatively short duration of action without apparent
the anterior chamber is entered, and should provide extrao-
cumulative effects, and elimination is independent of liver
cula1 muscle relaxation for the duration that the anterio1
and kidney function. An intravenous bolus of atracurium
chamber is open, the lens is delivered, and most if not all
(0.25 mg/kg), injected over 1 min, usually provides paralysis
of the time for the apposition of the corneal or limbal
of the dog fo1 about 30 min. Fo1 an additional intravenous
wound. If an additional dose is necessary, as with bilateral
bolus of atracurium, the dosage is reduced to 0.15 mg/kg.
cataract surgeries, the second dose of neuromuscular block-
Atracurium can be antagonized, if necessary, with intravenous
 ing agent is usually reduced by one-half.
ed1ophonium at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg. Bradycardia has been
associated with edrophonium administration. Either atropine
Ophthalmic drug and anesthetic
administered previously or the very slow injection of edropho-
nium minimizes this effect. Neostigmine (2.5 mg), combined
drug interactions
with atropine (1.2 mg). can also be used intravenously
to antagonize the effects of atracurium. The total dose of
Sometimes the ophthalmic medications and drugs asso-
 neostigmine should not exceed 0.1 mg/kg.
ciated with general anesthesia have possible conflicts. For
Pancuronium bromide is another frequently used neuro-
instance, the preoperative treatment of the eye may involve
muscular blocking agent for canine intraocular surgery. An
a topical cholinergic miotic, but the anesthetic protocol
intravenous injection of pancuronium (0.06 mg/kg) causes
includes the administration of parenteral anticholinergic
a maximum neuromuscular blockage of 3-5 min that p1o-
agents, such as atropine. Fortunately, the effects of topical
duces skeletal muscle relaxation and apnea for about
   r    
40 min. However, these muscle relaxants are not anesthetics.
systemic dilution that occurs with parenteral dnugs. For
Fo1 their proper use, the patient's respiration is carefully
instance, studies indicate that parenteral glycopyrrolate
controlled by mechanical ventilation, neuromuscula1 and
a Aue ay lou saop sop [ou un (l y/ lo'o)
cardiovascular functions are adequately monitored, and the
on IOP and pupil size. Parenteral atropine and glycopyTIO-
late at the recommended clinical doses in dogs with glau-
coma do not elevate IOP.
Table 3.1 Doses and length of paralysis with non-depolarizing
neuromuscular blocking agents in dogs
the patient about to be anesthetized. Systemic carbonic
anhydrase inhibitors are administered to lower IOP, but
Length of
can produce a temporary metabolic acidosis and considel-
Drug
IV dose (mg/kg)
effect (min)
able diuresis. Anticholinesterase miotics used for the treat-
Atracurium
0.5
15-80
ment of glaucoma can reduce the levels of plasma and 1ed
blood cell cholinesterases, rendering the patient more sensi-
 Alcurium 
0.06-0.1
30-40 
tive to the neuromuscular blocking agents and causing a
 Pancuronium
0.06-0.1
20-40 
prolonged effect. Fortunately, use of miotics for the treat-
ment of glaucoma has become infrequent, and generally
Vecuronium
0.06-0.1
15-20
replaced by the prostaglandins.
42
Local or regional yelid injections/neve blocks
Fig. 3.3 Effects of extraocular muscle tone during
general anesthesia on the posterior lens capsule
(a) after extracapsular cataract removal. (b)
Changes in the posterior lens capsule after the
 administration of neuromuscular blocking agents
A
B
Hyperosmotic agents, such as mannitol and glycerol, are
doses is usually best in these dogs, until the topical and/o1
 ni    n 
systemic levels of corticosteroids can be reduced or elimi-
of IOP, and to reduce the size of the vitreous body preoper-
nated. Oral glycerin to lower IOP and reduce the vitreous
atively. In patients with cardiac and pulmonary disease.
aa a se sop oaqe u papuai iou si aeds
acute increases in vascular volume associated with hyperos
is converted to blood glucose. Intravenous mannitol does
motic agents may be highly significant. Topical sympatho-
not elevate blood glucose, and is the recommended systemic
mimetic agents, such as 2% adrenaline (epinephrine) and
osmotic agent for the dog and cat.
10% phenylepinephrine, are important to the veterinary
ophthalmologist for their effect on IOP and as mydriatics.
cats, and its presence can complicate intraocular surgery as
Adrenaline (epinephrine) may also be injected (1:10 000
well as potentially contribute to postoperative intraocular
to 1:100 000 concentrations) into the anterio1 chamber fo1
hemorrhage and retinal detachments. The development of
mydriasis, and to control inidal hemorrhage. Use of halo-
these sequelae following apparent successful cataract surgery
thane as the general anesthetic with these adrenergic agents
with an intact corneal or corneoscleral incision should
is associated with occasional extrasystoles and arrhythmias,
necessitate periodic monitoring of blood pressure. Clinical
because the myocardium has been sensitized to these cate-
management of these complications must include successful
cholamines. Selection of isoflurane as the general anesthetic
treatment of the systemic hypertension.
for these patients is recommended.
 Dogs with advanced renal, cardiovascula1, and hepatic
diseases are not usually candidates for elective intraocula1
surgeries. Unless these diseases are successfully treated and
Systemic diseases and general anesthesia
the animals life span significantly increased, the risks and
costs of general anesthesia and time for surgery generally
Many ophthalmic surgical candidates may have certain sys-
negate elective intraocular surgeries in these patients.
temic diseases that potentially can affect the choice of gen-
eral anesthesia, the duration of general anesthesia, and the
Local or regional eyelid injections/
administration of other dnugs. In cataract surgery in dogs.
nerve blocks
animals with diabetes mellitus are the second largest group
of patients following those with inherited cataracts. In fact,
cataract secondary to diabetes mellitus is the most frequent
Eyelid injections are used more often in large animals than
type of metabolic cataract in the dog and the second most
in small animals fo1 eyelid akinesia, but not local anesthe-
frequent cataract surgery in America. Successful clinical
sia, and are targeted at the palpebral nerve and its branches
management of the diabetic dog with cataract must not only
as it extends forward to innervate the orbicularis oculi mus-
accommodate the daily control of blood glucose levels, but
de, the powerful sphincter muscle that closes the upper and
also control the lens-induced uveitis for optimal success
lower eyelids. In general, as these palpebral nerve blocks are
rates after cataract removal. One strategy in diabetic dogs is
placed closer to the palpebral fissure, the effects are moie
to substitute aspirin for systemic prednisolone. Topical anti-
localized as the main nerve trunk branches into numerous
prostaglandins can also reduce the dosage for systemic corti-
smaller nerves. Often topical anesthetics are instilled along
costeroids as well as antiprostaglandins, such as carprofen
with eyelid nerve blocks to piovide surface anesthesia and
(Rimadyl; Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, PA) and flunixin
permit detailed ophthalmic examinations, subconjunctival
meglumine (Banamine?; Schering-Plough, Kenilworth, NI).
injections, collection of samples from the cornea and con-
Administration of topical corticosteroids and even sys-
junctiva for cytology o1 culture, applanation tonometry.
temic prednisolone may be necessary in some diabetic dogs
and other minimally invasive procedures.
The exception in the horse is the supraorbital nerve block,
Some elevation of blood glucose levels may occur with both
in which local anesthetic is injected at the supraorbital fora-
topical and systemic corticosteroids in postoperative dia
men, which provides both mid upper lid akinesia and local
betic dogs. Maintenance of preoperative levels of insulin
anesthesia. Local ophthalmic nerve blocks in large animals
43
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
are used for ophthalmic examinations, especially in the
horse, and as an adjunct for local or general anesthesia as
 part of eyelid, orbital or ocular surgery.
Eyelid injections/nerve blocks in the dog
Eyelid injections are used in the dog both fo1 eye examina-
tion in dogs with very painful ophthalmic disorders, as well
as for therapy. Spastic entropion in the dog. a relatively rare
condition, may also benefit immediately from the palpebral
nerve block.
For akinesia of the dog eyelid, local anesthetic (1-3 mL)
   e s n  
Fig. 3.5 To perform the palpebral nerve block in the horse, local anesthetic
arch at its most lateral position o1 approximately 1-2 cm
is injected subcutaneously at the highest projection of the zygomatic arch
posterior to the lateral canthus (Fig. 3.4). An effective anes-
 aun jo lepnen Aaneipaww anoon aun ui (y - Auo aau engadied)
a a a jo orp a  si  o
zygomatic arch (B - contains the auriculopalpebral nerve, artery, and vein),
lid, an inability to close the palpebral fissure with a fixed
or in the supraorbital fossa within the supraorbital process of the frontal
bone (C). The first two nerve blocks provide only lid akinesia while the
and relaxed orbicularis oculi muscle, and an everted lower
supraorbital nerve block provides both akinesia and analgesia of the
eyelid. The dog continues to have complete sensitization of
mid upper eyelid.
the cornea, conjunctivae, and lid surfaces, as well as ocular
mobility, and topical anesthetics are usually also instilled
to permit minimally invasive diagnostic and therapeutic
Two different palpebral nerve blocks are frequently used
procedures.
in the horse to produce eyelid akinesia. The most popula1
is injection of about 1-3 mL of local anesthetic subcutane-
Eyelid injections/nerve blocks in the cat
cusly at the highest point of the zygomatic arch, midway
in the arch. In the second method, 1-3 mL of local anes-
 ia t a  i a no aa soa 
thetic is injected in the depression o1 groove of the ventral
   rs si ss s  d  p
edge of the temporal portion of the zygomatic arch, just cau-
other carnivores.
dal to the posterior ramus of the mandible. Just before injec-
tion of local anesthetic, aspiration is used to check the
Eyelid injections/nerve blocks in the horse
needle position and avoid injection into the rostral auricula1
Because the horse's orbicularis oculi muscle is very powerful,
artery o1 vein. As this nerve block is close to the main trunk
of the auriculopalpebral nerve, occasionally more extensive
eyelid closure can occur during an eye examination as well
Aq soa jenuu jo ads un usiue rp unp se
facial nerve block effects may occur, including muscle block
effects down to the nostril, as well as a drooping and immo-
the veterinarian o1 owner to maintain the palpebral fissure
bile ear. Topical anesthetic is also instilled for surface anes-
open. As a 1esult, eyelid nerve blocks for akinesia, as well
thesia of the coinea and conjunctiva.
as combined akinesia-anesthesia nerve blocks, are available
The combined akinesia and local analgesia (anesthesia)
and used very frequently in the hoise (Fig. 3.5).
supraorbital nerve block in the horse is used for diseases loca-
lized to the mid upper eyelid. Between 2 and 4 mL of local
anesthetic is injected about the supraorbital foramen within
the supraorbital arch. Topical anesthetic is also instilled for
surface anesthesia of the cornea and conjunctiva.
Eyelid injections/nerve blocks in the cow
Eyelid injections in cattle are usually combined with 1etro-
bulba1 nerve blocks which provide orbital and ophthalmic
 akinesia and analgesia (anesthesia) during orbital and eyelid
the lateral canthus to block the terminal branches of the pal-
pebral nerve.
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in animals
In non-primates the lateral and part of the caudal floor of
These areas, consisting of fascial tissue (periorbita), muscles.
and blood vessels, and covered with either skin or mucosa.
Fig. 3.4 For the palpebral nerve block in the dog, the local anesthetic
injection is positioned either immediately above the most lateral projection
represent potential entry sites for access to the orbital tissues
of the zygomatic arch or about 1-2 cm from the lateral canthus.
and the injection of drugs. In non-human primate species,
44
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in animals
 orbital access is generally limited to the frontal approach
around the intact globe.
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in dogs
Access to the coinea and anterior globe may present exposure
problems in small animals, especially in certain breeds of
dogs. Fortunately, the lateral and dorsolateral aspects of the
dog orbit are incomplete, and accommodate retrobulbar
injections. Injections of sterile 0.9% saline can enhance the
presentation of the cornea and globe, but only with some lisk.
  o a m  si  
anesthesia with the objective of forcing the globe furthel
Iostrad in the orbit, or to turn the globe and improve expo-
 re r n    e 
Providing 1etrobulbar anesthesia is another considera-
tion. The amount of sterile saline injected is ascertained as
the injection is performed, and the response of the globe to
the space-occupying solution is assessed. The hypodermic
needle may be inserted caudal to the junction of the lateral
orbital ligament and dorsal aspects of the zygomatic arch
jo sasisuos bop auz u! uogsalu! jegingonai joy poyaw 5,yueg Ze dbi
(Fig. 3.6). The needle is directed towaids the 1etrobulba1
placement of a 5-8 cm, 22 g hypodermic needle inserted beneath the 
space in a ventromedial direction toward the opposite man-
zygomatic arch at the level of the lateral canthus. The needle must pass
on paaup pue alqipuew aun jo snweu aup jo uoiod jean aun on penso
dibular joint. The solution may be injected in the lateral
the orbital fissure.
aspects of the extraocular muscle cone, o1 immediately caul
dal to the globe and within the retrobulbar muscle mass.
toward the orbital fissure. Injections exteinal to the retrobul
Injections external to the retrobulbar muscle cone will rotate
bar muscle cone in the orbital floo1 and the medial orbit wall
the globe laterally: injections immediately behind the globe
are possible with this method, and can be used to shift the
will push the globe forward. The volume injected should be
globe dorsally.
Retrobulbar injections can also be performed with curved,
undue pressure and distortion of the globe
5 cm long hypodermic needles directed through the con-
Another injection site is ventral to the anterior zygomatic
junctiva o1 the eyelids to deposit solution beside o1 caudal
arch and rostrad to the vertical portion of the ramus of the
to the globe (Dietz's method). The volume and position of
mandible, the Barth's nerve block (Fig. 3.7). The hypodeimic
the injection within the orbit will shift the eye accordingly.
needle, after passing the ramus of the mandible, is directed
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in cats
Retrobulbar injections in the cat are not recommended
because of the limited retrobulbar space and difficulty in
 proper positioning of the injection.
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in horses
Retrobulbar local anesthetic injections have been described
o noaiso aui 'uaisan pue aiag aq asiou aui u!
and entry of the critical cranial nerves in the horse are about
as deep as in cattle (10-12 cm), but the posterio1 orbit is
more conical. With gas inhalation general anesthesia, and
often neuromuscula1 blocking agents and forced ventilation,
 Ietrobulbar nerve blocks in the horse are unnecessary and
redundant.
In the Berge method, an 8-10 cm, 18 g needle is inserted
caudal to the supraorbital process of the frontal bone near
the supraorbital foramen. The long needle is directed ven-
tromedial (about 40° from the vertical) and slightly caudal
toward the area of the orbital fissure where 15-20 mL of
local anesthetic is injected (Fig. 3.8).
Fig. 3.6 Retrobulbar injetions can be positioned in the dog with an 8 cm,
In a modification of the Berge technique, in the Lichen-
22 g hypodermic needle inserted caudal to the lateral orbital ligament
stern's method, an 8-10 cm, 18 g needle is inserted 1.5 cm
and directed toward the opposite mandibular joint. Because the dog lacks
caudal to the middle of the supraorbital process. The needle
ocular rigidity, extraocular injections that are several milliliters can indent the
is directed toward the opposite last upper premolar tooth.
globe. Injections within the extraocular muscle cone may have greater
effects than those injected next to the orbital walls.
The taut extraocular muscles' fascial cone may be felt as
45
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
combined with neuromuscular blocking agents is highly
lecommended.
Retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks in cattle
Because of inherent problems associated with general anes-
thesia in cattle, as well as economics, regional nerve blocks
are common in this species. In fact, most orbital, eyelid.
conjunctival, and coineal surgery is performed with regional
injectable anesthesia. Of the three different routes for orbital
injections of regional anesthesia in the cow, i.e., Peterson's,
Schreibel's, and Hare's, Peterson's is the most common in
America, but somewhat more difficult. A relatively simple
method in cattle, the four-point block, uses more local anes-
thetic than the Peterson method, and delivers retrobulbar
anesthetic through the dorsal, medial, lateral, and ventral
conjunctival fornices directly into the retrobulbar space.
In Peterson's regional nerve block, an 8-10 cm, 18-20 g
slightly curved hypodermic needle is inserted at the posterio1
angle of the zygomatic arch and lateral orbital rim, and
Fig. 3.8 In Berge's retrobulbar nerve block in the horse for injection
directed anterio1 of the coronoid process of the mandible
within the orbital fissure, the needle is inserted behind the supraorbital
and inferomedially to the pterygopalatine fossa near the fora-
foramen of the dorsal orbital rim, inclined 40° to the vertical, and directed
men orbitorotundum (Fig. 3.9). Ater aspiration (avoiding
medioventrally and somewhat caudally.
the internal maxillary artery), 15-20 mL of local anesthetic
is injected. The auriculopalpebral nerve is blocked by placing
the needle penetrates it. Approximately 20 mL of local anes.
3-5 mL of local anesthetic subcutaneously along the dorsal
thetic is injected near the orbital fissure.
zygomatic arch. Successful nerve blocks result in mydriasis,
As a third method, the lateral and medial canthal routes
lack of globe mobility, loss of comeal sensation, and loss of
may be used to inject about 10-15 mL of local anesthetic
eyelid movement. The globe in some cows can be proptosed
at each site.
moderately, and maintained in position by the eyelids.
Of the large animal species, intraocular surgery is perfoimed
most often in the horse. As this species has considerable high
Complications of retrobulbar injections/
scleral elasticity (low scleral rigidity), sizeable volume 1etro-
nerve blocks
bulbar injections can markedly indent the posterior segment
Retrobulbar injections require care, and can induce retrobul-
of vitreous prolapse and posterior lens capsule rupture
bar hemorrhage. Hence, after needle placement and before
during cataract surgery. Therefore, when intraocular surgery
injection, aspiration is attempted to minimize injection into
is considered in this species, general gas anesthesia
the ocular vasculature. The animal orbit contains large veins
A
B
Fig. 3.9 In the Peterson retrobulbar nerve block in cattle: (a) View from side of orbit: A slightly curved, 10 cm hypodermic needle is inserted in the caudal
angle (arrow) of the supraorbital process and zygomatic arch, and manipulated in front of the coronoid process of the mandible.
aun pue essoy aupeledonAand aun jo jooy aun janua on Ajenuan zeumawos pue leipaw paaup uayn s! aipaau sjwapodky ayi main lenuouy (9)
 orbitorotundum foramen (arrow). After aspiration to make certain the maxillary artery has not been entered, approximately 15-20 mL of local anesthetic is
injected. As the hypodermic needle is withdrawn, an additional 3-5 mL of local anesthetic is injected subcutaneously for akinesia of the eyelids.
46
Horse
and venous plexuses, but hemorrhage sufficient to produce
A smooth recovery is necessary, and usually an analgesic, such
additional pressure of the globe, and even enter the subcon-
as butorphanol tartrate, is indicated.
junctival spaces, fortunately occurs infrequently. If this
occurs, surgery should be delayed until the hemorrhage
Corneal and intraocular surgeries
has reabsorbed.
Inadvertent puncture of the globe with the needle is rare,
Fo1 corneal and intraocular surgical procedures, tranquiliza-
but a serious complication. The retrobulbar saline is usually
tion with acepromazine, propofol for induction, and inhala-
Ieabsorbed within 30-60 min. With the use of intravenous
tion agents for maintenance of general anesthesia are
neuromuscular blocking dnugs, use of retrobulbar injec-
leco mmended. The administration of neuromuscular block-
tions to manipulate the globe is less common and may be
ing agents (such as pancuronium 0.06 mg/kg IV) is initiated
Iedundant.
once general anesthesia is stabilized and a few minutes
A few cases of cattle have been reported to suffer respira
before entry into the anterio1 chamber is achieved. Both a
tory collapse and sudden death after the Peterson retrobul-
smooth onset and recovery from general anesthesia are
      
anticipated. Some degree of analgesia is usually necessary
within the optic nerve meninges or the cerebrospinal space.
during the immediate postoperative period, and often
butorphanol tartrate or a similar drug is administered.
Choice of general anesthetic for selected
Recovery from general anesthesia
ophthalmic surgical procedures
During the recovery period after ophthalmic surgery, the
patient should slowly and smoothly recover from general
The ophthalmic surgical procedure may influence the choice
anesthesia. Excessive whining yelping, barking, vomiting.
of induction agent and general anesthetic based on the
expected duration of the surgery, and the level of pain and
discomfort expected postoperatively.
avoided. These effects may threaten the integrity of the surgi
cal wounds and can result in trauma and swelling of the eye
lids, subconjunctival hemorrhages, hyphema, and anterio1
Orbital surgery
uveitis.
 The optimum clinical management of these complications
Orbital surgery is expected to result in some blood loss, and
excessive globe traction may initiate the oculorespiratory
is to prevent thei1 occurrence by the appropriate selection of
cardiac reflex. In small animals, a combination of injectable
 perioperative drugs and general anesthetics. Tranquilizers.
and inhalational anesthetics is used to provide general anes.
such as acepromazine, have a reasonably long duration of
thesia fo1 about 60 min. The administration of aceproma-
action, and this effect usually includes the critical postope-
zine preoperatively will usually assist in promoting a
ative period. The usual dosage for acepromazine is 0.03-
smooth recovery.
0.1 mg/kg administered intramuscularly o1 subcutaneously
about 15 min before ophthalmic surgery. The lower dosage
level is best for older canine patients; the higher dosage level
Eyelid surgery
is recommended for young, healthy, and excitable patients.
Surgical procedures of the eyelids usually require induction
Butorphanol tartrate, an opiate agonist/antagonist analgesic
with injectable anesthetics and continued general anesthesia
with strong antitussive activity, may also be administered
with inhalational agents. Occasionally multiple admini-
ous e aoid on (s y/u o I-so) kliaoisod
strations of only injectable anesthetics will suffice. [n very
Iecovery from general anesthesia.
young puppies with entropion, correction with the ‘tacking
Restraint devices, such as the Elizabethan collar, hobbles,
procedure' often uses halothane anesthesia induced via mask.
and bandaging of the front paws, are additional measures
that can protect the eye during the 1ecovery phase from
general anesthesia.
Nasolacrimal flush and catheterization
Only topical anesthesia (occasionally combined with ace-
promazine tranquilization, o1 in non-cooperative patients)
ADAPTATIONS FOR LARGE ANIMALS
is necessary for many of the manipulations required for
AND SPECIAL SPECIES
the nasolacrimal system, including flushes, catheterization,
and incisions to open the imperforate lacrimal punctum.
Horse
Conjunctival and nictitating membrane
The introduction of many dnugs for sedation, analgesia, and
surgeries
Iestraint in large animals, especially the horse, has advanced
To perform nictitating membrane flaps and small eyelid or
significantly in the past 40 years. In the 1960s, sedation of
conjunctival tumo1 removals in small animals, propofol
horses fo1 eye examination o1 mino1 invasive procedures
in dogs and cats, or ketamine in cats, is recommended.
involved only acepromazine, and was not very satisfactory.
For conjunctival grafts, the time taken to perform these proce-
The introduction of xylazine in the 1970s, used singly
dures is about 30-60 min. As a 1esult, induction with a short-
 O1 best combined with acepromazine, provided much
acting intravenous barbiturate, endotracheal intubation, and
improved sedation and adequate restraint for detailed
maintenance with inhalational anesthesia is recommended.
ophthalmic examinations in horses with considerable
47
3
Anesthesia for ophthalmic surgery
eye-ielated pain, as well as more invasive procedures (co1-
characterized by a horse which stands on its fist attempt,
 neal cytology nasolacrimal system cannulation, etc.).
and does not repeatedly struggle to stand and fall! Unsatis-
 Nowadays, the availability of detomidine combined with
factory and prolonged recoveries risk injury to the eye and
butorphanol (introduced in the 1990s) provides deep seda-
limbs and other serious mishaps. Mortality with general
e ui un sai aisd i a pe u
anesthesia in the horse has been reported as 1.9%, and
drugs fo1 sedation and restraint in the horse, we would rank
excluding those horses with emergency abdominal proce-
(from lowest to highest sedation):
dures, the death rate is 0.9%.
acepromazine (0.02-0.05 mg/kg IV; avoid in stallions
Although complications with general anesthesia in horses
because of the potential for priapism)
undeigoing ophthalmic surgery have not been reported,
xylazine (usual dose: 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV)
fatalities after eal, nose, and throat (ENT) procedures have
1
been reported as 0.88%. As the length of time fo1 the oph-
xylazine (0.6 mg/kg IV) combined with acepromazine
thalmic surgical procedure and general anesthesia increases,
(0.02 mg/kg IV)
detomidine (our dose is 0.005-0.012 mg fo1 an
the likelihood of complications also increases. Fortunately.
most ophthalmic procedures in the horse take less than
ophthalmic examination rather than the recommended
0.01-0.02 mg/kg used for pain or placing a
1 h, o1 perhaps slightly more!
Standing ophthalmic procedures, including standing enu-
lavage system) combined with butorphanol
(0.02-0.03 mg/kg IV).
cleation, have been reported in horses. Most equine stand-
ing surgeries are relatively minor; howevel, some may
Probably most, if not all, sedatives lower IOP in horses.
become too diffcult, requiring use of general anesthesia
Acepromazine and xylazine lower IOP in hoises by about
fo1 successful completion.
10-20%. Both xylazine and detomidine are αz-agonist seda-
tives. IOP decline seems secondary to venous pressure, direct
Cattle
pressure on the globe, blood pressure, tone in the extraocular
muscles, head position, and the rate, dose, and rapidity of dnug
administration. Decline in IOP secondary to lower systemic
Cattle are most often physically restrained using its stan-
blood pressures is the likely explanation. Intravenous xylazine
chion (dairy cattle) o1 a squeeze chute and variable head
at dosages of 0.3 mg/kg (23%), 1.0 mg/kg (27%), and
1.1 mg/kg combined with ketamine (2.2 mg/kg), lower IOP.
because of the bovine's very high sensitivity to drugs, such
The majority of ophthalmic surgeries performed in horses
asx
xylazine,
. and must be carefully administered. The
use general anesthesia, and for corneal surgery often involv.
Iecommended dose (see Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbook)
ing penetrating corneal wounds, as well as surgery of the
is 0.05-0.15 mg/kg IV o1 0.10-0.33 mg/kg IM. Pretreat-
iris, lens, and cataracts, and neuromuscular paralysis
for
ment with atropine can decrease the bradycardia and
optimal globe positioning and ocular hypotony. However,
hypersalivation.
general anesthesia is not without risk in the horse! Smooth
Xylazine should be avoided in pregnant cattle (last trimes-
Iecovery does not always occur in a horse coming out of
te1) and in animals that are dehydrated, have urinary tract
general anesthesia, and a smooth recovery is hopefully
obstructions, o1 are debilitated.
 Further reading
General
as an intravenous anaesthetic, Drugs
Clutton RE. Boyd C. Richards DLS. Schwink K:
Auer U, Mosing M. Moens YPs: The effect of
35:334-372. 1988.
Significance of the oculocardiac reflex
Plumb DC: Plumb's Veterinary Drug Handbooh.
during ophthalmic surgery in the dog. J
 low dose rocuronium on globe position.
ed 5. Ames. 2005. Blackwell. pp 327-329
Small Amim Pract 29:573-579. 1988.
 muscle relaxation, and ventilation in dogs:
a clinical study. Vet Ophthalmol 10:295-298.
and 1156-1160.
 Frischmeyer K), Miller PE. Bellay Y. Smedes SL,
2007.
Rubin LF. Gelatt KN: Analgesia of the eye. ln
Brunson DB: Parenteral anticholinergics in
Brunson DB: Anesthesia in ophthalmic surgery.
Soma LR, editor: Textbook of Veterinary
dogs with normal and elevated intraocular
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Anesthesia, Baltimore, 1971, williams and
pressure, Vet Surg 22:230-234, 1993.
10:481-495. 1980.
Wilkins. pp 489-499.
Gelatt KN, Gwin RM. Peiffer RL, Gum GG:
Gelatt KN: Anesthetic agents. In Veterinary
Wilson RP: Complications associated with local
Tonography in the normal and
Ophthalmic Pharmacology and Therapeutics.
and general anesthesia, Int Ophthalmol Clin
glaucomatous Beagle. Am J Vet Res
ed 2. Bonner Springs, 1978. VM Publishing.
32:1-22. 1993.
38:515-520, 1977.
Hazra S. De D. Roy B, et al: Use of ketamine.
pp 23-28.
Canine
Hall LW, Clarke KW: Veterinary Anaesthesia.
xylazine and diazepam anesthesia with
ed 9. London, 1991, Bailliere Tindall.
 Bagley LH, Lavach ID: Comparison of
retrobulbar block for phacoemulsification
postoperative phacoemulsification results in
in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 11:255-260.
pp 105-133.
dogs with and without diabetes mellitus:
2008.
Kern Tl: Anesthetic considerations of the
153 cases [1991-1992). I Am Vet Med Assoc
Hofmeister EH, williams CO. Braun C.
ophthalmic patient. In Short CE. editor:
205:1165-1169. 1994.
Moore PA: Influence of lidocaine and
Principles and Practice of Veterinary Anesthesia.
Baltimore, 1987, williams and wilkins.
 Batista CM, Laus IL, Nunes N, PattoDos
diazepam on peri-induction intraocular
Santos PS. Costa JL: Evaluation of
 pressure in dogs anesthetized with propofol-
pp 173-176.
intraocular pressure and partial CO2
atracurium, Can J Vet Res 70:251-256, 2006.
Langley MS. Heel RC: Propofol: a review
pressures in dogs anesthetized with
Hofmeister EH, williams CO. Braun C.
of its pharmacodynamic and
propofol. Vet Ophthalmol 3:17-19. 2000.
 Moore PA: Propofol versus thiopental:
pharmacokinetic properties and use
48
Further reading
effects of peri-induction intraocular
Young SS. Barnett KC. Taylor PM: Anaesthetic
 Miller-Michau T: Equine ocular examination:
pressures in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg
regimes for cataract removal in the dog. J
 basic and advanced diagnostic techniques.
35:275-281, 2008.
Small Amim Pract 32:236-240. 1991.
In Gilger BC, editor: Equine Ophthatmology.
 Joffe WS. Gay Al: The oculorespiratory cardiac
St Louis. 2005. Saunders. pp 1-62.
Feline
reflex in the dog. mvest Ophthalmol
Robertson SA: Standing sedation and pain
5:550-554. 1966.
Hahnenberger EW: Influence of various
 management for ophthalmic patients. Vet
Magrane WG: Methoxyflurane (metofane)
anesthetic drugs on the intraocular pressure
Clin North Am Equine Pract 20:485-497.
anesthesia in intraocular surgery. Pract Vet
of cats. Von Graefes Archiv fir hlinische und
2004.
3:75-76. 1967.
experimentelle Ophthalmologie 199:179-186.
1976.
 Food and fiber-producing animals
Seim HB. Creed JE. Smith KW: Restraint
 techniques for prevention of self-trauma. In
 Mester U. Stein HJ. Pillat-Moog U: Experiences
 Donaldson LL, Holland M. Koch SA:
Bojrab Ml, editor: Current Techmiques in
 gained with a combination ketamine
Atracurium as an adjunct to halothane-
Small Animal Surgery. ed 3. Philadelphia.
anaesthesia for eye surgery on cats, Vom
oxygen anesthesia in a llama undergoing
1990. Lea and Febiger. pp 42-49.
Graefes Archiv fir hlinische und experimentelle
intraocular surgery: a case report, Vet Surg
 Sullivan TC. Hellyer Pw, Lee DD,
Ophthalmologie 201:289-294. 1977.
21:76-79. 1992.
 Davidson MG: Respiratory function and
Horse
Pearce SG., Kerr CL. Boure LP. Thompson K.
extraocular muscle paralysis following
 Dobson H: Comparison of the retrobulbar
administration of pancuronium bromide in
Brooks DE: Ophthalmology for the Equine
and Peterson nerve block techniques via
dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 1:125-128. 1998.
Practitioner, 2009, Teton New Media.
 magnetic resonance imaging in bovine
Vestre WA, Brightman AH. Helper LC.
Jackson. pp 17-29.
cadavers. I Am Vet Med Assoc 223:852-855.
Lowery JC: Decreased tear production
Hendrix DVH: Eye examination techniques in
2003.
 associated with general anesthesia in the
horses, Clinical Techmiques in Equine Practice
 Skarda RT: Local and regional anesthesia in
dog. I Am Vet Med Assoc 174:1006-1007.
4:2-10. 2005.
ruminants and swine, Vet Clin North Am
1979.
Food Anim Pract12:579-626. 1996
49
CHAPTER
Surqery of the orbit
Kirk N. Gelatt and R. David Whitley
Smail animais. Large aniais and sperial species
 Chapter contents
Surgical management of orbital diseases
51
Orbitotomy in small animals
76
Ancillary diagnostic procedures
52
 Total and partial orbitectomy
81
 Surgical anatomy of animal orbits
53
 Orbitotomy in large animals and special species
81
Surgical pathophysiology
57
Surgical management of traumatic proptosis
 Perioperative medications
59
in small animals
82
TYPES OF ORBITAL SURGICAL PROCEDURES
60
 Surgical augmentation of orbital volume in small animals
83
Enucleation procedures in small animals
60
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND MANAGEMENT
84
Evisceration with intraocular prosthesis in small animals
63
 Postoperative complications and treatment in all species
84
Exenteration in small animals
67
Short- and long-term results in all species
86
 Enucleation procedures in large animals
 and special species
67
Surgical management of orbital diseases
Defining the margins of orbital disease
Orbital diseases, particularly diffuse septic inflammation
Orbital diseases of small animals are common in veterinary
and expansive neoplasms, usually infiltrate the orbit within
practice and are often treated with a combination of medical
its fascial planes and confound determination of the disease
and surgical modalities. Orbital diseases in animals
are
margins, thereby limiting the success rate of surgery O1
traditionally classified into those that cause exophthalmia
radiotherapy. Before entering the orbit surgically, the disease
(which is the largest group) and those associated with
process and its borders should be identified as best as possi-
enophthalmia. Exophthalmia 1efers to an abnormal pro-
ble, by the different imaging modalities, as thoroughly as
minence or protrusion of the globe, and is associated with
possible. The orbit is highly vascular, and visualization of
space-occupying diseases, including inflammations, cysts
and neoplasms. Exophthalmia can be confused with mega-
the different structures during surgery is often limited using
loglobus or buphthalmia when prominence of the eye
only one technique. Vital nerves, blood vessels, and extrao-
cular muscles span the orbital space between the different
Iesults from an enlarged globe, as in the glaucomas.
Enophthalmia, which is less frequently encountered in
bony foramina and the globe, tear glands, nictitating mem-
brane, conjunctiva, and eyelids. Although imaging proce-
veterinary ophthalmology practice, occurs when the globe
dures such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
is recessed into the orbit or is less prominent. Enophthalmia
is associated with congenital orbital disorders, pain from
Iesonance imaging (MRl) are expensive, they often yield
the best results.
.Fortunately, however, the orbit can be
inflammation, microphthalmia (a smaller than normal
evaluated by a number of physical examination procedures,
globe), phthisis bulbi (atrophy of the eye secondary to cili-
as follows.
      
production). Hornel's syndrome, dehydration, loss of
sign, a number of additional more subtle clinical signs
orbital fat, and fibrosis within the orbit.
Surgery of the orbit
may assist in determining whether the space-occupying dis-
either resection or recession of affected extraocular muscles.
ease is inflammatory, cystic, o1 neoplastic. Primary orbital
The surgery is carried out at thei insertions to the anterior
diseases associated with exophthalmia are usually unilateral,
globe, and is relatively easy to perfoim.
and comparisons of the orbital position and size of both
Occasionally lateral strabismus develops after traumatic
eyes can be informative. If the exophthalmia is bilateral.
proptosis, and signals either nerve and/or muscle injury to
systemic disease should be suspected. The inability of the
the medial 1ectus muscle. If exotropia results from damage
animal to retropulse the globe or retract the globe upon eye-
to the oculomotor nerve, spontaneous recovery often
lid or corneal touch often signals a sizeable space-occupying
occurs. If the muscle or its insertion to the globe has been
disease. With orbital inflammatory diseases, retraction of the
transected, recovery is unlikely. Aftempts to reattach the sev-
extraocular muscles and globe may also elicit pain. With
ered ends of the medial rectus muscle are not usually suc-
orbital cysts o1 neoplasia, the 1etropulse 1eflex is impaired
cessful as the deeper (proximal) aspects of the medial
but usually elicits no pain.
rectus cannot be located. Splitting the dorsal rectus muscle
 Imaging techniques to evaluate the orbit initially include
longitudinally and repositioning the medial portion to the
plain and special contrast radiologic procedures, and ultra-
medial rectus insertion provides satisfactory results.
sonography. More sophisticated diagnostic procedures such
A fairly recent disorder in dogs, extraocular muscle myosi-
as CT and MRI offer the best imaging of orbital tissues,
tis (also called fibrosing strabismus), usually presents with
and fortunately their availability is increasing.
uni- or bilateral 1estrictive ventromedial strabismus and
enophthalmia. Several breeds of dogs appear affected, but
the large breeds as well as the Chinese Shar Pei seem most
Strabismus and orbital diseases
often affected. Involved muscles include the ventral 1ectus,
Strabismus refers to deviation of the globe, and is tradition-
ventral oblique, and medial rectus. Medical therapy includes
ally divided into dorsal (hypertropia), ventral (hypotropia),
immunosuppressive systemic therapy (prednisone and/or
lateral (exotropia), and medial (esotropia). Primary stra-
azathioprine) and early cases are the most responsive. Surgi-
bismus without ocular disease is rare in animals. It has
cal correction usually involves resection of the affected mus-
been reported in horses and mules, cattle, and dogs, but
de(s) or their insertion(s) rather than recessing the opposite
muscle to straighten the globe (because of the inflammation
Himalayan breeds. Uni- or even bilateral strabismus may
and subsequent fibrosis of the affected muscles).
occur in dogs, secondary to myositis of selected extraocular
muscles, and may be complicated by fibrosis of these mus-
Ancillary diagnostic procedures
cles. Secondary strabismus is frequently present with orbital
diseases, and the direction of the deviation of the globe may
suggest the location of the space-occupying lesion. When
If surgery on the orbit is anticipated, additional diag-
space-occupying orbital disease is directly behind the globe
and confined to the retrobulbar muscle cone, the eye is
the orbital disease, and perhaps the type of mass, are recom-
usually displaced directly forward. The pressure on the globe
mended. Plain and contrast radiography, combined with
may be sufficient to indent areas of the posterio1 segment
B-scan ultrasonography, usually provides the most valu-
and be detectable ophthalmoscopically.
able basic information in most veterinary centers. Special
If the space-occupying mass is located within the medial
radiographic procedures include venography, arteriography.
-        
optic nerve thecography, and the direct injection of air
mals, the 1esultant strabismus is usually lateral (exotropia)
and/o1 dorsal (hypertropia). If the mass involves the rostral
trast orbitography) into the orbit. Needle biopsy with B-scan
aspect of the medial orbit, the eye may be deviated upward,
ultrasonography may indicate the histologic characteristics
and the nictitating membrane is usually protracted. If the
of the orbital mass.
mass is located within the rostral aspect of the dorsal orbit,
 CT scans and MRI have markedly improved the diagnosis
the eye is usually deviated downward (hypotropia). In spite
and definition of orbital diseases in animals, but are cu1-
of the strabismus, tonic eye reflexes and eye movements are
rently limited to academic veterinary medical hospitals and
usually noimal.
large clinical centers.
Strabismus (rectus muscle) surgery
Incomplete orbital walls in domestic animals
a asan pad runau si aains ssien
[n contrast to humans, most small and large animal orbital
ocular malalignment usually signals ophthalmic disease.
walls are incomplete caudoventrally and laterally. In the
 Extaocular muscle surgery for strabismus in the Siamese
primate the contents of the entie orbit are bounded by
cat with esotiopia has not been successful because of the
bone, thereby providing maximum protection for the globe.
very small rectus muscles in the cat as well as the underlying
In many avian species orbits are unusually large and often
neuro-ophthalmic tract malformation. The congenital exo-
limit access through only the frontal aspects (like human
tropia occasionally seen in brachycephalic breeds of dogs
and non-human primates). The incomplete orbital walls in
has not been treated with rectus muscle surgery. Strabismus
is infrequent in horses and mules, and some affected horses
jaw as widely as possible. As a result, the coronoid process
may also exhibit night blindness (e.g., Appaloosa breed).
 of the mandible is medial of the zygomatic arch and in the
Strabismus in the horse has been successfully treated by
caudolateral orbit. Hence, in orbital diseases, especially
52
Surgical anatomy of animal orbits
acute inflammations, manipulation of the mouth will usu-
Canine orbit
ally elicit pain. Where the bony orbital walls are missing in
The bones that envelop and confine the orbital tissues in
cainivores, the wall is replaced with a variable thickness
fascial layer, the endorbita (o1 periorbita).
the dog consist of the zygomatic process of the frontal bone
 In the caudal, dorsal, and lateral orbital walls, the tempor-
dorsally; the frontal bone and palatine bones medially:
and the zygomatic arch and vertical ramus of the mandible
alis, masseter, and pterygoid muscles are adjacent to the
endorbita. The endorbita constitutes a reasonable barrier
laterally (Fig. 4.1a). The bony orbital floor is comprised of
the sphenoid bone. The orbital rim consists of the zygo-
to inflammation, trauma, and neoplasia, but still does not
provide the protection provided by bony walls. As a result,
matic process of the frontal bone dorsally, the lateral orbital
 orbital diseases in small animals may extend from the orbit
ligament, and parts of the zygomatic, maxillary, and lacri-
mal bones ventrally. Soft tissues that support the orbital
into the mouth via the caudal flool, perforate anteriorly to
walls include the temporalis muscles posteromedially. the
the conjunctival surfaces, or extend laterally into the subcu-
taneous tissues of the lateral orbit and face. While these
temporalis and pterygoid muscles medially, the masseter
Iegional soft-tissue orbital walls represent incomplete and
muscle laterally, and the medial pterygoid muscle ventrally.
The zygomatic or orbital salivary gland is located in the
weaker barriers, these same areas provide potential entry
dog in the rostrolateral orbit. In brachycephalic breeds of
Ioutes for surgical invasion of the orbital space.
dogs the orbit is very shallow, while in dolichocephalic
breeds the orbit is considerably deeper and difficult to access
Enophthalmia and surgery
surgically.
The major arteries in the dog orbit are located along the
Enophthalmia (1ecession of the globe within the orbit)
ventral and ventromedial floor, and consist of the pterygo-
is a common clinical sign when the orbital contents are
palatine portion of the maxillary artery with its various
less than noimal. The palpebral fissure may be 1educed in
branches, including the external ophthalmic (orbital) artery.
size. The most frequent condition with enophthalmia is
the infraorbital artery, the mino1 palatine artery, and a trunk
microphthalmia, a congenital and sometimes inherited con-
that gives rise to the majo1 palatine and sphenopalatine
dition, and phthisis bulbi or atrophy of the eye, an acquired
arteries. From the exteinal ophthalmic artery are branches
disorder. Enophthalmia can also accompany H
Horner's
that include the external ethmoidal artery and the anasto.
syndrome, the loss of fat associated with debility, dehydra-
motic ramus to the internal carotid artery. Branches from
 n n d pn aa  d e '
 od r , a si so  s 
the exteinal ethmoidal artery include, in part, the ventral
and dorsal muscular branches to the extraocular muscles,
drome', which consists of bilateral enophthalmia, persistent
the lacrimal and zygomatic branches. With the union of
and chronic conjunctivitis, and entropion and/o1 ectropion
the external and internal ophthalmic arteries emerge two
secondary to the lack of support and contact between the
to four long posterior ciliary arteries to supply the globe.
globe and eyelids. This condition, occurring more frequently
The orbital veins tend to follow the respective arteries,
in male dogs, is associated with very large heads and deeply
and, in addition, form an extensive and highly variable
orbital venous plexus.
cally and resolve. Augmentation of the volume of the orbit
with a visual eye has been attempted by adding autogenous
With the origin of the majority of the extraocular rectus
si Aiddns pooiq shl aioyaq isol si %oz inoqe Aensn) ey
muscles in the apex of the orbit, these muscles span the
orbit to insert anterior to the globe's equator. The four
Iestored), sterile glass beads (about 4-5 mm diameter),
 bellies of the retractor oculi muscle envelop the optic nerve,
medical grade silicone, and newer microporous implants
and attach to the globe posterior to the rectus muscle insel-
that permit vascular ingrowth into the device.
tions. The ventral oblique muscle has its unique origin in
the medial orbital wall. Immediately above the dorsal 1ectus
Surgical anatomy of animal orbits
muscle is the levator palpebrae superioris muscle, with its
common origin with the other rectus muscles but its inser-
0n uoupe ul paaa iddn au jo iakei iesei aui ul uon
The orbit consists of walls that are either bone o1 muscle
an extensive arterial and venous supply, and space-flling
combined with fascia that confine and protect the globe.
The anatomy of the orbit differs widely among humans
adipose tissues, all the orbital tissues are covered with
 aa   id  r 
and animals, and these differences modify the clinical man-
ifestations of orbital diseases and their surgical approaches.
with the fascia bulbi (or Tenon's capsule) that surrounds
The orbit in humans and animals is roughly conical in
the globe and attaches at the limbus, the periosteum o1
shape, with the apex of the cone directed ventroposteriorly
endorbita lining the orbital walls, and the tarsal layer within
and medially, and the base of the cone accommodating
the eyelids as the septum orbitale anteriorly. The sub-
the globe and supporting tissues. Through the apex traverse
Tenon's space between the fascia bulbi and the sclera is an
the different nerves to innervate the extraocular muscles, the
important surgical plane that permits dissection around
the globe with minimal hemorrhage.
sensory nerves to the globe and surrounding structures, and
The third (oculomotor)。 fourth (trochlear), and sixth
the optic nerve linking the retina to the midbrain and higher
visual centers. Adjacent areas, such as the frontal and maxil-
(abducens) cranial nerves innervate the retrobulbar muscles,
and the second (optic), fifth (trigeminal), and branches of
lary sinuses, and the teeth roots within the maxillary bone,
the seventh (facial) cranial nerves permit vision, sensation,
ale frequent sites of infection and neoplasia that may extend
and  lacrimation 
(Fig. 4.1b). The orbit also contains
into the orbit and produce clinical disease.
53
4
Surgery of the orbit
A
E
A
B
Fig. 4l.1 The bones of the canine orbit. The dorsolateral wall and caudal floor of the canine orbit consist of soft tissues. Entry into the canine orbit is restricted to
these sof tissues avenues, as well as through the palpebral fissure and orbital opening. (a) The canine orbital anatomy varies considerably based on breed 
aun apnpui ziquo auiuen aun asuduos eua sauog aul auawei eniquo leanel aua Aq pawoy s! Aeael pue anaiduosui s! wu lenquo Auog aul adk lnys pue
frontal bone and its zygomatic process (A), palatine bone (B), zygomatic arch (C), and vertical ramus of the mandible (D). The bony orbital floor consists of
the sphenoid bone (not visible). The orbital rim consists of the zygomatic process of the frontal bone (see A), and parts of the zygomatic (see C), maxillary (E),
and lacrimal (F) bones. The lateral orbital ligament (mising in this specimen) extends from the zygomatic process of the frontal bone to the zygomatic arch
(arrows). Surgical access to the canine orbit is generally through the orbital rim or through the lateral orbital wal, with or without the central zygomatic arch
removed. (G) indicates the lacrimal fossa which contains the lacrimal sac. (b) The three important foramina in the apex of the canine orbit are: (A) optic foramen,
through which the optic nerve and internal ophthalmic artery pass; (B) orbital fissure, through which the third, fourth and sixth cranial nerves, the ophthalmic
ssd Aane pue aau Aelxew ieuau aua y yhnoua uaweoy wnpunou () rssed uia ieiuo aun pue aau (y) ieuwahun aun jo uonsia
autonomic fibers, with the sympathetic fibers extending
Horse orbit
fibers entering the orbit to synapse in the ciliary ganglion.
Both the horse and cow orbits are among the largest that
dinically confront the veterinarian. The orbital bones in
Parasympathetic fibers from the ciliary ganglion then con-
the horse include the frontal, lacrimal, zygomatic, temporal,
tinue to innervate the iris sphincter and ciliary body
muscles.
sphenoid, palatine and maxillary (Fig. 4.3a). The bones
Canine orbit size varies by breed and skull type. [n
contributing to the equine orbital rim include the lacrimal
(ventromedial orbital rim), the frontal and its zygomatic
general, skull length, width, and height range from about
    8      x 2 8 91
in brachycephalics and 214 x 33 x 29 mm in dolichoce-
of the temporal and zygomatic bones (incomplete lateral
phalics. There is an increase in orbital size from the toy to
wall and lateral canthus). The zygomatic process of the
frontal bone contains the supraorbital foramen, an impo1-
  n si  an  's 
The canine globe size ranges from 19.7 to 25 mm transverse,
tant landmark for supraorbital nerve blocks to produce
upper eyelid regional anesthesia and paralysis. Hence, the
18.7 to 25 mm vertical, and 20.0 to 25 mm anteroposterio1.
entire orbital rim in horses consists of bones and no fascial
tissues or ligaments. The lacrimal bone contains both a
Feline orbit
shallow fossa for the poorly developed lacrimal sac as well
The orbit of the cat is similar but not identical to the dog. In
as the entry of the nasolacrimal system into the nasal
contrast to the dog, the feline orbit is only slightly larger
turbinates.
 The complete medial orbital wall consists of contributions
than the globe, which greatly restricts orbital exploration
unless the globe is first removed. The bones that compose
from the frontal and lacrimal bones and the wing of the pre-
sphenoid bone. The dorsal wall is formed by the fiontal
the orbital walls include the sphenoid, maxillary, lacrimal,
zygomatic, and frontal (Fig. 4.2). The lateral orbital liga-
and, to a smaller extent, the lacrimal bones. The incomplete
ment joins the frontal and zygomatic processes. The bony
ventral wall is formed by the zygomatic bone and, to a lim-
floor of the feline orbit consists of only a small shelf of max-
ited extent, the maxillary and palatine bones. The incom-
plete lateral wall is formed by the zygomatic processes
illary bone that holds the last molar teeth. The extraocular
muscles are small and ocular mobility is limited. The zygo-
from both the temporal and zygomatic bones, and the
 d a oi  i i i d
matic or intraorbital salivary gland is small in the cat and
lies close to the maxillary nerve. The cat's orbital measure-
structures is the large coronoid process of the mandible.
ments are about 87 mm long. 26 mm wide, and 23 mm
 Four important foramina are sited in the apex of the orbit
(Fig. 4.3b). They include:
high. The feline globe ranges in size from 20 to 22 mm ante-
1oposteriorly, 19 to 20.7 mm vertically and 18 to 21 mm
1. the ethmoid foramen - entry for ethmoid blood vessels
transversely. The larger Siamese breed globes measure
and nerves
 22.5 mm anteroposteriorly and 22.5 mm transversely.
 2. the optic foramen - exit of the optic nerve
54
Surgical anatomy of animal orbits
B
B
E
D
B
Fig. 4.2 The bones of the feline orbit. Entry into the feline orbit is generally limited to the palpebral fissure and orbital opening. View of the feline skullfrom
the side (a) and from the front (b). The bony orbit provides little more than the essential space to accommodate the cat globe. Like the dog, the bony
:(e) apis aun wouy ane ziquo zen ayn asudwos zeya sauog aul auawebil leniquo leanel yous aun Aq pawoy s! eane sin pue Ajeianel analdwooui s! wu leniqio
frontal (A), lacrimal (B), maxillary (C), and zygomatic (D). The medial orbital wall (E) consists of the frontal bone dorsally and the sphenoid and palatine bones
(3) ainssy leniquo jeanelouan pue uawaioy sndo jesiop aun (q) niquo ayn jo xade aua ui paman sy uiyn Aan pue anaidwooui s! jooy leniquo zen aul Aenuan
permit passage of the essential ophthalmic nerves and vessels. The globe and orbit accommodate fairly short optic nerves, and very small and limited 
mobility extraocular muscles.
B
A
E
B
Fig. 4.3 The bones of the equine orbit. Entry into the equine orbit is generally limited to the palpebral fissure and orbital opening. Although the dorsolateral
orbital wall and caudal floor of the orbit consist of soft tissues, these avenues provide very limited access to the caudal orbit as the extraocular muscle
yi auog leauouy ay jo asisuos <eanel pamal se aiquo aunba aun asudwon zeyn sauoq aul (e) idaap os ae saau euen pue sjassan pooia leain 'auon
large supraorbital process (A), zygomatic arch (B), the coronoid process of the mandible (C, not part of the orbit but within the orbit), lacrimal bone (D),
pawoy s! lem eniquo jesop aul sauog piouaydsad aua jo bum pue jewuoel jeuouy aun Aq pawuoy s! lem leniquo Auog lepaw aul (3) auog snewoz pue
by the frontal and small part of the lacrimal bones. The ventral floor is formed by the zygomatic bone, zygomatic process of the temporal bone and 
small part of the maxillary bone. The incomplete lateral wall is formed by the zygomatic bones. In contrast to the dog and cat orbital rims, the horse orbital
rim is all bone with limited access to the dorsal orbit structures. (b) At the apex of the equine orbit are four important foramina (arrow): most dorsal and 
medial is the ethmoidal foramen (passage of the ethmoidal artery, vein, and nerve); more ventrad and further caudad is the optic foramen (passage for 
the optic nerve and internal ophthalmic artery); just ventral is the orbital fissure (carrying the third, sixth and often the fourth or trochlear and ophthalmic
division of the trigeminal nerves); and lastly is the furthest ventral foramen, the round foramen (passage of the maxillary nerve). The apex of the orbit is a
considerable distance from the globe (longer than the cow), and generally approached immediately caudal of the supraorbital arch.
3.the orbital fissure -transmits the ophthalmic branch of
 [n the placement of successful 1etrobulbal nerve blocks in
the tigeminal nerve, the oculomotor (third) nerve, the
the hoirse, at least 8-10 cm of distance must be traversed
abducens (sixth) nerve, and often the trochlear (fourth)
by the hypodermic needle to inject local regional anesthetic
nerve
in the vicinity of these four foramina.
4.the round foramen -maxillary branch of the trigeminal
The orbital dimensions of the adult horse are estimated
nerve.
to be 62 mm wide, 59 mm high, 98 mm deep. and
55
Surgery of the orbit
173 mm between the eyes. The adult horse globe measures
the equatorial axis vertical, and 41.9 mm on the horizontal
43.7mm
 on the meridional anterior-posterio1
axis,
axis. Hence, for a successfil retrobulbar injection in cattle,
47.6 mm on the equatorial axis vertical, and 48.5 mm on
the hypodermic needle, if positioned near the optic
the horizontal axis.
and orbitorotundum foramina, must traverse a distance of
about 12 cm.
Cow orbit
Rabbit orbit
The cow orbit has many similarities to the hoise, but also
significant differences. For instance, the frontal bone is
 The rabbit has become an increasing popular household
very large and well developed to accommodate the cow's
Il e asn oi pauien pue uaoiq asnoq aq ueo i1 se ad
hoins. The bones which contribute to the bovine orbit
box. The rabbit has a large orbit as well as a large globe
include the frontal, lacrimal, zygomatic, palatine, maxil.
which occupies most of the orbital space, and a large venous
lary, and sphenoid. The bovine orbital rim, composed of
sinus within the orbit. Hence, orbital surgery in this species
three bony structures around 360°, consists of: 1) the fron-
must be limited to the space between the sclera and Tenon's
- ) ao l a (  o) ao l
capsule, and avoid entering the retrobulbar tissues directly.
thus); and 3) the zygomatic bone and frontal process of
The bones of the rabbit orbit include the maxillary, orbito-
the zygomatic bone (entire ventral rim and lateral can-
sphenoid, alisphenoid, lacrimal, palatine, frontal, pterygoid.,
thus). The coronoid process of the mandible is well devel-
and zygomatic. The orbital rim consists of the following
oped and positioned just caudal to the lateral rim to permit
- oe a  si  r s
hypodermic needle insertion into the deep orbital tissues
matic processes of the maxilla, and zygomatic bones (ventral
from behind the lateral orbital rim (Fig. 4.4a). The bony
orbital rim). The globe's lateral displacement allows the
orbital walls consist of: 1) the lacrimal and sphenoid bones
temporal bone to also contribute to the lateral orbital rim.
medially: 2) the palatine and sphenoid bones ventrally: 3)
The orbit is 1oughly circular, about 25 mm diameter,
the frontal bone dorsally. and 4) the temporal and
with the skull being about 108 mm long and 50 mm wide.
zygomatic bones laterally.
The 1abbit's globe measures 16-19 mm anteroposterioily.
[mportant orbital foramina include: 1) the ethmoidal
17 mm vertically, and 18-20 mm horizontally. A large
foramen (ethmoidal blood vessels and nerves): 2) the optic
Harderian gland (19 mm long.
12-15 mm wide, and
foramen (passage of the optic nerve); and 3) the orbito10-
4-6 mm thick at its largest point) occupies the lower ante-
tundum (a combination of the orbital fissure and the fora-
nio1 part of the orbit. It is medial to the lacrimal gland and
men rotundum) for passage of the oculomotor (third), the
almost completely surrounded by a large venous sinus.
trochlear (fourth), the trigeminal (fifth) and the abducens
(sixth) nerves, and retinal and maxillary blood vessels
(Fig. 4.4b)
Avian orbit
The orbital dimensions of the adult cow are estimated to
 be 65 mm wide, 64 mm high, 120 mm deep, and 151 mm
Avian species that are presented to veterinarians for eye
between the eyes. The adult cow globe measures 35.3 mm
disease are generally in the raptor group (owls, falcons,
on the meridional anterior-posterio1 axis, 40.8 mm on
and hawks) and the psittacines (parrots, cockatiels, and
A
B
Fig. 4.4 The bones of the bovine orbit. Entry into the bovine orbit is generally through the palpebral fissure and orbital opening. (a) The bones that comprise
the cow orbit, as viewed laterally, are the frontal bone with zygomatic process (A), lacrimal bone (B); zygomatic bone with frontal process (C); zygomatic
process of the temporal bone (D); and coronoid process of the mandible (E). (b) Viewed through the orbital rim and into the orbital base or apex, are three
foramina: the ethmoidal foramen (A); optic foramen (B), lateral to which is the pterygoid crest; and lastly the foramen orbitorotundum (C). Like the horse, the
cow orbital rim consists totally of bony structures, but the orbit is shallower than the horse. The pterygoid crest presents a sizeable barrier to orbital nerve
blocks (shielding all of the important foramina), and generally local anesthetic is injected deep to it (the pterygoid fossa) or just anterior to successfully block
all of the nerves supplying the orbit and globe.
56
Surgical pathophysiology
parakeets). Trauma in the raptor group is probably the
Surgical pathophysiology
most frequent single cause of eye disease in this group.
and the most treatable. Orbital anatomy varies markedly
The orbit can be characterized as a roughly conical cavity
in the avian species, based on the shape of the skull and
with bony and fibrous periorbital walls that are relatively
beak (Fig. 4.5).
Iesistant to expansion. Suspended within the orbit by a con-
The avian orbit and globe are unusually large relative to
tinuous covering of endorbita around the blood vessels,
  s  a oa  u  a
nerves, extraocular muscles, and adipose tissues, the globe
Iestricted access to the extraocular muscles as well as limited
is provided mobility. The bulbar and foinix conjunctivae
orbital space during surgery. In fact, sometimes it is best
are also thin and flexible, and accommodate ocular move-
to rupture the globe at the beginning of the enucleation pro-
ments without restriction, while still creating a significant
cedure to facilitate surgery and globe removal. Since there
is considerable variation in skull and orbital osteology.
barrier to the environment and potential infections from
entering the orbit and eye. As a result, inflammations, cysts,
only some generalizations are possible. In most birds the
and masses that increase the volume of the orbital tissues
orbit is almost completely enclosed by bones, the floor
will create pressure on these walls and, as the pathway of
 n   s    
least resistance, displace the globe forward into the palpe-
movements)
bral fissure. Hence, limited increases in orbital tissue vol-
Bones contributing. in part, to the avian orbit include: 1)
ume can lead to exophthalmia; with large amounts of
prefrontal o1 lacrimal bone; 2) frontal bone; 3) ethmoid o1
neoplasia or hemorrhage the globe can be proptosed or dis-
ectethmoidale bone (part of the 1ostral wall of the orbit,
placed beyond the palpebral fissure.
separating it from the nasal cavity);: 4) laterosphenoidale
This infrastructure of fascial tissues, which permit eye
bone (ventral caudal wall of orbit); and 5) zygomatic bone.
mobility and provide the conduit fo1 the blood vessels,
Often pneumatization of the skull bones is present; the
Ieduction in weight of these bones is probably an adapta-
nerves, and muscular attachments fo1 the eye to the rest of
the head, can also be damaged. Chronic inflammation, su1-
tion for flight. Both globes are separated by a thin bony
gery of the orbit, and trauma with hemorrhage can cause
partition, the interorbital septum (ethmoid bone), which
can be fractured easily during enucleation if one is not
fibrosis within the orbit sufficient to 1estrict globe move-
ment and cause enophthalmia. Loss of the orbital adipose
careful. Another interesting adaptation in birds are two
tissues, which fill the orbital spaces and act as flexible
muscles, the M. quadratus membranae nictitantis (originates
'shock' absorbers, can develop after significant orbital hem-
from beneath the origin of the dorsal oblique muscle) and
orhage and elevated intraorbital pressure, and result in
M. pyramidalis membranae nictitantis (originates near the ven-
enophthalmia.
tial rectus muscle), which combine and 1otate round the
 Typically the orbit may be divided into compartments:
optic nerve en route to provide motion to the highly mobile
1) intraconal (within the extraocular muscle cone); 2) extra-
nictitating membrane.
conal (within the orbit but outside of the extraocular muscle
D
B
A
B
Fig. 4l.5 The bones of the bird orbit. The avian skull varies markedly in size and shape, and is directly influenced by the bird's beak. Also, the orbits in birds are
generally quite large as compared to the associated skull (a) In general, the avian bony orbit consists of the following bones: (A) frontal bone; (B) lacrimal
bone; (C) the interorbital septum (separating both globes), at the caudal border of which is the optic foramen; and (D) nasal bone (forms the basis for the
beak). In this Rhea the orbital rim is much smaller than the bony sclerotic ring (E, representing the globe). In general, the avian orbital rim consists of the
following bones: sphenoid, lacrimal (or prefrontals) which form the dorsal orbital rim, nasal and frontal. There may also be an ectethmoid bone. (b) In this
Macaw parrot skull the orbit is very large compared to the bird's skull, and its shape is influenced by its massive beak. The globes are larger than the orbital
agojb aun jo (uogeapnua) lenowal lesibuns loy saunpasoud jenibuns lepads buuinbau 'w
57
 Surgery of the orbit
cone): and 3) extraendorbital (beneath the periosteum
blink reflex results in acute coineal exposure and rapidly
of the orbital bones). [ntraconal diseases typically cause
progressing malacia. Unchecked, the corneal integrity can
exophthalmos, while the more frequent extraconal diseases
be compromised within hours. Medical and surgical treat-
produce strabismus.
ment strategies that directly address the primary and second.
After orbital surgery, the intraorbital pressure secondary to
 ary events that can occur in traumatic proptosis are the most
postoperative hemorrhage and edema may produce some
siccessful.
exophthalmos, prolapse of the nictitating membrane, and
an impaied blink reflex. If eyelid function is impaired,
Orbital fractures
corneal ulceration can develop rapidly. Hence, after most
As the orbital shell is composed primarily of bony tis-
is indicated. Drainage tubes can also be used, separate from
sues, the globe is fairly well protected against trauma. How-
the primary incision, to reduce intraorbital pressure and
ever, considerable trauma can cause orbital fractures of the
promote drainage. These Penrose drains should be removed
temporal, zygomatic and frontal bones in most domestic
24-48 h postoperatively.
species. With the concurrent hemorrhage and swelling.
globe displacement, strabismus, impaired mobility, hemo1-
rhage, pain, and orbital asymmetry result. If the adjacent
Effect of globe development on orbit growth
sinuses are involved, orbital and/or subcutaneous emphy-
Development of puppy, kitten and foal orbits is partially
sema with crepitus occur.
determined by concurrent growth and expansion in the size
[n general, orbital fractures with minimal displacement
of the eye. In animals that lose an eye to trauma and/or
of the fractured bone heal without surgery; however, if dis-
inflammation in early life and while still growing. orbital
placement is considerable and unstable, reapposition and
development will markedly slow and 1esult in noticeable
orbital asymmetry at adulthood. The earlier in life that the
A vigorous blink reflex must be maintained in spite of
globe is destroyed, the more pronounced the orbital defect.
the orbital swelling, and the coinea protected by topical
Orbital asymmetry also occurs in puppies, kittens and foals
tear substitutes. Temporary complete tarsorrhaphy may
with unilateral microphthalmia: the more severe the micio-
be indicted to protect the outer eye and prevent secondary
phthalmia, the more extensive the orbital maldevelopment.
coineal ulceration.
Hence in young animals, enucleation of the globe and use
of an intraorbital implant affter surgery usually help to
Ieduce the orbital deformity to a minimum.
Orbital inflammation: acute and chronic
The animal orbit is susceptible to bacterial infections
 Traumatic proptosis/avulsion/luxation
(Fig. 4.6). Orbital cellulitis may present as acute or chronic,
of the globe
and is usually associated with bacterial o1 fungal infections
(often entry cannot be ascertained), as well as foreign
[n proptosis or luxation of the globe, the entire globe is
bodies. Orbital cellulitis occurs most frequently in dogs
displaced forward. In mild cases, secondary pressure from
(especially the hunting breeds), and is rare in cats. In horses,
retrobulbar hemorrhage and edema will force the globe
cattle, and certain species of birds orbital cellulitis may be
forward sufficiently to induce exophthalmia, exposure kera-
secondary to adjacent sinus infections or as a sequel of de-
titis, and an impaired blink 1eflex. Proptosis occurs most
horning in cattle. Fungal infections are infrequent in the
frequently in dogs and certain breeds, especially the bra-
dog, and are usually associated with foreign bodies. Infec-
chycephalic breeds, and in cats is usually catastrophic. In
tion may enter the orbit through several routes. Infectious
the horse, traumatic proptosis is usually incomplete and is
agents can enter from the mouth, conjunctivae, the adjacent
typically exhibited by intraorbital hemorrhage, exposure
sinuses and nasal cavity, the subcutaneous and skin surfaces
keratitis, exophthalmia, and impaired blink reflex. In other
of the incomplete lateral and dorsolateral orbital walls, and
species, proptosis appears rare.
When trauma is extensive, the globe may be thrust fo1-
ward with such force and speed that the equator of the globe
extends beyond the palpebral fissure. The compensatory
eyelid contractions that should retain the globe within the
orbit are delayed, and with the globe already forward of
the eyelid margins, the orbicularis oculi muscle spasms pre.
vent retraction of the globe into the orbit. At the same time.
forward stretching of the orbital tissues results in intraorbital
hemorrhage and edema which can displace the globe even
further forward. The stretching, direct pressure, and perhaps
thrombosis and ischemia can result in optic nerve inflam-
mation and subsequent atrophy. Elevated intraorbital pres-
sure, and nerve and vascular damage to the lacrimal gland.
may cause sufficient destruction to result in keratoconjuncti-
vitis malacia. The extraocular muscles are stretched consider-
ably in traumatic proptosis, and the shortest medial rectus
Fig. 4.6 English Springer Spaniel with acute orbital cellulitis. Note the
 a   r    
 Swelling of the eyelids and dorsal orbital subcutaneous tissues.
58
Perioperative medications
hematogenously. In a recent report on orbital abscesses
breed predisposition. Younger dogs may demonstrate more
     a s   
rapidly growing orbital masses. Most neoplasms external
lated from dogs were Staphylococcus, Escherichia, Bacteroides,
to the extraocular cone affect the medial orbital space and
Clostridium, and Pasteurella. The most frequent bacteria
wall. This area has the most difficult and limited surgical
isolated from orbital abscesses in cats were Pasteurella and
exposure. In dogs, about 60% of orbital neoplasms are
Bacteroides. The highly vascula1 orbit and the endorbita that
primary. As a 1esult, when orbital neoplasia is suspected,
covers the orbital tissues usually respond quickly to anti-
a complete and comprehensive general physical examina-
biotic therapy. This orbital compartmentalization can also
tion is required. The remaining 40% of orbital neoplasms
impede the spread of the infectious nidus, but also foster
usually invade the orbit from the adjacent nasal and oral
the development of focal septic areas that impede antibiotic
cavities, and the sinuses. Unfortunately, 9o% of canine
penetration. As a result, surgical excision of chronic orbital
 orbital neoplasms are malignant.
abscesses and focal granulomas may be necessary for
 The prognosis for orbital neoplasms is poor, because con-
complete lesolution of the condition.
servative surgery in an attempt to maintain the globe and
 For orbital abscesses in dogs and cats, based on in-vitro 
vision results in unacceptably high rates of tumor recu1-
susceptibility testing of aerobic bacterial isolates, cephalos-
lence. Patients with orbital osteolysis usually have a poo1
porins, extended-spectrum penicillins, potentiated penicil.
prognosis. Most clients do not accept the aggressive attempts
lins, and carbapenems are recommended for the initial
of orbitectomy with the resultant loss of the globe and
antimicrobial therapy of orbital abscesses in dogs and cats.
vision, and postoperative facial defoimities. A recent study
o     si  
Ieported that surgical intervention and chemotherapy can
abscess and in-vitro antimicrobial susceptibility determined
prolong life; about 40% of the dogs were alive 6 months
to assist in antibiotic selection.
after diagnosis, and about 19% were still alive 1 year late1.
Unfortunately, the other 6o% of patients, with advanced
orbital neoplasia and most with no therapy, were eutha-
Orbital neoplasms
nized within 6 months of diagnosis.
Orbital neoplasms are not infrequent in dogs, but are less
The treatment of choice is usually exenteration, which
common in cats. In both horses and cattle, intraorbital lym-
involves excision of the entire orbital contents including
phomas, lymphosarcomas, and squamous cell carcinomas
the globe. Orbital neoplasms affecting the rostral and lateral
are the most frequent types. In dogs, orbital neoplasms
 ae d e  s   n
m s ro  jo n a e jo ns
Unfortunately, masses involving the ventromedial and pos-
in cats the most frequent orbital neoplasm is squamous cell
   r a a  no r
carcinoma. Primary orbital neoplasms can arise from any
Iemoval of the eye during aftempts at excising the neoplasm.
tissue (epithelial, vasculal, neural, and connective tissues)
A major diffculty during surgery is the differentiation of
within the orbit. Secondary orbital neoplasms also occul
normal and cancerous tissues, often resulting in an incom-
and invade locally from the nasal, sinus, and cranial cavities,
plete excision of the neoplasm. When considering extensive
as well as metastasize from distant sites. The clinical signs of
therapy fo1 advanced orbital neoplasia in small animals and
orbital neoplasia are usually associated with a slowly enlarg-
horses, careful education of the client is very important as
ing and painless mass within the orbit (Fig. 4.7). Depending
the postoperative results can markedly affect the facial
on its position, a neoplasm within the orbit can produce
appearance.
stabismus; the direction of the ocular deviation may assist
Orbital
neoplasms in cats are usually malignant.
to localize the mass.
The orbital neoplasms reported most frequently include
The majority of infoimation on orbital neoplasia is on
squamous cell carcinomas, followed by lymphosarcoma-
dogs. The mean age of affected dogs with orbital neoplasms 
leukemia complex, undifferentiated sarcomas, osteogenic
is 8-9 years old. Females may be at higher risk. There is no
sarcomas, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Orbital neoplasia in cats 
necessitates a guarded to very poor prognosis.
Orbital neoplasia is infrequent in horses and cattle, and
careful systemic patient evaluation is essential. Conjunctival
squamous cell carcinomas may invade the orbit, especially
in the medial canthus. Retrobulbar lymphosarcoma occurs
in both species, and not infrequently affects both orbits.
The appearance after enucleation or exenteration in horses
is a greatly shrunken orbit, and an intraorbital prosthesis
may prevent most of the shrinkage.
Perioperative medications
Orbital surgery may be perfoimed with the patient under
various medications fo1 the pre-existing ophthalmic condi-
Fig. 4.7 Left orbital neoplasm (meningioma) affecting the medial orbital
sad i sis  sad s eo n r
floor in a 15-year-old Beagle. Note the exophthalmos and dorsolateral
When entry into the internal orbit o1 globe through the
deviation of the globe.
conjunctival surfaces is planned, complete asepsis is not
59
Surgery of the orbit
possible. If an intraocular or an intraorbital prosthesis is
[n large animals, the deep orbits are generally approached
implanted, topical and systemic antibiotics are 1ecom-
frontally, and removal of the globe usually precedes deep
mended perioperatively. If infection occurs postoperatively
orbital surgery. In birds, the intraorbital space is very lim-
around the prosthesis, successful resolution of the condition
ited, and enucleation and other orbital surgeries are diffi-
often necessitates removal of the device.
cult. In some species, the globe must be reduced surgically
Fo1 lateral and dorsal orbitotomy procedures, standard
during the enucleation procedure.
skin preparation is recommended. The planned surgical site
In an orbitectomy procedure, the entire contents of the
is clipped, and cleaned with surgical antimicrobial soap. The
orbit, including the globe, are excised. In addition, some
area is wiped with iodine (0.5% dilution) and alcohol, and
to most of the orbital bones are removed. This radical proce-
dure is reserved for orbital neoplasms localized to the orbit
and without distant metastases. With the loss of these tis-
the palpebral fissure, the eyelids, corneal and conjunctival
sues, variable facial disfigurement occurs. Preliminary results
    se s r and ae ss
with orbital neoplasms in dogs suggest that more extensive
surgical methods yield improved survival results compared
to the more conservative lateral orbitotomy o1 exenteration
TYPES OF ORBITAL SURGICAL PROCEDURES
procedures. Silicone or methyl methacrylate implants can
be used to fill some of the postoperative space and decrease
Orbital surgical procedures are divided into several majo1
the anticipated disfigurement.
types including: enucleation, evisceration, exenteration,
orbitotomy, and orbitectomy. In the enucleation procedure
Enucleation procedures in small animals
the globe is excised in total. Most, if not all, of the bulbar
and palpebral conjunctivae, the eyelid margins, and the
nictitating membrane are also removed. The lacrimal gland
In enucleation, the globe and its contents are excised. In
na a uo uadap pasxa aq rou e n 
animals, the indications fo1 enucleation include: 1) ocula1
procedure. An intraorbital prosthesis may be used to fill
congenital defects, such as microphthalmia, that result
the space occupied by the eye.
in chronic problems such as conjunctivitis and keratitis;
In birds, the enucleation procedure is unique because
2) intraocular infections that have destroyed the globe,
and are potential sources of systemic infection; 3) intraocl-
cleation technique, either additional exposure is created o1
lar tumors not amenable to local excision or laser therapy
the globe is collapsed before removal.
and still confined to the globe (Fig. 4.8); 4) proptosis of
In the evisceration procedure, the intraocular tissues,
the globe with several of the extraocular muscles and/o1
including the anterior and posterior uvea, lens, vitreous,
the optic nerve severed; 5) intraocular inflammation that
and 1etina, ale removed. After implantation of an intraocu-
has destroyed the intraocular tissues and resulted in blind-
lar prosthesis, the scleral or limbal incision is apposed, leav.
ness; and 6) extensive trauma to the globe with the loss of
ing the coineal and scleral tunics. Eye movement with the
intraocular tissues and without the possibility of successful
intraocular implant is retained. In the exenteration proce-
repair.
dure the contents of the entire orbit including the globe
 Enlarged and blind glaucomatous globes may also be trea-
are excised. This procedure is generally reserved for orbital
ted by enucleation; however, the evisceration procedure fol-
neoplasia in all animal species.
lowed by insertion of an intraocular prosthesis has largely
In orbitotomy procedures, selected areas of the orbit are
replaced the enucleation procedure because of superior cos-
exposed, usually for tissue biopsy and excision. Surgical
metic results. Advanced glaucoma secondary to intraocula1
approaches to the orbit are limited to the oral, anterior lat-
eral, and dorsal routes. The anterio1 orbitotomy procedure
has two surgical approaches: the transpalpebral (through
ane a yno) anosu a pue (sa a
conjunctiva) to gain entry into the anterior orbit. The lateral
and dorsal approaches provide access to the posterior orbit
through the corresponding soft tissue orbital walls. Because
of limited exposure with most orbitotomy procedures with
the globe in situ, as accurate a localization of the surgical site
as possible is helpful before surgical intervention.
The selection of a specific orbitotomy procedure depends
on the species. In dogs, a number of different surgical
entries, with or without zygomatic arch removal, are avail-
able because of the large lateral and dorsolateral fibrous
orbital wall. In cats, orbitotomies are limited to the frontal
approach, due to very limited space, large globe size relative
to orbit, and short optic nerves which limit globe manipula-
tion. In fact, optic nerve chiasm and optic nerve damage to
the fellow eye (opposite eye) sufficient to produce blindness
Fig. 4.8 Primary mast cell sarcoma involving multiple areas of the limbus
can follow excessive surgical handling and tension of the
with secondary glaucoma in an American Cocker Spaniel. The recommended 
feline's optic nerve.
teatment is enucleation.
60
Enucleation procedures in small animals
aced
neoplasms and non-specific panophthalmitis is best man-
vessels are transected just anterio1 to the hemostat. Place-
aged by enucleation.
ment of the scissors is critical to avoid any contact with
 In the enucleation procedure in small animals, the eye.
the posterior sclera and to prevent inadvertent incision of
eyelid margins, nictitating membrane, and lacrimal gland
the posterior segment of the eye. The globe is carefully
are excised. Surgical approaches for enucleation include the
Iemoved from the orbit to permit placement of a ligature
subconjunctival (through the bulbar conjunctiva), transpal-
deep to the hemostat still clamped to the optic nerve and
pebral (through the eyelids), and lateral (a modified palpe-
accompanying blood vessels. The orbit is now carefully
bral procedure starting at the lateral canthus and removing
examined for any bleeders, and ligatures or point electrocau-
the inner (deeper) one-half of the upper and lower eyelids).
tery applied if needed.
During enucleation of the eye in cats, minimal traction on
If an intraorbital implant is not used, parts of the remain-
the globe during the procedure is recommended. Excessive
ing extraocular muscles and periorbital fascia are apposed
traction on the feline globe undergoing enucleation may
with 2-0 to 4-0 simple internupted absorbable sutures to
damage the optic chiasm and the opposite optic nerve.
reduce the dead space within the orbit. The remaining bul-
 All orbital tissues (including the globes) that are excised
bar conjunctiva and anterior Tenon's capsule are apposed
should be examined histologically. Microscopic examina-
with 2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. With
tion of these tissues can confim the clinical diagnosis,
as
closure of the bulbar conjunctiva, 4-6 mm of the eyelid
well as provide additional information that could affect
margins (including the medial and lateral canthi, and nicti
the  postoperative  clinical 
 management and long-term
tating membrane) are excised circumferentially with tenot-
prognosis for the animal.
omy or strabismus scissors. The nictitating membrane
is
protracted, and two hemostats are overlapped and clamped
at its base (Fig. 4.9e). The remaining nictitating membrane,
Subconjunctival enucleation
complete with gland, is excised by tenotomy o1 strabismus
The subconjunctival enucleation technique is the simplest
scissors. The remaining eyelids (including the septum orbi-
and most rapid of these procedures, and the most frequently
tale) are closed and apposed with 3-0 to 5-0 simple inter-
perfoimed in small animals. Using this method, the globe is
rupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.9f,g).
excised from its surrounding Tenon's capsule with the majo1-
If an orbital prosthesis is planned, an 18-22 mm sterile
ity of the surgical dissection limited to the sub-Tenon's space.
silicone sphere (Jardon Eye Prosthetics [nc., Southfield, MI)
As a result, this method usually has less hemorrhage intrao-
peratively and less serum accumulation postoperatively. This
St Louis, MO) is usually selected (Fig. 4.10). The surface of
technique does not usually remove the conjunctivae and lac-
the silicone sphere is scarified o1 roughened with several inci-
rimal gland; however, the entire nictitating membrane is
sions via scalpel blade to roughen its smooth surface and
Excised. Exposure of the deeper orbital tissues may be limited
facilitate orbital retention. The sphere is inserted, and the
with this procedure because of the edematous bulbar con-
a ine pasoe are eioa pe sp ro
 junctiva, but can be enhanced by a lateral canthotomy.
sphere. An alternative method is the placement of mesh
In the subconjunctival procedure for enucleation, entry
implants on the anterior surface of the orbital rim to prevent
into the orbit is through the bulbar conjunctiva. After com
 postoperative eyelid and orbital shrinkage.
pletion of draping around the palpebral fissure, a 5-10 mm
lateral canthotomy may be performed to increase exposure
(Fig. 4.9a). With blunt-tipped tenotomy, strabismus, or Met-
Transpalpebral ('en bloc') enucleation
zenbaum scissors, the full-thickness lateral canthus is cut.
The transpalpebral enucleation technique differs from the
Hemostasis is usually achieved by direct pressure with a sul-
subconjunctival procedure in that the surgical entry starts
gical sponge, if necessary supplemented by point electrocau-
at the level of the eyelids, and the deeper aspects of the eye-
tery. The bulbar conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are incised
lids and the entire palpebral, fornix, and bulbar conjuncti-
at the 12 o'clock position by curved Steven's tenotomy, stra-
vae, and nictitating membrane are excised (en bloc*
bismus, o1 Metzenbaum scissois with blunt tips fo1 about
method). This technique is perfoimed more frequently in
3-5 mm posterior to the limbus, and the incision extended
the large animal species. Although more tissues are excised
fo1 360° (Fig. 4.9b). Lsing the scissors' blunt tips, the dissec-
in this procedure, the conjunctival and coineal surfaces are
tion plane between the sclera and Tenon's capsule is
avoided, thereby reducing the chance of orbital contamina-
extended deeper into the orbit until each extraocular muscle
tion and postoperative infection. This method is preferred
insertion is identified (Fig. 4.9c). After isolation with a mus-
when infections of the globe and conjunctival surfaces are
cle hook, the tendinous insertions of all of the extraocular
present. Because the entire conjunctiva is excised, exposure
muscles are incised. Transection of the extraocular muscle
and visualization of the deeper orbital tissues are facilitated.
insertions, rather than through the muscle per se, minimizes
After draping, the eyelids are apposed with simple contin-
hemorrhage. As each of the four major rectus muscle inser-
uous 3-0 to 4-0 sutures, thereby closing the palpebral fissure
tions is incised, the globe becomes more mobile. After inci-
(Fig. 4.1la). The eyelid skin is incised circumferentially by
sion of the retractor muscle and oblique muscle insertions,
scalpel blade about 6-8 mm from the eyelid margins to
the globe will displace slightly forward.
avoid the bases of the meibomian or tarsal glands
To sever the optic nerve and the adjacent posterior ciliary
(Fig. 4.11b). The skin incision is carefully deepened until
arteries, a small curved hemostat or enucleation forceps
the submucosa of the palpebral conjunctiva is reached.
are carefully positioned posterior to the globe (Fig. 4.9d).
Then, with blunt dissection with Steven's tenotomy, strabis-
With curved Metzenbaum scissors or the specially curved
mus o1 Metzenbaum scissois, the incision is continued
enucleation scissors, the optic nerve and surounding blood
under the conjunctival fornices, and onto the globe and
61
Surgery of the orbit
?
?
?
?
G
Fig. 4.9 Enucleation - subconjunctival approach: In this procedure the globe is removed from Tenon's capsule through a bulbar conjunctival incision at the
limbus. After removal of the nictitating membrane, the eyelid margins are removed and permanently apposed. (a) The palpebral fissure is temporarily enlarged
by a lateral canthotomy. The lateral canthus is incised by small tenotomy scissors for 5-10 mm. (b) The bulbar conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are incised 
360° by curved Steven's tenotomy or strabismus scissors a few millimeters behind the limbus. About 2-4 mm of bulbar conjunctiva are left attached at the
limbus, to permit manipulation of the globe with forceps during the enucleation procedure. (c) By blunt-sharp dissection with curved tenotomy scissors, the
extraocular muscle insertions to the globe are excised. The globe is rotated in different directions to provide the optimal exposure during the dissection
uaaaid on pauinbau s! aiea lepads siossns wnequaziaw jo uogeapnua pauin Aq paasue.n pue easowau paun Aq padwep s! auau sndo aul (p) ssaooid
touching the posterior globe with the tips of the scissors during optic nerve incision. Once the optic nerve has been cut, the globe can be rotated forward for
incision of any remaining fascial attachments. (e) The nictitating membrane is protracted by thumb forceps and its base clamped with two curved hemostats.
The structure is excised by Mayo scissors. The lacrimal gland may be removed at this time from beneath the lateral orbital ligament. (f) The two layers of
pasodde s! larel apsnw suejnoiquo-uiys aul sanans algeqiosge pandnuanu aldwis Aq ajnsden s,uoual jo uood eyasou aun jo uogisodde apnpui aunso
with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. (g) Two weeks following enucleation in a young Labrador Retriever and suture removal.
under the bulbar conjunctiva (Fig. 4.1lc). The procedure
with 3-0 to 4-0 simple internupted o1 horizontal mattress
continues using  the same steps as the subconjunctival
absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.11f). The eyelid-subcutaneous
 a saas a  as 
layer is apposed using the same type of suture and suture pat-
the sclera and Tenon's capsule will usually minimize hemo1-
tern. The eyelid skin is apposed with several 3-0 to 4-0 simple
rhage. All of the extraocular muscles are severed at their
interrupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.11g).
insertions (Fig. 4.11d). Isolation, clamping by curved hemo-
stat, incision of the optic nerve, and removal of the globe
Lateral enucleation
follow (Fig. 4.1le). The Vicryl ligature is carefully posi-
tioned deep to the hemostat on the optic nerve stump.
 [n the lateral approach for enucleation, the transpalpebral
Closure of the anterior periorbital fascial tissues with sim-
technique has been modified by the inclusion of a lateral
ple interrupted 3-0 to 5-0 absorbable sutures, with or without
canthotomy to increase further the access to, and visualiza-
  i ae   s 'sis  
tion of, the deeper orbit. This technique is useful in the dol-
the orbit. The orbital septum within the eyelids is apposed
ichocephalic canine breeds and fo1 deep orbits. The eyelids
62
Evisceration with intraocular prosthesis in small animals
clamped by curved hemostat, and transected by curved
Metzenbaum o1 enucleation scissois immediately in front of
the hemostat (Fig. 4.12e). With the posterio1 attachments
fee from the globe, further medial rotation permits inci-
sion of the medial extraocular muscle insertions and perio1-
bital fascia, freeing the globe, lacrimal gland, conjunctivae,
and nictitating membrane 'en mass' from the orbital wound
(Fig. 4. 12f). A sterile silicone sphere with its surfaces scarified
by several incisions can be inserted at this time.
Closure is accomplished in four layers, including the 
endorbita, septum orbitale, subcutaneous tissues, and skin
(Fig. 4.12g). Portions of endorbita can be apposed with
2-0 to 4-0 simple interupted absorbable sutures to secure
Fig. 4.10 Placement of a 14-22 mm silicone or methacrylate sphere after
the intraorbital prosthesis and reduce the dead space for
enucleation in the dog and cat. Two-layer closure is recommended with 
serum collection. The septum orbitale, located in the deeper
apposition of the dorsal and ventral periorbita and Tenon's capsule with
aspects of the eyelids, is apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple
simple interrupted absorbable sutures, and the eyelid skin and orbicularis
oculi muscle layer with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. In both
interrupted or horizontal mattress absorbable sutures. The
cats and horses these orbital implants are more apt to extrude than in dogs.
subcutaneous layer is apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple inter-
(Modied with permission from Nasisse MP van Ee RT. Munger Rl. Davidson MG 1988 Use
rupted absorbable sutures. The eyelid skin is apposed with
of methyl metharyiate orbital prostheses in dogs and cats: 78 cases 1980-1986). Journal
2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 192:539542.)
 Evisceration with intraocular prosthesis
are temporarily closed during the surgery by sutures and/o1
in small animals
instruments to prevent contamination of the corneal and
conjunctival surfaces with the orbital tissues. If the eyelids
Evisceration is an attractive alternative to the enucleation
are closed by instrumentation, the time to suture the eyelids
procedure. The procedure, like the enucleation technique,
 is omited, while still preventing contamination of the orbit 
treats blind and painful eyes, removes the need fo1 topical
with the outer ocular surfaces.
and systemic medications, but provides improved cosmesis.
        
In the evisceration procedure, the entire intraocular contents 
formed with curved Steven's tenotomy, strabismus, OI
are removed through a scleral o limbal incision, leaving only
Metzenbaum scissors (Fig. 4.12a). Starting at the lateral can-
the fibrous tunics of the coinea and sclera. Into this co1-
pue saaa iaddn au sosss nquazan usn pue s
neoscleral shell is inserted a sterile silicone sphere, and the
then the lower eyelids are divided into an outer layer con-
scleral or limbal wound apposed. The usual results are a pain-
sisting of the skin and orbicularis oculi, and an inner layer
less and cosmetically acceptable eye that often 1equires no
composed of the tarsal plate including the septum orbitale,
 medical therapy, has movement, and often shows no obvious
and the palpebral conjunctiva (Fig. 4.12b ). The blunt tipped
ophthalmic disease.
curved Metzenbaum scissors, with a combination of cutting
The primary indication for evisceration is end-stage primary
and blunt dissection, facilitates this process with minimal
glaucoma, which has become medically non-responsive, with
hemorrhage. Dissection is continued to include the medial
enlarged and painful globes. Globes with secondary glau-
coma associated with septic panophthalmitis and intraocular
A curved hemostat may be inserted into this cleavage plane
neoplasms are not candidates for evisceration, and should be
 to gently clamp the skin surface. The eyelid skin about
      
5-7 mm from the eyelid margins is incised 360° with the
globes with loss of intraocular tissues are occasional candi-
Metzenbaum scissors (Fig. 4.12c), and the eyelid margins
dates for evisceration with intraocular prosthesis, assuming
-d au aso oi say s aa no omn ym soe
infection is not present. Evisceration with intraocular prosthe-
pebral fissure and cover the coineal and conjunctival su1-
sis should be delayed o1 not perfoimed in eyes with majo1
faces. The globe is 1otated medially and the lateral canthal
corneal diseases, including deep ulceration and low tear pro-
ligament attachment to the orbital rim incised to provide
duction. Weakened coineas may not be able to accommodate
additional mobility to the globe (Fig. 4.12d)
 r a m  r  
Surgical dissection with tenotomy or strabismus scissors is
Some failures following evisceration with intraocular prosthe-
continued under the conjunctival foinices and to the sub-
sis have been associated with recurrence of the preoperative
Tenon's space just caudal of the limbus. Removal of the globe
ophthalmic disease, especially
unsuspected intraocular
from Tenon's capsule continues using a method similar to
neoplasia and mycotic infections.
that described in the subconjunctival enucleation technique,
Ophthalmic prosthetic devices have been described in the
except that the medial globe attachments are excised last.
veterinary literature since the latter part of the nineteenth
The insertions of all of the dorsal, lateral, and ventral extrao-
century. Most of the ophthalmic devices attempted in ani-
cular muscles are transected by scissors immediately next to
mals were employed after removal of the eye, and were posi-
the globe to minimize hemorrhage. As the different extraocu-
tioned either in the remaining conjunctival space or within
lar muscles are transected, the globe can be progressively
the orbit. The shell-type artificial eyes require daily mainte-
Iotated, eventually exposing the optic nerve. The optic nerve
nance, and orbital and conjunctival tissue contracture usu-
and adjacent posterio1 ciliary blood vessels are carefully
ally eventually extrudes these devices. Simpson reported on
63
4
Surgery of the orbit
A
?
?
?
F
G
[elgadled ayl (e) yayrabon padwep 1o panans splaka ayn 4aim panowau 5! aqoj6 aun anbiuupan siua ul ypeoudde (eigadjedsue.n - uogeaonu3 lldt *big
fissure is closed by suturing the eyelids together with a continuous non-absorbable suture. Alternatively, the eyelids can be clamped together by Alis or towel
forceps. (b) The eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle layers are incised for 360° to the level of the tarsoconjunctiva. The incision is usually about 6-8 mm
from the eyelid margins to avoid the bases of the meibomian glands. (c) With the sutured eyelids clamped by Allis forceps, the dissection is continued by
small curved Metzenbaum scissors around the conjuncival fornices and onto the globe. (d) Once the sub-Tenon's space is entered about the globe, the 
different extraocular muscle insertions are isolated and transected. Hemorrhage is usually minimal as long as the surgical plane remains in the sub-Tenon's 
space. (e) Once the posterior orbit is entered, the optic nerve is carefully isolated, clamped by a curved hemostat, and incised by curved scissors posterior to
the clamp. (f) The first of two layers of closure consists of apposition of the orbital septum with simple interrupted or simple mattress absorbable sutures. (g)
The second and last closure is apposition of the eyelid and orbicularis oculi muscle layer with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
intrascleral implants in dogs in 1956, but unfortunately
After implantation in glaucomatous globes, the elastic sclera
excised the coinea to peimit visualization of the prosthesis.
and coinea will 1educe in size over 1-3 months to confoim
Recurrent conjunctivitis in most of these dogs required
to the sphere size. Available in different colors, the black
intermittent topical antibiotics, and local infections often
sphere is recommended for dogs and the yellow sphere
resulted in eventual prosthesis extrusion.
may be used in cats. A vertical pupil can be tattooed on
Following encouraging studies on intrascleral prostheses
the sphere for the cat. The silicone sphere can be sterilized
in dogs by Magrane and Helper, the silicone (Jardon Eye
 n  e  i  n s 
Prosthetics [nc., Southfield, Ml) and methyl methacrylate
  a r  a si sas  
(Storz [nstrument Company, St Louis, MO) spheres have
cal sterilization of these spheres is not recommended.
been found to be non-painful, similar to the noimal eye in
Afte1 draping. an eyelid speculum is inserted between the
appearance, non-toxic, non-antigenic, easily implanted,
upper and lower eyelids to increase surgical exposure. A lat-
the intraocular volume.
eral canthotomy may be used for additional exposure
Sphere size ± 1 mm is deteimined by calipel measurement
(Fig. 4.13a). With tenotomy o1 strabismus scissors, a 6 mm
of the horizontal coineal diameter. In adult dogs, the sphere
limbal-based conjunctival flap is constricted fo1 180°, usu-
diameter size usually 1anges from 18 to 22 mm. When globe
ally from the 9 to 3 o'clock position. The bulbar conjunctiva
size has been increased by glaucoma, the fellow normal eye
is carefully and bluntly separated from the underlying
coinea is measured to determine the optimal sphere size.
Tenon's capsule and sclera (Fig. 4.13b). Hemostasis is
64
Evisceration with intraocular prosthesis in small animals
B
C
D
E
F
G
Fig. 4.12 Enucleation - lateral approach: In this procedure the globe is removed from Tenon's capsule starting at the lateral canthus. (a) A lateral canthotomy
is performed by tenotomy scissors. (b) At the lateral canthus and using curved small Metzenbaum scissors, the skin-muscle and the tarsus-conjunctiva layers
of the upper and lower eyelids are separated. (c) The eyelid skin-orbicularis oculi layer is incised for 360° by scissors to expose the deeper tarsoconjunctiva. (d)
The skin-muscle layer and eyelid margins are clamped by Allis forceps, and the globe is rotated medially to incise the lateral canthal attachments. (e) With
pue 'dweo asodxa on Alleipaw paeaou aq ues aqoj6 auz suoasu! apsnw ynso jone.au pue snau leianel aua jo uoisiu! pue uonassip degingouau adaap
transect the optic nerve. (f) Continued rotation of the globe exposes and permits incision of the remaining medial extraocular muscle insertions, the medial
canthal ligament, and the conjunctiva-nictitating membrane. (g) Closure is accomplished in four layers including parts of the endorbita, septum orbitale and
subcutaneous tissue with simple interrupted absorbable sutures, and eyelid skin layer with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
maintained by point electrocautery. The sclera is incised at
all blood clots and any remaining intraocular tissues
the 12 o'clock position with a Beave1 No. 6400 microsurgi-
(Fig. 4.13g). Excessive flushing is not 1ecommended as
cal blade, about 4 mm posterior and parallel to the limbus
damage to the corneal endothelium may result.
(Fig. 4.13c,d). Scleral tissues will usually hemorrhage and
A sterile premeasured silicone sphere, rinsed in saline, is
 ss    d 
The
carefully introduced into the fibrous tunics with the Carter
     a i  
sphere holder and introducer (Fig. 4.13h-k). Once the
tenotomy scissors to about 180°. The scleral incision must
sphere is in position, an additional flush with saline of the
be 1-2 mm larger than the sphere diameter to accommodate
area is performed.
the insertion of the device. Alteinatively, the anterior cham-
The scleral incision is apposed with 5-0 to 6-0 simple
ber may be entered through a limbal incision. The limbal
interrupted o1 continuous absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.13l).
incision is associated with less hemorrhage than the scleral
The bulbar conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are apposed
approach, but may be associated with more frequent post
with a 5-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. The
operative corneal complications.
lateral canthotomy is closed with 4-0 non-absorbable figure-
The globe is eviscerated using the lens loop posterioily
of-eight and internupted mattress sutures.
and cyclodialysis spatula o1 an iridal spatula anteriorly
Complete temporary tarsorrhaphies are often used aftel
to bluntly separate the anterior and posterior uveal tract
the evisceration procedure to protect the cornea for 10-14
from the limbus and sclera (Fig. 4.13e). The lens loop
days postoperatively. Topical and systemic antibiotics are
may be the most successful instrument and cause the least
administered immediately after surgery and continued fo1
hemorrhage. With slight traction on the iris, the entire
5-7 days. If the cornea develops a central ulceration postop-
anterio1 and posterio1 uvea, lens, vitreous, and 1etina are
eratively, a bulbar conjunctival graft should be perfoimed as
removed (Fig. 4.13f). The intraocular space is gently
  s se s as   r
flushed with saline or lactated Ringel's solution to remove
Penetrating corneal ulcers often necessitate enucleation.
65
4
Surgery of the orbit
E
F
G
H
①
K
L
Fig. 4.13 Evisceration with intraocular prosthesis. In this technique all of the intraocular tissues are removed, and a silicone sphere is introduced into the
au aseaui on sossns Awonouan s,uaans jo snwsigeas Aq pawoad s Awonouuen leael ww ls  (e) eaps pue eao aun (uo jo bunsisuon agoje
Aq snqwil ayn wouy ww g-t ajnsden s,uoual pue eanounjuos jeging aun jo uoisioui janyy (g) aunsodxa enjhuns aneney pue aunssy leigaded aun jo azis
tenotomy scissors, the sclera is exposed for about 180-200°. (c) The sclera is incised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade for approximately 140-180°.
(d) Incision of the sclera results in variable amounts of hemorrhage which is controlled by point electrocautery. (e) A lens loop (or blunt spatula) is inserted into
the subscleral space, or between the sclera and the anterior and posterior uvea tracts. All of the intraocular tissues are gently separated from the sclera.
Hemorrhage is to be expected. (f) With gentle traction, the iris, ciliary body, lens, vitreous, and retina are protracted from the anterior globe. (g) Intraocular
hemorrhage is expected as the intraocular tissues are gently retracted from the corneoscleral tunics. The shell, consisting of the cornea and sclera, is gently
flushed with sterile saline to remove any remaining intraocular tissues and clots. (h) The Carter sphere holder and inserter. A yellow sphere is held by the 
instrument's tips and is usually used for eviscerations in the cat. A black sphere is recommended for the dog. in With the Carter sphere holder and inserter, a
premeasured sterile sphere (the diameter is usually 1 mm less than the horizontal corneal diameter) is placed into the fibrous tunic shell (j) Intraoperative 
appearance of the Carter sphere holder and inserter. During the insertion of the sphere into the globe, the instrument inserts the sphere while retracting the
edges of the scleral wound. (k) Intraoperative appearance of the eye after intrascleral yellow prosthesis placement. Some hemorrhage still remains in the
anterior chamber. () The two layer closure consists of apposition of the scleral and the bulbar conjunctival wounds with simple interrupted absorbable 
sutures. Often a temporary complete tarsomhaphy is then performed to protect the cornea.
66
Enucleation procedures in large animals and special species
Exenteration in small animals
slight dorsal movement of the eyeball. With the needle in
position, 10-12 mL of 2% lidocaine is injected. Slight
Exenteration is the complete removal of all of the orbital
exophthalmos usually occurs. Anesthesia takes effect in
about 5-8 min and lasts 1-2 h.
tissues, including the globe, nictitating membrane, con-
The second technique is performed by curving the needle
junctivae, lacrimal gland, zygomatic salivary gland (in
the dog), and extraocular muscles. In some patients, some
slightly and placing it through the conjunctival fornices
using a four-point or a two-point retrobulbar block. With
of the orbital periosteum can also be removed. The indica-
i si ano jo  g   sod-oi e
tions fo1 exenteration include orbital neoplasia, medically
per site. When a four-point block is used, the injection vol-
non-responsive orbital infections, and extensive intraocu-
ume of local anesthetic is 2-6 mL per site
la1 neoplasia that has extended into the orbit. The surgical
procedure is very simila1 to the transpalpebral enucleation
procedure except the surgical dissection is along the
Surgical techniques
orbital walls, exteinal to the extraocula1 muscles. More
hemorrhage is associated with this procedure. Apposition
Enucleation
of the eyelids aftel complete Iemoval of the orbital con-
Enucleation is the surgical removal of the globe, third eyelid.
tents is similar to the other enucleation procedures. Sys
and conjunctivae. In most cases the eyelid margins and mei-
temic antibiotics should be administered postoperatively
bomian glands are removed and the skin sutured to cover
fo1 5-7 days.
the open orbit.
 Enucleation procedures in large animals
Indications
Enucleation is indicated for the removal of a blind, painful.
and special species
deformed o1 traumatized eye. The subconjunctival approach
is used for coineal disease, glaucoma, and phthisis bulbi
Orbital surgery in the horse
(Fig. 4.14). Removal of an equine eye is considered
major surgery, and is only rarely considered in a standing
Retrobulbar nerve blocks
non-anesthetized animal. When only one general anesthesia
Retrobulbar or orbital local anesthesia injections are used
episode is feasible or affordable, and the fellow eye is
to reduce globe and nictitating membrane movement, and
        
to
block or lower corneal and conjunctival sensation
advanced or painful ocular disease. Enucleation should not
for standing procedures such as eyelid lacerations, nictitat-
be considered a failure of ophthalmic care, but rather the
ing membrane excision, corneal foreign body removal,
iuo aos r nuea pauund pue aedoidde
iris cyst laser ablation, anterio1 chamber or vitreous injec-
disorders.
tions or aspirations, and enucleations in standing horses
In horses determined to be at high risk for complications
and hoises under general anesthesia. Retrobulba1 nerve
from anesthesia o1 recovery, those not amenable to frequent
blocks are used to decrease the depth of general anesthesia
medications, and for those cases in which additional
required for orbital, corneal, and intraocular surgery.
expenses are not possible, enucleation is a rapid therapy to
Two techniques are used in horses (see Fig. 3.8, p. 45-46)
lestore comfort and prevent further sequelae from disease.
The skin of the orbital fossa just caudal to the posterior rim
It is important to ensure that anesthesia and the recovery
of the orbit is prepared fo1 aseptic surgery, and a 6.25 cm,
phase are not a greater risk than the benefit of surgery.
22 g spinal needle is inserted just caudal to the posterior
Retrobulbar nerve blocks can dramatically reduce the depth
aspect of the bony orbital rim. The needle is inserted until
 of general anesthesia required for enucleation or facilitate
it reaches the extraocula1 muscle cone. This is detected by
enucleation in a heavily sedated standing horse.
A
B
Fig. 4.14 Patient candidates for enucleation in the horse. (a) Septic panophthalmitis with exudative retinal detachment in an adult horse. (b) Advanced
asioy anpe ue ui ewoupuen lan snowenbs leniquo pue jeupues leipau
67
 Surgery of the orbit
The client should be educated as to the alternatives to
should also be considered in a contaminated surgical site.
enucleation, expected costs associated with therapy and sur-
If the orbit is contaminated during surgery, an orbital
gery, expected appearance after enucleation, and possible
prosthesis is usually not placed.
complications of anesthesia and surgery: all these should
After the remaining conjunctivae are excised, the eyelid
be well understood before proceeding. Cosmetic options
margin is resected from lateral to medial. Usually 6-8 mm
fo1 the hoise should be explained before proceeding with
of eyelid is removed so that no meibomian gland material
enucleation. These will be discussed later in this section
is left. Care is taken at the medial canthus to remove the
There are two basic approaches to enucleation in the
entire medial canthal skin but not to incise the medial
hoise: the subconjunctival approach and the transpalpeb-
anguli oculi vein and artery deep to the medial canthus. If
ral approach. The subconjunctival approach requires less
the upper o1 lower lacrimal canaliculus is visible, it is ligated
time to perfoim and usually results in much less hemo1-
with 3-0 to 4-0 polyglycolic acid sutures.
rhage. It is used for cases of glaucoma, corneal ulcers, co1-
neal neoplasia,
. irreparable corneal
01
scleral tears,
Transpalpebral enucleation
refractory uveitis, and endophthalmitis. It is also the bet-
The transpalpebial approach is preferred for large malignant
teI cosmetic result of the two approaches. The subcon-
junctival technique is used when a cosmetic 
shell is
neoplasms and for septic globes. The transpalpebral tech-
placed to maintain the integrity of the eyelid margin.
nique allows fo1 complete separation of the globe from the
The transpalpebral approach is 1ecommended in patients
orbit. After the eye and periocular tissue are prepared for
with severe corneal infections, large corneal, third eyelid,
aseptic surgery, the eyelids are sutured tightly with 2-0 01
 OI conjunctival neoplasia. This technique creates a larger
3-0 nylon, in a Ford interlocking or simple continuous pat-
soft-tissue defect of the orbit than the subconjunctival
 tern, with the suture ends left long (Fig. 4.15a). Large hemo-
approach. An orbital prosthesis may be placed with either
stats or Allis tissue forceps are placed on sutures at each end
technique, although a larger silicone sphere is needed
of the eyelid fissure to provide identification and traction
with the transpalpebral approach.
during the procedure. A full-thickness skin incision is made
6-8 mm from the eyelid margins. Tissue planes are then
 bluntly dissected to separate the skin from the tarsal layer.
Subconjunctival enucleation
These tissue planes are a natural separation foimed by a
[f severe infection or extensive neoplasia is present, a closed
potential space from embryonic development. The separa-
 transpalpebral approach is the prefelred surgical technique.
tion is extended to the periorbital margin with caution to
The subconjunctival approach results in less postoperative
prevent perforating the tarsal layer and contaminating the
discomfort because fewel tissue planes are traversed.
orbit. The medial canthal ligament and lateral canthal
Subconjunctival enucleation is initiated by placement of
attachments are cut with a surgical blade. Additional dissec-
an equine eyelid speculum or sutures to hold the eyelids
tion will separate the globe from the orbital connective tis-
d si     and a r o
sue
(Fig. 4.15b).E
Extraocular muscles are dissected and
formed. The lateral canthus is crushed with hemostats for
excised. The optic nerve o1 optic cone is clamped with
0.5-1 min, and the skin and conjunctivae are cut with a
curved forceps o1 Carmalt forceps. A ligature may be paced
blade o1 surgical scissors. The bulbar conjunctiva is infil-
around the optic cone and tightened if desied. The optic
trated with 2% lidocaine, incised 5 mm caudal to the limbus
nerve is resected anterio1 to the clamp o1 about 0.5-2 cm
with Steven's tenotomy scissois, and a complete peritomy
from the globe. This technique naturally removes more
performed. The extraocular muscles are identified and
orbital tissue than the subconjunctival approach. An orbital
isolated with a strabismus (muscle) hook. The muscles are
prosthesis is routinely placed. In addition, large non-absorb.
incised near or at their attachment to the sclera, permitting
able sutures may be placed vertically, connecting the dorsal
free 1otation of the globe. The retractor bulbi muscles attach
a ig noddns aos pnsuon oi s leo jeu pue
more posteriorly, and are more difficult to visualize. They
anterio1 orbit and permanent tarsorrhaphy (Fig. 4.15c,d).
are incised somewhat blindly. A curved or angled hemostat
is used to crush the optic nerve and associated vessels. The
 Postoperative management
globe is removed and submitted for histologic examination.
Enucleation in the hoise has a low incidence of complica-
Frequently a silicone sphere is cut to form a flattened ante-
tions, less than 10%. Complications occur when the entire
rior surface and placed in the orbital space to eliminate dead
nictitating membrane and gland are not completely
space after enucleation.
Iemoved, when the eyelid margins do not include the entire
The nictitating membrane and any remaining conjuncti-
meibomian glands (meibomian glands extend about 6 mm
vae are removed. The orbital lacrimal gland is rarely identi-
into the eyelid skin), and when the bulbar and palpebral con-
fied and removed. The remaining orbital contents should
junctivae are not removed. Care must be taken to remove the
be examined to ensure that all diseased tissue has been
eyelid margin at the medial canthus. Rarely is the orbital lac-
removed. Capillary hemorrhage is common but should not
rimal gland removed during enucleation, but complications
preclude examination of the orbit.
do not seem to occur. When drainage is observed from the
The orbit should be flushed with dilute povidone-iodine.
suture line at the medial canthus, the differential diagnosis
The orbital space may be packed with sterile gauze sponges
must be either the retained mucocutaneous junction of the
Or surgical Gelfoam?. Infusion of antibiotic solution should
eyelid margin at the medial canthus versus an infected orbit
be considered if the orbit is contaminated during the proce-
after enucleation. If retained eyelid margin in the medial can-
dure. A surgical drain (Penrose) through the ventral orbit
thus causes a draining tract, correction is to simply remove
68
Enucleation procedures in large animals and special specie
A
日
Fig. 4.15 Transpalpebral enucleation technique in the horse. (a) The
eyelid margins are apposed by non-absorbable sutures or clamps to close
the palpebral fisure and prevent contamination of the surgical site.
(b) The incision through the lid margin circumference is continued to
the globe, but not penetrating the conjunctiva. The globe is visible in the
center of the surgical wound. (c) Non-absorbable sutures may be placed
in the dorsal and ventral orbital rims to reduce wound disfigurement
postoperatively. (d) A pemmanent complete tarsorrhaphy with non-
absorbable sutures completes the transpalpebral enucleation technique.
D
the eyelid margin and close the wound. If an infected orbit is
These range from the popular intraorbital silicone prosthesis
'paioidxa a Pnous 1u en buuiep paioajui ue io juasaid
to a conformer and corneoscleral shell.
debrided, flushed, and closed. The orbit may be flushed with
an antibiotic solution and a dependent drain can be created
Intraorbital silicone prosthesis
through a stab incision in the ventral-most portion of the
orbit. The drain tubing or Penrose drain is left in place for
 y  t ry n a sd is    
 joi ine nio aui jo auiedde uuns an uaa
drainage. Some surgeons will use roll gauze soaked in povi-
the entie globe in the subconjunctival enucleation pro-
done-iodine, placed in the orbit after debridement. The
cedure (see Fig. 4.13). The silicone prosthesis should be
soaked gauze passes through a separate stab incision, and is
washed to remove surface oils and allowed to dry prior to
held in place with a suture through the skin. A section of
sterilization. Usually steam sterilization is preferred. At suI-
the gauze is removed daily fo1 2-5 days, o1 until the drainage
gery the sterile prosthesis is rinsed with sterile saline O1
becomes clea1. The stab incision is sutured or allowed to heal
dilute povidone-iodine solution prio1 to insertion into the
by second intention.
orbit.
The size of the prosthesis is selected to fill the orbit and
approximate the size of the contralateral globe. The fellow
Implants to improve postoperative appearance
eye may be measured prio1 to surgery to give a size esti-
after enucleation
mate for the orbital prosthesis. Usual prosthesis sizes range
Several techniques have been used to improve the cosmesis
f1om 40 to 48 mm diameter silicone sphere in adult hoises
of the face and orbit following enucleation (Fig. 4.16).
(Jardon Eye Prosthetics [nc., Southfield, Ml). A silicone
orbital implant designed to prevent o1 decrease skin sinking
after enucleation is also marketed by Veterinary Ophthalmic
Specialties (Moscow, [D). The silicone prosthesis is rinsed o1
wiped with sterile saline o1 dilute povidone-iodine to
Iemove any powder or dust. The anterior surface of the pros-
thesis is cut to flatten the anterior aspect of the prosthesis to
leduce the prominent anterior curvature of the silicone
sphere. Non-absorbable suture material is used to close the
orbital tissue and the sphere incorporated into the suture
pattern to prevent rotation and hold the prosthesis in place.
Use of intraorbital implants is not 1ecommended in horses
enucleated for orbital infections or neoplasia.
Following introduction into the orbit, the prosthesis is
fixed in a stable position with 2-0 to 4-0 nylon o1 prolene
shallow sutures, and incorporated into a meshwork or in
Fig. 4.16 Postoperative appearance after subpalpebral enucleation in the
the closure of the extraocular muscles or orbital connective
horse. Note some concavity of the wound is present.
tissue. A layer of tissue is closed between the prosthesis
69
Surgery of the orbit
and the skin with 3-0 to 4-0 absorbable sutures, usually in a
sterile cotton-tipped applicatois, and flushed with sterile
continuous or internupted mattress suture pattein.
saline. With the horse under general anesthesia, sensory
Closure is usually accomplished in several layers. If no
nerve blocks of the eyelids are performed along with a retro-
prosthesis is introduced, the periorbita may be partially
approximated with an interlocking mesh of non-absorbable
ephrine are applied at 5-min intervals, beginning about
 s   n  s n n s
      n   
Fig. 4.15c). Retracting the skin and subcutaneous tissue will
 2% lidocaine is performed from about 3 to 9 o'clock, using
aid in placement of this mesh suture.
approximately 0.5 mL of lidocaine. A self-adhesive drape 01
The subcutaneous tissue is closed with 2-0 to 4-0 absorb-
dental dam is used to avoid contamination of the surgical
able sutures in a Ford interlocking or simple continuous
site.
pattein. Some surgeons prefer a simple interrupted or cruci-
A conjunctival flap is raised fo1 about 160-180°, 6-8 mm
ate pattern. Skin is closed with an interrupted cruciate o1
posterior to the limbus. Wet field or disposable ophthalmic
simple internupted pattern. To avoid suture removal, an
cautery is used to cut through Tenon's capsule; blunt dissec-
intradermal skin closure in a continuous pattern using 4-0
tion and cautery are used to expose the sclera. The sclera is
to 5-0 Vicryl has been used. Tetanus prophylaxis should
scored with the cautery unit and incised full thickness to
be verified or given at or prior to surgery. Postsurgical swell-
the uveal tissue using a No. 6400 microsurgical blade. Care
ing is usually minimal but will increase during recovery as
 d o  a a on  a Po
the systemic blood pressure increases. Cold compresses
 on ess si l l ss l  
followed by warm compresses 24 h later are used if the
exposure to remove uveal contents or to insert the silicone
horse will tolerate them. Pressure bandaging of the face is
sphere, a T-shaped incision is performed by scissois.
rarely used.
To remove the ciliary body and iris, a cyclodialysis spatula
is inserted anteriorly between the sclera and the uveal tissue
to break the attachments of the iris at the iridocorneal angle.
Intrascleral silicone implants
A lens loop is used to separate the uveal tissue from the
Evisceration of the globe and implantation of an intraocular
sclera posteriorly, and to separate the choroid and retina
silicone prosthesis (ISP), also termed an intrascleral silicone
fiom the sclera. Two non-toothed forceps or hemostats are
prosthesis, is a procedure used in hoises for blind, painful
used to grasp and remove the uveal tract. Caution is exer-
eyes, chronic glaucoma, early stages of phthisis bulbi, and
cised to prevent damage to the corneal endothelium. The
fo1 corneal and sclera lacerations that have a poor prognosis
uveal tissue is placed in fixative for histopathologic evalua-
fol surgical correction.
tion. The remaining intraocular contents are removed, the
An ISP requires a single surgical episode, and in most
intraocular space is swabbed with moistened cotton-tipped
cases is more cosmetic than enucleation. It is considered less
applicators, and the fibrous shell is flushed with sterile
cosmetic than placement of a scleral shell or an artificial
saline. Complete removal of the lens should be verified.
globe, which requires multiple anesthetic and/or surgical
Efforts are made to remove the entire uveal tract, but
procedures.
 Many clients accept an ISP to be more cosmetic and pref-
An intraocular silicone prosthesis is usually selected after
erable to removal of the eye o1 a phthisical globe. Clients
measuring the noimal coinea with calipers and adding
should be educated to the fact that corneal disease can occur
1-2 mm. In most adult hoises the silicone sphere should
and diseases of the eyelid margin and nictitating membrane
be 36-40 mm in diameter. The prosthesis is rinsed in sterile
are possibilities that will require therapy.
saline o1 residual powder is removed by wiping the prosthe-
Eyes with pre-existing coineal disease should be regarded
sis with saline or dilute povidone-iodine solution. The sili-
as being at higher risk for keratitis and ulceration following
cone sphere is introduced with care to avoid touching the
ISP. The presence of corneal disease at the time of surgery
eyelids o1 conjunctiva. The fit is assessed by apposing the
increases the risk of postoperative complications. However,
edges of the scleral incision.
Some surgeons will use light suction to remove blood
fully in horses with coineal lacerations. A conjunctival
from the fibrous cavity. The anterior surface of the prosthe-
advancement or pedicle flap should be considered at the
sis may be cut, trimmed, and flattened to provide a mo1e
e      s nn 
cosmetic result and to decrease contact with the coineal
Diseases (including neoplasia) that involve the eyelid mar-
endothelium.
gin, nictitating membrane, and conjunctivae can occur fol-
The scleral incision is closed with 4-0 to 5-0 polyglactin
lowing ISP since these structures are not removed.
910 in an interrupted or simple continuous pattein. The full
extent of the incision should be visualized and both ends
closed carefully to prevent dehiscence. The conjunctiva and
Evisceration and intrascleral silicone prosthesis
Tenon's capsule are closed with a continuous pattein, ensur-
Evisceration is the removal of the intraocular contents: aque-
ing that the scleral incision is completely protected.
ous, lens, uveal tract, retina, and vitreous, with preservation
The lateral canthoplasty, if perfoimed, is closed in two
of the fibrous tunic, o1 cornea and sclera. Careful surgical
layers. A subpalpebral lavage system may be placed to apply
topical antibiotics after surgery. A temporary tarsorrhaphy
skin is washed with baby shampoo, and nasolacrimal ducts
is perfoimed to reduce exposure and to protect the coinea
are flushed with dilute povidone-iodine. The 
skin
1S
and scleral closure. The globe is lubricated with Optix-
prepared for aseptic surgery, and the conjunctival fornices
are flushed with dilute povidone-iodine, swabbed with
 temic antibiotics and systemic anti-inflammatory agents,
70
Enucleation procedures in large animals and special species
usually flunixin meglumine (Banamine?; Schering-Plough,
the exposed intrascleral implant. Later studies succeeded by
Kenilworth, NI). The tarsorrhaphy sutures are removed in
using a silicone sphere placed within the ocular or co1-
3-4 days.
neoscleral tunics.
Persistence of, or an increase in, ocula1 discharge indicates
Gilger and associates reported use of a custom-made
the need for ophthalmic evaluation, possible culture and
hydroxyapatite orbital implant after enucleation of the eye
sensitivity testing, and staining the cornea with fluorescein
in a horse (Fig. 4.17). The corneoscleral prosthesis was fitted
dye. Coineal ulceration is the most common complica-
ove1 the orbital implant. The hydroxyapatite orbital implant
tion. Less frequent complications include: dehiscence of the
permits vascular and fibrous tissue growth from the host
surgical site; endophthalmitis, either septic Or powder
into and over the implant, thereby decreasing the chance
induced; o1 severe periocular swelling if traumatic dissection
of infection and implant extrusion. The extraocula1 muscle
occurred. Many coineas vascularize and scar within a few
insertions can be attached to the orbital implant to provide
  a iee u  e e sm
mobility.
time, if pigmentation results, the globe is more cosmetic.
Orbital exenteration in the horse
Cosmetic corneoscleral conformer, scleral
Exenteration in horses is a surgical technique designed to
cosmetic shell, and corneoscleral prosthesis
   o   o  
Corneoscleral conformers o1 extrascleral shell implants are
to other forms of therapy such as radiation therapy or che-
made by ocularists from methyl methacrylate, porcelain, O1
motherapy. Systemic antibiotics and flunixin meglumine
hydroxyapatite to fit to and cover a phthisical globe o1 a dis-
are given before surgery. Tetanus prophylaxis should be ver-
figured eye. The surface is painted by the ocularist from a
ified or administered prior to surgery. With this technique.
photograph of the fellow eye and the prosthetic shell is
the entire orbital contents are surgically removed, including
fitted into the conjunctival sac. The eyelids and third eyelid
the globe and the periorbita. The globe is removed by enu-
help to fix the confoimer in the desired location. The rela-
cleation and then periosteal elevators are used to remove
tively high costs and frequent cleaning of the prosthesis
the periorbital fascia. Care must be exercised to avoid break-
are limiting factors in thei1 use. The results are very cosmetic
ing into a paraorbital sinus. The remaining orbital tissue is
and most owners are quite happy with the outcome. Extra-
removed using electrocautery and sharp dissection. Bleeding
scleral shell confoimers are available from Jardon Eye Pros
should be controlled with cautery and ligatures. An orbital
thetics Inc. (Southfield, Ml) o1 can be individually made fo1
prosthesis is usually not placed when a large neoplasm is
horses by Dallas Eye Prosthetics (Dallas, TX).
excised. The remaining eyelid skin is sutured to cover the
Early artificial eyes o1 cosmetic globes (often constructed
open socket. If inadequate skin remains, the facial skin is
of glass o1 ceramic material) inserted into the sclera after
undermined and walking sutures are used to cover the
evisceration of all the intraocular tissues and removal of
defect. If excessive skin must be removed, a skin flap o1 graft
the entire cornea failed in horses because of infection even-
can be used. In rare cases, if a large amount of eyelid and
tually extending between the sphere and the host's sclera.
facial skin must be sacrificed, the socket may be allowed to
This chronic infection ultimately resulted in extrusion of
granulate and epithelialize.
A
B
Fig. 4.17 Intraorbital implants and corneoscleral conformers are used in the horse to reduce wound disfigurement and attempt to compensate for, at least,
some of the tissue loss from the enucleation procedure. (a) The hydroxyapatite intraorbital implant and corneoscleral conformer (generally constructed by an
ocularist) for the horse. The extraocular muscle insertions may be attached to the implant, thereby providing globe motility. (b) Postoperative appearance in
this type of implant in a horse.
(isaiun apis puo 4uon abg uug jo Asan syobbaouo 4iog)
71
Surgery of the orbit
Postoperative management after exenteration
severe ocular trauma that are beyond reasonable repair. Enu-
cleation may be inappropriate if the neoplastic process
Pressure bandages over the orbit are used to reduce swelling
involves the bony orbit o1 has metastasized to regional
Systemic antibiotics and flunixin meglumine are continued.
lymph nodes. The veterinarian should examine the oral cav.
If a sinus is damaged or entered during the procedure it may
ity and teeth to determine the animal's age and perform rec-
Iequie trephination, drainage, and lavage.
tal palpation to determine pregnancy status. Older age and
non-pregnancy may alter the feasibility of enucleation from
Orbital surgery in the bovine
an economic standpoint. The sale value for breeding use
Enucleation of the bovine eye
seems to decrease after the removal of one eye. An animal
should never have both eyes removed, unless used as a
In adult cattle, the most common enucleation technique is
pet, and this practice is questionable from a humane stand-
the transpalpebral approach. With this technique more of
point. In some cases, one-eyed cattle may do poorly in a
the orbital contents are removed than with a transconjuncti-
feedlot situation.
val or subconjunctival approach to enucleation. Frequently.
Iemoval of the bovine eye is done for economic reasons for
neoplasia of the third eyelid (nictitating membrane) or eye-
Anesthesia and surgical preparation
lids, when the eye o1 globe is noimal (Fig. 4.18). In many
Most enucleations are performed with the animal standing
cases it is easier and preferable to remove the eyelid mass
in a head catch o1 chute. The head is securely restrained with
by 'H-plasty' in cattle, o1 to remove the third eyelid when
a halter and nose lead, or a head board restraint device.
it is affected rather than 1emove the entire globe, or in some
Intravenous sedation and analgesia are commonly adminis-
cases perform an exenteration when the globe itself is intact
tered. The head is pulled to the opposite side of the chute
and visual.
from the eye to be removed, allowing adequate positioning
 Excision of eyelid squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in cattle
padd si iieu a aensn uaains au in ansodxa pue
is commonly perfomed, and is certainly preferable to enucle-
from the surgical site using a No. 40 clipper blade on a small
ation o1 exenteration when there is no involvement of the
animal electric clipper. If large amounts of necrotic o1 neo.
gobe o1 the bony orbit. Other foims of therapy fo1 eyelid
plastic tissue are present in the surgical area, this should be
neoplasia should be considered before enucleation of a
trimmed with scissors prior to scrubbing the site for surgery.
normal eyeball. These include cryotherapy, hyperthermic ther-
Some surgeons now elect to use sterile drapes for the surgi-
apy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and radiation therapy.
cal area. The surgeon must be certain that the diseased eye
o )    a
is being removed and not the normal eye.
intralesional injections of cisplatin in sesame oil injected
Intravenous mild sedation is used in some cattle. For
every 2 weeks fo1 8 weeks (foul treatments). Immunothel-
standing surgeries, xylazine (0.05 mg/kg IV) and butorpha-
apy has also been used for SCC in cattle. A mycobacterium
nol (0.02 mg/kg IV) are used. The addition of a low disso-
ciative dose of ketamine (0.1 mg/kg IV) has been used to
cattle with SCC; howevel, a majo1 drawback was that it con-
assist with fractious patients. The combination of xylazine,
verted the animals into tuberculin 1eactors. A phenol-saline
butorphanol, and ketamine has been called the ‘Ket-Stun
extract of bovine SCC led to regression of lesions following
technique. Anti-inflammatory therapy, flunixin meglumine
intramuscular injections. Immunotherapy with bacille Calm-
(1 mg/kg IV), immediately before surgery appears adequate
ette-Guerin (BCG) may be considered as well as immuno-
for most enucleation procedures.
modulation with oral(
cimetidine  for  eyelid  neoplasia.
Local anesthesia is used to infiltrate the retrobulbar
Investigation of therapeutic results for SCC in cattle is hin-
tissues. A four-point retrobulbar block is commonly per-
dered by the suspected relatively high incidence of spontane-
ous regression of these tumors.
and at the medial and lateral canthi. A slightly curved,
In other cases, exenteration of the orbit may be performed
8-10 cm, 18-20 g needle is directed toward the posterio1
fo1 uveitis, septic panophthalmitis, trauma to the globe, and
orbit and 10-20 mL of lidocaine injected. An alternative is
A
B
C
Fig. 4l.18 Bovine candidates for enucleation. (a) Panophthalmitis with corneal rupture in a cow after injury. (b) Intraocular squamous cell carcinoma in a cow.
Tumor apparently originated from the lateral limbus. (c) Extensive orbital squamous cell carcinoma is a 10-year-old Holstein cow.
72
Enucleation procedlures in large animals and special species
to mix a 4:1 injection solution of 0.5% bupivacaine and 2%
space will fill with blood. This clot will organize during
lidocaine containing 1:100 0o0 adrenaline (epinephrine).
the following few weeks, leaving a depression and sunken
When the retrobulbar tissue has been adequately anesthe-
appearance to the face.
tized the eye will appea1 exophthalmic, the pupil will be
An orbital prosthesis can be placed after surgery as is
dilated, and corneal sensation will be absent. Some surgeons
Iecommended in horses and small animals. A silicone
have favored the Peterson eye block fo1 this procedure, but
sphere can be used without carving o1 a surgical blade may
it has mostly been replaced with the four-point block, due
be used to flatten the front of the prosthesis in cattle.
to unpredictable anesthetic traits of the Petersen method.
Another option to decrease the amount of sunken tissue is
to ‘weave' a non-absorbable suture across the orbit beneath
the skin. Three-0 to 4-0 nylon o1 prolene would work well.
Surgical technique
if cosmesis is a concein.
Immediately following surgical preparation, the surgical site
Some veterinary surgeons elect to pack the orbit with ster-
is draped. Covering the entire head with the drape will pro-
ile gauze (10 x 10 cm) sponges immediately after the globe
vide a more sterile field and may aid in restraint. The eyelids
and orbital strictures have been removed; the number of
are held together with two or three Backhaus towel clamps.
 sponges packed into the orbit should be known to the sur-
       s 
d pao pe paoai are suods a au uo
towel clamps are used for light traction during dissection.
to tying the final skin sutures. All sponges must be removed
An alternative method is to use nylon suture material to
from the orbit. In some cases roll gauze may be packed into
close the eyelids with the ends left long enough to provide
the orbit and removed at the end of surgery. Many surgeons
traction during the procedure. A transpalpebral incision is
elect to pack the orbit only if hemorrhage is considered
made around the eyelid margins, leaving as much noimal
excessive or uncontrollable by other means.
tissue as possible. If adequate normal eyelid is present, the
Often skin closure is the only suture used in cattle enu-
incision is usually about 1 cm from the eyelid margins. If
cleations. Frequently the skin is closed with a non-absorb-
additional abnoimal eyelid tissue must be 1emoved, main-
able suture (No. 3 nylon) in a variety of patteins. Suture
taining enough normal skin to close the wound is impera-
patteins used for skin closure in enucleation in cattle
tive; alternatively, periorbital skin should be undermined
include the Ford interlocking, cruciate, simple continuous,
fo1 closure without tension on the suture line.
and simple interrupted patteins. If a continuous pattein is
The ventral skin incision and dissection are perfoimed
selected, it may be fortitous to use a single simple intel-
first to decrease hemorrhage from the upper eyelid obstruct-
rupted suture in the medial canthus, if by chance dependent
ing the surgeon's view of the surgical field. Dissection is
drainage is needed, and the single suture can be removed
continued for 360° using sharp and blunt methods. This is
easily. Nylon o1 prolene may be used for skin closure. In
usually completed with a scalpel blade and large Mayo o1
the past polymerized caprolactam (Vetafil) was used fo1
selrated surgical scissors, or large curved surgical scissors.
this closure by many food animal veterinarians. The surgical
The dissection is continued posteriorly to the caudal border
site is 1e-examined in 10-12 days and the sutures are
 of the orbit. Dissection is done in a lateral and posterior
removed. Some surgeons now prefer to wait 14-21 days
fashion to avoid cutting through the conjunctiva.
The
before suture removal. If drainage from the suture line o1
extraocular muscles, orbital fat, lacrimal gland, conjunctiva,
surgical site is present, the clinician may elect to remove
globe, nictitating membrane, and eyelid margins are excised.
the medial canthal suture, leaving the remainder of the skin
If the enucleation is performed for neoplasia, the surgeon
sutures in place. If drainage, infection, or the need to
must be certain that all eyelid, conjunctival, and retrobulbar
remove only part of the suture line is predicted at surgery.
neoplastic tissue has been satisfactorily removed.
then a simple interrupted pattern is recommended.
When enucleation is performed for non-neoplastic and
 Some veterinarians prefer to close the skin with absorb-
non-endophthalmitic conditions, more of the retrobulbar
able sutures when suture removal will be problematic, such
tissue may be left in place. This will reduce the amount of
as in range conditions where it may be cost prohibitive and
postoperative dead space, intraoperative hemorrhage, and
impractical to round up the animal fo1 a suture removal. In
the sunken appearance of the orbital skin after surgery.
-i s l no nie  o-e si yn
Once the optic nerve and vessels of the optic stalk
are
mended, using a medium curved large animal needle and
isolated, traction on the globe should be minimal and twist-
d as sa pu u ue a
ing of the globe should be avoided. Contralateral blindness
using double strands of suture. Some veterinarians also
is a consideration in most species when enucleation is per-
choose to insert a sterile suspension or bolus of soluble anti-
formed. If excessive traction o1 twisting of the globe occurs
biotic solution into the orbit at the end of surgery. This prac-
during removal, these traction forces are transmitted to the
tice is met with controversy, since it is felt by some bovine
optic chiasm and can lead to damage of the chiasmal axons,
surgeons that any material deposited in the orbit may
lesulting in blindness or visual field loss in the remaining
become a nidus for infection, o1 may lead to inflammation
good eye. The optic nerve and associated blood vessels are
clamped with a light-angled forceps, enucleation forceps,
to their chemical o1 caustic effects.
large hemostat, Carmalt foiceps, o1 a similar instrument.
Poe io piell aq a aaau odo pue siassa o au
a pinous uoaans au anssad aq no aeu no oi
Postoperative management
palpate the orbit to be certain that all abnormal tissue has
The degree of hemorrhage may alarm young or inexperi-
been removed. After removal of the globe a large amount
enced surgeons. Many agree that the most appropriate
of dead space is usually present. The orbit and retrobulbar
hemostasis is a rapid surgery and pressure from the closed
73
4
Surgery of the orbit
 skin following surgery. Systemic antibiotics are recom-
expands the palpebral fissure to permit removal of the large
 mended if infection is present at surgery.
intact tubular-shaped globe. The second method, which can
be used in any avian species, involves collapse of the globe
Subconjunctival enucleation in the bovine
third technique is a modified evisceration method involving
A subconjunctival enucleation with the animal under gen-
lemoval of the coinea and all of the intraocular tissues, but
eral anesthesia may be performed in simila1 fashion to those
leaving the sclera and bony ossicles behind. A complete pel-
 performed in horses and small animals.
 manent tarsorrhaphy is then performed.
Enucleation in birds, including owls and hawks, may be
Evisceration of the globe and intraocular
necessary after destruction of the eye and loss of vision fol-
silicone prosthesis
lowing extensive trauma, intraocular infection, and non-
infectious intraocular inflammation. As the avian eye is
In some cases evisceration of the globe and implantation of
unusually large in relation to its face, enucleation involving
an intrascleral silicone prosthesis is requested by the owner
complete removal of the globe results in considerable disfig-
to maintain a more cosmetic face. This is uncommon in cat-
tle, but may be used in valuable animals. This is most com-
urement. Leaving the sclera, as in the last modified eviscera-
tion method, results in less postoperative concavity of the
monly performed after trauma to the globe and early
 phthisis bulbi foimation.
eyelids. Birds have a very thin bony interorbital septum medi-
ally, and it should not be penetrated during surgery. As in any
enucleation procedure, and even if globe is not removed
Removal of prolapsed retrobulbar fat
intact, the contents should be examined histologically.
Prolapse of varying degrees of 1etrobulba1 fat is an uncommon
yet dramatic-appearing lesion in any animal. The diagnosis is
Transaural enucleation method for owls
In the transaural enucleation approach for owls, the feathers
a gloved and lubricated finger. In some cases the diagnosis is
made by fine needle aspirate and cytologic examination. If sul-
over the auricular area and orbit are plucked, and the area
prepared for aseptic surgery. The eyelids are retracted by
gical correction is elected, the prolapsed fat is removed follow.
two o1 more 4-0 silk stay sutures anchored in the eyelid
ing an auriculopalpebral nerve block and topical anesthetic
with 5-10 d1ops of 0.5% proparacaine hyd1ochloride 01 oph-
margins o1 an eyelid speculum (Fig. 4.19a). An incision
thalmic tetracaine applied to the cornea and conjunctiva. [n
(indicated by a doted line in Fig. 4.19a) is used to connect
the lateral canthus to the anterior auricular margin. Using a
some cases anesthesia is facilitated by injection of a small
amount of 2% lidocaine subconjunctivally at the incision site.
No. 6400 microsurgical blade, the skin incision is extended
through the lateral canthus and periorbital fascia to the
Adequate restraint is necessary fo1 ocular surgery in cattle.
Most surgeries are perfoimed with the animal standing in a
anterior auricular margin to the junction of the tubular
globe and the postorbital process (Fig. 4.19b). Hemostasis
squeeze chute, head catch, O1 stanchion, with the head
is achieved by point electrocautery. The lateral canthal and
lestrained with a halter and nose lead, o1 head board
Testraint. The eyelids are prepared for aseptic surgery, and
preaural skin are dissected free to expose the posterio1
aspects of the tubular globe (Fig. 4.19c). The subconjuncti-
the conjunctiva and cornea are irigated with dilute povi
done-iodine solution. The conjunctival fornices are irni-
val dissection is continued under the periorbital fascia for
gated and swabbed with sterile cotton-tipped applicators.
periorbital fascia can provide additional mobility for the
 A conjunctival incision is made rostrally to the prolapsed
fat with Steven's tenotomy scissors (standard, curved, with
globe. With digital pressure carefully applied to the limbus,
         n
the No. 6400 microsurgical blade is used to create a space
excised in toto. The conjunctival incision is closed to imbri-
between the posterio1 globe and caudal orbit (Fig. 4.19d).
cate the area with a simple continuous pattern using 5-0
Through this space, small tenotomy scissors are used to
Vicryl. Some surgeons have used simple interrupted or
sever the globe from its extraocula1 attachments and transect
the optic nerve (Fig. 4.19e). Once relieved of its attach-
biotic ointment is applied immediately following surgery.
ments, the tubular globe is removed. Hemostasis is achieved
-iu l ie ss a pe assid pan a
sis, the conjunctiva, nictitating membrane, and 2 mm of the
Enucleation procedures in birds
-dei a pais si an pasxa are sur paa aa
Removal of the globe in birds 1equires further modification
position of the anterior auricular margin with simple inter
of the enucleation procedures already presented. Avian
nupted 5-0 to 7-0 absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.19f). The
globes are very large in relation to the surrounding bony
eyelids are then apposed using simple interrupted 5-0 to
orbit, and the extraocular space for surgery is quite limited.
7-0 absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.19g).
The avian sclera contains 10-18 small overlapping ossicles
that foim a bony ring and give shape to the avian eye. In
 Globe-collapsing enucleation procedure
owls these ossicles result in a tubular-shaped globe. In most
for birds
hawks the globe has a globular shape. At least three different
enucleation procedures have been developed for birds;
 The globe-collapsing enucleation method can be used for
selection depends on the globe shape. In owls a transaural
  ie  r as e a
enucleation procedure is recommended as these species
fo1 aseptic surgery, a small pediatric wire eyelid speculum
have an extensive external ear opening. This method
is positioned to retract the upper eyelid, lower eyelid, and
74
sapads jenads pue siewue ahiel u sanpanoid uoeapnue
A
?
?
?
E
F
?
5n ul bujuado leniguo louanue paniwl aun pue 'agojb ayn jo azis pue adeys aun ynog Ag panesidwos s! aunpanoud siyl puig aya ui uogealonu3 6ldt *big
method the anterior orbital opening is expanded by a lateral canthotomy that extends to the anterior auricular margin. This method is recommended for owls.
(a) Two stay 4-0 silk sutures or an eyelid speculum is used to retract the upper and lower eyelids. The incision line (shown as a dotted line) extends from the
lateral canthus to the anterior auricular margin. (b) The lateral canthus and skin are incised by No. 6400 microsurgical blade through the anterior auricular
margin to the junction of the tubular globe with the postorbital process. The deeper conjunciva and periorbital fascia are also incised. (c) By small curved 
 ayn aauy on aoge panuguos s! uogoassip lenpounjuoogns aul aqojb aup jo snadse jouansod aun asodxa on pannassp Ainyauen s! uiys aun 'siossips Awonouan
ale siossios Awonouan 5,uanans (a) apelg lenibuns aup yaim pueoy panejndiuew 5! aqoj6 jouaasod aun 'snqwll leanel aun ne ainsaid lenibip 4riw (p) agoi6
inserted posterior to the globe to sever the optic nerve and any posterior attachments. The globe is delivered through this lateral incision. Hemorrhage is
usually controlled by temporarily packing the orbit with sterile gauze pads. f After removal of the remaining conjunctiva and nictitating membrane and a
2 mm strip of eyelid margin, 5-0 to 7-0 absorbable simple interrupted sutures are used to appose the anterior auricular margin, the eyelids, and skin.
(g) Immediate postoperative appearance.
(Reproduced with permission from Murphy Cl. Brooks DE. Kern Tl. Queensberry KE. Ris RC 1983 Enucieation in birds of prey. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Assoriation
183: 12341237.)
nictitating membrane. A lateral canthotomy, extending do1-
a stay suture positioned in the center of the cornea for its
solaterally to the anteriol auricula1 margin, is performed
manipulation (Fig. 4.20b). With curved tenotomy o1 strabis-
using a No. 6400 microsurgical blade or small tenotomy
mus scissors the bulbar conjunctiva, nictitating membrane,
scissors (Fig. 4.20a). The limbus is incised by scalpel o1 a
and periorbital fascia are incised 360°. The area deep to
combination of a scalpel and coineal scissors fo1 180°, and
the auricular skin is carefully undermined (Fig. 4.20c). Mayo
75
Surgery of the orbit
A
(F
S! wunjnoads plara aum auy e jagyy (e) sapads ueiae Aue ui pasn ag uen anbiuupan sll puig aya ui uogeanua ioy aunpanoud buisdelon-agoi oz't dbig
positioned, a lateral canthotomy is performed by the No. 6400 microsurgical blade, extending dorsolaterally to the anterior auricular margin. (b) The limbus is
incised for 180° and a stay suture is positioned in the central cornea. The conjunctiva, nictitating membrane, and periorbital fascia are incised for 360°. (c) The
area medial to the auricular skin is also undermined. (d) By Mayo scissors inserted carefully between the subconjunctival and subscleral spaces, the sclera and
scleral ossicles are incised. (e) Forceps are used to collapse the globe and permit access to the posterior globe. The optic nerve and posterior attachments are
severed by scissors, and the globe is carefully removed. (f) After removal of the nictitating membrane, conjunctiva, and a 2 mm strip of eyelid margin, the
eyelids are apposed with 5-0 to 7-0 absorbable simple interrupted sutures
(Reproduced with permission fror Murphy Cl. Brooks DE. Kern T. Queensberry KE Ris RC 983 Enucieation in birds of prey. Journal of the Armerican Veterinary Medical Assoriation
183: 1234-1237.)
scissois, carefully positioned between the uveal tract and sclera,
After placement of a small wire speculum, the peripheral
are used to sever the sclera and its ossicles (Fig. 4.20d). With the
cornea is incised for 360°, and the intraocular contents
dorsal sclera incised, forceps are used to collapse the globe. The
(including the uveal tract, lens, vitreous, and retina) are
extraocular muscle attachments and the optic nerve are severed
gently removed from the scleral shell by lens loop, spatula.
by scissors, and the globe is Iemoved from the orbit
and scissors. Hemostasis is achieved by direct pressure
(Fig. 4.20e). Excessive traction on the globe as it is manipulated 
forward should be avoided to prevent damage to the optic chi-
The conjunctiva, nictitating membrane, and a 2 mm strip
asm. Hemostasis of the deeper orbit is achieved by direct pres
of the eyelid margins are excised by tenotomy scissors. The
a  anaa d pue saos aea aq as
Padnaui ads or2 on o-s um pasodde are saa
conjunctiva, nictitating membrane, and a 2 mm strip of eyelid
absorbable sutures.
margin are excised bytenotomy scissors. Closure ofthe remain-
ing eyelids is accomplished by several 5-0 to 7-0 simple inte1-
Orbitotomy in small animals
nupted absorbable sutures ( Fig. 4.20f) .
In the orbitotomy procedures, access to the interior of the orbit
Modified evisceration method for enucleation
is gained with the eye in situ. The avenues include the anterior.
in birds
lateral, dorsal, and oral approaches. The orbit in dogs can be
This third method for enucleation in birds attempts to
approached from the frontal, dorsolateral or lateral aspects,
address the considerable disfigurement that occurs after
but the feline, equine, bovine, and bird orbits are usually
removal of the entire globe. However, fo1 this technique to
entered frontally (through the palpebral fissure) and often with
be successful, the postoperative field must be sterile. Hence
the globe already removed. The anterior approach enters the
birds with possible panophthalmitis and intraocular neopla-
orbit through the bulba1 conjunctiva or the eyelids beneath
sia should not be considered candidates fo1 this procedure.
the conjunctival fornix. Both of these approaches have been
76
Orbitotomy in small animals
described as the initial part of the subconjunctival and trans-
including chest and abdominal radiographs, complete
palpebral enucleation procedures. The anterior orbitotomy
 blood count, blood chemistries, and urine analysis should
approaches are the most useful for anterio1 orbital lesions.
 be performed. Neoplastic tissues sometime appear grossly
The lateral orbitotomy approach permits exploration of the
simila1 to adjacent orbital tissues. If the primary objective
 canine anterior and posterior orbit, and is 1ecommended fo1
zygomatic gland diseases, zygomatic arch disease, and reto-
 O1 debulk a mass for possible treatment with chemotherapy
bulbar lesions lateral to o1 within the extraocular muscle
and/or radiation, then an orbitotomy is recommended. The
cone. For maximal lateral orbital exposure, the center of the
 long-term survival rates for canine orbital neoplasms after
Zygomatic arch can be temporarily transected and reattached
 diagnosis and attempts to remove by orbitotomy procedures
at the conclusion of surgery. The dorsal orbitotomy approach
are very low, and few dogs live beyond 3 years after diag-
paaas si ue lo addn au jo ansdxa aeud sapd
nosis. If a primary orbital neoplasm is present in the dog.
for dorsal retrobulbar, zygomatic process of the frontal bone,
the most prudent surgical approach appears to be the exen-
and parietal bone diseases. The canine and feline orbital
teration procedure and removal of the eye. Preliminary
floors are incomplete posteriorly, and limited access is avail-
Iesults using the orbitectomy procedure in dogs with orbital
able through an oral approach immediately caudal to the last
neoplasms indicate better results and longer survival rates.
molar tooth.
The orbitectomy procedure involves excision of the globe,
As indicated earlier, a significant number of orbital masses
the remaining orbital tissues, and most of the orbital bones.
involve the ventromedial orbit and, as a result, the surgical
approach and visualization are difficult. Optimal explora-
 Lateral orbitotomy
tion of the medial and ventromedial canine orbit usually
Iequires removal of the globe and converts the orbitotomy
The lateral orbitotomy approach is usually performed in the
procedure into an exenteration.
area of the zygomatic arch. For optimal exposure, temporary
The specific orbital surgical approach should be selected
Iemoval of the zygomatic arch is recommended. Two differ-
based on the location of the orbital disease. For instance.
ent lateral orbitotomy procedures have been described.
if the mass is isolated to the anterior medial or lateral
Unfortunately, in both approaches, some of the branches
 orbit, anterior orbitotomy might provide the most useful
of the palpebral nerve that innervates the orbicularis oculi
route. If the primary lesion is confined to the lateral orbit
muscle (eyelid closure), the zygomaticofacial or zygomatico-
01 Zygomatic salivary gland, lateral orbitotomy with tempo-
temporal (maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve that
rary removal of the zygomatic arch may provide the best
provides sensation to the lateral face), and the parasympa-
exposure. With a lacrimal gland mass, the recommended
thetic fibers to the lacrimal gland can be damaged.
As previously noted, the feline orbit is only slightly larger
Limited lateral orbitotomy
than the globe, and surgical access to the retrobulbar space
with the eye in situ is very limited. Limited lateral exposure
The lateral orbitotomy approach by Harvey is the least diffi-
  s o   n  
cult procedure, and provides reasonably good exposure of
orbitotomy approach.
the lateral orbit. After draping. the skin incision by scalpel
blade extends from the middle of the lower eyelid to the
Indications for orbitotomy
caudal aspects of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 4.21a,b). The
underlying subcutaneous tissues are carefully dissected to
The clinical indications for orbitotomy include the excision of
permit transection of the orbicularis oculi, retractor anguli
an isolated inflammatory o1 neoplastic mass, biopsy of orbital
oculi, and lateral orbital ligament attachment to the dorsal
tissue while under direct observation, ligation of majo1 orbital
border of the zygomatic arch. With careful dissection the
vessels, orbital fracture fixation, orbital cytology and culture.
lateral orbital ligament is reflected dorsally to reveal the
The postoperative results after orbitotomies for the treatment
lacrimal gland (arrow, F
Fig. 4.21c) which is immediately
of chronic inflammation (usually as focal abscesses or granu-
beneath the lateral orbital ligament. Blunt deeper dissec-
lomas), benign tumors, masses and cysts of the zygomatic
tion, both caudally and rostrally on the dorsal aspects of
salivary gland, and the limited posterior extensions of neo-
the zygomatic arch, permits observation of the dorsal por-
plasms of the conjunctival and nictitating membrane are usu-
tion of the zygomatic gland and lateral periorbital fascia
ally good. Howevel, as indicated earlier, the majority of
(Fig. 4.21d). The zygomatic salivary gland in the dog
orbital neoplasms in the dog are malignant (about 90%)
occupies the ventrorostral position of the orbital floo1.
and most a1e primary (about 60-70%). [n cats, over 90%
Fo1 additional exploration of the orbit, a central portion
of the zygomatic arch is removed (Fig. 4.21e-h). A dorsal
Aq a  o l  a on ue u e
orbital walls, intraorbital masses tend to expand irregularly
teal elevatoi, and a 1-2 cm section of the arch is removed
and exhibit indistinct borders. In large animals, most orbital
in small pieces by rongeur. Immediately medial to the
neoplasms are malignant, and warrant a guarded prognosis.
Zygomatic arch is the zygomatic salivary gland. With addi-
Before surgical intervention of the orbit is contemplated,
tional dissection, most of the zygomatic salivary gland can
one or more of the orbital diagnostic procedures should
be localized (Fig. 4.21i).
be performed in an attempt to define the limits and possible
borders of the mass. As 4 of every 10 canine orbital neo-
areas within the ventral orbit become accessible. By digital
plasms are secondary, examination of the nasal cavity and
exploration the orbital floor can evaluated, including
sinuses is imperative. A complete physical examination,
    l a
OI
77
 Surgery of the orbit
A
8
D
?
G
?
Fig. 4.21 Lateral (limited) orbitotomy (Harvey approach): This procedure provides limited access to the lateral orbit; when combined with partial to total
resection of the middle portion of the zygomatic arch, access to the entire lateral orbital walls and most of the orbital floor is possible. This procedure
(or minor variations thereof) is the most frequent orbitotomy performed in the dog. (a) The skin incision extends 1 cm lateral from the medial canthus,
along the dorsal edge of the zygomatic arch, and terminates about 2 cm caudal of the zygomatic crest. (b) Intraoperative appearance showing the skin
incision. The exact position and its length vary depending on the target position (dorsal or ventral) within the orbit. (c) With careful dissection of the
subcutaneous tissues, the retractor anguli and orbicularis oculi muscles are transected from their attachments to the lateral orbital ligament to reveal the
lacrimal gland (arrow). (d) After transection of the ventral attachment of the lateral orbital ligament to the zygomatic anch, the lateral orbital ligament is
reflected dorsally to expose the lateral aspects of the orbital tissues including the zygomatic (orbital) salivary gland (arrow). (e) For exploration of the 
canine ventral orbit, a central portion of the zygomatic arch is isolated. To maximize entry into the retrobulbar space, the zygomatic arch is removed
temporarily by transecting its two ends. It is reattached by four wire sutures during wound closure. (f) A variably sized section of the zygomatic arch
[eibia (6) puej6 Aienljes snewobkz aua jo Aquoew ayn buisodxa mes auog jo inabuoi Aq panowau ae auoq aua jo suojod pue paneaala s! wnaasouad
exploration of most of the rostral orbital floor is possible. Orbital fat can be excised to facilitate exploration. (A) Lacrimal gland; (B) globe; (C) zygomatic
salivary gland; (D) retrobulbar fat. (h) Limited exploration of the medial retrobulbar area is posible by instrumentation (usually a small curved hemostat).
n ayy ziquo aua uuri woy uoisixa si buunp pannenau buiag s! lem as aul ajanonu equo ue y zuaed e ui aoueeadde aaneadoeui ()
removal, the entire zygomatic gland is also excised. (An alternative to surgery is to inject the mucocele with sclerosing agents, such as tetracycline or
polidocanol) (j) Closure consists of reapposition of the zygomatic arch periosteum, reattachment of the ventral portion of the lateral orbital ligament to
the zygomatic arch, and closure of the subcutaneous and skin layers. (k) Immediate postoperative appearance after orbitotomy in the patient from
Figure 4.21i.
(All drawings with permission from Bistner Sl. Aguirre G. Batik. G 1977 Atias of Veterinary Ophthaimirc Surgery. WB Saunders. Philadeiphia.)
78
Orbitotomy in small animals
infraorbital nerve, pterygopalatine ganglion, and palatine
jq A paieiedas aie yie seuoz al jo padse ieiau
nerves. By digital or blunt instrument probing. the extraocu-
dissection with a periosteal elevator. The zygomatic arch,
lar muscle cone can be evaluated dorsally and ventrally.
along with the lateral orbital ligament, is reflected dorsally
Removal of some orbital adipose tissues can aid in visualiza-
and rostrally from the wound. With the zygomatic arch
 tion of the retrobulbar area. A linear incision along the long
Iemoved from the surgical site, inspection of the dorsolat-
axis of the retrobulbar muscle cone permits inspection of
eral orbit from its rostral border to just in front of the caudal
these tissues, including the orbital portion of the optic
bony orbital wall is possible (Fig. 4.22f). Careful blunt
nerve.
medial dissection of the ventral endorbita reveals the maxil-
 Closure of the lateral orbitotomy apposes the tissues in
lary artery, the maxillary branch of the maxillary nerve, pter-
Ieverse order (Fig. 4.21j). If excision of tissue or an infected
ygoid muscles, and the pterygopalatine ganglion and nerve.
area creates a sizeable defect, a soft rubber o1 silicone
The endorbita of the extraocular muscle cone can be incised
Penrose-type tube is positioned to exit through the masseter
carefully along the long axis of the optic nerve. Blunt dissec-
muscle ventral to the zygomatic arch. The orbital tissues are
tion reveals the optic nerve, ciliary ganglion, retractor bulbi
usually apposed with a few 2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted
muscles, and the posterior aspects of the globe.
absorbable sutures, as is the periosteum of the zygomatic
Closure of the surgical wound begins with replacement of
arch, and the lateral orbital ligament is reattached to the
theZ
zygomatic arch with 18 g stainless steel wire sutures
Zygomatic arch periosteum with similar type sutures. The
through the eight previously drilled holes and reattachment
Zygomatic arch bone will regenerate within the periosteal
of the masseter muscle to the ventral zygomatic arch.
space. If a single portion of the zygomatic arch was removed,
 The edges of the temporalis muscle are reapposed to thei1
it can be repositioned and wired to the adjacent edges of the
original position at the external sagittal crest, external zygo-
arch. If necessary, simple interrupted absorbable sutures are
matic process, and the dorsal edge of the zygomatic
indicated to minimize any dead space. The subcutaneous
arch with 2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
tissues are apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted
The subcutaneous tissues are apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple
absorbable sutures; the skin incision is apposed with 3-0 to
interrupted or simple continuous absorbable sutures. The
4-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. As the blink
skin is apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted non-
leflex is usually impaired postoperatively, a complete tempo-
absorbable sutures (Fig. 4.22g). A rubber or silicone Penrose-
lary tarsorrhaphy is perfoimed to prevent exposure keratitis.
type drain, positioned in the retrobulbar space and directed
After the blink reflex can be elicited postoperatively, the tem-
beneath the zygomatic arch for surgical drainage, is indicated
porary tarsorrhaphy sutures can be removed (Fig. 4.21k)
for a few days postoperatively. A complete temporary tarsor-
rhaphy finalizes the procedure.
 Major lateral orbitotomy
Dorsal orbitotomy
This modified lateral and more versatile orbitotomy pro-
lo noaiso au jo ansodxa iesip pue leei oq sa
This extensive orbitotomy, reported by Slatter and Abdelbaki
(extraconal space), the intraconal space (with the lateral 1ec-
in the dog yields reasonable exposure of the dorsomedial
tus muscle insertions incised), and for those infrequent
orbital wall, anterior frontal bone and zygomatic process,
patients that appear to have both lateral and dorsal 1etio-
and the dorsal retrobulbar tissues, and is less offen pel-
bulbar (such as zygomatic gland cysts and neoplasms) o1
formed. This surgical approach can also damage some po1-
intraconal orbital masses. After surgical preparation and
tions of the palpebral nerve, particularly the branches to the
draping. the initial skin incision is made by scalpel blade,
upper eyelid. In this procedure the temporalis muscle attach-
starting at the posterior aspect of the zygomatic arch and
ments to the frontal bone are reflected dorsally and posteri-
continuing along the dorsal zygomatic arch to the posterior
orly to provide access to the dorsal orbit and retrobulbar area.
aspects of the lateral orbital ligament (Fig. 4.22a).
. The skin
After draping, a curved skin incision is made, starting exter-
incision is then continued dorsally following the posterior
nal to the sagittal crest and continuing along the posterior
curve of the zygomatic process of the frontal bone to termi-
margin of the lateral orbital ligament. This skin flap is
nate in the middle of the external sagittal crest (Fig. 4.22b,c).
reflected laterally and ventrally. The periosteum of the frontal
The palpebral nerve lies subcutaneous and dorsal to the
bone next to the sagittal crest is incised by scalpel and the
Zygomatic arch and should not be disturbed. The skin flap
temporal muscle reflected caudally with a periosteal elevato1,
is dissected free of its subcutaneous attachments
and
and laterally to the lateral orbital ligament. With this flap of
reflected caudally. The rostral aponeurosis of the temporalis
temporal muscle reflected laterally, the dorsal orbit and 1et1o-
muscle is incised about 4 mm from its 1ostral and medial
bulbar muscles can be visualized. Closure starts with reap.
edges to permit convenient reapposition. The temporalis
position of the periosteum along the external sagittal crest,
muscle is reflected sufficiently caudally to expose the dorsal
and routine closure of the subcutaneous and skin layers.
Ietrobulbar space (Fig. 4.22d,e), either by separating its
attachment to the periosteum of the parietal bone or by
Anterior orbitotomies
a periosteal elevato1 to remove both the periosteum and
temporalis muscle attachment together.
The anterior orbitotomy procedure may be used for lesions
After some superficial dissection, the zygomatic arch is
in the anterior orbit that are cranial to the equator of the
isolated and four holes are drilled at each end prior to its
globe. Indications for this approach include zygomatic
resection. These holes will be used to reattach the zygomatic
gland cysts and masses, nictitating membrane cysts and
arch during closure. Both ends of the zygomatic arch are
tumors, extraocular muscle biopsies, some retinal detach-
incised, and the temporalis and masseter muscles on the
ment surgeries, and disorders of the lacrimal gland.
79
4
Surgery of the orbit
A
B
C
?
F
Fig. 4l.22 The lateral orbitotomy reported by Slatter and Abdelbaki provides for more extensive exposure of the dorsal canine orbit. (a) The initial skin incision
extends the entire length of the zygomatic arch. (b) The skin incision is continued dorsal and immedliately lateral of the frontal crest: (A) skin flap; (B) lateral
orbital ligament; (C) zygomatic arch; (D) frontal crest. (c) Operative appearance of the lateral orbitotomy skin incision. (d) To reflect the temporalis muscle 
aun jo uogoas iofew  ypue spewobkz aup jo sadse jesiop aun pue sasao leihes pue jeauouy jeuuanxa aua buoje pasou! 5! sisounauode sn! <epnes (oue)
zygomatic arch is transected and eight holes are pre-placed to facilitate its reattachment. (e) Operative appearance of the U-shaped incision of the
aponeurosis of the temporalis muscle prior to its elevation and reflection caudally. The zygomatic arch is immediately below the lower temporalis muscle
incision.(f With removal of the central zygomatic arch and caudal reflection of the temporalis muscle from its medial and lateral attachments, a major portion
of the posterior orbit can be directly explored. (A) Frontalis muscle; (B) temporalis muscle; (C) lateral rectus muscle; (D) ventral oblique muscle; (E) ventral
rectus muscle; (F) optic nerve; (G) resected zygomatic arch and lateral orbital ligament. (g) Immediate postoperative appearance after lateral orbitotomy
for the excision of a zygomatic salivary mucocele. Following this procedure, the patient's blink reflex may be impaired and a temporary tarsorrhaphy is used
for 7-10 days to protect the comea. The tarsorrhaphy sutures are not removed until a brisk' blink reflex returns.
(All drawings with permission from Siatter DH. Abderbaki Y 1979 Lateral orbitotomy by zygomatic arch resection in the dog. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
175: 1179-1183.)
 n    no r an  
approaches are indicated for orbital biopsies, and to excise
 bulbar conjunctiva (transconjunctival) o1 the eyelids (trans-
conjunctival neoplasms that extend caudally into the ante-
rio1 orbit. The surgical approach through the conjunctiva
to the retrobulbar (intraconal) space and tissues. Often the
 has a greater chance of sepsis as this area cannot be sterilized
dorsal o1 dorsolateral anterior orbit is entered via the trans-
preoperatively.
conjunctival approach which avoids damage to the palpe-
With both anterior approaches, the lid and conjunctival
bral nerve branches. Entry into the dorsal orbit may be
incisions are parallel to the orbital rim. The dissection is
through either limbal or foinix-based conjunctival incisions.
continued deeper by blunt tenotomy o1 strabismus scissors.
-n aun u suoisal ry pasn si yoeoidde eiqadiedsun a
Once the mass is 'shelled out', closure is usually by two layers 
tral anterio1 orbit. The approach is through the lower eyelid
for the transconjunctival approach, apposing the subcon-
and under the ventral conjunctival foinix. Both of these
junctiva, endorbita, and conjunctiva with 4-0 simple
80
interrupted absorbable sutures. For the transpalpebral
maxilla, and others, may be excised. With total orbi-
approach, the endorbita and tarsus are apposed with 4-0 sim-
tectomies, the globe is removed. Although these more radi-
ple inteirupted absorbable sutures and the skin with 2-0 to 4-
cal surgical approaches are definitely more aggressive, there
0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. Sometimes to
was local 1ecurrence of orbital neoplasia in 37% of the
facilitate orbital exposure, insertions of the 1ectus muscles
patients. However, 50% of the patients remained tumo1
are incised, and reattached later with 6-0 absorbable mattress
free for 12 months postoperatively.
sutures.
Orbitotomy in large animals
Transoral orbitotomy
and special species
The transoral approach to the caudal orbit is immediately
behind the last molar teeth in the dog and cat, and used
An orbitotomy is indicated in the horse for excision o1
fo1 fine-needle aspiration of orbital masses, and ventral
biopsy of orbital or retrobulbar masses, removal of orbital
drainage of orbital cellulitis and abscessation. [n the dog.
foreign bodies, and drainage of retrobulbar abscesses that
this portion of the orbital floor is composed primarily of
are not responsive to systemic therapy. An orbitotomy may
the medial pterygoid muscle and periorbital fascia, and the
be needed to repair orbital fractures in the horse.
oral submucosa and mucosa (Fig. 4.23). In the cat, the cau-
  a ss   n r so
dal orbital floor is quite thin, consisting of only a small shelf
complex nature of the anatomy of the equine orbit and
of tuberous maxillary bone and soft tissues. The oral
the infrequent indications for the procedure. The most
approach, because of its very limited exposure, is used
frequent indication is to provide exposure to repair orbital
primarily for culture and cytology of the retrobulbar space,
fractures. Due to the infrequent use of the procedure,
and to provide ventral drainage for orbital cellulitis.
thes
surgeon should prepare a careful surgical plan pre-
Because the mouth is a septic environment, entry into the
operatively, review the anatomy of the area, and peruse the
orbit generally requires the perioperative administration of
surgical literature to plan the surgical episode. Orbitotomy
systemic antibiotics. After short-acting general anesthesia,
is a challenging procedure and requires advance planning.
the animal is intubated and a mouth speculum positioned.
An equine skull for review and for visualization of three-
Povidone-iodine (0.5% solution) is applied to the oral
dimensional concepts during surgery is helpful. An equine
mucosa immediately caudal to the last molar tooth. After a
anatomic atlas is also helpful. A general equine surgical
5-10 mm linear incision, a blunt probe is inserted into the
instrument pack and orthopedic instruments are necessary.
retrobulbar space. Bacterial and fungal cultures and cytology
An oscillating bone saw, orthopedic drill, periosteal eleva-
specimens can be collected. The incision is not closed,
tors, wire 'tighteners', and rongeurs are needed.
but allowed to heal by secondary intention.
Two orbital surgical procedures have been described fo1
orbital exploration in the horse: 1) a dorsal orbitotomy
Total and partial orbitectomy
approach (Basher et al); and 2) osteotomy of the zygomatic.
temporal, and frontal bone components of the zygomatic
arch (Koch, Goodhead, and Colitz).
The partial and total orbitectomy procedures are used to
The dorsal orbitotomy technique is initiated by careful
treat orbital and periorbital neoplasia, and include removal
attention to skin preparation for aseptic surgery. A generous,
of the eye, the other orbital tissues, and not infrequently
slightly curved skin incision is made over the dorsal orbit,
adjacent bony, sinus, nasal, and oral strictures. Muscles
lateral to the external sagittal crest of the frontal and parietal
adjacent to the orbit, such as the temporalis and masseter.
bones, extending posterior to the zygomatic process of the
and bones, such as portions of the frontal, zygomatic arch,
frontal bone. Lateral retraction of the attachments of the
frontoscutularis, interscutularis, and temporal muscles to
the temporal and frontal bones allows exposure of the
extraocular muscle cone.
The second technique involves resection of the zygomatic.
temporal, and frontal bone components of the zygomatic
arch. A large lateral canthotomy is performed to maximize
exposure. A curved skin incision is made over the zygomatic
process of the frontal bone, care being taken to preserve the
sensory nerve fibers from the frontal nerve and the motor
fibers to the orbicularis oculi muscle laterally from the
palpebral branch of the facial nerve. The periosteum of the
cranial rim of the zygomatic process is incised along its
length, and the aponeuroses of the frontoscutularis, intel-
scutularis, temporal, and masseter muscles are reflected.
Next, 1.5-2 mm holes are predrilled in the zygomatic pro-
cess of the frontal bone, the zygomatic arch, and the zygo-
matic process of the temporal bone. Three bone cuts are
Fig. 4.23 Oral orbitotomy: Immediately posterior to the last molar tooth
jsow s! anis Anua siyl yrnow aun wouy aiquo aun janua on eaie aun s! (moue)
then made with an oscillating bone saw. The first is through
useful for orbital culture and cytology, and to provide ventral drainage for
the zygomatic process of the frontal bone, the next through
se ptic orbital cellulitis.
the zygomatic arch, and the last through the zygomatic
Surgery of the orbit
 process of the temporal bone. The resulting wedge of bone
possible, using walking sutures and vertical mattress sutures,
is removed to expose the dorsolateral orbit, retrobulbar
and the remaining defect is allowed to heal as a granu-
muscle cone, and the orbital lacrimal gland. The bone
lating open wound or by second intention. Early in the
wedge is placed in a bowl of sterile saline until needed to
'ap iday paiasi a pnous eare a sanid sue
Ao passape si uoisal ieno aui aia Auoq aui aoeidai
and bandaged. Parenteral antibiotics are administered
excision, biopsy, or aspiration. Iridium seeds may be
until a good granulation bed is present in the orbit. The
implanted o1 cisplatin injected into a cancerous mass.
orbit is flushed with sterile saline until a healthy granulation
The procedure is completed by replacing the bone wedge
tissue bed covers the orbit; lavage is then continued with
and using 18-22 g stainless steel wire to 1eattach the bone
water.
through the predrilled holes. The periosteum is reattached
- ai-aun e r paedaid aq Pous siamo
using 3-0 polyglycolic acid sutures in a simple interrupted
ment period, but a good result can be expected in most
pattern. The subcutaneous tissues are closed with 3-0 to
cases. Reconstructive skin flaps and grafts should also be
4-0 absorbable sutures. Skin and lateral canthotomy inci-
considered. Consultation with an equine surgeon is of
sions are sutured with 3-0 to 4-0 nylon o1 prolene sutures.
benefit to determine the best therapeutic modality fo1 each
case.
Orbital fracture repair
Surgical management of traumatic
An orbital rim fracture is a potential globe- and vision-
threatening injury. These fractures may result in bone frag-
 proptosis in small animals
ment displacement, impingement of extraocular muscles,
laceration of the globe, impairment of the blink reflex, and
Although the surgical management of traumatic proptosis
Iestriction of ocular movement. The dorsal orbital rim is
-  r  e  d s
fractured most frequently. Diagnosis may be made by exam-
ination and palpation, by orbital radiographs, and by CT.
fo1 traumatic proptosis is determined by several factors.
The zygomatic arch of the frontal bone may be fractured
The breed of the dog should be considered as traumatic
in one piece. Reduction is usually facilitated by intravenous
proptosis occurs more frequently in brachycephalic bieeds
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and warm com-
with shallow orbits and large palpebral fissures. The trauma
presses for 12-24 h. The fracture may be reduced and repo-
 ssa si s   s d 
sitioned without a surgical incision and without fixation
mesocephalic and dolichocephalic breeds. Traumatic prop-
devices. Bone chips in comminuted orbital fractures that
tosis in cats is infrequent, and is associated with consider-
are too small to be fixed in position are preferably removed
able trauma; skull and/o1 mandibular fractures are often
to prevent bone sequestration and osteomyelitis.
concurrent (Fig. 4.24). The duration of the proptosis must
Ventral orbital rim fractures also occur from
1 valious
be considered: the longer the cornea is exposed, the more
injuries. Polo horses may be more prone to ventral orbital
extensive the damage to the epithelium and stroma, and
lim fractures. Traumatic fractures of the medial orbit may
the more extensive the retrobulba1 hemorrhage and edema.
affect the nasolacrimal canaliculus or nasolacrimal duct.
 The size of the resting pupil and the light-induced pupillary
Horses that fall over backward may have fractures of the
leflexes can help to assess possible damage to the optic
basioccipital bone and basisphenoid bone of the inner orbit
lesulting in blindness. CT will delineate these fractures
clearly, whereas orbital radiographs do not allow optimal
visualization.
Partial orbital rim resection for large eyelid
skin defects/cosmetic skin orbitectomy
When large eyelid skin resection is needed to remove neo-
plastic masses following enucleation or exenteration, an
orbital rim resection will assist closure of the skin margins.
In this procedure, the globe is removed, and the neoplastic
mass is excised with a large margin. If the skin margins are
too far apart to be apposed, an osteotome o1 oscillating
bone saw is used to remove a large amount of the dorsal
and lateral rim of the zygomatic process, allowing sufficient
movement of the skin to achieve more close apposition
of the skin edges. Walking sutures may be used to assist in
skin movement to cove1 the defect. A cross mattress suture
pattern may be used, with gradual tightening of the sutures
to close the defect. Releasing incisions are also beneficial
in allowing adequate skin to cover the defect completely.
Fig. 4.24 Proptosis in the cat usually requires a more guarded prognosis
In severe cases, when sufficient skin cannot be mobilized
than in the dog, because the trauma to displace the globe from the orbit
even with zygomatic arch resection, the orbit may remain
is more extensive, and the resultant damage to the eye and orbit is
open and heal. In these cases the skin is closed as much as
considerable.
82
Surgical augmentation of orbital volume in small animals
damage.
 Traumatic proptosis is rare in the other species, and in the
hoise often incomplete, presenting as acute exophthalmia
(secondary to intraorbital hemorrhage), impaired
land
incomplete blink 1eflex, and progressive coineal ulceration.
Careful orbital examination may detect orbital bone frac-
tures with variable displacement.
The prognosis for vision must be cautious, as blind-
ness occurs in about 60% of dogs and 100% of cats. Post-
proptosis strabismus in dogs is frequent, occurring in 36%
of the dogs. The medial rectus muscles are most frequently
avulsed; the ventral rectus and ventral oblique muscles are
less often involved.
Traumatic proptosis is one of the few ophthalmic emer-
gencies in all species (Fig. 4.25). As soon as possible, topical
solutions should be applied frequently to the exposed
cornea to minimize damage. After total patient evalua-
tion and short-acting general anesthesia, the eyelids
9IE
prepared quickly for aseptic surgery. After draping, a liberal
(10-15 mm) lateral canthotomy is performed with Steven's
tenotomy o1 strabismus scissois. A lateral canthotomy is
Fig. 4.26 Replacement of the globe during lateral canthotomy and
complete temporary tarsorrhaphy. As in this patient, hemorrhage within the
orbit causes the globe to place considerable pressure on the temporary
tarsorrhaphy. Small clear plastic or rubber band stents are placed under the
interrupted mattress sutures to maintain the complete temporary
tarsorrhaphy for 10-14 days.
usually necessary to increase the size of the palpebral fissure
in order to return the globe to the orbit. To temporarily
cover the coinea and provide direct pressure to the globe,
aa lo p a lo asaap oi e os
a complete temporary tarsorrhaphy is perfoimed (Fig. 4.26).
Four to six 2-0 to 4-0 non-absorbable internupted horizontal
sutures with stents are pre-placed. Stents may consist of old
intravenous tubing. buttons, wide rubber bands o1 silicone
strips. Stents are indicated because of eyelid edema and the
A
considerable pressure that occurs on these sutures. Once
all of the eyelid sutures are placed, they are tightened and
tied with long ends to accommodate either intermittent
ophthalmic examinations or to permit adjustments as the
eyelid and orbital swelling decreases. The postoperative
marized in the subsequent section.
 Surgical augmentation of orbital volume in
small animals
Enucleation and exenteration surgeries, trauma, and inflam-
mation can significantly reduce orbital volume, such that
health and function of the eye may be impaired. When sig-
nificant amounts of orbital tissue (including the eye) have
 e a a se rns s ns  
methacrylate spheres (flattened on one side) may be posi-
B
tioned and anchored within the orbit. Non-absorbable
sutures (nylon o1 mylar) and surgical mesh may be used
agojh aul (e) bop paaig-paxiw llws e ui sisondoud snewnell sz' dbis
is displaced beyond the eyelid margins and subconjunctival hemorrhage
to bridge the bone orbital opening before a permanent
is evident. (b) Appearance of the globe after replacement and the sutures
tarsorrhaphy is performed to 1educe the postoperative
are tied.
concavity that follows.
83
 Surgery of the orbit
POSTOPERATIVE CARE AND MANAGEMENT
 s s   a sn 
cal procedures. Surgical entry into the orbit through the con-
junctiva o1 mouth should always be considered as possibly
contaminated, as these surfaces cannot be sterilized. Surgical
lateral and dorsal orbitotomies. Topical antibiotics are
instilled perioperatively for eviscerations, and after the more
difficult orbitotomies. Systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDs
are often administered systemically after traumatic proptosis
and eviscerations to reduce orbital inflammation and
swelling. Diuretics may also assist in the reduction of exces-
sive orbital fluids. Warm and cold compresses can reduce
postoperative eyelid and orbital swelling after all of these
surgical procedures. Use of the E-collar postoperatively is
good preventive therapy against self-trauma.
 For those patients with considerable orbital swelling and
a visual eye, a complete temporary tarsorrhaphy is often
Fig. 4.27 Postoperative appearance of a young Great Dane 5 weeks after
indicated to protect the cornea. Postoperative exophthalmia
enucleation. With the short-hair coat breeds, postoperative disfigurement
and concavity of the orbit occurs.
may increase and impai1 the blink reflex. Partial-to-complete
loss of the blink reflex produces a central coineal ulceration
that often progress rather rapidly. The tarsorrhaphy should
lemain until a vigorous blink 1eflex retuins, which may be
accumulation around the implant is a common finding in
several weeks. Hence, single sutures from the tarsorrhaphy
cats, septic infections are not usually present.
may be removed over several days to weeks, to maintain
The most frequent long-term complication after enucle-
corneal health.
ation is the contracture of the orbital space and the concav-
ity of the permanent complete tarsorrhaphy. This sinkage
may be quite noticeable in short-haired dogs and cats, but
Postoperative complications and treatment
less obvious in long-haired b1eeds (Fig. 4.27). Implantation
 in all species
of an orbital sphere after enucleation will markedly reduce
 the postoperative orbital and eyelid deformity to acceptable
Enucleation
levels.
Swelling of the orbit or space between the conjunctival
The complications after enucleation are not usually serious.
 s n     
Swelling immediately after surgery is usually associated
operatively. Retained lacrimal and/o1 nictitating membrane
with orbital hemorrhage: it may be more frequent after the
glandular tissues are the most likely sources if the swelling
transpalpebral technique than the subconjunctival method.
is liquid. If the swelling becomes troublesome, excision of
Orbital hemorrhage may be associated with poor hemo-
the respective glands will generally resolve the problem.
stasis during surgery, or from blood vessels that did not
Orbital emphysema occurs  infrequently postoperatively.
bleed and were not ligated during surgery because of the
aui uo ie jo aessed au Aq pasnen aq oi sieadde pue
low blood pressure. Counterpressure with a temporary
nose, through the nasolacrimal duct, into an anterior orbital
facial bandage is a possibility. Ice packs fo1 a few hours
space. Sneezing by the animals can initiate rather acute and
postoperatively may reduce the swelling.
marked swelling of the complete permanent tarsorrhaphy.
a an riede a osie r au a
Resolution consists of excision of one or both of the patent
sutures in the skin incision. Orbital hemorrhage may also
lacrimal puncta.
exit the nose and is thought to be related to the passage of
Occasionally a small but chronic fistula from retained
orbital blood through the nasolacrimal system.
conjunctiva may develop, resulting in small amounts of
Postoperative infections after enucleation are infrequent
brown fluid that stain the eyelids. Treatment consists of
in small animals because of the perioperative administration
feshening the fistula's edges and apposition by sutures.
of systemic antibiotics. Infections usually occur within the
Occasionally the lacrimal and/or nictitating membrane
fist week postoperatively. Culture of the orbital contents
gland may also need to be excised.
is recommended for the selection of the most appropriate
antibiotic(s) after oral orbitotomy for orbital cellulitis or
Evisceration
fo1 postoperative orbital infections. High levels of systemic
antibiotics are recommended for 7-10 days.
The evisceration procedure is nearly always accompanied
Postoperative orbital infections with an orbital prosthesis
with an intraocular prosthesis (Fig. 4.28). The surgical suc-
usually require removal of the implant to resolve the orbital
cess rate of eviscerations in dogs is 90-95%, but is not
infection. Intraorbital prostheses may be less successful in
Ieported in cats and horses. Postoperative infections are
cats than in dogs; about 20-40% of the implants extrude
in cats. The reasons are not understood, and although fluid
enucleation. Perioperative antibiotics seem to prevent most
84
 Postoperative complications and treatment i all species
B
Fig. 4.28 (a) Postoperative appearance of bilateral evisceration with an intrascleral silicone prosthesis 12 months after surgery in a 10-year-old Beagle. The
presurgical condlition was absolute primary glaucoma which was intractable to continued topical medications. (b) Close-up of the right eye. Usually some 
corneal edema and/or pigmentation occur after this procedure. Topical medications after 2-4 weeks postoperatively are usually not necessary.
postoperative infections. Long-term successful eviscerations
require an intact and reasonably healthy cornea.
incision (often 180°) necessary to insert the near-globe size
Postoperative corneal diseases, possibly related to the intra-
prosthesis, considerable coineal o1 scleral nerves may be
ocular implant, include coineal erosions and ulcerations
tansected, rendering these postoperative coineas subject to
(Fig. 4.29). Often the cornea is compromised preoperatively.
lower sensitivities, less frequent blinking, and increased expo-
as in glaucoma. During evisceration surgery, instrument con-
sure. Several weeks may be necessary for these corneal nerves
tact with the posterio1 coinea is avoided, and in spite of the
to regenerate.
often considerable hemorrhage that accompanies the proce-
In the event that a central coineal ulcer develops after the
dure, excessive flushing of the globe should be avoided. These
corneas usually demonstrate edema postoperatively.
but
o rq e o  (idn s e s
often some clearing will occur in 4-8 weeks. Some coineal
graft is indicated. If the corneal ulcer becomes full thickness,
superficial pigmentation and vascularization may remain per
a conjunctival graft is essential. Infection from the coineal
manently, but are not usually objectionable. Other extraocu-
ulcer into the globe with the prosthesis generally requires
lar diseases, such as keratoconjunctivitis sicca, may affect the
enucleation.
coinea and indirectly the intraocular prosthesis success rate.
Surgical wound dehiscence is minimized when the scleral
Exenteration
The complications after exenteration are similar to those
associated with enucleation. The postoperative swelling
and the long-term wound contracture are usually greater
because of the larger amounts of orbital tissues that have
been excised.
Orbitotomy
 The immediate postoperative complications after orbito-
tomies are usually related to exophthalmia secondary to
Ietrobulbar swelling and hemorrhage, especially after the
lateral approaches. The lateral orbitotomies usually transect
Aiddns ieun sauuiq aiau ieiqadied a jo aos isl ie
the upper eyelid. As a result, a temporary complete tarso1
rhaphy is recommended after all orbitotomies until eyelid
swelling is reduced, and a reasonable blink response 1etuins
(which may be several weeks). Without a blink reflex, neu-
roparalytic keratitis and corneal ulceration can develop rap-
Fig. 4.29 After evisceration, the most frequent complication with an 
idly. If the lacrimal gland innervation is impaired, teal
ntrascleral prosthesis is a central corneal ulcer which develops immediately
production may also be insufficient. Oral pilocarpine (usual
e sauinba Alesid pue bueay mols Auan Aensn s! s!ul <lanneadonsod
bulbar pedicle conjunctival graft to resolve quickly. Corneal ulceration after
dose fo1 a 15 kg dog is 2 d1ops of 2% ophthalmic piloca1-
the evisceration procedure is best prevented by a temporary tarsorrhaphy
pine well mixed in the food, twice daily) will successfully
for 10-14 days or until normal blink reflex returns.
stimulate the denervated gland.
85
4
 Surgery of the orbit
Post-proptosis
Although the patient numbers are still limited, intraorbital
prostheses may be less successful in cats.
Complications after the surgical tieatment of traumatic
proptosis include short-term retrobulbar hemorrhage and
swelling, and corneal malacia and ulceration with secondary
Evisceration
inidocyclitis. Systemic corticosteroids, NSAIDs, and diuretics
The evisceration procedure with intraocular prosthesis has
can be administered to rapidly 1educe the 1etrobulbar
largely replaced the enucleation procedure for the treatment of
fluids, and reduce the pressure on the globe and intraorbital
end-stage, blind, painful and enlarged glaucomatous eyes. The
portion of the optic nerve. Treatment of corneal disease,
postoperative results are a comeoscleral shell with an intrascl-
hyphema, and anterior uveitis usually consists of topical
eral sphere that is cosmetically acceptable, painless, and has
antibiotics and mydriatics administered between the com-
normal ocular movements with the fellow eye. Lse of the evis.
plete temporary tarsorrhaphy sutures o1 by the subpalpebral
system. Long-term sequelae of traumatic proptosis include
non-specific uveal inflammations and suspected intraocular
enophthalmia and limited globe mobility (related to the
neoplasms is not recommended. As a quality control, the
loss of orbital fat and orbital fibrosis), optic nerve atrophy
intraocula1 tissues after evisceration should always be exam-
(related to excessive pressure of the optic nerve and pos-
ined histologically. The success rate in dogs after evisceration
sible ischemia of the optic nerve), pigmentary keratitis,
with intrascleral prosthesis is 90-95%, with co1neal ulceration
lagophthalmia, papilloedema, and exotropia (most often
as the most frequent complication. As corneal ulcerations tend
divergent strabismus related to palsy o1 transection of the
medial 1ectus muscle; Fig. 4.30).
intraocular prostheses, early treatment with bulbar conjuncti-
Attempts to correct the exotropia are not always success-
val grafts is recommended.
ful. If the innervation to the medial rectus muscle has been
impaired, spontaneous partial-to-complete 1ecovery may
Exenteration
occur in several months. If the exotropia is secondary to
tearing of the medial rectus muscle or its insertion, sponta-
 The short- and long-term success after exenteration is less
       
than with enucleation and evisceration, because this proce-
leapposition of the torn medial rectus portions, or splitting
dure is used primarily for the attempted excision of primary
the dorsal rectus muscle and reattaching it medially as
orbital neoplasms. In the event that total excision of the pri-
previously described.
mary orbital neoplasm is achieved, the main evidence of
exenteration is the complete permanent tarsorrhaphy, and
Short- and long-term results in all species
sinkage of the eyelids and orbit associated with the loss of
all of the orbital tissues. Use of a silicone o1 methyl methac-
rylate sphere within the orbit after exenteration can mark-
Enucleation
edly reduce, but not totally eliminate, the postoperative
The short- and long-term results after enucleation are good.
sinkage.
The majority of complications can be either medically o1
surgically managed. The defoimity associated with the loss
Orbitotomy
of the eye is greatly reduced by the use of orbital prostheses.
The judicious choice of a specific orbitotomy procedure for
 orbital disease will minimize the possible short- and long-
term side effects. Orbitotomy procedures provide excellent
lesults when used for orbital cysts, benign tumors, and focal
inflammations. Orbitotomies fo1 orbital neoplasia ale less
successful, because the incomplete excision of these malig-
nant tumors is often unavoidable. Based on current info1-
mation available on canine primary orbital neoplasms,
exenteration o1 the orbitectomy procedure may be the pre-
felled surgical procedure. The orbitectomy procedure may
have more success with complete excision of malignant
orbital neoplasms than the lateral orbitotomy methods,
but results in more postoperative disfigurement.
A common sequela to surgery, some periorbital fibrosis
usually develops, resulting in some enophthalmia and
Iestricted globe mobility. The loss of orbital adipose tissue
may also result in enophthalmia. Some long-term ptosis or
drooping of the upper eyelid may persist, probably related
to partial loss of some branches of the palpebral nerve.
Fig. 4.30 One of the more frequent complications after traumatic proptosis 
in the dog is lateral strabismus, which results from either rupture of the
medial rectus muscle (the shortest of the retrobulbar muscles) or its insertion
Traumatic proptosis
just posterior to the globe. Damage to this muscle and/or its nerve supply
causes lateral strabismus. A shallow ventral corneal ulcer is also present;
Postoperative complications related to the surgical treatment
it resulted from exposure and an inadequate blink reflex.
of traumatic proptosis are primarily associated with the
86
Further reading
disease. The improper placement of the eyelid sutures can
middle of the eyelid margin. As the eyelid swelling
produce direct corneal damage. These sutures must only par-
decreases, these sutures may require multiple readjustments
tially penetrate the eyelid thickness, and emerge through the
to avoid coineal contact.
 Further reading
Small animals
Kern T): The canine orbit. In Gelatt KN
Wang AL, Ledbetter EC, Kern T): Orbital abscess
Bartoe IT. Brightman AH. Davidson HI:
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 2.
bacterial isolates and in vitro antimicrobial 
Modified lateral orbitotomy for vision-
Philadelphia, 1991, Lea and Febiger.
susceptibility patterns in dogs and cats. Vet
 sparing excision of a zygomatic mucocele in
pp 239-255.
Ophthalmol 12:91-96. 2009.
a dog. Vet Ophthalmol 10:127-131, 2007.
 Koch SA: Intraocular prosthesis in the dog and
Whitley RD, Shaffer KW, Albert RA:
Bedford PGC: Orbital pneumatosis as an
cat: the failures. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 lmplantation of intraocular silicone
unusual complication to enucleation.
179:883-885. 1981.
prosthesis in dogs. The Compendium
J Small Anim Pract 20:551-555. 1979.
Konrade KA, Clode AB. Michau TM. Roe SC.
7:802-811. 1985.
 Bellhorn RW: Enucleation technique: a lateral
Trumpatori B), Krug WV. Gilger BC: Surgical
Large animals and special species
approach. I Am Amim Hosp Assoc 8:59-60.
correction of severe strabismus and
1972.
enophthalmos secondary to zygomatic arch 
 Basher AW, Severin GA, Chavkin MJ. Frank AA:
fracture in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol
Orbital neuroendocrine tumors in three
Blocker T, Hoffman A, Schaeffer DJ. Wallin JA:
 Corneal sensitivity and aqueous tear
12:119-124. 2009.
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:668-671.
 production in dogs undergoing evisceration
 Martin CL: Orbital emphysema: a complication
1997.
with intraocular prosthesis placement.
 of ocular enucleation in the dog. Vet Med
Baumel J. Whitmer LM: Osteologia. In
Vet Ophthalmol 10:147-154. 2007.
66:986-989. 1971.
Baumel Jl editor: Handbooh of Avian
Mclaughin SA, Ramsey DT. Lindley DM, et al:
Anatomy: Nomina Anatomica Avium.
Brightman AH, Magrane WG, Huff RW.
 Intraocular silicone prosthesis implantation
Cambridge. 1993. Nuttall Ornithological
 Helper LC: Intraocular prosthesis in the
in eyes of dogs and a cat with intraocular
Club. pp 45-132.
dog. I Amm Ani Hosp Assoc 13:481-485. 1977.
Gilger BC. Mclaughlin SA, Whitley RD.
neoplasia: nine cases [1983-1994). I Am Vet
Beard WL, Wilkie DA: Partial orbital rim
Med Assoc 207:1441-1443. 1995.
resection, mesh skin expansion. and second
Wright JC: Orbital neoplasms in cats:
21 cases. I Am Vet Med Assoc 201:
Mughannam Al, Reinke ID: Two cosmetic
intention healing combined with
1083-1086. 1992.
techniques for enucleation using a
emucleation or exenteration for extensive
periorbital flap. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
 periocular tumors in horses, Vet Ophthalol
Gilger BC, Whitley RD, McLaughlin SA:
30:308-312. 1994.
5:23-28. 2002.
 Modified lateral orbitotomy for removal of
orbital neoplasms in two dogs, Vet Surg
Nasisse MP, van Ee RT. Munger RJ.
Blogg IR, Stanley RG. Philip CI: Skull and
 Davidson MG: Use of methyl methacrylate
orbital blow-out fractures in a horse, Equine
24:53-58. 1994.
orbital prostheses in dogs and cats: 78 cases
Vet J (Suppl 10): Equine Ophthalmology
Gross S. Aguirre GD, Harvey C: Tumors
(1980-1986). I Am Vet Med Assoc
5-7. 1990.
involving the orbit of the dog. Proceedings of
192:539-542. 1988.
Bradecamp EA, Matter NE: How to perform an
the American College of Veterinary
Ophthatmologists 8:229-240, 1979.
O'Brien MG, Withrow Sl. Straw RC. et al.: Total
enucleation in the standing horse.
or partial orbitectomy for the treatment of
Proceedings of the American Association of
Hamor RE. Roberts SM, Severin GA: Use of
 periorbital tumors in 24 dogs and 6 cats:
Equine Practitioners 50:237-239. 2004.
 orbital implants after enucleation in dogs.
a retrospective study. Vet Surg 25:471-479.
Brooks DE: Orbit. In Auer JA editor: Equine
horses. and cats: 161 cases [1980-1990].
1996.
 Surgery. Philadelphia. 1992. WB Saunders/
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:701-706. 1993.
Prince IH. Diesem CD, Eglitis 1. Ruskell GL:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp 654-666.
Hamor RE, Whitley RD. Mclauglin SA.
Anatomy and Histology of the Eye and Orbit inE
 Brooks DE: Ocular emergencies and trauma. In
Lindley DM, Albert RA: Intraocular silicone 
Domestic Animals. Springfield. 1960. CC
Auer IA, Stick JA editors: Equine Surgery.
 prostheses in dogs: a review of the literature
Thomas. pp 65-181 and 260-297.
ed 2. Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
and 50 new cases. J Am Arnim Hosp Assoc
Ramsey DT. Fox DB: Surgery of the orbit. Vet
pp 508-514.
30:66-69. 1994.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Brooks DE: Orbit. In Auer JA, Stick JA editors:
Harvey CE: Exploration of the orbit. In
 Bistner Sl. Aguirre G. Batik G editors: Atlas of
27:1215-1264, 1997.
Equine Surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia. 1999.
Veterinary Ophthatmic Surgery. Philadelphia.
Riggs C, Whitley RD: Intraocular silicone
WB Saunders. pp 502-505.
1977. WB Saunders. pp 258-260.
 prosthesis in a dog and a horse with corneal
Brooks DE: Ophthatmology for the Equine
Hendrix DVH, Gelatt KN: Diagnosis. treatment
lacerations. J A Vet Med Assoc
Practitioner. Jackson, 2002. Teton New
196:617-619. 1990.
 Media, pp 36-41.
and outcome of orbital neoplasia in dogs: a
retrospective study of 44 cases. J Small Amim
 Simpson HD: Reconstructive surgery of the eye.
Brooks DE: Orbit. In Auer JA, Stick JA editors:
Pract 41:105-108. 2000.
1. Plastic eye prosthesis. North Am Vet
Equine Surgery. ed 3. St Louis. 2006.
37:770-777, 1956.
Saunders. pp 755-766.
Hong Yl. Jang SUl, Lee JH: Limited orbitotomy
without transection of the orbital ligament
 Slatter DH, Abdelbaki Y: Lateral orbitotomy
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
for zygomatic mucocele in three
 by zygomatic arch resection in the dog.
ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN
brachycephalic dogs. In Proceedings of he
J Am Vet Med Assoc 175:1179-1183. 1979.
editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology, ed4.Ames.
Speakman Al, Baines S), Williams JM, Kelly DF:
2006. Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
38th Meeting of the American College of
Veterinary Ophthatmologists: Abstract 4.
 Zygomatic salivary cyst with mucocele
Caron JIP. Barber SM. Bailey IV. Fretz PB.
2007
formation in a cat. J Small Anim Pract
 Pharr IN: Periorbital skull fractures in five 
Kennedy RE: The effect of early enucleation on
38:468-470. 1997.
horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc 188:280-284.
 the orbit in animals and humans. Am J
 Spiess BM: Diseases and surgery of the canine
1986.
Ophthalmol 60:277-306. 1965
orbit. In Gelatt KN editor: Veterinary
Colitz C. Gilger BC, Davidson MG: Orbital
Kern Tl: Orbital neoplasia in 23 dogs. I Am Vet
Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006. Blackwell.
fibroma in a horse. Vet Ophthalmol
Med Assoc 186:489-491. 1985.
pp 539-562.
3:213-216. 2000.
87
 Surgery of the orbit
 Cutler Tl: Diseases and surgery of the globe and vany IM: Farm animal anesthesia. In Fubini S. F
Noordsy IL: Food Animal Surgery, ed 3, Trenton.
 orbit. In Gilger BC editor: Equine
Ducharme NG editors: Farm Animal Surgery.
NJ. 1994, Veterinary Learning Systems.
Ophthalmology. St Louis. 2005. Saunders.
St Louis. 2004, Saunders. pp 97-112.
pp 82-85.
pp 63-106.
Klein WER, Bier I, van Dieten JS. et al: Radical
Pizzirani S. Tseng F. Pirie C: Evisceration in
Davis IL, Gilger BC. Spaulding K. et al: Nasal 
surgery of bovine ocular squamous cell
three species of owls. In Proceedings of the
adenocarcinoma with diffuse metastases
carcinoma (cancer eye): complications and
39thAnmual Meeting of theAmerican College
involving the orbit. cerebrum, and multiple
results. Vet Surg 13:236-242. 1984.
of Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Abstract 25.
Canial nerves in a horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Keinschuster S. Rapp H. Green S. Bier J.
2008.
221:1460-1463. 2002.
Kampen K: Efficacy of intratumorally
Provost P. Ortenberg Al, Caron JP: Silicone
Gelatt KN, Wolf ED. Boyd CL, Titus RS: The
administered mycobacterial cell walls in the
ocular prosthesis in horse: eleven cases
special sense organs. In Oehme FW, Prier JE
treatment of cattle with ocular carcinoma.
1983-i987. J Am Vet Med Assoc
editors: A Textbooh of Large Animal Surgery.
J Natl Cancer Inst 67:1165-1171, 1981.
194:1764-1766. 1989.
ed 2. Baltimore. 1988, williams and
Koch DB, Leitch M, Beach J: Orbital surgery in
Ramsey DT. Fox DB: Surgery of the orbit. Vet
Wilkins, pp 623-669.
two horses. Vet Surg 9:61-63. 1980.
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Gilger BC, Davidson MG: How to prepare for
Lavach ID: Large Animal Ophthalmology. St Louis.
27:1215-1264, 1997.
ocular surgery in the standing horse.
1990. CV Mosby. pp 225-236, and 289-298.
Riggs C., Whitley RD: Intraocular silicone
Proceedings of the American Association of
 Machado M. dos Santos Schmidt EM.
 prosthesis in a dog and a horse with corneal
Equine Practitioners 48:266-268, 2002.
Montiani-Ferreira F: Interspecies variation in
lacerations. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Gilger BC, Pizzirani S. Johnson LC.
orbital bone structure of psittaciform birds 
196:617-619. 1990.
[with emphasis on Psittacidae), Vet
Rubin LF: Large animal ophthalmic surgery. In
implant in a cosmetic corneoscleral
Ophthalmol 9:191-194. 2006.
Jennings P Jr, editor: The Practice of Large
 prosthesis after enucleation in a horse. J Am
Martin CL: Ophthalmic Disease in Veterinary
Animal Surgery. vol ll. Philadelphia. 1984.
Vet Med Assoc 222:343-345. 2003.
Medicine. London. 2005. Manson
Saunders. pp 1151-1201.
Goodhead AD, Vener l. Nesbit JW:
Publishing. pp 172-178.
 Schulz K: Field surgery of the eye and para-
 Retrobulbar extra-adrenal paraganglioma in
 McLaughlin SA, Gilger BC. Hamilton HL.
orbital tissues. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim 
a horse and its surgical removal by
Whitley RD. Harrison IW. Comer J:
Pract 24:527-534. 2008.
orbitotomy. Veterinary and Comparative
Intraocular silicone prosthesis as a
Severin GA:Severin's Veterinary Ophthatmology
Ophthalmology 7:96-100. 1997.
 cosmetically acceptable alternative to
Notes, ed 3. Fort Collins. 1996. Colorado
Grier R. Kigurardo G. Shaffer C. Pedrosa B.
enucleation in horses. Compendium of
State Universty Press. pp 486-498.
 Myers R. Merkley DF. Touvenelle M: Mast
Contimuing Education 17:945-951. 1995.
Theon AP, Pascoe IR, Carlson GP, Krag DN:
cell destruction by deinonized water. Am J
McLelland J: Color Atlas of Avian Anatomy.
 Intratumoral chemotherapy with cisplatin
Vet Res 51:1116-1120. 1991.
Philadelphia. 1991. WB Saunders. pp 33-46.
in oily emulsion in horses. J Am Vet Med
Hadick CL. Stoehr A, Rozmiarek H. Przybyla V:
 Meek LA: Intraocular silicone prosthesis in a
Assoc 202:261-267. 1993.
 Intraocular prosthesis in a cynomolgus 
horse. J Am Vet Med Assoc 193:343-345. 1988.
 Townsend wM: Food and fiber-producing
monkey. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 78:86-88.
Michau TM. Gilger BC: Cosmetic globe surgery
 animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN
1983.
in the horse, Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4, Ames.
Hamor RE. Roberts SM. Severin GA: Use of
20:467-484. 2004.
2007, Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
 orbital implants after enucleation in dogs.
 Muir ww: Local anesthesia in ruminants and
Turner AS. Mcllwrath CW: Techmiques in Large
horses, and cats: 161 cases [1980-1990).
pigs. In Schrefer J editor: Handboon of
Animal Surgery. Philadelphia. 1982. Lea &
J Am Vet Med Assoc 203:701-706. 1993.
Veterinary Anesthesia, ed 4. St. Louis, 2005.
Febiger. p 293-296.
Hoffman D. Jennings P. Spradbrow P:
Mosby. pp 72-99.
Tumer LM. Whitley RD. Hagar D: Management
 Immunotherapy of bovine ocular squamous
 Mufioz E. Leiva M, Naranjo C. Pefia T:
of ocular trauma in horses. Part 2: orbit.
cell carcinomas with phenol-saline extracts
Retrobulbar dermoid cyst in a horse: a case
eyelids, uvea, lens, retina, and optic nerve.
 of allogenic carcinomas. Aust Vet J
report, Vet Ophthalmol 10:394-397. 2007.
Mod Vet Pract 67:341-347. 1986.
57:159-162. 1981.
Murphy CJ, Brooks DE. Kern TJ.
lrby NL: Surgical diseases of the eye in farm
Queensberry KE. Riis RC: Enucleation in
 animals. In Fubini S. Ducharme NG editors:
birds of prey. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Farm Animal Surgery. St Louis, 2004.
Saunders. pp 429-459.
183:1234-1237. 1983.
88
CHAPTER
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Kirk N. Gelatt and R. David Whitley
Small animails. Large aniais and sperial species
Chapter contents
Introduction
89
Entropion in sheep
113
Anatomy
06
 Entropion and periocular fat pads in the Vietnamese
 Preoperative examination procedures
6
potbellied pig (Sus scrofa)
113
Surgical considerations of the eyelids
94
 SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR ECTROPION
114
 Surgical instrumentation
 Ectropion in the horse
95
117
 Surgical preparations of the eyelids
Surgical procedures for combined ectropion
95
 and entropion
117
 Tarsorrhaphy in small animals
95
OTHER SURGICAL PROCEDURES
120
Tarsorrhaphy in the horse
97
Surgical procedures to decrease palpebral fissure size
120
Aftercare for eyelid surgery in the horse
16
 Lateral canthotomy
 Surgical procedures to increase palpebral fissure size
122
98
 Nasal fold trichiasis and resection in dogs
123
Surgical procedures for eyelid agenesis
98
Surgical treatment of chalazion
123
Surgical procedures for distichiasis
100
 Surgical procedures for ectopic cilia
 Surgical repair of eyelid lacerations
123
103
 Surgical procedures for minor eyelid neoplasms
SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR ENTROPION
in small animals
126
IN SMALL ANIMALS
103
 Reconstructive blepharoplasty after removal of eyelid
 Non-surgical treatment of entropion
103
 masses in small animals
128
 Surgical management of entropion
105
 Surgeries for eyelid neoplasia in the horse
132
 Postoperative management and complications
111
 Blepharoplastic procedures for the horse
133
ADAPTATIONS IN LARGE ANIMALS
 Bovine eyelid surgery
AND SPECIAL SPECIES
137
112
 Entropion in horses
112
Introduction
Diseases of the canine eyelids
Congenital and developmental eyelid disorders in dogs.
Eyelid diseases are common in dogs and horses, and infre-
including entropion, ectropion, distichiasis, and trichiasis,
quent in cats and cattle. In contrast to most ophthalmic
diseases, the initial clinical management of eyelid disorders 
is usually surgery. Traditionally, eyelid diseases are divi-
Selection of the surgical technique for a particular condition
may be influenced not only by the most effective procedure,
matic, and neoplastic. The clinical management of all of 
 an   a no  a  o i
instrumentation available. In older dogs eyelid neoplasms
these groups of eyelid diseases, except for the inflammatory
aI
 common. Although a significant percentage of the
 a oe  n i s si s
for the inflammatory eyelid diseases, after resolution with
      
recurrence after surgical excision is infrequent. The majority
antimicrobial therapy, to restore the eyelid contours and
of canine eyelid neoplasms can be excised by reasonably
function associated with the excessive postinflammatory
simple surgical procedures.
scarring and distortion.
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Diseases of the feline eyelids
Anatomy
 Eyelid surgery in cats is less frequent, but just as challenging.
Eyelid agenesis occurs not infrequently in the cat, usually
The morphology of the eyelids in domestic animals is quite
affecting the lateral aspects of the upper eyelid. Several eye-
similar, with size being the major variable. The eyelids
lid surgical procedures have been developed to treat this
Iepresent the transition of the integument system and the
condition. Eyelid neoplasms in cats are usually malignant
beginning of the ophthalmic apparatus with the initiation
histologically and clinically. Surgical intervention is often
of the palpebral conjunctiva. The eyelids surround the
combined with radiation, cryotherapy, o1 other types of
palpebral fissure, through which the eye contacts the envi-
therapy for best results.
ronment. The eyelids are divided clinically into the dorsal,
Eyelid trauma occurs in the cat, and as one would expect,
superiol, 01 upper eyelid; the ventral, inferio1, o1 lowe1
is most frequent in young animals. The eyelid trauma may
eyelid; the medial or nasal canthus; and the lateral or tem-
be mino1 o1 extensive, and fortunately loss of substantial
poral canthus (Fig. 5.1). The dorsal eyelid is the largest,
portions of the eyelids is rare. Although traumatized eye-
most mobile, and 2-5 mm longer than the lower lid.
Distinct ligaments, the septum orbitale, and certain muscles 
the extensive vascularity of the eyelids usually protects
attach at both sides of the palpebral fissure, resulting in an
against tissue ischemia and necrosis. As a result, excision
 oval rather than round eyelid opening. The medial canthal
and liberal trimming of traumatized eyelid tissues prio1
eyelid area is relatively fixed to the subcutaneous tissues
 r  l r a  d 
severely traumatized eyelids usually yields better postopera-
ment. Piotected immediately behind the medial canthal
tive results than excision of still attached but lacerated lid
ligament is the nasolacrimal sac. The lateral canthal region
tissues and subsequent reconstrictive blepharoplastic surgi-
is more mobile, especially in dogs. The lateral canthal liga-
cal procedures to repair these defects.
au Aq paseidai si pue sop au u padonaaap kood si suau
retractor anguli oculi lateralis muscle. Hence in dogs, defects
often affect the lower lid and lateral canthus.
Diseases of the equine eyelids
Developmental lid diseases, such as entropion and ectro-
Eyelid skin, cilia (eyelashes), and glands
pion, occur rarely in hoises; howevel, trauma and neo-
The skin of domestic animal eyelids is thinner than other
plasia occur not infrequently and are often treated by
parts of the integument system (Fig. 5.2). Eyelid movements
surgery. Like other animal species, eyelid trauma occurs
require both thin and pliable skin. Fine short hairs noimally
more frequently in young animals, and maintenance of
cover the eyelid skin. The subcutaneous tissues under the
lid function and preservation of the lid margin are most
eyelid skin are relatively thin and attach the lid skin to the
important. Both squamous cell carcinoma and sarcoid
deeper orbicularis oculi muscle. Cilia o1 eyelashes occur pri-
to aged horses, and often surgery is combined with other
ilregular rows. These cilia are usually the same color as the
modalities used to treat these neoplasms and achieve higher
adjacent eyelid hair coat. Long tactile hairs (pili supraorbi-
success rates.
tales or vibrissae) appear as a tuft along the dorsal medial
orbital margin in several animal species. Eyelashes are not
present in cats, although the eyelid hair next to the dorsal
Diseases of the bovine eyelids
    i    
Of the different lid diseases, only neoplasia warrants not
of gland, the glands of Moll and glands of Zeis, are located
infrequent lid surgery in this species. Squamous cell carci-
about the cilia follicles. The gland of Moll is a modi-
noma is the most frequent neoplasm in cattle, and occurs
fied sweat (apocrine) gland and the gland of Zeis is a mod-
in cattle directly related to aging. The average age of the
ified sebaceous gland. These glands can become inflamed
Hereford breed affected with squamous cell carcinoma is
and abscessed in young animals, resulting in the formation
about 7-8 years. Lack of lid and conjunctival pigmentation
is also associated with this tumor.
Adaptations from eyelid surgeries in humans
The early small animal eyelid surgical procedures were
adapted from techniques performed in humans. Human
eyelids are quite similar to those in domestic animals, with
one majo1 difference: in humans the tarsal layer consists
of a distinct cartilaginous plate that provides inteinal sup-
port for the eyelids; in domestic animals the taisal plate
has been 1eplaced by a thinner and more flexible fibrous
tarsus. As a result, the eyelids of animals have less inter-
E
nal support, and contact with the anterior portion of the
Fig. 5.1 The canine eyelids are divided into upper lid (A), lower lid (B),
globe is more important to maintain their contours and
medial canthus (C), and lateral canthus (D). Other important areas include
position.
the nictitating membrane (E), caruncle (F), and cilia (G).
90
Anatomy
Levator anguli oculi medialis
Frontalis -
Orbicularis
D
oculi
E
Retractor angu
：
oculi lateralis
Pars palpebralis
Fig. 5.3 Muscles that control the size of the palpebral fissure in the dog 
include: orbicularis oculi (close), levator anguli oculi medialis (open), frontalis
(open), retractor anguli oculi lateralis (open), and pars palpebralis (open).
Muller's muscles (open) and levator palpebrae superioris (open) are not
shown.
Fig. 5.2 The different layers of the upper eyelid include: skin (A), orbicularis
oculi muscle (B), tarsus (C), insertion of the levator palpebrae superioris
muscle (D), meibomian glands (E), palpebral conjunctiva (F), and the cilia (G).
of the uppel eyelid. The levator palpebrae superioris muscle
seems to be the most important muscle fo1 upper lid 1etrac-
tion as damage to this muscle or its insertions into the tarsal
of a stye o1 exteinal hordeolum. The margo-intermarginalis
a (a adn au o dop i) sisid u ssai aa
represents the free margin of the eyelids.
levatol anguli oculi medialis muscle elevates the medial
upper eyelid and erects the long tactile hairs of the eyebrow.
In some of the large breeds of dogs, the action of this muscle
Eyelid muscles
results in a noticeable notch at the junction of the medial
The second layer of the eyelids is the muscle layer which
sian dop au ul pil iaddn aul jo spiui-auo aippiu pue
consists of several muscles that either close o1 open the
smooth muscle fibers, innervated by the sympathetic nerves,
palpebral fissure. The orbicularis oculi muscle is the pre-
attach to the upper tarsus; in the cat, these muscle fibers also
dominant muscle involved in closure of the palpebral fis-
attach to the nictitating membrane. With the release of
sure in domestic animals. This muscle encicles the entie
endogenous adrenaline (epinephrine), o1 during the fight-
palpebral fissure and is attached by the septum orbitale to
and-flight reflex, these adrenergic innervated smooth muscle
the medial and lateral canthi. It is divided into the inner
fibers can immediately increase the size of the palpebial
pars palpebralis and the outer pars orbitalis. Both the origin
fissure.
and insertion of the orbicularis oculi muscle is the medial
 [n the cat, the major muscle for closing the palpebral
palpebral ligament. This muscle is immediately beneath
fissure is the orbicularis oculi. The coinugator supercili
the skin layer, and surgical procedures fo1 entropion (inver-
medialis raises the majority of the upper eyelid, but laterally
sion of the eyelid margin) and ectiopion (eversion of the
the frontoauricularis helps to elevate the upper lid. Lateral
eyelid margin) directly involve this muscle. In large animal
and as a substitute for the lateral canthal ligament, the
species the orbicularis oculi muscle is very powerful, espe-
cornugator supercili lateralis elongates the palpebral fissure.
        
The lower eyelid is relatively fixed and only the orbicularis
local nerve blocks of the palpebral nerve branch of the
oculi is present to close the palpebral fissure.
auriculopalpebral nerve (branch of the facial nerve) is often
In the horse, the anatomy of the eyelids follows the other
necessary to relax this muscle to adequately examine and
mammalian patteins. The upper lid is considerably larger
even treat a painful eye.
than the lower lid and contributes most of the lid motility.
Several muscles are involved in opening the eyelids and
The lacrimal puncta are about 2 mm in diameter and about
increasing the size of the palpebral fissure in the dog and
8 mm from the medial canthus. The medial canthus can
cat. In the canine upper eyelid these muscles consist of
d e sassassd pe anoa panid ao
(medial to lateral) the levator anguli oculi medialis, levato1
occasionally pigmented, caruncle. The upper lid possesses
palpebrae superioris, and the frontalis, and in the lower
about 40-50 meibomian glands dorsally and 30-35 glands
lid, the pars palpebralis of the sphincter colli profundus
ventrally.
(Fig. 5.3). The levato1 palpebrae superioris muscle has its
 [n cattle, the eyelids are quite similar to the horse. They
origin deep within the orbit, along with the rest of the
are very thick and strong! The orbicularis oculi is often in
extraocula1 muscles, and lies immediately above the dorsal
small bundles and extends to the edge of the lid margin.
Iectus muscle that inserts several millimeters from the dorsal
The orbicularis oculi is attached medially to the strong
limbus of the globe. Fascial attachments between the dorsal
medial palpebral ligament and lacrimal bone. Although
Iectus and levator palpebrae superioris muscles 1esult in
cattle possess a small and weak lateral palpebral ligament,
simultaneous upper movements of the globe and retraction
entropion and ectropion occur rarely in cattle. There are
91
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Corrugator supercili medialis
middle section of the upper eyelid the levator palpebrae
superioris muscle inserts into the tarsal layer. The superio1
and inferior tarsal muscles are smooth muscles in the dog
Dorsal portion of
within the endorbita that inserts into the tarsus. These mus-
orbicularis oculi
cles are under sympathetic innervation and help maintain
the palpebral fissure open.
The tarsal o1 meibomian glands are sebaceous (holocrine)
types and produce the important outer lipid or oily fraction
of the preocular or precoineal film. The lipid layer of the
preocular film prevents evaporation of the thicker aqueous
layer and stabilizes the preocular film. The number of tarsal
Corrugator supercili
glands in each lid ranges from 20 to 40, with the upper
lateralis (retractor
eyelid containing more glands. The orifices of the tarsal or
anguli oculij
Ventral portion of
meibomian glands empty onto the center of the eyelid ma1-
 orbicularis oculi
gin. This area is referred to the 'gray line' and is an impo1
Fig. 5.4 Muscles that control the size of the palpebral fissure in the cat
include: orbicularis oculi (close), corrugator supercili lateralis (open),
through the palpebral conjunctiva, and extend for 3-5 mm
frontoauricularis (open), and corrugator supercili medialis (open). Muller's
into the lid substance. The tarsal glands seem able to
muscles (open) are not shown.
undergo metaplasia and form additional cilia, called dis-
tichia. At the medial canthus at the junction of the upper
about 32-34 meibomian glands in the upper lid and 26-28
 and lower lids, and at the base of the nictitating membrane,
in the ventral lid. The upper fornix measures about 36 mm
is the lacrimal caruncle. Small fine hairs emerge from its
from the upper lid margin, and the lower fornix is 22 mm
surface, which can act as a wick for tears to moisten the
from the lower lid margin.
medial canthal skin. The lacrimal caruncle also contains
 The lateral palpebral or canthal ligament is poorly devel-
small sebaceous glands.
oped in dogs and cats, and usually consists of an irregular
thickened lateral septum orbitale. In the large breeds of dogs
Palpebral conjunctiva
the lack of or a poorly developed lateral canthal ligament
contributes directly to lateral canthal lid diseases in these
Like the skin and muscle layers of the eyelid, the fibious
breeds. The major component of the lateral canthal support
tarsus and palpebral conjunctiva are in close contact and dif-
system has been replaced by the retractor anguli oculi later-
 n d    n 
alis (dog) o1 corrugator supercilii lateralis (cat) muscle
at the eyelid margin, and continues to the conjunctival fo1-
(Fig. 5.4). This results in a somewhat mobile but unstable
nix to join the bulbar conjunctiva. The palpebral conjuncti
lateral canthus in dogs, and contributes to the frequent
val surface at the eyelid margin consists of non-keratinized
involvement of the lateral canthus and lateral lower and
stratified epithelium, but approximately one-third the dis-
upper eyelids with entropion and ectropion. The lateral
tance from the lid margin to the conjunctival fornix it
one-half of the lower eyelid in the dog also has the pars
 changes into pseudostratified epithelium. Once the pseu-
palpebralis muscle, a subdivision of the sphincter colli
dostratified epithelial layer is established, goblet cells that
 profundus muscle, which can depress the lateral lower lid.
of goblet cells occur in the conjunctival foinices. Like the
Eyelid tarsal layer and glands
cornea, the palpebral conjunctiva is also coated with preocu-
la1 film to facilitate eyelid movement over the cornea, and
The eyelid skin and tightly adherent muscle layers are easily
to minimize trauma between the bulbar and conjunctival
separated surgically from the deeper two layers, the fibrous
epithelial surfaces.
tarsus containing the tarsal or meibomian glands and the
inner palpebral conjunctiva. The fibrous tarsus provides
Anatomy of the equine eyelid
some infrastructure fo1 the eyelids, but not to the extent that
the tarsal hyaline plate does in humans. The fibrous tarsus
Muscles that open the equine eyelids include the levato1
has fascial attachments to the septum orbitale, resulting in
palpebrae superioris, Millel's, levator anguli oculi medialis,
 a strong connection to the periosteum of the orbital rim,
frontalis, and malaris. The levato1 palpebrae superioris
and a significant barrier for trauma, surgery, and external
muscle, along with the levator anguli oculi medialis muscle,
infectious agents to enter the orbit. The fibrous tarsal layer
 os e s  s  idn an si
is also in intimate contact with the medial palpebral or
that originates from the posterior surface of the levator mus-
canthal ligament, the base of the nictitating membrane,
de in the upper eyelid and from the ventral rectus muscle
and the lateral canthus. The medial palpebral ligament is
fo1 the lower eyelid. It is innervated by sympathetic fibers
more distinct than the lateral ligament in the dog. and con-
that travel with the ophthalmic branch of the fifth cranial
sists of a fibrous band originating from the periosteum of
nerve. Miller's muscle inserts on the tarsus and, along with
the frontal bone that inserts into the upper and lower tarsal
other muscles, keeps the palpebral fissure open. It is the
layers. The medial palpebral ligament also serves as the
muscle, when innervation is interrupted in Horner's syn-
origin and insertion for the circular orbicularis oculi muscle.
drome, that results in ptosis of the upper eyelid. The fronta-
which undoubtedly assists in the medial movement of tears
lis muscle inserts laterally on the upper eyelid. The malaris
on the coinea and within the conjunctival sacs. In the
muscle inserts on the ventral orbicularis oculi muscle and
92
 Preoperative examination pro cedures
functions to open the lower eyelid. The upper eyelid is the
temporal artery. Additional blood supply to the lateral can-
more mobile and larger section of the eyelids. It provides
thus and upper eyelid is derived from the lacrimal and
the majority of the blinking function.
dorsal muscular branch arteries, and the lower eyelid by
Sensory innervation of the eyelids is via the ophthalmic
the zygomatic artery, all branches from the external ethmoi
and maxillary branches of the trigeminal (fifth cranial)
-s ae saa an a o sase iea a e 
nerve. The ophthalmic portion branches into the frontal,
 o       s  
lacrimal, and nasociliary nerves. The frontal branch passes
infraorbital artery, which anastomose with the inferio1 pal-
anteriorly from the orbit through the supraorbital foramen.
pebral and transverse facial arteries, and branches of the
It then becomes the supraorbital nerve, dividing over the
external ophthalmic artery. Limited blood supply to the eye-
lids is also provided from small vessels within the septum
lacrimal nerve innervates the lacrimal gland and the upper
orbitale and conjunctival fornices that originate from the
eyelid at the lateral canthus. The nasociliary branch gives
deeper orbital blood vessels.
nise to the infratrochlear nerve, which provides sensory
 The lymphatic drainage from the eyelids converges at
innervation to the medial canthus, caruncle, nictitating
the medial and lateral canthal areas. Lymphatic drainage
membrane, upper and lower conjunctiva, and nasolacrimal
appears to mainly involve the parotid lymph node. How-
puncta and ducts. The remainder of the lower eyelid is
ever, some of the same areas may drain to the mandibula1
innervated by the zygomatic nerve, which is a branch of
lymph nodes. As a result, both lymph nodes need to be
the maxillary nerve.
accessed clinically if regional metastases from eyelid neo-
plasms are suspected, particularly in horses and cattle.
Eyelid sensation
Most of the sensation of the animal eyelids is provided by
Eyelid function
several branches of the trigeminal nerve. Sensation of the
The functions of the eyelids are numerous and include:
lateral two-thirds of the upper eyelids is provided by the
1) protection of the eye: 2) entrapment of material before
trigeminal nerve through its frontal nerve and its branch,
it contacts the conjunctiva and cornea; 3) production of glan-
the supraorbital nerve, and the medial canthus by the infra-
dular secretions by the taisal o1 meibomian glands, a vital
trochlear nerve. The medial canthus and medial aspects of
component of the preocular film; 4) distribution of the preo-
the upper eyelids are also served by the nasociliary nerve.
cular film and tears across the coineal and conjunctival su1-
the largest branch of the ophthalmic nerve. The sensation
faces: 5) medial movements of tears toward the lacrimal
fo1 the entire lower eyelid is provided by the maxillary divi-
sion of the trigeminal nerve through its zygomaticotemporal
6) provision of the blink reflex to tactile stimuli applied to
branch.
the coinea, conjunctiva o1 nictitating membranes, o1 follow.
ing a strong light and/or loud noise. When direct stimuli are
Eyelid innervation
applied to the eyelids, conjunctival and corneal surfaces, the
eyelids blink. This reflex is subcortical, involving the ophthal-
The palpebral branch of the facial o1 seventh cranial nerve
mic division of the trigeminal nerve (afferent portion) and
innervates the majority of the muscles that control palpebral
palpebral division of the facial nerve (efferent portion).
fissure size, except for the levator palpebrae superioris
A strong light source directed at the eye will not only initiate
muscle that, along with most of the extraocular muscles,
is innervated by the oculomotor or third cranial nerve.
also a blink response (also a subcortical function).
The pars palpebralis muscle of the lateral lower eyelid of
the dog is innervated by the dorsal buccal branch of the
facial nerve.
Preoperative examination procedures
In horses, the auriculopalpebral nerve and its branches
(branch of the facial nerve), as well as the supraorbital nerve
In the assessment of the eyelids preoperatively, their stnuc-
(branch of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve,
ture, function (blink reflex), and relationship to the face,
sometimes 1eferred to as the frontal nerve), are common
each othel, and to both eyes are carefully evaluated. Adequate
sites for local nerve blocks in the horse to provide akinesia
illumination and some magnification are essential. The head
loupe or magnifier and Finoff transilluminator, or port-
nerve) to the upper lid.
able slit-lamp biomicroscope are the best instruments that
[n most animal species the rostral aspect of the palpebral
combine these two characteristics. The eyelids, eye, and
nerve can be blocked a few centimeters caudal of the lateral
orbit relationships can also be influenced by the presence
 canthus. In this forward position, movement of the upper 
of pain, inflammation, enophthalmia o1 exophthalmia,
lid may persist.
body condition, age, dehydration, and muscle condition.
Not infrequently, the eyelids cannot be restored surgically
 Eyelid blood supply and lymphatics
to completely normal appearance and function because of
these other variables, especially the position of the globe.
The blood supply to the eyelids is derived from several
These complex 1elationships of the eyelids, eye, and orbit
sources, but primarily originates from the medial and lateral
in the dog also impede genetic studies of the eyelid diseases.
canthal areas for both eyelids. The lateral aspects of both
The animal eyelids normally rest on the cornea and bulba1
eyelids in the dog are supplied by the lateral dorsal and
conjunctiva. If the globe is recessed into the orbit, eyelid
lateral ventral palpebral arteries from the superficial
Iamol aul jo Aieisu pue aiqissod aq iou ke peiuo
93
Surgery of the eyelids
eyelid results. The usual result is entropion or an inversion
tone will occur, and the extent of the eyelid problem to
 of the eyelid margin and substance. This phenomenon
be corrected surgically can be deteimined.
occurs commonly in certain bieeds of dogs, foals, and in
 [n the horse, the auriculopalpebral nerve can be blocked
aging animals (probably associated with loss of orbital fat).
at at least two sites (see Fig. 3.5, p. 44). The auriculopalpeb-
   e si s 
ral nerve can be blocked by infiltrating local anesthetic in a
most painful eyelid conditions. With eyelid swelling, the
fan-like manner subfascially in the depression just caudal to
eyelid margin usually 1olls inward. When the outer eyelid
the posterio1 ramus of the mandible at the ventral edge of
margin, normal cilia (eyelashes), and trichiasis (involving
the temporal portion of the zygomatic arch. The hypoder-
the normal eyelid hair) touch the bulbar conjunctiva, coinea
mic needle is directed dorsally just caudal to the highest
OI a combination of both surfaces, the animal reacts by devel-
point of the arch. Before injecting local anesthetic, aspira-
oping secondary blepharospasm. The resultant trigeminal-
tion is perfoimed to prevent injection into the rostral auric-
facial nerve reflex usually worsens the eyelid defect even
ular artery or vein. This procedure may also result in
further, and produces additional irritation and pain. This
akinesia of the ear muscles as well as gravitate ventrally
protective eyelid reflex then produces an ever-increasing cycle
and affect other branches of the facial nerve. Within a few
of pain and blepharospasm. Hence, in many painful eyelid
minutes, total loss of eyelid muscle tone will occur, but lid
diseases, the initial structural disease is aggravated by a nor-
sensation is still present.
mally protective eyelid closure reflex. Animals often 1espond
The second palpebral nerve block in the horse blocks
 aie  r  a d seo  o
multiple branches of the palpebral nerve closer to the eye.
tional localized swelling and even loss of skin integrity.
Local anesthetic is injected subcutaneously at the highest
Therefore, in the examination of eyelid diseases that are
point of the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch.
potential candidates for surgical correction, surgery should
The supraorbital nerve of the horse is often blocked at the
be directed at only the underlying structural eyelid disorder.
supraorbital foramen to provide akinesia to the forward
To estimate the extent of secondary blepharospasm in a
branches of the palpebral nerve, as well as local anesthesia
patient, a few drops of topical anesthetic are instilled onto
by blocking the supraorbital nerve, a branch of the trigemi-
the coinea and conjunctiva after the initial entropion has
nal nerve. This procedure is often used prio1 to ophthalmic
been estimated. After 3-5 min, the secondary blepha-
examinations, insertion of dorsal subpalpebral medication
Iospasm will usually be relieved, and the basic structural
systems, and excision of upper eyelid masses.
eyelid abnoimality can be ascertained. Surgical collection
 a p a  a aid a  
should be directed at only this anatomic eyelid abnor-
3-5 mL of local anesthetic about 4-6 cm caudal of the
mality. The defect is usually undercorrected slightly (about
lateral canthus.
0.5-1 mm) to accommodate postoperative fibrosis.
Infrequently, the eyelid defect can become so painful
Surgical considerations of the eyelids
and the eyelid and associated tissues so inflamed that mul-
tiple instillations of topical anesthetic will not totally
suppress secondary blepharospasm. In these patients, loca-
The uppel and lower eyelids share most functions, but also
lized regional eyelid block of the palpebral nerve can be
have some unique characteristics. The upper eyelid covers
administered.
the majority of the coinea, and blinks at a normal rate of
In the dog. a few milliliters of local anesthetic are injected
about 15 times per minute. Only part of these blink reflexes
subcutaneously along the dorsal aspects of the middle por-
cover the entire cornea. The upper eyelid has the levator
tion of the zygomatic arch to block the palpebral branch
palpebrae superioris muscle that originates from the depths
of the facial nerve and the primary innervation to the
of the orbit above the dorsal rectus muscle. The upper eyelid
orbicularis oculi muscle that closes the palpebral fissure
is primarily responsible fo1 the cosmetic appearance, while
(Fig. 5.5). Within a few minutes, total loss of eyelid muscle
the lower eyelid margin serves to collect and prevent the
Fig. 5.5 To perform the palpebral nerve block and produce lid
akinesia in most animal species, 3-5 mL of local anesthetic are 
uoiod aippiwu auz jo soadse jesiop aur uo Aisnoaueynogns panalu!
of the zygomatic arch or just caudal of the lateral canthus.
94
Tarsorrhaphy in small animals
preocular film and tears from overflowing onto the lowel
involving the eyelid skin and superficial aspects of the
canthi and eyelid surfaces. Surgical and traumatic intel-
orbicularis oculi muscle are usually non-absorbable and
luption of the palpebral nerve innervation to the eyelids
the simple interupted pattern. Many veterinary ophthal-
Iesults in exposure keratitis if upper, rather than lower,
mologists prefer 4-0 to 6-0 silk; if corneal contact with the
eyelid function is impaired.
silk suture occurs, no irritation or damage results. Although
The upper eyelids are larger and longer than the lower
tissue reactivity with silk can be a pioblem, and braided silk
lids, and are the principal source for tissues for reconstric-
is a potential wick for bacterial invasion, eyelid suture
tive surgical procedures of the eyelids. The higher number
Iemoval at 7-10 days postoperatively effectively avoids
of tarsal or meibomian glands occurs in the upper eyelid.
these potential problems. The other frequently used non-
Only the canine upper eyelid contains cilia (eyelashes).
absorbable suture is 4-0 to 6-0 nylon. Choice of atraumatic
Although the autogenous transplantation of cilia has not
swaged-on cutting needles is quite variable; however, the
been reported in domestic animals, the surgical technique
one-fourth to three-eighths curved needles are most useful.
is not difficult. Hence, surgery of the upper eyelids must
consider movements, protection of the eye, and appearance,
hemostats or point cautery. Vessel ligation with absorb-
whereas surgery of the lower eyelids must primarily address
able sutures is infrequent as these areas may develop focal
the collection, retention, and medial movement of tears.
postoperative fibrosis that may influence the surgical result.
After extensive blepharoplasty. the eyelids (especially the
Point cautery is usually preferred, but used judiciously.
Sterile cotton-tipped applicators and cotton surgical sponges
because of lid swelling and possible nerve impaiment.
can effectively maintain most eyelid surgical fields clea1 of
To protect the coinea and prevent ulceration, a temporary
hemorrhage. Moistening with 1:10 000 o1 other dilutions
complete tarsorrhaphy is necessary until a normal blink
of adrenaline (epinephrine) may be helpful. Hemostasis is
response returns.
also provided when the eyelids are grasped and held with
The conjunctival cul-de-sac or fornix is considerably larger
chalazion and entropion forceps.
fo1 the dorsal eyelid, probably to accommodate ventral
Iotation of the globe. The lower conjunctival foinix is more
Surgical preparations of the eyelids
shallow but is the primary receptacle for the tears and,
assisted by the inteimittent movements of the orbicularis
oculi muscles, gradually propels the tears medially toward
Surgical preparation of the eyelids is usually performed
the lacrimal puncta.
  nd a s n n 
As indicated in an earlier section, the surgical anatomy of
therapy with topical antibiotics or antibiotics/corticosteroids
the eyelids is usually divided into two layers: the skin and
fo1 treatment of the eyelid disordel, and the same therapy is
muscle layer, and the deeper tarsus and palpebral conjunc-
continued immediately after surgery. The high vascularity of
tiva. The thin elastic eyelid skin has limited subcutaneous
 r o  r s s a
tissue and attaches directly to the orbicularis oculi muscle.
 a r o rdod s are s
Surgical separation of the eyelid skin from the deeper mus-
inflammation and swelling.
cle layer is tedious and, in small species, often very difficult.
Within the eyelid margins are the numerous orifices of the
coineal and conjunctival surfaces to collect debris and hair
tarsal o1 meibomian glands. This area is referred to as the
during the surgical preparation. The ointment is carefully
'gray line', an area to surgically split or divide the eyelids
Iemoved by sterile cotton-tipped applicators immediately
longitudinally, as well as fo1 the placement of eyelid sutures
before surgery. The eyelid hair is carefully removed by
that will not contact and directly damage the cornea.
small hair clippers or shaved. The eyelid skin is thin and.
if traumatized during hair removal, swelling may result.
The surgical preparation of choice is 0.5% povidone-
Surgical instrumentation
iodine solution as contact with the cornea is not irritating.
At least three scrubs are recommended to clean and reduce
The instrumentation for eyelid surgery usually consists of a
the local microbial population. After these scrubs, the area
mixture of general soft tissue instruments, as well as selected
is liberally rinsed with 0.9% sterile saline. Alcohol and other
ophthalmic  instriments. T
 The 1ecommended ophthalmic
traditional surgical preoperative measures are not fecom-
instriments include small straight and curved strabismus o1
mended as contact with the coinea and conjunctiva can be
tenotomy scissors to cut tissues and sutures, both teeth
very irritating and damaging to their epithelia. Draping is
(1 × 2) and serrated thumb forceps (such as Bishop-Harmon
performed with four small cotton towels positioned around
forceps), small scalpel blades (Nos 6400 and 6500 microsurgi-
the palpebral fissure and covered with a surgical drape.
cal), small wire eyelid speculum, and a standard ophthalmic
Small towel clamps o1 bulldog clamps may be used to
needle holder (often with lock). Special thumb forceps, such
secure the drapes, but should be used sparingly.
as chalazion and entropion forceps, are useful to clamp and
stabilize the eyelids during surgery (see Table 1.3, p. 12).
Tarsorrhaphy in small animals
 ss a e o pe aea si uoas a
cretion. Sutures for the tarsus and palpebral conjunctiva are
usually absorbable (polyglycolic o1 polyglactic acid, and
aa pasode aie spaaa aun ainaid audeuosiei au ul
polydioxanone), and the simple continuous pattein is usu-
temporarily or permanently, and the lid apposition may
ally used. The knots should be buried beneath the palpebral
include part o1 all of the upper and lower eyelids. In the
conjunctiva to avoid direct contact with the coinea. Sutures
permanent tarsorrhaphy procedure part of the eyelid
95
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Iae pue pasoxa aie spaaa iamoi pue iaddn au jo sur
apposition by sutures, the eyelids should remain sealed.
Complete permanent tarsorrhaphies are part of the enucle-
ation and exenteration procedures after removal of the
eye and the orbital contents. Partial permanent tarsorrha-
phies are indicated to treat long-term ocula1 disorders, such
as neuroparalytic keratitis, neurotropic keratitis, lagophthal-
mia, and chronic exposure keratitis.
In the temporary tarsorrhaphy technique the eyelid mal-
(A)
B
gins are apposed by sutures for several days to a few weeks
to cover the healing coinea and/or conjunctiva. In the
Fig. 5.6 For a lateral permanent tarsorrhaphy. (a) The apposing upper and 
complete temporary tarsorrhaphy method the entire palpe-
lower eyelid margins are trimmed by Metzenbaum or Mayo scissors at a
depth of 45 mm. (b) The lids are apposed by two layers of sutures: the
bral fissure is closed. In the partial technique, only part
 trsoconjunctival layer with 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable sutures
(medial, central, o1 lateral) of the palpebral fissure is closed,
 placed submucosally, and the orbicularis oculi muscle and skin layer with 4-0
thereby permitting vision by the patient, daily inspection
to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
by the veterinarian, and topical medication of the eye. The
complete temporary tarsorrhaphy is indicated clinically. in
part, fo1 the treatment of traumatic proptosis, after most
entire eyelid margins are excised fo1 360°, with special care
orbitotomies, after many extensive eyelid procedures, after
to adequately excise the lid margins at the two canthi. Fo1
nictitating membrane flaps, after extensive conjunctival su1-
partial permanent tarsorrhaphy any section of the eyelid
gery, to treat premature opening of the eyelids, to help
may be used, but most often the lateral and medial canthal
maintain collagen shields and contact lenses in place, and
areas are involved. At a depth of 4-5 mm, the bases of the
fo1 the treatment of reculrent coineal erosions and other
meibomian glands are excised. The eyelids are usually
selected superficial coineal disorders. Complete temporary
(qo's b) saop isou ui sainns jo siakel omi Aq pasodde
  rn  p oe re sres
however, in miniature breeds, a single suture layer may suf-
tion is impaired and the development of exposure keratitis
fice. The deeper tarsopalpebral layer is apposed with either
is anticipated. The partial temporary tarsorrhaphy is used
4-0 to 6-0 simple internupted o1 a simple continuous
frequently after conjunctival and corneal surgery to reduce
absorbable suture placed submucosally to avoid coineal
eyelid trauma to the surgical site, and to provide some
contact. The eyelid skin-orbicularis oculi layer is usually
contact and pressure to fresh grafts. Suture ends in tempo-
d o pi ads oi o ot um psoe
rary tarsorrhaphies may be left long to facilitate occasional
 mattress non-absorbable sutures.
adjustment of the suture pressure, as well as occasional
loosening to open the tarsorrhaphy and inspect the eye.
Temporary tarsorrhaphy
The support of a weakened cornea by complete temporary
Dl ieadde ou saop 1l inq paaiq Aq Aiea Ae Aqdeqosiei
In the complete and partial temporary tarsorrhaphy pro-
Sunu a aq papid iei se joddns yn se aa
cedures, 4-0 to 6-0 interrupted mattress non-absorbable
membrane flap or a complete conjunctival graft. Howevel,
sutures are carefully placed in the eyelid margin through o1
the complete temporary tarsorrhaphy procedure can supple
just anterior to the 'gray line' to appose the upper and lower
ment these methods to provide additional corneal support.
lids (Fig. 5.7a). Sutures placed near or within the 'gray line
Complete temporary tarsorrhaphy constitutes a barrier to
can2
adequately hold the eyelids together without tearing of
  a    n  
the lid margins. Sutures placed within the ‘gray line' do
       a 
not penetrate the full thickness of the lid, thereby avoiding
fornix at the conclusion of surgery to ensure delivery of
direct contact and damage to the cornea. The number of
ophthalmic solutions. The apposed eyelids may also retain
eyelid sutures varies (usually 2-4) depending on whether a
the topical solutions in contact with the cornea for longer
periods of time, thereby increasing their effectiveness.
The permanent apposition of the upper and lower eyelid
margins at the medial and lateral canthi is discussed in a
X
later section under surgical procedures to reduce the size of
the palpebral fissure. Chronic exposure of the cornea, espe-
cially in brachycephalic breeds, may be a major contributing
factor in the pathogenesis of ecurrent central corneal ulcel-
ation, and surgical reduction of the size of the palpebral
fissure may significantly reduce the possibility of recurrence.
A
?
 Permanent tarsorrhaphy
Fig. 5.7 For the complete temporary tarsonhaphy. (a) Three to six 4-0 to 
In the permanent tarsorrhaphy procedure the upper and
6-0 interrupted mattress non-absorbable sutures are pre-placed in the lids.
lower eyelid margins are trimmed by curved Metzenbaum
Stents are used to distribute the tension on the sutures and prevent lid
scissors 3-5 mm from the lid margins (Fig. 5.6a). This area
necrosis. (b) The sutures are placed through the 'gray line' (or the orifices of
the tarsal glands) and outer one-half thickness of the eyelids to avoid 
is usually where the eyelid pigmentation stops and the eye-
touching the cornea and still maintain excellent holding capacity. The
lid hair appears. For complete permanent tarsorrhaphy the
sutures are left long to permit occasional adjustments postoperatively.
96
Aftercare for eyelid surgery in the horse
partial or complete temporary apposition of the eyelids is
4-0 to 5-0 nylon o1 proline. Sutures are placed partial thick-
perfoimed. Because of the tension on the eyelid sutures
 ness through the eyelid margin at the tarsal gland openings.
d a   a s a  
Alteinatively, sutures may be placed partial thickness in the
fissure, stents (consisting of rubber bands, old intravenous
eyelid in a pattern parallel to the eyelid margin and tied across
tubing, or other material) are used to distribute suture ten-
the eyelid fissure. The use of stents of sterile intravenous tub-
sion, and decrease local lid swelling and the likelihood of
ing, rubber tubing, sterile nubber bands, or buttons helps to
pressure necrosis (Fig. 5.7b). The temporary tarsorrhaphy
prevent the sutures from cutting into the eyelid tissue.
(t pe s' s as) s i r aa  s
Permanent tarsorrhaphy in the horse
Postoperative care and complications
When extended closure fo1 weeks o1 months is anticipated.
after tarsorrhaphy
The most frequent postoperative complications after perma-
nent tarsorrhaphy are related to excessive tension on the lid
that, prior to placing the sutures, the superficial eyelid
sutures short term, and wound failure long term. As indi-
margin is excised or debrided to allow adhesion as the tissue
cated in the eyelid anatomy section, several muscles func-
heals (see Fig. 5.6). Sutures are removed in 10-12 days.
tion to open the palpebral fissure. In the long-term partial
leaving the eyelid margins adhered. The tarsorrhaphy is left
permanent tarsorrhaphy procedure, this chronic tension
in place until the eyelids heal or neurologic function retuins.
lesults in gradual weakening and atrophy of the surgical
When the tarsorrhaphy is no longer needed, the adhered
apposition site. Dehiscence within the first few weeks post-
areas of the eyelid margin are carefully incised with tenot-
omy scissors to restore the palpebral fissure.
and apposition with additional sutures.
 The most frequent complications immediately after tem-
Aftercare for eyelid surgery in the horse
porary tarsorrhaphy are variable swelling of the eyelids and
suture contact with the cornea. Patients with temporary
tarsorrhaphies should be examined daily or every othel
The general protocol fo1 aftercare for eyelid surgery is similar
day, as eyelid swelling related to sutures and the preopera-
to those for skin and reconstructive procedures elsewhere
tive ophthalmic condition may necessitate occasional suture
on the body. Often after tarsorrhaphies, the primary condi-
adjustments. If the sutures become too tight, local eyelid
tion, such as corneal ulceration o1 facial nerve paralysis, still
necrosis and irritation result. If the sutures become to0
Iequires primary therapy. Preoperative and perioperative
loose, suture contact and damage to the cornea may occur.
topical and systemic antibiotics are indicated. The place-
Leaving the sutures a little long after performing the tem-
       o 
porary tarsoirhaphy procedure peimits mino1 adjustments
application of solutions to the eye.
and avoids these potential problems. Routine use of the
Postoperative swelling will be 1educed by the adminis-
E-collar postoperatively in small animals and facial masks
tration of systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
    r i s i
(flunixin meglumine 1 mg/kg [V: Banamine?, Schering-
to the surgical site.
Plough, Kenilworth, Nl) immediately before surgery. Post-
operative edema will be lessened by the application of ice
packs fo1 the first 24 h after surgery. If swelling is present
Tarsorrhaphy in the horse
24 h after surgery, warm compresses may further reduce
the swelling and discomfort at the surgical site. Dimethyl
A tarsoirhaphy is the apposition of the upper and lower
sulfoxide has been applied to the periorbital skin to reduce
eyelid to each other. The procedure can be temporary or peI-
postsurgical swelling and discomfort. Extreme caution must
manent, depending on the expected length of time the tar-
be exercised to avoid inadvertent contact of this product
sorrhaphy is needed. A tarsorrhaphy is used for protection
with the cornea and conjunctiva.
of the cornea in patients with the inability to blink nor-
If rubbing or self-mutilation is a concern, the surgical site 01
  n sid    s  
eye must be protected by a protective hood with a plastic o1
d  s  e  si 
solid eyecup (EyeSavel , Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland,
support to the globe, and after eyelid surgery to allow the
CO.). Cross tying or neck cradles have also been used success-
noimal eyelid to act as a splint fo1 the operated eyelid to
fully. In an effort to decrease dust and debris from complicat-
Ieduce distortion, cicatrix, and suture line dehiscence.
ing the suture lines in stabled horses, hay is fed on the ground
and hay and bedding may be misted with water to minimize
Temporary tarsorrhaphy in the horse
dust. If granulating wounds are present, removal of the exul
date once or twice daily, with application of petroleum jelly
A temporary tarsoirhaphy is used after coineal surgery O1
01 a povidone-iodine gel ventral to the wound is helpful
eyelid surgery, and is performed affer surgery while the
and fly control is essential in warmer climates. Fly control
horse is maintained under general anesthesia. HoweveI,
around the horse's face is achieved by wiping fly repellent
it can easily be performed in the standing horse with seda-
around the surgical site, by fitting the horse with a fly
tion, local nerve blocks, and topical ophthalmic anesthetic.
mask, or by using fly-repellent stips attached to the halter.
Preparation of the periocular area for aseptic surgery should
Skin sutures are usually removed 8-12 days after surgery. [n
be performed. Three to four horizontal mattress sutures are
situations when tension on the suture line cannot be avoided,
used (see Fig. 5.7). Most commonly the suture material is
sutures are left in place for 18-24 days.
97
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Lateral canthotomy
Surgical procedures for eyelid agenesis
The lateral canthotomy procedure is used to temporarily
Eyelid agenesis occurs not infrequently in cats, and no
increase the size of the palpebral fissure and facilitates surgi-
breed predisposition has been demonstrated. The condition
cal exposure of the globe. In many prominent-eyed breeds
is rare in dogs and other animal species. In lambs, congeni-
of dogs and for most cats, a lateral canthotomy for most
tal eye defects generally appear as 'notches'. In cats, the
ophthalmic surgical procedures is not necessary. However,
upper eyelid is most frequently involved. The condition
in many mesocephalic and nearly all dolichocephalic breeds
may be uni- o1 bilateral. The lateral aspects of the upper eye-
of dogs, lateral canthotomy is indicated for most corneal
lid are usually affected. In many cats with eyelid agenesis
and intraocular surgeries.
additional ocular anomalies, such as dermoids, iris defects,
After insertion of an eyelid speculum, the palpebral fissure
cataracts, and optic nerve colobomas, may be present. The
is maximized and the surgical exposure ascertained. If addi-
defect may be inherited, and also associated with factors
tional exposure is necessary, a lateral canthotomy is pel-
that influence eyelid and eye development such as infectious
   n n   
feline enteritis or panleukopenia virus.
(Fig. 5.8a). The lateral canthal eyelid is incised fo1 5-15 mm,
Clinical signs associated with eyelid agenesis include ini-
but the incision should not extend beyond the lateral orbital
 tation, epiphora, and the absence of the lateral upper eyelid
ligament. Hemorrhage is usually negligible. Point cautery
margin and variable amounts of the lid (Fig. 5.9). Often in
can control any minor bleeding. A straight mosquito forceps
the area of eyelid agenesis, the remaining lid is inverted,
n  n n ss a  s n  aq 
Iesulting in focal keratitis. Surgical correction of feline eyelid
to control hemorrhage but is not usually necessary.
 agenesis is recommended if chronic conjunctival iritation
At the conclusion of surgery, the lateral canthotomy is
and coineal involvement develop.
usually apposed by one o1 two layers of sutures. The palpe-
Several surgical techniques may be used to treat eyelid agen-
bral conjunctiva, submucosal fascia, and tarsus are apposed
esis successfully. The choice of surgical procedure is influenced
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
by the severity of the lid defect and the extent of reconstruction
(Fig. 5.8b). The external layer of closure, consisting of the
needed to repair the defect. For mild cases, the leading lid tissue
orbicularis oculi muscle and lid skin, is apposed with
that has become inverted can be corrected by the Hotz-Celsus
4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The
procedure used for entropion. The more severe defects require
fist suture is carefully placed at the eyelid margin. Occasion-
tissue transposition from distant sites. Several procedures may
ally this first suture is an interripted mattress or figure-
be performed, inchuding: 1) the skin, orbicularis oculi, and tar-
of-eight suture. The skin sutures are removed at 7-10 days
sal pedicle graf from the lower to upper lid; 2) the skin, orbicu-
postoperatively.
lanis oculi, and tarsal pedicle graft combined with conjunctiva
The most frequent postoperative complications after lat-
grafted from the anterior surface of the nictitating membrane;
eral canthotomy include dehiscence of the first one o1 two
3) the Cutler-Beard or bucket handle technique; and 4) the
sutures, usually within the first week, and the malalignment
sliding skin graft. All of these surgical techniques are successful
but more difficult, and some are two-step procedures. Both
medications and ophthalmic examinations should be per-
pedicle graft procedures will be described in this section. The
formed with care to prevent undue tension on the healing
bucket handle and sliding skin procedures will be presented
lateral canthus and sutures. Routine use of the E-collar in
 in a later section on reconstructive blepharoplasty.
small animals also assists maintenance of the lateral
As the most frequent foim of eyelid agenesis involves the
canthotomy. Animals can quickly traumatize this area and
margin and limited amounts of the lid per se, pedicle grafts
tear the sutures from the lateral canthus. In the event of
local dehiscence, the wound edges are refreshened and
apposed by additional sutures.
A
B
Fig. 5.8 Lateral canthotomy increases exposure of the globe. (a) After
placement of the wire eyelid speculum to ascertain exposure, the lateral 
spuadap ynbual aul 'ww sl-s ioy siossios orew paun Aq pasiou! s! snuaue
on the breed and required amount of exposure. (b) Two-layer closure 
includes: tarsoconjunctiva with 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable
suture and the orbicularis oculi-skin layer with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted
Fig. 5.9 Eyelid agenesis, affecting the lateral one-half of the upper lid, in a
non-absorbable sutures. The first suture is carefully placed at the lid margin.
cat. Secondary superficial keratitis is also evident.
98
Surgical procedures for eyelid agenesis
of skin, orbicularis oculi, and tarsus are quite successful. The
15 mm lateral of the lateral canthus and 2 mm parallel to
technique, described by Roberts and Bistnel, uses adjacent
the lower eyelid margin (Fig. 5.10b). The second parallel
palpebral conjunctiva to line the deep aspects of the skin-
incision should provide a pedicle that is about 0.5-1 mm
muscle graft. The procedure by Dziezyc and Millichamp
wider than the height of the upper lid defect. The length of
lines the inside of the skin, muscle, and tarsal pedicle graft
the pedicle varies depending on the length of the upper
with mucosa from the anterior suiface of the nictitat-
defect. By scalpel the skin incision is deepened to include
ing membrane. Both of these techniques may also be used
the orbicularis oculi muscle and tarsus (Fig. 5.10c,d). The
to treat eyelid neoplasms in cats, such as squamous cell
base of the pedicle graft should be wider than its tip to
carcinomas, that primarily affect the lid margin.
ensure adequate perfusion of the entire pedicle.
The pedicle is repositioned to the defect and apposed by
Roberts and Bistner procedure
two layers of sutures (Fig. 5.10e). The deep layer attaches
the recipient and donor tarsus by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple contin-
In this method a myocutaneous pedicle of skin, orbicularis
uous absorbable suture. The skin and orbicularis oculi layers
oculi muscle, and tarsus are transplanted from the lateral por-
-qiosqe-uou paidnuaui aldus o-g on 0-t Aq pasodde ane
tion of the lower eyelid to the dorsolateral lid defect. With the
able sutures. The posterior aspects of the pedicle graft must
transposition of the orbicularis oculi muscle, the blink reflex
-daid sunp paieedas eaounluoo ieiqadied aq paiaaon aq
is strengthened and often retuined to nea1 noimal.
aration of the graft bed. The new posterior conjunctival lin-
After general anesthesia and surgical preparation of both
ing should not produce any traction on the pedicle graft.
eyelids, the recipient bed of the upper eyelid defect is
The lower eyelid wound is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple
prepared by dividing the lid skin and tarsus from the palpe-
interrupted non-absorbable sutures. If traction on the graft
bral conjunctiva. Dissection of the upper border of the
is apparent at the conclusion of surgery, a complete tempo-
defect should continue toward the conjunctival foinix for
rary tarsorrhaphy is performed to provide counterpressure
10-15 mm to separate the palpebral conjunctiva sufficiently
for 14-21 days. An E-collar should be worn until the heal-
to line the posterior aspect of the pedicle graft. The eyelid
 ing is complete and all sutures have been removed.
is split into skin-orbicularis oculi muscle, and tarsus-
palpebral conjunctiva for a distance of 3 mm into normal
Dziezyc and Millichamp procedure
eyelid (Fig. 5.10a). A right-angle incision at the nasal end
of the defect is prepared by scissors to accommodate the
This method not only transplants a lower eyelid myo-
tip of the pedicle graft. The pedicle graft of skin, orbicularis
cutaneous pedicle graft to the focal area of lid agenesis, but
oculi muscle, and tarsus is prepared by scalpel starting
also requires a pedicle graft of palpebral conjunctiva from
A
B
D
Fig. 5.10 To treat eyelid agenesis. (a) A pedicle graft of skin, orbicularis oculi
muscle and tarsus is transplanted to the dorsolateral lid defect. The upper lid
defect is prepared by scissors to separate the skin-orbicularis oculi-tarsus
from the palpebral conjunctiva. The palpebral conjunctiva must be
adequately dissected to the fornix to ensure posterior cover for the graft
without any tension. (b) The pedicle is prepared by incision by scalpel about
2 mm below the lower eyelid margin. The length of the pedicle depends on
the length of the upper lid defet. (c) Intraoperative photograph showing the
myocutaneous graft, separated from its tarsoconjunctival layer, and ready to
attach to the edge of the remaining dorsolateral lid. (d) The pedicle is
separated by tenotomy scissors from the deeper palpebral conjunctiva
(e) The tarsal layers of the pedicle graft and defect are apposed with 4-0 to
6-0 simple continuous absorbable sutures. The muscle-skin layers of the
graft and defect are apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-
absorbable sutures. The adjacent palpebral conjunctiva is apposed to the
deep aspect of the pedicle graft by 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable
sutures.
99
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
B
C
Fig. 5.11 Another technique to treat upper eyelid agenesis in the cat. (a) A lower eyelid pedicle is prepared 5-7 mm below the lid margin by scalpel. The pedicle
consists of eyelid skin, orbicularis oculi muscle, and tarsus. The upperlid defect is prepared by tenotomy scissors to receive the graft. (b) A pedicle graft of mucosa
is prepared by scissors from the anterior surface of the nictitating membrane to line the posterior aspect of the myocutaneous pedicle lid graft. (c) Both grafts are
secured in their positions. For the mucosal graft, 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures are placed. For the external skin-muscle-tarsus graft, 4-0 to 
 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures are used. The conjunctival graft base can be transe cted 3-4 weeks postoperatively.
the anterior surface of the nictitating membrane. The initial
removal and graft establishment. Warm and cold com-
lower eyelid pedicle graft is prepared, as in the Roberts and
presses may be administered daily to reduce swelling and
Bistner method, but further (5-7 mm) from the lower eyelid
promote local circulation.
ai aiaai oi paiedaid s! paq ye au (e1I's g) ure
The most frequent short-term complication after both
lower lid graft. Both the pedicle's length and width should
of these procedures is postoperative swelling (Fig. 5.12).
be at least 1 mm greater than the defect. By scissors the graft
The most frequent long-term complication after these tech-
of skin, orbicularis oculi muscle, and tarsus are separated
niques is the development of a mild cicatricial entropion
from the underlying palpebral conjunctiva.
along the leading margin of the new pedicle graft. The tech-
The graft and the defect edges are apposed with 4-0 to 6-0
simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. A pedicle graft of
potential complication before its development. An adequate
palpebral conjunctiva is prepared by scissors from the anterio1
conjunctival lining on the posterior surface of the pedicle
surface of the nictitating membrane to line the posterior sur-
graft seems to be the main method to prevent this complica-
face of the skin, muscle, and tarsus graft already in position
tion. If trichiasis from the pedicle graft occurs, superficial
(Fig. 5.11b). The base of the graft is lateral, and it should be
keratitis at this site may develop. Surgical treatment consists
of a focal oval excision of the eyelid skin and orbicularis
rated from the anterior surface of the nictitans, the conjuncti-
oculi muscle in the affected area, and eversion of the surgical
val graft is 1otated 180° and apposed to the posterio1 surface
lid margin.
of the lid graft by 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
(Fig. 5.11c). The donor area on the antenior surface of the nic-
titans is left to heal by secondary intention.
Surgical procedures for distichiasis
Postoperative management and complications
Distichiasis, o1 the presence of one o1 more extra cilia o1
of myocutaneous pedicle grafts
eyelashes, is a common condition in dogs but rare in cats
and other animal species. The cilia emerge from neal o1
Topical and systemic antibiotics are administered after these
within the orifices of the meibomian o1 tarsal glands
Qu ui paauui aq Ae sop ui sissa (ei's b)
operative period, and maintained on the patient until suture
breeds, but may also result from metaplasia of the tarsal
Fig. 5.12 Eight week postoperative appearance of the Roberts-Bistner method for bilateral dorsolateral lid agenesis in a cat. (a) Appearance of face and 
myopedicle grafts. (b) Close-up appearance of the right eye.
100
Surgical procedures for distichiasis
electroepilation, cryoepilation, and various surgical proce-
dures. The Hotz-Celsus entropion procedures may be used
to evert the eyelid margin sufficiently to displace the disti-
chia from touching the conjunctiva o1 coinea, or both. With
the advent of the operating microscope, surgical techniques
to remove the distichia follicles and conserve as much as
possible of the deeper aspects of the eyelid margin have
evolved. Manual epilation of distichia can immediately
eliminate the clinical signs associated with these iritating
aberrant lashes, but regrowth occurs. Epilation may be used
to confim the clinical signs are secondary to certain disti-
chia, but is usually impractical long term and when multiple
distichia are involved.
[n electrolysis, a fine electrode is inserted into the distichia
follicle and 3-5 mA current is used to destroy the follicle
germinal cells. Several portable and battery-powered units
Fig. 5.13 Positions in the upper eyelid of the dog for normal eyelashes or
cilia (A), distichia (B), and ectopic cilia (C).
are available commercially, though culrent exceeding 5 mA
should not be used as excessive electrolysis cieates scar tissue
foimation at the eyelid margin (Fig. 5.15). To adequately
glands in older animals and from chronic inflammation.
perform electrolysis for distichia, general anesthesia is indi-
Breeds commonly affected with distichiasis include the
American Cocker Spaniel, English Cocker Spaniel, English
the distichia as well as assist the electrolysis. Electrolysis
Bulldog, Toy and Miniature Poodles, Boxer, St Bernard,
may be selected fo1 treatment of a few distichia but should
Golden Retriever, Long-haired Miniature Dachshund, Alsa-
be avoided when most of the eyelid margin is affected.
tian, Bedlington Terriel, Shetland Sheepdog, Yorkshire Ter-
Electrolysis is of limited success when multiple (compound)
niel, and the Pekingese. Over 90% of American CockeI
distichia exit from a single orifice. Once adequate current
Spaniels have distichia; however, treatment for distichia-
is applied, hydrogen gas bubbles occur, and the distichia
associated ophthalmic problems is necessary in only 10%
is easily detached from its base. Low milliamperage is
or less of affected dogs.
Iecommended (about 2-3 mA) for 15-30 s.
The clinical signs related to distichia are those of irritation,
Surgical procedures to excise the distichia follicles have
including increased lacrimation, epiphora, blepharospasm,
been refined from the initial report of eyelid splitting and
eyelid swelling, conjunctival hyperemia, and coineal disease
excision of the inner margin of the palpebral conjunctiva.
(vascularization, pigmentation, and/or ulceration). The dis-
to partial tarsal plate excision, and more recently conjuncti-
tichia are fine, the same colo1 as the adjacent hair coat,
val resection with minimal disturbance of the lid margin. In
 and best detected by adequate illumination and magnifica-
humans where distichiasis is infrequent, surgical procedures
tion, and with topical fluorescein stain (Fig. 5.14)
have been developed to excise the distichia and follicles.
Treatment for canine distichiasis consists of either tempo-
rary removal of the offending distichia by manual epilation,
O1 the permanent destriction of the distichia follicle by
小
DOLBYLEVEL
ECTRC
Fig. 5.14 Distichia coated with mucus emerging from the orifices of the 
glands of Meibom. Adequate illumination and magnification facilitate their
Fig. 5.15 A small battery-powered electroepilation unit may be used to
dete ction.
 treat limited numbers of distichia.
10
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
?
Fig. 5.16 For limited numbers of distichia. (a) Resection of the deeper aspects
A
of the lid margin with the tarsoconjunctiva and distichia with the Beaver No.
e Aq pazgens s! ujbuew pl aul pawuoyad s! apelg lenjbunsouoiw 0ozg 1o 00s9
chalazion clamp, and the resection of the distichia follicles is limited to only focal
Fig. 5.18 Conjunctival resection technique for the treatment of generalized 
parts of the entire eyelid length. (b) A block of tarsoconjunctiva with distichia is
canine distichiasis. (a) The affected area of the eyelid is grasped by the
excised with small tenotomy scissors at a depth of 4-5 mm. The surgical site(s)
dhalazion clamp. The tarsus and palpebral conjunctiva are incised 1 mm and 
should not exceed 5-7 mm long, and three sites per eyelid.
3-4 mm posterior to the eyelid margin. The block of tarsoconjunctiva and 
distichia follicles is carefully excised by small tenotomy scissors. Like the 
These methods usually divide o1 split the entire eyelid skin and
previous two methods, the surgery is limited to the offending distichia and 
 orbicularis oculi muscle from the tarsus and palpebral con-
 should not involve the entire eyelid margin. (b) The surgical defect is allowed 
junctiva from the distichia follicle excision site to the conjunc-
to heal by secondary intention.
tival fornix. The adjacent tarsus and palpebral conjunctiva
 are then slid to cover the surgical defect at the eyelid margin.
 Resection of the distichia follicles and adjacent palpebral
The incision should be 4-5 mm deep to ensure adeq-
conjunctiva is recommended for isolated distichia of the
uate removal of the distichia follicles. The surgical area is
upper and lower eyelid, but should not be used for distichia
affecting large portions of the lid margin. The affected eye-
In the conjunctival resection technique, the eyelid is stabi-
lid is grasped with a medium to large chalazion clamp to
lized by a chalazion o1 entropion clamp. The tarsus and
stabilize the lid as well as provide hemostasis. With the
palpebral conjunctiva are incised 1 mm below the eyelid
Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade, the distichia follicle
margin in the area of the distichia follicles (Fig. 5.18a). AfteI
is excised to a depth of 4-5 mm from the eyelid margin
a second parallel incision, 3-4 mm deep to the first incision,
(Fig. 5.16a). Once this block of tissue is isolated, small
the strip of palpebral conjunctiva, tarsus, and the distichia
tenotomy scissors are used to excise its base (Fig. 5.16b).
follicles is excised (Fig. 5.18b). The palpebral conjunctival
The wound is allowed to heal by secondary intention.
defect is allowed to heal by secondary intention. Although
In the partial tarsal plate excision method, the eyelid is
stabilized by a chalazion or entropion clamp. The distichia
this method is more tedious than the other methods, it
avoids the eyelid margin.
and follicles are excised by a V-shaped incision on the
More lecent i
investigations  have  demonstrated  the
outer and deeper aspects of the extra eyelashes (Fig. 5.17).
improved benefits of non-invasive cryotherapy fo1 the treat-
ment of canine distichiasis with limited complications. The
technique avoids surgery, but necessitates a nitrous (NO)
cryounit. A double freeze-thaw cycle sufficient to pioduce
-25°C with NzO can destroy the distichia follicles without
the destruction of the adjacent eyelid margin. The eyelid is
grasped and held during cryotherapy by a chalazion o1
entropion clamp. The cryotherapy procedure should not
with each unit, a line pressure of 625 mmHg for the cryo-
probe provides fo1 a standard cryofreeze. The cryoprobe is
placed on the palpebral conjunctiva directly over the disti-
chia follicles, about 2 mm below the eyelid margin
(Fig. 5.19). A glaucoma cryoprobe may freeze about a
4 mm diamete1 of eyelid tissue. The first freeze of 45 s 1esults
in an iceball that advances to about 1 mm anterior to the
meibomian gland orifices. After a brief thaw, a second freeze
of 25 s is performed.
Fig. 5.17 To treat a limited number of distichia in the dog, the distichia may
Postoperative management and complications
be excised with only part of the tarsal plate to reduce the loss of the eyelid
margin tissue. The surgery is limited to those distichia causing eye disease
 after distichia surgery
and should not involve the entire eyelid margin. The V-shaped incisions are
performed 4-5 mm deep, and the block of eyelid with the distichia follicles
Topical treatment with antibiotics and corticosteroids post-
excised. During this procedure the eyelid should be stabilized by a chalazion
 or some other type of clamp.
ling of the eyelid margin that may contribute to occasional
102
Non-surgical treatment of entropion
Fig. 5.19 (a) For effective cryotherapy of canine
distichiasis, a double freeze-thaw cycle is used to
destroy the distichia follicles. (b) Immediate
appearance after the cryoprobe has been withdrawn
to inspect the tissue freeze. Extensive post-
cryotherapy eyelid swelling should be anticipated,
and corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory agents should be used perioperatively.
entropion. After all of the distichia techniques, distichia
regrowth (about 10-30%) from inadequate excision of the
distichia follicles, eyelid margin fibrosis, focal depigmenta-
tion of the postoperative eyelid margin (especially after
cryotherapy), and entropion are occasional complications.
may be used to evert the eyelid margin to a 1elatively normal
position.
Complications after cryotherapy for distichia include
immediate and sometimes excessive eyelid and conjunctival
swelling that lasts about 48 h, depigmentation of the eye-
lid and lid margin within 72 h that usually completely
Ie-pigments within 6 months, and occasional distichia
regrowth. Properly performed, eyelid margin scarring and
distortion are unlikely after cryotherapy with temperatures
that do not fall below -25°C.
Fig. 5.20 Ectopic cilia of the central palpebral conjunctiva. The ectopic cilia
with lid scarring, necrosis, and permanent pigment loss, but
follicle is excised 'en bloc' or destroyed by cryotherapy or electrocautery.
 (Photograph courtesy of the iate Paul A Dice. Seatte, WA.)
not incieased efficacy. Topical antibiotics/corticosteroids are
necessary perioperatively to decrease the not infrequent
sd e  se s e s a r
Preoperative flunixin meglumine (0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV) helps
SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR ENTROPION
Ieduce the immediate lid swelling and may need to be
IN SMALL ANIMALS
continued fo1 the next 48-72 h.
 Entropion or the inversion of the eyelid margin can be divided
into three categories: congenital/developmental, spastic, and
Surgical procedures for ectopic cilia
 cicatricial. Developmental entropion is a common condition
in purebred dogs and not infrequent in cats. Predisposition
occurs in the Chow Chow, Norwegian Elkhound, Chinese
Ectopic cilia primarily affect the upper eyelid of dogs, and
   s    e 
are associated with intense blepharospasm, ptosis,
epi-
American Cocker Spaniels, English Bulldog, Toy and Minia-
phora, and a dorsal paracentral or peripheral corneal ulcer
ture Poodles, Great Dane, Rottweiler, and the Bull Mastiff
(Fig. 5.20). The onset of clinical signs is usually acute. Any
(Fig. 5.21). Often each breed has specific affected areas of the
breed can be affected, and most animals are young. There
eyelids that are commonly involved. Adjacent areas, such as
is also a direct association of ectopic cilia and distichia in
the nasal folds and 1edundant facial folds of skin, can com-
the dog. Upon eversion of the upper eyelid, a single o1,
more often, multiple cilia emerge from the central palpebral
pound entropion in certain breeds. Spastic entropion is infre-
quent in dogs, but the pain associated with the trichiasis from
conjunctiva about 4-6 mm from the eyelid margin. The
developmental entropion often worsens the basic lid defect.
ectopic cilia appea1 to arise from the base of the tarsal o1
meibomian glands, o1 from the base of hai1 follicles from
Non-surgical treatment of entropion
the overlying eyelid skin. After eversion of the affected eye-
   d  no  e a 
the ectopic cilia is excised ‘en bloc' with a scalpel blade.
Several non-surgical methods to tieat entropion in small
skin biopsy punch, or destroyed by electrocautery O1
animals have been used. Subcutaneous injections of anti-
cryotherapy.
biotics, paraffin, and mineral oil have been used to provide
103
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Fig. 5.21 Bilateral upper and lower eyelid entropion in a young English
Bulldog. With the associated trichiasis, blepharospasm has developed.
temporary eyelid margin eversion, and relief from the trichi-
asis and blepharospasm, but generally have been 1eplaced
aul Addnd iad leus asauiu plo-aam-g ue ui uoidonua zz's dbid
by the different lid surgeries: the larger the volume of injec-
entropion affects about 300° of the eyelids and the lateral canthus, and
tion, the greater the extent of eversion of the eyelid margin.
resulted in bilateral corneal ulceration.
Electrocautery of the skin and superficial aspects of the
orbicularis oculi muscle may be used to stimulate the fo1-
mation of sca1 tissue and coirection of the entropion. The
predictability of postcautery fibrosis is low. As a result, sev.
eral surgical procedures have been developed that provide
Ieasonably consistent and beneficial 1esults. Because of eco-
nomics and the frequency of congenital entropion in sheep.
injections to reverse lower lid entropion are not infrequent.
Temporary eversion - 'tacking'
Entropion generally requires surgical colrection. However,
in certain breeds, the eyelid defect may be minoi, but
  ssa ns  aa s
Chinese Shar Pei puppy with entropion, secondary blepha-
Iospasm can markedly increase the extent of the original
eus asauu buno Aan ui uoidoua yo uoishaa Aeiodwal ez's dai
entropion (Fig. 5.22). The redundant facial folds can also
Pei puppies may avoid surgical correction later. At least two interrupted
contribute to the entropion when blepharospasm is pre-
vertical mattress sutures are placed in each lid near the eyelid margin and
sent. Early treatment of the Chinese Shar Pei puppy with
10-20 mm from the eyelid margins to temporarily correct the lid defects.
These sutures are maintained for 10-20 days.
entropion, often at the age of 2-4 weeks, with temporary
sutures to maintain the eyelid margin in a relatively noimal
position for 10-20 days, may effectively resolve the condi-
tion. Overcolrection with the tacking procedure generally
temporary tacking methods develop coineal disease and
provides better results than undercolrection. Usually two
require entiopion surgery.
tacking sutures are placed at 45° in the upper eyelid, and.
pe ui pasn uaaq osie aaeu sainpanoid suoei asau
if necessary, in the lower eyelid.
dogs to treat spastic entropion, which does not respond to
Sutures (Lembert type) or skin staples can be inserted to
medical and other surgical therapies. By preventing the
temporarily evert the eyelid margins. Two to three 3-0 to
secondary pain caused by the trichiasis touching the con-
 5-0 non-absorbable interrupted vertical mattress sutures are
junctival and corneal surfaces, the tacking procedure may
placed in the upper and infrequently the lower eyelids, about
successfully stop the persistent blepharospasm. These same
2-3 mm from the margin, and the second 10-20 mm from
techniques are useful in lambs.
the margin (Fig. 5.23) near the orbital rim. The bites' are
fairly large, about 4-5 mm long. to ensure that adequate
Quickert-Rathbun procedure
tension and tissue-holding occur. As the sutures are tight-
ened, the inversion of the eyelid margins is corrected. Often
Williams 1ecently modified the Quickert-Rathbun tech-
the sutures are left long to permit multiple adjustments.
nique for young and older dogs with lower lid entropion.
Most Chinese Shar Pei puppies respond to the tacking
In this procedure traction is placed from the lower conjunc-
method. Those puppies that are not improved by the
tival fornix by sutures extending from the fornix to the
104
Surgical management of entropior
eyelid margin, and the positioning of the maximum aspects
of the surgical wound to the area of the most extensive
entropion. Because animals lack the tarsal plate, the eyelids
lack rigidity and require contact with the globe. The pres-
ence of enophthalmia complicates the successful repair of
entropion because of the lack of lower lid contact with the
globe. The lack of a well-developed lateral canthal ligament
in many animal species may also account for the frequent
(A)
B
involvement of entropion in this area.
Entropion sufficient to produce other ophthalmic dis-
Fig. 5.24 In the Quikert-Rathbun procedure, the distal lower eyelid and
eases, including conjunctivitis, keratitis, and epiphora with
margin are rotated outward, using a suture based in the deep
dermatitis, should be corrected by surgery. The Hotz-Celsus
conjunctival fornix. (a) A double-ended absorbable suture is carefully
positioned in the deep conjunctival fornix. (b) These two sutures are inserted
procedure with its different modifications and several other
in the skin 1-2 mm from the lid margin and carefully tightened to evert
related techniques effectively treats the majority of the differ-
the lid margin.
ent types of entropion in small animals.
The Hotz-Celsus technique can be used to correct entro-
pion of the entire lower lid, the upper eyelid, and, with
external skin of the eyelid margin. A double-ended 4-0
modification, the lateral canthus. For central lower entro-
absorbable suture is positioned from the deep conjunctival
pion defects, the following procedure is illustrated. A section
fornix to exit on the lid skin 1-2 mm from the lid margin.
of lid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle is excised in this pro-
which immediately everts the lid margin and coirects the
cedure. The length and shape of the skin-orbicularis oculi
entropion (Fig. 5.24). Tension on the sutures as well as
incisions vary, depending on the amount and area of entro-
their exit position on the lid surface can be varied to effect
pion correction.
entropion corection.
The initial skin incision is parallel to the eyelid margin.
usually 1-2 mm from the lid margin and where the pigmen-
tation of the skin ceases and the eyelid hair begins
Surgical management of entropion
d uoidonua ue Aq Piy aq  P au (e57's )
01 held taut and the eye protected by a Jaeger eyelid plate.
The surgical procedures for the treatment of entropion in
The depth of the skin incision can include variable amounts
animals evolved partially from those techniques 1eported
of the orbicularis oculi muscle, and is deeper especially in
 a siaz aq pa) aaid s aui u s u!
the large and giant breeds of dogs. The primary goal of the
Handbuch der plastischen Chirurgie. G. Reimer, Berlin, p 12)
procedure is to evert the eyelid margin and stop secondary
a crescentic area of eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle
blepharospasm. The amount of surgical correction should
is removed. In the Celsus-Hotz technique (Hotz CC 1879
allow fo1 0.5-1.0 mm of additional eversion of the eyelid
Operation fo1 entropion. Archives of Ophthalmology 3:249)
margins that occurs during postoperative healing. The ends
the apposition of the surgical wound involved placement
of the initial skin-orbicularis oculi incision are joined with
of the sutures through the tarsus and orbicularis oculi mus-
a ventral elliptical incision, the width deteimined by the
cles. Adaptation of the Celsus-Hotz technique has resulted
amount of tissue that needs to be excised to evert the eyelid
in a most useful piocedure that can be varied markedly for
margin into a normal position (Fig. 5.25b). If the lower
a number of different forms of entropion in the canine
entropion involves the medial and lateral one-third of the
and feline patient.
lid, but not the central section, two separate procedures are
[n Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology by Eugene
performed. To stabilize the eyelid during these incisions, a
Nicolas and translated by Henry Gray (H. and W. Brown,
  a re n a oe  s 
London, 1914), at least three different surgical procedures
to provide tension on the lids.
were described fo1 entropion in animals. Excision of an oval
The area of skin may also be outlined and slightly crushed
portion of skin involving the lateral lower eyelid and lateral
by curved mosquito forceps. This technique is more trau-
canthus for the treatment of entropion was referred to as the
matic, but provides some hemostasis. Hemorrhage is usually
Berlin-Megnin method. A simple method to repai1 entro-
minor and occurs from the lateral and medial ends of the
pion in the dog was reported by Veenendaal (1936). Exci-
incisions. Temporary clamping of the larger blood vessels
sion of an arrowhead-shaped section of lateral canthal skin
fo1 the treatment of entropion has been referred to as the
of these bleeders is not usually necessary. and the buried
Schleich method. Frohnel's method consisted of the exci-
suture material may cause local fibrosis of the lid. The
          
incised area of eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle is
tion of entropion.
- aao es e pasixa pue sdaioy qu e paieaana
ven's tenotomy scissors. The surgical wound is apposed with
4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures placed
Hotz-Celsus procedure for entropion
about 2-3 mm apart (Fig. 5.25c). Placement of the sutures
The Hotz-Celsus or Celsus-Hotz procedure and its modifi-
must accommodate the shorter eyelid margin wound and
cations are the basic surgical techniques for the treatment
the longer distal incision (Fig. 5.25d). Suture placement
of congenital, developmental, cicatricial, and senile entro-
starting from the central defect and working in each direc-
pion in domestic animals. The key to its success is the need
tion, as well as wound apposition starting from one end,
fo1 the procedure to be perfoimed as close as possible to the
may be used.
105
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
B
C
Fig. 5.25 Modified Hotz-Celsus technique for central lower lid entropion. (a) The skin and orbicularis oculi muscle layers are incised by scalpel. The incision
along the eyelid margin should be 1-2 mm from the margin. The lower incision is determined by the length and shape of the entropion. (b) The strip of eyelid
skin and orbicularis oculi muscle are carefully dissected and excised by small tenotomy scissors. (c) The surgical wound is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple 
 aun ay (p) sabpa punom aun jo supbual zuauayp oma aun anepowwone on zeumawos pajbue ag pinoys saunans aul saunans algequosge-uou pandnuanul
conclusion of surgery because of the eyelid swelling, slight overcorrection may be present. (e) Preoperative appearance of a cat with bilateral lower lid medial
entropion (right eye shown). (f Same cat immedliately after bilateral Hotz-Celsus procedure (left eye shown).
Modification of Hotz-Celsus technique
Bigelbach modification for medial entropion
for medial entropion
Bigelbach has modified the medial entropion procedure
 r i   d o a
by the excision of a 2-3 mm strip of the upper and lower
entropion and epiphora in miniature breeds of dogs. The
eyelids at the medial canthus, after the identification of
objective of this technique is to evert the medial lower eyelid
both lacrimal punta. In addition, the caruncle is excised,
margin sufficient to assist the lower lacrimal punctum to
Iesulting in an ‘anchoi-shaped' defect. The areas are not
conduct tears to its orifice (Fig. 5.26). The extent of the
-uui Aiepuoas Aq leau oi pamone pue sairuns Aq pasodde
lower eyelid skin-orbicularis oculi muscle to be excised is
tion. The resultant healing effectively treats the medial upper
determined preoperatively by estimating the number of
and lower entropion.
millimeters of colrection necessary to evert the medial lower
eyelid. The incision should not be deeper than the orbicu-
Modification of the Hotz-Celsus method
laris oculi muscle to avoid damage to the lower lacrimal
for lateral canthal entropion
punctum and canaliculus.
The Hotz-Celsus procedure may be adapted for entropion
of the lateral one-third of the upper and lower eyelids, and
the lateral canthus. This modification is recommended
when the palpebral fissure size is noimal, and an additional
enlargement of the palpebral fissure is not necessary. If the
lateral canthal entropion is associated with a micropalpebral
fissure (o1 the eyelids are shorter than normal), the arrow-
head and other surgical procedures are indicated. The p1o-
cedure is similar to the methods described previously. but
adapted to provide eversion of the outer one-third of both
the upper and lowel eyelids (Fig. 5.27).
'Y' to 'V' plasty for entropion
The Y' to V' plasty for entropion successfully corrects mild
central entropion of the upper and lower eyelids. This p1o-
cedure can also be reversed: V' to 'Y' or the Wharton-Jones
Fig. 5.26 The Hotz-Celsus technique may be modified to treat medial
entropion and secondary epiphora in miniature breeds of dogs. The tip of
blepharoplasty fo1 the coirection of mild central cicatricial
the triangle of the wound is opposite the lower lacrimal punctum and
ectropion. The initial Y incision, starting about 1 mm from
designed to improve lower punctum function.
the eyelid margin, is sufficiently deep to include the eyelid
106
Surgical management of entropion
area of the most extensive entropion. The tarsal pedicle is
margin (Fig. 5.29b). It is then freed from the deeper palpe-
bral conjunctiva and more superficial skin. A subcutaneous
-luan aq paiedaid si 'aipad aui se apim se si ieu au
omy scissors in the lower incision to correct the entropion:
the more severe the entropion, the longer the subcutaneous
tunnel. With a double-armed 5-0 non-absorbable suture, a
cruciate stitch is placed in the tarsal pedicle and extended
through the subcutaneous tunnel to be tied at the level of
the skin with a stent (Fig. 5.29c). As the suture is tightened
and tied, the entropion area should be corrected. The distal
s    o si s  s 
the upper and lower eyelids. The correction does not affect the size of the 
(Fig. 5.29d). Apposition of the skin wound is by 4-0 to 5-0
palpebral fissure.
simple inteinupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.29e).
Multiple tarsal pedicles can be used when more than one
skin and orbicularis oculi layers (Fig. 5.28a). The length of
area of the eyelid is affected. The tarsal pedicle technique
the basal part of the Y incision is designed to provide the
is often combined with a permanent lateral tarsorrhaphy.
appropriate amount of correction for the entropion. The tri-
angular flap of skin is elevated, and its base separated from
Combined entropion-distichiasis procedure
the underlying tarsus by blunt-sharp dissection with small
The surgical procedures for entropion and distichiasis may
flap is apposed to the bottom and sides of the skin-muscle
be combined in the dog. The distichia follicles are excised
se-u pi a o in o  si
using the tarsoconjunctival resection methods described in
sutures, resulting in a V-shaped closure (Fig. 5.28c).
an earlier section. The Hotz-Celsus procedure is then per-
formed to correct the entropion. Wound apposition is by
4-0 simple interrupted silk sutures. Each skin suture includes
Central tarsal pedicle for entropion (Wyman)
a deep bite of tarsus to assist with eyelid margin eversion.
The central tarsal pedicle has been combined with the Hotz-
Celsus procedure to treat central lower entropion. The tech-
Stades combined entropion-trichiasis
nique involves construction of a pedicle of tarsus to evert
the eyelid margin. This pedicle is secured in the subcutane-
procedure
ous tissues. The procedure has been used for congenital
The entropion and trichiasis procedures are combined for
and developmental entropion in the Chow Chow, Chinese
sie aiel pue uoidonua piaaa iddn yim sop jo spaain
Shar Pei, English Bulldog, and Rottweiler. It has also been
of 1edundant skin on the forehead (Fig. 5.30). Performance
employed for recurrent entropion in dogs and cats treated
of only the entropion procedure, usually the Hotz-Celsus
previously by surgery. This procedure is recommended for
sxa a se p a a aia nu a o
severe and recurrent entropion in small animals.
skin above both eyes results in recurrent upper entropion.
The traditional Hotz-Celsus technique is performed fist,
This procedure and modifications of this method are used
but the surgical procedure does not extend as deep as the
in selected breeds including the English Cocker Spaniel,
orbicularis oculi muscle (Fig. 5.29a). The distal elliptical
Chow Chow, Chinese Shar Pei, and Bloodhound.
skin incision is performed after the tarsal pedicle has been
At least two different surgical methods have been used
completed. Two parallel incisions are made through the
to treat the unusual entropion complicated by redundant
orbicularis oculi muscle and tarsus immediately below the
forehead folds of skin. In the combined upper eyelid
A
B
Ulys p!l ayn jo uoisiou! ,人. lenju! ayl (e) p!l lamol aun jo uood jenuan ayn jo uoidounua plwu joy pasn ag Aew uoidounua joy Aaseld ,A. on ,人. aul gzs dbi
and orbicularis oculi muscles layers by Beaver No. 6700 microsurgical blade starts about 1 mm from the eyelid margin. The lower part of the incision will
determine the extent of the lid eversion. (b) A triangular section of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle, based at the eyelid margin, is dissected from the
underlying tarsus by tenotomy scissors. (c) The tip of the skin-muscle flap is apposed in a V shape to effect eversion of the eyelid margin with 4-0 to 6-
 0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
107
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
?
?
Fig. 5.29 Central tarsal pedicle for entropion. (a) A tarsal pedicle anchored at the eyelid margin is combined with the Hotz-Celsus procedure. The initial skin
shi yai adleas Ag panuasuon si alpipad jesien  (a) uibuew paa aun wouy ww z-l anoge apeig ienibunsouiw oozg on laneag aun Ag pawoyad s! uoisiou
base at the eyelid margin of the most extensive entropion. (c) Through a subcutaneous tunnel made by scissors, a 5-0 non-absorbable cruciate suture
attached to the tarsal pedicle is secured with a stent below the surgical wound. (d) The second skin incision of the Hotz-Celsus method is performed, and the
section of skin is excised by tenotomy scissors. The width of the surgical wound varies with the extent of the entropion. (e) The skin wound, to correct
the remainder of the entropion, is apposed with 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
margin with 4-0 to 5-0 simple inteirupted or a combination
ofsimple
 internupted and continuous non-absorbable
sutures (Fig. 5.31e-g). The exposed area immediately above
   a s    a
Tesultant fibrosis everts the upper eyelid margin. This area
may become pigmented. The animal still retains its facial
folds of skin and its overall appearance is not markedly
altered.
 The second procedure consists of two parts: the excision of
a large section or facelift of the redundant forehead skin
(Fig. 5.32), and the Hotz-Celsus technique (o1 some modi-
fication thereof) to evert the upper eyelid margin and, if
indicated, the lateral canthus. The redundant skin in the
forehead is excised to an extent that these folds of skin do
 not affect the eyelids. Two curvilinear skin incisions are per-
foimed for the forehead skin 1esection. The skin is resected
by Metzenbaum scissors, and the edges are apposed with
Fig. 5.30 The Chinese Shar Pei can benefit from either the Stades
3-0 to 4-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The
procedure or the Hotz-Celsus procedure, combined with resection of
variable amounts of forehead skin. These combinations assist greatly when
upper entropion, or upper lid and lateral canthal entropion,
the upper eyelids also have entropion.
is corected by the Hotz-Celsus procedure or modifications.
Modified Hotz-Celsus procedure for entropion
and ectropion
The Quickert technique for humans has been modified
0.5-1.0 mm from the upper eyelid margin to 15-25 mm
fo1 the dog with a combination of lower entropion and
above the palpebral fissure, and horizontally 2-4 mm
ectropion. After the Hotz-Celsus procedure has been pel-
medial from the nasal canthus to 5-10 mm exteinal to the
foimed, a wedge of eyelid margin is excised from the center
lateral canthus (Fig. 5.31a-d). The upper eyelid wound is
 of the Hotz-Celsus procedure. The eyelid margin is apposed
partially closed by the apposition of the upper eyelid skin
with a figure-of-eight suture, and the Hotz-Celsus wound
to the subcutaneous eyelid layer 5-6 mm from the eyelid
apposed with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
108
Surgical management of entropior
A
C
E
B
F
Fig. 5.31 Stades procedure for entropion and redundant forehead folds of skin. (a) A large section of upper eyelid skin will be reseted. The skin incisions 
extend from 0.5-1.0 mm from the eyelid margin to 15-20 mm dorsally. (b) Intraoperative appearance in an English Bulldog. The large skin incision 
approaches but does not include the upper lid margin. (c) The skin section is excised carefully by tenotomy scissors. The size of the eyelid flap assists
aun jo suaxa aun bumous ydebonoud anlneiadoe.aul (p) spiojuis peayauoy suepunpau aua joy sanesuadwon pue uoidounua plara jaddn aun jo uonauon
skin removal. (e) Apposition of the surgical wound with 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures is incomplete, leaving 5-6 mm of subcutaneous
tissue of the upper eyelid to heal by secondary intention and rotate the lid margin outward. (f Immediate postoperative appearance of the left eye. Note
the exposed subcutaneous tissues immediately behind the lid margin. (g) Immediate postoperative appearance of the face after bilateral lid surgeries.
Face lift/skinfold excision and rhytidectomy
Surgical procedures for lateral canthal
entropion
Fo1 many breeds of dogs the excision of periocular (orbital
and forehead) skinfolds may be combined with other entro-
The lateral canthal region of the dog lacks stability because
pion surgeries, such as the Hotz-Celsus or Stades procedures,
of the absence of a strong and rigid lateral canthal ligament.
to effectively treat upper and lateral canthal entropion. In
The lateral retractor anguli oculi muscle partially replaces
breeds such as the Chinese Shar Pei, Bloodhound, and some
the function of the lateral palpebral ligament, but the area
of the spaniel breeds, the skin above the eye and on the fore-
remains unstable and is a frequent location for entropion.
head may be grasped in the awake patient, and 'gathered
 a    i s
until the upper entropion is corrected. Rather large amounts
lengths into the upper and lower eyelids, and not necessarily
of forehead skin can be safely excised in this method as
equally. As a result, each surgical procedure should be mod-
semicircular areas. The surgical skin defects are apposed with
ified for the individual lateral canthal defect. At least three
3-0 to 4-0 simple internupted sutures.
surgical procedures concentrate on entropion of the lateral
109
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Fig. 5.34 The arrowhead procedure for correction of lateral canthal
entropion is a further modification of the Hotz-Celsus procedure. The
procedure will also slightly increase the size of the palpebral fissure.
Fig. 5.32 In certain breeds, like the Chow Chow or the Chinese Shar Pei,
treatment of entropion can also include the resection of a large section of
forehead skin and the Hotz-Celsus procedure, as shown in this immediate
The lateral canthal region is stabilized with a thumb forceps
postoperative photograph.
placed in the lateral conjunctival fomix or with the lateral
canthus grasped with the Lordan triangular chalazion and/or
 r   oe    s
stasis. The technique is similar to the Hotz-Celsus procedure,
except for its shape (Fig. 5.34). The skin and orbicularis oculi
layers are incised with the Bard-Parker No. 15 blade o1 Beaver
No. 6700 microsurgical blade 1-1.5 mm from the eyelid
margin. The width ofthe surgical site is determined by the size
of the oniginal lid defect. The skin and orbicularis oculi layers 
are carefully excised by tenotomy scissors.
If the lateral canthus tension suture is used, it is posi-
tioned now. A 4-0 monofilament non-absorbable simple
interrupted or horizontal mattress suture is placed at the lat-
eral canthus in the muscle-tarsal layers and then in the fas-
cia overlying the orbital ligament. The suture is gradually
tightened to tense the lateral canthus into the desired posi-
tion. The surgical wound is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple
interrupted non-absorbable sutures, with the first suture
placed at the lateral canthus.
Fig. 5.33 The large and giant breeds of dogs with lateral canthal entropion
Lateral canthoplasty by Wyman
have lateral canthal instability and often a 'diamond'-shaped palpebral
fissure.
The lateral canthoplasty procedure, as developed by Wyman,
attempts to address the lack of lateral canthal stability and
the associated lateral canthal entropion of large and giant
canthus. Two of the three procedures increase the stability of
the area by constructing additional lateral canthal support
procedure include the St Bernard, Newfoundland, Chow
(Fig. 5.33). These three surgical procedures include the
Chow, Golden Retriever, Bull Mastiff, Rottweiler, and English
alrowhead procedure, lateral canthoplasty by the Wyman
Bulldog. These large breeds often have some enophthalmia,
technique, and modifications of the Wyman procedure.
and the lack of globe support for the lower eyelid may also
a round-, diamond- or pergola-shaped palpebral fissure,
Arrowhead procedure for lateral
and a combination of lateral entropion and central ectropion
canthal entropion
of both eyelids. With colrection of the lateral canthal entro.
The alrowhead procedure may be used to colrect lateral
pion, a significant portion of the central lower ectiopion
canthal entropion, but does not substantially increase the
(o1 central eversion of the eyelid margin) will also resolve.
size of the palpebral fissure. The extent of correction of
s   si  s aa   a
a uo Supuadap Aiea Keu uondonua iaddn pue namol
(Fig. 5.35a). The incision should be 1-1.5 mm from the lat-
degree of lid inversion of each eyelid margin. The arrowhead
eral eyelid margins. The width between the two elliptical
procedure is indicated for lateral canthal entropion with
skin incisions is the amount of correction for the lateral
normal-sized palpebral fissures and normal length upper
canthal entropion. The orbicularis oculi muscle is exposed
and lower eyelids. A subcutaneous lateral canthal suture
with blunt-sharp dissection with small tenotomy scissois.
may be added to this procedure to anchor and stabilize
   s  sd   r
the lateral canthus, and positioned just before the lid skin
constructed by scalpel with thei1 base at the lateral canthus
is apposed.
(Fig. 5.35b). The lateral canthus is dissected furthe1 to
110
Postoperative management and complications
5-10mm
A
B
C
Fig. 5.35 The lateral canthoplasty and construction of a lateral canthal ligament by Wyman has 
siiaa ypo jo uoidoua jeanel pue uoidoa leuan yr spaag nue pue aiel iog inyasn uaad
and the lateral canthus. (a) Two elliptical skin incisions are perfommed. The width of the surgical
wound (6-10 mm) should approximate the amount necessary to effect correction of the entropion. (b)
 Two myotomies are performed with their base at the lateral canthus. These strips of muscle willform
the new lateral canthal ligament. (c) After subcutaneous dissection by tenotomy scissors, the pedicle
of orbicularis oculi is secured by a cruciate suture to the periosteum of the zygomatic arch by a 4-0 to
5-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable suture. (d) The skin layers are apposed by 4-0 to 5-0 simple
D
interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
expose the lateral orbital rim and/or zygomatic arch. The
two muscle pedicles are united with a 4-0 to 5-0 non-
absorbable cruciate suture, and secured to the periosteum
of the zygomatic arch (Fig. 5.35c).
The skin layer is apposed with 4-0 to 5-0 simple inter-
rupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.35d). Because of the
additional dissection involved with this method, more post-
operative swelling of the lateral canthus usually occurs.
Lateral canthoplasty with suture
This surgical procedure is a modification of the Wyman lat-
aua ui sapsnw nso suensiquo jo alpipad aya on aneuianle ue sy yes dbs
eral canthoplasty and, instead of the orbicularis oculi mus
lateral canthoplasty procedure, one or preferably two sutures or a section of
cle pedicle, a non-absorbable suture is used to secure the
frozen scleral homograft can be used to attach the lateral canthus and the
lateral canthus. This adaptation reduces the time for surgery.
periosteum of the zygomatic arch, and stabilize the lateral canthus.
and with less tissue dissection the postoperative eyelid and
lateral canthal swelling are 1educed. An alternative method
The lateral canthus is everted by forceps to expose the pal-
that we have used replaces the non-absorbable suture with
pebral conjunctiva. With curved Steven's or tenotomy scis-
 a section of frozen scleral homograft.
sors, the palpebral conjunctiva is separated from the
The eyelid skin and part of the orbicularis oculi muscle are
deeper tarsus in a 9 mm arc. The fibrous band is located
excised to correct the lateral canthal entropion. The exact
by blunt dissection that extends from the lateral canthus to
shape and size of the upper and lower aspects of the ellipti-
the orbital ligaments and zygomatic arch, and a wedge of
cal incisions vary, depending on the extent of entropion of
the tendon excised near its base. An alternative technique
the upper and lower lids. Once the skin layer is excised,
is to sever the tendon (tendonotomy) by scissois midway
the dissection is continued laterally by small tenotomy scis-
between its origin and insertion. The conjunctival wound
sors to isolate an area to secure the lateral canthus. A single
2-0 non-absorbable suture (or occasionally two sutures) is
may be combined with this method.
secured in the lateral canthus and the periosteum of the
zygomatic arch (Fig. 5.36). The tension on the suture can
Postoperative management and complications
be adjusted to provide a reasonably normal sized and
shaped palpebral fissure. The skin layer is apposed with 
 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
Topical antibiotics/corticosteroids are usually administered
after entropion surgery. If coineal ulceration, secondary to
 Robertson's lateral canthal tendonectomy
the entropion, is present, topical antibiotics and mydriatics
are indicated. Systemic antibiotics are infrequently indicated
Robertson has described a procedure to treat lateral canthal
except for the lateral canthoplasty techniques when tissue
entropion that releases the tension in large and giant
dissection and surgical time are greater. The E-collar should
'uuan leuuen jeiaiel aui jo uonoasun aq sop jo spaa
be used after all of these procedures to prevent self-trauma
111
5
Surgery of the eyelids
and wound dehiscence. The skin sutures are usually
The injection of liquid paraffin has been reported, but is not
i srns ashn si ss  aeadsa shep oi ie paoa
Iecommended due to the lisk of inflammatory reaction.
too long may cause excessive irritation.
[f manual repositioning does not colrect the problem
Complications after these entropion procedures are usu-
in young foals, the use of everting sutures is considered.
ally associated with under- and oveicorrection of the defect.
Sutures are placed in a vertical mattress pattein. To ensure
ideal eversion of the eyelid margin and haired skin, the
to secure a reasonable repail, especially if the surgery is
sutures should be placed near the eyelid margin (approxi-
 performed in young and growing puppies and kittens.
. The
mately 2-3 mm from the margin). The suture bite should
not be so large as to overcoirect the entropion. If overcorrec-
and functional eyelid. Completely normal eyelid contou1
tion occurs, the resulting ectropion may interfere with eyelid
may not always be achieved. If the skin-orbicularis oculi
closure, and ocular iritation may develop from exposure of
muscle incision is too close to the eyelid margin, the sutures
tissues. Increased tension on the sutures may cause the
are very difficult to place, and there is a greater possibility of
sutures to cut through the thin eyelid skin. This will lead
the sutures touching the cornea. If the linear incision along
to failure of the procedure and increased scar tissue foima-
the eyelid margin is too fa1 from the margin, the extent of
tion. Non-absorbable suture material of 3-0 to 5-0 size is
eversion of the entropion is less. Suture failures are unlikely.
 ti  d u  an ae san a
Use of the E-collar provides excellent protection against the
Skin staples have been used with variable 1esults. The use
patient rubbing the surgical site that can result in local lid
    pss s q  s 
foals. They are readily available and rapid to place in the
wound dehiscence, there is additional postoperative fibrosis
foal with systemic conditions. Everting the eyelids with
and often overcolrection.
sutures or staples will frequently be adequate to achieve
If overcoirection of the entropion occurs, the blepharo-
colrection of the entropion, especially if the cause of the
spasm may have been overestimated or excessive tissue
entropion can be corrected.
was excised. If undercolrection results, usually insufficient
tissue was removed. The large and giant breeds of dogs with
Permanent correction of entropion
entropion and enophthalmia present additional challenges
in the horse
because the globe-lower eyelid contact is limited and entro-
sx    d ss i  
Entropion in older horses is commonly associated with cica-
forehead skinfolds and heavy ears complicate entropion
trix foimation and requires surgical colrection. Entropion
surgery. They often require concurrent excision of large
associated with localized eyelid disease such as scar foima-
amounts of forehead skin which will affect the dog's
tion is corrected using a Y' to V' procedure (see Fig. 5.28).
appearance.
Initially a Y incision is made, with the arms of the Y extend-
 ing slightly (1-2 mm) beyond the lateral and medial extent
of the lesion. A flat instrument (e.g., Jaeger eyelid plate,
sterile wooden tongue depressor, handle of a surgical
ADAPTATIONS IN LARGE ANIMALS AND
scalpel) is inserted behind the eyelid into the conjunctival
SPECIAL SPECIES
fornix to stabilize the skin and facilitate the skin incision.
 Ophthalmic cautery and a No. 15 blade are used. The length
of the stem of the Y is determined by the amount of eyelid
Entropion in horses
eversion needed. The skin is dissected from the subcu-
taneous tissues and undermined, and the existing scar tis-
Entropion is an inward rolling of the eyelid, allowing eyelid
sue excised. The incision is positioned and sutured in a
hair to contact the cornea and conjunctiva. Rubbing and
V-shaped closure, creating eversion of the eyelid margin.
irritation from the hair position result in blepharospasm
The skin is closed in a single layer using 4-0 to 5-0 simple
and increased tearing. Corneal ulcers and keratitis com-
internupted non-absorbable sutures.
monly occur. Entropion occurs in young foals and is con-
[n the horse, more generalized and non-cicatricial entro-
sidered to be hereditary in some cases. However, many
pion is corrected using a modified Hotz-Celsus procedure.
episodes of entropion in young foals occur in dehydrated,
In this technique, a crescent-shaped or elliptical area of skin
premature, o1 septicemic animals, and in such cases acquired
and orbicularis oculi muscle is excised (Fig. 5.37). The first
entropion seems more likely. Permanent surgical co rection,
incision is made parallel to and nea1 (2-3 mm) the eyelid
therefore, is not indicated in all cases.
margin. The amount of skin and orbicularis oculi muscle
 Non-surgical management may be
colrective in most
to be removed is determined in the awake horse by ocular
cases. In acute entropion in foals, lubrication of the coinea
examination. The eyelid is examined, then a blink response
and conjunctiva with ophthalmic lubricating ointment (arti-
OI palpebral reflex is induced and the eyelid re-examined.
ficial tears, ophthalmic ointment petrolatum, or Optixcare
After the examiner is satisfied with this assessment, topical
gel) with manual repositioning may be all that is necessary
anesthetic (0.5% proparacaine) is applied to the cornea
fo1 a good result and avoidance of surgical correction. The
and the eyelid 1e-examined without the blepharospastic
injection of different materials into the lower eyelid will also
component. The horse is then anesthetized and the surgical
lesult in temporary correction of the entropion. The injec-
site prepared for aseptic surgery. The eyelid skin may be sta-
tion of 0.5-1 mL of procaine penicillin G into the eyelid at
bilized with a laeger eyelid plate, the handle of a surgical
the base of the entropion and massaged toward the eyelid
scalpel, or a sterile wooden tongue depressor inserted
  d   r     
behind the eyelid into the conjunctival fornix. The skin is
112
Entropion and periocular fat pads in the Vietnamese potbellied pig (Sus scrofa)
B
Fig. 5.37 (a) Preoperative appearance of lower lid entropion in a young horse. (b) Postoperative appearance after correction using the Hotz-Celsus surgical
procedure.
incised, and the skin and a portion of the orbicularis oculi
is present 24 h after surgery, waim compresses may further
muscle excised with small surgical scissors (see Fig. 5.25).
reduce the swelling and discomfort at the surgical site.
In many cases about half as much muscle as skin is excised,
As nubbing or self-mutilation is often a concern in the
which leads to good repair fo1 the entropion and a cosmetic
horse, the surgical site o1 eye must be protected by a protec-
result. The skin is closed in a single layer using 4-0 to 5-0
tive hood with a plastic or solid eyecup (EyeSaver", Jorgen-
non-absorbable (monofilament nylon) sutures. Sutures are
sen Laboratories, Loveland, CO.). Skin sutures are usually
Iemoved in 10-12 days.
removed 8-12 days after surgery. In situations when tension
When entropion is associated with a small eyelid scar, a 'Y'
on the suture line cannot be avoided, sutures are left in
to V' procedure is often the best therapeutic option. The
place fo1 18-24 days.
arms of the Y should extend only slightly beyond the extent
of the entropion (see Fig. 5.28). The stem and height of the
Entropion in sheep
Y are deteimined by the amount of eyelid eversion needed.
The adjacent skin is undermined and the scar tissue excised
from normal tissue. The skin is apposed with 4-0 to 5-0
Entropion o1 inversion of the eyelid margins may be fairly
non-absorbable (monofilament nylon) sutures in a simple
common in newboin lambs in some flocks (Fig. 5.38).
internupted pattern. Sutures are removed in 10-12 days
Financial constraints and the need to treat several lambs in
the same flock have led to some interesting foims of ther-
apy. The Hotz-Celsus entropion procedure is also successful
Aftercare following entropion surgery
in lambs but often cost-prohibitive.
in the horse
Entropion may be corrected by subcutaneous injections in
Preoperative topical and systemic antibiotics are indicated.
the eyelid skin using procaine penicillin, mineral oil, water,
The placement of a subpalpebral lavage system will facilitate
ai1, and waim beeswax. The amount varies, but 1-2 mL is
topical application of solutions to the eye.
usually adequate. As the agent is injected, the lid is rotated
Postoperative swelling can be reduced by the administra-
outward and away from the eye. Another rapid foim of co1-
tion of systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
Iection is office staples and surgical staples to evert the lid
(flunixin meglumine 1 mg/kg IV) immediately before sur-
margin. Excision of lid skin and muscle followed by a single
gery. Postoperative edema will be lessened by the applica-
absorbable suture has also been reported.
s  s se u t i a ny sd an yo o
Entropion and periocular fat pads in the
Vietnamese potbellied pig (Sus scrofa)
Vietnamese potbellied pigs are predisposed to entropion,
relative enophthalmia, large periocular fat pads, predisposi-
tion to obesity, and heavy forehead brows and upper eye-
 s a  nda d  '
but more often corneal vascularization and scarring. Often
with increased age, these interrelated factors eventually
decrease vision and produce behavioral changes (apprehen-
Surgery for entropion in this species includes: 1) resection
of the fat pads beneath the eyelids; 2) the Hotz-Celsus pro-
cedure fo1 entropion, often with overcolrection; 3) 1esection
of part of the large (and heavy) forehead; and 4) postopera-
Fig. 5.38 Lower lid entropion in a lamb with secondary corneal disease
tive control of diet to reduce the obesity long term. This su1
There are several surgical and non-surgical avenues for repair.
gical procedure is similar to that in the large breeds of dogs
113
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
B
D
Fig. 5.39 Bilateral entropion in a Vietnamese pot-bellied pig. Surgical considerations include correction of the entropion (often 360°), removal of fat pads
within the affected eyelids, and removal of the excessive forehead brows. (a) Preoperative appearance of an affected pig. Note the generalized obesity.
jo suognas a6iel ayn jo saldwex3 () isaqo aya loy anesuadwon on pawoyad s! uoidounua aup jo uonauon-ano uayo yde.bonoud anpeladoenul (9)
forehead brows removed to reduce pressure on the upper eyelids. (d) Postoperative appearance at surgery. Long-term diet management is essential
to prevent return of the entropion.
fo1 forehead resections and entropion procedures, but is
Postoperative medications for several days may include:
complicated by the need to also resect the large and often
1) ceftiofu1 (3 mg/kg PO o1 [M} fo1 antibiosis; 2} flunixin
extensive subcutaneous fatty tissues (Fig. 5.39).
meglumine (0.7 mg/kg PO or IM) for postoperative swelling:
and 3) butorphanol (0.1-0.17 mg/kg IM q8h) for pain.
dication includes midazolam (0.3 mg/kg IM) and butorpha-
nol (0.3 mg/kg IM). Isoflurane anesthesia is induced by
mask, then the animal intubated and maintained on isoflur-
SURGICAL PROCEDURES FOR ECTROPION
ane and oxygen. The entire face and forehead are prepared
for surgery by clipping the hair and disinfection of the skin
 Ectropion or the eversion of the eyelid is less dangerous to
by dilute povidone-iodine (0.5%) solution. Co1rection of
thee
eye, but can produce chronic keratitis, conjunctivitis,
the upper entropion may be combined with resection of a
keratoconjunctivitis, epiphora, and tear staining of the eye-
large forehead section of skin. When combined with fore-
lids (Fig. 5.40). Of the animal species with ectropion, dogs
head skin resection and uppel entropion correction, the skin
(particularly the large breeds) are most frequently affected.
incision starts just ventral and rostral of the tragus of one ear
Ectropion may be associated with developmental, cicatricial,
and continues rostromedially along the ventral aspect of the
traumatic, neurologic, and postoperative causes. The breeds
fat pad to the lateral canthus, and then to within 2-3 mm
of dogs frequently affected with lower lid ectropion include
from the upper lid margin; the skin incision is then
the Bloodhound, St Bernard, Great Dane, Newfoundland,
continued on the opposite side of the face. Both forehead
Mastiff, and many spaniel breeds. In some breeds both the
Iy Auy pasixa aie sped iey pue us paa iaddn pue
eyelids and palpebral fissure are excessive in size and length.
muscle is spared, but fatty tissues are excised by sharp dissec-
In some large and giant breeds of dogs the laxity of the
tion, and the large forehead section and upper eyelids
lower eyelid may vary with the fitness and the age of the ani-
excised. After absorbable 2-0 subdermal sutures to close
mal. Central ectropion may also be associated with lateral
potential dead space, the leading edge of the remaining fore-
canthal entropion.
head skin is carefully apposed to the surrounding skin and
Part of the ophthalmic pathology secondary to ectropion
upper eyelids with simple interrupted non-absorbable
is associated with impaired blink reflex, preocular film
sutures. For lower lid entropion, the Hotz-Celsus procedure
defects, and impaired tear movement to the medial conjunc-
is used (usually an overcolrection), and the excessive fatty
tival sac. Surgical colrection of ectropion is recommended
tissues also removed.
when secondary ophthalmic disease results and requires
114
Surgical procedures for ectropior
(A
?
Fig. 5.41 Lateral eyelid wedge excision procedure. (a) A full-thickness
triangular section of lower lid is excised by scissors. A thumb forceps is
 inserted at the lateral canthus to provide tension on the lower lid. (b) The
surgical defect is apposed by two layers of sutures. The tarsoconjunctival
layers are apposed with a 3-0 to 5-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
The skin-muscle layers are apposed with 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted 
non-absorbable sutures.
Fig. 5.40 Ectropion can produce chronic ocular iritation, such as
conjunctivitis. Ectropion surgical procedures generally shorten the length of 
the eyelid.
removed should be slightly smaller than the extent of eyelid
shortening and colrection anticipated. As with entropion
long-term topical medications to control the local inflam-
additional 0.5-1 mm coirection.
 The surgery is performed immediately next to the lateral
Telatively normal length lower eyelid. Overco rection should
canthus. A triangular full-thickness section of lower eyelid is
-unod asnen uen pue nnsa Aeu uoidoua se papioae ao
S    ssS S  
tially more damage to the cornea and conjunctiva.
(Fig. 5.41a). The eyelid may be stabilized by a chalazion o1
The different ectropion surgical procedures for the lower
entropion foiceps, o1 the entire lower eyelids may be tensed
eyelid primarily shorten and strengthen the lid. As the
by a thumb forceps positioned in the lateral canthus. The sur-
 medial canthus is relatively fixed and more complicated
"(qlt's bi) sairuns jo siakel omi Aq pasodde s! punom eon
by the presence of the nasolacrimal apparatus and the nic-
In the deep layer, a 3-0 to 5-0 simple continuous absorbable
titating membrane, most ectropion surgical procedures
suture is positioned in the submucosa of the palpebral con-
involve the lateral one-half of the lower eyelid and the
junctiva and tarsus. The knots are buried to prevent contact
lateral canthus. Procedures fo1 the correction of ectropion
with the cornea. Starting at the eyelid margin, the superficial
include simple triangle excision at the lateral canthus, V to
layer of eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle is apposed
Y' plasty fo1 cicatricial ectropion, the Kuhnt-Szymanowski
with 4-0 to 5-0 simple inteinupted non-absorbable sutures.
procedure, the
Kuhnt-Helmbold procedure, 2
and
the
Munger and Carter modification of the Kuhnt-Helmbold
'V' to Y' plasty (Wharton-Jones procedure)
technique.
The V' to Y' plasty is the reverse of the surgical procedure
used fo1 cicatricial entropion. Unless a section of the eyelid
Lateral eyelid wedge excision
margin is excised, the ‘V' to Y' plasty tightens but not
[n this procedure, the lower eyelid is shortened by the
substantially shortens a lower eyelid with ectropion.
excision of a full-thickness wedge o1 triangular section of
Starting about 1 mm from the lower eyelid margin, two
lid. The lid excision is performed at the lateral canthus
converging skin incisions are performed on each side of
to avoid the development of an unsightly postoperative
the scarred area (Fig. 5.42a). The V-shaped skin flap is
eyelid margin notch that may occur when this surgery is per-
letracted upward, and the scar tissue in the subcutaneous
foimed elsewhere. The size of the wedge of lower lid to be
q  i i s   d  'e 
A
B
Fig. 5.42 The V to Y' plasty may be used to treat mild cicatricial ectropion. (a) Converging skin incisions are performed by the Beaver No. 6700 microsurgical
blade starting 1 mm from the eyelid margin. (b) The V' shaped skin flap is separated from the subcutaneous tissues, and the scar tissue excised. (c) The skin
flap is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures as a 'Y shaped closure.
115
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5.43 The Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure is used to correct ectropion and shorten the length of the lower lid. (a) The lower eyelid is split at the
gray line' of the eyelid margin at a depth of 10-15 mm and the incision is extended beyond the lateral canthus. (b) The skin-muscle flap is separated by
blunt dissection using tenotomy scissors. (c) Wedges of equal size of tarsoconjunctiva, orbicularis oculi muscle and skin are excised by tenotomy scissors.
(d) The tarsoconjunctival defect is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures with the knots buried to avoid corneal contact. The
skin wound is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The eyelid margin is apposed by 5-0 to 6-0 through-and-though
interrupted mattress non-absorbable sutures
tenotomy scissois (Fig. 5.42b). The adjacent subcutaneous
width of the wedge should be 0.5-1 mm shorte1 than the
tissues aie undeimined by blunt scisso1 dissection, and the
length of shortening for the lid (Fig. 5.43c).
wound is apposed as a Y-shaped closure with 4-0 to 6-0 sin-
0-9 oi o-t e Aq pasodde si punom leaunluonosiei au
ple inteinipted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.42c).
simple continuous absorbable suture with the knots buried
to avoid touching the coinea. The skin incision is apposed
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
Just below the eyelid margin the split eyelid wound
1is
The Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure and the next two sur-
apposed with 5-0 to 6-0 through-and-through interrupted
gical techniques are used to correct the more severe forms
mattress non-absorbable sutures with the knots on the skin
of ectropion and can substantially shorten the lower eyelid.
side (Fig. 5.43d).
The Kuhnt-Szymanowski method consists of the excision of
a wedge of conjunctiva and tarsus within the area of greatest
ectropion, the excision of a wedge of orbicularis oculi mus-
Kuhnt-Helmbold procedure
cle and skin at the lateral canthus, and the shortening of the
Like the Kuhnt-Szymanowski
i technique,
the Kuhnt-
lid with a sliding flap of orbicularis oculi muscle and skin.
Helmbold method addresses ectropion by shortening the
A major disadvantage of this procedure is that approxi-
lower lid, but the surgery concentrates on the central portion
mately the lateral two-thirds of the lower eyelid margin
of the eyelid. The lower eyelid is split at the'gray line' into tar-
and eyelid must be split into palpebral conjunctiva-tarsus,
sus and palpebral conjunctiva, and skin-orbicularis oculi
and the orbicularis oculi muscle and skin layers.
muscle layers with the No. 6500 microsurgical blade to a
The lower eyelid is split with the No. 6700 microsurgical
depth of about 10-15 mm (Fig. 5.44a). The length of the inci-
blade at the eyelid margin and immediately in front of the
sion should include about 60-70% of the total lid length.
'gray line' (opening of the meibomian glands), starting
[dentical sized wedges of tarsoconjunctiva and skin-muscle
medial to the central area of ectropion and extending to
are excised by small tenotomy scissors at two different loca-
the lateral canthus (Fig. 5.43a). The depth of the eyelid
tions (Fig. 5.44b). The tarsoconjunctival defect is apposed
splitting should be about 10-15 mm. The skin incision is
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. The
then continued into the lateral canthus to accommodate
skin-muscle wedge defect is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple
the excision of a wedge of skin approximately the same size
internupted non-absorbable sutures. The lid margin wound
as the tarsoconjunctival wedge (Fig. 5.43b). By tenotomy
is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 through-and-through interrupted
scissors a central wedge of tarsoconjunctiva is excised. The
mattress non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.44c).
B
apsnu no sueiniquo-uiys pue iegunluososen oui ,aull Aeun, aua ae ads s! piaa amol aul (e) uoidouna ioy aunpaoud pioqwah-auuny aul ts db
layers to a depth of 10-15 mm. (b) Identical wedges of tarsoconjunctiva and skin-muscle are excised from the lower eyelid. (c) The tarsoconjunctival
defect is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. The skin-muscle layer is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable
sutures. The lid margin wound is apposed with 4-0 to 6-0 through-and-through interrupted mattress non-absorbable sutures.
116
Surgical procedures for combined ectropion and entropior
(A
B
Fig. 5.45 The Munger and Carter modification of the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure for ectropion avoids splitting of the eyelid margin. (a) The skin incision is
3 mm below the eyelid margin and extends 10 mm beyond the lateral canthus. The skin-muscle flap is dissected from its deeper tarsal attachments. (b) Equal
size wedges of tarsoconjunctiva and skin-muscle are excised by scissors. The tarsoconjunctival wound is apposed by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous
absorbable suture. (c) The skin-muscle defect and the remaining skin edges are apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
Modified Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure
entropion, the conservative approach is to slightly under-
(Munger and Carter)
colrect the ectropion. Often the postoperative fibrosis
about the surgical site will provide an additional 0.5-
Both the Kuhnt-Szymanowski and Kuhnt-Helmbold
1.0 mm correction. These procedures are frequently used
ectropion procedures require a significant portion of the
in the large and giant breeds of dogs, and often globe con-
lower eyelid margin to be interrupted and then reapposed.
tact with the lower eyelid is minimal or absent. Undercor-
The Munger and Carter modification of the Kuhnt-
rection of ectropion is recommended in these breeds to
Szymanowski procedure permits the sliding and shortening
avoid postoperative entropion.
of the lower eyelid but avoids splitting of the critical eyelid
margin. The initial skin and orbicularis oculi muscle inci-
sion is made 3 mm from and parallel to the eyelid margin
Ectropion in the horse
to
 approximately 10 mm lateral of the lateral canthus
(Fig. 5.45a). A second skin-orbicularis oculi muscle incision
Ectropion is defined as an outward rolling of the eyelid. This
is continued ventral for about 15 mm. The skin and muscle
abnoimality results in increased exposure of the cornea and
flap is undermined by small tenotomy scissors. A wedge
conjunctiva. The most common cause in horses is contraction
of tarsus and palpebial conjunctiva, sufficient to shorten
 of scar tissue everting the eyelid following trauma and sur-
the lid and correct the ectropion, is excised by tenotomy
gery. Several surgical techniques have been described for cor-
scissors (Fig. 5.45b). The tarsoconjunctival defect is apposed
rection of ectropion in humans and in dogs.
with a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
The most commonly used procedure in horses is the V' to
One additional suture is placed at the eyelid margin to
Y' technique (see Fig. 5.42). The V portion of the incision is
maintain this apposition.
wide enough to extend slightly lateral and medial to the
A wedge of the skin and muscle flap is excised
by
sca1. The height of the V should be sufficient to remove
tenotomy scissors. The size of this wedge approximates the
the tension creating the ectropion. The skin beneath the V
tarsoconjunctival wedge. The skin-orbicularis oculi muscle
is undermined and the sca1 tissue is excised with tenotomy
flap is pulled dorsolaterally and the wound is apposed with
scissors. The apex of the V is pushed toward the eyelid mar-
4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures
 gin to allow realignment of the eyelid, and closed to form
(Fig. 5.45c). If the tension on the skin-muscle flap appears
a Y-shaped suture line with a single layer of simple inter-
excessive, additional blunt-sharp dissection with tenotomy
rupted sutures. Usually 4-0 to 5-0 non-absorbable suture
scissors should be performed. A few simple inteinupted
material is used in the horse eyelid. Sutures are removed in
absorbable sutures attaching the flap edges to the deeper
10-12 days.
tarsus may be used to reduce the tension on the flap and
skin sutures.
Surgical procedures for combined ectropion
and entropion
Postoperative management and complications
Postoperative treatment after these ectropion procedures
Certain breeds of dogs, such as the Bloodhound, St Bernard,
includes  primarily  topical  antibiotics/corticosteroids
for
and Clumber Spaniel, are selected for 'diamond'-appearing
10-14 days. Systemic antibiotics may be indicated fo1 the
palpebral fissures that 1esult in persistent conjunctival
more extensive procedures. The E-collar is used routinely
exposure and inflammation, impaired tear distribution on
to prevent the patient from rubbing the surgical site.
the ocular surfaces and to the nasolacrimal punta, lower
producing local irritation and even suture loss. Partial and
entropion, lateral canthal entropion, and often heavy and
complete temporary tarsorrhaphies can provide some coun-
excessive facial skinfolds and ears. Eyelid lengths, especially
teltension for these procedures if necessary. All sutures
the lower, are excessive and the lateral canthus unstable,
should be removed at 7-10 days.
resulting in a sagging lower lid and inverted upper and
The main goal of these procedures is to obtain a reason-
lower lateral canthi. A poorly developed lateral canthal liga-
id e-u e  rn  a
ment o1 excessive tension on this area, as well as variable
fissure. To avoid overcolrection and the more serious
enophthalmia, are other complicating disorders.
117
Surgery of the eyelids
Surgeries to colrect combined lower ectropion and lateral
the curve of the lower and upper eyelids, respectively, into
canthal entropion must include two concepts: 1) to shorten
the lateral canthus (Fig. 5.46c). A skin incision is used to
the lower lid; and 2) to stabilize the lateral canthus and co1-
connect the two incisions, creating a trapezoid shape; the
Iect the entropion. Available surgeries can effectively address
skin-orbicularis oculi section is undermined and excised
the lower ectropion, but lateral canthal stability can still
(Fig. 5.46d). The wound is then closed, resulting in a single
be a problem. Surgeries fo1 combined ectropion-entropion
include the traditional ectropion procedures, i.e., Wyman,
sutures and a figure-of-eight suture at the new lid commis-
the modified Kuhnt-Szymanowski, and the arrowhead
sures (Fig. 5.46e,f). As dehiscence occurred in nearly 50%
entropion technique combined with wedge removal of the
of the patients, a double-layer closure (palpebral conjunc-
outer lower eyelid, and newer methods including those
tiva-tarsus and orbicularis oculi-skin) is recommended,
described by Gutbrod and Tietz, Bigelbach (can also be used 
especially in large and giant breeds of dogs.
for the medial canthus), and Bedford. The newer surgeries
If this procedure is used for the medial canthus, both the
shorten the lower eyelid, and attempt to stabilize the lateral
upper and lower lacrimal puncta are identified and avoided.
canthus and coirect the entropion. In the Gutbrod-Tietz
Eyelid shortening in the medial canthal procedure is thereby
technique the lower eyelid is shortened and the lateral can-
 limited to the distance the puncta are from the medical can-
thus is removed. In Bigelbach's procedure a combined tar-
thus. After this surgery, approximately 30% of the patients
sorrhaphy-canthoplasty is used fo1 eithe1 lateral o1 medial
Iequired additional surgeries (Hotz-Celsus, Stades, forehead
canthal disorders. Bedford modified the Kuhnt-Szyma-
skin resections) to help 1esolve the combined ectropion-
nowski procedure with additional splitting and resection
entropion.
of the upper eyelid. Combined ectropion-entropion
patients are difficult to resolve and additional surgeries such
Bedford's modification of the Kuhnt-
as facial skin lifts o1 resections may be necessary.
Szymanowski technique
Bedford recently described a series of dogs treated with a
Bigelbach's lateral tarsorrhaphy-canthoplasty
modification of the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure in
In Bigelbach's procedure the lower and uppel eyelids can
which the lower eyelid margo-intermarginalis is translocated
be shortened 20-25% in an attempt to stabilize the lateral
to a new position above the lateral canthus to shorten the
01 medial canthus. A trapezoid-shaped section of skin and
lowel eyelid and help stabilize the lateral canthus. By two
orbicularis oculi muscle is excised from the lateral canthus
skin incisions by scalpel blade, a triangular skin flap is con-
(Fig. 5.46a). By scalpel blade, two 2 mm incisions are
structed at the lateral canthus (Fig. 5.47a,b). The 3-6 cm
made perpendicular to the eyelid margins: the length of
lowel skin incision continues the curve of the lowel eyelid:
these incisions from the lateral or medial canthus will deter-
the lateral incision is 45° to the original lower skin incision
mine the extent of the eyelid shortening (Fig. 5.46b).
and ends at the point determined to be the correct position
Two curved skin incisions twice the length of the
lid
for the lateral canthus. The skin flap is excised, leaving
shortening are then made dorsally and ventrally, following
beneath the orbicularis oculi muscle. The lower and upper
A
?
?
Fig. 5.46 In the lateral tarsorrhaphy-canthoplasty method by Bigelbach, a trapezoid-shaped section of skin and orbicularis muscle is excised from the lateral
pll aun jo zuanxa aua yew Aaul suibiew para jamol pue jaddn aun on deinipuadiad apew ane (-a pue g-y) suoisiou! ladjens ww z oml (e) snyaue
shortening. (b) A curved skin incision is extended from the lateral canthus following the curvature of the lower eyelid. (c) Similarly, a skin incision is performed
from the lateral canthus following the curvature of the upper eyelid. (d) Additional skin incisions are used to extend the lid margin incisions and outer aspects
of the curved skin incisions. These two wedges of skin are then excised. (e) The resultant surgical defect is trapezoid in shape, and the apposing edges are
 papuawwonau s! (uiys pue (eapounjuonosien jo snoaueanngns) aunsop janel-oml (4) smoue bupnauuon Aq panenipu!
118
Surgical procedures for combined ectropion and entropior
A
?
C
?
G
H
K
Fig. 5.47 In Bedford's modification of the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure, the upper eyelid is also shortened and incorporated into the lower lid and canthus
surgery (which shorten the lower lid). (a) Following the curvature of the lower eyelid, a skin incision is constructed with its point at the new lateral canthus.
pue eapounjuonosien onu! pasiou! s! uibuew paa aol ayl (o) sanssn snoauenno buuapun sai wouy sossios Aq paassip Ainyauen s! dey uiys siul (9)
 5iossis Ag paneiedas aue pll aun jo suakel oml aul (p) bujuaoys pll aun jo yabual aun sanewixoudde zeyn aouensip e ioy siakel apsnwu lnoo suejnoiquo-uiys
toward the base of the lids to a depth of several millimeters and laterally to become confluent with the skin flap. (e) The upper eyelid margin is incised 
similarly, and its two layers (skin-orbicularis oculi and tarsoconjunctiva) separated by blunt scissor dissection. (f) From the upper eyelid, a wedge of outer
skin-orbicularis is excised by scissors, with its tip at the new lateral canthus. (g) The base of the original skin flap is excised by scissors following the upper lid
curvature. (h) In a similar fashion, the lower eyelid tarsoconjunctival wedge is excised. (i) The eventual edges that appose are indicated after the wedges 
algequosge pandnuanu aldwis yaim snuues euael mau jauui aun wuoy on pasodde s! jakel lennsunjuososien jadaap aul (! pasoxa uaaq aney dey ulys pue
sutures (knots buried). (k) The remaining lower skin-orbicularis flap is shifted dorsally and laterally (to complete the shortening of the lids and raise the
lateral canthus), and secured with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
eyelid margins are split at the ‘gray line' (opening of the
[n a series of 22 dogs, including St Bernards (8), Blood-
meibomian glands) to a distance that equals the target
hounds (6), Clumbe1 Spaniels (4), English Cocker Spaniels
shortening (Fig. 5.47c-e). The lower tarsoconjunctival and
(2)。 and Neapolitan Mastiffs (2),。 surgical shortening of
upper lid skin-orbicularis oculi muscle triangular flaps
the eyelids was attained, but 5 dogs required additional
are excised, leaving overlapping lid sections (Fig. 5.47f-h).
forehead skin resections for optimum effect.
With both upper and lower eyelids shortened, the fellow
Grussendorf procedure
rupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.47ij). The 1emaining
lower skin-orbicularis oculi muscle flap is advanced dor-
In the procedure recently reported by Gnussendorf, both
sally and laterally into the triangular lateral canthal defect,
the upper and lower eyelids are shortened, and the lateral
and sutured in place with 3-0 to 4-0 simple internupted
le aruns uonen e Aq paxy pue pauonsodai si snqun
non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.47k).
the lateral canthus in giant breeds of dogs. This procedure
119
5
Surgery of the eyelids
is a further modification of the Wyman lateral canthoplasty
described previously.
The excessively long upper and lower lids are shortened,
up to one-third of their length, by removing the involved
lid margins to permit shifting of the lids laterally, and
Iemoval as triangles of skin later. A lineal skin incision is
  l   n s  a o 
lateral orbital ligament, and a new lateral canthus is created
with a figure-of-eight non-absorbable suture connecting the
lateral canthus and lateral orbital ligament. This suture is
tightened to establish a normal-appearing lateral canthus.
 se paaoi aie sns Pi lmoi e lddn sins u
triangles. The lateral canthal and lid wounds are closed by
simple interupted non-absorbable sutures, appearing as an
'X' or cross at closure.
OTHER SURGICAL PROCEDURES
Fig. 5.48 Pekingese with a melting corneal ulcer and lagophthalmos. As
part of the clinical management of the corneal ulcer and abscess, surgical
Surgical procedures to decrease palpebral
reduction in the size of the palpebral fissure is recommended.
fissure size
Surgical techniques to reduce the size of the palpebral fissure
Surgical procedures to change the size of the palpebral fissure
include the lateral canthoplasty (modified Fuch's), the Jen-
may involve the medial canthus, lateral canthus o1, in severe
sen/Roberts' medial and lateral ‘pocket' canthoplasties, and
cases, a combination of both areas. Surgical procedures at the
 n  a  son p 
medial canthus must first identify the problem area(s), and,
by Kaswan. Most of the surgical techniques that address ectro-
 often by cannulation with a 2-0 blue or green monofilament
pion, as well as the combination of entropion and ectropion,
nylon suture, locate the lacrimal puncta and canaliculi. The
also decrease the size of the palpebral fissure.
lateral canthus is most accessible, but surgical sites in this area
pue hs jo y au  m adone oi ie ano aie
Medial canthoplasty
the increased movements of the lateral canthal region may
also complicate these surgical procedures by causing greater
The medial canthoplasty procedure reduces the size of the
short-tem stress on the suture line and long-term tension
of the apposed eyelid tissues. Fo1 both the medial and lateral
medial upper and lower eyelids. As the length of the eyelid
canthoplasty procedures the usual goal is to reduce the palpe-
union increases, the size of the palpebral fissure decreases,
bral fissure by one-fourth to one-third.
but the correction is more limited with this method. Both
The overal size of the palpebral fissure can significantly
upper and lower lacrimal puncta should be identified and.
influence the health of the conjunctiva and the cornea.
if desired, can be cannulated with short lengths of green o1
Palpebral fissures that are larger than normal (euryble-
blue non-filament nylon suture. The medial canthal eyelid
pharon) have eyelids (macroblepharon) that are potentially
margin is everted, and the eyelid margin incised to a depth
longer than noimal. Enlarged palpebral fissures are often
of 3-4 mm by the No. 6400 microsurgical blade, starting
associated with an increased frequency of recurrent con-
1-2 mm medial of the lower lacrimal punctum and termi-
junctival and corneal diseases (Fig. 5.48). Breeds predis-
nating 1-2 mm medial of the upper lacrimal punctum
posed to macropalpebral fissures include the Bloodhound,
(Fig. 5.49a). Apposition of the surgical wound is by two-
St Bernard, English Cocker Spaniel, American Cocker Span-
layer closure. The tarsoconjunctival layer is apposed by a
iel, and English Springer Spaniel. Macropalpebral fissures
4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable sutures. The eyelid
may be those in excess of 35 mm long. but this limit is 1ela-
skin and muscle layer are apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple
tive until additional breed-1elated information is developed.
interrupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.49b).
Surgical reduction of normal sized palpebral fissures may
be indicated in the brachycephalic breeds with exophthalmia,
Pocket technique (Roberts and Jensen)
such as the Pekingese, Shih Tzu, and Lhasa Apso. These
breeds often develop recurrent central corneal ulcerations that
The pocket technique, described by Roberts and Jensen,
have the potential to progress and even perforate. The blink
is technically more difficult; however, with the multiple layers
leflex may be weak and incomplete, resulting in a thin preo-
of tissue apposition, the attachment of the upper and lower
cular film on the center of the cornea and an increased risk of
eyelids at the medial canthus is stronger. The technique can
epithelial loss. The 1etention of topical 1ose Bengal by the
also be used to treat medial entropion of this area. Because
central cornea suggests that this region is at risk for ulceration
this method uses a flap of palpebral conjunctiva to secure
and confirms the lagophthalmia. Surgical reduction in the
the lower pocket, the function of the upper lacrimal punctum
size of the palpebral fissure may decrease coineal exposure
is lost. This method can also remove the caruncle, and pre-
and hopefully the possibility of recurrent corneal ulceration.
vent the related medial trichiasis and epiphora. The pocket
Some of these dogs sleep with the central cornea exposed.
technique may also be used for the lateral canthus.
120
Surgical procedures to decrease palpebral fissure size
A
B
A
B
Fig. 5.49 The medial canthoplasty procedure reduces the size of the
Fig. 5.51 Permanent lateral canthotomy. (a) The upper and lower lid and 
palpebral fissure. (a) After identification of both upper and lower lacrimal
the lateral canthal margins are excised by tenotomy scissors to a depth of 3-
puncta, the eyelids margins are incised to a depth of 3-4 mm by tenotomy
4 mm: the longer the incision, the greater the reduction in the size of the
scissors, starting 1-2 mm medial of the lower lacrimal punctum and 
 palpebral fissure. (b) Two layers of sutures are used to appose the eyelid 
terminating 1-2 mm medial of the upper lacrimal punctum. (b) The surgical
 margins. The tarsoconjunctival layer is apposed by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple
wound is apposed by two layers of sutures for maximal strength. The
continuous absorbable suture. The skin-orbicularis oculi muscle layer is
tarsoconjuncival layer is apposed by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous
apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
absorbable suture. The skin-orbicularis oculi muscle layer is apposed by
4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
technically easy, the tension on these apposed tissues appears
greater than that at the medial canthus, and long-term atro-
The upper and lower eyelids are split to a depth of about
phy of the surgical union may occur. The upper and lower
10 mm at the 'gray line', starting 2-3 mm medial to the
 lower lacrimal punctum and continuing around the medial
sors, to a depth of about 3-4 mm (Fig. 5.51a). At this level
canthus, stopping 2-3 mm lateral of the upper lacrimal
both the meibomian glands and the pigmentation of the
punctum, using the No. 6400 o1 No. 6700 microsurgical
eyelid margins are excised, resulting in a continuous cover of
blade (Fig. 5.50a). Small tenotomy scissors may be used
eyelid hai1 over the surgical union. The length of the eyelid
for the deeper aspects of the dissection to develop the
margins excised directly influences the reduction in the pal-
'pocket'. A small strip of the skin portion of the split eyelid
 pebral fissure. The upper and lower eyelid surgical wounds
margins  is  carefully
excised
by
tenotomy scissois
are apposed by a two-layer closure. The tarsoconjunctival
(Fig. 5.50b). A triangular flap of palpebral conjunctiva is cre-
-qse sonuun adus o- o o e  pasode si ra
  e ie  Aq siosss n q pane
able suture. The eyelid skin and muscle layer is apposed
the lateral end of the split upper eyelid which sacrifices the
by 4-0 to 6-0 simple internupted non-absorbable sutures
upper lacrimal punctum. A 4-0 non-absorbable suture is
(Fig. 5.51b).
inserted through the lower eyelid skin into the lower pocket,
and then manipulated dorsally to emerge from the pocket
Lateral canthoplasty (Fuch's)
(Fig. 5.50c). The suture is placed in the tip of the upper palpe-
bral conjunctival flap, and then directed into the lower pocket
The lateral canthoplasty, modified from Fuch, provides a
to exit the skin. After the conjunctival flap is secured by suture,
stronger permanent union at the lateral canthus by rotating
the upper and lower eyelid margins are apposed by 4-0 to 5-0
a section of lower eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle
simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.50d).
ans leiins iie aul ajap Pil iaddn eiaiel e o!
area provides a stronger union for the permanent lateral
canthoplasty.
Lateral reduction canthoplasty
 Both lateral upper and lower eyelids are split by the No.
Lateral canthoplasty can reduce the size of the palpebral fis-
6400 o1 6700 microsurgical blade at the 'gray line' into
s n se pa a sde ad a a
outer skin and muscle, and inner tarsoconjunctival layers.
millimeters at the lateral canthus. This procedure is also
The length of eyelid cleavage will determine the 1eduction
known as the lateral permanent tarsorrhaphy. Although
in the size of the palpebral fissure (Fig. 5.52a). The medial
A
B
C
Fig. 5.50 Medial 'pocket' canthoplasty procedure. (a) Both eyelids are split at the 'gray line' into tarsoconjunctiva and skin-orbicularis oculi muscle layers
 assp pue subuew para jeupuen lepawu aun anowau on pasn ae siossos Awonouan lews (9) eund lewuoel amol pue jaddn aua jo lepaw wuw s-z
10-15 mm into the splitlid. (c) A triangular fap of upper tarsoconjuntiva is fashioned by scissors and its leading edge appsed deep within the lower lid
'pocket' with a 4-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable suture. (d) After the upper conjunctival flap is secured in the lower pocket, the skin-orbicularis oculi
'saunans alqequosqe-uou pandnuanu! aldwis 0-s on 0- yai pasodde ane siakel
12
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A)
B
Fig. 5.52 The lateral canthoplasty, modified from Fuch, rotates triangular sections of upper and lower lid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle. (a) The lateral
portions of the upper and lower lids are split by the No. 6700 microsurgical blade. (b) A triangular section of upper eyelid is excised by tenotomy scissors.
The lower eyelid is incised by tenotomy scissors, and its margin is excised. (c) The lower lid section is rotated into the upper lid defect. (d) The
tarsoconjunctival layers are apposed with a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. The lid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle layers are apposed
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
edge of the lower eyelid is incised by small tenotomy scissors
single 4-0 to 6-0 interrupted mattress non-absorbable suture.
to a depth of about 10-15 mm, and the lower lid margin is
The 1emaining skin flap is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple inteI-
trimmed from this area (Fig. 5.52b). Triangular sections of
nupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.53d).
the upper eyelid skin and muscle layer and the lower tarsocon-
junctiva are excised by tenotomy scissois. The medial aspects
Surgical procedures to increase
 of the upper tarsoconjunctiva and lower lid flap are rotated
and apposed to the respective defects by two layers of sutures
palpebral fissure size
(Fig. 5.52c). The tarsoconjunctival layer is apposed by a 4-0
to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. The external skin
Smaller than noimal palpebral fissures have shorter than
paidrau aldus o-9 on o-v Aq pasodde si iaael asn pue
 normal eyelids, and often lower and/or upper lid entropion
non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.52d).
and lateral canthal entropion. Breeds predisposed to micio-
palpebral fissures and the often concurrent entropion
Lateral canthoplasty (Wyman and Kaswan)
include the Chow Chow, Kerry Blue Terrie1, Collie, Shetland
Sheepdog, and the English Bull Terrier (Fig. 5.54). The surgi-
The lateral canthoplasty method by Wyman and modified
cal techniques to increase the size of the palpebral fissure
by Kaswan, like the previous method, strengthens the
may also address the entropion that often affects both the
permanent union of the lateral upper and lower eyelids
upper and lower eyelids. Surgical procedures to increase
by creating additional surface areas of the apposed tissues.
the size of the palpebral fissure include lateral augmentation
A full-thickness incision of the upper eyelid is performed
canthoplasty and the arrowhead procedure combined with
lateral canthotomy.
upper lid length (Fig. 5.53a). The upper eyelid margin and
the corresponding length lateral lower eyelid margin are
Lateral augmentation canthotomy
incised by the Beaver No. 6400 o1 6700 microsurgical blade
Lateral augmentation canthoplasty increases the size of the
and excised by tenotomy scissors. A similar triangular section
palpebral fissure by a short incision of the lateral canthus
of palpebral conjunctiva from the lateral upper lid is excised
and apposition of the incised eyelid surface. The procedure
by tenotomy scissors (Fig. 5.53b). The upper and lower pal-
is quite similar to the lateral canthotomy. The lateral canthus
pebral conjunctival, tarsal, and subcutaneous layers 
is incised by tenotomy scissors fo1 5-10 mm (Fig. 5.55a).
apposed by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture
 The length varies with the extent of the palpebral fissure
(Fig. 5.53c). The apposing eyelid margins are attached by a
enlargement. The palpebral conjunctiva is undermined in
A
?
C
?
Fig. 5.53 Lateral canthoplasty by Wyman and modified by Kaswan. (a) Tenotomy scissors are used to incise the upper eyelid to full thickness (usually at
the junction of the middle and lateral one-thirds of the eyelid), and excise the upper and lower eyelid and lateral canthal margins. (b) Corresponding but
opposite triangular sections of lower eyelid and upper palpebral conjunctiva are excised by scissors. (c) The palpebral conjunctival wounds are apposed with
a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. (d) The skin-muscle layers are apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
22
Surgical repair of eyelid lacerations
A
B
Fig. 5.54 Micropalpebral fissure in a Chow Chow. (a) Often micropalpebral fisure is combined with entropion of the lateral portions of the upper and lower
eyelids and the lateral canthus. (b) Correction of micropalpebral fissure and entropion in the Chow Chow with the arrowhead procedure and lateral
canthotomy at 5 days postoperatively.
Nasal fold trichiasis and resection in dogs
Several brachycephalic breeds of dogs have large nasal folds
whose hair may contact the medial nictitating membrane.
conjunctiva, and cornea. The resultant low-grade chronic irri-
tation results in epiphora and conjunctival hyperemia, inflam-
mation, and pigmentation. The corneal sequelae include
B
vascularization, pigmentation, and even ulceration. Medical
teatment consists of the application of heavy petrolatum oint-
Fig. 5.55 The lateral canthotomy may be modified to increase the size of
ment and hair wax to paste the nasal fold hairs away from the
the palpebral fissure. (a) The lateral canthus is incised by scissors for 5-
eye. Surgical removal of the upper one-half or the entire nasal
10 mm. (b) The palpebral conjunctiva is undermined to the level of the fornix
fold is the permanent method to prevent trichiasis. If medial
by tenotomy scissors, and apposed to the canthotomy wound by 4-0 to 6-
 0 simple interupted non-absorbable sutures.
entropion, exophthalmia, and lagophthalmia are present,
reduction in the size of the palpebral fissure with one of the
medial canthoplasty procedures should be considered.
the area to the level of the fornix by blunt scissor dissection to
The base of the nasal fold is carefully inspected and
line the edges of the new canthus. The palpebral conjunctiva
then incised by Mayo scissors (Fig. 5.57a). Hemostasis is
is apposed to the new lateral canthus by 4-0 to 6-0 simple
interrupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.55b).
 pasode are a s a l pssaa a essa
4-0 to 5-0 simple inteirupted non-absorbable sutures
Arrowhead procedure for entropion
-iod jenba asxa oi Aressnau si aie [eads (qs's 8)
with lateral canthotomy
tions of both nasal folds to ensure symmetry (Fig. 5.58).
 Nasal skinfolds should not be removed in show dogs.
The arrowhead procedure is detailed in a previous section
under surgical correction of entropion. The lateral canthus
can be incised as part of this procedure to increase the size
Surgical treatment of chalazion
of the palpebral fissure (Fig. 5.56). The edges of the lateral
canthal wound are apposed to the adjacent palpebral
A chalazion is a chronic granulomatous inflammation of the
conjunctiva.
tarsal or meibomian glands, and is presented as a swelling
immediately beneath the palpebral conjunctiva. The recom-
mended treatment fo1 a chalazion is surgical drainage. After
a short-acting injectable general anesthetic, the affected eye-
lid is grasped with a chalazion clamp (Fig. 5.59). After a
short linear incision, the chronic tarsal adenitis and seba-
ceous secretions are curetted from the area. The wound is
left to heal by secondary intention.
Surgical repair of eyelid lacerations
Eyelid lacerations are not infrequent in all animal species,
and often require surgical repai1. Eyelid lacerations may be
divided into partial and full thickness, and marginal and
Fig. 5.56 The lateral canthotomy may be added to the arrowhead
non-marginal. The eyelids are highly vascular and tissue
 procedure for entropion to increase the size of the palpebral fissure.
debridement immediately prior to 1epair should be
123
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Fig. 5.57 Treatment of nasal fold trichiasis. (a)
The nasal folds are carefully excised by curved 
Mayo scissors. (b) The wound edges are apposed
with 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable
sutures.
A
B
Injuries at a 90° angle to the eyelid margin have a greatel
potential to affect eyelid function and cosmesis than injuries
parallel to the lid margin (Fig. 5.60).
The eyelid margin should be apposed as accurately as
possible. Scar tissue at the eyelid margin can cause chronic
irritation of the conjunctiva and cornea. Sutures at the eyelid
margin should have their knots external to the 'gray line'
to avoid contact with the coinea. Inflamed and swollen
eyelids may develop temporary entropion. Two layers of
sutures are recommended: an inner layer of simple continu-
ous absorbable suture for the deeper palpebral conjunctiva
and tarsus, and simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures
fo1 the external orbicularis oculi muscle and skin layer. A fig-
Fig. 5.58 Postoperative appearance of a patient with the nasal folds
ure-of-eight suture pattern is recommended for lid margin
removed. The left eye has exotropia, healed corneal ulcer, and optic nerve
injuries, and may be continued to the upper lid to provide
atrophy from a previous traumatic proptosis.
tension on the injury site (Fig. 5.61). After any lid laceration
of the medial canthus, the lacrimal puncta and canaliculi
should be identified and flushed. In the event of transection,
the opposing ends should be isolated and cannulated with
2-0 to 3-0 monofilament nylon. The nylon suture catheter
should be left in position for 4-6 weeks or until the healing
of the area is complete. After the repair of extensive eyelid
injuries, a complete temporary tarsorrhaphy may be indi-
cated to protect the cornea because of the impaired eyelid
functions and blink reflex.
Eyelid trauma in the horse
The horse seems prone to eyelid lacerations from trapping
the eyelid margin on metal rings, bucket handles, doo1
latches, waterers, feed racks, lead shank clips, etc. Horses
are particularly prone to eyelid lacerations because of the
prominence of thei1 eye and their tendency toward very sud-
den head movements when startled. When eyelid trauma is
present o1 suspected, a thorough ophthalmic examination
Fig. 5.59 With the eyelid grasped by the chalazion clamp, the palpebral
leo iaqo on Ainlui no au on paoad aq Pinous
conjunctiva is incised and the contents of the chalazion are removed by
structures.
curetta ge.
When hematomas o1 eyelid edema occur, initial treatment
is with the use of ice packs, dimethyl sulfoxide applied to
the eyelids, and administration of flunixin meglumine
minimal. There are several guidelines for the surgical coirec-
(1 mg/kg IV q24h). If eyelid closure is impaired o1 if facial
Aq asodde aq pinous suoneaei l sanlui aa jo un
nerve damage is present, a temporary tarsorrhaphy or nicti-
tating membrane flap may be used to aid in the protection
considerable fibrosis and distortion of the eyelids and
of the globe. If eyelid abrasions occur, topical antibiotic
lid margin that may eventually require surgical correction.
cintments are used.
124
Surgical repair of eyelid lacerations
A
B
Fig. 5.60 Example of full-thickness eyelid lacerations in the dog. (a) Preoperative appearance of a recurrent lateral lower lid laceration. No tissue should be
trimmed, and the lacerated lid carefully reapposed starting with the lid margin. (b) Appearance of a medial upper lid laceration that was improperly managed,
and the lacerated lid excised. The remaining scarred lid is causing direct damage to the underlying cornea. Note the superficial corneal vascularization in the
exposed cornea
of eyelid scar formation and secondary corneal damage
is likely. Eyelid lacerations in the horse should be flushed
with saline and cleaned to remove all foreign material.
Lacerations less than 12 h old are cleaned and repaired as
soon as practical. Older lacerations or longstanding infected
 hssap ona u m pd aq r spm
24-48 h and then closed. Intravenous flunixin meglumine
is administered preoperatively.
sia, o1 standing with sedation and moto1 and sensory nerve
blocks for the affected area of the eyelid. The wound is
prepared with dilute povidone-iodine solution. Debride-
Fig. 5.61 The figure-of-eight suture pattern can be used to assist in closure
ment should be limited; the wound edges may be scraped
of the tarsoconjunctival layer in vertical lid lacerations. The exact apposition
with a surgical blade or rubbed with a surgical sponge
of the eyelid margin helps reduce the likelihood of a postoperative notch.
soaked in dilute povidone-iodine solution. Surgical scrub
is not usually used on the wound. However, shampoos that
Lacerations should be managed promptly to avoid distor-
are compatible with mucous membranes (baby shampoo)
tion from severe swelling, inflammation, infection, scarring
s    ps a a oi   s
and loss of function (Fig. 5.62). Lacerated tissue should not
should be excised, but wound debridement is minimal.
be excised. Even with the best plastic techniques, it is im-
Every attempt should be made to preserve the entire eyelid
possible to reconstruct the mucocutaneous junction of the
margin. Closure is perfoimed in two layers; the taisocon-
eyelid margin. If eyelid margin is sacrificed, the occurrence
junctival layer is closed with 5-0 to 7-0 polyglactin 910 in
Fig. 5.62 (a) Preoperative appearance of a full-thickness upper eyelid laceration in a young horse. (b) Immediate postoperative appearance after a two-layer
repair.
125
Surgery of the eyelids
a simple interrupted or continuous pattern. Suture knots are
buried to prevent corneal irritation.
The skin is closed beginning at the eyelid margin to prevent
scar formation and irritation of the coinea. Usually 4-0 to 6-0
non-absorbable suture material is used in the skin. A figure-
of-eight suture is used to align the eyelid margin. The remain-
der of the skin wound is closed in a simple inteirupted
pattein or an alternating simple interupted and vertical
mattress suture pattein. Usually I leave the ends long on the
first figure-of-eight suture and tie the ends into the knot of
the interrupted suture adjacent to the eyelid margin suture.
If there is significant eyelid swelling or lid closure is impaired,
a complete temporary tarsorrhaphy may be indicated.
Postoperative care of eyelid lacerations should include
systemic antibiotics are indicated for 5-7 days. Tetanus pro-
Fig. 5.63 Tarsal adenocarcinoma of the upper eyelid in a 10-year-old dog.
phylaxis should be verified by history o1 administered at the
time of surgical repair. Placement of a subpalpebral lavage
system will facilitate topical application of solutions to the
Certain neoplasms, however, such as the melanomas, should
eye. Postoperative swelling can be reduced by the adminis-
be resected and widely excised. The average age of dogs
tration of systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
affected with eyelid neoplasia is about 8 years, and the
(flunixin meglumine 1 mg/kg [V) immediately before su-
Beagle, Siberian Husky, and English Setter appea1 to have a
gery. Postoperative edema will be lessened by the applica-
higher lisk. The tarsal gland o1 meibomian adenoma and
tion of ice packs for the first 24 h after surgery. If swelling
adenocarcinomas are the most frequent group of tumois
  sssa  s le u t d 
(about 50%), and are best visualized by everting the lid and
leduce the swelling and discomfort at the surgical site.
  )    
Dimethyl sulfoxide has been applied to the periorbital skin
10% of canine malignant lid tumors are locally invasive
to reduce postsurgical swelling and discomfort.
and include melanoma, basal cell carcinoma, mast cell sal-
Rubbing or self-mutilation is often a concein in the horse, and
coma, squamous cell carcinoma, and hemangiosarcoma.
o n e  n a s  n s is 
When the recurrence rates of all types of canine eyelid neo-
-oqe usuaf  Iaaeag) dnaa pos o osd e 
plasms were compared after surgical excision o1 cryotherapy.
tories, Loveland, CO.). Skin sutures are usually removed 8-12
'   s  l    a
days after surgery. In situations when tension on the suture line
After cryotherapy. the mean leculrence late was about
cannot be avoided, sutures are left in place fo1 18-24 days.
8 months.
Improper closure of eyelid lacerations may
 In contrast to the dog, eyelid malignancy in cats is high.
lead
to
abnormal function and complications, including chronic
Squamous cell carcinomas constitute about 6o% of eyelid
ulcerative keratitis, cicatricial entropion o1 ectropion, con-
neoplasms, and the average age of affected cats is about 10
junctivitis, corneal fibrosis, and pigmentary keratitis.
years (Fig. 5.64). Other malignant feline lid tumors include
fibrosarcoma, adenocarcinoma, basal cell carcinoma, mela-
noma, and hemangiosarcoma. Feline eyelid neoplasms gen-
Surgical procedures for minor eyelid
erally require rather wide excision. For feline squamous cell
neoplasms in small animals
carcinomas of the eyelids, surgery is often combined with
 pn sian i u  p 
Variable size defects of the eyelids result from eyelid agenesis,
the excision of congenital, inflammatory, and neoplastic
masses, and eyelid loss after injuries. If these defects are less
than one-third to one-fourth of the total eyelid length, apposi-
tion of the defect may be achieved by sutures. If the lid defect
approximates up to one-third of the lid length, a 'relief lateral
breeds, like the American and English Cocker Spaniels, have
considerable eyelid length and sizeable defects can be accom
modated by simple apposition. However, in other breeds, like
the Dobeiman and Collie, surplus eyelid tissue is very limited.
and similar size defects may require grafts.
In cats, in contrast to dogs, most lid neoplasms are malig-
nant and wider excision is necessary. In cats, the sliding 01
grafting of adjacent lid and facial tissue is often necessary
as 'surplus' lid tissue is very limited.
Although about 20-30% of canine eyelid neoplasms are
Fig. 5.64 Squamous cell carcinoma of the lower eyelid and palpebral
conjunctiva in an aged cat.
26
Surgical procedures for minor eyelid neoplasms in small animals
healing there is an obvious notch in the eyelid margin
where the postoperative tension is greatest. The affected area
udonua io uoizie e Aq padse aq keu p au jo
clamp. The sides of the eyelid neoplasm are excised by
tenotomy scissors or a Beaver No. 6400 or 6700 microsurgi-
d a   si sisis (e's ) a 
sure o1 point electrocautery. The wound is usually apposed
by two layers of sutures. A 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous
A
B
absorbable suture is used to appose the tarsoconjunctival
Fig. 5.65 Full-thickness "V' or wedge eyelid excision. (a) A wedge of affected
e s r  o so e  a r
eyelid is excised by tenotomy scissors. (b) The wound is closed by two layers 
by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures
aldwis 0-g on 0- e Aq pasodde s JaAel leApounluonosie au1 saunans jo
(Fig. 5.65b). The suture at the external aspect of the eyelid
continuous absorbable suture. The skin-orbicularis oculi muscle layer is
margin is the most critical for lid alignment and to reduce
apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures.
the likelihood of a notch developing postoperatively. [n
large dogs, an interrupted mattress or figure-of-eight suture
excise masses of the eyelids without grafts of adjacent tissues
is recommended.
include the partial-thickness excision, the simple V’ tech-
A relief lateral canthotomy may be necessary if the wedge
nique (full-thickness excision), and the four-sided method.
 of lid resection approximates one-third of the lid length.
In horses and cattle, the same eyelid surgical techniques
With upper lid surgical defects, a modified lateral cantho-
can be readily adapted. Like cats, the majority of lid tumo1s
plasty may be performed (Fig. 5.66a). The 1emoval of a tri-
are malignant, and surgery is combined with other modal-
angle of skin from the lateral canthus permits the shift of
ities, such as local chemotherapy, to produce acceptable
this area to form a new lateral eyelid margin. The two sides
'cure' rates in horses and cattle.
of the skin triangle are apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple intel-
nupted non-absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.66b).
Partial lid thickness excision of eyelid masses
Eyelid neoplasms may affect only the skin and subcutane-
Four-sided full-thickness excision
ous layers, or the tarsal layer as with meibomian gland
 The four-sided full-thickness excision technique provides
masses. Many of these masses can be excised conservatively
improved results compared to the V' type method. This p1o-
without creating a full-thickness lid defect. Masses on the
cedure creates a larger surface area of the eyelid to distribute
eyelid skin can be excised by scalpel using a circula1 01
the tension associated with the apposition of the wound.
oval-shaped incision. Closure should be vertical or at 90°
The eyelid neoplasm is excised by tenotomy scissois to cie-
to the eyelid margin for lower lid defects and parallel to
ate a four-sided defect (Fig. 5.67a). The wound is apposed
the upper lid margin to reduce the scar tissue effect on lid
Aq pasodde si eaunluoosii au sains jo siael omi kq
movement. Other skin flaps, such as the Z' plasty tians.
a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture, and the
positional, pedicle, advancement, and rhombic types, can
skin-muscle layer by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-
be used for partial-thickness lid defects after neoplasm
absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.67b).
removal.
The eyelid may be grasped and everted by a chalazion
Postoperative management and complications
clamp to expose tarsal o1 meibomian gland tumors. The
tumor is excised by tenotomy scissors, and the palpebral
The usual postoperative treatment after the excision of
   r n  i  
small lid masses is topical antibiotics, often combined with
topical corticosteroids. The E-collar is useful to prevent the
'V' full-thickness excision
patient from rubbing and possibly interrupting the surgical
wound. The most frequent result after these procedures is
The V-shaped full-thickness excision of eyelid neoplasms
the development of an obvious V-shaped notch at the eyelid
is frequently used for most types of canine eyelid neo-
margin. This can usually be avoided by use of the four-sided
plasms. The V' method is simple, but not infrequently afte1
procedure.
(A)
Fig. 5.66 A relief lateral canthotomy may be indicated when the "V' shaped and four-sided fullthickness lid excision technigues are used. (a) The wedge
removed approximates one-third or more of the eyelid length. After a lateral canthotomy is performed by scissors, a triangular skin flap is incised at the lower
aspects of the lateral canthus with the Bard-Parker No. 15 scalpel blade. The skin flap is elevated from the subcutaneous tissues and excised by tenotomy
scissors. (b) The skin flap edges are apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The new upper lid margin should be covered by
palpebral conjunctiva, attached by a few 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
127
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
B
Fig. 5.67 The four-sided full-thickness eyelid excision technique. (a) The lid
mass is removed by tenotomy scissors, creating a four-sided surgical defect.
(b) Wound closure is by two layers of sutures. The inner tarsoconjunctiva is
-ulys a4l aunans alqequosqe snonuquos aldwis 0-9 on 0- e Aq pasodde
orbicularis oculi muscle layer is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-
absorbable sutures. The eyelid margin suture is carefully positioned on its 
aun jo uogisodde oexa apiAoud pue poenuoo leauioo plone on snadse jarno
eyelid margin. (c) Preoperative appearance of a large lid melanoma with its
base at the lid margin. The mass was excised using the four-sided full-
thickness technique. (d) Postoperative appearance several weeks later.
D
Reconstructive blepharoplasty after removal
Eyelid and tarsoconjunctival grafts should be handled
of eyelid masses in small animals
with care. Thei1 bases should be wide to assist perfusion
of the distal portion of the graft and prevent ischemia.
After tissue grafts, 0.5-1.0 mm contraction usually occurs
There are many different 1econstructive blepharoplastic
in small animals, and must be accommodated for in the
procedures available for small animals to repair defects
blepharoplastic procedure. Movement of eyelid and
that are one-third or more the length of the eyelid
taisoconjunctival grafts should be limited to maximize suc-
(Fig. 5.68). Some of these techniques include the sliding
cessful transposition. Partial-to-complete temporary taiso1-
skin flap, sliding 'Z' skin flap, semicircular skin graft, pedi-
rhaphies
are
usually
peifoimed after 1econstnictive
cle skin graft, tarsoconjunctival graft, palpebral conjuncti-
blepharoplasty in small animals. The closed eyelids reduce
'si eson ienq '(a pue hus) yeie iea
 graft movement, prevent lid trauma to the graft edges, and
rhomboid grafts, and the “bucket handle' (Cutler-Beard)
uuonosii iadaap a  ainsaid ioai aidde u
procedure. These blepharoplastic procedures can be modi-
and buccal mucosa grafts to reduce postoperative swelling.
fied for each patient, and are limited in application only
by the skill and imagination of the veterinarian. Additional
small animal patient from traumatizing the surgical site
surgical procedures are available in the standard human ocu-
and prematurely removing the sutures.
  rii  jo asaid a xn  
in humans presents additional opportunities as well as poten-
Sliding skin flap
tial complications. The upper eyelid has the unique characteI-
istics for the primary protection of the cornea, the major
The sliding skin flap or graft represents the most basic recon-
contributor for the blink 1eflex, the larger donor source of
structive blepharoplastic technique. It is used when surgical
autogenous full-thickness lid and tarsoconjunctival tissues,
the primary effect on the appearance of the eye, and in the
lid length. Sliding skin grafts should always be lined with
dog the only place for cilia. The lower lid is smaller. Its pri-
mucosa harvested from adjacent conjunctiva o1 moie
mary function is to capture and hold the tears, and facilitate
remote sites. Sliding skin flaps are appropriate for both
the medial movements of tears to the lower lacrimal punc-
upper and lower lid defects.
tum. A reasonable lower conjunctival foinix is essential to
After full-thickness excision of the lid neoplasm by scis.
hold the tears.
 sors o1 No. 6700 microsurgical blade, two slightly diverging
128
Reconstructive blepharoplasty after removal of eyelid masses in small animals
After liberal dissection to adequately separate the skin flap
from its subcutaneous attachments, the skin flap is moved
into the defect, thereby collapsing the Burow's triangles
(Fig. 5.69e). Before apposition of the skin flap, adjacent pal-
pebral and fornix conjunctivae are mobilized to cover the
deeper aspect of the skin flap. Other sources for mucosa to
line the skin flap include the tarsopalpebial conjunctiva
fom the upper lid and a free or island graft of buccal
mucosa. This dissection must provide adequate mucosa
without any tension to avoid excessive fibrosis and inversion
of the leading edge of the skin flap. After placement of the
leading edge of the skin flap about 0.5-1.0 mm above the
adjacent eyelid margin to compensate for postoperative
shrinkage of the graft, the sides of the skin flap are apposed
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures
Fig. 5.68 Extensive meibomian adenocarcinoma of the upper eyelid of a
(Fig. 5.69fg).
dog. Close inspection of the palpebral aspect of this eyelid mass will determine
whether conservative excision or reconstructive blepharoplasty is necessary.
 The conjunctiva is attached to the posterior aspects of
the skin flap by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorb-
able sutures with the knots buried or exposed on the eye-
lid flap skin. If some tension can be demonstrated on
the height of the defect (Fig. 5.69a,b). Two equal-sized
the skin flap, a complete temporary tarsorrhaphy is per-
triangles of skin (Burow's triangles) are excised to accom-
foimed and left in place for 4-6 weeks to provide
modate shifting the graft into the defect (Fig. 5.69c,d).
countertension.
A
?
E
F
Fig. 5.69 Sliding skin graft. (a) After full-thickness excision of the eyelid neoplasm, two slightly diverging skin incisions are continued from the base of the
wound. These skin incisions should be twice as long as the defec's height. (b) Intraoperative appearance, and removal of a full-thickness melanoma
punom (esibuns aua onu! ayeb aun bugls aneiey on pasoxa ane uys jo (sajbueun 5,moung) sajueun azis lenba oml (2) bop e u! paAa jamol aya wony
(d) Intraoperative appearance, showing construction of the sliding skin graft. (e) After extensive subcutaneous dissection under the skin graft, the flap is moved
into the wound. The leading edge of the skin graft should be 0.5-1.0 mm above the adjacent eyelid margin. (f The skin graft is secured by 4-0 to 6-0
simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The posterior aspects of the skin graft must be lined with mucosa, from adjacent palpebral conjunctiva, buccal
mucosa, or an island graft from bulbar conjunctiva of the opposite eye. (g) Immediate postoperative appearance, after completion of the lower sliding skin graft.
129
5
Surgery of the eyelids
'Z' plasty skin flap
Semicircular skin grafts
The Z' plasty is a modification of the sliding skin flap and
Semicircular skin grafts are used in dogs for 1estora-
is recommended for lateral defects of the upper eyelid.
tion of surgical defects involving 30-60% of the center of
The neoplasm is removed by 'en bloc' excision by tenotomy
scissors (Fig. 5.70a). After blunt-sharp dissection of the entire
rotational and sliding components. Following full-thickness
subcutaneous lateral canthus by scissors, two equilateral trian-
excision of eyelid neoplasms (Fig. 5.71a), the semicircula1
gles of skin are excised by the Beaver No. 6700 microsurgical
s    e   si  s
blade (Fig. 5.70b). The length of these skin triangles should
at the lateral canthus and of a length that approximates
be about 1 mm larger than the sides of the surgical defect.
the width of the surgical defect (Fig. 5.71b). Excision of a
The skin flap is slid ventrally to fill the upper lid defect and col-
Burow's triangle of skin at the end of the semicircular graft
lapse the lower skin triangle defect. The skin flap is apposed to
allows medial movement without focal terminal distortion.
the adjacent skin with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-
In the areas in which the semicircular flap is not covered
absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.70c). The posterio1 aspect ofthe skin
with conjunctiva, adjacent conjunctiva may be slid from
flap is lined by conjunctival mucosa, usually harvested from
the lateral canthal region and attached with absorbable
adjacent areas. The mucosa is apposed with a 4-0 to 6-0 simple
sutures with the knots buried (Fig. 5.71c,d). In areas in which
continuous absorbable suture (Fig. 5.70d).
a new eyelid margin occurs, the potential for trichiasis arises.
A
?
D
Fig. 5.70 The 'Z' plasty procedure is a modified sliding skin graft for the lateral canthal region. (a) The mass is removed full-thickness by tenotomy scissors
Uis jo sajbueun azis lenba omn 'snupuen jelanel aun ui sanssin snoauennoqns ayn jo uogassip zunig lany (g) plara jaddn aun jo uood leyanel ayn wo.y
are excised by the Beaver No. 6700 microsurgical blade. (c) The skin flaps are slid into position and secured by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable
sutures. The posterior aspect of the upper skin flap must be lined with mucosa from adjacent palpebral conjunctiva, buccal mucosa, or a free island bulbar
conjunctival mucosa graft. (d) Three week postoperative appearance of a dog with a 'Z' plasty procedure after excision of a large neoplasm of the lateral
aspects of the upper eyelid.
A
B
C
Fig. 5.71 Semicircular skin grafts may also be used to repair large eyelid defects. (a) The eyelid mass is excised full-thickness using the four-sided method, and
a skin incision is extended to the lateral canthus (length approximates the width of the surgical defect). (b) A triangle (Burow's) of skin is excised from the end
of the skin incision, and the semicircular skin flap is dissected carefully from its underlying subcutaneous attachments. (c) The semicircular skin flap is slid 
medially, and the eyelid defect apposed by sutures, usually in two layers: tarsoconjunctiva (simple continuous absorbable) and muscle-skin (simple 
interrupted). The remainder of the graft is secured with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The portion of the semicircular graft that forms the new
lateral upper lid must be lined with palpebral conjunctiva. (d) Immediate postoperative appearance after an upper semicircular skin graft in a dog.
130
Reconstructive blepharoplasty after removal of eyelid masses in small animals
Sliding skin flaps combined
section (Fig. 5.72c). To secure and stabilize both grafts, a
with tarsoconjunctival grafts
complete temporary tarsoirhaphy is peifoimed and main-
tained for 4-6 weeks. If topical medications are necessary.
For full-thickness eyelid defects that involve more than
one-half of the length of the eyelid, a sliding flap adjacent
conjunctival fornix.
o        a 
conjunctival graft from the opposite eyelid. The combined
'ap Pil lamoi o iaddn nauia i pas aq Aeu ainaoid
Full-thickness lid flaps ('bucket handle'
After removal of the lower lid eyelid mass, an upper tarso-
conjunctival graft is constructed. About 2 mm beyond the
or Cutler-Beard method)
eyelid margin, a broad pedicle graft of tarsoconjunctiva
For eyelid defects greater than one-half the length of the eye-
about 1 mm wider than the surgical defect is prepared
lid the full-thickness eyelid graft may be used. Although the
by tenotomy scissors (Fig. 5.72a). After adequate prepara-
upper lid has considerably more mass than the lower lid.
tion, the tarsoconjunctival graft is secured to the tarsocon-
 a ra a d a  s s
junctival layer of the surgical defect by 4-0 to 6-0 simple
the lower eyelid neoplasm has been excised, a full-thickness
internupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 5.72b). The sliding
upper lid graft is prepared about 4-5 mm above the lid ma1-
skin flap is then prepared as described in the earlier
gin (Fig. 5.73a). The tip of the lid graft should be 0.5-1 mm
A
B
C
Fig. 5.72 Sliding skin flaps involving one eyelid may be combined with tarsoconjunctival grafts from the opposite eyelid. (a) The lower eyelid
neoplasm is excised full-thickness. The upper tarsoconjunctival graft is constructed to be slightly larger than the lower lid defect. About 2 mm from the
eyelid margin, the palpebral conjunctiva and tarsus pedicle graft is prepared by tenotomy scissors. (b) The tarsoconjunctival graft is secured in the lower
lid defect by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. (c) The lower lid sliding skin graft is prepared as described in Figure 5.69. A temporary
complete tarsorrhaphy is perfommed to immobilize the graft sites. The skin sutures are removed in 7-10 days. The tarsorrhaphy sutures are removed in 4-6 weeks
and the base of the tarsoconjunctival graft is transected by tenotomy scissors. The upper tarsoconjunctival defect is allowed to heal by secondary intention.
A
B
C
Fig. 5.73 For full-thickness eyelid (bucket handle' or Cutler-Beard technique) grafts, either the lower or upper eyelid may be used as the donor. (a) The
fullthickness lid graft is constructed about 4-5 mm from the eyelid margin and should be 0.5-1 mm larger that the surgical wound. (b) The upper lid graft
is positioned under (deep to) the strip of remaining upper lid margin and secured in the lower lid defect by two layers of sutures. The tarsoconjunctival
layers are apposed by a 4-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. The skin-orbicularis oculi layer is apposed by 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted
non-absorbable sutures. (c) A complete temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed to stabilize the graft site. After 3-4 weeks all the skin and tarsorrhaphy sutures
algequosge-uou pandnuanul aldwuis 0-g on 0- Aq pasoddeau aue sabpa pll jaddn ayl papasue.n yei6 pll ssauypiyaliny aup jo aseg aun pue panowau ane
sutures. (d) Two week postoperative appearance of a dog with a lower full-thickness eyelid graft to the upper eyelid. Note the remaining strip of upper
eyelid and margin. The base of the graft will be transected in 2 weeks and reapposed to the remaining upper eyelid strip.
1 31
Surgery of the eyelids
larger than the surgical wound. The lid graft is manipulated
 additional medications are administered directly to the eye
under the upper lid leading margin and apposed to the
o1 by subpalpebral systems (see Chapter 2). An E-collar is
lower lid defect by two layers of sutures (Fig. 5.73b). The
used as long as any sutures are present or until the tarsorrha-
phy sutures have been removed. Waim and cold com-
interrupted absorbable sutures. The external skin and
aoid pue uams paaa aonai oi pasn aq Aeu sassaid
pi ads 0-o oi o- Aq pasoe are si as
circulation to the grafts.
non-absorbable sutures. A complete temporary tarsorrha-
The primary objective of these procedures is to obtain
phy, apposing the remaining upper lid edge and lower lid.
 adequate eyelid function and appearance, and prevent recur-
is perfoimed to 1estrict eyelid movements and assist
rence of the lid neoplasm. Restoration to complete no1-
graft establishment (Fig. 5.73c). If topical medication is nec-
malcy is not usually obtained. The usual postoperative
essary fo1 the eye, a subpalpebral system is implanted in the
appearance is an irregular but acceptable eyelid margin.
dorsolateral conjunctival fornix. After 3-4 weeks to permit
Fibrosis and slight inversion of the new eyelid margin may
establishment of the eyelid graft, all of the skin and tarsor-
develop and require minor resection of the outer skin
rhaphy sutures are 1emoved (Fig. 5.73d). The eyelid graft is
to evert the area and prevent trichiasis. If tension of the skin
transected 0.5 mm above the adjacent lower eyelid margin
flap is excessive, some ectropion of the lower lid may
to compensate for shrinkage. The remaining upper lid is
develop. Treatment is not usually necessary as long as
as 0-9 oi 0-y 4q uie p iaddn aq oi paqnai
epiphora and chronic conjunctivitis do not develop.
internupted non-absorbable sutures.
Surgeries for eyelid neoplasia in the horse
Large pedicle skin grafts
Large pedicle skin grafts may be used in small animals in the
Several different eyelid tumors have been reported in the
  a    r i
horse. These include squamous cell carcinomas, equine
Iesult from the excision of locally malignant skin neo-
sarcoids, papillomas, melanomas, fibromas, schwannomas,
plasms. Because of the greater frequency of locally aggressive
basal cell carcinomas, hemangiosarcoma, lymphosarcomas,
maligmant tumors, the cat is more often treated by these
mastocytomas, and adenocarcinomas. Approximately 10%
large grafts than the dog.
of all equine neoplasms are related to the eye. Squamous cell
These skin grafts, harvested from nearby sites, must be
carefully constructed to ensure a viable skin blood supply.
hoise, followed by sarcoids and papillomas. The othel reported
especially at the tip o1 end of the graft (Fig. 5.74a,b). As
tumor types are considered rare in occurrence. Biopsy and
histopathology o1 fine needle aspiration fo1 cytologic interpre-
with either nearby conjunctiva o1 buccal mucosa. As the
tation is recommended to differentiate the tumor types and to
grafts do not usually contain functional muscle, the blink
distinguish them from inflammatory lesions before multiple
Ieflex is usually absent and depends on the now mobile
therapies. Papillomas usually occur in young horses; they are
nictitating membrane for corneal protection in the cat.
commonly self-limiting, and do not require surgical excision.
These skin grafts are often two-step procedures.
Squamous cell carcinomas affect the eyelids, nictitating
membrane, and globe (Fig. 5.75). Lesions may be bilateral
but are usually not symmetrical. Draft breeds (especially
Postoperative management and complications
Belgians), Appaloosas, and horses with decreased eyelid
After all of these rather extensive reconstructive blepharoplas-
pigmentation appear to be predisposed. The average age
tic procedures, topical and systemic antibiotics are adminis-
of horses presented with squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is
tered. If other coineal and conjunctival diseases are present,
 8-11 years. Males are twice as likely as females to be affected,
A
Fig. 5.74 Postoperative appearance after large skin grafts in the cat for large malignant eyelid tumors involving the entire lower or upper eyelid, or canthi
(a) Upper pedicle skin graft 2 weeks after surgery and removal of a large squamous cell carcinoma. (b) Upper and lower pedicle grafts 1 week after surgery and
removal of a large squamous cell carcinoma of the lateral canthus, and lateral upper and lower eyelids.
132
Blepharoplastic procedures for the horse
Fig. 5.75 Squamous cell carcinoma of the entire lower eyelid in a horse.
Fig. 5.76 Sarcoid affecting the lateral lower eyelid and lateral canthus.
and geldings are five times more likely to have SCC than stal-
suggest that surgical excision or debulking, combined with
lions. Coat color, such as white, cremello/palomino, gray.
some form of adjunctive therapy. provides better long-term
strawberry/white, buckskin and chestnut/soirel, also predis-
recurrence-free status than surgery alone.
poses to SCC. Although the tumor is aggressive locally, its met-
astatic rate is low (6-15%), with the 1egional submandibula1
Four-sided excision
lymph nodes, salivary glands, thorax and orbit, sinus, and cal-
varia affected.
 p P-ao e     r ss
 Sarcoid is the second most common tumor of the eyelid
eyelid or less can be removed by ‘four-sided' excision of
and the most common tumol observed in hoises. Sarcoids
tissue and direct closure of the wound (Fig. 5.77). The mal-
gins of the mass are excised perpendicular to the eyelid
vernucose, nodular, fibroblastic, and mixed types. Molecular
maigin and connected with two angled incisions. The
biology techniques have confirmed the presence of bovine
tarsoconjunctiva is closed with a 6-0 simple continuous
papilloma vinus DNA in a high number of equine sarcoids.
absorbable suture, beginning at the distal incision, and the
Predisposition is seen in the American Quarter Horse, Arabian,
skin-muscle layer apposed with simple interrupted non-
and Appaloosa breeds. Periocular sarcoids are often prolifera-
absorbable sutures.
tive, may have nodules, may have a broad base o1 be peduncu-
lated, may infiltrate into deeper tissues, and may be ulcerative.
Reconstructive blepharoplasty
Sarcoids affect both upper and lower lids (Fig. 5.76). Some
Blepharoplasty techniques are indicated when more than
one-third of the eyelid margin has been removed. These pro-
cedures are best performed with the horse under general
Blepharoplastic procedures for the horse
anesthesia. When considering extensive blepharoplastic
techniques in the horse, it should be noted that although
the eyelid skin is very mobile, the sulrounding facial skin
fo1 horses affected with either SCC or sarcoid. Choice of
is relatively immobile and may not slide to provide good
donor tissue for eyelid defects. The skin is apposed with
depends on the size and location of the mass, vision status,
5-0 nylon beginning at the eyelid margin. The eyelid margin
intended use of the animal, available equipment, prior
is closed in a figure-eight suture using 5-0 nylon or silk.
experience of the veterinarian, value of the animal, and
The remainder of the incision is closed with non-absorbable
owner financial constraints. Retrospective studies strongly
sutures in a simple interrupted pattern
A
B
Y
Fig. 5.77 Four-sided or wedge excision of a very small squamous cell carcinoma of the central lower eyelid in a horse. (a) Preoperative appearance prior to
wedge excision and after marking the incision line. (b) The tumor is excised by scalpel and scissors. (c) Appearance of the surgical wound as the tumor is 
sanans uiys pandnanui aldwis aaun yai pasodde se punom aul panowal
133
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Sliding skin graft or 'H' plasty
the conjunctiva. A temporary tarsorrhaphy is necessary to
relieve tension on the conjunctiva in this procedure. A sec-
One of the easiest forms of blepharoplasty is the sliding skin
flap (see Fig. 5.69). The affected lesion is removed and the
ond surgical procedure is 1equired to cut the conjunctival
flap at the eyelid fissure to restore the eyelid margin. Cutting
incisions are extended for twice the amount of skin
of the conjunctival flap is usually perfoimed no earlier than
Iemoved. The incision is slightly diverging to allow for skin
3 weeks after the initial surgery. It may be advantageous to
- nuaia as (at's y) as e a
the leave the flap in place fo1 4-6 weeks, o1 longer, after
sions are not absolutely necessary in eyelid skin, due to its
the primary surgery.
relative pliability and plasticity. Triangula1 pieces of skin
are excised external to the base of the incisions. These trian-
gular skin excisions allow skin closure without puckering of
Full-thickness eyelid graft (Cutler-
the skin ('dog-ears') and distribute the tension on the skin.
Beard procedure)
The sides of the triangle should approximate the height of
A full-thickness eyelid flap is used fo1 neoplasia o1 traumatic
the excised triangle. Adjacent skin should be undermined
defects involving the lower eyelid where eyelid and facial
to provide mobility fo1 skin closure. Palpebral conjunctiva
skin are less mobile. A flap of more mobile and pliable
adjacent to the wound is undeimined and mobilized utiliz-
upper eyelid is used. The width of the flap approximates
ing Steven's tenotomy scissois. The eyelid defect is slightly
the width of the eyelid defect. The lower eyelid lesion is
overcoirected to allow for wound contracture. There should
never be tension on the conjunctival portion of the skin at
excised as in the sliding skin flap technique. In more exten-
closure. The conjunctiva is sutured using 6-0 polyglactin
sive defects, a lateral canthotomy is helpful to release ten-
in a continuous pattein. Skin closure begins at the eyelid
sion at the surgical site. The opposing eyelid is incised
about 5-6 mm from the eyelid margin, preserving the tarsal
margin, utilizing an interrupted pattern of 4-0 to 5-0 non-
glands. Splitting the flap into skin-muscle and tarsocon-
absorbable material. The skin is anchored to the conjunctiva
junctiva sections facilitates mobility and reduces the size of
using 6-0 polyglactin in a mattress o1 continuous pattein
with buried knots to avoid irritation of the cornea. A tem-
the graft required. The tarsoconjunctival portion of the flap
is sutured using 6-0 to 7-0 polyglactin 910, with the knots
porary tarsorrhaphy is perfoimed and left in place for
buried away from the cornea to prevent irritation. The skin
7-10 days to provide support for the skin flap during the
 initial healing phase.
wound is closed with simple interrupted sutures of 4-0 to
5-0 nylon, prolene or silk. The bridge portion of skin is
sutured to the flap using 5-0 nylon. The flap is left in place
Tarsoconjunctival advancement graft
fo1 several weeks (usually 4-8) until tension has normal-
When large areas of palpebral conjunctiva are excised, a
ized. In a second procedure, the flap is transected in line
tarsoconjunctival advancement flap from the opposing
with the original eyelid margin and sutured to the bridge
eyelid is used to fill the conjunctival defect. This is a two-
with 6-0 to 7-0 material. The newly created eyelid margin
stage procedure. The affected area of eyelid is excised and
is sutured to appose the conjunctiva and skin with 6-0 to
7-0 polyglactin 910 (Vicryl). A temporary tarsorrhaphy is
the sliding skin flap prepared as described above. Instead
of using adjacent conjunctiva to line the defect, tarsocon-
placed to prevent tension on the flap. The tarsorrhaphy can
 junctiva fiom the opposite eyelid is used to line the defect.
be removed in 3-4 weeks or left in place until the flap is
The donor conjunctiva is incised 4 mm from the eyelid
incised in the second procedure to form the new eyelid margin.
margin. The conjunctiva is dissected from a flap to fill the
Iecipient area using Westcott or Steven's tenotomy scissors.
Rhomboid graft
The tarsoconjunctiva is sutured across the eyelid to fill the
 Blanchard et al described a rhomboid graft flap for repairing
defect, and then the skin is advanced to cover the defect. A
few anchoring sutures are used in the donor graft to anchor
defects of more than 50% of the eyelid (a rhomboid is an
equal-sided parallelogram). One side of the rhomboid is
used to recreate the eyelid margin. The replacement flap is
-p au jo uisuixa ue si is a suoiu omi q ap
onal of the rhomboid and equal in length to the sides of the
rhomboid; the second incision is made parallel to the rhom-
boid for an equal length. Palpebral or bulbar conjunctiva is
undermined to cover the replacement skin flap. The skin is
undermined and rotated to fill the defect. The conjunctiva
is sutured to the skin to form an eyelid margin in a simple
continuous pattern using 6-0 polyglactin material. The
skin is closed in a simple interrupted pattein using 4-0 to
5-0 non-absorbable material.
Sliding 'Z' graft
-xa ae io ie aa i ieie a u sia e
sion of eyelid tumors can be closed with a sliding "Z' flap.
loy Aaseld .h. abuel e lanye anueieadde apeiadosod aneypawwl gs bi
Prio1 to excision of the lesion, the proposed excision area
squamous cell carcinoma of the entire lower eyelid in a horse.
is marked with a CO2 lasel, ophthalmic electrocautery, OI
134
Blepharoplastic procedures for the horse
with surgical marking ink. Two triangles of skin, one above
Squamous cell carcinoma
and one below the defect, are also marked. The lesion
Of the different sites in the horse fo1 SCC (eyelid, orbit, lim-
(mass) is excised. Adjacent skin is undeimined with surgical
bus, and nictitating membrane), the eyelids have the poo1-
scissors. Conjunctiva is undeimined and mobilized to fill
the defect, and closed with 6-0 to 7-0 Vicryl. The two trian-
est prognosis, with an average of 30-40% recurrence rate.
Perhaps one reason for the poorer prognosis with eyelid
gles, which are equal to the sides of the excised defect, are
then excised. Conjunctiva is undermined and mobilized to
SCC is the fact that they are often presented as large masses
fill the defect, and sutured to the free skin edge with 6-0 to
and ‘clean' surgical margins are not possible. Mean survival
e u uu o-g o o- m soe si us u  o-
time after diagnosis is 47 months. The recommendation of
a 2 cm tumor-free margin for surgical excision of the lids is
simple interrupted pattern.
generally impossible. As a result, surgery is often limited to
biopsy or debulking of the mass, and then some form of
Partial orbital rim resection
adjunctive therapy. These adjunctive therapies depend on
In 2002, Beard and Wilkie described a technique of enucle-
the size and location of the tumoi, vision status of the
ation o1 exenteration combined with a partial orbital rim
patient, prior experience of the veterinarian, value of the
Iesection and mesh skin expansion to fill the skin defects.
animal, and owner financial constraints. These therapeutic
 Following enucleation or exenteration and radical excision
options include cryotherapy, radiofrequency hyperthermia,
of periocular skin, there may be inadequate tissue to close
intralesional (intratumoral) injections of biologic modifiers
the wound using more conventional reconstructive and flap
(usually mycobacterial cell wall fraction or bacille Calmette-
techniques. In this procedure, a portion of the dorsal im of
Guerin (BCG), intralesional chemotherapy using cisplatin,
the orbit is resected after globe removal to decrease the
and radiotherapy (using cesium-137, cobalt-60, gold-198,
wound area and reduce the tension on the skin sutures.
inidium-192, and strontium-90.)
Extensive undermining of the adjacent skin is performed
and mesh skin expansion is added to allow advancement
Cryotherapy
and closure of the wound.
      n 
Iefrigerant, either as a spray or solid probe delivery sys-
Aftercare for blepharoplasty in the horse
tem, to freeze tissues to -20°C to -40°C, using eithe1 a
double o1 triple freeze-thaw technique. The tissue should
The general protocol for aftercare after blepharoplasty is simi
be allowed to completely thaw between freeze cycles. Use
lar to that fo1 skin and reco nstrictive procedures elsewhere on
of a thermocouple to monitor the depth of freezing for
the body. Pre- and perioperative topical and systemic antibio-
 larger masses is recommended. A heavy layer of petrolatum
tics are indicated. The placement of a subpalpebral lavage sys-
 OI a piece of styrofoam is used to protect the surrounding
tem will facilitate topical application of solutions to the eye.
area from freezing. The iceball should extend at least
Postoperative swelling will be reduced by the administra-
3-5 mm beyond the mass's base. Even with the sloughing
tion of systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
of cryonecrotic tissues within 2-4 weeks, the eyelid
is
(flunixin meglumine 1 mg/kg IV) immediately before sur-
usually able to heal and maintain its architecture and func-
gery. Postoperative edema will be lessened by the applica-
tion following cryotherapy. Cryotherapy combined with
ams jl ians ie u t isy au iy soed ai jo uon
 a sssa ea s ae  t sd s
feculence rate.
reduce the swelling and discomfort at the surgical site.
As rubbing or self-mutilation is always a concern in
Radiofrequency hyperthermia
horses, the surgical site or eye must be protected by a pro-
tective hood with a plastic or solid eyecup (EyeSaver
Radiofrequency employs a device that uses either a surface
Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, CO.). Cross tying o1 neck
01 a piercing p1obe to heat the tumo1 to 50°C (122°F) fo1
cradles have also been used successfully. If granulating
50 s; tumo1 cells are selectively destroyed over noimal cells.
wounds are present, 1emoval of the exudate once o1 twice
Multiple application sites are needed if the mass exceeds
daily, with application of petroleum jelly o1 a povidone-
0.5 cm in diametel, and therapy should extend 3-4 mm
iodine gel ventral to the wound is helpful, and fly-control
beyond the mass's base. Tumors in excess of 5 cm in diame-
ter are not candidates for hyperthermia. Reports suggest
is essential in waimer climates. Fly control around the
hoise's face is achieved by wiping fly repellent around the
about 75% complete 1egression after one treatment; fo1
surgical site, by fitting the horse with a fly mask, o1 by using
two treatments 66% completely regressed.
fly-repellent strips attached to the halter. Skin sutures are
Usually removed 8-12 days after surgery. In situations when
Immunotherapy
tension on the suture line cannot be avoided, sutures are left
Immunotherapy has been used successfully for equine eye-
in place fo1 18-24 days.
lid SCC using BCG cell wall extract. The usual dose for
BCG is 1 mL extract/cm? (
 of tumor injected throughout
Adjunctive therapeutic modalities which can
the mass. Treatments are spaced every 2-4 weeks, and
be combined with surgery for the horse
continued until the mass has completely regressed. Both
 r    rr  r
Fo1 eyelid squamous cell carcinoma and sarcoid in horses
pretreatment with flunixin meglumine, antihistamine O1
surgical removal of these tumors generally results in about
corticosteroids may be necessary. This therapy has a high
-mo r s e m aai-u 
rate of tumor non-recurrence.
135
5
Surgery of the eyelids
A
Fig. 5.79 Intralesional/intratumoral chemotherapy with cisplatin for eyelid squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in a horse. (a) Appearance of the SCC before
cisplatin intratumoral therapy. (b) Appearance of the tumor after the second of four cisplatin injections. After the last cisplatin injection, the region will be
assessed for regression and after biopsy has indicated that the area is tumor free.
Intralesional/intratumoral chemotherapy
Carbon dioxide laser
Intratumoral injection of cisplatin has been used success-
Carbon dioxide laser has been reported for equine lid SCC,
fully fo1 treating lid SCC in horses, and has partly replaced
applied after tumor debulking. Laser setings were 3 and
the BCG technique. The usual cisplatin dose is fou1
8 W, and the tumor surface was lasered (ablated) until
     s  ie 
covered with a brown char.
mg/mL; 10 mg cisplatin in 1 mL water and 2 mL of puri-
fied medical grade sesame seed oil) which should extend
Sarcoid
about 1 cm beyond the tumor margin (Fig. 5.79). Com-
Sarcoids, like SCC, have an unacceptably high rate of recur-
plete face protection from any cisplatin spray during the
Tence of about 50% after surgery alone. Hence, like SCC,
injection technique is required to prevent exposure of
d ro s ieni  iesanau aie saideu aaunie
administering personnel to the drug especially after the
successfully. Sarcoids tend to occur in young horses (3-6
first series of injections. The non-reculrence rate is about
years old); in contrast, SCCs occur in older horses (7-10
65-90%.
years old). Sarcoids are locally aggressive and tend to recur.
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) has also been used for intralesional
treatments of SCC in the horse: 10 mL 5-FU (50 mg/mL).
BCG immunotherapy
combined with 3 mL of 1:1000 adrenaline (epinephrine).
 The same menu of therapeutic choices used to treat SCC is
used for sarcoids. Surgery is used to biopsy and debulk
platin, but is more expensive and perhaps not as successful
(1 year follow-up: cisplatin 93% non-1ecurrence; bleomycin
The most common sarcoid therapy is immunotherapy using
78% non-recurrence).
multiple injections of BCG (1.0 mL/cm? of tumor suiface).
These injections, within the mass as well as at its borders,
Radiation therapy
are repeated at 2- to 4-week intervals, and continue until
complete 1egression of the tumo1 (Fig. 5.81). Both systemic
Radiation therapy with beta radiation (strontium-90) and
brachytherapy
with cesium-137, gold-198, radon-222,
cobalt-60, and iridium-192 have been reported fo1 equine
lid SCC. Beta radiation has limited penetration (and is pri-
marily used fo1 corneoconjunctival SCC), but the brachy-
therapy agents are generally placed directly within the
eyelid mass. The inidium-192 isotope, contained in stainless
steel 1ods at 1 cm intervals in a plastic coating or within nee-
dles, is placed in the SCC mass in parallel rows about 1 cm
apart (Fig. 5.80). The usual dose is 6000-7000 cGy and
requires about 7-10 days of implantation.
Unfortunately, availability, transportation and material
costs, radiation exposure to personnel, isolation of the
patient, and state radiation safety guidelines are impo1-
tant limitations. Brachyradiation yields the highest success
rate fo1 lid SC in the hoise, and has well over 95%
Fig. 5.80 Brachytherapy of a large upper eyelid squamous cell carcinoma
non-recurrence. Complications of brachytherapy include
using iridium-192. The stainless steel needles, about 1 cm apart, contain the
hair loss, hair and skin depigmentation, necrosis, fibrosis,
 iridium 192 isotope. Treatment exposure (usually 7-10 days) is dependent on
keratitis, cataract formation, and coineal ulceration.
the calculated total radiation dose.
136
Bovine eyelid surg ery
in North America. It occurs in Hereford, Hereford crosses,
 a   ss   s
infrequently. The economic impact includes carcass con-
demnations, production costs, treatment costs, and manage
ment expenses.
Surgery and surgery combinations for eyelid
SCC in cattle
Several treatment modalities are available; choice depends
on availability of instrumentation, training of the veterina1-
ian, location and size of the tumor, intended use of the ani-
mal, and value of the animal. Therapeutic choices include
ladiofrequency hyperthermia, immunotherapy, cryotherapy.
ladiation, CO, laser ablation, and intralesional chemothe1-
Fig. 5.81 Treatment of sarcoid with intralesional/intratumoral BCG
apy using cisplatin. Of these modalities, the lower cost cryo-
injections. The needles have been pre-placed to ensure adequate coverage
therapy and hyperthermia are used most frequently in cattle.
of the mass with the BCG injections.
combined with surgical debulking of the mass (see above
section on the horse).
and local anaphylaxis have been reported, and pretreatment
with flunixin meglumine, antihistamine o1 corticosteroids
Sliding skin graft or 'H' plasty
may be necessary.
 One study reported complete regression of all sarcoids
One of the frequent forms of blepharoplasty in cattle is the
with an average of 3.2 treatments (11.7 mL per treatment)
sliding skin graft. The lid mass is excised, and often treated
with a range of 14-253 days to resolve. Immunotherapy with
by cryotherapy (Figs 5.82 and 5.83). The skin incisions are
BCG seems most effective fo1 the fibioblastic and nodular
then extended for twice the amount of skin removed. The
types of sarcoid.
incision diverges slightly to allow for skin contracture after
Intratumoral (intralesional) chemotherapy
sary in eyelid skin, due to its elative pliability and plasticity.
Intralesional cisplatin is now the most common local
Triangular pieces of skin are excised external to the base of
chemotherapy method for sarccids. Multiple injections of
the incisions. These triangular skin excisions allow skin clo-
the cisplatin oily emulsion (1 mg cisplatin/cm? tumor
sure without puckering of the skin ('dog-ears') and distrib-
tissue) are administered fou1 times at 2-week intervals.
ute the tension on the skin. The sides of the tiangle
should approximate the height of the excised triangle. Adja-
sarcoids, with 1-year relapse-free non-recurrence of 87%.
cent skin should be undermined to provide mobility fo1
Another report noted 33% non-recurrence.
skin closure. Palpebral conjunctiva adjacent to the wound
is undermined and mobilized utilizing Steven's tenotomy
scissors. The width and length of the eyelid defect are
 Both of these therapies are administered as for SCC. Infor-
slightly overcolrected to allow for wound contracture. There
mation about effectiveness for sarcoids is unknown.
should never be tension on the conjunctival portion of
the skin at closure. The conjunctiva is sutured using 6-0
Brachytherapy
polyglactin in a continuous pattein. Skin closure begins at
Like squamous cell carcinomas in horses, brachytherapy
is effective to tieat all forms of sarcoid. Several foims of
isotope have been used. Iridium-192 has been reported
most frequently, and for sarcoids provides a non-recurrence
rate as high as 94% at 1 year. The usual radiation dose
is 5000-9000 cGy and requires 7-14 days of implanta-
tion. High costs and restricted availability are the main
limitations.
Bovine eyelid surgery
Eyelid SCC, as part of ocular squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC), is the most frequent indication for lid surgery in cat-
tle. Eyelid lacerations occur infrequently in catle, and are
Iepaired in a similar fashion to hoises and small animals.
Ocular squamous cell carcinoma in cattle, often termed
 Fig. 5.82 Intraoperative photograph of "H' plasty in a cow with squamous 
cancer eye, is the most economically important neoplasia
cell carcinoma of the entire lower lid. The skin graft has been advanced into
in cattle. It is the most common neoplasm affecting cattle
the surgical wound.
137
5
Surgery of the eyelids
Fig. 5.83 Three different delivery probes for liquid nitrogen and cryotherapy in cattle. (a) Use of a small direct contact cryoprobe for a limbal squamous cell 
(2) 'ewouues lian snowenbs plara jaol abiel e buyingap janje pasn aqoudoAo penuos zoaup ahiel e jo ydeibonoyd anpeyadoe.aul (g) ewouoies
Intraoperative photograph using liquid nitrogen spray for squamous cell carcinoma after debulking the mass affecting the lower eyelid. Adjacent normal
ah wnzelounad jo zeon pun e yri Aeuds uabounju au wouy paanoud ane sanssg
the eyelid margin, utilizing an interrupted pattern of 4-0 to
is necessary to relieve tension on the conjunctiva in this pro-
5-0 non-absorbable material. The skin is anchored to the
cedure. A second surgical procedure is lequired to cut the
conjunctiva using 6-0 polyglactin in a mattress or continu-
conjunctival flap at the eyelid fissure to restore the eyelid
ous pattern with buried knots to avoid irritation of the
margin. The cutting of the base of the conjunctival graft is
coinea. A temporary tarsorrhaphy is perfoimed and left in
usually performed no earlier than 3 weeks after the initial
place fo1 7-10 days to provide support for the skin graft
surgery. It may be advantageous to the leave the flap in place
during the initial healing phase.
 Ad  e s g r
Tarsoconjunctival advancement graft
Full-thickness eyelid graft
      o   
A full-thickness eyelid flap is used for neoplasia or traumatic
soconjunctival advancement graft from the opposing eyelid
defects involving the lower eyelid where eyelid and facial
is used to fill the conjunctival defect. This is a two-stage pro-
skin are less mobile. The procedure is identical to that in
cedure, as described in the horse. A temporary tarsorrhaphy
the horse.
 Further reading
Small animals
Blanchard GL, Keller WF: The rhomboid graft-
 Esson D: A modification of the Mustarde
Barrie KP. Gelatt KN, Parshall CP: Eyelid
flap for the repair of extensive ocular
technique for the surgical repair of a large
squamous cell carcinoma in four dogs. I Am
adnexal defects. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
feline eyelid coloboma. Vet Ophthalmol
Anim Hosp Assoc 18:123-127. 1982.
12:576-580. 1976.
4:159-160. 2001.
Blaskovies L: Ectropion. In: Fox SA, editor:
Gelatt KN: Resection of clia-bearing
Bedford PGC: Eyelashes and adventitious cilia
as causes of corneal irritation. J Small Anim
Ophthalmic Plastic Surgery. ed 4. New York.
 tarsoconjunctiva for correction of canine
Pract 12:11-17. 1971.
1976. Grune and Stratton. pp 278-279.
distichia. I Am Vet Med Assoc 155:892-897.
Bedford PGC: The treatment of canine
Brightman AH, Helper LC: Full thickness
1969.
distichiasis by the method of partial tarsal
resection of the eyelid, J Am Amim Hosp Assoc
Gelatt KN, Blogg IR: Blepharoplastic procedures
plate excision. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
14:483-485. 1978.
in small animals, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
15:59-60. 1979
Carter ID: Combined operation for
5:67-78. 1969.
 Bedford PGC: Conditions of the eyelids in the
noncicatricial entropion. I Am Anim Hosp
Grier RL, Brewer WG. Theilen GH:
dog. J Small Anim Pract 29:416-428. 1988.
Assoc 8:53-58, 1972.
 Hyperthermic treatment of superficial
Bedford PGC: Surgical correction of facial
Carter ID: Medial conjunctivoplasty for
tumors in cats and dogs. I Asm Vet Med Assoc
droop in the English Cocker Spaniel. I Small
aberrant dermis of the Lhasa apso. J Am
177:227-233. 1980.
Anim Pract 31:255-258. 1990.
Arnim Hosp Assoc 9:242-244. 1973.
Gross SL: Surgery of the eyelids. In Bojrab MJ.
 Bedford PGC: Technique of lateral canthoplasty
Chambers ED. Slatter DH: Cryotherapy (N2O)
editor: Current Techmiques in Small Animal
for the correction of macropalpebral fissure
 of canine distichiasis and trichiasis: an
Surgery. Philadelphia. 1990. Lea and
in the dog. I Small Anim Pract 39:117-120.
experimental and clinical report. I Small
Febiger. pp 68-76.
1998.
Anim Pract 25:647-659. 1984.
Grussendorf H: Outcome of a surgical technique
Bedford PGC: Diseases and surgery of the
Christmas RE: Common ocular problems of
fordogs sufferingfrom macroblepharon.
anine eyelid. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Shih Tzu dogs. Can Vet J 33:390-393. 1992.
Munich, 2004. Transactions of the ECVO/
 D'Anna N. Sapienza IP, Guandalini A.
ESVO/DOK Meeting. 41.
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 3. Baltimore.
Guerriero A: Use of a dermal biopsy punch
Gutbrod F. Tietz B: Entropion - operation
1999, Lippincott williams and wilkins.
pp 535-568.
for removal of ectopic cilia in dogs: 19
 mit Lidrandverkirzung. Vet Spiegel 4:14,
Bellhorn RW: Variation of canine distichiasis. J
cases, Vet Ophthalmol 10:65-67. 2007.
1993.
Am Vet Med Assoc 157:342-343. 1970.
 Doherty Ml: A bridge-flap blepharorrhaphy
Gwin RM: Selected blepharoplastic procedures
Bigelbach A: A combined tarsorrhaphy-
method for eyelid reconstruction in a cat.
of the canine eyelid. The Compendium
J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 9:238-241. 1973.
2:267-272. 1980.
canthoplasty technique for repair of
entropion and ectropion. Veterinary and
Dziezyc J. Millichamp N): Surgical correction of
Halliwell wH: Surgical management of canine
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:220-224.
eyelid agenesis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp
distichia, Am Vet Med Assoc 150:874-879.
1996.
Assoc 25:513-516. 1989.
1967.
38
Further reading
Hamilton HL, Whitley RD. Mclaughlin SA.
and Comparative Ophthatmology 4:93-103.
Wyman M: Ophthalmic surgery for the
 Swaim SF: Basic blepharoplasty techniques.
1994.
practitioner. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Compendium on Continuing Education for the
Read RA, Broun HC: Entropion correction in
Pract 9:311-348. 1979.
dogs and cats using a combination Hotz-
Wyman M. wilkie DA: New surgical procedure
Helper LC. Magrane WG: Ectopic cilia of the
Celsus and lateral eyelid wedge resection:
for entropion correction: tarsal pedicle
canine eyelid. I Small Anim Pract
results in 311 eyes. Vet Ophthalmol 10:6-11.
technique. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
11:185-189. 1970.
2007.
24:345-349. 1988.
Jensen HE: Canthus closure. The Compendium
 Roberts SM, Severin GA, Lavach ID: Prevalence
2Wyman M. Donovan EF. Rudy RL: Surgical
1:735-741, 1979.
and treatment of palpebral neoplasms in 
correction of cicatricial ectropion in the
Johnson BW, Gerding PA. McLaughlin SA.
the dog: 200 cases [1975-1983). I Am Vet
dog. Southwesterrn Veterinarian 23:229-232.
Helper LC. Szajerski ME. Cormany KA:
Med Assoc 189:1355-1359. 1986.
1970.
Nonsurgical correction of entropion in Shar
Roberts SR. Bistner Sl: Surgical correction of
Pei puppies. Vet Med 83:482-483. 1988.
eyelid agenesis in the feline. In Proceedings ofI
Large animals and special species
Kasa G, Kasa F: Exizionsraffung zur behebung
the American Society of Veterinary
Allbaugh RA, Davidson H: Surgical correction
eines entropiums beim chow-chow, Tierarztl
Ophthalmologists. 1968. pp 18-21.
 of periocular fat pads and entropion in a
Prax 7:341-349. 1979.
 Robertson BF, Roberts SM: Lateral canthus
potbellied pig (Sus scrofa). Vet Ophthalmol
Kirschner SE: Modified brow sling technique
entropion in the dog. part 1: comparative
12:115-118. 2009.
for upper lid entropion, Proceedings of the
anatomic studies. Veterinary and Comparative
Andrea CR, George LW: Surgical correction of
25th Anmual Meeting of the American College
Ophthalmology 4:151-156. 1995.
periocular fad pad hypertrophy in pot-
of Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Abstract 25:68.
 Robertson BF. Roberts SM: Lateral canthus
bellied pigs. Vet Surg 28:311-314. 1999.
1994.
entropion in the dog. part 2: surgical
Baker IR, Leyland A: Histologic survey of 
Krehbiel JD. Langham RF: Eyelid neoplasms of
 correction. Results and follow-up from
tumors of the horse with particular
dogs. Am I Vet Res 36:115-119. 1975.
21 cases [1991-1994). Veterinary and
reference to those of the skin, Vet Rec
Lawson DD: Canine distichiasis. J Small Anim
Comparative Ophthalmology 5:162- 169.
96:419-422. 1975.
Pract 14:469-478. 1973.
1995.
Barnett KC: The eye of the newborn foal. J
Lenarduzzi RF: Management of eyelid problems
Schmidt V: Kryochirurgische therapie der
Reprod Ferail Suppl 23:701-703. 1969.
in Chinese Shar-Pei puppies. Vet Med 
distichiasis des hundes Mh. Vet Med
Beard WL, Wilkie DA: Partial orbital rim
78:548-550. 1983.
35:711-712. 1980.
resection, mesh skin expansion. and second
Long RD: Treatment of distichiasis by
Stades FC: A new method for surgical
intention healing combined with
conjunctival resection. J Small Anim Pract
correction of upper eyelid trichiasis-
emucleation or exenteration for extensive
32:146-148. 1991.
entropion: operation method. J Am Anim
periocular tumors in horses. Vet Ophthatmol
Hosp Assoc 23:603-606. 1987.
McCallum P. Welser : Coronal rhytidectomy in
5:23-28. 2002
conjunction with deep plane walking
Stades FC: Reconstructive eyelid surgery.
Bertone AL, McClure Jl: Therapy for sarcoids.
sutures. modified Hotz-Celsus and lateral
Tijdschr Diergeneeshd 112[Suppl 1):
Compendium on Continuing Education for the
anthoplasty procedure in a dog. Vet
585-635. 1987.
Practicing Veterinarian 12:262-265. 1990.
Ophthalmol 5:376-379. 2004.
Stades FC. Boeve MH: Surgical correction of
 Blanchard GL, Keller WF: The rhomboid graft
McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD, Gilger BC.
upper eyelid trichiasis-entropion: results
flap for the repair of extensive ocular
Wright JC. Lindley DM: Eyelid neoplasms in
and follow-up in 55 eyes. I Am Anim Hosp
adnexal defects. I Am Amim Hosp Assoc
cats: a review of demographic data [1979 to
Assoc 23:607-610. 1987.
12:576-580. 1976.
1989), I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:63-67.
Stades FC. Gelatt KN: Diseases and surgery of
Blodi FC. Ramsey FK: Ocular tumors in
1993.
 the canine eyelids. In Gelatt KN, editor:
domestic animals. Am J Ophthalmol
Miller Wl. Albert RA: Canine entropion.
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
50:109-115. 1967.
Compendium on Contining Education for the
Blackwell. pp 563-617.
Brooks DE: Orbit. In Auer JA, Stick JA, editors:
Practicing Veterinarian 10:431-438. 1988.
Stades FC. Boeve MH, van der Woerdt A:
Equine Surgery. ed 3. St Louis. 2006.
 Moore CP: Eyelid and adnexal surgery from a
Palpebral fissure length in the dog and cat.
Saunders. pp 755-766.
practitioner's perspective, North American
Progress in Veterinary and Coparative
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
VeterinaryConferenceProceedings
Ophthalmology 2:155-161. 1992.
ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
14:556-559. 2000.
Stuhr CM, Stanz K. Murphy Cl. McAnulty I:
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2007.
Moore CP. Constantinescu GM: Surgery of the
 Stellate rhytidectomy: superior entropion
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
adnexa, Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
repair in a dog with excessive facial skin.
Cotchin E: A general survey of tumors in the
27:1011-1066. 1997
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33:342-345. 1997.
horse. Equine Vet J 9:16-21. 1977.
Munger RJ, Carter ID: A further modification of
Van der Woerdt A: Adnexal surgery in dogs and
Cutler N. Beard C: A method for partial and
 the Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure for
cats, Vet Ophthalmol 7:284-290. 2004.
total upper lid reconstruction. Am J
correction of atonic ectropion in dogs. J Am 
Wheeler CA, Severin GA: Cryosurgical epilation
Ophthalmol 39:1-7. 1955.
Anim Hosp Assoc 20:651-656. 1984.
for the treatment of distichiasis in the dog
 Diesem C: The organ of vision. In Getty R.
Munger Rl. Gourley IM: Cross lid flap for repair
and cat. I Am Arnim Hosp Assoc 20:877-884.
editor: Sisson and Grossman's Anatomy of
 of large upper eyelid defects. I Am Vet Med
1984.
Domestic Animals. ed 5. Philadelphia, 1975.
Assoc 178:45-48. 1981.
Williams Dl: Entropion correction by fornix-
WB Saunders. pp 226-244.
Peiffer RL: Four-sided excision of canine eyelid
 based suture placement: use of the
Dugan Sl: Ocular neoplasia, Vet Clin North Am
neoplasms. Canine Practice 6:35-133.
Quickert-Rathbun technique in ten dogs.
8:609-626. 1992.
1979.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:343-347.2004.
Dugan Sl. Curtis CR, Roberts SM. Severin GA:
Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM, Williams LW:
Willis M. Martin C. Stiles J. Kirschner S: Brow
Epidemiologic study of ocular/adnexal
Correction of inferior medial entropion as a
 suspension for treatment of ptosis and
squamous cell carcinoma in horses. J Am Vet
cause of epiphora. Canine Practice 5:27-31.
entropion in dogs with redundant facial
Med Assoc 198:251-256. 1991
skin folds. J Amr Vet Med Assoc 214:660-662.
1978.
 Englis RV, Nassisse MP, Davidson MG: Carbon
Pellicane CP. Meek LA, Brooks DE. Miller TR:
1999.
dioxide laser ablation for treatment of
 Eyelid reconstruction in five dogs by the
Wyman M: Lateral canthoplasty. I Am Arim
limbal squamous cell carcinoma in horses.
semicircular flap technique, Veterinary
Hosp Assoc 7:196-201, 1971.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:439-442. 1990.
139
5
Surgery of the eyelids
 Farris H. Fraunfelder F: Cryosurgical treatment
Lavach ID: Large Animal Ophthatmology.
Philadelphia, 1981. Lea and Febiger.
 of ocular squamous cell carcinoma of cattle.
St Louis. 1990. CV Mosby. pp 42-66.
pp 569-605.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 168:213-216. 1976.
Lavach JD. Severin GA: Neoplasia of the equine
 Roberts SM: Ocular neoplasia. In Smith BP.
Fox LM, Thurmon JC: Bilateral
eye, adnexa, and orbit: a review of 68 cases.
editor: Large Animal Internal Medicine, ed 4.
ankyloblepharon congenital in a newborn
J Asm Vet Med Assoc 170:202-203, 1977.
St Louis. 2009. Mosby. pp 1299-1305.
foal. Vet Med Small Amim Clin 64:237, 1969. Lavach JD. Sullins K, Roberts S. Severin GA.
Schwink K: Factors influencing morbidity
Gelatt KN: Blepharoplastic procedures in
et al: BCG treatment of periocular sarcoid,
and outcome of equine ocular squamous
horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc 151:27-44, 1967.
Equine Vet J 17:445-448. 1985.
cell carcinoma., Equine Vet J 19:198-200.
Gilger BC. Stoppini R: Diseases of the eyelids.
Linton LL, Collins BK: Entropion repair in a
1987.
conjunctiva, and nasolacrimal system. In
Vietnamese pot bellied pig. Jourmal of
Severin GA: Severin's Veterinary Ophthalmology
Gilger BC. editor: Equine Ophthalmology.
Small Exotic Animal Medicine 2:124-127.
Notes, ed 3. Fort Collins. 1996. Colorado
St Louis. 2005. Mosby. pp 107-156.
1993.
State University Press. pp 200-207.
Giuliano EA, MacDonald 1, McCaw Dl, et al:
Martin CL: Ophthalmic disease in veterinary
Sundberg IP. Burnstein T, Page EH, et al:
 Photodynamic therapy for the treatment of
medicine, London. 2005. Manson.
Neoplasms of equidae. I Am Vet Med Assoc
periocular squamous cell carcinoma in
pp 145-182.
170:150-152. 1977.
horses: a pilot study. Vet Ophthalmol
McLaughlin SA, Whitley RD: Eyelid wounds.
Theon AP, Pascoe JR: lridium-192 interstitial
11:27-34, 2008.
In Swaim SF. Henderson RA, editors:
 brachytherapy for equine periocular
Green LE. Berriatua E, Morgan KL: The prevalence 
Small Animal Wound Management, ed 2.
tumours: treatment results and prognostic
and risk factors for congenital entropion in
Baltimore, 1997, williams and wilkins.
factors in 115 horses. Equine Vet J
intensively reared lambs in south west
pp 403-430.
27:117-121, 1995.
England. Prev Vet Med 24:15-21. 1995.
 Miller TR: Eyelids. In Auer JA. Stick JA, editors:
Theon AP. Pascoe IR, Carlson GP. Krag DN:
Grier RL, Brewer WG, Paul SR, Theilen GH:
Equine Surgery. ed 2. Philadelphia. 1999. WB
 Intratumoral chemotherapy with cisplatin
 Treatment of bovine and equine ocular
Saunders. pp 450-464.
in oily emulsion in horses. I Am Vet Med
squamous cell carcinoma by radiofrequency
 Miller TR: Eyelids. In Auer JA, Stick JA, editors:
Assoc 202:261-267, 1993.
hyperthermia. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Equine Surgery, ed 3. St Louis. 2006.
 Townsend WM: Food and fiber-producing
177:55-61, 1980.
Saunders. pp 702-715.
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
Hamilton HL, Whitley RD. McLaughlin SA.
 Moore AS. Beam SL, Rassnick KM, Provost P:
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames.
 Swaim SF: Basic blepharoplasty techniques.
Long-term control of mucocutaneous
2007. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
Compendium on Continuing Education for the
 squamous cell carcinoma and metastases in Walker M, Adams W. Hoskinson J. et al:
Practicing Veterinarian 21:946-953. 1999.
a horse using piroxicam. Equine Vet J
lridium-192 brachytherapy for equine
Hendrix DVH: Equine ocular squamous cell 
35:715-718. 2003.
sarcoid. one and two year remission rates.
carcinoma, Clinical Techniques in Equine
 Moore CP. Whitley RD: Ophthalmic diseases of
Veterinary Radiology 32:206-208. 1991.
Practice 4:87-94.2005
small domestic ruminants, Vet Clin North
Welker B, Modransky PD. Hoffsis GF.
Kainer R. Stringer J. Lueker D: Hyperthermia for
Am Large Anim Pract 6:641-665. 1984.
Wyman MW. Rings DM. Hull BL: Excision
 treatment of ocular squamous cell tumors in 
Munger RJ, Gourley IM: Cross-lid flap for repair
of neoplasms of the bovine lower eyelid by
cattle. I Am Vet Med Assoc 176:356-360, 1980.
of large upper eyelid defects. I Am Vet Med
H-blepharoplasty, Vet Surg 20:133-139.
Knottenbelt DC. Kelly DF: The diagnosis and
Assoc 178:45-48. 1981.
1991.
Whitley RD: Neonatal equine ophthalmology.
445 cases from 1974 to 1999. Vet
 congenital entropion in a foal, Vet Med
 In Koterba AM, Drummond wH, Kosch PC.
Ophthalmol 3:169-191. 2000.
Small Anim Clin 72:1219-1225. 1977.
editors: Equine Clinical Neonatology.
Komaromy AM. Andrew SE, Brooks DE.
Philadelphia, 1990. Lea and Febiger.
 Plummer CE: Equine eyelid disease. Current
 Detrisac Cl, Gelatt KN: Periocular sarcoid in
Techmiques in Equine Practice 4:95-105, 2005.
pp 531-557.
a horse, Vet Ophthalmol 7:141-146. 2004.
 Priester WA: Congenital ocular defects in cattle.
Whitley RD. Vygantas KR. Whitley EM: Ocular
Latimer CA: Diseases of the adnexa and
horses. cats. and dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
trauma. In Smith BP, editor: Large Animal
conjunctiva. In Robinson NE, editor:
160:1504-1511, 1972.
mtermal Medicine, ed 4. St Louis. 2009.
Current Therapy in Equine Medicine. ed 2.
 Rasmussen RE: Repair of entropion in lambs.
Mosby. pp 1269-1274.
Philadelphia. 1987, Saunders. pp 440-445.
Mod Vet Pract 61:943-944. 1980.
Wyman M, Rings M, Tarr M, Alden C:
Lavach JD: The Handbooh of Equine
Ris RC: Equine ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
 Immunotherapy in equine sarcoid: a report
Ophthalmology, Fort Collins, Colorado.
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology.
of two cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc
1987, Gidding Studio. pp 63-97.
171:449-451, 1997.
140
CHAPTER
and tear systems
Kirk N. Gelatt
Chapter contents
Introduction
141
 Nasolacrimal duct obstructions (extracorneal bullous
Nasolacrimal apparatus
141
 spectaculopathy) in snakes
148
 Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal apparatus
143
SURGERY FOR KERATOCONJUNCTIVItIS SICCA
150
Surgical anatomy
ADAPTATIONS IN LARGE ANIMALS
150
AND SPECIAL SPECIES
148
 Adaptations in large animals and special species
155
Nasolacrimal obstructions in large animals
148
Introduction
a drainage system with disease also produces epiphora but
tear production is at normal levels. Therapy of tear drainage
Diseases of the nasolacrimal and tear systems occur fre-
system diseases is usually a combination of medical and
quently in small animals and, to a lesser extent, horses. They
surgical modalities, and re-establishment of patency.
ee ap a ue as o pa a u
and those involving the tear-producing lacrimal gland
Nasolacrimal apparatus
and the superficial gland of the nictitating membrane. The
health of the cornea, conjunctiva, and eyelids depends on
continuous secretion of tears and removal by the drainage
The nasolacrimal drainage apparatus conveys tears and other
debris from the external eye to the nasal cavity. This process
tear-producing systems can lead to overt acute-to-chronic dis-
appears to be only a passive capillary-like activity in animals,
eases of the cornea, conjunctiva, and eyelids. Recent advances
and the valve-like structures within the human nasolacrimal
in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases of the nasolacrimal
apparatus that prevent reverse flow have not been identified
drainage and teal-producing systems in all animal species
in small animals. The orbicularis oculi muscle may affect the
have resulted in markedly improved prognosis and successful
lacrimal sac to create a vacuum and/orpressure that may assist
clinical management of these patients.
in the movement of tears through the system. The anatomic
For convenience, the surgical procedures of the nasolacrimal
allangement of the orbicularis oculi muscle in the medial
and tear systems in this chapter are divided into surgical proce-
 canthus and near the lacrimal sac also supports a more active
dures that improve the drainage of tears, and those that increase
process which may be involved in the uptake and movement
OI substitute for tear production. Diseases of the nasolacrimal
of tears down the nasolacrimal apparatus.
 se e  s ai  s
partial-to-complete obstriction. Diseases of the lacrimal and
bit has a single ventral lacrimal punctum; and 2) the pig has
tear-producing glands that 1equire surgical management are
a single upper lacrimal punctum (the ventral punctum and
usually associated with reduced levels of aqueous tear forma-
canaliculus are occluded and non-functional).
tion. With reduced levels of tear formation, disorders of the
aqueous portion of the preocular or precorneal film develop.
Nasolacrimal anatomy in dogs and cats
Iesulting in secondary corneal and conjunctival disease.
Excessive lacrimation is usually secondary to pain, OI
The nasolacrimal apparatus consists of the upper and lower
exteinal and inteinal ophthalmic diseases. Excessive tear
lacrimal puncta, the upper and lower canaliculi, the lacrimal
 i  e  a   
sac, and the long nasolacrimal duct that empties into the 1os-
system, thereby causing clinical signs of epiphora. Similarly.
tral nasal cavity (Fig. 6.1). Although there are considerable
6
Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
0294687
6
Fig. 6.1 Latex preparations of normal nasolacrimal systems (metric scale shown). (a) Short-haired domestic cat. (b) Brachycephalic dog.
(c) Dolichocephalic dog.
(Reproduced with permission from Geiatt KN. Cure TH. Guffy MM. Jessen CL 1972 Dacryocystorhinography in the dog and cat. Journal of Small Animal Practice 13:38i-397.)
variations in head shape and size in the different breeds of
it extends from the lacrimal sac through the osseous lacri-
dogs, the predominant anatomic variation of the nasolacri-
mal canal of the maxillary bone (about 3-4 mm diamete1).
mal apparatus is the variable length and diameter of the
In mules, the nasolacrimal canal exits on the lateral part of
nasolacrimal duct.
the floor o1 lateral wall of the nostril. Accessory openings
i ae   ami  s a 'o u
may also occur further caudad. In general, the primary clin-
in the palpebral conjunctiva just deep to the mucocutaneous
ical entry into the equine nasolacrimal system is into its
junction, about 5 mm from the medial canthus, and appear
distal orifice, at the beginning of the mucosa on the floor
as slit-like openings. In cats, the lacrimal puncta are more
of the nostril.
circular and smaller. From both lacrimal puncta the nasola-
[n cattle, the entire length of the nasolacrimal system is
crimal system continues as two canaliculi that converge
about 16-18 cm long. The upper and lower lacrimal puncta
beneath the medial canthal ligament at the level of the lacri-
are 2-5 mm diameter and connected by the 1-1.5 cm diam-
-osu ad od e  on 1sso p aoq 
eter lacrimal canaliculi to the lacrimal sac (about 5-8 mm
crimal sac. From the ventral portion of the lacrimal sac
diameter). The nasolacrimal duct is about 12-15 cm long
emerges the nasolacrimal duct to traverse the small intra-
and straighter than the horse nasolacrimal duct. The distal
osseous canal of the maxillary bone to enter the nasal cavity
orifice of cattle, which is not easily accessible clinically.
within the maxilloturbinate to the nasal meatus. This
is located near the lateral wall of the nostril on the medial
intraosseous portion of the nasolacrimal duct appears to
surface of the alar fold of the ventral nasal concha. Hence,
have the smallest diameter, and appears to be the area most
fo1 nasolacrimal flushes in cattle, entry is usually through
the upper or lower lacrimal punctum.
The variable length of the nasolacrimal duct has a larger
- sido sse  oe  pe ra
Clinical diagnostic tests for the nasolacrimal
ately above the root of the upper canine teeth, perhaps just
drainage apparatus
as it enters the nasal cavity. The distal opening of the naso-
lacrimal duct of both the dog and the cat can be located
The two most useful diagnostic tests fo1 the determination
ventrolateral near the margin of the alar fold. Dilatation of
of nasolacrimal apparatus finctions in all animal species
the external nares by speculum assists in locating the distal
are: 1) the passage of topical fluorescein; and 2) the nasola-
opening. The distal opening can be cannulated for retIo-
crimal flush and cannulation. The fluorescein test measures
grade lavage of the nasolacrimal system. Because of the dif
both the anatomic and physiologic patency of the nasolacri-
ficulty of retrograde nasolacrimal cannulation at the nares
mal system. Aqueous fluorescein instilled onto the eye will
in the dog and cat, the convenient and readily accessible
normally enter the lacrimal puncta (mainly the lower punc-
upper and lower lacrimal puncta are the usual entry for
tum), traverse the entire nasolacrimal system, and appear at
nasolacrimal flushes and other manipulations.
the exteinal nares in 2-5 min. Fluorescein passage time
seems directly related to the length of the entire nasolacri-
mal system. In brachycephalic breeds of dogs and cats, the
Nasolacrimal anatomy in large animals
nasolacrimal duct is considerably shorter and tortuous,
The anatomy of the nasolacrimal system of the horse and
and fluorescein may exit the nasolacrimal duct to enter the
 iq 'i u o a yo 1 on 1es  si Mo
nasopharynx rather than the exteinal nares. In any breed
larger. In horses, the system starts as two lacrimal puncta,
of dog, if the dog's head is restrained upward during the test,
about 2 mm in diameter, located about 8 mm from the
the dye can also collect in the nasopharynx.
medial canthus and inside the lid margins. The two canali-
With a delayed or negative fluorescein test, the entire
culi or lacrimal canals connect the puncta with the lacrimal
 nasolacrimal system can be flushed. The nasolacrimal flush
sac, which is poorly developed in the horse. The long and
tests for the anatomic patency of the nasolacrimal system.
tortuous nasolacrimal duct, with a prominent dilatation
Under topical anesthesia and with the head of the dog
above the fist premolar tooth and about 25-30 cm long.
firmly restrained, either the upper or lower lacrimal punc-
extends from the lacrimal sac to the floor of the mucocuta-
tum is located, cannulated with a lacrimal or 20-22 g blunt
neous junction of the nostril where its diameter is about 
stainless steel needle, and flushed with 1-3 mL of sterile
3-4 mm. From its beginning of about 6-7 mm diameteI,
saline. The saline should exit out of the external nares,
142
Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal apparatus
unless the head is maintained dorsally, in which case the
and canaliculi), and postoperatively after nasolacrimal
 saline will enter the nasopharynx, and the animal may gag
system surgery.
OI sneeze.
With the dog or cat under short-acting general anesthesia,
In the cat, topical anesthesia, sedation, and some magnifi-
a blunted (smooth melted end) 2-0 to 3-0 monofilament
cation are generally necessary for nasolacrimal flushes. The
nylon suture is carefully inserted into the upper lacrimal
cat's lacrimal puncta are round rather than oval, and best
punctum, upper canaliculus, lacrimal sac, and nasolacrimal
cannulated with a 25-26 g blunt hypodermic needle o1 lac-
duct to emerge from the exteinal nares (Fig. 6.3a). The
nimal cannula.
nylon suture can potentially become halted temporarily at
In horses, the entire nasolacrimal system is flushed from
the base of the lacrimal sac and at the accessory opening
its distal orifice, located on the floo1 of the nostril at its
of the nasolacrimal duct immediately above the Ioot of
mucocutaneous junction. An 18 g blunt hypodermic needle
the upper canine tooth. Gentle turning and twisting of the
connected via tubing and a 10 mL syringe is used to flush
suture can pass these bariers en route to the external nares.
the system. Careful observation can usually distinguish the
Once the nylon suture has traversed the system, PE 90 poly.
individual patency of the upper and lower lacrimal puncta
ethylene, fine polyvinyl, o1 silicone tubing is slid over the
during the injection of saline or sterile water.
entire length of the suture if a larger diameter cannula is
[n cattle, nasolacrimal flushes are conducted under topical
prefelred. The suture is removed leaving the tubing within
anesthesia and manual restraint of the animal's head. Either
the nasolacrimal system; both ends are attached by one 01
the upper or lower lacrimal punctum is cannulated with an
two simple inteinupted non-absorbable sutures to the skin
18 g blunt hypodermic needle and a 10 mL syringe, and
of the medial canthus and lateral of the external nares
either saline or sterile water is used to flush the entire system.
(Fig. 6.3b,c). In foals and adult horses, the entire nasolacrimal
Visualization of the nasolacrimal system is possible in all
system from the upper or lower lacrimal punctum to its
animal species with dacryocystorhinography (Fig.
.6.2).
distal orifice can be easily traversed by a No. 5 French catheter.
Observation of the system may be necessary when there is
In some small animal patients only the nylon suture can
medically non-responsive o1 1ecurrent nasolacrimal sac 01
be passed through the nasolacrimal system. Perhaps the
duct obstructions, or the possibility of nasal cavity masses.
lumen within the system is too restricted o1 swollen to per-
Fo1 dacryocystorhinography, general anesthesia of the patient
and at least two radiographic views of the nasolacrimal
the presence of the suture can still maintain the patency of
system are necessary. A viscid cardiovascular radio-opaque
the system. If the dog is lightly anesthetized, contact of the
solution (0.2-0.7 mL) is slowly injected into the upper lacri-
catheter in the distal nasolacrimal duct, perhaps at the acces-
mal punctum in small animals and about 4-6 mL in foals and
s    a  o a
adult ho1ses; 10-30 s later at least two radiographic views are
Iemain in place for several days to a few weeks. Both topical
taken. Dacryocystorhinography can detect ilregularities in
solutions and systemic medications are usually administered
both the system's diameter and course, and is generally most
with the nasolacrimal catheter in position.
useful prior to consideration of surgeries of the lacrimal sac
 [n general, an E-collar is necessary in small animals, or a
 and nasolacrimal duct.
face mask and stockinet in horses to prevent the animal
from dislodging the ends of the nasolacrimal catheter. Fo1
sufficient and complete epithelialization of a new tear
Nasolacrimal catheterization
bypass, it is necessary fo1 the cathete1 to remain in position
Nasolacrimal catheterization in the dog, cat, and horse
for several weeks.
consists of the placement of indwelling sutures or tubing
spanning the upper or lower lacrimal punctum to the exter-
Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal
nal nares for several days to a few months to help maintain
patency. Nasolacrimal catheterization is indicated in patients
sheedde
with 1epeated obstructions of the nasolacrimal system
(usually the nasolacrimal sac and duct), secondary to naso-
Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal apparatus are
lacrimal duct atresia in foals, following lacerations of the
divided into minor and majo1 procedures. Mino1 procedures
upper nasolacrimal system (usually the lacrimal puncta
d n  o  rs 
A
B
Fig. 6.2 (a) Normal dacryocystorhinogram in the dog (lateral position): the canaliculi (A), nasolacrimal sac (B), and nasolacrimal duct (C). A secondary nasolacrimal
orifice may be located immediately above the canine tooth (corner or third incisor). (b) Normal dacryocystorhinogram in the cat (lateral position). (c) Abnomal
dacryocystorhinogram of a foal with atresia of the distal nasolacrimal duct (arrow). Note this blind’ end of the nasolacrmal duct is considerably enlarged
(Reproduced with permission from Geiatt KN. Guffy MM. Boggess Ts 1970 Radiographic contrast techniques for deterting orbital and nasoiacrimal tumors in dogs. Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association 156:74 1746]
143
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
A
B
Fig. 6.3 Catheterization of the canine nasolacrimal system has both diagnostic and therapeutic advantages. Catheterization of the canine nasolacrimal system
utilies either a monofilament nylon suture or very small diameter silicone tubing. Both ends are sutured to adjacent skin. The system may remain in position
for several weeks in ensure patency of the nasolacrimal system. (a) After deep sedation or short-acting general anesthesia, a 2-0 to 3-0 nylon suture is passed
through the nasolacrimal system, starting at the dorsal lacrimal punctum. (b) Once the nylon suture has traversed the nasolacrimal system, 50 to 90 size
polyethylene tubing is threaded down the suture. (c) Once completed, both ends of the tubing are transfixed to the adjacent skin by one or two simple
interrupted non-absorbable sutures. An E-collar is recommended when the nasolacrimal catheterization is in place to prevent its dislodgement.
displacement of the lower punctum, enlargement of the
present (Fig. 6.4).
Concurrent conjunctivitis is usually
lower punctum, lacerations of the canaliculi, and dacryocys-
absent, but variable amounts of dermatitis of the eyelids
totomy. The more extensive o1 major surgical procedures,
and face may be present.
which construct new avenues for the drainage of tears from
Close inspection of the medial lower palpebral conjunc.
the conjunctival fornix, include conjunctivorhinostomy.
tiva detects the absence of the lower lacrimal punctum.
conjunctivomaxillary sinusotomy.
and conjunctivoralost-
 The topical fluorescein test is usually delayed or negative.
omy (o1 conjunctivobuccostomy). In the conjunctivorhi-
The nasolacrimal flush performed through the upper lacri-
  i s  n  ' 
mal punctum exits from the nasolacrimal duct and external
the caudal nasal cavity from the medial conjunctival fornix.
nares, but not through the lower punctum. Observation of
[n the conjunctivobuccostomy procedure, a subcutaneous
the medial lower palpebral conjunctiva during the initial
tear drainage bypass is created from the middle of the ventral
injection of saline may reveal a slightly raised o1 ballooned
conjunctival fornix to terminate in the oral mucosa beneath
area during the initial flush that coiresponds to the orifice
of the lower punctum (Fig. 6.5a).
The mucosa overlying the lower punctum may be excised,
inflammation, trauma, and neoplasia, and restoration of its
leaving an oval to round defect, o1 a cruciate incision may
 patency is impossible in all animal species.
be performed in the area (Fig. 6.5b). The nasolacrimal flush
is again performed to confim patency. Topical antibiotic/
corticosteroid solutions are instilled six to eight times daily
Surgery for imperforate lacrimal punctum
Imperforate lacrimal punctum occurs in a number of
breeds of dogs, but most frequently in the Toy and Minia-
ture Poodles, Sealyham Terlier, American Cocker Spaniel,
Golden Retriever, and Bedlington Terrier. Lower punctum
obstructions are commonly presented because of epiphora.
However, upper punctum obstructions do not generally
produce clinical signs and are only detected as part of an
ophthalmic examination.
The imperforate lacrimal punctum should be distin-
guished from atresia of the puncta. In the imperforate lacri-
mal punctum, the opening of the punctum is covered by a
thin veil of mucosa. Absence of the punctum indicates that
the entire punctum is missing: with punctum absence the
colresponding canaliculus is also missing. In my experience,
imperforate lacrimal puncta are not infrequent in dogs.
but atresia of the lacrimal puncta is rare.
With the impaired drainage of tears with lower lacrimal
punctum obstriction, excessive moisture and rust-colored
Fig. 6.4 Young Miniature Poodle with unilateral imperforate lower lacrimal
staining of the medial canthal skin and hair are usually
 punctum. Note the epiphora and staining of the medial canthal hair.
144
Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal apparatus
administered six to eight times daily to control the healing
process and prevent fibrosis.
Displacement of the lower lacrimal punctum
a   sie ps au si nd mi au
medial canthus and 1-2 mm bulbar of the eyelid margin
A
B
in the palpebral conjunctiva. Displacement of the punc-
tum occurs infrequently in the dog in these patients the
ee laddn aun 'unund ewue lamal aeoadui ue ya s'g dbi
lower punctum is usually displaced several millimeters
punctum is cannulated and flushed with sterile saline. (a) with the initial 
ventral of its normal position. The condition may be pri-
flush, the mucosa overlying the imperforate lacrimal punctum will bulge or
mary or secondary to entropion, ectropion, trauma, and
tent, thereby indicating its position and the patency of the lower canaliculus.
scarring.
(b) Treatment of the imperforate lacrimal punctum is by excision of the
 Treatment for a displaced lower punctum is influenced
mucosa over the lacrimal punctum orifice by small tenotomy scissors.
Alternatively, the mucosa is incised in a cruciate manner. Topical antibiotics/
by the extent and severity of epiphora, the associated der-
corticosteroids are instilled frequently for the next several days to maintain
matitis, and tear staining. Mild or intermittent epiphora is
the lacrimal punctum orifice and to prevent the healing process from re-
usually tolerated, and no surgical treatment is attempted.
covering the opening.
 Patients with extensive medial canthal dermatitis and irrita-
tion require treatment. The fluorescein passage test is either
fo1 10-14 days to maintain patency and prevent the orifice
delayed o1 negative. The nasolacrimal flush will indicate
wall from healing together. Intracanalicular gelatin implants
 si d non a ia d si s a 
to
 convey the normal volume of tears into the lower cana-
liculus. The recommended initial treatment is to dilate the
displaced lower punctum and canaliculus to enhance the
Enlargement of the lower punctum
uptake of the tears. In the event that this fails, the displaced
Lower lacrimal micropuncta occur occasionally in the dog
punctum can be relocated to its normal position o1 a new
exit for tear drainage is constructed to the mouth, maxillary
and 1esult in epiphora. Scarring following conjunctival
inflammation and trauma may also 1educe the lower lacri-
sinus, o1 nasal cavity. Transposition of the lower punctum,
n       sd 
although minor surgery, requires magnification and cannu-
The fluorescein test will be delayed o1 negative. The nasola-
lation of the punctum and canaliculus during surgery and
crimal flush will indicate patency of the lower lacrimal
fo1 several weeks postoperatively.
 After general anesthesia and surgical preparation of the
punctum, but greater resistance to the flush.
medial canthus, the lower punctum and canaliculus are
Treatment consists of surgical enlargement of the lower
punctum. Under short-acting general anesthesia, the open-
cannulated with 2-0 to 3-0 monofilament nylon, and PE
ing of the micropunctum is incised with the Bard-Parker
 90 polyethylene tubing is slid over the suture. The mucosa
around the lower punctum is incised with the Beaver
No. 11 scalpel o1 Beaver No. 6500 o1 6700 microsurgical
No. 6400 microsurgical blade. By dissection with tenotomy
blade (Fig. 6.6). The knife blade is slid further into the lower
scissors, the lower canaliculus is isolated for approximately
canaliculus, and an additional 3-5 mm of canaliculus wall
is incised. Alternatively, the mucosa around the lower punc-
5-8 mm. The lower punctum and canaliculus are moved
to a small linear incision in the lower palpebral conjunctival
tum is incised into three sections and excised. Postoperative
treatment consists of topical antibiotics and corticosteroids
mucosa, 1-2 mm deep in the eyelid margin. The monofila-
ment suture or polyethylene tubing catheter is sutured to
the medial lower eyelid and the skin caudal to the nostril.
If the transplanted lacrimal punctum and canaliculus have
some surrounding mucosa, at least three 6-0 simple intel-
 rupted absorbable sutures are placed about the punctum to
secure it. [f limited mucosa is available, sutures may
adversely affect the punctum, and the cannula is critical to
maintain the transplanted tissues in position. Topical anti-
biotics and corticosteroids as well as systemic antibiotics
are administered fo1 7-10 days. The nasolacrimal catheter
is 1emoved after 3-4 weeks.
Lacerations of the canaliculi
Fig. 6.6 Lower lacrimal micropunctum is associated with epiphora, but a
Most lacerations of the dog's eyelids involve the lateral
patent nasolacrimal flush. The small size of the lower lacrimal punctum
aspects; medial eyelid lacerations are infrequent. If the
prevents the normal volume of tears entering the nasolacrimal system, and
laceration affects the medial canthus, transection of the can-
hence, the epiphora. Treatment of lower lacrimal micropunctum consists of
aliculus is likely. Lacerations that involve the canaliculi, gen-
enlargement of the orifice, beginning at the lower canaliculus with a
3-5 mm linear incision with the Bard-Parker No. 11 or Beaver No. 6500 bladle.
erally the lower, are usually in the vertical o1 somewhat
Alternatively, the periphery of the lower punctum orifice is incised into three
angled plane. The toin eyelid is usually highly edematous;
se ctions and partially excised.
debris and hemorrhage may obscure the extent of the injury.
145
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
[dentification of the canaliculus is usually difficult but is
usually indicates whether the system is plugged; if a fistula
enhanced during the injection of air either 1etrogradely from
is present, the flush may exit this route. When additional
the nares or from the fellow nasolacrimal punctum. The exit
 pressure is applied during flushing purulent material will
of bubbles from within the lacerated lid can greatly facilitate
often exit from the lower lacrimal punctum. Once the saline
localization and canalization of the severed canaliculus.
flush emerges freely from the lower lacrimal punctum,
Tissue destruction and resultant inflammation can markedly
digital pressure is applied to the lower lacrimal punctum
distort the area.
redirectthe
flush
through
1thelacrimal
sac
 After surgical preparation, the upper lacrimal punchum
and nasolacrimal duct. Additional punulent exudates may
and canaliculus are cannulated with the gold lacrimal or
emerge from the external nares. Fortunately, most nasolacri-
 22-23 g stainless steel needle, and the system is flushed to
mal foreign bodies lodge in the lower canaliculus o1 nasola-
locate the lower canaliculus. The distal portion of the lacel-
crimal sac, and are expelled by nasolacrimal flushes from
ated lower canaliculus is usually difficult to locate because
the upper lacrimal punctum. Occasionally a small selrated
of tissue trauma and swelling. If both parts of the canalicu-
01 1 x 2 teeth Bishop-Haimon forceps is necessary to
lus can be identified and cannulated, the edges of the eyelid
extract the foreign body.
laceration are carefully apposed, usually in two layers. The
 Post-flushing treatment is directed at combating infection,
nasolacrimal cathete1 of PE 50 to 90 polyethylene
Ieducing inflammation, and maintaining patency. Broad-
manipulated over the suture through the system, tied, and
d  n   s a
sutured to the skin at the medial canthus and lateral to the
terally. Choice of antibiotics may also be altered by sensitiv.
nostril.
ity tests. Most bacteria isolated from dacryocystitis in dogs
 Postoperative treatment includes topical and systemic anti-
ale similar to those lecovered from conjunctivitis, and
biotics and corticosteroids. The nasolacrimal catheter is left in
include hemolytic and non-hemolytic Staphylococcus spp..
situ for 4-6 weeks. Frequency of topical therapy should be
Escherichia coli, Enterobacter spp.. and alpha-hemolytic
about six times daily. After most of the eyelid swelling has
streptococci. Antibiotics in aqueous and non-irritating solu-
decreased, topical therapy is applied three to four times daily
tions can also be added to sterile saline during the nasolacri-
until the nasolacrimal catheter is removed.
mal flush. Corticosteroids are infrequently used, but if the
swelling is severe and the results of sensitivity tests guide
Dacryocystotomy
the choice of antibiotics, anti-inflammatory agents may be
helpful. To maintain nasolacrimal patency, either repeated
Surgical procedures of the canine and feline lacrimal sac are
nasolacrimal flushes or catheterization of the system may
infrequent, as the sac is poorly developed, partially covered
be necessary.
by the lacrimal bone, and caudal of the medial aspects
 In dacryocystotomy, the medial canthal and ventrome-
of the orbicularis oculi muscle. Dacryocystitis is not infre-
dial lowel eyelid regions ale prepared fo1 aseptic surgery.
quent in the dog. Foreign bodies, bacterial infections, and
A PE 50 to 90 polyethylene catheter is inserted through
obstruction of the lacrimal sac characterize dacryocystitis.
either the lower o1 upper lacrimal punctum into the lacri-
Occasionally a fistula may develop from the lacrimal
sac
mal sac. This catheter must be maintained in position
onto the skin of the medial canthus (Fig. 6.7). Dacryocystitis
to locate the lacrimal sac, and preserve the integrity of the
usually responds to a combination of nasolacrimal flushes
cannulated lacrimal punctum and associated canaliculus.
and antibiotic therapy. Fo1 recurrent dacryocystitis, nasola-
The lacrimal sac is located in a fossa in the lacrimal and
crimal catheterization is recommended. In those patients
frontal bones, posterior to the lacrimal crest (Fig. 6.8)
that do not respond to these treatments, an exploratory
A 2-3 cm skin incision is made parallel to the lower eyelid
dacryocystotomy for foreign bodies is recommended.
The fluorescein passage test is usually negative; if a fistula
    s n   ae s 
d  d a o  ' 
Fig. 6.8 The nasolacrimal sac is located in a fossa in the lacrimal and frontal
bones (arrow), posterior to the lacrimal crest. As the nasolacrimal sac is not
well developed in the dog, a polyethylene catheter inserted into the lower
Fig. 6.7 A dog with chronic dacryocystitis. Note the swelling of the medlial
lacrimal punctum, lower canaliculus, and into the nasolacrimal sac facilitates
lower eyelid and a fistula extending from the nasolacrimal sac onto the skin.
its location.
146
Surgical procedures for the nasolacrimal apparatus
margin along the ventromedial orbital rim. By blunt-sharp
surgical fistula is eventually lined with mucous membrane
dissection,
. the subcutaneous and periorbital tissues are
while its patency is maintained by an indwelling catheter.
penetrated to reach the lacrimal bone. The nasolacrimal
Polyethylene (3 mm outside diameter) or silicone tubing
catheter can be palpated as it enters the lacrimal sac within
can be constricted to fit in the fistula, and maintain patency
the lacrimal fossa, about 5 mm ventral of the orbital rim.
during healing. Polyethylene tubing is more rigid and when
A 3 mm bone burr is used to drill a hole in the lacrimal
exposed to heat will flare to form an 8 x 1.4 mm flange
bone and into the lacrimal sac. Once the lacrimal sac is
which can be attached by sutures to adjacent tissues. Sili-
entered, flushing from the nasolacrimal catheter will enter
cone tubing is more flexible, but sometimes cannot be
the freshly drilled hole. Any foreign body and other material
manipulated into confined areas without buckling. To add
can be removed from the lacrimal sac.
a flange to the silicone tubing, special silicone glue is neces-
Closure consists of 4-0 simple interrupted absorbable
sary to attach the silicone sheeting fashioned into any shape
sutures of the periosteum of the lacrimal bone, the perior-
and size. For this procedure, the stiffer polyethylene tubing
bita, and the subcutaneous layer of the eyelid. Skin apposi-
is clearly superior. The polyethylene tubing (40 mm long).
tion is by 4-0 simple inteirupted non-absorbable sutures.
with the heat-produced flange on its proximal end and
The nasolacrimal catheter is retained in the system fo1 14-
a beveled end, protrudes into the nasal cavity. Premature
21 days to maintain patency as the nasolacrimal sac wall is
loss of the indwelling catheter and its non-replacement will
not apposed by sutures, and to ensure delivery of topical
usually result in closure of the surgical fistula and failure of
antibiotics to the area. Systemic antibiotics are also recom-
the surgery.
mended because contamination of the surgical site occurs
After surgical preparation of the medial canthal region, an
once the lacrimal sac is opened and irrigated.
incision is made in the area of the caruncle at the base of the
nictitating membrane. With blunt dissection of the ventio-
Conjunctivorhinostomy (caudal nasal cavity)
medial orbital rim periorbita, the periosteum is isolated fo1
approximately 3-4 mm. The periosteum and maxillary bone
With congenital and acquired loss of the different parts
are incised with either a trephine o1 progressively larger
of the nasolacrimal system, an alternative route can be
Steinmann pins to enter the nasal cavity.
constructed surgically to prevent epiphora and to drain the
Entry into the nose usually produces variable amounts of
tears directly into the nose o1 oral cavity. The continuous
hemorrhage. After the tract has been flushed and cleared
presence of tears at the medial canthus and adjacent skin fre
of debris, a 40 mm length of polyethylene tubing posi-
quently results in medically uncontrollable chronic dermati-
tioned about the malleable probe, is manipulated into posi-
tis, rust-colored changes in the hair, and pruritus. Alternative
tion. If the tubing tends to protrde after placement, it is
     n    s
probably in contact with the nasal floor o1 medial septum
the tears to exit the ventral conjunctival fornix include
and should be shortened. At least three non-absorbable
the caudal nasal cavity, the maxillary sinus, and the mouth
sutures are used to anchol the proximal end of the tubing
(Fig. 6.9). Fortunately, atresia of the distal nasolacrimal duct
to the conjunctival mucosa and medial canthus. After
in young horses is usually within the area of the nostril, and
anchoring of the indwelling catheter, a final flush with ster-
can be reached through the nostril.
ile saline should indicate its patency and position within the
-n i s d  snn 
posterior nasal cavity.
structed surgically to extend from the medioventral conjunc
Postoperative therapy (
consists of topical and systemic
tival foinix to the nasal cavity o1 maxillary sinus (often
antibiotics and topical corticosteroids fo1 5-7 days. An
teimed conjunctival maxillary sinusotomy). Ove1 time, this
E-collar, while annoying. is valuable to maintain the cathe-
ter in place for as long as possible. The tubing should
remain in situ for at least 2 months to permit epithelializa-
tion of the fistula. Topical antibiotics once o1 twice daily
are useful. If the tubing becomes plugged, flushing with
0.9% sterile saline solution is used to re-establish patency.
Possible complications after this procedure include tube
displacement and loss, closure of the fistula, mucous mem-
brane overgrowth, and increased epiphora. The success rate
 of this method is 85-90%. Maintenance of the tubing during
the time of permanent fistulization is critical; premature loss
of the tubing generally requires placement of another as soon
as possible and before the fistula heals closed.
Conjunctivorhinostomy is less successful in cats as the
fistulas tend to close eventually. The indwelling catheter
should be left in the cat for as long as possible.
Conjunctival maxillary sinusotomy
Fig. 6.9 When the nasolacrimal system has been pemmanently damaged,
(into the maxillary sinus)
alternative routes for exit of the tears can be constructed surgically to enter
the posterior nasal cavity or maxillary sinus (conjunctivorhinostomy), or the
Another method developed for the dog constructs a buccal
mouth (conjunctivobuccostomy). The approximate sites for entry into the
mucosa tunnel that extends from the medial lower conjunc-
caudal nasal cavity (A) and maxillary sinus (B) are depicted on the canine skull.
tival fornix through the subcutaneous tissues and the
147
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
maxilla to enter the maxillary sinus. Patency of the buccal
tunnel is maintained by 4 cm long indwelling polyethylene
ADAPTATIONS IN LARGE ANIMALS
tubing (PE 50 to 90) fo1 several weeks. The buccal mucosa
AND SPECIAL SPECIES
tunnel is constricted from a freshly harvested 15 x 20 mm
section of buccal mucosa. A polyethylene tube is threaded
 Nasolacrimal obstructions in large animals
through its lumen to maintain its shape and facilitate
handling. After surgical preparation of the lower eyelid and
area over the maxillary sinus, a skin incision is made 1 cm
Nasolacrimal obstructions are in frequent in horses. In foals
lateral of the medial canthus fo1 3 cm to the area over the
and young horses, atresia of the distal nasolacrimal duct
maxillary sinus. Once over the maxillary sinus, the perios-
and nasal punctum manifests as epiphora, chronic reflex con-
teum is reflected and an 8-10 mm trephine is used to enter
junctivitis, and a prominent bulge in the distal nasolacrimal
the maxillary sinus. The buccal tunnel is positioned between
canal, fortunately accessible through the nostril. Other surgi-
the conjunctival fornix and maxillary sinus, and its ends
cally treated diseases are lacrimal punctum atresia, and more
secured. Simple interrupted absorbable sutures are used to
generalized nasolacrimal duct agenesis. Dacryocystitis is infre-
attach the proximal buccal tunnel to the conjunctival
quent in adult horses, and is usually associated with chronic
mucosa and submucosa, and the distal end of the tunnel
obstruction and bacterial infection of the lacrimal sac and
to the maxillary sinus mucosa and periosteum. The skin
chronic 1eflux conjunctivitis. Dacryocystorhinography is an
incision is apposed with simple inteirupted non-absorbable
sutures.
in horses and cattle.
Postoperative management after this method is identical
to the earlier procedure. Maintenance of the indwelling
Distal nasolacrimal duct atresia in foals
catheter within the buccal tunnel for several weeks is critical
and young horses
for its success.
This surgery can be perfoimed in the sedated and standing
foal, but may involve less time if general anesthesia is used.
Conjunctivobuccostomy
The bulging area of the distal nasolacrimal duct (basically a
m pasu pue deos ins m pa si nod p
An alternative to conjunctivorhinostomy, conjunctivobuc-
0.5% povidone-iodine (Fig. 6.11a). The entire nasolacrimal
  r e  i  i 
system is catheterized through the upper lacrimal punctum
not involved. In this procedure, a subcutaneous tunnel is con-
with silicone tubing polyethylene tubing, o1 a No. 40
stricted from the middle part of the lower conjunctival fornix
French catheter so that the catheter tip can be palpated in
to the upper fornix of the upper lip (Fig. 6.10). A buccal
the blind' pouch. The top of bulge is incised by scalpel;
mucosa tunnel can be constructed and positioned between
considerable hemorrhage may result and is controlled by
the two fornices. A long-term indwelling catheter of polyethyl-
surgical sponges and direct pressure. The wound is left
ene tubing must also be constructed and maintained within
open to heal with the catheter in position to ensure patency.
the subcutaneous buccal tunnel to maintain patency as the
Both ends of the catheter are secured by non-absorbable
     sa s r
sutures to the medial canthus and upper nostril respectively
insert a long-term indwelling polyethylene catheter, anchored
(Fig. 6.11b). The entire area is covered by stockinet and a
securely in the conjunctival and buccal fornices, and allow for
mask with a hard cup to reduce rubbing and protect the
epithelialization to occur. Postoperative management is iden-
indwelling catheter for several weeks. Topical antibiotics/
tical to the two previous procedures.
corticosteroids are administered daily fo1 several days.
In absence of the lower nasolacrimal system, canaliculo1-
hinostomy can be performed in the horse.
Nasolacrimal duct obstructions in cattle
Nasolacrimal obstructions are rare in cattle. Dacryocystorhi-
nography should precede any surgery for either the lacrimal
sac o1 nasolacrimal duct in cattle. Conjunctivorhinostomy
has been reported in cattle, providing passage for tears from
the front of the caruncle through the lacrimal bone and
ventral nasal concha into the ventral nasal meatus. A section
(A)
of polyethylene urinary catheter is positioned within the fis-
B
tula (ends are secured to the medial canthus and nostril)
Fig. 6.10 In conjunctivobuccostomy the tears drain from the lower
 and maintained for several weeks.
conjunctival fornix through a subcutaneous fistula into the mouth. (a) A
subcutaneous tunnel of buccal mucosa is constructed to span the ventral
Nasolacrimal duct obstructions (extracorneal
conjunctival fornix to the dorsocaudal buccal area. (b) To maintain patency
of this new buccal mucosa tunnel, a custom-constructed polyethylene
 bullous spectaculopathy) in snakes
tubing is left in situ for several weeks as shown in this immediate
postoperative appearance after conjunctivorhinostomy in a cat. The
silicone tubing has been inserted in the new surgical fistula into the nasal
In snakes and certain lizards the coinea is protected by a
cavity, and must remain in position for several weeks for epithelialization of
transparent spectacle foimed by fusion of the eyelids
the fistula.
during embryonic development. The tears, formed by the
148
Nasolacrimal duct obstructions (extracorneal bullous spectaculopathy) in snakes
A
B
Fig. 6.11 Atresia of the nasolacrimal duct in the foal. (a) The blind end of the distal nasolacrimal duct is usually visible and accessible just caudal of the
mucocutaneous junction on the floor of the nostril. (b) After a simple incision of the top of this blind end' of the nasolacrimal duct, silicone or polyethylene
tubing is positioned within the entire nasolacrimal system for several weeks to maintain the healing distal orifice patent, and secured by skin sutures at 
both ends or simply tied together. A stockinet is placed over the face to prevent dislodgement of the catheter until removal.
Harderian gland, enter the subspectacular and precoineal
Providencia rettgeri, commonly isolated from oral infections,
space to drain via the lacrimal duct into the mouth or the
can also be recovered from the subspectacular fluids. Flagel-
duct of Jacobson's organ within the mouth. Obstruction of
lates can also be 1ecovered; their role in the development of
the lacrimal duct, usually at the level of the roof of the
subspectacular infection is unknown. With subspectacular
mouth, results in accumulation of tears with enlarge-
infections, the spectacle loses its clarity, and may develop
ment of the subspectacular space and swelling of the specta-
ulcerations and bullae. Fluorescein can be injected carefully
cle that mimics enlargement of the eye and glaucoma
into the subspectacular space to demonstrate patency o1
(pseudobuphthalmos). Development of the lacrimal duct
obstruction of the lacrimal drainage apparatus.
occlusion and distention of the spectacle is usually acute.
Treatment of the condition is essential to prevent infec-
Occlusion of the lacrimal duct usually results from pres-
tion of the cornea and intraocular tissues, and damage to
sure or scarring from tumors and granulomas, and oral
the spectacle. The subspectacular space can be aspirated
lesions, usually grouped together as ulcerative and/or necrotic
and injected with low concentrations of antibiotics. In
stomatitis, and inflammations of Jacobson's organ (Fig. 6.12).
severe cases, a significant section of the spectacle has been
With obstruction of the lacrimal duct and ascending infections
excised, but the exposed coinea must be medicated daily with
from the mouth, a septic process can develop within the
ophthalmic antibiotic ointments until the next shedding of
subspectacular space. Pseudomonas spp. Proteus spp., and
the skin o1 ecdysis occurs.
A
B
C
Fig. 6.12 Nasolacrimal (lacrimal) duct obstructions (a) and ascending oral infections (b) in snakes are characterized by enlargement of the subspectacular
space with tears and inflammatory debris and swelling of the spectacle as well as the oral infection. Initial treatment consists of aspiration and culture and 
cytology of the subspectacular fluids, and treatment of any infections. (c) Sometimes partial removal of the spectacle is also necessary.
149
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
Another effective method is excision of a small 30° wedge
serve as the collecting 'pool' for the tears en route to the ventro-
of the ventral spectacle that permits sampling of the tears fo1
medial conjunctival foinix and the lower lacrimal punctum. In
possible pathogens, and an entry for repeated flushing and
humans, accessory tear glands within the conjunctiva, the
treatment of the condition. With the next shedding
the
glands of Krause and Wolfring have not been identified in ani-
spectacle integrity will be 1estored. Examination 
of
the
mals, and may have been consolidated through evolution into
mouth and treatment of ulcerative and necrotic stomatitis
the single gland of the nictitating membrane.
with parenteral systemic antibiotics are also indicated to pre-
Both the lacrimal gland and superficial gland of the nictitat-
vent recurrence of the lacrimal duct obstruction
ing membrane have considerable cholinergic and adrenergic
Conjunctivoralostomy has also been perfoimed in snakes,
osse aie a a oia a s a
using a curved 18 g hypodermic needle to create a fistula
with the blood vessels and are probably involved in local reg-
between the inferior fornix of the subspectacular space and
ulation of blood flow. The cholinergic nerve endings are
the roof of the mouth. Patency during healing is maintained
mainly around the acini in both glands. Experimental electri-
by a catheter 0.635 mm in diameter sutured to the 1oof of
cal stimulation of the lacrimal nerve in cats results in marked
the mouth and ventral periocular scales with 5-0 sutures
increases in the rate of tear formation.
(absorbable in the mouth and silk fo1 the skin). Because
 The superficial gland of the nictitating membrane in the
of the importance of Pseudomonas species in oral infections
dog may be the analog for the accessory lacrimal glands in
and infected subspectacular tissues in snakes, systemic and
humans. Studies in the dog suggest that tear production
may differ from that of humans in that both tear glands
appear to contribute to the basal and reflex portions of teal
foimation. The lacrimal gland contributes about 60-75% of
SURGERY FOR KERATOCONJUNCTIVITIS SICCA
the total tear volume; the superficial gland of the nictitating
membrane contributes 25-40%.
Diseases of the tear-secreting glands are demonstrated
As a reasonable substitute for tears, saliva from the
by reduction in tear production, changes in the preocular
 parotid gland is well tolerated by the cornea and conjunc-
(precorneal) film, and secondary keratoconjunctivitis. Tears
tival surfaces in humans, dogs, cats, and horses. Parotid
are composite secretions with oily, aqueous, and mucoid
     so  ss
portions. The lacrimal gland, the superficial gland of the
during eating. The parotid gland is located caudal to the
nictitating membrane, and any accessory lacrimal glands
mandible with its duct emerging from its base. The origin
within the conjunctiva produce tears.
of the parotid duct consists of several small ducts that con-
In the dog, excision of either the lacrimal or the nictitans
verge to form one large duct at the base of the gland and a
gland does not result in clinical disease, i.e., keratoconjunctivi-
single duct that passes forward external to the masseter
tis sicca (KCS), o1 significant changes in the Schirmer tea1 test
muscle. The parotid duct is closely attached to the external
1. However, the Schirmer tear test 2, conducted unde1 topical
masseter fascia, and separation of the two structures during
anesthesia, indicates a lower level of basal tear production.
surgery is sometimes quite tedious. In most breeds of dogs
[n dogs, the surgical loss of both glands results in kera
the course of the parotid duct is straight from the base of
toconjunctivitis sicca. Surgical studies in the dog suggest
the parotid salivary gland to its papilla. Howevel, in
that the lacrimal gland provides about 60-75% of the total
brachycephalic breeds, the course of the parotid duct is less
  a o  rs a  's
predictable, and often tends to be quite ventral of its usual
25-40%. Diseases of the nictitating membrane tear gland, such
straight course.
as 'cherry eye' or a prolapsed and inflamed gland, can predis-
The parotid duct is medial to and between the dorsal and
  e  s s    a 
ventral buccal divisions of the facial nerve in the dog
(even if treated successfully by surgical replacement of the
(Fig. 6.13). The duct usually appears pink-white, whereas
gland). Keratoconjunctivitis sicca occurs most frequently in
the nerve branches are white. Cannulation of the parotid
the dog: it is infrequent in cats, and is rare in horses and cattle.
duct with either green o1 blue monofilament nylon greatly
aids in its identification and prevents confusion with either
of the dorsal and ventral buccal nerves during surgery. The
Surgical anatomy
a n ed e ui san o p
caudolateral to the carnassial tooth. [n this area the buccal
Tear production in animals results primarily from two
nerves and facial vein usually have multiple branches that
glands. The lacrimal gland is located in the periorbital fascia
complicate the final phase of parotid duct dissection. The
dorsolateral to the globe and immediately beneath the lat-
parotid duct often extends 0.5-1 cm submucosally before
eral orbital ligament and zygomatic arch in the dog and
it enters the papilla. The papilla of the parotid duct should
cat. The superficial gland of the nictitating membrane is
not be confused with the one or more papillae of the
the smaller tear-producing gland, and surrounds the lower
zygomatic salivary gland in the dog.
aspects of the base of the cartilage of the third eyelid. While
The anatomy of the parotid gland and duct in the cat is
the tears from the lacrimal gland flow ventral and medial to
d a (i ) s   ai n r 
the nasolacrimal drainage apparatus, the tears produced by
of the parotid duct enters the cat's mouth immediately adja-
the superficial gland of the nictitans are probably mixed
cent to the last premolar tooth. The parotid duct can be can-
and distributed across the cornea and conjunctiva by a com-
nulated with 4-0 monofilament nylon in cats. The dorsal
bination of movements by the nictitating membrane
and
and ventral buccal nerves are more distant to the parotid
uppeI eyelid. Movements of the lower eyelid are limited, and
duct, but converge just before the anterior facial vein and
u xo un pe aa rml ai n sade
before the duct terminates in its papilla.
150
 Surgical anatomy
Surgical treatment of acute
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
The treatment of acute KCS includes medical or surgical
management, or a combination of both, and should be con-
sidered an ophthalmic emergency. Medical therapy of acute
KCS includes topical tear substitutes as well as stimulation
of existing tear formation to increase moisture to the exter-
nal eye. Antibiotics are administered to suppress or elimi-
nate opportunistic bacteria. Surgical procedures for acute
KCS include bulbar and palpebral conjunctival grafts as well
as nictitating membrane flaps to manage the rapid and often
progressive corneal ulceration of acute KCs. These surgical
procedures will be presented in Chapter 7.
5
Surgical treatment of medically non-
responsive chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Fig. 6.13 The major anatomic landmarks and surgical considerations for
by parotid duct transposition in dogs and cats
parotid duct transposition in the dog from the original drawing by
[n those patients that have failed to respond to medical
Lavignette (1966). During surgical dissection of the parotid duct (1), the facial
vein (2), the dorsal buccal nerve (3), and the ventral buccal nerve (4) should
treatment fo1 chronic KCS, parotid duct transposition to
be identified. A skin biopsy punch or corneal trephine is used to incise
substitute saliva for tears is 1ecommended (Fig. 6.15). Trial
the parotid duct papilla in the mouth (5). A small hemostat is inserted 
medical therapy with topical cyclosporin A twice daily
through the ventrolateral conjunctival fornix and a subcutaneous tunnel to
   s  in ne s 
pull the parotid duct into the fornix for apposition.
with the Schirmer tea1 test to detect any improvement in
/Reproduced witin permission from Lavingnette AN: 1966 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog
tear secretion. Topical treatment with antibiotics and co1-
treated by transposition of the parotid salivary duct. Journal of the American Veterinary
ticosteroids is also continued during this time. Surgical o1
Medical Association 148: 778786.)
electrocautery ablation of the lower lacrimal punctum 01
insertion of lower punctal occluders in the dog to conserve
existing tears has not been successful because the level of
tear production is too low. Reduction in the size of the pal-
pebral fissure with lateral canthoplasty, partial permanent
tarsorrhaphy, or other methods to conserve the existing
moisture have not been useful in the dog because most
KCS patients have little, if any, tear production.
The dog and cat must be evaluated for parotid function
before surgery. The gland and duct should be palpated for
abnormalities. The papilla of the parotid duct immediately
adjacent to the caudal aspect of the carnassial tooth should
be inspected, and saliva flow should be observed. Parotid gland
function can be tested by applying a few drops of 1% atropine
ophthalmic solution to the patient's tongue. Profuse salivation
should follow, associated with the bitter taste of atropine.
Fig. 6.14 Surgical anatomy for parotid duct transposition in the cat. As in
the dog, the feline parotid duct (A) traverses anteriorly external to the
masseter muscle and between the dorsal (B) and ventral (C) buccal nerves.
As the distal end of the duct and papilla are approached, several small
 Fig. 6.15 Chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca in an American Cocker Spaniel.
branches of the facial vein are encountered.
snoidos pue eauos panuawbid Aaaldwon e Aq pazuanneieyp s! aka aul
(Reproduced with permission from Gwin RM. Geiatt KN. Peiffer RL 1977 Parotid duct
mucopurulent conjunctival exudates. The condition, not respondent to 
transposition in the cat with keratoconjunctivitis sicca. Journal of the American Arimal
either long-term topical cyclosporin A or oral pilocarpine, is recommended
Hospitai Assocication 13:4245.)
for parotid duct transposition.
151
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
Parotid secretion has many similarities to tears and is non-
The lip is raised and the gauze sponge removed. The
irritating to the eye. Canine KCS patients with parotid duct
mucosa should not be penetrated beyond the submucosa.
tianspositions lasting over 7 years have not exhibited
The papilla and surrounding 3 mm radius of mucosa are
corneal irritation to parotid secretions. Parotid duct transpo-
dissected free, and the papilla and parotid duct are retracted
 aii u sop iadxa u paoai is sem uo
back into the initial exteinal incision. The oral incision is
Japan; the first description of this procedure fo1 the man-
apposed with 2-0 to 4-0 simple interupted absorbable
agement of canine KCS was in 1966. Since then, several
sutures. All instruments used within the mouth are set aside,
veterinary investigators have reported slight modifications
and the surgeon should reglove.
of the original surgical procedure, postoperative results,
With a small straight hemostat or mosquito forceps, a sub-
and complications. Parotid duct transposition can also be
cutaneous tunnel is constricted to the lateral conjunctival
perfoimed in cats, using the same surgical procedure and
fornix, superficial to the masseter muscle and the zygomatic
clinical management.
arch. Pressure is applied until the instrument's tips appear
subconjunctivally and the overlying conjunctiva is incised.
Surgical procedure
An alternative method is to excise a 2-3 mm diameter con-
junctival plug. The mosquito forceps, placed within the sub-
10 leio aul iua Aq pauoeoidde aq uen ionp puoied au
cutaneous tunnel, is used to grasp the edge of the mucosa
lateral 1oute. The lateral approach is preferred because of bet-
with the papilla and carefully draw the duct to the conjunc-
tel exposure, less potential fo1 transection of the duct, and
tival fo1nix (Fig. 6.16h).
septic contamination of the incision from the mouth is mark-
The mucosa about the papilla is trimmed, if excessive, and
edly reduced. The oral approach was developed initially in
is sutured to the adjacent conjunctiva with at least three
humans to avoid any facial skin incision and resultant scar.
to four 6-0 simple interupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 6.16i).
       
The facial skin exposure is dosed. Interrupted 2-0 to 4-0
eyelids and lateral face, the papilla of the parotid duct is
absorbable sutures are used to reduce the ‘dead space'
identified near the base (ventrolateral) of the upper car-
between the subcutaneous tissues and the masseter muscle.
nassial tooth. Care must be taken not to confuse it with
 The skin is apposed with simple interrupted 3-0 or 4-0 non-
the papillae of the ducts of the zygomatic salivary gland,
absorbable sutures (Fig. 6.16j,k).
which open near the gingival border above the last molar
tooth. A 2-0 to 3-0 monofilament nylon suture, with the
Oral approach for parotid duct transposition
tip flamed to “blunt' it, is passed into the parotid duct
in dogs
papilla. The suture can often be observed and felt moving
onp pied aun u anene sassed i se us au qeauaa
 The oral approach for parotid duct transposition is an altera-
to the gland.
tive method and was developed in humans to omit the post-
Two methods have been used to incise the papilla and 1os-
operative skin incision and scarring. In this procedure,
tral parotid duct. The mucosa can be incised and a round to
the initial step is to remove the oval mucosal plug with the
oval portion of mucosa removed with the papilla. With this
papilla and then, by blunt-sharp dissection, free the duct
method, dissection can be difficult and excessive buccal
from its masseter fascial attachments. A tunnel from the
mucosa may be excised. An alternative oral approach using
conjunctival fornix is formed from the ventrolateral con-
a 6 mm biopsy punch or corneal trephine is recommended
junctival fornix with a mosquito forceps, and the mucosa
(Fig. 6.16a). After the mucosal incision around the parotid
and papilla are transposed to the conjunctival sac. The
duct papilla and placement of the suture cannula, a 0.5%
papilla of the parotid duct is apposed as in the previous
method, and the oral incision is closed with 3-0 to 4-0 sim-
mouth to provide at least some disinfection in the area.
ple interrupted absorbable sutures.
After draping of the area directly over the entire length of
the parotid duct and the eye, the position of the nylon
Postoperative management and results
suture in the duct is again palpated through the skin. A skin
incision is made along the duct through the skin and super-
 Postoperative care after parotid duct transposition includes
ficial facial muscles to expose the duct (Fig. 6.16b.c).
topical antibiotics and corticosteroids four to six times daily
The parotid duct is very carefully dissected from the supel-
and systemic antibiotics for 7-10 days. If considerable facial
ficial fascia of the masseter muscle, and retracted by suture
edema occurs postoperatively, diuretics are useful. Gentle
O1 muscle hook to avoid excessive trauma to the duct
massage and occasional warm compresses to the surgical site
(Fig. 6.16d-f). The duct is dissected free posterior to the
help reduce the subcutaneous swelling and enhance duct
angle of the mandible or where the duct begins to divide
function between meals. The skin sutures are removed in
into smaller ductules immediately rostral to the base of the
7-10 days.
parotid gland to provide adequate length fo1 the duct's
Parotid duct function should be exhibited on the first
relocation to the lateral conjunctival fornix (Fig. 6.16g)
postoperative day, with epiphoia during snacks o1 meals.
 Separation of the parotid duct from the masseter muscle
A drop of 1% atropine ophthalmic solution applied to the
is continued rostrally: one must avoid the facial vein and
tongue can be used to check for duct patency, as well as to
the anastomotic nerve branch between the dorsal and
flush the debris associated with the trauma of surgery and
ventral buccal nerves. Near the buccal mucosa, the parotid
cannulation from the duct or its papilla (or both). Parotid
duct usually continues for about 0.5-1 cm submucosally
before terminating in the papilla adjacent to the carnassial
ciated with subcutaneous facial edema, minor damage, 01
tooth.
irregularities along the path of the duct. When the skin
152
Surgical anatomy
B
D
H
Fig. 6.16 For parotid duct transposition in the dog, the parotid duct is cannulated with blue or green 2-0 to 4-0 monoflament nylon inserted into the papilla.
(a) The mucosa around the papilla of the parotid duct (immediately adjacent to the carnassial tooth) is incised with a 4 mm skin trephine, and cannulated with
a 2-0 monofilament nylon suture to facilitate its identification during the lateral surgical approach. (b) The skin incision is made directly over the cannulated
duct, which can often be palpated. (c) The dotted line is the site for the skin incision directly along the parotid duct. (d) After the skin is incised, the parotid
duct is carefully dissected from its deeper masseter muscle attachments, and differentiated from the dorsal and ventral buccal nerves. (e) Intraoperative 
photograph with the cannulated parotid duct (with blue nylon suture) exposed. A branch between the dorsal and ventral buccal nerves is external to the
parotid duct and in the center of the surgical field. (f The parotid duct is carefully separated from the fascial attachments to the masseter muscle from the
base of the parotid gland to its distal opening into the mouth. (g) Intraoperative photograph showing the parotid duct papilla retracted into the lateral
panuguos s! uooassip ayl (y) (sdaouoy zeasoway aybiens e buisn) xiusoy eanounjuos jeanelounuan io leanel aun on Aisnoaueinsqns paanou s! sonp ayl uoisiou
 entire parotid duct. A small hemostat is directed from the
lateral ventral conjunctival fornix into the surgical site to protract the parotid papilla and duct for apposition to the conjunctival mucosa. (i A lateral
canthotomy can assist in the exposure of the lower conjunctival fornix.
papilla mucosa to the conjunctival fornix. (j) Closure after parotid duct transposition consists of reduction of the dead space between the masseter muscle and
the subcutaneous tissues with simple interrupted absorbable sutures, and appositior
 skin with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. The lateral
canthotomy is apposed with simple interrupted non-absorbable sutures. (k) Immediate postoperative appearance after apposition of the parotid duct papilla
to the conjunctival mucosa with three to five 5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
153
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
sutures are removed, parotid duct function, as evaluated
obstruction, the surgeon may dilate the parotid duct proximal
by the appearance of the eye and increased values of the
to the area of obstruction. Correction by careful removal of
Schirmer tear test, should be stabilized. Epiphora is usually
the fibrotic tissues surrounding the duct can be successful.
evident only during eating. If the moisture to the eye is inad-
a aq n  uoy  oed po 
equate between meals, oral pilocarpine therapy is again
preoperatively; loss of function postoperatively can be co1-
initiated.
related to duct obstruction with subsequent pressure at1o-
After chronic KCS and successful parotid duct trans-
phy of the gland. The parotid gland may also undeigo
position, benefit to the eye becomes rapidly apparent.
Coineal
1  vascularization
and
pigmentation gradually
 affecting all glandular tissues. About 10-20% of dogs with
decrease. Conjunctival exudates gradually decrease; thei1
KCS also have xerostomia and are not candidates for parotid
character changes from mucopurulent to seromucoid
duct transplantation. Excessive saliva may be a problem in
(Fig. 6.17).
some dogs, but fortunately this is infrequent. In a few
The surgical success rate of parotid duct transposition in
patients, ligation of smail branches of the parotid duct
the dog is high. Most investigato1s 1eport 85-95% success
may eventually be necessary. In humans, partial resection
rates with case follow-ups for as long as 5 years. Following
of the parotid salivary gland has been performed to remedy
surgery, patients with parotid duct transposition should be
 au u paoai ua ou seu l iaaamou rid s
Ie-examined every 6 months.
-dde  rn ae p sdg issod s a
tus is another possibility.
[nadequate length of the parotid duct is not usually a
Postoperative complications
problem in dogs, in contrast to humans. Elongation of the
Most of the immediate postoperative surgical complica-
 parotid duct by 1-2 cm can be achieved by construction of
tions are related to the parotid duct's small size. Transec-
a tunnel of mucosa about the parotid duct papilla. Alteina-
tion and twisting of the parotid duct are obvious
tively, dissection about the base of the parotid gland and
 u  i a jo uisi s ao
rostral displacement can provide a marginal length parotid
may be manifested by intermittent, reduced, o1 absent
duct with several extra millimeters.
secretions. Infections of the surgical wound after parotid
White crystal-like precipitates occur infrequently postoper-
duct transposition are rare, due to pre- and postoperative
atively, but may occur more often than when parotid duct
treatment with topical and systemic antibiotics. Absence
the development of these crystals in dogs is the most fie-
cal technique and preoperative confirmation of parotid
quent and often serious postoperative complication. Scrap-
gland finction for 3 or more days following surgery merits
ings of these precipitates, as viewed by light microscopy.
immediate surgical investigation.
dissolve quickly in 0.5-1.0% EDTA solutions. These precipi-
Postoperative focal stenosis of the parotid duct can occur
in 1-8 weeks, associated with fibrosis. Parotid secretion
 a combination thereof. The precipitates occur on the corneal
is 1educed or absent. To facilitate deteimination of the site of
suiface, conjunctivae, and nictitating membrane, and even
 adhere to the eyelid skin and hair, giving a 'frosted appeal-
ance' (Fig. 6.18).
Fig. 6.18 Occasionally after parotid duct transposition in the dog,
precipitates of calcium oxalates, phosphates, and carbonates may form on
the comeal and conjunctival surfaces, and even on the eyelid hair, giving a
frosted appearance. These precipitates dissolve in 1% or 2% EDTA ointment,
but once incorporated into the cornea or beneath the corneal epithelium do
Fig. 6.17 Miniature Schnauzer dog with bilateral parotid transposition of 3
not usually respond to EDTA therapy. These precipitates seem associated
 years' duration. Signs of the bilateral keratoconjunctivitis sicca have 
0n sadwuae esibuns jo/pue leipawu pue uoganas pnoued jo saey ybiy 4ai
disappeared, and the dog is visual.
reduce the salivation rates may be beneficial.
154
Adaptations in large animals and special species
ai ui e oi paei aie seiaid asa iei sieade l
of parotid gland secretion: the higher the rate of parotid
tivitis sicca in horses. The horse parotid gland is still larger
saliva formation, the higher the concentrations of these
than its counterpart in ruminants, but apparently actively
substances, and the greater the likelihood of their forma
secretes only during chewing (the ruminant parotid gland
tion. If the coinea is ulcerated or has not epithelialized fol-
continuously secretes).
lowing a superficial keratectomy, deposition of this white
material may be extensive. UIse of 0.5% EDTA as a solution
with a rinse cap, or preferably a 0.5-1.0% ointment, p1o-
Parotid duct transposition in the horse
vides partial but not total removal of the precipitates. Fre-
The parotid gland is located at the base of the ea1, caudal to
quent use of commeicial eye washes with EDTA may also
the mandible. The parotid duct arises from the combination
assist. Placement of the dog on a diet low in minerals fo1
of several collecting ductules at the base of the gland, and
1-2 months before parotid duct surgery, and maintenance
courses rostrad parallel to the facial vein. It continues ante-
thereafter, has been another approach.
nio1ly ventromedial to the mandible, and tuins dorsally to
 Surgical approaches to reducing the volume of salivary
pass the lateral mandible across the mandibular notch.
secretions are also possible and include: 1) a loose ligature
Within this notch, the combination of the parotid duct,
using a non-absorbable suture along the middle of the trans-
facial artery and vein can be palpated. From this notch, the
parotid duct continues between the facial vein and masseter
ligatures of accessory or feeder ducts at the level of the
muscle to enter the oral cavity via a small papilla lying
parotid gland. Both methods have successfully reduced the
opposite the third cheek tooth.
levels of salivary secretion, improved comfort, and 1educed
 pue op aq oy payo si anbnuuan iens au
the amount of ocular irritation, but still 
maintained
by starting with a skin incision extending ventrally from
adequate Schirmer tear test levels. In addition, both meth-
the mandibular notch along the ventral aspect of the man-
ods can be repeated to lower further salivary secretion levels,
dible to the base of the parotid duct. The parotid duct is
if necessary.
identified and isolated from the base of the gland to within
4 cm of its oral papilla. Once adequate length is obtained,
the duct is transected 4 cm from its papilla, and inserted
Adaptations in large animals
through a subcutaneous tunnel to enter the lower conjun-
 and special species
ctival sac. The lumen of the distal duct is incised by scissors
fo1 about 3-4 mm, and the ends of the duct attached to
The secretory abilities of the parotid gland vary by species.
the conjunctival mucosa with three simple internupted
In niminant species, parotid gland secretions are of very
absorbable sutures.
large quantities (as much as 50 L daily), and are critical to
Postoperative therapy is the same as for small animals.
 thei1 rumination cycle and gastrointestinal function. Fortu-
In one study, epiphora occurred during eating. but the
nately in the horse, the parotid salivary gland appears more
previous eye iritation and signs of keratoconjunctivitis
limited in function and volume, rendering it useful for
disappeared.
 Further reading
 Small animals
Gelatt KN. Cure TH, Guffy MM. Jessen CL:
Gwin RM. Gelatt KN, Peiffer RL: Parotid duct
Baker G). Formston C: An evaluation of
Dacryocystorhinography in the dog and cat.
 transposition in the cat with
transplantation of the parotid duct in
J Small Amim Pract 13:381-397. 1972.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca. I Am Anim Hosp
the treatment of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
Giuliano EA, Moore CP: Diseases and surgery
Assoc 13:42-45. 1977.
the dog. I Small Anim Pract 9:261-268,
of the lacrimal secretory system. In
Hallstrom M: Transplantation av ductus
1968.
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
parotideus som behandlingsmethod vid
Barnett KC: Imperforate and micro-lachrymal
Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
kerato-conjunctivitis sicca hos hund. Nord
puncta in the dog. I Small Arim Pract
Blackwell. p 633-661.
Vet Med 23:5-8. 1971.
20:481-490. 1979.
Giuliano EA, Pope ER. Champagne ES. et al:
Harvey CE. Koch SA: Surgical complications of
Betts DM: The surgical correction of parotid
Dacryocystomaxillorhinostomy for chronic
parotid duct transposition. I Am Anim Hosp
duct transposition failures. J Am Arnim Hosp
dacryocystitis in a dog. Vet Ophthalmol
Assoc 7:122-126. 1971.
Assoc 13:695-700. 1977.
9:89-94.2006.
Kamiya S. Horiuchi T. Hatakeyama A. Abe K.
Covitz D. Hunziker J. Koch SA:
Glen JB. Lawson DD: A modified technique of
Matumura T: Transplantation of the parotid
Conjunctivorhinostomy: a surgical method
parotid duct transposition for the treatment
duct into the conjunctival sac for the
for the control of epiphora in the dog and
of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a dog. Vet Res
treatment of xerophthalmia. Jpn J
cat. I Asm Vet Med Assoc 171:251-255, 1977.
88:210-213. 1971.
Ophthalmol 3:189-196. 1959.
Gelatt KN: Treatment of canine
Grahn BH, Sandmeyer LS: Diseases and surgery
Kaswan RL, Salisbury MA: A new perspective on
 keratoconjunctivitis sicca by parotid duct
of the canine nasolacrimal system. In
canine keratoconjunctivitis sicca: treatment
transposition. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 6:1-12.
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology.
with ophthalmic cyclosporine. Vet Clin
1970.
ed 4. Ames. 2006. Blackwell. pp 618-632.
North Am: Small Amim Pract 20:583-613.
Gelatt KN, Guffy MM, Boggess TS:
Guinan J. Willis AM, Cullen CL, Walshaw R:
1990.
Radiographic contrast techniques for
Post-enucleation orbital sialocele in a dog
Laing El, Spiess B. Binnington AG:
detecting orbital and nasolacrimal tumors
associated with prior parotid duct
 Dacryocystotomy: a treatment for chronic
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 156:741-746.
transposition. Vet Ophthalmol 10:386-389.
dacryocystitis in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp
1970.
2007.
Assoc 24:223-226. 1988
155
6
 Surgery of nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
Lavignette AN: Keratoconjunctivitis sicca in a
American College of Veterinary
Burling K. Murphy Cl. da Silva Curiel J.
 dog treated by transposition of the parotid
Ophthatmologists: Abstract 11.
Koblik P. Bellhorn RW: Anatomy of the
salivary duct. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Schmidt G, Magrane WG. Helper LC: Parotid
rabbit nasolacrimal duct and its clinical
148:778-786. 1966.
duct transposition: a follow-up study of 60
implications. Progress in Veterinary and
Long RD: The relief of epiphora by
eyes. J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 6:235-241.
Comparative Ophthalmology 1:33-40. 1991.
conjunctivorhinostomy. I Small Anim Pract
1970.
Maitchouk DY. Beuerman RW, Ohta T.
16:381-386. 1975.
 Severin GA: Nasolacrimal duct catheterization
Stern M, Vamell Rl: Tear production after
Moore CP: Dry eye syndromes: KCS and other
in the dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 8:13-16.
unilateral removal of the main lacrimal
tear deficient diseases. Transactions of the
1972.
gland in squirel monkeys. Arch Ophthatmol
North American Veterinary Conference
Smythe RH: Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 2.
118:246-252. 2000.
14:560-562. 2000.
London. 1958, Bailliere, Tindall and Cox.
Mangan BG, Gionfriddo JR, Powell CC:
Murphy IM, Severin GA. Lavach JD:
pp 206-207.
 Bilateral nasolacrimal duct atresia in a cria.
Nasolacrimal catheterization for treating
Stanley RG: Failure of parotid duct
Vet Ophthalmol 11:49-54. 2008.
chronic dacryocystitis. Vet Med 72:883-887.
 transposition due to sialolith formation.
 Mcllnay TR, Miller SM. Dugan Sl: Use of
1977.
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
canaliculorhinostomy for repair of
Pope ER, Champagne ES. Fox D: Intraosseous
7:26-127. 1997.
nasolacrimal duct obstruction in a horse.
approach to the nasolacrimal duct for
 Startup FG: Intra-canalicular gelatin implants in
J Am Vet Med Assoc 218:1323-1324. 2001.
removal of a foreign body in a dog. I Am Vet
lacrimal punctum surgery. J Small Anim
 Millichamp Nl. Jacobson ER. Dziezyc I:
Med Assoc 218:541-542. 2001.
Pract 25:635-637. 1984.
Conjunctivoralostomy for treatment of
Salisbury MA. Kaswan RL, Ward DA, et al:
White RAS. Herrtage ME, Watkins SB:
an occluded lacrimal duct in a blood python.
 Topical application of cyclosporine in the
 Endoscopic management of a cystic
J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:1136-1138. 1986.
 management of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in
naso-lacrimal obstruction in a dog. J Small
Townsend wM: Food and fiber-producing
dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:269-274.
Anim Pract 25:729-735. 1984.
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
1990.
editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 4. Ames.
Schilke HK, Sapienza JS: 2008. Partial ligation
Large animals and special species
2006. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
 of the transposed parotid duct at the level of
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
Wilkie DA. Rings DM: Repair of anomalous
 the parotid gland for excessive salivary
 ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
nasolacrimal duct in a bull by use of
secretions in the Yorkshire terrier breed. In
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
conjunctivorhinostomy. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Proceedings of the 39th Meeting of the
Blackwell p 1165-1274.
196:1647-1650. 1990.
156
CHAPTER
surgical
I procedures for the
conjunctiva and the nictitating
membrane
Kirk N. Gelatt' and Dennis E. Brooks2
Small animats Large animais and speciat species
 Chapter contents
Introduction
157
Adaptations in large animals and special species
174
Conjunctival anatomy
158
SURGERIES OF THE NICTITANS
176
Anatomy of the nictitans
159
Surgical treatment of everted nictitans
176
Bulbar/palpebral conjunctival biopsy (punch/snip)
160
 Surgical treatment for hyperplastic lymphoid follicles
177
Surgical repair of conjunctival lacerations
161
Surgical procedures for protrusion of the gland of the
Surgical repair of conjunctival defects
162
nictitating membrane or 'cherry eye'
178
Adaptations in large animals and special species
162
Surgical procedures for prominent/protruded nictitans
184
 Surgical treatment for symblepharon
162
 Nictitating membrane flaps
185
 Conjunctival grafts/transplantation
163
 Partial/complete excision of the nictitans
187
 Substitute materials for conjunctival grafts
174
Adaptations in large animals and special species
188
Introduction
construction of these grafts. The success rates for the differ-
ent conjunctival autografts are very high (>90%), and their
Conjunctival and nictitating membrane diseases occur ffe-
value in the overall clinical management of small animal
quently in all animals. In the dog, the majority of conjunc-
patients is often understated. In horses and cattle, neoplasia
tival inflammations are secondary, and bacteria isolated
is often treated with surgery, sometimes combined with
from these eyes usually yield a variety of noimal residents
cryotherapy or local chemotherapy.
of the conjunctival surfaces. In the cat, most conjunctival
The nictitating membrane has several synonyms includ-
inflammations are primary, infectious, and associated with
ing membrana nictitans, palpebra tertia, plica semilunaris, third
vinuses, chlamydia, and mycoplasma. In horses, primary
eyelid, and the haws. The nictitating membrane is a semilu-
conjunctivitis is infrequent, but both the conjunctiva and
nar fold of conjunctiva, which also occurs in redimentary
the nictitans are often involved with neoplasia in older
foim in humans and non-human primates, that protrides
horses. In cattle, primary inflammations and neoplasia of
from the medial canthus and can extend over a significant
the conjunctiva and nictitans are frequent.
portion of the cornea. It is more mobile in birds and cats,
Surgery for conjunctival diseases in the dog and cat is
and in birds it is very thin and semitransparent.
infrequent except fo1 excision of conjunctival masses, which
 Diseases of the nictitating membrane are not infrequent in
are often combined with other surgical procedures involy.
small animals. In dogs and cats, congenital, inflammatory.
ing the eyelids. The most frequent conjunctival surgical
traumatic, and neoplastic disorders may be treated surgi-
procedures are the several different types of conjunctival
cally. In cats, more frequently than in dogs, disorders of
grafts o1 flaps fo1 treatment of coineal ulcers that threaten
the nictitating membranes may also signal serious systemic
the integrity of the globe, and the maintenance of vision.
diseases. In both horses and cattle, neoplasms are the most
Fortunately, there is ample and mobile conjunctiva for the
frequent surgical indications.
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Movement of the nictitating membrane somewhat paral-
tarsus, septum orbitale, and the endorbita. The collective
lels its development in the different species. In dogs, the
conjunctiva is often referred to as the conjunctival sac.
dorsolateral movement of the nictitating membrane appears
Traditionally the conjunctiva is divided macroscopically
passive and associated with movement of the retracto1 oculi
into palpebral, fornix, and bulbar components. The palpe-
muscle, and the shifting of the endorbita fascia and orbit fat
bral conjunctiva lines the inner aspects of the eyelids. The
pad. As the globe is retracted into the depths of the orbit, the
bulba1 conjunctiva mucosa starts at the coineal epithelial
orbital adipose tissues shift forward to push the base of the
layer at the limbus. It covers Tenon's capsule or bulba1
nictitating membrane anteriorly and protract the structure
fascia, and extends to join the palpebral conjunctiva at the
across the cornea. Fascial attachments in the canine nictitat-
foinix or the conjunctival cul-de-sac. Tenon's capsule or bul-
 n  a    e  
ba1 fascia is quite thin in cats, horses, and cattle but variable
the nictitans tear gland to the bulbar fascia, medial canthal
in dogs, sometimes 5 mm or more thick. Medially a con-
ligament, and endorbita o1 periorbita fascia
junctival apex or fold, the nictitating membrane or third
In cats, movements of the nictitating membrane result
eyelid, divides the ventral conjunctival fornix into two parts:
from contraction of smooth muscles, and are associated
the outer or palpebral portion, and the deeper or bulbar
with its sympathetic nerve supply. Stimulation of the pregan-
component (Fig. 7.1). As the conjunctival fornices span
glionic cervical sympathetic nerve produces frequency-
the globe and eyelids for 360°, the foinices may be divided
dependent contractions of the nictitating membrane. The
into dorsal, lateral canthal, ventral, and medial canthal
feline nictitating membrane contains two thin sheets of mus-
parts. The dorsal conjunctival foinix is deeper than the ven-
cle, named by Acheson in 1938 as the medial and inferio1
tral fornix, and this may
be necessary to accommodate
muscles (also called Millel's muscles), that arise deeply
downwaid eye movements. The ventral conjunctival foinix
within the orbit from the periorbital fascia covering the
is shallower and its primary function is as a collecting basin
medial and ventral rectus muscles to insert into the adjacent
fo1 the tears. The medial conjunctival fornix is divided into
sides of the T-shaped nictitans cartilage. Alpha-adrenoceptor
anterior and posterior fornices of the nictitating membrane.
antagonists, whether selective or non-selective, produce a
Medial movement of tears toward the upper and, more
dose-dependent depression of the evoked nictitating mem-
brane movements, suggesting that the feline nictitans con-
tains mainly α -adrenoceptors postsynaptically
In horses and cattle, movements of the nictitans result
from contraction of the rectus and retractor oculi mus-
C
cles which displace the orbital fat rostrally and protract the
nictitans across the coinea in a more horizontal direction.
 In birds, the active movement of the nictitating membrane
is highly developed, and is rapidly protracted over the coI-
nea toward the lateral canthus by the pyramidalis muscle.
Protraction of the third eyelid is accomplished by contrac-
tion of the striated pyramidalis muscle that originates
in the posterior sclera and attaches to the nasal edge of the
nictitans. The quadratus muscle forms a sleeve dorsal to
the optic nerve through which the tendon of the pyramidalis
muscle passes, allowing a pulley action of the quadratus
muscle to amplify or modify action of the pyramidalis.
Innervation of both muscles by the sixth cianial nerve is
widely cited. The leading edge is pigmented and forms a
marginal plait (plica marginalis). The avian nictitans can be
 iae sanns Aq asode oi io pue u Aiaa
Conjunctival anatomy
Conjunctival anatomy is similar in all mammals. The con-
D
junctiva spans the eyelid margins to the limbus of the globe
E
and is the major barrier to the exteinal environment for the
globe and orbit. The conjunctiva, as a mucous membrane,
forms the fist line of defense against the external elements.
Its elastic nature accommodates both globe and eyelid
movements. The conjunctiva rests on the endorbita o1 peri
orbita fascia; on the globe the conjunctiva is in intimate
contact with the bulbar fascia (or Tenon's capsule) and
Fig. 7.1 Cross-section of the medial eyelids and anterior globe to 
attaches at the limbus. As a result, the conjunctiva accom-
demonstrate the palpebral conjunctiva (A), bulbar conjunctiva (B), and dorsal
modates globe mobility and provides for nearly unrestricted
fornix (C) of the conjunctiva. The nictitating membrane (D) divides the
ocular movements. The conjunctiva lining the inner aspects
medial lower conjunctival fornix into anterior or palpebral (E), and posterior
of the eyelids and foinix fo1 360° is next to the fibrous
or bulbar portions (F).
158
Anatomy of the nictitans
importantly, the lower lacrimal puncta by the eyelid is not
the bulbar conjunctiva, Tenon's capsule (orbital fascia),
 q lqi aae e aq on siadde 1 ia 'pooisun
and the limbus become closely united. Because of its suiface
passive process.
area and availability, the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is the
The palpebral conjunctiva originates at the eyelid margin
principal source of mucous membrane for graft construction
(the margo-intermarginalis) and the orifices of the meibo-
and transplantation to the cornea. The bulbar conjunctiva
mian glands. The margo-intermarginalis is the last tissue
contains few goblet cells.
that when contact occurs with the coinea and conjunctiva
The limbal conjunctival cell may have special significance
 produces no damage; when the outer leading edge of the
as a critical stem cell for conjunctival surgical procedures.
eyelid skin touches the coinea, as in entropion, coineal
Transplantation of limbal stem autografts to defects in the
and conjunctival damage start! The palpebral conjunctival
coineal epithelium in humans successfully 1e-establishes the
surface epithelium at the eyelid margin consists of non-
coineal epithelial characteristics and clarity, and offers poten-
keratinized stratified epithelium, but changes after several
tial fo animals. Normal coineal epithelial cells migrate cen-
millimeters from the lid margin into pseudostratified colum-
tripetally from the periphery to the center of the cornea.
na1 epithelium. Immediately beneath the palpebral conjunc-
The limbal cells appear to be the corneal epithelial stem cells
tiva is the thicker connective tissue, the tarsal layer, which
and capable of additional cell multiplication and differentia-
contains the sebum-producing tarsal or meibomian glands.
tion, and a terminal transparent cell. Epithelial cells from the
Once the pseudostratified epithelial surface is established,
limbus readily grow as explants; however, peripheral and cen-
conjunctival goblet cells begin to appear and are most
tral corneal explants are progressively less likely to grow as
numerous in the fornices. These goblet cells produce mucin,
explants. The peripheral and, to a greater extent, the central
an important deep component of the preoculal o1 precoineal
corneal epithelial cells appea committed to terminal differ-
film, and an essential lubricant to prevent eyelid trauma to
entiation. As a result, both the limbal and conjunctival
the conjunctival and the coineal surfaces (Fig. 7.2). Mucin
epithelia are excellent sources for autografts.
forms the innermost layer of the preocular (precorneal) film
Lymphoid follicles are scattered throughout the conjunc-
and ranges in thickness from 1 μm on the cornea to 2 μm
tiva, but may be more numerous in the foinices. These lym-
01 more on the conjunctival surfaces. Mucin, a hydrated gly-
phoid follicles, acting as regional lymph nodes, are the
coprotein, forms an interface between the larger aqueous
major defense for the conjunctival surfaces, and during
portion of the preocular film and the hydrophobic coineal
inflammation increase both in size and number. Grossly lym-
epithelium. A relatively small portion of mucin is water solu-
ble and part of the middle or aqueous fraction of the preocu-
areas.
lar film. The goblet cell-derived mucin decreases the surface
 The substantia propria of the conjunctiva consists of two
tension of the preocular film, enhances the stability of the
layers: a superficial layer that contains lymphatic follicles
preocular film, and aids in the coherence of the aqueous po1-
and glands, and the deeper fibrous layer that attaches the
tion of the preocular film to the coineal and conjunctival
conjunctiva to the orbital and eyelid fascia. The latter layer
epithelia. Mucin also coats and reduces the irregularities
tends to be quite variable in dogs, and in certain breeds
of the coineal epithelium to produce an optically smooth
is sometimes quite thick; however, in contrast, it tends to
coineal surface. The palpebral conjunctiva is quite transpar-
be quite thin in cats, hoises, and cows. In the preparation
ent and often allows visualization of impacted or inflamed
 of bulbar conjunctival grafts, the thickness of this layer
meibomian (or Meibom) glands on the deep aspects of
can contribute to excessive tension of the graft and retrac-
both eyelids.
tion toward the limbus. The nerves and vessels of the
The bulbar conjunctiva consists of entirely pseudostrati-
conjunctiva are primarily in the deep layel, and are derived
fied epithelium, and is most fimly attached at the fornices
from the anterior ciliary arteries that are branches from the
and the limbus. About 3 mm from the corneal periphery.
external ophthalmic arteries. Additional arterial branches
arise from the superficial temporal, malal, and palpebial
arteries. Venous drainage from the conjunctiva occurs to
adjacent palpebial and malar veins that eventually join
the facial vein, o1 deep into the orbit with the superficial
angularis oculi vein to the orbital plexus and superficial
temporal vein. The lymphatics of the conjunctiva are
divided into superficial and deep systems. Lymphatic
drainage from the medial aspects of the conjunctiva is to
the submaxillary lymph nodes and laterally to the parotid
lymph nodes.
Anatomy of the nictitans
The gross anatomy of the nictitating membrane is quite sim-
ilar among mammals. Located in the medial canthus, the
nictitating membrane is a roughly triangular-shaped fold
Fig. 7.2 Photomicrograph of the canine palpebral conjunctiva near the
of conjunctiva, with the base of the triangle consisting of
fornix. The goblet cells (stained red), the primary source of mucin for the
its free o1 leading margin (Fig. 7.3). Both anterio1 (palpe-
preocular flm, are outlined by periodic acid-Schiff stain. 200x.
bral) and posterio1 (bulbar) surfaces are confluent with the
159
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
The nictitans gland in small animals is an important
accessory tear-producing gland providing about 25-40% of
the total tears. Lymphoid follicles are usually present on
the posterio1 or bulbar surface of the nictitans, appearing
as raised translucent spots, and especially prominent in the
horse. Lymphoid follicles are infrequent on the anterio1
01 palpebral surface of the nictitating membrane and often
signal chronic conjunctival iritation.
The blood supply to the canine nictitating membrane
Ae Are l a jo yu e  pa si
located within the space between the ventral and medial
rectus muscles. Smaller branches are often located on both
sides of the stem portion of the cartilage and should be
avoided during surgery. Sensation is provided by the infra-
tiochlear nerve branch of the ophthalmic nerve, a sub-
division of the trigeminal nerve.
Fig. 7.3 By distortion of the palpebral fissure, the canine globe retracts to
The primary functions of the nictitating membrane are to
partially protrude the nictitating membrane. Note its pigmented margin.
assist in the protection of the coinea and provide the second
largest portion of tears. Mucin from the third eyelid tears
forms an essential part of the preocular film. Nictitating
palpebral and bulbar conjunctival mucosa. Its free margin
membrane movement may assist in the movement of tears
01 border is usually pigmented in animals. When non-
to the medial canthus, and the 'pick-up' of the tears by the
lacrimal puncta. Loss of the nictitans results in a larger
pigmented, the nictitans appears more prominent. Within
the substance of the nictitating membrane is a hyaline
medial lacrimal lake o1 conjunctival sac and often chronic
 conjunctivitis due to the collection and impaired drainage
T-shaped cartilage plate, which helps provide rigidity to
of tears from this area. The nictitating membrane is an
the structure, assists confoimation to the corneal curvature,
and prevents disfigurement during movement (Fig. 7.4).
-  s lm s o  n n 
The 'arms' of the T-shaped cartilage are immediately under
producing system. Total excision of the nictitating mem-
its leading margin, and are relatively thin and slender com-
brane should be reserved fo1 extensive neoplastic involve-
pared to the thicker stem or base. The superficial gland of
ment of this structure.
the nictitating membrane in both dogs and cats surrounds
the base of the nictitans cartilage and produces seromucoid
Bulbar/palpebral conjunctival biopsy
tears. Both dogs and cats possess a single nictitans gland, but
(punch/snip)
in some species such as birds, the third eyelid gland may have
two divisions. The deeper avian third eyelid gland is referred
to as the Harderian gland.
In horses, the nictitans gland is quite large (19 mm ante-
non-specific diffuse and focal conjunctival inflammations
roposterior x 11 mm wide). [n cattle, the triangular-shaped
(Fig. 7.5), and for possible neoplasia in all animal species.
nictitans gland (41 mm long x 26 mm wide) is in two parts,
Fo1  biopsies of  suspected conjunctival inflammations,
although it appears as one confluent stricture: the anterior
seromucoid nictitans gland which surrounds the cartilage
shaft (serous-appearing acini, but periodic acid-Schiff posi-
tive), and the deeper Harderian gland, which also has two
 parts, and is also mucoid but periodic acid-Schiff negative.
L
Fig. 7.4 The important surgical anatomy of the nictitating membrane
Fig. 7.5 Aged mixed-breed dog with episcleritis. Located beneath the
includes the leading margin (A), its base (B), the T-shaped hyaline cartilage
dorsal bulbar conjunctiva, the inflammatory mass is raised and bright red.
(C), and the superficial gland of the nictitans (D)
A wide excisional biopsy was performed.
160
Surgical repair of conjunctival lacerations
selection of the ventral conjunctiva may be more rewarding.
Small conjunctival lacerations less than 1 cm will usually
Focal swellings, such as conjunctival cysts, parasitic granulo-
heal by secondary intention. These lacerations should be
mas, nodular granulomatous episclerokeratitis, proliferative
keratoconjunctivitis of Collies, and nodular fascitis, can be
any foreign material 1emoved manually o1 irnigated from
biopsied or removed for histologic examination.
the tissues. Topical antibiotic solutions are administered
In contrast to the majority of eyelid neoplasms in the dog.
several times daily fo1 5-7 days, 01 until the conjunctival
primary conjunctival neoplasms may be invasive locally and
epithelium has bridged the wound.
Aq pasodde Aens aie suoneiael leaunuo aae
mas, angiokeratomas, viral papillomas, squamous cell carci-
sutures. Palpebral conjunctival wounds often involve the
nomas, and malignant melanomas have been reported in
full-thickness eyelids. Large bulbar conjunctival lacerations
the dog. In the cat, the most frequent conjunctival neoplasm
should be approached with caution, as intraocular tissue
is squamous cell carcinoma. Neoplasms of the conjunctiva
involvement is likely. If hyphema is present with a bulbar
affect the dorsal to dorsolateral limbal area most frequently.
conjunctival laceration, intraocular damage has occurred,
-du ue aed a uoi (iaon) ros susans
and careful examination of the entire globe is warranted.
tant role in their genesis. If a conjunctival neoplasm pene-
Both direct and indirect trauma can result in intraocular
trates the anterior orbital fascia, intraorbital extension is
hemorrhage and inflammation.
likely and the clinical appearance of the neoplasm may be
Large conjunctival lacerations (>1 cm) are best treated by
deceptive. In the clinical assessment before excision, involve-
apposition with sutures. After short-acting general anes-
ment of the deeper layers of the conjunctiva should be deter-
thesia, the conjunctival surfaces are carefully cleaned with
mined by ultrasonography or other imaging procedures.
cotton-tipped applicators and, if necessary, with selrated
If the mass involves the superficial layers of the conjunc-
thumb forceps. Any foreign material should be removed
tiva, it is usually easily manipulated and moves with
the
and, if possible, identified. Vegetative material will often
conjunctival mucosa. If the tumor has extended into the
provoke an acute and intense inflammation. Fungal organ-
deeper submucosa or even infiltrated the periorbital fascia,
isms may also be introduced into the tissues. Debridement
the tumor usually remains fixed as the surrounding
of conjunctival tissues, like that of the eyelids, should be
 conjunctiva is manipulated.
minimal to preserve as much of the conjunctiva as possible.
In horses and cattle, solitary masses of the conjunctiva
Small thumb forceps with 1 x 2 teeth and a small Castro-
are assumed to be neoplastic until proven different histo-
viejo needle holder are used. Simple inteirupted absorbable
logically. In both species, squamous cell carcinomas
are
sutures (usually 5-0 to 7-0) are used for apposition.
the most frequent neoplasms, affecting the eyelid margin,
Some chemosis is anticipated postoperatively. Topical anti-
nictitans, and limbus. Because of malignancy and infiltra-
biotics, often combined with corticosteroids, are instilled
tion of adjacent tissues, surgery is often combined with
four to six times daily fo1 5-7 days. The ointment form of
other treatment modalities, such as cryotherapy.
 medication may be more advantageous as dnug contact time
Sedation or short-acting general anesthesia is usually
is prolonged, and the ointment coats the conjunctival and
necessary fo1 conjunctival biopsy. Topical anesthesia, such
suture surfaces to act as a lubricant. If the conjunctival
as 0.5% proparacaine o1 0.5% tetracaine, can also be used.
swelling is excessive, hot and cold packs to the area may prc.
s r d r pad an lu e saa u
mote local circulation and reduce the swelling. Systemic anti-
The conjunctival surfaces, including the foinices, are cleansed
biotics and corticosteroids are also added to the topical
with sterile cotton-tipped applicators and 0.5% povidone-
therapy for more serious conjunctival lacerations. Topical
iodine solution.
and systemic (oral) non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
The elastic and accessible conjunctiva can be easily biop-
can also be added. Conjunctival healing after lacerations is
sied. Small biopsies less than 1 cm do not require sutures
usually uneventful. Focal scar tissue foimation is usually
and readily heal by secondary intention. The eyelids are
minor and not sufficient to restrict globe mobility o1 eyelid
retracted with a small wire speculum, conjunctival area to
movements
be biopsied is elevated by small thumb forceps, such as
 Palpebral conjunctival lacerations usually signal full-thick-
the Bishop-Harmon, and the conjunctiva excised by small
 ness eyelid perforations. In most small animals, full-thickness
tenotomy scissors. If the conjunctival defect is greater than
eyelid lacerations are repaired by two layers of sutures: one
1 cm, the mucosa edges are apposed with 4-0 to 7-0 simple
layer for the eyelid skin and orbicularis oculi muscle, and
interrupted or continuous absorbable sutures. Postoperative
the second and deeper layer for the tarsus and palpebral con-
treatment usually consists of topical antibiotics or antibio-
s o on o  o aq  s g 
tics/corticosteroids administered three or four times daily
interrupted sutures, absorbable sutures for the deep layer
for several days.
and non-absorbable sutures for the muscle and skin layer.
The deep layer of the tarsus and palpebral conjunctiva may
also be apposed with a simple continuous suture. The suture
Surgical repair of conjunctival lacerations
apposing the eyelid margin is most important and is often a
figure-of-eight stitch that either avoids the eyelid margin with
Conjunctival lacerations are infrequent and usually com-
its knot or is temporarily positioned in the opposite eyelid to
bined with lacerations of the eyelids, coinea, and sclera.
 provide some tension on the healing conjunctiva and eyelid
The presence of bulba1 conjunctival lacerations signals the
tissues.
need fo1 a complete eye examination. Bulbar conjunctival
 Postoperative treatment varies with the depth and extent
lacerations may mask more serious and vision-threatening
of the palpebral conjunctival and eyelid lacerations. Often
full-thickness scleral lacerations and intraocular damage
topical antibiotics and corticosteroids are supplemented
161
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
with systemic antibiotics and corticosteroids. The eyelids
Carcinoma in situ of the conjunctiva can be excised with
after trauma and laceration apposition may become quite
sedation, an auriculopalpebral nerve block, and topical
d a a s a a s a s
anesthetic in a good hoise.
Accordingly, an E-collar is often used to ensure the patient
cannot damage the postoperative area. The skin sutures are
Iemoved in 7-14 days, sometimes at two different times.
Surgical treatment for symblepharon
Symblepharon is the adhesion of bulbar to palpebral con-
Surgical repair of conjunctival defects
junctiva, the adhesion of the palpebral conjunctiva to the
cornea, or the adhesion of the bulbar conjunctiva to the co1-
Conjunctival defects may occur after the excision of large
nea. Symblepharon can also involve the nictitating mem-
conjunctival dermoids (Fig. 7.6) and neoplasms, after loss
brane. Symblepharon is rare in dogs, but more frequent in
from severe trauma, and extensive chemical buins. Fortu-
cats. In horses, symblepharon may follow trauma, and
nately, large conjunctival defects are infrequent in animals
  sn   e   a  
In dogs, symblepharon may develop after trauma, surgery.
to the lid tumors in most species, conjunctival neoplasms
and chemical burns to the coinea and conjunctiva. In cats
tend to be more aggressive clinically and merit larger inci-
with ocula1 herpes (FHV-1), symblepharon may develop
sional margins during attempted excision. Small conjuncti-
usually involving the coinea and the bulbar conjunctiva,
val defects (<1 cm) usually heal by secondary intention
the palpebral conjunctiva, or a combination of both con-
and resolve without adverse sequelae. Large palpebral and
junctivae (Fig. 7.7). Symblepharon associated with FHV-1
Aq pasodde aq pinous (uo I<) sioaap ieanounluoo ieqing
can be corrected successfully in cats, but since these coineal
sutures. For bulbar conjunctival defects of about 2 cm o1
and conjunctival inflammations are often chronic, symble-
larger, the adjacent conjunctiva may be undermined and
pharon formation may recur. Symblepharon affecting the
shifted to cover the defect. For larger defects, autografts of
coinea produces disfigurement and, if extensive, impairment
bulbar conjunctiva from the opposite fellow eye o1 the buc-
of vision. Adhesions involving the bulbar and palpebral
cal mucosa may be transplanted. The mucosa is usually
conjunctivae may shallow the conjunctival fornix, impai1
harvested free-hand, must be thin, and 1-3 mm larger than
the drainage of tears, produce chronic conjunctivitis, and
the defect to compensate for tissue shrinkage. The edges
retard ocular motility.
of the transplant are carefully apposed to the wound with
The objectives for the surgical correction of symblepharon
4-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. Often an
are to excise the fibrous adhesions between the conjunctiva
- le pad si adsien dn aia
and coinea, and to restore viable epithelial surfaces to the
 junctival transplantation to prevent eyelid trauma and apply
 palpebral and bulbar conjunctivae, and to the cornea. Vari-
pressure to the surgical site to retard swelling. Autografts of
ous confoimers, symblepharon lenses, and silicone strips
conjunctiva and buccal mucosa to the conjunctiva in small
are available to physically separate the healing conjunctival
animals are highly successful. When the conjunctival wound
    rsa d e s
01 autograft edges involve the limbal area, the conjuncti-
fornix. These temporary implants are generally retained in
Pioae oi sanns Aq snqul au on pasodde si unaieu lea
position by complete temporary tarsorrhaphies fo1 a few
overgrowth or migration onto the cornea.
weeks for the epithelial healing to be completed. If any of
Adaptations in large animals
and special species
Surgical resection alone of conjunctival squamous cell carci-
noma may be adequate if clean margins can be obtained.
Small tumors o1 carcinoma in situ of the conjunctiva or third
eyelid may also be effectively treated with simple excision.
Fig. 7.7 Symblepharon in a 2-year-old, short-haired, domestic cat. The
symblepharon involves the lateral cornea, bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva.
Fig. 7.6 Dermoid in a puppy affecting only the palpebral conjunctiva.
The patient has recurrent conjunctivitis and keratitis associated with feline 
Treatment is excision of the mass.
herpes virus (FHV-1).
162
Conjunctival grafts/transplantatior
these coineal or conjunctival structures is not covered with
(Fig. 7.8e). To retain the coineal contact lens and reduce eyelid
epithelium postoperatively, adhesions will recu1.
movements, a partial temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed
 After general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hair, and
with 4-0 to 6-0 simple mattress sutures positioned at one-half
surgical preparation of the eyelids, the area is draped fo1
thickness of the eyelids (Fig. 7.8f). For details on how to pel-
aseptic surgery. The conjunctiva is thoroughly cleaned with
form the temporary tarsorrhaphy, see Chapter 5. After recovery
 a n   e  s a
from general anesthesia, an E-collar is placed on the animal to
tipped applicators. After placement of a wire speculum to
prevent self-mutilation of the surgical site.
retract the eyelids, the conjunctiva adhered to the cornea is
 Postoperatively, topical antibiotic solution is instilled on
Iemoved by superficial lamella1 keratectomy. The periphery
the eye four to six times daily. Systemic antibiotics are also
of the co1neal lesion is incised by the Beaver No. 6400 mic10-
administered. Once corneal epithelialization is complete,
surgical blade to the level of the superficial stroma (Fig. 7.8a).
as evidenced by the lack of topical fluorescein, topical corti-
After lifting the edge of the incision with thumb forceps with
costeroids are added to reduce scar tissue foimation. After
1 x 2 fine teeth jaws, the adherent conjunctiva is excised
 2-4 weeks, the tarsorrhaphy sutures are released to remove
from the corneal surface (Fig. 7.8b). If the symblepharon
the coineal contact lens. About 2 weeks later, the foinix
continues into the conjunctiva, the incision is continued
silicone strip and sutures are removed. Topical antibiotics/
and the affected conjunctiva excised (Fig. 7.8c). Once the
corticosteroids are continued for another 7-10 days.
conjunctiva is freely moveable, its edge is apposed to the lim-
This piocedure provides good results in dogs and cats in
bus with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. If
which the symblepharon was secondary to trauma o1 chem-
a defect remains in the bulbar and/or palpebral conjunctiva,
ical burns, provided the contact lens is retained in position
its edges are apposed with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted
fo1 several weeks to permit complete epithelialization of
absorbable sutures. To cover the healing cornea and prevent
the apposing conjunctival surfaces. This method is less suc-
the development of new adhesions between the coinea and
cessful in cats when the symblepharon appears secondary
conjunctiva, a plastic methyl methacrylate corneal protecto1
to chronic feline herpes vinus infections, because with recu1-
(Crouch corneal protector; Storz, St Louis, MO) may be
rent or chronic FHV-1 the coineal and conjunctival epithelia
 may be damaged again and re-adhesion occurs.
coineal contact lens may be used instead of the thickel
corneal protecto1 (Fig. 7.8d). If considerable adhesions are
present between the bulba1 and palpebral conjunctivae, a
Conjunctival grafts/transplantation
thin strip of silicone sheeting is fashioned to fill the area
and secured in position with 4-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted
Conjunctival grafts o1 flaps were first perfoimed in humans
non-absorbable sutures as well as 5-0 to 7-0 simple mattress
in 1860 (Teale) and 1884 (Bock) fo1 the treatment of
sutures placed through the silicone strip and the full-thick-
symblepharon. Conjunctival autografts fo1 the treatment of
ness eyelid with the suture knots on the external lid surface
coineal ulcerations in humans fo1 the past several decades
A
B
C
子
D
F
Jo Aayduad aul Awoaeiay lenyadns Ag pasoxa s! uoueydaigwss aun jo uood jeauion aul (e) ren aun ui uoeydaigwrs jo zuawnean jeibuns g'e dhi
the corneal lesion is incised by Bard-Parker No. 15 or Beaver No. 6400 blade to the level of the superficial stroma. (b) With fine teeth thumb forceps, the edge
of the corneal incision is elevated, and the adherent conjunctiva is dissected from the anterior corneal stroma. (c) Excision of the adherent conjunctiva is 
aldwis 0-2 o 0-s yaim snqwll ayn on enpounjuos buuiewau aya jo uonisodde ayy (p) saneyns (enpounjuos (eigadjed pue jeging panaje ayn onuo panuguon
interrupted absorbable sutures, a corneal protector is positioned on the cornea to cover the corneal stroma and attempt to prevent re-adherence of the
legadied pue jeging leauan aua uaamaag uogeedas aun uieuiewu on xiuioy lenounjuon amol aun onu! paasui s! bugaays auos jo duas  (a) engounjuon
conjunctiva, and secured with 5-0 to 7-0 simple mattress sutures placed full-thickness through the eyelids. (f A partial temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed to
protect the surgical sites, retain the corneal protector during the epithelialization of the corneal wound, and maintain the silicone sheeting in the fornix to
separate the healing conjunctival surfaces.
163
 Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
plasty. The majo1 reason is the high visual acuity in humans
and the absolute need for a clear coinea. Nevertheless.
conjunctival autografts are still used in humans fo1 fungal
keratitis, selected herpes simplex ulcerations, and chemical
burns of the coinea.
Reports of bulbar and palpebral conjunctival grafts and
conjunctival keratoplasty fist appeared in the veterinary
medical literature more than 50 years ago (Ubelreiter 1937,
A
B
Shuttleworth 1939, Ste1n 1950, Livingston 1950, Henderson
1951, Dimic 1957, and Berge and Westhues 1956). Most
Fig. 7.9 An autogenous pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft is used to cover
significant defects following tumor excision. (a) Preparation of the site in the
reports described advancement bulbar conjunctival grafts,
dorsolateral conjunctiva to receive an autogenous pedicle conjuncival graft.
complete bulbar conjunctival grafts, and palpebral conjun-
The surgical defect resulted from previous excision of a hemangioma. The
ctival grafts. In veterinary ophthalmology the routine use of
adjacent area for the pedicle bulbar conjunctival autograft is outlined. (b)
keratoplasty has not yet occurred, but the development of
Completion of the pedicle conjunctival graft. The graft edges are apposed
conjunctival autografts for the surgical management of co1-
with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
neal ulceration has been continuously refined. As a result,
more transparent corneas now 1esult. Further improvements
conjunctiva is available. Mucous membrane grafts should
mucosa (available commercially) and amniotic membranes
be free of pigmentation. The conjunctival graft site must be
(not available commercially), rather than conjunctival grafts.
carefully prepared, and any necrotic or potentially infected
Because the veterinary ophthalmologist is concerned first
tissues removed. The adjacent bulbar conjunctiva is incised
fo1 the preservation of the globe and second for clinical
by small tenotomy scissors to produce a pedicle flap to cover
 d a      n 
the surgical defect (Fig. 7.9a). The thin conjunctival pedicle
totally clear. As each animal has ample bulbar and palpebral
should be 1-2 mm larger than the graft site to compensate
conjunctivae for temporary o1 even permanent transplanta-
fo1 graft shrinkage. As the scissors undermine and separate
tion to the coinea, availability and host acceptance are not
the conjunctival mucosa from Tenon's capsule, the scissors'
limiting factors. Treatment of deep corneal ulcerations, des-
tips should be plainly visible when the graft is sufficiently
cemetoceles, and perforated corneal ulcers with conjunctival
thin. Once fitted to the graft site, the edges of the graft and
 issad s a se s  sen
conjunctival mucosa are carefully apposed to ensure epithe-
initiates healing of the corneal ulcer, transplants epithelium,
fibroblasts and blood vessels to a weakened coinea, and
rupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 7.9b). A partial temporary
maintains vision.
tarsoirhaphy can be used to decrease eyelid trauma, and
 provide pressure to facilitate apposition of the graft to the
Conjunctival autografts
underlying Tenon's capsule.
Conjunctiva to conjunctiva
Buccal mucosa autografts to conjunctiva
Conjunctival autografts are used infrequently, because canine
and feline conjunctival defects usually heal by secondary
The buccal mucosa is a nearly unlimited potential graft
intention, and transposition to other areas in the same eye
source for the conjunctiva. The buccal mucosa is thicker
than the conjunctiva and often pigmented. In constriction
01 between eyes is seldom indicated. Nevertheless, destric-
of buccal mucosa grafts, as much as possible of the submu-
tion of large areas of the conjunctiva after trauma, chemical
cosal tissues should be dissected from the graft to provide
burns, and loss after conjunctival neoplasm excision may
a very thin mucosa grafft. Like autogenous conjunctival
Iequire transposition of conjunctival tissues from other con-
grafts, buccal mucosa grafts are performed free-hand, their
junctival sites.
 Thin mucosal grafts can be easily constructed from the
shape and size being dependent on the conjunctival defect.
After transposition, the buccal mucosa will become white
dorsal bulbar conjunctiva because this is the most accessible
and the largest source. Most grafts are performed free-hand,
fo1 several days and pink color will gradually return as the
because the conjunctival defects are usually irregular in
graft 1evascularizes. Partial temporary tarsorrhaphies can
 e  q os  m se
 r l a n    
cover to the graft site, and counterpressure to assist graft
palpebral conjunctival areas is more difficult, and constrc
tion of the ventral fornix 1equires long-term conformers.
establishment and vascularization.
Grafts from the dorsal bulbar and palpebral conjunctivae
Conjunctival autografts to cornea
vides primarily fo1 ocular mobility, but not for the collec-
tion and maintenance of tears.
Conjunctival autografts are frequently used in small animal
Conjunctival autografts are performed under general anes-
thesia and routine surgical preparation of the eyelids and
ulcers, descemetoceles, and perforated corneal ulcers (Figs
conjunctival surfaces. Conjunctival grafts must be thin and
7.10-7.12). Conjunctival autografts consist of either bulbar
devoid of most of the underlying connective tissues. Most
 OI palpebral conjunctival mucosa with epithelium and con-
a r i a r ar s r
nective tissue (fibroblasts, blood vessels, and lymphatics).
types. Pedicle grafts are preferred if sufficient adjacent
These autogiafts can be transposed and sutured onto the
164
Conjunctival grafts/transplantation
conjunctival epithelium is also a stem cell capable of addi-
tional generation and transition into corneal epithelium.
The conjunctival autograft contains blood vessels and lym-
phatics to offer significant antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral,
antiprotease, and anticollagenase effects. With conjunctival
transplants, leukocytes, antibodies, serum, and α-macro-
globulin (thought to be the anticollagenase factor) are
immediately incorporated into the corneal ulcer bed.
Because of the conjunctival blood vessels, systemic antibio-
tics can enter the ulcer site in higher levels. The fibrovascula1
01 deeper layer of the conjunctival transplant offers immedi-
ate fibroblasts and collagen to begin rebuilding the corneal
stroma (Fig. 7.13)
Conjunctival autografts from either bulbar or palpebral
Fig. 7.10 Extensive keratomalacia in a young dog. This patient is a
conjunctiva should be thin, and not include Tenon's capsule
 candidate for a conjunctival autograft.
o1 the bulbar fascia. The inclusion of Tenon's capsule creates
a thicker than necessary graft, and may contribute to surgical
failure by increasing tissue contraction and tension by the
 transplanted conjunctiva. The scar will be more prominent
with a thick autograft. Transpalpebral conjunctival auto-
grafts contain limited portions of the fibrous tarsal layer
which may be necessary to maintain the graft base from
the deeper aspects of the eyelid to the corneal surface. As a
general guide, if the surgeon can visualize the ophthalmic scis-
sors beneath the conjunctival graft as it is being prepared, the
graft is sufficiently thin
Conjunctival autografts are more difficult to perform than
nictitating membrane flaps, but are easier than corneocon-
junctival and corneoscleral transpositions, and the different
aun anon bop aleydauoeig e ui lanin ieauon lenuan daan llz di
types of keratoplasty procedures. Conjunctival autografts
steep sides of the corneal ulcer and the lack of cormeal vascularization.
are indicated for progressive and medically non-iesponsive
A conjunctival autograft is recommended.
corneal ulcers, fungal corneal ulcers, deep stromal corneal
ulcers, descemetoceles, ‘leaking' coineal ulcers (positive
Seidel test), perforated corneal ulcers, and perforated co1-
neal ulcers with iris prolapse.
Some ophthalmic instrmentation is essential to perfoim
these grafts and usually includes: an eyelid speculum, Beaver
No. 6400 o1 6700 microsurgical blade, Beaver scalpel han-
dle, small tenotomy or Steven's scissors, both small selrated
and 1 x 2 teeth thumb forceps to handle the conjunctiva.
ophthalmic needle holder usually with a lock (to accommo-
date 5-0 to 7-0 ophthalmic sutures), and suture tying thumb
forceps. Some magnification (5-10x) fo1 the operative
procedure is highly recommended.
There are several different types of conjunctival autograft
Fig. 7.12 Central descemetocele in a brachycephalic dog. The center
(Table 7.1). The divisions are based on the source of the
'uiansaionlg lenidon uienal rou pip pue leap s! aoayap leauion ayn jo
mucosa (bulba1, tarsopalpebral, o1 corneoconjunctival)
A conjunctival autograft is recommended.
and the type of graft (advancement, bridge, complete, island
(free), o1 pedicle). The dorsal bulba1 conjunctiva is the most
frequent source of mucosa, because of its accessibility and
 coinea to provide additional support and tissue for a cornea
large surface area. The transpalpebral graft is usually con-
weakened by deep ulceration, descemetocele, 01 perforation
with o1 without inis prolapse. The transplanted conjunctival
fo1 any size coineal defect. Generally, the more central the
autograft provides additional tissues and no risk of host
corneal defect, the more critical the conjunctival grafting
rejection.
procedure.
Conjunctival autografts  provide sufficient  tissue
to
 The different types of conjunctival autograft have different
strengthen a weakened coinea and prevent staphyloma
dinical characteristics that influence their clinical use
formation. If additional strength is indicated, a frozen sec-
(Table 7.2). The larger the surface area of the coinea covered
tion of sterile cornea or sclera is positioned in the corneal
by the conjunctival graf, the greater the postoperative
defect before the conjunctival graft is applied. Conjunctival
grafts provide new and often highly viable epithelium.
operative intraocular examination, and, at least theoretically.
When harvested from the limbal area, the transplanted
the greater impediment for the corneal and intraocular
165
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
A
B
daap e yaim zen e ui nyeib jensunjuon yeging alpipad (g) (aageiadonsod syaam g) yeib jenounjuon apipad e Ag panean bop e ui alanoiawansaa (e) el'z dbis
stromal corneal ulcer (immediate postoperative).
Table 7.1 Types of conjunctival autograft for corneal defects
Position of corneal defect
Type of conjunctival autograft
Peripheral
Paracentral
Central
 Corneoconjunctival, bulbar
 Sliding/pedicle
+++
++
 Advancement (hood)
+++
++
+十
Complete (360°)
+
+十
+++
Island 
+
+++
+++
 Pedicle
+++
+++
+++
Tarsopalpebral
Island 
+
+++
+++
 Pedicle
+
+++
+++
+ ++ most used;: ++ occasionally used; + infrequently used
Table 7.2 Clinical characteristics of conjunctival grafts
Type of graft
Characteristics
Advancement
Bridge
Complete
Island (bulbar/TP)
Pedicle (bulbar/TP)
 Barrier to eye exam
eed
 Partial 
Total
 Partial
Partial
56nup aka on daueg 
Minor
Minor
Minor
Minor
 Difficult to perform
Low
 Moderate
 Moderate
Low
 Moderate
 Dehiscence potential
Low
Low
 Medium 
 Medium
 Maintenance of viability
High
High 
High
 Moderate
Moderate
 Obstructs vision
No
Little
Total
Little
Little
 Surgical trauma
Low
Moderate
High
Little
 Moderate
 Suture patterns
Simple 
 Simple 
 Simple and mattress
 Simple 
Simple 
 TP, tarsopalpebral.
166
Conjunctival grafts/transplantatior
eye, and the intraocular penetration of topical drugs
used to cover the central cornea, and for the more serious co1-
through both the vascularized mucosa and the cornea is
neal ulcers, these techniques are often more difficult to per-
Ieduced. With this graft, systemic as well as topical adminis-
form. Attachment of the conjunctival graft to the progressive
tration of drugs is recommended. Of all of the different
central  coineal ulceration must be exact.  Magnification
types of conjunctival graft, the complete 360° conjunctival
provided by a head loupe o1 preferably the operating micro-
graft provides the maximum support for the entire cor-
nea. Coineal defects involving the central and paracentral
that are apposed by sutures directly to the adjacent corneal
 areas of the coinea are treated with this type of conjunctival
epithelium and stroma.
graff.
Preparation for surgery for the different types of conjunc-
 For the 360° fornix-based conjunctival graft, the dorsal
tival autogiaft is similar. Once under general anesthesia,
bulbar conjunctiva is elevated by fine teeth thumb forceps
the eyelids are carefully clipped and the eyelid skin prepared
and incised by scissors at the limbus (Fig. 7.14a). The bul-
for surgery. The conjunctival surfaces are carefully cleaned of
ba1 conjunctiva is separated from the underlying Tenon's
any debris with sterile cotton-tipped applicators. Dilute
solutions of 0.5% povidone-iodine are used to treat the su1
tenotomy scissors with blunt tips. For a reasonably thin con-
faces of both the conjunctiva and coinea to reduce the over-
junctival graft, the scissors' tips should be easily observed
all microbial population, and then rinsed from the eye with
through the thin mucosa (Fig. 7.14b). To facilitate dis-
sterile saline. A lateral canthotomy may be indicated to
section, saline can be injected subconjunctivally to help
increase exposure of the surgical site and facilitate the
separate the bulbar conjunctiva from Tenon's capsule. Some
surgery fo1 most dogs except the brachycephalic breeds.
hemorrhage is expected and depends on the extent of con-
junctival hyperemia associated with the corneal ulceration
Complete (360°) bulbar conjunctival
and secondary iridocyclitis. If the surgical dissection plane
enters Tenon's capsule, additional hemorrhage results.
autograft (Gundersen type)
The bulba1 conjunctiva is dissected for 360° about the lim-
The complete, 360°, or Gundersen-type conjunctival auto-
bus. The most difficult area is usually under the nictitating
graft has been used extensively in veterinary ophthalmology
membrane (Fig. 7.14b). As the cornea measures about 15 x
Mou s iq 'o s os Aau osp is sii a
16 mm in the dog and 16 × 17 mm in the cat, in vertical
-d o e s o  d d 
and horizontal diameters, respectively, adequate amounts of
tially cover the cornea. In this graft nearly all of the bulbar
bulbar conjunctiva necessitate 8-10 mm of dissection from
conjunctiva is separated from the underlying Tenon's cap-
the limbus fo1 360°. As the different rectus muscles in the
sule to cover the entire cornea. The graft covers the corneal
dog and cat insert 6-10 mm from the limbus, preparation
defect but is not apposed directly by sutures. Because the
 of the conjunctival graft requires surgical dissection immedi-
entire cornea is covered, patient vision, examination of the
 ately beneath the bulbar conjunctiva and not on the sclera.
A
Fig. 7.14 In the 360°, or Gundersen-type, conjunctival graft, (a) The dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is elevated by fine 1 x 2 thumb forceps and incised by
tenotomy scissors. (b) A thin bulbar conjunctival graft is constructed by careful separation from the underlying Tenon's capsule. The tips of the tenotomy
scissors should be visible under the conjunctival mucosa. The bulbar conjunctiva is incised at the limbus for 360° and separated from Tenon's capsule for
pasodde ane sabpa jenuan pue jesiop sa! pannsuon uaaq sey yeu eunjuos jegng aup aouo () snqull aun on jouansod ww zl-ol Aaewixodde
with 5-0 to 7-0 absorbable simple interrupted or simple mattress sutures, or a combination of both suture patterns. (d) Once completed, the 360° bulbar
conjunctival graft covers the entire cornea.
167
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Modified complete (360*) bulbar conjunctival
 graft with two suture lines
The complete or 360° bulbar conjunctival graft has been
modified to include two suture lines instead of a single
suture line. The major reason for failure of the complete 01
360° bulba1 conjunctival graft is the premature retraction
of the conjunctiva from the central cornea, and the failure
of the sutures to hold the dorsal and ventral conjunctival
edges together. In this technique a ‘Telief incision' of the
dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is performed to lessen the ‘pres-
sure' on the sutures apposing the upper and lower edges of
the graft.
 In this technique, a wide 10-15 mm strip of dorsal bulba1
conjunctiva is prepared by incisions at the dorsal limbus
fo1 180°, and parallel to the limbus 10-15 mm fo1 180°
Fig. 7.15 A complete bulbar conjunctival graft 4 weeks postoperatively. The
(Fig. 7.16a). Beyond the second incision, additional bulbar
entire cornea was covered by bulbar conjunctival mucosa, but this is now
conjunctival mucosa is separated from Tenon's capsule to
 retracing and several sutures are missing.
eventually slide ventrally toward the limbus. The conjuncti-
val graft must be thin and the tips of the curved blunt-tipped
The conjunctival graft must be thin to minimize traction and
tenotomy scissors should be clearly visible through the thin
graft. The surgical plane is in the subconjunctival fascia
erly prepared, the loosened edges of the bulbar conjunctival
above Tenon's capsule to avoid the deeper dorsal extraocular
graft should rest on the central coinea and not retract sponta-
muscle insertions. Both edges of the wide strip of dorsal
neously to the limbus.
bulbar conjunctiva are apposed to the adjacent loosened
The edges of the bulbar conjunctiva are apposed hori-
conjunctiva by 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable
zontally with 5-0 to 7-0 absorbable simple inteinupted o1
sutures (Fig. 7.16b). The ventral 180° of the bulbar conjunc-
simple mattress sutures (Fig. 7.14c). Usually four to six
Oi ainpanoid shoaid au u paqusap se paiedaid si ea
sutures are necessary to appose the dorsal and ventral con-
separate at least 8-10 mm of thin ventral conjunctival
junctival edges. Simple interrupted mattress sutures 
are
mucosa from Tenon's capsule (Fig. 7.16c). The presence of
recommended if the graft is thicker than desirable or addi-
a double rather than a single suture line substantially
tional traction on the suture line is anticipated. A purse-
reduces the likelihood of suture failure, but increases the
string stitch has also be used but is not recommended as
time required to prepare this graft.
this produces additional tension on the graft as all edges
are pulled to the center of the cornea. Once completed,
Advancement (hood or 180°) bulbar
the 360° bulbar conjunctival graft covers the entire coinea
 conjunctival graft
(Fig. 7.14d).
 The transposed conjunctival mucosa is not usually sutured
The advancement (hood o1 180°) bulbar conjunctival
directly to the coineal defect, but can be if perforation is
graft is very similar to the complete 360° technique, except
likely or the deep corneal ulcer is already leaking aqueous
that only the dorsal o1 lateral bulbar conjunctiva is trans-
humor (Fig. 7.15). As these grafts completely cover the co1-
posed onto the coinea. This method is most useful for
nea, vision in the eye is obscured and intraocular inspection
dorsal and lateral paracentral and peripheral coineal defects.
is not possible.
Advancement bulbar conjunctival grafts are difficult, but
A
B
Fig. 7.16 The modified complete bulbar conjunctival graft is a modified very wide bridge graft. (a) In the modified complete bulbar conjunctival graft, a wide
strip (10-15 mm) of dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is constructed by tenotomy scissors. The bulbar conjunctival graft should be sufficiently thin to permit 
visualization of the scissors' tips through the mucosa while performing the initial 360° peritomy starting at the limbus. (b) The dorsal aspects of the dorsal
bulbar conjunctival graft are positioned over the center of the cornea and apposed to the limbus with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
The remaining exposed surgical wound thereby provides a relief incision. (c) The ventral edge of the wide strip of dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is apposed with
5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures to the edge of the ventral bulbar conjunciva. Hence, with two lines of sutures instead of a single row to
appose the complete bulbar conjunctival graft, and the 10-15 mm from the relief incision, the possibility of general suture failure and dehiscence is reduced.
168
Conjunctival grafts/transplantatior
A
B
Fig. 7.17 Most advancement (hood or 180°) bulbar conjunctival grafts are performed in the dorsal or lateral quadrants because of accessibility. (a) The bulbar
conjunctiva is incised at the limbus with small tenotomy scissors and separated for 18o? from the underlying Tenon's capsule. (b) The advancement bulbar
conjunctival graft is positioned over the paracentral corneal defect, and its edges apposed to the corneal defect and adjacent areas with 5-0 to 7-0 simple
interrupted absorbable sutures. (c) Postoperative appearance of an advancement or hood conjunctival graft several weeks after surgery. As this graft does not
obscure vision, it can be left pemmanently in situ.
not impossible, to prepare from the medial bulbar conjunc-
bulbar conjunctival graft is recommended for central, dorsal
tiva beneath the nictitating membrane o1 from the ventral
paracentral, and lateral paracentral corneal defects.
bulbar conjunctiva. Advancement grafts permit patient
The bridge of conjunctiva is usually prepared from the
vision and intraocular examinations, and appear to impact
dorsal bulbar conjunctiva because of its accessibility and
minimally on corneal and intraocular dnug penetration.
  s     
If the advancement graft has limited-to-no impact on vision
formed by small curved blunt-tipped tenotomy scissors at
and the central cornea, it may be left permanently
in
the limbus and about 10-12 mm toward the conjunctival
position.
fornix (Fig. 7.18a). The conjunctival graft should be suffi-
q  si 1 r  r l 
-n siosss au jo uon d oi u a
 neath. The bridge of bulbar conjunctiva is manipulated
fo1 180-200° and dissected toward the conjunctival foinix
across the cornea and its edges apposed to the underly-
fo1 about 10-12 mm (Fig. 7.17a). The bulbar conjunctiva
ing corneal defect and adjacent normal cornea with 5-0 to
is separated primarily by blunt dissection from the under-
7-0 simple internupted absorbable sutures. Additional
  s a ius p nn son 
sutures may be used about the corneal defect to ensure graft
allow visualization of the scissors' tips under the mucosa.
adherence to the coineal ulcer edges and base (Fig. 7.18b).
The graft is manipulated to cover the corneal defect
 Often a temporary partial tarsorrhaphy is also used to pre-
without excessive traction, and apposed to the central edge
vent excessive lid trauma to the graft and its suture, but still
of the corneal ulcer with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted
accommodate topical medication and limited vision.
absorbable sutures (Fig. 7.17b). Additional sutures are
positioned along the leading edge of the conjunctival graft
 Pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft
to the cornea to provide additional support for the
graft and decrease the possibility of suture failure at the
Pedicle bulbar conjunctival grafts are becoming more popu-
corneal ulcer site. One or more additional sutures can be
la1 in small animal ophthalmology because of thei1 minimal
effect on vision, intraocular examination, and drug penetra-
added to attach the conjunctival graft to other areas of
the coineal defect, especially at the limbus. Conjunctival
  si udad nu s le a o 
graft adhesion will occur only at the corneal ulcer site.
ficult, but adequate corneal bed preparation is critical. All
Once suture removal occurs, the areas of the conjunctival graft
-s deus q pasxa aq is anss ieo snau pads
covering the cornea with epithelium will not adhere
section from the corneal ulcer to ensure graft apposition to
Depending on the pre-existing disease, advancement
the ulcer base and edges, and for maintenance of the su1-
bulbar conjunctival grafts usually do not interfere with
rounding sutures. The pedicle graft must be of sufficient size
 )        
to cover the entire corneal ulcer; it is usually constricted
An example is use of a permanent advancement graft
1-2 mm wider than the diameter of the corneal defect.
to strengthen the postoperative coineoscleral wound after
excision of a limbal or epibulbar melanoma in a dog or cat.
Bridge bulbar conjunctival graft
The bridge (or bipedicle) bulbar conjunctival graft is a fur-
ther modification of the complete bulbar conjunctival
n no i e a  as on m 
bridge of bulbar conjunctiva should be 10 mm o1 more to
ensure its vitality. As the bridge of dorsal bulbar conjuncti-
A
B)
val mucosa is perfused at both ends, ischemia of the graft
is less likely than with pedicle grafts. Sutures may be used
Fig. 7.18 Bridge bulbar conjunctival graft. (a) A 10 mm or wider strip of thin
to attach the corneal defect to the bridge of conjunctival
dorsal conjunctiva is constructed with small tenotomy scissors. The dotted
lines indicate the extent of the bridge of mucosa. (b) After placement on the
mucosa. As with the other incomplete conjunctival grafts,
cornea, the bridge bulbar conjunctival graft is apposed to the corneal defect
the impact on vision, intraocular examination, and corneal
and other edges of the graft to the cornea by 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted
 and intraocular dnug penetration is only partial. The bridge
absorbable sutures.
169
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
A
?
Fig. 7.19 Pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft. (a) The corneal ulcer is carefully debrided to remove all suspect necrotic and/or infected tissues. (b) The
dorsolateral bulbar conjunctiva is most accessible and the graft's base is usually lateral or at the 12 o'clock position. The doted line indicates the outline for
the pedicle graft. (c) A pedicle strip of thin bulbar conjunctiva is prepared primarily by small tenotomy scissors. (d) After preparation of the bulbar conjunctival
 pedlicle graft, its end is trimmed by scissors to conform to the ventral edge of the corneal ulcer. The pedicle graft should lie flat on the corneal surface, and be
neither stretched nor excessive in length. (e) The entire tip of the pedicle is apposed to the corneal ulcer by 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
At least one suture is carefuly positioned between the dorsal edge of the corneal ulcer and the pedicle; this suture is positioned along the long axis of the
graft to minimize its effect on the graft's blood supply.
Pedicle bulbar conjunctival grafts may be used fo1 central,
(Fig. 7.19c). Once prepared, the conjunctival pedicle graft
paracentral, and peripheral coineal defects.
is placed on the cornea and its tip trimmed to match the
 The recipient bed for the pedicle graft is prepared in the
edge of the ventral corneal defect (Fig. 7.19d). The pedicle
corneal ulcer. Debridement of the ulcel's edges and base
graft should not be stretched or excessively slack, and
with the Beaver No. 64 blade should 1emove all necrotic tis
lotated less than 45° from the vertical.
sues (Fig. 7.19a). The tissues are usually transparent to
A single suture is placed along the long axis of the pedicle
 aad au os aa no paa ad pue anedo
graft in the dorsal corneal defect edge to ensure contact
is usually prepared from the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva
between the coineal ulcer base and the graft. The remaining
because of improved exposure. The size and shape of the
tip of the pedicle graft and then the sides are gradually
pedicle are outlined on the dorsolateral bulbar conjunctiva
spread and apposed directly to the coineal defect edges
(Fig. 7.19b). The pedicle edges include the dorsolateral lim-
with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
bus and toward the fornix. The pedicle should be approxi-
(Fig. 7.19e). The conjunctival wound 
Createdby the
mately 1-2 mm wider than the coineal defect. The pedicle
construction of the conjunctival pedicle graft is apposed
base is constructed to be slightly wider than its tip to ensure
with 5-0 to 7-0 simple inteirupted absorbable sutures
adequate perfusion of the pedicle's tip. The bulbar con-
(Fig. 7.20).
junctiva is incised and separated from the underlying
Aq uoass dsr e  s s
Pedicle tarsopalpebral conjunctival graft
small curved blunt-tipped tenotomy or Steven's scissois
 Pedicle tarsopalpebral conjunctival grafts from the upper
eyelid offer another source, the tarsopalpebral conjunctiva,
for an autogenous mucosa transplant for corneal defects.
The pedicle of the tarsopalpebral conjunctiva is directly
apposed to the central corneal defect. This method may
be used when dorsal bulbar conjunctiva is not available o1
Paa iaddn pue aaa a uaamag sao s pasas
is unavoidable, a partial temporary tarsorrhaphy for 2-4
weeks is recommended after placement of the tarsopalpebral
conjunctival graft.
The coineal ulcer is carefully debrided to remove all the
potentially necrotic tissues and prepare a bed for the con-
junctival graft. The upper eyelid is grasped and everted with 
Fig. 7.20 Three-week postoperative appearance of an established bulbar
a chalazion or entropion clamp (Fig. 7.21a). The clamp
 conjunctival pedicle graft in a dog.
facilitates graft constriction and provides hemostasis. The
170
Conjunctival grafts/transplantatior
s   a   d 
Like the other partial conjunctival grafts, preservation of
the patient's vision, unimpaired dnug penetration into the
coinea and anterio1 segment, and postoperative eye exami-
nations are facilitated. However, unlike the other conjuncti-
val grafts, improvement of blood supply of the coineal ulcer
area is not rapid, which may be very important in septic
corneal ulcers.
The surgical technique is quite simple. The coineal ulcer is
A)
?
carefully debrided and all possible necrotic tissues excised.
With the upper eyelid everted and clamped with a 9 mm
Fig. 7.21 Tarsopalpebral conjunctival graft in the dog or cat. (a) The upper
chalazion clamp. a circular section of transpalpebral con-
eyelid is clamped and everted with a chalazion forceps. A small 
junctiva is harvested by a razor blade held by the Castro-
transpalpebral conjuncival graft is prepared by incision with the Beaver No.
6400 blade. (b) The tarsopalpebral conjuncival graf is apposed to the central
   s )   
cormeal ulcer by at least three 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable
utilizes doisal bulbal conjunctiva. Incision with the Beaver
sutures. After apposition of the graft to the cormeal ulcer, a partial temporary
No. 6400 microsurgical blade is usually less satisfactory.
tarsorrhaphy is performed to cover the graft and reduce eyelid movements.
The graf's base is undeimined at the level of the mid tarsus
with Steven's tenotomy scissors (Fig. 7.22b). The graft should
   aiad e ad oi ps i oo
be about 10% larger than the corneal wound to compensate
about 1 mm larger than the coineal defect. The length of
fo1 graft shrinkage. After trimming to conform to the wound
the pedicle graft should be sufficient to span the coineal sur-
shape, the tarsoconjunctival graff is apposed to the corneal
face and upper eyelid without traction and restriction of eye-
wound with either 8-0 to 9-0 nylon o1 simple interrupted
lid movements. The tarsopalpebral conjunctiva is elevated
absorbable sutures (Fig. 7.22c). Critical to the success of this
from the underlying tarsus and orbicularis oculi muscle
type of graft is the meticulously closely placed sutures; often
layer by sharp dissection with a scalpel or tenotomy scissors.
15-20 sutures are employed for exact apposition between
The tarsopalpebral conjunctival graft with the epithelial
the free graft and the corneal wound edges (Fig. 7.23).
layer exposed is attached to the corneal defect with at least
The palpebral or bulbar conjunctival wound is allowed to
three 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
heal by secondary intention. Without a blood supply, island
(Fig. 7.21b). The sutures should be placed to a depth of
grafts will rapidly blanch and remain white until vasculari-
one-half to two-thirds thickness of the viable cornea suI-
zation from the coinea occurs within 10-14 days. G1aft sub-
rounding the graft. A partial temporary tarsorrhaphy may
sistence is apparently derived from the adjacent corneal
be used to restrict eyelid movement, but still allow topical
stroma, aqueous humor, and tears. Central island grafts in
medication, patient vision, and eye examinations. Excessive
corneas with no o1 very limited vascularization require addi-
manipulation of the eyelids postoperatively should
be
tional time for the vascular supply to develop to the graft.
avoided.
Corneoconjunctival autograft
Island tarsopalpebral conjunctival graft
 The corneoconjunctival graft is a modified sliding conjuncti-
Island tarsopalpebral conjunctival grafts have been used in
val graft that transplants adjacent peripheral cornea and
dogs and cats. The free or island grafts have been useful
the attached bulbar conjunctiva into the central corneal
fo1 the surgical management of deep corneal ulcers, desce-
wound. Another modification is corneoscleral transposition
metoceles, and coineal perforations. These grafts with no
in which the adjacent coinea and sclera are shifted into a
 [euaneied io jenua on Aaip pasodde aie kiddns poo
coineal defect. These methods permit transplantation of
corneal defects. There is no need to trim these grafts in the
autogenous cornea from an adjacent healthy area in the
A
Fig. 7.22 Island or free transpalpebral conjunctival graft. (a) An 8-9 mm circular section of tarsopalpebral conjunctiva is incised from the upper eyelid,
ueun jabuel wwu l ag pinoys zye6 ayl siossis Aq snsen auz jo siael adaap aua wouy paneiedas 5! yeu6 aul (9) sdauoy uoizeleuo e Aq padwep pue padseib
the corneal defect to compensate for tissue shrinkage. (c) The island tarsopalpebral conjunctival graft is apposed to the edges of the carefully debrided 
corneal ulcer by 15-20, 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted sutures with either non-absorbable or absorbable material. These sutures are meticulously placed to
 prevent any interruptions between the graft and corneal ulcer surfaces.
171
 Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Fig. 7.23 One month postoperative appearance of an island or free
Fig. 7.24 Cormeal sequestrum involving the deeper corneal stroma in a
transpalpebral conjunctival graft in a dog. Both graft and cornea contain
short-haired domestic cat. After excision of the sequestrum, the cormeal
numerous blood vessels.
defect will be filled with a corneoconjunctival transposition.
same eye and usually yield less central corneal scarring.
Their use in infected and progressive bacterial corneal ulcers
debrided to remove all potentially infected and/o1 necrotic
should be delayed until the infectious and melting (prote-
tissue. Often the corneal bed is enlarged 1 o1 2 mm fo1
ase) process has been resolved. Their use in fungal infected
adequate removal of all suspect tissues. The sliding graft
coineas is not recommended.
of cornea and conjunctiva is then prepared. Extending
Transposition of a normal healthy cornea into an infected
from the corneal wound dorsally, two partial-thickness,
environment will not be successful.
Corneoconjunctival
slightly diverging coineal incisions are created by the Beaver
transposition has been used successfully for treatment of deep
No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 7.25a). Once the limbus
corneal ulceration, descemetocele, and feline comeal seques-
is traversed, the dissection plane is altered to subconjunctiva,
tration affecting the deeper layers of the cornea (Fig. 7.24).
and the bulba1 conjunctiva is incised by the scalpel blade
Corneoscleral transposition is indicated for fallthickness
OI small tenotomy scissors. The edge of the corneal trans-
defects of the coinea and is presented in Chapter 8.
dus aq 'pue 'sdai qn s A paieaa si uonisod
dissection with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade 01
eyelid speculum, a lateral canthotomy is performed to
a corneal lamellar knife-dissector, the coineal epithelium
improve exposure. The coineal ulcer site is carefully
and about one-half of the thickness of the stroma are
A
C
Fig. 7.25 Corneoconjunctival transposition. (a) The corneal bed is carefully prepared to remove any diseased tissues. Two slightly diverging corneal stromal
incisions with the Beaver No. 6400 blade are extended dorsally to the limbus. (b) The pedicle of anterior corneal stroma and epithelium is carefully separated
from the deeper stroma by sharp dissection. (c) The dissection is continued by small tenotomy scissors between the bulbar conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule
for a sufficient length to accommodate ventral sliding into the corneal defect. (d) The end and sides of the corneoconjunctival pedicle are apposed by 5-0 to
7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
172
Conjunctival grafts/transplantation
advancement, and pedicle conjunctival grafts are usually
trimmed and the limbal base severed by scissors under topi-
cal anesthesia about 4-6 weeks postoperatively. Trimming
of the conjunctival graft that is adherent to the coineal
wound is not usually necessary unless excessive and protrud-
ing mucosa are present. In time, these conjunctival grafts will
gradually confoim to the corneal curvature, and the majority
will become pigmented.
The success rates for conjunctival grafts in all animal
species are quite high. In one study in which 90% of
the conjunctival grafts were pedicle, the overall success
Fig. 7.26 One-month postoperative appearance of a corneoconjunctival
graft. The portion of the graft at the center of the cornea will remain clear.
rate in dogs as judged by structural integrity of the coinea
was 91%. The success rate fo1 the free o1 island taisopal-
pebral conjunctival graft in dogs and cats was 98%. There
are several reasons for conjunctival graft failures and
carefully incised to the limbus (Fig. 7.25b), usually using
most are related to: 1) technique; 2) inadequate corneal
the base of the coineal defect as a reference. The dissection
wound preparation; and 3) aqueous humo1 leakage unde1
is continued by scissors into the subconjunctival space, separ-
these grafts (Box 7.1). Adequate coineal wound debride-
ating the bulbar conjunctiva from the underlying Tenon's
ment cannot be overemphasized, as the presence
of
capsule (Fig. 7.25c). When the subconjunctival attachments
necrotic and infected tissues within the corneal bed can
of the conjunctival mucosa have been separated, the entire
 contribute to graft dehiscence. Bacterial wound infections
graft can be positioned into the corneal defect and trimmed,
of the surgical site and suture failures are infrequent.
if necessary, to fill the corneal wound. The transplanted
Aqueous humor appears toxic to conjunctival fibroblasts;
coinea should be 0.5-1 mm wider than the corneal defect
leakage of aqueous humor under these grafts causes graft
to compensate for shrinkage of the grafted corneal tissue.
thickening and seems to prevent permanent apposition of
The edges of the entire corneoconjunctival graft are carefully
the graft to the base of the corneal wound. Seidel's tests
apposed to the corneal wound with 5-0 to 7-0 simple
should be perfoimed pre- and postoperatively to detect co1-
inteinupted absorbable sutures (Figs 7.25d and 7.26).
neal perforations. Circumferential sutures placed at one-half
to two-thirds thickness of the coinea seem to offer the
Postoperative patient management, success
best technique to minimize this complication. Sutures
within a conjunctival graft should be placed radially and
rates, and potential complications
along the long axis of the pedicle graft not only to avoid
The postoperative management of all of the conjunctival
blood vessel occlusion, but also to provide the optimum
grafts is similar. Often a partial temporary tarsorrhaphy is
apposition of the graft to the corneal wound. In deep or
used at the conclusion of the graft procedure to reduce eye-
 perforated corneal ulceration, failure of a conjunctival graft
lid trauma to the surgical site, reduce exposure, provide pres-
should not prevent the placement of another conjunctival
sure on the graft site, permit topical medication, allow
sad ayado pue Aau leun uu on ei
patient vision, and facilitate daily ophthalmic examinations.
vision.
An E-collar o1 other restraint device is also recommended to
prevent self-trauma to the eye and surgical site by the small
Permanent conjunctival grafts
lars should be worn by the patient for approximately 2 weeks
Conjunctival grafts are usually employed as temporary trans.
O1 until the conjunctival graft appears well established.
plants to strengthen a weakened coinea. Within 4-6 weeks,
Topical medications are directed at the coineal ulcel, tear
the base of the conjunctival graft is severed. However, the
film proteases, and secondary anterior uveitis. Topical and
advancement and pedicle bulbar conjunctival grafts may be
often systemic antibiotics are administered to either treat
  sas i m ad d u 
coineal sepsis or prevent secondary coineal infection. Topi-
for selected chronic and/or 1ecurrent conditions, such as
cal mydriatics, such as 1% atropine, are instilled a few times
keratoconjunctivitis sicca and feline corneal sequestration.
to initiate and maintain mydriasis, but prolonged and exces-
sive topical atropine can 1educe tear production by 50% 01
more. Topical antiproteases such as autologous serum and/
Box 7.1
 Causes of conjunctival graft failures
01 EDTA are used to reduce tear film protease activity to
allow fo1 faster healing. Tear film proteases will attack
1. Incomplete cormeal site preparation and debridement of necrotic
absorbable sutures to cause premature graft retraction.
and/or septic tissues
Topical and systemic tieatments are usually administered
 2. Incomplete covering of the surgical site
fo1 5-10 days; thereafter only topical medications are
3.
 Aqueous humor leakage from deep or perforated cormeal ulcers 
continued until the graft is established. Topical antibiotics/
4.(
 Graft direction is greater than 45° from the vertical
 5. Excessive stretching of the graft
about 20-30 days postoperatively to reduce corneal scarring
 6. Wound infection
and pigmentation.
 7. Suture and/or knot failure 
 Suture removal is generally not necessary unless non-
 8. Infarction of conjunctival graft vessels
absorbable
sutures
are
 employed.
The
complete,
173
 Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Depending on the size and position of the conjunctival graft
and dogs, after lamellar corneal transplantation with SIS
and pupil size, vision may still be present.
grafts, Ie-epithelialization occurred after 7 and 14 days,
The persistent corneal edema in phthisis bulbi (results from
respectively.
intraocular pressure below 5 mmHg) and coineal endothelial
After debridement of the septic coineal ulcer, the SIS graft
dystiophy (1esults from defective coineal endothelia) can be
is carefully trimmed and ‘fitted’ to cover in excess of 1-
 a n e  paa n e a
1.5 mm of the entire corneal ulcerative bed. After securing
conjunctival graft. These grafts can reduce coineal edema, pre-
the graft to the ulcel's edges with several 7-0 to 9-0 simple
vent the formation of painful vesicles, and, if thin enough.
interrupted absorbable sutures, the entire SIS graft is coveied
can permit limited clinical vision in small animals.
with a bulbar pedicle conjunctival graft.
 SIS grafts have been reported in dogs, cats, rabbits, and
horses. SIS grafts have been reported to fill the limbocoineal
Substitute materials for conjunctival grafts
defect after limbal melanocytoma excision and covered with
bulbar conjunctiva, for full-thickness corneal ulcerative
disease in dogs and covered with conjunctival grafts, after co1-
There are patients in which adequate and viable conjunctiva
may not be available fo1 grafting to coineal defects. Most of
neal ulcers and corneal sequestra in cats and not covered with
these patients have had previous conjunctiva and/or lid sul-
conjunctival grafts, and after coineal ulceration and corneal
geries, and the dorsal conjunctiva is scarred or of inadequate
stromal abscess formation in horses and covered with
conjunctival grafts.
q  s r a s an  n 
These grafts are convenient to use, are commercially avail-
constructed from the ventral conjunctiva, but the surgery is
 more difficult and the amount of available conjunctiva quite
able and ready for use, avoid potential vinus transmission as
is possible with feline-based grafts, and are easy to handle
limited. Fortunately, there are both experimental and commer-
during surgery. If placed in an uncontrolled septic corneal
cially available alternatives. These include the porcine small
ulcer, covering with a conjunctival graft is highly recom-
intestinal submucosa (SIS) graft which is available commel
mended. If used alone and successfil, it appears that the
cially, and the amniotic graft, available experimentally. Both
grafts have been covered with pedicle conjunctival grafts in
SIS graff-treated corneal defects are more translucent than
those treated with pedicle bulbar conjunctival grafts.
   a n s o n m sd a
to cover the corneal defect. Both grafts seem to tolerate place-
ment in uncontrolled septic coineal ulcers; in these patients
Amniotic grafts as conjunctival substitutes
covering these avascular grafts with a pedicle bulbar conjuncti-
 dap rdai oi pda  aau s r
val graft is recommended.
ness coineal defects dogs. The amniotic grafts for both the
Porcine small intestinal submucosa
horse and dog studies were harvested from normal equine
placenta and are not available commercially.
(SIS) grafts
In the dog study, after harvest, the amniotic grafts were
The SIS graft provides a scaffold for corneal healing as well
preserved in 98% sterile glycerol (full-thickness scleral grafts
as additional strength to the overlying bulbar conjunctival
 aa a   n  
graft. Rabbit corneal SIS graft studies suggest that the graft
graft is obtained aseptically as a 5 mm² section of amnion
collagen sheet is actually incorporated into the healing pro-
after death o1 cesarean section. After harvest, the tissues are
cess. The SIS graft is derived from the porcine jejunum and
preserved in 98% sterile glyceiol; immediately before use
is composed of three distinct layers: 1) tunica muscularis
the tissue is rehydrated in sterile saline solution.
odo s a (  so 1n ( so
layer of the tunica mucosa. Following processing and
Other tissues for conjunctival substitutes
mechanical debridement, a few remaining endothelial cells
 ha 'm ro e m pz ane sai ue
The equine pericardium has also been used in surgery to
sheet of collagen with a smooth surface (stratum compac-
correct canine lateral canthal entropion, deep corneal ulcera-
tum) and a rough surface (tunica muscularis mucosa).
tions in dogs, fill the orbital cavity of dogs after enucleation,
The SIS graft is sterilized by ethylene oxide, and supplied
and as a scleral graft. Equine renal capsule grafts have also
commercially as either 7 x 10 mm sheets, o1 10 mm and
15 mm diamete1 ophthalmic discs.
The SIS graft is a biomaterial consisting primarily of
Adaptations in large animals
proteins and, to a lesser extent, carbohydrates and lipids.
and special species
lities for corneal replacement and healing, and consists of
collagen (types I, IIl, and VI), glycosaminoglycans (hyaluro-
Conjunctival grafts or flaps are used frequently in equine oph-
nic acid, chondroitin sulfate A and B, heparin, and heparin
sulfate)。 and other glycoproteins (fibronectin)。 as
well
large corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, and for perforated corneal
as fibroblastic growth factor (FGF-2) and transforming
ulcers with and without iris prolapse. Conjunctival flaps are
gTowth factor β (TGF-B). The SIS graft is acellular, biode-
 best mobilized from the bulbar conjunctiva. We do not recom-
gradable, non-immunogenic, and xenogeneic. By providing
mend using the conjunctiva near the nictitans, as nictitans
a scaffold for healing, the results are more like regeneration,
    n d  sd 
rather than 1eplacement and scar foimation. In labbits
result in premature graft release. Conjunctival grafts can be
174
Adaptations in large animals and special species
transposed and sutured onto the comea to provide sufficient
keratoplasty surgeries. They are easier to perfoim in the
tissue to strengthen most weakened coineas, but are not as
horse than in other species as the horse has a great deal of
strong as corneal grafts (Fig. 7.27). Conjunctival autografts
very mobile conjunctiva.
contain limbal stem cells, blood vessels, and lymphatics to
 To perform optimal conjunctival grafts in horses, general
offer significant antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antipro-
anesthesia is recommended. Magnification using a head
tease, and anticollagenase effects. With conjunctival grafts,
loupe, head-mounted telescope or the operating microscope
polymorphonuclear leukocytes, antibodies, serum, and α2-
is recommended. Ophthalmic instruments and suture sizes
macroglobulins are immediately placed in the corneal ulcer
are identical to those in small animals. Conjunctival auto-
bed. Systemic antibiotics can enter the ulcer site in higher levels
grafts from either bulbar or palpebral conjunctiva should
through leakage from the conjunctival graft vasculature. The
be thin, and should not include Tenon's capsule or the bul-
fibrovascular o1 deeper layer of the conjunctival transplant
bar fascia. Tenon's capsule should be stripped o1 cut from
offers immediate fibroblasts and collagen to begin rebuilding
the graft such that the graft lies over the corneal defect prio1
of the coineal stroma
to suture placement. The inclusion of Tenon's capsule may
Conjunctival grafts usually result in various sizes and degrees
contribute to surgical failure by increasing the traction on
        s 
the transplanted  conjunctival  graft.  Conjunctival flaps
necrotic coinea by keratectomy prio1 to graft placement. Post-
should have tension-relieving sutures placed at the limbus
operative topical corticosteroids can 1educe this postoperative
to prevent the graft pulling off the ulcer bed prematurely.
scar tissue formation to a minimum, but corneal scarring after
Conjunctival pedicle grafts utilizing bulbar conjunctiva from
conjunctival grafts should be anticipated.
the dorsal or temporal quadrants are my preference as the con-
Conjunctival autografts are more difficult to perfoim than
junctiva in those areas is surgically available, and the pedicle
flaps cover only the ulcer surface to allow postoperative obser-
junctival and corneoscleral transpositions, and penetrating
vation of the pupil and anterior chamber as the graft does not
C
Fig. 7.27 Examples of bulbar conjunctival grafts in the horse. (a) Acute corneal ulceration with central descemetocele in a young Thoroughbred foal.
Note the diffuse corneal edema and peripheral corneal vascularization. (b) Same eye 2 weeks postoperatively after successful treatment with a
pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft. The ocular and corneal inflammation have markedly regressed. (c) Postoperative appearance (4 weeks) of a combination
of bridge (horizontal) and pedicle (6 o'clock position) bulbar conjunctival grafts in an adult horse with a deep central corneal ulcer. (d) Three
day postoperative appearance of a dehisced or failed pedicle bulbar conjunctival graft in a deep corneal ulcer infected with a combination of
β-5treptococcus and Pseudomonas spp. in a adult horse. The loose end of the unsuccessful pedicle graft as well as the remaining corneal
absorbable sutures are still present.
175
 Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
cover the entire coinea. If possible, melting ulcers should be
generalized and advanced third eyelid neoplasia. In the past
stabilized with medical therapy prior to graft placement in
10-15 years, several surgical piocedures have evolved to
 order to prevent protease digestion of absorbable sutures hold-
treat the prolapsed nictitans gland or 'cherry eye', and
ing the conjunctival graft in place. Temporary tarsorrhaphies
preserve as much as possible tear production in the dog.
are performed concurrently with conjunctival grafts to mini-
 Surgeries of the nictitans in horses and cattle most often
mize blinking movements to the coineal sutures and allow
involve neoplasia. Squamous cell carcinomas are the most
quick graft adherence to the stroma.
frequent neoplasms in both species, and with the often con-
siderable involvement the entire nictitans must be removed.
Surgery for aberrant conjunctival
In addition, neoplasia of the nictitans of both of these spe-
overgrowth in rabbits
cies has a greater tendency to infiltrate the deeper orbital
tissues and necessitate exenteration of the entire orbit.
Aberrant conjunctival overgrowth, pseudopterygium or pre-
corneal membranous occlusion is a recently described con-
Surgical treatment of everted nictitans
junctival disease which appears unique to this species. The
disease is characterized by proliferation of the bulbar and
palpebral conjunctiva in a circular manner which eventually
Occasional malformations of the nictitating membrane ca1-
nearly totally occludes the corneal surface (Fig. 7.28). This
tilage occul, usually resulting in eversion of its leading ma1-
abelrant conjunctiva does not adhere to the coinea. It can
gin (Fig. 7.29). Infrequently, the abnormality results in an
affect one or both eyes in young and adult rabbits, and the
inversion or an inward scrollike deformity of the cartilage.
dwarf bieeds may be predisposed.
The condition usually presents unilaterally, but bilateral
Surgeries used to treat this condition include: 1) simple
involvement may occur eventually. Eversion of the third eye-
resection: 2) repositioning of conjunctiva to the limbus; 3)
     ie   Ps
dividing the aberrant conjunctiva into medial and lateral
of dogs, including the Great Dane, St Bernard, German
portions, and relocation to the fornix; and 4) centrifugal
Shepherd,
Weimaranel, Newfoundland, German Short-
incisions of the aberrant conjunctiva to the limbus and
haired Pointer, many retriever breeds, and English Bulldog.
transpalpebral fixation of the conjunctiva.
Inheritance has been suggested in the German Shorthaied
In the last technique, the conjunctival
1  overgrowth is
Pointer.
 Eversion of the nictitating membrane cartilage
divided into six more-or-less equal sections and incised to
may also occur after trauma and surgery.
the limbus. With simple mattress non-absorbable sutures
 Eversion of the nictitans usually occurs in dogs during the
placed through the base of the eyelid, the tip of each
fist year of life. The condition also occurs in cats. Clinical
conjunctival section is retracted into the conjunctival fornix.
signs consist of a raised pink defoimity of the medial can-
Postoperative treatment usually consists of topical antibio-
thus, which upon closer inspection is the curled nictitans
tics and corticosteroids for several days. Topical cyclosporine
withi
its
posterio1 leading margin exposed. Secondary
chronic conjunctivitis and epiphora may be present.
of fixation of the aberrant conjunctiva to the conjunctival
The defect affects the upper portion of the stem of the
fornix seems the most effective procedure at this time.
T-shaped cartilage resulting in a U-shaped abnormality
that reflects forward from the leading margin of the nictitans
(Fig. 7.30). Microscopic examination of affected areas of the
SURGERIES OF THE NICTITANS
cartilage reveals no abnormalities, although this area is proba-
bly the weakest part of the cartilage. Suggested cause(s) include
Surgeries of the nictitans are common in small animal prac-
prominence ofthe nictitans, cartilage defect, and adherent con-
tice, and may be used to treat primary nictitans diseases, as
junctival surfaces.
well as diseases of the adjacent conjunctiva and coinea. Exci-
sion of the entire nictitans is not recommended except fo1
Fig. 7.28 Rabbit with aberrant conjunctiva. The proliferative conjunctival
Fig. 7.29 Eversion of the nictitating membrane in a Great Dane puppy. With
overgrowth is attached at the limbus but is not adhered to the conjunctiva,
eversion of the leading margin, the posterior or bulbar aspect of the nictitans
and totally surroundls the cornea.
becomes visible.
176
Surgical treatment for hyperplastic lymphoid follicles
The eyelid hair is not usually clipped. After draping, the nic-
titating membrane is protracted by thumb forceps, being care-
ful to avoid the leading margin. A small linear incision through
MM
the bulbar surface ofthe mucosa is performed with small tenot-
omy scissors directly over the involved cartilage ( Fig. 7.32a). By
careful blunt-sharp dissection, the scroll-like section ofthe nic-
10
titating membrane cartilage is removed (Fig. 7.32b). The surgi-
15
cal wound is not usually apposed and is allowed to heal by
20
secondary intention. If apposition by sutures is preferred, a 5-
0 to 7-0 simple continuous suture o1 simple internupted
25
absorbable sutures are placed submucosally and the knots
buried to avoid suture contact with the cornea. The immediate
postoperative appearance is usually a slightly swollen but no1-
mal-appearing nictitating membrane (Fig. 7.32c). Postopera-
tive
 medical  treatment consists  of topical  antibiotics/
Fig. 7.30 Curled section of the hyaline cartilage excised to treat eversion of
the nictitating membrane. Scale in millimeters.
corticosteroids several times a day fo1 5-7 days. Recurrence
after surgical correction is most unlikely.
Surgical treatment for eversion of the nictitating mem-
 Surgical treatment for hyperplastic
brane cartilage consists of local excision of the affected carti-
lymphoid follicles
lage without disturbing the pigmented margin (Fig. 7.31a).
Surgical trauma to the pigmented margin may result in the
loss of pigment to this area. After excision of the 'curled' car-
Limited numbers of lymphoid follicles occur normally on the
tilage, the leading margin of the nictitating membrane
deep o1 bulbar surface of the nictitating membrane. In chronic
should 1e-establish in its noimal position and confoim to
inflammation there may be abundant numbers oflymphoid fol-
the corneal curvature (Fig. 7.31b).
licles on both surfaces (Fig. 7.33). Mechanical debridement of
After general anesthesia, the corneal and conjunctival sur-
excessive lymphoid follicles with dry cotton gauze or a blunt scal-
faces are carefully cleansed with sterile cotton-tipped appli-
pel blade is sometimes indicated if topical antibiotic/corticoste-
cators and the area irrigated with 0.5% povidone-iodine.
roid therapy has been unsuccessful. Use of silver nitrate O1
Fig. 7.31 Results of surgical correction of the
everted nictitating membrane in a dog. (a)
Preoperative appearance of an everted nictitating
 membrane in a German Shepherd dog. (b)
 Immediate postoperative appearance after
 excision of the affected cartilage portion.
A
B
Fig. 7.32 Technique for surgical correction of the everted nictitating membrane. (a) To correct the everted nictitating membrane, the nictitans is protracted
to expose its bulbar (deep) surface. With tenotomy scissors, a small linear incision is made through the mucosa directly over the affected cartilage. (b) By
blunt-sharp scissor dissection, the scrollike section of cartilage is isolated and excised. (c) With the defective area of cartilage removed, the nictitating 
membrane leading margins wil return to normal position.
177
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Fig. 7.35 Protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane in a young 
Miniature Poodle dog. Note the smooth surface of the prolapsed gland.
Hound, Lhasa Apso, and Shih Tzu. The condition occurs
infrequently in young cats and mainly in the Burmese breed.
Fig. 7.33 Excessive lymphoid follicles on the bulbar (deep) surface of the
Although protrusion and prolapse of the nictitating
nictitating membrane.
membrane gland is a relatively common condition in the
dog, the pathogenesis of the condition has not been
copper sulfate crystals to chemically destroy these follicles is not
deteimined.
lecommended because additional conjunctival and/or coineal
 Is the adenitis primary to the development of the gland
enlargement and protrusion or secondary?
After topical anesthesia, the nictitating membrane is p1o-
 Are fascial abnormalities present that attach the cartilage
tracted with thumb forceps to expose the excessive lymphoid
and/or gland to the periorbital fascia and predispose to
follicles on the palpebral and/or bulbar surfaces. With a blunt
the condition?
around a small curved hemostat, the surface is vigorously
Are specific pathogens involved in this adenitis?
With protrusion and enlargement of the third eyelid
rubbed to rupture and remove the follicles (Fig. 7.34).
.Lim-
ited hemorrhage may occur. After scraping of the lymphoid
gland, are there simultaneous changes occurring in the
lacrimal gland?
follicles, topical antibiotics/corticosteroids are usually admi-
nistered three or four times a day for several days.
The occurrence of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in dogs after this
condition would certainly suggest that both the lacrimal and
the nictitans tear glands are eventually involved. As the path-
Surgical procedures for protrusion of the
ogenesis of the protrusion of the nictitating membrane
gland of the nictitating membrane
gland is revealed, medical and/o1 surgical treatment strate-
or 'cherry eye'
gies may become further refined.
Protrusion of the superficial gland of the nictitating mem-
Protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane is not
brane results from hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the gland
infrequent in dogs and most affected animals are less than
sufficient to extend beyond the leading margin of the nicti-
1 year of age (Fig. 7.35). Although usually presented with
tans (Fig. 7.36). Secondary epiphora, conjunctivitis, an obvi
a unilateral protrusion of the nictitans gland, the condition
ous mass at the medial canthus, and local irritation are the
 s  a  aa  
usual presenting clinical signs (Fig. 7.37). Microscopic
examination of affected glands usually reveals dacryoadeni-
English Bulldog, Beagle, Pekingese, Boston Terrier, Basset 
tis, but detailed studies and isolates for viral and other
pathogens have not been reported.
Fig. 7.36 Protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane in a Boston
Fig. 7.34 To remove most of the lymphoid follicles, carefully scrape the area
Terrier dog as viewed from its posterior surface. Part of the swollen gland 
with a dull Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade.
extends from the base of the nictitans.
178
Surgical procedures for protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane or 'chery eye'
Box 7.2  Surgical procedures for replacement of the canine
prolapsed gland of the nictitating membrane
 Posterior nictitans anchoring or tacking approach
To ventral oblique muscle (Albert, Garrett, whitley)
- To ventral equatorial sclera (Gross)
- To ventral periorbital fascia (Blogg)
Anterior nictitans anchoring or tacking approach
- To ventral periorbital rim (Kaswan and Martin)
Intranictitans anchoring of glands (Plummer et al)
 Imbrication or mucosa envelope: scarification and cover with 
adjacent conjunctival mucosa (Moore)
 Envelope or mucosa pocket: cover with adjacent mucosa
(Morgan/Moore)
Fig. 7.37 Chronic protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane
in a mixed breed dog. Note the lymphoid follicles on the surface of the
direct damage to the ducts of the third eyelid gland, and
swollen gland.
 e r a  i   
excretory ducts of the nictitans gland exit the gland and
Topical antibiotics or antibiotic/corticosteroid therapy
emerge in the middle section of the bulbar mucosa surface.
may be used to treat early and mild cases. Reduction in
Hence, any surgical technique to treat this condition
the local inflammation and edema of the conjunctiva may
should have three goals: 1) adequately replace the prolapsed
lesult in the gland returning to its normal size and position.
gland behind the nictitans leading margin; 2) result in no
Unfortunately, topical medical treatment is often unsuccess-
- a   sl s
ful, and surgical treatment of the prolapsed gland of the nic-
ments; and 3) produce no damage o1 loss of glandula1 tis-
titans is necessary.
sues including the excretory ducts. One method may not
 The standard procedure for surgical treatment of the pro-
achieve all of these goals equally nor be effective in treating
lapsed third eyelid gland prio1 to about 1980 was conserva-
all degrees of third eyelid gland protrusion: those proce-
tive excision of the prolapsed portion of the gland to
dures that effect anchoring the nictitans cartilage more
preserve as much as possible of this important tear source.
deeply may be more successful fo1 the more extensive and
As indicated earlier, the gland of the nictitating membrane
chronic gland prolapses; the pocket methods may be more
in both the dog and cat provides about 25-40% of the total
effective in puppies and for mild protrusions of the third
tears. Although protrusion of the nictitating membrane
eyelid gland.
gland and keratoconjunctivitis sicca occur in many breeds
The surgical procedures will be divided based on entry to
of dogs, the interrelationships of these two conditions is
the prolapsed nictitans gland: 1) from the posterior or bul-
poorly understood. One study involving 33 dogs with p10-
bar surface of the nictitans to anchor the cartilage base to
trusion of the third eyelid gland fo1 at least 2 years that
the ventral epibulbar fascia, ventral equatorial sclera, or ven-
  s a yo (ed) sxa r u 
tral oblique muscle; 2) from the anterior o1 palpebral sul-
surgical replacement, suggested that keratoconjunctivitis
face of the nictitans to anchor the nictitans cartilage to the
Jo uisixa Aq paiea saaa al jo ot un padonaap eis
periosteum of the orbital rim; 3) intranictitans anchoring
the gland, in 43% of the eyes with prolapsed glands left
01 tacking of the gland; and 4) partial-to-complete covering
untreated, and in 14% of the eyes treated with surgical
of the prolapsed gland with adjacent conjunctival mucosa
replacement of the gland.
(pocket and imbrication methods).
In the most fequently affected breeds, i.e., American
 Fo1 all of these surgical procedures, surgical preparation is
Cocker Spaniel, Lhasa Apso, and English Bulldog, kerato-
limited. After the onset of general anesthesia, the eyelid hair
conjunctivitis sicca developed in 47.3% of all affected eyes:
is not usually clipped, but thoroughly cleansed with surgical
59% of eyes treated by gland excision, 17% of eyes treated
soap and irrigated with sterile saline. The conjunctival and
with gland replacement, and 75% of eyes with the nictitans
corneal surfaces are cleansed with sterile cotton-tipped
gland left prolapsed.
applicatois to remove any exudates and debris, and rinsed
 Several procedures have been developed to treat protru-
with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution. A small wie eyelid
sion of the nictitating membrane and still retain this tear
 speculum is placed to retract the eyelids.
gland (Box 7.2). These methods may be arbitrarily divided
into those that retract or anchor the prolapsed gland via its
 Posterior (bulbar) nictitans
cartilage, and those that cover (envelope o1 imbrication)
anchoring approach
the prolapsed gland with adjacent mucosa to force it into
a noimal position. Those methods that attempt to anchor
For the posterior nictitans anchoring approach, the posterio1
the cartilage and retract the prolapsed gland prevent normal
conjunctival fornix behind the nictitating membrane is
movements and protraction of the nictitating membrane.
incised, an anchor suture is positioned into the deeper fas-
The surgical procedures that incise the bulbar (or deep
cial o1 ocular tissues, and the gland is retracted by suture.
aspects) of the nictitating membrane surface and cover the
The anchoring suture retracts the prolapsed gland into posi-
prolapsed gland with adjacent conjunctival mucosa risk
 s   sd  
179
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
Recent studies indicate that the posterior surface of the nic-
aspects of the incision are exposed to reveal the ventral sclera
titans gland contains ductules from the underlying secretary
close to the equato1 of the globe, the ventral oblique muscle,
gland; therefore, to maintain tear secretion, the nictitans
 Or strong periorbital fascia (Fig. 7.38c). A 4-0 monofilament
gland and its posterior surface should not be separated.
 nylon (or other non-absorbable) suture with a cutting needle
Also, the posterior methods are more difficult to perform
is placed through the dorsal portion of the gland and then
than the anterior approach, and the anchoring suture is
6- 10 mm into the peribulbar area to ancho1 to the ventrome-
more likely to retract from the orbital or globe base. As a
dial equato1, periorbital fascia, or the ventral oblique muscle
Tesult, the anterior methods are more popular.
(Fig. 7.38d). The more extensive the nictitans gland protru-
In the anchoring procedures by Blogg. Gross, and others,
sion, the deeper the site fo1 the anchoring suture. As the
sdanon qunq  pid si auqu huiu a
suture is tied, the gland should return to its approximate no1-
to expose its deep or bulbar surface and the prolapsed
mal position (Fig. 7.38e). The conjunctival mucosa incision
gland (Fig. 7.38a). By Bard-Parker No. 15 scalpel o1 BeaveI
is apposed with a 5-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable
No. 6400 microsurgical blade, an incision is made starting
suture (Fig. 7.38f.g).
at the limbus and extending to the posterior aspects of the
 A modification of this procedure reduces the possibility of
prolapsed gland (Fig. 7.38b). The gland is thoroughly sepa-
disturbing the gland and its posterior ductules, but is more
rated from its conjunctival and periorbital fascial attach-
difficult. The initial incision extends from the ventromedial
ments by blunt-tipped tenotomy scissors. The globe is then
limbus to the posterior aspects of the gland, and then
rotated by thumb forceps to expose the bulba1 conjunctival
is continued to encircle  the gland's posterior  surface
fornix. By blunt dissection with tenotomy scissors, the deeper
(Fig. 7.39a). Using tenotomy scissors, the gland is isolated
A
B
C
?
E
B
C
二
?
Fig. 7.38 Posterior nictitans anchoring method for treating gland protrusion. (a) The bulbar surface of the nictitans is exposed to reveal the extent of the
pue xiuoy leajounjuon leynuaaoipaw aun on puejb aun jo louaasod wouy apelg lenibunsounjw 0otg on laneag e Aq pasou! 5! esosnw aul (q) asdeloud puejb
then to the limbus. Unfortunately, this may damage the majority of the nictitans gland's ducts. (c) The basal portion of the gland and the nictitans cartilage are
carefully separated from their fascial attachments by scissor dissection. By blunt dissection with tenotomy scissors, the anchor site (the ventral sclera, ventral
oblique muscle or periorbital fascia) is isolated. (d) A 4-0 green monofilament nylon suture with a reverse-cutting needle is passed through the prolapsed
portion of the gland and the anchor site. (e) As the suture is tightened and tied, the gland should return to its original position. (f The conjunctival mucosa
(piaa (v) :Auabuns panalduwoo aua jo uopas-ssoup (6) aoenuos jeauios zuanaid on palunq aue siouy aul aunans snonupuos aldwis 0-g o 0-s e yw pasodde s!
(B) nictitans cartilage; (C) nictitans' tear gland; (D) orbital bony rim; (E) deep anchor of the green non-absorbable suture.
180
Surgical procedures for protrusion of the gland of the nictitating membrane or 'cherry eye
A
B
D
Fig. 7.39 A modification of the posterior anchoring procedure attempts to retain as much of the prolapsed gland posterior mucosa and secretory ductules as
possible. Because of the limited surgical exposune, large prolapses may not be candidates for this procedure. (a) The initial conjunctival incision by a Bard-
Parker No. 15 scalpel blade extends from the ventromedial limbus to encircle the prolapsed gland. (b) The fascial attachments beneath the gland that attach
to the stem of the nictitans cartilage are carefully transected by blunt scissor dissection. The ventral sclera, periorbital fascia or the ventral oblique muscles are
also isolated. (c) A 4-0 green monofilament nylon suture with a cutting needle is used to encircle the gland and its deep orbit anchor. (d) As the suture is tied,
aneuns lesosnwu jouansod puelb suennniu aun yai pasojp 5! punon jenpounjuos aul (a) xiuuoy suennou jouansod ayp uiuai daap on zyils pinoys puejb aug
within its center with several 5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. The knots of these sutures should not touch the cornea.
and the deeper ventral sclera exposed (Fig. 7.39b). A 4-0
retum to its normal position behind the leading margin
monofilament nylon suture with a cutting needle is carefully
(Fig. 7.40e). The conjunctival wound is apposed with a 5-0
pue pue pasdeioid aul jo sioadse esop au ui pauoisod
to 6-0 simple continuous suture (Fig. 7.40f.g).
then into the ventromedial equator, periorbital fascia, O1
ventral oblique muscle (Fig. 7.39c). As the knot is tied, the
gland is positioned deep in the posterior conjunctival fornix
Intranictitans tacking procedure
(Fig. 7.39d). The conjunctival wound is apposed with the
This new procedure, developed by the Florida veterinary
prolapsed gland and its mucosa in its center with several
ophthalmologists, utilizes the suture anchoring technique
5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 7.39e).
around the entire nictitans tear glands, but limits the surgery
The knots should not touch the corneal surface.
(essentially placement of a single suture) to only the nictitans.
Imperative in this procedure is the base of the nictitans cartilage
Anterior nictitans anchoring approach
when the single suture enters and exits the nictitans, thereby
The anterior nictitans anchoring technique differs from the
providing an excellent strong base to anchor to the gland. This
suture must pierce and not encircle the shaft of the nictitans
nix in front of the nictitans o1 the medial lower eyelid. The
cartilage during its insertion and egress to avoid the small blood
suture is still embedded beneath the conjunctival mucosa
vessels which parallel the shaft's sides. This procedure involves
Over the nictitans gland. If the anchoring point is more ante-
no conjunctival mucosal incisions, and does not restrict
lio1 of the culrent nictitans base, as the suture to retract the
nictitans movements postoperatively.
gland is tightened the nictitans may be displaced more
A 4-0 nylon suture with a three-eighths circle 13 mm
anteriorly.
leveise P-3 cutting needle is passed from the anterior surface
In this approach, the nictitans is protracted by forceps to
of the third eyelid through the base of the cartilage to the pos-
expose its palpebral surface and the palpebral conjunctival
terior aspect and tunneled circumferentially beneath the con-
foinix at its base. A ventral linear incision of the anterio1
junctiva over and around the prolapsed nictitans gland. The
mucosa of the nictitans is performed with small tenotomy
suture is then passed back through the base of the cartilage
scissors (Fig. 7.40a). A 3-0 to 4-0 monofilament nylon suture
shaft to the anteior surface of the nictitans. It is gradually
is carefilly placed in the periosteum of the ventromedial
tightened to compress the prolapsed gland into its noimal
orbital rim and then directed dorsally to exit the top of the pro-
position and tied with a surgeon's knot (Fig. 7.41).
lapsed nictitans gland (Fig. 7.40b). The suture is reintroduced
into its exit hole and directed to the opposite side of the top of
Conjunctival mucosa envelope procedure
the prolapsed gland (Fig. 7.40c). The suture is then redirected
into its second exit hole to emerge in the incision (Fig. 7.40d).
The conjunctival mucosa may be used to cover the pro-
As the suture is tied, the prolapsed gland should gradually
lapsed nictitans gland permanently and apply pressure to
181
A
B
D
F
B
Fig. 7.40 Anterior nictitans anchoring (or tacking) technique. (a) The nictitans is protracted by thumb forceps to expose its palpebral (anterior) surface and
the conjunctival fornix. A linear incision of the conjunctival mucosa is performed by small tenotomy scissors. (b) A 3-0 to 4-0 green monofilament nylon suture
with a reverse-cutting needle is secured first in the periosteum of the ventromedial orbital rim and then directed dorsally to exit at the top of the gland. (c)
Through the same suture hole, the needle is reinserted to exit at the opposite side of the gland. (d) The suture is then reinserted again to exit in the incision.
(e) As the suture is tightened and tied, the prolapsed gland should return to its original position. (f) The conjunctival mucosal wound is apposed with a 5-0 to
6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. (g) As viewed in cross-section, the suture is secured in the distal position of the prolapsed nictitating membrane
buienu aua o puelb pasdeoud (a) sueu aua jo abees (v) paa amon wu eniquo ienuan aua jo wunansouad aua no eiase, leiguouad jeauan pue puelb
membrane (C), the ventral orbital bony rim (D), and the deep anchor of the nylon suture (E).
maintain the gland protrusion behind the leading margin of
veterinary ophthalmologists use this technique for all nictitans
the nictitating membrane. The imbrication or envelope
gland prolapses. In this procedure, the adjacent conjunctiva is
a r ssn s q n pai q s o
incised into two 120-140° sections and apposed by sutures
puppies (10-12 weeks old) and for acutely prolapsed nictitans
over the prolapsed gland. The open ends of the two conjuncti-
glands that are not large. The mucosa ovel the prolapsed
val flaps allow the nictitans gland's tears to continue to exit
gland is lightly scanified with a Bard-Parker No. 15 scalpel
 onto the corneoconjunctival surfaces
01 Beave1 No. 6700 mic1osurgical blade (Fig. 7.42a). The mo1e
The nictitating membrane is protracted by thumb forceps
extensive the scarification, the greater the permanent adhe-
to 1eveal the bulbar surface and the prolapsed gland
sions that develop postoperatively. With a 6-0 to 7-0 absorb-
(Fig. 7.43a). With the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade,
able suture, two 4 mm bites on the ventral aspects of the
the mucosa above (about 2-3 mm from the leading margin)
gland and a larger 6-8 mm bite on the dorsal side of the pro-
and below (next to the prolapsed gland and toward the bul-
lapsed gland is performed (Fig. 7.42b). As the suture is tied, a
ba1 conjunctival fornix fo1 6-10 mm) the prolapsed gland is
incised for about 1 cm (120-140°). The ends of the two
the conjunctival mucosa is pulled over the prolapsed gland.
incisions should not connect to each other (Fig. 7.43b).
The conjunctival mucosa overlying the prolapsed gland is
left undisturbed. After careful dissection of the submucosa
Conjunctival mucosa pocket procedure
layer about both incisions by tenotomy o1 Steven's scissors,
The conjunctival pocket method is recommended for older
dogs and for chronic prolapses of the nictitans gland. Some
ple continuous absorbable suture (Fig. 7.43c). If the tension
182
Surgical procedure
(A)
?
C
D
E
F
bunan 5-d asiaaau wuw el apiio syauaia-aaua e ym aunans uou uaan o- aul (e) puelh pasdelod suennnju ioy anbiuupan buynen sueniueaul lte dbis
aney jouasod ayn uo puej6 aya punoue Aengounjuosqns pajauuna 5! aunans aul (g) plaka puya aun jo abeen aya jo aseg aua ybnouua paneld asiy 5! aipaau
of the nictitans. The needle must exit and re-enter the subconjunctival space at each corner for proper placement of the suture around the gland. (c) With the
same suture exit and re-entry sites, no suture is exposed to irritate the corneal surface. (d) with the suture around the gland, the suture is passed back through
the nictitans cartilage to its anterior surface. (e) The two ends of the suture
 carefully tightened and tied to achieve the desired reduction of the prolapsed
gland. (f Side view of the prolapsed gland with its anchoring suture through the nictitans cartilage.
(Reproduced withn permission from Piummer CE. Kallberg ME, Gelatt KIN et al 2008 intranirtitans
s tacking for repiarement of proiapsed giand of the third eyelid of dogs. Veterinary
Qphthalmmoiogy 77:228233.)
rpue aiel e jo asnenaq aaisuaia sieadde aruns aui uo
 Postoperative treatment and complications
prolapse, 4-0 to 5-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
ale recommended. The knots are carefully buried to avoid
Postoperative therapy after these procedures to reposition
corneal contact. Both ends of the incisions are left open to
the gland of the nictitating membrane usually consists of
accommodate continued tear production by the nictitans
topical antibiotics o1 antibiotics/corticosteroids three to fou1
gland (Fig. 7.43d,e).
times daily until the prolapsed gland has reduced to about
noimal size, and supplemented fo1 several days with an
 Oral non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, such as carprofen
(4 mg/kg PO q24h; Rimadyl; Pfize1 Animal Health, Exton,
PA), and an E-collar or other restraint device. The surgical
procedures that anchor the prolapsed nictitans gland to the
Ietrobulbar sites are more difficult because of the more lim-
ited exposure, and may exhibit more lid o1 conjunctival
swelling. With prolapsed glands that are chronic and large.
the swelling within the gland may require several weeks to
 approximate normalcy.
Long-term postoperative problems associated with the
(A
B
anterior and posterio1 ancho1 methods include entropion,
lestriction of movements by the nictitans, and re-prolapse
Fig. 7.42 The conjunctival mucosa envelope procedure is used to treat
if suture failure occurs or the anchor site is inadequate.
prolapsed nictitating membrane glands in young puppies. (a) The mucosa 
Anchoring to the anterior periosteum has been associated
over the gland protrusion is lightly scarified by scraping with the Bard-Parker
No. 15 scalpel or Beaver No. 6700 microsurgical blade. (b) With a 6-0 to 7-
with a mild anterior displacement of the nictitans base.
0 absorbable suture, two 4 mm bites of mucosa ventral of the gland and a
Long-term postoperative complications after the envelope
single 6-8 mm bite anterior to the gland are used to appose the mucosa.
and pocket procedures avoid suture and/or wound failure
183
A
?
D
Jeging si! leanal on sdanoy qwnun Aq panoenoud s! suennsiu ayl (e) uoisnuoud puejb sueniu zeaun on aunpaooud nayood esosnw leapounjuo et'z *big
(deep) surface and the affected gland. (b) Two semicircular (~140-160°) mucosal incisions are performed with the Bard-Parker No. 15 or Beaver No. 64 blade.
(c) After separation from the submucosa, the two edges of the mucosa are pulled over the gland and apposed with a 5-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable
e jo mala ageladonsod aneipawwl (a) qixa ueo spuejh suennoju aua wouy suogaunas (smoue aas) uado esosnw (eaigounjuon aun jo spua ynog yri (p) ainans
'uado ane aypod, aua jo spua yrog zeun pue aungns snonuguos leuuan aua anon aunpanoud zaypod jesosnw leagounjuos yaim zuaged
when the prolapsed glands are very large, there is limited
Surgical procedures for prominent/
distortion and displacement of the nictitans base, and there
protruded nictitans
are limited-to-no movement restrictions that are associated
with the anchoring methods. Recurrence of gland prolapse
after either of these two groups of procedures does not pre-
Prominent and protruding nictitating membranes are infre-
clude an additional technique several weeks later to effect
quent in small animals, and are usually secondary to other
resolution.
orbital, ophthalmic, and systemic diseases. However, occa-
 [n the most recent report, using the intranictitans tacking
sionally in the large and giant bieeds of dogs, bilateral
procedure, all prolapsed glands returned to noimalcy in 14
 of 15 eyes. This technique, once mastered, requires little
(Fig. 7.44). [n some of these animals, the defect appears
more obvious by the absence of pigmentation of the nicti-
time as no tissue incisions are required
The basic histopathology of these prolapsed nictitans
tans leading margins. Surgical reduction of the overall
glands is poorly understood; however, many biopsies indi-
size of the nictitans can be performed to not affect tear fo1-
  -   's  
mation by the nictitans gland, maintain the integrity of
inflammation. The condition of the fellow tear gland in
the medial conjunctival fornix, and re-establish noimal-
the same eye, the lacrimal gland, is unknown at this date.
appearing nictitating membranes.
Dogs with prolapse of the nictitans gland and treated by
 Removal of just the leading margins of the nictitans is not
these surgical procedures, only medically, or no therapy.
recommended as the shape and the appearance of the
are predisposed to keratoconjunctivitis sicca months to years
later. In the study involving 33 dogs of all breeds with pro-
trusion of the third eyelid glands for at least 2 years previ-
ously, keratoconjunctivitis sicca developed in 48% of the
eyes treated by excision of the gland, in 43% of the eyes with
prolapsed glands and no therapy, and in 14% of the eyes
treated with these techniques to replace the gland.
As a result, continued postoperative clinical monitoring of
these dogs with periodic Schirmer tear tests is recommended
as the development of keratoconjunctivitis sicca months-to-
years after prolapse of the nictitans gland is significantly
higher than in the general canine population (5.6% in dogs
664.102.
without gland prolapse).
Fig. 7.44 Bilateral prominent nictitating membranes in a 2-year-old dog.
184
 Nictitating membrane flaps
A
B
Fig. 7.45 Surgical reduction of protracted nictitating membrane. (a) An
enlarged nictitans can be reduced by a full-thickness excision of a section
Fig. 7.47 In this cat with focal corneal edema, a nictitating membrane flap
just behind the leading margin. The dotted lines are the nictitans cartilage.
can provide temporary support.
(b) After the ful-thickness excision, the nictitans posterior and anterior
surfaces are apposed with a submucosa 5-0 to 6-0 simple continuous
absorbable suture and a mucosa 5-0 to 6-0 simple continuous absorbable
suture, respectively.
structures are markedly altered. Total 1emoval of the nictitat-
ing membrane will result in medial canthal disfigurement,
and the development of a chronic conjunctivitis or kerato-
conjunctivitis because of the loss of the nictitans tear gland,
and an excessively large medial conjunctival fornix.
The recommended procedure to reduce the overall size of
the nictitating membrane is achieved by full-thickness exci-
sion of the nictitans just below the leading margin but
Fig. 7.48 The painful vesicles that can form with corneal endothelial
above the thicker portion of the cartilage that surrounds
dystrophy can be treated temporarily with a nictitating membrane flap.
the tear gland (Fig. 7.45a). Part of the upper stem of the nic-
titans cartilage is removed to accommodate the reduction.
replaced the nictitating membrane flap for the surgical treat-
Wound closure consists of two layers of simple continuous
absorbable sutures involving the deeper o1 bulbar submu-
and coineal perforations with iris prolapse.
cosa, and the anterior o1 palpebral submucosa and mucosa
The nictitating membrane flap, used to cover the corneal sur-
(Fig. 7.45b).
face, provides a number of benefits. The corneal surface is
warmed by the flap and the increased temperature promotes
higher cellular metabolic rates. The bulbar nictitans surface is
Nictitating membrane flaps
nich with lymphoid follidles; scarification will provide serum,
inflammatory cells, fibroblasts, and blood directly to the cor-
nea. The nictitans flap obstructs light entering the eye and pro-
treatment of canine and feline coineal diseases, and is rela-
motes mydniasis. The flap reduces the evaporation of tears from
       
the corneal surface. It provides support to a weakened coinea
The nictitating membrane flap can be quickly performed
and helps prevent distortion of the central coinea. The flap also
with a minimum of ophthalmic instrumentation. The nicti-
protects the healing corneal epithelium from the trauma asso-
tating membrane is used as a flap to strengthen a weakened
ciated with normal eyelid movements.
coinea, but generally not to graft submucosa or mucosa to co1-
neal defects. Nictitating membrane flaps are generally indi-
Nictitating membrane flap-conjunctival fornix
cated fo1 neuroparalytic and neurotropic keratitis, temporary
exposure keratitis, corneal erosions (Fig. 7.46), superficial cor-
The nictitating membrane flap to cover the coinea is secured
neal ulcers, after corneal laceration repair (Fig. 7.47), acute
to either the dorsolateral conjunctival fornix o1 the dorsolat-
keratoconjunctivitis sicca, and for coineal vesicles associated
eral episclera. When secured to the conjunctival fornix, extra
with coineal edema ( Fig. 7.48). Conjunctival grafts have largely
long sutures may be used that permit occasional release to
examine and treat the protected cornea. The conjunctival
foinix method does not accommodate concurrent eye move-
ments as with the episcleral technique. In the episcleral
method, the securing sutures must be carefully placed and
should not penetrate the sclera which may produce intraoc.
ular hemorrhage.
 For nictitating membrane flaps, surgical preparation is
usually minimal. The eyelids are clipped and carefully
dleaned with surgical soap and water for the conjunctival
foinix procedure. The coineal and conjunctival surfaces are
fully cleansed with sterile cotton-tipped  applicators to
e Ag pansise ag uen uoisoua leauion zuaunnau e jo bueay aul 9tz dii
remove all debris and exudates. Both coineal and conjuncti-
temporary nictitating membrane flap.
val surfaces are rinsed with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution.
185
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
A
B
D
ay pue anoqe paneld s! sdaooy qwnun ayn jo dn auo (e) xiuioy lengounjuos jelanejosiop aun on Aueiodwan aueyqwaw bunennsju ayn buunnas bte *big
other tip below the eyelid margin. The forceps tips, inserted as far as possible, indicate the position of the conjunctival fornix (arrowed) and where the sutures
should traverse the eyelid. (b) The first 2-0 to 3-0 non-absorbable suture is placed through the eyelid stent (a rubber band is illustrated), through the eyelid,
and into the conjuncival fornix. The needle and suture are then extended to the dorsal surface of the leading edge of the nictitating membrane to penetrate
its full thickness. (c) At least two horizontal mattress sutures are pre-placed, and the part of both sutures that penetrates the leading edge of the nictitating
membrane should incorporate the upper stem of the nictitans cartilage. (d) After placement of both sutures, they are tightened to secure the nictitans in 
the dorsolateral conjunctival fornix. Leaving the suture ends long permits occasional adjustments and lowering of the flap for inspection and medication of
the eye.
Securing the nictitating membrane to the dorsolateral con-
to encircle the upper stem of the T-shaped nictitans hyaline
junctival fornix is the most frequent and easiest procedure
cartilage at a point one-half to one-fourth of the distance
using two to four interrupted mattress sutures. Old intrave-
between the leading margin and its base (Fig. 7.50a). The
nous tubing, buttons, suture foam or holders, or rubber
nictitans bulbar surface is not penetrated to avoid suture
band stents can be used on the eyelid surface to distribute
contact with the cornea. Both sutures are then passed
suture tension and prevent eyelid necrosis. All sutures must
through the dorsolateral conjunctival fornix and a rubber
be pre-placed to ensure proper placement and tied once all
band or button stent. The nictitans is protracted until its
are positioned.
leading margin is at the limbus or within the conjunctival
The nictitating membrane is protracted by thumb forceps
foinix, but not so tight that compression or distortion
and its doisolateral movement ascertained. The extent of
occurs (Fig. 7.50b).
the dorsolateral conjunctival fornix is determined by thumb
Nictitating membrane flap - episcleral fixation
(Fig. 7.49a). Two to four 2-0 to 3-0 non-absorbable sutures
are carefully pre-positioned through the dorsolateral eyelid
The nictitating membrane flap can also be secured to the
and the conjunctival foinix and the leading margin of the
dorsolateral episclera. This procedure allows simultaneous
nictitans (Fig. 7.49b). The sutures must traveise the outer
eye and nictitans movements, but is more difficult to
portion of the leading margin to reduce its eversion, and
part of at least two sutures are placed through the upper
stem of the T-shaped hyaline cartilage for maximal holding
ability (Fig. 7.49c). After all sutures are pre-placed, they are
carefully tightened and tied (Fig. 7.49d). Often the suture
d n i pio d   i  s
and medicate the eye.
Nictitating membrane flap - Blogg
and Helper modification
A
B
Similar to a modification of the technique reported in a
large number of cattle in the 1970s, Blogg and Helper
Fig. 7.50 Helper-Blogg modification of the nictitating membrane flap. (a) A
describe a method that uses a single suture to secure the nic-
double-armed, single suture is used to encircle the middle portion of the
stem of the T-shaped nictitans cartilage. (b) Both ends of the suture are
titans to the dorsolateral conjunctival foinix in small ani-
continued to the dorsolateral conjunctival fornix and upper eyelid. A section
mals. A 2-0 double-armed suture is passed through the
of old intravenous tubing or rubber band stent helps distribute the suture
palpebral (or anterior) surface of the nictitating membrane
pressure over a larger area of the eyelids.
186
Partial/complete excision of the nictitans
Partial/complete excision of the nictitans
Partial-to-complete excision of the nictitating membrane is
Ieserved for advanced and invasive neoplasia in small ani-
mals. The most common reported nictitating membrane
neoplasm in the dog is the adenocarcinoma (Fig. 7.52).
In the cat, the most frequent nictitans neoplasm is the squa-
mous cell carcinoma. Both neoplasms are locally invasive.
A
B
occur most frequently in older animals, and have postoper-
aun on painnas ag osje uen dey auegwaw bunennsu aul ls'z dbi
ative 1ecurrence 1ates as high as 70%. Nictitating membrane
dorsolateral episclera and conjunctiva. (a) Two to four 1-0 to 2-0 interrupted 
neoplasms often extend both outward and inward through
mattress non-absorbable sutures are pre-placed full thickness behind the
the periorbital fascia to gain entry into the anterior orbit.
leading margin of the nictitating membrane and firmly in the dorsolateral
episclera and bulbar conjunctiva. (b) After all sutures are positioned, they are
fo1 nictitating membrane neoplasms to thoroughly evaluate
tightened and tied.
the potential surgical site.
The surgical procedure for excision of the nictitating mem-
brane with advanced neoplasia must occasionally be con-
verted during surgery into an exenteration. For complete
perform. The "holding power of the episclera and dorsolat-
excision of the nictitating membrane, the eyelid hair is
eral conjunctiva are more limited, and penetration of the
clipped, and cleaned with surgical soap. The conjunctival
sclera during suture placement may cause intraocular
surfaces, foinices, and the coineal surfaces are cleaned with
hemorrhage.
 sterile cotton-tipped applicators, and all debris and exudates
The site of the dorsolateral conjunctiva and episcleral fixa
Iemoved. The corneal and conjunctival surfaces are ilrigated
tion to accommodate the sutures emerging from the nicti-
with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, and then rinsed with
tans is about 2-4 mm from the limbus. Two to four 1-0 to
sterile saline. After placement of a small wire eyelid specu-
2-0 simple mattress non-absorbable sutures are pre-placed
lum, the nictitans is protracted and inspected carefully.
through the nictitating membrane and the dorsolateral
Jo aseq a ie paeid aie aie ssu pan om
bulbar conjunctiva and episclera (Fig. 7.51a). At least one
the nictitans to slightly overlap to facilitate excision and to
suture should be secured to the stem portion of the T-shaped
provide hemostasis. With Metzenbaum scissors, the nicti
nictitans cartilage. After pre-placement of all sutures, they are
tans is excised, including the entire cartilage and gland
tightened and tied (Fig. 7.5 1b).
(Fig. 7.53a) The adjacent mucosa on each side of the hemo-
Adequate suture placement in the dorsolateral bulbar con-
stats is apposed with a 2-0 to 4-0 simple continuous absorb-
junctiva, episclera, and Tenon's capsule is critical to the
able suture (Fig. 7.53b). When a continuous suture is used,
the hemostats are left in place when the suture is being posi-
tea1 from the area; sutures placed too deep may penetrate
the sclera and produce intraocular hemorrhage.
tioned. Once the suture is placed, the hemostats are slowly
released and retracted from the incision. The suture is then
tightened and its ends tied. An alteinative method does
Postoperative management and complications
 The nictitating membrane flaps are usually left in position
section by small tenotomy scissors; hemostasis is main-
tained by cautery and vessel ligation.
fo1 10-14 days. An E-collar 01 other 1estraint device is
Fo1 partial excision of the third eyelid, its outer portion
Iecommended to prevent the animal damaging the eye and
surgical site. Postoperative medications are directed at the
may be excised immediately above the base of the T-shaped
underlying corneal disease, and usually include topical anti-
biotics and mydriatics. The thick and vascular nictitans
probably impairs the delivery of many medications to the
coineal suiface. As a result, systemic medications are often
added to those administered topically.
Complications associated with nictitating membrane flaps
include eyelid necrosis related to the sutures, corneal inrita-
tion from suture contact, membrane cartilage defoimation,
and protrusion for several days after 1elease. Often eyelid
swelling is present preoperatively and with the conjunctival
fornix technique will occur postoperatively. The coirect
position of the nictitans flap is critical to its success with
all of these techniques. If suture contact occurs with the coI-
nea, the patient will demonstrate considerable pain and
blepharospasm. Periodic postoperative examinations are
Iecommended to check the position of the flap daily o1
every other day. With long sutures, the position of the nicti-
 Fig. 7.52 Adenocarcinoma of the nictitating membrane gland in a 10-year
tans flap can be adjusted to accommodate changes in the
old American Cocker Spaniel. Complete excision of the nictitating
corneal disease and the eyelids.
membrane at its base is recommended for this type of neoplasm.
187
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
protect a weakened coinea, but are not usually a source of
tissues for the cornea. Nictitating flaps in large animals are
Iecommended for superficial corneal diseases including co1-
neal erosions, neuroparalytic and neurotropic keratitis, tem-
porary exposure keratitis, and superficial corneal ulcers, and
to reinforce a bulbar conjunctival graft.
In one study, nictitating membrane flaps were used as
an alternative to complete temporary tarsorrhaphies fo1
the treatment of advanced infectious keratoconjunctivitis
B
and ulcerative keratitis in 1845 cattle, with 96% success
Fig. 7.53 Removing the entire nictitating membrane. (a) Two curved
(Anderson et al). This same technique can also be used for
hemostats or Carmaltforceps are positioned and slightly overlapped at the base
small animals as reported by Blogg and Helper (1989; see
of the nictitating membrane, which is then excised with Metzenbaum scissors.
earlier section for a description of the technique).
 aldwis 0 on 0-z e 4zim pasodde ane sa6pa esosnw (eAiounluos ayl (9)
[n range beef cattle, a 'single catch' is often a limitation
continuous absorbable suture that is pre-placed loosely with the forceps in
to optimal therapy: as a result, the eye examination, adminis-
place. As the forceps is carefully removed, the sutures are tightened.
tering topical, subconjunctival or systemic antibiotics, and
nictitating flap surgery is performed with the animal
cartilage and the gland of the nictitans. This method pie-
lestrained in a catch chute. Absorbable sutures are preferred
serves tea1 foimation and the reduced medial lacrimal lake,
as, once the cow is released, re-examination and sutue
but results in some disfigurement with the loss of the lead-
removal are unlikely.
d on asode aa ou sa eso a  
After a subcutaneous ring block of both eyelids and the
exposure of the cartilage with a 5-0 to 6-0 simple continu-
base of the nictitans, the nictitating flap is perfoimed using
ous absorbable suture.
a single mattress 0 chromic gut suture (non-absorbable can
 Postoperative management after excision of the nictitating
 also be used) with a slightly curved cutting needle. The needle
membrane consists of topical antibiotics/corticosteroids,
is directed through the dorsolateral upper lid and into the
and systemic antibiotics administered for 7-10 days. With the
conjunctival fornix. After exiting the lid, the needle is placed
loss of the nictitans, tear formation should be carefully moni-
through the palpebral surface of the nictitans and under
01
tored and, if signs of keratoconjunctivitis sicca begin to appear,
circumventing the stem of its cartilage, just beneath its exten-
topical cyclosporine (2% solution twice daily) o1 oral piloca1-
sions. The suture is again positioned through the upper
pine (2% solution, two drops well mixed in the food twice
-od pan aaas e aa iddn pue xy ieuno
daily fo1 a 15 kg dog: reduce the dose fo1 smaller animals)
o a  s      
initiated. Because of an enlarged lacrimal lake in the medial
lateral bulbar conjunctiva. With an absorbable suture, the
canthus created by the loss of the nictitans, chronic conjuncti-
nictitans flap will remain in position for 7-14 days.
vitis may develop. Intermittent administration of topical anti-
Partial-to-complete excision of the nictitans is performed
biotics/corticosteroids may be necessary indefinitely.
not infrequently in large animals. Squamous cell carcinomas
may occur in both hoises and cattle, and can expand into
Adaptations in large animals
sizeable masses, which can readily invade the deeper medial
orbit. Small masses which can be manually elevated above
and special species
the subcutaneous tissues may be excised; often the surgical
wound is not apposed by sutures. Larger masses which
 Nictitating membrane flaps provide more support to the dis-
invade the nictitans cartilage and gland result in total exci-
eased coinea than the temporary complete tarsorrhaphy in
sion of the nictitans using the same procedure as in small
horses. Nictitating membrane flaps are used to cover and
animals.
 Further reading
Small animals: conjunctiva
Bussieres M, Krohne SG, Siles J. Townsend wM:(
Gundersen T: Conjunctival flaps in the
Barros PSM. Safatle AMV. Malerba TA,
The use of porcine small intestinal
 treatment of corneal diseases with reference
 Burnier M Jr: The surgical repair of the
submucosa for the repair of full-thickness
to a new technique of application. Arch
cornea of the dog using pericardium as a
corneal defects in dogs. cats and horses. Vet
Ophthalmol 60:880-888, 1958.
keratoprosthesis. Brazilian Journal of
Ophthalmol 7:352-359. 2004.
Hakanson NE, Merideth RE: Conjunctival
Veterinary Research and Animal Science
Carter ID: Medial conjunctivoplasty for
 pedicle grafting in the treatment of corneal
32:251-255. 1995.
aberrant dermis of the Lhasa apso.J Am
ulcers in the dog and cat. I Am Anim Hosp
Barros PSM, Garcia JA. Laus IL, Ferreira AL.
Anim Hosp Assoc 9:242-244. 1973.
Assoc 23:641 -648. 1987.
Gomes TLS: The use of xenologous amniotic
Featherstone H, Sansom J. Heinrich C:
Hakanson N. Lorimer D. Merideth RE: Further
membrane to repair canine cormeal perforation
Intestinal submucosa in two cases of feline
 comments on conjunctival pedicle grafting
Created by penetrating keratectomy. Vet
ulcerative keratitis, Vet Rec 146:136-138.
in the treatment of corneal ulcers in the dog
Ophthalmol 1:119-123. 1998.
2000.
and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:602-605.
Blogg IR, Stanley RG. Dutton AG: Use of
 Featherstone H, Sansom J. Heinrich C: The use
1988.
conjunctival pedicle grafts in the
of porcine small intestinal submucosa in ten
Henderson Ww: The repair of corneal injuries in
 management of feline keratitis nigrum.
cases of feline corneal disease. Vet
 the dog by conjunctival keratoplasty, Vet Rec
J Small Anim Pract 30:678-684. 1989.
Ophthalmol 4:147-153. 2001.
63:240-241. 1951.
188
Further reading
Hendrix DVH: Canine conjunctiva and
Plummer CE, Kallberg ME, Gelatt KN, et al:
Small animals: nictitating membrane 
 nictitating membrane. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Intranictitans tacking for replacement of
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
Barnett KC: Diseases of the nictitating
prolapsed gland of the third eyelid of dogs.
Blackwell. pp 662-689.
membrane of the dog. J Small Anim Pract
Vet Ophthalmol 11:228-233. 2008.
Mannis Ml: Conjunctival flaps, Int Ophthalmol
18:101-108. 1978.
Quinn Al: Lacrimal apparatus and nictitating
Clin 28:165-168. 1988.
 Blogg IR: Surgical replacement of a prolapsed
 membrane. In Bojrab Ml. editor: Current
 Moore CP: Qualitative tear film disease, Vet Clin
gland of the third eyelid ('chery eye'): a
Techniques in Small Animal Surgery. ed 3.
North Am Small Anim Pract20:565-581, 1990.
new technique. Aust Vet J 9:75. 1979.
Philadelphia. 1990, Lea and Febiger.
Moore CP: Surgery of the conjunctiva. In
Bromberg NM: The nictitating membrane. The
pp 82-86.
Bojrab Ml. editor: Current Techniques in
Compendium 2:627-632. 1980.
Richards DA: An adjustable suture: a technique
Small Animal Surgery, ed 3. Philadelphia.
Brooks DE: The canine conjunctiva and
for altering the tension of stitches
1990. Lea and Febiger. pp 18-56.
 nictitans. In Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
postoperatively. especially in third-lid flaps.
Moore CP. Constantinescu GM: Surgery of the
Ophthalmology. ed 2. Philadelphia. 1991. Lea
Vet Med 68:881-883. 1973.
adnexa. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
and Febiger. pp 290-306.
 Stanley RG, Kaswan RL: Modification of the
27:1011-1066. 1997.
Constantinescu GM, McClure RC: Anatomy of
orbital rim anchorage method for surgical
Ollivier FJ. Kallberg ME. Plummer CE et al:
the orbital fasciae and the third eyelids in 
replacement of the gland of the third eyelid
 Amniotic membrane transplantation for
dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:260-263. 1990.
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1412-1414.
corneal surface reconstruction after excision
Dugan Sl. Severin GA, Hungerford LL,
1994.
of comeolimbal squamous cell carcinomas in
Whiteley HE. Roberts SM: Clinical and
Startup FG: Corneal ulceration in the dog. J
nine horses. Vet Ophthalmol 9:404-413. 2006.
histologic evaluation of the prolapsed third
Small Anim Pract 25:737-752. 1984.
Parshall C): Lamellar corneal-scleral
eyelids gland in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Wilcock B, Peiffer RL: Adenocarcinoma of the
transplantation,J Am Arim Hosp Assoc
201:1861-1867. 1992.
gland of the third eyelid in seven dogs. I Am
9:220-277. 1973.
Gelatt KN: Surgical correction of everted
Vet Med Assoc 193:1549-1550. 1988.
Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN: Complete bulbar
nictitating membrane in the dog. Vet Med
conjunctival flap in the dog. Canine Practice
67:291-292. 1972.
Large animals and special species:
2:15-18. 1975.
Gross Sl: Effectiveness of a modification of the
conjunctiva and nictitans
Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN, Gwin RM:
 Blogg technique for replacing the prolapsed
 Allgoewer l, Malho P. Schulze H. Schaffer E:
 Tarsoconjunctival pedicle grafts for deep
 gland of the canine third eyelid. Transactions
Aberrant conjunctival stricture and
corneal ulceration in the dog and cat. J Am
of the American College of Veterinary
wergrowth in the rabbit. Vet Ophthalmol
Anim Hosp Assoc 13:387-391, 1977.
Ophthalmologists 14:38-42. 1983.
11:18-22. 2008.
Pirie CG, Dubielzig RR: Feline conjunctival
Helper LC. Blogg R: A modified third eyelid
Anderson IF. Gelatt KN, Farnsworth RJ:
 hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: a
flap procedure. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 A modified membrana nictitans flap
 retrospective evaluation of eight cases
19:955-956. 1983.
technique for the treatment of ulcerative
(1993-2004). Vet Ophthalmol 9:227-232.
Kaswan RL, Martin CL: Surgical correction of
keratitis in cattle. I Am Vet Med Assoc
2006.
third eyelid prolapse in dogs. I Am Vet Med
168:706-709. 1976.
Pirie CG, Knollinger AM, Thomas CB.
Assoc 186:83. 1985
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
 Dubielzig RR: Canine conjunctival
 Moore CP: Imbrication technique for
ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: a
replacement of prolapsed third eyelid gland.
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2007.
retrospective evaluation of 108 cases [1989-
In Bojrab Ml. editor: Current Techmiques in
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
2004). Vet Ophthalmol 9:215-226. 2006.
Small Animal Surgery. ed 3. Philadelphia,
 Dugan Sl: Ocular neoplasia, Vet Clin North Am
 Roberts SR: The conjunctival flap operation in
1990. Lea and Febiger. pp 126-128.
8:609-626. 1992.
small animals. J Am Vet Med Assoc 22:86-90.
 Moore CP. Constantinescu GM: Surgery of the
 Dugan SJ. Curtis CR, Roberts SM, Severin GA:
1953.
adnexa. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 Epidemiologic study of ocular/adnexal
Scagliotti RH: Tarsoconjunctival island graft for
27:1011-1066. 1997.
squamous cell carcinoma in horses. J Am Vet
 the treatment of deep cormeal ulcers.
 Moore CP. Frappier BL, Linton LL: Distribution
Med Assoc 198:251-256. 1991.
descemetocoeles. and perforations in 35 dogs
and course of ducts of the canine third eyelid
Hendrix DVH: Equine ocular squamous cell
and 6 cats. Semin Vet Med Surg 3:69-76. 1988.
 gland: effects of two surgical replacement
Carcinoma, Current Techniques in Equine
Stern Al: Conjunctival flap operation. J Am Vet
techniques. Veterinary and Comparative
Practice 4:87-94, 2005.
Med Assoc 117:44-45. 1950.
Ophthalmology 6:258-264. 1996.
Kainer RA, Stringer JM. Lueker DC:
Tsuzuki K. Yamashita K, lzumisawa Y. Kotani T:
Morgan RV: To excise or not to excise, Progress
Hyperthermia for treatment of ocular
Microstructure and glycosaminoglycan ratio
in Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
squamous cell tumors in cattle. J Am Vet
 of canine cornea after reconstructive
3:109-110. 1993.
Med Assoc 176:356-360. 1980.
 transplantation with glycerin-preserved
 Morgan RV. Duddy IM, McClurg K: Prolapse
King TC, Priehs DR. Gum GG, Miller TR:
 porcine amniotic membranes. Vet
 of the gland of the third eyelid in dogs:
Therapeutic management of ocular squamous
Ophthalmol 11:222-227.2008.
a retrospective study of 89 cases
cell carcinoma in the horse: 43 cases (1979-
Vanore M, Chahory S. Payen G, Clerc B:
(1980-1990). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
1989). Equine Vet J 23:449-452. 1991.
Surgical repair of deep melting ulcers with
29:56-60. 1993.
Lavach JD, Severin GA: Neoplasia of the equine
porcine smallintestinal submucosa (Sis)
Ojay E, Milinsky HC: Surgical correction of
eye. adnexa and orbit, I Am Vet Med Assoc
graft in dogs and cats. Vet Ophthalmol
unpigmented prominent membrana
170:202-203. 1977.
10:93-99. 2007.
nictitans. I Am Vet Med Assoc 144:857. 1964.
McCalla TL, Moore CP, Collier LL:
Wagner J. Nasisse M, Davidson M:
 Peruccio C: Surgical correction of prominent
Immunotherapy of periocular squamous
 A retrospective study of conjunctival flaps in
third eyelid in the dog. Calif Vet 4:24-25.
 cell carcinoma with metastasis in a pony. J
67 dogs and 17 horses [1987-1991).
1981.
Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1678-1681, 1992.
Abstract Verterinary Pathology 29:476. 1992.
Petersen-Jones S: Repositioning prolapsed third
Millichamp Nl: Conjunctiva. In Auer JA.
Williams Dl: Laboratory animal ophthalmology.
eyelid glands while preserving secretory
Stick JA, editors: Equine Surgery. ed 2.
In Gelatt KN, editor:Verinary Ophhalmology.
function. I Small Anim Pract 13:202-203.
Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
ed 4. Ames., 2006. Blackwell. pp 1336-1369.
1991.
pp 465-471.
189
Surgical procedures for the conjunctiva and the nictitating membrane
 Mosunic CB. Moore PA. Carmicheal KP. et al:
of cisplatin for treatment of cutaneous
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames.
 Effects of treatment with and without
tumors in equidae. J Am Vet Med Assoc 
2006. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
adjuvant radiation therapy on recurrence
205:1170-1176. 1994.
Wilkie DA, Burt IK: Combined treatment
of ocular and adnexal squamous cell
Theon AP, Pascoe JR, Madigan JE. Carlson G.
 of ocular squamous cell carcinoma in a
carcinoma in horses: 157 cases [1985-2002).
 Metzger L: Comparison of intratumoral
horse, using radiofrequency hyperthermia
J Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1733-1738. 2004.
administration of cisplatin versus
and interstitial 18Au implants.
Theon AP. Pascoe JR. Carlson GP. Krag DN:
bleomycin for treatment of periocular
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:1831-1833,
 Intratumoral chemotherapy with cisplatin
squamous cell carcinomas in horses. Am J
1990.
in oily emulsion in horses. J Am Vet Med
Vet Res 58:431-436. 1997.
Witt RP: Treating ocular carcinoma in cattle.
Assoc 202:261-267, 1993.
 Townsend wM: Food and fiber-producing
Vet Med Small Anim Clin 79:1087-1089.
Theon AP. Pascoe JR, Meagher DM:
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
1984.
 Perioperative intratumoral administration
190
CHAPTER
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Kirk N. Gelatt and Dennis E. Brooks2
Small animails. Large animais and sperial species
Chapter contents
Introduction
191
Surgery for corneal lacerations
210
Surgical anatomy
192
Surgery for corneal foreign bodies
214
Surgical pathophysiology
193
Corneal adhesives
215
 Preoperative treatment considerations
194
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
216
Surgical instrumentation for corneal and scleral surgeries
195
Thermokeratoplasty
228
Surgical procedures for superficial corneal diseases
196
Surgical treatment of limbal and scleral diseases
229
Surgical procedures for deep corneal ulcerations
201
 Adaptations for large animals and special species
232
Introduction
teatment is highe1. Medical treatment of coineal diseases
usually involves the direct instillation of drugs on the affected
Corneal diseases occur frequently in the dog and cat. In the
tissue. Topical dnugs include solutions, suspensions, and/or
dog. corneal diseases may be primary o1 secondary to other
ointments. When corneal diseases are progressing or are
ophthalmic diseases. Secondary coineal diseases occur fre-
unusually severe, the topical route may be supplemented
quently in the brachycephalic breeds and with kerato-
with drugs provided systemically and subconjunctivally.
conjunctivitis sicca. In dogs, the common causes of corneal
diseases are trauma, inflammations and ulcerations, degen-
lipophilic coineal epithelium. Chloramphenicol is still the
erations, and dystrophies. Congenital abnormalities and
antibiotic of choice when the epithelium is intact, and thera-
neoplasia of the canine coinea are infrequent. In cats, co1-
peutic levels of antibiotic are necessary in the coinea and
neal diseases are common, and are usually associated with
anterior chamber. With corneal ulceration, the epithelial
inflammations, trauma, and sequestration (corneal black
barrier is markedly reduced, and the administration of
spot, corneal mummification). In both cats and dogs.
broad-spectrum topical antibiotics is recommended. The most
trauma of the cornea occurs most frequently in animals
fequently used topical antibiotics include gentamicin, chlo1-
under 1 or 2 years of age.
amphenicol, tobramycin, the fluoroquinolones and the
Coineal diseases cause varying degrees of opacification.
combination of neomycin, polymyxin B, and bacitracin.
Invasion of blood vessels, pigment cells, neoplastic cells,
In coineal diseases with vasculanization of the coinea and/o1
lipid material, and leukocytes from the limbus reduce co1-
secondary iridocyclitis, systemic antibiotics are often indicated
neal transparency. Edema results from local coineal inflam-
and are highly successfuil.
 mation or impaired corneal endothelia that can no longer
 Surgical treatment of coineal diseases in the dog and cat is
remove fluids from the coinea. With reduction in coineal
often the primary modality. The normal cornea, exposed
transparency, vision can be gradually impaired; with total
suddenly to trauma or ulceration, often requires several days
corneal opacification, vision can be lost temporarily O1
to initiate satisfactory inflammatory and healing responses.
permanently.
In the meantime, the infectious agents, proteases, and
Treatment of corneal diseases in dogs and cats is quite suc-
collagenases (from bacteria and damaged coneal cells) can
cessful using medical, surgical, and a combination of these
cause rapid degradation of the cornea, and threaten the
integrity of the cornea and maintenance of vision. Surgical
owner because of the onset of pain, blepharospasm, photo-
phobia, conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis, tearing, and
reduce the length of the lag phase for healing. as well as
nubbing of the eyelids. As a result, the possibility of successful
provide vital structural corneal support. Corneal surgery
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
includes partial keratectomy (o1 removal for tieatment
becomes opaque and changes to sclera is the limbus. The
01 biopsy), keratotomies (single o1 multiple incisions),
limbus is sufficiently forward of the aqueous humor filtra-
transposition (movement from one site to another), primary
tion angle or the iridociliary cleft (or ciliary cleft) to prevent
closure for small coineal ulcers and lacerations, and trans-
direct visualization of the aqueous outflow pathways.
plantation (autogenous and homologous) or grafting of
Dog and cat corneas are divided into axial (central) and
corneal tissues to replace cornea lost to disease.
peripheral, with the central area most important for vision.
Often the coinea is divided into quadrants. The central co1-
 nea is generally the thinnest and most often affected with
Surgical anatomy
ulcerations.
Dog and cat corneas have four different microscopic
legions. From exteinal to inteinal, these subdivisions
Dog and cat corneal anatomy
include: 1) epithelia with basal membrane; 2) thick stromal
Dog and cat corneas are relatively large compared to those
layer; 3) Descemet's membrane; and 4) the posterio1 single
of humans, probably to assist in night vision. Animals
layer endothelia. A modified anterio1 region of the corneal
with large corneas are typically nocturnal, as large corneas
stroma, Bowman's membrane, is absent in the dog and
sup ldnd au iaua oi uall jo siunoue iaiea moe
cat, but present in humans and most birds. The epithelial
leduced illumination. Most animal coineas are 1oughly
layer is noimally about 5-7 cells thick and consists of:
elliptical in shape with the vertical diameter slightly
less
1) outel two to three layers of non-keratinized squamous
than the horizontal diameter. The normal dog coinea mea-
cells; 2) middle two to three layers of polyhedral or wing
sures 12-16 mm vertically and 13-17 mm horizontally.
cells; and 3) a single layel of basal columna1 cells that are
and is 0.45-0.55 mm thick centrally and 0.50-0.65 mm
positioned on a basement membrane (Fig. 8.2). The appar-
thick peripherally. The normal cat coinea measures 15-
ent tuinover of coineal basal epithelia is about 7 days. The
16 mm vertically and 16-17 mm horizontally, and is about
basement membrane, produced by the basal corneal epithe-
0.58 mm thick centrally and peripherally. Coineal measure-
lia, attaches the basal epithelial cells via hemidesmosomes
ments, both diameters and thicknesses, have not been estab-
to the anterio1 stroma. Defects in the canine basal coineal
lished for different ages and the different breeds in either the
epithelia and basement membrane are thought to contribute
dog or cat.
directly to the development of recurrent coineal erosions.
 The cornea, along with the sclera, forms the fibrous tunic
The corneal stroma, or substantia propria, accounts for
of the globe (Fig. 8.1). The zone where the cornea gradually
about 9o% of the coineal thickness, and consists of parallel
R
 Central (axial) cornea 
Peripheral (para-axial)
Pupil
cornea
Anterior ~
chamber
Limbus
Anterior chamber
angle
Sclera
Posterior
chamber
Lens
Iris
Zonules
A
/Ciliary body(pars plicata)
B
Fig. 8.1 The surgical and microanatomy of the dog and cat cornea. (a) The anatomic relationships of the cornea to the other tissues in the anterior
segment of the eye. (b) The microscopic layers of the dog and cat cornea include: (A) epithelium; (B) stroma; (C) Descemet's membrane; and
(D) the endothelium. H & E, 25x.
192
Surgical pathophysiology
(mean), respectively. Coineal endothelial count varies by
 age, and a count of 3216 cells/mm² has been reported in
the horse.
Bovine corneal anatomy
The oval cornea of the adult cow is roughly pear-shaped and
measures 22-24 mm vertically and 27-32 mm horizontally.
Its thickness also varies with the center thicker (1range from
center and periphery: 0.75 to 0.85 mm). The radius of curva-
ture fo1 the bovine coinea varies from 14.7 mm (vertically)
and 16.8 mm (horizontally).
Surgical pathophysiology
Fig. 8.2 The epithelial layer is usually five to seven cells thick. The basal
Diseases alter coineal transparency. Invasion of the coinea
epithelia are secured to the anterior stroma by a basement membrane.
with blood vessels from the limbus and bulbar conjunc-
H & E, 100×.
tiva; accumulation of extracellula1 and intracellular fluids
and edema; infiltration with the different types of leuko-
bundles of collagen fibrils, few fibrocytes (also called kerato-
cyte; migration of pigment cells from the limbus, conjunc-
cytes), and a matrix of glycosaminoglycans. The arrange-
tiva, and anterior synechiae; and deposition of lipid,
ment of these fibrils and the matrix of glycosaminoglycans
cholesterol, and calcium products all reduce the coinea's
become distorted with disease and is the basis of coineal
ability to transmit images. Fortunately, dog and
cat
opacification.
coineas have considerable capacity for repair and the 1e-
Coineal sensory nerves, distributed from the mid poste-
establishment of transparency. Coineal nutrition is from
rio1 stroma from the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal
three sources: precorneal/preocular film, limbal vascula-
nerve, eventually teiminate in subepithelial plexuses to
ture, and the aqueous humor posteriorly.
provide free nerve endings in the epithelial wing cell layer.
As a result, superficial coineal ulcers are usually more pain-
undergoing mitosis and sliding of new wing cells into the
ful in dogs than ulcerations involving the deep corneal
corneal defect. The entire cornea can be re-epithelialized in
stroma. Corneal sensitivity may be reduced in the brachyce-
7-10 days, although firm adhesion of the new epithelia
 phalic breeds, possibly predisposing the cornea to damage.
by hemidesmosomes requires several weeks. New corneal
Descemet's membrane is the basement membrane pro-
duced by the posterior cells, the endothelia. Descemet's
staining a faint green. During the coineal ulcerative process.
membrane, a 1elatively thick basement membrane that
proteases, collagenases, and other enzymes are released
increases in thickness with aging. is clear and somewhat
from degenerating corneal cells, leukocytes, and certain bac-
elastic. Surgical repair is necessary to prevent imminent
teria. These enzymes degrade the collagen fibrils and glyco-
coineal rupture when exposed Descemet's membrane o1 a
saminoglycans, potentiating the ulcer's progression even in
descemetocele is clinically visible.
the absence of sepsis.
 The single layer of endothelia forms the posterior layer
 Superficial corneal ulcers are often more painful than dee-
of the coinea, and consists of hexagonal-shaped cells that
 per ulcerations. Both the corneal epithelium and anterior
interdigitate with each other laterally with different cell
coineal stroma possess pain and pressure receptors that are
junctions, including zonulae occludentes, maculae adhei-
part of the long ciliary nerves that arise from the ophthalmic
entes, and nexi. These metabolically active cells are the prin-
branch of the trigeminal (fifth) nerve. Not only does pain
cipal site for removal of water from the coinea via an Na+K+
occur from stimulation of these nerve endings, but also an
ATPase ‘pump'. Surgical and traumatic damage, as well as
axonal 1eflex that results in a secondary iridocyclitis (1eflex
aging and decreased numbers of endothelia, alter this state
of 'deturgescence', and edema of the cornea may result.
altered blood-aqueous barrier (aqueous flare). Hence, co1-
neal ulceration commonly causes secondary inidocyclitis,
which requires treatment concurrent with the corneal ulcer
Equine corneal anatomy
therapy.
The oval adult equine cornea measures 26-28 mm vertically
 As the coineal ulcer is being rapidly covered by healing
and 32-38 mm horizontally, with a radius of curvature of
epithelia, the corneal stroma has a slower and longer repair
about 17 mm. The thickness also varies, with the center
phase. Often the stroma is invaded by blood vessels from
measuring as thin as 0.56 mm and the periphery 0.8 mm.
the limbus and bulbar conjunctiva, as well as leukocytes
Coineal thickness measurements can vary by the in-vivo O1
from tears, blood vessels, and limbus. Fibroblasts, converted
in-vitro method used (direct measurement in fixed tissue),
from keratocytes and histiocytes, slowly produce new colla-
ultrasonography o1 ultrasound pachymetry and specular
 s x so io  s 
micioscopy. Lltrasonic pachymetry of the central equine co1-
cess takes several weeks to a few months. Following deep
nea 1eveals 785 ± 2.98 μm to 858 μm (mean). Dorsal and
keratectomy, complete recovery of corneal stroma to normal
 s'68 pue (ueau) n s aie suns [ee
    n  s   s
193
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
return to normal thickness. It has been suggested that the
old dogs having cataract surgery, damage to the corneal
limit of three superficial keratectomies for the dog appears
endothelium during phacoemulsification must be con-
related to failure of total stromal regeneration.
sidered seriously, and more postoperative corneal edema is
After superficial keratectomy, the new collagen fibrils may
expected.
not perfectly realign with adjacent normal corneal lamellae,
lesulting in variable amounts of scarring. Fortunately, scar-
Preoperative treatment considerations
ning after superficial keratectomies in the dog and cat is
limited. In fact, if one ranks the tendency for corneal scarr-
ing among animals, it appears that the cat and cow have
The preoperative treatment of coineal diseases in animals
the least tendency, the dog ranks in the middle, and the
depends on the condition. With limbal and coineal neo-
horse has the greatest tendency for corneal scarring after
plasms, dermoids, focal corneal lipidosis, and corneal cysts,
disease or surgery.
treatment of the cornea prior to surgery is not usually neces-
Resolution of the corneal blood vessels after stromal
sary. In contrast, corneal inflammations, foreign bodies,
Iepail requies several weeks, often resulting in ghost vessels
ulcerations, and partial and full-thickness lacerations may
that can be observed years later by biomicroscopy.
require adequate preoperative treatment to ensure the suc-
Chronic corneal irritation in animals usually results in
cess of the surgical procedure, especially if entry into the
invasion of the coinea with melanocytes from limbus and
anterior chamber is likely. With coineal defects, i.e., ulcera-
bulbar conjunctiva, epithelial cells, and histiocytes. This
tions, descemetoceles, coineal ulcerations with inis prolapse,
intracellular
melanin ]
pigment,
observed
clinically
as
coineal foreign bodies, and partial-to-full-thickness lacera-
    i e 
tions, topical and systemic antibiotics are indicated to
in the corneal basal and wing cell layers, and in anterior co1-
prevent the infectious process from spreading intraocularly.
neal stroma. Once the canine coinea becomes pigmented,
the opacification from this pigmentation is difficult to elim-
Dog and cat
inate medically or excise surgically, but can usually be con-
trolled sufficiently to allow clinical vision.
Topical antibiotics most frequently include chloramphe-
Repai1 of defects in Descemet's membrane depend on the
nicol, gentamicin, tobramycin, and the combination of neo-
formation of new basement membrane by coineal endothe-
mycin, polymyxin B, and bacitracin. Most often the bacteria
lium and requires several weeks. Posterior endothelial regen-
Iecovered from coineal ulcers by culture are Staphylococcus
  e  ss re a  si 
and Streptococus spp., which are sensitive to most antibio-
animals the defect is covered by new coineal endothelia
tics. Systemic antibiotics, such as amoxicillin o1 cephalexin,
derived primarily by mitosis; in older animals these defects
are administered when coineal disease is advanced and
 a l   d  a
integrity of the globe threatened.
adjacent cells. In older animals, it appears that Descemet's
With inflammatory coineal diseases, secondary involve-
membrane progressively thickens. Once Descemet's mem-
ment of the anterior uvea is common. Miosis, flare in the
brane is cut, the membrane curls and retracts. The exposed
anterior chamber, fibrin formation, lowered intraocular
posterior stroma is rapidly covered with a fibrin clot.
pressure, photophobia, and swelling of the iris and ciliary
Adjacent endothelial cells, by either mitosis or enlargement,
cover the fibrin clot, and over several weeks produce a new
tions. Instillations of iridocycloplegics, such as 1% atropine
Descemet's membrane. The rabbit coineal endothelia seem
01 0.3% scopolamine with 10% phenylephrine, are indi-
to rapidly undergo mitosis and slide to cover areas on
cated to reduce ocular pain, decrease the likelihood of
Descemet's membrane o1 posterior stroma within days.
posterior synechiae and cataract formation, and retract the
Regeneration of endothelia in the dog and cat is poorly
inis from full-thickness axial coineal wounds. The physical
understood. Like children, the puppy and kitten corneal
objective of mydriatic treatment is to moderately dilate the
endothelia demonstrate remarkable and rapid regeneration
 pupil, but still permit some iris movement that discourages
by mitosis. However, the density of coineal endothelia in
the formation of posterior synechiae. The strong irido-
the dog gradually declines with age, suggesting that regener-
cycloplegics, such as 1-3% atropine, are long acting and
ation is not occurring. The occurrence of persistent corneal
can markedly decrease aqueous tear production. An acutely
dry coinea does not heal readily! As the pupil size can be
cate that regeneration of corneal endothelial cells in older
ascertained daily through most corneas, the intensity and
animals does not occur.
concentration of mydriatic(s) can be adjusted quickly to
The noimal cornea also becomes slightly thicker in older
maximize therapeutic effects and minimize side effects.
dogs, presumably from less effective corneal dehydration
Corneal ulcers in the dog occasionally progress even
associated with decreased numbers of corneal endothelia.
though sepsis is not demonstrable. This expansion of the
The density of coineal endothelial cells in the dog, critical
edges of the corneal ulcer may result from the local release
to maintain a cornea devoid of edema, ranges from 1200 to
of proteases, collagenases, and other enzymes liberated by
1500 cells mm², with 2500-3000 cells mm² being noimal.
dying corneal and inflammatory cells. Specific treatment to
In corneal tissue banks for humans, at least 2000 cells mm?
combat this effect may be achieved by topical 5.0% acetyl-
is considerable essential for coineal donor tissue fo1 coineal
cysteine or preferably autogenous serum.
transplantation. Because of limited numbers of endothelial
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such as
cells in older dogs, corneal edema is more apt to occur after
funixin meglumine (0.5 mg/kg IV; Banamine, Schering-
cataract surgery. Cataract surgery in dogs generally results in
Plough,
Kenilworth, NI)
 /）  1
the loss of 10-20% of the corneal endothelia. Hence, in very
Rimadyl, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, PA) are used in the
94
Surgical instrumentation for cormeal and scleral surgeries
 dog to reduce postoperative iridocyclitis, pain, and conjuncti-
val and eyelid swelling. These drugs may mimic the effects of
inflammation which can cause anterior and posterior syne-
steroids on the eye but with few side effects; however, like
chiae formation, secondary cataracts, and phthisis bulbi
corticosteroids, they appear to delay corneal vascularization.
(destruction of the ciliary body with markedly reduced aque-
-un eisausae se aun aieioi saa ien pue bop au
ous formation rates, intraocular pressure less than 5 mmHg.
tromedially, and collapse once the anterio1 chamber has
cataract foimation, and retinal detachment). Topical and
been opened. The use of non-depolarizing neuromuscular
systemic corticosteroids must be administered carefully in
blocking agents such as atracurium (0.2 mg/kg IV; Glaxo-
the horse, as potential adverse effects are not infrequent. Top-
Wellcome Research, Triangle Park, NC) paralyzes the ani-
ical and especially systemic non-steroidals, such as flunixin
mal, including the extraocular muscles. As a result, the eye
meglumine (1 mg/kg PO, IV, o1 [M q12h) are effective in
position remains normal and the lack of extraocular muscle
controlling secondary uveitis, reducing uveal exudation,
tone reduces intraocular tissue displacement once the ante-
and relieving ocular discomfort.
rior chamber is entered. Because of the paralysis of all stri-
 For horses with severe corneal disease, the subpalpebral
ated musculature, including the muscles associated with
medication system to administer medications to the eye is
breathing, artificial ventilation in these anesthetized patients
most useful when the medications are delivered to the eye
is essential until the drug-induced paralysis ceases o1 is
six to eight times daily for many weeks.
Ieversed (see Chapter 3).
With general anesthesia, loss of tear production, and lack of
Cattle
the protective blink reflex, the cornea quickly dries. During
surgery, the corneal surface should be intermittently irrigated
Generally economics preclude preoperative treatments in
with lactated Ringer's solution o1 balanced saline solution.
cattle. However, for highly valuable cattle, therapy similar
to the horse can be used. Systemic antibiotics and other
 drugs are often different between horses and cattle, and drug
Horse
residues in milk and meat may be important in cattle.
Preoperative treatment is not uncommon in horses, and
often directed at the primary corneal disease. Although the
 Surgical instrumentation for corneal
most common topical antibiotics for the horse include the
tiple antibiotics (neomycin, bacitracin, and polymyxin)
 and scleral surgeries
and gentamicin o1 tobramycin, ciprofloxacin may have the
greatest activity and least number of resistant organisms.
Small animals
Topical gentamicin, perhaps because of its high frequency
The investment in surgical instruments depends on the exper-
of use as the first-line topical antibiotic for nearly four dec-
ades, has been reported to now encounter the highest num-
tise of the veterinary surgeon and the anticipated patient load
ber of resistant Pseudomonas and Streptococcus organisms. As
with coineal surgical diseases (see Table 1.4, p. 12). Magnifi-
 cation is essential for corneal surgeries. Head loupes can pro-
a result, intensive o1 progressive corneal ulcers in the horse
should be cultured, if possible, to help guide antibiotic
vide magnification at levels of 2.5 to 4x; the operating
therapy.
microscope provides at least 10x and is generally preferred.
With considerable corneal surgery and keratoplasty, the
Mydriasis is often indicated for horses with corneal dis-
eases to reduce the ocular pain, dilate the pupil, and stabilize
operating microscope is recommended. Either standard o1
microsurgical instruments may be used, o1 a combination
the blood-aqueous barrier. Of the species requiring mydria-
 of both sizes. Minimal instruments include the following.
tics, the horse appears the most sensitive to the systemic
effects of atropinization. Hence, mydriatics are administered
 Fo1 exposure of the coinea and a possible lateral
to effect (a maximally dilated pupil) for a day o1 two, and
 canthotomy: tenotomy or Steven's scissors, eyelid
then 1educed to maintain the dilated pupil to minimum
speculum, tissue forceps (Bishop-Harmon), and needle
levels. Close daily observation of the horse for intestinal
holder (standard; with lock: Castroviejo). Fo1 additional
motility and output of feces is important. Any decrease in
information on lateral canthotomy, see Chapter 2.
intestinal motility o1 apparent abdominal distress should
Fo1 corneal tissues: Colibri and tying forceps (with
initiate immediate reduction ol cessation of topical anti-
1 x 2 teeth), Beaver scalpel handle and blades
cholinergic mydriatic therapy.
(Nos 6400, 6500, and keratome), co1neal scissors (right
Antifungal  medications  are i
important in the horse
and left handed), iris scissors, disposable electrocautery.
 because of the not-infrequent fungal involvement in corneal
Martinez coineal dissecto1, associated cannulas, needle
disease in many areas of the world. Natamycin, also known
holder (microsurgical size and without lock), and a set of
        
coineal trephines (at 0.5 mm increments). The diamond
fungal agent in the United States; its reported activity is fo1
knife is very useful for corneal surgery and can provide
Fusarium and some Aspergillus species. Other antifungals must
exact control of the depth of the coineal incision in
be individually prepared and include miconazole (1%), flu-
increments of 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 and 0.8 mm.
conazole (0.2%), voriconazole (1%), itraconazole (1%), and
Fo1 keratoplasty, additional instruments include corneal
      
cutting block (often Teflon' ) and punch. At least one o1
administered for several weeks. The search for effective sys-
two different sizes of Flieringa rings are useful for corneal
temic antifungals continues!
tansplantation, and are temporarily sutured to the
The horse eye is characterized by a profound inflamma
bulbar conjunctiva and episclera to prevent collapse of
tory response which often must be medically controlled in
the globe (see Chapter 1).
195
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Both absorbable and non-absorbable 6-0 to 10-0 sutures are
used for coineal surgeries. The least reactive suture is the
non-absorbable nylon, and is essential for keratoplasty.
but removal of the sutures is usually necessary. Absorbable
sutures, such as polyglactin 910 o1 polyglyconate, are the
usual choices with either reverse cutting or spatula needles.
Suture techniques include simple inteirupted, simple con-
tinuous, double saw-tooth, and others. Ideally a corneal
stitch should be 75-90% of the coineal thickness with bites
about 2 mm of tissue for maximum tissue holding (espe-
cially with edematous coineal tissue).
Large animals
The ophthalmic surgical instrumentation for performing
pasien aul bop jaxog plo-lea-s e ui uoisoa ieauo suanay tg dii
corneal or corneoscleral surgeries in large animals is identi-
epithelial rim or lip, which stains with rose Bengal, surnounds the erosion
cal to that for small animals. For these surgeries using lim-
(also stains with fluorescein).
ited magnification, standard size instniments are most
useful; if the operating microscope is used as well as general
In this section, surgical techniques that involve corneal
anesthesia, microsurgery ophthalmic instruments are often
epithelium and anterior aspects of the corneal stroma are
employed.
presented and include: 1) superficial keratectomy (partial
and complete); 2) superficial punctate, grid or linear
keratotomy; and 3) corneal biopsy.
Surgical procedures for superficial
 corneal diseases
Superficial keratectomy (partial and complete)
Superficial corneal diseases are usually confined to coineal
Keratectomy may prove useful in the early stages of ulcera-
epithelia and anterior stroma, and may be treated surgically.
tive keratitis when infection is confined to the corneal
Fo1 instance, coineal dermoids generally extend into the
epithelium and anterior third or half of the cornea stroma,
anterior stroma and may involve adjacent bulba1 conjunc
and in later stages of stromal keratitis when the epithelium
tiva (Fig. 8.3). Treatment is superficial keratectomy. Coineal
has healed. Removing necrotic tissue by keratectomy speeds
lipidosis often affects the anterio1 coineal stroma, and may
healing, minimizes scarring. and decreases the stimulus for
be 1emoved by superficial keratectomy. Recurrent coineal
keratitis and iridocyclitis.
erosions in the dog appear related to corneal epithelial dys-
[ns
superficial  keratectomy the corneal epithelia and
trophy and defects in the basement membrane which result
variable amounts of anterior stroma are excised. The pro-
in defective adhesion during healing of these superficial ero-
cedure may involve the entire cornea o1 only part of the co1-
sions and frequent recurrences (Fig. 8.4). Several surgical
nea. The thickness of stroma removed depends on the
procedures, including superficial keratectomy, have been
coineal disease. When the superficial keratectomy is limited
used to treat this condition. The superficial keratectomy pro-
to the outer one-third of the cornea, the postoperative
wound is treated medically as a corneal ulcer. HoweveI,
the anterio1 corneal stroma.
when the partial superficial keratectomy extends fo1 more
than one-half to two-thirds of the corneal stroma, the defect
is covered with a conjunctival graft. While regeneration of
coineal epithelia appears complete after superficial kera-
tectomy, total 1ecovery of the corneal stromal thickness is
questionable. A single cornea subjected to three superficial
keratectomies appears to have a stroma of about one-half
to two-thirds normal thickness thereafter.
[ndications for supeificial keratectomies include coineal
dermoid, chronic superficial keratitis (pannus), pigmentary
keratitis, chronic and recurrent corneal erosions, corneal
and/or limbal neoplasia, ulcerative keratitis with seques-
 s   )   o
(usually lipidosis and calcification), and superficial coineal
foreign bodies. [n some of these diseases, the cause[s) has
not been deteimined, and although the involved corneal tis-
sue(s) appears completely excised, recurrence may occu1.
For some of these conditions, such as pigmentary keratitis.
the superficial keratectomy may 1e-establish a clear coinea,
Fig. 8.3 Cormeal dermoid in a St Bernard puppy. Covered with long coarse
hair, that is highly irritating, the congenital mass involves the lateral cornea,
but if the predisposing factors, such as lagophthalmia, nasal
limbus, and bulbar conjunctiva. Recommended treatment is superficial
fold trichiasis, o1 tear film disordel, are not resolved, the
keratectomy.
cornea will become pigmented again.
96
Surgical procedures for superficial cormeal diseases
A
B
Fig. 8.5 Corneal sequestration in cats consists of a distinct central brown-to-black area of necrotic stroma. (a) Corneal vascularization and inflammation may
surround the lesion. (b) Immediate postoperative appearance after superficial keratectomy If the keratectomy is limited to less than one-third of the corneal
stroma, it is treated as a corneal ulcer. A bulbar conjunctival graft may also be used to cover the surgical defect, and may decrease the possibility for
recurrence of sequestrum.
There are several different modifications of the superficial
with 1 x 2 teeth tissue forceps to permit separation of
keratectomy procedure. As a rule, only the diseased area within
the diseased
cornea from the underlying stroma
epithelial and anterior stromal layers is excised. While the nor-
(Fig. 8.6b). The dissection plane within the stroma should
mal dog and cat corneas are about 0.5-0.6 mm thick, the
remain in the same parallel lamellae throughout the super-
abnormal cornea may exceed 1.0 mm in thickness. When the
ficial keratectomy. If the Beaver knife is used, the instr-
ment must be held tangential to the coineal stroma to
formed using a limited-depth coineal trephine or diamond
pievent progressive deeper dissection into the stroma
knife, or by dividing the cornea into four quadrants (much like
(Fig. 8.6c). Alternately, the Martinez dissecto1 facilitates
cutting a pie or cake) and separating the opaque superficial
this dissection to remain within the respective coineal
layers of comea from the deeper clear corneal stroma.
lamellae (Fig. 8.6d).
Instruments used to perfoim the superficial keratectomy
Once the diseased coinea has been completely separated
include: eyelid speculum, smooth and 1 x 2 teeth tissue fo1-
from the stroma, it is lifted from the surgical wound
ceps (Bishop-Harmon or Colibri), Beaver scalpel handle
(Fig. 8.6e). If some tags of stroma remain, they are carefully
and No. 6400 microsurgical blade o1 diamond knife, stra-
cut with utility o1 tenotomy scissors. If additional areas of
bismus o1 tenotomy scissors, irnigator bulb,
, and small
diseased cornea are still present, the procedure may be
 a d on s i i
Tepeated in these areas.
canthotomy may be necessary when improved exposure of
Partial superficial keratectomies are generally limited
the coineal site is necessary. Other coineal instruments that
to the outer one-half of the cornea unless a conjunctival
can assist in the superficial keratectomy are the Martinez
graft, corneoconjunctival graft, or lamellar corneal graft is
dissectoi, a coineal trephine whose depth can be preset to
attached afterwards to the surgical wound. Postoperatively.
0.2-0.3 mm, and the diamond knife with a micrometer
the supeificial keratectomy wound is not usually covered
(which limits the depth of the coineal incision). This proce-
with a nictitating membrane flap o1 complete temporary ta1-
dure is generally performed under general anesthesia.
sorrhaphy. Topical broad-spectrum antibiotics are instilled
 Superficial keratectomy is usually limited (partial) to the
four to six times daily. Topical 1% atropine is instilled to
diseased coinea. The periphery of the diseased area is
maintain a moderate to completely dilated pupil (one drop
encircled with an incision using the Beaver scalpel handle
- i o e oi  l a  
and No. 6400 microsurgical blade, o1 the diamond knife
ous tear formation, as measured by the Schirmer tear test, by
with the micrometer set at 0.15 o1 0.25 mm, or a preset co1-
50-75%. A marked decrease in tears can prolong coineal 1e-
neal trephine (0.15-0.25 mm). The incision should be of
epithelialization by several days.
sufficient depth to remove the base of the diseased cornea,
Every day o1 every 2 days the 1e-epithelialization of the
as estimated preoperatively by  slit-lamp
pbiomicroscopy
superficial keratectomy wound is evaluated with and with-
(Fig. 8.6a). Often, the cornea is vascularized, and limited
out topical fluorescein. Re-epithelialization usually starts
hemoirhage occurs during the incision. To prevent hemo1-
within 48 h. The entire canine coinea can 1e-epithelialize
rhage from obscuring the incision, a continuous stream of
within 7-10 days. New epithelia are somewhat translu-
0.9% sterile saline is directed at the leading aspects of the
cent, stain faintly with topical fluorescein, and adhere
corneal incision as it is performed. This hemorrhage will
incompletely. Each day the area of fluorescein retention
usually cease once sufficient time has elapsed to permit clot-
(devoid of corneal epithelia) should become smaller, as 1e-
ting. If a conjunctival graft is applied to the keratectomy site,
epithelialization occurs 360°. If 1e-epithelialization is slow
the surgical defect may be constricted as a square lesion.
Once the coineal lesion has been outlined, the edge of
ea aes o saa puom au oi pae aar
the superficial keratectomy section is grasped carefully 
activity.
197
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
B
C
Fig. 8.6 In the superficial keratectomy procedure, a section of corneal epithelium and the superficial stroma are excised. (a) The periphery of the corneal
dermoid is incised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade to a depth of about 0.2-0.3 mm. (b) The edge of the lesion is grasped and lifted with a
1 × 2 teeth thumb forceps, and separation of the lesion from the underlying clear stroma is continued by scalpel dissection. (c) During the dissection of the
stroma, the microsurgical blade is held tangential to avoid entry into the deeper stromal lamellae. (d) The Martinez corneal dissector or separator may also
panaldwos uaag sey uonoassip lewouas ayn aouo (a) uogsassp dellawel joy Auabuns aun jo 2ed siua buunp (apelg lesibunsouniw ayn jo peansul) pasn ag
the lesion is carefully removed, resulting in a corneal defect.
   i    r
These treatment modalities address the basic problems that
ment of feline corneal sequestration is often slower than
contributed to the development of the original corneal
normal and more scarring results. Once 1e-epithelialization
pigmentation.
of the superficial keratectomy site is complete, topical anti-
Superficial keratectomy for the clinical management of
biotics are continued for few days. Final corneal clarity
canine chronic superficial keratitis (pannus) is not curative.
may require several weeks during which the coineal stroma
but can remove the dense coineal pigmentation in advanced
disease and immediately restore vision in these dogs. How.
0.5% prednisolone o1 2.5% hyd1ocortisone, may be adminis-
ever, the healing periods after superficial keratectomies
tered two to four times daily, o1 cyclosporine administered
fo1 the treatment of this disease are not predictable. Recur-
once daily may be used to minimize corneal scarring. but
rence of pannus and coineal vascularization may occul
are not usually necessary. Although some coineal scarring
before o1 concurrent with the corneal re-epithelialization,
may result after the superficial keratectomy procedure, the
and necessitate topical corticosteroids or cyclosporine before
opacity is not usually dense in the dog and cat.
Ie-epithelialization is complete. Beta radiation may be indi-
Postoperative complications after superficial keratectomies
cated to retard coineal vascularization during immediate
are infrequent. Bacterial infection of the surgical wound is
postoperative healing in selected patients. Long-term control
rale, provided appropriate topical antibiotics are adminis-
of pannus still depends on daily instillations of cortico-
tered. Postoperative reduction in tear production will delay
steroids and/or cyclosporine, adjusted fo1 the severity of
coineal healing, and increase the possibility of corneal vascu-
the disease.
larization and more scarring. After superficial keratectomies
 Overall 1esults with superficial keratectomies are very
in brachycephalic breeds, the cornea should be evaluated
good. Recurrence of the original coineal disease may again
daily or every other day. Lagophthalmos, infrequent blink-
opacify the cornea, but the procedure provides a temporarily
ing, central corneal exposure, and marginal tear production
clear coinea. Removal of coineal scar tissue, coineal deI-
are often associated with coineal diseases in these breeds,
moids, embedded corneal foreign bodies, and other corneal
and can prolong coineal 1e-epithelialization of the superficial
opacities with superficial keratectomies is usually curative.
keratectomy site excessively. Postoperative corneal scarring
 may be more in dogs than in cats
Use of only superficial keratectomies to treat pigmentary
Adaptations in large animals and special species
keratitis in dogs is not successful. The surgical areas often
Keratectomy may be indicated in cases of melting ulcers in
Ie-pigment within months. For the superficial keratectomy
horses. Keratectomy is thought to speed healing by remov.
to have reasonable success for canine pigmentary keratitis,
ing necrotic and infected tissue, and encouraging vasculari
additional medical and/or surgical treatments are indicated,
zation, minimizing scarring, and decreasing the stimulus
such as permanent medial o1 lateral canthoplasty, removal
fo1 anterior uveitis. Necrotic tissues that are often present
of nasal fold trichiasis, and medically increasing tear pro-
in case of melting ulcers should be removed and this
can be achieved with a cellulose sponge o1 a fine-toothed
98
Surgical procedures for superficial cormeal diseases
A
B
sean z anis iejhuns aun ze auasaid s jeas snonewonuein  (e) asioy e ui yeih uojuwe pue Awoaneay leyadns Aq buuens jeauon jo suawneail 2g dhi
postoperatively for superficial keratectomy and permanent conjunctival graft for corneal squamous cell carcinoma. (b) A slight scar is present at the
surgical site five months postoperatively.
forceps (e.g., 0.12 mm Colibri forceps). Additionally, careful
debridement can be done with microsurgical coineal scis-
soIs, a microsurgical blade o1 a corneal dissecto1. A coineal
incision to outline the lesion to be removed can be done
with a coineal trephine, a diamond knife o1 a microsurgical
blade (e.g. Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade). The
depth of the incision in the stroma should be adequate to
remove the lesion completely. Once the initial incision is
made, the edge of the tissue to be removed is grasped by a
forceps (e.g., 0.12 mm Colibri forceps), and a coineal dis-
sector (e.g., Martinez corneal dissector) is introduced and
held parallel to the coinea. The dissector is used tangentially
to separate the corneal lamella without penetrating deeper
than the original cutting plane. The cornea is then separated
until the opposite incision line is 1eached. Depending on
the stromal defect, a conjunctival graft may be placed
subsequently
 Superficial keratectomy is also performed during any graft-
Fig. 8.8 Cormeal erosions, stained with topical fluorescein, are chara cterized
ing procedure to prepare the bed for conjunctival, amniotic
by slow healing and recurrence. New surgical procedures, such as the
membrane o1 corneal graft. The complications of super-
superficial punctate and grid keratotomies, attempt to enhance healing and
 ms n  ie ae an r
prevent recurrences by expanding the adhesion of the epithelia and
basement membrane to the anterior stroma.
infection, granulation tissue formation, perforation, and
excessive sca1 formation. Superficial keratectomy may also
be used in the treatment of superficial corneal scarring, with
d   no   on  a 
postoperative treatment of the corneal healing response
but shallow coineal ulceis, and to their variable but often
(Fig. 8.7).
improve adhesion of the defective epithelia and basement
membrane to the anterior stroma by making multiple shal-
Superficial punctate, grid, and linear
low grooves in the epithelia and anterio1 stroma that provide
deeper attachment sites. As a result, basal corneal epithelia
keratotomies
 n ise e  s  a
Superficial punctate, grid, and linear keratotomies are Iela-
incomplete needle o1 linear tracks to the anterio1 stroma. As
tively new surgical procedures used to treat chronic coineal
the entire cornea is involved, these procedures are used for
erosions and refractory corneal ulcers in dogs and other spe-
most of the entire coinea including the actual erosion site.
cies (Fig. 8.8). Investigations into coineal 1ecurrent erosions
Punctate keratotomy leaves smaller scars than grid keratot
(indolent ulcer o1 Boxer ulcer) in the dog indicate defective
omy. The keratotomy procedures are usually preceded by
basal corneal epithelia and basement membrane. Defects in
debridement using a cotton swab and topical anesthesia of
the basement membrane, including paucity of hemidesmo-
the edges of these chronic erosions fo1 1 o1 2 weeks. If epithe.
somes and multiple layers of basement membrane, appear 
lialization has not occurred in 12-14 days, one of these
199
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
keratotomies is perfoimed. Partial-to-complete superficial
 Superficial grid keratotomy
keratectomy has also been used fo1 this condition. Other
surgical procedures for recurrent and slow healing corneal
[n the superficial grid keratotomy procedure, the corneal
epithelia and anterior stroma are incised numerous times in a
erosions, such as transplantation of small lenticules of new
grid, cross-hatching o1 linear pattern. The majority of the gnid
incisions are adjacent to the corneal erosion, but this procedure
thermy of Bowman's membrane, and neodymium:yttrium
may cover most of the coineal surface. The linear incisions fo1
aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser photo-induced adhesion of
 corneal epithelia, have not been reported in the dog.
superficial grid keratotomy are made with a 20 g disposable
hypodermic needle, Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade, 01
a diamond knife with the micrometer set at 0.2-0.3 mm deep
Superficial punctate keratotomy
(Fig. 8.10a). Incisions at 90° to the first series of incisions
Superficial punctate keratotomy may be performed in quiet
complete the gTid keratotomy (Fig. 8.10b). Smaller gauge
dogs with only topical anesthesia, o1 with some sedation in
hypodermic needles are not recommended, as their incisions
extend too deep. The grids are about 1-1.5 mm apart.
under local anesthesia, but general anesthesia is recom-
mended if most of the comea is involved. Prior to both proce-
Superficial linear keratotomy
dures, loose coineal epithelia surrounding the chronic erosion
are debrided with thumb forceps o1 sterile cotton swabs.
The superficial grid keratotomy procedure has been partially
 [n superficial punctate keratotomy, multiple anterior stro-
Ieplaced by a linear keratotomy which is easier to perform
   e   a s p
in the clinical patient with only topical coineal anesthesia.
hypodermic needle or a diamond corneal knife with the
[n this modification, the corneal epithelia and superficial
micromete1 set at 0.10-0.2 mm (Fig. 8.9a). The hypodermic
stioma are incised in vertical linear incisions using a
needle is grasped directly or clamped with a small hemostat
20-22 g hypodermic needle. The incisions, about 1 mm
to expose 0.1-0.2 mm of the tip. The needle should enter
apart, overlap the corneal erosion by a few millimeters in
the coinea at a 45-90° angle. The 23 g hypodermic needle
all directions. As with the superficial punctate and grid
will penetrate deeper into the corneal stroma than the 20 g
keratotomies, smaller gauge hypodermic needles (smaller
hypodermic needle. Alternatively, the Nd:YAG laser may be
than 22 g) are avoided because of their tendency to
used with multiple impulses set at 2 mJ.
penetrate too deeply.
About 15-25 punctures are usually made about 1.5 mm
apart surrounding the erosion and extending into the
topical broad-spectrum antibiotics instilled every 8 h fo1
adjacent normal cornea (Fig. 8.9b). The cornea is slightly
5-7 days. Healing of the erosions should occur during
indented when the 0.1-0.2 mm depth is achieved. If inad-
this period. The success rate of these procedures for the treat-
vertent complete puncture of the cornea results, rapid self-
ment of 1ecurrent coineal erosions in dogs is about 80-90%
sealing occurs.
within 2 weeks.
?
Fig. 8.9 In the superficial punctate keratotomy procedure, multiple partial-thickness hypodermic needle punctures are made in the erosion and adjacent
cornea. (a) After thumb forceps removal of the loose epithelia about the erosion, the epithelia and 0.1-0.2 mm of the anterior stroma are repeatedly partially
penetrated with a 20 g hypodermic needle grasped with a hemostat to prevent deeper corneal penetration. (b) About 15-25 partial corneal punctures are
 positioned within the erosion and adjacent area.
(A
?
Fig. 8.10 In the superficial grid keratotomy procedure, the corneal epithelia and anterior stroma are incised in a grid or cross-hatching manner within the
corneal erosion and adjacent area. (a) The initial corneal incisions, about 0.1-0.25 mm deep, may be performed with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade,
spu6 aul suoisiou! leiqu! aya on a06 2e paseld ae suoisu! buurneyssouo jo ias puonas  (9) alpaau siwapodky 6 oz alqesodsip e io ajius puoweip
should be 1.0-1.5 mm apart.
200
Surgical procedures for deep cormeal ulcerations
 Alternative treatments appear to yield lower success rates.
 Adaptation for large animals and special species
Treatment of canine reculrent erosions with only aqueous
Keratectomy to obtain tissue for culture or histology in melt-
iodine cautery of the erosion requires an average of 46 days
ing ulcers is similar to the techniques used in small animals.
fo1 complete 1e-epithelialization. Contact lenses for co1-
neal erosions yield 73% success, the major limitation being
Large amounts of necrotic cornea can be removed with
retention of the lens. If the lens is retained for 7-10 days,
tenotomy scissors to speed healing of melting ulcers in
horses and cows.
the success rate increases to 92%. Other foims of treatment
fo1 this disorder include nictitating membrane flaps, tempo-
Stromal biopsies to aid in the diagnosis of stromal abscesses
lary tarsorrhaphy, and bulbar conjunctival grafts (see Chap-
Or immune-mediated keratopathies in horses can be obtained
in the standing horse. Utilizing sedation and topical anesthe-
ters 5 and 6). The success rates of these treatment methods
have focused on short-term management of the healing of
sia, a linear incision in the corneal epithelium is made with
the Beaver No. 6400 o1 6900 microsurgical blade (Fig. 8.11).
the recurrent erosions. The 1eal value of these procedures,
A Martinez coineal dissector is then used to separate the epi-
yet to be established, is long-term prevention of recurrent
thelium from the stroma. A small biopsy punch is utilized to
corneal erosions.
 obtain a stromal sample, and the tissue placed on a sponge
 Postoperative complications after superficial punctate and
grid keratotomies are infrequent. Inadvertent puncture of
in a histologic cassette in fixative. The corneal epithelium
d pr as e u sans oo m prns s
the cornea is rare, after the technique has been mastered.
 Topical antibiotics and NSAIDs can be used post-biopsy.
Fortunately, these punctures will self-seal immediately, but
a small corneal scar results. Both techniques may produce
faint anterior stromal scars, appearing as individual spots
 Surgical procedures for deep
O1 a grid. This scar formation is usually negligible when
corneal ulcerations
compared to the repeated effects of recurrent coineal er0-
sions of the canine cornea, including influx of vasculariza-
tion and pigmentation, and the occasional deposition of
Coineal ulcerations are frequent in dogs but less common in
lipids, cholesterol, and calcium.
cats. In the dog, corneal ulcers may be initiated by minor
Recently the clinical use of these different keratotomies
trauma. In certain breeds, particularly brachycephalic dogs.
in the cat has been questioned because of the development
coineal ulceration may be associated with several predis-
of corneal sequestrum following their use. Perhaps the
posing factors. In brachycephalic bieeds the eye is very
feline herpes vinus (FHV-1) is present in some corneal
prominent, suffers lagophthalmia, and the rate of blink-
sequestia, and, following keratotomy, the vinus can pene-
   iu  si a  
trate deeper into the stroma. As a result, pending further
occur from distichia and nasal fold trichiasis. The preco1-
clinical studies, keratotomies in cats must be most cau-
neal film may be thin and abnormal centrally, placing the
tiously peifoimed.
central corneal epithelia in constant jeopardy. Retention
of 1ose Bengal by the central coineal epithelia in these dogs
Corneal biopsy
suggests that these cells are degenerating at a faster rate
than normal. These eyes are frequently also victims of mar-
Biopsy of the cornea is usually performed to establish
E1
ginal o1 low levels of aqueous tear production. The combi-
diagnosis. Diagnosis of specific infectious agents (bacterial/
native effect is the development of a central-to-paracentral
fungal) and possible neoplasia is provided by coineal
corneal ulcer that rapidly becomes deeper and larger
biopsy. Coineal biopsies may be limited to the anterio1 epi-
(Fig. 8.12).
thelium, anywhere in the stroma, or even full thickness.
Clinical signs associated with pain are often minimal o1
Under the rubric of corneal biopsies is corneal cytology
absent. Initial medical treatment usually includes topical
(obtained by deep scraping), and superficial and deep kera-
broad-spectrum antibiotics, topical autogenous serum, and
tectomies. Deep keratectomies are performed in the same
mydriatics. If the corneal ulcer continues to progress to
manner as superficial keratectomies, but the surgical wound
involve the deep corneal stroma, becomes a descemetocele,
is usually covered with a bulbar conjunctival graft or coneal
01 perforates with iris prolapse, surgical treatment with con-
graft.
junctival o1 corneal grafts is recommended. Maintenance
Excisional coineal biopsies can combine both diagnosis
of vision and the least coineal scaring ale achieved when
and initial treatment. When ulcerated or inflamed cornea
conjunctival grafts are positioned before development of
is biopsied, all necrotic and involved tissues should be
corneal perforation and inis prolapse.
excised to enhance the possibility of diagnosis, demonstrate
Administration of antibiotic treatment to all potential
infectious agents, and facilitate attachment and retention of
corneal ulcerations is recommended. Surgical colrection of
the conjunctival graft.
these ulcerations will usually be successful, provided the
 The corneal biopsy procedure is modified by the depth of
infectious agents are eliminated. Bacteria, usually Staphylo-
the corneal disease: 1) superficial keratectomy for diseases
coccus and Streptococcus spp., are frequently isolated from
of the epithelia and anterio1 one-half of coineal stroma;
canine coineal ulcers. These organisms seem to originate
2) deep keratectomy for coineal diseases involving the pos-
from the conjunctival surfaces. Staphylococcus spp. are usually
terior one-half of the coineal stroma; and 3) full-thickness
susceptible to chloramphenicol, bacitracin, and gentamicin;
keratectomy with homologous corneal grafts when the
Streptococcus spp. are usually susceptible to chloramphenicol,
entire depth of the coinea is involved. These surgical proce-
erythromycin, carbenicillin, and cephalothin. Infrequently
dures are presented in the respective sections in this
Iecovered in small animals, Pseudomonas spp. are susceptible
chapter.
to gentamicin, tobramycin, polymyxin B, and amikacin.
20
8
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
B
C
Fig. 8.11 Corneal stromal biopsy in a horse with suspected immune-mediated keratitis. (a) Incision of the corneal epithelium in a sedated standing horse.
(b) The corneal dissector is used to expose the comeal stroma. (c) Corneal forceps and scissors are used to remove a section of stroma for histopathology.
d) Biopsy site is apposed by sutures.
Primary closure of small deep corneal ulcers
elimination of the potential pathogenic bacteria from the ulcel
site contributes directly to the success or failure of this method.
Small deep corneal ulcers may be closed by direct suturing.
After general anesthesia and surgical preparation of the eye-
The maximum diameter of corneal ulcers that can be apposed
lids and conjunctiva, the eye is draped and an eyelid specu-
by sutures is about 3 mm o1 less. Control and hopefully
lum positioned. The coineal ulcer is closely examined, and
any neciotic o1 suspect tissue carefully 1emoved by Beaver
No. 6400 miciosurgical blade (Fig. 8.13a). These tissues
should be cultured and evaluated histologically. The edges
of the corneal ulcer are carefully treated with aqueous 0.5%
povidone-iodine solution applied with sterile cotton swabs
to attempt sterilization of the ulcer. The same solution may
be applied carefully to the ulcer base, but only if some deep
corneal stroma remains.
Two o1 three 5-0 to 6-0 braided polyglactin 910 simple
interrupted sutures, o1 a combination of a central interrupted
horizontal mattress suture and two simple internupted
sutures, are used to appose the ulcer's edges (Fig. 8.13b).
Sutures are placed into the deep coineal stroma. Some disto1-
tion of the cornea develops as the sutures are tied and ulcer
edges apposed (Fig. 8.13c). Fortunately, as corneal heal-
ing occurs during the next 7-10 days, the corneal curvature
Fig. 8.12 Deep central corneal ulcer in a Pekingese dog. Primary closure
gradually returns to normal.
with sutures of small and deep corneal ulcers (<3 mm diameter) may be
 Fo1 success with this procedure, sutures must be placed in
attempted provided local sepsis is eliminated.
viable coineal stroma. Placement of the sutures in necrotic
202
Surgical procedures for deep cormeal ulcerations
A
B
Fig. 8.13 Primary closure of corneal ulcers may be attempted with deep corneal ulcers <3 mm diameter. (a) To ensure suture stability, any necrotic or
potentially infected corneal epithelia and stroma are excised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. These tissues should be cultured for bacteria and
examined microscopically. (b) Two or three 5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures are pre-placed. If the comea appears quite friable, interrupted 
mattress sutures may be used. The corneal bites for these sutures should be about 2 mm and deep in the normal cormeal stroma. (c) All sutures are tightened
and tied to effect primary ulcer closure. Some temporary corneal distortion is usually evident for several days postoperatively.
and friable stroma usually results in sutures tearing from the
Conjunctival autografts from either bulbar o1 palpebral
stroma in 24-48 h. Braided polyglactin 910 sutures are
conjunctiva should be thin, and not include Tenon's capsule
Iecommended as this material is not adversely affected by
01 the bulbar fascia. The inclusion of Tenon's capsule may
sepsis. After recovery from general anesthesia, medical treat-
contribute to surgical failure by increasing the traction on
ment is continued with topical and occasionally systemic
the transplanted conjunctival graft. Transpalpebral conjunc.
broad-spectrum antibiotics, topical autogenous serim, and
tival autografts contain limited portions of the fibrous tarsal
mydriatics. Maintenance of the wound beyond 5-7 days
layer which may be necessary to maintain the graft base
usually results in a successful apposition. If premature
de
from the deeper aspects of the eyelid to the corneal surface.
hiscence of the wound and sutures occurs, treatment of the
Conjunctival autografts are more diffcult to perform than
ulcer with a bulba1 conjunctival graft is recommended.
nictitating membrane flaps, but are easier than corneocon-
 junctival and corneoscleral transpositions, and the different
types of keratoplasty. The most frequent type of bulbar
Conjunctival autografts
conjunctival graft is the pedicle type (Fig. 8.14).
Conjunctival autografts are frequently used in small animal
ophthalmology for the clinical management of deep and
Porcine small intestinal submucosa (SiS) grafts
large corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, mycotic ulcers, stromal
abscesses, after sequestrum removal in cats, keratomalacia,
The porcine small intestinal submucosa graft is a biomate-
and for perforated corneal ulcers with and without iris pro-
nial consisting primarily of proteins and, to a lesser extent,
lapse. Conjunctival autografts were presented in Chapter 7.
carbohydrates and lipids. SIS grafts have been reported in
Conjunctival autografts consist of either bulbar or palpebral
dogs, cats, rabbits, and horses. The SIS graft, derived from
conjunctival mucosa with epithelium, and connective tissue.
the porcine jejunum, is composed of three distinct layers:
o aaip pairns pue pasodsuen aq un sheioine asau
1) tunica muscularis mucosa; 2) tunica mucosa; and 3) the
the edges of the corneal ulcer o1 defect to provide additional
stratum compactum layer of the tunica mucosa. Following
support and tissue for a coinea weakened by deep ulcera-
processing and mechanical debridement, a few remaining
tion, descemetocele, or perforation with or without iris
endothelial cells and fibrocytes are lyzed with a hypotonic
prolapse. The transplanted conjunctival autograft provides
wash, leaving a sheet of collagen with a smooth surface
additional tissues and no lisk of host rejection.
(stratum compactum) and a rough surface (tunica muscu-
Conjunctival   autografts  provide  sufficient 
ttissue
to
laris mucosa). The SIS graft is sterilized by ethylene oxide,
strengthen most weakened corneas and prevent staphyloma
formation, but are not as strong as corneal grafts. When har-
vested from the limbus, the transplanted limbal conjunctiva
contains stem cells capable of additional generation and tian-
sition into coineal epithelium. Conjunctival autografts con-
tain blood vessels and lymphatics to offer significant
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antiprotease, and anticolla-
genase effects. With conjunctival transplants, leukocytes, anti-
bodies, serum, and αz-macroglobulin (thought to be the
anticollagenase factor) are immediately incorporated into the
corneal ulcer bed. Through the conjunctival blood vessels, sys-
temic antibiotics can enter the ulcer site in higher levels. The
fibrovascular o1 deeper layer of the conjunctival transplant
 offers immediate fibroblasts and collagen to begin rebuilding
the coineal stroma. Conjunctival grafts usually result in co1-
neal scars of various sizes and depths. Postoperative topical
corticosteroids and/or cyclosporine can reduce this postopera-
tive sca1 tissue formation to a minimum, but corneal scarring
Fig. 8.14 Bulbar pedicle conjunctival grafts used in the dog to treat a
after conjunctival grafts should be anticipated.
central and deep cormeal ulcer.
203
8
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
and is supplied commercially as 7 x 10 cm sheets, and 10 o1
Corneoscleral transposition
15 mm diameter ophthalmic discs.
After debridement of the septic coineal ulcer, the SIS
Corneoscleral transposition shifts the peripheral coinea into
graft is carefully trimmed and ‘fitted’ to cover in excess of
central coineal defects and moves adjacent sclera into the
1-1.5 mm of the entire corneal ulcerative bed. After securing
peripheral cornea. As this procedure is primarily used for
the repair of corneal ulcerations it is included in this section;
the graft to the ulcel's edges with several 7-0 to 9-0 simple
however, corneoscleral and corneoconjunctival transposi-
interrupted absorbable sutures, the entire SIS graft is covered
with a bulbar pedicle conjunctival graft.
sliding lamellar keratoplasty. As a result, axial (central)
 The SIS graft provides a scaffold for corneal healing as well
and visually important cornea remains clear, but the peri-
as additional strength to the overlying bulba1 conjunctival
graft. Rabbit corneal SIS graft studies suggest that the graft
pheral coinea with the transposed sclera becomes some-
what translucent. A modification of this surgery, the
collagen sheet is actually incorporated into the healing
corneoconjunctival autograft, was presented in Chapter 7.
process. SIS grafts have been reported to fill the limbocor-
neal defect after limbal melanocytoma excision and covered
Coineoscleral transpositions are used to treat deep coineal
ulcerations, descemetoceles, and feline coineal sequestra
with bulbar conjunctiva, for full-thickness corneal ulcerative
disease in dogs and covered with conjunctival grafts, after
involving the deeper stroma. The advancement of coineoscl-
eral tissues into central corneal ulcers, suspected as septic o1
coineal ulcers and coineal sequestra in cats and not covered
not treated with antibiotics, is not recommended as these
with conjunctival grafts, and after corneal ulceration and
grafts may also be destroyed with the progressive melting
coineal stromal abscess formation in horses and covered
with conjunctival grafts.
process. If the tip of the corneoscleral graft is already vascu-
These grafts are convenient to use, are commercially
larized, the chance of slough from infectious agents is
available and ready for use, avoid potential vinus transmis-
leduced. Hence, before corneoscleral transpositions are per-
sion as is possible with feline-based grafts, and are easy to
formed, the corneal ulcer's edges should be scraped and
 handle during surgery. If placed in an uncontrolled septic
examined microscopically fo1 bacterial and fungal organ-
corneal ulcer, covering with a conjunctival graft is highly
isms. Alternatively, the corneal ulcer may be treated hourly
recommended.
with topical broad-spectrum antibiotics fo1 several hours
to attempt sterilization of the ulcer site.
After the onset of general anesthesia, and surgical prepa-
Amniotic conjunctival grafts
ration of the eyelids, conjunctiva, and coinea with aqueous
0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eye is draped and an
Amniotic grafts have been reported to repair deep cor-
eyelid speculum positioned. The corneal ulcer is carefully
debrided to remove all potentially necrotic and/or infected
thickness corneal defects dogs. The amniotic grafts for both
tissues (Fig. 8.15a). Once these tissues have been removed,
the horse and dog studies were harvested from noimal
the coineal defect may be 1-2 mm larger. The coineoscleral
equine placenta and are not available commercially.
advancement graft is prepared. Two slightly diverging
In the dog study. after harvest, the amniotic
Cgrafts
corneal incisions with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical
were preserved in 98% sterile glycerol (full-thickness
blade are performed, extending from the coineal bed to
scleral grafts are commonly preserved in glycerol). The
the limbus (Fig. 8.15b). These incisions are approximately
equine amniotic graft is obtained aseptically as a 5 mm?
one-half of the stromal thickness. At the limbus, the bulbar
section of amnion after death o1 cesarean section. After ha1-
     sn  
vest, the tissues are preserved in 98% sterile glycerol;
scissors fo1 about 15-20 mm and 1eflected caudally to
immediately before use the tissue is rehydrated in sterile
expose the sclera (Fig. 8.15c).
saline solution.
The ends of the two coineal incisions are extended into
The equine pericardium has also been used in surgery to
the sclera at a distance equal to the height of the coineal
correct canine lateral canthal entropion, deep corneal ulcera-
ulcer bed (Fig. 8.15d). These incisions should be about
tions in dogs, fill the orbital cavity of dogs after enucleation,
0.2-0.3 mm deep. Hemorrhage during these incisions is
and as a scleral graft.
anticipated and judicious cautery with the disposable
battery-powered electrocautery unit is necessary fo1 hemo-
stasis. The tip of the corneoscleral transposition is elevated
Nictitating membrane flaps
with 1 x 2 teeth thumb forceps and a coineal dissecto1,
Nictitating membrane flaps provide more support to the
and separated from the corneal bed to the end of the scleral
diseased cornea than temporary complete tarsorrhaphy in
incisions (Fig. 8.15e). The corneal separato1, in contrast to
small animals. Nictitating membrane flaps are used to cover
sharp dissection with a scalpel blade, facilitates dissection
and protect a weakened cornea, but are not usually a source
within the corneal lamellae without the danger of shifting
of tissues for the coinea. Nictitating flaps are recommended
the plane of tissue separation.
fo1 superficial corneal diseases, including corneal erosions,
Once separation from the underlying corneosclera is com-
neuroparalytic and neurotropic keratitis, temporary expo-
plete, the base of the graft is incised with tenotomy scissors
sure keratitis, superficial coineal ulcers, and acute keratocon-
(Fig. 8.15f). The length and width of the tip of the co1-
junctivitis sicca, and to reinforce a bulbar conjunctival graft.
neoscleral graft should be 1-2 mm larger than the corneal
Surgical procedures for nictitating membrane flaps are
ulcer bed. The corneoscleral graft is positioned in the coI-
presented in Chapter 7.
neal ulcer bed, trimmed if necessary, and apposed with 7-0
204
Surgical procedures for deep cormeal ulcerations
A
C
D
F
G
otg on aeag aun yri (e) ajap leauion lenuan e onui Auauduad aun woy ps ane eas zuaneipe pue eauion uonisodsuen (eapsoauion ul sig dbi
microsurgical blade, all necrotic and suspicious corneal epithelia and stroma are carefully excised. (b) Two slightly diverging corneal incisions are excised from
the edge of the corneal ulcer to the limbus with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade to prepare the corneoscleral graft. (c) At the limbus, the bulbar
jeauuos ypoq jo spua aul (p) euaps bukuapun ayp asodxa on siossins Awoxouan s,uanans Aq paspu! aue (ansdes s,uoual) eosey jeginq!da pue egounjuo
incisions are extended into the superficial (about 0.2-0.3 mm deep) sclera with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. Hemorrhage from these scleral
jewouas leauio aua pue 'sdauoy qwunun yzaan z × l yrm padseun s! zyeub jeapsoauios aun jo din aul (a) Auanenounala zuiod Aq pallouuon s! suoisiou!
dissection is started with a corneal dissector or separator. (f After the cormeoscleral graft is completely separated from the deeper corneal and scleral tissues,
its base is incised with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (g) The corneoscleral graft is carefully trimmed to fit the corneal defect, and should be 0.5-1 mm larger than
the defect to compensate for tissue shrinkage. t is attached by 7-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. (h) After the corneoscleral graft is secured by
sutures, the bulbar conjunctiva is apposed to the limbus with a 7-0 to 9-0 simple continuous absorbable suture. (i) The 3-week postoperative appearance of a
corneoconjunctival graft in a cat after removal of a corneal sequestrum.
to 9-0 simple interrupted braided polyglactin 910 sutures
Adaptations for large animals
(Fig. 8.15g). The edge of the bulbar conjunctiva is apposed
and special species
back to the limbus with a 7-0 to 9-0 simple continuous
braided polyglactin 910 suture (Fig. 8.15h).
Conjunctival grafts or flaps are frequently used in equine
Postoperative treatment after coineoscleral transpositions
ophthalmology fo1 clinical treatment of deep, melting, and
includes topical and  systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics.
large corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, and perforated cor-
and  topical mydriatics sufficient to maintain a moderately
neal ulcers. Melting ulcers should be stabilized with medical
dilated and mobile pupil. After 7-10 days, topical corticoster-
therapy, if possible, before the surgical placement of the
oids are started to reduce corneal scarring. Clearing of the coI-
graft to prevent protease digestion of any absorbable suture
nea usually starts 2-6 weeks postoperatively. Success rates
that will hold the conjunctival graft in place. The preopera-
with corneoscleral transpositions are 75- 80% (Fig. 8.15i).
       
Complications after this surgery include septic involve-
 ui uisid n sos io sos n leuno
ment of the tip of the transposition with the ulcer process.
cases and provides a healthier cornea for suturing. All con-
suture loss, and abscesses. Iridocyclitis is often intense in
 junctival flaps consist of thin conjunctival tissue transposed
these eyes, and vigorous mydriatic therapy indicated. With
onto the coinea to cover a severe coineal lesion and
inadequate control of the iridocyclitis, deposits of iridal tis-
provide sufficient tissue to strengthen most weakened melt-
sue on the anterior lens capsule, posterior synechiae, and
ing corneas.
They are not as strong as corneal grafts.
secondary cataract foimation result.
Conjunctival autografts consist of either bulbar or palpebral
205
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
conjunctival mucosa with epithelium, and connective tissue
the corneal lesion (1etraction of the graft). This may occu1
(fibroblasts, blood vessels, and lymphatics), thus offering a
because the coineal lesion is progressing (woisening) and
new and highly viable epithelium and significant antibactel-
damaging the cornea at the points where the sutures secure
ial, antifungal, antiprotease, and anticollagenase effects.
the graft. Cytokines released by the tissue may induce infarc-
With conjunctival grafts, polymorphonuclear leukocytes,
tion of the flap vessels and cause premature release. Exces-
antibodies, serum, and αz-macroglobulin are immediately
sive tension on the graft, o1 allowing a significant portion
placed in the corneal ulcer bed. The fibrovasculal, o1 dee-
of the fibrous Tenon's capsule to remain attached to the
 per, layer of the conjunctival transplant offers immediate
graft, may result in premature dehiscence of the graft. Proper
fibroblasts and collagen with which to begin rebuilding
suture placement in healthy cornea using a thin conjunc-
the coineal stroma.
tival graft concurrent with appropriate medical therapy will
Conjunctival autografts are more difficult to perform than
gTeatly decrease the complications following conjunctival
nictitating membrane flaps but simpler than surgeries such
graft surgery. Conjunctival grafts usually result in corneal
as corneoconjunctival grafts, corneoscleral transpositions,
scars of various sizes and degrees. Scarring can be minimized,
and penetrating keratoplasty (PK). They are also easie1 to
however, by removal of necrotic coinea with keratectomy
perform in the horse than in other species, because horses
before graft placement.(
Corticosteroids are not 1ecom-
 have a great deal of very mobile bulbar conjunctiva.
e Ar a Aidon pas aq u a  a
There are different types of conjunctival graft based on the
surgery to reduce postoperative scar tissue formation to a
source of the mucosa (bulbar or palpebral) and the type of
minimum, but some degree of coineal scarring after con-
graft (total or 360°, bridge or bipedicle, hood or 180°, pedi-
junctival grafts should be anticipated.
cle o1 rotational, and island). Conjunctival grafts are usually
 harvested from adjacent bulbar conjunctiva; however, the
Total or 360? conjunctival graft
palpebral conjunctiva can also be used. The disadvantage
of the palpebral conjunctival flap is that the eyelid is mobile
 This type of graft is indicated in eyes with a large melting
and some tension will be applied to the sutured conjuncti-
ulcer that affects most of the cornea. After Castroviejo eyelid
  jo i 1 e 0  Ass  
speculum placement to expose the eye and conjunctiva,
cence. However, as the bulbar conjunctival flap moves
and a drop of 2.5% phenylephrine, the dorsal bulba1 con-
with the eye, no tension is applied to the flap itself. It is also
junctiva is grasped with forceps (0.12 mm Colibri forceps
not recommended to use the conjunctiva near the nictitating
 Or Bishop-Harmon forceps) and incised with tenotomy scis-
membrane if possible because its movements can put
so1s (Westcott scissors o1 Steven's tenotomy scissors) 2 mm
tension on the graft, resulting in premature graft release.
from the limbus (limbus-based 36o° conjunctival graft).
Conjunctival autografts from either bulbar or palpebral
 The incision is then continued 360° around the limbus
conjunctiva should be thin, and not include Tenon's cap-
(i.e., peritomy). The bulbar conjunctiva is then separated
sule or the bulbar fascia. It seems beneficial to administer
from the underlying Tenon's capsule by alternating blunt-
a drop of 2.5% phenylephrine prior to dissection of the
a pua u ni oi dn panuu si neui uoas de
conjunctiva to limit hemorrhage. Tenon's capsule should
limbus. The conjunctival graft should be thin to minimize
be stripped or cut from the graft so that the graft easily cov.
traction, and the loose edges of the graft should rest on
s n no isn ae n  ren a si
the central cornea without spontaneously retracting. The
placement. The inclusion of Tenon's capsule may contribute
conjunctiva is then pulled over the cornea and sutured to
itself in the center of the coinea in a linear pattein (horizon-
transplanted conjunctival graft. Conjunctival grafts should
tal mattress) using 7-0 o1 8-0 absorbable sutures. A 360°
have tension-relieving sutures placed at the limbus to pre-
conjunctival graft is easy to perform and effective for large
   an   d  a n
coineal lesions; however, it covers the entire coinea which
Conjunctival pedicle grafts using the bulbar conjunctiva
makes vision impossible, prevents monitoring of lesion
from the dorsal or temporal quadrants are preferred,
progression, and leaves large corneal scars.
because the conjunctiva in those areas is surgically available
and the pedicle flap covers only the ulcer surface, allowing
 Bridge or bipedicle graft
postoperative observation of the pupil and anterior cham-
ber. The pedicle graft is a focal transplant and does not cover
 The bridge or bipedicle flap is indicated for large melting
the entire cornea. With all the flaps, it is important that the
ulcers in the central, dorsal paracentral, and lateral para-
  d a  e a  
central corneal regions (Fig. 8.16). This type of graft is also
prepared. The recipient bed for the conjunctival graft is
done when the corneal defect is too large for a pedicle graft
prepared by debridement and keratectomy of the corneal
(>6-8 mm) but too small fo1 a total graft. The first incision
ulcer with a Beaver No. 6400 miciosurgical blade, thereby
is made with the Westcott scissors in the conjunctiva at
Iemoving loose epithelium and necrotic coineal tissues.
1-2 mm from the limbus, and extended parallel to the
ad ieao id on uaei a Pinous aieo ier
limbus fo1 approximately 180°. This conjunctival incision
during this debridement.
a0 lm 1eun yen e ueqo on iapio ul apeu aq Pinous
Temporary tarsorrhaphy is performed concurently with
 perpendicular to the eyelid margins when in place on the
conjunctival grafts to minimize blinking movement, prevent 
cornea so as to minimize eyelid trauma to the corneal
excessive lid trauma to the graft and its sutures, and allow
sutures and conjunctival graft. This conjunctiva is exten-
quick graft adherences to the stroma.
sively undermined, and the underlying fibrous tissue
- j a  o   ns a
removed in order to obtain a conjunctival graft that is
junctival grafting procedure is dehiscence of the graft from
almost transparent. You should be able to visualize the
206
Surgical procedures for deep cormeal ulcerations
A
B
eauios daap aun jo anueueadde aneiadoaid (e) danin leauios abiel e jo zuawneain joy asioy aua u! yeub lenounjuos jeging abpiug io alpipadig glrg dbi
ulcer with a thin center. (b) Two week postoperative appearance of the bipedicle (bridge) bulbar conjunctival graft.
scissors' tips undeineath the tissue. A second conjunctival
generally with two o1 four simple internupted sutures O1
a continuous suture pattein using 7-0 or 8-0 absorbable
original conjunctival incision, thus creating a ‘bridge' of
material. Large scars result from this type of graft.
conjunctiva that should be 1-2 mm wider than the coineal
ulcer. This bridge is then advanced over the lesion by rota-
Pedicle or rotational conjunctival graft
tion (the 1otation should be less than 45° from the vertical)
and sutured using 7-0 or 8-0 simple interrupted absorbable
The pedicle o1 rotational graft is probably the most useful
sutures in the cornea around the lesion. The original graft
and versatile conjunctival graft as it generally leaves a
r a se a pas  a a hs
smaller sca1 to have minimal effects on vision, allows fo1
conjunctiva with simple inteinupted o1 continuous sutures,
 postoperative intraocular examination, and does not inhibit
but this is not necessary. The advantage of this procedure
dnug penetration into the anterior chamber. The conjuncti-
 is that it provides exquisite blood supply to lesions of the
val graft should be oriented vertically on the cornea so as
cornea.
to minimize eyelid trauma to the corneal sutures and con-
junctival graft. The base of the pedicle should be directed
at the area of the limbus closest to the lesion (Figs 8.17
Hood or 180? conjunctival graft
and 8.18). Once the location is determined, the conjunctiva
The hood o1 180° conjunctival graft is indicated fo1 large
is tented with the 0.12 mm Colibri forceps, a small slit is
peripheral melting corneal ulcers. The conjunctiva is cut
made with the Westcott scissors in the conjunctiva perpen-
from the limbus (2 mm away) and undermined. The con-
dicula1 to the limbus at 1-2 mm from the limbus, and this
junctiva is separated from Tenon's capsule and should be
initial conjunctival incision continued, parallel to the lim-
sufficiently thin to allow visualization of the scissors' tips
bus. The entire conjunctival flap site is then undermined
under the mucosa. The conjunctival graft is then advanced
using blunt dissection with Steven's tenotomy scissors. The
to cover the lesion without tension and sutured in place,
underlying fibrous tissue (i.e., Tenon's capsule) should be
A
Fig. 8.17 Treatment of a central deep corneal ulcer with a tectonic comeal transplant and bulbar conjunctival pedicdle graft in a horse. (a) A large diameter
melting corneal ulcer is surrounded by a strong cellular infiltrate and corneal edema. (b) After filling the corneal defect with frozen (tectonic) corneal tissue, the
entire ulcer is covered with a bulbar conjunctival pedicle graft (appearance 5 weeks postoperatively). (c) At 7 weeks postoperatively, the cornea has healed,
the pupil is well dilated, but the dorsal corpora nigra has adhered to the posterior comeal wound.
207
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
B
Fig. 8.18 Treatment of melting corneal ulcer with iris prolapse with penetrating keratoplasty (frozen tectonic graft) and conjunctival and amnion grafts in a
horse. (a) Perforated corneal ulcer with iris prolapse in an adult horse. (b) Penetrating keratoplasty has been covered by a conjunctival graft but is beginning to
fail. The avascular portion of the failed conjunctival graft has been covered by an amnion graft. (c) The cornea has healed, the amnion graft has sloughed, and
the pedicle conjunctival graft at 7 weeks postoperatively is ready to be transected at its base.
freed from the overlying conjunctiva so that the conjunctiva
(palpebral) or the bulbar conjunctiva. The conjunctiva is
appears nearly transparent and permits the visualization of
undermined and excised from the donor site using Colibri
the scissors' tips underneath the conjunctiva. The second
forceps and Westcott tenotomy scissors, and then transposed
incision is then made perpendicular to the first incision
to cover the corneal lesion, with the epithelial site exteinal
(and to the limbus) at the tip of the graft. The width of
to allow proper attachment of the graft to the lesion. Sim-
the incision should be 1-2 mm wider than the size of the
ple interrupted or continuous sutures can be used to secure
corneal lesion to be covered. The third and final incision is
the graft to the coinea using 7-0 to 8-0 absorbable material.
made parallel to the first, extending to the bulbar attach-
The lack of blood supply to the island graft reduces graft
ment of the graft. The strip of conjunctiva thus created is
   n in s  
then rotated to cover the corneal lesion. It should cover
Ieasons, the island conjunctival graft is not recommended
the corneal defect with no tension o1 retraction. The flap is
in equine coineal disease.
then sutured to the coinea with 7-0 to 8-0 simple inter-
nupted absorbable sutures. The cardinal sutures are placed
 Amniotic membrane grafts
first at the distal coiners of the flap. and then 1.0-1.5 mm
apart. Two inteinipted sutures may be placed at the limbus
The use of equine amniotic membrane grafts fo1 eye pro-
on either side of the graft to decrease the tension applied
blems in horses, and particularly to surgically treat melting
to the corneal recipient site. To prevent disruption of the
corneal ulcers, has been reported. Amniotic membrane (AM)
blood supply, sutures are not placed within the pedicle po1-
consists of an epithelium, a thick basement membrane, and
tion of the graft, or at the proximal portion of the lesion.
an avascular stroma. High concentrations of basic fibroblast
Conjunctival grafts will adhere to the exposed coineal
growth factor and basement membrane components such
i aiae an nou lm Aa i uisa a jo e
as collagen are present. It provides a good cell-basement
the epithelium surrounding the flap. Between 6 and 8 weeks
membrane structure that is critical for epithelial prolifera-
after the placement of the flap. the blood supply can be
tion and differentiation. Reports have shown interest in the
interrupted by cutting the base of the flap at the limbus. This
AM as a graft for reconstnuction of various ocular surfaces,
procedure can usually be perfoimed with the use of a topical
as it is a strong biomaterial that contains anti-angiogenic,
anesthesia and Steven's tenotomy scissors. Eliminating the
anti-inflammatory, antifibrotic, and growth factors. A recent
blood supply will allow the conjunctival graft to recede
investigation revealed that AM contains several protease
and lessen the resulting corneal scar. If the pedicle graft does
inhibitors such as αz-macroglobulin, α-chymotrypsin inhib-
not impede the horse's vision, trimming of the pedicle con-
junctival graft is not recommended since episodes of uveitis
plasmin inhibitor. The therapeutic effect of AM on severely
have been reported following this procedure in horses.
damaged melting ulcers may be due to the inhibitory effect
ad  sss ss  a e e a aa
of AM on coineal protease activity that would otherwise
induce severe and irreversible stromal destriction. It has also
pedicle flaps are easier to perfoim.
been suggested that the AM can decrease the protease activity
directed against the corneal stroma by providing exogenous
collagen as a deviant substrate for tear film proteases.
Island conjunctival graft
For the cases we initially treated at the University of
A conjunctival, free island graft is a modified conjunctival
Florida Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, an equine
graft in which the blood supply is severed from the outset.
placenta was harvested during an elective cesarean section
It is simply a transplant of conjunctival tissue to the coinea,
for term pregnancy on a 12-year-old mare. We have since
and its use has been described in deep, central, and para-
successfully used amnion obtained at term deliveries. The
central coineal lesions. The donor site can be the tarsal
allantoamnion is separated from the allantochorion and
208
Surgical procedures for deep cormeal ulcerations
Fig. 8.19 Treatment of a large corneal ulcer with
amnion graft in a horse. (a) Preoperative
appearance of the corneal ulcer with edema, 
keratomalacia, and hypopyon. (b) Preoperative
appearance of the large corneal ulcer after
staining with topical fluorescein. (c) An amnion 
 graft that has covered the corneal ulcer has nearly
sloughed off at two weeks postoperatively. (d)
The corneal ulcer is healing nicely surrounded
with superficial vascularization and granuloma
formation.
A
the amnion (epithelium, stroma, and basement membrane),
prevent excessive lid trauma to the graft and its sutures.
then separated by blunt dissection from the allantois. The AM
and allow quick graft adherence to the stroma.
is then placed on a nitrocellulose paper and stored frozen at -
80°C fo1 years in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium also
Other biomaterials with potential use in
containing glycerol, antibiotics, and antifungals (penicillin,
s a (   u a
corneal surgery in horses
in the freezel, the AM epithelium is almost non-existent,
Other biomaterials have been used in corneal surgeries
and therefore the AM graft material consists of a stroma and
in other species (human, dogs, cats, rabbits): equine peri-
 a basement membrane.
cardium, peritoneum, equine renal capsule, porcine small
Prior to coineal surgery, the AM is naturally thawed, and
intestinal submucosa (SIS), and porcine bladder submu-
then rinsed with sterile saline over 30 min to wash off the
cosa (ACell, Columbia, MD) with some interesting results 
glycerol. During the wash, the AM is kept on the nitiocel-
(Fig. 8.20). With the exception of the porcine bladder sub-
lulose paper with the allantoic (stromal) side against the
mucosa that has been used in a few equine cases, including
paper. The AM is then prepared and cut according to the size
at the University of Florida, College of Veterinary Medicine,
of the corneal defect to be covered. To reduce premature graft
to our knowledge the use of these biomaterials has not been
Ietraction, AM grafts should simply cover the corneal defect
Ieported in horses. Further studies need to be performed in
with little tension present before the suture placement. As
order to assess theil potential use for coineal surgery in
with conjunctival grafts, it is important that the corneal graft
horses with melting coineal ulcers.
site and the ulcer be properly prepared. The recipient bed fo1
the AM graft is prepared by removing loose epithelium and
necrotic corneal tissues with a Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical
blade. Great care should be taken to prevent corneal perfora-
tion during this debridement. The purpose and the evolution
of the AM graft depends on how the AM is placed on the
coinea: if the allantoic (stromal) side of the AM faces the co1-
nea, the AM graft will adhere to the coineal stroma and the
AM is expected to be incorporated into the coineal stroma;
on the other hand, if the basement membrane of the AM
faces the comea, the comeal epithelial cells will migrate along
the membrane and therefore the AM is used as a bandage. It
is expected to slough off in 7-10 days.
The AM is then sutured to the coinea with 7-0 to 8-0 sim-
ple interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 8.19). Several layers
 of AM can be used and piled up to fill the corneal defect if
necessary. The AM may be placed limbus to limbus to
Fig. 8.20 Treatment of a leaking corneal suture with tissue glue and BIOSIS
cover the complete coinea as a bandage. A temporary tarso1-
graft in a horse. Tissue glue and a BlOSIS graft were used to successfully stop
rhaphy is then placed to minimize blinking movement,
a leaking corneal suture in this horse.
209
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Nictitating membrane or third eyelid flap
Surgery for corneal lacerations
Nictitating membrane flaps provide more support to a dis
eased cornea than a temporary complete tarsorrhaphy. They
Corneal lacerations in small animals are frequent, and
ale used to cover and protect a weakened coinea, but are not
-i ieo (id g) se  ui a n
a source of nutrients o1 collagen to replace coineal tissue
 e s rd  a  are sn
loss. Nictitating membrane flaps are 1ecommended for
thickness (o1 complete). Full-thickness lacerations are sub-
superficial corneal diseases, as well as to reinforce a bulbar
divided into: 1) with and without inis prolapse; 2) with and
conjunctival graft. Third eyelid flaps are contraindicated fo1
without lens involvement; and 3) with loss of intraocula1
most corneal ulcers in horses, especially the melting ulcers
contents. The prognosis for successful treatment of corneal
 pooq e apoid iou op Aaui asneaq aipide ssanoid 1eu
lacerations in small animals is determined by: dog or cat;
supply or fibrovascular tissues to the ulcer. In addition, it
age of the patient; cause of the laceration; duration of the
is impossible to visually observe the progression of the dis-
laceration; depth, position, and size of the laceration; and
ease and cover the normal coinea. Furthermore, third eyelid
the involvement of other ocular tissues. Dogs tend to have
flaps might impede the penetration of topical medication
a more intense anterior uveal inflammation than cats fol-
and retain inflammatory exudates adjacent to the lesion.
 o   i  s l 
To place a third eyelid flap, one tip of the forceps (Bishop-
patient is important as young animals (less than 1 year
Harmon forceps) is placed above and the other tip below
old) have a greater chance of developing phthisis bulbi
the lateral aspect of the upper eyelid margin. The forceps tips
than oldel animals. Although most coineal lacerations are
are inserted as far as possible into the conjunctival fornix
caused by trauma with metal objects, coineal lacerations
where the sutures should traveise the eyelid. The first suture
secondary to cat scratches and wood splinters, with possi-
(4-0 non-absorbable suture) with a pre-placed stent (intrave-
ble embedment of organic material, produce a mo1e
nous tubing, buttons, polystyrene foam strip, rubber bands)
intense postoperative anterior uveitis and carry a guarded
is passed through the eyelid skin and into the conjunctival
prognosis. Lacerations with inis prolapse in excess of 24
fornix. The suture is then passed through the palpebral (ante-
h have a poor prognosis as the exposed iris must be excised
lior) side of the nictitating membrane to encircle the upper
(1athe1 than replaced in the anterior chamber) and a more
stem of the T-shaped nictitating hyaline cartilage. The suture
intense anterior uveitis results. Intraocular hemorrhage is
is then finally passed through the dorsolateral conjunctival
also possible. Axial or central coineal lacerations have a
fornix, the upper eyelid, and the stent again. The nictitating
greater adverse effect on restoration of vision and a greatel
membrane is then protracted until its leading margin is at
chance of lens involvement. Additional ocular tissue
the limbus or within the conjunctival foinix.
involvement with full-thickness coineal lacerations, such
as iris prolapse, laceration of the anterio1 lens capsule, loss
of lens and vitreous, intraocular hemorrhage, and lacera-
Temporary tarsorrhaphy
tions of the sclera decrease the prognosis markedly for resto-
A temporary taisoirhaphy minimizes eyelid movement
ration of vision. Eyes with large corneal lacerations, loss of
over the corneal sutures, conjunctival grafts, and corneal
intraocular contents, and no realistic possibility for vision
grafts, thus reducing any microtrauma to the surgical site
are best treated by enucleation o1 evisceration with an
and promoting graft adherence. A tarsorrhaphy is recom-
intrascleral prosthesis.
ticularly conjunctival, amniotic membrane, and corneal
grafts. The sutures may be left in place for a few days to a
week. If not placed properly, the tarsorrhaphy suture can
cause a corneal ulcer. Mild pressure necrosis of the eyelid
skin can result from a temporary tarsorhaphy suture left
in place for more than several days. Using 4-0 non-absorb-
able material, a horizontal mattress suture is placed across
the palpebral fissure. To achieve accurate apposition of the
lids, the needle should exit and enter the lid margin at the
level of the meibomian glands. Intravenous tubing, but-
tons, polystyrene foam strip, o1 rubber bands should be
used as stents to minimize the pressure applied to the eye-
lids. The tarsorrhaphy should be oriented along the eyelid
to allow for evaluation of the surgical site. The number of
eyelid sutures varies (usually two or three) depending on
   d r  e 
the eyelids is performed. Alternatively, the knot may be
tied first with a surgeon's throw and then finished in a
Fig. 8.21 Corneal lacerations in the dog often occur in young animals and
bow-tie to allow fo1 loosening of the tarsorrhaphy suture
are usually penetrating with iris prolapse. Immediate postoperative
to facilitate corneal evaluation. This technique requires
appearance of a cormeal laceration after repair, with apposition of its edges
with several 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. Some hemorrhage
some patience, however, and a protective eyecup
is
still remains in the anterior chamber. Mydriasis will be induced with 1%
Iequired. Additionally, thorough sedation is necessary to
atropine instillation, and if the hemorrhage persists, intracameral 25 μg tissue
untie and retie the bow.
 pla sminogen activator may be injected after about 7 days.
210
Surgery for cormeal lacerations
Preoperative medical treatment
 Penetrating corneal laceration with/without
Coineal lacerations are one of the few ophthalmic emel-
iris prolapse
gencies. Surgical coirection for corneal lacerations should
Full-thickness corneal lacerations with inis prolapse are
be performed as soon as possible. In the interim, medical
unfortunately the more frequent type of corneal injury.
therapy is immediately initiated. Not infrequently, these
The iris becomes incarcerated in the corneal laceration. The
patients are young animals, and the pain from the injury
amount of iridal protrusion varies with the size, shape,
often results in a patient that is difficult to handle and exam-
and duration of the corneal tear. Surgical repair should be
ine. Once the diagnosis is established, patient restraint
attempted as soon as possible. Medical therapy with topical
should be minimal. Initial medical treatment includes topi-
and systemic antibiotics is initiated immediately. After gen-
cal (gentamicin o1 chloramphenicol) and systemic antibio-
eral anesthesia and preparation of the eyelids and exteinal
tics (amoxicillin o1 cephalexin). Topical mydriatics, such
eye, the area is carefully draped. An eyelid speculum is
as atropine, are usually delayed until surgery or later, since,
inserted to retract the eyelids. The iris prolapse and under-
with a full-thickness corneal laceration, iris prolapse may
lying corneal tear are carefully cleaned with sterile lactated
 be important in maintaining the anterior chamber and
Ringel's solution with penicillin G (1:2000 [U/mL) added
 providing at least some intraocular pressure.
(Fig. 8.23a).
The remainder of the globe is carefully
inspected for tears and hemoirhages. The pupil and anterior
Partial-thickness corneal lacerations
lens capsule should also be carefully inspected.
The decision to amputate the prolapsed iris or replace it
Partial-thickness comeal lacerations usually bear a guarded
in the anterior chamber is based on the length of time that
but favorable prognosis. Once under general anesthesia, the
the iris has been exposed and the overall size of the iris pro-
eyelids and coineoconjunctival surfaces are prepared for asep.
lapse. There is little relationship between the size of the iris
tic surgery, the area draped, and an eyelid speculum inserted.
prolapse and the size of the corneal laceration. Once the iris
The partial-thickness corneal laceration and, if present, the
becomes plugged in the cornea, venous congestion, iridal
resultant corneal flap, are carefully cleansed with aqueous
 swelling, and seepage of fibrin rapidly enlarge the initial iris
0.5% povidone-iodine solution and sterile cotton swabs,
prolapse. Fortunately, most corneal lacerations are quite
and the rest of the cornea and globe are closely inspected
small under fairly large inis prolapses. With an iris prolapse
fo1 additional injuries (Fig. 8.22a). Like other ophthalmic tis-
more than 12 h old, the exposed iris is protracted to fresh
sues, excision of the injured coineal tissue is avoided. The
iris and amputated close to the corneal surface with sharp
corneal flap is carefully apposed with 5-0 to 7-0 simple inte1-
inis scissois (DeWecker, Vannas o1 Westcott) (Fig. 8.23b).
rupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 8.22b). The traumatized co1-
Several minutes are permitted to elapse for clotting and
nea will appear edematous and thicker than noimal.
sealing of the inis blood vessels with the fresh iris still incal-
The pupil is usually miotic with some aqueous humor flare
cerated within the coineal wound, before repositioning of
present. Topical mydriatics, such as 1% atropine, are instilled
the remaining iris within the anterior chamber. If iridal
during surgery to treat the secondary anterior uveitis. Postop-
hemorrhage persists, point electrocautery is performed with
eratively, topical and systemic antibiotics, mydriatics, and
a disposable unit (Fig. 8.23c).
The iris is carefully freed of its aftachments to the adjacent
daily. As healing progresses and the anterior uveitis resolves.
coinea and carefully replaced into the anterior chamber
the frequency of the medications is gradually reduced: sys-
with a cyclodialysis spatula (Fig. 8.23d,e) or viscoelastic
temic medications are usually stopped in 7-14 days; topical
material. Through the coineal laceration, the anterior cham-
ber is flushed with sterile lactated Ringer's or balanced salt
lution of the anterior uveitis. Topical corticosteroids may
solution containing penicillin G (Fig. 8.23f). All fibrin and
be initiated after 10-14 days to minimize coineal scarring.
any blood clots are carefully irigated from the anterio1
Overall results with partial coineal lacerations are usually
chamber. Excessive lavage of the anterior chamber should
 good, with an acceptable corneal scar resulting.
be avoided. The anterior chamber is then reformed with a
viscoelastic agent (1% sodium hyaluronate o1 2% hydroxy-
propyl methylcellulose) to facilitate corneal wound apposi-
tion and maintain the iris away from the posterior corneal
surface.
The corneal wound is apposed with 7-0 to 9-0 simple
interrupted absorbable (braided polyglactin 910) sutures
placed about 1-1.5 mm apart (Fig. 8.23g). Other suture
techniques are the simple continuous and the double saw-
toothed continuous patterns. These sutures should 
A
?
e a  s     
of the endothelia and Descemet's membrane as well as the
Fig. 8.22 Partial corneal lacerations may involve a large gash in the cornea
anterio1 coineal stroma and epithelia. Two mm bites of the
with loss of these tissues or a resultant pedicle of traumatized corneal
coineal stroma on each side of the suture line are recom-
epithelia and stroma. This pedidle should, if possible, be apposed to the
mended as these tissues are edematous and friable. Just
underlying corneal defect. (a) The corneal pedicle is carefully inspected and
cleansed with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution. (b) The corneal flap is
before placement of the last corneal suture, the viscoelastic
apposed to the underlying corneal stroma with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted
agent is flushed from the anterior chamber with balanced
absorbable sutures
salt or lactated Ringel's solution.
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
lris prolapse
B
C
D
F
G
?
Fig. 8.23 Full-thickness or penetrating corneal lacerations are usually complicated by an iris prolapse. (a) The full-thickness corneal laceration affects the axial
cornea and the thumb forceps is touching the iris prolapse. The corneal tear is carefully cleaned and irigated with lactated Ringer's solution containing
penicillin G (1:2000 IU/mL). (b) An iris prolapse that has been exposed more than 12 h is carefully protracted into the defect and amputated with sharp iris
scissors (DeWecker). (c) lridal hemorrhage usually results and hemostasis is secured by judicious electrocautery using a disposable cautery unit. (d) Once iridal
hemostasis is achieved, a cyclodialysis spatula is inserted through the corneal laceration to separate any iridocorneal adhesions. (e) The cyclodialysis spatula
should not touch the posterior corneal surface to reposition the iris into the anterior chamber. (f The anterior chamber is lavaged with sterile lactated Ringer's
solution with penicillin G (1:2000 IU/mL) to remove any remaining blood and fibrin, and then reformed with a viscoelastic agent to maintain its shape and
prevent the iris from contacting the posterior cornea during closure of the corneal laceration. (g) The corneal wound is apposed with 7-0 to 9-0 simple
interrupted absorbable sutures placed deeply in the corneal stroma. Before placement of the last corneal suture, the viscoelastic agent is flushed from the
anterior chamber with the lactated Ringer's solution-penicillin G combination. (h) After completion of the corneal wound closure, a small gauge hypodermic
needle is carefully inserted between two comeal sutures and the lactated Ringer's solution-penicillin G combination injected to increase the intraocular
pressure to about 10 mmHg and to check the integrity of the wound closure.
If the coineal edges in the wound are quite friable, o1 the
effect. Because of the coineal wound, topical corticosteroids
wound closure marginal, a bulbar pedicle conjunctival graft
are avoided. However, once the healing of the corneal
may be performed. The entie coineal wound minus its
wound is advanced, at 3-6 weeks postoperatively, topical
epithelium is covered with the tip of the conjunctival graft.
corticosteroids may be added.
The addition of the graft will inciease the postoperative co1-
The pupil, with the surgical iris defect, should be main-
neal scar, but can reduce the likelihood of the breakdown of
tained in a moderately dilated position. Some inidal move-
the coineal wound postoperatively and loss of the eye.
ment is preferred to minimize foimation of posterio1
Once the corneal wound is closed, the integrity of the
synechiae. Fortunately, bacterial contamination of the ante-
apposition should be tested. Lactated Ringer's solution is
 lio1 chamber and postoperative endophthalmitis in the dog
injected between two coineal sutures with a very small
and cat are rare. However, the intensity of the anterior uve-
-o a s e ym snql a ie io ( s) enus iiau
itis may be considerable. Medication frequency is dependent
dermic needle (Fig. 8.23h). Topical fluorescein can be
on daily assessments of the eye, the coineal wound, level
applied directly to the wound apposition to detect any leaks
 of intraocular pressure, pupil size, and appearance of the
in the wound closure.
iris. About 5-7 days postoperatively, 25-50 μg tissue plas-
Postoperative
 management  of full-thickness  corneal
minogen activato1 (tPA) may be injected into the anterio1
lacerations with iridal involvement anticipates variable co1-
 chamber to degrade excessive clots of fibrin. Once corneal
neal edema and severe anterior uveitis. Topical and systemic
wound integrity has been fimly established in 10-14 days,
antibiotics, topical mydriatics, and, cautiously, systemic
 topical corticosteroids may be initiated, but only when daily
NSAIDs o1 systemic corticosteroids are administered to
evaluations are possible.
212
Surg ery for comeal lacerations
Postoperative complications after full-thickness coineal
of the anterior lens capsule and the remainder of the lens
lacerations with iris prolapse include dense coineal scar
nucleus and cortex, as an extracapsular lens extraction 01
formation, anterior and posterior synechiae, iris tissue
by phacoemulsification, is presented in Chapter 9.
deposits on the anterio1 lens capsule, cataract formation,
secondary glaucoma, and phthisis bulbi. Because of the
Adaptation for large animals and special
full-thickness injury to the coinea, a coineal scar of vari-
able size and opacity results. The size of the scal and its
species
position in the cornea directly influence its effect on vision.
Corneal lacerations
Small corneal scars or corneal scars in the peripheral rather
than the central coinea minimally impact vision. Dense.
Corneal lacerations in the horse are always accompanied
large, and central coineal scars probably impai1 vision;
by varying degrees of iridocyclitis. Medical therapy should
however, with a dilated pupil, reasonable clinical vision
be sufficient for superficial, non-perforating lacerations. Top-
may result. With an intense postoperative anterior uveitis,
ically applied broad-spectrum antibiotics, mydriatics/cyclo-
the possibility of posterio1 synechiae and secondary cata-
plegics, and serum are recommended. Topically applied
ract formation is likely.
serum reduces enzymatic collagen breakdown of the coinea.
These complications are minimized by adequate control of
Systemic NSAIDs are also strongly indicated.
the iridocyclitis during the postoperative period. Phthisis bulbi
Deep or irregular coineal lacerations require surgical support
usually results secondary to intense anterior uveitis and occurs
of the cornea and more aggressive therapy for iridocyclitis.
more frequently in young animals. The overall results after
Direct corneal suturing and conjunctival flaps are indicated to
Iepair of full-thickness corneal lacerations with iris prolapse
more rapidly restore corneal integrity. Topically applied anti-
are usually favorable, but guarded. The final outcome depends
biotics and mydriatics/cycloplegics, as well as systemically
on successful treatment of the resultant anterior uveitis.
administered NSAIDs, are used until healing is complete.
 Full-thickness corneal perforations are usually associated
with iris prolapse, shallow anterio1 chamber, and hyphema.
Penetrating corneal lacerations and anterior
If the coineal lesion extends to the limbus, the sclera should
lens capsule tears with or without iris prolapse
also be carefully checked for perforation as it can be obscured
Penetrating corneal lacerations and tears of the anterior lens
by conjunctival chemosis and hemorrhage. Failure to detect
capsule with or without an iris prolapse occur primarily in
such a scleral tear results in chronic hypotony and globe
small animals. Puppies and young dogs are most likely to
 atrophy (phthisis bulbi).
experience self-sealing corneal lacerations, usually secondary
 Both small and large corneal perforations should be surgi
to a cat claw or a dog fight. In some animals the cat claw can
cally repaired. Complications include infection, iris pro-
bridge the anterior chamber and tear the anterior lens capsule.
lapse, anterior synechiae, cataract formation, and persistent
Anterio1 lens capsule tears larger than 1.5 mm, treated
iridocyclitis. Both small and large corneal or scleral full-
 only medically, are associated with severe and progressive
thickness defects can result in phthisis bulbi if left untreated.
anterior uveitis and cataract formation that often result in
Successful surgical repair of the iris prolapse and coineal
phthisis bulbi, enucleation, or evisceration. With large ante-
 perforation requires good illumination, magnification, and
nior lens capsule tears, the anterior cortical material quickly
proper instrumentation.
becomes cataractous and is gradually released into the ante-
 The prognosis of a full-thickness corneal perforation
lio1 chamber. This lens material is antigenic and incites a
depends on the duration and size, the amount of iris
progressively more intense lens-induced anterior uveitis.
and lens involvement, and the presence of infection and
The 1esultant anterior uveal inflammation, stimulated by
hemorrhage. A horse with a traumatic corneal perforation
exposure to progressively more amounts of lens material.
that defies repai, extensive extrusion of intraocular con-
can eventually destroy the eye.
tents, severe intraocular hemorrhage, o1 evidence of bacte-
 Successful treatment of patients with traumatic tears of the
nal infection should have the affected globe enucleated.
anterior lens capsule requires early recognition and lens
The eye of the hoise does not tolerate much damage to its
removal. Anterior lens capsular tears usually present as focal
vasculature. Severe intraocular hemoirhage usually results
deposits of fibrinous and inflammatory material on the
in phthisis bulbi. Septic intrusion into the globe results
 re   s r a s r
in painful endophthalmitis. Such infection can spread to
sular and anterior cortical cataracts. The majority of these
sulrounding soft tissues and necessitates enucleation.
patients have a small corneal laceration that eventually
self-seals. Infrequently, the patient will require both surgical
Iris prolapse
colrection of the full-thickness coineal laceration and extra-
capsular cataract removal. Late surgical intervention in these
Perforating corneal lacerations with iris prolapse confined to
patients is less successful, because the anterio1 uveitis has
the cornea and measuring 15 mm or less in length tend to
become advanced and difficult to control medically
have a favorable visual outcome after surgical repair. Iridect-
Correction of the full-thickness corneal penetration, if not
 s dsd e  u ao 
sealed, is performed as described in the previous section. If
adversely affect visual outcome, and may facilitate postoper-
the corneal puncture has self-sealed but is greater 
than
ative mydriasis and prevent septic endophthalmitis. Con-
2 mm, the corneal wound should be reinforced with addi-
versely, perforating corneal lacerations longer than 15 mm,
tional 7-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
extending to, along or beyond the limbus, are inclined to
Sometimes these wounds do not leak until the intraocular
poor visual outcome and enucleation. Chances of retain-
pressure begins to return to normal levels. Removal of part
Sad u pnai aisns al oie A uoisa su
213
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
coineal wounds accompanied by hyphema, even when
Affected animals present with acute ocular pain, tearing.
comprising only 10-50% of the anterio1 chambe1. Primary
blepharospasm, conjunctival swelling. variable amounts of
enucleation should therefore be more seriously considered
coineal edema, and anterior uveitis. Corneal foreign bodies
in cases with these clinical and surgical findings. Finally.
occur less frequently in the cat, and the ocular inflammatory
eyes with perforating corneal ulcers due to ulcerative kerati-
Tesponse is considerably less than in the dog.
tis of more than 2 weeks' duration, and melting ulcers and/
Surgery for coineal foreign bodies depends on their com-
01 ulcers with concomitant fungal and bacterial infections,
position (organic vs metallic), size and shape, duration,
tend to have a poor visual outcome or result in enucleation
integrity of the corneal defect, and involvement of other
due to endophthalmitis in a majority of such cases.
ocular tissues. Organic foreign bodies are more irritating
All horses with iris prolapse in the immediate preoperative
than metallic objects. Superficial corneal foreign bodies
period should be treated with a systemic NSAID, including
can often be removed under topical anesthesia with a strong
either flunixin meglumine (1 mg/kg IV q12h) o1 phenylbu-
stream of balanced salt solution, by sterile cotton-tipped
tazone (2 mg/kg PO q12h). All horses should be started
swab, sterile 20-23 g hypodermic needle, 01 co1neal foreign
on a systemic antibiotic. Antibiotics used include potassium
body spatula (Fig. 8.24).
. Post-removal topical treatment
penicillin G (22 000 IU/kg [V q8h), gentamicin sulphate
usually consists of topical antibiotics. If secondary anterior
(2.2 mg/kg IV q8h), procaine penicillin (22 000 IU/kg [M
 ae s pro d si si
q8h)。 and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (15 mg/kg PO
q12h). Tetanus antitoxoid is administered to most horses.
embedded in the coineal stroma and those partially in the cor-
 A subpalpebral lavage system aids topical therapy. Initial
 )  r     1
topical lavage therapy in all horses includes a topical anti-
These foreign objects are usually thorns, wood splinters,
biotic, with gentamicin, tobramycin, and chloramphenicol,
and other plant material. Immediate surgical removal of cor-
01 neomycin, polymyxin B, and gramicidin. All horses are
neal foreign bodies provides the best results before coineal
also started on topical 1% atropine. Miconazole (1%), nata-
transparency decreases and secondary iridocyclitis intensifies.
mycin or other antifungal therapy is instituted in horses
After the onset of general anesthesia, surgical preparation of
with cytologic, histologic o1 culture-positive evidence
of
the eyelids, conjunctiva, and coinea, and draping, the eyelids
are retracted by a wire speculum. The area about the corneal
instituted for their anticollagenase effects. Topical NSAID
foreign body is carefully inspected, and cleaned with aqueous
therapy, either suprofen or diclofenac sodium, can be used
0.5% povidone-iodine solution. If complete corneal penetra-
in horses to reduce severe uveitis.
tion is suspected, topical fluorescein is applied to determine if
Under general (inhalation) anesthesia, each perforation
any aqueous humor leakage (positive Seidel's test) can be
site is explored to determine both length and extent of co1-
demonstrated. With 1 × 2 teeth tissue forceps, the corneal fo1-
neal o1 coineoscleral involvement. Prolapsed iridal tissue
eign body is gently extracted from the stroma. If the foreign
that appears desiccated, necrotic o1 contaminated, or has
body cannot be loosened by forceps from the stroma, it
been prolapsed fo1 more than 24 h, is generally best excised.
is carefully dissected with the Beaver scalpel handle and
[ridal bleeding can be controlled with pressure and elec-
No. 6400 miciosurgical blade. As most foreign bodies are of
tiocautery following iridectomy. Coineal defect margins
plant origin, the entire object must be excised. The area is
may require debridement or keratectomy. Direct corneal clo-
lou pip Apoq ualaioy aul j! sairuns Aq pasodde Aensn iou
sure can be used in small or linear lesions. Conjunctival
 penetrate into the anterior chamber, but allowed to heal and
pedicle, hood or island grafts can be used to provide additional
 treated as a potentially infected corneal ulcer.
physical support when the corneal closure is tenuous or when
When the corneal foreign body penetrates the cornea, and
keratomalacia is prominent. Corneoconjunctival transposition
partially protrudes into the anterior chamber, removal is
may be used if corneal tissue is missing. A donor corneal graft is
more complicated. Depending on the size and shape of
used for larger perforations and ulcers, and then covered with 
a conjunctival flap o1 amniotic membrane.
Systemic antibiotics are continued for a minimum of
 5 days following surgical repair of iris prolapse. Following
surgical repair, all horses are also maintained on systemic
NSAIDs at presurgical doses for several days, and the dose then
decreased as the severity ofthe anterior uveitis diminishes. Top-
surgery and modified, if appropriate, based on corneal cytol-
ogy and culture findings. In general, tapering doses of topical
atropine, antimicrobials, and oral NSAIDs are continued fo1 a
minimum of4-6 weeks after surgery until clinical signs of ante-
nior uveitis have resolved.
1cm
Surgery for corneal foreign bodies
Fig. 8.24 Intraoperative appearance of a penetrating corneal foreign body
Corneal foreign bodies occur infrequently in small animals. In
(cat claw or nail) in a dog. Surgical removal requires a deep keratotomy to
dogs, foreign bodies occur primarily in hunting and working
remove the foreign body. Organic (i.e., plant material) corneal foreign bodies
breeds. Corneal foreign bodies are usually highly irritating.
are generally best removed as infection (bacteria/fungal) often results.
214
Corneal adhesives
A
B
Fig. 8.25 Examples of deep corneal foreign bodies in the dog. (a) Intracorneal foreign body (wood sliver) in a 5-year-old Labrador retriever dog. The foreign
body was removed by superficial keratectomy. (b) Foreign body consisting of a cactus spine partially protruding into the anterior chamber and anterior lens in
a young cat.
the coineal foreign body, surgical removal is approached
 and anterio1 uveal inflammations. Sequelae of the anterio1
from either the anterior coinea or the posterior cornea from
uveitis, i.e., posterior and anterio1 synechiae and secondary
the anterior chamber, which is more difficult. If the largest 
cataract foimation, are infrequent. When the coineal foreign
s n r i oq ia re a jo d
body penetrates the cornea and necessitates extraction from
membrane, removal from the anterior coineal approach
the anterior chamber, the possibility of complications
is usually recommended. However, if the largest part of the
increases. Bacterial infection of the coineal site and the ante-
corneal foreign body is already in the anterior chamber,
nio1 segment is fortunately rare. More often, sequelae of the
entry through a limbal or peripheral coineal incision is
anterior uveitis, i.e., iris pigment deposits on the anterio1
necessary and the least traumatic.
lens capsule, posterior synechiae, and secondary cataract
Once the penetrating corneal foreign body is removed,
foimation, develop. A dense coineal scar is expected when
apposition of the corneal wound is usually necessary.
all layers are damaged. Final results after most penetrating
Simple interrupted 6-0 to 7-0 absorbable sutures placed at
corneal foreign bodies are directly related to successful con-
depth of 70-80% of the coineal depth and at least 1.5-
trol of post-removal intraocular inflammation and resultant
2 mm bites' or penetrations into the adjacent healthy co1-
 o  oq  a o   
nea is recommended. Once the corneal wound is apposed,
in the selection of antibiotics.
lactated Ringel's or balanced salt solution is carefully
This section has been limited to corneal foreign bodies, pri-
injected into the anterio1 chamber between the sutures 01
marily of plant origin. Penetration of the cornea, lens, vitreous,
through the limbal cornea. Intraocular pressure after
and posterior segment with metal objects, such as bullets and
closure should approximate at least 10 mmHg.
buckshot, are more difficult to manage clinically. Corneal
 Postoperative management after corneal foreign bodies is
s   r r n r 
to prevent sepsis, control the secondary corneal and ante-
Penetration of the lens necessitates immediate lens removal.
nior uveal inflammation, and minimize corneal scarring.
Intraocular lead pellets within the anterior chamber and vitre-
Topical and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotics are admi-
ous are usually 1elatively inert. Howeve1, the newe1 ferlous 01
nistered. Topical chloramphenicol is useful because of its
tin pellets are toxic to the 1etina and must be removed as soon
ability to penetrate the intact cornea. Because of the ante-
as the intraocular inflammation, secondary to the trauma, is
lio1 uveitis, most systemic antibiotics probably enter the
controlled medically. Penetration of the vitreous and posterio1
aqueous humo1 in therapeutic levels. Mydriatics, usually
segment will be discussed in Chapter 12.
moderate pupillary dilatation is achieved. Once mydriasis is
Adaptations for large animals and special
obtained, the frequency of the 1% atropine instillations is
reduced to two to four times daily. NSAIDs are administered
species
systemically. Corticosteroids are added if the anterior uveitis
   sn   o 
becomes uncontrollable. Once corneal healing is advanced,
is similar to that in small animals. Superficial foreign
based on 1e-epithelialization and complete vascularization
 in   a ae n s
of the foreign body site, topical corticosteroids are slowly
(Fig. 8.26). Deeper foreign bodies may 1equire miciosurgical
initiated to resolve the keratitis and reduce to a minimum
Iemoval.
the density and size of the coineal scar. In many cases with
limited keratitis, topical corticosteroids are not necessary.
Postoperative complications after non-penetrating corneal
Corneal adhesives
      o  s 
corneal site is rare and some scarring is expected. Corneal
Corneal adhesives may be used to treat small partial coineal
penetrations, secondary to cat scratches, should be consid-
lacerations, pinpoint descemetoceles, small diameter deep
ered infected, and usually demonstrate more intense corneal
stromal coineal ulceis, and recurrent coineal erosions in
215
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
R
Fig. 8.26 Removal of chronic superficial corneal foreign body with granuloma formation in a horse. (a) A small vegetative foreign body has embedded iself in
the cornea, resulting in a focal granuloma formation. (b) The foreign body is carefully removed with a hypodermic needle.
small animals. Corneal adhesives are also used to support
glued to cover a leaking perforation (Fig. 8.27). Fibrin glue
sutures or as an alternate to sutures for selected coineal dis
provides faster healing and induces significantly less corneal
eases. The initial cyanoacrylate studies in ophthalmic tissues
vascularization; however, it requires a significantly longer
were of limited success because of the slow polymerization
time fo1 adhesive plug foimation.
time and local toxicity associated with the glue. The polymer
n-butyl cyanoacrylate (Nexaband?, CRX Medical, Raleigh,
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
NC) has been used in both human and veterinary ophthal-
mology. It has low local tissue toxicity, exerts an antibac-
terial effect (bacteriostatic), and inhibits coineal stroma
Introduction
melting. The glue will slough from the coinea about 2-4
More than 80 years ago, the first successful penetrating
weeks after application depending on the size and depth
coineal graft was 1eported in humans by Zirm. However,
of the coineal wound treated.
Several steps are important for success with the cyanoacry.
    s p      
who published a report describing a successful homograft
late adhesive. The patient must be sedated o1 anesthetized
in a pet gazelle. With technical and biological advances,
so that eyelid and eye movements are absent. The site fo1
penetrating keratoplasties have become one of the most suc-
gluing must be carefully debrided to remove all necrotic
cessful and frequent homograft surgeries in humans. The
and/or friable coineal tissues. The corneal site is carefully
advent of microsurgery, fine instruments, new suture materi-
and completely dried with sterile cotton-tipped swabs o1
als, and more effective anti-inflammatory and immunosup-
cellulose sponges and a warm air stream (hair dryer) as watel
pressive drugs have collectively contributed to the current
and adhesive contact result in immediate polymerization. A
status of keratoplasty in human ophthalmology.
very thin layer of glue is applied with a 30 g hypodermic nee-
dle; the glue will rapidly polymerize and cannot be disturbed
thereafter. The area is permitted to dry completely before
blinking. o1 other tissues and instruments touch the site.
The resultant 'glued' area becomes very hard. The surface
of the glued area should be as smooth as possible to prevent
irritation of the conjunctiva and/or eyelid margin. The glue,
after 2-6 weeks, is surrounded by coineal inflammation,
and is extruded en masse or in fragments. Corneal epithe-
lium migrates under the glued site. Failure of the glue to seal
the corneal defect usually results from excessive applications
of cyanoacrylate. Treatment after adhesive application is
directed at the primary corneal defect and the secondary
iridocyclitis.
Adaptations for large animals and special
species
Fibrin glue and cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive are both effec-
tive in the closure of small corneal perforations in horses.
Fig. 8.27 Treatment of a very small descemetocele in a horse with tisue
Amnion o1 small intestinal submucosa membranes can be
glue.
216
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
Keratoplasties, both lamellar (partial thickness) and
two conditions, the latter conditions may be treated quite
penetrating (full thickness), have not become ‘mainstream'
successfully with conjunctival grafts.
surgeries in veterinary ophthalmology. Part of the reason is
Keratoplasty is tiaditionally divided by the source of
costs, and the effectiveness and versatility achieved with
the donor cornea and the depth of the graft. Sources of corneal
conjunctival flaps/autografts. In contrast to humans, most
grafts are divided into: 1) heterologous grafs/heteroplastic/
animals demonstrate reasonable clinical vision with a less
xenograff/heterografts (from other species);: 2) homologous
than clear cornea. Nevertheless, all of the advances that have
graff/allogeneic/homoplastic/homografts (donor is same spe-
contributed to the highly successful keratoplasty procedures
can be used for our patients in veterinary ophthalmology.
grafts (same patient, usually a rotating or sliding graft). The
types of keratoplasty include: 1) anterior lamellar (corneal epi-
History
d (s rd) re d ( e
There have been several studies in lamellar (anterior stroma
also vary by diameter. Most coineal trephines, designed for
and epithelium) and penetrating (full-thickness) keratoplas.
use in humans, range from 2 to 9 mm in diameter. As corneas
ties in dogs and, to a lesser extent, in cats.
in the dog and cat are about twice as large as in humans, the
largest corneal graft in small animals is about 9 mm. With co1-
· In 1957, Holt described a coineal homograft in a
neal trephines now available up to 17 mm diameter, kerato.
Pekingese blind from pigmentary keratitis. The opposite
plasty in small animals can become more useful clinically.
    e   s a
1957, Singleton reported on keratoplasty in a Welsh
Corgi with bilateral pigmentary keratitis.
Preparation of donor corneas
In 1961, Cella reported corneal homografts in 19 dogs
Potential donor cornea, sclera, and whole eyes may
with corneal diseases.
be obtained from dogs and cats free of infectious diseases
[n 1962, lamellar keratoplasty was evaluated in 21 dogs
(dogs - distemper and rabies; cats - feline leukemia vinus
with coineal diseases by Lavignette. The success rate with
( )   s  1 
and feline immunodeficiency virus). Successful transplanta-
tion of corneal tissues starts with careful harvest and storage
 In 1963, Jensen reported on both partial- and fuill-
of donor corneas before either lamellar o1 penetrating kera-
thickness corneal grafts in 37 experimental dogs.
toplasty. Donor material is obtained from complete globes,
[n 1968, McEntyre 1eported a success rate of 78% in
freshly enucleated, or from coineas with a scleral rim main-
experimental dogs with penetrating corneal homografts
tained in tissue cell media (Optisol-Gs, Bausch and Lomb
and microsurgery.
Surgical, [rvine, CA) fo1 several days to 2 weeks. Removal of
In 1969, Mueller and Foimston described anterior
the globe for donor corneal tissue is performed aseptically
lamellar grafts in experimental dogs (11 of 21 grafts
with several drops of neomycin, bacitracin, and polymyxin
were successful), full-thickness grafts (3 of 27 were
B placed on the coinea as the subconjunctival enucleation
successful), and posterio1 lamellar grafts (15 of 16 were
is performed. The enucleated eye, placed in a sterile moist
successful).
[n 1973, Dice, Severin, and Lumb described autogenous
 e    a    
 dard refrigerator, should be transplanted within 7 days. An
and homologous corneal grafts in eight experimental
alternative procedure is to remove aseptically only the co1
dogs. Silk sutures were used and found to be very
nea with a 2 mm scleral rim. The coinea is very carefully
reactive with corneal grafts.
lifted from the globe to prevent detachment of Descemet's
[n 1982, Bahn and co-workers evaluated penetrating
keratoplasties in cats. Both homografts and rotating
membrane and endothelia. The coineoscleral tissue
is
placed in a tissue culture bottle and maintained in a reffiger-
autografts were perfoimed. Penetrating keratoplasties in
ato1 fo1 a maximum of 2-3 weeks with MK o1 K-sol media.
cats resulted in the loss of about 30% of the endothelial
Donor corneas for tectonic grafts are maintained frozen,
cells, about the same percentage established in humans.
and ready for use. Since viability of the coineal cells is
Lastly, in 1989, Brightman and co-workers 1eported
not important, corneas may be obtained from any age
autogenous lamellar corneal grafts in nine experimental
patient. The coineas are excised from the donors' eyes with
dogs and seven dogs with corneal diseases. In the clinical
a 1-2 mm scleral rim, placed in an ophthalmic neomycin,
patients, six of the seven grafts were considered successful.
bacitracin, and polymyxin B solution and stored in a small
These past reports record the evolution of keratoplasties
sterile bottle. The bottle and cornea are maintained in a stan-
in small animals. Fo1 optimal results, keratoplasty in small
dard freezer (-20C) ready for use. A maximum of 18
animals requires microsurgical instruments, an operating
months of frozen storage has been recommended. Prio1 to
microscope, 8-0 to 10-0 nylon sutures, vigorous periopera-
use, the bottle and dono1 coinea are thawed at room temper-
tive treatment, and long-term postoperative treatment and
ature or in a warm water bath. The trimmed tissue is a source
clinical management. Using these advances, lamella1 and
of preserved corneal and scleral collagen lamellae, but has
penetrating keratoplasties can achieve higher success rates
no viable cells. Prio1 to use, the epithelia and endothelia
in the dog and cat than reported in the past literature
with Descemet's membrane surfaces are vigorously scraped
[ndications for coineal grafts in small animals
include
with a scalpel blade, leaving just the corneal stromal collage-
corneal endothelial dystrophy and degeneration, opaque
nous lamellae. Tectonic grafts should be covered with a
central (or axial) coineal scars and blindness, deep coineal
conjunctival graft o1 nictitans flap to ensure graft survival
ulcers, corneal sequestra in cats, and descemetoceles. While
and reduce the likelihood of graft infection, collagenolysis,
penetrating keratoplasties ale clearly indicated for the fist
and dehiscence.
217
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Cryopreservation of potential coineal grafts has not been
important fo1 vision in small animals, and penetrating kerato-
reported in small animals. If this technology is successful,
plasties should be confined to this area. Concurrent diseases.
corneal graft materials with viable cells could be stored for
such as chronic keratoconjunctivitis sicca, acute-to-chronic iri-
several months o1 more.
docyclitis, and glaucoma, usually preclude keratoplasties. The
primary corneal endothelial dystrophies observed in certain
breeds of dogs and in older dogs and cats are the best candidates.
Instrumentation for keratoplasties
Active and progressive corneal ulceration constitutes a primary
Instruments to perfoim lamellar and full-thickness coineal
indication for penetrating corneal keratoplasty in humans, but
grafts are a combination of standard size and microsurgical
in small animals keratoplasty has not been thoroughly evalu-
instruments. These instruments include: eyelid speculum
ated because of the highly successful conjunctival grafts.
 A majo1 concern of keratoplasties in small animals is graft
bilize and maintain the peripheral cornea, anterior sclera,
Iejection, usually demonstrated as postoperative vasculariza-
and anterior segment), tissue fixation forceps (1 x 2 teeth
tion, edema, inflammation, and eventual opacification of
and tying), tenotomy o1 utility scissors, light- and left-
the transplanted corneal tissue. However, this concein may
handed corneal transplantation scissors, standard and micro-
be overstated. Alternative surgical procedures to keratoplas-
surgical needle holders, corneal trephines (Castroviejo set 8-
ties in small animals are the bulbar and tarsopalpebral con-
12 mm diameter in 0.5 mm increments), and Teflon coineal
junctival grafts which always produce a variable size corneal
graft block. Corneal transplantation scissors differ fiom the
 opacity. Keratoplasties, when unsuccessful, yield an opaque
     l  Ss s 
area. However, if successful, the resultant clear cornea per-
greater curvature, and the lower blade inside the upper blade
mits vision. Long-term topical corticosteroids (1% predniso-
to create a more perpendicular or less beveled incision.
lone and 0.1% dexamethasone) and/or cyclosporin A are
Recommended sutures include: 1) 4-0 to 6-0 braided silk
instilled for graft rejection eyes.
sutures to temporarily attach the Flieringa ring to the limbus
01 sclera; 2) 7-0 to 9-0 nylon fo1 graft stabilization (usually
Preoperative treatment
uou 0-o1 0i 0-g (e pue :(sns pndiu ads 91-8
(a simple or saw-toothed continuous suture to supplement
Medical treatments preoperatively for lamellar and penetrat-
the simple interupted sutures).
ing keratoplasties are different. As penetrating keratoplasties
involve entry into the anterior chamber, preoperative treat-
Indications for keratoplasty
ments for full-thickness grafts also include suppressing the
formation of fibrin in the aqueous humor and the anterior
Keratoplasties in small animals may be divided into:
uveitis that develop intra- and postoperatively.
1) autogenous sliding lamella grafts (sliding transparent
Fo1 both lamellar and full-thickness corneal grafts, the pre-
coineal tissues into an axial defect created by excision of
existing coineal disease is stabilized, and topical and systemic
an opacity of the anterio1 corneal stroma);: 2) homologous
antibiotics are usually indicated. For topical antibiotics, the tri-
lamellar grafts (homografts of corneal stroma); 3) 1otating
ple antibiotic combination (neomycin, bacitracin, and poly.
autogenous full-thickness grafts (rotation of a central
myxin B) o1 chloramphenicol is recommended. The pupil is
opaque scar to the peripheral coinea); and 4) homologous
dilated with 1% atropine pre-, intra-, and postoperatively. Fre-
full-thickness coineal grafts.
quency of atropine instillations varies, depending on mainte.
Fo1 successful keratoplasties in small animals, selection of
nance of a moderate mydriasis with limited inis movements
       
to reduce the likelihood of posterior synechiae and secondary
coineal stromal, Descemet's membrane, deep coineal seque-
cataract formation.
stra in cats, and endothelial diseases are the best candidates
 For full-thickness corneal grafts, several drugs are adminis-
(Fig. 8.28). The axial o1 central areas of the cornea are the most
tered to treat the resultant iridocyclitis once the anterior
A
B
Fig. 8.28 Bilateral corneal dystrophy in a Boston Terrier and treatment with full-thickness keratoplasty. (a) Bilateral corneal endothelial dystrophy in a
 6-year-old female Boston terrier. (b) Often the accumulation of corneal edema results in marked visual impairment and the development of painful bullae.
Therapeutic options are thermokeratoplasty or penetrating (full-thickness) keratoplasty.
218
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
chamber has been entered. Fibrin and inflammatory cells
desired graft, the stroma is incised and graft is split into
within the aqueous humor can adversely affect the full-thick-
two parts: the endothelium and posterior one-third of the
ness corneal graft success rate. These inflammatory products
stroma, which is discarded, and the anterior two-thirds of
coat the posterior aspects of the graft and form 1etrocor-
the stroma and epithelium which is transferred to the
neal membranes that impair the transplanted cornea's
 corneal defect with the epithelial surface upright.
transparency.
If a full-thickness or penetrating corneal graft is per-
Topical and systemic corticosteroids and non-steroidal
formed, the graft is constricted 0.5 mm larger than the reci-
 non-inflammatory agents are administered preoperatively.
pient's defect. The corneal graft is rotated with the posterio1
Systemic antihistamines (for the dog. chlorpheniramine
endothelial surface facing the anterio1 chamber and placed
0.5 mg/kg IM, 45 min before surgery) and hepanin (1000 IUI
on the recipient's bed ready to be apposed.
in 0.1-0.2 mL instilled directly through the corneal wound
into the anterior chamber) are recommended to reduce the
Autogenous sliding lamellar grafts
possibility of plasmid aqueous humor and overt fibrin forma-
tion in the anterio1 chamber intra- and postoperatively.
Autogenous lamellar keratoplasty represents the simplest
corneal graft. Corneal epithelial and stromal tissues are slid
Preparation of corneal donor graft
from a clear and healthy area to cover a central coineal
defect, and graft rejection does not occur. With relocation
The best source for coineal grafts is young dogs and cats.
of the central anterior stromal opacity with peripheral clear
Corneal endothelial cell counts are directly associated to age
cornea, vision is enhanced.
and, as animals age, the density of corneal endothelia
After the onset of general anesthesia, surgical preparation
decreases. Corneal endothelia are also lost during penetrating
 of the eyelids and conjunctiva, and draping, the eyelids
keratoplasty. In humans and the cat, about 20-30% of the
are 1etracted by a wire speculum. With a coineal trephine
endothelial cells are lost after keratoplasty. The donor comeal
about 0.5 mm larger in diameter than the diseased area
graft is prepared immediately before surgery from a freshly
of the cornea to be excised, the coineal epithelia and
enucleated eye o1 a coinea with a scleral rim. If a fresh intact
stroma are incised to a depth sufficient to remove the opac-
globe is used, the entire coinea with 1-2 mm of sclera is
  n        
carefully excised using sharp scissors under aseptic conditions.
0.25-0.35 mm works well fo1 this procedure (Fig. 8.30a,
The cornea, with attached sclera, is placed on the Teflon@
X I  ads si o  a go a a a
block with the coineal epithelial suiface down (Fig. 8.29a).
2 teeth tissue forceps and the underlying stroma is dissected
With a corneal trephine 0.5 mm larger than the surgical
at approximately one-half depth with the Beaver scalpel
wound, the cornea is trephined carefully, ensuring a perpen-
handle and No. 6400 microsurgical blade o1 the Martinez
dicular cut (Fig. 8.29b). The coineal graft is moistened with
coineal dissecto1, and excised (Fig. 8.30c). This surgical
lactated Ringer's solution or cell culture media to ensure via-
defect represents the recipient bed. The excised tissue should
bility. The coineal graft is transfelred to the surgical site, still
be evaluated histologically.
maintaining the coineal epithelia down. The posterior aspect
Two slightly diverging coineal stromal incisions with the
of the corneal graft, lined with the single layer of endothelial
Beaver scalpel handle and No. 6400 microsurgical blade are
cells, is most susceptible to damage, and this side should not
performed, extending from the corneal defect to the limbus
touch any surface or instruments.
(Fig. 8.30d). Grasping the end of this graft, the stroma is care-
Fo1 anterior lamella corneal grafts, the dono1 material is
fully separated at approximately one-half depth from the cen-
now divided. Dependent upon the relative thickness of the
tal wound to the limbus (Fig. 8.30e). Once the corneal
stromal dissection is complete, the corneal stromal graft
is excised at the limbus by coineal scissors o1 the Beaver
No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 8.30f). The co1neal graft
is ‘fitted' into the corneal wound, and should be 0.5 mm
s  rn a n     e
(Fig. 8.30g).
、The transplanted cornea is attached to the
surrounding wound edge with 7-0 to 9-0 nylon or braided
polyglactin 910 simple internupted sutures (Fig. 8.30h).
 Postoperative treatments include topical and systemic anti-
biotics, and topical mydriatics (usually 1% atropine). Once
fluorescein retention is absent in the transplant, topical corti-
costeroids are instilled (0.25-0.5% prednisolone q12h to
q6h) to minimize corneal scarring.
A
?
Homologous lamellar corneal grafts
pasoui s! agoib lny ayl (e) leuanew louop leauon yjo uoneiedad bt'g dbi
For homologous lamellar keratoplasty, a fresh corneal graft
immediately posterior to the limbus in front of the iris or just caudal to the
must be available. These grafts are used in small animals
iris, and positioned with the corneal epithelium down onto a Teflon
fo1 deep central corneal ulcers and descemetoceles. If possi-
keratoplasty block for cutting. (b) The full-thickness donor comeal graft is cut
Jaaweip u jabiel ww so s! ieyn auydan eauon e yam Aueinipuadiad
ble, the surgical site should be treated intensively for
than the recipient's bed. Either the fullthickness or the anterior stroma and
several hours with broad-spectrum antibiotics to reduce
epithelia are available for keratoplasty.
the possibility of infection of the transplanted cornea.
219
8
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
?
D
(F
G
H
Fig. 8.30 In autogenous sliding lamellar corneal keratoplasty, a superficial portion of clear peripheral cornea is slid into an axial or central superficial
corneal defect, thereby ensuring the central cornea is clear for vision. (a) By corneal trephine, the central superficial cornea is incised, usually to a depth of
0.25-0.35 mm. (b) The corneal incision should be perpendicular to the cornea to ensure exact apposition and minimal scarring. (c) The edge of the corneal
oassip eauo zauen aun y ewouas leauion jeap buuapun aun wouy paneiedas pue sdauoy qwnun yaan z x l y padsen s! pasixa ag on uoisal
jnoge on apelg leni6insouniw ootg on janeag aun yai pawoyad ane suoisiou! jeauon lenyadns buibianip Apubis oma punom leauion jenuan aun woiy (p)
jeauion zaupew ayp yai ewoas ladaap aun wouy paneedas pue sdaoy qunua yraan Z × l yri padsen s! eauios jo appad sun jo dn aul (a) snqwll au
dissector. (f Once this pedicle of cornea has been completely separated from the stroma, its base is incised by corneal or keratoplasty scissors. (g) The corneal
pedicle is positioned in the cormeal bed and trimmed to provide a cormeal graft about 0.5 mm larger than the bed. (h) The corneal sliding graft is apposed to
the graft bed edges with simple interrupted 7-0 to 9-0 nylon or absorbable sutures. The donor area is allowed to heal and treated as a sterile corneal ulcer.
After the onset of general anesthesia, surgical preparation of
Topical treatment should continue fo1 2-3 months before
the eyelids, conjunctival and corneal surfaces with aqueous
the final surgical result can be ascertained. Sutures should
 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, and draping, the eyelids
be removed once the wound has adequately healed, which
are retracted by a wire speculum. With a coineal trephine
occurs at 2-3 weeks postoperatively.
about 1-2 mm larger than the area of cornea to be excised,
the coinea is excised to a depth of 0.25-0.35 mm
Autogenous rotating full-thickness
(Fig. 8.31a,b). This circular area should include all of the
corneal grafts
of the central trephined area to be removed is grasped by
This keratoplasty procedure is used for patients with deep
1 x 2 teeth tissue forceps and elevated to permit dissection
and dense central corneal scars that markedly impair vision.
of the stroma with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade
In this technique, the patient's full-thickness coinea is tre-
01 the Martinez coineal dissecto1 (Fig. 8.31c). The coineal
phined, the dense coineal scar is rotated to the periphery.
lamellar graft is 0.5 mm larger than the corneal defect to
and clear cornea is positioned in the axial coinea. There is
compensate for tissue shrinkage. The corneal lamellar graft
 no possibility of graft rejection. If the opacity is isolated
to the anterio1 stroma, a rotating lamellar corneal graft is
 interrupted nylon sutures (Fig. 8.31d).
indicated. An alternative non-surgical route is long-term
Postoperative tieatment includes topical and systemic
treatment with mydriatics to permit the patient to see
broad-spectrum antibiotics, cyclosporine, NSAIDs, and topi-
cal mydriatics. Topical corticosteroids are initiated 7-14
illumination.
days postoperatively to minimize corneal scarring and
After the onset of general anesthesia, preparation of
maximize the chance of a successful lamellar transplant.
the eyelids, cornea, and conjunctiva with aqueous 0.5%
220
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
A
B
C
D
Fig. 8.31 In homologous lamellar corneal keratoplasties, fresh grafts are transplanted into defects of the outer one-third to one-half of the corneal
epithelia and stroma. (a) Homologous corneal grafts are usually performed for large but superficial central corneal lesions. (b) With a corneal trephine, pre-set
to 0.25-0.35 mm deep, the central corneal lesion is incised. (c) The edge of the central corneal lesion is lifted with 1 × 2 teeth thumb forceps and the lesion
is carefully separated and removed from the underlying clear stroma with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade or the Martinez corneal dissector.
(d) A fresh homologous lamellar graft, 0.5 mm larger in diameter, is placed in the graft bed and apposed with 8-0 to 10-0 simple interrupted nylon sutures.
povidone-iodine solution, and draping, the eyelids are
should not penetrate the full thickness of the coinea but
retracted by a wire speculum. As the anteriol chamber will
should reach the deeper two-thirds of the stroma. Once
be entered, a Flieringa ring is attached to the limbus with
the corneal graft is stabilized, an additional four to eight
8-10 simple interrupted 4-0 to 6-0 silk sutures (Fig. 8.32a).
simple interrupted sutures are added. One mm bites of the
As the globe, coinea, and anterior chamber of the dog and
dono1 graft and 2 mm bites of the recipient's bed are recom-
cat partially collapse once the anterior chamber has been
entered and intraocular pressure lost, the Flieringa ring
continuous o1 saw-toothed continuous 8-0 to 10-0 nylon
helps to prevent collapse and maintains the relative shape
suture is used to reinforce the simple interrupted sutures
 of the anterior segment and cornea. Once the surgical site
around the entire graft's periphery (Fig. 8.32h). These
is ascertained, a coineal trephine is used to incise the coinea
sutures should also be placed deep in the corneal stroma.
nearly full thickness (Fig. 8.32b). The trephine is held peI-
If a single continuous suture and a single knot are not pie-
pendicular to the coinea, and cutting is achieved with a
ferred fo1 the entire circumference, it can be divided into
downward pressure and an alternate twisting clockwise
two to four simple continuous sutures and knots.
and counterclockwise motion.
Postoperative treatment includes topical and systemic
Once at least 8o% of the stroma has been cut with the cor-
broad-spectrum antibiotics, cyclosporine, NSAIDs, and topi-
neal trephine, the anterio1 chamber is entered with a stab
cal mydriatics (instilled to maintain a moderate dilatation).
incision with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade
Systemic corticosteroids are administered only if the postop-
(Fig. 8.32c). Complete corneal penetration by the trephine
erative inidocyclitis 1equires additional suppression. The
is avoided to prevent any focal detachment of Descemet's
-Us au jo isou (i :sdais omi ul paoai aie sanns uou
membrane and endothelia. Once the incision has been
gle inteinupted sutures are removed at 2 weeks; and 2) the
enlarged to about 5 mm long. corneal section o1 keratoplasty
   i     
scissors a1e used to complete the incision 360° (Fig. 8.32d)
the rotated full-thickness corneal autograft should be ascer-
The coineal scissois must be carefully inserted into the ante-
tained by 3 months postoperatively.
d       n 
dicular to the surface. The anterio1 chamber is filled with a
Homologous full-thickness/penetrating
viscoelastic agent to maintain the anterior chamber and the
corneal grafts
      
flushed from the anterior chamber just before the last suture
The homologous full-thickness or penetrating kerato-
fo1 the corneal graft is finished and replaced with lactated
plasty is the type performed most frequently in humans.
Ringel's o1 balanced salt solution (Fig. 8.32e).
The fullthickness corneal graft is used to replace opaque
With the corneal incision completed, the corneal button' is
and weakened infected coineas that do not permit vision.
1otated about 180° to move the opacity peripherally and clear
If these grafts are used for descemetocele or perforated co1-
peripheral cornea to the axial or central cornea (Fig. 8.32f).
neal ulcer, several hours of intensive topical and systemic
The corneal graft is secured in each quadrant with four 8-0
broad-spectrum antibiotics are recommended to try to elim-
simple interrupted nylon sutures (Fig. 8.32g). These sutures
inate all bacteria from the ulcer site before keratoplasty. Fo1
221
8
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
A
B
C
G
Fig. 8.32 In autogenous rotating full-thickness keratoplasty, a fullthickness axial (central) corneal lesion is rotated to the corneal periphery and replaced with
clear peripheral cornea. As the graft is autogenous, there is no possibility of graft rejection. (a) A Flieringa ring is attached to the limbus with 8-10 simple
[eauios ayl (9) Aaseldoneiay buunp aqolb aun jo asdellos szuanaud pue zuawbas louanue aya uienuiewu sdjay buu sill saunans yis 0-g on 0- pandnuanu!
trephine, held perpendicular to the cormeal surface and twisted clockwise and counterclockwise, is used to incise the cormea to nearly full-thickness. (c) Once
about 80% of the corneal stroma has been cut with the trephine, the anterior chamber is entered with a stab incision with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical
blade. (d) With keratoplasty scissors the remaining full-thickness corneal incision is completed. (e) Viscoelastic agent is injected to fill the anterior chamber and
to help maintain its shape during apposition of the corneal graft. It is flushed from the anterior chamber just before the last corneal suture is placed.
Thecoealbuttonisrotated80torepositionthepaque corneaat theimbusgThegraft issecuredwith8 simplinterrupted nylnsuturesinach
quadrant. These sutures should be two-thirds of the stromal thickness. (h) Additional 8-0 simple interrupted nylon sutures are placed around the graft. An 8-0
to 10-0 simple continuous nylon suture is placed on top of these simple interrupted sutures to provide additional wound security.
successful penetrating keratoplasty in small animals, several
With escape of aqueous humor, the anterior chamber
factors appear important (Box 8.1).
is Ie-established with a viscoelastic agent to maintain the
After the onset of general anesthesia, preparation of the eye-
anterior chamber during apposition of the coineal graft
lids, conjunctival and coineal surfaces with aqueous 0.5%
(Fig. 8.33d). With right-and left-handed corneal transplanta-
povidone-iodine solution,  and  draping. the eyelids  are
tion scissors, the lower blade of the scissors is carefully
Ietracted by a wire speculum. For optimal positioning of the
inserted into the anterior chamber to avoid direct contact with
eye, neuromuscular blocking agents are administered. A Flier-
the endothelia (Fig. 8.33e). The incision is completed by scis-
s oia  s  on p si  
sors and the diseased coineal section 1emoved (Fig. 8.33f).
internupted 4-0 to 6-0 braided silk sutures (Fig. 8.33a). The
The coineal graft is carefully positioned in the recipient's bed
coineal region to be excised is centered within the minimum
(Fig. 8.33g). Donor tissue must be 0.5 mm large1 to compen-
size comeal trephine. The coineal trephine is held perpendicu-
sate for tissue shrinkage.
lar to the coineal surface, and is twisted clockwise and counter-
Four stabilizing (o1 cardinal) 8-0 simple inteirupted nylon
clockwise until about 80% of the stroma has been incised
sutures are placed at the corner of each quadrant to hold the
(Fig. 8.33b). With the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade,
transplant (Fig. 8.33h). Each suture is placed relatively deep
a 5 mm incision is made in the trephine incision into the ante-
within the corneal stroma, but penetration of Descemet's
nio1 chamber (Fig. 8.33c). Complete penetration of the coinea
membrane and the endothelia is avoided. One mm bites
with the trephine is not recommended as focal detachment of
of the donor graft and 2 mm bites of the recipient's bed
Descemet's membrane and endothelia may occur.
d s a d   
222
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
Complications include surgical failures (usually associated
Box 8.1 Determinants for successful penetrating keratoplasty
with leaining this procedure and with existing coineal sep-
 Optimal positioning of globe: use neuromuscular blocking agents.
sis), coineal ulcerations, sequelae of anterior uveitis (exces-
 Stabilize anterior segment: suture Flieringa rings to limbus to
sive fibrin and flare in the anterio1 chamber, retrocoineal
prevent anterior chamber collapse.
membranes, anterior and posterior synechiae, and second-
Prevent aqueous fibrin: preoperative treatment with
ary cataract formation), and long-term graft vascularization,
corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents.
pigmentation, and opacification (graft rejection). Retroco1-
 Intraoperative intracameral heparin.
neal membrane formation causes most of the opaque grafts
in dogs, and is associated with intraoperative damage to the
Size of donor cormeal graft: 0.5 mm larger than recipient bed.
 Sutures: 8-0 to 10-0 nylon (must be non-reactive):
corneal endothelial cells and poor posterior corneal wound
- Use 8-16 overlapping simple interrupted sutures and simple
apposition.
continuous suture.
  d a u  as jo io
- Bites: 1 mm donor side and 2 mm recipient side.
selection of patients, adequate pre-, peri-, and postoperative
 Suture removal: 2 and 4 weeks. Best to remove part of the sutures 
treatments, and surgical experience. The diameter of the
 at two different times.
donor corneas must be 0.5 mm larger than the corneal
defect to compensate for shrinkage of the transplanted co1-
add subconjunctival steroids if there is excessive corneal
neal tissue. It also avoids tension on the anterior segment
vascularization.
which, in humans, is associated with ocular hypertension
 Cyclosporin A: can be used concurrently with topical
(elevated intraocular pressure) postoperatively.
corticosteroids or long term.
Corneal graft rejections are characterized by the presence
of subepithelial infiltrates, occurrence of keratic precipitates
on the endothelial surface, and development of a rejection
line within the corneal endothelia. Early graft rejection
Once the coineal transplant is secured with the four sutures,
may be reversed by intensive topical corticosteroid therapy
an additional 10-12 simple interrupted sutures are placed to
(1% prednisolone hourly for 24-48 h). In humans, rejec-
secure the graft, provide even tension over the graft's edges.
tion rates appeal related to age (older patients produce a
and limit postoperative optical aberrations. These sutures
limited graft rejection), size of graft (grafts 8 mm in diame-
are reinforced with an 8-0 to 10-0 simple or saw-toothed
tel and close to the limbus are more likely to have rejec-
continuous nylon suture (Fig. 8.33i). If a single continuous
tion), gender (females are less likely to have rejection),
suture is not preferred, the apposition may be divided into
and pre-existing corneal vascularization, especially the deep
two to four simple continuous sutures. Before the last suture
blood vessels (can double the chance of rejection). Topical
is placed, the viscoelastic agent is flushed from the anterior
cyclosporin A (1-2%) may be initiated once to twice daily
chamber and replaced with lactated Ringer's solution. With
 o    
placement of the last suture, the integrity of the apposition
the topical steroid treatments. Topical steroids are initiated
  r      
2-3 weeks postoperatively once coineal wound healing is
injecting lactated Ringel's solution with a very small cannula
advanced. Subconjunctival corticosteroid injections are used
between two sutures into the anterior chamber.
to supplement or reduce the frequency of topical therapy.
Postoperative treatment after penetrating keratoplasty con
Topical immunosuppressant therapy is administered for
4-6 months o1 more and after coineal vascularization and
cal mydriatics (usually 1% atropine to obtain a moderately
inflammation have resolved.
dilated but moving pupil), and systemic NSAIDs. Topical
If the homograft clears with topical steroid therapy, the
and systemic corticosteroids are not usually indicated until
process is termed an 'allograft reaction'. If the graft becomes
2-3 weeks postoperatively, once healing of the corneal
 opaque or translucent, the diagnosis is 'allograft rejection'.
wound has advanced. It is important to minimize corneal
[n
experimental studies, t
the frequency of penetrating
vascularization as this clinical sign appears directly related
homograft rejections in dogs is 20% and in cats 15% with-
to the graft 1ejection process. Topical corticosteroids (1%
out intensive postoperative steroid and/o1 cyclosporine
prednisolone o1 0.1% dexamethasone) and/o1 1-2% topical
therapy.
 d  i  r  s
are continued for 3-6 months, depending on the appearance
Frozen (tectonic) corneal grafts
of the coinea. The coineal sutures are removed in two phases,
usually at 2 and 4 weeks. Since the nylon sutures are relatively
Preparation of tectonic coineal grafts was discussed in an eal-
non-ieactive, these sutures should not be removed until heal-
lier section in this chapter. Tectonic corneal grafts offer the
ing of the corneal incision is nearly complete (Fig. 8.33j).
convenience of frozen storage, but are sources of only colla-
The overall results of penetrating keratoplasty in both
gen. Although there are no viable cells in these grafts, endo-
dogs and cats are favorable. Success rates in small numbers
thelial cells, keratocytes (fibroblasts), and epithelial cells can
of clinical canine patients suggest that 70-80% of the
migrate from the host into this graft and become established.
surgeries result in clear grafts 3-6 months postoperatively.
As a result, tectonic grafts often result in translucent grafts.
In cats, the success rate is higher than in dogs, because of
The objective is to provide a homograft of collagen to
the reduced intensity of corneal and anterior uveal inflam-
 support and/or replace severely damaged corneas.
mations. Successful keratoplasty requires an operating
[ndications for tectonic corneal grafts are similar to those
microscope, microsurgical surgical instruments, and inert
fo1 lamellar and full-thickness keratoplasties, and include
fine sutures such as 8-0 to 10-0 nylon.
deep corneal ulcers, descemetoceles, and impending O1
223
8
Surgery of the cornea and sclera
?
F
Fig. 8.33 In homologous penetrating keratoplasty, a full-thickness cormeal graft is transplanted.
ccessful full-thickness corneal grafts, are viable
aun uienuiew on saunans ys 0-g on o-t pandnuanui aldwis 0l-a yrm sngwll ayn on paunoas s! buu ebuuad aul (e) aneuns louaasod syein ayn uo elayropua
shape of the anterior segment. (b) By corneal trephine, about 80% of the corneal stroma is incised. (c) With the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade, a stab
incision into the anterior chamber is performed within the trephine incision. (d) Viscoelastic a
 agent is injected to reform and maintain the anterior chamber
during the rest of the keratoplasty. (e) With keratoplasty scissors (either universal or right and left handed), the remainder of the fullthickness trephine
incision is completed. (f) Once the full-thickness incision has been completed by the keratoplasty scissors, the diseased corneal button is removed for
histology. (g) The cormeal graft, 0.5 mm larger in diameter than the corneal bed, is carefully positioned with the endothelia toward the anterior chamber.
(h) The four quadrants of the graft are secured to the host with 8-0 simple interrupted nylon stabilizing sutures. (i) After placement of 10-12 simple interrupted
8-0 to 9-0 nylon sutures, the entire incision is encircled with an 8-0 to 10-0 simple continuous nylon suture for additional security. All corneal sutures are at
yeih jeauion ssauypiua-lny jo anueieadde ageadonsod supuow alaml ( abpa punom aun wouy ww z puanxa pue ssauin eawon spuur-omn aseal
Anterior capsule-cortex cataract formation is present within the pupil.
224
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
existing coineal perforations. For corneal lesions, the surgical
corneal abscesses (DSA) with a clear overlying anterior
procedure is identical to that described in the fullthickness
stroma. A third type of split-thickness PK procedure, the
keratoplasty section. Free-hand tectonic grafts are also
deep lamella1 endothelial keratoplasty (DLEK), has recently
perfoimed fo1 peripheral coineal diseases, such as limbal
been used for DSA in the horse where the superficial coinea
(epibulbar) melanomas in dogs. These transplants range in
ad yn v ieu asao si n paen a a
shape from round, to square, to rectangular. The postopera-
of corneal transplant surgery, the deep anterior lamellar ker-
tive management and complications fo1 tectonic corneal
atoplasty (DALK), can be used for corneal lesions in which
grafts are similar to those for the penetrating keratoplasties.
the posterior cornea and Descemet's membrane are normal
Success rates for both dogs and cats with tectonic corneal
and the anterior cornea diseased. When indicated, these
grafts have been reported as 84%.
techniques result in a shorter duration of therapy and faster
Iecovery than medical treatment of these conditions alone.
Heterologous corneal grafts in small animals
These four surgical methods of corneal transplantation in
horses can have good visual outcomes, although partial graft
Based on availability of coineal tissues, medical and financial
Iejection and scar foimation have been unavoidable with all
limitations, heterologous or heterogenous (graft of one species
of these procedures.
to a different species) corneal transplants in both dogs and cats
have been reported. In cats, use of homologous (homogenous;
same species to same species) corneal transplants is limited as
Penetrating keratoplasty
feline corneas can be infected with the feline herpes vinus
Penetrating keratoplasty (PK) involves full-thickness removal
(FHV-1) and the feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV). Pre-
and replacement of a portion of the coinea. Corneal sutures
sumably all animal coineas can also be infected with the rabies
are necessarily utilized to heal a vertical stromal incision with
vinus. Equine and porcine tissues have been successfully trans-
associated disruption of the coineal surface and topogra-
planted to the canine coinea; dog and porcine coineal tissues
phy. Medical therapy is similar to that for iris prolapse su1-
have been transplanted successfully to the feline cornea.
geries. The surgical approach fo PK in hoises is as follows
(Fig. 8.34).
Adaptations for large animals and special
1. Donor coineal material is harvested preferentially from
fresh o1 frozen equine cadaver eyes (i.e., within 24 h of
species
death). The size of the lesion is determined with calipers.
Corneal transplantation
A full-thickness button of cornea that is 1 mm larger
Corneal transplantation has been performed successfully in
than the recipient bed is trephined from the endothelial
horses at the University of Florida since 1995. Most coineal
to the epithelial side of the donor cornea. The ideal graft
transplants performed in horses are for therapeutic and
size in horses is 6-8 mm diameter, but larger grafts are
tectonic reasons. Two basic corneal transplantation surgical
possible. The donor button is grasped with fine-toothed
procedures have been described for the horse: penetrating
forceps while paying particular attention to the
orientation of the epithelium/endothelium, placed on a
keratoplasty (PK) for full-thickness stromal abscesses
01
ulcers/iris prolapses, and a split-thickness form of PK, the
gauze swab, and kept mcistened with lactated Ringer's
posterio1 lamellar keratoplasty (PLK) fo1 deep stromal
solution. The epithelium is not removed from the
coineal donor button.
Fig. 8.34 Treatment of deep cormeal stromal
abscess with penetrating keratoplasty and 
conjunctival pedicle graft in a horse. (a) A deep
corneal stromal abscess, corneal edema, and
 peripheral corneal vascularization are present. (b)
A trephine is used to remove the stromal abscess.
(c) The donor tissue is the same diameter as the
lesion. (d) Three months postoperatively the
 corneal has healed and is covered with the
 conjunctival pedicle graft.
A
D
225
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
2. The 1ecipient globe is stabilized with scleral fixation
Split-thickness penetrating keratoplasty
sutures of 5-0 nylon. A corneal trephine of appropriate
The supeificial coinea may be vascularized, but is otherwise
size (i.e., 6-8 mm o1 greater} is centered over the
normal in deep stromal abscesses. For horses with DSA and
diseased area and then rotated with minimal downward
anterior chamber fungal invasion that persist, or even prog-
pressure to obtain a cleal-cut, round incision with
vertical sides. The incision with the trephine approaches 
Iess, with severe pain and vision-threatening uveitis in the
face of aggressive medical therapy, surgical removal of the
to just near Descemet's membrane.
posterior stroma and endothelium containing the abscess
3.
 The remaining intact deep stromal tissue is incised
by corneal transplantation is warranted.
vertically with a Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade to
The inherent philosophy of split-thickness o1 lamella1
enter the anterior chamber, being careful to avoid the
surgery is to replace only the diseased portion of the cornea,
iris, corpora nigra, and lens. The button of diseased host
leaving the normal tissue intact. In other words, do the least
tissue is then removed with coineal section scissors. The
keratectomy button is processed for culture and
Both the PLK and DLEK surgical methods are forms of
sensitivity, cytology, and histopathology.
split-thickness PK as they avoid 1emoval of superficial no1-
4.
Bulging of the iris and the corpora nigra into the incision
site may occur. Adhesions or synechiae between the
mal tissue but do surgically enter the anterior chamber.
These surgical methods are important in resolving deep
   d     s
stromal abscesses with anterio1 chamber invasion in horses.
be present on the posterio1 cornea and anterior iris face.
The DALK method maintains globe integrity by utilizing the
The pupil can be occluded by these membranes. The
anterior chamber is reformed by injecting viscoelastic
intact Descemet's membrane.
solution (hyaluronate sodium, 10 mg/mL; Hylartin V
Pfizer Animal Health, New Yo1k, NY) into the anterio1
Posterior lamellar keratoplasty
chamber. The viscoelastic solution will also move the
inis posteriorly, and break down any adhesions
Posterio1 lamellar keratoplasty (PLK) is 1ecommended fo1
between the abscess and the inis. Iris membranes
deep stromal abscesses in the central coinea that are 8 mm
should be removed with caution due to the risk of
01 less, and have a clea1 overlying anterio1 stroma. Medical
therapy is similar to that for iris prolapse surgeries. The su1-
hemorrhage. Direct contact with the lens capsule is also
avoided by reforming the anterior chamber with the
gical approach for PLK in horses is as follows (Fig. 8.35).
viscoelastics.
1. A rectangular, anterior lamellar corneal flap, hinged on
 5. The donor cornea is removed from the moistened gauze
one side, is constricted by hand dissection to two-thirds
swab and placed in the recipient bed, and four cardinal
stromal thickness over the stromal abscess.
sutures of 8-0 Vicryl (Ethicon, Somerville, NI) or 9-
2. A Martinez corneal dissector is used to undermine and
0 nylon (Ethilon; Ethicon) placed at the 12-, 6-, 9-, and 
elevate the superficial coineal layers to expose the
3-0'clock positions. Simple interupted sutures are
abscess.
placed to fill in the remaining sectors in each quadrant.
3.
The flap is gently raised, and a trephine, Beaver No. 6500
O1, alternatively, a simple continuous suture pattern can
blade and coineal transplant scissors used to remove the
be placed to hold the graft. Once the dono1 coinea is
posterio1 stromal abscess, Descemet's membrane, and
sutured into place, viscoelastic solution may again be
endothelium. A 1etrocoineal posterior collagenous layer
injected via a limbal incision to reform the anterior
may be present. The anterio1 chamber is refoimed with
chamber.
viscoelastic solution.
6. A conjunctival pedicle graft o1 amnion transplant may
4. A circular graft of posterior stroma, Descemet's
then be sutured over the keratectomy/graft site in those
membrane, and endothelium 1 mm larger than the
eyes with evidence of infection o1 vascularization to
defect is cut from donor tissue using a trephine.
achieve more rapid assimilation into the coinea.
 5. The graft is placed in the corneal defect, and sutured
A temporary lateral tarsorrhaphy is performed to
every 2 mm using 8-0 absorbable suture material in a
minimize eyelid trauma to the PK.
simple interrupted pattein.
Among PK cases in which conjunctival grafts are used, the
6.
 The three-sided superficial flap is then sutured in place
using 8-0 absorbable suture material.
function of the coineal graft is tectonic (i.e., it maintains
corneal integrity). Fresh, clear corneal grafts are prefeired,
 7. Partial temporary tarsorrhaphies are placed in all eyes to
but such grafts are not always available. In these cases, fro-
protect the graft during recovery.
zen tissue with dead endothelium can be used. Donor
corneal grafts in most equine cases perform thei1 tectonic
cyclosporin A, autogenous serim, antifungals and antibio-
sn asou uazo maj e uaas a l inq kiqiadns anoi
tics, and systemic antibiotics and NSAIDs
become completely clear postoperatively. This may be due
PLK is associated with a shorter surgery and treatment
to migration of recipient endothelial cells into the donor
time than PK. Complications of PLK include superficial
graff. Vascularization of the grafts, indicating rejection,
suture abscesses, suture incision leaks, flap ulcers, and flap
begins at 5-10 days postoperatively. Postoperative medica-
edema. The dono1 graft remains transparent for up to 7 days
 sep os keau jo aeae ue i pau aie suon
and then opacifies. Median time to end of treatment is
healing is complete. The visual outcome is greater than
24 days. Partial graft rejection and scar formation have been
75% for the PK horse eyes. Pupil occlusion is a major
unavoidable fo1 both the PLK and PK procedures. The
problem.
resulting scar, which is typically vascularized and eventually
226
Corneal grafts/keratoplasty
A
B
pue ssansqe lewouas leauio daaa (e) (ynd) Aaseldoneua yeawel louaasod ys uoAdodu pue ssansqe (ewouas leaunos daap jo zuawneaun jesi6uins seg dbi
hypopyon are present in this horse eye. (b) A posterior lamellar keratoplasty is used to remove the abscess. (c) At 1 month postoperatively, scarring of the PLK
graft is present.
opaque, is similar between PLK and PK. The retrocorneal
then vascularizes and opacifies. Median time to end of treat-
and iris membranes can resolve in many cases. Pupil occlu-
ment is 22 days. The 1esulting scar, which is typically vas-
sion is a major problem. The visual outcome is greater than
cularized and eventually opaque, is similar between PLK
90% for eyes that had the PLK procedure.
and DLEK. The visual outcome is greater than 90% for eyes
that had the DLEK procedure. Pupil occlusion is a majo1
Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty
problem.
Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty (DLEK) is 1ecom
mended for deep stromal abscesses in the peripheral cornea
Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty
that are 6 mm or less, and have a clear overlying anterior
Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) is a partial-
stroma. It avoids superficial incisions and suturing of the
thickness graft that preserves the innermost layers of the
central coinea. The DLEK transfers healthy endothelium
cornea: Descemet's membrane and the endothelium. The
while preserving corneal surface integrity. A fully intact epi-
goal of the procedure is to retain the endothelial layer of
thelium with no corneal sutures is present postoperatively.
Medical therapy is similar to that for iris prolapse surgeries.
the host. This layer keeps the cornea clear by removing fluid
from the bulk of the coinea. Retaining this layer avoids the
The surgical approach for DLEK in horses is as follows.
nisk of potentially blinding graft rejection that can occur
1. A two-thirds depth, limbal incision up to 23 mm in
with PK. If the endothelial layer and Descemet's membrane
length is made with a Beaver No. 64 blade.
are noimal, then they are worth preserving. Medical therapy
2.
 A stromal pocket is formed over the DSA with a Martinez
is similar to that for iris prolapse surgeries.
corneal dissector. Bleeding from the vascularized
The procedure is technically skilled and involves dis-
cornea is controlled with electrocautery.
secting the coinea to almost 95% thickness, and 1emoving
3.
 The superficial corneal flap is gently retracted and the
the superficial layers. A donor corneal button is prepared
abscess 1emoved with a trephine, Beave1 No. 65 blade
by removing Descemet's membrane and dono1 endothe-
and coineal scissors. The anterio1 chamber is 1eformed
lium. The donor graft is then sutured to the host. The coinea
with viscoelastic solution.
 takes a little longer to clear but visual results can be simila
4.
The anterior two-thirds of the dono1 coinea is removed
to those of PK.
by hand dissection, and a trephine 1 mm larger in
diameter than the recipient site used to obtain the
circular donor graft from the remaining split-thickness
Corneal transplant discussion for horses
coinea.
Penetrating keratoplasty suffers from the inherent problem
5.
 The superficial corneal flap is partially sutured with
of creating a vertical stromal wound that requires surface
 8-0 Vicryl. The donor graft is inserted into place with
coIneal sutures. The incised stroma never develops the
Utrata forceps, and the limbal incision closed. The graft
structural integrity and strength of noimal stroma. The PK
self-adheres to the recipient stroma by action of the
graft epithelium often sloughs, leaving the graft open to
infection and melting. PK wounds and suture tracts can
place by a needle inserted between the flap sutures, 01
leak. The sutures loosen as stromal edema resolves and
at the limbus. The graft is supported by the viscoelastic
the tissue contracts, allowing aqueous leakage. Vertical
solution in the anterior chamber. The viscoelastic
incisions are more prone to leak at low intraocular pressure
solution can be safely left in the anterior chamber.
levels.
6. Partial temporary tarsorrhaphies are placed in all eyes
The location and size of the transplant sites in the coinea
to protect the surgical site during recovery.
may influence corneal rejection. Graft sites closer to the lim-
 DLEK is associated with a shorter surgery and treatment time
than PK. Complications include suture abscesses, suture
vessels, and keratoplasties greater than 8.0 mm in diamete1
incision leaks, incision edema, and graft misalignment.
are associated with increased rejection rates in humans.
The donor graft remains transparent for up to 7 days and
Paradoxically, vascularization provides tectonic support to
227
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
the horse corneal transplant graft, and a donor graft is not
considered healed until it vascularizes. Grafts closer to the
limbus are considered more desirable for transplant in
horses with DSA due to their proximity to limbal blood ves-
sels, yet this proximity to the limbus undoubtedly increases
the rejection rate. The existence of a maximal size fo1 dono1
coinea in the horse should also be appreciated (i.e., use the
minimal graft size necessary to achieve the therapeutic goal
desired).
Corneal transplants have been performed in horses using
both fresh and frozen grafts. Fresh grafts maximize endothe-
lial cell preservation, thereby minimizing postoperative co1-
neal opacity. The endothelium of frozen cornea is damaged
by changes in pH, osmolality, solute concentration, and
by ice crystal formation. Because fresh cornea is not often
available, most coineal transplants in horses are still done
quite satisfactorily with frozen grafts. The frozen grafts in
Fig. 8.36 Thermokeratoplasty (Salaras procedure) in the dog is one method
to treat corneal edema associated with endothelial dystrophy. Appearance
within 10 days of surgery.
of corneal endothelial dystrophy immediately after treatment with
thermokeratoplasty
Corneal grafts performed fo1 non-inflammatory dystro-
phic conditions are the most successful clinical transplants
in humans, with those done for acquired coineal degen-
edema. With prolonged coineal edema, the intermittent fo1-
 i    e   
mation of painful bullae is common (Fig. 8.36). The intra-
inflammation, infection, and vascularization contribute sig-
coineal fluids tend to accumulate immediately beneath the
nificantly to the failure o1 rejection of coineal grafts. All eyes
corneal epithelia, resulting in variable size corneal epithelial
in hoises that have coineal transplants would be considered
vesicles. There are several methods of therapy fo1 this condi-
high risk for failure o1 rejection based on the human criteria
tion. Full-thickness keratoplasty may be used to provide a
as the grafts are placed in inflamed, infected, and vascular-
new source of coineal endothelial cells. A permanent very
ized coinea. Graft rejection is manifested by a loss of trans-
thin bulbar conjunctival graft may be used to reduce the co1-
parency. Partial graft rejection and scar formation have been
neal edema, prevent the foimation of painful vesicles, and,
unavoidable with PK, PLK, and DLEK procedures despite the
if thin enough, can permit clinical vision in small animals.
use of cyclosporin A. Vascularization abolishes the immune
Thermal cautery to create superficial scarring of the co1-
privilege of the cornea by allowing antigens to leave the grafft
neal stroma is another method. The anterior stromal colla-
via blood vessels and lymphatics, and also by allowing
gen
 fibers contract after thermal cautery, resulting in a
host antigen-presenting cells into the graft. Smaller grafts
flatter coinea. The resultant scar tissue forms a barrier to co1-
in humans are associated with lower rejection rates, and
neal edema. After the onset of general anesthesia, surgical
preparation of the eyelids, cornea, and conjunctiva with
to better postoperative management decisions. In one study
aqueous 0.5% povidone-iodine solution and sterile cotton
of corneal transplantation in humans, the 1-year graft sur-
swabs, the eyelids are retracted by speculum. The central co1-
vival 1ate was 88%, the 5-year survival rate was 74%, and
neal epithelia is debrided using a dull Beaver No. 64 O1
at 10 years the survival rate was 62%.
67 scalpel blade (Fig. 8.37a), and a cellulose sponge con-
Coineal transplants are associated with high success rates,
taining absolute alcohol (Fig. 8.37b). All corneal epithelia
good visual outcomes (75-90%), and shorter treatment
is removed to about 2-4 mm from the limbus. With a dis-
times than without surgery, although all corneal transplants
posable hand-held cautery unit with a very fine tip. a grid
in hoises vascularize and have some degree of opacity, and
of superficial burns is performed (Fig. 8.37c).
are thus considered partially rejected. These procedures are
Post-thermokeratoplasty, the eyes are treated with topical
still evolving in the horse. Automated microkeratomes, arti-
broad-spectrum antibiotics and mydriatics (1% atropine).
ficial anterior chambers, and specialized corneal forceps and
After corneal re-epithelialization is complete, topical co1-
scissois could technically improve the PLK and DLEK
ticosteroids are instilled to minimize corneal scarring.
procedures.
The anticipated result is a slightly scalled coinea, free of
recurrent bullae, erosions, and pain, and often sufficiently
translucent to permit clinical vision.
Thermokeratoplasty
 Adaptations for large animals
In thermokeratoplasty o1 corneal diathermy multiple focal
 and special species
points of superficial thermal cautery are applied to the cor-
nea. Sources of cautery range from the disposable battery-
Thermokeratoplasty can easily be done in the standing.
powered cautery unit to the excimer laser. This procedure
 sedated horse for persistent corneal edema from uveitis
has been reported recently as effective in the treatment
and glaucoma. Buins are made with a portable cautery
 of bullous keratopathy. In certain breeds of dogs, such as
device every 2 mm in the edematous coinea. Ulcers are pres-
Boston Terriers, and in older animals, impaired corneal
ent postoperatively and require antibiotic and antiprotease
endothelial function may eventually result in severe coineal
therapy.
228
Surgical treatment of limbal and scleral diseases
B
Fig. 8.37 In thermokeratoplasty focal superficial cautery is applied to stimulate scar tissue formation. Thermokeratoplasty has been used to treat endothelial
dystrophy and prevent recurrent and painful epithelial bullae. This procedure uses a portable ophthalmic cautery unit and induces an anterior stromal fibrotic
barrier to the corneal hydration, thereby decreasing the development of corneal bullae and ulcers. (a) Nearly all of the corneal epithelia are carefully removed
by scraping with the Beaver No. 64 scalpel blade. (b) Additional epithelia are removed with a cotton swab soaked with absolute alcohol. (c) With a disposable
cautery unit, a grid of superficial cornea burns is created.
Surgical treatment of limbal
and usually necessitate full-thickness excision with scleral
and scleral diseases
homografts.
The inflammatory masses at the limbus often mimic neo-
plasia. Inflammatory masses of this region include nodula1
The limbus o1 transition from sclera to coinea and the sclera
fascitis, fibrous histiocytoma, nodular scleritis, and prolif-
share many similarities with the coinea. Surgical treatments
erative keratoconjunctivitis in Collies (Fig. 8.39). If medical
of limbal and scleral diseases are usually directed toward
treatment, usually topical and intralesional corticosteroids,
Iemoval of neoplastic and inflammatory masses. The most
is not effective, these masses are excised.
common limbai tumor in the dog and cat is the epibulbal
melanoma (Fig. 8.38). These tumors are usually heavily
pigmented, enlarge slowly, invade slowly the anterior sclera,
Local excision with partial-thickness
limbus, and coinea, and usually remain superficial. As a result.
scleral excision
B        
laser treatment. The German Shepherd breed appears most
Partial-thickness excision of the limbus and sclera may not
frequently affected. These tumors have also been reported in
lequire reinforcement of the remaining defect. However, if
cats and may be more malignant. While epibulbar melanomas
the excision involves in excess of two-thirds to three-fourths
tend to expand externally, these masses can invade the deepeI
of the limbal or scleral thickness, free-cut fresh or frozen scleral
sclera and enter the anterior chamber. As primary anterio1
homografts are 1ecommended for reinforcement. A scleral
uveal melanomas in the dog and cat are more destructive.
graft is positioned within the scleral defect and apposed with
gonioscopy and ultrasonography are indicated to distinguish
6-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
between the relatively benign epibulbar melanomas and the
Use of the nictitans cartilage has been Iecommended
more senious primary anterior uveal masses.
as a replacement for sclera. Most scleral homografts in
Other neoplasms affect the limbus in small animals, but
small animals have been limited to the peripheral coinea,
are rare. Squamous cell carcinomas and adenocarcinomas
limbus, and anterior sclera. These scleral grafts are usually
have been reported in small animals. These tumois can
free-cut to fit the various sizes and shapes of the partial-
involve the deeper aspects of the limbus, sclera, and cornea,
to full-thickness scleral defects. Scleral homografts may
A
B
yuow auo (a) aoueieadde aneadoaid (e) paaig puaydaus uewan aun pue sngwll leaelosiop aun mae uayo sewoueiaw jeqwll ao jeginqida geg dbi
postoperatively after local excision with homologous scleral graft.
229
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
aayn n bop allo plo-iea- e ui sniunguonoieay annealoid beg di
is no response to topical and intralesional corticosteroids, the mass is
paydaus uewan plo-iear-s e ui ewouelaw segingida ahiel otg di
removed usually with partial-thickness excision of the underlying sclera.
nyen jeas ssausia-lny e yai uoisioxa eool Aq s! auawneail bop
also be used to correct traumatic or postoperative anterior
The incision is perfoimed slowly in multiple depths. The
staphylomas, usually by reinfoicing the existing bulging
sclera.
a disposable battery-powered unit. Once the black anterio1
uveal pigmentation appears, the deeper incisions of the
Preparation of scleral donor material
sclera are made very carefully to avoid incision and penetia-
Scleral homografts are relatively easy to prepare and
tion of the iris and/o1 ciliary body (Fig. 8.41d). After the
four sides of the scleral incision are completed, the attach-
maintain. These grafts are convenient ‘patches' of primarily
ments of the underlying inis and ciliary body to the sclera
collagen. Scleral homografts are stored in the standard
are carefully and bluntly separated with a cyclodialysis spat-
freezer (-20 to -30°C), o1 ultra freezer (-80°C), as well as
ula (Fig. 8.41e). The spatula must be manipulated in the
     5  -
potential subscleral space (Fig. 8.41f). If the spatula
A supply of frozen scleral homografts for the dog and cat
1is
inserted into the uveal tissue per se, considerable intraocula1
should be maintained fo1 these surgical procedures as well
hemorrhage occurs. There should be very limited or no
as for emergency coineal grafts.
hemorrhage associated with this part of the surgery.
Scleral grafts are obtained aseptically. The globe is enu
 Once anterior uveal separation from the sclera is complete,
cleated and placed on a sterile surgical drape. The globe is
opened 360° at the limbus and all intraocular contents (ante-
thes
section of sclera and limbal melanoma are removed
(Fig. 8.41g). Any remaining tissue attachments are carefully
nio1 and posterior uvea, lens, vitreous, and retina) are eviscer-
ated. The sclera is vigorously scraped with the Beaver No. 64
cut by tenotomy or utility scissors. If the anterior chamber is
collapsed excessively, it can be 1e-established with 0.5-0.7 mL
01 67 scalpel blade to remove as much as possible of the uveal
tissues. The sclera is then cut into a variety of sizes and shapes
of a viscoelastic agent (Fig. 8.41h). The scleral transplant is
    aq si a n 
fo1 potential grafts. These tissues are carefully transferred into
tenotomy scissors until about 0.5-1.0 mm larger than the
individual small sterile glass bottles and frozen until use.
Anterior full-thickness scleral grafts are used after surgical
defect (Fig. 8.41i). The scleral homograft is apposed to the
removal of a limbal (epibulbar) melanoma or as part of the
 0-2 o o- a as  aq sadan
excision of an iridal or iridociliary neoplasm. The fresh or fro-
Zen scleral homograft is trimmed to exceed the surgical defect
complete, the viscoelastic agent is lavaged from the anterior
chamber and replaced with lactated Ringer's solution.
by about 0.5-1.0 mm to compensate fo1 graft shrinkage.
Any fibrin or blood should also be irrigated from the anterior
chamber. After the last suture is placed, the wound apposition
 Excision of limbal melanoma with full-
is evaluated by the injection of additional lactated Ringel's
thickness scleral homograft
solution sufficient to provide about 10-15 mmHg intraocular
pressure. The scleral homograft is covered with the adjacent
The pieoperative examination of a limbal melanoma in a
bulbar conjunctiva and apposed to the limbus by simple
dog suggests that local excision and a full-thickness scleral
internupted 4-0 to 6-0 braided polyglactin 910 sutures
homograft may be curative (Fig. 8.40). After onset of general
(Fig. 8.41k).
anesthesia, preparation of the eyelids, conjunctiva, and co1-
nea with aqueous 0.5% povidone-iodine solution and ster-
ile cotton swabs, the area is draped and the eyelids are
Postoperative management and results
retracted by a wire speculum (Fig. 8.41a).The bulbar con-
Postoperative management after these procedures includes
junctiva and episclera above the mass are incised by tenot-
topical antibiotics and mydriatics, and systemic broad-
omy scissors and retracted toward the conjunctival fornix
spectrum antibiotics, corticosteroids, and NSAIDs. Mydriasis
(Fig. 8.41b). The edges of the scleral incision are defined,
inq paep Aiaeiapou e aproid oi nuanyns aq Pinous
and the sclera is incised slowly with the Beave1 No. 64 o1
moving pupil. Corneal edema adjacent to the opaque scleral
67 scalpel blade (Fig. 8.41c).
homograft is expected. After 5-7 days, the intensity of
230
Surgical treatment of limbal and scleral diseases
A)
B
C
?
?
H
①
?
pue snqwll leanelosiop aya sanloaui ewouelaw eqwll jo jeginqida ayl (e) ayeih jeaps snobojowoy ssauspiya-liny e yai ssew jeqw e jo uoisiox3 ltg dbis
sclera. (b) The bulbar conjunctiva and Tenon's capsule are incised by Steven's tenotomy scissors and retracted toward the conjunctival fornix to expose
the mass. (c) The extent of the scleral excision is determined and the scleral edges are incised with a Beaver No. 64 scalpel blade. Scleral hemorrhage is
controlled with point electrocautery. (d) The fullthickness limbus or peripheral cornea is incised similarly with a Beaver No. 64 scalpel blade, permitting entry
into the anterior chamber. (e,f With a cyclodialysis spatula inserted through the limbal or corneal incision, the spatula tip is used to separate the overlying
scleral block from the adjacent iris and ciliary body. (g) By Steven's tenotomy scissors, any remaining tissues are incised and the scleral block with the
pigmented mass excised. (h) About 0.7 mL viscoelastic agent is injected into the anterior chamber to reform the anterior segment of the globe and facilitate
apposition of the scleral graft. (i) The homologous scleral graft, which should be about 0.5 mm larger than the defect, is carefully fitted to the scleral wound.
(j) The scleral graft is apposed with 5-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. Just before the last limbal suture is placed, the viscoelastic agent is 
flushed from the anterior chamber and replaced with lactated Ringer's solution. (k) The bulbar conjunctiva is apposed to the limbus and anterior edge of
the scleral graft with 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
the topical and systemic treatments can be reduced. Postop
Laser treatment of limbal melanomas
erative complications after this procedure include hyphema,
corneal scarring adjacent to the graft, and if the anterio1
Both Nd:YAG and diode lasers have been used to treat
uveitis is poorly controlled, iris deposits on the anterior lens
limbal melanomas in the dog.
capsule, posterior synechiae, and secondary cataract forma-
[n an Nd:YAG laser study, the total energy applied
tion. Glaucoma is unlikely to occur as only a small percent-
was 7.5-572.0 I. The non-contact probe was positioned
age of the iridocorneal angle has been excised. Success of
1-3 mm from the surface of the mass and the beam was
this type of surgical procedure and the preservation of vision
directed away from the interio1 of the eye. Both charring
is high (85-95%).
and contraction of the mass occurred during lasering. Of
231
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
the 15 dogs and cats studied, limbal melanomas recurred in
fo1 closure. Mesh expansion of the skin can also be used.
three patients within 12 months.
Multiple 1ows o1 parallel stab incisions in the skin allow it
The advantages of laser treatment are that it is non-
to stretch over the orbit.
invasive, avoids the intraocular complications of surgery.
requires only a short duration of general anesthesia, and
Cryotherapy
does not require donor graft tissues. Its main limitation is
the higher recurrence rate.
Cryotherapy with liquid nitrogen or nitrous oxide can
be effective, with optimal cryonecrosis of malignant cells
being achieved between -20° and -40C using a double
Adaptations for large animals
freeze-thaw technique. Either a closed probe or spray can
and special species
be used. The closed probe gives better application accuracy
while the spray is faster; however, collateral tissue damage
 O1 runoff distant to the site is a potential complication.
Surgeries for squamous cell carcinoma
Cryosurgery is affordable and easily attainable. It can be
in the horse
used for eyelid, nictitans, conjunctival, and corneal tumors.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is a commonly occurring
Use of a thermocouple is helpful in thick eyelid tumois
neoplasm of the equine coinea and adnexa. Even though
to ensure an adequate freeze and prevent overfreezing.
many treatments are available, too many lesions are not
Cryotherapy is especially useful when treatment of a limbal
treated until they are large and ulcerated. Early treatment
tumor cannot be done with a strontium probe due to lack
should be easier and more accessible to the practitioner with
of availability or when the time 1equired to treat a very
the availability of topical and intralesional chemotherapeu-
large tumor is prohibitive due to exposure and anesthetic
tic dnugs. Early diagnosis and treatment result in decreased
time. The skin and coinea that is not to be frozen can be
morbidity and mortality.
pauni v uennad jo iae Aaey e ussn paanoid
Surgical resection alone of SCC may be adequate if clean
piece of polystyrene foam, as from a cup, covered in petrola-
margins can be obtained. Small tumors or carcinoma in situ
tum works well to protect the coinea when freezing the eye-
of the conjunctiva o1 third eyelid may be treated effectively
lids. Small superficial tumors should be frozen until the
with simple excision. Carcinoma in situ of the conjunctiva
iceball extends 3-5 mm beyond the visible tumo1 maigin.
can be excised with sedation, an auriculopalpebral nerve
Keratectomy sites that have been frozen seem to heal excep-
block, and topical anesthetic in a good horse. Unfortunately.
tionally slowly. The ulcers are treated with a broad-spectrum
many eyelid tumors are not diagnosed until it is difficult to
ophthalmic antibiotic and atropine as needed postopera-
obtain clean surgical margins without compromising lid
tively. Post-cryotherapy. eyelids are extremely erythemic
function. Therefore, it is 1ecommended that eyelid SCC be
and edematous fo1 several days.
treated with radiation therapy, cryotherapy, radiofrequency
hyperthermia, or intralesional chemotherapy without or in
Radiation therapy
combination with excision (Fig. 8.42). Occasionally, a tumo1
will be so extensive that enucleation is necessary because lid
Radiation therapy with beta irradiation (i.e., strontium-90)
function cannot be maintained with therapy. Excision of
Or brachytherapy is effective in the treatment of SCC. Beta
extensive periocular SCC can be difficult because of the possi-
radiation is most beneficial in superficial SCC of the cornea
bility of an insufficient amount of skin to close the orbit. Par-
and limbus after keratectomy. Eighty to 90% of horses with
tial orbital rim resection with mesh skin expansion has been
coineal SCC that undergo keratectomy and beta irradiation
shown to be an effective treatment in these cases. A tradi-
are cured after one treatment. As strontium has limited pen-
tional transpalpebral enucleation or exenteration is peI-
etration into soft tissue, it is very safe for corneal lesions as
formed. When tumor is present on the eyelids, an incision
the lens is not damaged, but it cannot penetrate lesions of
is made to allow a 5-i0 mm margin around the visible
the eyelid. Strontium iradiation is delivered via a probe.
tumo1. After exenteration of the orbit, the protuberant caudal
Healing of resultant ulcers is delayed compared to ulcers that
portion of the dorsal orbital rim is excised with an osteome.
have not been irradiated. In addition, it is not unusual for
This facilitates closure of the orbit as less skin is 1equired
granulation tissue to develop at the site that can be
A
B
Fig. 8.42 Treatment of equine corneoconjunctival squamous cel carcinoma in situ with superficial keratectomy, beta irradiation, and amnion graft in a horse.
(a) Generalized carcinoma in situ is present. (b) Keratectomy, beta irradiation, and amnion graft cover the corneal ulcer wound for 3 weeks postoperatively. (c)
Seven weeks postoperatively the cormea has healed with minimal vascularization and scarring.
232
Adaptations for large animals and special species
indistinguishable fiom tumor recurence without biopsy.
neoplastic cell destruction, and the slow healing rate of the
Reculrent tumors are often cured with a second treatment.
lesultant coineal ulcers. The technique involves using a
Bacterial keratitis is not an unusual complication follow-
COz laser with an articulated arm. The laser is operated
ing strontium; therefore, conjunctival grafts are commonly
in the continuous mode with a power setting of 3-6 on
placed over the ulcer bed.
the low scale, which coresponds to an average output of
 s  r a  
3-8 W. A defocused beam is used to provide ablation rather
advantage of continuous tumor exposure to high levels of
than cutting. Depending on the size of the tumol, a keratec-
Iadiation over a period of time. Treatments with cesium-
tomy may be done prior to laser ablation. The tumors are
137, 1adon-222, gold-198, cobalt-60, and inidium-192 have
vaporized in situ until all visible tumor is gone. The bed is
all been described. Brachytherapy involves the placement of
then lasered until it is covered with a brown char extending
tubes containing radioactive beads within neoplastic tissue.
5 mm into normal tissue. Topical broad-spectrum antibio-
One-yea local control rates with brachytherapy alone are
tics are used until the cornea is fluorescein negative.
74%. The 2- and 4-year progression-free survival rates are
about 70%. Advantages of brachytherapy include preserva-
Immunotherapy
tion of eyelid anatomy and function even with extensive
SCC and the high cure rate. Disadvantages of brachytherapy
[mmunotherapy with bacille Calmette-Guerin (BCG) cell wall
extract has been used successfully for large SCC in the horse.
include cost, required expertise, radiation exposure of person-
The tumors are injected with 1 mL vaccine/cm². Multiple injec-
nel, and necessity of isolation of the horse. Local toxicoses
tions are required approximately 1 week apart. Flunixin meglu-
and acute reactions include swelling, localized infection,
mine (1 mg/kg) should be administered concurrently to help
and dry and moist desquamation; generally these respond
to therapy or are self-limiting. Chronic radiation reactions
prevent anaphylaxis. Complications include severe inflamma
tion and risk of anaphylaxis. The benefit of BCG is that the
include hai1 loss, hai1 and skin depigmentation, necrosis,
eyelid architecture is preserved. Other newel, safer chemother-
fibrosis, cataract, keratitis, and corneal ulceration.
apeutic drugs that can be used intralesionally have largely
Generally the placement, number of beads, and time of
 Ieplaced BCG therapy.
exposure are calculated using a computer program. The
implants can be placed within an eyelid tumo1 o1 within
debulked eyelid tissue. The benefit of debulking a large
Intralesional chemotherapy
tumor is that less radiation is necessary, decreasing the
 Intralesional chemotherapy with cisplatin or 5-fluorouracil
amount of tissue necrosis. If the tumor is debulked, inter-
(5-FU) is an effective therapy for eyelid SCC. Like brachy-
therapy, intralesional chemotherapy results in very little eye-
We prefer to debulk the tumor mass if necessary, close the
lid distortion or functional alterations. Chemotherapy with
incision normally, and place the tubes at closure. If the
intralesional, slow-release cisplatin can give very effective
horse is cooperative, the beads can be placed in the standing
lesults, with or without surgical debulking. in large eyelid
horse 5 days postoperatively, avoiding another anesthesia.
SCC. Cisplatin, 3.3 mg/mL (10 mg of cisplatin in 1 mL of
This allows healing of the incision prio1 to irradiating the
water and 2 mL of purified, medical-grade sesame oil). is
tissue. Generally the horses are in isolation for 5-7 days.
used. The solutions must be mixed for l min to create an
If any health problems arise, the treatment is terminated
emulsion. The emulsion is injected using a 20 o1 22 g needle
by removing the beads as radiation exposure is too high to
inserted into the tissue. The emulsion is injected while with-
work on a horse with radioactive beads. Possible complica-
drawing the needle. Multiple injections are made to cover
the treatment field and include 1 cm of noimal margin
the beads and had to remain in isolation until the beads
tissue. Multiple planes of injections are needed for large
were passed in the manure.
tumors. Treatments are generally done under sedation. Four
sessions at 2-week intervals with 1 mg/cm? for tumois
Hyperthermia
10-20 cm? in size are necessary. The 1-year relapse-free rates
fo1 SCC treated with cisplatin approach 90%. Similar metas-
Hyperthermia of small, superficial SCC has been described.
tasis rates in studies using cisplatin indicate that damage to
Malignant cells appear to be more sensitive to temperatures
the blood vessels and lymphatics by the injections does
between 41°C and 45°C than noimal cells. Conjunctival
not increase the rate of metastasis.
and eyelid swelling is minimal after this procedure. Tumois
Topical therapy with 1% 5-FUl can be used for corneal,
are held at a temperature of 50°C for 30 s. Eyelid tumors
limbal, conjunctival, and superficial eyelid SCC. Topical
should be treated for 3-4 mm beyond the tumo1 margin.
5-FU, 1% solution, applied three to four times daily can
-oddo oy suoedde deaao nou on paie aq isu auo
be effective for coineal and conjunctival  intraepithelial
site directions. Hyperthermia should not be used in large
carcinoma. Superficial eyelid tumois can be treated with
tumois of 4-5 cm diamete1 that penetrate deeply into the
5-FU cream; however, this treatment occasionally causes
eyelid or conjunctiva.
severe necrosis. 5-FUI, 50 mg/mL with 3 mL of 1:1000 adren-
aline (epinephrine) per 10 mL of 5-FU, can be injected into
eyelid SCC.
Carbon dioxide laser
Most horses will tolerate intralesional tieatments very
Carbon dioxide laser ablation of superficial limbal SCC can
nicely although alopecia may result. Often the ocular dis-
 be effctive. The advantages are ease and speed, minimal
charge increases, necessitating the use of a fly mask. Gener-
pain and inflammation, and precision. The disadvantages
ally the response is positive, and a relatively normal eyelid
are the cost of the instrumentation, lack of specificity for
with noimal function is the result.
233
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Piroxicam, an NSAID, has been shown to have antitumo1
occasionally Simmental, and infrequently the Holstein
effects. It is thought to exert its effects by inhibiting cyclooxy.
breeds (white
 or non-pigmented eyelids) most often
develop BSCC, at an average age of about 7-9 years. Other
there are no publications describing the use of piroxicam in the
sites affected with BSCC include the medial coineolimbus,
teatment of ocular SCC in horses, it has been used successfully
eyelids and palpebral conjunctiva, lacrimal caruncle, and
in a horse with mucocutaneous carcinoma and metastasis.
nictitating membrane. Client education is important for
Piroxicam is administered at 150 mg per day for several
the management of BSCC, as in the Hereford breed there
months
are heritable factors, and therapy of small masses is far more
successful and less costly than for those masses with intrao1-
Surgeries for infectious keratoconjunctivitis
bital invasion and metastases to the regional palpebral
lymph nodes and other tissues.
and squamous cell carcinoma in cattle
All ofthe therapies used in the horse for the treatment of SCC
[nfectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (IBK) and bovine
are available for cattle, but financial constraints generally limit
squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) are the predominant
those techniques to initial surgery and tumor excision, cryo-
diseases for corneoscleral surgeries in the bovine species.
therapy, and hyperthermia. Anesthesia is usually retrobulbar
The bovine cornea has a remarkable ability to heal rapidly.
and local eyelid blocks. Enucleation surgeries for BSCC yield
and develops less coineal scairing than occurs in the hoise.
about 37% 1ecurrences. Salvage procedures may be used fo1
The coineal ulceration associated with IBK and Moraxella
advanced BSCC. Fo1 palpebral conjunctival BSCC, the ‘H'
bovis is sensitive to most topical antibiotics, and infre-
 blepharoplasty procedure is used most often. For corneolimbal
   l ss  i 
BSCC, superficial-to-deep keratectomy covered with a perma
brane flap sutured to the upper eyelid) to strengthen
nent advancement (hood o1 180°) bulbar conjunctival graft
those corneas
with deep and perforated ulcerations
is preferred.
(see Chapter 7).
Cryotherapy may be applied to the keratectomy site before
BSCC is one of the most frequent neoplasms in this spe-
the conjunctival graft is applied. Surgical reduction of the
cies. About two-thirds of BSCCs affect the coineolimbus
 no  a i oe  s 
region, usually the lateral and/or dorsolateral limbus, and
Hyperthermia is another option, and is often reserved fo1
less
frequently the
medial limbus.
The
Hereford,
small masses (avoid in masses over 3-4 cm).
 Further reading
Small animals: general
Barros PSM, Garcia JA, Laus IL, Ferreira AL,
Small animals: keratectomies
 Dubielzig RR, Schobert CS, Dreyfus : Corneal
Gomes TLs: The use of xenologous amniotic
squamous cell carcinoma in dogs with a history
Champagne ES. Munger RJ: Multiple punctate
 mermbrane to repair canine corneal perforation
of chronic keratitis. Proceedings of the 39th
keratotomy for the treatment of recurrent
Created by penetrating keratectomy. Vet
Meeting of the AmericanCollege ofVeterinary
epithelial erosions in dogs. I Am Anim Hosp
Ophthalmol 1:119-123. 1998.
Ophthalmologists: Absract 112. 2008.
Assoc 28:213-216. 1992.
Blogg IR, Dutton AG, Stanley RG: Use of third
Gelatt KN, Gelatt IP: Surgical procedures of the
 Peiffer RL, Gelatt KN: Superficial
eyelid grafts to repair full-thickness defects
cornea and sclera. In Handbook of Small
keratectomy for the treatment of
in the cornea and sclera. J Am Anim Hosp
 chronic ulcerative keratitis and sequestrum
Animal Ophthalmic Surgery. vol 2. Oxford.
Assoc 25:505-512. 1989.
1995. Corneal and Intraocular Procedures.
in the domestic cat. Feline Practice 6:37-40.
 Bussieres M, Krohne SG. Stiles J. Townsend WM:
Pergamon Press. pp 43-84.
1976.
The use of porcine small intestinal
Gilger BC, Bentley E. Ollivier Fl: Diseases
Thoft RA: Keratoepithelioplasty. Am }
submucosa for the repair of full-thickness 
 and surgery of the canine cornea and sclera.
Ophthalmol 97:1-6. 1984.
comeal defects in dogs. cats and horses.
In Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
Vestre WA: Surgery of the cornea. In Bojrab MJ.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:352-359. 2004.
Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006. Blackwell.
Birchard Sl. Tomlinson JL, editors: Current
 Crispin S: Corneal foreign bodies in cats and
pp 690-752.
Techmiques in Small Animal Surgery. ed 3.
dogs: is the damage comparable? Vet Med
Giuliano EA, Ota J. Tucker SA: Photodynamic
 Philadelphia, 1990. Lea and Febiger.
82:800-801. 1987.
 therapy: basic principles and potential uses
pp 94-98.
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP. Jamieson VE.
for the veterinary ophthalmologist, Vet
Whitley RD: The canine cormea. In Gelatt KN.
English RV, Olivero DK: Traumatic anterior
Ophthalmol 10:337-343.2007.
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 2.
lens capsule disruption. J Am Anim Hosp
Hirst LW, Rice TA: Surgery for ocular injuries.
 Philadelphia, 1991. Lea and Febiger.
Assoc 27:410-414. 1991.
In Rice TA, Michels RG, Stark W), editors:
pp 307-356.
Dice PF. Colley PL: Ulse of contact lenses to
Ophthalmic Surgery. ed 4. St Louis. 1984.
 treat corneal diseases in small animals.
 Small animals: corneal repair of
Mosby. pp 399-428.
Semin Vet Med Surg 3:46-51. 1988.
lacerations/ulcerations
Rampazzo A. Eule C. Speier S. Grest P. Spiess B:
Featherstone HJ. Sansom J: Intestinal
Scleral rupture in dogs. cats and horses, Vet
 Barnett KC: The cormeal ulcer-Vl. Surgical
submucosa repair in two cases of feline
Ophthatmol 9:149-156. 2006.
treatment. J Small Amim Pract 7:275-277.
ulcerative keratitis. Vet Rec 145:136-138.
Stark W). Bruner WE, Maumenee AE: Surgery of
1966.
2000.
the comea. In Rice TA, Michels RG,
 Barros PSM. Safatle AMV. Malerba TA.
Featherstone Hl. Sansom J. Heinrich CL: The
Stark Wl, editors: Ophchalmic Surgery. ed 4.
 Bumier M Jr: The surgical repair of the
use of porcine small intestinal submucosa
St Louis. 1984. Mosby. pp 115-137.
cornea of the dog using pericardium as a
in ten cases of feline corneal disease, Vet
Wilkie DA, Whittaker C: Surgery of the cornea.
keratoprosthesis. Brazilian Jourmal of
Ophthalmol 4:147-153. 2001.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Veterinary Research and Animal Science
Gerding PA, McLaughlin SA, Troop MW:
27:1067-1107. 1997.
32:251-255. 1995.
Pathogenic bacteria and fungi associated
Adaptations for large animals and special species
with external ocular diseases in dogs: 131
Bahn CF. Meyer RF. MacCallum DK. et al:
corneoscleral defect. Vet Ophthalmol
cases [1981-1986). I Am Vet Med Assoc
 Penetrating keratoplasty in the cat.
9:255-258. 2006.
192:242-244. 1988.
Ophthalmology 89:687-699. 1982.
Lewin GA: Repair of a full thickness
Kern T): Ulcerative keratitis, Vet Clin North Am
 Brightman AH, McLaughlin SA, Brogdon ID:
 corneoscleral defect in a German Shepherd
20:643-666. 1990.
Autogenous lamellar corneal grafting in 
dog using porcine small intestinal
Kuhns EL, Keller WF. Blanchard GL: The
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 195:469-475.
submucosa. J Small Amim Pract 40:340-342.
 treatment of pannus in dogs by use of a
1989.
1999.
corneal-scleral graft. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Cella F: Corneal graft in the dog. Ad. in Small
Norman JC. Urbanz IL, Calvares ST: Penetrating
162:950-952. 1973.
Animal Practice 3:101-103. 1961.
keratoscleroplasty and bimodal grafting for 
Morgan RV, Bachrach A, Ogilvie GK: An
Dice PF. Severin GA. Limb WV: Experimental
 treatment of limbal melanocytoma. Vet
evaluation of soft contact lens usage in the
autogenous and homologous corneal
Ophthalmol 11:340-345. 2008.
dog and cat. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
transplantation in the dog. J Am Anim Hosp
Plummer CE, Kallberg ME. Ollivier Fl, et al: Use
20:885-888. 1984.
Assoc 9:245-251. 1973.
of a biosynthetic material to repair the
Parshall Cl: Lamellar corneal-scleral
Gimrnez MTP. Farifa IM: Lamellar keratoplasty
surgical defect following excision of an
transposition. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
for the treatment of feline corneal
 epibulbar melanoma in a cat, Vet
9:270-277. 1973.
sequestrum, Vet Ophthalmol 1:163-166.
Ophthalmol 11:254. 2008.
Schmidt GM. Blanchard GL, Keller WF: The use
1998.
Schepens CL, Acosta F: Scleral implants: an
of hydrophilic contact lenses in corneal
Hacker DV: Frozen corneal grafts in dogs and
historical perspective. Surveys in
diseases of the dog and cat: a preliminary
cats: a report on 19 cases. J Am Arim Hosp
Ophthalmology 35:447-453. 1991.
report, J Small Ani Pract 18:773-777. 1977.
Assoc 27:387-398, 1991.
Sullivan TC. Nasisse MP. Davidson MG.
Stanley RG: Results of grid keratotomy.
Holt IR: Corneal graft in a dog. Vet Res 69:454.
Glover TL: Photocoagulation of limbal
superficial keratectomy, and debridement
1957.
melanomas in dogs and cats: 15 cases
for the management of persistent corneal
[1989-1993). I Am Vet Med Assoc
 Jensen EC: Experimental corneal
erosions in 92 dogs. Vet Ophthatmol
208:891-894, 1996.
transplantation in the dog. I Am Vet Med
1:233-238. 1998.
Assoc 142:11-22. 1963.
Wilkie DA. Wolf ED: Treatment of
Williams MM. Spiess BM. Pascoe PJ.
Lavignette AM: Lamellar keratoplasty in the dog.
 epibulbar melanocytoma in a dog. using
 O'Grady M: Systemic effects of topical and
Small Animal Clinician 2:183-197. 1962.
full-thickness eyewall resection and
subconjunctival ophthalmic atropine in the
 Mannis M). Krachmer JH: Keratoplasty: a
synthetic graft. J Am Vet Med Assoc
horse. Vet Ophthalmol 3:193-199. 2000.
historical perspective. Surveys in
198:1019-1022. 1991.
Small animals: corneal adhesives
Ophthalmology 25:333-338. 1981.
 Small animals: other
McEntyre JM: Experimental penetrating
Bonuchoff SA, Refojo M. Slansky HH, et al:
keratoplasty in the dog. Arch Ophthalmol
Bentley E. Murphy Cl: Thermal cautery of the
Clinical applications of adhesives in corneal
80:372-376. 1968.
cornea for the treatment of spontaneous
surgery,Trans Am Acad Ophthalmol
chronic corneal epithelial defects in dogs
Otolarymgol 73:499-505. 1969.
 Mueller FO. Formston C: Keratoplasty in the
and horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc
dog. Res Vet Sci 19:168-175. 1969.
Eiferman RA, Synder IW: Antibacterial effect of
224:250-253. 2004.
 Stechschulte SUl, Azar DT: Complications after
cyanoacrylate glue.Arch Ophthalmol
Michau TM, Gilger BC. Maggio F.
101:953-960. 1983.
penetrating keratoplasty. Int Ophthatmol Clin
40:27-43. 2000.
Davidson MG: Use of thermokeratoplasty
Laus IL. Barbosa VT. Ribeiro AP: Effect of the
for treatment of ulcerative keratitis and
 ethyl-cyanoacrylate or the octhyl-
Townsend WM, Rankin Al, Stiles J. Krohne SG:
bullous keratopathy secondary to corneal
 cyanoacrylate in experimental corneal
Heterologous penetrating keratoplasty for
endothelial disease in dogs: 13 cases [1994-
lesions in rabbits. Proceedings of the 38th
treatment of a corneal sequestrum in a cat.
2001). I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:607-612.
Anual Meeting of the American College of
Vet Ophthalmol 11:273-278. 2008.
2003.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Abstract 23.
Small animals: limbal surgery
 Murphy Cl., Burling T. Hollingsworth S:
2007.
Donaldson D. Sansom J. Adams V: Canine
Thermokeratoplasty for the treatment of
Refojo MF. Dohlma CH. Ahmad B. et al:
chronic bullous keratopathy in the dog.
Evaluation of adhesives for corneal surgery.
limbal melanomas: 30 cases (1992-2004).
Transactions of the 24th Anmual Meeting of the
Part 2. Treatment with lamellar resection
Arch Ophthalmol 80:645-656. 1968.
American College of Veterinary
and adjunctive strontium-90 beta
Refojo MF. Dohlman CH, Koliopoulos J:
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 21. 1993.
plesiotherapy: efficacy and morbidity. Vet
 Adhesives in ophthalmology: a review.
Shieh E. Boldy KL. Garbus J. McDonnell PJ:
Ophthalmol 9:179-186. 2006.
Surveys in Ophthalmology 15:217-236. 1971.
Excimer laser keratectomy in the treatment
 Featherstone Hl, Renwick P. Heinrich CL,
Watte CM, Elks R. Moore DL, McLellan GJ:
of canine corneal opacities, Progress in
 Manning S: Efficacy of cryotherapy for the
 Clinical experience with butyl-2-
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
treatment of canine limbal melanoma.
cyanoacrylate adhesive in the management
Proceedings of the 39th Anmual Meeting of the
2:75-79. 1992.
 of canine and feline corneal disease, Vet 
American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmol 7:319-327. 2004.
Large animals: equine
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 93. 2008.
Harling DE, Peiffer RL, Cook CS. Belkin PV:
Alexander GR, Chester Z: Use of free
Small animals: corneal grafts/
 Feline limbal melanoma: four cases, J Am 
 conjunctival grafts in horses: ten cases. Aust
keratoplasty
Anim Hosp Assoc 22:795-802. 1986.
Vet J 82:206-210. 2004.
Andrade AL, Laus IL. Figueiredo F. Batista CM:
Hirst LW: Epibulbar tumors., pterygia.
Anderson JF. Gelatt KN, Farnsworth RJ:
The use of preserved equine renal capsule to
enucleation and evisceration. In Rice TA.
A modified membrane nictitans flap
repair lamellar corneal lesions in normal
Michels RG, Stark WJ. editors: Ophthalmic
technique for the treatment of ulcerative 
dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 2:79-82. 1999.
Surgery, ed 4, St Louis. 1984. Mosby.
keratitis in cattle. I Asm Vet Med Assoc
Andrew SE. Samuelson DA. Lewis PA.
pp 63-84.
168:706-708. 1976.
 Kubilis PS: Comparison of Optisol-GS and
 Kanai K. Kanemaki N, Matsuo S. et al: Excision
Andrew SE. willis AM: Disease of the cornea
neomycin-polymyxin B-gramicidin
 of a feline limbal melanoma and use of
and sclera. In Gilger BC. editor: Equine
ophthalmic solution for corneal storage in
 nictitans cartilage to repair the resulting
Ophthalmology. St Louis. 2005, Saunders,
the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2:155-161. 1999.
pp 157-251.
235
8
 Surgery of the cornea and sclera
Andrew SE, Brooks DE, Smith PJ. Gelatt KN.
Chmielewski NT. Brooks DE. Smith Pl, et al:
 Rebhun wC: Treatment of advanced squamous
Chmielewski NT, Whittaker C: Equine
Visual outcome and ocular survival
 cell carcinomas involving the equine
ulcerative keratomycosis: visual outcome
following iris prolapse in the horse: a review
cornea, Vet Surg 19:297-302. 1990.
and ocular survival in 39 cases [1987-1996).
of 32 cases. Equine Vet I 29:31-39, 1997.
Sansom J. Featherstone H, Barnett KC:
Equine Vet J 30:109-116. 1998.
Cooley PL, Wyman M: Indolent-like corneal
Keratomycosis in six horses in the United
Andrew SE, Brooks DE, Biros Dl. Denis HM,
ulcers in 3 horses, I Am Vet Med Assoc
Kingdom. Vet Rec 6:13-17, 2005.
Cutler T). Gelatt KN: Posterior lamellar
188:295-297. 1986.
 Schoster JV: Using combined excision and
keratoplasty for treatment of deep stromal
 Denis HM: Equine corneal surgery and
Cyotherapy to treat limbal squamous cell
abscesses in nine horses, Vet Ophthalmol
transplantation, Vet Clin North Am Equine
carcinoma, Vet Med 87:357-365. 1992.
3:99-103. 2000
Pract 20:361-380. 2004.
 Townsend WM: Food and fiber-producing
Baker A. Brooks DE. Plummer CE. et al:
English RV. Nasisse MP. Davidson MG: Carbon
ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
 Penetrating lamellar keratoplasty for corneal
 dioxide laser ablation for treatment of
Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
stromal abscess in the horse: a retrospective
 limbal squamous cell carcinoma in horses.
Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
study of 21 clinical cases. Proceedings of
I Am Vet Med Assoc 196:439-442. 1990.
Whitley RD. Turner LM: Management of ocular
the 38th Anmual Meeting of the American
Grahn B. Wolfer J. Keller C, Wilcock B: Equine
 trauma in horses. Part 1: cornea and sclera.
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists:
keratomycosis: clinical and laboratory
Mod Vet Pract 67:233-238. 1986.
Abstract 68. 2007
findings in 23 cases. Progress in Veterinary
Whittaker CJG. Smith PJ. Brooks DE, et al:
Bentley E. Murphy Cl: Thermal cautery of the
and Comparative Ophthalmology 3:2-7. 1993.
Therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty for
cornea for the treatment of spontaneous
Hendrix DVH, Brooks DE, Smith PJ, et al:
 deep corneal stromal abscesses in eight
 chronic corneal epithelial defects in dogs
Corneal stromal abscesses in the horse: a
horses. Veterinary and Comparative
and horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc
review of 24 cases. Equine Vet J 27:440-447.
Ophthalmology 7:19-28. 1997.
224:250-253. 2004.
1995.
Blackwood SE. Brooks DE. Plummer CE, et al:
Lassaline ME, Brooks DE, Ollivier Fl: Equine
Large animals: bovine
 Penetrating keratoplasty in the horse: visual
 am niotic membrane transplantation for
 English RV, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG: Carbon
outcome and ocular survival. Proceedings of
 corneal laceration and keratomalacia in
 dioxide laser ablation for treatment of
the 38th Anmual Meeting of the American
three horses. Vet Ophthalmol 8:311-317.
limbal squamous cell carcinoma in horses.
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists:
2005.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 196:439-442. 1990.
Abstract 69. 2007.
Lavach ID. Severin GA, Roberts SM: Lacerations
 Farris HE: Cryosurgical treatment of bovine
Bosch G. Klein WR: Superficial keratectomy
 of the equine eye: a review of 48 cases. J Am
ocular squamous cell carcinoma. Vet Clin
and cryosurgery as therapy for limbal
Vet Med Assoc 184:1243-1248. 1984.
North Am Large Anim Pract 104:861-867.
neoplasms in 13 horses. Vet Ophthalmol
 Michau TM. Schwabenton B. Davidson MG.
1980.
8:241-246. 2005.
Gilger BC: Superficial., nonhealing corneal
Farris HE. Fraunfelder FT: Cryosurgical
 Brooks DE: Equine stromal and endothelial
ulcers in horses: 23 cases [1989-2003). Vet
 treatment of ocular squamous cell
 keratopathies: medical management of 
Ophthalmol 6:291-297. 2003.
carcinoma of cattle. J Am Vet Med Assoc
stromal abscesses, eosinophilic keratitis.
 McMullen RJ. Clode AB. Pandiri AKR, et al:
168:213-216. 1976.
calcific band keratopathy. striate band
Epibulbar melanoma in a foal. Vet
Grier RL, Brewer WG. Paul SR. et al: Treatment
opacities, and endothelitis in the horse.
Ophthalmol 11:44-50. 2008.
of bovine and equine ocular squamous cell
Current Techmiques in Equine Practice
Nasisse MP. Jamieson VE: Cornea and sclera. In
Garcinoma by radiofrequency hyperthermia.
4:21-28. 2005
Auer JA. Stick IA, editors: Equine Surgery.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 177:55-61, 1980.
Brooks DE: Penetrating keratoplasty. deep
ed 2. Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
Kainer RA: Current concepts in the treatment of
lamellar endothelial keratoplasty. and
pp 480-491.
 bovine ocular squamous cell tumors. Vet
 posterior lamellar keratoplasty in the horse.
Ollivier FJ. Kallberg ME. Plummer CE. et al:
Clin North Am Large Anim Pract 6:609-622.
Current Techmiques in Equine Practice
Amniotic membrane transplantation for
1984.
4:37-49.2005.
corneal surface reconstruction after excision
Klein WR, Brier J. van Dieten JS. et al: Radical
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
of corneolimbal squamous cell carcinomas
surgery of bovine ocular squamous cell
 ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
in nine horses, Vet Ophthalmol 9:404-413.
carcinoma (cancer eye). Complications and
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
2006.
results. Vet Surg 13:236-242, 1984.
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
Plummer CE. Brooks DE. Kalberg ME, et al:
Townsend WM: Food and fiber-producing
Brooks DE. Andrew SE. Biros Dl. Denis HM,
 Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty for
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
Cutler TJ. Strubbe DT, Gelatt KN: Ulcerative
equine corneal stromal abscesses: 57 cases 
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames.
keratitis caused by beta hemolytic
[2003-2007]. Proceedings of the 38th Annual
2007. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
Streptococus equi in 1l horses. Vet
Meeting of che American College of Veterinary
Ophthalmol 3:121-126. 2000.
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 70. 2007.
Other species
Brooks DE. Plummer CE. Kallberg ME. et al:
Plummer CE. Smith S. Andrew SE. et al:
Gionfriddo JR, Powell CC: Primary closure of
Corneal transplantation for inflammatory
Combined keratectomy. strontium-90
the corneas of two Great Horned owls after
 keratopathies in the horse: visual outcome
irradiation and permanent bulbar
resection of nonhealing ulcers. Vet
in 206 cases [1993-2007]. Vet Ophthalmol
conjunctival grafts for corneolimbal
Ophthalmol 9:251-254. 2006.
11:123-130. 2008.
squamous cell carcinomas in horses
Lin X-C. Hui Y-N, Wand Y-S. et al: Lamellar
Brinott A, Boeve MH, Velden MA: Grid
[1990-2002): 38 horses. Vet Ophthalmol
keratoplasty with a graft of lyophilized
 keratotomy as a treatment for superficial
10:37-42. 2007.
acellular porcine corneal stroma in a rabbit.
nonhealing corneal ulcers in 10 horses, Vet
 Plummer CE. Kallberg ME, Ollivier Fl. et al:
Vet Ophthalmol 11:61-66. 2008.
Ophthalmol 10:162-167. 2007.
 Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty
Lynch GL, Scagliotti RH, Hoffman A.
Bussieres M, Krohne SG, Stiles J.
in 10 horses, Vet Ophthalmol 11:35-43.
 Dubielzig RR: Penetrating keratoplasty in a
Townsend wM: The use of porcine small
2008.
Califomia Brown Pelican. Vet Ophthalmol
intestinal submucosa for the repair of full.
Rampazzo A, Eule C. Speier S. Grest P. Spiess B:
10:254-261. 2007.
 thickness corneal defects in dogs. cats and
horses, Vet Ophthalmol 7:352-359. 2004.
 Scleral rupture in dogs. cats and horses. Vet
Ophthatmot 9:149-156, 2006.
CHAPTER
chamber and anterior uvea
Kirk N. Gelatt and David A. Wilkie
saias as p sj a sj y
 Chapter contents
Introduction
237
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
248
Surgical anatomy
239
Laser treatment of anterior uveal cysts in the dog
 Pathophysiology
242
and cat
258
 Perioperative considerations
243
Laser treatment of anterior uveal neoplasms in the dog
258
Surgery of the anterior chamber
243
 Adaptations for large animals and special species
259
Introduction
cloudy ('aqueous flare' - Tyndall effect), with gravitation
of cells in the ventral anterior chamber producing hypopyon
Diseases of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea (iris and
and the adherence of inflammatory cells on the posterio1
ciliary body) are frequent in small and large animals. Causes
coinea (keratic precipitates). Anterio1 uveal inflammations
of these diseases include trauma, congenital anomalies,
in cats are usually associated with systemic diseases, and
inflammations, neoplasms, immune diseases, and degenera-
frequently require additional diagnostic procedures to estab-
tions. Aqueous humor within the posterior chambel, pupil,
lish the diagnosis (Fig. 9.1). Anterior chamber paracentesis
and anterior chamber delivers nutrients and removes wastes
(keratocentesis) with cytologic and protein (globulin, albu-
from the lens and posterior coinea, and contains cells, pro-
min, antibodies, etc.) analysis may assist in establishing
teins, and other substances that may be useful for diagnostic
the diagnosis.
and therapeutic techniques. Trauma affecting the anterior
Congenital anomalies of the anterior uvea are less f1e-
chamber and anterio1 uvea is common in small animals
m sop paiqand un nno iq 'sie ns un nan
and horses, often resulting in hemorrhage within the ante-
some frequency. Microphthalmia results in microcornea
rior chamber (hyphema). Ocular trauma also includes fo1-
and micro-anterior chamber. Anterior uveal anomalies, such
eign bodies that may be embedded within the cornea,
as persistent pupillary membranes, are not usually candi-
those partially extending into the anterior chamber, or those
dates for surgery, but may be associated with secondary
that penetrate the globe and lodge in the orbit or posterior
hemorrhage that requires therapy. Congenital abnormalities
orbit.
of the anterior segment have also been described in the
 Inflammations involving the anterior chamber and ante-
horse; specifically, anterior segment dysgenesis, megalo-
rior uvea are common in older small animals, and may
globus, and other ocular abnormalities seen in the Rocky
 s  s oe e r a o oi  a
Mountain and simila1 breed horses.
eases. Immune-mediate inflammation, termed equine recul-
Anterio1 uveal neoplasms are frequent in small animals,
Ient uveitis (ERu), is the most common cause of blindness
 but less frequent in horses. Clinical differences in the malig-
in the horse. An example of immune-mediated panuveitis
nancy of these tumors in the dog and cat necessitate differ-
ent strategies for theil clinical management. Anterior uveal
syndrome. Both of these chronic uveitides are apt to cause
 neoplasms in the dog are primarily malignant melanomas
secondary cataracts with posterior synechiae, secondary
and, less frequently, ciliary body adenomas and adenocarci
glaucoma, retinal degeneration, and optic nerve atrophy.
nomas (Fig. 9.2). These neoplasms, affecting the iris, ciliary
Leukocytic infiltration of the anterior uvea also affects the
body or both strictures, usually enlarge slowly and metasta-
anterio1 chamber, causing the aqueous humor to become
size late and infrequently (about 5%). The clinical history of
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
Pupillary changes, secondary glaucoma, hyphema, and retinal
detachments indicate that the iridal neoplasm is advanced,
and an enucleation should be performed. Controversy exists
among veterinary ophthalmologists and veterinary patholo-
gists as to early clinical management of these neoplasms when
the only clinical sign is the irnidal pigmentation, which is
progressing slowly. Diffuse iridal melanomas in cats usually
involve the majority of the iris and are not amenable to
sectional inidectomy or inidocyclectomy.
Cysts of the iris and ciliary body are not infrequent in
older dogs, cats, and horses (including those of the granula
inidica). [ris cysts arise from the posterior iridal epithelium,
and appear as densely pigmented, single o1 multiple spheri-
cal bodies. In dogs, they may be free-floating within the
anterior chamber, in the pupil, or still attached to the poste-
nio1 iridal surface (Fig. 9.4). In cats, most iridal cysts remain
attached to the pupillary margin. In dogs presented with iri-
Fig. 9.1 Anterior uveitis and hypopyon in a cat. Note the presence of
dal cysts in the anterior chamber, the drug-induced mydria-
clotted blood distributed throughout the hypopyon. As this condition is 
sis associated with the ophthalmic examination may liberate
bilateral, cytologic examination of these cells may help establish the cause of
additional cysts into the anterio1 chamber that were trapped
the iridocyclitis.
behind the pupil in the posterior chamber. The free-floating
cysts gravitate to the most ventral portion of the anterior
chamber. Manipulation of the animal's head and ocular
inflammation, and enlargement of the globe. Space-occupying
movements will often cause these bodies to move within
the anterio1 chamber. Sometimes these inidal cysts become
and retinal detachments. Hyphema or hemorrhage in the
trapped in the anterior chamber angle, and may simulate a
anterio1 chamber may result from the rapidly growing tumo1.
basal inidal melanoma. These small 1ound black iridal cysts
secondary glaucoma and lens luxation, and retinal detach-
transilluminate, (
distinguishing them from anterior uveal
ments. Types of neoplasm affecting the anterior uvea of large
melanomas. B-scan ultrasonography will also reveal hollow
animals are similar, with melanoma the most common
centers. Treatment includes temporization, laser-induced
primary tumor.
nupture o1 deflation, and paracentesis o1 lavage from the
Small isolated iridal neoplasms in dogs and hoises may be
anterior chamber.
tieated by iridectomy o1 inidocyclectomy combined with
 e io  re e o 
excision of the adjacent sclera, and more 1ecently by diode
ous. Anterior uveal cysts have been associated with glaucoma
laser photocoagulation (Fig. 9.3a,b). Diffuse inidal melano-
in the Golden Retriever and Great Dane breeds. In the
d a  n  e s  s
Golden Retrievel, nearly one-half of the dogs develop glau-
for local infiltration and metastasis is greater. Cats with dif-
coma and most of these animals lose their vision. The clinical
fuse inidal melanomas are usually presented with a progres
significance of iridal and ciliary body cysts is not known;
sive brown to black pigmentation of the iris (Fig. 9.3c).
histologically, the ciliary body cysts contain periodic acid-
The inidal mass increases in thickness late in the disease.
Schiff (PAS)-positive material which may be deleterious to
Fig. 9.2 Primary anterior uveal masses in the dog. (a) Sometimes the animal is presented because the owner notices a mass or something within the eye or
 pupil. (b) Other frequent presenting clinical signs include hyphema, anterior uveitis, and secondary glaucoma.
238
Surgical anatomy
A
B
C
Fig. 9.3 Iridal melanomas may present in different ways in the dog and cat. (a) The single ventrolateral pigmented mass in this dog was noted by the owner
because of the contrast to the surrounding light brown iridal tissues. (b) In contrast, this owner noted multiple pigmented masses in their dog's iris.
Multiple masses complicate the therapy options. (c) In this cat, the entire iris has become densely pigmented and the pupil irregular.
A
B
Fig. 9.4 Pigmented iris (usually black) or ciliary (usually red or clear) cysts in the dog may have different clinical significance. (a) This single iris pigmented cyst
in a 12-year-old Golden Retriever can be deflated by laser therapy or aspiration. The cyst readily transilluminates and the prognosis is good. (b) In contrast,
these ciliary cysts (clear cysts behind the pupil) and two pigmented iridal cysts (one dorsal and one in the ventral anterior chamber) in a 3-year-old 
Golden Retriever often progress to uveitis, pigment deposition on the anterior lens capsule, secondary cataract and glaucoma formation, and warrant a
much more guarded prognosis.
aqueous outflow pathways. The high number of these cysts
scleral incision is not usually performed because of the
within the posterior chamber may also displace the basal iris
 resultant hemorrhage but offers the possibility of the least
forward and compress the opening of the sclerociliary cleft.
postoperative corneal astigmatism.
Laser deflation of these cysts seems not to delay the onset of
The limbus (blue zone’) is the 0.5-1.0 mm junction of
the glaucoma, but more study is indicated.
the clear cornea and opaque white anterior sclera (Fig. 9.6).
The limbus may contain some pigmentation (especially
laterally), and a few small blood vessels. On its anterio1
Surgical anatomy
surface the non-keratinized squamous epithelium of the
cornea begins to transfoim to keratinized squamous epithe-
Limbus
lium of the bulbar conjunctiva. The limbus prevents direct
observation of the anterior chamber angle and the aqueous
Surgical entry into the anterior chamber usually occurs
humor outflow passages into the ciliary o1 sclerociliary cleft.
through the peripheral cornea, limbus, and at the limbal-
In this zone regula1 corneal stroma lamellae begin to form
scleral junction (Fig. 9.5). Most approaches for anterior uvea
the irregular dense connective tissues of the sclera. Blood ves-
and glaucoma surgeries enter the anterior chamber at the
sels, absent in the normal cornea, are present in the anterio1
scleral tissues next to the limbus.
hemorrhage. Peripheral corneal incisions are usually used
 The outer anterior boundary of the limbus is the transi-
fo1 cataract and lens removals, are performed faster, and pre-
tion of the coineal epithelia into conjunctival epithelia,
and the inner posterior boundary is the termination of
239
9
 Pupillary margin, iris
portion of the anterior lens capsule. The central iris is often
Basal
most pigmented and subject to marked changes in thick-
Cornea~
/ (peripheral) iris
ness. Iridal color changes occur in these species in response
 Pectinate
to chronic inflammations and intraocular neoplasms with
Anterior chamber、
 ligaments
progressive pigmentation.
Posterior
Sclerociliary
The animal iris is comprised of highly vascular, friable,
chamber,
cleft
and spongy tissues and, in contrast to humans, will usually
ss r is  e a   
Dorsal and ventral branches from the medial and lateral
Zonules
 i   sa e s  r 
01 anterior ciliary body to form an incomplete vascular
Pars plicata ciliaris
cicle providing the majority of the blood supply to the
anterior uvea (Fig. 9.7). In dogs, this incomplete vascula1
Pars plana ciliaris
annular circle occupies the basal iris in about 50% of ani-
Ora ciliaris retinae
mals; in the 1emaining animals the vascular circle is posi-
tioned in the anterior portion of the ciliary body. As a
Fig. 9.5 Relationships of the iris and ciliary body to the other structures
of the eye.
result, hemoirhage occurs about one-half of the time when
the basal inis is incised. Radial arteriolar branches from this
 nd ie a ui saq aedin ui aai a
R
minor arteriola1 circle of the inis, observed in humans, is
lacking or incomplete in many animal species. Incision of
the basal iris of animals is expected to hemorrhage and may
Iequire cautery for hemostasis, which, if possible, should be
performed with the peripheral iris protracted from the ante-
rior chamber. The inflamed animal iris can markedly thicken;
this increased thickness is a significant deterrent to surgical-
and lasel-produced iridotomies, and unfortunately these
small holes will usually seal and close within a few days.
The animal inis is 1emarkably similar microscopically
among the mammalian animal species, with often the main
difference being the size and shape of the pupil. The iris
separates the anterior and posterior chamber, with the fo1-
A
 d    in 
Fig. 9.6 The surgical limbus is the area between the external transition of
ily by ciliary body processes, flows from the posteriol
the corneal to conjunctival epithelium (A) and the internal termination of
chamber, through the pupil to enter the anterior chamber,
Descemet's membrane, anterior insertions of the pectinate ligaments, and
and eventually exits the conventional and uveoscleral out-
anterior border of the corneoscleral trabeculae (B). H & E, 25x
flow passages. The different layers of the iris (from anteriol
to posterior) include: 1) the anterio1 border; 2) stroma
-ida raisd a (e pue arensn ius leul pue
Descemet's membrane, insertion of the primary pectinate
thelial layers including the iridal dilato1 muscles (Fig. 9.8).
ligaments, and the coineoscleral trabecular meshwork.
The anterior border of the inis, consisting of fibroblasts and
Hence, limbal incision and entry of the anterior chamber
melanocytes, has direct contact with the aqueous humo1,
is just caudal of the termination of Descemet's membrane
and anterior to the insertion of the pectinate ligaments
and the anterior chamber angle.
Iris
The most striking gross difference between the cat and dog
irides, and the horse and cow irides, is the shape of the
pupil. The round pupil of the dog, when the anterior uveal
    sa  s re s
ject to temporary or permanent occlusion. In contrast, the
vertical slit pupil of the domestic cat, and the horizontal
oval pupil of the horse and cow with its considerable pupil-
lary margin length, are less likely to occlude secondary to
iridocyclitis. Nevertheless, iris bombe glaucoma from pupil-
lary occlusion may occur in these three species, but are less
common.
Iridal coloration also varies between species, and among
Fig. 9.7 The base of the iris in both dogs and cats often contains large
the different breeds of these species. The central portion of
 blood vessels that restrict the benefits of basal iridectomies, and can 
the iris with a normal size pupil usually touches the axial
hemorrhage profusely when transected. H & E, 100×.
240
Surgical anatomy
Ciliary body
The ciliary body is the second component of the anterio1
uvea, and continues posteriorly with the choroid. The ciliary
body has contact with both anterior and posterio1 cham-
bers, the sclera exteinally, the lens and vitreous inteinally.
and the retina and choroid posteriorly (Fig. 9.9). The ciliary
body is the principal source of aqueous humoi, controls
accommodation, and is important in the control of intraoc-
aae Aq paonpoid si lony snoanby (dol) ainssaid 1ein
a a e    
and by ultrafiltration from the capillaries in the ciliary body
processes. Aqueous humor provides nutrients and removes
waste products for the lens, anterior vitreous, iris, and poste-
nio1 coinea. Aqueous humoi, once leaving the ciliary body
processes, enters the posterior chamber, traverses the pupil.
and exits the anterior chamber through the inidocorneal
Fig. 9.8 The iridal sphincter muscle is located at the pupillary margin
and is the dominant muscle affecting pupil size in mammals. H & E, 
angle and trabecular meshwork including the cilioscleral
100 x.
cleft o1 sinus within the anterio1 aspect of the ciliary body.
O1 posteriorly through the uveoscleral route. Hence, the
aqueous humor dynamics of the ciliary body are directly
and foims a more-o1-less continuous cellular surface. The inis
stroma consists of fine collagenous fibers, fibroblasts and
related to maintenance of IOP, essential for most of the
melanocytes, and numerous blood vessels. The considerable
intraocular tissues' health and functions. The ciliary body.
through its musculature, changes the tension on the zonulary
extracellular spaces accommodate the physical changes in iris
attachments to the lens equator, and effects accommodation.
size secondary to the variations in pupil size.
The iridal sphincter, a non-striated muscle in the dog. cat,
Accommodation, o1 changes in the anteriol-posterior length
horse, and cow, and a striated muscle in birds, is located in
of the lens, appears minor in most mammals, and is seen
mainly in young animals. Accommodation and the ciliary
the stroma near the pupil margin. In mammals, the iridal
body musculature in non-human primates, some avian
d    i  
fibers from the ciliary ganglion within the orbit, but sympa-
species, and humans are highly developed.
thetic innervation has also been demonstrated. The poste-
The ciliary body is divided grossly into: 1) anterior pars
plicata (corona ciliaris or ciliary processes), and 2) poste-
rio1 layer of the inis is foimed by the dilato1 muscles and
lior pars plana ciliaris. The anterior pars plicata consists
the posterior iridal pigmented epithelium. The iridal dilator
 of about 70 major and minor ciliary processes, the primary
muscles, alranged like the spokes of a wheel, are highly
developed pigmented myoepithelial cells, innervated pri-
source fo1 aqueous humor formation and the attachment
marily by the sympathetic fibers from the cranial cervical
of the zonules. The posterior flat pars plana ciliaris extends
from the ciliary processes to the periphery of the 1etina,
ganglion in mammals. The single layer posterio1 iridal epi-
and serves as the termination for some of the lenticular
thelium is heavily pigmented and has direct contact with
zonules.
Each quadrant of the pars plana ciliaris varies
the posterio1 chamber and anterior surface of the lens.
markedly in thickness by fractions of millimeters, and
In the avian species, pupil size and motility are under vol-
these differences are critical when entry into the vitreous
untary control, and light-induced testing of pupil reflexes
of very limited value. If one undertakes entry into the ante-
rio1 chamber and even cataract surgery in the avian species,
the commercially available mydriatics have no effect. Often
B
systemic ketamine is part of the avian general anesthesia
protocol and can maintain a dilated pupil during anterior
chamber, inis, and lens surgeries. Alternatively, intracameral
use of non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agents
 has been described for mydriasis during cataract surgery in
birds.
The coipora nigra (also known as granula iridica) are
 numerous black nodules or masses on the upper pupillary
border and fewer small nodules on the ventral pupillary
border of the iris in the horse and cow, and are especially
well developed in South American camelids or cria (llamas,
alpaca, etc.). Their function seems to assist the horizontal
oval pupil in limiting light entry through the lens and vitre-
ous, and to the retina. Fortunately, the corpora nigra are rel-
atively avascular. They may become cystic, avulse secondary
Fig. 9.9 The anterior uvea consists of the iris and ciliary body. Base of the iris
to trauma or undergo atrophy, or form synechiae to either
(A), iridal pupillary margins (B), and ciliary body: pars plicata ciliaris (C) and
the anterior lens capsule or posterior cornea secondary to
pars plana ciliaris (D). SEM, 25×.
chronic inflammation.
{Courtesy of Dr Don Sarmueison. University of Fiorida.)
24
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
is attempted as during retinal detachment surgery in the
parasympathetic nerve endings. Ciliary blood vessels are
dog. cat, and horse.
sulrounded with numerous sympathetic nerve endings.
The pars plana ciliaris varies in width, with the ventral
and medial aspects the shortest in the dog and cat. In
Iridocorneal angle
si s ed sied a jo aq risd a 'so
8 mm from the limbus dorsally and laterally, but only
The anatomy of the i
inidocoineal angle is presented in
4 mm behind the limbus ventrally and medially. Hence,
Chapter 10. The pathogenesis of most animal primary and
        
secondary glaucomas appears to result from diseases of
plana ciliaris is usually through the larger dorsal and lateral
the outflow pathways, with the subsequent increase in
quadrants.
resistance to aqueous humo1 outflow, and increase in IOP.
 In horses, the width of the ciliary body and, in particular,
the pars plana ciliaris also varies by quadrant. These pars
Pathophysiology
plana ciliaris widths range from 2.92 mm dorsally. 3 mm
temporally o1 laterally, 0.33 mm nasally o1 medially, and
2.33 mm ventrally in fresh enucleated globes. Measurements
Surgical entry of the anterior chamber elicits an acute
by Frihauf et al for 12 o'clock vitrectomy suggest that the
inflammatory response by the anterior uvea (iris and ciliary
width of the dorsal equine pars plana ciliaris ranges from
body) which is mediated by the release of prostaglandins.
7 to 12.06 mm posterior to the limbus, with an average of
Similarly, the surgical approach to the iris and ciliary body
a  jo     o  5
and the dorsal quadrant of the pars plana ciliaris (about
  r  n e s s r
3 mm wide) accommodate the single port vitrectomy in
the iris, ciliary body, and posterio1 segment (including the
the hoise. These measurements may also be increased when
vitreous space and retina). Cautery of the sclera is often nec-
the equine eye is enlarged from glaucoma.
essary to control hemorhage. Because penetration of the
Microscopically the ciliary processes consist of a core of
letina may result in retinal detachment, access fo1 vitreous
stroma rich in blood vessels, and two layers of epithelium
and retinal surgeries is limited to the pupillary approach,
(Fig. 9.10). The inner non-pigmented ciliary epithelium's
O1 through incisions in the pars plana ciliaris.
primary function is the formation of aqueous humor.
The pathophysiology of the anterior uvea during intra
It continues posteriorly as the inner neurosensory retina.
ocular surgery includes several significant considerations.
The non-pigmented ciliary epithelia are linked to each other
Both the iris and ciliary body are highly vascular. Tearing
 a saai   de  
with forceps o1 incisions with scissors o1 scalpel result in
blood-aqueous barrier. The deeper pigmented ciliary epi-
variable hemorrhage. Control of the iridal and ciliary body
thelium provides the majority of the pigmentation of the
hemorrhage requires strategies that can be effective in the
ciliary processes. The core of connective tissue and blood
 presence of aqueous humor and blood. Judicious wet-field
    sd    si
cautery, diode laser, intracameral adrenaline (epinephrine)
of the two layers of epithelia, and the ultrafiltration portion
injections, and viscotamponade are the usual methods to
of the aqueous humor. The more external aspect of the cili-
control anterior uveal hemorrhage. For large bleeders of
ary body consists of smooth muscles. With limited accom-
the iris, wet-field cautery units are superior.
modation, the primary ciliary body musculature in the cat
 Direct surgical trauma o1 entry into the anterior chamber
and dog is meridionally alranged and extends to the irido-
 in the dog and cat results in variable miosis. In some breeds,
corneal angle, forming the collagen beams fo1 the trabecular
such as the Miniature Schnauzer, the miosis may result in a
meshwork. These ciliary muscles are richly innervated with
pupil of only 1-2 mm (sometimes referred to as atropine-
01 mydriatic-iesistant miosis). Pupillary constriction may
limit the visualization of the lens o1 posterior segment,
and impede, delay o1 preclude the surgery. This miosis, p1e-
viously thought to be associated with the release of hista-
mine or other substances, is now believed to be secondary
to the release of uveal endogenous prostaglandins. The p1os-
taglandins elicit an immediate contraction by the iridal
sphincter muscles, breakdown of the blood-aqueous barier
at the level of the ciliary body epithelium with the resultant
plasmoid or secondary aqueous humor, an acute elevation
in IOP with subsequent decrease in [OP (ocular hypotony),
and hyperemia of the anterio1 uveal and bulba1 conjunctival
blood vessels. Ocular hypotony from anterior uveal inflam-
mation and release of prostaglandins is associated with an
increase in the unconventional or uveoscleral aqueous
humor outflow through the posterior ciliary body.
Administration of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Jo o   reo  rd (s)
Fig. 9.10 The ciliary body's main function in dogs and cats involves the
formation of aqueous humor. The ciliary body process consists of a layer of
the release of prostaglandins during anterior chamber entry.
non-pigmented and pigmented epithelia, and a central core rich in blood 
may directly affect the eventual success or failure of the
vessels. H & E, 100x.
surgery. Pre-, peri-, and postoperative administrations of
242
Surgery of the anterior chamber
temic carprofen (Rimadyl Pfizer Animal Health, Exton,
Box 9.1
 Benefits of iridocycloplegia during iridocyclitis
PA) and flunixin meglumine (Banamine? Schering-Plough,
Administration of a mydriatic or combination of mydriatics to
Kenilworth, NI), are used to suppress the release of intra-
constantly change the pupil size, produce iridal movement, and 
 ocular endogenous prostaglandins. As a result, intra- and
discourage iridal attachments to the lens or posterior cormea.
postoperative control of the pupil in animals with topical
 Dilatation of the pupil to position the majority of the iris near the
mydriatics has become more successful.
 peripheral lens and away from the closer central and visually
Simple entry into the anterior chamber to aspirate aque-
important axis.
 Dilatation of the pupil to prevent obstruction with inflammatory
esis), with the resultant decrease in IOP, immediately
materials or formation of annular (360°) posterior synechiae.
disrupts the blood-aqueous barrier. The secondary aqueous
Suppress iridociliary inflammation and tissue swelling.
humor quickly restores the noimal volume of the posterior
 Paralyze the iridal sphincter and ciliary body musculature to
and anterio1 chambers but contains high levels of albumin
minimize the pain from iridocyclitis.
and globulins. These proteins result in increased turbidity
 Restore the blood-aqueous barrier to decrease as much as
of the aqueous humor and formation of frank fibrin clots
possible the cellular and protein (fibrin) content of the secondary
or plasmoid aqueous humor, and reduce the possibility of
within the anterio1 chamber. The fibrin clots may serve as
formation of fibropupillary membranes.
scaffolds for atachments of the iris to the lens, posterior
lens capsule, posterior coinea, and peripheral coinea. The
fibrin clots can also be gradually replaced with fibroblasts,
collagen, and pigment cells. The resultant opaque fibrous
the posterio1 cornea o1 the edges of the pupillary margins,
frequencies of the topical and systemic medications should
Iesulting in small and irregular pupils that impair vision.
be adjusted accordingly.
 Pre- and postoperative treatment with topical and systemic
- le uo iean ne a u d a
corticosteroids and NSAIDs, and intracameral heparin during
ocular surgery usually occurs 3-5 days postoperatively. An
surgery help to reduce the formation of intraocular fibrin.
indirect method of assessing the intensity of the iridocyclitis
[ntroduction of tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), injected
directly into the anterior chamber, can dissolve any existing
initial elevation in IOP associated with inidocyclitis (which
aqueous humor fibrin and clotted blood within 1-2 weeks
   r si l   s o i
post-formation. Intracameral tPA cannot, however, prevent
a as a  d n  
the formation of future aqueous humor fibrin. With any
each day, can monitor the extent and duration of the ocular
postoperative iridocyclitis, the iris becomes inflamed and
hypotony. As the inidocyclitis gradually resolves, IOP will
thicker than normal. From its inflammatory products the
return to noimal levels. As a clinical guide, medical treat-
-u aue oi saue aeai pue As saonaq anens ie
ments should be administered until normal IOP returns.
ocular tissues it contacts. As a result, temporary to permanent
Normal IOP with intense inidocyclitis often signals the onset
attachments may develop involving the iris and lens (poste
of secondary glaucoma and the obstruction of the aqueous
rio1 synechiae), the iridocorneal angle (peripheral anterio1
filtration angle with inflammatory debris and the formation
synechiae), the posterio1 coinea (anterior synechiae),
01
of peripheral anterior synechiae.
its pupillary margins (pupillary synechiae). Permanent iridal
Preoperative treatment before entry into the anterior
contact with the anterior lens capsule results in anterio1
 o   s  o  n 
capsular and anterior cortical cataract formation. Permanent
1) dilatation of the pupil with a mydriatic (usually 1%
inidal contact with the posterio1 comea lesults in edema
atropine or 1% tropicamide) or a combination of mydriatics
and dense coineal scars. Formation of peripheral anterio1
(1% atropine o1 1% tropicamide plus 10% phenylephrine):
symechiae within the iridocoineal angle predisposes the eye
2)1
topical (usually 1% prednisolone o1 0.1% dexam-
to angle-closure glaucoma by filling and closing the open-
ethasone) and systemic corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone
ing of the sclerociliary cleft. Adherence of the pupillary mar-
0.5-1.0 mg/kg PO once or twice daily) to suppress preoper-
ative o1 anticipated postoperative iridocyclitis; 3) topical
the pupil, resulting in an immediate iris bombe and loss
and systemic NSAIDs and antiprostaglandins to reduce ante-
of vision. Treatment strategies to prevent the formation of
nior uveal inflammation and assist in maintenance of the
dilated pupil during surgery, and 4) topical and systemic
synechiae are summarized in Box 9.1.
antibiotics to prevent bacterial infection if contamination
 of the anterior chamber occurs during surgery.
Perioperative considerations
Surgery of the anterior chamber
As inis and ciliary body inflammation always occurs follow.
ing anterior chamber penetration and the resulting abrupt
decrease in IOP, medical treatments should be implemented
Entry into the anterior chamber is usually through the
pre-, peri-, and postoperatively. If treatment is limited to the
periphery of the cornea o1 surgical limbus, o1 by a limbal-
postoperative period, less than optimal results should be
scleral incision. As the last approach usually causes hemor-
anticipated. The intensity of postoperative iridocyclitis
is
rhage from the posterior limbal and anterior scleral blood
variable, and should be assessed daily. With these changes
vessels, the clear corneal and limbal approaches are usually
in the intensity of postoperative iridocyclitis, the types and
      n  
243
9
Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
by a hypodermic needle, 01 scalpel blade (Beaver No. 6500
microsurgical blade o1 55M (keratome)).
Keratocentesis/anterior chamber paracentesis
[n keratocentesis a small gauge (25-30) hypodeimic nee-
dle is inserted into the peripheral clear coinea or limbus to
enter the anterio1 chamber and aspirate a small amount
(0.1-0.2 mL) of aqueous humor. Alternatively, this tech-
nique may also be used for intracameral injection of materi-
als such as tPA, adrenaline (epinephrine) o1 antibiotics. The
indications fo1 keratocentesis are summarized in Box 9.2.
The aqueous humor sample has a limited volume, usually
0.1-0.3 mL. The value of each diagnostic procedure (cytol-
ogy, culture, protein analyses, antibody titers) may require
prioritization and only the most important tests perfoimed
Fig. 9.11 Anterior uveitis and hypopyon in a shorthair cat with infectious 
(Fig. 9.11).
peritonitis. Note the hypopyon also contains limited hemorrhage. The
For keratocentesis, short-acting general anesthesia or deep
anterior uveitis affects both eyes.
 sedation is used to provide restraint. In the horse, general
-o u yo au rni e jo a no eisas
tion with sedation is required. Topical anesthetic is instilled
on the coinea and the eyelids retracted by speculum. Exl-
dates, if present, are removed by sterile cotton swabs and
the corneoconjunctival surfaces are flushed liberally with
0.5% povidone-iodine solution.
For keratocentesis, a 25-30 g hypodermic needle and
1 mL syringe are used (Fig. 9.12a). A thumb forceps is
used to grasp the bulbar conjunctiva and stabilize the eye.
A
B
The hypodermic needle is directed through the peripheral
cornea into the anterior chamber at an angle that avoids
Fig. 9.12 Keratocentesis through the peripheral cornea. (a) The von Graefe
contact with the posterior cornea and the anterior iris
thumb forceps is used to stabilize the eye and the hypodermic needle is 
(Fig. 9.12b). A small volume (0.1-0.3 mL) of aqueous
inserted through the peripheral cornea. (b) The angle of the needle pathway
humo1 is withdrawn. The needle bevel may be positioned
must avoid the anterior iris and posterior cornea.
 down (or toward the iris) to avoiding snagging the iris and
to provide a self-sealing needle puncture.
The hypodermic needle is carefully retracted. The needle
track should be self-sealing: if a small amount of aqueous
humol escapes, the needle hole is covered briefly with a
sterile cotton swab. Depending on the amount of aqueous
humor aspirated, IOP will be decreased proportionally.
As a variation of the clear coineal method, the hypoder-
mic needle is inserted in the bulbar conjunctiva 2-4 mm
posterior to the limbus (Fig. 9.13a). It is then carefully
A
moved forward subconjunctivally to the limbus, and then
inserted through the limbus at an angle between the poste-
Fig. 9.13 Keratocentesis through the limbus and under the bulbar
rior cornea and anterior iris (Fig. 9.13b). After aqueous
conjunctiva. (a) With the von Graefe thumb forceps holding the bulbar
humo1 sampling, the hypodermic needle is carefully and
conjunctiva and globe, the hypodermic needle is inserted in the bulbar
slowly retracted. If some aqueous humor leaks from the lim-
conjunctiva about 2-4 mm posterior of the limbus. The needle is advanced 
bal penetration, it remains trapped in the bulbar subcon-
subconjunctivally to traverse the limbus. (b) The hypodermic needle angle is
between the anterior iris and posterior cornea.
junctival space.
An alternative keratocentesis technique uses two 1 mL
syringes connected by a two-way stopcock, and a single
Box 9.21
Indications for keratocentesis in animals
 25-30 g hypodermic needle. One syringe is used to aspirate
 Aqueous humor cytology may assist in the diagnosis of the
0.1-0.3 mL of aqueous humor; the other is filled with
anterior uveal inflammation.
0.5 mL sterile lactated Ringel's o1 balanced salt solution
 Aqueous humor culture may determine the infectious organism.
(BSS), and is used to refill the anterior chamber with a vol-
Aqueous humor titers to selected diseases.
ume equal to the aqueous humo1 removed (Fig. 9.14). This
 Aspiration of small iris/ciliary body cysts.
technique immediately replaces the lost aqueous humo1,
To abruptly decrease intraocular pressure in patients with
leduces the influx of the plasmoid or secondary aqueous
medically non-responsive glaucoma.
humoi, avoids any ocula1 hypotony, and requires only a
single needle penetration into the anterior chamber.
244
Surgery of the anterior chamber
shifting of the lens and vitreous, and retinal and/or choroi-
dal detachments. While keratocentesis temporarily lowers
IOP in glaucomatous eyes, the resultant release of anterio1
  n l a aa  sid p
few hours. Hence, keratocentesis is recommended to lower
IOP only after intensive antiglaucoma medical therapy.
including intravenous mannitol, has failed to lower IOP to
safe levels, or immediately before an appropriate glaucoma
surgery is performed. When used for acute glaucoma, a
30 g needle should be used without a syringe, allowing the
A aq on dol a u y iaaissd o qy aiaa
reduced. This will help to minimize complications such as
an expulsive choroidal hemorrhage.
Fig. 9.14 Use of two syringes, stopcock, and a single hypodermic needle 
permits keratocentesis and restoration of the lost aqueous humor as a single
procedure.
Corneal/limbal incisions
When injecting materials intracamerally, a tuberculin
Surgical entry into the anterior chamber is the fundamental
syringe and 30 g needle are used. The volume to be adminis-
step in most intraocular procedures. For surgery involving
tered is generally about O.1 mL in small animals and up to
the iris, ciliary body, certain glaucoma procedures, phacoe-
0.3 mL in large animals, and usually requires removal of
mulsification, extracapsular and intracapsular lens extrac-
an equal volume of aqueous humor before injection of the
tion, proficiency in performing clear corneal or limbal
agent. The total volume to be administered should be the
incisions into the anterio1 chamber is essential. In the
total volume in the syringe. The anterio1 chamber is entered
1950s and 1960s, entry into the dog and cat anterior cham-
in the same manner as for keratocentesis, the material
ber was through the limbus under a limbal- o1 foinix-based
injected, and the syringe removed as for keratocentesis.
bulba1 conjunctival flap. Since the 1980s, the clea1 coineal
Leakage of a small volume of aqueous humor is acceptable
incision has become popular in all animal species. Clear
as this will help maintain a more noimal IOP since the
coineal incisions can be performed rapidly, avoid limbal
anterior chamber has been volume-expanded.
e i s e e '   s 
Post-keratocentesis treatment includes topical mydriatics,
with simple internupted o1 continuous sutures. However,
antibiotics, and corticosteroids to control the resultant mild
without protective cover by the bulba1 conjunctiva, exact
iridocyclitis. As any pre-existing iridocyclitis is usually inten-
apposition of the corneal incision is essential to maintain
sified by keratocentesis, the benefits and risks of keratocent-
the integrity of the wound and IOP postoperatively.
esis should be ascertained.
The peripheral cornea and limbus may be incised perpen-
Complications after keratocentesis are infrequent. Kerato-
dicular to the corneal surface, as a beveled incision to
centesis is used experimentally to break down the blood-
the corneal surface, or an incision that combines both
aqueous barriel, and markedly elevate serum proteins in
perpendicular and beveled characteristics (Fig. 9.15). Those
the resultant (secondary or plasmoid) aqueous humo1.
enties that include a beveled or angled entry into the ante-
These effects seem directly related to the release of prosta-
rior chamber are self-sealing. Entry into the anterior cham-
glandins from the anterior uvea.
ber that involves incisions that are perpendicular to the
After keratocentesis, the anterior chamber is quickly
coineal surface are not self-sealing, but result in the least
refoimed with new (secondary) aqueous humor rich in pro-
corneal scar formation. Limbal incisions are usually per-
teins (plasmoid aqueous). This secondary aqueous humor
foimed under a limbal- o1 foinix- based bulbar conjunctival
fequently contains fibrin clots. In glaucomatous eyes,
flap. If a limbal-based conjunctival flap is used, the flap is
usually only 3-5 mm wide to minimize its adveise effect
coineal angle closure. A misdirected hypodermic needle
 on observation of the anterior chamber during iris and lens
can penetrate the posterior coinea, creating a temporary cor-
surgeries. Sutures for closure of the limbal wound may be
neal opacity secondary to penetration of Descemet's mem-
 buried under the limbal- or fornix- based conjunctival flap.
brane. If the hypodermic needle touches the iris, limited
01 the knots may be exposed at the external limbus. Suturing
hemorrhage may result. If iridal hemorrhage occurs, the sec-
of the limbal wound under a limbal-based conjunctival flap
ondary aqueous humor contains additional levels of serum
is more tedious as braided sutures often snag on the flap.
proteins.
Selection of ophthalmic scissors determines the type of
The use of anterior chamber paracentesis in glaucomatous
 corneal incision. Corneal scissors provide corneal incisions
eyes has a potential benefit of lowering medically non-
perpendicular to the corneal surface. Corneal section or coI-
Iesponsive elevated IOP to reduce damage to the optic nerve
neoscleral scissois provide coineal incisions at an oblique
and retina versus the lisks of causing further anterior cham-
angle. Coineal scissois are used to completely incise the
ber angle closure, intraocular
hemorrhage, f
forward
coinea; the resultant wound edges are perpendicular to each
Fig. 9.15 The different types of comeal and 
limbal incisions. (a) Perpendicular to the corneal
surface. (b) Beveled incision. (c) Combination
perpendicular-beveled, most popular.
A
?
245
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
 other. Corneal cataract section or corneoscleral scissors pro-
monofilament polyglactin 910 or, if a larger suture is pre-
vide beveled ol angled incisions of the coinea or limbus.
ferred, 8-0 braided polyglactin 910 in a simple continuous
They may be for full-thickness incisions, creating a com-
pattern.
pletely beveled limbal incision. This type of incision provides
 Successful clear corneal or limbal sutures must be placed
a larger wound surface area, is self-sealing and apposition
in two-thirds thickness of the stroma (Fig. 9.16a). Sutures
with sutures is less exacting. However, the wound edges can
placed in the anterior one-third of the coineal stroma do
slide during suture apposition, resulting in greater coineal
not provide adequate wound apposition, as the posterio1
scarring.
stroma, Descemet's membrane, and the endothelium are
 The most useful variation for a longer clear coineal o1 lim-
eauad ieui sains (aoi'g big) pasodde kiaenbape iou
 bal incision is to combine an outer perpendicular incision
all layers of the cornea, including Descemet's membrane,
using the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade, and an inner
permit exposure of the stroma to aqueous humor, are gener-
beveled incision performed with the corneal section or coI-
ally associated with more corneal edema, and are a potential
neoscleral scissors. The resultant incision is self-sealing, has
pathway for the corneal epithelium (corneal epithelializa-
a large surface area for healing and apposition, and the edges
tion) or bacteria to migrate into the anterior chamber
do not slip. The initial outer scalpel incision also provides a
(Fig. 9.16c).
track for the deeper incision with the coineoscleral scissois.
The length of the clea1 coineal o1 limbal incision valies
with the surgical procedure. For entry into the anterior
Surgical treatment of hypopyon, hyphema,
 sdao qn ps jo as id on iq
 and anterior chamber foreign body or
retrieve iris/ciliary body cysts, penetrating foreign bodies.
parasites
01 immature heartwoims (Dirofilaria immitis), the incision
     )     5
Surgery for hypopyon
should be of sufficient length that the ends are not damaged
The presence of pus (hypopyon) or blood (hyphema) in the
01 torn during intraocular manipulations with the ophthal-
anterior chamber occasionally necessitates surgical removal.
mic instruments.
For most surgical procedures of the iris, ciliary body, glau-
Removal of this debris from the anterior chamber is usually
fo1 diagnosis but occasionally it is a therapeutic procedure.
coma, and lens using extra- and intracapsular lens extiac-
- oi si udoq rn uan aaaid a ae
tions, the clear corneal incision approximates 150-180°.
The incision must be sufficiently long to accommodate the
cally reduce the intensity of the underlying iridocyclitis and
Ieduce the rate of its formation.
essential intraocular instrument manipulations within the
Hypopyon is a collection of cells, fibrin, and proteins.
anterior chamber but without contact with the posterior cor-
nea. In the different stages of cataract formation, the overall
Cells can include the different types of leukocytes, erythro-
cytes, macrophages, and even neoplastic cells. Aqueous pro-
lens size varies. Accurate estimation of cataract size allows a
teins include albumin, globulins, antibodies, and fibrin. The
minimal length coineal or limbal incision, but of sufficient
 latter tends to hold cells togethel, and gravitates to the ven-
length to permit cataract extraction without causing addi
tral anterior chamber. Hypopyon, usually the result of irido-
tional diffculty and damage to the corneal endothelium.
cyclitis, and primary o1 secondary intraocula1 neoplasms, is
For phacoemulsification, the length of the clear coineal inci-
rarely associated with elevated IOP. Hypopyon may be aspi-
sion depends on the diameter of the phaco probe (usually
rated in an attempt to determine the cause of the anterior
3-4 mm) and the diameter of the intraocular lens (if one
uveal inflammation or the type of intraocular neoplasia
is inserted).
(Fig. 9.17).
incisions is by simple inteirupted o1 one to two simple
continuous absorbable 6-0 to 8-0 sutures. One author
Surgical removal/aspiration
(KNG) prefers simple interrupted sutures using polyglactin
    a   i
Most often, a hypodermic needle is inserted through the
is longer than 3 mm. These sutures, which are stable in
peripheral cornea or the limbus under 2-3 mm of bulbar
infected tissues, reabsorb within 6-8 weeks. When fist
conjunctiva. Because of the cellular and protein consistency.
attempting these procedures, simple interrupted sutures are
a 20-22 g hypodermic needle may be indicated, as small
Iecommended. With additional experience, the incision
diameter needles tend to plug. Entry into the anterior cham-
apposition is divided into two or a single simple continuous
ber with the hypodermic needle o1 scalpel blade 1equires
6-0 to 7-0 absorbable suture pattern. The other autho1
deep sedation or preferably a short-acting general anesthesia
(DAW) prefers a double continuous pattern using 9-0
(propofol).
Fig. 9.16 Depth for corneal and limbal sutures
for optimal apposition. (a) Recommended depth
is about two-thirds thickness of the stroma. (b)
Sutures too superficial result in incomplete
posterior apposition and additional edema and 
scarring. (c) Sutures that penetrate the entire
cornea pemit aqueous humor (arrows) to enter
A
C
the comea, and may allow the corneal epithelia to
enter the anterior chamber along the suture track.
246
Surgery of the anterior chamber
Fig. 9.18 Hyphema or hemorrhage in the anterior chamber may result from
trauma, inflammation, intraocular neoplasms, retinal detachments, and blood
clotting disorders. This clotted hemorrhage in the anterior chamber is the
result of trauma.
Fig. 9.17 Anterior uveitis and hypopyon in a cat. Note the presence of small
foci of fresh blood clots within the hypopyon. As this condition is bilateral, 
Cytologic examination of these cells may help establish the cause of the
integrity, presence of blood in the vitreous, retinal detach-
iridocyclitis.
ment, foreign body, and the integrity of the posterio1
eyewall.
Surgery for hyphema
Aspiration of hyphema is usually reserved for diagnostic
purposes, to clear the anterior chamber to permit examina-
Hyphema or blood in the anterio1 chamber may be second-
tion of the iris, lens, and posterior segment, and rarely if ele-
 s s s ro   on 
vated IOP appears secondary to the hyphema. Hyphema is
detachments), anterio1 uveal inflammations, primary and
highly cellular and a 20-22 g hypodermic needle is recom-
secondary intraocula1 neoplasms, certain systemic diseases
a au uaa iq noae au ase o pau
(such as ehilichiosis (Ehrlichia canis) and Rocky Mountain
hypodermic needles run the risk of becoming plugged. This
spotted fever (Rickettsia rickettsii), several vascular diseases
technique is not without significant risk and is a procedure
(such as immune-mediated thrombocytopenia), and sys-
of last resort.
temic hypertension.
Hence, 1emoval of part or all of a large hyphema may be
The appearance of hyphema may suggest its cause. Clotted
expanded to include: 1) a peripheral clear corneal incision
blood in the anterior chamber may indicate trauma or the
3-4 mm long. and 2) lavage of the anterio1 chamber with
cessation of the source of bleeding (Fig. 9.18). Clotted
balanced salt or lactated Ringer's solution to flush liquefied
hyphema suggests that fibrin is present, as well as intraocu-
blood and/or blood clots from the anterio1 chamber. Large
la1 inflammation. Multiple layers of blood in the antelio1
sa q auy Aq paaoi Ayar aq ke so poo
chamber, in which the dorsal aspect is bright red and the
with serated tips: however, if the blood clots have adhered
ventral portion is deep purple, suggest recurrent episodes
fiimly to the anterior iridal surface, secondary hemo1-
of bleeding. In older dogs and cats, hyphema, combined
rhage may result. Any blood clot removed from the anterior
with glaucoma or iridocyclitis, is often secondary to primary
chamber should be examined microscopically for possible
and secondary intraocular neoplasia.
neoplasia.
Hyphema that results from intravitreal hemorrhage (often
associated with retinal detachments) often contains little
Enzymatic therapy for hyphema
fibrin and tends to gravitate in the anterior chambel and
level dorsal surface. In older dogs with advanced renal dis-
 Injection of various enzymes into the anterior chamber may
ease, with and without hypothyroidism, systemic hyper-
be used to dissolve blood clots. In the rabbit, reabsorption
tension may be the cause. Hyphema in older cats is often
secondary to 1etinal and choroidal hemorrhages, retinal
of the fibrin matrix and egress of intact erythrocytes from
detachments, and systemic hypertension. Once the hyphema
the iridocorneal angle. Fibrin tends to hold the erythrocytes
is sufficiently reabsorbed, the deeper intravitreal hemorrhage
and impede the exit of these cells. Erythrocytes that hemo-
can be directly visualized.
 's a  a  
Hyphema that prevents complete examination of the lens
   s     
evaluated, only two, i.e., urokinase and tPA, have been effec-
nography. This is especially true in the case of ocular trauma
tive, and the latter most beneficial.
as is often seen in the horse. Ulltrasound is perfoimed trans-
Intracameral injections of urokinase have had variable
corneal or transpalpebral, depending on the health of the
success in resolving hyphema. Within the past few years,
cornea, using a 7.5-20 mHz probe. The eye is evaluated
intracameral (25-50 μg) tPA has offered improved success
e osod  ds  s an no sn r
rates in dogs, cats, and horses, provided the hyphema and
247
9
Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
fibrin are less than 10-14 days old. Howevel, excessive
secondary o1 recurrent hemoirhage. The abrupt decrease
levels of tPA can be toxic to the retina; doses of tPA exceed-
in IOP during keratocentesis apparently causes the damaged
ing 50 μg in cats have produced retinal damage. Ideally.
intracameral tPA is injected several days after hyphema
technique to restore the anterio1 chamber volume and IOP
(to allow clotting/sealing of the bleeding vessels and avoid
immediately after keratocentesis is recommended for eyes
re-bleeding), but before 10-14 days while the enzyme is still
with hyphema.
effective.
Medical treatment after keratocentesis is directed at the
underlying disease. Oten topical mydriatics, antibiotics.
and corticosteroids are administered. Keratocentesis is not
Anterior chamber foreign body and parasites
-o so jo i  a on snn ann
Parasites, such as Dirofilaria immitis in dogs, Cuterebra larvae
thalmic diseases, often aids diagnosis of the disease process,
in cats, and Setaria digitata in horses, occasionally enter the
and occasionally assists in focusing therapy for anterior
anterior chamber, cause clinical signs of anterior uveitis and
uveal diseases.
variable corneal edema, and can be 1emoved (Fig. 9.19).
These parasites are visible and mobile within the anterior
chamber, can occasionally traverse the pupil, and infre-
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
quently enter the vitreous. Hence, in their manual removal
through a 3-4 mm clear coineal incision, a small selrated
Both inis and ciliary body are friable and highly vascula1
thumb forceps is inserted to grasp the mobile parasite and
tissues that tear and hemorrhage readily. Both tissues are
carefully remove it in its entirety.
highly pigmented and require additional illumination du1-
 Anterior chamber or penetrating foreign bodies (FB) are
ing surgery fo1 observation. These pigmented tissues are also
infrequent in dogs, cats, and horses. FBs consisting of vegeta-
        
tive material are apt to also carry bacteria o1 fungal organisms
the iris and ciliary body is generally through a peripheral
into the anterior chamber and should be carefully removed.
 s e  ssel    
Shotgun pellets generally seal their corneal wounds and
in this chapter). Anterio1 chamber entry and surgical manip-
appea1 as slightly tan areas, and do not require surgical
ulations of the iris, ciliary body, or a combination of both,
Iemoval. If the lens is penetrated by the pellet, lens removal
elicit a variable but often intense inflammation. As a result,
by phacoemulsification should be considered, as the gradual
topical and systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDs are used to
release of lens material through the lens wound causes a pro-
temper and control the anterior uveal inflammation. Failure
 gressive and eventually medically refractory anterior uveitis.
to adequately control the postoperative inidocyclitis can
[n addition, intracameral adrenaline (epinephrine) for vaso.
Postoperative management and complications
constriction will minimize vascular leakage of fibrin, and
Entry into the anterior chamber to recover part of a hypop-
help to avoid and manage hemorrhage. Finally, use of visco-
yon usually intensifies the existing iridocyclitis. In fact, ther-
elastic agents to maintain space, project, and manipulate tis-
apy of selected cases of chronic iridocyclitis may include
sues, and as a means of viscotamponade, will also greatly
keratocentesis to stimulate and hopefully resolve the inflam-
improve outcome. Medical treatment of these patients fol-
mation. Keratocentesis for hyphema results infrequently in
lowing surgery usually spans several weeks.
 In this section, the common surgeries of the iris and cili-
ary body are presented. These procedures include: 1) inidot-
s  s an no     e  
o 1o auo) ds ( ((iase 1o 'sosss '
incisions of the iridal sphincter muscle to enlarge the pupil
01 impede miosis): 3) coreoplasty (creation of a larger pupil
by the excision of iridal tissue and/or inflammatory pupil.
lary membranes to improve vision and aqueous humo1
flow through an existing small and/or paracentral pupil);
4) iridectomy (1emoval o1 biopsy of a sector o1 small region
of the iris); 5) surgical treatment of iris bombe; and 6) irido-
cyclectomy o1 sclerouvectomy (excision of a section of iris
and ciliary body with or without a scleral homograft). The
treatment and clinical management of iris prolapse have
been addressed in Chapter 8 under corneal ulceration and
full-thickness corneal lacerations.
Iridotomy
In the inidotomy procedure, the full-thickness inis is incised
by iris scissors or scalpel blade, or photocoagulated by laser.
Fig. 9.19 lridocyclitis and corneal edema, secondary to the parasite,
Neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet (Nd:YAG) laser pho-
jo leaowau si auaweai bop e ui jagweup jouaue aua u 'sy pyo
 the parasite through a limbal or corneal incision. Often some corneal edema
tocoagulation has been used to create full-thickness holes in
remains long term.
the canine iris; however, these holes are usually temporary.
248
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
healing closed in a few weeks. There are considerable differ-
excised by DeWecker iris scissors (Fig. 9.20f). Hemorrhage
ences between normal dog and cat irides, and irides affected
may be controlled by point electrocautery. Alteinatively.
with inflammation and neoplasia. The cat and dog inflamed
Aq paad aq un au pue  o
   n s r   a  s
electrocautery.
production of surgical or laser-produced full-thickness holes
When iridal hemorrhage is excessive, several procedures
is difficult. Chronic iritis in both dogs and cats may result in
may be employed for hemostasis, including: 1) 1e-inflate
the formation of pre-iridal fibrovascula1 membranes which
the anterior chamber using a viscoelastic material, allow
include capillaries; presumably these vessels are also sources
time for clotting, and then gently inrigate the clotted blood
of hemorrhage and fibrin. These inides hemorrhage more
from the anterio1 chamber; 2) irrigate the anterio1 chamber
readily after contact with iris forceps and incision by inis
with 1:1000 adrenaline (epinephrine) (when using adrena-
scissors o1 cautery, and release more fibrin postoperatively.
line the patient should not be under halothane inhalational
Hence, the results of iris surgery in normal dogs and cats
anesthesia, and isoflurane should be selected instead);
cannot be directly transferred to clinical patients, and usu-
3) limited and judicious wet-field cautery of the incised
ally yield superior results compared to the clinical patients.
edges of the iris may attempted, but contact with the poste-
Iridotomies may be used to constrict alternative pathways
rio1 cornea and anterior lens must be avoided; o1 4) about
fo1 the flow of aqueous humor from the posterior chamber
to the anterior chamber when aqueous passage through the
blood vessels to seal) inject 25-50 μg tPA into the anterio1
pupil is impossible. Often iridal holes constructed during
 chamber to facilitate clot dissolution.
iridotomies will heal closed in several weeks, unless very
 The limbal incision is apposed by 8-0 to 9-0 simple inter-
nupted absorbable sutures about 1-1.5 mm apart (Fig. 9.20g).
thirds the distance from the pupil to the base of the iris.
Before placement of the last one or two sutures, the vis-
employing the diode laser using short duration (200-
coelastic agent is irrigated from the anterior chamber with
[ e panpoid '(m 0o5-oo7) 1mod 1mo pue (su 005
lactated Ringer's solution, preferably using an automated
burn with hyperpigmentation, dyscoria, and pigment dis-
irrigation/aspiration system, and any additional blood clots
persion into the anterior chamber, but no evidence of a visi-
Iemoved. After the limbal incision is completely apposed,
ble patent iridotomy in normal dogs. Histologically, there
a small gauge hypodermic needle is carefully inserted
was focal coagulation necrosis and thinning of the inis
between two sutures to refoim the anterior chamber and
stroma, and some loss of the iridal pigmented epithelium,
check the integrity of the closure. Intraocular pressure at this
but no definitive inidotomy o1 communication between
time should approximate 10-15 mmHg. The fornix-based
the anterior and posterior chambers.
-uuon ads o-g on o- e ym pasodde si de leaunuo
 In the iridotomy surgical procedure, the middle one-third
uous absorbable suture.
of the dorsal inis is incised by iris scissors to avoid the iridal
Postoperative management after iridotomy includes topi-
sphincter muscle at the pupil and the base of the iris which
cal and systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids, and NSAIDs.
contains the majo1 arteriolar circle which occurs in at least
Pupil dilatation and movement is achieved by changing
50% of dogs. If the iris is greatly thickened, cautery may
the daily frequency of the mydriatics, 1% atropine o1 1%
substitute for inis scissois to incise as well as cauterize fo1
tropicamide, and, if necessary, 10% phenylephrine. Extreme
hemostasis. For iridal cautery, 1etraction of the iris above
mydriasis risks closure of the iridotomy site, but the miosis
the remaining aqueous humor within the anterio1 chamber
that occurs with postoperative iridocyclitis can result in
is recommended.
posterior synechiae formation, and pupil movements can
After general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hair, and
minimize foimation of posterior synechiae.
preparation of the eyelids, corneal and conjunctival surfaces
Postoperative complications after iridotomy are infre-
with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, an eyelid speculum is
quent. With iridotomies, surgically induced small iridal holes
inserted to retract the eyelids. The limbal or clea1 corneal
may heal closed within several weeks. Formation of excess
incision should be directly adjacent to the iridotomy site.
fibrin and failure to eliminate its presence in the anterior
Entry into the anterior chamber may be through a clear co1-
chamber provide the scaffolding fo1 fibropupillary formation
neal incision, or under a limbal- or fornix-based conjunctival
with attachments in the pupil or the iridal incision.
flap and through the limbus. In this example, the iridotomy
 Elevated IOp is a concern, as the preoperative pupil may
is perfoimed through the limbus and under a foinix-based
be very small, and from the pre-existing iridocyclitis, peri-
conjunctival flap (Fig. 9.20a). The initial partial-thickness
pheral anterior synechiae, and aqueous humor outflow
incision, perpendicular to the limbus and within clear coinea.
may be compromised. Hence, daily applanation tonometry
is by the Beave1 No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 9.20b).
is 1ecommended to monitor IOP. If elevations in IOP occur,
Entry into the anterior chamber, in the center of the limbus,
gonioscopy to observe the iridocorneal angle is indicated.
is by Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade o1 keratome
(Fig. 9.20c). After the stab incision into the anterio1 chamber
however, smaller inidal defects may seal within 1-2 months.
and release of aqueous humor, the limbal incision is
Hence, beneficial effects from iridotomy are often temporary.
lengthened to 10-15 mm (90-140°) with right- and left-
handed corneoscleral scissors to permit access to the inis
Sphincterotomy
(Fig. 9.20d). [ntracameral 1:10 000 adrenaline (epinephrine)
and a viscoelastic agent are used for pupil dilatation and
A variation of the iridotomy procedure that is useful in
vasoconstriction, and to 1efoim the anterior chamber.
a u ad anas a si si e sio
For inidotomy of the mid iris, the surface of the inis is care-
one o1 more 1-2 mm long incisions of the iridal sphincter
fully protracted by thumb forceps (Fig. 9.20e) and carefully
muscle result in a more dilated and irregular pupil. The
249
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
A
D
F
G
Fig. 9.20 lridotomy (fullthickness incision of the iris) provides an alternative communication between the anterior and posterior chambers of the flow of
aqueous humor. (a) A fornix-based conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The initial half-thickness limbal incision by Beaver No. 6400
microsurgical blade is perpendicular to the limbal surface. (c) In the center of the incision, the anterior chamber is entered with a stab incision with the Beaver
 5l laqweuo aouanue aul aotl anoge on siosis leapsoauos papuey-yal pue -ybu Aq pauauniual s! uoisiou! leqwll aul (p) apelg esibunsoui oosg on
reformed with viscoelastic solution. (e) For an iridotomy involving the mid section, the iris is grasped by thumb forceps and protracted into the limbal incision.
(f) An oval section is incised with the DeWecker iris scissors. If hemostasis is necessary, point electrocautery is used. Alternatively, both iris incision and
hemostasis may be performed by electrocautery. (g) Closure of the limbal incision is by 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. Before placement of
the last suture, the anterior chamber is flushed to remove any remaining viscoelastic solution and re-inflated with lactated Ringer's solution. After allimbal
sutures have been completed, a 22 g hypodermic needle is inserted between two sutures, and sufficient solution is injected to provide an intraocular pressure
of about 10 mmHg. The conjunctival wound is apposed with a 7-0 to 8-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
larger pupil is less likely to become obstructed and enhances
fornix-based bulbar conjunctival flap constructed by tenot-
    o  s 
omy scissors (Fig. 9.21a-d). [ntracameral 1:10 000 adrena-
therapy. Temperatures below -25°C destroy the inidal
line (epinephrine) and a viscoelastic agent are used fo1
sphincter musculature, and cause focal depigmentation of
pupil dilatation and vasoconstriction, and to reform the
the area. Sphincterotomies are also indicated to enlarge a
anterior chamber.
small (1-2 mm) pupil, fixed by posterio1 synechiae after
 Fo1 sphincterotomies, the pupillary margin of the iris is
cataract surgery, which can impair vision in most dogs.
incised by sharp iris scissois fo1 2-3 mm, in two to four
Entry into the anterior chamber may be through a clear
-   n  ) soo
coineal incision, or under a limbal- or fornix-based con-
ment of an irregular pupil results (Fig. 9.21e,f). Thumb fo1-
junctival flap and through the limbus. In this example,
 d n d on s   ae 
the inidotomy is perfoimed through the limbus and under
of the inis during the scissor incisions. As with any incision
a fornix-based conjunctival flap. After general anesthesia,
 of the iris, limited hemorrhage is anticipated and fibrin will
clipping of the eyelid hai1, and preparation of the eyelids,
form soon after.
corneal and conjunctival surfaces with 0.5% povidone-
Alternatively, a non-invasive sphincterotomy can be per-
iodine solution, an eyelid speculum is inseited to retract
formed using the diode endolaser to cauterize and retract
the eyelids. For sphincterotomies, entry is closest to the
the pupil margin and sphincter prior to incising with scissois.
pupil (which is sometimes off center). Entry into the ante-
If collapse of the anterior chamber interferes with the iridot-
lio1 chamber is by foinix-based limbal incision under a
 omy or sphincterotomy, the anterior chamber is 1eformed
250
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
A
D
E
F
G
(#
Fig. 9.21 The sphincterotomy procedure involves multiple incisions of the iridal sphincter area to enlarge the existing pupil diameter. These limited incisions
(2-3 mm long) are performed with special and very sharp iridal scissors. (a) A fornix-based conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors.
(b) The initial half-thickness limbal incision by Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade is perpendicular to the limbal surface. (c) In the center of the incision, the
anterior chamber is entered with a stab incision with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade. (d) The limbal incision is lengthened by right- and left-handed
corneoscleral scissors to about 140°, and the anterior chamber is reformed with viscoelastic solution. (e) For two to four sphincterotomies, the pupillary margin
ae saooauds inoy io aaui () su leseg iense auou aur pioe ang anensnu auuds aua asoui on auayns sossis sui Aq wu ez iog pasu s
jo zuawaneld auoyag saunans alqequosqe padnuanui aldwis 0-6 on 0-g Aq s! uoisiou! leqwll ayn jo aunsolo (6) idnd jejnbaui ue ui buqjnsau pawoyad Ajensn
the last suture, the anterior chamber is flushed for the last time with lactated Ringer's solution. After all limbal sutures have been completed, a 22 g
hypodermic needle is inserted between two sutures, and sufficient solution is injected to provide an intraocular pressure of about 10 mmHg. (h) The
aunans algequosge snonuguoo ajdwis 0-g on 0-/ e yaim pasodde s! punom eaounjuo
with a viscoelastic agent. The highly viscous solution main-
Iemoved. After the wound is completely apposed, a small
tains the anteriol chamber in the presence of the limbal
incision.
sutures to reform the anterior chamber and check the integ-
 [ridal hemorrhage is infrequent with this procedure pro-
nity of the closure. Intraocular pressure at this time should
vided the sphincterotomies are not greate1 than 2-3 mm
approximate 10-15 mmHg. The limbal-based conjunctival
deep and tearing of the iris does not occur. If excessive, the
flap is apposed with a 7-0 to 8-0 simple continuous absorb-
several procedures described in the inidectomy section can
able suture (Fig. 9.21h).
be employed. If significant hyphema is still present 7-10 days
Postoperative management after sphincterotomy includes
       e 
topical  and  systemic  antibiotics,
corticosteroids, and
sels to seal) 25-50 μg tPA can be injected into the anterio1
NSAIDs. Pupil dilatation and movement are achieved by
chamber to facilitate blood clot and any fibrin dissolution.
changing the daily frequency of the mydriatics, 1% atropine
-ai ads o-6 on o-g aq pasodde si uosun iel au
01 1% tropicamide, a
and, if necessary, 10% phenylephrine.
nupted absorbable sutures about 1-1.5 mm apart (Fig. 9.21g).
The constant pupil movements can minimize formation
Before placement of the last one or two sutures, the visco-
of posterior synechiae; miosis from the postoperative irido-
elastic agent is irrigated from the anterior chamber with
cyclitis is counteracted by the drug-induced mydriasis and
lactated Ringel's solution, preferably using an automated
helps to reduce the possibility of posterior synechiae
 ilrigation/aspiration system, and any additional blood clots
formation.
251
9
Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
Postoperative complications with sphincterotomy are
anticipated; tearing of the inis should be avoided. For hemo-
infrequent, provided the procedure did not result in hemo1-
stasis, 1:10 000 ad1enaline (epinephrine) is intermittently
rhage. This is usually associated with iris incisions greater
lavaged into the surgical site. Once sufficient pupil margin
than 3-4 mm.
has been freed, the pupillary iris and fibropupillary mem-
The success of sphincterotomies is higher than irido-
brane are carefully excised by sharp iris, vitreous, o1 intraoc-
tomies, but the resultant enlargement of the pupil by one
ular scissors (Fig. 9.22f). The resultant irregular pupil should
01 more incisions may be less than anticipated because of
approximate 5-6 mm in diameter, and be clear of any
variable and restricting posterior synechiae (usually to the
tissues (Fig. 9.22g). If portions of the anterio1 and posterio1
remaining anterior and/or posterior lens capsules). Never-
lens capsules and vitreous are incarnated in the pupil, they
ad-uoe e io siosss renno Aq pasx aq isn
with a 1 mm pupil can be successfully treated by pupillary
vitrecto1.
enlargement to 4-6 mm diameter.
 The clear corneal incision is apposed with 8-0 to 9-0 sim-
ple interrupted absorbable sutures placed 1-1.5 mm apart.
Coreoplasty
Before placement of the last two coineal sutures, the ante-
rio1 chamber is once more irrigated with 1:10 000 adrena-
In the coreoplasty o1 pupilloplasty procedure, focal inidect-
line (epinephrine) and balanced salt solution to remove
      n 
any remaining viscoelastic agent, hemorrhage, and plasmoid
pupillary membranectomy because the small pupil results
aqueous humor. After the last corneal suture, a 27-30 g
from adhesions that involve not only the pupillary borders
cannula is carefully inserted between two sutures, and the
but also larger areas of the posterior iris surface. Entry into
anterior chamber 1efoimed to about 10-15 mmHg IOP
the anterio1 chamber may be through a clear coineal inci-
(Fig. 9.22h).
sion, o1 under a limbal- or fornix-based conjunctival flap
and through the limbus. In this example, the iridotomy is
Sectoral iridectomy
perfoimed through the limbus and under a fornix-based
conjunctival flap.
In the inidectomy procedure a full-thickness section of iris is
Before the coreoplasty is performed, the eye is treated pre-
excised. This procedure is used to excise inidal cysts, remove
operatively for the existing disease and in anticipation that
focal pigmented iridal neoplasms, and biopsy inflamed iri-
the surgery will elicit an intense iridocyclitis. Hence, topical
des to establish an etiology. The iridectomy procedures
and systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids, and NSAIDs are
may be further divided into the different parts of the iris:
administered for 3-5 days preoperatively. Mydriatics
are
 as i) os as ad 
not usually instilled preoperatively unless the coreoplasty
basal.
procedure is performed o1 an inidocyclitis is present. IOP
Before the iridectomy is performed, the eye is treated pre-
should be monitored preoperatively to provide a 1eference
 operatively for the existing disease and in anticipation that
fo1 the postoperative period.
the iridectomy procedure will elicit an intense iridocycli-
After general anesthesia with inhalational isoflurane,
tis. Hence, topical and systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids,
clipping of the eyelid hai1, and preparation of the eyelids,
and NSAIDs are administered for 3-5 days preoperatively.
corneal and conjunctival surfaces with 0.5% povidone-
Mydriatics are not usually instilled preoperatively, unless
iodine solution, the eyelids are retracted by speculum to
an iridocyclitis is present. IOP should be monitored preop-
expose the globe. If exposure to and observation of the
eratively to provide a reference for the postoperative period.
entire anterior chamber is not possible, a lateral canthotomy
After general anesthesia with inhalational isoflurane, clip.
is performed to increase exposure. Entry into the anterior
ping of the eyelid hai1, and preparation of the eyelids, co1-
chamber is by a peripheral clear corneal incision. The initial
neal and conjunctival surfaces with 0.5% povidone-iodine
 d s  a  s 
solution, the eyelids are retracted by speculum to expose
the corneal surface, is performed with the Beaver No. 6400
the globe. If exposure to and observation of the entire ante-
microsurgical blade and completed with coineoscleral scis-
nio1 chamber is not possible, a lateral canthotomy may
sors (Fig. 9.22a-c). The corneal incision is directly adjacent
be perfoimed to increase exposure. Entry into the anterior
to the inidectomy site.
chamber may be through a cleal coineal incision, o1 under
For the coreoplasty procedure (creation of a new O1
a limbal- o1 fornix-based conjunctival flap and through the
enlargement of an existing small pupil), a central iridectomy
limbus. In this example, the iridotomy is perfoimed by entry
is performed. Not infrequently a small pupil is complicated
into the anterior chamber via a peripheral clear coineal inci-
by multiple posterior synechiae, a fibropupillary membrane.
sion. The initial one-half thickness of the coineal incision,
and variable incorporation of opacified anterio1 and poste-
perpendicular to the corneal surface, is perfoimed with the
lior lens capsules. Disruption of posterior synechiae usually
Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 9.23a). The co1-
produces variable amounts of hemorrhage. The fibropupil-
neal incision is directly adjacent to the iridectomy site.
lary membrane, often consisting of tough fibrous tissue,
A stab incision into the anterior chamber with the Beaver
can be excised only by sharp iris, vitreous, or intraocula1
No. 6500 microsurgical blade or keratome is performed
scissors. These membranes cannot be toin by thumb forceps
through the center of this partial coineal incision (Fig. 9.23b).
without considerable damage to the iris and hemorrhage.
Aqueous humor will leak through this stab incision. The deeper
The anterior chamber is maintained with a viscoelastic agent
portion of the corneal incision is completed using the right-
(Fig. 9.22d). The margins of the pupil are carefully separated
and left-handed corneoscleral scissors ( Fig. 9.23c) The incision
from the anterio1 lens capsule and/or posterio1 lens capsule
is usually about 140-180°. The anterio1 chamber is then filled
with a cyclodialysis spatula (Fig. 9.22e). Hemorrhage is
with 1:io 000 adrenaline (epinephrine) and a viscoelastic
252
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
A
?
C
D
E
F
Fig. 9.22 Coreoplasty is the surgical creation of a new or larger pupil. The preoperative pupil which requires coreoplasty is generally very small, off-center,
and often obscured by inflammatory and capsular opacities from previous cataract surgery. (a) The peripheral cornea is initially incised about half-thickness for
paaua s aqweuo ouanue aun awioea io apea ieioinsoiu oosg on laaeag aua yri (a) apeia ieiounsoi otg on laeag aun yam aolozl noge
by a stab incision. (c) The deeper cormeal incision is lengthened by right- and left-handed corneoscleral scissors. (d) For the coreoplasty procedure, the small
pupil is usually adhered to the lens (with phakia) or to the posterior lens capsule and anterior vitreous (with aphakia). To maintain a deep anterior chamber, a
viscoelastic solution is injected. (e) With a cyclodialysis spatula, adhesions between the iris and other tissues are gently separated, resulting in some
enlargement of the pupil. f) With sharp intraocular scissors, all other remaining adhesions and pupillary membranes are excised, increasing the pupil size
further. (g) The resultant pupil should be enlarged, but usually irregular. (h) Closure of the corneal incision is by 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable 
sutures placed about 1.5 mm apart. Before the last corneal suture is placed, any remaining viscoelastic solution is flushed from the anterior chamber and
replaced with balanced salt solution or lactated Ringer's solution.
agent. For a complete sectoral iridectomy, as for removal of an
solution to remove any remaining viscoelastic agent, hemo1-
isolated pigmented inidal tumo1, the inis is retracted by a blunt
rhage, and plasmoid aqueous humor. After the last corneal
iris hook or serrated thumb forceps away from the anterior
suture, a 27-30 g cannula is carefully inserted between
lens surface and partially into the incision (Fig. 9.23d). Care
two sutures, and the anteriol chamber refoimed to about
must be taken to avoid tearing of the iris. The iris, on both sides
10-15 mmHg IOP (Fig. 9.23i).
of the mass, is slowly incised radially towards its base by iris
Postoperative 1
 management after complete or sectoral
scissors o1 by cautery (Fig. 9.23e,f). The base is incised by the
inidectomy procedures is quite similar to that for all inidal
same method. There should be limited or no hemorrhage dur-
surgeries. Topical and systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids,
ing the radial incisions. Because the majo1 arteriola1 circle
and NSAIDs are administered to treat the anticipated post-
occurs in the basal iris in about 50% of dog and horse eyes,
 operative iridocyclitis. The intensity of these treatments is
 some hemorrhage is expected during the basal incision. The
 adjusted daily to control the inidocyclitis. Postoperative
Iesultant complete iridectomy 1esults in a keyhole-shaped
 pupil size should be as large as possible by varying the
pupil (Fig. 9.23g).
frequency of topical instillations of 1% atropine, 1% tropi-
The clear corneal incision is apposed with 8-0 to 9-0
camide, 10% phenylephrine, or some combinations.
If
simple interrupted absorbable sutures placed 1-1.5 mm
excessive fibrin occurs, 25-50 μg tPA may be injected intra-
apart (Fig. 9.23h). Before placement of the last two corneal
camerally about 7-10 days postoperatively. The enzyme
 sutures, the anterior chamber is once more irrigated with
should not be injected at the conclusion of surgery or for a
1:10 000 adrenaline (epinephrine) and balanced salt
few days postoperatively, as adequate time must be provided
253
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
A
B
C
?
F
G
(H
Fig. 9.23 Sectoral iridectomy is the full-thickness excision of a section of iris and may involve the base (peripheral iridectomy) or other areas. As the iridal
arterial circle is within the iridal base about 50% of the time, excessive hemorrhage occurs about in about one-half of the eyes. (a) The peripheral cornea is
initially incised about half-thickness for about 120-180° with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. (b) With the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade or
keratome, the anterior chamber is entered by a stab incision. (c) The deeper corneal incision is lengthened by right- and left-handed corneoscleral scissors, and
the anterior chamber is reformed with viscoelastic solution. (d) For iridectomy, the involved iris is protracted with a thumb forceps into the corneal incision. (e,
f) Once partially externalized from the anterior chamber, the involved iris is both cauterized and excised. (g) The resultant pupil after a complete iridectomy is
the shape of a keyhole. (h) Closure of the corneal incision is by 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures placed about 1.5 mm apart. (i) Immediate 
postoperative appearance of dorsal sectoral iridectomy for removal of an iridal melanomas. Some hemorrhage remains within the animal chamber and a
dorsal bulbar conjunctival advancement (hood) has been used to cover the sclera immediately dorsal of the excised tumor site.
fo1 sealing of the inidal blood vessels to avoid secondary o1
suiface, o1 adhere to the anterio1 o1 posterior lens capsule.
recurrent hemorhage.
If the lens is present, as in eyes with an iris tumor, posterio1
IOP is monitored daily, although glaucoma is unlikely as
synechiae and secondary cataract formation may result. The
long as the pupil remains unobstricted. The intensity of
possibility of secondary glaucoma resulting from pupillary
the medical treatment is gradually tapered, based on the
01 inidocoineal angle obstruction is low. Phthisis bulbi o1
clinical appearance of the iris and pupil, and the gradual
atrophy of the globe is infrequent postoperatively unless
Ieturn of IOP toward normalcy. Medical treatment is usually
the inidocyclitis is intense and/or prolonged. Critical for suc-
continued fo1 3-6 months or until IOP has 1eturned to
cessful irnidectomy procedures is the medical control of the
normal levels and all clinical signs of anterior uveitis have
resultant iridocyclitis and maintenance of the largest and
resolved.
mobile pupil possible.
Postoperative complications include an intense irido-
The sectoral inidectomy techniques can be successfuil in
cyclitis that may be difficult to control medically, with a
the removal of isolated iridal tumors; however, if the tumor
plasmoid aqueous humor and large amounts of fibrin. This
invades the sclera o1 ciliary body success is limited. Intra-
fibrin can form adhesions within the pupil, on the iridal
cameral injections of tPA during the first 7-10 days
254
Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
postoperatively after these procedures can markedly reduce
lequires re-establishment of aqueous humor flow through
the fibrin and hemorrhage in these eyes and improve the
the pupil as soon as possible. The administration of man-
success rates.
nitol (1 g/kg IV) o1 oral and topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors immediately before surgery may reduce the size
of the iris bombe and retract the vitreous body. Prognosis
Iris bombe
for iris bombe should always be guarded as the response
[ris bombe is a forward ballooning of the iris caused by total
to medical, surgical, o1 a combination of both therapies is
 occlusion of the pupil. Iris bombe is usually associated with
 not always predictable.
360° o1 annular posterio1 synechiae (Fig. 9.24). These irido-
The treatment of inis bombe in phakic eyes is usually med-
lenticular adhesions usually involve the pupillary area of
ical initially. Intense therapy with topical and systemic corti-
the iris and may be temporary o1 permanent. Without trans-
costeroids and NSAIDs is indicated to suppress the anterioI
pupillary flow of aqueous humor, the fluid and pressure
uveal inflammation. Topical mydriatics, such as 1% atro-
gradually increase within the posterior chamber, pushing
pine and 10% phenylephrine, 01 0.3% scopolamine and
the basal iris forward into the anterior chamber and closing
10% phenylephrine, are instilled hourly to effect pupillary
the inidocorneal angle. Inis bombe may also be limited to a
dilatation and break down the annular posterior synechiae.
section of the iris, as evidenced by a focal raised area travers-
If this treatment fails to resolve the iris bombe, surgical
ing the iris from its base to the pupil margin. Pupil size with
intervention is recommended. Surgical entry into the ante-
 sae ed u  a a si a s
lio1 chamber in eyes with inis bombe is difficult, because
the iris noimally rest on the axial anterior lens capsule in a
the iris is very close to the posterior cornea.
phakic eye, o1 on the anterior and posterior capsules and vit-
Inis bombe in aphakic eyes usually occurs within the fist
leous in an aphakic eye. With iridal inflammation, the pupil
postoperative month after lens removal. A small pupil after
becomes miotic, and contact with the anterior lens capsule
   n     
Iesults in temporary to permanent iridolenticular adhesions.
tion of the posterior lens capsule, with or without vitreous,
Often underestimated is the concurrent compression of the
and inflammatory-based fibropupillary membranes often
opening of the sclerociliary cleft and rapid foimation of
clog the pupil. If the inis bombe occurs postoperatively in
peripheral anterior synechiae.
       e 
therapy (such as 0.3% scopolamine and 10% phenylephrine
presence (phakia) or absence (aphakia) of the lens. [nis
hourly) may dilate the pupil and re-establish aqueous
bombe in phakic eyes occurs with severe inidocyclitis and a
humor passage. However, if iris bombe occurs two or more
miotic pupil. In aphakic eyes, inis bombe usually involves
weeks after cataract surgery, dilatation of the pupil with
a small pupil, and occlusion of the pupil with the anterior
intensive mydriatic therapy is unlikely to be successful
lens capsule, posterio1 lens capsule, vitreous, fibropupillary
because of the formation of posterior synechiae.
membranes, o1 a combination of these tissues. Clinical
Persistence of iris bombe after 1-2 days with the appropri-
 ate intensive medical therapy requires surgical intervention.
and the possibility of vision. With ballooning of the basal
Treatment of iris bombe secondary to iridocyclitis consists
iris in iris bombe, closure of the iridocoineal angle and the
of: 1) hypodermic needle or laser-induced multiple full-
formation of peripheral anterior synechiae rapidly result.
thickness holes in the middle one-third of the iris to reduce
After 48-72 h these iridocoineal angle changes are difficult
ballooning of the iris and allow aqueous humor to flow
to reverse medically, and even after surgical resolution of
 into the anterior chamber; 2) continuation of intensive top-
iris bombe, treatment of angle-closure glaucoma may be
ical mydriatic treatments fo1 a few days; and 3) surgical
necessary. Regardless of whether the lens is present
entry of the anterio1 chamber if pupillary dilatation is not
absent, successful treatment of iris bombe in small animals
achieved, and freeing of the pupillary margins of the iris
from the anterior lens capsule. Hemoirhage is anticipated.
If vitreous is associated with the iris bombe post-cataract
 a   a re   s
iridocorneal angle closure is suspected or can be confirmed
Chapter 10). Viscoelastic agents should be injected during
surgery of the iris and pupil to expand the depth of the
anterior chamber and attempt opening of the sclerociliary
cleft.
Nd:YAG lasel treatment of inis bombe and pupillary block
glaucoma, primarily following cataract surgery, has been
evaluated in the dog. Laser surgery was 91% successful in
immediately relieving the iris bombe and 1e-establishing
the anterio1 chamber. However, these inidotomies did not
remain functional long term, and after the 1eformation to
a noimal o1 near noimal anterior chamber depth, surgical
 as p or e s so
necessary to maintain a patent and larger pupil. As most of
Fig. 9.24 lris bombe in the dog usually results from iridocyclitis, annular
these dogs had had cataract extractions, it is not surprising
(360°) posterior synechiae, and obstruction of the pupil.
that laser iridotomies were unsuccessful. Often the pupillary
255
9
an re ue rque re ajo spd reains
adenomas and adenocarcinomas) when the borders of these
pillary membranes, anterior and posterior capsular fibrosis
masses can be 1easonably determined pre- and intraopera-
and adhesions, and miotic pupils, and requires coreo-
 )   a ) 
plasty (creation of a new pupil) with synechiotomy, capsu-
may extend into the sclera and necessitate an iridocycloscler-
lotomy (o1 capsulectomy), and hyaloidotomy (or anterio1
ectomy with scleral graff. Assessment of the iridocoineal
hyaloidectomy).
angle by gonioscopy, and determination of the posterior
Laser inidotomy for iris bombe glaucoma offers the sur-
borders by indirect ophthalmoscopy (use sedation or general
geon the advantage of immediately re-establishing a near
anesthesia, and scleral depression), slit-lamp biomicroscopy.
noimal depth anterio1 chamber before surgical entry into
ocular ultrasonography or ultrasound biomicroscopy are
the anterio1 chamber to enlarge and re-establish a patent
necessary. If the borders of the mass cannot be defined, enu-
pupil. Entering the anterior chamber with iris bombe
cleation may be indicated. Permission from the pet owner
glaucoma is difficult because the anterior chamber volume
should be secured prior to surgery that, if complete tumor
is so compressed, and manipulation of instruments between
excision is not possible, enucleation can be perfoimed.
the forwardly displaced iris and the posterior coineal endo-
After general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hair, and
thelium is difficult and sometimes impossible. In one study.
preparation of the eyelids, corneal and conjunctival surfaces
the mean amount of diode laser energy delivered 
was
with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are 1etracted
1098 mJ (range 30-5900 mJ), and the mean number of
        
bursts was 25.2 (range 1-118) o1 an average of 126 pulses.
increase exposure (Fig. 9.26a). [n this example, the non-
Corneal transparency is critical in these laser therapies, and
pigmented ciliary body adenoma is visible in the dorsal pupil.
the earlier iris bombe glaucoma is diagnosed and treated,
A limbal-based conjunctival flap is performed by tenotomy
the higher the success rate for resolving the glaucoma and
scissors immediately above the iridocyclosclerectomy site
maintaining vision.
(Fig.9.26b).
The limbus is incised with the
Beaver
Medically non-responsive iris bombe with aphakia is
No. 6500 microsurgical blade or keratome (Fig. 9.26c), and
le Aensn) klaaeadoisod sep oi-s dolaaap on ide isou
enlarged with coineoscleral scissors to the appropriate length
(Fig. 9.26d). The block of sclera to be excised is outlined and
no Aednd Aq pienduo ann si il (suon
slowly incised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade
with lens capsules, vitreous, inflammatory membranes, 01
(Fig. 9.26e). Scleral hemorrhage will occur and judicious
a combination of these tissues. Surgical treatment includes
cautery must be applied to maintain hemostasis.
entry into the anterio1 chamber at the limbus, breakdown
As the scleral incisions are deepened and approach the iris
of the pupillary blockage with sharp inis scissois,
. and
 n e d  o  
removal of all materials in the pupil. An anterior vitrectomy
The scleral incision is cauterized more deeply to help pro-
may also be performed (see Chapter 12).
vide hemostasis during excision of the iris and ciliary body
 Postoperative management after iris bombe consists of top-
(Fig. 9.26f). The iris is incised on both sides, from the pupil-
ical and systemic antibiotics, corticosteroids, and NSAIDs.
lary margin to its base, by sharp iris scissors (Fig. 9.26g). The
and vigorous topical mydriatic therapy. The pupil after iris
incision by the scissors is continued around the sclera to
bombe must be dilated to at least 5-8 mm in dogs and cats,
complete the ciliary body incisions (Fig. 9.26hi). Any
panai si aai lnd u ar ap as p
zonules attached to the ciliary body are carefully torn o1
to reduce the likelihood of posterior synechiae formation.
cut by iris scissois. The underlying lens should not be
Hyphema and excessive fibrin in the aqueous humor are
touched. Any hemorrhage is carefully irrigated from the su1-
common postoperatively, and should be treated by intra-
gical site with balanced salt solution. If uveal hemorrhage
cameral 25 μg tPA for 3-7 days. Postoperative [OP must be
persists, additional cautery is applied, o1 the area is lavaged
closely monitored; if an increase occurs, topical timolol or
other beta antagonist, or carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
(either topically o1 systemically), should be initiated.
The most serious complications are the persistence of the
glaucoma, usually from the formation of peripheral anterior
synechiae, and the development of phthisis bulbi (failure of
the ciliary body and ocular hypotony - [OP <5 mmHg).
 i      s a 
other glaucoma surgeries (see Chapter 10).
Iridocyclectomy
In the inidocyclectomy procedure, a portion of iris and
adjacent ciliary body is excised. Iridocyclectomy can also
include 1emoval of the adjacent sclera, and replacement
with a frozen or fresh scleral homograft (see Chapter 8).
n auo uu ssa oi pan a Pious ns au
(90°) o1 smaller to minimize the occurrence of phthisis
Fig. 9.25 Ciliary body adenoma is evidenced as a non-pigmented mass
bulbi postoperatively, secondary to ciliary body inadequacy.
posterior to the pupil. Other frequent concurrent clinical signs may include
[nidocyclectomies are indicated fo1 isolated inis and/o1 cili-
iridocyclitis, glaucoma, hyphema, and cataract formation. The eye is a
  s  s  sss o e
Gndidate for iridocyclectomy.
256
 Surgical procedures of the anterior uvea
A
B
?
D
F
G
?
K
Fig. 9.26 Iridocyclectomy with or without homologous scleral graft. (a) A section of iris and ciliary body is excised usually for a focal neoplasm. (b) A limbal-
based bulbar conjunctival flap is performed by Steven's tenotomy scissors immediately above the iridociliary mass. (c) The limbus is incised one-half thickness
with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade. (d) The limbal incision is enlarged to about 120-180° with right- and left-handed corneoscleral scissors, and the
anterior chamber is reformed with a viscoelastic agent. (e) A block of sclera is incised full-thickness immediately over the iridocyclectomy area with the Beaver
No. 6400 microsurgical blade. f Scleral hemorrhage will occur throughout the incision and is controlled by point electrocautery. (g) Both sides of the iris are
incised by DeWecker or similar small iris scissors. (h) From the basal incisions of the iris, the ciliary body is incised with iris scissors. (i) The block of iris and ciliary
body, attached to the adjacent sclera, is carefully separated from any remaining tissues and removed. (j) A homologous graft of sclera, about 0.5 mm larger
than the surgical wound, is carefully fitted into the defect, and all four sides of the scleral graft are apposed with 7-0 to 8-0 simple interrupted absorbable
sutures. (k) After placement of all but the last of the limbal 7-0 to 8-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures, the anterior chamber is flushed with lactated 
Ringer's solution and reformed so intraocular pressure is adjusted to about 10-15 mmHg. () The limbal-based conjunctival flap is apposed with a 7-0 to 8-
 0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
with 1:1000 rathe1 than the 1:10 000 adrenaline (epineph-
8-0 absorbable sutures (Fig. 9.26k). Once the scleral graft
nine) solution.
has been secured, balanced salt solution is injected into
A scleral homograft, constructed by tenotomy scissois
the anterior chamber to test the integrity of the wound
and about 0.5 mm larger than the scleral defect, is apposed
apposition,a
and 1e-establish about 10-15 mmHg IOP
to the scleral defect and limbus with 7-0 to 8-0 simple
(Fig. 9.26k). The limbal-based bulba1 conjunctival flap is
inteirupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 9.26j). The limbal
apposed with a 7-0 to 8-0 simple continuous absorbable
suture (Fig. 9.261).
257
9
 Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
Postoperative treatment consists of topical and systemic
pupils. Cats are also more often affected bilaterally and with
antibiotics, corticosteroids, and NSAIDs to control and
multiple cysts. IOP may increase in cats with inidial cysts
Iesolve the iridocyclitis. Intraocular pressure is monitored
upon drug-induced mydriasis.
daily. As the inidocyclitis resolves, the IOP gradually returns
e pe o a un sis ie nae jo Adnan is
to normal. Topical cyclosporine is started a few days post-
Iepresents non-invasive therapy, in contrast to surgical entry
operatively to reduce the host response to the scleral graft.
into the anterior chamber and either grasping and manual
Postoperative complications after iridocyclosclerectomy
removal of the cysts, o1 puncture of the cyst wall by a small
are usually associated with the iridocyclitis, any remaining
hypodermic needle and cyst removal. Laser therapy causes
intraocular hemorrhage, fibropupillary membrane, a raised
less postoperative anterior uveitis, and reduces the need for
area from the scleral graft, and secondary cataract formation.
post-cyst deflation therapy with topical mydriatic, steroidal,
Tumol recuurence after this type of surgery is infrequent.
and non-steroidal therapy.
Intracameral 25 μg tPA may be injected 3-7 days postopera
Both the Nd:YAG and diode lasers are effective; however.
tively to help dissolve any intraocular fibrin bands and
the more versatile diode laser is the most common laser type
hemorrhage. Failure to successfully control postoperative iri-
docyclitis may result in either phthisis bulbi or angle-closure
geries. The diode laser's mechanism of action on the cyst
secondary glaucoma.
Hence, it is most commonly used for anterior uveal cysts
Laser treatment of anterior uveal cysts
in all species (Fig. 9.27). As deflation of the anterio1 cyst
in the dog and cat
depends on its size and number of cysts, laser therapy is to
effect (the cysts deflate once the cyst wall has been pene-
trated). In general, in the dog, the average power setting of
Pigmented iridal cysts in dogs may be free-floating within
the diode laser is about 1000 mW, the average duration
the anterior chamber, trapped in the iridocorneal angle,
ranges from 500 to 1500 ms, and the average number of
01 wedged within the posterio1 chamber, and originate
spots per cyst is about 15.
from the posterior iridal pigmented epithelium. More often
 In cats with iridal cysts, when the diode laser was applied
s u s roaisod au u aeiap aie kau lou ue
 in pulse, the average power setting was 700 mW, the average
Sometimes in an eye presented for a pigmented cyst, dnig-
duration was 1oo0 ms, and the average number of spots to
induced mydriasis will release additional cysts trapped
achieve rupture and coagulation of the cysts was 97 per
within the posterior chamber.
eye. As expected, with more laser energy used in cats, the
Ciliary body cysts usually arise from the anterior pars
greater the intensity of post-laser anterior uveitis.
plicata o1 corona ciliaris (ciliary body processes), and rarely
the posterior pars plana ciliaris (pars plana of the ciliary
q  re  s o   ul (o
Laser treatment of anterior uveal neoplasms
red or clear bubbles, and are usually still attached to their cil-
in the dog
iary body. Most iridal and ciliary body cysts are innocuous in
the dog: howevel, in the Great Dane and Golden Retriever
breeds, these anterior uveal cysts have been associated with
Therapies are evolving to eliminate intraocular melanoma
serious eye disease, including defoliation of iridal pigmenta-
in the dog while still preserving the eye and vision using
tion onto the anterior lens capsule, cataract formation, and
laser photocoagulation. In the past, focal primarily iridal
the development of a refractory secondary glaucoma.
melanomas have been removed by sectional iridectomy
 In cats, pigmented iridal cysts are the more common type
with limited involvement of the ciliary body, or by sectional
 of anterior uveal cyst, and when presented are pigmented
inidocyclectomy, often with a scleral graft. Anterio1 uveal
hollow cysts, sometimes relatively large, still attached to
melanomas in the dog. in contrast to the cat, seem to metas-
   as s  id rsd as
tasize late and with limited frequency (about 5%). These
in cats can mimic anterior uveal melanomas, ultrasonogra-
melanomas, if allowed to expand within the eye, may result
phy is very important to distinguish these cysts from solid
in persistent iridocyclitis, hyphema, cataract foimation,
pigmented masses (melanomas and ciliary body pigmented
angle-closure glaucoma, and retinal detachment. As a result,
epithelial tumors). Most cats with iridal cysts present with
at least two clinical studies have been reported evaluating
focal shallowing of the anterio1 chamber and dyscoric
laser photocoagulation for melanomas of the canine inis
Fig. 9.27 Treatment of a large pigmented iris
cyst in a cat with diode laser therapy.
Ultrasonography has indicated this cyst is hollow;
histopathology confirms the diagnosis. (a)
Preoperative appearance. (b) Post-laser therapy.
 Note the cyst has deflated.
258
Adaptations for large animals and special species
and ciliary body. The most effective laser results seem to be
stopped. Immediately after diode laser photocoagulation,
with the more supeificial iridal melanomas, rather than
those tumors which are deeper within the ciliary body.
flare were observed. Postoperative therapy consisted of
Transscleral and transcoineal Nd:YAG laseI photocoagu
subconjunctival and topical corticosteroids.
lation was reported for the treatment of four iris tumors
aa aq oi aaoid keu iasel apoip oidosoua iamau au
and 11 ciliary body tumors in the dog (Fig. 9.28). Although
  lo   a   a
no histopathology was performed, six of the 11 ciliary
plasms. This technique uses a 20 g endoprobe that provides
body tumors were presumed epithelial in origin; the remain-
light, video, and diode laser. This technique permits access
ing five tumors were pigmented and presumed melanomas.
to the posterior inis and ciliary body, and allows for precise
The total energy used was 10-400 joules per treatment. The
visualization and delivery of laser energy to the target tissue
inidal tumors 1esponded more favorably, with all four of
while maintaining the anterior chamber and avoiding
the masses regressing. Of the ciliary body masses, complete
collapse of the eye.
OI partial shrinkage occurred in five of the seven tumors that
- ue uo iq oq A a on pauun paede
Adaptations for large animals
plete response in three of the four ciliary body tumors with
iridal and scleral extension. Multiple treatments were often
and special species
used.
After Nd:YAG photocoagulation, the eyes developed
In general terms, the anterior chamber and uvea of large ani-
conjunctival hyperemia, mild to moderate aqueous flare,
mal species are similar in anatomy and physiology to those
variable hyphema, and vitreal hemorrhage. Focal cataract
of the dog and cat. The equine eye is the most common
foimation occuired in those eyes in which the tumor was
large animal eye in veterinary ophthalmology for which
in close proximity to the lens. Although this report demon-
anterio1 segment surgery is performed. Anatomic differences
strated potential effectiveness of laser photocoagulation of
include the presence of dorsal and ventral corpora nigra, a
these tumors, the clinical 1esults were not impressive. Lnfor-
horizontal pupil, and a relatively shallow anterio1 chamber
     ai s  
at the iridocoineal angle. The dorsal corpora nigra are the
study and the 1emission rates of those patients in the study
largest, consisting of three to four pigmented, irregular strc-
were considerable.
tures at the dorsal pupil margin of the iris. Corpora nigra
In the second report, the diode laser was used to treat
may undergo atrophy o1 adhere to the coinea o1 anterio1
presumed inidal melanomas in 23 dogs. The inidal masses
     o r e e s
ranged in size from 2 × 3 mm to 4 × 12 mm, appeared
cystic changes that can be associated with visual and behav-
as focal raised iridal hyperpigmentation, and
occurred
ioral changes. They may also present a mechanical problem
 sm  ns o a n ao  
to either an operating microscope adaptor o1 used as a laser
structures such as the lens during cataract surgery. As a result
indirect ophthalmoscope. Laser treatments consisted of
of coineal curvature, the anterior chamber is relatively shal-
80-1000 mW and cumulative durations up to 14.3 min,
low at the equine iridocoineal angle, making access to the
and experience suggested that emphasis on a hyperthermic
anterior chamber more difficult than in the dog or cat.
response (lower W/mm? with longer durations) yielded
 In general, a two-step, clear coineal or corneoscleral incision
better results. Five of the 23 cases required multiple treat-
is used to enter the equine anterior chamber and a high
ments. There was immediate shrinkage of the mass after
viscosity, cohesive viscoelastic agent is required to maintain
laser photocoagulation; long-term complications included
the anterior chamber during anterior segment surgery.
dyscoria, iridal hyperpigmentation, pigment on the anterior
 r i    n  n 
lens capsule, iris atrophy, and corneal edema. Glaucoma
of iris prolapse, uveal neoplasia, uveal cysts, cataract, glau-
and cataract formation were not observed, and follow-up
coma, and equine 1ecurrent uveitis (ERU). For discussion
ranged from 6 months to 4.5 years. Twenty of the cases
 )  st  n   s 
had follow-ups of 1 year o1 longer. Twelve of the 23 dogs
cataract (Chapter 11), glaucoma (Chapter 10), and ERUI
were Labrador Retrievers, and 12 dogs were 3 years of age
(Chapter 12), the reader is directed to the specific chapters
Or less.
legarding these equine surgeries.
Laser treatments were given to effect and discontinued
Anterio1 uveal cysts are relatively common in the equine
aftel no further shrinkage was observed, surface disruption
eye; they most frequently involve the dorsal corpora nigra 01,
ceased, and release of pigment cells into the aqueous humor
less frequently, the ventral corpora nigra o1 pupillary margin.
Fig. 9.28 Treatment of a focal iridal melanoma in
a dog with diode laser therapy. (a) Preoperative
 appearance. (b) Postoperative appearance after
iris biopsy and diode laser photocoagulation of an
iridal melanoma in a dog 5 months previously.
The mass recurred and was treated again with
uogelnbeos jasel apoip
(Photographs courtesy of D.E. Brooks. University of Fiorida.)
259
9
Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
ss ie lpo lo pae-ai aae ae sasu a
Techniques using the Nd:YAG lase1 01 an 810 nm diode
im paieioosse aq oi readde lou op pue 'uoisal paimoe ue aie
lasel and an indirect ophthalmoscope for cyst ablation have
intraocular inflammation o1 other abnormalities.
been described. This is performed in the standing horse using
Corpora nigra cysts appear as pigmented, smooth, round
structures projecting over the pupil. They may be uni- or
(Fig. 9.31c). The pupil should be undilated and the horse
bilateral, and vary in numbe1 and size (Fig. 9.29). The dif-
premedicated with a systemic NSAID. Care is taken when
  i e  Pm sis p
ablating those areas of the cyst in proximity to the coinea
In most instances, clinical examination alone is sufficient
Or the lens as heat may be transferred, resulting in collateral
for a diagnosis, but ocular ultrasound can be used
to
damage. If possible, treat the areas of the cyst distant to the
confim the diagnosis. A cyst will appear hollow while
cornea and lens, shrinking the overall size of the cyst and
a melanoma is solid. Depending on the ultrasound
increasing the distance from the coinea and lens. When
probe, an offset may be required to image the anterior
ablating the cyst, the clinician should attempt to focus the
segment.
laser energy in as small and round an area as possible to
 If they are large enough, corpora nigra cysts may result in
ensure maximal energy delivery. The goal is photocoagula-
visual disturbance and behavioral abnormalities (Fig. 9.30).
tion rather than photodisruption. Following ablation, a sin-
To assess the area of the visual field affected, the cyst should
gle administration of a mydriatic and 24-48 h of a systemic
be evaluated with the pupil in an undilated state. If vision
is compromised, surgical intervention is indicated. Corpora
With the availability of non-invasive laser ablation, more
nigra cysts can be managed in a non-invasive manner using
invasive techniques such as centesis of the cyst are rarely
focused laser energy to cauterize and disrupt the cyst wall.
indicated. If a centesis is required, it should be performed
The goal should not be to simply rupture the cyst as it
under general anesthesia and is most indicated for a free-
will refoim; rather the goal is to cauterize the entire cyst wall
floating cyst. A 27 or 30g needle on a tuberculin syringe
to1
prevent continued fluid secretion (Fig.
9.31a,b)
is introduced into the anterior chamber at the limbus. The cyst
is then carefully aspirated and removed. Postoperative miosis
 and aqueous flare are typical following centesis, and are man-
aged using topical mydriatics and systemic NSAIDs.
Primary neoplasia of the equine anterior uvea includes mel-
anoma, adenoma, adenocarcinoma, and medulloepithelioma.
Of the secondary neoplasms, lymphoma is the most common.
In general, anterior uveal neoplasia is rare in the horse. Of
the primary neoplasms, melanoma is the most common.
 Equine ocular melanoma is generally a solitary mass with-
out association with cutaneous melanoma. Based on the liter-
ature, intraocular melanomas are reported more commonly
in gray horses, with the most commonly affected horses
being between 5 and 10 years of age. Equine intraocular
melanoma most commonly originates from the iris and cili-
ary body. Although intraocular melanoma can demonstrate
lapid growth, distant metastasis is extremely rare, and histo-
logic diagnosis is generally benign. Clinical signs are variable,
Fig. 9.29 Two dorsal corpora nigra or granula iridica cysts of moderate size
and may include a pigmented mass, coineal edema, dyscoria.
 are present in a horse.
cataract, and glaucoma (Fig. 9.32). Additional clinical signs
vary depending on the size and location of the mass. Ultta-
sonography may be indicated to confirm the mass as solid
rather than cystic, and to evaluate the extent of the mass
and its effect on adjacent structures.
Treatment fo1 anterior uveal melanoma may include mon-
 itoring, sector iridectomy/iridocyclectomy, laser ablation or
        
horse, cost, location and size of the melanoma, availability
of treatment modalities, and surgical abilities. Laser abla-
tion may be performed using either the Nd:YAG or diode
laser in a non-invasive manner transcoineally or trans-
sclerally. In addition, diode endolaser ablation may also be
indicated with either an anterior limbal or a posterior pars
plana approach. Laser ablation would be most indicated
fo1 small melanomas typically involving less than 1-2 clock
hours of the anterio1 uvea. Inidectomy/iridocyclectomy is a
more invasive procedure and again is typically indicated
fo1 melanomas affecting less than 25% of the anterior uvea.
Fig. 9.30 Several large dorsal corpora nigra or granula iridica cysts are
present in a horse. The pupil is shown in a non-dilated state. Significant
One of the authors (DAw) has successfully excised 50%
visual impairment results from these cysts.
of the equine iris affected by melanoma, but secondary
260
Adaptations for large animals and special species
Fig. 9.31 (a) A ventral anterior uveal cyst is shown prior to diode laser ablation. (b) The same eye immediately following diode laser ablation of the ventral
anterior uveal cyst. (c) Performing photoablation of the cyst using an indirect ophthalmoscope, condensing lens and a diode laser.
Fig. 9.32 A large anterior uveal melanoma affecting 50% of the iris,
Fig. 9.33 A teratoid medulloepithelioma originating from the ciliary body
extending into the anterior chamber and resulting in secondary corneal
and extending into the posterior segment and resulting in a leukocoria.
edema and vascularization.
cataract is a common sequela. The techniques for iridect-
embryonic optic cup. Histologically, medulloepitheliomas
omy/iridocycletomy in the horse are similar to those
contain non-pigmented neuroepithelial cells in tubules
described for the dog. For an iridectomy, a limbal approach
and rosettes. They are further classified into teratoid
is preferred, incising adjacent to the affected iris base. For
and non-teratoid, based on whether they also contain
an iridocyclectomy, a limbus-based scleral flap provides the
non-ocular tissue such as bone, cartilage, and brain. They
best exposure. For both procedures, magnification, viscoelas-
are most commonly diagnosed in young horses, appearing
tic material, wet-field cautery, and intracameral adrenaline
as a white-to-pink mass in the pupil o1 anterior chamber
(epinephrine) are required. [ntraoperative hemorrhage, 1eti-
(Fig. 9.33). On ultrasound they are solid in appearance.
nal detachment, vitreous prolapse, phthisis bulbi, and cata-
The age of the horse and the clinical appearance are
ract are all potential intra- and postoperative complications
usually sufficient to make the diagnosis. Equine ocular
of iridectomy/iridocyclectomy.
medulloepitheliomas are slow growing and rarely metasta-
Medulloepithelioma of the anterior uvea originates from
size, and enucleation/exenteration is the treatment of
the undifferentiated
neurectodermal(
cells
lining
the
choice.
Further reading
Small animals: anterior chamber
Carastro SM, Dugan Sl. Paul Al: Intraocular
plasminogen activator on corneal
 Bedford PGC: The anterior uveal cyst as an
dirofilariasis in dogs. Compendium on
 endothelium and intraocular pressure in
unusual cause of corneal pigmentation in
Continuing Education 14:209-217, 1992.
dogs. Am I Vet Res 53:890-896. 1992.
the dog. I Small Anim Pract 21:97-101.
Carter ID. Mausolf F: Clinical and histologic
Gerding P. Essex-Sorlie D. Vasaune S. Yack R:
1980.
features of pigmented ocular cysts. J Am 
Use of tissue plasminogen activator for
Callahan A, Zubero J: Hyphema surgery. Am J
Anim Hosp Assoc 6:194-200. 1970.
intraocular fibrinolysis in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Ophthalmol 53:522-523. 1962.
Gerding PA, Essex-Sorlie D. Yack R, Vasaune S:
53:894-896. 1992.
Effects of intracameral injection of tissue
26
9
Surgical procedures of the anterior chamber and anterior uvea
Hill K: Cryoextraction of total hyphema, Arch
 Brinkmann MC, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG.
Berger JM. Bell SA, Holmberg BJ. Madigan JE:
Ophthalmol 80:368-370. 1968.
English RV, Olivero DK: Neodymium:YAG
Successful treatment of head shaking by
Howard DR: Canine anterior chamber
laser treatment of iris bombe and pupillary
use of infrared diode laser deflation and
paracentesis. Southwestern Veterinarian
block glaucoma. Progress in Veterinary
coagulation of corpora nigra cysts and
21:299-301. 1968.
ad Comparative Ophthalmology 2:13-19.
behavioral modification in a horse. I Am Vet
Johnson BW. Helper LC. Szajerski ME:
1992.
Med Assoc 233:1610-1612. 2008.
Intraocular Cuterebra in a cat. I Am Vet Med
Cook CS. Wilkie DA: Treatment of presumed
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Anterior chamber.
Assoc 193:829-830. 1988.
 iris melanoma in dogs by diode laser
 aqueous and glaucoma. In Barnett KC.
Komaromy AM. Brooks DE. Kallberg ME.
photocoagulation: 23 cases, Vet Ophthalmol
Crispin SM. Lavach JD, Matthews AG.
Andrew SE. Ramsey DT. Ramsey CC:
2:217-225. 1999.
editors: Equine Ophthatmology. ed 2.
Clerc B: Surgery and chemotherapy for the
Edinburgh. 2004. Saunders. pp 149-164.
 Hyphema. Part l. pathophysiologic
considerations, Compendium of Contiming
 treatment of adenocarcinoma of the iris and
 Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
Educatiom 21:1064-1091. 1999.
ciliary body in five dogs. Veterinary and
 ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Komaromy AM. Brooks DE. Kallberg ME.
Comparative Ophthalmology 6:265-270.
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
Andrew SE. Ramsey DT. Ramsey CC:
1996.
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
Hyphema. Part ll, diagnosis and treatment.
Gelatt KN, Henry ID. Strafuss AC: Excision of
 Canton DD, Murphy Cl. Buyukmihci NC.
Compendium of Continuing Education
 an adenocarcinoma of the iris and ciliary
 Schulz T: Pupilloplasty in a great horned
22:74-79, 2000.
body in a dog. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
owl with pupillary occlusion and cataracts.
Laver Dw. Spratt DM, Thomas C: Dirofilaria
6:59-70. 1970.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 201:1087-1090. 1992.
immitis from the eye of a dog. Aust Vet J
Gelatt KN, Johnson KA, Peiffer RL: Primary
Frihauf B. Ohnesorge B. Deegen E. Boeve M:
45:284-286. 1969.
pigmented masses in three dogs. I Am Anim
 Surgical management of equine recurrent
Lim Jl. Maguire AM. John G. Mohler MA.
Hosp Assoc 15:339-344, 1979.
Lveitis with single port pars plana vitrectomy.
Fiscella RG: Intraocular tissue plasminogen
Gemensky-Metzler Al. Wilkie DA, Cook CS:
Vet Ophhalmol 1:137-151. 1998.
activator concentrations after
The use of semiconductor diode laser for
Gemensky-Metzler AJ. wilkie DA, Cook CS:
subconjunctival delivery. Ophchalmology
 deflation and coagulation of anterior uveal
The use of semiconductor diode laser for
100:373-376. 1993.
cysts in dogs. cats. and horses, Vet
deflation and coagulation of anterior uveal
Martin C. Kaswan R. Gratzek A, Champagne E.
Ophthalmol 7:360-367. 2004.
cysts in dogs. cats., and horses. Vet
Salisbury MA, Ward D: Ocular use of tissue
Hendrix DVM: Canine anterior uvea. In
Ophthalmol 7:360-367, 2004.
 plasminogen activator in companion
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology.
Gilger BC. Davidson MG. Nadelstein B.
animals. Progress in Veterinary and
ed 4. Ames. 2006. Blackwell pp 812-858.
Nasisse M: Nd:YAG laser treatment of
Comparative Ophthalmology 3:29-36.
Koster HR. Kenyon KR: Complications of
 cystic granula iridica in horses: eight cases
1993.
 surgery associated with ocular trauma.
(1988-1996). J Am Vet Med Assoc
Miller W, Cooper RB: ldentifying and treating
Imt Ophthalmol Clin 32:157-178. 1992.
211:341-343. 1997.
intraocular Dirofilaria immitis in dogs. Vet
Nadelstein B. Davidson MG, Gilger BC: Pilot
Hollingsworth SR: Diseases of the anterior
Med 82:381-385. 1987.
 study on diode laser iridotomy in dogs.
Uvea. In Gilger BC. editor: Ophthalmology
Veterinaryand ComparativeOphthalmology
Moon J. Chung S. Myong Y. Chung S. Park C.
Equine, St Louis. 2005, Saunders.
 Baek N, Rhee S: Treatment of post-cataract
6:230-232. 1996.
pp 253-268.
fibrinous membranes with tissue
 Nasisse MP. Davidson MG. Olivero DK.
Latimer CA, Wyman M: Sector iridectomy
plasminogen activator. Ophthalmology
Brinkmann M. Nelms S: Neodymium:YAG
 in the management of iris melanoma
99:1256-1259. 1992.
laser treatment of primary canine
in a horse. Equine Vet J Suppl 2:101-104.
Nelms SR, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG.
intraocular tumors. Progress in Veterinary and
1983.
Kirschner SE: Hyphema associated with
Comparative Ophthalmology 3:152-157.
 Miller TL, willis AM, Wilkie DA, Hoshaw.
retinal disease in dogs: 17 cases
1993.
Woodard S. Stanley JRL: Description of
[1986-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Peiffer RL: Surgery of the iris and ciliary body
cliary body anatomy and identification of
202:1289-1292, 1993.
In Bojrab Ml, Birchard Sl. Tomlinson JL,
sites for transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
Stiles J. Rankin A: Ophthalmomyiasis interna
editors: Current Techmiques in Small Animal
in the equine eye. Vet Ophthalmol
anterior in a cat: surgical resolution, Vet
Surgery. Philadelphia. 1990. Lea and
4:183-190, 2001.
Ophthalmol 9:165-168. 2006.
Febiger. pp 112-117.
Scotty N. Barrie KP. Brooks DE. Taylor D:
Surgical management of a progressive
Small animals: anterior uvea
Large animals and special species:
melanocytoma in a Mustang. Vet
 Beckman H, Barraco R. Sugar HS. Gaynes E.
general
Ophthalmol 11:75-80. 2008.
Gaynes E: Laser iridectomies. Am J
 Barnett K: lris and ciliary body. In Barnett KC.
Townsend wM: Food and fiber-producing
Ophthalmol 72:393-402. 1971.
Crispin SM. Lavach JD. Matthews AG.
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
editors: Equine Ophthalmology. ed 2.
editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 4. Ames.
Bellhorn RW. Vainisi Sl: Successful removal of
ciliary body adenoma, Mod Vet Pract
Edinburgh. 2004. Saunders. pp 183-200.
2006. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
50:47-49. 1969.
262
CHAPTER
10
Kirk N. Gelatt', Douglas W. Esson1 and Caryn E. Plummer?
saas as p sw a sp 
Chapter contents
Introduction
263
 Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
284
 Diagnostic and monitoring techniques
Cyclodestructive procedures
294
for glaucoma patients
266
 Pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body
299
Surgical anatomy
269
 Neuroprotection
300
 Preoperative treatment
273
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
273
Introduction
 dominant). Whereas primary open-angle glaucoma occurs
as a chronic disease spanning several years, the angle-closure
The glaucomas in animals consist of a group of diseases
glaucomas typically manifest as acute clinical situations,
that share the common feature of elevated intraocular pres-
followed by a chronic cycle of secondary degeneration.
-o  p aq  sie rs u s
and optic nerve atrophy. In humans, an additional form of
scopy (examination of the iridocoineal anterior chamber
glaucoma, normal tension glaucoma, consists of progressive
angle) and etiology into primary, secondary, and congenital
optic disk cupping and vision loss in the presence of normal
(Box 10.1). Primary glaucomas affect both eyes, although
levels of IOP. Noimal tension glaucoma has not been
s   ss   a aa a
reported in animals, although canine patients with progres.
months to years before the opposite eye. Traditionally, the
sive optic disk atrophy and gradual loss of vision, in the face
symptoms of primary glaucomas are divided into acute
of an apparent normal range of IOP, have been identified
and chronic. However, clinical experience suggests that
clinically.
  s  d  o 
Traditionally, the veterinary glaucomas are divided into:
in thei1 development, with acute elevations in [OP toward
(aue aso, n ado, laa) Ared ro aeii-aarg (1
the end of the disease that produce overt clinical signs which
2) secondary, in which an underlying cause for the elevated
prompt presentation to the veterinarian. This suggests that
[OP can be deteimined; and 3) congenital, in which embry-
treatment for most primary glaucomas in dogs is started
onic developmental inidocoineal angle anomalies result in
with the disease in an already quite advanced state.
e a a  di  s
The clinical signs of acute and often marked elevated levels
of IOP, associated with primary closed-angle glaucoma, are a
dilated, fixed, or sluggish pupil, bulbar conjunctival and
The canine glaucomas
episcleral venous congestion, and corneal edema, as well as
Glaucomas occur in 1.8% of the canine population in North
 patient discomfort and visual disturbances (Fig. 10.1). With
America. The frequency of bilateral breed-predisposed glau-
prolonged elevations of IOP, secondary enlargement of the
comas in purebred dogs is the highest of any animal species,
globe, lens displacement, breaks in Descemet's membrane
except humans. Primary glaucomas are of both open and
of the coinea, and eventual buphthalmos (enlargement of
closed inidocoineal angle types that affect primarily pure-
the globe due to stretching) result (Fig. 10.2). Pain is usually
aq au u pau aq o nnou aie pue so pai
manifested by behavioral changes and sometimes periorbital
The modes of inheritance have been 1eported fo1 primary
pain rather than blepharospasm, or not at all.
open-angle glaucoma in Beagles (autosomal recessive), and
Treatment of the secondary glaucomas, which are often
  s i e    
unilateral, is determined based on the underlying disease.
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
Box 10.1 The different types of glaucoma in animals
Primary:
Open iridocorneal angle - dog, cat, and horse
 Narrow/closed angle - dog, cat and horse
Secondary: open/narrow/closed angle - all species
Anterior uveitis
- Peripheral anterior synechiae
- Pupillary obstruction 
- Iris bombe 
Lens-induced 
Cataract
- Displacement: anterior luxation, subluxation, posterior luxation
 Intraocular neoplasms
 Hyphema
 Pigmentary (dog only)
Traumatic
 Aphakic (angle/pupil obstruction)
Fig. 10.2 Glaucoma and subluxated lens in a dog.
 Silicone oil
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
Malignant
 Congenital iridocorneal anomalies
 Open/narrow/closed angle:
- Pectinate ligament dysplasia - dog 
- Goniodysgenesis - dog, cat, foal, and rabbit 
Fig. 10.3 Acute anterior lens luxation in a Smooth Fox Terrier. The periphery
of the lens is easily visible because comeal edema has not developed.
Fig. 10.1 Early glaucoma in the dog is often associated with moderate 
mydriasis, conjunctival congestion, and corneal edema. Repeated tonometry
may be necessary to detect the brief bouts of elevated intraocular pressure.
sufficient to elevate IOP. In both of these mechanisms of
secondary glaucoma in dogs, lens o1 cataract removal may
The most frequent cause of secondary glaucoma in the dog
be important in the treatment of elevated IOP.
is lens displacement, manifested as subluxation, anterio1
Secondary changes, such as peripheral anterior synechiation
luxation, or posterior luxation (Fig. 10.3). However, with
due to iridocyclitis, preiridal membrane formation, and filtra-
megaloglobus and subtle but gradual increases in IOP, sec-
d    os si s s 
and/or surgical treatments. Primary and secondary intraocular
glaucomas as tension of the lens zonules eventually results
neoplasms commonly produce secondary glaucoma in dogs
in their tearing, usually just below their attachment to the
and cats. Enucleation is usually the prefelred treatment for
lens equator. In addition, lens-induced uveitis (LIU) is com-
glaucoma esulting from advanced primary intraocular
mon in the dog. secondary to leakage of lens proteins from
neoplasms.
cataracts. Occasionally the iridocoineal angles of globes
Secondary pigmentary glaucoma occurs in the Cain
affected by LIU become plugged with lens proteins and
Terriel, manifested by a progressive and relentless infiltra-
inflammatory cells: peripheral anterior synechiae then foim,
  ss    r a no u
264
Iound, pigment-laden cells. The optimal treatment for pig-
mentary glaucoma has not been established, and the visual
prognosis for these animals remains poo1.
A syndrome of inidociliary cystic and pigment-dispersive
glaucoma is also recognized with increased frequency in
   e     
its development, manifested by the development of thin-
walled iridociliary cysts, cataract formation, proteinaceous
exudation, pigmentary dispersion, and ultimately glaucoma
associated with trabecular meshwork remodeling and cleft
collapse. These animals do not typically display inidocoineal
abnormalities gonioscopically, and the disease (although
nature.
With the increased frequency of extracapsular and phacoe
mulsification cataract surgery in dogs, aphakic glaucoma is
not infrequent postoperatively. True postsurgical glaucoma
l aiadid u asi e ssaidai m (o)
following phacoemulsification and which occurs 6-12 h
  l    
adjunctive treatment). This secondary glaucoma results from
closure of the iridocorneal angle and subsequent cleft col-
       
Fig. 10.4 Glaucoma secondary to iridocyclitis in the cat. Note the numerous
of the pupil, secondary to annular posterio1 synechiation.
 posterior synechiae.
Aphakic glaucoma, with pupillary blockage, requires surgery
within 24-48 h after onset.
New glaucomas, observed in dogs, are those occurring sec-
ondary to silicone oil in the anterio1 chamber, and those
secondary to rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. Silicone
cil is used in the repair of retinal detachments in dogs (see
Chapter 12). Leakage of this oil into the anterio1 chamber
Iesults in epithelial toxicity, impaired aqueous outflow,
and increased IOP, and the oil must be removed from the
anterio1 chamber. S
Subconjunctival silicone oil appears
relatively inet.
Retinal detachments  i
in  dogs  are usually associated
with ocular hypotony (low [OP), presumably from increased
uveoscleral aqueous humor outflow. However, rhegmato-
genous detachments in dogs, especially in those patients with
giant retinal tears (90° or more), may release outer 1od and
cone fragments into the subretinal fluids and vitreous that
eventually enter the anterio1 chamber. This cellular debris
Fig. 10.5 Anterior lens luxation, cataract formation, and secondary
in the aqueous humor outflow pathways elevates IOP
glaucoma in an aged cat.
The feline glaucomas
feline eyes have noimal levels of IOP: in others the IOP is
Glaucomas in cats occur predominately secondary to ante-
elevated. The globe is usually slightly enlarged, but the eye
lio1 uveitis and neoplasia; howevel, primary open-angle
often remains visual. Gonioscopy of affected cats (which,
glaucoma also occurs at a very low frequency. In one report,
unlike dogs, may be perfoimed without the aid of a refracting
based on 131 enucleated eyes, feline glaucomas were asso-
goniolens) usually reveals open iridocoineal angles; in fact,
ciated with chronic lymphocytic-plasmacytic anterior uveitis
some iridocorneal angles appear recessed posteriorly
in
(53 eyes), diffuse iridal melanoma/melanocytoma (38 eyes),
enlarged globes and are wider than normal. Lens removal
other neoplasms (14 eyes), lens rupture (4 eyes), anterio1
in normotensive eyes may resolve the problem. If glaucoma
lens luxation (4 eyes), primary glaucoma (3 eyes), and othe1
is already present, lens removal alone may not sufficiently
causes (15 eyes). In clinical reports, the most frequent form
address the elevated IOP because of permanent outflow
of glaucoma in cats occurs secondary to anterior uveitis,
abnormalities.
and neoplasia (Fig. 10.4). [n cats with inflammatory-related
 An apparently unique feline manifestation of glaucoma is
secondary glaucomas, topical and systemic corticosteroids
represented by the syndrome of aqueous misdirection. In
frequently reduce the anterior uveitis sufficiently to lower
this poorly understood condition, expansion of the vitreous
[OP. Cats, usually older than 10 years, may also develop lens
, n    l o
luxation in the absence of iridocyclitis (Fig. 10.5). Some
ected' shunting of aqueous into this space) results in marked
265
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
anterio1 chamber shallowing. and iridocoineal angle and
of development of the trabecular meshwork, and posterio1
ciliary cleft compromise. Glaucoma which results from
displacement of the aqueous plexus within the sclera.
aqueous misdirection is typically chronic in development,
 [n affected rabbits, impaired aqueous humor outflow
and many cats appear to tolerate elevated IOPs surprisingly
 Occurs by 3 months, and IOP elevates by 6 months. Coineal
well. Medical management of this situation is, however,
 and globe enlargement are detectable in animals as young as
generally less successful with progression. Lenticular pha-
4-6 months old. Pet rabbits are typically presented with,
coemulsification and limited vitrectomy likely 1epresent
at least, one buphthalmic eye (Fig. 10.6). Corneal edema,
the most effective surgical course of action when faced with
 pupillary dilatation, and elevated IOP are present. Medical
progressively escalating IOP.
treatment of pet rabbits is generally limited to topical agents:
e aa ssa ae saipe ia e s am
shorter duration than in dogs and cats. Glaucoma surgical
The equine glaucomas
procedures, including iridencleisis, can provide normal IOP
Glaucomas in horses have been classified into congenital, pri-
fo1 several months. Anterio1 chamber shunts in congenital
mary, and secondary to anterior uveitis, lens luxation, and
glaucomatous rabbits have been successful for periods greater
intraocular neoplasia. Aging persistent anterior uveitis, and
than 3 years; however, rabbits generally exhibit an even more
breed (Appaloosa is most often affected) are predisposing
aggressive healing and subsequent scarring response at the
factors. The signs of elevated IOP in the hoise are more subtle,
site of surgical intervention than dogs and cats.
and include enlargement of the globe, variable coineal edema,
and coineal striae o1 deep linear band opacities. Intraocular
The bovine glaucomas
pressure tends to fluctuate more than in small animals, and
highe1 levels (30-40 mmHg) tend to occur more frequently.
Glaucomas occur rarely in cattle. Primary glaucoma occurs
Topical medications should be attempted before diode lase1
in the Holstein breed and is concurrent with cataract fo1-
cyclophotocoagulation to reduce any existing anterior uveitis
mation, lens luxation, and globe enlargement. Secondary
and lower IOP. Topical medications which may be used for
glaucoma from anterior uveitis and perforated coineal ulcers
teatment of glaucoma in the horse include beta adrenergic
with iris prolapse occurs more frequently, but is not usually
agents (i.e. 0.5% timolol) and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors
treated. In some of these inflammatory glaucomas, once the
(2% dorzolamide). Topical prostaglandins, i.e. latanoprost,
anterior uveitis decreases, IOP may return to normal.
may lower IOP only slightly, and their use is tempered by side
effects including miosis and ocular iritation.
Diagnostic and monitoring techniques
for glaucoma patients
Congenital glaucoma in rabbits
Glaucoma in this species may be encountered by the
Several basic diagnostic procedures are essential to manage
small animal veterinarian, as pet rabbits become more
the glaucomas pre- and postoperatively in animals. They
popular, as well as by the laboratory animal veterinarian.
include: tonometry, ophthalmoscopy (direct/indirect), and
Congenital glaucoma in rabbits, occurring most frequently
gonioscopy (visualization of the iridocorneal angle). These
in New Zealand whites, is inherited as an autosomal reces-
procedures should be used each time the patient is exam-
sive trait. Affected rabbits may grow less than normal litter-
ined. Newer techniques, such as pattern electroretinograms
mates, and a 25% mortality of affected rabbits occurs. This
and visual evoked potentials, that estimate damage to the
  o sn  n so    
 retinal ganglion cells and their axons, detect the changes
pigmented rabbits. Congenital glaucoma results from irido-
that precede overt clinical signs of glaucoma by many
coineal angle anomalies, including disorganization and lack
 months to a few years in small animals. Confocal scanning
A
B
Fig. 10.6 Inherited and congenital glaucoma in rabbits. (a) This disease is a bilateral inherited disease. Note the enlarged globes. (b) t manifests as mydriasis,
corneal edema, and enlargement of the globe in animals 3-6 months old.
266
Diagnostic and monitoring techniques for glaucoma patients
B
X wiuadouol aul (e) suaned ewjue lews snonewonelb ioy aunpanoud buuonuow pue pnsoubeip lenuassa ue s! Anawouon (enuawnasul Zrol cbs
applanation tonometer. (b) Applanation tonometry in a dog with the TonoPenTm tonometer.
microscopy (Heidelberg retinal tomography (HRT), optical
(    )  
which is more commonly used in the monitoring of human
glaucoma and select research situations, has not found wide
 d n     n s
well as logistical challenges associated with patient restraint
and poor operator reproducibility.
  yo le    si oe 
ferent animal species to estimate [OP, and fortunately are
fairly accurate (in spite of varying corneal diameters) within
the normal range of IOP, though they tend to underesti-
mate when pressure exceeds about 40 mmHg (Fig. 10.7).
Rebound tonometry is increasingly used to estimate IOP
based on its ease and excellent patient compliance. Ophthal-
moscopy, especially the direct method, permits detection of
IOP-related damage to the retina and optic disk.
Fig. 10.8 Evaluation of the iridocorneal angle is important for classification
Gonioscopy, o1 the direct observation of the iridocoineal
of the glaucoma and to assist in selection of treatment methods. Beagle
angle through a special contact goniolens, is the basis for 
with gonioscopic lens on the cornea and examination with the portable
classification of all glaucomas, monitors iridocorneal angle
slit-lamp biomicroscope.
and cleft changes as the glaucoma progresses, and assists
selection of the different medical and surgical treatments
e aue-udo Ad nso uj (ool ue gor s)
narrow-angle glaucomas in animals, the iridocorneal angle,
tually closes with the secondary formation of peripheral
anterior synechiae.
As the outflow pathways become involved in the glauco
sively more difficult and eventually fails.
Glaucoma classification as a guide to therapy
Classification of the etiology of glaucoma, based on oph-
thalmic, gonioscopic, and ultrasonographic examinations,
assists in the optimal planning of clinical management and
 a s n sno   e n
the choice of medical, surgical o1, most frequently a combina-
tion of both modalities, must be tailored. In the case of acute
A
goniodysgenic/angle-closure glaucoma in dogs, surgical treat-
        
Fig. 10.9 Appearance of the normal canine iridocomeal angle: (A) iris;
providing only a few weeks to months of effective IOP con-
(B) cross-section of cormea; (C) corneoscleral trabeculae; and (D) pectinate
trol. Unfortunately, surgical treatments for the primary canine
ligaments. SEM, 29×.
glaucomas and the maintenance of effective long-term IOP
(Courtesy of Dr Don Samuelson.)
267
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
Box 10.2 Recommended medical and surgical treatment modalities for the different glaucomas in animals
Primary open angle glaucoma
- Betaxolol (0.25%) q12-24h
 Short and long term
-Levobunolol (0.25% and 0.5%) q12-24h
-Timolol (0.25% and 0.5%) q12-24h
Prostaglandins (not useful in horses and cats)
 Corticosteroids and non-steroidal antinflammatory agents (all 
Bimatoprost (0.03%) q12-24h
(sapads
- Latanoprost (0.005%) q12-24h
Travoprost (0.004%) q12-24h
Narrow/closed angle
- Unoprostone isopropyl (12% and 0.15%) q12-24h
Initial control
Miotics (limited use in horses)
 Osmotics
- Pilocarpine (1-2%) q6-12h 
 Prostaglandins or miotics
- Carbachol (0.75-3%) q8-12h
 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors 
- Demecarium (0.125-0.25%) q12-24h
 Adrenergics
-Echothiophate (0.125-0.25%) q12-24h
Beta-blocking adrenergics
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (CAl) (all species)
 Corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
- Systemic CAl
0 Acetazolamide, 10-25 mg/kg PO q12h
 Short and long term
0 Dichlorphenamide, 10-15 mg/kg PO, q8-12h 
 Surgery: filtering procedures, anterior chamber shunts
Cyclocryotherapy
O Ethoxyzolamide, 2-8 mg/kg PO q12h
O Methazolamide, 2.5-10 mg/kg PO q12h
 Laser transscleral or endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation
 Topical CAl
Secondary glaucomas
0 Dorzolamide (2%) q8-12h
 Address primary underlying condition
O Brinzolamide (1%) q8-12h
 Antihypertensive medications as necessary
Adrenergics (all species)
- Adrenaline (epinephrine) (1-2%) q8-12h
End-stage glaucoma with buphthalmia and
-Dipivefrin (0.1%) q8-12h
blindness (all species)
Osmotics (all species)
 Surgery: intrascleral prosthesis, enucleation 
- Mannitol, 1-2 g/kg IV
Cyclocryothermy
- Glycerol, 1-2 mL/kg PO
Intravitreal gentamicin (10-25 mg)
 Beta-blocking adrenergics (all species; caution in very small
patients)
control have been notoriously challenging. However, diode
Recurrent studies in the canine primary glaucomas suggest
laser cyclophotocoagulation and anterio1 chamber shunts
 n s  s n   
appear to offer longer periods of successful control of IOP
CD44, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), and other large
at this time. In horses, laser cyclophotocoagulation appears
proteins; these substances probably adversely affect aqueous
outflow after the traditional glaucoma surgeries as well as
ber shunts is still under study.
laser cyclophotocoagulation. High concentrations of these
Surgical procedures fo1 the treatment of the canine glau-
substances are found not only within the trabecular mesh-
comas have traditionally provided only short-term resolution
work, but also within the non-pigmented ciliary body epithe-
because the filtering fistulae eventually close and fail in the
face of inflammation and subsequent tissue 1emodeling
at the site of filtering surgeries has been characterized in sev-
and scarring. Newer anterior chamber shunts, with and with-
eral animal models, and an increased understanding of the
 out valves, offer improved results. Antifibrotic dnugs, such as
major mediators of this process will underlie more effective
mitomycin C and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), may delay or pre-
postoperative treatment strategies.
vent scarring of the alternative aqueous outflow channels
The relatively recent introduction of endoscopic diode
and prolong their function. Although intraoperative mito-
 cyclophotocoagulation has permitted the direct observation
mycin C application has yielded less promising results in
s an aas ae   sasan ao e 
nificantly improving the efficacy of this treatment modality.
erative use of 5-FU has significantly improved the survivabil-
ity of filtration blebs. Indeed, systemic anti-inflammatory
Medical and/or surgical treatment
appears key to maintaining the functionality of filtering sur-
The decision to employ medical and/or surgical therapy
geries for as long as possible. Hopefully, during the next
fo1 the veterinary glaucomas is determined by the stage of
decade, advances in surgical treatments of the primary glau-
the disease and the appearance of the iridocorneal angle as
comas in the dog will be similar to those that occurred during
judged by gonioscopy, as well as the perceived viability of
the past two decades in cataract surgery in small animals.
the visual structures and optic nerve. The dilemma that
268
Surgical anatomy
confronts the veterinarian is that both medical and those
 Surgical anatomy
traditionalfiltering
 surgical  procedures adopted  from
human ophthalmology do not usually provide long-term
Procedures for the surgical management of glaucoma
relief. As these patients are usually only of middle age, more
lequire accurate knowledge of the anterior orbit, globe,
successful surgical treatments need to be developed. Anterior
and intraocular tissues, including the inidocoineal angle,
chamber shunts and newer laser cyclophotocoagulation
lens, iris, and ciliary body (Fig. 10.10). The anatomy of the
techniques offer this potential
last three strictures (the inis and ciliary body, and the lens)
In general, horses, because of their size, are more difficult
is presented in Chapters 9 and 11, respectively. However,
 to manage medically long term, as the owners must medi-
some additional comments regarding the anatomy of this
cate these patients themselves.
area are important for the effective perfoimance of the
Medical treatments for the glaucomas either decrease the
different glaucoma surgical procedures.
rate of aqueous humor formation or increase its outflow. A
When cyclodialysis, posterior sclerotomy, and anterio1
few drugs, such as 1% and 2% adrenaline (epinephrine).
chamber shunts are performed in small animals, the surgeon
affect both aqueous humor outflow and foimation. Medical
should be familiar with the anterior orbit and, in particular.
therapy is most effective with open iridocoineal angles.
Unfortunately, most forms of primary glaucomas in dogs
the extraocular muscular insertions to the globe (Table 10.1).
The dog orbit has considerably more room for instrument
exhibit nalrow iridocoineal angles and outflow tracts, and
manipulations and glaucoma surgeries than the cat. Entry
result in eventual angle and cleft closure; thus medical ther-
through the sclera (posterior sclerotomy for cyclodialysis) is
apy will be successfil only short term or when combined
usually perfoimed at the 12 o'clock position because of
with surgery. In some breeds, angle closure seems secondary
improved surgical exposure. Like cataract patients, use of
and directly associated with enlargement of the globe
neuromuscular blocking drugs during surgery enhances max-
(megaloglobus o1 buphthalmia). With narrow angles and
    a r s
imal exposure of the globe, reduces intraorbital pressure on
the globe, and facilitates anterior chamber surgeries. Place-
humor outflow is ineffective for significant periods of time.
ment of the episcleral portion of the anterior chamber shunts
Drugs that decrease aqueous humor formation rates are
is usually performed between the dorsal rectus muscle and
most useful whether the iridocorneal angle is open, narrow
medial o1 lateral rectus muscle insertions. If the anterio1
01 closed. Intravenous osmotic agents are employed to rap-
idly lower IOP when the possibility for the return of vision
S    a  i n  
cles, portions of it may be manipulated under these muscles.
If the implant is long, it may extend posteriorly beyond the
These drugs are typically effective at rapidly lowering IOP in
equator of the globe and upon the insertions of the retracto1
  o   j d a
oculi muscles. Subsequent implants (if deemed clinically
their effect is short lived. The use of miotics after glaucoma
 necessary) may be placed in the dorsonasal, ventrolateral,
and ventronasal quadrants in that orde1 of preference.
may cause mild iridocyclitis and aqueous flare, which may
At the insertions of the major rectus muscles, both arterial
contribute to the failure of filtering surgical procedures. Top.
ical prostaglandins, introduced in the 1990s, can lower sig-
and venous connections with the anterior globe occur. Inci-
sasioq io sien u inyasn jou aie inq 'sop u doi Auey
sion of these rectus muscle insertions should be avoided
since any hemorrhage in the wound field will further dis-
Traditional surgical treatments of the canine primary
seminate and stimulate those growth factors which mediate
glaucomas have enjoyed only limited success rates. These su1-
subsequent bleb fibrosis and failure. Meticulous wet-field
geries, including inidencleisis, cyclodialysis, and a combina-
cautery facilitates a blood-free surgical site. With most
tion of both procedures, are not difficult to perform, but
gonioimplants, placement at least 10-14 mm behind the
these new surgical fistulae for the escape of aqueous humor
limbus is recommended in dogs.
usually seal and fibrose closed within 6-12 months. With
the relatively recent introduction of antifibrotic agents, these
; Pupilary margin of iris
techniques may be more successful. Although both contact
and non-contact laser-induced partial destruction of the ciliary
Basal iris
body (transscleral and endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation)
Cornea
Pectinate ligaments
have shown promise, at least 40% of the treated eyes develop
cataracts within 6 months of the transscleral technique.
~Bulbar conjunctiva
Recently, anterior chamber shunts consisting of silicone
Limbus
Pars plicata
tubing introduced into the anteriol chamber, a pressure-
ciliaris
sensitive valve, and a biocompatible extrascleral base have
Pars
shown promise in dogs. These drainage devices are not tiou-
 plana ciliaris 
ble free, as fibrosis around the episcleral bases can develop
rapidly. Patients with successful postoperative control of
IOP in excess of 3 years are, however, now common, espe-
Ora ciliaris
retinae
cially when operated on early in the course of the disease.
Blind end-stage glaucomatous globes do represent suitable
candidates for these complex surgeries, and are more ideally
Sclerociliary
Zonules
managed via ‘procedures of comfort', including enucleation,
cleft
gentamicin-induced ciliary body destruction, cyclocryoabla-
aua joy sauanuns joy Awoeue suawnas louanue jo wenhe oiol dbi
tion or intrascleral prosthesis placement in all animal species.
glaucomas.
269
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
large major iridal arteriolar circle is located about 50% of
Table 10.1 Anatomy of the rectus muscles in dogs and cats
the time in either the base of the iris or the anterior ciliary
Mean distance of the extraocular insertions of the dorsal
 () a  n   a )
body of dogs. Hence, incision of the basal iris (as with a
Species
DR
LR
VR
anbai aensn sop u saapul sop jo os inone
MR
wet-field cautery for hemostasis, applied simultaneously
Muscles from the limbus (mm)
with the electrocautery fo1 excision of the inis o1 following
sharp incision by iris scissors.
Canine
7.5
5.5
8.7
5.7
An embryologic cleavage line is present between the sclera
 Feline 
7.5
7.0
9-10
6-9
and the underlying iris and ciliary body. This area can be
Width of the rectus muscle insertions (mm)
spatula inserted through the sclera about 5-7 mm posterio1
Canine
8.5
10
9.9
8.0
to the limbus, and extending into the anterior chamber.
Feline
5.5
6.2
5.5
5.3
If the spatula is malpositioned within the outer aspects of
the iris and ciliary body, copious hemorrhage results.
Distance between the extraocular rectus muscles (mm)
While the macroscopic anatomy of the iridocoineal o1
Canine
17.9
17.4
18.2
18.1
anterior chamber angle of the dog and cat differs somewhat
Feline
from the radial canal of Schlemm in humans and non-
16.3
16.0
16.4
16.1
 human primates, the ultrastructure of the trabecular mesh-
work and the aqueous humor dynamics are 1emarkably
similar (Fig. 10.11). [n dogs and humans the percentage of
Most glaucoma surgeries are perfoimed in the dorsal o1
aqueous humor that exits the trabecular meshwork is about
dorsolateral one-half of the globe because of limited surgical
85-90% (conventional cutflow), and about 10-15% leaves
exposure medially and ventrally in small animals. The 9 and
by the uveoscleral route. The rates of aqueous humo1 turn-
3 o'clock positions of the sclera are avoided because of the
oqe) reius anb ieadde suu pue 'sien 'sop un iao
medial and lateral long posterior ciliary arteries. These two
5.0-6.0 μL/min), although cats have been thought to have
vessels provide the majority of the blood supply to the ante-
a much higher rate (about 15 μL/min). In horses, the best
studies to date suggest that the majority of aqueous humor
laser o1 cryothermy destruction of the ciliary body.
leaves through the uveoscleral outflow pathway. Hence,
If a scleral incision is being performed (such as in the
case of sclerotomy, cyclodialysis or iridencleisis), the proper
 a i     s a  aa
distance of the scleral incision from the limbus is critical.
space between the choroid and sclera.
d jo ais a nt u s oe st ais s
Aqueous humor outflow pathways have the following
boundaries: 1) the limbus and anterio1 chamber; 2) inwardly
lation. Ideally, the scleral incision is positioned directly over
the pectinate ligaments, base of the iris, and inner aspects of
the pars plana ciliaris or posterior portion of the ciliary body.
the ciliary 01 sclerociliary cleft o1 sinus; 3) posteriorly the
Anterior penetration increases the risk of intraocular hemor-
mo ( e ss n  a a jo sade iaa
rhage because of damage to the ciliary body processes. Scleral
the sclera anteriorly and the outer aspects of the ciliary
incisions that are too fa1 posterio1, overlying the oia serrata
 OI sclerociliary cleft posteriorly (Fig. 10.12). Canine and
O1 peripheral 1etina, have an increased risk of producing a 1et-
feline aqueous outflow pathways differ slightly from those
inal hole and secondary retinal detachment. With globe
of humans by a cleavage of the anterior ciliary body which
enlargement that is frequent with small animal glaucoma,
contains most of the trabeculae, and the inis base that
selection of the site over the pars plana is more difficult
directly communicates with the peripheral anterio1 cham-
Dorsal sclerotomy is perfoimed at the 12 o'clock position,
 be1. Pectinate ligaments of various sizes and shapes connect
and its anterior and posterior borders are about 4-5 and
7 mm, respectively, from the limbus. The length of the pars
plana ciliaris varies in dogs by quadrant, with the medial
 aspect the shortest.
B
Fo1 laser and cryotheimy destruction of the ciliary pro-
cesses, measurements from the limbus to the ciliary body
processes (pars plicata (corona) ciliaris) are critical for place-
ment of the probe. These measurements change in the glau-
comas when dog and cat globes are enlarged, and the sclera
D
stretches. Fo1 measurement of the exact distance from the
limbus, calipers are recommended. In the dog, laser cyclo-
 s  n  s e si on
bus. Application of laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
01 cyclocryothermy at the incorrect position attenuates the
A
anticipated results.
Fig. 10.11 The anterior segment of the dog eye: (A) cornea; (B) iris;
The iris is a highly vascular and spongy tissue. Tearing
pue yap Ael! (3) ajbue ieauonopu! (a) (sue!n enesd sed) Apog Ae ()
of the iris of the dog usually results in variable hemor-
(F) pectinate ligaments. SEM, 20x.
 rhage which can be controlled only by electrocautery. The
{Courtesy of Dr Don Sammuelson.)
270
Surgical anatomy
(external trabeculectomy). Other procedures, such as gonic-
~Pupil
synechiolysis (1estoring areas of the iridocoineal angle closed
    
Anterior chamber .
congenital tissues obstructing aqueous humor flow into
e s u paai  nu a  ss
These microsurgical procedures represent the current refine-
ment of human glaucoma surgical techniques, and suggest
Corneoscleral
Posterior
future possibilities for small animals. However, most primary
trabeculae
chamber
glaucomas in the dog, when first presented to the veterinal-
Sclerociliary
ian, already exhibit narrow-to-closed iridocorneal angles
 Ciliary body
o  aede ao aie saniai ae au sa 
cleft
process
inidocoineal angles. Nevertheless, experimental procedures
Uveoscleral-
such as goniotomy, trabecular meshwork transplantation,
pathways
and gene transfer to the trabecular cells are future techniques
Fig. 10.12 The flow (arrows) of aqueous humor in the dog and cat.
worthy of investigation.
Formation by the ciliary body process into the posterior chamber, through
the pupil, into the anterior chamber, and exit through the corneoscleral
the type and stage of glaucoma, the presence of secondary
 trabeculae and uveoscleral pathways.
changes, and the type of glaucoma surgery performed, as
well as changes 1esulting from either cryo- 01 cyclociliary
the inner posterior limbus and termination of Descemet's
destruction. For the majority of the primary glaucomas in
membrane to the anterior base of the inis. Although these
dogs, the anatomic and biochemical status of the aqueous
pectinate ligaments appear to play no direct role in aqueous
outflow pathways during the genesis of elevation of IOP
humor outflow unless significantly malformed/imperforate,
have not been determined. Progressive narrowing and even-
they do provide stability for the inis. These inidocoineal
tual closure of the inidocorneal angle occurs with all primary
angle anatomic differences between humans, non-human
glaucomas in dogs, but these changes may be secondary to
primates, and other animal species are thought to be asso-
gradual enlargement of the lens and/or globe, iridal irrita-
ciated with lens accommodation rather any differences in
tion, lenticular subluxation and instability, inidocoineal
aqueous humol outflow physiology.
angle and trabecular meshwork remodeling in the face of
  s s d s a s 
chronic inflammation and/or cellular infiltration, and sec-
of the sclerociliary cleft and are often visible without a
ondary instability of the ciliary cleft. These changes, whether
gonioscopic lens at the nasal and temporal quadrants. The
primary or secondary, furthel complicate the medical and
uveal trabecular meshwork (UTM; 74%), coineoscleral tra
becular meshwork (CSTM; 22%), and angular aqueous
  si   n  p 
plexus (AAP; 4%) have been quantified in horses; conven-
nalrow-to-closed anterio1 chambers and iridocoineal angles.
The distances between the basal iris and posterio1 limbus, as
pneumatonography, is 0.90 μL/min (about four times
well as the anterior opening of the ciliary cleft, are reduced
greater than in humans, dogs, and cats). The intertrabecular
 OI closed as viewed by gonioscopy. Hence, surgical enty
spaces of the uveal trabecular meshwork are very wide com-
into the anterior chamber through a limbal incision in the
pared to the corneoscleral meshwork; this suggests that a sig-
nificant resistance to aqueous humor outflow occurs in the
The teim
'goniodysgenesis'
'has unfortunately
been
latter trabeculae. Using microsphere perfusion studies it also
 applied inappropriately to many of the primary glaucomas
appears that the majority of aqueous humor exiting the
in dogs. Goniodysgenesis refers to a diverse group of con-
equine outflow pathways moves more posteriorly to enter
genital irnidocorneal anomalies in children that result in
mainly the vortex venous system.
glaucoma in early life and infancy. Congenital glaucomas
The anatomic differences in the outflow pathways in
in puppies and kittens resulting from goniodysgenesis are
 on d pai iedde sie jo saads au
rare.
needs of accommodation rather than physiologic and mo1-
 The term goniodysgenesis was first applied to the presence
phologic differences in aqueous humo1 dynamics. The mus-
paoap ssa si sie pe sop u ao ae a jo ae
dermal bands) in primary glaucoma in the Basset hound.
than in humans, as accommodation, i.e. changes in the lens
Primary glaucoma in the Basset hound, like most breeds
shape, is limited. The limited ciliary musculature and very
large lenses in horses and cows suggest very limited accom-
hood, and is not considered a congenital glaucoma. For
modation. Aqueous humor leaves most of the non-human
these areas of consolidated pectinate ligaments to signi-
primate species through the coineal or corneoscleral trabe-
ficantly impair the outflow of aqueous humoi, essentially
cular meshwork (conventional o1 pressure-sensitive out-
the entire inidocoineal angle would need to be affected.
flow) to enter eventually the episcleral plexus anteriorly, 01
Often flow holes' are present in these consolidated pecti
uveal meshwork, and to pass through the ciliary body poste-
d (is  ad) s 
liorly (unconventional/uveoscleral or pressure-insensitive
aqueous humor to traverse the entire filtration angle. The
outflow).
physiologic status of the trabecular meshwork environment,
In humans, microsurgical techniques have been developed
as well as stability of the ciliary cleft in the primary glauco.
that include suture cannulation of Schlemm's canal and exci
mas with pectinate ligament dysplasia, remain a mystery.
sion of segments of the coineoscleral trabecula1 meshwoik
and may be the key to the treatment of these glaucomas.
271
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
The persistence of large, poorly differentiated sheets of
few days) ocular hypotony: this is presumably the result of
pectinate ligaments in dogs should be classified as dysplasia
Ieduced rates of aqueous humor foimation due to pres-
of the pectinate ligaments. It appears that, in the dog, the
formation of primary and secondary pectinate ligaments
axa si ap s ll (ous aoq are, p
 is often imperfect, and the ange and relative size of the per-
and ieversible, phthisis bulbi results when normal aque-
sistent areas of dysplastic ligaments in normal dogs and
ous humor outflow cannot be Ie-established. The rate of
selected breeds need to be established, with a significant
aqueous humo1 foimation, as measured by fluorophotome-
variation in the 'normal population likely being present.
The presence of dysplastic pectinate ligaments in dogs corre-
and therefore the status of the ciliary body and its ability to
lates to, but does not parallel, the genesis of the primary
produce normal levels of aqueous humor are determined
glaucomas. Significant diseases of the adjacent trabecular
by clinical history and evaluation, tonography, and daily
meshwork, not yet defined, may underlie the mechanisms
monitoring of IOP prior to surgical intervention.
of glaucoma. Surgery of the pectinate ligaments, as it relates
The position of the lens can markedly influence the suc-
to the outflow of aqueous humor, has not been reported in
cess or failure of glaucoma surgeries in all animal species.
  s d p si n a  'o
The lens may intermittently occlude the pupil, causing the
of i
incieased relevance in those glaucoma surgeries that
basal iris to contact the inner posterior limbus and stimulate
invade the iridocoineal angle.
formation of peripheral anterior synechiae. These abrupt
Pre-iridal fibrovasculal membranes (PIFMs) are common
and temporary increases in IOP may hasten progressive
in advanced glaucomas in dogs. These membranes are
damage to all ocular tissues, including the retina and optic
potential sources of fibrin and other proteins, as well as ery-
disk. Lenticular instability (as well as increased lens/iris
throcytes and inflammatory cells that are released when the
contact and microabrasion) may also stimulate chronic,
anterio1 chamber is opened and IOP lowered abruptly to
low-intensity inflammation and pigment dispersion. Free
0 mmHg (Fig. 10.13). These same membranes may bridge
melanin pigment dispersion has been demonstrated with
the anterior iridocoineal angle, contributing to the forma-
the trabecular meshwork of advanced glaucomatous globes
tion of peripheral anterior synechiae (PAS), and even extend
(including those affected by primary structural or dysplastic
across the pupil and anterior lens capsule, and into the
changes). Inflammatory cells may contribute to trabeculal
posterior chamber.
meshwork atrophy and subsequent ciliary cleft collapse
Both PIFMs and PAS inteifere with surgical entry into the
which typifies end-stage glaucomatous globes. The exact
anterio1 chamber by scalpel blade o1 hypodeimic needle,
relationship between these factors during the genesis of the
and may contribute to early failures of many of the tradi-
canine glaucomas, however, remains poorly understood.
An anteriorly luxated lens, stuck in the anterio1 cham-
glaucoma filtering procedures in the primary glaucomas in
 be1, often has vitreous still affixed at its hyaloideocapsulal
dogs are more successful when performed in the early
(Wieger's ligament) attachments that can completely occlude
phases of the disease. This opportunity usually occurs in
the pupil and cause marked elevations in IOP posterior to
the pupil. Subluxation o1 luxation of the lens posteriorly into
symptomatic eye which often exhibits end-stage glaucoma
the vitreous can displace vitreous into the pupil and anterior
 and blindness at the initial presentation.
chamber.
The status of the ciliary body and its ability to form aque-
In most types of glaucoma the vitreous frequently under
ous humor are important considerations when planning
goes partial liquefaction (syneresis). Hence, during many
glaucoma surgery. Extensive damage to the ciliary body
surgical procedures for glaucoma when the anterior hyaloid
may occur in cases of advanced glaucoma, and is influenced,
membrane has been already torn, presentation of the vitre-
in part, by the severity and chronicity of IOP elevation, as
ous may occur within the anterio1 chamber. To minimize
well as the presence of inflammation. Marked elevations
vitreous disturbances, osmotic agents are essential not only
in IOP in the dog are often followed by brief (usually a
to reduce IOP, but also to dehydrate the vitreous, reduc-
ing its size. In advanced glaucoma eyes, syneresis of the vit-
leous is often complete. Preoperative administration of an
osmotic agent provides the additional benefit of minimiz-
ing the dangers presented by rapid decompression of a
hypertensive globe.
Potentially the most significant complication associated
with the glaucoma surgeries is the pronounced inflamma-
tory response which occurs at the surgical site in which
aqueous humor is redirected into the episcleral space and
is  s s si s 
fibrosis about the area, and ultimately contributes to the
failure of filtration blebs or drainage setons. Of interest,
the normal passage of aqueous humor through the uveoscl-
eral pathway all the way posterio1 to the optic nerve head
does not incite this inflammatory response! Although not
Fig. 10.13 Pre-iridal membrane (arrows) on the anterior surface of the iris in
fully understood, the mechanism of this response appears
Aew sauengwaw jeinosea asaul ewonejh panueape yai moun mou e
impair aqueous humor outlow through the iridocorneal angle and interfere
to follow the general parameters of the wound-healing cas-
'Xool '3 2 H sjewjue llws ui sanpanoud jenjbins buuany ewosnejh yaim
cade, with growth factors mediating fibroblastic recruitment
272
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
and transfoimation. Connective tissue growth facto1 (CTGF)
forward displacement of the iris. Intraocular hemorrhage is
 and transforming growth factor beta 2 (TGF-β2) have been
also more apt to occur in these globes. Cautious anterior
shown to mediate these initial events in multiple animal
chamber paracentesis may be performed in a glaucomatous
models (Tables 10.2a and 10.2b). Subsequent tissue fibrosis
eye that has not responded to vigorous medical treatment.
and cicatricial remodeling is at least partially matix meta-
Keratocentesis is usually performed under general anesthesia
lloproteinase mediated. Successfully controlling this post-
01 deep sedation, and aqueous humor is removed slowly
operative fibrotic 1esponse is crucial to improving the
from the anterio1 chamber after fist decompressing the
long-term success rates of all glaucoma surgeries. Ultimately.
syringe plunger (see Chapter 9).
this may require a ‘chemotherapeutic' approach involving
Many types of canine glaucoma exhibit concurrent aque-
     
ous humor flare, altered blood-aqueous barrier, and mild
to chronic iridocyclitis. The iridocyclitis may also be a pri-
this goal represents the single greatest challenge in the suc-
mary or secondary factor in the genesis of the glaucoma.
cessful long-term surgical treatment of this disease complex!
Topical  and  systemic corticosteroids and non-steroidal
 anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are indicated to suppress
Preoperative treatment
in the aqueous humor. The iridocyclitis and aqueous exu-
dates can compromise short- and long-term existing aque-
Preoperative considerations in the treatment of glaucoma
ous humor outflow pathways as well as the new surgical
include: 1) preoperative control of IOP to levels consistent
site.
AggTessiveS
systemic anti-inflammatory therapy may
with no1mal RGC physiologic function (<25-33 mmHg):
additionally contribute to alresting the destructive and self-
2) suppression of concurrent anterior segment inflamma-
perpetuating milieu of RGC death.
tion; and 3) vitreous body dehydration and shrinkage with
Control of the pupil immediately before surgery often
u m a on pani aq s jl sue ooso
contributes to the overall success rate of intraocular proce-
range in patients prior to glaucoma surgery if at all possible.
dures. Fo1 most types of glaucoma surgery, the desired pupil
Fortunately, combinations(
of miotics, osmotic agents,
size at the time of surgery is either normal or miotic. The
adrenergic agents, and carbonic anhydrase inhibitors can
pupil is usually constricted for surgical procedures, includ-
usually lower IOP to 10-15 mmHg, albeit temporarily.
ing iridencleisis,
cyclodialysis, iridencleisis-cyclodialysis,
Surgical entry into the anterior chamber when IOP is
corneoscleral trephination, and cyclocryothermy.
 25 mmHg or higher can be hazardous to the eye and surgi-
Pupil size when luxated lenses are removed depends on
cal outcome. If necessary, additional vigorous massage and
the position of the lens. Fo1 anterior luxated lenses, the
hypotensive medical treatment should be initiated (such as
 pupil is constricted immediately before surgery to main-
an additional intravenous dose of osmotic agents) before
tain the lens within the anterior chamber. Prior to surgery.
the eye is entered. Glaucoma procedures in a globe with ele-
10% phenylephrine may assist in re-establishing pupillary
vated IOP exhibit higher lisk and lower surgical success
flow and lower IOp in the posterior segment; sometimes a
rates. A glaucomatous eye without satisfactory ocular hypo-
combination of 2% pilocarpine and 10% phenylephrine is
alteinated to provide a constantly moving and moderate-
roidal edema, vitreous protrusion through the pupil, and
process by creating an acute pupillary blockage related to the
lens or adherent vitreous, o1 both. Before removal of sub-
 Table 10.2a Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) important in
luxated and posterior luxated lenses, the pupil is dilated with
ocular wound healing
several instillations of 1% tropicamide, 1% atropine 01 10%
phenylephrine, ol some combination of these agents. At
MMP
Designation
Substrates and actions
the time of mydriasis, IOP should be within noimal limits.
common
Following the intact removal of a luxated or subluxated lens,
name
 degenerate vitreous within the pupillary opening or anterior
chamber should be carefully removed by the judicious use
Fibroblast
(MMP-1)
Cleaves single bond in native
of automated vitrectomy where possible.
 collagenase
types I Il and Ill collagens 
72 kDa
(MMP-2)
 Degrades types IV, V, and Vll 
Gelatinase
collagens, gelatin, fibronectin;
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
synthesized by fibroblasts and
macrophages
Surgical procedures fo1 the treatment of the glaucomas may
92 kDa
(MMP-9)
 Degrades types IV and V
Gelatinase
collagen, gelatin; synthesized by
of aqueous humor via alternative pathways of drainage:
 epithelial cells, macrophages,
and 2) those that decrease the rate of formation of aqueous
 polymorphonuclear leukocytes
eno io eiesd sid a jo ed uonp kq rou
 Stromelysin
(MMP-3)
 Degrades proteoglycans,
ciliaris (Table 10.3). Procedures to increase the outflow of
fibronectin, laminin, gelatin and 
aqueous humor include iridencleisis, corneoscleral trephina-
types II, IV, and V collagen
tion, cyclodialysis, combined iridencleisis and cyclodialysis,
posterior sclerectomy, and anterior chamber shunts (gonio-
 Neutrophil 
(8-dWW)
Similar to MMP-1, degrades
 colla genase 
implants). Additional procedures to increase the outflow of
type I, Il, and Ill collagen 
aqueous humor include goniopuncture, inidosclerectomy.
273
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
 Table 10.2b Growth factors and cytokines important in ocular wound healing
Abbreviation
Description
Growth factor
 Epidermal growth factor
EGF
Synthesized by corneal epithelial cells, lacrimal gland; mitogen and chemotactic factor for
all three types of corneal cell
 Transforming growth factor alpha 
TGF-α
 Structurally and functionally similar to EGF; synthesized by corneal epithelial cells, lacrimal
puel6
 Transforming growth factor beta
TGF-β
Three isoforms: TGF-β1, TGF-β2, TGF-β3; promotes formation of extracellular matrix; TGF-β2
present in aqueous humor; synthesized by multiple types of cell
 Basic fibroblast growth factor
bFGF
 Detected in basement membranes; synthesized by endothelial cells; mitogen for fibroblasts
 and endothelial cells; angiogenic
 Acidic fibroblast growth factor
 Detected in basal layer of corneal epithelial cells and basement membranes; synthesized by
endothelil cels; mitogen for fiboblasts and endothelial cells; angiogenic
 Keratinocyte growth factor
KGF
Synthesized by keratocytes; stimulates cormeal epidermal cell proliferation and migration
 Hepatocyte growth factor
HGF
pue uoneiajod lian lewapida jeauion sanelnwas slian lelaunida leauo Ag pazisaynuns
migration
 Platelet-derived growth factor
PDGF
Synthesized by corneal epithelial cell; stimulates proliferation of stromal fibroblasts 
 Insulin-like growth factor I
IGF-I
 Part of the IGF axis (comprising surface receptors, ligands, binding proteins and proteases).
Involved in early healing and promotes cellular proliferation.
Connective tissue growth factor
CTGF
 Stimulates fibrosis and mediates the actions of TGF-β on matrix formation
Cytokines
 Tumor necrosis factor alpha
TNF-α 
 Proinflammatory cytokine with multiple effects including chemotaxis of leukocytes,
increased production of MMPs, and induction of apoptosis; soluble TNF-α is released by
TACE cleavage of transmembrane pro-TNF-α
Interleukin-1 beta
IL-1β
dh saneinwns slian leayaida jeaon Aa pazisauuas auon Aoneeuioid
 production by keratocytes
TACE, tumor necrosis factor-α. converting enzyme.
cal procedures have not been described in dogs. Techniques
used to reduce the rate of aqueous humor formation by partial
 Table 10.3 Mechanisms of surgical treatrments for the glaucomas
destruction of the ciliary body include cyclocryothermy, cyclo-
diatheimy, and diode laser transscleral or endoscopic cyclo-
photocoagulation. The popularity, staging, and combining
 Mechanism
Type of surgery
of these different glaucoma surgical techniques are constantly
Iridencleisis
evolving. Howevel, as new antifibrosis drugs are developed,
some of these older traditional selected filtration procedures
 Filtration/decrease formation*
Cyclodialysis
may again be more useful.
 Pupil bypass
Iridectomy
Additionally, minimizing the egress of blood into the su1-
Filtration/decrease formation*
Iridencleisis/cyclodialysis
gical wound feld during all forms of glaucoma surgery will
help minimize the subsequent healing and scarring response
Iridocorneal angle bypass
Corneoscleral trephination
 Filtration/decrease formation
 Cyclodialysis/iridocyclectomy
tors. Removal of the lens, although not commonly con-
sidered a surgical procedure fo1 treatment of lens-induced
lridocorneal angle bypass
 Anterior chamber shunts/
glaucoma, may be necessary in the management of many
gonioimplants 
canine glaucomas. Lens removal may be indicated fo1 sec-
 Decrease aqueous formation 
Cyclocryotherapy
ondary glaucomas associated with lens-induced uveitis and
 Decrease aqueous formation
 Transscleral or endoscopic
cataract resorption, intumescent cataracts, anterior and pos-
cyclophotocoagulation (diode laser)
terior lens luxations, and subluxations. When the lens is
displaced from its patellar fossa in a primary glaucomatous
 Destroy ciliary body epithelia
Intravitreal gentamicin
       an
*Short term only.
01 medical treatment, o1 a combination of both modalities,
may be impossible without first removing the luxated lens.
274
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
The canine lens may additionally need to be removed in the
The anterior chamber is entered through the limbus with the
face of aggressive endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation in order
Beave1 No. 6500 microsurgical (Fig. 10.15b). The limbal
to facilitate adequate exposure and reduce the necessity for
incision is usually 8-10 mm long. A 1-2 mm section of
subsequent cataract removal. Furthermore, the absence of the
sclera in the caudal aspect of the limbal incision is carefully
lens in the face of developing/outright glaucoma may contib-
excised (anterior sclerectomy). Hemostasis and limited
ute via decreasing lens/iridal contact and pigment shedding.
tissue destruction are achieved by cautious electrocautery
anterio1 chamber crowding, and iridocoineal angle and/o1
(Fig. 10.15c). The wet-field coagulato1 is superior in this
ciliary cleft collapse.
Limited application of electrocautery on the scleral aspect of
the incision seems to facilitate maintenance of an open fis-
Iridencleisis
tula and reduces the possibility of closure by fibrosis.
In the inidencleisis procedure, a radial section of inis is
During the limbal incision and subsequent anterio1 scler-
ectomy, the inis may protrde into the incision. A blunt iris
subconjunctival spaces beneath the bulbar conjunctiva
hook o1 selrated inis forceps is carefully manipulated into
(Fig. 10.14). Reduction in IOP following iridencleisis is pri-
the anterior chamber to grasp the dorsal pupillary margin
marily related to the escape of aqueous humor through this
(osiol di) uoisu lequ a ou s au nnid pue
alea. Aqueous may also filter through the space between
Using the iris hook and serrated forceps, the iris is carefully
the two pillars of the iris, as well as through the iridal
pulled from the anterior chamber into the limbal incision
stroma itself. Inidencleisis may be used successfully in the
o ui hd say s  m (asron )
management of narrow- and closed-angle glaucoma, acute
directions, the inis is slowly toin radially to its base. Each
iris bombe associated with annular posterior synechiae,
pillar of the iris, with its pigmented epithelium exposed,
and glaucoma associated with peripheral anterior synechiae.
is manipulated into the respective end of the limbal inci-
When the iris is thin, atrophied, or adhered to the lens with
sion (Fig. 10.15f). To minimize the possibility of the inis
focal posterior synechiae, iridencleisis is not recommended.
pillar retracting back into the anterior chamber, each tag of
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
the inis is attached to the sclera with a 6-0 simple interrupted
hair, and cleansing of corneal and conjunctival surfaces with
absorbable suture (Fig. 10.15g). The anterior chamber is
0.5% povidone-iodine solution with swabs, the eyelids are
carefully irrigated with balanced salt solution to remove all
retracted by speculum. The iridencleisis procedure is peI-
fibrin and blood. With successful manipulation of the iris
   ' an  -o i  e 
and judicious use of electrocautery, hemorrhage and fibrin
   r e  sd  
in the anterior chamber at the conclusion of surgery are gen-
selected if other surgical procedures have been previously
erally avoided. In the event that fibrin remains, or continues
performed in the preferred site.
to be formed in the anterior chamber, tissue plasminogen
With curved blunt-tipped tenotomy scissois, a limbal-
activator (tPA; 25-50 μg) is injected between the two iris
based 10 mm bulbar conjunctival flap is constructed. The
pillars into the anterior chamber (Fig. 10.15h).
flap is usually 12-18 mm long. Tenon's capsule is identified
 The limbal wound is not apposed with sutures. The bulbar
and, if extensive, excised from the overlying bulbar conjunc
conjunctival flap is apposed with a 6-0 to 7-0 simple contin-
tiva and sclera in the area of the limbal incision (Fig. 10.15a).
uous absorbable suture (Fig. 10.15i).
Postoperative treatment after iridencleisis consists of: 1)
maintenance of a pupil of normal size (neither dilated nor
 o       
and 3) suppression of postoperative iridocyclitis with topi
cal and systemic corticosteroids, NSAIDs, o1 a combination
of these agents. Topical and systemic antibiotics are admi-
nistered to prevent postoperative infections. Phenylephrine
(10%) and pilocarpine (2%) are alteinately instilled to facil-
itate movement of the pupil and minimize the possibility of
focal posterior synechiae. The ratio of these two drugs is
varied depending on pupil size. In the event that a relatively
normal-sized pupil cannot be obtained because of postoper-
ative inflammation, 1% tropicamide is administered until a
moderately dilated pupil is achieved. Topical and systemic
tively if IOP exceeds 25 mmHg. They are not necessary if
the IOP is normal and can be monitored daily.
Potential complications that may ocur following iriden-
dleisis include excessive/uncontrolled inidocyclitis, hyphema,
posterior synechiation, iridal pigment shedding onto the
anterior lens capsule, and cataract foimation. Blebs usually
occur following inidencleisis in the area of the limbal inci-
sion. These blebs may eventually flatten, but may still func-
Fig. 10.14 lridencleisis 1 year postoperatively in a dog. A large posterior
synechia is present as well as some pigment migration on the anterior lens
tion. The bulbar conjunctiva in the area of the limbal
capsule. Early cortical cataract formation is also present.
incision usually demonstrates increased vascularity.
275
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
A
?
C
D
E
F
G
snoanbe jo uogealg uoisiou! iegwll e yonoyn sanssn ieaounjuosgns ayn onui pazileuaxa ane sul jo sied omn aunpanoud sisiapuapu! ayn ul slol dbi
humor occurs through the space between the iris pillars as well as within the pillars themselves. (a) A 10 mm wide limbal-based conjunctival flap is 
constructed with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The anterior chamber is entered atthe limbus with a stab incision with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade.
The limbal incision is lengthened with the scalpel blade or corneoscleral scissors to about 8-10 mm. (c) In the central of the limbal incision, a 1-2 mm section of
aun onul paasui Ainyaien s! yooy sui sunig  (p) sisensowau leiaps ioy Aessanau aq Aew Aannen awos siossps Aq pasioxa 5! (Awoauaps jouanue) elalos
anterior chamber to the pupillary margin to retract the iris into the limbal incision. (e) The iris is protracted further by thumb forceps.(f The iris is then grasped
with an additional thumb forceps and gradually torn to its base. (g) Each pillar of iris is anchored to the sclera with a 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable suture.
(h) Any hemorrhage and/or fibrin is irrigated from the anterior chamber with lactated Ringer's solution. (i) The conjunctival flap is apposed with a 6-0 to 
 7-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
Failure of the inidencleisis procedure to satisfactorily con-
suprachoroidal space (the non-conventional o1 uveoscleral
trol IOP is usually related to the short-term closure of the
route); and 3) temporarily reducing the rate of aqueous
limbal incision with inflammatory products, secondary to
humor formation probably secondary to separation of the cil-
postoperative inidocyclitis, or long-term loss of filtration sec-
iary body from the sclera and some of its vascular supply. The
ondary to fibrosis several months later. Gentle massage of
cyclodialysis procedure may be performed posteriorly through
the eye postoperatively for several months is recommended.
the scleral incision o1 anteniorly from the anterior chamber,
Long-term administration of topical 1% prednisolone fo1 6
usually in conjunction with removal of the lens. The cyclodia
months or indefinitely may increase the success rate of the
lysis technique may have application in the treatment of nar-
iridencleisis procedure.
Iow-angle glaucoma, glaucoma associated with extensive
peripheral anterior synechiae, goniodysgenesis-associated
Cyclodialysis
glaucoma (congenital glaucoma), and glaucoma associated
with iris atrophy.
[n the cyclodialysis procedure, an artificial fistula is created
 After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping the eyelid hair
from the anterior chamber within the subscleral space beneath
and cleansing of coineal and conjunctival surfaces with 0.5%
the iris and ciliary body to a posterior opening in the sclera
povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are retracted by specu-
and the subconjunctival space. Cyclodialysis appears to lower
lum. The operation is usually perfoimed in the dorsal one-half
[OP by: 1) rerouting part of the outflow of aqueous humor
of the globe at the 12 o'clock position. With blunt-tipped,
from the anterior chamber into the subconjunctival space;
slightly curved, tenotomy eye scissors, a foinix-based bulbar
2) increasing the outflow of aqueous humor into the
conjunctival flap, measuring 10 mm deep by 10 mm wide, is
276
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
fashioned (Fig. 10.16a). Excessive Tenon's capsule, when
A cyclodialysis spatula is carefully inserted in the anterio1
 present between the bulbar conjunctiva and the sclera, is
part of the scleral incision between the sclera and ciliary
excised from the surgical site. As an intact bulbar conjunctiva
body, and manipulated forward into the anterio1 chamber
covers the filtering area, inadvertent incisions in the
(Fig. 10.16e). When the anterio1 chamber is entered, aqueous
conjunctiva (buttonholes') should be studiously avoided.
humor escapes along the sides of the spatula. Choice of cyclo-
A linear scleral incision is made 4-5 mm from and parallel
dialysis spatula is important in dogs. A flat, blunt-tipped
to the limbus fo1 approximately 8-10 mm using the Beaver
10 mm cyclodialysis spatula is recommended rather than a
No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 10.16b). Hemorrhage
from the sclera, which may be extensive, is controlled using
etrate this area easily in dogs and often contributes to exces-
wet-field coagulation (o1 less ideally with hand electrocau-
sive hemorrhage. The spatula is moved medially and
tery). After completion ofthe scleral incision parallel to the lim-
laterally about 8-10 mm to enlarge the artificial fistula to
bus, a rectangular section of sclera, measuring 2 x 6-8 mm,
the full extent of the sclerotomy (Fig. 10.16f). A cyclodialysis
is incised. The depth of the scleral incision should be
hypodermic needle may be used instead of the spatula; its
carefully controlled so that the underlying ciliary body is not
advantage is that, at the conclusion of the sweep, the anterio1
penetrated (Fig. 10.16c). When the pigmented ciliary body
chamber may be gently irrigated with balanced salt solution,
becomes evident, the scleral block is carefully excised
Temoving any hemorrhage or fibrin.
by tenotomy scissors (Fig. 10.16d). The sides of the scleral
The scleral incision is left open. If any fibrin or hemo1-
defect are lightly coagulated to reduce the possibility of the
rhage remains in the anterior chambel, 25-50 μg tPA is
defect healing closed.
injected into the anterior chamber. The bulbar conjunctival
A
?
C
D
?
G
e yonouun aixa on 'eaps pue Apog Aueo pue sui aya uaamnag aqweuo louanue aun wouy paiean s! einas!y ieibuns e ainpanoud sisieipoo aun ul glol dbi
scleral window into the subconjunctival spaces. (a) A fornix-based conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The sclera is incised 
 8-10 mm with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade about 4-5 mm posterior to the limbus. (c) A 2 × 8 mm block of sclera is incised with the Beaver
No. 6400 microsurgical blade. Cautery is usually necessary for scleral hemostasis. (d) The scleral block is carefully separated from the underlying ciliary body
and excised with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (e) A cyclodialysis spatula is carefully introduced through the scleral wound, immediately below the sclera, and
directed into the anterior chamber. (f) The cyclodialysis spatula is moved to each side of the scleral wound to create a large fistula beneath the sclera into the
anterior chamber. (g) Closure consists of apposition of the fornix-based conjunctival fap with 6-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. The posterior
flow of aqueous humor will produce a noticeable bleb in the conjunctiva.
277
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
aeqiosqe paidaun adus o-2 oi o-g ym pasodde si de
approximately 5 mm from the limbus with blunt, slightly
sutures (Fig. 10.16g)
curved, tenotomy scissors. The length of the bulbar conjuncti-
Postoperative tieatment after cyclodialysis consists of:
val incision is approximately 10-12 mm (Fig. 10.17a). The
1) control of the inidocyclitis using topical and systemic
anterior chamber is entered by incision of the limbus with
corticosteroids and NSAiDs; 2) prevention of sepsis with
the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade. Ifiris bombe is pres-
topical and systemic antibiotics; 3) maintenance of noimal
ent, entry into the shallow anterio1 chamber with the bulging
IOP, if necessary, using
 topical or systemic carbonic
inis must be perfoimed slowly and carefully (Fig. 10.17b.c).
anhydrase inhibitois; and 4) maintenance of a normal-
The 7-10 mm long limbal incision is then enlarged with right-
sized pupil (neither constricted no1 dilated). Pupil size is
and left-handed coineoscleral scissors (Fig. 10.17d).
controlled by varying the instillation frequency of a mydri-
 The inis is gently grasped with selrated forceps and pro-
atic (1% tropicamide or 10% phenylephrine): the postoper-
tracted into the limbal incision. During this procedure aque-
ative iridocyclitis will cause miosis. Drigs that may alter the
Aq panisi si nd au po ued se sadesa o so
blood-aqueous barrier are avoided to prevent excessive
separation of the iris from the temporary adhesions to the
fibrin formation within the aqueous humor.
anterior lens capsule (Fig. 10.17e). A cyclodialysis spatula
 The intensity of postoperative medication depends on
may be used to carefully separate the remaining posterio1
[OP and the degree of postoperative iridocyclitis. All drugs.
synechiae. In postoperative aphakic or pseudophakic eyes.
except fo1 topical corticosteroids (usually 1% prednisolone),
the lens capsule and inflammatory membranes may also
are gradually tapered over several weeks. The topical steroids
be involved in the pupillary blockage (Fig. 10.17f).
. The
are continued for several months or indefinitely.
pupillary margin of the iris is grasped with serrated iris fo1-
 Possible complications after cyclodialysis include hyphema,
ceps and the iris is protracted into the limbal wound
excessive/uncontrolled iridocyclitis, coineal endothelial dam-
(Fig. 10.17g). Two radial incisions of the iris are performed
age as a result of inadvertent contact with the spatula, and
using sharp inis scissors, supplemented with careful wet-field
recurrent/recalcitrant glaucoma. Hyphema is minimized by
coagulation for hemostasis (Fig. 10.17hi). The limbal inci-
sion is closed with 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable
sis spatula. If excessive fibrin or hemorrhage occurs within the
sutures (Fig. 10.17j). The anterio1 chamber is 1eformed with
 anterior chamber during the immediate postoperative period.
balanced salt solution and a small air bubble. If fibrin o1
25-50 μgtPA is injected into the anterior chamber to dissolve
hemorrhage remains in the anterior chamber, 25-50 pg
this material. Corneal damage is minimized by using a cyclo-
tPA is injected through the surgical incision (Fig. 10.17k).
dialysis spatula that does not exceed 10 mm in length. The
The bulbar conjunctival flap is apposed with a 6-0 simple
scleral defect may close soon after surgery as a result of the
continuous absorbable suture (Fig. 10.17l).
incorporation of inflammatory debris from the iridocyclitis,
Postoperative care after complete iridectomy in the dog
01 months later as a result of fibrosis and closure of the surgical
 depends, in part, on the preceding ocular condition. Topical
pathway secondary to the wound-healing response. Massaging
and systemic corticosteroids, NSAIDs, and antimicrobials
the globe two o1 three times daily in a careful fashion may
are administered to control postoperative iridocyclitis. IOP
promote patency of the cyclodialysis fistula.
is monitored daily by applanation tonometry. If necessary.
topical o1 systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitois may be
Iridectomy
administered to help maintain IOP within noimal limits.
Complications associated with complete and peripheral
[n the inidectomy procedure a radial (complete) o1 basal
iridectomies are usually related to postoperative iridocycli-
(peripheral) section of iris is excised. This procedure has
tis. Variable amounts of hyphema and fibrin may occur
proven highly successful fo1 treatment of narrow-angle glau-
postoperatively associated with the iridal incision as well
coma in humans. Unfortunately, in the dog, narrow- and
as postoperative inflammation. Complete inidectomy in
the absence of other ocular disease should be regarded
sive peripheral anterior synechiae and collapse of the sclero-
as a safe intraocular procedure in small animals. How-
ciliary cleft. As a result, complete and peripheral iridectomies
ever, when complicated by iris bombe o1 other factors,
have not been effective in the more advanced nalrow- to
closed-angle glaucoma. Complete iridectomy may, however.
levels of fibrin are high, and focal posterior synechiae
have application in the treatment of acute canine glaucoma
may form. Additionally, the iridectomy itself may occlude
associated with iris bombe and annular posterior synechiae.
with fibrinous or hemorrhagic debris. Secondary cataracts
In the event that this type of glaucoma has been present for
may develop, related to either the intraocular surgery O1
more than 48-72 h in the dog. the iridencleisis procedure
postoperative inflammation.
rather than complete inidectomy is recommended, antici-
pating that angle closure and peripheral anterior synechiae
Combined iridencleisis and cyclodialysis
have already occured. The presence of the majo1 basal arterio-
lar circle in at least 50% of the dogs has also discouraged the
The iridencleisis-cyclodialysis procedure combines the pre-
peripheral o1 basal iridectomy; excision of a basal section of
vious two methods for the treatment of more advanced
iris without electrocautery will sometimes produce copious
canine angle-closure glaucomas. A portion of the iris is
hemorrhage.
positioned through the surgical scleral defect beneath the
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
ciliary body into the subconjunctival space. Iridencleisis-
hait, and cleansing of corneal and conjunctival surfaces with
cyclodialysis may be employed in the treatment of advan-
0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are retracted by
ced narrow-angle glaucoma, closed-angle glaucoma, and
 speculum. A limbus-based bulbar conjunctival flap is created
glaucomas associated with iridocyclitis and iris bombe.
278
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
A
B
C
D
E
F
H
①
(K)
Fig. 10.17 In the iridectomy procedure, a full-thickness section of iris is excised to provide a bypass to the pupillary flow of aqueous humor. As incision of the
ldnd zueajnsau aul ubueu Auednd aun on aseg lepui aua wouy ww s-z spuanxa anis ienibuns aun abeuuoway y paneposse Ajensn s! bop aua u! su! leseg
will be keyhole shaped. (a) A limbal-based conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The anterior chamber is entered at the limbus
incision with a stab incision with the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade. (c) If iris bombe is present, the stab incision into the anterior chamber is more
difficult because of the bulging iris (d) After the limbal stab incision, the incision is enlarged with right- and left-handed corneoscleral scissors. (e) If iris bombe
is present, the iris is gently grasped with thumb forceps and retracted slightly to re-
e-establish aqueous humor flow through the pupil and deepen the anterior
chamber. (f If posterior synechiae are present, a cyclodialysis spatula is inserted into the pupil to break these adhesions. Intraocular scissors may be necessary
to excise fibrous pupillary membranes in the aphakic eyes. (g) The freed pupillary margin is grasped with thumb forceps and protracted to the limbal incision.
(h) A section of iris is excised using a combination of sharp iris scissors and cautery for hemostasis. (i) With incision of the base of the iris, the involved iris is
removed, creating a keyhole-shaped pupil. (j) The limbal incision is apposed with 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. (k) The anterior chamber is
reformed with lactated Ringer's solution introduced via a 22 g hypodermic needle inserted between two limbal sutures. (l) The conjunctival flap is apposed
with a 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
10 mm (Fig. 10.18a). In dogs where Tenon's capsule appears
hair, and cleansing of corneal and conjunctival surfaces with
excessive, it is carefully excised from the overlying bulbar con-
0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are 1etracted by
junctiva. Care is exercised to prevent 'buttonholing' of the bul-
bar conjunctival flap. The sclera is first incised parallel to and
slightly curved tenotomy scissors. The conjunctival flap is
3-4 mm posterio1 to the limbus with the Beaver No. 6400
started about & mm from the limbus and continued fo1 about
 microsurgical blade in a linear fashion (Fig. 10.18b).
279
A
B
C
?
G
小
#
Fig. 10.18 In the combined iridencleisis-cyclodialysis procedure, a section of iris is protracted through the subscleral space into a scleral window (anterior
sclerectomy) and into the subconjunctival spaces. Aqueous humor traverses this fistula as well as flters through the iridal tissues. (a) A formix-based 
conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The sclera is incised 5-8 mm with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade 3-4 mm parallel
to the limbus. (c) A 2 × 6 mm section of full-thickness sclera is excised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. (d) For scleral hemostasis, point 
electrocautery is necessary. (e) With Steven's tenotomy scissors, the deep attachments of the scleral block to the iris and ciliary body are incised. (f) Through
the anterior sclerectomy, a cyclodialysis spatula is carefully inserted subsclerally and directed into the anterior chamber. Once in the anterior chamber, the
spatula is moved from side to side to enlarge the fistula. (g) A blunt iris hook is inserted through the subscleral fistula to the dorsal pupillary margin to protract
the iris into the anterior sclerectomy window. (h) The iris is grasped by thumb forceps and manipulated into the sclerectomy window.(ij) With two thumb
forceps and a disposable cautery unit, the iris is radially cauterized and torn to its base. (k) The two iris pillars are anchored to the sclera with 6-0 simple
interrupted absorbable sutures. () The resultant iris pillars traverse the surgical fistula from the anterior chamber, through the anterior sclerectomy, and into
the subconjunctival spaces. (m) The anterior chamber is flushed with lactated Ringer's solution to remove any remaining fibrin and blood. (n) The conjunctival
wound is apposed with several 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
280
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
A scleral section, approximately 2 × 6 mm in size, is
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
excised without penetration of the underlying iris and ciliary
hair, and cleansing of coineal and conjunctival surfaces with
body (Fig. 10.18c). Scleral hemorrhage is controlled by wet-
0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are retracted by
field coagulation o1, less ideally, with point electrocautery
speculum. A limbal-based conjunctival flap, approximately
with a disposable unit (Fig. 10.18d). As the scleral incision
5 mm wide and 6 mm deep, is constructed with blunt-
approaches the underlying ciliary body, the pigment of the
tipped, slightly curved, tenotomy scissors. Excess Tenon's
ciliary body is observed. The full-thickness scleral block is
capsule beneath the bulbar conjunctiva is carefully excised so
separated from the underlying ciliary body by careful sharp
as not to buttonhole' the mucous membrane (Fig. 10.19a).
dissection using a microvitreoretinal (MVR) blade and
With the trephine method, entry into the anterior chamber
excised (Fig. 10.18e). A 10 mm cyclodialysis spatula is care-
is completed with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical
blade, and right- and left-handed coineoscleral scissors
sclera into the anterior chamber. Upon entry in the anterior
(Fig. 10.19b-d). This method permits convenient removal of
chamber, aqueous humor begins to flow into the incision.
the corneoscleral disk by special trephine scissors, and pre-
The cyclodialysis spatula is manipulated side to side to
vents it from falling back into the anterio1 chamber; however,
enlarge the subscleral fistula (Fig. 10.18f). A blunt iris hook
 the limbal incision is larger.
is carefully inserted through the newly created fistula into
Alternatively, the limbus may be incised with a Beavel
the anterior chambel, and manipulated to the pupillary
No. 6500 microsurgical blade fo1 approximately 5-7 mm,
margin of the dorsal iris (Fig. 10.18g). The iris is carefully
and a corneoscleral punch may be positioned to excise a
protracted by iris hook to the scleral wound and grasped
2-3 mm diameter section in the center of the posterior lim-
by thumb forceps (Fig. 10.18h). The iris is grasped with
bal incision. After exposure of the limbus and rostral reflec-
 ed a  s   no S o
tion of the limbus-based conjunctival flap, a small anterio1
Cautery is applied slowly between the forceps at the pupil-
sclerectomy, about 2 mm in diamete1, is made with a tie-
lary margin of the iris and continued to its base, using eithet
phine or special scleral trephine scissors at the 12 o'clock
an electroscalpel or the wet-field coagulator. Iris hemorrhage
position. The anterior edge of the 2 mm trephine hole is
is usually minimal (Fig. 10.18i)
placed next to the scleral aspect of the limbus to prevent
The iris is gradually separated, starting at the pupil margin
 e sss n ss a   a
and continuing to its base, creating two separate pillars
conjunctival flap (Fig. 10.19e). Often the posterior edge of
(Fig. 10.18j). These pillars are attached at each end of the
the trephine is lightly cauterized to delay healing and facili-
scleral defect with 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures
tate the flow of aqueous humor through this new fistula.
(Fig. 10.18kl). The anterio1 chamber is 1eformed with
balanced salt solution, using a cyclodialysis hypodermic
with fine serrated iris forceps and protracted slightly to per-
needle.
mit excision with either sharp inis scissois, supplemented
Hemorrhage and fibrin are carefully irrigated from the
with electrocautery, o1 by electrocautery (Fig. 10.19fg).
 anterior chamber. The anterior chamber is reformed again,
Because the basal iridal arterial circle occurs about 50% of
the time in the base of the inis and the remainder of the time
of the anterio1 chamber is injected (Fig. 10.18m).
in the ciliary body, copious hemorrhage occurs with this
q au sans sq pasode jou si punom leas au
 procedure in about 50% of the dogs. Once iridal hemostasis
conjunctival incision is apposed with several 6-0 simple
has been achieved, the inis is permitted to retract within the
interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 10.18n). If any fibrin
eye, or it may be repositioned with a cyclodialysis spatula.
 O1 hemorrhage persists in the anterior chamber, 25-50 μg
The anterior chamber is irrigated with balanced salt solution
tPA is injected into the anterior chamber.
to remove any hemorrhage and fibrin. The limbal incision is
 Postoperative treatment after iridencleisis-cyclodialysis is
apposed with 5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable
similar to that described fo1 both individual procedures.
sutures (Fig. 10.19h).
Postoperative complications are also similar to those of iri-
 After injection of additional balanced salt solution and a
dencleisis and cyclodialysis individually. The success 1ate
small air bubble to refoim the anterio1 chamber (Fig. 10.19i),
fo1 this procedure appears to be similar to that of scleral
the bulbar conjunctival flap is apposed with several 6-0 simple
trephination (the Scheie procedure), approximating 50%
interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 10.19j). If any fibrin o1
with 6- to 12-month follow-up.
hemorrhage persists in the anterio1 chamber, 25-50 μg tPA is
injected into the anterior chamber.
Postoperative treatment after corneoscleral trephination
Corneoscleral trephination
and peripheral iridectomy is simila1 to that of other glau-
Coineoscleral trephination is the creation of a surgical fis
 coma procedures. Pupil size is maintained in mid-position;
tula at the limbus to permit the escape of aqueous humor
extreme miosis and mydriasis are avoided. IOP is maintained
f1om the anterio1 chambe1, directly into the subconjunctival
within normal limits, if necessary with carbonic anhydrase
spaces. Corneoscleral trephination in dogs is usually com-
inhibitors. Postoperative iridocyclitis is controlled by topical
bined with peripheral iridectomy. The iridectomy prevents
and systemic corticosteroids, and NSAIDs. Topical and sys.
occlusion of the corneoscleral fistula by basal iris tissue. The
careful gentle massage of the eye may also be useful postop-
communication, besides the pupil, between the posterior
eratively during the fist month to maximize maintenance
and anterior chambers. The peripheral iridectomy must be
of patency of the corneoscleral fistula. Topical corticoster-
of sufficient size so that the iridal surgical defect will not
cids, such as 1% prednisolone, are instilled daily fo1 several
readily heal closed.
months to help maintain patency of the trephined fistula.
281
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
A
B
C
?
E
F
G
?
Fig. 1o.19 In the corneoscleral trephination technique, a surgical fistula is constructed at the limbus to permit aqueous humor to flow from the anterior
chamber into the subconjunctival spaces. An iridectomy is also usually performed as the fistula tends to plug with the basal iris. (a) A limbal-based conjunctival
flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) The limbus is incised one-half thickness with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade, usually at the 12
o'clock position for about 120-160°. (c) With the Beaver No. 6500 microsurgical blade, a stab incision is made into the anterior chamber. (d) The remainder of
the limbal incision is completed with the right- and left-handed corneoscleral scissors. (e) A 2 mm diameter anterior sclerectomy is performed with a special
scleral punch or scissors at the 12 o'clock position. (f) A section of iris about 2 mm above its base is point cauterized. (g) lris scissors are used to excise the
section of iris. (h) The limbal incision is apposed with 5-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. (i) The anterior chamber is reformed with lactated 
Ringer's solution and the integrity of the apposition is tested. (j) The conjunctival wound is apposed with several 6-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures.
The success rate with coneoscleral trephination and
the standard cyclodialysis site. Iridocyclectomy is performed
peripheral inidectomy is approximately 40-50% with 1-yea1
in order to reduce the possibility of obstruction of the cyclo-
follow-up. Complications associated with this procedure are
dialysis fistula by incorporation of the anterior uveal
similar to those of iridencleisis, cyclodialysis, and the com-
tissue. This procedure is used for advanced narrow- and
bination of these procedures.
closed-angle glaucoma in dogs
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the
Cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy
eyelid hair, and cleansing of corneal and conjunctival
surfaces with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids
In the cyclodialysis-inidocyclectomy procedure, a portion of
are 1etracted by speculum. A limbal-based conjunctival
the iris and ciliary body are excised immediately anterior to
flap is prepared ‘using blunt-tipped, slightly curved,
282
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
tenotomy scissors, approximately 8 mm from the limbus.
electrocautery. The cautery unit should be at sufficiently
The conjunctival flap and Tenon's capsule are 1eflected 1os-
high temperature to cut the iris and ciliary body cleanly
trally to expose a large area of sclera. Excess Tenon's capsule
but with minimal coagulation (Fig. 10.20fg).
is carefully excised from the overlying bulba1 conjunctiva
With a cyclodialysis hypodermic needle positioned in the
(Fig. 10.20a). A rectangular block of full-thickness sclera,
anterior chamber, fibrin and hemorrhage are irrigated from
measuring between 2 x 7 mm and 3 x 9 mm, is excised
the anterio1 chamber. The anterior chamber is restored with
approximately 4 mm posterio1 to the limbus with the Beave1
balanced salt solution and a small air bubble (Fig. 10.20h).
No. 6400 microsurgical blade (Fig. 10.20b).
The scleral window is allowed to remain open. The conjunctival
Hemostasis is maintained by point electrocautery o1 wet-
flap is apposed with a 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
field cautery. The rectangular block of sclera is carefully
If fibrin or hemorrhage remain in the anterior chamber, 25-50
lifted to expose the underlying pigmented ciliary body
μg tPA is injected into the anterior chamber (Fig. 10.20i).
and excised by Steven's tenotomy scissors (Fig. 10.20c).
Postoperative treatment after cyclodialysis-iridocyclect-
A 10 mm cyclodialysis spatula is manipulated forward into
omy is similar to the treatment for these operations in-
the anterio1 chamber through the subscleral space. The spat-
dividually. This procedure, like others, has a success rate
ula is moved from side to side fo1 approximately 90° to
of approximately 50% with 6- to 12-month follow-up in
enlarge the fistula (Fig. 10.20d). An iris hook is manipulated
the
dog.
Wet-fieldor
electrocautery is essential fo1
through the subscleral space into the anterior chamber
this procedure to excise the section of iris and ciliary
to grasp the peripheral iris and protract it into the scleral
 body with minimal hemorrhage. Complications of this
incision (Fig. 10.20e). Peripheral iris and ciliary body are
procedure are similar to those of the two operations
letracted into the scleral window and excised using
individually.
A
B
C
D
E
F
?
①
Fig. 10.20 In the cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy procedure, a surgical fistula is created from the anterior chamber, through a scleral window (anterior 
paseg-leqwll  (e) einasy siua bugsnuasgo jo poouayl aun aonpal on pasoxa ane Apog Aeo pue sui auaneipe ayl 'saneds enpounluongns aun on (Awonnaialns
conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) A 2-3 × 7-9 mm full-thickness block of sclera (anterior sclerectomy) 4 mm posterior to the
limbus is prepared with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. Scleral hemostasis is provided by point electrocautery. (c) The scleral block is separated from
the deeper iris and ciliary body attachments with Steven's tenotomy scissors and excised. (d) A cyclodialysis spatula is carefully inserted subsclerally into the
anterior chamber and moved from side to side to enlarge the surgical fistula. (e) A blunt iris hook is inserted through the surgical fistula into the anterior
chamber to protract the iris into the anterior sclerectomy window. (f) The section of iris and anterior ciliary body is protracted further with thumb forceps and
aun wouy adensa on jowuny snoanbe sjwad ejnasy lesjbuns sueajnsau ayl (6) siseasoway uienuiew on Auessanau s! Auainen qun Auaanen zuiod e buisn pasixa
anterior chamber, through the anterior sclerectomy, and into the subconjunctival spaces. (h) Any filbrin and hemorrhage are flushed from the anterior
chamber with lactated Ringer's solution. (i Closure consists of apposition of the conjunctival wound a 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
283
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
Baerveldt implant in 1992, and the Ahmed implant in
1993. The original Krupin-Denver valved gonioimplant
was evaluated in normal Beagles and Beagles with inherited
Clinical management of the primary canine glaucomas has
glaucoma. A modified Joseph implant was subsequently eval-
traditionally followed the basic algorithm of medically
m 1o Aed ym (saa i) siop 1i ui p
controlling IOP at levels that maintain vision for as long as
encouraging results. The range of observation postoperatively
possible, and only treating the condition surgically when med-
was from 9 to 15 months, and a success rate of 80% was
ical therapy is no longer successful at maintaining vision, o1 if
Ieported, although some dogs required concurrent medica-
adverse ocular or systemic effects result. This strategy was based
tions, usually at reduced doses. Additional reports have
on the low initial success rates achieved by the traditional filter
evaluated Ahmed, Baerveldt, and other anterior chamber
ing glaucoma surgical procedures. However, two new treat-
ment modalities - laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
shunts for the treatment of primary glaucomas in dogs. These
Ieports indicate encouraging results, but the postoperative
and anterio1 chamber surgical shunts (gonioimplants) - have
management after anterior chamber shunt implantation is
shown promise in the clinical management of canine primary
critical for their long-term success.
glaucomas. Hence, a newer treatment strategy for the manage
ment of canine primary glaucomas is evolving. and now typi-
Valved versus non-valved systems
cally involves initial surgical implantation of an anterio1
Perhaps the most significant difference in gonioimplant
chamber shunt (gonioimplant), often in combination with
diode laser cyclophotocoagulation, supplemented, if neces-
design is the presence or absence of an inteinal valve mech-
sary, with postoperative medical therapy. Clinical experience
anism. Gonioimplants with unidirectional (valved) systems
suggests that the early timing of surgical intervention contri-
butes to increased long-term success.
10-11 mmHg. Bidirectional (non-valved) systems have no
pressure regulatory devices, except fo1 the limited resistance
within the shunt (Fig. 10.21).
Progression of implant design
Valved (or unidirectional) systems maintain a minimal
The design of glaucoma drainage implants has evolved from
IOP, preventing ocular hypotony and collapse of the ante-
the initial use of a horse hair for this purpose by Rollett in
nio1 chambel, as well as minimizing hypotony-ielated uvei-
1907. This progression has included the introduction of the
tic changes to the aqueous, immediately after surgery. The
Molteno implant in 1969, the Krupin implant in 1979, the
non-valved (or bidirectional) flow systems may result in
ARIC
BRI
DRIC
Fig. 10.21 Commercial and self-constructed anterior shunts. (a) Ahmed (small, large, and attached to a 10 × 30 mm silicone band). (b) Molteno (single and
double plate). (c) Self-constructed T' shunt (with and without a valve). (d) Joseph.
284
Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
ocular hypotony, a shallow anterior chamber, disruption of
The different types of anterior chamber shunt used in the
the blood-aqueous barrier in the immediate postoperative
surgical treatment of primary canine glaucoma are summal-
 period, and even retinal detachment. IOP increases as
ized in Table 10.4. Several new implants are being evaluated
Iesistance increases, as a result of the fibrous capsule that
in dogs, and specific devices may be more successful than
forms around all extrascleral implants several weeks posto-
d jo s  a jo a a u si
peratively. The immediate postoperative medical manage-
glaucoma; however, anterio1 chamber shunts for dogs and
ment of valved and non-valved systems is also different
cats share similar characteristics.
 because of the ocular hypotony associated with non-valved
systems.
Size of the implant
     
of
the anterior chamber when placing non-valved devices, the
The total size of the implant directly deteimines the over-
implant drainage tubing may be temporarily occluded intrao-
all surface area of the host's resultant fibrous capsule, and
peratively with a non-absorbable suture inside the tubing. a
indirectly long-term clinical success o1 failure. The resultant
ligature (either absorbable or non-absorbable suture) around
permeability of the surrounding capsules is another impo1-
the tube, o1 other techniques. The valved systems in early
tant variable. The optimal range of implant surface area fo1
 e n a o a so n sa 
the dog has not been determined, and may range from
ocular hypotony. The bidirectional non-valved systems in
300 to 6oo mm?. Implants that are very small seem to func-
dogs with advanced o1 refractory glaucoma are not usually
tion fo1 brief periods of time in the dog. However, the over-
associated with postoperative ocular hypotony, perhaps
because aqueous humor flow is so compromised through
size in the different animal species (especially the cat).
the usual aqueous humor outflow pathways.
There is a considerable variation in size of the com-
Without effective antifibrotic therapy
this time,
mercially available implants, 1anging from about 200 to
increased IOP about 3-6 weeks postoperatively results from
500 mm². Because of the retrobulbar position of these
the fibrous capsule that forms 
 around the
extrascleral
 shunts, a postoperative bleb is often not visible. Without
implant. The presence o1 absence of a valve mechanism in
 effective antifibrosing agents, the size of the implant is bal-
the anterior chamber shunt influences immediate post-
anced between the smallest size that can accommodate
 operative management, as IOP below 5 mmHg is injurious
adequate aqueous reabsorption and the largest surfaces that
to the eye and the long-term function of the implant.
prolong function and do not interfere with other ocular
 Table 10.4 Available anterior chamber (AC) shunts in small animals
Implant*
AC tubing
 Scleral explant
Implant
AC tubing
Scleral explant
Non-valveo
Valved
 Baerveldt 
 Silicone 
 Oval-to-half circle base
 Ahmed 
 Silicone 
 Five-sided polypropylene
ID 0.3 mm 
Radiopaque
ID 0.3 mm
body
OD 0.6 mm
Three sizes: 400, 700, and
OD 0.6 mm;
 Three different sizes 
1000 mm?
Valve opens at
No valve
8-10 mmHg
 Modified by
Silicone strap (12 × 30 mm)
Molteno et al
Silicone
Polypropylene base
ID 0.3 mm 
Single/double plates:
pappe
 OD 0.63 mm
320 mm? single plate;
 Hitchings
 Silicone
1 × 9 mm silicone strap
No valve
640 mm? double plates 
 ID 0.3 mm
180-360°
OD 0.64 mm
1e 2a 2ax0425
 Silastic
No. 20 silicone band; 3609
Valve, slit (side): opens
ID 0.3 mm
Variable - 900 mm?
OD 0.64 mm
at 4-20 mmHg
No valve
Joseph 
Silicone
Silicone strap 1 × 9 mm
silicone
ID 0.3 mm
T'-implant
8.5 cm long
Silicone - 7 x 30 mm 
OD 0.64 mm
<1600 mm²
ID 0.3 mm
420 mm^
OD 0.6 mm
Valve, slit (side): opens
 Bedford - used as non-valve in 
No valve
at 4-20 mmHg
56op
White
Silicone
Silicone compressible reservoir
Krupin et al
Sila stic
Later No. 220 episcleral
ID 0.3 mm
 and base with tubing
ID 0.3 mm
explant, 180-360° in length 
 OD 0.64 mm
(1.04 mm ID and 1.42 mm)
OD 0.64 mm
Unidirectional
Valve, slit: opens at
No valve
11 mmHg; closes at
9 mmHg
ID, inner diameter; OD, outer diameter.
*lmplant dimensions are calculated for the entire surface areas of each implant.
285
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
functions. Among the different breeds of small dog, there is
 conjunctiva. The optimum diameter of the anterior chamber
a variably sized orbit that can accommodate different
tubing for the dog has yet to be determined, and larger
sizes of implant; however, in the cat, the space for gonioim-
diameter tubing can accommodate greater flow rates with
plants is very restricted. Placement of valved gonioimplants
less 1esistance. Anterio1 chamber silicone tubing of 0.40-
may be especially challenging in particularly small eyes
0.45 mm ID and 0.6-0.8 mm OD may be a 1easonable
and, in such cases, the (Ahmed) valve mechanism (and tub-
Iange for dogs. The tubing diameter should be small enough
ing) itself may have its surrounding silicone plate carefully
to allow its insertion into the anterio1 chamber through a
Iemoved and be implanted alone. Large implants
in
20-22 g hypodermic needle track. Implants with larger ante-
humans have been associated with diplopia and impaiied
nior tubing diameters may be indicated for those dog and cat
 ocular mobility.
glaucomas complicated by inidocyclitis.
Shape of the implant
Biocompatibility of implant material
The overall size of the implant appears to be more impol-
Both silicone tubing within the anterior chamber and
tant than its shape. Current anterior chamber shunts range
implant bases constructed of silicone o1 intraocular lens
in shape from round, oval, shell-shaped o1 C-shaped to long
plastics seem to be well tolerated in the dog. Softer materials
slender silicone straps. Large implants, because of limited
-ose a oi i ssal are pe si ai rade
space between the rectus muscles, can be shaped to extend
ciated with postoperative patient discomfort and  self-
conveniently under two o1 more extraocular muscles, 01
trauma, abrasion of overlying tissues, and the potential
more posteriorly into the retrobulbar spaces. If the non-
complication of implant extrusion. A fibrous capsule foims
absorbable sutures attaching the implant to the sclera break
around the implant's episcleral base. The capsule's thickness
Or fail to secure the implant, these larger types of implant
and permeability eventually determine the final success of
s  re  aa   ssa a
the device's ability to maintain IOP within a safe range.
extrude through the bulbar conjunctiva.
Several antifibrotic drugs may be employed in order to delay
and/or prevent excessive fibrous capsule formation, and are
 Size of the anterior chamber tubing
under study. If effective antifibrosis drugs/strategies are
eventually developed, most implants will require some form
All commercially available anterio1 chamber shunts utilize
of valve o1 pressure maintenance system.
silicone tubing with 0.3 mm inner diameter (ID) and
Development of the capsule around these shunts may sug-
0.6 mm oute1 diamete1 (OD) (Fig. 10.22). The total 3-6 μL
of aqueous humor outflow per minute in dogs and cats can
easily be accommodated by this diameter tubing. This same
stimulatory effects of aqueous humor when exposed to
non-endothelial  covered surfaces.(
size of tubing can accommodate in-vitro flow of 20 μL/min
Capsule thickness  is
without significant resistance as may be necessary in the
somewhat related to its permeability, but the matrix, such
horse. In the dog, occlusion of the small diameter tubes
as1
the glycosaminoglycans, surrounding these collagen
fibers and vascular angiogenesis may also have a marked
may be more likely because of the higher levels of aqueous
proteins, inflammatory cells, and fibrin from a more fragile
influence on the passage of aqueous humor.
blood-aqueous barrier.
There are, however, upper limits for tubing diameter,
Position of the implant's episcleral base
as too large a diameter of silicone tubing may result in
Implants placed close to the limbus in the subconjunctival
increased rigidity and coineal endothelial contact affer
spaces are more easily occluded by the host's fibrous cap-
placement. The bend which occurs when tubing is inserted
sule, and must be relatively small. Consequently, newer
into the anterior chamber at the limbus is also a concein,
q o an  n  sd an  
the limbus (approximately at the site of rectus muscle inser-
tions) at the equator of the globe, to extend an additional
10-15 mm into the 1etrobulbar space (Fig. 10.23). As a
result, these implants may be larger and provide for the fo1-
mation of a larger fibrous capsule. Implants placed forward
near the limbus are more likely to erode through the thin,
overlying bulbar conjunctiva.
Wound healing following glaucoma
filtration surgery
Wound healing following glaucoma filtration surgery (GFS)
occurs along similar general principles to that following
other ocular surgeries, and may be divided into three phases:
inflammation, proliferation, and remodeling. Inflammation
is initiated by the presence of blood in the wound field.
Inflammatory cells are attracted within hours, and release
growth factors and inflammatory cytokines. In 1esponse
Fig. 10.22 The standard size of shunt tubing (0.6 mm OD and 0.3 mm ID)
to these stimuli, fibroblasts are recruited and activated to
within the anterior chamber in a dog with primary glaucoma.
foim extracellulal matrix and vascula1 tufts. This tissue is
286
Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
Shunts to other areas
Because of the fibrosis that develops around intraorbital
sn l rn a n  s  s
to growth- and fibroblast-stimulating substances within the
aqueous humor), other sites for termination of these ante-
nio1 chamber shunts have been attempted in dogs. As newer
antifibrotic drugs and protocols are developed, medical con-
 tiol of the host's fibrotic response to the implant and aque-
ous humor may be possible.
 [n the meantime, other potential drainage sites are being
investigated; to date they include the frontal shunt, sub-
cutaneous tissues, jugular vein, and parotid duct. As these
implants do not stimulate the development of a fibrous
 capsule, which serves as the eventual resistance to maintain
IOP at 10-15 mmHg, these shunts should have a resistance
that approximates low normal IOP (10-12 mmHg) related
 to either the length and diameter of the tubing or a valve
Fig. 10.23 Position of the episcleral base (arrows) of the anterior chamber
mechanism.
shunt in a rabbit. H & E, 20×.
At this stage these surgeries should be considered experi-
mental.
However,
they signal a continued search for
subsequently remodeled through collagen deposition and
improved surgical procedures for small animal and equine
glaucomas, they are presented here.
wound contracture over months to years under the influence
of matrix metalloproteinases
 The majo1 cause of failure following GFs is the foimation
Surgical procedures for anterior
of scar tissue, which decreases the filtration of aqueous
chamber shunts
humor into the sub-Tenon's space.
Currently, the general, non-specific modulation of wound
The different surgical procedures for anterior shunts con-
healing following GFS involves the use of antimetabo-
tinue to progress in the dog. and in this section, the different
lites which broadly disrupt cell migration, proliferation,
sites will be presented separately. The first procedure, the
and extracellular matrix production. Mitomycin C (MMC)
intraorbital/subconjunctival implantation, is the most estab-
 lished technique. For those techniques that position the exit
is an alkylating agent that acts by disrupting RNA and pro.
tein synthesis, and by generating reactive oxygen species.
fo1 aqueous humor in non-orbital sites, the main difference
  i  a a i e aa si
in the surgical procedure is the latter stage.
patients has been disappointing. and it is frequently asso-
 in nd   o n 
ciated with the formation of thin-walled, avascular filtration
development of significant ocular inflammation will help
blebs and an aggressive subsequent fibrosing reaction as
maximize long-term surgical success. Preoperative medical
management similar to that recommended prior to cataract
a result of capsular tension. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) exhibits
several cytotoxic effects, including inhibiting DNA synthe-
phacoemulsification will help 1educe the postoperative
sis by inhibiting thymidylate synthetase, reducing protein
inflammatory cascade, and may comprise topical and/o1
synthesis by interfering with RNA synthesis, indirectly dis-
rupting actin cytoskeleton stability, and promoting fib1o-
the surgeon's discretion.
blast apoptosis. The beneficial properties of 5-FU may be
Intraorbital/subconjunctival implantation
operative administration directly into the filtration bleb
site, where its effects increase bleb survivability
and
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
functionality.
hair, and cleansing of corneal and conjunctival surfaces with
 s sid ss 's a i a a
0.5% povidone-iodine solution and swabs, the eyelids are
made in our understanding of the mechanisms of wound
letracted by speculum. Surgery to position the different
healing following GFS. Human, rabbit, and murine gene
anterior chamber shunts is similar, with the primary differ-
microalrays have allowed the mapping of gene expression
ence related to the additional dissection beneath the rectus
across this process, and identified its major mediators. These
muscles to accommodate the larger size implants.
include cytokines and growth factors, specifically the two
Generally, the patient is positioned in spinal recumbency.
growth factors thought to play dominant roles in promoting
and the use of a neuromuscular blocking agent such as atracur-
scarring (transforming growth factor beta and connective
U aoda aq A (uoeu paisisse A paei) u
tissue growth factor),
extracellular matrix protein genes
order to permit maximal globe rotation and surgical exposure.
(types I, Il, III, V, and xVIlI collagens, fibronectin, vitronec-
The superotemporal quadrant generally represents the
tin, and proteoglycans), proteases involved in cell migration
ideal site fo1 initial implant placement based on ease of
and extracellular matrix remodeling (MMP-2, -9, -11), and
exposure. The second choice is the superonasal quadrant,
the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (TIMPs 1, 2, 3).
third the inferotemporal quadrant, and fourth the inferona-
This information allows us to identify newer potential ther-
sal quadrant. This order of selection is also applicable if
apeutic targets (see Tables 10.2a and 10.2b).
a site is being selected for repeat surgical intervention.
287
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
Evidence suggests that gonicimplants should not be replaced
filled with fluid, it is now 'primed' and ready for implanta-
at the site of original (or ‘primary') intervention if this
tion (Fig. 10.24f). If the system is not primed with lactated
step becomes necessary during the course of surgical IOP
Ringer's solution, air within the device will impede the
management.
tansit of aqueous humo1 through the system. In the case
suisn uoisod ui piau aq Aeu aqo a iesanu jl
of the Ahmed valved implant, an audible ‘pop' may be
two traction sutures o1 fine mosquito forceps located at
heard as the pretensioned membranes within the valve are
the limbal junction. A deep fornix-based incision is made
separated by fluids. The device is carefully positioned into
approximately 10 mm behind the limbus using a combina-
the sub-Tenon's capsule space, ensuring that the implant
tion of blunt-sharp dissection with blunt-tipped, slightly
borders are in direct contact with the sclera (Fig. 10.24g).
curved, tenotomy scissors. The incision should be approxi-
Once the device is properly positioned, it is secured to the
mately 8-10 mm in width, such that the insertion of the
sclera and Tenon's capsule by two to four 7-0 to 9-0 non-
gonioimplant is just possible. This will minimize the danger
absorbable nylon sutures, usually placed at the anterior bo1-
of subsequent implant extrusion. Throughout the dissec-
der and near the extraocular muscle insertions (Fig. 10.24h)
tion, conjunctival and Tenon's tissues are grasped extremely
In many glaucomatous patients the sclera in this area may
gently in order to minimize tissue trauma (Fig. 10.24a). The
 be very thin, 1endering suturing difficult. Small needle sizes
dissection plane, using mainly tenotomy scissors and alter-
will help minimize the danger of deep scleral penetration
nating sharp and blunt dissection, is continued posteriorly
and hemorrhage. Sutures may be passed directly through
between Tenon's capsule and the sclera, and between the
soft implant material or into preformed suture holes if these
dorsal and lateral, or dorsal and medial, rectus muscle inser-
are present within the device.
tions. Excessive Tenon's capsule may be carefully excised.
The overall length of the anterior chamber tubing is care-
Meticulous hemostasis (ideally using wet-field cautery) dur-
fully estimated prior to trimming by laying the tubing
ing the dissection is vital in order to minimize the delivery
directly onto the cornea. If cut too long, tubing may contact
of those growth factors that will subsequently mediate
the endothelial surface of the cornea, partially occlude the
wound healing and fibrosis (Fig. 10.24b).
pupil, and produce focal edema. However, if cut too short,
The implant is usually positioned at or just posterior
the tubing lumen can become obstructed by the base of
to the equator, its rostral end about 10-12 mm from the
the iris or pre-inidal inflammatory membrane formation.
limbus. Hence, postoperatively, the episcleral portion of
If megaloglobus develops after placement of an anterior
the device cannot usually be visualized through the bul-
chamber shunt, stretching of the sclera can retract too-short
ba1 conjunctiva, except for the tubing that extends into the
anterior chamber tubing completely from the anterior
anterio1 chamber. Devices placed too close to the limbus
chamber. Ideally, once in the anterior chamber, the tubing
are more prone to erode the adjacent bulbar conjunctiva.
should not touch either the iris or the cornea, and avoid
The insertion of the dorsal rectus muscle may be used as a
 ie ixa sixe Arnd ar jo san au hssn
guide (Fig. 10.24c). The anterior border of the implant
into the anterior chamber. The tip of the tubing is usually
should be posterio1 of this landmark. The episcleral o1 main
cut with a wide, upward-facing bevel using Westcott scissors
portion of the anterio1 chamber shunt is placed between the
to facilitate insertion into the anterio1 chamber. The beveled
dorsal rectus and medial rectus muscles, ol, as a second
 opening of the tubing may also be less subject to plugging
choice, the space between the dorsal rectus and the lateral
with fibrin postoperatively (Fig. 10.24i).
Iectus muscle. These muscle insertions may be individually
[f additional intraocular surgery is being performed as
identified and manipulated by muscle hooks (Fig. 10.24d).
part of a combined procedure (such as cataractous or non-
Dissection is limited to immediately above the sclera, and
cataractous lenticular phacoemulsification o1 endoscopic
cytophotocoagulation), it is performed at this time. Implant
orrhage. Muscle bellies in particular should be carefully
plate placement and suturing prior to intraocular surgery
avoided since their inadvertent incision o1 transection will
avoids the potential complications associated with place-
Iesult in copious hemorrhage.
ment within a soft/hypotonous globe.
 The intraoperative application of MMC at the surgical site
The limbal area through which the implant tubing will
has been advocated by some surgeons to impede fibrosis;
pass is carefully prepared. The bulbar conjunctival flap is
however, long-term evidence that it is beneficial in dogs
elevated and the limbus exposed. The surgeon should stu-
is lacking. If elected, the surgical site is treated with a ster-
diously avoid any buttonholing' of the thin overlying con-
ile surgical cellulose speal soaked with MMC fo1 5 min
junctiva. A 2-3 x 3-4 mm partial-thickness scleral flap
(0.25-0.5 mg/mL; Fig. 10.24e). The optimal dose (drug con-
may be created at the site of tube entry into the anterior
centration and duration of exposure) of MMC for the dog
chamber if deemed necessary. Entry is achieved by creating
has not been determined. After exposure, the area is flushed
a scleral track, using a 22 g needle attached to a syringe.
with 20-30 mL of balanced salt solution. Mitomycin C
Entry into the canine anterior chamber is usually peI-
should not make contact with the wound edges or the ante-
foimed at about the 12 o'clock position. The hypodermic
nio1 chamber
 needle is carefully removed using a twisting motion, and
All anterior chamber shunts are checked for function and
the beveled silicone tubing inserted in a single smooth
patency at this time. A 25-27 g hypodermic needle is can-
exchange. A surgical assistant may facilitate this procedure
nulated into the end of the anterior chamber tubing and lac-
(Fig. 10.24j).
During anterior chamber entry and tube
tated Ringel's o1 sterile balanced salt solution is injected.
exchange, maintenance of IOP is preferred in order to min-
The use of tPA as a priming agent has been advocated
imize the formation of excessive fibrin in the aqueous
by some surgeons in an effort to reduce the likelihood of
humor. Grasping and manipulation of the tubing with
fibrinous occlusion postoperatively. With the shunt system
specialized silicone tubing forceps with specifically designed
288
?
?
?
F
G
(N)
Fig. 10.24 The surgical procedures for all of the anterior chamber shunts are quite similar. The larger devices require additional retrobulbar and extraocular
muscle dissection. All of the shunts are positioned 10-12 mm posterior to the limbus. (a) A 120-140° fornix-based conjunctival flap is prepared with Steven's
tenotomy scissors. (b) The scissor dissection continues to the sclera, beneath Tenon's capsule (bulbar fascia), to between the dorsal and medial rectus muscle
insertions. (c) The surgical dissection continues between the dorsal and medial rectus muscle insertions. The base of the anterior chamber shunt will be
posterior (caudal) to the dorsal rectus muscle insertion. (d) The dorsal and medial rectus muscles are identified with a muscle hook, and space between and
beneath these muscle is established for the implant. (e) A few drops of mitomycin C (0.25-0.5 mg/mL) may be placed on a surgical cellulose spear and 
positioned in the surgical site for 5 min. This intraoperative drug will hopefully delay fibrosis about the implant. (f) The implant is primed with lactated Ringer's
solution to ensure patency of the implant's tubing and valve function. (g) The base of the anterior chamber shunt is fitted into the space between the medial
 and dorsal rectus muscles. (h) The anterior chamber shunt is secu
ired to the sclera and/or rectus muscle insertions with two to four 7-0 to 9-0 non-absorbable
sutures. (i) The length of the anterior chamber tubing is determined and its end cut with scissors to create a beveled opening. (j) The tunnel for insertion of
the anterior chamber tubing is created with a 22 g hypodermic needle carefully inserted through the limbus into the anterior chamber. (k) With a special
(ww g x b) llews  () laqweyo jouanue aun onu! jauuna jeqwl aya yhnouyn pauonisod Anyaien s! buignn ayn 'sdaoioy qwnyn buigna zueidwiojuon
homologous scleral graft is positioned over the anterior chamber tubing immediately posterior to the limbus, and attached to the sclera with four 6-0 to 7-
0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures. The scleral graft stabilizes the tubing and protects the bulbar conjunctiva from direct contact and pressure with the
tubing. (m) The conjunctival wound is apposed with several 6-0 to 7-0 interrupted absorbable sutures. (n) With proper positioning of the anterior chamber
shunt's base, filtering blebs are retrobulbar and not usually visible through the upper conjunctiva.
289
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
tips is recommended, to prevent damage to the soft silicone
ligated; the tubing was advanced into the severed facial vein
tubing. Slightly turning/rotating the beveled end of the
which was then secured with a suture.
tubing may assist insertion into the needle puncture site
 This experimental study illustrates the problems asso-
(Fig. 10.24k).
  s   
An additional
l proposed benefit of creating a partial-
because of the lack of resistance. The non-valved systems
thickness scleral flap at the site of anterior chamber entry
implanted in the orbital tissues cause ocular hypotony
is 1eduction in the risk of conjunctival erosion above the sil-
(IOP <5 mmHg) until the host's fibrous capsule develops
icone tubing. In cases where this risk is deemed significant,
about the implant's base. In dogs, this fibrosis occurs in
such as those dogs with thin/friable overlying tissues, this
2-4 weeks. With ocular hypotony, aqueous flare, aqueous
Jo  2-s noae a   pe a ose ke
fibrin formation, and hyphema can occur from the anterior
silicone tubing with a thin (2 mm) scleral homograft, main-
uvea, and even retinal detachments develop. These exudates
tained frozen until required (Fig. 10.24l). The four corners
can repeatedly plug the drainage system, and compromise
of the scleral homograft are apposed to the underlying host
the surgical bypass. The result is alternating periods of
sclera with fou1 6-0 to 7-0 simple interrupted absorbable
ocular hypotony (the system is patent) and elevated IOP
sutures. Care must be taken, however, not to occlude the
(the system is plugged).
tubing with excessively tight sutures.
With the intravenous system, both hyphema and the fo1-
Aqueous humor will generally be noted flowing through
mation of blood clots at the end of the tubing within the
the device. Provided little aqueous humor has escaped
jugular vein can develop: similar results occur when this
through the anterio1 chamber needle track, IOP should sta-
type of shunt is used for the treatment of hydrocephalus in
bilize at about 10 mmHg. To dissolve any fibrin in the aque-
dogs and the cerebrospinal flow rate is considerably more.
ous humor, 25 μg tPA is usually injected into the anterior
With the subcutaneous system, ocular hypotony and intra-
chamber from the limbus at this stage.
    o   r
Two layers of wound closure are preferred. The endorbita
4 months postoperatively in one dog, the subcutaneous
 or Tenon's capsule wound is closed with several 6-0 to 7-0
device became non-functional because of the fibrous capsule
simple interrupted sutures o1 a continuous suture covering
around the device.
the gonioimplant. The bulbar conjunctival flap wound is
sans padrau aidus D-2 o o-g leaaas ausn pasodde
Anterior chamber shunt to the frontal sinus
01 a continuous absorbable suture (Fig. 10.24m,n).
Shunts from the anterior chamber to the frontal sinus have
 been reported in normal and glaucomatous dogs by Grahn
Anterior chamber shunt to subcutaneous tissues
and Cullen. The frontal sinus was selected because of its
and the facial and jugular veins
proximity to the orbit; although the frontal sinus is poten-
This pilot study by Hakanson involved four glaucomatous
tially a source of infection, no infections developed in either
Norwegian elkhounds and non-valved gonioimplants, con-
the noimal or glaucomatous dogs. The pilot study was con-
sisting of tubing of 0.5 mm ID and 1.0 mm OD, that were
ducted in four noimal dogs. Using Beinoulli's equation, a
implanted extending from the anterio1 chamber to either a
tube size of 0.76 mm ID and 1.65 mm OD and 45 mm long
subcutaneous site or via the facial vein to the jugular vein
was selected; there was no valve device, only the resistance
ending at the thoracic inlet.
created by the tubing's length and diameter.
The surgical placement of the anterior chamber portion
Through a 1.5 cm skin incision dorsomedial of the orbit,
of the shunt was similar to all implants. The tubing was
the rostromedial compartment of the frontal sinus was
anchored by silicone glue to a 0.5 x 4 x 10 mm piece of
entered with a 3/32" Steinman pin and Jacob's chuck.
silicone that was sutured to the sclera with 9-0 nylon
The tubing. along with its footplate, was attached to the
sutures, and served to anchor the tubing to the eye. The tub-
periosteum with 5-0 simple internupted nylon sutures.
ing was inserted into the anterior chamber under a 2 x 4 mm
The surgery about the eye was similar to other anterior
partial-thickness scleral flap hinged at the limbus. The tub-
chamber shunts. From an incision in the dorsobulbar con-
ing was inserted through a 0.9 mm hypodermic needle tiack
junctiva and Tenon's capsule, the tubing from the frontal
into the anterior chamber and the scleral flap closed with
sinus was pulled through a subcutaneous tunnel. After cut-
sutures.
ting the tubing to the appropriate length and at a bevel,
For the subcutaneous shunt, about 1o0 mm of 0.5 x
and priming the tubing with balanced saline solution, the
1.0 mm diameter tubing was extended to a 90 mm section
tube was inserted into the anterior chamber through a
of silicone tubing. 6.6 mm ID and 9.0 mm OD, with taper-
2.5 mm keratome limbal incision under a conjunctival
ing ends. Through a second skin incision, along the anterio1
flap. Another silicone footplate was secured to the tubing.
portion of the zygomatic arch, a subcutaneous pocket was
and both were secured to the sclera with 7-0 simple inter-
constricted to accommodate the large aqueous distribution
lupted absorbable sutures. The conjunctival wound was
device of the larger diameter tubing. which was secured by
 apposed with 5-0 simple interrupted monofilament nylon
sutures. The tubing from the anterior chamber was posi-
sutres.
tioned into the larger diameter tubing.
Postoperative treatments consisted of topical 1% predniso-
In two patients in which the shunt was positioned into
lone, 0.03% flurbiprofen, 1% atropine, and 0.3% ciprofloxa-
the jugular vein, the tubing was extended into the facial vein
cin, and all treatments ceased within 1 month. The results
and the jugular vein fo1 about 300-310 mm to terminate in
were encouraging after some experience with refining the
the anterior thoracic inlet. The facial vein was entered along
surgical technique. Self-trauma occurred in three of the
the face, ventral to the lateral nasal vein, and severed and
 a is  n ad e so r
290
Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
site at the frontal sinus. Ocular complications included iridal
aftachment to the implant, mild iridocyclitis, anterior sub-
capsular cataracts, and focal corneal and scleral scarring.
Postoperative pneumatonography indicates that aqueous
humor outflow is usually doubled, and the mean IOP is
about 10 mmHg. No 1etrograde infection from the frontal
sinus to the eye occurred.
 The same surgical procedure was evaluated in seven glau-
comatous dogs that were followed for a minimum of 6
months. The surgery was successful in four dogs, resulting
in IOPs of 8-23 mmHg and maintenance of vision. The
three failures included: anterio1 chamber tube extrusion at
1 week; one dog lost to follow-up: and the last dog with
fibrosis and plugging of the anterior chamber tubing.
Anterior chamber shunt to parotid duct
Fig. 10.25 Experimental anterior chamber shunt to the parotid duct. The
approximate pathway for this type of valved shunt in the dog. This 
In another experimental study, anterior chamber shunts to
experimental surgery failed after development of ascending infections from
the parotid duct were evaluated in glaucomatous Beagles.
the mouth into the parotid duct and explant, suggesting that the parotid
involving two different designs of valved implants by Gelatt
duct allowed bidirectional flow and the volume of flow of aqueous humor
and MacKay. The parotid duct site was selected as no fibrosis
was inadequate to prevent retrograde infections.
should develop with the aqueous humo1 entering a hollow.
mucous membrane-lined duct. Also, the parotid duct lumen
days of profound ocular hypotony in the dog can result
appears to be sterile. Unfortunately, retrograde flow of the
in complete retinal detachment; fortunately, once the glau-
aqueous humor within the parotid duct occurred over sev.
coma device plugs with fibrin o1 is ligated temporarily.
eral months and eventually reached the main episcleral
IOP rises and retinal reattachment is achievable. Aqueous
implant, necessitating its removal. Perhaps the flow of aque-
fibrin may temporarily plug the gonioimplant and maintain
ous humor within the parotid duct (with the parotid gland
[OP at 15-20 mmHg. Higher levels may require intracam-
ligated) was inadequate to prevent the infection, and needed
eral 0.25-0.5 μg tPA to dissolve clots of no longer than
combination with continued parotid gland salivary flow.
10-14 days' duration. Fibrin which accumulates within the
The gonioimplant evolved in a series of nine surgeries,
anterior chamber portion of the implant tubing may be par-
and became progressively more refined and smaller. The
ticularly challenging to manage, and, if necessary, may be
gonioimplant consisted of a modified small Ahmed valve,
gently ‘teased' using a fine hypodermic needle and tPA
encased in an 8 mm diameter thin silicone envelope, with
injected directly into the bore of the anterior chamber tub-
0.3 mm ID and 0.6 mm OD tubing extending from
ing itself. In these patients, digital massage may also assist
both ends to connect the anterior chamber to the parotid
lesolution of blockage and restore IOP.
duct through a unidirectional valve with an opening
Miotics are generally avoided because of thei1 potential to
pressure of about 10-12 mmHg. The main body of the
cause aqueous humor flare and perhaps stimulate fibroblast
implant was initially positioned close to the parotid duct
proliferation. Mydriatics are indicated for the treatment
below the zygomatic arch, but was eventually changed to
of iridocyclitis, but usually only weaker agents, such as 1%
directly posterior of the orbit on the surface of the temporal
tropicamide, to promote a constantly moving pupil.
muscle.
It is important postoperatively to carefully monito1 IOP,
 The surgery is divided into four parts: 1) placement of the
and any spikes over 20 mmHg o1 so should receive treat-
implant on the temporal muscle caudal of the orbit; 2) iso-
ment to minimize any further damage to the optic nerve
aeid pue np puoied au jo uoasuen pue uon
head and retina. Ocular hypotensives that may be safely
 of the exit tubing into the duct's lumen; 3) placement of a
used with gonioimplants include the topical and systemic
silicone tube stabilizing strip in the subconjunctival and
      
sub-Tenon's space; and 4) the insertion of the intake tube
intravenous mannitol. The role of digital massage has not
into the anterior chamber (Fig. 10.25).
been explored, but might have some benefit.
Successful valved anterio1 chamber shunts provide IOP
 Postoperative management following
of 8-12 mmHg immediately after surgery. With develop-
ment of the fibrous capsule about the base of both valved
gonioimplantation
and non-valved shunts, IOP will gradually increase to
The postoperative management of gonioimplants is divided
12-20 mmHg several weeks postoperatively. As antifibrotic
into those without valves and those with valves. In general,
dnigs are employed at therapeutic levels in small animals,
fo1 valved implants, iridocyclitis is intensively treated with
the postoperative IOP will be lower.
topical and/or systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDs, and
Topical corticosteroids, such as 1% prednisolone, and oral
no aqueous humor flare is tolerated that may potentially
systemic NSAIDs may be administered postoperatively fo1
plug the tubing and/or valve mechanism.
several months to resolve the iridocyclitis and impede cap-
In contrast, mild iridocyclitis is tolerated initially fol-
sule formation about the anterior chamber shunt base. As
lowing the placement of non-valved systems as immediate
antifibrotic drugs and protocols evolve, changes in these
postoperative ocular hypotony is a constant concein. A few
intraoperative and postoperative therapies will occur.
291
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
The long-term functionality of the filtration bleb which
chamber shunt placement will avoid the difficulties asso-
        sss
ciated with the surgical procedure. Often iridocyclitis is pres-
Iepeated local administration of antimetabolites such as
ent preoperatively in the dog and cat, and every attempt
5-FU. Protocols vary among surgeons, but 1 month postop-
should be made to control this inflammation before surgical
eratively, 3 months thereaftel, and then every 6-12 months
as a maintenance regimen has been proposed. Approxi-
the anterior chamber may occlude the anterio1 chamber tub-
mately 0.1-0.2 mL (50 mg/mL) 5-FUI is injected directly into
ing, either temporarily o1 permanently (Fig. 10.26). If fibrin
the bleb site, usually facilitated by sedation or anesthesia
is detected in the tip of the tubing, injection of 25 μg tPA
 depending on patient temperament. It is crucial that this
will digest the clot, but higher levels of topical and systemic
solution does not contact exposed cornea, either during
corticosteroids and NSAIDs are indicated to resolve the
d      r 
inidocyclitis.
injection period, otherwise severe and recalcitrant corneal
 i s  r   
ulceration may result. Corneal protection using a protective
associated with development of a fibrotic capsule around
the episcleral base of the device, and a resultant decrease
local pressure following injection, and topical antimicrobial
in its ability to filter and resorb aqueous humor. As these
cover will help avoid this complication.
shunts do not stop the progression of the original cause of
the primary glaucoma, t
the outflow of aqueous humor
Complications of anterior chamber shunts
through the iridocoineal angle continues to decline. Aqueous
humor is proinflammatory and may stimulate continued
and results
capsular thickening. With time, the capsule becomes thicker
    s  r no s
and/or less permeable, and IOP gradually increases over
1) short term - related to surgical technique, postoperative
weeks o1 seveial months. Topical corticosteroids may
inidocyclitis, and glaucomatous progression; and 2) long
impede, but not prevent, the development of these capsules.
term - related to shunt failure from capsule formation and
Surgical removal of the capsule overlying the implant o1 nee-
recurrent glaucoma (Table 10.5). Experience with anterior
dling the capsule's walls will immediately restore normal
 levels of IOp, assuming the system has not become plugged.
As the capsule is stripped from the implant during surgery.
aqueous humor will immediately flow into the incision
Table 10.5 Potential postoperative complications with anterior
and IOP will decrease. Recurent capsule formation may.
dhamber (AC) shunts
sisy aissae pe Pidei aio  sa 'iamo
Complication
following surgical 'deroofing'
More effective antifibrotic drugs are needed to markedly
Short term
  o as nd nrn n 
 implant extrascleral bases. These drugs may be injected o1
Glaucoma-related
 Lens displacement 
 Additional globe enlargement 
inserted, as timed-release medications into the retrobulba1
 Additional iridocorneal angle closure
space intraoperatively, o1 1-2 months postoperatively after
 Pre-iridal and inflammatory membranes
some capsule has formed around the implant and healing
 Vitreous plug of AC tubing
is complete.
A complete strategy for the placement and postoperative
 Surgical technique 
 lridocyclitis with aqueous fibrin
 management of anterior chamber shunts in dogs is still evol-
Hyphema
 Ocular hypotony/flat anterior chamber
ving, but some guidelines are emerging. A single implant
AC tubing too long/too short
 Suture failure - tubing and implant
dislodgement
 Bullbar conjunctival erosion below AC tubing
 AC tubing touching posterior cornea
Suture blockage of AC tubing 
Implant-related
Valve failure
 AC tubing, small diameter 
 Implant base, small 
Long term
Glaucoma-related
Continued iridocorneal closure
Additional peripheral anterior synechiae
Implant and AC tubing invasion by inflammatory
membranes
 Cataract progression
 Implant-related 
Inadequate size of base and size of
capsule
 Capsule begins to fail/insufficient aqueous
uondiosqe
Fig. 10.26 A temporary fibrin plug (arrow) lodged in the end of the anterior
 Implant extrusion
dhamber tubing in a dog 3 days postoperatively. Fibrinolysis can be achieved
with an intracameral injection of 25 μg tissue plasminogen activator.
292
Anterior chambe shunts/gonioimplants
design may not be effective fo1 all types of canine glaucoma,
implant in 48 dogs and 51 eyes. Good IOP control was
and the primary glaucomas in dogs may benefit from more
achieved in 76% of the eyes, nearly 50% of the eyes main-
than one type of implant. Surgical intervention early in the
tained vision for 6 months, and 41% were still visual at
course of glaucoma when limited aqueous humo1 outflow
12 months. Thei1 results, like the previous report, suggest
that these combined procedures are more successful.
the advanced glaucomas with no normal residual aqueous
With further refinement in these devices, the refinement
humor outflow. A different shunt with a larger diameter
of antifibrotic drugs and protocols, and the adjunctive use
 of cyclodestructive procedures, anterior chamber shunts 
associated with iridocyclitis. A different and thinner implant
may become our most useful surgical procedures for man-
may perform better in the cat.
agement of small animal glaucoma.
Optimal canine candidates for gonioimplants are visual
patients with early glaucoma, devoid of iridocyclitis and lens
Adaptations in large animals
subluxation, and normal-appearing optic disks. An implant
with a valve mechanism may be optimal for these patients.
and special species
Patients with vision and IOP that is increasing despite max-
 Methods of surgical aqueous diversion such as placement of
inmum levels of medical therapy are also good candidates for
an as an aq a s n s
these gonioimplants. Anterior chamber shunts for canine
fo1 the treatment of equine glaucoma. There have been spo-
patients with advanced glaucoma, not under adequate med-
radic reports of the use of gonioshunts in the experimental
ical control, may be less promising candidates and require
setting and the occasional clinical patient, but no efficacy
different strategies. Anterior chamber shunts without valve
data are available fo1 review. Placement of a gonioimplant
systems, and perhaps with a fairly large diameter anterior
chamber tubing and episcleral implant, may be better
valved shunts that divert aqueous humor into the subcon-
choices for these patients.
junctival space in the horse. The surgical procedure is iden-
Anterior chamber shunts have been less successful in
tical to that in the dog with the exception that the tubing
glaucomatous eyes with uncontrolled IOP as the rapid low-
must be longer to accommodate the large size of the eye
ering of IOP at surgery often causes foimation of excessive
and the greater distance between the tubing tip in the ante-
aqueous fibrin and intraocular hemorrhage. Vitreous
nio1 chamber and the body of the shunt placed at the
within the anterio1 chambe1, associated with luxated lenses
equator of the globe beneath the rectus musculature. The
and rupture of the anterior vitreous, may additionally plug
procedure requires that the horse be placed under general
these shunts. If vitreous plugs the tip of the anterior cham-
anesthesia in lateral recumbency. Neuromuscular paralysis
   (l oi-5) asy  1ag
will facilitate placement since the globe must be Ietracted
into the anterio1 chamber to attempt enzymatic degrada-
ventrally in order to expose a dorsal placement site. A con-
tion of the vitreous; alternatively, surgical vitrectomy may
junctival pocket is created and the body of the shunt is
be employed.
sutured to the sclera with 6-0 o1 7-0 nylon at the level of
At this time, the success of anterior chamber shunts is
and beneath the dorsal rectus muscle. The tubing is then
both improving and encouraging (Fig. 10.27). In a large
 primed with tPA, its tip is cut on the bevel so that its length
series involving 83 eyes of 65 dogs that evaluated both
will allow it to extend 5-8 mm into the anterio1 chamber,
the non-valved and Ahmed gonioimplants, maintenance
and then placed into the anterior chamber through a scleral
of IOP of 20 mmHg or less ranged from 4 to 10 months
 tunnel that has been created with a 22 g needle. The con-
depending on the implant. Fifteen of the 22 eyes with IOP
o  ' a de sode  i 
20 mmHg or below were visual 1 year postoperatively.
the surgical site prio1 to the completion of surgery with an
A smaller series of 18 dogs combined the Ahmed implant
antifibrosing agent such as MMC may extend the filtering
with either cyclocryotherapy o1 laser cyclophotocoagulation.
capacity of the bleb by decreasing the scarring around the
 oi  s a  n tr d r a
shunt. Data regarding the long-term efficacy of this step
14 of the 19 eyes had IOP of less than 25 mmHg.
are lacking. but given the horse's propensity for fibrosis
 Sapienza and van der Woerdt reported using the com-
and scar formation, it is reasonable to assume that this
bined transscleral cyclophotocoagulation and Ahmed valved
may extend the usefulness of the implant.
A
G
B
Fig. 10.27 Postoperative appearance after gonioimplants in the dog. (a) Six months postoperatively with an Ahmed gonioimplant in a 7-year-old American
Cocker Spaniel with primary angle-closure glaucoma. (b) Twelve months postoperatively with an Ahmed gonioimplant in a Beagle with inherited open-angle
glaucoma. (c) Slit-lamp biomicroscopic appearance of the anterior chamber tubing in a glaucomatous eye 2 years postoperatively.
293
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
Commercially available shunts are 1elatively small com-
aqueous humo1 outflow pathways. As a result, an elevation
pared to the large size of the equine globe, and their tubing
in IOP immediately following lasel o1 cryotherapy applica-
is necessarily narrow to combat structural rigidity. Although
tion is anticipated. If the IOP elevation is significant and
the tubing in most can accommodate in-vitro flow rates of
lasts fo1 more than a few hours, additional damage to the
20 μL/min, which should in theory be sufficient to facilitate
Tetina, optic nerve, and thus vision may result. Conse-
shunted aqueous outflow in the hoise, when inflammatory
quently, these treatment modalities tend to be applied to
products o1 pressure from the tissues surrounding its tunnel
medically non-iesponsive glaucomatous eyes, although
into the anterior chamber obstruct the diameter of the
attempted ‘prophylactic' treatment of eyes considered to be
lumen, increased resistance to flow and decreased flow
at lisk fo1 the development of disease has been proposed.
lesult, potentially diminishing the efficacy of the implant.
As the effects of lasel cyclodestruction are more controllable,
The use of more than one gonioimplant has been suggested
treatment of visual eyes has become commonplace, and is
to avoid this potential problem in the horse. Gonioimplants
now additionally offered by endolasel cyclophotocoagula-
may be most useful as an adjunctive modality combined
tion systems. Unfortunately, these laser instruments are
with a cyclodestructive procedure and medical therapy
expensive and these costs are reflected to the clients.
Postoperative care consists of topical antibiotics and corti-
As all these therapies induce an intense iridocyclitis,
costeroids, and systemic administration of an NSAID such
preoperative treatment of the eye must include: i) the
as flunixin meglumine. [ntracameral tPA is often necessary
in the immediate postoperative period to lyze accumula
 sss n s    ss
tions of fibrin that may obstruct the shunt tubing. If possi-
anticipated inidocyclitis in the foim of topical and systemic
ble, careful direct injection into the tubing lumen will
corticosteroids and NSAIDs.
have the greatest effect in clearing any fibrin clots within
it. This is often not possible if the injection is administered
Cyclocryothermy
while the animal is sedated yet standing. A short-acting gen-
eral anesthetic will permit easier access to the shunt tubing.
Cyclocryothermy is the application of intense cold directly
through the bulbar conjunctiva and sclera to partially dam-
age the ciliary body and reduce the rate of aqueous humor
Cyclodestructive procedures
formation.(
Cyclocryotheimy can be applied 1epeatedly
because the bulbar conjunctiva and sclera are not adversely
Several procedures have been developed to treat the dif-
affected. The extensive scleral and conjunctival inflamma-
  s  n s d 
tion and damage observed affter application of diathermy
the rate of aqueous humor formation by partial destriction
does not occur in small animals.
of the ciliary body processes. Lise of these techniques was
Cyclocryotheimy is employed primarily in advanced glau
stimulated by the limited initial success of the fltering glau-
comatous eyes to reduce IOP in the presence of persistent
coma procedures, even though the genesis of the primary
pain o1 to induce phthisis bulbi, which is more cosmetically
glaucomas has not been demonstrated to involve the ciliary
acceptable than the buphthalmic eye. This technique is also
body and excessive rates of aqueous humor production.
Used for the treatment of glaucomatous eyes that are non-
Using excessive heat, as in diathermy or lasers, or extreme
Iesponsive to intensive medical treatments and the possibly
cold, as in cryotherapy, these energies are directed through
fo1 1estoration of vision is low. Cyclocryothermy is used
the overlying sclera to the ciliary body processes. Addition-
less frequently in visual eyes with less-advanced canine
ally, dnugs, such as intraocular gentamicin, injected into
glaucoma.
the vitreous space, are extremely toxic to the ciliary body
For effective cyclocryothermy, part of the ciliary body pro-
epithelium and retina.
cesses are frozen and the ciliary body epithelium destroyed
Cyclodestructive therapies have the advantages of multiple
by the freeze-thaw cycle. Immediately after freezing, rupture
of the ciliary epithelia and pigmented cells in the ciliary
under only deep sedation. Application of the cryo- and
 a       i  s
and leak erythrocytes and plasma. The aqueous humo1
body processes. Laser techniques create more limited and
 a i  d as  p a 
focal lesions than cryocyclothermy, and with less collateral
reabsorbed, primarily through the compromised aqueous
tissue damage and complications. In dogs, the treatment
humor outflow pathways.
target area is 5 mm behind the limbus in the dorsal aspects
After the induction of deep sedation or short-acting gen-
of the globe. With globe enlargement, the ciliary processes
eral anesthesia, topical anesthetic is instilled onto the eye
(pars plicata ciliaris) may shift an additional 0.5-1 mm
and the eyelids are retracted by speculum. The globe may
posteriorly. The ciliary body epithelia and ciliary processes
possess remarkable regenerative capabilities, and complete
conjunctiva. The sites for cyclocryotheimy application are
Iecovery from laser and cryotherapy may result. Excessive
determined by calipers, measuring 5 mm posterio1 to the
applications of these energies result in phthisis bulbi, with
limbus (Fig. 10.28a). Repeatable and accurate freezing tem-
inreversible destruction of the ciliary body and permanent
peratures are achieved using nitrous oxide. A 2.0-3.0 mm
ocular hypotony (IOP <5 mmHg).
cryoprobe is applied 5 mm from the limbus directly onto
With the ciliary body cellula1 destnuction in these pro-
the dorsal bulbar conjunctiva (Fig. 10.28b,c).
cedures, large amounts of pigment, erythrocytes, fibrin,
Four to eight sites in the dorsal one-half of the eye are fro-
and cellular membranes will be released into the posterior
zen fo1 120 s, each with the temperature of the cryoprobe
chambe1, and eventually into the already compromised
reaching -60 to -80°C (1eflecting a killing' temperature
294
Cyclodestructive procedures
A
?
C
Fig. 10.28 Cyclocryothermy attempts to partially destroy the ciliary body and reduce the rate of aqueous humor formation and intraocular pressure. (a) The
sites, 4-5 mm posterior to the limbus, for cyclocryothermy are determined by calipers. (b) The cyclocryothermy probe is applied to four to eight sites. Each site
is frozen for 120 s. (c) Cyclocryotherapy using the nitrogen cryoprobe for absolute angle-closure glaucoma in a dog.
of -25 to -30°C at the ciliary body). The 3 and 9 o'clock
positions are avoided to prevent direct damage to the long
posterior ciliary blood vessels. During and after the appli-
cation of cryotherapy, chemosis and hyperemia of the
bulbar _conjunctiva develop. Repository subconjunctival
anti-inflammatories may be used to minimize swelling and
patient discomfort.
Transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation
Transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation  (TsCPC)
uses
energy developed by different types of laser (usually Nd:
YAG and diode lasers in veterinary ophthalmology) to
destroy ciliary body tissue, and reduce aqueous humor fo1-
Fig. 10.29 Appearance of a glaucomatous eye after contact laser
mation through coagulative necrosis. The non-contact and
cyclophotocoagulation. Note the individual laser applications in the sclera.
contact Nd:YAG and now, most frequently, diode lasers have
been used in different animal species, and although costly.
they offer considerable promise in the treatment of glaucoma
In 44 glaucomatous eyes in dogs, laser cyclodestruction
in animals. As with other procedures that attempt to destroy
Ieduced IOP to less than 25 mmHg in 83% of the eyes fo1
the ciliary body, considerable post-treatment anterio1 uveitis
12-24 weeks. In another study, 184 eyes of dogs with pri-
is an anticipated sequela, and may be minimized with the
mary glaucomas were treated with diode laser at 35 sites,
judicious use of preoperative anti-inflammatory therapy.
Varying success rates have been reported for eyes with less
fo1 a duration of 1500 ms (2.25 joules/site). [OP less than
uveal pigmentation; however, 1ecent investigation has con-
30 mmHg was achieved in 71% of the eyes. Of 39 eyes
firmed that although pigment in blue-eyed dogs is more
assessed to have potential for preservation of vision, only
sparsely distributed within the iridal stroma and muscula-
 17 eyes (44%) retained vision 8 weeks post-laser therapy.
ture, the amount of pigment within the ciliary epithelium is
no different when compared to that of brown-eyed dogs.
Diode endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation
TSCPC may also be combined with anterior chamber
shunts in sighted glaucomatous dogs. This combination
Endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation facilitates direct observa-
seems to offer impioved success rates fo1 maintenance of
   i s   sss  a no o
vision long term.
process. Although the amount of energy used varies based on
In a recent report of 46 glaucomatous canine eyes treated
pigment distribution, tissue proximity, and the presence of
with transscleral Nd:YAG cyclophotocoagulation, the num-
cystic uveal structures, the average amount of laser energy
ber of laser 'spots' averaged 35, with a total energy delivered
delivered to each site approximates 250 mW (range 200-350
to each eye of 228 joules (mean energy per burst was
mW) at a continuous duration. The average extent of each
7 joules). Both the dorsal and ventral scleral areas were trea-
ciliary body ablation is 272.5° ± 41.4° (1ange 185-300°). [n
ted using a contact 'G'-probe; the 3 and 9 o'clock positions
the first study by Bras et al, nine dogs and one cat with medi-
were avoided to prevent contact with the long posterior
 o a    i 
ciliary vessels (Fig. 10.29). Audible ‘pops' are the concus-
cyclophotocoagulation, either through a limbal incision in
sive 1esult of tissue micro-explosions and indicate excessive
combination with lenticular phacoemulsification, o1 posteri
energy application. Although excessive ‘pops' should be
crly via a pars plana approach. The average lasel setting was
avoided, the occasional pop 1eassures the surgeon that close
0.4 mW (range 0.25-0.5 mW) with continuous duration; the
to the ideal amount of laser energy is being applied at each
average treated area was 158° (range 90-180°) in eithe1 the
site, resulting in effective photocoagulation.
ventronasal or ventrotemporal quadrants. With follow-up
295
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
times ranging from 1 week to 7 months, IOP was less than
Hyphema occurred as a short-term complication in 16% of
20 mmHg in 9o% of the patients. All patients were visual at
r a sa  n - n a 'sa 
last examination; 9 of the 10 animals 1equired less medication
was complete and did not resolve. Cataract formation seems
 to maintain IOP than before laser therapy.
the most visually damaging complication and occurred in
udopnasd oi 'ezuaides pue zin Aq uodai puoas e uj
 37% of the eyes as a long-term complication. Phthisis bulbi
and aphakic dogs were treated by diode endoscopic cyclo-
also developed.
photocoagulation for secondary glaucoma through a limbal
In a larger series involving 176 eyes of 144 dogs, diode
approach. The average laser energy delivered to each site was
laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation, a contact probe
250 mW (range 200-350 mW) at a continuous duration.
The average extent of ciliary process ablation was 272.5° ±
3-4 mm posterior to the limbus with a power of 1250-
41.4° (range 185-300°). IOP was maintained within the
 2000 mW and a duration of 1500 ms for an average of
 ' d- ) so 01 a yo g i i 
l       d s 
1.7 months), and 5 dogs remained visual.
occurred, requiring anterior chamber paracentesis, and dur-
Current experience
ewould suggest that
 an anterior
ing the first week IOp fluctuations were common and
approach (via either one- or two-port limbal entry) is most
required systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitor treatment.
appropriate for veterinary patients that do not require poste-
With follow-ups of 6 months or longer on 106 eyes, 65%
rior segment surgery. Concurrent lenticular phacoemulsi-
(69 eyes) had IOP less than 30 mmHg. Of the 45 eyes
fication facilitates maximal ciliary sulcus exposure, as well
assessed to have the potential fo1 vision, 53% (10 of 19 eyes)
 lnod e se uoo eiein snasqns suo se
had vision. Failures were associated with persistent o1 recuI-
complication (secondary to diode laser energy o1 direct sul-
lent increases in IOP, cataract foimation, intraocula1 hemo1-
 s   s    
rhage, corneal ulceration due to lagophthalmos, and retinal
itself have beneficial effects in cases of anterio1 chamber
detachment. This clinical study was applied to primary glau-
CIowding secondary to intumescences. Adequate ciliary sul-
coma cases at different stages of the disease, and many
cus inflation is necessary in order to fully visualize the ciliary
eyes had no potential for vision. For a future study, careful
processes. This is accomplished using a sodium hyaluronate-
selection of patients prior to laser cyclophotocoagulation
based viscoelastic material, which permits the transmission
may yield improved results.
of laser energy. With four to six ciliary processes in view.
In the study by Lutz and Sapienza of 10 dogs treated by
the laser targeting beam should be situated over the ciliary
laser endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation, vision was pie-
piemdn ue u patdde Aiaua pue paiean aq oi sassannd
served in 6 of 10 patients, and the amount of glaucoma
painting' motion. Effectively tieated ciliary processes will
medications to maintain IOP below 25 mmHg was mark-
be noted to shrink and turn white. Copious proteinaceous
edly 1educed. Complications included superficial coneal
ulceration (1/10) and recurrence of glaucoma (2/10).
 n ln i aod i aq n  
optimal visualization. Residual viscoelastic matenial is com-
 Adaptations in large animals
pletely aspirated following surgery, and the incision closed
using a single cruciate suture of 6-0 to 9-0 absorbable material.
and special species
-e lan ue j sn aneiadoisod aea 
Cyclodestructive procedures such as cyclocryothermy and
inflammatory agent (0.1-0.2 mL dexamethasone 4 mg/mL)
tansscleral cyclophotocoagulation are the most common
as well as tPA has been advocated by some surgeons.
surgical approaches to the treatment of equine glaucomas
(Figs 10.30 and 10.31). This is due to the non-invasive
Postoperative management and results
nature of these procedures compared to placement of an
anterior chamber shunt, and the ability to perform either
Conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis follow cyclocryoth-
procedure in the standing animal under adequate sedation
ermy and may be intense. Topical and systemic corticosteroids
with local anesthesia.
and antiprostaglandins reduce cryogenic inflammation and
General anesthesia may be necessary with certain individuals
tissue destriction. IOP is maintained within normal limits
whose temperament does not permit a standing procedure,
with topical and/or systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
and may ease the administration of the chosen treatment
After approximately 4-6 weeks, the eventual 1esult of cyclo-
modality. Recently technology has evolved for endoscopic
Cryothermy can be ascertained. In the event that IOP is still ele-
cyclophotocoagulation which permits direct visualization of
vated in the absence of other medications, cyclocryothermy
the target ciliary processes during the application of laser
 can be repeated.
energy and therefore a more precise treatment. This procedure,
Complications following cyclocryotherapy include chemo-
however, must be performed under general anesthesia.
sis, conjunctivitis, corneal granulation, iris depigmentation,
retinal detachments, transiently increased IOP, iridocyclitis,
Cyclocryothermy
and phthisis bulbi. Cryotherapy may be more likely to p1o-
duce retinal detachments than laser cyclodestruction.
Cyclocryotheimy employs intense cold applied directly to
In a senies in 1990 involving 56 eyes of 37 dogs with glau-
the globe to partially destroy the ciliary epithelium that is
coma, short-term treatment success after laser cyclodestric-
the site of aqueous humor formation. After intravenous
tion, as determined by maintenance of IOP less than
sedation or short-acting general anesthesia, topical anesthe-
25 mmHg fo1 12-24 weeks, was 83%. Three of the fou1 treat-
sia is applied to the globe to facilitate anesthesia and analge-
ment failures were in eyes devoid of uveal pigmentation.
sia. A 3 mm cryoprobe with a nitrous oxide source is placed
296
Cyclodestructive procedures
A
B
Fig. 10.30 (a) Glaucoma in an Appaloosa. Note the buphthalmos, corneal edema, and mydriasis of the right eye. (b) Intraoperative photograph of transscleral
Cyclophotocoagulation with the diode laser in a horse with glaucoma.
A
Fig. 10.31 (a) This horse has clinical signs of glaucoma, including mydriasis and corneal edema. (b) The same eye 6 months later after laser transscleral
cyclophotocoagulation. The corneal edema has cleared but keratitis is present.
on the conjunctiva pressed to the sclera 6 mm posterior to
the limbus for a double fast-freeze, slow-thaw session at
port the external ocular structures if chemosis is profound.
six sites on the globe. The cryoprobe is applied to each site
The hypotensive effect of this procedure may be short lived
fo1 1 min. Care must be taken to avoid the 3 and 9 o'clock
as recurrence of elevated IOP has been reported as early as
positions on the globe to prevent damage to the long poste-
6 weeks postoperatively. This is most likely the 1esult of
nio1 ciliary artelies. Cyclocryodestnction is often 1eserved
 regeneration of the ciliary epithelium.
fo1 buphthalmic globes that are blind or have questionable
vision since this procedure is usually associated with signifi-
Laser cyclophotocoagulation
cant postoperative uveitis. [n visual eyes, this uveitis can
Cyclophotocoagulation has fewer intraocular side effects
the eye may have. Chemosis is a common, although tran-
than cyclocryothermy and is therefore the surgical treatment
sient, sequela. Postoperative treatment consists of support-
of choice. Contact TSCPC has been perfoimed with both
ive topical corticosteroids and systemic NSAIDs. Topical
the Nd:YAG and the semiconductor diode lasers with
297
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
similar results. Since the equine ciliary body varies in antero-
medications are continued and tapered as the postoperative
posterior length by the quadrant of the globe, the surgeon
inflammation improves over the next few weeks. Topical
should be familiar with the anatomy of this target tissue.
antiglaucoma medications should also be continued, and
The contact probe of the laser should be placed on the
may remain necessary in the extended postoperative period
globe 4-6 mm posterior to the limbus, avoiding the nasal
to maintain the target IOP. The IOP should be evaluated
quadrant and the 3 and 9 o'clock positions. Treatment in
 24 h after surgery since it may lise again following para-
the nasal quadrant is more likely to be associated with cata-
centesis, and this procedure may need to be repeated.
ract formation and retinal detachment.
The IOP lowering effect from the destruction of the ciliary
Prio1 to TSCPC, an affected eye should be treated medi-
body epithelium occurs 2-4 weeks after the laser proce-
cally to control any active anterior uveitis. Laser surgery
dure.
 Cyclophotocoagulation may need to be repeated at
perfoimed on an already inflamed eye is more likely
to
some point due to ciliary epithelial regeneration. Diligent
result in profound postoperative uveitis and lesser control
long-term monitoring of IOp will be necessary for the
of the elevated IOP. Topical corticosteroids should be
life of the patient. If concurrent equine recurrent uveitis
instituted at least 24 h before surgery and dosed fou1
(ERU) is present, topical and systemic anti-inflammatories
times daily. Systemic NSAIDs should also be given the
may be necessary long term, and the addition of a
day prior to surgery and continued as necessary into the
postoperative period. A single dose of atropine should
indicated
be administered prior to surgery and may be necessary
 A 1ecent retrospective evaluation of diode laser TSCPC
postoperatively as well. After the animal has been sedated
in 27 horses revealed that, in 90% of horses, adjunctive
heavily or placed under general anesthesia, an eyelid
medical therapy was required to keep the IOP within the
pdde siu oasaue ierdon pe paeid si uas
 target range (Figs 10.32 and 10.33). Vision was maintained
to the globe. Using a diode laser setting of 1200-2000
 d-m   l sd a po  
mW, 40-60 sites are treated fo1 a duration of 1500-5000
of 33 months. A recent study using the Nd:YAG laser in
ms. The settings are then adjusted so that an audible
23 eyes of 16 horses 1evealed that IOP was maintained
'pop' is heard in approximately one-third of the sites trea-
in the target range in 70% of cases more than 20 weeks
M oosl si suas namod jeu poo e 'enauae ul pa
after surgery. Sixty percent of these animals remained visual
fo1 a duration of 1500 ms, which will deliver 2.25 joules/
after the procedure, which was the same percentage of ani-
site. This has been determined to be the ideal energy to
mals visual before the procedure. Complications of TSCPC
achieve the desied effects without causing significant
included chemosis and conjunctival hyperemia, transient
unwanted collateral damage to normal tissue. When using
scleral fistulas, coineal ulcerations, hyphema, cataract, retinal
the Nd:YAG lasel, a power setting of 11 W fo1 a duration
detachment, phthisis bulbi, and failure to control IOP. Seri
of 0.4 s at 60 sites will deliver a total energy dose of 264
ous complications ale rare, howevel. The most common
joules.
complications noted were coineal ulcerations that healed
Immediately after the laser procedure has been perfor-
quickly and uneventfully. These may occur due to coineal
med, the IOP should be determined. Ocular hypertension
desensitization from the TSCPC or from exposure during
is common following lasel ablative procedures and should
the procedure.
aiaau o oe e ym sisanuaneed shoanbe e paiean a
 There are no published reports of diode endoscopic
and an attached 1 cc syringe inserted into the anterio1
cyclophotocoagulation in horses to date, but research is
chamber at the corneoscleral limbus. Aqueous humor is
ongoing. Preliminary results indicate that this may be an
removed to restore IOP to between 10 and 15 mmHg.
effective procedure for the control of IOp in glaucomatous
After surgery. topical  and  systemic anti-inflammatory
horse eyes. The disadvantage of this procedure is that it must
A
B
Fig. 10.32 (a) Intraoperative photograph of transscleral cyclophotocoagulation with Nd:YAG in a horse. (b) The same eye 5 days after transscleral diode
'aseaunap on paadxa ang paneala lls s! ainssaid iejnzoeynui aul uopeinbeosoioudopns
298
Pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body
B
Fig. 10.33 (a) Burns are apparent on the surface of the sclera of a horse after transscleral cyclophotocoagulation. (b) Intraoperative photograph of burns of
the ciliary body processes made with endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation.
be performed under general anesthesia; however, that may
to treat, but it is likely that between 180° and 270° will be
provide the opportunity for combined procedures. An
a reasonable starting point.
equine patient under general anesthesia for endoscopic
cyclophotocoagulation may also benefit from the placement
 Pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body
of a gonioshunt o1, if ERul is a concurrent problem, a slow-
Ielease suprachoroidal cyclosporine implant. The procedure
is similar to that in small animals with exceptions made
Unfortunately, with less than optimal success rates of tradi-
fo1 the comparatively large size of the equine eye. A longer
tional glaucoma filtration surgical procedures and the often
probe has been developed by the manufacturer to accom-
late initial presentation of glaucomatous eyes in small ani-
modate the large diameter of the globe. There are two possi-
mals, salvage procedures to prevent ocular pain, reduce to
ble approaches for this procedure. The limbal approach is
near normal size the enlarged globe, and still provide a cos-
begun with a 2-3 mm coineal incision. Viscoelastic materi-
metically acceptable eye may be necessary. These procedures
als are injected through this incision to fill the anterior
include: 1) pharmacologic destriction of the ciliary body
chamber and the ciliary sulcus between the iris and the
     
lens. The endoscopic probe is then inserted into the eye
intraocular) silicone prosthesis within an eviscerated globe;
and the laser energy is applied to the visible ciliary pro-
and 3) enucleation (surgical removal of the entire globe).
cesses. Once the treatment is complete, the viscoelastic
Fo1 the latter two surgical procedures, see Chapter 4.
material is Iemoved and the incision is closed outinely.
Pharmacologic destriction of the ciliary body with intra-
Intracameral tPA injected at the completion of surgery
ocular injections of gentamicin is a salvage procedure
may aid in the dissolution of fibrin that foims as a result
Ieserved for advanced and blind primary glaucomatous eyes
of tissue trauma. To date, the limbal approach has only been
in small animals. This method is an economic alternative to
-ixa ue ul see oropnasd ao sede u pao
imental protocol using cadaver eyes, the limbal approach
An intravitreal injection of gentamicin at the cytotoxic dose
Iesulted in excessive contact with the normal lens which is
of 25 mg can destroy the ciliary body and reduce aqueous
likely to result in postoperative cataract formation. The alter-
humor formation. The procedure is restricted to blind
chronic primary glaucomatous eyes that are buphthalmic
and painful in the dog and horse. This procedure is not
this appears to be potentially less traumatic to the noimal
Iecommended fo1 cats, as some cats have been reported to
lens, it is likely to be associated with higher rates of compli-
 develop intraocular sarcomas after intravitreal gentamicin
cations for the posterior segment, including hemorrhage
administration. Glaucomatous eyes with concurrent intraoc-
and retinal detachment. The large size of the horse eye
ular inflammation or neoplasia are not candidates fo1 this
may necessitate the use of multiple incisions to access suffi-
procedure.
cient ciliary tissue to effect the desired result. Sufficient data
The technique is performed under short-acting general
are not available to 1ecommend the ideal amount of tissue
anesthesia or tianquilization combined with
 topical
299
10
 Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
are associated with a higher incidence of severe phthisis
bulbi. Dexamethasone (1 mg) may be combined with the
gentamicin to minimize the inflammation and discomfort
that result from the injection.
Once the patient has been adequately sedated and locally
anesthetized, the eye and the conjunctival foinices should
be cleaned with a dilute povidone-iodine solution. An eye-
lid speculum may facilitate exposure of the injection site.
?
A 20 or 22 g needle attached to a 6 mL syringe is positioned
dorsolaterally, approximately 7 mm posterior to the limbus
Fig. 10.34 In pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body, a cytotoxic dose of
and directed at a 45° angle away from the lens and toward
gentamicin is injected into the vitreous space. (a) A 2.5 cm (1") 20 g 
the optic nerve. Before the gentamicin or gentamicin-dexa-
hypodermic needle is inserted 6-8 mm posterior to the limbus into the
methasone combination is injected, an equal o1 greater vol-
vitreous body. (b) After aspiration of an equal volume of liquefied vitreous, 25
ume of vitreous should be removed. If vitreous cannot be
mg gentamicin and 1 mg dexamethasone are injected.
the ocular volume and temporarily lower IOP. Aqueocent-
anesthesia. The eyelids are retracted by speculum, and the
esis is performed with a small gauge needle, usually 27 01
coineal and conjunctival surfaces are cleansed with 0.5%
30 g. inserted at the limbus into the anterior chamber. Care
povidone-iodine solution. To inject 25 mg of gentamicin
should be taken to ensure that the needle stays parallel
combined with 1 mg dexamethasone (to moderate the
to the plane of the iris while it is inside to eye to avoid dam-
post-injection inflammation), a 2.5 cm (1") 20 g hypo-
age to the iris and lens, which could result in intraoculal
dermic needle is inserted 6-8 mm posterior to the dorsal
hemorrhage and inflammation.
limbus and directed about 10-15 mm into the center of
This procedure, a form of cyclodestruction, is effective
the vitreous space (Fig. 10.34a). Ater the aspiration of
at lowering IOP, but does not address any other disease
0.5-0.6 mL of liquid vitreous, gentamicin (0.25 mL of a
processes that may be ongoing within the eye. If uveitis 
100 mg/mL solution) and dexamethasone (0.25 mL of a
is the initiator of glaucoma, this procedure will not treat
4 mg/mL solution) are injected (Fig. 10.34b).
the persistent inflammatory response. Uveitic eyes with
Post-injection management after pharmacologic ablation
controlled ocular hypertension may still require anti-
of the ciliary body includes primarily topical antibiotics and
inflammatory therapy to keep the animal comfortable.
corticosteroids. If IOP elevations develop, short-term medical
This procedure should be used with caution in eyes with
therapy is used. Pharmacologic ablation of the eye is suc-
diseased coineas. Animals with blind, glaucomatous eyes
cessful in about 65% of dog eyes in markedly lowering
and complicated corneal ulcers may be best served by
IOP. Eyes with marked elevations in IOP are less likely to
enucleation.
respond to intraocular gentamicin injections. Eyes that fail
to respond to the initial intravitreal injection of gentamicin
have only a 50% success rate to the second injection. Marked
Neuroprotection
reduction in the size of the normal globe (phthisis bulbi)
occurs in about 10-50% of the eyes. Reduction in the size
The pathophysiology of the glaucomas is marked by neuro-
of advanced and enlarged glaucomatous eyes in dogs is
degeneration. This degeneration is mediated through cellular
common, occurring in about 80% of the eyes. Frequent
apoptosis and shares many similarities with other neurode-
complications of intravitreal gentamicin include intraocular
generative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and
hemorrhage, corneal opacification, cataract formation, and
AIDS-related dementia. The exact mechanisms of this process
phthisis bulbi.
are complex and incompletely understood, but a decreased
supply of vital neurotrophic substances to RGC bodies, as
Adaptations in large animals
well as alterations in vascula1 delivery and autoregulation,
and special species
have been postulated to result in altered mitochondrial func-
tion and permeability and a local milieu of glutamate-related
Pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body in horses should
toxicity, leading to the calcium influx which marks the apo-
be reserved for permanently blind eyes that have persistently
ptotic process. Additionally, this process has been shown to
elevated IOP and buphthalmia. It is a particularly useful
be self-perpetuating, such that neuronal death may continue
 treatment option for an animal in which the risks of general
in spite of control of the initiating stimulus, in this case
anesthesia for enucleation or placement of an intraocular
elevated IOP.
   s o se   e 
Hence, a complete strategy for the successful long-term
individuals. The procedure is similar to that in dogs, but
management of glaucoma should encompass not only IOP
when perfoimed in the standing animal will require ade-
quate sedation, an auriculopalpebral motor block, and the
a il on idae ue ose in (aaone passsi sab
instillation of both topical anesthetic and phenylephrine
ensuing cycle of neurodegeneration.
(2.5% to blanch or vasoconstrict the conjunctival vascula-
The translation of this 'neuroprotective' approach into a
ture). The reported doses of gentamicin used vary from a
meaningful clinical strategy is challenging, and is com-
total dose of 25 to 100 mg. but generally 25 mg is sufficient
sing the potential benefits of such therapies. Proposed
IOP and induce mild shrinkage of the globe. Higher doses
neuroprotective therapies are summarized in Table 10.6.
300
Neuroprotection
 Table 10.6 Possible neuroprotectants for the animal glaucomas
Class
Name
Description
 NMDA antagonists
 Memantine, flupirtine 
Excitotoxicity results from excessive activation (excitation) of NMDA
receptors and is thought to mediate Ca-dependent neurotoxicity
associated with neurologic injury, through alterations in the receptor's ion
channel
NMDA antagonists remain potentially promising compounds, in spite of
early disappointing human trial results
Memantine is an open channel blocker giving rise to the property of 'use
 dependence' (higher concentrations of glutamate open a greater
 proportion of channels, which results in greater access for memantine)
 Second-generation amantadine derivatives are currently in development 
 Calcium channel
 Flunarazine, lomerazine, betaxolol, nifedipine
Calcium channel blockers reduce Ca influx into stressed cells and may also 
blockers
slow the influx of cytosol free Ca into mitochondria; they may also prevent
ET1-mediated nitric oxide hypoperfusion
 Betaxolol, a beta-blocker used to reduce IOP, has Ca channel-blocking 
properties and has also demonstrated potentialy neuroprotective effects
 Adrenergic agents
 Nipradilol, brimonidine
 The beta-blocker nipradilol and the αz-agonist brimonidine promote the
survival and function of RGCs and may act as anti-apototics; they may also 
directly modulate NMDA-receptor function and stabilize ion pores
 Prostaglandin analogs
Unoprostone
Unoprostone may inhibit glutamate stimulation and open potassium
channels under conditions of high intracellular Ca, thereby closing 
voltage-gated Ca channels and limiting neuronal damage
 Immunomodulators 
Cyclosporine
The inner mitochondrial membrane permeability transition pore complex
(PTPC) is cyclosporine inhibited, thus raising its potential for therapeutic
use
 NOS inhibitors/ROS
 N-nitro--arginine, aminoguanidine, SC-51, L-N 
Inhibitors of nitric oxide synthase (NOs) have been shown to
 scavengers
(6)-(1-iminoethyl)lysine 5-tetrazole amide,
 experimentally reduce levels of nitric oxide and consequently exhibit
vitamin E
neuroprotective properties
IOP, intraocular pressure; NMDA, N-methyl-D-aspartic acid; RCG, retinal ganglion cell; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
 Further reading
General and conventional filtration
32 cases [1997-2003). I Am Vet Med Assoc
focus on ganglion cell axonal mitochondria.
procedures
227(9):1434-1441. 2005.
Prog Brain Res 173:339-352. 2008.
Abraham LM, Selva D. Casson R, Leibovitch l:
Gelatt KN: Canine glaucoma. In Gelatt KN.
Peiffer RL, Gwin RM. Gelatt KN. Schenk M:
 Mitomycin: clinical applications in
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 2.
Combined posterior sclerectomy.
 ophthalmic practice. Drugs 66:321-340.
Philadelphia. 1991. Lea and Febiger.
cyclodialysis. and trans-scleral iridencleisis
2006.
pp 396-428.
in the management of primary glaucoma.
Atreides SP, Skuta GL, Reynolds AC: Wound
Gelatt KN, Brooks DE: The glaucomas. ln
Canine Practice 4:54-61. 1977.
 healing modulation in glaucoma filtering
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology.
 Stack WF: Posterior sclerotomy - a surgical
surgery, mt Ophchalmol Clin 44:61-106,
ed 3. Baltimore. 1999. Lippincott, Williams
procedure for treatment of glaucoma, J Am
and wilkins. pp 701-754.
2004.
Vet Med Assoc 136:453-455. 1960.
Barton K. Heuer DK: Modern aqueous shunt
Khaw PT. Sherwood MB. Doyle JW. Smith MF.
Vierheller RC: Surgery for glaucoma: an analysis
implantation: future challenges, Prog Brain
Grierson l., McGorray S. Schultz GS:
of technics. Mod Vet Pract 49:46-68. 1968.
Res 173:263-276. 2008.
Intraoperative and postoperative treatment
Weinstein WL, Dietrich UM. Sapienza IS.
 Bedford PGC: The surgical treatment of canine
with 5-fluorouracil and mitomycin-c: long
Carmichael KP. Moore PA. Krunkosky T:
glaucoma, J Small Anim Pract 18:713-730.
term effects in vivo on subconjunctival and
ldentification of ocular matrix
1977.
scleral fibroblasts. Imt Ophthalmol
metalloproteinases [MMPs) within the
 Bedford PGC: The treatment of canine
16[4-5):381-385. 1992.
aqueous humor of normal canine eyes
glaucoma, Vet Rec 107:101-104. 1980.
Khaw PT, Occleston NL, Schultz G, Grierson I.
and canine eyes with glaucoma. Proceedings
 Sherwood MB, Larkin G: Activation and
of the 36th Meeting of the American College
Ching-Costa A, Chen TC: Malignant glaucoma.
suppression of fibroblast function [review].
ofVeterinary Ophthalmologists:Abstract 66.
Imt Ophthalmol Clin 40:117-125, 2000.
Eye 8(Pt 2):188-195. 1994.
2005.
Cook C: Surgery for glaucoma, Vet Clin North
Keller Sl: Glaukom bein Pferd-2. Pferdeheizunde
Whitley RD: Surgical management of glaucoma.
Am Small Anim Pract 27:1109-1129. 1997.
10:261-266. 1994.
In Bojrab Ml, editor: Current Tecimiques in
Czederpiltz IM, La Croix NC. van der Woerdt A,
Osbome NN: Pathogenesis of ganglion 'cell
Small Animal Surgery, ed 3. Philadelphia.
et al: Putative aqueous humor misdirection
death' in glaucoma and neuroprotection:
1990. Lea and Febiger pp 104-112.
syndrome as a cause of glaucoma in cats:
301
10
Surgical procedures for the glaucomas
 cyclophotocoagulation and Ahmed
dogs with primary glaucoma, Vet
Anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
gonioimplantation in dogs with primary
Ophthalmol 7:311-318. 2004.
Bedford PGC: A clinical evaluation of a one-
glaucoma: 51 cases. Vet Ophthalmol 8:
Hardman C. Stanley RG: Diode laser
 piece drainage system in the treatment of
121-127. 2005.
 transscleral cyclophotocoagulation for the
canine glaucoma. J Small Anim Pract
Sapienza IS. Simo Fl. Prades-Sapienza A:
 treatment of primary glaucoma in 18 dogs:
30:68-75. 1989.
Golden Retriever uveitis: 75 cases
a retrospective study. Vet Ophthatmol
Bentley E. Nasisse MP. Glover T. Nelms S:
[1994-1999). Vet Ophthalmol 3
4:209-216. 2001.
 Implantation of filtering devices in dogs
[4):241-246. 2000.
Lutz EA. Sapienza IS: Diode endoscopic
with glaucoma: preliminary results in
 Sherwood MB: Complications of silicone tube
13 eyes. Progress in Veterinary and
drainage devices. In Sherwood MB.
and aphakic dogs with secondary glaucoma.
Comparative Ophthatmology 6:243-246.
Spaeth GL, editors: Complications in
Proceedings of the 39th Meeting of the
1996.
Glaucoma Surgery. Thorofare, N]. 1990.
American College of Veterinary
Bentley E. Miller PE. Murphy Cl. Schoster IV:
Slack. pp 307-326.
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 75. 2008.
 Combined cycloablation and
Strubbe DT. Gelatt KN. Mackay MO: In vitro
Merideth RE. Gelatt KN: Cryotherapy in
gonioimplantation for treatment of
 flow characteristics of the Ahmed and self-
veterinary ophthalmology. Vet Clin North
glaucoma in dogs: 18 cases (1992-1998).
constructed anterior chamber shunts, Am J
Am 10:837-846. 1980.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 215:1469-1472. 1999.
Vet Res 58:1332-1337. 1997.
Moller l, Cook CC. Peiffer RL. Nasisse MP.
Cullen CL. Allen AL, Grahn BH: Anterior
Tinsley DM, Betts DM: Clinical experience with
Harling DE: Indications for and
chamber to frontal sinus shunt for the
a glaucoma drainage device in dogs.
 complications of pharmacological ablation
diversion of aqueous humor: a pilot study
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
of the ciliary body for the treatment of
in four normal dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
4:77-84. 1994.
chronic glaucoma in the dog. I Am Anim
1:31-39. 1998.
Tinsley DM, Niyo Y. Tinsley LM, Betts DM: In
Hosp Assoc 22:319-326. 1986.
Garcia GA, Brooks DE, Gelatt KN, et al: Clinical
vitro evaluation of the effects of 5-
Nadelstein B, wilcock B, Cook C. Davidson M:
Evaluation of a nonvalved 'T'-shaped
fluorouracil and mitomycin-c on canine
Clinical and histopathologic effects of diode
 gonioimplant in acutely glaucomatous dogs
subconjunctival and subtenon's fibroblasts.
laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation in
at the University of Mexico. Proceedings of
Veterinaryand ComparativeOphthalmology
 the normal canine eye. Veterinary and
the American College ofVeterinary
5:218-230. 1995.
Comparative Ophthalmology 7:155-162.
Ophthatmologists 24:124. 1993.
Wirostko Wl. Mieler WF. Levin DS. et al:
1997.
Garcia-Sanchez GA. Brooks DE, Gelatt KN.
Hypotony and retinal complications after
Nasisse MP. Davidson MG: Laser therapy in
Kubilis PS. Gil F, Whitley RD: Evaluation 
aqueous humor shunt implantation: the
veterinary ophthalmology: perspective and
of valved and nonvalved gonioimplants in
1999 Dohlman lecture. Int Ophthalmol Clin
potential. Semin Vet Med Surg 3:52-61.
83 eyes of 65 dogs with glaucoma. Animal
40:1-12. 2000.
1988.
Eye Research 17:9-16. 1998.
Cyclodestructive procedures
Nasisse MP, Davidson MG. English RV.
Gelatt KN: Evaluation of the Krupin-Denver
 Jamieson V. Harling DE. Tate LP: Treatment
valve implant in normotensive and
 Bingaman DP. Lindley DM, Glickman NW.
of glaucoma by use of transscleral
glaucomatous Beagles. I Am Vet Med Assoc
Krohne SG. Bryan GM: Intraocular
neodymium:yttrium aluminum garnet laser
191:1404-1409. 1987.
 gentamicin and glaucoma: a retrospective
 cyclophotocoagulation in dogs. I Am Vet
Gelatt KN, Mackay EO: Pilot study of a valved
study of 60 dog and cat eyes [1985-1993).
Med Assoc 197:350-354. 1990.
 anterior shunt to the parotid duct in
Veterinary and ComparativeOphthalmology
Newkirk KN, Haines DK, Calvarese ST.
glaucomatous dogs [abstract]. Proceedings of
4:113-119. 1994.
Esson DW, Chandler HL: Differences in
the American College ofVeterinary
Bras ID. Robbin TE. Wyman M, Rogers AL:
 pigment distribution within the ciliary body
Ophthalmologists 31:250. 2000.
 Diode endoscopic cydlophotocoagulation in 
of blue-eyed and brown-eyed dogs.
Gelatt KN. Brooks DE. Miller TR. Smith PJ.
canine and feline glaucoma, Proceedings of the
Proceedings of the 39th Meeting of the
 Sapienza JS. Pellicane CP: Issues in
36th Meeting of the American College of
American College of Veterinary
ophthalmic surgery: the development of
Veterinary Ophthalmologis: Abscract 50, 2005.
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 102:2008.
anterior chamber shunts for the clinical
Brightman AH, Vestre WA. Helper LC.
Quinn RF. Parkinson K, Wilcock BP.
 management of the canine glaucomas.
Tomes JE: Cryosurgery for the treatment of
Tingey DP: The effects of continuous
Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Canine glaucoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
wave Nd:YAG and semiconductor diode
Ophthalmology 2:59-64. 1992.
18:319-322. 1982.
laser energy on the canine ciliary body:
Grahn BH, Cullen CL: Frontal sinus shunting of
 Brinkmann MC, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG.
in vitro thermographic analysis. Veterinary
aqueous humor in dogs with primary
English RV, Olivero DK: Neodymium:YAG
and Comparative Ophthatmology 6:45-50.
glaucoma [abstract]. Proceedings of the
 laser treatment of iris bombe and pupillary
1996.
American College of Veterinary
 block glaucoma. Progress in Veterinary and
 Roberts SM, Severin GA, Lavach JD:
Ophthalmologists 30:28. 1999.
Comparative Ophthalmology 2:13-19. 1992.
Cyclocryotherapy - part ll. Clinical
Guerrero AH, Latina MA: Complications of
Cook C. Brinkmann M, Priehs D. Abrams K.
 comparison of liquid nitrogen and nitrous
glaucoma drainage implant surgery. It
 Nasisse M. Faya G: Diode laser transscleral
 oxide cryotherapy on glaucomatous eyes.
Ophthalmol Clin 40:149-163. 2000.
cyclophotocoagulation for glaucoma in
J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 20:828-833. 1984.
Hakanson Nw: Extraorbital diversion of
dogs [abstract]. Proceedings of the American
Sapienza JP. Miller TR. Gum GG. Gelatt KN:
aqueous humor in the treatment of
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists 25:76.
Contact transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
 glaucoma in the dog: a pilot study including
1994.
two recipient sites, Veterinary and
Cook C. Davidson M, Brinkmann M. Priehs D.
garnet laser in normal dogs. Progress in
Comparative Ophthalmology 6:82-90. 1996.
Abrams K. Nasisse M: Diode laser
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
 Pellicane CP. Gelatt KN, Brooks DE. Smith PM.
 transscleral cyclophotocoagulation for the
2:147-153. 1992.
 McCalla T. Dice P: A clinical comparison of
treatment of glaucoma in dogs: results of six
 Sullivan TC, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
five gonioimplant types in the dog.
and twelve month follow-up. Veterinary and
Glover TL: Canine retinopexy - a
Proceedings of the American College of
Comparative Ophthalmology 7:148-154.
determination of surgical landmarks. and a
Veterinary Ophthatmologists 24:123. 1093.
1997.
comparison of cryoapplication and diode
Sapienza JS. van der Woerdt A: Combined
Qullen Cl: Cullen frontal sinus valved
laser methods. Veterinary and Comparative
 transscleral diode laser
glaucoma shunt: preliminary findings in
Ophthalmology 7:89-95. 1997.
302
Further reading
Vestre WA. Brightman AH: Ciliary body
Brooks DE, Matthews AG: Equine
Miller TL. willis AM. wilkie DA. Hoshaw-
temperatures during cyclocryotherapy in
ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Woodard S. Stanley JRL: Description of
clinically normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
ciliary body anatomy and identification of 
44:135-143. 1983.
Blackwell., pp 1165-1274.
sites for transscleral cyclophotocoagulation
West CS, Barrie K: The use of cryosurgery in a
 Esson Dw, Popp MP. Liu L, Schultz GS.
in the equine eye. Vet Ophthalmol
veterinary ophthalmology practice. Semin
 Sherwood MB: Microarray analysis of the
4:183-190. 2001.
Vet Med Surg 3:77-82. 1988.
 failure of filtering blebs in a rat model of
Miller TR, Brooks DE. Smith Pl. et al: Equine
Wolfer J. Wyman D, wilson B: Use of a non-
glaucoma filtering surgery. hmvest Ophthalmol
glaucoma: clinical findings and response to
contact neodymium:ytrium aluminum
Vis Sci 45[12):4450-4462. 2004.
treatment in 14 horses, Veterinary and
garnet laser in the treatment of canine
Esson Dw, Sherwood MB. Sampson EM.
Comparative Ophthalmology 5:170-182.
glaucoma, Proceedings of the American
 Schultz GS. Samuelson DA: Glaucoma
1995.
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists 24:138.
drainage implant surgery has a higher
Morreale RJ. Wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler AJ.
1993.
 survival rate as a primary procedure in a
 et al: Histologic effect of semiconductor
rabbit model. Proceedings of che 36th Meeting
diode laser transscleral
Antifibrosis drugs
of the American College of Veterinary
 cyclophotocoagulation on the equine eye.
Glover TL, Nasisse MP. Davidson MG: The
Ophthatmologists: Abstract 5. 2005.
Vet Ophthalmol 11:84-92. 2007.
 effects of topical mitomycin-c on fibrosis
Esson DW. Gelatt KN, MacKay E, et al:
Pickett IP. Ryan J: Equine glaucoma: a
following glaucoma filtration implant
 Development of gene microarray chips for
retrospective study of 11 cases from
surgery in normal dogs. Proceedings of the
canine and rabbit ocular tissues. Proceedings
1988 to 1993. Vet Med 88:756-763. 1993.
American College of Veterinary
of the 36th Meeting of the American College of
Popp MP. Liu L, Timmers A, Esson DW, et al:
Ophthalmologists 25:75. 1994.
Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Abstract 8. 2005.
Development of a microarray chip for gene
Lee DA: Antifibrosis agents and glaucoma
Esson Dw. Sherwood MB, Tuli SS.
expression in rabbit ocular research, Mol Vis
surgery.hmvest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
 Sampson EM, Schultz GS. Samuelson DA: A
13:164-173. 2007.
35:3789-3791. 1994.
sequential multiple treatment approach to
 Townsend wM: Food and fiber-producing
Polak MB. Valamanesh F. Felt O. et al:
 influence wound healing following
animal ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
Controlled delivery of 5-chlorouracil using
glaucoma filtration surgery in a rabbit
editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 4. Ames.
 poly(ortho esters) in filtering surgery for
model. Proceedings of the 36th Meeting of the
2006. Blackwell. pp 1275-1335.
glaucoma, Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
American College of Veterinary
Weber AJ. Harman CD, Viswanathan S: Effects
49:2993-3003. 2008.
Ophthatmologists: Abstract 9. 2005.
of optic nerve injury. glaucoma. and
Skuta GL: Antifibrotic agents in glaucoma
Frauenfelder HC, Vestre WA: Cryosurgical
neuroprotection on the survival, structure.
filtering surgery. Int Ophthalmol Clin
 treatment of glaucoma in a horse. Vet Med
and function of ganglion cells in the
33:165-182. 1993.
Small Amim Clin 76:183-186. 1981.
mammalian retina. J Physiol 586(Pt 18):
Kellner Sl: Glaukom beim Pferd-2. Teil.
4393-4400. 2008.
Equine and special species glaucoma
[Glaucoma in the horse. Part ll.].
Whigham HM. Brooks DE, Andrews SE, et al:
Annear MJ, wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler AJ:
Pferdeheilhumde 10:261-266. 1994.
Treatment of equine glaucoma by
 Diode laser transscleral
Lassaline ME, Brooks DE: Equine glaucoma. In
transscleral neodymium-yttrium
 Cyclophotocoagulation for treatment of
Gilger BC, editor: Equine Ophthalmology. St
aluminum garnet laser
equine glaucoma: a retrospective study of 42
Louis, 2005. Saunders. pp 323-339.
cyclophotocoagulation: a retrospective
eyes of 36 horses). Proceedings of the 39th
 Meek LA: Intraocular silicone prosthesis in a
study of 23 eyes of 16 horses. Vet
Anmual Meeting of the American College of
horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc 193:343-345.
Ophthalmol 2:243-250.1999.
Veterinary Ophthalmology: Abstract 86. 2008.
1988.
303
CHAPTER
11
 procedures of the lens
surgical
and cataract
Kirk N. Gelatt and David A. Wilkie2
Small animats. Large animais and speciat speries
Chapter contents
Introduction
305
 Phacoemulsification in the horse
330
Evolution of cataract surgery in dogs
307
 Intraocular lens implantation in small animals
334
 Evolution of cataract surgery in horses
308
Intracapsular cataract or lens extraction in 
Development of the intraocular lens for the dog, cat,
small animals
334
and horse
309
 Intracapsular cataract or lens extraction in the horse
555
Surgical anatomy
311
 Removal of the unstable lens in small animals
335
 Surgical pathophysiology
312
 Intraocular lens implantation
 Patient selection for all species
314
 Postoperative treatment and management 
 Non-surgical treatment of cataracts
316
in small animals 
342
 Preoperative preparation
319
 Postoperative treatment and management in
thehorse
342
 Surgical procedures for cataracts and lens removal
320
 Postoperative results and complications in small animals
 Choice of ophthalmic anesthesia and surgical exposure
321
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
343
 Anterior chamber entry for cataract and lens extraction
322
Postoperative results and complications after lens
 Capsulorhexis and anterior capsulectomies
322
surgery in the horse
351
 Phacoemulsification
324
The future and challenges of cataract and lens
 Phacoemulsification in small animals
327
 surgery in animals 
352
Introduction
ing the large number of recognized breeds of dogs, the num-
The major causes of blindness in small animals are corneal
ber of inherited cataracts in the dog probably exceeds those
diseases, cataracts, the glaucomas, and retinal degenerations.
in humans. Primary and possibly inherited cataracts affect
Of these disorders, the treatment of cataracts is clearly a sur-
a large number (about 125) of breeds of purebred dogs.
gical condition, and has been the surgery that has character-
In about 20 breeds, the age of onset, mode of inheritance,
ized the specialty of human and veterinary ophthalmology
and site of the lens initially involved in cataract formation
since their beginning.
have been documented. In other breeds of dogs, cataracts
Embryologically, the lens originates from surface ecto-
appear at a higher frequency than in the general population,
 derm. Congenital abnormalities of the lens may or may not
but thei1 characteristics have not yet been defined. Cataracts
be associated with other congenital intraocular abnormalities
secondary to traumatic, inflammatory, and metabolic dis-
OI cataract. Examples of congenital anomalies that may
orders also affect dogs, and are also treated by surgical
be associated with cataracts include persistent pupillary
removal.
membranes, persistent hyaloid artery, persistent hyperplastic
Cataracts in cats occur less frequently. Primary cataracts
primary vitreous/tunica vasculosa lentis (PHPV/PHTVL),
occur infrequently in young cats, and most of the inherited
 posterior lenticonus, microphakia, lens coloboma,
 and
cataracts appear in kittens rather than in adults. The most
microphthalmos.
frequent cataracts in cats are secondary types, associated
11
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
with anterio1 uveal inflammations. As many uveal inflam-
Cataract classification in animals
mations are secondary to serious systemic diseases, cats
i e s 'e so n   radde s
presented for evaluation for cataract surgery require a com-
plete physical examination and blood tests fo1 feline viral
dassification of these lens changes is the basis for qualify-
leukemia, feline immune-deficiency vinus, and other infec-
ing these opacifications. No single classification method
accommodates all these variables. As a result, several
tious diseases. Cats usually have less intense iridocyclitis
than dogs after lens and cataract extraction, and higher
different cataract classifications have evolved. Classifica-
tion of cataracts ensures a common system to identify
success rates, although only limited numbers of reports are
 cataracts in all animals and provides a uniform language
available.
Cataracts are not infrequent in horses, but are infrequent
among veterinarians diagnosing and performing cataract
in cattle (and more rarely diagnosed). The majority of catar-
surgery.
 [n small animals, the biochemical changes that initiate
acts in the horse are secondary to inflammation and trauma,
cataractogenesis have not been documented, except to
but inherited cataracts occur in the Morgan, Belgian, Quarter
Hoise, and Rocky Mountain horses. The cataracts in the
some extent in the inherited and congenital cataract in the
latter thiee breeds also have additional concurrent ocular
Miniature Schnauzer and sheep. The lens is highly cellula1
with no extracapsular spaces. The lens is also predominately
anomalies. Inherited cataracts may occur in other breeds of
proteins (soluble and insoluble) and cellular structures.
horses. When presented with a foal with congenital catal-
acts, a dilated examination of the mare and, if possible,
In cataract formation, regardless of the inciting cause, the lens 
the stallion is advised as they may also have incipient catar-
fibers eventually die, and lens epithelial cells may die o1
acts, supporting the possibility of inheritance. Breeding of
undergo transformation and proliferation. With continued
foals with congenital cataracts should be discouraged and
lens fiber death, lens osmolarity is altered, resulting in an
the mare, if re-bred, should not be bred back to the same
osmotic imbalance and the imbibition of water. With hydra-
stallion.
tion of the lens, which occurs late in the genesis of pro-
Cataracts in cattle are rarely reported but when herds
gressive cataracts, the lens becomes translucent and then
of cattle are closely examined, the frequency of cataract
opaque.
formation is more common. Inherited cataracts occu1 in
the Holstein-Friesian, Iersey, and Hereford breeds. Cataracts
Types of cataract classification
with other ocular anomalies occur in the Hereford,
Holstein-Friesian, Jersey, and Shorthorn breeds. Cattle also
The different cataract classifications in animals include:
exhibit a viral-induced congenital cataract, retinal detach-
1) age of onset; 2) position within the lens; 3) degree of
ment, and microphthalmia in calves secondary to bovine
opacification; and 4) possible cause (Table 11.1). Hence,
auuaid jo ued isiy au ui padonaap pue aui lei
fo1 the clinical description of a cataract, all methods are
(76-150 days post-gestation).
usually combined. For instance, the breed-specific cataract
Removal of displaced or luxated lenses in dogs, cats,
in Golden Retrievers is a juvenile, inherited, axial, posterio1
and horses is often utilized either to prevent the onset
       
 n a  niss n n o n no
secondary to diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats is an equato-
these glaucomas. The possible mechanisms by which these
rial cortical incipient cataract.
displaced lenses contribute to the onset of secondary
Relative to surgery, the classification system that assesses
glaucomas are presented in a later section. Loss of
the degree of opacification (or maturity) of cataracts is most
part-to-all of the zonulary attachments results in lens sub-
useful, as this quantification of lens opacity correlates
luxation, posterior (intravitreal) luxation, and anterio1
to clinical vision (Fig. 11.1). Incipient cataracts are the ea1-
chamber luxation.
liest detectable lens opacities. Often appearing as vacuoles
The lens is noimally held within the patellar fossa by
and water clefts, these opacities do not significantly impai1
120-180 zonules attaching the lens equator to the ciliary
 dlinical vision in dogs, cats, or horses. Immature cataracts 
'sadi 1oteu oml jo aq oi 1eadde sanuoz aun 'saop ul Apoq
have noticeable opacification and a tapetal fundic reflec-
resulting in a cruciate type of arrangement at the lens
tion. The animal still has clinical vision, but some visual
equatorial capsule. These zonules may degenerate with age.
impairment may be demonstrable, especially during day-
trauma, inflammation, malformation, and breed-associated
time with miosis. With an immature cataract the lens is still
and chronic glaucoma. With significant loss of zonules.
normal in size. By indirect ophthalmoscopy. the oculal
the lens position changes, with tilting, decentralization,
fundus is visible but some details may be hazy from lens
looseness within the patellar fossa (phacodonesis), possible
opacification.
tearing of the hyaloideocapsular ligaments (Wieger's liga-
With mature cataracts, the entire lens is opaque, there is no
ment), and tearing of the anterio1 hyaloid 
1membrane,
tapetal fundic reflex, no demonstrable vision with or without
lesulting in vitreous entering the posterior chamber, pupil,
mydriasis, and the ocular fundus cannot be observed with
and eventually the anterior chamber. The iris noimally
 indirect ophthalmoscopy. With mydriasis, the lens periphery
touches the middle and central positions of the lens; how-
is opaque, and the peripheral ocular fundus cannot be
evel, with these lens positional changes, the iris becomes
viewed.
unstable and inidodonesis occurs. As a result,
 lensectomy
 [n hypermature cataracts, the entire lens is opaque and
OI removal of the entire lens with its capsules (intracapsular
there is no demonstrable vision. The ocular fundus is not
extraction) is often performed in dogs and less frequently
observable with indirect ophthalmoscopy: however, with
in cats.
mydriasis, some of the peripheral ocular fundus may be
306
Evolution of cataract surgery in dogs
hypermature cataract in small animals is the Morgagnian
 Table 11.1 Different classifications for cataracts in animals
cataract, in which the lens cortex becomes liquefied, result-
Cassification
ing in a nucleus that moves freely through the inteinal lens
Description
and settles in the dependent and most ventral area of the
 Age of onset 
 Congenital
lens. A hypermature cataract often has associated secondary
Developmental (juvenile or adult)
lens-induced uveitis (LIU). This may 1esult in miosis, iris
Senile
hyperemia, ectropion uvea, synechia, hypotony, aqueous
 Anterior capsular
flare, keratitic precipitates, glaucoma, zonulary and vitreous
Position within the lens
Anterior cortical
degeneration, and retinal detachment.
An additional subdivision of the hypermature cataract,
Posterior cortical
the resorbing cataract, occurs not infrequently in dogs less
 Posterior capsular
than 3 years of age and frequently in dogs younger than
Equatorial and axial
1 year old. In resorbing cataracts the overall size of the lens
 Degree of opacification and 
Incipient
ranges from slightly smaller than normal to the complete
lens size
Immature
loss of all intralenticular material except for the anterio1
Mature (subdivision intumescent)
and posterior lens capsules which now contact each other.
Hypemmature (subdivision
As the cataractous material is lost, clinical vision may
 Morgagnian)
gradually return.
Resorbing
 Possible cause
Inherited
Evolution of cataract surgery in dogs
 Associated with other ocular
anomalies
 Secondary to retinal degeneration
Variations in the techniques for canine cataract surgery.
Secondary to trauma (direct/indirect)
including discission, couching, and extracapsular extractions,
Viral
 Post-inflammatory
were reported in the latter part of the nineteenth and fist pat
Metabolic
of the twentieth century. During this same time, the different
Toxic (infant formulas, radiation, drugs)
 e a q am as  p ad
in humans.
The first cataract extractions in dogs were perfoimed by
Moller in 1886 and later by Berlin in 1887. Nicolas 1eported
observed around the shrunken lens. The dog o1 cat is blind
discission, couching, and extracapsula1 cataract removals in
unless mydriasis is induced, and then visual impaiiment
dogs in 1908. Gray, describing the same procedures, was less
is present. However, the cataract is reduced in size and
impressed with the results in dogs. Muller and Glass in 1926
beginning to undergo dissolution, probably secondary
and Ratigan in 1928 reported good results with the dis-
to the death of the lens fibers and the release of intracellular
cission technique in young animals. Intracapsular cataract
proteases. As a result, the high molecular weight lens p1o-
extraction in the dog was described in 1936 by Bartholo-
teins break down into small proteins and even polypeptides
mew. In 1937, Ubereiter published several 1eports on the
that diffuse through the intact anterior lens capsule and per-
different cataract surgeries, including removal of luxated
haps even the posterio1 lens capsule. A subdivision of the
lenses. Several additional veterinarians, such as Condemine
A
B
Fig. 11.1 The different stages of cataract maturity in the dog. (a) Incipient cataract - the beginning
aun Aleauab s! siyl uogenynedo panueape anow yai yoeienen ainzewwl (a) uogewoy peyeren jo
best candidate for phacoemulsification. (c) Mature cataract. These cataracts generally also have
 concurrent lens-induced uveitis. (d) Hypermature cataract with secondary lens-induced anterior
uveitis. Note the dense opacities scattered throughout the anterior cortex.
307
1.1
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
(1939), Love (1940), Pe11y (1941), Means (1942). O'Conno1
extractions) and 69.4% (bilateral extractions not perfoimed
(1942), Bnumley (1943). G1eaud (1950), and Morgan (1952)
at the same time). [n dogs with bilateral cataract extractions.
Tecommended specific types of cataract extraction, and
 93.5% exhibited restoration or improvement of vision with
debated the advisability of cataract surgery in small animals.
successful surgery in one o1 both eyes.
 st as peien ien aoen uiso 'i u
In the late 1970s and early 1980s the new technique
with difficulties and is speculative'.
of phacoemulsification of cataracts was developed, with
Nevertheless, the evolution of cataract surgery continued
   i  
in small animals. In 1953, Magrane described aspiration
implantation of intraocular lenses (IOLs). With about the
of canine cataracts, and the following year defended the
same postoperative results, shorter hospitalization, smaller
rationale for canine cataract surgery using extracapsular
coineal incision and astigmatism, and same-day surgery.
extraction. Knight, in 1957, 1eported fai1 1esults (29%) in
phacoemulsification of cataracts became the preferred cata-
106 cases of cataract extraction in dogs, primarily using the
ract surgery in humans in the 1980s and to date.
intracapsulal technique. Three years later, Knight reported
With the same surgical instrumentation, phacoemulsifica-
a 34% success rate in 233 cases of cataract removal, pri-
tion of cataracts evolved for small animals. As a result, pha-
marily using the intracapsular technique.
coemulsification has  largely eplaced the extracapsular
Throughout the 1960s the debate among veterinarians
cataract method in many veterinary ophthalmology clinics
perfoiming cataract surgeries in small animals no longer
worldwide. Although limited in patient mumbers, Miller and
focused on the justification for the surgery, but on whether
co-workers 1eported on the success of phacofragmentation
the
extracapsular or the intracapsular technique was
and aspiration. In 82 cataracts removed by this method,
superior. At this same time, in humans, the intracapsu
vision was present immediately after surgery in 95% of
lar cataract extraction method with enzymatic zonulo-
the dogs. At 2 years after surgery, vision was still present in
lysis  (alpha
a chymotrypsin) was yielding the highest
85% of these patients. The reasons for this gradual decline
success rates.
were primarily related to postoperative anterior uveitis and
 se aaq A n (soei) aa s u
capsular fibrosis.
the highest success rates for cataract surgery in dogs resulted
 In a later series by Nasisse and Davidson that included
from extracapsular lens removal, because of adherence of
158 dogs, phacoemulsification with and without IOL
the vitreous to the posterior lens capsule, and the inability
implantation resulted in good-to-excellent postoperative
  si     
visual results in 90.3% of the eyes. Phacoemulsification time
minutes. In 1961, from a series of 104 cataract extractions
of the cataractous lens increased with patient age but hyper-
in the dog. Magrane reported a 76% success rate in dogs
aael a ue ssal paai siin ar
undergoing operations for juvenile cataracts and a 37%
times for immature, mature, and hypermature cataract
success rate in dogs with senile cataracts. The difference
were 180 s, 174 s, and 137 s, 1espectively). The endocapsular
between these two groups was believed to be associated with
(in the capsular bag') fragmentation technique was used
undetected accompanying degenerative changes,
, exagger-
and the main intraoperative complication was posterior lens
ated intraocular inflammation, and postoperative compli-
capsular tears (19%).
cations. A laiger series of cataract extractions by Magrane
 Today, the majority of veterinary ophthalmologists in the
(429 cases) in 1969 1evealed an 80% success 1ate. The
US and other countries regard phacoemulsification, a refine-
higher success rate was believed to be associated with an
ment of the extracapsular technique, as the cataract surgery
improved extracapsular extraction procedure, and pre- and
method of choice in dogs, cats, and horses. Extracapsular
postoperative administration of corticosteroids. The more
lens extraction is also used routinely by ophthalmologists
years of cataract surgery experience the veterinary ophthal-
with limited numbers of cataract surgeries, but with favor-
mologist had, the higher the rate of surgical success. If the
able results. The intracapsular lens technique is used pri-
dog's fellow eye underwent a subsequent operation, the suc-
marily fo1 subluxated lens, and anterio1 and posterio1
cess rate was 20% less than fo1 the entire group. This lower
(intravitreal) lens luxations.
success rate for second operated eyes appears related to the
sensitization of both eyes during the fist cataract surgery
Evolution of cataract surgery in horses
to the cataractous material, and the more intense uveitis that
Iesulted in these second eyes postoperatively. The success
rate was 15% higher fo1 cataract extractions fo1 congenital
While there was keen interest in cataract surgery in horses.
and juvenile cataracts than for diabetic and senile cataract
most of the early reports concentrated on the dog. With very
extractions. The success rate fo1 lensectomy decreased 18%
low success rates for canine surgery in the 1940s and 1950s.
when combined with iridectomy, which in the dog is often
there has been considerable discussion and debate as to
associated with intraocular hemorrhage and a more severe
whether cataract surgery in dogs could be recommended.
inidocyclitis.
Fortunately, with considerable progress in cataract surgery
 In the late 1960s, Startup published several articles on
in both humans and dogs in the 1970s and 1980s, cataract
cataract surgery, including cryoextraction, in dogs. In a
surgery was finally advocated for other species, especially
more recent series of 113 unilateral and 77 bilateral extra-
the horse.
capsula1 cataract extractions in dogs, 1estoration o1 improve-
 [n the veterinary literature, cataract surgery in horses is
ment of functional vision was achieved in 79.6% of the eyes
with unilateral extractions and 85.7% of the eyes with
was often leported as a major impediment to equine
bilateral extractions at 4-6 weeks postoperatively. Success
cataract surgery; general anesthesia at this time consisted
at 3-9 months postoperatively was 68.9% (unilateral
of a combination of chlorofoim, morphine, and local o1
308
Development of the intraocular lens for the dog, cat, and horse
regional anesthesia. Uberreiter, in his chapter in Advances in
Success rates varied by age group and duration of follow-
Veterinary Science (1959), 1eported on the culrent progress in
up (46/47 sighted immediately after surgery: 23/29 eyes
canine surgery, but barely mentioned the horse. He noted
sighted at 4 weeks postoperatively). At last examination,
that Daviel (1753) reported cataract surgery in the ho1se.
38/47 eyes (81%) were sighted; 2/47 eyes (4%) had poo1
vision, and 7/47 eyes (15% were blind). The success rate
ract surgery in horses with recurrent uveitis invariably ended
for congenital cataracts was 85% at 4 weeks, for the trau-
in atrophy of the globe (presumably from recurrence of the
matic cataracts 100% at 6 weeks and 1 yea1 (three ho1ses
disease). Cataract surgeries were divided into: 1) discission;
lost to follow-up), and for cataracts secondary to anterior
  (o  r) a  (
uveitis, 20% (five hoises; one eye sighted at 1.5 years
(or couching): and 4) flap extraction (the traditional extra-
postoperatively).
capsular and intracapsula1 methods). Other pioneers
in
veterinary ophthalmology, including Lanzillotti-Buonsanti.
Roder and Bayer, reported no success in the horse using
Development of the intraocular lens
the discission method.
for the dog, cat, and horse
In America, cataract surgery was reported in adult horses
using the intracapsula1 method by Van Krunigen in 1964.
He demonstrated that these surgical techniques were possi-
The implantation of the modern IOL in humans was fist
reported by Ridley in 1951 in England. The plastic
ble, although the majority (18/19) of the operated horses
had normal lenses. During this time, inhalational anesthesia
IOL was positioned between the iris and the anterior lens
with halothane become available, but positive-pressure ven-
capsule. Hundreds of studies followed, with general con-
tilation and neuromuscular paralysis, as well as the delivery
sensus to place the IOL within the capsular bag, after
phacoemulsification.
of topical medications via the subpalpebral system, were not
introduced until later.
Gelatt reported discission and aspiration of congenital
IOL in the dog
and soft cataracts in a foal in 1969, and in a larger series
with Meye1 and McClure in 1972 and 1974 (28 ho1ses).
9561 un uosdus 4q sm sop un siol Jo hodai isiy au
Higher success rates were 1eported in foals less than 6 months
in America. His study evaluated two different [OLs: 1} an
old (77% with vision) versus olde1 horses (60% visual).
11 mm diameter IOL fo1 intracapsula1 placement after an
Riis first 1eported phacofragmentation in the ho1se in 1981
extracapsula1 lens extraction; and 2) a 14 mm diameter plas-
in the fist edition of Veterinary Ophthalmology (Lea and
tic IOL positioned in front of the posterior lens capsule and
Febiger).
presumably the ciliary sulcus after extracapsular lens extra-
Whitley, Moore, and Sloan (1983) 1eviewed the state of
ction through either a peripheral iridotomy or the pupil.
cataract surgery in the horse, and described aspiration su1-
In 1980 Olson and co-workers evaluated the Shearing IOL
gery in eight foals with success in nine of the 16 eyes. In a
in the dog, because the canine ciliary body sulcus diameter
subsequent report by Whitley and co-workers in 1990, both
is approximately equal to that of humans.
aspiration and phacofragmentation were described in six
With improved success rates of extracapsular extractions
horses. Five of the six animals were less than 6 months
and phacoemulsification in dogs in the early 1980s, and
old; a single 4-yeal-old stallion was operated. They noted
the common use of IOLs in humans following phacoemul.
the problem of postoperative enteritis in the horse, and its
sification, the routine implantation of IOLs was evaluated
profound adverse effect on the success of surgery.
  s    s 
In the last 20 years o1 so, additional and more com-
bell, Davidson, Gaiddon, Nasisse, Peiffer, and co-workers.
prehensive reports of cataract surgery in the horse were pub-
It quickly became apparent that the initial IOLs developed
lished by Dziezyc and co-wo1kers (1991, 1992, 1999),
for humans (15-20 dioptic power) were not of sufficient
B1ooks et al (1999, 2005, 2006), and Fife et al (2006). These
strength fo1 dogs. The IOLs used now in dogs have dioptric
studies used the current general anesthesia and neuro-
powers of 40-42 D.
muscular paralysis methodologies, and provide the best
The materials from which IOLs are constructed may influ-
Iesults to date fo1 the horse. Again, the higher success rates
ence the development of postoperative capsula1 opacifica-
occurred in young foals (less than 6 months old). Success
tion (PCO) in dogs. Both the hard polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA) and soft foldable (acrylic hydrophil) IOLs a1e
sibility of recurrent uveitis, previous trauma, and lens
now available for the dog, cat, and horse. Although the
displacement.
PMMA IOL, supported by two haptics, has been the most
Phacoemulsification was prefelred, although the current
common IOL fo1 the dog (Fig. 11.2), the foldable IOLs have
human ultrasonic tips of the phaco handpiece are a little
Iecently also become popular. The 6-7 mm biconvex opti-
short to access the ventral capsular bag in the adult horse.
cal center of the IOL, o1 the optic, produces the refractive
This has been corrected with the introduction of a longer
power of the IOL. The +41 diopter (D) canine IOL requires
phaco needle specifically designed fo1 use in the equine
o i (s on a) o   e
eye (Acrivet, Hennigsdorf, Germany). In the last reported
tolerate slight decentralization without significant optical
series of 39 horses with 55 cataracts 1emoved by phacoemul-
aberrations. Currently, foldable acrylic IOLs are the most
sification (Fife et al 2006), similar results were obtained. The
commonly implanted IOLs in dogs, cats, and horses. These
   )     
allow for implantation through a smaller incision, resulting
14 adults with eithe1 traumatic cataracts (9/39) o1 cataracts
in less astigmatism, shortened surgical time, and possibly
secondary to uveitis (5/39).
less PCO.
309
11
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
A
B
Fig. 11.2 An intraocular lens can restore the post-cataract eye to preoperative optics. (a) An example of a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) intraocular lens
(IOL) implanted in a dog after phacoemulsification. (b) Foldable or soft IOLs (generally hydrophilic acrylic) are also available for the dog
(oppun 2o xnnawo sap pupiog *u) pwud aaw-1 jo uoisiuip p 4lipag jpwiuy aaw-1 jo Asaynas 4ob6ojoudl
The haptics are the arms of the IOL and serve to center the
foldable IOLs 1equire a holding/folder fo1ceps o1 cartridge
optic within the capsular bag. In the one-piece IOL the hap-
injecto1 to introduce the IOL through the corneal incision
tics are part of the IOL; in the three-piece IOL the haptics are
and into the capsular bag.
usually polypropylene (prolene) and much more flexible.
Current research in canine IOLs is investigating the role of
The stiffer haptics and one-piece IOL are recommended
the IOL in the genesis of PCO. Early studies suggest that
fo1 the dog. and range from about 13.5 to 17 mm in diame-
some IOLs can significantly reduce these opacities, which
te1. The [OL design angles o1 vaults the haptics about 3-10°
adversely affect vision in the dog and reduce the success
posteriorly to reduce chaffing and increase contact between
of cataract surgery long term. Also, lens instability and use
the optic and the posterior lens capsule. The direct contact
of IOLs in these eyes has attracted attention. As glaucoma
between the optic and the posterior lens capsule is thought
and retinal detachments are the most frequent complica-
to reduce the development of posterior capsular opacities.
tions after the removal of lens luxations in the dog, it is
Dialing holes (one o1 two) are often part of the canine
hoped that earlier surgical intervention and implantation of
[OL. Rotation of the IOL into the capsular bag or once
 an IOL will improve vision postoperatively and significantly
within the capsular bag may also use IOL forceps grasping
leduce these complications.
the junction (or base) of the haptic to the optic. Forceps
contact with the optic is avoided as scratches may result.
lOL in the cat
The placement of IOLs in humans has been variable.
[OLs have been implanted in the anterior chamber, pupil
 Studies have recently been reported on IOLs in the cat. The
supported, posterior chamber, and within the lens capsular
mean lens thickness is 7.77 ± 0.23 mm. IOL studies
bag. The anterior chamber IOLs are conveniently inserted,
l a ie isns saaa ie lu ui o u pue o ui
and do not require an intact posterior lens capsule, but are
power should be 53-55 D, with the cornea curvature, as
-  a o a on  m os
measured by keratotomy, to be 38.93 ± 0.73 D. Experimen-
neal endothelia. The pupil-supported IOLs have fewer com-
tal implantation of IOLs ranging in power from 48 to 60 D
plications than the anterio1 chamber IOLs, but unacceptable
aedoidde isou aq Pinom nol 0 55-7s e ieu pasans
rates of coineal edema. Direct contact of posterio1 chamber
The apparent difference between the cat and the dog is
[OLs, placed in front of the anterior lens capsule, causes iri-
related to the anterior chamber depth (cat, 5.0 mm; dog.
dal problems. Currently, the most frequent IOLs in humans
3.5 mm) and lens axial length (cat, 7.9 mm; dog. 7.6 mm).
are those placed in the posterior chamber, usually in the
Cat IOLs are commercially available.
capsular bag. Different placements of IOLs have not been
compared experimentally in small animals, as the early
lOL in the horse
lesults on IOL placement in humans were accepted; how-
ever, almost al iOLs used clinically in dogs, cats, and horses
Experimental IOLs placed in the horse eye range in size from
are implanted in the capsular bag. When capsular bag integ-
+14 D (1esulted in 6 and 12 D postoperative refractive el1o1
 a  d aq  l  s si 
of +2.5 D) to +30 D (resulted in overcorrection in equine
sulcus using various suture techniques.
 u sl  5+ ue a 9+ jo saa i5e
The foldable IOL, made of hydrophilic acrylate and ultra-
patients resulted in +3.94 D at 30 days post-surgery.
violet blocking material, has also become available for the
 The current equine IOL is made of a foldable acrylic mate-
dog, and allows a shorter corneal incision through which
nal (Acrivet 9o"). There are three different equine IOLs
to introduce the IOL into the anterior chamber. Many veter-
commercially available. The optic size ranges from 12 to
inary ophthalmologists now prefer these IOLs. These
13 mm and the haptic to haptic length from 21 to 24 mm.
310
Surgical anatomy
The diopter power of the current equine IOLs is either 14 D
peripheral coineal o1 limbal incisions are used, entry into
01 21 D, and there remains some discussion regarding the
the anterior chamber should be in front of the insertions
optimum IOL power to achieve emmetropia in the horse.
 of the pectinate ligaments, and at or near the termination
One of the difficulties in determining the optimal IOL
of Descemet's membrane.
power for the horse is the limited number of IOLs that are
Access to the anterior lens capsule and entire lens requires
implanted clinically and the even smaller number of horses
a maximally dilated pupil. Small and iregular pupils limit
that are refracted once the IOL is in place. While calculations
 o  r d  s  n s
of IOL power based on globe measurements are valuable,
lens. The dog iris is friable and highly vascular. Contact with
the final position of the IOL in the eye with respect to the
 s   oq   s 
retina has a significant effect on final refraction. It would
avoided as it may stimulate miosis (probably from the
appear that the current one-piece, plate haptic acrylic equine
release of prostaglandins from the iris). The first 'valley'
IOLs, once implanted in the equine eye, tend to sit more
between the peripheral posterior iris and the anterior
anteriorly in the lens capsule than expected. As a result,
boundary of the ciliary body is teimed the ciliary sulcus.
Iecent reports suggest an 18 D IOL may be required to
This area was the initial site for securing posterior chamber
achieve emmetropia (McMullen R, personal communica
IOLs and is currently used for sutured IOLs. However, poste-
tion). An 18 D IOL is currently in production (13 mm optic.
lio1 chamber IOLs were eventually replaced with IOLs fixed
 a e ae a is   on d  t
within the capsular bag because of several complications
of publication (Acrivet). Culrently, no data are available on
including decentration, pupil capture, chronic iridocyclitis,
this IOL in vivo. Equine IOLs are commercially available.
and the formation of posterior synechiae. Placement of
sulcus-fixated IOLs is Ieserved for cases of lens luxation
and lens capsule insufficiency.
Surgical anatomy
Normal lens anatomy in the dog and cat
        o
the peripheral cornea and limbus, iris and ciliary body.
The lens volume in dogs and cats is about 0.5 mL. The feline
lens, and anterio1 vitreous is important (Fig. 11.3). Cataract
lens is slightly larger than that of the dog. The diameter of
surgeries gain access to the anterior chamber, pupil, and
the canine lens at its equators is 10-11 mm; its anteropos-
anterior lens capsule through coineal or limbal incisions.
terior length is 7-7.7 mm. The lens is surrounded by two
Sclerotomies and removal of cataracts through the pars plana
capsules, usually identified as the anterior lens capsule
ciliaris and equatorial or posterior lens capsule are techni
 s as ( en  rsd a e (i)
cally difficult and not used. The corneal incision is performed
sules are the basement membrane for the lens. The ALC and
in the most peripheral cornea, consisting of a combination of
PLC are highly elastic and stain deeply with periodic acid-
 beveled and perpendicular incisions, or only a perpendicular
Schiff stain. The thickness of the ALC in the dog and cat
incision. The combination method provides a larger tissue
appears to vary with age, with older animals possessing
surface for closure of the cornea and is less likely to leak
thicker capsules. The ALC is decidedly thicker (50-70 μm)
aqueous humor postoperatively.
than the PLC (2-4 μm), and their equatorial junction is
The limbal incision is perfoimed in the 'blue zone' just
about 8-12 μm. The ALC also varies in thickness by region.
before the bulbar conjunctiva attaches to the cornea. The
It is thickest in its axial portion and becomes noticeably
incision can also combine coineal and limbal incisions,
thinner approximately 2 mm from the equato1. For capsulo-
starting with a beveled partial (about 50-75%) thickness
tomies and capsulectomies performed by tearing the ALC
in the limbus beneath the beginning of the bulbar conjunc-
with special forceps, the irregular and thick ALC can present
tiva, and once in the clear peripheral cornea, entering the
problems. Radial tears of the ALC can readily enter the
anterio1 chamber through a perpendicular incision. Whether
thinner equatorial lens capsule and PLC, and result in IOL
instability.
The suiface of the PLC totally contacts the anterior vit-
Anterior capsule,
Cornea (axial)
Ieous. The concave front of the vitreous is referred to as
Anteriorchamber
the patellar fossa. The PLC is nearly inseparable from the
Anterior cortex
anterior hyaloid membrane, and often the two strictures
 Pupillary iris
appear as one, held together by the lenticulohyaloid
Basal (peripheral)
Nucleus
hyaloideocapsular (Wieger's) ligament. Tears o1 holes in
iris
the PLC invariably result in defects in the anterior hyaloid
- Limbus
membrane.
Ciliary sulcus
The ALC encloses the lens cortex and the central nucleus.
Posterior chamber
Beneath the ALC is a single layer of epithelia that, at the
Pars plicata cilliaris
Pars plana ciliaris
equator, turns inward (the lens bow') to form lens fibers
Posterior cortex
throughout life. These elongated cells span 180° of the
Ora ciliaris retinae
lens. The ends of these lens fibers contact each other in the
Posterior capsule
anterior and posterior cortices, forming the anterior and
(axial)
Anterior vitreous
posterior lens sutures. The outer cortex consists of the
Anterior hyaloid!
youngest lens fibers; these cells become more compact as
mem brane
they travel centrally, forming the central adult lens nucleus.
Fig. 11.3 Surgical anatomy for lens and cataract removal in the dog.
As these central fibers compact, first noticeable in dogs and
311
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
cats at about 3 years of age, the nucleus becomes a notice-
Surgical entry into the anterior chamber is usually through
able blue or gray in small animals over about 6 years of
the peripheral coinea or the limbus under a limbal-
OI
age. This is termed lenticular or nuclear sclerosis. Lenticular
fornix-based conjunctival flap. The most frequent entry fo1
sclerosis is bilateral and symmetrical, affecting the central
cataract surgery in small animals throughout the early
nuclear portion of the lens. It must be differentiated from
1980s was the limbal approach. However, the peripheral
a cataract and is a noimal aging change. As the lens nucleus
 o od n   sr a 
 isisa ro e asp iaisanid soaq i 's
now it is the most common approach for cataract surgery
fragmentation by instruments and phacoemulsification.
in small animals. Once the anterior chamber is entered.
The lens anatomy in cats is poorly defined. Slightly larger
[OP rapidly decreases. This causes release of endogenous
than that of the dog, the feline lens has a steeper anterior
prostaglandins from the iris and perhaps other substances
curvature, a 12-13 mm diameter, and a thickness of 8 mm
(primarily from the anterior uveal tissues) that may result
anteroposteriorly. The large cornea of the cat, in spite of the
in miosis, breakdown in the blood-aqueous barrier (BAB),
more rounded anterior lens shape, accommodates a fairly
sonbe an un uan pue sunid jo sial asa
deep anterior chamber. The anterior lens capsule measures
 humor, and once the surgical wound has been apposed by
40-50 microns thick, with the equatorial capsule about 10
sutures, a transient increase in IOP. In the 1960s and early
microns and the posterior lens capsule about 3-7 microns.
1970s, this cascade of events after surgical entry of the ante-
Experimental IOLs for the cat are currently available at
nio1 chamber was thought to be associated with release of
53 D while the average IOL fo1 the dog is 41 D. Cataract
histamines:
howevel, pretreatment with antihistamines
surgery is less common in the cat as cataracts are often
did not prevent the miosis and other effects. Fortunately.
secondary to anterior uveitis and systemic disease.
topical and systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) inhibit the release of anterior uveal prostaglan-
dins, delaying o1 decreasing these tissue events, and limit
Normal lens anatomy in the horse
the miosis.
The normal equine lens measures 20 mm in diameter, and
       
has an axial length of 11-13.5 mm. Its volume is about
even prevent cataract o1 lens extraction. The small pupil pre-
2.5-3.2 mL, and its optical power is about 14.88 D. The
vents instrument and lens manipulations, limits the size of
thickness of the lens capsule is similar to other species, with
lens material delivered through the pupil, prevents visualiza.
the anterior lens capsule the thickest (91 μm), the posterio1
tion of the majority of the cataract, and increases the likeli-
capsule the thinnest (14 μm), and the equatorial capsule
hood of direct surgical trauma to the inis, ciliary body, and
in the middle range (20 μm thick). Like other animal spe-
even the anterio1 vitreous. As a 1esult, the intensity of post-
cies, the thickness of the anterior lens capsule increases
operative iridocyclitis is greater, control of the pupil is more
with age. Cataracts in horses are described as being congen-
difficult, and the overall surgical success rate is decreased.
ital or juvenile-onset, inherited, post-traumatic, and post-
Use of preoperative mydriatics and NSAIDs, as well as
inflammatory, with the last being the most common cause
intraoperative use of adrenaline (epinephrine), lidocaine,
of cataract in the horse.
and viscoelastic agents, has resulted in miosis becoming a
rare intraoperative complication.
 Perhaps the most important single event that affects the
Surgical pathophysiology
intraoperative and long-term postoperative cataract surgery
success rates in small animals is iridocyclitis. Lens-induced
The pathophysiology of cataract surgery includes the form-
uveitis (LIU) is the most frequent type of anterio1 uveitis
ation of cataracts, the effects of surgical entry into the eye.
in the dog, and has been associated with all stages of cata-
the development of lens-induced inidocyclitis (immune
lact foimation by fluorophotometer measurements of the
mediated) secondary to lens and cataractous lens material,
blood-aqueous barrier. Hypermature cataracts in dogs are
and lens-induced iridocyclitis (physical effects) secondary
the most frequent type of cataract extracted. Unfortunately.
to lens displacement and instability. Cataract foimation in
the release of lens materials during this phase of cataract
animals is incompletely understood. In congenital
 and
development and maturity results in a variable and some-
inherited cataracts in the Miniature Schnauzer, the catal-
times intense pre- and postoperative LIUI.
actogenesis has been partially defined, including early devel-
[n the prenatal development of the lens, the embryonic
opment, biochemical, and electron microscopic studies.
lens is already well developed and is surrounded with
In cataract formation, the lens fibers die probably secondary
anterior and posterior lens capsules before the embryo's
to abnormalities involving specific intracellular enzymes o1
immune system becomes oiganized. Consequently, 1elease
structural defects of the lens membranes. Once lens fibers
of lens material (e.g., following a traumatic or surgical tear
begin to die, clinical 'vacuoles' develop that eventually coa-
in the anterior lens capsule, or a spontaneous lens capsule
lesce into 'water clefts'. Once significant numbers of lens
rupture, most common in diabetes mellitus) or a hyperma
fibers die, the intracellula1 debris probably causes further
ture cataract results in inidocyclitis. [n cataractous canine
lens fiber loss. As the lens functions as an osmometer, the
eyes, the presence of cataractous lens material in the poste-
ar   r   r 
nio1 and anterior chambers incites a progressively intense
in increased lens osmolarity, and water is imbibed into the
inidocyclitis. This disparity in the intensity of lens-induced
lens causing translucency and eventually opacification. This
iridocyclitis between a normal lens and cataractous material
process can occur rather quickly, and explains why some cat-
may be associated with the gradual loss of cataractous mate-
aracts seem to progress slowly by slit-lamp biomicroscopy
Tial, rather than acute exposure to normal lens material, the
only to become opaque in a few weeks.
progressive sensitization of the uveal tissues to the
312
Surgical pathophysiology
cataractous material, and/or the greater antigenicity of cata-
any remaining lens material has been resorbed o1 isolated.
ractous versus noimal lens proteins. A 1ecent study using
Mydriatics to achieve a moderately dilated and continu-
cusly moving pupil are started preoperatively and continued
blood-aqueous barrier is changed in all types of cataract
postoperatively.
-  u a aa sno  i s 
Control and establishment of a moderately dilated pupil
opment of lens opacification.
are usually obtained within 4-7 days postoperatively. After
From the 1950s th1ough the late 1970s, cataract surgery
about 2 weeks, pupil changes (usually dilatation) are mo1e
was recommended once the dog became blind from bilat-
difficult to obtain because of the formation of posterio1
eral cataracts becoming mature and opaque. The rationale,
synechiae. Frequency of daily instillations of a single O1
with the prevailing 70-80% success rates fo1 cataract suI-
a combination of mydriatics is determined after periodic
gery, was that the dog was blind from cataracts, and if
inspection of the eye and pupil size fo1 the first 5-10 days
the surgery was unsuccessful, the dog would still be blind.
postoperatively. Failure to control and obtain a reasonably
Unfortunately, in these same patients, the most advanced
sized pupil after cataract surgery usually contributes directly
cataract had usually become hypermature, sensitizing the
to most surgical failures. Topical atropine can reduce the
uveal tracts of both eyes to lens materials. Some of this lens
rate of tear production to levels which result in acute kera-
 material may remain even after the best cataract surgery.
toconjunctivitis sicca, and may affect both eyes. If corneal
Unfortunately, dogs with hypermature cataracts, as well as
lesions develop soon after topical atropine instillations and
the second eye cataract surgeries, have lower success rates
low Schirmer tear test values are measured, cataract surgery
than dogs selected with immature cataracts that still have
some vision, a low likelihood of LIU preoperatively, and less
atic, 1% tropicamide may be used with apparently less effect
intense iridocyclitis postoperatively. As a result, selection of
on tear production.
dogs for cataract surgery continues to change, choosing
The period of postoperative inidocyclitis after cataract su1-
o ssd n e p s a  sio
gery varies, but apparently spans several months. Continu-
successful restoration of vision.
 Monitoring of IOP by periodic tonometry in cataractous
patients should be treated topically (and occasionally sys-
o anpanoid ousoueip juaiuaauo e aq oi sieadde saop
temically) with mydliatics, NSAIDs, and corticosteroids fo1
detect early LIU1. Tonometry in dogs with LIU usually reveals
6 months or longer. Premature cessation of these cataract
an IOP of less than 10 o1 12 mmHg. Some conjunctival
treatments contributes to smaller pupils, progressive fibropu-
hyperemia may also be associated with iridocyclitis. Intra-
pillary membrane foimation, and capsula1 fibrosis that cause
venous fluorescein will indicate that the blood-aqueous
a decline in the long-term success rates in small animals
barrier is impaired, as the dye rapidly diffuses into the pupil
The relationship between the stability of the lens and its
from the ciliary body and into the anterio1 chamber from
direct contact with the posterior surface of the iris and ante-
the anterior surface of the iris. These pupils often dilate
nior hyaloid membrane is poorly understood. With the loss
slowly and incompletely to 1% tropicamide.
 of 90-180° of the zonulary attachments to the lens, instabil-
Preoperative treatment with topical corticosteroids and
ity results. This lack of lens stability may be determined by
NSAIDs, and, if the anterior uveitis is intense, supplemented
dose examination of the iris and its base during ocular
with these drugs systemically, usually controls the inflam-
movements to detect partial movement of the lens and the
mation and results in a gradual increase in IOP to noimal
basal iris. Alternatively, after mydriasis, the periphery of
levels. Topical mydriatics, 1% tropicamide o1 1% atropine,
 ss    q n s 
are instilled concurrently to dilate the pupil and prevent
any instability ascertained.
With the loss of additional
the formation of posterior synechiae.
zonules, more lens instability results. The role of the hyaloi-
With stimulation o1 reactivation of an existing inidocyclitis
deocapsula1 (Wiegel's) ligament between the posterio1 lens
by cataract surgery, the plasmoid or secondary aqueous
capsule and the anterior hyaloid membrane in stabilizing
humor contains high levels of globulin, albumin, and fibrin.
so iano u jod aq  nq oun si sul a
These proteins coat the posterior surface of the cornea, ante-
and cats.
rior and posterior surfaces of the iris, and aqueous humor
With instability of the lens, microtrauma of the inis
outflow pathways. As a result, temporary or permanent ini-
lesults in iridocyclitis. Increased aqueous humor levels of
dal adhesions to the lens (posterior synechiae) and peri-
fibrin, proteins, and inflammatory cells occur. The inflamed
pheral posterior coinea (peripheral anteriol synechiae) are
inis may adhere with formation of posterior synechiae to
common in postoperative inidocyclitis in dogs and cats.
the unstable lens. Aqueous humor dynamics can also be
The fibrin can also attach to remnants of the anterior lens
impacted by lens instability, temporarily impairing pupil.
capsule, posterior lens capsule, and anterior vitreous mem-
lary passage of aqueous humor, and balloon the peripheral
brane, and form the scaffolding for other lens epithelia.
inis to embarrass the iridocorneal angle outflow pathways
fibrocytes, and iridal pigment cells to migrate on and estab-
and contribute to the development of peripheral anterio1
lish permanent fibropupillary and capsular opacities. These
synechiae.
inflammatory membranes can also crisscross the pupil,
With the loss of all zonulary attachments, the hyaloideo-
resulting in small and irregular pupils that limit vision.
capsular attachments may tear, resulting in presentation of
The other important effect of postoperative inidocyclitis
 anterior vitreous through the rent, often partially adhering
is miosis, secondary in part to the release of endogenous
to the posterior lens capsule. The loose lens can remain in
prostaglandins. Miosis starts during lens and cataract sur-
the patellar fossa, luxate into the anterior chamber o1,
gery, and continues thereafter until the anterior uveal
through the toin anterior vitreal face, displace posteriorly
inflammation from the entry of the anterio1 chamber and
 into the vitreous.
313
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
With displacement of the lens from the patellar fossa and
must be actively involved in their postoperative care, admin-
tearing of the anterio1 hyaloid membrane, vitreous can com-
ister all systemic and topical medications, and present the
plicate these cascading events. Vitreous adhering to the poste-
animals frequently for eye examinations and, if necessary.
rio1 lens capsule with an anterior lens luxation may occlude
accommodate adjustments to the medication dosing sche-
the pupil, preventing pupillary flow of aqueous humor, and
dules. In horses, the patient should be halter trained and
displace the base of the iris forward to cause inidocoineal
also accustomed to topical medication. Foals should be hal-
angle and sclerociliary cleft closure. The complete effect on
tel trained and broke to lead prior to surgery. All hoises can
aqueous humor flow of this type of iris bombe is often
 ie   ii on  a
artificial tear ointment twice daily for a few weeks prio1
With posterior or vitreal luxation of the lens, the toin
to surgery. Regardless, the overall surgical success rate in
anterior vitreal membrane allows both liquid and foimed
fractious patients is usually lower and less predictable.
(gel) vitreous access into the pupil and anterior chamber.
Formed vitreous may cause pupillary blockage and secondary
Concurrent eye disease
glaucoma. It can also adhere to the posterior cornea and iri-
docorneal angle. Blockage of the iridocorneal angle with
Pre-existing eye diseases can also affect patient selection and
formed vitreous sufficient to increase IOP is infrequent, and
either delay or prevent cataract surgeries. Congenital abnoim-
pupillary blockage is more common. Vitreous loss also seems
alities such as persistent pupillary membranes, persistent hya-
associated with the development of retinal detachment;
a major difference between extracapsular and intracapsular
vasculosa lentis (PHPV/PHTVL), posterio1 lenticonus, micro-
cataract extractions is the higher postoperative fequency of
phakia, lens coloboma, and microphthalmos may affect
retinal detachment after the intracapsular procedure
cataract surgery technique, outcome, and IOL selection.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) is a common disease
in dogs that can either delay or prevent cataract extraction.
Patient selection for all species
Cataractous dogs with KCS with Schirmer tear test levels of
10-15 mm/min may be 1easonable candidates fo1 cataract
Patient selection fo1 cataract surgery is an important factor
surgeries, but topical 1-2% cyclosporine should be instilled
in determining the eventual success o1 failure of this elective
once to twice daily along with the other postoperative
aoid aaisdxa iq Pidei e Si As ie 
medications. Cataract surgery should be delayed until teal
requiring approximately 1 h of general anesthesia. However.
-oo ieidon aq ra pauua aq un saii uooid
postoperative treatment requires considerable time and
sporine or tacrolimus, and 1% tropicamide should
be
effort, and directly determines the overall success rate and
substituted for 1% atropine as the mydriatic of choice. Post-
Iestoration of vision. The owner must be involved with thei1
operatively, topical tear replacement therapy using viscous
pet, be able to administer topical and systemic medications,
materials may be indicated for the fist few weeks following
and be committed to provide postoperative medications in a
surgery.
tapering fashion for at least 3-6 months. Not all cataract
The majo1 lisk with KCS patients is the anticipated decline
surgeries are successful, and the owner must be infoimed
in tear values postoperatively. A coinea, marginally dry and
that, as with any surgery, failures may occur.
under the influence of topical and systemic corticosteroids,
is prone to develop central progressive corneal ulcerations.
These coineal ulcers are slow to heal, sometimes require
Age
conjunctival grafts to prevent coineal perforation, and usu-
Age is not a major determining factor in patient selection
ally necessitate cessation of topical corticosteroids and
d s o  s a   o a 
NSAIDs until the ulcer has epithelialized. Sometimes sys-
condition. Physical examination, complete blood count,
temic corticosteroids can be administered cautiously in
ing clinical laboratory tests. In dogs and cats older than
cyclitis. Other coineal diseases, such as pigmentary keratitis,
10-12 years of age, the lens capsules are often thicker, more
 r       
difficult to tear with capsular forceps, and may contain
 and control are imperative. Glaucoma is another important
opaque areas of fibrosis and calcification. The vitreous may
consideration. If the cataract is ascertained important in the
 n sin r os '  m  a
genesis of the secondary glaucoma, cataract surgery should
posterio1 lens capsule and anterio1 hyaloid membrane result
not be delayed. Conculrent diode endolaser cyclophotocoa-
in presentation of mostly liquefied vitreous.
gulation may be considered in eyes with cataract and ele-
vated IOP. However, cataract extraction in a glaucomatous
Temperament
and blind eye is not recommended.
  a r  o a
The general behavior of the patient is important. Animals
postoperatively after cataract surgeries. The less frequent
that are fractious, aggressive or highly excitable should be
blinking rate, thinner than normal central precorneal tear
excluded from cataract surgery, unless there is some compel-
flms, and the compromised and exposed corneas predis-
ling factor. Small animals difficult to control and treat post-
- p d d n d  
operatively are prone to more complications, including
blems that impact the postoperative treatment of these
hyphema, surgical wound dehiscence, and more intense ini
eyes. If cataract surgery is perfoimed in brachycephalic
docyclitis, and may be dangerous to the hospital personnel.
breeds, the patient should be examined daily as long as
If cataract surgery is performed in these animals, the owners
intense mydriatic and corticosteroid therapy is maintained.
314
 Patient selection for alspecies
 audeosiei aeiodi ieed e aspe suoaains aos
control, these patients are usually excellent candidates for
these patients to decrease coineal exposure.
cataract extraction. As the diabetic cataract develops rapidly.
An Elizabethan collar or other head restraint device, and
it becomes quite intumescent or swollen, and cases of spon-
exercise restriction should be maintained in all small animal
taneous lens capsule rupture and the release of lens material
cataract patients until all sutures have been removed or dis-
have occurred. Hence, cataract surgery for diabetic cataracts
solved, and the intensity of topical and systemic medica-
should be perfoimed early and not be delayed unduly.
tions reduced to twice daily o1 less frequent intervals.
As general anesthesia, cataract surgery, and topical and
The presence of uveitis and cataract is common in the
systemic corticosteroids may elevate blood glucose levels,
horse. Typically, the uveitis is immune mediated, and is
close daily monitoring of urine and/or blood glucose post-
the primary disease occurring as equine recurrent uveitis
operatively is essential. The pre-existing daily insulin dose
(ERU). Chronic ERU may result in secondary changes such
levels are continued postoperatively, and some glycosuria
as cataract, glaucoma, and retinal detachment. If cataract
is acceptable. One-half of the daily insulin dose is usually
surgery is to be performed in these patients, the ERU must
administered on the day of surgery. It is not unusual for these
first be well controlled. The eye must be evaluated using
      oe  
electroretinography and ultrasound to ensure that the poste-
tions, and other systemic diseases. These should be assessed
lior segment is functional. Finally, implantation of a sus-
and, when indicated, treated. In a recent study by Bagley
tained-ielease suprachoroidal cyclosporine device should
and Lavach, the success of cataract surgeries in diabetic dogs
be considered concurrent with the cataract surgery and IOL
implantation. (See Chapter 12 for a more complete discus-
sion of the surgical management of ERU.)
Unilateral cataracts
Cataract surgery for small animal patients with unilateral
Maturity of cataract
cataracts is more frequent with the availability of IOL
The stage of cataractogenesis and maturity are important fac-
implantation and restoration of emmetropia. These animals,
tors in selecting small animal patients for cataract extraction.
especially if young. benefit from an IOL postoperatively as
The cataract stages usually operated are the immature,
theoretically the retinal image of both eyes would be reason-
mature, and hypermature (see Fig. 11.1). Clinical experience
ably comparable. In addition, waiting to see if the contralat-
suggests that selection of dogs with immature cataracts and
         
no evidence of LIU yields the highest success rates possible.
cataract in the initially affected eye. Progression to hyperma-
The recent association of retinal detachment and vitreous
turity may lead to secondary complications and result in the
abnormalities with hypermature cataracts in dogs provides
initial eye no longer being a candidate for vision restoration.
additional credence to operate on cataracts while immature
 Unilateral cataract surgery is common in the horse and may
OI at the latest in early maturity.
be of more benefit given the limited binocular vision in the
horse and the availability of an equine IOL.
Diabetes mellitus
Bilateral cataract surgery
Cataracts develop in 50-70% of diabetic dogs within the
fiist several months of the disease, and not infrequently
Cataract surgery is usually performed for both eyes at the
these patients are presented for cataract surgery (Fig. 11.4).
same time in small animals. With the development of pha-
[n fact, dogs with cataracts secondary to diabetes mellitus
coemulsification, the time of cataract surgeries has become
  sd jo do is As a ae
compressed, and more often than not, both cataracts are
surgery.
Assuming the diabetes is under reasonable
removed within a short period of time. Similar to the
Ieports on extracapsular cataract extractions in the second
eye by Magrane in 1969, the phacoemulsification study by
Davidson, Nasisse and co-workers revealed a success 1ate
from unilateral cataract extractions in dogs of 79.6%, and
85.7% in eyes with bilateral cataract removals. If the resto1a-
tion of vision in these bilateral cataract extractions was
 based on return of vision in at least one eye, the surgical suc-
cess rate was 98.7%. With general anesthesia, systemic med-
ications, and hospitalization costs about the same for either
have now become commonplace.
Intraocular pressure
[ntraocula1 pressure (IOP) is an important determinant
fo1 small animal candidates fo1 cataract surgeries. Many
of the canine breeds with inherited cataracts are also the
same breeds with inherited primary glaucomas. IOP less
than 10-12 mmHg usually signals low-grade o1 chronic
Fig. 11.4 Intumescent and mature diabetic cataract in a dog.
lens-induced iridocyclitis. These cataractous eyes usually
315
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
Iespond to topical and systemic corticosteroids. Once IOP
Risk of retinal detachment in certain breeds
leturns to about 15-18 mmHg, cataract surgery can be per-
foimed. IOP in excess of 25 mmHg should be carefully
Experience has shown that certain breeds with cataract
monitored for several days o1 a few weeks fo1 evidence of
inal detachment. These breeds include the Bichon Frise.
an early o1 low-tension glaucoma. Once IOP is within the
Havanese, Maltese, and American Cocker Spaniel, and vitre-
noimal range of 15-20 mmHg. cataract surgery may be
considered.
ous degeneration in the Shih Tzu. In these breeds prophy-
after IOL implantation should be considered. In the Bichon
Preoperative electroretinography
Frise breed, retinal detachments may be related to LIU and
and ultrasonography
cataract 1esorption, as these detachments occur with and
[n 1eferral and institutional  veterinary  ophthalmology
without cataract surgery. Use of prophylactic transscleral
clinics, cataract patients are also evaluated immediately
d        e
tocoagulation procedure, can reduce the frequency of retinal
nography (Us). Most potential cataract patients are pre-
detachments in the Bichon Frise breed after cataract surgery
from 55% to 12%. Retinal detachment may also occu1 mo1e
sented for surgical evaluation when both cataracts are
commonly in certain bieeds of horse such as the Rocky
mature o1 hypeimature, and visualization of the ocular
fundi is not possible. The visual history should be reviewed
Mountain horse, and success of cataract surgery has been
Ieported to be lower in this breed.
with the ownel, especially night vision. The flash ERG test is
nal degeneration (PRD) in small animals, and most often
Non-surgical treatment of cataracts
cataracts in dogs develop late in retinal degeneration. The
flash ERG test should be standardized (time fo1 dark adapta-
tion, intensity and color of light stimulus, presence of
Not all cataracts in animals are amenable to surgical extrac-
tion, nor are all owners prepared to elect cataract surgery
mydriasis, grounding, etc.). The flash ERG test in most
cataract patients with PRD is usually negative o1 the b-wave
fo1 theil pet. Because of the animal's general health, possi-
is barely detectable. Dogs with cataracts and electroretino-
ble cataract resorption, presence of other ocular diseases,
grams with low amplitudes present problems. Some of these
01 lack of owner finances, some animals with cataracts are
 not candidates for cataract surgery.
dogs have early retinal degeneration that within 1-2 years
will cause blindnes. Cataract surgeries in these patients
may be performed, but with the client understanding that 
Medical treatment of cataracts
postoperative vision may gradually decline in the following
12-24 months. In the horse, preoperative ERG is especially
Fo1 several centuries, many substances have been adminis-
indicated in eyes with cataract secondary to ERUl or in
tered topically and systemically to either delay the foimation
breeds such as the Appaloosa o1 Paso Fino that are known
of cataracts o1 cause their dissolution. Controlled investiga-
tions of these compounds have indicated no efficacy to
(CSNB).
date. Medications used in the past in small animals included
Recently Wilkie and co-workers reported on the preopera-
selenium-tocopherol injections, doses of sulfadiazine, injec-
tive value of ultrasound in evaluating cataractous eyes that
tions of an equine serum extract after sensitization of the
prevent inspection of the ocular fundi. Preoperative ultraso-
horse to injections of Actinomyces bovis, topical zinc citrate
nography in dogs detected retinal detachments in 11% of all
ascorbate, and aldose-ieductase inhibitors. [n humans, the
cataractous eyes. The frequency of retinal detachments was
lole of long-term ultraviolet radiation B and the release of
also related to the stage of cataract maturity, occurring in
intralenticular oxidants may be important in the pathogene-
4% of immature cataract eyes, 6.5% of mature cataract eyes,
sis of cataracts. It is doubtful that these conditions are as
and 19% of the eyes with hypermature cataracts. The high
important in small animals, and heredity and other issues
incidence of retinal detachment in the eyes with hyper-
may be major contributing factors.
 mature cataracts is an additional reason to operate on catar-
a u oi ssid Aa ar p un s
Spontaneous cataract resorption
cause-effect relationships between hypermature cataracts,
in young dogs
LIU, and the development of retinal detachment have not
been established, although the majority of postoperative 1et-
Spontaneous cataract resorption can occur in young dogs.
inal detachments and tears observed ophthalmoscopically
especially in animals less than 1 o1 2 years of age. Apparently
involve the peripheral retina. Perhaps the overall shrink-
in the maturation of the cataract and death of lens fibers, suf-
age of the lens and its capsules postoperatively creates ten-
ficient levels of intracellular proteases are liberated, breaking
sion on the zonules, ciliary body processes, and peripheral
down the high molecular weight lens proteins in young dogs.
retina. As retinal detachments that develop postoperatively
Changes in the permeability of the lens capsule have not
after cataract surgeries often result in blindness and surgical
been demonstrated, but may also occur. With progressive
failure, the elimination of these patients before cataract
loss of the lenticular proteins, the cataract gradually shrinks,
S      
and aphakic vision returns (Fig. 11.5).
sary surgeries. In the horse, preoperative ultrasonography is
There is no breed predisposition to cataract resorption in
indicated in all eyes with cataract whether congenital, post-
traumatic or secondary to ERUI.
e  s a a    n ss 
316
Non-surgical treatment of cataracts
A
B
C
D
Fig. 11.5 Examples of advanced spontaneous cataract resorption in generally young dogs. Hence, cataract resorption tends to occur most frequently in
xaos louaasod paziuebio awos buneal paquosau sey leuanewu snooeieren jeos jo Aauofewu aul (e) ayll Auea ui sneyeren dojaaap ypiym spaaiq asoye
and tiny foci of proliferating lens cells (Elschnig's pearls). (b) The majority of the cortical cataractous material has resorbed with some lingering cortex at
12 o'clock. Elschnig's pearls or proliferating lens cells are scattered throughout. (c) Most of the cortical cataract has resorbed, leaving scattered foci of
proliferating lens cells (Elschnig's pearls). (d) Lens material has settled within the ventral capsular bag, and is mobile with eye movements.
The history is usually acute loss of vision and rapidly develop-
surface becomes plano and even concave. The cataractous lens
ing cataracts. Ophthalmic examination usually reveals mature
 assumes a homogenous appearance with loss of all lens detail.
to hypermature cataracts with lens-induced inidocyclitis. IOP is
 Minute white 1eflective bodies suspended in the lens may sig-
usually low, and the pupils are resistant to dilatation with 1%
nal areas of resorption. The nucleus of the cataract is the most
tropicamide. Aqueous flare and bulba1 conjunctival hyper-
Iesistant to spontaneous resorption, and only in very young
emia ('ciliary flush') may be evident. The cataracts usually
dogs will it nearly o1 totally resorb.
appear as immature, mature, or hypermature, but signs of
In young dogs, these patients present two options:
lens-induced iridocyclitis are piesent. In some young dogs.
1) immediate cataract surgery before the lens-induced irido-
       
cyclitis becomes long term and sensitization to lens proteins
skip the mature phase. With resorption, the hypermature cata-
  n  s t   /a  i
ract gradually decreases in size. The anterior lens capsule and
bilateral lens extraction, the patient is examined frequently
surface become irregular and wrinkled. Eventually, as resorp-
and the lens-induced iridocyclitis controlled with topical
tion of the cortices and nucleus advance, the anterior lens
mydriatics and topical corticosteroids (usually 1%
317
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
prednisolone or 0.1% dexamethasone), sometimes supple-
Long-term mydriatics, such as 1% atropine once daily 01
mented with systemic prednisolone. Topical and systemic
once every 2 days, are instilled to fully dilate the pupils
 NSAIDs may be substituted fo1, or supplemented by, corti-
and allow the patient to see around the non-progressive cat-
costeroids if the lens-induced iridocyclitis becomes intense.
aract. Cataract surgeries in small animals with large persis-
The pupil size should be changed continuously
with
mydriatics to prevent foimation of posterior synechiae.
The possibility of cataract 1esorption appears 1elated
because the cataract still interferes with vision with mydlia-
primarily to the age of the dog. In dogs less than 1 year
S m  a   d ae s
old with mature cataracts, lens resorption sufficient to
Then several weeks later, once the laser-induced iridocyclitis
restore at least some vision occurs in about 50-70% of
has resolved, an extracapsular or phacoemulsification cata-
the eyes. If the dog is over 3 years old, resorption of the
ract extraction is performed.
cortices does not always lesult in the dissolution
1of
If posterior capsular and posterio1 cortical cataracts are
the nucleus. Proliferation of the lens epithelia (Elschnig's
present, secondary to persistent hyaloid vasculature (persis-
tent hyperplastic primary vitreous), and complete mydriasis
wrinkling of the lens capsules are usually limited. In dogs
does not permit vision, cataract surgery may be performed
less
than 1 year old, uncomplicated bilateral cataract
- sei ni asu id rod e  ia
Iesorption may result in clear lens capsules, and the disap-
ally have weak and thin posterior capsules that may rupture
pearance of the lens cortices and nucleus. In older dogs.
during extracapsulal o1 phacoemulsification surgeries, allow.
some residual cataractous lens nucleus can remain; how-
ing the anterior vitreous to displace forward. A planned
evel, with long-term drug-induced mydriasis, the animal
posterio1 capsulorhexis may be 1equired to restore a clea1
can have reasonable vision.
visual axis. The hyaloid blood vessels may hemorrhage.
Adrenaline (epinephrine; 1:1000 o1 1:10 000) irrigated
directly into the cataract surgical site usually provides the
Axial non-progressive cataracts and long-term
most effective but sometimes incomplete hemostasis. An
mydriasis
anterior vitrectomy may be necessary to excise the foimed
Aq paiapuu aq ke inq 'essy reied au puuaq soan
hemorrhage from the hyaloid blood vessels. Use of a disper-
impaied or blind but with normal sized pupils can regain
sive viscoelastic agent to keep the vitreous from prolapsing
Ieasonable clinical vision after instillations of mydriatics.
is indicated.
These cataracts include anterio1 capsular and cortical catar-
tal nuclear cataracts with clea1 cortices, posterio1 cortical
Secondary cataracts and iridocyclitis
cataracts in the Golden Retriever and Labrador Retrievel
Secondary cataracts complicated with inidocyclitis are not
en i s peei i se po n
with persistent hyaloid blood vessels (Fig. 11.6).
in cats are secondary to iridocyclitis, usually associated with
serious systemic diseases. Recuent inidocyclitis is less f1e-
quent in dogs (Fig. 11.7), but these patients are usually not
good candidates for cataract surgery unless the iridocyclitis
can be 1esolved. Cataract surgeries in eyes with chronic 01
Iecurent iridocyclitis also have additional risks with recur-
rence of the anterior uveal inflammation postoperatively.
and a greater possibility of phthisis bulbi and secondary
Fig. 11.6 Posterior capsular and cortical cataract, secondary to persistent 
hyperplastic primary vitreous, in a 6-month-old Vizsla. The red patent blood 
Fig. 11.7 Cataract secondary to chronic iridocyclitis in a 7-year-old mixed
vessels are visible within the cataract.
 breed dog. Numerous posterior synechiae are present.
318
Preoperative preparation
glaucoma with peripheral anterior synechiae. In the hoise
cintments) onto the operated eye, and clinical signs that
with ERU, lifelong management of the iridocyclitis is required
may signal potential problems. Owner compliance and
and may be addressed surgically with a sustained release
cooperation are as vital to the outcome as the skill of the
cyclosporine implant placed at the time of the cataract surgery.
surgeon and the effectiveness of the medications! In
horses, the patient should be halter trained and also
 Blind animals
accustomed to topical medication. Foals should be halter
trained and broke to lead prior to surgery. All horses
As with any surgical procedure, there is a group of catarac-
can be acclimatized to topical medication by applying
tous patients in which removal of the opaque lenses is nei-
topical artificial tear ointment twice daily fo1 a few weeks
ther beneficial nor feasible. Cats may adapt to blindness
prior to surgery. This will ensure that both the patient and
more readily than dogs. Older animals seem to adapt to
owner are comfortable with the application of topical
blindness better than young and active animals. Small ani-
ophthalmic medication.
mals that have the chance to adapt slowly to the onset
of blindness over several months appear to tolerate blind-
e e   s    s
Perioperative medications
permanently blind. Often blind animals sleep excessively.
The objectives of the perioperative medications include:
maintain hearty appetites, exercise little, and gain weight.
1) mydriasis o1 dilatation of the pupil to facilitate visualiza-
Excitable animals may adapt poorly, and loud noises may
tion of the cataract during surgery and prevent miosis;
induce vocalization and aggressive responses. Most blind
 2) control of the lens-induced and surgical-related irido-
animals are able to maneuver about the home without
cyclitis; and 3) antibiosis. Intensive therapy and control of
colliding excessively with furniture and walls. Behavioral
the iridocyclitis may be required several weeks preoperatively.
 changes in blind animals can be complicated by other aging
and is adjusted based on the ophthalmic findings. Each
and mental changes as well as pain. If other ophthalmic dis-
-ad no nuau luosid e su ionoudo Araiaa
orders are concurrent with cataracts, such as glaucoma o1
operative medications before cataract surgery (Tables 11.2a
lens-induced inidocyclitis, periodic examinations and medi-
 and 11.2b). Initiation of preoperative medication will vary
cal or surgical control of these conditions are recommended.
according to the presence o1 absence of LIU. If LIUl is present,
Horses with cataracts must be considered visually unsound
medication should be initiated several days prior to surgery
and may pose a risk to themselves and the owner/rider
and the clinical signs of LIU controlled. Starting 24-48 h prior
depending on thei1 use.
to surgery, topical broad-spectrum antibiotics and corticos-
teroids are administered every 6 h. On the day of surgery the
Continued monitoring of non-surgical
pupil is dilated using a parasympatholytic such as 1% atropine
01 1% tropicamide. Topical corticosteroids and NSAIDs
cataractous patients
s  rd  s  e a  e
For those patients that do not have cataract surgery.
A systemic NSAID and systemic broad-spectrum antibiotic are
continued long-term monitoring and examinations
I
topical antibiotics and corticosteroids are continued. Surgeons
of cataract maturity, and may require medications to sup-
vary as to the use of postoperative mydriatics, systemic anti-
press the uveitis, such as topical and systemic corticosteroids
biotics, and NSAIDs. In the horse, an intravenous catheter is
and NSAIDs. Signs of early and mild LIU include aqueous
placed prior to surgery for the administration of antibiotics
flare, miosis, decreased IOP, conjunctival hyperemia,
iris
and NSAIDs. This catheter is left in place for 2-3 days to con-
hyperpigmentation, ectropion uvea, and delayed-to-incom-
tinue systemic antibiotics and NSAID therapy. In addition,
plete mydriasis to 1% tropicamide. Signs of more severe
many surgeons will place a subpalpebral lavage catheter at
the conclusion of surgery to ensure administration of topical
[OP, keratitic precipitates, conjunctival hyperemia and cili-
medication postoperatively.
ary flush, and a pupil refractory to 1% tropicamide.
 Instillation of mydriatics, such as 1% tropicamide and 1%
 atropine, can induce pupillary movements and discourage
 Table 11.2a Recommended drugs and drug schedules for canine
the formation of posterior synechiae. Advanced hyperma-
Gataractous patients without lens-induced uveitis prior to cataract
ture cataracts are also associated with vitreal degeneration,
surgery
retinal detachments, and secondary glaucoma.
Schedule
Drug
Preoperative preparation
 24 h preoperatively
 Topical 1% atropine or 1% tropicamide q6h
Topical 1% prednisolone acetate q6h
Topical broad spectrum antibiotics q6h
As cataract surgeries are almost always elective, careful med-
Systemic prednisolone, 1 mg/kg q12h 
ical preparation of the patient and education of the owner
Systemic amoxicillin, 10-20 mg/kg q12h
are recommended fo1 optimal results. The patient is care-
 90 min preoperatively
Topical antiprostaglandin (suprofen)
fully examined and selected. The patient owner is informed
every 30 min
of the principles of cataract surgery, postoperative care,
the need for several examinations postoperatively to ensure
 Perioperatively
 Flunixin meglumine, 0.2 mg/kg IV at surgery
and once 24 h later, or
the highest possibility of successful restoration of vision,
Carprofen, 1-2 mg/kg q12h (do not use in cats) 
colrect methods to instill medications (solutions and/o1
319
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
consisting of sodium hyaluronate, chondroitin sulfate,
Table 11.2b Recommended drugs and drug schedules for horses
hydroxypropyl methylcellulose, polyacrylamide, or some
 24 h before cataract surgery
combinations of these compounds, are critical to maintain
Medication
Frequency
the shape and size of the anterio1 chamber and to protect
the coineal endothelium once the coineal incision is made.
Topical
They also are injected into the capsular bag to expand o1
separate the anterio1 and posterio1 lens capsules prio1 to
 1% Prednisolone or 0.1% dexamethasone
Every 6 h
the insertion of the IOL. They can also be used to manipu-
 Repeat steroids
1.5 h preoperatively
late intraocular tissues, such as in hemorrhage o1 tampo-
nade due to the vitreous protruding through a posterio1
 Triple antibiotic
 Every 6 h
lens capsule tear o1 around the lens equato1. (For additional
NSAIDs (Ocufen, Allrgan; or Voltaren,
 Every 30 min for 1.5 h
infoimation on viscoelastic agents, see Chapter 2.)
Novartis
preoperatively
1% Atropine
Once 2-3 h 
Surgical procedures for cataracts
 preoperatively
and lens removal
Systemic
Gentamicin (6.6 mg/kg) combined with
 Prior to induction
Lens surgical procedure choices in animals
potassium penicillin (20 000 IU/kg IV) or
ampicillin (10 mg/kg IV)
There are many different surgical procedures to remove lenses
Flunixin meglumine (1-1.5 mg/kg IV)
 At induction
are criteria for each surgical technique, but personal experience
From: Fife TM. Gemensky-Metzier AJ. Wvikie DA. Colitz CMH. Bras ID. Kiages DC 2006
and expertise also help determine the preferred surgical tech-
Clinical features and outcomes of phacoemuisification in 39 horses: α retrospective
nique. Justification fo1 the removal of subluxated and poste-
study (199-2003). Veterinary Qphthaimmoiogy 9.361-368.
nior lens luxations is still not resolved.
In this section, the different procedures to remove cataracts
in animals, based on frequency, include: 1) phacoemulsifica-
IOP is monitored closely. Cataract surgery is 1ecom-
mended when IOP is about 15-20 mmHg. Different levels
oisssi (e pue uoxa rensdeexa (7 q rensde 10
of IOP usually parallel the intensity of the LIU. Low IOP
and aspiration. The intracapsular extraction technique
is
usually indicates that more time and medications are
rarely used for cataract removal because of its hazards and
necessary to control the iridocyclitis preoperatively.
vitreal loss, but is used for lens luxations.
As fibrin in the aqueous humor is undesirable, heparin
 Phacoemulsification cataract surgery is the most frequent
(1-2 IU/mL) is added to the infusion solutions, such as lac-
e jo ss le  d  n j a
tated Ringer's or balanced salt solution, that are used to
The phacoemulsification modification uses a small corneal
moisten the eye, flush the anterior chamber, and restore
incision, and fragmentation and aspiration of the catarac-
- n ss ii s ie a i r 
tous lens through an anterior capsulectomy. The posterio1
factorily prevent the foimation of fibrin but not promote
lens capsule should not be disturbed. Implantation of
hemorrhage within the anterior chamber.
[OLs to treat the surgical aphakia is also presented, and is
       
commonly combined with the phacoemulsification and
se s a i a d  
extracapsulal cataract removals.
 Table 11.3 Different methods for cataract and lens extractions in animals
Method
Description
Indications
For cataracts
Discission
 Multiple incisions of lens capsule and substance
 Congenital/soft cataracts
 Aspiration
 Suction of lens material
 Soft/pieces of cataract
 Phacoemulsification 
 Leaves part ALC and all PLC
Immature/mature/hypemmature cataracts
 Extraca psular
Leaves part ALC and all PLC
Immature/mature/hypemmature cataracts
 Intracapsular
 Removal of entire lens with ALC and PLC
 Not recommended 
For displaced lenses
 Phacoemulsification
 Removal of lens but not always ALC and PLC
 For unstable lenses; can use lens fixation
elnsd e e.nul 
 Removal of entire lens with ALC and PLC
 For anterior and posterior luxations, and subluxated/partially displaced
lenses
ALC, anterior lens capsule; PLC, posterior lens capsule.
320
 Choice of ophthalmic anesthesia and surgical exposure
The extracapsular procedure, used in the dog in the 1960s 
surgeon can operate these comfortably and use both the
through the early 1980s, has been largely 1eplaced by pha-
night and left feet.
coemulsification. It requires a larger corneal or limbal inci-
Cataract surgery should be performed using an operating
sion (about 140-160°). The axial o1 central portion of the
microscope for magnification and illumination. The 5x to
anterior lens capsule is excised, and the cataractous cortices
20× magnification is prefered, with the lower magnifica-
and nucleus removed o1 slid through the larger incision.
tion used during the initial approach, and increased magni-
The posterio1 lens capsule remains. The extracapsular tech-
fication used fo1 capsulorhexis and delivery of the cataract,
Aq pasn st pue 'ainpanoid jeuaupuny au lus si anbu
and for suture apposition of the corneal or limbal wound.
veterinary ophthalmologists when phacoemulsification is
Once the surgical preparation is complete, the patient's head
not available.
is carefully positioned with a vacuum pillow and fixed
 The discission-aspiration method was traditionally used
beneath the microscope so that the eye is looking up into
        r
the microscope. The eye is centered in the scope's field and
phacoemulsification was developed. In this technique the
the instnument's focus adjusted. Additional adjustments
cataractous lens is incised into small pieces (discission)
in both the operating microscope's magnification (by
and aspirated from within the lens capsular bag.
This
changing the zoom) and focus are made at the beginning
method is rarely used and has been largely replaced with
of surgery.
the phacoemulsification procedure that performs these same
The eyelid hair is carefully 1emoved with small hai1 clip-
functions more efficiently and rapidly. The soft cataract
pers o1 by shaving. Whichever method is used, all hair from
s y nauaq uen ls spiq sos pue ssioq lunon u
the eyelids and approximate surgical site are removed with
technique if phacoemulsification is not available.
no nicks and abrasions of the skin. The eyelids and the
 The intracapsular technique for cataract extraction in
coineal and conjunctival surfaces are cleansed with 0.5%
animals is presented under the lensectomy section. The intra-
povidone-iodine solution and sterile cotton or Dacron
capsular method for cataract removal has more risks and
swabs. The corneal and conjunctival surfaces are carefully
yields the lowest success rates. However, 1emoval of sub-
flushed with sterile saline, and any debris removed by sterile
luxated lenses, anterio1 luxated lenses, and posterio1 luxated
Dacron swabs. The area is carefully draped to expose only
(intravitreal) lenses uses the intracapsular technique. With
the palpebral fissure.
partially-to-totally displaced lenses, the zonular attachments
extending from the equatorial capsule to the ciliary body
General anesthesia and neuromuscular
have been transected by age, trauma, malformation, O1
blocking agents
inflammation. Without the zonulary attachments, the entire
lens is delivered intracapsularly with the lens nucleus and
General anesthesia with isoflurane is 1ecommended for all
cortices inside its capsule.
cataract patients. With general anesthesia, the globe rotates
ventral and medial, and complete visualization of the ante-
Choice of ophthalmic anesthesia
nio1 segment may be impossible. Lateral canthotomy in
and surgical exposure
some dogs can improve exposure (see Chapter 2).
Fo1 optimal exposure of the anterior segment and position
of the eye, neuromuscular blocking agents such as atracur-
a jo le io pas si uoidad esins ies e eaua u
ium (0.2 mg/kg IV in dogs and 0.05 mg/kg in horses) are
different types of cataract surgery and lensectomies regard-
lecommended. T
The atracurium-induced paralysis also
less of species. The small animal patient is usually posi-
Iesults in reducing the extraocular muscle tone and the vitre-
tioned in dorsal recumbency and the head stabilized with
ous pressure. As the breathing muscles are also paralyzed,
a vacuum pillow for bilateral cataract surgery. If unilateral
assisted ventilation is required. To reverse atracurium's
cataract extraction is performed, the animal's head is placed
effects, edrophonium (2 mg/kg IV) may be used (fo1 addi-
in either dorsal or lateral recumbency. Horses may be posi-
tional information, see Chapter 3). Neuromuscula1 blocking
tioned in lateral or dorsal recumbency with the head rotated
agents in both the dog and horse, assisted by intermittent
to have the eyelids parallel to the floor and the surgical eye
looking up. The latter technique is best when bilateral sur-
for microsurgery, as well as relaxation of the extraocular
gery is planned so the horse does not need to be turned over
muscles and reduced pressure on the globe and posterio1
during the surgery. To facilitate positioning and protect the
lens capsule (when the eye is open).
 a aq  ar i e eed e 'aa mo
The intravenous administration of mannitol (1-2 g/kg) to
the horse's head to elevate the head and the down eye off
decrease IOP should be 2
 avoided when neuromuscula1
the operating table.
 blocking agents are used. In fact, if both mannitol and neu-
The optimal position for the primary surgeon is above the
Iomuscular blocking agents are combined, the eye may be
animal's head and eye. For both large and small animals a
too hypotensive for cataract surgery.
surgical table that can be elevated or lowered and an adjus-
table surgeon's chair with armrests is advised. The surgeon
Lateral canthotomy
should be seated and the chair and table height adjusted
so that the surgeon is comfortable, with a straight back
Surgical exposure to the globe may be enhanced with the
and the arms resting on the armrests and bent 9o° at the
lateral canthotomy. However, with neuromuscula1 blocking
elbow. This is the optimal working distance. [n addition,
agents, the need for the lateral canthotomy is also lessened.
foot pedals for control of both phacoemulsification and
As a result, once general anesthesia is stabilized and the neu-
a i os pauosod aq is adoos undo a
romuscular blocking agent is administered, the eyelids are
321
1.1
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
a oi pase si ansodxa jl 'ads am aq paei
in small animals usually requires a combination of sharp
insufficient, a lateral canthotomy is performed. For additional
inis scissois and cautery for hemorrhage, or simultaneous
information on lateral canthotomy, see Chapter 2.
sis is incomplete, o1 the anticipated postoperative mydriasis
is to be a problem, two to four sphincterotomies may be
Anterior chamber entry for cataract
performed, incising the pupillary aspects of the iris about
and lens extraction
2-3 mm in each quadrant. The resultant pupil is irregula1
and slightly dilated.
The surgical approach for removal of cataracts o1 displaced
lenses is identical. Entry into the anterior chamber may be
 Capsulorhexis and anterior capsulectomies
through the peripheral cornea or the limbus under a limbal-
01 foinix-based bulbar conjunctival flap. Scleral incisions
  s  n  r  
With the evolution of phacoemulsification surgery and the
with hemorrhage from the scleral vasculature, and hemosta-
introduction of the IOL, refinements in the entry through
sis usually requires point electrocautery. As a 1esult, the co1-
the anterior lens capsule were necessary. No longer was
        
grasping and tearing the anterior lens capsule by the extra-
ophthalmologists.
capsular forceps acceptable; the anterior lens capsulotomy
Entry through the limbus under a limbal- or fornix-based
and capsulectomy needed to be of an exact diameter not
conjunctival flap requires more time than the corneal inci-
only to accommodate phacoemulsification, but also to permit
sion, and may produce limited hemorrhage. The resultant
implantation of the IOL and retain the IOL indefinitely.
hemorrhage is not usually extensive and is controlled
 In traditional terms, capsulotomy implies cutting or tear-
by point electrocautery or Dacron swabs soaked with
ing the lens capsule, and capsulectomy refers to its excision.
1 :10 000 adrenaline (epinephrine). It is imperative that hem-
Capsulorhexis indicates tearing or rupture of the lens capsule
orrhage during the limbal and conjunctival phases of the
and is generally used to describe the entire process. The com-
approach is completely eliminated so that no blood enters
pletion of an acceptable capsulorhexis for cataract surgery is
the anterior chamber. Large limbal-based conjunctival flaps
 an important step for an uncomplicated cataract surgery.
interfere with manipulation of the cornea, visibility of the
Unfortunately, the response of the anterior lens capsule of
anteriol chamber, iris, and pupil, and surgical apposition of
the dog to shearing, tearing and cutting is the least predict-
the limbal incision. Hence, limbal-based conjunctival flaps
able aspect of cataract surgery, and sometimes the most
are usually small and limited to 3-5 mm from the limbus.
frustrating portion.
Apposition of the limbal incision requires that sutures are
 [n capsulorhexis, an opening is created in the anterior lens
placed under the limbal-based conjunctival flap, such as the
capsule that is sufficiently large to accommodate the
McLean interrupted mattress sutures o1 simple interrupted
implantation of an IOL but small enough to maintain IOL
stability long term. In the continuous curvilinear capsulo1-
hexis (CCC) procedure, the circular tea1 of the anterio1 lens
conjunctival flap. but provide two layeis of closure fo1 the
capsule contains no irregularities that could result in radial
incision.
tears toward the lens equator.
Fo1 foinix-based conjunctival flaps, the bulbar conjunctiva
If an IOL is to be inserted into the remaining capsulal
is incised at the limbus and reflected posteriorly for only
bag, the diameter of the anterio1 capsulectomy should be
3-5 mm. The approach for and apposition of the limbal
slightly smaller (1 mm) than the diameter of the IOL optic.
During anterior capsulectomy, the anterior chamber can
and the suture knots for the limbal apposition are usually
be reformed with either lactated Ringel's or balanced salt solu-
buried under the fornix-based conjunctival flap.
tion, or preferably with a viscoelastic agent. The highly viscous 
The peripheral coinea, limbus, o1 a combination limbus-
viscoelastic solution should not escape from the anterior
cornea entry into the anterior chamber incision may
be
chamber when the corneal incision is open during anterior
perpendicular to the coinea or limbus, beveled, or a combi-
capsulectomy o1 capsulorhexis. The surgical defect in the ante-
nation outer one-half perpendicular and inner one-half
beveled. The advantages and limitations of each anterior
extraction of the cataract, but small enough to retain the [OL.
chamber entry were presented in Chapter 9. The combina
Capsulorhexis is performed prior to delivery of the cataract.
tion perpendicular-beveled incision is preferred. The outer
The most frequent difficulty in performing the capsulectomy
one-half thickness perpendicular incision is performed with
is observation of the antenior lens capsule and its incised o1
the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade, and the inner one-
torn edges. Often increased magnification using the operating
half thickness beveled incision is perfoimed with cataract o1
microscope is necessary. Sometimes the capsulectomy may
corneoscleral scissors. The resultant incision has a large
Iequire some additional attention once the cataract is deliv.
surface area for apposition, tends to be self-sealing, and is
ered, and retroillumination from the ocular fundus aids its
conveniently apposed with sutures.
identification. Trypan blue and indocyanine green are also
available to stain the anterio1 capsule faintly and either is
injected immediately before the capsulorhexis. The staining
Peripheral iridectomies
 of the anterior lens capsule and its edges greatly facilitates
Small peripheral inidectomies are not usually perfoimed
its recognition.
in small animal cataract surgeries because of the possibility
 There are two important principles for continuous cu1-
of hemorrhage. Excision of the basal or peripheral iris
vilinea1 capsulorhexis: shearing and ripping. Shearing is
322
Iecommended over ripping because less force is necessary
animals, and more likely to tear radially toward the equato1.
and the force is distributed over a smaller area. In shearing
The anterior lens capsule in dogs 6-8 years or older is thicke1
force the lens capsule is rolled onto itself with Utrata capsu-
and more easily toin with the continuous tear or capsulo1-
la1 forceps, and the pulling force is concentrated in the
hexis procedure. However, the presence of focal lens capsule
direction of the tear. The tear is more directed and less likely
opacities (fibrosis or calcification) often encountered with
to result in radial tears toward the lens equator where the
hypermature cataracts makes tears difficult with forceps,
capsule becomes much thinner.
and incision with intraocular scissors is 1ecommended.
In ripping the lens capsule, the pulling force is greater and
Current techniques utilize tearing or multiple needle punctul-
distributed over a larger area. The pulling force is perpendic-
Ies; however, if the anterior capsulectomy begins to change
ular to the desired direction of the tear. Iregularities in lens
direction, colrective incisions of the anterio1 capsule with
capsule thickness and consistency, such as fibrosis or pla-
intraocular scissors are necessary.
ques, result in ripping forces being less predictable and more
apt to extend radially toward the lens equato1.
Continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis
i r   d   
1) the continuous tear capsulectomy (CTC) o1 capsulorhexis
The continuous tear anterio1 capsulectomy o1 capsulorhexis
method; and 2) the 'can-opener technique. Both of these
procedure is initiated with a curved incision of the anterior
methods can be modified and combined. The objective of
lens capsule with a 22-25 g hypodermic needle, cystotome
capsulectomy o1 capsulorhexis is to produce a round ante-
01 Vannas scissors to reduce tension on the anterior lens
lior lens capsule defect, without radial tears extending
capsule (Fig. 11.8a). This incision is somewhat inteinal to
toward the lens equator. In young dogs, the anterior lens
the desired CCC. A second hypodeimic needle incision 01
capsule is thinner than in old dogs and more easily torn
releasing incision is usually made at 90° to the initial stab
with the can-opener method. The direction of the continu-
incision of the anterior lens capsule performed during the
ous capsulorhexis is more difficult to control in young
initial corneal or limbal entry into the anterior chamber.
A
?
?
F
G
Fig. 11.8 The continuous anterior capsulectomy or capsulorhexis method removes a central circular portion of the anterior lens capsule sufficiently large to
permit extracapsular or phacoemulsification methods to remove the cataract, but of limited diameter (usually 1 mm less than the intraocular lens optic
diameter). The anterior chamber is usually maintained by the infusion of viscoelastic agent. (a) A short radial relief incision of the anterior lens capsule is 
performed with a 22-25 g hypodermic needle. (b) From this relief incision, with Utrata capsule forceps, a continuous circular tear of the central anterior lens
capsule is performed. (c) For fibrotic and/or thicker areas of the anterior lens capsule, intraocular scissors may be necessary to incise the anterior lens capsule
in the intended direction. (d) Any remaining portions of the anterior capsulectomy are carefully removed by Utrata capsule forceps, avoiding radial tears 
that may extend to the equatorial lens capsule. (e,f) A recent modification uses the Vannas capsulotomy and Utrata forceps. The Vannas capsulotomy scissors
are carefully inserted and used to make two opposing semicircular incisions of the anterior lens capsule. (g,h) Shearing of the anterior lens capsule between
the ends of these two incisions using the Utrata forceps completes the circular capsulectomy.
323
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
The edge of the incised flap of anterior capsule is then
Modifications
r on pani An pue 'sdanoy eienn ym padse
the anterior capsule to create a 5-7 mm diameter defect in
The can-opener and CCC methods may be combined to
the anterior lens capsule (Fig. 11.8b). Every 2 o1 3 mm of
various extents. The dorsal anterior lens capsule may be lac-
erated with the 22-25 g hypodermic needle between the
tear, the anterior capsule is regrasped with forceps to con-
10 and 2 o'clock positions and the remaining capsule toin
tinue shearing the circular tear. Shearing forces are preferred
during the CCC; however, at the 6 o'clock position o1
circumferentially with Utrata capsule forceps. Another mod-
directly opposite from the coineal incision, some tearing
ification is to perform the hypodermic needle lacerations of
of the anterio1 capsule may occur, making radial tears more
the anterior lens capsule at the 11-12, 3-4, 6-7, and 9-10
Heai aq seaie paieiael an nauo pue suoisod yoo
frequent in this position. If the initial CCC is too small, this
with the Utrata capsule forceps.
is repeated in the same fashion.
There are also other methods for anterior capsulectomies,
Occasionally the anterior capsule or portions of it appear
such as the envelope procedure, in which a single linear
thickened, fibrotic, and/o1 opaque, and resist forceps tear-
ing. Intraocular scissors are necessary to incise these areas
d as r d a  d si 
of the anterior lens capsule (Fig. 11.8c). The intraocular scis-
sors are carefully inserted with the blades closed. At the cap-
implantation are perfoimed through this single tear. Theoret-
ically, this method of phacoemulsification has the least effect
sulectomy site, the scissors are 1otated 90° and the lower
blade inserted into the intact capsule or beneath the edge of
on the coineal endothelium, but can result in additional tears
to the anterior lens capsule during the surgery. Once phacoe-
the torn capsule; the capsule is then incised, usually circumli-
mulsification has been completed, the anterior lens capsule is
nearly. Once a central portion of the anterior lens capsule
of about 7 mm diameter is achieved, the incised portion of
visualized by both direct and retroillumination, and the CCC
capsule is carefully removed by forceps (Fig. 11.8d)
performed.
 If an IOL is implanted, the diameter of the anterior capsu-
A 1ecent modification of the CCC procedure for the dog
lectomy should be about 1 mm less than the diameter of
anticipates anterior lens irregularities (areas of thickening.
fibrosis, and calcification), and combines the cutting of the
the IOL optic. If an IOL is not planned, the anterior capsu-
Vannas capsulotomy scissors with the shearing technique
using the Utrata forceps and connecting these two incisions
 si sd    ne l 's
acceptable, the procedure may be completed using intraocu-
(Fig. 11.8e,f). The Vannas capsulotomy scissors are carefully
 lal scissors. Anterior capsulectomies are less predictable in
introduced into the anterior chamber and used to incise two
 den s e a o si n soo
older dogs and with hypermature cataracts.
Utrata forceps is then used to grasp and shear the anterior
lens capsule between the two scisso1 incisions, thus com-
Phacoemulsification
pleting a circular capsulectomy (Fig. 11.8g.h).
Phacoemulsification was first introduced by Kelman in 1967.
Can-opener method
The procedure involves ultrasonic fragmentation and aspira-
[n the can-opener method, the anterior lens capsule is
tion of the cataractous lens through a small incision. The tech-
(saund os-ot inoqe) paieiaoel io pasioul Aipaieadai
circumferentially with a 22 o1 25 g bent hypodermic needle
small incision, eliminate some of the complications associated
(Fig. 11.9a). With puncture of the anterior lens capsule and
with large incision cataract surgeries, and shorten the recovery
central movement of the hypodermic needle, another con-
period. Phacoemulsification is a further refinement of the
necting needle laceration is perfoimed. This type of capsu-
extracapsular cataract extraction. Because of the high cost of
lectomy requires more time than the CCC method. Radial
the Kelman phacoemulsification instrument, many veterinar-
tears may develop from the individual needle lacerations.
 se  u n s d i s
Once the central portion of the anterior lens capsule has
small phacofragmentation units in the mid 1970s. Phacoe-
been ringed with needle lacerations, the central capsule is
mulsification is technically more difficult than traditional
carefully 1emoved by Utrata capsule foiceps (Fig. 11.9b).
extracapsular extraction techniques, and the instrumentation
In humans this technique is less popular as it has been
is considerably more expensive. At this time, phacoemulsifica-
associated with an increased frequency of radial anterio1
tion yields the highest success rates, and is the technique of
capsular tears.
choice for cataract extraction in dogs, cats, and horses.
Fig. 11.9 In the can-opener method for anterior
capsulectomies in small animals, 40-50 needle
penetrations are made in a circular pattern about
7-8 mm in diameter. The tip of the hypodermic
needle is bent 90° or a lens cystotome may be
used. (a) The bent hypodermic needle is used to
perform 40-50 punctures of the anterior lens
capsule in a 7 mm diameter circle. (b) Once the 
area is completely surrounded by needle
A
?
punctures, Utrata capsule forceps are used to
remove the central portion of the anterior lens
ca psule.
324
Phacoemulsificatior
Fundamentals of phacoemulsification
differential generates a vacuum which also helps to aspi-
rate fluids and fragmented lens material from the anterior
Phacoemulsification instruments possess two major integrated
chamber. With increased rates of compressed gas and
functions: 1) fluidic systems consisting of irrigation, aspira-
pump activity, the vacuum levels are also simultaneously
tion, and cooling: and 2) an ultrasonic system to fragment
increased. The diaphragm pump consists of a motor that
the lens. Additional components of the newer and larger
rotates causing a diaphragm to be elevated and depressed
that foims a compartment to connect to the two lower
tomy units. The fluidic system involves the active flow of
fluids into and from the anterior chamber of the eye. During
compartments and one-way valves.
Since these three pumps operate with different principles,
phacoemulsification the fluidics are designed to maintain
they provide different rates of fluid flow, vacuum levels, and
a stable anterio1 chamber which is particularly important
lise times. Although the Venturi and diaphragm pumps are
in animals in which the low scleral rigidity collapses the
more responsive to pressure changes, the surgeon must
anterior segment once aqueous humor is removed. The
appreciate that these changes can occur within fractions of
delivery and egress of lactated Ringel's or balanced salt solu-
a second. The peristaltic pump provides a slower response
tion is controlled by the ophthalmic surgeon via a foot con-
time and the vacuum pressure is influenced by the rate of
trol to maintain a balance of irrigation and aspiration to
infusion; that is, the higher rates of irigation create higher
provide sufficient inflation of the anterior segment, facilitate
levels of vacuum. Regardless of the choice of aspiration
Iemoval of lens fragments, and cool the ultrasonic tip. The
pump, adequate levels of fluids must be delivered to the
flow rate fo1 irrigation, the amount of vacuum for aspira-
anterior chamber to maintain the anterior chamber and
tion, and the amplitude of vibration (power settings)
lare
some degree of IOP, remove lens fragments, and cool the
controlled by foot pedal. During phacoemulsification, the
phaco needle during phacoemulsification
foot pedal has three positions: the first level activates only
The aspiration component of a phacoemulsification unit
the irrigation system; the second level activates the irrigation
Iemoves lens fragments and fluids from the anterior chambel.
and aspiration systems; and with the foot pedal fully
Aspiration occurs through the bore of the ultrasonic probe
 e se l a i rl ssaa
needle, and is connected by tubing to a collection reservoir.
mentation systems are activated.
 au jo ansaid aaau al a pand si nea au
ferent pumps, i.e., peristaltic, Venturi, and diaphragm. In aspi-
Irrigation and delivery of fluids
ration, two other principles are important: venting and
aspiration reversal. In venting. the vacuum is relieved by the
to the anterior chamber
foot pedal and ceases before irrigation is stopped. Venting
The irrigation and aspiration of fluid to and from the
allows the surgeon to release lens fragments, lens capsule, 01
anterior chamber involves an infusion system with a bottle
vitreous that plug the ultrasonic needle. Aspiration reversal
of lactated Ringer's or balanced salt solution (often with
refers to the reversal of the pump mechanism so that lens
1-2 [U/mL heparin added) and a pump (either peristaltic.
fragments, lens capsule, or vitreous that temporarily phug
Venturi, or diaphragm). Heparin is added to reduce the
the phaco ultrasonic needle are actively pumped from the
 a   s    
aspiration system within the ultrasonic needle.
the height of the fluid bottle may be raised and lowered to
change the rate of flow of the irrigation fluid and assist the
phacoemulsification pump. Current phacoemulsification
Ultrasonic or 'cutting' system
units control the irrigation of fluids during surgery by a
The phacoemulsification handpiece
 generates ultrasonic
foot-activated pump.
energy that fragments the lens material into small pieces that
can be aspirated from the capsular bag and anterior chamber.
 The piezoelectric ultrasonic system is light, durable, and
Aspiration and vacuum levels
 ads r i   e sd ss sae
Three different pumps have been developed for phacoemul-
quency (27 000-60 000 cycles/s o1 kilohertz (KHz)). The
sification, and each has certain advantages and limitations.
power of the ultrasonic handpiece is determined by several
The peristaltic pump is the oldest type and consists of a
factors including: frequency of vibration, amplitude o1 stroke
loller system that forces the fluid forwaid, utilizing a series
length (back and forth movement of the ultrasonic needle).
of 1oller heads that collapse and push the fluid through
shape and sharpness of the needle tip, aspiration, and reso-
the tubing. The pressure created by this pump results in a
nance (maintenance of frequency during phacoemulsifica-
negative pressure differential or vacuum. This vacuum is
(o    id) ss o 
dependent on its speed; when the system is moving slowly
are available on the instrument console, and change the
the vacuum is very limited. Howevel, at faster rates with this
stroke length of the ultrasonic needle. Both fixed and linea1
type of pump the vacuum level is greater. The 'rise time' o1
modes are also available: in the fixed mode the power is con-
time for the vacuum pressure to build up is low, which
stant as the foot pedal activates the ultrasonic handpiece; in
makes this a less responsive but safer system, especially fo1
the linear mode (as the ultrasonic foot pedal is depressed
surgeons in training.
by the surgeon) additional ultrasonic power is provided.
The Venturi and diaphragm pumps are more advanced
The linear power setting is preferred by many surgeons as
systems, and both provide fast flow rates and rapid vacuum
power can be varied (higher during sculpting and lower when
nise times. The Venturi pump uses a mechanism of com-
in the area of the posterior lens capsule). The handpiece, with
pressed gas that is passed through a tube that has a small
the vibrating needle enclosed within a blue plastic protective
sd si  d r ss e ro o
sleeve, accommodates aspiration and irrigation (Fig. 11.10).
325
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
-ed ul anai kiare uaaq ay aniu eauon jo sada
45°
coemulsification, the coineal incision (usually 3.0-3.2 mm)
Bevel tips
60°
     a  
tion of the phaco ultrasonic needle and sleeve. Incisions
too small result in direct damage to the corneal tissues
and increased postoperative edema. Howevel, a larger than
necessary coineal wound causes excessive leakage of the
irrigating fluids, difficulty in maintaining inflation of the
anterior chamber, and the additional fluids cause unneces-
sary corneal endothelial cell loss. The phacoemulsification
Utrasonic
ultrasonic needle generates heat, and thermal damage
needle
may result. Newer designs contain an additional sleeve
-Infusion
that decreases the friction between the needle, cornea, and
sleeve, and permits the irrigation fluids to flow about the
UItrasonic fragmentation
needle and dissipate the heat.
and aspiration
Phacoemulsification, to maximally protect the coineal
Fig. 11.10 Diagram of the tip of the phacoemulsification handpiece.
endothelium, should be performed within the capsular bag
The tip, inserted into the anterior chamber, accommodates ultrasonic
(endocapsular phacoemulsification).  Phacoemulsification
fragmentation, aspiration, and infusion of the irrigating solution.
of lens fragments within the anterio1 chamber and close to
the coineal endothelium should be avoided if possible.
The addition of viscoelastic agents just before phacoemulsi-
Ultrasonic needles
fication, as well as before the insertion of the IOL, provides
The ultrasonic needle is threaded onto the phaco hand-
excellent protection for the corneal endothelium.
piece to permit the transfer of the ultrasonic energy. The
Cavitation bubbles occur during phacoemulsification,
ultrasound needle is available with a number of different
and consist of high pressures and temperatures, and free
(0 (blunt), 15°, 30°, and 45°) bevels. The degree of needle
a a (i  s s a  s l
lience of the surgeon; 2) the phacoemulsification technique
fication needle vibrations. Higher phaco power (greater than
(either sculpting procedure o1 the port occlusion method);:
60% of maximum power) and larger tip surface areas cause
and 3) the relative softness of the cataract.
more cavitation bubbles. Cavitation bubbles can also arise
With limited phaco experience the 15° needle bevel is
at the junction of the ultrasonic needle and needle piece,
Iecommended as it acco mmodates slow sculpting and is there-
especially in those abrupt or square threading devices. These
fore the safest; it is, however, more easily occluded with lens
cavitation bubbles at the phaco tip also decrease contact
fragments, and more difficult to introduce into the anterior
 between the ultrasonic needle and the lens tissues, reduce
chamber through the coineal incision. The 45° bevel needle
the cutting ability of the needle, and interfere with visualiza-
is 1ecommended for harder cataracts, and the 30° bevel needle
tion of the anterior chamber and cataract.
fo1 softer cataracts. The 45° bevel needle provides not only the
 To reduce cavitation bubbles several strategies have evolved.
most rapid sculpting. but can also penetrate the posterio1
Phacoemulsification should be perfoimed at lower power
capsule the easiest. In addition, bent or Kelman tips and flare
(30-40%o) with small needles and limited bevels. New needles
tips are available to improve fragmentation and tip occlusion.
have tapered junctions to the thread (stealth or bubbleless
needles), and can be used with a 2.7 mm corneal incision.
Irrigation/aspiration (l/A) handpiece
Fundamental phacoemulsification procedures
The I/A handpiece does not generate ultrasonic energy.
therefore it is used, after nearly all of the cataractous material
Two phaco procedures foim the fundamental methods of
has been removed by the phaco ultrasonic handpiece, to
providing contact of the lens tissues to the tip of the ultra
remove all residual lens cortex with minimal trauma to the
sonic needle: 1) sculpting o1 movement of the ultrasonic
lens capsules. Its tip is smoothly rounded, and aspiration
needle tip. gradually allowing the ultrasound to fragment
occurs on the side ports. [rrigation occurs at 9o° from the
the lens material within a relatively fixed cataractous lens;
aspiration ports to facilitate movement of the lens fragments
and 2) port occlusion o1 the obstruction of the ultrasonic
into the aspiration ports. The I/A tip may be straight o1
needle with loose lens fragments using aspiration (and
vacuum pressure)
while
eperforming phacoemulsifica-
lequired for cortical aspiration as a smaller lumen will fire-
tion. Vacuum surges may occur with the latter technique.
quently become occluded with canine and equine lens cortex.
To reduce the magnitude of these surges, vacuum levels, irri-
gation, and aspiration rates are reduced, and areas close to
Corneal damage during phacoemulsification
the posterior capsule are avoided.
Corneal damage of two types, i.e., physical and thermal
One- and two-handed phacoemulsification
damage to the entry wound into the anterior chamber and
coineal endothelial loss, has been associated with phacoe-
Phacoemulsification in small animals has the potential to
mulsification. With 1efinement in the phacoemulsification
provide the highest success rates, shorter surgery times,
instrumentation and the use of viscoelastic agents, both
smalle1
coineal or limbal incision, and less intense
326
Phacoemulsification in small animals
postoperative inidocyclitis. Both one-handed and two-
Once the clear coineal incision is completed, the anterior
handed phacoemulsification procedures are used in small
chamber volume is restored with an injection of visco-
and large animals. The one-handed coaxial technique is eas-
elastic agent (Fig. 11.11c), and the anterio1 capsulorhexis-
capsulectomy performed.
shorter phacoemulsification times, lower energy levels, and
the ability to manage hard and unstable o1 subluxated
Hydrodissection
lenses.
 In the two-handed phaco procedure, the dominant hand
In hydrodissection, lactated Ringel's o1 a balanced salt solu-
is used to hold the phaco handpiece, and the opposite hand
tion is carefully injected between the anterior lens capsule
can maneuvel othel ophthalmic instruments, such as the
and the cortex to 'hydrodissect' or loosen the outer cortex
nuclear manipulator to shift and rotate lens fragments, 01
from the lens capsule. Hydrodissection is useful when a
the chopper to divide the lens into smaller pieces, during
two-handed technique is planned. It is less desirable for
phacoemulsification. Because both instnuments ale in the
one-handed coaxial phacoemulsification. A 27 g cannula with
eye and lens simultaneously, two-handed phacoemulsifica-
a 3 mL syringe is carefully inserted between the anterio1 lens
tion is more difficult to master.
capsule and cortex a few millimeters from the capsulotomy
Phacoemulsification is performed through a widely dilated
edge toward the lens equator. Fluid is carefully injected; the
pupil within the capsular bag (intercapsular/endocapsular
initial injection requires more pressure. Eventually the injected
technique). Phacoemulsification of lens fragments within
fluid will surface from the opposite side of the capsulotomy.
the anterior chamber should be avoided. All lenses and
Hydrodelineation has been reported in humans to remove
cataracts can be potentially fragmented by phacoemulsifica-
as many lens cells and fibers as possible, and reduce the
E ssassod (ae jo sieak oi-g iaao) sieue Pio inq 'uon
extent of the lens capsular opacification. Unfortunately, this
harder nucleus that can prolong the phacoemulsification
-aa on a sead op a ui  si anrua
time. There are many phacoemulsification units available
turity of most cataracts). In this technique, a cannula is used
to veterinarians. Experience, purchase, and operating costs
to inject fluid to separate the nucleus from the epinucleus.
 generally dictate the instrument obtained.
Phacoemulsification of the cataract
Phacoemulsification in small animals
With the anterio1 capsulectomy complete, the ultrasonic
handpiece is carefully inserted through the coineal incision
Fo1 phacoemulsification, a peripheral corneal incision is
and into the anterio1 capsulectomy site (Fig. 11.11d). The
performed about 1 mm anterior to the limbus. It should
ultrasonic handpiece may be held as a pencil or screwdrivel,
approximate 3.0-3.2 mm in length and be sufficient to
whichever is more comfortable, but accommodates fine
accommodate the phaco tip's diameter and, if indicated, the
movements. The bevel of the phaco needle is positioned
diameter of the IOL (Fig. 11.11a). The two-step corneal inci-
down o1 toward the eye to avoid catching on the inis and
sion involves a partial incision with the Beaver No. 6400
stripping Descemet's membrane, and the irrigation system
microsurgical blade (50-70% co1neal thickness), and the
is activated during entrance. The bevel of the phaco needle
deeper aspect into the anterior chamber with the keratome.
p uop ro d aa a a  a 
The first half-thickness corneal incision is initially performed
on the surgeon's preference and the position within the lens.
with the Beave1 No. 6400 microsurgical blade perpendicular
When the bevel is down, observation of the phaco site is
to the coineal suiface; its length is determined by whether
- a no d      
nio1 lens capsule is less likely. When the phaco needle bevel
IOL is planned. If a PMMA IOL implantation is anticipated,
is up or toward the surgeon, the phaco site is fully visible,
the eventual corneal incision will be about 8-10 mm long.
but penetration of the posterior lens capsule is more likely.
and will be enlarged after phacoemulsification has been
Hence, my preference (KNG) for beginners is bevel up dul-
completed. With a foldable acrylic IOL, the entire procedure
ing the initial phacoemulsification of the anterior cortex
may be performed through a 3-4 mm incision.
and lens nucleus, and bevel down when in the posterio1
Once the outer comea is partially incised for about
cortex and near the posterior lens capsule.
3.5-4.0 mm, a 3.0 o1 3.2 mm keratome is inserted through
Phacoemulsification of the lens may be performed using
the center of the coineal incision and into the anterior cham-
many techniques. With one-handed phacoemulsification,
ber. The length of the initial coineal incision is important,
the three principles for lens removal include central sculpting.
as it should be long enough to accommodate the tip of the
nuclear rotation, and 1emoval of the residual central and
phaco handpiece, but not as excessively long as would
 deep nucleus. These techniques are divided into: 'chip and
permit loss of irrigating fluids, resulting in excessive volumes
flip', 'crater divide and conquer', 'trough divide and conquer',
of fluid escaping from the anterior chamber. Often during
and various modifications. All of these techniques are based
the deeper aspects of the coineal incision, the keratome 01
on the observation that the central and hard nucleus is the
scalpel blade may also be advanced into the anterior lens
most difficult and requires the most energy for phacoemulsi-
capsule to perform the initial incision for the anterior capsu-
fication, and the softer cortex provides some protection
lectomy (Fig. 11.11b). If two-handed phacoemulsification is
during this ‘high energy phase of phacoemulsification. Once
planned, a second 1 mm corneal incision is made about
the1
 nucleus is fragmented and aspirated, the remaining
80-90° from the fist incision. Through this second port,
cataractous cortical material is easily removed. Reducing the
instriments such as the nuclear manipulator and viscoelastic
agents can be injected.
time and energy for phacoemulsification in the dog.
327
A
B
G
D
F
G
?
①
<
Fig. 11.11 Phacoemulsification is a modification of the extraction technique in which the cataractous material is removed by ultrasonic fragmentation and
aspiration through a small corneal incision. (a) A 4-5 mm corneal incision is performed with a keratome, sufficient to permit insertion of the phaco needle but
 small enough to prevent excessive loss of the irrigation fluids. The length of the cormeal incision is related initially to the diameter of the phaco tip. Depending
 on the diameter of the optic of the intraocular lens, the corneal incision may be enlarged later in the surgery. (b) During the corneal incision, the anterior lens 
capsule may also be incised with the keratome. (c) The anterior chamber is filled with viscoelastic agent to maintain the anterior chamber during 
phacoemulsification. (d) The Utrata capsule forceps are used to tear a continuous anterior capsulectomy (about 6-8 mm diameter). If an intraocular lens (IOL)
is implanted, the diameter of the anterior capsulectomy should be 1 mm less than the diameter of the IOL optic. (e) The phaco ultrasonic tip is carefully 
inserted (bevel up) through the corneal incision, then through the anterior capsulectomy (bevel up) into the anterior lens cortex. (f Phacoemulsification is
started in the anterior lens cortex and nucleus. (g) If a chopper is used to divide the lens nucleus into halves, it is inserted through a separate cormeal incision.
It is carefully manipulated across the pupil and beneath the anterior capsule. Using the phaco tip and aspiration to stabilize the nucleus, the tip of the chopper
is advanced to divide the nucleus into halves. The tip of the instrument should not extend below the posterior lens nucleus. (h) The sculpting is initially limited
to the nucleus, fragmenting it into four pieces, and then removing it.(i) The remaining nucleus and cortices are fragmented by parallel sculpting. (j) With most
of the cataractous lens material fragmented and aspirated, any remaining material is carefully removed, avoiding tearing of the posterior lens capsule. An 
irrigation-aspirating handpiece is useful during this final phase for removing any remaining cataractous material from the equator and surface of the posterior
lens capsule (polishing). (k) The short corneal incision is apposed with two or three 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures, and the anterior chamber
is reformed with lactated Ringer's solution.
328
Phacoemulsification in small animals
The concept of 'nucleofractis' is about 60 years old and
nucleus and epinucleus can be removed separately. It begins
developed along with phacofragmentation/phacoemulsifica-
with sculpting a central bowl which is rotated and the entire
tion. Nucleofractis is the fracturing or cracking of the lens
mucleus rim is removed. With a second handpiece the inner
nucleus as this area of the lens is the oldest and most resis-
(deeper) nucleus is lifted and removed. A nuclear rotato1 is
tant to phacoemulsification. The nucleus is also the largest
Sumoe ‘imog reapnu (ano) ioaue a d, oi pasn
part of the lens and requires most of the phacoemulsifica-
fragmentation. Hence, in this technique phacofragmenta-
tion process. By subdividing the lens nucleus into smaller
tion is always performed on the outer surface of the cataract,
pieces, less time, less phaco energy, and less potential dam-
and the posterior lens is flipped for fragmentation to mini-
age to the eye results. Dividing the nucleus, when it is rela-
mize the possibility of posterior lens capsule damage.
tively large, generally requires two instruments: one is the
This method has been modified for the dense canine
phaco tip and its aspiration, and the other, an instrument
mucleus. In this procedure, hydrodissection and hydro-
to divide, rotate, and manipulate the nucleus while still
 s  p      
within the cortices - hence, the re-emergence of two-handed
a central groove in the central nucleus and epinucleus.
techniques in phacoemulsification. However, these techni-
The nucleus is then fractured using the phacoemulsification
ques can also be performed using the single phaco incision.
tip and a nucleus rotator, and divided into five or six
 The nucleofractis concept involves deep sculpting of the
pie-shaped pieces for fragmentation.
lens nucleus so a division o1 fracture can occur; fracture of
the lens nuclear rim and posterior nucleus; dividing or frac-
Phaco chop technique
turing the remaining nucleus into smaller wedge-shaped
fragments; and rotation of the lens nucleus (to expose its
The phaco chop was introduced by Nagahara (2002) and
posterior aspects for fragmentation).
utilized the natural cleavage planes of the lens. It utilizes a
chop to divide the nucleus; the human lens instrument is
too short fo1 the canine nucleus (1-2 mm tip for humans;
Divide and conquer technique
4 mm fo1 dogs). Warren modified the Nagahara technique
The divide and conquer techniques are generally divided
from humans for the dog. This procedure uses the phaco
into: 1) trench (for softer to medium hard lens nuclei):
tip to impale and high vacuum to hold the lens nucleus
 "(ianu asu ue iey Aa on iey r) iie (7 pu
while a chopper is hooked at the lens equator and pulled
ad e ln da e ae a e e o i
centrally, splitting the nucleus along its natural planes.
By dividing the nucleus into quadrants or smaller parts
eral lens nucleus rim to fracture into multiple sections. Two
instruments (and incisions) are used to manipulate the lens,
using the chop technique, and combined with the phacoe-
fracture the nucleus, and rotate the lens. However, for the
mulsification ‘divide and conquer' technique, phaco time
one-handed technique and using only the phaco tip, the pha-
and energy are significantly reduced, as is corneal endothe-
lial cell damage.
coemulsification process creates the nucleus fractures and
rotation using its fragmentation, aspiration, and irrigation
Because the lens in the dog is larger than in the human,
capabilities.
Waren recommends using the human instrument for small
The divide
 and conquer method was popularized in
dogs (1-2 mm tip) and has modified the Chang combina-
Gimbel (1991). In this method the dense nucleus is frag-
 t i e) so    r o 
oqe) qnon daap no aoo eu daap e on pai
tip). For safety, the chopper's tip is inserted into the nucleus
70-90% of the depth of the nucleus o1 twice the width of
to only one-half thickness. Some canine cataract cortices
the phaco tip), and the nucleus is fractured using the phaco
nsun ssassod no dou, on piey oon aie pnu pue
tip and a lens manipulato1. The manipulator, initially
Ioom for the instriment to pass between the anterior lens
a
cyclodialysis spatula and now a lens manipulato1, helps
capsule and adjacent cortex, and are not amenable to this
steady the nucleus during fracturing. and rotation requires
technique.
a separate, small (1 mm) corneal incision at about 90° to
the phaco incision. The nucleus is then rotated 90° and a
Sculpting and lens rotation
second groove is made perpendicular to the first fracture.
The cortices are then sculpted into four to six more-or-less
Fo1 phacoemulsification surgery, sculpting and lens 1ota-
equal pieces, and these pie-shaped pieces are then individu-
tion are important concepts. For sculpting, either the 30°
ally fragmented. This method or its modifications is the
01 the 45° bevel of the tip of the phaco ultrasonic needle
op au ui rndod isou
is recommended. The 30° bevel is preferred by many su1-
An alteinative trough ‘divide and conquer' procedure
geons because of its safety near the posterior lens capsule,
divides the lens with a softer nucleus with a single central
but it is slower and more easily occuded with lens frag-
sculpted trough, the nucleus fractured by opposing actions
ments. The 45° bevel needle provides more cutting power
of the phaco tip and cyclodialysis spatula, and then the
fo1 sculpting of the harder cataracts, but is associated with
Iemainder of the cortices into several wedge-shaped sections
a higher incidence of posterior lens capsule tears. These tears
fo1 individual fragmentation.
can be prevented, fo1 the most part, by constant visualiza-
tion of the phaco's tip, and changing its bevel when sculpt-
 rd an rau e x lid a  da 
Chip and flip technique
capsule.
The chip and flip technique was first published by Fine
Generally in small animals the phaco technique fist
(1991). In this technique, both hydrodissection and hydro-
removes the anterio1 cortex just below the anterior capsulect-
delineation are performed so that the central and often hard
omy site, and then attacks the lens nucleus (Fig. 11.11e,f).
329
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
The most effective sculpting is from the coineal incision to
than the fragmentation cycle, to polish or remove any
the opposite side of the cataract, and the development of a
remaining lens material from the equatorial and posterio1
large V-shaped groove. This groove also accommodates the
lens capsules. The aspiration (vacuum) levels during this
sleeve of the phaco tip which increases the diameter of the
step should be reduced to decrease the risk of posterior lens
entire ultrasonic needle
capsule tears.
As the lens nucleus is the hardest and most 1esistant to
If lens fragments exit the capsular bag and enter the ante-
phacoemulsification, it should be addressed early in the
lio1 chambel, they are 1emoved primarily with inigation
phaco procedure. Often when the nucleus is sculpted, result-
and aspiration. Fragmentation in the anterior chamber is
ing in a wide and deep V-shaped groove, it may collapse
 apt to produce diect corneal endothelial damage. If lens
on itself. Pulling rather than pushing forces are recommended
fragments penetrate the posterior lens capsule, their retrieval
 an r s si a a n i 
depends on their size and position within the vitreous, the
rotator (with two-handed phacoemulsification) or the phaco
size of the posterior lens capsule tear, potential damage to
needle using aspiration can be used to manipulate lens frag
the anterior vitreous during fragment removal, and the need
ments. Eventually the lens is divided into four or more pieces
for an anterior vitrectomy.
that are addressed individually by phacoemulsification
Most phaco units have a separate small irrigation/aspira-
(Fig. 11.11g.h). With the collapse of the nucleus, the cataract
tion (l/A) handpiece that may be used at this stage to
may loosen slightly from the equatorial capsules.
Iemove the softer and any remaining cortex still attached
Recent modifications during the phacoemulsification of
to the lens capsule. The I/A tip is preferred during the latter
the lens utilize special instruments to either manipulate
stages of phacoemulsification because of the low likelihood
 on  a o o)   ()
of damage to the lens capsule and posterior lens tears. The
sections and reduce the time and possible trauma of pha-
linear mode is recommended for I/A as it allows the cortex
coemulsification. Generally these instruments require two
to be removed in large sheets and perhaps increases the pos-
entries into the anterio1 chamber: one for the phaco tip
sibility of the removal of as much lens material as possible
and the other, which is smaller, for the insertion of these
with the least trauma. The I/A handpiece consists of only
special instruments. If two-handed phacoemulsification is
 aspiration and irrigation, and its tip is rounded, providing
used, a second instrument can be inserted to manipulate,
the least trauma to the lens capsule. To remove any remain-
stabilize, chop, divide o1 rotate the lens. A nuclea1 manipu-
ing sheets of lens material within the equatorial regions, the
lator (i.e., Bechert nucleus rotator) or other instriments can
lens material is engaged with the I/A tip and then gradually
be inserted through the second port, and used to rotate the
stripped from the capsule, moving the I/A tip to the center
lens fragments and facilitate and reduce the time and energy
of the lens. Vacuum levels should be low so as not to wrin-
fo1 phacoemulsification.
kle or penetrate the lens capsules. Engagement of the lens
The instruments, i.e., quick chopper, nucleus segmenteI,
capsule with the I/A tip is corrected by reflux (not additional
prechoppel, etc., attempt to assst phacoemulsification by sta-
traction) and dislodging the capsule.
bilization as well as to chop (incise and divide) the hard lens
The most diffcult remaining cortex to remove is that
mucleus (Fig. 11.1lg). They are also inserted into the lens
directly beneath the coineal incision. Angled I/A tips (either
mucleus to lift as well as support lens fragments toward the
45° o1 90°) are available fo1 this region. The [/A tip is 1ein-
phaco tip for fragmentation. The Steinert muclear chopping
troduced and the remaining lens material removed.
Polishing the posterio1 lens capsule with the I/A hand-
end (1.5 mm) is sharpened on its inner edge. This creates
the chop of the nucleus while maintaining contact of the
ties postoperatively. The I/A tip is carefully manipulated to
chopper with the nucleus; deep penetration of the nucleus
is avoided to prevent posterior capsule penetration.
appears to be no benefit from this technique.
 After the majority of the lens nucleus is fragmented, the
Once phacoemulsification is complete, and no IOL is
sculpting of the remaining lens fragments consists of linear
 planned, the corneal incision is apposed with two or three
movements extending from the coineal incision (Fig. 11.1 1ij).
8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 11.11k).
The equatorial and posterior cortices are fragmented last,
The anterio1 chamber is re-filled with lactated Ringel's o1
as visibility during this phase should be optimal. Port occlu-
balanced salt solution injected with a 27-30 g irrigation
sion, using aspiration from the phaco's tip to hold lens frag-
cannula carefully inserted between two sutures. The immedi-
ments, is used fo1 the smaller lens fragments and to maintain
ate postoperative [OP should be about 10-15 mmHg
them within the capsular bag.
(Fig. 11.12).
 a  e  s 
corneal incision are often the most difficult to access. The
Phacoemulsification in the horse
pupil needs to be widely dilated fo1 observation and opti-
mal fragmentation of equatorial areas. During this part of
phacoemulsification, the posterior lens capsule can be dam-
There are several differences in cataract surgery of the equine
aged and toin, usually by direct penetration with the phaco
eye as compared to small animals. The size of the patient
needle, or an abrupt change in aspiration flow with the pos-
makes anesthesia, patient positioning, and pre- and postop.
terior lens capsule suddenly pulled into the phaco needle.
erative care more difficult. The size of the eye and the lens
With the phaco needle bevel down and caution, the possi-
may require modifications of technique and instrumenta-
bility of posterior lens capsule tears is reduced.
tion. The decision on implantation of an IOL, which IOL
Toward the end of phacoemulsification, irrigation and
to implant, and the technique and instrumentation required
aspiration are used primarily with the ultrasonic tip, rather
to implant an equine-specific IOL must be considered.
330
 Phacoemulsification in the horse
seen in the horse. Horses with cataracts secondary to ERUI
may have additional intraocular abnormalities such as glau-
coma, synechia, phthisis bulbi, and retinal detachment/
degeneration.
 Preoperative medication for equine cataract patients is
similar to that in small animals. In horses, the patient
should be halter trained and also accustomed to topical
medication prior to surgery. Foals should be halter trained
and broke to lead prior to surgery. All horses can be acclima-
cintment twice daily fo1 a few weeks prior to surgery. The
authol's (DAW) preference is to administer topical 1% pred-
nisolone acetate and broad-spectrum topical antibiotics
every 6 h, starting 48 h prior to surgery. In horses with
Fig. 11.12 Intraoperative appearance of phacoemulsification after nearly all
ERU, all intraocular inflammation must be controlled prior
 of the cataractous material has been removed in a dog.
to considering surgery. Topical prednisolone and a topical
NSAID are administered every 30 min, starting 2 h prio1 to
Finally, the purpose of the animal and the risk associated
surgery. Topical 1% atropine is administered the morning
with visual impaiiment to both the animal and owner/rider
of surgery. At induction of anesthesia intravenous flunixin
must be addressed.
meglumine  (1.0 mg/kg:
Banamine?;
Schering-Plough,
The technique of choice for equine cataract surgery is pha-
Kenilworth, Nl) and systemic antibiotics are administered.
coemulsification. Typically, equine cataracts fall into one of
General inhalational anesthesia with neuromuscular block-
several etiologic categories: congenital o1 juvenile-onset,
ing agents such as atracurium (o.05 mg/kg) is preferred.
traumatic, postinflammatory, and senile (Fig. 11.13). While
The horse must be assisted using intermittent positive pres-
the most common cause fo1 cataracts in the horse is uveitis,
sure ventilation following administration of a neuromuscu-
the most common cataract surgical patient is a foal with
lar blocking agent. A hydraulic table that can be raised and
congenital o1 juvenile-onset cataract. In one study, 25/39
lowered is preferred. For unilateral surgery the horse is
horses undergoing phacoemulsification surgery were foals,
placed in lateral recumbency with the surgical eye up. Fo1
9/39 had traumatic cataracts and only 5/39 had uveitis-
bilateral surgery, the horse can be placed in dorsal recum-
associated cataract (Fife et al 2006).
bency and the head turned to have the operated eye facing
 Prior to cataract surgery, a complete ophthalmic examina-
up: the head is then repositioned for the second eye. The
tion, including an ultrasound and electroretinogram, is peI-
author (DAw) prefers to use a moderately inflated inner
  d a  n    s
tube under the head to help with positioning and to keep
standing hoise using sedation and nerve blocks. With con-
the down eye off the table. The operating microscope, surgi-
genital cataracts in young foals, the eye should be examined
cal chair, and phacoemulsification equipment are then posi-
fo1 other congenital abnormalities such as anterior segment
tioned around the head. The eye is routinely clipped and
dysgenesis o1 microphthalmos. When other congenital ocu-
prepped similar to that described for small animals.
la1 abnormalities are present, a decrease in successful out-
An equine eyelid speculum is placed and, if required, a lat-
come of cataract surgery is reported. In addition, when
eral canthotomy performed. A stay suture(s) is placed at the
possible, the mare and stallion should have a complete
discretion of the surgeon. The surgeon should be positioned
dilated ophthalmic examination to look for abnormalities
at the dorsal eyelid. With the horizontal pupil and large
that would support a hereditary basis for the foal's cataract.
dorsal corpora nigra, the easiest approach will be from the
Breeds considered to have a predisposition fo1 cataracts
lateral or nasal aspect of the equine pupil, giving the su1-
include the Morgan, Quarter Horse, Belgian, Arabian, and
geon the most direct and unimpeded access to the lens.
Thoroughbred. Regardless, a recommendation not to use
A two-plane limbal incision is perfoimed. A 3.2 mm, 75%
seieieo ‘ape a Pinous buaiq ioy leoy panae ue
depth groove is made at the limbus and the anterior cham-
secondary to ERUl are the most common type of cataract
ber enteied using a 3.2 mm keratome. The anterio1 chamber
A
B
Fig. 11.13 Examples of cataracts in the horse. (a) A hypermature juvenile-onset cataract in a 7-month-old American Paint Horse filly. (b) A post-traumatic
cataract secondary to a penetrating trauma 1 year previously. There is a focal corneal scar, anterior and posterior synechiae, and corpora nigra avulsion.
(c) A hypermature cataract, posterior synechiae, and corpora nigra atrophy secondary to chronic equine recurrent uveitis.
331
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
depth of the horse at the iridocoineal angle is shallow com-
is very thin and the large area of the capsule renders it prone
pared to the dog and the surgeon must be careful to make
to wave and undulate in the I/A fluid currents. This makes it
the entry in one continuous motion without traumatizing
much easier to inadvertently contact, aspirate, and tea1 the
the iris. Following entry, the anterior chamber is re-inflated
posterio1 capsule. To avoid this, the surgeon should perfoim
using 1:10 000 adrenaline (epinephrine) for pupil dilatation
phacoemulsification in the mid-pupil at the level of the
and vasoconstriction, followed by a high-viscosity viscoelas-
anterior lens capsule with the bevel up as much as possible.
tic agent placed intracamerally.
Once the majority of the lens has been removed, the hand-
The technique used to complete the anterior capsulorhexis
piece is changed for a curved 0.5 mm I/A handpiece. Again,
will depend on whether the surgeon plans to implant an
 r s ()  si    
[OL. If no IOL is planned, a large anterior capsulorhexis
equine eye (Fig. 11.15f). If no IOL is to be implanted, a
is usually perfoimed. This can be done using Vannas scis-
planned posterio1 capsulorhexis may be advised in foals as
sors or the can-opener technique with a bent needle or
cystotome, followed by intraocular forceps to complete the
sequela. A high-viscosity viscoelastic is used to displace the
capsulorhexis. The typical Utrata forceps used for capsulor-
hexis in small animals is too short to reach the distal aspect
intraocular scissors and forceps are used to complete a con-
of the equine anterior capsule. Longer Utrata forceps O1
trolled continuous tear circular posterior capsulorhexis. The
modified equine Utrata-type capsulorhexis  forceps
are
coineal incision is then closed using 8-0 absorbable suture
available (Acrivet). If implantation of an IOL is planned,
in a cruciate or other continuous pattein.
then a controlled circular anterio1 capsulorhexis must be
The current equine IOL is made of a foldable acrylic mate-
perfoimed similar to the small animal patient. The optic of
rial (Acrivet 9ov). There are three different equine [OLs 
the equine IOL is 12-13 mm so the anterior capsulorhexis
commercially available. The optic size ranges from 12 to
should be 10-11 mm in diameter. In the author's (DAw)
13 mm and the haptic to haptic length from 21 to 24 mm.
opinion the easiest and most precise method for performing
The diopter power of the current equine IOLs is either 14
a circular anterior capsulorhexis in the horse is using
D or 21 D, and there remains some discussion regarding
the bipolar capsulotomy device that is available with the
the optimum IOL power to achieve emmetropia in the
Alexos anterior segment surgical system (Fig. 11.14). This
horse. One of the difficulties in determining the optimal
 o n a s ad sdio ro
IOL power for the horse is the limited number of IOLs that
elongating it for the equine eye (Acrivet). This will allow
are implanted clinically and the even smaller number of
a precise and perfect axial anterio1 capsulorhexis to be
horses that are refracted once the IOL is in place. While cal-
performed (Fig. 11.15a,b). The anterior capsule, once cut
culations of IOL power based on globe measurements are
   aa  'd reo a 
valuable, the final position of the IOL in the eye with respect
n reoi e l (i'1l ) sao ad-i
to the retina has a significant effect on final refraction.
tip is not available, then intraocular scissois and forceps
It would appear that the current one-piece, plate haptic
are used to peiform a controlled tear circular anterior
acrylic equine IOLs, once implanted in the equine eye, tend
capsulorhexis.
to sit more anteriorly in the lens capsule than expected. As a
 In young foals, the cataractous lens is soft and a one-
 Iesult, recent reports suggest an 18 D IOL may be requiied
 handed coaxial phacoemulsification is routinely performed.
 to achieve emmetropia (McMullen R, personal communica-
A 30° o1 45° phaco tip is used, and the majority of the lens
tion). An 18 D IOL is culrently in production (13 mm optic,
 is removed using irrigation/aspiration with only minimal
24 mm haptic to haptic; Acrivet) and should be available at
phaco energy required. The author (DAW) prefers to use
the time of publication. Currently, no data are available on
the pulse setting and short controlled bursts of energy to
this IOL in vivo.
emulsify the harder nucleus. The standard length phaco tips
If an [OL is to be implanted, viscoelastic material is used
will not reach the distal aspect of the equine lens
to expand the capsular bag and vault the anterior chamber.
(Fig. 11.15d). A longer equine phaco tip is available (Acri-
The corneal incision is enlarged to a length of 7-8 mm using
vet) and will facilitate access to the fa1 cortex (Fig. 11.15e).
 corneal section scissors. The IOL is grasped in lens-holding
If this longer needle is not available, the surgeon should rely
forceps and folded using IOL implantation forceps, both
on careful aspiration to grasp the cortex that can be reached
of which are specifically designed for the equine IOL
and to gently pull the associated distal cortex closer until it
(Acrivet) (Fig. 11.15g).
. The folded IOL is gently placed
too may be grasped. The posterior lens capsule in the foal
through the coineal incision and into the anterior chamber,
and the distal haptic is directed through the anterior capsu-
lorhexis and into the lens capsule (Fig. 11.15h). The [OL
is 1otated 90° and the IOL implantation forceps are slowly
opened, allowing the IOL to expand downwards below
the forceps and into the lens capsule. An IOL manipulato1
is used to push the optic away from the coineal incision
and direct the proximal haptic into the lens capsule
(Fig. 11.15ij). The coineal incision is closed using an 8-0
absorbable suture in a double continuous pattein. The
author prefers to leave the viscoelastic agent in the equine
eye to maintain the anterior chamber and keep the IOL
 Fig. 11.14 The standard and the longer equine bipolar capsulotomy tip for
and vitreous face from moving anteriorly in the immediate
anterior capsulorhexis
postoperative period.
332
 Phacoemulsification in the horse
D
G
H
Fig. 11.15 Phacoemulsification in the horse. (a) Anterior capsulotomy is performed using the modified equine Alexos bipolar capsulotomy tip. (b) The area
of anterior capsule to be removed can be visualized as the capsulotomy is completed. (c) The anterior capsulorhexis is completed using curved 17 mm
capsulorhexis gripper forceps (Acrivet). (d) The standard length phacoemulsification needle is too short to reach the distal aspect of the equine lens.
(e) A longer, modified equine phaco needle is available (Acrivet) and permits easy access to the distal lens nucleus and cortex. (f) A longer, modified equine I/A
cannula (Acrivet) is used to grasp and remove the lens cortex. (g) The intraocular lens (IOL) is grasped in equine lens-holding forceps and gently folded using 
equine lens-implantation forceps (Acrivet). (h) The IOL is rotated and introduced through the corneal incision into the anterior chamber. The distal haptic is
placed into the lens bag through the anterior capsulorhexis. (i An IOL manipulator is used to position the IOL in the capsular bag. (j) Photograph immediately
postoperatively following implantation of an Acrivet 90V 14D 13 mm optic, 22 mm haptic IOL.
(Photographs I1. 15a-r. e and f. courtesy of Dr Brian Gilger.)
Fo1 older horses and those whose cataract is secondary
first incision. This incision is used to place a nucleus rota-
to ERU the surgeon should expect the lens to be harder
to1, chopper or manipulator into the anterior chamber
and more difficult to fragment. In these instances, a two-
(Fig. 11.16). The surgeon now has two instruments in the
  a   si e 
eye, one temporal and one nasal to the dorsal corpora nigra.
hexis has been perfoimed and the phaco needle inserted,
The standard two-handed techniques described for small
the irrigation is used to vault the anterio1 chambe1. A 1 mm
animal phacoemulsification may be used. Use of the second
  a  s e  n   si 
instrument will decrease the surgical time and ultrasonic
opposite side of the pupil and dorsal corpora nigra to the
energy required to remove the cataract. This will also
333
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
bag. After the phacoemulsification procedure, the coineal
's    ti- n a si 
sufficient to accommodate the 8-9 mm diameter optic of
the PMMA IOL. If a foldable acrylic IOL is used, the incision
 length does not usually need to be enlarged.
The anterior chamber and capsular bag are reformed with
viscoelastic agent to assist with IOL placement into the cap-
sular bag, as well as protect the posterior surface of the co1-
nea. The procedure for IOL placement is presented in a
subsequent section. Foldable or soft IOLs can be inserted
through the 3-4 mm corneal incision directly into the cap-
sular bag and do not require changes in the original phaco
coineal incision length.
Once the IOL is properly positioned, the viscoelastic agent
is removed from the anterior chamber using the automated
I/A handpiece, and the corneal incision apposed with 7-0 to
9-0 simple interrupted o1 continuous absorbable sutures.
IOP of about 10-15 mmHg is restored with the same irriga-
Fig. 11.16 A two-handed technique is used to manipulate and fragment
the lens in an older horse. A 45° phaco needle tip enters the eye to the right
tion solution carefully injected between the coineal sutures.
and a lens rotator to the let of the dorsal corpora nigra.
facilitate access to the large lens, allowing fragments to be
Intracapsular cataract or lens extraction
stabilized and moved to the phaco tip.
in small animals
 Prior to closure, any vitreous strands that have presented
into the anterio1 chamber, especially those that extend into
In intracapsular lens removal, the entire lens and its capsule
the coineal incision, must be removed or displaced posteri-
- a a se  a a ae
orly using viscoelastic material. Vitreous that is incarcerated
lar ligaments between the posterio1 lens capsule and ante-
into the coineal wound is a risk for tracking of bacteria and
nor vitreous membrane that occur in dogs, but not in
secondary endophthalmitis.
humans, render the intracapsula1 method more hazardous
If the cataract is secondary to ERU, the surgeon should
and decidedly less successful in dogs. As a result, the extra-
consider the implantation of a sustained-release cyclospo1-
capsular technique and modification with phacoemulsifica-
ine delivery device at the conclusion of the cataract p1o-
tion are the only recommended surgical techniques fo1 the
cedure (see Chapter 12). If fibrin foimation is observed
Iemoval of cataracts in dogs and cats.
at the conclusion of surgery, 75 μg of intracameral tissue
However, the intracapsular method is used in dogs and
plasminogen activator (tPA) may be administered using a
cats when the lens is displaced partially o1 completely from
27-30 g irrigation cannula inserted between the sutures.
its patellar fossa. Often these lenses are completely clear
Prior to recovery, a subpalpebral lavage catheter (Mila InteI-
and not cataractous. Lens luxations or displacements are
national, Florence, KY) is placed to facilitate postoperative
divided into three types, although gradients occur. [n sub-
medication delivery. The hoise is 1ecovered in as atraumatic
luxated lens, some zonulary attachments are still present
a fashion as possible. Foals are recovered by hand, often in a
(Fig. 11.17). The lens is usually within the patellar fossa,
bedded stall, and older horses are generally recovered using
but may be tilted. It does not provide stability to the iris, cre-
head and tail ropes in a padded recovery room. Protective
ating variable amounts of iridodonesis. With loss of all
headgear may be used at the surgeon's discretion.
Postoperative medication includes systemic antibiotics for
3-5 days, systemic flunixin meglumine every 12 h fo1 a
week and then used in a tapering dose fashion as required.
Topical broad-spectnum antibiotics and prednisolone ace-
tate o1 dexamethasone are administered every 6 h, and at1o-
pine is used as needed to maintain a dilated to mid-dilated
pupil. Exercise is restricted for a few weeks. Once the horse
  a si  ain  a 
may be removed. The topical antibiotics are discontinued
after 14 days, and the topical and systemic NSAIDs 
are
tapered as indicted by the postoperative uveitis and comfort
over the next weeks to months.
Intraocular lens implantation in small animals
If IOL implantation is planned after phacoemulsification o1
extracapsular extraction, the [OL is inserted once all of the
Fig. 11.17 Subluxated and cataractous lens in a dog. Note the medial
rnsden au o paaouai uaaq seu ieaie sual aissod
aphakic crescent.
334
Removal of the unstable lens in small animals
zonulary attachments, the lens can slide from its patellar
Intracapsular cataract or lens extraction
fossa into the anterior chamber, usually with its posterio1
in the horse
capsule adhered to the anterior hyaloid membrane. The
anterior luxated lens may contact the posterior surface of
the cornea causing loss of the endothelial cells and variable
Lens subluxation and anterior or posterior luxation is uncom-
coineal edema (Fig. 11.18). The displaced lens can also
mon in the horse and is typically secondary to chronic ERUL,
cause iridocyclitis. The adherent formed vitreous 
can
glaucoma o1 trauma. In addition, congenital microphakia
occlude the pupil and prevent aqueous humor from flowing
and lens luxation occur in the horse (Fig. 11.19). Intracapsu-
through the pupil into the anterior chamber. As a result,
lar lens extraction has been reported in the horse, but the
IOP becomes elevated in the posterior segment of the eye.
numbers of cases are few and the outcomes poor. The size
ballooning the basal iris and closing the anterior chamber
of the incision required and the conculrent intraocular dis-
eases make this a high-risk procedure. Eyes with a lens luxa-
nent peripheral anterior synechiae. The high posterior seg-
tion that are comfortable may be monitored and medically
ment pressure damages the retina and optic disk, probably
managed. Enucleation o1 an intrascleral prosthesis may be
by impairing regional blood flow and mechanically distort-
considered in a blind o1 painful eye with a lens luxation.
ing the scleral lamina cribrosa. IOP measured at the level of
the coinea in these eyes is misleading and erroneously low.
Removal of the unstable lens in small animals
In some eyes, loss of zonulary attachments to the lens
m ad  ro s su a u ssan
the vitreous. For posterior lens luxations, the anterio1 vitre-
mologists fo1 surgical and medical treatment of lens luxations
ous membrane is toin, allowing the lens this posterio1 route;
in animals. The primary objective for intracapsular lens
however, the liquid and/o1 formed vitreous are displaced
Iemoval is to either prevent or treat the not-infrequent sec-
into the pupil and anterior chamber. If the displaced vitre-
ondary glaucoma in these patients. Not surprisingly, the
ous is liquefied, it appears mixed with aqueous humor and
lack of adequate clinical studies fosters these disagreements.
is eventually lost; however, if the displaced vitreous is
Jo e ui sio eooea in sisans nodai janai au
formed and occludes the pupil, it can produce acute eleva-
eyes with anterio1 lens luxations, in 43% of eyes with sub-
tions in IOP. If the formed vitreous contacts the posterior
luxations, and in 38% of eyes with posterio1 lens luxations.
surface of the coinea, focal edema lesults.
However, the duration of the lens luxation, the condition
There may also be significant differences in the patho-
of the aqueous outflow pathways (as judged by repeated
tonometry, tonography, and gonioscopy), and the age and
with clear lenses and displacements, versus those dogs with
breed of the dogs are important interrelated variables. The
hypermature cataracts, lens instability, and LIU. The foimer
absence of medical and/or surgical treatment of eyes with
patients are primarily at risk for secondary glaucoma
l and
letinal detachments; the latter patients are at higher
displaced lenses eventually 1esults in secondary glaucoma.
risk
 d ss s  ai jo  
fo1 chronic uveitis, glaucoma, and retinal detachments.
the terrier breeds, has the highest possibly of success fo1
retention of vision and prevention of secondary glaucoma.
Hopefully, additional information can be developed to assist
in the clinical management of these patients.
As indicated in an earlier section, many displaced lenses in
dogs are clear, and detection of the lens within the vitreal
space can be difficult. The displaced lens may shift from
one compartment to another. For instance, in the surgical
Fig. 11.18 Anterior lens luxation in a Smooth Hair Terrier. The entire
Fig. 11.19 Congenital microphakia and anterior lens luxation in a
 periphery of the lens is detectable.
Thoroughbred foal. The condition was bilateral.
335
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
Iemoval of an anterior lens luxation, after the onset of gen-
immediately before lensectomy. Even with the pupil under
eral anesthesia o1 surgical entry into the anteriol chamber,
the influence of 2% pilocarpine, the pupil may dilate during
the lens may gravitate into the vitreous body. A clear poste-
general anesthesia and surgery, allowing the lens to settle in
nio1 lens luxation is difficult to detect in the foimed vitreous.
the vitreous. Another fixation technique is to place one or
Hence, intracapsular lens extractions or lensectomies in
two long 22-25 g hypodermic needles posterior to the ante-
dogs and cats are used in the treatment of displaced lenses,
rior luxated lens to attempt to trap the lens within the ante-
whether clear o1 cataractous, to prevent or treat secondary
nior chamber.
glaucoma. Vitreous problems during surgery are common,
Extraction of the anterior luxated lens may use a lens loop.
and successful lens removal with intracapsular methods
viscoelevation, cryothermy, o1 an intracapsula1 forceps. Each
depends on surgical treatment of the concurrent vitreous
method has advantages and limitations. In the lens loop
disorder. General anesthesia combined with neuromuscular
method, the lens loop is carefully manipulated behind the
blocking agents is recommended for intracapsular lens
posterior lens surface, and the lens is carefully lifted from
removal in the dog. Because vitreous presentations 
are
the anterio1 chamber and removed (Fig. 11.20a). The adhe1-
anticipated during or after delivery of the lens, the lack of
ent vitreous may be separated from the posterior surface of
scleral rigidity in the dog, and the need for optimal exposure
the lens with the lens loop while simultaneously preventing
of the globe, the neuromuscular blocking agents are most
the lens from migrating into the vitreous. If vitreous is
important.
adherent to the posterior lens, it is carefully separated with
As more intraoperative complications are likely to occur
a cyclodialysis spatula (Fig. 11.20b). Alternatively, viscoelas-
with the intracapsular lens extraction procedure with unstable
tic material may be placed posterior to the lens and used to
lenses, we prefer to remove these lenses, if possible, by pha-
elevate the lens and float it out of the coineal incision.
pue snn ssan a on siedde s se uois
If cryotherapy is used, a cryoprobe should use either car-
time-consuming. If necessary, the unstable lenses can be posi-
bon dioxide o1 nitrous oxide to provide a temperature of
tioned in front of fixation hypodermic needles o1 other
about -25°C at the tip for firm attachment to the lens
devices inserted at the limbus o1 through the pars plana.
periphery in the presence of aqueous humor or formed vit-
reous (Fig. 11.21a). Once adhered to the tip of the cryo-
probe, the anterior luxated lens is carefully slid from the
Operative procedure
anterio1 chamber. Any vitreous adherent to the posterio1
Fo1 intracapsular lens removal, either the peripheral coineal
surface of the lens is carefully separated with a cyclodialysis
 i r n a    a 
spatula (Fig. 11.21b). Care must be taken to avoid contact of
The limbal approach offers the security of two layers of
the cryoprobe with the coinea or iris.
wound apposition and may be advantageous if secondary
With the intracapsular forceps, the anterior lens capsule is
glaucoma is alleady present, o1 if an additional glaucoma
firmly grasped. However, with luxated lenses, the unstable
surgery procedure is anticipated. The incision is identical
do   ns im e 'ds oi  aq  sa
to that described in the earlier section on the anterior cham-
direction. If the fist attempt with intracapsular forceps is
-np ieu iensnun iou si 1l (o-el1'1I y aas) yoeoidde iaq
unsuccessful, either the lens should be stabilized by another
ing entry into the anterior chamber, formed vitreous
forceps for another attempt, or the lens loop or cryotherapy
protrudes into the incision. A single pre-placed suture is
method should be used.
lecommended in the event that extensive vitreous prolapse
After removal of the anterior luxated lens, any foimed vit-
into the anterior chamber occurs.
reous within the anterior chamber and pupil is carefully
 The pupil size intraoperatively depends on the position of
excised using cellulose spears and scissors, o1 a vitrecto1
the luxated lens. With anterio1 luxated lens, 2% pilocarpine
(Fig. 11.21c). An air bubble may be injected into the ante-
is instilled about 1 h preoperatively to try to induce a small
rior chamber to check for the presence of formed vitreous.
pupil during surgery to retain the lens in the anterior cham-
Excessive irigation of the anterio1 chamber with possible
formed vitreous may aggravate the problem, as fluids may
anterior luxated lens, as the miotic pupil is more prone to
also enter the vitreous space and displace additional gel
obstruction with the vitreous, and are administered only
vitreous into the anterior chamber.
Fig. 11.20 Intracapsular lens extraction involves
the removal of the entire lens and its capsules,
and is generally the procedure for removal of
displaced lenses in small animals. Because of the
lens-vitreous attachments, vitreal presentation 
during lens removal usually occurs. (a) The
anterior luxated lens may be removed by several
techniques, anticipating that formed vitreous will 
be adherent to the posterior lens capsule. In the
first procedure, the anteriorly displaced lens is 
removed by retracting the limbal incision with
thumb forceps, and scooping the anteriorly
luxated lens from the anterior chamber with a
lens loop. (b) The loop also partially separates the
formed vitreous from the posterior lens capsule.
A
?
336
Removal of the unstable lens in small animals
A
?
Fig. 11.21 Another technique for removal of the anterior lens luxation is cryosurgery, with the limbal incision retracted by thumb forceps. (a) The cryoprobe is
positioned at the lens equator and after freezing attaches the probe to the lens, the lens is carefully slid from the anterior chamber. Cryoprobe contact with
 alnsden sual jouansod ayn on zuawupenne snoaaiA pawuoy aun aneyedas Ainyaien on pasn 5! ejnzeds sisAleipop/o ayl (q) papione s! uoisou! leqwll jo sui au
during the cryoextraction. (c) Formed vitreous is removed from the anterior chamber using cellulose spears to lift the vitreous for excision with sharp iris 
scissors parallel to the surface of the iris. No formed vitreous should remain in the anterior chamber and pupil.
 n  n l o S   S r
foimed vitreous, but are usually located in the most ventral
attachments, the pupil is maximally dilated as in cataract
quadrant of the vitreal space. Ultraviolet illumination may
surgery (Fig. 11.22a). The lens is removed using any of the
assist in their detection. A translucent or opaque lens luxated
three intracapsular methods used for removal of anterior
posteriorly is easily located in the formed vitreous.
lens luxations. However, if the remaining zonules are still
 Fo1 removal of intravitreal lenses, cryosurgery with a cal-
holding the lens within the patellar fossa during entry into
the anterior chamber, an extracapsular lens or phacoemulsifi-
ence of foimed vitreous and fimly adhere to the lens
cation removal is preferable. Because of the hyaloideocapsu-
(Fig. 11.23). The lens is carefully maneuvered through the
lar attachments, vitreous presentation is common, especially
pupil and out the surgical incision. Formed vitreous presen-
through the larger aphakic crescents (Fig. 11.22b). Once the
tation in the pupil, anterior chamber, and even in the co1-
lens is removed, any foimed vitreous within the pupil and
neal or limbal incision is frequent. All formed vitreous
      r rs
within the anterior chamber, pupil, and anterior vitreal
and scissors, o1 preferably a vitrector. An air bubble, injected
space is carefully removed using cellulose spears and scis-
into the anterio1 chamber, is the simplest method to detect
sors, or preferably a portable vitrector. An air bubble is used
formed vitreous. Hence, an anterior vitrectomy is often peI-
to detect any remaining formed vitreous within the anterior
formed after the intracapsular procedure.
chamber.
Removal of the posterior luxated or intravitreal lens requires
The corneal or limbal incision is apposed with 8-0 to 9-0
the cryoprobe o1 the lens loop to extract the lens from the
simple interrupted absorbable sutures placed 1-1.5 mm
formed vitreous. These instruments should not contact the
apart. These sutures should be placed at two-thirds thickness
retina. Clear lenses are most difficult to differentiate from
of the cornea to ensure apposition of all layers of the cornea.
A
?
C
Fig. 11.22 For subluxated lenses with some zonulary attachments, the extracapsular and phacoemulsification methods are recommended. Cryoextraction is
preferred for the intracapsular removal of the subluxated lens without any significant zonulary atachments. (a) Through a dilated pupil, the cryoprobe is
touched to the dorsal anterior lens surface. Once a firm adherence is established, the lens is carefully slid from the patellar fossa and through the limbal
incision. (b) The lens-vitreous attachment usually results in formed vitreous presentation behind the subluxated lens. This attachment is carefully separated by
the cyclodialysis spatula. No formed vitreous should remain in the anterior chamber and pupil. Removal is by cellulose spears and sharp iris scissors, or a
vitrector. (c) Intraoperative photograph showing cryoextraction of a subluxated lens through a clear corneal incision.
337
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
Lens instability may provide excessive movement of the
vitreous base with associated peripheral 1etinal traction,
tears, and eventual detachment. The mechanisms fo1 the
genesis of glaucoma in eyes with unstable lenses is more
complex; however, the low-grade anterior segment inflam-
mation, collapse of the sclerociliary cleft, and displacement
of part to all of the basal iris circumference contribute to
Ieduced aqueous humor outflow and the increase in IOP.
In some clinical terrier breed patients with early lens sublux-
ation and limited, if any, displacement, pneumatonography
often indicates that impaired conventional aqueous outflow
is already present and glaucoma is likely to occu1.
Hence, when presented with an unstable lens, the extent
of the zonulary loss should be determined intraoperatively.
If the zonulary loss is less than 180°, the unstable lens can
be treated by a capsular ring and an IOL implanted into
the capsular bag. If the zonulary loss is in excess of 180°
or is too unstable to receive an IOL within the capsular
bag, the IOL can be placed in the ciliary sulcus using eithel
Fig. 11.23 In the removal of the posterior or intravitreal luxated lens,
identification of a clear lens in the vitreous space is very difficult. A carbon
the ab externo or the ab interno approach. The ab interno
dioxide or nitrous cryoprobe is touched to the lens periphery (usually in the
approach requires IOL placement through the anterior
presence of formed vitreous). Once the freezing and attachment occur, the
chamber, posterio1 to the inis and in the ciliary sulcus in a
lens is carefully removed from the vitreal space. At the conclusion of the lens
blind fashion using a 160° or 'open sky corneal incision.
extraction, no formed vitreous is permitted within the pupil or anterior
This technique is more difficult than the ab externo approach
chamber.
and has significant postoperative complications. Generally.
two rather than three sutures are used to fix the IOL in place
Once the last suture has been placed, a small 22-25 g hypode1-
and, as a result, accurate IOL positioning is more difficult.
mic needle is carefully placed between two of these sutures,
Ab externo fixation of IOLs in the ciliary sulcus has been
and the antenior chamber is restored with lactated Ringel's o1
recommended by Wilkie and co-wo1kers (2008) immedi-
balanced salt solution until about 10-15 mmHg [OP
is
ately following phacoemulsification of unstable lenses with
achieved. This level of IOP permits integrity of the wound
a small corneal incision and viscoelastic agents already pres-
apposition to be ascertained and any leaks detected. If leaks 
ent. Prior to entry into the eye, a ciliary sulcus-designed
occu1, additional 8-0 to 9-0 simple interrupted absorbable
PMMA (K9400; Ocularvision, Inc., Solvang, CA) or foldable
sutures are placed in the area. If a limbal- o1 fornix-based
acrylic IOL (Acritec 10v-17; Acri.Tec, Hennigsdorf, GeI-
Psodde si d uno au asn sm d iaun
many) is prepared by attaching 9-0 nylon sutures (with nee-
with a 8-0 to 9-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
dles removed) to the haptic eyelets for either a two- or three-
point fixation. The three-point fixation results in less chance
Ciliary sulcus intraocular lens fixation
difficult. If the lens capsules are to remain in situ, an axial
or placement
posterio1 capsulorhexis is performed.
In the early development of IOLs, these devices were placed
Viscoelastic is injected from the coineal incision to behind
in several positions within the anterio1 chambe1, pupil, cili-
the iris to expand the ciliary sulcus, pushing the iris forward
ary sulcus, and capsular bag. Eventually, the routine and
and the anterio1 vitreous posteriorly. A 2 cm 30 g (0.3 mm)
optimal position for the IOL was established as within the
 needle is inserted 1.5 mm posterio1 of the limbus from out-
capsular bag: all of the other sites were determined as less
side the globe and anterior of the anterior vitreous, to
satisfactory. Ciliary sulcus placement of IOLs in humans
emerge from the corneal incision. For optimal dorsal and
was associated with iridal rubbing iris iritation, and pig-
ventral fixation suture placement about 180° apart, the ven-
ment loss from the posterior iris surface. Howevel, with lens
tal needle is placed about 120° from the coineal incision
instability, lens luxation, large posterior capsular tears, and
and the dorsal needle is positioned about 60° from the same
large capsular tears in the dog placement of the IOL within
incision. The IOL with sutures attached to each haptic is
the capsular bag may be impossible and new strategies have
carefully passed into the lumen of the ventral needle first,
evolved to treat these problems.
followed by the dorsal suture and needle, respectively. With
Placement of the IOL by either ab externo or ab interno
a 4 mm coineal incision a foldable IOL can be used; for a
methods secures the IOL within the ciliary sulcus with
PMMA o1 hard IOL the coineal incision must be about
non-absorbable nylon sutures, hopefully improves vision
8 mm long.
(from aphakia), and reduces the frequency of the serious
If a PMMA IOL is used, the IOL is carefully slid into the
postoperative complications
of！
glaucoma
and
retinal
 pupil and sulcus; if a foldable acrylic IOL is used, the IOL
detachments in the dog. If possible, phacoemulsification is
is introduced into the pupil with the special forceps or injec-
used for these unstable lenses, which permits a smaller
to1. The coineal incision is apposed by sutures, the viscoelas-
incision (and less surgical trauma and time, as well as less
tic agent removed, and the anterior chamber is reformed.
postoperative inflammation) and allows the placement of
Using the sutures attached to the IOL haptics, the IOL is
these ciliary sulcus IOLs through a small coineal incision.
carefully centered and the ends of both haptic sutures
888
Intraocular lens implantatior
secured to the sclera with a separate 9-0 nylon suture and
An IOL may be implanted in the remaining capsular bag
then covered by small individual conjunctival flaps.
after the cataract has been removed by phacoemulsification
 [n a limited number of patients, the ab externo approach
01 by the extracapsular method (Fig. 11.24). Phacoemulsifi-
was well tolerated with good centralization of the ciliary
cation is preferred for IOL implantation because of the lim-
sulcus-fixed IOL. Mild anterior vitreal hemorrhage occurred
ited size of the anterior capsulectomy (usually 1 mm less
in about 50% of the patients, but resolved within 2 weeks.
than the diameter of the IOL optic). Delivery of the catarac-
This technique, combined with phacoemulsification of
tous lens nucleus and cortices in the extracapsular extraction
unstable lenses and foldable IOLs, seems promising for the
method through an anterior lens capsulectomy of about
dog. Additional patients and long-term follow-ups are nec-
7 mm diameter may be difficult o1 impossible. Forcing the
essary to determine if the serious postoperative complica-
cataractous material through this size of anterior capsulect-
tions of glaucoma and retinal detachments are significantly
omy may produce additional tears of the anterior lens
reduced.
capsule, often radiating toward the thinner capsule at the
 Clearly with both the ab externo and ab interno techniques,
equator.
and the sutures placed through the vascularized posterio1
There are many commercially available IOLs for animals
iris and in the ciliary sulcus, intraocular hemorrhage is
(Table 11.4). The preferred dioptric power (D) for the
almost certain! Can these fixation sutures be avoided by
canine IOL is about 41 D. Canine IOLs are designed fo1
specially designed IOLs with larger haptics fo1 the aphakic
insertion through small incision phacoemulsification proce-
dog without an acceptable and stable capsula1 bag? Time
dures, but can also be used with extracapsular methods.
will tell!
[OLs with a continuous haptic (ring or disk type) usually
require a larger coineal or limbal wound and larger anterior
capsulectomy. One-piece IOLs are preferred by most veteri-
Intraocular lens implantation
nary ophthalmologists. The IOL may be either hydrophilic
(preferred) or hydrophobic.
The technique for [OL implantation in the different animal
The 1ecent introduction of foldable IOLs for dogs using
species is very similar, allowing for the differences in size
hydrophilic acrylic represents another advancement for cata-
 of the IOL. In general, the most universal IOL for the dog
ract surgery (Fig. 11.25). These 'soft' IOLs are grasped by
is +41 D, and fo1 the cat +53 D; howeve1, the ideal IOL
for the horse is still unresolved (IOLs ranged from +14,
and placed through a small coineal incision (2.7-4.0 mm)
+25 to +30 D).
into the capsular bag.
Most dogs are within 1 D of emmetropia. The majority
The technique for placement of the hard IOL in the capsu-
of the diffrent breeds, as evaluated by retinoscopy, are
lar bag is about the same for the different canine IOLs. The
slightly hyperopic, and astigmatism is infrequent. Accom
anterior chamber is filled with viscoelastic agent to protect
modation is also limited in dogs: 2-3 D has been proposed.
the coineal endothelia and pievent their adherence to
A +41 D IOL after lensectomy in dogs can 1e-establish
the IOL should accidental contact occur. Additional visco-
emmetropia  in most dogs.
Theformula tocalculate
elastic agent may be injected to expand the capsular bag.
the refractive power of an IOL requires axial length of the
The corneal incision fo1 extracapsular cataract extraction is
globe (by a-scan ultrasonography), corneal curvature (by
more than long enough. The corneal incision used for pha-
keratometry), and an equation (such as the Binkhorst
coemulsification is lengthened by coineoscleral scissors to
formula). As most dogs are within 1 D of emmetropia, a
8 mm to accommodate the 7 mm diameter optic of these
standardized +41 D IOL is used. After cataract surgery.
IOLs.
aphakic dogs are approximately 14 D hypermetropic.
If foldable or soft IOLs are eventually used in dogs, the
although some veterinary ophthalmologists have observed
same small phaco incision is used. These [OLs are inserted
that 1efractive changes in dogs over several months do not
folded through the coineal incision and, once inserted in
Iemain static.
the capsular bag are allowed to regain their original shape.
A
B
Fig. 11.24 Examples of intraocular lens (IOL) implants in the dog.(a) Six-month postoperative appearance of PMMA IOL in the dog. There is minimal posterior
capsular opacity. (b) Three-month postoperative appearance of the foldable IOL in an aged dog.
339
11
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
 Table 11.4 Types of intraocular lenses (lOLs) and capsular rings for animals*
IOL dioptric
IOL overall
IOL optic
10L
IOL haptic type
1OL
power (D)
diameter (mm)
diameter (mm)
construction
and material
 manufacturer
Dog
41
12, 13, 14 
7
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
Acrivet
41
15
7
3 piece
 Foldable; acrylic Nylon
41
12, 14 
7
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
26, 30
17
3 piece
J/C; PMMA
Cutting Edge
40
11,12
6-7
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
41
14, 15, 16 
9
1 piece
; PMMA
Domilens
41
15
7
1 piece
C; PMMA
 Eye Care
41
14-17
6-7
1 piece
1; PMMA
 HMED Pharma
41
13
6.5
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
 HMED Pharma
41
12, 14 
6
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
 HMED Pharma
29
10.5
6.5
1 piece
Disk; PMMA
 Morcher GmbH
45
13
6.5
1 piece
Disk; PMMA
 Morcher GmbH
40, 41
14-17
6-7
1 and 3 piece
J/C/Disk; PMMA
 Oculanvision
40
13, 16.5
7
1 piece
PMMA; Sulcus
 Ocularvision
41
16-18
6-7
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
 Ocularvision
38, 41, 43
15, 16, 17
7
1 piece
C; PMMA
Storz
42
16
7
3 piece
C (blue); PMMA
Aapi6uns
30, 36
15
8
1 piece
C; PMMA 
1e3
53.5
12, 13, 14 
7
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
Acrivet
53
16, 18
7, 6-7
1 piece
; PMMA
 Oculanvision 
Horse
14, 21 
14, 21
12, 13
1 piece
 Foldable; acrylic
 Acrivet
Capsular rings for dogs
Size (mm)
Manufacturer
12.5, 13.5, 15.5
 Acrivet
14-16
HMED Pharma
*IOLs, capsular rings, and manufacturer may vary by country.
C and J, haptic shapes; PMMA, polymethylmethacrylate.
With special IOL forceps, the IOL is grasped and the
For one-piece IOLs, a lens positioning instrument is used
ventral haptic is inserted through the anterior capsulectomy
to dial the opposite haptic into the capsular bag by rotating
 r i )     
the IOL clockwise. Alternatively, the upper haptic is grasped
[OLs with flexible suture-like haptics, the opposite or dorsal
by forceps and carefully positioned into the dorsal capsular
haptic is grasped with a tying forceps, flexed over the optic.
 l a  r a  ho  a  
and placed into the capsular bag. Once the three-piece
lotated clockwise until the haptics are directed medially
[OL is totally in the capsular bag, the IOL is released
and laterally (Fig. 11.26b).
  s a   n  s a 
With the more recent foldable o1 'soft' IOLs, the original co1-
capsular bag.
neal incision, used during phacoemulsification, is not enlarged
340
Intraocular lens implantation
Fig. 11.25 Foldable or soft intraocular lenses (10Ls)
are becoming increasing popular worldwide, and 
may eventually replace the PMMA type as the most
popular IOL for the dog. (a) One type of foldable or
soft acrylic IOL for the dog. Foldable IOLs are also 
 available for the cat and horse. (b) For most foldable
IOLs, a companion inserter or injector is essential to
implant the IOL
(Photographs courtesy of i-MED Animais Heaith. a division of
[-MED Pharma inc. Doiard des Ormmeaux, QC. Canada.)
B
as these IOLs can be folded and inserted through the smaller
 can be used to enlarge the diameter of the anterior capsu-
coineal incision and into the capsular bag. Once in the capsula1
lectomy or provide a regular edge to the existing anterio1
bag, the IOL is allowed to 'unfold' and is rotated within the bag
capsulectomy. Forcing the IOL through a small capsulect-
for proper positioning and centralization.
omy may result in the development of one or more radial
tears. The opening should be about 5-6 mm wide to accom-
modate the 7 mm diameter optic of most canine IOLs.
Intraoperative complications with loLs
Viscoelastic agents (sodium chondroitin sulfate-sodium
Several intraoperative problems may occur with insertion of
hyaluronate preferred) can be injected into the capsula1
IOLs. The most frequent problems include: onset of miosis,
bag to separate the anterio1 and posterior lens capsules for
IOL insertion.
the anterior capsulectomy, inadequate separation of the ante-
The expanding vitreous syndrome occurs with an intact
posterior lens capsule, most often in the brachycephalic
posterior capsular tear, and the expanding vitreous syndrome.
breeds. The intravitreal pressure seems to displace the poste-
Miosis is usually associated with prolonged o1 traumatic
nior lens capsule forward, occasionally entering the anterio1
surgery, or perhaps in certain breeds, such as the Miniature
capsulectomy and pupil. Prevention of the expanding vitre-
Schnauzer. The pupil can usually be enlarged with 1:1000
ous syndrome includes deep general anesthesia, neuromus-
to 1:10 000 adrenaline (epinephrine) and viscoelastic agent
cular blocking agents, liberal lateral canthotomy, and no
injected into the anterior chamber.
direct pressure on the globe (eyelid speculum and stay
If the opening of the anterior
capsulectomy is too
   s    s
small, further enlargement with the continuous curvilinear
by tamponade with viscoelastic agents, o1 by temporarily
capsulorhexis method is recommended. Intraocular scisso1s
dosing the coineal or limbal incision and increasing IOP
fo1 10-15 min to reduce the size of the vitreous.
One o1 multiple radial capsular tears may preclude the
implantation of an IOL. These tears may result in displace-
ment o1 decentralization of the [OL. Sometimes these radial
omy. Sometimes an IOL can be implanted perpendicular
to the direction of the radial tear o1 a posterior chamber
[OL is sutured into the ciliary sulcus. Often in these cases
implantation of the IOL is possible.
Posterior capsular tears can occur, especially as the oph-
thalmologist masters phacoemulsification. Sculpting too
deeply o1 rapidly, as well as higher vacuum levels when pha-
coemulsification is performed near the posterior lens cap-
sule, are the usually causes. If the vitreous presentation in
A
?
   l e  si rn d rd a
implanted.
Fig. 11.26 Placement of an intraocular lens (IOL) is through the large
If limited vitreous is protruding through a posterior cap-
extracapsular corneal or limbus incision, or through an enlarged (usually to
sular tea1, it should be removed by vitrector before IOL
8-9 mm long) corneal incision after phacoemulsification. The anterior
placement. Alternatively, a posterior chamber IOL may be
capsulectomy diameter should be 1 mm less than the IOL optic diameter. (a)
sutured in the ciliary sulcus.
After the anterior chamber is filled with viscoelastic agent, the lower haptic
Posteriol capsular opacities are occasionally encountered
of the IOL is carefully slid into the capsular bag. (b) The upper haptic of the
at the conclusion of surgery that are large enough and within
IOL is positioned into the capsular bag by dialing the IOL (one-piece IOL)
clockwise or actually placing the three-piece IOP haptic directly into the
the pupillary axis to cause significant visual impaiment
capsular bag. Once the IOL is completely in the capsular bag, it is rotated
after phacoemulsification (and after extracapsular cataract
clockwise until the haptics are situated at the 3 and 9 o'clock positions.
 sid ny a ae sdo a 
341
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
involve the polar posterior capsule. Some may represent
After lensectomies for displaced lenses, IOP is carefully
residues of the prenatal hyaloid system. Using intraocular
monitored, as the possibility of postoperative glaucoma is
scissors or the continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis method,
40-70% within the first 3 months. Medical treatment of ele-
these polar posterior capsular opacities are carefully
vated IOP in these patients is initially topical 0.5% timolol,
Iemoved after all of the cataractous material has been
and topical and/or systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors.
Iemoved. While a slight bulge of vitreous is tolerated, a sig-
Elizabethan collars o1 other 1estraint devices are Iecom-
nificant presentation of vitreous is removed carefully by
mended to prevent self-trauma during the first 4-8 weeks.
intraocular scissors o1 vitrecto1.
Small animals tend to try to rub these eyes during the fist
7-10 days, and immediately after instillations of the ophthal-
Postoperative treatment and management
mic solutions. Direct damage may be induced to the lateral
canthotomy site, necessitating reapposition with sutures.
in small animals
  sd     
the first 5-7 days, then weekly fo1 2-4 weeks, and then every
The majo1 objective of postoperative treatment in small ani-
 2 months until 6 months after surgery. Based on the results
mals is to control and resolve the inidocyclitis. Failure to
of these eye examinations, medications and dosing sche-
adequately control the inidocyclitis markedly reduces the
dules can be changed. If possible, cataract surgical patients
success rate fo1 the different types of cataract extractions
should be examined every 3 o1 6 months thereafte1.
and lensectomies. Medical treatments for postoperative iri-
docyclitis are summarized in Box 11.1. With phacoemulsifi-
Postoperative treatment and management
cation in the dog the intensity of the postoperative
in the horse
inidocyclitis is considerably less than after the routine extra-
capsular lens removal techniques. The cat has less intraocu-
lar inflammation post-cataract surgery than the dog.
Postoperative medication includes systemic antibiotics fo1
The postoperative pupil should
1 be moderately dilated
3-5 days, systemic flunixin meglumine every 12 h fo1 1
(about 6-8 mm). Changes in the postoperative pupil size
week and then used in a tapering dose fashion as required
are best achieved during the first 7 days. Eventually, poste-
rio1 synechiae and fibropupillary membranes may fix the
nisolone acetate o1 dexamethasone are administered every
 pupil size and movements, and hopefully can be avoided.
6 h, and atropine is used as needed to maintain a dilated
Excessive fibrin usually signals an intense postoperative
to mid-dilated pupil. Foals undergoing cataract surgery
iridocyclitis. The frequency of topical and systemic corticoster-
- s    r n a o
oids and NSAIDs can be temporarily increased. If necessary.
ation. Exercise is restricted fo1 a few weeks. Once the hoise
within 7-10 postoperative days, 25 μg tPA can be injected
  a s  in   i
into the anterior chamber to dissolve most fibrin clots.
may be removed. The topical antibiotics are discontinued
after 14 days, and the topical and systemic NSAIDs a1e
tapered as indicted by the postoperative uveitis and comfoit
over the next weeks to months. Unlike small animal
Box 11.1 Recommended postoperative treatments for dogs
patients, most horse owners/trainers will often discontinue
after cataract extraction and lensectomy (the choice
topical and systemic medications within a few months
and intensity of medications is based on the
individual patient)
Table 11.5 Recommended postoperative treatments for horses
Mydriatics: To effect and maintain a moderately
 after cataract extraction and lensectomy
dilated and 'moving' pupil
 Topical 1% tropicamide, 1% atropine or, if necessary, 0.3%
Medication
Frequency
scopolamine-10% phenylephrine q6h or adjust to patient 
Topical
Anti-inflammatory agents: To reduce the
 iridocyclitis and stabilize the blood-aqueous barrier
1% prednisolone acetate
 Every 6 h
 Topical 1% prednisolone q6h (can increase to q4h)
 Chloramphenicol or triple antibiotics
Every 6 h
Topical antiprostaglandin q6h (may also assist with pupil size)
1% atropine
 Every 6 h 
 Systemic prednisolone 1 mg/kg q1 2h, gradually taper for 2 weeks.
Maintenance dose for 4-6 months. Can substitute with topical or
NSAID (such as diclofenac)
 Every 6 h 
systemic non-steroidal in dogs
Systemic
 Antibiosis
 Omeprazole (to prevent gastric ulcer and 
4 mg/kg PO q24h
 Topical antibiotics
erosions)
for 28 days
 Systemic amoxicillin: 10-120 mg/kg q12h; continue for 7-10 days
Flunixin meglumine (NSAID with analgesic,
1 mg/kg IV, IM, or
 If complications
anti-inflammatory and antipyretic effects)
PO q12h
With elevated IOP: systemic and/or topical carbonic anhydrase
 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMS)
 15 mg/kg PO q12h
 inhibitors; topical 0.5% timolol
 If excessive aqueous humor fibrin: 25 μg tissue plasminogen
Modified fromm Brooks DE 2005 Phacoemuisifiatin cataract surgery in the horse.
lagweuo loaiue aul otul paalul (vdl) loteae
Clinicat Techniques in Equine Pratire 4:1 t-20.
342
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
following cataract surgery in the horse, and many horses are
 lost to long-term follow-up.
Box 11.3 Summary of short- and long-term complications
after intracapsular extraction in dogs
Postoperative results and complications
Intraoperative
in small animals
 Fibrin accumulation
 Ciliary body origin hemorrhage
The success rates after cataract surgery in dogs have steadily
paaowal aq isnw snoaila lle) asdejoid pue uoisuedxa snoail
improved during the past 30 years. Current success rates in
from the anterior chamber?
dogs with extracapsular cataract extractions range from
Postoperative
70% to 90%. The success rates fo1 phacoemulsification fo1
 Some refractive error (even with ciliary sulcus intraocular lenses)
cataracts in dogs are 80-90%. When bilateral cataract extrac-
Greater possibility of wound dehiscence
Secondary glaucoma (occurs in 12-16% of dogs)
short-term success rates with restoration of vision in at least
 Retinal detachment (second most common complication in dogs;
one eye are 95-98%
unknown frequency). Consider prophyactic transscleral laser or 
As these success rates are projected for 3-5 years, the over-
cryotherapy retinopexy
all success lates for cataract extractions in dogs decrease
about 10-20% because of the development of PCO within
the pupil. After phacoemulsification and IOL implantation
in humans, the possibility of PCO is 50% within the first
Intraoperative complications
postoperative year. Laser treatment of PCO in humans is
Intraoperative complications during cataract and lens su1-
highly effective. Unfortunately, as discussed in a later sec-
gery generally require immediate resolution. Some intrao-
tion, postoperative PCO is more complex in dogs, as well
perative complications 1epresent less than adequate patient
as thicker and tougher than in humans. Fortunately, with
selection, less than complete medical preparation preopel-
some degree of PCO, dogs still maintain clinical vision.
atively, o1 unexpected events during surgery. As with any
At least two ingredients may improve canine success rates
surgical complications, prevention is the most effective
further, both short and long term. First, selection of candi-
treatment.
dates for cataract surgery should concentrate on dogs with
Long-term success of cataract surgery depends, in part,
immature cataracts before development to hypermature catar-
on successful resolution of significant intraoperative compli-
acts and lens-induced iridocyclitis. Secondly, postoperative
cations. Experience with hundreds of cataract surgeries in
    s   sn in
 small animals eventually encompasses most complications.
corticosteroids oI systemic NSAIDs should be continued for
6-12 months or perhaps for the remainder of their lives to
impede development and opacification of the posterior cap-
Inadequate exposure
sules. The short-term and long-term postoperative complica-
Access to the eye varies among different breeds of dogs, but
tions and approximate frequencies affer extracapsular,
is more consistent in various breeds of cats. An enophthal-
phacoemulsification and intracapsular cataract surgeries in
mic eye turned ventromedially, with the nictitating mem-
dogs are summarized in Boxes 11.2 and 11.3.
brane protruding, increases the difficulty and the duration
of surgery. Differences in prominence of the eye vary among
the various breeds of dogs, and the surgeon must take
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
account of these differences. Cataract surgeries in an Ameri-
can Cocker Spaniel and an enophthalmic Akita are different.
[n this discussion the complications associated with cataract
An enophthalmic globe requires additional patience and
surgery in dogs are divided into: 1) intraoperative; 2) short-teIm
time for cataract extraction. Sutures to pull the globe fo1-
postoperative; and 3) long-term postoperative complications.
ward and retract the nictitans from the cornea have both
benefits and limitations. General inhalational anesthesia
supplemented with neuromuscular blocking agents pro-
Box 11.2 Summary of short- and long-term complications
vides the best exposure to the anteriol segment and cataract.
after phacoemulsification and extracapsular
The lateral canthotomy provides, as much as possible, an
extraction in dogs
improved exposure of the globe without any limitations.
Anterior uveitis: 100%
The surgical exposure also includes the corneal and limbal
with posterior synechiae, 40%
incisions. The limbal approach, as it is closer to the center of
 with iris bombe, 1%
the globe, can be longer with fewer degrees. The corneal
Comeal edema:
incision fo1 the extia- and intracapsular cataract and lens
- focal, 10%
removals usually extends 140-180°, sufficient to accommo-
generalized, 1-2%
date the largest lens fragment without damage to the corneal
 Transient ocular hypertension: 50%
endothelia. The foinix-based conjunctival flap offers the
 Aphakic glaucoma: 10-15%
benefits of two layers of closure, but without the limitation
Hyphema: 2%
of decreased observation through the cornea and the incon-
venience of limbal apposition, suturing on both sides of the
 Posterior capsular opacification: 90-95% 
 Retinal detachments: 5%
limbal-based conjunctival flap. For phacoemulsification, the
optimum peripheral corneal or limbal incision is between
343
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
3 and 4 mm: shorter incisions result in theimal burns and
 The best treatment for increased levels of fibrin intraopera-
direct damage to the coinea from the phaco needle; longer
tively is its prevention with adequate preoperative treatment
incisions result in excessive volumes of fluid during the pha-
with topical and systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDs. Moni-
coemulsification procedure from leakage around the phaco
toring of IOP by tonometry may also aid in reducing this
needle.
intraoperative complication. Cataract surgeries in dogs with
decreased IOP should be delayed until sufficient time and treat-
ment with topical and systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDs
Miotic pupil
ad sa   i n i sd
The pupil should be fully dilated for all types of cataract
 All topical and anterior chamber irrigation solutions should
extraction and lensectomies for subluxated and intravitreal
have heparin added (1-2 IU/mL) to help discourage intrao-
  d  e    
perative formation of aqueous humor fibrin. These levels of
the onset of general anesthesia should delay surgery for a
heparin do not significantly impair hemostasis. Heparin
(1000 IU/mL) may also be injected directly into the anterio1
maximal pupillary dilatation. Dogs less than 1 yea1 old, eyes
chamber (0.1-0.2 mL), but should not be used if iridal or cil-
with hypermature cataracts, and the Miniature Schnauzer
iary body hemorrhage occurred intraoperatively.
breed are more apt to respond incompletely to topical 1%
Large fibrin clots may be addressed immediately after su1-
atropine every 6 h preoperatively, and the combination
gery or within the first week postoperatively by injection of
0.3% scopolamine-10% phenylephrine ophthalmic solu-
25 μg tPA into the anterio1 chamber at the conclusion of
tions are recommended for these patients.
surgery, after the corneal or limbal incision has been closed,
Intraoperative miosis may occur to various extents, but a
       
1 mm pupil can stop cataract surgery. Intraoperative miosis
assists in dissolution of excessive aqueous humor fibrin.
  ad ai  d i si
Fibrin clots in excess of 7-10 days old appear not to respond
mydriatics, often fo1 several days. Production of mydriasis
to tPA treatments.
in a patient fo1 only 24 h preoperatively may result in a less
than well dilated pupil during cataract surgery. Dogs with
 Intraoperative bacterial contamination
LIU and hypermature cataracts require mydriatics and topi-
cal and sometimes systemic corticosteroids for several weeks
Cataract surgery in small animals is performed under asep-
before cataract surgery. Preoperative treatment with topical
tic conditions. Nevertheless, bacterial contamination, 2
as
and systemic NSAIDs seems most important in dogs to pie-
Iecently reported by Taylor et al and Ledbetter et al, occurs in
vent the 1elease of endogenous prostaglandins that cause an
at least 25% of dog eyes, as analyzed by culture ofthe aqueous
immediate miosis.
humor after cataract extraction. Eyes undergoing phacoemulsi-
With even the best preoperative treatments, intraoperative
fication were less often contaminated than eyes undergoing
miosis may result. There may be several explanations,
large incision extracapsular extractions. Bacteria recovered
including: 1) the coineal or limbal incision required extra
from the aqueous humor were unrelated to those 1ecovered
time and manipulations; 2) the iris was repeatedly touched
from the conjunctival and eyelid surfaces. Contaminated eyes
with surgical instruments; 3) excessive volumes of irrigation
with large incision extracapsular cataract extractions had a
fluids were used during the phacoemulsification procedure;
greater likelihood of developing postoperative glaucoma. In
4) the irrigating solutions for the anterior chamber were
spite of bacterial contamination of the aqueous humor,
cold; and 5) the time for cataract extraction was unduly
these eyes did not develop bacterial endophthalmitis O1
long. When intraoperative miosis begins, the injection of
 panophthalmitis. The authors present a convincing argument
1:10o0 adrenaline (epinephrine) (the adrenaline (epineph-
nine) solution should contain no preservatives) can halt
broad-spectrum antibiotics in small animals.
d on a n aend a aa p
cataract extraction. An alteinative method is to perfoim four
Aberrant and radial anterior capsule tears
iridal sphincterotomies, incising the pupillary margins of
the iris about 2 mm with sharp iris scissors at the 12, 3. 6,
Anterior capsulectomies are one of the least predictable
and 9 o'clock positions.
steps of cataract surgery in small animals. During the
Ioughly circulal capsulectomy fo1 extracapsulal o1 phacoe-
mulsification extraction, the needle-produced can-openel
Excessive fibrin within the aqueous humor
OI continuous capsulorhexis may go awry and begins to
Fibnin may form during cataract surgery, resulting
in
extend toward the thinner equator capsule or even into the
increased aqueous humor turbidity or formation of fibrinous
posterior lens capsule, with the resultant presentation of a
clots. There may be many reasons for increased aqueous
 small portion of formed vitreous.
 se  a  s 
The anterior lens capsule appears thicker in older dogs
fibrin may be related to the pre-existing lens-induced iridocy-
and those with hypermature cataracts. Focal areas of fibrosis
clitis, often in older dogs with hypermature cataracts. The
and calcification can affect these anterior lens capsules. As a
Iesult, anterio1 capsulectomies under these circumstances
with the anterior chamber open and IOP at O mmHg. result-
can be less predictable. In these animals, the anterio1 capsu-
ing in marked breakdown of the blood-aqueous barrier.
lectomy can be performed initially by incising the majority
Hemorrhage may have occurred during the limbal incision,
of the circular capsulotomy with intraocular scissors. The
01 from the iris o1 ciliary body during lens removal, resulting
  d     a s e
in excessive fibrin even after removal of overt blood clots.
the incised portion of the anterior lens capsule.
344
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
[f radial tears develop during an anterior capsulectomy
protocol for cataract surgery in dogs appears to reduce the
being performed with extracapsular forceps, needle,
01
possibility
 of posterior capsule tears intraoperatively.
Utrata forceps, the anterior capsulectomy should be stopped
It appears that the loss of extraocular muscle tone decreases
and completed with sharp intraocular scissors. Once radial
pressure on the posterior segment. As a result, with the
tears start, there is no means available to seal the tear. Radial
eye open during extiacapsular or phacoemulsification
tears can also develop with small diameter anterio1 capsulec-
extraction, the posterior lens capsule remains relatively
tomies during the extracapsular and phacoemulsification
unchanged and does not protrude forward, becoming
extractions. This is usually associated with a too small ante-
less concave. Consequently, accidental contact with ins-
lio1 capsulectomy o1 excessive manipulations during the
trumentation, including the tip of the phaco handpiece, is
subsequent cataract extraction. Intraocular scissors may be
lessened. Many posterior lens capsule tears occur late in
used to enlarge the anterior capsulectomy.
the phacoemulsification procedure secondary to abrupt
changes in aspiration, with phaco needles with 30° o1 45°
   d a a   
Anterior and posterior capsular opacities
excessive levels of aspiration are employed. Use of the
The anterior lens capsule may change during cataract fo1-
pulse cycle
(intermittent fragmentation), reducing the
mation in dogs, and focal areas of capsular thickening.
levels
(vacuum) of aspiration, i
 increased  magnification,
fibrosis, calcification, and plaque formation may occur. Fo1-
and use of the I/A handpiece (rather than the phaco hand-
tunately, the posterior lens capsule is usually clear in small
piece) for clearing and polishing the posterior lens capsule
animals, and not involved in the opacification process
are important considerations. IOLs can still be inserted
except in hypermature, posterio1 cortical, and capsular catar-
in eyes after posterior lens capsule tears and anterior
acts. If the posterior lens capsule appears translucent, or
vitrectomy.
contains a few small opacities, a prudent intraoperative deci-
 d S ri pie a  '  i Si 
Anterior vitreous presentation
opaque and quite large, this section of the posterior capsule
 Formed vitreous may be presented in the pupil and anteriol
is excised with intraocular scissors after the cataract removal
has been completed. As excision of the central posterior lens
chamber when zonulary attachments are torn during ante-
capsule results in presentation of formed vitreous of varying
nio1 capsulectomies, when some zonulary attachments have
amounts, the corneal or limbal incision can be partially
degenerated causing a small subluxation, when the posterio1
closed. The anterior chamber and patellar fossa are filled
lens capsule is torn during phacoemulsification, during
with viscoelastic agent to maintain the anterior chamber
clearing and polishing of the posterior lens capsule, and
and eventually tamponade the vitreous presentation. With
  o   s  
opacities. Potential vitreous problems may be addressed pre-
a 22 g hypodermic needle, a hole is made in the posterior
lens capsule. With intraocular scissors the opaque posterior
operatively by use of deep general anesthesia and neuro-
lens capsule is carefully excised, and the opaque portion is
muscular blocking agents to minimize extraocula1 muscle
Iemoved by forceps. Formed vitreous that protnudes is
tone on the posterior segment, mannitol (1-2 g/kg IV) at
gently excised using cellulose spears and sharp inis scissors,
the onset of general anesthesia fo1 maximum 1eduction in
the size of the vitreous body in 60-90 min, and careful
O1 preferably by vitrector with a guillotine-type cutter.
No foimed vitreous should remain in front of the posterior
intraocular manipulations. At the conclusion of cataract
capsulectomy. An air bubble can be used to detect any
extraction, any formed vitreous anterio1 to the posterior lens
formed vitreous. Once the anterio1 vitrectomy is complete,
capsule should be removed by vitrecto1.
pue 'sarrns a pasodde s uoisun leq no lo a
the anterior chamber reformed with lactated Ringel's or bal-
Short- and long-term complications
anced salt solution and a small air bubble (less than 25% of
Iridocyclitis and sequelae
the anterio1 chamber). IOLs may be implanted in eyes with
posterior lens capsule defects, usually less than 4-5 mm,
Comparing the dog, cat, and horse for the relative intensity
and without formed vitreous protruding.
of postoperative iridocyclitis after phacoemulsification, the
dog generally has the most intense inflammation, and cats
and horses 1elatively mild inflammation. Fortunately, topi-
Posterior capsular tears
cal and occasionally systemic corticosteroids and NSAIDS
The posterio1 lens capsule in dogs and cats is very thin
can effectively control nearly all of these postoperative
(about 2-4 μm), and about 4-6% of the thickness of the
inidocyclitides.
anterior lens capsule. Tears in the posterior lens capsule
Well over one-half of the postoperative complications
a unp oo Aensn pue sop un uoonun nou ae
may be directly related to the iridocyclitis that is present in
delivery of the lens during the extracapsula1 technique, o1
late in the phacoemulsification technique.
marily achieved with topical and systemic corticosteroids
There are several contributing events that may be
and NSAIDs. As the inflamed iris adheres to any tissues it
addressed pre- and intraoperatively to prevent develop-
contacts, posterior synechiae foim between the iris and
ment of these tears. Once the eye is opened, the levels of
 remaining anterior and posterior lens capsules, and perhaps
general anesthesia should not change. Lighter general anes-
the anterior vitreous face (Fig. 11.27).
thesia increases the tone and effect of the extraocular and
 su lnd o pe  a 
orbicularis oculi muscles on the globe. Incorporation of
the iridocyclitis, reduces the pain, facilitates vision, and
      r
345
11
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
A
B
C
D
Fig. 11.27 Complications after cataract surgery, secondary to iridocyclitis. (a) Iridocyclitis with ventral hypopyon in a dog 4 days after phacoemulsification.
(b) Iridocyclitis with excesive fibrin in a dog which developed a gastrointestinal disease postoperatively. The anterior chamber fibrin was successfully
treated by intracameral injection of 22 μg tPA. (c) lridocyclitis with a large posterior synechia at the 12 o'clock position 7 days after extracapsular cataract
extraction Intensive mydriatic therapy may break this posterior synechia if the pupil can be fully dilated. (d) The immediate iridocyclitis after
ui alea sep 6 pawoyad se uogeyisinwaoseud spouaawu uonenxa jensdene.axa euogipe aua ae ueua asuanui ssal sieadde uogenyisinwaoseud
pasnpau buiag ane suonenipaw sjwansrs pue lenidon jo Aaisuanui aun pue hop siug
moderately dilated pupil is also less apt to adhere to itself o1
dogs should be as atraumatic and as short a duration as
become obstructed, reducing the possibility of aphakic glau-
possible.
coma and iris bombe.
Transient lop hypertension
Corneal edema
Monitoring IOP immediately after cataract extraction by
Focal coineal edema is more frequent with coineal inci-
extracapsula1 o1 phacoemulsification techniques indicates
sions. Additional trauma and thermal effects during pha-
that 40-50% of the dogs develop elevated IOP that per-
coemulsification may also contribute to the local edema.
sists fo1 12-72 h. In the majority of patients no clinical signs
Generalized corneal edema occurs infrequently, and may
develop. In othe1 patients with higher [OPs (30-40 mmHg).
be associated with excessive intraocular manipulations
the cornea develops generalized edema and mydriasis occurs.
and volumes of iigating fluids during cataract surgery.
 Treatment is recommended if IOP exceeds 30 mmHg, and
Corneal edema also occurs more frequently in old dogs.
consists of mannitol (1-2 g/kg IV), topical 0.5% timolol,
where the number of coineal endothelial cells is marginal.
and systemic carbonic anhydrase inhibitors. The intensity of
sda auni 'sim-o e   noai e u
the topical and systemic NSAIDs is increased. Tieatment
cataract extraction 1educed the central and peripheral
usually spans 2-4 days.
co1neal endothelial cell densities by 34% and 31%, 1espec-
 The transient rise in IOP appears associated with a tempo-
tively, and the phacoemulsification procedure 1educed
Iary decrease in the outflow of aqueous humor rather than
the central and peripheral coineal endothelial counts by
pupillary obstructions. Contributing factors appear to be
 22% and 13%, respectively. Cataract extractions in old
inidocorneal angle debris from cataract surgery, remaining
346
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
viscoelastic agent, excessive volumes of irigation fluids,
leaks can also self-seal, only to recur a few days later. Treat-
and, perhaps the most important, the release of endogenous
ment consists of an additional suture o1 application of glue
 prostaglandins intra- and postoperatively.
in the leaking area.
Corneal ulcerations
Hyphema
Corneal ulcerations, usually central, may develop in some
postoperative patients (Fig. 11.28). Contributing factors are
Hyphema o1 blood in the anterio1 chamber may be an early
as follows: 1) the intensive mydriatic therapy can signifi-
o1 late complication of cataract extractions and lensectomies.
cantly reduce tear formation rates; 2) self-trauma may occu1,
Hyphema ranges from small focal blood clots in the ventral
anterio1 chamber to an anterio1 chamber completely filled
with blood.
thin central precorneal tear film may render the central co1-
Intraoperative hyphema results from hemorrhage from the
neal epithelia to damage; and 4) intensive corticosteroid
scleral aspects of the limbal incision, the iris, and the ciliary
therapy may delay healing of small abrasions that progress
body. Incision of the iris results in variable hemorrhage, with
to large and central ulcerations.
large amounts with incisions of its base. Accidental instrument
With development of coineal ulceration in postoperative
contact with the canine iris may cause limited hemorrhage.
 Tension on the zonules during anterior capsulectomies may
patients, topical and perhaps even systemic corticosteroid
therapy is markedly reduced. If tear production is reduced,
provoke limited hemorrhage from the ciliary body. Contact
the intensity of mydriatic therapy is decreased to encourage
of the iris and ciliary body with the phaco needle may also pro-
corneal healing. Tropicamide instillations may be substituted
duce limited hemorrhage. Most intraoperative hemorrhages
fo1 the 1% atropine drops. Unfortunately, during the time
are limited and removed at the conclusion of cataract extrac-
that the intensity of these medications must be decreased, the
tions and lensectomies.
postoperative inidocyclitis is progressing.  The pupil
size
Hyphema may also occur postoperatively, usually during
gradually decreases. These coineal ulcers are often either pro-
the first few weeks or later. A leaking corneal or limbal
gressive or slow to heal, and conjunctival grafts may be neces-
wound produces a narrow-to-flat anterio1 chamber and ocul-
sary to treat the ulcer as well as allow the medications for
lar hypotony. The low IOP may cause hemorrhage, usually
the iridocyclitis to be Iesumed. Often the inidocyclitis has
originating from the ciliary body. Sealing the leaking inci-
significantly worsened, and the success rates for these eyes are
sion with an additional suture o1 glue results in an imme-
decreased.
diate rise in IOP, cessation of hemorrhage, and gradual
resorption of the blood, usually within 5-7 days.
Hyphema that occurs in postoperative cataract extractions
Surgical wound leakage and flat anterior chamber
and lensectomies several months after surgery is usually
Fortunately, leakage of the corneal o1 limbal incision is rare.
secondary to retinal detachments with tearing of retinal
In postoperative cataractous eyes with a narrow to flat ante-
blood vessels. IOP in these eyes is usually normal or slightly
rio1 chamber and/o1 hyphema, leakage of the coineal or
elevated. If the hyphema obstructs a view of the ocular
limbal wound should be suspected. These leaks may occur
fundus by ophthalmoscopy, ultrasonography can usually
only when IOP exceeds certain levels o1 even after repeated
detect the 1etinal detachment. Surgical treatment of retinal
barking (and assumed marked elevations in IOP). These
 detachments is presented in Chapter 12.
A
B
Fig. 11.28 Corneal ulcerations are infrequent after cataract surgery in the dog, but if they develop, they must be treated aggressively. Corneal ulceration can
also restrict the use of topical and systemic corticosteroids post-cataract surgery. (a) Large but shallow corneal ulceration 2 days after cataract surgery.
Cause was apparently a weak and inadequate blink reflex. (b) Suture line infection and leak 3 days after cataract surgery. Topical fluorescein has been applied.
Note the anterior chamber is very shallow.
347
1.1
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
Postoperative glaucoma or aphakic glaucoma
Fibropupillary membranes, associated with postoperative
e pe jo sad le o ro  'sno
Secondary glaucoma is one of the more common complica
lens surgery. Development of pupillary opacities may occur
tions of cataract surgery, and is usually related to severe and/
soon after lens removal, as with the fibropupillary mem
01 chronic anterio1 uveitis (Fig. 11.29). In the largest study to
branes, o1 later with opacification of the posterior lens cap-
date, 16.8% of the dogs (58 of 346 eyes) developed glaucoma
Y mo ie aiam sop Jo spaai pax ians peiee iae
sule with lens epithelial proliferation and metaplasia.
Removal of large central sections of the anterior lens capsule
compared to the purebieds. Eyes with IOLs had lower risks,
during extracapsular lens extraction or phacoemulsification
and eyes with hypermature cataracts were at increased risk.
may reduce these post-surgery opacities. The decline in suc-
The aphakic glaucomas may be divided clinically into
cess rates of cataract surgery in dogs, as measured by restora-
two types based on pupil size. With a small pupil, posterio1
tion of sight, appears directly related to the development
synechiae and inflammatory membrane formation, and any
bulging of the vitreous face, an obstruction of the pupil may
capsule opacities (Fig. 11.30).
result. With aqueous humor trapped behind the pupil and in
the posterior chamber, iris bombe results. This type of acute
Fibropupillary membrane foimation starts with postoper-
ative iridocyclitis and the fibrin-rich secondary aqueous
aphakic glaucoma occurs more often within the first month
humor. Accumulation of inflammatory cells
sand fibrin
postoperatively.
within the pupil and on the anterior surface of the iris du1-
Over a period of only a few days and with persistence of the
ing the first several days postoperatively foims the scaffold-
inis bombe, additional changes begin to occur in the anterior
ing for the migration of iris pigment cells, lens epithelium,
chamber. With iris bombe and collapse of the anterior cham-
fibrous cells, and even neovascularization. Fortunately, most
ber, the iridocoineal angle and ciliary cleft close, peripheral
inflammatory membranes gradually resorb, but some may
anterior synechiae form, and angle-closure glaucoma develops.
remain on the surface of the inis and the anterior and/or
Fo1 aphakic glaucoma with pupillary obstructions, inido-
posterior lens capsules, to distort the pupil shape, form
tomies are not usually curable in small animals. Because of
posterior synechiae, and impai1 vision. The fibropupillary
the concurrent iridocorneal angle closure, the re-establishment
membiane may fuse eventually with the anterior and/o1
of only patency of the pupil is not sufficient therapy. Iriden-
cleisis and anterior vitrectomy are recommended.
posterior lens capsules to form a combined fibropupillary
and lens capsule membrane.
The second type of aphakic glaucoma occurs with a mod-
Opacification of the anterio1 and posterior lens capsules
erately to fully dilated pupil and occlusion of the outflow
follows the different types of cataract extraction, involving
channels with inflammatory cells short term, and extensive
parts of the anterior capsule and all of the posterior capsule.
 peripheral anterior synechiae and angle closure long term.
In intracapsular lens extractions, where the entire lens and
Initial medical treatment includes beta adrenergics, carbonic
its capsules are removed, pupillary opacification results from
anhydrase inhibitors, and high levels of corticosteroids fo1
development and organization of fibropupillary membranes
the concurrent iridocyclitis. If medical therapy fails to con-
on the surface of the anterior hyaloid membrane or the
trol IOP, an anterior chamber shunt or other filtering glau-
coma surgery, or laser cyclophotoablation is recommended.
secondary vitreous.
 Postoperative anterior and posterior capsulal opacification
is also associated with proliferation of the remaining anterior
Fibropupillary and inflammatory membranes/
lens epithelium to form Elschnig o1 crystalline pearls (some-
 anterior, intralenticular, and posterior capsular
times called secondary o1 after cataract),. and fibrous and
fibrosis
myofibroblastic differentiation by the lens fiber cells. The
myofibroblastic cells produce collagen deposits, and contract,
Opacities may develop in the pupil afte cataract extraction
producing numerous wrinkles in the posterior lens capsule.
due to fibropupillary membranes, and opacification of the
Studies in cats also indicate a concurrent development of a
anterior and posterior lens capsules and IOL surfaces.
pigment-containing membrane arising from the iris root and
S s a o s   ao 
Presence of posterio1 synechiae and a fixed immobile pupil
assist in the migration of the pigment cells onto the lens
capsules.
Postoperative pupil size in eyes with these opacities
can either lessen o1 woisen effects and assist in the
choice of medical and/o1 surgical coirections. If the pupil is
nearly close the pupil and produce blindness. If the pupil is
moderately to widely dilated, these opacities are less likely
to physically obstruct the pupil and prevent vision.
Treatment of fibropupillary membranes and opacification
of the lens capsules consists of laser treatment for recently
developed cases (Fig. 11.31), and surgical treatment for long-
-      n soo 
Fig. 11.29 Postoperative aphakic glaucoma in a dog 4 weeks after
invasively photocoagulate these opacities within several weeks 
awenag Alenuaa (moue) ldnd snou aul uogseynxa oeieren jejnsdenenxa
postoperatively. These tough thick fibrous membranes are
obstructed with the fibropupillary membrane.
difficult to incise, excise o1 treat by laser unless recently
348
Complications of cataract surgery in dogs
A
D
G
Fig. 11.30 Fibropupilary membrane and posterior capsule opacifications currently affect almost all dogs after cataract surgery with long-term checkups.
 5! sisouqy delnsden aui Aisnoiaid supuou 6 uogeyisinwaoseud buunp uogeyipedo elnsdes ouaasod jo, pawoyad sem Awoainsden louansod leixe u (e)
limited to the remaining anterior and posterior lens capsules. (b) Close-up of posterior capsular opacities (PCO) showing lens cell proliferation as well as
pigment immigration, from the posterior iris and possible posterior synechia. (c) Postoperative appearance of PCo in the dog after phacoemulsification 
and IOL at 6 months. Control of postoperative capsular fibrosis is important for long-term successful cataract surgery and maintenance of vision.
Jaye bop aun u! od jo aoueieadde anneiadoasod (a) yaam I ne nol pue uogenyisinwaoneyd jaye bop ayn u! od jo aoueieadde anlneiadonsod (p)
phacoemulsification and IOL at 1 month. (f) Postoperative appearance of PCO in the dog after phacoemulsification and IOL at 1 year. (g) Postoperative 
appearance of PCO in a Siberian Husky after phacoemulsification and IOL at 3 years.
A
B
Fig. 11.31 Laser therapy for PCO in the dog using either the Nd:YAG or the diode laser. (a) Positioning of the dog with the Nd:YAG laser. (b) Immediate
appearance after Nd:YAG laser treatment with subsequent enlargement of the pupil and deepening of the anterior chamber. Pupil has increased in 
diameter by 4 x.
349
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
foimed. The surgeries may include capsulotomy o1 capsulect-
the immediate postoperative vision in dogs, but the aphakic
 q  l n '   q 
dogs eventually regain thei vision, perhaps compensating
scissors, small needle knife o1 a hypodermic needle with
fo1 objects closer than 1-3 meters. Howevel, IOL implanta-
its bevel partially bent to form a hook and, if indicated.
tion is not always successful, and a tilted o1 decentralized
enlargement of the pupil (coreoplasty), often combined with
IOL may impair vision in dogs.
anterior vitrectomy (see Chapter 9).
IOLs cause additional surgery and anesthesia time, and
The prevention of capsular fibrosis, rather than its treatment,
client expense for cataract extractions, although that has not
Iequires additional attention as the therapy results in the dog
been a significant limitation. Some clients can afford the basic
are not promising. Since this complication is difficult to treat,
cataract surgeries, but not the additional IOL costs. The
prevention may be the key to its 1esolution. Improved IOL
implantation of IOLs requires patience and practice. Dogs
design, as well as coating IOLs with certain drugs, will hope-
undergoing cataract surgeries that consume considerable time
fully significantly reduce the frequency and severity of capsular
and where there is difficulty during extraction of the cataract
opacities in the dog in the near future
may not be candidates for IOLs. The additional time and
As reported by Gift et al, the three most important
manipulations for IOL implantation may result in an intense
surgical factors contributing to PCO in humans are: 1) cortical
postoperative inidocyclitis with uncontrollable miosis. For
cleaving hydrodissection (1emoval of all possible lens cells,
most veterinary surgeons, large posterior capsule tears negate
especially within the equator); 2) complete capsular fixation
[OL implantation. Dogs with small posterio1 capsule tears
(good contact between the IOL and posterior lens capsule);
without vitreous presentation may be candidates for IOLs.
and 3) a continuous curvilineal capsulorhexis (0.5 mm diam-
 In humans, certain types of IOL complications have
eter smaller than the [OL optic). The three most important IOL
been associated with the different IOL designs and their site
factors related to PCO in humans are: 1) a biocompatible IOL;
of implantation. In dogs, most clinical reports involve
To (e p o ansde noaisod sdo ol x (7
[OLs within the capsular bag (Fig. 11.32). Decentralization
geometry (the edge of the IOL presents a physical barrier to cell
is probably the most frequent complication in dogs, usually
migration between the IOL optic and the posterior lens
lesulting from haptic failure and displacement, excessive
capsule). Attention to these facts in humans has led to signifi-
fibropupillary membrane, and posterio1 capsule opacifi-
cant improvements in phacoemulsification surgical techni-
cation. If the anterior capsulectomy is large, the IOL may
ques and IOL design, and has reduced the frequency of PCO
displace forward and cause partial-to-complete pupillary
in humans from about 50% to <10%.
rupture. Many veterinary surgeons prefer the stiffer haptics
Their study in the dog concluded that the square-edged
of the one-piece IOLs fo1 maintenance of the IOL within
foldable acrylic IOLs showed a predisposition toward hav-
the capsular bag rather than the three-piece IOLs with pro-
ing less PCO than the 1ound-edged PMMA IOLs in the early
lene haptics. The role of IOLs in the postoperative devel-
postoperative period, but the acrylic IOLs (two different
types were studied) had greater persistent hyperopia than
opacification of the posterior lens capsule has not been
the PMMA IOLs. Hopefully more studies in the dog can
determined. Surgical 1emoval of pupillary opacities that also
compare phacoemulsification techniques 2
and additional
include IOLs can be quite difficult.
IOLs, and gradually reduce the frequency and severity of
PCO in the dog.
Retinal detachment
 Retinal detachments may present at variable times, but usu-
IOL complications
ally occur several months following cataract extractions and
Short- and long-term complications of IOLs in small ani-
lensectomies. The majority of these cases appear associated
with alterations within the vitreous body that allow the 1et-
 of IOL complications from large clinical studies in dogs
ina to detach and to also be more common in certain breeds
are not unlimited. It appears that pseudophakes improve
of dogs such as the Bichon Frise (Fig. 11.33). Fibrous
A
B
Fig. 11.32 Complications following IOL placement after cataract surgery. (a) There is anterior displacement of a PMMA IOL from the capsular bag. The upper
haptic can be seen protruding from the anterior capsulectomy at the 12 o'clock position into the anterior chamber. (b) A PMMA IOL has become decentered
in the dog but is still within the capsular bag.
350
Postoperative results and complications after lens surgery in the horse
and IOL implantation are relatively recent in the horse, fu1-
ther refinements are predicated.
One study by Millichamp and Dziezyc (2000) evaluated
outcomes of phacoemulsification in horses and found that
coineal edema (56%) and coineal ulcerations (45%) were
the most frequently seen complications. Other 1eported
complications were intraoperative posterio1 capsule tears
(28%), intraocular fibrin formation (16%), postoperative
ocular hypertension (10%), and endophthalmitis (8%).
A more 1ecent retrospective study by Fife et al (2006)
looked at visual outcome fo1 cataracts in 55 eyes of 39 horses
(Figs 11.34 and 11.35). Of the 55 cataractous eyes, 47 under-
went phacoemulsification. At the time of last follow-up
(range 1 day to 9 years, median 4 weeks), 38/47 eyes (81%)
were sighted, 2/47 eyes (4%) were 1eported to have poo1
Fig. 11.33 Hyphema and vitreal hemorrhage secondary to early retinal
vision, and 7/47 eyes in six horses (15%) were blind. The
detachment following intracapsular lensectomy for lens luxation in a dog.
most common complications observed were corneal edema
(19/47). fibrin (11/47). postoperative hypertension (9/47),
membranes may develop within the pupil and anterior vit-
dyscoria (9/47), hyphema (7/47), co1neal ulceration (5/
reous, then contract and place traction on the anterio1 1et-
47). 1etinal detachment (3/47). phthisis bulbi (2/47), and
s       
cases to break down the vitreal membranes and to reattach
the retina (see Chapter 12). However, the prognosis fo1 1es-
toration of vision in these cases is usually poor (20-30%).
Postoperative results and complications
 after lens surgery in the horse
Unlike the small animal patient, most hoise patients are lost
to follow-up shortly after surgery. This, combined with the
smaller numbers of equine cataract surgeries perfoimed
and the very recent introduction of IOL implantation in
the equine eye, makes discussion of long-term success rates
and complications more difficult and less accurate in this
Aq dn-mooy oi isol aiam saa jo %ge 'Kpns auo uj dno1g
4 weeks following surgery. Complications after lens removal
in the hoise are similar to those in the dog. but there are
 also significant differences (Box 11.4). As cataract surgery
Fig. 11.34 The foal seen in Figure 11.13a 2 weeks post-phacoemulsification.
There is a large, almost complete anterior and a partial posterior
capsulorhexis. The pupil has been pharmacologically dilated and focal
Box 11.4 Summary of short- and long-term complications after
corneal edema is observed at the phaco entry wound. The eye is aphakic.
@taract removal and phacoemulsification in horses
Gelatt (1974)
Intraoperative complications included rupture of posterior lens
capsule (5.%) and loss of vitreous (2%). Postoperative complications
included excessive fibrin in anterior chamber (63%), iridocyclitis
(100%), corneal incision edema (80%), posterior synechiae (100%),
fixed pupil (75%), opacity of posterior lens capsule (21%).
endophthalmitis (7%), and phthisis bulbi (16%). Total horses: 28.
Dziezyc and Millichamp (1990-91)
Corneal edema (56%) and commeal ulcerations (45%) were the most
frequently seen complications. Other reported complications were
 intraoperative posterior capsule tears (28%), intraocular fibrin 
formation (16%), postoperative ocular hypertension (10%), and
endophthalmitis (8%). Total horses: 12.
Fife et al (2006)
Complications included corneal edema (40%), fibrin (23%).
postoperative hypertension (19%), dyscoria (19%), hyphema (15%), 
Fig. 11.35 An adult horse 2 years after phacoemulsification. A complete
cormeal ulceration (11 %), retinal detachment (6%), phthisis bulbi (4%),
anterior and a partial posterior capsulorhexis were performed. There is a focal
and enucleation (4%). Total horses: 39.
corneal scar and a few bands of fibrosis in the area of the posterior lens
capsule. The eye is aphakic.
351
11
 Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
Fig. 11.36 A foal 1 year following phacoemulsification. There is significant 
Fig. 11.37 A foal with congenital cataract, microphthalmos, ectropion uvea,
pawoyad ou sem sixauionsden jouansod y uogenyioedo ajnsden louaisod
and anterior segment dysgenesis.
in this eye at the time of surgery.
The future and challenges of cataract
enucleation (2/47). Of the eyes with follow-up of greater
and lens surgery in animals
than 1 yea1, 2/13 had posterior capsule opacification
(Fig. 11.36). When visual outcome was assessed, 98% of the
eyes were sighted immediately postoperatively. The overall
 Cataract surgery in both human and animal ophthalmology
long-term visual outcome was 76% (13/17 eyes) at 1 year.
continues to be identified with the specialty, and undoubt-
 in an n jo sa  a 
edly is the most important intraocular surgery performed
outcome with juvenile-onset cataracts was 88% (7/8), trau-
in the dog. When one observes and analyzes the advances
matic 100% (4/4), and uveitis 100% (2/2) at 1 year following
in cataract surgery in the dog from the 1960s to the present,
surgery. The success of the juvenile cataracts was reduced to
one cannot be but most impressed! Nevertheless, there are
64% (7/11) at 1 year when eyes with concurrent anterior seg-
still many opportunities to further increase the chance of
 ment dysgenesis (ASD) were included. This would suggest
the restoration of vision in oul cataract patients. The 1ole
that foals with cataracts and ASD are poo1 candidates for
of LIU and its control is still a considerable challenge. Pie-
cataract surgery and long-term vision (Fig. 11.37). None of
existing LIU in dogs increases the likelihood of postopera-
the eyes in either of these studies 1eceived an IOL.
tive glaucoma and retinal detachment. If these significant
 g ss m nn n d  
postoperative complications develop. the cataract surgery
in the equine cataract patient is related to visual soundness.
success rate falls accordingly.
Just because a hoise has a menace response and refracts to
Capsular opacities, developing on the anterior and poste-
emmetropia, does not guarantee the horse to be visually
nior lens capsule and within the pupil, gradually restrict
sound. The specific use of the horse and safety of both the
vision and adversely affect long-term success rates after cata-
horse and the owner/rider must be considered. Unlike a
-do n) os nd i sid s p
dog or cat which often returns to a safe and restricted envi-
ate on patients at an earlier stage of cataract formation),
Ionment, the horse may be expected to perfoim activities
improved medical and surgical procedures to remove all
such as jumping or trail riding in an unfamiliar envion-
lens material from the capsular bag, and improved IOL
ment. This may be further complicated by a lider, whose
designs and coating with certain drugs are, at least, some
safety must be considered. With current techniques and
possibilities to enhance our long-term success rates for
[OLs it is still wise to consider that a horse following a suc-
canine surgery.
asdnd au io punosun an si aans peieie ssa
Further studies will decide the colrect IOL power fo1 the
of visually challenging activities. In addition, foals with con-
equine eye. In addition, as more IOLs are implanted in the
genital or juvenile cataracts are best considered unsound for
horse, evaluation of the long-term outcome with the equine
the purpose of breeding.
IOL in both foals and adult horses will be published.
 Further reading
Small animals: displaced lenses
aetiology of primary lens luxation in the
 lens luxation in the dog associated with
 Breaux CB, Dugan SJ, Siegel AM, Schreiner T:
dog. Vet Rec 112:238-246. 1983.
lenticular zonule degeneration and its
Retrospective study of intracapsular
Glover TL, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
relationship to glaucoma. I Am Anim Hosp
EXtraction in the dog. Proceedings of the 38th
Olivero DK: The intracapsular extraction of
Assoc 18:485-491. 1982.
Anmual Meeting of the American College of
displaced lenses in dogs: a retrospective
Knight GC: The extraction of the dislocated
Veterinary Ophthatmologists: Abstract29, 2007.
study of 57 cases [1984-1990). J Am Anim
and the cataractous crystalline lens of
Curtis R, Barmett KC. Lewis Sl: Clinical and
Hosp Assoc 31:77-81, 1995.
the dog with the object of preserving
 pathological observations concerning the
Gwin RM, Samuelson DA. Powell NG.
some useful vision, Vet Rec 69:318-321.
Gelatt KN. Wolf ED, Merideth R: Primary
1957.
352
Further reading
Stuhr CM, Forte C: Intracapsular lensectomy
Gilger BC: Phacoemulsification: technology
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists 30:57.
 with sulcus intraocular lens implantation in
and fundamentals, Vet Clin North Am
dogs with primary lens luxation or
27:1131-1141, 1997.
 Miller PE. Stanz KM, Dubielzig RR, Murphy CR:
subluxation, Proceedings of the 38th Anmmual
Gilger BC. Davidson MG. Colitz CMH:
 Mechanisms of acute intraocular pressure
Meeting of che American College of Veterinary
Experimental implantation of posterior
increases after phacoemulsification lens
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 77. 2007.
 chamber prototype intraocular lenses for the
xtraction in dogs. Am J Vet Res
Wilkie DA, Stone SG, Gemensky-Metzler AJ.
feline eye. Am J Vet Res 59:1339-1343. 1998.
58:1159-1165. 1997.
 Basham CR, Norris KN: Canine lens
Glover TD. Constantinescu GM: Surgery for
 Miller TR, Whitley RD. Meek LA, Garcia GA.
instability surgical option - part 2: a
cataracts. Vet Clin North Am 27:1143-1173.
Wilson MC. Rawls BH: Phacofragmentation
modified ab externo approach for suture
1997.
and aspiration for cataract extraction in
fixation of an intraocular lens implant in
Glover TL, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
dogs: 56 cases [1980-1984). I Am Vet Med
the dog [abstract]. Vet Ophthalmol 10:409.
Olivero DK: The intracapsular extraction of
Assoc 190:1577-1580. 1987
2007.
displaced lenses in dogs: a retrospective
 Nasisse MP. Glover TL: Surgery for lens
Wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler Al. Stone SG.
study of 57 cases [1984-1990). I Am Anim
instability. Vet Clin North Am 27:
et al: A modified ab extermo approach for
Hosp Assoc 31:77-81. 1995.
1175-1192. 1997.
suture fixation of an intraocular lens
Hendrix DV. Nasisse MP, Cowen P.
Nasisse MP. Davidson MG. English RV.
implant in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol
 Davidson MG: Clinical signs. concurrent
Roberts SM, Newman HC: Neodymium:
11:43-48, 2008.
diseases. and risk factors associated with
YAG laser treatment of lens extraction-
 Small animals: cataract surgery
retinal detachments in dogs. Progress in
induced pupillary opacification in dogs.
Veterinary and Comparative Ophthalmology
J Am Anmim Hosp Assoc 26:275-281, 1990.
Allgoewer l, Heinrich CL, Renwick PW, et al:
3:87-91. 1993.
 Nasisse MP, Davidson MG. Jamieson VE.
Spontaneous posterior lens rupture
Isard PF. Rosolen S. Le Gargasson JIF: A new
English RV. Olivero DK:
associated with rapidly progressive cataracts
in non-diabetic dogs, Proceedings of the 39h
foldable injectable intraocular lens designed
 Phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
for the canine eye: the pfi/c 2000. Preliminary
Anmual Meeting of the American College of
implantation: a study of technique in 182
results of surgical technique, Imvest
dogs. Progress in Veterinary and Comparative
Veterinary Ophthatmologis: Abstract 96.
Ophchalmol Vis Sci Abstract 41:S487, 2000.
Ophchalmology 1:225-244. 1991.
2008.
Lane SS, Lindstrom Rl: Viscoelastic agents:
Nelms SR, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
Bagley LH. Lavach JD: Comparison of 
formulation, clinical applications, and 
Glover TL: Comparison of corneal and
postoperative phacoemulsification results in
complications. Semin Ophthalmol
scleral surgical approaches for cataract
dogs with and without diabetes mellitus:
7:253-260, 1992.
extraction by phacoemulsification and
153 cases [1991-1992). I Asm Vet Med Assoc
Ledbetter EC, Millichamp Nl. Dziezyc J:
intraocular lens implantation in normal
205:1165-1169. 1994.
 Microbial contamination of the anterior
dogs. Veterinary and Comparative
Biros DJ, Gelatt KN, Brooks DE. Kubilis PS.
chamber during cataract
Ophthalmology 4:53-60. 1994.
Andrew SE. Strubbe DT. Whigham HM:
phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
Rooks RL, Brightman AH. Musselman EE.
 Development of glaucoma after cataract
implantation in dogs. Vet Ophthalmol
Helper LC. Magrane WG: Extracapsular
surgery in dogs: 220 cases [1987-1998).
7:327-334. 2004.
cataract extraction: an analysis of 240
J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:1780-1786. 2000.
Liesegang Tl: Viscoelastics. Int Ophthalmol Clin
operations in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 Blody Kl: Current status of canine cataract
33:127-147. 1993.
187:1013-1015. 1985.
surgery. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and
Linebarger E), Hardten DR. Shah GK,
 Rubin LF. Gelatt KN: Spontaneous resorption
Surgery 3:62-68, 1988.
Lindstrom RL: Phacoemulsification and
of the cataractous lens in dogs. J Am Vet Med
Colitz CMH, Malarkey D. Dykstra MJ.
modern cataract surgery, Surveys in
Assoc 152:139-153. 1968.
 McGahan MC, Davidson MG: Histologic
Ophthalmology 44:123-147. 1999.
Schellini SA, Creppe MC, Gregorio EA.
and immunohistochemical characterization
Lynch GL, Esson D. Evans P:
Padovani CR: Lidocaine effects on corneal
 of lens capsule plaques in dogs with
 Phacoemulsification surgery for juvenile-
emdothelial cells ultrastructure. Vet
cataracts, Am J Vet Res 61:139-143. 2000.
onset feline cataracts. Proceedings of the 39th
Ophthalmol 10:239-244. 2007.
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP. Rusnak IM.
Anrual Meeting of the American College of
Sigle KJ. Nasisse MP: Long-term complications
Corbett WT. English RV: Success rates of
Veterinary Ophthalmologiss: Abstract 97. 2008.
after phacoemulsification for cataract
unilateral vs bilateral cataract extraction in
 Maggio F. Pirie CG. Pizzirani S: 'Stop and chop'
removal in dogs: 172 cases (1995-2002).
dogs. Vet Surg 19:232-236. 1990.
phacoemulsification technique for canine
J Am Vet Med Assoc 228:74-79. 2006.
Davidson MG, Nasisse MP. Jamieson VE.
 cataracts using a single incision and
Stone SG, Wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler AJ:
English RV, Olivero DK:
Akahoshi phaco prechopper. Proceedings of
Canine lens instability options - part 1:
 Phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
implantation: a study of surgical results in
the 39th Anmual Meeting of the American
capsular tension ring use for
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists:
 phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
182 dogs. Progress in Veterinary and
Abstract 94. 2008.
placement [abstract]. Vet Ophthalmol
Comparative Ophthalmology 1:233-238.
 Magrane WG: Cryosurgical lens extraction: uses
10:407. 2007
1991.
and limitations, J Small Anim Pract 9:71-73.
Stone SG, Wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler AJ:
 Dziezyc I: Cataract surgery: current approaches.
1968.
Canine capsular tension ring safety and
Vet Clin North Am 20:737-754. 1990
Magrane WG: Cataract extraction: a follow-up
complication rates in eyes with stable and
Gaiddon JA. Lallement PE, Peiffer RL:
study of 104 cases. J Small Anim Pract
unstable lenses [abstract]. Vet Ophthalmol
 lmplantation of a foldable intraocular lens
1:163-170. 1969.
11:426. 2008.
in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 216:875-877.
2000.
 Magrane WG: Cataract extraction: A follow-up
Spiess BM. Bolliger J. Rihli MB: Radio-
study [429 cases). J Small Anim Pract
frequency anterior capsulotomy to facilitate
Gerardi JG, Colitz CMH, Dubielzig RR.
10:545-553. 1969.
 phacoemulsification and intraocular lens
 Davidson MG: lmmunohistochemical 
Miller PE, Lannek EB: Glaucoma following
implantation, Veterinary and Comparative
analysis of lens epithelial-derived
 phacoemulsification cataract surgery
Ophthalmology 6:233-236. 1996.
 membranes following cataract extraction
in dogs: a case-controlled retrospective
Spreull JSA, Chawla HB, Crispin SM: Routine
in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 2:163-168.
study [abstract]. Proceedings of the American
 lens extraction for the treatment of cataract
1999.
353
11
Surgical procedures of the lens and cataract
in the dog. J Small Amim Pract 21:535-553.
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.N
Millichamp N). Dziezyc J: Cataract
1980.
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
phacofragmentation in horses.
Startup FG: Cataract surgery in the dog - 1.
Cooley PL: Phacoemulsification in a clouded
Vet Ophchalmol 3:157-164. 2000.
history and review of the literature. J Small
leopard [Neofelis nebulosa]. Vet Ophthalmol
Ramsey DT, Ewart SL, Render JA, Cook CS.
Anim Pract 8:667-670. 1967.
4:113-118, 2001.
Latimer CA: Congenital ocular
Startup FG: Cataract surgery in the dog - 1l.
Cutler TJ. Brooks DE. Andrew SA. et al: Visual
abnormalities of Rocky Mountain horses.
published results, J Small Anim Pract
outcome in young horses undergoing
Vet Ophthalmol 2:47-59. 1999.
8:671-674, 1967
 phacoemulsification [abstract], Vet
Ris RC: Equine ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN.
 Startup FG: Cataract surgery in the dog - Ill.
Ophthalmol 4:291. 2002.
editor: Veterinary Ophthalmology.
factors responsible for failure. J Small Anim
 Dziezyc J: Intraocular surgery. In Auer JA.
Philadelphia, 1981. Lea and Febiger.
Pract 8:675-679. 1967.
editor: Equine Surgery. Philadelphia, 1992.
pp 569-605.
Startup FG: Cataract surgery in the dog - Vll.
WB Saunders. pp 648-654.
Scotty NC. Cutler TJ. Brooks DE. Ferrell E:
qyoextraction. J Small Anim Pract
Dziezyc : Intraocular surgery. In Auer JA.
Diagnostic ultrasonography of
8:693-701, 1967.
Stick JA, editors: Equine Surgery. ed 2.
equine lens and posterior segment 
 Startup FG: Cataract surgery in the dog. I Small
Philadelphia, 1999, WB Saunders.
abnormalities, Vet Ophthalmol 7:127-139.
Anim Pract 10:457-460. 1969.
pp 492-496.
2004.
Stiles J, Didier E. Ritchie B, Greenacre C.
 Dziezyc J. Millichamp NJ. Keller C: Use of 
Van Kruiningen H): Intracapsular cataract
Willis M, Martin C: Encephalitozoon cuniculi
 phacofragmentation for cataract removal in
extraction in the horse. I Am Vet Med Assoc
 in the lens of a rabbit with phacoclastic
horses: 12 cases [1985-1989). J Am Vet Med
145:773-777. 1964.
Lveitis: confirmation and treatment.
Assoc 198:1774-1778, 1991.
Whitley RD: Diseases and surgery of the lens. In
Veterinary and Comparative Ophchalmology
 Farrall H. Handscombe MC: Follow-up report
Gilger BC. editor: Equine Ophthalmology.
7:233-238, 1997.
of a case of surgical aphakia with an analysis
St Louis. 2005. Saunders. pp 269-284.
Taylor MM, Kern TJ. Riis RC. McDonough PL.
of equine visual function. Equine Vet I 10
Whitley RD. Moore CP. Slone DE: Cataract
Erb HN: Intraocular bacterial
(Suppl 2):91-93. 1990.
surgery in the horse: a review, Equine Vet J 2
 contamination during cataract surgery. J Am
 Fife TM, Gemensky-Metzler AJ. Wilkie DA, et al:
(Suppl 2):127-134. 1983.
Vet Med Ass0c 206:1716-1720. 1995.
Clinical features and outcomes of
Whitley RD, Meek LA. Millichamp Nl, et al:
van der Woerdt A, wilkie DA, Myer CW:
 phacoemulsification in 39 horses: a
Cataract surgery in the horse: 6 cases. Equine
Ulltrasonographic abnormalities in the eyes of
retrospective study (1993-2003). Vet
Vet I 13(Suppl 3):85-90. 1990.
dogs with cataracts: 147 cases (1986-1992).
Ophthalmol 9:361-368. 2006.
IAm Vet Med Assoc 203(6):838-841. 1993.
Intraocular lenses and
 Frazer AC: An operation for the treatment of
Warren C: Phaco chop technique for cataract
congenital bilateral total cataracts in a
phacoemulsification instruments
surgery in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol 7:
Thoroughbred colt. Vet Rec 73:587-591. 1961.
Carlson AN, Stewart WC. Tso PC: Intraocular
348-351. 2004.
Gelatt KN: The eye. In Equine Medicine and
lens complications requiring removal or
Wilkie DA, Coliz C: Surgery of the canine lens.
Surgery, ed 2. Wheaton. IL. 1972. American
exchange Surveys in Ophthatmology
 In Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
Veterinary Publications. pp 399-432.
42:417-440. 1998.
Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames, 2006. Blackwell.
Gelatt KN: The special sense organs -
eye
 Davidson MG. Murphy Cl. Nasisse MP. et al:
pp 888-931.
and eyelid. In Oehme FW. Prier JE.
 Refractive state of aphakic and
editors: Textbooh of Large Animal Surgery.
Wilkie DA, Wolf ED: Cataract surgery. In
pseudophakic eyes of dogs, Am J Vet Res
Bojrab Ml. editor: Current Techniques in
Baltimore, 1974. williams and wilkins.
54:174-177. 1993.
Smal AnimalSurgery.ed3.Philadelphia
pp 546-574.
Fine H: The chip and flip phacoemulsification
1990. Lea and Febiger. pp 98-104.
Gelatt KN, Kraft WE: A technique for aspiration
technique, JCataract Refract Surg
Wilkie DA, Gemensky-Metzler Al. Colitz CMH.
of cataracts in young horses, Vet Med
17:366-371, 1991.
 et al: Canine cataracts, diabetes mellitus and
64:415-421. 1969.
Gaiddon J, Rosolen SG, Stenu L, Cook CS.
spontaneous lens capsule rupture: a
Gelatt KN, Myers VS. McClure JR: Aspiration of
Peiffer RL: Use of biometry and keratometry
retrospective study of 18 dogs. Vet
 congenital and soft cataracts in foals and
for determining optimal power for
Ophthalmol 9:328-334. 2006.
young horses. I Am Vet Med Assoc
intraocular lens implants in dogs, Am J Vet
Williams DL, Heath MF: Prevalence of feline
165:613-616. 1974.
Res 52:781-783. 1991.
cataract: results of a cross-sectional study of
Grahn BH, Cullen CL: Equine phacoclastic
Gilger BC, Whitley RD, Mclaughlin SA.
2000 normal, 50 cats with diabetes and 100
uveitis: the clinical manifestations. light
Wright JC. Boosinger TR: Clinicopathologic
cats following dehydrational crises. Vet
microscopic findings. and therapy of 7
findings after experimental implantation of
Ophthalmol 9:341-349. 2006.
cases. Carn Vet J 41:376-382. 2000.
synthetic intraocular lenses in dogs. Am I Vet
Hardman C. Mcllnay TR. Dugan SJ:
Res 54:616-621, 1993.
 Horse and special species: cataract
 Phacofragmentation for morgagnian
Gilger BC, Whitley RD, Mclaughlin SA.
surgery
cataract in a horse, Vet Ophthalmol
Wright JC. Boosinger TR: Scanning electron
 Beech J. lrby l: Inherited nuclear cataracts in the
4:221-225, 2001.
microscopy of intraocular lenses that had
Morgan horse. I Hered 76:371-372. 1985.
 Matthews AG: The lens and cataracts.
been implanted in dogs. Am I Vet Res 
 Beech J. Aguirre G. Gross S: Congenital nuclear
Vet Clin North Am Equine Pract 20:393-415.
54:1183-1187. 1993.
cataracts in the Morgan horse. I Am Vet Med
2004.
Gilger BC. Davidson MG, Colitz CMH:
Assoc 184:1363-1365. 1984.
 Matthews AG, Barnett K: Lens. In Barnett KC.
 Experimental implantation of posterior
Brooks DE: Equine ophthalmology. In
Crispin SM, Lavach ID, Matthews AG.
chamber prototype intraocular lenses for the
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary Ophthatmology.
editors: Equine Ophzthalmology. ed 2.
feline eye. Am I Vet Res 59:1339-1341.
ed 3. Philadelphia, 1999. Lippincott.
Edinburgh. 2004. Saunders. pp 165-182.
1998.
Williams and wilkins. pp 1053-1116.
 McLaughlin SA, Whitley RB, Gilger BC:
Gimbel HV: Divide and conquer nucleofractis
Brooks DE: Phacoemulsification surgery in the
Diagnosis and treatment of lens diseases.
 phacoemulsification: development and
horse. Current Techmiques in Equine Practice
Vet Clin North Am 8:575-585. 1992.
variations. I Cataract Refract Surg
4:11-20. 2005.
 Millichamp Nl., Dziezyc J: Cataract surgery in
17:281-291, 1991.
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
horses [abstract]. hmvest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
McMullen R). Gilger BC: Keratometry. biometry
 ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
37:S763. 1996
and prediction of intraocular lens power in
354
Further reading
the equine eye. Vet Ophthalmol 9:357-360.
Townsend wM. Jacobi S. Peterson-Jones SM.
Champion R. McDonnell Pl, Green WR:
2006.
Bartoe JT: Phacoemulsification and
Intraocular lenses. Histopathologic
McMullen RJ, Salmon JH, Davidson MG.
implantation of a +14 diopter foldable
characteristics of a large series of autopsy
 Gilger BC: In vitro and in vivo evaluation
intraocular lens in an adult horse.
eyes. Surveys in Ophthatmology 30:1-32.
of an equine intraocular lens, Proceedings of
Proceedings of the 38th Anmual Meeting
1985.
dhe 39th Anmual Meeting of the American
of the American College of Veterinary
Cobo LM, Ohsawa E. Chandler D. Arguello R.
College of Veterinary Ophthalmologists: Abstract
Ophthatmologists: Abstract 79.
George G: Pathogenesis of capsular
62.2008.
2007.
 opacification after extracapsular cataract
Mello MO, Scott IUl, Smiddy WE. Flynn HW.
von Plettenberg DG. Dorner M. Hoffs B:
extraction: an animal model. Ophchalmology
 Feuer W: Surgical management and
 Nachstarfreie kataraktextraktion mit
91:857-863. 1984.
outcomes of dislocated intraocular lenses.
geplanter virektomie und implantation
Gift BW, English RV. Nadelstein B, Weigt AK.
Ophthalmology 107:62-67. 2000.
einer transkeral sulkusfixierten
Gilger BC: Comparison of capsular
Nagahara KP: Phaco chop. In Fishkind Wl.
hinterkammerlinse bein hund, Kleinterpraxis
opacification and refractive status after
editor: Complications in Phacoemulsification:
36:29-36. 1991.
placement of three different intraocular lens
Avoidance, Recognition and Management, New
Watson JL, Bras ID, Webb TR, et al: A
implants following phacoemulsification
York. 2002. Thieme. pp 94-99.
quantitative comparison of posterior
 and aspiration of cataracts in dogs, Vet
 Nasisse MP. Glover TL, Davidson MG. Nelms S.
capsular opacification in canine patients
Ophthalmol 12:13-21. 2008.
Sullivan T: Technique for suture fixation of
following intraocular implantation with
Gwin RM, Warren IK, Samuelson DA.
intraocular lenses in dogs. Veterinary and
 polymethylmethacrylate and foldable
Gum GG: Effects of phacoemulsification
Comparative Ophthatlmology 5:146-150.
acrylic lense. Proceedings of the 38th
and extracapsular lens removal on corneal
1995.
Anmual Meeting of the American College of
 thickness and endothelial cell density in the
Veterinary Ophthatmologists: Abstract 78.
Olivero DK, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
dog. Mmvest Ophthalmol Vis Sci 24:227-236.
 Dykstra Ml: Canine intraocular lens quality
2007.
1983.
control: light and scanning electron
Wilkie DA. Gemensky-Metzler Al. Stone SG.
Lynch GL, Brinkis IL: The effect of elective
 microscopic evaluation. Progress in
 et al: A modified ab extermo approach for
 phacofragmentation on central corneal
Veterinaryand ComparativeOphthalmology
suture fixation of an intraocular lens
thickness in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol
3:98-105. 1993.
implant in the dog. Vet Ophthalmol
9:303-310. 2006.
Olson RJ. Morgan KS. Kolodner H: The
11:43-48. 2008.
Nasisse MP, Davidson MG: Surgery of the lens.
Shearing intraocular lens, Ophthalmology
In Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
 Postoperative complications: all species
87:668-672. 1980.
Ophthalmology. ed 3. Baltimore, 1999.
Apple DJ. Solomon KD. Tetz MR. et al:
Peiffer RL, Gaiddon J: Posterior chamber
Lippincott, williams and wilkins.
 Posterior capsule opacification, Surveys in
intraocular lens implantation in the
pp 827-856.
Ophthalmology 37:73-116. 1992.
dog: results of 65 implants in 61 patients.
Nasisse MP, Davidson MG, English RV.
J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 27:453-462. 1991.
Bras 1D, Colitz CMH, Saville WJA, et al:
 Roberts SM, Newman HC: Neodymium:
 Posterior capsular opacification in diabetic
YAG laser treatment of lens extraction-
Simpson HD: Intra-ocular plastic lens
implantation in canine cataract surgery.
and nondiabetic canine patients following
induced pupillary opacification in dogs.
Gataract surgery. Vet Ophthalmol 9:317-327.
North Amm Vet 37:573-581, 1956.
J Am Amim Hosp Assoc 26:275-281. 1990.
2006.
355
CHAPTER
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
Kirk N. Gelatt', Bernhard M. Spiess2 and Brian C. Gilger2
Small animais Large animais and special species
Chapter contents
Introduction
357
Preoperative considerations for vitreal aspiration
Surgical anatomy
357
and removal
362
Surgical pathophysiology
Preoperative considerations for retinal
359
detachments
363
Types of retinal detachment
360
TYPES OF VITREORETINAL SURGERY
363
 Types of vitreoretinal surgery
360
Surgery of the vitreous
364
dinical evaluation of retinal detachments
360
 Adaptations for large animals and special species
369
Instrumentation for vitreoretinal surgeries
361
Surgery of the retina
373
Introduction
and degenerative retinopathies are less frequent, but inflam-
mations of the ocular fundus and hypertensive retinopathies
Diseases of the posterior segment, including those affecting
are common. Surgeries of the retina and choroid in small
the vitreous, retina, choroid, and optic disk, are common in
animals include retinal o1 chorioretinal biopsies, and the
small animals. These diseases may be of congenital, trau-
correction of retinal detachments.
matic, inflammatory, degenerative, and neoplastic origin.
The development of the different types of vitreoretinal
Diseases of the vitreous affect both cats and dogs, but are
surgery in small animals is still early, but these surgeries
more frequent in dogs. Vitreal conditions include persistence
 have been reported since the 1970s. The expensive instru-
mentation and time-consuming training have delayed
primary vitreous (PHPV)), vitreal syneresis (liquefaction of
the vitreous), asteroid hyalosis (presence of numerous white
ophthalmology centers offer this highly specialized service.
rhage, and vitreal herniation through the pupil. Presentation
The inclusion of vitreoretinal surgery in this text will
of vitreous in the pupil and anterior chamber is usually asso-
hopefully stimulate its continued development in small
ciated with lens displacement and lensectomy, and cataract
animals. In horses, anterior vitiectomy has been recom-
Iemoval with ripture of the posterior lens capsule and ante-
mended in the treatment of recurrent uveitis, and is used
lio1 vitreous membrane. Neoplasms, pigment, parasites, fo1-
widely in Europe.
eign bodies, and cysts also affect the vitreous. For these vitreal
a n 'ss  paeil aq a ns sas
of the vitreal pupillary herniation into the anterior chamber.
 Surgical anatomy
The removal of diseased vitreous and traction bands in the
repair of retinal detachments will be presented in the section
on retinal surgeries.
The surgical anatomy of the canine vitreoretinal surgeries
Congenital and degenerative retinopathies are among the
includes the extraocular space, insertions of the 1ectus mus-
cles, and the different landmarks of the external sclera
the majority of these retinopathies appear inherited. Inflam-
(Fig. 12.1). The surgical approach to the anterior vitreous
mations of the retina and choroid in dogs are frequent, and
is usually through the pupil, posterior lens capsule (aftel
often associated with systemic infections. In cats, congenital
extracapsular cataract surgery), and anterior vitreal membrane
12
Cross-section dorsal
Anterior ciliary
oblique muscle, tendon 
artery
and insertion
/Dorsal rectus muscle
Limbus
-Vortex vein
Anterior
chamber
Retractor
oculi
Cornea
muscle
Optic nerve
Pupil
Ventral
Long posterior
Short posterior
ciliary artery
rectus
ciliary arteries
muscle
Vortexvein
Insertion medial
Cross-section ventral
rectus muscle
oblique muscle
Fig. 12.1 Lateral view of the canine globe with important landmarks for vitreoretinal surgeries.
(after intracapsula1 cataract and lens 1emoval). Vitreoretinal
these serious complications necessitates the external pene-
surgeries involve entry into the vitreal space through multiple
tration of the sclera and pars plana ciliaris, o1 the insertion
small sclerotomies or surgical ports in the pars plana ciliaris.
of a hypodermic needle through the pupil after entry into
Incisions of the retina are avoided as the resultant hole may
the anterio1 chamber through a coineal o1 limbal incision
produce a rhegmatogenous retinal detachment. Full-thickness
into the anterior chamber.
retinal holes, whether surgical or spontaneous, require laser,
 In order to access the vitreous space during retinal detach-
diatheimy o1 cryotherapy to seal the area and stimulate fo1-
 ment surgery through small scleral incisions (sclerotomies
mation of a strong chorioretinal sca1. This scar prevents aque-
OI ports), and for vitreous samples, the critical entry areas
ous o1 vitreous from entering the subretinal space through
are between the end of the anterior pars plicata (ciliary body
the retinal break and causing a retinal detachment.
processes) and the ora ciliaris retinae (beginning of the ret-
To perform vitreous paracentesis (hyalocentesis). the
ina). In a study by Smith and co-workers, the following sites
extent of the pars plana ciliaris or the flat posterior portion
(as deteimined by calipers posterior to the canine limbus)
of the ciliary body is determined based on measurements
are 1ecommended for the dog: 1) superotemporal, 6 mm;
posterior to the limbus (Fig. 12.2). The exact anterior and
( ue  s esoadns (  6 eooau (7
posterio1 borders of the pars plana ciliaris have been deter-
inferonasal, 7 mm. Eye size and head size are correlated,
mined in the dog but not in the cat. The width of this tissue
and in larger dogs the anterior and middle portions of the
varies by quadrant, with the pars plana ciliaris in the lateral
pars plana are more posterior. In another study by Sullivan
quadrant the longest. Hypodeimic needle penetration of
and co-workers, the distances from the limbus to the ora
ciliaris retinae were: 1) dorsal quadrant, 9.25 ± 0.81 mm;
in considerable intraocular hemorhage. Hypodermic needle
p11 u ( / 60  16 u11 1 (7
penetration posterior of the pars plana ciliaris will pro-
7.18 ± 0.89 mm; and 4) medial quadrant, 5.30 ± 0.77 mm.
duce retinal holes. Hence, access to the vitreal space without
 Another important site to avoid in the canine is the intrascl-
eral plexus, which drains aqueous humor and is located in the
Pars plicata ciliaris
anterior sclera. The intrascleral plexus is located 4-5 mm pos-
tenio1 to the limbus, and may be 4-5 mm wide. Sclerotomies
 Pars plana ciliaris
that penetrate the intrascleral plexus often hemorrhage, and
 Pars ciliaris retinae
Limbus、
judicious cautery is necessary when these sclerotomies are
Sclera
being performed. UInder most circumstances, the sclerotomies
are postenior to the intrascleral plexus.
Vitreousbody
The anatomy of the vitreous is critical to vitreoretinal su1-
Cornea
geries, as part of the surgical procedure will nearly always
-Tapetal fundus
be within the vitreous space (Fig. 12.3). The vitreous humor
is noimally a clear gel that adjoins the entire retina, and this
 Anterior chamber 
Opticdisc
interface is termed the posterio1 vitreal membrane. This
Posterior
attachment to the retina appears relatively weak, except at
chamber
the periphery of the retina (pars plana retinae) and the optic
disk. The vitreous border continues anteriorly onto the pars
\Non-tapetal fundus
plana ciliaris and, just before the origins and insertions of
lridocorneal angle
the zonules or suspensory ligaments between the ciliary
Fig. 12.2 Cross-section of the globe of the dog. Critical anatomic areas for
body and lens equato1, forms the posterior border of the
vitreoretinal surgeries are the pars plana ciliaris and the posterior segment.
posterior chamber.
358
Surgical pathophysiology
Pars ciliaris retinae
such as the vitrectomy and a scleral buckle. Hence, knowl-
edge of the insertions of the rectus and oblique extraocular
Hyaloideocapsular
muscles in dogs is important, as these muscles are identi-
Ciliary 」 Pars plana
ligament
body L Pars plicata
fied during surgical dissection to place this silicone strap.
(Weiger's ligament)
The bulbar conjunctiva is usually incised 360° posterior to
the limbus fo1 exposure of the entire globe.
The sclera constitutes the fibrous tunic for the entire poste-
Mittendorf's dot 
Berger'sspace
nior segment. There are several channels or emissaria where
Patellar fossa or -
the full-thickness sclera is penetrated, and during vitreoret-
fossa hyaloiden
inal surgeries, these regions are avoided (see Fig. 12.1). These
channels also represent weak areas of the sclera, and during
 Hyaloid canal,
glaucoma, focal enlargements or staphylomas may develop.
 canalis hydoideus,
At least four vortex veins exit the posterior segment, usually
primary vitreous,
by quadrant and at the equator. These large veins provide
or Cloquet's canal
Zonules
the majority of venous drainage from the anterior and pos-
(tertiary vitreous)
Secondary vitreous
terior segments of the eye and should be avoided. At the
Anterior hyaloid membrane
3 and 9 o'clock positions within the exteinal sclera are the
(membrana vitrea)
long posterior ciliary arteries and veins that are branches
of the exteinal ophthalmic artery and vein. These vessels
Fig. 12.3 The different components of the vitreous body. The strongest 
are avoided as they provide the majority of the blood sup-
attachments for the vitreous body are the pars plana retinae and the optic
disk.
ply to the anterior segment of the eye. Numerous anterior
ciliary arteries and veins penetrate the anterior sclera at
the insertions of the different rectus muscles. These blood
The anterior aspect of the vitreous is immediately pos-
vessels eventually anastomose with other intraocula1 ves-
terior to the posterior lens capsule, and has been termed
sels. Hence, transection of the rectus muscle insertions
      
Jo juaas noaiue au oi Aiddns pooia aun aseaiop u
potential space between the posterior lens capsule and
the eye.
hyaloideocapsular ligaments is termed Berger's space. This
separation between the dog's posterior lens capsule and
Surgical pathophysiology
the hyaloideocapsular ligament appears more potential than
leal, as tears or penetration of one structure also affects
the other. The principal attachment o1 base of the vitreous
The pathophysiology of the vitreous and retina are closely
appears to be the pars ciliaris retinae or the anterior border
Ielated; however, for purposes of discussion, each is pre-
of the peripheral retina.
sented separately. The vitreous is a clear and fairly fim
 The vitreous body is divided into primary (that vitreous
gel in the young cat and dog, but with aging. the vitreous
formed and heavily vascularized prenatally) and secondary
(that vitreous formed postnatally as the eye grows to normal
diseases, such as inidocyclitis, the glaucomas, cataract forma-
adult size). The central primary vitreous in adulthood,
tion, retinal degenerations, and retinochoroiditis accelerate
usually termed Cloquet's canal, is a clear zone that extends
the rate and extent of liquefaction of the vitreous. Hence.
from the optic disk to the central or axial posterior lens
if the posterior lens capsule is penetrated during cataract sur-
capsule. The prenatal blood vessels that traverse this space
gery in a young dog the vitreous is usually a well-formed
may persist as remnants at the axial posterior lens capsule
gel. However, with posterior lens capsule tears in older dogs.
(Mittendorf's dot) or at the optic disk (Bergmeistel's papilla).
the vitreous presentation usually involves a more liquefied
 The majority of retinal surgeries address 1epai1 of retinal
vitreous. Vitreous syneresis is also enhanced by cataract
detachments. Retinal detachments are microscopic separa-
and vitreoretinal surgeries.
tions of the inner nine layers of the neurosensory retina from
the retinal pigment epithelium. Because of retinal develop-
The role of the vitreous
   a      s
 of the retina and the retinal epithelium. With hemorrhage.
The appearance of vitreous within the pupil, as after lens dis-
inflammatory exudates, edema, o1 the influx of vitreous
through a retinal hole, these fluids can separate these retinal
blems.
Vitreocorneal contact results in temporary coineal
layers, and produce the ophthalmoscopic findings of the
edema. Separation of the vitreous from the coinea may
Ietinal detachment. Hence, in the repair of retinal detach-
detach the corneal endothelium, resulting in permanent co1-
ments, contact must be re-established between the inner
neal edema. Vitreous can obstrict the pupil and iridocorneal
nine retinal layers and outer retinal pigment epithelium.
angle resulting in elevations in intraocular pressure (IOP).
Aspiration of subretinal fluids involves the removal of fluids
A miotic pupil can be more easily 'plugged' with formed
from this space.
vitreous than a dilated pupil. With vitreous heiniated in the
Repair of retinal detachments usually includes the place-
anterior chamber and pupil, removal of the vitreous (ante-
ment of a silicone strap (buckle) around the entire globe
nior vitrectomy) is indicated. The vitreous provides variable
about the equator, pars plana vitrectomy, retinopexy with
support to the entire retina in the dog and cat. However,
laser photocoagulation o1 cryotheimy, tamponade with
absence of part to all of the vitreous does not automatically
intravitreal gas or silicone oil, o1 a combination procedure
Iesult in retinal detachment. Formation of inflammatory
359
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
traction bands involving the iris, ciliary body, lens capsules.
Types of retinal detachment
and the vitreous, and the development of holes in the
peripheral retina in dogs after cataract and vitreoretinal
 Retinal detachments in small animals are classified using
surgeries, seem more influential in the genesis of retinal
detachments than the lack of the vitreous per se. Hence,
several different schemes. They are divided into partial and
complete. They are also classified into rhegmatogenous
abnormalities in both the vitreous and retina are key facto1s
(having retinal holes or tears) or non-rhegmatogenous (no
in the pathogenesis of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments.
defects in the neurosensory retina). They are also divided
Certain breeds of dogs, i.e., Shih Tzu, Boston Terriel, and
s e sn i    (i n a
Toy and Miniature Poodles, develop excessive vitreous
by fluids (serous), cells from inflammations (exudative),
degeneration. This degeneration results in considerable syn-
neoplasms, and hemorrhages; 2) traction, when inflamma-
eresis; if the dog is a violent head shaker with toys, rhegma-
tory or other types of bands pull the inner retinal layers
togenous retinal detachments (RRDs) may result.
away from the retinal pigment epithelium, usually resulting
in a retinal hole(s): and 3) congenital, in which the retinal
Cataract surgery
detachments are associated with retinal dysplasia o1 optic
disk pits.
In dogs, the most common cause of RRD is cataract surgery.
 Complications associated with cataract surgery in the dog.
such as large tears in the posterior capsule, vitreous loss,
Types of vitreoretinal surgery
intraocular hemorrhage, or retained lens fragments, appeal
to contribute directly to RRD.
Vitreoretinal surgeries, presented in subsequent sections,
concentrate on vitreous aspiration for diagnosis o1 injec-
Inherited cataracts and lens-induced uveitis
tions; vitrectomy (anterio1 and posterior) fo1 1emoval of
formed or gel vitreous in the pupil and/or anterior cham-
In breeds with inherited cataracts, i.e., American Cocker
ber, or in treatment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments;
Spaniel, Siberian Husky, Bichon Frise, and others which
chorioretinal biopsies for tissue analyses; and the surgical
occur in young ages, cataract resorption and lens-induced
management of retinal detachments. Vitreoretinal surgeries
lveitis are common. This uveitis seems to be associated with
are indicated for the rhegmatogenous retinal detachments
a significant numbeI of RRDs, including vitreous retraction,
associated with 1etinal holes and inflammatory and/or
vitreous degeneration or liquefaction, obliteration of retinal
vitreal traction bands.
vessels and secondary peripheral retinal thinning, formation
Non-rhegmatogenous retinal detachments are usually
of 1etinal cysts, and transient glaucoma afttacks with inter
treated medically. If possible, the inciting cause is identified
mittent stretching of the globe, all of which add further
and treated. For instance, if systemic hypertension has
insult to the peripheral retina.
resulted in the retinal detachment, systemic antihypertensive
therapy is administered (Fig. 12.4). If the retinal detachment
Inherited retinal dysplasia
has resulted from a chorioretinitis, the appropriate therapy
is administered. Retinal detachments are also treated symp.
Certain breeds of dogs have inherited retinal dysplasia,
tomatically. Systemic drugs, such as corticosteroids and diure.
i.e., Labrador Retrievers and English Springer Spaniels.
tics, may hasten the reabsorption of the subretinal fluids, and
These dysplastic retinas ale pione to RRD, especially when
Ieapposition of the neurosensory retinal layers and the retinal
the retina is thin or develops holes, and has liquefied
pigment epithelium.
vitreous.
Clinical evaluation of retinal detachments
Predisposed breeds
Certain breeds of dogs, i.e., Bichon Frise and Havanese,
The broad objective for this type of retinal detachment su1-
appear predisposed to RRD when affected with inherited
gery is the identification of the retinal breaks and sealing
and early onset cataract formation, cataract resorption,
these breaks. Detection of 1etinal breaks in small animals
lens-induced uveitis, and prior to or after cataract surgery.
requires meticulous examination of the retina by ophthal-
As a result, laser or cryoretinopexy is often performed in
these two breeds prior to or immediately before cataract
d   s      
surgery.
letina. Often the dog requires sedation to accommodate
the time for this examination and the scleral depression.
Postoperative capsular and pupillary opacities after cataract
Other factors
surgeries may limit fundic observations. Scleral depression
Ocular trauma, luxated lens, and retinal cysts can also
can be achieved under topical anesthesia with a scleral
predispose to the development of RRD. Systemic hyperten-
depressor instrument, Jameson muscle hook or a moist cot-
sion and choroiditis are associated with intraocular hemo1-
ton swab. The scleral depressor is used to indent the globe a
rhage and serous to exudative non-rhegmatogenous retinal
few millimeters posterio1 to the limbus while simultaneously
detachments. Immune-mediated diseases, as well as fungal.,
performing indirect ophthalmoscopy. Most 1etinal breaks
bacterial and rickettsial chorioretinitis, can also result in
(holes and tears) occur in the peripheral retina.
exudative non-rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. Gener-
Once the fundoscopic examination has been perfoimed
ally, non-rhegmatogenous retinal detachments are treated
and any retinal breaks identified and localized, retinal su1-
medically
 gery may be indicated. The general principles for the surgical
360
Instrumentation for viteoretinal surgeries
A
B
ysip sido aun jo sapis yrog jo zuouy ui sinso zuawupenap ieunau aul (e) uoisuaady waasis yai paneosse ien e ui suawupeap ieunay tzl db
(b) Reattachment of the retinal detachment in this cat's eye after successful treatment of the systemic hypertension, but some retinal pigment epithelium
proliferation is present (suggesting some retinal damage).
treatment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments are sum-
Instrumentation for vitreoretinal surgeries
marized in Box 12.1, part A. Once the retinal traction is
removed and the retinal breaks are sealed, noimal physio-
For optimal results in vitreoretinal surgeries, a considerable
logic function of the retina may resume with the pigmented
investment in training and instrumentation is necessary.
epithelium to evacuate the subretinal fluids, and eliminate
any space between the neurosensory retina and the retinal
Surgical instruments
pigment epithelial layers.
Additional invaluable diagnostic procedures for small ani-
Basic ophthalmic instruments are necessary to perform the
mals are electroretinography and ultrasonography. Electro-
surgical approach for retinal detachments. These instrl-
  on se  d  a
ments are necessary to perform the conjunctival (peritomy)
of the retina, and for detecting retinal detachments. Ultraso-
and periocular surgery to isolate and sometimes transect
 nography is used particularly to evaluate the posterior seg-
the extraocula1 muscle insertions. The sclerotomies o1 small
ment in which visualization is incomplete because
 of a
20 g incisions through the sclera and pars plana of the ciliary
small pupil, o1 lens o1 vitreal opacities (Fig. 12.5).
body 1equire a basic set of 20 g diameter instrumentation
Box 12.1 General principles for the treatment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments
 Part B. Specialized instruments for pars plana retinal
Part A. Principles
detachment surgery
1. Closure of retinal break: By diathermy, cryotherapy, or laser.
 20 g microvitreoretinal (M/vR) blades
2. Collapse of the space between the separated retinal layers:
 Drainage of subretinal fluids, and with an extermally applied 
20 g end gripping microforceps
silicone buckle.
20 g DeJuan intraocular forceps
3. Excision of vitreal and/or inflammatory traction bands that appear
20 g horizontal and vertical forceps
to pull on the retina.
20 g membrane scratcher
4. Occasional temporary intravitreal injections of silicone oil and/or
20g retinal pick
perfluorocarbon gases to push and flatten (tamponade) the area of
20 g scleral plugs
retinal detachment.
20 g scleral plug forceps (pair)
5. Development of focal chorioretinitis that eventually resolves to
 Other
 form scar tissue that adheres to the retinal layers within the
detached area and, most importantly, around the retinal break.
Accessory aspiration tubing 
Intraocular pressure control line with filter
Two stopcocks
20 g high viscosity infusion cannula
Grizzard cannula
 0.2 flter for perfluorocarbon gas and air 
28 D lens
Modified from Smith PJ 1999 Surgery of the canine posterior segment. in: Geiatt KN (ed.) Veterinary Ophthaimoiogy. 3rd edn. Lippincott, Williams and Wikins. Baitimore, p 935-980.
361
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
Fig. 12.5 Ultrasonography can be useful to
detect retinal detachments in eyes with dense
cataracts or other opaque media. (a) Retinal
detachment in a horse, appearing as a "V or
'seagull' with its attachments at the optic nerve
 and ora ciliaris retinae. Note also the opacities
within the vitreous. (b) Retinal detachment in a
dog, with lens luxation and cataract formation.
B
A
(Box 12.1, part B). These 20 g instruments can be inserted
causing coineal edema and, if in significant quantity, angle-
and withdrawn from these ports without causing damage.
obstruction glaucoma. In phakic dogs, cataract formation
In addition, several of the instruments are essential. Posterio1
has been associated with intravitreal SiO. Silicone oil is 1ou-
vitreous cutter, light source, IOP control, and wet-field cau-
tinely left within the vitreous after retinal detachment surgery
tery are necessary. The Machemer lens rests on the coinea
in dogs, and is not removed (unless it escapes into the anterior
and provides irigation to the cornea, and a wide field of
chamber). In dogs, intravitreal silicone oil appears to be a
vision and magnification. To inject silicone oil, either a large
Ieasonable vitreous substitute; in humans, silicone oil is usu-
bore high viscosity cannula with a Luer-lock syringe for man-
'an uoi yal lou pue 'iains-isod squouu g-e paaouai ae
ual injection or a special syringe pump and high-viscosity
injection, are necessary. A nitrous oxide cryounit with a 1eti-
Preoperative considerations for vitreal
nal probe and/o1 a diode laser with endolasel and indirect
 delivery modes are essential for retinopexy.
aspiration and removal
 Small animal patients, presented for possible vitreous aspi-
Perfluorocarbon gases
ration, usually have exidative retinal detachments, intense
The perfluorocarbon gases are used to manipulate and flat-
chorioretinitis with vitreal infiltration, and endophthalmitis.
Often the ophthalmic disease is part of a systemic infectious
ten retinal detachments during pars plana retinal detach-
disease, and the vitreal aspirate may assist in identification
ment surgeries. They are biologically inert, clea1 optically.
immiscible with water, and have a higher specific gravity
of the infectious agent. Systemic aspergillosis, blastomyco-
than saline. Of the perfluorocarbon gases in use, perfluo1-
sis, and cryptococcosis can often be diagnosed by vitreous
aspiration and the demonstration of organisms within the
coctane, perfluorotributylamine, perfluorodecalin, and per-
fluoroperhydrophenanthrene, only the first two gases have
aspirate. During vitreal aspirations, the hypodermic needle
u s ai  o    
can often be directed under direct observation through a
as
water, these gases can very effectively tamponade and flatten
dilated pupil to the inflammatory material suspended
the retina intraoperatively, and displace subretinal fluid
within the vitreous. Hence, the diagnostic value of vitreal
anteriorly from peripheral retinal breaks into the vitreous.
aspirates with a fairly clea1 anterior segment and lens is
 sd s rn ld 'a a u  a
They are removed after retinopexy because of potential 1eti-
observation of the hypodermic needle within the vitreous,
nal toxicity, and replaced with silicone oil which will remain
the accuracy of the technique declines. Concurrent ultta-
in the eye postoperatively for several months.
sonography during vitreous aspiration in eyes with com-
plete opacities can ensure that the hypodermic needle is
positioned as accurately as possible within the vitreal body.
Silicone oil (Sio)
Small animal patients with vitreal diseases that may require
The silicone cils are different molecular weights of poly
partial-to-complete surgical excision are usually presented
dimethylsiloxane. Of those available, the medical grade
with lens displacement, with o1 without concurrent second-
5000 centistoke SiO is the most frequently used in the
ary and aqueous misdirection (or malignant) glaucoma, 01
dog. With a specific gravity of 0.971, which is less than
postoperatively after cataract surgery. Formed or gel vitreous,
water, SiO forms a buoyant bubble in the vitreous space
partially herniated in the pupil and anterior chamber.
that provides long-term tamponade to the dorsal retina.
appears as a formed, slightly translucent bulge with occa-
In aphakic and pseudophakic dogs after SiO injection into
sional fine white fibril strands. Corneal contact will cause
the vitreal space, the oil may enter the anterior chamber,
focal edema. The pupil margin can be distorted by formed
362
Preoperative consicderations for retinal detachments
vitreous, and vitreous strands may extend from the pupil into
the previous coineal or limbal incision. If the pupil is miotic
01 miotics are inadvertently instilled, pupillary occlusion
with the foimed or gel vitreal herniation may result, necessi-
tating additional therapy for the secondary glaucoma.
  r n   si a i
tions without coineal contact. Topical corticosteroids and
mydriatics are used to suppress the iridocyclitis. The resultant
pupillary dilatation decreases the possibility of pupillary occlu-
sion with the herniated vitreous and secondary glaucoma.
Mannitol (1-2 g/kg IV) may be administered once o1 even
twice to dehydrate and shrink the foimed vitreous and lower
[OP. Ideally, the heiniated vitreous will retract behind the
dilated pupil and remain. The effects of mannitol in a highly
inflamed eye are usually less than optimal because the
blood-aqueous barrier is reduced, and the osmotic imbal-
ance caused by the intravascular mannitol is diminished.
After 24-72 h of less than successful medical treatment, an
anterior vitrectomy is indicated to remove the vitreous from
the anterior chamber and pupil.
Fig. 12.7 A large retinal detachment with a giant ventral retinal tear in
an eye 6 months after successful cataract removal.
Preoperative considerations
for retinal detachments
Surgical treatment of retinal detachment has been reported
in dogs with serous retinal detachments secondary to optic
TYPES OF VITREORETINAL SURGERY
disk pits or idiopathic (Fig. 12.6), and for rhegmatogenous
letinal detachments associated with retinal holes or tears
In this section, the fundamentals of vitreoretinal surgery are
that developed after cataract surgery. As indicated in an eal-
presented. As these types of surgical procedure are still evol-
lier section, exudative retinal detachments associated with
ving in the dog, and to a limited extent in cats, textbooks
posterior segment inflammations, systemic hypertension,
devoted to retinal detachment surgery in humans should
s oas a r adeia  paia ar s ro p
be
temic disordel, and systemic corticosteroids and diuretics
to attempt to remove the subretinal fluids before the retinal
anterior vitrectomy are presented. Fo1 retinal detachment
degeneration becomes advanced. Unfortunately, most reti-
surgery, the basic approach is presented for both the extra-
nal detachments are presented late in small animals, and
and intraocular procedures. Procedures such as the intra-
often entire retinas are detached in both eyes. Retinal
ocular excision of pupillary and traction bands, posterio1
detachments that develop after lens and cataract removal
vitrectomy, aspiration of subretinal fluids, and the injection
are often detected earlier during the periodic postoperative
examinations (Fig. 12.7).
also be discussed.
A
B
Fig. 12.6 Dorsal serous non-rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in a dog of unknown cause. (a) The retinal detachment is immediately above the disk.
(b) Several spots of laser photocoagulation were positioned immediately adjacent to the retinal detachment.
363
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
Surgery of the vitreous
chamber, vitreous removal in endophthalmitis, removal of
deep vitreal foreign bodies, excision o1 transection of vitre-
ous traction and inflammatory bands, and in the manage-
Surgery of the vitreous includes vitreal paracentesis (hyalo
ment of rhegmatogenous retinal detachments, especially
with giant tears.
and complete vitrectomy perfoimed through the pars plana
ciliaris. Vitreal paracentesis is used to obtain liquid vitreous
for cytology and culture. Vitreous samples may also be ana-
Hyalocentesis/vitreous paracentesis
lyzed for drug levels, antibodies, and different substances.
In vitreal paracentesis or hyalocentesis a small quantity of
In the anterior vitrectomy procedure, often performed at
liquid vitreous is aspirated for analysis, usually cytology
the conclusion of lens removal, vitreous is excised that has
and bacterial/fungal culture. The formed gel vitreous cannot
entered the anterior chamber or pupil. In the complete vit-
be aspirated; however, vitreous syneresis or liquefaction
Iectomy procedure, the majority of the vitreous is removed,
occurs with aging, cataract formation, intraocular inflam-
usually through one or more sclerotomies at the level of the
mation, and glaucoma in small animals. As a 1esult, some
pars plana of the ciliary body.
 Modern vitreous surgery techniques have been developed
portion of the vitreous is liquefied, unless the cat o1 dog is
less than 1 year old. Vitreal paracentesis is a most useful
in humans since about 1965. With the demonstration that
diagnostic technique for dogs and cats presented with
the excision of vitreous in humans did not result in the
bilateral exudative 1etinal detachments o1 endophthalmitis
detachment of the retina and loss of vision, specialized
associated with Blastomyces dermatitidis, Histoplasma capsula-
instrimentation and techniques have been developed in
humans to perform vitreoretinal surgeries through small
tum, Cryptococcus neoformans, Coccidioides immitis, Geotrichum
candidum, and Prototheca organisms (Fig. 12.8). Hyalocent-
incisions in the pars plana of the ciliary body. Anterio1 vit-
rectomy involves the excision of vitreous herniated o1 p1o-
sia; however, this technique is not recommended for this
truding through the pupil, as well as pupillary opacities
purpose. Direct hypodermic needle contact of the neoplasm
       
is usually associated with hemorrhage. However, if cellular
animals. These pupillary opacities usually consist of anterio1
material is present in the vitreous adjacent to the cho1-
and posterior lens capsules, oiganized anterio1 vitreous and
ioretinal mass, aspiration of the vitreous in this area is
inflammatory fibropupillary membranes. In the former case,
the herniated organized anterior vitreous is excised using
leasonably safe.
cellulose sponges or forceps, and vitreous scissors utilizing
an anterior vitrector (either portable or attached to a cataract
Vitreous aspiration procedure
 do d     
Hyalocentesis is perfoimed after the onset of general
develop in dogs and, to a lesser extent, in cats, the anterior
anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hair, and cleansing of the
eyelid skin, conjunctival and coineal surfaces with 0.5%
sharp scissors and forceps (anterior vitrectomy and pupillary
membranectomy). Depending on its composition, the ante-
lio1 vitreous may be excised (foimed vitreous) o1 aspirated
(liquid vitreous). Sometimes the irregular and often miotic
pupil requires coreoplasty (see Chapter 9) to not only excise
the opacities within the pupil but also enlarge the pupil to
enhance vision.
The instrumentation to perfoim anterio1 vitrectomy
through a corneal or limbal incision varies, but the basic
 procedure in small animals may be performed with sharp
vitreous scissors, cellulose sponges, cyclodialysis spatula,
intraocular forceps, and intraocular scissors. For pars plana
vitreoretinal surgeries, a considerable investment in special-
ized instrumentation is necessary, and only a few veteri-
nary ophthalmology clinical centers have acquired these
Iesources and mastered the surgical techniques. Vitreoretinal
surgery, as presented in this chaptel, 1epresents one of the su1-
gical frontiers for veterinary ophthalmology where significant
advances will undoubtedly occur during the next decade.
of persistent hyperplastic vitreous, opacified vitreous, herni-
ation of the vitreous through the pupil, partial excision of
the vitreous within the pupil in malignant glaucoma,
removal of anterior vitreal foreign bodies, and fo1 excision
of vitreous incarcerated within a corneal or limbal wound.
 Pars plana vitrectomy is indicated fo1 deeper vitreal opaci-
Fig. 12.8 Chorioretinitis in a cat secondary to systemic cryptococcosis.
ties, including hemorrhages, treatment of malignant glau-
 Note the chorioretinal granulomas and surrounding focal exudative retinal
coma, treatment for vitreous prolapsed into the anterio1
deta chments
364
Surgery of the vitreous
Fig. 12.9 Aspiration of liquid vitreous through
the pars plana ciliaris (a) Approach is usually via
the dorsal or dorsolateral pars plana ciliris 
because of greater accessibility. By Jameson
calipers, the needle puncture site is localized
8 mm posterior to the limbus. (b) The 
hypodermic needle is inserted through the
dorsal conjunctiva, sclera, and pars plana ciliaris.
(c) The needle is directed toward the optic disk
or floaters within the vitreous. About
A
B
 0.1-0.25 mL of liquid vitreous may be removed.
povidone-iodine solution. The pupil is dilated before the
Intravitreal injections
onset of general anesthesia. For convenience, the eyelids
The same technique used for hyalocentesis can be used
are retracted by speculum. The pupil and anterior vitreous
are usually visible. The bulbar conjunctiva is grasped by
to deliver drugs directly into the vitreous space. As descri-
thumb forceps with teeth several millimeters posterior to
bed in Chapter 10, intravitieal injections of gentamicin
the dorsal limbus (Fig. 12.9a). By calipers the site to pene-
(10-25 mg), with and without 1 mg dexamethasone, have
been used to destroy the ciliary body epithelia, and induce
tiate the bulbar conjunctiva is determined as 6-9 mm
 phthisis bulbi and ocular hypotony in advanced end-stage
(dorsal) to 8-9 mm (lateral) posterio1 to the limbus. At this
primary glaucomatous eyes.
position, the 22-23 g hypodermic needle, aimed at the optic
 Antibiotics and antifungal agents can be injected intravitre-
disk, should penetrate the sclera and pars plana ciliaris to
enter the anterio1 vitreous (Fig. 12.9b).
ally for bacterial and fungal chorioretinitis, and endophthal-
mitis. Both volume and concentration of drugs injected
Often once the hypodeimic needle is in the anterior vit-
intravitreally are limited. The retina and lens appear quite
Ieous, it can be directly observed. If vitreal opacities 01
sensitive to drugs, and excess drug concentrations result in
floaters are present, the hypodermic needle is carefully
directed to these opacities (Fig. 12.9c). Aspiration of vitre-
cataract formation and retinal degeneration. The doses of
ous depends on it being liquefied. Formed vitreous or large
selected antibiotics and antifungal agents, based on those
opacities may plug the needle and require flushing to
for humans, are summarized in Table 12.1.
Ielieve the obstruction. The quantity of liquid vitreous
aspirated is limited to 0.1-0.25 mL. If larger volumes are
Transpupillary vitreal aspirations
removed, an equal volume of saline or lactated Ringer's
Aspiration of liquefied vitreous from the vitreous space may
solution is injected to immediately restore the lost vitreous
be performed through the pupil during lens and cataract
volume and IOP.
surgery, when formed or gel vitreous herniates through
Hyalocentesis is an excellent diagnostic procedure that can
the pupil. Aspiration of some vitreous can be performed in
letrieve vitreal opacities for analyses. Identification of the
most older dogs during cataract and lens removal surgery.
infectious organism, obtained by hyalocentesis, frequently
as a portion of the vitreous is usually liquefied. In dogs less
aids in the treatment and prognosis for small animal
than 1 year of age with congenital cataracts, there may
patients. Treatment after hyalocentesis is usually directed at
be limited-to-no liquefied vitreous, and vitreal aspiration is
the pre-existing posterior segment inflammation. Effective
not possible. Vitreous herniation may follow development
treatment of diseases of the anterior vitreous includes the
of a tear in the posterior lens capsule, o1 after intracapsula1
administration of both topical and systemic antibiotics,
lens and cataract removal. As the posterior lens capsule
and/or antifungals. Mydriatics are indicated for the irido-
ap 'unxdde aso u aie aey ie nae pue
cyclitis and are administered at levels sufficient to maintain
usually affects both structures.
 a reasonably dilated pupil.
 Table 12.1 Doses for intravitreal antibiotics in the dog
Potential complications after hyalocentesis
 Post-hyalocentesis complications are negligible, provided the
Antibiotic
Dose
procedure is properly performed. Obstruction of the hypo-
Amikacin
5w t0
dates during hyalocentesis is infrequent, and is remedied by
 Ampicillin
5.0 mg
alternate flushing with sterile saline and aspiration, o1 reposi-
Cefazolin
2.25 mg
tioning the needle tip to another area. If the needle puncture
site is anterior to the pars plana ciliaris, penetration of the
Cephaloridine
0.25 mg
ciliary body processes results in secondary intraocular hem-
Chloramphenicol
2.0 mg
orrhage. If the hypodermic needle is inserted more perpen-
Gentamicin
6wt0
dicular, the lens may be touched by the needle. Penetration
posterior to the pars plana ciliaris may result in chorioretini-
Tobramycin
0.4 mg
tis and full-thickness retinal holes, which may lead to retinal
Vancomycin
1.0 mg
detachments.
365
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
e i d a m s  n ad
is avoided, and the tip of the instrument should always be
necessitate excision of any organized vitreous within the
visible. Contact with the inis and ciliary body may result in
anterio1 chamber with vitreous scissors o1 the anterior
significant hemorrhage.
vitrecto1. Aspiration of liquid vitreous from within the
 The iridal diaphragm may appear somewhat concave after
vitreal space is one method to assist in the retraction of
successful vitreous aspiration, and 1estoration of all formed
formed vitreous behind the pupil.
vitieous to behind the pupil (Fig. 12.10c). As the gel vitreous
Part of the pathogenesis of vitreal presentation within
and solutions used to lavage the anterior chamber are indis-
the pupil includes not only a tear in the posterior lens cap-
a oun paal a ke anq re ls e ausu
sule and anterior hyaloid face, but also pressure on the
anterio1 chamber to assist in detection of any residual gel vit-
vitreal space because of decreased scleral rigidity in dogs
reous (Fig. 12.10d). The air bubble should be freely maneu-
and cats under general anesthesia. The possibility of herni-
    n    
ation of formed vitreous is reduced by avoidance of tears of
vitreous has been removed or retracted through the pupil. If
the posterior lens capsule during cataract surgery.
no
some gel vitreous remains within the anterior chamber, the
instrument pressure on the globe, and the use of neuro-
ai1 bubble movement is restricted and may outline the
muscular blocking agents during general anesthesia in
formed vitreous. No formed or gel vitreous should remain
the dog to reduce the extraocular muscle tone on the
in the anterior chamber at the conclusion of this technique.
posterior globe.
Vitreous aspiration is one of several methods to treat pre-
Aspiration of liquefied vitreous is usually performed at the
sentation of gel or formed vitreous in the pupil during cata-
completion of phacoemulsification, or extracapsular and
ract or lens surgery. Success of this procedure is dependent
intracapsular lens removal. Entry into the anterio1 chamber
on some portion of vitreous being liquefied, and is generally
has alieady been established through the small incision
unsuccessful in cats and dogs less than l year old. This tech-
used in phacoemulsification, o1 through the larger coineal
nique may be perfoimed through a tear in the posterior lens
capsule and anterior vitreous face. Placement through the
sao q  paai si eo au suoea sul
pupil must be performed carefully, and a blunt 18-20g
to expose the anterior chamber and pupil.
hypodermic needle should be inserted only 5-7 mm poste-
The anterior chamber is maintained with viscoelastic
nior to the pupil. Inadvertent needle contact with the retina
agents.
may produce a retinal hole and predispose to retinal detach-
 The foimed vitreous may be indistinguishable from the
ment. Nevertheless, this procedure, performed properly, is a
aqueous humo1 o1 liquefied vitreous, unless some vitreal
useful method to treat vitreal herniation and presentation
floaters (cells, fibrils, opacities) are present (Fig. 12.10a).
through the pupil and into the anterior chamber. Medical
A blunt 18-20 g hypodermic needle, attached to a 1-3 mL
treatment after vitreal aspiration is directed at the underlying
syringe, is carefully inserted through the pupil and the
disease, usually postoperative inidocyclitis. The anterio1 cham-
remaining posterior lens capsule and/or anterio1 hyaloid face
be1 and pupil should be examined daily by slit-lamp biomi-
about 5 mm into the most dorsal vitreal space. Insertion of
croscopy to observe the size and patency of the pupil. Any
the hypodermic needle through the exteinal sclera and pars
inregular shape in the pupil may indicate some vitreal contact.
plana ciliaris, as used for hyalocentesis, is not recommended
as it may collapse the globe and cause additional formed
Anterior/partial vitrectomy in small animals
vitreous to appear in the pupil (Fig. 12.10b). Liquid vitreous
is always above the formed or gel portion, and shifts to
Q hl snanid omi ou pai si  ro
remain dorsal during the different positions of the eye. As a
be performed at the conclusion of lens and cataract surgery
Iesult, the hypodermic needle to aspirate liquid vitreous must
in the dog and cat, and may also be performed weeks to
be placed in the upper vitreal body. Liquefied vitreous is
months after cataract surgery to excise pupillary opacities
slowly aspirated, usually 0.1-0.5 mL. Often with removal of
that also include the lens capsules and anterior vitreous.
the liquid vitreous, the formed vitreous within the pupil
In the first procedure, which is more common in the dog.
and anterior chamber will partially o1 completely shift
anterior vitrectomy is performed when formed vitreous is
behind the pupil.
presented within the pupil, anterior chamber, o1 the co1-
Availability of a vitrecto1 has 1eplaced the hypodermic
neal o1 limbal incision. This complication occurs when the
 needle approach. During vitrectomy, contact with the inis 
posterio1 lens capsule and anterio1 vitreous face are toin o1
A
B
?
Fig. 12.10 Aspiration of liquefied vitreous through the pupil. (a) Entry to the anterior chamber is through a limbal or corneal incision. (b) A blunt 18-20 g
hypodermic needle with a 3 mL syringe is carefully inserted about 5 mm through the pupil into the most dorsal vitreous space. (c) with aspiration of the
dorsal liquefied vitreous, the formed vitreous wil often retract from the anterior chamber into the vitreous space, causing the iris diaphragm to become
366
Surgery of the vitreous
interrupted during phacoemulsification, extracapsula1 and
postoperative medical therapy, including topical corticoster-
intracapsular cataract and lens surgeries. Occasionally in
cids and systemic non-steroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs
intracapsular lens extractions, i.e., anterior lens luxation,
(NSAIDs), after cataract surgery in the dog is to either retard
foimed vitreous may be present in the anterio1 chamber 01
01 prevent foimation of these pupillary membranes. The
even emerge within the corneal or limbal incision as it is
cat, in contrast to the dog, shows a less intense iridocyclitis
performed.
after cataract surgery, and a lower tendency to develop these
Fo1 satisfactory conclusion of cataract and lens removal
pupillary membranes.
 s p le sd ien m 
be excised and/or replaced behind the pupil before com-
after lens o1 cataract removal, the majority of the procedure
is performed within the anterior chamber. The formed vitre-
Vitreous touching the posterio1 coinea is associated with
ous may be clear o1 contain suspended cells, fibrin, vitreous
persistent edema. Vitreous spanning the pupil and incar-
opacities (such as with hyalosis), and blood. In the anterio1
  m s   n an  
     n i
the pupil and serve as the scaffolding for pupillary inflam-
tation, small cellulose surgical sponges are touched to the
matory membrane formation. Traction bands from this area
formed vitreous (Fig. 12.1la).The adherent gel vitreous is
may extend into the anterior vitreous and peripheral 1etina,
slowly retracted and carefully cut with sharp inis o1 vitreous
eventually resulting in retinal detachment. Vitreous within
scissors. The scissors are held parallel to the surface of
the pupil may also potentially occlude aqueous humor flow.
the iris to minimize traction on the deeper vitreous and
especially when the pupil becomes small.
indirectly on the retina (Fig. 12.11b). All gel vitreous within
The anterior vitrectomy procedure is also used for post-
the anterior chamber may be 1emoved by this procedure.
cataract pupillary opacification after cataract surgeries in the
The iris surface should be slightly concave afterwards
dog and cat. This procedure may also be combined with
because of the loss of formed vitreous immediately posterio1
coreoplasty (creationofalager pupil), synechiolysis (cutting
to it (Fig. 12.11c). Many phacoemulsification units also
or tearing posterior synechia), and removal of extensive
offer vitrectomy capacity that can be used to cut and aspirate
fibrotic lens capsules (capsulectomy). These opaque pupil-
the foimed vitreous from the anterior chamber.
lary membranes consist of one or more components includ-
Liquid vitreous, located in the most dorsal vitreal space,
sd n  s  i 
may be aspirated with a blunt 18-20 g hypodermic needle
inidocyclitis, when fibrin from the secondary aqueous humor
foims the scaffolding for fibroblast proliferation and produc-
reous body. Aspiration of the liquid vitreous often results
i j d   n p jo 
in retraction of the formed gel vitreous within the pupil
lens epithelial cells (Elschnig's pearls): 3) migration of ante-
(Fig. 12.11d)
lior uveal pigment cells on these membranes from the inis
When the anterior vitrectomy procedure is performed sev-
and posterior synechiae; and 4) proliferation of lens fibers
eral weeks to months after cataract surgery in dogs, and to
as myofibroblasts that contract and distort the posterior lens
a lesser extent in cats, the surgical entry into the anterio1
capsule.
chamber is usually thorough the original coineal incision
 These posteriol capsular changes account fo1 the gradual
01 in a different area with improved access to the pupil.
decline in the success rates of cataract surgery in the dog.
Anterior vitrectomy may be combined with other techniques
from 90-95+% at 4-6 weeks postoperatively to about 80%
to excise fibropupillary membranes (membranectomy) and
at 2-3 years after surgery. For comparison, posterio1 lens
posterior synechiae (synechiolysis), and enlarge the pupil
opacification that requires laser therapy after phacoemulsifi-
(coreoplasty) to enhance vision. [n contrast to humans,
 o oq i so s  As  
the fibropupillary membranes in the dog often cannot be
the patients within the first postoperative year. Laser inter-
treated successfully with laser photocoagulation because of
vention in humans is highly successful for restoring visual
thei1 extent and thickness. These membranes are also mo1e
acuity. In the dog, these capsular changes may also contract
difficult to incise and excise than in humans, and are often
the remaining posterior lens capsule, and indirectly (through
 complicated by a small fixed pupil with numerous posterior
the zonulary fibers) o1 directly (by inflammatory traction
synechiae. Incision and tearing of the iris invariably result
bands) contribute to the genesis of peripheral retinal holes.
tears, and detachments. Part of the rationale fo1 long-term
a go A 1/ (oo 01:1 01 on1 (adaa)
A
C
D
Fig. 12.11 Anterior vitrectomy in small animals using surgical cellulose spears. (a) Through a corneal incision, a small cellulose surgical spear is inserted
into the anterior chamber to touch the formed vitreous. (b) The surgical spear is retracted with the formed vitreous adhered and carefully excised by sharp iris
or vitreous scissors held parallel to the anterior surface of the iris. (c) Once the formed vitreous is removed from the anterior chamber, the iris appears concave.
(d) Aspiration of additional liquefied vitreous may help maintain the remaining gel vitreous within the vitreous space.
367
12
edges of the iris. Wet-field cautery of the inis is advantageous
the free borders of the pupil are identified, and posterio1
as aqueous humol is usually in the cautery site. Sharp iris,
synechiae are carefully toin between the posterior iris and
intraocular o1 vitreous scissors ale essential to excise the
thef
fibropupillary membrane. Limited iridal hemorrhage
fibropupillary membranes in the dog.
is anticipated. If observation of the surgical site is impaired,
adrenaline (epinephrine; 1:1000 to 1:10 000) is injected
Surgical procedure
to secure inidal hemostasis, and perhaps some mydriasis.
The iris is often two to four times thicker than normal
 After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
(Fig. 12.12d). With 1 × 2 teeth fine thumb forceps or an
hair, and cleansing of the eyelid skin, corneal and conjunc-
intraocular forceps, the center of the fibropupillary mem-
tival surfaces with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution and
s 'sui deus Aq pasxa aiaie pue padse si au
sterile cotton swabs, the eyelids are retracted by speculum.
O1 intraocula1 scissors (Fig. 12.12e). These membranes may
To enhance exposure, a lateral canthotomy may be per-
contain fine blood vessels and limited hemorrhage may result.
formed. Neuromuscular blocking agents may be injected
With the excision and 1emoval of the fibropupillary mem-
branes, the opacified portions of the anterior and posterio1
ing of the globe and reduce extraocular muscle tone on the
lens capsules and anterior vitreous are removed similarly.
posterior segment of the eye.
 Traction and tearing of these opaque pupillary membranes
Entry into the anterio1 chamber may be through the orig-
are avoided, as iridal and ciliary body hemorrhage lesult.
inal coineal incision o1 in another site that is closer to the
A portion of the anterior vitreous is removed with the
pupil for the anterior vitrectomy, occasionally combined
vitrecto1 (Fig. 12.12f).
with synechiolysis and/o1 membranectomy. The coinea is
The pupil is carefully inspected for any remaining po1-
partially incised with the Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical
tions of the fibropupillary membrane which are grasped
blade (Fig. 12.12a). The deeper aspects of the coineal inci-
and excised by sharp scissors. Any anterior vitieous that
sion are completed with right- and left-handed coineoscleral
dus a pasxa s iaqeu ioaue io ldnd au ui sue
scissors (Fig. 12.12b). Once the coineal incision is complete,
scissors or the vitrector unit. An air bubble, injected imme-
the anterio1 chambe1 is filled with 0.5-0.7 mL viscoelastic
diately in front of the pupil and under the viscoelastic
agent to maintain the chamber during the intraocular
agent that flls the entire anterior chamber, can be used to
manipulations. Instrument contact with the posterior cor-
detect presence of any residual gel o1 foimed vitreous within
nea is avoided (Fig. 12.12c). With a cyclodialysis spatula,
01 immediately caudal to the pupil (Fig. 12.12g). The clear
Fig. 12.12 Anterior vitrectomy through 
a corneal incision and through the pupil.
 Often anterior vitrectomy is combined 
 with other procedures including 
coreoplasty, membranectomy, and
 synechiolysis. (a) The peripheral cornea is
incised to one-half thickness with the
Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade.
(b) After a stab incision with a Beaver
A
B
C
No. 6500 microsurgical blade and entry
into the anterior chamber, the corneal
incision is completed with right- and left-
handed corneoscleral scissors. (c) The
anterior chamber is filled with a
viscoelastic agent to maintain the
anterior chamber. (d) All posterior
synechiae are carefully separated from 
the remaining lens capsules and anterior
vitreous. (e) With intraocular forceps and 
scissors, all opacified fibropupillary 
D
E
F
material is excised. This material includes
remaining anterior and posterior lens 
capsules, post-inflammatory membranes,
and anterior vitreous. (f) A vitrector unit 
 may be used to complete the removal of
the anterior vitreous. (g) An air bubble is 
injected into the anterior chamber to
check for any remaining gel vitreous.
(h) After the removal of all pupillary 
debris and the anterior vitreous, the
cormeal incision is apposed with 6-0 to 
G
H
7-0 simple interrupted absorbable
sutures. A 22 g hypodermic needle is 
inserted between two sutures and the
anterior chamber is restored with
lactated Ringer's solution until about
10 mmHg is achieved.
368
Suprachoroidal cyclosporine implants for the treatment of equine recurent uveitis
as o on oio is m soe si unsun ie
has also demonstrated success in dogs. It will be presented
interrupted absorbable sutures (Fig. 12.12h). Before place-
ment of the last two sutures, the viscoelastic agent is flushed
from the anterior chamber and eplaced with lactated
 Adaptations for large animals
Ringer's or balanced salt solution. After placement of all
coineal sutures, the integrity of the wound apposition is
and special species
checked with an additional injection of lactated Ringel's o1
balanced salt solution. The Iesultant IOP should approxi-
mate preoperative levels.
Suprachoroidal cyclosporine implants
for the treatment of equine recurrent uveitis
Postoperative management
Postoperative management after anterio1 vitrectomy for
Brian C. Gilger
fibropupillary membrane formation in the dog is similar to
the medical treatments after cataract removal. The eye should
Horses with equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) have episodes of
be closely monitored during the first 2 weeks postoperatively.
ocular inflammation that characteristically recul and cause
and, if necessary, changes in the medication schedule made,
blindness in more than half of horses over a 2-year period.
a  s a no a a  
Treatment of ERU is generally symptomatic, consisting of
size of the pupil. Topical and systemic antibiotics are adminis-
topical and systemic anti-inflammatory therapy. Cyclosporin
tered to prevent intraocular infection if intraoperative
A (CsA) blocks interleukin 2 (IL-2) transcription and impairs
contamination occurred. Topical and systemic corticosteroids
proliferation of activated T-helper and T-cytotoxic cells.
and NSAIDs are administered to control the postoperative
Therefore, CsA may be an ideal drug to prevent reactivation
inidocyclitis. Mydriatics are administered to effect; a moder-
of ocular inflammation in ERU, which is an immune-
ately dilated pupil is preferred. Atropine (1%) combined with
mediated disease.
10% phenylephrine, or 0.3% scopolamine combined with
Because of the difficulty of treatment and the long-term
10% phenylephrine, is instilled once to several times daily.
health conceins of some anti-inflammatory medications
Postoperative movements and the eventual size of the pupil
in horses, sustained delivery of CsA to the eye via implantable
are dependent on a moderately dilated pupil established soon
drug devices without reliance on the horse owner's com-
after surgery. A miotic pupil postoperatively unfortunately
pliance with treatment would greatly facilitate the ability to
often negates the benefits of this surgical procedure.
control ERUI. Previous studies have demonstrated that intravi-
If excessive fibrin and any blood clots are present 5-7 days
treal sustained-release CsA devices are well tolerated in the
postoperatively, 25 μg of tissue plasminogen activato1 (tPA)
equine eye, with and without ERUl; however, late-onset trac-
is injected into the anterior chamber through a coineal o1
tion retinal detachments occurred. Placing sustained release
limbal site under short-acting general anesthesia. Ideally at
implants in the deep sclera and suprachoroidal space prevents
1 week postoperatively, very litle fibrin or blood is present
the need to enter the eye, which would eliminate the chance
within the anterior chamber and pupil. IOP is monitored
of injuring the lens, minimize the chance of developing
daily and can serve as an indicator of the intensity of the ini-
endophthalmitis, and decrease rates of retinal detachment,
docyclitis. As IOP gradually increases toward normal levels
all complications of intraocular surgery.
of about 15-18 mmHg. the intensity of the postoperative
In 2006 we reported on the long-term results of horses
medications is gradually decreased. Topical 1% predniso-
that received a suprachoroidal CsA implant fo1 ERU (see
lone is often instilled for several months postoperatively to
further reading, Gilger et al 2006). Horses entered into this
impede development of another fibropupillary membrane.
 r  i ns  s  
The success of this procedure is related directly to the
inflammatory therapy. Sixty-seven horses with 80 eyes
ease o1 difficulty in removing the fibropupillary membrane
treated had a mean of 5.5 ± 2.1 (SD) uveitis flare-ups, OI
and anterior vitieous, amount of intraoperative hemorrhage.
approximately one every 2 months, occurring in the year
successful control of the postoperative iridocyclitis,
and
prior to surgical implantation. Aggressive control of clini-
resultant size of the pupil. As a guide, the success rate with
cally active ocular inflammation with traditional anti-
this procedure 1anges from 50% to 80%. Angle-closure
s   snn s   
glaucoma and phthisis bulbi are infrequent complications.
dal and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications, was
perfoimed before placement of the deep scleral lamella1
CsA device, so that the uveitis was not active at the time of
Pars plana posterior vitrectomy
surgery. Presence of vision was required and animals with sig-
In pars plana vitrectomy, portions of the anterio1 vitreous,
nificant cataract formation (i.e., more than 20% of the ante-
posterior vitreous, or most of the vitreous are excised. The
nio1 cortical surface) were excluded from the study. In-vitro
surgery is performed using special instrumentation, inserted
analysis of the CsA implant suggested a projected duration
  )   )  
 of release of CsA from the implant of 3.18 years
tomies) in the sclera and pars plana ciliaris. This procedure
Fo1 the suprachoroidal implantation of the CsA device,
is usually part of the vitreoretinal procedure used for the
general anesthesia of the horses is required. After sterile
intraocular portion in the treatment of retinal detachments
ocular preparation, a conjunctival incision is made fol-
complicated by retinal holes, giant tears (retinal tears that
o) d as ss-d  2 e A pmo
are 90° o1 more in circumference), and/or traction bands.
depth centrally) 8 mm posterior to the limbus supero-
This procedure has become quite popular in humans, and
temporally, immediately temporal to the dorsal 1ectus
369
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
(n = 4), complete cataract (n = 2), retinal detachment
(n = 1), and fungal keratitis (n = 1). There was no significant
corelation between signalment of the animal, location of
surgery, and preoperative ocular clinical signs (e.g. presence
of aqueous flare, synechiae, vitreous opacity, cataract, or glau-
coma) to postoperative development of blindness. Duration
of clinical signs before surgery was significantly longer in eyes
 (s I  oie )  aq 
with eyes that 1etained vision (mean, 13.7 ± 10.1 months;
p = 0.0003), suggesting that earlier implantation in the
course of the disease would result in a better outcome. Over-
all, the percentage of eyes with vision at 6 months after
surgery was 98% (68/69), affer 12 months was 93%
(43/46), after 18 months was 90% (28/31), and afte1 24
months was 96% (22/23). Overall, 85% (68/80) of eyes
Fig. 12.13 A 7 mm partial-thickness scleral flap (90-95% depth) is made
had vision after surgery.
8 mm posterior to the limbus superotemporally. Exposure of the external
choroid (dark central spot) and suprachoroidal space is made in the central
Since the publication of this papel, over 500 horses have
area of the scleral dissection.
been implanted worldwide. Success, defined as eliminating
flare-ups and maintaining vision, is approximately 85%.
muscles (Fig. 12.13). Exposure of the external choroid and
The duration of effect is unknown, but if the flare-ups are
suprachoroidal space is made in the central area of the scleral
controlled, most horses have a duration of effect of the
dissection. The CsA implant is placed under the flap
implant greater than 5 years. We have 1eimplanted only
(Fig. 12.14), and the flap is closed with a 6-0 polyglactin
two horses in which flare-ups recurred. In two other horses
910 suture (Vicryl; Ethicon, Somerville, NI). Horses are typ-
where a single implant did not decrease flare-ups after sul-
ically evaluated at 1, 3, and 6 months, and then every 6
gery, a second implant placed in the same eye completely
months after implantation.
eliminated flare-ups of inflammation.
In the 2006 study, the 67 horses had exhibited signs of
Despite the favorable response of most horses to the use
ERU, on average, 16.4 ± 16.0 months (SD; median 12; range
of the suprachoroidal CsA implant, there are several nega-
3-120) before 1eceiving the implant. Mean follow-up time
tive aspects of its use. First, the CsA implant is not commel-
was 14.2 ± 9.9 months (1ange, 3-36; median, 11.5). The
cially available, although regulatory approval for marketing
number of uveitis flare-ups was significantly decreased after
the
 devices is being considered. Implants are available
surgery (p = 0.0001), with a mean of 0.544 flare-ups per
through several universities until the device is commercially
month before surgery and 0.096 per month (approximately
available. Second, accurate diagnosis of ERU is required for
one flare-up per 12 months) affer surgery. The only signifi-
the device to be effective; the implant may not be effective
cant correlation between preoperative clinical features and
in infectious o1 other primary uveitis cases. Third, horses
outcome was the presence of preoperative glaucoma, even if
with significant posteriol uveitis and associated vitreal opac-
ity should be considered as candidates for vitrectomy to
flare-ups (p = 0.0016). No complications were associated
remove the cloudy vitreous (and clear the visual axis) and
with the surgical procedure. Twelve of the 80 eyes became
obtain diagnostic material. Use of vitrectomy and a CsA
blind (15%) in the 2 years after implantation. Blindness
implant together is a possibility, but further study is needed
was attributed to uncontrolled uveitis (n = 4), glaucoma
to determine clinical effectiveness.
 Pars plana (anterior) vitrectomy
Bernhard M. Spiess
For more than 25 years, pars plana vitrectomy (PPV)
has been used in the management of chronic endogenous
uveitis (CEU) in people. The main goal was to improve
vision by clearing the media or removing membranes. How-
  o       o a n 
diminished the severity as well as the frequency of attacks.
There is evidence that PPV has a beneficial effect on the clin-
ical course of chronic endogenous posterior uveitis, possibly
by physically removing any 1esident inflammatory cells with
the vitreous. Despite the reported complications (i.e., vitreal
hemorrhage, cataract formation, retinal detachment) follow-
ing PPV, an overwhelming majority of the patients were able
to switch from ligorous systemic preoperative medication
Fig. 12.14 The cyclosporine implant is placed under the sclera flap.
to simple eye drops o1 no treatment at all.
a4n jano pasop s! dey a4l aoeds leplououpeidns pasodxa a4n on zuane!pe
Vitrectomy has been studied in experimental, protein-
implant with a 6-0 polyglactin 910 suture.
induced uveitis in rabbits, but it was not until 1991 that
370
Pars plana (anterior) vitrectomy
PPV was described in the management of ERU. PPV has
posterio1 synechiae. Pre-existing focal cataracts are likely
since been increasingly employed in the treatment of ERU
to progress following PPV. This should be taken into consi-
in Europe. Similar to the human counterpart, the most com-
deration. In patients with secondary glaucoma, phthisis
mon complications reported in horses are transient hypop
bulbi, or pre-existing retinal detachment, PPV should not
yon, vitreal and/or retinal hemorrhage, retinal detachment,
be 1ecommended. Owners should be carefully infoimed on
and cataract formation.
the surgery, as well as the possible intra- and postoperative
In the majority of reported cases in Europe, Leptospira sp. has
complications.
indicates that ERUl is probably often a sequela of systemic Lep-
 Pre- and postoperative medication
tospira infection. The presence of intact Leptospira and specific
antibodies in eyes affected with ERUI indicates a local antibody
Topical 0.1% dexamethasone drops in combination with
production to Leptospira organisms and/or their antigens.
neomycin and polymyxin B are administered once daily
beginning 1 week prior to surgery. Systemic NSAIDs (i.e.)
vedaprofen, flunixin meglumine) are administered begin-
Patient selection
ning 3 days preoperatively. The pupil is dilated with 1%
Because of the possible serious complications of PPV
atropine drops on the day of surgery.
patient selection is of great importance. All patients are
Postoperatively, topical dexamethasone/neomycin/polymyxin
  u doso d-l q a
B eye drops are continued three times a day for 2 weeks, and
ophthalmoscopy, and applanation tonometry. Ultrasonog-
then tapered ovel another 4 weeks. Systemic NSAIDs are
raphy is performed in cases with opaque media. The diagno
continued for 1 week.
sis of ERUI is based on the typical signs of acute or chronic
uveitis and a documented history of reculrent episodes of
acute uveitis. Recent clinical evidence suggests that horses
Surgical technique
with aqueous humor samples testing positive for Leptospira
A standard two-port PPV is performed in lateral recumbency
sp. should be considered suitable candidates for PPV, while
under general inhalational anesthesia. The eye is prepared
those testing negative should receive alternative therapies.
fo1 intraocular surgery. After draping, an eyelid speculum
Horses ideally are operated in the quiescent stage of the dis-
is inserted. A lateral canthotomy may improve exposure of
ease. Because of the transpupillary visualization of the vitrec-
the globe; however, this is usually not necessary. A limbal
tomy probe during the procedure, the optical media (i.e.
stay suture in the 12 o'clock position is placed for globe
comea, anterior chamber, lens) should be as transparent as pos-
manipulation (Fig. 12.15a). A limbal-based conjunctival
sible. The pupil should dilate maximally with no or few
flap is prepared and the sclera exposed medially and
4
B
D
Fig. 12.15 Pars plana (anterior) vitrectomy in the horse. (a) The eye is prepared for intraocular surgery. A bridle suture has been placed in the 12 o'clock
position. (b) After preparing a conjunctival flap, the first sclerotomy is performed in the 11 o'clock position using a COz laser. (c) A small amount of
alAuoi 0 buisn elaps aun on pauououe pue Awonouaps ayn onu! pannpouui s! mod uogebu! ayl (p) Awonouaps aun yonouua buipnuoud s! snoani
'sual ayn puiyaq uaas ag uen aqoud aun jo dn aul Awonouaps jasel puonas e yonouyn uogisod ypolp,o l aun u! pannpouau! 5! aqoud Awonaunin aul (a)
(f) The deeper parts of the vitreous are visualized with the 20 D lens and an indirect ophthalmoscope.
371
12
laterally to the dorsal rectus muscle. Using a COz laser, a
Complications
first sclerotomy is perfoimed 10 mm posterior to the limbus
(Fig. 12.15b,c). A right-handed surgeon will place this
Intraoperative complications include vitreal/1etinal hemo1-
rhage and retinal detachment. Maintaining IOP at around
first entry to the left of the rectus muscle. A double-ended
J anas a aaea oi pas aq a ie i
40 mmHg and using a COz laser fo1 the sclerotomies instead
of surgical blades or cannulas can avoid hemorrhage. Touch-
necessary. The irrigation port is inserted and its footplate
ing the retina should also be avoided as it results in immedi-
secured to the sclera with two 4-0 polyglactin 910 sutures
(Fig. 12.15d). With the vitrectomy unit in continuous ilmi
ate hemorrhage and subsequent detachment.
Early postoperative complications (less than 3 months)
gation mode and the fluid-containing botle positioned
 85 cm higher than the surgical site, the IOP will be around
include cataract formation and retinal detachment. Late com-
 40 mmHg. Balanced salt solution (Bss) with 40 mg of gen-
plications occurring after 3 months include cataract formation
tamicin added per 500 mL is used as irrigation fluid. A sec-
as well as 1eculrence of active uveitis.
ond laser sclerotomy is perfoimed, again 10 mm posterio1
to the limbus and to the right of the rectus muscle. The vit-
rectomy probe is carefully inserted and advanced in the
Long-term results
direction of the center of the vitreous. Again, the sclerotomy
d sd s r s n rd 
may be enlarged with a lacrimal dilator if necessary. Both
vitrectomy showed no further 1ecurrence of uveitis; 22%
sclerotomies should be tight enough to prevent leakage of
continued to suffer from 1ecurrent episodes of uveitis.
irrigation fluid, which would make maintenance of IOP dif-
The remaining horses were 1eported to have experienced
ficult. The vitrectomy probe should be held at an approxi-
only one more 
episode of uveitis, which was easily
mately 70° angle and passed toward the optic nerve, taking
 controlled with topical anti-inflammatory therapy.
care to avoid touching the lens when inserting the probe.
Vitreous samples of every horse were submitted and 78%
The probe tip should be held with the aspiration port facing
      r  
the surgeon. In this position the port can be visualized
were L. grippotyphosa, L. copenhageni, L. bratislava, L. canicola,
through the pupil using the light of an indirect binocular
L. pyogenes, and L. pomona. Of the Leptospira-positive horses,
ophthalmoscope (Fig. 12.15e). The central and anterio1
81% showed no further recurrences after vitrectomy, while of
parts of the vitreous can be removed by direct visualization
the Leptospira-negative patients, 83% had further recurrences.
through the dilated pupil. Indirect ophthalmoscopy using
It appears that pars plana vitrectomy represents a successful
a 20 D lens is used to visualize posterio1 and peripheral
parts of the vitreous (Fig. 12.15f). Aspiration of vitreous
ERU, while patients testing negative for Leptospira sp. are
can easily be observed, especially if there are inflammatory
poorer candidates for this surgery. They may, however, be
materials. Again, care is taken to avoid the lens. Estimat-
more suitable candidates fo1 the imp lantation of cyclosporine-
ing the distance between the probe and its shadow cast
releasing devices.
onto the retina will help the surgeon to avoid touching the
Clinical experience would suggest that aqueous humo1
retina. Throughout the entie procedure, the IOP should
and/or vitreous samples of horses suffering from ERUI should
be maintained at approximately 40 mmHg. Slight wrinkl-
be tested for Leptospira sp., and that the decision to perform
ing of the retina, seen with the aid of the ophthalmoscope.
pars plana vitrectomy should be based on these results.
indicates that the IOP may be too low. Vitrectomy should
 [n another study of 38 cases, five eyes showed recurrence
-id aui aiisi si dl lou e lun padnau a
of uveitis between 10 days and 3 years postoperatively.
dure is continued until all turbid vitreal material has been
Thirty-three eyes showed no recurrence during a follow-up
removed. Under continuous irrigation, the vitrectomy probe
period of up to 5 years. Vision remained stable in 28 eyes
is removed and the sclerotomy closed with one o1 two single
and improved in one eye. The remaining eyes showed
interrupted sutures using 4-0 polyglactin 910. Subsequently
marked vision loss as a result of cataracts (3), phthisis bulbi
the irrigation port is removed. Remaining peripheral vitre-
(22), or unknown cause (22). Of the five eyes with recurrent
ous will usually prevent fluid from escaping through this
uveitis, two demonstrated marked loss of vision, while three
sclerotomy, which is closed with 4-0 polyglactin 910. The
maintained preoperative vision.
conjunctiva is closed with polyglactin 910 in a continuous
 [n an earlier study of 43 eyes post PPV, 42 remained f1ee
pattern. A canthotomy is closed with a figure-of-eight suture
of recurrent uveitis during a follow-up period of 67 months,
using 4-0 non-absorbable suture materials. At the end of
with 70% of these eyes 1etaining some vision. The most
surgery 20 mg of methylprednisolone is injected subcon-
common complication was cataract formation in 19/43
junctivally in the inferior bulbar conjunctiva
eyes, followed by phthisis bulbi in six eyes, and retinal
 Some differences performing this procedure in the horse
detachment in four eyes.
have been established. To avoid uveal hemoirhage, both
Most veterinary ophthalmologists agree that the long-
sclerotomies are perfoimed using a COz laser in continuous
term prognosis for ERU with medical therapy alone
1S
mode at 50 W. Commercially available vitrectomy probes
poor. Even aggressive therapy is often insufficient to pre-
are too short fo1 use in hoises. A custom-made 55 mm
vent recurrent painful inflammatory episodes. Cumulative
oscillating vitrectomy with a guillotine-like chopping blade
intraocular damage often leads to phthisis bulbi, glaucoma.
probe is used at 12.0 Hz, an aspiration vacuum
of
o1 loss of vision as a lesult of cataract formation o1 retinal
400 mmHg. and a flow rate of 15 mL/min. High oscillation
detachment.
frequency, moderate suction, and low flow is used to mini-
In selected patients with consenting owners, PPV offers a
mize vitreoretinal traction and decrease the incidence of
promising alternative to conventional therapy. With few
iatrogenic retinal breaks.
Ad ie saan jo anna ou mous saaa 'sondaa
372
Surgery of the retina
Subretinal fluid aspiration
tions cause visual impaiiment o1 blindness. The most com-
 o siade o aisd ia u
Subretinal fluids may be aspirated in the treatment of serous
cataract formation. It is unclear whether pre-existing lenticu-
retinal detachments as well as to obtain subretinal fluids fo1
lar opacities progress despite PPV or if the progression is
analyses for cytology and culture for bacterial and fungal
caused by the procedure. Touching the posterior lens cap-
oiganisms. Fo1 aspiration of subretinal fluids, the location
sule during PPV invariably leads to focal cataracts, which
and extent of the retinal detachment must be accurately
very often progress.
determined by direct and indiect ophthalmoscopy, and
Retinal and vitreal hemorrhage is the most common intrao-
ultrasonography.
perative complication. Maintaining a high normal IOP, care-
The technique is performed after the onset of general
ful manipulation of the vitrectomy probe, and avoidance
anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hai1, cleansing of the eye-
of touching the retina usually prevents such complications.
lid skin, corneal and conjunctival surfaces with 0.5%
Choroidal hemorrhage can be avoided with the use of a CO2
povidone-iodine solution and sterile cotton swabs, and
laser instead of a surgical blade.
Ietraction of eyelids by speculum. Depending on the posi-
  d e aq on side aa ed sie
tion of the serous o1 exudative retinal detachment, a fo1-
for long-teim control of equine recurrent uveitis.
nix-based bulbar conjunctival flap is incised by Steven's
tenotomy scissors about 5 mm posterior to the limbus
(Fig. 12.16a). The dissection is continued
posterioily
Surgery of the retina
beneath the epibulbar fascia o1 Tenon's capsule. This tissue
plane allows blunt-sharp tissue dissection without signifi-
Different types of surgical procedure
cant hemorrhage. If the posterior dissection strays into
Tenon's capsule, hemorrhage results and impedes the surgi-
In this section the different surgical procedures for the dog
cal procedure (Fig. 12.16b).
and cat retina and retinochoroid are described. They include:
At about 10-12 mm posterior to the limbus, the inser-
1) subretinal fluid aspiration; 2) chorioretinal biopsy: 3)
tions of the rectus muscles are identified (Fig. 12.16c).
Ietinopexy; and 4) retinal detachment surgery. The aspiration
If one of these muscles is directly over the subretinal aspira-
 of subretinal fluids is often part of retinal detachment sul-
tion site, it may be transected immediately posterior to its
geries but will be presented separately. Chorioretinal biopsies
insertion into the sclera. A single 4-0 nylon suture is placed
have been performed in dogs experimentally fo1 the analysis
in both of the incised ends of the rectus muscle, for eventual
of 1etinal tissues. This technique permits multiple evaluations
leattachment to its insertion after completion of the sub-
of retinal tissues in a single eye in a dog to document tissue
retinal fluid aspiration. To double-check the position fo1
 changes as the retinal disease progresses.
the subretinal fluid aspiration, indirect ophthalmoscopy
 Retinal detachment surgeries represent an under-utilized
is performed using a sterile 20 diopter lens and a headset
 placed temporarily on the surgeon's head. Aspiration of
advances in these same surgical techniques used in humans
subretinal fluids is perfoimed with a 28-30 g hypodermic
are being applied to the dog. Retinal detachments in small
 needle attached to a 1 mL sterile syringe inserted through
animals are unfortunately presented much later than in
the adjacent sclera and choroid. As hemorrhage from both
humans. However, periodic fundus examinations of high-
sclera and choroid may occur, a 30 g diathermy needle is
  r  s  s s 
inserted to provide both a needle pathway and hemostasis
ment diseases, such as the Collie, Shetland sheepdog and
(Fig. 12.16d).
Australian shepherd breeds, and all dogs that have under-
The aspirating needle is carefully inserted through the dia-
gone cataract surgeries, can detect retinal detachments
thermy site and a quantity of subretinal fluid aspirated
amenable to repai1, and before blindness and irreversible
(Fig. 12.16e). The volume is usually about 0.1-0.2 mL.
letinal degeneration have occurred. Some retinal detach-
The fundus is re-checked and the retinal detachment is
ment surgical procedures have become 1outine in major
usually reduced from loss of subretinal fluids.
veterinary ophthalmology  Ieferral  centers.
Vitreoretinal
An alternative and safer method consists of a small
d  n ssn s  d s
linear scleral incision parallel to the underlying choroidal
plana ciliaris require special and expensive instrumentation,
blood vessels. Through this small scleral incision, a 30 g
which has delayed implementation in small 
 animal
diathermy tip is inserted into the subretinal space. Subret-
patients.
inal fluids are drained by rolling a cotton swab on the
A recent study by Grahan and associates of 17 canine
external sclera toward the diathermy hole. Closure includes:
patients with chronic complete 1etinal detachments found
1) reapposition of the rectus muscle insertion with two
that, for those eyes not treated o1 treated only medically.
o1 t
three 4-0 to 6-0 simple interrupted non-absorbable
the majority had to be enucleated within 12 months
sutures if the rectus muscle insertion was tiansected; and
because of intractable uveitis, cataract formation, pre-iridal
 2) apposition of the limbal-based bulbar conjunctival flap
membrane formation, and secondary glaucoma.
with a 6-0 to 7-0 simple continuous absorbable suture
[n contrast, those eyes (4/6 eyes) with vitrectomy and per-
(Fig. 12.16f)
fluorocarbon gas retained some vision at 3 years. Although
Complications after the aspiration of subretinal fluids are
infrequent, provided the procedure is properly performed.
treatment of complete detachments should be attempted
Subretinal
1hemoirhage
is the most common sequela.
in dogs: if not, most affected eyes must be removed within
If hypodermic needle penetration of the retina occurs,
12 months for painful and intractable eye diseases.
cryotherapy is immediately applied to the site.
373
12
Fig. 12.16 Aspiration of subretinal fluids is
used in the treatment of retinal
detachments and to assist in the diagnosis
of chorioretinitis. (a) A fornix-based
conjunctival flap is performed with Steven's
 tenotomy scissors (b) By blunt-sharp
dissection beneath the bulbar fascia
(Tenon's capsule), the retrobulbar space is
entered. (c) Depending on the position of
(A)
B
?
the subretinal fluids, the adjacent rectus
muscles are identified. (d) After checking
the ocular fundus and site for subretinal
fluids by indirect ophthalmoscopy, a 30 g
diathermy needle is applied for hemostasis
to the sclera and choroid for the site of the
needle puncture. (e) After entry of the 
subretinal space with a 25 g hypodermic
needle, a small volume (0.1-0.2 mL) of 
subretinal fluid is withdrawn. Indirect 
ophthalmoscopy is repeated and with loss 
(D)
E
F
of the subretinal fluids, the serous or
exudative retinal detachment is usually 
flatter. (f) Closure consists of apposition of
the conjunctival wound with a 6-0 to 7-0 
simple continuous absorbable suture.
Chorioretinal biopsy
fascia) to minimize hemorrhage. The insertions of the dorsal 
and lateral (or the dorsal and medial) rectus muscles are
 Chorioretinal biopsies permit histologic and biochemical
identified and isolated (Fig. 12.17b).
analyses of small sections of choroid and retina. Chorioret-
inal biopsies have been performed in both normal dogs
The biopsy site is usually posterior to the equator and
the exit of the vortex veins. A full-thickness scleral flap about
and in dogs with progressive retinal degenerations to inves
3-4 mm in diameter is carefully constricted using the
tigate the different stages of the disease. This technique
Beaver No. 6400 microsurgical blade. The incision fo1 the
could also be used for potential chorioretinal neoplasia to
scleral flap is about 270° with its hinge at the caudal aspects
establish the diagnosis. The principal concein of any surgical
(Fig. 12.17c). The scleral flap is carefully elevated and blunt
procedure that incises the full-thickness retina is imme-
dissection with tenotomy scissors is used to separate the
diate vitreous loss and secondary retinal detachment. Both
deep aspects of the scleral flap from the choroid
techniques reported in the dog have avoided these serious
(Fig. 12.17d). Three sutures of 9-0 nylon are pre-placed
complications. Both procedures use a similar surgical
through both edges of the scleral incision and the scleral
approach, and will be presented together.
flap prior to biopsy to, if necessary, effect immediate wound
Preoperative tieatments with topical and systemic anti-
closure (Fig. 12.17e,f). The center of the choroid is grasped
biotics and corticosteroids are recommended. The pupil is
dilated with 1% atropine to accommodate intraoperative
and elevated with selrated thumb forceps. With curved
Vannas scissors, a full-thickness incision ofthe choroid and 1et-
indirect ophthalmoscopy. After the onset of general inhala-
ina is made to excise a 1-3 mm circular section (Fig. 12.17g).
tional anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid hai1, and cleansing
The scleral flap is apposed with the three pre-placed
of the eyelid skin, coineal and conjunctival surfaces with
sutures. Two or three additional simple interrupted 9-0
0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eyelids are retracted
nylon sutures are positioned between the pre-placed sutures
  a      
for complete apposition of the scleral flap (Fig. 12.17h). The
enhance surgical exposure. Neuromuscular blocking agents
conjunctival flap is apposed with a 6-0 simple continuous
(see Chapter 3) are administered intravenously fo1 optimal
absorbable suture (Fig. 12.17i).
positioning of the globe and relaxation of all extraocular
muscles. Mannitol (2 gm/kg IV) is administered at the start
 Postoperative management
of surgery to shrink the vitreous body. Immediately prior
to the scleral incision and chorioretinal biopsy, the mean
Postoperative management includes topical and systemic
arterial (aortic)
blood pressure is slowly reduced over
antibiotics and corticosteroids. Mydriatics, such as 1% at1o-
10 min from about 120 to 50 mmHg with the use of 3-4%
pine, are instilled to maintain moderate pupillary dilatation.
halothane and inteimittent positive pressure ventila-
If possible, the surgical site should be monitored daily
tion (20 cycles/min). Both methods 1educe [OP, minimize
fo1 1-2 weeks, and then weekly until healing occurs, as
choroidal bulging, and constrict the choroidal and retinal
a u pad si yide rins au sassa o
Potential complications include occasional intraoperative
dorsal fundus, where access is the most convenient. A for-
vitreous loss, and excessive hemorrhage from the retinal
nix-based conjunctival flap is performed with small thumb
and/o1 choroidal blood vessels. Postoperative retinal detach-
forceps and tenotomy scissors (Fig. 12.17a). Dissection is
ments secondary to the full-thickness retinal defect are
continued posteriorly
beneath Tenon's capsule (bulbar
possible, but did not result in the experimental studies.
374
Surgery of the retina
P
B
D
F
G
H
Fig. 12.17 Chorioretinal biopsy in the dog is used to obtain small (1-3 mm) samples of generalied disorder of the choroid and retina for diagnosis
(a) A dorsal fornix-based conjunctival flap is performed with Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) Blunt-sharp dissection is continued posteriorly by Steven's
tenotomy scissors, usually between the dorsal and lateral rectus muscle insertions. (c) Posterior to the equator, a fullthickness scleral flap is performed with
the Beaver No. 64 scalpel blade. The hinge for the scleral flap is caudal of the surgical approach. (d) By blunt dissection the scleral flap is raised, and with 
Steven's tenotomy scissors the underlying choroid is separated for the sclera. (e) Three pre-placed 9-0 nylon sutures are positioned on both sides and at the
end of the scleral flap. (f An enlarged view of the scleral flap for entry to the choroid and retina. Note the three pre-placed sutures are about one-half to 
two-thirds the thickness of the sclera. (g) With sharp Vannas scissors a section (1-3 mm diameter) of choroid and retina is excised. (h) The scleral flap is secured
with the three pre-placed sutures as well as additional 9-0 simple interrupted nylon sutures. (ij Closure consists of apposition of the conjunctival wound
with a 6-0 simple continuous absorbable suture.
The different types of retinopexy
escape subconjunctivally. Most retinal detachments and 1eti-
nal tears in dogs are too large (greater than 3 clock hour in size;
Pneumatic retinopexy
giant tears) and are not amenable to pneumatic retinopexy.
but unfortunately has several limitations. In this procedure
Therapeutic retinopexy
expansile gases are used to tamponade the retina against
the underlying retinal pigment epithelium and close a reti-
Therapeutic retinopexy, or the sealing of retinal holes
nal tear or break. Laser Or cryotherapy is used to seal the
01 breaks with no o1 limited flat retinal detachments, is
letinal break and produce a focal chorioretinal adhesion.
performed with laser photocoagulation, cryotherapy
01
Sulfur hexafluoride (SFs) or perfluoropropane (CsFs) gases
cryopexy, and scleral buckling. Laser photocoagulation is
have also been used. These gases can persist in the vitre-
usually used fo1 those retinal breaks located more posterio1
and near the optic disk, as may occur in Collie eye anomaly
SF gas expands 2.5x within 48 h and usually persists fo1
(Fig. 12.18). The lase1 therapy is delivered through the pupil
10-14 days. In contrast, CsFs gas expands 4x within 72 h
and directly about the retinal break. For more anterior retinal
and persists fo1 4-6 weeks.
breaks, cryopexy is recommended and may be delivered
As these are gases, they are mobile in the vitreous; to be
transconjunctivally (without incision) o1 directly on the
 aa d aq oi sau  s a a
sclera through a fornix-based conjunctival approach. During
the retinal break. In humans, the patient's head is immobi-
these retinopexies, the break should be directly visualized
lized for long periods for small dorsal retinal detachments 
by indirect ophthalmoscopy, and the therapy directed to
(less than 1 clock hour in size); unfortunately in dogs this is
sulround the retinal break with one o1 more layers of retino-
not possible, thereby limiting this technique in dogs. An exces
pexy. Retinopexy is less satisfactory for these retinal breaks
sive amount of gas within the vitreous can increase IOP and
and small retinal detachments but with vitreal traction.
375
12
A
B
C
Fig. 12.18 Collie eye anomaly (CEA) and possible indications for retinopexy. (a) A young Collie with a peripapillary coloboma next to the optic nerve head.
These lesions may predispose this eye to retinal detachment. (b) Another young Collie with retinal hemomhage and retinal detachment. (c) A young Collie 
with retinal detachment treated with diode laser retinopexy. Note the large preretinal hemorrhage which was caused by the laser retinopexy.
In a comparative study by Sullivan and co-workers, cryo1-
Prophylactic retinopexy
Prophylactic etinopexy is being used more frequently
compared in the dog. Nitrous oxide cryoretinopexy caused
  no s  sio  a
letinal edema and transfocal serous retinal detachments
(Bichon Frise, American Cocker Spaniel, Siberian Husky.
and, in general, produced larger and more severe retinal
Havanese) that may develop retinal breaks and peripheral
letinal detachments after cataract surgery, and in fellow OI
cryoprobe that produced an expanding iceball around the
 opposite eyes of phakic dogs with unilateral 1etinal detach-
retinal tissue in 10-15 s. In contrast, diode laser retino-
edde sop un nuai ruai n is ie sg 
pexy produced more obvious retinal vasculature damage.
to be those with hypermature cataracts, as well as those
[n 30 days, both techniques caused mild perivascular scleri-
tis, choroidal thinning, retinal degeneration, and retinal
breeds with lens luxations and intracapsular lensectomies.
Prophylactic retinopexy is usually delivered by cryotherapy
pigment migration. The diode laser was used to produce
directed to the dorsal peripheral retina, either before O1
two rows of retinal burns immediately posterior to the o1a
immediately following cataract surgery or intracapsular
ciliaris retinae with 0.8 s and 400 mW settings. The laseI
lensectomy. This therapy should be performed with the
induced an immediate white to light gray spot.
dorsal peripheral 1etina under direct observation. The
goal of this therapy is to stimulate the development of
 Demarcation and barrier retinopexy
dorsal chorioretinal scarring and adhesions to the region
Retinopexy has been used successfully to treat early retinal
of the retina most apt to develop retinal breaks and
detachments in collie eye anomaly. These serous 1etinal
detachment.
detachments were associated with optic disk pits and suc-
 [n a recurrent study by Schmidt and Vainisi in the Bichon
cessfully treated with xenon arc photocoagulation applied
Frise breed with cataract formation, the effectiveness of
along the edges of the detachment. In one report,
 25 of
prophylactic transscleral retinopexy was investigated. The
28 eyes with focal retinal detachments responded to a sin-
gle teatment of photocoagulation. Two additional eyes
(20 eyes): 12 (60%) of the eyes developed rhegmatogenous
responded after the administration of a second xenon arc
Ietinal detachments (RRD). The second group consisted of
photocoagulation. Only one eye failed to respond and even-
  s  d   s
tually the retina totally detached. The duration of the xenon
10 eyes (55%) developed RRD. The third group consisted
arc photocoagulation for each site was 1 s with a power
of dogs that had prophylactic transscleral retinopexy and
setting of 8 μV. Treatment consisted of a single row of con-
cataract 1esorption (19 eyes); 2 eyes (10%) developed
tiguous photocoagulation applications placed immediately
-od yon pey saa ae 'dnon isei pue ynoy aun ul aaa
adjacent to the edge of the retinal detachment along the
phylactic transscleral 1etinopexy and phacoemulsification
edge of the optic disk. The individual spots of the xenon
of cataracts. In this last group. RRD developed in 5 eyes
(12%). This study is the largest to date, and clearly demon-
and white on the non-tapetal fundus. Retinal reattachment
strates the value of prophylactic transscleral 1etinopexy in
occurred in most dogs within 2-4 weeks after photocoagula-
the Bichon Frise breed with inherited cataracts.
tion. The area of retinal detachment invariably resulted
In the Schmidt and Vainisi study, prophylactic transscleral
in focal retinal degeneration.
-oai las l Axado iaa aq paiaap sem Axadoa
In another report, rhegmatogenous (retinal breaks, holes,
pexy. For the cryopexy, a nitrous oxide curved retinal probe
OI tears) retinal detachments in three of four dogs that
was placed 10 mm posterio1 to the limbus with five to six
     d 
freezes per site fo1 10-12 contiguous sites, 360° around the
  a   s a n s
globe. Fo1 laser retinopexy, a diode transscleral probe was
retinal hole. This fundamental retinal detachment surgical
used with 800 mV and 1000 ms settings. The laser probe
procedure, performed primarily extraocularly, will be
was positioned 10 mm posterior to the limbus; five to six
presented.
burns were directed toward the optic nerve and continued
376
Surgery of the retina
clockwise around the globe. Recommended laser burns were
 performed both extra- and intraocularly using a pars plana
'aa iad sunq iasel 5z-s9 on ot-5z wo pasueu
 a   a oe  
described in the veterinary medical literature, and has been
01 laser combined with the indirect ophthalmoscope
in
a transpupillary fashion when direct observation of the
pars plana approach is used for the more extensive retinal
peripheral 1etina is possible. Excessive treatment is avoided,
detachments complicated by retinal breaks and tears, requires
as vitreous contraction and giant retinal tear may occur.
special instrumentation and training, and is the preferred pro-
Fo1 cryopexy of the peripheral retina, the cryoprobe must be
cedure by most vitreoretinal surgeons today. This technique
placed 10 mm posterio1 to the limbus except inferiorly and
is the most frequently perfoimed procedure in humans and
nasally, where it can be 2 and 4 mm closer, respectively.
is most useful for rhematogenous retinal detachments.
Schmidt and Vainisi 1ecommend 10-12 contiguous freezes
Retinal detachments and secondary glaucomas are the
around the globe. The freeze is stopped once the cryoprobe
most serious complications after cataract surgery in the
touches the sclera (6-7 s) or when a white spot develops as
dog. Both of these conditions can also develop in dogs
viewed by indirect ophthalmoscopy. For chorioretinal adhe-
with only cataract formation, lens-induced uveitis, and the
sions to develop, 10-12 days are required.
lesult of resorbing cataracts. Both of these complications,
For laser retinopexy delivered through the pupil by indi-
if diagnosed early, C
can be effectively treated and vision
Iect ophthalmoscopy. the ocular media must be sufficiently
prolonged. Retinal detachments have been 1eported  in
clear to permit focus on the target ietina. Two rows of
occur in 4.2-10.3% of dogs after cataract surgery. As these
contiguous burns of the peripheral 1etina for 360° are per-
retinal  detachments
usually develop unilaterally, only
foimed. Laser settings vary based on tissue pigmentation,
Iepeated postoperative examination can detect early and
laser, clarity of the ocular media, and angle of incidence of
limited size detachments. Hence, the recommendation after
the laser beam; one recommendation with the diode laser
cataract surgery is for repeated, often quarterly, re-examina-
is 250 mW of power at 1000 ms.
tions indefinitely. Retinal detachments should be assumed
rhematogenous until proven otherwise, and considerable
dog. a minimum of 2 weeks is recommended before
time and patience may be necessary during indirect ophthal-
attempting cataract surgery to ensure good chorioretinal
moscopy, often with scleral depression, to detect the retinal
adhesion.
break(s).
Patient selection
Retinal detachment surgery
The duration of retinal detachment (RD) is very important
Retinal detachment surgery in small animals is still in its
in humans, and can usually be fairly accurately detei-
infancy; howevel, there are several reports of successful
mined. Unfortunately, in dogs. the duration of retinal
surgical treatment of retinal detachments in dogs.
detachment cannot be determined, except in dogs with
   s  s s 
one visual eye and which develop retinal detachment and
 (   d d  (i 
become acutely blind (Fig. 12.19). [n humans, the return
A
B
C
Fig. 12.19 Examples of retinal detachments and giant tears. (a) External appearance of a Lhasa
Apso dog presented with vitreal syneresis, hemorrhages, retinal detachment, and a giant retinal tear.
(b) Ophthalmoscopic view of the same eye showing the retinal detachment and a giant retinal
auouy (p) lean ieunan uein e pue zuawuneap ieunau yaim jaueds jaso uenawy uy (2) iean
ean leunan zueih e pue zuawupeap leunau yrm laueds ayno ueuawy
377
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
of 20/20 visual acuity is possible if the 1etina is reat-
used to indent the sclera to locate the break (Fig. 12.20d).
tached with 7-9 days post-detachment. In dogs, reattach-
The sclera overlying the 1etinal hole may be marked with
ment of the retina within 4 weeks after 1etinal detachment
a disposable cautery unit (diathermy) or a nylon suture
provides a reasonable chance for some functional clinical
(Fig. 12.20e). Interrupted horizontal mattress 5-0 braided
vision.
polyester sutures are pre-placed partial thickness in the
S  ss    s  
sclera in each quadrant to secure later a 4-5 mm encircling
flash electroretinography has been less reliable. Eyes with RD
Ietinal silicone buckle o1 some other type of scleral buckle
and almost extinguished electroretinograms can recover
around the equator. If additional focal depression on
vision; within 1 week after reattachment the ERG begins to
the sclera is anticipated in the area of the retinal break, four
return to normal. Corneal opacities as well as post-cataract
additional interrupted mattress sutures are pre-placed
 a e ans   aa oe u sao
(Fig. 12.20f).
to be treated either before or during surgery. As secondary
 o s      i 
glaucoma is not uncommon after RD surgery, preoperative
pexy or transscleral diode laser photocoagulation while
being directly visualized by indirect ophthalmoscopy
patient must also be determined, as most retinal detachment
surgeries are 2-3 h long.
until the fist signs of retinal freezing (whitening of the
edges of the toin retina) are detected. Multiple sites are f1o-
Preoperative medication
zen until the retinal tear has been surrounded by these
As retinal detachment surgeries often span 2-3 h, topical and
freezes (Fig. 12.20g.h)
systemic antibiotics are administered beginning 2 or 3 days
To help appose the retinal detachment and the retinal
pigment epithelium, scleral buckling is necessary. Scleral
preoperatively. Topical and systemic corticosteroids are also
administered to combat the anticipated postoperative intra
buckles range from round o1 encircling hard silicone straps
to small soft silicone sponges. These buckles must extend
ocular inflammation. Systemic and topical NSAIDs are also
adde aie pue yeai leuai au puoaq u 7 isean e
usually administered. Mydriasis is critical intraoperatively to
observe the retinal detachment and the operative changes.
externally to the sclera in a radial, circumferential, o1 encir-
 dling fashion, or some combination thereof. Ideally the
Atropine (1%) combined with 10% phenylephrine, 01 0.3%
scopolamine combined with 10% phenylephrine, is instilled
buckle should also extend forward of the break and nea1
starting the day before surgery.
the vitreous base.
The small radial buckle is placed perpendicular to the
especially if a scleral buckle or silicone oil is used. Hence,
limbus and is effective fo1 small retinal breaks and mo1e
a few tonometries at different times of the day should
posterior breaks. The circumferential buckles are used for
be perfoimed preoperatively to establish the range of IOP
multiple retinal breaks, wide and anterior breaks. The encir-
each patient should approximate postoperatively. If higher
ding retinal buckle is used to surround the entire globe
levels occur postoperatively, drugs to lower and maintain
with extensive retinal detachments and when the retinal
safe levels of IOP are important to prevent pressure-induced
    (   a 
encircling buckles can be augmented with focal sponges to
retinal degeneration.
apply additional pressure and indentation in the area of
Basic retinal detachment surgery with a retinal
the retinal break.
hole or small tear
A 4-5 mm wide 1etinal detachment silicone band
(buckle), presoaked in gentamicin (50 mg/mL) fo1 30 min,
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eyelid
a aa on s si  a i pe si
hai1, and cleansing of the eyelid skin, conjunctival and co1-
entire globe and positioned over the retinal break. The
neal surfaces with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the eye-
letinal detachment band or buckle is secured to the
lids are retracted by speculum. A lateral canthotomy is used
globe with the four pre-placed interrupted mattress sutures.
to increase exposure. A 180-360° fornix-based conjunctival
The ends of the band are secured by a clove hitch
flap is perfoimed with small thumb forceps and tenotomy
(Fig. 12.20i-1).
scissors (Fig. 12.20a). This peritomy is performed 1-2 mm
Any subretinal fluids may be aspirated. After a small
from the limbus. [
Dissection  is continued posteriorly
 deep scleral incision parallel to the underlying large choroi-
beneath Tenon's capsule to the insertions of all of the rectus
dal blood vessels, a puncture into the subretinal space is
muscles (Fig. 12.20b,c). If surgical exposure about the rectus
performed with a 30 g diathermy needle. Subretinal fluids
muscles and the equator is adequate, transection of each 1ec-
are
drained by rolling a sterile cotton swab in several
tus muscle insertion is avoided. Because of the usual dorsal
directions toward the diathermy hole. The silicone band is
approach, the lateral and medial rectus muscles are secured
tightened to indent the globe to effect or about 2 mm,
by sutures, and with traction, can proptose the globe fo1-
thereby shortening
the globe circumference by about
ward. However, if surgical exposure is poor, each rectus
15%. indirect ophthalmoscopy is used again, to check that
muscle insertion is identified, tagged with nylon or silk
the buckle is properly positioned and that the retina is
sutures, and transected. With loss of the rectus muscles,
against
the
underlying retinal pigment
epithelium
the globe can usually be manipulated forward for improved
(Fig. 12.20m).
exposure.
 Closure includes apposition of the fornix-based conjunc-
Indirect ophthalmoscopy is perfoimed with a sterile
tival flap with several 6-0 simple inteirupted absorbable
20 diopter condensing lens to locate the retinal tear.
sutures o1 two inteirupted mattess sutures at the 9 and
A coton-tipped applicato1 o1 sterilized scleral depresso1 is
3 o'clock positions (Fig. 12.20n).
378
Surgery of the retina
Postoperative management
in the dog unless the retinal hole o1 tear is present in the
dorsal ocular fundus.
Postoperative care includes topical and systemic antibio-
Retinal tacks (3 mm diameter stainless steel) have been
tics for 5-7 days. Topical and systemic corticosteroids 
are
reported by Vainisi and Packo in dogs to treat giant retinal
administered to effect, depending on the intensity of the
tears. In all dogs, the retinal tears were 360°. In three of
the 16 dogs, retinal detachments developed after cataract
cally, the postoperative posterior segment inflammation is
surgery; the 1emaining 13 retinal detachments were idio-
focal and controllable. Mydriatics, such as 1% atropine, are
pathic. The tacks, loaded in a special holder and inserted
instilled daily, to maintain a dilated pupil that accommo-
through the pars plana ‘ports', were used to impale o1 tack
the retinal break and retinal detachment. Successful repair
the retina, choroid, and sclera approximately 1-2 mm poste-
nior to the edge of the retinal tear. After tacking of the edge
results in a gradual flattening of the retinal detachment,
of the torn retina, endophotocoagulation or cryoretinopexy
and development of pigmented and non-pigmented retinal
(applied external to the globe) is used for additional chor-
scars within the retinal break, secondary to cryotherapy
ioretinal adhesions. The former technique, endophotocoa-
IOP must be monitored daily postoperatively fo1 the first
gulation, was preferred when the retinal tacks were used.
week. If IOP is increased, topical adrenergics, and systemic
Use of these tacks with the newer silicone oil methods to
01 topical carbonic anhydrase inhibitors are administered.
hold the retina in position has been reduced.
In the event that IOP is still elevated, anterior chamber
Traction bands connecting the posterior i
inis, pupil,
paracentesis may be necessary.
posterior lens capsule, ciliary body, and peripheral retina
Postoperative complications after retinal detachment sul-
frequently develop during postoperative inidocyclitis after
gery in dogs appear infrequent, but too few cases have been
reported to date. Potential serious complications include:
cataract surgery in the dog. These traction bands may be
important in the pathogenesis of retinal detachments that
1) angle-closure glaucoma secondary to an excessively tight
occur pre- and postoperatively in about 5-10% of dogs
scleral encircling buckle o1 excessive cryopexy: 2) necrosis
undergoing cataract surgery. Retinal detachments usually
of the anterior segment from damage to the long posterior
develop within the fiist few months postoperatively. Treat-
ciliary blood vessels, tenotomy of the insertions of all of
ment of retinal detachments in these patients, in which
the rectus muscles, o1 an excessively tight encircling band;
inflammatory membranes and bands appear important,
3) 25-50% cataract formation in phakic animals; 4) orbital
requires anterior vitrectomy to remove all pupillary debris
hemorrhage with some exophthalmia and impaired ocular
(inflammatory membranes, capsular fibrosis, and posterio1
motility: 5) posterior uveitis with 1e-detachment; and 6) co1-
synechiae) as well as the specific treatment for retinal
ad p s pd a   e
detachment. The pars plana vitreoretinal approach accom-
impaired blink postoperatively).
modates all of these procedures. At this time the surgical
lesults (anatomic colrection and 1estoration of vision)
of
Pars plana retinal detachment surgery
these postoperative retinal detachments are poorer than in
the phakic dogs without pre-existing lens-associated uveitis.
The second retinal detachment surgical procedure, using both
 If cataract or lens capsular opacities and an IOL prevent an
extraocular and intraocular manipulations, is performed in
adequate view of the posterior segment, they are removed
the phakic and aphakic dog for more serious retinal breaks,
including giant retinal tears. Giant retinal detachments and
retinal detachment surgery with the phacofragmatome.
retinal tea1 o1 breaks (greater than 3 clock hours in size) are
the most common RD in dogs, and this surgical procedure is
the most frequently performed in the dog.
Vitreoretinal instruments
This procedure is considerably more difficult, time con-
The recommended indications fo1, and vitreoretinal instnl-
suming, and requires additional training and an investment
ments to perform, pars plana retinal detachment surgery
in special instrumentation for intraocular irigation, aspira-
are listed in Box 1.1 (Vainisi and Wolfer), and Box 12.1A
e i a d  h    
and 12.1B (Smith). Several of these instruments are steri-
and visual postoperative lesults.
n 'pasn seme lou aie aq se shun leniun u paz
Newer techniques, such as intravitreal injections of silicone
should be available. A good operating microscope with
oil and perfluorocarbon gases (short term, sulfu1 hexafluoride
coaxial illumination and X-Y functions is essential.
(SF): long term, perfluoropropane (CsFs)), have been demon-
Several lens-viewing systems are satisfactory for the dog: the
 Machemer irrigating lens can be used. Wide-angle (between
with large or giant retinal tears. The perfluorocarbon gas initi-
 90 and 130°) non-contact lenses such as BIOM? (Insights
ally and later intravitreal silicone oil are used intraoperatively
[nstruments, [nc., Sanfo1d, FL) o1 Eibos 200? (Moller-Wedel 
to tamponade and roll the retina against the retinal pigment
GmbH, Wedel, Germany) are also used in the dog: these
epithelium, and postoperatively silicone oil is left in the vitre-
lenses are based on indirect ophthalmoscope principles,
Cus space to continue the tamponade ofthe retinal break, inde-
and require an inverter mounted on the operating micro-
pendent of eye position. However, silicone oil can migrate
scope. Vitrectomy units are available and often have light
oe  s  s e no r re  o
illumination systems, electrocautery, air infusion capabil-
ciated with elevated IOP, corneal decompensation, and edema.
ities, and even ultrasonic fragmentation and silicone oil
The perfluorocarbon gases have similar benefits to silicone
pumps. Vitrectomy probes are disposable and small; they
 u aq oi see a i le si ud aa in 
have a guillotine-type cutter on the side of a 2 g blunt needle.
contact with the retinal break. This is impossible to achieve
Most cutters operate at 500-1500 cuts/min, but higher speed
379
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
A
D
E
?
H
M
N
Fig. 12.20 For legend see opposite page
380
Surgery of the retina
aun woy ww z-l eanounjuon jeging aul (e) yoeoudde aiseg suawupnap ieunau snouaboewnauu ioy Aabins auawupeap ieunay pauos-oz'zl diis
limbus is incised 360° (peritomy) by Steven's tenotomy scissors. (b) Intraoperative appearance of the eye, with a strabismus hook around the insertion of the
(esiop ayn asodxa on siossips Aworouan 5,uanans Aq (epsey jeging) ajnsden 5,uoual uaamag Auouansod panupuoo 5! uogassp aul (2) apsnw snanal (esiop
and lateral aspects of the globe. Access to the globe is optimal in this area. (d) By indirect ophthalmoscopy and with a sterile cotton swab to depress the
sclera, the exact site of the retinal break is identified. (e) The sclera immediately above the retinal break site is marked by diathermy or a nylon suture. (f) Fou
5-0 interrupted mattress sutures are pre-placed at each quadrant of the equator to secure a retinal silicone buckle later. (g) Cryothermy is applied around
the retinal break. Cryothermy is applied at each site until the retina begins to turn white, as viewed by indirect ophthalmoscopy. (h) If necessary, subretinal
fluids are aspirated through a scleral hole made with a 30 g diathermy needle; the retinal detachment should noticeably flatten during this procedure.
(i) A 4-5 mm silicone retinal buckle is carefully placed around the globe at the equator and through the pre-placed interrupted mattress sutures in each quadrant.
(j) Intraoperative photograph: the scleral buckle has been placed just posterior to the equator and is being manipulated beneath the medial rectus muscle. (k)
Intraoperative photograph: the scleral buckle has been manipulated around the entire globe. () Intraoperative photograph: the scleral buckle has been positioned
around the entire equator of the globe, over the retinal break (arow), and is ready to be tied. (m) As viewed by indirect ophthalmoscopy, the retinal detachment
should be flattened and the globe indented with the tightened silicone buckle. (n) Closure consists of apposition of the conjunctival flap with several simple
interrupted absorbable sutures at the limbus.
cutters (2500 cuts/min) are available. The faster cutters oper-
Iate of infusion and the level of IOP during vitreoretinal
ate at less vacuum and have less tendency to draw the retina
surgery are controlled by changes in the level of the infusion
into the tip (causing an iatrogenic retina tear).
Teservoir. In the pars plana method, IOP must always
be maintained during the surgery to prevent further
retinal detachment and intraocular (retinal and choroidal)
Surgical procedure
hemo1rhages (Fig. 12.21d).
After the onset of general anesthesia, clipping of the eye-
With special intraocular scissors and aspirations, the vitreous
lid hai1, and cleansing of the eyelid skin, conjunctival and
and any material around the retinal detachment and break,
corneal surfaces with 0.5% povidone-iodine solution, the
and within the pupil, are excised. The vitreous is removed
eyelids are retracted by speculum. A lateral canthotomy is
in small pieces and low vacuum pressure (<150 mmHg).
pelfoimed to piovide maximum exposure. As sufficient
If hemorhages results, adrenaline (epinephrine; 1:10o0 to
exposure of the globe is often not possible fo1 three-port
  sa   si aq s (oo oi1
vitrectomy, the globe is usually proptosed.
inflammatory bands near the 1etinal break are also excised
A 360° peritomy is prepared with thumb forceps and
(Fig. 12.21e). Once the vitreous has been sufficiently removed,
a r  r a si siosss a
the retina can be gently manipulated using the tip of the light
limbus (Fig. 12.21a). The dissection is continued posteriorly
pipe and the vitrectomy probe.
to expose 6-8 mm of the sclera behind the limbus in the
Once the retina falls back into place, careful inspection often
dorsomedial quadrant and the entire lateral one-half of the
reveals additional retinal tears o1 breaks. Endolaser can be
globe (Fig. 12.21b).
initiated. However, since 75% of canine 1etinal detachments
 For the pars plana approach, three 20 g sclerotomies
have tears over 270°, perfluoro-n-octane (PFO), which is
('ports') are made through the pars plana ciliaris: 1) two
heavier than water, is needed to flatten the retina. Perfluoro-
scleral incisions 5-6 mm posterior to the limbus at the 10
carbon (sulfur l
hexafluoride (SFo) o1 perfluoropropane
and 2 o'clock positions are used fo1 the insertion of the
  (     )  )
intravitreal instrumentation; and 2) one incision 7-8 mm
and slowly injected into the vitreous space, using a soft-tipped
posterior to the limbus at the 4 o'clock position for intraoc-
silicone needle over the optic nerve head, to unfold and flatten
ular fluids (inferotemporal, Fig. 12.21c). Vainisi and co-
the retinal detachment. The gas is injected very slowly and a
workers now place all three ports in the doisal portion of
single large bubble is maintained, if possible. As the retina
the eye. The sclerotomies are performed with the 20 g
begins to unfold or flatten, folds may persist; they can be gently
microvitreoretinal (MVR) blades.
Through these three
flattened using the silicone-tipped needle. If additional mem-
sclerotomies, one will be used for infusion to maintain
branes are detected, they are removed and the PFO injection
IOP and volume, the second will be the port to insert the
completed.
illuminator, and the third will be the entry site for the vitrec-
Once the gas bubble has manipulated the retina into
to1 and endolaser instruments. In the Siberian Husky breed,
place, either laser using the transpupillary o1 endovitreal
   ( i)  Aa si d s s a
 1oute, or cryotherapy is applied externally, and is directed
 breed the third port is placed temporally.
at any retinal break (Fig. 12.21f). Often multiple 1ows of
Because the intrascleral venous plexus in the dog is in
laser retinopexy are applied. Two or three rows of contigu-
 OI near the site for the sclerotomies, a modification may
ous burns near the ora serrata are applied for 360°. The 1et-
be used. This intrascleral plexus or circle of Hovius is
ina insults (burns o1 freezes) will appear as small white
3-4 mm from the limbus and 4-5 mm wide. A 20 g dia-
spots. In subalbinotic animals, transscleral cryotherapy
thermy tip is used to make the sclerotomies. This essential
may be substituted for endolaser photocoagulation.
cautery procedure usually avoids intraocular hemorrhage
After the laser o1 cryoretinopexy procedure has been com-
from the intrascleral venous plexus. A 20 g infusion cannula
pleted, silicone oil (medical grade 5000 centistoke SiO) o1
is sutured to the 4 o'clock sclerotomy site with a 7-0 absorb-
 r     xa i 
able suture. The infusion cannula delivers balanced salt
retinal tears in the dog, silicone oil is preferred to air. The
solution into the vitreous cavity throughout surgery. The
silicone oil is injected deep within the vitreous space
381
12
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Fig. 12.21 Retinal detachment surgery for rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. The pars plana approach is more difficult and requires special
5,uanans Ag (Awonuad) aoge pasiou! 5! eanounjuos jeging aul (e) shop ui siean pue syeaug leupau abuel joy papuawwoau Aubiy s! ang uogenuawnunsu!
tenotomy scissors. (b) The retrobulbar dissection is continued between the sclera and Tenon's capsule to completely expose the entire lateral and 
dorsomedial globe. (c) Three 20 g sclerotomies ('ports) are made by diathermy at the 10 and 2 o'clock positions for the insertion of instruments (scissors,
forceps, diathermy, light probe, and other intravitreal instruments), and at the 4 o'clock position (inferotemporal). (d) The upper sclerotomies are performed
6-7 mm posterior to the limbus. The ventrolateral sclerotomy is 7-8 mm posterior to the limbus to avoid the intrascleral venous plexus but penetrate the pars
plana ciliaris. (e) As viewed in cross section, a special contact lens (arrow) permits fundus examination during surgery without ophthalmoscopy. Special
intravitreal scissors are used to incise a vitreal traction band. (f Retinopexy via nitrous oxide cryothermy is applied to effect in the area of the retinal break.
(g) A 4-5 mm silicone retinal buckle is manipulated under the four rectus muscles and the four pre-placed interrupted mattress sutures. Once complete, the
buckle is tightened and tied, sufficient to indent the globe. In many patients, the buckle is not necessary. (h) Closure consists of a 7-0 simple absorbable
suture at each sclerotomy site, and apposition of the conjunctival flap to the limbus with two interrupted mattress 7-0 absorbable sutures.
(usually 2-3 mm in front of the optic disk) to produce a
Fo1 closure: 1) single three-throw pattern 7-0 absorbable
large and single bubble. During the silicone oil and perfluo-
sutures are placed in each pars plana port; and 2) the fo1-
Iocarbon exchange, ocular hypotony must be avoided;
nix-based conjunctival flap is apposed to the limbus with
choroidal and retinal hemorrhages can rapidly result if IOP
buried interrupted mattress 7-0 absorbable sutures at the
falls. If the retinal break does not remain in apposition to
3 and 9 o'clock positions (Fig. 12.21h) or a continuous pat-
the underlying retinal pigment epithelium, the silicone oil is
tern. The globe is carefully repositioned. If a lateral canthot-
allowed to remain in the vitreal space. The silicone oil may
omy was used, it is apposed with non-absorbable sutures.
be removed 3-6 months later, or left in situ indefinitely.
In addition, a temporary tarsorrhaphy with at least two non-
The exteinal retinal strap o1 buckle, if needed, is inserted
absorbable mattress sutures is completed to protect the coinea
and apposed as described in the previous procedure. Fortu
for at least 7-10 days.
nately with this procedure, placement of the scleral buckle
is not usually necessary. A silicone sponge can also be used
Postoperative management
area. The retinal buckle must be tightened sufficient to
Postoperative management of these patients includes several
indent the globe to effect, usually about 2 mm (Fig. 12.21g).
avenues. Postoperative inidocyclitis and control of the IOP
382
Surgery of the retina
are most important. Systemic and topical antibiotics
 o1 later (persistent uveitis and gradual iridocoineal angle clo-
are administered for 5-7 days. Topical and systemic corti-
sure). As these eyes have experienced considerable intraocular
costeioids and NSAIDs are administered fo1 several weeks.
surgery and uveitis, clinical management of the glaucomas is
Coineal erosions are not uncommon due to exposure as
medical. Topical (dorzolamide o1 brinzolamide) and sys-
well as occasional corneal decompensation.
temic (methazolamide) carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, as well
Mydriatics are instilled at a frequency to ensure moderate
as topical beta antagonists (timolol or betaxolol), are adminis-
pupillary dilatation for the inidocyclitis, and to permit peri-
tered, and IOP monitored long term. I1reversible glaucoma, as
odic fundus examination of the retinal break and detach-
well as persistent uveitis, can result in phthisis bulbi.
ment. If intravitreal gas, silicone oil, and retinal buckle were
used, IOP is closely monitored, and if ocular hypertension 
Corneal exposure and ulceration
occurs, topical beta-blocking agents and systemic carbonic
RRD repair usually involves surgery of at least 1-2 hours'
anhydrase inhibitors are administered. The gas or silicone
duration. The cornea is in continuous jeopardy as the globe
oil may require removal if complications related to either
is partially proptosed, exposed to continuous drying, and
develop. As glaucoma also occurs in breeds with RRDs,
the consistent lavage of irrigating fluids. Proper selection of
long-term IOP monitoring is essential!
Postoperative complications
In the brachycephalic breeds, corneal exposure is a frequent
problem after RRD surgery. As a result, topical methylcellu-
Complications after this surgery appear the same as for
lose can be substituted for balanced salt solution for irriga-
basic retinal detachment surgery, and include the formation of
s n d e p s  
new retinal tears, extension of existing retinal tears, glaucoma,
cataract foimation, endophthalmitis, and proliferative vitreo1-
sures. In fact, partial temporary tarsorrhaphies (the medial
etinopathy (PVR). Remaining perfluorocarbon gas can cause
one-half of the palpebral fissure is closed) are recommended
n   i   i
for all dogs after RRD surgery; the amount of the palpebral
ated, but larger amounts (50% of the vitreous) can result in
fissure which remains open should be sufficient to inspect
intractable endophthalmitis. Silicone cil in the anterio1
dd s reo  n a a
chamber can cause corneal decompensation (direct contact
These coineal ulcers appear as shallow central erosions
of the silicone oil with the coineal endothelium) as well as
and usually respond to frequent topical antibiotics and
glaucoma. Intravitreal silicone oil is apparently well tolerated
serum administrations (Fig. 12.23). Partial temporary tarso1-
by the dog. and can be left in the vitreous for the dog's life.
rhaphy is an important preventive as well as therapeutic pro.
cedure for these ulcers. The presence of these postoperative
Postoperative glaucoma or late-onset glaucoma
erosions is best prevented as they can limit the use and f1e-
Glaucoma is one of the more frequent complications;
quency of topical medications for the postoperative uveitis.
factors which contribute to its genesis include breed predis-
position as many of the breeds presented for RRD also have
Cataract formation
inherited glaucoma (American Cocker Spaniel, and 
Toy
Cataract formation in phakic dogs is generally limited to
and Miniature Poodles) as well as cataract foimation and
those breeds which develop RRDs secondary to vitreous
lens-induced uveitis (Fig. 12.22). Hence, gonioscopy is
degeneration. Fortunately, the frequency of these canine
patients is less than those breeds which develop RRD after
the status of the ciliary cleft and iridocorneal angle.
   l      
The glaucomas occur in the immediate postoperative
opacities prior to presentation with RRD. Cataract progres-
period (probably related to uveitis or operative factors),
sion is likely after RRD surgery: however, the rapidity of
cataract progression is less predictable.
a ano ains uawupeap ieuau humolly eone zzi i
episcleral congestion, diffuse corneal edema, and few perfluorocarbon gas
bubbles within the anterior chamber.
Fig. 12.23 Central and shallow corneal ulceration after retinal surgery.
383
12
Vitreoretinal surgery
Scleral buckle-related complications
anterior chambel, especially in aphakes o1 pseudophakes
It appears that tolerance for the silicone scleral buckle in dogs
(Fig. 12.25). Thus, all possible PFO gas should be removed
before the conclusion of RRD surgery!
is less than in humans. Scleral buckle-related complications
include buckle migration and extrusion, strabismus and
Silicone oil complications
impaired ocular motility (1elated to buckle size and orbital
limits), and retrobulbar hemorrhage. The dog sclera in its
Silicone oil is an excellent adjunct for canine RRD surgery
equator is very thin, and sutures about the buckle in this area
and seems well tolerated in the dog. In fact, intravitreal sili-
can easily penetrate the thin sclera. As a result, the intraocular
cone oil in the dog seems tolerated better than in humans,
method of pars plana retinal detachment repair without the
and has been left in situ fo1 months to years. Hence, in the
op a u redod ano aaq s na iess
         o
tamponade after vitreoretinal surgeries (Fig. 12.26). Because
Retinal complications
of its toxicity to the lens in humans, intravitreal silicone oil
is usually removed within 3 months postoperatively.
postoperatively. They include new or extensions of existing 1et-
inal tears, difficulties with the intravitreal gas (sulfur hexafluo1-
ide, SFs, and pefluoropropane, CsFs) and silicone oil, and
other factors. As glaucoma also occurs in many breeds with
RRDs, long-term IOP monitoring is essential! Fortunately.
proliferative vitreoretinopathy is uncommon in the dog, and
early surgery, as well as closure of all retinal holes and tears,
seems to markedly decrease the chance of this complication.
Subretinal gas (sulfur hexafluoride (SF6)
and perfluoropropane (CFs) migration
These gases are valuable to manipulate the retinal detach-
inally. This seems to occur more frequently when multiple
bubbles are present. Fortunately, a thump to the globe
during surgery can usually coalesce these bubbles into a
single bubble! Airplane travel for the canine patient after
RRD surgery should be avoided as any remaining intravi-
treal gas may expand at the higher altitudes. As a result,
non-expansile concentrations of SF, and CsFs are used.
Retention of these gases after surgery in the dog can cause
subretinal inflammation, even endophthalmitis; they may
Fig. 12.25 In pneumatic retinopexy, perfluorocarbon gas is injected to
also migrate subretinally and prevent retinal reattachment.
assist the intraoperative repositioning of the detached retina to directly
A small bubble of PFO gas in the vitreous is usually tolel-
contact the retinal pigment epithelium. In this patient a large volume of the
ated, but a large bubble should be removed intraoperatively
aaneadonsod iagweuo ouaue aun pauaua sey sen
(Fig. 12.24). PFO gas can also migrate into the ventral
Fig. 12.24 Multiple bubbles of perfluorocarbon gas within the dorsal
Fig. 12.26 Silicone oil within the vitreous can be a permanent tamponade
anterior chamber after retinal detachment surgery in an aphakic dog 
after retinal detachment surgery as in this aphakic dog. The ocular fundus 
following cataract surgery.
is clearly visible.
384
Surgery of the retina
However, in aphakes, pseudophakes, and rarely phakes,
that treatment of RRDs in phakic eyes that have not had
silicone oil migration may occur into the anterior chamber,
intraoculal surgery yields higher successful anatomic co1-
obstrict the outflow channels, and cause glaucoma. Small
lections in about 9o% of the patients, and 1estores clinical
amounts of intracameral silicone oil can contact the poste-
vision in about 80% of the dogs. In dogs that developed
lior cornea and cause localized edema. A large silicone
RRDs after cataract surgery, the success rates are much lower.
bubble in contact with the corneal endothelium can cause
with anatomic coirection in 9o% of the patients and clinical
coineal decompensation. Silicone oil can also migrate
vision in 30% of the dogs. [n operated dogs with 1etinal
 into the subconjunctival tissues through improperly closed
detachments secondary to vitreous degeneration, about
scleral ports.
 90-95% of the surgeries are anatomically successful and
As a result, small amounts of floating silicone oil in the
about 85% of the patients 1ecover clinical vision.
With additional patients and surgical experience, these post-
are removed. Removal from the anterior chamber is usually
delayed 2-4 weeks affer RRD surgery to allow sufficient
in postoperative cataract dogs are lens-induced uveitis and the
time fo1 the retinal scars to develop and securely reattach
inflammatory and capsular changes that develop postopera-
the retina.
tively. Nevertheless, majo1 advances in the surgical repail of
paidu pue paino aau so un suaip leua
Other complications
results are predicated. In general, about 9o% of canine retinas
are reattached after pars plana retinal detachment surgery, and
Postoperative endophthalmitis is rare after RRD surgery in
76% of the patients 1ecover clinical vision. Onset of vision
the dog, in spite of the long surgery duration. Perioperative
after surgery may occur as early as 24 h or up to several weeks
topical and systemic antibiotics are usually administered in
postoperatively. Most patients 1ecover vision in 10-14 days
 n aa    e  o a
post-surgery. The sooner the surgery for retinal detachment,
improperly closed scleral ports.
the greater the chance of vision!
The recently introduced 25 g transconjunctival sutureless
vitrectomy procedure has been used in humans and may
Postoperative results
Postoperative 1esults are divided into anatomic 1epair of
trauma and inflammation, and may become an important
the retinal detachment, and restoration of vision. It appears
 pars plana vitrectomy technique for the dog.
Further reading
Small animals
the American College of Veterinary
Peiffer RL, Weintraub BA: Clinical and
Archambeau PL, Henderson JW: Transscleral
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 30. 2006.
 histopathologic effects of lensectomy and
 freezing of the retina: an experimental
Hendrix DV. Nasisse MP. Cowen C.
anterior vitrectomy in the canine eye. I Am
study. Imvest Ophthalmol 4:885-892. 1965.
Davidson MG: Clinical signs, concurrent
Anim Hosp Assoc 14:421-432. 1979.
Blair NP. Dodge IT. Schmidt GM:
diseases, and risk factors associated with
Rubin LF: Correction of retinal detachment
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
retinal detachments in dogs. Progress in
in a dog. I Amm Vet Med Assoc 157:461-466.
Labrador retrievers. 1. Development of 
VeterinaryandComparativeOphthalmology
1970.
retinal tears and detachment. Arch
3:87-91. 1993.
Schmidt GM, Vainisi S): Retrospective study of
Opthalmol 103:842-847. 1985.
Klassen H, Schwartz PH, Ziaeian B, et al: Neural
prophylactic random transscleral retinopexy
Blair NP. Dodge IT. Schmidt GM:
 precursors isolated from the developing
in the Bichon Frise with cataract, Vet
 Rhegmatogenous retinal detachment in
cat brain show retinal integration 
Ophthalmol 7:307-310. 2004.
Labrador retrievers. ll. Proliferative
following transplantation to the retina of
 Smith Pl: Surgery of the canine posterior
vitreoretinopathy. Arch Ophthalmol
the dystrophic cat. Vet Ophthalmol
segment. In Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary
103:848-854. 1985.
10:245-253. 2007.
Ophthalmology. ed 3. Baltimore. 1999.
Boeve MH, Stades FC: Diseases and surgery of
Leon AL: Diseases of the vitreous in the dog
Lippincott, williams and wilkins.
the canine vitreous. In Gelatt KN, editor:
and cat. J Small Amim Pract 29:448-461.
pp 935-980.
Veterinary Ophthatmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
1988.
Smith PJ. Mames RN, Samuelson DA. Lewis PA.
Blackwell. pp 932-943.
 Millichamp N: mvestigations of inherited retinal
Brooks DE: Photoreceptor outer segments in
Constable lJ. Slatter DH, Horine R:
disease in the dog. PhD Thesis. 1985.
aqueous humor from dogs with
 Chorioretinal biopsy in dogs. lmvest
University of London.
rhegmatogenous retinal detachments. I Am 
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 19:603-609. 1980.
 Narfstrom K. Petersen-Jones S: Diseases of the
Vet Med Assoc 211:1254-1256. 1997.
 Dziezyc J. Wolf ED. Barrie KP: Surgical repair of
anine ocular fundus. In Gelatt KN, editor:
 Smith PJ. Pennea L, Mackay EO. Mames RN:
 rhegmatogenous retinal detachments in
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
ldentification of sclerotomy sites for
dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 188:902-904.
Blackwell. pp 944-1025.
posterior segment surgery in the dog.
1986.
Okun E, Rubin LF, Collins EM: Retinal breaks
Veterinaryand ComparativeOphthatmology
Grahan BH, Barnes LD. Breaux CB.
in the senile dog eye. Arch Ophthalmol
7:180-189. 1997.
 Sandmeyer LS: Chronic complete retinal
66:702-707. 1961.
 Sullivan TC: Surgery for retinal detachment., Vet
detachments in dogs: outcome comparison
 Ollivier FJ. Barrie KP. Mames RN: Pars plana
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 of no treatment, medical therapy and
vitrectomy for the treatment of
27:1193-1214, 1997.
retinal reattachment after vitrectomy.
 ophthalmomyiasis interna posterior in a
 Sullivan TC, Davidson MG, Nasisse MP.
Proceedings of the 37th Anmual Meeting of
dog. Vet Ophthalmol 9:259-264. 2006.
Glover TL: Canine retinopexy - a
385
12
determination of surgical landmarks. and a
presence of leptospires, Proceedings of the
Werry H. Gerhards H: Moglichkeiten der und
comparison of cryoapplication and diode
38th Anmual Meeting of the American College
indikationen zur chirurgischen behandlung
laser methods. Veterinary and Comparative
of Veterinary Ophthatmologists: Abstract 98.
der equinen rezidivierenden uveitis (ERU).
Ophthalmology 7:89-95. 1997.
2007.
Pferdeheilhumde 7:321-331. 1991.
Tolentino Fl, Donovan RH, Freeman HM:
Gilger BC. Michau TM: Equine recurrent
Werry H. Gerhards H: Zur operation therapie
 Biomicroscopy of the vitreous in collie dogs
uveitis: new methods of management, Vet
der equinen rezidivierenden uveitis (ERU).
with fundus abnormalities. Arch Ophthalmol
Clin North Am Equine Pract 20:417-427.
Tierarzliche Praxis 20:178-186. 1992.
73:700-706. 1965.
2004.
Winterberg A. Gerhards H: Langzeitergebnisse
Vainisi S). Packo KH: Management of giant
Gilger BC. Spiess BM: Surgical management of
der pars-plana vitrektomie bei equiner
retinal tears in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 equine uveitis. In Stick JA, editor: Equine
rezidivierender uveitis. Pferdeheilhumde
206:491-495. 1995.
Surgery. Philadelphia. 2006. WB Saunders.
13:377-383. 1997.
Vainisi Sl, Wolfer JC: Canine retinal surgery.
pp 749-755.
Wollanke B. Gerhards H. Brem S. Meyer P.
Vet Ophthalmol 7:291-306. 2004.
Gilger BC. Malok E. Cutter KV, Stewart T.
Kopp H: Etiology of equine recurrent uveitis
Vainisi SJ. Peyman GA, Wolf ED, West CS:
Horohov Dw. Allen JB: Characterization of
(ERU): autoimmune disease or intraocular
 Treatment of serous retinal detachments
T-lymphocytes in the anterior uvea of eyes
leptospiral infection. Pferdeheilhumde
associated with optic disk pits in dogs.
with chronic equine recurrent uveitis, Vet
20:327-340, 2004.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:1233-1236.
Immumol Immumopathol 71:17-28. 1999.
Wollanke B. Rohrbach BW. Gerhards H: Serum
1989.
Gilger BC. Malok E. Stewart T. Ashton P.
and vitreous humor antibody titers in and
Vainisi S). Packo K. Schmidt GM: Retinal
Smith T. Jaffe G). Allen JB: Long-term effect
isolation of Leptospira interrogans from
detachments in the Shih Tzu, Trarsactions
on the equine eye of an intravitreal device
horses with recurrent uveitis. I Am Vet Med
oftheAmerican College ofVeterinary
used for sustained release of cyclosporin A.
Assoc 219:795-800. 2001.
Ophthalmologists 25:115. 1990.
Vet Ophthalmol 3:105-110. 2000.
Vainisi Sl, Wolfer JC. Smith Pl: Surgery of 
Gilger BC. Malok E. Stewart T. et al: Effect of
suewnH
 the canine posterior segment. In
 an intravitreal cyclosporine implant on
Allen AW: Giant retinal tears, Ophthalmol Clin
Gelatt KN, editor: Veterinary Ophchalmology.
experimental uveitis in horses. Vet Immunol
North Am 7:31-37. 1994.
ed 4, Ames, 2006. Blackwell.
Immumopathol 76:239-255. 2000.
Ambati J. Arroyo JG: Postoperative
pp 1026-1058.
Gilger BC, Wilkie DA, Davidson MG, Allen JB:
complications of scleral buckling surgery.
Webb TR. Bras ID. Griffiths C: Retrospective
 Ulse of an intravitreal sustained-release
Imt Ophthalmol Clin 40:175-185. 2000.
 evaluation of diode endolaser usage for
 Cyclosporine delivery device for treatment of
equine recurent uveitis. Am J Vet Res
Becker MD, Harsch N, Zierhut M, Davis IL.
retinopexy in canine patients: 16 patients.
62:1892-1896. 2001
Holz FG: Therapeutische Vitrektomie bei
Proceedings of the 39th Anmual Meeting of the
 Uveitis. Aktueller Stand und Empfehlungen.
American College of Veterinary
Gilger BC. Salmon JH, Wilkie DA, et al: A novel 
Ophthalmologe 100[10):787-795. 2003.
Ophthalmologists: Abstract 99. 2008.
bioerodible deep scleral lamellar
 Berrocal MH, Chang S: Perfluorocarbon liquids
cyclosporine implant for uveitis. nvest
Horses
Ophthalmol Vis Sci 47:2596-2605. 2006.
in vitreous surgery. Ophthalmol Clin North
Am 7:67-76. 1994.
Brem S. Gerhards B, Wollanke P. et al:
Hesselink DA. Baarsma GS. Kuijpers RW.
 Intraokularer Leptospirennachweis bei 4
van Hagen PM: Experience with
Binder S. Freyler H: Vitrektomie bei
emtzundlichen Erkrankungen des hinteren
pferden mit rezidivierender uveitis (ERU).
 cyclosporine in endogenous uveitis
Berlinder umd Munchener Tierarztliche
Augenabschnittes, Klin Monatsbl Augenheilhd
posterior, Transplant Proceedings 36
Wochenschrift 111:415-417, 1998.
(Suppl 2):372S-377S. 2004.
183(2):86-89. 1983.
Brem S. Gerhards B. Wollanke P. et al: 35
Kay IE: lnhibitory effects of cyclosporin A on
Brinton DA, Hilton GF: Pneumatic retinopexy.
Leptospirenisolationen aus glaskorpern von
lymphocyte activation. In Thomson AW.
Ophthalmol Clin North Am 7:1-12. 1994.
32 pferden mit rezidivierender uveitis
editor: Cyclosporine: Mode of Action and
Chang S: Perfluorocarbon liquids in 
(ERU). Berlinder umd Munchener Tierarztliche
Clinical Application. Dordrecht, 1989.
vitreoretinal surgery. Int Ophthatmol Clin
Wochenschrift 112:390-393. 1999.
Kluwer. pp 1-23.
32:153-163. 1992.
Brooks DE. Matthews AG: Equine
Kermani-Arab V. Salehmoghaddam S.
 Diamond JG. Kaplan HJ: Lensectomy and
 ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, editor:
Danovitch G, Hirji K, Rezai A: Mediation of
vitrectomy for complicated cataract
Veterinary Ophthalmology. ed 4. Ames. 2006.
 the antiproliferative effect of cyclosporine
secondary to uveitis. Arch Ophthalmol 96
Blackwell. pp 1165-1274.
 on human lymphocytes by blockade of
[10):1798-1804, 1978.
Deeg CA, Kaspers B. Gerhards H, Thurau SR,
interleukin 2 biosynthesis. Transplantation
Diamond JG, Kaplan H): Uveitis: effect of
Wollanke B. wildner G: lmmune responses 
39:439-442. 1985.
vitrectomy combined with lensectomy.
Matz-Rensing K. Drommer W. Kaup FJ.
Ophthalmology 86:1320-1329. 1979.
equine recurrent uveitis. Imvest Ophchalmol
Gerhards H: Retinal detachment in horses.
Gardner RC: Anterior vitrectomy. Am
Vis Sci 42:393-398. 2001.
Equine Vet } 28:111-116. 1996.
Ophthalmol 7:723-726. 1975.
Dwyer AE: Visual prognosis in horses with uveitis.
 Storey ES. Gerhards H, Wollanke B: Transscleral
Glaser BM, Carter JB. Kuppermann BD.
American Society of Veterinary
vitrectomy for the diagnosis of Leptospira
 Michels RG: Perfluorooctane in the
Ophthalmology Annual Meeting. Chicago.
 and treatment of equine recurent uveitis in
 treatment of giant retinal tears with
1998.
a horse in the United States, Proceedings of
proliferative vitreoretinopathy. Int
 Dwyer A, Gilger BC: Equine recurrent uveitis. In
the 38th Anmual Meeting of the American
Ophthalmol Clin 32:1-14. 1992.
Gilger BC. editor: Equine Ophthalmology.
College of Veterinary Ophthatmologists:
Hutton WL, Fuller DG: Silicone oil in treatment
St Louis. 2005. Saunders. pp 285-322.
Abstract 99:2007.
of retinal disease. Ophthalmol Clin North Am
 Frihauf B, Ohnesorg B. Deegen E, Boeve M:
 Strobel BW, Wilkie DA, Gilger BC: Retinal
7:89-99.1994
Surgical management of equine recurrent
detachment in horses: 40 cases [1998-
Kaufman HE: Vitrectomy from the anterior
Lveitis with single port pars plana vitrectomy.
2005). Vet Ophthalmol 10:380-385. 2007.
approach. Ophthalmic Surg 6:58-65. 1975.
Vet Ophthalmol 1:137-151. 1998.
Tomordy E: Verlaufsstudie der vitrehtomie bei
Kim RY, D'Amico Dl: Postoperative
Gesell S. Brem S. Gerhards H, Wollanke B:
equiner rezidivierender uweitis. Zurich. 2009.
complications of pneumatic retinopexy, Int
 Examination of normal equine eyes for the
Vetsuisse Faculty.
Ophthalmol Clin 40:165-173. 2000.
386
Surgery of the retina
Kloti R: Pars-plana Vitrektomie bei chronischer McDonald HR. Schatz H. Johnson RN: Treatment Verbracken H: Therapeutic pars plana
Uveitis. Klin Monatsbl Augenheilhd 192
 of retinal detachment associated with optic 
vitrectomy for chronic uveitis: a
(5):425-429. 1988.
pits, mt Ophchalmol Clin 32:35-42. 1992.
retrospective study of the long-term results.
Krzystolik MG, D'Amico Dl: Complications of
fScott RA, Haynes RJ. Orr: Vitreous surgery in
Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthatmol
intraocular tamponade: silicone oil versus
 the management of chronic endogenous 
234:288-293.1996.
intraocular gas. Int Ophthalmol Clin
posterior uveitis. Eye 17(2):221-227. 2003.
Werry H, Honegger H: Pars-plana vitrektomie
40:187-200, 2000.
Tornambe PE: Pneumatic retinopexy: current
bei chronischer uveitis, Klin Monatsbt
Leaver PK: Ulse of intravitreal liquid silicone. Imt
 status and future directions, nt Ophthalmol
Augenheilkhd 191:2-7, 1987.
Ophthalmol Clin 32:81-93. 1992.
Clin 32:61-80. 1992.
387
Note: page numbers in italics refer to tables. page numbers in bold refer to figures. page numbers followed by a 'b' refer to boxes.
A
Anterior chamber (Comtimued)
Anterior uveal surgery [Comiued]
 gonioimplants see Anterior chamber shunts
sphincterotomy 249-52.251
Abdelbaki orbitotomy 79. 80
(gonioimplants)
see also lris: glaucoma surgery
Abscesses
perioperative considerations 243. 248. 273
surgical pathophysiology 242-3
deep stromal corneal 225. 225. 226. 227,
surgery of 243-8
see also Ciliary body: lris
228
corneal incisions 245-6. 311
Anterior vitrectomy 363. 364. 366-9. 370-3
 orbital 59
cyclodialysis 276-81, 277. 280. 282-3.
 Antibiotics
Acepromazine 18, 40. 47
283
 after enucleation 84
Adenocarcinoma
foreign bodies 248
for conjunctival lacerations 161
nictitating membrane 187. 187
for hyphema 247-8. 247
for corneal diseases 191. 201
tarsal 126. 129
for hypopyon 246. 247
for dacryocystitis 146
Adenoma. ciliary body 256
keratocentesis 244-5. 248
intravitreal 365. 365
Adhesives, corneal 215-16
 in large animals 259-61
for orbital abscesses 59
Adrenaline (epinephrine)
limbal incisions 245-6. 311. 322
perioperative use of 30-1
anesthetic drugs and 43
parasites 248. 248
for cataract surgery 344
for intraoperative hemostasis 25. 30
postoperative care 248
for corneal surgery 194. 195. 215
mydriasis with 31, 43
surgical pathophysiology 242-3
for iris prolapse in horses 214
 Adrenergic agents. neuroprotectant 301
Anterior chamber shunts (gonioimplants)
for orbital surgery 59-60. 81. 84
Advancement (hood, 180°) conjunctival grafts
269. 284-94.289
Antifibrin drugs
166. 168-9.169, 207
complications of 292-3, 292. 292-3
for hyphema 247
Alcurium 42
implant design 284-6. 284. 286. 287
perioperative use of 30, 243. 344
Amniotic membrane grafts 174, 204. 208-9.
 in large animals 293-4
Antifibrotic agents 31. 268. 287. 292
209
postoperative management 291-2
Antifungal medications 195. 365
Anesthesia 37-48
shunt types 285
 Anti-inflammatory agents
for cataract surgery 321
surgical procedures for 287
 anterior chamber pathophysiology and
general 24
facial vein shunt 290
242-3
choice of 47
frontal sinus shunt 290-1
for iris prolapse in horses 214
inhalational 39. 40-1
 intraorbital/subconjunctival implant
perioperative use of 30. 31. 194-5
injectable 39. 40
287-90. 289
Antiseptic solutions 21
in large animals 47-8
 jugular vein shunt 290
Aphakic glaucomas 348. 348
neuromuscular blocking agents and 24.
parotid duct shunt 291, 291
Applanation tonometry 267. 267
41-2. 195. 321
subcutaneous shunt 290
Aqueous humor 237. 243
ophthalmic dnug interactions with 42-3
Anterior nictitans anchoring technique 181.
anatomy 240. 241, 270-1
ophthalmic effects of 37-9. 195
182. 183
flow pathways 270-1, 271
 preanesthetic medications with 39-40
Anterior orbitotomy 79-81
 glaucoma surgery pathophysiology
recovery from 47. 48
Anterior uveal surgery
272-3
systemic diseases and 43
anatomy 239-42.269. 270
 glaucoma surgery procedures 273-4
 local/regional eyelid injections/nerve blocks
corneal incisions for 246
 anterior chamber shunts (gonioimplants)
43-4. 94
diseases managed by 237-8. 239
284-94
retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks 23. 24.
iridocorneal angle see lridocorneal angle
corneoscleral trephination 281-2. 282
37. 44-7. 67. 72-3
laser treatment of cysts 29. 258. 260. 261
cyclodestructive 270. 294-9. 295.
Anterior capsule forceps 4. 5. 6
laser treatment of neoplasms 258-9
297-9
Anterior capsule opacities 345. 348. 349
 perioperative considerations 243
cyclodialysis 276
Anterior capsule scissors 7-8
procedures 248-58
iridencleisis 275
Anterior capsule tears 213. 344-5
coreoplasty 248, 252. 253
glaucoma treatment options 268. 269
Anterior capsulectomies 322-4. 344-5
iridocyclectomy 248, 256-8. 257
 intraoperative fibrin in 344
Anterior chamber
iridotomy 248-9. 250
keratocentesis 244-5
anatomy 239-40. 269
iris bombe 248. 255-6. 255
Aqueous misdirection syndrome 265-6
cataract surgery
iris prolapse 210. 211-13. 212. 213-14
Argon lasers 28
entry through 322
in large animals 259-61
 Arrowhead procedure for lateral canthal
surgical pathophysiology 312
sectoral iridectomy 248. 252-4. 253.
mntropion 110. 110. 123. 123
diseases of 237
270
Artificial eyes 71
389
Index
Aspiration
Bridge (bipedicle) conjunctival grafts 166.
Cataract surgery (Contirmued)
cataract 309. 320. 321
168. 168. 169. 169.206-7.207
 intraocular lenses
subretinal fluid 373. 374
Buccal mucosa grafts 164
anterior capsulectomies 322. 324
vitreal 362-3, 365-6
 Bucket handle (Cutler-Beard) eyelid grafts
capsulorhexis 322
Atracurium 42. 195. 321
131-2. 131. 134
development of 308. 309-11
Atropine
 Bulbar conjunctiva 158. 159
equine 332, 333, 340
mydriasis with 31, 194. 318
biopsy 160-1
implantation of 334, 339-41
 oculorespiratory cardiac reflex and 38-9
defect repair 162
 as preanesthetic medication 38-9
grafts 164, 165. 166. 166. 167-70, 167-70.
 postoperative complications 350
Avian species see Birds
175-6. 175. 203, 203. 205-6
intraoperative complications 343-5
Avulsion of the globe 58
lacerations 161
iris bombe following 255-6. 314
symblepharon 162-3. 162
mydriasis for 39
Bullous spectaculopathy 148-50
neuromusaular blocking agents 24. 42. 321
B
Burow triangles 129
 operating conditions 321
Barbiturates 40
Butorphanol 48. 72
 operating microscopes for 20, 321
Bard-Parker blades 8. 11
patient selection 314-16
 Barraquer eyelid speculum 2
peripheral iridectomies 322
c
Barraquer forceps 5
phacoemulsification 308, 309, 320. 321,
 Barraquer iris scissors 7. 7
Calcium channel blockers 301
324-34. 351-2. 351-2
Barraquer needle holder 9
Calipers 10
instruments for 5. 8. 11. 325-6. 330. 332
Barrier retinopexy 376
Canaliculi (lacrimal canals)
 phacofragmentation 309
Barth nerve block 45. 45
anatomy 141-2
postoperative care 334. 342-3
 Basher orbitotomy 81
lacerations of 145-6
postoperative complications 343, 345-52
 BCG im munotherapy
Cancer eye see Bovine squamous cell
 preoperative preparation 313. 316. 319-20
for sarcoid 136-7. 137
carcinoma
 procedure options 320-1. 320
for squamous cell carcinoma 135.
Canine species see Dog[s)
surgical anatomy 311-12, 311
233
Cannulas 10
surgical exposure 321-2. 343-4
BD microsurgical blades 8
Can-opener capsulectomy 323. 324. 324
surgical pathophysiology 312-14
 Beaver blades 8. 11
Canthus 92
 systemic diseases and 43. 315
 Bedford modifed Kuhnt-Szymanowski
 see also Lateral canthus: Medial canthus
Cataracts. postoperative 383
procedure 118-19. 119
Capsulorhexis 322-4
Cat(s)
Berge retrobulbar nerve block 23. 45. 46
Carbon dioxide laser therapy 28-9
 anterior chamber surgery
Beta-blockers 301
for squamous cell carcinoma 136. 233
corneal incisions for 245
 Bigelbach technique for entropion 106
Cardiac reflex, oculorespiratory 38-9
foreign bodies 248
with ectropion 118. 118
Cardiovascular disease 43
for hyphema 247-8
Biopsies
Castroviejo calipers 10. 10
hypopyon 238. 244. 248
chorioretinal 374. 375
Castroviejo corneal scissors 6. 7
keratocentesis 244
 conjunctival 160-1
Castroviejo cyclodialysis cannula 10
parasites 248
corneal 201, 202
Castroviejo eyelid speculum 2
anterior uveal diseases 237. 238
Bipedicle (bridge) conjunctival grafts 166.
Castroviejo forceps 5
cliary body anatomy 242. 242
168. 168. 169, 169. 206-7.207
Castroviejo needle holder 9. 9
iris anatomy 240. 240, 241
Birds
Cataract surgery 305-6
iris cysts 238, 252. 258. 258
iris anatomy 241
alternatives to 316-19. 317
neoplasms 237-8. 239, 252. 254-5.
nictitating membrane surgery 158. 160
anesthesia 321
256-8
 orbital surgery in
anterior capsulectomies 322-4. 344-5
surgical pathophysiology 242
enucleation 60. 74-6. 75-6
 anterior chamber entry for 322
anterior uveal surgery
orbital anatomy 56-7. 57
anterior vitrectomy after 367-8
coreoplasty 252. 253
orbital inflammation and 58
aspiration 309, 320.321
iridectomy 252-4. 253
orbitotomy 76
capsulorhexis 322-4
iridocyclectomy 256-8. 257
surgical instrumentation for 2. 11
cataract classification 306-7. 307.
iridotomy 248-9.250
 Bleeding see Hemorrhage
307
iris bombe 255
 Blepharoplasty. reconstructive
cataract resorption and 316-18
sphincterotomy 249-52. 251
in cattle 137-8
corneal incisions for 246. 311. 322
blindness 319
in the horse 133-5. 134
corneal pathophysiology and 194 
cataract surgery 305-6
for small animals 128-32. 129-32
discission 320. 321
alternatives to 318-19
Blepharospasm. secondary 94. 104
evolution of in dogs 307-8
 anterior vitrectomy after 367-8
 Blind animals 319
evolution of in horses 308-9
cataract classification 306-7
Blink reflex, eyelid function 93
extracapsular extraction 307. 308. 320
intracapsular extraction 334
 Blogg-Helper nictitating membrane flap
see also Cataract surgery:
intraocular lens implants 310. 340
186. 186
 phacoemulsification
intraocular pressure during 42
 Blood clots, intracameral see Hyphema
future of 352
magnification for 20
 Bovine species see Cattle
instruments for 12. 13
patient selection 314
Bovine squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC) 72.
corneoscleral scissors 7
phacoemulsification 324
72. 90. 137-8. 138. 234
lens loops 9. 10
postoperative care 342
Brachytherapy
phacoemulsification 5. 8, 11, 325-6. 330,
surgical anatomy 311-12
for sarcoid 137
332
systemic hypertension and 43
for squamous cell carcinoma 136. 136.
intracapsular extraction 307. 308. 309, 320.
conjunctival surgery
232-3
321. 334-5
diseases managed by 157
390
Index
Cat(s) (Contimued)
Cat(s) (Conimued)
Cattle [Contimued)
grafts 157. 164-73. 166. 174. 203.
for orbital inflammation 58. 59
squamous cell carcinoma 72. 72, 90, 137-8.
204-5. 205
for orbital neoplasms 59. 77
138. 234
neoplasms 161. 162
orbitotomy 60. 76-7. 81
strabismus 52
for symblepharon 162-3. 162. 163
 postoperative complications 84
Cautery units
 corneal surgery 191-2
strabismus and 52
for intraoperative hemostasis 25. 26
corneal anatomy for 192-3. 192
traumatic proptosis 82-3. 82
thermokeratoplasty 228. 229
corneal pathophysiology 193-4
 perioperative drugs for 31. 194-5
Cavitation bubbles 326
for deep ulcerations 164-73. 166. 174.
see also Cat(s); general anesthesia for
Cellulitis. orbital 58
201. 203-5. 205
positioning for surgery 20. 24
Celsus-Hotz procedure for entropion 105.
for foreign bodies 214-15. 215
retrobulbar injections in 23. 45
106. 106. 107.108. 112-13.113
keratoplasty (corneal graft) 217-25
scleral homografts 229-31
Central tarsal pedicle for entropion 107. 108
lacerations 210-13
self-induced trauma prevention 31-2
Chairs. operating room 20-1. 321
 preoperative considerations 194-5
subpalpebral medication systems 33
Chalazion 123, 124
superficial keratectomy 196-8. 197
surgical instrumentation for 195-6
Chalazion forceps 3. 4
superficial keratotomies 201
anterior lens capsule forceps 5
Chemotherapy
entropion in 103-4. 105
eyelid specula 2
for sarcoid 137
eyelid anatomy 90-1. 92. 92. 93
kmives 8
for squamous cell carcinoma 72. 136, 136.
eyelid injections/nerve blocks 44
rings 10. 24
233-4
eyelid surgery
scissors 6
Cherry eye (nictitating membrane gland
diseases managed by 90
vitreoretinal surgery 357
 protrusion) 178-84, 178-84
for distichiasis 100
anterior vitrectomy 366-9
Chlorhexidine 21
for entropion 105-7. 106. 111-12
hyalocentesis 364-5
 Chop technique. phacoemulsification 329
for eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
retinal detachments 361
Chorioretinal biopsy 374. 375
lacerations 90. 123-4
surgical pathophysiology 359-60
Cilia see Eyelashes
lateral canthotomy 24, 98
types of 363
Ciliary body
for neoplasms 90. 126-7. 126.132. 132
vitreal aspirations 366
anatomy 241-2. 241-2, 269. 270.
tarsorrhaphy 95-7
Cattle
358. 358
 general anesthesia for
anesthesia 72-3
corneal incisions for surgery on 246
injectable 40
eyelid injections/nerve blocks 44. 94
cysts 238. 239, 258
neuromuscular blocking agents and 41.
retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks 23.
glaucoma surgery
42. 195
24. 46. 46. 47. 72-3
cyclodestructive 270. 294-300, 295.
ophthalmic effects of 38. 39
 cancer eye see Cattle, squamous cell
297-300
 systemic diseases and 43
carcinoma
cyclodialysis 276-8. 277
glaucomas 265-6. 265
cataract surgery 306
cyclodialysis-iridencleisis 278-81, 280
 diode endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation
conjunctival surgery 157. 161
cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy 282-3. 283
295-6
corneal surgery
 pharmacologic ablation 299-300. 300
gonioimplants 269
anatomy for 193
neoplasms 254-5. 256-9. 260. 261
 pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
tG1 Aonosuloed eauon
 perioperative considerations 243. 248
body 299
for infectious keratoconjunctivitis 234
surgical pathophysiology 242. 272
surgical anatomy 269-71
preoperative treatment 195
surgical procedures for 248
laser therapy in 28-9. 231-2. 258. 295-6
for squamous cell carcinoma 234
iridocyclectomy 248. 256-8. 257
lens surgery
eyelid specula for 2
see also Ciliary body: glaucoma surgery
cataracts see Cat(s), cataract surgery
eyelid surgery
vitreoretinal surgery
lens removal 306
diseases managed by 90
hyalocentesis 358
luxated lenses 306. 334-6
eyelid anatomy for 91-2
 retinal detachment surgery 379-85.
limbal neoplasms 229-32
for neoplasms 72. 90
382-4
 nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
glaucomas 266
vitrectomy 364. 370-3
anatomy 141-2. 142. 150. 151
iris anatomy 240. 241
Ciliary sulcus-fixed 1OLs 338-9
catheterization 143
nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
Cisplatin 136. 136. 137. 233
conjunctivobuccostomy 148. 148
anatomy 142
Colibri forceps 5
conjunctivorhinostomy 147
diagnostic tests 143. 148
Colitz orbitotomy 81-2
dacryocystotomy 146-7
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 150
Collars. postoperative use of 31-2
diagnostic tests 142. 143
obstructions 148
Collie eye anomaly [CEA) 375-6. 376
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 150. 151-2.
 nictitating membrane surgery 157. 158.
 Complete (360°. Gundersen-type) bulbar
151
159-60. 188
conjunctival grafts 166. 167-8. 167-8.
 nictitating membrane surgery 157. 158
orbital surgery in
206
anatomy for 159-60
emucleation 72-4
Conjunctival maxillary sinusotomy 147-8
 everted nictitating membrane 176-7
evisceration with intraocular prostheses
Conjunctival mucosa envelope procedure
membrane flaps 185-7. 185
74
181-2. 183-4. 183
for neoplasms 187-8
orbital anatomy 56. 56
Conjunctival mucosa pocket procedure
 orbital surgery in
orbital inflammation and 58
182-4. 184
enucleation 60-3, 63. 84
for orbital neoplasms 59
Conjunctival surgery 157
evisceration with intraocular prostheses
orbitotomy 76
biopsy 160-1
63-5. 66. 84-5
 removal of prolapsed retrobulbar fat
conjunctival anatomy for 158-9. 158
incomplete orbital walls and 52-3
74
defect repair 162
orbital anatomy 54. 55
restraint of 48. 72
diseases managed by 157
 orbital growth and 58
sedation 48. 72
 general anesthesia for 47
391
Index
Conjunctival surgery (Comtinmued)
Cormeal surgery (Contimued)
Descemetoceles
grafts 157. 162. 163-76
for lacerations 210-14
conjunctival grafts for 165. 166, 175.
buccal mucosa to conjunctiva 164
 patient preparation for 21-2. 194-5
203
 conjunctiva to conjunctiva 164
perioperative drugs for 30. 194-5
corneal adhesives for 215-16, 216
conjunctiva to cornea 163-71. 173. 203.
superficial keratectomy 196-9
keratoplasty for 217. 219-20. 221-2
205-9
 superficial keratotomies 199-201
Descemet's membrane 192. 192. 193
corneoconjunctival 165. 171-3. 204-5
sutures for 14. 24. 246
 surgical pathophysiology 194
large animal adaptations 174-6
thermokeratoplasty 228. 229
Detomidine 48
permanent 173-4
see also Anterior chamber
DeWecker iris scissors 7
substitute materials for 174. 203-4.
Comeoconjunctival grafts 165. 171-3. 172.
 Diabetes mellitus
208-9
204-5.205
cataract surgery and 315. 315
instrumentation for 11-12. 165
 Comeoscleral prostheses 71
 general anesthesia and 43
forceps 3. 4. 5
Comeoscleral scissors 7
Diamond knives 9
scissors 6
Cormeoscleral transposition 204-5. 205
Diode lasers 28-9
laceration repair 161-2
Cormeoscleral trephination 281-2. 282
diode endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation
neoplasms 161, 162. 232. 233
Corpora nigra 241. 259
295-6. 298-9. 299
for overgrowth in rabbits 176
cysts 259-60. 260
iridal melanomas 259
 patient preparation 21
Corticosteroids
 transscleral cyclophotocoagulation 295.
resection for distichiasis 102
anterior chamber pathophysiology
296. 297-8. 297. 298
sutures for 14
243
uveal cysts 258
for symblepharon 162-3
diabetic dogs and 43
Discission. cataract surgery 320. 321
see also Nictitating membrane surgery
perioperative use of 30, 31. 195
Distichiasis 92. 100-3
Conjunctivobuccostomy 148. 148
Cosmetic globes 71
 combined entropion-distichiasis procedure
Conjunctivoralostomy 150
Cosmetic skin orbitectomy 82
107
Conjunctivorhinostomy 147. 147, 148
Cow[s) see Cattle
cyotherapy for 26. 27. 102. 103. 103
Continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC)
Cryotherapy 26-7
electroepilation for 26. 101
322-4. 323
for distichiasis 26-7. 102. 103, 103
 Divide and conquer phacoemulsification 329
Continuous tear capsulectomy (CTC) 323-4.
 prophylactic retinopexy 377
Dog(s)
323
for sarcoid 137
anterior chamber surgery
Coreoplasty 248. 252. 253
for squamous cell carcinoma 135, 138.
corneal/limbal incisions for 245
Corneal diseases 191
232
foreign bodies 248
 after evisceration 85
 Cutler-Beard (bucket handle) eyelid grafts
for hyphema 247-8
 cataract surgery and 314
131-2. 131. 134
parasites 248, 248
conjunctival grafts for 163-73. 174-6. 203.
Cyanoacrylate adhesive 216
 anterior uveal diseases 237
205-9
Cyclocryothermy 294-5. 295. 296-7
cliary body anatomy 242. 242
nictitating membrane flaps for 185-7. 188.
Cyclodestructive therapies 270. 294-9. 295.
ciliary body cysts 238
204. 210
297-9
iris anatomy 240. 240. 241
pathophysiology of ulceration 193
cyclocryothermy 294-5. 295. 296-7
iris cysts 238.239. 252. 258
symblepharon 162-3
diode endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation
neoplasms 237-8. 238. 239. 252. 254-5.
see also Corneal surgery
295-6. 298-9.299
256-9
Corneal drying 38
in large animals 296-9. 297-9
surgical pathophysiology 242
Corneal injury, surgery causing 326. 346. 347.
pharmacologic ablation 299-300. 300
 anterior uveal surgery
383.383
transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation
coreoplasty 252. 253
Corneal surgery 191-228
295, 295, 296. 297-8, 297-9
iridectomy 252-4. 253.270. 278
adhesives for 215-16
Cyclodialysis 276-8. 277
iridocyclectomy 256-8
basic operative approach in 22-5
with iridencleisis 278-81, 280
iridotomy 248-9. 250
biopsies 201. 202
with iridocyclectomy 282-3, 283
iris bombe 255-6.255
corneal anatomy and 192-3
Cyclodialysis spatulas 9. 9. 10
sphincterotomy 249-52. 251
corneal grafts (keratoplasty) 164. 216-28
Cyclosporine [CsA) implants 369-70
blindness 319
corneal pathophysiology 193-4
Cysts. anterior uveal 29. 238. 239. 252. 258.
cataract surgery 305
 deep keratectomy 201
259-60. 260-1
alternatives to 316-18, 317, 318
for deep ulcerations 201-10
Cytokines 274. 286. 287
anterior capsulectomy 323. 344-5
conjunctival autografts 163-71. 173. 203.
anterior vitrectomy after 367-8
205-9
anterior vitreous presentation 345
corneoscleral transposition 204-5
D
bacterial contamination 21. 31. 344
primary closure of 202-3. 203
Dacryocystitis 146. 146. 148
capsulorhexis 323. 324
substitute graft materials 174. 203-4. 208-9
Dacryocystorhinography 143. 143. 148
cataract classification 306-7. 307
equine squamous cell carcinoma 232-4
Dacryocystotomy 146-7. 146
cataract resorption and 316-18
for foreign bodies 214-15
Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK)
 corneal edema after 346
general anesthesia for 47. 48
225.227
corneal pathophysiology and 194
incisions for anterior chamber entry 245-6.
 Deep lamellar endothelial keratoplasty
corneal ulcerations after 347. 348
322
(DLEK) 225.227.228
evolution of 307-8
instrumentation for 4. 12. 195-6. 218. 245
Deep stromal corneal abscesses [DSA) 225.
exposure 343-4
forceps 3. 4. 5
225.226.227.228
fibrin in the aqueous humor 344
knives 8. 9
Demarcation retinopexy 376
fibropupillary membranes 348-50. 349.
needles 14
Dermoids
369
rings 10
conjunctival 162. 162
glaucoma after 348
scissors 6-7
corneal 196. 196
hyphema after 347
392
Index
Dog(s) (Comtimued)
Dog(s) (Contimued)
Dog(s) (Continued)
intracapsular extraction 334. 334
forehead skinfolds and 107-8. 108. 109.
 nictitating membrane surgery 157. 158
intraocular lenses 309-10. 310, 334.
109. 110
anatomy for 159-60.160
339-42. 339. 340. 350
for lacerations 123-4. 125
cherry eye 178-84. 178-84
intraoperative complications 343-5
lateral canthotomy 24-5. 98
everted membrane 176-7. 176-7
iridocyclitis 345-6. 346. 348
for nasal fold trichiasis 123. 124
membrane flaps 185-7
iris bombe following 255-6
for neoplasms 89. 126. 126. 129, 130.
 membrane protrusion 184-5. 184
lens capsule opacities 345. 348. 349. 350.
131. 132
for neoplasms 187-8. 187
367
 orbital surgery in
lens capsule tears 344-5
123
 enopthalmia and 53
magnification for 20
for palpebral fissure size reduction
enucleation 60-3. 60. 62, 63. 84. 84
miotic pupil 344
120-2. 120-2
 evisceration with intraocular prostheses
neuromuscular blocking agents and 24.
preliminary examination for 93-4
63-5. 66. 84-5. 85. 86
42. 321
 incomplete orbital walls and 52-3
 patient selection 314-15. 316
tarsorrhaphy 83. 95-7. 95
 orbital anatomy 53-4, 54
perioperative drugs with 31. 39
for trichiasis 107-8. 108. 109. 123. 124
orbital growth and 58
phacoemulsification 8, 308, 324, 327-30,
 general anesthesia for
for orbital inflammation 58. 59
328
injectable 40
for orbital neoplasms 59. 59. 60. 77. 86
 posterior capsule opacities 345. 348. 349.
neuromuscular blocking agents and 24.
orbitectomy 60. 77. 86
350.367
41,41, 42. 42.195. 321
orbitotomy 60. 76-81. 78, 80, 86
 postoperative care 342
ophthalmic effects of 38-9, 40-1
 postoperative complications 84. 84
 postoperative complications 343. 343.
 preanesthetic medications with 40
strabismus and 52. 86
345-51. 348-51
systemic diseases and 43
traumatic proptosis 82-3. 83. 86
retinal detachment 316. 350-1. 351, 360.
glaucomas 263-5. 264
perioperative drugs for 31, 39. 194-5
383
anterior chamber shunts 269, 284-93.
see also Dog(s); general anesthesia for
surgical anatomy 311-12
289
positioning for surgery 20. 22-3. 24. 39. 45.
surgical pathophysiology 312-13
corneoscleral trephination 281-2. 282
321
systemic diseases and 43. 315
cyclodestructive procedures 294-6. 295
retinal detachment 316. 350-1. 351
transient 1OP hypertension 346-7
cyclodialysis 276-8. 277
see also Dog[s): vitreoretinal surgery
wound leakage 347
 cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy 282-3.
retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks 22-3.
conjunctival surgery
283
23. 39. 45. 45
biopsy 160. 161
diagnostic procedures 267
scleral homografts 229-31. 231
defect repair 162. 164
gonioimplants 269
 self-induced trauma prevention 31-2
diseases managed by 157
inidectomy 278. 281
skin preparation for surgery 21
grafts 157. 164-73. 174. 203
inidencleisis 275-6. 275-6
subpalpebral medication systems 33. 33
neoplasms 161. 162
inidencleisis-cyclodialysis 278-81, 280
surgical instrumentation for 195-6
palpebral conjunctiva 159
lens removal prior to surgery 274-5
anterior lens capsule forceps 5
for symblepharon 162-3
 pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
eyelid specula 2
corneal surgery 191-2
body 299-300. 300
intraocular lens instrumentation 5
corneal anatomy for 192-3. 192
postoperative 348
knives 8
corneal pathophysiology 193-4
 preoperative treatment 273
phacoemulsification 8
for deep ulcerations 164-73. 174. 201.
surgical anatomy 269-71
rings 10.11.24
202. 203-4
surgical pathophysiology 271-3
scissors 6. 11
for foreign bodies 214-15. 214-15
treatment options 267-8. 269
systemic diseases in 43. 315
keratoplasty (corneal graft) 217-25.
laser therapy in 28-9, 29. 231-2. 255-6.
vitreoretinal surgery 357
218
258-9
anterior vitrectomy 366-9
lacerations 210-13. 210
lens surgery
chorioretinal biopsies 374, 375
 preoperative considerations 194-5
 cataracts see Dog(s). cataract surgery
demarcation retinopexy 376
superficial keratectomy 196-8. 196
ciliary sulcus-fixed 1OLs 338-9
hyalocentesis 364-5
superficial keratotomies 199-201.
lens removal 306
intravitreal antibiotics 365
199-200
luxated lenses 306. 334-9. 342
 pneumatic retinopexy 375
thermokeratoplasty 228. 228, 229
limbal neoplasms 229-32. 229. 230-1
postoperative complications 383-5
diabetes mellitus in 43. 315. 315
medial canthal pocket syndrome 53
 preoperative considerations 363
Elizabethan collars for 31-2. 32
nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
 prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
emophthalmia in 25. 53
anatomy 141-2,142.150,151
retinal detachments 360. 362. 362-3.
entropion in 103-12, 123
catheterization 143. 144
373. 377-85
extraocular muscle myositis in 52
conjunctival maxillary sinusotomy
surgical anatomy 357-9. 358
eyelid injections/nerve blocks 44, 94. 94
147-8
surgical pathophysiology 359-60
eyelid surgery
conjunctivobuccostomy 148. 148
therapeutic retinopexy 375-6. 376
diseases managed by 89
conjunctivorhinostomy 147
types of 363
for distichiasis 100-3. 101-2. 107
dacryocystotomy 146-7, 146
vitreal aspirations 365. 366
for ectopic cilia 103
diagnostic tests 142-3. 143. 150
 Dorsal orbitotomy
for ectropion 108. 114-20. 115-17.
displaced lower punctum 145
in the horse 81
118-19
imperforate punctum 144-5, 144
in small animals 79
for entropion 103. 105-12. 106-11.
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 150. 151-5.
Draping 22
117-20. 118-19. 123
151. 153-4
Drugs. perioperative 30-1. 42-3. 47-8
for eyelid agenesis 98
lacerations of the canaliculi 145-6
for anterior uveal surgery 243
eyelid anatomy for 90-1. 91. 92. 93. 101
lower micropunctum 145
for cataract surgery 319-20, 344
393
Index
Drugs. perioperative (Contimued)
Exenteration (Comtimued)
Eyelid surgery (Continmued)
for corneal surgery 194-5
orbital volume augmentation after 83
for palpebral fissure size alteration 120-3
for glaucoma surgery 273
 postoperative complications 85. 86
 preoperative examination 93-4
for orbital surgery 59-60. 81. 84
in small animals 67
 special considerations in 94-5
see also Anesthesia: specific drugs
Exophthalmia. orbital surgery and 51-2. 58
sutures for 14. 95
 Dziezyc-Millichamp procedure 99-100. 100
Expanding vitreous syndrome 341
tarsorhaphy 83. 84. 85. 95-7. 118
Extracorneal bullous spectaculopathy 148-50
E
Extraocular muscle myositis 52
Extraocular muscle tone 39. 41-2. 43. 195
F
Ectopic cilia 101, 103.103
 Extrascleral shell implants 71
 Facial vein-anterior chamber shunt 290
Ectropion 114-17. 115
Eyelashes
 Fat. prolapsed retrobulbar 74
entropion and 108. 117-20
anatomy 90. 91. 101
 Fat pads. in Vietnamese potbellied pig
Edrophonium 42
distichiasis 26. 27. 92. 100-3. 107
113-14
Electrocautery
ectopic 101, 103. 103
Feline species see Cat[s)
for entropion 104
electroepilation of 26. 101
Fibrin 30. 243
for intraoperative hemostasis 25. 26
 presurgical clipping of 21
anterior chamber shunts 292. 292
Electroepilation 26. 101
Eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
hyphema 247-8
Electroretinography (ERG) 316. 361
Eyelid anatomy 90. 90. 95
intraoperative excess 344
Elizabethan collars 31-2
blood supply 93
see also Antifibrin drugs
Emphysema, orbital 84
eyelashes 90. 101
Fibrin glue 216
'En bloc' enucleation see Transpalpebral
glands 90-1
Fibropupillary membranes 348-50. 349. 369
enucleation
gray line 95
Fibrosing strabismus 52
Endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation 295-6.
innervation 93
Fibrotic response. glaucoma surgeries 272-3.
298-9.299
lymphatics 93
287.290.292
Enophthalmia 25. 51. 53
muscles 91-3. 91. 92
Fistulas. post-enucleation 84
Entropion 103
 palpebral conjunctiva 92
Fixation rings 10. 24
non-surgical treatment 103-5. 112. 113
skin 90.91
Flieringa rings 10. 24
surgical management
tarsal glands 92. 95
 Flieringa-LeGrand rings 24
of ectropion and 108. 117-20
tarsal layer 92
Fluorescein test. nasolacrimal system 142
in the horse 112-13
Eyelid diseases 89-90
 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)
in sheep 113
see also Eyelid neoplasms: Eyelid surgery:
for glaucomas 268. 287. 292
in small animals 105-12. 117-20. 123
diseases managed by: specific diseases
for squamous cell carcinoma 136. 233
in Vietnamese potbellied pig 113-14
Eyelid function 93. 94-5
Forceps 2. 3-6. 11
Entropion forceps 3. 4
Eyelid injections/nerve blocks 43-4. 94
Forehead skinfolds 107-8. 108. 109. 109.
Enucleation procedure 60
Eyelid neoplasms
110. 113-14
in birds 60. 74-6. 75-6
in cattle 72. 90, 127. 137-8
 Foreign bodies
in cattle 72-4
in the horse 90. 127. 132-7. 232. 233
anterior chamber 248
in the horse 67-70. 71. 71
in small animals 89. 90. 126-32
corneal 214-15. 214-16
orbital volume augmentation afer 83
Eyelid skin 90. 91
Fornices. conjunctival 158-9. 185-6. 186
 postoperative complications 68-9, 84. 86
 grafts for eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
Four-sided full-thickness eyelid excision 127.
in small animals 60-3
orbital rim resection for defects of 82.
128. 133. 133
indications for 60
135
 Fractures. orbital 58. 81. 82
lateral approach 62-3. 65
preparation 21
 Free [island) conjunctival grafts 166. 171. 171.
 postoperative complications 84
 repair after neoplasm removal
172. 173. 208
subconjunctival approach 61. 62
in cattle 137-8. 137
Frontal sinus-anterior chamber shunt 290-1
transpalpebral approach 61-2. 64
in the horse 133-5, 134
Frozen [tectonic) keratoplasty 217, 223-5.
Enzymatic therapy. for hyphema 247-8
in small animals 128-32. 129-32
226
 Epinephrine (adrenaline)
Eyelid specula 2
Fuch lateral canthoplasty 121-2. 122
anesthetic drugs and 43
Eyelid surgery 89-138
 Fungal infections
for intraoperative hemostasis 25. 30
adaptations from human surgery 90
orbital involvement 58-9
mydriasis with 31. 43
anesthesia for 43-4. 47. 94
 perioperative drugs for 195
Episcleral fixation., nictitating membrane flap
qyotherapy in 26. 27. 102. 103
186-7. 187
diseases managed by 89-90
Equine recurrent uveitis (ERU) 315. 331, 333.
agenesis 98-100
G
334.369-73
chalazion 123
Equine species see Horse[s)
distichiasis 26. 27. 100-3. 107
General anesthesia see Anesthesia, general
Evisceration
ectopic cilia 103
Gentamicin. for ciliary body ablation
for enucleation in birds 76
ectropion 108. 114-20
299-300.300
with intraocular prosthesis
entropion 105-14. 117-20. 123
Gills-Welsh lens loop 10
in cattle 74
lacerations 123-6
Glaucoma filtration surgery (GFS) 286-7
in the horse 70-1
neoplasms 89, 90. 126-38. 232. 233
Glaucomas 263-301
in small animals 63-5. 66. 84-5. 85. 86
secondary blepharospasm and 94. 104
aphakic 348, 348
postoperative complications 84-5. 86
trichiasis 107-8. 123
bovine 266
Excimer lasers 28
eyelid anatomy for 90-3. 95
canine 263-5. 264
Exenteration
eyelid preparation for 95
dlassification 267-8. 268b
in cattle 72
the gray line 95. 96
diagnostic procedures 266-7
in the horse 71-2
instrumentation for 3. 4. 11-12. 95
equine 266
 of orbital neoplasms 59. 71-2. 74
lateral canthotomy 24-5. 62-3. 83. 98
feline 265-6. 265
394
Index
Glaucomas (Contimued)
Hair
Horse[s) (Comtimued]
iris bombe 255. 256
 presurgical clipping of 21
squamous cell carcinoma 232-4. 232
keratocentesis and 245
trichiasis 107-8. 108. 109. 123. 124
superficial keratectomy 198-9. 199
laser therapy for 29. 255-6. 295-9. 295.
see also Eyelashes
 temporary tarsorhaphy 210
297-9
Halothane 41. 43
thermokeratoplasty 228
medical treatments 24. 267-9. 268b
Harvey orbitotomy 77-9. 78
eyelid specula for 2
neuroprotection 300.301
Haws see Nictitating membrane
eyelid surgery
 pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary body
Head positioning 20. 21-2. 321
aftercare 97. 113. 135
299-300
Head-mounted magnifiers 18
diseases managed by 90
postoperative 348. 383.383
Helper-Blogg nictitating membrane flap 186.
for ectropion 117
 preoperative treatment 273
186
for entropion 112-13. 113
in rabbits 266. 266
Hemorrhage
eyelid anatomy for 91. 92-3
surgical anatomy 269-73
hyphema 247. 247.347
for lacerations 124-6. 125
surgical instrumentation for 12. 13
intraoperative 25. 26. 30. 95
for neoplasms 90. 127. 132-7, 232.
cyclodialysis spatulas 9
orbital 84
233
surgical pathophysiology 271-3
Hemostasis. intraoperative 25, 26. 30. 95
tarsorrhaphy 97
surgical procedures for 267-9. 273-5
Heparin 30. 243. 344
glaucomas 266
anterior chamber shunts/gonioimplants
Hepatic disease 43
 anterior chamber shunts 293-4
269. 284-94. 289
Hood (advancement, 180°) conjunctival grafts
cyclodestructive therapies 296-9. 297-9
corneal incisions for 246
166. 168-9. 169. 207
pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
corneoscleral trephination 281-2. 282
Horse(s)
body 299. 300
cyclodestructive 270. 294-300. 295.
anesthesia
surgical anatomy 270. 271
297-300
eyelid injections/nerve blocks 43-4. 94
laser therapy in 29. 136. 233. 260. 261.
cyclodialysis 276-8. 277
general 46. 48. 67
297-9
cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy 282-3. 283
retrobulbar injections/nerve blocks 23.
lens surgery
enucleation 60-1
45-6. 67
cataracts see Horse[s). cataract surgery
evisceration with intraocular prostheses
anterior chamber surgery 237. 259-61
luxated lenses 306. 335. 335
63. 64. 86
foreign bodies 248
 nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
iridectomy 278. 279
for hyphema 247-8
anatomy 142
iridencleisis 275-6. 275-6
keratocentesis 244
catheterization 143
iridencleisis-cyclodialysis 278-81, 280
parasites 248
diagnostic tests 143. 148
mechanisms of 273-4. 274
anterior uveal diseases 237
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 150. 155
ophthalmic-anesthetic drug interactions
ciliary body anatomy 242
obstructions 148. 149
42
cysts 259-60. 260, 261
 parotid duct transposition 155
types of 263, 264b
iris anatomy 240. 241
neuromuscular blocking agents in 24.
Globe-collapsing enucleation for birds 74-6.
neoplasms 260-1. 261
321
75-6
surgery for 259-61
nictitating membrane surgery 157. 158.
Goblet cells 159
blindness 319
159-60. 188
Goniodysgenesis 271-2
cataract surgery 306
for neoplasms 188
Gonioimplants see Anterior chamber shunts
volution of 308-9
 orbital surgery in
(gonioimplants)
intracapsular 335
enucleation 67-70. 67. 69. 71. 71
Gonioscopy 267. 267
intraocular lens implants 310-11. 340
evisceration with intraocular prosthesis
Goodhead orbitotomy 81-2
patient selection 314. 315. 316
70-1
Graefe forceps 3. 4. 4
phacoemulsification 309. 324. 330-4.
exenteration 71-2
Graefe strabismus hook 9
331. 333-4. 351-2. 351-2
orbital anatomy 54-6. 55
Grafts
postoperative care 342-3. 343
for orbital fractures 82
 after eyelid mass removal
 postoperative complications 351-2. 351-2
orbital growth and 58
in cattle 137-8. 137
preoperative preparation 319. 320. 331
orbital inflammation and 58
in the horse 133-5. 134
retinal detachment risk 316
for orbital neoplasms 59. 67. 81. 82
in small animals 128-32. 129-32
surgical anatomy 312
orbitotomy 76. 81-2
conjunctival 157. 162. 163-76
conjunctival surgery
 traumatic proptosis 83
corneal transplants see Keratoplasty
diseases managed by 157
positioning for surgery 20. 321
for eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
grafts 174-6. 175, 205-9
recurrent uveitis (ERU) 315. 331, 333, 334.
scleral 229-31. 229. 231
neoplasms 161. 162,232. 233
369-73
Granula iridica see Corpora nigra
for symblepharon 162
retinal detachment 316. 362
Grid keratotomy 199-200. 200, 201
corneal surgery
sedation of 47-8
Growth factors 273. 274, 286. 287
adhesives for 216. 216
self-induced trauma prevention 32. 97
Grussendorf procedure 119-20
anatomy for 193
squamous cell carcinoma in 67. 90. 132-3.
 Gundersen-type [360°) bulbar conjunctival
biopsy 202
134. 135-6. 188. 232-4
grafts 166. 167-8. 167-8. 206
corneal pathophysiology 194
strabismus in 52
Gutbrod-Tietz procedure 118
corneal transplantation [keratoplasty]
subpalpebral medication systems 32-4.
Guyton-Park eyelid speculum 2
225-8.225. 227
32-3. 214
for foreign bodies 215. 216
vitreoretinal surgery
H
grafts 174-6. 175, 203-4. 205-9, 207-9
 pars plana vitrectomy 370-3. 371
iris prolapse 213-14
suprachoroidal cyclosporine implants
H plasty
lacerations 213-14
369-70
in cattle 137-8. 137
 nictitating membrane flaps 210
Hotz-Celsus procedure for entropion 105.
in the horse 134. 134
perioperative drugs 195
106. 106. 107. 108. 112-13.113
395
Index
Hyalocentesis (vitreal paracentesis) 358.
Intraocular pressure (lOP) (Continued)
lris [Cortimued]
364-5. 365
cyclodestructive procedures 294. 295.
 peripheral iridectomy with cataract surgery
Hydroxyapatite orbital implants. for the horse
296. 298.300
322
71. 71
cyclodialysis 276
surgical pathophysiology 242. 243. 272. 272
Hyperosmotic agents 43. 321. 363
inidocyclitis 243
surgical procedures for 248
Hypertension
pharmacologic ablation of the ciliary
coreoplasty 248.252.253
 ocular see lntraocular pressure
body 300
iridectomy 248. 252-4.253. 270. 278.
systemic 43
 preoperative treatment 273
281
Hyperthermia see Radiofrequency
surgical pathophysiology 272
iridocyclectomy 248. 256-8. 257. 282-3
hyperthermia
keratocentesis and 245. 248
iridotomy 248-9. 250
Hyphema 247-8. 247. 347
sedatives in the horse and 48
iris bombe 248. 255-6.255
Hypopyon 238. 244. 246. 248
Intraocular silicone prostheses se Intrascleral
prolapse 210, 211-13. 212. 213-14
silicone prostheses
sphincterotomy 248. 249-52. 251
Intraocular surgery
see also lris: glaucoma surgery
 basic operative approach in 22-5
lris bombe 248. 255-6. 255. 314
llumination systems 20
general anesthesia for 47
lris forceps 5
Immunomodulators
instrumentation for 12. 13
lris hooks 9
 cyclosporine implants 369-70
cnnulas 10
lris scissors 7
for glaucoma 301
forceps 4. 5-6
lrrigating solutions 30. 31
Immunotherapy
 intraocular lens instrumentation 5
lrrigation 10. 22
for sarcoid 136-7. 137
major intraocular surgical packs 17-18
lsland (free) conjunctival grafts 166. 171, 171.
for squamous cell carcinoma 135. 233
minor intraocular surgical packs 17
172. 173. 208
lmperforate lacrimal punctum 144-5. 144-5
scissors 7-8
lsoflurane 41. 43. 321
Implants
patient preparation for 21-2
anterior chamber shunts 269. 284-94. 289
perioperative drugs for 30
intraocular lenses see Intraocular lenses
see also specific surgeries
(I0Ls)
 Intraorbital hydroxyapatite implants.
 Jameson calipers 10. 10
orbital
71.71
Jameson muscle hook 9
in cattle 73. 74
 Intraorbital silicone prostheses 69-70
Jugular vein-anterior chamber shunt 290
in the horse 69-71. 71
Intrascleral silicone prostheses
in small animals 63-5. 66. 84-5. 85. 86
in cattle 74
K
suprachoroidal cyclosporine 369-70
for the horse 70-1
 symblepharon 162-3
postoperative complications 84-5. 85. 86
Kaswan lateral canthoplasty 122. 122
lnfections
for small animals 64. 65. 66. 84-5. 85
Keratectomy
postoperative 84
Intravitreal injections 365
deep 201
 prevention of see Antibiotics. perioperative
lridectomy 248. 252-4. 253. 270. 278. 281.
superficial 193-4, 196-9. 196-9
use of
322
Keratitis 196. 198
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis (1BK)
lridencleisis 275-6. 275-6
Keratocentesis 244-5. 244. 245. 248
234
with cyclodialysis 278-81. 280
Keratoconjunctivitis
 Inflam matory response
lridocorneal angle
infectious 234
cataract surgery 348
anatomy 242. 269.270
proliferative 229. 230
glaucoma surgeries 268. 272-3. 273-4.
evaluation 267, 267
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca [KCS) 150
286-7
surgical pathophysiology 271-2
acute 151, 178. 179,184, 185. 188
Instrumentation see Surgical instrumentation
lridocyclectomy 248. 256-8. 257
cataract surgery and 314
Intracapsular lens extraction 307. 308. 309.
with cyclodialysis 282-3. 283
 parotid duct transposition for chronic 150.
320. 321. 334-9. 342.343
lridocyclitis
151-5
Intranictitans tacking technique 181. 183. 184
cataract surgery and 312-13, 318-19. 318.
Keratomalacia 165
Intraocular injection cannulas 10
342. 345-6. 346. 348
Keratoplasty (corneal graft) 164. 216-28
Intraocular lenses [lOLs]
with gonoimplants 291
autogenous rotating full-thickness 220-1.
anterior capsulectomies 322. 324
keratocentesis and 248
222
capsulorhexis 322
parasite-related 248
autogenous sliding lamellar 219. 220
ciliary sulcus placement 338-9
postoperative 243. 254
donor cornea preparation 217-18. 219.
development of 308, 309-11
lridotomy 248-9. 250
219. 225
equine 332. 333. 340
lris
graft rejection 223. 227-8
implantation of 334. 339-41
anatomy 240-1.241,269. 270
heterologous 225
intraoperative complications 341-2
cataract surgery and 312-13. 318-19. 342.
history 217
 postoperative complications 350
345-6. 346
homologous full-thickness (penetrating)
surgical instrumentation for 5
corneal incisions for surgery on 246
221-3. 224, 225-6. 225
types of 340
cysts 238. 239. 252. 258. 259-60
homologous lamellar 219-20. 221
 Intraocular pressure (10P)
glaucoma surgery
in the horse 225-8. 225. 227
cataract surgery and 313. 315-16. 342. 346-7
cyclodialysis-iridocyclectomy 282-3.
indications for 217. 218, 218
ciliary body and 241. 242
283
instrumentation for 6. 7. 218
general anesthetics and 37-8, 40-2. 43
iridectomy 278.279, 281
 preoperative treatment 218-19
glaucomas 263.265. 266
inidencleisis 275-6. 275-6
tectonic [frozen) 217.223-5. 226
anterior chamber shunts 284-5. 291.
iridencleisis-cyclodialysis 278-81, 280
Keratotomies 199-201, 199-201
292. 293
neoplasms 238.239. 252, 254-5.254.
Ketamine
applanation tonometry 267
256-9. 260-1.261
for general anesthesia 40
classification 267-8
perioperative considerations 243. 248
for sedation of cattle 72
396
Index
Knapp straight strabismus scissors 6
Lens surgery (Contimued)
Microscopes. operating 18-20. 321
Knives 8-9. 11
capsulorhexis 322-4
Microsurgery
Koch orbitotomy 81-2
cataracts see Cataract surgery
instrumentation for 1
Kuhnt-Helmbold procedure 116. 116
corneal incisions for 246. 311. 322
magnification for 18-19
Kuhnt-Szymanowski procedure 116. 116.
displaced lenses 306. 313-14. 320, 321,
 operating room chairs for 20-1
117. 118-19
334-9. 342. 343-7
Midazolam 40
future of 352
Miosis 242
instruments for 12. 13
after cataract surgery 313
L
cyclodialysis spatulas 9
 intraoperative 344
Lacerations
forceps 4. 5. 6
Miotics
 conjunctival 161-2
intraocular lenses 5
anesthetic drugs and 42
corneal 210-14
lens loops 9. 10
 gonoimplants and 291
of the eyelid 90. 123-6
scissors 7-8
perioperative use of 30. 31, 273. 312
 of the lacrimal canals 145-6
Lens-induced uveitis (LlU) 312-13. 319. 352.
Mitomycin C 31. 268. 287
Lacrimal apparatus see Nasolacrimal apparatus
360
Moll gland 90-1
lichenstern retrobulbar injections 23. 45-6
and tear systems
Mucin 159
Laser therapy 27-30
Light systems 20
Munger-Carter procedure 117. 117
anterior uveal cysts 29. 258. 260. 261
Limbal anatomy 239-40
Muscle hooks 9. 9
 anterior uveal neoplasms 258-9
Limbal conjunctival cells 159. 165. 203
Mydriatics 30. 30. 43
for glaucoma 29. 255-6. 295-9. 295.
limbal surgery 229-32. 233
anterior uveal surgery 243
297-9
corneal scissors used at 6. 7
cataract surgery 344
of iris bombe 255-6
corneoscleral trephination 281-2. 282
corneal surgery 194. 195
for limbal melanomas 231-2
forceps 3
glaucoma surgery 373
 prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
incisions for anterior chamber entry 245-6.
gonoimplants and 291
squamous cell carcinoma 136. 233
322
long-term 318
 therapeutic retinopexy 375-6
knives 8. 9
Lashes see Eyelashes
rings 10
see also Anterior chamber: surgery of
N
Lateral canthoplasty 110-11. 111. 118
 palpebral fissure size changes 121-3. 121-3
Linear keratotomy 199-200, 201
Nagahara phacoemulsification 8
Lateral canthotomy 24-5. 98. 98
Local anesthesia
Narcotics 40
cataract surgery and 321-2
 eyelid injections 43-4. 94
Nasal fold trichiasis 123. 124
enucleation and 62-3
retrobulbar injections 23. 24, 45-6. 67.
 Nasolacrimal apparatus and tear systems
 palpebral fissure size augmentation 122-3.
72-3
141-55
123
luxated globe 58
anatomy 141-2. 150
 traumatic proptosis and 83
Luxated lenses 306. 313-14, 334-9
atheterization 143. 144
with V-shaped excision for eyelid neoplasms
Lymphoid follicles
diagnostic tests for 47, 142-3, 148.
127.127
conjunctival 159
150
Lateral canthus
of the nictitating membrane 160. 177-8.
diseases of 141
ectropion 115. 116. 116. 117. 118-20
178
nictitating membrane function 150. 160
entropion 106. 107. 109-11, 110. 118-20.
orbitotomy complications 85
123
M
surgical procedures for 143-55
palpebral fissure size increase 122-3
 conjunctival maxillary sinusotomy
 palpebral fissure size reduction 120.
 Magnifying instruments 18-20
147-8
121-2
Mannitol 321. 363
conjunctivobuccostomy 148
tendonectomy 111
 Mast cell sarcoma 60
conjunctivorhinostomy 147. 148
Z plasty skin flap for 130. 130
 Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 268. 273.
dacryocystotomy 146-7
see also Lateral canthoplasty: Lateral
273. 287
displaced lower punctum 145
canthotomy
 Maxillary sinusotomy 147-8
imperforate punctum 144-5
Lateral enucleation 62-3. 65
 Mayo scissors 11
keratoconjunctivitis sicca 150-5. 184
Lateral eyelid wedge excision procedure 115.
 McPherson-Vannas iris scissors 7
lacerations of the canaliculi 145-6
115
Medial canthal pocket syndrome 53
lower micropunctum 145
Lateral orbitotomy 77-9. 78. 80. 85
Medial canthoplasty 120-1. 121
obstructions in large animals 148
Lateral permanent tarsorrhaphy 121. 121
 Medial canthus. palpebral fissure size 120-1.
obstructions in snakes 148-50
Lateral tarsorrhaphy-canthoplasty 118.
121
parotid duct transposition 150. 151-5.
118
Medulloepithelioma 261. 261
151. 153-4
Lens
Meibomian glands see Tarsal (meibomian)
Nasolacrimal flush tests 47. 142-3
anatomy 306. 311-12. 311
glands
Nd:YAG laser therapy 28-9
capsule opacities 345. 348. 349, 350. 367
Melanomas
anterior uveal disease 29. 256. 258. 259.
capsule tears 213. 344-5
anterior uveal 158-9. 237, 238. 239. 254.
260
 cataracts see Cataract surgery
256. 260-1. 261
limbal melanomas 231-2
development of 305
eyelid 126. 128, 129
 transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation
intraocular see Intraocular lenses (lOLs)
limbal 229. 229. 230. 230-1. 231-2
295. 297-8. 298
iris bombe and 255. 256. 314
Memantine 301
 Needle holders 2. 9
Lens position, glaucoma surgery and
 Membrana nictitans see Nictitating membrane
Needles 14
272. 273
 Methoxyflurane 41
ultrasonic 326
 Lens removal. glaucoma surgery and 274-5
 Methyl methacrylate spheres 64
 Neoplasms
Lens surgery 306
 Metzenbaum scissors 11
 adjunctive therapeutic modalities 72.
anterior capsulectomies 322-4
Micropalpebral fissures 122-3. 123
135-7.138
397
Index
Neoplasms (Coninued]
Operating room (Continued]
Pancuronium 42
anterior uveal 237-8. 239. 252. 254-5.
 subpalpebral medication systems in
Pannus (chronic superficial keratitis)
256-9. 260-1
32-4
196.198
conjunctival 157. 161, 162. 233
see also specific procedures
Paracentesis
corneolimbal 229-32. 229. 230. 231. 233.
 Ophthalmic instruments see Surgical
 anterior chamber (keratocentesis) 244-5.
234
instnumentation
244.245.248
eyelid
Orbital abscesses 59
vitreal (hyalocentesis) 358. 364-5. 365
in large animals 72. 90. 127. 132-8. 232.
Orbital anatomy 53-7
Parasites 248. 248
233
Orbital emphysema 84
Parotid duct-anterior chamber shunt
in small animals 89. 90. 126-32
Orbital fractures 58. 81. 82
291. 291
laser therapy for 29
Orbital growth 58
Parotid duct transposition 150. 151-5. 151,
nictitating membrane 157. 187-8
Orbital implants see Implants, orbital
153-4
orbital 59
 Orbital inflammation 58-9
Pars plana ciliary body
enucleation 60. 60. 67. 68. 72
Orbital neoplasms 59
anatomy 358
exenteration 59. 71-2. 74. 86
enucleation 60, 60, 67. 68
hyalocentesis 358. 365
orbitectomy 60. 77. 81, 82. 86
exenteration 59. 71-2. 74. 86
retinal detachment surgery 379-85.
orbitotomy 77. 81. 86
orbitectomy 60. 77. 81, 82. 86
382-4
Nerve blocks 23. 24. 32.43-7. 67. 72-3
orbitotomy 77. 81. 86
vitrectomy 364. 370-3
secondary blepharospasm and 94
Orbital rim resection 82. 135
 Pectinate ligaments 271-2
 Neuromuscular blocking agents 24. 41-2.
Orbital skin preparation 21. 60
Pedicle grafts
195. 321
Orbital surgery 51-87
 after eyelid neoplasm removal 132. 132
Neuroprotectants 300-1. 301
diagnostic procedures prior to 51-3
conjunctival 164. 166. 169-71. 175-6. 203.
New Orleans lens spoon 10
disease margin definition for 51-2
206. 207-8
Nictitating membrane 157
diseases managed by 51
for eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
anatomy of 158. 159-60. 160
general anesthesia 47
 Penetrating keratoplasty ( PK)
diseases of 157-8. 187-8
instrumentation for 11. 14
in the horse 225-6. 225. 227. 228
function 160
orbital anatomy for 53-7
in small animals 221-3. 224
movement of 158
orbital pathophysiology and 57-9
Perfluorocarbon gases 362. 379. 384. 384
sutures for 14. 24
 perioperative medications 47, 59-60. 81. 84
Peterson retrobulbar nerve block 23. 24. 46.
tear production by 150, 160
postoperative care and management 84-7
46. 47. 72
Nictitating membrane surgery 176
procedures 60-83
Phacoemulsification 320, 321, 324-34
everted membrane 176-7
enucleation 60-3. 67-70. 73-6. 84. 86
chop technique 329
general anesthesia for 47
evisceration 60. 63-5. 66. 70-1. 76.
 corneal damage during 326
 hyperplastic lymphoid follicles 177-8
84-5. 86
divide and conquer technique 329
instrumentation for 11-12
exenteration 60, 67. 71-2. 85. 86
history of 308. 309
in large animals 188
for orbital fractures 81. 82
in the horse 330-4. 331, 333-4. 351-2.
membrane excision 187-8
orbital rim resection 82. 135
351-2
membrane flaps 185-7. 188. 204. 210
for orbital volume augmentation 83
instruments for 5. 8. 11. 325-6. 330,
 membrane gland protrusion (cherry eye)
orbitectomy 60. 77. 81, 82. 86
332
178-84
orbitotomy 60. 76-82. 85. 86
lens rotation 329-30
 membrane protrusion 184-5
 postoperative complications 68-9. 84-7
sculpting 329-30
Nitric oxide synthase [NOS) inhibitors 301
in traumatic proptosis 82-3. 86. 87-8
in small animals 327-30. 328
NMDA antagonists 301
 strabismus and 52. 86
Phenothiazine tranquilizers 40. 47
 Non-steroidal anti-inflam matory agents
sutures for 14
Pigmentary keratitis 196. 198
anterior chamber pathophysiology 242-3
Orbitectomy 60. 77. 81. 82. 86
Piroxicam 234
antitumor effects 234
Orbitotomy
Plica semilunaris see Nictitating membrane
for iris prolapse in horses 214
indications for 77
Pneumatic retinopexy 375
perioperative use of 30. 31, 194-5
 in large animals 81-2
Pocket canthoplasty procedure 120-1. 121
postoperative complications 85. 86
 Porcine small intestinal submucosa (SIS)
in small animals 76-81. 78. 86
grafts 174, 203-4
0
Owls. enucleation 74. 75
Posterior capsule opacities [PCOs) 345. 348,
Oculorespiratory cardiac reflex 38-9
349. 350. 367
O'Gawa-Castroviejo forceps 5
Posterior lamellar keratoplasty (PLK) 225.
P
180° (advancement, hood) conjunctival grafts
226-7.227.228
166. 168-9. 169. 207
 Palpebra tertia see Nictitating membrane
 Posterior nictitans anchoring technique
Operating room 17-34
Palpebral conjunctiva 92. 158. 159. 159
179-81. 180-1. 183
basic operative approaches 22-5
biopsy 160-1
Povidone-iodine 21
chairs in 20-1, 321
defect repair 162, 162
Preanesthetic medications 39-40
cyotherapy in 26-7
grafts 164. 165, 166. 170-1. 171. 172. 203.
Pre-iridal fibrovascular membranes (PlFMs)
electroepilation in 26
205-6
272.272
hemostasis in 25. 30
lacerations 161-2
Prolapsed retrobulbar fat 74
illumination of 20
symblepharon 162-3. 162
Prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
laser therapy in 27-30
Palpebral fissure
Propofol 40
magnifying instruments in 18-20. 321
lateral canthotomy 24-5. 62-3. 83. 98
Proptosis, traumatic 58. 82-3. 86, 87-8
 patient preparation in 21-2
muscles controlling 91. 91, 92. 92
 Prostaglandin analogs 301
 perioperative drugs in 30-1
surgery to decrease 120-2
Prostaglandins 242. 243
see also Anesthesia
surgery to increase 122-3
Prostheses see lmplants
postoperative patient care 31-2. 47
Palpebral nerve blocks 43. 44. 94
Punctate keratotomy 199-200. 200, 201
868
Index
Pupil
Retinal detachments [Comtimued)
Slatter orbitotomy 79. 80
cataract surgery and 313. 342. 344, 348-50.
 surgical pathophysiology 350-60
Sliding conjunctival grafts 166. 171-3
349
treatment principles 361
Sliding skin grafts
coreoplasty 248, 252. 253
Retinal procedures 360, 373
in cattle 137-8. 137
effects of general anesthetics on size of 39
barier retinopexy 376
in the horse 134-5
glaucoma surgery and 273
chorioretinal biopsy 374. 375
in small animals 128-9. 129. 131, 131
iris anatomy 240. 241
demarcation retinopexy 376
 Small intestinal submucosa (Sis) grafts 174.
iris bombe 255-6. 255
pneumatic retinopexy 375
203-4
perioperative drugs for 30. 31. 39. 194. 273.
prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
Snake[s) 148-50. 149
344
retinal detachment see Retinal detachments
Spatulas 9. 10
surgical pathophysiology 243
subretinal fluid aspiration 373. 374
Spectaculopathy. bullous 148-50
vitreoretinal surgery 364. 367
therapeutic retinopexy 375-6. 376
Sphincterotomy 248. 249-52. 251
Pupilloplasty (coreoplasty) 248. 252. 253
Retractors 9
Sponges 22
Pus. hypopyon 238. 244. 246. 248
Retrobulbar fat. prolapsed 74
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Retrobulbar injections 22-4. 44-7
bovine 72. 72. 90. 137-8. 138. 234
Q
in cats 23. 45
conjunctival 161. 162
in cattle 23. 24, 46. 47. 72-3
corneolimbal 229. 232. 233. 234
Quickert-Rathbun procedure 104-5. 105
 complications of 23-4, 46-7
equine 67, 90. 132-3, 134, 135-6. 188.
in dogs 22-3. 39. 45
232-4
in the horse 23. 45-6. 67
 in the eyelid
R
 Rhomboid graft. eyelid repair 134
in cats 126-7, 126
Rabbit
Rings 10-11. 24
in cattle 72. 72. 90. 137-8. 138
anterior chamber shunts 287
Ripping principle 322-3
in the horse 90. 132-3. 133. 134. 135-6.
conjunctival overgrowth 176. 176
136.232.233
corneal surgery 174. 194. 203-4
99.100.100
in the nictitating membrane 187. 188
glaucomas 266,266
Roberts-Jensen palpebral fissure size
 Stades combined entropion-trichiasis
hyphema 247
reduction 120-1. 121
procedure 107-8, 108. 109
 orbital anatomy 56
Robertson lateral canthal tendonectomy 111
Stay sutures 24
Radiation therapy
Sterilization of instruments 13
for sarcoid 137
 Steven tenotomy scissors 6
S
for squamous cell carcinoma 136. 136.
 Storz intraocular forceps 6
232-3
 Salaras procedure (thermokeratoplasty) 228.
 Storz intraocular scissors 8
Radiofrequency hyperthermia
228
Storz needle holder 9
for sarcoid 137
Sarcoid 133. 133. 135. 136-7. 137
Strabismus
for squamous cell carcinoma 135. 233
Schirmer tear test 38. 150
after traumatic proptosis 86
Rappazzo intraocular forceps 6
Scissors 2. 6-8, 11
 orbital diseases and 52
 Reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavengers.
Scleral buckles 378, 381. 382. 384
Strabismus hooks 9. 9
Scleral incisions 270. 277
Strabismus surgery 52. 86
Rectus muscle anatomy 269. 270. 359
Scleral surgery 229-32
Subconjunctival enucleation 61, G2, 67.
Rectus muscle surgery 52
 corneoscleral transposition 204-5
68. 74
 traumatic proptosis 86
instrumentation for 195-6
 Subpalpebral medication systems 32-4. 214
Regional nerve blocks 23. 24, 43-7. 67. 72-3
forceps 3
Succinylcholine 41-2
secondary blepharospasm and 94
knives 8.9
Suprachoroidal cyclosporine (CsA) implants
Renal disease 43
needles 14
369-70
 Restraint methods
scissors 7
Supraorbital nerve blocks 32, 43-4, 94
for cattle 48. 72
sutures for 14
Surgical instrumentation 1-14, 17-18
for horses 47-8. 97
Sedatives 40. 47-8. 72
calipers 10
postoperative 31-2. 97
Self-trauma, prevention 31-2, 47. 97
cannulas 10
 Retinal degeneration 316
Semicircular skin grafts 130. 130
care of 13
Retinal detachments
Shearing principle 322-3
for cataract surgery 7. 9. 10, 12. 13
cataract surgery and 316. 350-1, 351, 360
Sheep. entropion in 104. 113. 113
 phacoemulsification 5. 8. 11. 325-6. 330.
classification 360
Silicone buckles 378. 381, 382. 384
332
 dinical evaluation of 360-1. 361. 362
Silicone oils (SiOs) 362. 379. 384-5. 384
for conjunctival surgery 11-12
 demarcation retinopexy 376
Silicone prostheses
for corneal surgery 4. 12. 14
medical treatment 360
for cattle 73. 74
design of 1-2
preoperative considerations 363. 363
for horses 69-71
external surgical packs 17
 prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
for small animals 64. 65. 66
eyelid specula 2
subretinal fluid aspiration 373, 374
Skin, eyelid 90. 91
for eyelid surgery 11-12. 95
surgery for 358. 359, 377-85. 377
Skin grafts
forceps 2. 3-6. 11
 basic technique 378-9. 380-1
in cattle 137-8. 137
importance of microsurgical 1
pars plana approach 379-85, 382-4
for eyelid agenesis 98-100. 98-100
for intraocular surgery 4. 5-6. 7-8. 10. 12,
 patient selection 377-8
in the horse 133-5. 134
13. 17-18
postoperative complications
in small animals 128-32, 129-32
investment in 1
383-5. 383-4
Skin preparation 21
iris hooks 9
postoperative management 379. 382-3
Skinfolds
knives 8-9. 11
 preoperative medication 378
entropion and 107-8. 108, 109. 109. 110.
for large animals 2. 11
surgical anatomy 358. 359
113-14
lens loops 9
surgical instrumentation 361-2. 379-81
nasal fold trichiasis 123. 124
needle holders 2. 9
399
Index
Surgical instrumentation (Contimued)
360° (complete, Gundersen-type) bulbar
Vitreoretinal surgery (Contirmued)
needles 14
conjunctival grafts 166. 167-8, 167-8.
retinal procedures 360. 373
for orbital surgery 11. 14
206
barrier retinopexy 376
retractors 9
Tissue plasminogen activator [tPA) 30, 243.
chorioretinal biopsy 374. 375
rings 10-11
247-8. 344
demarcation retinopexy 376
scissors 2. 6-8. 11
Total (360°) conjunctival grafts 166. 167-8.
pneumatic retinopexy 375
spatulas 9, 10
167-8. 206
prophylactic retinopexy 376-7
for special species 2. 11
Tranquilizers 40. 47
retinal detachment see Vitreoretinal
sterilization of 13
Transaural enucleation 74
 surgery, retinal detachments
storage of 13
 Transoral orbitotomy 81. 81
subretinal fluid aspiration 373. 374
sutures 2. 3-5. 6. 14. 24
Transpalpebral enucleation
therapeutic retinopexy 375-6, 376
for vitreoretinal surgery 12-13. 361-2.
in cattle 72. 73
surgical anatomy 357-9. 358-9
364. 379-81
in the horse 68. 69
vitreal procedures 360. 364
see also specific procedures
in small animals 61-2. 64
anterior vitrectomy 363. 364. 366-9.
Sutures 14
 Transpupillary vitreal aspirations 365-6
370-3
corneal 246. 246
 Transscleral laser cyclophotocoagulation
equine recurrent uveitis 369-73
for eyelid surgery 14. 95
(TSCPC) 295. 295. 296, 297-8, 297-9
hyalocentesis 358. 364-5
following enucleation in cattle 73
Traumatic proptosis 58. 82-3. 86. 87-8
intravitreal injections 365
lateral canthoplasty with 111. 111
Trichiasis
pars plana vitrectomy 364. 369, 370-3
for lateral canthotomy 25
 combined entropion procedure 107-8. 108.
preoperative considerations 362-3
limbal 246. 246
109
suprachoroidal cyclosporine implants
 postoperative protection of 32. 97
nasal fold 123. 124
369-70
scissors for cutting 6
 Troutman-Barraquer forceps 5
surgical pathophysiology 350-60
stay 24
Tumors see Neoplasms
vitreal aspiration 362-3. 365-6
tacking procedures 104, 104. 112. 181. 183.
Tying forceps 2. 3-5
Vitreous humor
184
anatomy of 358-9
 in traumatic proptosis surgery 83. 86-7
anterior chamber shunts 293
U
tying forceps for 2. 3-5
cataract surgery and 345
Swabs 22
Ulltrasonographic equipment.
expanding vitreous syndrome 341
Symblepharon 162-3. 162. 163
phacoemulsification 325-6, 326
glaucoma surgery pathophysiology 272
Llltrasonography (US) 316. 361, 362
surgical pathophysiology 359-60
see also Vitreoretinal surgery
Urokinase 247
T
Utrata forceps 5. 323. 324
Von Graefe forceps 3. 4. 4
Lvea, anterior see Anterior uvea
Von Graefe strabismus hook 9
Tacking procedure
for entropion 104. 104. 112
intranictitans 181, 183. 184
A
W
Tarsal (meibomian) glands 92. 95
distichiasis see Distichiasis
V-shaped (wedge) excision 127. 127
Warren phacoemulsification 8
neoplasms 126, 126.129
V to Y plasty [Wharton-Jones procedure) 106.
Wedge excision, eyelid neoplasms 127.
Tarsal pedicle for entropion 107. 108
115-16. 115
127
Tarsal plate excision for distichiasis 102
Vannas scissors 7.7. 323. 324
Wharton-Jones procedure for ectropion 106.
Tarsoconjunctival grafts
Vecuronium 42
115-16. 115
in cattle 138
Venturi pumps 325
Williams eyelid speculum 2. 3
in the horse 134
Vietnamese potbellied pig. entropion 113-14.
Wound healing 268, 272-3. 273-4. 286-7
in small animals 128. 131. 131
114
Wyman lateral canthoplasty 110-11. 111.
Tarsopalpebral conjunctival grafts 165. 166.
Viscoelastic agents 30. 31, 320
122. 122
170-1, 171. 172. 173
Vitreoretinal diseases 357
Tarsorrhaphy
laser therapy for 29
after orbital surgery 83, 84. 85
surgery for see Vitreoretinal surgery
X
in the horse 97. 210
Vitreoretinal surgery 357-85
 in small animals 83. 95-7
instrumentation for 12-13. 361-2. 364.
Xylazine 40. 47-8. 72
 Tear systems see Nasolacrimal apparatus and
379-81
tear systems
retinal detachments
Tectonic (frozen) keratoplasty 217. 223-5.
cataract surgery and 316. 350-1. 351. 360
Y
226
classification 360
Y to V plasty for entropion 106-7. 107. 112
Telazol 40
demarcation retinopexy 376
Telescope magnifiers 18
evaluation 360-1. 361
Tenotomy scissors 6
preoperative considerations 363
Z
Therapeutic retinopexy 375-6. 376
surgery for 358. 359, 377-85, 380-4
Thermokeratoplasty 228. 228. 229
surgical anatomy 358, 359
Z plasty skin flaps 130. 130. 134-5
Third eyelid see Nictitating membrane
surgical pathophysiology 359-60
 Zeiss gland 90-1
400