FELINEDENTISTRY
Oral Assessment, Treatment,
and Preventative Care
JANBELLOWS
WILEY-BLACKWELL
FELINEDENTISTRY
Oral Assessment, Treatment, and Preventative Care
FELINEDENTISTRY
Oral Assessment, Treatment
and Preventative Care
Jan Bellows
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publicatior
Edition first published 2010
 This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
@ 2010 Jan Bellows
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in Febru-
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assis-
ary 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has been merged with
tance is required, the services of a competent professional should
Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form
be sought.
Wiley-Blackwell.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
Bellows, Jan.
 Feline dentistry : oral assessment, treatment, and preventative
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and 
care / Jan Bellows.
for information about how to apply for permission to reuse the
p. ;cm.
copyright material in this book, please see our website at www.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
ISBN 978-0-$138-1613-5 (hardback : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary
dentistry. 2. Cats-Diseases. I. Title.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or
[DNLM: 1. Tooth Diseases-veterinary. 2. Cats. 3. Dental
the internal or personal use of specific clients, is granted by Black-
Care-veterinary. 4. Mouth Diseases-veterinary. SF 867 B448f
well Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the
2010]
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA
SF867.B447 2010
Adoud e pauei uaaq aay eu suoezueio asu x eo
636.808976-dc22
license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged.
2009031848
The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1613-5/2010.
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library
of Congress.
 Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are
often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product names
p eaaie ias-isa ueddi Aq oueed id zt/so un ia 
used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
 Printed in Singapore
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is
not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
12010
Dedication
This text is dedicated to
the Comparative Respiratory Society, secretary (1985-
Dr. Colin E. Harvey
 89) of the American Veterinary Dental Society, president
(1990-92) and executive secretary (2002-present) of the
Throughout his professional life, Dr. Colin Harvey
American Veterinary Dental College, cofounder (1985)
has taught and mentored others while creating and
of the Intermational Veterinary Ear Nose and Throat
maintaining the foundation of veterinary dentistry in
Association, charter fellow and secretary-treasurer
the United States and around the world.
(1987-89) of the Academy of Veterinary Dentistry, and
Dr. Harvey graduated from the School of Veterinary
director (1997-present) of the Veterinary Oral Health
Science at the University of Bristol, England, in 1966. He
Council.
completed an internship and residency in small animal
 Dr. Harvey was editor of the Journal of Veterinary
surgery at the University of Pernsylvania, receiving the
Surgery from 1982 to 1987 and editor of the Journal of
Diploma of the American College of Veterinary Sur-
Veterinary Dentistry from 1994 to 2000 and has been a
geons in 1972.
reviewer or review board member for numerous other
Dr. Harvey is a diplomate of the American College of
journals. His publications include approximately 70
Veterinary Surgeons (1972), member of the Organizing
chapters in textbooks, 130 papers in peer-reviewed jour-
Committee and charter diplomate of the American Vet-
nals, and over 100 abstracts and other papers on surgical
erinary Dental College (AVDC, 1988) and the European
and dental topics. He has written, edited, or coedited
Veterinary Dental College (1998), and also a charter dip-
five books on small animal surgery and dentistry.
lomate of the European College of Veterinary Surgeons
Dr. Harvey's research interests include veterinary and
(1993). He was section chief of Small Animal Surgery
comparative periodontal disease (including compara-
(1974-80) and vice-chair of the Department of Clinical
tive microbiology, standardization  of periodontal
Studies (1996-2002) and was the founding head of the
scoring, and prevention and treatment); the interaction
Dentistry and Oral Surgery Service at the University of
 of infectious oral diseases, particularly periodontal
 Pennsylvania (the first dentistry and oral surgery service
disease, with the rest of the body, specifically, distant
to be established at a veterinary school in North
 Organ and systemic effects; and the utility and effective-
America).
 ness of antimicrobial drugs in the management of
 Dr. Harvey has received numerous university,
patients with oral diseases.
national, and international awards for excellence in
Feline dentistry has been of special interest to Dr.
teaching, research, and clinical work. He was elected a
Harvey. Much of what we know about feline dentistry
fellow of the College of Physicians of Philadelphia in
today is largely due to his and his mentees' uncompro-
1980. Dr. Harvey has been a board member (1978-83) of
mised research and discovery efforts.
V
Contents
Preface, vili
 Acknowledgments, ix
Introduction, x
Section I.
Oral Assessment, 3
Chapter 1.
Anatomy, 5
Chapter 2.
Oral Examination, 28
Chapter 3.
Radiology, 39
Chapter 4.
 Charting, 84
 Chapter 5.
 Oral Pathology, 101
 Section Il.
Treatment, 149
Chapter 6.
 Equipment, 151
Chapter 7.
Anesthesia, 169
Chapter 8.
 Treatment of Periodontal Disease, 181
Chapter 9.
Treatment of Endodontic Disease, 196
Chapter 10. Treatment of Tooth Resorption, 222
Chapter 11. Treatment of Oropharyngeal Inflammation, 242
Chapter 12. Treatment of Occlusion Disorders, 269
Chapter 13. Oral Trauma Surgery, 280
Chapter 14. Treatment of Oral Swellings/ Tumors, 290
Section I11. Prevention, 297
Chapter 15. Plaque Control, 299
Index, 305
vii
Preface
by the body's own tissues for reasons that are still not
clear, and our frustrations are heightened by the lack of
success of restoring feline teeth undergoing resorption.
Squamous cell carcinoma is by far the most common
 feline oral neoplasm, benigm or maligmant; and it resists
all standard treatments used in management of other
maligmancies. When we add in that anesthesia is essen-
tial for all feline dental procedures (lest our fingers be
impaled by the needle-like, plaque-coated canine teeth)
and that cats have such a little mouth compared with
Ah, Cats.
dogs, it is not surprising that there is some love-hate
What would veterinary dentistry be without them!
aspect to the relationship of veterinary dentists to cats.
For sure, a lot simpler and less frustrating. Even for
 The challenge is one to rise to, and the companionship
 procedures so apparently "simple" as a tooth extraction,
cats offer makes it all worthwhile.
the cat often has the last word, when we as veterinary
A book dedicated to feline dentistry and related topics
dentists hear that quiet but awful 'snick' that means that
is overdue. I am pleased that Dr. Bellows has found the
a tooth root has fractured, leaving a root tip somewhere
time to pull the material together in a coherent format,
down there. ...
so that others may build upon the accumulated experi-
 Since the first-reported mention of oral disease in cats
ence and kmowledge that are described here. Those deli-
in the 1920s, a lot of progress has been made, but some
cate feline oral structures require all the skill and
key knowledge is not yet available. The immunological
kmowledge that we have and deserve our best efforts to
function of the cat does not seem to obey the same rules
ensure that we are not continuously restarting the steep-
as rodents, dogs, and humans; and as a result, immuno-
slope part of the learning curve.
logically based conditions such as stomatitis continue to
frustrate veterinary dentists. Teeth in cats are attacked
Colin E. Harvey
vii
Acknowledgments
The author acknowledges and greatly appreciates the
Additionally, I acknowledge the American Veterinary
selfless efforts of many in the production of this text.
s iao, 0n sioa na ul (o) aano eua
 First to my wife Allison who has always supported
right." I have had the pleasure and honor of being a
Au roy isaq au op oh uoissed Au pasemooua pue
member and chairman of the college's nomenclature
 patients and help other veterinarians do their best too.
committee since 2004, during which time the college has
Next my children Wendi, David, and Lauren who have
improved classifications for tooth resorption stages and
 helped in the practice and have been there every step of
 types, fractures, periodontal disease, and many anatom-
the journey.
ical terms.
 Dr. Carlos Rice, currently a dental resident at Univer-
I acknowledge and thank Dr. Paul Pion, the originator
sity of Wisconsin, on a four-month volunteer stint at All
of the Veterinary Information Network (VIN). Dr. Pion
 Pets Dental in Weston helped catalog thousands of
strives to improve the veterinary community on all
 images from our client base to be considered for inclu-
levels. Through the give and take on VIN's message
sion in this text. Dr. Rice also reviewed the final text.
forums, we learn from each other. I also thank Dr Pion
Dr. Gary Edelson also volunteered to review the text
for the use of his talented full-time graphic artist, Tamara
word by word multiple times. His attention to detail is
Rees, who provided illustrations for the AVDC and this
 much appreciated.
text.
 Drs. Gregg DuPont and Alex Reiter reviewed every
 Finally, I can't say enough about the publisher of this
Ara padxa ar Aa ran s u a pue prm
text, Wiley-Blackwell. Working with Nancy Simmer-
dentists with decades of teaching and practical experi-
 man, the Editorial Assistant, has been a pleasure from
Ence. Both share a passion for the best in companion
our initial discussions, in early 2006, throughout the
animal dental care based on solid peer-reviewed infor
process to the final submission of the manuscript.
mation where available. Their input resulted in the work
you have before you.
ix
Introduction
Cats are not dogs. Small dogs are plagued primarily
little doubt that periodontal disease will either continue
with various degrees of periodontal disease (gingivitis
or worsen. Plaque control methods must be specifically
and periodontitis). Large dogs more commonly present
tailored to the patient and client in order to be
with gingivitis, fractured teeth, and oral masses. Feline
effective.
Dentistry: Oral Assessment, Treatment, and Preventative
 Through daily use of the oral assessment, treatment,
Care was born primarily to give cats their fair due, a
and prevention process, patients can get the best in vet-
book on dentistry dedicated solely to their species.
erinary dentistry, which is our ultimate goal.
Cats also are affected by periodontal disease and frac-
Although a genuine effort has been made to assure
tured teeth, but their main oral pathologies include
that the dosages and information included in this text
tooth resorption, oropharangyeal inflammation, and
are correct, errors may occur, and it is recommended
maxillofacial cancer. Plaque prevention products and
that the reader refer to the original reference or the
techniques covered in this text also differ from those 
 approved labeling information of the product for addi-
used in dogs.
 tional information. Dosages should be confirmed prior
The second goal in writing this text is to introduce to
 to use or dispensing of medications.
some and reinforce to others the paradigm shift elimi-
nating the terminology "doing a dentistry,” "performing
Jan Bellows, D.V.M.
a prophy," or "Max is in for a dental." Replacing the old
 Diplomate, American Veterinary Dental College
terminology with "oral assessment, treatment, and pre-
Fellow, Academy Veterinary Dentistry
vention," better represents what we do as veterinary
Diplomate, American Board of Veterinary Practitioners
dentists.
Assessment involves evaluation of the patient before
the anesthetic procedure and includes medical and
 dental history, feeding management, home oral hygiene,
 and physical and laboratory testing. Once the patient is
anesthetized, a tooth-by-tooth examination is conducted
to create a treatment plan.
Treatment with the goal of eliminating non-functional
 abnormalities uncovered during assessment is next. The
treatment plan often can be accomplished within one
anesthetic visit. In some instances, multiple visits or life-
long therapy are indicated.
Prevention of periodontal disease is aimed at control-
ling plaque. Prevention is as important as the assess-
ment and treatment steps. Without prevention, there is
+
FELINEDENTISTRY
Oral Assessment, Treatment, and Preventative Care
Section I
Oral Assessment
Chapter 1
Anatomy
An understanding and appreciation of feline dental
 nerve. The body (the rostral two-thirds) of the tongue is
pathology, treatment, and prevention requires a deep
attached ventrally to the midline of the floor of the
awareness of the structure and function of oral tissues
mouth by the lingual frenulum.
that are composed of the teeth and supporting tissues.
Tongue
Oral Cavity
The tongue has important functions in grooming, eating.
The oral cavity extends from the lips to the pharynx,
drinking, and vocalization. The tongue is composed of
bounded laterally by the cheeks, dorsally by the palate,
both striated intrinsic and extrinsic muscles. The body
and ventrally by the tongue and intermandibular tissues.
of the tongue comprises the rostral two-thirds. The root
The oral cavity is divided into the oral cavity proper and
comprises the caudal one-third and is attached to the
the oral vestibule. Within the oral cavity proper are
hyoid apparatus.
the hard palate, soft palate, tongue, and the floor of the 
The dorsal surface of the tongue is covered by keratin-
mouth. Caudally, the oral cavity proper ends at the
ized stratified squamous epithelium that forms papillae.
palatoglossal folds. The oral vestibule spans between
 The tongue of a cat is populated by fliform, fungiform,
the lips, cheeks, and dental arches. The labial vestibule
vallate, foliate, and conical papillae. Filiform and fungi-
is the space between the incisors, canines, and lips. The
form papillae occupy the dorsal surface of the tongue
buccal vestibule is the space between the cheek teeth and
 body. Vallate papillae separate the tongue body and root
the cheeks (figs. 1.1 a-g).
dorsally. Vallate, foliate, and conical papillae occupy the
tongue root (figs. 1.2 a, b).
Mucosa
 Pillars of mucosa and the palatoglossal folds extend
to the soft palate at the base of the tongue (fig. 1.3).
The ventral tongue surface contains less cornified
Oral mucosa covers the surface of the mouth. The outer
layer is composed of variably pigmented nonkeratinized
mucosa. The lingual frenulum connects the tongue to
 and parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium.
the floor of the mouth within the intermandibular space.
The submucosa is composed of loose connective tissue,
salivary glands, blood vessels, muscle fibers, lymphat-
Innervation
ics, and salivary ducts. The submucosa of the palate is
composed of dense collagen.
Sensory input is received from maxillary and mandibu-
lar divisions of the trigeminal nerve. The maxillary
Muscles
branch leaves the trigeminal ganglion, then exits the
cranial cavity through the foramen rotundum, courses
The muscles of mastication that close the jaws are the
 through the alar canal and the pterygopalatine fossa to
temporal, masseter, and medial and lateral pterygoid 
enter the infraorbital canal. Just before entering the
muscles, all of which are innervated by the mandibular
 caudal limit of the infraorbital canal, the nerve branches
nerve (the only motor branch of the trigeminal nerve).
to become the major and minor palatine nerves. These
The digastricus muscle opens the mouth. Its rostral belly
nerves innervate the hard and soft palates and the naso-
is innervated by the mandibular branch of the trigeminal
pharyrx. The palatine nerves are desensitized with the
nerve, while its caudal belly is innervated by the facial
maxillary nerve block.
5
Dr.AlexanderReite
Hard palate
Softpalate
Dr.AlexanderReite
Hard palate
Gingiva
Mucosa of the
caudal oral cavity
Buccal
mucosa
Labial.mucosa
Soft palate
Palatoglossal fold
Dr.AlexanderReiter
Dr.AlexanderReiter
Vestibular sulcus
Mucogingival junction
Figure 1.1 a-g Mucosal surfaces of the oral cavity (all images  2009
Dr. Alexander M. Reiter).
Sublingual
Figure 1.1Contintued
Figure 1.3 Palatoglossal fold inflammation.
Figure 1.2 a. Tongue and papillae 1. Filiform papillae; 2. Fungiform papillae; 3. Foliate papillae; 4. Vallate papillae. b. Filiform papillae.
Feline Dentistry
The maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve also
The maxillary arteries also give rise to the major pala-
gives off the caudal maxillary alveolar nerve, which
tine arteries, which anastomose with the infraorbital
inmervates the maxillary first molar, the buccal gingiva,
arteries. The infraorbital arteries exit at the infraorbital
and mucosa. This area is blocked with the infraorbital
foraminae to supply the rostral muzzle.
nerve block.
Lymph from the oral cavity drains into the parotid,
After giving off the caudal maxillary alveolar nerve,
 mandibular, lateral, and medial retropharyngeal, super-
the maxillary nerve enters the infraorbital canal, where
ficial, and deep cervical lymph nodes.
it is called the infraorbital nerve. While the infraorbital
nerve is traversing the infraorbital canal, it gives off two
more branches that exit ventrally from the canal. The
Salivary Glands
middle maxillary alveolar nerve innervates the premo-
lars and associated buccal gingiva. The rostral maxillary
 The major salivary glands in the cat include the parotid,
alveolar nerve supplies the canines, incisors, and associ-
Zygomatic, mandibular, and sublingual. Saliva from the
ated buccal gingiva. The remaining fibers of the infraor-
parotid gland exits at a papila in the alveolar mucosa,
bital nerve then exit the rostral extent of the infraorbital
just caudal to the maxillary fourth premolar. Saliva from
canal to innervate the lateral and dorsal cutaneous struc-
the zygomatic gland exits at a papilla in the alveolar
tures of the rostral maxilla and upper lip. The middle
maxillary alveolar, rostral maxillary alveolar, and the
mandibular and sublingual glands enters the oral cavity
infraorbital nerves are anesthetized by the rostral infra-
through the sublingual caruncles located ventral and
orbital nerve block.
rostral to the base of the tongue (figs. 1.4 a, b).
The mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve arises
Cats have four molar salivary glands. The buccal
from the trigeminal ganglion, exits the cranium via the
molar glands empty into the oral cavity through several
foramen ovale, and divides into multiple branches. The
small ducts. The lingual molar glands are located in the
divisions include the sensory buccal nerves, lingual
membranous molar pad linguodistal to the mandibular
nerve, and mandibular (inferior alveolar) nerve. The
first molar teeth (fig. 1.5).
buccal nerves receive stimuli from the facial muscula-
ture, skin and mucosa of the cheek, and buccal gingiva
along the caudal mandible.
Periodontium
 The hypoglossal nerve inmervates the tongue, the floor
of the mouth, the lingual gingiva, and the mandibular
The term periodontium is used to describe tissues that
salivary gland. The mandibular nerve enters the man-
surround and support the teeth, including the gingiva,
dible on the lingual side, via the mandibular foramen.
periodontal ligament, cementum, and alveolar bone.
 The nerve then courses rostrally within the mandibular
canal to innervate the mandibular teeth to the midline.
This nerve can be blocked with the mandibular (inferior
Gingiva
alveolar) nerve block. Rostral to the third premolar
The cat's oral cavity is lined with keratinized and non-
tooth, the mandibular nerve gives off mental nerve
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Gingiva
branches. These branches exit through the mental foram-
refers to the keratinized oral mucosa that covers the
ina (rostral, middle, and caudal) and innervate the cuta-
alveolar process and surrounds the cervical portion of
neous areas of the chin and lip, and the rostral buccal
the tooth crowns. Unlike the epithelial lining of the
 gingiva and mucosa. These nerves are blocked with the
digestive tract, the gingiva does not have absorptive
mental nerve blocks (usually the middle mental nerve is
je 1areq arqeaad sionoisud e se sioe inq Aedes
blocked).
 protects underlying structures (fig. 1.6).
The  gingival  epithelium  is  composed  of the
following:
Blood Supply and Lymphatic Drainage
The oral epithelium, also called the outer gingival
The external carotid arteries branch off to the maxillary
 epithelium, which is keratinized or parakeratinized
arteries. They further supply the mandibular (inferior
 and covers the oral surface of the attached gingiva
alveolar) arteries, which enter the mandibular foramina
and gingival papillae.
on the medial sides of the mandibles and then course
The sulcular epithelium is a nonkeratinized exten-
rostrally in the mandibular canals, where they exit
sion of the oral epithelium into the gingival sulcus.
through the mental foramina.
The bottom of the gingival sulcus in a periodontally
Anatomy
Figure 1.5  Membranous bulge linguodistal to the mandibular first molar
Figure 1.4  a and b. Sublingual caruncle.
healthy tooth should be slightly coronal to the
cementoenamel junction.
Figure 1.6 Oral mucosa in a patient with gingivitis, periodontitis, and
The junctional epithelium attaches to enamel of the 
caudal mucositis.
o s q  a  o ld 
hemidesmosomes and lies at the floor of the sulcus,
immediately coronal to or at the cementoenamel
tooth but lies passively against it. When healthy, it
junction. The junctional epithelium and gingival
 appears coral-pink, firm, and with knife-edged margins.
connective tissue separate the periodontal ligament
aeds a jasad Au aq po A n Ae ja
from the oral environment. The floor of the gingival
between the tooth and the marginal gingiva is the gin-
sulcus is located on the most coronal junctional epi-
gival sulcus (or crevice). The normal depth of the sulcus
thelial cells.
is less than 1 mm in cats.
Marginal gingiva is the most coronal (toward the
The free gingival margin is the coronal edge of the
crown) aspect of the gingiva that is not attached to the
marginal gingiva. Marginal gingiva is demarcated from
10
Feline Dentistry
ment near the apex of the root and from lateral aspects
of the alveolar socket and branch into capillaries within
the ligament along the long axis of the tooth. Collagen
fibers also run through these spaces. The blood vessels
Mucogingival
Alveolarmuc
junction
are closer to the bone than to the cementum. Venules
Attached gingiva
drain the apex through apertures in the bony wall of the
alveolus and into the marrow spaces.
Free gingival margin
 Nerve bundles enter the periodontal ligament through
numerous foramina in the alveolar bone. They branch
and end in small rounded bodies near the cementum.
The nerves carry pain, touch, and pressure sensations
 and form an important part of the feedback mechanism
 of the masticatory apparatus.
 The periodontal ligament has great adaptive capacity.
Figure 1.7 Gingival structures surrounding the left maxillary fourth
 It responds to chronic functional overload by widening
premolar.
to relieve the load on the tooth. Vascular communica-
tions between the pulp and periodontium form
pathways for transmission of inflammation and micro-
the attached gingiva by the gingival groove, a slight
organisms between the tissues.
depression on the gingiva corresponding to the normal
sulcus depth (fig. 1.7).
Cementum
 In the cat, the healthy free gingival margin of premo-
lars and molars lies between 0.5 and 1 mm coronal to the
Cementum covers the root and provides attachment for
cementoenamel junction, where root cementum meets
the periodontal ligament. Cementum is produced con-
crown enamel.
tinuously, slightly increasing in thickness throughout
 The attached gingiva is located apical to the marginal
 life. Acellular cementum is present at the coronal one-
gingiva and is normally tightly bound to the periosteum
third of the root. Cellular cementum is present at the
of alveolar bone. Attached gingiva is keratinized to
apical two-thirds of the root. It is capable of formation,
withstand the stress of mastication. The width of the
destruction, and repair. It is avascular but is nourished
 attached gingiva varies in different areas of the mouth.
from vessels within the periodontal ligament. Cemento-
The attached gingiva is widest at the maxillary canines.
cytes in cellular cementum communicate with each
The firmly attached gingiva is contiguous with loose
other via canaliculi and with underlying dentin.
alveolar mucosa at the mucogingival junction, also
referred as the mucogingival line. The mucogingival
Alveolar Bone
junction remains stationary throughout life, although
the gingiva around it may change in height due to
 Alveolar processes house the alveoli, which support the
 attachment loss (figs. 1.8 a, b).
teeth by providing attachment for fibers of the periodon-
The gingival sulcus is a shallow space between the
tal ligament. An alveolus can be divided into two parts:
marginal gingiva and the tooth. The sulcus depth is
1
Alveolar bone proper, which is a thin layer of bone
-ads au uo lupuadap saea jnq uu I rapun Aenanan
surrounding the root and allowing attachment to the
cific tooth and the size of the cat. In cases of periodontal
 periodontal ligament.
disease, the abnormal sulcus is termed a pocket, which
2.
 Supporting alveolar bone, which consists of compact,
extends further apically due to destruction of the peri-
cortical, or cancellous bone on the vestibular and
odontium (figs. 1.9 a, b).
oral aspects of the alveolar process.
The alveolar bone and cortical plates are thickest in
Periodontal Ligament
the mandible. The shape and structure of the trabeculae
 The periodontal ligament is a dense, fibrous connective 
of spongy bone reflect the stress-bearing requirements
tissue that attaches the tooth root to the bony alveolus.
of a particular site. In some areas, alveolar bone is thin
The periodontal ligament also acts as a suspensory
with no spongy bone. The alveolar bone proper is also
a  s p se o ie 
referred to as the cribriform plate and is identified on
attachment to keep debris from entering deeper tissues.
radiographs as lamina dura (fig. 1.10).
The blood supply to the periodontal ligament origi-
The alveolar bone height is an equilibrium between
nates from the alveolar artery. Arterioles enter the liga-
bone formation and bone resorption. When bone
Mucogingival junction
Attached gingiva
mucogingival junction
11
12
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 1.9 a. Periodontal probe with millimeter markings before insertion. b. 3-mm palatal probing depth of the left maxillary canine.
resorption exceeds formation, the alveolar bone height
is reduced (figs. 1.11 a, b).
Bones and Joints
Cranium
The dorsal aspect of the cranium is composed of the
paired frontal and parietal bones. The occipital region of
the cranium is the caudal aspect of the skull formed by
the occipital bone. The temporal region is composed of
the lateral walls of the cranium formed by the temporal
bones. The rostral wall of the cranium is formed by the
ethmoid bone (figs. 1.12 a, b).
Facium
The facial part of the skull, which encloses the nasal and
oral cavities, is divided into oral, nasal, and orbital
regions. The oral region surrounding the oral cavity is
composed of the incisive, maxillary, palatine, and man-
dibular bones.
 The region surrounding the nasal cavity is composed
Figure 1.10  Lamina dura (arrows pointing to the white line surrounding the
of the nasal, maxillary, palatine, and incisive bones. The
tooth root).
orbital region is formed by the frontal, lacrimal, palatine,
Alveolus
Fractured
tooth
Figure 1.11 a. Alveolus encasing a fractured maxillary canine tooth. b. Decreased alveolar margin height (arrows) secondary to periodontal disease.
Figure 1.12 a. Left lateral aspect of
the skull with the zygomatic arch
removed; 1. Parietal bone; 2. Squamous 
temporal bone; 3.S
 Sphenopalatine
foramen; 4. Maxil; 5. Incisive bone; 6.
 Fontal bone; 7. Lacrimal bone; 8. Optic
Ganal.
 b. Medial aspect of a sagittal section
of the left aspect of the skull: 1. Incisive
bone: 2. Maxilloturbinates; 3. Nasal
bone; 4. Nasal septum; 5. Palatine bone;
6. Pterygoid bone; 7. Ethmoid bone.
c. Dorsal aspect of the skull: 1. Incisive 
bone; 2. Nasal bone; 3. Maxilla; 4.
Frontal bone; 5. Zygomatic process of
frontal bone; 6. Zygomatic bone; 7. Pari-
etal bone; 8. Zygomatic process of tem-
poral bone; 9. Lacrimal foramen; 10.
 Infraorbital foramen.
d. Ventral aspect of the skull 1. Inci-
sive bone; 2. Palatine process of the
maxilla; 3. Major palatine foramen; 4.
Vomer bone; 5. Pterygoid bone; 6. Frontal
bone: 7. Palatine bone: 8. Temporal
process of the zygomatic bone; 9. Zygo-
matic process of the temporal bone; 10.
Retroarticular process: 11. Mandibular
fossa of the articular surface of the ten-
poromandibular joint. (Images reprinted
with permission of Morton Publishing
Company.)
13
14
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 1.12  Continued
sphenoid, and zygomatic bones surrounding the orbit
attached, heavily keratinized mucosa covers the hard
(figs. 1.12 c, d).
 palate. Seven to eight transverse ridges called rugae pro-
trude from the mucosa with rows of papillae between
the ridges. The soft palate begins caudal to the maxillary
Maxillary Region
first molar teeth and separates the nasopharynx dorsally
 The maxillary bones or maxillae form the lateral parts of
 and oropharynx ventrally (figs. 1.15 a, b).
the face and the part of the hard palate that holds the
The infraorbital canal is located apical to the maxillary
canine and upper cheek teeth. The maxilla articulates
third and fourth premolars below the orbit. Compared
with the incisive bone rostrally, the nasal bone dorsally,
to the dog, the cat's infraorbital canal is shorter and
the vomer bone medially, and the lacrimal and zygo-
usually less than five millimeters in diameter.
matic bones caudally (figs. 1.13 a, b).
 The palatine bone forms the bony part of the hard
Mandibles
palate together with the maxillary and incisive bones.
The incisive bone located rostrally holds the upper inci-
The large bones articulating with the skull that support
sors. A pair of openings, the palatine fissures, allows
the lower teeth are the mandibles. Each mandible is
passage of the incisive ducts of the vomeronasal organ.
composed of a horizontal body and a vertical ramus. The
 The incisive papilla located just caudal to the maxillary
body supports the lower teeth. The ramus has three
first incisor teeth houses these incisive ducts as they
processes: coronoid, condylar, and angular. The condy-
open into the oral cavity (figs. 1.14 a, b).
lar process articulates with the cranium in the temporo-
The hard palate separates the oral and nasal cavities.
 mandibular joint (figs. 1.16 a-c).
The primary palate is the incisive portion of the palate
 The mandibles are connected to each other by a strong
and associated soft tissues. The secondary palate includes
fibrocartilaginous joint at the mandibular symphysis.
the remaining hard and soft palatal structures. Firmly
The nerves and vascular supply to the mandibular teeth
Anatomy
15
Figure 1.14 a. Palatine fissures. b. Incisive papilla.
Temporomandibular Joint
The head of the condylar process of the mandibular
ramus articulates with the base of the zygomatic process
of the squamous part of the temporal bone (mandibular
fossa) at the temporomandibular joint: a transversely
elongated (cigar-shaped), condylar, synovial joint (fig.
1.18). The retroarticular process is a caudoventral exten-
sion of the mandibular fossa. The retoarticular process
helps prevent caudal luxation of the mandible (fig. 1.19).
The insertion of the masseter muscle reaches the
ventral and rostral aspect of the joint capsule. There is a
thin, cartilaginous intra-articular disc dividing the joint
Figure 1.13 a. Lateral aspect of right maxilla: 1.Alveolar process;: 2. Frontal
into dorsal and ventral compartments. This disc reduces 
process; 3. Infraorbital canal; 4. Zygomatic process. b. Medial aspect of the
friction by providing a double synovial film.
right maxilla: 1. Maxillotubinates; 2. Palatine process.
Teeth
enter the mandibular canal ventrally on the lingual
Dental Formula
aspect of the angle of the mandible and course rostrally
exiting at the caudal, middle, and rostral mental foram-
Normally, there are twenty-six deciduous and thirty
 ma to supply the rostral mandible, chin, lip, buccal
 permanent teeth in the cat's oral cavity.
gingiva, and mucosa (figs. 1.17 a-c).
 Dental formulas (upper number indicates the maxil-
The tongue and some of the muscles of the hyoid
lary teeth, lower number the mandibular teeth) are as
follows:
Figure 1.15 a. Sagittal section of dissected head: 1. Choana; 2. Nasopharynx;
3. Epiglottis: 4. Palatine tonsilin tonsilar fosa; 5. Oropharynx; 6. Oral cavity:
7. Hard palate b. Roof of the oral cavity. 1. Hard palate, 2. Palatine rugae, 3.
Palatine tonsil, 4. Stick in nasopharynx, 5. Epiglottis (reflected laterally) 6. Pala-
toglossal arch, 7. Soft palate.
16
Figure 1.16 a. Lower jaw. b. Right mandible buccal aspect: 1. Mandibular
body: 2. Mandibular ramus;: 3. Masseteric fossa; 4. Coronoid process; 5.
mental foramen. c. Right mandible lingual aspect: 1. Mandibular symphysis
articular surface; 2. Mandibular foramen.
Middle
Caudal
17
I1O
Figure 1.19 Lateral aspect of the left temporomandibular joint: 1. Coronoid process; 2. Zygomatic arch; 3. Zygomatic process of the temporal bone; 4. Man-
dibular ramus; 5. Condylar process; 6. Articular eminence; 7. Tympanic bulla; 8. Mandibular fossa; 9. Retroarticular process; 10. Angular process.
18
Anatomy
19
 The deciduous dental formula for kittens is 2 x (I3/
 Incisors are small teeth located between the canines.
IB, C1/C1, P3/P2) = 26 teeth.
They are used for prehension. Incisors are referred to
The permanent dental formula for adult cats is
 as right/left, maxillary/mandibular, first, second, and
2 x (I3/I3, C1/C1, P3/P2, M1/M1) = 30 teeth.
third incisors (fig. 1.20).
When using the modified Triadan system, right maxil-
All of the incisors and canine teeth have one root. The
lary incisors are numbered 101, 102, and 103 starting
maxillary second premolar, if present, normally has one
from the first incisor, and left maxillary incisors are
root; however, studies have shown nearly 40% of the
numbered 201, 202, and 203. The left mandibular inci-
maxillary second premolars have two (sometimes fused)
sors are numbered 301, 302, 303, and the right mandibu-
roots. The maxillary third premolar has two roots in
lar incisors are 401, 402, 403 (fig. 1.21).
most cases (10% of the maxillary third premolars have a
Canines are single-rooted teeth located rostrally in the
small third root), and the maxillary fourth premolars
mouth caudolateral to the incisors. They are used for
have three roots. The maxillary first molars, if present,
piercing and biting. Canines are referred to as right/left,
usually have two roots.
maxillary /mandibular canines. The crowns of the max-
The mandibular cheek teeth in a cat (third and fourth
 illary and mandibular canine teeth have vertical grooves
 premolars and first molars) have two roots.
(figs. 1.22, 1.23).
When using the modified Triadan system, the right
and left maxillary canines are numbered 104 and 204,
Tooth Types
respectively. The root and crown of the maxillary canines
Teeth are categorized by location and form. There are
au uaqm jeu os 'piemno di raddn aut piou o dau
four types of teeth in the cat:
mouth is closed, the coronal tip of the mandibular canine
Figure 1.20  Maxillary and mandibular incisors.
103
102
101
201
202
203
403
402
401
301
302
303
Figure 1.21  Modified Triadan system
 incisor tooth numbering.
Figure 1.23  Mandibular canine vertical groove.
 Figure 1.22 Extracted canine tooth.
20
Anatomy
21
slides into the vestibule without traumatizing the upper
Premolars are located caudal to the canines. There are
lip. The left and right mandibular canines are numbered
normally three maxillary and two mandibular premo-
304 and 404, respectively (in the modified Triadan
lars in the cat. Proper nomenclature of feline premolars
system, all the canines end in 4 and first molars in 9)
is based on the archetypal carnivore model, which has
(figs. 1.24 a, b; 1.25).
a full dentition of forty-four teeth (six incisors, four
canines, sixteen premolars, and twelve molars).
The premolar behind the maxillary canine is termed
the right or left maxillary second premolar (fig. 1.26).
Using the modified Triadan system, the second premo-
lars are referred to as tooth 106 (right) or 206 (left). The
second premolar has one or two fused roots. The third
premolars (107, 207) have two roots. The fourth premo-
204
lars (108, 208) have three roots (mesiobuccal, mesiopala-
tal, and distal)(fig. 1.27).
The premolar behind the mandibular canine is termed
the left or right mandibular third premolar (307, 407),
04
Figure 1.26  Maxillary premolars.
Figure 1.24 Modified Triadan canine tooth numbering: a. Maxillary canines.
b. Mandibular canines.
Figure 1.25  Normal canine tooth occlusion.
Figure 1.27  Maxillary fourth premolar.
22
 Feline Dentistry
followed by the fourth premolar (308, 408), which has
 Dentin is porous; each square millimeter contains
two roots (figs. 1.28 a, b).
over 40,000 dentinal tubules that communicate between
Molars are located caudal to the premolars. There is
the pulp and the dentin-enamel or dentin-cementum
one set in the maxilla termed right or left maxillary first
junctions. If there is near-pulp exposure from trauma or
molar (109, 209) and one set in the mandible termed left
resorption, bacteria can travel through the exposed den-
or right mandibular first molar (309, 409). The mandibu-
tinal tubules to the pulp. Near exposure can also trans-
lar first molar has one large mesial root and a smaller
mit painful stimuli (heat, cold, pressure) from the oral
distal root, which angles caudally (figs. 1.29, 1.30 a-d).
environment to the pulp.
In cats and other species including the dog, two micro-
scopic features of the dentin known as vasodentin and
Tooth Composition
osteodentin may occasionally exist. Vasodentin is char-
The exterior surface of the healthy crown is covered with
acterized by microscopic vascular inclusions within the
a thin layer of enamel, a hard inorganic substance (96%
outer third of the dentin. It is found to have vascular
 inorganic) formed by ameloblasts within the tooth bud
channels and dentinal tubules coursing through vaso-
before eruption. Enamel when damaged is incapable of
dentin randomly. Osteodentin, unlike vasodentin, is
repair once the tooth has erupted.
most often found in the dentin adjacent to the root canal.
 Dentin located beneath the enamel and cementum
Previous studies have demonstrated the presence of
composes the majority of the mature tooth mass. Dentin
these two peculiar microscopic structures in cats with
is a specialized connective tissue of mesenchymal origin
tooth resorption. However, vasodentin and osteodentin
and is the second hardest tissue in the body after enamel.
 have also been found in teeth free of resorption, making
 It is 70% inorganic and 30% organic (water, collagen,
a cause-and-effect relationship difficult to confirm.
 and mucopolysaccharide).
The pulp, located in the center of the tooth, is com-
posed of conmective tissue, nerves, lymph and blood
vessels, collagen, and odontoblasts, which form dentin
throughout the tooth's life. The pulp cavity consists of a
 pulp chamber located in the crown and a root canal in
molar
4th pren
3rd premo
4th
3rd
h
Figure 1.28 a. Teeth of the lower jaw. b. Right mandibular premolars.
Figure 1.29  Dissected left mandibular first molar.
Anatomy
23
409
molar
309
20
4th premc
206
408
308
106
3rd premola
407
307
107
201
409
408
407
307
808
309
me hama au ui yat yo huagunu wsis uepel pa pia me! laddn au ui yat yo huagunu wsis uepel pa 'e oe'l an
the root. In a fully mature tooth, an apical delta contain-
tooth has developed to its final length, the odontoblasts
 ing minute openings allowing the passage of vessels and
produce secondary dentin, causing the dentinal walls to
nerves is present at the root apex. Occasionally, there are
thicken toward the pulp cavity This will effectively
communication canals present at the furcation of the
decrease the width of the pulp cavity as the cat ages.
 maxillary fourth premolar and other multirooted teeth
Reparative or tertiary dentin is produced in response to
(fig. 1.31).
thermal, mechanical, occlusal, or chemical trauma to the
During pre-eruptive development and during erup-
odontoblasts. The pulp chamber in cats lies closer to the
tion, the odontoblasts produce primary dentin. Once the
enamel than in dogs. For this reason, any tooth fracture
24
 Feline Dentistry
Interproximal space
- the space between
Enamel-thehardest
two adjacent teeth.
substance in the body,
Coronal -in the direction of
covering only the crown.
the tip ofthe crown.
Dentin-ahard substance
Crown - the part
similar to bone forming
of the tooth
the bulk of the tooth
projecting
surrounding the pulp
above the
cavity.
gingiva covered
with enamel.
Cementoenamel
junction (CEJ)-
where the enamel of
the crown meets the
Apical -in the direction of
cementum of theroot.
the tip (apex) of the root.
Furcation-the space
between the roots of the
same tooth.
Figure 1.31 llustration of sagittal section through the canine tooth.
in the cat should be treated aggressively, since most
The deciduous tooth eruption is normally complete by
require endodontic therapy or extraction.
two months of age. By seven months, the permanent
 Odontoblast processes extend into the dentinal
teeth should be fully erupted (Table 1.1).
tubules. These processes, together with the fine nerve
 endings, cause the dentin to be sensitive to temperature
and pressure. When traumatized, the pulp reacts to irri-
Terminology
tants through inflammation. If untreated, severe inflam-
 mation spreads up and/or down the pulp, eventually
Teeth
becoming irreversible. Toxic products from damaged
tissue and microorganisms in the tissue sustain
Incisors are referred to as the (right or left, maxillary or
inflammation.
mandibular) first, second, or third incisors numbered
The tooth's anatomical crown is visible to the naked
from the midline.
eye. The root is located in the alveolus encased in the
In the cat, the tooth immediately distal to the maxil-
alveolar processes beneath the gingiva. The cribriform
lary canine is the second premolar; the tooth immedi-
 plate (lamina dura) lines the alveolus (fig. 1.32).
ately distal to the mandibular canine is the third
premolar.
Tooth Eruption
Surfaces of teeth and directions in the mouth
The maxillary teth generally erupt before their man-
(fig. 1.33)
 dibular counterparts. Eruption of the incisors precedes
Vestibular is the correct term referring to the surface of
that of the canines, which is later followed by the pre-
the tooth facing the vestibule or lips; buccal and labial
molars and molars.
are acceptable alternatives.
Anatomy
25
Apical delta
Alveolar process
Lamina dura
Trabecular bone
Cortical plate
Periodontal ligament
0
Cementum
-Alveolarmucosa
Alveoler crest
Mucogingival line 
Gingival margin
Attached gingiva
Free gingiva
Gingival sulcus
Epithelial attachment
Dentin
Pulp
Enamel
Figure 1.32 Canine tooth and surrounding structures.
Table 1.1.  Approximate age when teeth erupt (in weeks).
 The surface of a mandibular or maxillary tooth facing
the tongue is the lingual surface. Palatal can also be
Deciduous
Permanent
 used when referring to the lingual surface of maxillary
teeth.
Incisors
3-4
11-16
 Mesial and distal are terms applicable to tooth sur-
Canine
3-4
12-20
 Premolar
16-20
faces. The mesial surface of the first incisor is next to the
5-6
Molar
20-24 
median plane; on other teeth it is directed toward the
first incisor. The distal surface is opposite the mesial
surface.
TermsofDirection inVeterinaryDentistry
Caudal-partof themouthor displacement towardsthe tail.
Rostral-partofthemouthordisplacement
toward thefront part of the head or nose.
Buccal or Facial - the surfacefacing the cheeks or lips.
Distal - facing in the caudal direction of
the arch (or laterally for incisor teeth).
Lingual - surface of the tooth facing
Buccal-
surfaceofamolar
toward thetongue.
tooth facing the
cheek or lip.
Mesial-facingtowardtherostralendofthe
arch or towardsthemidline(forincisorteeth).
Distal
Distalforincisorteeth.
Midline
Mesial
Lingual
Labial-surface of the canine or
incisor toothfacing the lip.
Buccal
Figure 1.33  Directions in the oral cavity.
26
Anatomy
27
Rostral and caudal are the positional and directional
Hayashi K, Kiba H. Microhardness of enamel and dentine of
anatomical terms applicable to the head in a sagittal
cat premolar teeth. Nippon Juigaku Zasshi (Japanese Jourmal 
plane in nonhuman vertebrates. Rostral refers to a struc-
of Veterinary Science), 1989; 51: 1033-1035.
ture closer to, or a direction toward the most forward
Hennet P. Dental anatomy and physiology of small carmivores.
In: Crossley DA, Penman S (eds). BSAVA Marual of Small
structure of the head. Caudal refers to a structure closer
Animal Dentistry, 2nd ed. BSAVA, Cheltenham, 1995;
to, or a direction toward the tail.
93-104.
Hennet PR, Harvey CE. Apical root canal anatomy of canine
Jaws
teeth in cats. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1545-1548.
Holland GR. The dentinal tubule and odontoblast process in
All mammals have two maxillas (or maxillae) and two
the cat. J Anat 1975; 120: 169-177.
 mandibles. The adjective maxillary is often used in a
Hudson LC, Hamilton WP. Atlas of Feline Anatomy for Vet-
wider sense, for example,
，"maxillary fractures" to
erinarians. WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1993.
nclude other facial bones, in addition to the maxillary
Nanci A. Ten Cate's Oral Histology, Development, Structure,
bone proper.
and Function, 6th ed. Mosby, St. Louis, 2003.
Negro VB, Hermandez SZ, Maresca BM, Lorenzo CE. Furcation
canals of the maxillary fourth premolar and the mandibular
Further Reading
1 1   1 1   1 1 1.
 Okuda A, Inoue E, Asari M. The membraneous bulge lingual
to the mandibular molar tooth of a cat contains a small sali-
American Veterinary Dental College. Veterinary dental nomen-
clature (available at www.avdc.org).
vary gland. J Vet Dent 1996; 13: 61-64.
Orsini P, Hennet P. Anatomy of the mouth and teeth of the cat.
Bishop MA, Malhotra M. An investigation of lymphatic vessels
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1265-1277.
 in the feline dental pulp. Am J Anat 1990; 187: 247-253.
Rosenzweig LJ. Aratomy of the Cat. Brown Publishers, Dubuque,
Crossley DA. Tooth enamel thickness in the mature dentition
1993.
 ia f ps Aaad :sies pu ssop snsaup go
Schaller O. Hllustrated Veterinary Anatomical Nomenclature, 2nd
1995; 12: 111-113.
ed. Enke Verlag, Stuttgart, 2007.
Floyd MR. The modified Triadan system: nomenclature for
Verstraete FJM. Colour Self-Assessment Review of Veterinary Den-
veterinary dentistry. J Vet Dent 1991; 8(4): 18-19.
tistry. Manson, London, 1997.
Gioso MA, Carvalho VGG. Oral anatomy of the dog and cat in
Verstraete FJM, Terpak CH. Anatomical variations in the denti-
veterinary dentistry practice. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim 
tion of the domestic cat. J Vet Dent 1997; 14: 137-140.
Pract 2005; 35: 763-780.
Vongsavan N, Matthews B. The vascularity of dental pulp in
 Gracis M. Radiographic study of the maxillary canine tooth of
cats. J Dent Res 1992; 71: 1913-1915.
four mesaticephalic cats. J Vet Dent 1999; 16: 115-128.
Wiggs RB, Loprise HB. Oral anatomy. In: Veterirary Dertistry:
Gracis M. Orodental anatomy and physiology. In: Tutt C,
Principles and Practice. Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia 1997,
Deeprose J, Crossley D (eds). BSAVA Manuat of Canine and
55-86.
Feline Dentistry, 3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 1-21.
Wilson G. Timing of apical closure of the maxillary canine and
Harvey CE. Anatomy of the oral cavity in the dog and cat.
mandibular first molar teeth of cats. J Vet Dent 1999; 16:
Veterinary Dentistry, WB Saunders, Philadelphia, 1985;
19-21.
5-22.
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Function, formation, and anatomy of
 oral structures in carmivores, Small Animal Dentistry, Mosby,
St. Louis, 1993; 1-18.
Chapter 2
Oral Examination
Treatment planning is based on the results of clinical
of the examiner. Some cats are too fractious or painful
examination and diagnostic imaging with direction
 to inspect without chemical restraint.
from patient history and dental habits. The best possible
 After a general physical examination, concentrate on
treatment outcome is related to an accurate diagnosis.
the head and face. Signs of facial asymmetry, differences
 Using a carefully planned examination, the practitioner 
in palpebral sizes, ocular or nasal discharge, discomfort
can recognize both normal and abnormal conditions. A
 or swelling, pain on palpation, or discoloration should
permanent record should be made of relevant medical
be noted (figs. 2.1 a-g).
and dental history and diagnostic data, as well as treat-
While looking in the cat's eyes, palpate along the man-
ment recommended, performed, and advised for the
dibles and maxillae. Enlarged unilateral or bilateral
future.
mandibular lymph nodes should be noted if present
during this examination. Holding the head steady in one
hand, the rostral portion of the lips is pulled caudally to
Patient History
examine occlusion; missing, extra, or malpositioned
teeth; the presence of periodontal disease or oral masses;
ssase a jo jrd jpuod ue si roist sua
and fractured, discolored, or resorbed teeth. The man-
 process. Relevant history should include present and
dibular third premolar, often the first tooth affected by
 past medical information, vaccination status, amount of
tooth resorption, is difficult to observe unless you move
time spent indoors and outdoors, and information about
the lower lip ventrally (figs. 2.2a-i and 2.3 a, b).
other animals in the patient's environment. Discussion
During the conscious patient examination, the mouth
of clinical signs related to oral disease in the cat should
is opened and closed to evaluate temporomandibular
include difficulty with prehension; difficulty with
 joint movement. To open a cat's mouth, place one hand
chewing and /or swallowing food; pawing at the mouth;
on top of the cat's head with the thumb and forefinger
lightly pressing just behind the lip commisures. Pull the
or closing the mouth; increased salivation with or
lips caudally to reveal the premolars. Tilt the head back-
without hemorrhage; sneezing; nasal discharge; facial
ward while applying the forefinger of the opposite hand
swelling; ocular signs; and decreased self-grooming.
to the mandibular incisor area, puling the lower jaw
 The intake discussion should include dialogue with
ventrally (fig. 2.4).
the owner concerning their wishes and perception of
 Pain, crepitus, and decreased ability to open or close 
type and level of service they are expecting to receive.
the mouth are noted on the medical record.
Additionally, the willingmess of the client to provide
Generally, a scissors bite with the maxillary incisors
home care, as well as the acceptance of home care pro-
 touching and located slightly rostral to the mandibular
cedures by the patient, should be addressed in order to
incisors is considered normal in domestic short hair
help construct a treatment plan.
cats and a majority of the recogmized cat breeds. In
brachycephalic breeds (Burmese, Himalayan, and
 Persian), mandibular mesioclusion, where the maxillary
Examination of the Conscious Cat
incisors are positioned caudal to their mandibular
counterparts, is abnormal but considered "normal
Most cats will allow an initial evaluation of their teeth
occlusion" for the breed. Mandibular distoclusion,
aua pue mols e u pauooidde uaum Aiaes leio pue
where the maxillae extend far in front of the mandibles,
manner. The extent of an examination on a nonsedated
is not considered normal in any cat breed (figs. 2.5, 2.6,
cat is dependent upon patient cooperation and expertise
and 2.7).
28
Figure 2.1 a. Facial swelling secondary to osteomyelitis. b. Mandibular asym-
metry secondary to squamous cell carcinoma. c. Horner's syndrome and man-
dibular deformity secondary to trauma. d. Decreased palpebral size of the left 
eye. e. Mild left-sided facial swelling. f-g. Left mandibular swelling and facial
staining secondary to complicated mandibular canine tooth fracture.
29
Figure 2.2 a and b. Tooth resorption at the right maxillary fourth premolar c. Tooth resorption at the right mandibular canine. d-g. Various appearances of
 tooth resorption at the mandibular third premolar. h. Possible tooth resorption at the left mandibular first molar i. Tooth resorption confirmed at surgery.
30
Figure 2.2 Continued
31
Figure 2.3 a. Discolored left mandibular canine secondary to tooth resorption. b. Discolored left maxillary second incisor secondary to endodontic disease.
Figure 2.5Normal occlusion.
Figure 2.4Proper positioning of the right and left hands to examine the
Oral cavity.
32
 Oral Examination
33
 pressure to elicit a pain response; this could indicate the
 presence of a possible tooth resorption (fig. 2.10).
The mandibular canine tooth crowns are normally
located in the diastema between the maxillary third
incisor and the maxillary canine teeth. There should not
be contact between the mandibular canine and maxillary
third incisor or maxillary canine when the mouth is
closed. Cheek teeth should not occlude (touch each
other) as in humans and dogs (fig. 2.11).
Oral Examination under Anesthesia
 General anesthesia with intubation is essential to prop-
erly immobilize the patient for an in depth tooth-by-
tooth examination, periodontal probing, and intraoral
radiography (fig. 2.12).
Figure 2.6 Mandibular distoclusion.
Dental Hand Instruments for
Examination
Periodontal Probe
 The periodontal probe is used to measure the depth of
 the gingival sulcus in millimeters to help evaluate the
 extent of periodontal support.
 Probes vary in cross-sectional design (rectangular/
flat, oval, or round), with millimeter markings at the
calibrated working end. Because the cat's gingival sulcus
is quite narrow, most periodontal probes used in dogs
are not appropriate for cats and can cause damage. The
author prefers the Michigan O probe with Williams
markings at 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, and 10 millimeters (figs.
2.13 a, b).
Figure 2.7 Mandibular mesioclusion.
Probing Depth
 The dorsal surface of the tongue is examined for sym-
The clinical or probing depth is the distance between the
metry and ulceration. The sublingual area is also visual-
 base of the pocket and the gingival margin.
 ized for areas of inflammation, swelling, oral masses,
Inserting the periodontal probe into the gingival
and foreign bodies (figs. 2.8 a-e)
sulcus and recording millimeter findings is called
 Healthy gingiva appears light pink. The gingival
probing. With gentle pressure, the probe will stop where
margin lies next to the tooth 0.5-1mm coronal to the
the gingiva attaches to the tooth. Every professional oral
attached gingiva.
hygiene procedure conducted under general anesthesia
Gingival inflammation clinically presents as erythema
should include probing and charting. Cats normally
papaau Aesio a jo ,supumoi, sasnes pue
have probing depths less than 1mm. Greater depths
gingival margin. In cats with advanced periodontal
may indicate periodontal disease requiring further eval-
disease, attachment loss clinically appears as periodon-
uation and treatment (figs. 2.14 a, b, c).
tal pocket formation or gingival recession with root
 Two methods of probing are spot and circumferential.
exposure (fig. 2.9).
Spot probing is the insertion and withdrawal of the
The teeth are grossly inspected for fracture, obvious
probe at a single area per tooth. Because single areas do
resorption, and mobility If the patient will allow, a Q-tip
not represent the entire tooth, an inaccurate assessment
is applied to the gingival/tooth interface with gentle
may be obtained. Circumferential probing is insertion of
Figure 2.8 a. Normal-appearing tongue in a cat with extracted mandibular cheek teeth. b. Sublingual tongue mass secondary to squamous cell carcinoma.
34
Oral Examination
35
Figure 2.12 General anesthesia necessary for oral assessment, treatment.
and prevention.
Figure 2.9 Inflamed gingiva and alveolar mucosa around the maxillary
 cheek teeth and mucosa of the caudal oral cavity.
Figure 2.13
a. University North Carolina probe (Cislak). b. Williams probe
(Cislak).
pue bupaig aot isat on enbunh isuiehe paneid kuah dn-o ol'z auni
sensitivity (note: Q-tips can also be used for plaque removal).
the probe in the sulcus or pocket in at least four places
(two buccal and two lingual/palatal) around the tooth,
recording millimeter readings. This method compen-
sates for inaccurate readings when subgingival calculus
 or isolated areas of vertical bone loss are present (figs.
2.15 a, b, c, d).
Clinical Attachment Level
The clinical attachment level offers greater diagnostic
Figure 2.11  Normal canine and premolar occlusion.
significance compared to the probing depth. Attachment
canine palatal pocket.
Figure 2.15 a-d. Four probed areas around the mandibular third premolar (mesiobuccal, distobuccal, distolingual/distopalatal, mesiolingual/mesiopalatal).
36
Oral Examination
37
Figure 2.16  a. Number 17 Orban explorer (Cislak). b. ODU explorer (Cislak).
c. Shepherd's hook explorer (Cislak). d. Combination of periodontal probe and 
explorer (Miltex).
loss or clinical attachment level is determined by mea-
suring the distance from the cementoenamel junction to
the pocket base. Alternatively, this measurement is
determined by adding the probing depth to the gingival
recession measurement (distance between the cementoe-
namel junction to the gingival margin).
Normally, the gingival margin lies less than 1 mm
 coronal to the cementoenamel junction. With gingival
recession, the gingival margin lies apical to the cemen-
toenamel jumction. In these cases, the loss of attachment
will be greater than the pocket depth.
Dental Explorer
A dental explorer has a sharp point (tip) used to examine
the tooth for surface irregularities, calculus, resorption,
necrotic cementum, and mobility. The explorer can also
be used for examination of pulp exposure. The explorer
b
is not used to remove calculus.
 Explorer examples useful in feline dental pathology
Figure 2.17 a. Compressed air applied to suspected tooth resorption of the
assessment include the number 17 Orban explorer,
right maxilary third premolar b. Explorer used to help confim presence of
which has a fine 2-mm tip that extends at a right angle
tooth resorption of the left maxillary third premolar.
 from the shank. The O.D.U. (Old Dominion University)
number 11/12 is patterned after the Gracey 11/12
 curette. The thin tip is especially useful for examining
When there is a ledge of subgingival calculus present,
areas of tooth resorption. A Shepherd's hook explorer,
the explorer moves over the tooth surface, encounters
although thicker, can also be used (figs. 2.16 a, b, c, d).
the ledge, moves laterally over it, and returns to the
 Normally, there is a smooth path when the explorer
 tooth surface. When fine deposits of subgingival calcu-
is inserted and withdrawn from the sulcus or pocket.
lus are present, there will be a gritty sensation as the
38
Feline Dentistry
 explorer passes over the fine calculus. In cases of tooth
Harvey EE, Emily PP. Oral examination and diagnostic tech-
resorption and other structural defects, the probe enters
niques, Small Animat Dentistry, Mosby, St. Louis, 1993;
the area of dental hard tissue loss (figs. 2.17a, b).
19-41.
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER. Dental records, Veteri-
nary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal Practitioner, 3rd
Further Reading
ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 1-38.
Lobprise HB. Treatment planning based on examination
results. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2000; 15: 211-220.
 Baxter CJK. Oral and dental diagnostics. In: Tutt C, Deeprose
 J, Crossley D. BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Dentistry,
3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 22-40.
Chapter 3
Radiology
 [1e isou u jied jeisau ue sheld Audensoipei [eua
assessments. Dental films are indicated for evaluation of
 projected fees, the patient is treated.
0 uoissanoid rouou c Aem e se oooed juaredde
The following is a typical timeline for one patient
resolution of treated disease, and as part of the periodic
(other patients are added to the daily schedule depend-
complete dental evaluation.
 ing on availability of anesthesia units and staff):
 Intraoral radiography offers the capability of viewing
9:00 a.m.: The patient is examined or left for an
pathology below the gingival margin and inside the
examination. The owner is advised to call the office
tooth. Among many other things, it allows us to visibly
or come back at noon for discussion of dental exami-
evaluate tooth vitality; pre-, intra-, and postoperative
nation and radiographic findings, while the animal
endodontic treatment; progression of pulpal pathology
is still anesthetized.
and /or periodontal disease; and anatomical orientation
9:30-10:30 a.m.: Preoperative laboratory and electro-
and documentation of root structure before extraction.
 Intraoral radiography is also very useful to determine
cardiographic evaluation are performed. An intra-
venous catheter is placed.
 the cause of chronic nasal discharge and to assess the
10:30-11:45 a.m.: The patient is anesthetized, teeth
extent of oral neoplasia and severity of maxillofacial
are cleaned, the mouth is probed and charted, and
trauma.
 Examination of intraoral films will also allow postop-
oral survey radiographs are exposed by the staff. A
treatment plan is formulated by the veterinarian and
erative evaluation after extraction to confirm all root
fees are calculated.
fragments were removed. It also provides essential
12:00 p.m.: The client calls. The veterinarian dis-
information in evaluating tooth resorption and finally
cusses examination findings, treatment plan, and
provides a baseline record to compare future radio-
fees while the technician is completing the dental
graphic studies.
cleaning procedure.
12:10 p.m.: When the treatment plan is approved,
Incorporating Dental Radiography into
therapy begins.
General Practice
 2:00 p.m.: Therapy is completed (time depends on
procedure).
5:00-6:00 p.m.: The patient is discharged, with a dis-
Frequently, patients presenting for "routine teeth clean-
charge order and picture report discussion with the
ing and examination" have significant disease. The
owner.
 decision to extract, perform flap surgery, apply local
 antibiotics, or only clean and polish is made by visual
examination,
 periodontal
"guqoid
and
dental
Radiograph Unit
radiography.
Logistically, when the patient is admitted to the hos-
pital for dental evaluation and care, the pet owner
Although the veterinarian may choose to use a conven-
 tional whole-body radiograph unit, acquiring high-qual-
cannot receive an accurate treatment plan until a thor-
ity dental images requires a dedicated dental radiograph
ough tooth-by-tooth assessment is conducted. The client
 is encouraged to return to the office or call at a specific
unit for a multitude of reasons:
0l 1ajel simou aanu 1o oml Aensn paed si 1o 's
Shorter film focal length and automatic collimation
discuss the treatment plan based on clinical examination
result in less scattered radiation and radiation expo-
and radiographic findings while the patient continues to
sure to the patient and staff.
6E
40
 Feline Dentistry
Ideal tube positioning is greatly facilitated by tube
Example, a 4-inch cone requires one-fourth of the expo-
support, arms of various lengths that allow vertical,
sure of an 8-inch cone. Generally, short-cone technique,
horizontal, and rotational movement, resulting in
which produces less magnification, is preferable because
less patient repositioning.
it uses a quarter of the exposure and is easier to position.
 Radiographs can be obtained on the dental opera-
The long-cone technique, however, produces films with
tory table rather than moving the patient to a dedi-
less divergence and scatter.
cated radiography area (figs. 3.1 and 3.2 a, b, c ).
The arm connects the radiograph tube and the control
panel. The control panel contains the timer, kilovoltage
 Most dental units are economically priced between
(kV), and/or milliamperage (mA) regulators. Most
US$3,000 and US$5,000, requiring a small cash outlay,
machines have a fixed kV (50-120) and mA (7-15). The
 and a long arm can reach two closely located operatory
only variable parameter is duration of the exposure in
areas.
fractions of seconds or pulses (figs. 3.3 a, b).
The position indicating device (PID) is an extension
The exposure timer regulates the time an exposure
placed on the tube head at the collimator attachment. To
lasts. The timer is engaged only while the switch is
minimize the amount of radiation exposure, the PID is
depressed and automatically stops at the end of the
lead lined. (Note: older units may not be lead lined.) The
 preset exposure. The timer resets after each exposure.
shape of the PID may be circular or rectangular.
 Dental lead-lined cones are available in a variety of
Most dental units use 110V, 60Hz AC electricity. A
lengths from 4 to 16 inches. The end of a 4-inch cone may
 separate dedicated electrical circuit is recommended.
The kilovoltage peak (kVp) determines the penetrat-
be 8 inches from the radiograph generator. An 8-inch
aleoaoi paonpoid uoeipei jo Aenb io lamod su
extension (using a 4-inch cone) is referred to as short-
affects the contrast (shades of gray). The higher the kVp
cone technique; longer extensions result in a long-cone
setting, the higher is the photon energy that strikes an
technique. Exposure adjustments to accommodate dif-
area. To penetrate larger teeth, a higher kilovoltage is
ferent cone lengths employ the inverse square rule. For
 required to produce a diagnostic film. When using ultra-
speed D film, the kVp setting varies from 40 to 70,
depending on the tooth and animal size or on the gen-
erator used.
Digital Imaging
Digital imaging is a major technical advancement in
companion animal dental radiography. Instead of film,
an electronic sensor pad is placed against the teeth; the
pad senses radiation and transfers the pattern as an
image to a computer screen where it can be enhanced,
 enlarged, e-mailed, printed, or archived.
AFP
A dental radiographic unit is still needed to expose
the sensor. Approximately 1/10 to 1/2 of the nondigital
exposure is commonly needed to obtain a diagnostic
image; however, some systems need the same amount
of radiation as F-speed film. Because of low time expo-
sure settings, older dental radiographic machines may
 not have fast enough timers to produce digital images.
The direct-to-digital sensors used in the patient's
mouth are available in two sizes, similar to film numbers
1 and 2. Phosphor transfer sensors are available in four
sizes, similar to film numbers 0, 1, 2, and 4. Parallel and
bisecting angle techniques are used to position the
sensor and PID properly. The operator selects the tooth
or quadrant to be exposed from computer sofftware. In
m nans a uo readde i sar 'sasas pai
Figure 3.1  Ceiling-mounted radiographic generator and monitor.
a matter of seconds (figs. 3.4 a, b).
Figure 3.2 a. Dental operatory with cabinet mounted radiograph unit. b. Portable handheld radiograph generator (Nomad). c. Wallmounted radiograph unit
(Progeny Vet Visionby Midmark).
41
1
IMAGE
IMAGE-VET70ACP
NOMADPRO
VETERINARY
AA
W
Figure 3.4 a. Wired direct radiography (DR) sensor (EVA AFP Imaging).
.国
b. Computed radiography (CR) film plate (Scan X).
60kU
2
5mA
Q0
Figure 3.3 a. Control panel Image-Vet 70 plus (AFP Imaging). b. Control
panel (Nomad).
42
Radiology
43
Image quality is equivalent to traditional dental films.
Film
 The software allows a variety of options for enhancing
and manipulating the image for greater diagnostic value.
Intraoral, nonscreen film can be used in small animal
 The tools used most often include enlargement, autocon-
dental radiography. It is inexpensive and flexible and
trast, grayscale resolution, spotlight features, inversion
provides diagnostic detail. The author prefers digital
of colors, and measurement rulers (figs. 3.5 a-f).
imaging using sensors to replace film.
Individual dental films are packaged in a light-safe
packet made of either Poly-Soft plastic or paper mate-
rial. The back of the packet has a tab used to open the
Radiation Safety
packet and remove the film for processing. The tabbed
side is placed away from the radiation beam. Inside the
ALARA
packet, film is positioned between two sheets of black
paper. Lead foil, which protects film from secondary
 Radiation exposure should be "as low as reasonably
 backscatter radiation, is located next to the tab opening
achievable" (ALARA). This concept endorses exposing
(fig. 3.6).
the patient (and operator) to the lowest possible amount
 Intraoral dental film is packaged with one or two films
 of radiation necessary to produce a diagnostically
 acceptable radiograph.
give to the client or referring veterinarian, or to archive
 Staff of the veterinary facility must be protected
interesting cases.
against excessive radiation exposure.
e.Radiograph
aprons, gloves, and thyroid shields should be worn
when exposing films. Personal radiation monitoring
Film Speed
devices are required in most states.
Veterinarian responsibilities include (1) prescribing
The efficiency with which a film responds to radiograph
omly radiographs that are clinically necessary, (2) install-
exposure is known as film sensitivity or speed:
ing and maintaining the radiographic equipment in
D speed (Ultraspeed, Kodak) provides high contrast
 a safe working condition, and (3) adequate training,
and fine detail. Ultraspeed is the most popular film
 supervision of, and monitoring of personnel who expose 
used for veterinary dentistry.
radiographs.
E speed (Ektaspeed, Kodak) requires 25% less expo-
Aapes ropnado cn Aidde uopn jo sad om
sure time than D speed film, with minimal loss of
 Primary radiation comes from direct exposure to the
contrast.
radiograph beam. The veterinarian or staff should never
F speed (InSight, Kodak) requires 60% less exposure
 hold film or digital sensors in the patient's mouth with
time than D speed film, and 20% less than E speed
 bare or even gloved fingers. To avoid finger exposure,
film.
film or sensors can be positioned in the mouth using
the endotracheal tube, clay encased in a plastic bag.
Kodak film packet backs are color coded to indicate
 gauze, or crumpled newspapers, decreasing operator
film speed and number of films in the packet.
exposure.
Secondary (scatter) radiation reflects from areas that
have been irradiated by the primary beam. Protective
Film Sizes
 devices must be wom for shielding.
● Small periapical (size 0, Kodak Ultraspeed DF-54)
 measures % x 1% inches. Size 0 is used mostly in cats
due to the small-sized film. It is appropriate for the
parallel technique of the mandibular cheek teeth
Personnel Monitoring
(P3-M1) (fig. 3.7a).
A film badge service is used to provide radiation moni-
Large periapical (size 2, Kodak Ultraspeed DF-58)
 toring for all members of the office staff functioning near
measures 11%4 x 1% inches. It is appropriate for the
radiation exposure. The dosimeter badge should be
near parallel technique of the maxillary cheek teeth
worn at all times in the veterinary office. It measures the
(P2-M1) and bisecting angle of the mandibular inci-
pasodxa st [enpiaipu ue uoneipei jo adk pue jmoue
sors and canine teeth (fig. 3.7b).
to in the working environment. The badge should not
Occlusal (size 4, Kodak Ultraspeed DF-50) film mea-
be worn outside the office. The periodic radiation
sures 2% x3 inches. Occlusal film is used in extraoral
monitoring report should be evaluated and saved
technique and nasal studies. It is appropriate for the 
indefinitely.
maxillary occlusal view (fig. 3.7c).
Figure 3.5 Rostral mandibles: a. Underexposed film. b. Exposure correction. c. Inverse. d. Enlarged part of image. e. Intraoral radiograph of bilateral tooth
resorption at the mandibular canines. f. Software color enhancement (Schick).
44
ZoomedImage:Images,Various-5/9/2006-CenterMandibular
Figure 3.5Continued
45
46
Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.6  Opened film packet (film light green color).
Digital Format Sensor (Plate) Sizes
There are many methods for using the film dot for
tooth identification. One method places the raised dot
Direct-to-digital sensors are currently marketed in size
against the cutting edge of the teeth and toward the tube
1 and 2 formats (figs. 3.8 a, b, c, d). Phosphor transfer
head. Using this system to determine whether a pro-
digital plates are available in sizes 1, 2, and 4 (fig. 3.8e).
 cessed film is from the right or left side, the progression
of the teeth from molars to incisors is identified, as well
Film Dot
as the location of the raised film dot. With this method,
spueis arddy pandde aq uen ami ,red, pue ,adde, a
Most dental films are embossed with a raised dot (or
for mterior to posterior (rostral to caudal) = left side. Par
dimple) in one of the corners. The dot is used to identify
stands for posterior to amterior (caudal to rostral) = right
right from left. The side of the film containing the raised
side.
(convex) side of the dot indicates the side to be posi-
 tioned toward the radiation beam (figs. 3.9 a-f).
SIZEO
DF-54
Kodak
SIZE2
DF-58
Ultra-speed
Peni
Kodak
1001-FILMPA
 Utra-speed
RE
150 1-FILM PACKE
CAT1658194
SIZE4
DF-50
Kodak
ultra-speed  Ooccl
251-FILMPAPERPACKETS
CAT1666163
Intraoral Film
 Sizes
Periapical
Bitewing
Occlusal
Size 0
Size 0
Size 4
Size 1
Size 1
Size 2
Size 2
Size 3
Figure 3.7 a. Size 0 film. b. Size 2 film. c. Size 4 film.
47
progeny
VDX-VET
eva
5101
Oppositeside
2
towardstube
TECHNIQUES
7227
Figure 3.8 a. Sizes 1 and 2 digital sensors (EVA, AFP Imaging). b. Schick Technologies 0, 1, and 2 digital sensor sizes. c. Schick Technologies sensor attached
48
TECHNIQUES
5101
INC
2
Oppositeside
towardstube.
23616163
Figure 3.9 a. Scan X digital phosphor plate film position mark "a" circled.
b. Film marker "a" indicating left maxilla. c. Digital sensor position marker
(arrow) indicating left maxilla. d. Film packet embossed dot (arrows). e. Right
mandible film placement with marked film dot. f. Left rostral mandible film
placement with marked film dot.
49
50
 Feline Dentistry
A lesser used alternative system positions the dot on
the film, creating a nondistorted image. Only the man-
the right side of the radiographed object. When reading
dibular cheek teeth allow the film to be placed lingually
 a s h e, a u st jop a j yde a
(parallel) in the flexible intermandibular soft tissue par-
side. If it is in the "bone," it is the left side.
allel to the roots.
 Most digital sensors and phosphor plates are mar-
Parallel technique is not usually feasible for most
keted with embedded position indicators.
studies. Instead, the bisecting angle technique is used.
Imaginary lines are drawn along the long axis of the
tooth/teeth and the plane of the film. The point where
Tube/Film/Patient Placement (see Table 3.1)
 these two lines meet creates an angle. Instead of aiming
the central beam perpendicular to the film, as in the
A radiographic dental survey consists of a minimum of
parallel technique, the central beam is aimed perpen-
six views:
dicular to the imaginary line that bisects the angle formed
by the plane of the film and the long axis of the tooth.
Rostral maxilla including the canines
 Rostral mandible including the canines
 Right maxillary cheek teeth
Positioning for the Maxilla
Left maxillary cheek teeth
Incisors: Place the film packet or sensor toward the
Right mandibular cheek teeth
 Left mandibular cheek teeth
tube head against the incisors and palate. Position the
PID perpendicular to an angle that bisects the film and
The film should be placed inside the mouth, as paral-
teeth planes (fig. 3.10 a). If present and anatomically
lel as possible to the long axis of the tooth roots to be
normal, both canines should touch the film (figs. 3.10 b,
radiographed. The nontabbed side faces the tube head.
C, d).
The film can be held in position by the endotracheal
Canine: Place the film packet facing the tube, between
tube, wadded-up newspaper, gauze, hair curler devices,
the tongue and maxilla and beneath the canine tooth
lead radiograph gloves (without fingers inside), sponges,
root. Center the PID over the mesial root of the second
clay encased in plastic bags, or by commercial holding
 maxillary premolar, dorsally or laterally depending on 
devices. Operators must not use their fingers to hold
the view needed. Determine the angle between the axis
film during exposure.
of canine tooth root plane of the canine tooth root and
Vertical angulation refers to the up-and-down move-
the plane of the film. Position the cone perpendicular to
ment of the PID. Vertical angulation determines how
the bisected angle.
accurately the length of the object being radiographed is
 The lateral oblique view is recommended for close
reproduced.
inspection of the periapical region of the canine tooth
 Horizontal angulation refers to rostral-caudal move-
(figs. 3.11. a, b).
 ments of the tube head. Proper horizontal angulation
Premolars and first molar intraoral technique: Place
produces normal interproximal anatomic representation
the film packet as close as possible to the inmer surface
of the teeth without overlapping.
of the cheek teeth. For the maxillary view of the cheek
 Parallel technique places the film parallel to the tooth,
teeth, the patient is positioned in stermal recumbency
and the radiograph beam is positioned perpendicular to
with a support placed under the chin, at a height where
Table 3.1. Intraoral Radiographic Overview.
View
Position
Technique
Film Size
 Exposure Time at 60 kv
 and 7 mA (in seconds)
Maxillary incisors and 
Intraoral occlusal 
 Bisecting angle
2
0.16
canines
 Maxillary premolars and 
Intraoral and/or
 Near parallel 
2
0.20
molars
 extraoral
 Mandibular incisors and 
Intraoral occlusal
 Bisecting angle
0.12
Ganines
Mandibular premolars and  Intraoral
 Parallel
0 or 2 
0.12
molars
Periapical Examination:
TheBisecting-AngleTechnique
Long Axis
Imaginary
Plane
CentralRay
Film
Figure 3.10 a. Bisecting angle tooth, sensor and beam position illustration.
b. Patient, sensor and tube head positions for intraoral films of the maxillary
image.
51
52
Feline Dentistry
+
Figure 3.11  a. Lateral oblique tube head and sensor position. b. Lateral oblique maxillary canine image.
the muzzle is parallel to the tabletop. A size 2 film or
Due to superimposition of the zygomatic arch over
sensor is placed into the mouth (film white side toward
the maxillary cheek teeth, satisfactory views may not be
the palate). Aim the PID at the roots of the premolars at
 obtained using the standard bisecting angle technique
 approximately 45 degrees. The maxillary fourth premo-
(fig. 3.12c).
lar has three roots (mesiobuccal, mesiopalatal, and
 To avoid the zygomatic arch, use a rostral oblique
distal). To avoid overlap of the mesiobuccal and mesio-
Extaoral bisecting angle projection, aimed at the premo-
palatal roots, position the PID caudal oblique (figs. 3.12
lar roots with the PID positioned just ventral to the arch
a,b).
aimed at the palatal surfaces of the teeth. The film is
Zygomaticarch
Figure 3.12 a. Patient, tube head, and sensor position to expose maxillary
cheek teeth. b and c. Maxillary cheek teeth image—note superimposition of the
zygomatic arch over the fourth premolar d and e. Extraoral radiographic patient,
tube head, and flm and sensor positions. f. Extraoral image without zygoma
superimposition.
53
54
 Feline Dentistry
 placed extraorally on the table. The cusp tips of the pre-
Incisors: Position the film packet toward the tube head
molars should be near the lower edge of the film, so
against the incisors on top of the tongue. Position the
 most of the film is under the maxilla and zygomatic arch
PID perpendicular to the bisecting angle (figs. 3.13 a, b).
(figs. 3.12 d, e, f).
Canine: Place the patient in ventral recumbency. Posi-
 The embossed dot is along the lower edge of the film.
tion the film on top of the tongue. To obtain a lateral
When extraoral technique is used, right will appear to
view, position the PID approximately 45 degrees toward
 be left when viewing the film. The raised dot on the film
the canine (fig. 3.14).
should now be mounted so the indented dimple (concave
Premolars and first molar: Place the cat in lateral
side) is toward the viewer. This will help to avoid mis-
recumbency, with the film or sensor at the floor of
interpreting right from left when viewing the mounted
the mouth lingual to the premolars. Place gauze or a
 intraoral radiograph.
hemostat to help depress the film into the floor of the
mouth. Aim the PID perpendicular to the tooth roots
Positioning for the Mandible
and film (parallel technique). Occasionally, a slightly
Place the patient in dorsal or lateral recumbency with
caudal oblique position of the PID enables viewing the
 support under the neck so the muzzle is parall to the
distal root of the mandibular molar (figs. 3.15 and 3.16
tabletop.
a, b, c, d).
Figure 3.13 Rostral mandible: a. Tube head and sensor position. b. Image.
Figure 3.14  Lateral view of the mandibular canine.
Periapical Examination:
TheParallelTechnique
Long Axis
Central Ray
Film'
Figure 3.15  Parallel technique used when imaging the mandibular premolars.
55
56
Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.16 a and b. Left mandibular premolars and first molar. a. Patient, tube head, and sensor position. b.Left mandibular premolars and first molar image.
C and d. Right mandibular premolars and first molar. c. Patient, tube head, and sensor position. d. Right mandibular premolars and first molar image.
Temporomandibular Joint
dibular fossa that partially envelops and prevents caudal
luxation of the mandibular condyle. At the rostral
The temporomandibular joint (TMJ), also called the cra-
margin of the mandibular fossa there is a small, unnamed
niomandibular joint, is a transversely elongated, syno-
protuberance.
vial joint formed by the condylar process of the mandible
 The joint may be affected by congenital defects (most
and the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone. The
commonly dysplasia), trauma (luxation, fracture), infec-
reticular process is a caudoventral extension of the man-
tion (septic arthritis, non-infected degenerative joint
Radiology
57
Figure 3.17 a. Intraoral temporomandibular joint (TMJ) positioning. b. Exposed intraoraly obtained temporomandibular joint image.
disease), and neoplasia. Imaging of the TMJ can be dif-
Alternately, an extraoral technique can be used. Stan-
ficult. Intraoral or extraoral techniques can be used to
dard radiograph views include closed dorsoventral/
view the joint.
ventrodorsal, lateral, lateral oblique, and open-mouth.
 When using an intraoral technique, a number 2 or
 The dorsoventral (DV) position usually gives the most
number 4 film can be placed in the oropharynx wedged
 information concerning the TMJ. The radiograph beam
under the endotracheal tube in the area of the TMJ. The
should be centered between the two TMJs with care
PID is placed against the ear canal (figs. 3.17 a, b).
to assure symmetric positioning of the head. This is
58
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.18 a. Dorsoventral positions for exposure of the TMJs. b. Exposed
extraoral image with TMJs circled.
Figure 3.19 a. Straight lateral. b. Superimposition of the TMJs.
often difficult in patients that have suffered head
trauma. In those cases, ventrodorsal (VD) views may be
easier to obtain. The normal TMJ space is a thin, sharply
 marginated, radiolucent band of uniform width (figs.
3.18 a, b).
radiograph with the TMJ closer to the film cassette being
Lateral positioning is accomplished with the nose
more caudal (figs. 3.19 a, b).
raised 15 to 20 degrees. However, true lateral views of
Lateral oblique is another option that allows the TMJs
the TMJs are not usually diagnostic due to superimposi-
to be viewed without superimposition. The head is
tion, unless the radiograph beam is centered over the
rotated 20 degrees along its median axis, and the TMJ
third cervical vertebra and the film focal distance is 100
closer to the film cassette is projected clear of the skull
cm. Due to parallax, both TMJs will be visible on one
ventrally (figs. 3.20 a, b).
Radiology
59
Figure 3.20 a. Extaroral lateral oblique positioning to evaluate left TMJ in a cat skull. b. Lateral oblique image, the left TMJ located ventrally to the opposite
TM on the radiographic image.
Even  with good-quality dorsoventral  and lateral
SLOB Rule
 oblique views, an accurate diagnosis of TMJ pathology
sa lep 1o oeue uo paseq aqssod aq jou Ae
The "SLOB rule" (same lingual, opposite buccal), also
 In those cases, thin-sliced computed tomography offers
called the "buccal object rule," is a tube-shift technique 
superior imaging of the TMJ.
that helps identify the relative bucco-lingual location of
60
 Feline Dentistry
objects in the oral cavity. When two roots of a triple-
rooted tooth (e.g., the maxillary fourth premolar) are
superimposed on the radiograph, it is sometimes diffi-
cult to distinguish the individual roots. Defining which
paiosse Aonoed uaum juodui si uum st jo0n
with advanced periodontal disease or foreign bodies is
discovered. To visualize the roots, two radiographs are
taken at oblique angles, fixing the vertical position and
moving the tube horizontally. Horizontal tube shift will
separate the superimposed roots on the film. The root
that "moves" in an opposite direction to the horizontal
shift of the tube, is labial or buccal. For example, when
the tube head is moved rostrally, the mesiopalatal root
of the right or left maxillary fourth premolar will be the
 most rostral root on the radiograph, and the mesiobuccal
root will be caudal to the mesiopalatal root. Generally,
aqnt a se tooap as a un ,saaow, poon e wa
 head, it is located more lingual or palatal compared to
元SNI
the other root(s).
 Elimination of movement is essential to image sharp-
ness. During exposure, movement of the film packet,
 patient's head, or PID must be avoided.
Film Processing
Emulsion film may be developed either manually or
automatically. Digital images are processed through the
computer.
With manual processing, the operator moves the film 
from the developer, water, and fixer solutions in the
practice darkroom or in a chairside darkroom.
With the chairside darkroom, a portable light-safe box
containing developer, distilled water, and fixer in small
containers is placed in the dental operatory. The chair-
side darkroom is covered with a Plexiglas safety flter,
which enables operators to see their hands while han-
dling the film(s). The filter is either amber (when D
speed film is exposed) or red (for E or F speed films).
Processing time from opening the film packet to initial
examination of a rinsed film takes approximately 2
Figure 3.21 a. Chair-side developer unit. b. Individual cups for developer.
minutes (figs. 3.21 a, b).
water, fixer, and water inside the chair-side developer.
 Developer and fixer jars in the chairside darkroom
should be covered when not in use. Depending on the
chemical manufacturer, number of films processed, and
film packet tab down to present the film, cardboard,
environmental conditions, the fixer and developer
and lead blocker. The film will feel firm to the touch
remain usable for 2 days to 2 weeks. To maximize the
compared to the other film packet contents.
life of the developer, stock solutions can be stored in a
2.
Attach a film hanger to the film edge. Touch only
 refrigerator. The developer and fixer should be brought
the sides of the film with your fingers. Apply a
to room temperature before use.
Manual processing includes the following steps:
 gentle tug to make certain the film is firmly attached
to the hanger (fig. 3.22a).
1.
After exposure, carry the film into the practice dark-
3.1
Place the film into developer solution for the speci-
room or chairside darkroom for processing. Slide the
fied time recommended by the manufacturer (Kodak
Radiology
61
Figure 3.23  Automatic film processor.
4.
 After removal from the developer, rinse the film in
fresh distilled water (wash) for 10 to 15 seconds.
Rinsing removes the alkaline developer from the
film surface, preventing mixture with the acid fixer.
 5. Place the film into fixing solution for at least 2
minutes. Fixer removes the unexposed or underde-
veloped silver halide crystals and rehardens the
emulsion.
6.
Rinse the film for 30 seconds in distilled water.
 7.After viewing, place the film back into fixer for 5
minutes, followed by a distilled water rinse for 10
minutes.
8.
 When rinsing is complete, attach the radiograph to
 a clip on the drying rack.
 When using an automatic standard film processor, the 
dental film can be attached to a larger film with silver 
photographic tape. This procedure is discouraged
because small dental films might become lost in the
processor, and/or the tape might harm the processor's
rollers.
 An automatic dental film processor with a light-safe
feeder can be located in the chairside darkroom or a
separate darkroom. Exposed dental film(s) are inserted
at one end of the automatic dental processor and exit
fully developed, fixed, and dried in 5 to 7 minutes (or in
2 minutes, rapid cycle, for endodontic intraoperative
Figure 3.22 a. Attached film hanger. b. Film and hanger placed into devel-
films not fully fixed) (fig. 3.23).
oper solution.
Automatic Processing
Rapid Access Chemistry: 15 seconds at 68 degrees).
 Note: an alternative method starts manual film pro-
Remove all wrappers around the film in the
cessing with water immersion to soften the emulsion
darkroom.
before placement in the developer (fig. 3.22b).
2.
 Insert the film into the film processor.
62
 Feline Dentistry
Quality Control
Lay a dental film tab-side down on a flat surface.
Place a step wedge over the film.
3.
 Use previously described techniques to expose the
A good radiograph is useless umless it can be read
film.
accurately, and a poor radiograph cannot be read
Process the film using new chemicals in a light-
accurately.
$”
secured area.
 Daily, a quality assurance film should be exposed to
verify that all parts of the dental radiography system are
The processed image should show ten shades of
sau apam das umue ue jo asn iadord unom
varying densities, from light gray to black. If all ten steps
accomplish this goal. The step wedge is composed of
are not apparent, adjust the exposure up or down until
 graduated pieces of aluminum placed to produce a step
all can be distinctly seen. If the lightest steps (from the
effect (figs. 3.24 a, b).
thickest part of the wedge) are indistinct, the exposure
To use a step wedge to establish a control
 is increased. If the darkest steps (from the thinnest part
radiograph:
of the wedge) are indistinct, the exposure is decreased.
b
Figure 3.24 a. Aluminum step wedge placed on film. b. Tube head position to expose quality control film. c. Reference film with clearly identified density
shades. d. Reference film processed in exhausted chemicals with blurred density shades.
Radiology
63
When the correct exposure is determined, this becomes
Film Fogging
the control film. Thirty reference films are exposed but
not processed. Reference films should be stored in a
several causes:
refrigerator. (figs. 3.24 c, d)
The control film is placed on the view box. Every day.
Insufficient fixation time (most common reason). To
one of the pre-exposed reference films is developed to
correct this fault, immerse the film in the fixer for an
confirm that the density (overall darkness of the image)
additional 5 minutes.
and contrast (number of visible steps of the wedge)
 Exhausted processing chemicals
remain constant when compared to the baseline film. If
+
Expired film
they are not identical, the correct processing time and
 Light leaks from the film packet or processing area.
temperature are verified. If more than two steps are
 To evaluate whether the processing area was at
lighter than the control film, and other variables have
fault, place a coin on top of an open unexposed film
not changed, the developing and fixing solutions should
packet in the dark room for 10 minutes, then process
either be replenished or changed.
the film; if an outline of the coin shows, there is a
 Film quality encompasses many variables, including
light leak in the darkroom.
Overdeveloped film
Detail: the delineation of minute structure,
1
con-
 Film processed in fixer contaminated with devel-
 trolled by kVp and the developing process.
oper solution
Definitior: the distinctmess and demarcation of the
detail that make up the radiographic images, con-
trolled by distance, focal spot size, type of film, and
No Image
motion. Adequate definition is present when the
apical lamina dura, periodontal ligament space, and
Film immersed in fixer before developer
individual bone trabeculae can be clearly demar
 Film unexposed (either due to poor PID positioning.
cated around a healthy tooth.
packet placement, or failure to engage the timer)
 Dernsity: the degree of whiteness created on the film,
controlled predominantly by mAs; settings of 10-
12.5 mAs typically provide adequate detail.
Light Image
Contrast: the relative difference between densities,
 Decreased exposure time
controlled by kVp (normally between 40 and 75) and
 Decreased kilovoltage
+
processing variables (temperature, humidity, devel-
Contaminated or exhausted developing solution
 opment time, light leaks, and inherent characteris-
Decreased developing time
tics of film); high-contrast films appear black and
Inappropriate film placement in the mouth
white, while low-contrast films demonstrate many
shades of gray.
Dark Image
 Overexposed film
 Excessive kilovoltage
Troubleshooting
Increased exposure time
 Overdeveloped film
 Foreshortened Image
Warm developing solution (ideal temperature is
The exposed dental image should be approximately the
68 F)
same size as the patient's tooth. Foreshortened images,
aus radde 'uomlue ieraa aissanxa aq pasnes
 If the film is black, then it may have been exposed to
than the patient's anatomy. To correct a foreshortened
light before processing.
image, the vertical angulation is reduced.
 Partially Visible Image
Elongated Image
The film was partially immersed in the developer.
While in the developer, the film became attached to
 Elongated images, caused by too litle vertical angula-
other films or the side of the container.
tion, appear longer than the actual tooth. To correct an
The film or tube head was incorrectly positioned,
elongated image, vertical angulation is increased.
creating cone cutoff.
64
 Feline Dentistry
Blurred or Double Images
For labial mounting:
Blurred and double images are caused by movement of
 All radiographs of the dental survey are placed on
the patient, film, or radiograph machine head, or by
a flat view box with the convex side of the dot
exposing a film twice. If the movement continued
toward the viewer (any films made using extraoral
throughout the exposure, the image will be blurred.
technique are placed with the convex dot away from
 Movement where the film was in one position for part
the viewer).
of the exposure and then maintained in a second posi-
The radiographs are arranged anatomically; maxil-
tion for the remainder of the exposure will display a
lary above, mandibular below.
double image. Tongue movement in lightly sedated
The patient's right side should be placed on the left
patients may move the film during exposure.
side of the box.
The maxillary radiographs are positioned with the
crowns of the teeth facing the bottom of the view
Other Complications
box.
 Fingerprints occur from poor handling while pro-
The mandibular radiographs are rotated until the
1
cessing (wet hands, fingertips). The film should be
coronal portions of the teeth are directed toward the
handled only by the edges.
top of the view box.
Frosty films occur from insufficient removal of fixer
The films are placed into the mount as positioned
when rinsing manually processed films. The remain-
on the view box. The rostral maxillary and man-
ing residue dries on the film, leaving a frosty finish.
dibular views are mounted in the upper and lower
Rinsing a processed film with fresh distilled water
center mount openings.
for sufficient time easily prevents frosty films.
Lingual mounting (sitting on the tongue), where films
Streaked films might occur when the film is insuf-
are placed in the mount with raised dots facing away
ficiently developed, fixed, or rinsed. Contaminated
from the viewer, is less commonly utilized. In this
processing solutions might be at fault.
method, radiographs are viewed as if the viewer is
Crescent-shaped lines occur when the film packet is
inside the patient's mouth looking out; the patient's left
sharply bent.
side is on the viewer's left side.
Low-density tire tracks or geometric patterns on the
film occur as the result of directing the radiograph
through the lead foil side of the film packet.
Radiograph Interpretation
Radiographic Landmarks
Film Storage and Mounting
It is important to be able to look at a film and anatomi-
cally identify the area exposed:
Film mounts are used to organize and store radiographs.
Mounts are available in a variety of styles, materials, and
The maxillary incisor area contains a radiopaque
sizes of windows (openings) to accommodate the
(white) area caudal to the incisors, with two radio-
patient's radiographic survey. All the radiographs in a
lucent (black) ovals representing the palatine fis-
single series should be in the same mount and labeled
sures (fig. 3.26)
with the patient's name and date of the study. Digitally
The maxillary premolar and molar area contains a
 displaying full-mouth survey films is easy when using
radiopaque fine line apical to the roots, representing
templates (fig. 3.25).
the nasal surface of the alveolar process—a white
 There are two common methods used to mount films.
line caused by tangential beam to the 45-degree
 Both rely on the knowledge of the normal radiographic
angle of the ventrolateral surface of the maxillary
anatomical landmarks for each region of the mouth,
recess (caudally) and nasal cavity (rostrally). The
tooth morphology (shape and form), and identification
maxillary recess does not extend over the second
of the embossed corner dot.
and third premolars (fig. 3.27).
 Labial mounting (nose to nose), wherein the films are
The mandibular incisor area has a linear radiolucent
placed in the mount with the raised dots facing the
-edas 'sisaudus renqipuu au suuasaidan ane
viewer, is most commonly used. The radiographs are
 rating the right and left mandibular bodies (fig.
examined as if the viewer is looking directly at the
3.28).
patient nose to nose; the patient's left side is on the
The mandibular premolar and molar area has radio-
viewer's right side, and the patient's right side is on
lucent areas above and below the body of the man-
the viewer's left side.
dible (fig. 3.29).
INC
CAN-PM-M
CAN-PM-M
CAN
INC
CAN
M-PM
PV-M
Figure 3.25  Digitally displayed oral film survey.
89
66
Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.28 Mandibular incisors and canines.
Figure 3.26  Maxillary incisors and canines.
Figure 3.27  Maxillary premolars and first molar.
Figure 3.29 Mandibular premolars and first molar (affected by Stage 4
periodontal disease).
Mental foramina are normal radiolucent anatomical
 The middle mental foramen is located ventral to the
structures that may be confused with pathology. Cats
mesial root of the second premolar in the dog and
have three mental foramina:
distal to the root of the canine tooth in the cat.
The rostral mental foramen is located ventral to the
The middle mental foramen may radiographically
incisor apices near the symphysis.
-uopopua Sugsagans Asuasnl esidejad e se readde
Radiology
67
Figure 3.30  Middle and caudal mental foramina.
Figure 3.31  Mandibular canal.
tic disease. If in doubt, the tooth can be radiographed
in an oblique angle, which will show that the
foramen is not connected to the tooth's apex.
animal, becoming ill-defined in the aged patient or in
The caudal mental foramen is located ventral to the
various disease states. The lamina dura is separated
 mesial root of the mandibular third premolar (fig.
from the root by a radiolucent line, which represents the
3.30).
periodontal ligament space (fig. 3.33).
The mandibular canal appears as a lucent tubular
The lamina dura of each tooth should be inspected to
structure parallel to the ventral border of the mandible.
 see whether it is continuous or breached (indicating
The mandibular canal may be superimposed on the
pathology). A complete lamina dura generally indicates
 apices of the mandibular cheek teeth, giving the appear-
good periodontal health. In cases of early and estab-
 ance of periapical disease (fig. 3.31).
lished periodontal disease, the coronal lamina dura
 The alveolar margin (also called alveolar crest) is the
appears radiographically indistinct, irregular, and fuzzy.
cortical border of the alveolar process positioned
Resorption of the alveolar bone with advanced stages of
 a o rene u nso ade
periodontal disease leads to widening of the periodontal
 junction in the cat. The shape of the alveolar margin
ligament space and loss of lamina dura. When viewing
varies from pointed to flat. The rostral alveolar margins
the lamina dura and the periodontal ligament space,
appear sharply pointed. Normal cheek teeth alveolar
 only the interproximal portions are visible. The buccal
 margins appear parallel or flat between adjacent cemen-
and lingual walls of the alveolus do not project a lamina
toenamel junctions (fig. 3.32).
dura since they are perpendicular to the radiograph
The lamina dura is a radiographically visible, thin
 beam. With disease, the periodontal ligament space may
radiopaque line that represents a layer of compact bone
 appear with varying thickness, indicating that involve-
lining the alveolus. The lamina dura is not a structure in
ment is not consistent around the entire root.
 its own right but represents the radiographic image of
 The periodontal ligament space normally appears
the dense cortical bone that is continuous with the alveo-
 radiographically as a uniform radiolucent area between
lar margin. It appears dense and uniform in the younger
the lamina dura and tooth root. It is normally wider in
68
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.33  Lamina dura.
 Unilocular corticated. The radiolucent space exhib-
its one space. If they have borders, they are corti-
cated, usually a border of radiopaque rim of bone.
Examples: periapical cyst, granuloma, and dentiger-
ous bone cyst.
Figure 3.32 Alveolar margin.
Unilocular noncorticated. There is no presence of
the thin radiopaque rim of bone at the periphery.
 Instead, it appears fuzzy and ill-defined. Examples:
osteomyelitis and neoplasia.
 Focal opacities.  Well-defined localized lesions.
 Examples: condensing osteitis and periapical cemen-
younger animals and narrows with advancing age. The
tal dysplasia.
periodontal ligament space also appears wider due to
 Irregular or ill-defined opacity  Patterm often
tooth mobility in the presence of periodontal disease.
observed in maligmant conditions as well as
osteomyelitis.
Radiographic Terminology
Periodontal Disease
 Radiolucent. That portion of the processed radio-
 graph that is dark or black. Radiolucent structures
Periodontal disease can be classified in stages 1 to 4
include resorption, soft tissues, dental pulp, and the
based on severity of radiographic and clinical signs. In
periodontal ligament space.
the normal cat without periodontal disease, the alveolar
Radiopaque. That portion of the processed radio-
margin resides 0.5-1 mm apical to the cementoenamel
 graph that is light or white. Radiopaque structures
junction.
include enamel, dentin, bone, and mineralization of
The radiograph is used indirectly to determine degree
soft tissues.
of bone loss. The bone level in periodontal disease often
Radiology
69
decreases as inflammation extends and bone is resorbed.
namel junction to the apex. Clinically, early periodonti-
A significant amount of compact (or cortical) bone is lost
 tis is typified by pocket formation or gingival recession.
before bone loss can be radiographically visualized. Dis-
Radiographically, stage 2 disease appears as blunting
tribution of bone loss is classified as either localized or
(rounding) of the alveolar margin in addition to bone
generalized, depending on the number of areas affected.
loss. There may also appear to be a loss of continuity of
Localized bone loss occurs in isolated areas. Generalized
 the lamina dura at the level of the alveolar margin (fig.
bone loss involves the majority of the marginal bone.
3.34a).
Specific areas of bone loss may be classified as horizontal
 Stage 3, moderate periodontitis, is diagnosed when
(perpendicular to the tooth) or vertical (angular along
25%-50% of attachment loss occurs. The direction of
the side of the root).
bone loss may be horizontal or vertical (angular) (figs.
Stage 1, gingivitis, occurs when the gingiva appears
3.34 b, c).
 inflamed. There is no periodontal support loss or radio-
 Horizontal bone loss radiographically appears as
 graphic change.
decreased alveolar bone along adjacent teeth. Normally,
Stage 2, early periodontitis, occurs when attachment
the alveolar margin bone is located 1mm apical to the
loss is less than 25%, as measured from the cementoe-
cementoenamel junction. With horizontal bone loss,
Figure 3.34 a. Early periodontal disease with less than 25% horizontal bone loss at the mesial root of the right mandibular first molar b. Radiograph of
established periodontitis revealing decreased alveolar bone height of the buccal or lingual alveolus of the mandibular first molar. c. Moderate periodontitis with
less than 50% angular (vertical) bone loss at the right mandibular canine. d. Established periodontitis of the distal root of the right mandibular first molar.
e. Advanced periodontitis with marked horizontal bone loss.
70
Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.34 Continued
both the buccal and lingual plates of bone, as well as
Vertical bone loss, resulting from infrabony defects,
 interdental bone, have been resorbed. Clinically, hori-
occurs when the walls of the pocket are within a bony
zontal bone loss is typified by a suprabony pocket,
housing. Periodontal disease may cause a vertical defect
which occurs when the epithelial attachment is above
to extend apically from the alveolar margin. At first, the
the bony defect.
defect is surrounded by three walls of bone: two mar-
Radiology
71
 ginal (lingual/palatal and facial) and a hemisepta (the
bone of the interdental septum that remains on the root
of the uminvolved adjacent tooth). As disease progresses,
two-, one-, and no-walled (cup) defects may occur.
Radiographically, vertical bone defects are generally
V-shaped and sharply outlined.
Stage 4, advanced periodontal disease, is typified by
deep pockets and/or marked gingival recession, tooth
mobility, gingival bleeding, and purulent discharge.
Attachment loss is greater than 50% of the root length
(figs. 3.34 d, e).
 Furcation exposure results from bone loss at the root
junction of multirooted teeth because of advanced peri-
odontal disease. It is sometimes difficult to determine
radiographically whether the interradicular space is
 involved, unless there is a radiolucent area in the region
of the furcation. Lack of radiographically detectable fur-
cation involvement is not confirmation of the absence of
 periodontal destruction. Advanced furcation exposures
where both cortical plates are resorbed are easily recog-
nized on radiographs.
Stage 1 furcation involvement exists when the tip of
a probe can just enter the furcation area. Bone par-
tially fills the area where the roots meet. Radio-
graphically, there may be decreased opacity of the
bone at the furcation.
 Stage 2 furcation involvement exists when the probe
tip extends horizontally into the area where the
roots converge but does not exit on the other side.
Radiographically, there will be bone loss at the fur-
cation (fig. 3.35a).
Stage 3 furcation exposure lesions exist secondary
 to advanced periodontal disease. Alveolar bone has
resorbed to a point that an explorer probe passes
through the defect unobstructed. Radiographically,
there will be an area of complete bone loss (fig.
3.35b).
Alveolar Bone Expansion (Chronic Alveolar
Osteitis)
 Alveolar bone expansion clinically appears as bulging
 alveoli around one or both maxillary and/or mandibu-
lar canines. Radiographically, this lesion appears as
bone loss around the root and expansile alveolar bone
growth (figs. 3.36 a, b, c, d).
Tooth Extrusion
 Tooth extrusion (also called supereruption) occurs when
b
 one or more of the intact canine teeth appear longer than
Figure 3.35 a. Stage 2 furcation involvement. b. Stage 3 furcation
normal. Radiographically, the affected teeth have
exposure.
marked loss of periodontal support (figs. 3.37 a, b).
Figure 3.36 a. Clinical alveolar bone expansion. b. Radiograph image of the bone expansion. c. Bilateral maxillary canine alveolar bone expansion with
'sauuen Aeixeu au hununauns auag huaing ya ydehey p auen Aelxew yal aun ya uaisnxa peuuge
Figure 3.37 a. Left mandibular canine tooth extrusion. b. Radiograph confirm
ing advanced periodontal disease.
72
Radiology
73
Figure 3.39 Ankylosis and replacement resorption of both mandibular
canine tooth roots.
extent of endodontic disease. The pulp is contained
tissue appears radiolucent radiographically. The radio-
graph of an endodontically affected tooth is examined
for the following:
Figure 3.38 Hypercementosis around the mandibular canine apex (image
Apical closure, which is necessary for conventional
courtesy Dr. Barry Rathfon).
endodontic therapy
Tooth fracture
Abnormalities in the root canal, such as obstruction
 or resorption
Hypercementosis
 Periapical pathology, such as widened periodontal
ligament space at the tooth's apex secondary to bone
Hypercementosis appears as excessive deposition of
resorption
cementum, usually at the apical third of the root in
response to chronic inflammation or abnormal occlusal
 Periapical disease is a pathologic process surrounding
forces (fig. 3.38).
the apex of one or more roots that is due to either inflam-
mation or necrosis of the dental pulp from trauma or
Ankylosis
infection, or occurs as an extension of periodontal
disease. The radiographic appearance of periapical
Ankylosis is the union of cementum with the alveolar
 disease consistent with a granulomatous lesion (periapi-
bone through destruction of the periodontal ligament.
 cal granuloma) is a widening of the apical periodontal
The tooth root becomes fused to the alveolar wall.
 ligament space with circumscribed alveolar bone resorp-
Radiographically, there will be litle or no periodontal
tion. In the early stages of abscess formation, bony
ligament space (fig. 3.39).
-aou v uasard Aderopni pou are sasu
neous radiolucency at the apex or a dark halo in the
periapical tissues is typical of an abscess. A sharply
Endodontic Disease
 outlined circumscribed radiolucent area is commonly
Radiography is essential for evaluation of a tooth
 sasie Ainsn um iss ieidenad e Aq pasn 
 affected by endodontic disease. Radiographic images of
preexisting granulomas (figs. 3.40 a, b; 3.41 a, b; 3.42 a,
the teeth and tissues around the root help to define the
b; 3.43 a, b).
complicatedcrown
fracture
Figure 3.40 a. Inflammation around the distal root of the right mandibular
first molar. b. Radiographic appearance of periapical cyst secondary to root
pathology.
Figure 3.41 a. Enlarged pulp cavity and periapical lucency consistent with
pulp necrosis mandibular canine. b. Periapical lucency and ill-defined periapi-
Gal periodontal ligament of fractured tooth.
74
Figure 3.43 a. A markedly enlarged pulp cavity due to pulp exposure soon
after the permanent tooth erupted, b. Cut secion of tooth after extraction.
Figure 3.42  a. Complicated fracture of the left maxillary canine. b. Circum-
75
76
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.44External root resorption with periapical lucency.
External root resorption may also result from periapi-
 cal inflammation, orthodontic therapy, or from unknown 
stimuli. Radiographically, external resorption appears
 as radiolucent defects on any area of the root surface (fig.
3.44).
 Internal resorption arises from the pulp. The cause is
Figure 3.45 Internal root resorption.
unknown, but trauma or pulpitis from anachoresis (bac-
teria gaining access to the injured pulp through vascular
channels) are believed to be contributing factors. A dead
Stage 2 (TR 2): Moderate dental hard tissue loss
 pulp cannot cause internal resorption (fig. 3.45).
(cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of
 Often, it is difficult to determine whether a lesion is
 dentin that does not extend to the pulp cavity) (figs.
due to intemal or external resorption. If a normal-
3.46 a, b, c)
appearing root canal is visualized radiographically, the 
Stage 3 (TR 3): Deep dental hard tissue loss (cemen-
lesion is considered external in origin.
tum or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin
that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth
Tooth Resorption
retains its integrity. Internal resorption radiographi-
Tooth resorption is classified as the following:
cally appears as focal enlargement of the root canal
(figs. 3.47 a, b).
 Stage 1 (TR 1): Mild dental hard tissue loss (cemen-
 Stage 4 (TR 4): Extensive dental hard tissue loss
tum or cementum and enamel).
(cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of
Figure 3.46 a.Radiograph of Stage 2 tooth resorption lucency in the mid-root area. b. Stage 2 tooth resorption affecting the cementum and dentin. c. Stage
2 tooth resorption approaching the pulpcavity.
77
78
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 3.47 a. Stage 3 tooth resorption radiographic image. b. Extracted third incisor.
dentin that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 2 appearance, there
tooth has lost its integrity.
is narrowing or disappearance of the periodontal liga-
a.
 Crown and root are equally affected (fig. 3.48a).
ment space in at least some areas and decreased radi-
b. Crown is more severely affected than the root
 opacity of part of the tooth (fig. 3.51).
(fig. 3.48b).
On a radiograph of a tooth with type 3 appearance,
C.
 Root is more severely affected than the crown
features of both type 1 and type 2 are present in the
(fig. 3.48c).
 same tooth. A tooth with this appearance has areas of
Stage 5 (TR 5): Remnants of dental hard tissue are
normal and narrow or lost periodontal ligament
visible only as irregular radiopacities, and gingival
space, and there is focal or multifocal radiolucency in
covering is complete (fig. 3.49).
the tooth and decreased radiopacity in other areas of
the tooth (fig. 3.52).
In addition to the above classification, some investiga-
 tors believe that three radiographic appearances of tooth
Neoplastic Disease
resorption should be distinguished in order to create a
treatment plan based on clinical and radiographic find-
Neoplasia in the oral cavity may only affect the soft
ings (fig. 3.50):
tissues or extend into hard tissue of the skull. Radio-
graphic signs of oral neoplasia in the cat include inva-
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 1 appearance, a
sion of the mandible or maxilla with sclerosis, periosteal
focal or multifocal radiolucency is present in the tooth
proliferation, osteolysis and displacement of the locally
with otherwise normal radiopacity and normal peri-
affected teeth. Occasionally, the teeth will appear to be
odontal ligament space (fig. 3.51).
floating (figs. 3.53 a, b; 3.54 a, b).
"udiosau yot yt ahers 'o uondiosal yroot at ahers g uondiosal yroot et ahers'e at'e ainb
Figure 3.49  Stage 5 tooth resorption.
79
Type 1
Typel
Type2
Type 2
Figure 3.51  Types 1 and 2 tooth resorption.
Type 3
Figure 3.50 llustrations of radiographic tooth resorption types.
80
Radiology
81
TMJ Disease
Traumatic Jaw Injury
Luxation of the TMJ is due to trauma or congenital mal-
 Jaw fractures should be evaluated radiographically to
formation. Usually the mandibular condyle is luxated
help determine a therapy plan. Often the fracture line
rostrodorsally, resulting in malocclusion. When there is
will include a tooth that should be extracted. Normal
a fracture of the retroarticular process, a caudal luxation
breed variations of the mandibular symphysis should
is possible.
not be confused with a fracture that needs therapy (figs.
 Ankylosis of the TMJ is a rare condition in the usually
3.55 a, b).
young cat that occurs most commonly from previous
 trauma. Radiographic features include loss of the TMJ
 space and irregular new bone formation.
Figure 3.53 a. Clinical appearance of squamous cell carcinoma affecting the left maxilla. b. Radiographic image of advanced squamous cell carcinoma.
llan snowenbs jo ahew pdenhonpen jeaten q ewouien lian snowenbs Ag paae aaiuew yal aun yo ydehopen anbao eaen 'e ts'e anna
carcinoma.
Figure 3.55 a. Normal left temporomandibular joint. b. Fracture of the right temporal bone and condylar process.
82
Radiology
83
Further Reading
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER. Dental radiology. Vet-
erinary Dentat Techniques for the Small Aniral Practitioner, 3rd
Bar-Am Y, Pollard RE, Kass PH, Verstraete FJ. The diagnostic
ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 131-174.
 Lommer MJ, Verstraete FJ. Radiographic patterns of periodon-
yield of conventional radiographs and computed tomogra-
phy in dogs and cats with maxillofacial trauma. Vet Surg
titis in cats: 147 cases (1998-1999). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2001;
2008; 37: 294-299.
218: 230-234.
Baxter CJK. Oral and dental diagnostics. In: Tutt C, Deeprose
Mulligan TW, Aller MS, Williams CA. Atlas of Carnine and Feline
 J, Crossley D. BSAVA Maruatl of Canine and Feline Dentistry,
 ss ure aa r 
3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 22-40.
1998.
 Bellows J. Radiographic signs and diagnosis of dental disease.
Niemiec BA. Dental radiographic interpretation. J Vet Dent
 Sem Vet Med Surg Small Anim 1993; 8: 138-145.
2005; 22: 53-59.
DeForge DH, Colmery BH. An Atlas of Veterinary Dental Radiol-
 Niemiec BA, Furman R. Feline dental radiography. J Vet Dent
ogy. Iowa State University Press, Ames, 2000.
2004; 21: 252-257.
DuPont GA, DeBowes LJ. Atlas of Dentat Radiography in Dogs
Niemiec BA, Gilbert T, Sabatino D. Equipment and basic geom-
αnd Cats. Saunders-Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2009.
etry of dental radiography. J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 48-52.
 Eisner ER. Oral-dental radiographic examination technique.
Niemiec BA, Sabatino D, Gilbert T. Developing dental radio-
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1998; 28: 1063-1087.
graphs. J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 116-121.
 Schwarz T, Weller R, Dickie AM, Konar M, Sulivan M. Imaging
Gorrel C. Radiographic evaluation. Vet Clin North Am Small
 of the canine and feline temporomandibular joint: a review.
Anim Pract 1998; 28: 1089-1110.
Harvey CE, Flax BM. Feline oral-dental radiographic examina-
Vet Radio1 Ultrasound 2002; 43: 85-97.
 tion and interpretation. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Verstraete FJM, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Diagnostic value of full-
 mouth radiography in cats. Am J Vet Res 1998; 59: 692-695.
1992; 22: 1279-1295.
Harvey EE, Emily PP. Oral examination and diagnostic tech-
Verstraete FJM, Kass PH, Terpak CH. Routine use of full-
niques. Small Arimal Dentistry, Mosby, St. Louis, 1993;
mouth radiographs in the dog and cat. Praktische Tierarzt
19-41.
2001; 82: 658-667.
Chapter 4
Charting
Dental charting provides a graphic report of the cat's
maxillary quadrant is completed. The right mandibular
teeth and mouth. A blank dental chart depicts anatomi-
quadrant (400 series) follows, the endotracheal tube
cally correct maxillary and mandibular teeth with space
attachment to the anesthetic machine is detached, and
to note abnormalities. Charting provides a place to
the animal's body and head are rotated for evaluation
record examination findings in order to develop an accu-
and charting of the 200 and 300 series. Each tooth is
rate and comprehensive treatment plan, as well as a
examined completely, including periodontal probing.
thorough record of past treatments.
before the next tooth is viewed. Only abnormalities are
To evaluate each tooth individually for charting, com-
noted on the dental chart (figs. 4.1 a, b).
plete immobilization (general anesthesia) is necessary.
Examine the occlusion rostrally and caudally
The mouth is generally charted before scaling and can
 before intubation and record any abnormalities.
be recharted when a significant amount of calculus has
Normally, the teeth of the opposing arches in cats 
been removed.
do not touch.
 Chart formats vary from paperless electronic files
2.
After intubation, examine the mouth for missing
incorporated in proprietary veterinary software pro-
teeth and circle all visibly missing teeth on the
 grams to handwritten paper forms (see examples at end
 dental chart. The most commonly missing tooth is
 of chapter). Whichever system is used, the dental chart
the mandibular third premolar.
should include areas to record the dental history; skull
3.
Record obviously fractured teeth.
type (brachycephalic, mesaticephalic, dolichocephalic);
4.
Check for tooth mobility using an instrument
 oral pathology, including the amount and location of
handle pressed against the tooth. Record abnormal
plaque and calculus; probing depths; fractured and
mobility (M1, M2, M3).
mobile teeth; oral masses; and radiographic findings.
5.
 Record areas of calculus accumulation.
Additionally, therapy provided, therapy recommended
6.
 Record abnormal probing depths or attachment
but not provided, and the future treatment plan and
levels around each tooth.
home care instructions should be noted on the dental
7.
 Expose and process dental radiographs.
chart and medical record.
8.
 Scale and polish the teeth.
 Reprobe if a significant amount of calculus was
removed.
Charting Steps
10.
 Formulate a treatment plan through tooth-by-tooth
 evaluation; draw a diagonal line through teeth that
Four-handed (two person) charting is the fastest and
need to be extracted.
most efficient. One person examines the mouth and the
11.
 Calculate fees for the treatment plan and contact
other records information on the chart. The examiner
 the owner for approval while the technician is com-
a st ynm) ,lol, pue ,saas ool, Sukes Aq sugaq
 pleting the teeth cleaning process.
maxillary right first incisor according to the modified
12.
Triadan system of tooth identification), noting any
 and record all care on the dental chart (figs.
abnormalities and then moving distaly until the right
4.24.7).
84
Charting
85
Figure 4.1 a. Two-handed charting. b. Four-handed dentistry.
Charting Abbreviations
The following abbreviations (in alphabetical order) were
 adapted from the American Veterinary Dental College
(AVDC):
AB
Abrasion
Flap
APG
 Apexogenesis
F/AR
Apically repositioned periodontal flap
APX
 Apexification
F/CR
Coronally repositioned periodontal flap
AT
Attrition 
F/L
Lateral sliding periodontal flap
B
Biopsy
FGG
Free gingival graft
B/E
 Biopsy excisional
FRE
Frenoplasty (frenotomy, frenectomy)
B/1
 Biopsy incisional
FX
Fracture (tooth or jaw)
BG
Bone graft (includes placement of bone substitute
For tooth fracture abbreviations, see under T/FX 
 or bone stimulant material)
FXR
Repair of jaw fracture
C
Canine
FXR/P
Pin repair of jaw fracture
CBU
Core build-up
FX/R/PL
Plate repair of jaw fracture
CFL
Cleft lip
FX/R/S
Screw repair of jaw fracture
CFLR
 Cleft lip repair 
FXR/WIR
Wire repair of jaw fracture
CFP
 Cleft palate
FXR/WIR/C
Cerclage wire repair of jaw fracture
CFP/R
 Cleft palate repair
FXR/WIR/ID
 Interdental wire repair of jaw fracture
CR
Crown
FX/R/WiR/OsOsseous wire repair of jaw fracture
CRA
 Crown amputation 
Granuloma
CR/M
 Crown metal
G/B
Buccal granuloma (cheek-chewing lesion)
CRR
 Crown reduction
G/L
Sublingual granuloma (tongue-chewing lesion)
DT
 Deciduous (primary) tooth 
G/E/L
Eosinophilic granuloma—lip 
DTC
Dentigerous cyst
G/E/P
 Eosinophilic granuloma—palate
E
 Enamel
G/ET
Eosinophilic granuloma—-tongue
E/D
 Enamel defect 
GH
Gingival hyperplasia/hypertrophy
FB
Foreign body
GR
Gingival recession
OM/PAP
Papillomatosis
GTR
Guided tissue regeneration
OM/SCC
Squamous cell carcinoma
GV
Gingivoplasty (gingivectomy)
ONF
Oronasal fistula
IM
Impression and model
ONF/R
Oronasal fistula repair
10
Interceptive (extraction) orthodontics
OR
Orthodontic recheck
IO/D
Deciduous (primary) tooth interceptive orthodontics
OST
Osteomyelitis
IO/P
 Permanent (secondary) tooth interceptive
PC
Pulp capping
orthodontics
PC/D
 Direct pulp capping
IP
 Inclined plane 
PC/1
 Indirect pulp capping
IP/AC
Acrylic inclined plane
PDI
 Periodontal disease index
IP/C
Composite inclined plane
PDO
Normal periodontium
IP/M
 Metal (i.e., lab-produced) inclined plane
PD1
Gingivitis only
LAC
Laceration
PD2
<25% attachment loss
LAC/B
Laceration buccal (cheek)
PD3
 25%-50% attachment loss
LAC/L
 Laceration lip
PD4
>50% attachment loss
LACT
Laceration tongue
PE
 Pulp exposure
MAL
 Malocclusion
PRO
Periodontal prophylaxis (examination, caling.
MAL/1
Class I malocclusion (normal jaw relationship.
polishing, irigation)
specific teeth are incorrectly positioned)
R
Restoration of tooth
MAL/2
Class ll malocclusion—mandibular distoclusion 
R/C
Restoration with composite
 (mandible shorter than maxilla)
R/CP
Restoration with compomer
MAL3
Class ll maloclusion-—mandibular mesiocluson
 (maxilla shorter than mandible)
R/I
Restoration with glass ionomer
 Linguoversion mandibular canine tooth 
RAD
 Radiograph
MALLV
RC
Root canal therapy
MALRXB
Rostral crossbite
RC/S
 Surgical root canal therapy
MALCXB
Caudal crossbite
MAL/MA
 Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry
RD
Retained deciduous (primary) tooth
MN/FX
Mandibular fracture
RPC
Root planing—closed 
RPO
Root planing—open
MX
 Maxilla or maxillary
MXFX
Maxillary fracture
RR
Internal root resorption 
OA
 Orthodontic appliance
RRT
Retained root tip
RTR
 Retained tooth root
OAA
Adjust orthodontic appliance 
OA/BKT
S
Surgery
 Bracket orthodontic appliance
S/M
Mandibulectomy
OA/BU
Button orthodontic appliance 
OA/EC
 Elastic (power chain) orthodontic appliance
S/P
Palate surgery
S/X
Maxillectomy
OA/WIR
Wire orthodontic appliance
SC
Subgingival curettage
OAI
Install orthodontic appliance
OAR
Remove orthodontic appliance
SN
Supernumerary
oC
 Orthodontic/genetic consultation
SPL
Splint 
 Oral mass
SPLAC
OM
 Acrylic splint
OM/AD
 Adenocarcinoma
SPL/C
Composite splint 
 Acanthomatous ameloblastoma (epulis)
SPL/WIR
Wire-reinforced splint
OM/EPA
OM/EPF
 Fibromatous epulis 
ST
Stomatitis
ST/CU
Ossifying epulis 
 Stomatitis—-contact ulcers
OM/EPO
OM/FS
Fibrosarcoma
ST/FFS
Stomatitis-feline caudal stomatitis
OM/LS
SYM
Symphysis
Lymphosarcoma
OM/MM
Malignant melanoma
SYM/S
Symphyseal separation
OM/OS
Osteosarcoma
SYM/WIR
Wire repair of symphyseal separation
86
Tooth
TR
Tooth resorption lesion
T/A
Avulsed tooth
TR1
Tooth resorption into enamel only
T/FX
 Fractured tooth (see next seven listings for fracture
TR2
 Tooth resorption into dentin 
types)
TR3
Tooth resorption into pulp or root canal
T/FX/EI
 Enamel infraction 
TR4a
Marked hard tissue resorption of crown and root
T/FXEF
 Enamel fracture
TR4b
Marked hard tisue resorption of crown more than
T/FX/UCF
 Uncomplicated crown fracture
root
TFX/CCF
 Complicated crown fracture 
TR4C
Marked hard tissue resorption, affecting root more
T/FXUCRF
 Uncomplicated crown-root fracture
than crown
Complicated crown-root fracture
TR5
Crown lost, root tips remain
T/FX/CCRF
TMJ/R
Reduction of TMJ luxation
T/FXRF
Root fracture
T/1
Impacted tooth
TRX
Tooth partial resection (e.g., hemisection)
VP
Vital pulp therapy
T/LUX
Luxated tooth
T/NE
 Near pulp exposure
X
Simple closed extraction of a tooth
T/NV
Nonvital tooth 
XS
Extraction with tooth sectioning, nonsurgical
T/PE
Pulp exposure
XSS
Surgical (open) extraction of a tooth
TP
 Treatment plan
87
CLAVAMOX.
Porphyromonas|Bacterin
ANTIROBE'
Doxirobe Gel
(amoxicillin/clavulanic acid)
Denticanis-Gulae-Salivosal
(clindamycinhydrochloride)
(8.5%doxycycline)
Pet's Name:
Date:
Breed:
Age:
Sex:
Medical Alert:
Presenting Complaint:
T
Procedure Record
Signs:
Diagnosis:
Treatment:
Clean / Polish / Fluoride:
Routine
Extended
Root Planing /Packing:
X-rays:
Comments:
Antibiotics Dispensed:
 Maxilla
Pain Medications:
Inj:
Right
Left 
Dispensed:
Mandible
Diet:
Home Care:
Recheck:
Abbreviation Key
AL
 Attachment Loss
OM——Oral Mass 
AT
Attrition
 ONF - Oronasal Fistula
CA
Caries
PE-
Pulp Exposure
CWD-
 Crowding
PP
 Periodontal Pocket
ED
Enamel Defect
RD-
Retained Deciduous
EP
Epulis
RE-
Root Exposure
FE
 Furcation Exposure
RL-
Resorptive Lesion
FX
Fracture
ROT - Rotated Tooth
GH-
Gingival Hyperplasia
RPC- Root Planing, Closed
GV/GP- Gingivectomy/Plasty
RPO- Root Planing, Open 
LPS-
Lymphocytic,Plasmacytic, Stomatitis
 RTR - Retained Root
M
Mobile Tooth
X一
Extraction
Missing Tooth
XS-
 Extraction, Sectioned
OP
Odontoplasty
 xss— Extraction, Surgical 
1
404
81
PfizerAnimalHealth
a
P
PFE1106008
Figure 4.2 a. Blank Pfizer feline dental chart. b. Completed chart (courtesy of Dr Heidi Loprise).
88
Feline Dental Chart
CLAVAMOX
(amoxicillin/clavulanicacid)
(clindamycinhydrochloride)
 Pet's Name:
Feline
Date: 01-01-0}
Breed:
DMH
Age:&
Sex: F/S
Medical Alert:
gocd
general
heath
 Presenting Complaint: 
needsdentolcleonioo
chpped
foots
Procedure Record
Signs mild calculus, mid g ingivitis ;mnor frochure.
of.max.cooinereorphooafboihmend s om-
-2
etcrawn gone (gingvaheled)rt crawn demeged
109
白品
209
Diagnosis: S+oge
TPencdontal'diseose
#Ia4 -uncompicaled croun fracture
#207-TR($)
#407(12-4)
Treatment: complele dental clecning :
10H-Fx
x0
nenhoneloo+rekt(c>
Clean / Polish/ Fluorids.
VRoutine
Extended
Root Planing /Packing:
X-rays: complele
motn
-digita
Comments:moniror Lc7
-ratswlodortcclashc.resorphid
Antibiotics Dispensed: as prescri bed
ren: local-marcaine (0.s%-.2c
Dispensed:
Maxilla
Diet: Gof+
if reeced
Left
q-2mo
Mandible
Abbreviation Key
AL
Attachment Loss
OM-
Oral Mass
AT
Attrition
ONF-
 Oronasal Fistula
407
307-7Q-
CA
Caries
PE-
Pulp Exposure
TR-s+cx
soge5
CWD.
Crowding
PP
 Periodontal Pocket
ED-
 Enamel Defect
RD-
 Retained Deciduous
EP
Epulis
RE
Root Exposure
FE
Furcation Exposure
RL-
 Resorptive Lesion
FX
Fracture
ROT-
Rotated Tooth
GH-
Gingival Hyperplasia
RPC- Root Planing, Closed
GV/GP- Gingivectomy/Plasty
RPO- Root Planing, Open 
LPS
Lymphocytic, Plasmacytic, Stomatitis
 RTR- Retained Root
Mobile Tooth
 Extraction
a
Missing Tooth
XS一
 Extraction, Sectioned
Odontoplasty
 Extraction, Surgical
60t
304
XSS-I
307308309
OP
Pfizer Animal Health
2PlizarInd
b
PFE1106008
Figure 4.2 Continued
68
06
FELINE
R
Buccal
+
Palatal
0
口
D
109
108
107
106
104
103
102
101
201
202
203
204
206
207
208
209
G
60t
408
407
404
403
402
401
301
302
303
304
307
308
609
Buccal
1
Lingual
PATIENT:
DATE:
Copyrlght 1995 DentaLabels
CRACK AND PEEL HERE
DentaLabels coDE KEY
C/S
Calculus/Slight
GR
 Gum Recession
RR
Retained Root
C/M  Calculus/Moderate
H
Hyperplasia (Gingival)
RT 
 Root Canal Therapy
C/H
 Calculus/Heavy
M
Mobile Tooth (M1, M2, M3)
R/C
Restoration/Composite
D
Discolored Tooth
PE
Pulp Exposure
SE
Super Eruption 
F
Furcation Exposure (F1, F2, F3)
RL
 Resorptive Lesion
W
Worn Tooth
FX
Fractured Tooth
GINGIVITIS BOX SCORES
 Thin red gingival line, no bleeding 
==
Moderate swelling, "rolled" gingiva, some bleeding
三二
 Marked swelling, bleeds easily
C2001 DentaLabels * Revised 10/01
6
19 Norw0od Ave. ● Kensington, CA 94707 + (510) 524-6162 o1 (800) 662-7920 · www.dentalabels.com
KR
FELINE
GRz
M7
1
R
CiH
cs
C/M
Buccal
?
+
?
109
108
107
106
104
103
102
101
201
202
203
204
206
207
208
209
H
H
1H
H
H
HLH
G
G
H1
409
408
407
404
403
402
401
301
302
303
304
307
308
609
Buccal
1
Q
Lingual
ds
Vy
3
RK
C/M
AFx
RL
cfs
RL
M
W
W
1
W
My
RoccoSuith
DATE: 2 /A]04
F
PATENT:
Copyright 1995 DentaLabels
CRACK AND PEEL HERE
Figure 4.3  Continued
91
6
A03-19-09 Dental Probing and charting
FileEdityiew Assessment
区
History
C
03-19-09
General
0
10
0
Na
Right
Code
Palata
Ado
Select
DP
/Line
Description
Cimy
Rectangle
Dental Probing and charting
Ret
 Elipse
W
Images
Tooth #104 Pulp not
PA
2Freehand
exposed (UCF)
Na
Polyline
0
O0O:O0Q-
Bir
7Pointer
Bre
Highlight
Co
AText
lmage
→
M
Dat
000
DOD
03-
10-
Lingusl
o00
Occlusal
Tooth#407（TR)
Tooth#307
Stage4
(TR)Stage5
Added On:
A88AAA
Code
Description
U
10
0
0
Abnormalities
VOK
XCancel
start
ec
AVImark
3:25PM
Figure 4.4  AVImark paperless computer generated and stored dental chart.
Examination Findings
109
108
107
106104
1103102101201202203
2042062
207
208
209
ST
—Slomalilis
ST/CU-Slomalilis
AB
—Abrasion
conlacl ulcers
AT
-Allrilion
ST/FFS — Slomalilis -
C—Canine
[eline aucilis-slomalilis
CA
—Caries
SYM —— Symphysis
CFL-
— Clel lip
SYM/S  Symphyseal
CFP
Clell palale
 separalion
CMO - Cranio-mandibular
T— Toolh
osleopa lhy
T/A — Avulsed loolh
DT-
Deciduous (primary)
T/FX — Fraclured loolh
loolh
(see nexl sevenlislings of
DTC — Denligerous cysl
[raclure lypes)
E - Enamel 
T/FX/EI— Enamel
E/D —Enamel delecl
inraclion
E/H - Enamel
T/FX/EF  Enamel fraclure 
hypocalicalionrhypoplaia
104
204
T/FX/UCF 
FB —Foreign body
Uncomplicaled crown
FX
Fraclure (loolh of
T/FX/CCF-Complicaled
fraclure
jaw).For loolh fraclure
abbrevialions see under T/FX
106
O
O
206
crown fraclure
G—Granuloma
T/FX/UCRF
107
Uncomplicaled crown-0ol
G/B —Buccal granuloma
207
fraclure
(cheek chewing lesion)
T/FX/CCRF-Complicaled
G/L — Sublingual granuloma
(longue chewing lesion)
108
208
crown-iool raclure
G/E/L -Eosinophilic
T/FX/RF - Rool fraclure
granuloma-lip
T/I  Impacled loolh 
G/E/P  Eosinophilic
T/LUX  Luxaled loolh
109
209
T/NE Near pulp
granuloma - palale 
G/E/T — Eosinophilic
exposure
gianuloma-longue
T/NV — Non-vilal loolh
GH—— Gingival hyperplasial
T/PE-Pulp exposue
hyperlrophy
T/V Vvil looth
GR — Gingival recession
TMJ
L1,2,3 Incisor leelh
Temporomandibular joinl
LAC—Laceralion
TMJ/D — TMJ dysplaisia
LAC/B
— Laceralion buccal
TMJ/FX -
TMJ 『raclure
(cheek)
wexn rW - XIW1 
LAC/L-
Laceralion lip
409
309
TP
 Trealmenl plan 
LAC/T -
Laceralionlongue
TR-
Toolh resorplion
M1,2,3 — Molar leelh
lesion
MAL -
—Malocclusion
TR1 - TR Slage 1: mild
MAL/1  Class 1 malocclusion
408
308
denlal hard lissue loss
(normal jaw relalionship.
(cemenlum or cemenlum
specific leelh are incofreclly
and enamel).
407
307
posilioned)
TR2 -TR Slage 2:
MAL/2 - Class 2 malocclusion
moderaledenlal hard
-mandibular disloclusion
lissueloss (cemenlum of
(mandible shorler lhan 
cemenlumandenamelwilh
loss o denlin Thal does nol
maxilla)
40
exlend lo Ihe pulpcavily).
MAL/3  Class 3 malocclusion
TR3 -TR Slage 3:Deep
- ma ndibular mesiocluson
(maxilla shorler lhan 
denlalhardlissueloss
mandible)
cemenlumorcemenlum
MAL/1-3/BV  Buccoversion
and enamel wilh loss of
MAL/1-3/CXB-caudal
denlin Ihalexlends lo Ihe
Ioolh relains ils inlegily.
pulp cavily):mosl o Ihe
crossbile
MAL/1-3/DV Disloversion
TR4 - TR Slage 4:
MAL/1-3/LABV
— Labioversion
Exlensive denlal hard
MAL/1-3/LV  Linguoversion 
lissueloss(cemenlum of
MAL/1-3/MV  Mesioversion
cemenlumandenamelwilh
MAL/1-3/OB- Open bile
lossofdenlinlhalexlends
lo Ihe pulp cavily): mosl
MAL/RXB  Roslial crossbile
of Ihe loolh has losl ils
MAL/1-3XB-Crossbile see
CXBorRXBdonolusewfy
inlegrily.
TR4a - Crownand rool
bileor WRY)
are equally allecled.
MN —Mandible Oi
409
408
407
404
403 402 401301 302 3033
304
307
308
309
TR4b - Crown is more
ma ndibular
severely allecled Lhan lhe
MN/FX  Mandibular fraclure
r0ol.
MXMaxillaor maxillary
OM/EPF
Fibromalous epulis
 OM/SCC - Squamous cell
PD1
Gingilis enly
RAD — Radiograph
TR4c — Rool is more
MXFX-Maxillary fraclure
OM/EPO
carcinoma
PD2
RD —Relaineddeciduous
severely allecled Lhan Lhe
ocOrhodnlicigenelic
OM/FS -
ONF
— Oronasal fislula
PD3
25-50% allachmenl
CIown.
OM/LS 
Lymphosarcoma
OR-
Orlhodonlic recheck
kOSS
consullalion
See TR for loolh resorplion.
TR5 -TR Slage 5:
Malignanl
PD4 >50% allachmenl loss
OM — Oral mass
OM/MM
OST
 Osleomyelilis
RR-
Inlernal rool resorplion 
remnanls of denlal hard
OM/AD Adenocarcinoma
melanoma
PE-
 Pulp exposure
RRT
— Relained rool lip
lissue are visible only as
PDI
Periodonlal disea se
 OM/OS - Osleosarcoma
PM1,2,3,4 — Premolar 
irregular radiopacilies.
OM/EPA — Acanlhomalous
index
RTR-
— Relained loolh r00l
andgingivalcovering is
ameloblasloma (epulis)
 OM/PAP - Papillomalosis
PDO  Normal periodonlium
[eelh
SN-
Supernumerary
complele
Figure 4.5 Dental charts with American Veterinary Dental College abbreviations.
93
Treatment Provided
109
108
107
106 104 103 102 101201 202 203
204206
207
208
209
APG-
Apexogenesis
IPIC - Composil inclined 
APG —Apexic lion
plane
B—Biopsy
IP/M - Melal (i.e.. lab
Biopsy excisional
aueld peuu penpoid
B/Biopsy incisional
B/E
OA —Orlhodonlic appliance
OAA
Adjusl orlhodonlic
Subsiluleor bone
appliance
OA/BKT -Brackel
slimulanl malerial
orlhodonlic appliance
CBU-
Core build up
OA/BU — Bullon orlhodonlic 
CFL/R
—Clen lip repai
appliance
CFP/R
Clell palale
OA/EC - Elaslic (power
repair
chainj orlhodonlic appliance
CR-
Crown
OA/WVIR - Wire orlhodonlic
CRA
 Crown ampulalion
appliance
CR/M  Crown melal
OAI— Inslall orthoconlic 
CRL
Crown lenglhening
104
appliance
CRI/PFM-Crown porcelain
OAR—Remove
[used lomelal
orthodonicappliance
CR/P
 Crown preparalion
PG —
 Pulp capping
CRR—Crown reduclion
106
PC/D-Direcl pulpcapping
O
206
cs—Cullure/susceplilly
PC/I-Indirecl pulp capping
F—Flap
107
207
PRO — Periodonlal
F/ARApicallyreposilioned
periodonlal flap
R —Resloralion o loolh
F/CR -Coronally
reposilioned periodonlal ap
108
208
R/C - Resloralion wilh
F/L-Laleralsliding
composile
R/CP Resloralion wilh
 periodonlal lap
FGG —— Free gingival grall
109
209
compomer
R/I  Resloralion wilh glass
FRE—Frenoplasly
ionomer
FX/R-Repair or jaw
(frenolomy. [reneclomy)
RG — Rool canal lherapy
fraclure
RCIS - Surgical rool canal
Pin repair or jaw
lherapy
FX/R/P
RPC Rool planing -
[raclure
FX/R/PL - Plale repair of
closed
Rool planing-
jawfraclure
FX/R/s - Screw repair ol
open
S—Surgery
jaw [raclure
409
309
S/MMandibuleclomy
FX/R/WIR-Wirerepairo
S/P-Palale surgery
jaw [raclure
S/X-Maxilleclomy
FX/R/WIR/C
-Cerclage
SG -
Subgingival Curellage
408
308
FX/R/WIR/ID
SPL -
—Splinl
SPLAC — Acrylic splinl
[raclure
407
307
SPU/C- Composile splinl
FX/R/WIR/OS
Osseous wirerepairorjaw
SPLWIR - Wire reinlorced
[raclure
splinl
SYM/WIR - Wire repair of
GTR — Guiced lissue
symphyseal separalion
regeneralion
404
304
GVGingivoplasly
TMJ/C
Temporomandibular joinl
(gingiveclomy)
IM—Impression and model
condyleclomy
TMJ/R — Reduclion o
IMP-
— Implanl
TMJluxalion
I0 —Inlerceplive
TRX —— Toolh parlial
(exlraclion} orlhodonlics
eseclion (e.g.hemiseclion)
IO/D Deciduous
VP
Vilalpulptherapy
Simple closed
exlraclion of a loolh
IO/P —Permanenl
xS —— Exlraclion wilh loolh
(secondary)loolh
seclioning. non-surgical
inlerceplive orthodonlics
IP—Inclined plane
xSS -- Surgical (open)
exlraclion of a loolh
IPIAC —Acrylic inclined 
plane
409
408
407
404
403402 401301302 303304
307
308
309
Figure 4.5 Continued
94
VHUP DeNTAL RecOrd
Copyright: Veterinary Hospital of the University of Pemmsylvania
Date:
Staff:
(circle primary staff)
R
Chief Complaint:
Awake
Sedated
Anesthetized
MAL/1
MAL/2MAL/3MALWRY
MAL/BN Malooclusion/base narrow mand. canines
AT / AB Attritin/abrasion
MALABXPBXMaVanteorpstercrsbe
E/D. H
 Enameldefect. hypoplasia
SN Supernumerary tooth
CA
Caries
NA - Extraoralfacial
DT
Deciduous tooth
TR
Tooth Resor ption
 Retained deciduous tooth
(Grade) 1. 2. 3. 4. 5
(se xd
RR
Internal root resorption
PD1  Gingitis (no bone loss)
RTR
Retained tooth root
N A- Lymph nodes
PD2 Mid periodnttis(< 25% attach kss)
RRT
Retained root tip
PD3
Mod periodentitis (< 50% attach loss)
T/A I, LUX
Tooth/ avulsed, inpacted, luxated
PD4
Severe periodenttis (> 50% attach loss)
T/FX
Tooth Fracture
N A- Buccal mucosa
GH
[EI, EF UCF, CCF, UCRF, CCRF. RF )
GRGingiwal reoession
T/NV. VTooth/nen-vital vtal
STStomatitis
G/B, L
Granuloma/buccal, sublingual
G/E/L, P. T  Eosinophili gran./lip. palate, tongue
N A- Tongue
ST/CU
 Stomatitis - contact ulcer
ST/FFSStomatitis-Felinefaucitistomatis
FB
 Foreign body
DM  Dral mass:
DST
 Dsteomyelitis 
DM/EPA OM/EPF OM/EPO
LAC/B. L. T  Laceratin/buccal. lip. tongue
MN/FX MX/FXJaw factures
N A-Palate
DM/MMDM/FS
DM/SCC
DM/DS
OM/ADOM/LS
DM/PAP
SYM/SSymphyseal separatin
DTC Dentigerous cyst
 
Cleft palate, Ckeft lip
D
Missing tooth
DNF
Dronasal fistula
N A - Tonsils
DTH Dther 
CMD
Crani-Mandibular Osteopathy
TMJ/D. FX, LUX TMI/dysplasia, fracture, luxation
NA- Pharynx
Taath
Triada n
103
Mability
Furcalian
Hype plasia
Cacuus
RaqUE
Taath
Triadan
Mability
Reressiar
Cacuus
R
RaqUE
Gingivilis
e
69
Figure 4.6Dental charts (courtesy of Dr Alex Rieter, University of Pennsylvania).
6
NerveBlock 0.5% Marca
LEFT
R
AL
Rads [Dental, CDR, CT
Scan, Plain Flm]
Inf raorbilal
hotos (Digital, 35 mm)
Ireror ANeolar
B/I B/E
IeUoSoxalevoouAsdo
Menlal
nSultabon
Maxillar
OR
Orthodontc Recheck
Treatment:
PRO
Penodontal prophyaxs
RPC
GV
Alveolopilasty
F/CR
FRL
Crown lengthemng
G
one graft
FTR
renforoed
RCS
Root canal therapy
RRX
[s aeed 
Rootresecbon crov
RX
CRR
Crown red uchon
PC/D
PC/l
CRA
d
Apexficabon
Apexoge ness
Reshorabo
MP
jueu
O/P IOD
ort ho (permdec)
ONFIR
Instructions and medications:
GX
Maxollecto my
FRE
renoplasty
FXIR
FX/R/P
Pin 1.bk.rp
9w hracture re pair (j. hx.rp ↓
FX/R/PL
FXrRrS
FXIRWIRC
Wire .k.ro
Follow-up:
FXIRWIR/ID
Interde ntal w
FX/R/VIROS
TKUIR
TMI condyecto iny
Reduchon of TM Iuxabon
C山
Core buld up 
CRP
Crown reara
Crow
CRPFM
Crown porcelan fused to metal
IPIAC, C, M
snlpe-aoueide oup
R
Ortho applance  re move
OTH:
b
Figure 4.6
Continued
Feline Dental Record
U of MN Dental Record
Date:
taff:
Chief Complaint:
104
204
AT/AB -atrition/abrasion
 OM- oral mass 
RRT -retained rout tip
N A - Extraoralfacial
0
CU/B, T, PLT - ulcer on cheek/tongue/ 
RC - previous root canal
RTR - retained tooth root 
NA-Lymph nodes
RD - retained deciduous tooth
SN - supernurmerary tooth 
NA - Buccal mucosa
DTC - dentigerous cyst
 TR1 -lesion into enamel only 
ST-stomatitis (caudal/gingival/buccal) NA - Tongue
FX -tooth fracture: EI/EF/UCF/CCF/
TR2- lesion into dentin
T/A/TLUX - touth avulsionv/luxation 
N A - Palate
UCRF/CCRF/RF
 TR3 -lesion into pulp 
 PDO - no perio dx (rmaybe calculus)
N A - Tunsils
GH - gingival hyperplasia/hyperrophy 
 TR4 (a/b/c) - extensive stru
 PD1 - gingivitis (no bone loss) 
N A - Pharynx
JVG - juvenile gingivitis
aewp
PD2 - mild periodontitis 
OTHER:
LAC/B/L/T - laceration cheek/lip/tongue
 TR5 - crown lost
(<25% attachment loss)
MAL -Mal 1, Mal 2, Mal 3 
TR - Type 1
 PD3 -mod periodontitis 
MALWRY-wry bite
TR - Type 2
(<50% attachment loss)
MN/FX, MXFX, SYM/S -fractures
 PD4- severe periodontitis
0 - missing tooth 
(>50% attachment loss)
Right
Left
Touth
M1
P3P2
C
13
13
P2
P3
M1
Triadan
109
108
107106
104103
102
101
201
202203
204
206
209
Pocket Buccal
Pocket Palatal
Recession
Furcation (1 -3)
Mobility (1-3)
Touth
M1
P4
P3
G
13
12
11
12
13
P3
P4
M1
Triadan
409408
407
404403
402401301302303304
307308
309
Pocket Buccal
Pocket Lingual
Recession
Furcation (1-3)]
304
Mobility (1-3)
History/Comments
VMC #75.2
a
Figure 4.7 Dental charts (courtesy of Dr. Gary Goldstein, University of Minnesota).
68
 Treatment Plan
R
Nerve Blocks
APX
apexification
BG
bone graft
38/18
biopsy incisional/excisional
Treatment
CFP/R
cleft palate repair
CRA
crown amputation
CR/L
crown lengthening (Type 1/Type 2)
CR/R
crown reduction
F
flap
FNA
fine needle aspirate
108
FX/R/WIR/AC
wire repair jaw fx
GV
gingivectomy/gingivoplasty
110
irterceptive orthodontics 
ONF/R
oronasal fistula repair
Radiographs
PCD
direct pulp capping 
PCI
indirect pulp capping
PRO
dental prophylaxis 
R/C, R/1
restoration com/GI
RC
rmot canal therapy
RPC
closed root planing
RPO
open root planing
S/M
mandibulectomy
Complications
S/P
palate sx
S/X
maxillectormy
SPL/AC, SPL/COM
 splint acrylic/composite 
SYM/WIR
symphyseal wiring
VP
vital pulpotomy
Instructions and Medications
X
ext closed no sectioning
XS
ext closed w sectioning
XSS
surgical (open) ext
Other:
Follow-up
This docurnent prepared by the University of Mirmesota Veterinary Medical Center.
b
Sept 2008 Regents ofthe University ofMinnesota. All ights reserved.
Figure 4.7Continued
FelineDental Record
UofMNDentalRecord
411010q
Fx/ccF
Gingivitis
20
RRT-retained root tip
CU/B,T.PLT-u
-retained toothroc
TR-
F
TR2-
JCRF/CCRF/RF
intopulp
PDO-
LAC/B/L/T-la
ek/lip/tongue
TR5）-crown
Mal 1.Mal2.Mal3
PD3Y
MALWRY
50% attachment loss)
0-missingtooth
3
TR3
304
Geacalizcc
madeate
Calculus,oithmodeat
Blecdia
prahia
atmen len Oetad Qroghy
Full mouth
Nerve Blocks
2mh
Bupivacain@+
iafca ochital
ond inferioc alveolac
Blocks
sedar aeled uaro
crown amputatior
COA#107
xsS#37,309,uoq-Closdw
ychomi
RC
#Zoy  s:dwguttaClow
aGutteQecha
SoBcss
#309
409
PRO
RC
closed root planing
Ponc
SS
PL
Sof+Fsd7-1o
XSS
KS
Clavamox
-61.Sm
BE07doy
Bpenoohino.IsmhBTo S
3-4wccks
d
Allrigh
Figure 4.7 Continued
66
100
Feline Dentistry
Further Reading
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER. Dental records. Veteri-
rary Dental Techniques for the Small Anirmat Practitioner, 3rd
 American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC). Veterinary
ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 1-38.
Dental Nomenclature (available at www.avdc.org).
Mills AW. Oral-dental disease in cats: a feline practitioner's
 perspective. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22:
 Baxter CJK. Oral and dental diagnostics. In: Tutt C, Deeprose 
1297-1307.
J, Crossley D. BSAVA Maruat of Canine and Feline Dentistry,
Schaller O. Illustrated Veterinary Anatomicat Norenctature, 2nd
3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 22-40.
Floyd MR. The modified Triadan system: nomenclature for
ed. Enke Verlag, Stuttgart, 2007.
veterinary dentistry. J Vet Dent 1991; 8 (4): 18-19.
Tholen MA. The veterinary dental record: key to veterinary
 Harvey CE. Shape and size of teeth of dogs and cats: relevance
dental medicine. Vet Med Small Anim Clin 1983; 78:
to studies of plaque and calculus accumulation. J Vet Dent
1403-1412.
Verstraete FJM. Colour Self-Assessment Review of Veterinary Den-
2002; 19: 186-195.
Harvey EE, Emily PP. Oral examination and diagnostic tech-
tistry. Manson, London, 1997.
niques. Smatl Animal Dentistry, Mosby, St. Louis, 1993;
1941.
Chapter 5
Oral Pathology
Variation in Tooth Number and
observed in the deciduous as well as in the permanent
Morphology
dentition. Occasionally, it is difficult to differentiate
fusion of supernumerary teeth from gemination.
Abnormalities in the number of teeth in cats can be
inherited or result from disturbances during the initial
Periodontal Disease
stages of tooth formation. Anodontia, complete absence
of all teeth, and oligodontia, decreased number of teeth,
Periodontal disease is the most common oral disease in
cats. There are two broad categories of periodontal
 more common and may result in crowding and mis-
disease: gingivitis and periodontitis.
alignment of teeth, which may predispose to the devel-
Gingivitis is the beginning stage of periodontal disease
opment of periodontal disease. The mandibular fourth
 in which inflammation is confined to the gingiva (fig.
premolars are the most common supernumerary teeth
5.6a). Periodontitis is the more established form of peri-
observed in the cat. Supernumerary teeth that result in
odontal disease where there is actual loss of the tooth
crowding should be extracted early (figs. 5.2 a-f).
supporting tissues (figs. 5.6 b, c).
Persistence (formerly called retention) of deciduous
 teeth occurs in cats much less frequently than in dogs.
Pathogenesis
Persistent (retained) deciduous teeth should be extracted
as soon as they are diagnosed to make sufficient room
Within minutes of teeth scaling and polishing, a layer of
for the permanent teeth to erupt into their normal posi-
glycoprotein (acquired pellicle) attaches to the exposed
tions. When persistent deciduous teeth are not removed,
crowm surface. Hours later, aerobic and facultative
permanent teeth can deflect lingually (mandibular
anaerobic bacteria (including Actinomyces and Strepto-
canine tooth) or rostrally (maxillary canine tooth) (fig.
coccus) colonize the glycoprotein layer, forming plaque.
5.3).
 Gemination has been observed in the deciduous, as
well as in the permanent, dentition. It is an attempt to
form two teeth from one enamel organ. This results in a
-s a ro ia om m an
rated crowns each with a single pulp chamber and a
shared root canal. Occasionally, complete cleavage or
twinning occurs resulting in two teeth from one enamel
organ. The etiology is unknown, but trauma has been
suggested as a possible cause, though a familial ten-
dency has been observed (figs. 5.4 a, b; 5.5 a, b).
 Fusion is the joining of two tooth germs, resulting in
 a single large tooth. Fusion may involve the entire length
of the tooth or only the roots, depending on the stage of
development of the teeth at the time of the union. The
root canal can be shared or separate. The etiology is
unknown, but trauma and a familial tendency both
have been suggested as possible causes. Fusion is also
Figure 5.1  Radiograph of a cat skull affected with adontia.
101
Figure 5.2 a. Supernumerary tooth caudal to the mandibular first molar b. Radiograph of single-rooted supernumerary tooth caudal to the mandibular first
molar. c. Two tooth structures in the maxillary canine position (image courtesy of Dr Charra Sweeney-Reeves). d. Radiograph of the normal and supernumerary
permanent canine (image courtesy of Dr. Charra Sweeney-Reeves). e. Supernumerary mandibular fourth premolars. f. Supernumerary maxillay third
premiolar's.
102
Figure 5.3 Bilateral persistent deciduous maxillary canines.
Figure 5.4 a. Gemination of the left maxillary third premolar. b. Radiograph of the geminated left maxillary fourth premolar
Figure 5.5 a and b. Radiographs of geminated right mandibular fourth
premolars.
103
104
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.6 a. Gingivitis. b. Periodontal disease at the distal root of the first
mandibular molar. c. Advanced periodontal disease at the maxillary third and
 fourth premolars.
 In some cats, the plaque irritates the gingiva, allowing
playing a role in maintaining and accelerating periodon-
pathogenic gram-negative bacteria (Porphyrormonas, Pre-
tal disease by keeping plaque in close contact with the
votella, Peptostreptococcus, Fusobacterium) to survive sub-
gingival tissues and decreasing the potential for repair
gingivally. By-products of these bacteria stimulate the
and new attachment (fig. 5.7).
host's immune system to release cytokines and prosta-
Appreciating the difference between gingivitis and
glandins that weaken and destroy the tooth's support-
 periodontitis is important. Gingivitis is an inflammatory
ing tissues. The progression of periodontal disease is
process affecting the gingiva only. This process does not
dependent on the complex regulatory interaction
clinically extend into the alveolar bone, periodontal liga-
between bacteria and immune modulators of the host
ment, or cementum. Periodontitis is inflammation
response. Animals that have compromised health often
involving the periodontal ligament, alveolar bone, and
cannot fight periodontal pathogens. Diabetes, hyperthy-
cementum.
-ad Ae ATaH pue 'Al usoouapeady 'usiion
Gingivitis can be present without periodontitis. Simi-
dispose cats to periodontal disease.
larly, periodontal disease can exist without gingivitis in
Supragingival and subgingival bacteria form microen-
an area of previous periodontitis that has been treated
vironments of bacterial colonies called biofilms, which
and controlled, relieving inflammation but not attach-
 are separated from the junctional epithelium by a wall
ment loss.
of neutrophils. Gram-positive, nonmotile aerobic cocci
(Staphylococcus and Streptococcus spp.) naturally occupy
Periodontal Charting
the gingival sulcus in most cats. As plaque accumulates
at the gingival margin, subgingival oxygen decreases.
After the teeth are cleaned and debris irrigated, peri-
Toxins produced by biofilm bacteria stimulate prosta-
odontal probing is performed. A periodontal probe is
glandin and lysosome release, which can damage the
the single most important examination instrument used
biofilm-neutrophil wall, allowing invasion of the junc-
to evaluate periodontal health, and it helps to create a
tional epithelium.
road map to create a dental treatment plan. By gently
Calculus is formed by mineralization of plaque and
inserting a calibrated periodontal probe just apical to the
food debris. Calculus is covered with bacteria, thus
free gingival margin and tracing the gingival sulcus
 Oral Pathology
105
Figure 5.7 Supra and subgingival calculus on extracted maxillay fouth
premolar.
from mesial to distal buccally and lingually/palatally, a
rapid determination of the health of the periodontal
tissues can be made (fig. 5.8).
Probing depth is the distance from the free gingival
 margin to the most apical point that the probe reaches
when gently inserted into the gingival sulcus. The probe
Figure 5.8  Periodontal probe with millimeter markings.
stops where the gingiva attaches to the tooth. Each tooth
should be probed completely around the circumference
(fig. 5.9).
 Bleeding on probing is indicative of an inflammatory
ment of periodontal destruction in cases of gingival
process in the connective tissue adjacent to the junc-
 recession where little or no pocketing exists. The PAL is
tional epithelium. If the sulcular lining is intact 
measured from the base of the gingival sulcus/peri-
and healthy, no bleeding will occur. However, if peri-
 odontal pocket to the cementoenamel junction. The clini-
 odontal disease is present, bleeding will usually occur
cal pocket depth plus recession (measured from the
(fig. 5.10).
cementoenamel junction to the gingival margin) equals
Normal cats should have less than 1mm sulcular
the total periodontal attachment loss (fig. 5.12).
probing depths. Abnormal probing depths are noted on
the dental record and discussed with the client, and a
Furcation Disease
treatment plan is mapped out before therapy begins.
The furcation is a normal anatomical area at the trunk
 of a multirooted tooth where the roots begin to diverge.
Pocketing Defects
Normally, this area is sealed from the oral environment
A periodontal pocket is a pathologically deepened gin-
by the periodontium. When the integrity of the peri-
gival sulcus. The clinical (absolute) pocket depth is the
distance from the gingival margin to the base of a pocket,
migrates apically, oral microflora can gain access and
measured in millimeters (figs. 5.11 a, b).
multiply, resulting in progressive disease.
Furcation involvement or exposure occurs secondary
to periodontal disease. The slightest radiographic change
Nonpocketing Defects
in the furcation area should be investigated clinically.
Gingival recession results in the exposure of the root
 involvement. Radiolucency in the furcation suggests 
odontal attachment level (PAL) is an accurate measure-
furcation exposure.
 Figure 5.9  Periodontal probe inserted into a 3-mm periodontal pocket.
Figure 5.10  Bleeding on probing between the right maxillary third and
fourth premolars.
106
 Cral Pathology
107
Figure 5.13  Furcation exposure at the right maxillary third premolar.
Figure 5.12 Marked gingival recession at the left maxillary fourth
premolar.
 Disease affecting the furcation (F) can be classified in
and up to 0.5 mm. If there is only stage 2 periodontal
stages:
 disease present, nonsurgical therapy and home care
is the treatment of choice. If higher stages of peri-
 F1 involvement is diagmosed when an explorer can
odontal disease are present, extraction should be
just detect an entrance to the furcation. A portion of
alveolar bone and periodontal ligament is intact at
considered.
Stage 2 (M2): Mobility is increased in any direction
the furcation. Generally, there will be less than 1 mm
other than axial over a distance of more than 0.5 mm
exposure.
and up to 1.0mm. Extraction should be considered
F2 involvement occurs when an explorer can enter
umless the client and patient will allow stringent
the furcation but does not exit the other side. The
home care after periodontal therapy.
umdermined furcation is occluded by gingiva or
uonna1p Aue u paseaouI sI AqoN (N) e ases
bone on one side.
other than axial over a distance exceeding 1.0 mm or
 F3 exposure is diagnosed when the periodontium is
any axial movement. Treatment of choice is extrac-
destroyed to such a degree that the furcation is open
tion of the affected tooth.
and exposed. An explorer can easily pass from side
to side (fig. 5.13).
Plague Index (Silness and Loe)
Tooth Mobility (M)
 Plaque index (PI) measures the amount of plaque on the
Normally there is physiological tooth movement of less
tooth surface.
than 0.2mm for incisor teeth and no mobility of others.
 PI0: No observable plaque.
Teeth may become pathologically mobile in response to
 PI1: A thin film of plaque is detected at the gingival
increased occlusal forces, trauma, or normal forces
margin by placing a probe or explorer across the
exerted on a reduced periodontium. Mobility per se is 
tooth surface (fig. 5.14a).
not diagnostic of periodontal disease, but it reflects a
 PI2: A moderate amount of plaque is detected along
pathologic adaptation to stresses placed on the
 the gingival margin. Plaque is visible clinically (fig.
 periodontium.
5.14b).
h0  n  e  0 
 PI3: Heavy plaque accumulation is detected at the
 Stage 1 (M1): Mobility is increased in any direction
gingival margin and in the interdental spaces (fig.
 other than axial over a distance of more than 0.2mm
5.14c).
108
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.14 a. Pl 1. b. Pl 2. c. Pl 3.
Calculus Index
GI1: Marginal gingivitis. Mild inflammation at the
 gingival margin only; slight color change at margin; 
Calculus index (Cl) refers to the amount of calculus on
slight edema; no bleeding on gentle probing, and no
the tooth surface.
increase in sulcus depth (fig. 5.16b).
GI2: Moderate gingivitis. Increased hyperemia
CI0: No observable calculus.
of the marginal gingiva; wider band of inflamma-
CI1: Scattered calculus covering less than one-third
tion; edema and glazing of marginal gingiva,
of the buccal tooth surface (fig. 5.15a).
bleeds on gentle probing; normal sulcus depths
CI2: Calculus covering between one- and two-thirds
(fig. 5.16c).
of the buccal tooth surface with minimal subgingi-
GI3: Advanced gingivitis. Inflammation affecting
val calculus (fig. 5.15b).
gingiva from gingival margin to mucogingival junc-
 CI3: Calculus covering greater than two-thirds of
the buccal tooth surface and extending subgingi-
tion; marked hyperemia and edema; thickening of
gingival margin; ulceration; tendency to spontane-
vally (fig. 5.15c).
ous bleeding. At this stage there will often be peri-
 odontitis with attachment loss (fig. 5.16d).
Gingival Index
Periodontal Disease Index (PD)
To determine the gingival index (Gl), the mouth is irri-
gated and gently blotted, then a periodontal probe is
Stage 1 (PD1): Gingivitis only without attachment
carefully applied below the gingiva.
loss. The height and architecture of the alveolar
margin are normal (fig. 5.17a).
 GIO: Normal, healthy gingiva with sharp gingival
Stage 2 (PD2): Early periodontitis implies that there
margins. Gingiva wrapped tightly around each
 is less than 25% of attachment loss. There are early
tooth; gingiva is shrimp-colored and stippled from
radiologic signs of periodontitis. The loss of attach-
mucogingival junction to gingival margin; gingival
ment of alveolar bone on the root is less than 25%
sulcus of normal depth for animal and tooth; no
as measured either by clinical attachment level or
odor; minimal crevicular fluid (fig. 5.16a).
radiographically as determined by the distance of
 Oral Pathology
109
Figure 5.15 a. Cl 1. b. Cl 2. c. Cl 3.
the alveolar margin from the cementoenamel junc-
 affected by both pocketing and nonpocketing defects
tion relative to the length of the root. At most, stage
(figs. 5.17 i, j).
1 furcation involvement exists (fig. 5.17b).
 Stage 3 (PD3): Moderate periodontitis implies that
Juvenile Hyperplastic Gingivitis
there is 25%-50% loss of attachment of alveolar bone
on the root as measured either by clinical attach-
 Juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis occurs after the perma-
ment level or radiographically as determined by the
nent teeth have erupted when the cat is between six and
distance of the alveolar margin from the cemento-
eight months old. Although this condition is seen most
enamel junction relative to the length of the root. At
often in Persian and Abyssinian cats, it can be present
most, stage 2 furcation involvement exists (figs. 5.17
in any breed.
C, d).
Clinically, the attached gingiva is markedly inflamed,
 Stage 4 (PD4): Advanced periodontitis implies that 
with overgrowth at times covering the crowns of the
there is more than 50% loss of attachment of alveolar
premolars and molars creating pseudopockets.
bone on the root as measured either by probing
 Treatment involves cleaning the teeth of affected cats
depth (figs. 5.17 e, f) or as determined by the dis-
 every three to six months and gingivectomy of the
tance of the alveolar margin from the cemento-
hyperplastic gingiva sparing at least 2mm of attached
enamel junction relative to the length of the root.
 gingiva. If available, laser ablation of hyperplastic tissue
(figs. 5.17 g, h). Stage 3 furcation involvement will
 may be helpful. Some of these patients progress to
be involved in multirooted teeth. Some teeth are
 chronic oropharangyeal inflammation; others revert to a
110
Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.16 a. Gl 0. b. Gl 1.c. GI 2.d. GI 3.
 more normal gingival architecture within months to
Canine Tooth Extrusion (Supereruption)
years of treatment (fig. 5.18).
Normally, the alveolar margin should reside within
1 mm apical to the cementoenamel junction. Occasion-
Juvenile Onset Periodontitis
ally, when the maxillary or mandibular canine tooth is
Juvenile onset periodontitis occurs before the kitten is
 affected by advanced periodontal disease, there appears
nine months of age. Siamese, Main Coon, and domestic
to be greater crown height above the gingiva compared
shorthaired cats are predisposed. The most common
to the contralateral (unaffected) tooth. This condition is
 presenting sign is halitosis at the time of permanent 
called canine tooth extrusion or supereruption. It has
tooth eruption. Physical examination reveals marked
been reported that a significant relationship exists
generalized inflammation of the marginal gingiva
between supereruption and tooth resorption. Hyperce-
 extending to the attached gingiva.
 mentosis (cemental hyperplasia) secondary to periapical
 Closer examination under general anesthesia will
 inflammation may also be involved in the tooth extru-
usually reveal marked mandibular incisor mobility, as
Jo Aoonona uuon e aq uaaa Ae araul ssanoid uois
well as gingival recession, periodontal pocketing, and
 tooth resorption, alveolar bone expansion, and hyperce-
furcation exposure of the cheek teeth (figs. 5.19 a, b).
mentosis (fig. 5.20).
Figure 5.17 a. Gingivitis. b. Early periodontal disease, no pocket. c. Moderate periodontal disease (no pocket with calculus in place). d. Moderate periodontal
disease, no pocket after calculus removal. e. Advanced periodontal disease before probe insertion into a periodontal pocket at the right maxillary canine.
f 14-mm probing depth. g. Advanced periodontal disease (no pocket). h. Extracted tooth affected with advanced periodontal disease displaying greater than
50% loss of attachment level. i. Advanced periodontal disease exposing greater than 50% of the roots. j. Advanced periodontal disease with pocketing and 
gingivalrecession.
111
Figure 5.17  Continued
112
Figure 5.18  Juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis.
Figure 5.19 a. Juvenile periodontitis at maxillae. b. Juvenile periodontitis
at rostral mandibles.
Figure 5.20 Left mandibular canine tooth extrusion ("supereruption").
113
114
Feline Dentistry
Alveolar Bone Expansion (Chronic Alveolar
In cats, the pulp chamber extends to just under the
Osteitis)
crown tip compared to mature dogs, which usually have
several millimeters of protective dentin under the
Another presentation of stage 3 and 4 periodontal
 enamel. When trauma causes pulp exposure, oral bacte-
disease in the cat is chronic alveolar osteitis where the
ria often enter the pulp chamber, infecting the pulp.
alveolar bone around the tooth appears to be bulging.
 Infection may then extend to the periodontal ligament,
Radiographically, there are areas of expansive buccal
 periapical tissues, and alveolar bone.
 alveolar bone (figs. 5.21 a-d).
Seldom do cats show obvious signs of endodontic
disease. Occasionally, endodontic disease presents as a
purulent draining tract either ventral to the orbital rim
Fractured Teeth and Endodontic Disease
or under the chin secondary to extension of disease from
the pulp periapically. Some cases of chronic rhinitis are
Cats that are hit by cars, fight with other cats or fall from
secondary to long-standing fractured teeth. Diagnosing
high places may inadvertently traumatize their crowns
endodontic disease is sometimes straightforward with a
on one or more teeth (fig. 5.22).
fine explorer or endodontic file applied to the pulp
Figure 5.21 a.Alveolar bone expansion and advanced periodontal disease. b. Radiograph of alveolar bone expansion surrounding the maxillary canines (more
advanced on the left maxillary canine). c. Bilateral canine alveolar bone expansion. d. Radiograph of marked bilateral alveolar bone expansion.
 Oral Pathology
115
Root fracture. A fracture involving the root (figs.
5.23 j, k).
Tooth Resorption
Tooth resorption is a common dental finding clinically
affecting between 20% and 75% of mature cats depend-
ing on the population researched. One study found his-
tologic evidence of resorption on all teeth in cats that
had at least one resorption, leading to the hypothesis
that given enough time, all teeth of affected cats will
develop tooth resorption. A related study found that in
those cats that had at least one resorption, greater than
 half of nonclinical teeth had histologic evidence of exter-
 nal root resorption. Only 8% of the teeth examined from
cats without tooth resorption had similar lesions.
Location
 Tooth resorptions are usually clinically apparent at the
labial or buccal surface near the cementoenamel junc-
tion, occasionally filled in with hyperplasic gingiva.
Figure 5.22  Complicated crown fracture.
Resorptions can be found on any tooth, although the
teeth most commonly affected are the mandibular third
premolars, first molars, and the maxillary third and
cavity opening. When the file or explorer enters the pulp
fourth premolars. Many resorptions affecting the canine
cavity, pulp exposure is present.
 teeth occur apical to the cementoenamel junction and
 Dental radiographs can help detect gross evidence of
(8-e 17'g sy) puaredde Aesuo jou ane uao
 pulpal and marked periapical pathology. Radiographs
Resorption may be confined deep in the alveolus
 can also be used to evaluate the width of root canal
where noninflammatory replacement resorption takes
when compared to that of the contralateral tooth (assum-
place (tooth substance is resorbed and replaced with
ing it is vital). A nonvital tooth may have a wider root
bone). Tooth resorption is considered progressive. With
canal indicating that there was pulp death some time
coronal progression of the disease into crown dentin,
previously that resulted in the cessation of dentin
resorption of enamel may take place, exposing the lesion
formation.
to the oral cavity and bacteria.
 In the cat, the maxillary and mandibular canines are
the most common teeth fractured, followed by the
Clinical Signs
incisors.
When the resorption progresses along the root surface
and erodes through the gingival attachment, the resorp-
Fracture Classification
 tion lesion is exposed to oral bacteria, which may result
Enamel fracture. A fracture with loss of crown sub-
in painful inflammation of surounding soft tissue. In
stance confined to the enamel (fig. 5.23a).
most cases of tooth resorption, there are no overt clinical
Uncomplicated crown fracture. A fracture of the
signs. However, patients affected with tooth resorption
crown that does not expose the pulp (figs. 5.23 b, c).
 may show hypersalivation, head shaking, sneezing.
Complicated crown fracture. A fracture of the
anorexia, oral bleeding, or may have difficulty with food
crown that exposes the pulp (figs. 5.23 d, e).
prehension.
Uncomplicated crown-root fracture. A fracture of
the crown and root that does not expose the pulp
Terminology
(figs. 5.23 f, g).
Complicated crown-root fracture. A fracture of
At one time, these lesions were called cat cavities due to
the crown and root that exposes the pulp (figs.
their clinical and radiographic similarity to human
5.23 h, i).
caries. This is an incorrect term in that clinically and
Figure 5.23 a. Enamel fracture illustration. b. Uncomplicated crown fracture illustration. c. Uncomplicated crown fracture. d. Complicated crown fracture
illustration. e. Complicated crown fracture. f. Uncomplicated crown-root fracture illustration. g. Uncomplicated crown-root fracture. h. Complicated crown-root 
116
Figure 5.23 Continued
117
Figure 5.23 Continued
118
uodiosan yroon jo saueieadde pue sueal aidunn he th's ainb
119
120
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.24  Continued
histologically, tooth resorption is different from human
Stage 4 (TR 4): Extensive dental hard tissue loss
caries (cavity). Caries is caused by cariogenic bacteria
(cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of
(mainly Streptococcus mutans) that ferment highly refined
dentin that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the
carbohydrates on the tooth surface. Acids are released
tooth has lost its integrity. (a) Crown and root are
during this fermentation process, resulting in deminer-
equally affected (figs. 5.25 h, i); (b) crown is more
alization of enamel and dentin of the tooth and bacterial
severely affected than the root (figs. 5.25 j-l); (c) root
 infection of the dentin.
is more severely affected than the crown (figs. 5.25
Tooth resorptions have also been referred to as neck
m-0).
lesions, external odontoclastic resorptions, feline odon-
Stage 5 (TR 5): Remnants of dental hard tissue are
toclastic resorption lesions, feline oral resorptions, and
visible only as irregular radiopacities, and gingival
cervical line erosions.
covering is complete (figs. 5.25 p-r).
Some investigators believe that three radiographic
Tooth Resorption (TR) Classification
appearances
of
tooth
resorption
 should
be
Stage 1 (TR 1): Mild dental hard tissue loss (cemen-
distinguished:
tum or cementum and enamel) (fig. 5.25a).
Stage 2 (TR 2): Moderate dental hard tissue loss
Type 1: There is usually a loss of alveolar bone adja-
(cementum or cementum and enamel with loss of
cent to an often well-defined area of tooth resorp-
dentin that does not extend to the pulp cavity; figs.
tion; normal
 periodontal  ligament  space 
is
5.25 b-d).
maintained at other areas of the tooth.
Stage 3 (TR 3): Deep dental hard tissue loss (cemen-
Type 2: There is a loss of the periodontal ligament
tum or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin
space and lamina dura due to fusion of the toth
that extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth
root and alveolar bone (dentoalveolar ankylosis);
retains its integrity (figs. 5.25 e-g).
the resorbing tooth structure may appear less
Figure 5.25 a. Stage 1 illustration. b. Stage 2 illustration. c. Stage 2 lesion on the maxillary canine. d. Radiograph of stage 2 lesion. e. Stage 3 illustration.
f Stage 3 lesion on a left mandibular molar. g. Radiograph of stage 3 lesion. h. Stage 4a illustration. i. Stage 4a radiograph. j. Stage 4b illustration. k. Stage
4b lesion at the right maxillary canine. I. Stage 4b radiograph. m. Stage 4c illustration. n. Stage 4c lesion at the left mandibular canine. o. Stage 4c radiograph.
p. Stage 5 illustration. q. Stage 5 lesion. r. Stage 5 radiograph.
121
Figure 5.25 Continued
122
Figure 5.25 Continued
123
Figure 5.25 Continued
124
Figure 5.25 Continued
125
126
 Feline Dentistry
radiopaque than the unaffected tooth (replacement
gingival attachment will expose the resorption to the
resorption).
oral environment. Inflammation of the surrounding
 Type 3: There are features present of both types 1
tissues then occurs, leading to increased sensitivity.
and 2.
 Many noninflammatory lesions do not progress and stay
apical to the cementoenamel junction.
Examination Findings
 Resorption lesions that begin near the cementoenamel
junction are quickly exposed to the oral environment,
Examination in the conscious cat often will reveal tooth
 where they become contaminated and inflamed early in
resorption as an area of missing tooth substance. Any
the process of resorption. Some believe these lesions are
surface of the tooth can be affected. The most common
caused by plaque accumulation, inflammation, and
occurrence is on the buccal surface of the maxillary and
release of cytokines and lipopolysaccharides that stimu-
mandibular premolars. General anesthesia is necessary
late migration of clastic cells to the area. The tooth
to conduct a thorough tooth-by-tooth clinical and radio-
resorption then extends down the root, infecting the
graphic examination. In certain cases the overlying
periodontal ligament and preventing replacement of
 gingiva is severely inflamed; in others there is no inflam-
hard tissue loss with bone- or cementum-like material.
 mation to indicate pathology.
Eventually the tooth may become mobile secondary to
A dental explorer is used to probe for a defect or
the loss of attachment and /or fracture from the weaken-
   n a  
ing of tooth substance. Although it is tempting to incrim-
attachment. All surfaces of every tooth should be
inate plaque and periodontal disease as the etiology of
explored. Normal anatomical familiarity is important
tooth resorption in cats, several studies have not shown
especially of the mandibular first molar where furcation
a cause-and-effect relationship between tooth resorption
 involvement or exposure is often misdiagmosed as tooth
 amd periodontal disease. Periodontal disease may be
resorption.
secondary to the tooth's rough surface caused by
resorption.
Prevalence
Internal and External Resorption
All cats are susceptible to resorptions. Purebred cats
such as Abyssinian, Siamese, Russian Blue, Scotish
Tooth roots either resorb from the outside toward the
 Fold, and Persian appear to be affected at an earlier age.
inside (external resorption) secondary to disorders of the
Any cat with permanent teeth can be affected. Tooth
im Aoonoued squopopua ol anp io umguoponad
 resorption, however, is rarely diagnosed in cats younger
inflammatory mediators exiting apical foramina or
than two years of age. Most affected cats develop lesions
lateral canals to affect the periodontium or resorb from
by four to six years of age.
the inside toward the outside (internal resorption) as a
 Additionally, tooth resorption has been reported more
result of disorders of the pulp tissues. The lesion affect-
prevalent in cats that gulp rather than chew their food,
ing cats is typically an external resorption in that it
only eat table foods, female cats, cats that drink city
begins on the outside of the tooth root(s).
(compared to well) water, cats that are on a raw liver
 In humans, external root resorption can be further
diet or a low calcium diet, and cats that are exclusively
classified as surface, inflammatory, and replacement
indoors.
(noninflammatory).
 Surface resorption occurs secondary to relatively
 minor trauma (mastication, orthodontic therapy) to the
Pathenogenesis
cementum. Clastic cells will resorb the cementum for a
Tooth resorption occurs secondary to the activity of mul-
few days as long as osteoclast-activating factors are
tinucleated odontoclastic cells, which resorb the dental
 released at the site of injury. When the resorption stops,
hard tissues. Resorption typically starts in the cementum
 cells from the periodontal ligament proliferate and pop-
anywhere along the root surface and then progresses
ulate the resorbed area, resulting in deposition of repar-
into dentin apically and /or coronally.
ative tissue. Surface resorption is self-limiting and
 The location where the resorption begins usually dic-
reversible, but it can eventually progress to become
tates the outcome.
destructive.
For resorptions that begin on the root surface deep in
Tooth resorption that occurs in the cat can be inflam-
the alveolus, a progressive noninflammatory process
 matory but more commonly is characterized by nonin-
replaces the periodontal ligament and root with bone- or
flammatory dentoalveolar ankylosis and replacement
cementum-like tissue. In resorptions that progress
 resorption of unknown etiology. Once the root has fused
toward the crown, loss of dentin and enamel near the
to the bone, the teeth become part of the alveolar bone
 Cral Pathology
127
remodeling process and eventually resorb, which may
clasts; however, when resorbing mineralized dental
take years. This can somewhat be seen as a form of
tissues or mineralized cartilage, they are called odonto-
healing, as the bone has accepted the dental hard tissue
clasts or chondroclasts, respectively.
 as part of itself and the tooth becomes involved in the
Adhesion molecules associated with mineralized tis-
 normal skeletal turnover. When the resorptive process
suesbone sialoprotein and osteopontin, and a cell
is over, osteoblasts form bone in the resorbed area. Thus,
surface receptor linked with these molecules, alpha v
the dental hard tissues will gradually be replaced by
beta 3—are involved in regulating resorption and repair.
 bone. These lesions are not considered to be painful as
 There are two distinct stages involved in the progres-
long as they remain sealed below the gingival sulcus.
sion of inflammatory tooth resorption:
Teeth with significant replacement resorption can be
Acute phase—where resorptive lacunae in the
[ p non m p s q pn
"root" retention. The resorbing root can be left if there
dentin are created by odontoclasts. If there is an
 inflammatory stimulus, increased amounts of blood
is no evidence of periodontitis, stomatitis, or endodon-
vessels will populate the tissues covering the exca-
tic/periapical disease. The retained root will continue to
 be resorbed and replaced by bone until nothing of it is
vated dentin. The pulp and adjacent hard tissue is
normal in the acute phase.
left. This process is asymptomatic (based on what we
Chronic remodeling (reparative) phase—where
kow from human dentistry). Replacement resorption
cementoblast- or osteoblast-like cells populate the
does not exclude the presence of a viable pulp. The pulp
area producing a cementum- or bonelike tissue on
may be normal in most affected teeth. Only in advanced
top of the excavated dentin. Destruction of the peri-
cases will the resorptive process penetrate into the root
odontal ligament as well as adjacent alveolar bone
canal or pulp chamber and gradually fill the pulp cavity
occurs. The acute and chronic phases can coexist in
with new bone.
a single lesion with both destruction and repair
 Inflammatory root (cementum, dentin) resorption is
occurring simultaneously.
thought to be triggered by a variety of factors, including
periodontal inflammation. These painful lesions often
 begin in the gingival sulcus around the neck (cervical
Etiology
portion) of the tooth. Inflammatory cells in the lesion
may recognize osteoclast activating factors of the bare
 uq sans snnau uaq aau ara
root surface, initiating the resorptive process just apical
understanding to tooth resorption; however, a specific
 to the marginal gingiva. Alveolar bone adjacent to an
etiology has not yet been identified for resorption of
inflammatory root resorption lesion is usually also
multiple permanent teeth in domestic cats.
resorbed. Two subtypes of inflammatory root resorption
One study about prevalence and risk factors associ-
 have been recognized:
ated with tooth resorption found older age and higher
magnesium content of the food to be variably associated
 Transient resorption is followed by formation of
with tooth resorption.
 reparative tissue.
Human bulimic patients have similar-appearing
 Progressive resorption is due to continued release
lesions caused by erosion at the cementoenamel junction
of inflammatory mediators. When resorption pro-
due to low-pH, caustic stomach contents. It was theo-
gresses coronally, enamel is often undermined,
rized without confirmation that tooth resorption in cats
breaks off, or is resorbed.
may be caused by hairball regurgitation.
 A popular theory to explain tooth resorption in cats
 Cat diets may hold the key to unlocking a significant
stipulates that all cats are affected by surface resorption.
part of the etiologic puzzle. Feral cats have much less
Aq ,paleau, st eare paqrosa1 eus au sases Aueu u
prevalence compared with domestic cats.
Excessive
formation of reparative cementum-like tissue. Those 
vitamin D intake from cat diets may be involved.
 lesions that fail to heal progress to dentin resorption.
Statistically
 sigmificant increased concentrations of
Additional research has shown
that
osteoclast
serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D have been found to be
numbers and resorptive activity increase in an acidic
present in cats with tooth resorption compared to cats
 sa  g r psans si h l
without. The recommended amount of vitamin D in cat
 play a role in the pathogenesis of tooth resorption.
diets is 250IU/kg dry matter, but 73% of canned foods
tested showed in excess of 1,500IU/kg dry matter,
and 31% exceeded the Association of American Feed
Histology
Control Officials' maximal allowance of 10,00oIU/kg
Clastic cells are responsible for mineralized tissue
dry matter. Furthermore, administration of excessive
resorption. Bone resorbing cells are usually called osteo-
amounts of vitamin D in experimental animals (dogs)
128
 Feline Dentistry
pigs, rats) resulted in changes to the tooth and periodon-
Oropharangyeal Inflammation
tal tissues similar to those observed in tooth resorption
in cats.
Widespread oral inflammation of the oral cavity is
Areas explored and found not to be directly associated
 termed stomatitis, compared to gingivitis or periodonti-
with tooth resorption include an increased acid content
tis with localized support loss (fig. 5.26). Some cases of
of dry food coating and specific oral pathogenic bacteria
stomatitis show diffuse inflammation extending past the
(Actinomyces).
mucogingival margin (alveolar/labial/buccal mucosi-
tis) (figs. 5.27 a, b) or deeper into the bone and bone
Radiographic Findings
marrow (osteomyelitis). Some cats are affected by
inflammation of the palate (palatitis), lip (cheilitis),
 Intraoral radiographs are a critical diagnostic tool to
and /or tongue (glossitis; fig. 5.28). Finally, some patients
help the veterinarian classify and treat tooth resorption.
 present with varying degrees of unilateral or bilateral
Most lesions are localized to the root surfaces within the
alveolar bone. Clinically detectable lesions at the cervi-
cal portion of the tooth may appear as radiolucent areas
near the cementoenamel junction. When one tooth
resorption is noted, other resorptions on the same tooth
and multiple other teeth are often revealed.
 There are two commonly used radiographic classifica-
tion systems applied to feline tooth resorption—stages
and types. Radiographic appearance of tooth resorption
varies from minute surface radiolucent defects of the
tooth at the cementoenamel junction to widespread root
replacement resorption that gives the tooth a mottled
or moth-eaten look. Treatment plarming also involves
evaluation
of
the   periodontal ligament  space
radiographically.
Figure 5.27 a. Gingivitis and alveolar mucositis at the maxillary cheek
teeth. b. Gingivitis and labial/buccal mucositis at the left mandibular cheek
Figure 5.26 Periodontal support loss and inflammation.
teeth.
 Cral Pathology
129
In another study of nearly 9,000 cats affected with oral
lesions, more than 20% of animals with chronic stoma-
titis were retrovirus (FeLV and/or FIV) positive. In a
study of sixty cats with caudal stomatitis, 7% were posi-
tive for FeLV, 8% positive for FIV. None were positive
for both FeLV and FIV.
Although some cats that have stomatitis are positive
for Bartonella spp., a cause-and-effect has not been
proven in that there is already a high prevalence rate of
antibody-positive cats within the healthy population
due to flea exposure. Many cats that have been exposed
to the bacteria will have a positive titer, even if not
currently infected. Another study found both calici
virus and feline herpes virus in 87% of twenty-five cats
affected with chronic oral inflammation, while only
Figure 5.28 Severe proliferative caudal stomattis with inflammation
 21% of cats with periodontal disease were shedding
extending into the mucosal surfaces of the cheeks, soft palate, and tongue.
both viruses.
caudal stomatitis/mucositis extending to the palatoglos-
History and Clinical Signs
sal folds (figs. 5.29 a-e, 5.30).
The median age of affected cats is seven years. Patient
Past references have referred to these conditions as
history often includes dysphagia or anorexia causing
lymphocytic-plasmacytic gingivostomatitis, as well as
weight loss, ptyalism, bruxism (grinding of teeth), and
 plasma cell gingivitis, faucitis, and pharymngitis (though
face pawing. There may be resistance to opening the
the latter two terms are incorrect in that the fauces and
mouth when eating. The cat's hair coat is often unkempt
   n o  a x
secondary to poor self-grooming due to oral pain. Hali-
 Chronic stomatitis may appear similar but differs
tosis and bleeding within the oral cavity are common.
from other gingival inflammatory diseases (feline juve-
Glossitis, cheilitis, and mandibular lymphadenopathy
nile and adult-onset periodontitis, feline eosinophilic
may also be evident. Widespread inflammation of the
 granuloma complex) and other metabolic, nutritional,
palate and pharynx is usually not present.
 and neoplastic diseases that may present with a clinical 
 In some cats, inflammation is apparent only around
 appearance of oral inflammation.
the caudal cheek teeth extending from the gingiva
 beyond the mucogingival junction into alveolar mucosa.
Etiology of Oropharangyeal Inflammation
Other cats show marked gingivitis and periodontitis 360
 Oral tissues are constantly exposed to pathogens and
degrees around the incisors, premolars, and /or molars.
Caudal stomatitis, incorrectly referred to in the past as
 antigenic proteins. In a healthy mouth, there is a balance
faucitis, clinically appears as cobblestone-like ulcerative,
 between disease, the host, and its immune response. The 
-od a n s ou ana
etiology of oropharangyeal inflammation has not been
 definitively determined. Dental plaque intolerance is
glossal folds and regions lateral to the folds. One study
found 15% of the cats only had caudal stomatitis without
believed to be involved. Either an inadequate 
or
apparent lesions further rostrally. Mandibular lymph-
exaggerated host response occurs in the affected cat,
adenopathy is common.
which leads to marked gingival and oral mucosal
 Histopathology of the mucosa and submucosa reveals 
inflammation.
dense infiltrations of plasma cells with lesser numbers
A multifactorial etiology is suspected, including
of lymphocytes, neutrophils, and macrophages consis-
genetic predisposition, environmental stress, diet, viral
tent with virtually any inflammation in a cat's mouth.
(calici, herpes) and bacterial infection. Only calici virus
 Unfortunately, the only advantage of histopathology is
has shown significant presence in those cats affected by
to rule out neoplasia.
chronic oropharangyeal inflammation (97%) compared
with a control group of cats (25%). When specific patho-
 gen-free cats were inoculated with serum from positive
Radiography
feline chronic oropharangyeal inflammation cats, those
inoculated developed oral signs of ulceration but did not
Intraoral radiographs often reveal moderate to
develop caudal stomatitis.
marked periodontal disease, with all stages of tooth
Figure 5.29 a. Mild caudal oropharangyeal inflammation. b. Marked right-
sided caudal stomatitis. c. Mild right-sided vestibular mucositis persisting after
extraction of the cheek teeth. d and e. Marked alveolar and vestibular mucositis
and periodontal disease.
130
Oral Pathology
131
 resorption, missing teeth, and root fragments (figs. 5.31
a-d).
Occlusion Disorders
Many factors determine normal and abnormal occlu
sion. The mandibular arch is smaller than the maxillary
arch at birth. Mandibular growth occurs in a downward
and forward direction at a faster rate than maxillary
growth. The jaws are divided into upper and lower
arches. If the cat has an infection, trauma, or poor nutri-
tion during one of the growth spurts, then the affected
e Sunpond Xeuou mono jou ua mef a jo jed
developmental malocclusion.
Generally, the teeth are normally arranged to create a
 self-cleansing mechanism, pushing food away from the
tooth/gingiva interface.
The mandibular teeth occlude palatal to the maxil-
lary teeth. The mandibular incisor cusps normally
rest on the the palatal side of the maxillary incisors
(fig. 5.32a).
Figure 5.30 Bilateral caudal stomatitis.
d
Figure 5.31 a. Gingivitis periodontitis, and alveolar mucositis, right maxillary cheek teeth b. Radiograph confirming support loss. c. Mandibular mucositis,
periodontal disease. d. Mandibular radiograph revealing tooth resorption and periodontal disease.
132
Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.32 a. Normal incisor-canine relationship b. Normal third incisor-
 canine relationship. c. Normal premolar interdigitation. d. Maxillary fourth pre-
molar covering the mandibular first molar.
The mandibular canine crowns lie equidistant
periodontal disease, damage to the soft tissues, and
between the maxillary third incisors and the maxil-
excessive wear.
lary canines (fig. 5.32b).
Ch ensnn paonsod si reouand remqipu yn
the corresponding maxillary premolar (fig. 5.32c).
Malocclusion
The maxillary fourth premolar covers the mandibu-
Abnormalities of occlusion in cats can be divided into
lar first molar bucally (fig. 5.32d).
(1) skeletal malocclusion, where the maxillae or mandi-
When the teeth are crowded, rotated, or malposi-
bles are abnormally positioned, and /or (2) dental maloc-
tioned, the cat is predisposed to early-onset gingivitis,
clusion or malposition, where the maxillae and mandibles
 Cral Pathology
133
Figure 5.34  Mandibular distoclusion.
Figure 5.33 Dental malocclusion of the left maxilary and mandibular
canines.
points to the tip of another, or if there is an increased
space between the cusps of the maxilla and mandible,
the malocclusion probably is due to genetic influence.
Skeletal malocclusions are generally considered genetic
 in origin. Dental malocclusions are developmental and
can also be genetic.
are positioned normally but individual teeth are abnor-
mally located (examples: rostromesial inclination of the
Skeletal Malocclusion
maxillary canine tooth, lingual displacement of the man-
 dibular canine tooth, crowded mandibular incisors; (fig.
Mandibular distoclusion (Class 2) occurs when there is
5.33)).
an abnormal rostral-caudal relationship between the
dental arches, in which the mandibular arch occludes
 Cats are born with mandibular mesioclusion closer to
caudal to its normal position relative to the maxillary
a level bite. This configuration allows the neonatal
 animal to nurse facilitating suckling as the lips form an
arch (fig. 5.34).
Mandibular mesioclusion (Class 3) is present in
O. As the animal grows and the impending transition
brachycephalic cats that have short and wide muzzles,
from the mother's milk to solid food occurs, the maxilla
 or occurs when the mandibles grow longer than the
goes through a growth spurt, nearly catching up to its
maxillae. The mandibular incisors are positioned rostral
relative adult percentage of jaw length.
 Breeds with medium-length muzzles and those with
to the maxillary incisors. In some cases, this occlusion
results in abnormal tooth-to-tooth or tooth-to-soft tissue
long, narrow muzzles (certain Siamese) usually do not
contact (figs. 5.35 a, b).
have spatial problems with accommodating the com-
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry is a skeletal maloc-
plete dental numbers. Brachycephalic breeds with short,
clusion characterized by a loss of the normal symmetry
wide muzzles (Persian, Burmese), on the other hand,
of the maxillary or mandibular arches. This condition
occasionally have occlusion-related problems due to the
includes:
space limitations.
To determine whether the likelihood of a malocclu-
Midline discrepancy, where the midlines of the
sion is genetic in origin, interdigitation of premolars can
maxillary and mandibular dental arches do not
 be studied. In the normal cat, the premolars meet in a
align with each other (fig. 5.36a)
saw tooth fashion, wherein the tips of the mandibular
Unilateral mandibular mesioclusion, where one
premolars point to the spaces between their maxillary
mandible is in mesioclusion and the other is in
interdental counterparts. If the cusp tip of one premolar
normal occlusion (fig. 5.36b)
134
 Feline Dentistry
Figure  5.36 a. Maxillary/mandibular asymmetry. b. Mandibular
asymmetry.
Linguoversion describes a tooth that is in its anatomi-
cally correct position in the dental arch but is abnor-
mally angled in a lingual direction (fig. 5.38a).
Labioversion describes an incisor or canine tooth that
b
is in its anatomically correct position in the dental arch
 but is abnormally angled in a labial direction (fig. 5.38b).
Figure 5.35 a and b. Mandibular mesiodlusion.
Buccoversion describes a premolar or molar tooth that
is in its anatomically correct position in the dental arch
 but is abnormally angled in a buccal direction.
Normally, cats replace their deciduous teeth starting
with the first maxillary and mandibular incisors at four-
Dental Malocclusion
teen weeks. The permanent canines should erupt by six
Distoversion describes a tooth that is in its anatomically
months. Persistent deciduous mandibular canine teeth
correct position in the dental arch but is abnormally
may fail to exfoliate because the permanent tooth buds
 amgled in a distal direction.
A uoisodieu su pauoisodreu aenul anam
Mesioversion describes a tooth that is in its anatomi-
result in lingual (base narrow) displacement of the per-
cally correct position in the dental arch but is abnor-
manent mandibular canine teeth, causing traumatic
mally angled in a mesial direction. This inherited defect
occlusion with the hard palate.
 au ol anp suoisal dil Arelxeu Aiepuosas asnes Aeu
Maxillary fourth premolar impingement results in
abnormal canine tooth position (figs. 5.37 a, b).
trauma to the soft tissue (gingiva and alveolar mucosa)
 Oral Pathology
135
Figure 5.38 a. Linguoversion of the maxillary canines. b. Labioversion of
the right mandibular canine.
Osteomyelitis
Figure 5.37 a. Maxillary canine tooth mesioversion. b. Mandibular canine
Bone infection and inflammation is often diagnosed as
tooth mesioversion.
the cause of oral swellings in the cat. These pathologies
commonly occur from traumatically induced bone seg-
ments that act as sequestra or tooth root fragments.
 Biopsy and culture are important for treatment planming
and to help rule out neoplasia (figs. 5.42 a-e).
surrounding the mandibular first molar buccally. The
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex
repeated trauma frequently results in gingival ulcer-
ation, proliferation, recession, and exposure of the roots
This complex can manifest in three ways:
of the mandibular fourth premolar and/or first molar
 Eosinophilic (indolent or rodent) ulcer
(figs. 5.39 a, b; 5.40 a, b).
Eosinophilic plaque
Eosinophilic granuloma
Oral Swellings/Tumors
 Only the eosinophilic ulcer and eosinophilic granu-
'seae paieu juaoee pue Aaes ieio au oi Aidde euo
Swellings and growths of the oral cavity are relatively
 Eosinophilic ulcers most commonly affect the upper
common. There are many etiologies of oral masses
lip at the philtrum but may occur anywhere in the oral
 ranging from cyst, infection, and inflammation to benign
-paaien e aaey Aensn dl raddn au uo siann aen
and malignant tumors (fig. 5.41).
Sade-mon e um auaede passadap 'no
Figure 5.39  a and b. Right maxillary fourth premolar impingement.
Figure 5.40  a and b. Left maxillary fourth premolar impingement.
Figure 5.41  Pharngyeal mucocele.
136
Figure 5.42 a. Marked facial swelling. b. Inflamed gingiva. c. Aspiration of swollen face. d. Inflammatory cytology (neutrophils, macrophages). e. Radiograph
revealing root fragments and left maxillary third premolar periodontal disease.
137
138
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 5.43 a. Eosinophilic ulcer b. Eosinophilic granuloma. c. Tongue eosinophilic granuloma.
center. Clinically, the lesions can be mistaken for neo-
the biopsies from the face or oral cavity, and there may
plasia (figs. 5.43 a, b).
be a peripheral eosinophilia as well (fig. 5.43c).
 Even though cats nine months to nine years of age can
be affected, there is a higher incidence in middle- to
Oral Neoplasia
older-aged cats with females predisposed. There may be
a genetic component with a predisposition in some
Oral tumors in the cat make up approximately 10% of
 inbred lines.
feline neoplasms. Nearly 90% of feline oral tumors are
The major underlying diseases thought to cause the
malignant. When presented with an oral swelling, the
lip ulcers are flea and/or food allergy, Microsporum
practitioner needs to use available diagnostic aids,
 canis, and atopic dermatitis; when these underlying con-
including radiography, fine-needle aspiration for cytol-
ditions are controlled, the lip lesion usually resolves.
 ogy, and biopsy for histopathology to render a diagnosis
Diagnosis of lip ulcer is confirmed by deep incisional
and treatment plan.
biopsy. Histopathology reveals hyperplastic, ulcerative,
 Oral tumors may be classified as odontogenic or non-
superficial, perivascular dermatitis with eosinophils,
 odontogenic, depending on origin, and as inductive or
neutrophils, mononuclear cells, and fibrosis.
moninductive, based on the interaction of epithelial and
 Eosinophilic granuloma occurs most commonly in the
mesenchymal tissues.
oral cavity and/or as a linear lesion on the back legs. The
etiology is unknown but suspected to be a hypersensitiv-
Benign Neoplasia
ity reaction. The underlying cause is rarely identified.
 Oral lesions may occur anywhere in the mouth including
Peripheral odontogenic fibroma
the gingiva, hard and/or soft palate, tongue, and oro-
(fibromatous epulis and ossifying epulis)
renpou on rended e aaeq suoisal au Xllesid xuaeud
An epulis is a nonspecific clinical descriptive term refer-
configuration and histologically show granulomas with
ring to a benign local growth of the oral mucosa. Histo-
 multifocal areas of collagen. Eosinophils are common in
logically, the overlying gingival epithelium is normal to
 Oral Pathology
139
Inductive fibroameloblastoma
Inductive refers to the relationship between the amelo-
blastic epithelial cells and the dental pulp-like stroma.
Also known as inductive fibroameloblastoma, the feline
inductive odontogenic tumor most commonly affects
 young cats. Osteolytic involvement of the rostral maxilla
is usually involved in this rather rare tumor.
Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumor
Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumor,  previously
referred to as calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor,
s 1nq sieo pe soop qoq u aaisau Aeol aq A1
not been reported to metastasize.
Malignant Neoplasia
A ten-year study of 371 neoplasms in the oral cavities of
cats found that a majority (89%) were malignant. Squa-
Figure 5.44  Peripheral odontogenic fibromas.
mous cell carcinomas make up a vast majority (61%) of
the oral maligmant tumors diagnosed, with fibrosar-
coma, adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, osteosarcoma, and
melanoma occurring less often.
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) occurs primarily in the
tongue and/or gingiva. A small percentage of cases also
involves the palate, pharynx, and one or both tonsils.
 Metastasis to distant organs is not common. Metastasis,
if present, is usually confined to the ipsilateral regional
lymph nodes.
Oral SCC in the cat displays a significant geographic,
environmental, and dietary correlation. Tonsillar SCC
are rare in North America but more common in the
United Kingdom, while lingual SCC is rare in Australia.
Figure 5.45 Multiple peripheral odontogenic fibromas.
One study also found a significant correlation between
 oral SCC in cats and exposure to secondhand tobacco
smoke. Another study found that cats fed canned food
were predisposed to oral SCC compared with those fed
 mildly hyperplastic in the sessile forms, but peduncu-
dry food.
 [sonu pue eaibuo paxe aaey uao sapmda paie
 The median age of cats with oral SCC is eleven to
hyperplasia with prominent rete ridge formation.
thirteen years; however, affected cats as young as three
 A majority of the feline epulides are peripheral odon-
months and as old as twenty-one years have been
togenic fibromas. Some have mature osteoid as their
reported.
The most common finding is a facial swelling or asym-
 metry recognized by the cat's owner or veterinarian
5.44).
during a routine examination (fig. 5.46). Other signs
 The majority of peripheral odontogenic fibromas
include excessive salivation, anorexia, weight loss, and
 occur as single oral swellings; however, multiple epuli-
halitosis. On oral examination, a prominent hard mass
des have been reported. In one study of thirteen cases,
will usually be noted on the maxilla or mandible (fig.
the biologic behavior of multiple fibromatous epulides
5.47).
 differed from the single lesion in that after local surgical
 Often the tumor affects the tongue root ventrally near
Excision, eight of the eleven patients had tumor recur
the frenulum, which often appears thickened or ulcer-
rence (fig. 5.45).
ated (figs. 5.48 a, b). If the mass occurs on the gingiva,
Figure 5.48 a. Thickened tongue deformity secondary to squamous cell
carcinoma. b. Squamous cel carcinoma tongue mass.
Figure 5.47 Mandibular firm swelling secondary to squamous cell
carcinoma.
140
Oral Pathology
141
Figure 5.51 Fibrosarcoma.
Although fine-needle aspiration with cytological eval-
uation can be used to tentatively evaluate suspected
 lesions, proper diagnosis of SCC requires an incisional
Figure 5.49 Radiograph of a right mandible with squamous cell
biopsy and histopathological examination. Fine-needle
carcinoma.
aspiration and cytology is performed if any local lymph
nodes are palpable, asymmetric, or enlarged. The typical
histologic characteristics of oral SCC include irregular
cords of pleomorphic epithelial cells with abundant
 eosinophilic cytoplasm, prominent intercellular bridges,
and keratin pearls (fig. 5.50).
Fibrosarcoma
Fibrosarcoma (FSA) is the second most common
(although rare) tumor of the feline oral cavity. Oral FSA
 generally occurs in older cats (average thirteen years);:
however, cats as young as one year of age and as old as
twenty-two years have been reported. There does not
appear to be any gender predisposition or any oral
cavity site predilection, though the lesions are usually
located rostrally on the gingiva.
Most cats with oral FSA will present for the same
problems as cats with oral SCC; however, cats with oral
 FSA invariably will have a mass at the primary tumor
site. The workup for the oral FSA patient is identical to
that discussed above for oral SCC. Procurement of a
Figure 5.50 Fine-needle aspiration cytology of squamous cel carcinoma
 deep incisional biopsy is recommended to best ensure a
with marked anisocytosis, anisokaryosisa, and prominent nucleoli.
correct histopathological diagmosis (fig. 5.51).
Staging of Oral Tumors
there may be increased mobility of the adjacent teeth
 In order to compare examination findings and treatment
results, oral masses can be staged per the World Health
Abnormal laboratory results often show a neutro-
 Organization's TNM system, based on the extent of the
philic leukocytosis, anemia, and azotemia. There is also
 am increased incidence of feline immunodeficiency virus
tumor, the extent of spread to the lymph nodes, and the
 in those cats affected with oral SCC. There is no apparent 
presence of metastasis.
For staging, the tumor is:
link to feline leukemia virus. Thoracic radiographs
usually do not show evidence of metastasis. Intraoral
Inspected and palpated for the presence of ulcer
radiographs commonly reveal marked localized osteoly-
ation or necrosis.
sis with increased hard tissue formation on the affected
Examined for adjacent tooth mobility not related to
 lower jaw but not on the upper jaw.
fracture or periodontal disease.
142
Feline Dentistry
Evaluated for regional lymph node involvement;
three times the width. Lesions from fixed alveolar or
nodes are checked for size, shape, pain on palpation,
palatal tissue do not require the 3:1 ellipse shape because
and lack of mobility.
of the inability to close the surgical defect. Normal tissue
Radiographed for areas of bone resorption or new
Xisnoiaand Suuado juaaand on pasiou Arasodmd jou s!
bone production; thoracic radiographs are taken for
wexposed tissue planes.
 metastatic evaluation (depending on tumor type).
Once the cytologic or histopathologic diagnosis has
been rendered, additional surgical excision, chemother-
apy, and/or radiation therapy can be performed. Ideally,
Primary tumor
the surgeon should provide clean surgical margins of at
T-1: Tumor less than 2cm in size
least 1 cm for benign lesions and at least 2 cm for malig-
T-2: Tumor between 2 and 4 cm in size
nant lesions.
T-3: Tumor greater than 4 cm in size
Bone invasion (determined radiographically)
Oral Trauma
a: Absent
b: Present
Maxillary and mandibular fractures occur often second-
ary to facial trauma and rarely from preexisting pathol-
 Ogy. Before focusing on the obvious orthopedic problem,
Regional lymph nodes
the examiner must stabilize the patient. If the cat will
N-0: Non-palpable nodes, no metastasis expected
allow examination without causing further pain, the oral
N-1: Palpable, ipsilateral, nonfixed, no metastasis
suspected
the cat is uncomfortable, this examination can wait until
N-2: Palpable, contralateral, nonfixed, node metastasis
the cat is anesthetized.
suspected
 Oral examination should include evaluation of range
 N-3: Fixed nodes, metastasis suspected
of motion of the temporomandibular joints and palpa-
fion for crepitus and areas of discomfort. The trauma-
Distant metastasis
tized jaws may present in normal occlusion or with
M-0: No distant metastasis
displacement toward or away from the side of fracture
M-1: Evidence of metastasis to other than cervical nodes
or dislocation.
The hard and soft palates separate the oral and nasal
 Generally, the ipsilateral mandibular lymph nodes are
cavities. When the palate has been injured, causing a
regarded as the ones to biopsy when striving to deter-
communication between oral and nasal passages, the
 mine regional metastasis. Consideration should also be
nasal cavity may fill with food or fluid during eating and
given to examining the parotid and medial and lateral
drinking, and aspiration pneumonia may result. Prompt
-lanap Aiasioand arou ci sapou ydul ieasuereqdona
treatment of acquired palate defects is required. Fresh
mine regional metastasis.
linear midline defects, which often result from falling
 Tissue sampling can be accomplished by fine-needle
-i ands Aq psoe aq u 'sn un n e wo
aspiration, which is also helpful for lymph node
sampling.
 Incisional biopsy is indicated  for large lesions
e p snu ao e m aso pe
Temporomandibular Joint Dislocation
not conducive to initial total removal.
Incisional
biopsies can be performed with a scalpel blade, dispos-
A traumatic rostrodorsal or less commonly caudoven-
able biopsy punch, or a Tru-cut needle. A Michelle
tral temporomandibular joint dislocation may be respon-
trephine or Yamshidi needle can be used to biopsy
,ae paddoip, e um suasaid aane jeuies e royas
masses that have bone involvement. Biopsy of an orally
or with the jaws in a non-occlusal position. Due to a
visible mass should not be sampled through the skin but
large retroarticular process that forms a caudal exten-
Supaas juaaand ot uoisiout [enonnut ue yanor ran
sion of the mandibular fossa, the condylar process
of the tumor into the surrounding normal external
usually displaces rostrodorsally (figs. 5.52 a, b).
tissues.
The luxation may be unilateral or bilateral (fig. 5.53).
A pie-shaped or elliptical wedge of soft tissue is
When unilateral, the lower jaw deviates to the side
removed for incisional biopsy. Incisions on either side
opposite the luxated joint. Diagnosis of luxation alone
ui uiol o adeus A e ui asiaauos pmous asdia au jo
or luxation with fracture can usually be confirmed with
deeper sublesional tissues. The ellipse length should be
ventrodorsal closed-mouth radiographs.
 Oral Pathology
143
Figure 5.53  Right-sided temporomandibular joint dislocation computer 3-D
reconstruction of CT study.
Open-Mouth Jaw Locking
Temporomandibular dysplasia can cause joint laxity.
This may resultin mandibular shift, causing the coronoid
 process of the mandible to lock on or ventrolateral to the
Zygomatic arch. The affected cat presents with the mouth
wide open and without contact between the maxillary
and mandibular teeth. Locking usually occurs opposite
to the dysplastic joint. Palpating the zygomatic arch may
yield a prominent protrusion contralateral to the affected
Figure 5.52 a. Right-sided rostrodorsal temporomandibular joint disloca-
temporomandibular joint. The open mouth resists closure
ton computer 3D reconstruction of CT study b. Clinical appearance of right-
until either the cat frees the locked coronoid or the veteri-
sided temporomandibular joint dislocation.
narian does so under sedation or anesthesia.
Jaw Fractures
Occasionally, the fibrocartilaginous disc in the luxated
Maxillary and mandibular fractures occur most com-
joint will be torn and folded on itself, preventing the
monly from automobile trauma and falling from heights.
mandibular condyle from settling back in place or relux-
 Mandibular symphyseal separations are most common,
 ating following reduction. If the condyle does not prop-
followed by fractures of the mandibular body, mandibu-
erly reduce back into the fossa, condylectomy may be
lar condyle, maxilla, and hard palate.
 ndicated to allow functional occlusion.
Mandibular symphysis separation
The mandibles are connected to each other by means of
a fibrous symphysis (not bone). Separation of the man-
Temporomandibular Joint Ankylosis
dibular symphysis is a common condition in cats, typi-
 Temporomandibular joint ankylosis may occur second-
cally as a result of falling from a height or other blunt
ary to zygomatic arch and mandibular condyle trauma
force trauma. Radiographs are exposed and examined
leading to subsequent loss of effective joint function.
to evaluate the symphysis and adjacent structures.
Clinically, the cat will be unable to open its mouth nor-
Radiographs must be exposed and examined before
mally (figs. 5.54 a, b, c).
attempting care (figs. 5.55 a, b).
emporomandibula
oinits
zygomatic bone
mandibular
cononoid process
b
Figure 5.55 a. Mandibular symphysis separation. b. Radiograph of man-
dibular symphysis separation.
Figure 5.54 a. Temporomandibular joint ankylosis (clinical appearance).
b. Radiograph with abnormal-appearing temporomandibular joints circled.
c. Computed tomography scan confirming ankylosis.
144
 Oral Pathology
145
Coronoid Process
Condylar Process
FX
AngularProcess
Figure 5.57 Radiograph of mandibular fracture.
Berger M, Stich H, Huster H, Roux P, Schawalder P. Feline
dental resorptive lesions in the 13th to 14th centuries. J Vet
Dent 2004; 21: 206-213.
Berger M, Stich H, Huster H, Roux P, Schawalder P. Feline
caries in two cats from a 13th century archeological excava-
tion. J Vet Dent 2006; 23: 13-17.
Bertone ER, Snyder LA, Moore AS. Environmental and lifestyle
risk factors for oral squamous cell carcinoma in domestic
cats. J Vet Int Med 2003; 17: 557-562.
Figure 5.56 a. Midline hard palate defect after motor vehicle trauma.
Bonello D. Feline inflarmmatory, infectious and other oral con-
b. Radiograph of traumatic hard palate trauma.
ditions. In: Tutt C, Deeprose J, Crossley D (eds). BSAVA
Manuat of Canine and Felire Dentistry, 3rd ed. BSAVA,
Maxillary fractures
Gloucester, 2007; 126-147.
Midline maxillary fractures usually result from high-rise
or hit-by-car trauma in the cat (figs. 5.56 a,b).
a cat. J Vet Dent 2003; 20: 218-219.
Clarke DE, Cameron A. Relationship between diet, dental cal-
Mandibular fractures
culus and periodontal disease in domestic and feral cats in
Australia. Aust Vet J 1998; 76: 690-693.
Mandibular fractures are the third most common frac-
Colgin LM, Schulman FY, Dubielzig RR. Multiple epulides in
ture in cats (head of femur and pelvis fractures first and
13 cats. Vet Pathol 2001; 38: 227-229.
second in a study of 517 cats) (fig. 5.57).
Colley PA, Verstraete FJ, Kass PH, Schiffman P. Elemental
composition of teeth with and without odontoclastic resorp-
tion lesions in cats. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63: 546-550.
Further Reading
 Cotter SM. Oral pharyngeal neoplasms in the cat. J Am Anim 
Hosp Assoc 1981; 17: 917-918.
 Berger M, Schawalder P, Stich H, Lussi A. Feline dental resorp-
 DeBruijn ND, Kirpensteijn J, Neyens IJ, Van den Brand JM, van 
tive lesions incaptive and wild leopards and lions. J Vet Dent
 den Ingh TS. A clinicopathlogical study of 52 feline epulides.
1996; 13: 13-21.
Vet Pathol 2007; 44: 161-169.
Berger M, Schawalder P, Stich H, Lussi A. "Neck lesion" bei
 DeLaurier A, Allen S, deFlandre C, Horton MA, Price JS. Cyto-
Grosskatzen; Untersuchungen beim Leoparden (Parthera
kine expression in feline osteoclastic resorptive lesions. J
pardus). Kleintierpraxis 1995; 40: 537-549.
Comp Pathol 2002; 127: 169-177.
146
 Feline Dentistry
DeLaurier A, Boyde A, Horton MA, Price JS. Analysis of the
Healey KAE, Dawson S, Burrow R, Cripps P, Gaskell CJ, Hart
 surface characteristics and mineralization status of feline
CA, Pinchbeck GL, Radford AD, Gaskell RM. Prevalence of
teeth using scanning electron microscopy. J Anat 2006; 209:
feline chronic gingivostomatitis in first opinion veterinary
655-669.
practice. J Feline Med Surg 2007; 9 (5): 373-381.
DeLaurier A, Boyde A, Horton MA, Price JS. A scanning elec-
Heaton M, Wilkinson J, Gorrel C, Butterwick R. A rapid screen-
 ton microscopy study of idiopathic external tooth resorp-
ing technique for feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions. J
tion in the cat. J Periodontol 2005; 76: 1106-1112.
Small Anim Pract 2004; 45: 598-601.
Diehl K, Rosychuk RA. Feline gingivitis-stomatitis-pharyngitis.
Herring ES, Smith MM, Robertson JL. Lymph node staging of
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1993; 23: 139-153.
oral and maxillofacial neoplasms in 31 dogs and cats. J Vet
 Dubielzig RR, Adams WM, Brodey RS. Inductive fibroamelo-
Dent 2002; 19: 122-126.
blastoma, an unusual dental tumor of young cats. J Am Vet
 Ingham KE, Gorrel C, Blackburm J, Farmsworth W. Prevalence
Med Assoc 1979; 174: 720-722.
of odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a population of clini-
 DuPont GA, DeBowes LJ. Comparison of periodontitis and
cally healthy cats. J Small Anim Pract 2001; 42: 439-443.
 root replacement in cat teeth with resorptive lesions. J Vet
Klein T. Predisposing factors and gross examination findings
Dent 2002; 19: 71-75
 in periodontal disease. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract 2000; 15:
Emily P. Feline malocclusion. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
189-196.
Pract 1992; 22: 1453-1460.
Lewis JR, Okuda A, Pachtinger G, Shofer FS, Pachtinger G,
Frost P, Williams CA. Feline dental disease. Vet Clin North Am
Harvey CE, Reiter AM. Significant association between tooth
Small Anim Pract 1986; 16: 851-873.
extrusion and tooth resorption in domestic cats. J Vet Dent
Gardner DG. Ameloblastomas in cats: a critical evaluation of
2008; 25: 86-95.
the literature and the addition of one example. J Oral Pathol
Lewis JR, Tsugawa AJ. Gingival hyperplasia and granulation
Med 1998; 27: 3942.
 tissue associated with a feline dental resorptive lesion. J Vet
Gardner DG. Spontaneous squamous cell carcinomas of the
Dent 2004; 21: 23-25.
 oral region in domestic animals: a review and consideration
Lommer MJ, Verstraete FJ. Concurrent oral shedding of
of their relevance to human research. Oral Dis 1996; 2:
 feline calicivirus and feline herpesvirus 1 in cats with chronic
148-154.
 gingivostomatitis. Oral Microbiol Immunol 2003; 18: 131-
Gardner DG, Dubielzig RR. Feline inductive odontogenic
134.
tumor (inductive fibroameloblastoma): a tumor unique to
 Lommer MJ, Verstraete FJ. Prevalence of odontoclastic resorp-
cats. J Oral Pathol Med 1995; 24: 185-190.
tion lesions and periapical radiographic lucencies in cats:
Gauthier O, Boudigues S, Pilet P, Aquado E, Heymann D,
265 cases (1995-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 217:
 Daculsi G. Scanming electron microscopic description of cel-
1866-1869.
lular activity and mineral changes in feline odontoclastic
Love DN, Johnson JL, Moore LV. Bacteroides species from the
resorptive lesions. J Vet Dent 2001; 18: 171-176.
 cral cavity and oral-associated diseases of cats. Vet Microbiol
Gengler W, Dubielzig R, Ramer J. Physical examination and 
1989; 19: 275-281.
radiographic analysis to detect dental and mandibular bone
Love DN, Redwin J, Norris JM. Cloning and expression of the
resorption in cats: a study of 81 cases from necropsy. J Vet
superoxide dismutase gene of the feline strain of Porphyromo-
Dent 1995; 12: 97-100.
rus gingioalis: immunological recognition of the protein by
Gorrel C, Larsson A. Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions:
cats with periodontal disease. Vet Microbiol 2002; 86:
         i
245-256.
422-428.
Love DN, Vekselstein R, Collings S. The obligate and faculta-
Hale FA. Juvenile veterinary dentistry. Vet Clin North Am
 tively anaerobic bacterial flora of the normal feline gingival
Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 789-817.
margin. Vet Microbio1 1990; 22: 267-275.
Harley R, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Day MJ. Salivary and serum
Lund EM, Bohacek LK, Dahlke JL, King VL,Kramek BA,Logan
 immunoglobulin levels in cats with chronic gingivostomati-
El. Prevalence and risk factors for odontoclastic resorptive
tis. Vet Rec 2003; 152: 125-129.
lesions in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998; 212: 392-395.
Harley R, Helps CR, Harbour DA, Gruffydd-Jones TJ, Day MJ.
Luskin IR. Dental-related facial swelling in a cat. J Vet Dent
Intra-lesional cytokine mRNA expression in chronic gingivo-
2001; 18: 132-133.
stomatitis in cats. Clin Diag Lab Immunol 1999; 6: 471-478.
Lyon KF. Gingivostomatitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Harvey CE. Feline dental resorptive lesions. Sem Vet Med Surg
Pract 2005; 35: 891-911
Small Anim 1993; 8: 187-196.
Mallonee DH, Harvey CE, Venner M, Hammond BF. Bacteriol-
 Harvey CE, Orsini P, McLahan C, Schuster C. Mapping of the
ogy of periodontal disease in the cat. Arch Oral Biol 1988;33:
radiographic central point of feline dental resorptive lesions.
677-683.
J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 15-21.
Marretta SM. Chronic rhinitis and dental disease. Vet Clin
Harvey CE, Thormsberry C, Miller BR. Subgingival bacteria-
North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1101-1117.
comparison of culture results in dogs and cats with gingivi-
Marretta SM. Feline dental problems: diagnosis and treatment.
tis. J Vet Dent 1995; 12: 147-150.
Feline Practice 1992; 20 (5): 16-20.
Hayes A, Scase T, Miller J, Murphy S, Sparkes A, Adams V.
Meomartino L, Fatone G, Brunetti A, Lamagna F, Potena A.
COX-1 and COX-2 expression in feline oral squamous cell
 Temporomandibular ankylosis in the cat: a review of seven
carcinoma. J Comp Pathol 2006; 135: 93-99.
cases. J Small Anim Pract 1999; 40: 7-10.
 Oral Pathology
147
Murphy CJ, Koblik P, Belhorn RW, Pino M, Hacker D,
Reiter AM, Mendoza KA. Feline odontoclastic resorptive
Burling T. Squamous cell carcinoma causing blindness and
 lesions: an unsolved enigma in veterinary dentistry. Vet Clin
ophthalmoplegia in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1989; 195:
North Am Small Anim Pract 2002; 32: 791-837.
965-968.
Reiter AM, Smith MM. The oral cavity and oropharynx. In:
Muzylak M, Armett TR, Price JS, Horton MA. The in vitro effect 
Brockman DJ, Holt DE (eds). BSAVA Marual of Carine and
of pH on osteoclasts and bone resorption in the cat: implica-
Feline Head, Neck and Thoracic Surgery. BSAVA, Gloucester,
tions for the pathogenesis of FORL. J Cell Physiol 2007; 213:
2005; 25-43.
144-150.
Reubel GH, Hoffmann DE, Pedersen NC. Acute and chronic
 Nap RC, Meij BP, Hazewinkel HAW. Fractures of the mandible
faucitis of domestic cats—A feline calicivirus-induced
and maxilla in the dog and cat. Tijdschrift voor Dierge-
disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22:
neeskunde 1994; 119: 456-462.
1347-1360.
Ohba S, Kiba H, Kuwabara M, Yoshida H, Koide F, Takeishi
Roux P, Berger M, Stoffel M, Stich H, Doherr MG, Bosshard D,
M. Contact microradiographic analysis of feline tooth resorp-
 Schawalder P. Observations of the periodontal ligament and
tive lesions. J Vet Med Sci 1993; 55: 329-332.
cementum in cats with dental resorptive lesions. J Vet Dent
Ohba S, Kiba H, Kuwabara M, Yoshida H, Koide F, Takeishi
2005; 22: 74-85.
M. A histopathological study of neck lesions in feline teeth.
Sakai H, Mori T, lida T, Tokuma Y, Maruo K, Masegi T.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29: 216-220.
Immunohistochemical features of proliferative marker and
Ohba S, Kuwabara M, Kamata H, Yukawa M, Kiba H. Scanning
basement membrane components of two feline inductive
electron microscopy of root resorption of feline teeth. J Vet
odontogenic tumours. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 296-
Med Sci 2004; 66: 1579-1581.
299.
Ohmachi T, Taniyama H, Nakade T, Kaji Y, Furuoka H. Calci-
 Sapierzynski R, Malicka E, Bielecki W, Krawiec M, Osinska B,
fying epithelial odontogenic tumours in small domesticated
Sendecka H, Sobczak-Filipiak M. Oral tumors in dogs and
carmivores: histological, immunohistochemical and electron
cats: retrospective review of 143 cases. Medycyna Wetery-
microscopical studies. J Comp Pathol 1996; 114: 305-314.
naryjna 2007; 63: 1196-1199.
Okuda A, Harvey CE. Etiopathogenesis of feline dental resorp-
Scarlett JM, Saidla J, Hess J. Risk factors for odontoclastic
 tive lesions. Vet Clin North America Small Anim Pract 1992;
resorptive lesions in cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999; 35:
22: 1385-1404.
188-192.
 Pedersen NC. Inflammatory oral cavity diseases of the cat. Vet
Schlup D, Stich H. Epidemiologische und morphologische
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1323-1345.
Pettersson A, Mannerfelt T. Prevalence of dental resorptive
lesions in Swedish cats. J Vet Dent 2003; 20: 140-142.
1982; 27: 179-188.
Pope ER. Head and facial wounds in dogs and cats. Vet Clin
Schneck GW, Osborm JW. Neck lesions in the teeth of cats. Vet
North Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36: 793-817.
Rec 1976; 99: 100.
 Poulet FM, Valentine BA, Summers BA. A survey of epithelial
Seawright AA, English PB, Gartmer RJW. Hypervitaminosis A
odontogenic tumors and cysts in dogs and cats. Vet Pathol
in the cat. Adv Vet Sci Comp Med 1970; 14: 1-27.
1992; 29: 369-380.
Stebbins KE, Morse CC, Goldschmidt MH. Feline
oral
Quimby JM, Elston T, Hawley J, Brewer M, Miller A, Lappin
neoplasia: a ten-year survey. Vet Pathol 1989; 26: 121-
MR. Evaluation of the association of Bartonella species, feline
128.
herpesvirus 1, feline calicivirus, feline leukemia virus and
 Steinberg S. Histologische Untersuchungen zu Fruehveraende-
feline immunodeficiency virus with chronic feline gingivo-
 rungen der Felinen Odontoklastischen Resorptiven Laesio-
stomatitis. J Feline Med Surg 2008; 10: 66-72.
nen (FORL) an klinisch gesunden Zaehnen [thesis]. Berlin:
Reeves NC, Turrel JM, Withrow SJ. Oral squamous cell
Free University of Berlin, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine;
carcinoma in the cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1993; 29: 438-
2002.
441.
 Tannehill-Gregg S, Kergosien E, Rosol TJ. Feline head and neck
Reichart PA, Durr U-M, Triadan H, Vickendey G. Periodontal
squamous cell carcinoma cell line: Characterization, produc-
disease in the domestic cat. A histopathological study. J Peri-
 tion of parathyroid hormone-related protein, and regulation
odont Res 1984; 19: 67-75.
by transforming growth factor-beta. In Vitro Cell Develop
 Reiter AM. Feline odontolysis in the 1920s—the forgotten his-
Biol Anim 2001; 37: 676-683.
topathological studies of feline odontoclastic resorptive
 Trope M. Root resorption of dental origin: classification based
lesions. J Vet Dent 1998; 15: 35-41.
on etiology. Pract Periodont Aesthet Dent 1998; 10:
Reiter AM, Brady CA, Harvey CE. Local and systemic compli-
515-522.
cations in a cat after poorly performed dental extractions. J
Trope M, Chivian N. Root resorption. In: Cohen S, Burms RC
Vet Dent 2004; 21: 215-221.
(eds). Pathuays of the Pulp, 6th ed. Mosby-Year Book, St.
Reiter AM, Lewis JR, Okuda A. Update on the etiology of tooth
Louis, 1994; 486-512.
resorption in domestic cats. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Umphlet RC, Johnson AL. Mandibular fractures in the cat: a
Pract 2005; 35: 913-942.
 retrospective study. Vet Surg 1988; 17: 333-337.
Reiter AM, Lyon KF, Nachreiner RF, Shofer FS. Evaluation of
Van Wessum R, Harvey CE, Hennet P. Feline dental resorptive
calciotropic hormones in cats with odontoclastic resorptive
lesions: prevalence patterms. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
lesions. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66: 1446-1452.
Pract 1992; 22: 1405-1416.
148
Feline Dentistry
Verstraete FJ. Anomalous development of the upper third
Verstraete FJM, Terpak CH. Anatomical variations in the denti-
 premolar in a dog and a cat. J S Afr Vet Assoc 1985; 56:
tion of the domestic cat. J Vet Dent 1997; 14: 137-140.
131-134.
White SD, Rosychuck RAW, Janik TA, Denerolle P, Schultheiss
Verstraete FJ, van Aarde RJ, Nieuwoudt BA, Mauer E, Kass PH.
P. Plasma cell stomatitis-pharyngitis in cats: 40 cases (1973-
The dental pathology of feral cats on Marion Island, part I:
1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 1992; 200: 1377-1380.
 congenital, developmental and traumatic abnormalities. J
Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Domestic feline oral and dental
Comp Pathol 1996; 115: 265-282.
disease, Veterinary Dentistry-Principles and Practice, Lippin-
Verstraete FJ, van Aarde RJ, Nieuwoudt BA, Mauer E, Kass PH.
cott-Raven, Philadelphia, 1997; 482-517.
The dental pathology of feral cats on Marion Island, part
Williams CA, Aller MS. Gingivitis/stomatitis in cats. Vet Clin
 I: periodontitis, extermal odontoclastic resorption lesions
 North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1361-1383.
and mandibular thickening. J Comp Pathol 1996; 115:
 Zetmer K, Steurer I. The influence of dry food on the develop-
283-297.
ment of feline neck lesions. J Vet Dent 1992; 9 (2): 4-6.
Section Il
Treatment
Chapter 6
Eauipment
Acquiring the proper equipment to perform feline den-
Oral Assessment Instruments
tistry is one of the wisest investments a practitioner can
and Materials
make. There is no other branch of small animal practice
wherein a relatively modest financial investment can
 Mouth props or gags, which can be placed between
provide such benefit to the patient, client, and practice
the maxillary and mandibular canines or cheek teeth
(fig. 6.1).
to keep the mouth open during dental procedures
Choosing how much equipment, materials, and edu
(placing spring loaded props between canines is
cation to obtain is an individual decision. If feline den-
 generally not recommended due to potential for iat-
tistry is only a small part of the practice, the veterinarian
rogenic damage to the teeth and/or temporoman-
 may want to acquire only basic equipment and materi-
dibular joints (figs. 6.2 a,b).
als. If advanced dentistry is the goal, additional instru-
 mluminated dental magnification telescopes (fig.
ments, materials, and training are needed.
6.3).
 Dental mirror (fig. 6.4)
Sterile instrument holders (figs. 6.5 a,b)
Education Tools
 Operator safety equipment (goggles, mask, gloves)
(fig. 6.6)
Veterinary Dental Techniques, Holmstrom et al.,
 Dental radiography (fig. 6.7)
Saunders, 1999
口
unit for exposure
Veterinary Dentistry: Principles and Practice, Wiggs
口
 film, digital sensor or CR phosphor plate
and Loprise, Lippincott, 1998 
D
processor—analog (chairside, or automatic) or
Small Animal Dental Equipment, Materials, and
digital
Techmiques, Bellows, Blackwell, 2004.
Dental explorer (fig. 6.8)
     s 
Periodontal probe (fig. 6.9)
and Colmery, Iowa State University Press, 1999
+
Charts for dental examination
Atlas of Canine & Feline Dental Radiography;
Dental models (figs. 6.10 a,b,c)
Mulligan, Aller, and Williams; Veterinary Learning
Systems; 1998
An Introduction to Veterinary Dentistry; Johnston;
an interactive multimedia CD-ROM dental educa-
Oral Treatment and Prevention
tion course comprised of six chapters, including
Instruments and Materials
video clips; www.vetschools.ac.uk
The Journal of Veterinary Dentistry
Ultrasonic scaler with multiple tips (figs. 6.1la,b)
Veterinary Dentistry, Harvey and Emily, Mosby,
 Polishing equipment—disposable polishing angle,
1993
polishing paste (fig. 6.12)
The Practice of Veterinary Dentistry: A Team Effort,
Gracey curette feline mini 1/2, 5/6, 9/10, 13/14
Bellows, Iowa State University Press, 1999
(Cislak)
Atlas of Dental Radiography in Dogs and Cats,
Molt periosteal elevator (figs. 6.13 a,b,c)
DuPont and DeBowes, Saunders, 2009.
 Freer periosteal elevator (fig. 6.14)
151
Figure 6.1 Four-station dental operatory, All Pets Dental, Weston, Florida
(Midmark manufacturing case work and dental stations).
Figure 6.2 a. Leopold mouth gag (Cislak). b. Proper placement of mouth 
gag between canines.
Figure 6.3 Magnification and illumination telescopes (Perioptix).
152
SEE-THRU/SELF SEALING
ADA
SELF-SEAL
STERILIZATION
Figure 6.4 Dental mirror.
Figure 6.5 a. Sterile instrument pouch. b. Sterile extraction pack.
Figure 6.6
 Operator safety equipment.
Figure 6.7 Intraoral radiology.
153
Figure 6.8 Dental explorer (Cislak).
Figure 6.9  Periodontal probe (Cislak).
Figure 6.10 Dental teaching models: a. Henry Schein. b. Columbia Denti-
form. c. Shipp Laboratories.
154
Spatula
Perio
Universal
+
Figure 6.11  a. Ultrasonic scaler (Midmark). b. Piezoelectric tips.
155
Figure 6.12 Low-speed polishing handpiece with disposable polishing tip.
Figure 6.13 Molt periosteal elevators: a. Peri EX-9 small (Cislak). b Peri
EX-9 Large (Cislak). c. Peri EX-7 Large (Cislak).
Figure 6.14  Freer periostal elevator (Cislak).
156
 Equipment
157
Figure 6.15 a-d. Wing-tipped elevators (EXW1-4 Cislak). e. Short-handle, wing-tipped elevator set (Miltex).
Winged-tipped elevators (figs. 6.15 a,b,c,d,e)
High-speed, low-speed handpiece with contra angle
Extraction forceps (figs. 6.16a,b)
attachment (figs. 6.19 b,c)
Caries curette (fig. 6.17)
Assortment of burs: round, inverted, pear, fissure
Root tip elevator (figs. 6.18 a,b)
(fig. 6.20)
High-speed/low-speed delivery system (Ultima
Home care products
Dental) (fig. 6.19 a)
Figure 6.16 a and b. Extraction forceps (Cislak).
Figure 6.17  Caries curette (Cislak).
Figure 6.18 a and b. Root tip elevators (Cislak).
158
UTNTADEAITALSTEMNS5O
Figure 6.19 a. High-low-speed delivery system (Ultima Dental). b. High-
speed handpiece. c. Low-speed handpiece with contra angle and polishing
attachment (circled) (Midmark manufacturing whip style).
Figure 6.20  Assorted high-speed burs.
159
160
Feline Dentistry
Endodontic Instruments and Materials
remove plaque and fresh calculus. Most cats requiring
scaling present with chronic calculus and plaque
1
K-files 21mm long, width sizes 8 to 40
accumulation.
 23 gauge and 27 gauge blunted endodontic needles 
The sonic scaler unit requires continuous air pressure
 Sodium hypochlorite solution
papaau st (du r<) 1ossanduos aliel Aaagean y isd o jo
Root canal conditioner, file lubricant
for power. If the delivery system is oxygen-, nitrogen-
Mixing slab and spatula
or carbon dioxide-driven, use of sonic scalers can
Paper points: 30mm long, various widths
consume large volumes of gas, which might not be
Gutta percha
financially feasible. Daily lubrication is necessary for
Spreaders: small
maintenance.
 Pluggers: small
Zinc  oxide-eugenol  or  non-eugenol  endodontic
Ultrasonic Scaler
canal sealer (Sealapex-Kerr)
Calcium hydroxide powder and paste
 Utrasonic scalers are classified as magmetostrictive or
College tipped pliers
piezoelectric. Magmetostrictive units use ferromagnetic
Etching gel
stacks or ferrite rods to produce tip vibration. Ferromag-
 Bonding resin and brush
netic stacks are strips of laminated nickel attached with
 Composite restorative
solder. When the operator wants to remove plaque and
 Plastic matrix strips
calculus from above the gingiva, the standard P-10 or
Curing light
beavertail insert is selected. When subgingival use is
planned, magnetostrictive thin, long subgingival After-
Five (Hu-Friedy) and SLI Slimline (Dentsply Cavitron)
Orthodontic Instruments and Materials
inserts can be used safely.
When an alternating electrical current is supplied to a
Orthodontic buttons
wire coil in the magnetostrictive handpiece, a magnetic
Bracket cement
field is created around the stack or rod transducer,
Elastics—Masel chain
causing the tip to constrict and relax. This vibration
energizes the water as it passes over the tip, producing
a scouring effect to remove plaque, calculus, and stains.
Power Scaling
 Bubbles are created which implode, affecting bacterial
cell walls in the gingival sulcus. The water mist also
Professional calculus and plaque removal (scaling) is
cools the tip and irrigates debris.
performed by using hand instruments or scalers powered
A piezoelectric scaler is activated by dimensional
by elecricity, compressed air, or gas while the cat is
changes in crystals housed within the handpiece as elec-
anesthetized. Powered scalers increase the speed and
tricity is passed over the surface of the crystals. The
efficiency of teeth cleaning.
resultant vibration produces tip movement (fig. 6.21).
There are three types of power-driven scalers: sonic,
When choosing an ultrasonic scaler, frequency, tip
ultrasonic, and rotary. Because of the potential for iatro-
motion, and potential iatrogenic injury must be consid-
genic damage to the gingiva, dental hard tissues and the
ered. Magnetostrictive advocates claim elliptical tip
 pulp, techniques for rotary scaling are not discussed in
motion is most effective because it generates pathogen-
this text.
destroying cavitation bubbles 360 degrees around the
tip. In contrast, the piezo desigm creates bubbles only at
the two ends of the back-and-forth cycle. The sonic
Sonic Scaler
scaler does not produce cavitation bubbles.
The sonic (subsonic) scaler is attached to the high-speed
outlet of an air-or gas-driven delivery system. Sonic
Frequency
scalers have a wide amplitude (0.5mm) compared to
ultrasonic scalers (0.01-0.05 mm). This wider amplitude
 Frequency is the number of times the scaler tip vibrates
may result in greater cementum removal when the scaler
each second. A variety of frequencies are available
is used subgingivally compared to the ultrasonic scaler
a sann osm jo sa an a u
equipped with a periodontal tip for subgingival use.
higher frequencies (above 40,000 CPS) may provide
Additionally, sonic scaler tips vibrate at low frequencies
 greater efficiency.
ranging between 3,000-9,000 CPS (ultrasonic 20,000-
Ultrasonic scaling units are also available in manual-
 50,000 CPS). The lower frequency is best used to
tuning or auto-tuning models. Some researchers feel that
Equipment 
161
compares the tip in use with an original. A loss of one
millimeter of the tip equals a 25% loss of efficiency. A
two millimeter loss of the tip equals a 50% loss in effi-
ciency and the tip should be replaced.
The magnetostrictive types of ultrasonic tips are
changed with a pull-out/push-in action. O-rings are
used in the handpiece and on the instrument to provide
'aexel raem puaaaid ot reas e pue  uon e
Piezocelectric scalers require a wrench to unscrew one
tip and to replace it with another.
 Magnetostrictive inserts and piezoelectric tips should
be cleaned and sterilized after each use. To clean, rinse
thoroughly or immerse in an ultrasonic instrument-
cleaning unit for 20 minutes. After removal, rinse the
 inserts with tap water and dry before packaging and
sterilizing in a steam autoclave or gas sterilizer.
S
Virtually all brands of magnetostrictive inserts of the
AT
same frequencies are interchangeable. Most 30kHz units
ELE
will operate only with 30kHz inserts (a 25kHz insert
will not fit into the handle). Most piezoelectric scalers
use tips designed specifically for each brand of scaler,
 Jo jno sao ramem a j uanqoid e saieann ym
business.
Power Scaling Technique
Follow these steps for the sonic/ultrasonic technique:
1.  Hold the handpiece lightly in a modified pen grasp;
Figure 6.21  Piezoelectric ultrasonic scaler.
ie., the scaler is held in the dominant hand
with the pads of the index finger and thumb oppo-
site to each other on the handle closest to the
 better cavitation is achieved at low power settings if the 
working end. The thumb and index finger are not
scaler is slightly mistuned. Because auto-tuned scalers
touching, thereby creating a tripod effect with
perfectly tune to the insert's frequency, a manually
the middle finger placed along the shank of the
tumed scaler would be preferred.
instrument. This tripod effect balances the instru-
ment in the operator'shand to provide stability and
Tip Activity and Surfaces
control by keeping the index finger and thumb
separated.
The activity of piezoelectric scalers is limited to the last
2.
 The ultrasonic instrument should be grasped
 3mm of the tip. Magnetostrictive metal stack tips are
lightly, not tightly. It should feel balanced in the
active at the last 4 mm of tip; the magnetostrictive ferrite
hand, with minimal pull from the handpiece cord.
rod scaler is active a full 12 mm of the tip.
The handpiece, not the hands, must be allowed to
 The most powerful surfaces of the magnetostrictive
do the work. The handpiece is balanced on the
stack scaler tip are the underside and the top; the lateral
 index or middle finger. A modified pen grasp is not
sides are the least active. To prevent trauma to the tooth
as important in holding the ultrasonic or sonic
surface, only the lateral sides should be used against the
scaler as it is with hand instruments. To decrease
tooth or within the gingival sulcus. The ferroceramic
stress on the hand from the pull on the handpiece
(ferrite) rod tip is equally active on all sides.
cord, the cord may be looped over the litle finger
(fig. 6.22).
3.
 Use eye, ear, and respiratory protection.
Tip Replacement
 Hold the fulcrum or finger rest at a distance further
Tip wear is critical to the efficiency of the scaling proce-
from the tooth than with hand instruments, because
dure. Tip wear can be evaluated using a chart which
the tips do not have cutting edges.
162
Feline Dentistry
Figure 6.22  Proper finger position.
Figure 6.23  Adjusted mist for ultrasonic scaling.
 5.Adjust water spray to deliver a steady drip with a
High/Low Speed Delivery Systems
small mist halo (fig. 6.23).
6.
Apply light pressure to the tip working in a coro-
Compressed air or gas can be used to power handpieces
nal-to-apical direction. The sound waves should do
for polishing, tooth sectioning, endodontics, restoration,
most of the work. Efficiency decreases with
and oral surgery. The advantages over motorized
increased pressure.
systems lie in the capability of precise cutting at higher
7.
. Pass the side of the working end over calculus and
speed, and water cooling to prevent thermal damage to
plaque in short, light vertical strokes. The scaler
the pulp and surrounding bone.
should not be used on a single tooth for too long to
The compressor provides pressurized air for the air-
avoid iatrogenic damage. Heavy lateral pressure
water syringe and handpieces. Compressor size is
should be avoided.
important. The required capacity of the compressor is
8. Keep the lateral surface working end in constant
related to the number of operatories and handpieces
motion. Leaving it in one place too long increases
used at the same time in the practice. The compressor
the amount of tooth material removed and can
dt  g assd  n noa a aq ssn
cause thermal damage to the pulp. Never hold the
at a flow rate of 3 cubic feet per minute. When the com-
tip perpendicular to the surface of the tooth. This
pressor is too small, it will run almost continuously
will either etch or groove the surface.
during use and may overheat. If a sonic scaler or more
9.
 Specially designed  subgingival periodontal tips
than one station is used, a minimum of a 1hp compres-
 may be used subgingivally. To avoid iatrogenic
sor is recommended.
 injury, decrease the power with subgingival use.
 Compressors are either air- or oil-cooled. Air-cooling
10.
After ultrasonic tooth cleaning is completed, use air
reduces the amount of contaminants (oil) in the line, but
from the air/water syringe to gently blow the gin-
can be noisier and usually more expensive than oil-
 gival margin away from the tooth and examine the
cooling. Modified refrigerator oil-cooled compressors
tooth surface for missed calculus.
("silent" compressors) are commonly used in smaller
Equipment
163
self-contained delivery systems. Unfortunately, when
using an oil-cooled compressor, small particles of oil
 become mixed with the compressed air, which might
contaminate
tooth
surfaces,
interfering
with
restoration.
Compressors for dental delivery systems are attached
either to the unit (self-contained) or located remotely
in a nearby cabinet, closet, attic or outside the clinic.
The advantages of remote compressors include the
following:
 Less noise occurs in the operatory.
+
Multiple
stations
may
beattachedto one
compressor.
 Less storage is required in the immediate operatory
area.
The storage or air tank holds air compressed by the
 compressor. This stored air is used to power the dental
handpieces and air/water syringe. Air tanks come in
 , ss  'azis n a  a sis 
compressor needs to do. Pressure inside the air storage
tank varies by manufacturer between 80-120psi. When
 maintenance pressure is reached, the compressor turns
off. When the tank pressure drops below 60psi, the
compressor turns on to refill the tank with compressed
air.
The assembly delivery system (control panel) contains
the air /water supply syringe, tubing for the handpieces,
 pressure gauge(s), switches for turning water on and off,
needle valve to adjust water flow and a switch to change
from the high- to low-speed handpiece. The control
panel may be part of a cart or mounted on the dental
table (figs. 6.24 a,b).
The foot pedal starts and stops the system and in some
Figure 6.24 a. Control panel, airwater syringe, handpieces, and ultrasonic 
units controls handpiece speed.
scaler (Midmark). b. Nitair Il (CBi).
Nitrogen-Powered Delivery Systems
Dental  handpieces  are precision-built  mechanical
devices designed for use with rotary instruments, such
Some delivery systems use nitrogen to power hand-
as burs, stones, wheels, and discs. Handpieces can be
 pieces. Nitrogen, an inert gas, can provide clean, oil-free
classified according to the revolutions per minute (RPM)
power, which may extend the handpiece life. Because
or speed at which they operate. Handpieces that run
r siapu se u paaap Aap st amed
under 100,000 RPM are classified as slow speeds. Models
sors and air storage tanks are not necessary. There is no
-Mols se paisse[o are NdY 0o0'ol-ooo'oz ie Suuun1
electrical requirement and no compressor noise. Addi-
speed type II mid speed. Low speed is a subcategory of
tionally, nitrogen-driven delivery systems require less
slow speed. The handpieces commonly used in veteri-
maintenance than air-driven units. The typical cost of 
 nary medicine run less than 20,000 RPM and are classi-
st uasonin 'ampaoid 1ad os'tsn ueu ssa[ si uasonu
fied as slow-speed type II low speeds.
not recommended to power air-driven sonic scalers
The (s)low-speed (straight) handpiece commonly
because of the large volume of gas needed (figs. 6.25 a,b).
used in veterinary dentistry:
A  g p si s   
system. The syringe produces a stream of air, water or
Rotates at 5,000-20,000 RPM
a spray, for rinsing debris from the teeth and drying as
Contains forward and reverse controls
needed during dental procedures (fig. 6.26).
Operates with high torque
Figure 6.25 a. Nitrogen-powered high-low-speed delivery system (CBi). b. Portable delivery system.
164
Equipment 
165
Figure 6.26  Three-way airwater syringe.
Generally does not use water (although some are
The disposable plastic single-use prophy angle is
water-equipped)
preferred by the author because of reduced cross-
 Is used for polishing
contamination, lack of maintenance, ease of operation
 Is available as one- or multiple-section units
 and low expense.
 The one-section straight handpiece accepts cutting
 The oscillating disposable prophy angle rotates 45
degrees and reverses. Advantages of the oscillating dis-
and polishing burs desigmated as handpiece (HP). An
HP designation means that the cutting or polishing
posable prophy angle include decreased heat generated
-jod au u nes reu d ssan pue anems yooi au uo
instrument has a long, straight shaft that inserts directly
ishing cup.
 into the straight handpiece and is tightened by rotating
High-speed handpieces are used when rapid and effi-
the collar clockwise. A prophy head, right-angled hand-
cient cutting of the tooth and/or supporting bone is
piece or contra-angle may also attach to the one-section
needed. High-speed handpieces are air-powered to
unit.
 300,000-400,000 RPM. To avoid overheating, an irriga-
 The multiple-section, slow-speed handpiece is com-
tion spray is automatically delivered over the operative
E pue 1oiou paads (ad1 ueadoma) 2 Mol e jo pasod
field. When choosing the handpiece style, a pediatric
straight nose cone with a reduction gear to drive the
head gives the operator improved access in small
'aue-enuos 1o anaidpuey palbue-ubi 'peay Audoid
animals. Some high-speed handpieces have a fiber-optic
 Many units have a method of quickly connecting and
 disconnecting the motor and attachments.
light built into the head. The light projects a beam from
the head of the handpiece directly onto the bur and
The contra-angle attaches to the slow-speed straight
 handpiece to form an extension with an angle greater
tooth.
High-speed handpieces use friction grip (FG) burs.
than 90 degrees at the working end. Angulation pro-
Attaching a bur to the high-speed handpiece is an
vides better access to the posterior teeth. The contra-
 easy procedure. The chuck is tightened by thumb control
angle's main use is powering burs for finishing
[eaouai-/Suniasu-mq e Suisn Aq 1o raaal u-Hmq 10
restorations and Gates Glidden drills for pulp chamber
tool.
and root canal enlargement.
 The head of the contra-angle attachment contains
either a latch or a friction type chuck, into which a dental
 bur or other rotary instrument is fitted. Latch-type con-
Rotary Cutting Instruments
tra-angles hold the end of the cutting instrument by
mechanically grasping a small groove on the end of the
Rotary cutting dental instruments are used to:
 instrument shaft. Right angle (RA) designates latch-type
burs. Friction grip (FG) burs have short, smooth shafts
Section multi-rooted teeth and/or remove part of
without retention grooves.
the buccal alveolus, thus facilitating extraction.
166
 Feline Dentistry
Perform alveoloplasty to smooth out sharp
Fissure burs have grooved heads and are useful for
projections.
sectioning teeth and reducing crown height. The sides
Provide access points for root canal therapy.
of straight fissure burs are parallel. The sides of taper
Reduce
MOID
height in crown
1
reduction
fissure burs converge toward the tip. Fissure burs may
procedures.
also contain cross-cuts along the blades (called cross-cut
 Remove part of the maxilla or mandible.
fissure burs), which act like saw teeth to allow additional
cutting ability. The size of straight fissure burs ranges
 Burs are instruments placed into the dental hand-
from 56-58L, that of cross-cut straight fissure burs from
piece. Burs consist of two parts:
556-558L and that of taper fissure burs from 699-703.
(1) The shaft fits into the handpiece.
Diamond burs have industrial diamond grit embed-
(2) The head is the cutting end.
ded into the working surfaces. Diamonds are used in
many places that carbides the tooth to receive are, and
especially in restorative dentistry to prepare the tooth to
Operative Bur Types
posite restorations.
 Carbide steel burs (carbides) are used for cutting and are
 Trimming and finishing burs are designed for com-
the most commonly used burs.
pleting restorations, odontoplasty and alveoloplasty
Diamond points (diamonds) are burs covered with
The more flutes on a finishing bur, the finer will be the
 industrial diamond grit used for crown preparation,
finish (a 30-fluted bur, also known as a fine finishing bur,
bone smoothing (alveoloplasty),
 scarification
and
produces a smoother finish than does a 12-fluted bur).
shaping teeth (odontoplasty).
Stones are used for polishing and finishing restora-
tions. Stones are mounted on a mandrel (mounting
device), which is inserted into the handpiece. Stones are
Three Types of Bur Shanks
identified by color. White stone burs are commonly used
in veterinary dentistry to finish composite restorations
Straight handpiece burs have long straight shanks. In
or to smooth minor enamel defects. Green stones are
 dental supply catalogs, they are abbreviated as SH or
used to finish amalgam and smooth enamel. Gray stones,
HP.
 made of carborundum and rubber, are used for polish-
Latch-type burs have notched shanks and are abbrevi-
ing fabricated crowns.
ated as LA (latch-type angle) or RA (right-angled).
Finishing discs are used to shape and smooth restora-
Friction grip burs have smooth shanks, which are
tions. They are available in various grades of abrasive-
smaller in diameter than HP burs. They are used in high-
ness, from coarse to superfine and are used sequentially
speed handpieces. Friction grip burs are identified as
from coarse (to shape restorations) to fine grade (to
FG, FGS (friction grip surgical) or FGSS (friction grip
smooth surfaces). The finest-grade disk is used with a
short shank used for tight areas and restorations).
paste.
Surgical burs have longer (25mm) shanks used to
reach into deep recesses; restorative burs are shorter
(20mm).
Bur Care
Burs are surgical cutting instruments and should be
Bur Shapes and Sizes
dleaned and sterilized before each use. To remove debris
lodged in the bur head, the bur is removed from the
Burs come in several sizes, represented by numbers. The
 handpiece then rinsed, brushed free of debris with a
lower the number in a series, the smaller the bur head.
nylon or wire bur brush (or pencil eraser) and soaked in
 Round burs are most commonly used to open the pulp
a cold sterile solution for 24 hours.
chamber in preparation for endodontic treatment, bone
smoothing and root atomization. Their sizes range from
0.25-10.
Equipment Maintenance
Inverted cone burs are wider at the tip with slightly
 rounded corners for added protection against chipping.
Dental handpieces are precision instruments and must
Their sizes range from 33.5 to 37L (L indicates long).
Inverted cones at one time were used to create undercut
maximum life. The veterinarian or technician should
restoration sites for filling. Unfortunately, inverted cones
check with the manufacturer's instructions for specific
may leave unsupported enamel at the restoration site.
care.
Equipment 
167
 A generic lubrication/sterilization process consists of
Condensation in the air storage tank accumulates with
these steps:
each use. The accumulated fluid should be drained
weekly to monthly depending on use and ambient
1.  At the end of each procedure, scrub the handpiece
humidity.
-njos Suueap pue ysniq e 1o 'asuods e 'aznes um
tion to remove debris.
2.
 Following the manufacturer's instructions, rinse the
Infection Control
handpiece without immersion.
3.
 Dry the handpiece with gauze, paper towel, or air
Disinfection is the process of destroying microbial life
 from the air/water syringe.
by placing instruments in a solution (example: Cidex)
4. For handpieces requiring lubrication, add three
for a specified period. Chemical disinfection does not
drops of lubricant to the smaller of the two large
eliminate all viruses and spores.
holes (drive air tube) at the conmection area. Note:
Sterilization kills all microorganisms. The autoclave is
Some handpieces are lubrication-free and will be
a steam chamber for sterilizing instruments. During the
destroyed if lubricated; check manufacturer's
sterilization cycle, distilled water flows into the chamber
instructions.
and is heated to create steam. Because the chamber is
5.
 Briefly power the handpiece with the bur inserted to
 sealed, pressure increases to approximately 15 pounds
remove excess lubricant.
 per square inch. The increase in presure causes the heat
6.
 Place the handpiece in an autoclavable envelope.
of the steam to rise to approximately 250°F. When the
7.
 Sterilize the handpiece in the autoclave.
instruments are exposed to this high pressure/steam
temperature for 15 minutes or more, sterilization occurs.
Dental instruments used in the mouth should be sterile.
Replacing the High-Speed Turbine
After cleaning, instruments can be placed in an autoclav-
able see-through sleeve and sterilized.
The turbine is secured in the high-speed handpiece head
 Patient and operator infection control requires the
by a screwed faceplate. After the faceplate is unscrewed
following:
 using the manufacturer-supplied tool, the turbine can be
An individual set of sterilized instruments should
 easily replaced.
be used on each patient. Human dentists have developed
To clean and lubricate the low-speed handpiece and
aggressive infection control procedures in response to
 attachments, use the following steps:
spreading HIV and hepatitis among patients and staff.
1.  Place the working end of the handpiece into a small
 Many of these protocols can be adopted in veterinary
 bottle of handpiece-cleaning solvent.
hospitals for similar reasons. Viral and bacterial particles
2.
Power the handpiece backward and forward for one
may become lodged in the paste remaining on the head
minute.
of the prophy angle and transmitted to the next patient
3.
 Remove the handpiece from the cleaner and wipe
even if the prophy cup is changed. Disposable prophy
AIp
angles or autoclaved metal angles are recommended for
4. Periodically, disassemble the handpiece, using the
all feline patients to prevent spread of feline leukemia
special wrench furnished by the manufacturer
virus and feline immunodeficiency virus. Polishing paste
5.
 Following the manufacturer's instructions, place
 is available in individual cups or in bulk form in a supply
 one drop of liquid lubricant on the neck of the head,
container. When using the bulk container, the paste
one drop on each gear of the gear and shaft assem-
should be applied with a new and clean tongue depres-
bly, and three drops into the back end of the angle.
 sor to avoid contaminating the container.
Alternatively, place heavy lubricant (petroleum
 A mask, gloves, and ear and eye protection should be
jelly) on the gears of the handpiece before
worn when performing dental care. The oral cavity
reassembly.
should be rinsed with a 0.12% chlorhexidine solution
before oral procedures to reduce the number of bacteria
that could enter blood vessels of the patient (bacteremia)
Compressor Maintenance
or become aerosolized during power scaling. The
patient's head should be angled downward to promote
Oil-cooled compressors are equipped with a dipstick or
drainage.
view port to monitor the oil level. The owner's manual
 High-speed delivery system fluid lines can develop a
should be checked for the recommended replacement oil
biofilm of potentially harmful viruses and bacteria.
if needed. Some compressors are "oil free" and do not
Chlorhexidine can be used to flush the fluid lines, thus
require oil maintenance.
decreasing the viral and bacterial load.
168
Feline Dentistry
Further Reading
Lipscomb V, Reiter AM. Surgical materials and instrumenta-
tion. In: Brockman DJ, Holt DE (eds). BSAVA Marual of
Canine and Feline Head, Neck and Thoracic Surgery. BSAVA,
Deeprose J. Operator safety and health considerations. In: Tutt
C, Deeprose J, Crossley D (eds). BSAVA Marual of Canine and
Gloucester, 2005; 16-24.
Feline Dentistry, 3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 56-66.
Robinson J. Dental instrumentation and equipment.  In:
Gorrel C, Penman S. Dental equipment. In: Crossley DA,
Tutt C, Deeprose J, Crossley D (eds). BSAVA Marual of
Penman S (eds). Marual of Small Animal Dentistry, 2nd ed.
Carine and Feline Dentistry, 3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007;
BSAVA, Cheltenham, 1995; 12-18.
67-76.
 Wiggs RB, Lobprise HB. Dental equipment, basic materials and 
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Small animal dental equipment and
materials, Small Animal Dentistry, Mosby, St. Louis, 1993;
supplies,
Veterinary
Dentistry-Principles and Practice,
378-400.
Lippincott-Raven, Philadelphia, 1997; 1-54.
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER. Dental equipment and
care,Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animat Practi
tioner, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 39-129.
Chapter 7
Anesthesia
General anesthesia is necessary for the oral assessment,
gival space between the gum and the root), where peri-
treatment, and prevention visits. The American Veteri-
odontal disease is active. Because the patient cooperates,
nary Dental College (AVDC) created a position state-
dental scaling ofhuman teeth performed by a professional
ment (below) regarding the need for general anesthesia
trained in the procedures can be completed successfully
to provide companion animal dental diagnostics and
without anesthesia. However, access to the subgingival
therapy (fig. 7.1).
area of every tooth is impossible in an unanesthetized
canine or feline patient.Remoual of dental tartar on the
visible surfaces of the teeth has little effect on a pet'shealth
Non-Professional Dental Scaling (NPDS)
and provides a false sense of accomplishment. The effect
is purely cosmetic.
In the LInited States and Canada,only licensed veterinarians
3.
Inhalation anesthesia using a cuffed endotracheal tube
provides three important aduantages—the cooperation
includes veterinary surgery, medicine, and dentistry. Anyone
of the patient with a procedure it does not understand,
providing dental services other than a licensed veterinarian,
elimination of pain resulting from examination and treat
o a supervised and trained veterinary technician, is practic
ment ofaffected dental tissues during the procedure,and
ing veterinary medicine without a license and shall be subject
protection of the airway and lungs from accidental
to criminal charges.
aspiration.
Although the term "Anesthesia-Free Dentistry" has been
4.
A complete oral examination, which is an important part
used in this context, AVDC prefers to use the more accurate
of α professional dental scaling procedure, is not possible
term Non-Professional Dental Scaling (NPDS) to describe
in an unanesthetized patient. The surfaces of the teeth
this combination. This position statement addresses dental
facing the tongue cannot be examined,and areas of disease
scaling procedures performed on pets without anesthesia,
and discomfort are likely to be missed.
gftenbyindividuals untrainedinveterinarydental
Safe use of an anesthetic or sedative in a dog or cat requires
techniques.
evaluation of the general health and size of the patient to
Owners of pets naturally are concerned when anesthesia is
determine the appropriate drugand dose,and continual moni-
required for their pet. However, performing NPDS on an
toring of the patient. Veterinarians are trained in all of these
procedures. Prescribing or administering anesthetic or seda-
1.Dental tartar is firmly adhered to the surface of the teeth.
Scaling to remove tartar is accomplished using ultrasonic
is illegal.
and sonicpower scalers,plus hand instruments that must
Although anesthesia will never be 100% risk-free, modern
have a sharp working edge to be used effectively. Even
anesthetic and patient evaluation techniques used in veteri-
slight headmovementbythe patientcouldresult ininjury
nary hospitals minimize the risks, and millions of dental
to the oral tissues of the patient, and the operator may be
aa uahyona paufiad hpafos ain sainpaod Suus
bitten when the patient reacts.
nary hospitals.
2. Professional dental scaling includes scaling the surfaces
To minimize the need for professional dental scaling proce-
of the teeth both above and below the gingival margin
dures and to maintain optimal oral health, the AVDC recom-
(gum line),followed by dental polishing. The most critical
mends daily dental home care from an early age. This should
part of a dental scaling procedure is scaling the tooth
surfaces that are within the gingival pocket (the subgin-
accumulation of dental plaque,such as dental diets and chew
169
170
Feline Dentistry
Abnorma
Teledto
BckAVBnYOM
Figure 7.1  Patient anesthetized, temperature control assist Bair Hugger@,
Cardell@ monitor Matrix? anesthetic unit attached to adjustable height
START
hydraulic table (Canis Major, Midmark).
materials. This, combined with periodic examination of the
Figure 7.2 a. ECG evaluation software (DVM Solutions). b. Preanesthesia
patient by a veterinarian and with dental scaling under anes-
blood pressure evaluation (DVM Solutions).
thesia when indicated,will optimize life-long oral health for
dogsand cats.
For general information on performance of dental proce-
dures on veterinary patients, please read the AVDC Position
Anesthesia Protocols
Statement on Veterinary Dental Healthcare Providers, which
is auailable on the AVDC website (www.AVDC.org). For
Anesthesia protocols vary by patient age, condition,
information on effective oral hygiene products for dogs and
morbidity factors, and length and type of procedure.
cats, visit the Veterinary Oral Health Council website (www.
Local anesthetics are used on all dental surgical cases
VOHC.org).
where tissue is incised (see Table 7.1 at end of chapter).
Preanesthetic Evaluation
Premedication
All anesthetic patients require proper preanesthetic
An intravenous catheter is placed and fluids are admin-
evaluation including a detailed history, physical exami-
istered in all patients undergoing anesthesia.
nation, and laboratory testing. Patients with preexisting
Premedication for healthy cats may include hydro-
medical conditions may need further evaluation to
morphone 0.1 mg/kg IM or SC or butorphanol 0.2 mg/
modify the anesthetic protocol (figs. 7.2 a, b).
kg IM or SC combined with dexmedetomidine 0.0025 to
Hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and chronic renal
0.01 mg/kg IM (fig. 7.3).
 disease are common feline diseases requiring special
 As cats become more debilitated or aged, butorphanol
anesthetic attention. Generally, unless the patient is in
0.2mg/kg IM or SC or hydromorphone 0.05-0.2 mg/kg
 pain, conditions yielding abnormal test values should be
IM or SC with 0.2-0.4 mg/kg midazolam IM can be
corrected before dental care is rendered.
considered.
Anesthesia
171
must be considered when anesthetizing older or ill
patients.
Etomidate
Etomidate (0.5-1.5mg/kg IV) is the induction drug of
choice for patients that have cardiovascular disease or
Butler
arrhythmias (except A-V dissociation) because cardiac
TORPHAJECT
output and blood flow to the kidneys are maintained.
However, there have been reports of hemolysis in cats
Figure 7.3  Preanesthetic medication.
after etomidate injection. A premedicant (e.g., butorpha-
nol IV, SC, IM; diazepam; or midazolam IV) should be
For fractious cats presenting without feline hyper
administered prior to etomidate administration.
trophic cardiomyopathy, a combined dose of mede-
tomidine HCl 0.01-0.02 mg/kg, plus buprenorphine
0.01-0.02mg/kg, ketamine HCl 1-3mg/kg, and butor-
Pain Control
phanol tartarate 0.1 mg/kg are mixed in one syringe and
administered IM; for fractious cats with feline hyper-
Anesthesia protocols linked to pain control (in addition
trophic cardiomyopathy, low-volume medetomidine
 to local anesthesia) include the following:
(0.005 mg/kg) plus butorphanol tartarate 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
plus or minus midazolam HCl 0.2mg/kg may be
 Expected mild to moderate pain-buprenorphine
administered.
0.01-0.03IM, IV sublingually mg/kg plus mid-
All patients should be individually assessed and a
azolam 0.2mg/kg, plus 0.0005-0.075 mg/kg dexme-
 patient-specific anesthetic premedication protocol devel-
detomidine (0.0025-0.005μg/kg).
oped, as the above are simply examples of typical pre-
Expected moderate- to high-level pain—-hydromor-
medication protocols.
phone 0.1 mg/kg plus midazolam 0.2mg/kg, plus
dexmedetomidine 0.0005-0.075mg/kg (0.5-7.5μg/
kg).
Induction
There are many feline anesthesia protocols for the
Intubation
healthy young to middle-aged cat.
All cats placed under anesthesia for oral assessment and
treatment must be intubated and the airway secured
Chamber or Mask Induction
with an inflatable cuff. Topical lidocaine may be applied
Chamber or mask induction should be avoided due to
to the laryngeal mucosa to facilitate passage of the endo-
catecholamine release during the excitement phase from
tracheal tube.
the struggle against restraint or as a reaction to the
The endotracheal tube should be secured before the
 pungent odor of the inhalant anesthetic agent.
cuff is inflated. The cuff should be inflated to a light seal.
Overinflation of the endotracheal cuff must be avoided.
Subcutaneous emphysema and pneumothorax have
Propofol
 Occurred during or after anesthesia in cats anesthetized
Propofol (2,6-diisoproylphenol) (3-4 mg/kg IV; 3 mg/kg
for dental care. It is critical that anytime the head is
if opioid is given as a premedicant), with half of the dose
moved from side to side during assessment or dental
given as a slow bolus over 40-60 seconds the rest to
treatment, the endotracheal tube be disconnected from
effect, is a nonbarbiturate hypnotic. Slightly higher
the anesthesia machine and reconnected after the new
doses are required for cats than dogs, and recoveries are
position is reached (figs. 7.4 a, b).
longer in cats than dogs when the infusion lasts more
 than 30 minutes due to decrease in glucuronide conjuga-
tion. Propofol provides no analgesia in the cat. Propofol
Maintenance
is a direct myocardial depressant resulting in both
venous and arterial relaxation, thus creating hypoten-
Anesthesia is generally maintained with isoflurane or
sion. This hypotension is well recognized clinically and
sevoflurane and oxygen. Litfle isoflurane or sevoflurane
172
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 7.5 a. Hot Dog@ patient warmer b. Bair Hugger@ used below the
patient.
to support body temperature. It is much easier to prevent
hypothermia than to treat it (figs. 7.5 a, b).
Preparation of the Anesthetized
Dental Patient
Figure 7.4 a. Lateral thoracic radiograph before anesthesia. b. Pneumotho-
rax, pneumomediastinum, and pneumoabdomen secondary to endotracheal
tube-induced tracheal tear.
to absorb debris is controversial. Danger lies in gauze
entering the esophagus and either being vomited after
 the surgical procedure is completed or ingestion leading
is metabolized. The insolubility of the inhalants allows
to gastrointestinal obstruction.
for a rapid induction and recovery.
 In the author's opinion, packing the pharymgeal
 Patient body temperature control is necessary. Long
area with gauze is not necessary because the seal pro-
anesthetic procedures coupled with the frequent use of
vided by the endotracheal cuff is sufficient to prevent
water and the ambient room temperature may create
[sims jo uogendse on Aiepuonas Amju snuasone!
hypothermia. In a risk determination study of 138 anes-
debris.
thetized cats, 71 (51%) had rectal body temperatures
≤35°℃ (95°F); the lowest recorded temperature was
28.8°C (83.8°F). Prolonged anesthesia dramatically
Monitoring
 increased the risk of hypothermia. In addition to the
 increased infection rate seen in hypothermic patients,
Often, dental assessment results in a treatment plan that
there is increased risk of fatal ventricular arrhythmias in
 requires multiple hours of anesthesia. Constant monitor-
patients with body temperatures <33 *℃. Bair Huggers?,
ing of the cat's physiological status is critical to a consis-
Therma-drapes@, warm water circulating blankets, low-
tent positive outcome.
flow anesthesia, a heat and moisture exchanger, plastic
 Monitoring is accomplished through clinical appear-
wrap, leg wraps, radiant heating (Hot Dog @ patient
ance as well as electrical monitoring systems. During
warming system), and warmed fluids may all be used
anesthesia the cat should have minimal jaw tone and
Anesthesia
173
Marnitol is particularly useful in well-hydrated geri-
atric cats with chronic renal failure (with normal cardiac
function) to ensure diuresis. The dose of mannitol is
Bluetooth
0.25-0.5 g/kg IV over 15-20 minutes.
Anesthesia may be induced with a combination of
propofol and diazepam. Ketamine and barbiturates
rices.withpuf.co
should be avoided. Maintenance with isoflurane is stan-
dard. Hypotension should be closely monitored and if
present adjusted with crystalloid administration.
IAYAV
Hyperthyroidism
Solartron
Chronic unregulated hyperthyroidism can result in cats
that present thin, azotemic, with hypertrophic cardio-
myopathy, and with multiple oral issues, including
Figure 7.6  Wireless monitor with esophageal probe.
tooth resorption, oropharangyeal inflammation, and
periodontal disease. If possible, patients should be
euthyroid before anesthesia. Patients with enlarged
hearts on thoracic radiographs should have echocardio-
 grams performed before anesthesia.
Anesthesia protocol in the controlled hyperthyroid cat
96
should be tailored to prevent catecholamine release,
avoid arrhythmias, and promote normal blood pressure.
120
Premedication with an opioid is advised due to its
80
50
calming effect and minimal cardiovascular compromise.
 Midazolam, etomidate, and diazepam are considered
100
safe to use for induction.
98
Ketamine should be avoided. Barbiturates may also
increase heart rate and should not be used. Propofol, a
30
'uaned Aeau au u uonepauad padasse Aerauas
0.1
0.0
98.8
71.610.
61.9
3.7
can also impair myocardial function in the ischemic
57.310.
52.0
myocardium and should be used with caution.
 Patient monitoring during anesthesia is critical, espe-
Figure 7.7 Monitor display (DVM Solutions).
cially with regard to blood pressure measurement and
ECG. Hypotension can usually be managed with proper
intravenous fluid  administration  without overload.
palpebral reflex. The pulse should be palpable and the
Patients  with  hypertrophic 
 cardiomyopathy have
 perfusion time should be two seconds or shorter Breath-
decreased compliance and ventricular volume. Dopa-
 ing during anesthesia should be even and regular.
mine administration may be useful to increase blood
Electronic monitoring includes electrocardiogram,
 pressure to ensure adequate renal perfusion. Cardiac
blood pressure, pulse oximetry, and end tidal CO2.
tachyarrhythmias may be managed with propanolol.
Apnea, temperature monitoring, and respiratory rate
 are additionally helpful in assessing the cat's response
Diabetes Mellitus
to anesthesia (figs. 7.6, 7.7).
Diabetes mellitus requires special consideration in the
 feline dental patient. Anesthesia should be scheduled in
Medical Conditions Requiring
the morning to avoid normal diurnal fluctuations of
Tailored Protocols
blood glucose levels. The client should be instructed to
give the patient only half the normal amount of insulin
the day of surgery.
Renal Disease
 Unless the cat has secondary organ compromise,
Some cats with kidney disease may be dehydrated due
generally there are no specific medications to avoid
to their inability to concentrate urine. The dehydration
for induction or anesthetic maintenance. Diabetes can
should be corrected before anesthesia if possible
lead to neutrophil dysfunction and impaired wound
174
Feline Dentistry
healing.  Intravenous antibiotics  (ampicillin)  can be
Benefits of Local and Regional Anesthesia
 administered at induction and six hours later if surgery
Decreased
 pain
pue Sump
 after
 surgical
is performed.
Blood glucose levels should be monitored at least
procedures
Decreased
every thirty minutes. Adjustment with either intrave-
risk
of
vagally
mediated reflex
bradycardia
nous glucose or insulin should be administered to
Lower inhalant anesthetic requirement; decreased
maintain blood glucose concentrations between 100
and 200mg/dL. Periodic blood glucose monitoring
minimum alveolar anesthetic concentration needed
after recovery is also recommended until the patient is
to provide analgesia
 Less immediate postoperative analgesic medication
stable.
needed
Improved level of anesthesia, thus decreasing the
Local/Regional Anesthesia
variation of anesthetic depth when painful stimula-
tion occurs
 Pain management must be instituted when approaching
the feline surgical patient. General anesthesia is not suf-
Indications for Local and Regional Anesthesia
ficient to control dental pain. Local and regional anes-
thesia not only help decrease pain before, during, and
Surgical and nonsurgical extractions
Root canal therapy
 after surgery, but also result in lessinhaled general anes-
thesia due to decreased hyperventilation.
 Mandibulectomy, maxillectomy
 Jaw fracture repair
1
Vital pulp therapy
Regional Analgesia
Periodontal procedures including flaps, gingivec-
A similarity exists in the way dogs, cats, and humans
tomy, and oronasal fistula repair
feel dental pain. Regional anesthetics are agents that
Oral mass incision or excision
when injected decrease or halt nerve conduction in a
limited area of the body.
Contraindications for Local and Regional
Regional anesthesia occurs after depositing an appro-
Anesthesia
priate agent in close proximity to a nerve innervating the
 area intended for dental treatment. Following the injec-
 Local anesthetic agents may not be effective when
tion, anesthetic molecules move by diffusion into the
 injected into a region of increased acidity (e.g., area
nerve, blocking its normal action. Local anesthetics work
of infection).
by inhibiting the influx of sodium ions into the nerve
 Epinephrine-potentiated local anesthetics should
axon, preventing the development of the action poten-
 not be used in cardiac patients.
tial necessary for sensory propagation along the axon.
 The loss of sensation can be complete when properly
Duration
administered.
 The trigeminal nerve is responsible for the sensory
The action of a local anesthetic will continue until the
innervation of the oral cavity. The maxillary teeth, as
concentration is carried away by the vascular system to
 well as maxillary soft and hard tissues, are innervated
other tissues. Local anesthetics are metabolized primar-
 by the maxillary nerve, which branches into the infraor-
ily in the liver and excreted through the kidneys.
bital nerve. The mandibular nerve branches into the
Anesthetic duration is related to the amount of medi-
lingual nerve, which innervates the tongue and the infe-
cation bound to proteins in the nerve membrane. The
rior alveolar nerve, which branches into the mental
 greater the binding affinity to nerve proteins, the longer
nerves.
the duration of action. For example, the increased protein
To obtain complete anesthesia following an injection,
binding of bupivacaine compared with mepivacaine
 the nerve must be permeated by a sufficient concentra-
causes a two- to fourfold increase in the bupivacaine's
tion of the anesthetic base to inhibit conduction in all
duration. A similar relationship exists between lidocaine
fibers. Induction is the length of time from the deposi-
and its longer-acting analogue etidocaine. Local anes-
tion of the anesthetic solution to complete and effective
a na aiensn Auaiod isaeaa a aaeu ie sa
conduction blockage. The action of a local anesthetic
longest duration of action.
continues until the concentration is carried away by the
Local anesthetics are vasodilators. Vasoconstrictors
bloodstream. Duration is the length of time from induc-
(epinephrine) incorporated into the local anesthetic
tion until the reversal process is complete.
solution enhance the duration and effectiveness of anes-
Anesthesia
175
thesia, decrease systemic toxicity by lowering the blood
The infraorbital foramen lies as a depression in the
concentrations of the anesthetic, and decrease local
alveolar mucosa apical to the distal root of the maxillary
bleeding at the injection site.
third premolar The distal extent of the infraorbital canal
can be estimated by palpating the caudal ventral margin
Local and Regional Anesthesia Equipment
of the bony orbit. Advance the needle rostrocaudal (hor-
izontal) to the entrance of the foramen. Before injection,
Disposable l-cc tuberculin syringes equipped with a
aspirate the syringe in several directions to make sure
 0.75- or 1.5-inch, 27-gauge needle are most commonly
the tip is not located intravascular.
used, although human dental local anesthetic adminis-
To desensitize caudal to the maxillary fourth premolar
tration syringes that allow one-hand aspiration can also
on the same side of the injection, advance the 0.63-inch
be used in cats.
needle through the infraorbital foramen and several mil-
limeters into the infraorbital canal. 50% more anesthetic
Dosage
(not to exceed 2mg/kg) is slowly injected for 30-60
seconds. After injection, digital pressure is applied over
A combination of 0.5% bupivacaine hydrochloride with
the foramen for 1 minute to force the agent to diffuse
epinephrine (Marcaine@, 1mg/kg) and lidocaine 2%
caudally into the infraorbital canal (figs. 7.8 a, b, c). This
(1 mg/kg) in a 4:1 ratio is commonly used in veterinary
block will not likely anesthetize the maxillary molar
dentistry. Mixing 0.8mL of bupivacaine with 0.2mL of
located 3-4 mm caudal to the injection site.
 lidocaine in the same tuberculin syringe accomplishes
the 4:1 ratio. The recommended volume for regional
anesthesia is 0.1-0.3 mL per injection site. Maximum
Maxillary nerve block
 patient dosage of this mixture would be 0.1 mL/kg, or
The maxillary nerve block desensitizes the palatal soft
approximately 0.25mL/jaw quadrant in case all quad-
tissues, dentition, lip, and bone on the injection side of
 rants need anesthesia in a 5-kg cat.
the maxilla.
The middle and caudal maxillary alveolar nerves
enter the maxilla on the ventral floor of the orbit and
Injection Precautions
innervate the molar and premolar teeth. To adequately
Injection into a blood vessel can alter cardiac function.
block these nerves, the anesthetic agent needs to be
To be careful that the solution is not being injected
introduced in the rostroventral aspect of the orbit into
 nto a vessel, the operator needs to aspirate before
the pterygopalatine fossa, with an approach from the
injecting.
ventral orbital rim. The injected area is rich in neurovas-
cular structures supplying the eye. For this reason the
Nerve Blocks
infraorbital block is preferred.
With the cat's mouth open, palpate the zygomatic arch
Desensitization of the teeth occurs mainly through the
where it meets the maxilla between the fourth premolar
 pulp. Regional anesthesia is obtained by injecting the
and molar Direct the needle next to the bone and
anesthetic solution in the proximity of the nerve trunk.
advance dorsally along the caudal aspect of the notch to
a level just beyond the root tips. Aspirate the needle and
Infraorbital nerve block
 Branches of the infraorbital nerve supply sensory inner-
vation to the maxillary dental arcade. The caudal maxil-
lary alveolar nerve, which branches off the infraorbital
Middle mental nerve block
nerve before it enters the infraorbital canal, innervates
The middle mental nerve block anesthetizes the lingual
the caudal maxillary teeth. Within the infraorbital canal,
and buccal soft tissues of the mandibular incisors and
the middle maxillary alveolar nerve branches to supply
canine on the side injected, as well as the third premolar
the middle maxillary teeth. The rostral maxillary alveo-
when the needle contents are deposited inside the
lar nerve branches off the infraorbital nerve just before
foramen. If the anesthetic agent is deposited outside of
its exit from the infraorbital canal. This branch supplies
the foramen, only the buccal soft tissues from the canine
nnervation to the maxillary canine teeth and incisors.
forward to the midline will receive analgesia.
The infraorbital artery and vein travel with the infraor-
Locate the middle mental foramen in the center of the
bital nerve within the canal and should be avoided whern
 space between the mandibular canine and third premo-
injecting the local anesthetic agent. Regional anesthesia
lar, then half the distance between dorsal and ventral
placed deep in the infraorbital foramen desensitizes the
borders of the mandible under the lip frenulum. Insert
maxillary premolar, canine, and incisor teeth on the 
 the needle through the foramen aspirate and inject (figs.
same side of the injection.
7.10 a, b).
 Infraorbital Foramen
Mental Block
Middle Mental Foramen
Figure 7.8 a-c. Infraorbital nerve block.
ZygomaticArch
MaxillaryNerveBlock
MaxillaryForamen
Figure 7.9
176
Anesthesia
177
Figure 7.10  a. and b. Middle mental nerve block.
Mandibular nerve block
Systemic Analgesia
The mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve exits the
foramen ovale, dividing into the anterior and posterior
 During dental procedures, cats experience pain similar
branches. The posterior divides into the lingual and
to that of humans, and they need to have their
mandibular nerves. The mandibular nerve reenters the
pain controlled. In pain management, the choice of
mandibular foramen on the medial surface just rostral
 medication varies depending on the anticipated level of
to the angle of the mandible to occupy the mandibular
discomfort.
canal.
The opioid family of medication is recommended for
 The mandibular nerve can be anesthetized by intra-
 controlling dental pain in cats. When oral surgery is
oral or extraoral techniques. The mandibular nerve is
planned, use of an opioid in premedication, as well as
located 0.5-1 cm from the ventral border of the mandi-
 intraoperatively, will provide pain control while waiting
ble. The mandibular nerve block will desensitize the
for the regional nerve block to take effect.
mandibular body, the lower portion of the mandibular
 Butorphanol has a duration of effect for pain control
ramus, all mandibular teeth on the same side, the floor
of 1-2 hours, oxymorphone 1.5-3 hours, and morphine
of the mouth, the rostral two thirds of the tongue, the 
2-4 hours. Morphine is unpredictable in its onset of
gingiva on the lingual and labial/buccal surfaces of the
effect and duration of action. This may be due in part to
mandible, and the mucosa and skin of the lower lip and
the cat's low capacity for hepatic glucuronidation. Post-
chin.
operatively, the author prefers oral buprenorphine,
 When using the intraoral approach, infiltrate the man-
which provides 8-10 hours of analgesia.
dibular nerve where it enters the mouth at the angle of
the jaw. Gently "walk" the needle along the medial
Constant Rate Infusion (CRI)
border of the mandible just caudal to the last molar.
 Then advance the needle toward the angular process to
 CRI is being used more widely to provide analgesia both
 an area half the dorsoventral width of the mandible.
intraoperatively and perioperatively. CRI avoids the
Aspirate the syringe, then deliver the anesthetic agent at
peaks and troughs in the plasma levels when the medi-
the location of the mandibular foramen.
cations are given as repeated injections. The aim of the
When using the author-prefered transcutaneous
infusion is to maintain the plasma level of the drug
(extraoral) approach, clip and prepare a small area of
within the therapeutic range.
skin ventromedial to the angle of the mandible just
In order to perform a CRI, an opioid is selected and
rostral to the angular process. Insert the needle at a
the dose calculated for a specific period of time. The total
point ventral to the lateral canthus. Direct the tip medi-
dose is then drawm up into a syringe and administered
ally along the border of the mandible. Aspirate the
e 0l pappe si H 1o idumd auis e Sursn aun 1aao
I' s se sasae a iau mo u 'ss
volume of fluids, and then the fluids are administered
a, b, c).
at a specific rate for the desired period of time.
MandibularNerveBlock
MandibularForamen
Extraoral MandibularNerveBlock
MandibularForamen
Figure 7.11 a. Extraoral approach to mandibular nerve block. b. and c. Transcutaneous approach to the mandibular nerve block.
178
Anesthesia
179
Table 7.1. Analgesic and anesthetic medications.
NDC50458-033-05
One (25μg/h) System
Medication
Dosage
DURAGESIC25wg/h
 Bupivacaine
1-2 mg/kg regional block
(FENTANYLTRANSDERMALSYSTEM)
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.03mg/kg q 6-8h SC,IM,IV sublingual q 6-12h
In vivo deliveryof25ug/h fentanyl for72hours
Butorphanol
0.2-0.4mg/kg SC, IM, IV q 2-4h 
NOTFORACUTEORPOSTOPERATIVEUSE
0.5-1 mg/kg orally q 6-8h
Each transdermal system contains:
Carprofen 
1-4mg/kg SC. preoperatively,then 2mg/kg orallylimit
2.5mg fentanyl and 0.1ml alcohol USP
sAep OM4
KEEP OUT OF REACH OF CHILDREN
Codeine
0.5-2.0 mg/kg orally q 6-12h
Rxonly
Fentanyl
25 μg/kgrh transdermal patch
Loading dose 1-2 μg/kg IV, then CRl 1-4μg/kg/h IV
JANSSEN
Gabapentin 
3mg/kg orally q 24h
00125351
Hydromorphone 0.02-0.05 mg/kg SC, IM, IV q 2-6h 
 Ketamine
Loading dose 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV, then CRI 10-20 μg/kgy
Aabans ane uwryz ua auns huunp Al uu
Figure 7.12 Fentanyl transdermal patch.
 for up to 18 hours (60 mg ketamine in 1000ml of
Lactated Ringers Solution given at 2 mL/kgyh)
Ketoprofen
1-2 mgykg IM or SC once, then 0.5-1 mg/kg PO, SC q
 24h for a maximum of 5 days
Techniques for setting up a CRI involve the use of a
Lidocaine
Maximum 2 ml total dose (0.25-0.5 mg/kg slow IV)
 syringe pump or a fluid pump, and the drug to be used
Medetomidine
Al loueydioing yo aunjon jenba yum byr6no'l
is administered slowly at the botle concentration or
(producing heavy sedation and not recommended if
 diluted in maintenance fluids. During surgery, it is rec-
planning on proceeding to general anesthesia)
ommended that the drug be administered separately
Before surgery with atropine + opiate: 5-10 μg/kg IM
from the maintenance fluids since fluid boluses are com-
 After surgery used alone: 4-8μg/kg IM
monly used under anesthesia to treat hypotension and
After surgery with opiate: 2-4μg/kg IM
blood loss.
(After surgery piate is given at one-half the dose used
A CRI commonly used is a combination of butorpha-
 in premedication; e.g., butorphanol at 0.2-0.4 mg/kg in
 nol and ketamine that can be infused continuously (e.g.
 premedication is used at 0.1-0.2 mg/kg after surgery)
12 mg butorphanol and 60 mg ketamine in one liter of
Meloxicam
0.3 mg/kg SC once
a (/x/ 7-1 ie uaa uoos s,ra1 pa
0.2mg/kg orally q 24h ×1 day, 0.1 mg/kg P0 q 24h ×2
CRI can be continued after surgery is completed in order
days (extra-label)
to ease recovery.
Morphine
0.05-0.2 mg/kg SC, IM q 4-6h
0.02-0.1 mg/kg IV q 1-4h 
Transdermal Pain Patch
 Postoperatively, CRI 0.1-0.3 mg/kg/h (morphine is 
delivered in 3-4 mL/kg/h fluids)
Fentanyl delivered transdermally through an adhesive
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC, IV, q 1-3h 
si uied y/n sz v ued ponuo o diau osie m ye
 Piroxicam 
0.3mg/kg PO q 24-72h for a maximum of 7 days
recommended for small to medium sized cats. The patch
should be placed in a location where the patient or small
Tramadol
4mg/kg orally q 12h
children cannot access it, and covered with a bandage.
The patch can be applied the evening before surgery to
ensure serum levels are appropriate preoperatively.
Postoperative Analgesia
 is approximately 6-8 hours, with maximum effect at 12
hours. The patch may stay applied for up to 4 days.
Buprenorphine is an effective opioid for pain control in
Butorphanol should not be used while waiting for onset
the cat. The small volume, ease of administration, and
of analgesia from the fentanyl patch, as it is a competi-
lack of undesirable side effects make it suitable for home
five antagonist and will decrease the patch's effective-
administration. The buccal or transmucosal route results
ness. In addition, warming devices may accelerate
in an onset of action in 20-30 minutes and a duration of
fentanyl's absorption (fig. 7.12).
8-12 hours.
180
 Feline Dentistry
Further Reading
Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, Permell RT. Tracheal
American College of Veterinary Anesthesiologists. Suggestions
1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc 2000; 216: 1592-1595.
for monitoring anesthetized veterinary patients (available at
Reuss-Lamky H. Administering dental nerve blocks. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 2007; 43: 298-305.
www.acva.org/professional/position/monitor.htm).
Beckman BW. Pathophysiology and management of surgical
 Richey M. Anesthesia and pain management in dental and oral 
 and chronic oral pain in dogs and cats. J Vet Dent 2006; 23:
procedures. In: Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER (eds).
50-60.
Veterinary Dentat Techniques for the Smalt Animat Practitioner,
Hale FA, Anthony JMG. Prevention of hypothermia in cats 
3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 601-624.
 during routine oral hygiene procedures. Can Vet J 1997; 38:
Robertson SA, Lascelles BDX, Taylor PM, Sear JW. PK-PD
297-299.
[o pue snouaaeu :sieo u aundrouandnq jo Sunapou
Hardie EM, Spodnick GJ, Gilson SD, Benson JA, Hawkins EC.
 transmucosal administration. J Vet Pharmacol Therap 2005;
Tracheal rupture in cats: 16 cases (1983-1998). J Am Vet Med
28: 453-460.
Assoc 1999; 214: 508-512.
Rochette J. Regional anesthesia and analgesia for oral and
 dental procedures. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER (eds). Regional and
local anesthesia. Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small
2005; 35: 1041-1058.
 Silva MLA, Santana MI, Araujo LV, Elston F. Topography and
Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004;
625-636.
anesthetic blockage of mandibular nerve in cats. Rev Port
Joubert K, Tutt C. Anaesthesia and analgesia. In: Tutt C, Dee-
Cienc Vet 2006; 101: 187-192.
Woodward TM. Pain management and regional anesthesia for
 prose J, Crossley D (eds). BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline
Dentistry, 3rd ed. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 41-55.
the dental patient. Top Comp Anim Med 2008; 23: 106-114.
Mazzafero E, Wagner AE. Hypotension during anesthesia in
Zetmer K, Rausch WD, Weissensteiner J, Kruzik P, Steurer I.
dogs and cats: recognition, causes, and treatment. Comp
 Pain relief after dental treatment in cats. Praktische Tierarzt
Cont Ed Pract Vet 2001; 23: 728-737.
1996; 77: 678-682.
Chapter 8
Treatment of Periodontal Disease
 Goals of periodontal therapy include removing irritants
 Stage 4 advanced periodontitis occurs where there
and debris from the tooth surfaces and periodontal
is greater than 50% loss of periodontal support.
pockets, and minimizing pocket depth and attachment
Extraction is generally the treatment of choice.
loss while maintaining at least two millimeters of
attached gingiva.
Plaque and Calculus Removal
 Periodontal therapy ranges from removing plaque
and calculus in cases of gingivitis, to mucogingival
 Plaque and calculus can be removed by hand using fine
surgery, to extracting affected teeth. Periodontal therapy
 curettes or with the help of ultrasonic scalers equipped
decisions should be made by evaluating clinical and
with periodontal tips.
radiographic examination results together with client
 Utrasonic sound waves are composed of alternate
 input concerning expectation, finances, and ability to
compressions and rarefactions. During the low-pressure
provide essential after care.
rarefaction cycle, microscopic bubbles are formed.
Stage of disease at the time of the oral assessment
Through
dictates the recommended therapy (table 8.1). Gingivitis
the
 high-pressure compression cycle, the
bubbles collapse or implode. These implosions produce
is confined to gingival soft tissue inflammatory changes.
Periodontitis is diagnosed when there is loss of tooth
 support from the peridontium.
Table 8.1.
Summary of periodontal therapy.
Stage 1 disease is characterized by gingival inflam
mation without loss of periodontal support. Radio-
Stage
Disease
Description
Therapy
graphs are developed and examined to give more
nformation about additional pathology present.
Stage 1  Gingivitis
Inflammation without 
Supragingival scaling.
Gingivitis is treated with plaque and calculus
periodontal support loss 
irrigation, and 
 removal, polishing, and irrigation of the crowm and
polishing 
the gingival sulcus. Once the irritating plaque and
Stage 2  Early
Inflammation, swelling.
Supragingival and
calculus are removed, the gingiva returns to normal
periodontitis 
 gingival bleeding upon
 subgingival scaling.
as long as home care is instituted.
probing, with up to 25%
irrigation, and 
 Stage 2 early periodontitis is present when there is
periodontal support loss
 polishing
less than 25% loss of periodontal support. Stage 2
Stage 3 Established
 Inflammation, edema,
 Supragingival and
disease is treated as above, plus removal of plaque
periodontitis 
 gingival bleeding upon 
 subgingival scaling.
and calculus from the exposed root surface (subgin-
probing, pustular
irrigation, and
gival scaling root planing) and gingival curettage.
discharge, moderate bone
 polishing; extraction
 Stage 3 established periodontitis exists when 25%
loss, between 25% and
of affected teeth if 
to 50% of the periodontal support is lost. The prog-
50% periodontal support 
 owner cannot provide
nosis is better when there are nonpocket defects
loss
home care
compared to pocket defects, which readily accumu-
Stage 4  Advanced
 Inflammation, edema,
Extraction of affected
late oral debris after the oral assessment, treatment,
periodontitis 
 gingival bleeding upon
teeth
and prevention (Oral ATP) visit. Efforts of plaque
probing, pustular
discharge, tooth mobility.
and calculus removal versus extraction must be
marked (>50%)
weighed against the ability to provide daily home
periodontal support loss 
care.
181
182
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 8.2 Adjusted ultrasonic spray.
Figure 8.1  Anesthetized cat for oral ATP visit.
shock waves (cavitation) that disrupt the bacterial cell
wall and lead to bacterial cell death. Additionally, acous-
tic streaming occurs when a continuous torrent of water
 produces tremendous pressure within the confined
space of the periodontal pocket, resulting in a decreased 
number of bacteria. Gram-negative, motile rods in par-
ticular are sensitive to acoustic streaming because of
their thin cell walls.
Operator and Patient Protection
To protect from bacterial aerosols and other effects of
ultrasonic scaling, the operator should wear a surgical
mask, ear protection, gloves, glasses, and/or a face
shield, surgical cap, and smock.
The anesthetized patient should have artificial tears
Figure 8.3 Proper position of ultrasonic scaler against crown surface.
ophthalmic preparation applied to the corneal surfaces
[  m  p p w nd c
recumbency, the cat's head should be cushioned to
 protect the eye closer to the table surface from abrasion
and to raise it off the table to prevent water contamina-
tion. The upper eye should be draped to protect it from
Adjust water spray to deliver a steady drip with a
fomites and from prolonged exposure to the procedure
small mist halo (fig. 8.2).
light (fig. 8.1).
3.
Apply the side of the scaler lightly to the crown in
The mouth is rinsed with 0.12% chlorhexidine gluco-
a coronal-to-apical direction. The sound waves
 nate or acetate before the scaling begins.
should do most of the work. Efficiency decreases
with increased pressure.
4.
Keep the lateral surface working end in constant
Supragingival (Above the Gum Line)
motion. Leaving it in one place too long increases
Scaling
 the amount of potential heat or mechanical damage
to the tooth or gingiva. To prevent enamel damage,
 Hold the ultrasonic handpiece lightly at a distance
never hold the tip perpendicular to the surface of the
further from the tooth than with hand instruments.
tooth (fig. 8.3).
Treatment of Periodontal Disease
183
Subgingival (Below the Gum Line)
Scaling
Calculus, coated with bacteria, left on the root surface
contributes to the progression of periodontal disease. If
subgingival calculus removal is not performed, the teeth
have not been adequately cleaned.
 Subgingival root cleaning can be accomplished with
curettes or special ultrasonic, thin, periodontal tips man-
ufactured specifically for root surface use. When there is
fine curette can be inserted with the face of the blade
flush against the tooth. When the instrument reaches the
bottom of the pocket, the working angulation of the
instrument-usually anywhere between 45 and 90
degrees--is established. The instrument is then pushed
against the tooth and pulled coronally. This process is
 repeated until all subgingival calculus is removed (fig.
8.4).
 To avoid iatrogeric injury when using the ultrasonic
scaler with periodontal tips for removal of plaque and
 calculus, decrease the power and increase the amount of
water irrigation.
Figure 8.4  Thin curette (NvO Cislak).
 After ultrasonic tooth cleaning is completed, use air
from the air/water syringe to gently blow the gingival
margin away from the tooth, and examine the tooth
surface for missed plaque and calculus. Water from the
from the sulcus or pocket after cleaning.
Air polishing uses sodium bicarbonate to "sandblast"
the tooth surface smooth in addition to or as a replace-
ment for conventional polishing. The small size of cat
Tooth Polishing
teeth generally precludes air polishing due to potential
iatrogenic damage to the gingiva.
 Polishing smoothes minor enamel defects and removes
 some of the plaque missed during previous steps.
Regardless of how careful scaling and curettage are per-
Fluoride Application
formed, minor defects (microetches) of the tooth surface
occur. Polishing teeth decreases the surface area of
Potential fluoride advantages in veterinary dentistry
 @namel and cementum microetches, retarding plaque
 include reduction in tooth sensitivity from exposed den-
reestablishment.
tinal tubules, decreased plaque accumulation, increased
 Tooth polishing can be accomplished by applying pol-
enamel resistance to acid demineralization, and a client-
ishing paste on the prophylaxis cup attached to a slow-
pleasing cherrylike aroma after application (FluraFom
 speed handpiece. Cross-contamination can be avoided
Virbac Products).
between different cats by using disposable polishing
 Fluoride can be applied while the cat is anesthetized,
angles and individual paste cups. When polishing, light
after the teeth are cleaned and polished and before the
a8pa dns au igum qooi yoea ol pandde st anmssaid
plaque barrier gel OraVet@ is applied. Both the gel and
flares. Care must be taken not to hold the cup on one
foam have a pH of 3.0, which may cause gastric irritation
 spot for more than a few seconds to prevent overheating
and nausea if swallowed; it is therefore administered in
and subsequent damage to the pulp. Cementum and
the clinic while the patient is still intubated and has a
dentin are softer than enamel. When exposed from
barrier in the oropharynx.
gingival recession, they should be polished for a few
Fluoride is deposited in the gingival sulcus with a
seconds only to avoid further wear.
cotton-tipped applicator, a soft toothbrush, or a foam
184
 Feline Dentistry
1311-801-05
MAL HEALTH
ORAL HYGIENE
F
FluraFom"
1.23%Acidulated
TopicalFluorideFoam
Figure 8.5 Fluoride.
applicator and is allowed to remain in contact with the
tooth surface for three minutes. When using fluoride
 paqqni s uon a jo uout je-auo Aaeuxidde 'ueoy
over the teeth. After three minutes, the foam is removed
with suction or with a dry gauze sponge. Irrigation is
not used after fluoride application (fig. 8.5).
Barrier GEL
 OraVet? (Merial) can be applied to the crown and root
to provide a barrier against plaque attachment. The
Figure 8.6 a. OraVet@ professional application kit. b. Applying OraVet@
pap uo aiaap roieidde ue yim pandde st ia Axem
to the tooth surface during anesthesia. c. Applying Oravet? supra- and
teeth at the gingiva/tooth interface before the cat is
 subgingivally with a polishing cup.
 awakened from anesthesia (figs. 8.6 a, b, c).
The at-home product should be applied weekly to
 ment, treatment, and prevention visit, followed by
 help prevent plaque accumulation.
weekly application, showed significant decrease in the
In a double-blind study on OraVet?, those cats treated
amount of plaque accumulation compared with controls
with the professional application during the oral assess-
during the fifty-six-day evaluation period.
Treatment of Periodontal Disease
185
Antibiotics
tion. Chlorhexidine can devitalize periodontal liga-
ment cells and interfere with attachment.
 Bacterial load in the mouth and bacteremia can be sig-
2.
Create an access flap with interdental and sulcular
 nificantly decreased when the oral cavity is rinsed with
incisions. Plane the root smooth with a curette and
Q12% chlorhexidine gluconate after general anesthesia
 remove excess granulation tissue.
 is induced and before tooth cleaning or oral surgery.
Add four to six drops of the patient's blood, sterile
Antibiotics are not indicated in most patients with
water, or saline to 0.5 mL of the graft material in a
periodontal disease. The goal of periodontal therapy is
dappen dish.
to remove the cause of inflammation--plaque, calculus,
4.
Mix the liquid and granules (e.g., Consil?) in the
or periodontal pockets. Treating the infection with anti-
dappen dish with a spatula for tern seconds to achieve
biotics but without mechanical debridement will at best
ou hl Aidde pue pues jam un jo Kouaisisuos a
the defect area. Alternatively, carry the granules to
the development of resistant pathogens.
the defect and mix with the patient's blood. In two
In stage 3 and 4 periodontal disease, antibiotic use is
to three minutes, a chemical change occurs within
 controversial but may be indicated. Choosing the appro-
the granules that initiates the process of bone regen-
 priate antibiotic can be challenging. One in-vitro study
eration. Consil Putty@ can also be applied into the
found either amoxicillin-clavulanic acid or cefadroxil
defect.
most effective against gram positive and negative
5.
.Suture the access flap without tension.
aerobic bacteria in cats with gingivitis. For anaerobic
bacteria, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid or clindamycin
Postoperative care includes pain control and antimi-
were most effective.
crobial medication. The cat is fed a soft diet for several
Pulse therapy is the use of periodic (i.e., first five days
 days. Gentle brushing can begin one week after surgery.
 of every month) oral antibiotic administration to help
 The surgical site is reexamined every two weeks until
control the bacterial load. However, this is only rarely
clinical healing is confirmed. The area is radiographed
recommended as an adjunct in cases where periodontal
in four months.
pocket disease has been treated and the client can
 provide daily home care. Pulse therapy is not indicated
 in cases where periodontal disease exists, anesthesia is
 not performed due to client or practitioner concerns, or
Technigue for the Palatal
as a substitute for home care.
Periodontal Pocket
Palatal pocket therapy is indicated in cases where
there is >25% attachment loss on the palatal aspect of
Bone Grafting
one or both maxillary canine teeth and the periodontal
probe does not yet enter the nasal cavity (figs. 8.7 a, b).
 Bone grafts are used to preserve or restore the alveolar
When deep pockets are diagnosed, pocket therapy
height in deep, narrow, three-walled infrabony pockets,
should be performed or the tooth extracted and the
such as defects on the palatal side of canine teeth, that
ssanord  aod a 'paea  pas poanp
do not extend into the nasal cavity. The goals of bone
until it penetrates the nasal cavity, creating an oronasal
 grafting are to restore normal bony architecture, rebuild
fistula.
the periodontal ligament and soft tissue, and prevent
further periodontal pocket formation.
 Many materials have been used for cat bone grafts,
1.
 Make 2-4 mm mesial and distal incisions to the bone
ncluding autogenous bone, alloplasts, and synthetic
 at 20-degree angles palatally from the affected tooth
bioactive ceramic such as Bioglass? (Consil@, Consil
(figs. 8.7 c, d).
Putty Nutramax Laboratories), which develops a direct
2.
Use a Molt or Freer periosteal elevator to gently raise
bond to tissue and becomes osteoconductive when
a full-thickness flap (figs. 8.7 e, f).
implanted into an osseous defect. The ceramic is sur-
 Use a thin curette to clean accessible granulation
3
rounded by and incorporated into the new bone within
tissue, calculus, and plaque between the root and
weeks.
alveolus (figs. 8.7 g, h).
 Carry bone-grafing particles into the cleaned defect
(fig. 8.7 i).
General Technique
5.
Oppose the flap snugly against the tooth with
1. If chlorhexidine is used as an irrigant during surgery.
 4-0 absorbable suture on an atraumatic needle (fig.
rinse it off thoroughly with lactated Ringer's solu-
8.7).
Figure 8.7 a. Maxillary canine teeth palatal bleeding after dental scaling. b. 7-mm palatal periodontal pocket. c. Palatal incision. d. Buccal incision. e. and f.
Freer elevator used to move palatal tissue caudally exposing subgingival calculus. g. Curette used to remove plaque and calculus. h. Prepared palatal defect.
i. Consil? application into the defect. j. Sutured palatal defect.
186
Figure 8.7
Continted
187
188
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 8.7 Continued
Alveolar Bone Expansion
affected with stage 4 disease should be surgically
extracted after the bulging alveolus is exposed. The
bulge is flattened via alveoloplasty before flap closure
Maxillary and/or mandibular canine teeth affected by
(fig. 8.8 c-q).
chronic alveolar osteitis clinically present with unilateral
In cases where the maxillary canine tooth has been
or bilateral thickening (bulging) of the buccal alveolar
extracted, the mandibular canine tooth crown may now
bone (fig. 8.8a).
interfere with the lip, requiring extraction or crown
 Oral probing and radiographic examination usually
reduction and restoration (fig. 8.9; see chap. 9, pp. 209
reveal stages 2 to 4 periodontal disease (fig. 8.8b). Teeth
for technique).
Figure 8.8 a. Bilateral maxillary canine alveolar osteitis. b. Left maxillary
canine 12-mm probing depth. c. Incision caudal to the affected left maxillary
canine. d. Molt elevator used to separate attached gingiva from underlying
periosteum. e. Molt elevator used rostrally. f. Reflected attached gingiva.
g. Alveolar bone expansion site exposed. h. Removal of the coronal alveolus to
aid extraction. i-k. Wing-tipped elevator used to create mobility. I. Delivery of
tooth from the alveolus. m and n. After additional alveoloplasty, the periosteum 
is partially excised to free up gingiva for tension-free closure. o. Before suturing.
gingiva is opposed over defect. p. First suture at most coronal point. q. Defect
sutured.
189
Figure 8.8 Continued
190
Figure 8.8 Continued
191
Figure 8.8 Continued
192
Treatment of Periodontal Disease
193
Figure 8.9 Mandibular canine lip impingement secondary to extraction of the ipsalateral maxillary canine tooth.
Multiple Tooth Extractions for Advanced
Gingival Enlargement
Periodontal Disease
Benign proliferation of the gingiva is termed gingival
 Often the best approach to care for the cat with advanced
hyperplasia. Gingival hyperplasia, rare in the cat, results 
periodontal disease is multiple extractions. In most cases
in increased pocket depths, caused by augmented gin-
the surgical area heals without incident and the cat
gival height, not attachment loss. The resultant "pseudo
rapidly returns to normal function (figs. 8.10 a-f).
pocket" can accumulate plaque and, if untreated, may
progress to attachment loss. Gingival hyperplasia is
u cn a au rs  A q pa
prevent recurrence. At least two millimeters of attached
gingiva should remain after gingivectomy.
Figure 8.10 a. Stages 3 and 4 periodontal disease and tooth resorption.
b. Flap exposure. c. Partial removal of the coronal buccal alveolus and sectioning
of the teeth before extraction. d. Extraction of the mandibular third premolar.
e. Separation of the gingiva from the lingual side of the mandible to allow
smoothing of the sharp alveoli (alveoloplasty). f. Alveoloplasty.
194
 Treatment of Periodontal Disease
195
Further Reading
d        s
and periodontal disease stages, Veterinary Dental Techniques
 Beebe DE, Gengler WR. Osseous surgery to augment treatment 
for the Small Anirmat Practitioner, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadel-
 of chronic periodontitis of canine teeth in a cat. J Vet Dent.
phia, 2004; 175-232.
Holmstrom SE, Frost Fitch P, Eisner ER. Periodontal therapy
2007; 24: 30-38.
and surgery, Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animat
Harvey CE. Management of periodontal disease: understand-
ing the options. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2005;
Practitioner, 3rd ed. Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 233-290.
31: 819-836.
Norris JM, Love DN. In vitro antimicrobial susceptibilities of
 three Porphyromonas spp and in vivo responses in the oral
Harvey CE, Emily PP. Periodontal disease. Small Anirmal Den-
tistry. Mosby-Year Book, St. Louis, 1993; 89-144.
cavity of cats to selected antimicrobial agents. Aust Vet J
Harvey CE, Thormsberry C, Miller BR, Shofer FS. Antimicrobial
2000; 78: 533-537.
givitis. J Vet Dent 1995; 12: 157-160.
Chapter 9
Treatment of Endodontic Disease
 Endodontic treatment or extraction is required when the
 Specific endodontic therapy depends on the severity
pulp is exposed by trauma. When exposed to the oral
 of damage to the tooth structure, periapical and peri-
environment, pulpal contents undergo irreversible
odontal pathology, the functional significance of the
degenerative inflammation resulting in necrosis.
tooth, equipment available, and the confidence and
 There are many clinical presentations for a tooth
ability of the veterinarian to perform endodontic therapy
affected with endodontic pathology. The crown may or
(or refer the case).
 may not be fractured. If fractured, the pulp may or may
not be visible. Pulpitis may result if there is no obvious
fracture -it may only be visible clinically as a discolored
Severity of Damage to the Tooth
tooth. In advanced cases, fistulous tracts apical to the
Structure
mucogingival junction can be observed.
A majority of cats presented with fractured teeth do
In cats, the pulp lies closer to the enamel compared with
 not show any signs of discomfort, even though animals
dogs. Some fractures are limited to enamel and require
experience pain similar to humans. Cats frequently do
 litle or no therapy; others involve dentin and might not
not show overt signs of pain because they would be
require endodontic care; still others expose enamel,
regarded as weak.
 dentin, and pulp, and require endodontic care or extrac-
When the pulp necroses, the pain decreases unless
tion. Due to the proximity of the pulp chamber to the
 periapical lesions form. The mere fact that a cat does not
coronal enamel, even moderate dentin involvement
appear to be in pain does not eliminate the need to treat
without obvious pulp exposure should be treated.
the fractured tooth. Secondary signs related to fractured
The ultimate goal of endodontic care is to return the
teeth include:
tooth to function if possible, and if not possible, to
 Chewing on one side
extract the tooth to prevent further pain. When pathol-
 Dropping food from the mouth when eating
ogy secondary to pulp necrosis and/or concomitant
Excessive drooling
disease renders the tooth nonfunctional, extraction is the
1
Grinding of teeth
treatment of choice (figs. 9.1a, b, c; 9.2 a-e).
 Pawing at the mouth
Facial edema
Fistulous tract below the eye or under the
Degree of Periapical and Periodontal
mandible
Changes
Regional lymph node enlargement
 Shying away when the face is petted
-pua jo ssaoons ual-suol on [esnu si joddns yoon
Refusing to eat hard food
odontic treatment. If marked periodontal disease is
Refusing to chew on hard treats or toys
present before therapy, success will be unlikely unless
epic measures are taken and strict home care is provided
When presented with a tooth that is fractured and has
(figs. 9.3 a, b, c).
 pulp exposure (complicated tooth fracture), the practi-
tioner has two choices:
1.
Extract the tooth.
Functional Significance of the Tooth
 Perform endodontic therapy, which usually allows
the tooth to be saved and returned to function.
Although endodontic care can be performed on any
Endodontic therapy is less invasive than open
tooth, in the cat, the canines and maxillary fourth pre-
extraction.
molars generally are the only teeth where endodontic
196
Figure 9.1 a. Complicated crown fracture of the right maxillary canine.
b. Radiograph revealing periapical lucency. c. Root canal therapy four months
guarded).
197
Figure 9.2a. Complicated crown fracture of the left maxillary canine in a four-year-old cat. b. Radiograph revealing an enlarged pulp cavity and an open apex
indicating fracture occurred when the cat was between six and nine months old, halting tooth maturation. c. Extracted tooth cut along its long axis. d. Compli-
198
Figure 9.2Continued
Figure 9.3 a. Crown-root fracture, mandibular fourth premolar. b. Radiograph
-u pane a o aseas ead pue e a paea hueaa
root segment. c. Postextraction radiograph.
199
200
Feline Dentistry
therapy would be considered due to the surgical dis-
is so beneficial in the healing response in other body
comfort that accompanies extraction.
areas creates swelling leading to pulpal death and necro-
sis due to the nonelastic and hard surroundings of the
pulp cavity (fig. 9.4).
Owner's Expectation and Desires
 Pulpitis is uncommonly associated with tooth resorp-
tion in the cat, for which extraction is the treatment of
Before commencing endodontic therapy, the owner
choice. Root canal therapy can be performed on a dis-
must be made aware of the prognosis, fees involved, and
colored tooth without radiographic signs of resorption,
follow-up care required.
with a guarded prognosis. If there are radiographic
signs of resorption, root canal therapy will not halt the
 progression of resorption.
Clinician's Availability and skill
Uncomplicated Tooth Fractures
 If the client refuses advanced endodontic therapy, the
veterinarian is unable to perform endodontics, or refer-
Uncomplicated fractures are classified into enamel,
ral is not available, extraction may be the only option for 
crown, and crowm/root fractures.
care of the fractured tooth with pulpal exposure.
An enamel fracture occurs when there is loss of crown
substance confined to the enamel (fig. 9.5). The dentin
or pulp is not exposed. Intraoral radiographs should be 
Endodontic Care Based on Presentation
exposed and examined as a baseline and to check for
additional root fracture. The tooth should be radio-
Pulpitis
graphed six and twelve months later for evidence of
 periapical pathology.
Occasionally, teeth can be traumatized by blunt trauma,
 Treatment of enamel fractures entails smoothing and
hyperthermia from ultrasonic scaling, and/or overly
contouring the surface with a white stone or fine
 aggressive polishing. The resulting inflammation may
be sufficient to cause vascular damage, hemorrhage, and
Pos e um pauun si dnd au uams iednd
unyielding chamber with limited blood supply and no
collateral support; thus, the inflammatory process that
Figure 9.4 Discolored toth consistent with pulpal hemorrhage.
Figure 9.5 Enamel fracture illustration.
Treatment of Endodontic Disease
201
several millimeters of protective dentin under the
to remove sharp edges, which could cause trauma to the
enamel. For this reason even fractures that do not show
lips and tongue. Light-cured dentin bonding resin mate-
 gross pulp exposure are considered contaminated,
rial can be placed at the fracture site according to the
necessitating root canal therapy or extraction.
 manufacturer's instructions to protect against dentin
 The patient's age also affects the treatment plan. When
exposure.
 intraoral radiographs do not reveal periapical pathology
An uncomplicated crown fracture (figs. 9.6 a, b) occurs
and the patient is less than nine months old, a dentinal
when a fracture of the crown does not expose the pulp
 bonding agent can be applied to the injured site and
but extends into the dentin. Bacteria have an indirect
covered with composite. If the cat is between nine
pathway to the pulp through the dentinal tubules. If the
months and six years old, root canal therapy can be
injury is recent and a pink spot (pulpal blush) is evident
 performed with generally favorable results.
 on the fracture site, a near-pulp exposure is present. If
 Alternatively, indirect pulp capping using a bonding
untreated, the pulp may become necrotic, eventually
 agent and restorative agent is performed. When indirect
appearing as a dark spot through the thin dentin. In cats,
-oipen dn-monoy ‘pasn aie sampasoid Suddes dmd
dn umono a rapum isnf oi spuaixa raqureuo dmd a
graphs should be taken at six-month intervals after treat-
compared with that of mature dogs, which usually have
 ment for several years to examine the pulp chamber for
internal resorption  and pathology 
of  periapical
structures.
 When intraoral radiographs do not reveal periapical
e 'sieas xis ueu rapio st juaned au pue Ksojoued
wait-and-see approach can be initiated. Those that
are older than six years with fractures that just enter
the dentin usually have sufficient dentin between the
fracture and pulp, alleviating the need for root canal
therapy.
 When periapical pathology exists with a radiographi-
cally closed apex, and if the patient is older than nine
months, root canal therapy and crown restoration are
the treatments of choice, usually resulting in a saved,
nonpainful tooth.
When periapical pathology radiographically exists
and there is an open apex (fracture occurred before the
patient was nine months old), either tooth extraction, an
apexification procedure, or surgical endodontic care is
performed.
 In uncomplicated crown-root fractures, the fracture
involves enamel, cementum, and dentin, extending from
 the crown subgingivally into the root without exposing
the pulp (fig. 9.7).
Treatment is similar to the uncomplicated crown frac-
ture; however, additional treatment may be necessary to
treat the subgingival area void of cementum and dentin
due to the fracture extension. The goal of therapy in this
area is to remove significant periodontal pocketing
either through gingivectomy (providing that at least
2 mm of attached gingiva remain) or an apically posi-
tioned flap.
Complicated Tooth Fractures
Complicated
Uncompl
 Complicated crown fractures have pulp exposure (fig.
9.8a). The pulp usually appears as a red (vital pulp often
Figure 9.6 a. Uncomplicated crown fracture illustration. b. Complicated
a recent injury) or black/brown spot (usually an older
and uncomplicated canine fractures.
injury) on the fracture site. When pulp exposure exists,
202
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 9.7 Uncomplicated crown-root fracture illustration.
endodontic therapy should be performed (vital pulp
therapy, standard root canal therapy, or surgical root 
canal therapy) or the tooth extracted (figs. 9.8 b-l).
In complicated crown fractures, there is direct com-
munication between the oral bacterial environment and
the pulp. The bacterial exposure frequently leads to irre-
Figure 9.8 a. Complicated crown fracture illustration. b. Chronic hyperplas-
versible pulpitis, pulp necrosis, apical granuloma forma-
tic pulpitis (pulp protruding through the fracture site) of the right maxillary
tion, periapical abscessation, and pain. The process may
fourth premolar treated with tooth extraction. c. Vertical releasing incision.
 occur within a month or may be prolonged, smoldering
d. Sulcular incision. e. Application of molt elevator. f Molt elevator used to
for years (figs. 9.8 m-q).
separate attached gingiva from underying alveolar bone. g. Removal of the
buccal coronal alveolus. h. Sectioning of the maxilary fourth premolar.
A complicated crown-root fracture occurs when the
 crown and root are fractured and there is pulp exposure.
i. Sectioned tooth. j. Wing-tipped elevator utilied to deliver the sectioned
crown-root segments. k. Tooth fully extracted (note smooth apices). I. Remov-
Treatment for complicated crown-root fractures is the
ing the sharp alveolar margins with a high-speed, water-cooled round bur
same as for complicated crowm fractures, with addi-
before suturing. m. Rostral mandibular swelling. n. Pustular discharge from
tional attention to the developing periodontal pocket at 
the ventral mandible. o. Left mandibular complicated crown fracture. p. Radio-
the subgingival fracture site (fig. 9.9).
graph revealing marked interal and external resorption.q.xtracted canine.
Figure 9.8 Continued
203
Figure 9.8 Continued
204
Figure 9.9  Complicated crown-root fracture illustration.
Figure 9.8 Continued
205
206
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 9.10  Root fracture illustration.
Root fractures are classified by the anatomic location
Figure 9.11  Radiograph of a complicated right maxillary canine tooth frac-
of the fracture (coronal, middle, or apical third) and
ture in seven-month-old cat.
usually have pulp exposure. Coronal root fractures often
present with a mobile crown (fig. 9.10).
Treatment usually consists of tooth extraction and
removal of the fractured coronal and apical root
fragments.
exposure and closed root apices can be treated with
standard root canal therapy.
Age of the Patient
Age of the Fracture
 Age of the patient is also important when choosing end-
odontic therapy options. Canine teeth of patients 
Age of the fracture influences endodontic treatment.
 aa Ae aae jo suuou aaami cn auu uu rasumon
Shortly after pulp exposure, inflammation occurs less
open root apices (fig. 9.11). Mandibular molar teeth gen-
than 2 mm from the exposure site. In acute fractures, the
erally have closed apices by seven months of age. Stan-
pulp appears pink or red at the fracture surface. The
dard root canal therapy is not performed on cat teeth
pulp of a long-standing fracture will appear brown or
 with open root apices because appropriate sealing of the
black. Vital pulp tissue can be found several millimeters
apex cannot be assured.
deeper within the pulp, which might respond to vital
 Treatment options for teeth with open root apices
pulp procedures (i.e., vital pulp therapy).
 include (1) vital pulp therapy (partial coronal pulpec-
 In the mature animal that has an acutely or chronically
tomy, direct pulp capping, and restoration) to promote
fractured tooth with a closed apex, standard root canal
apexogenesis in a tooth with vital pulp or (2) an apexi-
therapy results in a more predictable outcome compared
fication procedure if the pulp is dead. Teeth with pulp
to vital pulp therapy.
Treatment of Endodontic Disease
207
20
25
15
30
35
40
CE0120
Absorbent Paper Points
200 Points
META
COLOR-CODED
STERILE
15
20
25
30
35
40
CE0120
Gutta Percha Points
120Points
META
COLOR-CODED
Figure 9.12 a. Paper points. b. Gutta percha points. c. Tooth obturated with gutta percha.
Materials for Endodontic Therapy
Mineral Tri-Oxide Aggregate (MTA)
MTAis composed of a calcium and silicate. It is supplied
Paper Points
as a powder, which when hydrated sets in two to four
 Paper (absorbent) points are rolled sterile papers used
hours. When set, MTA is biologically compatible with
adjacent tissues and can be used in vital pulp therapy
to absorb irrigation solutions in the prepared root canal.
Paper points are long, narrow, and tapered to fit into the
(direct pulp capping), surgical endodontics, root perfo-
root canal (fig. 9.12a).
rations, and one-step apexification procedures.
Calcium hydroxide can also be used in a similar
fashion as MTA and has many uses for feline endodontic
Gutta Percha Points
care. Calcium hydroxide offers the following features:
Gutta percha points are slender, tapered, and pointed to
 Can be used (1) during the apexification procedure 
fit to the contours of the root canal when compressed.
to stimulate hard tissue closure of an open apex in
Gutta percha is a combination of zinc oxide (66%),
a nonvital tooth and (2) in apexogenesis to stimulate
 gutta percha rubber (23%), and radiopaque barium
dentinal bridge formation under a direct pulp
sulfate (11%). Gutta percha advantages include being
capping and hard tissue closure of an open apex in
an
 inert material, radiopaque, nonirritating.
a vital tooth.
removable for retreatment if root canal therapy fails 
(figs. 9.12 b, c).
Sodium Hypochlorite (Bleach)
Zinc Oxide-Eugenol
Sodium hypochlorite (common household bleach) acts
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE) is a cement that acts as a
as a solvent for necrotic tissue, a lubricant, and disinfec-
sealer between the gutta percha and root dentin. End-
tant for irrigation of the root canal. Depending on the
odontic sealing cement is also available without eugenol.
practitioner's preference, sodium hypochlorite may be
208
Feline Dentistry
diluted with one to two parts distilled water or be used
without dilution as it comes from the bottle.
 To apply sodium hypochlorite, a sterile 1-cc dispos-
able plastic syringe with a blunt 20-23 gauge endodontic
needle is used. The needle may be bent at an angle to
facilitate access to the canal. Care should be taken not to
apply excessive pressure on the syringe contents.
 Damage to the periapical structures may occur if sodium
hypochlorite solution is pushed out of the apex into the
 periapical tissues.
Ethylenediaminetetracetic Acid (EDTA)
EDTA is available in a liquid and a gel. The gel is used
as a file lubricant, a dentin softening agent, and an effer-
vescent that helps lift debris from the root canal. It can
be introduced by dipping the files into the gel. The
liquid is used to remove the smear layer from the root
canal wall after filing and is introduced using endodon-
tic flushing needles on a syringe.
Instruments for Endodontic Therapy
The goal of standard root canal therapy is to remove
toxins, microbes, and necrotic debris by thoroughly
 debriding the root canal(s) and then sealing the space to
prevent further infection. Burs, files, broaches, spread-
SI 1I ieog siun usiduosoe oh pasn are siasanid pue 'sia
essential that endodontic instruments and accessories be
Figure 9.13 Endodontic files.
sterile before placement into the root canal. A sterilized
endodontic pack is prepared with the necessary
(K files cut on both clockwise and counterclockwise rota-
instruments.
tions and on insertion and withdrawal). To prevent a
corkscrew apical penetration, H files should not be
rotated (fig. 9.13).
Endodontic Files
Nickel titanium (NiTi) files have become the preferred
Endodontic files are used to enlarge, debride, shape, and
file of choice for many human and veterinary dentists.
smooth the root canal. Kerr (K) files and Hedstrom (H)
These instruments are used by hand or in a powered
files are most commonly used.
handpiece at speeds ranging from 150 to 2000 rpm. NiTi
 K files cut or shave the root canal walls during rota-
files, available in H or K varieties, are more flexible than
tion. They are applied in a push-pullor clockwise quarter
files made from stainless steel.
rotation push-rotate fashion to pull dentin debris coro-
The International Standards Organization (ISO) sets
nally. The file is extended to its root canal apex before
standardization  from  one manufacturer  to another
withdrawal. Files come in various lengths and sizes. K
regarding lengths and widths of flutes, taper, relation-
files are stronger and more flexible than H files and less
ship between successive sizes, and coloration. Most files
prone to breakage. File length chosen depends on the
are purchased with color-coded handles, which corre-
root canal length from tooth access to its apex. Files can
late with various widths. ISO width sizes are numbered
be purchased in groups of five in one size or assorted
8 to 140 (0.8-1.4mm at the tip). File handle color corre-
sizes.
lates to the diameter at the working end (e.g., all #10 file
H files are sharper than K files. They cut efficiently
handles are purple, #15 are white, #20 are yellow, and
and quickly, and they are used when significant removal
so on).
 of dentin is desired, such as enlarging the access in the
 Standard ISO file widths typically increase in 0.05-mm
coronal third of the tooth. H files are not intended for
increments (15, 20, 25, etc.). It would be rare to need to
use in the apical third. They cut on the up (pull) stroke
use a file greater than size 50 in the cat.
Treatment of Endodontic Disease
209
Files are also measured by lengths. Human dental files
are sized 21, 25, and 30mm, sufficient for working on
feline companion animal patients.
With repeated use, endodontic files fatigue and even-
 tually separate (break). As instruments are prepared for
sterilization, they should be individually checked for
signs of wear, weakness, or fracture. Some practitioners
 color code the files with endodontic stops relating to the
number of times each file is used. The safest practice is
to use new files with each patient. To mitigate the
expense of using fresh files for each case, a sterile end-
 odontic surgical pack fee can be charged to the client.
Should the instrument separate within the root canal,
 retrieval is attempted. In some cases, apical surgery or
 extraction of the tooth becomes necessary.
Endodontic Stops
 Endodontic stops are small, round pieces of rubber or
plastic that act as visual stopping point references to
assist the veterinarian in preparing the canal. The stops
are placed toward the file handle and the file is placed
 into the root canal to make a confirming radiograph
before root canal therapy is initiated. The stop is read-
 justed when the file is at the internal end of the apex, as
confirmed by a working-length radiograph. All succeed-
 ing files are fited with endodontic stops at the working
b
length. Some of the newly designed instruments, such
Figure 9.14  a. Spreader. b. Plugger (Cislak).
ing the need to set and reset stops during treatment.
They are available in both locking and nonlocking styles,
Spreaders and Pluggers
with plain or serrated tips (fig. 9.15).
Spreaders and pluggers are available in multiple diam-
eters and lengths, used to compact and adapt gutta
Spatulas
 percha to the prepared root canal. The smooth-pointed
 Spatulas are instruments used to mix dental materials.
 spreader is a hand-operated, tapered metal instrument
Cement spatulas are thin and nonflexible (fig. 9.16).
that compacts gutta percha laterally into the root canal
 space, forcing sealant into apical and nonapical ramifica-
tions and dentinal tubules, and creates room for inser
Irrigation Needles
 tion of additional gutta percha. The blunt-tipped plugger
Irrigation needles (available in 23, 25, 27 guage sizes) are
compacts gutta percha vertically toward the apex (figs.
used to flush fluids into the canal in order to remove
9.14 a, b).
dentinal shavings and debris that accumulate during
 For feline teeth, which are short, human pluggers and
instrumentation. Irrigation needles have a slotted tip or
 spreaders can be used.
a lateral opening for fluid to exit around the needle and
not through the apex, preventing apical damage from
overzealous irrigation.
College Pliers
 College pliers, also called cotton pliers or endodontic
locking pliers, enable the operator to pick up and hold
Vital Pulp Therapy
 paper or gutta percha points in place for insertion into
the prepared root canal. Pliers can also be used for
Vital pulp therapy involves partial pulpectomy, direct
holding cotton pledgets for cleaning tooth surfaces.
 pulp capping, and restoration.
210
Feline Dentistry
 Paper points
 Retrograde amalgam carier
Chlorhexidine solution (0.12%)
Calcium hydroxide powder or MTA
 Restorative material
Technique
Vital pulp therapy has limited use in the cat. It can be
used for treatment of acutely (treatment within hours of
 injury) fractured teeth and surgical crown reduction for
orthodontic care.
1.
Administer
parenteral
pain
medication
preoperatively.
2.
 Obtain an intraoral dental radiograph to determine
root maturity and to evaluate dental pathology.
3.
 Clean and polish the teeth ultrasonically.
4.
 Infuse a local anesthetic with epinephrine around
the tooth or perform a nerve block to desensitize
the pulp.
5.
Disinfect the oral cavity with 0.12% chlorhexidine
gluconate antiseptic solution. A sterile punctured
 glove may be placed over the crown.
Figure 9.15  College-tipped pliers (Cislak).
6.
Access directly through the exposed pulp with a #1
or #2 sterile round bur in a sterile high-speed hand-
 piece under sterile saline irrigation (figs. 9.17 a, b,
c, d).
7.
 Remove 3 mm of coronal pulp tissue, using a round
or diamond bur (fig. 9.17e).
 To control pulpal bleeding, irrigate the pulp
chamber with cold sterile saline initially; follow by
 applying sterile
paper points to absorb hemor-
 rhage. Bleeding that is not controlled within five
dmd pau  no aa aq r sa
 that might not be treatable by vital pulp therapy.
(He) apopay ues jo uuz Aidde Aua
powder with a retrograde amalgam carrier on top
of the exposed vital pulp. MTA can also be used
instead of CaOH.
10.
 Slightly undercut the access area to prepare for
placement of the final restoration (figs. 9.17 f, g, h).
11.
Restore the tooth with a light-cured composite
 resin; the final restoration layer should be at least
2 mm thick (fig. 9.17i).
Figure 9.16  Spatula with zinc oxide-eugenol cement.
 Obtain a final radiograph. Send the patient home
with pain control and prophylactic antibiotic
medication.
The tooth is examined and radiographed at six months
Instruments and Materials
701, #1 and #2 round carbide burs
arises during future oral hygiene procedures. In the
Sterile saline
immature tooth, a radiographic visible dentinal bridge
Cotton dressing forceps
often forms below the restoration. The presence of a
Figure 9.17 a. and b. Mandibular canine tooth before crown reduction to prevent upper lip impingement after maxillary canine extraction. c. Cross-cut fissure 
bur used to reduce the crown height. d. Crown height reduced. e. Inverted cone bur used to remove 3-5 mm of the coronal pulp.f. Retrograde amalgam plugger
aixopay wnle jo aueieaddy'y uoeasan iog yoot au anedad o pasn ang auon paaaul h dind pasixa aui lano apixopay wnien asuupe ot pasn
before restoration.i. Restored tooth.
211
Figure 9.17 Continued
212
Treatment of Endodontic Disease
213
dentinal bridge does not guarantee success. On sequen-
Sodium hypochlorite or 0.12% chlorhexidine (causes
tial radiographs, the root canal of a vital tooth
 less apical inflammation due to leakage)
should appear narrower because of continued dentin
Sterile saline
 production. Apexogenesis (root development and apical
 Absorbent paper points 
closure) is the desired outcome when vital pulp tissue is
Gutta percha points
dnd jenA (ase jo suuou 6>) jes Sumof e ul pasodxa
Root canal sealer AH-26 or zinc oxide eugenol
therapy is performed to allow continued growth of the
 Finger spreaders and pluggers 
root and apical closure (figs. 9.18 a-j).
 In the mature tooth, radiographic success of vital pulp
Accessing the Root Canal
without pathology.
Local anesthetic is injected before the standard root
canal therapy commences. Cat canine teeth are usually
Standard Root Canal Therapy
entered from the fracture site, compared to dog's canine
teeth, which are entered through an access site coronal
 Standard root canal therapy entails removing the entire
to the gingival margin (fig. 9.20a).
pulp (total pulpectomy), shaping and disinfecting the
pulp cavity, sealing the apex and ramifications, and
 restoring the access and fracture sites.
Preparing the Root Canal
 Indications for standard root canal therapy include
Cleaning and shaping procedures are designed to
pulpitis from trauma and pulp exposure from fracture,
remove deleterious debris from the root canal system
attrition, or abrasion. Contraindications include concur
while producing a smooth furmel shape for ease of com-
 rent advanced periodontal disease requiring extraction,
 plete filling. This process is called debridement or instru-
open apices, and tooth resorption.
mentation. The thoroughness of debridement facilitates
successful dimensional sealing during the obturation
Minimum Set of Radiographs
(filling) phase.
At least five radiographs are needed for standard root
1. H and K files are used to shape and clean the root
canal therapy:
canals. The pretreatment radiograph can be used to
1. The initial radiograph is exposed and examined
estimate the file length needed to reach the apex.
before therapy to identify peculiarities of the tooth
Endodontic stops applied to prevent placing the
to be treated, anatomy of the pulp chamber, and root
instrument too far into the root canal through the
angulation. Most cat canine tooth root canals are
apex into the periapical tissues. The working length
slightly curved. Sharply curved canals present a
is established when the tip of the file rests on the
challenge to the veterinary dentist, particularly if
apical floor of the canal (fig. 9.20b).
flexible NiTi files are not used.
 The first file used should just barely engage the root
a s, e wm pasodxa si w aaeadoni r '7
 canal walls when it is carried to the working length.
 in the root canal to establish working length (file
H files should be inserted and partially removed
 reaches the internal end of the apex).
without rotation. The H file works on the pull stroke.
3.
 The final instrumentation film is exposed when the
Use H files to flare the coronal third of the root canal.
"last" file reaches the internal end of the apex.
Use K files to prepare the middle and apical thirds
 The completion film is exposed when the root canal
 of the root canal, particularly in short (<31 mm long)
is obturated and the fracture and access sites are
 canals. Turn K files clockwise 90 degrees, remove
restored.
1-2mm, and reinsert multiple times. Apply chelat-
 5. Follow-up radiographs are taken 4-6 months post-
ing agents (e.g., RC Prep) on the first two or three
procedure 
the first year, followed by periodic
files introduced into the root canal to soften dentin
rechecks dictated by the case (fig. 9.19).
for easier debridement and file lubrication.
3.
 Take a radiograph to verify that the file is within
the tooth's apical terminus. If the file tip has not
Instruments and Materials
reached the apex, continue filing. The working-
 #1 and #2 round or pear-shaped burs for access
length distance may vary from 0.1 to 2.0mm
Gates Glidden burs (size 2)
from the radiographic apex due to differences in
 Files 10-80 diameter, 21 mm long
patient age, size of tooth, and root canal anatomy
RC Prep
(fig. 9.20c).
Figure 9.18 a. Acutely fractured left maxillary canine twelve hours before presentation—note inflamed pulp. b. Radiograph confirming fracture limited to the
crown. c. Round bur used for partial pulpectomy. d. After 3-5 mm of coronal pulp removed. e and f. Calcium hydroxide applied to the pulpectomy site using a
retrograde amalgam filler. g. Bonding agent applied. h. Composite resin applied. i. White stone used to finish the restoration. j. Postoperative intraoral
radiograph.
214
Figure 9.18 Continued
215
Figure 9.18 Continued
216
Treatment of Endodontic Disease 
217
Figure 9.19 Follow-up radiograph six months after conventional root canal therapy.
4. After the working length is established, slide an end-
root region, followed by smaller K files toward
odontic stop to the tooth level and apply at the same
the apex (figs. 9.20 d, e).
distance to all successive files.
b.
 Between files, irrigate the root canal with 5.25%
 5.  Instrumentation of a file is complete when it can be
sodium hypochlorite full strength or diluted
inserted to full working length and withdrawn
50% with sterile saline, or with 0.12% chorhexi-
without resistance. Introduce progressively larger
dine to remove dentinal debris, dissolve soft
files, enlarging the root canal until a size is found
 tissue, disinfect, and provide a bleaching effect.
that does not easily reach the working length. Then
 Introduce the irigation solution by using a slot-
with apical pressure, cut the dentin until the apex is
ended endodontic needle to prevent periapical
 reached. This file is termed the master or final apical
extrusion of dentin debris and bleach. Bleach is
file.
employed when the apex is closed. Irrigate the
a.
With the step-back method, the veterinarian
root canal with sterile saline between the last
uses smaller diameter files nearest the apex pro-
three file sizes to remove the irrigation solution.
 gressing to larger sizes further away from the
 EDTA solution is also used to remove the smear
apex. Alternatively, the crown-down method
layer.
may be employed where the veterinarian works
C.
As the procedure progresses, reinsert the last
from the crown of the tooth, shaping the root
file that reached the apex to the full apical extent 
canal as he or she moves toward the apex. The
to recapitulate the root canal and remove den-
first instruments are H files, which create the
tinal debris that might have accumulated near
coronal flaring; H or K files are used in the mid-
the apex.
Figure 9.20 a. Radiograph confirming complicated crown fracture. b. Tooth approached through the fracture site. c. Radiograph of working-length file in root
a a n pndde as aanaapixa ouz o eue paedad u pd suod aded  ua ieue po o sais all huseaul a pue p ee
h. Gutta percha point placed after sealer introduction.i. Completed root canal therapy.
218
Figure 9.20 Continued
219
220
 Feline Dentistry
o.
When file flutes reveal clean dentinal shavings, irri-
tively, gutta percha points can be dipped in sealer
 gate the root canal with saline and dry by repeatedly
 before insertion into the root canal, carrying the
placing sterile paper points into the opering of the
sealer to the apex.
tooth to the apex (fig. 9.20f). When the points are
5.
 Gutta percha is placed into the prepared and sealed
removed dry, the tooth is ready to be filled and
canal using college-tipped pliers (fig. 9.20h).
sealed. Blood present on the paper points indicates
 Use a plugger to vertically compact the gutta
either apical perforation or inadequate pulp removal.
percha apically. The plugger should be slightly
If bleeding persists, take radiographs to confirm that
smaller than the root canal width.
the apex has not been perforated. If the apex is
7.
Use a spreader to laterally compact the master cone
 intact, use additional filing to remove all the pulpal
and sealer against the root canal walls.
 contents and stop the bleeding.
8.
 Cut multiple accessory cones to 3- to 5-mm lengths.
The apicai third of the root canal is flled by placing
these accessory gutta percha points in the space
Obturating the Root Canal
made by the root canal spreader alongside the
Obturation is the three-dimensional filling and sealing
 master cone. The accessory cones are vertically and
of the entire root canal, preventing leakage and estab-
laterally condensed until the operator canmot com-
 press the spreader within 5 mm of the intermal end
 After the tooth has been successfully prepared (cleaned
of the apex.
and shaped) and disinfected, the root canal and pulp
9.
 Take a radiograph to confirm a dense apical fil. If
chamber are obturated with permanent filling material.
absent, spend more time compacting the gutta
Healing of the periapical tissues occurs when the condi-
percha toward the apex. If present, back-fill the
tions favorable for growth of bacteria are eliminated by
coronal portion of the root canal and compact,
debridement, disinfection, and obturation of the root
using cut gutta percha, spreaders, and pluggers
canal.
(fig. 9.20i).
10.
 Remove excess gutta percha and cement extending
1. Place a gutta percha master cone (same size as the
from the fracture and access site with an inverted
master file) into the root canal to the apex and
cone or pear-shaped bur on a high-speed, air-
obtain a radiograph. Position the cone to a depth
driven handpiece, a heated spreader, or iris
that feels snug. Good apical fit is evidenced by
scissors.
receiving a tug-back when the point is at the floor
of the root canal. Mark the master cone with cotton
pliers at the line where it is flush with the access
Restoring Fracture and Access Sites
opening of the tooth, and remove for application of
Following radiographic confirmation of a complete root
root canal sealer cement.
canal fill, the access is restored with glass ionomer
2. Use root canal cement to seal the apex, dentinal
cement and/or light-cured composite. If endodontic
tubules, and accessory canals and to fill irregulari-
ties in the root canal. Zinc oxide eugenol is a com-
ization of composite), then glass ionomer must be
monly used sealer; however, the trend is to use
applied between obturation material and composite.
calcium hydroxide-based sealers with little to no
 Follow the manufacturer's directions when applying the
eugenol (Sealapex-Kerr) or an intermediate (glass
restorative material to the fracture site.
ionomer, calcium hydroxide) filler if composite res-
toration is planned.
 To merge zinc oxide and eugenol, mix a dime-sized
Follow-up
3.
 amount of zinc oxide powder and several drops of
 Follow-up radiographs are recommended at six months
eugenol liquid to a creamy consistency with a #5
and periodically when the animal is placed under anes-
auo Apanexondde roy qers sslo e uo eieds
thesia for other procedures.
minute. Incorporate small amounts of powder into
the liquid and wipe over a large area of the mixing
pad. Mixing is finished when a half-inch string of
Further Reading
the cement can be drawn between slab and spatula
(fig. 9.20g).
Beckman BW. Engine driven rotary instrumentation for end-
4.
 An endodontic file is loaded with sealer and rotated
odontic therapy in a cat. J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 88-92.
counterclockwise in the root canal, releasing the
Clarke DE. Endodontics of dogs and cats: an altermative to
cement toward the apex and dentin walls. Alterna-
extraction. Aust Vet J 1995; 72: 383-389.
Treatment of Endodontic Disease 
221
 Eisner ER. 353 sequential canine and feline endodontic cases:
Holmstrom SE, Fitch PF, Eisner ER. Endodontics. In: Veterinary
Dentat Techniques for the Smalt Animal Practitioner, 3rd ed.
Anim Hosp Assoc 1992; 28: 533-538.
Saunders, Philadelphia, 2004; 339-414.
Girard N, Southerden P, Hennet P. Root canal treatment in
Lemmons M, Carmichael DT. Dental fracture treatment options 
dogs and cats. J Vet Dent 2006; 23: 148-160.
in dogs and cats. Vet Med 2008; 103: 363-371.
 Holmstrom SE. Feline endodontics. Vet Clin North Am Small 
 Niemiec BA.Fundamentals of endodontics. Vet Clin North Am
Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1433-1451.
 Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 837-868.
Chapter 10
Treatment of Tooth Resorption
Classification of Tooth Resorption (see
same tooth. A tooth with this appearance has areas
chap. 5 for additional resorption
of normal and narrow or lost periodontal ligament
space, and there are focal or multifocal areas of
coverage)
 decreased radiopacity surrounded by normal radi-
paseaap pazieraa e pue 'seare aos ul Aoedo
The following classification is based on the assumption
radiopacity in other areas of the tooth.
that tooth resorption is a progressive condition.
 Stage 1: Mild dental hard tissue loss (cementum or
cementum and enamel) (fig. 10.1la).
Therapy Options
 Stage 2: Moderate dental hard tissue loss (cementum
or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that
Noninflammatory resorptions limited to the root surface
does not extend to the pulp cavity; fig. 10.1b).
that have not progressed to the pulp should not be
Stage 3: Deep dental hard tissue loss (cementum or
painful to the cat. Once dentin destruction has pro-
cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that
st jeu uogeaes qaureua no amsodxa ledind oi passana
extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth retains
open to the oral cavity, then discomfort and /or pain are
its integrity (fig. 10.1c).
likely. The main goal of treatment is to relieve the cat of
 Stage 4: Extensive dental hard tissue loss (cementum
 present pain and future discomfort.
or cementum and enamel with loss of dentin that
A treatment plan is developed for each tooth affected
extends to the pulp cavity); most of the tooth has
by resorption. The veterinarian has options based on
lost its integrity. Sublevels of stage 4 are (a) crown
clinical and radiographic findings, including careful
and root are equally affected (fig. 10.1d), (b) crown
monitoring, tooth extraction, crown amputation with
is more severely affected than the root (fig. 10.1e)
intentional root retention and gingival closure, or refer-
 and (c) root is more severely affected than the crown
ral to a facility that can evaluate and provide appropri-
(fig. 10.1f).
 ate therapy.
Stage 5: Remnants of dental hard tissue are visible
 Presurgical radiographs are important to evaluate
only as irregular radiopacities, and gingival cover-
root anatomy and pathology. If the veterinarian is not
ing is complete (fig. 10.1g).
able to radiograph the patient's teeth, the case should be
 referred for proper pre- and postoperative evaluation
Tooth resorption is also classified as types 1 to 3 based
and treatment.
on the radiographic appearance of the tooth and the
periodontal ligament space (fig. 10.2).
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 1 appearance,
Restoration
a focal or multifocal radiolucency is present in the
 tooth with otherwise normal radiopacity and normal
Preserving a tooth affected with pathology and return-
periodontal ligament space.
ing it to painless function is our ultimate goal. Unfortu-
On a radiograph of a tooth with type 2 appearance,
 nately, tooth resorption is considered to be progressive
there is narrowing or disappearance of the peri-
 regardless of therapy.
pue seare auos iseal 1e ul aoeds juaueai lejuopo
Results of restoration using a variety of restorative
decreased radiopacity.
materials and techniques have shown that the long-term
 On a radiograph of a tooth with type 3 appearance,
likelihood of retaining an intact tooth is very poor Like-
features of both type 1 and type 2 are present in the
222
Figure 10.1 a. Stage 1 tooth resorption. b. Stage 2 tooth resorption. c. Stage 3 tooth resorption. d. Stage 4a tooth resorption. e. Stage 4b tooth resorption.
f Stage 4c tooth resorption. g.Stage 5 tooth resorption.
223
Figure 10.1 Continued
224
Treatment of Tooth Resorption
225
cautery to surface lesions has not resulted in halting the
Type 1
progress of resorption, nor are these methods effective
in treating the pain from tooth resorption.
Monitoring without Surgery
Some teeth have asymptomatic replacement root resorp-
tion isolated to the root without exposure to the oral
environment. In these teeth, resorption is considered
progressive; careful monitoring of such teeth both clini-
cally and radiographically at least every six months can
be chosen as an alternative to immediate extraction. If
on follow-up examination the lesions become exposed
to the oral environment, extraction is indicated.
Crown/Root Atomization
Type 2
Crown and/or root atomization is not recommended as
a therapy option in the care of tooth resorption. Root
atomization is a procedure performed using a round
A
bur loaded on a water-cooled, high-speed handpiece to
blindly eliminate a root fragment. This procedure is
wrought with potential iatrogenic negative outcomes,
including perforation into the nasal cavity or mandibu-
 lar or infraorbital canal, sublingual soft tissue trauma,
and subcutaneous emphysema.
Tooth Extraction
The current recommendation is to fully extract those
teeth that have normal radiographic appearance of the
Type 3
 root and periodontal ligament space in addition to tooth
resorption. These lesions typically start at the cementoe-
namel junction and can extend in all directions. Extract-
ing these teeth helps prevent a future nidus for continued
inflammation. Additional indications for complete tooth
extraction include cats that have caudal stomatitis, are
positive for FeLV and FIV and have viral associated oral
inflammation or in some patients that have chronic oral
inflammatory disease.
Instruments and Materials
 Disposable #15 scalpel blade and #3 handle
Periosteal (Freer and Molt #2) elevators to reflect
and retract periosteum from the surface of the bone
Curved Iris scissors (11 cm)
Winged elevators (1-5mm)
Castroviejo needle holder to allow controlled sutur-
ing of delicate flaps
Miller surgical bone curette #10 (Cislak EX2)
Bishop-Harmon tissue forceps
226
Feline Dentistry
#6 India sharpening stone (autoclavable for use
elimination. A fullthickness flap, which includes the
during surgical procedures)
 periosteum, can be elevated by blunt dissection using a
Monocryl 5-0 suture with RB-1 taper needle
periosteal elevator in a rocking motion until the perios-
teum is lifted from the underlying bone.
Envelope flaps, preferred by the author, are conserva-
Considerations
tive full-thickness elevations coronal or apical to the
Treatment planning after  clinical and  radiographic
mucogingival line, used to expose gingival pockets
examination is critical for a successful outcome. The
 through intrasulcular incisions. The horizontal incision
surgeon must be aware of the extent of tooth resorption
is made along the alveolar margin at least one tooth
as well as adjacent structures before surgery begins.
distal and mesial to the site of operation. In the unmodi-
Important points to evaluate include the amount of
-  s cu a  'd a 
resorption present, location of lesions on the tooth, and
sions. After the root surface is cleaned and irrigated,
the radiographic appearance of replacement resorption
sutures are placed to close the flap.
if present.
A triangular flap includes one vertical releasing inci-
The canines, the incisors, and often the maxillary
sion. The papilla is included in the mesial extent of the
second premolars are single rooted. The maxillary first
incision when the vertical incision is on the mesial side
molars, though anatomically double or triple rooted, can
of the flap, or in the distal extent when the vertical inci-
be treated as single rooted due to root fusion. The maxil-
sion is on the distal side of the flap to make repositioning
lary fourth premolar has three roots, and all remaining
and suturing easier. A pedicle flap is created with two
premolars have two roots.
vertical releasing incisions.
The oral cavity is prepared after intubation and patient
The partial- or split-thickness flap leaves the perios-
stabilization under anesthesia by rinsing with 0.12%
teum at the donor site, avoids larger blood vessels, and
chlorhexidine gluconate, scaling, and polishing the 
allows suture placement in the periosteum. Partial-
visible teeth, followed by rinsing again. The chlorhexi-
thickmess flaps are indicated when thin bony plates are
dine gluconate helps to reduce the bacterial load to the
present, in areas of dehiscence or fenestration where
 patient and operator Full oral survey intraoral radio-
bone must be protected, and in areas where bone loss is
graphs are exposed and examined to evaluate crown
permanent.
and root morphology. Local nerve block anesthesia is
 provided before any incisions are made.
Extraction Technique
1. Incise mesially and distally (if necessary) 1-2mm
Periodontal (Gingival) Flap
coronal to the mucogingival junction. One mesial
Periodontal flaps expose the alveolar bone and underly-
releasing incision is preferred so as not to interrupt
 ing root surface, preserve attached gingiva, and allow
the distal blood supply. Placing the incision totally
suturing in a fashion that reduces the periodontal pocket
 in attached gingiva helps preserve the blood supply
and promotes reattachment of soft tissue to the root
during and after surgery and takes advantage of
surface. The base through which the attachment and
the rapid epithelial migration encountered in this
circulation is maintained is called the pedicle.
area during wound healing.
Flap design should allow maximum utilization and
2.
 The blade tip is angled toward the root, incising
retention of keratinized gingival tissue and have ample
360 degrees into the pocket or sulcus (figs. 10.3 a,
length to fully evaluate the root surface not covered with
b, c).
bone. Tissue tags should be removed to allow rapid
3.
A freshly sharpened periosteal elevator (Molt or
 healing and prevent formation of undesired granulation
Freer) is used to expose the alveolar bone by freeing
tissue.
the attached gingiva and alveolar mucosa past the
 Flap closure sutures should be placed tension free
mucogingival junction (figs. 10.3 d, e).
from movable to nonmovable tissue when possible. Sur-
4.
A #1 or #2 carbide round bur on a high-speed,
gical knots should not lie on the incision line
water-cooled handpiece is used to remove the
Tooth extraction requires the removal of several mil-
coronal one-half to three-fourths of the buccal alve-
limeters of the coronal buccal alveolar bone underlying
olar plate from the tooth root. Occasionally, radio-
 graphs reveal a bulbous root apex, which requires
 odontal flap exposure. There are numerous types of
 additional widening of the overlying alveolus (fig.
flaps.
10.3f).
The full-thickness flap is used to gain visibility and
5.
 Multirooted teeth are sectioned into single-rooted
access for osseous surgery, root planing, and pocket
crown-root segments using a cross-cut fissure or
Figure 10.3  Extraction of the right mandibular third premolar:a. Caudal verti-
cal releasing incision. b. Sulcular incision. c. Rostral incision. d. Molt periosteal
elevator used to raise a gingival flap. e.Attached gingiva reflected. f. Removing
the coronal alveolus. g. Sectioned two-rooted tooth. h. Wing-tipped elevator
placed between the crown-root segments. i. Wing-tipped elevator placed on the
outside of the distal crown-root segment. j. Alveoloplasty. k. Suture placement.
I. Gingival flap sutured without tension.
227
Figure 10.3 Continued
228
Treatment of Tooth Resorption
229
small #1 round bur. The sectioning begins at the
 dure, a trench can be created around the root frag-
furcation and is carried coronally until the tooth is
ment with a 701L cross-cut taper fissure bur to
split into single-rooted segments (fig. 10.3g). When
provide a purchase area for a dental elevator or
extracting mandibular teeth, be aware that the
root tip pick.
mandibular canal lies  immediately  beneath  the
After extraction, the remaining rough edges of
cheek tooth apices. Marked hemorrhage and
alveolar bone are contoured and smoothed with a
damage to the mandibular nerve may occur when
round bur placed in a high-speed water-cooled
the mandibular canal is entered. Excessive hemor
handpiece (fig. 10.3j).
rhage can usually be controlled by digital pressure
8.
 A radiograph is exposed and examined to confirm
 and closure of the gingival defect.
extraction.
6.
 A winged elevator is used to stretch the periodon-
9.
A bone curette is used to clean out alveolar socket
tal ligament and gently elevate the tooth root from
debris.
the alveolus. The blade is introduced between the
10.
 The gingiva is sutured without tension where the
root and the alveolus, and each movement of rota-
extraction is greater than 1 mm in circumference
tion is maintained for at least ten seconds (fig. 10.3
(figs. 10.3 k, 1).
h, i). The tooth or segments can usually be deliv-
Maxillary fourth premolars affected with tooth
ered from the alveolus with the operator's fingers
or through gentle torsion with extraction forceps.
resorption are extracted in a similar fashion (figs. 10.4
 If the root fractures during the extraction proce-
a-j).
Figure 10.4 a. Right maxillary third and fourth premolars affected by tooth resorption. b. Appearance after elevation of attached gingiva. c. Gingiva reflected
 past the mucogingival junction. d. Coronal alveolus removed. e. Sectioning the fourth premolar: f. Sectioning the two-rooted third premolar. g. Delivery of the
mesiobuccal and mesiopalatal roots of the fourth premolar. h. Alveoloplasty. i. Suture placement. j. Sutured gingival flap without tension.
Figure 10.4 Continued
230
Treatment of Tooth Resorption
231
Crown Amputation with Intentional
4.
 Sharp alveolar margin projections are removed with
Partial Root Retention
a round bur.
5.
The resulting defect is sutured with 5-0 absorbable
Root resorption is considered a progressive disease. It is
suture (figs. 10.7 e, f)
believed that bone- and cementum-like tissue replaces
6.
 The operative area is radiographed to document the
postoperative result.
the periodontal ligament, dentin, and pulp in many
cases of tooth resorption (root replacement resorption).
In these cases, crowm amputation with intentional partial
 root retention followed by gingival closure is the treat-
Extraction of Teeth Based on Patient
ment of choice because the root is already resorbing and
History
not painful.
 Case selection is based on radiographic appearance of
 Occasionally, patient history reveals partial anorexia,
the root, which will have decreased radiopacity (motled
face rubbing, face scratching, or periodic pain-related
or moth-eaten with no or little periodontal ligament
vocalization. Often, the signs will resolve once teeth
space surrounding it; figs. 10.5 a-e).
affected with apparent stage 2 tooth resorption are
Contraindications for crown amputation with inten-
extracted (figs. 10.8 a-0).
tional partial root retention include periodontal disease
 as evidenced by horizontal or vertical bone loss, end-
odontic disease, stomatitis, and positive retroviral status
Dealing with Root Fragments
(figs. 10.6 a-m).
 Procedure for intentional crown amputation and gin-
When a tooth fractures during the extraction process, the
gival closure (figs. 10.7 a, b):
root fragment can usually be retrieved after removal of
d joon es e ym uoneaaa pue auoq reloaane arou
1.
An envelope flap (preferred) or a mucoperiosteal
 pick elevator. Avoid displacement of root fragment(s)
flap is created both labially and buccally by verti-
into the mandibular or infraorbital canal, nasal cavity,
cally incising several millimeters interproximally
or maxillary sinus. In cases of oropharangyeal inflam-
mesial and distal to the affected tooth.
mation, it is essential that no root fragment remains. If
2. A fine periosteal elevator is used to expose the
a root fragment is left in place, the owner should be
 cementoenamel junction and alveolar margin (fig.
informed and provision made for radiographic follow-
10.7c).
up (figs. 10.9 a, b, c).
3.
 The crown and 1-2mm of the coronal root apical to
the alveolar margin are removed using a #2 sterile
 Or cross-cut fissure bur on a high-speed water-irri-
 gated handpiece (fig. 10.7d).
Figure 10.5 a-e. Teeth affected with type 2 tooth resorption (dentoalveolar
reduction and gingival suturing.
232
Figure 10.6 Teeth that should be extracted entirely (crown and roots): a and b. Endodontic disease in addition to tooth resorption. c and d. Teeth with type
1 radiographic appearance at least on one root (normal-appearing periodontal ligament and root opacity. e-g. Teeth with type 3 lesions. h and i. Clinical-
appearing endodontic abscess coupled with radiographic evidence of type 2 tooth resorption. j. Exposed resorbed area of canine root. k and I. Marked clinical
resorption with type 3 tooth radiographic appearance. m. Surgical exposure.
233
Figure 10.6
Continued
234
m
Figure 10.6 Continued
235
Figure 10.7 a and b. Type 2 tooth resorption. c. Flap exposure. d. Crown
reduction. e. Sutures placed. f. Surgical site ten days postsurgery.
236
Figure 10.8 a. Intraoral radiograph of the mandibular canines and incisors in a cat with persistent episodes of vocalized pain and scratching at the mouth.
b Initial incision rostral to the left mandibular canine. c. Sulcular incision. d. Incision caudal to canine to create a gingival flap. e-h. Molt elevator used to separate
attached gingiva from the periosteum and alveolus. i and j. Removal of the coronal buccal alveolus. k-m. Luxator used to create tooth mobility. n. Delivery of
the mandibular canine from the alveolus. o. Alveoloplasty before closure.
237
Figure 10.8 Continued
238
Figure 10.8 Continued
239
Figure 10.8 Continued
240
Treatment of Tooth Resorption
241
Figure 10.9 a. Multiple inflamed areas on the mandibular gingiva. b. Radio-
 graph of mandibular premolar and molar root fragents.c. Gingival flap expos-
ing retained root fragments before extraction.
Postoperative Recommendations
DuPont GA. Radiographic evaluation and treatment of feline
dental resorptive lesions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
The diet should be softened for at least one week after
Pract 2005; 35: 943-962.
Gunew M, Marshall R, Lui M, Astley C. Fatal venous air embo-
surgery. This can be accomplished by instructing the
lism in a cat undergoing dental extractions. J Small Anim
client to prewet the animal's food for about twenty
Pract 2008; 49: 601-604.
minutes before feeding. A 0.12% chlorhexidine solution
Lyon KF. Feline dental disease: treatment of subgingival
can be sent home with the owner to apply twice daily
resorption lesions. J Vet Dent 1990; 7 (1): 13-14.
for a week as an oral rinse.
Lyon KF. Subgingival odontoclastic resorptive lesion, classifi-
cation, treatment, and results in 58 cats. Vet Clin North Am 
Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1417-1432.
Further Reading
Reiter AM. Dental surgical procedures. In: Tutt C, Deeprose J,
Crossley D (eds). BSAVA Marual of Canine and Feline Den-
Blazejewski S, Lewis JR, Reiter AM. Mucoperiosteal flap for
tistry. BSAVA, Gloucester, 2007; 178-195.
extraction of multiple teeth in the maxillary quadrant of the
Smith MM. Extraction of teeth in the mandibular quadrant of
cat. J Vet Dent 2006; 23: 200-205.
the cat. J Vet Dent 2008; 25: 69-74.
DeBowes LJ. Simple and surgical exodontia. Vet Clin North
Smith MM, Smith EM, La Croix N, Mould J. Orbital penetration 
Am Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 963-984.
associated with tooth extraction. J Vet Dent 2003; 20: 8-17.
Dupont G. Crown amputation with intentional root retention 
Zetmer K, Steurer I. Long-term results of restoration of feline
for advanced feline resorptive lesions: a clinical study. J Vet 
Dent 1995; 12: 9-13.
1995; 12: 15-17.
DuPont GA. Crown amputation with intentional root retention
for dental resorptive lesions in cats. J Vet Dent 2002; 19:
107-110.
Chapter 11
Treatment of Oropharyngeal Inflammation
Therapy for feline stomatitis can be frustrating. Plaque
Antimicrobials
control using diligent homecare does not usually lead to
The inflammed gingiva is also commonly infected.
long-term success. In resistant cases, the practitioner is
left with medical, surgical, or a combination therapy to
Approved antimicrobials for use in dental infections can
help control the disease.
be prescribed to decrease the bacterial load but should
 not be regarded as a preferred form of monotherapy.
 The practitioner must understand that stomatitis often
is a combination of many conditions, including gingivi-
 Clindamycin 5-10mg/kg PO BID for 10-30 days
tis, periodontitis, palatitis, glossitis, chelitis, and caudal
Amoxicillin/clavulanate potassium  10-20 mg/kg
stomatitis, as well as inflammation of the alveolar and
PO BID for 7-10 days.
vestibular mucosa.
Metronidazole at 11-22mg/kg PO in divided dose
twice daily for 7-10 days. In addition to its antibac-
terial activity, metronidazole has some anti-
Medical Therapy
 inflammatory action, which may be beneficial in
treating this disease.
It is thought that chronic stomatitis has a multifactoral
etiology. Currently, there is no medical protocol that
Non-Steroidal Anti-lnflammatory and
yields consistent long-term positive results. Treating
Immune-Modulating Drugs
solely with anti-inflammatory medication is, unfortu-
 Solganol, Gold Salts (Shering): 1mg/kg IM every
nately, covering up the problem without treating the
week until improvement (up to 4 months), then
uderlying issue (hypersensitivity to plaque).
 Corticosteroids, gold salts, coenzyme Q-10, metroni-
every 20 days.
Piroxicam: 0.3mg/kg PO q 72h, or compounded
dazole, megestrol acetate, meloxicam, antibiotics, bovine
 into a liquid and administered at 1mg/cat orally
lactoferrin, azithromycin, alpha-interferon, interferon
every 72 hours; side effects of piroxicam include
omega, and omega-3 fatty acid supplements have been
 gastrointestinal ulceration.
used to treat the disease, with mixed long-term results.
 Azathioprine: A 50-mg tablet is crushed into 15 mL
 of liquid vitamin syrup; give0.3 mg/kg (0.33 mL/8lb)
Corticosteroids
PO every 48 hours. Azathioprine can cause fatal
Repeated  repositol  corticosteroid  injections usually
toxicity in cats.
Interferon
they decrease the body's ability to resist the inflamma-
tory proces and predispose cats to diabetes mellitus.
Interferon (Virbagen [FelFN], Virbac) has antiviral and
Prednisone (2 mg/kg orally) initially daily, followed by
antiproliferative effects. Use of interferon in cases of
every other day may be helpful to control inflammation
refractory chronic oropharangyeal inflammation may
but should not be regarded as a preferred form of
decrease the calicivirus load. Clinically in a small number
therapy. Intralesional triamcinolone, although tempo-
of cases, there appeared to be a slight reduction in the
rarily effective in controlling inflammation, is not con-
targeted mucosal inflammation, but according to the
sidered a viable long-term therapy.
clients, when questioned, there had been marked
242
Treatment of Oropharyngeal Inflammation
243
improvement in attitude and disposition. An unpub-
Doxycycline (Vibramycin; 10 mg/mL) Pfizer, 5mg/
lished study of chronically calici virus-affected cats that
kg orally BID, if effective reduce to 2mg/kg BID, if
continued to have significant oral inflammation more
still works decrease to 0.2mg/kg BID. Doxycycline
than two months after full mouth extraction showed
can also be administered in subantimicrobial doses
similar results using interferon compared to oral
of 5mg/cat/day (Periostat), usually 9 to 12 months
prednisone.
after initiating or until favorable results. Doxycy-
Interferon is a glycoprotein that is likely to be
dline has inhibitory effects on the secretion of matrix
destroyed by the gastrointestinal system. Oral adminis-
metalloproteinases (which destroy collagen and
 tration results in transmucosal absorption. This way
other matrix components) by gingival PMNs. Use of
interferon acts at a lower dosage using another pathway
submicrobial doses of doxycycline may result in a
 than it acts when given systemically.
decrease of gingival collagen destruction.
 There are various interferon protocols for the manage-
Eicosanoids are compounds derived from C20 fatty
 ment of refractory feline oropharangyeal inflammation
acids (eicosanoic acids), including prostaglandins,
after the initial assessment and surgical care. Monitoring
leukotrienes, thromboxanes, and hydroxyeicosatet-
the cat's weight is an objective way to monitor therapy.
raenoic acids.
 Lysine 250mg/ cat PO BID (Enisyl-F dosing syringe
20 40IU orally daily or 1IU submucosal injection
with 250 mg/mL, Vetoquinol)
into the caudal oral cavity every 2 weeks.
Cycosporine alters the immunological response
The preferred method is 5IU via submucosal admin-
from blocking T-helper cells. This is a specific and
istration at the junction between healthy gingiva
reversible inhibition in which immunocompetent
and diseased tissues immediately postoperatively
while the cat is still anesthetized. This is accom-
mhibited. The T-helper cell is the main target, but
plished by using a 10-MU vial, half the volume
T-suppresser cells may also be suppressed. Lym-
Tai m ax as us un o 
phokine production and release is inhibited, includ-
of saline or sterile water to provide a reasonable
ing interleukin-2 or T-cell growth factor (TCGF).
volume for use. The contents are administered in
Side effects include hepatic dysfunction, impaired
fractions of 0.1-0.2mL over the inflammed areas.
renal function, and anemia. Oral absorption during
The remaining 5MU from the vial is injected into a
chronic cydlosporine use is erratic. The doses of
100-mL saline bag for oral use by fractionating the
cyclosporine vary, and it is essential that these
100 mL mixture into 10-mL syringes that are frozen
patients have blood levels evaluated to avoid toxic-
for future oral use. Oral dosage is 1 mL/day until all
ity (high levels). Cyclosporine serum levels taken at
the units are used. Frozen shelf life is 1 year; refrig-
4 to 6 weeks after initiation should be greater than
erated, 3 weeks.
300ng/mL in order to result in clinical improve-
1MU/kg FelFN SC every other day for five treat-
ment. The risk increases with increasing dose and
ments; after the fifth dose 10,000IU in 2 mL of iso-
duration  of  cyclosporine  therapy.  Cyclosporine
tonic saline given orally once daily for 2 months,
takes time to be beneficial, with some benefit seen
then every other day for the 3rd month. This method
by 4 weeks and the maximum benefit by 8 weeks.
appears to be less effective than the submucosal and
The absorption rates will also vary with the form of
oral routes.
this medication. Sandimmune@ and Neoral? are
not bioequivalent and cannot be used interchange-
Other Medical Options (None expected to cure
ably. In liver transplant patients treated with Neoral,
peak levels were 40% to 106% greater than those
caudal stomatitis)
treated with Sandimmune. Sandimmune (Schering-
Chlorambucil 2mg/kg orally every 2-3 days or
 Plough) has an expected absorption rate on oral
 20mg/kg every other week.
administration of about 30% and Neoral (Novartis)
 Bovine lactoferrin 40mg/kg applied to the oral
about 60%. The higher absorption rates are related
mucosa.
to the microemulsion form of the cyclosporine with
 Megestrol acetate 1 mg/kg every 1-4 days, or 2.5mg
 generics having the lowest absorption. Recom-
PO every 24hrs for 10 days followed by every other
mended dosage is 2mg/kg PO BID (Neoral and
day for 10 days, then as needed. Megestrol acetate
Atopica), up to 7.5-15mg/kg PO BID (Sandim-
consistently decreases inflammation but predis-
mune). Adjunct therapy with corticosteroids is rec-
ommended in some patients. Cyclosporin should
uria, and diabetes mellitus.
only be administered to indoor cats (outdoor cats
Levamisole 25mg orally every other day for 1 week.
are at higher risk of infection [especially toxoplas-
244
Feline Dentistry
mosis] and immunosuppression, as well as impaired
cavity is performed after extractions to remove surface
ability to fight infection adequately).
area for plaque to accumulate.
Antibiotics approved to treat dental infections are
administered for two weeks postoperatively. Pain relief
FIV-Positive Cats with Chronic Stomatitis
and anti-inflammatory medication are also dispensed
for the short-term. The prescribing of azithromycin as
Cats affected with feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
the antibiotic of choice for the treatment of feline oro-
can develop stomatitis secondary to immune dysfunc-
pharangyeal inflammation even in Bartonella-positive
tion. Medical therapy with corticosteroids should be
cats is controversial and not substantiated by scientific
avoided. Total mouth extraction is the treatment of
studies.
choice. In those cases with poor response after total
 Supragingival and subgingival plaque appears to be
mouth extraction, zidovudine (AZT) at 5-10mg/kg
one of the multifactoral initiating sources of oropharyn-
Pla Keu smou Zl Aiaaa Aisnoauensqns 1o Aeno
 geal inflammation. The only treatment thus far shown
promising results. AZT blocks the viral reverse tran-
to have long-term positive results without the need for
scriptase enzyme, which effectively inhibits FIV replica-
further medication in a majority of affected cats is tooth
tion, reduces the plasma viral load, and improves the
extraction. Removing teeth decreases the plaque burden.
 patient's clinical status.
The decision whether all teeth are extracted or only the
 premolars and molars is based on examination findings.
If marked inflammation, periodontal pockets or tooth
Specific Therapy for Mild Stomatitis
resorption are noted around the canines and/or incisors,
the affected teethi are also extracted.
Initial care for mild cases of non-caudal stomatitis
To evaluate response to extraction in cases of chronic
 includes teeth cleaning with ultrasonic and hand instru-
caudal stomatitis, a retrospective study of dental extrac-
ments above and below the gingival margin, followed
tions in sixty calicivirus-positive cats was conducted. In
by a tooth-by-tooth clinical examination and full-mouth
that study 50% of the cases resolved without the need
 intraoral radiography.
for further treatment, 37% sigrificantly improved requir-
All abnormalities are charted, including probing
ing less medication to control the stomatitis than before
depths. Those teeth affected with greater than stage 1
the extractions, 13% improved but required similar
 periodontal disease should be extracted.
amounts of continuing anti-inflammatory treatment,
Home plaque control includes daily application of
 and 7% did not improve from medical or surgical care.
 OraVet? plaque barrier gel and antimicrobial mouth
For those patients with anorexia prior to presentation
 rinses containing chlorhexidine gluconate (Oral Hygiene
that present in poor condition, nutritional support via
Rinse-Virbac, Fort Worth, TX) to help decrease the oral
-and panepu si aqnn uonssn ro soru
bacterial load. Daily rubbing with a Q-tip applicator
and/or postoperatively until eating returns to normal
dipped in water-packed tuna juice (for taste) to the free
(figs. 11.1 a-h).
gingival margin to remove plaque may also be helpful.
A hypoallergenic diet (Hills@ z/d, Waltham-Royal
with pre-anesthetic opioid administration (buprenor-
 Canin@ HP23) and feeding from ceramic or glass dishes
 phine), intraoperative local anesthetics (bupivacaine),
(not plastic ones) may also be beneficial.
and postoperative opioids given orally for five to seven
days.
Presurgical radiographs are important to evaluate
Surgical Management of Refractory
root anatomy and pathology. Teeth with tooth resorp-
Caudal Stomatitis
tion lesions are often undergoing root replacement
resorption, making luxation and elevation difficult. Pul-
When caudal stomatitis or marked vestibular mucositis
verizing or atomizing the root within the alveolus with
 is present and there is no visible inflammation sur-
a water-cooled high-speed handpiece and dental bur
rounding the canines and incisors, and when radio-
may result in removing excess supporting bone, remov-
graphic changes are absent on those teeth, extraction of
ing too little tooth, or causing trauma to adjacent
 all teeth and root fragments caudal to the canine teeth is
 anatomy, and should be avoided.
the treatment of choice. If the gingiva surrounding the
Postoperative examination is performed two weeks
canines or incisors are inflammed or abnormal on radio-
 graphs, they also should be extracted.
 preventative is recommended, and the client is shown
 If available, carbon dioxide laser rastering of
how to control plaque daily with Q-tips, OraVet?, and
inflammed and proliferative tissue in the caudal oral
0.12% chorhexidine gluconate irrigation.
Figure 11.1 a. 14 French red rubber feeding tube premeasured to the eighth intercostal space. b. Curved carmault tip placed in the cranial esophagus with
downward pressure on the handle. c. Incision made over the tip. d. Placement of the tube tip in the hemostat jaws. e. Tube pulled out of the mouth before
redirected down the esophagus.f. Caudal section of tube placed in the esophagus exiting from the skin (note previously marked area). g. Modified Chinese finger-
trap friction suture used to secure feeding tube. h. Bandaged patient.
245
246
Feline Dentistry
 In cases where oropharangyeal inflammation persists
pharangyeal inflammation. Removing multiple teeth
for months despite extractions and laser rastering caudal
and root fragments together with periodic laser ther-
to the canines, extraction of all remaining teeth and root
moablation and medication (prednisone every 2-3 days)
fragments is indicated.
may be helpful in these cases (figs. 11.2 a-y, 11.3 a-d,
 If lesions persist and the patient has been affected for
11.4 a-l, 11.5 a-k, 11.6 a-0).
 months to years, the condition is termed refractory oro-
Figure 11.2 a. Right maxillary alveolar mucositis and periodontal disease. b. Radiograph of right cheek teeth. c. Left maxillary alveolar mucositis. d. Radiograph
of the left maxillary cheek teeth showing radiolucency between the furcation. e. Caudal vestibular stomatitis. f. Right mandibular alveolar mucositis. g. Radio-
graph of the right mandibular cheek teeth showing tooth resorption and stage 4 periodontal disease. h. Left mandibular cheek teeth. i. Radiograph of the left
mandibular cheek teeth showing tooth resorption and stage 4 periodontal disease.j. Right maxillary canine and cheek teeth extracted. k. Radiograph confirming
extraction at the right maxilla. I. Left maxilla radiograph confirming extractions. m. Left mandibular canine and cheek teeth extractions. n and o. Radiographs
esn aeadsd poydee a ydee ee es aeadaad h exeu es aeadod d suexa iae saeu al pe  au ia
maxilla after extractions. 5. Preoperative rostral mandible radiograph. t. Postoperative surgical image of mandible. u. Postoperative radiograph of the rostral
mandible. v. Persistent caudal mucositis three months after surgery. w. Surface COz laser ablation of the inflammed tissues. x. Four months postoperatively.
y Eight months postoperatively, inflammation resolved.
m
Figure 11.2  Continued
247
Figure 11.2 Continued
248
Figure 11.2 Continued
249
Figure 11.2Continued
Figure 11.3 a. Unilateral caudal stomatitis. b. Increased plaque accumulation
due to a supernumerary right mandibular fourth premolar. c. Preoperative radio-
 graph. d. Resolution after extraction of the right mandibular cheek teeth.
250
Figure 11.4 a. Gingivitis, periodontitis, and mild alveolar mucositis around 
the maxillary cheek teeth. b. Gingivitis, periodontitis, and alveolar mucositis of
the mandibular cheek teeth. c. Close-up of the right maxillary cheek teeth.
d. Close-up of the right mandibular cheek teeth. e and f. Immediate postopera-
tive views after extraction of the teeth caudal to the maxillary and mandibular
canines. g-l. Six months postoperatively, resolution of inflammation.
251
Figure 11.4 Continued
252
Figure 11.5 a-d. Gingivitis, periodontitis, and alveolar mucositis before
surgery. e Radliograph of the maxilla confirming extraction.f.Radiograph of the
rostral maxilla confirming extractions. g and h. Radiographs of the mandibles
 confirming extractions. i-k. Six months after all teeth were extracted; full resolu-
tion of previous oral disease.
253
Figure11.5Continued
Figure 11.6 a. Right maxillary fourth premolar and mandibular molar alveolar mucositis and periodontal disease. b. Radiograph of right mandibular first molar
distal root bone loss (arrows). c. Left maxillary fourth premolar and mandibular first molar alveolar mucositis and periodontal disease. d. Radiograph of the left
mandibular first molar distal root bone loss (arrows). e. Right maxillary fourth premolar extracted. f Postoperative radiograph of right maxilla. g. Left maxillary
fourth premolar extracted. h. Postoperative radiograph of left maxilla. i. Left mandibular first molar extracted. j. Postoperative radiograph of left mandible. k.
Right mandibular first molar extracted. I. Postoperative radiograph of right mandible. m-o. Three months postoperatively, resolution of inflammation.
254
Figure 11.6  Continued
255
T
Figure 11.6 Continued
256
Treatment of Oropharyngeal Inflammation
257
Preoperative Laboratory Evaluation
5.1
 Use a round carbide bur loaded on a high-speed,
water-cooled handpiece to remove at least half of
Laboratory evaluation should include CBC, serum
the buccal alveolus, exposing the root surface.
 profile, coagulation profile, thyroid tests, urinalysis, and
Alternatively, sterile saline is irrigated (instead
tests for feline leukemia (FeLV) and FIV. A majority of
of water from the drill) on the surgical site by
 the cases will have elevated globulin levels and are neg-
an assistant. Removal of a 2- to 4-mm-long slot
ative for FeLV as well as FIV. The purpose of the workup
between the tooth and periodontal ligament as a
Auapi oh rayei 1nq as rad sisoueip e qoean ch jou st
"purchase" place for wing-tipped elevator blade
 possible underlying causes and to provide information
helps the extraction process (figs. 11.7 n, 0).
to ensure the safest possible anesthetic episode.
6.
Section multirooted teeth into single-rooted crown-
root segments with a #1 or #2 round or a taper
fissure bur Sectioning should begin at the furcation
and extend toward the coronal aspect of the tooth
Technique for Multiple Tooth Extraction
(figs. 11.7 p. q).
 Gently stretch the periodontal ligament and elevate
1. Perform maxillary and /or mandibular nerve blocks
single-rooted segments using a #1 or #2 wing-
to provide regional anesthesia.
tipped elevator between the roots. The mesiopala-
 2. Incise the sulcular gingival attachment 360 degrees
tal root of the maxillary fourth premolar is best
with a #15 scalpel blade around all teeth to be
approached after extraction of the mesiobuccal and
extracted (figs. 11.7 a-h).
distal roots by exposure of overlying septal bone.
3.
To aid excision of the canine and cheek teeth, make
8.
 Narrow-beaked extraction forceps are used to
 a vertical releasing incision into alveolar mucosa
deliver the teeth from the oral cavity once suffi-
beyond the mucogingival junction mesial to the
ciently mobile.
canine tooth.
9.
The alveolar sockets should be debrided with a
4.1
Elevate the flap bucally and lingually, using a
spoon curette to remove vestiges of the periodontal
freshly sharpened Molt periosteal elevator. This
 ligament and cementum.
full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap
will free the
10.
 Use a large diamond-coated round bur to perform
attached gingiva and several millimeters of alveo-
an alveoloplasty after extraction to remove dis-
lar mucosa from the underlying bone (figs. 11.7
eased bone and sharp bone fragments and to
i-m).
 smooth the alveolar margin.
Figure 11.7 a-d. Gingivitis, periodontitis, and alveolar mucositis around the maxillary and mandibular cheek teeth. e. Red marker used to identify teeth to
be extracted. f-h. Sulcular incisions. i and j. Molt elevator used to detach gingiva from the teeth and alveolar bone. k-m. Exposure of the mandibular and maxil-
eand yn ee al a has id sne leng ie a io le o pe u uung lnn aun d sassad eone ae
q. Sectioning the left maxillary fourth premolar. r. Extracted maxillary premolars and molars. s. Extracted mandibular premolars and molars. t. Deep and wide
suture placement. u. Sutured maxillae. v. Sutured mandibles. w. Resokving stomatitis one month after surgery.
258
Figure 11.7 Continued
259
Figure 11.7  Continued
260
Figure 11.7 Continued
261
262
Feline Dentistry
11.
 Expose and examine intraoral films of all extraction
sent home with the owner to apply twice daily for a
sites.
week as an oral rinse.
12.
 Close the gingiva over the extraction sites without
tension. If tension exists, dehiscence often occurs.
To create a larger flap to suture without tension,
Laser Adjunctive Therapy
lightly incise in a distomedial direction over the
 connective tissue of the inside of the flap.
Carbon dioxide and diode laser ablation may be helpful
13.
 Suture using 4-0 or 5-0 absorbable material with
as an adjunct therapy modality in cases of stomatitis
reverse cutting or round tapered needles (figs. 11.7
where proliferative caudal stomatitis is present and mul-
r-v).
tiple extractions have been performed. Laser therapy
14.
 Postoperative films are exposed and examined.
can be performed at the time of initial extraction surgery
15.
 Postoperatively, administer an antibiotic approved
and as part of follow-up therapy Clinically, laser therapy
for dental disease and pain control medication for
appears to increase patient comfort as evidenced by a
one week. Soft food is recommended for one month
prompt return to eating (fig. 11.11a).
(fig. 11.7w).
 Laser therapy removes part of the proliferating tissue
and bacteria, thus decreasing the antigen load. After
See figures 11.8 a through 1 for examples of full-mouth
laser ablation, a portion of the inflammatory mass is
extractions, and figures 11.9 a through e for extraction
replaced with fibrous, less-reactive scar tissue. Laser
of teeth caudal to the canines.
 treatment does not cure oropharangyeal inflammation
and should not be recommended as monotherapy for
Aressanau si juauneaan Auou 'uao uonpuoo si
Root Fragment Removal
for the three months after extractions, followed by semi-
 annual reevaluation and posible laser application (figs
A fully extracted tooth should have a smooth round
11.11 b, c, d).
 apex. When this is not observed, often a root fragment
 The operator and all assistants in the immediate area
remains in the alveolar socket. Every effort should be
 of the laser should wear protective eye wear. Warning
 made to retrieve from the alveolus any remaining root
signs should be posted on all entrances to the operatory
fragments created during the extraction procedure. If
area when the laser is being used.
these fragments are not removed, a nidus of chronic
 An anti-inflammatory dose of dexamethasone sodium
infection may develop.
phosphate is administered (0.125-0.5mg/kg IV) before
A fine elevator or root-tip pick is used to retrieve the
laser ablation to minimize oropharyngeal swelling. The
root fragment. If this approach does not allow extrac-
patient is placed in sternal recumbency with the maxil-
tion, the buccal alveolar plate covering the fragment is
lae supported between two adjustable intravenous fluid
removed, exposing the underlying root. A slot between
-msu rav lueisisse ue Aq uado piau io adet um salod
the tooth and periodontal ligament is created to place
ing adequate seal of the endotracheal cuff, a moistened 
the blade of the wing-tipped elevator, which is used to
gauze is wrapped around the endotracheal tube in the
elevate and extract the root fragment.
 pharynx to prevent the laser from contacting it. A smoke
1.
 Intraoral radiographs are exposed and examined,
evacuator is placed near the patient's mouth.
revealing the root fragment and adjacent anatomy.
 Four-quadrant regional anesthesia with long-acting
2.
 A mucoperiosteal flap is created.
0.5% bupivicaine is administered. The COz laser is set to
3.
A root-tip elevator is advanced around the root
6 watts in continuous mode delivered to a 0.8-mm
remnant to create mobility and delivery.
ceramic tip used in focused (cutting) noncontact mode
4.
 If the root-tip elevator is not effective in delivering
to thermoablate visible proliferative tissue of the caudal
the root remnant, removal of additional buccal alve-
oral cavity. After gross removal of proliferative tissue,
olar bone should expose the root tip for easier visu-
the wave-guide can be changed to accommodate a scan-
alization and delivery (figs. 11.10 a, b, c).
 ning handpiece capable of efficient ablation of remain-
ing visible proliferative tissue. The scanning handpiece
is used at a seting of 6 watts in continuous mode. The
Postoperative Recommendations
tissue at the base of the excised portions is ablated layer
by layer. This will usually create a char layer. Removal
The diet should be softened for at least one week after
of char is recommended with saline-soaked cotton-
surgery. This can be accomplished by instructing the
tipped applicators. This process is repeated multiple
client to soak the animal's food for about twenty minutes
times until all visible proliferative tissue is removed.
before feeding. A 0.12% chlorhexidine solution can be
The remaining tissue shows a decreased tendency to
Figure 11.8 a and b. Right caudal vestibular mucositis and periodontal
disease. c. Maxillary incisor fractures. d. Left maxillary fourth premolar alveolar
mucositis and periodontal disease. e and f. Left caudal vestibular mucositis.
 g-i. Delivery of left maxillary cheek teeth during the full-mouth extraction
procedure.  j-l.  Resolved  oropharyngeal inflammation  after full-mouth 
extraction.
263
Figure 11.8 Continued
264
Figure 11.9 a. Caudal vestibular gingivitis and mucositis. b. Right caudal
vestibular stomatitis. c. Right mandibular gingivitis and mucositis. d and e.
 Resolution after extraction of the teeth caudal to the canines.
265
+
266
一品
Figure 11.11 a. Diode laser b. Diode laser tip applied to inflammed gingiva. c. CO, laser ablating inflammed tissue. d. CO laser used to remove inflammed
Gaudal stomatitis tissue.
267
268
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 11.12 a. Gingivitis and caudal stomatitis. b. Laser ablation of the
inflammed tissue after full-mouth extractions. c. Resolution of inflammation.
spontaneous bleed when touched with a gauze sponge.
blood mononuclear cells during chronic feline immunodefi-
The treated surfaces are sprayed with 2mg of lidocaine
ciency virus infection. J Vet Med Sci 2008; 70: 429-435.
before extubation (figs. 11.12 a, b, c).
Lewis jR, Tsugawa AJ, Reiter AM. Use of CO2 laser as an
Postoperative
pain medication
(buprenorphine,
adjunctive treatment for caudal stomatitis in a cat. J Vet Dent
 hydromorphone, fentanyl patches), oral steroids (admin-
2007; 24: 240-249.
Lyon KF. Gingivostomatitis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
istered twice daily for one week followed by every other
IPract 2005; 35: 891-911.
day for two weeks), and dental-specific antimicrobials
Niza MMRE, Mestrinho LA, Vilela CL. Feline chronic gingivo-
are dispensed when the laser patient is released.
stomatitis: a clinical challenge. Rev Port Cienc Vet 2004; 99
(551): 127-135.
Sato R, Inanami O, Tanaka Y, Takase M, Naito Y. Oral admin-
Further Reading
istration of bovine lactoferrin for treatment of intractable
Addie DD, Radford A, Yam PS, Taylor DJ. Cessation of feline
and FIV-negative cats. Am J Vet Res 1996; 57: 1443-1446.
calicivirus shedding coincident with resolution of chronic
Southerden P, Gorrel C. Treatment of a case of refractory feline
gingivostomatitis in a cat. J Small Anim Pract 2003; 44:
chronic oropharangyeal inflammation with feline recombi-
172-176.
nant interferon omega. J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48:
Bellei E, Dalla F, Masetti L, Pisoni L, Joechler M. Surgical
104-106.
 therapy in chronic feline gingivostomatitis (FCGS). Vet Res 
Williams CA, Aller MS. Gingivitis/stomatitis in cats. Vet Clin
Commun 2008; 32: 231-234.
North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1361-1383.
 Hennet P Chronic gingivo-stomatitis in cats: long-term follow-
 Zetmer K. Evaluation of the effects of an intraoral administra-
up of 30 cases treated by dental extractions. J Vet Dent 1997;
tion of recombinant feline omega-interferon (Virbagen Ome-
14: 15-21.
gaReg.) on feline oropharangyeal inflammation and the
Kobayashi S, Sato R, Aoki T, Omoe K, Inanami O, Hankanga
general condition of cats suffering from chronic inflamma-
C, Yamada Y, Tomizawa N, Yasuda J, Sasaki J. Effect of
tion of mouth and pharynx. Praktische Tierarzt 2008; 89:
bovine lactoferrin on functions of activated feline peripheral
630-634.
Chapter 12
Treatment of Occlusion Disorders
The goal of treatment for cats affected by malocclusion
resistance. The crown moves in one direction and
 disorders is to return the patient to a functional condi-
the root apex in the opposite direction.
 tion. This may involve orthodontic tooth movement,
2.
. Bodily movement (translation) occurs when two
extraction, or crown reduction and restoration.
forces are applied simultaneously to the crown of a
tooth, causing the crowm and apex to move in the
same direction.
Ethics of Performing Veterinary
 3. Rotation (torsion) moves the tooth around its long
Orthodontics
axis.
4.
 Extrusion moves the tooth out of the alveolus.
The shape and size of the head and the number and
5.
 Intrusion moves the tooth inward into the alveolus.
position of teeth are genetically controlled. Occasionally,
 Extrusion is the easiest to accomplish, followed by
owners of show cats seek orthodontic care to correct
 tipping. Intrusion is the most difficult.
abnormal tooth position. Organized cat show associa-
tions do not allow a cat that has had orthodontic care to
 compete in the show ring.
Force
Cats that have pain or periodontal disease secondary
to occlusal abnormalities deserve treatment to alleviate
 Force must be applied at least six hours each day for
 lesions and make the mouth comfortable. Orthodontic
 proper orthodontic tooth movement to occur. Orthodon-
 cats can be performed with a clear conscience.
 Intermittent force: This can be applied with rest
periods characterized by an abrupt decline of force
Principles of Orthodontic Tooth
to zero every time the load is released. An inclined
plane used to treat lingually displaced canine teeth
Movement
would be an example of an intermittent force
appliance.
Teeth are anchored to the alveolar bone by the periodon-
Continuous force: This produces effective tooth
tal ligament fibers. Orthodontic tooth movement results
from light, persistent pressure that stimulates bone
movement when light forces are used. Orthodontic
jaaiet pue rououe ue ot padde sonsela pue suonq
remodeling. This movement involves at least three vari-
tooth would be an example of continuous force orth-
ables: magnitude, direction, and duration of force.
Tooth movement for orthodontic care is considered
odontic movement.
an advanced dental procedure that should not be
 umdertaken without appreciation of the science, treat-
Pressure
ment options, and sequelae.
There
are
fivebasic
tooth
movements
in
Pressure of the tooth against bone, caused by orthodon-
orthodontics:
tic devices designed to push or pull teeth, results in
1.
 Tipping involves a single force applied to the crown,
blood vessel compression. This blood flow compression
which causes the tooth to rotate around its center of
leads to cell death within hours. Through biological
269
270
Feline Dentistry
feedback, the body increases osteoclastic activity on the
used because the fluoride might prevent the etching
side of increased pressure and increases osteoblastic
 process of the enamel.
activity on the side of decreased pressure. The result is
2.
Thoroughly rinse the teeth for at least thirty
a shift in the position of the alveolar socket in the direc.
seconds.
tion of applied force. With sustained light force, move-
3.
Dry the teeth with oil-free compressed air.
 ment usually begins in two weeks.
4.
 Apply etching solution or gel according to the man-
Excessive force might cause interference with the peri-
ufacturer's instructions on the enamel surface
odontal ligament and alveolar bone blood supply, which
where the button is to be affixed. After etching.
can lead to pulp and bone necrosis. Damage to the peri-
rinse and air-dry the tooth surface. Use of hot air
odontal structures may produce tooth mobility and
from a hair blower is not recommended because of
eventual exfoliation.
potential damage to the tooth and surrounding
tissue.
 After etching, the tooth surface should appear dull
Orthodontic Buttons and Elastics
 and chalky. If not, repeat the etching process.
 With a small absorbent square cotton pellet attached
Tooth movement with elastics and buttons involve so-
to cotton pliers, or a brush, mix the sealant and
called anchor and target teeth. The anchor tooth or teeth
accelerator; paint the mixture on the etched sur-
must have a greater root surface area, which provides
faces of one or more teeth. Choose the location for
 higher resistance to movement compared with that of
 button placement to provide a straight line between
the target tooth. Ideally, the anchor tooth remains stable,
the anchor and target.
7.
 Mix the adhesive and hardener with a brush to a
allowing target tooth movement. Healthy anchor teeth
putty consistency.
and periodontal support are critical to successful target
8.
Select metal orthodontic buttons with bracket
tooth movement. Commonly, the maxillary third and
fourth premolars are used together as anchors to move
forceps or college-tipped pliers.
rostrally deviated canines caudally.
9.
Apply the adhesive/hardener mixture to the base
Orthodontic buttons are cemented on the teeth to
of the button (hold with bracket placement pliers).
provide attachment for elastics, wires, or springs.
10.
Position the button on the tooth and press into the
Elastic chains are used as a source of force for many
adhesive. Remove excess bonding material with a
appliances.
hand scaler.
Aae snq a u pad aq r ss
fifteen minutes after cementation. To place elastics,
Additional Instruments and Materials
apply light force to the elastic power chain. If the bracket
does not come off the tooth, pull the chain to test the
Right-angled handpiece
bond. If the bracket is dislodged, it can be reapplied
 Rubber polishing cup
using the adhesive/hardener mixture.
Fine pumice
Check the cat weekly to monitor progress and replace
 Cotton pliers
elastics. Tooth movement is not expected in the first two
 Bracket cementCB Metabond (Parkel, Farming-
weeks because it takes that long to recruit osteoclasts
dale, N.Y.)
and osteoblasts. Movement in the first two weeks would
 Metal brackets, Ormesh curved lingual pad with
be secondary to bone necrosis, not remodeling, indicat-
button (Ormco Corp.)
ing excessive force and eventual failure. The goal is slow
 Elastic Masel chain, flattened elastic with an arrange-
movement over two to four months. At the recheck
ment of holes to allow attachment to buttons or
appointment, possible anchor tooth movement should
brackets
also be checked and, if present, elastics removed or addi-
Bracket placement tweezers
tional anchor teeth added (figs. 12.1 a-e).
Extraction of Malpositioned Teeth
Technique for Button Placement and
Force Activation
The advantages of extraction compared to orthodontic
movement include less total treatment time and fewer
1. Polish the tooth surfaces free of plaque and debris
anesthetic procedures to accomplish the therapy goal of
A1mis pue aloue Audoid e uo dns 1aqqni e Suisn
relieving discomfort. The disadvantage of extraction is
of pumice/water. Fluoride paste should not be
loss of a permanent tooth.
Treatment of Occlusion Disorders 
271
Figure 12.1 a. Mandibular maxillary asymmetry. b. Orthodontic buttons and elastics used to move the left and right maxillary canines caudally. -e. Functional
 occlusion after three months of orthodontic treatment.
Crown Reduction with Vital Pulp
cat's mouth to normal function. The procedure is often
Therapy
quicker than canine tooth extraction and still maintains
the function of the tooth. The disadvantage lies in the
When a malpositioned tooth impinges on the opposing
possibility of composite shrinkage causing the restora-
gingiva or interferes with other teeth, crown reduction
tion to fail and allowing oral bacteria to enter the pulp,
with vital pulp therapy and restoration may return the
which ultimately leads to pulp necrosis (figs. 12.2 a-e).
272
Feline Dentistry
Figure 12.2 a and b. Mandibular mesioclusion exposing rostral lower jaw.
c. Diamond disk used to reduce the crowns of the mandibular canines (Author
comment: crosscut fissure bur is effective and safer). d. Reduced and restored
 mandibular canines. e. Rostral mandible covered normally.
Specific Occlusion Disorders
manent teeth to abnormal locations, which causes mal-
occlusion. Double sets of roots may also prevent the
Persistent Deciduous Teeth
normal development of the alveolus and periodontal
support around the permanent tooth, resulting in early
Normally, cats’ deciduous (primary) tooth roots are
tooth loss.
resorbed as the permanent (secondary) teeth erupt. The
 A persistent deciduous tooth should be extracted as
mechanism that causes physiological resorption of the
soon as the permanent tooth starts to erupt in the same
deciduous tooth roots is not fully understood, nor is the
alveolar socket. If extraction is performed early, the
mechanism that leads to failure of the roots to resorb.
abnormally positioned permanent tooth usually moves
When resorption fails, the permanent teeth occupy the
to its normal location.
same alveolus as the deciduous teeth. Double sets of
When a wait-and-see approach is taken to see whether
teeth may overcrowd the dental arch, moving the per-
the persistent deciduous tooth is exfoliated on its own
Treatment of Occlusion Disorders 
273
accord, the permanent tooth occasionally becomes per-
buds, genetic influence (especially Persian cats), or skel-
manently malpositioned, requiring orthodontic move-
etal abnormalities.
ment, crown reduction, or extraction.
Treatment for canine mesioversion includes:
● Orthodontic movement with elastics. The best time
Supernumerary (Extra) Teeth
for this treatment is between 9 and 18 months. Tooth
Supernumerary teeth can cause periodontal disease
movement to a functional position takes two to six
from crowding and displacement of normal teeth. Fol-
months.
Extraction
lbwing intraoral radiographs, supernumerary teeth
should be extracted if crowding or gingival impinge-
Crown reduction with vital pulp therapy and resto-
ration (figs. 12.3 a-0)
ment exists.
Missing Teeth
Mandibular Canine Linguoversion
Missing teeth (hypodontia) usually occurs in the premo-
Lingually displaced mandibular canines may trauma-
lar area, but any tooth in the mouth may be absent. The
tize the hard palate. Treatment options include man-
dlinically absent tooth may be present below the gingival
dibular canine extraction, crown reduction with vital
margin. Dental radiographs are indicated to determine
 pulp therapy and restoration, orthodontic movement
whether the tooth is not present, nonerupted, or missing
with buttons and elastics, or fabrication of an acrylic
 its crown with the fractured root positioned subgingi-
inclined plane on the maxilla to move the mandibular
vally. Where teeth or root fragments are located subgin-
canines buccally.
givally, extraction is indicated if gingival inflammation,
sinus tracts, or signs of endodontic/periapical disease
Maxillary Fourth Premolar/Mandibular First
are present.
Molar Interference
Treatment options for the impinging tooth (the maxil-
Mesioversion of Canine Teeth
lary fourth premolar) include odontoplasty to decrease
Mesioversion (rostral displacement, lance, or spear
 the sharp penetrating edge, crown reduction with vital
teeth) of the maxillary or mandibular canine teeth occurs
 pulp therapy and restoration, or extraction. Extraction
when the affected teeth are angled in a mesial direction.
 of the mandibular teeth affected by gingival recession
This may be caused by malpositioned permanent tooth
may also be performed (figs. 12.4 a-q, 12.5 a-c).
Figure 12.3 a. Left and right mandibular canines impinging on the upper lips. b-e. Mesiolinguoversion of the maxillary canines. f. Orthodontic buttons and
elastics applied to move the right maxillary canine caudally. g. Right and left maxillary orthodontic buttons and elastics applied. h and i.After two months right
-dde pue unpan uman auuen denque y sd laddn au ua huudui sauuen engiue ! suonisod jeuung ot paau sauuen Aellew yal pe
tion of calcium hydroxide during vital pulp therapy. l-m. Crown-reduced canines in functional occlusion before final restoration finishing. n and o. Patient's
 canines no longer protruding.
Figure 12.3 Continued
274
Figure 12.3 Continued
275
Figure 12.4 a. Right maxillary fourth premolar impinging on the buccal
gingiva and alveolar mucosa of the right mandibular first molar. b-d. Gingival
recession and inflammation at the right mandibular first molar secondary to the
impinging right maxillary fourth premolar. e-h. Crown height reduction. i and
uniey y dind euonn aun jo wug anwan on pasn ang auo paaul !
hydroxide applied over the exposed pulp. I. Bonding agent applied to the area.
m. Light curing acrylic resin composite. n. Polymerized composite. o and p. white
stone bur used to finish the restoration. q. Area healed on 3-month follow-up
exam.
276
Figure 12.4
Continued
277
m
Figure 12.4 Continued
278
Treatment of Occlusion Disorders 
279
Figure 12.5 a. Left maxillary fourth premolar penetrating gingival buccal to
the left mandibular molar. b. Marked proliferative inflammation of the gingiva
and alveolar mucosa of the left mandibular first molar secondary to impinge-
ment by the left maxillary fourth premolar. c. Inflammation resolved after extrac-
 tion of the maxillary fourth premolar and the mandibular first molar.
Further Reading
Sarkiala-Kessel E. Malocclusion in a cat. J Vet Dent 2001; 18:
76-77.
Emily P. Feline malocclusion. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
Surgeon TW. Surgical exposure and orthodontic extrusion of
Pract 1992; 22: 1453-1460.
an impacted canine tooth in a cat: a case report. J Vet Dent
Gioso MA, Carvalho VG, Carvalho PE. Construction of dental
2000; 17: 81-85.
Van de Wetering A. Orthodontic correction of a base narrow
study models. J Vet Dent 2004; 21: 122-126.
Hale FA. Juvenile veterinary dentistry. Vet Clin North Am
mandibular canine tooth in a cat. J Vet Dent 2007; 24:
Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 789-817.
22-28.
Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB, Peak RM. Dental diseases of puppies
Wissdorf H, Hermanns W. Permanent milk canine teeth in the
and kittens. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1999; 29:
upper jaw of a domestic cat. Kleintierpraxis 1974; 19 (1):
871-893.
14-16.
Chapter 13
Oral Trauma Surgery
Knowledge of surgical anatomy, pathology, and opera-
mandibular condyle from settling back in place or relux-
tive principles is essential to positive outcomes.
ating following reduction. If the condyle does not prop-
erly reduce back into the fossa, condylectomy may be
indicated to allow functional occlusion.
Treatment Considerations
Fractures of the condylar process are not repairable by
fixation of the fragments. If the jaw can be closed, treat
Functional occlusion is more important than cosmetics.
the cat conservatively with a loose tape muzzle unless it
 Intact teeth in the fracture line should not be extracted
becomes clear that the range of motion of the jaw is
if they do not interfere with fracture reduction. Vital
reduced and the patient is unwilling to eat by itself. If
teeth that have been malpositioned by the fracture are
there is an additional rostral mandible fracture, rigid
extracted or repositioned and splinted into functional
fixation may be indicated (figs. 13.2 a-o).
position.
Esophagostomy tube placement may be necessary.
 Bone plates are not commonly used in mandibular or
Temporomandibular Joint Ankylosis
maxillary fracture repair.
 Interdental fixation with wire, acrylic splints, or orth-
Treatment of  temporomandibular  joint  ankylosis
 odontic buttons and elastics are preferred methods for
involves excision arthroplasty of the temporomandibu-
repair.
lar joint, condylectomy, or caudal mandibulectomy to
allow functional range of motion of the lower jaw.
Temporomandibular Joint Dislocation
Open-Mouth Jaw Locking
Treatment of a temporomandibular joint dislocation
 involves placing the cat under general anesthesia, insert-
Acute treatment involves opening the lower jaw further
ing a fulcrum (a pencil or tubular device) across the
to release the coronoid process from the ventrolateral
region of the maxillary and mandibular carnassial teeth
aspect of the zygomatic arch, then closing the mouth. A
on the side of the luxation, and closing the jaws, which
tape muzzle may provide temporary stabilization.
inserts the mandibular condyle into the mandibular
Definitive surgical treatment, partial zygomectomy
fossa. The condyle must first pass over the articular
(by removing the part of the zygomatic arch that catches
eminence before it can properly be reduced into the
the coronoid process), usually results in resolution of the
 mandibular fossa. This is best accomplished by gently
pulling the mandible of the luxated side rostrally to
 not resolve the locking, then several millimeters of the
disengage the condyle from the dorsal surface of the
dorsal aspect of the coronoid process are also resected
articular eminence. The mouth is then closed on the
(partial coronoidectomy)
 fulcrum and the mandible is pushed caudally to prop-
The coronoid process can be palpated when it is devi-
 erly reduce the condyle within the fossa. No postreduc-
ated laterally in an abnormal position which also allows
tion fixation is necessary unless there are additional
for a lateral surgical approach. A periosteal elevator is
maxillary or mandibular fractures requiring stabiliza-
used to peel away temporal muscle from the dorsal
tion (figs. 13.1 a-h).
aspect of the coronoid process exposing the underlying
 Occasionally, the fibrocartilaginous disc in the luxated
periosteum. Then 3-5mm of the dorsal aspect of the
joint will be torn and folded on itself, preventing the
coronoid process are removed with a rongeur.
280
Figure 13.1  a. Lower jaw deviated to the left secondary to a right temporomandibular joint (TMJ) luxation. b. Right (red) TMJ rostrodorsal luxation dorsoventral
image. c. Syringe placed between the right maxillary fourth premolar and mandibular first molar teeth to act as a fulcrum. d. Mandible pulled forward and
downward by gently closing the lower jaw. e. Luxation corrected. f. Functional occlusion reestablished. g. Reexam two months postoperatively (after extraction
 of the left maxillary and mandibular canines and root canal therapy on the right maxillary canine). h. Patient appearance after treatment.
281
Figure 13.1
Contintuied
Figure 13.2 a. Cat presented with maxillofacial deformity and asymmetry. b. Deviated rostral lower jaw. c. Rostral mandibular fracture. d. Radiograph confirm-
ing fracture involving incisors and mandibular symphysis. e and f. Radiographs of caudal mandibular fracture. g. Fine pumice used to clean teeth before etching.
h. Etchant applied before bonding. i. Light-cured acrylic resin applied to maxillary and mandibular canines. j. Gold instrument used to place bonding material
between the tooth surfaces. k. Light curing. I. white stone used to shape cured acrylic. m. Canines bonded in functional occlusion with sufficient space to move
tongue and to breathe comfortably (esophagostomy tube placed). n. Acrylic has been removed; functional occlusion achieved after one month of acrylic holding
canines together. o. Clinical appearance (note persistent left-sided Horner's syndrome).
282
Condylar Process
FX
Coronoid Process
AngularProcess
Coronoid
Pro
Figure 13.2 Continued
283
284
Feline Dentistry
Figure 13.2Continued
Maxillary/Mandibular Fractures
within the oropharynx via a pharyngostomy incision
between the ramus of the mandible and the epihyoid
bone.
The endotracheal tube often serves as an impediment to
 properly evaluating occlusion and repairing maxillary
Mandibular Symphysis Separation
and mandibular fractures. To remove the endotracheal
tube from the rostral oral cavity, the trachea can be intu-
In most cases, the mandibles can be apposed and stabi-
bated through a tracheotomy site or preferentially from
lized for fibrous attachment to occur by means of self-
Oral Trauma Surgery
285
cured temporization material (3MTM ESPETM Protemp
Mandibular Fractures
3TM GarantTM; figs. 13.3 a-h).
 Alternatively, the mandibular symphysis can be sta-
Fractures in the mandibular incisor area can usually be
bilized with cerclage wiring.
ds ore u uidde Aq pae pa u pax
from canine tooth to canine tooth, incorporating all of
 the incisor teeth on that jaw. Dental composite may also
1.
 Two centimeters of the rostral lower jaw are pre-
be applied between the maxillary and mandibular
 pared for surgery.
canines to stabilize mandibular fractures.
2.
An 18-gauge needle is passed through the skin
Mandibular body fractures are more common than
ventral to the carine teeth up and around one
 fractures in the incisor region. Depending on the extent 
side of the mandible to exit just behind the canine
 of displacement there are multiple therapy options:
tooth.
 Interdental wiring with intraoral resin oversplint.
 3. Orthopedic wire (22 gauge) is inserted through the
Application of a muzzle for fractures with minimal
needle and grasped with a needle holder when the
displacement.
needle is withdrawn.
 Temporary bonding of the maxillary and mandibu-
4.
 The needle is reinserted at the other side in similar
lar canines in normal occlusion until the fracture site
fashion as described above.
has healed into a functional position.
5.The intraoral end of the wire is inserted into
Segmental mandibulectomy for fractures deemed
the sharp end of the needle, and the needle is
 not repairable.
removed.
6.
 Both wire ends are twisted sufficiently to approxi-
 mate the mandibles and compress the separation
MaxillaryFractures
site (fig. 13.4).
Midline maxillary fractures result from trauma in the
cat. Suturing the palatal defect is usually curative.
Care should be taken not to compromise the blood
Unstable fractures of the maxilla can usually be held
supply to the area through excessive compression. Clini-
in reduction with a splint extending across the palate
cal union of the symphyseal separation usually occurs
from the canine tooth on one side to the canine tooth on
within six weeks.
the other side (figs. 13.5 a-f).
Figure 13.3 a. Mandibular symphysis separation. b. Radiograph of rostral
lower jaw. c. Teth cleaned with fine pumice. d and e. Partial application of
temporization material. f. Trimmed and polished splint. g. Postoperative radio-
graph. h. Immediate appearance after splint removal six weeks postinjury.
Figure 13.3 Continued
286
Figure 13.4  Ends of cerclage wire exiting ventrally to repair mandibular symphysis separation.
b
Figure 13.5 a. Traumatic midline hard palate defect. b. Maxillary radiograph revealing extent of fracture. c. Temporization material applied to the maxillary
 pue hex 'a sauen enue unsoda a yo aue ao mae o ang pads ya y pauu pte p ues a saen
 temporization material applied with room for functional occlusion. f. Maxillary fracture healing two weeks after splint application.
287
288
 Feline Dentistry
Figure 13.5 Continued
 Further Reading
 Boudrieau RJ, Kudisch M. Miniplate fixation for repair of man-
dibular and maxillary fractures in 15 dogs and 3 cats. Vet
Surg 1996; 25: 277-291.
Anderson MA, Orsini PG, Harvey CE. Temporomandibular
Chambers J. Principles of management of mandibular fractures
ankylosis: treatment by unilateral condylectomy in two dogs
in the dog and cat. J Vet Orthop 1981; 2: 26-36.
and two cats. J Vet Dent 1996; 13: 23-25.
Eisner ER. Bilateral mandibular condylectomy in a cat. J Vet
Barbudo GR, Selmi AL, Canola JC. Oral and maxillofacial
Dent 1995; 12: 23-26.
a i f o p am n i e u os
 Kapatkin AS, Matthiesen DT. Feline high rise syndrome. Comp
2000; 17: 168-172.
Cont Ed Pract Vet 1991; 13: 1389-1398.
Beam RC, Kunz DA, Cook CR, Carson RL, Briscoe P, Cook JL.
 Legendre L. Maxillofacial fracture repairs. Vet Clin North Am 
Use of three-dimensional computed tomography for diagno-
Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 985-1008.
sis and treatment planning for open-mouth jaw locking in a
Legendre L. Use of maxillary and mandibular splints for res-
cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2007; 230: 59-63.
 toration of normal occlusion following jaw trauma in a cat:
Bennett JW, Kapatkin AS, Marretta SM. Dental composite for
a case report. J Vet Dent 1998; 15: 179-181.
the fixation of mandibular fractures and luxations in 1l cats
 Legendre LFJ. Management and long term effects of electrocu-
and 6 dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 190-194.
tion in a cat's mouth. J Vet Dent 1993; 10 (3): 6-8.
Bilgili H, Kurum B. Treatment of fractures of the mandible and
 Lobprise HB, Wiggs RB. Modified surgical treatment of inter-
pue shop u suasAs uoex ateld unuei yu Aq eixeu
 mittent open-mouth mandibular locking in a cat. J Vet Dent
cats. Aust Vet J 2003; 81: 671-673.
1992; 9 (1): 8-12.
 Oral Trauma Surgery
289
Masztis PS. Repair of labial avulsion in a cat. J Vet Dent 1993;
case report and literature review. J Vet Dent 2004; 21:
10 (1): 14-15.
147-158.
Okumura M, Kadosawa T, Fujinaga T. Surgical correction of 
Wallace Bennet J, Kapatkin AS, Marretta SM. Dental composite
[ a isny sies omi u sisoue puf ennanut 
for the fixation of mandibular fractures and luxations in 11
1999; 77: 24-27.
 cats and 6 dogs. Vet Surg 1994; 23: 190-194.
 Piemattei DL, Flo GL. Fractures and luxations of the mandible
and maxilla. In: Handbook of Small Animal Orthopedics and
 parapulpar pin composite bridges. Vet Clin North Am Small
Fracture Repair. Saunders, Philadelphia, 1997; 659-675.
Anim Pract 1992; 22: 1461-1467.
Reiter AM. Symphysiotomy, symphysiectomy and interman-
dibular arthrodesis in a cat with open-mouth jaw locking:
Chapter 14
Treatment of Oral Swellings/Tumors
Inflammatory Lesions
 Fine-needle aspiration of regional lymph nodes may be
diagnostic for metastasis.
Abscesses and osteomyelitis can result in oral swelling.
 Treatment options include surgery, radiation therapy,
Removing the cause of inflammation is usually curative
 and chemotherapy.
(figs. 14.1 a-d, 14.2).
 Cysts are rare in the oral cavity but do occur. Aspira-
Fibrosarcoma
tion for diagnostics and marsupialization if possible are
therapeutic options (figs. 14.3 a, b).
Fibrosarcoma (FSA) is the second most common tumor
Tongue eosinophilic granulomas,
if large, can be
of the feline oral cavity. Approximately 10% to 20% of
treated by surgical debulking, laser ablation, and medical
feline oral tumors are FSA compared to nearly 75% for
therapy (figs. 14.4 a-d).
SCC. A deep incisional biopsy is recommended to obtain
a correct histopathological diagnosis.
Similar to SCC, oral FSA is an invasive malignancy
Benign Tumors
mecessitating wide surgical excision. Inadequate surgical
margins generally result in recurrence. Even aggressive
 Unlike canine peripheral odontogenic fibromas, feline
surgery and histopathologically determined "clean"
odontogenic fibromas appear to recur frequently after
 margins may result in recurrence in 20% to 30% of cases.
surgical excision. Wide margins are indicated to prevent
 As a primary mode of therapy, the use of radiation
reoccurrence.
therapy in cats with oral FSA is generally discouraged.
However, the use of radiation may be beneficial in cases
with incomplete surgical resection, or if the radiation is
Malignant Tumors
being used palliatively (3-6 large doses).
Chemotherapy is generally not effective in oral FSA
due to relative chemoresistance of soft-tissue sarcomas.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Chemotherapy is occasionally used in cats with large
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) accounts for nearly 75%
oral FSA in an attempt to downstage the tumor for later
of malignancies involving the cat's oral cavity. SCC is an
surgical resection or in cats with high-grade FSA that
invasive maligmant neoplasm. Usually by the time a
have a greater chance for metastasis.
 clinical diagnosis is made, there is no form of therapy
Surgical prognosis is better for oral feline FSA com-
that renders a predictably favorable prognosis.
pared with SCC, with survival times of those cases
Greater than 90% of affected and treated cats will
 treated with combined immunotherapy, chemotherapy,
either be euthanized or die from secondary local effects
from the tumor within one year of diagnosis. Without
and 1,205 days (hard palate) compared to 49 and 59 days
therapy, most cats will be euthanized within a month of 
for SCC.
diagnosis due to local effects of the tumor.
 Intraoral radiographs are helpful to evaluate the
extent of the tumor within hard tissue. Computed
Mandibulectomy and Maxillectomy
tomography (CT) examination will usually provide
greater information concerning the extent of tumor
 Surgery as a sole treatment for SCC is generally unre-
sononedoisty pue Asdoa leuoisiou daaa uoiseau
warding with the median survival rate between six and
 examination are necessary to definitively diagnose SCC.
nine months. Generally, those cats that survive one year
290
Figure 14.1 a and b. Left side of face swollen. c. Intraoral radiographs revealing periodontal disease and root fragments. d. Two months after surgical removal
of the teeth and root fragmrents.
Figure 14.2 Marked inflammation and exuberant tissue secondary to underly-
ing osteomyelitis from mandibular first molar root fragment local reaction.
291
Figure 14.3 a. Soft swelling in the area of the right tonsil. b. Aspiration fluid consistent with pharyngeal mucocele.
Figure 14.4 a. Eosinophilic granuloma affecting a cat's tongue. b. Surgical debulking. c and d. CO laser used to partially ablate the underlying tissue.
292
Treatment of Oral Swellings/Tumors
293
Figure 14.4 Continued
after surgery were also alive at year two, indicating a
lectomy with good to excellent results. The surgical goal
favorable prognosis in those cats that survive one year.
should be tumor removal with at least 1cm clinically
 Surrounding the tumor is a pseudocapsule composed
and radiographically clean margins.
of normal and neoplastic cells and a reactive zone com-
Mandibulectomies are classified according to the 
 posed of inflammatory cells.
part excised: unilateral or bilateral; rostral, central,
The optimum goal is to render the patient tumor
or caudal mandibulectomy; and three-quarter or total
free. When this goal is not possible because of the
 mandibulectomy.
 extent of disease, palliative surgery can be performed to
After the soft tissue attachments are incised to the
achieve temporary local control. Maxillectomy and man-
bone, osteotomies are performed. For a rostral mandibu-
 dibulectomy are considered advanced oral surgical
lectomy, the first osteotomy is at the mandibular sym-
 procedures.
physis followed by a second at the predetermined area
 Before surgery, the cat is treated with appropriate
between the premolar teeth. A curved mosquito hemo-
antibiotics and pain relief medication. When anesthe-
stat can be used to locate the mandibular alveolar
tized, the oral mucosa is irrigated with 0.12% chlorhexi-
artery for ligation. If the artery retracts into the man-
dine. Regional nerve blocks are also performed. After 
dibular canal, the canal can be packed with bone wax
surgery, the patient is maintained on a soft gruel diet
or hemostatic sponges (Vetspon, Novartis) to control
 or fed through a pharyngostomy tube until normal pre-
hemorrhage. After tumor removal, the lip mucosa is
hension and swallowing are restored. Antibiotic and
sutured to the sublingual and contralateral mandibular
 pain relief medication are administered for two weeks
mucosa without tension. When the chin has been
postoperatively.
included in the resection, skin is sutured to the mucosa
 Cats with small lesions involving the rostral mandible
of the floor of the mouth rostrally to reconstruct a lip
may be able to undergo an aggressive rostral mandibu-
margin.
294
Feline Dentistry
Total unilateral mandibulectomy may lead to a drift
include CBC, blood profile, urinalysis, and blood pres-
of the remaining mandible toward the mandibulectomy
sure measurement. Cats that are prescribed NSAIDs for
side, although this rarely produces a functional problem
chronic use also need to be periodically monitored, and
other than the remaining mandibular canine tooth trau-
this is considered an extra-label use.
matizing the hard palate. Crown reduction and vital
Recently, a human medication used in the treatment
pulp therapy with restoration or extraction should be
of head and neck tumors, zoledronate, a potent amino-
considered to prevent palate trauma.
bisphosphonate, has shown promise in the treatment of
The infraorbital artery is located apical to the distal
oral SCC. Zoledronate displays antineoplastic effects,
root of the maxillary third premolar. The major palatine
neovascularization,
artery emerges from the hard palate at the level of the
decreased tumor angiogenesis, and decreased malignant
maxillary fourth premolar, midway between the midline
osteolysis. In vitro and in vivo efficacy has been demon-
and dental arcade. These vessels should be ligated if the
strated in cats.
tumor removal requires their transection. A large area
of maxillary resection often exposes the nasal cavity,
which needs to be covered with a full-thickness muco-
Combined Radiotherapy and
periosteal flap.
Chemotherapy
Mitoxantrone is a chemotherapeutic agent related to
Radiation Therapy
doxorubicin. Eleven cats affected with oral SCC were
 treated with mitoxantrone and radiation therapy (44-
Radiation therapy as a sole treatment modality for SCC
65Gy, 10-15 fractions over a three-week period). Eight
has median survival times of less than three months.
of the eleven cats went into clinical remission for 28 to
One radiation therapy protocol involves megavoltage
485 days, but survival rates were not available.
radiation in 8 Gray (Gy) fractions delivered on days 0,
7, and 21 for a total dose of 24Gy. Treatment fields
include the tumor, 1-cm margins, and tumor-draining
Combined Surgery and Radiotherapy
lymph nodes. Slightly better results are obtained using
an accelerated protocol (14 fractions of 3.5Gy in 9 days).
Eleven-month, disease-free, interval median results
Radiotherapy complications include mucositis, sero-
were obtained in a small study of seven cats affected
sanguinous oral discharge, pain, and dysphagia. Coarse
with oral SCC. Tumors >4cm in diameter were treated
fractionation radiotherapy does not result in palliation
with mandibulectomy and full-course radiation (five
in cats with inoperable oral SCC.
orthovoltage, one cobalt, one combined). The overall
median survival time was fourteen months.
Chemotherapy
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
Though relatively few reports exist on the sole use of
chemotherapy (doxorubicin, mitoxantrone, and /or car-
New methods in humans with head and neck cancer are
boplatin) for feline oral SCC, it is generally felt to be
aimed at blocking epidermal growth factor receptor
minimally beneficial.
(EGFR), which is overexpressed in patients with oral
Research is ongoing to determine if inhibition of
SCC. Squamous cells proliferate in response to the
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) can play a role in the treat-
binding of polypeptide growth factors with transmem-
ment of oral SCC to enhance the anticancer effects of
brane receptors. Blocking of the EGFR is currently being
chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Initial research
investigated as therapy for human head and neck SCC.
showed that COX-2 was present in only 9% of feline oral
 It has been demonstrated that EGFR is overexpressed
SCC. The absence of COX-2 expression suggests that
in feline SCC similar to humans. It is hoped that research
COX-2 inhibitors will likely have a low potential as a
aimed at human treatment will benefit cats also.
cancer agent for oral SCC therapy.
 NSAIDs such as piroxicam have been given at 0.3 mg/
kg PO once daily to help decrease inflammation. Meloxi-
Further Reading
cam is dosed at 0.1 mg/kg once daily. Administration of
NSAIDs should be reserved for normotensive adult cats
Beatty JA, Charles JA, Malik R, France MP, Hunt GB. Feline
without history of bleeding disorders or renal, hepatic,
inductive odontogenic tumour in a Burmese cat. Aust Vet J
or gastrointestinal disease. Screening blood tests should
2000; 78: 452-455.
Treatment of Oral Swellings/Tumors
295
Bradley RL, Mac Ewen EG, Loar AS. Mandibular resection for
 of mandibulectomy and radiotherapy: seven cases (1987-
removal of oral tumors in 30 dogs and 6 cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 1984; 184: 460-463.
Jones PD, de Lorimier L-P, Kitchell BE, Losonsky JM. Gem-
Bregazzi VS, LaRue SM, Powers BE, Fettman MJ, Ogilvie GK,
citabine as a radiosensitizer for nonresectable feline oral
 Withrow SJ. Response of feline oral squamous cell carcinoma
squamous cell carcinoma. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2003; 39:
 to palliative radiation therapy. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2001;
463-467.
42: 77-79.
Lascelles BDX, Henderson RA, Seguin B, Liptak JM, Withrow
DiBermardi L, Dore M, Davis JA, Owens JG, Mohammed SI,
SJ. Bilateral rostral maxillectomy and nasal planectomy for
Guptill CF, Knapp Dw. Study of feline oral squamous cell
 large rostral maxillofacial neoplasms in six dogs and one cat.
    r 
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2004; 40: 137-146.
treatment. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes & Essential Fatty
Lester S, Pratschke K. Central hemimaxillectomy and recon-
Acids 2007; 76: 245-250.
struction using a superficial temporal artery axial patterm
 Farrelly J, Denman DL, Hohenhaus AE, Patnaik AK, Bergman
flap in a domestic short hair cat. J Feline Med Surg 2003; 5:
PJ. Hypofractionated radiation therapy of oral melanoma in
241-244.
five cats. Vet Radiol Ultrasound 2004; 45: 91-93.
Moore AS, Wood CA, Engler SJ, Bengtson AE. Radiation
Fidel JL, Sellon RK, Houston RK, Wheeler BA. A nine-day
 therapy for long-term control of odontogenic tumours and
accelerated radiation protocol for feline squamous cell carci-
epulis in three cats. J Feline Med Surg 2000; 2: 57-60.
noma. Vet Radio1 Ultrasound 2007; 48: 482-485.
Northrup NC, Selting KA, Rassnick KM, Kristal O, O'Brien
Hahn KA. Vincristine sulfate as single-agent chemotherapy in
MG, Dank G, Dhaliwal RS, Jagannatha S, Comell KK, Gieger
 a dog and a cat with malignant neoplasms. J Am Vet Med
TL. Outcomes of cats with oral tumors treated with man-
Assoc 1990; 197: 504-506.
dibulectomy: 42 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2006; 42:
Harvey CE. Oral surgery. Radical resection of maxillary and
350-360.
mandibular lesions. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
Verstraete FJ. Mandibulectomy and maxillectomy. Vet Clin
1986; 16: 983-993.
North Am Small Anim Pract 2005; 35: 1009-1039.
 Hayes AM, Adams VJ, Scasey TJ, Murphy S. Survival of 54 cats
Wypij JM, Fan TM, Fredrickson RL, Barger AM, de Lorimier
with oral squamous cell carcinoma in United Kingdom
LP, Charmey SC. In vivo and in vitro efficacy of zoledronate
general practice. J Small Anim Pract 2007; 48: 394-399.
for treating oral squamous cell carcinoma in cats. J Vet Int
Hutson CA, Willauer CC, Walder EJ, Stone JL, Klein MK. Treat-
Med 2008; 22: 158-163.
asn Aq sieo u eoues tio snoenbs reqpuu jo pua
Section Ill
Prevention
Chapter 15
Plaque Control
One of the biggest challenges in veterinary dentistry is
Toothbrushing
how to prevent periodontal disease (gingivitis and peri-
odontitis) through daily plaque control after the oral
The gold standard in human dentistry to prevent plaque
is toothbrushing at least twice daily. Human baby soft-
assessment, treatment, and prevention (ATP) visit.
bristled toothbrushes or small animal mini toothbrushes
Prevention is not a substitute for periodic (at least
yearly) professional examination under general anesthe-
can be used.
 Most cats will permit toothbrushing when approached
 sia to evaluate and treat areas above and under the gin-
 gradually as kittens. The client should begin by massag-
gival margin and to search for tooth resorption, which
 affects more than half of the mature domestic cat popu-
ing the side of the cat's muzzle in a rostral to caudal
direction. Most cats will tolerate this because it simulates
lation worldwide.
 their natural behavior when they rub against a person
Before periodontal treatment is initiated, a discussion
 or object and mark their saliva on the property. This is
Aiqe pue juuos suuianuon rumo jad a ym
Auaa oiasuods aznea 1o yolousem e Sursn Aq pamoog 
to provide aftercare should be conducted. There is little
rub the teeth and gingiva. Once the cat is comfortable
reason to perform intermediate or advanced dental pro-
with fingers rubbing inside the mouth, a toothbrush or
cedures if the pet owner will not or cannot brush the
Q-tip is substituted. Tuna juice can be applied to the end
pet's teeth. If there is minimal commitment for home
of the brush or Q-tip to gain acceptance (figs. 15.1 a-d).
care, it may be better for the veterinarian to extract a
C.E.T.? paste and Oral Hygiene Gel, Maxiguard@
 tooth affected with stage 3 or 4 periodontal disease.
Oral Cleansing Gel, Dermapet's Dentacetic GelTM, and
Follow-up progress visits are essential to monitor
Oxygene? paste can be used as dentifrices to help
periodontal healing. The time between oral examina-
control plaque and maintain good oral hygiene. It is the 
tions should be based on the degree of disease and the
client's ability to provide home oral hygiene. Progress
mechanical removal of plaque from brushing that is
most important (fig. 15.1e).
visits are initially scheduled weekly until the owner is
comfortable with the home care process. Thereafter,
 advanced periodontal cases should be rechecked every
Oral Rinses/Gels
other week to once monthly. Pets that have been treated
Chlorhexidine is the most effective chemical agent for
for stage 1 or 2 disease and whose teeth are brushed once
 or twice daily could be rechecked every six months. The
prevention and reduction of plaque accumulation.
 reminder interval for recheck can be linked by computer 
to the degree of periodontal disease (i.e., if the patient is
 treated for grade 3 periodontal disease, a monthly prog-
Table 15.1.
 Products awarded the Veterinary Oral Health Council seal.
ress reminder can be automatically generated).
Product
Type of 
Claim
Company
 Product
Home Care and Follow-Up
Friskies@ Feline Dental Diet
Diet
Plaque and
Friskies Petcare
Co.
There are numerous products available to help reduce
 New and Improved Prescription 
Diet
 Plaque and 
Hills Pet
 plaque and calculus. The Veterinary Oral Health Council
Diet? Feline t/d
Tartar
Nutrition Inc.
reviews independent efficacy studies and approves
products that significantly decrease plaque and/or cal-
Purina Veterinary Diets@ DH
Diet
 Plaque and 
Nestle Purina
Dental Health TM brand Feline
Tartar
PetCare
culus. Table 15.1 shows diets that have been awarded
Formula
the Veterinary Oral Health Council seal for use in cats.
299
C.E.T.
CatToothbrush
evirbac
Figure 15.1 a. Mini-toothbrush (Virbac). b. Correct angle for toothbrushing.
c. Cat toothbrush (Virbac). d. Using a Q-tip to remove plaque. e. Cat toothbrush
 and dentifrice.
Plaque Control
301
by decreasing plaque through their antimicrobial effect
(figs. 15.3; 15.4 a, b, c).
Sodium hexametaphosphate inhibits mineralization
of plaque by binding salivary calcium, thus inhibiting
calculus formation on tooth surfaces. Unlike chlorhexi-
dine, sodium hexametaphosphate has no known effect
on the microbial population of the oral cavity. It is avail-
able as coatings on various cat foods, treats, chews, and
oral hygiene wipes.
Plaque Barrier Gel
Plaque barrier gel (OraVet@ Merial) is an inert polymer
e padde uaum anbeid paand diau c paisod
an oral assessment, treatment and prevention visit,
Figure 15.2  C.E.T. oral rinse.
OraVet is designed to create a barrier on the entire tooth
surface against plaque formation by interferring with
pellicle fomations between the tooth surface and the
gum line. This action decreases the attachment of plaque
to the tooth surface at the gingival margin, preventing
bacterial colonization beneath the gum line.
One double-blind study of thirty-one client-owned
cats showed that OraVet@ sigmificantly (p < 0.05) reduced
plaque compared to negative controls (figs. 15.5 a, b).
Drinking Water Additives Containing Xylitol
Xylitol has been shown to have antibacterial effects and
also decreases plaque formation (figs. 15.6 a, b).
Cleansout &Freshers
Diet
Dry food would appear better to help control plaque
compared to moist or semimoist foods. Hills diets t/d@
Toste Free
and Science Diet? Oral Care for cats, all Eukanuba@
diets except kitten foods, and Friskies@ Feline Dental
Notural Forn
7FLOZ(59mll)
 Diet are 20% or more effective in controlling plaque than
control diets. Hills and Friskies diets have obtained the
Veterinary Oral Health Council seal of acceptance (figs.
15.7 a, b, c).
Figure 15.3 Orazn (Addison Biological Laboratory, Inc.).
Chlorhexidine is effective against most oral bacteria,
Treats
 fungi, and many viruses. Compared to using antibiotics,
C.E.T. Chews for Cats? contain oxidizing properties,
chronic chlorhexidine use will not result in development
which are believed to decrease plaque. Feline Greenies?
of bacterial resistance. By decreasing or eliminating the
has been shown in studies to decrease plaque and gin-
-os u aneid e aaey a auar 'pot uaod
matitis care. To be effective, chlorhexidine should stay
givitis (figs. 15.8; 15.9 a, b).
in contact with the gingiva for at least two minutes.
Humans swish chlorhexidine solution in their mouths
Oral Exercise
for this period of time (fig. 15.2).
Zinc and zinc ascorbate can be used as oral antiseptics
Items softer than the teeth, such as the Feline Kong? and
to slow the development and progression of gingivitis
small rubber toys, promote gingival health
ReducesPlague and
MAXI/GUARD
Oral
Oral
Cleansing
Cleansing
Gel
Figure 15.4 a. MaxiGuard Oral Cleansing Gel (with attached vitamin C). b. Adding vitamin C to the gel. c. Application of gel with finger to the side of the
cat's mouth.
OraVet
comb
Figure 15.6a. AquaDent. b. Breathalyser.
302
Plaque Control
303
Look!
PRESCRIPTION
DIET.
SCIENCEDIET
P/
Friskies
PROVEN
DentalDiet
Feline
OralCare
b
Figure 15.7a. Hill's Prescription Diet t/d Feline?. b. Hill's Science Diet@ Oral Care Feline. c. Friskies@ Dental Diet.
basted Chicken Flauor
CatsLove!
Figure 15.8 CET Oral Hygiene Chews for Cats@.
Figure 15.9 a and b. Feline Greenies@.
Scheduling the Next Oral ATP
In some cases, this is performed monthly; in other cases,
Examination
recall every six months is sufficient.
 A recall system is essential to a successful prophylac-
Once the teeth are clean, the patient's oral health is
tic program, because the client is unlikely to schedule
reevaluated and a long-term oral health program is
periodic appointments without first being reminded.
 developed or updated. Choosing the appropriate time 
Cats with basically healthy teeth and gingiva will benefit 
for recall should be tailored to each individual patient.
from arnual professional dental care. Cats with early
 If surgery was performed, the first recheck should be
periodontal disease should have at least semiannual
 days after surgery to follow the healing process. After
 professional evaluations. Pets with advanced periodon-
the operative area has clinically healed, the client's
tal disease benefit from professional clinical evaluation
efforts at plaque control should be carefully monitored.
monthly to prevent the condition from progressing.
304
 Feline Dentistry
Further Reading
Logan El. Dietary influences on periodontal health in dogs and
         
Aller S. Dental home care and preventive strategies. Sem Vet
1385-1401.
 Richardson RL. Effect of administering antibiotics, removing
Med Surg Small Anim 1993; 8: 204-212.
 Boyce EN. Feline experimental models for control of periodon-
the major salivary glands, and toothbrushing on dental
tal disease. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 1992; 22:
calculi formation in the cat. Arch Oral Biol 1965; 10:
1309-1321
245-253.
Clarke DE. Clinical and microbiological effects of oral zinc
Robinson JGA. Chlorhexidine gluconate: the solution for dental
problems. J Vet Dent 1995; 12: 29-31.
ascorbate gel in cats. J Vet Dent 2001; 18: 177-183.
Clarke DE. Drinking water additive decreases plaque and cal-
Roudebush P, Logan E, Hale FA. Evidence-based veterinary
culus accumulation in cats. J Vet Dent 2006; 23: 79-82.
dentistry: a systemic review of homecare for prevention of
periodontal disease in dogs and cats. J Vet Dent 2005; 22:
DuPont GA. Prevention of periodontal disease. Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 1998; 28: 1129-1145.
6-15.
 Studer E, Stapley RB. The role of dry foods in maintaining
Gawor JP, Reiter AM, Jodkowska K, Kurski G, Wojtacki MP,
Kurek A. Influence of diet on oral health in cats and dogs. J
healthy teeth and gums in the cat. Vet Med Small Anim Clin
Nutr 2006; 136: 2021S-2023S.
1973; 68: 1124-1126.
Theyse LFH, Vrieling HE, Dijkshoorn NA. A comparative
Gorrel C. Home care: products and techniques. Clin Tech Small 
Anim Pract 2000; 15: 226-231.
study of 4 dental home care regimens in client owned cats.
Proc Hill's Europ Symp Oral Care, Amsterdam, 2003;
Gorrel C, Inskeep G, Inskeep T. Benefits of a ‘dental hygiene
chew' on the periodontal health of cats. J Vet Dent 1998; 15:
60-63.
135-138.
Veterinary Oral Health Council (VOHC). Products awarded
the VOHC seal (available at http:/ /vohc.org/accepted_
 Ingham K,Gorrel C, Bierer B. Effect of a dental chew on dental
products.htm).
substrates and gingivitis in cats. J Vet Dent 2002; 19:
201-204.
Vrieling HE, Theyse LFH, van Winkelhoff AJ, Dijkshoorm NA,
 Logan E, Picavet P. Effectiveness of feeding large kibbles
 Ingham KE, Gorrel C, Blackburm JM, Fransworth W. The effect
with mechanical cleaning properties in cats with gingivitis.
of tooth brushing on periodontal disease in cats. J Nutr 2002;
132: 1740S-1741S.
Tijdschrift voor Diergeneeskunde 2005; 130 (5): 136-140.
 Logan El. Oral cleansing by dietary means: feline methodology
Watson AD. Diet and periodontal disease in dogs and cats.
and study results. Proc Comp Anim Oral Health Conf 1996;
Aust Vet J 1994; 71: 313-318.
31-34.
Abscesses
pain control and, 171
extraction and, 234
 patient preparation and, 172
radiology and, 73, 74, 75
protocols for, 170
treatment of, 290
root canal therapy and, 213
Acoustic streaming, 181
tooth resorption and, 126
Acquired pellicle, 101, 104
Anesthesia-free dentistry, 169-170
Aggregate. See Mineral tri-oxide aggregate
Ankylosis
Air-bone rule, 50
radiology and, 73
 Air-cooled compressors, 162-163
of temporomandibular joint, 143, 144, 280
Air polishing, 183
Anodontia, 101
ALARA, 43. See also Radiation safety
Antibiotics
Allergies, lip ulcers and, 138
diabetes mellitus and, 174
 Alpha V beta 3 receptors, 127
periodontal disease and, 185
Alveolar bone, 10-12, 127
stomatitis and, 242, 244
 Alveolar bone expansion
Apexogenesis, 213
overview of, 114
Apical closure, 73
radiology and, 71-73
Apple-par rule, 46
treatment of, 188, 189-193
AquaDent, 302
Alveolar margin (crest), 67, 68
Arteries, 8. See also Specific arteries
Alveolar nerve, 8, 174
Artificial tears, 182
Alveolar process, 24
As low as reasonably achievable. See ALARA
Alveoli, 10, 13, 115
Atopic dermatitis, 138
Alveoloplasty, 166, 194, 240, 257
ATP. See Oral assessment, treatment, and prevention
Ameloblasts, 22
visits
American Veterinary Dental College (AVDC), 169-
Attached gingiva, defined, 10, 11
170
Autoclaves, 167
Amoxicillin, 185, 242
 AVDC. See American Veterinary Dental College
Ampicillin, 174
 AVImark paperless charts, 92
Amyloid-producing odontogenic tumors, 138
Azathioprine, 242
Analgesia, 171, 177-179
Azithromycin, 244
Anesthesia
AZT. See Zidovudine
evaluation before, 170
induction of, 171
Bacteria
intubation and, 171
caries and, 120
laser therapy and, 262
equipment and, 167
local/regional, 174-177
plaque and, 101, 104
maintenance of, 171-172
 ultrasonic scaling and, 181
 medical conditions requiring special protocols for,
Barbiturates, 173
173-174
Barrier gel, 184, 185
monitoring during, 172-173
Biofilms, 104, 167
overview of, 169-170
Bioglass, 185
305
306
Index
Biopsies, 142
Cervical line erosions. See Resorption
Bisecting angle technique, 50, 51, 52
C.E.T. Oral Hygiene Chews, 303
Bitewing flm, 46, 47
C.E.T. paste/rinse, 299, 301
Bleach (sodium hypochlorite), 207-208, 217
Chamber induction, 171
 Bleeding, periodontal probing and, 105, 107
Charting
 Blood pressure, anesthesia and, 170
abbreviations for, 84-87
 Blood supply, anatomy of, 8
overview of, 84, 88-99
 Blurred images, 64
of periodontal disease, 104-105
Bodily movement (translation), 269
Cheilitis, 128
 Body temperature. See Temperature control
Chemotherapy, 290, 294
Bone curettes, 160
Chlorambucil, 243
Bone grafting, 185-188
Chlorhexidine
Bone invasion, 142
bone grafing and, 185
Bone loss, 68-71
infection control and, 167
Bones, 12-15. See also Specific bones
plaque control and, 299
Books, 151
root canal therapy and, 220
Brachycephalic breeds, 28, 133
 scaling and, 181
Breathalyser, 302
stomatitis and, 244
Buccal, defined, 24, 26
Chondroclasts, 127
 Buccal object rule, 59-60
Chronic alveolar osteitis
Buccoversion, overview of, 134
overview of, 114
Bupivacaine, 174, 175, 179, 262
radiology and, 71-73
 Buprenorphine, 171, 179
treatment of, 188, 189-193
Burs, 161, 165-166
CI. See Calculus index
Butorphanol, 170-171, 177-179
Cidex, 167
Buttons, 270, 271
Circumferential probing, defined, 33, 37
Clavulanic acid, 185, 242
 Calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumors, 138
Clindamycin, 185, 242
Calcium hydroxide, 207, 210, 212, 215, 220
Clinical pocket depth, defined, 105
Calciviruses, 244
Codeine, 179
Calculus, 104, 108, 181, 188
 College pliers, 209, 210
Calculus index (CI), 108
Complicated crown fractures, defined, 115, 116-117
Canine teeth
Complicated crown-root fractures, defined, 115,
anatomy of, 19-21
117-118
extrusion of, 110, 113
Compressors, 162-163, 167
malocclusion and, 134, 135, 273-274
Computed tomography (CT) scans, 290
radiography of, 50, 54, 55
Condylar process fractures, 280
terminology of, 24-26
Consil Putty, 185, 186
Canine tooth extrusion, 113
Constant rate infusion (CRI), 177-178
Carbides, 166
Contra-angle, 165
Carbon dioxide laser ablation, 244, 262, 267, 268
Contrast, defined, 63
Carboplatin, 294
Control films, 63
 Carotid artery, anatomy of, 8
Corticated, defined, 68
 Carprofen, 179
Corticosteroids, 242
Cat cavities. See Resorption
Cotton pliers, 209
Catecholamines, 171
COX-2 inhibitors, 294
Caudal, defined, 26, 27
Craniomandibular joint. See Temporomandibular
Cavitation, 181
joint
Cefadroxil, 185
Cranium, anatomy of, 12, 13
Cementum
CRI. See Constant rate infusion
anatomy of, 10
Cribriform plate
radiography and, 73
anatomy of, 12
tooth anatomy and, 22
radiography and, 67, 68
tooth resorption and, 76, 77
tooth anatomy and, 24
Index
307
Crowm, 24, 76,232
Drinking water, 301
 Crown-down method, 220
 Dropped jaw, 142
Crown fractures
D speed film, 43
classification of, 115
illustrations of, 116-117, 201, 202, 206
ECG (electrocardiography), 170
treatment of, 218
EDTA (ethylemediaminetetracetic acid), 208
Crown reduction, malocclusion and, 271-272, 275
Education tools, 151, 155
 CT scans. See Computed tomography scans
 EGFR. See Epidermal growth factor receptor
Cuffed endotracheal tubes, 169
Eicosanoids, 243
Curettes, 160, 182-183
Elastics, 270, 271
 Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitors, 294
Elevators
Cyclosporine, 243-244
endodontic disease and, 203
Cysts,290
overview of, 156-158, 160
Cytokines, 104
periodontal disease and, 185, 187
I1 '6et pe seoures an snoenbs ono
tooth resorption and, 238
 Elongated images, 63
Debridement (instrumentation), 213, 220, 257
Enamel, 22, 76
Definition, 63
Enamel fractures, 115, 116, 200-201
Density, defined, 63
Endodontic disease
 Dental artery, 10
damage to tooth structure and, 196, 197, 198-199
Dental explorers, 37-38, 154
degree of changes and, 196, 198-199
Dental formulas, 15, 19
equipment for, 160
Dental malocclusion, 134-135
instruments for therapy, 208-209, 210
Dental mirrors, 153
materials for therapy, 206-208
Dentin
pathology of, 114-115
tooth anatomy and, 22
physical examinations and, 32
 tooth resorption and, 76, 77
pulpitis and, 200, 203
types of, 23
radiology and, 72-76
vital pulp therapy and, 210
root canal therapy and, 197, 200, 213, 217-221
 Dentinal bridges, 210
tooth fractures and, 197-199, 200-206
Dentinal tubules, 24
treatment overview for, 196
 Dermapet's Dentacetig Gel, 299
vital pulp therapy and, 209-213, 214-216
Detail, defined, 63
Endodontic files. See Files
Developer tanks, 60-61
 Endodontic stops. See Stops
Dexamethasone, 262
Endotracheal tubes, 169, 171
Dexmedetomidine, 170, 171
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex, 135, 138, 290,
Diabetes mellitus, anesthesia and, 173-174
292-293
Diamond burs, 166
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), 294
Diamonds, 166
Epinephrine, 174-175
Diazepam, 173
 Epulides, 138, 139. See also Peripheral odontogenic
Diet
fibroma
recommendations for, 300, 301, 303
Equipment
squamous cell carcinomas and, 139
for assessment, 151
stomatitis and, 244
burs, 166
tooth resorption and, 127-128
education tools, 151
 Digital imaging, 40-42, 47
endodontic disease therapy and, 202, 206-209, 210
 Direct-to-digital sensors, 40
high/low speed delivery systems, 162-163
 Disinfection, 167
infection control and, 153, 167
Distal, defined, 25, 26
maintenance of, 166-167
 Distoversion, overview of, 134
nitrogen-powered delivery systems, 163-165
 Dosimeter badges, 43
 radiology and, 39-40
 Double images, 64
rotary cutting instruments, 165-166
 Doxorubicin, 294
for treatment and prevention, 151-162
Doxycycline, 243
Eruption, tooth, 24, 25
308
Index
Esophagostomy, 280
Fogging of film, 63
E speed film, 43
Folate papillae, 7
Etching, 270
Food. See Diet
Ethics, orthodontic movement and, 269
 Food allergy, lip ulcers and, 138
Ethmoid bone, 12
Force, orthodontic movement and, 269
Ethomidate, 171
Forceps, 159
Ethylenediaminetetracetic acid (EDTA), 208
 Foreshortened images, 63
Etidocaine, 174
Four-handed charting, 84, 85
Eugenol. See Zinc oxide-eugenol
Four-station dental operatory, 152
Examinations, 28, 33-38
Fractures (jaw), 82, 83, 143-145, 282-288
Exposure timers, 40
Fractures (tooth)
External odontoclastic resorption. See Resorption
abscesses and, 75
Extraction forceps, 159
classification of, 115
Extractions
endodontic disease and, 196, 197-199, 200-202,
 crown amputation and, 231
203-207
malocclusion and, 270
extractions and, 263-264
periodontal disease and, 193, 194
facial swelling, tooth staining and, 29
postoperative care and, 241
pathology of, 114-115
root fragments and, 231
treatment of, 282-284
stomatitis and, 257, 262
Freer periosteal elevators, 160, 185, 187
technique for, 226, 231
Frequency, scalers and, 160
tooth resorption and, 225-234
 Friction grip burs, 165
Extrusion, 71, 73, 269
Frosty films, 64
Eyes, 28, 29
 FSA. See Fibrosarcoma
F speed film, 43
Face, 28, 29
Fungiform papillae, 7
Facial, defined, 26
Furcation, overview of, 105
Facium, 12-14
Furcation bone loss, 71
FelFN, 242-243
Furcation disease, 105-107
 Feline hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 171
Fusion, 101
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), 139, 244
 Feline odontoclastic resorption. See Resorption
Gabapentin, 179
 Feline oral resorption. See Resorption
Gates Glidden drills, 165
Fentanyl, 179
Gauze sponges, 172
Fibroameloblastoma, 138
Gemination, 101, 103
Fibromatous epulis, 138, 139
GI. See Gingival index
Fibrosarcoma (FSA), 141, 290
Gingiva
Files, 208-209
anatomy of, 8-10, 11
 Filiform papillae, 7
hyperplasia of, 193
Film, overview of, 43-50
 physical examinations and, 33
Film badges, 43
squamous cell carcinomas and, 139
Film dots, 46, 49, 50, 54
Gingival hyperplasia, 193
Film size, 46, 47
Gingival index (GI), 108
Film speed, 43
Gingival sulcus, defined, 9, 10 
 Fingerprints, 64
Gingivectomy, 193
Finishing burs, 166
 Gingivitis. See also Juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis
 Finishing discs, 166
advanced periodontitis and, 111
Fissure burs, 166
charting and, 91
 FIV. See Feline immunodeficiency virus
extractions and, 252-254, 258-261, 265
Fixer tanks, 60-61
laser therapy and, 268
Fleas, lip ulcers and, 138
overview of, 101, 104
Fluoride, 183-184, 270
periodontitis vs., 104
FluraFom Virbac Products, 183, 184
treatment of, 181, 182
Focal opacities, defined, 68
Glass ionomer filler, 220
Index
309
Glossitis, 128
Infraorbital nerve block, 175, 177
Glycoproteins, plaque and, 101, 104
Infusion, 177-178
Gold Salts, 242
Innervation, anatomy of, 5, 8
Grafting, 185-188
Instrumentation. See Debridement
Granulomas, 74
Interferon, 242-243
Greenies, 303
Interleukin-2, 243
Gutta percha points, 206, 207, 219, 220
Intermandibular space, 15
Intermational Standards Organization (ISO), 208
Halitosis, 110
Interpretation, radiography and, 64-68
Handpieces, 163-165, 167
Intrusion, 269
Hard palate
Intubation, 171
overview of, 5, 6, 14
Inverted cone burs, 166
trauma to,145, 287-288
Irrigation needles, 209, 217
Head, 28, 29
ISO. See International Standards Organization
Hedstrom (H) files, 208, 213, 217
Isoflurane, 171-172
Hemisepta, 71
Hemorrhages, pulpal, 200
Jaw
H files. See Hedstrom files
 anatomy of, 27
High/low-speed delivery systems, 161, 162-163, 167
fractures of, 81, 143-145, 282-288
Histories, 28
locking of, 142-143, 280
Horizontal angulation, 50
luxation of, 142
Horizontal bone loss, 69-70
traumatic injuries to, 81
Horner's syndrome, 29, 284
Joints. See Temporomandibular joint
Hydromorphone, 170, 179
Junctional epithelium, defined, 9
Hypercementosis, 73, 110
Juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis, 109-110, 113
Hyperplasia, 193
Juvenile onset periodontitis, 110, 113
Hyperthermia, 200
 Hyperthyroidism, anesthesia and, 173
Kerr (K) files, 208, 213, 217
Hypodontia, 273
Ketamine, 171, 173, 177-179
Hypoglossal nerve, anatomy of, 8
Ketoprofen, 179
Hypotension, 171
K files. See Kerr files
Hypothermia, 172
Kidney disease, 173
Kilovoltage peak (kVp), defined, 40
Ilumination telescopes, 152
kVp. See Kilovoltage peak
 Immune system, 104, 138. See also Inflammation
Impingement, 138, 193, 273, 276-279
Labial, defined, 24, 26
 Incisive papilla, 15
Labial mounting, 64
Incisor teeth
Labial vestibule, 5, 6
anatomy of, 19, 20
Labioversion, overview of, 134, 135
radiography of, 50, 51, 54
 Laboratory panels, preoperative, 257
terminology of, 24-26
Lactoferrin, 243
Inductive fibroameloblastoma, 138
Lamina dura
 Infections, equipment care and, 167
 anatomy of, 12
Inflammation
radiography and, 67, 68
lesions and, 290
tooth anatomy and, 24
 oropharyngeal, 128-131
Landmarks, radiography and, 64-68
pulp and, 24
Laser therapy, 262, 267, 268
pulpitis and, 200
Leopold mouth gags, 152
stomatitis and, 242
Levamisole, 243
tooth resorption and, 126-127
Lidocaine, 174, 179
Infraorbital arteries, 8
 Ligament. See Periodontal ligament
Infraorbital canal, 14
Lingual, defined, 25, 26
 Infraorbital foramen, 175
 Lingual mounting, 64
Infraorbital nerve, anatomy of, 8
 Lingual nerve, anatomy of, 8
310
Index
Linguoversion, 134, 135, 273-274
Meloxicam, 179
Lips
Mental foramina, radiography and, 66-67
 impingement of, 193, 211
Mental nerve blocks, 8, 175, 177, 178
inflammation of, 128
Mepivacaine, 174
ulcers of, 135-138
Mesial, defined, 25, 26
Local anesthesia, 174-177, 213
Mesioversion, 134, 135, 273
Luxation, jaw, 142, 280, 281
 Metastasis, oral tumor staging and, 142
Lymphatic drainage, 8, 28, 141-142
Metronidazole, 242
Lymphokines, 243
Michigan O probes, 35
Lysine, 243
Microsporum canus, 138
Lysosome, 104
Midazolam, 170, 171
Middle mental nerve block, 175, 177, 178
M. See Mobility
 Mineral tri-oxide aggregate (MTA), 207, 210
Magnetostrictive scalers, 160, 161
Mirrors, 153
Magnification telescopes, 152
Mitoxantrone, 294
Maintenance, equipment and, 166-167
Mobility (M), 107
 Malocclusions, 132-135. See also Occlusion
Models, 155
Mandibles
Molar teeth
anatomy of, 14-15, 17
 anatomy of, 22
arteries of, 8
radiography of, 50-52, 54, 56
fractures of, 143, 145, 282, 285-288
terminology of, 24-26
jaws and, 27
Molt periosteal elevators, 156, 203, 238
malocclusion and, 133-134
Monitoring, 43, 172-173
 radiography and, 64, 66
Morphine, 177, 179
radiography of, 54
Mouth gags, 151, 152
 squamous cell carcinomas and, 140, 141
 MTA. See Mineral tri-oxide aggregate
 Mandibular canal, radiography and, 67
Mucoceles, 138, 292
Mandibular glands, 8
Mucogingival junction, 10, 11
Mandibular mesioclusion, 28, 133
Mucosa, anatomy of, 5, 6
 Mandibular nerve, 8, 174
Mucositis
Mandibular nerve block, 8, 177, 178
extractions and, 252-261, 263-265
Mandibular symphysis separation, 143, 144, 282, 284-
overview of, 128-129, 130, 131
285, 287
radiotherapy and, 294
Mandibulectomy, 290, 293-294
stomatitis and, 244
Marmitol, 173
treatment of, 247, 248
Marginal gingiva, defined, 9-10
Muscles, anatomy of, 5, 17
Mask induction, 171
Masseter muscle, 15
Neck lesions. See Resorption
Maxiguard Oral Cleansing Gel, 299
Needles, 209, 217
Maxi/Guard Oral Cleansing Gel, 302
 Neoplasias. See also Squamous cell carcinomas
Maxillary, defined, 27
benign, 138, 290
 Maxillary bones
malignant, 139, 290
anatomy of, 14, 15
overview of, 138-142
arteries of, 8
radiology and, 78
fractures of, 143, 284-288
staging of, 141-142
jaws and, 27
Neoral, 243
radiography and, 64, 66
Nerve blocks, 175-177, 178
radiography of, 50-54
 Nerves, anatomy of, 5, 8
Maxillary-mandibular asymmetry, 133-134
Neutrophils, 104
 Maxillary nerve, anesthesia and, 174
Nickel titanium (NiTi) files, 208
Maxillary nerve block, 5, 175, 177
NiTi files. See Nickel titanium files
Maxillectomy, 290, 293-294
Medetomidine, 171, 179
Nonodontogenic tumors, 138
Megestrol, 243
 Nonpocketing defects, 105, 111-113
Index
311
Non-professional dental scaling (NPDS), 169-170
 Oxygene paste, 299
NSAIDs, 294
 Oxymorphone, 177, 179
Obturation, 219, 220
Pain control, 171, 177-179
Occlusal film, 43-46
Pain patches, transdermal, 179
Occlusion
PAL. See Periodontal attachment level
abnormal, 28, 33
Palatal, defined, 25
brachycephalic breeds and, 28
Palatal pocket therapy, 185-188
charting and, 84
Palate. See also Hard palate; Soft palate
 crown reduction, vital pulp therapy and, 271-272
arteries of, 8
disorders of, 131-135
bone of, 14
extraction and, 270
fissures of, 14
 impingement and, 273, 276-279
inflammation of, 128
 linguoversion of canine teeth and, 134, 135, 273-
nerves of, 5
274
Palatitis, 128
mesioversion of canine teeth and, 134, 135, 272, 273
 Paper points, 207, 219
missing teeth and, 273
Papillae, 5, 7, 15
normal, 28, 32, 35
 Parallel technique, 50, 55
orthodontic movement and, 269-270, 271
 Parotid glands, anatomy of, 8
persistent deciduous teeth and, 272-273
Patient histories, 28
supernumerary teeth and, 101, 102, 273
Peel-off dental charts, 90-91
Odontoblasts, 22, 23, 24
Periapical cysts, 76
Odontoclasts, 126, 127
Periapical disease, overview of, 73-76
 Odontogenic tumors, 138
Periapical film, 43
Odontoplasty, 166
Periapical lucencies, 76
ODU explorers, 37, 38
Periodontal attachment level (PAL), defined, 105
 Oil-cooled compressors, 167
 Periodontal disease. See also Gingivitis;
Opacities, defined, 68
Periodontitis
Open-mouth jaw locking, 143
alveolar bone expansion and, 114, 188, 189
 Open root apices, 202
 antibiotics and, 185
Opioids, 177, 179
barrier gel and, 184, 185
 Oral assessment, treatment, and prevention (ATP)
bone grafting and, 185-188
visits, 181, 299, 301
calculus index and, 108, 109
Oral cavity. See also Specific elements
canine tooth extrusion, 110, 113
anatomy of, 5, 6, 16
charting of, 104-105
inflammation of, 128-131
extractions and, 193, 194, 255-257
swelling and tumors of, 135-142
fluoride application and, 183-184
Oral epithelium, defined, 8
furcation disease, 105, 107
Oral Hygiene Gel, 299
 gingival enlargement and, 193
 Oral rinses/ gels, 299
gingival index and, 108, 110
Oral tumors. See Neoplasias
juvenile hyperplastic gingivitis, 109-110, 113
Oral vestibule, overview of, 5, 6
juvenile onset periodontitis, 110, 113
OraVet, 183, 185, 244, 301, 302
nonpocketing defects, 105, 111-113
OraZn, 301
overview of, 101
Orban explorers, 37, 38
 pathogenesis of, 101-104
Oronasal fistulas, 185
 patient, operator safety and, 182
Oropharynx, 128-131. See also Stomatitis
periodontal disease index and, 108-109
Orthodontic tooth movement, 269-270, 271
plaque, calculus removal and, 181, 188
Ossifying epulis, 138, 139
plaque index and, 107-108
Osteoblasts, 127, 270
pocketing defects, 105, 111-113
Osteoclasts, 127, 270
polishing and, 183
Osteodentin, 22
radiology and, 68-71
Osteomyelitis, 29, 135, 290, 291
scaling and, 182-183
Osteopontin, 127
staging of, 181, 182, 194
312
Index
Periodontal disease (cont'd)
Position statement on anesthesia, 169-170
therapy overview, 181, 182
Power scaling. 160
tooth mobility and, 107
Prednisone, 242, 246
Periodontal disease index (PDI), 108-109
Premolar teeth
Periodontal ligament, 10, 73
anatomy of, 21-22
 Periodontal ligament space, 67-68
extraction of, 227-228, 231
 Periodontal probes
impingement of, 138
 charting and, 104-105
radiography of, 50-52, 54, 55, 56
gingival index and, 108
terminology of, 24-26
overview of, 33, 35-37, 154
Pressure, orthodontic movement and, 269-270
use of, 107
Primary palate, 14
Periodontal tips, 182-183
Primary radiation, overview of, 43
Periodontitis
Probes
extractions and, 252-254, 258-261
charting and, 104-105
gingivitis vs., 104
 gingival index and, 108
juvenile onset, 110, 113
overview of, 33, 35-37, 154
overview of, 101
use of, 107
radiography and, 69-71
 Probing depth, defined, 105
treatment of, 181, 182
 Processing of films, 60-61
Periodontium
Propofol, 171
cementum, 10, 22,72,73,76,77
 Proportions, 173
 gingival sulcus, 9, 10
Prostaglandins, 104
overview of, 8-12
Pulp. See also Endodontic disease
 periodontal ligament space, 67-68
complicated tooth fractures and, 201-202, 206
Periosteal elevators, 156, 157, 185
internal root resorption and, 76
Peripheral odontogenic fibroma, 138, 139
necrosis of, 196
Persistence, 101, 103
tooth anatomy and, 22
Persistent deciduous teeth, 272-273
Pulpal blush, 201
 Personal protective equipment (PPE), 181, 262
 Pulp capping, 201, 207. See also Vital pulp therapy
 Pfizer feline dental charts, 88-89
Pulp cavity, 22-23, 76, 77
Pharymx, 5, 6, 138
Pulp chamber, 22-24, 114
 Phosphor transfer sensors, 40
 Pulpectomy. See Root canal therapy; Vital pulp therapy
Physical examination, 32
Pulpitis, 200, 203
PI. See Plaque index
 Pulse therapy, 185
 PID. See Position indicating devices
Piezoelectric scalers, 155, 160
Q-tips, 33, 35
Piroxicam, 179, 242
Quality control, radiography and, 62-63
 Plaque. See also Scaling
control of, 299-303
Radiation safety, 43-50
glycoproteins and, 101, 104
Radiation therapy, 290, 294
 oropharymgeal inflammation and, 244
Radiology
periodontal disease and, 181, 188
alveolar bone expansion and, 71-73
staging of, 107-108
ankylosis and, 73
 Plaque barrier gel, 301
digital imaging and, 40-42
Plaque index (PI), 107-108
endodontic disease and, 73-76
Pliers, 209, 210
equipment for, 39-40
Pluggers, 209, 212
film and, 60-64
Pneumoabdomen, 171, 172
hypercementosis and, 73
 Pneumomediastinum, 171, 172
 neoplastic disease and, 78
Pneumothorax, 171, 172
oral inflammation and, 129-131
Pocketing defects, 105, 111-113
overview of, 39
Polishing, 156, 183
 periodontal disease and, 68-71
 Position indicating devices (PID), 40, 50
quality control and, 62-63
 Positioning, radiography and, 50-60
radiograph interpretation and, 64-68
Index
313
root canal therapy and, 213-218
laser therapy and, 262
safety and, 43-50
periodontal disease treatment and, 181-183
stomatitis and, 244
radiology and, 43-50
terminology of, 68
Salivary glands, 8, 9. See also Specific salivary glands
TMJ disease and, 81
Sandimmune, 243
tooth extrusion and, 71, 73
Scaling
tooth resorption and, 73, 75-80, 81, 120-126, 128
above gingiva, 182
traumatic jaw injury and, 81
below gingiva, 183
 trouble-shooting and, 63-64
non-professional dental scaling and, 169-170
 tube/film/patient placement and, 50-60
overview of, 160-162
Radiolucent areas, 64, 68
periodontal disease and, 182-183
 Radiopaque, defined, 68
technique for, 161-162
Regional anesthesia, 174-177
ultrasonic, 155, 160, 181-183
Renal disease, anesthesia and, 173
Scatter radiation, 43
 Resorption
 SCC. See Squamous cell carcinomas
classification of, 120-126, 222, 223-225
 Sealapex-Kerr, 20
crown/root atomization and, 225
 Secondary palate, 14
etiology of, 127-128
Secondary (scatter) radiation, 43
extraction and, 225-231
Sensory buccal nerves, 8
histology of, 127
Sevoflurane, 171-172
intemal and extemal, 126-127
Shanks, 166
monitoring of, 225
Shepherd's hook explorers, 37, 38
overview of, 115, 119-120
Sialoprotein, 127
pathogenesis of, 126
Skeletal malocclusion, 133-134
 periodontal disease and, 194
SLOB rule, 59-60
 physical examinations and, 30-32, 38
Sodium bicarbonate, 183
 prevalence of, 126
 Sodium hexametaphosphate, 301
pulpitis and, 200, 205
Sodium hypochlorite (bleach), 207-208, 217
radiography of, 128
Soft palate, 5, 6, 14
radiology and, 73, 75-80, 81
 Software, radiography and, 40, 44-45
restoration and, 222, 225
 Solganal, 242
therapy options for, 222
Sonic scaler, 160
 Retention. See Persistence
Spatulas, 209, 210
 Retroarticular process, 15
 Speed, handpieces and, 163-165
Root canal, 22-23, 76
 Spot probing, defined, 33
Root canal therapy, 197, 200, 213, 217-220
Spreaders, 209
Root fractures
Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC)
defined, 115, 118
overview of, 139-141
endodontic disease and, 202, 206
physical examinations and, 29, 34
Roots
treatment of, 290, 293-294
extractions and, 231, 241, 262, 266
Staging
furcation bone loss and, 71
 of oral tumors, 141-142
numbers of, 19
 of periodontal disease, 181, 182, 194
 persistent deciduous teeth and, 272-273
of tooth resorption, 222, 223-225
scaling and, 182-183
Step-back method, 217
SLOB rule and, 59-60
Step wedges, 62
Root tip elevators, 160
Sterile packs, 153
Rostral, defined, 26, 27
Sterilization, 167
 Rotary cutting instruments, 165-166
Stomatitis
Rotation (torsion), 269
FIV and, 244
Round burs, 166
laboratory evaluation and, 257
laser therapy and, 262, 268
Safety. See also Personal protective equipment
medical therapy for, 242-244
equipment for, 154, 167
multiple tooth extraction and, 257, 262
314
Index
Stomatitis (cont'd)
 Tooth resorption. See Resorption
overview of, 128-129, 130, 131, 242
Tooth resorption (TR) classification, 120
root fragments and, 262
Torsion. See Rotation
surgical management of, 244-246
Tramadol, 179
 Stones, 166
 Transdermal pain patches, 179
Stops, 209
Translation. See Bodily movement
Storage, radiographs and, 64
Trauma, 142-145, 280-288
Streaked films, 64
TR classification. See Tooth resorption classification
 Streaming, 181
Triadan system (modified), 19-23, 84
Sublingual glands, anatomy of, 8
Triamcinolone, 242
Sulcular epithelium, defined, 8-9
Trigeminal nerve, 5, 8, 174
Supereruption. See Extrusion
Trimming burs, 166
Supernumerary teeth, 101, 102, 273
Tumors. See Neoplasias
Systemic analgesia, 177-179
Turbines, 167
 Two-handed charting, 84, 85
T cell growth factor (TCGF), 243
TCGF. See T cell growth factor
Ultrasonic scalers, 155, 160, 181-183
 Teaching models, 155
Uncomplicated crown fractures, defined, 115, 116
Teeth. See also Specific teeth
Uncomplicated crown-root fractures, defined, 115,
composition of, 22-24
117
dental formulas for, 15, 19
Unilocular corticated, defined, 68
eruption of, 24, 25
Unilocular noncorticated, defined, 68
functional significance of, 196, 200
University of Minnesota dental charts, 97-99
malocclusions of teeth, 134-135
 University of Pennsylvania dental charts, 95-96
terminology of, 24-27
types of, 19-22
Vallate papillae, 7
variations in number and morphology of, 101
Vasoconstrictors, 174-175
Telescopes, 152
Vasodentin, tooth anatomy and, 22
 Temperature control, 170, 172
Vasodilators, 174
Temporomandibular joint
Vertical angulation, 50, 63
anatomy of, 15, 18
Vertical bone loss, 68, 70-71
ankylosis of, 143, 144, 280
Vestibular, defined, 24
dislocation of, 280, 281
VHUP dental charts, 95-96
radiology and, 56-59, 81
Virbac, 242-243
T-helper cells, 243
Viruses, 129, 244
Thin curettes, 185
Vital pulp therapy, 209-213, 214-216, 271-272, 275
Tipping, 269
TMJ disease, 81
William's probes, 35
anbuo
Wing-tipped elevators, 158
 anatomy of, 5, 7
eosinophilic granulomas and, 290, 292-293
Xylitol, 301
inflammation of, 128
physical examinations and, 33, 34
Zidovudine (AZT), 244
squamous cell carcinomas and, 139, 140
Zinc, 301
Tonsils, 139
Zinc oxide-eugenol (ZOE), 207, 210, 219, 220
Toothbrushing, 299, 300
 ZOE. See Zinc oxide-eugenol
Tooth extrusion. See Extrusion
Zoledronate, 294
Tooth fractures. See Fractures
Zygomatic arch, radiography and, 52
Tooth mobility. See Mobility
Zygomatic glands, anatomy of, 8