Feline
Emergency&
Critical Care
Medicine
Kenneth J.Drobatz & Merilee F.Costello
WILEY-BLACKWELL
Feline Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine
Edited by
Kenneth J. Drobatz
Merilee F. Costello
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Feline Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine
Feline Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine
Edited by
Kenneth J. Drobatz
Merilee F. Costello
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
Edition first published 2010
@ 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program has been
merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial Office
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for custormer services, and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book, please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific clients, is
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC,
a separate system of payrments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are
ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-2311-9/2010.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and
product narmes used in this book are trade narmes, service marks, tradermarks or registered tradermarks of their
respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This
It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If professional
advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a cormpetent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
Feline emergency and critical care rnedicine / edited by Kenneth J. Drobatz, Merilee F Costello.
p.;cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-2311-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Cats- Wounds and injuries-Treatment-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Cats-Diseases-Treatment-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Veterinary emergencies-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
4. Veterinary critical care-Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Drobatz, Kenneth J. I1. Costello, Merilee F
[DNLM:  1. Cat Diseases-therapy. 2. Critical Care-methods. 3. Emergencies-veterinary. 4. Emergency
Treatrment-veterinary. SF 985 F3142 2010]
SF985.F415 2010
636.8'0896025-dc22
2009049306
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.s. Library of Congress.
    q     a  
Printed in Singapore
12010
Dedications
To Lita, my wife, my best friend, and the best move I have EVER made!
Kenneth J. Drobatz
To Amy and Evie for all the love and joy you bring me every day
To my mother for always believing in me
To all the students, interns, residents, and nurses I have worked with—thank you for all you have
ta ught me
Merilee F Costello
Contents
Contributors
xi
Acknowledgments
xt
Approach to the Critically Ill Cat
3
Kenneth j.Drobatz
Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
13
Sean D.Smarick
3
Shock
23
Merilee F Costello
Tra uma
31
Erica L. Reineke
S
Guidelines for Anesthesia in Critically Ill Feline Patients
39
Lynne I. Kushner
Anesthetic Protocols for Systemically Healthy Cats
53
Lynne I.Kushner
7
 Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
63
Lynne I.Kushner
8 Fluid Therapy
77
Garret Pachtinger
 Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
87
Daniel L.Chan
10  Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
105
Amy V.Trow,ElizabethRozanski,and ArmelledeLaforcade
11
Upper Airway Disease
127
April L.Paul and Elizabeth Rozanski
12Lower Airway Disease
137
Benjamin M. Brainard and Lesley G.King
vii
vili
Contents
13
 Parenchymal Disease
151
Deborah Silverstein
14
 General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
167
Manuel Boller
151
 Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases
181
Mark A.Oyama
16 Management of Thromboembolic Disease Secondary to Heart Disease
191
Amy j. Alwood
17
Management of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias
199
Meg M. Sleeper
18  Less-Common Cardiac Conditions: Heartworm, Syncope, Pericardial Disease,
Bacterial Endocarditis, and Digitalis Toxicity
209
jamie M. Burkitt
191
 Diagnostic Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Conditions
219
Daniel Z. Hume
20
General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
229
Sara Snow and Matthew W.Beal
21
Management of Specific Gastrointestinal Conditions
245
Anne Marie Corrigan and Douglass K. Macintire
22
 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques for the Urologic System
267
Simon W. Tappin and Andrew j. Brown
23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
281
Annie Malouin
24 Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
303
Cathy Langston
General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
313
Daniel j. Fletcher
26  Neurologic Emergencies: Brain
331
jessica M.Sryder
27
 Neurologic Emergencies: Spinal Cord
339
Jessica M.Snyder
28  Neurologic Emergencies: Peripheral
351
Jessica M.Sryder
Contents
ix
29
Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
357
Susan G. Hackner
30
Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
379
Susan G. Hackner
31
Management of Specific Endocrine and Meta bolic Diseases: Diabetes
409
Tara K. Trotman
32
 Management of Specific Endocrine and Meta bolic Diseases: Other
419
Cynthia R. Ward
33
 Diagnostic Testing of Endocrine Disease in the Cat
429
fennifer E.Prittie
34
Electrolyte Disorders
439
Linda G. Martin and Amanda E. Veatch
35
 Reproductive Emergencies
467
Page E.Yaxley and L.Ari Jutkowitz
361
Pediatric Emergencies
491
Maureen McMichael
37
Ocular Emergencies
503
Deborah C. Mandell
38
 Dermatologic Emergencies
529
Jill L. Abraham
39
Toxicological Emergencies
561
Robert H. Poppenga
 Environmental Emergencies
601
Lori S. Waddell and Elise Mittleman Boller
Index
619
Contributors
Jill L. Abraham, VMD, DACVD
Andrew J. Brown, MA, VetMB, DACVECC
 Massachusetts Veterinary Referral Hospital
MRCVS
20 Cabot Road
Assistant Professor
Woburn, MA 01801
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Amy J. Alwood, DVM, DACVECC
Michigan State University
Critical Care Specialist
East Lansing, MI
Monroeville, PA
Jamie M. Burkitt, DVM, Dipl. ACVECC
Matthew W. Beal, DVM Diplomate ACVECC
Critical Consultations
Associate Professor, Emergency and Critical Care
Davis, CA 95616
Medicine
 Director of Interventional Radiology Services
Daniel L. Chan, DVM, DACVECC, DACVN,
College of Veterinary Medicine
MRCVS
Michigan State University
 Lecturer in Emergency and Critical Care
East Lansing, MI 48824-1314
Clinical Nutritionist, Nutrition Support Service
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Elise Mittleman Boller, DVM, DACVECC
Royal Veterinary College
Staff Veterinarian, Intensive Care Unit
University of London
 Department of Clinical Studies
North Mymms
College of Veterinary Medicine
Hertfordshire, AL9 7TA
University of Pennsylvania
United Kingdom
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Anne Marie Corrigan, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Manuel Boller, Dr. Med. Vet., DACVECC
Associate Professor
 Senior Research Investigator, Critical Care
 Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
 Department of Clinical Studies
St. George's University
School of Veterinary Medicine
Grenada, West Indies
 3900 Delancey Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19104
Merilee F Costello
Critical Care Specialist
Benjamin M. Brainard, VMD, DACVA,
Allegheny Veterinary Emergency Trauma and
DACVECC, Assistant Professor
 Specialty
Department of Small Animal Medicine and
Department of Critical Care
Surgery
Monroeville, PA
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Georgia
Athens, GA
Xi
xii
Contributors
Armelle deLaforcade, DVM, DACVECC
Lynne I. Kushner DVM, DACVA
Assistant Professor
1858 Huron Ave.
Department of Clinical Sciences
Roseville, MN 5S113
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
Tufts University
Cathy Langston
North Grafton, MA
Head of Nephrology, Urology, and Hemodialysis
Unit
Kenneth J. Drobatz , DVM, MSCE, DACVIIM,
Animal Medical Center
DACVECC
510 E. 62"d Street
Professor and Chief, Section of Critical Care
New York, NY
 Director, Emergency Service
 Department of Clinical Studies—Philadelphia
Douglass K. Macintire, DVM, MS
University of Pennsylvania
Professor
 School of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Clinical Sciences
 Philadelphia, PA
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
Daniel J. Fletcher, PhD, DVM, DACVECC
Auburn, AL 36849
Assistant Professor of Emergency and
Critical Care
Annie Malouin, DVM, DACVECC
Cornell University Hospital for Animals
Emergency and Critical Care Services
VCA Sacramento Veterinary Referral Center
Susan G. Hackner, BVSc, MRCVS, DACVIM,
Sacramento, California
DACVECC
Veterinary Specialty Consulting
Deborah C. Mandell, VMD, DACVECC
New York, NY
 Staff Veterinarian, Emergency Medicine
Adjunct Assistant Professor
Daniel Z. Hume
Section of Critical Care
 Staff Veterinarian, Emergency Services
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital of the
 Diplomate of American College of Veterinary
University of Pennsylvania
Internal Medicine—Small Animal
 Philadelphia, PA
Diplomate of American College of Veterinary
Emergency and Critical Care
Linda G. Martin, DVM, MS, DACVECC
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital at the
Assista nt Professor, Small Animal Emergency and
University of Pennsylvania
Critical Care
3900 Delancey, Room #2018
Department of Clinical Sciences
Philadelphia, PA
College of Veterinary Medicine
Auburn University
L. Ari Jutkowitz, VMD, Dipl. ACVECC
Auburn, AL
Assistant Professor, Emergency and Critical Care
College of Veterinary Medicine
Maureen McMichael, DVM, DACVECC
Michigan State University
Associate Professor
East Lansing, MI 48824-1314
 Section Chief SA Emergency and Critical Care
 Director SA Medicine and Surgery Internship
Lesley G. King, MVB, DACVECC, DACVIM
Program
Professor, Section of Critical Care
 Director Small Animal Blood Bank
 Department of Clinical Studies
Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine
 School of Veterinary Medicine
 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 University of Pennsylvania
1008 West Hazelwood Drive
 Philadelphia, PA
Urbana, IL 61802
Contributors
xili
Mark A. Oyama, DVM, DACVIM-Cardiology
Deborah Silverstein, DVM, DACVECC
Associate Professor
Assistant Professor of Critical Care
 Department of Clinical Studies—Philadelphia
3850 Delancey Street
School of Veterinary Medicine
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital at the
University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania
3900 Delancey St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6010
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Meg M. Sleeper, VMD
Garret Pachtinger, VMD
Associate Professor of Cardiology
Veterinary Specialty and Emergency Center
Department of Clinical Studies
1900 W. Old Lincoln Hwy.
School of Veterinary Medicine
Langhorne, PA
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
April Paul, DVM, DACVECC
Critical Care Specialist
Sean D. Smarick, VMD, DACVECC
TuftsVETS
Director
 Department of Emergency and Critical Care
 Allegheny Veterinary Emergency Trauma and
Walpole, MA
Specialty
Monroeville, PA
Robert H. Poppenga, DVM, PhD, Dipl ABVT
 Professor of Clinical and Diagnostic Toxicology
Sara Snow, DVM
Head, Section of Toxicology
D208 VMC
California Animal Health and Food Safety
MSU
Laboratory
East Lansing, MI 48824-1314
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California-Davis
Jessica M. Snyder, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Davis, CA
Staff Neurologist
VCA Veterinary Specialty Center of Seattle
Jennifer E. Prittie, DVM, ACVIM, ACVECC
20115 44th Avenue W
Staff Criticalist
Lynnw0od, WA 98036
 Department of Emergency and Critical Care
Animal Medical Center
Simon W. Tappin, MA, VetMB, DipECVIM-CA,
New York, NY
MRCVS
Dick White Referrals
Erica L. Reineke, VMD, DACVECC
The Six Mile Bottom Veterinary Specialist Centre
 Assistant Professor, Emergency and Critical Care
 London Road
Medicine
Six Mile Bottom
 Department of Clinical Studies-Philadelphia
Suffolk
University of Pennsylvania
CB8 0UH
School of Veterinary Medicine
ENGLAND
 3900 Delancey Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
Tara K. Trotman, VMD, DACVIM
Staff Veterinarian, Internal Medicine
Eliza beth Rozanski, DVM, DACVIM, DACVECC
Department of Clinical Studies
Department of Clinical Sciences
Matthew J. Ryan Veterinary Hospital of the
Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine
University of Pennsylvania
Tufts University
Philadelphia, PA
North Grafton, MA
xiv
Contributors
Amy Trow, DVM DACVECC
Cynthia R. Ward, VMD, PhD, DACVIM
Ocean State Veterinary Specialists
Chief of Staff, Small Animal Medicine
East Greenwich, RI
Professor of Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
Amanda E. Veatch, DVM
University of Georgia
Small Animal Intern
501 DW Brooks Drive
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Athens, GA 30602
College of Veterinary Medicine
Washington State University
Page E. Yaxley, DVM
Pullman, WA 99164-6610
 Resident, Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Lori S. Waddell, DVM, DACVECC
D208 VMC
Adjunct Assistant Professor, Critical Care
College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Clinical Studies
Michigan State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
East Lansing, MI 48824-1314
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Dougie Macintire for all her support through my career and all the doors and oppor-
tunities she has opened for me.
Kenneth J. Drobatz
I would like to thank Dr. Ken Drobatz for always being an inspiring teacher and excellent mentor, and for
giving me this wonderful opportunity.
Merilee F Costello
XV
Feline Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine
APPROACH TO THE CRITICALLY ILL CAT
Kenneth J. Drobatz
Unique Features
The major point to emphasize regarding cats is that they are very subtle in their manifestation of criti
cal illness/disease. What might appear to be subtle clinical signs may only be the tip of the iceberg
regarding the severity of the condition. A full assessment of the vital parameters of a cat that "is not
doing well" is essential to avoid missing serious underlying problems.
A. The general approach to the critically ill cat involves three phases: triage, primary survey, and
secondary survey. The first two phases are for rapid assessment and recognition of the most life-
threatening conditions.
a. Triage is a process for sorting injured or sick animals based on their need for or likely benefit from
immediate medical trea tment.
b. The primary survey is a more in-depth assessment utilizing the triage principles.
Telephone triage (box 1.1)
1. The initial contact between the client and the veterinary hospital is often via telephone. This
conversation can allow for triage of the cat, help in the diagnosis, and provide information
regarding first aid treatment.
a. Immediate aims of telephone triage: Determine if the cat needs to be assessed by a veteri-
narian on an emergency basis, provide information for first aid for the cat, and calm the
owner.
b. Questions asked on the phone should determine the following:
i.
The nature of the injury
ii.
Respiratory status
ili.
 Mucous membrane (mm) color
iv.
Level of consciousness
V.
 Presence and severity of bleeding
1. Owners often overinterpret the severity of the bleeding.
vi.
Heart rate
vii.1
Presence/severity of wounds
vii.
 Ability to ambulate
ix.
 Presence of fractures
X.
 Presence/severity of vomiting and diarrhea
xi.
Ability to urinate (especially male cats)
xii.
Abdominal distention
xii. Ingestion of toxins (rare in cats)
3
4
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 1.1. Telephone triage-symptoms to determine.
1. Nature of problem/injury
a. Cardiovascular status (HR, mm color)
2. Neurologic status (mentation/seizures/ability to ambulate)
3. External hemorrhage
 4. Vomiting/diarrhea severity
5. Ability to urinate
6. Toxin ingestion
7. Pain
8. Hiding/not eating/listless (warrants evaluation)
xiv. Coughing {rare in cats)
xv. Seizures/altered mentation
xvi. Presence and severity of pain (diffcult for owner to assess accurately)
c. Conditions that demand immediate attention
Respiratory distress (open-mouth breathing is generally a sign of severe respiratory
distress in cats).
ii.
 Severe bleeding
Straining to urinate without passing urine (often confused with constipation by
owners)
iv.
Bleeding from body orifices
V.
 Seizures/altered mentation/decreased level of consciousness.
Toxin ingestion.
vi. Severe coughing (often confused by owners with retching or vomiting)
vifi. Protracted vomiting or diarrhea
ix.1
 Extreme pain
X.
Hiding/not eating/listless
1. Owners often just state that their cat is hiding/not eating or listless. The range of
severity of disease with this complaint can be wide, and therefore it should be
recommended that the cat be evaluated by a veterinarian. Cats hide disease very
well.
d.  Advising first aid
i.Relying on the owner's interpretation of the cat's problem can be risky.
ii. If the problem is clear (e.g., previous condition with same clinical signs, etc.), then
advice over the phone is reasona ble.
ili. If in doubt at all about the cat's condition, the default recommendation is that the cat
should be brought in for evaluation.
iv. If trauma has occurred:
1. The cat should be placed on a board or blanket/towel for support that will minimize
movement of fractured bones.
2. Although rolling newspapers into splints has been recommended for stabilization
of fractures, we advise against this for both the cat's and the owner's sakes.
3. Owners should be warned that handling a painful cat is dangerous as even the
most docile cat may bite when it is painful.
2. Calming the owner
a. The owner may be extremely upset about the pet while talking on the phone.
b. If the owner is overly upset, it is advisable to ask if there is someone else present who can
drive him or her and the pet to the clinic.
Chapter l A
 Approach to the Critically Ill Cat
5
Box 1.2. Waiting room triage.
1. Obtain capsule history.
2. Assess respiratory (loudness, rate, rhythm, effort).
 3. Cardiovascular (mm color, CRT, pulse rate and quality)
4. Neurologic (mentation, ability to ambulate)
5. Urinary tract (palpation of urinary bladder)
6. General
a. Toxin exposure (ingestion, inhalation, topical)
b. Potential for infection disease
c. Limb fractures
d. Severe pain
e. Dystocia
f. Prolapsed organs
g. External bleeding
h. Open wounds
i. Owner's concerns
c. Clear directions should be given on how to get to the clinic
i. It is best to have sets of directions for all areas around the clinic prewritten at the
reception desk so the directions can be clear and consistent all the time.
ii. Try to estimate the time of arrival and notify the rest of the medical staff about the
 potential condition the cat may be in and when it might arrive.
i. Waiting room triage (box 1.2)
1. All cats presenting to an emergency clinic should be assessed immediately.
2. Triage is the assessment and classification of patients to determine priority of need and proper
placement of treatment.
3. Steps of waiting room triage:
a. Obtain a capsule history (ideally this should take <2-3 minutes):
i. The nature of the complaint and its progression
il.  Previous major medical problems
iii. Current medications and treatment
b. Rapid physical evaluation. (Cats in carriers or wrapped in owner's arms or blankets should
be removed from these coverings to be assessed. Be cautious with fractious cats or cats
that might jump free. If in doubt, the cat should be assessed in a closed examination room
if possible.)
i. Four major body systems to assess:
1.Respiratory
a. Assess rate rhythm and effort
ment room include the following (see chap. 2—Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral
Resuscitation (CPCR):
i.
 Increased respiratory rate (many times the only sign in cats, even those with
substantial respiratory compromise)
ii.
Increased respiratory effort
ili.
 Loud upper airway sounds
iv.
Open-mouth breathing
6
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
V.
Abducted elbows (rare in cats)
vi.
Extended head and neck (rare in cats)
vii. Paradoxical respirations
vifi. Flaring of nares
ix.  Cats exhibiting signs iv-vi are generally in extreme respiratory distress.
2. Cardiovascular system (assessing for poor tissue perfusion)
a. Assess mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, pulse quality, pulse rate,
and rhythm (see chap. 3—Shock)
 b. Signs of cardiovascular system derangement that require immediate transfer to
treatment room (see chap. 3—Shock)
i. Pale, gray, or hyperemic mucous membranes (normal feline mucous mem-
branes tend to be less pink than in the canine, and cats hyperemic mucous
membranes don't tend to be as red as the dogs').
i. Very rapid or prolonged capillary refill time (<1 second and >2-3 seconds).
ii. Weak or bounding pulses (cats' pulses don't tend to get as bounding as dogs')
iv. Very rapid, slow, or irregular pulse/heart rhythm
3. Neurologic system
a. Assess mentation and ability to ambulate (see chap. 25—General Approach and
Overview of the Neurologic Cat)
 b. Signs of neurologic system abnormalities that require immediate transfer to the
treatment area:
i. Severe changes in mentation (stupor, coma, obtundation, extreme hyperexcit-
ability, seizures)
ii. Inability to walk or move legs
4. Urinary tract system
a. Assess ability to urinate and palpate urinary bladder {especially sick male cats)
b. Abnormalities in urinary tract system that require immediate transfer to the
treatment area {see chap. 23—Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra,
GN, CRF):
i. Inability to urinate
i. Large, firm, nonexpressable urinary bladder
 5. Other assesments that require immediate transfer to the treatment area:
a. Recent ingestion of toxin
b. Topical exposure to toxin
C. Severe vomiting and diarrhea (rare in cats compared to dogs)
d. Owner is very concerned.
e. Obvious limb fractures
f. Severe pain
g. Recent trauma
h. Burns (fire, chemical, or hot water)
i.
Excessive bleeding
Dystocia
k. Prolapsed organs
1. Open wounds
m. Animals that have died
n. Insect or snake bites
O. If in doubt, transfer to treatment area for further assessment.
C. Primary survey (see box 1.3)
sisas apoq roteu inoy al jo suawssae ydap-u pun paeiap arou e si Aaains Aewd aui "!
The goal is to establish the relative stability of the cat and to further determine if immediate
therapy is warranted.
Chapter 1 Approach to the Critically Ill Cat
7
Box 1.3. Primary survey.
1. Respiratory system
a. Physical: mm color, respiratory rate/effort, upper airway sounds, thoracic auscultation
b. Objective: Pulse oximetry, arterial blood gas analysis
 2. Cardiovascular system
a. Physical: mm color, CRT, pulse rate/quality, cardiac auscultation, rectal-to-toe temperature
difference
b. Objective: ECG, blood pressure, lactate concentration, CVP (central venous pressure)
3. Neurologic system
a. Physical: mentation, cranial nerve function, ability to ambulate/motor movement, limb pain
sensation, and spinal reflexes
 b. Objective: none on an emergency basis
4. Urinary tract:
 a. Physical: Palpate urinary bladder for distention; palpate kidneys for size, shape, pain,
symmetry.
 b. Objective: Measure BUN, creatinine, blood gas analysis, potassium concentration.
ii. Respiratory system
1. Similar parameters should be assessed as in triage: mucous membrane color, upper airway
sounds, respiratory rate, rhythm, and effort.
2. Auscultation of all regions of the thorax and trachea
3. Pulse oximetry and arterial blood gas give more objective and detailed information regarding
lung function (the stress of obtaining an arterial blood gas may outweigh the benefit in a cat
with respiratory compromise).
(see chap. 10—Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease).
a. Evaluation for the underlying cause should be immediately undertaken if the cat will toler-
ate this further assessment.
ii. Cardiovascular system
1. Similar parameters should be assessed as in triage: mucous membrane color, capillary refill
time, pulse quality, rate, and rhythm. Cardiac auscultation and rectal-to-toe temperature dif-
ference can also provide assessment of tissue perfusion status.
2. More objective assessments include ECG evaluation, blood pressure determination, blood
lactate concentration, central venous pressure measurement, pulmonary artery catheterization
and determination of pulmonary artery hemoglobin saturation with oxygen, measurement of
cardiac output, tissue oxygen delivery, and consumption. (The pulmonary artery catheter is
rarely used in cats for these determinations. See chap. 3—Shock.)
a. Anecdotal impression is that cats with poor tissue perfusion often have low rectal
temperature.
b. Cats in shock often are bradycardic compared with dogs, which are usually tachycardic.
3. Cardiovascular system derangements are life-threatening and should be addressed immediately
(see chap. 3—Shock).
iv. Neurologic system
 1. Assessment of the neurologic system is primarily through physical examination.
2. Abnormalities of brain function may manifest as changes in mentation, gait, or cranial nerve
function.
3. Abnormalities of spinal cord or peripheral nerve function are manifested with normal menta-
tion/cranial nerves, but abnormal limb findings such as loss of conscious proprioception,
ataxia, changes in limb reflexes, altered sensation, and motor function.
8
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. Abnormalities in brain function require rapid assessment and treatment of the underlying
cause before irreversible damage can occur {see chap. 25—General Approach and Overview
of the Neurologic Cat).
 5. Note: cats with severe altered perfusion may have abnormal neurologic function until perfu-
sion abnormalities are corrected. Use caution when interpreting a bnormal neurologic findings
when perfusion is severely compromised.
v. Urinary tract system
1. Initial primary survey physical evaluation of the urinary tract system is palpation ofthe urinary
bladder, determination of urethral obstruction, and palpation of the kidneys for size, shape,
symmetry, and pain.
2. More objective primary survey rapid assessment includes determination of blood urea nitrogen
(BUN), serum creatinine and potassium concentrations, and blood gas analysis.
d. Secondary survey (box 1.4)
i. The secondary survey occurs after assessment and stabilization of the immediate life-threatening
conditions.
a detailed medical history, imaging studies, and clinical pathology as indicated. Response to
therapy may also be included as part of the secondary survey.
ili. A comprehensive diagnostic and therapeutic plan can be developed; prognosis and costs can be
estimated as well.
é. Emergency clinical pathology database (box 1.5)
i. Rapid assessments of packed cell volume (PCV), total solids (TS), dipstick blood glucose, dipstick
BUN, and a blood smear provide relatively immediate and essential information for evaluation of
the critically ill patient.
1. The blood for these evaluations can be obtained by filling three heparinized capillary tubes
from the hub of an intravenous catheter that is being placed or by filling them from the hub
of a 2S-gauge needle placed in a peripheral vein.
2. Detailed evaluation of the findings of the emergency database can be obtained from their
respective following chapters.
Box 1.4. Secondary survey.
1. Head-to-tail physical examination
 2. Detailed medical history
 3. Imaging studies
4. Clinical pathology
5. Response to therapy
Box 1.5.
 Emergency database.
1. PCV
2. Total solids
3. Dipstick BUN
4. Dipstick glucose
5. Blood smear
Chapter I Approach to the Critically Ill Cat
6
 3. General interpretation of abnormal emergency database findings
a. PCV and TS should be interpreted together.
i.  Increased PCV and TS
1. Dehydration (anecdotally TS is a more sensitive assessment of dehydration in the
cat).
ii. Increased PCV and normal TS
1. Polycythemia
2. Dehydration with protein loss
ii. Normal PCV and increased TS
1. Dehydration (common)
2. Dehydration and anemia (common)
3. Increased globulin production
 4. Lipemic serum or severely hemolyzed serum can give an increased TS reading on
a refractometer.
iv. Decreased PCV and decreased TS
1. Blood loss (most common)
 2. Nonregenerative anemia with protein loss
 3. Nonregenerative anemia and liver dysfunction
4. RBC destruction and protein loss
b. Increased glucose
i.
Stress (most common)
ii. Diabetes mellitus
ii. Iatrogenic (intravenous glucose supplementation)
c. Decreased glucose
i. Insulin overdose
ii. Liver failure
iii. Sepsis
iv. Neonatal/juvenile hypoglycemia
d. Decreased BUN
i.Diuresis
ii. Liver dysfunction/failure
e. Increased BUN
i.
Prerenal (most common)
1. Dehydration (common)
2. GI hemorrhage (uncommon)
ii.Renal dysfunction/failure (common)
ii. Postrenal (common in male cats)
f. Blood smear evaluation
i. Accurate evaluation of blood smear is highly dependent upon the quality of the smear
that is made. A quality smear should:
1. Have a feathered edge and a broad monolayer in which RBC are evenly distributed
and have minimal overlap. This area is where WBCs are most easily identified and
where RBC abnormalities can be most readily seen. Abnormal cell types, platelet
clumps, and microfilariae may be found along the feathered edge.
i. For emergency purposes, gross evaluation of the three major cell lines is all that is
needed.
1. For rapid assessment of platelets and WBC count, first look at the feathered edge
at low to medium power.
a. Gross decreases in WBC (panleukopenia) can be recognized rapidly by
the paucity of WBCs on the feathered edge (WBCs tend to accumulate at the
10
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
feathered edge; therefore, if the feathered edge lacks them, it is very likely that
the WBC count is very low).
b. Platelet clumps on the feathered edge suggest adequate platelets. These clumps
can result in a falsely low estimate of platelet numbers when the estimate is
based on the count from the monolayer.
 2. After viewing the feathered edge, move to the monolayer just inside the feathered
edge and evaluate the quality (see above) of the smear.
a. Evaluate WBCs: Estimate the absolute number as low, normal, or high by using
the high dry magnification.
i. Estimate a differential WBC count using high dry magnification.
il. Evaluate leukocyte morphology using the oil immersion magnification.
b. Evaluate platelets: Estimate the number. Adequate platelet number {enough to
prevent bleeding) is indicated by observing 3-4 platelets/oil immersion field or
noting several platelet clumps at lower magnification. In cats with a normal
RBC count, one platelet per 20 RBCs suggests a normal platelet count as well.
c. Evaluate RBCs: RBCs should be evaluated for size, shape, color, and
parasites.
g. Evaluation of hematocrit tube supernatant 
i.A large buffy coat indicates a high WBC count.
ii. Icteric serum could be due to prehepatic, hepatic, and posthepatic causes.
ii. Hemolyzed serum can be due to poor blood collection technique or intravascular
hemolysis (rare in cats).
iv. Lipemic serum can be due to pancreatitis, immediately postseizure {anecdotal), or
postprandial.
f. The emergency plan (box 1.6)
i. After the initial assessment, a problem list should be generated with prioritization of most life-
threatening to least life-threatening.
ii. Plans {diagnostic, therapeutic, and monitoring) should then be made for each of those
problems.
1. The plan itself depends upon the problem, the sta bility of the cat, the nature of the cat {e.g,
fractious), and the number and skill of the availa ble nursing staff.
2. After making a plan for each problem, they should be collated so that a comprehensive,
cohesive, and clear order sheet can be written.
3. Categories covered by emergency orders:
a. Fluid therapy
b. Medications to be given
C. Diagnostics to be performed
d. Parameters to be monitored
e. Nursing care
Box 1.6. General emergency plan.
[Should be made for each problem separately and then consolidated for final order sheet)
1. Fluid therapy (type, route, rate)
2. Medication to be administered (type, dose, rate, frequency, compatibility)
3. Diagnostic plan (imaging, clinical pathology, etc.)
4. Monitoring (physical parameters, clinicopathology, electronic)
5. General nursing care orders
Chapter I Approach to the Critically Ill Cat
11
4. Fluid therapy orders should include (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy) the following:
a. Type of fluid to be administered
b. Route of administration
c. Rate of administration
5. Medication orders should include the following:
a. Type of medication
b. Dose of medication
c. Rate of administration
d. Frequency of administration
e. Medications should be reviewed for compatibility with other administered therapies, as
well as whether they are tolerated by cats, and potential untoward reactions that may occur.
i. The orders should note monitoring for these reactions, and contingency orders should
be available in case a reaction occurs.
6. Diagnostic plan
a. Should be considered for all problems and then listed together in order of priority of
completion.
i. The stability of the cat, as well as the importance of the information in the emergency
management of the cat, should determine the priority.
7. Monitoring plans 
a. Monitoring plans can be categorized into physical examination, clinicopathologic, and
electronic parameters.
b. Monitoring is extremely important in critical care to detect trends. This allows anticipation
of problems before they occur.
C. Common physical parameters that are monitored
i.
Mucous membrane color
ii.
Capillary refill time
ii. Pulse rate and rhythm
iv.
Pulse quality
V.
Lung sounds
vi.
 Respiratory rate and effort
vii. Neurologic function
1. Mentation
2. Cranial nerves
 3. Long tracts (especially voluntary motor capabilities and pain sensation for spinal
cord injuries).
4. Urination. Bladder size is easily palpable in cats and gives an estimate of urine
production.
 5. Vomiting/bowel movements 
6. Rectal temperature
 7. Abdominal palpation
 8. Assessing skin and mucous membranes for petechiations/ecchymoses
viil. Body weight
d. Common clinicopathologic parameters
i.
 PCV, TS, dipstick BUN, and glucose
ii. Electrolytes
ii. Blood gas parameters
iv. Blood smear
y. Coagulation parameters
e. Electronic monitoring parameters
i.
 Central venous pressure
12
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Electrocardiogram
ii. Blood pressure
iv. Pulse oximetry
V.
 Pulmonary artery catheter placement (not commonly done in cats) to measure cardiac
output, oxygen delivery, oxygen consumption, peripheral vascular resistance, and
mixed venous oxygen saturation.
f. Common nursing orders
i.
 Keep patient clean and dry.
i. Check comfort (pain, etc.).
ii. Turn patient as needed.
iv. Other nursing orders will be for the specific patient needs.
iii. General comments
1. Emergency plans will need to be tailored to individual patient needs, the specific disease
condition, the severity of the cat's condition, the physiologic stability of the cat, and the
number and skill of the nursing staff. Additionally, the owner's personal needs and financial
capability must also be considered.
 2. If the best emergency plan cannot be accommodated by your facility, then referral should be
considered and discussed with the client.
Telephone Triage
Waiting Room Triage
Primary Survey
Secondary Survey
Emergency Plan
Fig。 1. 1。 Algorithm for "Approach to the Critically Ill Cat."
2
CARDIOPULMONARY-CEREBRAL
RESUSCITATION (CPCR)
Sean D. Smarick
Unique Features
Cats warrant some special consideration in CPCR:
+ Fixed and dilated pupils are delayed in CPA.
● Airway management is more challenging due to laryngospasm.
+ Size and conformation call for circumferential compressions.
● Faster compression rates
● Vasopressin use has not been reported in feline CPCR.
+ Lidocaine dosage is decreased.
● IV and IT saline flushes are reduced in volume.
 Offer technical challenges to invasive monitoring
A. Definitions
a. Cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation (CPCR) is the treatment for a cardiopulmonary arrest which
incorporates basic, advanced, and brain-oriented prolonged life support.
b. Cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) is the lack of effective respiration and circulation that is the common
pathway preceding death.
B. Precipitating factors
a. Cardiopulmonary arrest can be caused by anything that can lead to death, so quickly identifying
treatable underlying conditions is crucial for survival.
b. The American Heart Association suggests ruling out “Hs and Ts" as potentially treatable factors
leading to CPA. Adapted for cats, they include (see box 2.1) the following:
i.
Hypoxia
ii.
Hypovolemia
ii. Hypoglycemia
iv.Hyperkalemia
V.
H+ (acidosis)
vi.
Hypothermia
vi.  Tablets (drugs/anesthesia)
vii. Thromboembolism
ix. Tension pneumothorax (extremely rare in cats)
X.
Tamponade (cardiac, relatively rare in cats)
xi.  Trauma (head)
13
14
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 2.1. Cardiopulmonary arrest.
A. Reversible precipitating factors
a. Hypoxia
 b. Hypovolemia
c. Hypoglycemia
d. HyperK+
e. H+ (acidosis)
f. Hypothermia
g. Tablets(drugs/anesthesia)
h. Thromboembolism
i. Tension pneumothorax
j. Tamponade (cardiac)
k. Trauma (head)
C. Clinical signs
a. Observations and physical examination
i.
 Unconsciousness and unresponsiveness
i. Lack of chest wall movement or agonal respirations
iii. Auscultation will reveal no or agonal breath and no heart sounds.
iv. Palpation will not yield an apex heart beat or peripheral pulse.
v. Fixed and dilated pupils may take up to 90 seconds after a CPA in cats, whereas in primates it
is almost immediate.
b. Electrocardiogram (ECG)
i.Asystole (flatline on ECG)
i.  Pulseless electrical activity
1. Previously called electromechanical dissociation
 2. Appears on the ECG as organized electrical activity that is not associated with any mechanical
contraction of the heart
iii. Ventricular fibrillation (VF)
iv. Cats in respiratory arrest or early CPA also have had other arrhythmias reported, such as, sinus
bradycardia, ventricular tachycardia, A-V block, and so on, that affect perfusion.
v.  Electrical activity on the ECG does not ensure mechanical activity; conversely, a lack of a dis-
cernable ECG rhythm may be due to poor electrode-patient coupling, machine malfunction, and
so on, rather than CPA.
 1. Auscultation should always be done to fully evaluate cardiac activity in a patient with con-
firmed or suspected CPA.
C. Other continuous patient monitors used during anesthesia or in critically ill patients can support,
but are not specific for, a CPA.
i. Doppler blood flow intensity drops precipitously or stops completely.
ii. Capnometer alarms apnea or end-tidal carbon dioxide concentrations (PetCO2) acutely trend
downward toward O mmHg.
ii. Pulse oximeter plethysmograph or LED pulse meter will indicate no pulsatile blood flow; satura-
tion is not a reliable indicator as many dead patients will display a normal SpO2.
D. Prognosis
a. Return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) in cats suffering a CPA has been reported in 15-61% of
patients.
 b. Survival to discharge in cats with CPA has been reported as 2-22%, with the larger studies reporting
<10% survival.
Chapter 2   Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
15
Fig. 2.1., deally, q dedicated cart for patients undergoing CPA is often found in referral centers; however, ①
save valuable time. See box 2.2 for a basic list of supplies. These supplies must be checked daily.
Box 2.2. CPR box supplies.
3.0-mm to 5.5-mm cuffed endotracheal tubes with air syringe
Lidocaine 2% in an atomizer or 1-cc syringe to prevent laryngospasm
Muzzle gauze, umbilical tape, or other material to secure the endotracheal tube
Infant Ambu bag
Atropine injectable
Epinepherine injection 1:10,000 or 1:1,000
Sodium bicarbonate (8.4%)
0.9% saline for flushing IV catheters
1-cc and 3-cc syringes with 1-inch needles
Intraosseus needles/spinal needles
24-, 22-, and 20-ga IV catheters
Infusion caps or T-sets
Bag of LRS or saline
 Infusion set
c. In a study of cats with only respiratory arrest, 58% were discharged from the hospital.
d. Factors associated with discharged feline survivors of CPA:
i.
CPA generally related to anesthesia and the perioperative period, although other causes have
been successfully resuscitated.
ii. Duration of CPCR less than 15 minutes
ii. Do not rearrest.
E. General recommendations
a. A dedicated area, cart, or tackle box for CPCR supplies should be maintained (fig. 2.1 and box 2.2).
b. CPCR should be reviewed and practiced regularly by the staff.
C. In the absence of a documented owner “"do-not-resuscitate” order or signs of obvious death such as
rigor, decapitation, and so on every CPA should be treated.
16
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Treatment
A. Basic life support provides initial care in or out of the hospital and consists of the “ABCs” (box 2.3):
a.Access airway
i.
 Extend the neck (in a nontraumatized patient), pull the tongue forward, and if laryngospasm is
observed or intubation imminent, instill 2% lidocaine by an atomizer or a drop or two via a 1-cc
syringe onto the larynx.
1. In a patient with a known or suspected traumatic injury, care should be taken to minimize
i. Place and secure an appropriately sized endotracheal tube.
ii. Confirm initial and continued placement with capnometry, visualization, or palpation.
iv. If an airway obstruction is suspected, that is, the endotracheal tube cannot be passed or the
patient cannot be ventilated, perform the following:
Box 2.3. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation BLS: "ABCs"
A. Assess unresponsiveness
B. Airway access
C. Breathing
a. 20 bpm RA
b. 8-10 bpm CPA
D. Circulation
 a. Circumferential compressions 
b. 120 compression/minute
 C. Open chest if chest, pleural space, or pericardial pathology
ACLS: "D-G"
A. Differential diagnosis
a. Hs (see box 2.1)
b. Ts (see box 2.1)
B.Drugs
a. IV access
b. Treatment for underlying cause
C. Epinephrine
d. Atropine
e. NaHCO;
C. Evaluate ECG
a. Asystole/PEA/sinus bradycardia
b. VF
D. Fibrillation treatment PRN
E. Gauge effectiveness
PLS (prolonged life support): "H and I"
A. Hypothermia
B. Intensive care
a. Maximize cerebral perfusion (blood pressure) (see box 2.4)
b. Avoid hypoxemia and hypercapnea
C. Anticipate other organ dysfunction
Chapter 2   Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation (CPCR)
17
Box 2.4.
Quick reference CPCR drug volumes For the average-size
(5-kg) cat.
Epineprhine
0.1 mL of 1:1000 (low dose)
1 mL of 1:10,000 (high dose)
Atropine
0.5 mL
NaHCO;
5 mL of 1 mEq/mL (8.4%) IV
Fig. 2.2. Proper hand positioning for circumferential compressions. Note that both hands are used and encompass
the cranial thorax.
1. Suction laryngeal/pharyngeal area of any vomitus or secretions.
2. Physically remove any visible foreign body or use a polypropylene urinary catheter as a stylet
to guide the endotracheal tube around the obstruction.
3. Consider a foreign body obstruction and perform a Heimlich maneuver by making a sharp
ventrocraniodorsal compression just cranial to the umbilicus.
4. Perform a tracheostomy if an upper airway obstruction cannot be relieved.
b.Breathing
i. Provide positive pressure ventilation (PPV) via an ambu-bag, Baines or other nonbreathing cir-
cuits, or anesthesia machine, ideally with 100% oxygen supplementation.
ii. PPV may also be provided by mouth-to-snout or a tight-fitting mask in the absence of endotra-
of gastric contents.
1. 20 breaths/minute in respiratory arrest
2. 8-10 breaths/minute in CPA.
c. Circulation
i. External chest compressions
1. Circumferentially place the hands around the cranial thorax of the cat in lateral recumbency
(fig. 2.2).
2. Decrease the chest diameter by about 30%.
18
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Maintain a 1:1 compression-to-relaxation ratio.
 4. Compress at a rate of 120 beats/minute and minimize interruptions.
5. If unsatisfactory results are obtained, changing compressors or placement of hands and varying
the rate and depth may offer some benefit.
6. Interposed abdominal compressions may have benefit but have not been clinically evaluated
in the cat; compress the mid-cranial abdomen with the palmar surface of the fingers or hand
during the relaxation phase of the chest compressions.
7. Simultaneous ventilation-compression CPCR and caudal binding/MAST trouser application
are no longer recommended.
8. Complications of external chest compressions include rib/sternum separations or fractures,
hemothorax, pneumothorax, pulmonary contusions, and hepatic and splenic lacerations.
ii. Internal cardiac compressions (ICC) is an advanced cardiac life support maneuver.
1. Despite ongoing debate of the role of ICC, it is generally accepted that ICC must be employed
within 2-5 minutes to realize the benefits of the intervention on survival.
 2. Indications include chest wall defect (e.g, rib fractures), penetrating trauma, cardiac tampon-
ade, loss of chest wall compliance, and pleural space disease.
3. A lateral thoracotomy is performed at the left 6th intercostal space by incising the skin with
a scalpel blade, stabbing into the pleural space and extending the incision dorsally and ven-
trally stopping short of the vertebral arteries and internal thoracic with curved mayo
scissors.
 4. Alternatively, excising the diaphragm during a ceilotomy offers an approach during an intra-
operative CPA.
5. Baby Balfour abdominal retractors or Finochetto rib spreaders are used for incision
retraction.
6. Deliver the heart from the pericardial sac (with the mayo scissors); and using the palmar
surfaces of the fingers and thumb, compress the heart from the apex to the base at a rate of
1 50 beats/minute.
 7. Occlude the descending aorta by digital compression or by blunt dissection and occlusion with
red rubber catheter, penrose drain, or Rumel tourniquet.
 8. With ROSC, release the aortic occlusion over 5-10 minutes and close the chest routinely after
 pleural lavage.
B. Advanced cardiac life support incorporates more sophisticated care usually available only in a
hospitalized setting and continues the alphabet mnemonic letters D through G (box 2.3).
a. D: Differential diagnoses are considered and identified reversible causes of CPA (see heading
" Precipitating Factors") are addressed.
b.D:Drugs
i. Inhalant anesthetics are discontinued and 100% oxygen is given. Reverse any reversible injectable
anesthetic drugs that were given.
i. Obtain vascular access if it is not already in place.
1. Central intravenous catheters are ideal for administering drugs, but placement is technically
difficult during CPCR, and the long length is not ideal for administering fluid boluses.
a. A short {1-2 inch), large-bore catheter placed in the jugular vein facilitates rapid infusion
of drugs and fluids but can be technically difficult in an arrest situation. A cutdown can
be helpful in visualization and placement.
 2. Intraosseous access in the proximal cranial humerus or trocanteric fossa of the femur is espe-
cially useful in kittens and a good alternative in adult cats.
shorten the time of drug delivery to the heart. After drug administration, flush the catheter
with 2-5 mL of saline and elevate the extremity for 20 seconds but do not let this interfere
with compressions and ventilations.
Chapter  2Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation(CPCR]
19
4. If vascular access is delayed, the intratracheal route can be used to administer naloxone,
atropine, vasopresin, epinephrine, and lidocaine (NAVEL). The drug amount should at least
be double the IV dose and suspended in 3-5 mL sterile water for injection or 0.9% saline,
injected via {i.e., red rubber) catheter to the level of the carina and followed by the adminis-
tration by two breaths.
5. Sublingual administration of medications has been only anecdotally recommended.
ili. Narcotics and other anesthetic agents should be reversed with the appropriate antagonists during
an anesthetic arrest.
iv. Hyperkalemia and hypoglycemia are treated immediately.
1. Hyperkalemia treatment
a. Calcium gluconate
i. 3-4mL 10% calcium gluconate slow IV bolus over 1 minute during cardiac arrest.
b. Dextrose bolus (0.25-0.5 g/kg) IV with insulin (1 unit regular insulin/cat) slow IV bolus
over 1-2 minutes
c. NaHCO; 1 mEq/kg slow IV bolus over 15-20 minutes.
2. Hypoglycemia
a. Dextrose 0.5 g/kg IV bolus
v.  If hypovolemia is the cause of or contributed to the CPA, appropriate boluses in 10-30-mL incre-
ments of 0.9% saline or LRS are indicated; however, in euvolemic CPA, minimize fluid adminis-
vi. As the majority of CPA ECG rhythms in cats call for both a pressor and vagolytic therapy, it is
reasonable to empirically administer them if an ECG interpretation is not readily available or
the interpretation is delayed.
1. If there has been no response, repeat epinenephrine 0.01-0.02mg/kg IV every 3-5 minutes.
 For endotracheal administration, use the 0.1-0.2 mg/kg dose.
 2. Vasopressin is used in people and dogs at 0.8 U/kg once as an alternative to epinephrine, but
no feline studies ha ve been performed.
3. Atropine 0.004-0.04 mg/kg, repeated once in 5 minutes PRN. The low dose is used for sus-
 pected vagal-mediated (vomiting or urination followed by collapse) arrests.
4. Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCOs) is given for known metabolic acidosis, hyperkalemia, and
after 10 minutes of CPCR at 1 meq/kg, then 0.5 meq/kg every 10 minutes. It is contraindicated
c. E: ECG Evaluation
i. Asystole (flatline), pulseless electrical activity (wide, often bizarre bradyarrhythmia with no or
ineffective mechanical cardiac activity), and severe sinus bradycardia are most often observed in
cats with CPA.
1. Administer epinephrine and atropine if not already given.
2. Transthoracic electrical pacing {available on many defibrillators) may play a role in treatment
of severe bradyarrhythmias. {Caution, as this can be quite painful to the cat if mistakenly
applied when the cat still has brain function.)
i. Ventricular fibrillation (saw tooth waveform) is initially encountered in approximately 20% of
felineCPA.
1. It is possible VF may spontaneously terminate due to the small heart size.
2. Immediate fibrillation therapy is indicated because the longer a heart fibrillates, the less likely
is survival.
d. F: Fibrillation treatment
i. Electrical defibrillation is the only effective therapy.
1. A quick clip of the electrode area is ideal, but in short-haired cats, good paddle contact
hazard!).
20
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. The cat can be squeezed between the two standard "paddles" on opposite sides of chest with
the paddle marked “sternum" over the patient's right thorax. Alternatively, the flat paddle
pushed down on patient's right thorax; internal paddles are applied directly to either side of
the heart if a thoracotomy has been employed.
3. Select 5-10 J/kg for monophasic (older) defibrillators or about 40% less with newer biphasic
defibrillators. Internal defibrillation is approximately 10% of external settings.
4. Apply firm pressure to handheld paddles and use coupling gel or saline-soaked gauzes to
decrease transthoracic impedance.
5. As contact with the patient or an item connected to the patient during defibrillation creates
 a shock hazard, the person using the defibrillator should announce while they insure
a. "I am clear."
b. "You (the resuscitation team) are clear."
c. "All clear"
6. Administer one shock as above then perform compressions, ventilation, and drug therapy for
1 minute, repeating this cycle until VF is terminated.
i. Pharmacologic attempts at defibrillation have been grossly disappointing, but pharmacologic
intervention may be helpful in electroconversion with amiodarone 5mg/kg (half the dose may
be repeated once). Magnesium is only indicated in hypomagnesemic states or Torsades de pointes:
20 mg/kg diluted in D, W over 5 minutes. The use of lidocaine has been questioned and is not
recommended at this time.
ii. In the absence of a defibrillator, a precordial thump consisting of a closed fist hit over the middle
sternum from 6 inches above can be attempted, but it is not recommended for routine use.
e. G: Gauge resuscitative efforts
i. End tidal carbon dioxide values >15-20mmHg, coronary perfusion pressure >15-20mmHg or
 diastolic direct arterial pressure >30 mmHg support adequate circulation, but require monitoring
equipment.
ii. No other clinical indicators including pulse checks and pulse oximetry have proved reliable for
real-time evaluation of CPCR effectiveness.
ii. ROSC is proof of effective resuscitation; and, if it is not obtained:
1. Confirm endotracheal tube placement.
2. Augment compressions.
3. Consider buffer therapy.
4. Reevaluate ECG rhythm.
5. Revisit differential diagnosis ("Hs and Ts") to address reversible cause.
6. Consider discontinuing CPCR if there has been no ROSC after 15-30 minutes, sooner if the
patient was presented in CPA or the underlying cause was a disease already receiving maximal
support (i.e., septic shock on maximal pressors).
C. Prolonged life support PLS {see box 2.3) is postresuscitative care aimed at maximizing neurological
recovery, represented by the letters H and I in the alphabet mnemonic. Invasive monitoring and PPV
 in cats are technically more challenging than in larger species.
a. H: Hypothermia
i. Do not actively rewarm unless hypothermia was a precipitating factor.
ii. Cooling hemodynamically stable patients by permissive means, cooling blankets, or ice
packs down to approximately 93.5°F (34"C) for 12-24 hours may improve neurological
recovery.
b. I: Intensive care to maximize cerebral perfusion and support the other organ systems is often needed
for successful recovery.
1.
Supplemental oxygen or PPV is administered to maintain an arterial blood gas PaO2 > 80 mmHg
Or pulse 0ximeter SpO2 > 95%.
Chapter 2   Cardiopulmonary-Cerebral Resuscitation ( CPCR)
21
Box 2.5.CRl setup.
● Dose of drug in μg/kg/dose × body weight in kg × 0.6 = # of mg placed into 50 mL at 5 mL/hr via
syringe pump
Or
● Dose of drug in μg/kg/min × body weight in kg × 3 in 250 mL of saline @ 5 mL/hr via infusion pump
  =        s
blood gas (PvCO2 = 35 mmHg) or end tidal (PetCO2 = 30 mmHg).
ii.Constant rate infusions (CRI, Box 2.5) of norepinephrine (0.05-0.3μg/kg/min), dopamine
(10-20 μg/kg/min), and epinephrine (0.1-1 μg/kg/min), in order of decreasing preference, along
with addressing acidemia are often needed to meet the goal of maintaining the MAP> 1 00 mmHg
{or Doppler systolic >140 mmHg) for the first 12 hours and normotension thereafter.
iv.
Arrhythmias and rearrests are common and warrant continuous ECG monitoring. Arrhythmias
that affect BP or are deteriorating warrant appropriate antiarrhythmic therapy.
V.
Acid-base balance is initially normalized to a pH of 7.35 using central venous pH by maximiz
ing perfusion, maintaining normocapnea, and correcting pH with NaHCO; (0.3 meq/kg/meq of
base deficit). Arterial samples do not accurately reflect the patient's acid-base status during
CPCR but may be used after equilibration with the venous circulation.
vi.
Normoglycemia of 100-150 mg/dL is maintained by supplementing with dextrose (0.1 gm/kg
bolus then 2.5%-10% CRI) or by administering insulin (0.5 w/cat regular insulin IM PRN).
vii. Due to global ischemic nature of CPA, monitoring for and treating other organ dysfunction is
also needed.
1. Coagulopathy
2. Pneumonia
3. Sepsis
4. Renal failure
S. Seizures
vii. Prognostic factors at 24 hours post-ROSC in people indicating poor neurological outcome or
death include the absence of a corneal flex, a pupillary light response, a pain withdrawal
response, or any motor responses.
Recommended Reading
American Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular
care. Circulation 2005; 112(24 Suppl):1-203.
American Heart Association in collaboration with the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation.
Guidelines 2000 for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation 2000;
102(8 Suppl)
Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation in small animals: A clinical review.
Part I. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2003; 12(4):261-267.
Part II. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 2003; 13{1):13-23.
Gilroy BA, Dunlop BJ, Shapiro HM. Outcome from cardiopulmonary resuscitation in cats: Laboratory and
clinical experience. J Amer Anim Hosp Assoc 1987; 23:133-139.
Hofmeister EH, Brainard BM, Egger CM, Kang S. Prognostic indicators for dogs and cats with cardiopul-
monary arrest treated by cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation at a university teaching hospital. J Am
Vet Med Assoc. 2009 Jul 1; 235{1):50-57.
22
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Kass PH, Haskins SC. Survival following cardiopulmonary resuscitation in dogs and cats. J Vet Emerg Crit
Care 1992; 2(2):57-65.
 Plunkett SJ, McMichael M. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation in small animal medicine: an update. J Vet
Intern Med. 2008 Jan-Feb; 22(1):9-25.
 Rush JE, Wingfield WE. Recognition and frequency of dysrhythmias during cardiopulmonary arrest. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c 1992; 200f12):1932-1937.
Waldrop JE, Rozanski EA, Swanke ED, et al. Causes of cardiopulmonary arrest, resuscitation management,
and functional outcome in dogs and cats surviving cardiopulmonary arrest. Can Vet J 2005;
14(1):22-29.
Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR. Respiratory and cardiopulmonary arrest in dogs and cats: 265 cases f1986-
1991). J Am Vet Med Ass0c 1992; 200( 12):1993-1996.
3
SHOCK
Merilee F. Costello
Unique Features
● Cats in shock (particularly septic shock) may present with an inappropriately low heart rate
(<160bpm).
● Hypothermia is common in these patients and should be addressed once initial fluid therapy has
been administered.
● Pain can be difficult to assess in cats, so analgesics should be administered if there is any question.
● Nutrition is important, as cats with poor perfusion rapidly develop a catabolic state which can lead
to hepatic lipidosis.
A. Definition
Oxygen delivery (DO) must equal oxygen consumption (VO2).
1. DO2
a. Oxygen delivery is determined by cardiac output multiplied by oxygen content (CO x CaO2).
i.CaO = (Hb × 1.34 × SaO2) + (PaO × 0.003)
2.VO2
a. Oxygen consumption is relatively constant in a normal animal.
b. Causes of increased VO2
i.  Status epilepticus (relatively rare)
ii.Heatstroke (rare)
ii. Tremorogenic mycotoxins (rare)
iv. Malignant hyperthermia (rare)
3. If DO2 is less than VOz, the result is cellular oxygen and energy debt leading to the
following:
a. Lactic acid production
b. Intracellular acidosis
c. Decreased intracellular enzyme function
d. Decreased activity of the Na-K-ATPase pump, which leads to the following:
i. Cell swelling
ii. Loss of function
ili. Cell death
iv. Cytokine release
23
24
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Further cellular damage
2. Cell death
3. Systemic inflammation
 a. Can lead to progressive failure of compensatory mechanisms and irreversible
organ damage and failure
B. Clinical signs
a. Clinical signs of poor perfusion are similar regardless of the category or underlying cause of the
shock, and may include the following:
i. Poor pulses
ii. Prolonged capillary refill time
ii. Cold extremities
iv. Hypothermia
v.Tachycardia or bradycardia
1. Bradycardia is a unique pathophysiologic response to shock (particularly septic shock) in cats.
C. Categories of shock
a. Cardiogenic shock
i. Failure of the heart to maintain cardiac output
1. Decreased cardiac output results in a decrease in oxygen delivery.
ii.Etiology
1. Low cardiac output heart failure {see chaps. 14—General Approach and Overview of Cardiac
Emergencies and 15—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases)
a. Occurs when systolic dysfunction impairs the ability of the heart to effectively maintain
cardiac output
b. Most commonly seen in cats with dilated cardiomyopathy
c. Can also occur in severe cases of restrictive or unclassified cardiomyopathy
2. Arrhythmias (see chap. 17—Management of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias)
a. Tachyarrhythmias
i. Significant increase in heart rate impairs ventricular filling and subsequent cardiac
output.
b. Bradyarrhythmias
i. Significant decrease in heart rate impairs ability of the heart to provide adequate cardiac
output
ii.  Cats may become bradycardic secondary to critical illness and shock, so differentiating
primary bradyarrhythmia as a cause of shock versus bradycardia secondary to shock
can be challenging.
 3. Pericardial effusion (see chap. 14—General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies)
a. Clinically significant pericardial effusion leading to cardiac tamponade is rare in the cat.
b. When cardiac tamponade occurs, increased pressure within the pericardial sac leads to
impaired filling of the right side of the heart. This results in poor cardiac output and poor
tissue perfusion.
ii. Clinical signs
1. Hypothermia common
 2. Cold extremities, poor to absent pulses 
3. Irregular heart rate, pulse deficits, tachycardia {HR >200-220) or bradycardia {HR
<140-160)
4. In cases of pericardial effusion, the heart sounds may be muffled and there may be jugular
vein pulses or jugular vein distention (can be seen with just right-sided cardiac failure as well).
5. A heart murmur is usually present, but the presence or absence of a heart murmur does not
rule cardiogenic shock in or out.
6. If congestive heart failure is present, increased lung sounds or pulmonary crackles may be
a usculted.
Chapter 3  Shock
25
 7. In cases with concurrent pleural effusion, lung sounds will be muffed (pleural effusion can
occur in cats with left-sided heart failure).
b. Hypovolemic shock
i.
Hypovolemic shock is impaired perfusion secondary to a decrease in effective circulating
volume.
ii. Etiology
1. Hemorrhage
a. Hemoperitoneum
b. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
c. Epistaxis
d. Trauma resulting in significant tissue damage and hemorrhage
2. Isotonic losses/severe dehydration
a. Vomiting
b. Diarrhea
C. Severe polyuria without compensatory polydipsia (e.g., sick diabetic ketoacidotic cat)
3. Third space loss
a. Ascites
b. Pleural effusion
ili. Clinical signs
1. Poor pulse quality
2. Pale mucous membranes (especially if blood loss)
3. Prolonged CRT
4. Tachycardia
a. Bradycardia possible in severely ill cats
5. Abdominal fluid wave
a. Hemoabdomen
b.Ascites
c. Distributive shock
i.
 This class is characterized by syndromes that result in inappropriate vascular tone, vasodilation,
and impaired microcirculation.
ueue pue us sudas au aus sn  psse aa sona ai 
shock.
iil. Anaphylactic shock
a. Mediated by IgE antibodies
 2. Can occur independent of IgE mediation; this is termed an anaphylactoid reaction.
3. Occurs due to direct activation of the complement cascade
4. Diagnosis
a. Anaphylaxis can occur secondary to any stimulus of the immune system, including insect
bites, snake envenomation, vaccines, drug reactions, transfusion reactions, and mast cell
tumors.
b. The signs of anaphylaxis in cats most commonly start in the gastrointestinal tract foften
severe vomiting) and then progress to clinical signs of hypoperfusion.
5. Treatment
a. Removal of the underlying cause, if known
b. Benadryl 1-2 mg/kg IM
c. Epinephrine 0.1 mL/cat IV or IM (1 :1,000 solution)
( s ,as     
iv. Septic shock
1. Sepsis is defined as a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) secondary to an infec-
tious process.
26
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 3.1. SIRS criteria in the cat.
Temperature
>103.5°F, <100°F
Heart rate
>225, <l40 beats/minute
Respiratory rate
>40 breaths/minute
White blood cell count
>19,500, <5,000, or >5% bands
2. Septic shock is a progression of this inflammatory response resulting in cardiovascular dys-
function and compromise.
 3. SIRS can result from a number of different disease processes.
a. The criteria for the diagnoses of SIRS are different in cats (see table 3.1).
4. Potential sources of infection include the following:
a.Pulmonary
i.Pyothorax
ii. Pneumonia
1. It is important to note that in a study of histopathologically diagnosed pneumonia
in cats, significant pneumonia was associated with minimal or no changes on tho-
racic radiographs or CBC in some cats.
iii. Endocarditis {extremely rare in the cat)
b. Abdominal
i.  Septic peritonitis
ii. Septic pancreatitis
ii. Pyelonephritis
iv. Bacteremia secondary to severe gastrointestinal disease
v.  Pyometra
vi. Hepatic abscesses
c. Neurologic
i.Meningitis
d. Severe bite wounds and subsequent tissue infection
5. Clinical signs
a. Bradycardia common in septic cats (HR <140 bpm)
b. Tachycardia (HR >225 bpm)
c. Hypothermia
d. Poor to absent pulses
e. Prolonged CRT
f. Pale, icteric mucous membranes
i. The classic hyperemic, red mucous membranes with a rapid CRT is generally not
appreciated in cats.
g. Abdominal pain
 i. This was reported independent of intra-abdominal pathology in a study of severe sepsis
in cats.
D. Treatment of shock
a. Goals of therapy are to maximize oxygen delivery to the tissues
i.
 Oxygen delivery (DO2) = cardiac output X oxygen content 
1. Oxygen content = (1.34 Hb × SpO2) + (0.003 × PaO2)
il. Addressing each of these components (hemoglobin, oxygen saturation and PaO2) will maximize
your oxygen delivery.
b. Fluid therapy (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy for more details)
i.
 Cardiac output = heart rate X stroke volume
Chapter 3  Shock
27
Fig. 3. 1.  Cat being externally rewarmed using a Bair Hugger circulating air blanket.
1. Fluid therapy will improve preload and subsequently improve stroke volume.
2. Although cats in shock may be bradycardic, atropine should not be administered to increase
heart rate as this will increase myocardial oxygen consumption.
a. Fluid resuscitation and rewarming generally willresult in a normalization of the heart rate.
i. Fluid therapy is an integral part of the therapy in all categories of shock except cardiogenic shock
resulting from low cardiac output heart failure.
iii. The lung is the shock organ in the cat, so care must be taken with fluid therapy to avoid pulmo
nary edema or fluid overload.
iv. The shock bolus in cats is 60mL/kg of isotonic fluids or 3-5 mL colloid intravenously.
1. This bolus should be given in smaller increments to affect.
 2. Initial bolus of 15-30 mL/kg of isotonic crystalloids over 15-20 minutes and repeat as needed
to the full 60 mL/kg to improve perfusion parameters.
 3. Initial therapy should be isotonic fluids, but if patient is hypoproteinemic or perfusion param-
eters (pulse quality, heart rate, CRT) fail to improve with crystalloids, then colloids should
be administered. The dose of colloidal solutions (e.g. Hetastarch) should be 2-3ml/kg over
15-20 minutes.
4. The initial treatment should be with a warmed isotonic fluid if the cat is hypothermic.
c. Rewarming
i. Rewarming is initially done by administering warm intravenous fluids.
ii. After an initial bolus, external warming should be instituted.
1. Forced-air heating (Bair Hugger, Arizant Healthcare Inc., Eden Prairie, MN; fig. 3.1)
2. Circulating water blankets
3. Incubator
ili. A continuous rectal temperature probe can be invaluable in these patients to monitor response
to warming as well as to watch for any evidence of hyperthermia or relapse of hypothermia.
 iv. Cats generally require improvement in their body temperature before improvement in perfusion
parameters are appreciated.
1. After initial fluid bolus of 15-30 mL/kg, rewarming should be initiated.
d.Catecholamines
1.
 In cats that remain hypotensive {Doppler <100 mmHg, mean arterial pressure <70) despite ade-
quate fluid therapy and normothermia, exogenous catecholamine therapy may be indicated.
28
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Dopamine
a. Vasopressor with dose-dependent effects of the following:
i.5-10μg/kg/min (affects B1 adrenergic receptors)
1. Positive inotropic and chronotropic effects
ii. >10 μg/kg/min (affects alpha-1 adrenergic receptors resulting in vasoconstriction)
2. Dobutamine
a. Dose 5-20μg/kg/min
b. Positive inotropic and chronotropic effects
c. Cats treated with dobutamine should be observed closely, as there are reports of seizures
in cats treated with dobutamine CRIs for greater than 24 hours.
i. If a patient has seizures on dobutamine, administer 0.5 mg/kg of diazepam and discon-
tinue the dobutamine immediately.
3. Norepinephrine or epinephrine
a. Can be used in cats that are not responding to dopamine or dobutamine
b. Norepinephrine 0.1-3 μg/kg/min
C. Epinephrine 0.1-2 μg/kg/min
4. Vasopressin
a. Potent pressure agent
b. No officially reported doses, although anecdotally it has been used as a last-ditch effort in
cats that have not responded to all the other measures listed above (dose 0.5-2mU/kg/min
as a CRI). Should never be used as a first-line agent.
e. Antibiotic therapy
i. Antibiotics should only be administered in cases of documented or suspected infectious compo-
nents to the clinical presentation.
i. In cats with septic shock, appropriate antibiotic therapy is an integral part of the therapy.
ili. Culture and sensitivity should be used to identify effective antibiotics. Broad spectrum antibiotics
should be instituted pending sensitivity results. Combination choices include the following:
1. Ampicillin 22 mg/kg IV every 8 hours and Baytril 5 mg/kg IV every 24 hours
2. Clindamycin 10 mg/kg IV every 12 hours and Baytril 5 mg/kg IV every 24 hours
 3. Timentin (Ticarcillin and Clavulanate Potassium) 40-50 mg/kg IV every 6-8 hours
f. Glucocorticoids
i. High-dose corticosteroids are no longer recommended for the treatment of shock.
1. Potential risks of high-dose corticosteroid use for shock include increased risk of infection,
delayed wound healing, and gastric irritation/ulceration (although cats are relatively more
resistant to these effects compared to dogs).
 i. Recent studies, however, have suggested that septic human patients may benefit from physiologic
doses of steroids.
1. In humans the current recommendation is the use of replacement doses of glucocorticoids in
 patients with refractory septic shock.
 2. A recent study in septic cats documented a decreased adrenal response, but no study has docu
mented an improved outcome in cats treated with physiologic steroids as compared to con-
ventional therapy.
a. However, in cats with refractory septic shock that remain hypotensive despite adequate
volume replacement, normothermia, vasopressor therapy, and treatment with physiologic
steroids may be indicated.
i. Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.08 mg/kg IV every 12-24 hours
1. Equivalent to 0.5 mg/kg prednisone
g. Blood products
i.Administration of red blood cells to an anemic patient will improve the oxygen carrying capacity
 Of the blood and therefore improve oxygen delivery.
Chapter 3  Shock
29
1. Red blood cell transfusions should be considered in any poorly perfused cat with a PCV <20
a. Initial dose of 1 unit (~ 20-30 mL) per cat
ii. In cats with a coagulopathy, replacement of coagulation factors with plasma therapy minimizes
further blood loss.
1. Plasma should be administered in cats with prolonged coagulation times.
a. Dose S-10mL/kg
h. Nutritional support
i.Cats in shock can rapidly develop a catabolic state.
1. This can rapidly result in a significant nutritional deficiency, and nutritional needs should be
addressed early.
i. Nutrition can be provided enterally by a naso-esophageal, esophagostomy, or PEG tube if the
patient is not vomiting and is normothermic {see chap. 9—Nutritional Support for the Critically
Ill Feline Patient).
ii. In cats that cannot tolerate enteral feeding, total parenteral nutrition may be necessary (see chap.
9—Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
i.Glycemic control
i.
 In humans, maintaining normoglycemia significantly improves outcome in critically ill patients.
ii. Cats that are stressed frequently become hyperglycemic.
1. If this is persistent throughout hospitalization and despite improving perfusion, judicious
regular insulin therapy may be indicated to try and maintain a blood glucose of less than 250.
a. This is particularly important in patients receiving TPN.
j.Pain management (see chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients)
i.Pain can be diffcult to recognize in veterinary patients, particularly in critically ill cats.
1. The severity of illness may result in reluctance to treat with analgesic agents.
i. Untreated pain in these cats will lead to depression, inappetance/anorexia, decreased mobility,
and an increase in stress hormones furthering the negative nitrogen balance.
4
TRAUMA
Erica L. Reineke
Unique Features
Clinical signs of shock
Bradycardia {HR <160 bpm) in addition to other
commonly cited signs of shock
Treatment of shock
Crystalloid shock bolus: 40-60 mL/kg
Colloid shock bolus: 3-5 mL/kg
Note: In cats, caution must be exercised, with
administration of fluid therapy, as pleural
effusionand pulmonary edema can occurasa
result of fluid overload.
Response to hemorrhage
Limited ability of the spleen to contract and release
additional red blood cells during blood loss
Clinical signs of respiratory distress
wsevere respiratory distress. Open-mouth breathing
is a sign of severe respiratory distress.
Overview of trauma
A. Definition of trauma: tissue injury that occurs more or less suddenly and includes any physical
damage to the body caused by violence or accident
B. Trauma is one of the most common emergencies seen in the hospital. Severe trauma is generally
associated with significant blood loss or extensive soft tissue and orthopedic injury, and often
involves vital organs. The unique physiology of the feline patient makes the treatment of trauma
difficult and different from that of canine patients.
belt injuries, and common traumatic injuries such as vehicular injury and bite wounds.
11.]
 Physiologic response to trauma
A. Trauma elicits complicated physiologic responses designed to prevent further tissue injury and
promote adequate cellular oxygen delivery.
1. Sympathetic nervous system stimulation will lead to release of catecholamines and cortisol.
a. Increasing heart rate, contractility, and blood pressure through vasoconstriction
b. This initially results in increases in skeletal muscle blood flow and decreases in splanchnic
blood flow.
c. Ongoing increases in circulating catecholamines will lead to activation of the renin-
angiotensin system and secretion of vasopressin, ultimately intensifying vasoconstriction.
31
32
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. Blood flow is redistributed to the lungs, heart, and brain, and away from the skin, skeletal
muscle, kidneys, and other abdominal organs.
2. Activation of intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation cascades occurs.
3. Immune system up-regulation leads to the production of acute phase proteins and cytokine
release.
B. Exuberant physiologic responses to trauma can initiate a cascade of inflammatory and metabolic
responses that predispose to the development of systemic inflammatory response and multiple organ
dysfunction syndrome.
II. Approach to the feline trauma patient
A. Assessment of the respiratory system
1. Observation
a. Evaluate respiratory rate and effort and pattern of breathing.
i.
 Signs of respiratory distress include tachypnea, open-mouth breathing, cyanotic mucous
membranes, stridor or stertor, restlessness, extended head and neck, nasal flare, and para-
doxical respiration.
ii. Keep in mind that cats develop more subtle signs of respiratory distress compared with
dogs, and tachypnea alone may be indicative of severe respiratory compromise. Open-
b. Evaluate for thoracic injuries such as penetrating chest wounds or flail chest.
c. Evaluate for injuries that could impair the upper airways, including jaw fractures, skull frac-
tures, tracheal avulsion, or direct injury to the laryngeal and pharyngeal area.
 d. Hypoventilation may occur due to severe pain, trauma to the thorax, or neurologic disease.
2. Auscultation
a. Pulmonary crackles or harsh lung sounds may indicate the presence of contusions.
b. Dull lung sounds may be heard with pleural space disease (pneumothorax, hemothorax,
diaphragmatic hernia).
3. Diagnostics
a. Thoracic radiography is useful in identifying rib fractures (relatively rare in cats due to very
compliant ribs compared to dogs), pulmonary contusions, diaphragmatic hernia, and pleural
space disease. Chest radiographs should be performed with caution as they can be life
threatening due to both the manual restraint and positioning required.
b. Thoracic ultrasound may be useful in identifying the presence of pleural fluid or diaphrag-
matic hernia (recently, its use for identifying pneumothorax and thoracic injury has been
reported in dogs with tra umatic injury).
c. Pulse oximetry can be used to evaluate for hypoxemia, although results may be affected by
poor perfusion and pigmented mucous membranes.
d. Arterial blood gas analysis may be used to assess for hypoxemia and hypoventilation. Arterial
blood gas sampling is generally difficult to perform in a cat and requires restraint, which may
further compromise the patient. Therefore, venous CO2 may be used with caution as an
indicator of hypoventilation as long a perfusion is good. Poor perfusion may cause an increase
 in venous CO2 despite normal or low arterial PaCO2-
4.Treatment
a. Provide supplemental oxygen either with flow-by, mask, or oxygen cage.
b. Thoracocentesis should be immediately performed if respiratory compromise is suspected to
be secondary to pleural space disease. Tension pneumothorax {extremely rare in the cat) will
not only cause severe respiratory compromise due to lung collapse but will also decrease
venous return and impair cardiac output.
c. Consider intubation and positive pressure ventilation if respiratory distress does not improve
with oxygen support or thoracocentesis. This is rarely needed, and most cats will significantly
improve following oxygen supplementation and minimizing handling, which may exacer bate
stress.
Chapter 4 Trauma
33
d. Emergency tracheostomy may need to be performed if there is an upper airway obstruction
from traumatic injuries. This procedure is rarely necessary in the feline trauma patient.
B. Assessment of the cardiovascular system
1. Physical examination
a. Evaluate for shock: hypovolemia and anemia can occur in the feline trauma patient following
external hemorrhage from wounds or hemorrhage into a body cavity fabdomen, thorax, or
can occur even without obvious evidence of external injuries or wounds.
i.
 Mucous membrane color and capillary refill time: pale or white mucous membranes may
indicate vasoconstriction from hypoperfusion and/or anemia.
ii. Heart rate and rhythm
1. Tachycardia (heart rate >200 bpm) or bradycardia (heart rate <160bpm) may be sup
 portive of shock.
 2. Bradycardia has been reported in cats in response to severe systemic illness. The mecha-
nism by which this occurs in unknown but may be secondary to cytokine release or
increased vagal tone.
3. Arrhythmias can occur secondary to blunt myocardial trauma or electrolyte
abnormalities.
iii. Pulse rate and quality: poor pulse quality or absent femoral or dorsal metatarsal pulses
are indicative of shock. Extremities may also feel cool to the touch.
iv. Measure rectal temperature. Hypothermia can occur commonly in the feline trauma
patient and is another indicator of shock.
2. Diagnostics
a. Measurement of indirect arterial blood pressure:
i.A systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg is supportive of hypotension.
ii. Blood pressure measurements should be interpreted in light of the physical exam
findings.
b. ECG
c. Packed cell volume (PCV) and total solid concentration:
i. Unlike the dog, the feline spleen has a limited ability to contract and release additional
red blood cells during acute blood loss.
d. Blood lactate concentration: elevations in venous blood lactate are supportive of
hypovolemia.
i. In contrast to the dog, cats may only develop very high blood lactate concentrations in
response to severe life-threatening hemorrhage. Therefore, even mild elevations in blood
lactate concentration should prompt the clinician to evaluate for hypovolemic shock.
e. Central venous pressure monitoring: this is generally not performed immediately due to the
need for central catheter placement. However, a decreased central venous pressure (<0-
SmmHg)  with concurrent physical  examination findings of shock is supportive of
hypovolemia.
3. Treatment
a. Evidence of poor tissue perfusion (pale mucous membranes, slow capillary refill time, brady-
cardia or tachycardia, weak or absent pulses, depressed mentation) should be immediately
treated.
i. 40-60 mL/kg is the shock bolus a of a balanced crystalloid solution, whereas 3-5 mL/kg
is the bolus for a colloid solution.
ii. Typically, one-third to one-half of the shock bolus is initially administered over 15-20
minutes and additional fluids are given depending on the patient's response to fluid
therapy.
ii. Transfusions of packed red blood cells {10 mL/kg) or fresh whole blood (20 mL/kg) should
only be administered to patients who develop severe anemia {PCV ≤15%-20%) from
34
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
hemorrhage. Hemoglobin-based fluids, such as Oxyglobin (2.5-10 mL/kg given at a rate
of <5 mL/kg/hr), should be used cautiously in cats as they may lead to pulmonary edema
and pleural effusion due to the potent oncotic effect of these solutions. In addition, these
solutions have not been approved for use in cats at this time.
iv. The goal of fluid therapy in a patient should be to alleviate peripheral vasoconstriction,
increase systolic blood pressure to at least 90 mmHg, and restore urine output through
restoration of an adequate intravascular volume.
v. Caution must be exercised when administering fluid therapy to feline patients, especially
if a heart murmur or arrhythmia is ausculted, as fluid overload resulting in pleural
effusion and pulmonary edema is common. This may occur secondary to increased
vascular permeability, myocardial dysfunction, or decreased oncotic pressure due to
hypoalbuminemia.
b. Major external hemorrhage {extremely rare in traumatized cats) should be managed by use
of direct and indirect pressure and compressive bandaging.
c. Hypothermia should be initially treated through the administration of warm intravenous
fluids. Once the intravascular volume has been restored, circulating warm water blankets or
forced air blankets can be used.
d. Institute pain management:
i. Some studies have shown that pain may worsen traumatic conditions and increase mortal-
ity from shock.
ii. Opiods are this author's drug choice for controlling pain from trauma as they cause
minimal cardiovascular and respiratory depression. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medi-
cations should be avoided initially until renal and gastrointestinal perfusion is adequate
and there is no evidence of kidney injury.
hemorrhage. This is rarely indicated, and most patients can be stabilized through fluid
therapy, blood products, and pain management.
C. Assessment of the neurologic system
1. Physical examination
a. A complete examination of the neurologic system should be completed after evaluation of the
respiratory and cardiovascular systems and after fuid resuscitation and respiratory support
have been initiated.
b. Evaluate for trauma to the skull: scleral hemorrhage, skull fractures, ocular injuries.
c. Evaluate mentation
i.
 Depressed or dull mentation may be secondary to pain or hypoperfusion but may also
indicate elevations in intracranial pressure {ICP).
1. These patients should be continually reassessed during fluid resuscitation as the
patient may become more responsive when fluid therapy or pain management is
initiated.
ii. Obtunded, stuporous, or comatose patients should alert the clinician to likely increases
in ICP secondary to brain edema or hemorrhage.
d. Evaluate cranial nerves: assess pupil size and shape as well as presence of nystagmus or other
cranial nerve abnormalities.
e. Evaluate motor ability {and ability to ambulate once stable) and spinal reflexes.
f. Seizures should alert the clinician to elevations in ICP.
2.Diagnostics
a. Monitor heart rate and blood pressure: hypertension with associated bradycardia (Cushing's
reflex) indicates elevations in ICP.
b. Blood glucose: hyperglycemia is often seen in patients with head trauma and may have an
association with worse brain injury.
Chapter 4 Trauma
35
c. Radiography to assess for skull and spinal fractures fonly once the patient has been
stabilized).
d. Monitor for hypoventilation with serial arterial CO2 measurements or end-tidal CO2 monitor
ing. CO2 should be maintained within the normal range (30-40 mmHg). Hypoventilation can
lead to cerebral vasodilation and worsening of elevations in ICP. Too low of a PaCO2
(<20 mmHg) can result in excessive brain blood-vessel vasoconstriction.
e. We are currently limited in our ability to directly measure intracranial pressure in patients
with head trauma.
3.Treatment
Cat and chap. 26—Neurologic Emergencies: Brain)
i.1
 Elevate head 15-30 degrees to encourage venous drainage, being careful to keep both the
head and neck straight.
ii. Provide oxygen support.
ii. Consider administration of mannitol (0.5g/kg-1 g/kg intravenously over 20-30 minutes)
or hypertonic saline (3-5 mL/kg) intra venously to reduce cerebral edema.
iv. Maintain adequate mean arterial blood pressure (>90mmHg) to ensure cerebral
perfusion.
v.  Jugular venous blood sampling should be avoided.
vi. If patient's neurologic status is deteriorating, consider intubation and positive pressure
ventilation. Patients may be temporarily hyperventilated to decrease ICP as this will cause
cerebral vasoconstriction.
 ns    e d    d d a
spinal fractures.
D. Assessment of the renal system
1. Physical examination
a. Evaluate for the presence of a urinary bladder. The absence of a palpable urinary bladder
should alert the clinician to the possibility of a ruptured bladder. Serial evaluations for the
presence of a bladder should be performed following fluid resuscitation.
1.
 Damage to the urinary system may not be evident for several hours following the initial
tra uma.
ii. In addition to a ruptured bladder, urine may leak into the retroperitoneal space from
trauma to the kidneys or ureters. Therefore, monitoring for adequate urine output in
 addition to serial monitoring of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine is essential.
2. Diagnostics
a. Monitor urine output. Normal urine output is 1-2 mL/kg/hour in an adequately hydrated and
perfused patient.
b. Monitor renal values at least once daily. Elevations in blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and
potassium with a decreased urine output should alert the clinician to the possibility of urinary
tract rupture.
c. Abdominal radiography: evaluate for the presence of a urinary bladder or loss of serosal detail
 in the abdominal or retroperitoneal space, which may indicate effusion.
d. Renal ultrasonography: evaluate for the presence of a urinary bladder. In addition, trauma
to the kidneys, ureters, and presence of abdominal or retroperitoneal effusion can be assessed.
e. Retrograde urethrocystogram and/or intravenous pyelography to assess for leakage of urine
along the urinary tract.
f. A uroabdomen may be diagnosed by comparing abdominal effusion creatinine to serum
i.
An abdominal effusion creatinine to serum creatinine ratio of 2.0: 1 or abdominal effusion
potassium to serum potassium of 1.9: 1 is diagnostic of a uroabdomen.
36
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Treatment
 a. Until surgery, placement of a urinary catheter for bladder rupture can decrease leakage of
urine into the abdominal cavity.
b. A pigtail catheter can be placed into the abdominal cavity to facilitate removal of urine from
the peritoneal space until surgery.
c. Exploratory laparotomy can be used to identify and repair damage to the urinary system.
E. Additional evaluation
1. Once the patient is stabilized, a thorough evaluation for orthopedic and soft-tissue injuries should
be performed.
 a. Radiography should be utilized to diagnose fractures, luxations, and penetrating wounds. If
a fracture is suspected, a soft padded bandage should be applied to immobilize the fracture
fragments, preventing further injury and alleviating pain.
b. All wounds should be clipped and cleaned. If wounds are extensive or degloving wounds are
 present, surgical debridement and placement of wet-to-dry bandages may be indicated. Broad-
 spectrum antibiotic thera py should be instituted.
IV. Specific types of trauma
A. High-rise syndrome
1. Overview
a. High-rise syndrome is defined as traumatic injuries sustained by cats falling at least two
stories.
b. It occurs more commonly in younger cats and may be more frequent in warmer weather.
c. Extent of injuries depends both on the length of fall and landing surface.
d. After falling five stories, the cat reaches terminal velocity (60 mph) and may relax, positioning
its legs horizontally (splay-legged or spread-eagled). In this position, the cat distributes forces
evenly throughout its body during landing.
2. Common injuries
a. Shock: either from internal or external hemorrhage
b. Thoracic injuries: pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax, trauma to the chest wall. In one
n 5  1  os y an  1h i s  %0g on d 
injuries.
C. Abdominal trauma: hemoperitoneum, urinary tract rupture, and diaphragmatic hernia
d. Facial injuries: facial trauma, hard palate fractures, mandibular fractures, dental injuries
e. Skeletal injuries: limb, spinal fractures, and luxations. These injuries should be addressed once
the patient is sta bilized.
3. Prognosis
a. Dependent on the severity of the injury. Reported survival rates are between 90% and
96.5%
b. In one study, only one-third of the cats required emergency treatment. Surviving cats fell a
range of 2 to 32 stories.
B. Dryer injury
1. Overview
a. The natural curiosity of the cat in addition to its heat-seeking behavior may lead to dryer
injury.
b. The severity of injury will depend both on the length of time the cat is in the dryer and the
temperature setting of the dryer.
C. Compared with dogs, cats are naturally heat resistant.
2. Common injuries
a. Heatstroke: once the body temperature rises above 106°F, the cat is at risk for developing
thermal injury to tissues.
i.
 Thermal injury can occur to all tissues of the body, including the central nervous system,
liver, kidneys, and gastrointestinal and coagulation systems.
Chapter 4   Trauma
37
testinal tract.
b. Head trauma
c. Burns
d. Thoracic injuries such as rib fractures, hemothorax, pneumothorax, and diaphragmatic hernia
é. Skeletal and spinal injuries
3. Approach to the patient with dryer injury
 a. Evaluate the cardiovascular system. Shock should be treated as recommended previously with
the administration of either intravenous crystalloids and/or colloids.
b. Evaluate the respiratory system and institute therapy as above.
C. Evaluate for hyperthermia: if the rectal temperature is >105°F, the cat should be actively
cooled.
i. Cooling methods that could be considered include saturating the hair coat with room-
temperature water, using fans, and/or placing the cat on a cool surface such as an exami
nation ta ble.
ii. Cold water or immersion in ice baths should be avoided as this may lead to peripheral
vasoconstriction which will inhibit heat dissipation.
d. Evaluate for evidence of head trauma.
e. Evaluate for burns and orthopedic injury. Burns should be cleaned. Silver silvadene can be
applied, and broad spectrum antibiotic therapy should be initiated.
4. Diagnostics
a. Complete blood count, chemistry screen, and urinalysis to evaluate for thermal injury to
organs
 b. Coagulation profile: if DIC is suspected, treatment with fresh frozen plasma may be considered
(dose = 10mL/kg)
c. Radiography to assess for thoracic and skeletal injuries
d. Serial blood pressure and ECG monitoring
e. Abdominal ultrasonography
5. Prognosis
a. Depends on severity of injuries sustained, in addition to thermal injury.
Jo snsan e se ainey ueao aldunu pue sisdas dopaaap ieul sieo ul papieng si sisouaoid '9
thermal injury.
C. Fan-belt injuries
1. Overview
a. Fan-belt injuries most commonly occur in cold weather as cats seek a warm place to sleep.
The cooling engine block of a car can be very enticing for both the warmth radiating from
the block and the shelter provided by the hood and fenders.
b. Trauma to the cat occurs when the owner of the car starts the engine, causing the fan blades
to spin and placing the cat at risk for contact with either the belt or blades.
2. Common injuries
a. Head trauma
b. Abrasions and lacerations: most wounds may be managed medically, but if a puncture into
a body cavity is suspected or uncontrolled hemorrhage is present, surgical intervention is
warranted.
c. Burns: ear tips, face, and foot pads
d. Degloving injuries
e. Limb/spinal fractures
i. Closed fractures should be bandaged to immobilize fracture movement once the patient
is stabilized.
ii. Open fractures should be thoroughly lavaged followed by bandaging. In addition, antibi
Otic therapy should be initiated.
38
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
D. Predator injury and bite wounds
1.Overview
a. There are a number of animals that may prey on domestic and feral felines; however,
the majority of wounds will be sustained following interactions with dogs. Cats may also
develop bite-wound abscesses following fights with other cats. Generally, these are rarely life-
threatening and are easily treatable.
b. Bite wounds from dogs or other predators range in severity from simple lacerations to life
threatening injuries to the head, chest, and abdominal cavities.
c. These injuries may lead to internal organ damage, a systemic inflammatory response, and
sepsis.
2. Approach to the feline with bite wounds
 a. Puncture wounds should be surgically explored as extensive injury can occur to the underlying
tissues despite the relatively benign appearance of the overlying skin area.
b. Radiography should be considered if wounds are suspected to penetrate the thoracic or
abdominal cavity.
i. Radiographic evidence of penetrating wounds includes the presence of free gas or
effusion.
 ii. Wounds that are found to penetrate a body cavity warrant an exploratory laparotomy or
thoracotomy to evaluate for injury to internal organs and to lavage the body cavity
ii. In addition, body wall defects or herniation warrant surgical evaluation and repair.
C. Additional radiography should be considered if skeletal or spinal injuries are suspected.
d. Wounds that are found to have extensive dead space should have drains placed.
e. Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy and pain management (see chap. 7—Pain Management in
Critically Ill Feline Patients) should be started.
f. Complete blood count, chemistry screen, and urinalysis should be monitored to assess for
organ injury or failure.
g. Noninvasive blood pressure monitoring and pulse oximetry monitoring if indicated.
matory response and sepsis. Progression of the latter warrants a more guarded progression.
Recommended Reading
Driessen B, Brainard B. Fluid therapy for the traumatized patient. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2006;
16(4):276-299.
Muir W. Trauma: Physiology, pathophysiology and clinical implications. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2006;
16(4):253-263
Clin Small Anim, 2005; 35(2):343-358.
Vnuk D, Pirkic B, Maticic D, et al. Feline high-rise syndrome: 119 cases (1998-2001). J Fel Med Surg,
2004; 6:305-312.
Whitney WO, Mehlhaff CJ. High-rise syndrome in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1987; 191(11):1399-
1403.
5
GUIDELINES FOR ANESTHESIA IN
CRITICALLY ILL FELINE PATIENTS
Lynne I. Kushner
A. Preanesthetic assessment
a. The need to anesthetize a critically ill cat must outweigh the risks of postponing the surgery or
procedure until the animal is stable. In some cases surgery to correct a life-threatening condition, for
example, septic abdomen, cannot be postponed. However, sta bilization of cardiovascular status must
be initiated prior to anesthesia.
i.
Cats with heart failure, intracranial hypertension, pneumothorax, or pulmonary edema should
be sta bilized whenever feasible. Cats in acute respiratory distress may require sedation/anesthesia
for diagnostic or therapeutic interventions (thoracocentesis, etc.).
b. Preoperative assessment of history, HR and rhythm, blood pressure, hydration, respiratory rate and
character, mental status, and temperament should be routine.
i.
A current, complete blood count and chemistry and acid-base status should be evaluated if timé
will allow. Tests of coagulation and blood typing may be indicated, depending on disease and
needs of the patient.
ii.
 All pertinent diagnostic modalities (chest radiographs, echocardiogram, ECG, etc.) should be
availa ble and reviewed by the anesthetist prior to anesthesia.
C. Chronic diseases such as diabetes mellitus, renal and heart disease, poor body condition, or advanced
age may often coexist with the acute disease.
i.
o  s  sss   n s   
prolonged effects; hypothermia can be severe.
ii.
With obesity, relative overdose of IV-administered drugs may occur if dosage is not modified
for ideal weight; ventilation is compromised due to smaller functional residual capacity com-
pounded by respiratory depressant drugs.
ili.
 Aged cats have decreased functional physiologic reserves with decreased capacity for adaptation
to physiologic changes.
d. Classification of the patient's physical status (PS), although somewhat subjective, can be helpful in
providing the anesthetist means of a consistent approach to case management (table 5.1).
1.
Critically ill cats (cats whose health status is life-threatening) and those who are moribund are
generally classified as PS 4 and 5, respectively.
é. Assessment of risk, anticipation of potential anesthetic complications, and management strategies to
prevent or address them should be planned prior to anesthesia.
B. Pharmacologic considerations
a. Drugs chosen for premedication and induction should depend on the disease(s) present as well as
the temperament and condition of the cat {see anesthesia for specific diseases below)
b. Cats who are critical (PS 4) typically do not require premedication, and agents can be titrated IV to
effect for induction.
39
40
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 5.1. Physical status (PS) classifications, modified from the American
Society of Anesthesiologists.
PS 1
Nbrmal healthy patient; usually elective procedure
(OHE; minor laceration)
PS 2
Slight systemic disease, no obvious incapacity (early,
simple urethral obstruction; healthy dystocia!
PS 3
Moderate systemic disease, but well compensated
[diabetes M; significant cardiac disease, but not
in Failure; obstructed bowel with no perforation]
PS 4
Severe systemic disease that is a constant threat to
life (perforated bowel; diaphragmatic hernia with
pulmonary compromise; brain tumor with
deteriorating mentation)
PS 5
Moribund; not expected to live
E
Emergency procedure applied to classification
c. Mask induction may be appropriate if stress or hemodynamic instability is avoided.
1.
High inhalant concentrations (≥1.5 MAC) typically result in unacceptable low blood pressures;
critically ill cats may not tolerate low concentrations.
ii.
 Mask induction is not appropriate if the need for rapid intubation is required ( vomiting; airway
or respiratory distress).
ii. In general, drugs with significant cardiovascular depressive effects (acepromazine, alpha-2 ago-
nists, propofol) should be avoided in PS 4 animals.
C. Intraoperative monitoring and management
a. Although monitoring by a dedicated and competent individual is important during any anesthetic,
it is imperative in critical patients (see “Anesthesia for Healthy Cats,” monitoring).
Monitoring with continuous ECG, blood pressure should be routine and end-tidal CO, is highly
recommended.
i. Pulse oximetry should be monitored during thoracotomy, diaphragmatic hernia, thoracocente
sis, or any case where oxygenation may be impaired. If in doubt, pulse oximetry monitoring
should be performed.
ii. Monitoring of body temperature and vital signs should continue at least every 30 minutes during
the recovery period until the cat is normothermic and conscious. Critical patients may require
hematologic and acid base monitoring along with continuous monitoring of vital signs with
interventions (blood products, colloids, vasopressors) to achieve stable hemodynamics. Comfort
level (signs of pain or anxiety) should always be monitored as a vital sign.
b. Additional venous catheters should be secured in case administration of blood products or other
infusions are needed.
i.
5-15 mL/kg/hr balanced crystalloid volume solutions are recommended during anesthesia; rate
will depend on the severity of surgical trauma and concurrent diseases.
ii.
Cats with low colloidal osmotic pressure (ie., hypoalbuminemia) will benefit from colloids
{Hetastarch 1-2 mL/kg /hr), which can maintain normovolemia while sparing excessive crystal-
loid rates. Hypotension due to hypovolemia may necessitate administration of a colloid bolus
initially may increase plasma volume by 2-4mL per mL of colloid. In cats, the total dose of
colloid should not exceed 12-15 mL/kg/24hr.
ii. Crystalloids replace estimated blood loss over 15-20 minutes 3: 1; colloids, 1:1.
iv.]
 Packed RBCs or whole blood when PCV <15-18%. Factors to consider when making the deci-
sion to transfuse:
Chapter 5Gvidelines For Anesthesia in Critically ill Feline Patients
41
Fig. 5.1l. The hair of the ventral aspect of the proximal third of the tail is clipped and cleaned with surgical scrub
prior to placement of a 22-gauge venous catheter in the coccygeal artery. From the arterial catheter, direct blood
pressure can be monitored and arterial blood may be sampled if needed.
1. Acute vs. chronic blood loss
2. Duration of anesthetic procedure and resulting fluid needs
3. Ongoing blood loss
 4. Hemodynamic instability of patient
 Fresh frozen plasma if coagulation factors are needed at a rate of approximately 5mL/kg.
c. Cats pose particular challenges to the anesthetist.
1
Indirect blood pressure monitors foscillometric, plethysmographic and ultrasound Doppler
techniques) have been evaluated in anesthetized cats for reliability and accuracy. Many studies
find that most indirect techniques, particularly Doppler, underestimate systolic but are good
1. Indirect techniques may fail during periods of severe hypotension, hypothermia, and poor
per fusion.
 2. Arterial catheterization for direct BP monitoring can be difficult, especially in hypotensive
cats; but with skill, dorsal pedal, or coccygeal arteries can be catheterized (fig. 5.1).
 3. Limited accessibility under drapes during surgery
 a. Jugular catheters are most accessible and reliable for blood sampling and can be used to
measure CVP (central venous pressure; fig. S.2). Jugular catheters should be avoided in
cats that are coagulopathic (hyper- or hypocoagulopathic).
b. All peripheral catheter ports should be made accessible.
4. Arterial or central venous blood should be sampled intraoperatively to assess changes in PCV
and plasma proteins, electrolyte, acid-base, or blood gas abnormalities if significant blood
loss, hemodilution, or acid-base imbalance is suspected.
5. Small size can lead to severe hypothermia (<34°C), which can lead to bradycardia, hypoten-
sion, decreased enzyme and cell function, increased infection rate, prolonged recovery, and
reduced anesthetic requirements.
a. Forced warm air blankets or warm water circulating pads should be applied to the patient
at induction of anesthesia (Bair Hugger, Arizant Healthcare Inc., Eden Prairie, MN; fig. 5.2).
d. Balanced anesthetic techniques reduce inhalant concentrations and allow for better cardiovascular
stability, analgesia, and muscle relaxation (table 5.2).
t a cephalic catheter, a double lumen catheter was placed in the jugular vein providing addition IV access if needed
central venous pressure (CVP) may be monitored from the jugular catheter. Note forced warm air blanket under caf.
Table 5.2. Anesthesia maintenance adjuncts
Drug
Dosage
Commenls
Fentanyl
2.5-5.0μg/kg IV
Duration of effect --15-20 min
repeat as needed
Significant bradycardia, respiratory
0.5-1.0μg/kg/min
depression, uport entiltin; excelle
analgesia, poor muscle relaxation; infusion
Morphine
IV bolus not recommended
Histamine release is dose, rate dependent and
1.7-6.7 μg/kg/min
usually produces no clinical signs of
histamine release in healthy animals.
Butorphanol
0.1-0.2mg/kg IV
Duration --45-60 min
Hydromorphone or
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IV
Duration 45-90min
 Oxymorphone
0.025-0.05 mg/kg IV
Bradycardia and respiratory depression are
possible; support ventilation.
Etomidate
0.2-0.0.5mg/kg IV
Cortisol depression, supplement with steroids if
necessary; intravascular hemolysis possible.
Duration 10-20min
 Diazepam or Midazolam
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
For improved muscle relaxation; duration
0.025-0.1mg/kg
15-30min; repetitive dosing may result in
prolonged recovery.
Atracurium
0.05-0.1mg/kg
For neuromuscular blockade; duration
15-20min; institute IPPV; provide adequate
anesthesia.
Ketamine
0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV
8-25 μg/kg/min
dose); can provide balanced anesthesia
Propofol
0.1-0.4mg/kg/min
Will reduce or replace inhalant; avoid if
significantly hypotensive.
Lidocaine
25-50 μg/kg/min
May reduce inhalant MAC; avoid prolonged
 infusions; can produce cardiovascular
depression.
42
Chapter 5Gvidelines For Anesthesia in Critically ill Feline Patients
43
1.
All inhalants produce dose-dependent decreases in BP, and the anesthetic concentration should
be reduced or terminated if blood pressure falls to unacceptable levels (MAP <60 mmHg or
Doppler <80 mmHg).
i. Intraoperative opioid administration reduces isoflurane MAC requirements in cats by up to
35%, depending on opioid and patient responses.
1. Opioids, however, do not provide good muscle relaxation and are not anesthetics (not
hypnotics).
iii. Studies have determined that at equipotent doses, blood pressure is better maintained with
propofol than with isoflura ne.
1. In a clinical study, cats undergoing orthopedic surgery due to trauma received either isoflu-
rane (inspired 1.2%) and fentanyl (0.33μg/kg/min) or propofol (0.2 mg/kg/min) and similar
fentanyl. In that study, cats receiving isoflurane-fentanyl had significantly lower arterial blood
pressures compared with the cats receiving propofol-fentanyl.
2. However, both drugs can produce bradycardia and are potent respiratory depressants. Heart
rate and ETCO2 should be carefully monitored, and controlled ventilation should be insti-
tuted if necessary.
 3. In a different study, the minimal infusion rate of propofol to prevent response to various
stimuli in 50% of cats breathing room air was 0.1-0.28 mg/kg/min, and cardiovascular and
respiratory indices were well maintained.
a. The addition of low- (23 μg/kg/min) or high- (46 μg/kg/min) dose ketamine significantly
reduced the dose of propofol (~50%), even though there was no difference between the
two doses.
b. Although the addition of ketamine with the reduction of propofol did not alter most
cardiovascular and blood gas values, it did significantly increase pulmonary arterial pres-
sure and venous admixture and did significantly reduce PaO2.
iv.  Small doses of benzodiazepines (BZ) (0.0s-0.1 mg/kg) can improve muscle relaxation.
V.
Etomidate in small boluses (0.3-0.5 mg/kg) produces minimal C/V depression, but cortisol
supplement (0.05 mg/kg Dexamethasone IV) may be warranted.
e. Hypotension should be treated once volume depletion is corrected and anesthetic concentrations
have been reduced.
1.
Without complex hemodynamic monitoring, the vasopressor/inotrope chosen is based on clinical
judgment and patient response.
1. Dopamine 5-10μg/kg/min; positive inotropic and chrontropic effects; will increase MAP;
vasoconstriction at high doses
2. Dobutamine 5-10μg/kg/min; positive inotropic and chrontropic effects; less likely to increase
MAP unless high dosage rates used
3. Phenylephrine 0.1-4 μg/kg/min ; vasoconstriction; minimal change in HR
 4. Norepinephrine 0.05-0.2μg/kg/min vasoconstriction
5. Epinephrine 0.05-2 pg/kg/min positive inotropic and chrontropic effects; vasoconstriction
D. Anesthesia for cats with cardiovascular dysfunction
a. Cardiovascular dysfunction may refer to a primary disorder of the heart, such as hypertrophic car-
b. Preanesthetic assessment
1.
 Cats who are hypovolemic from hemorrhage, third space losses, or vasculogenic disorders such
as sepsis should be aggressively treated as appropriate prior to anesthesia (see chap. 3—Shock ).
Cats with a life-threatening surgical disease (e.g., perforated bowel) may require surgery before
complete stabilization can be accomplished (PS 4, 5) and pose the most challenges to the
anesthetist.
ii. Cats with preexisting cardiac disease without evidence of failure may require anesthesia and
surgery for a variety of noncardiac causes.
44
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 5.3.
 Suggested sedation and anesthesia protocols for cats with cardiac disease or hemodynamic
instability .
Disorder
PS
Sedation/Premed
Induction IV
Comments
Mild-moderate
2.3
AcP/Op; Op/BZ,
Prop, Thio,
Caution AcP in PS 3; low
hypertrophy
Op/BZ/Ket ±AcP
dose Ket if necessary
(2-5mg/kg IM).
Avoid thio if exirasystoles.
HCM severe; enlarged
3.4
Op/BZ
Op/BZ + Etom, Prop,
Minimize thio, prop but 
LA; dynamic LVOT
Thio, mask
avoid with systolic
obstruction
dysfunction; avoid thio if
arrhythmias; avoid Ket.
Extreme caution with fuids
Hemodynamic instability
Not needed 
Op/BZ, Etom
Avoid morphine for
[sepsis, etc.]; no
Ket/BZ, mask
induction; caution with
primary cardiac
Ket; caution with inhalant
disease
concentrations; ensure
adequate volume
replacement.
0.1 mg/kg; butorphanol 0.1-0.4 mg/kg IM, IV; morphine 0.2-0.5mg/kg IM), BZ (diazepam 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV;
1-4 mg/kgl, Etom (etomidate 0.3-1 .5 mg/kg IV, use physiologic dose of dexamathasone sodium phosphate 0.05 mg/
kg IV), mask (isoflurane, sevoflurane induction).
1. Murmurs and gallop rhythms auscultated preoperatively should be investigated to determine
significance.
a. Thoracic radiographs to evaluate heart size, evidence of edema, or effusions
b. Echocardiography necessary to determine functional abnormalities
2. Cats with physiologic murmurs generally pose no additional concerns for anesthesia.
3. Cats with mild cardiac enlargement or thickening of ventricular walls but no evidence of
obstructive or myocardial dysfunction pose some concern for possible fluid overload.
4. Cats with severe HCM and atrial enlargement; dynamic LV outflow tract obstruction (LVOT)
present greater anesthetic concerns; caution with fluid rates; avoid tachycardia, hypotension
c. Pharmacologic considerations {table 5.3)
1.
Premedication may not be indicated in cats with hemodynamic instability (PS 4).
1. Opioids, BZ are relatively devoid of significant cardiovascular depressive effects and are good
choices as IV adjuncts for induction.
2. Unlike the depressed dog, cats typically require small amounts of anesthetics with the above
to accomplish intubation.
a.
 Etomidate (0.3-1.0mg/kg IV) provides the best hemodynamic sta bility.
b. Ketamine (2-5 mg/kg IV) may be a good choice in most situations, but not in severe HCM.
However, the direct depressive effects of ketamine may predominate in unstable patients
with little sympathetic tone.
c. Inhalant induction but may cause hypotension
Premedication may be warranted in stable cats (Ps 2, 3) with heart disease, but drugs should
be chosen according to the degree of dysfunction.
iii.
 In general, ketamine and tiletamine/zolazapam are not recommended in cats with moderate/
severe HCM because of their indirect sympathomimetic effects.
Chapter 5Gvidelines For Anesthesia in Critically ill Feline Patients
45
iv.  Alpha-2 agonists in general should be avoided in cats with heart disease because of the profound
cardiovascular effects they produce.
V.
 However, aggressive, fractious cats often become a real challenge to handle without sedation
and require good chemical restraint.
1. Opioid + BZ + small amounts (<5 mg/kg) of ketamine IM is usually well tolerated in cats
with mild-moderate HCM.
2. In an echocardiographic study of cats with significant HCM, disappearance of systolic ante-
rior motion of the mitral valve and normalization of the gradient across the LVOT occurred
after administration of 20 pg/kg medetomidine IM.
 3. Mask or tank induction can be an option if extreme excitement can be avoided.
4. Therefore, risks and benefits of these techniques should be weighed against potential conse-
quences of increasing heart rate and oxygen demands from excessive manual restraint and
res ulting increases in sympathetic tone.
vi.Anticholinergics should be administered only if needed to treat a clinically significant
bra dycardia.
vi.  Propofol, thiopental should be avoided in cats with hemodynamic insta bility (PS 4, S), but small
amounts may be appropriate for cats with HCM.
vifi. Cats receiving ACE inhibitors or calcium channel blockers may be at increased risk for intra-
operative hypotension or bradycardia.
d.Anesthesia management and monitoring
1.
 Cats classified as PS 4, 5 or cats with functional abnormalities on echocardiogram undergoing
prolonged anesthesia (PS 3, 4) ideally should have a central venous catheter for easy IV access
and possible CVP monitoring as well as additional peripheral catheters depending on severity
and duration of surgery.
ii. Cats with significant heart disease may not tolerate fluid volumes typically administered during
anesthesia; fluid rates should be decreased during prolonged procedures.
1. However, hypotension during anesthesia may occur secondary to hypovolemia if fluid losses
are not adequately addressed.
2. CVP monitoring may be helpful to assess volume overload or hypovolemia. Because of
much intercat variation in CVP measurements, trends in CVP and the response to fluid chal-
lenges are more important than absolute values. Modest increases to fluid challanges
(-2.0 mmHg after 6mL/kg crystalloid in healthy cats) may be expected if heart failure is not
present.
iii. Supplemental opioids or local anesthetic techniques to reduce inhalant concentrations should
be routine.
1. Opioid infusions (see table 5.2)
2. Morphine epidural; lidocaine line block (see chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill
Feline Patients)
iv.  Arterial or central venous blood may be sampled intraoperatively to assess changes in PCV and
plasma proteins, as well as electrolyte, acid-base, or blood gas abnormalities.
V.
Monitoring urine output during anesthesisa may be helpful to assess adequate CO and renal
perfusion, although little information is available describing normal urine production in anes-
thetized cats.
vi. Hypotension (MAP <60-65 mmHg; Doppler <75 mmHg) should be treated with vasopressors
or positive inotropes as needed after volume needs are addressed.
1. Positive inotropes and chronotropes (dopamine, dobutamine) may be contraindicated in cats
with HCM; modest amounts of vasoconstrictors (phenylephrine) may be better choices.
 2. Cats without HCM may benefit from a positive inotrope.
3. Septic cats may require vasoconstrictors and positive inotropes and can be the most chal-
lenging to treat.
46
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
E. Anesthesia for the hyperthyroid cat
a. Hyperthyroid cats are often aged, thin, and exhibit multisystemic abnormalities, including the
following:
i.
 High output cardiac state with murmurs, gallops, tachycardia
ii.Renal insufficiency that may coexist
ii. Behavior changes and hyperexcitability
b. A euthyroid state should be attained prior to anesthesia but is not always possible.
1.
Thyroidectomy should be performed after medical management is instituted.
ii.H
 Hyperthyroid cats may require anesthesia for emergency procedures unrelated to thyroid disease.
1. Significant tachycardia (>200 bpm) may require preoperative treatment with beta blockers
Apropranalol 0.5-2.0 mg/kg PO; esmolol 10-100 μg/kg /min) or calcium channel blockers
Diltiazem 7.5 mg/kg PO),
c. Pharmacologic considerations
1.
 Avoid agents that can potentiate catecholamine release or activity.
1. Avoid ketamine.
2. Thiopental (4-12 mg/kg) (if no dysrhythmia) or propofol (2-6 mg/kg) can be a good choice
in most cats.
 3. Acepromazine (0.03-0.05 mg/kg IM) may blunt sympathetic activity and can minimize stress
(avoid in PS 4).
4. Opioids, ± BZ
 5. Avoid routine use of anticholinergics, but use if needed to correct a clinically significant
bra dycardia.
d. Anesthetic management and monitoring
i.
Cardiac rate and rhythm must be closely monitored.
ii.[
If significant tachycardia develops {HR >220 bpm) despite adequate depth of anesthesia, esmolol
(0.01-0.1 mg/kg /min) may be indicated.
i. As some cats may be hypertensive with some degree of renal insufficiency, renal perfusion should
be maintained by keeping BP in the range of high normal.
 iv.   Caution with indirect-acting catecholamines {dopamine, ephedrine) as this may precipitate an
exaggerated catecholamine res ponse.
v. Monitor body temperature, keep normothermic with external warming devices.
F. Anesthesia for cats with airway Or respiratory diseases
a. Cats presented in acute respiratory distress may require anesthesia for diagnostic or therapeutic
purposes (chest tubes, thoracocentesis), or for repair of traumatic injuries suffered with concurrent
thoracic trauma (stabilized pneumothorax, diaphragmatic hernia, or pulmonary hemorrhage)
b. Preanesthetic assessment
 IV access should be secured with minimal stress; if not possible, sedation may be warranted. In
 all circumsta nces, close observation is necessary.
1. The cat with moderate/severe respiratory disease may breathe well when conscious but can
be severely compromised when sedated.
ii.
 Cats with obstructive disease (nasopharyngeal polyps or masses) may be difficult to intubate
necessitating small diameter tubes or tracheostomy, and this should be anticipated prior to
induction.
ueo spioido sisuoae pioido aund 1o ssuose sn se yons suujuoa asneo Aeu ieql sanup pioay '!!
be administered if necessary once the airway is secured.
c. Pharmacologic consideration (table 5.4)
1.
Acepromazine (0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM) provides mild/moderate sedation with little or no respira.
tory depression.
i. If good chemical restraint is necessary, ketamine 2-4mg/kg IM with AcP or BZ produces
minimal res piratory depression.
1. Ketamine decreases bronchomotor tone and is a good choice for asthmatic cats.
Chapter 5 Guidelines for Anesthesia in Critically Ill Feline Patients
47
Table 5.4. Examples of some sedation/anesthesia protocols for various diseases and procedures
Disease/Condition
Procedure
Sedation/Anesthesia
Commenls
Urinary obstruction
 Catheterization
Ket/BZ IV* /IM
Brief restraint
With hyperkalemia
But/BZ IV ± Ket; Prop IV
Ket (≤2mg/kg) Prop (≤l mg/kg)
only if nec
Intubation may be necessary; O2.
Respiratory distress (mild)
Radiographs
AcP; Ket /Mid IM, IV
Ket (≤5mg/kg) administer Hlow-by
 Severe respiratory distress
Chest tube
Thio, Prop IV; Ket/Diaz
O2 intubate if necessary
Rapid intubation necessary; O2
Liver disease
Aspirate, biopsy
But ± BZ ± Prop IV
Midazolam (<0.2mg/kg)
preferable to diazepam
caution without Hlumazenil; be
prepared to intubate when
using Prop; provide O2.
Neurologic disease
CSF collection
 BZ + Thio or prop IV
Intubate; avoid hypoventilation;
dvoid high concentrations of
 inhalant or use propofol.
0.05mg/kg).
* Use lower dosages IV.
ili.T
Thiopental (2-8 mg/kg IV), propofol (2-6 mg/kg IV), or KetBZ (5-8 mg/kg, 0.3-0.4mg/kg) for
rapid induction and intubation
iv.
 Etomidate may cause wretching or vomiting and should be reserved for patients with hemody
namic insta bility.
Volatile anesthetics also decrease bronchomotor tone.
d. Anesthetic management and monitoring
1.
Avoid stress or excitement that can exacerbate respiratory distress.
1. Premedication may be warranted.
ii.
Preoxygenation with 100% oxygen for 3-5 minutes should precede administration of a rapid
sequence IV induction and intubation.
ili.
 Controlled ventilation should be applied as necessary with attention to airway pressures and
pulmonary compliance.
1. Increased airway pressures >15cm HzO to achieve tidal volumes of 15mL/kg or less may
indicate poor pulmonary compliance and suggest airway obstruction, pneumothorax, or
pleural effusion.
a. Suction endotracheal tube to remove obstructive airway secretions.
b. Thoracocentesis to remove air or fluid
 Discontinue positive pressure ventilation briefly during thoracocentesis to avoid iat-
rogenic pneumothorax.
c. Bronchodilators (terbutaline 0.01 mg/kg IM IV) if bronchoconstriction is suspected.
Hypotension can occur with rapid IV administration.
1le aaiel e 1eu sisaaans 0't Jo 0 uaskxo audsui %00t ym %te>ods pasaaa 7
arterial oxygen gradient (P[A-a] O2 gradient) in addition to the above can be caused by
parenchyma diseases resulting in disruption of V/Q ratios.
3. Positive pressure ventilation rather than spontaneous breathing may improve oxygenation.
48
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 a. Positive end expired pressure (PEEP) can be applied by the anesthetist by maintaining up
to Scm HzO positive pressure within the rebreathing bag if a PEEP valve is not available.
b. PEEP may result in lower blood pressure due to a decrease in venous return; if so, adequate
hypotension above).
iv. Pulse oximetry and ETCO, should be monitored
V.
Prior to extubation, SpO, should be monitored.
1. Placing the cat in sternal recumbency and careful reversal of opioids or BZ may be necessary
to restore spontaneous respiration and adequate PaCO2.
2. Once spontaneous respiration is restored, SpO, should be monitored as the FiO, is reduced
to determine the animal's O2 requirements prior to extubation.
vi. O2 supplementation should be provided in recovery and the cat should be continuously
monitored.
G. Anesthesia for cats with urinary tract diseases
a. Cats with obstructive uropathy may require brief anesthesia or sedation for urinary catheterization;
cats in renal failure that require general anesthesia for surgery (PU, ruptured bladder, or unrelated
surgical diseases) should be stabilized as well as possible to correct electrolyte abnormalities and
restore vascular volume.
b. Preanesthetic assessment
Cats who are severely hyperkalemic, demonstrating ECG abnormalities or idioventricular
rhythms, are at great risk for mortality because of cardiac insta bility (PS 4).
1. Treatment to stabilize cardiac conduction with calcium gluconate {50-100 mg/kg IV slowly)
should be instituted before sedative or anesthetic agents are administered.
 2. Efforts to reduce serum K and the existing acidemia (fluids, Na, bicarbonate, glucose ±insulin)
should be instituted (see chap. 23—Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and
CRF).
ii. Cats with advanced renal failure may have secondary cardiac disease, which should be identified
prior to anesthesia, as this will greatly complicate anesthetic management (fluid
administration).
ii. Inhalant anesthesia generally depresses renal function transiently in healthy animals by altering
autoregulation, renal blood flow, and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) via changes in cardiovas-
cular function and neuroendocrine activity; therefore, cats with preexisting renal disease are at
risk for further damage.
1. BP should be maintained in the upper range of normal.
c. Pharmacologic considerations {table 5.4)
 Ketamine in low/moderate dosages (<5 mg/kg with 0.25 mg/kg BZ IV) may be used in cats with
mild or moderate renal disease.
 1. Ketamine is metabolized rapidly in the liver, and metabolism and redistribution are the major
factors in reducing blood levels.
2. Although renal excretion is responsible for elimination, only 10% of the administered ket-
amine and its metabolite were eliminated in the urine during recovery in healthy cats.
3. Ketamine may increase RBF with little to no change in GFR.
i. Cats with obstructed uropathy can tolerate low dosages of Ket with BZ (as above) if needed
for urinary catheterization; however, if severely hyperkalemic, Op/BZ would be a better choice.
1. Ketamine should be avoided in cats with hyperkalemic cardiac conduction abnormalities,
due to its indirect sympathomimetic effects.
iii. Acepromazine may potentiate hypotension and should be avoided in PS 4 patients.
1. However, in isoflurane-anesthetized dogs administered 0.1 mg/kg acepromazine or saline,
RBF and GRF were similar between the two groups despite significantly lower MAP in the
acepromazine group. However, this has not been specifica lly investigated in cats.
Chapter 5Gvidelines For Anesthesia in Critically ill Feline Patients
49
iv. Thiopental and propofol produce little change in RBF and GFR providing CO and BP are well
ma intained.
1. Thiopental is a highly protein-bound weak acid that may reach receptor sites in higher con-
centrations in the presence of hypoalbuminemia and acidosis, as may occur with uremia.
V.
Etomidate may produce hemolysis and hemoglobinuria due to the high osmolality of its formu
lation (propylene glycol).
vi. Sevoflurane presents some issues relevant to the renal system.
1. Although highly fluorinated, sevofurane requires little intrarenal metabolism, which may
result in lower inorganic Fl- concentrations as occurred with methoxyflurane.
a.Little work has been done in cats determining F- concentrations with sevoflurane.
b. Sevoflurane in the presence of CO2 absorbents is degraded to compound A, a potential
renal toxin. Although no further renal damage from sevoflurane has been documented in
human patients with renal failure, it probably should be avoided unless non-rebreathing
circuits are used.
2. Deep planes of inhalant anesthesia disrupt autoregulation and decrease RBF; balanced tech-
miques will minimize inhalant concentrations.
3. Inhalants have weak Ca channel blocking effects, which can potentiate the cardiac effects of
moderate hyperkalemia if not treated.
vi. Cats with renal failure may be receiving Ca channel blockers, which may put them at risk for
hypotension during anesthesia.
d. Anesthetic management and monitoring
i.
It is most important to maintain adequate perfusion to kidneys by maintaining CO, BP.
 1. Hypotension should be managed by lowering inhalant anesthetic concentration, maintaining
adequate vascular volume and administering inotropes such as dopamine or dobutamine at
≥5 μg/kg /min to improve CO and consequently, RBF.
 2. The practice of administering low-dose dopamine (1-4μg/kg/min) for providing protective
renal effects has been questioned. Studies in humans have not confirmed intrinsic protective
effects of dopamine on the kidney. Some studies failed to demonstrate dopamine receptors
in the renal circulation of cats, although dopamine receptors have been identified in feline
renal cortices.
ii. Fluid rates should be administered at 10-15mL/kg, but care must be used to avoid fluid over
load, especially if heart disease is present.
1. CVP should be monitored and fluids carefully administered, especially if heart disease is
present.
H. Anesthesia for cats with hepatic disease
a. Cats with hepatic lipidosis, porto-systemic shunts, or biliary obstruction may be chronically debili-
tated, hypoproteinemic, icteric, exhibit various stages of liver dysfunction, and require anesthesia for
liver biopsy, feeding tubes, or surgical exploration.
b. Pre-anesthetic assessment
1.
Blood count and chemistry with albumin should be current, and coagulation function (pro-
thrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, activated clotting time) should be evaluated prior
to surgery.
ii. Cats with signs of hepatic encephalopathy (HE) demonstrate increased sensitivity to GABA-
      e     s 
particular, the BZ.
C. Pharmacologic considerations (table 5.4)
 Acepromazine requires extensive meta bolism, can transiently decrease platelet function and PCV
and should be avoided in cats with severe liver disease.
ii. Unless flumazenil is available, benzodiazepines should be used with extreme caution or not at
all in cats with severe liver disease.
50
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Glucuronidation is required for elimination of BZ.
2. HE may be potentiated by BZ administration.
a. Evidence of improved mentation exists in people and animals with HE after receiving the
BZ antagonist flumazenil (0.01-0.02 mg/kg).
iii. Small doses of thiopental (<5 mg/kg) are not necessarily contraindicated in mild-moderate liver
disease.
1. It requires extensive hepatic metabolism and is highly protein bound; caution in severe liver
disease.
iv.  Propofol is rapidly metabolized and eliminated in part due to extra hepatic mechanisms of
removal and is a good induction agent for patients with liver disease, providing there is good
cardiovascular sta bility.
V.
Opioids maintain C/V stability well, reduce induction and inhalant requirements, and can be
reversed if necessary.
vi. Ketamine is rapidly biotransformed in the cat via microsomal N-demethylation; use low dosages
if necessary in cats with mild-moderate liver disease.
vii. Hepatic metabolism of desflurane, isoflurane, and sevoflurane are negligible and none are associ
ated with hepatic injury.
d. Anesthetic management and monitoring
1.
 In general, reduction of hepatic blood flow is proportional to decreases in arterial BP and cardiac
output.
1. Maintenance of good BP and CO is most important.
ii.Cats who are severely hypoproteinemic are at risk for hypotension due to low oncotic pressure
and relative hypovolemia.
1. Colloids such as hetastarch {1-2mL/kg/hr) as well as fresh frozen plasma if coagulation
factors are needed, should be included as part of the fluid plan to maintain vascular volume,
minimize crystalloid volumes, and prevent further dilution of existing plasma proteins.
I.Anesthesia in cats with neurologic disease
a. Cats with neurologic disease (brain tumor or inflammatory DZ) may require anesthesia for cerebral
spinal fluid collection or imaging. Cats suffering major trauma with evidence of head trauma (aniso-
coria; scleral hemorrhage; skull or jaw fractures) may require anesthesia for diagnostic purposes
 (radiography) or surgery for lacerations or fracture repairs.
b. Preoperative assessment
or seizure should be treated appropriately with furosemide or mannitol before anesthesia (see
chap. 25—General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat and 26—Neurologic
Emergencies: Brain).
i. Hypertension (MAP >100 mmHg) may be the response to maintain cerebral perfusion pressure
in the presence of increased ICP; treatment to decrease ICP should be instituted prior to
anesthesia.
hypertension, tachycardia, arrhythmia, and marked T wave changes can be signs of intra
cranial pathology.
iii. Cerebral blood flow (CBF) is dependent on cerebral perfusion pressure, PaCO2, and PaO2, and
is autoregulated in the normal brain; this may be disrupted in disease.
c. Pharmacologic considerations {table 5.4)
 Thiopental, propofol reduces cerebral metabolic rate (CMRO2) and CBF by directly increasing
1.
cerebral vascular resistance.
ii. BZ and opioids may decrease or not change CBF directly as long as hypoventilation is avoided.
ii. Dissociatives should be avoided because they increase CMRO2 and CBF by decreasing cerebral
vascular resistance, although hyperventilation will minimize the increase in CBF
Chapter 5Gvidelines For Anesthesia in Critically ill Feline Patients
51
iv. Isoflurane, sevoflurane, and desflurane {halothane should be avoided) decrease CMRO2 but
increase CBF and cerebral blood volume to varying degrees despite normal ventilation at ≥1 MAC.
1. Dose-dependent disruption of autoregulation of CBF occurs with inhalants but may be less
altered by SEVO.
 2. CBF and cerebral blood volume increase at <1 MAC in presence of poor intracranial compli
ance, and injectables such as propofol may be prefera ble.
d. Anesthetic management and monitoring
i. The benefit of premedication must be weighed against the potential risks in the patient with
poor intracranial compliance.
1. Avoid drugs that may induce vomiting or hypoventilation (increased pCO2) before the airway
is secured.
2. Avoid increases in MAP and occlusion of jugular veins as can occur with excessive restraint
in uncooperative patients.
 3. Rapid sequence induction is ideal to quickly secure the airway.
 4. Lidocaine 2mg/kg IV included at induction/extubation may minimize coughing, which can
increase intracranial pressure.
ii.
ETCO, should be included as routine monitoring in animals with possible or confirmed intra
cra nial pathology.
1. Ideally, the paCO,-ETCO2 gradient should be determined in order to maintain ETCO2 at
appropriate levels.
2. paCO2 should be kept in low-normal range (30-40 mmHg), and paCO2 <25 mmHg or >50
should be avoided.
iii. Hypotension should be avoided to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion pressure.
iv.  Avoid excessive fluid administration, but normovolemia must be maintained.
1. Hypertonic saline (2-4mL/kg) may be the optimal fluid when ICP is of concern and hypo
volemia is present.
2. Avoid glucose-containing solutions unless hypoglycemia is documented. Normoglycemia
should be maintained.
v. Elevate head 30 degrees when possible to facilitate venous and CSF drainage.
Recommended Reading
Bostrom I, Nyman G, Kampa N, et al. Effects of acepromazine on renal function in anesthetized dogs.
Amer J Vet Res 2003; 64:590-598.
Caulkett NA, Cantwell SL, Houston DM. A comparison of indirect blood pressure monitoring techniques
in the anesthetized cat. Vet Surg 1987; 287:370-377.
Green SA. Renal disease; hepatic disease. In Thurmon JC, Tranquilli WJ, Benson GJ, eds, Lumb and Jones*
Veterinary Anesthesia, 3d ed, pp 785-797. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1996.
Ilkiw JE. Anaesthesia and disease. In Hall LW, Taylor PM, eds, Anaesthesia in the Cat, pp 224-248.
London: Bailliere Tindall, 1994.
Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ. Effect of variable-dose propofol alone and in combination with two fixed doses of
ketamine for total intravenous anesthesia in cats. Am J Vet Res 2003; 64:907-912.
Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Fisher LD. Effect of alfentanil on the minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in
cats. Am J Vet Res 1997; 58:1274-1279.
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res 2002; 63:1198-1202.
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 2002; 221:1276-1281.
52
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Liehmann L, Mosing M, et al. A comparison of cardiorespiratory variables during isoflurand-fentanyl and
 propofol-fentanyl aneaesthesia for surgery in injured cats. Vet Anaesth Analg 2006; 33:158-168.
Pascoe PJ, Ikiw JE, Pypendop BH. Effects of increasing infusion rates of dopamine, dobutamine, epineph-
rine, and phenylephrine in healthy anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2006; 67:1491-1499.
 Patel PM, Drummond JC. Cerebral physiology and effects of anesthetics and techniques. In Miller RD, ed,
Miller's Anesthesia, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Churchill Livingston, 2005.
Pypendop BH, Ikiw JE. The effects of intravenous lidocaine administration on the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:97-101.
Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in cats.Am J Vet Res 2004; 65:20-25.
Steffey EP, Branson KR, Gross ME, et al. Drugs acting on the central nervous system. In Veterinary phar-
macology and therapeutics, 8th ed, Adams HR ed, pp 153-360. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State Press, 2001.
6
ANESTHETIC PROTOCOLS FOR
SYSTEMICALLY HEALTHY CATS
Lynne I. Kushner
Unique Features
● Feline patients may present challenges to the clinician with respect to their temperament, behavior,
 and response to sedative and analgesic agents.
to oxidative injury, can influence their response to some drugs such as benzodiazepines and propofol,
respectively.
 administration unless alpha-2 agonists or dissociatives are included.
● Opioids can produce mild or moderate sedation and euphoria in calm cats that can make them more
manageable for minor procedures.
● Opioids may produce hyperthermia that can be profound in some cats, although the mechanism and
consequences are unclear.
· Securing accurate blood pressure readings may be more challenging in cats due to inconsistencies of
some indirect methods and greater difficulty in performing arterial catheterization.
I. General Comments
A. Systemically healthy cats may present with conditions of an acute nature where sedation or anes-
thesia is required to accomplish diagnostic or therapeutic interventions. The fractious or aggressive
cat always poses a challenge to accomplish noninvasive tasks without good chemical restraint.
1. Mild to moderate sedation may be needed to facilitate radiographic or ultrasound examinations,
or to accomplish bandage or splint application.
2. Heavy sedation and immobilization may be required to perform procedures such as urinary
catheterization for urethral obstruction, needle/bone marrow aspirates/biopsies, thoracocentesis,
Or chest tube placement.
 3. Sedation prior to induction of general anesthesia is always recommended, with some exceptions,
to facilitate IV catheterization, minimize stress related catecholamine release, and reduce IV
induction dosage and inhalant requirements.
 4. Emergencies requiring anesthesia and surgery include cats with dystocia, intestinal foreign bodies,
severe bite wounds, lacerations, and abscesses.
B. Sedation implies a state of depressed consciousness that is qualitative.
1. Mild: tranquilization or euphoria; where animal maintains mobility but is responsive to stimuli
53
54
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Moderate: depression of consciousness, recumbent, easily aroused; small risk for respiratory
depression and hypoxia
3. Heavy: depression of consciousness, not easily aroused but responsive to noxious stimuli; moder
ate risk for respiratory depression and hypoxia
4. Unconscious sedation = anesthesia; unable to be aroused; significant risk for respiratory depres-
sion and hypoxia
5. The degree of sedation required depends on the type and duration of procedure, the requirement
for immobility, and physical status and temperament of animal.
C. Anesthesia implies loss of consciousness and perception to noxious stimuli and can be accomplished
with injectable agents or inhalants. In either situation, with some exceptions {very brief, noninvasive
procedures), endotracheal intubation should always be accomplished and oxygen provided.
D. Although we can never guarantee anesthesia or heavy sedation free from complications, it can be
minimized by consideration of the following:
1. Evaluation of physical status of patient and recognition of any preexisting conditions
2. Basic hematological/biochemical screening should include PCV, TS, BUN, Creat, ALT
 3. Continuous monitoring of vital signs during anesthesia through recovery by qualified
individuals
 a. Type of monitoring may depend on duration and type of procedure being performed, and
condition of patient
i. Intermittent monitoring, at least every 10 minutes, of heart and respiratory rates, pulse
quality, mucous membrane color, and CRT by auscultation and observation should be
the minimum required for every patient under heavy sedation or brief anesthesia.
ii. For patients not intubated, SpO2 monitoring is most important. However, oxygen supple-
mentation should always be provided.
ii. For most patients during anesthesia in addition to the above, continuous ECG, blood
pressure monitoring, and temperature should be routine.
iv. End-tidal CO2, SpO2 monitoring is most important in patients with neurological or pulmo
nary diseases, respectively (see chap. 7—-Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients).
b. Guidelines for intraoperative monitoring (ideal)
i.HR should be at least >100 but <180bpm.
ii.  Mean arterial BP should be at least ≥60 mmHg or a Doppler pressure of at least 80 mmHg.
ii. Respiratory rate and tidal volume should maintain ETCO2 between 30 and 45 mmHg,
and controlled ventilation should be instituted when necessary.
iv. Degree of CNS depression (depth of anesthesia) should be assessed continually and inter-
preted with respect to degree of muscle relaxation and autonomic responses.
4. Venous access should be secured on every patient heavily sedated or anesthetized.
a. Fluids during surgery are administered to maintain vascular volume and oxygen delivery to
tissues, replace acute fluid losses, counteract vasodilating effects of anesthetics, and normalize
acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities.
1.
 Crystalloids at 5-15 mL/kg/hr depending on severity of surgical trauma and concurrent
diseases
ii. Blood redistribution, net fluid reabsorption typically decrease PCV, plasma proteins
during routine anesthesia.
b. A healthy anesthetized animal can safely lose up to 40% of its blood volume if volume
replacement is adequate.
c. Crystalloid solutions should replace estimated blood loss by volume 3: 1; colloids, 1: 1.
5. Body temperature should be monitored and forced-warm-air blanket or circulating warm water
pads should be applied at the time of induction.
6. Knowledge of the pharmacologic effects of sedative and anesthetic agents used
Chapter 6Anesthetic Protocols for Systemically Healthy Cats
55
Table 6.1. Examples of sedation protocols for healthy cats (all doses are in mg/kg!
Drugs/combinations
mg/kg IM
mg/kg IV
Comments
 Acepromazine
0.025-0.1
0.01-0.04
 Mild-mod sedation, euphoria in calm cat; less
Hydromorphonea
0.05-0.1
0.05-0.1
effective in Fractious cats; duration 0.5-2hr
Hyperthermia possible at recovery
Midazolamb
0.1-0.25
0.1-0.25
 Mild-mod sedation in calm or older cat;
Hydromorphone 
0.05-0.1
0.05-0.1
dysphoria possible; duration 0.5-2 hrs;
hyperthermia possible
Acepromazine
0.025-0.05-0.1
0.02-0.05
 Mild sedation; dysphoria lesslikely than with
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02
0.005-0.01
likely
Dexmedetomidine
0.0025-0.020
Moderate sedation; duration 0.5-1.0hr;
severity of bradycardia variable
Xylazine
0.5-1.0
Moderate-heavy sedation/immobilization
Ketamine
4-8
duration 0.5-0.75hrs; may vomit
Medetomidine
0.005-0.02
Immobilization/anesthesia at the higher
Ketamine
2-6
dosages; duration 0.5-1.5hrs; severity of
bradycardia variable
Ketamine
2-10
2-5
Heavy sedation /immobilization; duration
Midazolam
0.1-0.25
0.1-0.25
0.5-1hr
±
 Hyperthermia possible
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.1
0.05-0.1
Telazol?
3-4
1-2
Heavy sedation/immobilization; duration 
0.5-1.0hr; larger doses may result in
 prolonged recoveries 
Telazol@
2-3
Heavy sedation/immobilization; duration 
Hydromorphone?
0.05-0.1
0.5-1.0hr
Diazepam
0.2-0.5
0.2-0.4
Heavy sedation/immobilization/anesthesia;
Ketamine
5-10
2-5
duration 0.5hr
α. Hydromorphone can be substituted with oxymorphone 0.025-0.05mg/kg, butorphanol 0.1-0.4 mg/kg.
b. Midazolam can be substituted with diazepam O.1-0.5 mg/kg.
II. Sedatives (table 6.1)
A. Phenothiazines (acepromazine; AcP)
1. Blocks central postsynaptic transmission of dopamine in several areas of the brain, including
peripheral blockade of vascular adrenergic and H1 receptors
 2. Mild to moderate sedation depending on dosage and individual response
3. Variable vasodilation, hypotension depending on dosage and individual response
a. Splenic sequestration of blood results in drop in PCV, platelets
4. Antihistaminic and antiemetic
5. May decrease seizure threshold (controversial)
6. Little change in HR but could decrease from decreased sympathetic tone
a. Raises threshold to catecholamine-induced arrhythmia
7. Little respiratory depression except in high doses
8. Metabolized in liver
56
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
B. Benzodiazepines (BZ; diazepam, midazolam)
1. Binds to specific BZ receptors, which facilitates inhibitory action of GABA and glycine on central
 and peripheral neuronal transmission; reduces polysynaptic reflex activity
2. Anticonvulsant, sedation, muscle relaxation
3. Significantly reduces induction doses of hypnotics via synergism at GABA sites
4. BZ are not good sedatives in cats unless used in combination with other sedatives but may
produce excitatement at high dosages.
5. Diazepam formulated in propylene glycol may be irritating when administered IM ( but not inef-
fective), unlike water-soluble midazolam.
a. Midazolam is reported to be 1.5-3 times more potent than diazepam.
b. Midazolam has shorter t Ys, but pharmacokinetics in cats have not been reported.
6. In general, BZ are associated with minimal C/V and pulmonary depression; however, large doses
IV can produce transient respiratory depression and apnea, decreased HR and BP.
 7. Metabolism of BZ require hydroxylation by microsomal enzymes and elimination by glucoronide
reduction
a. Cats have limited ability for glucoronidation, important for final elimination of BZ.
b. Cats may have prolonged recoveries with BZ, and they should be used with caution in cats
with significant liver disease if flumazenil (BZ antagonist) is not readily available (see chap. 14).
C. Alpha-2 agonists (medetomidine, xylazine)
1. 02 :0 ratio: medetomidine 1,600:1 vs. 160:1 xylazine
2. Activation of central and peripheral presynaptic O2a receptors mediate decreases in NE release;
decreases sympathetic outflow from cardiovascular centers; increases vagal outflow; reduces
polysynaptic reflex; activation of postsynaptic peripheral vascular C2e receptors
3. Sedation; analgesia; muscle relaxation
4. Profound cardiovascular changes: bradycardia; initial vasoconstriction and increased BP fol-
lowed by decreased BP to baseline or below; decreased CO
5. Decreased sensitivity to increases in CO2 when large dosages are administered
6. Cardiovascular effects of alpha-2 agonists are qualitatively similar and specific effects will depend
on species, dosage, route administered, and drug's affinity for and ability to activate central and
 peripheral o2 receptor subtypes. Medetomidine has potency and efficacy greater than xylazine.
a. It is the relative predominance of affinity at either C2a or Q2e receptors that may determine
overall hemodynamic effects of medetomidine.
b. Duration and degree of sedation is dose-dependent, but C/V effects are similar over most
dosage rates.
c. Concomitant use of anticholinergics is controversial. Evidence demonstrates that increased
HR along with increased afterload increases cardiac work, O2 consumption, but some clini-
cians find it clinically useful.
7. May cause vomiting: xylazine >> medetomidine
8. Specific Q2 antagonism: atipamazole >> yohimbine
a. May produce hypotension; caution if administered IV
D. Opioids (see chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients for specifics on
a ntinociception)
1. Opioids are analgesics but are frequently used for its sedative effects.
2. Opioids bind to a family of opioid receptors (μ, K, 8) located in brain, spinal cord, and peripheral
sites. The specific opioid receptor(s) they bind to, the concentration and sites of location, and
clinical effects of the drug and its binding affinity to the receptor vary among drugs, species, and
studies, making opioid pharmacology complex and often confusing.
3. Bradycardia; reduced CNS sensitivity to CO2, but usually is not a clinical problem in cats
4. Causes little/no change in cardiac contractility or blood pressure although blood pressure may
Chapter 6  Anesthetic Protocols For Systemically Healthy Cats
57
5. Behavioral effects from opioids in cats have determined the following:
a. Euphoria or dysphoria from most opioids and depends upon opioid, dosage, and condition
of the cat
i. Euphoria after hydromorphone; dysphoria after butorphanol; dysphoria rare after
buprenorphine
b. Vomiting after hydromorphone and morphine; no vomiting after butorphanol and
buprenorphine
C. Hyperthermia (>104°F) after hydromorphone and ± BZ in healthy cats. The mechanism and
significance of these findings are uncertain at this time.
6. Opioids should be administered with tranquilizers to minimize potential dysphoria; can produce
mild to moderate sedation in calm cats but unlikely to produce immobilization
a. Greater sedative effects in aged cats
7. Morphine and meperidine associated with histamine release
a. Morphine may be administered slowly IV in low dosage (<0.5mg/kg) or as an infusion
without adverse hemodynamic effects. IV administration of meperidine is not recommended
because it can cause significant histamine release, vasodilation, and myocardial depression.
IIl. Drugs and drug combinations producing immobilization (see table 6.1)
A. The addition of low dosages of an Q2 agonist or a dissociative such as ketamine or tiletamine-
zolazapam to an opioid or tranquilizer is likely to produce immobilization or anesthesia
B. Although mixing drugs may be complicated, it allows for lower dosages of any one drug with the
advantage of additive or synergistic effects.
IV. Injectable anesthetics {table 6.2)
A. Dissociatives {ketamine; tiletamine-zolazapam [Telazol]}
1. Ketamine binds to N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and non-NMDA glutamate receptors as well
as to muscarinic and nicotinic cholinergic sites, monoadrenergic and opioid receptors. In addi-
tion, ketamine interacts with voltage-dependent ion channels of Na and Ca.
 2. NMDA receptor binding appears to be the primary site of anesthetic and analgesic action.
3. Dose-dependent central nervous system depression leading to a state of dissociation between
thalamo-neocortical and limbic systems.
4. Subanesthetic dosages produce inhibition of central sensitization of spinal neurons (wind-up);
anesthetic doses produce good somatic, weak visceral analgesia.
Table 6.2. Injectable anesthetics and dosages typically required for endotracheal intubation.
Drug
Nonsedated
Sedated
Comments
Thiopental (2.0%) mg/kg
12-15
2-8
Administered to effect; may cause apnea
IV
with rapid administration; can potentiate
catecholamine induced dysrhythmia
 Propofol mg/kg IV
6-8
2-6
Administered to effect; apnea likely with
rapid administration; vasodilation,
hypotension; muscle twitching possible
Ketamine/Diazepam mg/ 5-8/0.25-0.5
2-5/0.25-0.5
Ketamine should be administered with BZ;
kg/mg/kg IV
sympathomimetic effects may be blunted
with increased dosage of BZ; respiratory
depression possible
Etomidate mg/kg IV
2-3
0.25-1
Can produce myoclonic activity; can result
 in pigmenturia and hemolysis; minimal
cardio/ pulmonary effects
Telazol@ mg/kg IV
2-3
1-2
Similar to ket/diazepam; larger doses may
result in prolonged recoveries
58
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
5. Good evidence that ketamine can reduce or reverse opioid tolerance
6. Ketamine has direct cardio-depressive effects that are offset by the indirect sympathomimetic
effects in normal patients.
a. Inhibition of CNS-mediated intraneuronal and extraneuronal uptake of catecholamines, and
inhibition of the vagal component of the baroreceptor reflex result in the increases in HR,
CO, BP seen clinically.
b. Sympathomimetic effects are minimized but may not be abolished by concurrently adminis
tered opioids, BZ and o2 agonists.
the sympathomimetic effects.
7. Minimal effects on central respiratory drive; produces the typical apneustic pattern of breathing.
When used with other CNS depressants, may result in significant respiratory depression.
edema after ketamine may be due to a direct increased pulmonary arterial pressure {cardio-
genic) or central sympathetic stimulation (neurogenic)
b. Ketamine is a bronchial smooth muscle relaxant and directly antagonizes the spasmogenic
effects of carbachol and histamine.
 8. Ketamine is rapidly biotransformed in the cat via microsomal N-demethylation, but unlike other
species, forms primarily only 1 metabolite (norketamine) which exerts little pharmacologic
activity. Although ketamine and norketamine are excreted by the kidneys, in one study very little
(10%) was recovered in the urine at recovery.
B. Tiletamine/zolazapam (T/Z) (1 : 1 ratio)
1. T/Z produces dose dependent sedation/anesthesia with excellent muscle relaxation
 2. Cardiovascular/pulmonary effects similar to ketamine/diazepam
3. Recovery may be prolonged with high dosages (>4 mg/kg) because of the relatively high concen-
trationofBZ
C. Hypnotics (propofol, thiopental, etomidate)
1. Similarities (propofol and thiopental)
a. Interacts with the CNS GABAa receptor, resulting in dose-dependent depression of cortical
and postsynaptic cortical reflexes
b. Produces dose-dependent sedation to unconsciousness (anesthesia) and provides no analgesia
at subanesthetic concentrations
i. Rapid redistribution; short acting
c. Potent respiratory depressant
d. Myocardial depressant
e. Metabolized by microsomal oxidative enzymes
f. Cerebral vasoconstrictor which reduces cerebral blood flow and volume (CBF) and intracra.
nial pressure, and cerebral metabolic rate (CMR)
2. Differences (propofol vs. thiopental)
a. Propofol (phenolic compound) metabolism exceeds liver blood flow, suggesting extra hepatic
sites {in cats, 60% first pass extraction found in the lung) and lack of pharmacokinetic altera-
tions found in patients with liver disease
b. Relatively nonaccumulative; however, in cats, prolonged recoveries are seen after continuous
infusions.
i.1
 Full recovery in cats administered propofol at infusion rates for 2.s hours were almost
twice as long as those who received 30-minute infusions
c. Because feline RBCs are susceptible to oxidative injury, Heinz body anemia and malaise have
been documented in cats after consecutive day administration.
d. Propofol has greater veno and vasodilatory actions; hypotension more likely.
t. Propofol lacks the vagolytic effects of thiopental, and HR may decrease or not change.
Chapter 6Anesthetic Protocols For Systemically Healthy Cats
59
f. Although propofol lowers the threshold to catecholamine-induced dysrhythmia, probably less
dysrhythmogenic
g. Propofol may be inhibitory or excitatory at CNS sites and twitching or seizurelike motor
activity is not uncommon.
3. Etomidate (imidazole derivative)
a. Probable mechanism for hypnosis is via GABA-ergic sites.
b. Rapid hepatic hydrolysis
c. Formulated in propylene glycol, etomidate in moderate amounts can cause hemolysis, hemo-
globinuria beca use of high osmolality (>4,000 mOsm/L).
d. Maintains cardiovascular stability with minimal respiratory depression
i. Does not potentiate catecholamine-induced dysrythmia
e. Etomidate transiently decreases cortisol production (see chap. 7—Pain Management in
Critically Ill Feline Patients).
D. Local anesthetics (lidocaine 2%; bupivacaine 0.5%)
1. Many toxicity studies using healthy cats have determined that seizure and cardiovascular
collapse occur with dosages in excess of 11 mg/kg and 4mg/kg of lidocaine and bupivaine,
respectively.
 2. Infiltration of local anesthetics for line or nerve blocks may allow surgical procedures with only
hea vy sedation (small mass removals) or reduce the amounts of injectable or inhalant anesthetics
{C-section)
a. Lidocaine <4 mg/kg; bupivicaine <2 mg/kg
b. Diluting lidocaine or bupivicaine with saline to 1% and 0.25%, respectively, will increase
volume but not dose
3. IV lidocaine (bupivacaine should NOT be administered IV) can be administered to cats in IV
infusions for minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) reduction or analgesia, although docu-
mented efficacy is variable and questionable.
a. One study documented a linear reduction of MAC over a large range of plasma
concentrations.
i. Cardiac index decreased significantly despite increases in MAP when plasma concentra.
tions >5 μg/mL.
ieo nom paasue aq ueo uyanos oi dn ieui sisans auadxa iu sa
cular depression.
i. Dosage should be reduced after 1-2 hours to avoid cardiovascular depression that may
occur from accumulation of lidocaine.
4. Lidocaine 2 mg/kg IV administered immediately prior to induction can produce mild sedation
and may reduce dosage of hypnotics.
5. Methemoglobinemia in cats has been documented with benzocaine but not lidocaine.
V. Volatile anesthetics (table 6.3)
A. Isoflurane (ISO) and sevoflurane (SEVO) are the most commonly used inhalants in veterinary medi-
cine. Desflurane (DES) may be less commonly used because of its unique properties and atypical
vaporizer design. Nitrous oxide (NzO), commonly used in human medicine, is less useful in veteri-
nary medicine because of its low potency. Halothane will soon follow methoxyflurane as being of
historical significance.
B. Low blood-gas solubility coefficients of the volatile agents mean that alveolar concentrations
change quickly with changes in inspired concentrations; thus induction and recovery times are
rapid.
1. Blood-gas solubilities: desflurane < sevoflurane < isoflurane < halothane
2. This property may be most relevant during mask or tank induction.
C. Minimum alveolar concentration of inhalants, a measure of potency, is generally higher (less potent)
in cats than in dogs.
60
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 6.3. Some properties of the common inhalant anesthetics.
Blood/gas solubility
Mean MACso values
Inhalant
coefficients at 37*C
reported in cats (% )
Isoflurane
1.46
1.6-2.2
Sevoflurane
0.68
2.6;3.4
Desflurane
0.42
9.8; 10.2
Halothane 
2.54
0.8-1.2
MACso %: minimum alveolar concentration in 50% of animals.
D. Studies in cats comparing the C/V and pulmonary effects of SEVO, DES, and ISO found similar
effects with minor differences.
1. SEVO produced less vasodilation but greater decrease in CO compared to ISO.
2. SEVO produced less CV depression with controlled ventilation compared to ISO.
E. Neither ISO, SEVO, or DES sensitizes the myocardium to catecholamines.
 F. All have similar effects on the CNS and will produce decreases in CMR but increases in CBF at ≥1
MAC.
G. ISO, SEVO, and DES do not produce direct hepatic or renal toxicity, and hepatic and renal blood
flow are well preserved in clinically relevant concentration as long as CO and BP are preserved.
1. Sevoflurane reacts with CO2 absorbents to produce a potentially renal toxic vinyl ether,
"Compound A", a substance that produces dose-dependent nephrotoxicity at high concentra-
tions in rats.
S  o  s n a    i s    s
in humans, horses, and dogs failed to document clinical toxicity.
2. DES, ISO, and especially SEV produce carbon monoxide {CO) and extreme temperatures during
reactions with dessicated CO absorbents, and although rare, explosions/fire in canister with
sevoflurane have been reported.
 3. The use of nonrebreathing circuits, which obviates the need for CO2 absorbents, negates the
concern of CO or Compound A (se VI. Breathing circuits).
VI. Breathing circuits
A. Circle or rebreathing systems utilize CO2 absorbents for removal of CO2 and imply rebreathing
(minus COz) some portion of exhaled gases, the amount of which depends on the fresh gas flow
rate.
1. Pediatric circles utilizing smaller volumes and diameters can be used for healthy cats as small as
2.5-3.0kg.
2. Maintenance O, flow rates are based on the recommendation of three times the patient's O2
consumption, approximately 22-44 mL/kg.
3. Advantages of a semiclosed rebreathing circuit are conservation of heat and moisture, and
economy in usage of inhalant and O2.
4. Disadvantages are increased resistance to breathing across one-way valves and CO, canister, and
 potential concern for breakdown products of compound A and CO in the circuit.
B. A nonrebreathing circuit is a common term describing circuits that do not utilize CO2 absorbents
and rely on high O2 flow rates to avoid rebreathing.
1. Recommended flow rates depend on type of nonrebreathing circuit, spontaneous vs. controlled
anu suaed sau aau oi omi jo saaun ui are pue ssaereuo suaed pue 'aueang
volume = 450-600 mL/kg/min.
2. Advantages are minimal resistance, less work of breathing; no break down products of inhalants
{compound A) in circuit
3. Disadvantages are loss of heat and moisture, wasteful in oxygen and inhalant usage.
Chapter 6Anesthetic Protocols For Systemically Healthy Cats
61
Recommended Reading
Andress JL, Day TK, Day DG. The effects of consecutive day propofol anesthesia on feline red blood cells.
Vet Surg, 1995; 24:277-282.
Duncan B, Lascelles X, Robertson SA. Antinociceptive effects of hydromorphone, butorphanol, or the
combination in cats. J Vet Intern Med, 2004; 18:190-195.
in healthy awake cats. J Vet Pharmacol Therap, 1998; 21:54-61.
Lamont LA, Bulmer BJ, Grimm KA; Cardiopulmonary evaluation of the use of medetomidine hydrochloride
in cats. Am J Vet Res, 2001; 62:1745-1762.
Paddleford, RR. Anesthetic equipment. In Manual of small animal anesthesia, 2nd ed, pp 89-109.
Philadelphia: W.B. Sa unders, 1999.
anesthesia in cats. Vet Anaes Analg, 2006; 33:2-7.
Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Hemodynamic effects of sevoflurane in cats. Am J Vet Res, 2004; 65:20-25.
Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. Assessment of the hemodynamic effects of lidocaine administered IV in isoflurane
anesthetized cats. Am J Vet Res 2005; 66:661-668.
Pypendop BH, Ilkiw JE. The effects of intravenous lidocaine administration on the minimum alveolar
concentration of isoflurane in cats. Anesth Analg 2005; 100:97-101.
Steffey EP, Branson KR, Gross ME, et al. Drugs acting on the central nervous system. In Adams HR, ed,
Veterinary pharmacology and therapeutics, 8th ed, pp 153-360. Ames: Iowa State Press, 2001.
             s
Veterinary Anesthesia, 3rd ed, pp 183-209. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1996.
7
PAIN MANAGEMENT IN CRITICALLY ILL
FELINE PATIENTS
Lynne I. Kushner
 Nociceptive transmission—and associated vocabulary
aaap auos sanpoud ieui snnws shoixou e Aa pasneo uosuas sueseadun snoosuoo e si uied v
of tissue injury.
chemical, thermal, or mechanical stimuli and transform these signals into action potentials. If
minimal/no damage to tissues occurs, physiologic pain results.
i. Physiologic pain is a normal innocuous response to a noxious stimulus that is transient and
protective in nature (fig. 7.1).
ii.C
 Clinical pain is an exaggerated, prolonged physiologic pain associated with some degree of
tissue damage and inflammation; it is typically acute and secondary to surgery or trauma.
il. When significant tissue damage occurs, prostaglandins, histamine, serotonin, and brandyki-
nins are but a few of the compounds released from damaged tissues that sensitize nociceptors,
reduce thresholds, and augment the response to further nociceptive stimulation leading to
peripheral sensitization.
iv.  Peripberal sensitization may lead to hyperalgesia (see below) and allodynia (see below) at the
site of injury.
C. Action potentials are transmitted via afferent A8 and C peripheral nerve fiber to the dorsal root
 ganglion and dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
D. Modulation occurs throughout the peripheral and CNS when the interaction of neurotransmitters
with receptors lead to activation of intracellular signaling cascades on the neuronal membrane,
which can amplify, or inhibit, further intracellular signaling.
i.
 Excitatory amino acids and peptides (glutamate, substance P) released from afferent syna ptic
terminals on dorsal horn neurons bind to glutaminergic receptors a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-
methyl-4-isoxazlepropionic acid (AMPA), kainite, and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA),
resulting in opening and phosphorylation of ion channels and regulatory proteins.
ii. AMPA receptors respond more to acute and brief noxious impulses, but repetitive activation
leads to the removal of the magnesium block in the NMDA channel.
ii. NMDA receptor activation enhances further AMPA activity, which in turn activates more
NMDA receptors, leads to amplification of responses of impulses, and increases its receptive
field size in the spinal cord resulting in synaptic plasticity and central sensitization.
a. Central sensitization thus is an increased responsiveness of sensory input into the spinal
cord {also called windup).
noxious stimuli at the site of injury (primary) but also may extend to areas outside the site
of injury (secondary).
63
Spinal Cord
Dorsal Root
DorsalRootGanglion
ASAB
Peripheral
D
Nerve
Sympathetic
Physiologic pain
Ganglion
Ca2+
C Fiber
Visceral
Central Axon
Sensory Nerve.
A6,C
GLU
NMDAR
Sympathetic
nerves
AB
MC
GLU
A8
Mg
NMDAR
AMPA/KAR
↑[Na+]
Dorsal Horn Neuron 
Central Sensitization
CFiber
SevereTissue
Ca²+
Wi
Damage
CentraLAxon
SP
Primary
Hyperalgesia
Allodynia
D
Secondary
Hyperalgesia
+
。
NMDAR
OGLU
AMPAKAR
X
MO
NMDAR
P
[Na+]
[Ca+]
↑(PKC
Dorsal Horn Neuron 
Fig. 7.1.
 Diagram describes what happens during severe peripheral tissue damage. Afer transduction by noci-
ceptors on afferent Aβ, C and A& fibers, action potentials are transmited to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord for
Further processing and modulation. During physiologic pain, most NMDARs are blocked by Mg2t; consequently,
there is no postsynaptic cumulative depolarization of theCNS.During somatic or visceral pathologic pain conditions,
Cfibers become sensizedby infammatory mediators Iperipheral sensitization],lowering the threshold to iring and
producing spontaneous discharges resuling in a persistent release of glutamate and substance P on the C fibers of
the dorsal horn. These substances produce a cascade of intracellular signaling leading to activation of phosphokinase
C (PKC), phosphorylates, and NMDARs leading to the removal of the Mg block, central sensitization, and windup.
From Pozzi, Muir, and Traverso 2006.
64
Chapter 7  Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
65
 pd a  au m   e o pid d si o 's
painful.
d. Neuropathic pain is associated with damage to peripheral and central components of the
nervous system and can be characterized by hyperalgesia and allodynia.
E. Projection of nociceptive information is transmitted via ascending tracts to areas of the cortex
where perception occurs. Further transmission and modulation occur via descending tracts.
i.
 The periaqueductal gray and ventromedial medulla are rich in serotonin, opioid, adrenergic
receptors and are important centers for relaying descending information to the spinal cord
where nociceptive input is further modulated (facilitated or inhibited),
 Types of pain categorized by severity, duration, anatomic location, or neurobiological mechanisms
A. Somatic pain arises from bone, skin, or muscle, and is generally transmitted via A8 fibers, some
C fibers.
i.Somatic pain is typically characterized as sharp and well localized.
B. Visceral pain arises from stretching, distension, or inflammation of viscera, is transmitted along
C fibers and A8 fibers, and is associated with sympathetic and parasympathetic pathways.
i. Visceral pain is characterized as dull, aching, and poorly localized
C. Acute pain typically is associated with trauma, surgery, or disease; it is physiologic pain that may
evolve to clinical and inflammatory pain. Acute pain often responds favorably to opioids, NSAIDs.
i.Mild-moderate
a. Lacerations, abscesses
b. Surgical (pyometra; C-section)
ii. Moderate-severe
a. Fractures, blunt trauma; degloving injuries; burns
b. Surgical (orthopedic, amputation, thoracotomy, extensive abdominal), radical mastectomy,
enucleation
ii. Clinical, inflammatory pain may result in pathologic or neuropathic pain if not treated
aggressively.
D. Chronic pain persists weeks or months beyond the time acute pain is expected to resolve and is
associated with chronic disease processes.
i.
 Chronic pain is less responsive to conventional analgesics and is more difficult to treat; NMDA
antagonists, systemica lly administered local anesthetics, antidepressants may be effective.
ii.  Mild to severe
a. Dental, periodontal disease; glaucoma
b. Osteoarthritis, interstitial cystitis
c. Musculoskeletal pain
d. Bone pain (neoplasia)
E. Targeting the mechanism rather than the symptom and applying a multimodal approach is the
best rationale for pain management.
II. Pain and the stress response
A. Although pain can play a protective role in minimizing tissue damage, unrelieved pain induces
stress and suffering, and pain and suffering are associated with malada ptive physiologic responses.
i.
 Increases in neuroendocrine activity can induce cardiovascular changes (tachycardia, hyperten-
sion) and metabolic consequences such as protein catabolism and modulation of the immune
response.
 ii. Stress increases energy requirements, which may lead to weight loss and negative nitrogen
balance if caloric intake is decreased.
IV. Assessing pain in the cat
A. Any surgery or a trauma that would be painful to humans should be assumed to be painful to a
cat; when in doubt, analgesics should be administered.
B. Recognizing pain in the cat is a subjective assessment based on changes in the cat's behavior or
appearance (table 7.1).
66
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 7.1。 Behavior or appearance that suggests a cat in pain.
Atfitude
Aggression in an otherwise riendly cat; quite decreased responsiveness in 
an otherwise active cat; does not engage in otherwise normal interactions
Mobility
Unwillingness or slow to move; inability to jump; change in gait; hiding
Posture
Lying with tense muscle tone, less likely to sleep curled up; hunched
appearance when standing
 Reaction to touch
Flinching or increased muscle tension when sroked; hissing, growling when
Anuo Aabins jo as ot lpiayduad yon o uonai aisa pynl
Other physiologic changes
Loss of appetite; change in elimination habits 
Table 7.2。 An example of an interactive simple descriptive score For assessment of pain in cats (modified from
Cambridge, et al. 2000j.
Stimulus by Observer
Cat's Response
Score
Approaches cat
Seeks interaction (rubbing, purring)
0
Does not approach but raises head
1
Does not move
2
Withdraws head and body
3
Avoids, moves away
4
 Strokes cat
 Responds avorably
0
Does not move
1
Withdraws from observer
2
Moves away
3
Palpates wound
Does not respond
Moves away
1
Growls
2
Reacts violently and moves away
3
 Signs of pain in cats can be subtle, chronic pain particularly.
i.It can be diffcult to distinguish between attitude, malaise, and pain.
ili. Subject to observer variability
C. Physiologic parameters such as cardiovascular, respiratory indices, and neuroendocrine concentra-
tions, such as cortisol and catecholamines, have not been reliable indicators of pain or pain relief
after analgesic administrations in various clinical studies.
 D. Using pain scales with specific descriptors that can be qualified and scored decreases observer
variability, maintains a record of assessment or change of behaviors, and aids in evaluating
response to analgesia. Few scoring methods in cats have been published or validated, however
(table 7.2).
Sioey Aueu uo spuadap oisagieue aieudoudde au sussoou 
A. Type of pain—categorized by severity, duration, anatomic location, or neurobiological
mechanisms
B. Physical status and concurrent disease(s)
Critically ill or aged cats may not tolerate the cardiovascular effects of alpha-2 agonists;
NSAIDS would be contraindicated in cats with renal disease.
C. Routes available for administration
1.
lidocaine allows for better owner compliance.
Chapter 7 Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
67
Table 7.3.
Recommended dosoges of opioids for cats.
Drug
Dose
Route
Interval
Side Effects/Comments
Morphine
0.1-0.5mg/kg
IM, SC
 4-6 hours
 Histamine release
0.1-0.2mg/kg/hr
IV
8-12+ hours
 Urinary retention
0.1mg/kg
Epidural
 Methadone
0.1-0.5mg/kg
IM, SC, IV
2-4 hours
Weak mu agonist NMDA
0.1-0.2mg/kg
Epidural
4 hours
antagonist
Side effects rare
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
IM, SC, IV
4-6 hours
Hyperthermia common 
Oxymorphone
0.05-0.2 mg/kg
IM, SC, IV
4-6 hours
Similar to hydromorphone
Meperidine
3-10mg/kg
IM, SC
1-3 hours
Histamine release
Fentanyl
3-5 μg/kg
IV
 5-90 minutes
Bradycardia marked
2-10μg/kg/hr
IV
1-3 days (6-12
5 μg/kg/hr
 Transdermal patch 
hour onset!
Variable absorption
25 μg/hr/cat
Butorphanol
0.1-0.8 mg/kg
IM, SC, IV
 2-4 hours
Marked individual
 0.1 mg/kg/min
variability in response
Buprenorphine
0.01-0.02mg/kg
Im, SC, IV, OTM
6-8 hours (onset
 Excellent buccal absorption
30 minutes)
VI.
Opioids (table 7.3)
A. Most effective systemically administered analgesics used to treat acute, severe pain.
B. Opioid receptors are G protein-coupled receptors located in spinal and supraspinal sites.
 Ultimately leads to decrea sed cAMP formation, membrane hyperpolarization, inhibits voltage
1.
sensitive Ca channels, and depresses terminal release of neurotransmitters from the cell.
C. In humans, considerable genetic polymorphism exists in opiate receptor genes, as well as the
isoenzymes responsible for opioid metabolism.
i.
May account for individual variability in responses.
ii.
The cat is no exception in this regard.
D. Potency depends on the affinity of the drug to the receptor and the intensity of the effect it pro
duces for a given dosage.
Two drugs can be equi-effective ( produce same effects), but the one that produces the maximal
effect by occupying fewer receptors with a lower dose is more potent.
a. Fentanyl >>> hydromorphone > morphine
ii.
 The intensity of the pain will dictate the efficacy of the drug in that it may decrease its potency;
that is, more receptors must be occupied to produce the effect.
ii. Clinical impression suggests pure agonists (hydromorphone) are more effective for severe,
acute pain than partial agonists (buprenorphine), which do not achieve maximum effect
despite large dosage.
snixou aqeieadau pue pannsea e Aidde ieul spouau pakoidua aaey sieo ui saipns juaoay 1
 stimulus (thermal or pressure) for which a response can be determined objectively (finching,
vocalization). After baseline responses are measured, the response to various opioids and dosages
can be compared. (table 7.4).
i.
Thermal, mechanical stimuli assess somatic analgesia; other methods (e.g, colonic balloon
model) may be more appropriate for visceral pain.
a. Therefore, extrapolating results of experimental studies to clinical cases should be done
cautiously.
Table 7.4. Summary of studies that have determined the effects of opioids on thermal thresholds in cats. The
higher the temperature, the greater the analgesic effect.
Time (min)
Dose
to significantDuration Peak temp Baseline
Opioid
mg/kg
analgesia
(min)
("C)
(°C)
Observations
Morph
0.2
240
360
49
<47
Similar peak responses despite
Bupren
0.01
240
>480
51
<48
different onset and duration;
Butorph
0.2
30
50
<46
 mild sedation, euphoria
IM
Vomited with morphine;
9=u
Robertson, et al. 2005a, b
Bupren
0.02
30
360
57
41.2
 No vomiting; euphoria; no
OT
0.02
30
360
51
40.8
correlation between plasma
Bupren IV
 concentration and effect
9=u
Robertson, et al. 2005a, b
Fentanyl
0.02
5
110
55
41.8
 No vomiting; euphoria;
IV
mydriasis
n=6
Analgesia >1 .07ng/ml
Robertson, et al. 2005a, b
OPAH
0.1
15
450
54
40.9
No vomiting but salivation;
IV
 significant increase in skin 
9=u
 and rectal temp; mydriasis;
 no concentration and effect
relationship
Wegner, et al. 2004
Meper
5
30
60
50
45
 Normal behavior
IM
Dixon, et al. 2002
n=6
Butorph
0.1-0.8
90
48
<42
No difference between doses,
IV
results pooled; no vomiting;
9=u
dysphoria associated with
all doses; marked variation
in response among cats
Lascelles and Robertson 2004
Metha
0.2
60
180
3.4
0
Reported as increase from
Morph
0.2
45
60
3.4
0
baseline; also tested
Bupren
0.02
45
45
2.9
0
pressure thresholds with
SQ n = 8
similar results
Steagall, et al. 2006
OPAH
0.025
No change
40.7
No excitatory behavior;
IV
0.05
5
80
47
41.0
hyperthermia only with high
=u
0.1
20
200
55
41.5
dose
Wegner and Robertson 2007
oPAH
0.1
15
345
49
40
50% vomited with hydro only
Butorph
0.4
15
180
48
Dysphoria with butorph only
+opAH
0.1+0.415
540
46
Combo increased duration,
Butorph n = 6
decreased quality
Lascelles and Robertson 2004
Note: morph = morphine; bupren = buprenorphine; butorph = butorphanol; meth = methadone; hydro = hydromor-
 phone; meper = meperidine.
68
Chapter 7 Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
69
F. Morphine, a pure agonist, is the prototype to which other opioids are compared.
i.
 May have delayed or unpredictable effects in cats due to a relative deficiency in metabolizing
morphine to its more potent active metabolite, morphine 6 glucorinide (M6G). However,
efficacy has been demonstrated in cats.
i.Avoid large or rapidly administered IV dosages due to histamine release.
ii.Vomiting is commonly reported after morphine administration.
iv. Dose: 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM, SQ
G. Meperidine is an opiate agonist with anticholinergic, antispasmotic actions with a potency less
than morphine.
i.
 IV admininistration is contraindicated due to histamine release and significant vasodilatory
and cardiac depressive effects.
ii.Mild sedative effects
ii. Vomiting uncommon
iv. Short duration of analgesia (<2 hrs)
v. The active metabolite normeperidine produces neuroexcitatory effects when in high
concentrations.
a. Seizures have occurred in humans with renal failure.
b. Normeperidine has been recovered in the serum of cats.
vi. Meperidine has intrinsic serotonergic properties and should not be used concurrently with MAO
inhibitors, which could lead to serotonin syndrome: signs of tremors, hyperthermia, coma.
a. Selegiline is a MAO B inhibitor which may minimize the likelihood of this interaction.
vi. Dose: 3-10 mg/kg SQ, IM
H. Oxymorphone is a pure opiate agonist with a potency ten times that of morphine in humans.
Little objective information concerning oxymorphone's effect on nociceptive thresholds in cats is
known, although clinical studies and experience demonstrate positive responses.
i.
Dose: 0.05-0.4 SQ, IM, IV
I. Hydromorphone is reported as having five to seven times the potency of morphine in humans.
i.
May have supplanted oxymorphone in popularity because of its reliable availability and lower
cost than oxymorphone.
il.Very effective analgesia and long duration of action (4-6 hrs)
ili. Increases in skin and rectal temperatures were recorded in research cats.
a. Retrospective evaluation of postanesthetic hyperthermia in feline hospitalized patients
revealed a positive correlation to the use of hydromorphone.
iv. Euphoria typically observed
v.Dose: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg SQ, IM, IV
 J.  Methadone is a pure agonist with similar potency and duration to morphine.
1.
 Demonstrates a relative potency of antagonism at the NMDA receptor
a. ketamine ≥ dextromethorphan > methadone
ii.Vomiting less common than with morphine
ii. Dose: 0.1-0.5 mg/kg SQ, IM, IV
K. The phenylpiperidine derivatives, which include alfentanil, fentanyl, sufentanil, and remifentanil
are potent synthetic opioids with relatively short durations of action.
1.
 Commonly administered as continuous rate infusions to minimize inhalant and injectable
anesthetic concentrations in order to preserve cardiovascular stability
i. Relative potencies: sufentanil >> fentanyl ≥ remifentanil > alfentanil
iii. A ceiling effect in isoflurane MAC reduction (35%) with alfentanil
a. Some cats demonstrated increase in rectal temperatures, paCO2, and muscle rigidity during
alfentanil-isoflurane anesthesia.
iv. Infusions of fentanyl (0.1 μg/kg/min), alfentanil (0.5 μg/kg/min), and sufentanil (0.01 μg/kg/
min) to cats significantly reduced the minimal propofol infusion dose to prevent purposeful
movement.
70
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
v.   Remifentanil (0.2-0.3μg/kg/min)  prevented  purposeful  movement  and  cardiovascular
responses in propofol-anesthetized cats undergoing ovariohysterectomy.
a. Remifentanil is noncumulative and rapidly cleared due to metabolism by hydrolysis via
nonspecific plasma esterases.
vi. Although hemodynamic stability is associated with the use of these opioids, significant bra-
dycardia and respiratory depression can occur.
L. Fentanyl transdermal patch
i.
ii. Time to achieve steady state plasma concentrations in cats is reported to be from 12 to 72
      oi d  
ili. Partial removal of adhesive backing of a 25 μg/hr patch resulted in minimizing the plasma
concentration of fentanyl and may be desirable in small or debilitated cats.
iv. Hypothermic cats during isoflurane had significantly lower fentanyl plasma concentrations
than normothermic anesthetized cats.
v.   Some clinical studies demonstrated improved pain scores in cats after ovariohysterectomy and
onychectomy.
M. Butorphanol is primarily an agonist at kappa and antagonist at mu receptors.
i. Some studies in cats found significant analgesia, but somewhat unpredictable and of short
duration.
a. Low dosages (0.1 mg/kg) effective in a colonic balloon model, representative of visceral
pain
 b. Analgesic responses to electrical stimulation (somatic pain model) were significant and dose
dependent (0.4, 0.8 mg/kg)
c. Recent studies (thermal threshold, somatic pain) found significant analgesia that was not
dose dependent but with a marked intercat variability in regard to eficacy.
ii. Dysphoria has been reported as frequent in recent studies but not seen in other studies
iil. Not associated with vomiting
iv. Dosage 0.1-0.8 mg/kg IV, IM
N. Buprenorphine is a partial mu agonist and kappa antagonist that is reported to be 2s-50 times
more potent than morphine in humans.
i.
 Binds avidly to the mu receptors, but long onset; slow dissociation resulting in long duration
of action (≥6 hrs)
ii.Produces a partial or "ceiling" effect in analgesia; efficacy best with mild-moderate pain
ii. Purported to be difficult to reverse with antagonists
iv. Bioavailability by the oral transmucosal route in cats was found to reach 100% and duration
and efficacy were equal to similar IV dosage.
v. Not associated with vomiting
vi. Euphoria common
vi. Dose: 0.01-0.02 mg/kg buccal mucosal, SQ, IM, IV
O. Tramadol (atypical opioid)
i.
 Centrally acting analgesic whose actions are mediated through opioid, serotonergic, and
adrenergic pathways; NMDA receptor inhibition reported
ii. Pharmacokinetics of IV and oral tramadol and its main metabolite, O-desmethyl-tramadol,
have been studied in cats.
a. At 5 mg/kg PO good bioavailability with elimination t 12 of 3.4 hours (twice as long as
reported in dogs)
 b. Pharmacokinetic profiles between metabolite and parent are very similar, and metabolite
is thought to bind to mu receptors avidly.
c. Euphoria observed in most cats
ii. Few controlled analgesic studies available in cats
Chapter 7   Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
71
a. One recent study demonstrated minimal effect on thermal or mechanical thresholds after
1 mg/kg dosage SQ.
b. Euphoria and occasional dysphoria observed
iv.  Tramadol may be a good postoperative analgesic for home administration.
V.
 Tramadol may lower the seizure threshold; serotonin syndrome (signs of sympathetic over-
stimulation, seizure, coma) reported in humans with concurrent administration of antidepres
sants {SSRI, MAOI, tricyclics)
vi. Published dosage for cats is 2-4mg/kg PO/12 hrs.
VII. NMDA antagonists (ketamine, amantadine)
A. Ketamine, in addition to providing chemical restraint and dissociative anesthesia, produces moder-
    s        
i. After 2 mg/kg, a delayed onset of hyperalgesia was demonstrated in one study.
B. Recent advances in the study of nociception and its pathways have determined ketamine to be a
potent noncompetitive inhibitor of the NMDA receptor at subanesthetic dosages, thus inhibiting
central sensitization, hyperalgesia, and opioid tolerance.
i. Acts centrally and peripherally at opioid, AMPA, NMDA, GABA-A receptors
a. Blocks open ion channels and inhibits Ca entry in NMDA receptor
ii. Experimental and clinical studies in experimental animals and humans have demonstrated
higher nociceptive thresholds, lower pain scores, and opioid requirements when subanes-
thetic dosages of ketamine are administered prior to and during the noxious stimulus
{surgery).
a. Dosages used clinically in cats are extrapolations from other species; no dose response
studies have been done in cats evaluating ketamine for the purpose of preventing or treat-
ing central sensitization.
ili. Doses 0.1-0.6mg/kg/hr after a loading dose of 0.5-1 mg/kg
C. Amantadine has low affinity for NMDA receptors.
i.
 Has been used in humans to treat neuropathic pain and adjunct to reduce opioid requirements
and tolerance
ii. Little documentation about efficacy in cats, but clinical experience supports use for chronic
pain
ii. Reported dosage for cat, 2-5mg/kg PO/24 hrs
VIll. Anticonvulsants (Gabapentin)
A. Gabapentin is a GABA analog, does not appear to interact directly with GABA but appears to
bind to voltage gated calcium channels on a GABA subunit.
i.
Other actions include interactions with NMDA receptors and inhibition of release of a variety
excitatory peptides and amino acids in the spinal cord.
il. Does not appear to alter nociceptive thresholds; rather, potentiates the effects of other
a na lgesics.
il. In humans, good efficacy noted for neuropathic pain
iv. Objective data in cats are lacking, but clinical impressions have determined good results in
cats with chronic pain, with minimal side effects (sedation with high dosage).
v. Published dosages 1.5-4 mg/kg SID; clinical experiences suggest up to 5-10 mg/kg/8-12 hrs
IX.Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; meloxicam, carprofen; table 7.5)
A. NSAIDs inhibit production of prostaglandins by noncompetitive inhibition of cyclooxygenase
{COX) enzymes, thus reducing fever, inflammation, and pain.
 B. COX-1 is important in physiological processes such as regulation of gastrointestinal and renal
blood flow, while COX-2 is induced by inflammatory mediators, although there is some overlap
of function.
C. Choosing an NSAID with COX-2 specificity is best to minimize the potential for GI or kidney
toxicities.
72
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 7.5. Nonopioid drugs used to treat pain.
Drug
Dosage mg/kg
Route/lnterval
Side Effects/Comments
Ketamine
0.3-0.6mg/kg loading
CRI
 Dosages extrapolated from humans, rats 
 0.1-0.6mg/kg /hr
Tramadol
2-4
PO/12hr
NMDA antagonist 
Avoid with SSRl and MAO inhibitors
Amantadine
2-5
PO/24 hr
NMDA antagonist
Effiacy anecdotal in cats
Gabapentin
1.5-4
PO/24 hr
GABA analog; dosage; effects anecdotal in cats
5-10
PO/12
Lidocaine
 1-2 mg/kg loading
CRI
 Potential for cardiovascular depression
1.5-3 mg/kg/hr
Meloxicam
0.1-0.2mg/kg (acute)
SQ or PO once
0.05 mg/kg (chronic)
SQ, PO 1-4 days
 avoid in hypovolemic /hypotensive cats
Carprofen
1-2mg/kg
SQ; IV once
Avoid in hypovolemic/hypotensive cats
However, specificity of NSAIDs to COX receptors determined from in-vitro testing and sus-
ceptibility to toxicities are unique between species, and in-vitro data may not represent in-vivo
conditions.
i. NSAIDs may also interact with enzymes other than COX, such as 5-lipoxenase, which may
be responsible for additional detrimental or beneficial effects.
D. Many NSAIDs rely primarily on hepatic gluronidation for metabolism, which may reduce their
margin of safety in cats.
E. NSAIDs are contraindicated in cats with liver or renal disease and those that are hypovolemic or
hypotensive.
F. Meloxicam is the only NSAID registered for cats in the United States; it is also registered for use
in cats in Europe, Australia, and New Zealand.
i.
 In-vitro study found that any meloxicam concentration producing COX- 2 inhibition always
inhibited at least 20% of COX-1.
i. One clinical study in cats undergoing onychectomy found better analgesia with meloxicam
than butorphanol.
ili.A short-term toxicity study following single dose in cats found no elevations in BUN, creati
nine, or buccal mucosal bleeding time after 24 hours.
iv. 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO or SC has been recommended for perioperative pain followed by 0.05 mg/
kg for 4 days. For chronic pain, 0.1 mg/kg followed by 0.05 mg/kg for 4 days then to the
lowest effective dose every 24-48 hours.
v. 0.2-0.3 mg/kg SC once prior to or after surgery is recommended.
G. Carprofen
i.
 At the labeled dose, in-vitro testing found COX-2 inhibition at 100% with COX-1 inhibition 44%.
ii. Several clinical studies in cats report very effective analgesia after ovariohysterectomy, provid-
ing better analgesia than meperidine or buprenorphine, and no difference from meloxicam or
ketoprofen.
a. Only recommended for single dosing at 1-2 mg/kg SQ
X.
Alpha-2 agonists (medetomidine; dexmedetomidine)
A. Like opioids, alpha-2 agonists bind to G protein-coupled receptors, leading to a variety of intra
cellular messenger signaling cascades, which ultimately results in diminished neurotransmitter
release and inhibition of nociceptive transmission.
Chapter 7   Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients
73
1.
Alpha-2 receptors, like opioid receptors, are found in similar sites throughout the brain and
spinal cord.
ii.Dexmedetomidine, the d-isomer of the racemate medetomidine, is twice the potency of
medetomidine at equivalent dosage, but comparison at equipotent dosages finds little differ-
ence in quality of effects.
ii. One study found that only 40 and not 2, 5, 10, or 20 μg/kg of dexmedetomidine IM signifi-
cantly increased thermal thresholds in cats, and this response was less than that from a dosage
of 20 pg/kg of buporenorphine; however, sedation increased in a dose-dependent manner.
B. Not typically a first-line analgesic because of marked sedative effects; however, relatively low
dosage can potentiate the effects of other analgesics and sedatives; therefore, a multimodal phar-
macologic approach to analgesia is most effective.
C. Low dosage of continuous rate infusions (1-2μg/kg medetomidine; 0.05-1.0 μg/kg dexmedetomi-
dine) can be beneficial in cats requiring analgesia with anxiolysis.
XI.  Local anesthetics (lidocaine; systemic analgesia)
 s n d d   rd dd  e  a
experimental animals. Therefore, lidocaine continuous-rate infusions may be effective adjuvants
for preventing and/or treating central sensitization and hyperalgesia in cats.
B. Possible mechanisms include decreased neuronal discharge secondary to blockade of selective
sodium channel subtypes that are up-regulated after sensory nerve injury and neuronal hyperpo-
larization by enhancing inward potassium currents.
i.Lidocaine concentrations in the range of 0.6-5.7μg/mL are reported to provide analgesia in
a variety of species.
C. In toxicity studies, convulsive dosages of lidocaine administered IV to cats have ranged from 11.7
± 4.6 mg/kg to 22.0 ± 4.4 mg/kg, and lidocaine plasma concentrations during seizures varied from
19.6 ± 5.5 to >100 μg/mL.
i.
 Subjective signs of toxicity such as dizziness occur in people at concentrations >Sμg/mL,
although plasma levels and clinical signs are not always well correlated.
D. Few studies determining efficacy and safety of lidocaine as an analgesic/anesthetic in cats have
been published.
i.
 No effect on thermal thresholds were determined when moderate lidocaine plasma concentra-
tions {up to 4.3 μg/mL) were achieved; no adverse effects were noted in that study.
ii. In an IV-regional anesthesia study in isoflurane-anesthetized cats, cumulative dosage of 6 mg/
kg 1% lidocaine over a 40-minute duration resulted in no significant decreases in blood pres-
sure or adverse effects with concentrations in ranges of 1.5-6.4 μg/mL.
iii. Lidocaine infusions administered to achieve target plasma concentrations decreased isoflurane
requirements up to 52% at a maximum concentration of 11 μg/mL {estimated dosage, 3.4 mg
kg). However, cardiovascular depression was dose dependent and became severe when con-
centrations exceeded 5pg/mL; investigators did not recommend lidocaine infusions for isoflu-
rane MAC reduction in cats.
E. The safety and efficacy of transdermal lidocaine creams have been studied in cats.
i.
 One gram of EMLA (lidocaine/prilocaine) and 15 mg/kg of ELA-Max (liposome-encapsulated
lidocaine) applied locally to intact skin were evaluated for determination of plasma concentra-
tions, possible adverse effects, and effcacy in minimizing discomfort for jugular catheter
placement in healthy and clinically ill cats.
a. Although some cats objected to catheter placement, minimal plasma concentrations were
measured in both studies, methemoglobin levels were negligible, and no adverse effects
were noted in any cat.
b. Lidocaine creams may be useful for minor surgical procedures such as mass removals.
C. Lidoderm patch placed along incision lines is effective and appears to be safe in cats.
74
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 7.6. Some common regional technigues and their indications. Parentheses denote alternative choice.
Procedure
Indications
Drug(s)
Dose mg/kg
Comments
Epidural
 Femoral, pelvic,
M
0.1-0.15
Total volume 0.2 ml/kg
 perineal traumas/
(bupren)
(0.01-0.02)
 Significant MAC
surgery
(bupiy)
(0.5-1.0)
reduction with local
(lido)
(3)
anesthetic
Epidural (fig. 7.3)
Sternotomy;
M (bupren)
As above
 No local anesthetic to
cranial-abdominal
0.7 saline
0.25ml/kg
avoid
analgesia
 Potential blockade of
autonomic or
respiratory function
Brachial plexus block
Traumas to forelimb,
Bupiv
1.5
Add equal volume of
(fig. 7.2)
distal to mid-humerus,
 saline for greater
elbow
spread; with nerve
locator less volume
recessary
Line blocks (along
C-section
Lido
4
Saline can be added to
incision lines)
increase volume 
Interpleural analgesia 
Postthoracotomy; chest
Bupiv
1.5 with equal
Evacuate chest tube first;
traumo;
volume saline
instill with affected
 upper abdominal pain
side down
Note: M = morphine I mg/ml; bupren = buprenorphine 0.3 mg/ml; lido = lidocaine 20mg/ml; bupiv = bupivicaine
5mg/ml.
Xll.  Regional analgesic techniques (table 7.6)
A. Local anesthetics applied via infiltration whenever possi ble can minimize intraoperative anesthetic
 concentrations and minimize post-operative pain and opioid requirements. Peripheral nerve blocks
with local anesthetics can interrupt the impulse flow from the painful area to the CNS.
 B. Recommended dosages for local anesthetic infiltration techniques
Lidocaine 1%; 2%: up to 4mg/kg
ii.Bupivacaine 0.25%; 0.5%: up to 2mg/kg
C. Epidural and spinal {subarachnoid l) administration of opioids, alpha-2 agonists, local
anesthetics
i.
Generally applied at the lumbosacral space (fig. 7.3)
a. In cats, the spinal cord ends at the cranial sacrum; therefore, subarachnoid penetration is
not uncommon.
b. Generally less volume (~l2 epidural) should be administered.
 Local anesthetics block all sensory input to the dorsal horn.
ii. Opioids, alpha-2 agonists are applied in close proximity to its target (receptors); lower doses
are required.
iv.
 Less systemic effects (opioids), longer duration of action (morphine) than when administered
systemically
V.
 Contraindications include local infection, sepsis, bleeding disorders
vi. Drugs used should be preservative free; may preclude the use of drugs not easily obtained in
this form (alpha-2 agonists, some opioids)
vii. Strict attention must be paid to sterile technique.
D. Detailed descriptions of regional techniques in cats can be found in Tranquilli et al. 2007.
Fig. 7.2. Needle placement for a brachial plexus block. (o) sixth, (b) seventh, (c) eighth cervical, and (d) first
thoracic spinal nerves; (e) tuberosity of humerus; (f) first rib. A 22-gauge 1.5-inch needle is placed in the axillry
a pys aus aui ds a ot id aud o u pp si apu aul us i ot joixod as
u o bybug I uidng ot po q u aus jo a  uui o oud poq io ps
2mg/kg and can be injected at the brachial plexus and as the needle is withdrawn. From Tranquilli, Thurmaon, and
Grimm2007.
Fig. 7.3.1
 The lumbosacral space has been palpated along the dorsal midine at a level immediately caudal to the
wings of the ilia. A 22-gauge, 1.5 spinal needle is being iniroduced perpendicular to the dorsum and is advanced
needle is in the epidural space. After the stylet is removed, a test injection of a small amount of air is made. When 
 no resistance is encountered, the syringe with morphine and bupivacaine is injected.
75
76
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Recommended Reading
Cambridge AJ, Tobias KM, Newberry RC, et al. Subjective and objective measurements of postoperative
pain in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2000; 217:685-690.
Gaynor JS, Muir WW. Pain behaviors. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW, eds, Handbook of Veterinary Pain
Management. St Louis: Mosby, 2002.
Kushner LI. Intra venous regional anesthesia in isoflurane anesthetized cats: Lidocaine plasma concentrations
and cardiovascular effects. Vet Anaesth Analg, 2002; 29:140-149.
Lascelles BD, Court MH, Hardie EM, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in cats: A review. Vet
Anaes Analg, 2007; 34:228-250.
Lascelles BD, Robertson SA. Use of thermal threshold response to evaluate the antinociceptive effects of
butorphanol. Am J Vet Res, 2004; 65:1085-1089.
Muir WW, Woolf CJ. Mechanisms of pain and their therapeutic implications. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2001;
219:1346-1356.
Pozzi A, Muir WW, Traverso F. Prevention of central sensitization and pain by N-methyl-D-aspartate
receptor antagonists. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2006; 228:53-60.
Robertson SA, Lascelles BD, Taylor PM. PK-PD modeling of buprenorphine in cats: Intravenous and oral
tra nsmucosal administration. J Vet Pharm Therap, 2005a; 28:453-460.
Robertson SA, Taylor PM, Sear JW et al. Relationship between plasma concentrations and analgesia after
intravenous fentanyl and disposition after other routes of administration in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Therap,
2005b; 28:87-93.
 Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ. Local and regional anesthetic and analgesic techniques: Cats. In Tranquilli WJ,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds, Lumb and Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th ed. Ames,
Iowa: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
phine or saline on thermal and pressure thresholds in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Therap, 2006;
29:531-537.
Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds. Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4th
ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell, 2007.
Wagner AE. Opioids. In Gaynor JS, Muir WW, eds, Handbook of Veterinary Pain Management. St Louis:
Mosby, 2002.
Wegner K, Robertson SA. Dose-related thermal antinociceptive effects of intra venous hydromorphone in
cats. Vet Anaes Analg, 2007; 34:132-138.
Wegner K, Robertson SA, Kollias-Baker C, et al. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic evaluation of
intravenous hydromorphone in cats. J Vet Pharmacol Therap, 2004; 27:329-336.Recommended Reading
Woolf CJ, Max MB. Mechanism-based pain diagnosis, issues for analgesic drug development. Anesthesiology,
2001; 95:241-249.
8
FLUID THERAPY
Garret Pachtinger
Unique Features
· Compared to dogs, cats are more susceptible to fuid overload resulting in respiratory distress.
Therefore, the patient should be monitored closely when using crystalloids, colloids, or hemoglobin-
based solutions such as oxyglobin.
● Feline vascular volume (40-60mL/kg) differs from canine vascular volume (90mL/kg). As a result,
fluid resuscitation needs will differ between cats and dogs.
decreased cardiac output in most species is tachycardia, cats can have a normal or bradycardic
response to shock.)
The goal of fluid therapy is to expand intravascular volume, restore circulatory function, and ultimately
deliver oxygen to tissues. Although in most situations the importance of fluid therapy is quite clear, there
are many different opinions regarding the type of fluid, volume of fluid, and rate of fluid to be administered.
Fortunately, as long as the heart and kidneys are working appropriately, normal homeostatic mechanisms
pnbau adeaun pun yyap piy al jo uoewsa aui un oua jo urew aqeuosn e moe
1.
Crystalloid solutions (table 8.1)
a. Electrolyte solutions are considered the mainstay of fluid therapy in veterinary medicine.
b. Consist primarily of water with a sodium or glucose base, plus the addition of other electrolytes
and/or buffers
C. Can be used as maintenance or replacement solutions
d. May be isotonic, hypotonic, or hypertonic based on the sodium concentration and osmolality of the
fluid:
i. Isotonic crystalloids contain a sodium concentration or osmolality similar to that of the cells in
the body. This is the most common fluid type used in veterinary medicine. Examples include
Normosol-R, 0.9% NaCl, Plasma-Lyte 148, and lactated Ringer's.
ii.H
Hypotonic solutions contain a lower sodium concentration or osmolality than the cells of the
body (0.45% NaCl, D, W).
ii. Hypertonic solutions contain a higher concentration of sodium or osmolality than cells of the
body (i.e., 7.2%-23% NaCl).
e. Using Isotonic crystalloids, only one-third of the volume administered remains within the intravas-
cular space 1 hour after administration; therefore, larger volumes need to be used as compared to
Other types of fluid (Griffel, Elgart).
77
78
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 8.1. Fluid categories.
Type of solution
Examples
Crystalloid
Isotonic
Normosol-R@, 0.9% NaCl, Plasma-lyte
148, lactated Ringer's
Hypertonic
7.2%-23% NaCl
Hypotonic
0.45% NaCl, DsW
Colloid
Natural
Albumin
 Synthetic
Hetastarch, dextrans, gelatins
Other
 Packed red blood cells, plasma,
Oxyglobin@, PN
Table 8.2.  Shock doses of intravenous fluids.°
Fluid Type
Dose
Crystalloid
40-60ml/kg: /4 to 1/3 given over 20-30
minutes. Reassess patient to determine need
for additional bolus or placement of fluid rate.
Colloid
2-4 mL/kg given over 20-30 minutes. Reassess
patient to determine need for additional bolus
or placement of fluid rate.
 Hypertonic saline
2-3 mL/kg given over 20-30 minutes. Reassess
(7.2%)
patient to determine need for additional bolus
 or placement of fluid rate.
° Doses are patient dependent and may need to be altered based on underlying
conditions such as cardiac disease.
f. Examples of situations when crystalloid fluid therapy is indicated include volume depletion second-
ary to the losses associated with vomiting, diarrhea, third spacing, or diuresis (polyuria), as well as
for replacement of intravascular volume seen with losses in shock and hemorrhage.
g. Shock dose: 40-60 mL/kg in the cat. Most patients do not require the entire shock dose, and it is
advisable to divide the total shock volume into two to four aliquots, giving each over 20 to 30
minutes and reassessing the patient between each increment to determine its effectiveness.
i.
An example would be to give a 5-kg cat in shock 75-100 mL over approximately 30 minutes
and then reassess to determine effectiveness and future plan.
II. Colloid solutions
a. When compared to crystalloids, colloids contain larger molecular weight substances, remain in the
intra vascular space longer, increase oncotic pressure, and increase vascular volume by retaining fluid
within the vascular space (Rizoli, Concannon).
b. Colloid therapy is often used in conjunction with crystalloid fluid therapy because colloids provide
intravascular volume while crystalloids correct both intravascular and extravascular deficits {table
8.2).
c. Use of colloids is generally considered when there is a low colloid osmotic pressure (<15 mmHg),
or a low total protein (<3.s-4), or when edema develops following administration of isotonic
crystalloids.
Chapter 8Fluid Therapy
79
d. Colloids can be divided into two categories: natural and synthetic.
i. Natural—albumin is the only naturally occurring colloid.
1. At this time, no species-specific albumin is available for cats.
 2. Plasma contains approximately 25 to 30g/L of albumin. If a 5-kg cat has a serum albumin
of 1.5 g/dL, the cat would require approximately 0.5 liters of FFP to increase the albumin to
2.5 g/dL (calculated using the following formula: albumin deficit = 10 × [Desired Alb - Patient
Alb] × body weight (kg) x 0.3)
 3. Although administration of plasma is the optimal choice for albumin replacement, the cost
of plasma, its limited supply, and the amount necessary to increase colloid osmotic pressure
make plasma an unrealistic choice for colloid fluid therapy.
ii. Synthetic—there are three types of synthetic colloids (gelatins, hydroxyethyl starches, and
dextrans)
1. Initial boluses of hydroxyethyl starch {Hetastarch) or Dextran 70 {not readily available
anymore) given at a dosage of 2-4mL/kg given over 15-20 minutes can be used in the cat.
 2. Maintenance therapy at 0.s-1 mL/kg/hr can be used for oncotic support.
e. The main adverse effects of synthetic colloid administration are coagulopathy and decreased coagu-
lability. When dosages >20 mL/kg/24h are used, coagulopathic effects become apparent.
III. Hypertonic solutions (i.e., hypertonic saline)
a. Provide rapid volume expansion with lesser volume administration.
b. Cause an increase in the osmotic gradient, which “pulls water" from the interstitial space and
intracellular space into the intravascular space, expanding intravascular volume.
c. May be most efficacious in patients with acute hypovolemic shock {and therefore normal interstitial
hydration) and may also be useful in resuscitation of patients with head trauma
d. Since the initial volume expansion is followed by redistribution, hypertonic saline should not be
used alone but followed with crystalloid fluid therapy.
e. Due to the large sodium concentration and osmotic pull of fluid from the interstitial and intracellular
 spaces, hypertonic solutions are contraindicated in dehydrated or hypernatremic patients.
f. A bolus of 2-3 mL/kg over 15 to 20 minutes is recommended in cats.
g. A recipe for administration of hypertonic saline with a colloid is to dilute 23.4% NaCl with 6%
hetastarch or dextran 70 (volume NaCl and volume colloid) to make a 7.5% solution of NaCl.
IV. Hemoglobin-based solutions
a. Oxyglobin (Biopure Corporation, Cambridge MA) is a purified, polymerized bovine hemoglobin
diluted in a modified lactated Ringer's solution.
b. This fluid can carry and release oxygen in a manner similar to red blood cells.
 C. Advantages of Oxyglobin include the following:
i. Long shelf life (approx. 3 years)
ii. Immediate oxygen carrying capability
becausethereisno requirementfor
2,3-diphosphoglycerate.
ii.  No need for blood typing/crossmatching
iv. Minimal risk of infectious disease transmission
v. Contributes to osmotic pressure, offering an additional advantage in hypotensive patients
vi. No known allergic reactions following repeat doses 
vii. Plasma half-life of approximately 24 hours
d. Disadvantages of Oxyglobin
i.
 Rapid fluid overload and development of pulmonary edema due to the high oncotic pressure.
i. Administration may cause a transient yellow-brown discoloration to mucous membranes, skin,
sclera, and urine.
iii. Fever
iv. Diarrhea
v. May cause an inability to measure certain normal bloodwork parameters:
80
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 8.3. Shock categories and causes.
Category
Cause
Hypovolemic shock
Loss of intravascular volume from hemorrhage,
vomiting, diarrhea, and severe polyuria without
 odequate polydypsia
Cardiogenic shock
Cardiac disease leading to a reduced cardiac outpuf
Distributive shock
SRS, sepsis, or anaphylaxis triggered by a
dysfunction of the microcirculation that leads to
inappropriate, widespread vasodilatation and
results in relative hypovolemia
Obstructive Shock
A mechanical interference with yentricular filling.
from pericardial effusion leading to tamponade,
caval syndrome of heartworm disease, aortic
thromboembolism, and intracardiac neoplasia
1. While the PCV may decrease due to dilution, oxygen carrying capacity, and ultimately
hemoglobin, can be measured with a hemoglobinometer. The hemoglobin concentration can
be multiplied by 3 to estimate the PCV (i.e., a blood hemoglobin concentration of 10 cor-
relates to a PCV of 30).
2. Oxyglobin may cause a transient red discoloration of the plasma resulting in the inability to
detect hemolysis. Furthermore, due to this red discoloration, certain chemistry analyzers that
use colorimetry may not give accurate values.
t. Dose: 5 mL/kg is recommended. Due to the high oncotic pressure, smaller doses should be considered
in patients with underlying cardiac disease.
V. Specific conditions requiring fluid therapy
a. Shock (table 8.3): A complex group of conditions that result from inadequate oxygen delivery to
tissues. While numerous classification schemes have been developed, clinically useful categories in
feline emergency medicine include hypovolemic shock, cardiogenic shock, obstructive shock, and
distributive shock (sepsis/SIRS; see chap. 3—Shock).
i.
Hypovolemic shock: can be either absolute or relative in nature
1. Causes of absolute hypovolemic shock: hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea, and severe polyuria
without adequate polydypsia
2. Causes for relative hypovolemic shock: anaphylaxis or the use of vasodilatory drugs and an
increased microvascular permeability
ii.
Cardiogenic shock: caused by a reduced cardiac output and often associated with cardiac
disease. The end result of cardiogenic shock is global hypoperfusion.
iii.
 Distributive shock: most commonly associated with SIRS, sepsis, or anaphylaxis triggered by a
dysfunction of the microcirculation that leads to inappropriate, widespread vasodilatation and
results in relative hypovolemia
iv. Obstructive shock: results from a mechanical interference with ventricular filling. Examples
include pericardial effusion leading to pericardial tamponade, caval syndrome of heartworm
disease, aortic thromboembolism, and intracardiac neoplasia.
1. From clinical experience, both hypovolemic and distributive shock syndromes respond to
correction of the underlying cause will more rapidly improve patient outcome. Due to the
underlying cardiac disease, fluid therapy is contraindicated in cardiogenic shock.
b. Dehydration (table 8.4)
i.
Treatment involves administration of crystalloid fluids to both correct the fluid deficit as well
as calculate and replace ongoing loss.
Chapter 8  Fluid Therapy
81
Table 8.4.  Physical assessment of dehydration.
Estimated %
Dehydration
 Clinical Signs
<4
Not detectable
4-5
Subtle loss of skin elasticity, "tacky" mucous membranes
6-8
Decreased skin turgor (when the skin is tented there is
α slight delay in return to normal position], dry
mucous membranes, slight prolongation of capillary
refill time, eyes may be dull
10-12
Prolonged capillary refill time (>2 seconds), dry mucous
membranes, sunken eyes, tented skin does not return
to normal position, possible tachycardia, and weak
pulses
12-15
 Pale mucous membranes, capillary refill time >3
seconds, signs of shock, dementia, death imminent
Table 8.5. Potassium supplementation chart.
Serum Potassium
mEq KCl to Add
Maximum Infusion
Concentration (mEq/L)
to 500mL Fluid
Rate (0.5 mEq/kg/h)
<2.0
40
6ml/kg/h
2.1-2.5
30
8mL/kg/h
2.6-3.0
20
12mL/kg/h
3.1-3.5
14
18mL/kg/h
>3.5-<5
5
25ml/kg/h
Note: Potassium doses should not exceed K-Max (0.5 mEq/kg/h) unless clinically required and only when extremely
close monitoring is implemented.
ii.The fluid deficit is calculated based on the patient's body weight (kg) and the percentage of
dehydration (see box 8.2).
ili.
 Ongoing losses may be caused by diarrhea, vomiting, polyuria (without sufficient polydypsia),
or other conditions that lead to an abnormal fluid loss.
1. Losses such as these can be estimated by weighing diapers. This can be performed by sub-
C. Potassium supplementation (table 8.5)
i.
Potassium is vital in the function of tissues such as muscles and nerves.
ii.
.Causes for hypokalemia include (but are not limited to) the following:
1. Anorexia
2. Diabetes mellitus
3. Administration of potassium-free or low-potassium fluids
4. Gastrointestinal fluid loss (vomiting or diarrhea)
5. Renal disease/failure
6. Hyperaldosteronism (Conns Syndrome)—a rare disease that leads to loss of potassium via
the kidneys due to the activity of aldosterone (see chap. 32—Management of Specific
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Other and chap. 34—Electrolyte Disorders).
7. Iatrogenic causes such as the administration of diuretics (e.g., furosemide).
82
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
iii. Signs of hypokalemia include weakness, ventroflexion of the neck, lethargy, mental depression,
arrhythmias, and death from respiratory muscle paralysis.
iv.  Potassium can be supplemented orally or added to intravenous fluids.
1. Oral supplementation can be done by administering potassium gluconate (Tumil-K, Daniels
Pharmaceuticals) at a dose of 2mEq/4.5 kg PO q12h.
2. If oral supplementation is not possible or severe hypokalemia is present, intravenous potas-
sium administration should be considered.
3. The amount of potassium to add to maintenance fluids should be based on measured serum
potassium. (When giving boluses of intravenous fluids, potassium should NOT be supple-
mented due to the risk of rapid hyperkalemia and cardiotoxicity. See table 8.5.)
4. If oral or intravenous potassium administration is not possible, subcutaneous administration
with solutions containing up to 30 mEq/L of KCL can be administered safely.
5. Potassium doses should not exceed K-Max (0.5 mEq/kg/hour) unless clinically required. If
required, strict monitoring should include heart rate, respiratory rate and effort, ECG, blood
pressure, and mentation. Frequent evaluation of electrolytes (hourly to no less than every 6
hours) should be performed as well.
d. Bicarbonate supplementation
i.
Usually reserved for a severe metabolic acidosis and pH disturbance fpH <7.1-7.2; base deficit
>10; bicarbonate <14mEq/L).
ii. Bicarbonate deficit equation (mEq of bicarbonate to administer):
1. 0.3 × Bw(Kg) × {24 - patient bicarbonate)
2. One-fourth to one-third of this deficit should be given slowly over 2 to 4 hours.
 3. Alternatively, 1-3 mEq/kg can be administered with 1 mEq/kg for mild acidosis and 3 mEq/
kg for severe acidosis.
4. Blood gases should be taken after completion of this aliquot to determine if additional bicar-
bonate administration is necessary {i.e., if the patient pH is still less than 7.2 or clinical signs
related to acidemia such as decreased response to pressor therapy, etc.)
 5. Bicarbonate administration is not recommended if blood gases are not available.
 6. Bicarbonate is not recommended if there is a respiratory dysfunction leading to an already
elevated CO2 as bicarbonate will be broken down into H2O and CO2, further exacerbating
the existing respiratory compromise and hypercapnea.
7. Complications of bicarbonate administration include hypernatremia, hyperosmolality, and
additional electrolyte disturbances (decrease in ionized calcium and potassium) due to its
alkalinizing effects.
e. Maintenance fluid therapy (box 8.1)
i. Defined as the volume needed per day for fluid balance (i.e., the intake of fluids should be equal
to the loss of fluids).
i. Daily fluid requirements (mL/kg/day) parallel daily energy requirements (kcal/kg/day).
ii. Normal feline energy requirements are 50-60 kcal/kg/day. Therefore, a rough estimate for fluid
balance would be 50-60 mL/kg/day for the maintenance fluid requirement (see box 8.2).
iv.  Alternatively, an approximate dose for fluid maintenance is 2-3mL/kg/h.
f. Ongoing loss therapy
i. The amount lost through vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria, and so on that should be measured/
estimated and then added to the maintenance and dehydration fluid calculations
1. Example: A 5-kg patient is estimated to be vomiting approximately 10mL every 4 hours.
24 hours/4 hours = 6 episodes in 24 hours
6 vomiting episodes ×10 mL = 60 mL
Therefore, the patient's ongoing loss is estimated to be 60 mL over 24 hours.
Chapter 8 Fluid Therapy
83
Box 8.1. Fluid calculations.
Feline maintenance fluid administration:50-60 mL/kg/24 hours
Fluid deficit from dehydration (in mL) =  % Dehydration × body weight (kg) × 1,000 mL
Ongoing losses per hour in mL:  Estimation of loss/24 hours
g. Fluid diuresis
1. The goals are to increase the glomerular filtration rate, increase renal perfusion, and enhance the
renal excretory function.
2. Specific disease states where fluid diuresis may be considered include renal disease to eliminate
renal toxins and improve azotemia as well as in cases of toxin ingestion to hasten the elimination
 Of toxins that are excreted by the kidneys.
3. In these situations, crystalloid fluids are the fluids of choice.
4. Fluid rates required to induce a sufficient diuresis can be as high as 2-4 times a patient's main-
tenance requirements. Expected urine output for adequate fluid diuresis is 2-6 mL/kg/h.
5. "Ins" and "outs" should be measured every 2-4 hours. A urinary catheter with a closed collec-
tion system is recommended to allow accurate monitoring and calculation of "outs."
6. During fluid diuresis, careful monitoring should be made for signs of fluid overload such as abnor-
mal lung sounds (crackles), generalized edema, hypertension, or jugular venous distension.
VI. Constant rate infusion {CRI) formulas
Formula 1:
[CRI dose (mg/kg hr)xbody weight (kg)×bag volume (mL)] + fluid rate (mL/hr) = dose of
drug (mg) to add to bag
Example: Morphine CRI at 0.1 mg/kg/hr for 10-kg cat with IV fluid rate of 20mL/hr:
(0.1 mg/kg hr x10 kg x1,000 mL)+ 20 mL/hr = 50 mg added to a 1-L bag
Formula 2 (for vse if multiple CRl medications will be needed at the
same time):
Fluids will run at 1 mL/kg/hr
CRI dose (mg/kg hr)×bag volume (mL) = dose (mg)to add to bag
Additional maintenance fluids will need to be piggy-backed or placed through another catheter if addi-
tional fluids are required, as the CRI rate for this formula will only be 1 ml/kg/hr.
Formula 3:
Dosage (μg/kg min)x W (kg)= mg to add to 250 mL base solution at a rate of 15 mL/h
Formula 4:
M=D×WxV/Rx16.67
84
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Abbreviation key:
M = milligrams of drug to add to the base solution
D = dosage of drug in micrograms per kilogram per minute
W = body weight in kilograms
V = volume in milliliters of base solution
R = fluid rate in milliters per hour
16.67 = conversion factor
To determine the appropriate R if dosage is adjusted, the formula would be:
R=D×W×V/Mx16.67
Box 8.2. Sample Feline Huid therapy case.
Example: A 5-kg cat with a 1-day history of vomiting and diarrhea. On physical examination, the cat
is 5% dehydrated (tacky mucous membranes, CRT 1.5 seconds, very slight decrease in skin turgor).
The cat is vomiting 10mL every 4 hours. PCV 45, TS 7.4, Na 153, K 3.2, BUN 41, Creat 1.8, Glucose
140.
 Solution: Use a balanced electrolyte solution and replace the deficit over 12 hours.
Dehydration
= % dehydration x BW (kg) x 1,000 = mL of fluid needed
= 0.05 x 5 x 1,000 = 250mL
Maintenance (x12 hours)
= 50-60 kcal/kg/day = 50-60 mL/kg/day
= 300 mL/day
= 300 mL/24h
= 150mL in 12 hours
= 150 mL for 12 hours
 Ongoing losses
= 10mL in 4 hours
= 30mL in 12 hours
Total
= 250mL + 150 mL + 30 mL
= 430mL/12 hours
= 35.8 mL/hour x 12 hours
Additives to the fluids:
Potassium is added to the fluid bag (14 mEq/500 mL) based on the KCL replacement chart.
parameters (heart rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate, respiratory effort, mentation), electrolytes, blood
 pressure, mentation, and continued losses.
References and Recommended Reading
Brady CA, Otto CM. Systemic inflammatory response syndrome, sepsis, and multiple organ dysfunction.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 2001; 31:1147.
Brown R. Potassium homeostasis and clinical implications. Am J Med, 1984; 77:3-10.
Concannon KT, Haskins SC, Feldman BF. Hemostatic defects associated with two infusion rates of dextran
70 in dogs. Am J Vet Res, 1992; 53{8):1369-1375.
Cote E. Cardiogenic shock and cardiac arrest. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 2001; 31:1129.
 a o  s    e    n  
Vet, 1992; 14:1.
Chapter 8 Fluid Therapy
85
Day TK. Current development and use of hemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying (HBOC) solutions. J Vet
Emerg Crit Care, 2003; 13{2):77-93.
DiBartola SP. Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid Base Disorders, 3rd ed. WB Saunders, 2005.
Elgart HN. Assessment of fluids and electrolytes. AACN Clin Issues, 2004; 15{4):607-621.
Gibson GR, Callan MB, Hoffman V, et al. Use of a hemoglobin-based oxygen-carrying solution in cats:
72 cases {1998-2002). J Am Vet Ass0c, 2002; 221f1):96-102.
Glowaski MM, Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN, et al. Effects of oxypolygelatin and dextran 70 on hemostatic
variables in dogs. Vet Anaesth Analg, 2003; 30(4):202-210.
Griffel MI, Kaufman BS. Pharmacology of colloids and crystalloids. Crit Care Clin, 1992; 8:235.
Gutierrez G, Reines HD, Wulf-Gutierrez ME. Clinical review: hemorrhagic shock. Crit Care, 2004;
8(5):373-381. Epub 2004 Apr 2.
Haldane S, Graves TK, Bateman S, Lichtensteiger CA. Profound hypokalemia causing respiratory failure
in a cat with hyperaldosteronism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2007; 17(2):202-207.
 Johnson AL, Criddle LM. Pass the salt: indications for and implications of using hypertonic saline. Crit
Care Nurse, 2004; 24(5):36-8, 40-4, 46 passim.
Kelly N, Rentko VT. Comparative cardiovascular response by Oxyglobin versus packed red blood cells in
acute anemia. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 1998; 8{3):252.
Kirby R. Septic shock. In Bonagura JD, ed, Current Veterinary Therapy XII. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders
1995.
Kumar A, Parillo JE. Shock classification, pathophysiology, and approach to management. In Parillo JE,
Dellinger RP, eds, Critical Care Medicine: Principles of Diagnosis and Management in the Adult, 2nd
ed. Philadelphia: Mosby, 2001.
Mendez CM, McClain CJ, Marsano LS. Albumin in clinical practice. Nutr Clin Pract, 2005;
20(3):314-320.
Moore KE, Murtaugh RJ. Pathophysiologic characteristics of hypovolemic shock, Vet Clin North Am Smal
Anim Prac, 2001; 31:1175.
Muir WW. Overview of shock. In proceedings of the 14th annual Kal Kan Symposium Emergency/Critical
Care, Columbus, OH, 1990, p. 7.
Orton EC, Muir Ww. Hemodynamics during experimental gastric dilitation and volvulus in dogs. Am J
Vet Res, 1983; 44:1512-1515.
Rahilly L. Hypoalbuminemia: pathophysiology and treatment. Conference Proceedings, International
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care Symposium, 2006.
Rixen D, Siegel JH. Bench-to-bedside review: oxygen debt and its metabolic correlates as quantifiers of the
severity of hemorrhagic and post-traumatic shock. Crit Care, 2005; 9(5):441-453. Epub 2005 Apr 20.
Rizoli SB. Crystalloids and colloids in trauma resuscitation: a brief overview of the current debate. J
Trauma, 2003; 54 (Suppl):S82-S88.
Velasco IT, Pontieri V, Rocha E, Silva M. Hypertonic NaCl and severe hemorrhagic shock. Am J Physiol,
1980; 239:H664-H673.
Vercueil A, Grocott MP, Mythen MG. Physiology, pharmacology, and rationale for colloid administration
for the maintenance of effective hemodynamic stability in critically ill patients. Transfus Med Rev, 2005;
19(2):93-109.
Walton RS. Polymerized hemoglobin versus hydroxyethyl starch in an experimental model of feline hemor
rhagic shock. Proceedings IVECCS, 1996, San Antonio.
Wingfield WE, Betts CW, Rawlings CA. Pathophysiology associated with gastric dilatation-volvulus in the
dog- JAAHA, 1976; 12:136-142
6
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT FOR THE
CRITICALLY ILL FELINE PATIENT
Daniel L. Chan
Unique Features
1. A particular concern with hospitalized cats is the development of food aversion. For this reason,
stressful means for nutritional support such as force feeding or syringe feeding are not
recommended.
2. The importance of appropriate nutritional support in critically ill cats is highlighted by the develop
ment of hepatic lipidosis, which is usually secondary to another underlying condition and results
 3. Particular differences in the nutritional requirements of cats include a higher requirement for dietary
protein (6 g of protein/100 kcal of food consumed) and strict requirements for taurine and arginine,
explaining why enteral formulas designed for people are usually unsuitable for use in cats.
A. Importance of nutritional support
a. Loss or decrease in food intake is often the first sign of illness in cats. An important consideration
is that almost all diseases induce dramatic changes in energy and nutrient metabolism which puts
critically ill patients at high risk for malnutrition and its subsequent complications. Whereas healthy
animals primarily lose fat when fasted, sick or injured animals catabolize lean body mass when they
are not provided with sufficient calories.
b. Hospitalized cats are particularly stressed, which contributes to decreased food intake. Anorexia in
cats can be particularly challenging to manage and if left untreated can have serious metabolic
consequences.
c. An important point to make is that successful management of anorexia in cats is to reverse the
adde, suao Aq suea senoua kiduis io sunus aadde asn uu raueu uouo Arwd
tizing" food.
d. The goals of nutritional support include correction of nutritional deficiencies and imbalances and
e. Prevention of further catabolism of lean body tissue and reversal of metabolic derangements are
other important goals of nutritional support.
f. Because nutritional interventions are not without risk, appropriate nutritional assessment can help
select which patients are most likely to benefit from nutritional support and to help minimize
complications.
B. Indications for nutritional intervention
87
88
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Nutritional assessment identifies malnourished patients that require urgent nutritional support as
well as those in which nutritional support is likely to be necessary to prevent malnutrition.
b. Overt indicators of malnutrition include recent weight loss, poor haircoat quality, muscle wasting,
signs of inadequate wound healing, hypoalbuminemia, and lymphopenia. However, these abnormali-
ties are not specific to malnutrition and do not occur early enough in the process.
C. Key factors to consider in the nutritional assessment include the following:
i.Anorexia lasting greater than 3 days
il. Serious underlying disease (e.g., severe trauma, sepsis, peritonitis, acute pancreatitis, burns)
ii. Large protein losses (e.g., draining wounds, exudative effusions)
d. Patients with obvious protracted disease courses in which the patient is likely to be hospitalized for
Over 5 days should be strongly considered to receive nutritional support.
e. Nutritional assessment also identifies factors that can affect the nutritional plan, such as electrolyte
abnormalities, hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, or comorbid illness such as significant hepatic,
cardiac, or renal disease.
f.Appropriate laboratory analysis {i.e., serum biochemical profile) should be performed in all patients
 in which nutritional support is being considered beca use abnormalities may influence the nutritional
plan.
 g. Before commencing nutritional support, the patient should be rehydrated, adequately resuscitated,
that is, cardiovascularly stable, and have significant electrolyte and acid base abnormalities addressed.
C.Determine the route of nutritional support
a. If there are no signs of overt gastrointestinal dysfunction, for example, protracted vomiting or diar-
rhea that results in overt dehydration (>8%) or compromises intravascular volume status, the enteral
route of delivery should be chosen.
b. Enteral nutrition is the most practical, economical, and physiologically sound approach of delivering
nutrients. Except for feeding tube problems, there are fewer complications associated with enteral
nutrition compared with parenteral nutrition.
c. Even when enteral nutrition does not completely meet all of the patient's energy and nutrient needs.
delivery of food via the gastrointestinal tract is still beneficial in that it modulates gastrointestinal
motility, immune function, and maintains the integrity of the intestinal barrier.
d. For patients that cannot tolerate enteral feedings or in which there is concern for aspiration of food
aa pnous anou lerauaed aun 'eaudsap ro uounsap ieaauareud 'aduexa rog 'shemne aun ou
considered.
D. Enteral nutrition
 a. If the enteral route is chosen, the most appropriate type of feeding tube for that patient must be
considered.
b. Factors to consider in choosing a particular feeding tube include the anticipated duration of nutri-
tional support, the need to circumvent certain segments of the gastrointestinal tract (e.g., pancreatitis,
esophagitis), form of nutrition to be delivered {e.g, liquid diet vs. blenderized diet), suitability of the
patient to withstand anesthesia, and clinician preference and experience.
C. Feeding tube options
i. Nasoesophageal tubes
1. Technically, this is the simplest type of feeding tube to place (see figures 9.1 through 9.6).
2. This is a good option if only a short {less than 3 days) course of nutritional support is
a nticipated.
3. Patients that are unstable for anesthesia can have these tubes placed with minimal sedation
if any is required and topical anesthetic instilled in nasal passages.
4. Major limitations include using liquid diets only, patient discomfort, and requirement of
Elizabethan collars.
 5. Most nasoesophageal feeding tubes in cats are either 3.5Fr or 5 Fr tubes in size.
Chapter 9Nutritional Support for the Critically ill Feline Patient
68
Fig. 9.1. Underweight cat ready to receive placement of nasoesophageal tube.
Fig. 9.2. Placing local anesthetic nares. Note how the head is tilted straight up so that topical anesthetic will
follow gravity into the nasal cavity.
6. Correct placement within the esophagus should be checked by either radiography, fluoros
copy, or end-tidal CO2 measurement.
a. Tubes placed within the esophagus should not yield appreciable CO2 (fig. 9.6).
b. The tip of the feeding tube should lie in the distal third of the esophagus and not directly
within the stomach, as the lower esophageal sphincter may become irritated or
incompetent.
06
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 9.3。 Initial placement of nasoesophageal tube into nares. Note that initial placement should directed toward
the ventromedial aspect of the nares.
Fig. 9.4. Nasoesophageal tube has been placed the proper distance. Note how the exit of the tube is nearly Hlush
wih the lateral aspect of the nares and then is directed up toward the forehead between the eyes. The tube also
could be directed to the lateral side of the face, but whiskers should be avoided as this will more likely cause irrita-
tion to the cat.
ii. Esophageal tubes
1. This is probably the most versatile and useful feeding tube for critically ill cats.
 2. It is relatively simple to place, requires only short anesthesia (should not be placed with seda-
tion alone), and allows use of blenderized calorically dense diets.
 3. Most cats tolerate esophageal tubes without need of Elizabethan collars and can eat volun-
tarily with these tubes in place, compared with cats with nasoesophageal tubes, which may
not have an interest in eating.
Chapter 9Nutritional Support for the Critically ill Feline Patient
91
Fig. 9.5. Tube is secured to skin using a tape butterly and sutured or glued to the skin.
rot be detected if proper placement has occurred. If the tube is on the trachea or airways, CO2 will be detected with
respiration. Proper placement could also be confirmed by thoracic radiography. The tube should end in the distal
third of the esophagus and should not enter the stomach.
       s          
figures 9.7a through 9.7n.
5. The positioning of the tube should be assessed via radiography, fluoroscopy, or end tidal CO2
before use (see fig. 9.8).
a. The distal tip should lie within the distal third of the esophagus.
6. The most common sizes of esophageal feeding tubes for cats are 12 Fr and 14 Fr.
92
93
94
11104
95
Fig. 9.7. a through n. Step-by-step technique for esophagostomy tube placement.
at the level no farther than the ninth intercostal space. This moy require premeasuring the tube. Rather than
cutting the distal tip and creating a sharp edge, elongate the exit side hole using a small blade.
2.
The patient should be anesthetized and preferably intubated. While in right lateral recumbency, the left side of
the neck should be clipped and a routine surgical scrub is performed.
3.
A curved Rochester carmalt is placed into the mouth and down the esophagus to the midcervical region. The
jugular vein should be identified and avoided.
4.
The tip of the carmalt is then pushed dorsally, pushing the esophagus toward the skin.
The tip of the carmalt is palpated over the skin to confirm its location, and an incision is made through the skin
onto ihe tip of the carmalt in the esophagus. The mucosa of the esophagus is relatively more difficult to incise
than the skin.
6.
 The tip of the instrument is then forced through the incision, which can be slightly enlarged with the blade to
allow opening of the fips of the carmalt and placement of the esophagostomy tube within the tips.
The carmalt is then clamped closed and pulled from the oral cavity.
8.
Disengage the tips of the carmalt, curl the tip of the esophagostomy back into the mouth, and Feed it into
esophagus. As the curled tube is pushed into the esophagus, the proximal end is gently pulled simultaneously.
This will result in a subtle *flip" as the tube is redirected within the esophagus. The tube should easily slide back
and forth a few millimeters, confirming that the tube has straightened.
9.
Visually inspect the oropharynx to confirm that the tube is no longer present within the oropharynx.
10. The incision site should be briefly rescrubbed before a purse-string suture is placed, followed by a "Chinese
finger trap," further securing the tube in place.
11. A light wrap is applied to the neck.
96
Chapter 9  Nutritional Support or the Critically Ill Feline Patient
6
Fig. 9.8. Correct placement of the esophagostomy tube should be confirmed with either radiography or
fluoroscopy.
7. There is no minimal amount of time the tubes need to stay in place, and they can be pulled
at any time. Tubes can remain in place for months, if necessary.
8. The most common problems with esophageal feeding tubes are tube occlusion and cellulitis
at the skin incision site.
ili. Pharyngostomy tubes
1. This is technically a slightly more difficult tube to place correctly, and associated complica-
 tions are significant.
2. Pharyngostomy tubes have been largely replaced by esophagostomy tubes and are not
recommended.
iv. Gastrostomy tubes
1. Indications for placement of gastrostomy tubes (both percutaneous endoscopically guided
[PEG] or surgically placed)
a. Need for long-term nutritional support (greater than 4 weeks)
b. Need to bypass the mouth, pharynx, or esophagus, for example, mandibular fractures or
sites of radiation therapy
C. Patients undergoing endoscopic evaluation
 2. Placement of gastrostomy tubes (typically 22-28 Fr tubes) allows feeding of various blender-
ized canned diets, which may not be amenable for feeding via other smaller tubes.
 3. Placement of these tubes requires full anesthesia and specialized equipment.
v. Low-profile gastrostomy tubes
1. These tubes are generally used to replace a long-standing gastrostomy tube with a more
"cosmetic" tube when very long-term nutritional support is anticipated, for example, several
 months as in cases of patients undergoing chemotherapy.
2. The decision to use these tubes is based mainly on practical and cosmetic reasons rather than
medical reasons.
3. In cats, replacement of a standard gastrostomy tube {in place for at least a month) with a
low-profile gastrostomy tube requires general anesthesia.
vi. Jejunostomy or jejunal tubes
1. Placement of jejunostomy tubes is indicated when the patient necessitates abdominal surgery
 and there is a need to bypass a certain segment of the gastrointestinal tract.
98
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 2. A significant amount of technical expertise is required to place these tubes.
3. Major complications
a. Tube dislodgement and leakage around stoma site, which can prove fatal due to septic
peritonitis.
b. Diarrhea
i. Generally related to the composition or osmolarity of the diet, rather than being caused
by the mode of feeding
4. Feeding via jejunostomy feeding tubes is best achieved using liquid diets designed for cats and
administered as continuous infusions rather than bolus feeding.
5. A newer technique involves a "J-through-PEG" tube approach that circumvents the need for
abdominal surgery or a jejunal incision.
6. These tubes are considerably more difficult to place and increase total anesthesia time
dramatically.
7. J-through-PEG tubes are placed by threading a feeding tube through a PEG tube; the distal
tip is placed within the jejunum with the aid of endoscopy. The jejunal tube is grasped with
a biopsy wire and pushed through the pyrolus, and the procedure is repeated until approxi-
mately 20 cm of feeding tube is within the jejunum.
E. Parenteral nutrition (PN)
a. PN should only be considered for patients with overt gastrointestinal dysfunction such as protracted
vomiting, severe ileus, or diarrhea.
b. Inappetance is not sufficient justification for PN.
c. PN is usually a mixture of an amino acid solution with lipids and dextrose. Vitamins, trace minerals,
and certain medications can be safely added to PN.
 d. General considerations for using parenteral nutrition include the following:
i. Careful selection of patients most likely to benefit from this form of support
ii. The ability to place appropriate catheters (double- or triple-lumen catheters)
ii. The ability to safely compound and administer PN. Solutions are mixed aseptically, usually
through intravenous filters, and administered continuously via infusion pumps.
iv. Frequent monitoring for possible complications is imperative.
e. Measures to reduce complications associated with PN include careful patient selection and conserva
tive estimation of energy requirements.
f.Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN; table 9.1)
i. This type of PN refers to the administration of nutrients intravenously that are only capable of
meeting some of the caloric and nutrient requirements of a patient.
i.  This is designed for patients anticipated to return to enteral feeding within 3 days and for patients
in which total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is not feasible, for example, when a central catheter
cannot be placed.
ii. Because PPN is a “less concentrated” form of PN, its osmolarity is considerably less {approx.
800 mOsm/L) than that of TPN (usually >1 ,200 mOsm/L) and could be administered peripherally,
which explains why PPN is sometimes defined as "peripheral parenteral nutrition."
1. The decrease in the osmolarity of the solution in PPN is achieved by the use of 5% dextrose
as opposed to 50% dextrose. Additionally, the targeted amount of calories is between 65%
and 80% of resting energy requirement with PPN.
iv. PPN is perhaps associated with fewer complications as compared with TPN, and this may be
related to the differences in total calories delivered, composition of solutions, or different patient
populations.
v. PPN can also be used to supplement cats that can only tolerate small amounts of enteral feeding.
vi. As PPN is typically formulated with 5% dextrose, there is potential for fluid overload; the final
volume of PPN should always be assessed for appropriateness for given patients.
g. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN; table 9.2)
Chapter 9  Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient
66
Table 9.1. Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN) calculations
1. Calculate resting energy requirement [RER]
RER = 70 x [current body weight in kg)0.75 or
RER = [30 x current body weight in kg] + 70
RER = _
kcal/day
 2. Calculate the partial energy requirement (PER) 
 Plan lo supply 70% of the animal's RER with PPN:
PER = RER x 0.70 = _kcal/day
3. Proporlion of nulrient requiremenls according lo body weight:
(Nole: for animals ≤ 3 kg, the formulalion will exceed maintenance fluid
requirements.]
α. Cals 3-5kg:
PER x 0.20 =
kcal/day carbohydrale required
PER x 0.20 =
_kcal/dcy protein required
PER x 0.60 =
_kcal/day lipid required 
b. Cals 6-10kg:
PER x 0.25 =
kcal/day carbohydrate required
PER x 0.25 =
_kcal/day protein required 
PER x 0.50 = _
_kcal/day lipid required
4. Volumes of nutrient solutions required:
a. 5% dexlrose solution = 0.17kcal/mL
kcal carbohydrate required/day ÷ 0.17kcal/ml =  ml/
day dexlrose
b. 8.5% amino acid solution = 0.34kcals/ml
kcal protein required/day + 0.34 kcal/ml = _
_mL/day
amino acids
c. 20% lipid solution = 2kcal/ml
kcal lipid required /day + 2kcal/mL = — mL/day lipid
_ tolal ml of PPN to be administered over 24 hrs
Nole: This formulalion provides approximately a maintenance fluid rale.
Commonly used 8.5% amino acid solulions (i.e., Travasoll with eleclrolyles
provide approximately maintenance levels of polassium. Rales of other IV
fluids being concurrenily administered should be adjusled accordingly.
i. The indication for use of TPN in cats typically involves a case with overt and intractable gastro-
intestinal dysfunction. These patients have severe vomiting, diarrhea, and/or mala bsorptive condi-
tions, and it is anticipated that enteral nutrition will not resume promptly.
i. Patients with overt malnutrition, for example, greater than 15% loss of body weight, may not
'NI um paieaul isaq aq Aew pue Ndd yum pahoddns Aiaienbape aa
ii. Due to higher osmolarity and increased risk of thrombophlebitis, TPN usually requires central
venous administration, that is, jugular catheters or femoral catheters threaded to caudal vena
cava.
iv. In patients where placement of such catheters (e.g., double- or triple-lumen catheters) are not
feasible, PPN may be the only option.
 F. Calculation of caloric requirements
 a. The patient's resting energy requirement (RER) is the number of calories required for maintaining
homeostasis while the animal rests quietly.
100
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 9.2. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) calculations.
1. Calculate resling energy requirement [RER]
RER = [30 × current body weight in kg] + 70
RER = _
_kcal/day
 2. Prolein requirements
[g/100kcal]
Standard
6
 Reduced [hepalic/renal disease]
3-4
Increased [excessive prolein losses]
7-8
[RER ÷ 100] ×_
- g/100kcal =
_ 9 protein required/day
3. Volume of nutrient solutions required
α. 8.5% amino acid solulion = 0.085 g protein/ml
  prolein required/day ÷ 0.085 g/ml = - ml/day of amino acids
b. Nonprotein calories:
 The calories supplied by prolein [4 kcal/g] are sublracled from the RER to get tolal nonprotein calories
needed.
 g protein req/day × 4kcal/g = 
_ kcal provided by protein
RER - kcal provided by protein = --.
 lotal nonprotein kcal/day required
c. Nonprolein calories are usually provided as a 50:50 mixlure of lipid and dexirose.
20% lipid solulion = 2kcal/ml
To supply 50% of nonprotein calories
lipid kcal required + 2kcal/ml =
_ ml of lipid
50% of dexirose solulion = 1.7kcal/mL
 To supply 50% of nonprolein calories
 dexirose kcal required + 1.7kcal/ml = — ml of dexirose
 4. Total daily requiremenls
 ml of 8.5% amino acid solulion
ml of 20% lipid
ml of 50% dexirose
total ml of TPN solution to be administered over 24 hrs
Bupioosn apow Ndl ljiosoao1'a'j wnissniod buuiauoo uounjos pioo ouwo %s'g uowwoo o buisn aion 
lo this worksheet will provide polassium at higher than maintenance levels. TPN for animals that are hyperkalemic
 should be formulated using cmino acid solulions without electrolyes. Rales of other IV fluids being concurrenily
administered should be adjusted accordlingly.
b. Estimation of energy requirements is calculated as follows:
1.
 RER = 70(body weight in kg)0.75 or RER = 30(body weight in kg) + 70
C. Several factors impact the overall total energy expenditure, including level of activity and the effects
of disease processes on meta bolism.
d. Clinically, energy expenditure is difficult to measure; therefore, estimation of energy requirements is
the standard for calculating nutritional support.
i. Formerly, there was an emphasis on adjusting energy expenditure by simply multiplying the RER
with an arbitrary, extrapolated illness factor. More recently, this practice is purported to increase
rates of complications without improving outcome. Therefore, recent recommendations propose
initial caloric targets to be simply the estimated RER.
Chapter 9Nutritional Support for the Critically ll Feline Patient
101
e. One of the reasons for starting with RER is that the main purpose of nutritional support in critically
'ua uaiam aeau u insan ou 'shuaannbau ahesqns pue araua lodns o si saned 1!
f. Only after the patient is deemed to be recovering and tolerating feedings well should caloric targets
be raised, usually by 10-20% increments if there is failure to gain weight.
G. Types of diets
a. The choice of an appropriate enteral diet to be used for tube feeding depends on several factors:
i. The underlying disease process and presence of comorbid conditions
i. The size and type of feeding tube placed
ii. Access to veterinary specialized diets
iv. Owner ability to obtain and administer prescribed diet
b. Veterinary liquid diets
i. There are only a few products commercially available that are suita ble for cats.
1. Human enteral formulas lack several key nutrients, such as arginine and taurine, which
 precludes recommending the use of such products.
i. These diets are ideal for cats that have nasoesophageal and jejunal tubes in place, although liquid
diets can be used with any feeding tube.
ili. In certain critically ill cats, a slow continuous infusion of liquid diets through nasoesophageal or
esophagostomy tubes may be tolerated despite occasional vomiting. Infusion rates between
0.5 mL/kg/hr to 2 mL/kg/hr are recommended.
iv. One of the major disadvantages of liquid diets is the high fat and protein content, which may
not be appropriate for all patients {e.g., cats with steatorrhea or hepatic encephalopathy,
respectively).
v. The caloric density of most liquid diets is approximately 1 kcal/mL, which could translate to
large volumes of the diet being necessary to meet energy requirements.
c. Veterinary canned diets
i. Placement of larger feeding tubes, for example, esophagostomy and gastrostomy tubes, allows
feeding of more calorie-dense diets (some as high as 2kcal/mL). This results in smaller volumes
of food being administered at each feeding.
i. In addition to "critical care diets," almost any canned product can be prepared to make tube
feeding amenable. This usually requires blenderizing a canned diet with a certain amount of water
and sometimes straining the mixture through a sieve before being able to feed via feeding tubes.
ii. Examples of how common veterinary diets can be modified to make them amenable for tube
feeding are listed in table 9.3.
H. Role of appetite stimulants
[oe aun ueun rauen aseas auapun aul jo auanbasuo e shemie si uoissddns aadde se e
primary problem, the use of appetite stimulants is seldom recommended in the initial treatment of
critically ill cats.
b. The use of appetite stimulants while cats are hospitalized (e.g., diazepam) is usually ineffective and
not recommended.
C. The more appropriate use of appetite stimulants is when the patient is recovering from the underly-
ing disease and has been discharged from the hospital.
d. One of the main problems with the use of appetite stimulant is that while there may be a response
to these drugs, adequate intake is seldom achieved.
e. A commonly used appetite stimulant in cats recovering from illnesses is cyprohepta dine administered
orally at 2-4 mg q24h. This approach is not appropriate for severely ill hospitalized cats.
I. Monitoring and reassessment of the patient
a. As with all interventions, it is important to emphasize the role of close monitoring of patients receiv.
ing nutritional support.
b. Feeding tubes and PN catheters must be monitored for mechanical problems as well as infections at
entry site. Catheter and feeding tube sites should be evaluated daily for signs of inflammation/
infection.
102
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 9.3. Enteral nutrition calculations for tube feeding.
1. Calculate resting energy requirement [RER]
RER = [30 × current body weight in kg] + 70
RER = _
kcal/day
2. Product selecled:
Caloric densily of diel:
kcal/mL
 3. Total volume ho be administered per day
Kcal required/day =
_mL/day
Kcal/mL in diet
4. Adminislralion schedule
V of total requirement on Day 1 = —_mL/day [Day 1]
Total requirement on Day 2 and beyond = —ml/day [Day 2]
5. Feedings per day
Divide total daily volume into 4-6 feedings [depending on palient tolerance for feedings]
feedings/day
6. Volume per feeding
 Divide total ml/day by the number of feedings per day
=—_ml/feeding [Day 1]
mL/feedling (Day 2)
7. Diet oplions
A. Nasoesophageal and jejunoslomy tubes
1.  Liguid diels only
ii. QdiniCare Canine and Feline Formula [l.0kcal/mL] 
ll1. Human liquid diels unbalanced for cats
B. Esophagoslomy and gaslroslomy tubes
1. Eukanuba Maximum Calorie canned
Supplies 2.1 kcal/ml straight from can but needs further dlilution
1 can + 50ml waler = 1.6 kcal/ml
1 can + 25 ml water = 1.8kcal/ml [for larger lubes]
i1. Hill's a/d canned
Supplies 1.3kcal/ml straight from can but needs further dilution
1 can + 50ml water = 1.0kcal/ml
1 can + 25ml water = 1.1 kcal/ml
Ill. Royal Canin Canine /Feline Recovery RS canned
Supplies 1 kcal/ml straight from can but needs further dlilulion
1 can + 25ml water = 0.9kcal/ml
C. Recommended monitoring for patients receiving PN include frequent evaluation of heart rate, respi-
ratory rate, temperature, blood glucose, blood urea nitrogen, and triglycerides. In particularly
debilitated cats, monitoring of magnesium, potassium, and phosphorus is also recommended.
i. Periodic nutritional reassessment can guide whether there should be an adjustment of nutritional
support; for example, increase calories delivered by 20% if there is persistent weight loss in the
face of nutritional support or decrease or stop delivery of nutrition if complications arise.
Chapter 9 Nutritional Support or the Critically Ill Feline Patient
103
Recommended Reading
Chan DL. Nutritional requirements of the critically ill patient. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2004;
19(1):1-5.
Crabb SE, Freeman LM, Chan DL, Labato MA. Retrospective evaluation of total parenteral nutrition in
cats: 40 cases (1991-2003). J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2006; 16(S1):S21-S26.
Freeman LM, Chan DL. Total parenteral nutrition. In DiBartola SP, ed, Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-base
Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed, pp 584-601. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2006.
Mazzaferro EM. Esophagostomy tubes: don't underutilize them! J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2001;
11(2):153-156.
 Mitchel K. Preventing and managing complications of enteral nutritional support. Clin Tech Small Anim
Pract, 2004; 19(1):49-53.
 Pyle SC, Marks SL, Kass PH. Evaluation of complications and prognostic factors associated with admin-
istration of total parenteral nutrition in cats: 75 cases (1994-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2004;
255(2):242-250.
10
RESPIRATORY EMERGENCIES AND
PLEURAL SPACE DISEASE
Amy V. Trow, Elizabeth Rozanski, and Armelle de Laforcade
Unique Features
● Identification of the specific underlying cause will result in more effective therapy.
● Increased respiratory rate and effort due to pleural effusion should improve rapidly following
thoracocentesis.
· The average cat thorax will contain 200-300 mL of effusion or air before respiratory distress will
develop.
· Heart failure is less common than often believed.
I. Respiratory emergencies
A.Triage
a. Telephone triage
i. If the owner reports any concern for ability to breathe, increased respiratory rate or effort, the
ii. Ensure that there is no closer appropriate facility.
b. Waiting room triage
i. Complaint of potential respiratory problems warrants immediate attention and movement of
the patient to the treatment area.
i. Obtain brief history, specifically asking about signalment, rapidity of onset, cough, history of
heart disease, asthma, trauma, or any other respiratory problems.
B. Initial assessment (fig. 10.1)
a. Complete physical examination is often not possible (or recommended) initially in cats with severe
respiratory distress.
b. Clinical signs of respiratory distress include rapid, shallow, or noisy breathing. Open-mouth
breathing is occasionally present. Some cats demonstrate orthopnea, preferring to sit only in a
sternal/hunched position. Cats will often have widely dilated pupils and may have excessive sali-
vation. Cats with primary cardiac or pulmonary disease may have only been appreciated to be
lethargic at home; however, following a car trip, they may demonstrate overt distress. Note that
cats can have significant respiratory compromise primarily manifested only as increased respira-
tory rate until stressed, at which time full clinical signs of respiratory distress become evident.
C. Assess whether the cat seems to be in immediate, life-threatening respiratory failure. Note cya-
intermittent apnea.
105
106
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Cat with
No
Evaluate that problem
respiratory
distress?
Yes
Upper
Yes
airway disease
Likely heairt
most likely
disease
Loud sounds?
No
Yes
Increased lung
No
sounds, crackles,
Yes
Dull sounds;
wheezes?
abdominal effort?
Low temp?
Yes
Murmur?
No
Probably not heart.
Gallop?
Airway or noncardio-
genic disease
Pleural space
disease
Fig. 10.1. How chart.
d. If life-threatening state is assessed, cautiously sedate (if necessary) and intubate. Use of an opiod
and a benzodiazepine is recommended, such as butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg and diazepam 0.4 mg/kg
IV (medial saphenous vein often easiest). Propofol alone is a poor choice, due to its cardiovascular
depressant properties. Maintain on 100% O2 with manual positive pressure ventilation. Be pre-
pared to suction any pulmonary edema.
e. Allow the cat time (-10 minutes) to recover from the stress of transport in a low-stress environ-
ment with oxygen supplementation. Typically, an oxygen cage is used for this purpose, although
the cat should be closely observed. Other options include an oxygen hood or flow-by administra-
tion of oxygen with a mask or oxygen line if the patient will tolerate it with minimal stress and
movement. Prepare to intervene quickly (e.g., intubate or consider thoracocentesis if pleural space
disease is sus pected) if respiratory distress worsens.
f. Observe the breathing pattern and effort.
g. Proceed with physical exam. Assess for the following specifically:
i.
 Increased respiratory rate and effort or, conversely, intermittent (or agonal) gasps. If agonal
or intermittent apnea is present, begin CPR.
11.
 Evidence of abdominal or paradoxical breathing.
ifi.
 Upper airway noise/stertor/stridor; recall auscultation over trachea may help localize noisy
breathing to upper airway.
iv.
 Increased or decreased lung sounds
Chapter 10Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
107
V.
Crackles (fluid in alveoli, not specific for heart failure)
vi.Expiratory wheezes
vi.  Compressibility of cranial thorax
1. Decreased compressibility may indicate a cranial mediastinal mass.
2. Older cats can normally often have a decreased compressibility and can confuse this
diagnostic clue.
viii. Subcutaneous emphysema
ix.  Heart murmurs
X.
Gallop rhythms (may be best heard with the bell)
xi. Nasal discharge
xii. Cough (inducible with tracheal compression?)
xii. Rectal temperature (typically low with heart failure)
xiv. Assess degree of hypoxemia with pulse oximetry; this is often unrewarding in cats with poor
perfusion; prolonged efforts are not required.
h. Attempt to localize the disease to the upper airway, lower airway, pulmonary parenchyma, or
pleuralspace.
i.
Loud, noisy breathing—upper airway
ii.  Prolonged expiration with crackles and wheezes—lower airway
         o       
tion. Rarely, cats with severe lower airway disease {feline "asthma") may have decreased
lung sounds due to air trapping and inability to expire air.
ii. Tachypnea with crackles or increased lung sounds—pulmonary parenchyma; most often
cardiac. Pneumonia is very rare in cats.
iv. Rapid shallow breathing with abdominal component and decreased lung sounds—pleural
space.
C. Loud breathing: suspect upper airway disease
cats) may have noise only on inspiration, while fixed obstructions may have noise on inspiration
and expiration.
i.
 Laryngeal tumors are the most common cause of fixed airway obstruction (fig. 10.2).
b. Have a surgery pack and supplies available for emergency tracheostomy as well as a variety of
sizes (2.0-5.0 mm ID) of endotracheal tubes (box 10.1).
c. Sedation is helpful to place an IV catheter, although a complete oral exam may require brief
phone {0.05 mg/kgIV and diazepam 0.2mg/kgIV). Propofol {2-8 mg/kgIV) is usetul but may
result in hypotension and apnea. Avoid ketamine, as altered laryngeal function is possible, which
could lead to errors in interpretation.
d. Use laryngoscope to visualize glottis. Assess first for a mass lesion; if no lesion is present, assess
laryngeal function. Doxapram (0.5 mg/kgIV) is useful as a diagnostic adjuvant to temporarily
stimulate respiratory efforts if laryngeal paralysis remains a concern.
e. If a mass is present, intubation may be challenging. Smaller tubes, and careful observation of the
air flow (may be visualized as bubbles through the distorted lumen) may permit capture of the
airway. Excessive attempts to force an endotracheal tube into place will result in swelling and
possible hemorrhage when a mass is present. However, successful intubation is ideal for patient
care and complete evaluation.
f. Consider a tracheostomy (if orotracheal intubation is not possible and the tracheostomy will
bypass the obstruction) followed by a biopsy or debulking procedure. A biopsy without trache-
ostomy risks airway obstruction due to postprocedural swelling and bleeding. Informed client
consent about the potential need as well as risks and benefits (see box 10.1) of a tracheostomy
are warranted prior to proceeding with an oral examination.
108
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
业
Fig. 10.2. Note the mass on this cat's right (upper) arytenoid.
Box 10.1. Tracheostomy.
i.Make 2-3-cm incision on ventral aspect of neck, just caudal to thyroid cartilage.
ii. Separate the sternohyoideus muscles bluntly with hemostats and isolate the trachea. Stay on midline.
ii. Place stay sutures around adjacent cartilaginous tracheal rings if time allows, that is, if patient is
not in severe distress due to tracheal obstruction. If patient requires immediate intubation via tra-
cheostomy, place stay sutures after performing the tracheostomy.
iv. Once the trachea is visualized, incise the trachea between the third and fourth or fourth and fifth
rings for about one-half circumference of the trachea. A longitudal (between rings) or a t-shaped
incision are both accepta ble.
v. Place 3-4-mm endotracheal or tracheostomy tube into the tracheal incision and begin positive pres
sure ventilation. Do not inflate cuff unless cat is maintained on ventilator.
vi. Place stay sutures around adjacent cartilaginous tracheal rings. It is ideal to place sutures prior to
incision, but in emergent situations, time may not allow that.
g. Tracheostomies may be lifesaving procedures but are associated with some risks, especially in
cats. Specifically, due to the small size of the trachea and the general reactivity of the feline airway,
the tube is at increased risk to get clogged with mucus or dislodged (see box 10.1). Cats with
tracheostomy tubes in place should be carefully observed, and all personnel should be familiar
with replacement of the tube. Additional recommendations include placement of a “trach kit" by
the cage of the cat, which includes a new tube, Q-tips, scissors, syringe/needle, and propofol, so
that valua ble time is not lost gathering supplies in the event of a crisis.
D. Rapid, smooth, shallow breathing with crackles or harsh lung sounds suggests pulmonary parenchy-
mal disease such as cardiogenic pulmonary edema (congestive heart failure), noncardiogenic pulmo-
nary edema (secondary to choking/upper airway obstruction, electrocution, seizures or head trauma ),
Chapter 10 Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
109
endomyocarditis/inflammatory lung lesions, pulmonary hemorrhage (coagulopathy, neoplasia), con-
tusions, infiltrative disease (bacterial pneumonia, fungal, toxoplasmosis, lymphoma), smoke, or other
toxin inhalation.
a. The most common parenchymal diseases in cats that present with respiratory distress are cardio
genic pulmonary edema or endomyocarditis/nonspecific inflammatory lung lesions.
b. If cardiogenic pulmonary edema is suspected based on the rest of PE fe.g., heart murmur, gallop
rhythm, low rectal temperature) and history, administer Furosemide (1-4 mg/kgIV or IM; avoid
SQ as systemic absorption may be compromised with poor cardiac output). If pulmonary edema
suspected, let cat rest in oxygen.
c. Nitroglycerine paste may be used with very strong suspicion of heart failure based on auscultation
of heart murmur, history of heart disease, pleural effusion, and/or cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Place 14 inch topically; may be used for venodilation.
d. If respiratory failure appears imminent, intubate patient for mechanical ventilation.
i. Induction: Hydromorphone 0.05 mg/kgIV and Diazepam 0.2 mg/kgIV
ii. Intubation: 3 or 4 endotracheal tube
ii. Ventilation: ventilator, anesthesia machine, or ambu bag with 100% oxygen
1. Start breathing for the patient at 10-20 breaths per minute. Inspiratory time should be
2. Minute ventilation {or oxygen flow) requirements are 150-250 mL/kg/min.
3. Maintain airway pressure at <20 cm HzO. Patients with severe parenchymal disease may
require higher peak airway pressures, but higher peak airway pressures can be associated
saturation >90%.
4. PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure) valves may be helpful in keeping small airways
 and alveoli open and increasing oxygen saturation.
S. A deep breath to 30 cmHzO every half hour can help decrease small airway collapse also.
6. Monitor pulse oximetry, end-tidal CO2, and arterial blood gas if possible. Arterial blood
 gas sampling is very challenging in cats and often limited to anesthetized patients, and it
is not indicated in awake feline patients with respiratory distress.
 7. Do tracheal wash while intubated to help with diagnosis if indicated.
e. Once patient is stabilized, proceed with thoracic radiographs.
i. With patchy or perihilar alveolar pattern +/- enlarged cardiac silhouette, continue treatment
with oxygen and furosemide as needed and perform echocardiogram to determine cause of
heart failure.
1. Normal heart size in cats {use standard radiograph and vertebral heart size measurements;
fig. 10.3): patient may still have heart disease due to concentric nature of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
i. With dorsocaudal alveolar pattern and low suspicion of cardiac disease, research possibility
of noncardiogenic edema (determine if cat had experienced upper airway obstruction, head
trauma, electrocution, or seizures). Continue supportive care with oxygen.
iii. With diffuse alveolar pattern and no evidence for heart disease, test coagulation function,
including prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, and blood smear for platelets. If
coagulation function is normal and patient is assessed as stable, an endotracheal wash is
recommended for further diagnostics.
1. If endotracheal wash is not possible due to experience of clinicians or stability of cat, then
empirical therapy with broad spectrum antibiotics and furosemide may be necessary until
stabilization can be achieved. Intravenous formulations are recommended to minimize
stress and ensure delivery. See table 10.1 for antibiotic recommendations.
 E. Rapid shallow breathing with abdominal component and dull sounds; suspect pleural space disease.
a. Differentials include congestive heart failure, trauma, chylothorax, pyothorax, diaphragmatic
hernia, or malignant pleural effusion. In contrast to dogs, coagulopathy is rare. Heart failure is
110
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 10.3. Vertebral heart score (VHS) in cats. Measure both the long and short axis of the heart on a lateral
range is 7.5 ± 0.3 vertebrae (from Litster and Buchanan, JAVMA 2000; 216; 210-214).
Table 10.1。 Recommendation for antibiotic therapy in possible respiratory disease.
Potentiated amoxicillin (Clavamox)
10-15 mg/kg orally twice a day
Cephalexin
20mg/kg orally wice a day
Doxycyline
 5-10mg/kg/day orally per day; follow tablers wih
 syringe of waler lo try to prevent esophageal striclure
Enrofloxacin (Baylril)
2.5-5 mg/kg/day orally or slow IV (offlabel]
Ticarcillin/clavulanic acid
50mg/kg IV three limes a day
Note: Recall, cals are uncommonly affecled wih pneumonia; patchy infiltrales lypically refect another disease
process. The specific antibiolic used should reflect clinician comfort, availability, cost, and degree of clinical
illness. Other combinalions are also effeclive. Oral therapy is contraindicated in cats with respiralory distress.
the most common cause of pleural effusion in cats presenting with respiratory distress followed
by lymphosarcoma and chylothorax.
b. If heart murmur/gallop and/or hypothermia present, administer furosemide 1-4 mg/kg IM or IV,
not SC. Diuretics are much less effective against pleural effusion than pulmonary edema.
c. If able, place IV catheter for venous access.
a routine procedure with substantial benefits. However, complications are possible, specifically,
iatrogenic pneumothorax and reexpansion pulmonary edema. Iatrogenic pneumothorax is most
common in cats with chronic effusion; over time, the pleura become thickened and may be inad-
vertently torn by the thoracocentesis needle. In acute situations, the lung/pleural are rapidly self-
sealing; however, in chronic situations the pleural thickening prevents adequate seal formation.
 In severe cases, thoracostomy tubes or even thoracic surgery may be required to prevent ongoing
air leakage.
i. Reexpansion pulmonary edema (NCPE) can be a complication of relief of chronic lung collapse
due to effusion (table 10.2) or diaphragmatic hernia.
Chapter 10 Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
111
Box 10.2.Thoracocentesis.
1. Clip area over sixth to eighth intercostal space. Perform a sterile prep over clipped area.
2. Attach butterfly needle (21 or 23Ga) to extension set, followed by three-way stopcock and
12-30-mL syringe. Have collection container ready. In obese cats, a 1.5-inch needle or longer may
be required.
 3. Insert the needle through the chest wall. A distinctive "pop” may be appreciated by the more expe-
rienced operator.
4. Remove all fluid or air.
5. Determine the total protein of fluid and submit fluid for cytological analysis.
Note: A thoracostomy tube may be warranted in recurrent effusion or if a recurrent pneumothorax is
present.
Table 10.2.
 Types of pleural efusion and associated diseases. (Most feline effusions are modified
transudates.)
Type of effusion
Protein Level
 Cell Count
Other
Associated Diseases
Transudale
<2.5 g/dL
<1,000/μl
SG < 1.016
Heart failure,
hypoalbuminemia
[<1.5 gm/dl]
Modified transudate
>2.5g/dL
1,000-8,000/μl
Heart failure, neoplasia 
Chylous
1P/6g<
1,000-22,000/ul
Triglyceride
Heart failure, neoplasia,
np/bw00 1<
idiopathic, other 
>2-3x that of serum
Exudate (septic or
1p/60'E<
>5,000/μl
Bacterial, FIP, fungal,
nonseptic)
protozoal, parasitic,
neoplasia,
immune-mediated
Hemorrhagic
Trauma, neoplasia,
coagulopathy
ii. A thoracostomy tube may be warranted in recurrent effusion or if a recurrent pneumothorax
is present (box 10.3). NCPE is potentially more likely with application of negative pressure
to the pleural space via thoracostomy tube or when overenthusiastic ventilation is used. Lungs
will gradually reinflate on their own; peak inspiratory pressure should be limited to 20cmH20.
Reexpansion pulmonary edema is characterized by decline in oxygen saturation, increased
respiratory rate and effort, and/or crackles and harsh lung sounds.
F. Prolonged expiration, wheezes, cough
a. Suggests lower airway disease, colloquially referred to as feline asthma.
b. Administer dexamethasone 0.25-0.50 mg/kgIV or IM.
c. Consider bronchodilator therapy with inhaled albuterol or subcutaneous terbutaline (0.01 mg/kg)
Or aminophylline. Administer sustained released theophylline (Inwood Laboratory), 20 mg/kg
orally in the evening.
i. If concurrent cardiac disease is suspected or can't be excluded, you may wish to avoid terbu-
taline due to beta effects, which could cause detrimental increase in heart rate.
d. Most (all) lower airway disease cats should show prompt improvement following beta-2 (alb-
uterol) and steroid therapy. Failure to improve within 8-12 hours should promote reconsideration
of the diagnosis.
112
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 10.3.  Thoracostomy (chest) tube placement
1.
 Establish vascular access first; gather supplies.
2.
 Preoxygenate for 5 minutes prior to anesthesia if possible; induce general anesthesia. Most clinicians
prefer to place chest tubes in anesthetized cats unless their condition is moribund. Use cardio
protective anesthetic protocols and try to limit anesthesia time.
3.
 Intubate, ventilate, and maintain on 100% oxygen.
4.
 Monitor with continuous EKG, pulse oximetry, and assessment of anesthetic depth.
5.
 The cat may be placed in sternal or lateral recumbency at the operator's preference.
6.
 Sterily prepare the site, from 3rd to 13th rib, dorsal to ventral midline, and drape.
7.
Have assistant pull skin from level of 4th rib cranially.
8.
Make 1-cm incision cranial to rib at 7th, 8th, or 9th rib space.
 9. Bluntly dissect with hemostats into pleural cavity or carefully use sharp dissection. Trochar use in
cats can be challenging since their chests are so compressible—the chest often just collapses with
pressure on trochar instead of puncturing chest cavity. Therefore, it is often easiest to perform a
mini approach. Some clinicians prefer red rubber catheters for chest tubes in cats.
10. Once pleural space is punctured, start positive pressure ventilation (if not already performing).
11. Advance chest tube over trochar cranially.
12. Have assistant release skin to form subcutaneous tunnel to decrease risk of pneumothorax and
infection.
13. Place purse-string suture around chest tube entrance into skin to secure tube location. Some clini-
cians also like to place suture through skin and around tube at midway point of subcutaneous
tunnel for added security.
                 
15. Attach adaptors and chest tube extension set with three-way stopcock and injection caps.
16. Evacuate and clamp tube for additional security in case adaptor, extension, or stopcock comes off.
17. Assure familiarity with chest tube care among all hospital personnel.
G. Hypoventilation
a. Suggests brain, cervical spinal cord (diaphragmatic nerve damage), or lower motor neuron disease.
b. Evaluate arterial PCO2 or end-tidal CO2; consider mechanical ventilation. Pulse oximetry is
insensitive for determining hypoventilation, particularly in the face of supplemental oxygen.
Additionally, end-tidal CO2 analysis may provide a false sense of security, and normal values
should not be taken to indicate that hypoventilation is not present.
c. If severe altered mentation is present, in addition to careful monitoring and ventilatory support,
consider the possible presence of cerebral edema and administer dexamethasone 0.25 mg/kg IV
and mannitol 0.5-1.0 gram IV over 20 minutes (see chapter 25—General Approach and Overview
of the Neurologic Cat and chapter 26—Neurologic Emergencies: Brain).
H. Further diagnostics for all conditions
a. Chest radiographs are warranted. It is often still possible to interpret suboptimally positioned
flms. Set up the radiology suite prior to moving the cat from the oxygen cage. Set mas, kV, and
plate and put pedal in easily accessible position if needed. Put on protective lead clothing before
getting the patient to minimize patient time out of oxygen. Only one view at a time may be pos-
sible due to respiratory distress. Avoid laying cat on its back for ventral-dorsal view.
b. Endotracheal wash
c. Echocardiogram and ECG
d. Thoracic ultrasound or CT scan for more detailed assessment of pulmonary parenchyma and
pleural space.
I.Client education
Chapter 10  Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
113
a. Respiratory distress is serious.
b. Specific therapy is more likely to be effective than supportive care.
 IIl. Pleural space disease
A. Definition
a. The area surrounding the lung lobes lined by parietal or visceral pleura depending on the surface
against which the pleura rests
i. Parietal pleura lines the body wall.
ii. Visceral pleura lines the lungs and organs.
b. Normally contains no more than 3-5 mL of a low-protein fluid
i. Mostly lubricant function
 B. Clinical signs of pleural space disease
a. Mild to severe depending on the volume of pleural effusion or severity of disease
b. Mild tachypnea to overt respiratory distress
c. Respiratory pattern
i. Exaggerated inspiratory effort, abdominal component is often noted
ii. The pattern of breathing can resemble signs of upper airway obstruction.
d. Decreased lung sounds on thoracic auscultation
i.  Most pronounced ventrally with pleural effusion
ii. Muffled heart sounds
C. Types of pleural space disease
a. Pleural effusion
i. Abnormal accumulations of fluid in the pleural space
ii. Classifications (see table 10.2)
1. Transudate
a. Protein <2.S g/dL, nucleated cell count <1,000/μL
2. Modified transudate
a. Protein <2.5-3.5g/dL, cell count <1,000-5000/μL
 3. Exudate (septic or nonseptic)
a. Protein >3.5 g/dL, cell count >5,000/μL
4. Chylous
a. Protein >2.5, cell count >500/μL
b. Gross appearance of milky white fluid (variable)
c. Contains chylomicrons and lymph
d. Does not clear upon centrifugation
e. Pleural fluid triglyceride and cholesterol concentrations
i. Triglyceride concentration >100 mg/dL
il. Triglyceride:cholesterol ratio <1
5. Pseudochylous
a. Grossly similar to chylous effusion
b. Associated with chronic inflammatory conditions of the thoracic cavity
c. Clears upon centrifugation
d. Contains no chylomicrons
e. Fluid is typically high in cholesterol but low in triglyceride
6. Hemorrhagic
iii. Diagnosis of pleural effusion
1. Thoracic radiography images
a. Small volume 
i. Pleural fissure lines
b. Large volume can be seen when fluid (pleural effusion) collects in fissures, which are
the normal divides between lung lobes. Fissures are not normally visualized on radio-
 graphs but become apparent when filled with fluid.
114
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i.
Obscured cardiac silhouette
ii. Rounded borders of lung lobes
ii. Retraction of lung lobes from body wall
 2. Thoracic ultrasound images
a. Fluid density (hypoechoic) surrounding lung lobes (see fig. 10.6)
b. Lung lobes may appear to be floating
c. Can help guide thoracocentesis
3. Thoracocentesis (see fig. 10.4)
a. 22-g needle with extension tubing and three-way stopcock
b. Butterfly catheter often selected in cats
c. 6th-10th intercostal space, aseptically prepared
d. Often immediate improvement in clinical signs
e. Complications
i.
 Pneumothorax with repeated thoracocentesis or chronic pleural disease
ii.Pleural hemorrhage
iv. Causes of pleural effusion
1. Congestive heart failure (CHF)
a. Common in older cats but can occur at any age
b. Physical examination findings
i.
 Shortness of breath
i. Cardiac murmur or gallop
ii. Distended jugular pulses
iv. Hypothermia is common
c. Diagnosis
Thoracocentesis
1. Modified transudate or chylous effusion most commonly noted
ii. Thoracic radiography
1. Pulmonary edema or pleural effusion
2. Enlarged cardiac silhouette
 3. Distended pulmonary vessels
4. Better visualization of thoracic structures when performed after thoracocentesis
ii. Echocardiogram
1. Evidence of cardiomyopathy
a. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) most common
b. Intermediate, restrictive, or dilated cardiomyopathy also seen
2. Left atrium distension supports a diagnosis of CHF
a. May be less dramatic following multiple doses of furosemide
d. Emergent therapy
i.
 Oxygen supplementation
ii. Low-stress environment
ii. Thoracocentesis (see fig. 10.4)
1. Removal of as little as 50 mL can vastly improve respiratory distress.
2. Large volume effusion often present (up to 350 mL)
 3. Both left and right side for best drainage
4. Radiographs ideally taken following thoracocentesis
a. Better visualization of cardiac structures
b. Help rule out other causes of pleural effusion
i. Cranial mediastinal mass 
iv. Furosemide
1. Loop diuretic
Fig. 10.4. Thoracocentesis performed in a cat with pleural effusion. Supplies include a 10-20-ml syringe, @
 three-way stopcock, and 19-2 i-ga butterfly needlle. Aseptic technique is recommended.
115
116
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. 2-4 mg/kg IM or IV
3.Repeat
 4. Always provide bowl of water
5. Avoid subcutaneous injection
a. Questionable absorption due to lack of peripheral perfusion
V.
 Nitroglycerine paste
1. Venous vasodilator
2. 14-inch strip applied to ear pinna or groin (Clipping hair away at area of appli-
cation may facilitate absorption.)
 3. Gloves must be worn for application.
 4. Efficacy questionable due to lack of peripheral perfusion
vi. Nitroprusside
1. Potent arterial and venous vasodilator
2. Intravenous, continuous infusion
a. Dose 0.5-2μg/kg/min
3. Rarely needed in the absence of severe pulmonary edema
a. Most commonly used for several hours—up to 24 hours in cats
4. Complications
a. Extreme hypotension, may be fatal
i. Blood pressure monitoring required
b. Cyanide toxicity with extended use (>3 days)
vii. Sedation, intubation
 1. Consider when clinical signs cannot be controlled with thoracocentesis, furose-
 mide, and oxygen supplementation
2. Control of airway
3. Administration of 100% oxygen
4. Sedative selection
a. Minimal cardiovascular depression
b. Diazepam (0.2-0.5 mg/kg)
c. Hydromorphone (.05-0.2 mg/kg IV)
d. Reversible
i. Naloxone
2. Septic pleuritis (pyothorax, thoracic empyema)
a. Definition
i. Pleural accumulation of purulent exudates associated with bacterial infection
b.Etiology
i.
Young cats
ii. Access to outdoors, multicat household
ili. Seasonal variation
1. Most common in summer and fall months
C. Causes of septic pleuritis
i.
 Direct inoculation
1. Penetrating bite wound 0.05 over thorax
a. Often not documented
 2. Complications of thoracic trauma, surgery
ii. Ruptured lung lobe abscess
ili. Bronchopneumonia
iv. Esophageal rupture
v. Migrating foreign body
vi. Parasitic migration
Chapter 10 Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
117
d. Clinical signs
i.  Most common
1. Tachypnea or dyspnea
2. Reduced appetite
3. Lethargy
ii. Other clinical signs
1. Hypersalivation
2.(
Cough (rare)
 3. Ocular or nasal discharge
e. Physical examination
i.
Tachypnea or dyspnea
ii.Fever or hypothermia
ii. Dehydration
iv.  Muffled heart sounds
V.
 Poor body condition
vi. Pale mucous membranes
vii. Cardiovascular collapse possible
1. Collapse
2. Mentation changes
3. Hypotension
4. Tachycardia or bradycardia
f. Diagnosis
Clinical signs of systemic inflammation (SIRS)
1. Not present in all cases 
2. Three of four criteria present
a. Fever (>103.5°F) or hypothermia (<100°F)
b. Tachycardia (>225 bpm) or bradycardia (<140 bpm)
c. Tachypnea (>40 breaths/min)
d. White blood cell count >19,500/μL, or <5,000/μL, or >5% bands.
ii. Radiographic evidence of pleural effusion (fig. 10.5)
1. Unilateral or bilateral effusion
a. Most commonly bilateral
ii. Thoracic ultrasound (fig. 10.6)
1. Echogenic effusion
2. Possible atelectasis or lung lobe abscess
iv. Thoracocentesis
1. Thick, malodorous fluid
a. Red brown or cream colored
v.Fluid cytology
1. Septic suppurative inflammation (figs. 10.7 a, b)
a. Primarily neutrophilic exudate
b. Intracellular bacteria
 2. Suppurative inflammation
a. Neutrophils only
b. Filamentous organisms on cytology
i. Nocardia, Actinomyces
vi. Bacterial culture
1. Infections often polymicrobial
a. Anaerobes and facultative anaerobes
2. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures recommended
118
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig.10.5.
 Dorsoventral radiograph of a cat with unilateral pleural effusion. The cardiac silhouette is shifted to
the left due to the effusion in the right hemothorax. There is Hlattening of the diaphragm consistent with increased
yolume within the thorax. The caudal aspect of the lung lobe margins are rounded, consistent with restrictive
pleuritis.
0:23:36
LEFT
THORAX
Fig. 10.6. Thoracic ulrasound image of a cat with severe pleural effusion. Note the echogenic nature of the
effusion and the associated fibrin tags.
3. Most common infectious agents
a.Aerobes
i.Pasteurella spp.
ii. Actinomyces spp.
b. Anaerobes
Chapter 10  Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
119
Fig。 10.7. a. Effusion cytolgy in a cat with pyothorax. Note the septic suppurative inflammation (predominance 
of neutrophils with intracelular bacteria).Here both intra- and extracellularbacteria along with degenerative neu-
trophils can be idenfified (photo courtesy of Dr. Joyce Knoll. b. Efusion cytology of a cat with pyothorax. Here
intra- (thick arrow) and extracellular (thin arrows) filamentous rods are identified. These findings are consistent with
either Actinomyces or Nocardia (photo courtesy of Dr. Joyce Knoll.
i.Bacteroides spp.
ii. Peptostreptococcus anaerobius
ili. Fusobacterium spp.
iv. Clostridium spp.
V.
Porpbyromonas spp.
vi. Prevotella spp.
g. Treatment
i.
 Oxygen supplementation
ii.Antimicrobial therapy
1. Broad spectrum, combination thera py
 2. Empiric pending results of culture and sensitivity
120
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Obligate anaerobes
a. Ampicillin (2.2 mg/kgIV TID)
b. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid (13.7S mg/kg PO BID)
c. Clindamycin ( 11 mg/kgIV BID, 5-10 mg/kg PO)
d. Metronidazole (5-10 mg/kg) IV BID-TID
4. Facultative anaerobes
a. Amikacin {15mg/kgIV SID) {Assure that renal function and perfusion are
adequate.)
b. Gentamicin (6mg/kgIV SID) (Assure that renal function and perfusion are
adequate.)
 5. Tailor antimicrobial to culture and sensitivity results
6. Duration of therapy 4-6 weeks
ili. Fluid resuscitation
1. Replacement fluid
a. Lactated Ringer's or 0.9% NaCl
b. Rate: 40-60 mL/kg/hr
c. Reduce rate when endpoints are met
d. Consider more gradual resuscitation in cats with known underlying cardiac
diseaser (see chap. 8—-Fluid therapy).
2. Goals
a. Improved mentation
i. Alert or arousable, sternal recumbancy
b. Normalization of blood pressure
i. Systolic >100mmHg using Doppler
c. Normalization of heart rate
i.HR 160-180bpm
d. Resolution of hyperlactatemia
i. Lactate <2.S mmol/L
iv. Drainage of pleural space
1. Thoracostomy tubes preferred
a. More complete drainage
b. General anesthesia
i. Control of airway (intubation)
c. Bilateral tube placement for bilateral effusion
i. 7th-8th intercostal space
d. Median duration S days
 2. Intermittent drainage
a. Thoracocentesis
3. Pleural lavage (initially 2-3 times per day, and decrease frequency as fluid
becomes more clear on initial aspiration or after initial flush drainage)
a. 15-20mL/kg warm saline
i. Instill and drain
b. Indications
i. Effusion that is thick or containing solid particles
ii. Persistent obstruction of thoracostomy tube
c. Major complication: infection
v.Thoracotomy
1. Rarely needed
 2. Persistent pleural fluid accumulation or cannot effectively drain with chest tubes
due to loculation and compartmentalization of fluid
Chapter 10 Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
121
3. Mass effect suggestive of abscess
4.Advantage
a. Complete exploration of thorax
b. Complete drainage
5.Disadvantage
a. Increased length of hospitalization
b. Increased cost of treatment
c. Likely increased pain and morbidity
vi. Prognosis
1. 60-70% survival in treated cats
2. Cost of care can be significant
3.Chylothorax
a. Definition
i.
Intrapleural accumulation of chylous fluid
1. Lymph and chylomicrons
b. Predispositions
i.
Older cats > younger cats
ii.
 Purebreed cats overrepresented in some studies
1. Siamese, Himalayans
c. Causes of chylothorax
Idiopathic
ii.
 Cardiomyopathy and congestive heart failure
ili.
Neoplasia
iv.
Heartworm disease
V.
Thoracic lymphangiectasia
1. Functional obstruction of lymphaticovenous junction
vi.
Trauma to the thoracic duct
vii.
Lung lobe torsion
vifi. Cranial vena caval obstruction
1. Tumor
2. Thrombus
3. Granuloma (heartworm disease)
ix.
 Diaphragmatic hernia
X.
 Fungal infection
d. Clinical signs
i.
 Dyspnea and cough most commonly noted
e. Diagnosis
Thoracic radiography
1. Radiographic evidence of pleural effusion
ii.
Thoracocentesis
1. White or pink, opaque fluid
2. Fluid analysis
a. Pleural fluid triglyceride concentration > serum triglyceride concentration
b. Pleural fluid cholesterol concentration:triglyceride concentration ratio <1
3. Fluid cytology
a. Primarily lymphocytes
b. Ratio of neutrophils to lymphocytes may increase over time
f.Treatment
i.
 Medical management
1. Low triglyceride diet
122
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Reduce chyle in thoracic duct
b. Often poorly palatable
c. Low caloric content
2. Rutin (50-100 mg/kg BID or TID)
a. Benzopyrone compound 
b. Stimulates uptake of chyle by macrophages
3. Intermittent thoracocentesis
a. Long-term effects
i.
 Restrictive pleuritis
i. Protein and electrolyte loss 
ii. Nutritional wasting
ii. Surgical management
 1. Failure of medical management
2. Persistent chylous effusion
 3. Mesenteric lymphangiography to highlight thoracic duct
4. Thoracic duct ligation
a. Most commonly performed
b. Omentalization, adva ncement of omentum into thorax
C.
May enhance fluid absorption. Thoracic duct gluing has recently been described
as another approach.
5. Pleuroperitoneal shunts
6. Pleurodesis
7. Improvement in roughly 20-50% of cases
a. 3-7 days following surgery
4. Neoplasia
a. Mediastinal or parenchymal in origin
b.Mediastinal mass
 Lymphosarcoma
ii.Thymoma
1. Must differentiate from lymphosarcoma
2. Must be removed surgically
ii. Branchial cyst
1. Benign lesion
c. Pulmonary parenchymal neoplasia
i. Pulmonary adenocarcinoma
d. Other
i. Lymphangiosarcoma
 lii. Metastatic disease
e. Clinical signs
i.
 Respiratory compromise
ii.
 Regurgitation associated with mediastinal masses
1. Likely esophageal compression
ii. Weight loss
iv. Lethargy, reduced appetite
f. Diagnosis
i.
 Neoplastic cells noted on fluid cytology
1. Lymphosarcoma most commonly noted
ii.Reduced compressibility of the cranial thorax
1. Mediastinal masses
ii. Thoracic radiography
Chapter 10 Respiratory Emergencies and Pleural Space Disease
123
1. Pleural effusion
2. Mass effect cranial to the heart
iv. Thoracic ultrasound
1. Pleural effusion
2. Mass effect cranial to heart
g.Treatment
i.
 Oxygen supplementation
ii. Thoracocentesis
iii. Exploratory thoracotomy
1. Lung lobe resection
2. Cranial mediastinal mass removal
iv. Lymphosarcoma is more effectively treated with chemotherapy than with surgery.
5. Diaphragmatic hernia
a. Definition
i. Protrusion of abdominal organs into thoracic cavity through the diaphragm
b. Causes
i.
Most commonly traumatic
ii. Peritoneopericardial
1. Abnormal opening between the pericardial sac and the pleuroperitoneal
membrane
2. Congenital anomaly
c. Clinical signs
i.
Respiratory distress
ii. Vomiting
d. Diagnosis
i.
Radiographs
1. Inability to fully distinguish length of diaphragm
2. Abdominal structures identified in thoracic ca vity
a. Liver, jejunum, stomach
3. Enlarged cardiac silhouette
 a. Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
ii. Ultrasound
1. Can be difficult to appreciate rent in diaphragm
 2. Abdominal structures identified in thoracic cavity
iii. CT scan
1. Not frequently required
e. Treatment
i.
 Oxygen supplementation
ii.
Exploratory laparotomy
1. Manual reduction of abdominal organs
a. Adhesions present with chronic hernias
ii. Exploratory thoracotomy required in rare cases
f. Complications
i.
Blood loss
ii. Systemic inflammation
1. Cardiovascular insta bility postoperatively
ili. Ischemic, necrotic bowel
b. Pneumothorax
1.
 Definition
1. Accumulation of air in the pleural space
124
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Causes
1．Trauma
2. Penetrating thoracic wounds
3. Iatrogenic secondary to thoracocentesis
a. Uncommon in the dog but common in the cat with chronic pleural effusion
4. Pulmonary parenchymal abnormality
a. Ulcerated pulmonary mass, abscess
b. Bleb or bulla
5. Secondary to severe coughing from feline asthma/bronchial disease
6. Secondary to tracheal laceration during endotracheal intubation
a. Pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema often present
ili. Clinical signs
1. Acute onset severe respiratory distress
 2. Diminished bronchovesicular sounds on thoracic auscultation
iv. Diagnosis
1. Thoracic radiography images
a. Lateral view
i. Elevation of cardiac silhouette off sternum
b. Ventral dorsal view
i. Retraction of lungs from body wall
v.Treatment
1. Thoracocentesis
a. May be sufficient for traumatic pneumothorax
2. Thoracostomy tube placement
a. If repeated thoracocentesis is required
b. Continuous suction
c. May take days for pneumothorax to resolve
3. Exploratory thoracotomy
a. If persistent despite repeated thoracocentesis
b. If lung pathology is suspected
i. Mass, bleb, bulla
4. Airway capture if severe external wounds present
a. Sedation, intubation
5. Supportive care
a. Pain medication
b. Oxygen supplermentation
Recommended Reading
Barr V, Allan G, Beatty J, et al. Feline pyothorax: a retrospective study of 27 cases in Australia. J Fel Med
Surg, 2005; 7:211-222.
Brady C, Otto C, Van Winkle T, et al. Severe sepsis in cats: 29 cases {1986-1998). J Am Vet Med Ass0c,
2000;217:531-535
Davies C, Forrester S. Pleural effusion in cats: 82 cases. J Small Anim Pract, 1996; 37:217-224.
Demetriou J, Ladlow J, McGrotty Y, et al. Canine and feline pyothorax: a retrospective study of S0 cases
in the UK and Ireland. J Small Anim Practice, 2002; 43:388-394.
Fossum T, Forrester D, Swenson C, et al. Chylothorax in cats: 37 cases (1969-1989). J Am Vet Med Assoc,
1991; 198(4):672-678.
125
 Fossum T, Jacobs R, Birchard S. Evaluation of cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations in differentiating
chylous and nonchylous pleural effusions in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1986; 188(1 ):49-51.
Fossum T, Miller M, Rogers K, et al. Chylothorax associated with right-sided heart failure in 5 cats. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c, 1994; 1:84-89.
Kerpsack S, McLoughlin M, Birchard S, et al. Evaluation of mesenteric lymphangiography and thoracic
duct ligation in cats with chylothorax: 19 cases {1987-1992). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1994;
205(5):711-715.
LaFond E, Weirich W, Salisbury K. Omentalization of the thorax for treatment of idiopathic chylothorax
with constrictive pleuritis in a cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 2002; 38{1):74-78.
Litster AL, Buchanan JW. Vertebral scale system to measure heart size in radiographs of cats. J Am Vet
Med Ass0c, 2000; 216:210-214.
Rooney M, Monnet E. Medical and surgical treatment of pyothorax in dogs: 26 cases {1991-2001). J Am
Vet Med Ass0c, 2002; 221:86-92.
Suess R, Flanders J, Beck K, et al. Constrictive pleuritis in cats with chylothorax: 10 cases {1983-1991). J
Am Anim Hosp Ass0c, 1994; 30:70-77.
Waddell L, Brady C, Drobatz K. Risk factors, prognostic indicators, and outcome of pyothorax in cats: 80
cases {1986-1999). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 2002; 221:819-824.
Walker A, Jang S, Hirsh D. Bacteria associated with pyothorax in dogs and cats: 98 cases (1989-1998). J
Am Vet Med Ass0c, 2000; 216:359-363.
11
UPPER ARWAY DISEASE
April L. Paul and Elizabeth Rozanski
Unique Features
+ Cats with respiratory distress are often fragile; proceed with caution.
● Supplemental oxygen and efforts to localize the source of the problem are warranted.
● Upper airway disease is characterized by loud breathing.
A. Physical examination
a. Nose
i.
Nasal discharge
1. Serous
a. Clear, watery consistency
 b. Represents non-specific irritation of the nasal mucosa
2. Mucoid
a. Clear, thick consistency
 b. In response to chronic, noninfectious nasal disease
3. Purulent
a. Thick, white, yellow, or green, with ropey consistency
 b. Due to either primary or secondary bacterial or rarely fungal colonization 
4. Mucopurulent
a. Mixture of mucoid and purulent discharges
b. Common with chronic nasal disease where there is bacterial infection or a necrotic focus
5. Sanguinous
a. Blood is mixed with another discharge
b. Indicates damage to the nasal mucosa or a coagulation defect (rare)
6. Epistaxis
a. Hemorrhage
i.
Head trauma
ii. Coagulopathy (particularly thrombocytopenia/thrombocytopathia)
iii. Nasal mass
iv. Infection
ii.Sneezing
1. Acute (sudden onset; may be paradoxical)
127
128
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Environmental irritant (pollen, smoke, air freshener)
b. Viral infection (often early)
c. Foreign body
2. Chronic (>2 weeks)
a. Sinusitis
b. Nasal tumor
C. Nasal infection (bacterial, fungal)
ii. Reverse sneezing—noisy, labored, inspiratory effort, possible orthopneic position with neck
extension and elbow abduction (uncommon in cats)
iv. Open-mouth breathing
1. Will have pink mucous membranes
 2. Unable to breathe through nose, not respiratory distress
b. Nasopharynx
i. Auscultation
1. Stertor—loud, coarse sound such as that produced by snoring or snorting
ii. Referred upper airway sounds
 C. Laryngeal and pharyngeal disease
i. Prolonged and labored inspiratory phase of respiration
ii. Auscultation
1. Referred upper airway sounds
2. Stridor; high-pitched audible wheezing
 3. Relative decreased lung sounds possible (if upper airway obstruction)
d. Trachea
i. Cough—spontaneous or elicited on tracheal palpation
ii.Airway obstructive breathing pattern—characterized by a slow inspiratory phase followed by a
more rapid expiratory phase if problem is cervical trachea. If lower airways affected, then the
reverse is true.
iii. Loud rhonchi—rattling in the throat
iv. Degree of respiratory distress reflects cause and severity
B. Differential diagnosis
a. Nose
i.
Feline upper respiratory tract complex
1. Feline herpesvirus-1 {FHV-1), also called feline rhinotracheitis virus {FRV), feline calicivirus
(FCV) and Chlamydia psittaci
 2. Opportunistic bacterial infections secondary to mucosal damage from above agents
 3. Pyrexia and anorexia
 4. Nasal discharge, sneezing, ulcerated nares, turbinate necrosis, severe conjunctivitis, and
ulcerative keratitis
ii.
Mycotic infections
1. Cryptococus neoformarns, other Cryptococcus spp. occasionally described
 2. Nasal discharge, pyrexia, anorexia
3. Nose is often disfigured (roman nose), enlarged submandibular lymph nodes.
4. Commonly feline leukemia positive
iii. Neoplasia
1. Adenocarcinoma, lymphosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma of the nasal planum and undif
ferentiated carcinoma most common
 2. Locally invasive with variable metastatic potential
3. May invade the cranial vault, which may or may not result in CNS signs, most often seizures
 and altered mentation
Chapter 11 Upper Airway Disease
129
4. Unilateral nasal discharge, sneezing epistaxis, epiphora, exophthalmus, facial deformity,
pain, and neurologic signs
5. Older animals
6. Absence of airflow through one or both nostrils
7. Deformation of the facial bones may be visible
iv.
 Allergic rhinitis
 1. Serous to mucoid discharge
V.
Nasal polyps
1. Inflammatory in nature
2. Originate from the ethmoturbinates
vi. I
 Parasitic rhinitis
1. Cuterebra spp.
vii.  Foreign bodies
1. Inhaled or migrated from the external nares or oral cavity
 2. Serous to purulent discharge
 3. Sneezing/pawing at the face
viii. Dental disease
1. Tooth root abscess may cause nasal discharge.
2. Oronasal fisula
b. Nasopharynx
i.
 Nasopharyngeal polyp
1. Proliferations of inflammatory tissue
2. Extend via the eustachian tube from the middle ear, and may grow into the external ear canal,
pharynx, and nasal cavity
3. Young cats—-average age is 3 years.
4. May palpate mass in the soft palate {under anesthesia)
5. Grossly the mass is pink, polypoid, often arising from a stalk.
6. Stertorous breathing, upper airway obstruction, and serous-to-mucopurulent nasal
discharge
 7. May see signs of otitis externa, head tilt, nystagmus, or Horner's syndrome
8. May remove with gentle traction (50% recur) or via a ventral bulla osteotomy
 ii. Nasopharyneal stenosis or webbing 
iii. Grass or other foreign bodies
c. Larynx and pharynx
i.
 Laryngeal paralysis—uncommon in cats
1. Inspiratory stridor
2. May be due to central and peripheral nerve disease or neoplasia, most often idiopathic
3. Owner may notice change in meow.
il. Granulomatous/inflammatory laryngeal disease
1. Irregular proliferation, hyperemia, and swelling of the larynx
 2. Upper airway obstruction
 3. Larynx appears grossly neoplastic
ili. Neoplasia
1. Squamous cell carcinoma most common, lymphoma and others reported
 2. Tumors originating in tissues adjacent to the larynx may compress or invade the larynx
3. Respiratory noise—both with inspiration and expiration
4. Inspiratory stridor and voice change initially, may progress to cyanosis, syncope
iv. Foreign bodies
1. Toys, plants, and cuterebra larvae
130
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. May act as a valve and restrict inspiration
d. Trachea
i.
Masses
1. Intraluminal
a. Neoplasia—uncommon
b. Granulomas, abscesses, inflammatory polyps (fig. 11.1)
C.
 Obstructive airway signs if impeding over half of the airway diameter (fig. 11.1)
2. Extraluminal
a. Causing compression of the trachea
ii. Foreign bodies
1. Large foreign bodies localize to the carina
ii. Tracheal trauma
 1. Subcutaneous emphysema
2. Respiratory distress if severe
3. Tracheal perforation/tear (fig. 11.2)
a. May be associated with intubation
iv. Stricture or avulsion
V.
Tracheal collapse
1. Rare in cats
EIEROPPOSUM
SUNIV.OFVET.MED
O,S171673
Mar 21,20081:16:59PM
MedicalSvste
SC819mm
StudyDesC:<SAVE,HR.GR
.OF VET.ZED
617:1
C128
W255
Fig. 1 1.1. CT image of a cat with a tracheal adenocarcinoma.
Chapter 11Upper Airway Disease
131
C2048
Fig. 11.2. This lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrates marked subcutaneous emphysema, as well as a pneu-
 momediastium, pneumothorax, and pneumoretroperitoneum secondary to tracheal tear from intubation.
C. Diagnostics
a. Nose
i.
 Routine hematology and biochemistry analysis
ii.
Coagulation profile for epistaxis; specifically platelet count
ii. Smear of nasal discharge, most helpful in suspected Cryptococcus cases
iv.
 Specific tests to identify the upper respiratory complex; rarely performed clinically unless a
specific etiology is desired
1. Fluorescent antibody testing on conjunctival scrapings, pharyngeal swabs, or tonsillar swabs
 2. Virus isolation on pharyngeal, conjunctival, or nasal swabs or on tissue specimens such as
 tonsillar biopsy specimens
 3. PCR of pharyngeal or ocular fluids
4. Bacterial cultures from the oropharynx (generally not helpful)
 5. Serum antibody titers—rising titers over 2 to 3 weeks suggests active infection
V.
Diagnostic imaging
1. Requires general anesthesia
2. Radiography
a. Two orthogonal views—lateral skull and a DV, dorsal ventral intraoral or occlusal or
an oblique open-mouth view
b. Assessment includes symmetry, bone, or turbinate destruction, masses, variations of
opacity and soft tissue changes
c. Interpretation can be difficult due to superimposition of structures
3. Computed tomography (CT; fig. 11.3)
a. Detailed view of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses with higher resolution and
sensitivity
b. Nasal discharge may be difficult to differentiate from soft tissue opacity
132
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 11.3.
 The CT image showed a nasal mass on the left side of the nasal cavity. Note the asymmetry and bony
destruction.
4. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
a. Greater soft tissue resolution than CT or radiography
b. Soft tissue opacities easily distinguished from nasal discharge
vi. Rhinoscopy
1. Allows direct evaluation of lesions and foreign bodies
2. Collection of biopsy samples under visual guidance
 3. Can examine the pharynx above the soft palate with a flexible endoscope
vi. Tissue biopsy
1. Performed blind or with a scope
2. Care must be taken not to penetrate the cribiform platethe medial canthus of the eye is a
 general marker for maximal distance from the nares.
3. Hemorrhage is a major complication.
a. Pack the nasal ca vity temporarily with cotton balls or gauze. Be sure to count the number
that you place so they may all be accounted for at removal.
b. Use of dilute epinephrine or phenylephrine applied locally may help to control
hemorrhage.
c. The ipsilateral carotid may be ligated if hemorrhage is not controlled.
vii. Cytology
1. Done by impression smears of biopsy samples
2. Can be useful to detect the presence of fungal elements, tumor cells, type of inflammatory
cells, and the presence of bacteria
ix.
Culture
1. Normally the nasal ca vity contains a mixed bacterial and fungal population.
 2. Bacterial culture is only considered significant if there is heavy growth of a single isolate.
 3. A positive fungal culture in a symptomatic cat is considered positive.
b. Nasopharynx
i.Radiography
Chapter 11 Upper Airway Disease
133
340
Fig. 1l.4. This CT image showed a large mass, biopsied as a squamous cell carcinoma
1. Soft tissue opacity above the soft palate
 2. Evaluation of the osseous bullae to determine the extent of involverment
i. CT or MRI may be used for more advanced imaging, although direct visualization is more usual
(fig. 11.4).
ii. Gross visualization of a mass in the nasopharynx, nasal cavity, or external ear canal
iv. Deep otoscopic examination
V.
 Doxapram hydrochloride at 2.2 mg/kg IV may be used to stimulate laryngeal function under
anesthesia when evaluating possible laryngeal paralysis.
c.Larynx/pharynx
i.Radiography
1. May identify radiodense foreign bodies, soft tissue masses, and soft palate abnormalities
2. Abnormal opacities may be misleading due to rotation of the head and neck.
ii. Laryngoscopy and pharyngoscopy
1. Anesthesia should be performed with short-acting injectable agents without prior sedation.
 2. Anesthesia titrated to allow visualization of the laryngeal cartilages with some jaw tone to
evaluate for laryngeal paralysis
 3. Deeper anesthesia is required for thorough examination of the caudal pharynx and larynx.
 4. Biopsy specimens should be obtained from any lesions found on examination.
 5. The clinician should be prepared to perform a tracheostomy in any cat if a laryngeal mass is
a nticipated.
d. Trachea
i. Radiography
1. Lateral and dorsoventral views
 2. Tracheal masses may decrease luminal size.
3. May visualize radiopaque foreign bodies
4. Hyperinflated lung may result due to air trapping caused by intrathoracic tracheal
obstruction
134
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
5. May reveal subcutaneous emphysema with tracheal tears (see fig. 11.2)
6. Pneumomediastinum with a cervical or intrathoracic tracheal tear (see fig. 11.2)
ii. Bronchoscopy
1. Can be used to visualize tracheal masses, tracheal collapse, tears, and foreign bodies
 2. Useful for obtaining cytologic specimens of masses or obtaining biopsies
D. Treatment/prognosis
a. Nose
 Supportive care such as hydration and nutrition
ii.Upper respiratory complex
1. Vaporizers
 2. Antibiotic therapy if signs are severe or if there is evidence of secondary bacterial infection
3. Amoxicillin (20 mg/kg q12h) Clavamox (10-15 mg/kg q12h) doxycycline (5-10 mg/kg q24h),
 Or Azithromycin (S mg/kg every other day) for 7-14 days
4. Lysine (125-250mg PO q12h, indefinitively)
5. Prognosis is good.
iii. Mycosis
1. Amphotericin B, ketoconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, and S-flucytosine. Antifungal drugs
should be used with caution and by individuals familiar with their possible side effects. For
Cryptococcus, the preferred regime is typically fluconazole 2.5-10 mg/kg PO or 25 mg/cat PO
q12h or 50 mg/cat PO once daily continued for 3-4 months after clinical cure. Amphotericin
B is reserved for more resistant cases due to the side effects (renal failure).
 2. Prognosis is good if just nasal involvement. The costs of therapy can be quite high, and clients
should be advised of this.
iv. Neoplasia
1. Surgical excision
2. Radiation therapy
3. Chemotherapy
 4. Prognosis is fair to poor. Tumor type influences prognosis.
v.Allergic rhinitis
1. Remove the offending allergen.
 2. Antihistamines are variably effective. The most popular is chlorpheniramine (1-2 mg q12h).
These may be continued as needed if the cat responds well. If there is no response, then the
medicine should be discontinued.
 3. Glucocorticoids; prednisone or prednisolone, 1 mg/kg q12h for 5 days, then taper to lowest
effective dose.
4. Prognosis is excellent.
vi. Nasal polyps
1. Surgical removal
2. Prognosis is good.
vii. Foreign bodies
1. Removal
2. Prognosis is excellent.
b. Nasopharynx
i. Polyp
1. Surgical excision
 2. Prognosis is excellent. Regrowth is possible if all abnormal tissue is not excised.
 a. A decrease in the incidence of regrowth has been reported in cats treated with a bulla oste-
otomy (versus simple polyp removal).
C. Pharynx/larynx
i. Laryngeal paralysis
Chapter 1l  Upper Airway Disease
135
1. Arytenoid lateralization; mildly affected cats may be treated avoiding stress. Some cats are
evaluated only for increase in inspiratory noise without distress; in these cats surgery is not
indicated due to the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
2. Prognosis is fair; aspiration pneumonia is possible.
ii. Granulomatous/inflammatory laryngeal disease
1. Prednisone—5 mg/cat q12h for 30 days, then taper. Or as clinically indicated.
 2. Conservative excision of the tissue
 3. Prognosis varies depending on responsiveness to steroids and surgical resection.
iii. Neoplasia
1. Surgical excision
 2. Complete laryngectomy and permanent tracheostomy if highly invasive
'su sususu nog nood pue shoun uajuaq iog suallanxa s sisousoid g
iv. Foreign bodies
1. Removal
 2. May require temporary trachestomy if severe airway occlusion occurs
 3. Prognosis is excellent.
d. Trachea
i.
Masses
1. May be removed via bronchoscopy
2. Surgical removal or resection
 3. Chemotherapy depending on type
4. Prognosis is guarded.
i.  Foreign bodies
1. May be removed via bronchoscopy
 2. Hold the cat upside down while under general anesthesia and gently but firmly tap the thorax.
3. Surgical resection
4. Prognosis is excellent although secondary tracheal stenosis is possible.
iii. Tracheal trauma
1. Cage rest for cats without respiratory distress
2. Surgical repair
3. Prognosis is fair to good.
12
LOWER AIRWAY DISEASE
Benjamin M. Brainard and Lesley G. King
A. Definitions: Lower airway disease
a. Feline asthma: An inflammatory (usually allergic) disease of feline bronchi characterized by reversible
bronchospasm and airway hyper-reactivity, epithelial edema, and mucous gland hypertrophy and
hyperactivity.
b. Bronchitis: A chronic, progressive inflammatory disease of the lower airways often clinically mani
fested as a cough.
C. Bronchiectasis: Irreversible dilation of bronchi, occasionally congenital but more commonly seen as
a consequence of chronic inflammatory or other bronchopulmonary disease.
d. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: A sequela of chronic bronchitis denoting bronchial obstruc.
tion due to inflammation, edema, and mucus secretion, accompanied by early closure of small
airways.
B. History, signalment
a. Cats presenting with emergent lower airway disease may be of any age, although a predisposition
for middle-aged to older female cats has been reported.
b. Siamese and other oriental breeds are overrepresented.
C. Common historical findings may include the following:
i.
Introduction of new cats to the household
1. Upper respiratory infections may be concurrent or may trigger clinical lower airway disease.
i. New construction or carpeting at home
ii. A prior history of cough or an asthmatic episode
iv. A change in seasons
1. Increased airborne allergens
 2. Initiation of central heating
v. The aeroallergens associated with tobacco smoke may also cause exacerbations of allergic airway
disease.
vi. Some cats with lower airway disease may have sneezing episodes or nasal discharge in their
history.
d. The use of potassium bromide for control of seizures has been associated with the development of
bronchial disease and coughing in cats.
e. These historical findings and clinical presentations are common to a wide range of inflammatory
diseases of the feline lower airway, which include allergic airway disease (classical asthma), chronic
bronchitis, and even bronchiectasis. Individual cats may display features of more than one airway
disorder.
137
138
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
C. Clinical signs, physical examination
a. Respiratory pattern
i. Because feline bronchial diseases are associated with bronchoconstriction and inflammation, the
end result is a decrease in the diameter of the airways leading to the alveoli.
1. Air flow into the alveoli is described by the Poiseuille equation, which relates flow to the radius
of the airway to the fourth power.
a. A 50% decrease in the bronchus diameter results in 1/16 of the normal flow through the
airway.
2. The airway diameter is slightly larger during inspiration because inspiratory muscle activity
exerts radial traction on the small lower airways. During expiration the opposite forces are
exerted, and there is early closure of narrowed small airways. Thus, while inhalation may
sometimes be difficult in asthmatic cats, the majority of the dyspnea is expiratory.
a. When observing the respiratory pattern in affected cats, the expiratory phase can be sig-
nificantly longer than the inspiratory phase, but this may be difficult to discern clinically.
b. Some cats display an increased effort at the end of expiration ("expiratory push") in an
effort to complete the expiratory phase of respiration.
 3. Exhalation is usually prolonged in cats experiencing acute bronchoconstriction, and associated
with recruitment and active effort by the muscles of the abdominal wall.
a. Alveolar air trapping due to early closure of the small airways can lead to overinflation of
the lungs.
b. Some asthmatic cats may exhibit a barrel-shaped chest due to air trapping. In these
instances minimal airway sounds are detectable on auscultation and the cat is in severe
respiratory distress, but overall this manifestation is relatively rare.
c. Excessive air trapping and barotrauma due to overdistended alveoli may eventually result
in the development of emphysema and occasional instances of pneumothorax.
4. Cats may present with clinical signs ranging from mild dyspnea to fulminant respiratory
compromise and cyanosis.
b. Auscultation
i. The presence of wheezing sounds on exhalation, and occasionally on both inhalation and exhala-
tion, is highly suggestive of bronchial disease. However, in most instances airway sounds are
described as harsh or increased.
ii. Cats may have a pronounced expiratory grunt.
ii. If there has been lobar collapse, or if there is concurrent pulmonary parenchymal disease, focal
crackles may be heard.
iv. Dull sounds are ausculted in hemithoraces with pneumothorax, particularly dorsally rather than
ventrally, as might be expected with pleural effusion.
c. Cardiovascular
 i. Cats in respiratory distress due to bronchial disease are commonly tachycardic and hypertensive.
In contrast, cats with congestive heart failure may be tachycardic or bradycardic and may be
hypotensive.
ii. Cardiac auscultation should be normal. The finding of a heart murmur or gallop rhythm should
prompt suspicion of heart failure rather than bronchial disease.
ii. ECG analysis may show sinus tachycardia, though if there is hypoxia, arrhythmias such as ven-
B             
abnormalities such as bundle-branch block may be observed. See chapter 17—Management of
Life-Threatening Arrthymias.
D. Pathophysiology
a. Bronchial disease, especially allergic bronchial disease, is multifactorial.
b. Classically, an immune stimulus, usually in the form of aeroallergens, triggers Th2 cells (T-helper
white blood cells, essential for antibody-mediated immunity).
Chapter 12  Lower Airway Disease
139
i. Th2 lymphocyte stimulation leads to allergen-specific IgE production, as well as chemoattraction
of eosinophils, mast cells, and basophils.
i. IgE cross-linked to allergens binding to mast cells induces degranulation and subsequent
airway hyperreactivity due to release of inflammatory mediators {e.g., serotonin, histamine,
substance P).
ii. Recruitment and degranulation of inflammatory cells cause thickening of the airway walls and
iv. Inflammation in the bronchial submucosa can cause hypersecretion of mucus by goblet cells.
v. Chronic allergen stimulation can also lead to formation of circulating antigen-specific IgG
and IgA.
C. Chronic inflammatory disease such as bronchitis or bronchopneumonia may result in bronchiectasis,
a relatively rare condition in cats.
i.Widened bronchioles with abnormal bronchial epithelium interfere with mucociliary clearance
mechanisms and may predispose to further chronic destruction of lung parenchyma by
pneumonia.
d. Histologically, cats with allergic or inflammatory bronchial disease have inflammatory cell influx
into the bronchial mucosa and submucosa, causing edema and producing the characteristic radio-
graphic pattern attributed to thickened bronchial walls. Other findings can include mucosal hyper-
emia, and hyperplasia of goblet cells and smooth muscle. Emphysema occurs in chronically affected
cats due to obstruction of small airways and air trapping at the end of exhalation.
i. Cats with bronchiectasis may also have endogenous lipid pneumonia or emphysema.
E. Diagnosis
a. Compatible historical and physical examination findings
b. Depending on the degree of dyspnea, it may not be appropriate to pursue radiographs on presenta-
tion if the cat is very unstable. Emergency treatment (see below) may be initiated based on physical
examination findings and historical information. If the cat is extremely distressed and does not
respond to initial management, it may be necessary to anesthetize, intubate, and ventilate it with
100% oxygen to safely perform diagnostic procedures.
c. Radiography (figs. 12.1 a and b)
i.
 Bronchial pattern, representing accumulation of inflammatory cells around the airways.
1. Described as "doughnuts and train tracks," which are the end-on or cross-sectional views of
the bronchial walls.
i. Bronchiectasis may be apparent in some cats with chronic bronchial inflammation. Bronchiectasis
is characterized by variable radiographic patterns:
1. Enlarged bronchi may appear cylindrical with an increased diameter and lack of tapering.
2. Sacculated appearance
3. Affected areas may be focal or diffuse
ii. Hyperinflation of lungs
1. Flattening of the diaphragm
2. Borders of the lungs extend beyond the twelfth or thirteenth rib.
iv.  Collapse of the right middle lung lobe
v.Pneumothorax {uncommon)
vi. Aerophagia in severely dyspneic cats, causing a gas-flled stomach.
vii. In some cats, especially those with concurrent pulmonary parenchymal disease, interstitial or
mixed broncho-interstitial patterns may be seen.
d. Complete blood count
i. Peripheral eosinophilia is noted in about 20% of cats with bronchial disease, but can be seen
with other respiratory diseases, systemic inflammation, or parasitic infection.
i. A stress leukogram may be present if the cat is distressed at the time of blood collection.
e. Serum chemistry
140
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Figs. 12.1 a gnd b. Radiographs of a cat diagnosed with lower airway disease. See text for details of radio.
graphic signs of lower airway disease.
i. Should be normal in cats with uncomplicated bronchial disease.
i. Hyperglobulinemia may be present in some cats with chronic inflammation
f. Assessment for parasitic disease
i. Fecal exam
1. Baermann for detection of Aeluorostrongylus
 2. Zn-SO4 floatation for detection of eggs of Capillaria and Paragonimus
ii. Heartworm serology
1. Antibody serology is more accurate in cats (see chaps. 15 and 18)
F. Differential diagnoses
a. Allergic bronchitis, asthma, chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis
b. Smoke inhalation (usually evident in history)
c. Infections
1.
 Bacterial
1. Bordetella bronchiseptica has been isolated and may cause clinical disease in cats.
a. May cause cough and bronchitis/bronchiolitis
i. Acute history of a dry nonproductive cough, or cough elicited on tracheal palpation
b. May cause severe fulminant bronchopneumonia
c. Susceptibility
i. Kittens and immunosuppressed cats may be more susceptible.
i. Cats housed in colonies with many individuals in close proximity or in multicat house-
holds may also be at increased risk.
 2. Mycoplasma sp. have been isolated from some cats presenting with lower airway disease;
however, its significance in the lower respiratory tract is unclear.
3. Pneumonia (see chap. 13)
Chapter 12 Lower Airway Disease
141
ii. Parasitic
 1. May induce eosinophil degranulation, causing bronchoconstriction, and the clinical signs of
asthma.
 2. The most common species in the lungs include Capillaria and Aelurostrongylus.
 3. Paragonirmus or Ascaris sp. may cause lower airway disease as the larvae migrate through the
lungs.
iii. Other infections
1. Viral
a. Some cats with acute viral upper respiratory infections (calicivirus or herpes virus) may
 have dyspnea and coughing as part of their clinical presentation.
2. Fungal
a.Histoplasma (Histoplasma capsulatum)
i. Can cause granulomatous interstitial pulmonary lesions in susceptible cats.
ii. Clinical signs include cough, dyspnea, fever, and lethargy.
b. Cryptococcus (Cryptococcus neoformans)
i. Commonly isolated from the nasal cavity and sinuses of cats, where it results in 
granulomatous sinusitis
ii. Rarely causes clinical signs of lower respiratory tract disease
c. Other
i. Coccidioides { Coccidioides immitis) is usually characterized by skin lesions (but may
ca use pneumonia) in cats.
il. Blastomycosis (Blastomyces dermatitidis) is rarely diagnosed in cats.
3. Protozoal
a. Although pneumonia caused by Toxoplasma commonly has an interstitial to alveolar
pattern on radiographs, some of the initial clinical signs may mimic asthma.
d.Neoplasia
i. Neoplasms of the upper airways may present with coughing as the primary clinical sign, but
dyspnea associated with extrathoracic upper airway obstruction would be expected to be primar-
ily inspiratory.
ii. Bronchial tumors
1. Focal neoplasms that obstruct the trachea or bronchi may present with a clinical sign
of coughing. Absorption atelectasis may occur if the neoplasm completely obstructs a
bronchus.
 2. Carcinomatosis may occasionally be seen in bronchial walls, causing a bronchial pattern on
radiographs, as well as characteristic clinical signs of dyspnea and coughing.
e. Foreign bodies
 i. Typically, inhaled foreign bodies are more likely to cause upper airway obstruction associated
with coughing and inspiratory dyspnea, rather than lower airway expiratory dyspnea. Cuterebra
ha ve been reported to cause tracheal obstruction.
f. Chronic pleural effusion
i. Cats with chylothorax may have a chronic cough due to fibrosing pleuritis of the parietal pleura
after exposure to the chylous effusion.
1. In these cats, lung lobe collapse and dyspnea will remain despite appropriate evacuation of
the pleural effusion.
g. Cardiac disease
i. Heart disease rarely causes coughing in cats.
h.Trauma
carina. These cats may be presented with acute respiratory distress but may also have signs delayed
by several days as fibrin and scarring cause narrowing at the site of the rupture.
142
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
G. Advanced diagnostic procedures
a. Many diagnostic procedures require anesthesia, which may be challenging in cats with lower airway
hyperreactivity. Any airway stimulation, such as placement of an endotracheal tube or instillation
of saline for lavage, may stimulate further bronchoconstriction and a worsening of the cat's condi-
tion. Owners should be aware of these risks prior to performing anesthesia in asthmatic cats.
i.Premedication/sedation is usually required, especially if there is no intravenous access.
1. Ketamine
 a. In the absence of heart disease, a very useful premedicant and induction agent
b. Results in bronchodilation, making it ideal for use in cats in asthmatic crises
c. Induction doses can range from 3-7mg/kg IV, and should always be combined with a
tranquilizer such as a benzodiazepine (0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV).
2.Halothane
a. Bronchodilatory effect via relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle
b. Not easily available currently; isoflurane may have similar properties but is more irritating
to the bronchial mucosa, and the full effect may not be realized. Sevoflurane is less irritat-
ing to the respiratory tract and decreases airway resistance in anesthetized humans with
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
C.Arrhythmias may occur with halothane anesthesia in patients who have received large doses
of sympathomimetic drugs for bronchodilation.
3. Diazepam, midazolam
a. Benzodiazepines combined  with ketamine provide good sedation or  anesthetic
premedication.
4. Narcotics may allow neuroleptanalgesia when combined with benzodiazepines and provide
sedation in cats in which ketamine is contraindicated.
a. Butorphanol may be administered at doses of 0.1-0.2 mg/kg.
b. Butorphanol may have antitussive properties.
c. Side effects include respiratory depression, and dyspneic animals should be monitored
closely after administration.
5. Drugs to avoid
a. Beta-blockers
i. May attenuate B2-induced bronchodilation and exacerbate clinical signs by causing
bronchoconstriction
b. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
i. In humans, inhibition of cyclooxygenase with aspirin causes increased production of
leukotrienes by inflammatory cells, which may worsen the asthmatic symptoms. It is
unknown whether this is true in cats.
ii. Contraindicated in animals that are receiving corticosteroids.
ii. Cats should always be intubated for the duration of anesthesia, and care should be taken to ensure
that they are adequately ventilating (either spontaneously or with assistance) with 100% oxygen
during the diagnostic procedures. Ideally, these cats should be monitored with pulse oximetry
and end-tidal capnography during anesthesia.
b. Lung mechanics, pulmonary function tests
i. May require anesthesia and special equipment.
i. Pulmonary function measurement may be more valuable as a measure of improvement in indi-
vidual cats after treatment, as single measurements may be misleading.
1. Increased lung resistance is expected in cats with bronchial disease
to various irritants such as methacholine, and also the response to selected
bronchodilators.
2. Changes in dynamic lung compliance may occur in cats with bronchopulmonary disease.
Chapter 12Lower Airway Disease
143
a. Decreased lung compliance may occur if there is concurrent pulmonary disease.
b. Emphysematous changes due to chronic asthma may cause an increase in dynamic lung
compliance.
 3. Tidal breathing flow volume loops can be measured using a close-fitting face mask in awake
cats, which can provide information about the extent of expiratory airway obstruction
without the need for general anesthesia and intubation.
iii. Whole-body plethysmography
1. Allows noninvasive measurement of respiratory rate, tidal volume, peak inspiratory and
expiratory flow rates, and inspiratory and expiratory time in the awake cat.
a. Requires special equipment
 b. Can demonstrate a characteristic decrease in peak expiratory flow rates in cats with lower
airway disease compared to normal cats
C. Cats with bronchial disease may have prolonged expiratory times compared to normal
cats.
iv. Pulse oximetry
1. Noninvasive
way
yto estimate the percentage of oxygen-saturated hemoglobin
(oxyhemoglobin)
2. Related to the PaO2 by the oxy-hemoglobin dissociation curve, but does not measure PaO2
directly
v. End-tidal capnography
1. Sidestream adapters may be used to estimate partial pressure of exhaled carbon dioxide in
awake patients; more accurate capnograms are obtained from intubated patients.
 2. Analysis of capnograms may give information on ventilatory parameters.
vi. Arterial blood gas analysis
1. Measures partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in arterial blood, in addition to the
blood pH
a. If animals have significant lower airway disease, the arterial partial pressure of oxygen
(PaO,) may be decreased.
b. With significant lower airway disease, the arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide
{PaCO,) may be increased.
C. With less severe lower airway obstructive disease, the PaCO, may be decreased secondary
to tachypnea.
2. May be obtained from the metatarsal or femoral arteries
3. Helps to quantify degree of oxygenation or ventilation disturbances and to monitor
recovery
4. Normal values (while breathing room air)
a. PaO2= 80-100 mmHg
b. PaCO2= 35-45 mmHg
c. Endotracheal wash (ETW)
i. The cat is intubated with a sterile endotracheal tube, and a sterile catheter (e.g., a red rubber
urinary catheter) is passed through the endotracheal tube as far as possible into the lungs.
Aliquots (each 5 mL) of nonbacteriostatic sterile saline are instilled into the airway and immedi-
d u  (  s  a i d  o     
useful information for cytology and culture.
i. Cytology of ETW fluid. ETW is indicated for obtaining representative cytologic samples from
the lower airway and is useful for distinguishing between infectious and inflammatory processes.
Because it is a procedure that is performed blindly, the possibility of obtaining a less-diagnostic
sample from an unaffected lung lobe exists.
1. Eosinophils
a. May be the predominant cell in 25%-30% of cats with feline asthma or bronchitis
144
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. May also be isolated from ETW of normal cats
c. In individual cats, eosinophils may correlate with severity of disease
2. Neutrophils
a. Consistent with lower airway inflammation
 b. With eosinophils, may be the predominant cell in feline asthma or bronchitis
3. Mixed populations
a. Some cats have mixed populations of eosinophils, neutrophils, and macrophages.
b. Numbers of cells may correlate with the radiographic severity of the lesions.
4. Cytology may be normal in some cases, especially if the cat has been treated with corticoste-
roids prior to sampling.
Aia uo paiou aq keu sao alqos paudouadkq Aq panpoud 'snonu jo sunoue paseauoul 's
in cats with chronic bronchial disease.
iii. Bacteriologic cultures
1. Cultures from healthy and asthmatic cats can give similar results. Thus cultures may give
misleading information unless there is heavy growth of a single species.
2. Mycoplasma is a possible pathogen that has been isolated from the lower airways of asthmatic
cats but is very difficult to culture.
d. Bronchoscopy, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
i. Performed using a sterile bronchoscope. BAL allows samples to be obtained from the alveoli and
distal airways.
ii. Allows direct inspection of abnormal areas of the upper bronchial tree, more directed sample
acquisition, and the potential to remove inspissated mucous plugs that might be ca using bronchial
obstruction.
ii. Cytology is variable, depending on distribution of the lesion and recovery of sample.
 1. Cats with histologically confirmed lower airway disease may have alveolar cytology consistent
with inflammation (e.g., neutrophils, eosinophils, and macrophages).
2. The primary cells identified in BAL samples from healthy cats are pulmonary alveolar
macrophages.
iv. Bacterial and Mycoplasma culture may be performed, although even normal cats may have small
numbers of bacteria in the lungs that may appear on culture.
H. Management of allergic and chronic bronchitis, feline bronchial asthma
a. Emergent therapy (table 12.1)
i.Oxygen
1. Preferably via oxygen cage, to create an oxygen-rich atmosphere with minimal stress to the
cat
 2. May also be administered via an e-collar with cellophane placed over the opening, with the
 oxygen tubing snaked under the collar, although this may be stressful
3. If the degree of dyspnea is extreme, anesthesia and mechanical ventilation may be the only
ways to adequately provide oxygen while treating the acute bronchoconstriction and confirm
the diagnosis.
ii. Corticosteroids
1. Corticosteroids should be administered parenterally in an emergency situation.
a. Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.2 mg/kg
i.  May be administered IV or IM
ii. SQ administration may not be reliable, especially if the cat is clinically dehydrated.
iii. Long-acting (depo preparations) steroids such as methylprednisone acetate are not
recommended for management of acute dyspnea because of slower absorption.
2. Inhaled corticosteroids may be useful in an emergency, especially if the cat has been on chronic
therapy with an inhaler.
Chapter 12Lower Airway Disease
145
Table 12.1. Emergency treatment of cats with dyspnea due to lower airway disease.
Contraindications
and Adverse
Expected
Drugs
MOAS
Doses
Effects
Results
Oxygen
 Increase alveolar
40-100% prn, via
 Prolonged high FiO2
Decreased
PO2
oxygen cage,
[>60% for >8-12
respiralory rale
mask, or hood;
hours]  may
and effort,
mechanical
predispose lo
resolution of
ventilation if no 
oxygen toxicily
cyanosis
response lo
oxygen
supplementation
Dexamelhasone
Decrease
0.2-0.4mg/kg IV,
Relalive risks of
Gradual decrease
sodium
inflammalion in 
IM, SQ g12h
immunosuppression,
in respiratory
phosphale
the airways
Gl ulceralion,
effort and rale
weighed against
polenlial as a
life-saving treatment
Prednisone
Decrease
1-3 mg/kg IV, IM
Relalive risks of
Gradual decrease
sodium 
 inflammalion in 
immunosuppression,
in respiratory
succinale
the airways
Gl ulceralion,
effort and rate
weighed against
potential as a
life-saving treaiment
Terbutaline
 Bronchodilation via 
0.01 mg/kg IV, IM,
Contraindicaled if the
Decreased
β2 agonism 
SQ q8 PRN
cat has heart
respiralory rale
disease or
and effort,
hypertension
relatively rapid
onset
Albulerol
 Bronchodilation via 
One puff (90-
 Potenlially distressing
Variable,
β2 cgonism
100μgl q30min
to the cat
 depending on
PRN up lo 8 doses
efficiency of
drug
administration 
Aminophylline
Bronchodilation via
2-5 mg/kg slow,
Contraindicated if the
Less effeclive than
phosphodiesterase
diluted,IV
cat has hearl
terbutaline
inhibition
disease or
hypertension 
Theophylline
 Bronchodilation via 
0.1 mg/kg slow,
Contraindicaled if the
Less effeclive than
 phosphodieslerase 
diluted, IV
cat has hearl
terbutaline
inhibition
disease or
hypertension 
 Epinephrine
 Bronchodilation via 
0.04 mg/kg IV, IM,
Contraindicated if the
Used in exlremis
β2 agonism 
SQ
cat has heart
or if other
disease or
bronchodilators
hypertension 
are unavailable
 a. Regular use of inhaled fluticasone for 7-10 days is necessary before seeing demonstrable
effects in some cats.
b. Dosed at one puff (120-220μg) every 12 hours × 1 month along with 7-10 days of oral
steroid, tapering to q24h if tolerated and effective
c. Cats should be allowed to take S-10 breaths from the mask and spacer after discharge of
the puff of drug.
146
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
iii. Bronchodilators
1. Injectable bronchodilators should be administered to cats exhibiting signs of
bronchoconstriction.
a. Nonspecific: bronchodilation is accompanied by generalized increases in sympathetic activ-
ity, including tachycardia and possibly hypertension.
i.
 Methylxanthines such as aminophylline are available for injection but have a lower
therapeutic index than terbutaline.
i. Vagolytics such as atropine are effective bronchodilators but may cause significant
tachycardia.
ii. Epinephrine (0.01-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM) can be given to extremely emergent cases but
has significant alpha and β, agonist activity.
b. Specific: β2 agonists cause bronchodilation and vasodilation, with less effect on the β
receptors and therefore less tendency to cause tachycardia.
i. Terbutaline (Brethine) is administered IV, IM, SQ at 0.01 mg/kg.
ii. Clenbuterol is an available β2 selective agonist but is orally administered and is there.
fore not applica ble to emergency situations.
2. Inhaled bronchodilators may provide immediate relief to some dyspneic cats if they tolerate
use of a face-mask and spacer (fig. 12.2).
a. Albuterol is a β2 agonist; 90 μg (one puff) may be administered q30min up to three times,
in combination with anti-inflammatory therapy and parenteral bronchodilators.
iv. Antibiotics are rarely indicated as part of emergent therapy.
b. Chronic therapy (table 12.2)
i.(
Corticosteroids are extremely important for chronic management of lower airway diseases caused
by inflammation. Without adequate control of inflammatory processes, the disease may progress,
eventually resulting in worsening clinical signs and irreversible damage to the lungs.
1. Oral
a.Prednisone
i. Oral glucocorticoid of choice
ii. Initially dosed at 1 mg/kg PO q12h, and then tapered to a lower dose based on individual
response.
Fig. 12.2. Asthma inhaler with mask and spacer.
Table 12.2. Long-term treatment of cats with lower airway disease.
Drug
MOA
Dose
Contraindications
Expected Results
Prednisone
Decrease airway
1-2 mg/kg PO q12,
 May result in
Maintenance free
inflammalion
gradual weaning lo
development of 
of clinical signs
the lowest possible
diabeles mellitus or
mainlenance dose
other complicalions 
[e.g., 0.5 mg/kg PO
when used
EOD, depending on
long-term
response]
Dexamelhasone
Decrease airway
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO
May result in
 Maintenance free
inflammalion 
q12, gradual
development of 
 of clinical signs
weaning lo the
diabeles mellitus or
lowest possible
other complicalions 
maintenance dose
when used
[e.g., 0.05 mg/kg
long-lerm
POEOD, depending
on response]
Methyl
Decrease airway
1-3mg/kg SQ q 4-8
May result in
ldeally, not a 
 prednisone
inflammation in 
weeksPRN
development of 
maintenance
acelale
cals who are
diabetes mellitus or
therapy, although
unable to take
other complicalions
some cals may
inhaled or oral
such as heart
only tolerale
medicalions 
failure when used
intermiltent
long-term
injeclion.
Fluticasone
Decrease airway
One puff [120-
Associated with fewer
 Maintenance free
inflammalion
220mcgl
side effecis than
of clinical signs
q12h x one month
oral steroids, as
along with 7-10
long as cal
days of oral steroid,
tolerates
tapering lo q24h if
administration
toleraled and
effeclive
Terbutaline
Bronchodilator
1.25-2.5 mg/cat PO
May cause
Maintenance
q8-12h
tachycardia at
therapy
higher doses,
avoid in cals with 
hearl disease
Theophylline
Bronchodilator
2-4 mg/kg PO
May cause
Maintenance
q8-12h
tachycardlia at
therapy
higher doses,
avoid in cals with
heart disease
Aminophylline
Bronchodilator
2-5 mg/kg PO
May cause
Maintenance
q8-12h
tachycardia at 
therapy
higher doses,
avoid in cals with
heart disease
Albulerol
Bronchodilator
One puff [90 μgl up to
Less likely lo cause
Maintenance
three limes daily.
adverse cardiac
therapy
may supplement in
effecls
acule exacerbalion 
147
148
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Dexamethasone
i. Initially dosed at 0.1 mg/kg PO q24h and tapered depending on response.
c. Side effects include the possible development of dia betes mellitus, pancreatitis, and polyuria
with polydypsia.
2. Inhaled
a. Fluticasone propionate
i.
 To supplement or replace oral steroids
i. Works topically in the lungs, with minimal systemic absorption, thereby decreasing
systemic side effects
ii. Dosed at 1 puff (approximately 100 μg from the metered dose inhaler) once to twice
daily, depending on severity of the asthma.
iv. Administration is accomplished via a rebreathing chamber {e.g-, Aerochamber), which
holds the aerosolized drug while the cat takes 5-10 breaths via an attached soft face
ma sk.
3. Injectable
a. Methylprednisone acetate ("Depo-medrol")
i. If the owner has diffculty administering oral medications, corticosteroids can be admin-
istered by injection every 2-4 weeks.
ii. Long-term use may result in side effects such as diabetes mellitus.
ii. Bronchodilators
1. Oral
a. Terbutaline 1.25-2.5 mg/cat PO q8-12h
i. Contraindications as listed above
b. Theophylline 2-4mg/kg PO q8-12h
i. Available both in an instant-release (q6-8h administration) and a controlled-release
(q12h) form
2. Inhaled
ae u ns   s a o dn (o d ao o "
exacerbation
C. Other therapies
i. Cyproheptadine
1. Serotonin (S-HT) is a major product of eosinophils and mast cells in cats and is thought to
be responsible for the majority of the airway reactivity seen in asthmatic cats.
 2. Administration of a S-HT receptor blocker may help alleviate some of the bronchospasm.
Experimentally, cyproheptadine appears to attenuate the severity of bronchoconstriction.
However, when used as a single agent in a small clinical trial, it did not significantly attenuate
the clinical signs.
3. Dose 0.5 mg/kg, q8-12h, PO
i. Leukotriene inhibitors
1. In human asthma, leukotrienes are important to the pathogenesis and clinical signs of asthma.
The contribution of leukotrienes to feline asthma is unclear.
2. One small clinical study in asthmatic cats did not show improvement when cats were treated
with zafirlukast compared with prednisone alone.
3. Thus, leukotriene inhibitors may not be useful as a monotherapy; however, they may be
indicated as part of a treatment regime for asthmatic cats.
4. Monoleukast (inhaled) and zafirlukast (oral) are two currently available leukotriene
inhibitors.
5. Zafirlukast {Accolate), 0.15-0.2 mg/kg, PO, q12-24h
I.  Management of bronchiectasis
a. Cats with bronchiectasis may be difficult to treat.
Chapter 12 Lower Airway Disease
149
b. Treatment consists of symptomatic care for inflammatory airway disease as described above, using
combinations of bronchodilators and antibiotics.
c. Due to inability to clear material from the lower airways, chronic pneumonia is common, and
repeated courses of antibiotics may be indicated.
d. Corticosteroids may cause worsening of clinical signs in cats with bronchiectasis.
J.Management of smoke inhalation
a. Smoke inhalation from house fires can cause damage to the respiratory tract by multiple
mechanisms.
i. Carbon monoxide (CO) is a byproduct of incomplete combustion that is produced in large
qua ntities in structure fires.
1. CO binds to hemoglobin with a significantly higher afinity (approx. 200 x) than oxygen,
thus displacing O, from the molecule and decreasing tissue delivery.
2. Carboxyhemoglobin is measured with a co-oximeter; pulse oximetry is not accurate fand
consistently reads 85%).
3. CO may also disrupt the utilization of oxygen by mitochondria.
a. For this reason, carbon monoxide intoxication should be suspected when blood lactate is
high despite adequate tissue perfusion.
4. Delayed neurologic sequelae may also be recognized, presumed secondary to hypoxic brain
damage.
i. Toxins from burning plastic and other household items may produce cyanide, which inhibits
mitochondrial aerobic respiration.
ii. Other toxins and irritants produced by combustion in structure fires
1. Can cause direct irritation, which may result in reflex bronchoconstriction
2. Specific toxins may interfere with the function of surfactant, decreasing the tidal volume.
iv. Superheated air or steam may be inhaled and scald the entire respiratory tree.
1. Thermal injuries to the respiratory mucosa include erythema, swelling, edema, and epithelial
necrosis and sloughing
v. Animals that have been in fires may have been exposed to low fractional inspired concentrations
of oxygen, combined with high inspired carbon dioxide concentrations, resulting in loss of
consciousness.
adai smous sauni aul jo koloedonsy Kinlui uoejequi axows on pasodxa anu pue sueunq ul "1a
 II cell hypertrophy, with cytoplasmic blebbing and vacuolization. Additionally, mucosal hemor-
rhage and edema, with infiltration of macrophages and lymphocytes, is seen.
b. Clinical signs in cats after smoke inhalation
i. Tachypnea, open-mouthed breathing, vocalization, lethargy, and unconsciousness
i. A more severe clinical course may be seen in animals with evidence of both surface burns and
respiratory distress.
1. Physical examination may reveal increased upper airway noise (stridor) caused by laryngeal
Or pharyngeal edema.
2. If bronchoconstriction is present, expiratory wheezes may be ausculted.
3. Alternatively, if there is a component of lower airway disease, focal or diffuse crackles or
harsh bronchovesicular sounds may be present.
C. Diagnostic evaluation
i. For animals in respiratory distress, as noted above
ii. Co-oximetry may be of assistance in distinguishing the presence of methemoglobinemia or
carboxyhemoglobinemia.
iii. Pulse oximetry is inaccurate in the presence of met- or carboxyhemoglobin, and may overestimate
the actual oxygen saturation.
iv. Radiographs may show bronchial, alveolar, or interstitial patterns.
d. Emergent therapy is geared toward support of the cat's oxygenation.
150
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i.Oxygen supplementation at high fractional inspired concentrations will help to clear
carboxyhemoglobin.
1. At least 2-4 hours of treatment have been recommended, more if indicated.
ii. Bronchodilators are indicated if there is bronchoconstriction.
 ili. If there is severe tissue edema in the upper airway, tracheostomy or mechanical ventilation may
be indicated until resolution of the inflammatory changes.
iv. Mechanical ventilation is occasionally indicated in animals that require high inspired oxygen
concentrations, or in whom hypoventilation occurs.
Recommended Reading
Dye JA, McKiernan BC, Rozanski EA, et al. Bronchopulmonary disease in the cat: historical, physical,
J Vet Int Med, 1996; 10(6):385-400.
McKiernan BC, Dye JA, Rozanski, EA. Tidal breathing fow-volume loops in healthy and bronchitic cats
J Vet Int Med, 1993; 7(6):388-393.
Norris CR, Griffey SM, Christopher MM, et al. Thoracic radiography, bronchoalveolar lavage cytopathol.
ogy, and pulmonary parenchymal histopathology: a comparison of diagnostic results in 11 cats. J Am
Anim Hosp Ass0c, 2002; 38:337-345.
Padrid PA. Feline asthma: diagnosis and treatment. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 2000;
30(6):1279-1293.
13
PARENCHYMAL DISEASE
Deborah Silverstein
Unique Features
● Cats with pulmonary parenchymal disease and dyspnea rarely open-mouth breathe as dogs typically
do. Cats most commonly exhibit tachypnea, nostril flaring, an increase in breathing effort, and
reluctance to lie down.
● A perihilar interstitial-alveolar pattern is rarely seen on thoracic radiographs in cats with cardiogenic
pulmonary edema. Instead, a patchy, diffuse interstitial infiltrate is commonly observed. Cardiomegaly
and pulmonary venous distention are also frequently evident.
Differential Diagnoses
Pneumonia
Edema
Hemorrhage
 Endogenous toxins
Inhaled toxins
Drug reaction
 Neoplasia
Atelectasis
Accidental drowning/submersion
 Pulmonary thromboembolism 
Lung lobe torsion
 General Diagnostic Plan
Venous blood gas +lactate
Pulse oximetry
Complete blood count, biochemical analysis, urinalysis
Three-view thoracic radiographs
+/- Computerized tomography
+/- Magnetic resonance imaging
Endotracheal wash with cytology and culture/susceptibility testing
151
152
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
A. Physical examination findings and clinical signs
a.History
1.
Exercise intolera nce
ii.
 Shortness of breath
i.
Lethargy
iv.
Coughing: Cats with parenchymal disease commonly have a history of and/or present with a
Exposure {reside in or travel history) to area with fungal disease
vi.
+/- Vomiting, diarrhea
vii.
+/- Anorexia, weight loss
vili. +/- Recent stressful event or corticosteroid treatment leading to immunosuppression
+/- Smoke or toxin exposure
X.
+/- Exposure to colony situation
xi.
+/- Seizures, ataxia
xii. +/- Pancreatitis
xifi. +/- Recent anesthesia or prolonged recumbency
xiv. +/- Recent trauma
XV.
 +/- Recent accidental drowning or submersion injury
b. Clinical signs (see Unique Features box)
i.
Tachypnea
Dyspnea
ili.
Cyanosis
iv.
Reluctance to lie down
V.
Orthopnea
vi.
Lateral recumbency
vii.
Gasping/agonal breathing (prearrest)
vili.
+/-Fever
ix.
+/- Concurrent upper respiratory tract signs and/or nasal discharge
X.
+/- Vague pain upon abdominal palpation
xi.
+一
Oral/ocular/nasal abnormalities (viral, fungal, parasitic disease)
xii.
+/- Skin lesions (poxvirus, coccidioidomycosis)
xili.
+/- Peritoneal effusion (disseminated infectious or neoplastic disease)
xiv.
 +/- Coma or seizures, gagging, foaming at mouth, rubbing eyes, soot on fur, smoky odor, skin
burns (smoke or toxin exposure).
XV.
  d o u   u do    t
endomyocarditis)
xvi.
+/- Decreased breath sounds ventrally (pleural effusion secondary to cardiogenic edema, neo-
plasia, bronchopneumonia, or hemorrhage)
xvii.
+/- Palpable thyroid nodule
xvii. +/- Lameness (metastatic neoplasia)
cC. Auscultation
i.
 Normal tracheal breath sounds
ii. Loud breath sounds on inspiration +/- expiration
iii. Adventitial breath sounds
1. Inspiratory +/- expiratory crackles and/or wheezes
B. Differential diagnoses and most common etiologies
a.Pneumonia
 Bacterial/mycoplasmal/mycobacterial
1.Staphylococcus spp.
2. Streptococcus spp.
Chapter 13  Parenchymal Disease
153
3.Escherichia coli
4. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
5.1
Bordetella bronchiseptica
6.Pasteurella multocida
7.Klebsiella pneumoniae
8.Bacteroides fragilis
9.Clostridium diffcile
10. Proteus mirabilis
11.Capnocytophaga cyndegmi
12.Chlamydia psittaci
ii.
Viral
1. Herpesvirus-1 (feline rhinotracheitis)
2.Calicivirus
3.Poxvirus
ili.
Protozoal
1. Toxoplasmosis
iv.
Mycotic
1. Histoplasmosis
2.Blastomycosis
3. Coccidioidomycosis
 4. Cryptococcosis (Abyssinian and Siamese breeds overepresented)
5. Aspergillosis
6. Sporotrichosis
7. Candidiasis
8. Zygomycosis
9.Penicilliosis
V.
Parasitic
1.Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
2.Bronchostrongylus spp.
3.Troglostrongytus spp.
4.Capillaria aerophilia (or Eucoleus aerophilus)
5.Paragonimus kellicotti
6.Cuterebra spp.
vi.
 Lipid pneumonia
1. Chronic forced mineral oil administration
vi. Inflammatory
1. Idiopathic hypereosinophilia syndrome
 2. Potassium bromide therapy
vifil. Usual interstitial pneumonia
1. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
b. Edema
i. Cardiogenic (see chaps. 14—General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies and
1 5—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases)
1. Left-sided congestive heart failure
ii. Noncardiogenic
1. Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
 2. Neurogenic pulmonary edema
 3. Upper airway obstruction
4. Feline endomyocarditis
5. Near drowning
154
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
c. Hemorrhage
i. Pulmonary contusions
i. Coagulopathy (i.e., anticoagulant rodenticide, liver dysfunction, biliary obstruction, thrombocy-
topathia, thrombocytopenia)
d. Endogenous toxins
i. Uremic pneumonitis
e. Inhaled toxins
i. Smoke or noxious gas inhalation
ii. Prolonged oxygen therapy
f.Adverse drug reaction
g. Neoplasia
h. Atelectasis
i.Accidental drowning/submersion injury
j. Pulmonary thromboembolism
k. Lung lobe torsion
C. Diagnostic imaging
a. Thoracic radiography and/or computerized tomography (CT) +/- magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Combinations of interstitial and alveolar disease are typically evident in cats with pulmonary
parenchymal disease. The distribution of infiltrates may assist in determining the underlying
etiology.
ii. Classically, cats with bacterial bronchopneumonia show cranioventral alveolar infiltrates,
although patchy combinations of alveolar, interstitial, and bronchial disease may be present.
Small pleural effusions may be present in severe cases (figs. 13.1 a, b, and c).
ii. Diffuse or caudodorsal interstitial and/or alveolar infiltrates are typical of viral pneumonia or
neurogenic pulmonary edema.
iv.  Pulmonary fungal disease may appear as interstitial, alveolar, bronchiolar, nodular, military,
or mixed patterns. In addition, lobar consolidation, discrete nodules, or cavitary lesions, hilar
lymphadenopathy, pleural effusion or thickening, and/or pneumothorax may be evident (figs.
13.2 a and b).
V.
 The presence of a mediastinal shift, elevation of the hemidiaphragm, rearrangement of borders
Of inflated lung lobes, separation of the heart from the sternum, and asymmetry of the rib cage
are consistent with atelectasis.
vi.Pulmonary contusions appear as unilateral or bilateral patchy interstitial to alveolar infiltration.
Animals with pulmonary contusions often have concurrent rib fractures, pneumothorax, and/
 or a diaphragmatic hernia. Pulmonary contusions are detected earliest using CT imaging.
Additionaly, the clinical radiographic signs of pulmonary contusions can often lag behind the
clinical progression.
vi. Pulmonary thromboembolism may ha ve completely normal thoracic radiogra phs. Other reported
abnormalities include pleural effusion, alveolar and interstitial pattern, and venous
congestion.
vii. Reported radiographic changes with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis include dense patchy or
diffuse interstitial, bronchiolar, and alveolar infiltration.
n s    o s  sa d  a i
cally have a more diffuse, patchy interstitial disease with cardiogenic pulmonary edema, not
perihilar in distribution (see Unique Features box).
 D. Additional diagnostic techniques
a. Complete blood count, biochemical profile, urinalysis
1.
 Leukocytosis or leukopenia +/- left shift may be seen with infectious or inflammatory diseases
Eosinophilia can be seen with parasitic disease, hypersensitivity reactions, or idiopathic hypere-
osinophililc syndrome.
Chapter 13Parenchymal Disease
155
Figs. 13.1 a through c. Severe aspiration pneumonia in a cat I week following anesthesia. There is consolida-
tion and air bronchograms throughout the left hemithorax, the right caudal portion of the cranial lobe, and the right
middle lung lobe.
 ii. Nonregenerative anemia may be seen with more chronic inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic
diseases.
ii. Hypoalbuminemia and hyperglobulinemia are commonly seen with fungal disease. Hypercalcemia
may also be present. Hyperbilirubinemia, increased alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phospha-
tase, and creatine kinase may be present in cats with Toxoplasma gondi due to infection in other
organ systems.
iv. Proteinuria may be seen in cats with Toxoplasma gondii.
b. Pulse oximetry (SpO2)
i.  Normal value 95-100% when breathing room air.
ii. Values less than 93% indicate significant hypoxemia and warrant oxygen therapy
c. Fundic examination
i. See cha pter 37—Ocular Emergencies.
156
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
should also be a rule-out based on these radiographs.
d. +/- Arterial blood gas analysis or venous blood gas analysis and lactate
t. Trans- or endotracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage
f.Cytologic evaluation and culture/sensitivity should be done on fluid obtained +/- special staining for
fungi (periodic acid Schiff, Gridley's fungal, Gomori's methenamine silver stain) and/or lipid (Sudan
black, Sudan red, oil-red-O), +/- polarized light, +/- tissue chromatography.
i. The presence of leukocytes with intracellular organisms confirms an infection.
g. Lung aspirate with cytology +/- culture and sensitivity +/- special staining for fungi (periodic acid
Schiff, Gridley's fungal, Gomori's methenamine silver stain) and/or lipid (Sudan black, Sudan red,
oil-red-O), +/- polarized light, +/- tissue chromatography.
h. Lung biopsy with cytology +/- culture and sensitivity +/- special staining for fungi (periodic acid
Schiff, Gridley's fungal, Gomori's methenamine silver stain) and/or lipid (Sudan black, Sudan red,
oil-red-O), +/- polarized light, +/- tissue chromatography.
Chapter 13  Parenchymal Disease
157
i. Immunohistochemistry or polymerase chain reaction testing for Toxoplasma gondi is available.
i. Serum toxoplasma titers
j.Fecal float, smear, Baermann to evaluate for evidence of parasitic infection
k. +/- serum FelV, FIV testing
 1. +/- Heartworm testing
m. +/- Viral testing (virus isolation or immunochemistry on swabs of affected areas, polymerase chain
reaction on respiratory samples)
n. +/- Serologic fungal testing (coccidioidomycosis and cryptococcus)
0. +/- Cerebrospinal fluid tap (Toxoplasmosis gondi)
p. +/- Co-oximetry to identify levels of carbon monoxide, methemoglobinemia, and/or cyanide intoxi-
cation in smoke or toxin inhalation victims
q. +/- Echocardiogram will help to identify pleural effusion and cardiomyopathy, respectively, in cats
with cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Thyroid hormone levels should be checked in patients with
suspected hyperthyroid induced cardiomyopathy.
r.  Thoracic ultrasonography (identify coexisting pleural effusion, visualize pulmonary mass, lung lobe
torsion)
s. +/- Thoracocentesis with cytology and culture
t. +/- Coagulogram, d-dimer, anticoagulant rodenticide serum levels, liver function tests, platelet func
tion testing, thromboelastography in cats with suspected pulmonary thromboembolism or hemor-
rhage. Pulmonary angiography, computerized tomographic digital subtraction angiograph, and/or
ventilation perfusion scanning may also prove helpful.
u. +/- abdominal ultrasound and/or skeletal radiographs (metastatic neoplasia, systemic infection)
 E. General management of animals with pulmonary parenchymal disease
a. Oxygen therapy PRN (via flow by, mask, hood, cage)
b. Positive pressure ventilation if:
i.PaO2 <60 mmHg or SpO2 <90% with oxygen supplementation
ii. PaCO2 >60mmHg
ii. Severe dyspnea with impending fatigue
c. Fluid therapy
 i. Caution should be exercised since many parenchymal diseases cause vascular endothelial leakiness
and predispose to fluid extra vasation into the lungs {i.e., pulmonary contusions, ARDS)
ii. Fluid therapy is contraindicated with cardiogenic pulmonary edema
F. Specific conditions (see table 13.1 for specific drug doses and details)
a. Bacterial pneumonia
i. Nebulization and coupage
ii.Antibiotic therapy
1. Empiric choices pending culture and susceptibility testing results include ampicillin/baytril
clindamycin/baytril, ampicillin/clavulanate, ticarcillin/clavulanate, cefoxitin, or a third
generation cephalosporin.
ii. +/- Bronchodilator therapy
 1. Controversial benefit—may worsen V/Q mismatch
2. Beta-2 agonists (i.e., terbutaline)
3. Methylxanthines (i.e., theophylline, caffeine)
iv. +/- Mucolytics
1. Efficacy unproven
2. N-Acetylcysteine
b. Protozoal pneumonia
i. Toxoplasma gondii
1. Clindamycin hydrochloride
2. Potentiated sulfonamides
Table 13.1. Drug toble.
Routes of
Contraindications
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAs
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Aminophylline
Xanthine derivalive
Compelilive
CNS stimulation, gaslric
1. Hypersensilivily to
5-10mg/kg IV q6-8h
Feline asthma
phosphod iesterase
irritation, nausea,
xanthines
+/- atelectasis
inhibifion to 
vomiling
2. Cardiac disease,
increase cAMP,
gaslric ulcers,
direct relaxalion
hyperthyroid ism,
 of smooth muscle
hypertension,
 in bronchi and
renal or hepalic
pulmonary
disease
vasculature
Ampicillin
Aminopenicillin
Inhibil cell wall
Hypersensilivily, anorexia,
History of
22 mg/kg IV or PO
ads pom
+/-
synthesis; addition
vomiting, diarrhea
hypersensilivily
q8h
infection
clavulanate
of clavulanale will
 inhibit bacterial
bctamase
Amikacin
Aminoglycoside
Inhibit protein
Nephrotoxicily, ototoxicily,
Renal disease,
15 mg/kg IV q24h
Gram negalive
synthesis by
neuromuscular blockade,
dehydration,
infeclions
binding 30S
lacial edema,
neuromuscular
ribosomal subunit
hypersensilivily
disease
Amphotericin B
 Polyene macrolide
Binds to sterols in
Nephroloxicily [less so with
1. Hypersensilivily
A 0.25 mg/kg in
 Fungal infeclions
antifungal
cell membrane
liposomal forms],
2.Renal disease
30mL DsW IV over
and alters
anorexia, vomiting,
15 minutes q48h
permeabiliy
hypokalemia, distal renal
[+/-additional
lubular acidosis,
herapeulics]
hypomagnesemia,
 B amphotericin B lipid 
phlebilis, cardiac
complex [ABLC;
arrhythmias,
Abelcer) 1 mg/kg
nonregenerative anemia
IVthree days per
and fever
week for a total of
12 treatments
[cumulative dose of
12mg]. Dilute to a
concentration of
1 mg/ml in dexirose
5% [DsW] and
infuse over 1-2
hours
Azithromycin
Macrolide
Bind 50S ribosomal
Hypersensilivily, diarrhea,
1. Hypersensilivily
5-10mg/kg IV or PO
Mycoplasma
unit and inhibit
vomiling, cnorexia
2. Hepalic disease
q24h
haemofelis,
bacterial growth
Toxoplasmosis,
broad
spectrum
baclerial
infection
Cefoxilin
Cephamycin,
Inhibit cell wall
Diarrhea,
History of
30 mg/kg IV q6-8h
Broad specirum
2ndgeneration
synthesis
granulocylopenia,renal
hypersensiliviy,
infection
 cephalosporin
lubular necrosis,
reduce dose with
hypersensilivily
renal failure
Cefolaxime
Aminothiazolyl
Inhibit cell wall
Diarrhea,
Jo 人IoS!H
25-50mg/kg IV
Gram negalive
cephalosporin,
synthesis
granulocytopenia,renal
hypersensilivily,
q6-8h
infeclions
3rd-generation
lubular necrosis,
reduce dose with
cephalosporin
hypersensilivily
renal failure
Clarithromycin
Macrolide
Bind 50S ribosomal
Hypersensilivily, diarrhea,
J IoS!H
7.5 mg/kg PO q12h
Mycoplasma
unit and inhibit 
vomifing, anorexia, pinnal
hypersensilivily
haemofelis,
bacterial growth
erylhema
Toxoplasmosis,
alypical
mycobacterial
infections
Clindamycin
Lincosamide
Bind 50S ribosomal
Gastroenteritis,
History of 
10mg/kg IV q8-12h
Anaerobic
subunit
hypersensilivily
hypersensilivily
infections,
Toxoplasmosis
Corlicosteroids
Glucocorlicoid
 Many mechanisms
Polydipsia, polyuria,
1. Hypersensilivily
Depends on
Inflammatory
2. Sepsis
formulation
disease,
gain, diarrhea,
autoimmune
depression, “Cushingoid”
disease
like signs
Enrofloxacin
Fluoroquinolone
Inhibit DNA gyrase
Vomiling, anorexia, alaxia,
Hislory of
5mg/kg IV or PO
Gram + and
seizures, carlilage
 hypersens ilivily.
q24h [diluted, off
- infeclions
cbnormalifies, acute
young animals,
bbeluse]
bindness, hypersensilivity
breeding or
pregnant animals
(Continved!
60
Table 13.1.
Confinued
Routes of
Contraindications
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAs
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Fenbendazole
Benzimidazole
Interferes with
Hypersensitivily, vomiting
None
50mg/kg PO q24h
Lungworms
anthelmintic
microlubulin
for 10-14 days
formation 
Flucylosine
Fluorinated
Interferes RNA and
Vomiring, diarrhea,
1. Hypersensilivily
25-50mg/kg PO q6h
Cryplococcosis,
 pyrimidine
DN synthesis
 dose-dependent bone
2. Renal impairment,
or 50-65mg/kg PO
Candidiasis/
marrow suppression, oral
preexisling bone 
q8h.Must be given
cndiduria
ulceralion, increased 
MO
with a polyene or
hepalic enzymes, CNS
suppression,
azole antifungal
effecls
hematologic
cgent
diseases, or
receiving other
bone marrow
suppressant drugs
Furosemide
Loop diurelic
Increases renal
Dehydralion, elechrolyte and
1.
Hypersensiltivily
0.5-4mg/kg IV or IM
Cardiogenic
excrelion of
acid/base imbalances,
2.
Severe
ql-2h in severe
 pulmonary
water, sod ium,
olotoxicily, gashrointestinal
dehydralion
cases; 1-2mg/kg
edema
polassium,
disturbances, hematologic
3. Furosemide should
PO q8-12h for
dloride, calcium,
effects [anemia,
be used with
maintenance
magnesium,
lukopenia], weakness
caution in patients
hydrogen,
cnd restllessness
with preexisting
ammonium, and
eleclrolyte or
bicarbonate
waler balance
abnormalities,
impaired hepalic
function [may
pecipitate hepalic
coma], and
diabetes mellitus.
lraconazole
Triazole
Alter cell membrane 
Anorexia, weight loss,
1. Hypersensilivily
10 mg/kg/day PO
 Fungal infeclions
and increase
vomiling, increased liver
2. Hepalic
with food
permeabilily
enzymes, depression
insufficiency
3. Achlorhydria/
hypochlorhydria 
Ivermectin
Avermeclin
Enhances release of
Hypersensiivily, ag itation,
Hypersensilivily
0.4 mg/kg SQ once
Aelurostrongylus
anthelmintic
GABA to paralyze
vocalization,anorexia,
obstrusus;
parasile
mydriasis, rear limb
Capillaria
paresis, lremors,
cerophilia
disorientation, blindness,
headpressing, wall
climbing, absence of
oculomotor menace reflex,
slow and incomplele
 pupillary light response 
Keloconazole
Imidazole
Increase cell wall
Anorexia,vomiting,
1. Hypersensilivily
10-15mg/kg PO
 Fungal infeclions
permeabiliy and
diarrhea, hepalic
2. Hepalic
q12h
inhibit growth
toxicily,thrombocylopenia,
insufficiency
reversible lightening of
 3. Thrombocylopenia
haircoat, transient
dose-related suppressant
Cats may be
pup jopouob uo jpaje
especially
adrenal steroid synthesis
sensitive to
this drug.
N-Acelylcysteine
Derivalive of
Mucolylic
Nausea, vomiling
Hypersensilivily
70 mg/kg IV q6h
Pulmonary
L-cysteine
[diluted, off label
 consolidalion
use]
Terbutaline
Beta-2 agonist
Shimulation of B-2
Hypotension, tachycardia,
1. Cals that are
Asthma: 0.01 mg/kg
Feline asthma
receplors causes
lemors, CNS excitement,
hypersensilive lo
SC q4h; 0.3-0.6mg
smooth muscle
hypokalemia
terbutaline
bolal dose or
relaxalion
2. Cardiac disease,
0.03 mg/kg PO
diabeles,
q8-12h
hyperthyroidism,
Inhaler with spacer
hypertension, or
dose for asthma:
seizure disorders
Press inhaler wice
and allow cat to
lake 5-7 breaths.
(Continved!
62
Table 13.1.
Confinued
Routes of
Contraindications
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Praziquantel
Prazinoisoquinoline
Unknown
Hypersensilivily, diarrhea,
Hypersensilivily
23-25mg/kg PO q8h
Paragonimus
 derivalive
weakness, vomiting.
for 3 days
kellicotti
anthelmintic
salivation, sleepiness,
lransient anorexia, pain at
the injeclion site
Ticarcillin
Aminopenicillin
Inhibit cell wall
Hypersensilivily, anorexia,
JoIOS!H
 50 mg/kg IV q6h
Broad spechrum
+/-
synthesis;addition
vomiting, diarrhea
hypersensilivily
bacterial
clavulanale
of clavulanale will
infections
 inhibit bacterial
bctamase
Trimethoprim
Potentiated
Inhibit bacterial
Anorexia, crystalluria,
1. History of
15-30mg/kg IV or
Broad speclrum
sulfa
sulfonamide
thymidine
hemauria, leukopenia
hypersensilivily
PO q12-24h
bacterial
synthesis
anemia
2.
Hepalic disease
infections,
3.
Blood dyscrasia
Toxoplasmosis,
4. +/-Urolithiasis
Pneumocystis
carinil,
coccidia
Chapter 13 Parenchymal Disease
163
3. Pyrimethamine
4. Minocycline
5.Azithromycin
6. Clarithromycin
 7. Topical, oral, or parenteral corticosteroids in cats with uveitis
C. Mycotic pneumonia
Nebulization and coupage
ii. Polyene antibiotics
1. Amphotericin B
a. Lipid encapsulated form is less nephrotoxic.
2.Hamycin
ili. Azoles
1. Ketoconazole
2. Itraconazole
a. Best tolerated "azole” in cats
3. Fluconazole
iv. Antimetabolites
1.Flucytosine
v.  Chitin synthesis inhibitors
1. Nikkomycin
2.Lufenuron
a. Published use in dogs only
d. Parasitic pneumonia
i.
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus
1. Often self-limiting
2. Fenbendazole (extended regimen)
3.Ivermectin
ii.Capillaria aeropbilia
1. Fenbendazole
2. Ivermectin
3. Levamisole
ii. Paragonimus kellicotti
1. Praziquantel
2. Fenbendazole
 3. Albendazole (careful of bone marrow suppression)
iv.Cuterebra spp.
1. Ivermectin
 2. +/- Corticosteroid therapy (anti-inflammatory regimen)
e. Lipid pneumonia
i. Exogenous lipid pneumonia
1. Discontinue forced administration of petroleum products.
 2. Use of corticosteroids is controversial.
ii. Endogenous lipid pneumonia
1. Treatment of underlying disease, if present, and surgical removal of affected lung lobes {in
humans since treatment of cat is not reported).
2. Use of corticosteroids is controversial.
f.Inflammatory
i. Idiopathic hypereosinophilia syndrome
 1. Immunosuppressive corticosteroid therapy
2. +- Hydroxyurea therapy
164
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Potassium bromide therapy
1. Discontinue potassium bromide
2. +/- Corticosteroid administration
 g. Usual interstitial pneumonia
i. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
1. Drug therapy is typically unrewarding but has primarily included corticosteroids, bronchodila.
tors, and antimicrobials.
2. Cyclophosphamide has been used successfully in one cat.
h. Edema
i. Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (see chaps. 14—General Approach and Overview of Cardiac
 Emergencies and 15—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases for further information)
1. Furosemide
2. +/- ACE inhibitor
3. +/- Nitroglycerin
4. +/- Nitroprusside
ii. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
1. +/- Diuretic therapy
 2. Correct underlying disease states
i. Hemorrhage
i. Pulmonary contusions
1. Use of judicious intravenous fluids during resuscitation and maintenance is recommended.
 2. Treat associated thoracic and life-threatening injuries first.
3. Analgesia PRN
 4. Avoid diuretics or prophylactic use of antibiotics or corticosteroids.
ii. Coagulopathy
1. Fresh frozen plasma (10mL/kg) for prolonged PT, PTT, and/or ACT.
2. Vitamin K; if indicated (anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, liver disease, biliary
obstruction).
a. Dose: 2.5-5 mg/kg SQ or PO (with fatty meal) every 24 hours
 b. Caution: excessive vitamin K therapy in cats leads to oxidant injury to red blood cells and
Heinz body anemia.
 3. Fresh whole blood or platelet-rich plasma for thrombocytopathia or severe thrombocytopenia
(<20,000/μL)
j. Endogenous toxins
i. Uremic pneumonitis
1. Correct uremia
k. Inhaled toxins
i. Smoke or toxin exposure (see chap. 12——Lower Airway Disease)
1. Use of judicious intravenous fluids during resuscitation and maintenance is recommended.
 2. 100% oxygen for 4-6 hours to reduce the half-life of carbon monoxide 
 3. Nebulization and coupage
4. +/- Bronchodilators (reserved for cats with reflex bronchoconstriction (suspected in cats with
audible or auscultable wheezes +/- hypercapnea)
5. +/- Tracheostomy if severe upper airway obstruction
6. +/- Treatment of ocular injuries
ii. Prolonged oxygen therapy
1. Decrease fraction of inspired oxygen to <60% after 4-6 hours
1.Adverse drug reaction
i. Discontinue drug
ii. +/- Corticosteroids or epinephrine if needed
Chapter 13  Parenchymal Disease
165
m. Neoplasia
i. Surgical excision
i. Adjunctive chemotherapy +/- radiation therapy as indicated
n. Atelectasis
i.
 Use adequate, not excessive concentrations of oxygen therapy since high inspired oxygen con-
centrations predispose to atelectasis.
 ii. If mechanical ventilation is required, the use of a recruitment or vital capacity maneuver may be
beneficial. Positive end expiratory pressure will also help reduce atelectasis.
ii. Aminophylline has proven helpful in humans with postoperative atelectasis.
0. Accidental drowning/submersion injury
i. Use of judicious intravenous fluids during resuscitation and maintenance is recommended.
ii. Correct acid/base abnormalities.
p. Pulmonary thromboembolism
i.
 Identify underlying cause and treat it appropriately.
ii. +/- thrombolytic therapy (streptokinase, urokinase, t-PA)
ii. Anticoagulant therapy {i.e., aspirin, heparin, low molecular weight heparin, vitamin K
antagonist)
q. Lung lobe torsion
i.
 Cardiopulmonary stabilization
i. Surgical excision of affected lobe
ii. +/- Thoracic duct ligation and subtotal pericardectomy PRN
14
GENERAL APPROACHAND OVERVIEW
OF CARDIAC EMERGENCIES
Manuel Boller
Unique Features
● The most common clinical signs in cats with cardiac emergencies are respiratory distress, syncope,
hind limb paresis, or a combination thereof.
● Pleural effusion often plays an important role in the etiology of respiratory distress in cats with left-
sided congestive heart failure.
· Radiographic appearance of cardiogenic pulmonary edema in cats is widely variable; it can have a
perihilar, caudal, or diffuse patchy distribution.
A. Signalment and history
a. Breed predisposition
i. Dilated cardiomyopathy
1. Oriental breeds (Siamese, Burmese, Abyssinian)
i. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
1. Various breeds, including Maine Coon, American Shorthair, Persians, and possibly British
Shorthair, Ragdoll, Norwegian Forest, Scottish Folds, and Turkish Van
b. Age
i. HCM at any age (2 months to 19 years; mean 5 to 6 years)
c. Sex
i. Male cats more frequently (4:1) affected with HCM.
d. History
i. The cat may or may not have a history of heart disease (e.g., a previously ausculted murmur or
gallop rhythm).
i. A stressful event (i.e., anesthesia, surgery) within 3 months prior to occurrence of congestive heart
failure is often reported in cats with endomyocarditis.
1. Endomyocarditis is an inflammatory condition of the pulmonary vessels as well as the endo
cardium, and this may be the primary reason that these cats develop respiratory problems.
e. Presenting complaint
i.
 Cats with heart disease present as emergencies due to congestive heart failure (CHF), low cardiac
output heart failure (LOHF), or arterial (aortic) thromboembolism (ATE).
i. Typical presenting complaints include
1. Dyspnea, tachypnea
167
168
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Weakness, depression, collapse, syncope
 3. Sudden onset of paraparesis, paralysis, or pain
ii. In contrast to dogs, coughing is an unusual finding in cats with CHF and should trigger investi-
gation into other respiratory disease processes {i.e., feline bronchial disease).
B. Physical examination. Findings vary in accordance to whether the cat suffers from CHF, LOHF
ATE, or a combination of the above.
a. Congestive heart failure (CHF):
i.
 Mentation varies from anxiety to depression
ii. Increased respiratory rate and/or effort
ii. Open-mouth breathing
iv. Cyanotic mucous membranes
v.  Lung auscultation
1. Increased lung sounds
2. Crackles with alveolar pulmonary edema
a. Absence of crackles does not preclude a diagnosis of CHE.
3. Dull lung sounds ventrally suggest presence of pleural effusion.
vi. Heart auscultation
1. Tachycardia
2. Irregular heart rhythm; an electrocardiographic examination is necessary to reach a specific
diagnosis.
3. Positioning of stethoscope over 4th or Sth intercostal space or just to the right or left of the
sternum allows best identification of heart murmurs in the cat.
 4. Muffled heart sounds with pleural effusion
5. Gallop rhythm
a. Consequence of an ausculted third {S3) or fourth (S4) heart sound and indicates heart
disease in cats.
i. S4: Atrial gallop. Indicates altered ventricular compliance as in HCM.
ii. S3: Often heard in patients with dilative cardiomyopathy.
b. Consider hyperthyroidism with abnormal cardiac auscultation (gallop rhythm or systolic
murmur).
6. Cardiac murmurs
a. Systolic murmur in cats with dynamic left ventricular outflow obstruction or mitral valve
regurgitation as can occur with ventricular concentric hypertrophy fe.g., HCM or
hyperthyroidism)
b. Soft systolic heart murmur may be present with dilative cardiomyopathy {i.e., due to
annular ring enlargement and valvular regurgitation).
vii. Pulse palpation
1. Increased pulse rate
 2. Normal to weak femoral pulses
3. Pulse deficits
4. Irregular pulses
b. Low cardiac output heart failure (LOHF)
1.
 Depressed mentation and weakness as consequence of impaired cerebral blood flow and tissue
perfusion (i.e., cardiogenic shock)
ii. Increased respiratory rate +/- effort due to respiratory compensation for metabolic (e.g., lactic)
acidosis
ii. Cold extremities and decreased rectal temperature
iv. Pale mucous membranes with prolonged capillary refill time
v.Auscultation lungs
1. No specific findings unless CHF concurrently present
Chapter 1 4 General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
169
2. Dull lung sounds with pleural effusion
vi. Auscultation heart
1. Heart murmur and gallop rhythm possible
2. Muffled heart sounds with pericardial effusion. (Clinically significant pericardial effusion is
very rare in the cat. Muffled heart sounds are more commonly due to pleural effusion.)
3. Heart rate may be increased, normal, or decreased
a. Tachycardia
i.
 Sinus tachycardia due to increased sympathoadrenergic tone
ii.
 Supra ventricular tachycardia, atrial flutter, or fibrillation
ii. Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
b. Bradycardia
 Sinus bradycardia with decompensated shock
ii. First-, second-, or third-degree atrioventricular block (fig. 14.1)
ii. Sinus arrest
vii. Pulse palpation
1. Weak to absent femoral and/or metatarsal pulses
2. High, low, or normal pulse rate
3. Pulse deficits
 4. Regular, regularly irregular, or irregularly irregular pulse
C. Arterial thromboembolism (see chap. 16—Management of Thromboembolic Disease Secondary to
Heart Disease)
 Cats are typically very painful, displaying excitement, vocalization, aggression, and open-mouth
breathing (panting).
+
Fig。 14.1. Electrocardiograms (lead Il) of cats with atrioventricular (AV) block.
a. First-degree AV block in a 15-year-dd male castrated cat that was referred for a heart murmur and bradycardia
The PR-interval (arrows) measures 0.1 ms (normal 0.05-0.09 ms). 50mm/s; 20 mm/mV.
b. Second-degree AV block in a 13-year-dd male castrated cat with HCM, referred for a heart murmur and an
irregular heart rhythm. Note the absence of QRS complexes after some of the P waves (long arrows). Ventricular
beats are present as a consequence of an accelerated escape rhythm and fuse with the subsequent P waves (short
arrows). 25mm/s; 20mm/mV.
C.
 Third-degree AV block in 17-year-dd female cat presented for syncopical episodes. Note the complete dissocia-
tion of P waves and QRS complexes (escape beats). The ventricular heart rate is 95 beats per minute. 50mm/s;
20 mm/mV.
170
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Heart auscultation may reveal abnormalities suggestive for, but not proof of, heart disease, such
as a heart murmur or gallop rhythm.
ii. 40-60% of cats with ATE are in CHF at the time of presentation and show clinical signs accord-
ingly (see above).
iv. Neurological and musculoskeletal findings
1. Any limb can be affected, but the hind extremities are involved in more than 90% of cases;
thus, hind limb paresis or paralysis is observed most frequently.
a. Pain proximal to desensitized area
b. Poikilothermia: cold distal extremity
c. Pulselessness: absence of femoral or radial pulse and absence of blood flow as determined
with Doppler blood flow probe
d. Pallor of the paw, if nonpigmented
é. Paresis, lower motor neuron deficits
 3. The musculature in the affected limb may be firm and contracted, in the hind leg particularly
the gastrognemic musculature.
4. Deep pain in the distal extremity is absent in severe cases.
v. Inadequate systemic perfusion or shock is frequently observed in affected animals.
1. This may be due to the following:
a. Left ventricular diastolic or systolic dysfunction associated with the underlying heart
disease.
b. Reperfusion injury leading to electrolyte abnormalities (hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia),
thelial injury.
C. Differential diagnosis
a. Congestive heart failure:
i
 Noncardiac causes of pulmonary gas exchange abnormalities, including pneumonia (bacterial,
fungal, parasitic, viral), pulmonary neoplasia, heart worm disease, pulmonary thromboembolism,
iatrogenic (excessive fluid administration), and others.
i. Lower airway disease: feline asthma, chronic bronchitis
ii. Noncardiac causes of pleural effusion, including pyothorax, chylothorax, neoplastic effusion,
and others.
b. Low output heart failure:
i. Noncardiac causes of low tissue perfusion or hypotension, including hypovolemic shock, SIRS/
sepsis, and electrolyte a bnormalities (hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia ).
i. Noncardiac causes of syncope: vasovagal syncope, situational syncope, causes of transient loss of
consciousness other than syncope (e.g., seizures, hypoglycemia).
C. Arterial thromboembolism
i. Other conditions leading to acute paraparesis, including spinal lymphosarcoma, spinal trauma.
focal mengiomyelitis (FIP, toxoplasma, cryptococcus), discospondylitis, spinal ischemia (fibrocar-
tilaginous embolism), and intervertebral disk disease
il. Noncardiac causes of thromboembolism, including tumor embolism, paraneoplastic thromboem
bolism, and other causes of hypercoagula bility
d. CHF, LOHF, and ATE in cats can be the sequelae of various types of heart disease, and an echo.
cardiogram is required to differentiate between the different types, the most frequent being the
following:
i.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
ii. Restrictive cardiomyopathy
il. Unclassified cardiomyopathy
iv. Dilated cardiomyopathy
Chapter 1 4General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
171
v. Endomyocarditis
vi. Myocardial infarction
vi. Primary mitral valve regurgitation
e. The term cardiomyopatby generally applies to the presence of a primary myocardial disease, and
other cardiac (e.g., aortic stenosis) or noncardiac causes (e.g., systemic hypertension, hyperthyroid-
ism, taurine deficiency) have to be excluded prior to making that diagnosis.
 D. Diagnostics and monitoring procedures
a. Laboratory tests:
i. Changes in CBC, serum biochemistry, and urine analysis may occur but are not specific for
cardiac disease:
 1. Neutrophilia and less consistently lymphopenia and monocytosis may be present as a response
 to high serum cortisol and catecholamine levels (stress response).
2. Stress hyperglycemia is common.
a. In cats with ATE, blood glucose taken from the affected limb may be lower than that
sampled from normal limbs.
 3. Azotemia is found as a consequence of inadequate effective circulating volume, chronic renal
failure, or thromboembolic occlusion of the renal artery.
4. Serum concentrations of enzymes associated with muscle injury {CK, AST > ALT; CK = cre-
atine kinase, AST = aspartate aminotransferase, ALT = alanine aminotransferase) may be
elevated in cats with ATE.
5. Electrolyte abnormalities include
a. Hyponatremia, which may occur in cats with LOHF. However, litle data is available in
this species.
b. Changes that can occur in cats with ATE during reperfusion of the ischemic extremity
include
i. Hyperkalemia
1. This may occur acutely, resulting in sudden death.
ii. Ionized hypocalcemia secondary to hyperphosphatemia.
 C. Hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis can occur with administration of loop diuretics (e.g-,
furosemide).
6. Myoglobinuria may be present in cats with ATE during reperfusion.
il. Arterial blood gas analysis and pulse oximetry (SpO2):
1. Arterial blood gas collection in cats is technically difficult and very stressful and thus danger-
ous for the cat in respiratory distress. Therefore, this technique is rarely indicated in the clini-
cal setting.
 2. Pulse oximetry (SpO2) is clinically useful for objective assessment of the cat's oxygenation
status.
a. A lower than expected SpO2 measurement supports the presence of a pulmonary gas
exchange abnormality but is not specific for cardiogenic pulmonary edema as the
etiology.
ii. Venous blood gas analysis and acid-base status:
1. Venous carbon dioxide partial pressure (PvCO2) is typically decreased (due to hyperventila
tion) or normal in cats with CHF. An elevated PvCO2 (PvCO2 > 45 mmHg) may indicate
a. Upper or lower airway obstruction
 b. Respiratory fatigue with prolonged dyspnea
C. Severe tissue hypoperfusion, for example, cardiogenic shock
2. Meta bolic acidosis may be present as a consequence of impaired tissue perfusion {lactic aci-
dosis) and may indicate cardiogenic shock.
3. An elevated blood lactate value (>1.5 mmol/L) indicates anaerobic tissue metabolism and is
most often the consequence of inadequate tissue blood flow; less frequently, it is the sequela
172
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
of arterial hypoxemia or other abnormalities. However, struggling can increase blood lactate
levels in cats manifold; this effect has to be taken into account when interpreting lactate levels.
a. In cats with ATE, venous lactate sampled from the affected {ischemic) limb is higher than
that sampled from normal limbs.
iv. Neurohumoral indices of heart disease:
1. Circulating peptide hormones (natriuretic peptides) and proteins of the contractile apparatus
 of the cardiac myocytes (troponins) have been used to identify heart disease in people.
2. While assays for brain natriuretic peptide, and to a lesser extent atrial natriuretic peptide,
have been validated in dogs, data for the cat is currently lacking.
 3. Cardiac troponin I concentrations increase in cats with CHF due to HCM and may be helpful
to identify heart failure as etiology of respiratory distress in the emergency situation.
a. Most normal animals have levels below the threshold of detection of the assay, but normal
values have to be established for each assay.
b. A veterinary point-of-care assay is available for troponin I (cTnI catridge, i-STAT, Heska).
c. Samples can be sent for analysis to
i.New Bolton Center, Attn Heart Center, 382 West Street Road, Kenneth-Square, PA
19348; phone: (610) 444-5800, ext. 6359
ii. At least 1 mL of heparinized plasma sent overnight on dry ice
ii. Normal values: <0.03-0.16 ng/mL
b. Electrocardiography (ECG)
i.
 Recording of an ECG is indicated in every patient in whom cardiac disease is suspected. The
 greatest value of the ECG consists of identification of arrhythmias and conduction abnormalities
in regard to severity and necessity to treat {for details see chap. 17—Management of Life-
Threatening Arrhythmias).
1. An abnormal ECG can be present in an animal without heart disease and vice versa.
i. Continuous evaluation of the ECG is further indicated in all critically ill patients and in patients
electrolyte and/or acid-base abnormalities, calcium gluconate administration, hypoxemia).
ii. While various leads are routinely used for acquiring an electrocardiogram, Einthoven's bipolar
three-lead system (I,Il,Ill) suffices the needs of the emergency evaluation for most cases:
1. Cat is positioned sternally and gently restrained.
 2. Adhesive electrode patches (Ambu Bluesensor N, Ambu A/S, Denmark) or blunted alligator
clips can be used.
3. One electrode is placed just proximal to the left and right olecranon and one just proximal
to the left patella.
iv. Normal ECG criteria (table 14.1) have been listed for cats.
Table 14.1. Normal values for heart rate, intervals between complexes,
duration of P-QRS-T complexes, and heights of complexes.
Heart Rate (Beats
per Minute)
120-240
P wave
Width: <0.04 secs; height: <0.2mV
 P-R interval
0.05-0.09 sec
QRS complex
Width: <0.04 secs; height: <0.9mV
Q-T interval
0.07-0.20 sec; various w/heart rale
S-T segment
No depression or elevalion
T wave
Posilive, negalive, or biphasic
 Mean elecirical axis
0° to +160°
Chapter 1 4General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
173
Fig. 14.2. Normal ECG cat, lead Il, 25mm/s; 20 mm/mV. The complexes are much smaller than in the dog, and
Pand T waves may become unidentilible with onlylile baseline artifact being present. The T wave can be positive,
negative, or biphasic. The heart rate is 2l4 beats per minute and the rhythm is sinus rhythm.
Table 14.2. Unique radiographic features in cats as opposed to dogs with congestive heart failure (CHF).
Feature
Cat
Dog
Distribution of
Varicble distribution; diffuse, paichy
Predominantly perihilar interslitial to
 pulmonary edema
appearance of interslilial io alveolar
alveolar infilirates; cavdal and
infiltrales is common.
ulimately remaining lung lobes are
involved with severe edema.
Pleural effusion
Common with left heart failure alone
Indicales right heart failure
 Engorgement of
Inconsistent finding: absence does not
Consistently present with CHF
pulmonary veins
exclude presence of CHF.
 Posilion of leff atriurm
Leff atrium is located belween
bulge at 2-3 o'clock posilion of VD
 mainstem bronchi and not prominent
thoracic radiograph; it is not prominent
 on VD view; if enlarged, it appears
on laterolateral radiograph.
prominent on laterolateral view.
Vertebral heart size
7.5 +/- 0.3 vertebrae on laterolateral
9.7 +/- 0.5 vertebrae on laterolateral
radiograph
radiograph
v. Distinct characteristics of the feline versus canine ECG
1. Sinus arrhythmia {also termed respiratory arrhythmia) is abnormal in cats.
2. QRS configuration in cats is more variable than in dogs, and the R amplitude is usually low
(figs. 14.2).
c. Holter monitor
i.
A Holter monitor in cats is a device capable of continuously recording an ECG for 24-48 hours
for later analysis.
ii. The use of a Holter monitor allows identification and characterization of arrhythmias that occur
only intermittently.
ii. Further indications include
1. Correlation of an arrhythmia with clinical signs (e.g., syncope)
2. Evaluation of necessity for antiarrhythmic treatment
3. Evaluation of the efficacy of an antiarrhythmic intervention
iv. Due to the size of the recording device, cats have to be hospitalized for the duration of the
recording process (fig. 14.3).
174
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 14.3. Use of adhesive electrode patches taped in posion on the distal extremities of the right and left front
d. Cardiovascular imaging
i.Thoracic radiography (table 14.2, fig. 14.4)
1. Heart size can be roughly assessed by using the thoracic vertebrae as a scale, starting at the
4th thoracic vertebra.
a. On a lateral radiograph, the vertebral heart size (sum of short and long axes) measures
   tt   s     n  0
 b. On a ventrodorsal view, the cardiac short axis measurement is less than four vertebrae in
most normal cats (fig. 14.4b).
c. Pericardial fat can mimic cardiomegaly.
 2. Absence of generalized cardiomegaly does not prove absence of heart disease (because of
concentric hypertrophy). Heart size correlates best with dilated cardiomyopathy, followed by
restrictive cardiomyopathy, unclassified cardiomyopathy, and HCM.
 3. Left atrial enlargement in cats can often not be identified on the lateral view due to its cranial
position but appears as a bulge at the 2-3-o'clock position on the ventrodorsal view fig.
14.5).
4. Engorgement of pulmonary veins may be present in cats with CHF, but this is less consistently
the case than in dogs (fig. 14.6).
5. Pulmonary edema occurs with left-sided CHF and can have a perihilar location, can involve
mostly the caudal lung fields, or have a more diffuse patchy appearance (fig. 14.7).
6. Pleural effusion in cats is a frequent finding with left-sided CHF alone.
a. This pleural effusion can be a modified transudate, pseudochylothorax, or a true chylo
thorax. Most commonly, it is a modified transudate.
ii.  Echocardiography
1. Echocardiography is an essential tool to confirm and characterize heart disease in the cat. The
diagnosis is made upon determination of wall thickness, chamber dimensions, cardiac valve
function, and blood flow turbulence and velocities.
 2. Normal echocardiographic values for cats have been established (table 14.3) but are operator
de pen dent.
3. Decreased end-diastolic and -systolic volumes with a thickened left ventricular wall are typical
for HCM. Increased end-diastolic and -systolic volumes with reduced thickness of the left
ventricular wall are characteristic for dilated cardiomyopathy.
4. The left atrium is almost always enlarged with left-sided CHF
Chapter 1 4 General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
175
L=4.6
S=3.4
T3
VHS=8.0
3.
L=5.5
S=4.0
VHS=9.5
Fig.14.4.[
Determination of the vertebral heart size.
axis (L) that leads from the base of the heart (intersection of the trachea with the most ventral apical yein, just
cranial to the bifurcation) to the apex of the heart, and the short axis (S) that runs perpendicular to the long axis
and at the widest part of the heart. Both lengths of L and S are transferred to overlay the thoracic vertebrae
starting at the cranial border of the fourth thoracic vertebra (T4). Summation of L and'S leads to the vertebral
heart size.
b. Determination of the short-axis cardiac dimension in the ventrodorsal view in the same animal. The short axis (S)
[igauaa aut jo ybua ot peioduos uaui s! s yoay aul jo pod isapim aul io (i sixo buol ay ot jonoipuadiad suni
body identical to the procedure described in 14.4a.
c.D
 Determinafion of the vertebral heart size in an I-year-old male castrated cat that presented with congestive heart
 Failure secondary to hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
5. Determining the ratio of the left atrial diameter to the aortic root diameter {LA-Ao ratio)
facilitates objective judgment of left atrial size. LA-Ao ratio greater than 1.3 suggests left atrial
dilation (fig. 14.8).
formation and occurs due to blood stasis in the large left atrium. Spontaneous echo contrast
indicates an increased risk for thromboembolism (e.g., ATE).
aC
trophicobstructive cardiomyopathy.
a. A waistline (arrow) that is not normally visible indicates the presence of an enlarged left atrium.
b. Compared to the lateral view, the enlargement of the left atrium (arrow) is easier to detect on the ventrodorsal
view and appears as a prominent bulge at a 2-3-o'dlock position. This is not the case in the dog, where the left
atrium is positioned between the mainstem bronchi of the caudal lung lobes.
However, the vessel size is assessed in an identical manner. On a lateral thoracic radiograph, the size of the pul-
monary vein (vessel ventral to the bronchus; 5th intercostal space) is considered increased if it surpasses the diameter
of the proximal 4th rib. This is the case in this I-year-dd male intact cat with hyperrophic cardiomyopathy.
176
Fig. 14.7. Right lateral (a) and ventrodorsal (b) view of thoracic radiographs of a cat with congestive heart failure
exemplifying the characteristic patchy appearance and difuse distribution of cardiogenic pulmonary edema com-
monly seen in this species.
Table 14.3. Normal feline echocardiographic values (M-mode; n = 79)
Parameter
Mean ± SD
Range
95% Cl
LVID[cm]
1.5 ± 0.2
1.08-2.14
1.46-1.54
LVID,[cm]
0.72 ± 0.15
0.4-1.12
0.69-0.75
LVW(cm]
0.41 ± 0.07
0.25-0.6
0.39-0.43
LVW,(cm]
0.68 ± 0.11
0.43-0.98
0.66-0.7
IVSa[cm]
0.42 ± 0.07
0.3-0.6
0.4-0.44
IVS,[cm]
0.67 ± 0.12
0.4-0.9
0.64-0.70
Ao
0.95 ± 0.14
0.6-1.21
0.91-0.98
LAD,[cm]
1.17 ± 0.17
0.7-1.7
1.13-1.21
LA:Ao
1.25 ± 0.18
0.88-1.79
1.21-1.29
%FS
52.1 ± 7.11
40-66.7
50.51-53.69
Weight
4.7 ± 1.2
2.7-8.2
4.43-4.97
Modified from Drourr et al. JAVMA, 2005; 226[5):734-737.
LVIDa and LVID, = Leff ventricular internal dimension at end diastole and systole, respeclively. LVWa and
LVW, = Left ventricular wall at end diastole and systole, respeclively. IVS and IVS, = Interventricular septal thick-
ness al end diastole and systole, respeclively. Ao = Aoric root dimension. LAD, = Leff alrial dimension al end
 systole. LA:Ao = Left alrium-to-aortic ralio. %FS = Percentage fraclional shortening.
177
178
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
CM
B
Fig. 1 4.8. Echocardiographic examination of the heart. Right parasternal short axis view at the level of the heart
basis in a cat with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (A) and in a cat with a normal heart (B). The left atrial
size is markedy larger when compared to the aortic diameter in the cat with heart disease, leading to an increase
in the LA-Ao ratio. LA = left atrium; RA = right atrium; Ao = Aorta; PA = pulmonary artery. (lmages courtesy of Dr.
NickRussel.)
Fig. 14.9. Aortic angiogram of a cat with recurrent aortic thromboembolism (white arrow). Several collateral
of Dr. James Buchanan and the Veterinary Information Network [VIN.com].]
7. Systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve describes the displacement of the anterior leaflet
of the mitral valve into the left ventricular outflow tract during the rapid left ventricular ejec-
tion phase in cats with HCM. Consequences of systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve
are dynamic stenosis of the left ventricular outflow tract and mitral regurgitation.
ii. Angiocardiography
1. Radiopaque dye is injected in a vessel or heart chamber, which allows visualization of these
structures radiographically. It allows identification of vascular shunts, congenital cardiac
anomalies, and valvular regurgitation and stenosis, including ATE (fig. 14.9).
 2. Administration of the contrast agent requires the following considerations:
a. Contrast agents are hypertonic solutions: volume overload and pulmonary edema can
occur.
flow.
é. Central venous pressure
i.
 The central venous pressure {CVP) is the intravascular pressure in the large thoracic veins and
is typically measured at the junction of the cranial vena cava and the right atrium via a jugular
catheter.
Chapter 1 4  General Approach and Overview of Cardiac Emergencies
179
i. The CVP is normally used as a marker of intravascular volume status and preload.
ii. If CVP is intended to serve as an index of cardiac preload, the end-diastolic pressure at end·
expiration should be used.
iv. A CVP of 0-3 mmHg (0-5cmHzO) is considered normal in a cat.
v. In cats with heart disease that are in need of IV fluid therapy, the CVP is routinely measured to
minimize the risk of causing cardiogenic pulmonary edema. An increase of the CVP above
5 mmHg (7cmHzO) suggests increased risk of fluid overload and consequent hydrostatic pulmo-
nary edema.
vi. Factors other than intravascular volume influence the CVP and have to be taken into
consideration:
1. Vascular tone
disea se, tamponade
 3. Tricuspid valve disease: stenosis, regurgitation
4. Cardiac rhythm: atrial fibrillation, AV dissociation
 5. Intrathoracic pressure: pleural effusion (>20 mL/kg),tension pneumothorax, respiration, inter-
mittent positive pressure ventilation, PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure)
f.Arterial blood pressure
i. In cats, arterial blood pressure is best measured by Doppler sphygmomanometry (normal:
110-150 mmHg).
i. If trends are of importance, the same leg should be used for repeated measurements.
ii. Doppler sphygmoma nometry allows assessment of arterial blood pressure even in cats with severe
hypotension; however, the correlation between Doppler blood pressure and arterial blood pres-
sure can be affected by variables such as technique (e.g-, pressure on transducer), arterial tone
{e.g., hypothermia), blood pressure level, and others.
iv. In cats with low output heart failure, blood pressure is often maintained due to counteracting
neuroendocrine responses:
 1. Activation of the sympathoadrenergic system
 2. Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system
3. Secretion of other vasoactive hormones (vasopressin, endothelin)
v. This has two clinical implications in this group of patients:
1. A normal arterial blood pressure does not guarantee adequate cardiac output and tissue blood
flow.
2. Occurrence of hypotension indicates decompensation and requires immediate therapeutic
intervention (see chap. 15—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases).
15
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC
CARDIAC DISEASES
Mark A. Oyama
Unique Features
● Detection of heart murmurs, gallops, and other physical exam findings of early or mild heart disease
in cats can be challenging.
· Chest radiographs are relatively insensitive in detecting heart enlargement in cats.
· Almost all forms of cardiomyopathy in cats result in diastolic heart failure.
● The mainstay of medical therapy in cats with heart failure is diuretics; long-term efficacy of ACE
inhibitors, beta-blockers, and calcium channel blockers is largely unknown.
General approach to feline heart disease
a. The diagnosis and treatment of feline heart disease are challenging. The clinical signs associated
with heart disease are often vague and nonspecific. In all but the most advanced cases, assessment
of heart size and shape using thoracic radiography is difficult, and echocardiography is typically
 a    ri a d  si  
increased survival. The fragile clinical state of cats with severe congestive heart failure can hinder
diagnostic and therapeutic efforts.
b. Feline heart diseases can be classified as either primary or secondary.
i. Primary diseases refer to those that occur in the absence of an identifiable etiology and are typi-
cally categorized based on their morphologic appearance. These diseases include hypertrophic,
dilated, restrictive, and unclassified cardiomyopathy. Other less common conditions include
endomyocardial fibroelastosis, arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy, and excessive
left ventricular moderator band cardiomyopathy. These diseases are typically progressive and
lead to clinical signs such as heart failure, fainting, or thromboembolism. In virtually all cases
of primary disease, treatment is palliative.
ii. Secondary diseases refer to those with a proven or strongly suspected etiology such as taurine
deficiency, thyrotoxicosis, systemic hypertension, toxin (doxorubicin), and infiltrative (neopla-
sia). Cases of secondary heart disease are often relatively mild and may not be associated with
cardiac clinical signs. In some cases (i.e., taurine deficiency, thyrotoxicosis), cardiac pathology
is reversible if the underlying cause is successfully managed.
c. Because most forms of feline heart disease primarily involve diastolic dysfunction, treatment is
tricular relaxation.
d. In cases of systolic dysfunction (i.e., dilated cardiomyopathy), treatment is aimed at relieving signs
of congestion and improving contractility.
181
182
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
II. Clinical examination of patients with heart disease
a. Common presenting complaints include the following:
i.Tachypnea, dyspnea, inappetence, lethargy, posterior paralysis, or paresis.
i. Coughing, which is a common sign in dogs with congestive heart failure, is rare in cats.
 ii. Many patients with heart disease are asymptomatic and identified only after physical examina-
tion reveals a murmur or gallop heart sound.
b. Physical examination findings
i.Cardiac auscultation
1. Systolic heart murmur heard along the sternal border
 2. Murmurs may be accentuated during periods of tachycardia.
 3. Diastolic gallop sound (typically due to a fourth heart sound)
4. Arrhythmia
i. Pulmonary auscultation
1. Increased bronchovesicular sounds
2. Muffled lung and heart sounds (typical in cases of pleural effusion)
ii. Jugular venous distension or pulses
iv. Weak, irregular, or absent femoral pulses
v.Signs of systemic thromboembolism (i.e., paresis)
c. Clinical pathology
i. In most cases, routine serum biochemistry, CBC, and urinalysis do not assist in the clinical
diagnosis. These tests are often performed to screen for concurrent disease in geriatric patients
or prior to pharmacologic intervention with agents such as diuretics or ACE-inhibitors.
ii. Cardiac troponin, endothelin, and atrial and B-type natriuretic peptide concentrations are com-
monly increased in cats with primary and secondary cardiac disease.
ii. Skeletal muscle enzymes (e.g., CPK) may be increased in cases of systemic thromboembolism.
iv. Plasma or whole-blood taurine concentration should be determined in cats with poor systolic
function (i.e., dilated cardiomyopathy).
v.Fluid analysis of thoracic or abdominal effusion is commonly performed to screen for potential
noncardiac etiologies (i.e., neoplasia, FIP, etc.).
d. Electrocardiography
i. In the emergency setting, ECG adds little to the diagnosis of a specific form of heart disease.
il. Occasionally, atrial or ventricular premature beats are identified.
ii. Atrial fibrillation may be present in patients with severe disease.
iv. Sustained episodes of ventricular tachycardia (>30 sec in duration) are uncommon.
e. Thoracic radiography
i. Useful in assessing cardiac size and shape, pulmonary parenchyma, pulmonary vessels, and the
thoracic space.
1. In cases of mild to moderate disease, thoracic radiographs are relatively insensitive and
echocardiography may be required.
 2. The dorsoventral projection is the preferred view to assess left atrial size and shape.
i. Left-sided heart failure in the cat can result in pleural effusion, pulmonary edema, or both
(fig. 15.1).
1. In cases of severe pleural effusion, assessment of heart size and shape is difficult, and if
suspected, therapeutic thoracocentesis should be performed prior to radiography.
2. Distribution of pulmonary edema in cats is often multifocal and patchy and does not typi-
cally accumulate around the pulmonary hilus or in the caudodorsal lung fields as it does in
the dog.
ifi. Cats with a fragile clinical presentation may not tolerate restraint for radiography, and the clini
cian should first attempt to stabilize these patients (see “"Ill. Treatment of life-threatening heart
failure” below).
Chapter 15 Management of Specilic Cardiac Diseases
183
Fig. 15.1. Lateral chest radiographs from two cats with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy demonstrating (A) pleural
effusion; note the compression and rounding of the lung lobes in the dorsocaudal chest and loss of cardiac silhouette
this radiographic finding should initiate prompt pleurocentesis; and (B) pulmonary edema; note the hazy pulmonary
pattern in the lung fields, enlarged pulmonary vessels, and enlarged cardiac silhouette. The large amount of air in
f.Echocardiography
i. Useful in assessing cardiac structure and function and achieving a morphologic diagnosis. The
echocardiographic examination typically concentrates on left ventricular and interventricular
wall thickness, function, echogenicity, left atrial size, mitral valve motion and regurgitation,
and presence of dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (fig. 15.2).
ii. The typical echocardiographic features of the most common forms of feline cardiomyopathy
are as follows. The author notes that disagreement exists regarding the appropriateness of
1. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM): idiopathic left ventricular concentric hypertrophy,
left atrial enlargement, hyperechoic endocardium, and/or papillary muscles.
2. Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM): similar features as in HCM but also
with systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve that creates a left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction.
3. Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM): left and right atrial enlargement, endocardial hypere-
degrees of ventricular hypertrophy, normal to mildly decreased systolic function, restrictive
mitral inflow Doppler pattern.
4. Unclassified cardiomyopathy (UCM): Displays various features of multiple forms of cardio-
myopathy and used to describe cats whose cardiac morphology does not fit into any of the
above categories.
5. Endomyocardial fibroelastosis (EMF): widespread thickening and hyperechogenicity of the
endocardial surface. Rare. Seen mainly in young Burmese or Siamese cats.
6. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy: severe right atrial and right ventricular
dilation, right ventricular aneurysmal dilations and dyskinesis, tricuspid regurgitation. Rare.
Often misdiagnosed as congenital tricuspid valve dysplasia.
ii. Cats with a fragile clinical presentation may not tolerate restraint for echocardiography and
the clinician should first attempt to stabilize these patients {see "Ill. Treatment of life-threat
ening heart failure" below)
IlI. Treatment of life-threatening heart failure (table 15.1)
a. Regardless of etiology of the underlying cardiomyopathy, emergency treatment consists of an
appropriate combination of diuretics, pleurocentesis, and supplemental oxygen (fig. 15.3).
184
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
A
B
Fig. 15.2. Echocardiographic images from cats with cardiomyopathy. (A) Right parasternal long axis view of a
cat with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Note the thickening of the ventricular walls and hyperechoic endocardial
regions. (B) Right parasternal long axis view of a cat with systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve (arrow). The
mitral valve has moved toward the interventricular septum, narrowing the lumen of the outflow tract. A hyperechoic
region of the interventricular septum, likely due to repeated contact with the valve, is noted directly opposie the valve
leaflet. Note the leff atrial enlargement and thickening of the ventricular walls. (C) Right parasternal long axis view
of α cat with restrictive cardiomyopathy. Note the enlarged right and left atria and relatively normal-appearing leff
ventricular wall thickness and chamber diameter. (D) Right parasternal long axis view of a cat with restrictive
cardiomyopathy, severe left atrial enlargement, and sponfaneous contrast within the atrial chamber. This finding is
 thought to represent a high risk for development of systemic thromboembolism.
i.Diuretics
1. Furosemide (1-2 mg/kg q1-2h IV, IM, SC as needed to alleviate respiratory distress).
2. Response to diuretic therapy is monitored using respiratory rate and effort. Diuretic dose is
sharply decreased once respiratory rate begins to decrease or is approximately 40 breaths/
min (see “IV. Treatment of chronic heart failure” below).
3. Overzealous diuretic therapy can precipitate or aggravate renal insufficiency. Thus, free-
choice water is typically offered during acute treatment and the patient is monitored to
ensure that urine is being produced.
4. Mild increases in serum BUN (<60mg/dL), creatinine (<2.5 mg/dL), and total solids are
indications that effective diuresis is occurring.
a. Supplemental parenteral fluids are not indicated unless cats demonstrate signs of low-
output failure (i.e., hypotension), are severely dehydrated, cease taking in oral fluids, or
are at high risk for acute renal failure due to preexisting renal insuficiency.
ii. Pleurocentesis
1. Most cats will tolerate pleurocentesis without chemical restraint.
2. The author prefers use of a 21-gauge butterfly catheter.
Table 15.1. Commonly used drugs and doses in cats with heart failure.
Mechanisms of
Adverse
Drugs
Indications
Action
Effects
Dosages
ACE inhibitors
All forms of
Antagonize
Azolemia,
 PO: enalapril,
cardiomyopathy
renin-
 hypotension
0.5 mg/kg
angiotensin-
q12-24h; PO:
aldosterone
benazepril,
cxis
0.25-0.5mg/kg
q24h
Alenolol
HCM, HOCM,
Bela-blocker
 Bradycardlia,
PO: 6.25-12.5mg/
RCM, UCM 
hypotension
cat q12-24h
Digoxin
DCM, +/- RCM
Posilive inolrope
Gl upsel,
PO: cals 1.9-3.2kg,
arrhyihmias
0.031mg/cat
q72h; cats
0.031mg/cat
q24-28h; cats
>6.0kg,0.031mg/
cat g12-24hrs
Dilliazem
HCm, HOCm,
Ca-channel 
 Bradycardia,
PO: Cardizem CD,
RCM, UCM
blocker
hypotension,
10 mg/kg q24h;
Gl upsel,
PO: Dilacor XR,
inappelence
30-60mg/cat
q12h; PO:
dilliazem, 0.5-
1.5mg/kg q8h
 Dobutamine
DCM
 Sympathomimetic
Tachycardia,
CRI: 2-10μg/kg/min
seizures
Dopamine 
DCM
Sympathomimelic
Tachycardlia,
CRI: 2-5 μg/kg/min 
vasoconstriclion
Esmolol
Ventricular or
Bela-blocker
Bradycardia
IV: 250-500 μg/kg
supravenlricular
slow bolus
lachycardia 
50-200μg/kg/min
CRI
Furosemide
CHF
Loop diurelic; for 
Dehydration,
IV/IM/SC: 1-2mg/
treatment of
hypokalemia
kg.q1-2h; PO/SC:
life-threatening
6.25-12.5mg/cat
heart failure,
q12-24hs
for treatment of
chronic heart 
failure
Hydrochlorothiazide
 Refraclory CHF
Distal tubule
Azotemia,
PO: 1-2mg/kg
diuretic
hypokalemia
g12-24h
Hydrochlorothiazide/
Refraclory CHF
Distal tubule
Azotemia,
PO: 2.2 mg/kg q24h
Spironolactone
diurelic/
polassium
polassium-
imbalance
sparing diurelic
Lidocaine
Ventricular
Na-channel
Hypotension,
IV:0.25-0.75mg/cal
arrhythmias
blocker
seizures
slow bolus
 Propranolol
HCM, HOCm,
Bela-blocker
Bradycardia,
PO: 5-10mg/cal
RCM, UCM
hypotension,
q8-12h
aggravalion of
asthma or
diabetes
mellitus
live cardiomyopaihy; UCM = unclassified cardiomyopathy; DCM = dilated cardiomyopathy; CHF = congeslive 
heart failure.
185
186
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine 
Physical examination,
+}-radiographs,
+/- echocardiogram
w/minimal stress
Yes
Pleural
effusion?
Pleurocentesis
Na
Yes (i.e.,DCM,
Maximize doses,
cerlain cats with
add aldactazide,
Systolic
RCM or UCM)
switch to furosemide SC,
 Dobutamine or
dysfunction?
+/-digoxin?
dopamine
Refractory
heart failure
Furosemide (1-2mg/kg IV),
oxygen
Aspirin, heparin,
No
or clopidogrel
1-2hrs
Yes
Severe left
atrial enlargement
Yes
or spontaneous
Respiratory
contrast?
distress?
No
Atenalol
Furosemide
(6.25-12.5mg/cat
3-5days
HOCM
q12-24hrs)
(RCM,UCM?)
HCM
(RCM,UCM2)Long-acting
Renal panel
ACE-inhibitor
Etiology?
dliltiazem
DCM
+/- Digoxin
 e uaidun puo umoun jo ai apesny jo asn pueq suis
tRecommendation of this treatment is based particularly on the author's experiences and
 preferences; clinical studies are required to document elficacy.
Fig. 15.3.1
 Treatment algorithm for treatment of heart failure in cats. See text for further details and discussion.
4. Pleurocentesis is an essential aspect of treatment in cats with effusions. Diuretic therapy
alone is ineffective at significantly alleviating respiratory distress due to large accumulations
of pleural effusion.
ii. Supplemental oxygen
1. Housing in an oxygen cage at 40% Oz or greater.
Chapter 15Management oF Specilic Cardiac Diseases
187
ally administered but is of dubious efficacy.
v. Cats with systolic dysfunction (i.e., DCM, some cases of UCM or RCM) benefit from intrave
nous inotropic support.
1. Dobutamine (2-10 mcg/kg min CRI) is the preferred drug, seizures may occur.
 2. Dopamine (2-5 mg/kg/min CRI), excessive tachycardia may occur.
 3. Excessive tachycardia in cats with diastolic disease further impairs diastolic function and
filling and should be avoided.
b. Confounding factors affecting emergency treatment
i.Systemic thromboembolism (see section below)
ii. Arrhythmias
1. Ventricular premature beats are relatively common but often resolve once congestive heart
failure is treated. Ventricular tachycardia is relatively uncommon. Standardized treatment
recommendations are not available (see chap. 17—Management of Life-Threatening
Arrhythmias).
a. Beta-blockers
i.Atenolol 6.25 mg PO q12-24h
ii. Esmolol 250-500 μg/kg slow IV bolus, 50-200 μg/kg/min CRI
b. Lidocaine (0.2s-0.75 mg/cat slow IV bolus) may cause seizures.
2. Atrial fibrillation is infrequently detected in cases with severe atrial enlargement, and treat-
ment to slow the ventricular rate is considered.
a. Beta-blockers {see "IV. Treatment of chronic heart failure")
b. Calcium channel blockers (see “IV. Treatment of chronic heart failure")
C. Digoxin is not commonly used due to high risk for toxicity.
IV. Treatment of chronic heart failure
a. Goals of treatment include alleviation of respiratory signs (ie., congestive failure), prevention of
syncope, sudden death, and systemic thromboembolism, and alleviation of left ventricular outflow
tract obstruction caused by systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve. In cats with systolic dys-
function, positive inotropes are also used (see fig. 15.3).
b. Beyond diuretic therapy, the ideal treatment of feline cardiomyopathy has not been esta blished. A
combination of diuretics, beta-blockers or calcium cha nnel blockers, and ACE-inhibitors is typically
used.
c.Diuretics
i. Furosemide (6.25 mg/cat PO q12-24h) is typically administered. The dose is tailored to the
lowest dose required to control congestive signs. Thus, some cats can be maintained on 6.26-
12.5 mg/cat PO every other day, while others will require 12.5 mg/cat q12-24h)
i. Periodic evaluation of renal function is recommended while receiving diuretics.
d.Beta-blockers
i. Primarily used in cats with HCM and HOCM. Occasionally used in RCM, UCM, and EMF if cats
are tachycardic. Atenolol (6.25-12.5 mg/cat PO q12-24h) or propranolol (5-10 mg/cat PO q8-
12h) is used to slow heart rate, improve diastolic filling, and suppress ventricular arrhythmias.
i. Despite widespread use of beta-blockers, particularly in cats with concurrent left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction (i.e., HOCM), long-term benefit is unproven.
ii. Due to risk of bradycardia and hypotension, combination therapy with beta-blockers and
calcium channel blockers is not recommended. The superiority of either treatment has not been
rigorously established. Often, beta-blockers are chosen for cats with the obstructive form of
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, while calcium-channel blockers are chosen in cats without
obstruction or in cats with restrictive/unclassified cardiomyopathy.
e. Calcium channel blockers
i.  Primarily used in cats with HCM and HOCM. Occasionally used in cats with RCM, UCM.
and EMF
188
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
il. Slow heart rate, improve diastolic filling, and theoretically improve diastolic relaxation. Long-
acting formulations provide the advantage of longer dosing intervals.
1. Cardizem CD (10 mg/kg PO q24h)
2. Dilacor XR (30-60 mg/cat PO q12h)
ii. Avoid concurrent use with beta-blockers (see above)
f.ACE inhibitors
i. The author uses ACE inhibitors in cats with any form of cardiomyopathy if they are concur
rently receiving diuretic therapy.
il. Reduce activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis, and theoretically ameliorate patho-
logic ventricular and coronary arterial remodeling and improve diastolic dysfunction. ACE
1. Enalapril (0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h)
2. Benazepril (0.25-0.5 mg/kg q24h)
ii. Despite their vasodilatory capacity, ACE inhibitors do not significantly aggravate preexisting
left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in cats with HOCM.
g. Digoxin
i.Use is restricted to cats with evidence of systolic dysfunction (i.e., DCM).
i. Risk of toxicity is relatively high, and stringent monitoring of patient's serum levels, appetite,
and attitude is required.
ii. Digoxin 0.031 mg/cat q72h in cats weighing 1.9-3.2kg, 0.031 mg/cat q24-48h in cats weighing
3.3-6 kg, and 0.031 mg/cat q12-24h in cats >6 kg. The author rarely administers more than
0.031 mg/cat q24h.
h. Taurine
i. Supplementation (250-500 mg/cat q12h) is recommended in all cats with systolic dysfunction
Ideally, plasma or whole-blood taurine levels should be determined prior to supplementation,
but the assay is not widely available.
i. Antithrombotic therapy (see below)
V.  Monitoring patients with chronic heart failure
a. Owners are instructed to monitor patient appetite, activity level, respiratory effort, and rate.
[dsoy-ui huunp wda os i> sueuau aieu heau j! paunad si apeoiq oarauaupe-eiaq aienbapa q
examination.
c. Periodic evaluation of BUN, creatinine, and serum electrolytes is performed.
d. Effective resolution of left ventricular outflow tract obstruction is accompanied by disappearance
or reduction of heart murmur and resolution of systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve on
echocardiographic examination. In some cases, this may be accompanied by partial or complete
regression of left ventricular hypertrophy, and prognosis is favora ble.
VI.  Treatment of refractory or advanced heart failure
a. In patients presenting with continued signs of congestive failure despite therapy, additional medica
tions are required.
b. Treatment strategies include increasing doses of existing therapy, prescribing additional classes of
diuretics, altering route of furosemide administration, and addition of digoxin in cases of right-
sided failure.
i. Beta-blocker, calcium-channel blocker, and ACE-inhibitor therapy is maximized.
ii. Hydrochlorothiazide (1-2mg/kg q12-24h) is added to enhance diuresis. Alternatively, a
combination of hydrochlorothiazide and spironolactone can be used (Aldactazide, 2.2 mg/kg
q24h).
ii. Route of administration of furosemide is changed from PO to SC. This strategy often permits
a slight decrease in the dose as bioavailability is improved.
iv. Digoxin (see above for dosages and precautions)
VII. Treatment and prevention of systemic thromboembolism
Chapter 15Management of Specilic Cardiac Diseases
189
its acute onset, poor treatment options, high recurrence rate, and associated morbidity to the
patient.
b. Etiology is likely a combination of blood stasis, local endothelial or endomyocardial injury, and
hypercoagulability. The most common site of STE is the distal aorta (saddle thromboembolism).
i. Echocardiographic evidence of severe left atrial enlargement or spontaneous contrast ("smoke")
within the left atrium are considered risk factors for thrombus development.
C. Treatment of STE involves {1) promoting collateral circulation, (2) thrombolytic therapy, {3) anti-
coagulation, (4) alleviating patient pain and distress, (5) preventing recurrence, and (6) treatment
of concomitant congestive heart failure. All aspects of treatment are challenging and prognosis is
extremely guarded.
i. Clinical signs of grave prognosis include evidence of multiple sites of STE (i.e., renal or mesenteric
arteries), progressive loss of limb function/via bility, coexisting refractory congestive heart failure
or arrhythmias, hyperkalemia due to reperfusion injury, identification of intracardiac thrombus,
severe hypothermia or cardiac shock, and owners who are unwilling to provide intensive and
often frustrating long-term home care.
d. Approximately 50% of cats with STE are euthanized, 25% succumb during initial treatment in the
hospital, and 25% are eventually discharged. Of the cats that leave the hospital, it is the author's
experience that many are soon euthanized once owners attempt to provide extended home care.
 Other cats may recover enough function within several days to weeks to adequately ambulate and
maintain an acceptable quality of life. Sloughing and necrosis of affected tissues can occur, and in
these cases, amputation is the only remedy (fig. 15.4). Recurrence of thromboembolism or conges-
tive heart failure is likely.
Fig. 15.4. Medial surface of the right pelvic limb of a cat 3 weeks after experiencing a saddle thrombus. Note
the moist dermatitis and necrosis of superficial tissues indicating loss of viability and poor collateral circulation.
 Prognosis for limb salvage is grave, and eventual amputation is likely required should the owner choose to continue
treatment.
190
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Disease.
f.  Treatment of concurrent congestive heart failure
i. Diuretics are used judiciously to avoid excessive dehydration, vasoconstriction, and compromise
of collateral circulation.
g. Supportive care
 i.Aggressive pain control is achieved during the initial episode using an appropriate combination
of aspirin, morphine (0.05-0.1 mg/kg administered epidurally), oxymorphone (0.05-0.15 mg/
kg IM or IV q6h) and butorphanol (0.02-0.4mg/kg IM or SC q4h).
ii. Promotion of collateral circulation is achieved by acepromazine (0.0s-0.1 mg/kg IV), judicious
fluid therapy, and maintenance of proper body temperature.
ii. Nutritional support through a nasoesophageal feeding tube.
iv. Prevention of self-mutilation using loose-fitting bandage material or an e-collar.
v.Access to litter box, food, and water.
vi. Physical therapy of the affected legs (ie., massage or range of motion) is of questionable value
and may precipitate patient discomfort or stress.
16
MANAGEMENT OF THROMBOEMBOLIC
DISEASE SECONDARY TO
HEART DISEASE
Amy J. Alwood
a. Arterial thromboembolism is an acute and potentially catastrophic syndrome that most commonly occurs
in association with heart disease in cats {i.e., cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism; CATE). Other
diseases associated with arterial thromboembolism include hyperthyroidism, neoplasia, and less com-
monly, sepsis or trauma. This chapter will focus on the approach to cardiogenic arterial thromboembo
lism, although the initial approach to arterial thromboembolism will be similar independent of the
underlying cause or risk factors associated with thromboembolism.
b. The most common site(s) affected in CATE is the aortic trifurcation supplying the pelvic limbs. Partial
or complete obstruction of flow in one or both femoral arteries leads to the common clinical signs of
acute onset paresis of one or both hind limbs (more on clinical signs below). Other sites that may be
affected either alternatively or concurrently include
i.Left forelimb (brachial artery)
i.Right forelimb (brachial artery)
ii. Mesenteric and/or renal arteries
iv. Cerebral arteries
c. Clinical signs:
i.Acute or peracute paresis of the affected limb(s), often severe enough to prevent walking. Patients
often present dragging both hind limbs. A common presenting complaint may include an owner
suspicious of a traumatic injury involving the spine or pelvis.
 ii. Tachypnea (which may represent pain or true respiratory compromise secondary to congestive heart
failure)
either pain, beha vioral distress, or true dyspnea.
iv. Palpation of the affected limb(s) often reveals a cool extremity with absent or weak pulses.
v.  Upon inspection of the digital pads of the affected limbs, the clinician may find pale/cyanotic tissue
corresponding with the severe compromise of primary circulation; however, this is not always readily
appreciated despite significant obstruction of the main vessel(s). (The reader is reminded that col-
lateral circulation preserves some flow to the affected limb even though the dominant supply may
be occluded).
d. Triage/initial assessment
i. Observation
a. Cats with acute systemic arterial thromboembolism are distressed independent of true dyspnea.
They are typically painful. Brief observation from a distance while providing oxygen via an
191
192
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
oxygen cage or flow-by oxygen can allow for initial assessment without adding to the stress that
the patient is experiencing.
ii. Thoracic auscultation
a. Thoracic auscultation can be performed quickly and safely in most patients.
b. Initial auscultation should first include all regions of the thorax to detect any pulmonary crackles
(suggesting pulmonary edema) or regions of diminished or dull lung sounds (suggesting possible
pleural effusion).
C. Auscultation of the heart should assess rate and evaluate for the presence of a murmur or gallop.
iii. Peripheral circulation
a. Similar parameters should be assessed as with any routine triage: mucous membrane color, capil-
lary refil time, and pulse quality as well as comparative assessment of temperature of the distal
limbs.
 b. Careful assessment of femoral pulses in both limbs as well as assessment of the distal pulses in
all limbs is central to diagnosis of arterial thromboembolism. Additional information on diagnosis
is provided below.
c. Observation of distal limbs should include assessment of the color of the digital pads—pale/gray
coloration may be noted in the pads of affected limbs.
d. If assessment/definitive diagnosis is uncertain after routine physical examination, paired/compara-
tive measurement of noninvasive blood pressure of a forelimb and hind limb can be performed
fi.e., in a patient with a thrombus of the iliac artery; the BP would be expected to be obtained with
relative ease in the forelimb and should be greater than that obtained in the hind limb. In many
cases of distal iliac thrombembolism, a blood pressure {or pulsatile sounds with the Doppler) is
not detectable in the affected limb[s]). Similarly, paired lactate measurements are sometimes evalu-
ated. The measured lactate in the affected limb is higher than that in the unaffected limb. Similarly,
blood glucose is often lower in the affected extremity than that in the normal extremity.
NOTE: THE AUTHOR DISCOURAGES USE OF DEEP CLIPPING OF THE TOENAIL TO
ASSESS FOR LACK OF BLOOD FLOW. (The diagnostic tools listed above offer a less painful
yet effective and sensitive means of diagnosis and should be chosen preferentially to deep nail
clipping.)
iv. Further assessment of respiratory function
a. When possible, pulse oximetry provides more objective and detailed information about lung
function; however, poor perfusion, especially in cases with concurrent heart failure, may make
obtaining an accurate rea ding with pulse oximetry challenging.
b. Any cat showing signs of respiratory compromise should be given oxygen supplementation (see
chap. 10).
é. Initial treatment
   g    
ii. Early use of analgesic therapy is encouraged. For specific recommendations and dosing, refer to the
section below on comprehensive treatment.
ili. Diuretic therapy: An initial dose of 1-2 mg/kg (administered IV or IM) furosemide should be admin-
istered to cats with evidence of congestive heart failure {e.g., respiratory distress with increased lung
sounds or pulmonary crackles).
f. Secondary assessment and comprehensive diagnostics
i. The secondary survey occurs after assessment and stabilization of the immediate and life-threatening
conditions.
ii.Full physical assessment/examination with particular note of the following:
a. Thoracic auscultation
b. Pulse quality
Chapter 16Management of Thromboembolic Disease Secondary to Heart Disease
193
C. Careful assessment of the hind limbs for any muscle rigidity or contraction (particularly the
gastrocnemius muscle in each leg can often be firm to palpation). Also note forelimb(s) for any
 postural changes/paresis.
d. Rectal temperature
ii. Clinical pathology/diagnostic samples
a. Chemistry panel
b. T4 and/or free T4
c. CBC
d. Urinalysis
e. +/- Coagulation panel
f. Thromboelastography
1. Thromboelastography (TEG) is a specialized analysis of hemostasis utilizing citrated whole
blood. This technology (which involves the instrument, a computer, and special software to
 process and translate results into a digital image) provides a global assessment of hemostasis
{incorporating the effects of clotting factors, platelets, and fibrinolysis). TEG has gained inter-
est in veterinary medicine in recent years because of its ability to assess hemostasis more
comprehensively and because of its unique ability to identify hypercoagulable states. As such,
TEG has the potential to be applied as a screening tool to cats known to have underlying
heart disease in an attempt to identify degree of risk for thromboembolic disease. The applica-
tion of TEG in veterinary medicine has recently been extended to use in feline patients.
However, the necessity of performing the analysis on whole blood samples (citrated whole
blood) within 30 minutes of sample collection requires that samples be collected and analyzed
on site {remote sample submission is not possible). Currently, the presence of TEG analyzers
is limited to a small number of academic or specialty veterinary institutions; hence, universal
clinical use of TEG remains unlikely. As well, while research in this area is currently underway
at multiple institutions, no data yet exists documenting the ability of TEG to distinguish which
cats are at greater risk for clot events.
iv.Imaging
a. Chest radiographs are advised in all cases of suspected or confirmed CATE to evaluate or confirm
 the presence of congestive heart failure as well as potential identification of cardiomegaly (keeping
in mind that many cats with cardiomyopathy will have no overt changes to the appearance of
the cardiac silhouette on films).
b. Echocardiogram: ultimately the performance of an echocardiogram allows confirmed diagnosis
of underlying cardiac disease and the potential of a clot present in the left atrium.
C. +/- Abdominal ultrasound is not an essential diagnostic in most cases but is sometimes utilized
arteries. More often it may be of value in cases suspected to have more extensive thrombosis
involving the renal or mesenteric arteries.
g. Comprehensive treatment (short- and long-term)
1.
Specific Cardiac Diseases).
ii.
 Continued oxygen therapy as needed.
ili. Analgesia should be provided and may be selected from the following (see chap. 7—-Pain Management
in Critically Ill Feline Patients for more details):
a. Buprenex 0.01-0.03 mg/kg IM or IV q6-8h
b. Morphine 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM or SQ q2-4h
c. Fentanyl
1. Injectable fentanyl: 410 pg/kg as initial IV bolus followed by a constant rate infusion at
410 μg/kg/hr.
194
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Fentanyl patch placement (either 12.5 or 25 μg/hr based on patient size) may be considered
for analgesia after initial patient stabilization and restoration of normal systemic circulation
{use would not be advised for a patient in congestive heart failure as the impact of congestive
failure on the pharmacokinetics of transdermal fentanyl has not been determined and the
risk of ineffective analgesia exists).
d. Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM or IV q2-4h
e. Hydromorphone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM or IV q2-6h
f. NSAIDS SHOULD NOT BE USED ACUTELY DUE TO RISK OF RENAL INJURY.
iv.  Anxiolytic thera py: administration of an injectable anxiolytic may be considered in addition to (but
not as a replacement for) analgesic therapy.
a. Diazepam or midazolam may be administered as intermittent IV injections at a dose of 0.2-
 0.5 mg/kg fan initial dose of midazolam IM may also be considered if IV access has not yet been
achieved).
 b. Acepromezine may be administered by injection (IV or IM) in cardiovascularly stable patients
{ie., patients that are normotensive) at a dose of 0.005-0.02 mg/kg. It is thought that in addition
in the affected limb(s).
v.Monitoring
a. Serial monitoring of electrolytes, renal values, and PCV/TS as an indicator of hydration status/
fluid balance should be considered while patients are receiving acute/inpatient therapy. This is
particularly true of patients receiving diuretic therapy for congestive heart failure or patients
that are severely affected and where concern for ischemia-reperfusion injury exists.
The majority of cases are treated supportively/symptomatically with secondary focus on com-
plications. It is not common to pursue or attempt definitive treatment of the thromboembolism;
however, several treatment options do exist but typically require or are most appropriately
pursued at a secondary or tertiary referral center.
vi. Medical and surgical options for acute TE
a. Pharmacologic thrombolytic therapy frequently has been considered for patients with CATE.
Systemic administration of tissue plasminogen activator {tPA) and streptokinase ha ve most com-
monly been reported. However, the use of these drugs remains a subject of continued debate as
no convincing improvement in outcome has been seen, and in fact a higher risk of reperfusion
complications, hemorrhage, or death may be associated with these drugs. At this time the author
 does not routinely advise the use of thrombolytic therapy.
b. Interventional/catheter-assisted embolectomy has been reported, but while return of blood flow
was achieved, there was no improved outcome in the cases treated with this specialized therapy.
As with medical thrombolysis, this therapy is currently associated with a higher risk of complica-
tions and death.
c. Surgical embolectomy is not considered a practical clinical therapy for CATE. In addition to the
risk of complications (ie., hemorrhage, reperfusion injury, embolism, and death), extended
 general anesthesia would be contraindicated for acute CATE patients.
vi.  Prophylactic antithrombotic therapies: There are no antithrombotic therapies with proven benefit
for treatment or prevention in cats with ATE. In addition, there are few therapies with known
cats affected with CATE and discuss options for future prophylaxis with owners.
a. Heparins
 1. Unfractionated heparin {UFH) may be administered subcutaneously for future prophylaxis.
Prior to initiation of UFH therapy, a baseline-activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
should be obtained. A dose of 250 IU/kg SQ q6h has been shown to achieve the desired
prolongation of PTT (1.5-2 times patient baseline) in healthy cats in an experimental seting.
However, the actual dose found to be effective in individual cats with illness may vary; hence,
Chapter 16Management of Thromboembolic Disease Secondary to Heart Disease
195
the dose administered to a patient will likely need to be adjusted based on serial monitoring
of aPTT (anticipate a dosing range of 150-300 IU/kg SQ q6-8h in most clinical circum-
stances). If acute therapy {with rapid onset of effect) is desired, IV administration of the
initial dose {200-2s0IU/kg IV once) followed by intermittent SQ administration may be
pursued. Administration of the initial UFH dose intravenously may be of particular benefit
to hemodynamically unstable patients in congestive heart failure. Note: If baseline (pretreat-
            
dosing (25% reduction of initial dosing recommendations) may be considered, and closer
monitoring of clotting times would be advised. If moderate to severe prolongation of clotting
time(s) is noted, repeat analysis in 12-24 hours may be warranted prior to initiating heparin
therapy.
2. Dalteparin (Fragmin) is a low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) that has a longer half-life
than UFH when administered to people. Recent studies would suggest this is not true in
normal cats; however, many veterinarians still find this heparin appealing for the potential
benefit in prophylaxis and the need for less frequent monitoring compared to UFH. Dosing
is species-specific and currently limited to subcutaneous administration. Recommended
dosing is 150 IU/kg SQ q46h. Baseline PT and aPTT may be obtained prior to initiating
therapy to confirm clotting times are normal prior to administering an antithrombotic agent,
but baseline values are not part of monitoring of LMWHs. Monitoring is recommended but
requires measurement of anti-Xa levels {inhibition of the activity of activated Factor X) with
a specialized and standardized assay requiring submission of samples to the Comparative
Coagulation Laboratory of Cornell University. Routine monitoring is based on peak anti-Xa
activity levels {drawn 2 hours after drug administration) with the goal of achieving values
between 0.5 and 1.0IU/mL. Steady-state effect with low molecular weight heparins may not
be achieved until 48-72 hours of use, so unless concern for excess drug effect exists, moni-
toring is not advised until 2-3 days after initiating treatment. Dalteparin is not commonly
used by the author due to its short half-life and the need for frequent administration. Some
specialists do advocate for reduced dosing and less frequent administration of dalteparin in
cats {ie., 100 IU/kg SQ q12h); however, pharmacokinetic studies in normal cats would
 suggest lower dosages, and less frequent administration may be inadequate. In general, there
is uncertainty about the optimal use of dalteparin in cats with CATE and its efficacy at any
dose. Cost and availability can be a significant limiting factor for use of this medication
long-term.
3. Enoxaparin (Lovenox) is another LMWH with a slightly longer half-life in cats (relative to
dalteparin) and is the author's preferred LMWH choice for cats. Recommended dosing is
1.25 mg/kg SQ q6h (in some cases, it may be possible to adjust frequency of administration
to q8h for long-term therapy). As with dalteparin, cost and availability may be a limiting
factor for some clients and their patients, and therefore some specialists advocate for
reduced dosing and less frequent administration (i.e., 1 mg/kg SQ q12h, but as with dalte-
parin, pharmacokinetic studies in normal cats would suggest lower dosages, and less fre-
quent administration may be inadequate). Also, monitoring should be considered, and the
recommendations for monitoring of enoxaparin are the same as those described above for
dalteparin.
dde jo saauaneuo aui oi anp pasn auouun si inq aisnonaad anodau uaaq sq ueea a
priate dosing and the risk of serious bleeding complications. If warfarin is to be used, it would
be advised to pursue such treatment with the involvement of a specialist experienced with the
use of this antithrombotic therapy.
1. Standard dosing recommendations of 0.06-0.09 mg/kg PO q24h necessitate compounding of
the medication since tablets CANNOT be split {the medication is not evenly distributed
within a standard tablet, and administration of a portion of a tablet will result in erratic and
196
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
unsafe dosing). Daily monitoring is necessary when initiating therapy, with less frequent
monitoring being possible long-term. Monitoring requires establishment of an international
normalized ratio (INR) with an esta blished laboratory, and while prolongation of prothrom-
 e jo up a um pui si pe an s um uas s a u
INR, simple use of PT prolongation as a monitor of therapy would be considered below the
standard of care.
c. Primary platelet antagonists
1. Aspirin (chronic): 0.5-1 mg/kg or 5 mg/cat q72h (Note: This is the advised dosage of aspirin
for clot prevention in cats as it is believed to be effective while limiting side effects; however,
it requires the use of a compounding pharmacy, and as a result some veterinarians and/or
clients may prefer the use of 20mg aspirin q72h [4 of an 81-mg tablet].)]
 (a - e yo ) 1 )  aa o u aido 7
 3. While some specialists will consider concurrent use of aspirin and clopidogrel, generally use
of either aspirin or clopidogrel would be the standard approach to antiplatelet/antithrombotic
therapy. Monitoring of platelet antagonists is not readily performed in the clinical setting
and is generally limited to academic institutions with specific platelet function analysis avail-
able {i.e., PFA-100, TEG with Platelet Mapping, Verify Now). The author would caution
against concurrent use of aspirin and clopidogrel at this time unless appropriate platelet
function analysis indicates that an individual cat is in fact resistant to standard, single-agent
therapy.
vii. Physical therapy/convalescence
a. Passive range of motion exercises should be performed several times daily in all patients as soon
as their comfort allows.
b. Bladder care: periodic bladder expression or assistance with litter box use may occasionally be
needed early on in some cases.
h. Short-term complications or sequelae
i. Ischemia-reperfusion {IR) injury: While uncommon unless thrombolytic therapy is utilized, it still
can occur in cases treated with supportive care alone, particularly in cases that achieve rapid recovery
of circulation. Primary features of ischemia-reperfusion injury include development of metabolic
acidosis and hyperkalemia. Marked elevation of potassium levels, which have the potential to cause
significant arrhythmias, are of greatest clinical concern. Hence, regular ECG analysis or continuous
ECG monitoring may be considered. As well, periodic evaluation of electrolytes fand venous acid-
base status) may be considered every 12-24 hours to monitor for early signs of IR injury.
ii. Delayed onset of congestive heart failure
ii. Organ failure secondary to extensive thrombosis or IR injury
i.Prognosis
 i. Numerous studies have documented that both short-term and long-term prognoses are negatively
affected by the presence of concurrent congestive heart failure in cats with CATE.
ii. Survival to hospital discharge: in addition to the presence of congestive heart failure, several char
acteristics have been associated with short-term survival
a. Single-limb invol vement favors hospital discharge.
b. Presence of motor function (in the affected limb[s]) favors hospital discharge.
c. Hypothermia: While hypothermia is common in cats presenting acutely, a single study evaluating
127 cats identified a 50% probability of survival in cats with a body temperature of 98.9°F. In
this same study, a body temperature of 96°F appeared to be associated with only a 25% probabil-
ity of survival.
ii. Recovery of limb function should be anticipated in most cats but occurs over days to weeks, or in
some cases even months.
iv. Long-term complications/risk of recurrence
Chapter 16Management of Thromboembolic Disease Secondary to Heart Disease
197
a. It is important to note and communicate to cat owners that progression of heart disease, future
episodes of congestive failure, and euthanasia related to these factors are much more likely
to influence long-term survival and complications than the thromboembolic event itself or
recurrence of thromboembolic disease. However, repeat clot events do occur in about 25% of
cases. (For further information on survival in cats with heart disease, readers may also refer to
chap. 15—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases.)
b. Complications in the affected limb(s) are in fact uncommon, but limb contracture, self-trauma,
and tissue/limb necrosis may occur in a minority of cases {approximately 10-15% of cases).
17
MANAGEMENT OF LIFE-THREATENING
ARRHYTHMIAS
Meg M. Sleeper
Unique Features
Clinically relevant arrhythmias are less common in cats than dogs. Ventricular tachycardias are the
most common necessitating therapy. Highlights:
● Cats are more sensitive to the neurotoxic effects of lidocaine, and care should be taken when using
this medication in cats. If seizure activity does occur, diazepam should be administered for control.
● Vagal maneuvers are not always effective, but the technique should be a first-line approach in cats
presenting with rapid tachycardias that are narrow or wide complex in QRS morphology.
· B adrenergic blockers, while primarily for supraventricular tachycardias, may also be beneficial in
some cats with ventricular tachycardia.
A. Overview
a. Feline arrhythmias are similar to those seen in dogs, but they occur less commonly.
b. Arrhythmias can be secondary to primary heart disease or due to extracardiac disease.
C. All cats presenting with arrhythmias should be screened for the following abnormalities. Correction
of the underlying disease often results in abolition of the arrhythmia.
i.Hyperthyroidism may be associated with sinus tachycardia, atrial, ectopy, and/or conduction
disturbances. Electrocardiographic (ECG) changes are most common with severe thyroid hormone
elevations or chronic disease.
ii. Hyperkalemia may be associated with atrial standstill or sinoventricular rhythms. Urethral
obstruction is the most common cause, but hyperkalemia can also be caused by acute renal failure
or reperfusion following arterial thromboembolic disease. Classic ECG changes associated with
hyperkalemia include
1. absent or flattened P waves
2. widened QRS complex
3. tall, or spiked, T waves
B. When to treat
a. Arrhythmias are clinically relevant when they cause hemodynamic consequences {such as systemic
hypotension) or degenerate into unstable forms {i.e., rapid ventricular tachycardia with R on T; fig.
17.1). In these scenarios they should be treated, but otherwise therapy is not recommended.
b. The clinical signs most frequently associated with feline arrhythmias are lethargy, syncope, wea kness,
or sudden death. Additionally, in some cases the arrhythmia may contribute to decompensation of
congestive heart failure.
199
200
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
043
Fig。 17.1。 Lead Il strip from a cat run at 25mm/sec and 20mm/mV. Note the several ventricular premature
complexes (VPCs) that are wider and taller than the normal sinus beats. In the middle of this ECG strip, two closely
coupled VPCs occur. In this couplet, the QRS from the second complex occurs nearly on top of the preceding T wave
[arrow], a phenomenon called "R on T.
Fig. 17.2. Vagal stimulation using the carotid body massage technique.
C. Antiarrhythmic pharmacodynamic/kinetic studies have rarely been performed in cats, and most of
the medication protocols are anecdotal. Therefore, it is important to be cautious when using these
medications in cats and start with a low dose, titrating upwards if necessary.
C. Diagnosis
a. The ECG is recorded with the feline patient restrained in right lateral recumbency. However, in
dyspneic cats, stress must be avoided and the ECG can be recorded with the cat standing or in sternal
recumbency.
b. When the arrhythmia or clinical signs are intermittent, definitive diagnosis may require the use of
ECG telemetry, a 24-hour Holter monitor, or even an event monitor. There are many different Holter
and event monitors available on the market, and several companies will rent devices.
c. Vagal maneuvers can be useful diagnostically or therapeutically when a tachycardia is present, but
the maneuvers should be avoided if AV block or significant bradyarrhythmias are present. Vagal
 stimulation can be achieved with ocular pressure (retropulsing the globes), carotid sinus massage
(fig. 17.2), or stimulation of a gag reflex. The sinus and AV nodes are particularly sensitive to vagal
tone, so vagal stimulation results in slowing of the sinus node discharge rate and prolonged AV
nodal conduction time {and refractoriness). During a tachycardia requiring the AV node as part of
its circuit, brief AV block will result in termination of the tachycardia. With atrial tachycardia, if
transient AV block can be achieved, the atria will continue to rapidly fire; however, some of these
P waves will not conduct (physiologic AV block).
Chapter 17Management of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias
201
Fig。 17.3. Normal sinus rhythm from an adult cat in right lateral recumbency. Note the regular RR intervals and
the normal (narrow) QRS morphology (paper speed 25 mm/sec; 20 mm = I mV).
d. The rapid heart rate and low-voltage ECG complexes can make interpretation of feline ECGs
challenging (see fig. 17.3).
i. Use of calipers or ECG rulers are very helpful for interval measurement.
ii. Magnification of the ECG (2x normal gain or 20 mm/mV) is helpful.
ii. Minimize artifact {ensure lead wires are not touching, an alcohol-soaked cotton ball placed near
the cat's nose may stop purring, etc.).
iv. Use multiple leads for complete assessment of ECG wave morphology.
D. Treatment of specific arrhythmias
a. Tachycardias and premature complexes
i. Supraventricular—the site of origin is proximal to the bundle branches {atrial or AV nodal).
Therefore, the QRS morphology is normal unless a concurrent ventricular conduction abnormality
is present.
 1. Isolated supraventricular premature complexes are common with primary heart disease or
extracardiac disease, but sustained supraventricular tachycardias (SVT) are rare in cats.
 2. Sinus tachycardia, an accelerated sinus rate due to elevated adrenergic tone, is considered a
normal physiologic response; however, in some patients (particularly hyperthyroid patients]
(heart rates ≥2s0 bpm).
output, especially when primary heart disease is present. As the heart rate gets faster, impair-
ment is more likely.
4. Atrial fibrillation occurs when significant structural heart disease leads to heart enlargement in
the cat. QRS complex morphology may be non-uniform due to varying AV nodal and ventricu
lar conduction.
5. Ventricular pre-excitation
a. An accessory pathway allows a supraventricular impulse to bypass the AV node and activate
ventricular tissue earlier than would be expected if the impulse traveled through the AV
node. This phenomenon results in a shorter than normal PR interval (fig. 17.4). The QRS
duration may be increased {as in figure 17.4) or normal.
b. Most affected cats have no clinical signs; however, AV reentrant or reciprocating tachycar
dias can occur rarely.
6. Treatment of supraventricular tachycardias {table 17.1)
a. Vagal maneuvers may abolish the tachycardia or reveal underlying P waves (the maneuver
can be diagnostic as well as therapeutic).
b. Negative chronotropes that slow conduction through the AV node are all potentially effec-
tive for treating SVT; however, digoxin should be avoided in cats with bypertrophic car-
diomyopathy or if an accessory pathway is suspected.
c. For reciprocating tachycardias characterized by a re-entrant circuit, if vagal maneuvers
are ineffective, they should be followed by diltiazem and repeated vagal maneuvers. If
202
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig。 17.4. Note the short PR interval (arrow) in this cat with ventricular preexcitation (paper speed 25 mm/sec)
20mm = I mV}.
unsuccessful, add antiarrhythmic agents that suppress conduction in abnormal pathways
(i.e., procaineamide).
i. Calcium channel blockers
1. Diltiazem is used most widely in veterinary medicine.
2. Dose: 1.0-2.5 mg/kg PO q8h; 0.1-0.2 mg/kg as a slow IV bolus, then 2-6μg/kg/min
IV CRI; Dilacor XR: 30-60 mg PO q24h per cat
ii.Beta adrenergic blockers
1. Atenolol is cardiac specific and used most frequently in cats for chronic use.
a. Dose: 6.25-12.5 mg PO q12-24h
 2. Propranolol is not cardiac specific, but it is available in an injectable form.
a. Dose: 0.02-0.06 mg/kg IV over 5-10 minutes
b. Start with low dose and titrate to effect; taper dose when discontinuing therapy;
reduce dose with liver disease; beware possible bronchoconstriction
3. Esmolol is an ultra-short-acting beta-adrenergic blocker with effects lasting for only
minutes.
a. Dose: 50-100μg/kg IV bolus every 5 minutes up to a maximum of 500 μg/kg;
50-200 μg/kg/min CRI
b. Useful for SVT which does not respond to vagal maneuvers or diltiazem; usually
switch to atenolol for chronic therapy
ili. Digoxin
1. Dose: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg q24 48h
2. Digoxin is excreted renally, so lower dose with renal disease
3. Steady state is attained after 7-10 days (therefore, it is not a good drug for acute
therapy but is used for chronic therapy). Therapeutic range is 0.s-2.0 ng/mL.
4. Dose on lean body weight and avoid elixir form in cats.
5. Signs of toxicity: anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea
ii. Ventricular ectopy
1. Ventricular ectopy is the most common feline arrhythmia.
2. The origin or focus is distal to the bundle of His, and the QRS morphology is wide and bizarre
(fig. 17.5).
3. Ventricular ectopy can be associated with primary heart disease or extracardiac disease.
 4. Intermittent ventricular premature complexes ( VPC) which are not associated with clinical signs
do not necessitate treatment. However, when frequent enough to cause hemodynamic impair-
ment, such as systemic hypotension, syncope, wea kness, and so on, therapy is indicated.
5. Treatment (table 17.2)
Table 17.1. Drugs for treatment of feline cardiac supraventricular tochycardias.
Mechanisms of
Contraindications or
Routes of Administration
Tachycardias
Drug Classes
Actions
Side Effects
Precautions
and Doses
Diliczem
L-lype calcium
Slows AV node
CV: Modest peripheral
 Bradycardia, overt
7.5 mg/cat TID PO or
channel
conduclion and
vasodilation and
congestive heart
30-60mg/cal exlended
blocker
inhibits cardiac and
negalive inotropic effect
failure, hypotension
release formula g12-24h;
vascular smooh
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV bolus
muscle contractilily
[over I min] followed by
2-6 μg/kg/min IV
Atenolol
Bela-blocker
β,-seleclive beta
CV: Bradycardia,
Bradycardia, ashma
6.25-12.5mg PO q12-24h
 adrenergic blocker
negalive inotropic
[less than nonseleclive
[drug of choice for
effect, hypotension
blockers], overt
lachycardias associaled
Neuro: lethargy
 congeslive heart
with' hyperthyroidlism]
failure; renal disease
Esmolol
Bela-blocker
 Ulra-short-acting
CV: Bradycardia,
Bradycardia, overt
 50-100 μg/kg IV every 5 min
βi-seleclive beta
negative inotropic
congeslive heart
[over 1 min] as needed up
adrenergic blocker
effect, hypotension 
Failure; use caution
lo 500μg/kg max.
with asthma and/or
50-200μg/kg/min CRI
diabeles
 Propranolol
Bela-blocker
Nonseleclive β
As for cardioselective
Bradycardia, asthma,
0.01-0.06mg/kg IV over
receplor blocker
 bela-blockers and also
diabeles, renal and/
1 min; up to a maximum of
potential
or hepalic disease
1 mg/kg
bronchoconstriction
Digoxin
Cardiac
Antiarrhythmic effect
Gl:anorexia,nausea,
Toxicily potenliated by
0.005 mg/kg PO q24-48h
glycoside
due to
 diarrhea, vomiting
eleclrolyle
[12 depending on serum
parasympathetic
Neuro: depression
disturbances, thyroid
digoxin levell
slimulation
CV: rarely arrhyihmogenic
disorders, and
Dose on lean body weight.
hypoxia. Typically
Do not use elixir in cals.
contraindicated in
 Therapeulic range is
cases of hyperirophic
1-2 ng/ml 6-8 hours after
cardliomyopathy or
acministration.
existing bradycardia.
20
204
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 17.5. Normal sinus rhythm with a VPC (wide and bizarre in appearance compared with the normal sinus
beats (paper speed 25 mm/sec; 20mm = ImV).
a. Acute therapy
i. Sodium channel blockers
1. Lidocaine
a. Dose: 0.25-0.75 mg/kg IV over 5 minutes
b. Cats are more sensitive to neurologic toxic effects than dogs (seizures), which can
be controlled with diazepam.
2. Procainemide
a. Dose 3-8 mg/kg IM q6-8h
b. Reduce dose with renal or liver disease
c. A sign of toxicity is 2s% prolongation in QRS interval
b. Chronic therapy
i. Beta adrenergic blockers
1. Atenolol (see above)
ii. Sodium channel blockers
1. Procaineamide
a. Dose: 3-8 mg/kg PO q6h
b. Reduce dose with renal or liver disease
c. A sign of toxicity is 2s% prolongation in QRS interval
ili. Class IIl antiarrhythmics
1. Sotalol
a. Dose: % of 80 mg tab PO q12h
b. Reduce dose if bradycardia and/or weakness develop
b. Bradyarrhythmias
i.AV block
1. Advanced second- or third-degree (complete) AV block (fig. 17.6) can result in intermittent or
continuous bradycardia. However, in many cats, the heart rate is fairly normal and there are
no clinical signs.
Table 17.2. Drugs for treatment of feline cardiac ventricular tachycardias.
Mechanisms of
Contraindications
Routes ofAdministration
Tachycardias
Drug Classes
Actions
Side Effects
or Precautions
cnd Doses
Lidocaine
Class IB ventricular
Sodium channel
Gl: nausea, vomiling
Cals are sensilive to
0.25-0.5mg/kg IV
antiarrhyihmic
blocker
CV: hypolension
neuroloxic effecls
[over 1 min]; CRI at
Neuro: seizures
and deserve
10-20μg/kg/min
Drug level may be increased
 caulion. Diazepam
with concurrent
will control
administralion of
secondary seizures.
cimelidine or other
cntiarrhythmics
Procaineamide
Class IA ventricular
 Sodium channel
CV: proarrhythmic potential,
Second- or third-
3-5 mg/kg PO q8h;
antiarrhythmic
blocker
hypotension
degree AV block
1-2 mg/kg IV [over 1 min];
 Gl: vomiling, diarrhea 
[unless paced],
CRI at 10-20μg/kg/min
 Neuro: seizure polential
hypotension
CRI
Sotalol
Mixed class Ill
Potassium channel
 CV: myocardial depression,
 Overl congestive heart
2 mg/kg PO q12-24h
ventricular
blocker and
bradycardia
failure, asthma,
antiarrhythmic
β-blocker
Gl: vomiling
bradycardia; lower
and β-blocker
Neuro: lethargy
dose with renal
disease.
r
206
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
   a a      o o u o y y  ' 
suggests yentricular activation is not associated with atrial activation (P waves; paper speed 25mm/sec;
20mm = I mV).
2. Possible clinical signs include lethargy, episodic weakness, syncope, inappetance, and respira.
tory distress.
3. First-degree AV block (PR intervals of >.09 s) is common in cats but requires no specific
therapy. Iatrogenic block can be caused by digoxin, beta adrenergic blockade, or calcium
channel blockers and suggests dose reduction.
 4. Treatment (when clinical signs such as syncope or weakness are present)
5. Acute management (table 17.3)
a. Sympathomimetics
i.Dobutamine
1. Dose: 2-10μg/kg/min IV (titrate up to effect)
2. Preferable to dopamine if cat in congestive heart failure; inotropic effect is dose
dependent; less arrhythmogenic than most other catecholamines; monitor for arrhyth
mias and/or hypotension. Dobutamine has been reported to cause seizures in cats.
ii. Isoproterenol
1. Dose: 0.04-0.09 μg/kg/min IV (titrate up to effect); 10 μg/kg IM or SQ q6h
 2. Hypotension is possible, but vasodilatory effect is usually offset by increased heart
rate.
b. Parasympatholytics are worth trying but rarely increase AV conduction significantly.
i.Atropine
1. Dose: 0.01-0.04 mg/kg IV, IM; 0.02-0.04mg/kg SC q6-8h
a. When given IV may transiently worsen bradyarrhythmia; more potent chrono
tropic effect than glycopyrrolate
ii. Glycopyrrolate
1. 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IV or IM; 0.01-0.02 mg/kg SC
2. Longer duration of action with less chronotropic effect than atropine
6. Chronic management
a. Long-term control necessitates a permanent pacemaker.
i. Occasionally these arrhythmias are short lived and a temporary pacemaker is supportive
until a sinus rhythm returns.
Teble 17.3. Drugs for treatment of feline cardiac bradyarrhythmias.
 Mechanisms of
Side Effects and Drug
 Contraindications or
Routes of administration
Bradycardias
Drug classes
Actions
Classes
precautions
sasop pun
Dobutamine
Synthelic belta-
Mixed β > β2-α
CV: proarrhythmic potential
Less arrhythmogenic than 
3-10μg/kg/min IV filrale
adrenergic
agonist
Gl: nausea, vomiling
most calecholamines. Use
upward io effect
 slimulating agent
Contraindicated when HCM
with caulion and monitor
is present
 for arrhythmias and
hypotension.
Isoproterenol
Synthelic
Pure β (β >β2)
CV: proarrhyihic potential,
 Hypotension; ventricular
0.01-0.08 μg/kg/min IV
 sympathomimetic
agonist
 hypotension 
arrhyihmias
litrale up to effect
Gl: vomiling.
Neuro: weakness
Terbutaline
Synthetic
β2 agonist
CV: hypolension, lachycardia (
 Cals hypersensilive lo
0.625-1.25 mg/cat q8-12h
 sympathomimelic
Neuro: Iremors, CNS
terbutaline; caution in cals
PO
excitement
with myocardial disease,
0.01 mg/kg SQ; IM
 Transient hypokalemia
hyperthyroidism,
possible
hypertension, seizure
disorders; decrease dose
with renal disease.
Alropine
 Anticholinergic
Compelilively
CV: tachycardia
May transiently worsen
0.01-0.04mg/kg IV, IM,
inhibits
Gl: decreased motiliy, dry
bradyarrhyihmia.
SQ q6-8h
acelylcholine
secrelions
Contraindicated with
More potent chronotropic
 glaucoma, hypersentilivily,
effect than glycopyrrolale
Gl obstruclion
Glycopyrolale 
Anticholinergic
Compelitively
CV: tachycardia
Longer duralion of aclion 
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM, IV
inhibits
Gl: decreased molilily, dry
with less of a
0.01-.02 mg/kg SQ
acelylcholine
secretions
chronolropic effect than
alropine
 Theophylline
Xanthine
 Phosphodiesterase
CV: tachycardia
Palients hypersensilive; use
4mg/kg PQ q12h PO
derivialive
inhibitor
Neuro: CNS slimulation
caulion if hyperthyroidlism,
[extended release formula]
[increases cAMP]
 Resp: bronchodilation
severe heart diease,
[mild signs usually resolve
hyperlension; dose on
affer several days of
lean body weight
medication]
208
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Lead.1
.f
::::
A
Fig. 17.7. Sinus arrest in a cat. Note the pause in the rhythm (no P or QRS depolarizations), which lasts almost
2 seconds (paper speed 25 mm/sec; 20 mm = I mV).
ii. Sinus node disturbances
1. Sinus arrest is the complete lack of atrial activation for one or more beats (fig. 17.7). Sinus
(<140bpm).
 2. These arrhythmias can commonly occur with extracardiac disease (respiratory, CNS, gastro-
intestinal, etc.).
 3. Associated clinical signs are rare, but lethargy or weakness is possible.
4. An atropine response test will help determine if the bradycardia is due to elevated vagal tone
(0.04mg/kg atropine IV or IM should result in a sinus tachycardia greater than 220 bpm if the
bradycardia is secondary to vagal influence).
5. Treatment (only if symptomatic)
a. Parasympatholytics if atropine response test suggests vagal tone is abnormally high and
atropine is likely to be effective
i.Atropine
ii. Glycopyrrolate
ili. Propantheline bromide
b. Pacemaker if the patient is clinical
i. Typically exhibited signs include: weakness, exercise intolerance, syncope, overt conges-
tive heart failure
6. Permanent pacemaker implantation
 a. Prior to implantation, the patient should be thoroughly assessed to exclude possible underly-
ing disease as a cause of the arrhythmia.
 Complete blood count, chemistry panel, urinalysis
 ii. A 24-hour Holter monitor may be necessary if the arrhythmia is not evident on the
resting ECG.
ii. Thoracic radiographs and echocardiography are performed to evaluate underlying heart
disease.
b. Implantation
i. In cats, an epicardial lead is usually placed via a lateral thoracotomy, caudal median
sternotomy, or a ventral abdominal transdiaphragmatic approach.
ii. The lead is implanted in an avascular site on the left ventricular apex and the pulse
generator is optimally placed on the flank in a subcutaneous pocket.
7. Temporary pacemakers
 a. Temporary pacemakers are often placed in cats for heart rate control during implantation
of the permanent pacemaker and are particularly useful in cats that do not respond to posi-
tive chronotropic agents (isoproternol, atropine).
 b. In these situations, the temporary pacemaker can be placed in an emergency setting and
kept in place for 24-48 hours until the permanent pacemaker can be placed.
18
LESS-COMMON CARDIAC CONDITIONS:
HEARTWORM, SYNCOPE, PERICARDIAL
DISEASE, BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS,
AND DIGITALIS TOXICITY
Jamie M. Burkitt
Unique Features
I. Feline heartworm infestation
a. Relatively rare compared to dogs
b. Low worm burden (~1-3 worms/cat)
C. Diagnostic tests:
i. False negatives are common due to low worm burden, all-male infestation, and the fact that
cats are rarely microfilaremic.
d. Treatment
i. Cats should NOT be treated with adulticides, sudden worm dieoff can result in severe
reactions.
II. Pericardial effusion
dogs.
b. Hemangiosarcoma is a rare cause of pericardial effusion in cats.
C. Causes of pericardial disease are more varied in cats compared to dogs.
III. Bacterial endocarditis
a. Rare in dogs but even more rare in cats.
b. Bartonella bensalae as a cause for endocarditis is being recognized now in cats.
A. Heartworm infestation
a. Heartworm infestation is less common in cats than in dogs due to the species' inherent resistance to
infection. The causative agent in the United States is Diroflaria immitis. The parasite is introduced
when a mosquito carrying D. immitis bites a cat, transmitting larvae. Larvae mature into adult worms
over about 3-4 months, at which time they arrive and attach in the pulmonary arteries. Because cats
               
infection with only male worm(s), which can affect testing for the disease (see below). Clinical signs
are most likely to manifest in cats during initial worm migration into the pulmonary arteries or at
death of the worm(s). Heartworm lifespan in cats is 2-3 years.
b. History—Veterinarians in endemic areas should ask about use of heartworm preventative. Historical
complaints in cats with heartworm infestation may include:
209
210
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1.
Respiratory: tachypnea, dyspnea, and coughing
ii.Gastrointestinal: vomiting
 ili. Rarely: syncope, neurologic signs, embolic events, caval syndrome
C. Physical examination—Findings are nonspecific and may include tachypnea, dyspnea, increased
breath sounds, or a right-sided heart murmur if worms are disrupting the tricuspid valve.
d. Diagnosis of heartworm infestation in cats can be challenging. The clinician must have an increased
index of suspicion in geographic areas where heartworm is common in dogs. The combination of
chest radiographs, serology (both antibody and antigen), and echocardiography is the most reliable
 method. Cats are rarely microfilaremic, so blood evaluation for larvae is very insensitive.
i.
Feline heartworm antibody test—Once thought highly sensitive, it is now known to be only
 32-89% sensitive in clinically infected cats. Therefore, false negative tests are possible. Detects
exposure to both male and female larvae; not specific for current, adult infection.
ii.Heartworm antigen test—Highly sensitive for infection with adult female heartworm(s). However,
because cats are usually infected with only 1-3 worm(s), cats may have active adult infection
   ea      
ii. Chest radiographs—Most changes are related to the appearance of the pulmonary arteries.
Prominent, tortuous, and truncated pulmonary artery appearance, best visualized on the dorso-
ventral view, are consistent. The heart usually looks normal. There may be an increased bron-
chointerstitial pulmonary pattern.
iv. Echocardiography—The worm's body wall may be visualized as two highly echogenic (white),
They can be seen as far proximal as the vena cavae. This technique is relatively sensitive in the
hands of an experienced ultrasonographer.
e. Treatment—Cats should NOT be treated with adulticides, as sudden worm dieoff can be associated
with severe inflammatory and embolic complications. All cats with significant clinical signs should
be treated supportively with oxygen, bronchodilators, and/or IV fluids as indicated.
i. Conservative management: In clinically normal cats, specific treatment may not be necessary. Cats
should be monitored periodically for disease resolution as the worm(s) dies. In cats showing clini-
cal signs, standard medical treatment is corticosteroids. Prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day tapered to
0.5 mg/kg/every other day for 2 weeks, then discontinued after another 2 weeks is one empirical
regimen. Reevaluation should be performed, and the treatment regimen repeated as needed.
HILIP
JRVHUF
ZHS6
Fig. 18.1. Short-axis view of heartworms and the main pulmonary artery trunk and right ventricle of a cat.
Chapter 18Less-Common Cardiac Conditions
211
venotomy for forceps or brush retrieval, or by thoracotomy.
f. Prognosis for cats with heartworm varies significantly. Many cats have occult, subclinical infections
and clear the infection on their own without treatment or obvious untoward effects. Other cats die
as a result of pulmonary inflammation or embolic disease.
B.Syncope
a. Syncope is rare in cats. It is defined as a temporary decrease or loss of consciousness and postural
tone. It is always a sign of another primary disease rather than a definitive diagnosis. Therefore, the
primary underlying disease must be found and treated appropriately to resolve the syncopal events.
Syncope happens when oxygen or energy substrate {i.e., glucose) delivery to the brain is inadequate
Syncopal events generally last <10 seconds and are not usually preceded or followed by abnormal
behaviors. Cats can experience syncope during exercise or at rest, depending on the underlying
etiology and its severity.
b. Etiologies
i. Cardiac abnormalities are common underlying causes of syncope. Such cardiac causes include:
1. Tachyarrhythmias, as seen in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Very high heart rates prevent
adequate diastolic chamber filling, which leads to decreased stroke volumes and poor cardiac
output {see chap. 17—Management of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias).
2. Bradyarrhythmias (see chap. 17—Management of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias) such as
high-grade second-degree AV block or third-degree AV block. Primary conduction distur-
bances are rare in cats. Bradyarrhythmias caused by metabolic disease {hyperkalemia of
urethral obstruction or renal failure) are unlikely to lead to syncope before the primary disease
causes other significant clinical signs.
can therefore lead to poor cardiac output. Causes of pericardial tamponade are discussed in
a later section.
4. Heartworm infestation. The worm(s) may intermittently obstruct the main pulmonary arteries,
leading to periods of poor cardiac output.
ii. Respiratory disease sufficient to cause hypoxemia can cause syncope, though syncope in the
absence of significant dyspnea is very unlikely.
iii. Metabolic causes such as hypoglycemia, anemia, or electrolyte abnormalities may cause syncope.
Hypoglycemia or anemia can lead to decreased brain function due to decreased neuronal energy
or evidence of the underlying metabolic cause.
c. Differential diagnoses—Occasionally (extremely rare) primary neurologic disease can produce clini-
mal or “ absence” seizures, and narcolepsy. Primary neurologic events may be preceded and followed
events may be of minutes? duration and often include urination, defecation, or tonic limb movements
or postures.
d. Historical findings-Clients report short periods of collapse and unresponsive mentation that resolve
e. Physical examination findings may be normal or may reveal signs of the cardiac, respiratory, or
 metabolic diseases listed above. Unfortunately, it is uncommon for patients to experience syncopal
events during the short time period of examination.
f. Diagnosis of the underlying cause of syncope may be difficult. In some patients, an underlying etiol-
ogy is never found. It is important to search extensively for the underlying cause (the most common
cause is cardiac disease), however, as it may lead to death without appropriate treatment. The diag-
nostic data base includes:
212
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1.
Clinicopathologic data base. Complete blood count, chemistry panel with glucose and electrolytes
T4, heartworm test (see above section for details), and urinalysis
i. Electrocardiogram. A standard three-lead ECG can be used for basic evaluation. The ECG should
be studied for intermittent or persistent brady- or tachyarrhythmia.
ii. Chest radiographs. Radiographs should be evaluated for cardiac and vascular size and shape,
and pulmonary parenchymal markings.
iv. Echocardiography. Cardiac ultrasound may reveal structural heart disease such as HCM that
can be associated with tachyarrhythmias or bradyarrhythmias leading to syncope.
V.
 Complete neurologic exam to help differentiate syncope from neurologic events
malities causing syncope, since these rhythms may be intermittent and thus absent during hospital
evaluation. Traditionally, 24- to 48-hour continuous ECG monitoring has been performed using
Holter monitors, but they must be worn by the patient and are bulky for cats. Another option
is the cardiac event monitor, which is smaller and can be worn for a longer period of time. The
event monitor records and stores the ECG for only a short period of time prior to and after an
event; it stores a limited number of event recordings. The owner must activate the recorder when
an event is witnessed, so this method works best for cats that are well supervised.
g. Treatment—The treatment of syncope is based on appropriate treatment of the underlying disease.
i.Cardiac diseases
of Life-Threatening Arrhythmias). Cats with HCM may require heart rate reduction to
Specific Cardiac Diseases). Prognosis depends on the underlying cause of the
tachya rrhythmia.
2. Bradyarrhythmias severe enough to cause syncope {i.e., high-grade, second-degree to third-
degree AV block) are usually unresponsive to anticholinergics. However, cats with clinical
bradyarrhythmia should receive an atropine challenge (see chap. 17—Management of Life-
Threatening Arrhythmias). Most patients with severe bradyarrhythmias require permanent
pacemaker implantation. Transvenous and surgical implantation techniques have been used
successfully in cats. Prognosis with successful artificial pacing is good.
3. Pericardial tamponade {extremely rare in cats) due to pericardial effusion requires timely
 pericardiocentesis. See section below regarding management.
4. Treatment of heartworm infestation in cats is usually conservative. Adulticides are generally
considered too risky in cats due to the likelihood of worm embolism into the pulmonary
arteries after treatment. See section above on specific treatments for heartworm infestation
in cats.
i.  Respiratory and metabolic diseases should be treated as indicated.
ii. Prognosis—Short-term prognosis for the patient with syncope is guarded; decreased cerebral
function can be life threatening and the patient may die if the diagnosis is not readily made and
treatment initiated. The long-term prognosis for syncope depends on the underlying etiology,
and therefore varies from very good to grave.
C. Pericardial disease
a. Pericardial disease is uncommon in cats, and it is rarely clinically significant. Pericardial disease
becomes clinically significant when high pressure within the pericardial sac impedes right atrial filling
(cardiac tamponade) resulting in decreased cardiac output and increased venous pressures. Thus,
when clinically apparent, pericardial disease causes clinical signs of right heart failure and/or decreased
cardiac output. A small volume of fluid within the pericardium can cause tamponade when the fluid
accumulates acutely; a large fluid volume may not lead to tamponade if it develops over a long period
of time, allowing for stretching of the pericardial sac.
b.Etiologies
Chapter 18Less-Common Cardiac Conditions
213
i. Pericardial effusion is fluid accumulation within the pericardial sac. Etiologies in cats include
disease such as HCM, fluid overload, and hemorrhage.
i.  Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH) is usually a congenital abnormality in which
the peritoneum is continuous with the pericardial sac. The most common herniated organ is the
liver. Because it is a congenital abnormality and the pericardium is likely chronically stretched,
PPDH does not usually cause clinically evident cardiac tamponade. PPDH is an incidental finding
in many cases.
ii. Restrictive pericardial disease is rare in cats. It can be idiopathic or due to a chronic inflamma-
tory process. Restrictive pericardial disease can cause tamponade.
C. Historical findings vary by etiology and severity of disease and include dyspnea, tachypnea, anorexia,
lethargy, and collapse. PPDH may be associated with gastrointestinal signs due to incarceration of
the abdominal organs within the pericardial sac, or PPDH may become clinically evident as a result
of abdominal straining from intestinal disease or parturition. Cats with tamponade may develop
abdominal distention due to ascites.
d. Physical findings in cats with pericardial disease vary by etiology and severity of cardiac compromise.
Findings may include
i.Dyspnea, tachypnea
ii. Muffled heart sounds. In the case of PPDH, heart sounds may be asymmetrically muffled. Small
volumes of acute effusion may cause tamponade in the absence of muffled heart sounds.
ii. Muffled breath sounds if right heart failure and subsequent pleural effusion develop.
              
developed.
v.  Pulsus paradoxicus {variable pulse quality with respiration—weaker pulses on inspiration) is not
e. Diagnostic evaluation includes the following:
i.
 Chest radiographs. Significant pericardial effusion or PPDH with herniated organs will cause an
enlarged, globoid cardiac silhouette.
i.  Acute accumulation of a small pericardial effusion or restrictive pericardial disease will not cause
an obvious change to cardiac silhouette, although a distended caudal vena cava should be noted
on the lateral view. If pleural effusion is present, it may obscure the cardiac silhouette and prevent
accurate diagnosis of pericardial disease; pleurocentesis should be performed and thoracic radio-
 graphs performed thereafter to evaluate the cardiac silhouette.
ili. Electrocardiography. Pericardial effusion is associated with low-voltage QRS complexes and
electrical alternans (alternating size of the R-wave) on ECG, although the latter is rarely detected.
This finding must be interpreted with caution in cats, which normally have low voltage QRS
complexes compared to dogs.
iv. Echocardiography. Definitive diagnosis of pericardial effusion or PPDH with herniated organ(s)
is made by echocardiography. Pericardial effusion is visualized as anechoic fluid within the peri
 cardial sac (fig. 18.2). Tamponade is present if the right atrium moves inwardly (collapses) during
diastole.
v. Contrast peritoneogram may aid in the diagnosis of PPDH. If contrast media injected into the
peritoneal cavity appears within the pericardial sac, a PPDH is present though false negatives
can occur (figs. 18.3 a and b).
 1. Positive contrast peritoneogram technique
 a. Dilute iodinated contrast material to 25% concentration with normal saline into appro-
priately sized syringe (~10-mL syringe).
b. Inject diluted contrast material into abdominal cavity near umbilicus using a 220-gauge
meedle (avoid falciform fat).
C. Wait S minutes and perform whole body lateral radiograph.
JR VHUP
GOMN
909
Fig.18.2.
 Short-axis view of a cat with pericardial effusion. Note the fluid-filled, anechoic region surrounding
the heart.
Fig. 18.3 a and b. Lateral thoracic radiographs of a cat with PDH. Note the globoid appearance to the heart
and loss of a complete outline of the cranial aspect of the diaphragm. Also note how the positive contrast agent
injected into the abdomen has leaked into the thoracic cavity.
214
Chapter 18Less-Common Cardiac Conditions
215
vi. Cytologic analysis of pericardial fluid should be performed. See treatment section below for
centesis technique. Cytologic analysis may reveal the underlying cause (neoplastic cells in fluid,
septic exudates) or may be suggestive of the underlying etiology (high-protein exudates in FIP,
low-protein transudates with primary heart disease or fuid overload). Biochemical analysis of
pericardial fluid is unlikely to lend significantly to the diagnosis.
f. Treatment for pericardial disease is specific to the underlying etiology.
i. Pericardiocentesis is performed to remove fluid from the pericardial sac. Most cats do not
require sedation for this procedure; it may be performed in sternal or lateral recumbency.
Continuous ECG should be performed to monitor for arrhythmias associated with catheter
cardium via the right or left 4th or Sth intercostal space. Chest radiographs or echocardiography
can be used to determine the ideal rib space for catheter insertion. Once fluid appears in the
stylet hub, the fexible catheter is advanced into the pericardial space and the stylet removed.
If arrhythmias are noted, the catheter should be repositioned to decrease epicardial contact
              s
syringe for fuid withdrawal. Fluid analysis should include a total protein, cell count, and
cytology evaluation.
i. Definitive treatment for PPDH requires surgery for hernia reduction and herniorrhaphy. Cats
IV fluids as indicated prior to surgical repair. Owners of cats with incidental diagnosis of PPDH
may or may not elect surgical repair. However, organs can herniate in previously clinically
"silent" cases, leading to acute cardiac tamponade and death. This latter event occurs more
commonly in cats straining due to gastrointestinal disease or during parturition.
ii. Definitive treatment of restrictive pericardial disease requires total or subtotal pericardectomy.
Cats should be treated supportively with oxygen and IV fluids as indicated prior to the thoraco-
scopic or surgical pericardectomy.
performance of definitive treatment in the case of PPDH.
D. Bacterial endocarditis
a. Bacterial endocarditis is rare in cats. Information on the disease in cats is very limited. Endocarditis
usually manifests as infection of the valves on the left side of the heart. In dogs, the aortic valve is
the most commonly affected. In the few reports of bacterial endocarditis in cats either the aortic
valve, mitral valve, or both have been affected. In dogs, many different bacteriologic agents have
been associated with endocarditis, most commonly Stapbylococcus aureus, Streptococcus spp., E.
coli, Bartonella spp., and others.
b. Predisposition—Most people with bacterial endocarditis have a predisposing cardiac lesion. This
is not the case in cats. Most veterinary patients’ endocarditis lesions occur on previously normal
valves. It is unclear whether other factors such as severe dental disease or dermatologic disease
predispose to bacterial endocarditis. Diseases leading to immune compromise such as diabetes
 mellitus may predispose cats to development of endocarditis, but the literature does not support a
connection.
c. Historical findings in cats with endocarditis are usually those of left-sided congestive heart failure,
including dyspnea, tachypnea, and lethargy. Other reported clinical signs in cats include coughing,
anorexia, and hemoptysis.
d. Physical examination findings may include the following:
i. Signs referable to cardiac disease or failure, such as a heart murmur often loudest on the left side,
tachycardia, dyspnea, tachypnea, and lethargy
ii. Signs referable to sepsis, which in cats include hypo- or hyperthermia, bradycardia, poor mental
responsiveness, pale mucous membranes, and poor pulse quality
e. Diagnostic tests should include the following:
216
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i.
 Thorough historical and physical review. The presence of a new heart murmur and clinical signs
of sepsis are consistent with the diagnosis.
i. CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis. A complete blood count may reflect the septic process; however,
an inflammatory leukogram was not a consistent finding in cats with endocarditis in the literature.
The chemistry panel and urinalysis are important to rule out other, more common causes of
sepsis and to determine if other organs (kidneys, liver) are affected.
ili. Chest radiographs. Chest radiographs may reveal left-sided heart enlargement and/or evidence
of congestive heart failure (pulmonary edema, pleural effusion).
iv. Blood cultures. Aseptic collection and handling technique is imperative, and samples from at
least 2-3 vessels should be submitted. Blood cultures are not very sensitive or specific for bacte-
rial endocarditis. Collecting blood cultures prior to antibiotic administration may increase the
diagnostic yield but should not be allowed to significantly delay institution of antibiotic therapy.
Urine culture may be an alternative or an adjunct to blood cultures in diagnosing the specific
bacteria responsible for the infection.
v. Echocardiography. Demonstration of a vegetative, destructive, and/or thickened valvular lesion
on echocardiography. Pericardial effusion has also been reported in cats with infective
endocarditis.
f. Treatment includes the following:
i. Supportive care. Appropriate supportive care measures, including oxygen therapy, vasoactive
agents, and intensive nursing care will likely be required. Intravenous fluids should not be used
in animals in left-sided congestive heart failure and should be used judiciously in cats predisposed
to it by endocarditis.
i. Antibiotic therapy. Empirical, injectable, broad-spectrum anti biotic therapy should be instituted
as soon as possible. Combinations such as a potentiated beta-lactam antibiotic {ie., ticarcillin-
clavulonate) and a fluoroquinolone (i.e., enrofloxacin) would be appropriate. Once blood or
urine culture and sensitivity results are available, antibiotic therapy should be tailored
appropriately.
ii. Treatment for congestive heart failure, if present. Oxygen therapy and diuretics are the corner-
stone of management. See chapter 15—Management of Specific Cardiac Diseases.
 g. Prognosis is poor to grave. All feline cases reported in the literature either died or were euthanized
within 11 months of diagnosis.
E. Digitalis toxicity
a. Intoxication with digoxin or other cardiac glycosides is uncommon in cats. Glycoside intoxication
in cats usually occurs secondary to digoxin therapy. The drug has a narrow margin of safety, with
signs of toxicity seen at <10 times the standard therapeutic dosage. Due to cats' discerning behavior,
accidental ingestion of digoxin medication is rare. Many plants contain cardiac glycosides, including
oleander and yellow oleander, laurel, dogbane, foxglove, lily-of-the-valley, some milkweed plants,
and Kalanchoe spp. The toxins of Bufo spp. toads also contain cardiac glycosides, which can enter
through cats' oral mucous membranes.
b. Pathophysiology—Digoxin inhibits Na+/K+ ATPase pumps throughout the body. The heart is the
targeted therapeutic organ; digoxin is used to increase contractility and slow heart rate, particularly
 in cats with DCM. Therapeutic index is small with significant individual variation. Intact females are
resistant to toxicity. Approximately 45 % of digoxin is excreted unchanged in the urine; therefore, cats
with renal disease may be predisposed to toxicity. The remainder appears to be excreted in the bile.
C. History—Most cats with digitalis toxicity will be those purposely medicated with digoxin. Other
exposures {ingestion of owner medication, toxic plants, or Bufo toads) are rare. The earliest clinical
signs of toxicity are GI disturbance such as vomiting, diarrhea, or anorexia. Advanced clinical signs
include GI signs and those of dysrhythmia (weakness, colla pse, dyspnea).
d. Physical examination findings may include nonspecific abnormalities of the gastrointestinal system;
cardiac arrhythmias may be noted. Cardiac glycosides can lead to a variety of rhythm disturbances.
Chapter 18Less-Common Cardiac Conditions
217
t. Definitive diagnosis of digoxin toxicity is by a combination of historical known or suspected expo-
sure, physical examination, and the following:
i.Serum digoxin levels should be measured. The toxic plasma concentration in cats was 2.4-2.9 ng/
mL in one small experimental study. Contact your local reference or toxicologic laboratory for
sample collection and handling procedures. Even if the patient has a digoxin level within the
reference interval, digoxin toxicity is still possible due to significant individual variation in sus-
ceptibility to toxicity as well as electrolyte disturbances, particularly hypokalemia. Hypokalemia
lowers the threshold for digoxin toxicity.
i. ECG. All patients with suspected cardiac glycoside intoxication should have continuous ECG
ii. Full minimum database {PCV, TS, BUN, Glucose, Na+, K+, Cl-, Mg++, blood gas) should be
performed to rule out other causes of gastrointestinal disturbance and/or arrhythmia at presenta -
tion followed by CBC, chemistry panel, urinalysis, chest radiographs, abdominal imaging, and
echocardiography if the underlying cause has not been determined.
f.Treatment
i. Digibind is an immune Fab antidote for digitalis toxicity. The product contains Fab fragments
from ovine antidigoxin antibodies. The fragments bind digoxin and other cardiac glycosides,
removing them from the Na+/K+ ATPase. The dosage to use is derived from the serum digoxin
concentration. However, in veterinary medicine these results are unlikely to be rapidly available.
Therefore, it is recommended to initiate treatment with one vial of Digibind and monitor for
efficacy, but the safety of this medication has not been fully evaluated in cats. Additionally, this
medication is extremely expensive.
ili. Antiarrhythmic therapy as indicated. See chapter 17—Management of Life-Threatening
Arrhythmias.
iv. Supportive care as indicated for gastrointestinal signs.
g. Prognosis for long-term recovery is good if the patient survives the initial toxic crisis.
Recommended Reading
Bolton GR, Powell W. 1982. Plasma kinetics of digoxin in the cat. Am J Vet Res, 1982;
43{11):1994-1999.
Borgarelli M, Venco L, Piga PM, et al. Surgical removal of heartworms from the right atrium of a cat.
J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1997; 211f1):68-69.
Brady CA, Otto CM, Van Winkle TJ, King LG. Severe sepsis in cats: 29 cases (1986-1998). J Am Vet Med
Assoc, 2000; 217(4):531-535.
 DeFrancesco TC, Atkins CE, Miller MW, et al. Use of echocardiography for the diagnosis of heartworm
disease in cats: 43 cases {1985-1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2001; 218(1):66-69.
Am J Vet Res, 1980; 41{12):2049-2058.
Glaus TM, Jacobs GJ, Rawlings CA, et al. Surgical removal of heartworms from a cat with caval syndrome.
J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1995; 206(5):663-666.
Gwaltney-Brant SM, Rumbeiha WK. Newer antidotal therapies. Vet Clin Sm Anim, 2002;
32(2):323-339.
Hawe RS. Bacterial endocarditis: a review. Vet Med Sm Anim Clin, 1980; 75(10):1569-1579.
Kittleson MD. Infective endocarditis {and Annuloaortic Ectasia). In Kittleson MD, Kienle RD, eds, Small
Animal Cardiovascular Medicine, pp 402-412. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.
Nelson CT, McCall JW, Rubin SB, et al. 2o0s Guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention, and management
of heartworm {Diroflaria immmitis) infection in cats. Vet Parasitol, 2005; 133{2-3):267-275.
218
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Peterson EN, Moise NS, Brown CA, et al. Heterogeneity of hypertrophy in feline hypertrophic heart disease.
J Vet Int Med, 1993; 7(3):183-189.
Reimer SB, Kyles AE, Filipowicz DE. Long-term outcome of cats treated conservatively or surgically for
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia: 66 cases (1987-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2004;
2245):728-732.
Rush JE, Keene BW, Fox PR. Pericardial disease in the cat: a retrospective evaluation of 66 cases. J Am
Anim Hosp Ass0c, 1990; 26(1):39-46.
19
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION OF
GASTROINTESTINAL CONDITIONS
Daniel Z. Hume
Unique Features
● The sublingual space should be examined for string foreign bodies.
· Cats less frequently exhibit abdominal pain associated with pancreatitis and septic peritonitis com-
pared to dogs. However, it has been reported that septic cats may exhibit nonspecific abdominal
pain despite the absence of abdominal disease.
● Reactive feline mesothelial cells do not often exhibit cellular characteristics of malignancy. Therefore
the presence of cells with these characteristics should prompt the consideration of a cancerous
process.
I. Clinical signs, diagnosis
A. Oral examination
1. A thorough oral examination should be performed on all cats. The sublingual space should be
examined for string foreign bodies {fig. 19.1). Ptyalism and icterus may be present in cats with
hepatobiliary disease. Oral ulcers may be present in association with renal disease or viral disease.
Advanced dental disease is a frequent cause of anorexia in the feline patient.
B. Abdominal auscultation
1. Abdominal auscultation is frequently unrewarding in the evaluation of emergent gastrointestinal
disease and is probably more important in the serial evaluation of the hospitalized patient.
C. Abdominal palpation
1. Careful and thorough abdominal palpation is paramount in the physical examination in cats
presenting for signs of gastrointestinal disease. The loose abdominal musculature of a cat makes
abdominal palpation relatively easy and often helps in the diagnosis. The liver margins should
not extend past the last rib and any enlargement should prompt suspicion of hepatobiliary disease.
The location and severity of any abdominal pain should be noted. Cats less frequently exhibit
abdominal pain associated with pancreatitis and septic peritonitis compared to dogs. However,
it has been reported that septic cats may exhibit nonspecific abdominal pain despite the absence
of abdominal disease. The large and small intestines should be carefully palpated for thickness,
symmetry, masses, or focal pain. Constipation or obstipation is often diagnosed based on a physi-
cal examination. The anus should be visually examined. Gentle digital rectal examination is
mandatory in any cat presenting for tenesmus or constipation.
II. Diagnostic and monitoring procedures
A. Survey abdominal radiographs
219
220
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 19.1. String foreign body under the base of the tongue. (Courtesy of Dan Hume, MR-Veterinary Hospital
at the Univeristy of Pennsylvania.)
Fig. 19.2. Lateral radiograph of a cat with carcinomatosis secondary to pancreatic carcinoma. Note the ground-
glass appearance to the cranial abdomen. (Courtesy of Anthony J. Fischeti, Animal Medical Center.)
1. Decreased abdominal serosal detail is compatible with abdominal effusion or peritonitis, though
this finding is also seen in young patients, thin patients, or poor radiographic technique.
A “ground glass" appearance to mid-abdomen may be seen in patients with carcinomatosis
(fig. 19.2).
 2. Moderate to severe gas or fluid enlargement of small intestine may be seen with small intestinal
mechanical obstruction. Normal bowel diameter is <12 mm or less than twice the height of the
central portion of a lumbar vertebrae (figs. 19.3 and 19.4).
 3. A soft tissue tubular structure with an oblong, tapering gas bubble ("bullet" sign or "snakehead"
sign) may be seen in animals with intussusceptions.
4. Intestinal plication and tear-drop-shaped luminal gas bubbles may be seen with a linear foreign
body (fig. 19.5).
5. Although extremely rare in cats, compartmentalization of the stomach and pyloric displacement
occur with a gastric dilation-volvulus {right lateral projection).
Fig. 19.3.  Lateral abdominal radiograph of a cat with a mechanical intestinal obstruction secondary to a foreign
body. Note the two populations of small bowel (one population of normal diameter and one distended population 
with a diameter >12 mm. (Courtesy of Anthony J. Fischetti, Animal Medical Center.)
Fig. 19.4. VD abdominal radiograph of a cat with a mechanical intestinal obstruction secondary to a foreign
body. Note the two populations of small bowel (one population of normal diameter and one distended population
with a diameter >12 mm. (Courtesy of Anthony J. Fischetfi, Animal Medical Center.)
Fig. 19.5. Lateral abdominal radiograph of a cat with a mechanical intestinal obstruction secondary to a linear
foreign body. Note the bunched or plicated small intestine. (Courtesy of Anthony J. Fischetti, Animal Medical Center.)
221
222
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
6. Animals with pancreatitis may have increased opacity, granularity, and decreased detail in the
right cranial quadrant, along with an increase in the gastroduodenal angle.
B. Esophagram
1. Indicated for the evaluation of esophageal causes of gastrointestinal signs (e.g., regurgitation
weight loss).
2. Diseases include esophageal strictures, masses, foreign bodies, and esophageal motility
disorders.
 3. Barium is contraindicated and nonionic, iodinated contrast preferred if esophageal perforation is
suspected or possible.
4. Obtain orthogonal survey radiographs prior to initiation of ANY contrast study.
 5. Administer 5-7 mL of 60% barium sulfate suspension or barium paste for 5-10 mL of solution
of 50: 50 nonionic iodinated contrast media to water.
6. Lateral projection of the neck and a lateral and V/D projection of the thorax are immediately
obtained.
7. The study can be repeated with barium-soaked kibble if warranted.
8. The caudal third of the esophagus normally has a herringbone appearance given the smooth
muscle composition of the feline esophagus in that region.
C. Upper and lower GI series
1. Indications for upper GI study
a. Survey radiographs are not definitive.
b. Intestinal obstruction (stricture, foreign body, mass) is suspected.
c. For the evaluation GI transit time
d. Gl ulcers and other mucosal irregularities
2. Barium is contraindicated and iodinated contrast preferred if GI perforation is suspected. Barium
is generally preferred over iodinated contrast material because barium is more opaque, not
absorbed, and adheres better to abnormal mucosa.
3. Obtain orthogonal survey abdominal radiographs prior to initiation of the contrast study.
4. Administer 12-20 mL/kg of 30% barium solution (or 600-800 mL/kg of iohexol diluted with
water to obtain a volume of 10mL/kg) via nasogastric or orogastric tube.
5. At time zero, four-view abdominal radiographs are taken allowing for visualization of all regions
of the stomach.
6. Right lateral and V/D radiographs are obtained at 15 minutes, 30 minutes, and 60 minutes.
7. Radiographs should be taken every 30 minutes until the contrast reaches the colon and the
stomach does not contain a pool of barium.
8. If a colonic abnormality is suspected, the radiographs should continue until the barium has
completely emptied the colon.
21 o dn axei uo 1nq sainw o9-s1 si wneq %oe pmbl ym aw suaidua sse 1ewon '6
hours with food, depending on size, shape, pH, and fiber content of the food.
10. Normal small intestinal transit time with liquid barium 30% is 30-60 minutes but can take as
long as 3-4 hours.
D. Pneumocolonography
1. May be used to distinguish between normal gas or feces-filled large intestine and a small intestine
dilated with gas. This is particularly useful in cats suspected of having a GI obstruction.
 2. Obtain orthogonal survey abdominal radiogra phs prior to initiation of the contrast study to allow
comparison with the contrast enhanced films.
 3. Administer 20-30mL of air into the rectum using a red rubber catheter or an oral dosing syringe.
4. Immediately after insufflation, a right lateral film should be taken. A ventral/dorsal film and
opposite lateral film may be taken if enough air remains. The procedure may be repeated if addi-
tional air is needed for orthogonal views.
E. Fecal examination
Chapter 1 9DiagnosticEvaluation of Gastrointestinal Conditions
223
1. Fecal parasitology
a. Fecal flotation is indicated to find cysts, oocysts, and ova in feces.
b. Techniques utilizing centrifugation methodology consistently recover more eggs than other
methods.
c. Zinc sulfate flotation of three separate samples procured at least 48 hours apart is the preferred
floatation technique for Giardia cyst detection (fig. 19.6).
2. Fecal cytology
a. Direct wet preparation
1. A small amount of fresh feces is mixed with a drop of saline.
2. Motile trophozoites of Giardia spp. and Tritrichomonas foetus may be visualized.
b. Stained preparations
1. Diff-Quick or Wright's stain may be used.
2. The smears may be evaluated for increased number of white blood cells, presence of a
monomorphic bacterial population, Clostridial endospores, or spiral-shaped bacteria con-
sistent with Campylobacter spp.
3. It is important to note that the diagnostic utility {low sensitivity and specificity) of fecal
cytology in the diagnosis of bacterial causes of diarrhea is low and there is poor correlation
with other more definitive diagnostic tests and that these organisms may be present and
visualized in both health and disease.
3. Other fecal tests
a. Clostridium spp.
1. Tests are available for the determination of fecal enterotoxin (Clostridiurm per fringens) and
toxin (Clostridium diffcile) quantification.
2. Submit 0.5-1.0 gram of feces.
 3. May be considered useful in cats with acute onset hemorrhagic diarrhea, diarrhea develop-
ing during hospitalization, or diarrhea in which another cause cannot be identified.
b.Tritrichomonas
1. A commercially available culture pouch (InPouch, Biomed Diagnostics, White City Oregon)
has been shown to increase the diagnostic yield compared to direct wet mounts.
2. A sensitive, inexpensive PCR test is also available (North Carolina State University, Texas
A&M GI Lab).
c. Giardia
1. Snap ELISA {IDEXX Laboratories, Inc., Westbrook, Maine) and several direct immuno
fluorescence tests are available.
 F. Diagnostic peritoneal lavage
1. Indicated in animal with suspected abdominal disease in which simple abdominal or 4-quadrant
paracentesis has been unsuccessful.
 2. Diagnostic peritoneal lavage is more sensitive than paracentesis in the diagnosis of abdominal
disease.
3. Procedure
a. Local and systemic sedation and analgesia are indicated (e.g., lidocaine 1%, butorphanol
0.25-0.5 mg/kg, diazepam 0.25-0.5 mg/kg)
b. Clip and aseptically prepare an area approximately 10cm X 10cm centered on the
umbilicus.
C. Place animal in lateral recumbency.
d. Gently insert a 20-22-gauge, over-the-needle catheter or peritoneal dialysis catheter into the
abdominal ca vity near the umbilicus and direct the catheter caudally.
e. If no fluid is noted after removal of the stylet, infuse sterile, warmed crystalloid fluid (20-
22 mL/kg) over approximately 5 minutes; remove catheter.
caris leonina (l0x); (C) Toxc
Medicine.)
224
Chapter 1 9Diagnostic Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Conditions
225
f. Roll the animal from side to side and gently massage the abdomen to help distribute the lavage
fluid throughout the abdomen.
g. Repeat a simple or four-quadrant paracentesis.
G. Abdominal ultrasound
1. An abdominal ultrasound is an invaluable imaging modality in cats with gastrointestinal
abnormalities. Considerable expertise and experience is required to properly perform and
interpret abdominal ultrasonography. The use of abdominal ultrasonography in the emergency
room setting is usually limited to identification of abnormal fluid accumulation. Studies
abdominal fluid.
 2. It may be used to evaluate the architecture and size of the abdominal viscera, identify and procure
samples of abdominal fuid, and aid in the diagnosis of many abdominal diseases.
3. May be used alone or in combination with survey abdominal radiographs to confirm a gastroin-
testinal foreign body or obstruction.
H. Specific blood tests
1. Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (fTLI)
a. Species specific—0.5mL fasting {12-18 hours) nonhemolyzed serum
b. This assay detects both trypsinogen and trypsin, but trypsin should only be present in the
serum when there is pancreatic inflammation.
C. A low value (≤8.0μg/L) is diagnostic for exocrine pancreatic insuffiency.
d. Serum TLI is increased in approximately 30-40% of cats with pancreatitis.
e. Serum TLI may be increased with small intestinal disease and severely decreased renal
function.
2. Feline pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity
a. Species specific—0.5mL fasting (12-18 hours) nonhemolyzed serum. No special handling
needed (Texas A&M GI Lab, College Station, TX).
b. This assay detects lipase specifically released from the pancreas.
c. The most sensitive (up to 100%) and specific (up to 100%) test for diagnosing feline
pancreatitis
d. An elevated value (>12 μg/L) is consistent with pancreatitis.
3. Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
a. O.5 mL fasting nonhemolyzed serum. No special handling.
b. Cobalamin is a vitamin absorbed in the distal small intestine (specifically in the ileum).
c. A decreased value may be seen in cats with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, diseases
affecting the distal small intestine, and exocrine pancreatic insuffiency.
4.Folate
a. 0.5 mL fasting nonhemolyzed serum. No special handling.
b. Folate is absorbed in the proximal small intestine.
c. Folate may be produced by bacteria, and the serum folate concentration may be increased
with small intestinal bacterial overgrowth.
d. Serum folate concentration may be decreased in cats with abnormalities in small intestinal
a bsorption.
5.Bile acids
 a. The bile acids are secreted in the bile primarily to facilitate fat absorption and are subsequently
reabsorbed in the ileum and transported in the portal blood to the liver, where they are
extracted by hepatocytes and resecreted in bile.
b. The fasting serum total bile acid concentration is a reflection of the eficiency and integrity of
the enterohepatic circulation.
c. Pathology of the hepatobiliary system or the portal circulation results in increased serum bile
acids prior to the development of hyperbilirubinemia.
226
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. In the absence of hyperbilirubinemia, serum bile acids are a sensitive and specific measure of
hepatobiliary function.
6. Serum albumin
a. Albumin may be reduced with decreased production or increased loss
b. Cats with protein-losing enteropathies may have a decreased albumin.
 7. Serum globulins
a. Globulins may be decreased in cats with protein-losing enteropathies.
b. Globulins may be increased in cats with infectious, inflammatory, or neoplastic diseases.
I. Endoscopy
 1. Indicated for the evaluation of chronic gastrointestinal diseases, which can ca use chronic vomiting,
chronic diarrhea, melena, weight loss, hematochezia, and hematemesis. Diseases may include
inflammatory bowel disease, gastrointestinal neoplasia, ulcers, lymphangiectasia, and foreign
bodies.
 2. May be used for removal of esophageal and gastric foreign bodies
J. Abdominocentesis
1. Indicated in any cat with an abdominal effusion of unknown etiology
2. Abdominocentesis may be contraindicated with a suspected increased bleeding problem.
3. Greater than 5mL/kg needed for successful tap using a single-hole needle or catheter
4. Increased yield with ultrasound guidance
S. Paracentesis
 a. The cat is placed in lateral recumbency and the area clipped and aseptically prepared.
b. 20-22-gauge hypodermic needle or over-the-needle catheter is gently inserted near the
umbilicus.
c. Fluid is allowed to drip into sample tubes or gentle aspiration with a syringe.
 d. An increased yield can be obtained utilizing a catheter with side holes or a peritoneal dialysis
catheter.
6. Four-quadrant paracentesis
a. Four quadrants are sampled as described above for simple abdominocentesis.
 b. Samples taken from an imaginary square centered over the umbilicus with the corners of the
square being approximately 4-6 cm from the umbilicus
1. Right cranial quadrant
2. Right caudal quadrant
3. Left cranial quadrant
4. Left caudal quadrant
K. Abdominal fluid analysis
1. Assess packed cell volume (PCV), total protein (TP), and total nucleated cell count TNCC).
a. Transudate: total nucleated cell count (TNCC) <1,S00 cells/μuL, TP <2.S g/dL
b. Modified transudate: TNCC 1,000-7,000 cells/μL, TP 2.5-7.S g/dL
c. Exudate: TNCC >5,000 cells/μL, TP >3.0 g/dL (table 19.1)
2. Perform aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture as indicated.
3. Cytology
a. Cytologic evaluation involves a subjective description of fluid, determination of the type of
inflammatory infiltrate, presence and degree of nuclear degeneration/toxicity and microorgan-
isms, plant or food material, bile pigments, and/or evidence of criteria of malignancy. A direct
smear is often used to gauge the cellularity of the fluid. In samples with a low to moderate
cellularity, examination of a centrifuged sediment sample may increase the sensitivity of detect-
ing bacteria or malignant cells.
b. A large number of degenerative neutrophils may indicate a significant inflammatory or infec-
tion process and should prompt the clinician to consider exploratory laparotomy even in the
absence of intracellular bacteria.
Chapter 1 9Diagnostic Evaluation of Gastrointestinal Conditions
227
Table 19.1. Effusion types.
Total Protein
Total Nucleated Cell
Effusion Type
(g/dL)
Count (cells/μL)
Examples
Transudate
1p/60'c>
<1,500 cells/μl
hypoalbuminemia 
right hecrt failure
 portal hypertension (prehepalic
and hepalic)
neoplasia
ymphatic obstructlion
Modified
3.0-5.0 g/dl
1,000-7,000 cells/μl
neoplasia
Iransudale
chylous effusion
 portal hypertension (posthepalic]
Exudale
p/60'<
>5,000 cells/μl
pancrealilis, FIlP, uroabdomen, bile
perilonilis, neoplasia, seplic
perilonitis
c. The presence of intracellular bacteria (within neutrophils and macrophages) is diagnostic for
a septic intra-abdominal process, and emergency exploratory laparotomy is indicated.
d. Reactive feline mesothelial cells do not often exhibit cellular characteristics of malignancy.
Therefore, the presence of cells with these characteristics should prompt the consideration of
a cancerous process.
e. Bile pigments may also be seen on cytologic evaluation in cats with bile peritonitis. Bile pigment
may be found either intracellular or extracellular. Bile pigment ranges in color from a dark
yellow to green brown with Romanowsky-type stains.
4. Bilirubin measurement
a. A fluid bilirubin concentration >2 times the serum bilirubin collected at the same time is sup
portive of a diagnosis of bile peritonitis.
S. Creatinine measurement
a. An abdominal fuid creatinine >2 times the serum creatinine collected at the same time is sup-
portive of uroabdomen. The serum creatinine should be greater than normal.
b. This difference is not noted in all patients with an uroabdomen.
6. Potassium measurement
a. In cats, potassium in the fluid >1.9 times the serum potassium collcted at the same time is
supportive of an uroabdomen.
b. This difference is not noted in all patients with an uroabdomen.
 7. Glucose measurement
a. A peritoneal effusion with glucose levels <50 mg/dL is suggestive of a septic peritoneal
effusion.
b. A blood-to-peritoneal glucose difference >20 mg/dL is suggestive of a septic peritoneal
effusion.
8. Lactate measurement
a. The use of peritoneal fluid lactate concentration and blood to fluid lactate difference has not
been shown to be accurate in detecting septic peritoneal effusions in cats.
Note: The clinician should take into account the whole clinical picture (signalment, history, physical exami-
nation findings, and diagnostic results) prior to making a diagnosis. Caution should be used against making
a diagnosis based on an isolated parameter or value. Additional studies are needed to further validate the
use of glucose and lactate in the diagnosis of a septic abdomen.
228
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Recommended Reading
Bonczynski JT, Ludwig LL, et al. Comparison of the peritoneal fluid and peripheral blood ph, bicarbonate,
 glucose, and lactate concentration as a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats. Vet Surgery,
2003; 32:161-166.
2003.
Walters JM. Abdominal paracentesis and diagnostic peritoneal lavage. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2003;
18{1):32-38.
20
GENERAL APPROACH TO THE
ACUTE ABDOMEN
Sara Snow and Matthew W. Beal
Unique Features
· Cats presenting with acute abdominal illness may or may not demonstrate abdominal pain.
+ Early nutritional support is critical in cats with acute abdominal illness.
· The diagnostic and therapeutic value of abdominal exploration in cats with acute abdominal illness
should not be overlooked.
· Cats that are septic may exhibit pain on abdominal palpation in the absence of abdominal disease.
Introduction
Acute abdomen refers to the rapid onset of abdominal pain. Acute abdomen is most often a sign of signifi-
cant and potentially life-threatening abdominal disease but may also be a manifestation of minor intra.
abdominal disturbances, or even disease outside the abdomen (box 20.1). The following pages will focus
on the pathophysiology of abdominal pain as well as physical examination, diagnostic workup, differential
diagnoses, and emergency stabilization and management of the cat with acute abdomen.
1. The perception of abdominal pain
a. Stimulation of nociceptors (sensory neurons) in and around the abdominal wall is responsible for
the initiation of abdominal pain.
i.
Nociceptors have unmyelinated (C-polymodal fiber/CPM fiber) or thinly myelinated (A8-fiber)
a xons that are critical in the perception of acute abdominal pain in patients with intra-abdominal
pathology.
ii. A8-fiber nociceptors specialize in the detection of dangerous mechanical and thermal stimuli,
such as those associated with abdominal wall injury or surgery.
ili. CPM fiber nociceptors respond to strong mechanical and chemical stimuli such as stretch, tension,
inflammatory mediators, and ischemia. These fibers mediate dull visceral pain associated with
the parenchymal organs of the abdomen. Visceral pain is poorly localized, and patients demon-
strating this type of pain might appear restless and ambulatory in an effort to relieve
discomfort.
iv. Both A8 and CPM fibers mediate somatic pain arising from the abdominal wall or surgery.
 Somatic pain is a sharp pain that can be localized to a specific area and may be immobilizing
for the patient.
v.Various mechanical forces, inflammatory mediators, ischemia, and chemical irritants can activate
nociceptors.
229
230
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 20.1. Common causes of acute abdomen in cats.
Gastrointestinal System
 Foreign body
Obstruction
 Perforation
Ischemia
 Neoplasia
Gastroenteritis, colitis
Intussusception
Ileus
Urogenital System
 Urethral/ureteral obstruction
Disruption of ureter, bladder, urethra, renal pelvis
 Pyelonephritis
Urolithiasis
Acute renal disease
 Neoplasia
Pyometra
Peritoneum
 Septic peritonitis
Hemoperitoneum
Feline infectious peritonitis
Disseminated neoplasia
Hepatobiliary
Cholangiohepatitis
Biliary obstruction
Cholecystitis
- Neoplasia
Pancreatic
Pancreatitis
-Neoplasia
Body Wall
-Penetrating injury
Hernia
Referred Pain
- Intervertebral disc disease
Spinal neoplasia
Pelvic trauma
vi. Nociception is initiated by various stimuli that activate the peripheral nerve terminals of nocicep-
tors. Conscious perception of pain will occur when action potentials generated in the periphery
travel via the spinothalamic and spinoreticulothalamic tracts to the thalamic nuclei and finally,
the cerebral cortex.
b. Referred pain presents as abdominal pain when the source of pain is a site at the periphery that
shares a common nociceptive segment.
i.
 Thoracolumbar spinal pain and neoplasia may be causes of referred abdominal pain in the feline
patient.
2. Complete physical examination of the feline patient with acute abdomen is critical to the rapid identi
fication of specific intra-abdominal injury or disea se.
a. Initial evaluation will focus on the major body systems and will trigger initiation of treatment for
 immediately life-threatening problerms.
Chapter 20GeneralApproach to the Acute Abdomen
231
b. Abdominal palpation is performed to localize abdominal pain and narrow differential diagnoses. It
should be noted that not all cats will demonstrate pain on abdominal palpation even in the presence
of significant intra-abdominal disease. In addition, cats that are septic may exhibit pain on abdominal
palpation in the absence of abdominal disease.
i. Dissemination of abdominal pain
1. Focal abdominal pain
a. Small bowel obstruction
b. Foreign body
c. Mild pancreatitis
d. Intussusception
e. Focal neoplastic disease
2. Regional abdominal pain
a. Pyometra
b. Moderate to severe pancreatitis
C. Regional septic peritonitis
d. Pyelonephritis
3. Diffuse abdominal pain
a. Generalized septic peritonitis
b. Generalized chemical peritonitis
c. Generalized neoplastic disease
d. Diffuse gastroenteritis (example: feline panleukopenia)
ii. Anatomic location
1. Cranial abdomen
a. Hepatobiliary disease
b. Pancreatitis
c. Gastric and cranial duodenal disease
2. Midabdomen
a. Splenic disease
b. Diseases involving the bowel
3. Caudal abdomen
a. Genitourinary disease
b. Conditions affecting the distal colon
 4. Dorsal abdomen/retroperitoneum
a. Renal and ureteral disease
b. Retroperitoneal disease or injury
c. Miscellaneous physical examination considerations for abdominal assessment
i.
 Assessment of organ size
ii. Assessment for the presence of intra-abdominal masses
ii. Visual inspection
1. Abdominal distention
2. Bruising may suggest intra-abdominal disease.
a. Periumbilical bruising suggests peritoneal disease or injury; however, thrombocytopenia/
thrombocytopathia should also be considered.
 b. Inguinal or perineal bruising suggests retroperitoneal disease or injury.
iv. Gentle ballottement for assessment of a fluid wave
v. Other physical considerations
1. Oral examination, including assessment of the sublingual region for a linear foreign body,
should always be performed (figs. 20.1a and b.). This is best accomplished by placing the
index finger on the mandibular incisors to open the mouth while pushing upward with the
thumb in the intermandi bular space to elevate the tongue.
232
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 20.1 a and b. a. Technique for evaluation of the sublingual region in a cat. Place the index finger on the
mandibular incisors to open the mouth while pushing upward with the thumb in the intermandibular spoce to elevate
the tongue. b. Linear foreign body anchored under the tongue in a cat.
2. Spinal palpation should also be undertaken as spinal pain is frequently mistaken for abdomi-
nal pain (please see above).
 3. Rectal examination is indicated with the utilization of a sedative protocol in cats with history
and physical examination suggesting large bowel obstruction, hematochezia, or straining to
defecate.
3. Stabilization of the patient with acute abdomen should focus on restoring abnormalities identified in
the major body systems assessment.
a. Vascular access is critical for the delivery of fluids and blood products.
i.Peripheral venous access initially
ii. Central venous access will facilitate monitoring of CVP, delivery of nutritional support, and the
reliable sampling of blood for diagnostic purposes. Assessment of primary and secondary hemo-
static potential with PT, aPTT, and platelet count should be considered prior to central venous
catheter placement.
Chapter 20General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
233
b. Blood should be collected for a minimum database including packed cell volume, total solids, venous
blood gas, electrolytes, blood glucose, and blood urea nitrogen (BUN).
c. Blood may also be collected for a complete blood count, serum biochemical profile, blood type, and
coagulation profile (or activated clotting time).
i. It is not necessary to run all of these samples on every patient; however, early sample collection
 prevents the need for repeated venipuncture and minimizes patient discomfort.
d. Urine should be collected via cystocentesis early in the course of therapy.
i. Urine specific gravity is most useful prior to the initiation of fluid therapy to assess urine-con-
centrating ability.
i. A urine sample should be saved for culture prior to the institution of antibiotic therapy.
ii. Caution using cystocentesis in potentially coagulopathic cats.
e. The fluid therapy plan should initially be focused on restoring intravascular volume deficits. The
fluid therapy plan may later focus on rehydration, maintenance, and management of ongoing fluid
losses. For a more in-depth discussion of fuid therapy, please refer to chapter 8—Fluid Therapy.
f. Antibiotics should be instituted immediately in patients that demonstrate evidence of sepsis, severe
sepsis, or septic shock.
i. Current evidence in human literature suggests that the early institution of antibiotic therapy
within 1 hour of the recognition of severe sepsis may improve survival.
i. Fluid or tissue samples for culture and cytology should be obtained prior to the institution of
antibiotic therapy if possible. However, antibiotic therapy should not be delayed if said samples
cannot be easily acquired (see below).
ii. Empiric antibiotic therapy should be based on underlying disease process, cytological examina-
tion of infected fluids and tissues, and Gram staining of these specimens.
4. Abdominal effusion is a common clinical finding in cats presenting with acute abdomen. Retrieval of
fluid from the abdomen for subsequent analysis and culture is essential for accurate determination of
the disease etiology. Fluid cytology and analysis provides information that is essential in determining
whether medical or surgical management is most appropriate.
drainage, or most often, a combination thereof.
b. A sample of abdominal fluid may be obtained through abdominocentesis, ultrasound-guided abdomi-
nocentesis, or diagnostic peritoneal lavage (DPL).
i. To obtain a sample of abdominal effusion through abdominocentesis, the patient should be
placed in left lateral, clipped, and aseptically prepared (fig. 20.2).
1. A site that is 1-2cm caudal to the umbilicus and 1-2cm left of midline is chosen for
sampling.
2. Abdominocentesis is performed using a needle and syringe advancing in 1-2-mm increments
in a direction perpendicular to the skin, the subcutaneous tissues, and the abdominal wall.
3. The syringe should be aspirated intermittently as it is advanced through the body wall.
4. Abdominal fluid sample handling
a. Aliquot placed in EDTA tube for cytological analysis 
b. Aliquot placed in a tube for serum determinations (red top) chemical analysis if desired
c. Aliquot placed in sterile tube and saved for culture if indicated based on cytological analysis
or chemical analysis
 d. Aliquot of hemorrhagic samples placed in serum tube to evaluate for clotting. Samples
retrieved from the abdominal cavity (rather than the spleen or other vascular structure)
will generally not clot unless the hemorrhage is peracute.
i. When single-quadrant abdominocentesis is unsuccessful, four-quadrant abdominocentesis may
be performed.
1. With this technique, abdominocentesis is repeated in areas 1-2cm cranial and lateral to the
umbilicus and caudal and lateral to the umbilicus.
234
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 20.2.Abdominocentesis in a cat.
Fig. 20.3。 Eyaluation of the subxyphoid region in the cat using ulrasonography for the identification of peritoneal
fluidaccumulations.
ii. Ultrasonography may be used for the identification and retrieval of abdominal fluid accumula-
tions. Four anatomic locations that can be quickly imaged with both longitudinal and transverse
views are listed below (figs. 20.3 and 20.4).
1. Subxyphoid
2. Right flank
3.Left flank
4. Prepubic
iv. Abdominal paracentesis and DPL with a peritoneal dialysis catheter is a more sensitive method
for the detection and collection of intra-abdominal fluid and the detection of intra-abdominal
disease.
Chapter 20General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
235
leff lank, and prepubic regions for the identification of introabdominal fluid accumulations.
1. This procedure is performed with the patient heavily sedated and in dorsal recumbency.
 2. The urinary bladder should be emptied manually or with a urinary catheter to minimize the
likelihood of inadvertent puncture.
3. The abdomen is aseptically prepared and a local anesthetic (lidocaine) is infused just caudal
to the umbilicus to include all planes of the body wall.
4. A 1- to 2-cm skin incision is made, and blunt dissection is performed to allow visualization
of the linea alba (figs. 20.5a and b).
5. The linea is grasped with forceps and a 0.5-cm stab incision is made into the abdomen with
the sharp edge of the blade pointing outward (figs. 20.5c and d).
6. A peritoneal dialysis or other multifenestrated catheter is placed and directed toward the
pelvic inlet (fig. 20.5e).
 7. Free-flowing fluid may be collected from the catheter or a syringe may be attached to retrieve
a fluid sample (fig. 20.5f)
 8. With this catheter in place, DPL may be performed in cats suspected to ha ve focal abdominal
effusion and in which the aforementioned techniques are unsuccessful in retrieving a fluid
sample. DPL is the more sensitive test for the identification of serious abdominal injury or
disease when compared with abdominocentesis. In DPL, lavage fluid contacts all peritoneal
surfaces and the fluid retrieved is representative of what is happening throughout the peri-
toneum (fig. 20.5g).
9. DPL utilizes warm 0.9% sodium chloride (20-22 mL/kg) that is introduced, and then col-
lected through a peritoneal dialysis catheter.
10. The collected fluid sample will be diluted, which will preclude significant biochemical
testing.
11. The authors find DPL to be most useful for ruling in or out septic peritonitis in patients
presenting with acute abdomen.
236
237
238
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Ari is ha
9
and the head is located to the right. Please refer to p. 235 for a description of these procedures.
 5. Cytological and chemical fluid analysis should be conducted on abdominal fluid samples.
a. Characterization of the fluid sample through total cell count and total protein concentration in
concert with cytological evaluation can aid in the diagnosis of underlying illness.
i.
A transudate contains less than 1,000 cells/μL and less than 2.5 g/dL protein. Transudates accu-
mulate in response to changes in hydrostatic pressure or colloid osmotic pressure. Transudates
are associated with hypoproteinemia, or lymphatic or venous congestion. Transudates are not
generally associated with acute abdominal pain unless associated with acute portal
hypertension.
i. A modified transudate contains greater than 1,0o0 cells/μL and/or a protein concentration greater
than 2.Sg/dL. Modified transudates may result from the chronic transudation of fluid and
increased venous hydrostatic pressure. Modified transudates may be associated with cardiac
disease, vascular insult, inflammation or torsion of an organ, and leakage of a sterile irritant such
as urine. Macrophages or mesothelial cells represent the predominant cell types in these
effusions.
ii. An exudate contains greater than 5,000 cells/μL with greater than 3.0g/dL protein. Exudates
accumulate in association with chemotaxis of inflammatory cells, altered vascular permea bility,
organ inflammation, leakage of plasma proteins, rupture of a visceral organ or vessel, exfoliation
of neoplastic cells, leakage of chylous fluid, and leakage of bile or urine. Any cell type may be
Chapter 20General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
239
iv. A septic effusion is exudative due to the presence of bacterial agents. Septic fluid contains an
increased number of neutrophils and macrophages with free and phagocytosed bacteria. There
are numerous causes for septic effusion, including abdominal wall penetration or rupture of a
visceral organ, internal abscessation, hematogenous spread, or surgical entry.
b. Direct smears of the fluid sample may be diagnostic; however, centrifugation with subsequent cyto-
logical examination will allow the clinician to review a greater number of nucleated cells.
c. Cytological evaluation can aid in the differentiation between septic and nonseptic peritonitis and is
the test of choice for diagnosing acute septic peritonitis.
i. Causes of nonseptic peritonitis in cats include FIP, pancreatitis, neoplasia, bile peritonitis, uro
peritoneum, and hemorrhage.
ii. Cytological evaluation is considered to be 57-87% diagnostic for acute septic peritonitis. The
presence of phagocytosed bacterial agents is critical in making this diagnosis.
ii. Acute septic peritonitis is always a surgical emergency and should proceed following rapid
medical stabilization.
iv. The presence of gold-green-blue phagocytosed bile pigment may be noted in abdominal effusion
6. Biochemical analysis of undiluted abdominal effusion is an important diagnostic tool to aid in the
identification of the origin of the cause of acute abdominal illness. Results of biochemical analysis of
abdominal fluid should always be interpreted in concert with cytological findings.
a. The diagnosis of uroperitoneum can be made based on evaluation of the ratio of abdominal fluid
creatinine and potassium concentration to that of the peripheral blood.
i. A creatinine level of the abdominal fluid twice that of peripheral blood is a highly sensitive and
specific indicator of uroperitoneum.
ii. A potassium concentration of the abdominal fluid 1.9 times greater than that of peripheral blood
is also supportive of uroperitoneum in cats.
radiography to determine the site of urine leakage.
1. A retrograde urethrocystogram will identify urethral or bladder disruption.
2. An excretory urogram will identify kidney, renal pelvis, ureteral, and possibly bladder disrup-
tion. Patients should be volume resuscitated prior to intravenous iodinated contrast agent
administration. Prolonged renal excretion of contrast media has been associated with renal
damage in humans; therefore, excretory urography should be considered cautiously in patients
with evidence of dehydration and azotemia.
 a. An enema to empty the large bowel will facilitate visualization of the ureters and ureterove.
sicular junction. This may or may not be feasible in the critically ill patient.
b. Water-soluble, sterile iodinated contrast agent equivalent to 400-800 mg iodine/Kg body
weight is injected intravenously. Nonionic agents are preferred due to a lower incidence
of side effects.
C. Right lateral and VD radiographs are taken at times 0, 5, 20, and 40 minutes. Oblique
views at 20 and 40 minutes may facilitate visualization of the ureters.
bladder.
e. Side effects of administration of iodinated contrast medium include hypotension, vomiting,
hives, and acute renal failure.
b. The ratio of bilirubin concentration of abdominal effusion to peripheral blood may be useful in the
diagnosis of bile peritonitis.
i. A ratio greater than 2.0 may be a sensitive indicator of bile peritonitis. However, further investiga-
tion is warranted to identify the overall utility of this ratio.
c. The utility of amylase and lipase measurements in abdominal fluid has yet to be adequately
investigated.
240
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. The measurement of glucose gradients between abdominal fluid and blood has been found to be a
quite sensitive (86%) and highly specific (100%) test for the diagnosis of septic peritonitis in cats.
i. An abdominal fluid glucose 20 mg/dL lower than blood glucose in the cat supports a diagnosis of
septic peritonitis. This has been demonstrated when glucose concentrations were measured with
a Vet Test 8008 Analyzer (Idexx Laboratories Inc., Westbrook, ME) and has not been demon-
strated with the use of glucometers or other laboratory equipment used for chemistry and blood
gas analysis. It should be noted that highly cellular nonseptic abdominal fluids may also demon-
strate a large glucose gradient (>20 mg/dL). Further evaluation of animals with highly cellular
nonseptic effusions will be beneficial to definitively evaluate the utility of the glucose gradient for
the diagnosis of septic peritonitis. A definitive diagnosis of septic peritonitis, however, should be
based on integration of cytological, biochemical, and imaging findings.
7. Diagnostic imaging is a valuable resource for identification of the underlying cause of acute abdomen
in cats. Prior to any imaging, the patient should be stable, calm, and pain free.
a. Abdominal radiography is a valuable tool for evaluation of cats with acute abdominal pain. It is
important that image quality allow for the assessment of all intra-abdominal structures and the
surrounding tissues.
b. A significant percentage of cats presenting with acute abdomen have ingested foreign material. Upper
gastrointestinal studies are the most appropriate diagnostic test to rule out gastric and small bowel
obstruction.
i. 30% barium sulfate suspension can be administered via nasogastric tube at a dose of 10 mL/kg in
cats with no evidence of gastrointestinal disruption. In cases where gastrointestinal perforation is
suspected, an iodinated contrast medium may be used at a dose of 2mL/kg diluted in 8 mL/kg of
water. However, if gastrointestinal disruption is suspected, an indication for surgery may be sought
through acquisition of abdominal fluid.
1. Lateral and ventrodorsal radiographic views may be taken at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90, 120, or 180
minutes after administration.
2. Normal gastrointestinal transit time is anywhere from 1 to 2 hours in cats but can be increased
to 3 to 4 hours (but can vary depending on other factors [see chap. 19—Diagnostic Evaluation
of Gastrointestinal Conditions]).
physical evidence of cardiorespiratory disease or decreased oxygen indices.
i.
 Due to the high incidence of cardiomyopathy in the cat population, thoracic radiographs may
be indicated in all cats presenting with acute abdomen and critical illness because of the fluid
loading that is often necessary in this patient population.
i. Acute lung injury (ARDS) can occur secondary to numerous conditions associated with acute
abdomen.
 ii. Thoracic radiogra phs should be evaluated for evidence of neoplastic disease in all geriatric patients.
d. Abdominal ultrasound may also be useful in the search for an underlying cause of acute abdomen
in the cat. Abdominal ultrasound should be considered complimentary to rather than a substitute
for abdominal radiography.
performed by individuals without appropriate training and experience.
8. Abdominal exploration is often the definitive diagnostic and therapeutic tool for the feline patient with
acute abdomen (box 20.2).
a. Surgical exploration is indicated based on a presumptive diagnosis through findings from history,
physical examination, and diagnostic testing.
persistent symptoms of acute abdominal pain.
i. Grossly "negative” abdominal exploration may have important diagnostic value after biopsies
are taken.
Chapter 20 General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
241
Box 20.2. Common surgical conditions associated with acute abdomen in cats.
+ GI foreign body
●Intussusception
· Gastrointestinal perforation
· Biliary obstruction
·Septic peritonitis
●Hemoperitoneum
● Uroperitoneum
· Pyometra
●Penetrating injury
· Body wall hernia/disruption
+Abdominal neoplasia
ii. Problems identified during abdominal exploration may be definitively treated. Due to the high
incidence of infiltrative small bowel disease in the feline population, biopsies should be taken of
all grossly abnormal tissues and of all small bowel segments in cats with a history of vomiting
and diarrhea without an obvious cause. Mesenteric lymph node biopsies should also be per-
formed in these patients.
iv. Biopsies of the large bowel are indicated only in patients with gross evidence of pathology or a
history of large bowel disease such as large bowel diarrhea.
b. Evaluation of a patient with any wounds over the abdomen should always include surgical explora-
tion of those wounds following abdominal radiography.
i. Wound probing with a blunt instrument is not an accurate tool for identifying penetrating injury
because of the ability of skin and subcutaneous and body wall muscle layers to move over one
another.
i. All bite wounds should be surgically explored (and opened) to facilitate adequate exposure for
complete exploration, debridement, lavage, and esta blishment of drainage.
ii. Wounds that penetrate the abdominal cavity warrant ventral midline abdominal exploration
from xyphoid to pubis.
1. Intra-abdominal injuries are identified and treated.
 2. Body wall repairs are performed from the abdomen.
Ethicon Inc., Somerville, NJ; figs. 20.6 a and b) is established in all cases of penetrating injury.
Although not all cases may require ongoing drainage, the infected nature of penetrating
wounds makes early drainage important. Drains may be removed when abdominal fluid
production decreases to <S-7mL/kg/day.
 4. External wounds are then definitively managed. Definitive management includes debridement,
lavage, and esta blishment of drainage.
iv. Nonpenetrating wounds may result in severe intra-abdominal injury from crushing and shearing
injury. The author has found laparoscopy to be a rapid, minimally invasive yet highly diagnostic
tool for abdominal exploration in these types of cases. Surgical abdominal exploration may be
warranted in cases where laparoscopy is not available. A proactive philosophy to approaching
these patients is important. Cats will not experience serious morbidity from a negative abdominal
exploration; however, failure to identify serious intra-abdominal injury can result in serious
morbidity or morta lity.
C. Analgesia is an important consideration for cats with acute abdominal pain.
1.
Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients).
242
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Figs。 20.6 a cand b. T-fluted closed suction drain (Blake Drain; Ethicon, Inc. Somerville, NJ).
d. Early enteral nutritional support is important to rapidly meet caloric needs in critically ill patients
(see chap. 9—Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
1.
 Anesthesia events common to the management of cats with critical illness offer the opportunity
for the placement of nasoesophageal, esophagostomy, gastrostomy, nasojunostomy, gastrojeju-
nostomy, or surgical jejunostomy feeding tubes.
 ii. Nasoesophageal/nasogastric, esophagostomy, or gastrostomy tubes are good choices for feline
patients that are not vomiting.
1. Nasoesophageal or nasogastric tubes are quick and easy to place and are excellent for short-
term nutritional support in the feline patient.
2. Esophagostomy tubes are preferred to endoscopic gastrostomy tubes due to a perceived lower
complication rate. These tubes are excellent for longer-term nutritional support.
ii. Gastrostomy tubes offer a means of both feeding and gastric decompression.
iv. Nasojejunostomy, jejunostomy, or gastrojejunostomy tubes bypass the stomach and are indicated
in patients with persistent vomiting (such as in cats with pancreatitis) or decreased gastric
motility.
Chapter 20 General Approach to the Acute Abdomen
243
Feline patient with abdominal pain
个
Patiett assessment atd stabilization
Blood and urine collection
↑
Survey radiographs of abdomen and thorax
个
个
Definitive diagnosis
No definitive diagnosis
个
个
Abdominal ultrasound
Contrast study
个
个
Abdominal effusion
No effusion
↑
个
Fluid collection and analysis
√
 Definitive treatment +/- abdominal exploration
Fig. 20.7 Approach to ocute abdomen.
Summary
Acute abdomen is a common clinical complaint identified in feline patients. Successful management results
from rapid stabilization of major body systems, early identification of underlying disease, and timely defini-
tive therapy.
References
Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ. Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc,
1998; 34:315-324.
 Baker R, Lumsden JH. Pleural and peritoneal fluids. In Baker R, Lumsden JH, eds, Color Atlas of Cytology
of the Dog and Cat, pp 159-164. St. Louis: Mosby, 2000.
Beal MW. Approach to the acute abdomen. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 2005;
35(2):375-396.
Bonczynski JJ, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ, et al. Comparison of peritoneal fluid and peripheral blood pH,
bicarbonate, and lactate concentration as a diagnostic tool for septic peritonitis in dogs and cats. Vet
Surg, 2003; 32:161-166.
Dellinger RP, Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving sepsis campaign guidelines for management of severe
sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med, 2004; 32f3):858-873.
Dillon AR, Spano JS. The acute abdomen. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 1983; 13:461-475.
Heuter KJ. Excretory urography. Clin Tech Sm Anim Pract, 2005; 20:39-45.
Mazzaferro E. Triage and approach to the acute abdomen. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2003;
18(1):1-6.
244
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Mueller MG, Ludwig LL, Barton LJ. Use of closed-suctioned drains to treat generalized peritonitis in dogs
and cats: 40 cases (1997-1999). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 2001; 219(6):789-794.
Shelly SM. Body cavity fluids. In Raskin RE, Meyer DJ, eds, Atlas of Canine and Feline Cytology,
pp 187-205. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2001.
Ann Intern Med, 2004; 140:441-451.
21
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC
GASTROINTESTINAL CONDITIONS
Anne Marie Corrigan and Douglass K. Macintire
Unique Features
 1. The feline esophageal muscle layer contains more smooth muscle compared with dogs (the proxi-
mal two-thirds are striated muscle and the distal one-third is smooth muscle; the canine esophagus
contains striated muscle throughout).
2. High doses of enrofloxacin may cause blindness in cats.
4. String foreign bodies under the tongue are relatively common, and this site should be consistently
evaluated in vomiting or anorexic cats with acute onset of clinical signs. Additionally, string foreign
bodies can be found protruding from the anus. Passage this far does not assure absence of GI
obstruction and the necessity for surgery.
5. Cats with similar diseases that cause vomiting in dogs tend to not vomit as prolifically as dogs do.
6. Triaditis (pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, and cholangiohepatitis) is relatively unique to
cats compared with dogs.
8. Cats are more sensitive to the colloidal effects of oxyglobin compared with dogs, and administra-
tion of large volumes should be done with caution.
 9. Loss of appetite in cats can result in clinically significant hepatic lipidosis compared with dogs.
dogs.
Complete physical exam, history, and evaluation of clinical signs and test results are necessary to
adequately diagnose and treat any gastrointestinal disease in cats.
Many diseases will respond to therapeutic trials without having a primary diagnosis; however, for
recurrent, complicated, or severe diseases, a working knowledge of the appropriate disease process will
assist in selecting the appropriate medical, nutritional, or surgical choices in a timely manner. Initial
emergency database is indicated for most conditions; however, more complete blood work will be
indicated for many diseases, as well as for anesthesia preparedness. Drug recommendations are made
in the appropriate paragraphs, but all dosages are listed in the table at the end of the chapter.
A. Regurgitation
a. Key points and rule-outs
i. The feline esophageal muscle layer contains more smooth muscle compared with dogs (the
proximal two-thirds are striated muscle and the distal one-third is smooth muscle; the canine
esophagus contains striated muscle througout).
i. Must identify passive versus active expulsion of food to differentiate from vomiting.
245
246
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Many owners will not specify vomiting versus regurgitation. Most will consider the cat to be
vomiting.
iii. Possible causes include
1. Esophagitis causing esophageal motor dysfunction or stricture formation
a. Causes of esophagitis include profuse vomiting, ingestion of caustic substances, gastric
contents pooling in the esophagus during general anesthesia, hiatal hernia, and lodging of
doxycycline tablets.
 b. Esophageal obstruction/stricture 
i. Esophageal foreign body, previous trauma, mediastinal mass, esophageal neoplasia,
previous esophagitis, and persistent right aortic arch.
C. Esophageal motility disorder (megaesophagus)
i. Neuromuscular disease (generally will see other signs of muscular weakness), active
esophagitis, lead toxicity, hypokalemia, organophosphate toxicity
ii. Inherited esophageal motility disorder (Siamese cats)
ii. Paraneoplastic megaesophagus
iv. The primary cause needs to be identified to prevent recurrence after therapy.
b. Diagnostics
i.  Radiographs (cervical and thoracic), fuoroscopy, and contrast studies are beneficial; it is also
helpful to monitor for common associated conditions such as aspiration pneumonia or
neoplasia.
ii. Endoscopy may be indicated to evaluate mucosal surfaces, identify foreign bodies or strictures.
May also be utilized for therapeutic balloon dilation.
c. Therapeutics
i. Elevated feedings, frequent small calorie-dense feedings, the Bailey Chair, or holding upright
after feedings for 10-15 minutes, feeding tubes to bypass or rest a dilated esophagus. Balloon
dilation while under anesthesia if stricture present
1. The Bailey Chair may work well in dogs, but cats may not tolerate it or may not intake food
 in the appropriate position.
d.Drugs
i.Omeprazole (0.7mg/kg PO q24h)
ii. H2 blockers {Famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM IV q12-24h, Ranitidine 2.5 mg IV q12h or
1-2 mg/kg PO q8-12h)
ii. Sucralfate (0.25-0.5 g PO as slurry q8-12h)
iv. Cisapride (2.5 mg PO <10-lb cat, 5mg PO >10-1b cat q8h, give 30 minutes prior to meal) or
metoclopramide (0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO or SC q8-12h or 1-2 mg/kg per day CRI infusion) to increase
lower esophageal sphincter tone {30 minutes prior to feeding—the prokinetic aspects may not
be particularly beneficial).
v. Pain management for severe esophagitis {see chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline
Patients).
vi. Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy if aspiration pneumonia present
1. Ampicillin 22mg/kg IV q8h for gram positive bacteria combined with a gram negative cover-
age antibiotic—aminoglycoside or fluoroquinolone
2. Gentamicin 6 mg IV q24h (avoid in cats that are dehydrated, have decreased blood pressure
or perfusion, or have renal compromise)
3. Enrofloxacin 2.5 mg/kg q12h or Marbofloxacin 5 mg/kg q24h
B. Esophageal foreign body
a. Key points
i.  Historical observation of foreign body ingestion, recent hairballs, ptyalism, or dysphagia
ii. Ensure careful palpation on left side of neck for the presence of a mass, swelling, or pain in the
cervical esophagus.
Chapter 21 Management of Specific Gastrointestinal Conditions
247
b. Diagnostics/therapeutics
i.Radiographs or fluoroscopy
1. Pay particular attention to thoracic inlet, heart base, and diaphragm, which are common
 areas for foreign body lodgment
2. Note the mediastinum for fluid or air, which may indicate tracheal or esophageal
perforation.
3. Subcutaneous air or pneumothorax indicate possible esophageal perforation.
ii. Use caution with contrast agents if perforation is suspected.
1. If perforation is a significant possibility, then consider an iodated contrast material.
ii. Endoscopy with removal and evaluation of mucosal surface damage.
1. If further damage may occur to esophagus with removal with the endoscope, then consider
advancement of the foreign body to stomach and surgical gastrotomy for removal.
iv. Surgical repair of esophagus if perforation is present
v. Placement of an esophageal or gastric feeding tube should be considered at this time. If mucosal
damage is present, monitor the cat for future complications such as stricture formation {1-3
weeks) or perforation.
c.Drugs
i. Sucralfate slurries (0.25-0.5 g PO q8-12h) after removal to assist in mucosal protection and
hea ling
i. H2 blockers or omeperazole if esophagitis is a concern, consider therapeutics listed above for
regurgitation.
C. Gastric foreign body/intestinal foreign body/obstructions/intussusception
a.Key points
i. Historical, clinical signs, radiographic, or ultrasound diagnosis.
 1. Vomiting and anorexia are the most common clinical signs.
 2. Gastric foreign bodies can cause intermittent vomiting/anorexia until they pass into the small
intestine; can cause obstruction and then signs become more persistent.
 1. Occasionally, string will be found protruding from the anus. This does not rule out the pos-
sibility of intestinal obstruction.
ii. Consider toxin ingestion and monitor for complications, for example, zinc and lead (see chap.
39—Toxicological Emergencies).
iv. Gastric/high intestinal obstructions tend to have more acute presentations. Lower intestinal
obstructions may present with more chronic onset and may include foreign bodies, tumors, and
int uss usceptions.
v. Extraluminal (adhesions and strangulations) as well as intramural diseases (FIP, fungal infec-
tions, and neoplasia) also occur.
shock.
 1. Severe ileus is primarily characterized by absence of borborygmi on abdominal auscultation
and uniformly dilated small intestinal loops on abdominal radiographic evaluation.
b. Diagnostics/therapeutics
 i. Perform blood work to identify metabolic derangements that can be addressed before or during
bolic alkalosis, although severe vomiting from any cause can result in this constellation of
electrolyte and acid/base changes.
ii. Abdominal radiographs with characteristic patterns—severely dilated bowel loops proximal
to foreign body or obstruction, bunched intestines seen with linear foreign bodies, loss
of abdominal detail seen with perforation, radiodense metallic foreign body seen with lead or
zinc
248
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Abdominal ultrasound is especially beneficial for visualizing intussusceptions—can appear as
oval masses, target-shaped masses, or thickened intestines with too many layers .
iv.  If plain radiographics are questionable for the diagnosis of intestinal foreign body obstruction,
then consider repeating plain abdominal radiographs in 2-3 hours. If intestinal pattern still
indicates the same local bowel distention, then intestinal obstruction is more likely.
v. Positive-contrast upper Gl study is the noninvasive gold standard for ruling out intestinal
obstruction if plain radiographs are questionable for the diagnosis.
vi. Definitive treatment
1. Endoscopic examination and removal (for gastric foreign bodies)
2. Exploratory laparotomy and correction, removal, and intestinal resection if necessary.
vii. Initiate IV fluid therapy to correct dehydration and any acid base or electrolyte disturbances.
c.Drugs
i. Sucralfate, H, blockers, and omeprazole (see drug table at end of chapter).
d. Nutritional support
i.
Rest damaged mucosa and gastrotomy/enterotomy site 12-24 hours and reintroduce food in
liquid or slurry form. Caloric requirements are calculated at 30 x BW {kg) + 70. Begin with
one-third of caloric needs on day 1, increasing to full dose by day 3 fsee chap. 9—Nutritional
Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
 1. Monitor for hypophosphatemia in cats that have been off feed. Signs of hypophosphatemia
include wea kness, lethargy, altered mentation/seizures, and hemolysis.
2. If ileal resection is performed, cobalamin supplementation 250-500 ug SQ or IM every 1-2
weeks may be necessary; use injectable form, not a multivitamin.
D. Infammatory bowel disease (IBD)
a. Key points
i. One of the most common causes of chronic vomiting and diarrhea in cats.
ii. Historical findings may range from acute to chronic and from mild to severe.
ii. Physical examination findings can include any GI signs, as well as nonspecific findings such as
lethargy, anorexia, and weight loss.
iv. Rule out systemic disease such as FIV, FeLV, hyperthyroidism, parasites, food allergies, and
lymphosarcoma.
b. Diagnostics
i. Blood work to assess hydration status and anesthesia preparedness
ii. Gastric and intestinal biopsies via endoscopy, colonoscopy, or surgical exploratory
ii. The laparotomy increases diagnostic power over endoscopy by obtaining full-thickness
biopsies.
C. Therapeutics
i.  Supportive care depending on severity of presenting signs
i. Hypoallergenic or low-additive diet and immunosuppressive therapy are the mainstays of IBD
therapy.
ii. Prednisolone or prednisone (see table 21.1 at end of chapter for doses and adjustments depend-
ing on severity) and metronidazole
1. For more severe or resistant disease, chlorambucil can be added to corticosteroids for
enhanced immunosupression.
2. Methylprednisolone injections can be administered every 2-4 weeks if owners are unable to
administer pills or liquid.
3. Budesonide is a locally acting steroid, with low systemic effects, which might be promising
in diabetic cats with IBD.
E. Gastric ulceration
a. Key points
Chapter 21Management ofSpecificGastrointestinal Conditions
249
i. Predisposing factors include shock, mast cell tumors and other neoplasia, NSAIDs, renal failure,
liver disease, gastric foreign bodies, sepsis, ischemia/infarction, and trauma.
ii. Patients may present with hematemesis (coffee grounds or frank blood), melena, anemia, and
may present with uremia and oral ulceration if concurrent with renal disease.
ii. Complications can include perforation and peritonitis, coagulopathies, and DIC.
b. Diagnosis
i. Fine-needle aspirates of lymph nodes, spleen, or masses, thoracic radiographs, buffy coat smear,
abdominal ultrasound, and a diligent search for tumors are utilized to find evidence of mast cells
 or other neoplasia.
ii. Serial PCVs or CBCs to monitor for anemia and regenerative response. If severely anemic, pRBC,
whole blood, or oxyglobin transfusion may be required for stabilization.
1. Whole blood use {recipient wt [kg] × 60) × (desired HCT—HCT of recipient/donor HCT in
anticoagulant).
3. Monitor closely for vomiting, fever, or other transfusion reactions.
4. Oxyglobin use 5-20 mL/kg IV, but use caution as oxyglobin acts as a colloid, and pulmonary
edema and pleural effusion are relatively common side effects. Give small doses of 2-4 mL/
kg/hr and monitor for sign of fluid overload (pulmonary edema/pleural effusion).
ii. Endoscopy or abdominal exploratory with gastrotomy and biopsy samples are definitive
dia gnostics.
iv. Perforation will require surgery to repair the defect and flush abdominal cavity to decrease
complications from peritonitis.
C. Therapeutics
i.  Fluid therapy and gastric protectants: sucralfate, H blockers, omeprazole.
ii. Antibiotic therapy for Helicobacter spp. if indicated {after histologic evaluation and other causes
for vomiting have been ruled out, including amoxicillin, metronidazole, and Pepto-Bismol). Treat
for 5-7 days and reevaluate. Some animals may need longer trials.
iii. Metoclopramide as a prokinetic and antiemetic if indicated
iv. Iron supplementation if chronic microcytic hypochromic anemia. Although blood transfusion is
an excellent source of iron.
F.Acute vomiting
a. Key points
i. Many causes should be considered, including disorders of the central or peripheral nervous
systems, and Gl, renal, hepatic, and systemic inflammatory diseases.
Aoq uaoy sus rog anaun lapun yoauo pue uonainu snsiaa sua ansug '!
1. Vomiting is an active process with abdominal contractions and preliminary signs, while
b. Diagnostics
i.  Initial database can include PCV/TS, glucose, BUN, and urine specific gravity, but due to the
variety of systemic causes, a more complete workup is usually indicated and includes CBC with
a blood smear, chemistry, and urinalysis. One venipuncture would be less stressful for the cat.
ii. Other diagnostics may include fecal examination, abdominal radiographs, abdominal ultra-
sound, endoscopy with biopsies, or surgical exploratory with biopsies.
iii. The primary rule-outs on an emergency basis for acute vomiting are gastrointestinal obstruction,
septic peritonitis, and gastrointestinal ischemia or rupture.
c. Therapeutics
i. Even if the correct diagnosis is not identified, therapeutics are aimed at supportive care, correct-
ing dehydration, metabolic derangements, and gastritis. Positive responses may be seen within
 24-48 hours if the condition is self-limiting and relatively benign.
250
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Antiemetics and prokinetics may mask primary cause and could be dangerous if foreign body
or obstruction have not been ruled out.
iii. Treatment includes IV fluids, antiemetics, (phenothiazines, metoclopramide [also has the benefit
of preventing ileus], Meclizine if vestibular ca use), and anthelmintics.
iv. Diet recommendations
1. If the cat will eat, a bland diet such as cottage cheese and rice, lean cooked hamburger and
rice, or lean chicken and rice can be fed within 24-48 hours.
2. Force-feeding is not recommended for anorexic cats.
3. Trickle feeding through NE tube, esophagostomy, or jejunostomy tube can nutritionally
au iop hoddns leuonne deuo aas) sisopidi suedau uaand pue ieo au joddns
Critically Ill Feline Patient).
4. Partial or total parenteral nutrition may be indicated when oral feeding is not an option and
cannot be instituted within 3-5 days.
G. Acute diarrhea
a. Key points
i. Differentiate between large and small bowel, localized versus diffuse disease, and evaluate sys
temic effects such as dehydration, electrolyte disturbances, or sepsis.
1. Large-bowel diarrhea is characterized by small-volume bowel movements that occur fre-
quently and with urgency. Straining and mucus are also frequent with occasional fresh blood.
2. Small-bowel diarrhea tends to be less frequent with larger volumes.
ii. Rule-outs include parasitism, dietary changes or indiscretion, drug side effects or intoxication,
IBD, LSA or other neoplasia, and fungal, protozoal, and bacterial infections.
b.Diagnostics
i. Minimum database (PCV, TS, blood glucose, BUN) to evaluate for hydration status if acute or
mild, or complete blood work (CBC, chemistry screen) if more severe or chronic disease
ii. Obtain a fecal sample for flotation, direct smear, or culture if indicated. Advanced diagnostics
may include CBC, chemistries, blood gases, cobalamin, folate, feline pancreatic lipase immuno-
reactivity (fPLI), abdominal radiographs, and ultrasound.
C. Therapeutics
 i. Administer fluids with KCl supplementation if necessary to rehydrate and maintain the cat during
dia gnostics.
ii.  Diet modification—including NPO for 24 hours and then a reintroduction with a bland diet for
3-5 days.
d.Drugs
i.May include sucralfate, H2 blockers, omeprazole, and metoclopramide if necessary
ii. Immunosuppressive therapy for IBD
iii. Antibiotics are indicated if there is a clear indication of infection or sepsis risk, including fever,
neutrophilia or neutropenia, bloody stool, and shock.
Symptomatic thera pies may often mask underlying causes and decrease one's ability to monitor
 progress and thera peutic response.
H. Acute pancreatitis
a. Key points and rule-outs
Common associated diseases include cholangiohepatitis, hepatic lipidosis, IBD, trauma, and
toxoplasmosis.
ii. Triaditis includes concurrent pancreatitis, cholangiohepatitis, and IBD.
ii. Cats can present with a variety of signs. General malaise, weight loss, anorexia, dehydration,
hypothermia, and icterus are common.
iV.
 Differentials include foreign bodies, IBD, gastroenteritis, intussusceptions, infections (panleu
kopenia), neoplasia, and cholangitis.
1. These can progress to more severe conditions such as hepatic lipidosis, septic shock, and DIC.
Chapter 21Management of Specilic Gastrointestinal Conditions
251
N.
Cats are much less likely to vomit with pancreatitis than dogs.
vi. Siamese cats may be predisposed.
b. Diagnostics
i.
 Complete blood work and urinalysis to assess systemic responses to disease and to have baseline
data for therapeutic monitoring.
i. Amylase and lipase have not proven helpful in the diagnosis.
ii. The fPLI serum test is appropriate for diagnosis and monitoring therapy.
iv.  Other laboratory changes are variable: dehydration, early (neutrophilia with a left shift) or late
{decreased WBC) signs of inflammation, elevated liver enzymes, hypocalcemia due to fat saponi-
fication, and hyper- or hypoglycemia.
V.
 Radiographic appearance may range from no signs to loss of cranial abdominal detail (ground
glass), and/or duodenal gas.
vi.(
Chest radiographs may identify diffuse infiltrates (ARDS), pleural effusion, and/or aspiration
pneumonia.
vii.  Abdominal ultrasound is excellent for evaluating any concurrent liver disease and may identify
hypoechoic masses in cranial abdomen, cysts, abscesses, free abdominal fluid, and may allow
for evaluation of the pancreas and gall bladder.
vifi. Abdominocentesis if indicated; cytology usually reveals an exudative effusion that is aseptic.
Monitor for signs of diabetes mellitus; insulin therapy may have to be instituted.
c. Therapeutics
Most are aimed at supportive care and fluid and electrolyte deficit correction.
 Begin crystalloid fluid therapy with KCl supplementation.
1. If rapid resuscitation is required to treat shock or poor perfusion, KCl supplementation
should be delayed until after the initial fluid bolus has been administered.
ii. Pain medication such as buprenorphine, oxymorphone, or fentanyl
ii. Antibiotic therapy to prevent bacterial translocation (cats have a higher bacterial count in duo
denum compared with dogs), enrofloxacin (caution with high doses), cefazolin, or a combination
of ampicillin and enrofloxacin are recommended in cats with fever and more severe disease.
There is some controversy surrounding reintroduction of food. If the cat will eat, a low-fat
feline diet can be fed within 24-48 hours.
1. Force-feeding is not recommended for anorexic cats as this may result in food aversion.
 2. Trickle feeding through NE tube, esophagostomy, or jejunostomy tube can nutritionally
'sisopidi oueday suaaaud pue ieo aul loddns
3. Partial or total parenteral nutrition may be indicated when oral feeding is not an option
Patient).
iv.  Other medications of value include antiemetics such as metoclopramide, cobalamin, and oral
pa ncreatic enzymes.
V.
Surgical exploratory may be indicated for abscesses, peritonitis, bile duct obstruction, and
jejunostomy tube placement.
vi.  Complicated or severe cases may benefit from plasma transfusions 5-20 mL/kg IV, hetastarch
or dextran 20 mL/kg/day IV, or 0xyglobin 5-20 mL/kg/IV to assist in oxygen delivery to
damaged tissues.
1. Caution should prevail with aggressive oxyglobin administration as fluid overload is a rela-
tively common side effect. Try 2-4mL/kg doses over 1 hour and evaluate response and
evidence of fluid overload ( pulmonary edema, pleural effusion, persistent increase in central
venous pressure).
d. Complications may include renal failure, diabetes mellitus, DIC, ARDS, cardiac arrhythmias, bile
duct obstruction, vitamin K responsive coagulopathies, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and death
in severe cases.
252
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
é. The prognosis depends on the severity of disease and complications such as concurrent disease states
and on possible sequelae such as chronic pancreatitis, hepatic lipidosis, exocrine pancreatic insuf-
ficiency, and rarely, dia betes mellitus.
I. Acute stomatitis/oral ulcers
a.Key points
 Frequent problem in cats, and it is common for this to progress and involve many sites, includ.
ing tongue, gingiva, lips, periodontal membranes, and glossopalatine folds.
1i.
 Rule-outs include severe dental disease, immune-mediated diseases, immunodeficient diseases,
and infectious diseases, including bacterial and viral diseases (most commonly calicivirus),
metabolic diseases (most commonly uremia), neoplasia, nutritional disorders, toxic/caustic,
diabetes mellitus, and trauma (including foreign bodies and electrical cord burns).
b.Diagnostics
 Due to the wide variety of causes, a detailed history including onset and duration must be
evaluated.
ii.
1.Clinical signs usually associated with oral disease, including anorexia, dysphagia, halitosis, and
ptyalism
iii.
 Physical exam to try and identify if localized disease or oral manifestation of systemic disease,
as well as a careful oral exam to identify and describe all inflamed areas
iv.  If the cat is particularly painful or fractious, sedation/anesthesia is indicated, and while under,
culture swa bs f usually not diagnostic, but sensitivity will help pick antibiotics that are efficacious ),
scrapings, or biopsy samples are necessary to identify cause or cellular infiltrate via cytology.
Blood work to identify underlying causes including CBC-leukocytosis for chronic infection or
 inflammation, eosinophilia-eosinophilic granuloma complex, FIV/FeLV testing, serum chemis-
tries, and urinalysis to assess kidney function and test for diabetes mellitus
vi.Cytology or histopathology of oral samples
vii. Dental radiographs to assess alveolar bone and possible tooth root disease
C.Treatment
1.
Identification of primary cause necessary for appropriate long-term therapy
ii.
 Adequate nutrition and hydration must be managed—soft foods, vitamin supplementation, and
fluid therapy. Additional conservative therapeutics includes full dental prophylaxis, followed
with daily oral antiseptic rinses, fluoride gel, lidocaine gel, and wax coatings.
iii. Feeding tube placement indicated for severe inflammation, pain, or prolonged anorexia 
 iv.   Antibiotic therapy to control secondary infections (clindamycin 5-11 mg/kg PO q12h); bacteria
are rarely primary ca uses.
V.
Culture and sensitivity will aid in selection of appropriate drugs; common choices include
 amoxicillin/cla vulanic acid, clindamycin, azithromycin, and doxycycline.
vi.  Immunosuppressive therapy is indicated for eosinophilic granulomas.
vil.  Antifungal therapy if indicated; antivirals: interferon-α for retroviruses (efficacy questiona ble)
or immunosuppressive or anti-inflammatory therapy, but only after trying antibiotics. This is
beyond the scope of emergency medicine and the rea der is referred to more appropriate internal
medicine/infectious disease texts.
vi. Bovine lactoferrin for calicivirus, although this is experimental and clinical efficacy and safety
has not been established
ix.  More veterinarians are finding that partial (molars and premolars) or complete tooth extractions
 are the only ways to halt the progression of lymphocytic or plasmacytic gingivostomatitis.
J.Large-bowel diarrhea—colitis
a. Key points
i. This is often acute and self-limiting.
i. Clinical signs include small-volume, frequent bowel movements often with straining, mucus, and
occasionally fresh blood.
Chapter 2l Management oF Specilic Gastrointestinal Conditions
253
iii. History must include diet, previous anthelmintic therapy, frequency and amount of defecation,
the presence of blood or mucus, and duration of clinical signs.
iv. Chronic disease can be associated with decreased appetite, weight loss, and lethargy.
v. Parasites, including Trichomonas, Cryptosporidium, Giardia, Coccidia, whipworms, hook-
worms, and roundworms can cause large-bowel diarrhea.
b. Diagnosis
i.Physical exam often normal, palpation may be painful.
i. Digital rectal examination should be performed to rule out rectal strictures, masses, or other
 abnormalities.
ii. Collect feces for floatation, smear, and culture if necessary.
iv. Complete blood work and further diagnostics for severe or complicated disease.
v. Colonoscopy or exploratory laparotomy with biopsies will provide the definitive diagnosis.
K. Therapeutics
 i. Symptomatic therapy includes crystalloid fluid therapy to restore and maintain hydration.
ii. Dietary manipulations may include high-fiber diets (commercial brand or by adding psyllium,
bran, or canned pumpkin pie filling 1-4 tsp/meal).
iii. Hypoallergenic diets may benefit more chronic inflammatory disease.
iv. The appropriate use of anthelmintics, antiparasitics, and antibiotics, commonly beginning with
metronidazole and fenbendazole
v.  Immunosuppressive therapy such as prednisone should be reserved for definitively diagnosed
inflammatory colitis that is unresponsive to the above therapeutics.
vi. Sulfasalazine—must use caution in cats as they are more sensitive to salicylates than dogs and
may become acidotic; reserve use for complicated or recurrent cases and monitor for vomiting,
diarrhea, and anemia.
L. Constipation/obstipation/megacolon
a. Key points
i.
 Tenesmus in middle-aged to older cats is commonly idiopathic megacolon {dilation and
hypomotility).
ii. Other rule-outs: dietary indiscretion (less common in cats), neoplasia, dyschezia, neurologic
disease, trauma/previous pelvic fractures, dehydration (especially with chronic renal failure),
and strictures.
b. Diagnostics
i.
 Abdominal palpation and radiographs are useful for identifying the primary cause during or
after treatment.
 Blood work will help assess hydration status and anesthesia preparedness as well as any other
diseases.
C. Therapeutics
i. Administer fluid therapy and electrolyte replacement as needed for rehydration.
i. Enemas using 5-10 mL/kg warm water or saline with K-Y jelly, along with manual fecal removal
using gentle digital manipulation
1. Do not use commercial Fleet enemas as hyperphosphatemia and hypocalcemia will result.
ii. If obstipated, administer fluid therapy to rehydrate for 12-24 hours before attempting manual
removal. Manual removal often requires general anesthesia.
iv. Utilize oral stool softeners or laxatives: lactulose or docusate sodium. Cisapride is used for its
prokinetics effects.
1. Avoid use until pelvic fracture or other obstructions have been ruled out and manual evacu
ation completed.
v.Feed high-fiber or low-residue diet. The addition of Metamucil {1-4g every 12-24 hours mixed
with wet food) or pumpkin filling may be beneficial in stimulating motility via increasing output,
reducing stool density, and increasing bulk.
254
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vi. Hairball laxatives are not usually beneficial, except in mild cases.
vii. For complicated or unresponsive cases, a subtotal colectomy should be considered, along with
lifelong lactulose.
M. Hepatic encephalopathy
a. Key points
i. Porto-systemic shunts—usually extrahepatic in cats (look for copper eyes and ptyalism), end-
 stage liver disease, and severe acute liver disease are all possible causes.
ii. The toxins involved in the development of CNS signs are complex and multiple; they are prob-
ably produced by abnormal metabolism of neuroactive agents and are often due to hepatic
dysfunction and gastrointestinal tract bacterial metabolite production. These may include
ammonia, excitatory and inhibitory neurotransmitter imbalances, the production of false neu-
rotransmitters, and mercaptans.
ii. Complicating factors include high-protein meals/gastrointestinal bleeding, neoplasia, corticoste.
 roids, and infections with concurrent tissue cata bolism.
iv. Presenting signs may range from ptyalism to seizures and coma. Gastrointestinal and renal signs
are also common.
v. Avoid benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and acepromazine.
b. Diagnostics
i.Blood work
1. CBC—mild anemia
 2. Serum chemistry—liver-specific findings common, low BUN, hypoalbuminemia, hypoglyce-
mia, hypocholesterolemia, possibly elevated liver enzymes
3. Urinalysis may show ammonium biurate crystals, hematuria, pyuria, isosthenuria.
ii. Liver function tests, resting ammonia, and bile acids
iii. Radiographs may show microhepatica for chronic liver disease or PSS, hepatomegaly for acute
liver disease, and renomegaly in some cats due to the trophic effects of ammonia.
iv. Abdominal ultrasound may identify urate urolithiasis, a shunting vessel, and allow evaluation
 of liver echotexture; portal scintigraphy is also helpful in identifying shunts.
v. Definitive diagnosis is usually based on liver biopsy or identification and repair of a shunting
vessel. Portal hypertension is the most common postsurgical complication.
C. Therapeutics
i. Initially directed toward supportive care while trying to identify cause
il. Fluid therapy, low-protein diet, oral antibiotic therapy options include neomycin, amoxicillin,
and metronidazole.
ii. If ammonia levels are high, use oral lactulose to help reduce ammonia.
1. Lactulose retention enemas (warm saline, lactulose 10 mL/kg 1:3 dilution retained for 15
minutes) or betadine (10 mL/kg 1 :10 dilution retained for 15 minutes) can be used to decrease
the ammonia levels if the cat is seizuring or comatose.
iv. If a shunt is suspected or identified, surgical exploratory and shunt repair with an ameroid
medical therapy may keep them free of clinical signs.
N. Acute hepatic failure
a. Key points
i. Regardless of cause, hepatic necrosis can follow any insult.
ii. Common causes include toxins (aflatoxins, pesticides, and many cleaning products), drug expo-
sure (acetaminophen, diazepam, glipizide, and griseofulvin), and infectious disease (leptospirosis,
although extremely rare in cats), sepsis, FIP, fungal disease, bacterial cholangiohepatitis, and
toxoplasmosis).
ii. Prognosis will vary depending on cause, ability of liver to regenerate, and previous hepatic
insult.
Chapter 21Management of Specilic Gastrointestinal Conditions
255
iv. Presenting signs can range from lethargy and anorexia to shock, DIC, and CNS signs.
Common signs include dehydration, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and icterus.
b. Diagnosis
i. History of toxin or drug exposure, CBC, chemistry, urinalysis
il. Elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, and hypoglycemia
1. Extremely high liver enzymes are expected with acute hepatic necrosis that results in liver
dysfunction.
iii. Elevated bile acids {only run if not icteric) or elevated ammonia
iv. WBC can vary depending on stage and severity of disease.
v. Coagulation abnormalities occur with liver failure and DIC.
vi. Radiographs may show mild hepatomegaly or microhepatica with chronic disease or shunting.
Abdominal ultrasound may indicate hepatic necrosis (hypoechoic foci) or lipidosis (diffuse
hyperechogenicity); mixed patterns can indicate neoplasia or cholangiohepatitis.
c. Therapeutics
i. Crystalloid fluid therapy with acetate buffer instead of lactate (Normosol-R or Plasmalyte) with
i. Colloids may be necessary if hypoproteinemia in present, especially with more chronic or severe
disease.
iii. Monitor glucose and supplement as necessary.
Hypoglycemia treated with 0.5-1 mL/kg IV of 50% dextrose (dilute 1:4) and then 2.5-5%
in fluids.
iv. Broad-spectrum antibiotics may be necessary if there is evidence of sepsis: ampicillin in combina -
tion with an aminoglycoside or a fluoroquinolone
v.  Blood products if necessary, heparin therapy (controversial), and antidote therapy for intoxica-
tions should be used when indicated.
vi. Nutritional support with a liver diet such as Hill's L/D if anorexic for more than 2448 hours.
1. If anorexic, a feeding tube may be necessary (see chap. 9—Nutritional Support in Critically
Ill Feline Patents).
O. Cholangiohepatitis
a. Key points
i. Complex disease state in cats may include local diseases such as cholangitis, hepatitis, and
pancreatitis.
ii. Clinical signs include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, and possibly icterus.
ii. Causes include immune or local inflammatory disease, neoplasia, infectious disease including
toxoplasma, FIP, and bacterial; oftentimes the diagnosis is idiopathic.
iv. Definitive diagnosis is provided by liver biopsy and histologic evaluation.
1. Histologic findings include suppurative and/or lymphocytic/lymphoplasmacytic cellular infil-
trates, or fibrosis with more chronic disease.
b. Diagnostics
i. Blood work, including CBC (neutrophilic leukocytosis), serum chemistry with elevated liver
enzymes and bilirubin, elevated globulins, and urinalysis identifying bilirubinuria
ii. Coagulation profile may be abnormal.
ii. Radiographs may identify an enlarged liver or loss of cranial abdominal detail if pancreas is
involved.
iv. Abdominal ultrasound can identify enlarged liver, also useful to evaluate gall bladder and
common bile duct size and patency, as well as pancreas and duodenum {inflammation of either
can ca use secondary bile duct obstruction).
v.  If the disease is nonsuppurative, aggressive diagnostics should be performed, such as ultrasound-
guided liver biopsy, culture of bile, or exploratory surgery with appropriate sampling. If an
infectious cause can be ruled out, immunosuppressive therapy may be efficacious.
256
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
c. Therapeutics
i. Fluid therapy and nutritional support are necessary to correct hydration, electrolytes, and acid/
base abnormalities as well as prevent hepatic lipidosis.
il. If improvement does not occur with supportive care and therapy, liver aspirate or biopsy are
indicated to help diagnose and better treat, either ultrasound guided or during an abdominal
laparotomy.
iii. Ursodeoxycholate after bile duct obstruction is ruled out
iv. Sam-E is indicated to help support the liver.
v. Long-term antibiotic therapy, best if chosen on culture and sensitivity of biopsy or gall bladder
aspirate
1. Common choices include amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, enrofloxacin, or cephalosporins for 8
weeks.
P. Rectal prolapse
a. Key points
i. May be complete or incomplete, depending on how many layers of the rectal wall are everted
ii. Owners may report tenesmus, diarrhea, or other signs of intestinal disease. It is also seen with
stranguria, chronic FLUTD, and in reproductive diseases such as dystocia.
iii. Manx cats have predisposition.
Intussusception (with obstructive pattern associated) must be ruled out and differentiated from
true rectal prolapse. Perform a careful rectal exam to determine extent and layers involved in
prolapse.
1. A lubricated blunt probe will not pass lateral to rectal prolapse, but will if colonic or ileoce-
 cocolic intussusception and prola pse.
b. Therapeutics
i. Identify and treat the predisposing cause, GI or genitourinary tract disease.
ii. Assess the prolapse: Is the tissue viable or necrotic?
1. Black or purple rectal tissue suggests necrosis and may have to be resected.
iii. Conservative therapy for viable prolapse includes anesthesia and analgesics, warm saline with
dextrose or hypertonic fluids that will clean, warm, and moisten the tissues and allow for reduc-
tion of edema.
1. Gently reduce the tissues and place a loose purse-string suture in anus {a 3-cc-size
syringe case will allow for proper sizing) with nonabsorbable suture, and place patient on
stool softeners and a low-residue diet. Purse-string suture can be removed in 10-14 days.
2. Tilting the body such that the anus is higher than the head may facilitate reduction of the
prolapsed tissue. Use caution and watch ventilation and blood pressure when putting the cat
in this position.
3. Occasionally ice packs placed on the prolapsed tissue may reduce swelling and inflammation
and facilitate reduction of the prolapsed tissue.
iv. If the tissue is not reducible or viable, then surgical correction is indicated.
 aggressive antibiotic therapy
vi. Surgical complications include recurrence, stricture, and stenosis.
Q. Peritonitis—septic, aseptic, FIP, bile
a.Key points
i. Primary or secondary causes possible for peritonitis
ii. Complication anticipation will be the key to adjusting therapies and diagnostics.
ii. Cytology and fluid analysis will help differentiate underlying etiology.
b. Diagnosis
i.  Blood work for patient assessment and anesthesia preparedness
Chapter 21Management of Specilic Gastrointestinal Conditions
257
il.  Four-quadrant abdominocentesis using sterile technique, ultrasound-guided aspirate, or diagnos-
tic peritoneal lavage will allow you to identify the effusion type and allow for appropriate
therapeutics.
iii. Cytology and chemistry of sample will allow for differentiation for the types of peritonitis.
1. Bile peritonitis—bile crystals (gold to green) on cytology, chemistry will show more elevated
bilirubin in effusion than in serum.
in aspirate, and elevated lactate may also indicate septic effusion.
a. A blood-to-abdominal-fluid glucose difference of >20 mg/dL was 86% sensitive and 100%
specific for a diagnosis of septic peritonitis in cats. The blood-to-fluid glucose difference
was more accurate for a diagnosis of septic peritonitis than peritoneal fluid glucose con-
centration alone. Further studies will be required to determine the ability of this diagnostic
tool to differentiate a sterile but severely inflammatory peritonitis versus a septic
peritonitis.
3. FIP-pyogranulomatous effusion usually characterized by a high total protein of moderate to
severe cellularity
iv. Surgical exploratory is indicated in all cases with intracellular bacteria or bile peritonitis.
1. Surgical exploratory may also be indicated in cases with degenerate neutrophils with no
intracellular bacteria or in a decompensating patient where peritonitis is suspected but
abdominocentesis is negative. This will allow for diagnostics as well as therapeutics such as
identifying an underlying cause, obtaining biopsy samples, flushing abdomen, correcting any
abnormalities, and removing any necrotic tissue or blood clots.
2. Rarely, no obvious surgically correctable underlying cause for septic peritonitis can be
found.
c. Therapeutics
i. Initiate fluids and broad spectrum antibiotic therapy pending culture and sensitivity results.
1. Commonly used combination therapy including a cephalosporin with metronidazole or an
aminoglycoside (caution with dehydration or azotemia)
 2. Another common and effective combination in cats with poor renal perfusion or azotemia is
intravenous ampicillin and intravenous enrofloxacin, +/- intravenous metronidazole.
ii. Monitoring for hydration status, blood pressure, and urine output to assess perfusion
ii. Pain medication is warranted and necessary in cats with septic peritionitis. Choose cardiovas-
d ah      d aas s  
R. Mesenteric thrombosis
a. Key points
i. May be secondary to arterial thrombus associated with underlying cardiac disease or other
diseases that result in hypercoagulability (see chap. 29—Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding).
Will often present with an acute onset of vomiting, bloody diarrhea, anorexia, shock, and pain.
ii. This disease holds a very poor prognosis.
b. Diagnostics
i.  Blood work to assess electrolytes and anesthesia preparedness
i. Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound may reveal dilated gas-filled loops of bowel with reduced
motility. However, not diagnostic for mesenteric infarction.
ii. Auscultation, ECG, and echocardiography should be performed to identify underlying cardiac
disease.
iv. A complete blood count, serum chemistry profile, and thyroid level should be done to investigate
other disease processes.
v. Thoracic radiographs may be helpful to identify any pulmonary, cardiac, or vascular
abnormalities.
Table 21.1. Drug chart.
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
Amoxicillin
Aminopenicillin
Bactericidal, inhibits 
 Mostly Gl, rare
mucopeptide synthesis
hypersensitivities
Amoxicillin/clavulanic
Aminopenicillin/
Bactericidal, inhibits
Mostly Gl, rare
acid
beta-lactamase
mucopeptide synthesis/
hypersensitities
inhibitor
irreversibly binds
betalactamases
Ampicillin
Aminopenicillin
Bactericidal, inhibits
Mostly Gl, rare
mucopeptide synthesis
hypersensitivities
Aspirin-acetylsalicylic
NSAID
Analgesia, anti-inflammatory
Gastric irritation, blood loss,
ocid
and antiplatelet effects
hypersensitivity reactions,
acidosis
Azithromycin
Macrolide antibiotic
Inhibits bacterial protein
Gl distress
synthesis—bacteriostatic
 Bethanechol
 Cholinergic agonist
Muscarinic receptor agonist
Parasympathetic activation
Budesonide
Locally acting steroid
Glucocorticoid, high first
HPA suppression
pass effect, low systemic
levels, still suppresses HPA
Buprenorphine
 Partial opiate agonist
mu receptor partial agonist:
CV and resp. depression
 30x more potent than
morphine
Butorphanol
 Partial opiate agonist/
kappa and sigma agonists,
mild sedation
antagonist
mu antagonist-4-7x
 more potent than
morphine
Cefoxitin
 2nd-generation
 Bacteriocidal— inhibit cell 
Gl distress hypersensitivity,
 Cephalosporin
wall synthesis 
thrombocytopenia,
B-lactam antibiotic
diarrhea
Chlorambucil
Cell cycle nonspecific
 DNA crosslinking
 Myelosuppression-anemia,
allkylating agent
 immunosupressant and
thrombocytopenia,
antineoplastic
leukopenia, possible
teratogen
Clindamycin
Lincosamide antibiotic
Binds 50S ribosomal
Gastroenteritis
 subunit-inhibits peptide
bond formation
Cisapride
 Substituted piperidinyl
Gl prokinetic
 May impair absorption of
benzamide
other drugs due to
decreased Gl transit time
Cobalamin
Vitamin B12
 Pain at injection site
 Gl absorption
 Docusate sodium
Stool softener
Surfactant stool softener
Cramping, diarrhea, Gl
mucosal damage
Doxycycline
Tetracycline antibiotic
Bacteriostatic— inhibits
 Esophageal strictures,
bacterial protein synthesis 
vomiting
258
Contraindications and
Routes of Administration
Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
In animals with history of allergic
22 mg/kg PO q12h 2-3 weeks
For helicobacter infection with
reactions to beta lactam antibiotics
metronidazole, clarithromycin,
and possibly Pepto-Bismol
In animals with history of allergic
62.5 mg/cat PO q12h
Urinary tract, skin, and soft tissue
reactions to beta lactam antibiotics
infections
In animals with history of allergic
10-20 mg/kg PO q12h
Gram + infections
reactions to beta lactam antibiotics
20-30 mg/kg PO q8h
Gram - infections
20-40 mg/kg IV q6-8h
For sepsis
Cats very sensitive; caution with dosing 
 5mg/ CAT PO q72h
Antithrombotic dose often used
with hypertrophic
cardiomyopaihy
Caution in hepatic disease
5-10mg/kg PO q24h for 3-5
Stomatitis, upper respiratory
days or 5mg/kg PO q24h for 2
infections
dhys then every 3-5 days for a
total of
5 doses
Outflow obstruction
1.25-7.5mg/day divided q8h
Bladder palpation often
For dysautonomia
Gl ulcers, active infections
1 mg/cat PO q24h
For IBD in diabetic cats, may be
promising
 CNS and hepatic dysfunction, biliary
0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM, IV, SQ
 Pain management
tract disease
q6-12h
Can also be given orally/
transbuccally
Renal disease, liver disease, Addison's, O.1-l mg/kg iM, IV, SQ ql-3h
Antiemetic—decreased sensitivity
CNS
of vomiting center to chemical
stimuli, anxiolytic
 Mild pain management
Decrease dose in renal failure
25-30mg/kg IV q8h
For peritonitis and sepsis
Caution with other myelosuppressives
0.05-0.1 mg/lb/day (can
IBD, adjunctive treatment of FIP,
decrease to EOD if side effects)
pemphigus, severe feline
in conjunction with prednisolone
eosinophilic granuloma complex
at I mg/lb/day
Or 0.07-0.15mg/lb q72h
 Caution in severe renal or hepatic
11-33mg/kg PO q24h
Dental infections
disease
12.5mg/kg PO or IM q12h
Anaerobic infections
Toxoplasmosis
Caution with Gl obstruction
2.5 mg/ <10-lb cat PO q8h
 Constipation/obstipation or
Decrease dose in hepatic failure
5mg/>10-lb cat PO q8h
megacolon
Drug interaction with cimetidine
Give 30 minutes before meal
 Use in conjunction with stool
 softeners and a bulk laxative 
None reported
Injectable 250 μg SC q7d for 6
For ileal resection
weeks then q14d for 5 more
doses, then once monthly.
 Caution with preexisting electrolyte
2 mg/kg PO q24h
Stool softener
disturbances
 Do not use in pregnant or nursing
5mg/kg PO q12h Followed by at
For susceptible infections
animals
least 6ml of water, or choose a
liquid formulation 
259
Table 21.1. Confinved.
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
Enrofloxacin
Flouoroquinolone
Inhibits DNA gyrase
Blindness with high doses in
antibiotic
cats.
Caution in young animals -
cartilage defects
Famotidine
H, histamine receptor
Reduces gastric acid
Give slow IV-may cause
blocker
production
bradycardia
Hypersensitivity
Fenbendazole
Benzimidazole
Microtubule assembly
Vomiting; monitor for
inhibitors
reactions to rapid
 antigen release from
dying parasites
Fentanyl
Opioid analgesic
mu receptor agonist
 Respiratory depression and
bradycardia
Ferrous sulfate
 Oral iron supplement
lron supplementation
Gl upset. Can be very toxic
if overdosed
Heparin and low
Anticoagulants
 Depending on size fraction
 Bleeding and 
molecular weight
thrombocytopenia
heparin 
coagulation effects
Interferon alfa-2a
Cytokine-antiviral
Antiviral,
Uncommon: malaise, fever,
 immunomodulating, and
allergic reations,
 antiproliferative effects
myelotixicity, myalgia
Lactoferrin
Cytokine
Immunomodulatory
Not reported
Lactulose
 Disaccharide laxative
 Osmotic laxative and colonic
Hatulence, gastric
 and blood ammonia
acidifier which allows for
distension diarrhea and
reducer
 ammonia trapping
dehydration
Lomotil—diphenoxylate,
 Antidiarrheal opiates
Mu agonist, decreases
 Exciation, constipation
 Imodium—loperamide,
peristalsis
codeine
Marbofloxacin
Fluoroquinolone
Inhibits DNA gyrase
Seizures, Gl distress, drug
antibiotic
interactions
Meclizine
Piperidine derivative,
Not completely understood,
Sedation, dry mucous
antiemetic and
 central anticholinergic and
membranes, tachycardia,
antihistamine,
 CNS depressant activity
 CNS stimulation possible
 antispasmodic and
local anesthetic effects
Methylprednisolone
Glucocorticoid
4-5x more potent than
Cushing's-like: PU, PD, PP
hydrocortisone
Metodlopramide
Para-aminobenzoic acid
Increases LES tone
Frenzied behavior or
derivative
Prokinetic
disorientation,
Antiemetic
constipation
Metronidazole
Nitroimidazole
Bacteriocidal; proposed
Neurotoxicity, lethargy,
 antibacterial and
MOA is disrupting DNA
weakness, neutropenias,
antiprotozoal
and nucleic acid synthesis,
hepatotoxicity, hematuria,
 antiprotozoal activity not
anorexia, nausea,
understood
yomiting, and diarrhea
260
 Contraindications and
Routes of Administration
Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Caution with renal, or hepatic
5mg/kg per day q24 h or divided
 For susceptible infections
insufficiency and dehydration
qi 2h until 3 days beyond
clinical signs
Cardiac, hepatic, or renal disease-
0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, IM IV
 For Gl diseases, regurgiation, or
consider reduced dose
q12-24h
other esophageal disease,
yomiting, gastric ulceration 
Not FDA approved, but many reports 
50 mg/kg PO q24h for
Ascarids, hookworms,
of use and no contraindications
5 days
strongyloides, Taenia spp.,
reported
lungworms, and Giardia
Severe cardiovascular, respiratory, or
1-2μg/kg IV bolus, then 0.017-
For <5kg can cover a portion of a
 CNS disease. Rashes at site of patch
0.33 μg/kg/min CRI IV or a
 24 μg/h patch with liner-do
placement
25μg/h transdermal patch 
not cut patch
Urine retention and dysphoria
Hemosiderosis, hemochromatosis,
50-100mg/cat PO q24h
For iron deficiency anemia
hemolytic anemial or hypersensitivity
Hypersensitivity, cautious use with
Heparin 250-375 U/kg SQ
For thromboembolic disease
renal dysfunction
q6-8h
 Research pending
Lovenox (Enoxaparin] 1.25-
1.5mg/kg SC q6h
Caution in severe cardiac, pulmonary,
30 U/cat PO q24h 7 days on 7
For retroviral infections, stomatitis
and CNS disorders, autoimmune
Jo sAop
diseases
 Not reported
40 mg/kg or one 350-mg capsule
For stomatitis
opened into mouth
Use caution in diabetic patients
0.25-1 ml/cat PO q8-12h
For PSS, constipation
Or 1 mL/4.5kg q8h then PRN
Hepatic encephalopathy
Goal 2-3 soft stools per day
Constipation, hypersensitivity, renal 
Widevariety:
Adverse reactions and lack of safe
disease, concurrent MAOl use, toxin
 0.04 mg/kg, 1 mg/cat, ONLY for
dosing information restricts use
ingestion, CNS injury, respiratory
a maximum of 3 days
in cats
compromise, hepatic disease
Young/growing animals due to
5mg/kg PO q24h
Susceptible infections
 carilage effects, caution in hepatic
or renal insufficiency
Bladder neck obstruction, severe
12.5 mg per cat PO once daily
 For vestibular disease/ vomiting
 cardiac failure, angle-closure 
4mg/kg PO once a day
As antiemetic
glaucoma
Hyperglycemia, insulin resistance,
20 mg SQ or IM per cat q 2 weeks
For IBD if owners cannot
immunosuppression, weight gain,
for 2-3 doses then every 4-6
odminister pills or liquid
hepatomegaly,thin hair coat, PU/PD
 weeks as needed for control
Gl hemorrhage, obstruction or
0.2-0.4mg/kg PO, SC q8-1 2h
As antiemetic and prokinetic
perforation
1-2mg/kg per day CRI
Metabolized by the liver, may need to
10-15 mg/kg PO q12-24h
For susceptible infections, and
dose reduce with hepatic
antibiotic responsive diarrhea,
dysfunction, hypersensitivity
anaerobic and protozoal
infections
261
Table 21.1. Confinued.
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
 Omeprazole
 Substituted
 Proton pump inhibitor
Gl distress hematologic
benzimidazole
abnormalities, urinary
tract infections, proteinuria,
other CNS disturbances
Ondansetron/Dolasetron
5-HT, receptor
Antiemetic when other drugs
 Sedation, lip licking, head
antagonist 
will not work
shaking
Oxymorphone
Semi-synthetic opiate
Mu agonist
Ataxia, hyperesthesia,
behavior changes.
Pepto-Bismol
Gl protectant
Not completely understood
Dark color stools—do not
bismuth subsalicylate
 confuse with melena
Radio-opaque
Phenothiazine
Phenothiazines
Low dose inhibits
Sedation, significant
Chlorpromazine
 chemoreceptor trigger
hypotension, cardiac rate 
 Prochlorperazine
zone
abnormalities, hypo- or
High dose depresses
hyperthermia; may cause
vomiting center
extrapyramidal effects at
high doses in cats
Prednisone/Prednisolone
Corticosteroid
Anti-inflammatory and
 Hyperglycemia, insulin 
 immunosuppressant
resistance,
immunosuppression
Psyllium
Hemicellulose mucilage
Bulk laxative
Hatulence, fecal impaction,
 Metamucil
 or obstruction
Ranitidine
Hz histamine receptor
 Reduces gastric acid
Give slow IV-may cause
blocker
 production
bradycardia
Hypersensitivity
S-adenosyl-methionine
Nutraceutical
Naturally occurring.
Very safe, rare vomiting
[SAMe)
 molecule — essential in liver
biochemical pathways
Sucralfate
 Aluminum complex of
Unknown, forms protective 
Constipation,
sucrose sulfate
barrier at ulceration sites
hypophosphatemia
Sulfasalazine
 Sulfa derivative
Exact mechanism unknown
Anorexia, vomiting,
anemias
Ursodeoxycholate acid/
Bile acid
Increases bile flow
Ursodiol
262
Contraindications and
Routes of Administration
Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Hepatic or renal disease
0.7 mg/kg PO q24h
Most potent gastric acid inhibitor,
may increase liver enzymes
Caution with use in cats
0.22 mg/kg PO q8-12h
Good for chemotherapy-induced
Do not use in nursing animals 
 0.1-0.15mg/kg slow IV push
nausea
Very expensive
q6-12hPRN
Respiratory, cardiovascular, and CNS
 0.1-0.2mg/kg IV, SQ, IM q4-8h 
 Pain management
depression
Do not use frequently or in high doses,
0.25 mL/kg/ PO q4-6h
Eliminafion prolonged in cats; care
 do not use in pregnant or nursing
Kitten dose 1-2ml 3-4 times α
should be taken.
animals, renal disease
人pp
Separate from tetracyclines by 2 hours
Hypovolemia, dehydration,
0.5 mg/kg IV, IM or SC q6-8h
Most effective central-acting
hypotension
0.5 mg/kg SC or IM q8h; ensure
 antiemetic in cats regardless of
odequate hydration.
cause
Systemic infection, cardiac disease
Mild IBD 1-2.2 mg/kg divided
IBD, Eosinophilic granuloma 
ql 2h for 2-4 weeks then 50%
complex, lymphocytic
decline at 2-week intervals
plasmacytic stomatitis
depending on severity of signs,
may be 2-3 months for q48h or
q72h or 3-6 months before
discontinuation
Severe 2-4mg/kg divided BID for
 2-8 weeks or until clinical signs
resolve, 1-2mg/kg dose may
be necessary for months to years
Fecal impaction, intestinal obstruction 
1-4 tsp/meal
Increases dietary liber, good or
IBD, diarrhea, can also use
canned pumpkin pie filing
Cardiac, hepatic or renal disease-
2.5 mg/kg IV q1 2h
For Gl diseases, regurgitation or
consider reduced dose
1-2 mg/kg PO q8-12h
other esophageal disease,
yomiting, gastric ulceration
 As prokinetic to increase colonic
motility
Give on an empty stomach
18 mg/kg rounded to closest pill
 Adjunctive treatment for liver
size, usually one 90-mg tablet
disease
PO q24h
chronic hepatitis
200 mg/cat PO q24h
 Need to use as a slurry if esophageal
0.25-0.5g, PO q8-12h can be
 Binds to injured gastroesophageal
irritation or inflammation
diluted 1: 5 as a slurry
mucosa
Neutralizes acid
Inactivates pepsin
Adsorbs bile acids and pancreatic
enzymes
 Stimulates local cytoprotective
 prostaglandins
Liver, renal or hematologic diseases
5-7 mg/kg PO q24h for 14 days
Caution in cats;
monitor for vomiting, diarrhea,
and anemia
Aluminum-containing antacids
10-15mg/kg PO q24h
Mix with food
263
264
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vi. Definitive diagnosis will only be provided by surgical exploratory. All other diagnostic findings
for surgical exploratory is based on clinical suspicion and accumulation of diagnostic evidence.
C. Therapeutics
i. Crystalloid fluid therapy to maintain perfusion, prevent more ischemic damage, and stabilize
before or during surgical identification and resection of damaged bowel loops, followed by
copious abdominal lavage
ii. Use caution if underlying heart disease is present. Placement of a central line to monitor CVP
may be indicated.
ii. Ischemic injury may cause gastrointestinal sloughing, protein loss, and bacterial translocation.
iv. Broad-spectrum combination antibiotic therapy (see septic peritonitis discussion above)
v. Anticoagulant therapy with heparin or aspirin may be indicated postoperatively to prevent
additional thromboembolic episodes (see chap. 16—Management of Thromboembolic Disease
Secondary to Heart Disease).
S.Dysautonomia
a.Key points
i. Also known as Key-Gaskell syndrome, usually associated with megaesophagus, esophageal
hypomotility, mydriasis, constipation, and regurgitation 
ii. May present with mydriatic pupils, KCS, and occasionally anisocoria
ii. This disease carries a guarded to poor prognosis, with 20-40% of affected cats likely to recover.
Recovery may take up to 12 months, and often the patient may not completely recover.
b. Diagnosis
i. Suggestive clinical signs and physical exam findings that include a generalized loss of both sym-
 pathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems
c. Therapeutics
i. Supportive care includes fluid therapy, artificial tears, parenteral nutrition, feeding tube place-
ment, or elevated feedings.
i. Parasympathomimetic therapy with bethanechol or metoclopramide, bladder palpation, and
expression
ii. Close monitoring is necessary; many animals may become resistant to therapy and need dose
adjustments.
T. Intestinal parasites
a. Key points
i. Roundworms, hookworms, coccidia, toxoplasmosis, protozoans, trichomonads, and cestodes
are all common intestinal parasites.
ii. Clinical signs may range from none to severe chronic anemia, and sepsis.
1. Clinical signs may be more severe in kittens or immunocompromised cats.
b. Diagnosis
i. Fecal examination including direct smear, floatation, and culture if necessary
ii.  Giardia can be identified with zinc sulfate flotation.
ii. Trichomonads identified on direct exam, special stains to differentiate from Giardia, if clinical
 may have other intestinal disease or immunodeficiency.
C. Therapeutics
i.Empirical therapy is commonly attempted with fenbendazole or pyrantel pamoate; if tapeworms
are visualized, use praziquantal and discuss flea treatments with owners.
ii. For severe infections, hospitalization with fluid therapy and supportive care is indicated while
waiting for more complete diagnostics.
iii. Antibiotics commonly used empirically are clindamycin and metronidazole.
iv. Tricomonad therapeutics are currently under research. Some cats have responded to ronidazole
at 30-50 mg/kg PO q12h, but neurologic side effects have been noted during clinical use.
Chapter 21Management of Specilic Gastrointestinal Conditions
265
References
August JR. Consultations in Feline Internal Medicine, vol. 5. Elsevier Saunders, 2006.
Carmichael D. Feline gingivostomatitis: how to relieve the oral discomfort. Vet Med, 2006;
101(2):76-78.
Colopy-Poulsen, Danova, Hardie, Muir. Managing feline obstipation secondary to pelvic fracture.
Compendium, Sept 2005; 662-669.
Ettinger, Feldman. Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Sth ed. W.B. Saunders, 2000.
Gookin J, Copple C, Papich M, Poore M, Levy M. Efficacy of Ronidazole in vitro and in vivo for treatment
of feline tritrichomonas foetus infection. ACVIM 23rd Annual Veterinary Medical Forum Abstract
Program. J Vet Int Med, 2005; 19{3):436.
Kyles, Hardie, Mehl, Gregory. Evaluation of ameroid ring constrictors for the management of single
extrahepatic portosystemic shunts in cats: 23 cases {1996-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2002;
220(9):1341-1347.
Maclntire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD. Manual of Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care
Medicine. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005.
Morgan RV, Bright RM, Swartout MS. Handbook of Small Animal Practice, 4th ed. W. B. Saunders, 2003.
Norsworthy GD, Crystal MA, Grace SF, Tilley LP. The Feline Patient: Essentials of Diagnosis and
Treatment, 2nd ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2003.
Patsikas MN, Papazoglou LG, Papaioannou NG, Savvas I, Kazakos GM, Dessiris AK. Ultrasonographic
findings of intestinal intussusception in seven cats. J Feline Med Surg, 2003; 5(6):353-343.
Plumb DC. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 4th ed. Iowa State Press, 2002.
Tams T. Handbook of Small Animal Gastroenterology, 2nd ed. W. B. Saunders, 2003.
22
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION,
MONITORING, AND THERAPEUTIC
TECHNIQUES FOR
THE UROLOGIC SYSTEM
Simon W. Tappin and Andrew J. Brown
Unique Features
· The most common cause of acute renal failure in cats is urethral obstruction.
● Feline urine is normally very concentrated; specific gravity values below 1.035 represent suboptimal
concentration.
● Struvite crystals are a normal finding in feline urine, but numbers increase with storage and
infection.
● Stress can elevate serum glucose levels above the renal threshold leading to glucosuria.
● Bilirubin is not normally found in feline urine and reflects icterus.
I. Clinical signs and diagnosis
A. Uremia refers to the clinical and clinicopathologic abnormalities that occur secondary to renal
failure.
 e a   s d a a p  a sis  a
solutes within the blood that would normally be excreted by the kidneys. Cats may be presented
for vomiting, nausea, anorexia, hypersalivation (due to either uremia or oral ulceration), diarrhea,
weight loss, changes in drinking habits, hiding, lethargy, or straining.
C. Physical examination findings may include depression, pale mucous membranes, dehydration, poor
pulses, tachycardia, bradycardia, hypothermia, cachexia, oral ulceration, abnormal kidney size,
painful abdomen and/or kidneys, and an absent or large firm bladder.
D. Clinicopathologic abnormalities include azotemia {accumulation of nitrogenous compounds in the
blood), elevated BUN (blood urea nitrogen) and serum creatinine, hyperkalemia or hypokalemia,
hyperphosphotemia, nonregenerative anemia, and meta bolic acidosis.
 E. Diagnosis is made using the above clinical and clinicopathologic findings. Classification into primary
renal, prerenal, and postrenal azotemia is useful to guide further diagnostics, therapy, and
prognosis.
i.Prerenal
a. Secondary to decreased renal perfusion (see chap. 3—Shock)
i.Hypovolemic shock (decreased circulating volume)
i.Cardiogenic shock (ineffective circulating volume)
ii. Distributive shock (inappropriate dilatation or constriction of the afferent and/or efferent
arterioles)
267
268
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Clinical signs usually result from inadequate systemic perfusion rather than the subsequent
uremia.
c. Urine specific gra vity (pre-fluids) should be maximally concentrated (>1.0s0) unless concen-
trating ability is impaired {e.g-, glucosuria, diuretic administration).
d. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) will increase prior to, and to a greater degree than, serum
creatinine.
e. Unless primary renal damage has occurred, prerenal azotemia is reversible with restoration
of renal perfusion.
f. In the presence of primary renal dysfunction (when >2s% of tubules are still functioning
normally), azotemia may occur with just a mild decrease in renal perfusion.
ii. Primary renal (see chap. 24—-Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure)
a. With normal renal perfusion, azotemia occurs when less than 25% of renal tubules are
functioning.
b. Can be classified to guide prognosis:
i.Acute renal failure
ii. Chronic renal failure
ii. Acute on chronic (see chap. 23—Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN,
and CRF)
c. Clinical signs will result from azotemia, electrolyte abnormalities, anemia, and metabolic
acidosis.
ii. Postrenal (see chap. 24)
a. Impaired renal excretion secondary to rupture of or obstruction to:
i.Ureters
ii.Bladder
iii. Urethra
b. Leakage from the urinary tract leads to resorption of urinary solutes and azotemia.
c. Obstruction of the urinary tract leads to reduced glomerular filtration rate and azotemia.
 d. Physical examination findings will depend on site of obstruction or rupture.
e. Patient stabilization (e.g., correction of hypovolemia and hyperkalemia) important before
invasive diagnostic and therapeutic procedures are performed
f. Azotemia typically reversible unless prolonged obstruction, which can lead to irreversible
tubular damage
g. The most common cause of acute renal failure in cats is urethral obstruction
II. Diagnostic and monitoring procedures
A. Urethral catheterization
i.  Indications
a. To collect a urine sample
b. To monitor urine output
c. To relieve urethral obstruction
d. To keep the bladder empty and facilitate healing
e. To act as a urethral stent and allow healing after trauma
f. To perform retrograde contrast radiography of the lower urinary tract
ii. Considerations
a. The cat must be sedated or anaesthetized for catheterization.
b. The catheter should be placed as aseptically as possible (sterile gloves, hair clipped as needed,
and the area surgically scrubbed). The prepuce or vestibule should be flushed with dilute
povidone iodine solution or similar.
C. Catheters should be long, soft, and sterile. Red rubber catheters (Tyco Healthcare Group LP,
Mansfield, MA) are commonly used for indwelling catheters. Polypropylene Tom Cat
catheters {Tyco Healthcare Group LP, Mansfield, MA) are more rigid and useful to relieve
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
269
urethral obstruction. They should NOT be used as an indwelling catheter, as their rigid
construction can lead to bladder wall irritation. Diameter depends on patient size (3.5-5
French). A wire stylet may aid placement of a red rubber catheter in a female, but caution
d. A closed collection system should always be used for indwelling catheters. The bladder should
be allowed to empty under gravity. The collecting system should have enough slack to prevent
its interfering with the cat's movement. It should be attached to the tail to prevent trauma
to the anchor sutures. Sterile collection systems are commercially available; however, sterile
'pasn aq osle Aeu Seq piny snouaaeu1 Aidua ue pue Suqnl
e. After placement, an Elizabethan collar should be fitted to prevent the cat's removing the
catheter.
iii. Technique
a.Male
i. The tom is positioned in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
 ii. For the right-handed operator, the left thumb and forefinger are used to extrude the penis
by pushing the prepuce cranially.
iii. The catheter is well lubricated {with sterile water-soluble lubricant) and inserted into the
penile urethra.
iv. The penis is then extended caudally to align the penile and membranous urethra while
the catheter is gently advanced.
v. Once in the bladder, urine will appear at the hub and advancement is ceased.
vi. The catheter is sutured to the prepuce using holes in the catheter hub or using a tape
butterfly.
vi. If resistance is felt, the catheter should not be forced as this may lead to urethral trauma.
Instillation of sterile saline will allow dislodgment of urethral material.
b.Female
i.
 The urethral opening lies in a depression in the ventral vaginal wall approximately 1cm
from the vulva. This depression helps guide the catheter allowing "blind” catheterization
i.The queen is usually placed in lateral or sternal recumbency. However in difficult cases
 dorsal recumbency may aid placement.
ii. For the right handed operator, the left hand is used to grasp and gently extend the vulva
 iv. The catheter is well lubricated (with sterile water-soluble lubricant) and gently guided
along the ventral vestibule floor which commonly results in placement.
v.A small speculum or sterile otoscope can help identify the urethral orifice.
vi. Once in the bladder urine will appear at the catheter hub. Advancement is ceased and
the catheter is secured as above.
iv. Concerns
a. Iatrogenic urinary tract infection
i. Avoid by aseptic catheter placement and management of the collection system
ii. Prophylactic systemic antibiotics or flushing the catheter with antibiotic/antiseptic solu
tions are not advised as these can increase the risk of resistant urinary tract infections.
ii. Urine culture and sensitivity should be performed 24-48 hours following catheter
removal.
B.Cystocentesis
i.  Indications
a. To collect a urine sample without contamination from the lower urinary tract
b. To help localize the source of hematuria, bacteriuria, or pyuria to the upper or lower urinary
tract
C. Therapeutic bladder decompression due to urethral obstruction, when urethral catheterization
is not possible. Repeated decompression via cystocentesis in the obstructed cat is not
270
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
recommended, and placement of a cystostomy tube for continuous bladder evacuation should
be considered until urethral patency is attained.
ii. Considerations
a. Ultrasound guidance may be useful in obese cats or when the bladder is small.
iii. Technique
a. The cat is restrained in lateral recumbency by an assistant. Sedation or anesthesia is not
normally needed but should be considered in the fractious patient.
b. For diagnostic sample collection a 1-1.5-inch, 22-gauge needle and 2-10-mL syringe will
allow adequate sample collection.
 C. The skin on the caudal ventral abdomen is clipped and aseptically prepared.
d. With one hand the bladder is immobilized, and with the other the needle (with syringe
attached) inserted through the abdominal wall into the bladder.
e. The most common site for cystocentesis is ventrally; however, ventrolateral or dorsal
approaches may be considered. The ideal site for bladder compression is just cranial to the
urethral junction, as this will allow drainage without multiple insertions as the bladder
empties.
f. Where possible, the needle should enter the bladder wall at a 45-degree angle. This reduces
the possibility of leakage postprocedure by passing through different bladder layers at slightly
different points.
g. Once in the bladder, urine will appear in the syringe hub and gentle aspiration will yield a
sample. The needle and syringe can then be gently withdrawn.
h. For therapeutic bladder decompression, the needle is connected via an intravenous extension
set to a 20-mL syringe and three-way tap. As the syringe fills, the three-way tap allows the
 syringe to be repeatedly emptied into a collction bowl until the bladder is empty.
iv. Concerns
a.A severely distended bladder wall may be compromised, leading to rupture on
cystocentesis.
 b. Hemostatic disorders are a contraindication to cystocentesis.
C. Tracking of neoplastic cells along the needle paths has been reported.
C. Routine urinalysis
i. Routine urinalysis involves the measurement of specific gravity, dipstick evaluation. and sedi
ment analysis.
a. Specific gravity
i. Specific gravity reflects the solute concentration of urine and should be measured using
a refractometer before therapy begins.
il. Glucosuria and proteinuria will elevate specific gravity by approximately 0.o05 per gram
of glucose or protein.
ii. Urine with a specific gravity of 1.008-1.012 is regarded isosthenuric as it has the same
solute concentration as the glomerular filtrate.
iv. Urine with a specific gravity <1.008 is regarded as hyposthenuric and has been actively
dil uted.
v. Urine specific gravity >1.012 is regarded as hypersthenuric; however, feline urine is
usually concentrated (SG >1.035); values below this may reflect poor renal concreting
ability or polydipsia.
b. Dipstick evaluation
i. Urine pH
1. Normal pH for feline urine is 5-7.5
 2. Acidic urine may reflect a high protein diet, catabolic state, or metabolic or respiratory
acidosis.
3. Alkaline urine may reflect the presence of urease positive bacteria, respiratory or meta-
bolic alkalosis, postprandial alkaline tide, or prolonged exposure to room air.
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
271
ii. Glucose
1. Glucose appears in the urine if the renal threshold is exceeded (250-350mg/dL). This
can occur with diabetes mellitus and stress.
2. Primary glucosuria occurs secondary to tubular dysfunction, and glucosuria will be
seen with normal blood glucose concentrations.
iii. Ketones
1. Ketones are not normally present in feline urine and reflect changes in fatty acid
metabolism.
 2. Acetone and acetoacetate react with the nitroprusside agent on dipsticks; however,
beta hydroxybutyrate does not. Beta hydroxybutyrate can be oxidized to acetoacetate
using 1-2 drops of hydrogen peroxide.
iv. Occult blood
1. Hemoglobin, myoglobin, and erythrocytes all cross-react with dipstick reagents
 Results must therefore be interpreted in conjunction with a spun-down urine sample.
Sediment analysis will reveal intact red cells when hematuria is present, whereas
examination of the supernatant will confirm pigmenturia.
v.Bilirubin
 1. Bilirubin is not normally found in feline urine and when present reflects elevated serum
bilirubin.
 2. Bilirubinuria occurs prior to hyperbilirubinemia.
c. Urine sediment analysis
i. Urinalysis should be performed as promptly after collection as possible. Cells and casts
will degenerate, bacteria may grow, and crystals may form or dissolve.
ii. The sample should be evaluated with its collection method in mind. For example, a
catheterized sample may contain epithelia cells as a result of urethral trauma, and a
cystocentesis sample may contain red blood cells as a result of trauma.
1. White blood cells
 a. Occasional white blood cells are normal (0-8/hpf in voided samples, 0-5/hpf in
catheterized samples, 0-3/hpf in cystocentesis samples).
b. Increased white blood cells (pyuria) indicate urinary tract inflammation.
2. Red blood cells
a. Occasional red blood cells are normal (0-8/hpf in voided samples, 0-5/hpf in cath
eterized samples, 0-3/hpf in cystocentesis samples).
b. Increased red blood cells (hematuria) indicate urinary tract inflammation or
hemorrhage.
3. Bacteria
a. The bladder is normally sterile, but increasing numbers of commensals will be
found along the lower urinary tract.
b. If visual numbers are present, they are usually significant and should be accompa-
nied by an active sediment.
C. Care needs to be taken to differentiate stain precipitate and contaminants.
4. Crystals
a. Struvite crystals ("coffin lids") are normal in feline urine but increase in number
with infection and precipitate if urine is stored.
b. Oxalate crystals:
i. Monohydrate crystals (" picket fence” or "dumbbell") are rarely seen except in
animals that have ingested ethylene glycol.
i. Dihydrate crystals ("Maltese cross" or "envelope") can be seen in normal cats,
but large numbers can be associated with ethylene glycol intoxication.
c. Urate stones (thorn apples) are suggestive of liver dysfunction
5.Casts
272
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Casts are cylindrical concretions formed in the renal tubules.
b. They consist of cells, proteins, and cellular debris.
C.
 Hyaline casts may be seen due to normal sloughing of tubular epilethial cells (<2 per
low-power field). This may increase after exercise. Hyaline casts consist partly of
d. Granular casts reflect precipitation of filtered proteins or cellular degeneration.
Occasional granular casts may be seen in normal cats (<2 per low-power field);
however, large numbers suggest tubular degeneration or necrosis.
e. Fatty casts contain lipid granules and can be seen with nephrotic syndrome or
diabetes mellitus.
f. White cell casts suggest pyelonephritis.
 g. Waxy casts are uncommon and reflect degeneration of granular casts. They are
seen mainly with chronic renal failure.
 h. Hemoglobin and myoglobin casts suggest hemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria.
D. Urine culture and sensitivity
i. Although urinalysis and clinical signs may suggest a urinary tract infection, a positive urine
culture is needed to confirm the diagnosis and differentiate the condition from other causes of
feline lower urinary tract disease.
ii. Urinary tract infections occur when sterile areas of the urinary tract are colonized by bacteria.
This is more common in females, animals with poor concentrating ability, or when glucosuria
is present.
ii. Escherichia coli is the most commonly isolated organism. Stapbylococcus, Streptococcus,
Klebsiella, Proteus, and Pseudomonas species are also reported.
iv. Urine should be collected for culture by cystocentesis to avoid contaminants. Culture of catheter-
ized and voided samples frequently results in false positive results.
v. Urine should be cultured as quickly as possible, as bacterial numbers change rapidly once the
sample had been collected. If immediate culture is not possible, transporting in boric acid tubes
is recommended and the sample refrigerated is a culture swab. Bacterial concentrations above
1,000 colony-forming units per milliliter of urine are considered significant growths.
vi. Treatment should be based on sensitivity results, and determining the minimum inhibitory con-
centration may help in resistant or recurring cases.
E. Urine protein-creatinine ratio
i. The urine protein-creatinine ratio {UPC) allows quantification of urine protein loss and is indi-
cated in the investigation of renal failure (acute and chronic) as well as hypoalbuminaemia.
ii. Protein loss is corrected for urine concentration by correlating it to the urine creatinine concen-
tration. The results of UPC ratios correlate well with 24-hour urine protein excretion.
iii. Normal feline UPC values are <0.4 (cats fed high-protein diets can have higher values, so fasted
samples are desira ble).
iv. Inflammation and blood contamination can increase urine protein content; thus, the UPC ratio
should be interpreted in conjunction with a sediment examination and urine culture. The true
extent of blood contamination on the feline UPC ratio is unknown. However, studies with ca nine
urine revealed that urinary albumin concentrations do not change until urine becomes grossly
hematuric, and the maximal change in UPC seen was an increase of 0.4.
F.Fractional clearance/excretion of electrolytes
i. The renal tubules are responsible for the secretion and resorption of filtered electrolytes.
Fractional clearance of electrolytes can therefore be used to investigate tubular function by
comparing them to the excretion of creatinine, which is excreted at a constant rate.
ii. Fractional clearance of electrolyte x = {UxV/P) / {UV/P) = {UxP) / {UPx)
a. Ux = Urine concentration of x
b. Px = Plasma concentration of x
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
273
c. U = Urine concentration of creatinine
d. P。 = Plasma concentration of creatinine
e. V = Urine volume over time period of test
ii. Normal values for feline fractional clearance of electrolytes
a. Sodium <1%
b. Potassium <6%
c. Chloride <1.3%
d. Phosphate <73%
iv. Fractional excretion of sodium
a. Renal failure
 i. Fractional excretion of sodium increases with renal failure (>1%) due to decreased tubular
function
ii. Fractional excretion of sodium decreases with prerenal azotemia (<1%) to conserve
sodium and prevent further volume depletion
b. Hyponatraemia
i. An increased fractional excretion of sodium indicates that renal loss of sodium is contrib-
uting to the hyponatraemia (e.g., reduced aldosterone secondary to ACE inhibitor admin-
istration, loop diuretics increasing sodium excretion, increased ANP, or tubular disease).
ii. A decreased fractional excretion of sodium indicates that the kidneys are attempting to
conserve sodium (through the actions of aldosterone and angiotensin Il) and suggests an
extrarenal cause (e.g., gastrointestinal tract loss through vomiting or diarrhaea)
v. Fractional excretion of potassium
a. Renal insufficiency and loop diuretics may cause potassium wasting {fractional excretion
 >10%). Supplementation should be considered to prevent clinical signs of hypokalaemia.
G. Abdominal ultrasound
i. Abdominal ultrasound allows noninvasive imaging of the urinary tract, revealing shape, size,
and structure of the kidneys and lower urinary tract.
ii. This can usually be achieved when conscious, but sedation should be considered in fractious
cats.
ii. Hair needs to be clipped from the viewing area, and alcohol followed by ultrasound gel applied.
a. Kidney
i.
The feline kidneys can usually be imaged with the transducer placed on the ventral
abdominal wall, with the cat in lateral recumbency. In some cases, moving the cat
to dorsal recumbency or placing the transducer directly over the area of the kidney fjust
 caudal to the last rib on the left and level with the last two ribs on the right) may help.
i.
 The normal kidney has a smooth, well-defined outline and measures approximately
3-4.3 cm in length.
ii. Ultrasound allows the differentiation of the cortex, medullar, and renal pelvis. The
normal feline kidney is less echogenic than liver or spleen, with the renal medulla appear-
ing less echogenic than the cortex due to its higher water content. In normal cats, the
relative difference in echotexture between the cortex and medulla can vary due to dif-
ferences in the fat content of the proximal tubular cells.
iv.
Hydronephrosis and marked dilation of the renal pelvis is seen with ureteral obstruction,
whereas mild pelvic dilation can be seen with pyelonephritis or intravenous fluid therapy.
Renal calculi (of all types) appear echogenic and cast acoustic shadows.
vi.
 Renal cysts appear as discrete rounded anechoic areas. Infarcts, abscesses, and neoplastic
lesions have variable appearances.
vi. Diffuse parenchymal diseases do not usually change ultrasound appearance until the
disease is relatively advanced; a normal ultrasound therefore does not rule out renal
disease.
274
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vifi. Ethylene glycol toxicity leads to the deposition of calcium oxalate crystals within the
kidney, which appears more hyperechoic than the liver or spleen.
ix.  The medullary rim sign (a hyperechoic band at the corticomedullary junction) is not
specific for renal disease in the cat, as mineralization of the basement membrane causes
the same effect in normal cats.
b.Ureters
1.
Ureters are not normally seen on ultrasound evaluation due to their small size.
 Periodic jets of urine may be seen entering the bladder (especially using color flow
Doppler) and can be useful when searching for ectopic ureters.
iii. Ureteral dilation (hydroureter) is caused by ureteral obstruction and is usually accom
panied by dilation of the renal pelvis. The ureter can then be traced medially and caudally
from the renal pelvis toward the trigone of the bladder.
iv.  Doppler examination can help distinguish dilated ureters from vascular structures.
V.
 Ureteral calculi may be identified as focal areas of echogenicity that are usually associ-
ated with acoustic shadowing.
c. Bladder
i.
 The bladder is imaged via a ventral abdominal approach, which gives information about
size, shape, integrity, wall thickness, and luminal content.
ii.The normal bladder wall is smooth with well-defined layers. A full colon may indent
the dorsal bladder wall.
ii. Inflammation may increase wall thickness, and neoplasia may form focal masses.
iv. Calculi may be seen as echogenic masses that cast acoustic shadows.
H. Plain radiography
i. Abdominal radiography allows noninvasive imaging of the urinary tract, revealing shape, size,
and structure of the kidneys and the bladder.
ii. Radiographs may be achieved when conscious, but sedation should be considered in fractious
cats.
ii. Conventionally, projections are right lateral and ventrodorsal (VD),
a. Kidneys
i. Both kidneys are normally visible ventral to L3, with the right silhouette slightly cranial
to the left.
i. Normal kidneys should be 2.4-3 times the length of L2.
ii. Enlarged kidneys may displace other abdominal structures (e.g., in the lateral projection
right renomegaly may depress the duodenum, whereas left renomegaly may depress the
descending colon. In VD the colon may be deviated medially by renal enlargement).
iv. Renal enlargement may be due to neoplasia, acute nephritis, hydronephrosis, FIP, porto
vascular abnormalities, polycystic kidney disease, or a hematoma.
v. Reduced renal size usually results from end-stage chronic renal disease, although it can
Occur due to renal hypoplasia.
b. Ureters
i. Ureters are not normally seen on plain radiographs.
 ii. Ureteroliths may be seen on lateral and VD projections, but are generally best visualized
on lateral radiographs.
c. Bladder
i. Bladder varies with the volume of urine it contains.
 ii. Bladder wall thickness cannot be assessed on plain radiographs (ultrasound or contrast
studies are needed),
ili. Gas bubbles may be seen in the dependent portion of the bladder; these may be secondary
to catheterization or cystocentesis.
iv. Gas in the bladder wall is called emphysematous cystitis and is often secondary to diabetes
mellitus.
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
275
v.  Radiodense mineralized calculi may be seen in the dependent portion of the bladder. The
type of calculi present cannot be determined by radiography. Radiolucent calculi may not
be visualized without ultrasound or contrast studies.
I.Contrast cystogram
i.Indications
a. Identification and evaluation of bladder shape, size, position, and integrity
 b. Identification and evaluation of urethral position and integrity
C. Investigation of persistent feline lower urinary tract disease
ii. Technique
a. If possible, the cat should be fasted for 12-24 hours.
b. A cleansing enema should be administered 2-3 hours prior to the procedure, although it may
not be required for primary assessment of bladder integrity.
c. Ideally, general anesthesia should be considered (as urethral catheterization is required).
 d. Plain survey radiographs (lateral and ventrodorsal) should be taken to evaluate the urinary
tract prior to urethral catheterization and the administration of contrast.
é. A sterile urethral catheter should be placed {as described above) and the bladder emptied of
urine.
f. Several contrast techniques are available, and the technique chosen will depend on the infor-
mation required. For example, to check bladder integrity, instilling a small volume of water
soluble iodine media may be sufficient, whereas for diagnostic evaluation of FLUTD, a
combination of techniques will be required for thorough evaluation of the lower urinary
tract.
i.Pneumocystogram
a. Air is injected to fll the bladder until moderate resistance is felt or the bladder is
moderately distended on abdominal palpation (approx. S0 mL air).
b. A lateral radiograph is taken centered at the bladder neck and a ventrodorsal view
taken if needed.
ii.Positive contrast cystogram
a. Dilute 5-10% water-soluble iodinated contrast medium is instilled into the bladder
until it is moderately distended on abdominal palpation or until resistance is felt
(approx. 50 mL).
b. Positive contrast cystography gives good mucosal detail; however, calculi and small
intraluminal lesions may be masked by the contrast.
ii. Double contrast cystogram
a. 5-10 mL of 20% water-soluble iodinated contrast medium is instilled into the bladder
followed immediately with air (the bladder is distended as described above).
b. Contrast media highlights the mucosal surface, and the small pool of contrast that
forms in the dependent part of the bladder will highlight calculi or small masses in
that area.
iv. Positive contrast urethrogram
a. The urinary catheter is withdrawn to the proximal part of the penile urethra.
b. 5 mL of 20% water-soluble iodinated contrast medium is injected.
C. A lateral radiograph is taken at the end of the injection centered at the bladder neck.
d. This allows evaluation of urethral integrity and diameter.
ili. Concerns
a. Care needs to be taken to not rupture the bladder due to overdistension.
b. Air embolism as a result of a pneumocystography is rare but has been reported as a fatal
complication. The use of nitrous oxide or carbon dioxide reduces the risk of fatal emboliza
J.Intravenous urography
i.  Indications
276
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Identification and evaluation of renal shape, size and position
b. Identification and evaluation of ureter integrity and course (e.g., to evaluate potential obstruc
tion or avulsion)
C. Investigation of urinary incontinence or upper urinary tract hematuria or pyuria
ii. Technique
a. If possible, the cat should be starved for 12-24 hours.
 b. A cleansing enema should be administered 2-3 hours prior to the procedure.
C. Ideally, general anesthesia should be performed.
d. Plain survey radiographs forthogonal views lateral and ventrodorsal) should be taken to
evaluate the urinary tract prior to the administration of contrast.
e. A rapid bolus of 600-800 mg/kg of iodinated contrast medium should be given intravenously
 and a ventrodorsal radiograph taken immediately. Further films should be taken at 1, 5, 10,
15,and 20 minutes.
f. Initial films should be taken in the ventrodorsal position, progressing to lateral views once
adequate opacification is achieved. Oblique views may also be helpful.
ii. Concerns
a. Intravenous urography is contraindicated in dehydration, decreased glomerular filtration rate,
hypovolemia, and hyperosmolar states.
b. A diagnostic study requires adequate glomerular filtration rate.
[u m adoad u Audeon snoau jo auanbasuo e se panodan si anh lua 
insufficiency. Fluid diuresis after the procedure is therefore suggested.
d. Adverse reactions include retching and vomiting. Hypotension is also reported in some
patients.
e. Contrast media increases urine specific gravity measurements.
f. Contrast media may inhibit the growth of bacteria, thus interfering with urine culture and
sensitivity.
K. Antegrade pyelography image
i.Indications
a. Allows identification and evaluation of ureteral size and position
 b. Allows diagnosis and localization of ureteral obstruction
ii. Considerations
a. Requires skilled ultrasonographer
b. Plain radiographs and ultrasound evaluation should be performed prior to antegrade
pyelography.
c. Antegrade pyelography allows ureteral evaluation in patients with compromised glomerular
filtration rate and avoids the potential nephrotoxicity associated with systemic contrast
administration.
ii. Technique
a. If possible, the cat should be fasted for 12-24 hours.
b. A cleansing enema should be administered 2-3 hours prior to the procedure.
c. General anesthesia should be performed.
d. The kidney of interest is immobilized so it lies directly under the skin, and the area over the
kidney to be aspirated is clipped and aseptically prepared.
e. Under ultrasound guidance, a 2.5-inch 25-gauge spinal needle is inserted into the renal pelvis.
f. An extension set is attached and urine is aspirated for culture and cytology.
 g. An equivalent volume of ionic iodinated contrast media is then instilled slowly into the renal
pel vis.
 h. The contrast is then followed using fluoroscopy or multiple radiographs, with filling defects
revealingobstruction.
iv.Concerns
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
277
a. Hemorrhage or trauma to the renal pelvis
b. Nondiagnostic study due to leakage of contrast media
L. Computer tomography (CT)
i. CT is used as an adjunct to other imaging modalities.
ii. CT contrast studies are especially useful in the diagnosis of ureteral obstruction and ectopic
ureters.
ii. General anesthesia is required.
M. Renal biopsy
i. Indications
a. Allows a definitive histopathological diagnosis and should be considered when this informa
tion is likely to change patient management (e.g., diagnose neoplasia, differentiate ARF from
CRF, guide likely outcome of continued therapy).
b. Definitive diagnosis allows an accurate prognosis to be given.
c. Repeated biopsies may yield information about the response to treatment.
ii. Considerations
a. A renal biopsy should not be performed until a thorough less-invasive diagnostic investigation
has been performed.
 b. Platelet numbers, buccal mucosal bleeding time, and a coagulation profile should be checked
before biopsy, as uremia can cause thrombocytopathia and an increased risk of
hemorrhage.
iii. Technique
a. Fine needle aspiration (FNA)
i.
The cat is sedated and percutaneous aspirates are taken for cytological evaluation.
ii.
 Ultrasound guidance is advantageous, as it allows accurate needle placement and moni-
toring of any postaspiration complications, such as hemorrhage.
ili.
 FNAs are useful for the diagnosis of diseases where cells aspirate easily, for example.
renal lymphoma or inflammatory conditions; however, they can give inconclusive results.
iv.
 The kidney of interest is immobilized so it lies directly under the skin {if using ultrasound
 guidance, this is best done by an assistant).
The area over the kidney to be aspirated is clipped and aseptically prepared.
vi.
 A 1-inch, 22-gauge needle is inserted gradually into the kidney and sequentially moved
back and forth through the renal cortex.
vi. Using an air-filled syringe, the contents of the needle can be deposited onto a slide and
smears made for cytological evaluation.
viil. Repeat sampling with aspiration of the syringe can be performed if the cell harvest is
poor or for FNAs of more solid tissue (e.g., a focal mass).
b. Tru-cut biopsy
i.
 Tru-cut biopsy will yield tissue for histopathology and culture. It is more invasive than
an FNA but yields information about tissue structure.
ii.
 Good sedation or general anesthesia is required.
ili.
 The area is clipped and aseptically prepared as for FNAs.
iv.
With the kidney immobilized, the Tru-cut needle {18 g) is then advanced into the renal
cortex.
V.
 Biopsies should be taken at parallel to renal pelvis to avoid the ureter and renal vessels.
vi.
 Once collected, the sample should be fixed in formalin and sent for histopathology.
vi. Coagulopathies, pyelonephritis, and hydronephrosis are considered contraindications to
Tru-cut biopsy.
c. Surgical biopsy
1.
 Surgical biopsies yield the largest volume of tissue for histopathology and therefore allow
the most accurate diagnoses to be made.
278
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii.
 Obtaining surgical biopsies requires general anesthesia and exploratory laparotomy or
laparoscopy.
iv.Concerns
a. Complications are rare but include:
1.
Leakage of urine, for example, uroperitoneum
ii.
Hemorrhage (gross or microscopic)
ii.
 Spread of infection, for example, leakage of infected urine from pyelonephritis or rupture
of a renal abscess
iv.  Possible seeding of neoplastic cells along the biopsy path
v.  Histopathological interpretation
 a. Good prognostic signs include tubular regeneration and an intact basement membrane
 b. Poor prognostic signs include tubular necrosis, basement membrane disruption, and intersti-
tial mineralization.
N. Interpretation of urine output
i.
 Normal urine output is 1-2 mL/kg/hr.
Oliguria is urine output <0.5 mL/kg/hr.
ii.Anuria is the complete absence of urine production.
iv.
Urine production must be interpreted in conjunction with intravascular volume status.
Urine output is a function of renal perfusion and renal function.
 a. If renal perfusion decreases, then glomerular filtration will decrease, leading to reduced urine
output.
b. Mean arterial blood pressure needs to be >60 mmHg to maintain renal perfusion. Mean
pressures <60mmHg or systolic pressure <80 mmHg will therefore lead to progressive
oliguria.
C. Reduced glomerular or tubular flow (acute renal failure) will reduce urine production.
vi.   Placing a urinary catheter will allow accurate measurement of urine production.
vi. Weighing diapers, monitoring bladder size with ultrasound, and weighing the cat are nonin-
vasive but less accurate methods of monitoring urine production.
O. Peritoneal dialysis
i.Indications
a.Anuric renal failure
 b. Oliguric renal failure with hyperkalemia
c. Oliguric renal failure and fluid overload
d. Severe clinical uremia (polyuric or oliguric renal failure) unresponsive to fluid therapy
e. Postrenal uremia resulting from obstruction
f. Dialyzable toxicities, for example, barbiturates, ethylene glycol
ii. Considerations
a. Requires sedation or anesthesia for placement of peritoneal dialysis catheter
 b. Dialysis catheters can rapidly become occluded. Prior omentectomy is recommended to avoid
this (requires general anesthesia and midline celiotomy).
c. Contraindications
i.
 Peritoneal adhesions
ii.
 Compromised peritoneum
1. Diaphragmatic hernia
2. Recent abdominal surgery (relative)
 3. Inguinal or abdominal hernias (relative)
ii. Any condition that may result in increased intra-abdominal pressure
d. Labor intensive
iii. Technique
a. Dialysis catheters
Chapter 22 Diagnostic Evaluation, Monitoring, and Therapeutic Techniques
279
i.
Percutaneous (short-term)
ii.
Surgically impla nta ble
ii. Laparoscopic
b. Placement
i
 Sedation or general anesthesia necessary
ii.
 Patient in dorsal recumbency and abdomen shaved
ii. Patient draped and strict aseptic technique maintained
iv.1
 Percutaneous trocar technique
1. Stab incision 3-5 cm lateral to the umbilicus
 2. Catheter tunneled caudally from stab incision before entering abdominal cavity
3. Catheter threaded off trochar
 Surgically placed
1. Omentectomy via midline celiotomy
 2. End of catheter placed in inguinal region
 3. Catheter to exit abdomen via tunnel 3-5 cm lateral to the umbilicus
vi.(
Catheter secured with purse string and Chinese fingertrap.
vi. Catheters with Dacron cuffs should be used in long-term dialysis patients to avoid the
use of suture, which may increase infection rate.
c. Dialysate
Commercially available products containing various concentrations of dextrose are
a vailable.
ii.
"Homemade” using lactated Ringer's solution
iii.
Solutions contain 1.5-4.2s% dextrose. Variations in dextrose alter the osmolality of the
solution, with the higher concentration being used to remove fluid from the overhydrated
patient.
iv.
 Some authors recommend the use of heparin (250-1,000 IU/L) in the dialysate for the
first few days following catheter placement to help prevent occlusion of the catheter.
 Dialysate should be warmed to 38°C to improve permeability of the peritoneum.
vi.
Volume of dialysate instilled should be approximately 10mL/kg for the initial 24 hours,
and gradually increase to 30 mL/kg following this.
d. Dialysis
i.
Ensure aseptic technique.
ii.
One-third of the calculated dialysate volume should be instilled in the initial 24 hours
iii.
 Use a closed Y system to reduce potential for contamination.
iv.
Use “"drain first—infuse later” principle to reduce potential for infection.
V.
Instill 10mL/kg over 10 minutes for the initial 24 hours.
vi.
 Gradually increase to 30 mL/kg after the initial 24 hours.
vi. In the acute setting, dialysate remains in abdomen for approximately 30 minutes (dwell
time).
vifi. Dialysate removed under gravity over 20 minutes
ix.1
 Process repeated every hour until patient clinically improved and serum creatinine and
BUN have decreased by one-third.
X.
Do not attempt to reduce the BUN by more than one-third over the initial 24 hours or
dialysis disequilibrium syndrome may develop.
xi.(
 Continue with acute dialysis until BUN has reached 60-100 mg/dL.
xi. Chronic dialysis with a dwell time of 3-6 hours should then be implemented and rates
adjusted accordingly to maintain a BUN of approximately 70 mg/dL
iv. Concerns
a. Septic peritonitis
280
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Catheter occlusion
C. Dialysate leakage
d. Visceral damage
e. Electrolyte imbalances
f. Overhydration
 g. Hypoalbuminemia
P.
Hemodialysis
i.  Indications
a. Anuric renal failure
b. Oliguric renal failure with hyperkalemia
C.（
 Oliguric renal failure and fluid overload
 d. Severe clinical uremia (polyuric or oliguric renal failure) unresponsive to fluid therapy
e. Postrenal uremia resulting from obstruction or rupture to the urinary collecting system
f. Dialyzable toxicities, for example, barbiturates, ethylene glycol
ii. Considerations
a. Limited availability
b. Expensive
c. Requires sedation for placement of temporary dialysis catheter or general anesthesia for
placement of permanent {tunneled long-term) dialysis catheter
iii. Complications
a. Hemorrhage
b. Catheter-related bloodstream infection
c. Thrombosis
d. Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome (too rapid a drop in BUN)
e. Hypotension while receiving dialysis (due to volume of blood in extracorporeal circuit)
23
UROLOGIC EMERGENCIES: URETER,
BLADDER, URETHRA, GN, AND CRF
Annie Malouin
Unique Features
of severe azotemia, hyperkalemia, and decreased ionized calcium.
● Urine analysis and culture with antimicrobial sensitivity should be performed in the preliminary
diagnostic workup of azotemic patients.
· In critically ill cats with renal dysfunction, urine output should be monitored hourly. Also, special
attention should be given to match the ins-outs.
● Positive-contrast radiographic studies are useful to diagnose trauma within the urinary tract.
· Parenteral fluid therapy is the most important step in the initial treatment of the uremic cat.
A. Definitions
a. Azotemia (uremia): the presence of nitrogen-containing compounds in the blood
i.
 Prerenal azotemia: due to extrarenal causes that reduce renal blood flow and glomerular
filtration
ii. Renal azotemia: results from loss of functional renal parenchyma
ili. Post-renal azotemia: caused by reduced renal blood flow caused by increased pressure within the
renal collecting system
b. Isosthenuria: preservation of a constant osmolality of the urine, regardless of changes in osmotic
pressure in the blood
c. Hyposthenuria: excretion of urine of low specific gravity (low osmolality)
d. Hypersthenuria: excretion of urine of high specific gravity (high osmolality)
e. Specific gravity of urine: measures of the solute concentration in urine to assess the ability of the
renal tubules to concentrate or dilute the glomerular filtrate
f. Pollakiuria: frequent passage of small amounts of urine
g. Periuria: urinations in inappropriate locations
h. Stranguria: slow and painful discharge of urine
i. Oliguria: reduced urine output
j.  Anuria: complete suppression of urine formation by the kidney
 B. Emergency triage assessment
a. The cat's history might include a recent trauma or a vague malaise that is acute or chronic in dura-
tion. The patient's owner might describe more general signs: lethargy to stupor and coma, seizure,
anorexia, polydipsia, polyuria, halitosis, vomiting, and diarrhea.
281
282
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. More specific signs related to urinary tract abnormalities may also be noted: inappropriate voiding,
incontinence, straining to urinate, polyuria, and hematuria.
C. Pet owners often confound straining to urinate for constipation.
d. At presentation to the hospital (on triage), after a brief evaluation of the cat's respiratory and car-
diovascular system, the urinary bladder should be palpated as an assessment of its ability to urinate.
e. A cat that presents with a history of inability to urinate and palpation of a large, firm, nonexpress-
ible urinary bladder requires immediate transfer of the animal to the treatment area.
C. Disease conditions
a. Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD) and feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC)
i.Definitions
1. A syndrome of hematuria, dysuria, stranguria, periuria, and/or urethral “plug” formation
{with or without urinary obstruction) of undefined etiology
a. The term idiopathic is used because an etiologic diagnosis cannot be found in two-thirds
of cats with these signs.
b. The pathophysiology of FIC is not fully understood and may involve complex interactions
between several body systems. Damage to or malfunction of the glycosaminoglycan layer
of urothelium and abnormalities in local sensory neurons, sympathetic nervous system, and
central nervous system are known to occur in these patients and result in an inappropriate
release of inflammatory mediators locally.
ii. Clinical presentation
1. Lower urinary tract signs can occur at any age but are unusual in cats less than 1 year
of age and most frequent in cats 2-6 years of age. In older cats, neoplasia should be ruled
out.
2. When clinical signs are considered without regard to obstruction, no difference in risk between
males and females is observed.
3. Risk factors include indoor-restricted cats, dry food diet, excessive body weight, decreased
activity, multiple-cat household, and Persian cat breeds. The exact nature of these predisposi-
tions remains to be determined.
iil. Diagnostics
1. Two-thirds of cats with FLUTD signs have FIC, and in approximately 85% of cats with FIC,
clinical signs resolve in 2 to 3 days without treatment.
2. Thus, it is debatable whether any diagnostics should be performed for a young cat in its first
presentation of FLUTD signs.
 3. Urinalysis, radiographic studies, and cystoscopy may be necessary to differentiate behavioral
disorder from FLUTD and FIC
4. Which tests will yield the most benefit for each individual patient must be decided based on
the cat's signalment and clinical signs.
a. Urinalysis may show hematuria, proteinuria, mild sterile pyuria, and crystalluria.
b. If urine specific gravity is decreased (<1.035 for cats eating solely dry food; <1.025 for cats
eating primarily canned foods), a serum biochemical profile and thyroid evaluation should
be obtained.
c. In cats <10 years of age, urine culture is negative 98% of the time.
d. Urine culture should be performed in all cats:
i.with recurrent (>2 episodes) FLUTD signs
ii. older than 10 years old with FLUTD signs
iii. with a urine specific gravity (USG) <1.030
iv. that underwent perineal urethrostomy
v.  after a urinary catheter has been placed
5. A plain abdominal radiograph that includes the entire urinary tract {including urethra) can
be a useful to assess for the presence of cystic calculi.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
283
6. Contrast studies of the bladder and urethra in cats with FIC are usually unremarkable, but
diffuse or asymmetrical thickening of the bladder wall may be seen.
a. Contrast studies are especially indicated in elderly cats (> 10 years of age) where FLUTD
b. A contrast cystogram and urethrogram can be useful to diagnose nonradiopaque calculi
and other lesions such as mass lesions, blood clots, and strictures in cats with recurrent
episodes.
7. When radiographic findings are negative and a urine culture reveals no growth in cats with
no other identifiable abnormalities, the diagnosis of FIC is likely.
8. Ultrasound of the bladder:
a. May reveal wall thickening that is usually most pronounced cranioventrally. In severe cases,
it can become generalized.
b. Wall thickening somewhat depends on the volume of urine in the bladder. In a nondis-
tended bladder, evaluation of the wall thickness is subjective according to the amount of
distension. In a fully distended bladder, normal wall thickening is approximately 1-2mm.
c. Diagnostic ultrasound may also help to identify differential diagnosis fe.g, bladder neo-
plasia, polyps, cystic calculi, etc).
9. Cystoscopy can be performed at referral practices when FLUTD signs fail to resolve after
standard therapy in those cats with negative findings from radiography and urine cultures.
a. Cytoscopy allows visualization of the bladder and urethra, and can exclude less common
diseases (small cystic calculi, urachal diverticula, ectopic ureters, and small polyps).
iv. Treatment
1. Many cats improve within 5 days with or without therapy.
2. Subcutaneous fluids (40-60 mL/kg/day) can be given to promote diuresis and dilute urine.
3. Male cats should be watched closely for signs of obstruction.
4. Canned diets can be given to increase water intake.
a. Easy access to fresh water should be provided at all times.
5. Antibiotics are usually not indicated unless there is a previous history of catheterization and/
or severe hemorrhagic cystitis.
6. Metacam is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory, specific to COX-2. It can provide analgesia and
reduce inflammation and edema; 0.1 mg/kg PO, SC once daily (limit to 4 days use).
 7. Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant that may benefit by stabilizing mast cells and reduc.
ing inflammatory changes, and it might relieve stress through mild sedation; 2.5-10 mg once
daily in the evening.
8. Phenoxybenzamine is an alpha-adrenergic antagonist that may reduce urethral spasms; 2.5-
7.5 mg/cat PO q12h.
9. Diazepam can relax the striated muscle of urethral sphincter and therefore help in the man-
agement of urethral spasm; 1-2.5 mg/cat PO q8-12h, or 0.5 mg/kg IV PRN.
v.Prognosis
 1. Recurrence rates for FLUTD signs are high. About 50% of cats have a recurrence of clinical
signs within 1 year.
b. Urethral obstruction
i.Definitions
 1. Urethral plugs made up of a proteinaceous matrix imbedded with struvite crystalline material
are the most common causes of obstructions.
a. Calcium oxalate urethroliths (predominant form of uroliths found in cats), strictures, and
neoplasia can also cause obstructions.
b. Strictures can be secondary to trauma or congenital anatomical abnormalities.
ii. Clinical presentation
1. Male cat with a history of straining to urinate
284
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 2. Other signs frequently noted:
a. Attempting to urinate outside of the litter box
b.Hematuria
C.Lethargy
d. Excessive vocalization as if in pain
é. Pain on palpation of the abdomen
f. Loss of appetite and vomiting
3. Owner may mistake cats with urethral obstructions as being constipated, with increased time
and effort spent in the litter box.
4. Urethral plugs affect males almost exclusively:
a. Male cats have a narrow penile urethral lumen and are more at risk to develop a urethral
obstruction than are females.
5. Physical examination
a. Bladder is distended, firm, and nonexpressible with gentle palpation.
i. Absence of a palpable bladder does not rule out urethral obstruction.
ii. Seldom, the bladder can rupture because of the severe inflammation and the increased
pressure.
ii. These patients are usually very ill and severely azotemic.
b. Some cats might have severe cardiovascular compromise, but others are stable.
c. Dehydration might be present from anorexia and vomiting.
d. Bradycardia and circulatory collapse might support the presence of hyperkalemia and
decreased ionized calcium; therefore, one should monitor an electrocardiogram. See below
for a description of ECG changes.
e. On palpation, the abdomen is often painful.
f. The tip of the penis might be discolored (dark-red to purple) and swollen, and a urethral
 plug might be present at its tip.
ili. Diagnostics
1. In severely ill cats, an extended database {electrolytes, acid-bases, PCV/TS, glucose, and azo-
stick) should be completed.
2. Serum biochemistry, CBC, and urinalysis should be obtained, though it is not necessary to
evaluate such results prior to obstruction relief in unstable cats.
 3. Urinalysis may show evidence of inflammation (hematuria, pyuria, proteinuria).
a. Crystals (struvites or calcium oxalates) may not be present.
b. Cats with struvite urolithiasis often have a urine pH >6.8 and those with oxalate urolithiasis
often have a urine pH <6.5.
c. USG is often elevated.
4. Survey abdominal radiographs should be obtained after relief of the obstruction to determine
if cystic or renal calculi are present. In cats >8 years old, survey abdominal radiographs
should be obtained after relief of the obstruction to determine if cystic or renal calculi are
present.
5. All uroliths and plugs retrieved from a cat should be submitted for quantitative analysis.
a. This procedure will examine all layers of the urolith and will provide an estimate of the
mineral content of each layer.
iv. Treatment
1. Regardless of the underlying ca use, relief of obstructions, reesta blishment of urine flow, and
correction of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base imbalances associated with obstruction and
postrenal azotemia are the first steps in proper management.
2. Critically ill cats with urethral obstruction and severe azotemia often have decreased tissue
perfusion due to hypovolemia and cardiac dysfunction secondary to meta bolic disturbances.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
285
3. An intravenous catheter should be placed and an emergency database (including PCV, TS,
dipstick glucose, dipstick BUN, sodium and potassium concentrations, blood gas analysis,
and ionized calcium concentration) should be obtained.
4. An ECG should be obtained if a fast, slow, or irregular heart rate is ausculted. Abnormalities
cause by hyperkalemia may include
a. Increased T wave amplitude
b. Decreased R wave amplitude
c. ST segment depression
d. Decreased P wave amplitude
é. Prolonged PR, QRS, QT
f. Loss of P wave
g. Possible ventricular arrhythmias.
 5. If severe hyperkalemia is present and causing bradycardia and cardiac electrical conduction
disturbances, it should be treated immediately.
a. Regular insulin, 0.1-0.25 U/kg IV with a 0.25-0.5 g/kg dextrose IV bolus
i. IV dextrose should be diluted 1:2 prior administration in a peripheral vein.
ii. Also, add dextrose to IV maintenance fluids (2.s%-5% concentration) to prevent
hypoglycemia.
     n  n    
hours.
b. A dextrose bolus alone (0.5 g/kg IV) will induce endogenous insulin release in the nondia-
betic patient, which translocates potassium intracellularly.
c. Calcium gluconate 10%, 0.5-1 mL/kg IV slowly over 10 minutes, will rapidly oppose the
effect of hyperkalemia on the myocardium, and its effect will last for 10-15 minutes.
i. Monitor with ECG. Too-rapid infusion of calcium may manifest on the ECG as pro
longed PR intervals, widened QRS complex, shortened QT interval, shortened or
absent ST segment, and widened T wave. Bradycardia may progress to complete heart
block, asystole, and cardiac arrest. If any of these abnormalities are noted, the calcium
infusion should be stopped.
d. Sodium bicarbonate, 1 mEq/kg IV slowly, will shift potassium to the intracellular com-
partment, and its effect lasts for up to 2 hours.
i.
 Caution: It may decrease the ionized calcium concentration further, leading to clinical
 signs of hypocalcemia (tetany, seizures).
t. Monitor blood gas.
6. If poor tissue perfusion is present (and no obvious physical examination evidence of cardiac
disease is present, such as loud heart murmur or gallop rhythm), a bolus of 30 mL/kg/hr of
a balanced electrolyte solution should be administered.
a. After cardiovascular status is improved, parenteral administration of fluid should be
continued to promote diuresis (about 3 times maintenance rate), and relief of the urinary
obstruction should be attempted.
7. Plugs usually occur at the tip of the penis where the urethra is very narrow, but they can
occur anywhere in the urethra.
a. The tip of the penis should be examined, and if a plug is present it should be dislodged.
8. All items needed to relieve the obstruction should be gathered and ready (fig. 23.1).
a. An open-end tomcat catheter should primarily be used to relieve the obstruction.
9. Anesthesia is needed to allow proper manipulation of the cat's penis and passage of the
urinary catheter (for more in-depth detail, see chap. S—Guidelines for Anesthesia in Critically
Ill Feline Patients and chap. 6—Anesthetic Protocols for Systemically Healthy Cats).
a. In critically ill cats, this procedure might be well tolerated without sedation.
286
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 23.1。 Male urethral catheterization setup:
1. Open-end male cat urethral catheters
2. Sterile lubrication
3. Sterile gloves
4. Red top sample vial for urinalysis
5. White tape
6. 3/0 nylon suture material
7.
 Sterile bag for urine collection
8. Sterile IV setup for urine collection
9. 10-cc syringes For Hlushing urinary catheter
10. Sterile saline for Hlushing urinary catheter
11. Urine collection bowl
12. Catheter adapter
b. Analgesia should be provided: butorphanol (0.3-0.4 mg/kg), hydromorphone (0.05-
0.1 mg/kg), or buprenorphine 8-10 μg/kg).
C. Then, the combination of ketamine (2.5-5 mg/kg) and diazepam (0.3-0.5 mg/kg), given
intravenously to effect, provides adequate sedation for most cats. Ketamine should
not be used in patients with cardiac disease, including hyperkalemic cats with EKG
abnorma lities.
d. Gas anesthesia with isoflurane administered by facemask or an infusion of propofol
(3-5 mg/kg IV) can provide additional sedation and urethral relaxation. These can cause
hypotension and the patient's blood pressure should be monitored.
10. The catherization technique should be atraumatic and as gentle as possible.
a. The severely inflamed urethra and bladder are fragile and can easily rupture.
b. It is important to follow sterility principles:
i. Use sterile gloves when placing the catheter.
i. Clip the hair from the prepuce and form a small area on the perineum around the
prepucial orifice.
ili. Clean the prepucial orifice with aseptic soap and water.
c. Small amount of a sterile lubricant gel should be placed at the tip of the tomcat catheter
for lubrication.
d. The prepuce is retracted to extrude the penis and then the penis is pulled caudally to
straighten the urethra.
e. The catheter is inserted into the penis.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
287
Fig. 23.2. Cosed drainage system for urinary catheter.
11. Once the catheter has been inserted into the urethra, it should be advanced gently until
resistance is encountered at the site of the urethral plug.
a. A syringe filled with sterile saline is attached to the urinary catheter and retropulsion with
hydraulic forces is performed.
b. Catheter advancement should be attempted again until it can be introduced in the
bladder.
C. Once the catheter is in the bladder, urine should flow into the catheter.
 d. The bladder can be emptied by aspirating the urine with a syringe attached to the end of
the catheter.
d. Once the bladder is emptied, it should be flushed by inserting about 20 mL of sterile saliné
through the catheter. This should be done 3-5 times, or until the urine sample is cleared
of blood or grit.
e. An indwelling urinary catheter is then inserted:
i.It should be pliable (e.g., red rubber feeding catheter)
ii. Prior to insertion, the urinary catheter should be measured to assure that the tip of
the catheter is about 3 cm past the pelvic inlet.
ili. The urinary catheter should be attached to a closed drainage system (fig. 23.2).
12. If the urethral plug cannot be dislodged via urethral catheterization, decompressive cysto-
centesis is recommended.
a. A small (22- or 23-gauge) butterfly needle inserted into the lateral bladder wall midway
between the apex and urethral outflow works well for this procedure and aids in the
removal of urine without reinsertion of the needle.
b. Alternatively, if a longer needle (22-gauge) is necessary, it can be attached to an extension
set and urine removed with a syringe in a similar manner.
c. The bladder should be continuously palpated during the drainage.
d. Complications are rare but include extravasation of urine into the peritoneal cavity,
urinary bladder rupture, or damage to the urinary bladder wall.
14. If still unsuccessful at relieving the obstruction, an emergency percutaneous cystostomy tube
should be placed until a perineal urethrostomy can be performed.
288
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
15. Urine output should be monitored hourly.
a. Special attention should be given to match the "ins-outs" (see chap. 8—Fluid therapy).
16. Monitor body temperature and provide heat support if needed.
a. Azotemic animals are often slightly hypothermic.
17. A perineal urethrostomy surgery may be needed to prevent future episodes of urethral
obstruction.
a. This surgery carries some risks or complications such as bacterial UTIs and postoperative
strictures.
b. Clients need to be made aware that this surgery does not correct the underlying problem.
c. Recurrent uroliths and FIC episodes can still occur.
18. Dietary and environmental changes should be made as needed.
a. Use of moist rather than dry cat food causes urine dilution and reduces the severity of
signs and likelihood of recurrence in cats with idiopathic cystitis.
b. Struvite uroliths maybe dissolved by feeding a calculolytic diet (Hill's Prescription Diet
Feline s/d). Continue diet therapy for 1 month after surveying radiographic evidence of
urolith dissolution. Subsequently, feeding magnesium and phosphorus-restricted urine
acidifying diets may minimize struvites crystalluria. Several therapeutic foods are avail-
able: Hill's Prescription Diet Feline w/d, Hill's Prescription Diet Feline c/d Multicare
Feline, and Purina Veterinary Diet UR St/Ox.
c. Attempts to dissolve calcium oxalate stones have not been successful. For nutritional
management of feline oxalate urolithiasis, diets with the highest moisture or protein
taining increased dietary sodium (>1%, dry matter basis) are recommended {e.g-, Royal
Canin Veterinary Diet feline Urinary SO, Hill's Prescription Diet Feline x/d, Hill's
Prescription Diet Feline c/d Multicare Feline, and Purina Veterinary Diet UR St/Ox)
v. Prognosis
1. Prolonged urethral obstruction usually carries more severe morbidity.
2. Death can occur due to consequences of severe dehydration, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis,
and hypocalcemia.
a. Rarely, cats have a ruptured bladder secondary to long-standing urethral obstruction.
b. Prognosis for survival in these cats is worse.
3. Almost all cats treated for urethral obstruction at a university referral hospital survived initial
treatment and stabilization.
4. Recurrent obstructions may occur.
C. Urethral tear
i.History
 1. The history will often lead the clinician to the cause:
a. Blunt trauma: urethral contusion (HBC)
b. Laceration/rupture: pelvic (pubic) fractures, penetrating wound (bite wound, gunshot)
c. Iatrogenic {traumatic catherization)
ii. Clinical signs
1. Dysuria, hematuria, pain, swelling, ascites, edematous and swollen hind legs
a. May or may not be present and voiding may be normal
 2. The hair around perineum should be clipped for better examination of the area: skin discol-
oration, edema, cellulitis, and fistulous tracts may be present.
iii. Diagnostics
1. Perform FAST (focused abdominal sonogram for trauma) to check for abdominal effusion.
 2. Laboratory findings may present dehydration, hypoproteinemia, azotemia, and leukocytosis.
3. Perform a positive contrast urethrogram to locate the precise site of rupture. Ideally, this
procedure should be performed under fluoroscopic guidance to better localize the site of leakage.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
289
iv. Treatment
1. A balanced crystalloid solution should be administered intravenously to correct electrolyte.
acid-base, and perfusion abnormalities.
2. A small tear in the urethra may not require surgery.
 3. A urinary catheter should be placed and attached to a closed-drainage system.
a. It should be kept in place for 2-4 weeks, after which a urethrogram should be performed
before catheter removal.
4. Immediate surgical procedure is required for complete urethral tear.
a.Primary urethroplasty
 b. Temporary cystostomy drainage followed by delayed urethroplasty
d. Bacterial cystitis
i.History and clinical presentation is usually similar as with FLUTD and FIC.
1. Bacterial cystitis is rare in cats, but perhaps more common in those with defenses that are
compromised due to other diseases or treatments.
2. Incidence of urinary tract infection rises with age:
a. Approximately 45% of cats >10 years of age with signs of FLUTD have urinary tract
infection
3. Risk factors for UTIs include:
a. Urolithiasis
 b. Immunosuppression
c. Previous indwelling catheterization
d. Perineal urethrostomy
e. Tube cystostomies
f. Diabetes mellitus
g. Neoplasia
 h. Hypera drenocorticism
i. Congenital or acquired anomalies of the lower urinary tract
j.Chronic renal failure
i. Diagnostics
1. Urinalysis may show signs of inflammation.
a. Caution should be taken when reporting bacteria from the sediment:
i.Some cellular breakdown products in the urine can exhibit Brownian motion and look
similar to bacteria.
i. Bacteria may not be seen, particularly when the USG is low and urine is dilute.
ii. A urine culture with antimicrobial sensitivity should be performed in all cases.
ii. Treatment
1. Subcutaneous fluids (40-60 mL/kg/day) can be given to promote diuresis and dilute urine.
 2. Antimicrobials should be administered based on quantitative urine cultures and sensiti-
vities.
a. E. coli is the most common isolate, but gram-positive cocci such as Stapbylococci and
Streptococci account for the next most common isolates.
é. Ureteral obstruction
i.Definitions
1. Ureteral obstruction can result from intraluminal and rarely from intramural or extramural
causes
a. Intraluminal obstruction of urine flow can occur as a result of calculi, a blood clot, intra.
mural fibrosis, or a stricture.
b. Primary ureteral neoplasia has not been reported in cats.
c. Extramural compression may occur from a retroperitoneal mass, a bladder neoplasm, or
from a ligature placed accidentally during surgery.
290
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. During ovariohysterectomy, the most common location for inadvertent ureter ligation and/
or transection is near the uterine body and this may result in complete obstruction, with
associated hydronephrosis, hydroureter, and eventually permanent renal damage, if not
corrected within 7 days.
i. Pathophysiology
 1. Obstruction of a ureter can cause ureteral dilatation and progressive distension of the renal
pelvis.
 2. As pressure builds up proximal to the site of obstruction, renal blood flow and glomerular
filtration decrease, potentially causing permanent renal parenchymal damage.
3. Chronic renal failure is common at the time of diagnosis of ureteral calculi.
ifi. Clinical presentation and clinical signs
1. Uroliths tend to develop in middle-aged to older cats, with no sex predilection.
 2. Clinical signs of obstruction may not be apparent unless bilateral obstruction, the contralateral
kidney is dysfunctional, or concomitant infection of the urinary tract is present.
 3. Clinical findings are usually nonspecific:
a. Inappetence
b. Vomiting
c. Lethargy
d. Polyuria
e. Polydipsia
f. Hematuria
g. Lumbar pain
h. Weight loss
4. Cats with complete, bilateral obstruction are anuric and may be collapsed at presentation.
a. Complete, bilateral obstruction that persists for 3 days or longer is fatal without appropri-
ate treatment.
iv. Diagnostics
1. Distinction should be made between obstructing and nonobstructing causes of ureteral
dilatation.
a. Pyelonephritis may also cause ureteral dilatation but would not warrant surgery.
b. Conversely, an obstructing calculus or mass would necessitate early surgical intervention.
2. A combination of survey radiographs and abdominal ultrasonography is recommended to
confirm the diagnosis.
 3. Most ureteral calculi contain calcium oxalate or calcium phosphate and appear radioopaque
on radiographs.
a. However, small calculi, calculi overlying the colonic contents, and radiolucent calculi may
be missed on survey radiographs.
4. Ultrasonography allows limited morphologic assessment of the renal parenchyma and can
identify hydronephrosis and hydroureter.
a. Although ureteral dilatation alone is not a specific sign of obstruction, visualization of focal
hydroureter to the level of obstruction can be diagnostic.
 b. Ureteral dilatation usually begins proximally, and as the degree of hydroureter increases,
it extends distally.
C. Ureteral dilatation may not extend to the level of the ureteral obstruction.
d. Also, in some patients it may be difficult to follow the entire course of the ureter because
of its small size and because of interference by other organs.
i.In these cases, absence or reduced amplitude and duration of ureteral flow at the
e. Ultrasonography may also indicate abnormality in the contralateral kidney (e.g., small size,
dilated pelvis), suggestive of preexisting renal parenchymal disease.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
291
5. Additional imaging modalities, such as antegrade pyelography, intra venous urography, nuclear
scintigraphy, and computed tomography may be necessary to identify ureteral calculi that are
sagewl punoseun pue sqde.soipeu Aains uo uauedde 1ou
a. Renal scintigraphy allows evaluation of renal function but does not predict what function
will be after the obstruction has been relieved.
b. Excretory urography can identify ureteral dilatation to the point of obstruction and may
show a filling defect or stricture if the associated kidney is functional and the patient is
not severely compromised.
i. If renal function is decreased, filtration of the contrast medium will be reduced, which
will result in poor opacification of the upper portion of the urinary tract.
ii. This procedure should not be performed in a dehydrated or severely azotemic cat, as
B            s
renal damage.
c. Percutaneous antegrade pyelography is an accurate diagnostic test for patients in which
excretory urography is nondiagnostic, or when concern exists about the adverse effects of
systemic contrast administration.
i. Fluoroscopy or ultrasonography is used to guide needle or catheter placement into the
dilated renal pelvis.
ii. Urine is aspirated from the renal pelvis and submitted for analysis and culture.
ii. Iodinated contrast material is then injected into the needle or catheter at a volume equal
to one-half the aspirated urine volume.
iv. The flow of contrast is monitored with fluoroscopy or with radiographs taken imme-
diately after contrast injection.
v. This technique is easily performed and has minimal complications, such as hematuria
and leakage of contrast material or urine into the abdomen.
vi. Fluid diuresis should be performed concurrently to prevent blood clot formation, which
may result in obstruction.
6. Laboratory findings include variable elevation of serum creatinine, BUN, and phosphorus.
a. Factors affecting the degree of azotemia include:
i. Unilateral or bilateral ureteral obstruction
ii. The degree of ureteral obstruction
ii. The degree of impairment of renal function in each kidney
iv. The degree of prerenal azotemia
b. Azotemia in cats with unilateral ureteral obstruction indicates reduced renal function in
the contralateral kidney or prerenal azotemia.
c. Some azotemic cats with unilateral blockage may have concurrent infection or a milder
degree of ureteral obstruction in the contralateral kidney, which could be caused by undi-
agnosed ureteral calculi, sediment accumulation, or ureteral stricture.
7. Urine analysis may show crystalluria with amorphous crystals, calcium oxalate crystals, or
struvite crystals.
a. Most uroliths are composed of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate.
b. Uroliths should be sent for analysis.
 8. Urinary tract infection should be ruled out by obtaining a culture and antimicrobial sensitivity
of the specimen.
v.Treatment
 1. Rapid surgical intervention is indicated once the diagnosis has been made because recovery
of renal function is inversely related to the duration of obstruction.
a. The patient should be treated medically until it is stable for definitive surgical correctior
of the ureteral obstruction.
b. Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance should be restored.
292
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Critically ill cats with ureteral obstruction and acute renal failure often have decreased tissue
perfusion due to hypovolemia and cardiac dysfunction secondary to hyperkalemia, acidosis,
and dehydration.
3. An intravenous catheter should be placed and an emergency database fincluding PCV, TS,
dipstick glucose, dipstick BUN, sodium and potassium concentrations, blood gas analysis,
and ionized calcium concentration) should be obtained.
4. An arterial blood pressure measurement should be obtained.
a. If the patient blood pressure is decreased (systolic blood pressure <100 mmHg, mean
arterial pressure <70 mmHg) and/or if poor tissue perfusion is determined on physical
examination:
i.Administer a bolus of 30 mL/kg/hr of a balance electrolyte solution.
5. An EKG should be obtained if a fast, slow, or irregular heart rate is ausculted.
a. Hyperkalemia can cause severe cardiac rhythm abnormalities (see above section, "Urethral
Obstruction,” for a description).
6. If severe hyperkalemia is present and causing bradycardia and cardiac electrical conduction
disturbances, it should be treated immediately {see above section, "Urethral Obstruction,"
for its treatment).
7. After cardiovascular status is improved, parenteral administration of fluid should be contin
ued to promote diuresis {about 3 times maintenance rate). The amount of fluid required for
{mL) = {30 × kg) + 70.
8. A urinary catheter should be placed and urine output monitored hourly.
9. Buprenorphine or butorphanol should be administered for pain control.
a. Pure opioid agonists should be avoided because they may increase ureteral tone, bladder
tone, and external sphincter tone, leading to increased difficulty in urination.
b. Morphine can also cause an increase in antidiuretic hormone release, and thus reduce
urine production.
c. Epidural analgesia may also be given.
10. Furosemide (1-2mg/kg IV) may be given to promote further diuresis, promoting urine pro-
duction and passage of the ureteral calculi or blood clot.
ization of the membrane by opening the potassium channels; thus, there is ureteral relaxation
and the potential for facilitating stone passage in cats with ureteral calculi. The recommended
dosage for amitrityline is 1 mg/kg orally q12-24h.
12. Hemodialysis and emergency placement of nephrostomy catheters can be useful for stabiliza-
tion of severely uremic patients.
a. The aim of dialysis is to reduce the degree of azotemia, allow time to determine whether
the ureteral calculus will pass on its own, and improve the clinical condition of the cat
prior to surgical treatment.
b. Temporary nephrostomy catheters can be placed in both kidneys in case of bilateral
ureteral obstruction.
i. Placement of temporary nephrostomy catheter diverts urine flow, allows time for
physiologic dieresis, and thus preserves renal function.
i. It has the additional advantage of allowing a preoperative assessment of remaining
renal function in the obstructed kidney.
13. Broad spectrum antibiotherapy should be started if there is any indication of infection on
the urine analysis and until results of the urine culture and sensitivity are available. Ampicillin,
20 mg/kg IV q8-12h; amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 62.5 mg/cat PO q12h; cefazolin 20 mg/kg
IV q8-12h; and enrofloxacin, 5 mg/kg IV/SQ/IM/PO q24h.
a. Any infection should be aggressively treated for 4-8 weeks.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
293
14. During medical management of ureteral calculi, imaging studies should be repeated periodi-
cally to evaluate if the calculi have spontaneously passed down the ureter into the bladder.
15. Surgical treatment depends on the cause and duration of obstruction.
a. If the source of the obstruction is extraluminal, the cause should be removed if
possible.
b. If ureteral calculi are suspected, surgical removal is warranted if there is evidence of partial
or complete obstruction of the ureter, or if the calculi are immobile on repeated imaging
examinations.
16. Options for surgical treatment of ureteroliths include:
a.Ureterotomy
b. Retrograde flushing of calculi into the renal pelvis, followed by pyelolithotomy
C. Resection of the affected portion of the ureter, followed by primary anastomosis or reim-
plantation into the bladder
d. Ureteronephrectomy
17. Complications of ureteral surgery include urine leakage, dehiscence, and stricture
formation.
18. Placement of a nephrostomy catheter after surgery may be helpful for diverting urine flow
until the ureter heals.
19. Ureteronephrectomy may be required if the ureteral obstruction cannot be corrected, but the
contralateral kidney function must be within normal limits.
20. If the obstruction is caused by a urolith, analysis of the stone should be performed, so that
dietary and appropriate medical therapy can be initiated.
vi. Prognosis
1. The longer the obstruction, the less chance of reversibility of renal dysfunction.
2. Medical and surgical treatment of ureteral obstruction can sta bilize renal function, although
3. If patency of a completely obstructed ureter is restored within 1 week of obstruction, renal
4. Irreversible renal damage may occur if complete ureteral obstruction is present for longer than
4 weeks.
f. Ureteral tear
i.History
1. Injury to the ureters can occur from:
a. Blunt or penetrating abdominal injury
b. Iatrogenically finclude complete or partial ligation, transection, kinking, crushing, and
devascularization) during abdominal surgery (occurs most commonly as a complication
during ovariohysterectomy and resection of a caudal abdominal or pelvic neoplasm) or
laparoscopy
c. Secondary to ureteral obstruction
ii. Diagnostics
1. Loss of retroperitoneal detail on abdominal radiograph combined with ultrasound findings of
free retroperitoneal fluid warrants a suspicion of ureteral rupture, although retroperitoneal
hemorrhage can have similar findings.
few days after the surgery when the patient becomes clinical.
 3. If ureteral injury is suspected during surgery and cannot be confirmed by visual examination,
retrograde ureteral catheterization (by cystotomy) can be attempted.
4. Intravenous urography during surgery can also be performed as a single film exposure 10
iii. Treatment
294
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Several surgical procedures may be considered, including nephroureterectomy, ureteral
anastomosis, ureteral reimplantation, and placement of a ureteral stent with or without
nephrostomy drainage.
2. Time of diagnosis, severity, and location of the injury are variables that will guide the surgical
treatment.
 3. Nephroureterectomy is most often performed in patients with traumatic injury in an effort to
eliminate many of the potential complications associated with primary repair procedures.
g. Uroperitoneum
i.Definition:
1. Accumulation of urine in the peritoneal cavity following leakage from the kidneys, ureter,
bladder, or urethra.
ii. Clinical presentation
1. Uroperitoneum commonly results from trauma—either blunt trauma to the abdomen or pelvis,
which has created urinary tract injuries, or traumatic catheterization of cats with urethral
obstruction and bladder expression.
 2. Less common etiologies include urethral and ureteral tear from obstruction with calculi and
bladder rupture from a neoplastic process (lymphoma, transitional cell carcinoma).
ili. Clinical signs
1. Anuria and dysuria are the most common historical complaints.
2. Depressed mentation, dehydration, hypothermia, bradycardia, palpa ble abdominal fluid wave,
and hematuria
 3. Free abdominal fluid may also be identified with a focused abdominal sonogram test.
a. Abdominocentesis should be performed to obtain a sample of effusion.
iv. Diagnostics
1. Definitive diagnosis is supported by finding free urine within the abdominal cavity and with
a radiographic contrast study to demonstrate loss of urinary tract integrity, or exploratory
surgery to allow direct visualization of the site of urine leakage.
2. The gross appearance of peritoneal effusion might be misleading in the diagnosis of UP,
because it does not always resemble urine.
3. Free fluid in the abdomen may be identified as urine by
a. Comparison of the abdominal fluid creatinine and potassium concentration to their con
centration in a peripheral blood sample collected at the same time
i. Large creatinine molecules do not diffuse readily across the peritoneal membrane into
the blood, leading to a gradient between creatinine concentration in serum and a bdomi-
nal fluid.
ii. A 2: 1 ratio of creatinine concentration in the abdominal fluid compared to that in the
serum is predictive for uroa bdomen.
ii. A potassium concentration in the abdominal fluid higher than in the serum with a ratio
of >1.9 : 1 is predictive for uroabdomen.
b. Conversely, the small urea molecules diffuse rapidly across the peritoneal membrane into
the blood without allowing a gradient to be established.
i. A higher BUN in the abdominal fluid than in the serum suggests that the free abdominal
fluid is urine, but abdominal fluid with a BUN that is less than or equal to that of
4. Survey radiographs may be suggestive of urinary tract injury but are rarely diagnostic.
a. They often show a decrease in abdominal detail due peritoneal effusion.
5. Positive contrast radiographic studies include excretory urography, cystography, and retro-
grade urethrography.
a. These methods are very accurate for the diagnosis of urinary tract injuries.
b. Accuracy depends largely on the amount of contrast medium injected, and false negative
results may be from inadequate distension of the bladder with contrast medium.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
295
c. Excretory urography should not be performed on dehydrated animals because prolonged
excretion of dye may cause renal damage.
v.Treatment
1. Initial stabilization with intravenous fluids should be administered to any traumatized and
critically ill patient.
a. Ventilation support and perfusion support
b. Electrolyte imbalance and acid-base abnormalities should be treated.
2. Since uremic patients are at high risk for developing complications during anesthesia, surgical
correction of urinary tract leakage should be delayed until metabolic, fluid, and electrolyte
disturbances have been corrected.
3. Severely uremic patients will benefit from peritoneal dialysis, hemoperfusion, or hemodialysis
 prior to anesthesia and surgery.
4. The decision between surgical or conservative management is based on the site and the extent
of the lesion as well as associated injuries.
 a. Once the patient is sta ble, surgery should be performed to repair the defect.
 5. A small tear in the bladder and urethra may not require surgery.
a. A urinary catheter and closed-drainage system can be left in place for 3-10 days.
6. Conservative therapy
a. Fluid therapy and drainage of urine from the peritoneal cavity are very important to sta-
bilize the patient.
b. Effective urine drainage from the peritoneal cavity can be accomplished with an intra-
abdominal catheter or with a peritoneal dialysis catheter.
C. Urethral catheter drainage may be successful in patient with partial urethral tear and small
bladder rupture.
d. The urinary catheter should be kept in place for 2-4 weeks, after which a urethrogram
should be performed before catheter removal.
7. Exploratory surgery should be performed once the patient is stable.
a. Urine is irritating to the tissues and causes a chemical peritonitis.
b. The degree of peritonitis may differ depending on duration, amount of urine leakage, and
bacterial contamination.
c. A septic peritonitis may also develop if urinary tract infection was present before urinary
tract rupture.
d. Bacteriologic culture of the peritoneal effusion should be performed and broad-spectrum
antibiotic therapy should be initiated. Ampicillin, 20 mg/kg IV q8-12h; amoxicillin-cla vu-
lanic acid, 62.5 mg/cat PO q12h; cefazolin 20 mg/kg IV q8-12h; and enrofloxacin, 5 mg/
kg IV/SQ/IM/PO q24h.
e. Bladder rupture at the apex most often results from blunt abdominal trauma.
f. Defects in the dorsal and ventral aspects of the bladder trigone are more often associated
with urethral obstruction and traumatic catheterization.
g. For detailed instruction on bladder repair, a surgical textbook should be consulted.
vi. Prognosis
1. Associated injuries caused by trauma are more often responsible for morbidity and
mortality.
 2. A delay in diagnostics and treatment may greatly raise the mortality rate.
h. Acute-on-chronic renal failure
i.Pathophysiology
1. Chronic renal failure (CRF) is common in cats >7 years old.
2. Possible causes of CRF are:
a. Sustained systemic hypertension, chronic infection or inflammation, urolithiasis, urine
outflow obstruction, polycystic kidney disease or other congenital renal disorder, FIP, and
chronic interstitial nephritis (idiopathic).
296
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. By the time of diagnosis, the cause(s) of CRF are usually not identifiable or treatable.
3. Cats with loss of two-thirds or more of functional nephrons lose the ability to concentrate
urine effectively and are said to have renal insufficiency.
viable nephrons, clinical signs and laboratory data compatible with CRF are not present
in most cases until greater than three-fourths or more of functional nephrons have been
lost.
 5. Serum phosphorus concentration becomes increased with greater than 85% loss of excretory
renal function.
 6. Once a cat is diagnosed with CRF, regenerative and compensatory nephron changes have had
time to occur, yet the presence of azotemia indicates the inadequacy of these compensatory
processes.
7. Cats with CRF are polyuric and have a compensatory polydipsia as a result of a decrease in
urine-concentrating ability.
8. As long as water intake is adequate and therefore renal blood flow and the glomerular filtra
tion rate (GFR) are maintained, renal failure and severe azotemia can be avoided.
 9. Conditions that may produce hypotension, such as dehydration and anesthesia, promote renal
hypoperfusion.
a. These conditions may exacerbate the clinical and laboratory abnormalities of chronic renal
insufficiency and failure, perhaps precipitating a uremic crisis: “acute on chronic renal
failure."
b. Further, if dehydration and decreased renal blood flow are severe, additional ischemic renal
damage may occur.
c. Hyperthyroidism can increase the GFR and thereby decrease the serum BUN and creatinine
concentration masking underlying renal disease. Treatment of hyperthyroidism may there.
fore have a negative effect on renal function.
ii. Clinical signs and findings
1. Clinical signs may include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, dehydration, oral ulcer-
ations, and weakness.
2. CRF is usually characterized by polyuria, but affected cats may transiently be oliguric when
dehydrated, and permanent oliguria develops during terminal decompensation.
 3. Gastrointestinal ulcers and signs of gastroenteritis may occur because uremic toxins stimulate
the chemoreceptor trigger zone, increase the production of gastrin, and can produce a uremic
vasculitis.
4. Systemic hypertension is seen in 60-75% of cats with CRF.
a. Glomerular capillary injury, decreased vasodilatory substances, and enhanced renin
angiotensin-aldosterone activation may all lead to hypertension during renal failure.
b. Indirect blood pressure measurement should be obtained.
c. Hypertension in cats is defined as a systolic blood pressure >160-170 mmHg.
d. Fundoscopic evaluation should be performed, since retinal lesions (e.g., edema, hemor-
rhage, or detachment) are common in cats with hypertension.
5. Cats with CRF should also be evaluated for hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, and cardiac
a bnormalities.
ii. Diagnostics
 1. Initial database should include CBC, biochemistry and acid-base measures, T4, and urinalysis
with urine culture.
a. Blood work findings may include azotemia, metabolic acidosis, hyperphosphatemia, hypo-
kalemia, hypermagnesemia, and nonregenerative anemia.
2. Severe hypokalemia can cause significant muscular weakness, often recognized with neck
ventroflexion.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
297
3. Hyperphosphatemia is due to decreased GFR and retained phosphorus, but also decreased
activation of vitamin D and decreased calcium absorption.
a. This may lead to secondary hyperparathyroidism, and therefore a progressive increase in
parathyroid hormone occurs to maintain serum calcium concentration.
b. High levels of parathyroid hormone may cause multiple disorders (e.g., renal osteodys-
trophy, soft tissue calcification), and it is a significant uremic toxin.
4. Nonregenerative anemia is due to decreased erythropoietin production, gastrointestinal loss
due to hemorrhage, and shortened RBC life span.
a. Platelet function might also be abnormal.
5. Urine analysis can show isostenuria, proteinuria, tubular casts, hematuria, and pyuria.
6. Microalbuminuria detection is marketed for detection of early renal disease:
a. Detects urine albumin in 2-30 mg/dL range.
b. Unknown whether it will be specific or predictive as early marker of CRE.
7. Urinary tract infection should be ruled out with a urine culture.
8. Abdominal radiographs can confirm the presence of small kidneys.
9. Renal ultrasonography usually reveals diffusely hyperechoic renal cortices with loss of the
normal corticomedullary junction.
a. The increase in renal echogenicity is caused by fibrous scar tissue replacing the irreversibly
damaged nephrons.
10. Radiology and ultrasonography can also help by ruling out potentially treatable causes of
CRF like pyelonephritis and renal urolithiasis.
11. Renal biopsy is not routinely performed unless the diagnosis is in question
iv. Treatment
1. Adequate extracellular fluid volume must be maintained to maximize renal perfusion and
assist in excretory function.
2. Parenteral fluid therapy is the most important step in the initial treatment of the uremic cat,
and its goals include extracellular fluid volume expansion, correction of electrolyte and acid-
base disturbances, and reduction of the magnitude of azotemia.
 3. The volume of fluid needed is determined by considering the extent of dehydration and the
maintenance and continuing fluid loss of the patient:
a. Volume replacement (mL) = (body weight [kg]) × (estimated deficit [%]) × 1,000
b. Fluid deficit should be replaced with a balanced electrolyte solution over 8 hours.
c. If the cat does not seem dehydrated, 5% of its body weight should be infused over 4
hours to correct subclinical dehydration and promote diuresis.
4. Matching the ins and outs once rehydrated: urine output should be monitored as accurately
 as possible (weigh diapers, towels, litter, etc.) as well as the fluid administered.
5. Central venous pressures (2-3 mmHg), assessment of body weight, serial measurement of
PCV/TS, and frequent pulmonary auscultation can also help gauge the adequacy of fluid
therapy and limit possibility of overhydration.
6. Arterial blood pressure should be monitored frequently, and a mean arterial pressure of
80-100 mmHg should be maintained.
 7. Once the cat is rehydrated and minimal MAP is maintained, minimal acceptable urine output
should be 2 mL/kg/hr
8. Electrolytes and acid base should be monitored closely, particularly in oliguric, anuric, or
severely polyuric patients (see specific treatment for each biochemical abnormality.)
9. Hypokalemia is common, and potassium depletion results from increased urine production
along with decreased intake.
a. Oral supplementation of potassium is preferred over intravenous supplementation, and
if at all possible it should be combined with intra venous supplementation during the acute
treatment.
298
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Potassium should not be infused intravenously at a rate greater than O.5 mEq/kg body
weight per hour.
c. Infusion of potassium-containing crystalloid fluids initially may be associated with a
decrease in serum potassium concentration as a result of dilution, increased tubular fluid
flow in the distal renal tubules, and cellular uptake of potassium.
i.This effect may be minimized by selecting a fluid that does not contain glucose
administering fluids at an appropriate rate, and beginning oral potassium gluconate
(4-8 mEq q24h) as soon as possible.
d. Clinical improvement usually is observed within 1-3 days.
e. Chronic treatment involves oral administration of potassium gluconate {2-4 mEq
q24h).
f. Oliguric or anuric cats might be hyperkalemic secondary to decreased excretion and
metabolic acidosis.
10. Vomiting can be controlled with the following medications:
a. Famotidine: 0.25 mg/kg q24h
b. Ranitidine: 2-4mg/kg IV q12h
c. Omeprazole: 0.5-1 mg/kg PO q24h
d. Odansetron: 0.1 mg/kg PO q12h
e. Metoclopramide: 1-2 mg/kg/24h added to fluids as a constant rate infusion
11. Hypertension should be treated if systolic pressure exceeds 200 mmHg. The goal of
long-term management of hypertension is to maintain a systolic blood pressure below
140-160 mmHg.
a. Amlodipine besylate, a calcium channel blocker, is an effective antihypertensive agent in
cats: 0.625-1.25 mg/cat PO q24h.
12. Proteinuria predicts a worse outcome in cats with CRF. ACE inhibitors decrease proteinuria
and increase survival time in cats with proteinuria. A urine protein-to-creatinine >0.4 in cats
should prompt intervention: benazepril 0.5-1 mg/kg PO q12-24h, enalapril 0.5 mg/kg PO
q12h. Using benazepril is preferable due to decreased renal elimination as compared to
enala pril.
13. Iatrogenic blood loss should be minimized.
a. If severe anemia develops (hematocrit values decline <20% and presence of clinical
signs attributable to the anemia), a transfusion of packed RBCs or whole blood is
indicated.
b. The transfusion can be followed by recombinant erythropoietin therapy. There are two
different peptides available: epoeitin alfa (Epogen, Procrit) injections: 50-150 U/kg SQ
three times weekly, or darbepoetin (Aranesp) 6.25 μg/cat SC weekly, tapering to q2-3
weeks as needed to keep PCV around 30%.
i. Adequate iron stores are necessary for, and optimal response to, erythropoietin
therapy, and iron supplementation is usually required during the initial treatment
period. Iron sources: iron dextran S0 mg/cat deep IM injection monthly; ferrous sulfate
50-100 mg/cat PO q24h.
ii. Hematocrit should be monitored weekly or biweekly until a target hematocrit of
approximately 30%.
ili. Correction of hematocrit to low normal takes approximately 2-8 weeks, depending
on the starting hematocrit and dose given.
iv. Adverse effects related to recombinant erythropoietin therapy may include systemic
hypertension, seizures, local reactions at the site of injection, and development of
antibodies directed at erythropoietin. Darbepoetin may be less antigenic than the other
recombinant EPO therapies.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
299
14. The kidneys are responsible for elimination of many drugs from the body; thus, renal drug
clearance is reduced as renal function declines.
a. Excessive drug accumulation can cause adverse drug reactions and nephrotoxicity; there-
fore, dose regimens should be adjusted for drugs requiring renal excretion to compensate
for decreased organ function.
15. For maintenance therapy, a stepwise therapeutic approach that addresses the progresive
complications of renal failure is suggested:
a. Oral potassium supplementation (see above dosage)
b. Daily maintenance fluid needs in animal with CRF are higher than those of normal animal
because of polyuria.
C. Dietary management: protein restriction to prevent buildup of nitrogenous wastes and
limit diet phosphate content
d. Phosphorus restriction in conjunction with phosphorus binder (aluminum hydroxide or
aluminum carbonate, 30-90 mg/kg q24h divided and administered with meals) to limit
phosphorus retention, hyperphosphatemia, renal secondary hyperparathyroidism, and
 progression of renal disease
e. Multivitamin supplement is recommended to replace loss of water-soluble vitamins B and
C from polyuria.
v.Prognosis
1. Continued improvement in renal function is a favorable prognostic sign.
2. CRF is an irreversible and progressive disease.
a. It is difficult to estimate the extent to which function will return.
b. Monitoring response to therapy is the only way to monitor the degree of returning
function.
3. With successful renal transplantation, survival times of several years are now expected.
4. When renal function declines to the point where azotemia/uremia can only be adequately
controlled with intravenous fluids and diuresis, the patient's quality of life is usually poor and
euthanasia may be an appropriate decision.
i. Acute pyelonephritis
i.Pathophysiology
1. Pyelonephritis is a bacterial infection of the upper urinary tract.
2. Most infections ascend from the lower urinary tract, but hematogenous spread can occur
( periodontal disease, bacterial endocarditis, etc).
3. Acute pyelonephritis can develop from ureteral reflux of bacteria in the urine of animals with
lower urinary tract infection.
4. Other risk factors include urolithiasis, immunosuppression, diabetes mellitus, neoplasia,
hyperadrenocorticism, indwelling urinary catheter, and congenital or acquired anomalies of
the urinary tract.
 5. Pyelonephritis can result in acute or chronic renal failure.
ii. Clinical signs
1. Clinical signs may include fever, anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, dehydration, pain on palpation
 Of the kidneys, and lumbar pain.
ili. Diagnostics
1. Laboratory work evaluation
a. Depending on the extent of renal parenchymal involvement, azotemia, hyperphosphatemia,
nonregenerative anemia, and meta bolic acidosis may be found.
b. Common findings on a urine analysis are bacteriuria, pyuria, hematuria, casts (cellular or
granular), and low USG.
C. Urine should be submitted for culture and antimicrobial sensitivity testing.
300
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. The most common cause of bacterial pyelonephritis is E. coli infection.
ii. Unfortunately, urinalysis findings may be nonspecific, and urine cultures may be nega-
tive in cats with chronic pyelonephritis.
 2. Renal ultrasonography may reveal dilated renal pelvis and proximal ureter, hyperechoic renal
pelvis, and changes in the echogenicity of the renal parenchyma.
a. Renal size may be increased or decreased.
 3. Excretory urography may show dilatation of the renal pelvis, proximal ureter and renal diver-
ticula, decreased uptake of contrast material, or prolonged retention of dye.
a. A normal study does not rule out pyelonephritis
iv. Treatment
1. Fluid therapy should be administered to restore and maintain hydration.
 2. Antibiotics should be chosen on the basis of culture and sensitivity testing.
a. Empirically used antibiotics should have a good gram-negative spectrum, good renal pen-
etration {ampicillin, 20 mg/kg IV q8-12h; amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 62.5 mg/cat PO
q12h; cefazolin 20mg/kg IV q8-12h; and enrofloxacin, 5 mg/kg IV/SQ/IM/PO q24h) and
should not be nephrotoxic (e.g., aminoglycosides).
b. Antibiotic therapy should be continued for 48 weeks.
 3. Any predisposing factors (e.g, calculi, obstruction) should be removed.
4. Urine should be cultured 5-7 days after completing antibiotic therapy.
5. If infection is still present, antibiotherapy should be continued as indicated by culture and
sensitivity for another 6-8 weeks and recultured.
a. Urine should be cultured every 6-8 weeks until three negative cultures are obtained.
b. A positive urine culture would require another 6-8-week course of therapy.
6. If casts are seen in the urine and either acute renal failure or acute-on-chronic renal failure is
suspected, the cat should be treated accordingly for this specific condition.
j. Glomerulonephritis (GN)
i.Pathophysiology
1. Systemic diseases reported in association with glomerular disorder in cats include bacterial
infection (chronic bacterial infections, mycoplasmal polyarthritis), viral infection (feline
immunodeficiency virus, feline infectious peritonitis, feline leukemia virus), inflammatory
causes (pancreatitis, cholangiohepatitis, chronic progressive polyarthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus, other immune-mediated diseases), neoplasia (leukemia, lymphosarcoma, mas-
tocytosis, other neoplasms), acromegaly, mercury toxicity, familial predisposition, and idio
pathic causes.
a. However, in most reports of GN in cats, no predisposing factors can be found and the
disease is classified as idiopathic.
ii. Clinical presentation
1. Young adult male cats typically are affected and there is no breed predisposition.
 2. The clinical presentation may fall into two categories:
a. Classical nephrotic syndrome characterized by subcutaneous edema, ascites, proteinuria,
hypercholesterolemia, and hypoalbuminemia without marked azotemia
b. CRF with azotemia
3. Signs of thromboembolic disease may be present, such as dyspnea or a decreased or absent
peripheral pulse.
4. Predisposing inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic process may be found during physical
examination.
 5. Blood pressure should be taken, as hypertension is frequent.
6. Kidney size may be different.
7. Cats with CRF often have small, firm, irregularly shaped kidneys, whereas those with milder
disease often have normal-sized or, occasionally, enlarged kidneys.
Chapter 23 Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder, Urethra, GN, and CRF
301
ili. Diagnostics
1. Laboratory abnormalities may include proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia,
and nonregenerative anemia.
a. Azotemia and hyperphosphatemia are not always present.
2. A urine protein-to-creatinine ratio {UPC) greater than 0.5 in a urine sample free of evidence
of inflammation and macroscopic hematuria is abnormal and suggestive of significant
proteinuria.
 3. Hypercoagulability (from loss of antithrombin), thrombocytosis, and hyperfibrinogenemia can
be ruled out by thromboelastography.
4. On abdominal radiographs, kidneys may appear normal, small and irregular, or enlarged.
 5. Similar changes in shape and size can be seen with sonography.
a. Increased echogenicity of the cortex and loss of corticomedullary distinction may also be
noted.
b. The renal pelvis may be mildly dilated if polyuria is present or if fluids are being
a dministered.
6. Renal biopsy can provide a definitive diagnosis of glomerular disease.
a. Membranous nephropathy with IgG and complement deposition are seen histologically.
iv. Treatment
1. The main treatment goals are:
a. Treatment and elimination of potential underlying diseases
b. Reduction of proteinuria
c. Management of uremia and other complications of renal failure
2. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors can significantly reduce proteinuria
and delay either the onset or the progression of azotemia. Enalapril 0.5 mg/kg q12-24h or
benazepril 0.5-1 mg/kg PO q12-24h. (See comment regarding benazapril versus enalapril
above.)
3. If hypertension is still present despite the ACE inhibitor, additional treatment may be needed:
Amlodipine besylate, a calcium channel blocker, 0.625-1.25 mg/cat PO q24h.
4. Aspirin is a nonspecific cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor that may be used to reduce glomerular
inflammation caused by thromboxane and inhibit platelet aggregation, which may have an
added benefit of preventing thromboembolism. Aspirin 25 mg/kg (or 14 of a 325-mg tablet)
PO q48-72h.
5. A diuretic can be given to reduce edema and ascites: Furosemide 2-4mg/kg q8-24h,
Spironolactone 1-2mg/kg q12-24h.
6. GN associated with immune-mediated disease should be treated with immunosuppressive
therapy ( prednisolone 2-4 mg/kg q24h).
7. Antiemetics may be use as needed. H2 blockers are used to manage gastritis: famotidine,
ranitidine, cimetidine.
8. Feed a high-quality diet that is restricted in protein and sodium.
9. Fluid therapy regimen
a. Acute azotemia should be treated with fluid therapy.
b. Hydration should be corrected with electrolyte-balanced crystalloid solutions.
C. If edema is present, colloids (hetastarch, dextran 70, plasma, human albumin concentrate)
should be administered at a dose of 1-2mL/kg/day.
d. Maintenance requirements should be sustained with low-sodium crystalloid solutions
(0.45% NaCl with 2.5% dextrose).
10. Cats with azotemia and end-stage renal disease should be treated for CRE.
11. The UPC, urinalysis, body weight, body condition score, and serum albumin and creatinine
concentrations should be evaluated monthly or whenever modifications in the therapeutic
plan are being made.
302
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
v. Prognosis
1. Prognosis is variable.
2. The disease is slowly progressive although remissions are possible.
3. Azotemia, severe proteinuria, systemic hypertension, and marked tubulointerstitial lesions at
presentation are the most significant predictors of an unfavorable outcome in most forms of
glomerular disease.
4. Cats with end-stage renal disease have the shortest survival times (a few weeks to a few
months).
 5. Non-azotemic cats presented with the nephrotic syndrome do better and survive several
months to several years.
Recommended Reading
Adin CA, Herrgesell EJ, Nyland TG, et al. Antegrade pyelography for suspected ureteral obstruction in
cats: 11 cases (1995-2001). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2003; 222:1576-1581.
Aumann M, Worth LT, Drobatz KJ. Uroperitoneum in cats: 26 cases (1986-1995). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc,
1998; 34:315-324.
Bellah JR. Wound healing in the urinary tract. Semin Vet Med Surg, 1989; 4:294303.
Buffington CA, Chew DJ, Kendall MS, et al. Clinical evaluation of cats with nonobstructive urinary tract
diseases. J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1997; 210f1):46-50.
Cowgill L, James KM, Levy JK, et al. Use of recombinant humans erythropoietin for management of anemia
in dogs and cats with renal failure. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1998; 212(4):521-528.
DiBartola SP, De Morais HA. Disorders of potassium: hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In DiBartola SP,
ed, Fluid Therapy in Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed, pp 91-121. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2006.
Kirk CA, Ling GV, Franti CE, et al. Evaluation of factors associated with development of calcium oxalate
urolithiasis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1995; 207(11):1429-1434.
Kyles AE, Hardie AM, Wooden BG, et al. Clinical, clinicopathologic, radiographic and ultrasonographic
abnormalities in cats with ureteral calculi: 163 cases (1984-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2005;
226:932-936.
Kyles AE, Hardie AM, Wooden BG, et al. Management and outcome of cats with ureteral calculi: 153
cases {1984-2002). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 2005; 226:937-944.
Kyles AE, Stone EA, Goodkin J, et al. Diagnosis and surgical management of obstructive ureteral calculi
in cats: 11 cases (1993-1996). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1998; 213:1150-1156.
Lamb CR. Ultrasonography of the ureters. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 1998; 28(4):823-848.
Lee JA, Drobatz KJ. The characterization of the clinical characteristics, electrolytes, acid-base and renal
with urethral obstruction. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2006; 16(2):104-111.
Nwadike BS, Wilson LP, Stone EA. Use of bilateral temporary nephrostomy catheters for emergency treat-
ment of bilateral ureter transaction in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2000; 217:1862-1865.
and clinical application in the dog and cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 1997; 33{1):61-68.
Weisse C, Aronson LR, Drobatz KJ. Traumatic rupture of the ureter: 10 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc.
2002; 38:188-192.
24
ACUTE INTRINSIC RENAL FAILURE
Cathy Langston
A. Definitions of acute azotemia
a. Prerenal azotemia is caused by decreased renal perfusion.
i.
Causes include dehydration, hypovolemia, decreased cardiac output, hypotension, and
anesthesia.
i. Prerenal azotemia is rapidly reversed with correction of the underlying condition.
ili. Long-standing prerenal azotemia can lead to intrinsic renal failure.
b. Postrenal azotemia is caused by urinary obstruction or leakage.
i.
 Urinary obstruction, which by a combination of neurohumoral events and increased back-pres
sure in the kidney that opposes filtration, decreases renal clearance.
1. Azotemia is rapidly reversed by relieving obstruction.
a. Urethral obstruction
b. Bilateral ureteral obstruction, or unilateral obstruction with solitary functional kidney
2. Long-standing obstruction may lead to intrinsic renal failure.
i. Urine leakage, which allows fltered substances (i.e., BUN, creatinine, etc.) to be reabsorbed
1. Azotemia is rapidly reversed by providing drainage of urine, either by drain placement (i.e.,
peritoneal catheter for uroabdomen) or urinary diversion {i.e., urethral catheter to stent rup-
tured urethra ).
 2. Urine causes inflammatory reaction in tissues
a. This can lead to sterile peritonitis.
b. Urine leakage into the abdomen in a patient with a urinary tract infection can lead to a
septic peritonitis. This is a surgical emergency.
c. Intrinsic renal failure is caused by the following factors:
i.Ischemia
1. Occurs secondary to poor blood flow to the kidneys
2. Potential causes include progression of prerenal azotemia, hypotension, hypovolemia, circula -
nated intravascular coagulation, stenosis)
ii. Primary renal diseases: pyelonephritis, lymphoma, or other infectious, immune, neoplastic, or
 degenerative conditions that primarily affect the kidneys
ili. Nephrotoxins {table 24.1)
1. Common causes include lily plants, ethylene glycol, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
{NSAIDs].
2. Increased use of NSAID for perioperative pain management may increase incidence of acuté
renal failure {ARF).
303
304
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 24.1。 Substances with nephrotoxic potential.
Classes of Agents
Examples
 Antimicrobials
Aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, penicillins, sulfonamides,
quinolones, tetracyclines, vancomycin, carbapenems,
aztreonam, rifampin, nafcillin
Antiprotozoals
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, sulfadiazine, thiacetarsamide,
pentamidine, dapsone
Antifungals
Amphotericin B
Antivirals
Acyclovir, foscarnet
Chemotherapeutics
Cis- or carboplatin, doxorubicin, azathioprine, methotrexate
Immunosuppressives
Cyclosporine, interleukin (IL) 2
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories
All
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
All
Diuretics
AlIl
Radiocontrast agents
Misc. therapeutics
Allopurinol, cimetidine, apomorphine, dexiran 40, penicillamine,
streptokinase, methoxyflurane, tricyclic antidepressants, lipid
lowering agents, calcium antagonists 
Heavy metals
Mercury, uranium, lead, bismuth salts, chromium, arsenic, gold,
cadmium, thallium, copper, silver, nickel, antmony.
Organic compounds
Ethylene glycol, chloroform, pesticides, herbicides, solvents,
 carbon tetrachloride
Miscellaneous toxins
Gallium nitrate, disphosphonates, mushrooms, grapes, raisins,
 snake venom, bee venom, lilies, vitamin Ds-containing
rodenticides
Endogenous toxins
Hemoglobin, myoglobin
 iv. Systemic diseases: feline infectious peritonitis, pancreatitis, sepsis, systemic inflammatory response
syndrome, multiple organ failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation, hemolytic anemia,
hyperthermia, heart failure, hyperviscosity
d. There are four phases of acute kidney injury.
i.
Initiation
1. When damage occurs, early intervention may prevent progression.
2. Clinical signs are often not apparent during this phase, which makes intervention difficult.
ii. Extension: renal hemodynamic alterations, sublethal injury to cell death, intervention may not
be successful.
 ii. Maintenance phase: critical amount of irreversible damage has occurred.
iv. Recovery: regeneration and repair of the renal tissue, lasts weeks to months.
B. Risk factors for development of intrinsic ARF
b. Combining multiple factors increases the risk of ARE
i.
 Some factors are avoidable. In patients with nonavoidable risk factors, careful attention to mini-
mizing concurrent risk is prudent (see box 24.1).
ii. Volume depletion is the most significant predisposing factor.
ii. Risk of aminoglycoside toxicity is increased by prolonged use (>5 days), elevated trough level
>2 μg/mL for gentamicin and tobramycin, >5 μg/mL for amikacin), preexisting renal disease,
Chapter 24 Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
305
Box 24.1. Risk factors of acute renal failure.
 Preexisting renal disease
Dehydration and volume depletion
Trauma
Advanced age
Decreased cardiac output
Dia betes mellitus
Fever
Hypotension
Hypoalbuminemia
Sepsis
 Electrolyte imbalances
Hyperviscosity syndromes
Liver disease
 Concurrent use of potentially nephrotoxic drugs
 Dietary protein level
Acidosis
dehydration, hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, metabolic acidosis, old age, concur-
rent nephrotoxic drug administration, diuretics, and antiprostaglandin therapy.
C. Diagnosis
a. Clinical presentation
i.
Historical findings include recent (generally <l week) onset of anorexia or polydipsia, lethargy,
nausea or vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria or oliguria/anuria, and weakness.
i. Cats with exposure to nephrotoxin may present with no other significant historical findings.
1. Lily ingestion frequently associated with vomiting of leaves or other plant parts.
2. Acute central nervous system signs may be present early in course of ethylene glycol
toxicity.
ii. Physical examination may reveal some of the following:
1. Variable degrees of hydration
2. Generally good body condition
 3. Uremic halitosis or oral ulceration with severe uremia
4. Renal pain (specific or nonspecific abdominal pain), renal enlargement
5. Tachycardia or bradycardia
b. Initial clinical investigation
i.
 Hematology and biochemistry findings
1. Azotemia {elevated BUN, creatinine)
2. Hyperphosphatemia
3. Metabolic acidosis
4. Hypocalcemia
5. Hypo- or hyperkalemia
6. Anemia, if concurrent blood loss (i.e., gastrointestinal bleeding) is present
ii. Urinalysis findings
1. Isosthenuria or minimally concentrated urine specific gravity (<1.035)
 2. Dipstick findings of proteinuria and glucosuria
3. Sediment examination
306
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Presence of casts indicates ongoing renal damage. Casts are fragile and may disintegrate if
long delay before analysis.
b. RBCs, WBCs, or bacteria may be present.
C. Calcium oxalate crystals may indicate ethylene glycol toxicity.
4. Positive urine culture if pyelonephritis
iii. Imaging
1. Radiographs may reveal normal or enlarged kidneys, or nephroliths/ureteroliths.
 2. Abdominal ultrasound may show normal or enlarged kidneys.
a. Hydronephrosis may indicate obstruction or pyelonephritis. Mild renal pelvic dilation may
occur as result of aggressive diuresis.
b. Dilated ureter may be traced to obstructing stone (frequently difficult to visualize). Mild
ureteral dilation extending only minimally past renal pelvis supports inflammation associ-
ated with pyelonephritis.
c. Specific diagnostic tests
i.
 Rapid ethylene glycol testing may be performed with a commercially available in-house test kit
{EGT Test Kit, PRN Pharmacal, Pensacola, FL).
1. False positive results with propylene glycol (found in etomidate, diazepam, activated charcoal,
etc.)
 2. False negative possible with cats due to lower limit of detection of test kit (50 mg/dL)
ii. Blood concentrations of certain drugs, such as..., are availa ble to determine if toxic concentration
is present and to monitor response to therapy
iii. Renal biopsy may provide specific etiology (e.g., calcium oxalate crystals in renal parenchyma
supporting ethylene glycol toxicosis) or show nonspecific changes (e.g., tubular necrosis) consis-
tent with a variety of ischemic or toxic causes.
1. Risk of bleeding from uremia-induced thrombocytopathy or other complications with percu-
taneous needle biopsy may limit utilization of renal biopsy.
2. Renal biopsy may provide prognostic indicators.
d. Differentiating acute from chronic disease
i. Prognosis differs with acute vs. chronic renal failure.
i.Historical findings of long-standing signs (polyuria, polydipsia, partial or complete anorexia, etc.)
suggests chronicity.
ili. Small kidneys, poor body condition suggests chronicity.
iv. Nonregenerative anemia more common with chronic renal failure.
v. Enlarged parathyroid glands on cervical ultrasound suggests chronicity.
D. Therapy of acute renal failure
a. Medical management
i.Fluid balance
1. Careful management of fluid balance is the most effective therapy of ARE
 2. Regulation of the volume and type of fluid administered is necessary.
a. Volume of intravenous fluid
i.Rehydration
1. Body weight {in kg) X estimated % dehydration = fluid deficit in L
2. Administered over 2-4 hours to rapidly reverse any ongoing renal damage from
poor perfusion, and to rapidly assess urine output
 3. Administered over longer time frame if cardiovascular compromise prohibits rapid
fluid administration
ii. Maintenance fluid therapy
1. 66 mL/kg/day presumes normal urine output and no excessive losses {i.e., vomiting,
diarrhea).
2. Urine output in a cat with ARF may be high, low, or normal.
Chapter 24Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
307
3. Cats with ARF may be unable to excrete this fluid volume and have "relative
oliguria."
4. Cats with ARF may have polyuria and require rates of administration exceeding
maintenance volumes to avoid dehydration.
ifi. Fluid therapy to promote diuresis
1. In cats with the ability to increase urine output in response to a fluid challenge,
administration of a volume of fluid exceeding “maintenance” can improve excretion
of some uremic toxins.
 2. Volume is varied based on clinical situation and clinician preferences, but generally
ranges from 2.5-6% of body weight per day, in addition to maintenance fluid
administration rate.
3. 60 mL/kg/day = 6% of body weight (i.e., twice the maintenance fluid rate is equiva-
lent to a maintenance rate plus a 6% “push" for diuresis)
iv. “Ins-and-outs” method
1. It is used when urine output varies from normal, usually below normal, but it is
useful for polyuric cats also.
h sued e j audodde iou) anaduo si uoepauau rahe pasn aq Auo pnous 7
still dehydrated or hypovolemic)
 3. There are three components of volume calculation.
a. Insensible loss (fluid lost via respiration and normal stool) = 22 mL/kg/day
b. Urine volume replacement calculated by actual measurement (see below for
measuring techniques)
C. Ongoing losses (ie., vomiting, diarrhea, body cavity drainage) generally
estimated
4. If no fluid pump available, calculate daily insensible fluid needs and divide by
administration interval {i.e., if adjusting fluid rate 4 times a day, divide daily fluid
need by 4). Add to this volume the amount of urine produced in previous 6 hours,
and add a volume estimate of other losses.
5. If a fluid pump is available, calculate daily insensible fluid needs and divide by 24
to get hourly rate. Add to this the hourly volume of urine output over the previous
monitoring interval, plus an estimate of ongoing losses.
6. Sample calculations without fluid pump: 4.5-kg cat × 22 mL/kg/day = 100 mL/day,
:4 = 25 mL per 6 hours; 30 mL urine output over previous 6 hours; vomiting about
3 times a day {-8 mL each time) = 6mL over 6 hours: 25 + 30 + 6mL = 61 mL to
administer over next 6 hours
7. Sample calculations with fluid pump: 4.5kg × 22mL/kg/day = 100 mL/day,
+24 = 4mL/hr; 30 mL urine output over previous 6 hours ÷ 6 = 5mL/hr; vomiting
about 3 times a day {~8 mL each time) = 1 mL/hr: 4 + 5 + 1 = 10 mL/hr
b. Type of IV fluid to administer
i. Balanced polyionic {i.e., lactated Ringer's solution [LRS], Plasmalyte, Normosol)
appropriate in most situations
ii. 0.9% NaCl contains no potassium; suitable choice for hyperkalemic patient
ii. Lower sodium fluid more appropriate after rehydration (i.e., 0.45% NaCl with 2.5%
dextrose, V2-strength LRS with 2.5% dextrose).
iv. 5% dextrose in water (DsW) rarely appropriate as sole fluid choice, but may be com-
bined with LRS or 0.9% saline to make 12- 0r %4-strength sodium solutions (25 mL
LRS + 25 mL D5W = 50mL 12-strength LRS + 2.5% dextrose)
v.  Colloidal solution (i.e., Hetastarch, 6% Dextran) may be appropriate if hypoalbumin-
emia present. Generally administered at 20mL/kg/day (which may replace insensible
loss if using ins-and-outs method).
308
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
c. Other fluids included in fluid balance calculations: medications, transfusions, and
nutrition.
3. Urine output and other fluid loss should be monitored.
a. Monitoring fluid loss
i. Monitoring urine volume
1. Indwelling urinary catheter with closed collection system
2. Weigh dry litter, subtract weight from wet litter: 1 g = 1 mL
 3. Weigh diaper pads, subtract weight of dry diaper: 1 g = 1 mL
ii. Losses from vomiting, diarrhea—usually estimated
iii. Other losses
1. Body cavity drainage {ascites, pleural effusion)
2. Nasogastric tube suctioning
b. Inadequate urine production
i. Oliguria is defined as <1 mL/kg/hr.
ii. Anuria is defined as essentially no urine.
ii. Prior to starting diuretic therapy, ensure the cat is adequately hydrated and has suffi-
cient blood pressure to perfuse kidneys {mean arterial pressure >60-80 mmHg, Doppler
systolic pressure >80-100 mmHg).
iv. Diuretics that may be used include:
1. Mannitol: 0.2s-0.5 g/kg IV over 20 minutes, followed by constant rate infusion
(CRI) of 1-2 mg/kg/min IV if successful at inducing urine production
a. Contraindicated in face of dehydration or volume overload
b. Doses in excess of 4g/kg may cause ARF
 2. Furosemide: 2-6 mg/kg IV, followed by 2-6 mg/kg q6h or 0.25-1.0 mg/kg/hr CRI
a. No evidence that furosemide improves outcome
b. Electrolyte abnormalities possible if brisk diuresis ensues; monitor electrolytes at
least twice daily
ii. Treatment of uremic signs
1. Gastrointestinal manifestations—nausea, vomiting
a. Inhibitors of gastric acid secretion
i. Famotidine 0.2S-0.S mg/kg SC, PO SID (do not give IV in cats)
ii. Ranitidine 0.5-2.5 mg/kg IV, IM, SC, PO SID
ii. Cimetidine S-10mg/kg IV, IM, PO BID
iv. Omeprazole 0.7 mg/kg PO SID
b. Antiemetics
i.Metoclopramide 0.2-0.4 mg/kg SC QID or 0.01-0.02 mg/kg/hr IV as CRI
iil. Chlorpromazine 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC TID-QID
ii. Ondansetron 0.1 mg/kg PO BID-TID, 0.1-0.3mg/kg IV BID-TID
iv. Dolasetron 0.S mg/kg PO, SC, IV SID
c. Motility modifiers:
i. Cisapride 0.1-0.5 mg/kg PO BID-TID
ii. Metoclopramide (see dose above)
iii. Ranitidine (see dose above)
d. Gastric protectants—if evidence of GI ulceration (hematemesis, melena, increased BUN-to-
creatinine ratio, panhypoproteniemia with acute anemia): sucralfate 0.25 g/cat PO TID)
2. Hyperkalemia
a. It causes bradycardia, small or absent p waves, tall tented T waves, and wide and bizarre
QRS complex.
b. Treatment of hyperkalemia involves translocation of potassium into cells until urine flow
can be reesta blished or dialysis instituted (see table 24.2).
Chapter 24 Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
309
Table 24.2. Drugs to treat hyperkalemia.
Onsets of
Drugs
Doses
Routes
Actions
Indications
Comments
10% calcium
0.5-1 mL/kg
V over 10 minutes Immediate
Immediately
Must monitor
gluconate
life-threatening
EKG during
arrhythmia
administration;
pou saop
decrease [K]
 Regular insulin
0.25 u/kg
IV
30 minutes
Moderate to
Must give
severe
dextrose to
hyperkalemia 
avoid
hypoglycemia
Dextrose (with 
1-2 gm per.
V as bolus, and
30 minutes
Give initial IV
insulin}
unit insulin
IV over next
dose as bolus
6-8 hours
and continue
as IV infusion
Dexirose (without0.25-0.5g/
IV as bolus
30 minutes
 Mild to moderate
insulin)
kg
hyperkalemia
Sodium
1-2 mEq/kg
V over 10-20
30 minutes
Mild to severe
 Contraindicated if
bicarbonate
minutes
hyperkalemia 
PCOz elevated;
may cause
hypernatremia
or paradoxic
CNS acidosis
i.10% calcium gluconate
1. 0.5-1 mL/kg IV over 10 minutes
2. Effective immediately
3. Cardioprotective but does not decrease potassium concentration
 4. Requires concurrent electrocardiographic monitoring
ii. Regular insulin (0.25 U/kg IV) and dextrose (1-2 g/U insulin IV, then 1-2g/U IV over
next 4-6 hours) requires 30 minutes to onset of action.
ii. Dextrose alone at a dose of 0.2s-0.5 g/kg can be administered to stimulate endogenous
insulin release from the pancreas.
iv. Sodium bicarbonate (1-2 mEq/kg IV over 10-20 minutes) is contraindicated if PCO2
is elevated, and it may cause hypernatremia or paradoxic CNS acidosis.
3. Metabolic acidosis
a. Treat if pH <7.1.
b. One half of the calculated sodium bicarbonate dose (body weight [kg] × 0.3 × [desired
bicarbonate - measured bicarbonate]) is administered over 20-30 minutes and the rest over
the next 2-4 hours.
c. Hypernatremia is a possible complication, and bicarbonate is contraindicated if PCO, is
elevated.
4. Hypertension
a. Goal is to decrease systolic pressure to <180 mmHg {as measured by Doppler or oscillo
metric techniques), but a void precipitous decrease.
b. Antihypertensive drugs to consider:
i.
Amlodipine (0.625mg PO SID) response may be seen within 2448 hours. Can be
administered rectally if vomiting
310
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. ACE inhibitors: generally avoided in ARF
ii. Hydralazine (2.5 mg/cat PO or SC once): reserved for unmanageable or severe
hypertension.
1. Blood pressure must be monitored closely after administration.
2. Onset in 15 minutes (SQ) to 1 hour (PO)
5.Anemia
a. Anemia may occur due to GI bleeding, repeated blood sampling, or dilution associated
with volume overload.
b. Administer blood transfusion if clinical signs of anemia. Packed RBC preferred to whole
blood if volume overloaded and/or oliguric.
i. Clinical signs of anemia include tachycardia, heart murmur, weakness, dull mentation,
anorexia, and so on.
ii. Clinical signs of anemia overlap with signs of ARE.
ii. There is no absolute degree of anemia to dictate transfusion.
1. More liberal criteria if anemia acutely develops
c. More stringent criteria if chronic
d. Recombinant erythropoietin products generally not indicated in ARF due to long onset to
effect{weeks]
6. Coagulation abnormalities
a. Uremia induces a platelet function defect.
b. Buccal mucosal bleeding time is prolonged; coagulation profile is normal.
C. No effective treatment is available other than controlling uremia.
7. Pancreatitis
a. Common occurrence in cats with ARF
b. No known effective treatment strategies-—antiemetics, pain management, and early nutri-
tional support (parenteral if vomiting not controlled, feeding tube if anorexic but not
vomiting) are commonly used by author.
ili. Specific treatments
1. Pyelonephritis
a. Gram negative bacteria are the most common causes.
b. Antibiotics to consider include the following:
i. Fluoroquinolones have good spectrum and renal tissue penetration.
1. Enrofloxacin S mg/kg IV SID
 2. Do not exceed 5mg/kg due to potential for acute blindness
ii. Ampicillin, amoxicillin,  amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, or cephalosporins may be
effective.
1. Ampicillin/amoxicillin 15-22mg/kg IV TID
2. Clavamox 10-20 mg/kg IV BID
ii. Trimethoprim-sulfa drugs are effective against E. coli and gram positive bacteria.
1. Sulfonamides do not reach effective intrarenal concentrations.
2. Only the trimethoprim component is effective.
3. Dose 30 mg/kg PO BID
iv. Aminoglycosides are a last resort due to the potential for nephrotoxicity.
c. Treat for at least 46 weeks.
i. Culture urine 3-7 days after completing antibiotic therapy.
ii. If negative culture, repeat in one month.
ii. If positive culture, treat for additional 4 weeks with appropriate antibiotic.
2. Nephrotoxicity
a. Ethylene glycol
i. Treatment should be started within 8 hours of ingestion.
Chapter  24Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure
311
Box 24.2. Ethanol treatment for ethylene glycol toxicosis.
1. Dilute ethanol to 20% solution (200 mg/mL) in 0.9% saline (e.g., 26.6 mL of 75% ethanol plus
73.4mL 0.9% saline).
2. Day 1: Give 5mL/kg IV at hours 0, 6, 12, 18, and 24.
3. Day 2: Give 5mL/kg IV at hours 8, 16, and 24.
4. Day 3: Give 5mL/kg IV at hour 8 (last treatment).
 5. Monitor level of consciousness during treatment. Cat should be visibly sedate but not comatose.
ii. 4-methylpyrazole is not effective in cats at standard doses. A higher dose of 125 mg/kg
IV once followed by 31.25 mg/kg at 24, 48, and 72 hours after the initial dose can be
used.
1. Although no azotemia developed in experimental cats, oxalate crystals in the urine
indicated there was some ethylene glycol meta bolism.
2. Side effect is mild sedation.
ii. 20% ethanol is given at 5mL/kg q6h for 5 treatments, then q8h for 4 treatments (see
box 24.2).
b. NSAID
i. Misoprostol (PGE analogue)—1-3μg/kg PO TID-QID
3. Ureterolithiasis
a. Surgical removal after medical stabilization is associated with 91 % survival rates at 1 year.
b. Some ureteroliths can pass into bladder over time (days to months).
iv. Nutritional support (see chap. 9Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient)
1. Early institution of nutritional support improves prognosis in humans. ARF is a highly cata-
bolic disease.
2. If vomiting prohibits enteral feeding, total or partial parenteral nutrition may be utilized.
 3. Once vomiting is controlled, a feeding tube is placed if the patient remains inappetant.
4. A moderately protein-restricted diet (such as used for CRF) is appropriate in most situations;
higher protein intake may be needed with greater catabolic stress.
5. Oral phosphate binders can be added when enteral feeding is started.
a. Aluminum hydroxide, 30-90 mg/kg/day, divided and given with meals
b. Calcium acetate, 60-90mg/kg/day, divided and given with meals
b. Renal replacement therapies
i. Hemodialysis and continuous renal replacement therapy
1. Removes uremic toxins by diffusion from bloodstream through dialyzer outside the body
2. Exogenous toxins that are readily removed by dialysis include ethylene glycol, methanol,
salicylate, lithium, ethanol, phenobarbital, acetaminophen, aminoglycosides, and tricyclic
a ntidepressants.
 3. Requires referral to university or specialty private practice
ii. Peritoneal dialysis
1. Removes uremic toxins by diffusion from peritoneal membrane into dialysate infused into
abdomen, then drained
2. Necessary supplies are readily available, but is time consuming
3. Common complications include catheter occlusion and peritonitis.
ii. Renal transplantation
1. Not suitable as emergency procedure
2. If cat stabilized {medically or with hemodialysis) but renal function does not recover, trans-
plantation can be considered.
312
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
E.Monitoring
a. Frequency of monitoring depends on severity of disease.
b. Check hydration status at least BID, namely, skin turgor, mucus membrane tackiness, body weight,
urine output, blood pressure, PCV, total solids, and central venous pressure.
C. Acid-base and electrolyte determinations are done multiple times daily if severe abnormalities exist.
d. BUN and creatinine are measured SID-QOD.
F. Prognosis
a. Potential outcomes include death, euthanasia, stabilization with permanent chronic renal failure, or
functional recovery.
b. Overall mortality is about 40-50%, and 50% of survivors have subsequent CRF, although there are
differences in survival associated with etiology.
i.
Ischemia: 7s% survival
ii. Nephrotoxins: 20-50% survival
ili. Infectious/other: 50-100% survival
c. Polyuria has a better outcome than oliguria or anuria.
Recommended Reading
Cowgill LD, Francey T. Acute uremia. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds, Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
 Elliott DA, Cowgill LD. Acute renal failure. In Bonagura JD, ed, Current Veterinary Therapy Xll Smal
Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000.
Grauer GF. Prevention of hospital-acquired acute renal failure. Vet Forum, Jan 1999; pp. 46-54.
Langston CE. Renal emergencies. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds, Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 6th ed, p 447. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
25
GENERALAPPROACH AND OVERVIEW
OF THE NEUROLOGIC CAT
Daniel J. Fletcher
Unique Features
● Neurologic exam in the cat can be challenging and should be done as efficiently as possible, in dis-
crete segments with pauses between if necessary.
● Conscious proprioception is generally better evaluated in the cat using tactile placing rather than the
paw-placement test.
· Cats are more sensitive to the neurologic effects of pyrethrins and pyrethroids than most other
species. Even exposure to products specifically labeled for cats can lead to tremors and seizures.
● Idiopathic epilepsy is uncommon in the cat compared to the dog; therefore, cats presenting acutely
with seizures should be fully evaluated for other extracranial and intracranial causes of seizures.
A. Feline neurologic emergencies
a. The initial approach to the acutely neurologic cat is identical to that of any critically ill cat. Initial
triage and primary assessment should proceed as with any other emergent feline patient (see chap.
1—Approach to the Critically Ill Cat). Once life-threatening extra-central nervous system (CNS)
abnormalities have been identified and addressed, a complete secondary CNS assessment should be
done.
b. Secondary CNS assessment
i.Mentation
1. Normal—alert and appropriately responsive to the environment
2. Depressed—alert and aware, but not appropriately responsive to environmental stimuli
3. Obtunded—unconscious, but arousable with nonnoxious stimuli, such as loud noises, light,
or gentle manipulation
4. Stuporous-unconscious and arousable only with painful stimulation
 5. Comatose—unconscious and nonarousa ble, even with the application of noxious stimuli
ii. Ambulation
1. Determine the ability of the patient to ambulate. Stressed cats often will not walk. If the cat
is responsive, place on the floor in an enclosed room and encourage to move.
2. If the cat is ambulatory, thoroughly assess the gait.
a. Evaluate each limb for strength and appropriate movement.
i. Paresis—decreased voluntary motor function
i. Paralysis/plegia—absent voluntary motor function
313
314
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. The brainstem (red nucleus) is the most important center for walking in cats.
1. Forebrain lesions rarely cause paresis or paralysis.
 2. Brainstem or spinal cord lesions commonly cause paresis or paralysis.
b. Look for evidence of crossing over or incoordination in the thoracic and/or pelvic limbs
i.
Ataxia—uncoordinated motor function
ii. Usually due to disease affecting the following:
1. Cerebellum
 2. Vestibular system
3. Spinal cord
c. Note exaggerated movements (hypermetria) or truncated movements (hypometria)
i.
Most commonly seen with cerebellar disease
i.  Can be seen with head movements, resulting in overshooting of movements followed
by correction {intention tremors)
d. If the patient collapses in the thoracic or pelvic limbs, note the side to which the patient
is falling.
e. Look for evidence of circling behavior.
i. Circling is a sign of intracranial disease.
i. Direction is generally toward the affected side of the brain.
iiil. Size of circles can help localize lesion
1. Tight circles—vestibular disease
2. Wide circles, wall-hugging—forebrain disease
ili. Posture
1. Vestibular disease
a. Unilateral—head tilt, leaning to one side
b. Bilateral—wide-based stance
2. Decerebrate (opisthotonus; fig. 25.1)
a. Rigid extension of thoracic and pelvic limbs
b. Rigid neck extension
C. Severe brainstem disease
3. Decerebellate
a. Rigid extension of thoracic limbs
b. Relaxed pelvic limbs
c. Cerebellar disease
Fig. 25.1l. Cat with decerebrate posture. Note extension of allfour limbs. (Photo courtesy of Curis W. Dewey.)
Chapter 25General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
315
4. Schiff-Scherrington
 a. Rigid extension of thoracic limbs and neck when in lateral recumbency
b. T3-L3 myelopathy
5. Cervical ventroflexion (without neck pain)
a. Neuromuscular disease (weakness)
b. Metabolic diseases such as hypokalemia
6. Postural reactions should be evaluated in all four limbs.
a. Tactile placing and hopping are often easier to evaluate in the cat than the paw-position
test.
b. The complete ascending sensory pathways from the limbs, up the spinal cord, through the
brainstem and thalamus, to sensorimotor cortex as well as the descending pathways
through the spinal cord to the effector muscles must be intact. Lesions in any of these
pathways will lead to deficits.
iv. Cranial nerves
1. A thorough cranial nerve exam is essential for accurate neurolocalization of intracranial
disease.
 2. Clinical signs associated with specific cranial nerves include
Olfactory
i.
 Limited clinical usefulness
ii. Loss of smell
II.
Optic
i.
Loss of vision
ii. Loss of pupillary light reflex
III.
Oculomotor
i. Eye movement abnormalities (loss of function of dorsal, ventral, and medial
recti resulting in ventrolateral strabismus)
ii. Loss of pupillary light reflex
IV.
Trochlear
1.
 Rotary strabismus due to paralysis of the dorsal oblique muscle
V.
Trigeminal
i.
 Loss of palpebral reflex
ii. Loss of facial sensation
iii. Temporal and/or masseter muscle atrophy
iv. Sunken eye due to paralysis of pterygoid muscle
VI.
Abducens
i.
 Loss of globe retraction due to paralysis of retractor bulbi muscle
ii. Medial strabismus due to paralysis of lateral rectus muscle
VIl.
Facial
i.Facial and lip droop (fig. 25.2)
ii. Loss of palpebral reflex and menace response but still retains vision. Can some-
times see just third eyelid movement when cat attempts to blink if abducens
function still intact.
ili. Keratoconjunctivits sicca
VIII.
Vestibulocochlear
i. Ataxia, head tilt, nystagmus, strabismus
ii. Circling and leaning behaviors
il. Deafness
iv. Vomiting
IX/X/Xl. Glossopharyngeal, vagus, spinal accessory
i. Loss of gag reflex
316
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 25.2. Cat with lip droop secondary to facial paralysis. (Photo courtesy of Curtis W. Dewey.)
ii. Dysphagia
iii. Laryngeal paralysis
iv. Megaesophagus
XII.
Hypoglossal
i. Dysphagia
ii. Deviation of tongue
iii. Unilateral atrophy of tongue
3. Vll and the sympathetic trunk pass through the middle ear. Otitis media/interna can cause a
combination of signs
a. Vestibular
b. Facial/lip droop, facial sensation deficits
c. Horner's syndrome (fig. 25.3)
i.
 Ptosis
ii. Miosis
ii. Enophthalmus
 4. V, VIl, and VIlI arise from the area of the cerebello-pontine angle. Brainstem lesions affecting
this area can cause signs associated with all three cranial nerves.
v. Spinal reflexes
1. Spinal reflexes are useful for localization of spinal cord lesions as well as peripheral
neuropathies.
2. Absence of spinal reflexes is a lower motor neuron sign, indicating spinal cord damage to the
cervical intumescence in the case of thoracic limb deficits (C6-T2 spinal cord segments) or
the lumbar intumescence with pelvic limb deficits {L4S3).
 3. Absence or deficits of individual reflexes can further localize a spinal cord lesion.
c. Specific neurologic emergencies
i. Disorders of posture and ambulation
1. Flaccid paralysis/paresis {lower motor neuron signs)
a. Flaccid paralysis may be due to diseases affecting the muscle, neuromuscular junction.
peripheral nerves, or spinal cord. The most consistent finding is loss or decrease of
Chapter 25 General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
317
Fig. 25.3. Cat with Horner's syndrome in the left eye. (Photo courtesy of Curis W. Dewey.)
voluntary motor function and muscle tone with a concurrent loss of segmental reflexes in
the affected limb or limbs.
b. Myopathies and neuromuscular junction disease are uncommon in cats, but there are
several described congenital diseases that can cause flaccid paralysis.
i.
 Burmese cats: hypokalemic myopathy
i. Norwegian forest cats: glycogen storage disease
ii. Devon Rex: congenital myopathy
iv. Congenital muscle and neuromuscular junction disorders without breed predilection
also occur.
1. Congenital myotonia
2. Hypertrophic feline muscular dystrophy
 3. Laminin alpha-2 deficiency
4. Myasthenia gravis (most common in Siamese cats)
v. Acquired myasthenia gravis has also been reported in cats, although less commonly
than dogs. Abyssinian cats may be predisposed.
c. Peripheral neuropathies are commonly due to systemic disease or metabolic disturbances.
i.
 Diabetes mellitus: diabetic polyneuropathy, commonly affecting the tibial nerve, results
 in a characteristic plantigrade stance.
ii. Hyperlipemia
ili. Brachial plexus avulsion secondary to trauma results in lower motor neuron signs to
a single thoracic limb. Ipsilateral loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex and Horner's
syndrome may also be present.
d. Spinal cord disease of the cervical (C6-T2) or lumbar (L4-S3) intumescence can also cause
flaccid paralysis. Differential diagnoses include intervertebral disk disease, neoplasia (com-
monly lymphoma), infectious disease (FIP, cryptococcus), thromboembolic disease, and
trauma.
2. Spastic paralysis/paresis {upper motor neuron signs)
a. Spastic paralysis or paresis is characterized by loss or decrease of voluntary motor function
in the affected limb or limbs with preservation of normal or increased segmental reflexes.
It is due to spinal cord disease cranial to the affected limbs or brain disease.
318
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Damage to descending motor and ascending sensory pathways causes the signs, which
affect only the pelvic limbs (T3-L3 myelopathy) or both the thoracic and pelvic limbs
(C1-C6 myelopathy).
C. Differential diagnoses are the same for those noted for spinal cord disease causing flaccid
 paralysis above.
3. Incoordination/ataxia
a. Sensory ataxia
i.Sensory ataxia is associated with loss of proprioception in the thoracic and pelvic limbs
(C1-C6 myelopathy) or only the pelvic limbs (T3-L3 myelopathy).
ii. This type of ataxia is also often associated with paresis.
ii. It is caused by spinal cord disease, and differential diagnoses are the same for those
described above for flaccid paralysis due to spinal cord dysfunction.
b. Vestibular ataxia
i.Peripheral
 1. Damage to the vestibular apparatus of the inner ear or the cranial nerve Vll can
lead to vestibular ata xia.
2. In addition to ataxia, head tilt toward the side of the lesion and nystagmus with
the fast phase away from the side of the lesion are common. Nystagmus should not
be positional but may be of any type (rotary, horizontal, or vertical). Tight circling
or falling to the side of the lesion are also common.
 3. No paresis, proprioceptive deficits, or alterations in mentation are present.
4. The sympathetic trunk runs through the middle ear, making Horner's syndrome a
possible finding (miosis, ptosis, and enophthalmos ipsilateral to the lesion).
 5. Ventral strabismus may be present ipsilateral to the lesion with extension of the
neck. This may also be present with central vestibular disease (see below).
6. Common causes include otitis media/interna, neoplasia, nasopharyngeal polyps,
tra uma {including overly aggressive ear flushing), and ototoxic drugs (aminoglyco-
sides, metronidazole).
7. A full otoscopic exam may provide evidence of disease, but imaging of the skull
(radiographs or CT) is often required to identify disease affecting the bullae.
i. Central
2. Proprioceptive deficits or paresis ipsilateral to the lesion, combined with head tilt
(toward the side of the lesion) and/or nystagmus (fast phase away from the side of
the lesion) are diagnostic for central vestibular disease.
 3. Nystagmus may be positional with central vestibular disease and is more commonly
rotary or vertical than in peripheral vestibular disease. Tight circling or falling to
the side of the lesion are also common.
4. Other cranial nerve deficits may accompany the vestibular signs with central ves-
tibular disease.
5. Mental dullness, obtundation, stupor, or coma may be present due to the close
proximity of the reticular activating system.
6. Ventral strabismus may be present ipsilateral to the lesion with extension of the
neck. This may also be present with peripheral vestibular disease (see above).
7. Common causes include neoplasia, trauma, infection (e.g., FIP), parasitic disease
(e.g., Cuterebra), toxins (lead, hexachlorophene), thromboembolic disease, or
storage diseases.
ili. Paradoxical central
1. The presence of head tilt or nystagmus in the opposite direction to other localizing
signs such as paresis or proprioceptive deficits is indicative of paradoxical vestibular
disease.
Chapter 25General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
319
 2. This is caused by lesions of the flocculonodular lobes of the cerebellum or the caudal
cerebellar peduncles.
 3. Lesion localization is ipsilateral to the proprioceptive signs or paresis.
 4. Causes are the same as those for central vestibular disease described above.
iv.Bilateral
1. Cats with bilateral vestibular disease usually do not have head tilts or nystagmus.
2. A side-to-side swaying of the head is often noted {this can be subtle, so look closely).
 3. A characteristic wide-based stance is often present.
4. Can look disoriented, reluctant to move, and vocalize without side-to-side head
movements
c. Cerebellar ataxia
i. Cerebellar ataxia is commonly associated with hypermetria, truncal ataxia, intention
tremors (especially of the head), and a wide-based stance.
ii. Menace response is often decreased to absent in cats with diffuse cerebellar
disease.
ii. Motor and sensory tracts are not affected; therefore, no proprioceptive deficits or
paresis are present.
iv. Acute cerebellar damage can be associated with decerebellate posture (see above).
Hyperreflexia may also be present. Animals that survive the acute stage often develop
the other signs of cerebellar disease described above.
v. Common causes include neoplasia, infection (e.g., FIP), cerebellar abiotrophy, storage
diseases, and toxins {lead, organophosphates ).
ii. Disorders of mentation
1.Altered mentation
a. Patients that are alert and responsive but are exhibiting abnormal mentation or behaviors
most commonly have diseases affecting the prosencephalon.
b. Cranial nerve, proprioceptive, or motor deficits can help localize focal disease, with deficits
occurring contralateral to the affected hemisphere. Animals with prosencephalic disease
often walk in wide circles in the direction of the lesion.
c. Disinhibition due to frontal lobe disease may lead to compulsive stereotypic pacing and
head pressing.
 d. Potential causes of altered mentation may be divided into extracranial and intracranial
diseases.
i.Extracranial
1. Hepatic encephalopathy
2. Uremic encephalopathy (see chap. 23—Urologic Emergencies: Ureter, Bladder,
Urethra, GN, and CRF and chap. 24—Acute Intrinsic Renal Failure)
3. Toxins such as early ethylene glycol ingestion, antidepressants, sedatives, illicit
drugs, heavy metals, and other neuroactive substances 
4. Other metabolic disturbances such as hypoglycemia or extreme changes in sodium
concentration
i. Intracranial causes include neoplasia, infection (e.g., FIP, toxoplasmosis, cryptococ-
cus), congenital brain diseases, thiamine deficiency lea ding to polioencephalomalacia,
and head trauma.
e. Diagnostics include ruling out major extracranial causes (complete blood count, serum
chemistry analysis, resting blood ammonia, serum osmolality, toxicology screen, blood
pressure), followed by intracranial causes (toxoplasmosis titer, retinal examination, brain
imaging such as MRI, and cerebrospinal fluid analysis).
2. Obtundation, stupor, or coma
a. Patients that are unconscious either have diffuse cerebral disease or damage to the rostral
brainstem (containing the reticular activating system).
320
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Deficits in motor function (hemiparesis or tetra paresis) are commonly noted, contralat-
eral to the lesion with cerebral disease, ipsilateral to the lesion with brainstem disease.
ii.Vision is commonly absent with diffuse cerebral disease but present with rostral brain-
stemlesions.
ii. Pupil size and pupillary light response are normal with diffuse cerebral disease, but
pupils are often unresponsive with rostral brainstem lesions.
iv. Eye movements are generally normal with diffuse cerebral disease, but patients will not
follow moving objects due to loss of vision. Ventrolateral strabismus ipsilateral to the
lesion, and decreased physiologic nystagmus is common with rostral brainstem lesions.
c. Likely causes of stupor or coma vary depending on the presence of lateralizing signs.
i. Lateralizing signs present: neoplasia, trauma causing focal hemorrhage, and thrombo-
embolic disease
ii. Lateralizing signs not present: congenital malformations, extracranial causes (see
"Altered mentation" above), thiamine deficiency, encephalitis (infectious or noninfec-
tious), toxins, or tra uma leading to cerebral edema.
iii. Neurotrauma
1. Head trauma
a.Etiology
i. The most common causes of head injuries in cats include crush injuries, penetrating
wounds, vehicular injury, fall from height, and purposeful harm.
i. Many cats present with head trauma of unknown cause.
b. Pathophysiology
i.Primary injury
1. Primary injury is the direct result of the traumatic event, and includes cerebral
contusion, hematoma, laceration, axonal injury, and skull fracture.
2. With the exception of extra-axial hemorrhage causing a space occupying lesion and
unstable skull fracture, primary injury is not amenable to treatment.
ii. Secondary injury
1. Secondary injury is the result of a series of biochemical processes that ultimately
lead to neuronal cell death.
 2. These processes include the following:
a. Excitotoxicity due to release of neurotransmitters such as glutamate.
b. Intracellular accumulation of sodium and calcium, leading to cellular edema.
C. Ischemia-reperfusion injury and production of reactive oxygen species.
d. Release of inflammatory mediators via the arachidonic acid pathway.
e. Migration and activation of inflammatory cells such as neutrophils and
monocytes.
f. Activation of platelets and the coagulation cascade leading to microvascular
thrombosis and compromise of local perfusion 
 3. The end result of these processes is perpetuation of neuronal cell death and develop-
ment of cerebral edema.
ili. Because the brain is contained within the rigid skull, once compensatory mechanisms
are exhausted, cerebral edema can eventually lead to increases in intracranial pressure
(ICP).
 1. Cerebral oxygen and nutrient delivery is dependent on adequate cerebral perfusion
pressure (CPP).
 2. CPP is defined as the difference between mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) and
ICP.
a. CPP = MAP - ICP
Chapter 25  General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
321
When ICP increases, CPP decreases, and cerebral ischemia results.
C.Treatment
i. Extracranial stabilization
1.Perfusion
a. Because CPP is dependent on MAP, hypotension cannot be tolerated in patients
with head injury.
b. Aggressive fluid therapy should be used to maintain normotension.
c. Isotonic crystalloids
i.15-20mL/kg bolus over 15-20 minutes
ii. Repeat as necessary to maintain normotension (mean blood pressure
80-100 mmHg).
d. Synthetic colloids (hetastarch)
i.S mL/kg bolus over 15-20 minutes.
ii. Repeat as necessary to maintain normotension.
ii. Suggested maximum daily dose of hetastarch is 20 mL/kg. This is due to an
acquired decreased ability to coagulate when this dose is exceeded, although
specific studies in cats have not been performed.
iv. Do not use in dehydrated patients.
e. Blood products
i. Use packed red blood cells or fresh whole blood for anemic patients.
ii. Hemoglobin concentration is the major determinant of oxygen carrying
ca pa city.
iil. Consider fresh frozen plasma (10-15mL/kg) in patients with coagulopathy.
2. Oxygenation
a. Maintain SpO2 >95%.
 b. All patients should receive oxygen supplementation during initial stabilization.
i.Flow by mask
ii. Nasal cannulae (avoid inducing sneezing as this can increase ICP)
ili. Nasal catheters (avoid inducing sneezing)
iv. Oxygen cage
v.Oxygen tent
3.Ventilation
a. Elevations in CO, lead to cerebral vasodilation, pooling of blood within the
calvarium, and potentially, increases in ICP.
 b. Altered mentation and/or airway obstruction due to trauma can cause hypoven-
tilation in patients with head tra uma.
c. If patients cannot maintain normocapnea {PaCO, of 35-4S mmHg, PvCO, of
40-50 mmHg), they should be mechanically ventilated.
 4. Avoid compression of the jugular veins (holding off jugular for blood draw, bending
of the neck, etc.)
ii. Intracranial stabilization
1. Osmotic therapy
a.Mannitol
i. There are multiple proposed mechanisms of actions by which mannitol
decreases ICP, including reflex vasoconstriction of brain vasculature via
decreasing blood viscosity, reduction of cerebrospinal fluid production, scav-
enging free-radical species, and osmotically drawing extravascular edema
fluid into the intravascular space.
i.Administer intravenously over 10-20 minutes at a dosage of 0.5-1.5g/kg. A
recent human clinical trial supports the use of higher doses of mannitol
322
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
(1.4g/kg) rather than lower doses (0.7g/kg) in patients with severe brain
injury.
ii. Serum osmolality and electrolytes should be measured with repeated man-
nitol use; osmolality should be maintained at or below 320 mOsm/L to
reduce the risk of renal failure due to renal vasoconstriction (see chap. 24).
iv. Because of mannitol's diuretic properties, volume status should be closely
monitored (either by measuring urine output via a urinary catheter or weigh-
ing diaper pads or closely monitoring body weight), and crystalloid and/or
colloid therapy should be adjusted to address any volume deficits (see chap.
24).
b. Hypertonic saline
i. Hypertonic saline (7%) is a hyperosmotic solution that may be used as an
alternative to mannitol in patients with head injury.
i. Administer intravenously at a dose of 2-3mL/kg over 15-20 minutes.
ii. Other beneficial effects include improved hemodynamic status via volume
expansion and positive inotropic effects, as well as beneficial vasoregulatory
and immunomodulatory effects.
iv. Monitor serum sodium concentrations to avoid hypernatremia.
2. Glucocorticoids
a. High dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate {MPSS) and prednisolone
sodium succinate have been recommended as neuroprotective agents after head
injury. However, a recent, large human clinical trial demonstrated worse outcome
in patients with head trauma treated with MPSS compared with controls. The
use of these high-dose protocols is no longer recommended.
b. Dexamethasone and prednisone have been shown to be effective for treating
vasogenic edema associated with intracranial neoplasia but have not been shown
to be beneficial when treating patients with cytotoxic edema due to head trauma.
c. It is the author's opinion that corticosteroids should not be used in patients with
head tra uma.
3. Facilitation of venous drainage
a. Elevation of the head by 15-30 degrees reduces cerebral blood volume by
increasing venous drainage, decreasing ICP, and increasing CPP without changes
in cerebral oxygenation.
b. A slant board should be used to prevent occlusion of the jugular veins. Higher
elevations may cause a detrimental decrease in CPP.
4. Decompressive craniectomy
a. Indications for surgery after head trauma include presence of extra-axial hemor-
rhage causing compression of the brain (diagnosed by CT or MRI), open skull
 fractures, depressed skull fractures (with associated neurologic impairment), and
retrieval of potentially contaminated bone fragments or foreign material lodged
in brain parenchyma.
b. Surgical intervention should be considered in head-traumatized cats that are
 deteriorating neurologically despite aggressive medical therapy.
d. Prognosis
i. The overall prognosis for victims of severe head trauma is considered guarded to poor.
il.  The Modified Glasgow Coma Scale scoring system, adapted from a human coma scale,
has been shown in one retrospective study to predict survival to 48 hours in dogs
with head injury. Its prognostic value has not been evaluated in cats, but it is a
useful quantitative scale to evaluate severity of neurologic injury and to monitor
progression.
Chapter 25General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
323
iii. Presence and persistence of hyperglycemia have been shown to be prognostic indicators
in people with head trauma. However, in a veterinary study including cats with head
  i  o s  s   se 
outcome.
iv. There is a tremendous recuperative ability in cats, especially younger animals, and
 prognosis can be difficult to predict at admission. It is the author's clinical experience
that many cats with severe neurologic deficits at admission can show remarkable
improvement in the first 24-48 hours postinjury.
2. Spinal cord trauma
a.Etiology
i. The most common causes of spinal trauma in cats include motor vehicle accidents,
animal-animal interactions, falls from heights, and crush injuries.
ii. Spontaneous intervertebral disk herniation is rare in cats but can occur.
b. Pathophysiology
i.Primary injury
1. Primary injury is the direct result of the traumatic event and includes spinal luxation
and vertebral fracture, traumatic intervertebral disk herniation, spinal cord contu-
sion, and extra-axial hemorrhage.
2. Surgical and medical therapies can help correct or mitigate the impact of primary
spinal injuries.
ii.Secondary injury
1. Secondary injury results from activation of a number of biochemical pathways that
ultimately lead to continued neuronal damage or death.
 2. These processes include the following:
a. Excitotoxicity due to release of neurotransmitters such as glutamate.
 b. Intracellular accumulation of sodium and calcium, leading to cellular edema.
C. Ischemia-reperfusion injury and production of reactive oxygen species.
 d. Release of inflammatory mediators via the arachidonic acid pathway.
e. Migration and activation of inflammatory cells such as neutrophils and
monocytes.
f. Activation of platelets and the coagulation cascade leading to microvascular
thrombosis and compromise of local perfusion.
c. Diagnostics
i. Spinal radiographs are indicated in all cats with spinal trauma but have been shown
to have low sensitivity for fracture (72%) or spinal luxation (77.5%) in dogs. No data
are available in cats, but given their generally smaller size, it is unlikely the sensitivity
is higher. Patients should be immobilized by taping them to a back board before seda -
tion and radiographs to reduce the risk of further spinal cord trauma during manipula-
tion, and ventrodorsal views should be obtained using a horizontal beam technique.
i. Advanced imaging techniques such as myelography, CT, or MRI are often required to
definitively diagnose spinal injuries. All of these modalities require anesthesia, and care
should be taken to immobilize patients to prevent further trauma to the spinal cord.
d. Treatment
i. Extra-CNS stabilization
1. Recognition and treatment of concurrent life-threatening injuries in the spinal
tra uma patient is of paramount importance. Aggressive therapy to maintain perfu-
sion, oxygenation, and ventilation must be instituted as soon as possible.
2. See “Extracranial stabilization” in the Head Trauma section above for specific
therapeutic recommendations.
ii. Primary injury treatment
324
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Spinal luxation and vertebral fracture
a. Surgical management: Surgical options for stabilization and internal fixation
include the use of bone plates, screws, Steinmann pins, and polymethylmethac
rylate (PMMA) cement. Surgical management often results in accelerated stabi-
lization of the spine and more rapid return to function, but it is expensive, may
result in worsening of spinal cord injury during anesthesia and surgical manipu-
lation, and carries the risk of implant failure or complications, such as infection
and implant fracture.
b. Nonsurgical management: External coaptation and strict cage rest for 6-8 weeks
are the basic principles of nonsurgical management. Fiberglass, thermoplastics,
plaster, metal rods, or other materials can be fashioned to conform to the
patient's body shape. The entire spine must be immobilized and the splint held
in place using bandage material. Soiled bandages must be replaced immediately.
Nonsurgical management requires intensive nursing care, longer recovery
periods, and a greater likelihood of persistent neurologic deficits.
2. Tra umatic intervertebral disk herniation
a. Surgical and nonsurgical management are options for these types of injuries.
 b. In general, surgical management is recommended when voluntary motor func-
tion is absent or severely decreased, or if clinical signs are progressing in spite
of conservative treatment.
c. Conservative management consists of strict cage rest for 6-8 weeks.
3. Spinal cord contusion
a. There are no direct therapies for spinal cord contusion.
ii. Secondary injury treatment
1. Maintenance of perfusion, oxygenation, and ventilation are of paramount impor-
tance in reducing secondary injury in the patient with traumatic spinal cord injury.
See “Extracranial stabilization" in the Head Trauma section above for specific
recommendations.
2. Methylprednisolone sodium succinate {MPSS) has been extensively studied as a
therapy to address secondary injury. The free-radical scavenging effects are likely
the most important for providing neuroprotection.
dexamethasone, prednisone) are likely to reduce the discomfort associated with
spinal trauma, they are unlikely to have any significant neuroprotective effect.
b. There have been no placebo-controlled trials evaluating the efficacy of MPSS in
veterinary patients with spinal cord injury. It is well known that high-dose cor-
ticosteroids can have significant side effects in cats, including immunosuppres-
sion, decreased renal blood flow, and ga strointestinal effects, although anecdotally,
cats appear to be more resistant to these side effects compared with dogs.
c. Given the clinical and experimental evidence, MPSS at an initial dose of 30 mg/
kg followed by a constant rate infusion (CRI) of 5.4 mg/kg/hr or repeated boluses
of 15 mg/kg every 6 hours for 24-48 hours may be considered as neuroprotective
therapy in patients with spinal cord injury. However, given the potential side
effects and the lack of clinical trials in cats demonstrating efficacy, it is the
author's opinion that the risks of this treatment outweigh the potential benefits.
There is no clinical or experimental evidence of a neuroprotective effect of other
corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone or prednisone, but these drugs may be
useful at an anti-inflammatory dose {initially 1-2 mg/kg/day prednisone, 0.15-
0.3 mg/kg/day dexamethasone, tapering over 1-2 weeks) to reduce discomfort
associated with the injury.
Chapter 25General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
325
damaged nerve fibers. In addition, PEG seals damaged cells and reduces the release
of cytotoxic substances leading to secondary injury. A clinical trial of intravenous
 PEG (two doses, 2 mL/kg of a 30% solution intravenously 4-6 hours apart) in dogs
with acute intervertebral disk herniation within 72 hours of injury showed that
treated dogs had improved outcomes compared with historical controls. Although
no data are available in cats, PEG may provide a promising new therapy for acute
spinal trauma.
iv. Seizures
1. Pathophysiology
chronized population of neurons. Individual neurons within the population experience a
sequence of events including the following:
i. A burst of action potentials (700-1,000 per second) mediated by an influx of calcium
ii.A sustained depolarization
ii. Rapid repolarization and hyperpolarization mediated by GABA receptors, which
promote either chloride influx or potassium efflux.
b. Many areas of the brain, including the subcortical nuclei, thalamus, cerebrum, and brain-
odo  s as  d o 
c. This population of hypersynchronized neurons then overcomes normal physiologic sur-
round inhibition, allowing propagation of the seizure into surrounding areas as well as
distant areas of the brain via long-distance pathways (e.g., the corpus callosum).
2. Classification
a. Generalized seizures: Generalized seizures (also called tonic-clonic seizures or grand mal
seizures) are associated with a loss of consciousness and symmetrical effects on the brain.
These events can manifest in a number of ways, including paddling or tonic-clonic move-
ment of all limbs or generalized rigidity.
b. Focal/partial seizures: Focal seizures {also called partial seizures) are initiated by abnormal
activity in a circumscribed region of the brain. Clinical signs are related to the area of the
brain affected and are often lateralized. Patients remain conscious during partial seizures,
but changes in behavior and mentation may occur. Simple partial seizures (also called
partial motor seizures) result in abnormal, often rhythmic contraction of a single muscle
group, such as facial muscles or muscles of a single limb. Complex partial seizures (also
called psychomotor seizures) are characterized by abnormal, quasi-purposeful behaviors.
Quasi-purposeful behaviors are normal behaviors that are repeated inappropriately or
exhibited at inappropriate times. Behaviors such as fly-biting, fear, or aggression are
typical of quasi-purposeful behaviors. Simple or complex partial seizures may progress to
c. Cluster seizures: There are various definitions of cluster seizures in the literature, but the
most widely accepted is two or more separate seizures in a 24-hour period. In order to be
considered separate, the animal should return to normal mentation and neurologic status
between the seizures.
d. Status epilepticus: Patients who continue to have seizure activity for more than 5 minutes,
or who have repeated seizures without returning to normal neurologic status between
epiosodes are considered to be in status epilepticus. Patients presenting with cluster seizures
or status epilepticus are at high risk of developing systemic sequelae, including hyperther-
mia, disseminated intravascular coagulation, systemic inflammatory response syndrome,
and multiple organ failure. In addition, there is a risk of permanent brain damage and
expansion of the seizure focus in the brain.
326
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Etiology
a. Extracranial diseases: Metabolic disturbances and systemic disease can lead to alterations
in the electrophysiology of the brain, causing paroxysmal neuronal discharges and
seizures. In general, these types of diseases are likely to cause widespread disturbances
affecting both hemispheres. Therefore, generalized seizures are more common than focal
seizures. Endogenous toxins accumulating due to hepatic or renal disease can lead
to seizures. Meta bolic disturbances, such as hypoglycemia, hyperlipidemia, hypernatre-
mia or hyponatremia, and hypocalcemia, as well as endocrine diseases such as hypothy-
roidism and diabetes mellitus (hyperosmolar nonketotic) can also lead to seizures
Many toxicoses, including early ethylene glycol intoxication, bromethalin, pyrethrins,
theobromine, caffeine, cocaine, lead, or organophosphate poisoning may also result in
seizures.
b. Intracranial diseases: There are many, primary intracranial causes of seizures. A classifica-
tion scheme, such as DAMNIT-V, can be helpful for organizing this large list.
Degenerative: storage diseases
 Anomalous: hydrocephalus, lissencephaly
iii.
Metabolic: see "Extracranial diseases" above
iv.
Neoplastic: primary brain tumors as well as metastatic disease
Nutritional: thiamine deficiency in cats fed exclusively fish diets
vi. Infectious: viral (FIP, FeLV), bacterial, fungal (cryptococcus), protozoal
(toxoplasma)
vi. Idiopathic: epilepsy
vii. Trauma: head trauma
ix. Toxin: see “Extracranial diseases" above
X.Vascular: thromboembolic disease, intracranial hemorrhage
4.Treatment
a. Individual, infrequent, and short-duration seizures may not require therapy, but severe,
acute seizures are life-threatening emergencies, and aggressive therapy is warranted.
Cluster seizures and status epilepticus are the two most life-threatening types of seizures.
In addition to direct neuronal damage, systemic sequelae of severe seizures include trau-
matic injury to other parts of the body, hyperthermia leading to disseminated intravascular
coagulation, aspiration pneumonia, and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema.
b. Anticonvulsant therapy
1.
 Benzodiazepines: Intravenous diazepam (0.5-1.0 mg/kg) or midazolam ( 0.066-0.22 mg/
kg) should be considered first-line therapy for patients with severe, acute seizures.
These drugs are GABA agonists, leading to hyperpolarization of neurons and cessation
of seizure activity. For patients in whom intravenous access is not readily available,
diazepam at a dose of 1-2mg/kg is rapidly absorbed intrarectally. If the patient
responds to benzodiazepine therapy but rapidly recrudesces, an intravenous CRI is a
 good option. Diazepam at 0.5-2.0 mg/kg/hr is often effective. Diazepam administered
undiluted via a peripheral vessel can cause vasculitis; use of a central line or dilution
in intravenous fluids is recommended. Diazepam may be mixed with 0.9% saline or
5% dextrose in water. Avoid mixing with lactated Ringer's solution as the calcium
will precipitate the diazepam. Plastic will adsorb diazepam and may make the actual
CRI dose of diazepam unpredicta ble.
i. In addition, injecta ble benzodiazepines are light sensitive, so infusion lines should be
wrapped.
ii. Barbiturates: For patients refractory to benzodiazepine therapy, barbiturates
(Pentobarbital, Phenobarbital) can sometimes be effective. Pentobarbital (2-15 mg/kg
IV) can effectively terminate the physical manifestations of seizure activity within
Chapter 25General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
327
several minutes, but it is not generally considered to be an effective anticonvulsant and
vulsant {2-6 mg/kg IV) but can take 15-20 minutes to have an effect. If an effect is
not noted within 15-30 minutes, the dose may be repeated to raise blood levels to the
therapeutic range more rapidly (to a maximum loading dose of 16 mg/kg within the
first 24 hours), but care must be taken to avoid overdose.
iv. Propofol: Propofol is a rapidly acting injectible anesthestic that is a centrally acting
GABA agonist. It may be administered via slow IV injection at a dose of 1-6mg/kg
and has been shown to be effective for stopping seizure activity (cluster seizures and
status epilepticus) in human and veterinary medicine. If the initial bolus dose is effec-
tive but seizures recur, a CRI at 0.1-0.6 mg/kg/min may be instituted. Apnea and
cardiovascular depression are important side effects to consider, and it is the authors
 opinion that any animal receiving a propofol infusion should be intubated to protect
the airway, and ventilation should be closely monitored to avoid the sequelae of
hypoventilation. In addition, propofol has been associated with transient seizure activ-
ity on induction and discontinuation of infusion in people. Additionally, propofol may
be associated with increased Heinz body formation in cats, but recent studies suggest
that these are not clinically significant.
v. Levetiracetam (Keppra): Levetiracetam is a piracetam anticonvulsant that has shown
efficacy for treatment of seizures in people and experimental animals. The mechanism
of action of this drug is not known. It has a high bioavailability and is excreted
unchanged in the urine without any significant hepatic metabolism, suggesting that it
 may be safer than benzodiazepines or barbiturates for treatment of seizures in patients
with hepatic disease. There are no published doses for cats, but anecdotal reports have
noted seizure control with 20 mg/kg intravenous boluses q8hr. It has no sedative side
effects, making it easier to evaluate neurologic status in treated patients. Although the
use of this drug for severe, acute seizures has not yet been described in the veterinary
literature, a recent report showed significant improvement in seizure control in epileptic
cats with the use of the oral formulation of this drug as an adjunct to phenobarbital
therapy. It may prove to be a useful addition to the anticonvulsant armamentarium
for cats and is available in an intravenous formulation {UCB Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Smyma, GA, USA).
c. Once seizures are controlled, aggressive supportive care targeted at the cerebral and
systemic sequelae of seizures should be undertaken.
 Fluid therapy with or without the addition of pressors should be instituted to aggres-
sively treat perfusion deficits and maintain a mean blood pressure of 80 mmHg.
i. Ventilation should be closely monitored with blood gas analysis, and normocapnea
maintained with intubation and ventilation if required.
ii. Oxygenation should be maintained using supplemental oxygen therapy.
iv. Hyperosmolar therapy (mannitol at 0.5-1.5 g/kg over 15-20 minutes or 7% hypertonic
saline at 2 mL/kg over 15-20 minutes) should be considered for all patients with evi-
dence of increased intracranial pressure, such as cranial nerve deficits, abnormal menta-
tion, or hypertension and bradycardia (Cushing's reflex).
1. Cushing's reflex occurs as result of increased intracranial pressure resulting in brain
ischemia. The physiologic response to this is a release of catecholamines causing
increased blood pressure and reflex bradycardia. It is a sign of clinically significant
 increased intracranial pressure and requires aggressive thera py.
v. Body temperature should be monitored and active cooling instituted in all patients
v.  CNS toxins (see chap. 39)
328
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Many toxins have the potential to induce neurologic signs in cats, but few have specific
antidotes. Therefore, general decontamination procedures are recommended in all cats with
sus pected neurotoxin ingestion.
a. Emesis induction: If the patient has been exposed within 4-6 hours and is not currently
exhibiting altered mentation, emesis may be induced with oral hydrogen peroxide admin-
istration {1-5 mL/kg PO) or intravenous xylazine {0.44mg/kg)
b. Gastric lavage: In patients with neurologic signs or in which emesis induction is otherwise
contraindicated, anesthesia, intubation, and gastric lavage are recommended.
C. Activated charcoal: After emesis induction or gastric lavage, activated charcoal administra-
tion is recommended, either PO or via stomach tube. Administration should be repeated
q6h when toxins undergoing enterohepatic recirculation are ingested. Activated charcoal
with a cathartic {such as sorbitol) may be administered once, but only cathartic-free for-
mulations should be repeatedly administered.
2. Specific toxins
a. Bromethalin
i. Bromethalin is a newer rodenticide that exerts its toxic effects via uncoupling of oxida-
tive phosphorylation, resulting in ATP depletion, inactivation of sodium-potassium
ATPases, and development of cerebral edema.
i. Common clinical signs of acute intoxications include seizure, coma, and death. Chronic
exposure to lower doses can lead to pelvic limb paresis and altered mentation.
ii. There is no specific antidote for Bromethalin intoxication. Decontamination protocols
(as described above) and supportive care for seizures and cerebral edema are
recommended.
iv. Bromethalin undergoes enterohepatic recirculation. Repeated doses of activated char-
coal for 2448 hours are recommended.
v.Prognosis is poor once signs have developed.
b. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
i.
Exposure most commonly occurs after administration of over-the-counter topical flea
and tick products in cats. Because some cats are extremely sensitive to these com-
pounds, even products specifically labeled for cats have been known to cause clinical
signs when used at the recommended dose. Ingestion during grooming rather than
transdermal absorption is most likely the cause of toxicosis.
i.  Pyrethrins are the naturally occurring forms of these compounds {derived from chry-
santhemum flowers), and pyrethroids are synthetic analogs.
ii. These compounds prolong the opening of sodium channels in neural tissue by
inhibition of GABA, resulting in prolonged membrane depolarization. This leads
to muscle tremors, seizures, and ataxia, as well as hypersalivation, anorexia, and
vomiting.
iv. Treatment
1. Gastric decontamination is risky in symptomatic patients and is unlikely to be
effective.
2. Bathing should be done as soon as possible to remove any remaining compound
from the skin and to decrease additional transdermal or oral absorption.
 3. Medical therapy is targeted at stopping tremors or seizures.
a. Methcarbamol (50-150 mg/kg slow IV to effect) is the treatment of choice for
muscle tremors. It can be repeated as needed, but the total dose should not
exceed 330 mg/kg/day, although the author has rarely exceeded this dose in
severe or persistent cases.
b. Barbiturates (such as phenobarbital) or general anesthesia with propofol or
inhalants may rarely be required to stop seizures.
Chapter 25 General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat
329
4. Patients are commonly hyperthermic on presentation and should be cooled if
body temperature is greater than 10s°F. Hypothermia commonly develops
after tremors or seizures are controlled and the cat is bathed; therefore,
close monitoring of temperature and thermal support are important aspects of
ma na gement.
5. Most cats recover within 24 hours, but some may remain clinically affected for
48-72 hours.
c. Organophosphates and carbamates
 i. These insecticides are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors that lead to increased concentra-
tions of actylcholine at somatic, sympathetic, and parasympathetic preganglionic
synapses.
 il. Clinical signs can vary depending on the type or types of receptors stimulated.
1. Muscarinic: The most common clinical signs are a result of parasympathetic stimu-
lation and include salivation, lacrimation, urination, and defecation (SLUD).
2. Nicotonic: Tremors and muscle fasciculations can develop secondary to stimulation
of nicotinic receptors.
3. Central cholinergic: Stimulation of central cholinergic receptors results in
seizures.
iii. Treatment
1. Gastrointestinal decontamination should be instituted if exposure is sufficiently
acute and there are no contraindcations.
2. Anticholinergic therapy (atropine 0.1-0.2 mg/kg, 14 IV, the remainder SQ) if mus-
carinc signs are present.
3. Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM) results in the release of the toxin from acetylhcho-
linesterase and will treat nicotinic and muscarinic effects. The drug is administered
IM at 20 mg/kg BID. Because carbamates spontaneously dissociate from acetylcho-
linesterase, 2-PAM should not be used to treat carbamate intoxication.
d. Lead
i. Lead exerts its toxic effects via multiple enzyme systems, binding to ligands nonspeciff-
cally via sulfhydryl groups. This produces a variety of cellular effects, including inter
ference with cellular meta bolism, damage to heme production, and endothelial damage.
It is present in many household items, including paint produced prior to 1950, curtain
sinkers, pottery, roofing materials, and many other substances.
il. Neurologic signs include blindness, seizures, ata xia, altered mentation, coma, or tremors.
Other clinical signs include mild anemia, vomiting, diarrhea, and megaesophagus.
ii. Diagnosis is definitively determined via blood lead level determination. Consult your
diagnostic laboratory to determine the appropriate sample for lead level determination.
Other suggestive findings include increased nucleated red blood cells and red blood
cell basophilic stippling.
iv. Treatment includes gastrointestinal decontamination for acute exposures as described
above, chelation therapy, and symptomatic treatment.
1. Chelation may be accomplished with any of the following:
a. Calcium EDTA: 25mg/kg SQ q6h for 5 days. The 100 mg/mL solution should
be diluted with 0.9% NaCl to a 10 mg/mL solution.
 b. D-Penicillamine: Should be considered after Calcium EDTA therapy if lead levels
remain elevated. Give 125 mg PO q12h for 5 days.
c. Succimer: 10 mg/kg PO q8h for 10 days is the published dose for dogs. No dose
has been published for cats.
2. Seizures should be controlled and supportive care administered. See "Seizures"
above for specific recommendations.
330
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 3. Methocarbamol may be used to treat tremors at a dose of 15-44 mg/kg PO or IV,
not to exceed a total dose of 330 mg/kg/day.
e. Metronidazole
i.When administered at a dose of greater than 30 mg/kg/day, metronidazole can lead to
neurologic signs, including central vestibular signs, cerebellar ataxia, seizures, blind-
ness, and abnormal mentation. The pathophysiology of this toxicosis is not known,
but similar histopathologic lesions affecting the reticular system have been found in
cats, dogs, and rats after metronidazole overdose.
i. Diagnosis is based on history and compatible clinical signs.
iil. Treatment consists of discontinuation of metronidazole therapy and supportive care.
 Fluid therapy and antiemetics are indicated for patients with significant vomiting and/
or nausea. Diazepam at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg IV q8h for 3 days can reverse many of
the clinical signs associated with this toxicosis. Note that the use of oral diazepam in
mended. Prognosis is good, and most animals recover within 1-3 weeks.
26
NEUROLOGIC EMERGENCIES: BRAIN
Jessica M. Snyder
Unique Features
1. Potassium bromide may be associated with a respiratory syndrome similar to feline asthma in
approximately 40% of cats treated with the medication. This is generally reversible when the
medication is discontinued.
2. Diazepam can cause a fatal, irreversible hepatic necrosis in cats when administered orally.
3. Rectally administered valium is not reliably absorbed in cats.
4. Hepatic encephalopathy due to hepatic lipidosis is a more common metabolic cause of severe
 prosencephalic disease in cats than portosystemic shunting, and should be considered in any icteric
or historically inappetent cat. Cats with hepatic encephalopathy often display ptyalism as a clinical
sign.
5. Thiamine deficiency is uncommon in cats but should be suspected in a neurological cat on an
all-raw fish diet or with a history of prolonged anorexia.
 6. Permethrin toxicity is a common cause of severe generalized tremoring in cats. This can occur after
some dog flea products are applied to cats.
 7. Idiopathic vestibular disease occurs in cats of all ages.
 8. Granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis is an extraordinarily rare cause of intracranial disease
in cats, as opposed to dogs.
 9. Siamese cats and other oriental breeds normally will have a pendular nystagmus.
10. Seizure activity and other clinical signs of forebrain disease are more commonly seen in cats with
 Metronidazole toxicosis, in addition to symptoms of central vestibular disease.
11. Ketamine anesthesia, especially in Persian cats, has been associated with cerebellar disease.
12. Prolonged hepatic metabolism makes several third-line anticonvulsant drugs unsuitable for use in
cats, including Primidone, Phenytoin, and Valproic acid.
13. Idiopathic epilepsy is less common in the cat than the dog. Diagnostic testing should be pursued
to rule out an identifiable underlying cause regardless of age.
14. Cerebellar hypoplasia, caused by in utero panleukopenia infection (feline parvovirus), is a common
cause of nonprogressive cerebellar dysfunction in kittens
A. General approach to the critically ill cat
a. The brain can be subdivided broadly into four major anatomic and functional regions that
cause distinct clinical syndromes: prosencephalon, diencephalon; midbrain/pons/medulla; and
cerebell um.
 B. Prosencephalon: Emergency manifestations of prosencephalic disease include seizure, stupor/coma, and
tremors.
331
332
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Seizure
i. Seizure management
1. Initial stabilization
a. Evaluate for airway patency, breathing, and circulation.
b. Administer diazepam (0.5-1 mg/kg IV). Venous access should be obtained. If venous access
cannot be obtained, diazepam may be provided per rectum (dosing at 1-2 mg/kg can be
attempted, but some report that absorption is unreliable in cats as opposed to dogs).
 2. Diazepam should not be used in cases of chlorpyrifos exposure as it may worsen the signs of
acute toxicity.
3. A blood glucose, serum calcium, BUN, and TP/PCV should be assessed immediately.
a. 10% calcium gluconate (5-15mg/kg IV over 10-15 minutes) may be administered to the
hypocalcemic cat.
b. 50% dextrose (1-2 mL/kg IV diluted with sterile water or 0.9% sodium chloride) may be
administered to the hypoglycemic cat.
i. If hypoglycemia is the cause, expect cessation of seizures within 1 minute of
administration.
4. Intravenous diazepam may be given up to three times to control acute seizures.
a. A diazepam constant rate infusion (CRI) may be started at 0.5-2.0mg/kg/hr if seizure
activity quickly recurs.
i. Diazepam may be mixed with 0.9% saline or 5% dextrose in water. Avoid mixing with
lactated Ringer's solution as the calcium will precipitate the diazepam.
ii. Plastic will adsorb diazepam and may make the actual CRI dose of diazepam
unpredicta ble.
b. If diazepam is not effective in controlling the seizures, then propofol (bolus of 1-4 mg/kg
followed by 0.01-0.25 mg/kg/min CRI) or another anesthetic drug (i.e., volatile anesthetic
agent such as isoflurane) should be used.
5. Any icteric or historically inappetant cat (in which hepatic encephalopathy is suspected) should
be treated with lactulose enemas (dose of 1 mL/kg per rectum); oral dose of 1 mL/5kg PO q8h
may be used in stable, aware patients.
6. If the cat has had recurrent seizures, it may be phenobarbital loaded. Intravenous phenobar
bital takes 20 minutes to obtain blood levels following administration (therefore, phenobar-
bital is not immediately effective for control of ongoing seizure). A loading dose of phenobarbital
is approximately 15 mg/kg. This may be given as a single slow intravenous push, or it may
 be divided into four 4mg/kg doses, administered every 30 minutes to 4 hours, depending on 
the frequency of seizure.
a. If cat is severely sedated or comatose prior to next dose, then withhold dose.
b. Adequacy of ventilation and airway protection should be monitored in any cat that has
received multiple doses of anticonvulsants and is heavily sedated. If gag reflex is absent,
an endotracheal tube should be placed to protect the airway.
7. After the seizure is stopped, rectal temperature should be measured. Appropriate cooling
measures should be undertaken if the cat is extremely hyperthermic (e.g., >105°F). Intra venous
fluids may be administered.
8. If the cat is in status epilepticus (see 8a below), and in any cat with severe seizures and obtun
 dation, nystagmus, unresponsive pupils, bradycardia and hypertension, or anisocoria, a dose
of mannitol (0.5-1 g/kg over 15-20 minutes IV) may decrease cerebral edema. Limit treatment
to three doses in a 24-hour period. Furosemide administration at 2 mg/kg intra venously prior
 to mannitol infusion may provide synergistic effect in reducing intracranial pressure and also
prevent the mild increase in intracranial pressure that occurs when mannitol is first adminis-
tered. The cat should be hydrated prior to the administration of mannitol and fluid therapy
continued to avoid hypotension or dehydration secondary to mannitol administration.
Chapter 26 Neurologic Emergencies: Brain
333
Table 26.1. Causes of seizure in the cat (bold denotes common cause).
Degenerative
Lysosomal storage disease; leukodystrophies
 Anomalous
Lissencephaly; intracranial intra-arachnoid cyst; hydrocephalus;
Metabolic
Hepatic encephalopathy: uremic encephalopathy; hypoglycemia
(insulin overdose, insulinoma); hypocalcemia; acid-base disturbances
(respiratory acidosis most common], polycythemia
Neoplastic
o d o  d oi a
metastatic brain tumor
Nutritional
Thiamine deficiency
Infectious
Feline infectious peritonitis; other viral; rabies; Cypfococcus
neoformans, other Fungal disease; bacterial; Toxoplasma gondi; parasitic
[Cuterebra larvae myiasis)
Idiopathic
Idiopathic epilepsy reportedly uncommon in cats in the U.S.; eosinophilic
Toxin
Veterinary drugs (recent ketamine anesthesia); lead; organophosphates;
ethylene glycol; metronidazole
Trauma
Common
Vascular
Feline ischemic encephalopathy; hypertensive encephalopathy
a. Status epilepticus can be defined as a seizure that lasts >5 minutes continuously or multiple
seizures lasting less than this without complete neurologic recovery between seizures.
9. Blood pressure (systolic of 90 mmHg) and oxygenation (Hb saturation of >95% if possible)
should be monitored and maintained in any cat with suspected increased intracranial
pressure.
ii.Causes of seizure in the cat (table 26.1)
ii. Emergency diagnostic workup for the seizuring cat
1. CBC/Chemistry/UA/T4; FeLV/FIV test (if status unknown)
 2. Bile acids/NH; in cases of possible hepatic encephalopathy
 3. Thoracic +/- abdominal radiographs if indicated
4. Blood pressure measurement
a. Hypertension
i. Hypertensive encephalopathy can be an underlying cause of seizures.
ii. Hypertension can occur secondary to increased intracranial pressure (Cushing's reflex;
see chap. 25—General Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat).
5. Fundoscopic evaluation
iv. Further therapy
1. Anticonvulsant of choice: phenobarbital at 2 mg/kg PO BID.
 2. Potassium bromide may be associated with a respiratory syndrome identical to feline asthma
in 40% of cats (see chap. 13—Parenchymal Disease).
3. Oral diazepam may cause irreversible and fatal hepatic necrosis, although this is relatively
rare.
4. Drugs to avoid: phenytoin, primidone, valproic acid due to the prolonged half life in cats and
potential for hepatotoxicity and other side effects fextreme sedation with phenytoin and
hyperactivity and alopecia with valproic acid),.
5. Other anticonvulsants may be used: Levetiracetam (Keppra) (20-25 mg/kg PO or IV q8-12h)
or Zonisamide 5-10 mg/kg PO q24h. Keppra seems to be tolerated better by cats and is not
metabolized by the liver.
6. Hepatic encephalopathy or liver disease {see cha p. 21—Management of Specific Gastrointestinal
Conditions for more details).
334
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Lactulose
b. Antibiotic therapy to decrease gastrointestinal bacterial load
i.Neomycin
ii.Amoxicillin 22 mg/kg PO q12h or Ampicillin 22 mg/kg IV q12h
ii. Metronidazole 7.5 mg/kg PO or IV q12h
7. Blood pressure support as appropriate (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy)
a. Blood pressure support is indicated when the doppler is <90 or the mean arterial pressure
is <60-80 mmHg after adequate fluid replacement.
i. Dopamine S-15 μg/kg/min
ii.Norepinephrine 0.1-3 μg/kg/min
ii. Dobutamine should not be used as an initial theraputic agent due to reports of seizure
activity secondary to dobutamine CRI.
8. Thiamine deficiency: thiamine (vitamin B1) at 20-100mg/cat IM or SQ q12-24h, begin oral
supplementation when stable.
a. Thiamine deficiency is rare in cats but is seen in cats receiving purely overly cooked diets
or pure raw fish diets or cats with prolonged anorexia.
b. Clinical signs are a result of polioencephalomalacia of the brain gray matter and include
ataxia, seizures, and pupillary dilatation due to oculomotor nerve paralysis. A characteristic
sign is ventroflexion of the neck when the cat is lowered head first to the ground. Clinical
signs should improve within 24 hours of administration of thiamine.
b. Stupor/coma: Global lesions of the cerebrum or of the ascending reticular activating system may
cause stupor or coma.
i. Causes of stupor/coma: see table 26.1
ii. Management of stupor/coma
1. Manage airway, breathing, circulation, and provide oxygen support.
a. PaCOz <30mmHg reduces cerebral blood flow and cerebral edema.
i. Goal: PaCO, 35-40 mmHg
b. Maintain PaO2 at 100 mmHg in cats (pulse oximetry SaO2 >95% mmHg if arterial blood
gas not available).
2. Keep head at 30-degree elevation and avoid compressing jugular veins and angling the neck.
3. Body temperature should be maintained between 99° and 102°F
4. Maintain PCV between 20% and 40% ideally.
 5. Monitor electrolytes—magnesium maintains cellular enzymatic reactions and mitochondrial
stability in the injured brain.
6. Good nursing care is essential.
a. Monitor and maintain normal body temperature (hypothermia is a common problem).
b. Turn cat from one side to the next or place sternal every 2-4 hours.
C. Express urinary bladder as needed to prevent overdistention.
d. Keep cat dry and prevent soiling.
e. Keep eyes lubricated with artificial tear ointment if blink reflex is affected.
f. Keep tongue moist if una ble to retract tongue.
7. Mannitol if indicated (0.5-1 g/kg over 15-20 minutes IV).
 8. Nutritional support when appropriate.
ili. Head trauma patients with stupor/coma should be treated to reduce the effects of the secondary
injury (continued hemorrhage and edema). (For more details, see chap. 25—General Approach
and Overview of the Neurologic Cat.)
1. Maintain blood pressure of a doppler >90 mmHg or a mean arterial pressure of >60-80 mmHg.
Hetastarch may be administered to cats at a dose of 5 mL/kg over 5-10 minutes. Hypertonic
saline (7% NaCl) may also be used at a dose of 2-3 mL/kg over 15-20 minutes, although
there is some concern that this treatment may disrupt the blood brain barrier.
Chapter 26 Neurologic Emergencies: Brain
335
2. All other treatments should be similar to the treatment of cats with stupor or coma above.
iv. Emergency diagnostic workup (see seizure section above). Tests that may be used to
confirm brain death include BAER testing (brainstem auditory-evoked response testing) and
electroencephalography.
c. Tremors
 i. Causes of generalized twitching in the cat: A thorough history should be taken including possible
exposure to toxins or administration of topical fea control (particularly products that contain
permethrins).
1. Prosencephalic disease (table 26.1)
 2. Metabolic: hypernatremia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia, uremia, hepatic encephalopathy.
3. Toxin: permethrin products (common), hexachlorophene, heavy metals, organophosphates,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, mycotoxins, poisonous plants, strychnine, metaldehyde,
brometha lin 
4. Cerebellar disease
 5. Primary disorders of the muscles, nerves, or neuromuscular junction
ii. Management of tremors
1. Decontamination in case of intoxication
a. For recent oral exposures, may induce emesis and then administer activated charcoal. This
should not be done in impaired animals or those who have ingested a CNS stimulant (see
chap. 39—Toxicological Emergencies).
b. In cases of dermal exposure, the cat should be bathed.
2. Diazepam at 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV may help control tremors.
 3. Methocarbamol: Administer 44 mg/kg IV as slow push (may repeat); do not exceed 330 mg/
kg/day.
a. This is particularly effective and is the drug of choice to treat permethrin-induced tremors
in cats.
C. Diencephalon: comprises the thalamus and hypothalamus
a. Signs of diencephalic disease
1.
 Abnormal temperature regulation (hypothermia, hyperthermia)
ii.Abnormal urine concentrating ability (central diabetes insipidus)
ii.Electrolyte derangements (hypernatremia, hyponatremia)
iv. Blind eye(s) with dilated, unresponsive pupil(s)
V.
Vestibular disease
vi.E
 Endocrine dysfunction including diabetes insipidus, acromegaly, hypothyroidism, and hyperad-
renocorticism (all uncommon in cats)
vii. Abnormal eating patterns
vii. Nonspecific pain (uncommon)
ix. Stupor/coma
b. Causes of diencephalic disease: see table 26.1
c. Emergency management of diencephalic disease
i.
Hypernatremia: Hypernatremia in cats can lead to the shrinkage of brain parenchymal cells and
should be corrected by administration of fluids hypoosmolar to the patient.
1. The water deficit (L) can be calculated as 0.6 × lean BW (kg) X patient's Na/normal
Na+- 1.
a. This calculation should be used as an initial guide, but response varies from cat to cat.
Therefore, initial calculation should be made and rate administered for 1-2 hours, and
then sodium concentration should be evaluated. Adjustments of fluid infusion rate can be
made empirically as sodium concentration changes.
2. Chronic hypernatremia should be corrected over 48-72 hours.
a. Serum sodium should not be decreased faster than O.5 mEq/hr
336
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. If the hypernatremia is corrected too rapidly, it can lead to intracellular swelling within
the brain parenchymal cells.
Hyponatremia: Hyponatremia in cats can result in swelling of brain parenchymal cells with
subsequent brain edema and should be corrected by administration of sodium-containing fluids
such as normal, or in rare, acute, severe cases, hypertonic saline.
1. The sodium deficit (mEq/L) can be calculated as 0.6 × lean BW (kg) × (normal Nat - patient's
Na +).
2. Chronic hyponatremia should also be corrected over 48-72 hours.
a. Serum sodium should not be increased faster than O.5 mEq/hour.
b. If the hyponatremia is corrected too rapidly, it can lead to intracellular dehydration within
the brain parenchymal cells.
c. Initial fluid therapy should be instituted using 0.9% sodium chloride, and the sodium
measured closely (every 1-2 hours for the first 6-12 hours).
d. If the sodium is increasing too quickly, addition of a lower sodium fluid is indicated.
e. Ideally, serum sodium concentration should not be increased greater than 0.5 mmol/L/hr.
iil. Temperature regulation
1. Temperature can vary depending upon if the thermoregulatory center is specifically affected
or not. Temperature should be monitored closely in cats with severely altered mentation and
should be maintained between 99° and 102°F
iv.Mannitol if indicated (0.5-1g/kg over 15-20 minutes IV).
V.
Appropriate intravenous fluid therapy
1. Maintenance fluid therapy is indicated for patients that have normal electrolytes but are not
eating/drinking and do not have ongoing losses (vomiting, diarrhea, fever; see chap. 8).
D. Midbrain/pons/medulla: the portion of the brainstem not including the diencephalon, which is anatomi-
cally and functionally distinct from the remainder of the brainstem
a. Emergency manifestations of disease include vestibular disease and stupor/coma.
b. Vestibular disease: signs include head tilt, nystagmus, stra bismus, and a vestibular ataxia.
i. Peripheral versus central vestibular disease {table 26.2)
ii. Causes of central vestibular disease are similar to those for seizure {see table 26.1), although
metabolic causes are less likely.
ili. Peripheral vestibular disease is caused by a lesion of CN Vlll and may be seen in conjunction
with CN VII dysfunction or a Horner's syndrome. Causes of peripheral vestibular disease:
1. Congenital: Siamese, Burmese, and Tonkinese kittens
 2. Neoplastic: involving temporal bone or middle ear
3. Idiopathic: cats of all ages. Stabilization of clinical signs should occur within 72 hours and
recovery in 2-4 weeks. No other cranial nerve deficits should be present.
Teble 26.2. Distinguishing peripheral from central vestibular disease.
Clinical signs
Peripheral Vestibular Disease
Central Vestibular Disease
 Mentation
Alert +/- disoriented
+/- dull, stupor, coma
Other cranial nerve deficits
+/- cranial nerve 7 dysfunction
+/- cranial nerve 5, 6, 7, 9-11
dysfunction
 Proprioceptive delicits
None
Possible
Nystagmus
Horizontal, rotary; fast phase away
Horizontal, rotary, vertical; fast
from side of head tilt
 phase toward or away from
side of head tilt
Horner's syndrome
common
rare
Vestibular ataxia
Mild to severe
Mild to severe
Degree of head tilt
Mild to severe
Mild to severe
Chapter 26  Neurologic Emergencies: Brain
337
4. Infectious: bacterial otitis media/interna most common (Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and
Pseudomonas spp.)
5. Inflammatory: feline nasopharyngeal polyps (cats often <2-5 years of age); may also see clini-
cal signs of otitis or upper respiratory signs
6.Trauma
 7. Toxin: aminoglycoside antibiotics; loop diuretics; propylene glycol, chlorhexidine, and cet-
rimide; five-lined skink (SW US); some antineoplastics (cisplatin); heavy metals (arsenic, lead,
mercury)
iv. Emergency management of the acutely vestibular cat
1. Lubricate eyes in cases of facial nerve paralysis.
2. Protect animal from self-trauma.
 3. Antihistamines (diphenhydramine, meclizine) may decrease severity of head tilt, nystagmus,
and nausea.
a. Diphenhydramine 2-4 mg/kg PO, IM q8h
b. Meclizine 6.25 mg/5 kg PO q24h
4. Antibiotic therapy in cases of suspected otitis interna/media
a. First-generation cephalosporins
i. Cefazolin 10-30mg/kg IV or IM q8h
i. Cephalexin 22 mg/kg PO q8h
iii. Cefadroxil 22 mg/kg PO q8-12h
b. Clavamox 62.5 mg/cat PO q12 or Baytril 5 mg/kg PO, IV q24h, although this has been
associated with renal degeneration and blindness in some cats.
5. Mannitol if indicated (0.5-1 gram/kg over 15-20 min. IV).
v.  Emergency diagnostic workup (p = peripheral vestibular disease; c = central vestibular disease)
1. CBC/Chemistry/UA +/- thoracic radiographs (p, c)
2. Otoscopic examination (p, c)
 3. Noninvasive blood pressure measurement (c)
4. +/- Skull radiographs (p)
E. Cerebellum
a. Signs of cerebellar disease include tremor of the head and limbs (may worsen with purposeful activ-
ity), nystagmus, decreased menace response, opsithotonus, and dysmetria.
b. Causes of cerebellar disease
i. Generally similar to causes of prosencephalic disease (see table 26.1); in addition, consider cerebel-
lar abiotrophies, cerebellar hypoplasia (common), and toxins {ivermectin, lead, hexachlorophene,
organophosphates, plants, and ketamine anesthesia [especially in Persian cats] ].
c. Emergency management and diagnostic workup: see “Vestibular disease” above.
27
NEUROLOGIC EMERGENCIES:
SPINAL CORD
Jessica M. Snyder
Unique Features
1. A history of rabies vaccination or possible exposure should always be obtained in the cat that
 presents with unexplained paralysis.
2. Clinically significant intervertebral disk disease is uncommon in cats as opposed to dogs, and the
lumbar spine is most often affected. Clinically significant cervical disk disease in cats is extremely
uncommon.
3. Lymphoma is the most common neoplasm to affect the spinal cord in cats, and it most often involves
the thoracic and lumbosacral spine. Lymphoma may be diagnosed on cerebrospinal fluid analysis
in up to one-third of the cases.
4. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy does occur in (most often middle-aged to older) cats and
involves the thoracic and lumbar intumescences more frequently.
5. Feline infectious peritonitis is the most common infectious disease to affect the spinal cord of cats,
although intracranial signs often are seen as well.
6. When a spinal, metabolic, or vascular cause of paraparesis or tetraparesis cannot be identified in
cats, the possibility of intracranial disease should be investigated.
A. General approach: Spinal cord injuries can generally be assigned to one of four neuroanatomic
locations within the spinal cord based on the neurological examination findings (see table 27.1).
B. L4-S3 myelopathy: The approach to the L4-S3 myelopathy is illustrated in figure 27.1. Diffuse lower
motor neuron disease or orthopedic disease should be suspected in the cat with decreased reflexes or
a short-strided gait in both the pelvic and thoracic limbs. With an L4-S3 myelopathy, only the pelvic
limbs are affected.
a. With S1-S3 disease, tail tone and rectal tone may be decreased, and the perineal reflex may be absent.
 Sacrococcygeal dysgenesis is an inherited condition in Manx cats that may be associated with lower
 motor neuron signs of the pelvic limbs, urinary bladder, and anus, generally in a young cat (see figs.
27.2, 27.3, and 27.4).
b. With disease of the L3-5 lumbar spine, the patellar (femoral nerve) reflex may be decreased to absent
and the sciatic nerve reflexes present. With disease of the L6-S3 spine, the patellar reflex may be
increased (pseudohyperreflexia) and the sciatic nerve reflexes depressed (see Special Section).
c.Differential diagnoses for the cat with L4-S3 myelopathy (see table 27.2).
 d. Emergency diagnostic workup:
i. Palpate femoral pulses.
i. CBC, chemistry, UA; FeLV/FIV if status unknown
339
340
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 27.1. Clinical signs of spinal cord disease by spinal cord segment
C1-5
C6-T2
T3-L3
L4-S3
Pelvic limb tone
Normal to ↑ 
Normal to ↑
Normal to ↑ 
Normal to ↓
Pelvic limb reflexes
Normal to ↑ 
Normal to 
个
Normal to ↑
Normal to ↓
Thoracic limb tone
Normal to ↑ 
Normal to ↓
+/-increased
+/-increased
(Schiff-
[Schiff-
Sherrington]
Sherrington]
Thoracic limb
Normal to ↑
Normal to ↓
Normal
Normal
reflexes
 Paraparesis/plegia 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Telraparesis/plegia
Yes
Yes
No
Zo
Proprioceplive
+/- all limbs
+/- all limbs
+/- pelvic limbs
 +/- pelvic limbs
deficits
 Spinal pain 
+/- cervical
+/- cervical
+/- thoracic
+/- lumbar
 Anal and tail tone
Present
Present
Present
↑-/+
Bladder
+/- large, firm,
+/- large, firm,
+/- large, firm,
+/- large,
and difficult 
and difficult
and difficult
flaccid, and
ssandxa ol
easy lo express
Horner's syndrome
Possible,
Possible,
No
Zo
ipsilaleral
ipsilateral
Nole: C = cervical spinal cord segment; T = thoracic spinal cord segment; L = lumbar spinal cord segmenl.
 Proprioceptive placing
Normal
Abnormal
Limb tone and reflexes
Femoral pulses absent
Normal, and cat is lame.
Limb tone and reflexes decreased.
Ischemic neuromyopathy should be suspected.
 Orthopedic disease should be
 Lower motor neuron disease is
 Pursue cardiovascular
ruled out.
suspected.
workup.
Fig. 27.1.
 Algorithm for approaching L4-S3 myelopathy.
ii. Survey spinal radiographs (two-view ideal) if any suspected history of trauma; use caution posi-
tioning the cat until vertebral fracture/luxation is ruled out.
e. Emergency thera peutic plan:
 Bladder expression
ii.
If history of tra uma is unknown, minimize movement/manipulation of lumbar spine; if a fracture
is identified or suspected, the cat may be immobilized by taping to a backboard.
ii. High-dose methylprednisolone sodium succinate (SoluMedrol) treatment for acute spinal
tra uma:
1. This treatment is controversial, and efficacy has not been proven in controlled clinical trials
in small animals. The protocol in human medicine consists of an initial slow intravenous
Chapter 27 Neurologic Emergencies: Spinal Cord
341
Fig. 27.2. Lateral radiograph of the lumbar spine in an 1l-week-old Manx cat. Note the vertebral incongruity
and deformity of L6 and L7 (arrow). There are absent sacral and coccygeal vertebrae.
Fig. 27.3. Ventrodorsal view of the lumbar spine in the same cat. Note the incomplete fusion of the L6 and L7
vertebrae (arrows), which suggests spina bifida in this cat.
injection of 30 mg/kg SoluMedrol, followed by a constant rate infusion of 5.4mg/kg/hr for
the next 23 hours. A modified protocol has been proposed for use in veterinary medicine.
This involves an initial bolus of 30 mg/kg IV with subsequent doses of 15 mg/kg administered
at 2 and 6 hours. Results from human clinical trials suggest that treatment may be deleterious
if administered >8 hours following the trauma.
 2. Potential side effects include hyperglycemia, and SoluMedrol should not be administered to
a hyperglycemic patient. Gastrointestinal ulceration has been reported in dogs receiving the
high-dose SoluMedrol protocol.
iv. Surgical decompression and stabilization is recommended in cases of moderately to severely
 displaced vertebral fracture/luxation, in patients with severe neurological dysfunction (non-
ambulatory paraparesis) and deteriorating neurological status. Advanced imaging (myelography,
342
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 27.4.B
 Eleven-week-old Manx cat in a characteristic posture in the hind end. The cat is tucked under in the
hind end, dropped in the hocks (arrow), and it bunny hops. The tail is absent (arrowhead].
Table 27.2. Differential diagnosis for spinal disease in the cat (common causes presented in bold type).
Degeneralive
Clinically significant interverlebral disk disease [L4-5 most common site]; slorage diseases
 Anomalous
Spinal arachnoid cyst; syringomyelia or hydromyelia; sacrocaudal dysgenesis [Manx
cals]; mulliple carlilaginous exostoses
Neoplasia
Lymphosarcoma [most common in cals 2-8 years old); vertebral neoplasms [most
 cmmon >8 years old); peripheral nerve sheaih tumors; melastalic neoplasms
Nutritional
Metabolic osteodyslrophy
Infeclious
Feline infectious peritonitis; Cryprococcus neoformans [other fungal such as
coccidiodomycosis reporled, but less likely); Toxopiasma gondi;, bacierial (including 
discospondylis); Sarcocystis neurona; FeLV associaled myelopaihy; feline 
polioencephalomyelilis
Trauma
Vertebral fraclure or luxalion (L2-3 and L4-5 most common siles); subdural hemaloma;
Iraumalic intervertebral disk hernialion; fraclure/luxalion of the sacrococcygeal region
due lo Iraction injury; Iraumalic feline ischemic myelopathy (due lo vasospasm or
hrombosis of lumbar arteries supplying the spinal cord]
Vascular
Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopaihy
computed tomography, or magnetic resonance imaging) is indicated when possible to rule out
spinal cord compression, including traumatic intervertebral disk herniation in the absence of
obvious spinal fracture.
.
Nonsurgical management can be attempted in cats with less severe neurological dysfunction, in
cats with no evidence of spinal insta bility or spinal cord compression, or in cases with financial
constraints. Some authors suggest that the prognosis is similar for cats with exogenous spinal
trauma treated surgically and nonsurgically, although study sizes are small. Cats do not tolerate
external support bandages or casts as readily as dogs, although this treatment has been reported.
Conservative therapy should involve 4-6 weeks of cage rest with or without an attempt at
external coa ptation.
vi. In one study of cats with thoracic and lumbar spinal cord injuries due to external trauma, the
survival rate was 50%. The presence or absence of deep pain was the most important prognostic
Chapter 27 Neurologic Emergencies: Spinal Cord
343
indicator, with no cat with paraplegia and loss of deep pain perception surviving. Cats with
intact pain perception made a complete or functional recovery in 15/22 cases (68%).
vi. For cases with no history or radiograph evidence of trauma, the cat should be kept cage confined.
Antibiotics (Clindamycin at 10-15 mg/kg BID) and/or corticosteroids (Prednisone at 1 mg/kg
BID) may be used in case of infectious or inflammatory spinal cord disease if the clinical signs
of neoplastic (lymphoma) or inflammatory disease and may worsen infectious disease. The para-
lyzed, systemically stable cat with no radiographic abnormalities should be referred for advanced
imaging as soon as possible.
C. T3-L3 myelopathy
a. Clinical signs: see table 27.1.
b. There may be focal loss of the cutaneous trunci reflex.
C. Schiff-Sherrington posture is caused by a severe (although not irreversible) lesion of the thoracolum-
bar spine and is characterized by increased tone in the thoracic limbs due to a lack of ascending
inhibition. This posture should not be confused with a lesion in the cranial cervical spine; postural
reactions should be normal in the thoracic limbs in a cat with Schiff-Sherrington posture and
decreased in a cat with a C1-CS myelopathy.
d. Differential diagnoses: see table 27.2.
e. Emergency diagnostic workup: see "B. L4-S3 myelopathy: d. Emergency diagnostic workup."
f. Emergency therapeutic plan: see B.e.
D. C6-T2 myelopathy
a. Clinical signs: see table 27.1.
 b. The cat, if ambulatory, may walk with a short-strided gait in the thoracic limbs and a long-strided,
ataxic gait in the pelvic limbs.
c. The cutaneous trunci response may be absent on the ipsilateral side in case of a lesion affecting the
lateral thoracic nerve where it exits the spinal cord at T1-T3.
d. Respiratory difficulty may occur in severe cases, characterized by an "abdominal"” breathing
pattern.
é. Differential diagnoses: see table 27.2.
f.  Emergency diagnostic workup: see B.d.
i. Perform a blood gas with CO2 (to assess adequacy of ventilation) in the cat with cervical spinal
disease and increased respiratory effort or decreased thoracic wall excursions.
g. Emergency therapeutic plan: see B.e.
i. Ventilation may be required in cases of severe respiratory compromise.
1. PaCO2 >S0mmgHg on arterial blood gas
2. PvCO2 >60-70 mmHg on venous blood gas (as long as perfusion is good)
3. Significant respiratory distress
E. C1-C5 myelopathy
a. Clinical signs of a C1-CS myelopathy: see table 27.1.
b. With very high cervical disease, the postural ability in the thoracic limbs may be worse than that in
the pelvic limbs.
c. With markedly increased muscle tone, the segmental spinal reflexes may paradoxically appear
diminished.
d. May see respiratory difficulty with poor chest excursions and diaphragmatic movements.
e. Differential diagnoses: see table 27.2.
i. Additionally, atlanto-axial instability occasionally occurs in cats, and feline hypervitaminosis A
(in cats fed exclusively liver diets) can be associated with exostoses of cervical and thoracic ver-
tebrae. Diagnosis is based on serum vitamin A concentration.
f. Emergency diagnostic plan: see B.d.
g. Emergency therapeutic plan: see B.e.
344
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Special Section: Performing the Feline Neurological
Examination
General attitude: Is the cat depressed, dull, stuporous (responsive to noxious stimuli), or comatose (unre-
sponsive even to noxious stimuli)? Is the cat mentally appropriate? Does the cat seem disoriented?
 Posture: Is there a head tilt or a body curve, which may suggest vestibular disease? Is there a head turn,
which may suggest forebrain disease? Is there ventroflexion of the neck or a plantigrade stance, which
may suggest neuromuscular disease? Does the cat show decerebrate rigidity (extension of all limbs, with
or without opisthotonus), decerebellate rigidity (opisthotonus, forelimb extension, and hind limb flexion),
or Schiff-Sherrington posture (see fig. 27.3)?
Gait: Observe the animal's gait, if possible. Cats will infrequently walk on a leash. Ideally, take the cat into
a small examination room with the door closed. Many cats will refuse to ambulate in an unfamiliar
environment. Luring them with food or with their open cat carrier may help in some instances. Note
any tendency to circle. Ataxia (an uncoordinated gait) can be classified as a proprioceptive (spinal)
ataxia, characterized by a long-strided, ataxic gait with crossing, interference, and floating of the limbs;
a vestibular ataxia, characterized by tilting, leaning, veering, and circling in tight circles; or a cerebellar
ataxia, characterized by head bobbing, hypermetria or dysmetria, and a truncal sway. Note any lame-
 ness, which may suggest orthopedic or lower motor neuron disease (see fig. 27.1).
Cranial Nerve Examination
Menace response (cranial nerve 2 afferent, cranial nerve 7 efferent). Covering one eye, make a menacing
gesture in front of the open eye. Be careful not to touch the whiskers, and do not move the hand force-
fully enough to direct air movement toward the eye. Some cats will be anxious in the hospital and
reluctant to completely close the eye. If there is doubt about the patient's vision, cotton balls can be
thrown in front of the cat, to observe for visual tracking. Kittens younger than 8-12 weeks normally
may lack a menace response.
Pupillary light response (cranial nerve 2 afferent, cranial nerve 3 efferent). Observe the pupils for any disparity
in size or shape. Shine a bright light into one pupil, and observe for constriction of both pupils. Repeat
with opposite eye. Some cats will be anxious in the hospital and will have dilated pupils that respond
poorly to light. Performing the test in a dark room may enhance the pupil's response to bright light.
Facial sensation and movement (cranial nerve 5 afferent, cranial nerve 7 efferent). Tickle the nares and the
upper and lower lips with a closed hemostat, and observe for moving the head away from the stimulus
and retracting the lip.
Palpebral blink (cranial nerve 5 afferent, cranial nerve 7 efferent). Touch the medial canthus of the eye
with a finger or closed hemostat. The appropriate response is to close the eyelid completely.
sauaqunoau [eiaiel yoq u pue isau ie snuseisku sjgojoued ioy aiasqo (g aaiau leues) snuaeisAn
and dorsal recumbency.
Strabismus {cranial nerves 3, 4, 6). Observe the globe for deviation in any direction, and then elicit physi-
ological nystagmus by moving the head from side to side. A positional ventrolateral strabismus may be
present in an animal with a head tilt, and reflects disease of cranial nerve 8.
Gag response Not routinely performed in cats. The mouth should be opened if possible during the exami-
nation, and the tongue should be inspected for atrophy (cranial nerve 12).
Proprioceptive Testing
All limbs: Knuckle the paw so that the animal is standing on the dorsum of the paw (fig. 27.5). Observe
U punoa au uo med aun ind on noA moe nou lm sieo [u Au uwed md suo o
an abnormal position (fig. 27.6).
Chapter 27 Neurologic Emergencies: Spinal Cord
345
Fig. 27.5。 Preparing to turn the paw so that the animal is standing on the dorsum of the paw.
Fig. 27.6.  Many normal cats will not allow you to put the paw on the ground in an abnormal position.
Postural reactions: Holding the cat under the abdomen, walk the cat forward on the thoracic limbs only.
Then hold the cat up to a table, allowing the limbs to hit the edge of the table. The normal cat should
lift the legs to stand on the table. Now, holding the cat under the axillary regions, walk the cat back-
wards on the pelvic limbs (fig. 27.7).
Segmental Spinal Reflex and Limb Examination
Pelvic limbs: Note the tone in the pelvic limbs and tail.
Quadriceps {Femoral nerve): Percuss the patellar tendon with the straight edge of a pleximeter, and observe
for extension of the stifle (fig. 27.8).
Withdrawal (sciatic nerve): Pinch the toe and observe for flexion of the hock, stifle, and hip (fig. 27.9). The
lateral aspect of the foot is innervated by the sciatic nerve. The medial digit is innervated by the femoral
Fig. 27.7. Waking the cat backward on the pelvic limbs.
Fig.27.8.
 Observing for extension of the stifle.
Fig。 27.9. Observing for flexion of the hock, stifle, and hip.
346
Chapter 27 Neurologic Emergencies: Spinal Cord
347
Fig. 27.10. Observing for extension of the carpus.
Fig. 27.11. Observing for flexion of the carpus, elbow, and shoulder.
 nerve, so in some cases of femoral nerve disease, pinching the medial digit will not elicit withdrawal of
the limb.
 Perineal reflex (perineal and pudendal nerves): Lightly stroke the perineum lateral to the anus. The anal
sphincter should contract and the tail flex.
Thoracic limbs: Note the tone in the thoracic limbs.
Extensor carpi radialis (radial nerve): Percuss the extensor carpi radialis muscle on the dorsal aspect of the
antebrachium with the pointed end of the pleximeter {fig. 27.10). Observe for extension of the carpus
Withdrawal (musculocutaneous, axillary, median, ulnar, and radial nerves): Pinch the toe, and observe for
flexion of the carpus, elbow, and shoulder (fig. 27.11).
Cutaneous trunci response: Can be elicited in some cats by pinching the skin lateral to the thoracolumbar
spine with hemostats. This reflex is considered unreliable in cats.
Hyperpathia: Palpate the spine for pain by firmly pressing on the dorsal spinous processes of the thoracic
and lumbar spine. Move the head and neck in a full range of motion.
348
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Recommended Reading
General
Dewey CW. Disorders of the cauda equina. In Dewey CW, ed, A Practical Guide to Canine and Feline
Neurology, pp 337-355. Ames: Iowa State Press, 2003.
Dewey CW. Myelopathies: disorders of the spinal cord. In Dewey CW, ed, A Practical Guide to Canine
and Feline Neurology, pp 277-336. Ames: Iowa State Press, 2003.
LeCouteur RA. Proceedings of the ESFM Feline Congress, Stockholm, September 2002. Spinal cord disor-
ders. J Feline Med Surg, 2003; 5:121-131.
Marioni-Henry K, Vite CH, Newton AL, et al. Prevalence of diseases of the spinal cord of cats. J Vet Intern
Med, 2004; 18:851-858.
 Spinal Cord Trauma
Anderson A, Coughlan AR. Sacral fractures in dogs and cats: a classification scheme and review of 51 cases.
J Small Anim Pract, 1997; 38:404 409.
Bagley RS. Spinal fracture or luxation. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract, 2000; 30:133-153.
Bagley RS, Harrington ML, Silver GM, et al. Exogenous spinal trauma: clinical assessment and initial
management. Comp Contin Educ Pract Vet, 1999; 21:1138-1143.
Bracken MB, Collins WF, Freeman DF, et al. Efficacy of methylprednisolone in acute spinal cord injury. J
Am Med Ass0c, 1984; 251:45-52.
 Bracken MB, Holford TR. Neurological and functional status 1 year after acute spinal cord injury: estimates
of functional recovery in National Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study I from results modeled in National
Acute Spinal Cord Injury Study IIl. J Neurosurg, 2002; 96:259-266.
Bracken MB, Shepard MJ, Collins WF, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of methylprednisolone or
naloxone in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury. New Engl J Med, 1990; 322:1405-1411.
 so t o t g a yo u  a '     
tirilazad mesylate for 48 hours in the treatment of acute spinal cord injury. J Am Med Assoc, 1997;
277:1597-1604.
Braughler JM, Hall ED. Lactate and pyruvate metabolism in injured cat spinal cord before and after a
single large intravenous dose of methylprednisolone. J Neurosurg, 1983; 59:256-261.
Grasmueck S, Steffen F. Survival rates and outcomes in cats with thoracic and lumbar spinal cord injuries
due to external trauma. J Small Anim Pract, 2004; 45:284-288.
Kraus KH. Medical management of acute spinal cord disesase. In Bonagura, JD, ed, Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XIll, pp 186190. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000.
Kuntz CA. Sacral fractures and sacrococcygeal injuries in dogs and cats. In Bonagura, JD, ed, Kirk's Current
Veterinary Therapy XIll, pp 1023-1026. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000.
Olby N. Current concepts in the management of acute spinal cord injury. J Vet Intern Med, 1999;
13:399-407.
Voss K, Montavon PM. Tension band stabilization of fractures and luxations of the thoracolumbar verte
brae in dogs and cats: 38 cases (1993-2002). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2004; 225{1):78-83.
Congenital Disease
Bagley RS, Silver GM, Kippenes H, et al. Syringomyelia and hydromyelia in dogs and cats. Comp Contin
Educ Vet Pract, 2000; 22:471-478.
349
Bone DL, Wilson RD. Primary syringomyelia in a kitten. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1982; 181:928-929.
Crawley AC, Muntz FH, Haskins ME, et al. Prevalence of Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI mutations in
Siamese Cats. J Vet Intern Med, 2003; 17:495-498.
Galloway AM, Curtis NC, Sommerland SF, et al. Correlative imaging findings in seven dogs and one cat
with spinal arachnoid cysts. Vet Rad Ultrasound, 1999; 40:445-452.
Haskins ME, Bingel SA, Northington JW. Spinal cord compression and hindlimb paresis in cats with
Mucopolysaccharidosis VI. J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1983; 182:983-985.
Plummer SB, Bunch SE, Khoo LH, et al. Tethered spinal cord and an intradural lipoma associated with
meningocele in a Manx-type cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1993; 203:1159-1161.
Vignoli M, Rossi F, Sarli G. Spinal subarachnoid cyst in a cat. Vet Rad Ultrasound, 1999; 40:116-119.
Watson AG. Congenital occipitoatlantoaxial malformation in a cat. Compend Contin Educ Prac Vet,
1985; 7:245-252.
Wilson JW. Spina bifida in the dog and cat. Compend Contin Educ Prac Vet, 1982; 4:626-632,
636-637.
Degenerative/Nutritional
Goldman AL. Hypervitaminosis A in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1992; 200:1970-1972.
Mesfin GM, Kusewitt D, Parker A. Degenerative myelopathy in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1980;
176:62-64.
Polizopoulou ZS, Kazakos G, Patsikas MN, et al. Hypervitaminosis A in the cat: a case report and review
of the literature. J Feline Med Surg, 2005; 7:363-368.
Intervertebral Disk Disease
Knipe MF, Vernau KM, Hornof WJ, et al. Intervertebral disk extrusion in six cats. J Feline Med Surg,
2001; 3:161-168.
Lu D, Lamb CR, Wesselingh K, et al. Acute intervertebral disc extrusion in a cat: clinical and MRI findings.
J Feline Med Surg, 2002; 4:65-68.
45:327-330.
Munana KR, Olby NJ, Sharp NH, et al. Intervertebral disk disease in 10 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc,
2001; 37:384-389.
Rayward RM. Feline intervertebral disk disease: a review of the literature. Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol
2002; 15:137-144.
Fibrocartilaginous Embolic Myelopathy
Abramson CJ, Platt SR, Stedman NL. Tetraparesis in a cat with fibrocartilaginous emboli. J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc, 2002; 38:153-156.
MacKay AD, Rusbridge C, Sparkes AH, et al. MRI characteristics of suspected acute spinal cord infarction
in two cats, and a review of the literature. J Feline Med Surg, 2005; 7:101-107.
 Mikszewski JS, Van Winkle TJ, Troxel MT. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy in five cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc, 2006; 42:226-233.
Scott HW, O'Leary MT. Fibrocartilaginous embolism in a cat. J Small Anim Pract, 1996; 37:228-231.
Turner PV, Percy DH, Allyson K. Fibrocartilaginous embolic myelopathy in a cat. Can Vet J, 1995;
36:712-713.
350
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Spinal Neoplasia
lumbar spinal lesions in cats. Prog Vet Neurol, 1990; 1:473-475.
Lane SB, Kornegay JN, Duncan JR, et al. Feline spinal lymphosarcoma: a retrospective evaluation of 23
cats. J Vet Intern Med, 1994; 8:99-104.
Levy MS, Mauldin G, Kapatkin AS, et al. Non-lymphoid vertebral canal tumors in cats: 11 cases {1987-
1995). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1997; 210:663-664.
Noonan M, Kline KL, Meleo K. Lymphoma of the central nervous system: a retrospective study of 18 cats.
Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet, 1997; 19:497-503.
O'Brien D. Osteosarcoma of the vertebra causing compression of the thoracic spinal cord in a cat. J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc, 1980; 16:497499.
                
canal in a cat. J Vet Med Sci, 2007; 69:683-686.
Spodnick GJ, Berg J, Moore FM, et al. Spinal lymphoma in cats: 21 cases (1976-1989). J Am Vet Med
Ass0c, 1992; 200:373-376
42:306-310.
 Sumner J, Simpson DJ. Surgical management of a recurrent spinal meningioma in a cat. Aust Vet J, 2007;
85:276-280.
 Infectious Myelopathies
Addie DD, Jarett O. Feline coronavirus infection. In Greene CE, ed, Infectious Diseases of the Dog and
Cat, 2nd ed, pp 58-69. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1998.
Carmichael KP, Bienzle D, McDonnell JJ. Feline leukemia virus-associated myelopathy in cats. Vet Pathol,
39;536-545.
Dubey JP, Benson J, Larson MA. Clinical sarcocystis neurona encephalomyelitis in a domestic cat following
routine surgery. Veterinary Parasitology, 2003; 112:261-267.
Dubey JP, Lappin MR. Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis. In Greene CE, ed, Infectious diseases of the dog
and cat, 2nd ed, pp 493-509. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1998.
 Foureman P, Longshore R, Plummer S. Spinal cord granuloma due to Coccidioides immitis in a cat. J Vet
Intern Med, 2005; 19:373-376.
Heidel JR, Dubey JP, Blythe LL, et al. Myelitis in a cat infected with Toxoplasma gondi and feline immu
nodeficiency virus. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1990; 196:316-318.
Kline KL, Joseph RJ, Averill DR. Feline infectious peritonitis with neurologic involvement: clinical and
pathologic findings in 24 cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 1994; 30:111-118.
Kornegay JN. Multiple neurologic deficits: inflammatory diseases. Probl Vet Med, 1991; 3:426-439.
Legendre AM, Whitenack DL. Feline infectious peritonitis with spinal cord involvement in two cats. J Am
Vet Med Ass0c, 1975; 167:31-32.
Malik R, Latter M, Love DN. Bacterial discospondylitis in a cat. J Small Anim Pract, 1990; 31:404.
Norsworthy GD. Discospondylitis as a cause of posterior paresis. Feline Pract, 1979; 9:39.
Packer RA, Coates JR, Cook CR, et al. Sublumbar abscess and diskospondylitis in a cat. Vet Radiol
Ultrasound, 2005; 46:396-399.
Singh M, Foster DJ, Child G, et al. Inflammatory cerebrospinal fluid analysis in cats: clinical diagnosis and
outcome. J Feline Med Surg, 2005; 7:77-93.
Vinayak A, Kerwin SC, Pool RR. Treatment of thoracolumbar spinal cord compression associated with
Histoplasma capsulatum infection in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2007; 230:1018-1023.
Watson E, Roberts RE. Discospondylitis in a cat. Vet Radiol Ultrasound, 1993; 34:397-398.
28
NEUROLOGIC EMERGENCIES:
PERIPHERAL
Jessica M. Snyder
Unique Features
1. Ventroflexion is a common clinical sign in cats with neuromuscular disease and is most commonly
associated with hypokalemia, myasthenia gravis, hyperthyroidism, and thiamine deficiency.
 2. Megaesophagus and regurgitation are less common in cats with acquired myasthenia gravis than in
'ssop
3. The prognosis for cats with myasthenia gravis is better than that for dogs, and the one year mortal-
ity rate for cats is 15%
4. Diabetes mellitus should always be ruled out in the cat that presents with a plantigrade stance.
5. Cats are more sensitive to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, and immunosuppression with prednisone
is often the most effective therapy in feline myasthenia.
A. General approach
a. Broadly, the peripheral nervous system can be subdivided into three major neuroanatomic locations:
muscle, peripheral nerve, and neuromuscular junction. Clinical signs of peripheral nervous system
disease are generally similar for these three divisions (see box 28.1).
B. Muscle
 a. Inflammatory myopathies
i.  Infectious (see table 28.1)
a. Clinical signs: related to CNS, respiratory, and gastrointestinal signs; myopathic signs
include muscle wea kness and possible muscle pain.
b. Diagnosis
i. Serum IgM titer >1:64.
ii. A fourfold increase in the serum IgG titer is indicative of a recent or active infection.
c. Treatment: Clindamycin 10 mg/kg TID +/- trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 10-15mg/kg PO
q12h pyrimethamine 0.25-1.0 mg/kg PO q8-12h.
ii. Immune-mediated (see table 28.1)
b. Noninflammatory myopathies
i.Metabolic {see table 28.1}
1. Hypokalemic myopathy: total potassium depletion caused by decreased potassium intake,
increased excretion secondary to chronic renal failure, polyuria/polydipsia secondary to
351
352
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 28.1. Clinical signs of peripheral nervous system disease.
●Short-strided, choppy gait
Muscle weakness
Ventroflexion of the neck
·Regurgitation (megaesophagus) and/or dyspnea
Muscle atrophy (rarely hypertrophy with primary muscle disorders)
·Hypotonia and/or hyporeflexia
Fecal and urinary incontinence
Table 28.1. Causes of myopathy and neuropathy in cats.
Myopathies
Neuropathies
Inflmmatory:
Toxoplasma gondi; Clostridial myositis;
 Feline leukemia virus (may see in
Infectious
Feline immunodeficiency virus
association with urinary
incontinence); feline 
immunodeficiency virus (generally
subclinicall; mycobacterial neuritis
Inflammatory:
Feline idiopathic polymyositis; systemic
 Paraneoplastic; chronic inflammatory
Immune
lupus erythematosus; paraneoplastic;
 mediated
toxin Ipenicillamine, cimetidine,
toxin (Salinomycin; Acrylamide;
trimethoprim-sulfa)
Pyrethrins/pyrethroid!
Congenital
Feline muscular dystrophy; myotonia
congenita; hereditary myopathy of
Devon Rex cats; defects of glycogen
metabolism
Metabolic
Hypokalemic myopathy; glucocorticoid
 Diabetic neuropathy; hyperthyroid
myopathy; hyperthyroid myopathy:
reuropathy; primary
hypoadrenocorticism-associated
hyperlipoproteinemia
myopathy; hypokalemic periodic
paralysis
hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperaldosteronism (often accompanied with hypertension,
and hypomagnesemia.
2. The most life-threatening concern for severe hypokalemia is respiratory muscle weakness
resulting in hypoventilation and even respiratory arrest. This usually does not occur until
potassium is <2.0-2.5 mmol/L. Mechanical ventilation will be required in these cases until
normal potassium concentration is restored and respiratory muscle weakness is resolved.
 a. Laboratory abnormalities: CK elevated 10-30 times normal; serum potassium concentration
<3.5 mEq/L; serum BUN and creatinine may be elevated with with renal disease.
b. Treatment:
i. In the stable animal, begin supplementation with potassium gluconate at 2-4mEq PO
BID until signs resolve and then maintain at 2-4 mEq PO per day.
ii. In more severe cases, intravenous potassium chloride may be used at a dose not to exceed
0.5 mEq/kg/hr.
3. Congenital (see table 28.1)
1. Most congenital feline myopathies manifest by 12-18 months of age.
C. Nerve
a. Polyneuropathies
Chapter 28Neurologic Emergencies:Peripheral
353
i.Chronic (see table 28.1)
 1. Diabetic neuropathy: Classic clinical signs include a pelvic limb distal polyneuropathy with a
plantigrade stance; strict glycemic control reverses the clinical signs of this neuropathy in some
cats.
2. Hyperthyroid neuropathy: Clinical signs include muscle tremors and ventroflexion of the neck;
weakness typically results from the myopathic effects of disease and usually reverses with
control of the hyperthyroidism.
i. Acute onset of flaccid tetraparesis: uncommon in cat; differential diagnoses include fulminant
myasthenia gravis, black widow spider (preceded by muscle spasticity and pain progressing to
flaccid tetraparesis) and coral snake envenomation, organophosphate and salinomycin toxicity,
and myopathies (see above); tick paralysis and polyradiculoneuritis reported in cats but very
uncommon.
b. Mononeuropathies (see table 28.1)
i.Peripheral nerve sheath tumors: uncommon; lymphoma, sarcoma, and carcinomas may also affect
the peripheral nerve.
i. Trauma: Trauma can cause either temporary signs resulting from a localized conduction block
in the nerve or more severe permanent signs if complete transection of the axons occurs.
Treatment consists of stabilizing other systemic injuries and tincture of time. The rate of axonal
regrowth is 1-4mm/day. The time period expected for return of function of most traumatic
peripheral nerve injuries is within 6 months. Beyond this time, it is unlikely that there will
be return of function. The most important prognostic indicator is presence of deep pain
sensation.
1. Brachial plexus avulsion: ventral nerve roots more often affected; may see ipsilateral Horner's
syndrome (a partial Horner's syndrome with miosis of the pupil should not be confused with
intracranial trauma); may also see loss of the ipsilateral cutaneous trunci reflex; cats with
cranial avulsions {less common than caudal plexus avulsions) may still be able to fix the elbow
and bear weight on the limb.
a. Treatment for this injury includes physical therapy (passive range of motion exercises and
massage, to prevent muscle contracture) and protecting the limb from self-mutilation and
from dragging on the ground. If there is no improvement within 4-6 months, it is not likely
that there will be return of function, and amputation may be necessary. The prognosis for
return to function is guarded.
 2. Pelvic limb: Approximately 10% of pelvic fractures in cats are associated with peripheral nerve
injury (generally of the sciatic nerve); sciatic nerve injury may also be seen with intramuscular
injections, bites, and lacerations of the caudal thigh; cats with sciatic nerve injuries are able
to bear weight on the limb, but they walk with a plantigrade stance.
a. Therapy for this condition includes surgical correction of pelvic fractures and tincture
of time. Sciatic nerve paralysis may be treated with talocrural joint fusion and muscle
transfer.
ili. Vascular: ischemic neuromyopathy; most affected cats have hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
and emboli lodge in the aortic trifurcation (brachial artery occlusion has also been reported);
suspect if there are poor peripheral pulses, swollen and painful limb muscles, and cyanotic food
pads. The prognosis for this condition is guarded, with a median survival of 117 days and recur-
  s o po - d   p   a
Heart Disease).
D. Neuromuscular junction
a. Myasthenia gravis: rare in cats
i.  Acquired and congenital forms are possible; the acquired form involves production of antibod-
ies against acetylcholine receptors in the postsynaptic membrane. Acquired myasthenia gravis
is most commonly noted in Abyssinian cats. Myasthenia gravis may also be associated with
354
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
methimazole administration in hyperthyroid cats {extremely rare; <0.5% of cats receiving
methimazole) and the  clinical signs can be reversible  when methimazole treatment is
discontinued.
ii. Clinical signs
1. Appendicular muscle weakness (85% of cats)
2. Regurgitation or vomiting (60%)
3. Ventroflexion of the neck (20%)
4. Decreased palpebral reflex (60%)
iii. Diagnostic testing
1. Thoracic radiographs
a. Cranial mediastinal mass present in 15% of cases.
b. Megaesophagus in 35-40% of cases.
2. Administration of edrophonium chloride (0.1 mg/kg IV not to exceed 0.5 mg/cat IV following
pretreatment with atropine [0.02-0.04 mg/kg atropine subcutaneously 15 minutes prior to
edrophonium administration]) may result in improvement in muscle strength.
3. Serum Ach-receptor antibody titer >0.3 nM/L
iv. Treatment: pyridostigmine (0.25 mg/kg/day) and corticosteroids (0.25-2mg/kg/day prednisone
PO).
b. Toxins
i. Organophosphate and carbamate toxicity
1. Clinical signs: tachycardia; tremors; muscle weakness; respiratory paralysis; salivation; lacri-
mation and bronchial hypersecretion; vomiting; urination; diarrhea; and possible seizures and
coma.
2. Treatment
a. Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM, 20-50 mg/kg diluted in 10% glucose solution and adminis-
tered slowly IV) if animal showing nicotinic signs {muscle stiffness, muscle fasiculations,
tremors, wea kness, flaccid paralysis).
i. 2-PAM is contraindicated in cases of carbamate intoxication.
ii. Prior to administration, atropine should be administered at a dose of 0.1 mg/kg IV,
followed by a dose of 0.3 mg/kg IM.
b. Diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV) may be administered to control seizure activity.
therapy, potentially mechanical ventilation, and correction of meta bolic acidosis.
i. Tick paralysis: in cats, occurs only in Australia.
iii. Elapid neurotoxins; envenomation by black widow spider; toad poisoning; algal blooms (see
chap. 40)
iv. Drug-induced neuromuscular blockade; aminoglycoside antibiotics; streptomycin, gentamicin;
antiarrhythmic agents; phenothiazines; methoxyflura ne; magnesium
E. Autonomic nervous system/miscellaneous conditions
a. Dysautonomia: rare in the United States in cats; cause undetermined but most likely is a result of
changes in the autonomic ganglia affecting both sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems;
poor prognosis.
i. Clinical signs: may develop over a few hours to several weeks and include anorexia, obtundation,
gastrointestinal stasis, dry mucous membranes, constipation, urinary bladder atony, reduced tear
production, regurgitation or vomiting, protrusion of the nictating membranes, mydriasis, and
bradycardia
ii. Diagnostic testing
1. Response to one drop of 0.1% pilocarpine in the eye
a. There should be no change in normal cats. Denervation hypersensitivity in cats with dys
autonomia results in miosis and retraction of the third eyelid.
Chapter 28 Neurologic Emergencies: Peripheral
355
2. One drop of 0.25% physostigmine in the eye
a. Rapid miosis will occur in the normal cat and no response will occur in the cat with
dysa utonomia.
3. Plasma catecholamine assay
a. May be decreased in cats with dysautonomia, but these are not commonly measured.
iii. Treatment: primarily symptomatic and supportive
 1. Promote gastrointestinal motility
a. Cisapride 2.5-5.0 mg/cat PO q8-12h
b. Metoclopromide 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM, IV, PO 30 minutes prior to feeding
2. Decrease urinary retention
a. Bethanecol 2.5 mg/cat PO q8-12h (monitor for bradycardia/cardiac arrhythmias)
3. Stimulate lacrimation
a. Pilocarpine 1% one drop OU q6h
4. General supportive care
a. Express bladder, colon care
b. Physical therapy
C. Maintain feeding and hydration
b. Megaesophagus: uncommon in cats. Prognosis is fair to guarded.
and other congenital disease, dysautonomia, esophageal stricture, and lead toxicosis.
ii. Treatment:
2. Supportive care
a. Sucralfate 0.2S g/cat PO BID-TID to reduce esophagitis secondary to regurgitation
b. Hz antagonists (famotidine at 0.5 mg/kg SID-BID or ranitidine at 2.5-3.5 mg/kg BID). Used
to decrease stomach pH, which may help reduce esophageal irritation in dogs with reflux
esophagitis.
c. Metoclopramide 0.2-0.4 mg/kg as a prokinetic to promote gastrointestinal motility. Of
questionable benefit with megaesophagus.
d. Feed from elevated position (gruel/liquid diet) and encourage to remain in upright position
for 10-15 minutes after feeding.
c. Tetanus: rare in cats, but generalized and localized forms of disease have been reported in cats.
i. Clinical signs: seen within 21 days {usually S-10 days) of wound contamination and may progress
to generalized contraction and rigidity of appendicular and facial muscles, then recumbency with
extension of all four limbs and opisthotonus. Respiratory depression and paralysis may occur in
 generalized cases, and mechanical ventilation may be required.
ii. Treatment
1. Wound debridement
2. Antibiotics such as penicillin G (20,000-80,000 IU/kg IV or IM TID), metronidazole (10 mg/
kg IV BID-TID), or clindamycin {3-10 mg/kg IV BID-TID)
 1 mg/kg IM +/- dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV. Corticosteroids are indicated if a hypersen-
sitivity reaction to antitoxin is suspected.
4. Sedation if needed (intravenous diazepam 0.5 mg/kg IV PRN, phenobarbital 1-3 mg/kg IV
BID, acepromazine 0.02-0.1 mg/kg IV, IM, SC PRN (caution as acepromazine can cause
hypotension)
5. Minimize stimulation (keep cat in a quiet, dimly lit area).
6. Nursing care
d. Urinary system dysfunction: Failure to completely empty the bladder can be attributed to failure of
detrusor contractile function, anatomic or functional urethral obstruction, or both. Anatomic
356
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
obstructive disorders are more common and should always be ruled out, especially if no other neu-
rologic deficits are present.
i. An upper motor neuron bladder is large, firm, and difficult to express. The urethral sphincter
tone may be increased. This type of bladder is seen with spinal lesions cranial to L5-7.
1. Diagnostic evaluation: See chapter 27 for diagnostic approach to spinal cord disease.
Additionally, consider CBC, serum chemistry, urinalysis and urine culture, and imaging of
the urinary tract (survey or contrast radiography or ultrasonography). Urodynamic studies
(cystometrogram, urethral pressure profiles) may add additional information.
2. Therapeutic plan
a. Address primary neurologic, meta bolic, or obstructive disease.
 b. Prevent urinary bladder from becoming overdistended. Place indwelling urinary catheter
to empty bladder and to keep bladder small, or intermittently catheterize or manually
express bladder.
c. Treat urinary tract infection, if present. Monitor for development of urinary tract
infection.
d. Decrease urethral resistance with diazepam (0.2-0.5 mg/kg IV prior to expression) or
phenoxybenzamine (1.25-5 mg/cat PO SID-BID). Blood pressure should be monitored in
the animal receiving phenoxybenzamine, and the effects may not be seen for 2-3 days. This
drug should be used with caution in cases of cardiac disease, renal disease, or diabetes
mellitus. Oral diazepam may be used in cats, but owners should be cautioned of the risk
of hepatic necrosis.
ii. A lower motor neuron bladder is flaccid, distended, and easily expressed. This type of bladder
is seen with spinal lesions caudal to L5-L7, with peripheral neuropathies, and with autonomic
dysfunction (dysautonomia). Bladder atony may also result from chronic distention secondary
to urinary retention (seen in cats that are stressed, painful, or receiving anticholinergic agents,
opioids, or tricyclic antidepressants, or post urethral obstruction).
1. Diagnostic evaluation: See diagnostic approach to upper motor neuron bladder above.
2. Therapeutic plan: See therapeutic plan for upper motor neuron bladder above.
a. Consider Bethanecol at 1.s-5 mg per cat PO TID. Bethanecol is contraindicated in cases
of gastrointestinal or urinary obstruction. Bethanecol may increase urethral resistance in
some cases, and should be administrated with phenoxybenzamine (1.25-5mg/cat PO
q12-24h) or diazepam (0.1-0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h, risk of hepatotoxicity in some cats) if
this occurs.
b. Other agents used less frequently to increase bladder contraction include:
i. Metoclopramide 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM, PO, SC q6h
ii. Cisapride 0.1-1 mg/kg PO q8-12h
1. Cisapride is no longer commercially available; must be obtained through a com-
pounding pharmacy.
29
HEMATOLOGIC EMERGENCIES:
BLEEDING
Susan G. Hackner
Unique Features
 Primary thrombocytopenia is uncommon in cats. The majority of cats with thrombocytopenia have
an underlying disease. Most common are viral (FeLV, FIP), neoplasia, and hepatobiliary disease.
 DIC in cats is characterized by microvascular thrombosis. Overt hemorrhage is unusual. When it
Occurs, it is a late-stage event, always preceded by thrombosis.
1.General
a. Bleeding disorders may be due to disorders of primary or secondary hemostasis, or both.
i.1
Primary hemostatic disorders result from either thrombocytopenia, platelet dysfunction (throm-
bopathia), or rarely, from vasculopathies.
i1.S
 Secondary hemostatic disorders (coagulopathies) result from low concentration or activity of
coagulation factors.
ii. Mixed hemostatic disorders occur when primary and secondary disorders coexist, such as in dis-
seminated intra vascular coagulation (DIC).
b. Spontaneous bleeding disorders are uncommon in cats, but subclinical hemostatic abnormalities are
relatively common, particularly in cats with underlying disease, such as neoplasia, viral disease, or
hepatopathy.
c. The vast majority of bleeding disorders in cats are acquired.
d. Bleeding disorders should always be considered life-threatening. Even the stable patient can decom-
pensate rapidly due to massive bleeding, or bleeding into a vital organ.
2. Presenting signs
 a. Clinical signs are extremely variable and depend on the site, extent, and duration of hemorrhage, as
well as the presence of any underlying disorder.
 a  s     a 
C. The patient with a bleeding disorder may demonstrate:
i.
 Abnormal hemostatic testing, in the absence of any evidence of bleeding.
i. Bleeding that is evident to the owner (e.g., epistaxis)
ii. Apparently unrelated symptoms due to bleeding (such as blindness due to hyphema)
iv. Compromised hemodynamics and/or organ function as a result of acute hemorrhage:
1. If acute, substantial blood loss has occurred, signs of hypoperfusion predominate.
2. Hemorrhage into the brain, spinal cord, myocardium, or lungs can result in acute organ com-
promise without significant anemia or shock.
357
358
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Primary survey
2. Establish vascular access.
3. Collect pretreatment blood samples:
minimum database (MDB)
blood smear
EDTA plasma (for later CBC, reticulocyte count, platelet count, blood typing immune
testing, PCR, etc.)
serum (for later chemistry profile, serologic testing, etc.)
citrated plasma (for later coagulation testing)
4. Initiate therapy to stabilize the patient:
support of airway and/or breathing, if indicated
control of hemorrhage, if present
fluid therapy, as needed to maintain adequate perfusion
 blood transfusion, if sufficient compromise exists due to massive hemorrhage or
anemic crisis
5.Secondary survey
complete history
thorough physical examination
MDB interpretation
6. Formulate problem list and differentials
7. Formulate plan, and write orders, for ongoing supportive care and monitoring
8. Diagnostic workup
9.Specific therapy
Fig. 29.1. Approach to the emergent bleeding patient.
v.Signs related to anemia from subacute or chronic hemorrhage
the patient is weak and lethargic, but hemodynamically stable. Mucus membranes are pale,
and a flow murmur may be evident.
2. Severe anemia that overwhelms compensatory mechanisms results in an anemic crisis. The
patient is depressed or moribund, with pallor, tachypnea, tachycardia, and bounding pulses.
 3. Initial stabilization and monitoring
 a. The patient in crisis requires rapid intervention, with an initial goal of stabilizing life-threatening
emergencies (fig. 29.1).
 to the Critically Ill Cat). Hypovolemic shock, an anemic crisis, and pulmonary or brain hemorrhage
constitute life-threatening situations in the bleeding patient.
C. Venous access should be established without delay, by placement of a peripheral catheter.
d. Blood is collected from the catheter immediately following placement, for a minimum database,
including a PCV and total solids (TS),
e. Additional blood samples should be collected prior to initiating therapy, to avoid treatment-induced
changes in laboratory parameters. These should include:
i.blood smear
ii. serum sample
ii. EDTA-plasma sample
iv. citrated-plasma sample(s) (preferably two)
f. Initial therapy is aimed at stabilizing the patient while diagnostic testing continues. It includes:
i. Control of hemorrhage, where possible
ii. Blood volume replacement, if the patient is hypoperfused. In hemorrhagic shock, hypoperfusion
constitutes the most life-threatening problem. Initial therapy, therefore, is aimed at correcting
Ou si aaui 'aqeea si pooa iun (iooo -/+ Pioeisa adeaun Png aaissaaae ia uoisnad
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
359
justification to withhold fluid therapy in the anemic patient. Hypoperfusion will only serve to
exacerbate the tissue hypoxia.
ii. Blood transfusion, if anemic crisis or massive hemorrhage
 g. Secondary survey. Once stabilization is initiated, attention should be focused on the rapid establish-
be formulated, and orders written, for supportive care and monitoring (see chap. 1—Approach to
the Critically Ill Cat).
i. Absolute cage rest should be prescribed and enforced.
i. Avoid unnecessary surgical or medical procedures that could exacerbate bleeding.
ii. Subcutaneous injections should be avoided where possible.
iv. Venipuncture should only be performed when required for platelet enumeration. Venipuncture
sites should be held off with manual pressure for 5 minutes.
V.
 Jugular veins should never be used for venipuncture in the coagulopathic patient as bleeding
from this site can be difficult, if not impossible, to control.
vi. An intravenous sampling catheter can usually be safely placed in the femoral vein and used to
collect all other blood samples.
vi. The patient should be closely monitored for evidence of ongoing or recurrent hemorrhage. This
includes, at a minimum:
1. Perfusion status, mucous membrane color, pulse rate, and quality
2. General attitude
 3. Respiratory rate and effort
4. Neurologic status
5. Temperature
6. PCV/TS
7. Blood pressure
4. Clinical assessment
a. General: The clinical assessment of the bleeding patient includes a history, physical examination, and
a few selected screening laboratory tests. The information gleaned from these should answer three
 initial questions that will narrow the list of differentials and guide a systematic and efficient diagnostic
workup:
 Is the bleeding due to local factors, or does the patient have a generalized bleeding disorder?
ii.
If a systemic bleeding disorder does exist, what is the nature of the defect (primary or secondary
hemostasis)?
ii. Is the defect congenital or acquired?
b.History
1.
The history should aim to determine whether bleeding is due to local factors or to a systemic
bleeding disorder, and to try to narrow down the possible etiologies.
 ii.  The signalment of the patient may be informative. Inherited disorders are generally apparent
within the first 6 months of life. Some milder forms, however, may not be diagnosed until
surgery, tra uma, or concurrent disease precipitate bleeding.
ii.  Questions should ascertain:
1. If there is bleeding in multiple sites that may indicate a systemic bleeding disorder
2. If there is a history of repeated bleeding episodes that may indicate an inherited or longstand-
ing disorder
3. Whether bleeding occurred spontaneously or was precipitated by injury or surgery. Some
disorders (e.g., thrombocytopenia) produce spontaneous bleeding, whereas milder forms of
these diseases and other conditions {e.g., hemophilia) more commonly require some form of
trauma or surgery to ma ke the impairment clinically apparent.
360
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 29.1。 Clinical features helpful in differentiating primary and secondary hemostatic disorders.
Disorders of Primary Hemostasis
Disorders of Secondary Hemostasis
 Petechiae common
 Petechiae rare
Hematomas rare
Hematomas common
Bleeding often involves mucous membranes
Bleeding into muscles and joints common
Bleeding usually at muliple sites
Bleeding frequently localized
Prolonged bleeding from cuts or venipuncture
Bleeding may be deloyed at onset, or stop and start again
4. The response to previous trauma. This may enable the clinician to date the onset of the
disorder. A patient who has tolerated surgery is unlikely to have an inherited bleeding
disorder.
 5. Previous or current illnesses. Some systemic diseases can compromise hemostasis and precipi-
tate clinical bleeding, particularly in a patient with an already compromised hemostatic
mecha nism.
 6. Past and present medications. Numerous drugs have been associated with thrombocytopenia
(e.g., methimazole), thrombopathias, and coagulopathies (e.g., phenobarbital).
 7. Home environment and exposure to other cats, to elucidate the potential of infectious disease
 8. Environmental and behavioral history, to determine potential exposure to toxins, trauma, or
insect vectors
 9. Medical history of family members, where available
c. Physical examination
1.
 A thorough physical examination should focus particular attention on the following:
1. The distribution and extent of current hemorrhage
a. This requires careful examination of all body systems, including the skin, mucous mem-
branes, eyes, and joints, as well as the urine and feces. The ear pinna is a common site of
petechiation in the cat.
 b. The presence of hemorrhage in more than one site suggests a bleeding disorder.
c. The nature of the hemorrhage helps to characterize the defect (table 29.1).
i. Defects of primary hemostasis are characterized by petechiation or ecchymosis, as well
as spontaneous bleeding from mucosal surfaces, including epistaxis, gingival bleeding,
hyphema, hematuria, and melena.
ii.Defects of secondary hemostasis are usually characterized by single or multiple hema
tomas and bleeding into subcutaneous tissue, body ca vities, muscles, or joints.
ii. Some acquired disorders, such as DIC, defy this classification because multiple hemo
static defects are present.
2. Evidence of any systemic disease that may impair hemostasis. These include: neoplasia, viral
disease, and hepatopathy.
3. Evidence of immune-mediated disease (e.g., cutaneous or mucocutaneous lesions, arthropa-
thy, chorioretinitis)
d. Screening laboratory tests (table 29.2)
i.
The screening laboratory tests globally evaluate aspects of primary and secondary hemostasis.
their limitations in mind.
ii. The usual screening panel includes platelet enumeration, prothrombin time (PT), partial throm-
boplastin time (PTT), and fibrin split products (FSPs) or D-dimers. In the emergency setting,
platelet enumeration, PT, and PTT {or an activated clotting time, ACT) are generally sufficient
to allow characterization and to guide further testing.
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding 
361
Table 29.2. Screening laboratory tests of hemostasis
Screening Test
Component(s) Evaluated
Reference Values
 Primary hemostasis
Platelet enumeration
Platelet numbers
200-600×10/μ
Platelet estimation?
Patelet numbers
11-25/hpf
BMBT
Patelet numbers and Function,
1.4-3.2 min.
vascular integrity
Secondary hemostasis
Activated clotting time (ACT)°
 Intrinsic and common pathways:
50-75 sec.
Factors XIll, Xl, IX, Vill, X, V,II,
 and fibrinogen
 Prothrombin time (PT)b
Extrinsic and common
9-12sec.c
pathways: factors Ill, Vll, X,
V,ll and fibrinogen
 Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)b
As with ACT, but more sensitive
15-21 sec.
Fibrinolysis
Fibrin split products (FSPs)b
Products of fibrinolysis
<10μg/mL
D-dimersb
Products of fibrinolysis, specific
<250mg/dL
for lysis of cross-linked fibrin
a. In-house test.
b. In-house testing optionis) available.
c. Reference values are loboratory- and technique-dependent. Normal values for patient-side coagulometers are
provided by the manufacturer.
iv. General principles
1. Blood samples should be collected prior to the initiation of any therapy.
2. Hemostatic tests make high demands on sampling techniques. Improper technique or han-
dling leads to false results.
3. For platelet enumeration, EDTA blood is required. Most of the other hemostatic tests are
performed on citrated blood or plasma. Citrated tubes contain sufficient volume of citrate
solution such that the ratio of citrate to blood is 1:9. Should there be deviations in this ratio,
false test results are obtained. This ratio, however, is valid for animals with a physiologic
hematocrit. It can be adjusted via controlled underfilling for patients with a markedly
decrea sed hematocrit.
4. Blood collection should be performed without, or after brief (<30-second), venous congestion.
Puncture should be quick and atraumatic. Puncture of the same vein should not be repeated
within 30 minutes. Venipuncture of the jugular veins should be avoided in the patient with
a bleeding tendency, as bleeding from this site can be extremely difficult to control.
inversion and rotation.
V.
Platelet enumeration (platelet count)
1. The platelet count detects quantitative platelet disorders. A count should be performed in all
patients with a suspected bleeding disorder.
2. Feline platelets tend to clump rapidly, placing high demand on rapid and atraumatic sam-
pling. Even with excellent technique, however, clumping can occur. Decreased counts, there-
fore, should always be verified via blood smear examination.
3. In cats, there is considerable overlap between erythrocyte and platelet volumes, resulting in
erroneous results from automated cell counters. Feline platelets should therefore be enumer-
ated manually ( via hemocytometer).
362
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vi. Platelet estimation (via blood smear)
 1. Blood smear examination allows for rapid estimation of platelet numbers.
 2. This is essential in the emergency setting where manual enumeration is often not feasible and
automated counts are frequently inaccurate.
 3. Accurate assessment is highly dependent on the quality of the smear and systematic, careful
evaluation.
4. Feline platelets clump readily. It is therefore extremely important to assess the feathered edge
of the smear for platelet clumps. If large clumps are present, platelet numbers are likely
adequate and counts from this sample will be erroneously low.
5. In a well-distributed smear without platelet clumps, approximately 11-25 platelets per oil
immersion or high-power field (1,000x) is considered normal. In such a field, each platelet
represents a count of approximately 15,000/μL.
6. Large platelets (macroplatelets or "shift" platelets) generally indicate megakaryocytic
dysplastic syndromes.
vi. Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT)
1. The BMBT refects in vivo primary hemostasis. It is prolonged with thrombocytopenia,
thrombopathia, or vascular anomalies.
 2. It is indicated in patients with a suspected primary hemostatic defect when the platelet count
 is adequate. The test is unnecessary in the thrombocytopenic patient.
3. Cats usually require light sedation. The patient is restrained in lateral recumbency. A strip
of gauze is tied around the maxilla to fold up the upper lip tightly enough to cause moderate
mucosal engorgement. In cats, there may not be sufficient space to accommodate this, and
the lip must be held manually. A two-blade, spring-loaded device (Simplate II, Organon
Teknika Corporation, Jessup, MD) is used to make two 1-mm-deep incisions in the mucosa
of the upper lip. The incisions should be made at a site devoid of visible vessels and inclined
so that the blood flows toward the mouth. Shed blood is carefully blotted with filter paper,
taking extreme care not to disturb the incisions. The BMBT is the time from incision to ces-
sation of bleeding (fig. 29.2).
4. Normal BMBT in the cat is less than 3.2 minutes.
Fig. 29.2. Performance of a buccal mucosal bleeding test. A spring-baded device is used to make two I-mm
incisions in the upper lip.
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
363
viil. Activated clotting time (ACT)
1. The ACT is a simple in-office screening test for the intrinsic and common coagulation path.
ways (fig. 29.3).
2. In the traditional ACT, blood (2 mL) is drawn into a prewarmed (37°C) commercial tube
containing diatomaceous earth, which serves as a chemical activator (The first few drops of
blood are discarded because of the possible presence of tissue factor.) The sample is mixed
by inversion and then placed into a 37°C heat block or water bath for 50 seconds. It is
inverted every 10 seconds, observed for clot formation, and replaced. The ACT is the time 
interval to first clot formation (table 29.2).
3. A patient-side coagulometer (SCA 2000, Synbiotics, San Diego, CA) allows automated ACT
testing. Given that this coagulometer also enables PT and PTT testing, which are more sensi-
tive, the use of the ACT in this situation is hard to justify.
4. The ACT test is relatively insensitive. A single coagulation factor must be decreased to less
than 10% of normal before ACT prolongation occurs.
5. ACT prolongation may be due to:
a. Severe anomaly/anomalies of the intrinsic and/or common coagulation pathways
b. Severe thrombocytopenia (<10,000 platelets/μL)
c. Some thrombopathias
d. Hypofibrinogenemia
ix.  Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
1. The PTT tests the intrinsic and common pathways (fig. 29.3). Only factors VII and XIlI are
not evaluated.
2. This test is more sensitive than the ACT and is not affected by primary hemostatic disorders.
INTRINSIC
EXTRINSIC
PATHWAY
PATHWAY
Xll
Xlla
X
Xla
Tissue factor
区
IXa
Vlla
VII
VIIIa
Ca++, PL
PTT
X-
—Xa
PT
ACT
BA
Ca*, PL
Prothrombin —→ Thrombin
Fibrinogen
 Fibrin
TT
COMMON
PATHWAY
Fig。 29.3. A simplified, schematic representation of secondary hemostasis and the factors evaluated by the
screening laboratory tests. PT = prothrombin time; PTT = partial thromboplastin time; ACT = octivated cloting time;
Ca = calcium; Pl = platelet phospholipid.
364
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. In general, at least one factor must be decreased to below 2s-30% of normal concentration
before prolongation occurs.
4. A patient-side coagulometer (SCA 2000, Synbiotics, San Diego, CA) is an attractive alterna
tive to conventional laboratory PTT determination in the emergency setting.
a. While the methodology ena bles testing of either nonanticoagulated blood or citrated whole
blood, the latter is preferable with respect to sensitivity and specificity.
b. Using citrated whole blood, reported sensitivity in dogs is 100%, with a specificity of
approximately 83%. As such, it is an excellent screening test for defects of the intrinsic
and common pathways. False positives, however, do occur.
C. A prolonged PTT on the SCA should be validated via conventional laboratory testing. In
the author's experience, marked prolongations are usually clinically significant; mild pro-
longations should be interpreted with caution.
X.Prothrombin time (PT)
1. The PT tests the extrinsic and the common pathways {fig. 29.3). It is the principal test of the
extrinsic pathway.
2. Because of the short half-life of factor Vll, the PT is very sensitive to vitamin K deficiency or
antagonism. It is less sensitive to heparin than is the PTT.
 3. The patient-side coagulometer is a relatively accurate methodology for PT testing.
a. Using citrated whole blood, reported sensitivity and specificity in dogs are approximately
86% and 96%, respectively. That is, some defects of the extrinsic system will not be
detected, and false positives occur.
disorders of the extrinsic pathway that result in hemorrhage. Mild defects, however, may
not be detected, and mild prolongations should be interpreted with ca ution.
c. Results that do not correlate with clinical findings should be verified via conventional
laboratory testing.
xi. Thrombin time (TT)
1. The TT assesses the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin {the common pathway) and bypasses
all other steps (fig. 29.3).
 2. The TT may be prolonged by hypofibrinogenemia (<100 mg/dL), by dysfibrinogenemia, or
by substances that inhibit thrombin (heparin, FSPs).
xii. Fibrin split products (FSPs)
1. FSPs are generated with fibrinolysis.
2. Elevated FSP concentrations commonly occur in DIC but are not universally present, nor
specific for the syndrome. Increased concentrations can also occur in hepatic disease (due to
enhanced fibrinolysis and reduced clearance). False elevations may occur in patients on
heparin therapy, or those with dysfibrinogenemia.
3. Commercial latex agglutination kits (Thrombo-Wellcotest, Wellcome Reagents, Beckenham,
xifi. D-dimers
 1. D-dimers are unique FSPs that are formed when cross-linked fibrin is lysed by plasmin.
 2. In contrast to FSPs, D-dimers are specific for active coagulation and fibrinolysis.
3. The half-life of D-dimers is short. As such, they are only useful for detection of recent or
ongoing fi brinolysis.
4. D-dimers are a relatively sensitive test for DIC, and likely superior to traditional FSP assays.
However, they are neither universal nor specific for DIC. Elevated concentrations have been
demonstrated in dogs with thromboembolism, intraca vitary hemorrhage, neoplasia, hepatic
disease, renal failure, cardiac failure, and following surgical procedures. Less is known about
the significance of D-dimers in feline patients.
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
365
 5. As with FSPs, D-dimers should be considered an ancillary diagnostic test, with the diagnosis
of DIC relying on the appropriate constellation of clinical findings and abnormal results of
hemostatic testing.
6. The traditional laboratory assay of D-dimers is the ELISA test. An in-office latex bead agglu
tination test (Accuclot D-dimer, Sigma) has been shown to compare favorably in dogs but
remains to be fully evaluated in cats.
5. Diagnostic approach
a. Bleeding disorders are classified as disorders of primary or secondary hemostasis (figs. 29.4 and 29.5).
Since etiologies are distinct, this classification is an essential early step in the diagnostic workup.
 Distinction is generally possible from the history and physical examination.
b. If a disorder of primary hemostasis is suspected (fig. 29.6):
formed correctly and that a smear is evaluated to assess for platelet clumping, thus avoiding
erroneous interpretation {see above).
ii. If the platelet count is sufficiently low to explain spontaneous bleeding (<40,000/μL), then workup
for thrombocytopenia should follow (see below—Specific conditions: Thrombocytopenia).
ili. If the platelet count does not explain bleeding, assess tests for secondary hemostasis.
1. If the platelet count is normal and PT and/or PTT (or ACT) is prolonged, then a disorder of
secondary hemostasis should be pursued.
2. If the platelet count is mildly or moderately decreased and PT and/or PTT (or ACT) is pro-
longed, then there is either a combined defect or a disorder of secondary hemostasis with
consumptive thrombocytopenia due to bleeding.
 3. If platelet counts and tests for secondary hemostasis are normal, a BMBT should be performed
to assess in vivo primary hemostasis.
c. If a disorder of secondary hemostasis is suspected (fig. 29.7):
i. Review the history regarding the possibility of an inherited disorder.
ii. Assess PT and PTT.
1. If PT is prolonged and PTT is normal, there is a disorder in the extrinsic pathway (factor VIl).
This could be caused by early anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, warfarin therapy, an inherited
factor Vll deficiency, or (occasionally) early hepatic failure or biliary obstruction. Following
collection of samples, plasma transfusion and vitamin K can be administered if needed (see
below, 6.c. Acquired vitamin K deficiency).
2. If PTT is prolonged and PT is normal, there is a disorder(s) in the intrinsic pathway. This is
Evaluation of D-dimers or FSPs, platelet count, viral serology, and hepatic function should
follow.
3. If both PT and PTT are prolonged, there are multiple disorders or there is a disorder in the
common pathway.
a. Evaluate for DIC (clinical evidence, D-dimers or FSPs, platelet enumeration). If findings
are compatible, search for underlying disorder (neoplasia, viral, etc).
b. Evaluate for hepatopathy.
c. Consider anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication or other cause of vitamin K deficiency.
d. Consider a circulating anticoagulant. If no compatible drug history, verify the presence of
an anticoagulant by mixing patient plasma and normal plasma at ratio of 1:1 and repeating
the tests. The absence of an anticoagulant will result in normalization of testing.
e. If above are negative, or deemed extremely unlikely, consider an inherited disorder and
submit samples for specific factor assays.
i. Comparative Coagulation Section. Animal Health Diagnostic Center. College of Veterinary
Medicine, Cornell University. (607) 253-3900. www.diaglab.vet.cornell.edu/coag/
Thrombocytopenia
 Decreased production (megakaryocytic hypoplasia):
Pure megakaryocytic hypoplasia
Immune-mediated megakaryocytichypoplasia
Vaccination (panleukopenia virus)
Infectious (FeLV, FIV)
Panhypoplasia
Aplastic pancytopenia
Infectious:FeLV, FIP, FIV, chronic ehrlichiosis, parvovirus,
endotoxemia/septicemia
Drug-associated: chemotherapeutic agents, griseofulvin, sulfadiazine.
methimazole, albendazole
Myelophthisis
Myelofibrosis
Hematopoietic neoplasia
Dysthrombopoiesis
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
hcreased destruction:
Immune-mediated (ITP)
Primary idiopathic
Secondary
Drugs (methimazole, propylthiouracil, cephalosporins, penicillin, oxytetracycline
phenobarbital)
Viral (FeLV, FIP)
Neoplasia
Rickettsial disease (ehrichiosis, hemobartonellosis)
Bacterial infection
Infectious
Viral: FeLV, FIV, FIP, parvovirus
Rickettsial: Hemobartonellosis, ehrichiosis
Protozoal: cytauxzoonosis
Bacterial: bacteremia, sepsis, leptospirosis, salmonellosis
Fungal: histoplasmosis, disseminated candidiasis
Consumption/sequestration:
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Sepsis
Vasculitis
Hepatic disease
Profound, acute hemorrhage
Microangiopathy (hemangiosarcoma, splenic disease)
Thrombopathia
Acquired:
Hepatic disease
Myeloproliferative disorders
Dysproteinemia (myeloma)
Uremia
Drugs (calcium channel blockers, dextran, hetastarch, propanalol, cephalosporins,
sulfonamides, aminophylline, isoproteranol)
hherited:
VonWillebrand'sdisease
Type I (Himalayan)
Type Ill (domestic shorthair, domestic longhair)
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (Persian cats)
Vascular Disorders
Vasculitis (FIP)
 Hyperadrenocorticism
Fig. 29.4.
 Causes of primary hemostatic disorders in cats.
366
Chapter 29Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
367
Acquired:
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Hepatopathy
Vitamin K deficiency/antagonism
Anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication
Hepatic disease, extrahepatic biliary obstruction
Pancreatic insufficiency
Phenobarbital
Circulating anticoagulants
Hornet venom
Inherited factor deficiencies:
Vll:
Hypoproconvertinemia (domestic shorthair)
VIlI:
Hemophilia A (Abyssinian, domestic shorthair, domestic longhair, Havana brown,
Himalayan, Siamese)
IX:
Hemophilia B (British shorthair, domestic shorthair, domestic longhair, Siamese)
X
Stuart Prower trait (domestic shorthair)
XIl:
Hageman factor deficiency (domestic shorthair, domestic longhair, Siamese)
Other:
Vitamin K-dependent factors (Devon rex)
Fig. 29.5.
Causes of secondary hemostatic disorders in cats.
f. Plasma transfusion can be given if necessary. Because this can interfere with future
hemostatic testing, however, samples for laboratory testing should be collected prior to
transfusion. Vitamin K therapy should be initiated if there is concern for deficiency!
a nta gonism.
ii. If only ACT testing is available:
1. If ACT is prolonged:
a. Consider DIC, hepatic failure, vitamin K deficiency/antagonism, circulating anticoagulant.
severe thrombocytopenia or thrombopathia.
b. Evaluate a blood smear for platelet estimation.
c. Evaluate hepatic values.
d. Submit samples for PT, PTT, D-dimers (or FSP) testing, prior to any therapy. Save addi-
tional plasma.
e. Initiate therapy, if required, with fresh frozen plasma. If rodenticide intoxication or hepatic
failure is considered possible, vitamin K therapy should be initiated. For long-acting roden-
ticide intoxication, vitamin K is administered at 3-5mg/kg/day SC, IM, or PO; for short-
acting rodenticides, and other vitamin K deficiencies, doses of 1-2mg/kg/day SC, IM, PO
are considered adequate. High doses (>5 mg/kg) can result in Heinz body anemia.
2. If ACT is normal:
a. Consider the possibility of a primary hemostatic disorder. Evaluate blood smear for platelet
estimation.
b. Consider the insensitivity of the ACT, and the possibility of a subtle disorder. Submit
 samples for PT, PTT, D-dimers (or FSP) testing, prior to any therapy. Save additional
plasma.
6. Specific conditions
a. Thrombocytopenia
General
<
or sequestration (fig. 29.4).
Suspect disorder of primary hemostasis
Platelet count
Decreased (confirmed via blood smear)
Normal
PT, PTT, D-dimers
PT, PTT, D-dimers/FSPs
Abnormal
Normal
Abnomal
Normal
Consider:
Consider:
sequestration,
decreased production,
Pursue disorder of
Recheck platelet count
consumption,
in creased destruction,
secondary hemostasis
BMBT
combined defect
sequestration/ consumption
Differentials:
Exclude causes of
Evaluate for drugs or diseases
DIC (viral, neoplasia, sepsis, etc),
that may cause thrombopathia
hepatic disease, splenic disease,
seq uestration/consumpti on
hemangiosarcoma,severe acute bleeding
：
CBC, chemistry profile,
drug history, viral serology.
None found
Look for evidence of above:
PE, CBC, chemisty profile,
Bone marrow examination
WF assay,
viral serology, radiographs,
platelet function tests
ultrasound, etc.
Decreased
Normal/increased
megakaryocytes
DIC
Severe
Liver/splenic
megakaryocytes
factor
disease
deficiency
Dys-
Panhypoplasia
Pure
Pursue
Work up for
underlying
thrombopoiesis
megakaryocytic
(myelodysplasia)
Pursue
infectious diseases
hypoplasia
Exclude
underlying causes
Vitamin K deficiency
viral disease, ehrlichiosis.
regative
negative
Specific
Likely TTP
assays
Look for underlying disease
and concomitant immune disease
Response to immunosuppressive therapy
Fig. 29.6.A
 Algorithmic approach to the diagnosis of disorders of primary hemostasis. PT = prothrombin time; PTT = partial thromboplastin time;
FSPs = fibrin spli products; DiC = disseminated intravascular coagulation; BMBT = buccal mucosal bleeding time; ITP = immune-mediated throm-
bocytopenia; vWf = von Willebrand factor.
Suspect disorder of secondary hemostasis
PT, PTT (or ACT), D-dimers (or FSPs)
PT prolonged
PT nomal
PT and PTT (or ACT)
 PT and PTT nomal
 PTT (or ACT) nomal
PTT (or ACT) prolonged
prolonged
ACT prolonged
EXTRINSIC PATHWAY
 INTRINSIC PATHWAY
COMMON PATHWAY
DEFECT
DEFECT
01 MULTIPLE DEFECTS
Differentials:
severe thrombocytopenia,
thrombopathia,
D-dimers (or FSPs)
hypofibrinogenemia
Differentials
Differentials:
early rodenticide toxicity,
hepatic failure,
early hepatic failure, warfarin therapy,
DIC,
anticoagulant therapy,
 Normal
hereditary disorder (fV II)
Increased
hereditary defect (X1, IX, V1I1, X1I1)
Differentials:
Vitamin K deficiency,
Evidence of hepatic failure?
Differentials:
DIC,
DIC,
Evidence of DIC
hepatic failure,
hepatic failure
S2A
No
 or hepatic failure?
circulating anticoagulant,
hereditary defect
Evidence of hepatic failure?
Possibility of
No
Todenticide toxicity?
Evidence of hepatic disease?
Specific factor assays
Yes
No
No
No
Evidence of DIC?
Pursue DIC.
Consider PIVKA/toxin testing.
 Search for neoplasia,
.Specific factor assays
Search for neoplasia,
viral disease, etc.
viral disease, etc.
Possibility of
Todenticide toxicity?
Yes
No
Consider PIVKA/toxin testing.
Test for circulating anticoagulants.
Specific factor assays
Fig. 29.7. Algorithmic approach to the diagnosis of disorders of secondary hemostasis. PT = prothrombin fime; PTT = partial
thromboplastin time; FSPs = fibrin split products; ACT = activated cloting time; DIC = disseminated intravascular coagulation;
PIVKA = test for proteins induced by vitamin K absence or antagonism.
370
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 2. Most thrombocytopenic patients do not bleed overtly. Rather, they are presented for lethargy,
weakness, or clinical signs related to the underlying disease. Thrombocytopenia is often first
identified on blood work.
3. Spontaneous bleeding generally does not occur until platelet counts are below approximately
40,000/uL, unless another concomitant bleeding disorder exists. Many patients will tolerate
lower counts without evidence of hemorrhage.
4. CBC may show evidence of other cytopenias (nonregenerative anemia, leukopenia).
This suggests marrow panhypoplasia and is an absolute indication for bone marrow
examination.
 5. Primary idiopathic thrombocytopenia is relatively uncommon in cats estimated at less than
2%). The majority of cats with thrombocytopenia have underlying disease. Most common
are viral disease (approx. 30%) and neoplasia {approx. 20%). It is imperative, therefore, that
a finding of thrombocytopenia prompts a thorough workup for underlying disorder(s).
6. The drug history should be carefully appraised for any drug(s) that may be associated with
thrombocytopenia, and the potential for infectious disease thoroughly investigated (fig. 29.4).
 7. The secondary hemostatic mechanisms should be evaluated in all thrombocytopenic patients,
to evaluate for DIC or other combined defects.
8. If the cause of thrombocytopenia is not obvious (e.g., compatible drug history), bone marrow
examination is indicated to evaluate platelet production. This is important in feline patients
because primary thrombocytopenia is uncommon, and intramarrow disorders are common.
a. Both a bone marrow aspirate and a core biopsy should be collected.
i. Bone marrow aspirate cytology allows rapid interpretation of megakaryocyte numbers
and evaluation of cellular morphology. At least three good quality smears must be
evaluated.
ii. Histopathology (via core biopsy) allows more accurate evaluation of cellularity, pro-
portions, maturation sequences, and other marrow components.
ii. Bone marrow aspirate samples should be tested for FeLV (via IFA) where blood serol-
ogy is negative.
b. Samples can be collected from the proximal humerus, iliac crest, or femur. Where throm-
bocytopenia is severe, it may be prudent to select a site with less covering muscle mass
(e.g., the proximal humerus).
C. A current blood smear and CBC results should accompany the submission of bone marrow
samples.
d. Thrombocytopenia is not a contraindication to bone marrow sampling. In fact, it is fre-
quently the only means of establishing a diagnosis and prognosis. If the patient is actively
bleeding, blood transfusion may be administered prior to sampling (CBC, however, should
be collected beforehand).
ii. Megakaryocytic hypoplasia
 1. Decreased platelet production can result from the following:
a. Conditions that affect only the platelet precursors (pure megakaryocytic hypoplasia)
b. Conditions that can affect multiple marrow progenitor cells (panhypoplasia)
c. Dysthrombopoiesis, where platelet maturation is abnormal (fig. 29.4).
2. Suspicion or confirmation of hypoplasia should prompt revision of the drug and vaccination
history, and testing for infectious diseases.
3. Intramarrow conditions (aplastic pancytopenia, myelodysplastic syndromes, myelophthisis,
myelofibrosis, and hematopoietic neoplasia are diagnosed via marrow histopathology (see
chap. 30).
4. Immune-mediated megakaryocytic hypoplasia can present a diagnostic dilemma, which is
usually resolved by exclusion of other causes of hypoplasia, and evaluation of the response
to immunosuppressive thera py {see below)
Chapter 29  Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
371
S. Treatment
a. General principles apply.
b. Specific therapy of intramarrow disorders and infectious disea ses is addressed in cha pter 30.
ili. Consumptive or sequestration thrombocytopenia
1. As a general rule, most causes of consumptive thrombocytopenia lead to a mild or moderate
decrease in circulating platelet numbers. DIC and sepsis are exceptions and may occasionally
result in profound thrombocytopenia. In such cases, however, thrombocytopenia is usually
associated with concomitant anomalies in secondary hemostatic testing.
2. Causes (fig. 29.4) can usually be identified or excluded based on clinical findings. Bone
marrow examination is seldom necessary. When performed, megakaryocyte numbers are
normal or increased.
3. Treatment is directed to the underlying cause. If this is reversed, platelet numbers normalize
within days.
iv.  Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP)
1. Primary ITP is uncommon in the cat. ITP is usually secondary to viral disease, drugs, or
neoplasia (especially lymphoid; fig. 29.4). It is rarely associated with other systemic immune-
mediated diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus).
 2. Diagnosis is difficult and is based largely on exclusion of other causes of thrombocytopenia.
A clue to possible ITP is a profound thrombocytopenia (<20,000/μL) in the absence of other
cytopenias.
 3. Bone marrow examination usually reveals a profound megakaryocytosis; less commonly,
megakaryocyte numbers are within normal limits. Immune-mediated megakaryocytic hypo-
plasia also occurs (see above).
4. The drug history should be carefully reviewed (fig. 29.4.). Drug-induced ITP usually occurs
at least 7-10 days following initiation of the drug, or at least 3 days after its reintroduction
(second exposure).
5. Suspicion of ITP should prompt a thorough search for underlying disease. In addition to a
CBC, serum biochemical analysis, and urinalysis, diagnostic testing should include thoracic
radiology, abdominal ultrasonography, and testing for viral and other infection.
6. Treatment (table 29.3)
a. The goals of therapy are to arrest bleeding, to replace losses as needed, to halt ongoing
platelet destruction, and to treat the underlying disorder.
b. Blood losses can be replaced via the transfusion of whole blood or packed RBCs and
plasma. Provision of platelets, however, can only be achieved via fresh whole blood trans-
fusion. This is indicated with severe, active hemorrhage.
c. Treatment of the underlying disorder is essential to a sustained beneficial response. Where
drug-induced thrombocytopenia is suspected, all drugs the patient is receiving should be
discontinued.
d. Immunosuppressive therapy
i.  Immunosuppressive therapy should be initiated with prednisolone at 1-2 mg/kg PO
q12h. If parenteral therapy is preferable, dexamethasone can be substituted, at 0.1-
0.25 mg/kg SC or IV q12h.
ii. Patients should be hospitalized until platelet counts are above 50,000/μL and bleeding
has ceased. Thereafter, platelet counts should be regularly monitored. When these are
within reference range, prednisolone dose is decreased by approximately 2s%. The
dose is then decreased gradually (every 4 weeks) over 3-6 months, with close monitor-
ing of platelet counts.
iv. Relapses of thrombocytopenia with decreases of the prednisolone dose are unpredict-
able and not uncommon. If relapse occurs, the dose should be increased temporarily
Table 29.3. Drug table.
Contraindications or
Drugs
Classes
Primary Mechanism(s)
 Adverse Effects
Precautions
Doses and Routes
Cyclosporine A
Immunosuppressant
Inhibits early T-cell
Inappetance generally
1. Bioavailability is reduced by
4-6mg/kg PO or IV q12h
Calcineurin inhibitor
octivation, T-helper cells,
occurs only with high
food. Should be administered
(Doses are for Neoral or 
 and the production and
plasma levels
 on an empty stomach (l hour
Atopica.)
release of certain
(>1 ,000 ng/ ml).
before or 2 hours after a
Goal: trough plasma level
cytokines (interleukin-2).
Nephrotoxicity and
meal).
of 250-500ng/ml.
hepatoxocicty only
2. Bioavailability is variable, and
reported with severe
different forms of the drug are
overdose (plasma levels
 not bioequivalent. Trough
>3,000ng/ml)l.
plasma levels should be
Hirsutism reported.
measured if response is
 May increase susceptibility
 inadequate, or overdose 
to infection.
suspected.
 3. Cyclosporine can increase
plasma levels of digoxin.
 Some drugs can increase
cyclosporine levels
[ketoconazole, metoclopramide,
calcium channel blockers).
Some drugs can decrease
yclosporine levels
(trimethoprim/sulfa,
phenobarbital, omeprazole).
Dexamethasone  Glucocorticoid
Numerous systemic
 Occasional polyphagia,
1. Use in the diabetic patient is
0.11-0.25mg/kg IV or SC
mechanisms.
 polyuria, polydipsia.
likely to increase insulin
q12h initially; then taper
Immunomodulating
Can precipitate diabetes
requirements.
or switch to
effects include
mellitus.
 2. Patients on corticosteroids 
 prednisolone.
decreasing
 Muscle and joint weakness
 should not receive live virus
T-lymphocytes, inhibition
with prolonged use.
vaccination.
of phagocyte migration,
latrogenic
inhibition of chemotactic
 hyperadrenocorticism is
lctors, cytokines, and
rare.
omplement.
Heparin sodium  Anticoagulant 
 Enhances activity of
Excessive bleeding possible
：1. Contraindicated in patients
See text.
 antithrombin, thus
with large doses.
with thrombocytopenia that is
inactiyvating thrombin
not related to DIC or
and factors IX, X, Xl,
thromboembolism.
and Xll.
 2. Contraindicated in patients 
with bleeding that is not due
to DIC.
 3. Use with caution in patients on
concurrent anticoagulant or
antiplatelet therapy.
 Prednisolone
Glucocorticoid
Numerous systemic
 Occasional polyphagia,
1. Use in the diabetic patient is
1-2 mg/kg PO, SC q12h
mechanisms.
 polyuria, polydipsia.
likely to increase insulin
initially; then taper
 Immunomodulating
Can precipitate diabetes
requirements.
according to response.
effects include
mellitus.
 2. Patients on corticosteroids
decreasing
 Muscle and joint weakness
 should not receive live virus
T-lymphocytes, inhibiion
with prolonged use.
vaccination.
of phagocyte migration,
latrogenic
inhibition of chemotactic
latrogenic
kactors, cytokines, and
 hyperadrenocorticism is
complement.
rare.
Vincristine
Vinca alkaloid
Binds tubulin in mitotic
 Inappetance, constipation,
1. Must be given strictly IV.
0.025 mg/kg, or 0.5mg/
spindle, preventing cell
diarrhea.
 2. Use with caution in patients
m? once weekly, stricily
division during
Myelosuppression (mild).
with leukopenia, infection,
IV.
metaphase.
Peripheral neuropathy.
preexisting neuromuscular
Immunosuppression.
 Profound tissue irritation 
disease, or hepatic disease.
 Mechanisms of promoting
 and necrosis with
 thrombocyte release are
extravasation.
unclear.
Vitamin K1
 Fat-soluble vitamin
Heinz body anemia can
1. PO absorption enhanced by
Long-acting rodenticides:
result from high doses
feeding a fatty meal.
3-5 mg/kg/day SC, IM,
(>5mg/kg)
2. PO absorption adversely
PO. Short-acting
 affected by biliary obstruction
rodenticides and other
and malassimilation disorders.
vitamin K deficiencies:
1-2 mg/kg/day SC, IM,
PO.
374
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
(until counts rebound) and another immunosuppressive agent added to the therapeutic
regimen.
plasma cyclosporine levels are 400-600ng/mL. Monitoring of levels, however, is
generally recommended only where response is inadequate, or where adverse
res ponses occur.
 2. Responses have also been reported to weekly vincristine therapy (0.025 mg/kg strict
IV, once weekly).
extremely limited. As such, it is impossible to give evidence-based recommendations
for their use.
 4. Azathioprine should not be used in cats due to the lack of metabolizing enzyme in
v. Infectious thrombocytopenia
1. Infectious diseases that can cause thrombocytopenia are listed in figure 29.4.
2. The mechanisms by which these diseases result in thrombocytopenia are often multifactorial
and incompletely understood. They include DIC, vasculitis, splenic platelet sequestration,
decrea sed thrombopoiesis, and/or immune mediated.
3. The history and clinical signs may be suggestive of an infectious etiology. Geographic location
and travel history can also be informative.
4. Depending on the etiologic agent, definitive diagnosis may depend on organism identification
or culture, serologic testing, or PCR amplification of DNA.
 5. Specific diagnostic testing, and treatment, is addressed elsewhere.
b. Thrombopathia
i.
Vascular disorders are a relatively uncommon cause of bleeding in the cat. In the patient with
a primary hemostatic disorder and normal platelet numbers, a platelet function defect is likely.
ii.
 Diseases known to precipitate platelet dysfunction should be excluded and the drug history
appraised (fig. 29.4). If no obvious cause of acquired thrombopathia can be found, a hereditary
disorder is suspected.
ili.Von Willebrand disease {vWD) is rare in cats. Isolated cats with types I and Ill have been
reported. Assay can be performed by specialized laboratories.
iv.
 The patient with a suspected non-vWD hereditary thrombopathia should be referred to a tertiary
referral institution for specific platelet function testing.
C. Acquired vitamin K deficiency
Vitamin K deficiency or antagonism results in failure to activate vitamin K-dependent factors
(factors II, Vll, IX, and X), resulting in a secondary hemostatic disorder.
ii. Causes:
1. Anticoagulant rodenticide intoxication. This is uncommon in cats. Clinical signs generally
occur 2-3 days postingestion.
 2. Severe hepatic disease, or extrahepatic biliary obstruction
3. Pancreatic insufficiency
4. Phenobarbital therapy. This has been associated with dose-dependent decreases in the activi-
ties of factors II and VIl.
ii. Diagnosis
1. Prolongation of the PT occurs first, but by the time hemorrhage is evident, the PT, PTT, and
ACT are usually all prolonged.
2. FSP, D-dimer, and fibrinogen concentrations are generally normal.
3. The platelet count is usually normal but may be decreased due to hemorrhage-related
consumption.
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
375
4. The cat should be evaluated for hepatobiliary disease and the drug history appraised.
nism (PIVKA) is not usually helpful in the emergency situation but may serve to confirm an
uncertain diagnosis.
iv.  Treatment
1. Initial therapy
a. General
i. General therapeutic and monitoring principles apply.
ii. Hemorrhagic shock should be managed via appropriate fluid therapy +/- blood
tra nsfusion.
ii. Oxygen supplementation may be indicated in cats with respiratory compromise due
to pulmonary or pleural space hemorrhage.
b. Vitamin K is essential to management.
i. Initiate vitamin K therapy subcutaneously, using a small-gauge needle. For long-acting
rodenticide intoxication, vitamin K is administered at 3-5 mg/kg/day; for short-acting
rodenticides and other vitamin K deficiencies, doses of 1-2 mg/kg/day are considered
adequate.
ii. The intravenous route should be avoided, due to the potential for anaphylaxis.
c. Plasma
i.Response to vitamin K commonly takes up to 12 hours. Emergency needs for clotting
factors can be met only by plasma transfusion.
ii. Plasma transfusion should be should be administered at S-10 mL/kg and repeated
every 6 hours for the first 12-18 hours (due to the short half-life of transfused factors).
ii. Whole blood transfusion (fresh or stored) is indicated when severe anemia is present.
2. Ongoing therapy
a. The cause of the deficiency must be reversed where appropriate (e.g., treatment of hepa-
tobiliary disease).
b. After 24 hours, if the patient is not vomiting, vitamin K1 therapy is administered
orally.
C. Therapy should be maintained until the toxin has been metabolized, or the underlying
disease sufficiently resolved.
i.With rodenticide intoxication, the duration of therapy depends on the type of roden
ticide. If the anticoagulant is known to be warfarin, 10-14 days of therapy is usually
sufficient. If the anticoagulant is unknown or a second-generation rodenticide, oral
vitamin K1 should be continued for at least 3-4 weeks.
d. Evaluate the PT 48-72 hours after cessation of therapy. If it is prolonged, therapy
should be reinstituted for an additional 2 weeks, and the PT again reevaluated after
discontinuation.
d. Hepatic disease
1.
Hepatobiliary disease is one of the more common bleeding disorders in cats, resulting in abnor.
mal results of hemostatic testing. Spontaneous hemorrhage, however, is relatively infrequent.
Bleeding generally occurs following surgical or medical procedures. This underlies the impor-
tance of routine hemostatic testing in cats with hepatobiliary disease.
ii.
 Severe disease can result in one or more of the following: decreased production of coagulation
factors, interference with hepatic vitamin K recycling, decreased vitamin K absorption (biliary
obstruction), quantitative and/or qualitative platelet disorders, excessive fibrinolysis, and reduced
clearance of FSPs.
ii. Diagnosis
1. In very acute cases, only PT elevation may occur. Thereafter, both PT and PTT elevations
are usually noted.
376
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 2. Mild to moderate thrombocytopenia may occur.
3. FSPs and D-dimers may be elevated.
4. Antithrombin and fibrinogen concentrations may be reduced.
depends on clinical findings, serum chemistries, and liver function testing.
iv.Treatment
1. Bleeding tendencies must be corrected before pursuing hepatic biopsy or other invasive
procedures.
 2. Plasma transfusion can temporarily offset factor deficiencies.
3. Vitamin K1 may be beneficial in some patients. Efficacy should be ascertained by repeating
e. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
i.
DIC is an acquired syndrome, characterized by the excessive activation and loss of regulation
of coagulation, with subsequent microvascular thrombosis.
Aberrant expression of tissue factor (by neoplastic cells or cytokine-stimulated monocytes) initi-
ates excessive coagulation. This is sustained and amplified by the consumption of coagulation
inhibitors (antithrombin, protein C). In systemic infammatory response syndromes (SIRS),
a self-perpetuating cycle occurs, whereby inflammatory mediators activate coagulation and
activated coagulation factors promote inflammation.
ili. DIC is always secondary to inciting illness. Most common in the cat are neoplasia {lymphoma
and others), pancreatitis, and sepsis. Other reported causes include severe hepatic disease,
trauma, heatstroke, viral infection {FIP), SIRS, and tissue necrosis. Secondary factors, such as
vascular stasis, acidosis, and hypoxia, exacerbate the systemic response and promote DIC.
iv.  DIC is a dynamic process. Initially, a compensated or “ non-overt" hypercoagulable phase occurs,
in which procoagulant activity is counterbalanced by the natural inhibitors of coagulation. With
continued activation, however, inhibitors become overwhelmed, and uncompensated or "overt"
DIC results, with widespread microvascular thrombosis. In a subset of patients, platelets and
coagulation factors are consumed, leading to hypocoagulation and bleeding.
：
The hemorrhagic phase of DIC is a late-stage event, always preceded by thrombosis. It is uncom-
mon in cats, 0ccurring in <20% of feline DIC patients.
vi.  Mortality is very high and is usually the result of microvascular thrombosis and organ failure.
vii. Clinical signs
1. DIC can be subclinical, mild or severe, and acute or chronic.
2. Overt DIC usually manifests as failure of one or more organs. Spontaneous bleeding is uncom-
mon. When it occurs, it may be suggestive of a primary hemostatic disorder, a secondary
hemostatic disorder, or both.
vii. Diagnosis
1. Diagnosis is generally challenging, owing to the variability in clinical manifestations, the
difficulty in detecting thrombosis, and the lack of pathognomonic laboratory tests. Diagnosis
of DIC requires careful consideration of both the clinical and laboratory findings.
 2. Diagnosis depends on the following:
a. Identification of an inciting cause (see above).
b. Laboratory testing. There is no single test or combination of tests that serves as a gold
standard for DIC diagnosis. Findings are extremely variable.
i.
 Thrombocytopenia is frequently, but not universally, present. Relative changes may
be undetected unless a recent platelet count is available for comparison.
i. The PTT is usually prolonged; less commonly, the PT.
ili. Elevated FSP concentrations are highly suggestive but nonspecific. D-dimers
appear to be very sensitive in cats and likely superior to FSP assays. They are also
nonspecific.
Chapter 29 Hematologic Emergencies: Bleeding
377
iv. Antithrombin behaves as an acute phase reactant in cats and is inconsistently decreased
with DIC.
v.Scizocytosis is consistent with DIC, but schizocytes are not invariably present and may
 Occur with other conditions.
vi. Thromboelastography shows promise to identify both hyper- and hypocoagulability.
ix.Treatment
1. Identification and correction of the underlying cause. This is paramount, and should be
accomplished as rapidly as is possible.
 2. Further management should focus on preventing or reversing factors that may exacerbate the
DIC. This includes optimization of perfusion via appropriate fluid therapy, correction of
acid-base and electrolyte disorders, supplemental oxygen therapy where indicated, mainte-
nance of adequate renal perfusion, and the prevention of secondary sepsis.
3. Plasma transfusion remains controversial but has theoretic merit. It provides antithrombin
and replaces depleted coagulation factors. Moreover, there may be additional indications for
plasma administration relating to the underlying disease (e.g., sepsis, SIRS, pancreatitis).
4. Heparin therapy {table 29.3) has no proven efficacy in human patients and remains to be
evaluated in cats. It is therefore impossible to give evidence-based recommendations for its
use. Dosing regimens are uncertain, and most published doses are anecdotal. These have
included 50-200 iu/kg SC q8h for mild cases, and 300-700 iu/kg SC q8h for moderate and
severe cases. Monitoring of the cat on heparin therapy is difficult, as PTT does not appear
 to be well correlated with plasma heparin concentrations in this species.
f.  Inherited coagulopathies
 In contrast with dogs, cats with heritable disorders seldom bleed spontaneously. They are fre-
quently discovered when excessive bleeding occurs following surgery or trauma.
ii.
 Inherited coagulopathies are rare in the cat (fig. 29.5).
1. Factor XII (Hageman factor) deficiency is the most common, resulting in prolongation of the
PTT; but it does not result in a bleeding disorder unless other hemostatic abnormalities
develop. Coexistence of factor Xll deficiency and hemophilia has been reported in domestic
shorthair cats.
 2. Hemophilia A and B are recessive sex-linked traits, thus manifesting in males.
ili.An inherited coagulopathy should be suspected, particularly in younger cats, if PT and/or PTT
are prolonged in the absence of other abnormal testing and if acquired secondary hemostatic
defects have been ruled out. A history of prior or recurrent bleeding is highly suggestive.
iv.  Definitive diagnosis requires specific factor assays, performed by specialized laboratories.
V.
Trea tment
1. Treatment adheres to general principles of bleeding control.
2. If bleeding is severe or unrelenting, factors should be provided via plasma transfusion.
Recommended Reading
Bick RL. Disseminated intravascular coagulation: current concepts of etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis,
and treatment. Hemat Oncol Clin North Am, 2003; 17(1):149-176.
Catalfamo JL, Dodds WJ. Thrombopathias. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds, Schalm's Veterinary
Hematology, Sth ed, pp 1042-1050. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Dodds WJ. Other hereditary coagulopathies. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds, Schalm's Veterinary
Hematology, Sth ed, pp 1030-1036. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Estrin ME, et al. Disseminated intravascular coagulation in cats. J Vet Int Med, 2006; 20(6):1334-1339.
Grindem CB. Infectious and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. In Bonagura JD, ed, Kirk's Current
Therapy XIll, pp 438-442. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2003.
378
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Jordan HL, et al. Thrombocytopenia in cats: a retrospective study of 41 cases. J Vet Int Med, 1993;
7(5):261-265.
 Peterson JL, et al. Hemostatic disorders in cats: a retrospective study and review of the literature. J Vet Int
Med, 1995; 9(5):298-303.
Stokol T, Brooks M. Diagnosis of DIC in cats: is it time to go back to the basics? (Editorial). J Vet Int
Med, 2006; 20(6):1289-1290.
Tseng LW, et al. Evaluation of a point-of-care coagulation analyzer for measurement of prothrombin time.
activated partial thromboplastin time, and activated clotting time in dogs. Am J Vet Res, 2001;
62(9):1455-1460.
Weiss DJ. Platelet production defects. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds, Schalm's Veterinary
Hematology, Sth ed, pp 469-471. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Zimmerman KL. Drug-induced thrombocytopenias. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds, Schalm's
Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed, pp 472-477. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
30
HEMATOLOGIC EMERGENCIES: ANEMIA
Susan G. Hackner
Unique Features
 Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia is a less common cause of anemia in cats than in dogs. When
it does occur, it is usually secondary to viral disease, parasitic infection, or antithyroid medication.
Feline hemoglobin is extremely sensitive to oxidant denaturation. Heinz bodies occur in association
with many conditions and do not necessarily correspond to hemolytic anemia in the cat. Heinz
bodies, therefore, should be interpreted in the light of other clinical findings.
 Iron deficiency may be difficult to recognize in cats. Automated cell counters may not count micro-
cytes, MCHC is usually normal, and microcytic hypochromia is difficult to appreciate on blood
smear evaluation. Diagnosis rests on identification of an underlying cause and measurement of serum
 Nonregenerative anemias are common in cats. Examination of the bone marrow is essential in the
diagnostic workup of any patient with nonregenerative anemia. This is best achieved via both cytol-
ogy (aspirate) and histopathology (core biopsy).
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is commonly associated with anemia in cats. Mechanisms include:
immune-mediated, secondary infection (hemobartonellosis), anemia of inflammatory disease, and
intramarrow disorders (pure red cell aplasia, myelodysplasia, myelofibrosis, hematopoietic neopla-
sia, and aplastic anemia). As such, serologic testing is mandatory in anemic cats. Treatment should
focus on the mechanism of the anemia.
A. General
a. Anemia is defined as a decrease in the red blood cell mass, occurring due to decreased production,
increased destruction (hemolysis), or loss (hemorrhage) of red blood cells.
b. The consequences of anemia are tissue hypoxia and, ultimately, death.
B. Presenting signs
a. Anemic cats are usually presented for progressive weakness, lethargy, and inappetence, which may
culminate in collapse.
b. The duration of signs ranges from peracute to chronic.
c. Pallor is the hallmark sign and should be differentiated from pallor associated with hypoperfusion,
by determination of perfusion parameters (heart rate, pulse quality, blood pressure) and the packed
cell volume (PCV; see chap. 3—Shock).
d. Other clinical manifestations may include bounding pulses, a gallop rhythm, and a systolic flow
murmur. Signs of an underlying disease may also be evident.
379
380
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1.
Primary survey
2.
Establish vascular access
3.
Collect pretreatment blood samples:
minirmum database
blood smear
EDTA plasma (for later CBC, reticulocyte count, platelet
count, blood typing, immune testing, PCR, etc.)
serum (for later chemistry profile, serologic testing, etc.)
citrated plasma, if bleeding suspected/possible (for later
coagulation testing)
in-saline agglutination test, if hemolysis suspected/possible
4. Initiate therapy to stabilize the patient:
support of airway and/or breathing, if indicated
conitrol of hemorrhage, if present
fluid therapy, as needed to maintain adequate perfusion
blood transfusion, if indicated
5.
Secondary survey
complete history
thorough physical examination
 MDB interpretation
6.
Formulate problem list and differentials
7.
 Formulate plan, and write orders, for ongoing supportive care and
monitoring
8.
Diagnostic workup
Specific therapy
9.
Fig. 30.1.
 Approach to the emergent anemic patient.
e. Patients in an anemic crisis are moribund or extremely depressed, with marked pallor, tachypnea,
tachycardia, and bounding pulses. If the anemia is due to severe blood loss, signs of hypoperfusion
predominate.
C. Initial stabilization and monitoring
 a. The patient in crisis requires rapid intervention, with an initial goal of stabilizing life-threatening
emergencies (fig. 30.1).
b. The primary survey of the emergent patient is the rapid assessment of vital organ systems to determine
whether a life-threatening situation exists (see chap. 1—Approach to the Critically Ill Cat). In the
anemic patient, an anemic crisis or hemorrhagic shock constitutes life-threatening emergencies.
c. Venous access should be established without delay, by placement of a peripheral catheter, ideally
the largest bore possible, in case aggressive fluid therapy is warranted.
d. Blood is collected from the catheter immediately following placement, for a minimum database
including a PCV and total solids (TS).
e. Additional blood samples should be collected prior to initiating therapy, to prevent treatment-
induced changes in parameters. These should include:
i. Blood smear
ii. In-saline agglutination test
ii. EDTA-plasma sample
iv. Serum sample
v. Citrated plasma sample
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
381
f. Initial therapy should be instituted without delay. This is aimed to stabilize the patient while diag-
 nostic testing continues. It includes:
i. Control of hemorrhage, where applicable
ii. Blood transfusion if the cat is in an anemic crisis
ii. Blood volume replacement, where hypoperfusion is present (see chap. 3—Shock and chap. 8
—Fluid Therapy).
iv. The severely anemic cat can be remarkably fragile and decompensate rapidly with stress. It is
important that stress is minimized, therefore, and nonessential procedures delayed until the
patient is stabilized.
 g. Following initial stabilization, attention should be directed to the establishment of a diagnosis. The
secondary survey includes a thorough history and physical examination, and interpretation of the
minimum data base. This allows generation of an initial problem list and formulation of a diagnostic
plan.
h. Ongoing care and monitoring:
i. Pending diagnosis and institution of specific therapy, a plan should be formulated, and orders
written, for supportive care and monitoring (see chap. 1—Approach to the Critically Ill Cat).
ii. The patient should be kept quiet and unstressed.
ii. Nonessential procedures are avoided until a bleeding disorder has been ruled out.
iv. Monitor closely for evidence of worsening anemia and decompensation. This includes, at a
minimum:
1. attitude and mental status
 2. respiratory rate and effort
3. perfusion status
 4. mucous membrane color
5. temperature
6. PCV/TS
7. blood pressure
D. Clinical assessment
a. History
i.The signalment of the patient may be informative. Young animals are more likely to have con-
genital disease or blood loss due to parasites, whereas older animals are at greater risk for
ma lignancies.
ii.The owner should be questioned on the following:
1. The duration and progression of clinical signs. This may allow one to date the onset of disease.
Determination of chronicity is useful in formulating differential diagnoses. {For example, the
cat with a chronic progressive clinical course is unlikely to have suffered an acute toxic insult.)
 It also allows one to predict whether there has been sufficient time (2-4 days) for a regenera-
tive response.
2. The degree of functional compromise
3. The presence of any other signs not directly related to the anemia (e.g., vomiting or dyspnea)
4. Whether anorexia is present and, if so, its duration. This is always relevant in the cat where
hepatic lipidosis can complicate other diseases {and resulting icterus may be misinterpreted
as being directly related to the anemia).
5. Diet, travel, and home environment {indoor/outdoor), which may elucidate the potential fo
trauma, toxin exposure, or infectious disease
6. Present and past illnesses
7. Any history of past or current bleeding—melena, hematuria, epistaxis, etc.
8. Vaccines and medications, which may predispose to immune-mediated disease or marrow
suppression,
9. History of viral serologic testing for FeLV/FIV and exposure to other cats.
382
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
10. The medical history of other household cats. If other cats have similar signs, environmental
{toxin), genetic (if the other cats are related), or infectious causes should be considered. The
viral status of other household cats may be informative.
b. Physical examination. A thorough examination should focus particular attention on the following:
i.A thorough search for evidence of hemorrhage: evaluation of the body cavities, examination of
the skin, mucous membranes and joints, rectal and fundic examinations
i. The presence of icterus, which may be due to hemolysis or hepatobiliary disease
ii. The presence of splenomegaly, which could be consistent with hemolysis, neoplasia, infectious
disease, or extramedullary hematopoiesis
iv. Any evidence of neoplasia, infectious disease, or immune-mediated disease
c. Diagnostic tests
i.Complete blood count (CBC)
1. The CBC is part of the laboratory database in any ill patient and is essential in the anemic
patient.
 2. The total erythrocyte count (RBC) and hemoglobin concentration (Hb) confirm the presence
and severity of anemia. Discrepancies between these values and the PCV may occur in several
situations:
a. Heinz bodies may increase erythrocyte fragility, causing lysis, thus lowering the PCV and
increasing the Hb.
b. Microcytic erythroctes can result in a lower PCV and Hb relative to the RBC.
c. Laboratory error
3. The erythrocyte indices, mean corpuscular volume (MCV), and mean corpuscular hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC), may be useful but should never be considered pathognomonic. Four
patterns can be recognized:
a. Microcytic anemia usually indicates iron deficiency
 b. Normocytic, normochromic anemia is generally suggestive of a nonregenerative response
but should always be verified via reticulocyte count.
c. Macrocytic, hypochromic anemia usually indicates a regenerative response but should
always be verified via reticulocte count.
d. Macrocytic, normochromic anemia may also occur with regeneration. In the cat without
regeneration, however, it may be suggestive of FeLV or myelodysplasia. Macrocytosis can
also be an artifact in day-old samples. Vitamin B12 or folic acid deficiency are rare causes
of macrocytosis.
 4. The total white cell count (WBC) and differential counts are informative. Leukocytosis sug-
gests infection, inflammation, or neoplasia. Leukopenia may be indicative of an intramarrow
disorder.
5. Automated platelet counts are not reliably accurate for cat blood.
ii. Blood smear
1. Blood smear examination is invaluable in the evaluation of the anemic patient.
 2. Accurate assessment is highly dependent on the quality of the smear and systematic, careful
evaluation.
3. Erythrocyte morphology may indicate an etiology (table 30.1), for example, toxic damage
(Heinz bodies, eccentrocytes), physical damage (schizocytes), or erythrocyte parasites
(Mycoplasma, Babesia, Cytauxzoon; see below). Microcytosis and spherocytosis are generally
not recognizable in cats.
4. It is important to realize that regeneration cannot be accurately assessed on blood smear
examination in cats. Due to the different forms of reticulocytes in this species (see below),
the absence of identifiable reticulocytes does not exclude regeneration. Conversely, evidence
of any degree of reticulocytosis on blood smear examination in a cat indicates an acute and
profound regenerative response.
Chapter 30Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
383
Table 30.1。 Erythrocyte morphologic changes that may be observable on blood smear examination.
Abnormality
Associated Disorder(s)
Acanthocylosis
Chronic liver disease
Eccentrocylosis
 Onion toxicily,
Echinocytes
Crenation arlifact
Heinz bodies
Oxidative red cell injury
Hypochromia
Iron deficiency
Macrocylosis
Aclive regeneralion, myelodysplasia, FelV infeclion, hypernalremia, arifact
Nuclealed red blood cells
Aclive regeneralion, splenic disease, poslspleneclomy, lead loxicily, syslemic
slress, some intramarrow disorders
Parasitic inclusions
Hemobartonella, Babesia, Cytcuxzoon
Scizocylosis
Microangiopathy
5. Smear examination also allows assessment of other cell lines. The clinician should evaluate
platelet numbers and morphology (see Bleeding Disorders). Leukocyte assessment is informa-
tive with regard to white cell numbers and proportions and may indicate the presence of a
left shift, neoplastic changes, or parasites {Ebrlichia morulae). Approximately 18-51 leuko-
cytes per x10 objective field is considered normal.
iii. Reticulocyte count
 1. A reticulocyte count should be performed in all anemic patients, providing the only accurate
assessment of the regenerative response.
 2. The clinician should be aware of the species peculiarities in the cat regarding reticulocyte
counts.
a. Automated counts are not accurate in cats. Counts should be performed manually via vital
staining that allows visualization of ribosomes. A few drops of EDTA-anticoagulated
blood are mixed with an equal volume of 0.5% new methylene blue in physiological saline.
The solution is allowed to incubate for 10-20 minutes, remixed, and a thin smear made.
A thousand red blood cells are counted, and the percentage of reticulocytes recorded.
b. The cat has two types of reticulocytes: aggregate reticulocytes, in which the organelles are
coalesced into aggregates, and punctate reticulocytes, in which the organelles are present
as small particles. Aggregate reticulocytes are released from the marrow and mature into
punctate forms within 12 hours. The latter mature to erythrocytes over 10-12 days.
recent, cumulative regeneration. Because punctate forms are not recognizable on routine
staining, the degree of regeneration may be underestimated in cats. If both forms are
counted and not distinguished, active regeneration may be overestimated (fig. 30.2).
 3. The degree of reticulocytosis must be interpreted relative to the degree of anemia, by calcula-
tion of the absolute reticulocyte count (numbers/μL of blood) or a corrected reticulocyte count
(percentage; fig. 30.3). An increase in either of these parameters provides the best evidence
for a regenerative response. An absolute count of >50,000 aggregate reticulocytes/μL, or a
corrected reticulocyte count of >0.5% is considered regenerative {table 30.2).
 4. Aggregate reticulocytes generally appear in the circulation within 48 hours of hemorrhage or
hemolysis, peak by 4-6 days, and then decline. Punctate reticulocytes, on the other hand,
persist for up to 2 weeks following insult.
iv. In-saline agglutination test
1. This evaluation for autoagglutination is indicated in all anemic patients, except those with
obvious hemorrhage. It is particularly indicated in the patient with confirmed or suspected
hemolysis.
384
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
A
Fig. 30.2.
 Blood smears from a cat with regenerative anemia. A: New methylene blue staining, demonstrating
identiliable as large, basophilic erythrocytes (courtesy of Dr. Elizabeth Spangler, Oregon State University).
Absolute reticulocyte count (reticulocytes/μL):
= % reticulocytes x RBC/μL
100
Corrected reticulocyte count (%):
observed reticulocyte % xPCV of the patient
37
Fig. 30.3.。 Calculation of the reticulocyte response.
Table 30.2. Grading of the reticulocyte response in cats.
Absolute
Reticulocytosis
Corrected (%)
Aggregate/uL
Punctate/uL
Mild
0.5-2
>50,000
>500,000
Moderate 
2-4
>100,000
>1,000,000
Marked
>4
>200,000
>1,500,000
2. The test is performed by mixing a drop of blood with an equal or greater volume of saline
on a glass slide. Macroagglutination can be visualized grossly but is present in only a small
percentage of cases. Microscopic evaluation of a fresh wet mount should always be performed.
This will allow detection of microagglutination and differentiation from rouleau formation.
Agglutination appears as "grapelike” accumulations of erythrocyte, whereas rouleau forma-
tions are more linear, resembling stacks of coins.
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
385
3. Convincing agglutination is evidence of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA) but is
not universally present. A diagnosis of IMHA should not be excluded based on a negative
agglutination test.
v. Bone marrow evaluation
1. Indications for bone marrow examination
a. Nonregenerative anemia of greater than 2-4 days’ duration
b. Thrombocytopenia without evidence of a consumptive disorder
C. Pancytopenia
d. To investigate for, or stage, certain neoplastic conditions (e.g., myeloma, lymphoma)
e. To assess for Feline Leukemia virus (FeLV) infection, when blood serology is negative
2. Both a bone marrow aspirate and a core biopsy should be collected in cats.
a. Samples can be collected from the humerus, ilial crest, or femur.
 b. Bone marrow aspirate cytology allows rapid impressions of cellularity and evaluation of
cell morphology.
C. Histopathology (via core biopsy) allows more accurate evaluation of cell numbers, propor-
tions, maturation sequences, and other marrow components. This is important in cats,
where myeloid dysplasia, aplasia, and myelophthisis are relatively common.
d. Aspirate samples should be tested for FeLV (via IFA) if blood serology is negative.
 3. A current CBC and blood smear should accompany submission of marrow samples.
E. Diagnostic approach
a. Causes of anemia are classified by mechanism: decreased erythropoiesis, hemolysis, or hemorrhage
(fig. 30.4). Determination of the mechanism is an essential process in the diagnostic workup.
b. The essential first step is to determine whether the anemia is regenerative or nonregenerative.
i.The only reliable indication of regeneration in the cat is via manual reticulocyte count (see above).
Nucleated red blood cell are not a reliable indicator, as they may be present in numerous condi-
tions in spite of a quiescent marrow.
i. The presence of regeneration indicates either hemolysis or hemorrhage.
ii. In general, a nonregenerative anemia indicates decreased erythropoiesis. There are, however,
three important exceptions (ta ble 30.3):
1. Acute hemorrhage or hemolysis of less than 2-4 days' duration, as there has been insufficient
time for reticulocytosis
 2. Concomitant disease that precludes an appropriate bone marrow response, for example, renal
failure
3. IMHA, where the immune response is targeted to the red cell precursors
iv. Therefore, if the anemia is regenerative, the next step is to determine if it is due to hemolysis or
hemorrhage. If the anemia is nonregenerative, decreased erythropoiesis should not be assumed.
c. Hemolysis vs. hemorrhage. Blood loss is not always obvious, so a careful search must be made for
evidence of hemorrhage. Several clinical clues may assist in differentiating hemolysis from hemor-
rhage (table 30.4).
d. Other factors that should be considered:
i.The severity of anemia (table 30.s). Some anemias (e.g., anemia of inflammatory disease)
are characteristically mild or moderate and would be excluded from consideration in a severe
anemia.
ii. The progression of disease. Anemias of decreased erythropoiesis tend to have a chronic progres-
sion (weeks to months), corresponding to erythrocyte life span. Hemolytic and hemorrhagic
anemias may be more acute {days to weeks). There are, however, exceptions {e-g-, chronic hem-
orrhage, acute hematopoietic neoplasia).
ii. The magnitude of clinical signs relative to the PCV. Animals with an acute onset of hemolysis
or hemorrhage will develop clinical signs at a higher PCV than animals with a gradual onset of
anemia due to decreased erythropoiesis.
Hemolysis
Antibody mediated
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Primary/idiopathic
Secondary
Viral (FeLV, FIV, FIP)
Bacterial (various acute and chronic infections)
Protozoal (hemobartonellosis, ehrlichiosis, babesiosis)
Drugs (methimazole, propylthiouracil)
Neoplasia
Neonatal isoerythrolysis
Transfusion reaction
Oxidative damage
Food
 Onions, propylene glycol (semi-moist foods), some fish-
based diets
Drugs
 DL-methionine, propofol
Diseases
Diabetes/diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperthyroidism, neoplasia
(lymphoma), hepatic disease, renal disease, others
Toxins
Zinc
Naphthalene
Infectious
Hemobartonellosis
Babesiosis
Cytauxzoonosis
Microangiopathic
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Near-drowning (fresh water)
Heat stroke, severe burns
Neoplasia
 Splenic disease, hepatic disease, vasculitis
Congenital
Pyruvate kinase deficiency (Abyssinian, Somali, domestic
shorthair)
Porphyria (Siamese, domestic shorthair)
Increased osmotic fragility (Abyssinian, Somali)
Poikilocytosis (domestic shorthair)
Methemoglobin reductase deficiency (domestic shorthair)
Miscellaneous
Hypophosphatemia
Hemorrhage
Trauma/surgery
Bleeding disorders
Ectoparasites
Gastrointestinal (endoparasites, ulceration, neoplasia)
Neoplasia (hemangiosarcoma, others)
Fig. 30.4.
Causes of anemia in cats.
386
 Decreased or ineffective erythropoiesis
Extramarrow disease
Anemia of inflammatory disease
Iron deficiency (severe)
Renal failure
Endocrine/metabolic disorders
hypothyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism, panhypopituitarism
Starvation-inadequate protein intake
Intramarrow disease
Pure red cell aplasia
Aplastic pancytopenia (aplastic anemia)
Infectious: FeLV, FIV, chronic ehrlichiosis, parvovirus,
endotoxemia/septicemia
Drug associated: chemotherapy, griseofulvin, albendazole,
sulfadiazene
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Myelophthisis
Myelofibrosis
Hematopoietic neoplasia
Infectious
 Feline leukemia virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus
Ehrlichiosis
Parvovirus
Endotoxemia
Fig.30.4.
Confinued.
Table 30.3。 Mechanisms of regenerative versus nonregenerative anemia.
 Regenerative Anemia
Nonregenerative Anemia
● Hemolysis 
● Decreased or ineffeclive erythropoiesis 
●Hemorrhage
● Acule hemolysis or hemorrhage <2-4 days
● Hemolysis or hemorrhage with concurrent disease precluding regeneralion
● Immune-mediated destruclion of erythrocyle precursors
Table 30.4。 Clinical features helpful in differentiating hemorrhage from hemolysis.
Clinical Features
Hemorrhage
Hemolysis
 Evidence of bleeding
Common
Rare
 Serum protein 
 Low to normal
Normal to high
Hemoglobinemia/uria
No
 May be present if intravascular
hemolysis
Icterus
 No, unless concurrent or underlying
 Common, but not invariably present
 hepalobiliary disease 
Splenomegaly
 No, unless concurrent or underlying
Common, but not invariably present
disease, or exlramedullary hemalopoiesis
387
388
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 30.5. Guidelines for classification of the severity of anemia
Severity of Anemic
PCv/Hematocrit (%)
Mild
20-26
Moderale
14-19
Severe
10-13
Very severe
<10
1. Severe signs, relative to the degree of anemia, indicate either an acute anemia or that another
process is contributing to the symptomatology.
2. Mild signs, relative to the degree of anemia, generally reflect a chronic process, usually either
decreased erythropoiesis or chronic blood loss.
F. Specific conditions
a. Hemolytic anemia
i.
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA)
1. Hemolysis is usually extravascular but may be intravascular.
2. IMHA can be primary {idiopathic) or secondary to tick-borne disease {hemobartonellosis,
babesiosis), viral infection (FeLV, FIV), various acute/chronic bacterial infections, drugs
(methimazole, propylthiouracil), or neoplasia (especially lymphosarcoma).
3. IMHA may be accompanied by other immune-mediated processes {such as immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia). Rarely, it is a component of a systemic immune-mediated disease.
4. Clinical signs
a. The onset of signs is usually acute or subacute.
b. Signs of anemia usually predominate. Splenomegaly is common, as is icterus and fever.
Signs of an underlying disease may be evident.
5. Diagnosis
 a. Diagnosis requires elimination of other causes of hemolysis and demonstration of
immune-mediated erythrocyte injury.
b. The anemia is usually regenerative. Up to one-third of cats with IMHA, however, have
reticulocytopenia.
c. Neutrophilia is not uncommon. Thrombocytopenia may occur.
d. Autoagglutination is convincing evidence of IMHA but is not always present.
e. A positive direct Coombs? test supports the diagnosis but should be interpreted with
caution. False positives have been reported with FeLV and FIP infections, hemobartonel-
losis, neoplasia, and some chronic bacterial infections. Conversely, a negative test does
not rule out IMHA.
f. Spherocytosis cannot be identified in cats, owing to the small size and lack of central
pallor of normal feline erythrocytes.
 g. If agglutination and Coombs' tests are negative, a saline fragility test helps to document
h. If the anemia is nonregenerative, bone marrow examination is indicated. This may reveal
erythrophagocytosis, a maturation block at one stage of erythroid development, or pure
red cell aplasia. Diagnosis of IMHA in these cases can be difficult, and response to therapy
 provides important diagnostic information.
i. A diagnosis, or suspicion, of IMHA should prompt a thorough search for underlying
causes. In addition to a CBC, biochemical profile, and urinalysis, testing should include
radiology and/or ultrasound, viral serology (FeLV, FIV), and testing for hemobartonel-
losis (smear examination, polymerase chain reaction) and other parasites.
6.Treatment
Chapter 30Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
389
a. General treatment principles apply. The guidelines for blood transfusion are no different
from those for other forms of anemia.
b. Management of any underlying cause. In the absence of an identifiable underlying cause,
treatment for hemobartonellosis should be instituted.
c. Immunosuppression
i. Glucocorticoids are the backbone of immunosuppressive therapy and should be initi-
ated without delay, following diagnosis and evaluation for underlying neoplasia.
1. Therapy is initiated with prednisolone (1-2 mg/kg PO, SC q12h). If a parenteral
route is preferable, dexamethasone may be substituted (0.11-0.20 mg/kg IV or SC
q12h).
 2. Most patients with regenerative IMHA show a response to glucocorticoid therapy
within 5-7 days. Response is considerably slower in patients with nonregenerative
forms.
3. Corticosteroids are continued at the initial dosage until the hematocrit increases
usually a minimum of 3-4 weeks. They are then gradually tapered (by 50% every
3-4 weeks) according to response.
ii. Adjunctive immunosuppressive therapy
1. Indications
a. Intravascular hemolysis
b. Autoagglutination
C. Severe hyperbilirubinemia
 d. Unrelenting aggressive hemolysis
e. Delayed or incomplete response to corticosteroids
f. Unaccepta ble adverse effects to corticosteroids
g. Relapse with weaning of corticosteroids
2. Cyclosporine is the most appealing option for adjunctive immunosuppressive
therapy in cats, as it is rapid acting and well tolerated. Cyclosporine {Neoral or
Atopica) is dosed at 4-6 mg/kg PO or IV q12h. As bioavailability is reduced by
food, the drug should be administered on an empty stomach (1 hour before or 2
hours after a meal). Adverse effects are rare and generally occur only with overdose
{ina ppetance, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity). Determination of trough plasma
udoudde puosau iou op ieun shuaed og auo papuau Aleauag are saaa
ately, or where overdose is suspected. Samples are collected 12 hours after dosing.
just prior to the next dose. The recommended therapeutic range is a trough cyclo-
sporine concentration of 250-500 ng/mL.
 3. Vincristine (0.025 mg/kg, or 0.5 mg/m2 , once weekly, strictly IV) is an alternative if
cyclosporine therapy is not feasible, or if the patient fails appropriate cyclosporine
therapy. The drug must be administered strictly IV as profound tissue irritation and
necrosis occur with extravascation. Potential adverse effects include inappetance,
constipation, diarrhea, myelosuppression (mild), and peripheral neuropathy.
immunosuppressive therapy, or that have intractable drug-induced side effects.
There is little or no published data to support this practice in cats, but there are
anecdotal reports of success. Prior to splenectomy, it is important to rule out tick-
borne disease and ascertain marrow activity (via marrow examination).
5. Azathioprine should not be used in cats because of the potential for development
of fatal toxicity.
ii.
Hemol ytic transfusion reactions
1. Isoantibodies, directed against erythrocyte antigens, result in acute or delayed hemolytic
transfusion reactions.
390
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Isoantibodies occur naturally in cats, necessitating blood typing of both the donor and
recipient prior to transfusion.
ili.  Neonatal isoerythrolysis
1. Occurs in type A or type AB neonates of type B queens. Strong maternal anti-A alloantibod-
ies are transferred via colostrum, resulting in lysis of the neonate's erythrocytes. This can
occur even in primiparous queens.
2.Clinical signs
a. Kittens are born healthy; signs develop within hours to days.
b. Peracute death may Occur in the first day of life in the absence of clinical signs. More
commonly, kittens stop nursing and fail to thrive. Signs include hemoglobinuria, anemia,
+/- icterus.
C. Kittens that are subclinical, or survive the acute disease, may develop tail tip necrosis
and/or a positive Coombs' test.
3. Treatment
a. Kittens should be removed from the queen for the first 2-3 days of life. During this time,
r  a e a u   o   e  a u 
 b. Severely anemic kittens require blood transfusions. In the first 3 days of life: washed type
B blood. Thereafter: type A blood. Blood is washed by centrifugation, removal of the
plasma supernatant, and reconstitution with normal saline. This washing procedure is
 generally repeated twice.
iv.Hemobartonellosis (feline infectious anemia)
1. Caused by the epicellular erythrocyte organism, Mycoplasma bemofelis (previously named
Hemobartonella felis) and the less pathogenic Mycoplasma hemominutum.
2. Infection appears to occur via bloodsucking ectoparasites and, possibly, bite wounds.
transfusion.
3. The organism is opportunistic; it is usually associated with other underlying disease.
Approximately 50% of cats with hemobartonellosis are FeLV positive.
4. Parasitemia is cyclic and can last for weeks to months.
 5. Parasitized erythrocytes lose deformability and elicit an immune response, resulting in phago
cytosis. Hemolysis is usually extra vascular.
6. Clinical signs
 a. Depend on the degree of anemia, the stage of infection, and the immune status of the
patient
b. Anemia can be gradual or precipitous.
c. Icterus is rare. Splenomegaly is common. Cyclic fevers can occur during periods of
parasitemia.
7. Diagnosis
a. Hemobartonellosis should be considered in any cat with anemia of any duration, particu
larly if hemolysis is suspected. It should also be evaluated for in cats with IMHA or FeLV
infection.
b. Anemia is usually regenerative but can be nonregenerative if there is a coexisting disorder
that results in chronic inflammation.
c. Diagnosis is confirmed by organism identification on blood smear.
i. Samples should be collected prior to therapy.
ii. Since parasitemia is cyclic, a negative test does not rule out the disease. Smear exami-
mation should be repeated daily.
ifi. Fresh blood must be used, as the organisms are epicellular and can be dislodged in
EDTA.
iv. The smear should be well fixed prior to staining, to avoid organism dislodgement.
Chapter 30  Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
391
Fig. 30.5。 _Mycoplasma hemofelis organisms on Feline erythrocytes (Diff-Quik; courtesy of Dr. Raquel Walton,
University of Pennsylvania).
v. Any Romanowsky-type stain can be used (e.g., Diff-Quik, Wright's-Giemsa). New
methylene blue staining is not appropriate as organisms can be confused with other
inclusions.
vi. Organisms appear as blue-staining ring, rod, or coccoid forms on the surface of
erythrocytes (fig. 30.5).
d. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests to detect mycoplasma-DNA are reliable. However,
a positive test may indicate a carrier state or infection with Mycoplasma bemomimutum
and is not necessarily associated with hemolytic anemia.
e. In-saline agglutination and Coombs’ tests may be positive, due to the role of immune-
mediated erythrocytic destruction in this disease.
f. Testing for associated conditions (including FeLV) is imperative.
8. Treatment
a. Antibiotic therapy for 21 days:
i.
Doxycycline {S mg/kg PO or IV twice daily) is the drug of choice. Tetracycline {12-
25 mg/kg PO q8-12h) is an alternative. Due to the risk of esophagitis with oral doxy-
cycline administration, the drug should be delivered as a dilute suspension. The most
common adverse effects are GI irritation {inappetance and vomiting). These tend to
be less severe with tetracycline and can be reduced by administration with food.
Dental staining can occur in young animals. IV doxycycline must be diluted and
administered slowly via continuous rate infusion. Rapid injection can result in hypo-
tension, colla pse, and vomiting.
ii.
 Enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO, SC, or IV q24h) may be used when tetracyclines are not
tolerated. Efficacy, however, is not established. The most common adverse effects are
GI intolerance {inappetance, vomiting, diarrhea). These may be reduced by adminis-
tration with a meal. Ocular toxicity has been reported at high doses (15mg/kg).
 Enrofloxacin can cause cartilaginous damage when administered to young, growing
animals.
ii. A doxycycline/tetracycline and enrofloxacin drug combination may be helpful in
refractory infections.
b. Corticosteroids (e.g., prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q12h) are prescribed for the first 7 days.
392
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
c. Supportive care and blood transfusion (packed RBC) as indicated.
d. Parasitemia typically resolves rapidly following institution of appropriate antibiotic
therapy, and a clinical response is generally seen within days.
e. Antibiotics do not entirely clear the infection; treated cats remain carriers. Relapses,
however, are uncommon.
Babesiosis
1. Babesia species that infect cats include B. felis, B. cati, B. berpailuri, and B. pantherae.
 2. Disease is reported in cats in Africa, South America, and southern Asia.
 3. Organisms are intracellular in the erythrocyte, resulting in intra- and extravascular
hemolysis.
4. Clinical signs
a. Cats usually have a chronic anemia, which may be severe.
b. Fever and icterus are rare.
C. Diarrhea and splenomegaly are common.
5. Diagnosis
a. Babesiosis should be a differential diagnosis in cats with a compatible travel history and
with a chronic regenerative hemolytic anemia.
b. Definitive diagnosis depends on demonstration of the organism within erythrocytes or
positive serologic testing.
i. Parasitemia may be low in chronically infected cats, making organism identification
difficult. Yield can be improved by:
1. Smear preparation from capillary blood collected from the ear tip or nail bed.
2. Examination of erythrocytes in the feathered edges of multiple blood smears.
i. Organisms are intra-erythrocytic and basophilic. B. felis and B.cati appear as small,
single, or paired annular bodies; B. berpailuri appear as large piriform bodies.
6. Specific treatment
a. Primaquine phosphate (0.5 mg/kg IM or SC once) is effective. Extreme caution must be
exercised with dosing as the therapeutic index is low (lethal dose is 1.0 mg/kg). Adverse
effects include myelosuppression, hemolysis, and methemoglobinemia.
b. The need for immunosuppressive therapy is unclear Short-term use should be considered
if anemia persists following antiprotozoal therapy.
vi. Cytauxzoonosis
1. An uncommon disease, caused by Cytauxzoon felis, affecting cats in the midwestern and
southern United States.
2. Wildcats appear to be the reservoir, with ticks serving as vectors.
 3. Merozoites infect erythrocytes, leading to severe intravascular hemolysis.
 4. Clinical signs
a. Anemia, fever, icterus, pigmenturia, dyspnea. Organ dysfunction, particularly pulmo-
nary, is common. DIC may occur.
b. The disease is rapidly progressive, generally leading to death within a week.
5. Diagnosis
a. Should be considered a differential diagnosis in the cat that has access to tick-infested
wooded areas, becomes depressed, febrile, anemic, and possibly icteric
b. Diagnosis is confirmed by organism identification on Romanowsky-stained blood smear.
 Infection is usually low (1-2 piroplasms in <5% of erythrocytes). Organisms appear as
basophilic cocci, rings with eccentric nuclei (signet ring), or oblong rings with bipolar
nuclei (safety pin; fig. 30.6)
c. The tissue phase of the organism may be demonstrated on aspirates or impression smears
of bone marrow, spleen, liver, or lymph node (fig. 30.7).
d. Serologic tests are not commercially available.
Chapter 30Hematologic Emergencies:Anemia
393
Fig. 30.6.
 Cyrouxzoon felis organisms on feline erythrocytes (Diff-Quik; courtesy of Dr. Raquel Walton, University
of Pennsylvania).
Fig。 30.7. Bone marrow aspirate of a cat with cytauxzoonosis (Diff-Quik; courtesy of Dr. Raquel Walton,
University of Pennsylvanial.
6.Treatment
a. Therapy with a diamidine, either diminazene aceturate (2 mg/kg IM once) or imidocarb
(5 mg/kg IM q 14 days), may be attempted, together with supportive therapy. These drugs
are of variable efficacy and are associated with significant morbidity (see table 29.3).
b. Mortality is extremely high, even with therapy.
vii. Heinz body anemia
394
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Heinz bodies are aggregates of precipitated hemoglobin, attached to the internal surfaces of
RBC membranes. They result from oxidative damage of globin sulfhydryl groups.
 2. In normal, healthy cats, Heinz bodies should not be present in more than 5% of erythrocytes.
Increased numbers occur readily in numerous situations because feline hemoglobin is
very susceptible to denaturation by oxidants, and the spleen is inefficient in Heinz body
removal.
3. The presence of increased Heinz bodies, even in high concentrations, is not necessarily
associated with anemia.
4. Hemolysis, when it occurs, is primarily extravascular. Intravascular hemolysis is less common.
5. Causes of Heinz bodies:
a. Drug induced. Oxidant drugs are likely to cause an acute anemia due to the rapid rate
of formation.
b. Diet induced. Anemia is not always present. When it occurs, it is generally mild or mod·
erate. An exception is onion toxicity, which can cause significant anemia. Onions can be
ingested in raw, cooked, dehydrated, or powdered forms. The latter is common in baby
food.
c. Disease associated. Numerous diseases can result in significant Heinz body formation
Most notable is diabetic ketoacidosis, which can result in up to 80% Heinz bodies. A
mild to moderate anemia generally occurs but is seldom acute.
6. Severe drug-induced Heinz body anemia may also be associated with methemoglobinemia.
a. Methemoglobin is formed when the heme moiety of hemoglobin is oxidized to the ferric
form.
b. Exposure to oxidant drugs can result in significant methemoglobinemia, with or without
anemia. Methemoglobin is unable to bind oxygen, resulting in hypoxermia.
c. Clinical signs of methemoglobinemia: Cyanosis is evident when concentrations reach
10% of total hemoglobin, but serious clinical signs are not usually appreciated until a
concentration of 40%. These include lethargy, dyspnea, and exercise intolerance, and
can progress to stupor, coma, and death. Cats with acetaminophen toxicity also exhibit
facial swelling.
7. Diagnosis of Heinz body anemia
a. Anemia is usually regenerative and ranges from subclinical to severe.
 b. The clinical history should elucidate the potential for drug- or diet-associated oxidants
and concurrent diseases.
c. Heinz bodies are confirmed by blood smear examination (fig. 30.8).
 i. They can be easily missed with routine staining, where they appear as pale inclusions
within erythrocytes, or as bulges from the surface.
ii. They are readily visualized as dark, refractile inclusions in new methylene blue “wet”"
preparations. Rapid evaluation can be achieved by placing a drop of new methylene
blue on a dried blood smear and covering it with a coverslip.
iii. The presence of eccentrocytes (fig. 30.9), erythrocytes in which the hemoglobin is
concentrated on one side of the cell, is suggestive of oxidant injury.
iv. A high percentage of Heinz bodies does not necessarily correspond to significant
hemolytic anemia in the cat. Conversely, drug-induced Heinz bodies can result in a
severe life-threatening anemia. It is important, therefore, that the number of Heinz
bodies be interpreted in the light of other clinical findings: severity of anemia, history,
and exclusion of other causes of anemia.
d. In cases of severe drug-induced hemolytic anemia, the patient should be evaluated for
methemoglobinemia:
i. A simple spot test can detect clinically important methemoglobinemia. If a tube
of blood, or a drop of blood on filter paper, remains brown after exposure to air,
Fig。 30.8. Heinz bodies. A: Diff-Quik stained blood smear, showing Heinz bodies evident as pale bulges from
the erythrocyte surface. B: New methylene blue staining of a blood smear from the same cat. Heinz bodies are
evident as dark blue inclusions on the periphery of the erythrocytes (courtesy of Dr. Elizabeth Spangler, Oregon 
StateUniversityl.
Fig.30.9.
Eccentrocytes, characterized by the eccentric distribution of hemoglobin within the erythrocyte (Diff-
Quik; courtesy of Dr. Elizabeth Spangler, Oregon State University).
395
396
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
compared to a control sample that turns red, methemoglobin concentration exceeds
10%.
ii. Accurate quantification can be performed by commercial laboratories.
8. Treatment
a. The oxidant source should be removed where possible.
b. Supportive therapy, including blood transfusion (packed red cells), as indicated.
c. If severe intravascular hemolysis is present, intravenous fluid therapy should be admin-
istered to ameliorate the risk of hemoglobinuria-induced nephrosis.
d. The hematocrit or PCV should be closely monitored because the nadir is not generally
reached until several days after oxidant exposure.
e. Following oxidant removal/withdrawal, Heinz bodies disappear gradually over 1-4
weeks.
viii. Methemoglobinemia:
1. Oxygen supplementation is of limited benefit, as the methemoglobin cannot bind oxygen.
2. Routine decontamination should be attempted after a known or suspected ingestion.
3. Mild to moderate methemoglobinemia does not require specific therapy to reduce the met-
hemoglobin content. If the oxidant source is eliminated, erythrocytes can reduce the methe-
moglobin within 24 hours.
4. Ascorbic acid {30 mg/kg PO q6h) should be administered to assist in the reduction of met-
hemoglobin to hemoglobin.
 5. Severe methemoglobinemia can be corrected via a single administration of Methylene blue.
However, the drug has the potential to actually cause Heinz bodies and exacerbate anemia.
It is considered contraindicated in cats by some clinicians. It should only be used with
extreme caution, and only when absolutely necessary. Methylene blue is given at 1.0-1.5 mg/
kg via slow IV injection, once only. A dramatic response should be seen 30 minutes after 
administration.
6. In cats with acetaminophen toxicity, N-acetylcysteine should be administered. This provides
an alternate substrate for one of the active metabolites of acetaminophen. Moreover, it
provides cysteine, to restore glutathione synthesis. A loading dose of 140 mg/kg is given IV
in D5W, or PO, followed by 70 mg/kg PO q6-8h for 3-7 days.
ix.Zinc toxicity
1. Less common in cats compared with dogs due to their more discriminating eating habits.
They are unlikely to ingest pennies, zinc nuts, or bolts. Toxicity, however, can occur via
ingestion of topical protectants.
2. Toxic concentrations of zinc result in severe intravascular hemolysis and gastrointestinal
irritation. Acute renal failure can result from massive hemoglobinuria.
3. Diagnosis
a. Zinc toxicity should be considered in the patient with acute hemolytic anemia without
a utoagglutination or morphological abnormalities on blood smear.
b. Hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria are common.
c. Reticulocytosis may or may not be present, depending on the duration of hemolysis.
d. A tentative diagnosis is based on a history of exposure, the presence of intravascular
hemolysis, and the exclusion of other causes of such.
e. Metal-dense foreign objects can sometimes be seen radiographically, but their absence
should not exclude a diagnosis.
f. Definitive diagnosis requires the presence of convincing clinical signs or an elevated blood
zinc concentration. Samples should be submitted in special trace mineral tubes to avoid
contamination from rubber stoppers and erroneous results. Due to the high mortality
associated with this condition, these cases are serious emergencies and treatment should
not be delayed pending results.
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
397
4.Treatment
a. If a foreign body is present, it should be removed (via endoscopy or laparotomy) follow-
ing sta bilization of the patient.
 b. Appropriate fluid therapy, based on perfusion parameters and renal function.
C. Packed red blood cells should be transfused as necessary.
 d. Hz-receptor antagonists are recommended to decrease leaching of zinc from the source
(e.g., famotidine 0.5 mg/kg PO, SC, or dilute IV, q12-24h).
e. Chelation therapy with calcium ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (CaEDTA) should be
initiated at 25 mg/kg, as a 1% solution in S% dextrose water, SC q6h. This is achieved
by diluting 1 mL EDTA (200 mg/mL) with 19 mL 5% dextrose water. The resulting solu-
tion administered at 2.5 mL/kg. EDTA is nephrotoxic. It is contraindicated in patients
with anuria and should be used with caution in patients with renal failure or on concur-
rent therapy with potentially nephrotoxic drugs. The duration of chelator thera py remains
unclear, as serum zinc concentrations may take 2-21 days to decline following removal
or elimination of the toxin. The decision should be based on normalization of the serum
zinc concentration.
f. The prognosis for complete recovery is good with timely and aggressive intervention.
X.
 Microangiopathic anemia
 1. Numerous conditions can cause physical damage to erythrocytes, resulting in fragmentation
and hemolysis.
2. Microangiopathic hemolysis is usually mild and subclinical. Signs of the underlying disease
predominate.
3. Diagnosis is based on the following:
a. Identification of an underlying trigger condition
b. Identification of schizocytes on blood smear examination. These erythrocyte fragments
appear as small, misshapen, often helmet-shaped or triangular structures (fig. 30.10).
They are significant when present but are not specific for microangiopathy.
C.
Elimination of other causes of anemia
4. Treatment
Fig. 30.10. Schizocytes (arrow) are indicative of microangiopathic erythrocyic damage (Diff-Quik; courtesy of
Dr. Raquel Walton, University of Pennsylvania}.
398
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Besides supportive care, treatment is directed at the underlying disease.
 b. Prognosis is guarded to poor unless the underlying condition is corrected.
xi.F
Hypophosphatemia
1. Patients are rarely presented for hypophosphatemic anemia. Hypophosphatemia generally
 occurs in hospitalized patients, resulting in anemia and increased morbidity.
2. Causes
a. Diabetes mellitus, diabetic ketoacidosis
b. Hepatic lipidosis
c. Starvation-refeeding syndrome (enteral or parenteral)
d. Phosphate-binding antacids (rare)
 3. Phosphorus concentrations can drop precipitously in ketoacidotic patients following insulin
therapy and in patients with lipidosis or prolonged starvation following refeeding.
4. Decreased serum phosphorus is generally evident 24 hours after initiation of therapy but
may continue to decline thereafter.
5. Depletion of ATP results in erythrocytic damage and intravascular hemolysis. It can also
result in myopathy and neurologic dysfunction.
6. Clinical signs
a. Acute hemolytic anemia: weakness, pallor, sometimes icterus and/or hemoglobinuria
b. Neuromuscular signs: weakness, disorientation, ataxia, convulsions
7. Diagnosis
a. Hypophosphatemia should be suspected if acute anemia (or acute worsening of anemia)
occurs in the ketoacidotic patient following initiation of therapy or in the patient with
lipidosis or starvation following refeeding.
b. Hemoglobinemia is usually evident; less commonly, gross hemoglobinuria.
c. Diagnosis is confirmed via serum phosphorus determination (<2.0mg/dL). This can
underestimate the phosphate depletion and may be erroneously higher due to hemoglo-
binemia and hyperbilirubinemia.
8.Treatment
a. Intravenous supplementation, as potassium phosphate or sodium phosphate, at 0.03-
0.06 mM/kg/hr, infused over 6 hours. This is best achieved by diluting the dose with a
small volume of normal saline or balanced electrolyte solution, and administering via
syringe pump. Alternatively, the dose can be added to the patient's usual crystalloid fluids.
Serum phosphorus concentration should be reassessed following infusion, and the infu-
sion repeated as necessary.
b. Oral supplementation is sufficient when hypophosphatemia is mild and subclinical, where
further decline is not anticipated, and if the patient is eating and not vomiting. This is
achieved via milk or commercial phosphate products (0.5-2.0 mM/kg/day).
 9. Prevention. The clinician should predict clinical situations in which hypophosphatemia is
likely to occur. In such patients:
a. Serum phosphorus should be measured prior to therapy. Borderline or low-normal con
centrations should prompt IV phosphate supplementation.
b. Serum phosphorus should be measured 24 hours after initiation of therapy in
patients at risk. Hypophosphatemia, or a significant decline, are indications for
supplementation.
c. Close monitoring of PCV and mucous membranes, and observation of plasma for
hemoglobinemia
b. Hemorrhagic anemia
i. Acute blood loss
1. Acute blood loss reduces both the RBC mass and the circulating volume.
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
399
2. Blood loss constituting less than 20% of the blood volume is generally well tolerated. When
loss exceds 20%, cardiovascular effects are evident. Initial compensatory responses attempt
vasoconstriction (resulting in pallor and a prolonged capillary refill time). As loss exceeds
30-40%, cardiac output and blood pressure decrease, resulting in hypoperfusion, shock and,
ultimately, death.
3. If blood loss is rapid, cardiovascular collapse can occur before any changes in PCV and TP
 If loss is gradual, fluid shifts occur into the vascular compartment to maintain vascular volume,
resulting in decreased PCV and TP In the absence of fluid therapy, these shifts, and the associ-
ated drop in PCV, are gradual (2-3 days). The PCV, therefore, can underestimate the extent
of hemorrhage.
4. Marrow response to anemia takes several days, so the initial anemia is nonregenerative.
Aggregate reticulocytosis is evident by 2-4 days.
5. Diagnosis:
 a. Acute, external hemorrhage is usually obvious. The extent and severity should be assessed
via evaluation of perfusion parameters.
 b. Internal hemorrhage should be considered in any patient with hypoperfusion and/or acute
anemia. Potential sites of significant blood loss include the gastrointestinal tract, abdominal
cavity, thoracic cavity, retroperitoneal space, and musculofascial planes. The clinician
should be aware that melena may not be evident for several days following Gl
hemorrhage.
6. Treatment
a. Four main goals in management
i. Intravascular volume replacement (fluid therapy)
ii. Control of hemorrhage
ili. Provision of red cells (transfusion)
iv. Treatment of the underlying disorder
b. With acute, substantial blood loss, the effects of hypoperfusion are more critical than those
of a reduced red cell mass. Initial treatment, therefore, must be directed toward intra vas
cular volume expansion and reestablishment of adequate perfusion. There is no rationale
to withhold fluid therapy in these patients; hypoperfusion will only serve to exacerbate the
tissue hypoxia. Fluid choice (crystalloid/colloid) and administration rate depend on the
severity and rapidity of hemorrhage, the clinical status of the patient, and whether other
concomitant injuries are present (see chap. 3—Shock and chap. 8—Fluid Therapy).
c. The transfusion trigger may be difficult to determine, because the PCV and TP do not
accurately reflect the extent of loss until intravascular volume is normalized. Moreover,
hypoperfusion contributes to the hypoxia. Transfusion, therefore, should be based on the
status of the patient, not the PCV.
d. After control of hemorrhage, red cell mass generally returns to normal over 1-2 weeks
ii. Chronic blood loss—iron deficiency anemia
1. With chronic internal blood loss, iron is recycled, and an iron deficiency does not occur. The
anemia is regenerative, the magnitude depending on the extent of blood loss and of marrow
response.
2. Chronic external blood loss results in iron loss and eventual deficiency. Iron deficiency leads
to excessive cell division of erythroid precursors and the production of smaller erythrocytes
(microcytosis).
 3. In contrast to humans, iron deficiency anemia is usually regenerative. In the most advanced
stages, a nonregenerative anemia may occur.
400
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 4. Young, nursing kittens are particularly susceptible to iron deficiency from any type of blood
loss, as stores are low and milk contains little iron.
5. Causes of external loss
a. Gastrointestinal loss {most common): parasitism, ulcers, neoplasia, malabsorption
b. Hematuria
c. Severe flea infestation, in kittens or very small cats
 d. Overzealous and repeated phlebotomies, particularly in small cats
6. Clinical signs
a. Anemia is generally insidious occurring over weeks and allowing remarkable adaptation.
b. Pica is a classical manifestation, exhibited by the eating of cat litter or dirt.
C. Signs relating to the primary disorder may be evident. Melena, however, is often intermit-
tent or occult.
7. Diagnosis
a.CBC
i. MCV is generally normal initially. If deficiency persists, microcytic cells constitute a
significant portion of the RBC population, and MCV decreases.
1. Some electronic counters may not count microcytic cells, resulting in a spuriously
normal or increased MCV. (An erythrocyte histogram will provide evidence that this
has occurred.)
 2. A decreased MCV may not be evident in the neonate as the MCV is normally higher
at birth.
 3. Marked microcytosis is almost pathognomonic for iron deficiency. Mild microcytosis
may be seen with other conditions, for example, anemia of inflammatory disease,
portosystemic shunt.
ii.A decreased MCHC is rarely present in cats.
ii. Red cell distribution width (RDW) may be high, reflecting the presence of microcytes
together with normal erythrocytes.
iv. Thrombocytosis can occur.
 b. Reticulocyte count: Absolute reticulocytosis generally occurs. As the magnitude of depletion
increases, reticulocytosis decreases.
c. Hypochromia is usually not evident on blood smear examination in cats.
d. Bone marrow is characterized by mild to moderate erythroid hypoplasia. Evaluation for
stainable iron is of limited value in the cat, as normal cats store only small amounts of iron
in the marrow.
e. Iron parameters
i. Serum iron concentrations are low, but this can occur in other disorders.
i. Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) is usually normal or slightly increased; transferrin
saturation is decreased.
iii. Serum ferritin concentration is usually low. Since ferritin is an acute phase protein,
however, concentrations may increase in inflammatory conditions.
iv. Iron parameters are affected by transfusions, iron supplements, and corticosteroid
administration.
f. Investigation of underlying disease. This should include evaluation for intestinal and urinary
sources of blood loss. Since melena may not be grossly apparent, testing for fecal occult
blood may be necessary.
8. Treatment
a. Correction of the underlying cause
b. Supportive care
C. Blood transfusion, if anemia is severe and the patient sufficiently compromised, or if surgery
is to be performed
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
401
d. Iron supplementation
i. Oralsupplementation (ferrous sulfate (50-100 mg PO q24h)is preferable. Gastrointestinal
intolerance is the primary adverse effect. Division of the daily dosage may ameliorate
should be continued beyond correction of hematocrit and erythrocyte parameters, to
replenish iron stores. This may take several months. Oral iron should be avoided in
neonates during the first week of life, due to potential for liver injury.
i. Injectable iron dextran (10 mg/kg IM q 3-4 weeks) may be used if oral therapy is inef-
fective or results in adverse effects, if the patient is uncooperative, or if the owner is
unwilling to give oral preparations. Injections, however, are painful and irritating.
ili. Blood transfusion is an excellent source of iron, but use should be restricted to severely
a nemic patients.
c. Decreased and ineffective erythropoiesis
i. Extramarrow disorders
1. Anemia of inflammatory disease (AID)
a. AID (formerly known as anemia of chronic disease) is a nonregenerative anemia that often
accompanies inflammatory and neoplastic disorders.
b. Pathogenesis may include mediators that inhibit erythropoiesis, decreased serum iron, a
blunted erythropoietin response, and decreased erythrocyte life span.
C. Clinical signs vary depending on the underlying disorder. Presenting complaints are seldom
directly related to the anemia, but anemia may be contributory.
d. Diagnosis:
i.CBC and reticulocyte count
1. Mild or moderate, nonregenerative anemia
2. MCV is usually in the low end of the reference range but may be mildly decreased.
3. MCHC and RDW are normal.
ii. Serum iron and TIBC are normal or decreased. Serum ferritin is normal or increased.
e. Treatment: The anemia is reversible with effective treatment of the underlying disorder.
 2. Iron-deficiency anemia
a. Severe iron deficiency can result in nonregenerative anemia and marrow hypoplasia (see
above).
3. Anemia of renal failure
a. Nonregenerative anemia is relatively common in cats with renal failure, especially chronic
and severe failure. It is usually mild to moderate but can be severe.
b. The pathophysiology is complex and may include erythropoietin (EPO) deficiency, pres-
ence of circulating toxins that suppress erythropoiesis or reduce RBC life span, AID,
gastrointestinal ulceration, and/or thrombopathia. EPO appears to play less of a role in
the pathogenesis of anemia in cats compared to dogs. Cats with renal failure may have a
normal or only modestly decreased EPO concentration.
C.Diagnosis:
i. A nonregenerative anemia in a patient with significant renal failure is suggestive.
i. Other causes of anemia should be excluded, particularly if the degree of anemia is
disproportionate to the magnitude and duration of renal failure.
ili. Measurement of plasma EPO concentration is useful to determine pathogenesis and
d. Treatment
i.
 Management of the renal disease and uremia.
ii. Blood transfusion if the anemia is severe and the patient has associated compromise
ili. EPO therapy (using human recombinant EPO) can result in the development of
antibodies after several weeks of use. Therefore, it is only indicated if the patient has
402
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
clinical signs related to the anemia or is significantly affected (PCV < 20%). EPO
therapy is initiated 100 units three times weekly until the target hematocrit is reached.
It is then reduced to twice weekly. The lowest possible maintenance dose should be
used. Treatment should not be initiated in patients with hypertension or iron deficiency
until these problems have been corrected. Blood pressure and serum iron should be
monitored during therapy. If refractory anemia occurs despite therapy and a normal
ated. Erythroid hypoplasia suggests the development of autoantibodies, necessitating
cessation of EPO therapy and support via blood transfusion.
iv. Other therapeutic strategies should be directed toward factors that may be contributing
to the anemia, including gastrointestinal ulcers and reduced nutrient intake.
ii. Intramarrow disorders
1.General
a. Result in nonregenerative anemia. With the exception of pure red cell aplasia, variable
degrees of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia may occur.
b. Taking a history usually reveals a chronic, progressive course. Acute hematopoietic neo-
plasia is an exception.
C. General clinical signs include lethargy, inappetance, and weight loss. Other signs may be
present relating to the cytopenia: weakness and pallor with anemia, infections and fever
with neutropenia, and bleeding with thrombocytopenia. Splenomegaly may occur due to
extramedullary hematopoiesis or neoplastic infiltration.
d. Intramarrow disorders should be suspected in the patient with the following:
i.A nonregenerative anemia together with another cytopenia(s)
ii. A nonregenerative anemia and a history of exposure to viral disease or potentially
myelosuppressive drugs
ili. A nonregenerative anemia of more than 3-5 days duration, in which other causes
have been eliminated
histopathology). A current CBC and blood smear should accompany sample
submission.
f. Cats with intramarrow disorders should be evaluated for viral disease, neoplasia, and
immune-mediated disease. If FeLV blood serology is negative, IFA should be performed
on marrow aspirate samples.
g. General treatment principles:
i. Supportive care includes fluid and electrolyte therapy to maintain adequate hydration
and electrolyte balance and nursing care to ensure comfort.
ii. Blood transfusion, if indicated
ili. Broad spectrum antibiotics, if significant neutropenia {<2,S00/μL) exists. Examples
include amoxicillin/clavulanate (15-22 mg/kg PO q12h) and enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg PO,
SC, dilute IV q24h).
iv. Nutritional support. Many of these cats are chronically inappetant and malnutritioned,
requiring appetite stimulants or enteral nutrition (see chap. 9—Nutritional Support
for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
2. Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA)
a. A severe nonregenerative anemia associated with depletion of erythroid precursor cells in
the bone marrow
b. Secondary PRCA occurs in cats with FeLV infection. Primary PRCA is likely immune
mediated.
C. Diagnosis:
i. CBC reveals a severe anemia; white cell and platelet counts are within normal limits.
Chapter 30 Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
403
ii. Confirmed via bone marrow examination: Erythrocyte precursors are often virtually
absent; myeloid and megakaryocytic elements are preserved.
ii. Viral serology should be performed as well as Coombs' testing.
d. Specific treatment
i. Primary PRCA: Generally responds to immunosuppressive therapy within 3-4 weeks
(see IMHA—Treatment).
il. Secondary PRCA: No specific therapy for the anemia. Immunosuppressive and inter-
feron therapy can be attempted (see below: FeLV).
3. Aplastic anemia (Aplastic pancytopenia)
a. Characterized by pancytopenia of blood and panhypoplasia of bone marrow with marrow
space replaced by adipose tissue.
b. Acute and chronic forms are seen
i. Acute. Clinical signs develop within 2 weeks of marrow injury. Neutropenia develops
 5-6 days after the insult, followed by thrombocytopenia at 8-10 days. Anemia is gener-
ally mild or absent.
i. Chronic. Clinical signs develop over weeks or months. Signs of severe anemia usually
predominate. Neutropenia and thrombocytopenia are often of insufficient magnitude
to result in infection and/or hemorrhage.
C.Causes:
i. Infectious. Parvovirus and endotoxemia/septicemia result in acute aplastic anemias.
Chronic ehrlichiosis results in chronic aplastic anemia. Uncommonly, FeLV and FIV
may cause a chronic aplastic anemia.
ii. Drug-induced. Chemotherapeutic drugs, griseofulvin, sulfadiazine, and albendazole
can cause acute aplastic anemia.
ii. Idiopathic cases are rare in cats.
d.Diagnosis
i. Careful history taking should elucidate possible exposure to drugs or infectious
agents.
ii. Pancytopenia with a nonregenerative anemia
ili. Diagnosis is confirmed on bone marrow evaluation. Hemic tissue occupies less than
25% of the marrow space, with the remainder replaced by adipose tissue.
iv. In the absence of a compatible drug history, testing for infectious causes is
indicated.
e. Specific treatment
i. Acute: Withdrawal of offending drug, or treatment of the underlying disease. Severe
therapy for 3-5 days until the neutrophil count increases above 3,000/μL.
i. Chronic: Specific treatment is not reported for animals. Bone marrow transplantation
is limited by a lack of compatible donors and high incidence of rejection. Management
of severe cytopenias may be attempted via hematopoietic growth factor therapy (EPO,
G-CSF).
f. Prognosis
i. Acute aplastic anemias tend to be reversible after elimination of the initiating cause and
with adequate supportive care.
i. Chronic aplastic anemias are less amena ble to therapy. However, with supportive care,
recovery can occur weeks to months after diagnosis.
4. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
a. MDSs are a group of hematopoietic stem cell disorders, characterized by ineffective hema-
topoiesis and evidence of disturbed maturation in blood and bone marrow.
404
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. MDSs are heterogenous with respect to clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities.
c. MDS can evolve into acute myeloid leukemia {AML). Even in the absence of neoplasia,
MDSs are lethal in many cases due to the severe cytopenias.
d. FeLV is the probable cause for MDS in most cats. Other potentially mutagenic events
include exposure to chemotherapeutic agents, radiation, or certain chermicals.
e. Diagnosis:
i. CBC findings are variable. Multiple cytopenias are common, but decreased mature cell
numbers in one or two lines may be accompanied by normal or increased numbers of
Other cells.
 1. A nonregenerative anemia is present in almost all patients and is often severe.
Macrocytosis is usually present. Nucleated red blood cells may be profoundly
increased.
2. The majority of patients have thrombocytopenia; few have thrombocytosis.
Abnormal platelets may be evident on blood smear evaluation.
3. Neutropenia and monocytopenia are common, but profound leukocytosis may also
occur. Immature and dysplastic eosinophils are relatively common. Circulating
myeloid blast cells generally represent less than 10% of white cells.
ii. Bone marrow examination by an experienced hematopathologist is essential to diag-
nose and classify MDS.
ii. The diagnosis can be difficult in patients that lack convincing evidence of multilineage
dyspoiesis or excess blast cells. In such cases, benign or potentially reversible disorders
should be excluded. These include nutritional deficiencies (folate, cobalamin), drugs
( vincristine, chloramphenicol), and immune-mediated ineffective erythropoiesis.
f.Treatment
i.Administration of hematopoietic growth factors (EPO, G-CSF) can alleviate the effects
of cytopenias.
ii. The benefits of corticosteroid therapy in these patients is uncertain but may be
attempted.
ii. Low-dose cytosine arabanicide has been reported to be effective in a small number of
cases.
iv. Adjunctive therapy with interferon may be of some benefit in patients with FeLV-
associated MDS.
AML is unpredictable. Cats with mild to moderate cytopenias and low blast counts can
live for months to years with therapy.
5. Myelophthisis
a. Characterized by the replacement of bone marrow with nonmarrow elements. These can
be neoplastic cells, infectious granulomas, or fibrous tissue.
b. Anemia usually normocytic, normochromic. Nucleated red blood cells are frequently
increased. Marked anisocytosis and poikilocytosis are also common. Immature white cells
and immature, abnormal megathrombocytes may be evident.
C. Diagnosis depends on demonstration of inappropriate invading cells on bone marrow
histopathology.
Ae auas si sisousoid "llo supeaui jo adki aui uo puadap sisousoid pue suaueau syoads p
poor.
6. Myelofibrosis
a. Characterized by an increase in bone marrow collagen and extracellular matrix. A pivotal
role for megakaryocytes in the pathogenesis has been demonstrated in several species.
b. Myelofibrosis is a reactive process associated with various diseases. In cats, the most
common underlying diseases are MDS and AML. Other causes include infectious diseases,
ra diation, drugs, and immune-mediated nonregenerative anemias.
Chapter 30  Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
405
c. Diagnosis:
i. CBC reveals variable cytopenias. Thrombocytosis is not uncommon.
i. Bone marrow histopathology confirms a diagnosis and may indicate an underlying
disease.
ii. Further workup should include investigation of drug history, infectious diseases, and
immune-mediated diseases.
d. Specific therapy
i. Myelofibrosis can resolve with correction of the underlying disease. As such, diagnosis
and treatment of such is paramount.
il. Adjunctive therapy with hematopoietic growth factors may be beneficial.
7. Hematopoietic neoplasia
a. Characterized by replacement of normal hemic tissue with abnormal clonal proliferation
b. Acute and chronic myeloproliferative and lymphoproliferative disorders are recognized in
cats.
c. Viral infection {FeLV or FIV) is commonly associated.
d. Diagnosis
i.The history should provide clues as to chronicity.
ii. Nonspecific bone pain can occur.
ii. Variable cytopenias occur. Neoplastic cells in the peripheral blood occur frequently
but not universally.
iv. Infiltration of other hematopoietic tissues (spleen, liver, lymph nodes, central nervous
tissue) is common. Sampling of these sites may reveal neoplasia.
v. Marrow examination serves to confirm a diagnosis and may suggest cell type. Flow
cytometry or immunocytochemical staining is necessary for accurate classification.
vi. Viral serology should be performed.
e. Specific treatment and prognosis
i. Chemotherapy options depend on the tumor type and the status of the patient. Therapy
may offer some prolongation of life and improved quality, but responses are generally
palliative and not curative.
ii. Infectious
1. Feline leukemia virus {FeLV)
a. At least 50% of cats with FeLV infection are anemic. Possible mechanisms include:
i. Anemia of inflammatory disease related to FeLV-associated disease(s).
i. Intramarrow disorders: pure red cell aplasia, MDS, myelofibrosis, hematopoietic neo-
plasia, or aplastic anemia.
ili. Hemolysis associated with secondary infection (hemobartonellosis) or immune-medi-
ated mechanisms.
b. The type of anemia reflects the pathologic process. If anemia is caused by an intramarrow
disorder or AID, it is usually normocytic normochromic and nonregenerative. Where
cats defy these patterns in that they demonstrate a macrocytic normochromic nonregenera-
tive anemia.
C. Clinical signs may reflect anemia, other cytopenias, and/or other FeLV-associated diseases.
d. Diagnosis
i. FeLV infection should be suspected and tested for in any anemic cat without obvious
ca use.
ii. Diagnosis of FeLV is confirmed via ELISA or IFA testing for viral antigens. If testing
of blood samples is negative, marrow aspirate samples should be tested via IFA.
e. Treatment
i. Treatment should focus on the mechanism for the anemia, be it immune mediated.
parasitic, or intramarrow.
406
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Adjunctive interferon {IFN) therapy. Beneficial results have been reported using oral
recombinant human IFN-alpha (Roferon, Hoffman Laroche; Intron A, Schering-
Plough) or injectable recombinant feline IFN-omega (Virbagen omega, Virbac). Oral
rh-IFN is dosed at 30 u per cat daily, on a 7-day-on, 7-day-off cycle. The IFN is pro-
vided in a concentrated form and is diluted as follows: The entire contents of a
 3-million-unit vial are diluted in 1 liter of sterile normal saline to yield a 3,000u/mL
solution. This is then divided into 10-mL aliquots in plastic tubes and frozen. Such
aliquots are stable for years. When needed, an aliquot is thawed and diluted in 1 liter
of saline to yield a 30u/mL solution. This final solution is stable for 3-6 months if
refrigerated. Injectible feline-IFN-omega is dosed at 10"u/kg SC daily for 5 consecutive
days, on days 0, 14, and 60.
f. Prognosis is variable and depends on the pathogenesis of the anemia and the presence of
other FeLV-associated disorders. If the cause of the anemia is reversible or manageable,
many of these cats can enjoy a good quality of life for an extended period. The contagious
nature of the disease and the consequential risk to other cats, however, should be addressed
with the owner.
2. Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
a. Anemia 0ccurs frequently in FIV-infected cats (18-36%). This is likely related to AID
rather than a direct result of infection.
 b. Other CBC findings may include neutropenia, lymphopenia, lymphocytosis, monocytosis,
and thrombocytopenia.
c. Diagnosis is confirmed by demonstration of FIV antibodies via ELISA, IFA, or Western
Blot assays.
3. Ehrlichiosis
a. Ehrlichiosis in cats has been recognized with increasing frequency worldwide. There
appear to be two forms: one caused by Ehrlichia canis, with inclusions in neutrophils, and
another caused by Anaplasma (Ehrlichia) pbagocytophilum, with inclusions in mononu-
clear cells.
b. Clinical signs are variable. Anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, pallor, fever, hyperesthesia or
joint pain, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and/or dyspnea are most common.
C. Laboratory findings
i. A nonregenerative, normocytic, normochromic anemia is usually present. Leukopenia,
leukocytosis, or thrombocytopenia can occur. Less commonly, anemia is regenerative.
ii. Hyperglobulinemia is not uncommon. This is usually a polyclonal gammopathy,
although a monoclonal gammopathy is also described.
ii. Antinuclear antibody testing is frequently positive.
iv. Bone marrow changes include hypoplasia and dysplasia.
d. Diagnosis
i. Demonstration of intracytoplasmic inclusions in neutrophils or monocytes may be
possible in acute cases. But these are inconsistent findings, making this an insensitive
method of diagnosis.
ii. Serologic testing {IFA) for antibodies is available, but false negatives and positives
occur.
ili. PCR testing is specific and confirms a diagnosis, but false negatives occur, particularly
in patients that have received antibiotic therapy.
iv. Ehrlichiosis should be a differential diagnosis in the cat with nonregenerative anemia
due to hypoplasia or dysplasia, or in the cat with immune-mediated disease. A tentative
diagnosis is based on a combination of clinical and laboratory findings consistent with
the disease, exclusion of other causes, positive serologic testing, and response to
therapy. A positive PCR test or demonstration of morulae confirms the diagnosis.
Chapter 30Hematologic Emergencies: Anemia
407
e. Treatment
i. Doxycycline, for 3-4 weeks
il. Clinical response is generally good. Complete eradication of the organism may be dif-
ficult, however, particularly in patients on concurrent immunosuppressive therapy.
Recommend Reading
Blue JT. Myelodysplastic syndromes and myelofibrosis. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds, Schalm's
Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed, pp 682-688. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
Feldman BF. Nonregenerative anemia. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds, Textbook of Veterinary Internal
Medicine, 6th ed, pp 1908-1917. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
Giger U. Regenerative anemias caused by blood loss or hemolysis. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds,
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed, pp 1886-1907. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
Harvey JW. Methemoglobinemia and Heinz body hemolytic anemia. In Bonagura JD, ed, Kirk's Current
Therapy XIl, pp 443-446. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1995.
McSherry LJ. Techniques for bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, eds,
Textbook of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 6th ed, pp 285-288. St. Louis: Elsevier Saunders, 2005.
Tvedten H, Scott M, Boon GD. Interpretation of cytograms and histograms of erythrocytes, leukocytes,
 and platelets. In Bonagura JD, ed, Kirk's Current Therapy XIl, pp 381-390. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders,
2002.
Tvedten H, Weiss DJ. Classification and laboratory evaluation of anemia. In Feldman BF, Zinkl JG, Jain
NC, eds, Schalm's Veterinary Hematology, Sth ed, pp 143-150. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2000.
31
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIO
DISEASES: DIABETES
Tara K. Trotman
Unique Features
● A small number of cats develop "transient" diabetes mellitus, in which hyperglycemia and glucosuria
resolve sometime during the course of treatment, and therapy is no longer required. This “resolution?
 of diabetes mellitus can be temporary or permanent.
● Cats can tolerate higher blood glucose levels than dogs without showing overt clinical signs.
· Cats may have a strong catecholamine response to stress, leading to a stress hyperglycemia, which
must be differentiated from dia betes mellitus.
· Beca use cats are obligate carnivores, gluconeogenesis is ongoing. Therefore, nutritional recommenda-
tions are to feed a diet high in protein content, with limited carbohydrates.
● May be able to regulate feline diabetes mellitus with oral hypoglycemic agents such as glipizide.
I.Dia betes mellitus
A. Background
a. Diabetes mellitus is defined as persistent fasting hyperglycemia and glucosuria.
b. Historically, two types of diabetes melltus exist.
i. Type 1—also known as insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, associated with an absolute
deficiency of insulin
ii. Type 2—also known as non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, associated with a relative
insulin deficiency or insulin resistance
c. While most commonly thought to be insulin-dependent diabetics, felines have been reported to
have non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and some will respond to dietary management and/
or oral hypoglycemics, without the need for exogenous insulin administration.
d. “Transient” diabetes mellitus: see Unique Features box.
B. Pathophysiology
a. Diabetes mellitus occurs secondary to an absolute or relative deficiency of insulin secretion from
the pancreas. Lack of insulin leads to an inability of tissues to utilize glucose as a source of
cemia in the blood circulation, which leads to glucosuria when the feline renal threshold of
approximately 280 mg/dL is exceeded.
409
410
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Glucosuria causes an osmotic diuresis leading to the classic clinical sign of polyuria, which is
followed by a compensatory polydipsia.
C. A decrease in the utilization of nutrients by the peripheral tissues leads to weight loss.
d. Glucose typically inhibits the satiety center to decrease hunger, but because a lack of insulin
reduces the ability for glucose to enter the satiety center, polyphagia ensues.
C. Signalment, history, clinical signs, and physical examination
nq Kuanbay isow pasouaeip are (sieak 0l jo ueau e yim 'sieak g ueul raieaa) sies 1pio *b
cats of any age may be affected.
 b. Neutered male cats tend to be overrepresented.
c. A history of polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, and weight loss is typical, although owners may
also report lethargy, decreased grooming activity, or an unkempt hair coat. These signs are not
diagnostic for diabetes mellitus, as other feline diseases such as hyperthyroidism can cause similar
signs.
d. Owners may report hind limb weakness, due to a plantigrade posture.
e. Findings on physical examination can vary, but unless concurrent disease is present, or diabetic
complications such as diabetic ketoacidosis have occurred, many cats are in good or even obese
body condition, and no classic examination findings are seen.
D. Diagnosis
a. Persistent fasting hyperglycemia with glucosuria is necessary for diagnosis.
 b. Because cats have a strong catecholamine response to stress, which leads to stress-induced hyper-
glycemia, it is extremely important to document glucosuria, as well as an appropriate history.
Rarely, cats may have glucosuria secondary to stress-induced hyperglycemia. If in doubt, further
testing to establish a diagnosis may include repeated blood and urine glucose measurements,
allowing the owner to check for glucosuria at home in a nonstressful environment, or measure-
ment of a fructosamine.
i. Fructosamines are proteins that have been glycated, and they typically measure the glucose
concentration for the prior 3 weeks.
i. Normal reference ranges for fructosamine are laboratory dependent. Typically, the higher the
ceding 3 weeks.
E. Treatment of the uncomplicated feline diabetic patient
a. Diet therapy
i. Obesity is a common finding in diabetic cats and may cause reversible insulin resistance.
are undertaken.
ii. Historically, nutrition recommendations for diabetic cats have relied on feeding a diet high
in fiber, which has been shown in studies of cats and dogs to improve glycemic control
because of its ability to inhibit or slow intestinal glucose absorption.
ifi. Newer information suggests that feeding diabetic cats a high-protein, low-carbohydrate diet
may be more effective in improving glycemic control in cats.
1. The pathophysiologic reason for this is that cats are carnivores, and as such they use
amino acids and fat, rather than carbohydrates, as their energy source. Thus, dietary
carbohydrates may lead to higher postprandial glucose concentrations.
2. Current feeding recommendations for cats with diabetes mellitus are to feed a diet with
a high protein level, limited carbohydrates, and a fixed amount of fat. Diets such as Purina
DM (Nestle Purina Pet Care Company, St. Louis, MO), Hills M/D, or kitten foods with
this type of content, are suggested.
3. These diets may not be ideal for cats with preexisting renal disease because of the high
protein content.
Chapter 31Management of Specific Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Diabetes
411
b. Oral hypoglycemic
i.  Many oral hypoglycemic agents exist, with a variety of goals including improvement of
insulin secretion, suppression of hepatic glucose production, decrease in insulin resistance,
or a reduction of glucose absorption via the GI tract.
ii. Little evidence exists in feline medicine for the use of such agents; however, they may be
successful in regulating diabetes mellitus in a small portion of cats. These agents are not
thought to have any benefit in dogs with diabetes mellitus.
ii. The most commonly used oral hypoglycemic agent in feline diabetes mellitus is glipizide.
1. Glipizide is a sulfonylurea, which acts by increasing insulin secretion from pancreatic beta
cells.
a. Glipizide is recommended for use in cats with mild to moderate hyperglycemia that
are clinically stable.
b. Start at 2.5 mg PO BID for 2 weeks.
c. If patient is still hyperglycemic and no adverse side effects are noted, possibly increase
to 5mg PO BID.
d. If blood glucose remains above 300-400 mg/dL after 1-2 months, treatment is discon-
tinued and subcutaneous insulin injections should be started.
2. Adverse side effects of glipizide include hypoglycemia, GI intolerance, and/or hepatic
toxicity/icterus.
C.Insulin administration
 It is very important that owners are made aware upfront that diabetes mellitus is most often
a disease that requires lifetime therapy with twice daily subcutaneous injections.
ii. There are many insulin types being used for the treatment of feline diabetes mellitus. The
uncomplicated diabetic cat is typically administered an intermediate or long-acting insulin
subcutaneously, at 0.5 units/kg BID. Some insulin types, such as glargine or PZI, may be
effective when administered once daily.
ili. See box 31.1.
iv.  Most stable newly diagnosed diabetic cats can be treated as outpatients.
 Owner instructions must be clear so as to ensure the insulin is being handled and adminis-
tered properly.
vi.  Insulin must be stored at constant temperature, avoiding major fluctuations.
vi. Prior to use, the bottle must be mixed. Never shake the insulin bottle. Mix the contents by
gently rolling the bottle between two hands.
vifi. Injections are administered subcutaneously, with proper technique demonstrated to the
owner. They can practice using 0.9% saline if needed. Owners should be told that if they
are unsure if the dose was administered properly, they should rot repeat the dose. They
should wait until the next injection before administering insulin again, and give the regular
dose at that time.
ix. The pet should always be fed prior to insulin administration to ensure adequate intake.
If the pet does not eat, half the dose should be administered. If the pet misses a second meal,
the veterinarian should be contacted immediately.
X. It is important to inform owners of the risks of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia.
d. After starting insulin therapy, the pet should be seen back for a 12-24 hour blood glucose curve
in 7-10 days. This curve requires blood glucose checks every 2 hours. This is very important.
Dose adjustments should never be made based on one spot blood glucose. A 12-hour curve,
along with report on resolution of clinical signs, should be monitored regularly.
e. Fructosamine, as mentioned previously, can be used to monitor glycemic control in fractious
animals. Veterinarians should be aware that they can be difficult to interpret at times, especially
if the animal is receiving excess insulin, leading to the somogyi effect, which then could lead to
a high fructosamine despite excess insulin dose.
412
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 31.1. Insulin therapy for newly diagnosed diabetic cat.
1. Humulin NPH
a. Intermediate-acting insulin
b. Duration of action ≤ 12 hours
c. Onset of action: 4-6 hours
d. Administration: 0.5 units/kg, subcutaneously, BID
2. Glargine
a. Long-acting insulin
b. “Peakless” insulin in humans, although this has not proven true in felines
C. Its activity is dependent on the acidity of the solution, and therefore, glargine cannot be diluted.
d. Duration of action 23 +/- 0.9 hours (Rand, Marshall 2006)
e. Reports differ as to the best dosing regimen.
i. May start anywhere from 0.25 units/kg to 0.5 units/kg SID-BID subcutaneously
f. Studies suggest that some cats may go into remission with use of this insulin type; therefore, cats
in which this type of insulin is used must be monitored closely for signs of hypoglycemia (weak
ness, lethargy, disorientation, ataxia, seizures).
 3. While other insulins such as PZI and vetsulin may be used to treat newly diagnosed diabetic patients.
the author has found that therapy with NPH or glargine insulin leads to more consistent results and
diabetic stabilization
IIl.Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
A.Pathophysiology
a. DKA is a serious, life-threatening complication of diabetes mellitus characterized by formation
of ketone bodies, which may lead to severe meta bolic acidosis and electrolyte derangements.
b. Ketone bodies are generated when the body perceives a deficiency of glucose; they are utilized
as an energy source by many tissues of the body.
c. The ketone bodies present in the body during a DKA episode are acetoacetate, β-hydroxybutyrate,
and acetone.
d. Insulin is a potent inhibitor of lipolysis and fatty acid oxidation. A lack of insulin leads to
increased lipolysis, which causes an increase in free fatty acids, promoting the formation of
ketones.
e. Feline patients are typically in one of two categories when they present with a DKA episode.
i. Newly diagnosed, untreated diabetic patient that has not received insulin previously. Insulin
deficiency leads to ketone formation.
i. A second category of feline patients is already receiving insulin at the time of DKA diagnosis.
These patients often have concurrent disease, leading to overproduction of counterregulatory
hormones and a relative insulin deficiency secondary to insulin resistance. Therefore, DKA
ensues despite the presence of insulin in circulation.
 B. History and physical examination
a. In the previously undiagnosed diabetic cat, clinical signs of diabetes may have been present but
were subtle and went unnoticed by the owner. The ongoing lack of insulin therapy then leads
to the development of ketone formation, which leads to progressive systemic signs such as
anorexia, lethargy, and vomiting as the meta bolic acidosis develops.
b. In the cat being treated with insulin, systemic signs such as anorexia, lethargy, and vomiting also
may occur, along with signs related to the presence and severity of a concurrent disease (e.g.,
renal failure, heart disease, infection, neoplasia).
c. Physical examination can vary as well but often reveals dehydration, depression, weakness,
acetone odor of the breath, and tachypnea.
Chapter 31Management of Specilic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Diabetes
413
C. Diagnosis
a. The diagnosis of DKA requires the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus f persistent fasting hyperglycemia
along with glucosuria), as well as ketonuria or ketonemia and metabolic acidosis.
The most common technique used for detecting ketonuria or ketonemia involves the use of
and acetoacetate in the urine or serum, but β-hydroxybutyrate may not be detected via this
method. Beca use β-hydroxybutyrate may be present in higher concentrations than the other
ketone bodies, the severity of ketonemia and ketonuria may be underestimated if additional
methods are not used for its detection.
1. Adding one drop of hydrogen peroxide to the dipstick may aid in detection of
β-hydroxybutyrate.
b. CBC/ chemistry screen
i.
Elevated total solids and hematocrit secondary to dehydration
ii.
 Elevation of white blood cells due to inflammation and/or infection
ii. Liver enzyme elevations
iv. Hyperbilirubinemia
v.Azotemia
vi. Acidosis
vii. Severe electrolyte shifts
1. Hyponatremia
2. Hypokalemia
 3. Hypophosphatemia
4. Hypomagnesemia
c. Urinalysis
i.
 May show pyuria or bacteriuria if an infection is present.
ii.A sterile cystocentesis sample should always be obtained and analyzed to rule out a urinary
tract infection.
ii. A culture should always be done in the diabetic cat to rule out an infection, as bacteria or
white blood cells may not be present in the urine despite an infectious process.
d. Imaging may reveal disease within the thorax {thoracic radiographs—heart failure, neoplasia,
pneumonia), or abdomen (abdominal radiographs and/or ultrasound—pancreatitis, pyometra,
neoplasia, hepatic lipidosis).
D. Therapy of the feline DKA patient
a. Due to severe fluid and electrolyte shifts, these patients are often critical and require intensive
management for stabilization.
b. Fluid therapy
i.1
 After obtaining intravenous access (preferably central venous access if possible), fluid therapy
should be started immediately. Choice of fluids depends on the presence of electrolyte abnor-
malities; however, rate may be calculated by determining the percent dehydration, ongoing
and insensible losses, and amount needed for maintenance.
indicated (see chap. 3—Shock).
c. Insulin administration
 i. Fluid therapy should be administered for at least 4-6 hours before insulin therapy is started,
in order to better hydrate the patient and evaluate electrolyte status. Blood glucose will often
decline significantly with fluid therapy alone. Once the patient is more sta ble and the hydra-
tion status has improved, insulin therapy can be started.
ii. Recheck measurements of potassium and phosphorus levels should be done prior to initiating
insulin therapy and supplementation provided if necessary, as these levels will decrease with
insulin treatment. A short-acting insulin with rapid onset of action, such as regular insulin,
414
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 3 1.2. Continuous rate infusion of insulin for the diabetic ketoacidotic Feline patient.
1. Place 1.1 units/kg of regular insulin into 240 mL of 0.9% NaCl.
2. Run approximately S0mL of this through the primary venoset line so that insulin adheres to the
inner portions of the tubing.
3. Blood glucose measurements should be made every 2 hours.
a. A catheter should be placed that can be used for sampling, and minimal amount of blood should
be drawn to limit the potential for iatrogenic anemia.
4. The following is only a guideline—rates and concentrations may need to be adjusted based on an
individual's response to therapy.
Blood Glucose
Rate of Insulin CRl
Dextrose [conc]
>350g/dL
10ml/hr
0%
250-350g/dL
7 mL/hr
0%
200-250g/dL
 5mL/hr
0%
150-200g/dL
3mL/hr
0%
100-150g/dL
1 mL/hr
2.5%
1p/6001>
OmL/hr
5%
5. Care should be taken to avoid fluid overload. Any additives {i.e., potassium, phosphorus, magnesium,
etc.) should be placed in a separate fluid line and given at a different rate that can be adjusted as
meeded (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy)
should be used. Methods for its use have been described elsewhere but typically involve either
intermittent intramuscular injections or continuous rate intravenous infusion (see box 31.2).
ii. Gradual decline of the blood glucose level is ideal, as rapid changes in blood glucose con-
centration can lead to rapid fluid and electrolyte shifts that can be life-threatening in extreme
cases.
iv. The goal of treatment is to allow the body to start utilizing glucose and thus to stop ketone
formation. Therefore, once blood glucose levels fall below a certain level {usually around
100 mg/dL), dextrose should be added to the fluids to increase the blood glucose level so that
ins ulin can continue to be administered.
 1. The only way to stop the body from continuing to make ketones is to allow it to utilize
glucose by providing insulin.
 2. Blood glucose levels should be maintained at a relatively consistent level (i.e., 150 mg/dL
to 250mg/dL).
v. Insulin therapy is continued as an intramuscular or intravenous dosing until the patient begins
to eat regularly, at which point the insulin can be switched to a longer acting, subcutaneous
dosing schedule (see above).
d. Electrolytes
i.Potassium
1. These patients are invariably depleted of their total body potassium, even if the blood
potassium levels are normal at presentation. Once insulin administration begins, potas-
sium is pushed into the cells and serum potassium levels may drop dramatically. Aggressive
supplementation may be required. Potassium administration should not be given at
a rate higher than 0.5 mEq/kg/hr. If rates at or above that should become necessary,
intensive monitoring with continuous ECG and frequent blood sampling must be
provided.
a. Some cats with DKA require higher rates of potassium than 0.5 mEq/kg/hr (Kmax)
Chapter 31Management oF Specilic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Diabetes
415
b. If potassium concentration remains below 3.5 mEq/L despite potassium supplementa-
tion at Kmax, potassium constant rate infusion can be increased in increments of
0.25 mEq/kg/hr.
c. At rates above Kmax, heart rate should be monitored regularly, and a continuous ECG
used if possible. If arrhythmias occur, potassium infusion should be discontinued and
potassium checked immediately.
ii. Phosphorus
1. Similar to potassium, these patients are often depleted of their total phosphorus stores,
and once insulin administration is begun, phosphorus is pushed into cells. If levels reach
below 1.5 mg/dL, clinical signs such as hemolysis, lethargy, and neurologic changes such
as seizures and weakness due to decrea sed 2,3-DPG concentration may occur. Phosphorus
supplementation should be provided as needed.
phosphate 3 mM/mL) at 0.03-0.12 mM phosphate/kg/hour, but K administration must
be taken into account.
i. Recheck potassium and phosphorus within 6 hours of instituting supplementation,
then every 6-8 hours.
iii. Magnesium
1. Magnesium levels may drop also. Hypomagnesemia may cause hypokalemia to be refrac-
tory to supplementation. If potassium remains low despite appropriate supplementation,
magnesium should be evaluated.
2. Magnesium can be administered at a rate of 1 mEq/kg/24 hours. Magnesium should be
checked at least once every 24 hours.
e.Acidosis
i. It is rare that bicarbonate administration is required in these patients because acidosis typi-
cally responds to fluid therapy and resolution of ketones.
ii. Bicarbonate therapy may be necessary if pH < 7.1 despite adequate fluid resuscitation and
institution of insulin therapy. The following formula may be used to calculate the bicarbonate
deficit:
1. NaHCO; (mL) = 0.3 × body weight (kg) × base deficit
 2. The patient should be given %4 to 1/s of this amount slowly (over 1-2 hours), and then the
acidosis should be reassessed.
3. Contraindications to use of sodium bicarbonate administration include hypernatremia
 and/or respiratory compromise, which could lead to hypercarbia.
f.Concurrent diseases
i. Common concurrent diseases may include pancreatitis, hepatic lipidosis, pyelonephritis,
neoplasia, and cholangitis. A thorough workup should always be performed to look for
underlying diseases, and the concurrent disease must be addressed as well. Tests should
include at least the following:
1. Complete blood count
 2. Chemistry screen
3. Urinalysis
4. Urine culture and sensitivity
 5. Thyroid testing, T4
6. Chest radiographs
 7. Abdominal radiographs and/or abdominal ultrasound
 8. Additional tests may be performed depending on the results of initial evaluation.
g.Nutrition
i.1
 Depending on the severity of the disease, as well as the concurrent disorder, these patients
may require supplemental enteral (nasoesophageal-, esophagostomy-, gastrostomy-,
416
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ejunostomy-tube placement) nutrition, or possibly administration of total parenteral nutri-
tion (see chap. 9—Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
E.Follow-up
 a. Once stable, these patients may be sent home with an appropriate dose of insulin and reevalu-
ated as discussed in the chapter on diabetes mellitus.
b. An appropriate dose to send these patients home with is usually 0.5 units/kg of an intermediate
or long-acting insulin.
i. Exceptions to this are:
1. Patient is extraordinarily sensitive to insulin therapy in the hospital, and the veterinarian
is concerned this may be a transient diabetic (i.e., resolving pancreatitis with newly diag-
nosed diabetes). This patient may be sent home with a lower dose of insulin, such as 0.25
units/kg BID subcutaneously.
2. Patient is extraordinarily resistant to insulin while in the hospital and has a known reason
patient may require a higher dose of insulin.
3. No matter what dose the patient is sent home with, the owners must always be aware of
possible complications from hypo- or hyperglycemia.
III. Hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar syndrome
A.Definition
a. In humans, this syndrome is characterized by a patient with a blood glucose greater than 600 mg/
dL, osmolality over 350 mOsm/kg, severe dehydration, and a lack of serum or urine ketones.
b. While the syndrome is less well defined in cats, one study defines it as occurring in cats with
 blood glucose greater than 600 mg/dL, osmolality over 350 mOsm/kg, and negative urine ketones.
c. This syndrome is reportedly seen most commonly in older cats that are long-standing diabetics
and have been receiving insulin. It is thought that the presence of insulin may prevent the devel-
opment of ketosis but allow for profound dehydration and development of hyperosmolarity.
d. Common reported clinical signs include polyuria, polydipsia, and lethargy, and many cats are
found to have neurologic (stupor, obtundation, coma, seizures) and respiratory signs {dyspnea
and/or tachypnea due to pleural effusion from cardiac failure or neoplasia, pulmonary edema,
or asthma}.
é. Concurrent diseases are commonly found in this population of cats and include diseases found
in many older cats. Such diseases include renal failure, respiratory disease, infection, heart
disease, neoplasia, and gastrointestinal disease.
f. Most cats present with profound dehydration, azotemia, and acidosis.
g. The survival rate for these cats is typically low, with one study reporting a mortality rate of
64.7%. No variables evaluated in this study were associated with a better or worse chance for
survival. It is possible that given the severity of clinical signs with which these animals present,
and the common finding of concurrent disease such as renal failure and infection, these animals
were euthanized early in the course of treatment.
B. Diagnosis
a. Because many patients will present with neurologic signs such as obtundation, twitching, sei-
zures, or disorientation, it is important to differentiate between HHS and hypoglycemia.
b. These patients will have a profound hyperglycemia, hyperosmolality, and glucosuria.
c. Renal values and full electrolyte panel should be evaluated upon presentation and will help to
calculate serum osmolality if an osmometer is not available.
d. Serum osmolality = 2{Na + K) + {BUN/2.8) + (glucose/18). Reference range: 292-308 mosm/L
é. Urinalysis, hematrocrit, and total solids may help differentiate between renal and prerenal azo-
temia, since these patients are often profoundly dehydrated.
f. Additional testing should include complete blood count, serum chemistry, urinalysis and urine
culture, thyroid level, and serum osmolality. Other testing may include radiography, abdominal
ultrasound, and echocardiography as indicated.
Chapter 31Management of Specilic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Diabetes
417
1. Diagnostics 
a. Extended database
 Blood glucose
ii.
 Serum and/or urine ketones
iii. PCV
iv.  Total solids
V.
 pH, HCO;, base deficit
vi.  Sodium, chloride
vi.  Potassium
vii. Phosphorus
ix.  Magnesium
b. Blood pressure
c. Complete blood count
d. Chemistry screen
e. Urinalysis
f. Urine culture
g.T4
 h. Chest and abdominal imaging
i. Miscellaneous testing such as fPLI
2. Therapeutics
a. Obtain intra venous access, preferably central venous access.
b. Begin fluid therapy.
i.  May require fluid boluses to stabilize patient—see chap. 3—Shock and chap. 8—Fluid
Therapy.
ii. Once hemodynamically stable, begin replacement and maintenance fluid therapy.
ii. Continue to monitor electrolyte, blood glucose, and blood pressure closely.
c. Start insulin continuous rate infusion—usually after at least 4-6 hours of replacement fluids have
been administered.
i.See box 31.2 for further details.
ii. Blood glucose should be checked every 2 hours.
d. Once insulin therapy has started, expect further shifts in electrolytes such as potassium, magne-
sium, and phosphorus. Check these levels at least every 8-12 hours. Most cats will need supple-
mentation of one or more of these electrolytes to prevent complications.
e. If underlying infection such as urinary tract infection is suspected, antibiotics should be started
after obtaining a sterile urine sample for culture.
f. If protracted vomiting occurs, antiemetics should be administered.
g. Gastrointestinal protectants such as famotidine may be used to limit acid secretion in the stomach.
h. Treat underlying diseases as indicated.
C. Differential diagnosis
 a. Hyperosmolar, hyperglycemic syndrome must be differentiated from other diabetic emergencies
such as insulin overdose, and hypoglycemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis. It should be remembered
that the urine dipstick does not measure β-hydroxybutyrate. While it is unlikely that a patient
would have diabetic ketoacidosis only due to production of this ketone body, it is possible.
 b. Other causes of neurologic abnormalities should be considered, including renal failure, hepato-
hypocalcemia, and toxicity (ethylene glycol, etc.).
418
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
D.Treatment
a. Treatment protocol follows that of DKA; however, rehydration must be performed more slowly
to prevent cerebral edema and worsening of neurologic signs.
b. It is very important to allow the glucose concentration to be slowly corrected as well to prevent
rapid fluid and electrolyte shifts that could lead to cerebral edema. The rate of decline of serum
glucose should not exceed 75-100 mg/dL/hr.
c. Sodium concentrations should be monitored closely as well, and the serum sodium concentration
should not decline (or rise) more rapidly than 10-12 meEq in a 24-hour period.
d. As with DKA patients, potassium, phosphorus, and magnesium concentrations should be moni-
tored closely to prevent extreme reductions in their total body levels.
e. The absolute goal of therapy is to allow for gradual rehydration and gradual correction of the
serum glucose levels, leading to correction of the hyperosmolar state. Underlying diseases need
to be treated as well.
Recommended Reading
Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Canine and Feline Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed. Elsevier Science,
2004.
Greco DS. Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus in cats and dogs. In Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, eds, The
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice: Endocrinology, pp 84s-853. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders, 2001.
Koenig A, Drobatz KJ, Beale AB, King LG. Hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar syndrome in feline diabetics: 17
cases {1995-2001). J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2004; 14f1):30-40.
Rand J, Marshall R. Feline diabetes mellitus: which insulin do I choose and how do I adjust the dose?
ACVIM Proceedings, June 2006.
Rand JS, Martin GJ. Management of feline diabetes mellitus. In Behrend EN, Kemppainen RJ, eds, The
Veterinary Clinics of North America Small Animal Practice: Endocrinology, pp 881-913. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders, 2001.
32
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIO
DISEASES: OTHER
Cynthia R. Ward
Unique Features
● Cats with thyroid storm present with acute manifestations of thyroid hormone excess and should
● The most common cause for a low Na:K ratio in the cat is cavitary effusion and not hypoadreno-
 corticism; cortisol sampling times for ACTH-stimulation testing in the cat using the IV protocol are
at 0, 60, and 90 minutes.
Hyperaldosteronism in the cat is a rare endocrinopathy that results in severe hypokalemia and
hypertension.
Medical treatment for hyperadrenocorticism in cats using trilostane has been successful.
Thyroid storm
A. Thyroid storm is an acute thyrotoxic manifestation of hyperthyroidism in cats and can be a signifi-
cant cause of mortality.
B. Etiology
1. Rapid increases in free thyroid hormone 
 2. Increased cellular sensitivity to the hormone
 3. Increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system
C. Precipitating events that may be linked to the development of thyroid storm
1. Surgery
2. Nonthyroidal illness
 3. Vigorous palpation of the thyroid gland
4. Sudden withdrawal of antithyroid medication
 5. Administration of iodine-containing agents, such as radioiodine or potassium iodide
6. Trauma
 D. Clinical presentation
1. Signalment—middle- to older-aged cats, no breed/sex predilection
2. Cardiovascular
a. Congestive heart failure
b. Cardiac arrhythmias
c. Cardiac murmurs
d. Gallop sounds
e. Thromboemboli
419
420
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Neurologic
a. Hyperactivity
b. Hyperesthesia
C. Ataxia/paresis
d. Altered mentation
é. Seizure
f. Coma
4. Muscular
a. Severe muscle atrophy
b. Generalized weakness
c. Neck ventroflexion
5. Gastrointestinal-hepatic dysfunction
a.Diarrhea
b.Vomiting
c. Unexplained hyperbilirubinemia
6. Acute respiratory distress
7. Hypovolemia
8. Hypertension
9. Hyperthermia
E. Clinical pathology abnormalities
1. CBC
a. Mild erythrocytosis
b. Macrocytosis
c. Mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia (stress leukogram)
2. Chemistry
a. Mild hyperglycemia
b. Elevated liver enzymes (ALT, SAP, LDH, AST)
c. Hyperbilirubinemia
d. Mild-severe hypokalemia
3. Lack of urine concentrating ability
4. Elevated serum T4 or elevated serum T4 and fT4
F. Diagnosis
1. Newly or previously diagnosed hyperthyroidism
2. Clinical signs as listed above
 3. Presence of clinical abnormalities in three or more separate organ systems may indicate impend-
ing thyroid storm.
G. Treatment (table 32.1)
1. Treatment of nonthyroidal illness or other precipitating cause
 2. Inhibition of hyperactive thyroid gland tissue
a. Methimazole 2.5-5 mg BID
i． Oral
ii. Transdermal—in PLO gel
ili. Rectal—dissolve crushed tablet in warm water
b. Iodine preparations
i.1
 Prevents release of preformed thyroid hormone in thyroid gland
ii.
Give methimazole 1 hour before administration of these compounds to prevent new
hormone synthesis.
ii. Iopanoic acid 100-150 mg PO q24h
iv. Potassium iodate 25 mg q8h
 3. Inhibition of peripheral thyroid hormone effects
Chapter 32 Management of Specic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Other
421
Table 32.1. Medications used in managing feline endocrine diseases.
Medications
Usages
Doses
Comments
Methimazole
Blocks thyroid hormone
2.5-5mg q12h, orally,
Immune-mediated side
production
transdermally, rectally
effects
bpanoic acid
Blocks peripheral T4 to
100-150mg PO q24h
T3 conversion
Potassium iodate
Blocks thyroid hormone
25mg q8h PO
release
Atenolol
Beta-blockade
1-3mg/kg PO q12-24h
 Propanolol
Beta-blockade, inhibits
0.02 mg/kg slow IV
14 to T3 peripheral
2.5-5mg PO q8-12h
conversion
Esmolol
Short acting
Load: 200-500μg/kg IV
Beta-blockade
over 1 min
25-200 μg/kg/min CRI
Dexamethasone
Weak inhibitor of
 0.1 mg/kg q12-24h
peripheral T4 to T3
conversion
Glucocorticoid
0.0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV
replacement
q24h
Adrenal Axis testing
 0.1 mg/kg IV
10x canine dose
Amlodipine
 Antihypertensive
0.625-1.25 mg PO or
rectally ql2-24h
Enalapril or benazepril
Antihypertensive
0.25-0.5mg/kg q12-24h
Nitroprusside
Antihypertensive
0.5-5μg/kg/min as a
CRI
 Potassium gluconate
 Potassium replacement
0.5mEq/kg PO q24h
Potassium chloride
 Potassium replacement
0.1-0.5 mEg/kg/hr IV
B complex vitamins
Support
2-4ml/L of IV Huids
Unfractionated heparin
Anticoagulation
200-400U/kg SQ q8h
Cortrosyn
Adrenal axis testing
125 mg IV or IM
 Postinjection sampling
times differ depending
on route of delivery
ACTH gel
Adrenal axis testing
2.2U/kg IM
Obtain at reliable
compounding
pharmacies. May not be
standardized strength
Prednisone
Glucocorticoid
0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO q24h
replacement
Methylprednisolone acetate
Glucocorticoid
 5-10mg SQ, IM once per
May cause diabetes
replacement
month
mellitus
Desoxycorticosterone
 Mineralocorticoid
2.2U/kg IM q25-28 days
pivalate (DOCP)
replacement
Fludrocortisone acetate
 Mineralocorticoid
0.1 mg PO q24h
(Florinef)
replacement 
Spironolactone
Blockage of aldosterone 
2-3mg/kg PO q12h
Trilostane
 Medical treatment of
5mg/kg POq24h
hyperadrenocorticism
a.B-blockade
i.
Atenolol 1-3mg/kg PO q12-24h
ii.  Propanolol
a. May also have weak activity to inhibit T4 to T3 peripheral conversion
422
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. 0.02 mg/kg slow IV, may repeat up to four times
c. 2.5-5 mg PO q8-12h
iii. Esmolol
a. Load at 200-500 μg/kg IV over 1 min
b. 25-200 μg/kg/min CRI
b. Dexamethasone
i.
 Inhibits peripheral conversion of T4 to T3
ii. 0.1 mg/kg q12-24h
4. Management of hypertension
a. B-blockade may normalize blood pressure so try first
b. Enalapril or benazapril 0.25-0.5 mg/kg q12-24hr
c. Amlodipine: 0.625-1.25 mg PO or rectally q12-24h
 d. Nitroprusside: 0.5-5 μg/kg/min as a constant rate infusion
i. Monitor blood pressure closely to avoid hypotension.
5. Supportive care
a. IV Fluid therapy +/- potassium chloride as necessitated by hydration status (see chap. 8)
b. Potassium gluconate if hypokalemic at 0.5 mEq/kg PO per day
c. B complex vitamins at 2-4mL/L of IV fluids
d. Aspirin S mg/cat q72h
e. Unfractionated heparin 200-400 U/kg SQ q8h until aPTT 1.5-2 × > baseline
i. Ensure patient is adequately hydrated and perfused prior to SQ injections.
II.Hypoadrenocorticism
A. Hypoadrenocorticism is a rare disease in cats.
B.Etiology
1. Primary disease—most common
a. Idiopathic
b. Neoplastic infiltration, lymphoma
2. Iatrogenic secondary disease—acute withdrawal of methylprednisolone acetate or other gluco-
corticoids at high doses
C. Clinical presentation
1. Signalment: young to middle-aged cats (range 1.5-14yrs)
2.History:
a. Waxing and waning clinical signs
b. Weight loss
c. Anorexia
d. Lethargy
e. Intermittent vomiting
f. High doses of glucocorticoids administered in repository form or acute withdrawal from
short-acting glucocorticoids
 3. Clinical signs
a. Depression
b.Weakness
c. Dehydration
d. Hypothermia
e. Collapse/weakness
f. Bradycardia
4. Clinicopathologic abnormalities
a. CBC—nonregenerative anemia
b. Chemistry
Hyponatremia
Chapter 32Management of Specilic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Other
423
11.
Hyperkalemia
ii.Sodium-potassium ratio <27:1
iv.
Hypochloridemia
V.
Hypercalcemia
vi.Azotemia
vii. Hyperphosphatemia
vili. Meta bolic acidosis
c. Urinalysis: +/- isosthenuria
d. Imaging studies 
Microcardia
i. Pulmonary hypoperfusion
i. Small or nonvisualized adrenal glands; may be enlarged with abnormal echogenicity if
infiltrative disease
D.Diagnosis
1. Major differential diagnoses
a. Pleural, peritoneal, or bicavitary effusion (these are associated with low serum sodium and
high serum potassium concentrations)
b. Renal failure
c. Gastrointestinal disease
d. Dia betes mellitus
é. Hyperthyroidism
2. ACTH-stimulation test—tests adrenal reserve of cortisol secretion
a. Synthetic ACTH {cortrosyn)
i. 125 μg IM, serum cortisol samples 0, 30, 60 min.
ii. 125 μg IV, serum cortisol samples 0, 60, 90 min. Use caution as vomiting and collapse have
been associated with IV administration in cats.
b. ACTH gel: 2.2 U/kg IM, serum cortisol samples 0, 60, and 120 min
c. To support a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism, baseline and post-ACTH serum cortisols
should be below the cortisol reference range.
E. Treatment
1. Goals
a. Correct hypovolemia
b. Correct acid/base abnormalities
c. Correct electrolyte deficiencies
 d. Correct adrenal cortical hormone deficiencies
2. IV fluid therapy to correct hypovolemia
a. 0.9% saline, replaces sodium and does not add potassium
b. If serum sodium is very low, <125mg/dL, raise sodium more slowly; consider using
lactated Ringer's solution, which has a lower sodium than saline and lower potassium than
many of the replacement fluids (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy and chap. 34—Electrolyte
Disorders).
c. If severe hypovolemia, may need to bolus fluids to shock dose of 60mL/kg/hr
3. Initial glucocorticoid replacement
a. Dexamethasone
i.1
 Best choice until ACTH-stimulation test can be performed since it will not interfere with
cortisol assay
ii. Use quick-acting formulation, such as Dexamethasone SP.
ii. 0.1 mg/kg IV to correct deficiencies and account for stress in the acutely ill animal
4. Long-term glucocorticoid replacement
a. Prednisolone
424
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i.0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO q24h
i. Increase to 0.5 mg/kg PO q12-24h for stressful events
b. Methylprednisolone acetate if oral medication prohibited
i.5-10 mg SQ per month
il. Increases possibility of diabetes mellitus
5. Long-term mineralocorticoid replacement
a. Desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP; Percorten-V, Novartis Animal Health): 2.2 U/kg IM q
25-28 days
b. Fludrocortisone acetate (Florinef, Bristol-Myers-Squibb): 0.1 mg q24h
F. Monitoring
1. Serum Na/K levels to determine mineralocorticoid therapy; adjust if necessary.
 2. Glucocorticoid therapy monitoring relies on the owner's reports of attitude, appetite, and energy
levels at home. Weight gain can also be monitored. There is no need to repeat an ACTH-
stimulation test.
G. Prognosis—excellent long-term prognosis for hypoadrenocorticism if condition is recognized and
treated appropriately
IlI. Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's Syndrome)
A. Rare disease in cats
B. Etiology
1. Oversecretion of aldosterone
2. Unilateral or bilateral adrenocortical tumors
 3. May be benign or malignant
C. Clinical presentation
1. Signalment
a. Middle-aged to older cats (range 6-20 years)
b. No breed/sex predilection
2.History
a. Episodic lameness or muscle weakness
b. Polyuria/polydipsia
c. Vision loss
d. Polyphagia
e. Weight loss
3. Clinical signs
a. Hypokalemic polymyopathy
i. Ventroflexion of neck
ii. Hind limb weakness
ili. Paresis
b. Retinal abnormalities
i.Detachment
ii. Tortuous vessels
iii. Hemorrhages
iv. Bullae
v.Edema
c. Hypertension
4. Clinicopathologic changes
a. Hypokalemia (common)
b. Hypernatremia (uncommon)
c. Azotemia
d. Elevated CK
e. Elevated plasma aldosterone
Chapter 32Management of Specilic Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Other
425
5. Abdominal ultrasound
a. Unilateral or bilateral adrenal mass{es)
b. +/- mass extension into the vena cava
D. Diagnosis
1. Appropriate history and clinical signs
2. Appropriate biochemical data, hypokalemia most important
3. Elevated plasma aldosterone levels
4. Presence of uni- or bilateral adrenal masses
E. Treatment
1. Correction of hypokalemia
a. Oral potassium gluconate: 0.5 mEq/kg PO
b. Potassium chloride IV not to exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/hr
2. Blockage of aldosterone: spironolactone: 2-3 mg/kg PO q12h
 3. Treatment of hypertension
a. Enalapril or benazepril: 0.5 to 2 mg/kg PO q12h
b. Amlodipine: 0.625-1.25 mg PO or rectally q12-24h
c. Nitroprusside: 0.5-5 μg/kg/min as a constant rate infusion
4. Definitive treatment
a. Surgical removal of tumor
b. Ultrasound or MRI should be performed to determine whether tumor has invaded vessels.
F. Prognosis
1. Medical treatment improves clinical signs but will not normalize blood values.
 2. Medical treatment can preserve quality of life for 1-3 years; euthanasia is usually due to chronic
renal failure.
 3. Surgical removal of nonmalignant tumor yields good response of up to 6 years.
IV. Hypera drenocorticism
A. Uncommon disorder in cats; being recognized more frequently
B. Etiology
1. Pituitary adenoma (85%)
2. Adrenal adenoma
3. Adrenal carcinoma
C. Clinical presentation
1. Middle-aged to older cats (5-16 years), no breed or sex predilection
2. Concurrent insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus (80%)
 3. Thin, fragile skin
 4. Large, nonhealing cutaneous wounds
 5. Polyuria/polydipsia
6. Polyphagia
 7. Recurent cutaneous, upper respiratory, and urinary tract infections
8. Lethargy
9. Muscle atrophy
10. Weakness
11. Abdominal enlargement
12. Alopecia/failure to regrow hair
 D. Clinicopathologic findings 
1. Elevated ALP and ALT
2. Hypercholesterolemia
3. Hyperglycemia
 4. Mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia (stress leukogram)
5. Glucosuria
426
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 32.1。 Nonhealing wound of a cat with thin skin due to hyperadrenocorticism.
6. Lack of urine concentrating ability
7. Proteinuria
8. Bacteriuria, pyuria
E. Diagnosis
1. Screening tests
a. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
i.0.1 mg/kg dexamethasone IV (10x canine dose)
ii. Serum cortisol measured 0, 4, 8hr
ili. Cortisol not suppressed at  4 and/or  8  hourssupports  diagnosis of feline
hyperadrenocorticism
iv. Cannot be used as a differentiating test as in dogs
b. ACTH-stimulation test
i. 40-50% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism will show a normal response to ACTH
ii.Synthetic ACTH (cortrosyn)
1. 125 μg IM, serum cortisol samples 0, 60, 90 min.
2. 125 μg IV (preferred), serum cortisol samples 0, 60, 90 min.
ili. ACTH gel: 2.2U/kg IM, serum cortisol samples 0, 60, and 120 min
iv. An exaggerated response to ACTH of >19μg/dL is consistent with a diagnosis of
hyperadrenocorticism.
2. Differentiating tests
a. Plasma endogenous ACTH concentration
i. Single plasma sample submitted
i.  Special handling of sample (call lab for specifics)
ili. Pituitary-dependent disease: ACTH concentrations normal to high
iv. Adrenal-dependent disease: ACTH concentrations low or nondetecta ble
b. Abdominal ultrasonography
i.
 Unilaterally enlarged
or
calcified   adrenal  gland   supports  adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism.
 i. Bilaterally enlarged adrenal glands support pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism.
c. Magnetic resonance imaging—can detect presence of a pituitary tumor
Chapter 32 Management of Specific Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases: Other
427
F.Treatment
1. Medical
a. Mitotane {Lysodren)—do not use
i.Not effective in cats
ii. Causes acute liver failure
b. Trilostane
i. Begin with S mg/kg PO q24h and adjust as necessary.
ii. Monitor with ACTH-stimulation test with the goal of having pre- and post-ACTH
cortisol concentrations between 1 and 4μg/dL.
iii. Monitor serum Na/K levels
iv. In cats with diabetes mellitus, reduce insulin by at least 2s% before starting trilostane
as insulin requirements will decrease.
2. Surgical
a. Unilateral adrenalectomy
b. Bilateral adrenalectomy in cats that cannot be medicated orally
C. Control clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism with trilostane for at least 2 weeks before
surgery to heal skin lesions and control diabetes mellitus if present; insulin dose should be
decreased by at least 25% before initiating trilostane.
 d. If bilateral adrenalectomy, glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid therapies will be necessary
for life.
i.Desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP; Percorten-V, Novartis Animal Health): 2.2U/kg
IM q 30 days
ii.Prednisolone 0.4mg/kg PO SID
ii. Methylprednisolone acetate, Depomedrol, 10mg IM q 30 days
e. Unilateral adrenalectomy—glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid therapies may be necessary
for several weeks while the healthy adrenal gland regenerates.
G. Prognosis
1. Successful treatment of hyperadrenocorticism will decrease or eliminate insulin requirement.
2. Prognosis is good with successful control.
Recommended Reading
Bell R, Mellor DJ, Ramsey I, Knottenbelt C. Decreased sodium-potassium ratios in cats: 49 cases. Vet Clin
Pathol, 2005; 34:110-114.
Chiaramonte D, Greco DS. Feline adrenal disorders. Clin Tech Sm Anim Prac, 2007; 1:26-31.
Dillmann WH. Thyroid storm. Curr Ther Endocrinol Metab, 1997; 6:81-85.
Flood SM, Randolph JF, Gelzer AR. Primary hyperaldosteronism in two cats. JAAHA, 1999;
35:411-416.
Lien YH, Huang HP, Chang PH. Iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism in 12 cats. JAAHA, 2006; 42:423.
Neiger R, Witt AL, Noble A, Cerman AJ. Trilostane therapy for treatment of pituitary-dependent hyper
adrenocorticism in 5 cats. JVIM, 2004; 18:160-164.
S     1       
Ward CR. Feline thyroid storm. Vet Clin Sm Anim, 2007; 37:745-754.
33
DIAGNOSTIC TESTING OF ENDOCRINE
DISEASE IN THE CAT
Jennifer E. Prittie
Unique Features
● In cats, differential diagnoses are for weight loss and polyphagia together include hyperthyroidism,
diabetes mellitus, and hypera drenocorticism.
●Cats with hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome) commonly present with the following constellation
of signs: hypernatremia, hypokalemia and associated polymyopathy, metabolic alkalosis, and sys-
temic hypertension.
· Atypical hypoadrenocorticism is not reported in cats; all cats with disease have demonstrated a low
sodium : potassium ratio.
1. Introduction
a. Feline endocrine and metabolic emergencies present a challenge to the attending clinician. Many of
the endocrinopathies and ensuing electrolyte and cardiovascular abnormalities result in vague and
episodic clinical signs, and routine laboratory tests rarely provide the veterinarian with a definitive
diagnosis. Advanced imaging and less frequently utilized or provocative laboratory tests are often
needed to elucidate the cause of the cat's clinical signs.
2. Clinical presentation
a. Most cats with underlying endocrine disorders present with historical weight loss, changes in food
consumption (inappetence or polyphagia), and general lethargy or malaise.
i.
 Differential endocrine diagnoses for weight loss and polyphagia together include hyperthyroid-
ism, diabetes mellitus, and hypera drenocorticism.
b. Polyuria and polydipsia may be associated with hyperthyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocor-
ticism, hypoa drenocorticism, hyperaldosteronism, pheochromocytoma, and hyperparathyroidism.
c. Cardiovascular abnormalities, including systemic hypertension, cardiac arrhythmias, cardio
myopathy with or without congestive heart failure, and hypertensive retinopathy, are most
commonly  associated  with  hyperthyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, hyperaldosteronism, and
pheochromocytoma.
d. Neurologic or neuromuscular abnormalities accompany several endocrinopathies.
i.Hypokalemia-induced polymyopathy, characterized by weakness, ataxia, dysphagia, respiratory
depression, and ventroflexion of the neck, may occur secondary to diabetes ketoacidosis, hyper-
aldosteronism, or hyperthyroidism.
ii. Both ionized hypocalcemia and hypercalcemia associated with hypoparathyroidism and hyper-
parathyroidism, respectively, may result in muscle tremors and fasciculations.
429
430
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Seizure activity is most commonly reported with primary hypoparathyroidism and resultant
hypocalcemia (tetany) and insulin-secreting tumors (neuroglycopenia).
1. Hypocalcemic seizures are typically not associated with incontinence or a loss of
consciousness.
 2. Hypocalcemic cats may also demonstrate mydriasis, lenticular cataracts, dysphagia, pruritus,
ptyalism, panting, or protrusion of the nictitating membranes.
iv. Irritability, nervousness, aggression, and an inability to sit still have been reported in hyperthy-
roid cats. Seizures have been infrequently reported.
e. Patchy spontaneous alopecia or failure to regrow hair where it has been clipped and inelastic, fragile,
thin skin that bruises easily are typical of hyperadrenocorticism.
f. Cats with hyperthyroidism (>90%) or hyperparathyroidism may have a palpable cervical mass.
3. Routine laboratory findings
a. Complete blood count in affected cats is typically unremarkable but may reveal:
i.
 Erythrocytosis and macrocytosis and the presence of Heinz bodies in hyperthyroid cats
ii.
Normocytic, normochromic anemia associated with hypoadrenocorticism
ii.I
 Lymphocytosis and eosinophilia in cats with hypoadrenocorticism
1. The presence of an absolute lymphocytosis and/or eosinophilia in a sick cat should raise the
clinician's suspicion that the patient is unable to mount an appropriate stress response,
consistent with a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism.
b. Abnormalities in serum biochemistry profile are typically more helpful diagnostically.
Hypokalemia
1. Diabetes ketoacidosis
2. Hyperaldosteronism 
3. Hyperthyroidism
ii.
.Hyperkalemia
1. Hypoadrenocorticism
2. The hyperkalemia associated with hypoadrenocorticism in feline patients is milder than that
documented in affected dogs.
iii. Ionized hypocalcemia and concurrent hyperphosphatemia
1. Primary hypoparathyroidism
 2. The main differential for hypocalcemia with hyperphosphatemia is renal insuficiency, which
can easily be excluded with routine blood work.
3. Other causes of hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia together, including acute pan-
creatitis, magnesium depletion, administration of phosphate-containing enemas,
ethylene glycol toxicity, and intestinal malabsorption, should be excluded on a case-by-case
basis.
iv.  lonized hypercalcemia
1. Primary hyperparathyroidism
a. Concurrent hypophosphatemia is expected.
2. Hypoadrenocorticism
 3. Other differentials for hypercalcemia in cats, including neoplasia, renal failure, idiopathic
disease, granulomatous disease (deep fungal infection), and vitamin D toxicosis should be
explored as deemed necessary on a case-by-case basis.
W.
Hypoglycemia
1. Insulin-producing islet cell tumor
 2. Less commonly associated with hypoa drenocorticism
vi. Hyperglycemia
1. Diabetes mellitus
2. Hyperadrenocorticism
a. 80% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism have concurrent diabetes mellitus.
Chapter 33 Diagnostic Testing of Endocrine Disease in the Cat
431
vi.  All cats with hypoadrenocorticism have demonstrated an abnormally low sodium-potassium
ratio (<24:1).
1. Other differentials for this combination of electrolyte abnormalities include renal and
urinary tract disease, liver failure, gastrointestinal infection with whipworms or salmonel-
losis, pleural effusion with repeat drainage, diabetes ketoacidosis, pancreatitis, and conges-
tive heart failure.
viil. Metabolic alkalosis resulting from increased tubular bicarbonate transport is typical of cats
with hyperaldosteronism.
ix. Less specific biochemical alterations include elevated liver enzymes, hyperbilirubinemia, and
azotemia, which are associated to various degrees with hyperthyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism,
hypoadrenocorticism, and hyperaldosteronism.
X.
 Siamese cats appear to be at increased risk for development of insulinoma and primary hyper.
parathyroidism, and at decreased risk for developing hyperthyroidism.
c. Urinalysis should be collected as part of a minimum database but is not often helpful in achieving
a diagnosis.
 i. Glucosuria is common in cats with diabetes mellitus and hyperadrenocorticism.
ii. Urine specific gravity varies drastically.
4. Ancillary diagnostics
a. Serial blood pressure evaluation is indicated for cats suspected to have hyperthyroidism, hyperad-
renocorticism, pheochromocytoma, or hyperaldosteronism.
b. Electrocardiography may document arrhythmias in patients with derangements in calcium or potas-
sium balance, hyperthyroidism, or catecholamine excess (pheochromocytoma).
c. Echocardiography may reveal concurrent cardiomyopathy, which has been reported in cats afflicted
(adrenal-tumor-dependent hyperadrenocorticism, aldosterone-secreting tumor, or pheochromocy-
toma) or pancreatic neoplasia {insulinoma).
e. Thoracic radiographs are indicated in any feline patient suspected to have an endocrine disease of
malignant origin.
f. Abdominal CT or MRI may confirm the presence of an abdominal mass and can be useful in ascer-
taining the extent of the tumor prior to surgical resection.
 g. Brain CR or MRI may aid in visualization of a pituitary mass.
i. 50% of cats with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism have tumors that are large enough
to visualize.
h. Cervical ultrasound may detect a thyroid or parathyroid mass but has not been shown to be useful
or relia ble for diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.
5. Definitive diagnosis of hyperthyroidism is achieved in most cases by measurement of serum thyroid
hormones.
a. Basal total thyroid hormone concentrations
i. Thyroid hormone concentrations fluctuate, but basal total T4 concentration is above the refer-
ence range in greater than 90% of hyperthyroid cats.
ii. Infrequently, cats with hyperthyroidism have a normal total T4. This is most likely with:
1. Early or mild hyperthyroidism
2. Significant concurrent nonthyroid disease {euthyroid sick)
ii. Basal total T; is less sensitive than total T4, diagnostic for hyperthyroidism in approximately
70% of affected cats.
iv. Most veterinary laboratories utilize human T4 radioimmunoassay (RIA) kits for measurement
of T4.
1. Many are validated for use in cats.
2. Reference ranges should be established for feline patients.
432
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. Free thyroxine concentration (fT4)
i. 99% of thyroid hormone is protein bound and inactive; fT4 is the hormone fraction (1%) that
diffuses into the cell and is converted to T to exert metabolic effects.
ii. fT4 is less affected by nonthyroid illness than is total T4, and is therefore more sensitive for
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism.
1. fT4 is elevated in greater than 98% of affected cats.
ii. There is an increased likelihood of false positive fT4 results, making this test less specific for
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism than total T4.
1. 6-12% of cats with nonthyroidal disease demonstrate elevated fT4 concentrations.
iv. Free T4 is typically assayed via equilibrium dialysis.
v.  If a clinician suspects hyperthyroidism and the total T4 and/or T; are within the reference range,
the current recommendation is as follows:
1. Repeat the test days to weeks after initial testing
2. Rule out any concurrent nonthyroid illness.
3. Measure the free T4 concentration.
4. Consider dynamic thyroid function tests.
c. Feline thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
i. There is currently no commercially available feline-specific assay.
ii. Measurement of circulating TSH is not recommended as a screening test for feline
hyperthyroi dism.
thyroidism when the serum T4 concentration remains nondiagnostic.
i. Triodothyronine (Ts) suppression test
1. Administration of T; to healthy cats should suppress pituitary TSH secretion and lower serum
T4 concentration.
2. Cats with hyperthyroidism have chronic suppression of TSH secretion due to autonomous
secretion of thyroid hormone from one or both thyroid glands. Administration of T, to these
cats has little to no effect on serum T4 concentration.
3. Protocol: Baseline measurement of serum T4 and T3, administration of seven oral doses of
liothyronine over a 2.5-day period, and subsequent measurement of serum T4 and T3
concentrations
4. Interpretation: An increase in T; concentration confirms successful medication. Suppression
of total T4 concentration <50% of baseline, or <1.5 μg/dL (<20nmol/L) does not occur in
hyperthyroi dism.
5. The T; suppression test can be used to rule out hyperthyroidism, distinguishing between
euthyroid and mildly hyperthyroid cats.
6. A 3-day testing interval and reliance on owners to administer an oral medication seven times
at home diminishes the practicality of this test.
ii. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response test
1. This test is not recommended for diagnosis of hyperthyroidism in cats.
ii. Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test
1. This test involves measurement of serum T4 concentration before and 4 hours after admin
istration of TRH (0.1 mg/kg IV).
2. Hyperthyroid cats demonstrate a blunted response to TRH stimulation (<50% increase in T4
Over the baseline value) because of chronic suppression of TSH by thyroid hormone.
 3. This test compares favorably with the T, suppression test, requiring less time and with more
convenience.
4. Disadvantages include common adverse side effects associated with TRH administration,
including vomiting, salivation, tachypnea, and defecation.
e. Radionuclide imaging
Chapter 33Diagnostic Testing oF Endocrine Disease in the Cat
433
i. Radionuclides available for thyroid scanning include radioactive technetium-99m (pertechne-
tate), iodine-131, and iodine-123.
ii. Pertechnetate is the most readily available and inexpensive, exhibits the highest safety margin,
and has the shortest half-life.
iii. Tissue identified during subsequent scintigraphy includes all functioning thyroid tissue.
1. Ectopic thyroid tissue in the anterior mediastinum, metastasis of functioning thyroid malig-
nancies, and unilateral versus bilateral thyroidal disease can be identified via thyroid scan.
 2. Methimazole and related compounds may affect scintigra phy results.
iv. This procedure requires specialized equipment, a licensed facility, and heavy sedation or general
anesthesia, limiting its usefulness in most cases.
f. Trial of antithyroid therapy
i. A 30-day trial of antithyroid therapy while monitoring for improvement or resolution of clinical
signs in a cat suspected as hyperthyroid may be considered when thyroid hormone testing is
equivocal.
6. When hyperadrenocorticism, or feline Cushing's syndrome (FCS) is suspected, screening testing includes
the following:
a. Urine cortisol-to-creatinine ratio {UC:CR)
i. A urine sample is collected, centrifuged, and the supernatant analyzed.
ii. This test is highly sensitive and there is a high predictive value associated with a normal result.
1. A UC:CR value ≥3.6 × 10-^ in a cat with compatible clinical signs is supportive with a
diagnosis of FCS.
2. A UC:CR value between 1.3 and 3.6 × 10-" in a cat with appropriate clinical signs is
equivocal.
iii. The low specificity of this test limits its usefulness in achieving a diagnosis.
1. Elevated UC:CR values are seen with nonadrenal diseases, such as diabetes mellitus and
hyperthyroidism.
2. Collection of the urine at home may increase test reliability due to decreased patient stress.
b. Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
i. Protocol: Serum cortisol is measured before (baseline cortisol) and then 4 and 8 hours after
intravenous administration of 0.1 mg/kg dexamethasone.
ii. Interpretation: Appropriate suppression of pituitary ACTH leads to a >50% decrease in serum
cortisol from the baseline value.
1. 80-90% of cats with FCS fail to suppress at 8 hours.
2. Suppression at 4 hours but not 8 hours is consistent with a diagnosis of pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH).
iii. This is a highly sensitive screening test, outperforming the UC:CR and ACTH stimulation tests,
but it does not consistently differentiate between adrenal-tumor-dependent hyperadrenocorti-
cism (ATH) and PDH.
C. ACTH stimulation test
i. This test is not currently recommended as a screening test for feline FCS as it lacks the necessary
sensitivity (60% of affected cats have cortisol responses within the reference range).
7. Discriminating tests for FCS include:
a. High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST)
i. Protocol: Serum cortisol is measured before {baseline cortisol) and then 4 and 8 hours after
intravenous administration of 1.0 mg/kg dexamethasone.
i. Interpretation: Appropriate suppression of pituitary ACTH leads to a >50% decrease in serum
cortisol from the baseline value.
1. Cats with PDH may or may not suppress; cats with ATH will not suppress.
iii. An alternative at-home HDDST protocol is now available that facilitates test implementation
and interpretation and patient comfort.
434
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Protocol: The owner collects urine from the cat in the morning on days 1 and 2; administers
three doses of dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg PO) at 8-hour intervals at 8:00 a.m., 4:00 p.m.,
and 12:00 p.m. after collection of the second urine sample; then collects a urine sample on
the morning of day 3. UC:CR values are obtained from the three urine samples.
2. Interpretation: The mean of the first two UC:CR values acts as a screening test for FCS and
serves as the baseline UC:CR value. If the UC:CR value on day 3 is <S0% the baseline value,
the cat has suppressed. Cats with PDH may or may not suppress, while cats with ATH will
not suppress.
b. Measurement of endogenous corticotropin (ACTH) concentration
i.Protocol: Blood is collected in an EDTA tube (with aprotinin), the plasma immediately separated
and placed in plastic, and shipped on ice or frozen for storage.
i. Interpretation: Cats with ATH typically have low to undetectable ACTH concentrations (<10 pg/
mL), whereas cats with PDH have normal to high ACTH concentrations (often >45 pg/mL).
ACTH concentrations of 10-45 pg/mL are equivocal.
c. Abdominal ultrasound may correctly differentiate between ATH and PDH in up to 80% of afflicted
cats.
8. Definitive diagnosis for hypoadrenocorticism {Addison's disease) in cats is achieved with the ACTH
stimulation test.
a. The ACTH stimulation test is the “gold standard” for diagnosis of hypoadrenocorticism in humans,
dogs, and cats.
i. Protocol A: With synthetic ACTH {cortrosyn), blood samples are obtained before and 30 and
60 minutes following administration of 0.125 mg IV or IM.
1. This method is preferred because of more profound and consistent stimulation of the adrenal
cortex.
ii. Protocol B: Using ACTH gel, blood samples are collected before and 60 and 120 minutes fol-
lowing administration of 2.2U/kg IM.
iii. Interpretation: Cats with hypoadrenocorticism demonstrate both pre- and post-ACTH stimu-
lated cortisol concentrations less than 2 μg/dL.
b. Plasma endogenous ACTH concentration may aid in differentiation between primary and secondary
a drenocortical destruction.
i. Cats with naturally occurring primary hypoadrenocorticism will have elevated endogenous
ACTH.
(from drug-induced inhibition of pituitary secretion of ACTH). These cats will exhibit low
cortisol levels and low endogenous ACTH.
ii. Naturally occurring secondary hypoadrenocorticism has not been reported in the cat.
iv. Proper sample collection is important to avoid erroneous results, as ACTH is cleared from fresh
whole blood rapidly.
1. Blood is collected in an EDTA tube (with aprotinin), centrifuged, and the plasma stored in
a plastic container (the ACTH molecule adheres to glass).
 2. The blood sample should be shipped at 4°C (or frozen if not collected in aprotinin).
v. Normal endogenous ACTH concentration is 20-80 pg/mL (4.4-8.8 pmol/L).
9. Definitive diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome) includes mea surement of pla sma
aldosterone concentration.
a. Plasma aldosterone concentration will be elevated in affected cats.
i. A recent case series reports a mean aldosterone concentration of 5,820 pmoll (reference range,
150-430).
b. Primary hyperaldosteronism should result in suppressed plasma renin activity, or renin-aldosterone
dissociation.
Chapter 33 Diagnostic Testing of Endocrine Disease in the Cat
435
i.When measured in affected cats, plasma renin activity has been variable, with So% of
cats having normal values. A normal renin level does not, therefore, rule out primary
hyperaldosteronism.
ii. A high plasma renin concentration is suggestive of secondary hyperaldosteronism.
1. Diseases such as congestive heart failure and renal failure will lead to appropriate activation
of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
iii. The ratio of plasma aldosterone concentration to plasma renin activity may be more beneficial
in confirming a diagnosis of Conn's syndrome.
c. Histopathology will confirm a diagnosis of adrenocortical neoplasia.
 d. Increased urinary fractional excretion of potassium (FEk) results from hyperaldosteronism and may
facilitate with a diagnosis.
i.  FEk in affected cats typically >50%, with normal FEk <6% in hypokalemic animals
10. Definitive diagnosis of pheochromocytoma antemortem can be particularly challenging.
a. Cytologic evaluation of the adrenal mass is consistent with neoplasia of endocrine or neuroendocrine
origin.
i. Histopathology following surgical resection or postmortem is necessary for definitive
diagnosis.
b. 24-hour urine collection and measurement of urinary catecholamines and their metabolites ( vanillyl
 mandelic acid and metanephrines) may aid in diagnosis.
i. Stress has been shown to increase catecholamine excretion in the urine in dogs and may affect
test results if collection takes place in hospitalized patients.
ii. ARUP, a national diagnostic laboratory in Utah, will measure urinary catecholamine levels:
1. www.aruplab.com
ii. Metanephrine-creatinine ratios from spot urine samples have been useful for diagnosis of pheo
chromocytoma in human patients. This test has not been evaluated in cats.
c. The phentolamine test relies on the principal that administration of this alpha-adrenergic antagonist
will lead to a predicta ble decrease in systemic blood pressure in affected patients.
i. The potential for severe systemic hypotension and the availability of safer diagnostic modalities
limits this test's clinical utility.
d. The clonidine suppression test involves administration of an alpha-2 adrenergic agonist and subse
quent documentation of failure of norepinephrine levels to suppress.
i. Episodic release of catecholamines makes test results difficult to interpret, limiting its utility in
the clinical setting.
e. Provocative tests using glucagon, tyramine, or histamine are not recommended due to the potential
of life-threatening complications and high cost.
11. Definitive diagnosis of insulinoma involves the following:
a. Documentation of an inappropriately high serum insulin concentration despite the presence of
hypogl ycemia is confirmatory.
i.  Inappropriate hyperinsulinism is easiest to recognize when the blood glucose is <50-60 mg/dL.
1. A 6-12-hour fast may be necessary prior to blood sample collection if the blood glucose is
>60 mg/dL.
 2. Additionally, brief reduction or cessation of intravenous dextrose supplementation may be
necessary to induce mild hypoglycemia for testing purposes.
ii. Serum insulin and blood glucose concentrations should be evaluated simultaneously from the
same blood sample.
ii. An insulin concentration above the reference range or at the high-normal end of the reference
range at the time of hypoglycemia supports the diagnosis of an insulin-secreting tumor.
iv. There are radioimmunoassays utilized to measure serum insulin concentration that have been
validated in cats {labs at Cornell University and Michigan State University).
436
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
b. The amended insulin-glucose ratio (AIGR) has previously been recommended as a diagnostic
aid:
Serum insulin (μU mL)
×100
Blood glucose (mg dL) - 30
1. An AIGR >30 is consistent with an insulin-secreting tumor.
2. This test is not specific for diagnosis of insulinoma. Elevated AIGR values have been docu
mented in dogs with liver disease and sepsis, and in healthy dogs.
3. Dogs with confirmed insulinoma have had AIGR values <30, calling into question the sensi-
tivity of this assay as well.
c. Histopathology will ultimately confirm the diagnosis of insulinoma.
d. Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy ( utilizing radiolabeled octreotide) has been successful in identify-
ing beta-cell neoplasia in dogs.
 1. Associated expense and need for specialized facilities and equipment limit the clinical utility of
this diagnostic modality.
12. Definitive diagnosis of primary hyperparathyroidism requires documentation of:
a. A serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentration that is either within or above the reference
range in the face of hypercalcemia.
i. Serum or EDTA plasma can be used to measure PTH concentration.
ii. Utilization of an assay that detects intact PTH is important, as inactive PTH fragments may
accumulate in the bloodstream in patients with concurrent renal dysfunction and confound
results. This assay must be validated in cats.
ii. Ionized calcium is the biologically active form that regulates PTH activity, and this is the recom-
mended form to measure.
1. Ionized calcium can be measured in serum or heparinized plasma.
iv. Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) and vitamin D metabolites are also low in
affectedcats.
b. Histopathology confirms parathyroid malignancy.
13. Definitive diagnosis of primary hypoparathyroidism involves documentation of:
a. Lack of PTH during a period of profound, clinical hypocalcemia
i. A PTH concentration that is in the low-normal range is also abnormal during periods of
hypocalcemia.
ii. Serum or EDTA plasma can be used to measure PTH.
ii. Utilization of an assay that detects intact PTH is important, as inactive fragments may accumu-
late in the bloodstream in patients with concurrent renal dysfunction and confound results.
iv. Ionized calcium is the biologically active form that regulates PTH activity, and this is the recom-
mended form to measure.
1. Ionized calcium can be measured in serum or heparinized plasma.
b. Histological evaluation of a parathyroid gland biopsy provides additional supportive evidence but
is no longer necessary to achieve a diagnosis.
Recommended Reading
Ash R, Harvey A, Tasker S. Primary hyperaldosteronism in the cat: a series of 13 cases. J Feline Med Surg,
2005; 7:173-182.
Bonczynski, J. Primary hyperparathyroidism in dogs and cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2007;
22:70-74.
Feldman ES, Nelson RW. Beta-cell neoplasia: insulinoma. In Canine and Feline Endocrinology and
Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 616-644. Elsevier Science {USA), 2004.
Chapter 33Diagnostic Testing of Endocrine Disease in the Cat
437
Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 152-218. Elsevier Science {USA), 2004.
Feldman ES, Nelson RW. Hyperadrenocorticism in cats (Cushing's syndrome). In Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 358-393. Elsevier Science {USA), 2004.
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 660-715. Elsevier Science (USA), 2004.
and Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 394-439. Elsevier Science (USA), 2004.
Feldman ES, Nelson RW. Hypocalcemia and primary hypoparathyroidism. In Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 716-742. Elsevier Science {USA), 2004.
 Feldman ES, Nelson RW. Pheochromocytoma and multiple endocrine neoplasia. In Canine and Feline
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 3rd ed, pp 440-463. Elsevier Science (USA), 2004.
Greco DS. Hypoadrenocorticism in small animals. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2007; 22:32-35.
Green SN, Bright RM. Insulinoma in a cat. JSAP, 2008; 49:38-40.
Gunn-Moore D. Feline endocrinopathies. Vet Clin Small Anim, 2005; 34:171-210.
27(4):270-279
 Kallet A, Richter KP, Feldman EC, et al. Primary hyperparathyroidism in cats: seven cases (1984-1989).
JAVMA, 1991; 199(12):1767-1771,
Lange MS, Galac S, Trip MRJ, et al. High urinary corticoid/creatinine ratios in cats with hyperthyroidism
J Vet Intern Med, 2004; 1:152-155.
McElravy BL, Brunker JD. Diagnosing and treating primary hypoparathyroidism in dogs and cats. Vet
Med, January 2007; 40-50.
Peterson ME, Greco DS, Orth D. Primary hypoadrenocorticism in ten cats. J Vet Intern Med, 1989;
3:55-58.
Peterson ME, James KM, Wallace M, et al. Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism in five cats. J Vet Intern Med,
1991; 5:46-51.
Peterson ME, Ward CR. Etiopathologic findings of hyperthyroidism in cats. Vet Clin Small Anim, 2007;
37:633-645.
Redden B. Feline hypoadrenocorticism. Compendium, 2005; 27(9):697-706.
Shiel RE, Mooner CT. Testing for hyperthyroidism in cats. Vet Clin Small Anim, 2007; 37:671-691.
Syme HM. Cardiovascular and renal manifestations of hyperthyroidism. Vet Clin Small Anim, 2007;
37:723-743
Ward CR. Feline thyroid storm. Vet Clin Small Anim, 2007; 37:745-754
34
ELECTROLYTE DISORDERS
Linda G. Martin and Amanda E. Veatch
Unique Features
 Electrolyte disorders are common in feline emergency and critically ill patients. Electrolyte disorders
 should be suspected in all patients predisposed to their development (disease processes or therapeutic
modalities that can lead to alterations in electrolyte status) and exhibiting clinical signs consistent with
electrolyte abnormalities.
A. Sodium
a. General points
i.Distribution
1. Sodium is the primary cation in the extracellular fluid
ii. Functions of sodium
1. Sodium is vital to the maintenance of extracellular fluid volume.
2. Sodium is the major contributor to osmolality.
a. Osmolality is calculated from the following formula:
Osmolality = 2(sodium)+ BUN/2.8+ glucose/18
ili. Homeostasis/regulation
1. Osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus
a. Regulate thirst and the release of antidiuretic hormone {ADH) and therefore indirectly
regulate sodium concentration through regulation of body water content
2. Kidney
aldosterone
b. Sodium is filtered by the glomeruli and reabsorbed by the renal tubules.
b. Hyponatremia
i.
Causes of hyponatremia {table 34.1)
1. Hyponatremia can be real or artifactual (pseudohyponatremia).
a. To determine if the hyponatremia is real, osmolality should ideally be measured. If the
osmolality is low (<308mOsm/L), then true hyponatremia is present.
2. True hyponatremia
a. Physical and historical assessment of vascular volume status can help determine the under-
lying cause (see table 34.1).
439
440
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 34.1.(
Causes of hyponatremia.
 Normal plasma osmolality
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperproteinemia
Elevated plasma osmolality
Hyperglycemia
Mannitol administration
Decreased plasma osmolality
 Concurrent hypovolemia
 Renal loss
 Hypoadrenocorficism
Diuretic administration
Extrarenal loss
Gastrointestinal loss
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Third-space loss
 Pleural effusion 
Chylothorax
 Lung lobe torsion 
Neoplasia
Peritoneal effusion
Pancreatitis
Peritonitis
Uroabdomen
Neoplasia
Cutaneous loss 
Severe burns
 Concurrent normovolemia
Psychogenic polydipsia
Syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion
Hypotonic fluid administration
Antidiuretic drugs
NSAIDs
Narcotics
Barbiturates
Cholinergic drugs
β-adrenergic drugs
Vincristine
Concurrent hypervolemia
Severe liver disease
Congestive heart failure
Nephrotic syndrome
Advanced renal failure
 3. Pseudohyponatremia
a. Normal plasma osmolality (308-355 mOsm/L)
b. Occurs as a result of lipids, proteins, or high serum viscosity that causes sample dilution,
resulting in spuriously low serum sodium concentrations.
4. Low serum sodium concentrations may occur in the presence of increased plasma osmolality
(>355 mOsm/L) as a result of hyperglycemia or mannitol administration. Glucose and
 mannitol can cause fluid to shift from the intracellular to the extracellular fluid space with an
accompanying decrease in serum sodium concentration as a result of dilution.
Chapter 34  Electrolyte Disorders
441
a. Each 100-mg/dL increase in serum glucose concentration decreases serum sodium concen-
tration by 2.4mEq/L.
5. If a lipid layer is not noted in the supernatant of a centrifuged hematocrit tube or hypergly.
cemia is not present, the measurement of osmolality is not essential to make the diagnosis of
true hyponatremia. It can be inferred by ruling out the conditions mentioned above.
ii. Clinical signs of hyponatremia
1. Clinical signs depend on the rapidity with which the sodium deficit develops. Most problems
occur when sodium decreases acutely (<48 hours) and the body does not have sufficient time
to compensate.
2. Clinical signs are generally attributable to CNS and neuromuscular dysfunction as rapid
decreases in serum sodium result in rapid infux of water into the brain, causing cerebral
edema.
Signs include lethargy, weakness, weight gain, vomiting, incoordination, seizures, and coma.
 3. If hyponatremia develops slowly (>48 hours), the brain has time to adjust by losing potassium,
sodium, and organic osmolytes. Clinical signs are typically negligible under these
circumstances.
4. Clinical signs are generally seen when serum sodium concentrations are <125 mEq/L.
ili. Diagnosis of hyponatremia
1. Normal feline serum sodium concentrations range from 149-162 mEq/L. Hyponatremia is
defined as a serum sodium concentration <149 mEq/L.
2. If the serum sodium concentration is <120 mEq/L, it is unlikely that pseudohyponatremia or
a hyponatremia secondary to hyperglycemia or mannitol administration is present.
iv. Therapy for hyponatremia {box 34.1)
1. Correct underlying problem.
2. Replace volume and electrolyte deficits by administering 0.9% NaCl or a balanced electrolyte
solution such as Normosol-R or lactated Ringer's solution intravenously. Rapid correction
with hypertonic saline {3-7.5%) is contraindicated.
 3. The speed of correction depends on the speed with which the hyponatremia developed and
ization of the central pons and other areas of the CNS. Cerebral dehydration and hemorrhage
may also occur as the brain shrinks and tears subarachnoid blood vessels. To minimize these
complications, hyponatremia should be corrected at a rate of no faster than 0.5-0.7 mEq/L/
hr.
Box 34.1. Highlights of therapy for hyponatremia.
1. Correct underlying disease process.
2. Replace volume and electrolyte deficits.
a. 0.9% NaCl
b. Normosol-R
c. Lactated Ringer's solution
3. Slowly correct hyponatremia
a. Increase sodium no faster than 0.5-0.7 mEq/L/hr
4. Monitor sodium concentrations q1-2h initially.
 5. Restrict water intake in normovolemic hyponatremic cats.
6. Discontinue drugs that may stimulate release of ADH.
a. NSAIDs
b. Narcotics
c. Barbiturates
442
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. Sodium concentrations should be checked every 1-2 hours until a consistent trend of change
has been esta blished, then sodium monitoring can be adjusted accordingly.
5. In normovolemic cats, restrict water so that water intake is less than urine output.
6. Discontinue any drugs that might stimulate the release, or enhance the effects, of ADH (i.e.,
NSAIDs, narcotics, or barbiturates).
7. If pseudohyponatremia is diagnosed, no specific therapy for hyponatremia is necessary. If
hyponatremia with high plasma osmolality is diagnosed, treat the underlying cause (e.g., treat
diabetes mellitus with insulin therapy).
c. Hypernatremia
Causes of hypernatremia (table 34.2)
1. Hypernatremia can result from sodium-free fluid (pure water) loss, hypotonic fluid (low
sodium containing fluid) loss, or from sodium gain.
 2. In feline patients, hypernatremia is most commonly caused by sodium-free and hypotonic fluid
loss.
Table 34.2. Causes of hypernatremia
 Sodium-free Hluid loss
Renal loss
 Diabetes insipidus 
Respiratory loss via panting
Fever
 High environmental temperatures
Lack of free water intake
Lack of access to water
Neurological disease with altered thirst mechanism
 Primary hypodipsia
Hypotonic fluid loss
 Gastrointestinal loss
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Renal loss
Osmotic diuresis
Diabetes mellitus
Mannitol administration
Intravenous glucose supplementation
Third-space loss
 Pleural effusion/inflammation 
 Peritoneal effusion/inflammation
Sodium gain
Administration of high-sodium-containing Hluids or drugs
0.9% NaCl
Hypertonic saline
Sodium bicarbonate
 Sodium phosphate enema
Ingestion of high-sodium-containing food or water
 Sea water
Rock salt
Sodium retention (rare in the cat)
 Decreased renal excretion
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Chapter 34  Electrolyte Disorders
443
ii. Clinical signs of hypernatremia
1. Signs are manifested primarily as disorders of the CNS. Hypernatremia causes a shift of water
from the cells of the brain to the intravascular space. Decreases in cell volume can cause
vascular rupture, cerebral and subarachnoid hemorrhage, and irreversible neurological
damage.
 2. Clinical signs are generaly seen when serum sodium concentrations are >170mEq/L.
The severity of the signs is determined by the rate of change in the serum sodium
concentration.
a. A slow increase in serum sodium concentration is associated with a higher sodium level
before neurological signs develop.
b. A rapid rise in serum sodium concentration is associated with a lower sodium level when
neurological signs develop.
3. Early signs can appear as weakness, lethargy, depression, vomiting, and abnormal behavior.
4. Later signs can develop into twitching, tremors, seizures, coma, and death.
iii. Diagnosis of hypernatremia
1. Hypernatremia is defined as a serum sodium concentration >162 mEq/L in cats.
2. The underlying pathophysiologic cause of hypernatremia can be inferred from the patient's
volume status.
a. If the patient is hypovolemic, the most likely cause of hypernatremia is hypotonic fluid
loss.
 b. If the patient is normovolemic, the most likely cause of hypernatremia is a result of sodium-
free fluid (pure water) loss or decreased free water intake.
c. If the patient is hypervolemic, the most likely cause of hypernatremia is due to sodium
gain.
iv. Therapy for hypernatremia (box 34.2)
1. Correct underlying problem.
 2. Correct hypovolemia and replace water deficits.
a. Correction of hypovolemia can be accomplished by the intravenous administration of
osmoles. The presence of these osmoles causes cerebral edema if plasma sodium levels are
corrected too rapidly. This can be avoided by administering fluids at a rate that does not
decrease serum sodium concentrations by more than 0.5-0.7 mEq/L/hr. In hypernatremia,
0.9% NaCl (containing 154mEq/L of sodium) often has a lower sodium concentration
than that of the patient, resulting in gradual dilution of sodium as the intravascular volume
is replaced (table 34.3).
Box 34.2. Highlights of therapy for hypernatremia.
1. Correct underlying disease process.
2. Correct hypovolemia and replace water deficits.
a. 0.9% NaCl
3. Correct remaining free water deficits only after correction of hypovolemia.
a. 0.45% NaCl
b. 5% dextrose in water
4. Slowly correct hypernatremia.
a. Decrease sodium no faster than 0.5-0.7 mEq/L/hr.
5. Monitor sodium concentrations q1-2h initially.
 6. Administer furosemide only to hypervolemic hypernatremic cats.
444
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 34.3. Sodium concentration of
intravenous fluids.
Fluid Solution
mEq/L
7% NaCl
1,197
3% NaCl
513
0.9% NaCl
154
Normosol-R
140
Lactated Ringer's
130
0.45% NaCl
77
5% dextrose in water
b. Only after the hypovolemia is corrected should the remaining free water deficit be addressed.
Residual free water deficits should be replaced slowly, correcting the serum sodium con-
hypotonic crystalloids such as 0.45% NaCl or 5% dextrose in water intravenously.
c. To estimate the effect of 1L of a crystalloid solution on the patient's serum sodium con-
centration, see the following equation:
Crystalloid [Sodium]- Patient's Serum [Sodium]
Change in Serum Sodium =
[Body Weight (kg) x0.6]+ 1
d. Regardless of the crystalloid fluid solution given or the rate of intravenous fluid administra-
tion, hypernatremic patients need frequent monitoring and reassessment. Fluid therapy
should be adjusted and individualized to best meet the patient's needs. It is difficult to
predict how fast or even in what direction the sodium concentration will change. Therefore,
sodium concentrations should be checked every 1-2 hours until a consistent trend is estab-
lished, then sodium monitoring can be adjusted accordingly.
3. Increase sodium excretion.
volemia. In these cases, the administration of furosemide at 1-2 mg/kg q8-24h PO, SC,
IM, or IV will help increase sodium elimination and decrease volume.
B. Potassium
a. General points
i.
Distribution
1. Most abundant intracellular cation in the body; 95-98% located intracellularly
 2. Concentrated most in muscle tissue
ii. Functions of potassium
1. Generation of the resting cell membrane potential (sodium-potassium ATPase pump)
2. Various enzyme systems for cell growth
iii. Homeostasis
1. Intake
a. Primarily from dietary ingestion
2. Excretion
a. Primarily renal excretion
3. Translocation
 a. Potassium movement into intracellular space is stimulated by several factors, including
insulin, catecholamines, metabolic alkalosis, and increased extracellular potassium.
b. Extracellular translocation of potassium is stimulated by a metabolic acidosis, which then
results in increased potassium excretion.
Chapter 34Electrolyte Disorders
445
Table 34.4. Causes of hypokalemia.
 Decreased intake
Anorexia
Vomiting
 Potassium-deplete diet
Administration of potassium-deplete IV luids
Increased excretion
Vomiting
Diarrhea
 Chronic renal failure
Renal tubular acidosis
Postobstructive diuresis
Dialysis
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Primary hyperaldosteronism
Drugs
Diuretics
Furosemide
Thiazides
Mineralocorticoids
 Amphotericin B
Penicillins
Aminoglycosides
Intracellular translocation
 Insulin and glucose
Alkalosis
Albuterol overdose
Catecholamines
Hyperthyroidism
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (Burmese kittens)
b. Hypokalemia
Causes of hypokalemia (table 34.4)
1. General causes of hypokalemia include decrea sed intake, increased excretion, and intracellular
translocation.
a. Chronic renal failure is one of the most common causes of hypokalemia in cats.
b. Hyperaldosteronism
i. Clinical signs of hypokalemia
1. Clinical signs may be absent or nonspecific, such as anorexia, lethargy, ileus, or weakness.
 2. Musculoskeletal weakness manifested by ventroflexion of the neck, forelimb hypermetria, Or
a wide-based hind limb stance, may progres to respiratory muscle paralysis with severe
hypokalemia.
3. Hypokalemic nephropathy, with impaired urinary concentrating ability, polyuria, and poly.
dypsia, may occur.
4. Potassium depletion has been associated with the development of metabolic acidosis in
cats.
S. Abnormal cardiac conduction can occur.
a. The ECG changes of ST segment depression, reduced T-wave amplitude, and prolonged
QT intervals are not consistently seen in feline hypokalemic patients but may occur.
b. Ventricular or supraventricular arrhythmias may occur and may be refractory to Class I
antiarrhythmics (lidocaine and procainamide) until hypokalemia is corrected.
446
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 34.5. Potassium supplementation guidelines.
Maximum Fluid Rate (mL/
Serum Potassium
mEg KCl to Add to
kg/hr) Not Exceeding
Concentration (mEq/L)
1 LFluids
0.5 mEq/kg/hr kcl
3.6-5.0
20
25
3.1-3.5
30
18
2.6-3.0
40
12
2.1-2.5
50
10
<2.0
60
6
6. With chronic hypokalemia, inhibited cell growth is manifested by weight loss, poor hair coat,
and decreased muscle mass. Potassium-deficient cats may develop taurine deficiency and asso-
ciated cardiovascular disease.
iii. Diagnosis of hypokalemia
1. Normal feline serum potassium concentrations range from 3.5-5.5 mEq/L. Hypokalemia
occurs when serum potassium concentrations fall below 3.5 mEq/L.
iv. Therapy for hypokalemia
1. Correct underlying problem.
 2. Intravenous potassium supplementation
a. Potassium chloride (2mEq/mL) and potassium phosphate (4.36mEq/mL) solutions are
available for parenteral use. These solutions must be diluted in a parenteral fluid solution
and mixed well to avoid oversupplementation. Rate of administration should not exceed
0.5 mEq/kg/hr. See table 34.5 for appropriate supplementation amounts and rates of
administration.
b. Higher rates of potassium supplementation may be essential during fluid therapy for dia-
betic ketoacidotic patients, as the body is usually potassium depleted and administration
of insulin causes serum potassium concentrations to decrease even further due to intracel-
lular translocation {See Chap. 31—Management of Specific Endocrine and Metabolic
Diseases: Dia betes).
c. Hypokalemia that fails to respond to supplementation may indicate the presence of concur-
rent hypomagnesemia.
3. Oral potassium supplementation
a. Potassium gluconate is most commonly recommended for oral supplementation. It can be
administered at 5-8 mEq/cat/day PO divided BID or TID initially, then reduced to 2-4 mEq/
cat/day for maintenance therapy.
4. Serial potassium measurements are recommended when supplementing.
c. Hyperkalemia
i.
Causes of hyperkalemia (table 34.6)
1. Extreme leukocytosis or thrombocytosis can falsely elevate serum potassium concentrations
and are considered to be causes of pseudohyperkalemia.
2. Sustained hyperkalemia is almost always associated with impaired urinary excretion of potas-
sium (urethral obstructions, bladder rupture, anuric or oliguric renal failure).
3. Cats in a diabetic ketoacidotic state may be hyperkalemic because of insulin deficiency or
hyperosmolarity. However, an overall hypokalemia may be present that can become apparent
4. Drugs associated with hyperkalemia usually are not clinically significant unless other factors
that potentiate hyperkalemia are present, such as decreased urinary excretion.
Chapter 34 Electrolyte Disorders
447
Table 34.6. Causes of hyperkalemia.
latrogenic—potassium-rich IV fluid administration
Extracellular translocation
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Tumor lysis syndrome
Massive fissue trauma
Mineral acidosis
Reperfusion injury -after aortic thromboembolism
Lysine or arginine (TPN)
Drugs
Beta-blockers (propranolol)
Cardiac glycosides
 Decreased urinary excretion
Urethral obstruction
Bilateral ureteral obstruction
Urinary bladder rupture
Anuric/oliguric renal failure
Hypoadrenocorticism
Gastrointestinal disease
Severe whipworms
Salmonellosis
 Duodenal perforation 
Effusions
Chylothorax- repeated drainage
Peritoneal effusion
Pericardial effusion
 Pseudohyperkalemia
Thrombocytosis
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
 Drugs promoting hyperkalemia
Potassium-containing drugs
ACE inhibitors
Potassium-sparing diuretics
NSAIDs
Heparin
Succinylcholine
i.  Clinical signs of hyperkalemia
1. The most significant and life-threatening effects of hyperkalemia are changes in cardiac con-
duction, associated with characteristic ECG changes.
a. The first abnormality seen is a T wave increased in amplitude with a "tented" appearance.
A decrease in R wave amplitude, a prolonged P-R interval, and a decreased QT interval
may be seen.
b. The P waves decrease in amplitude, widen, and eventually become absent (atrial standstill)
with increasing hyperkalemia. Widening of the QRS complex and bradycardia are also
seen with higher levels.
c. Ventricular fibrillation, asystole, and cardiac arrest can also occur.
2. Hyperkalemia may be associated with generalized skeletal muscle weakness.
iii. Diagnosis of hyperkalemia
1. Hyperkalemia should be suspected in cats with appropriate underlying diseases or showing
senting with a urethral obstruction.
2. Hyperkalemia occurs when feline serum potassium concentrations rise above 5.5 mEq/L.
448
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 34.3.Highlights of therapy for hyperkalemia
1. Correct underlying disease process.
2. In cases of hyperkalemic crisis administer one or more of the following:
a. Sodium bicarbonate
b. Dextrose and regular insulin
c. Calcium gluconate
3. Discontinue all sources of potassium {IV fluids, medications),
 4. Start IV fluid therapy with a low-potassium-containing crystalloid.
a. 0.9% NaCl
b. Lactated Ringer's solution
5. Consider furosemide to enhance renal potassium excretion.
a. Do not give to hypovolemic or dehydrated cats.
6. Consider peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis in cases of anuric or oliguric renal failure.
iv. Therapy for hyperkalemia (box 34.3)
1. The presence of cardiac conduction abnormalities may require treatment before the cause of
hyperkalemia is identified. Treatment of hyperkalemia involves intracellular translocation of
pota ssium and protection of the myocardium.
a. Calcium gluconate {50-100mg/kg IV slowly over 5-10 minutes) is cardioprotective by
making the threshold potential less negative. This should be administered to any cat with
life-threatening ECG changes due to hyperkalemia. Doses should be administered slowly
and the patient's ECG should be monitored during administration as changes in heart rate
or cardiac arrhythmias may occur with administration that is too fast. Effects will last 30
minutes to 1 hour.
b. Sodium bicarbonate (1-2mg/kg IV slowly over 15-20 minutes) causes intracellular move
ment of potassium. This treatment method is often recommended in cats with urethral
obstruction after administration of calcium, as hypocalcemia may also be present and
seizures may be induced by further lowering the ionized calcium concentration with sodium
bicarbonate administration.
c. Glucose also causes intracellular movement of potassium. Dextrose-containing solutions
percent dextrose can be administered as an IV bolus. Additionally, 0.25-1.0 U/kg of regular
insulin can be diluted in IV fluids containing dextrose {2 g/U insulin), or 0.25-1.0U/kg of
regular insulin can be administered as an IV bolus followed by a 25% dextrose IV bolus
{1-2 g/U insulin).
2. Correct the underlying cause of hyperkalemia (i.e., esta blishing urine outflow).
 3. Discontinue all sources of potassium intake {intra venous fluids, medications).
4. Intravenous fluid therapy with low-potassium crystalloids (lactated Ringer's solution, 0.9%
NaCl) provides a dilutional effect on extracellular potassium.
 5. Loop or thiazide diuretics may be considered as adjunctive therapy to enhance renal potassium
excretion.
6. Peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis should be considered if other treatments are ineffective in
lowering potassium concentrations, and they may be necessary in cases of anuric or oliguric
renal failure.
C. Calcium
a. General points
i. Distribution
Chapter 34  Electrolyte Disorders
449
1. Ninety-nine percent of the body's calcium is found in the skeletal system as a component of
hydroxyapatite, and 1% is present in extracellular fluid (<1% is intracellular).
2. For extracellular calcium, 52% is in an ionized form, 40% is bound to albumin or globulins,
and 8% is chelated with phosphate, citrate, or bicarbonate. The ionized form is thought to
 be the physiologically active component.
3. In the presence of acidosis, a shift toward ionized over protein-bound calcium occurs, and the
opposite occurs with alkalosis.
ii. Functions of calcium
1. Calcium is a major component of bone, important for stability and formation.
2. Calcium is necessary for muscle contraction, including skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscle,
and is required for cardiac pacema ker cell excitation.
 3. At a molecular level, calcium is involved in enzyme activation and second messenger systems
that promote neurotransmitter and hormone release, coagulation, and cellular motility, secre-
tion, differentiation, and permeability.
ili. Homeostasis
1. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) is the primary regulator of calcium, and its release causes
increased serum calcium concentrations. (Increased serum calcium serves as a negative feed-
back for PTH release.)
a. GI tract—PTH causes increased absorption of calcium.
b. Bone—PTH causes bone resorption and mobilization of calcium and phosphate.
c. Kidney—PTH causes decreased excretion of calcium, inhibits reabsorption of phosphate,
and stimulates synthesis of calcitriol.
 2. Calcitriol is an active metabolite of vitamin D produced by the kidney Its major action is on
b. Hypocalcemia
i. Causes of hypocalcemia (table 34.7)
1. Hypoalbuminemia will cause total serum calcium to decrease; however, ionized calcium (iCa)
concentrations should be normal.
ii. Clinical signs of hypocalcemia
 1. Musculoskeletal manifestations of hypocalcemia include muscle fasiculations or tremors, stiff-
ness, or tetany. Severe hypocalcemia can result in seizures. True seizures can be differentiated
tonic-clonic limb motion, loss of consciousness, and other signs of central nervous system
dysfunction.
2. Cardiovascular signs include hypotension, tachyarrhythmias, or prolonged Q-T interval.
 3. Other signs may include prolapsed nictitating membrane, facial rubbing, behavioral changes
(restlessness, excitation, aggression, hypersensitivity to stimuli, disorientation), laryngeal or
bronchospasm, panting, or apnea in severe cases.
ili. Diagnosis of hypocalcemia
1. Obtaining iCa concentrations is the preferred method of measuring calcium, and reference
ranges are 4.5-5.5 mg/dL or 1.1-1.4 mmol/L. (In order to convert mg/dL to mmol/L, multiply
mg/dL by 0.25; to convert mmol/L to mg/dL, multiply mmol/l by 4.)
a. Clinical signs usually do not manifest if iCa is >0.8 mmol/L or 3.2 mg/dL.
b. Results can be altered by processing samples aerobically, overheparinizing samples, or using
silicone separator tubes.
2. Normal feline serum total calcium concentrations range from  8.0-10.5 mg/dL or
2.0-2.6 mmol/L
a. Consider albumin level and protein-bound calcium. The albumin correction formula
(calcium - albumin + 3.s) is typically not accurate in cats.
450
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Table 34.7. Causes of hypocalcemia.
Hypoproteinemia/hypoalbuminemia (normal iCa)
Renal failure
Acute or chronic
Ethylene glycol toxicity
Hypoparathyroidism
latrogenic (parathyroidectomy, thyroidectomy)
Primary (rare, may be congenital)
Cervical trauma
 Severe hypomagnesemia
Nutritional or renal secondary hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin D deficiency
Hepatic insufficiency
Intestinal malabsorption or malnutrition 
Renal disease
Redistribution
Alkalosis
Eclampsia (1-3 weeks postpartum]—rare in cats
Hyperphosphatemia causing Ca-P precipitation
Phosphate-containing enemas
Renal or postrenal causes
Massive blood transfusions (citrate anticoagulant)
 Massive soft-tissue trauma/rhabdomyolysis
Tumor lysis syndrome
Sodium bicarbonate therapy
Urethral obstruction
Acute pancreatitis
Extensive IV fuid or furosemide diuresis
Hyperthyroidism
Hypoadrenocorticism (rare in cats)
Sepsis/SIRS
3. Additional tests to establish the cause of hypocalcemia may be necessary, such as PTH concen-
trations, T4 concentrations, chemistry profile, urinalysis, or bone marrow aspirates or biopsy.
iv. Therapy for hypocalcemia
1. Correct underlying problem.
2. Calcium can be administered intravenously for severe hypocalcemia, or orally in mild or
chronic cases of hypocalcemia. Parenteral supplementation is recommended only if degree of
hypocalcemia is severe or clinical signs are present.
3. Calcium gluconate or calcium chloride can be administered intravenously. Ten percent calcium
gluconate (50-150 mg/kg IV slowly) contains 9.2 mg/mL elemental calcium and is safer than
10% calcium chloride, which contains 27.2 mg/mL elemental calcium. Additionally, calcium
chloride is very irritating if given perivascularly.
a. Administration should be over at least 10-30 minutes. Monitor patient's ECG during
administration, as rapid administration can cause bradyarrhythmias, asystole, and death.
b. Repeat as needed until neuromuscular signs resolve.
c. Subcutaneous administration is not recommended, as tissue irritation and necrosis can
occur (most commonly associated with calcium chloride).
4. Isotonic intravenous fluids can be administered to correct hypovolemia or hyperthermia.
 5. Oral vitamin D can be used adjunctively if hypocalcemia is secondary to hypoparathyroidism
or renal disease. Serum calcium concentrations should be monitored while using vitamin D
preparations.
Chapter 34Electrolyte Disorders
451
Table 34.8.
Causes of hypercakemia
Hypercalcemia of malignancy
Lymphoma
Anal sac apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
Carcinomas
 Mulliple myeloma
Leukemia
 Metastatic or primary bone neoplasms
Renal failure—acute or chronic
Hypervitaminosis D
Toxic plants
Cesirus diurnum—day-blooming jessamine
Solanum malacoxylon- nightshade
Triestum flavescens— yellow oatgrass
 Cholecalciferol rodenticides
 Calcipotriene— psoriasis medication
Excessive dietary supplementation
Excessive calcium ingestion
Calcium-containing intestinal phosphate binders
Excessive calcium supplementation
 Hyperparathyroidism
 Primary - neoplasic (adenoma], hyperplasia 
Secondary —renal, nutritional
Skeletal lesions
Neoplastic
 Osteomyelitis—esp. fungal
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
Disuse osteoporosis
Nonpathologic or transient causes
Hyperproteinemia/hemoconcentration
Lipemia
Hemolysis
 Postprandial
 Physiologic growth of young animals
Laboratory error
Hypoadrenocorticism
Acromegaly
 Postrenal transplantation 
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of cats 
6. For oral supplementation, several formulations are available, the most common being calcium
carbonate ( dose: 25-50 mg/kg/day divided BID-QID on the basis of elemental calcium content).
Other formulations include calcium chloride, gluconate, or lactate.
 7. Correct hyperphosphatemia prior to calcium administration to prevent precipitation and soft
tissue minera lization.
8. If eclampsia is the cause of hypocalcemia, wean kittens.
9. Serial monitoring of serum calcium concentrations is recommended while supplementing.
c. Hypercalcemia
i.
Causes of hypercalcemia (table 34.8)
1. Hypercalcemia of malignancy is less common in cats than in dogs but can occur with several
neoplasms, the most common being lymphoma.
2. In the condition of idiopathic hypercalcemia of cats, no etiology is identified. Young to middle-
aged cats are affected. The hypercalcemia is usually not progressive and is associated with
452
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
minimal clinical signs but may be associated with azotemia, nephrocalcinosis, and calcium
oxalate urolithiasis.
ii. Clinical signs of hypercalcemia
1. Clinical signs are due to alterations of cellular membrane permeability and calcium pump
activity causing cellular dysfunction or death. The most affected organs include the central
nervous system (CNS), gastrointestinal system, heart, and kidney.
2. CNS signs range from depression or lethargy to seizures or coma.
 3. Peripheral neuromuscular signs include muscle weakness or wasting, tremors, shivering, stiff
gait, decreased reflexes, or soft tissue calcification.
a. Soft tissue calcification occurs when concurrent hypercalcemia and hyperphosphatemia
'Tp/auoz uen 1ieaa s ieul pnpod shoudsoud weo e un insau
4. Cardiovascular effects may be a direct consequence of hypercalcemia or secondary to tissue
calcification. ECG changes (prolonged PR interval, shortened QT interval) or ventricular
arrhythmias can be seen, and hypertension and vasoconstriction can occur peripherally.
a. Hypercalcemia can cause an increased sensitivity to digitalis.
5. Renal effects from hypercalcemia include polyuria/polydypsia, isosthenuria, azotemia,
decreased renal blood flow, nephrocalcinosis, urolithiasis, or interstitial nephritis. Hypercalcemia
can cause renal damage or it can develop as a consequence of existing renal damage.
6. Gastrointestinal signs associated with hypercalcemia include anorexia, weight loss, vomiting,
diarrhea, constipation, ulceration, and pancreatitis.
iii. Diagnosis of hypercalcemia
1. Hypercalcemia occurs when feline serum total calcium concentrations rise above 10.5 mg/dL
and when iCa concentrations rise above 1.4 mmol/L or 5.6mg/dL.
 2. Additional tests to establish the cause of hypercalcemia may be necessary, such as electrolytes,
 BUN, and creatinine to identify nonneoplastic causes; PTH or PTH-related peptide assays;
imaging of the cervical region, chest, or abdomen; lymph node or bone marrow aspirates; or
measurement of vitamin D metabolites.
iv. Therapy for hypercalcemia (box 34.4)
1. Definitive treatment for hypercalcemia involves treating the underlying cause. Goals of treat-
ment include increasing urinary excretion of calcium, inhibiting bone resorption, and prevent-
ing intestinal absorption.
2. Volume expansion and calciuresis with 0.9% NaCl given intravenously at 100-125 mL/kg/
day is often sufficient to cause a significant decrease in calcium concentrations. For mild eleva-
tions, fluids can be administered subcutaneously at 75-100 mL/kg/day.
Box 34.4. Highlights of therapy for hypercalcemia
1. Correct underlying disease process.
2. Diurese using 0.9% NaCl.
3. Consider furosemide to enhance diuresis and calciuresis.
a. Do not give to hypovolemic or dehydrated cats.
4. Consider glucocorticoids if appropriate.
a. Do not give if concern of neoplasia or infection.
 5. Consider calcitonin if appropriate.
6. Consider sodium bicarbonate if appropriate.
 7. Consider bisphosphonates if appropriate.
 8. Consider antineoplastic agents if appropriate.
 9. Consider peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis in cases of anuric or oliguric renal failure.
Chapter 34  Electrolyte Disorders
453
3. Furosemide {2-4mg/kg PO, SC, IM, or IV q8-12 hr) can be given after adequate volume re-
expansion. Avoid thiazide diuretics because they may result in hypocalciuria and aggravate
hypercalcemia.
4. Glucocorticoids cause inhibition of bone resorption and intestinal absorption and increase
renal excretion. Their use is most effective in hypercalcemia of malignancy, hypervitaminosis
or infection, as administration can make a diagnosis of lymphoma difficult or worsen infec.
tious diseases.
a. Prednisone, 1.0-2.2mg/kg q12-24h PO, SC, IM, or IV
b. Dexamethasone, 0.1-0.22mg/kg q12-24h PO, SC, IM, or IV
5. Calcitonin (4-6IU/kg SC q8-12h) causes inhibition of bone resorption and increases renal
excretion; it is indicated for cholecalciferol toxicity. Its analgesic properties may provide relief
in malignancy.
 a. Calcitonin has a rapid onset and causes moderate decreases in calcium concentrations.
b. If resistance develops, coadminister glucocorticoids or discontinue use for 24-48 hours.
c. Vomiting can occur secondary to calcitonin administration.
d. Since calcitonin is a foreign protein, allergic reactions can occur. Pretreat with Benadryl.
Some clinicians recommend an intradermal test first to check for wheal formation.
 6. Sodium bicarbonate is used for reversal of acidosis. It causes some calcium binding to proteins
and can also directly bind calcium. It can be used in an acute crisis.
a. Bicarbonate dose {mEq) = 0.4 × BW(kg) × {12 - patient's bicarbonate). Give 12 of the
calculated dose over 3-4 hours in IV fluids.
7. Bisphosphonates {etidronate, pamidronate) inhibit bone resorption. They have a slow onset
of action and are indicated for long-term treatment.
a. Etidronate, S-20 mg/kg/day PO divided BID.
b. Pamidronate, 1.3-2.0 mg/kg IV in 0.9% NaCl given over 2 hours; repeat in 1-3 weeks PRN.
8. Antineoplastic agents (plicamycin, gallium nitrate) are used to inhibit bone resorption.
Significant side effects can be associated with their use, and clinical experience for some drugs
is limited in cats.
9. Hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis can be used in patients with renal insufficiency. A low-Ca
dialysate should be used.
10. Calcium channel antagonists (diltiazem, verapamil) protect against cardiac arrhythmias that
hypercalcemia may induce, and they may help to stabilize calcium concentrations.
a. Diltiazem, 0.5-1.5 mg/kg PO q8h.
b. Verapamil, 0.025 mg/kg IV q 10-30min; max. cumulative dose 0.15 mg/kg.
11. Prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors/NSAIDs have been historically used for hypercalcemia of
avoided if the hypercalcemia has resulted in renal damage and worsening of renal function.
12. Diet changes (calcium-restricted, high fiber, alkalinizing) can be implemented for long-term
control.
D. Phosphorus
a. General points
i.Distribution
1. Phosphorus is the most plentiful intracellular anion and is a major component of the phos-
pholipid bilayer of cellular membranes.
2. Approximately 85-90% of the body's phosphorus is present as a structural component of
teeth and bone, as a component of hydroxyapatite.
3. Approximately 1 % of the body's phosphorus is present in extracellular fluid.
ii. Functions of phosphorus
1. Phosphorus is a major component of cellular and extracellular structure, present in cellular
membranes, bone, and teeth.
454
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Two of the most important phosphorus-containing compounds are ATP and 2,3-DPG, neces-
 sary for cellular energy, membrane integrity, and oxygen delivery.
 3. Phosphorus is also necessary for several metabolic processes and secondary messenger systems.
ili. Homeostasis
1. Phosphorus is absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract by passive diffusion, and by active absorp-
tion mediated by calcitriol.
2. The kidney is the primary regulator of phosphate levels.
a. Low phosphorus concentrations stimulate calcitriol production and enhanced rea bsorption
by the kidney.
b. Reabsorption by the kidney is inhibited by PTH, hypercalcemia, calcitonin, cortisol, and
expanded ECF volume.
3. Several factors influence the intracellular or extracellular transport of phosphorus.
a. Entry into cells is stimulated by insulin, glucose, carbohydrates, alkalosis, amino acids,
corticosteroids, sodium bicarbonate, or diuretics.
b. Effux from cells is promoted by glucagon, acidosis, or proteins.
b. Hypophosphatemia
Causes of hypophosphatemia (table 34.9)
1. General mechanisms for hypophosphatemia include intracellular translocation, decreased
inta ke, or increased renal loss.
Table 34.9. Causes of hypophosphatemia.
Intracellular translocation
Insulin administration
Hyperventilation with respiratory alkalosis
CNS disorders
Sepsis
Pain
 Eclampsia and postprandial
Refeeding syndrome/nutrional recovery syndrome
Hyperalimentation
Severe hypothermia
Salicylate toxicity
 Decreased intake/absorption
Vomiting
Starvation
Enteropathies
Intestinal binding agents
 Malabsorption syndromes
Hypovitaminosis D
Increased renal loss
Renal tubular loss
Dialysis
 Drugs promoting urinary excretion 
Corticosteroids
Diureics
Sodium bicarbonate
Hyperparathyroidism
Diabetes mellitus 
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Hyperaldosteronism 
Laboratory error
Mannitol therapy
Chapter 34Electrolyte Disorders
455
ii. Clinical signs of hypophosphatemia
1. Severe hypophosphatemia can affect all blood cell lines, causing hematologic dysfunction.
a. Erythrocyte fragility and hemolysis results from decreased membrane integrity and is most
likely when phosphorus concentrations are <1.0 mg/dL.
b. Leukocyte dysfunction results in leukocyte chemotaxis and phagocytosis.
C. Platelet dysfunction and thrombocytopenia can occur with hypophosphatemia.
2. Skeletal muscle weakness, fasciculations, or pain can occur with hypophosphatemia, and if
severe enough can result in respiratory failure and death. Rha bdomyolysis and myoglobinuria
can occur.
 3. Cardiac muscle dysfunction can occur and results in decreased cardiac contractility and stroke
volume.
4. CNS signs include ataxia, paresthesia, altered mental status, seizures, or coma.
 5. Gastrointestinal signs include intestinal ileus, nausea, or vomiting.
6. With chronic hypophosphatemia, bone demineralization can occur.
ii. Diagnosis of hypophosphatemia
 1. A feline serum phosphorus concentration <2.5 mg/dL indicates hypophosphatemia.
 2. Cats are more susceptible to clinical signs with mild decreases in phosphorus.
 3. Diabetic ketoacidotic patients may have normal or elevated serum phosphorus concentrations
despite total body depletion.
a. Monitor serum phosphorus concentrations 12-24 hours after beginning insulin therapy,
as insulin can cause intracellular translocation of phosphorus.
iv. Therapy for hypophosphatemia
1. Intra venous phosphate replacement, in the form of potassium phosphate solution, is indicated
for feline patients with a serum phosphorus <1.5 mg/dL. (Dose: 0.01-0.03 mmol/kg IV over
6 hours.) It should be administered in calcium-free fluids (0.9% NaCl) and is contraindicated
in oliguric or hypocalcemic patients.
a. Recheck at 6 and 12 hours, and continue constant rate infusion if necessary.
b. Discontinue when serum phosphorus >2.5 mg/dL.
 C. Complications of supplementation include hyperphosphatemia, hypocalcemia, tetanic sei-
zures, soft tissue mineralization, or hypotension.
2. Oral phosphorus (0.5-2.0 mmol/kg/day) is indicated for mild hypophosphatemia or long-term
supplementation.
3. Gradual refeeding of patients with chronic anorexia is recommended to avoid a rebound
hypophosphatemia.
a. Feed 1/s daily caloric requirement on first day, 2/s on second day, then the full amount on
third day (see chap. 9—Nutritional Support for the Critically Ill Feline Patient).
b. Avoid high-carbohydrate diets during refeeding.
E. Magnesium
a. General points
i. Distribution
1. Magnesium is the second most abundant intracellular cation.
2. The vast majority of magnesium is present in bone (60%) and muscle (20%).
 3. Less than 1% of total body magnesium is present in the serum.
4. In the serum, magnesium exists in three distinct forms: a protein-bound fraction (30%), an
anion-complexed fraction (4%), and an ionized fraction (66%).
a. The ionized fraction is believed to be the physiologically active component.
ii.Functions of magnesium
1. Magnesium is required for many cellular metabolic processes, such as those involved in
the production and use of ATP. This electrolyte is a coenzyme for the membrane-bound
sodium-potassium ATPase pump and functions to maintain the sodium-potassium gradient
456
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
across all membranes. Calcium ATPase and proton pumps also require magnesium as a
coenzyme.
2. Magnesium participates in the synthesis and degradation of DNA, the binding of ribosomes
to RNA, and the production on intracellular second messengers such as cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP).
3. Magnesium is involved in the regulation of vascular smooth muscle tone and signal
transduction.
 4. Magnesium also exerts an influence on lymphocyte activation and cytokine production.
ili. Homeostasis
1. Magnesium homeostasis is achieved through intestinal absorption and renal excretion.
a. Magnesium absorption occurs primarily in the small intestine (jejunum and ileum).
b. The kidney is the main regulator of serum magnesium concentration and total body mag-
 nesium content. This is achieved by glomerular filtration and tubular reabsorption.
 2. Lactation also plays a role in gut and renal handling of magnesium. Increased concentrations
of PTH, in addition to calcium concentration, likely play a role in magnesium conservation
during lactation to supply the mammary glands with sufficient magnesium.
 3. No primary regulatory hormone has been identified for magnesium homeostasis, although
 parathyroid, thyroid, and adrenal glands are likely involved.
b. Hypomagnesemia
i.Causes of hypomagnesemia (table 34.10)
1. The causes of magnesium deficiency can be divided into three categories: decreased
intake, increased losses, and redistribution by intracellular translocation, chelation, or
sequestration,
i. Clinical signs of hypomagnesemia
1. Often relate to magnesium's effect on the cell membrane, which results in changes in the
resting membrane potential, signal transduction, and smooth muscle tone. This is most com-
monly manifested as cardiovascular and neuromuscular abnormalities.
2. Cardiovascular signs include arrhythmias comprising atrial fibrillation, supraventricular
tachycardia, premature ventricular contractions, ventricular tachycardia, and ventricular fibril-
platelet aggregation.
3. Magnesium decreases acetylcholine release from nerve terminals and depresses the excitability
of nerve and muscle membranes. This electrolyte also plays a role in muscle contraction and
relaxation by regulating calcium channels. Neuromuscular signs of magnesium deficiency
include muscle weakness (which can be manifested by dysphagia or dyspnea if esophageal or
respiratory muscles are affected respectively), muscle fasciculations, seizures, ataxia, and
coma.
4. Since magnesium is necessary for the movement of sodium, potassium, and calcium into and
out of cells, other manifestations of hypomagnesemia include metabolic abnormalities such
as concurrent hypokalemia (often refractory to potassium supplementation), hyponatremia,
and hypocalcemia.
ii. Diagnosis of hypomagnesemia
1. Determination of serum magnesium concentrations is usually the most readily availa ble tech-
nique for estimation of magnesium status. However, the precise clinical diagnosis of hypo-
magnesemia can be difficult. Since greater than 99% of total body magnesium is located in
the intracellular compartment, serum magnesium concentrations do not always reflect total
body magnesium stores. Therefore, a normal serum magnesium concentration can occur in
the presence of a total body magnesium deficiency. The reported reference range for serum
magnesium in cats is 1.9-2.6 mg/dL. Hypomagnesemia occurs when serum magnesium con-
centrations fall below 1.9 mg/dL
Chapter 34  Electrolyte Disorders
457
Table 34.10.(
 Causes of hypomagnesemia.
Decreased intake
Inadequate nutritional intake
Administration of magnesium-deplete IV fluids
Administration of magnesium-deplete TPN or PPN
Increased losses
Gastrointestinal
 Malabsorption syndromes
Extensive small bowel resection
 Chronic diarrhea
 Inflammatory bowel disease
Cholestatic liver disease
Renal
Intrinsic tubular disorders
Glomerulonephritis
Acute tubular necrosis
Postobstructive diuresis
 Drug-induced tubular injury
Aminoglycosides
Amphotericin B
Carbenicillin
Cisplatin 
Cyclosporine
 Extrarenal factors influencing renal magnesium handling
Diuretic-induced states
Furosemide
Thiazides
 Mannitol
 Digitalis administration
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hyperthyroidism
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
Alterations in distribution
Extracellular to intracellular shifts
Glucose, insulin, or amino acid administration
Chelation
Elevation in circulating catecholamines
Sepsis/shock
Trauma
Hypothermia
 Massive blood transfusion
 Sequestration
 Pancreatitis
2. Measurement of ionized magnesium may provide a more accurate reflection of intracellular
ionized magnesium status. lonized magnesium appears to equilibrate rapidly across the cell
membrane; thus, extracellular ionized magnesium may be reflective of intracellular stores. The
feline reference range for ionized magnesium is 0.43-0.70 mmol/L. Ionized hypomagnesemia
occurs when ionized magnesium concentrations fall below 0.43 mmol/L.
iv. Therapy for hypomagnesemia
1. The amount and route of magnesium replacement depends on both the degree of hypomag-
nesemia and the patient's clinical condition. Mild hypomagnesemia may resolve with treat-
ment of the underlying disorder and modification of intravenous fluid therapy. Animals
458
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
receiving long-term diuretic and/or digoxin therapy may benefit from oral magnesium supple-
mentation. Supplementation should be considered if serum magnesium concentrations are
below 1.5 mg/dL and at higher concentrations if clinical signs (cardiac arrhythmias, muscle
tremors, refractory hypokalemia) are present.
2. Renal function and cardiac conduction should be assessed prior to magnesium administration
Since magnesium is primarily excreted by the kidneys, the dose of magnesium should be
reduced by 50% in azotemic patients and serum concentrations should be monitored to
prevent the development of hypermagnesemia. Magnesium also prolongs the conduction
through the AV node. Patients with cardiac conduction disturbances should have judicious
supplementation of magnesium and continuous ECG monitoring.
 3. Both magnesium sulfate and magnesium chloride are available for parenteral supplementation.
Parenteral administration of magnesium sulfate may result in hypocalcemia due to chelation
mia is already present.
4. The intravenous route is preferred for rapid repletion of magnesium concentrations. (The
intramuscular route is generally painful.)
 5. For rapid repletion of magnesium concentrations, an initial dose of 0.75-1.0 mEq/kg/day can
be administered for the first 24-48 hours by continuous rate infusion in 0.9% NaCl or 5%
dextrose in water. A lower dose of 0.3-0.5 mEq/kg/day can be used for an additional 3-5
days.
6. For the treatment of life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias, a dose of 0.15-0.3mEq/kg of
magnesium diluted in normal saline or 5% dextrose in water can be slowly administered IV
over 5-15 minutes.
 7. Side effects of magnesium therapy include hypotension and atrioventricular and bundle- branch
blocks. Adverse effects are usually associated with intravenous boluses rather than continuous
rate infusions.
C. Hypermagnesemia
i. Causes of hypermagnesemia
1. Renal failure
a. Magnesium excretion decreases as GFR declines. Acute renal failure is more likely to be
associated with hypermagnesemia than chronic renal failure, but it may occur in the latter.
b. Hypermagnesemia has also been reported in cats with urethral obstruction.
2. Endocrinopathies
a. Hyperparathyroidism
b. Hypoa drenocorticism
c. Hypothyroidism
d. These diseases are rare in cats and cause hypermagnesemia less frequently and to a milder
degree than other causes of hypermagnesemia. The mechanisms that lead to hypermagne-
semia are not well understood in these endocrine disorders.
3. Iatrogenic overdose of magnesium
a. Improper dosing of magnesium replacement therapy or lack of consideration of the
underlying renal function generally plays a role in the development of iatrogenic
hypermagnesemia.
b. Many cathartics, laxatives, and antacids contain magnesium, and care should be exercised
if multiple doses are given to a patient with underlying renal disease.
ii. Clinical signs of hypermagnesemia
1. Nonspecific clinical signs may include:
a. Lethargy, depression, and weakness
 2. Neuromuscular signs include:
a. Hyporeflexia and flaccid paralysis
Chapter 34 Electrolyte Disorders
459
b. Profound magnesium toxicity has been associated with respiratory depression secondary
to respiratory muscle paralysis. Severe respiratory depression can result in hypoventilation
and subsequent hypoxemia.
C. Dull mentation, absent menace and palpebral reflex
3. Cardiovascular effects include:
a. Hypotension secondary to relaxation of vascular resistance vessels
b. Bradycardia, complete heart block, and asystole
c. Hypothermia
ii. Diagnosis of hypermagnesemia
1. Hypermagnesemia occurs when feline serum magnesium concentrations rise above 2.6 mg/dL
Ionized hypermagnesemia occurs when ionized magnesium concentrations rise above
0.70 mmol/L.
 2. Unlike magnesium deficiency, serum concentrations cannot hide increased magnesium stores.
iv. Therapy for hypermagnesemia (box 34.5)
1. Correct underlying problem.
2. Stop all exogenous magnesium administration.
3. Diurese using 0.9% NaCl at 2-4 mL/kg/hr IV.
a. Consider peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis in patients with severely impaired renal
function.
4. Furosemide, 1-4 mg/kg q8-12h, PO, SC, IM, or IV to increase renal magnesium excretion.
a. Do not use in a dehydrated or hypotensive patient.
Box 34.5. Highlights of therapy for hypermagnesemia.
1. Correct underlying disease process.
2. Stop all exogenous magnesium therapy.
3. Diurese using 0.9% NaCl.
 4. Consider furosemide to enhance renal magnesium excretion.
a. Do not give to hypovolemic or dehydrated cats.
5. Consider calcium gluconate to reverse the cardiotoxic effects of hypermagnesemia.
 6. Consider physostigmine to reverse the neurotoxic effects of hypermagnesemia.
7. Intubate and provide positive pressure ventilation and/or vasopressor therapy in severe cases.
Electrolyte disorders: Algorithmic overview
 Suspicion of an electrolyte abnormality.
个
Confirm electrolyte abnormality by appropriate diagnostic method.
个
Institute emergency therapy.
个
Determine etiology of electrolyte abnormality.
个
Correct underlying disease process.
Fig. 34.1. Electrolyte disorders: algorihmic overview.
Table 34.11. Drug toble.
Routes of
Contraindications or
Administration and 
 General
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
Precautions
Doses
Uses
Calcitonin
Hormone
Inhibits
Vomiting, diarrhea,
Caution in young animals 
4-61U/kg SC q8-12h
Adjunctive therapy for
osteoclastic
anorexia, allergic
hypercalcemia
resorption
reaction/anaphylaxis
Calcitriol
Vitamin D analog
Promote Gl
Hypercalcemia,
Hypercalcemia, vitamin D
2.5-3.5ng/kg PO q24h
Hypocalcemia from
(hormone)
absorption,
rephrocalcinosis,
 toxicity, malabsorption
hypoparathyroidism
renal
hyperphosphatemia
syndrome; caution with
 or renal disease
reabsorption,
hyperphosphatemia
and bone
resorption of
calcium
Calcium
Calcium salt
Increase
Hypercalcemia, if in
Hypercalcemia, ventricular
25-50 mg/kg/day
Hypocalcemia
carbonate
extracellular
 combination with
fibrillation; caution with
divided BID-QID on
calcium
vitamin D or
digitalis
the basis of elemental
increased PTH
calcium content
Calcium chloride
 Calcium salt
Increase
Hypercalcemia, vascular
Hypercalcemia, ventricular
50-300mg/cat IV
Hypocalcemia
extracellular
 irritation; hypotension,
fibrillation; caution with
slowlyover
calcium
arrhythmias, arrest if
digitalis, cardiac or renal
10-30min
rapid administration 
disease, respiratory
acidosis or failure
Calcium gluconate  Calcium salt 
Increase
Hypercalcemia, vascular 
 Hypercalcemia, ventricular
50-150mg/kg IV slowly
y Hyperkalemic crisis,
extracellular
irritation; hypotension,
fibrillation; caution with
over 5-30 minutes;
correction of
calcium,
 arrhythmias, arrest if
 concurrent digitalis use,
60-90 mg/kg/day IV
hypocalcemia,
normalize
rapid administration
cardiac or renal disease
CRI for refractory
decrease
cardiac
hypocalcemia
cardiotoxic
 membrane
effects of
excitability
hypermagnesemia
Dexamethasone
Glucocorticoid
Muliple
Symptoms of
Systemic fungal infections;
0.1-0.22 mg/kg PO,
 Hypercalcemia
 mechanisms
hyperadrenocorticism,
will complicate diagnosis 
SC, IM, IV q12-24h
Gl ulceration, growth
of lymphoma
retardation of young
animals
Dibydrotachysterol  Vitamin D
Promote Gl
Hypercalcemia,
Hypercalcemia, vitamin D
0.03 mg/kg/day PO
Hypocalcemia from
analog
absorption,
nephrocalcinosis,
toxicity, malabsorption
divided BID for 2-5
hypoparathyroidism
(hormone)
renal
hyperphosphatemia
syndrome; caution with
days, then 0.01 mg/
or renal disease
reabsorption,
hyperphosphatemia
kg/day divided BID
and bone
resorption of
calcium
Diltiazem
Calcium-channel
Inhibit influx of
Bradycardia, Gl distress, 上
Hypotension, sick sinus
0.5-1.5mg/kg PO q8h;H
Hypercalcemia-
blocker
extracellular
hypotension, heart
syndrome, AV block;
for acute management
cardioprotective
calcium
bock, CNS effects
 caution in heart failure,
0.125-0.35 mg/kg IV
hepatic and renal 
impairment
Ergocalciferol
Vitamin D analog
Promote Gl
Hypercalcemia,
Hypercalcemia, yitamin D
4,000-6,000U/kg/day
Hypocalcemia from
(hormone)
absorption,
nephrocalcinosis,
 toxicity, malabsorption 
PO, then 1,000-
hypoparathyroidism
renal
hyperphosphatemia
syndrome; caution with
2,000u/kg/day once
or renal disease
reabsorption,
hyperphosphatemia
daily to once weekly
and bone
PO
resorption of
calcium
Etidronate
Bisphosphonate
Inhibit osteoclastic
Diarrhea, nausea, bone 
 Impaired renal function;
5-20 mg/kg/day PO
Adjunctive therapy for
resorption
pain
caution with bone
divided BID
hypercalcemia
fractures, enterocolitis,
cardiac failure
Furosemide
Loop diuretic
Increase renal
 Electrolyte abnormalities
 Dehydration, hypotension,
Aftervolume
Hypercalcemia,
excretion of
 due to renal loss,
 preexisting electrolyte
reexpansion, 1-4 mg/
hypermagnesemia
magnesium and
dehydration,
imbalances, hepatic
kg PO, SC, IM, or IV
calcium
dtotoxicity, Gl
 dysfunction, diabetes
q8-24h
disturbances,
mellitus
weakness
Magnesium
 Magnesium salt 
Increase
Usually the result of
Caution with heart block
Rapid repletion: 0.75-
Hypomagnesemia
chloride
extracellular
Overdose.
gnd impaired renal 
1 mEq/kg/day for 1st
magnesium
Hypermagnesemia,
function 
24-48 hrs; slow
hypotension,
repletion: 0.3-
bradycardia,
0.5 mEq/kg/day for
yomiting, weakness,
3-5 days; life-
respiratory
threatening ventricular
depression, CNS
arrhythmias: 0.15-
depression,
0.3mEq/kg over
hyporeflexia
5-15 minutes. Dilute
in 0.9% NaCl or 5%
dextrose in water.
 Table 34.11.
Confinved.
Routes of
 Contraindications or
Administration and 
General
Drugs
Classes
MOAs
Side Effects
Precautions
Doses
Uses
 Magnesium
 Magnesium salt
Increase
 See magnesium
 See magnesium chloride.
 See magnesium
Hypomagnesemia
sulfate
extracellular
chloride.
 Hypocalcemia
chloride.
magnesium
Hypocalcemia 
 Pamidronate
Bisphosphonate
Inhibit osteoclastic
Nephrotoxicity
Hypomagnesemia,
1.3-2.0mg/kg IV in
Adjunctive therapy for
resorption
 arrhythmias, impaired
0.9% NaCl given over
hypercalcemia
renal function, anemia,
 2hrs; repeat in
thrombocytopenia
1-3wks PRN
Physostigmine
Anticholinesterase Reverses
Vomiting, nausea,
Epilepsy/seizures,
0.02 mg/kg IV q12h
 Decrease neurotoxic
anticholinergic
miosis, salivation,
bradycardia,
effects of
effects or agents
sweating, lacrimation,
tachycardia, asthma,
hypermagnesemia
bronchospasm,
diabetes mellitus,
 dyspnea, pulmonary
 cardiovascular disease,
edema, respiratory
gastrointestinal or
paralysis, irregular
urinary obstruction
pulse, bradycardia or
tachycardia,
hypotension or
hypertension,
restlessness,
weakness, muscle
twitching, seizures,
 collpse, paralysis
 Plicamycin
Antineoplastic
Inhibit osteoclastic
Gl, thrombocytopenia,
 Impaired renal function
25 μg/kg IV in 5%
 Hypercalcemia
[Mithramycin)
resorption
hepatotoxicity,
dextrose in water over
nephrotoxicity
2-4hrs
Potassium chloride Potassium salt 
Increase
Hyperkalemia, vascular 
 Hyperkalemia, renal 
If IV, do not exceed
Hypokalemia
(2 mEq/mL)
extracellular
irritation
impairment, hemolytic
0.5mEq/kg/hr. If SC,
treatment or
potassium
reactions, acute
db not exceed
prevention
dehydration, digitalized
30mEq/L.
patients
Potassium
 Potassium salt
Increase
Hyperkalemia, Gl 
Hyperkalemia, renal
5-8mEq/cat/day PO
Hypokalemia 
 gluconate
 extracellular
irritation
impairment, hemolytic
divided BID or TID
treatment or
potassium
reactions, acute
initially, then 
prevention
 dehydration, digitalized
2-4mEq/cat/day
patients
maintenance
Potassium
 Potassium salt
Increase
Hyperkalemia, vascular
Hyperkalemia, renal
For potassium
Hypokalemia
Phosphate
extracellular
irritation,
impairment, hemolytic
supplementation: If IV,
treatment or
[4.36mEq/ml]
potassium
 hyperphosphatemia,
reactions, acute
do not exceed
prevention,
hypocalcemia,
dehydration, digitalized
 0.5 mEq/kg/hr. If SC,
hypophosphatemia
hypotension, renal
patients,
do not exceed
treatment
failure, sof tissue
hyperphosphatemia,
30mEq/L.
mineralization,
hypocalcemia, oliguric
For phosphorus 
seizures
or anuric renal failure,
supplementation:
tissue necrosis
0.01-0.03mmol/kg
V over 6 hours in
calcium-free fluids
 Prednisone/
Glucocorticoid
Muliple
 Symptoms of
Systemic fungal infections,
1.0-2.2 mg/kg PO, SC,
Hypercalcemia
 prednisolone
mechanisms
 hyperadrenocorticism,
Will complicate
IM, IV q12-24h
 Gl ulceration, growth
diagnosis of lymphoma
retardation of young
animals
 Regular insulin
Endocrine
Facilitates
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia
0.25-1.0U/kg diluted
Hyperkalemic crisis
pancreatic
intracellular
in IV fluids containing
hormone
nutrient uptake
dextrose (2g/U
insulin!
Sodium
Alkalinizing agent  Extracellular
Metabolic alkalosis,
Alkalosis, hypochloremia,
For hyperkalemic crisis:
Hyperkalemic crisis,
bicarbonate
buffer, calcium
hypokalemia,
hypocalcemia; caution in
1-2mg/kg IV slowly.
metabolic acidosis,
binding
hypocalcemia,
CHF, volume overload,
For metabolic acidosis
hypercalcemia
hypernatremia,
nephrotic syndrome,
or hypercalcemia:
volume overload,
oliguria, hypertension
Bicarbonate dose
decreased
(mEq) = 0.4 x BW
oxygenation
(kg] × {12 - patient's
bicarbonate]. Give /2
of the calculated dose
over 3-4 hours in IV
Hluids.
Verapamil
 Calcium-channel
Inhibit influx of
Hypotension, brady/
Hypotension, sick sinus
0.025mg/kg IV q
Hypercalcemia-
blocker
extracellular
tachycardia, AV
syndrome, AV block;
10-30min;max
 cardioprotective
calcium
 block, worsening of
caution in heart failure,
cumulative dose
CHF, nausea,
hepatic and renal
0.15mg/kg
constipation
impairment
464
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
5. Calcium gluconate, 50-100 mg/kg IV over 10 minutes
a. Direct antagonist of magnesium at the neuromuscular junction
b. May be beneficial in reversing the cardiotoxic side effects of hypermagnesemia
6. Physostigmine, 0.02 mg/kg q12h IV
a. May offset the neurotoxic side effects of hypermagnesemia.
 7. Severe cases may require intubation, positive pressure ventilation, and vasopressor therapy to
maintain blood pressure.
Recommended Reading
Adams LG, Hardy RM, Weiss DJ, Bartges JW. Hypophosphatemia and hemolytic anemia associated with
diabetes mellitus and hepatic lipidosis in cats. J Vet Int Med, 1993; 7(5):266-271.
Bateman S. Disorders of magnesium: magnesium deficit and excess. In DiBartola SP, ed, Fluid, Electrolyte,
and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, pp 210-226. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2006.
Bruskiewicz KA, Nelson RW, Feldman EC, Griffey SM. Diabetic ketosis and ketoacidosis in cats: 42 cases
{1980-1995). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1997; 211{2):188-192.
 Ai Aa h s 's   'a eg u a is N ea
pp 132-133. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1995.
Dhupa N, Proulx J. Hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract, 1998;
28(3):587-598
DiBartola SP. Disorders of sodium and water: hypernatremia and hyponatremia. In DiBartola SP, ed, Fluid,
Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, pp 47-79. St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier,
2006.
 DiBartola SP, Morais HA de. Disorders of potassium: hypokalemia and hyperkalemia. In DiBartola SP, ed,
Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, pp 91-121. St. Louis: Saunders
Elsevier, 2006.
DiBartola SP, Willard MD. Disorders of phosphorus: hypophosphatemia and hyperphosphatemia. In
DiBartola SP, ed, Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, pp 195-209. St.
Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2006.
 Drobatz KJ, Hughes D. Concentration of ionized calcium in plasma from cats with urethral obstruction.
J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1997; 211{11):1392-1395.
Hackett T. Endocrine and metabolic emergencies. In King L, Hammond R, eds, Manual of Canine and
Feline Emergency and Critical Care, pp 177-189. Shurdington, Cheltenham, United Kingdom: British
Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1999.
 Jackson CB, Drobatz KJ. Iatrogenic magnesium overdose: 2 case reports. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2004;
14(2):115-123.
 Justin RB, Hohenhaus AE. Hypophosphatemia associated with enteral alimentation in cats. J Vet Int Med,
1995; 9(4):228-233.
Kimmel SE, Washabau RJ, Drobatz KJ. Incidence and prognostic value of low plasma ionized calcium
concentration in cats with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases (1996-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2001;
219(8):1105-1109.
Macintire DK, Drobatz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD. Endocrine and metabolic emergencies. In Manual of
 Small Animal Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, pp 296-333. Philadelphia: Lippincott Wiliams
and Wilkins, 2005.
Manning AM. Electrolyte disorders. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract, 2001; 31(6):1289-1321.
28(3):565-585.
Martin LG, Matteson VL, Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR, Hackett TB. Abnormalities of serum magnesium
in critica lly ill dogs: incidence and implications. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 1994; 4f1 ):15-20.
Chapter 34Electrolyte Disorders
465
                
RW, eds, Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl, pp 128-131. Philadelphia: WB. Saunders, 1995.
Martin LG, Wingfield WE, Van Pelt DR, Hackett TB. Magnesium in the 1990's: implications for veterinary
critical care. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 1993; 3(2):105-114.
Norris CR, Nelson RW, Christopher MM. Serum total and ionized magnesium concentrations and urinary
fractional excretion of magnesium in cats with diabetes mellitus and diabetic ketoacidosis. J Am Vet Med
Assoc, 1999; 215(10):1455-1459.
 Phillips SL, Polzin DJ. Clinical disorders of potassium homeostasis. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract,
1998; 28(3):545-563.
Schenck PA, Chew DJ. Understanding recent developments in hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia.
 Proceedings of the 23rd American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum, 2005; 23:666-668.
    s o sa   a  a   
DiBartola SP, ed, Fluid, Electrolyte, and Acid-Base Disorders in Small Animal Practice, pp 122-194.
St. Louis: Saunders Elsevier, 2006.
Toll J, Erb H, Birnbaum N, Schermerhorm T. Prevalence and incidence of serum magnesium abnormalities
in hospitalized cats. J Vet Int Med, 2002; 16(3):217-221.
recipients. Vet Surg, 1999; 28(1):31-37.
35
REPRODUCTIVE EMERGENCIES
Page E. Yaxley and L. Ari Jutkowitz
Unique Features
· Cats are seasonally polyestrous, induced ovulators.
· A working knowledge of normal parturition is essential to recognition of dystocia.
· Uterine prolapse generally results from severe straining during or post parturiation.
● Uterine torsion is rare in cats but should be suspected in cases of dystocia with persistent severe
straining.
+Endometritis,
d     a i  
complications.
● Pyometra may be successfully managed medically or surgically, but ovariohysterectomy is the treat-
ment of choice.
A. Normal feline reproduction
a. Seasonally polyestrous
i. Normal breeding season is February through October in the Northern Hemisphere.
1. Heat cycles are typically repeated unless interrupted by pregnancy, pseudopregnancy,
or illness.
 2. Queens can produce two litters per season.
b. Estrous cycle
i. Proestrus
1. 1-2 days in length
2. Ovarian follicles increase in size.
 3. Estrogen is dominant hormone produced.
 4. Queens attract males but are unreceptive to copulation.
ii. Estrus {box 35.1)
1. 3-16 days (average 7 days) in length
2. Estrogen levels increase due to follicular growth and maturation.
3. Females become receptive to males and sexual beha viors are noted (see box 35.1).
4. Cats are induced ovulators.
a. Only ovulate in response to mating
ili. Interestrus
1. 1-2 weeks (8 days average)
2. Follicles from previous estrogen wave regress.
467
468
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 35.1. Signs of estrus.
Vocalization
Affectionate, rolling behavior
Lordosis (elevation of hindquarters while in sternal recumbency)
3. No copulation occurs during this time.
4. Low estrogen, low progesterone levels
5. Ends when a new follicular wave starts
iv. Diestrus
1. Uterus is prepared for implantation of fertilied ovum.
2. Progesterone is released from corpus luteum.
3. Pseudopregnancy
a. Queen ovulated but failed to become pregnant.
b. Triggers 35-45-day period of luteal activity
C. May be clinically inapparent
4. Pregnancy
a. Gestation is approximately 63-67 days.
b. Queens can have two litters per season.
V.
 Seasonal anestrus
1. Reproductive quiescence with onset in late fall through winter
2. Females do not exhibit sexual beha vior or attraction of males.
B.1
 Pregnancy diagnosis
a. History of breeding
b. Abdominal palpation
i. Fetuses are first palpable at approximately 21-28 days.
c. Abdominal radiographs
i.Mineralization of the feline fetus at 45 days allows for skeletal detection on radiographs.
ii. Most useful for assessment of fetal numbers and position
d. Ultrasonography
i.
Gestational sacs visible by 11 days, fetal poles by 15 days
ii. Fetal heart rate detectable at 23-26 days
ii. Useful for assessment of fetal viability
iv. Assessment of fetal numbers may be inaccurate due to miscounting.
C.1
 Normal parturition
a. Stage 1 labor (box 35.2)
i.
 May be preceded by a drop in rectal temperature 12 hours prior to parturition, though this
finding is unreliable in queens
ii.
 Lasts approximately 2-12 hours
Box 35.2.
 Signs of stage l labor.
Voca lization
Restlessness
Tachypnea
Nesting
Purring
 Milk secretion from developed mammary glands
Chapter 35 Reproductive Emergencies
469
ili.  Subclinical uterine contractions and progressive dilation of cervix
b. Stage 2 labor
i.
Average 2-6 hours but can be up to 24-42 hours
ii.
 Rapid abdominal contractions
iii.
 First fetal delivery usually occurs 1-2 hours after onset of stage 2 labor.
iv.
Generally there is less than 30 minutes between births of kittens.
V.
Queens will nurse while continuing parturition.
vi.
Presentation
1. Anterior
a. Head, neck, and forelimbs extended through canal
2. Posterior
a. Rear limbs extended through canal
b. Up to 40% of kittens born in this position
vii. Queens can stop parturition for 12-24 hours
1. Queens will shut down labor if they feel threatened.
vifl. Lochia (presence of greenish vaginal discharge) can be present shortly before the onset of stage
 2 labor and is suggestive of placental separation.
c. Stage 3 labor
i.
 Period of placental expulsion
1. This follows fetal delivery closely in the queen.
11.
The placenta is frequently attached to fetus by umbilical cord
iii.
 Placental expulsion within 15 minutes of each kitten
1. Alternate delivery between uterine horns allows for two placental deliveries after two kittens
are delivered.
iv.
Queens remove amniotic membranes and placenta from the kittens by licking and chewing
1. Ingestion of too many placentas can lead to vomiting or black, watery diarrhea.
V.
Queens lick and clean the kitten, stimulating normal respiration.
i.
 Discharge can become darker brown and slowly decrease over 4-6 weeks as uterine involution
takes place.
D. Dystocia
a. Inability to expel fetuses through the birth canal during parturition
b. Maternal factors leading to dystocia:
i. Uterine inertia is the most common cause of dystocia (box 35.3)
1. Complete uterine inertia
a. Gestation that has exceeded 67 days post suspected breeding date with no progression to
active labor
2. Partial uterine inertia
a. Parturition is initiated with subsequent failure to deliver all fetuses.
3. Secondary uterine inertia
a. Prolonged attempts to expel an obstructed fetus result in myometrial failure that persists
following relief of obstruction.
i.  Morphologic (obstructive) factors
1. Primary morphologic factors
a. The birth canal is too small to pass a fetus of normal size for the breed.
i.Brachycephalic breeds
2. Secondary morphologic factors
a. Abnormal influence within or upon birth canal
i. Previous pelvic fractures
i.  Pelvic canal neoplasia
470
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 35.3.F
Factors associated with uterine inertia.
Myometrial fatigue
Hypoglycemia
 Calcium/magnesium imbala nce
Old age of queen
Obesity of queen
Hereditary factors
Stress or environmental disturbances
Ina dequate oxytocin secretion
Prematurity
Uterine overdistension
Large litter size
Large fetus size
Uterine underdistension
Small litter size
Inadequate fetal fluids
 Estrogen/progesterone imbalance
Fig. 35.1.
Uterine rupture with intra-abdominal fetuses in a queen.
ili. Uterine torsion
iv. Uterine rupture (see fig. 35.1)
 Uterine prolapse
vi. Fibrosis of uterus, cervix, or vagina
vi. Vaginal septum
c. Fetal factors leading to dystocia
i.Malpresentation (Box 35.4)
1. Second most common cause for dystocia
ii. Oversize
1. Uncommon in cats
2. Single, large fetus
Chapter 35 Reproductive Emergencies
471
Box 35.4.
Common malpresentations.
Transverse
Lateral or ventral flexion of neck
Anterior presentation with flexion of one or both forelimbs
Posterior presentation with retention of both hind limbs
Simultaneous presentation of two fetuses
Fig. 35.2. Fetal duplication in a cat presenting with obstructive dystocia
iii. Fetal malformation
1. Anasarca (generalized subcutaneous edema)
2. Hydrocephalus
3. Cerebral or cerebrospinal hernias
4. Abdominal hernias
5. Duplication (fig. 35.2)
6. Rib cage malformations (Pectus Excavatum)
iv. Fetal death
 1. Increases the likelihood of malpresentation because of failure to posture normally
d. Diagnosis of dystocia
i.Obtain an accurate breeding history (box 35.5).
i.  Perform a thorough physical exam.
1. Rule out systemic illness.
 2. Abdominal palpation
a. Assess the size and tone of uterus.
b. Estimate the number of remaining fetuses.
c. Evaluate for presence of fetus in birth canal.
3. Vaginal exam
a. Use a sterile glove, well lubricated with sterile lubricant.
b. Determine:
i.
 Vaginal or cervical abnormalities
472
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 35.5. Taking α good reproductive history.
 Previous queening history
Earliest and latest breeding dates
Male animal used
Time of temperature drop
Time of onset of parturition
Frequency and intensity of expulsive efforts
Number and viability of kittens already delivered
Interventions utilized
Box 35.6. Radiographic hindings associated with fetal death.
Intrafetal gas patterns
Hyperextension of extremities (rigor mortis)
Collapse of spinal column due to loss of muscular support
Overlapping bones of fetal skull
Accumulation of intrauterine gas
1. Finger should pass easily on digital exam.
2. Due to patient size, digital exam may not be possible.
ii. Fetal presentation
iii. Fetal viability
c. Gentle stroking {feathering) of dorsal vaginal wall stimulates contractions {Ferguson
reflex).
i. Allows assessment of contraction strength
ii. Rule out underlying systemic causes.
1. Measure blood glucose and calcium levels.
iv. Obtain radiographs for:
1. Rapid, accurate assessment of number, size, location, and position of fetuses
2. Detection of maternal pelvic a bnormalities
3. Assessment of fetal viability (box 35.6)
v.  Abdominal ultrasound
1. More useful than radiographs for assessing fetal viability, fetal malformations, fetal distress
2. Average normal fetal heart rate is 228 +/- 35 bpm in the cat.
 3. Deceleration of heartbeat to less than 1 80 bpm or the presence of fetal bowel movements on
ultrasound indicate fetal distress and necessitate rapid intervention.
e. Medical management of dystocia
i. If a fetus is lodged in the birth canal, digital manipulation is recommended.
1. Use copious amounts of sterile lubricant.
2. Apply digitally or infuse around fetus with a red rubber catheter and syringe.
3. Grasp fetus around the head and neck, or pelvis, or proximal portions of hind limbs.
a. Be careful not to exert too much traction.
b. Fetal limbs are easily torn or damaged.
 4. Apply gentle traction posterior-ventral with queen standing.
5. Rock fetus back and fourth and twist diagonally to free shoulders and hips locked in the
pelvic canal.
ii. For nonobstructive dystocia
Chapter 35  Reproductive Emergencies
473
1. Oxytocin
a. Increases the frequency and strength of uterine contraction by promoting the influx of
calcium into myometrial cells
b. Dose: 0.5-1 units IM in the cat
c. May be repeated every 30 minutes as needed for expulsion of fetuses
i. If two doses have not resulted in production of fetus, surgical intervention is
warranted.
d. Contraindicated in obstructive dystocia and uterine inertia secondary to overstretching
e. Although higher oxytocin doses have been previously recommended, these can cause inef-
fective or tetanic uterine contraction and lead to decreased fetal blood flow.
2. Calcium gluconate
a. Enhances uterine tone through influx of calcium
b. Used when contractions are weak or infrequent, if initial oxytocin dose was nonproduc-
tive, or if laboratory results reveal hypocalcemia
c. Dose: calcium gluconate 10% solution
i. 0.5-1.5 mL/kg IV slowly
d. Monitor ECG for arrhythmias.
3. Dextrose
a. Should be considered when laboratory results reveal hypoglycemia
b. Dose: dextrose 50% solution, 0.5-1 mL/kg IV or 2 mL/kg PO
4. Failure of the queen to clean kittens should prompt human intervention.
a. Remove amnion by cleaning carefully with a soft dry towel.
 b. Remove fluid from nasal passage with a bulb syringe.
c. Clamp, transect, and ligate umbilicus approximately 1-2 cm from the newborn's body.
 d. Disinfect the umbilical stump with iodine to prevent infection.
iii. Prognosis
1. 29-40% successful for vaginal delivery following dystocia in cats
2. Stillbirth rates rise when dystocia continues for 4.5-6 hours from the onset of stage 2 labor.
 3. Caesarian section should therefore not be delayed.
f. Surgical management (box 35.7)
i. Preanesthetic considerations
1. Provide intra venous fluid therapy as needed to prevent or correct hypovolemia.
2. Perform CBC and serum biochemistry to assess maternal status.
3. Minimize fetal drug exposure by avoiding premedications.
Box 35.7. Indications for C-section.
Complete primary uterine inertia
 Partial primary or secondary uterine inertia with poor response to medical therapy
Fetal oversize
Gross maternal pelvic abnormalities
 Fetal malformations
Malpresentation not amena ble to manipulation
 Past history of dystocia or caesarian section
 Fetal putrefaction
Maternal systemic illness
Suspicion of uterine torsion, rupture, prolapse, or herniation
Evidence of fetal distress
474
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 35.8.
 Drugs associated with higher mortality.
Thiopental
Ketamine
Xylazine
Medetomidine
Methoxyflurane
5. Preoxygenate via mask for 3-5 minutes
ii.Anesthetic considerations (box 35.8)
1. Equipment and personnel (surgical team) should be ready prior to induction.
2. Induction agents should be given to effect.
a. Choose drugs with a short duration of action or drugs that can be reversed.
i. Propofol 46 mg/kg IV to effect, or
ii. Mask induction with isoflurane or sevoflurane
b. Use the lowest possible concentration of inhalant.
i. Inhalant anesthetics can cause vasodilation and reduction of uterine blood flow,
lea ding to neonatal depression.
3. Protect the maternal airway.
 a. Delayed gastric emptying results in an increased risk of aspiration pneumonia in gravid
animals.
b. The use of cuffed endotracheal tubes is recommended.
C. Do not tilt the table head downward as this may cause undue pressure on the diaphragm
 and impair ventilation.
4. Regional anesthetic techniques
a. Useful for limiting fetal exposure by decreasing maternal anesthetic requirements
b. Line block
i. Lidocaine 2%, 1-2mg/kg infused along the midline
ii. Cats may be more sensitive to lidocaine.
iil. Minimal effect on fetus
C. Alternatively epidural anesthesia
i. Lidocaine: 2-3 mg/kg
1. Preferable to bupivicaine because of a more rapid time of onset and shorter dura-
tion of action
iii. Surgical techniques
1. General considerations
a. The linea alba will be much thinner due to abdominal stretching, and care should be taken
to avoid incising the underlying uterus or bladder.
b. Avoid incision of mammary tissue.
C. Caesarian section or en-bloc hysterectomy (see 3) may be utilized.
d. En-bloc hysterectomy has comparable neonatal survival rates to C-section and will not
interfere with lactation.
2. Hysterotomy (Caesarian section)
a. Make a ventral midline incision.
b. Exteriorize the uterus.
 C. Pack off the abdominal cavity with moistened laparotomy sponges to minimize contamina-
tion from fetal fluids.
Chapter 35 Reproductive Emergencies
475
Box 35.9. Consider en-bloc ovariohysterectomy if:
Uterine disease is present
Speed is necessary due to instability of queen
Morphological abnormalities prevent vaginal delivery of further litters
Owner does not plan to breed animal again
d. Create a single, longitudinal incision in an avascular area of uterine body with a scalpel.
This incision can be opened further with scissors if needed to prevent incision of fetus.
e. Milk fetuses down each uterine horn and remove one at a time.
f. Handle the umbilicus carefully to prevent body wall tearing.
g. Once all fetuses are removed, the uterus is closed with a double layer continuous inverting
suture pattern using absorbable monofilament suture material.
h. Copious lavage of abdominal cavity with warmed sterile saline should be performed to
remove any fetal fluids.
i. Close abdominal wall and skin routinely.
j. Nonabsorbable monofilament suture should be used in the skin to prevent wicking and
breakdown from nursing neonates.
3. En-bloc ovariohysterectomy (box 35.9)
a. Make a ventral midline incision.
b. Exteriorize the uterus.
c. Gently manipulate intracervical or vaginal fetuses back into uterus.
d. Break down the suspensory ligaments on both sides prior to placing clamps to minimize
the duration of fetal hypoxia.
e. Place double clamps on the body of the uterus just cranial to cervix and across each ovarian
pedicle.
f. Remove the entire uterus by incising between the clamps.
i. The uterus is rapidly handed off to a team of assistants prepared for neonatal
resuscitation.
ii. Resuscitation of fetuses should be performed within 60 seconds of clamping pedicles
to prevent fetal hypoxia and maximize survival.
g. Double ligate the ovarian and uterine pedicles and perform routine abdominal closure.
E. Neonatal resuscitation
a. Preparedness
i.Have ready a warmed incubator (90°F), hemostats, suture material, suction bulb syringes, emer
gency drugs, and an adequate supply of soft dry towels.
b. Clamp the umbilical cord 1-2cm away from body wall and ligate.
C. Address hypothermia.
i.Fetal fluids should be removed by rubbing briskly with a soft, dry, clean towel.
ii. Radiant heat and warmed air maintain body temperature better than circulating water
blankets.
1. Use a warmed and humidified incubator or warm air blanket.
2. Use prewarmed towels.
d. Stimulate ventilation.
i.Suction oral cavity and nares with a bulb syringe.
ii. Avoid "swinging" kittens as this increases the risk for cerebral hemorrhage.
ii. If vigorous rubbing fails to stimulate respirations, positive pressure ventilation using a snug-
fitting oxygen mask should be instituted.
476
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Because isoflurane is not metabolized, ventilation is necessary to eliminate the anesthetic gas
from the body.
 2. Keep head and neck extended to facilitate lung inflation.
 3. Patients should be carefully monitored for gastric distention as this technique may result in
gastric insufflation.
iv. Intubation may also be performed using a red rubber catheter or small uncuffed endotracheal
tube.
v.  Jen Chung Acupuncture (GV 26) has been reported to stimulate respiration.
1. For adjunctive use only—should not replace traditional therapy
2. Insert 25-gauge needle in nasal philtrum at base of nares.
 3. When bone is contacted, rotate needle to stimulate respiratory center.
e. Cardiac massage
i. Institute cardiac massage if no heartbeat is detected, once rubbing, warming, and ventilatory
measures have been started.
1. Goal is approximately 200 bpm, compressing the chest by approximately 33%
f. Routes of fuid and drug administration
i.Intravenous
1. Difficult to access—jugular or umbilical veins preferred
ii. Intraosseous
1. A 22-25-gauge needle can be inserted into proximal femur for administration of drugs and
fluids.
ili. Endotracheal
1. For administration of:
a. Atropine, epinephrine, lidocaine, naloxone
 2. Drugs should be diluted to increase the area of mucosal contact and improve uptake.
g. Resuscitation drugs
i.Atropine
1. Atropine may cause increased myocardial oxygen demand and is therefore not routinely
recommended in the hypoxic neonate.
ii. Epinephrine
1. Drug of choice for neonatal resuscitation
 2. 0.02-0.2 mg/kg administered IV, IO, IT if warming, ventilating, and chest compressions are
not effective
ili. Naloxone
1. Consider if queen received opioid anesthesia
a. Dose: 0.1 mg/kg IV, IM, or sublingual
iv.Doxapram
1. Once thought to aid in respiratory stimulation
 2. No longer recommended due to lack of evidence to support its use
 3. May significantly decrease cerebral blood flow in vulnerable hypoxemic newborns
v.50% dextrose
1. If clinical signs of hypoglycemia are noted or suspected
a. Seizures
b. Flaccidity
c. Weakness
d. Coma
 2. Doses: 0.25-1 mL/kg IV (dilute if given peripherally), 2mL/kg PO
h. Fluid therapy
i. Preferred method IO or IV
ii.Warm fluids to 37°C (96.8°F)
Chapter 35Reproductive Emergencies
477
Fig. 35.3. Uerine prolapse in a postpartum queen.
ili. Rate dependent on severity of fluid deficits
1. Bolus doses of 10 mL/kg may be administered as needed to address hypovolemia
2. Neonatal maintenance crystalloid fluid requirements 60-180 mL/kg/day
a. Neonatal requirements higher due to higher total body water percentage and inability to
concentrate their urine
F.
 Uterine prolapse
a. Rare postpartum complication in cats
b. Clinical signs
 Seen during or immediately following parturition as cervical dilation is necessary for prolapse
to occur (fig. 35.3)
c. Risk factors for prolapse
i.
 Severe straining during or after parturition
ii.
 Incomplete placental separation
iii.
 Relaxation or atony of the uterus
iv.
 Excessive relaxation of the pelvic and perineal region
d. Physical exam
i.
 Nonspecific signs of abdominal pain and straining may indicate prolapse into cranial vagina
{incomplete prola pse).
ii.
A large mass may be seen protruding from vaginal orifice (fig. 35.3).
ili.
Variable degrees of tissue edema, ulceration, or necrosis may be present.
iv.
 Undelivered fetuses may remain within the retained horn.
V.
Hemorrhagic shock may result from ovarian or uterine vessel rupture.
e.Treatment
i.
Lubricate and protect exposed tissues.
ii.
 Sta bilization
1. Intravenous fluids to correct shock
2. Blood transfusion
a. Required if signs consistent with severe hemorrhage are noted
i.
 Packed cells 10 mL/kg
ii.Whole blood 20 mL/kg
 3. Systemic antibiotic therapy
478
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ili.  General anesthesia should be performed after stabilization is achieved.
iv.
Clean tissue gently and determine viability.
V.
 If tissue appears healthy, lubricate copiously with sterile lubricant.
vi.
 Manual reduction may be attempted as follows:
1. Apply external pressure to manually replace uterus within the body.
2. A test tube can be used to help invert and replace the uterus.
 3. Hydropulsion with a red rubber catheter and warmed sterile saline may aid in proper posi-
tioning of the uterine horns.
4. Dorsal episiotomy may be performed to aid in reduction when severe edema is present.
 5. Oxytocin (0.5 U IM) administered after replacement will promote uterine involution.
vii. Surgical reduction is indicated if manual reduction attempts have failed, severe
hemorrhage is present, tissues are deemed nonviable, or animal is not intended for future
breeding.
1. Make a caudoventral midline incision.
 2. Apply intraabdominal traction to the uterus while an assistant applies external pressure to
replace the uterus within the abdomen.
3. Routine ovariohysterectomy may then be performed.
4. If tissue is viable and future breeding is desired, uterus may alternately be pexied to the
ventrolateral body wall to prevent reoccurrence.
 5. If reduction is impossible due to severe tissue swelling or necrosis, amputation of traumatized
external tissue may be necessary.
a. Urethral catheterization is recommended to prevent accidental trauma.
b. Identify and ligate bleeding uterine vessels.
c. After excision of necrotic tissue, the remainder is reduced via laparotomy and a complete
ovariohysterectomy is performed.
G. Uterine torsion
a. Rare in cats
i.
Can involve one or both uterine horns
Most commonly involves a single horn that twists at its base
ili.180-degree torsion can be present for weeks without clinical signs.
b. Risk factors
i.
 Multiparous animals
1. Caused by previous stretching of broad ligament
ii.
 Mid to late pregnancy or at parturition
iii. Pyometra
c.Etiology
i.
Unknown
ii.
 Suspected to be related to fetal movement, rough handling during pregnancy, uterine contrac-
tion, lack of uterine tone, lack of fetal fluid, flaccid mesometrium, or previous stretching of the
broad ligament of the uterus
d. Clinical signs
i.
 Depression, anorexia, lethargy
ii.
Abdominal pain
ili.  Abdominal distension
iv.
 Shock
V.
Hypothermia
vi.
 Hemorrhagic vaginal discharge
vii. Dystocia with severe persistent straining
viil. Vomiting
ix. Restlessness
Chapter 35 Reproductive Emergencies
479
e. Radiographic or ultrasonographic findings
i.
 Fluid-filled uterus
ii.
 Fetal death
iii.  Intrauterine gas
iv.  Peritoneal effusion
f. Treatment
i.
 Intravenous fluid therapy to address shock
ii.
 Perioperative antimicrobial use
iii.
 Exploratory surgery is required for definitive diagnosis and treatment.
1. Ovariohysterectomy is the technique of choice.
2. The uterus should be removed without untwisting to prevent release of endotoxin and
inflammatory mediators.
g. Prognosis
1.
Good for the queen, provided shock is corrected and surgery is performed in a timely fashion
ii.Fetal survival is unlikely.
H. Mastitis
a. Uncommon postpartum complication in cats resulting from bacterial infection of the mammary
gland
b. Etiology
i. Bacterial entrance through nipple secondary to nursing, trauma, or poor hygiene
ii. May be spread hematogenously
iii. May develop in immunosuppressed animals
1. Feline leukemia
2. Feline immunodeficiency virus
3. Feline infectious peritonitis
c. Clinical signs
i.Discomfort
i. Swelling and inflammation of mammary gland
ili. Systemic illness in severe cases
1.Fever
2. Anorexia
3.Lethargy
iv. Reluctance to lie down
v. Refusal to nurse offspring
1. This results in vocalization and failure to thrive of neonates.
 2. Vocalization of neonates often prompts owner's phone call to veterinarian.
vi. Abscessation and necrosis of mammary gland
d. Diagnosis
i. Generally based on history and clinical signs
ii. Complete blood count
ii. Chemistry
iv. Milk evaluation
  r d ' s     uxa s l
colored.
2. Cytology
a. Large number of white blood cells
b. Degenerative neutrophils with intracellular bacteria
3.Culture
a.Escherichia coli, Stapbylococcus, and Streptococcus most commonly isolated
e. Treatment
480
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Broad-spectrum antibiotics
1. Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
a. Safe for nursing neonates
b. Dose: 62.5 mg/cat PO BID
2. Cephalexin
a. Safe for nursing neonates
b. Dose: 22 mg/kg PO BID
3. Clindamycin
a. Achieves good levels in milk
 b. Gastroenteritis may develop in nursing neonates.
c. Dose: 5-11 mg/kg PO BID
ii.Warm compresses
ii. Frequent milk stripping
1. Kittens should be allowed to continue nursing as this will promote drainage of affected glands.
iv. Lancing of abscess pocket if palpable
V.
 Mastectomy of necrotic glands
1. Controversial
2. May aid in rapid resolution
 3. Acceptable cosmesis by most owners
Endometritis (box 35.10)
a. Bacterial infection of the uterus generally seen within 3 days of parturition
b. Etiology
i. Retention of fetus or placenta
ii. Abortion
ii. Uterine trauma secondary to dystocia or obstetrical instrumentation
iv. Ascending infection from vaginal vault
C. Diagnostics
Complete blood count
1. Leukocytosis with left shift
2. Leukopenia
3. Thrombocytopenia
i. Serum chemistry profile
1. Elevated liver values
2. Hypoalbuminemia
ii. Coagulation panel
1. Rule out disseminated intra vascular coagulation (DIC).
Box 35.10. Clinical signs of metritis.
Fever
Lethargy
Anorexia
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Poor lactation
Neglect of offspring
 Fetid, malodorous vaginal discharge
 Purulent vaginal discharge
Chapter 35Reproductive Emergencies
481
iv. Imaging (radiographs or abdominal ultrasound)
1. Evaluate for fetal death, retained placentas, or evidence of uterine enlargement
v.  Cytology of vaginal discharge
1. Degenerate neutrophils and macrophages with intracellular bacteria
d. Treatment
i.For sepsis
1. Intravenous fluid therapy
2. Broad-spectrum antibiotic combinations
a. Ampicillin/enrofloxacin
b. Ampicillin/aminoglycoside
c. Cefazolin/aminoglycoside/metronidazole
i. Aminoglycosides should only be used after the patient is rehydrated to avoid
nephrotoxicity.
 3. Supportive measures
ii. Surgical intervention
1. After stabilization, ovariohysterectomy should be performed.
ii. Medical therapy
1. May be considered in nonseptic, breeding animals
 2. Evacuation of uterine contents achieved through prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a; lutalyse)
a. See discussion of PGF2a in pyometra section below
J.Eclampsia
a. Life-threatening hypocalcemia in the periparturient period
b. Uncommon in cats
 oi d  i s  s uas aq u 
d. More commonly develops 2-3 weeks postparturition
e.Pathophysiology
i.
 Loss of calcium through lactation and fetal skeletal mineralization in excess of that entering
the extracellular fluid through gastrointestinal absorption and bone resorption
f.Risk factors
i.
 Increased ratio of litter size to maternal body weight has been associated with the development
of hypocalcemia.
g. Clinical signs (may be subtle)
i.
Hypothermia
ii.
Hyperexcitability
ili. Hypersensitivity
iv.
 Flaccid paralysis
V.
Clonic-tonic muscle spa sms
vi.  Ptyalsim
vi. Ataxia
vili. Mydriasis
h. Diagnosis
i.
 Based on history and physical exam
ii.
Low ionized or total calcium levels
i.Treatment
 Place an intravenous catheter.
ii.
 Initiate intravenous fluid therapy.
ili.
Administer calcium gluconate (10%) 0.5-1.5mL/kg IV slowly to effect, until cessation of
tremors is noted.
iv.
Monitor an ECG during calcium administration.
1. Slow or discontinue calcium infusion if bradycardia or ventricular arrhythmias are noted.
482
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
V.
Monitor ionized calcium levels after administration to ensure adequate replacement.
vi.
Monitor temperature, as hyperthermia is common with eclampsia.
j. Prevention of recurrence
i.
Remove the kittens from the queen and bottle feed or wean.
ii.
 Feed the queen a high-quality kitten food.
iii.
 Oral calcium supplementation is necessary if continued nursing is permitted.
1. Calcium carbonate: 50-100mg/kg divided into three doses daily until weaning.
a. Regular strength Tums contains 200 mg calcium per tablet.
2. Supplementation prior to parturition is not recommended as this may promote calcium
wasting during pregnancy leading to increased risk of eclampsia postpartum.
k. Prognosis
i. Good
K. Ectopic pregnancy
a. Rare, but reported in cats
b. Primary ectopic pregnancy
i. Results from fertilized ova entering peritoneal cavity and attaching to mesentery or abdominal
viscera
C. Secondary ectopic pregnancy
i. Results from rupture of uterus following trauma
d. Clinical signs
i. Mechanical interference with abdominal organs
ii. Necrosis of intra-abdominal ectopic tissue
iii. Incidental finding
e. Treatment
i.Surgical removal +/- ovariohysterectomy
L. Abortion (fig. 35.4)
a. May result from maternal, fetal, or placental abnormalities
i.
Systemic illness of queen
1. Viral disease is the most common cause of abortion in cats
a. Feline leukemia virus
b. Feline immunodeficiency virus
Fig. 35.4. Aborted fetus.
Chapter 35 Reproductive Emergencies
483
c. Feline infectious peritonitis
d. Feline herpesvirus
2. Toxoplasma gondi
ii.Early embryonic death
1. Generally occurs before 45 days of pregnancy
2. Cause is often undetermined
 3. Chromosomal abnormalities have been identified in aborted kittens.
iii. Placental problems
1. Placental necrosis of unknown cause has been reported in cats.
iv. Drugs
1. Chloramphenicol
2. Glucocorticoids
3. Prostaglandins
b. Partial abortion may occasionally be seen.
i. The rest of the litter may be carried to term.
C.Treatment
i. Treat underlying cause of abortion.
1. Supportive and symptomatic care of queen
2. Baseline lab analysis
a. CBC
 b. Serum chemistry profile
c. Urinalysis
 d. Serological testing of queen for infectious agents
ii. Establish status of uterine contents.
1. Radiography or ultrasonography
a. Determine viability of remaining fetuses
ili. Evacuate nonviable uterine contents.
1. PGF2α 0.1-0.25 mg/kg SC
2. Oxytocin 0.5-3 units IM
iv. Queens may attempt to consume aborted fetus.
v. Abortus and placenta should be submitted for gross, microbiological, and histopathological
analysis.
d. Prognosis
i. Dependent on underlying cause of abortion
i.  May put other colony members at risk
M. Pyometra
a. Accumulation of purulent exudate within the uterine lumen
b. Hormonally mediated disease seen in diestrus
c. Risk factors
i.
Rare in cats
1. Require intercourse for luteal activity
ii.
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia may play a role.
1. Abnormal uterine response to progesterone results in hypertrophy of mucus-producing
glands in the endometrium, endometrial thickening, and decreased myometrial activity.
 2. The combination of increased mucus production and decreased myometrial activity leads to
fluid accumulation within the uterus.
a. Hydrometra: low-viscosity uterine fluid
b. Mucometra: high-viscosity uterine fluid
3. Establishes favorable environment for bacterial growth
a. Opportunistic invasion by bacteria from vaginal vault
484
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ili.  Most commonly affects middle-aged cats, though cats of any age may be affected
iv.
 More common in cats treated with megestrol acetate (ovaban) and cats with retained corpora
lutea or cystic ovaries
d. Clinical signs
i.
Anorexia
ii.
 Sanguineous to mucopurulent vulvar discharge
1. May be subtle due to grooming behaviors
ili.
Depression
iv.
 Polyuria/polydipsia
V.
Vomiting
vi.
 Diarrhea
vil. History of estrus 28-60 days ag0
1. 80% may be within 28 days of last estrus
 2. Higher frequency during breeding season
vii. Abdominal distension
ix. Uveitis
X.
 Perineal soiling
xi. Dehydration
xil.  Sepsis/septic shock
e. Physical exam
1.
 Palpably enlarged uterus
1. Caution should be taken to not rupture uterus with aggressive palpation, as the uterus may
be friable.
11.
 Rectal temperature can be low, normal, or high depending on degree of morbidity.
iii.Evidence of shock may be noted.
f. Diagnostics
Complete blood count
1.Anemia
2. Leukocytosis
a. Degenerative left shift
3. Leukopenia
ii.
 Serum chemistry profle
1. Hyper- or hypoproteinemia
 2. Hyperglobulinemia
3. Hyper- or hypoglycemia
4.Azotemia
a. May result from prerenal or renal causes
 5. Elevations in alanine aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase
ili. Urinalysis
1. Concurrent urinary tract infections are common.
 2. Cystocentesis should be avoided to prevent risk of uterine rupture.
3. Midstream voided urine sample should be obtained if possible, or cystocentesis can be
 obtained at surgery for evaluation.
4.Proteinuria
a. Can be indicative of urinary tract infections or immune complex deposition in the glom-
eruli resulting in glomerulonephropathy
b. Typically resolves with treatment of pyometra
5. Isosthenuria
 a. E. coli endotoxin causes decreased ability of renal tubules to concentrate urine in response
to ADH.
Chapter 35  Reproductive Emergencies
485
Fig. 35.5. Lateral abdominal radiograph of a cat with pyometra. Note the mid-abdominal, large, Hluid-filled
tubular structure.
b. Specific gravity is therefore not helpful in differentiating prerenal from renal causes of
azotemia.
 C. Differentiation of prerenal from renal causes of azotemia may be accomplished by assess-
ing response to fluid therapy.
1V.
Vaginal cytology
1. Large number of degenerative neutrophils with intracellular bacteria
2. Obtain sample from anterior vagina via use of a shielded swab.
a. Aids in antibiotic sensitivity for medical management
3. Vaginal and uterine cultures
a.
Escherichia coli most common isolate
b. Reported to be negative in 10-30% cases
V.
Radiographs
1. A tubular soft tissue opacity may be seen in the caudal abdomen (fig. 35.5).
 2. Loss of abdominal detail may suggest uterine rupture.
 3. Inability to identify the uterus does not rule out pyometra, as open pyometra may prevent
significa nt distension.
 4. Differential diagnosis of pregnancy should also be considered.
a. Uterus normally visible on radiographs by day 28 of pregnancy
b. Difficult to differentiate from pyometra as fetal skeletal development does not occur until
day 45
vi. Ultrasonography
1. May reveal increased wall thickness and presence of uterine fluid (fig. 35.6)
 2. Useful for identification of gravid uterus
g. Patient stabilization and perioperative considerations
i.
Administer fluid therapy with goals of correction of shock, normalization of electrolyte and acid
base abnormalities, and correction of hypoglycemia.
1. Colloids may also be administered to address hypotension and peripheral edema resulting
from hypoproteinemia.
a. Indicated when total protein <4.0 g/dL
486
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
670402 MAINE C00NF1Y
B:8.5/DPT68mm/6185
HORN
HORI
Fig. 35.6.
 Abdominal ulrasound image of the horns of a cat with pyometra. Note increased thickness of the
uterine wall.
ii. Broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy
1. Administer preoperatively.
2. Continue 7-10 days postoperatively.
iii. Treatment of coagulopathy
1. Fresh frozen plasma (10 mL/kg) is indicated when clotting times are prolonged.
h. Surgical management
Ovariohysterectomy is the treatment of choice.
1. Surgical considerations:
a. Large, friable uterus may be easily ruptured.
b. Caution should be taken to avoid uterine laceration on entry, or accidental rupture or
spillage during manipulation.
c. The uterus should be exteriorized and packed off with laparotomy sponges to avoid
contamination of the abdomen.
d. The uterine stump should not be oversewn as this may increase the chance of uterine
stump abscessation.
ii. Surgical complications
1. Anesthetic complications
a.Correct electrolyte abnormalities prior to surgery.
2. Uterine rupture
3. Hemorrhage
4. Peritonitis
S. Dehiscence
 6. Uterine stump pyometra
a. Incomplete removal of the uterine body or horns
b. Progesterone source from ovarian remnant or exogenous administration necessary for
development.
ili. Prognosis
1. 92% survival with surgical management
 2. Development of peritonitis results in more guarded prognosis and may necessitate closed
suction drain placements or management as an open abdomen
Chapter 35  Reproductive Emergencies
487
i. Medical management of pyometra
 Generally discouraged due to potential for complications
1. High rate of recurrence
 2. Increased risk of uterine rupture
 3. Less effective in closed pyometra
a. Potential for retrograde expulsion of exudate through oviducts into abdomen
ii.May be of value in animals whose sole purpose is for breeding
ii. Prostaglandin F2a (PGF2α; lutalyse) is medical therapy of choice
1. Mechanism of action
a. Causes contraction of the myometrium and relaxation of the cervix leading to evacuation
 of the uterine contents
b. Decreases progesterone levels through luteolysis
 2. May require greater than 48 hours for clinical improvement to be seen
a. Should not be attempted in systemically ill animals
 3. Dose: 0.1-0.25 mg/kg subcutaneously, diluted in equal volume of saline, once daily for
S days
a. Start at lower dose and titrate upward based on animal's response.
i. Increase frequency of administration to twice daily if increased volume of discharge is
not noted following administration.
b. Only naturally occurring PGF2a should be used.
C. Synthetic analogues more potent and can be fatal
4. Not approved for use in queens 
a. Owners should be informed of extralabel usages.
 5. Associated with numerous side effects (box 35.11), typically lasting 30-60 minutes following
injection
iv. Concurrent use of broad-spectrum antibiotics recommended for 14 days (based on anterior
vaginal culture)
1. Amoxicillin-clavulanate: 13.75-27mg/kg every 12 hours
2. Fluoroquinolone: enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg every 24 hours, combined with another drug such as
ampicillin 22mg/kg every 12 hours
V.
 Hospitalize animal during medical management to allow for continued monitoring.
1. Resolution of clinical signs, cessation of vaginal discharge, and resolution of neutrophilia
indicate good response to medical management.
Box 35.11.S
Side effects seen Following PGFza administration.
Restlessness
Panting
Pacing
 Ptyalism
Tachycardia
 Abdominal pain
Fever
Vomiting
Mydriasis
Vocalization
Excessive grooming
Lordosis
Tenesmus
488
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Acute onset of signs of systemic illness should prompt immediate surgical intervention.
a. Suggestive of uterine rupture or peritonitis
vi. Reevaluation 2 weeks after completion of treatment
1. If persistent clinical signs, repeat second course of treatment
vi. Prognosis
1. Reported 95% cats with open pyometra good outcome after single course of therapy
2. Breeding is recommended next estrus cycle to maximize reproductive potential of queen.
 3. Ovariohysterectomy is recommended once animal is no longer used for breeding.
References
Adeyanju JB. Eclampsia in a cat. Vet Rec, 1984; 114:1296-1297.
Berepubo NA, Long SE. A study of the relationship between chromosome anomalies and reproductive
wastage in domestic animals. Theriogenology, 1983; 20:177-190.
Biller DS, Haibel GK. Torsion of the uterus in a cat. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1987; 19:1128-1129.
Bjerkas E. Eclampsia in the cat. J Anim Pract, 1974; 15:411-414.
Darvelid AW, Linde-Forsberg C. Dystocia in the bitch: a retrospective study of 182 cases. J Small Anim
Pract, 1994; 35:402-407.
Davidson AP, Feldman EC, Nelson RW. Treatment of pyometra in cats using prostaglandin F2o: 21 cases
{1982-1990). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1992; 200:825-828.
   s     s d      s
1986; 27:109-114.
Drobatz KJ, Casey KK. Eclampsia in dogs: 31 cases (1995-1998). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2000;
217:216-219.
Ekstrand C, Linde-Forsberg C. Dystocia in the cat: a retrospective study of 155 cases. J Small Anim Pract,
1994; 35:459-464.
 Farrow CS. Maternal-fetal evaluation in suspected canine dystocia: a radiographic perspective. Can Vet J,
1978; 19:24-26.
Fascetti AJ, Hickman MA. Preparturient hypocalcemia in four cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1999;
215:1127-1129.
Funkquist PME, Nyman GC, Lofgren AMJ, et al. Use of propofol-isoflurane as an anesthetic regimen for
cesarian section in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1997; 211:313-317.
Gunn-Moore DA, Thrusfield MV. Feline dystocia: prevalence and association with cranial conformation
and breed. Vet Rec, 1995; 136:350-353
Huxtable CR, Duff BC, Bennett AM, et al. Placental lesions in habitually aborting cats. Vet Pathol, 1979;
16:283-291.
Johnston SD. Management of pregnancy disorders in the bitch and queen. In Kirk, RW, ed, Current
Veterinary Therapy VIll, pp 952-955. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1983.
Kenney KJ, Matthiesen DT, Brown NO, Bradley RL. Pyometra in cats: 183 cases (1979-1984). J Am Vet
Med Ass0c, 1987; 191:1130-1132.
Linde-Forsberg C, Eneroth A. Parturition. In Simpson GM, ed, Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and
Neonatology, pp 127-142. Cheltenham: British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1998.
Marretta SM, Matthiesen DT, Nichols R. Pyometra and its complications. Prob Vet Med, 1989;
1:50-61.
Maxon FB, Krausnick KE. Dystocia with uterine prolapse in a Siamese cat. Vet Med Small Anim Clin,
1969; 64:1065-1066.
Moon PF, Erb HN, Ludders JW, et al. Perioperative management and mortality rates of dogs undergoing
cesarian section in the United States and Canada. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1998; 213:365-369.
Chapter 35Reproductive Emergencies
489
Moon PF, Massat BJ, Pascoe PJ. Neonatal critical care. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract, 2001;
31:343-367.
Moon-Massat PF, Erb HN. Perioperative factors associated with puppy vigor after delivery by cesarian
section. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 2002; 38:90-96.
Nelson RW, Feldman EC. Pyometra. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract, 1986; 16:561-575.
Pascoe PJ, Moon PF. Periparturient and neonatal anesthesia. Vet Clin N Am Small Anim Pract, 2001;
31:315-341.
 Potter K, Hancock DH, Gallina AM. Clinical and pathologic features of endometrial hyperplasia, pyometra,
and endometritis in cats: 79 cases (1980-1985). J Am Vet Med Ass0c, 1991; 198:1427-1431.
Ridyard AE, Welsh EA, Gunn-Moore DA. Successful treatment of uterine torsion in a cat with severe meta.
bolic and haemostatic complications. J Feline Med Surg, 2000; 2:115-119.
Robbins MA, Mullen HS. En bloc ovariohysterectomy as a treatment for dystocia in dogs and cats. Vet
Surg, 1994; 23:48-52.
 Roll C, Horsch S. Effects of doxapram on cerebral blood flow velocity in preterm infants. Neuropediatrics,
2004; 35:126-129.
 Root MV, Johnston SD, Olson PN. Estrous length, pregnancy rate, gestation and parturition lengths, litter
size and juvenile mortality in the domestic cat. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc, 1995; 31:429-433.
Skarda RT. Anesthesia case of the month. J Am Vet Med Assoc, 1999; 214:37-39.
Verstegen JP, Silva LDM, Onclin K, et al. Echocardiographic study of heart rate in dog and cat fetuses in
utero. J Reprod Fertil Suppl, 1993; 47:175-180.
Wallace LJ, Henry JD, Clifford JH. Manual reduction of uterine prolapse in a domestic cat. Vet Med Small
Anim Clin, 1970; 65:595-596.
Wallace M. Management of parturition and problems of the periparturient period of dogs and cats. Sem
Vet Med Surg, 1994; 9:28-37.
Zone MA, Wanke MM. Diagnosis of canine fetal health by ultrasonography. J Reprod Fertil Suppl, 2001;
57:215-219.
36
PEDIATRIC EMERGENCIES
Maureen McMichael
Unique Features
· Hct decreases from 47.s% at birth to 27% at 46 weeks of age and then slowly begins to
normalize.
● Albumin is also lower in pediatric felines; expect a lower total solids in this age group.
● Urine is isosthenuric in neonates, and there is a decreased capacity to concentrate or dilute urine.
● Meticulous monitoring for both under- and overhydration is essential via accurate pediatric gram
scales, frequent checks of weight, Hct/TS, urine SG, and respiratory rate.
A. Overview
a. There are significant differences in biochemical, hematological, radiographic, pharmacologic, and
monitoring parameters in feline neonates compared to their adult counterparts. This chapter will
discuss these differences and stress the importance of knowing the variations from normal. In addi-
tion, hemodynamic parameters, drug dosages, laboratory data, and diagnostic imaging differ con
siderably in feline neonatal and pediatric patients. Interpretation of certain parameters can be quite
challenging, and familiarity with normal values will assist in accurate assessment.
b. For the purposes of this chapter, the term neonate encompasses birth to 2 weeks of age, and the
term pediatric encompasses 2 weeks to 6 months of age.
B.Initial examination
a.Environment
i. Keep stress low and the environment warm.
ii. Warmed towels on cold steel table
ili. Essential equipment—pediatric and neonatal stethoscopes and appropriate-sized blood pressure
cuffs, accurate gram scale, digital thermometer
C.History
a. Should have a strong suckle reflex at birth
b. Should nurse and sleep constantly first 2-3 weeks
C. Constant crying may signal insufficient milk ingestion.
 D. Physical examination and normal parameters
a. Normal body temperature in kittens is 98°F at birth
b. Increases to 100°F by the end of the first week
c. Pain sensation present at birth, analgesia essential for all procedures that are anticipated to be
painful
d. Kittens have less muscle tone than puppies, so weakness should be assessed in comparison to other
normal kittens.
491
492
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
e. Heart rate {200-220 bpm) and respiratory rate {15-35 bpm) are higher in neonates than adults.
f. Eyes open by day 12-14, vision normalizes by the end of the first month.
g. Menace reflex not present until 2-3 months of age.
h. Physical examination should include
i. Oral examination to check for a cleft palate
i. Abdominal palpation to check for an umbilical hernia
iii. Skull palpation to check for an open fontanel
iv. Verification of the presence of patent urogenital openings
v. Umbilical cord area should be free of redness, swelling, and discharge.
E.Nutrition
a. Weight gain should be progressive; kittens should gain ~10g per day and should double their birth
weight in the first 10 days of life.
 b. If amount of ingestion is questionable, the kittens should be weighed on a gram scale before and
after feeding.
C. Options for supplemental feedings include surrogate dam, bottle feeding, and tube feeding.
d. Tube feeding is done using a 5-Fr red rubber catheter for neonates under 300 g and should only be
it is essential that experienced personnel perform tube feeding to avoid aspiration.
e. Address nutritional issues early.
F.Laboratory values
a. This section will discuss the variations in the laboratory values that may be encountered in the
feline neonatal or pediatric patient. It is essential to be familiar with these parameters to avoid
misdiagnoses.
b. Hematology and coagulation changes
i. Hct decreases from 47.5% at birth to 27% at 4-6 weeks of age and then begins to increase to
adult values.
ii.During this time period, a rise in the Hct may indicate significant dehydration.
ii. Clotting factors and antithrombin are decreased at birth and increase to normal values by the
end of the first week.
1. Prothrombin time is increased and normalizes by 7 days. Partial thromboplastin time is also
 increased but may not normalize by day 7.
c. Biochemical changes
values at birth and decreases to adult ranges in the first weeks of life.
ii.Bile acids are normal in kittens at 2 weeks of age.
iii. Serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, albumin, cholesterol, and total protein are lower
in neonates than adults.
iv. Lower creatinine due to decreased muscle mass
v. Lower BUN and cholesterol due to immature liver function
vi. Knowledge of these values is critical to prevent a misdiagnosis of liver disease in the neonate
(elevated liver enzymes and low levels of BUN, cholesterol, and albumin can mimic liver
dysfunction).
vi. Elevations in calcium and phosphorous due to bone growth
d. Renal changes
i. Urine is isosthenuric in neonates, as the capacity to concentrate and dilute urine is limited in
this age group.
i. Key point in fluid resuscitation—-overhydration is just as much a concern as underhydration.
G. Radiographic imaging
a. In this section the differences in neonatal radiographic imaging are highlighted. In order to ma ximize
radiographic diagnosis, consider decreasing the KVP below the adult range.
Chapter 36 Pediatric Emergencies
493
b. The thymus is in cranial thorax on the left side and can mimic a mediastinal mass or lung
consolidation.
c. The heart takes up more space in the thorax than in adults, and it can falsely appear enlarged.
d. The lung parenchyma has increased water content and is therefore more opaque in neonates.
e. Absence of costochondral mineralization makes liver appear falsely enlarged.
f. Loss of abdominal detail due to lack of fat and a small amount of abdominal effusion can mimic
peritonitis.
H. Pharmacology
a. Some of the significant differences in the pharmacology of various drugs are highlighted here. It is
imperative that the practitioner with a feline pediatric patient base become familiar with these
differences in order to avoid toxicity.
b. General differences in feline neonatal and pediatric patients
i.
Cats have a longer intestinal transit time, a shorter intestinal tract, and increased intestinal
permea bility to drugs compared with dogs.
11.
 Dog dosages cannot be extrapolated directly to cats for most drugs.
ii. Differences in body fat, total protein and albumin, immature renal and hepatic mechanisms
contribute to differences in drug metabolism compared with adult cats.
iv.
 Decreased body fat may cause increased potency of certain drugs (e.g., thiopental).
 Decreased total protein and albumin may cause increased potency in drugs that are highly
protein bound.
vi.Renal excretion of many drugs (e.g., diazepam, digoxin) is diminished, increasing the half-life
in circulation.
vil. Drugs requiring activation via hepatic metabolism have lower plasma concentrations, while
drugs requiring metabolism for excretion have higher plasma concentrations.
vi. Cardiovascular drugs (e.g., epinephrine, dopamine, dobutamine, etc.) are difficult to dose in
neonates due to individual variations in maturity of the autonomic nervous system.
ix. Response to treatment, continuous monitoring of hemodynamic variables essential
X.
The blood brain barrier is more permeable in neonates, allows drugs that do not normally
cross over to enter the central nervous system.
c. Routes of delivery
Oral drug absorption is higher in first 72 hours (increased permeability of GI).
ii.
 Intestinal flora is very sensitive to disruption by oral antimicrobials.
ii. Intravenous routes most predictable, preferred over intramuscular or subcutaneous routes.
d. Specific recommendations
i.
Aminoglycosides cause histologic damage to kidneys in neonates-avoid.
ii.
 Chloramphenicol ca uses changes in hematopoietic parameters and collapse in neonates—-avoid.
ili.
Potassium bromide can cause bronchitis in cats—avoid.
iv.
 Tetracyclines cause skeletal growth abnormalities, staining of teeth—avoid.
 Lidocaine—cats are very susceptible to toxicity and neonates have a decreased response
V.
avoid.
vi.  Oral diazepam can cause hepatic failure in cats—avoid.
vi. Fluoroquinolones can cause blindness in cats and destructive lesions of cartilage in long
bones—caution.
viil. Sulfonamides can suppress bone marrow—caution.
ix. Metronidazole preferred for giardiasis and anaerobes, decrease dose or increase interval in
neonates.
x. B-lactam antibiotics is made safe in neonates by decreasing dose or increasing interval (from
q8h to q12h).
xi.  Avoid drugs that depress respiration and heart rate (neonates are very dependent on high heart
rate to increase cardiac output).
494
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
xii. For drugs with decreased clearance or increased response, reduce dose.
xii. Thiopental can cause an increased response in neonates due to the lower percentage of body
fat and decreased hepatic clearance. Titrate to effect.
xiv. For inotropes and vasopressors titrate drug dosages to individual kitten.
xv.  Opioids good for analgesia due to reversibility, but kittens more susceptible to excitement and
dysphoria—-use lower dosage and monitor heart rate and respiratory rate very closely.
I. Catheter placement
a. Intravenous {IV) route is preferred.
b. Neonates often require very small-gauge catheters (i.e., 24ga), which can burr easily when being
driven through skin.
i.5
catheter can be fed through skin hole.
c. If attempts at IV catheter placement fail, an intraosseous catheter {IO) should be placed
i.  An IO catheter can be inserted in the proximal femur or humerus using an 18-22-gauge spinal
needle or an 18-25-gauge hypodermic needle.
ii. Can be used for fluid and blood administration
 ii. Area must be prepared in a sterile manner, needle inserted into bone parallel to the long axis
of the bone.
iv. Gently aspirate to assure patency and secure with sterile bandage.
v.  Ideal for neonates because they have a large portion of “red" marrow compared with adults
    o, a  
vi. Intravenous access must be established as soon as possible, ideally within 2 hours, and the IO
catheter should be removed to minimize intraosseous infection.
vi. Intraosseous catheter complications correlate with duration of use.
J.Fluid requirements
a. Neonates have higher fluid requirements than adults due to a higher percentage of total body water,
a greater surface area to body weight ratio, a higher metabolic rate, decreased renal concentrating
ability, and decreased body fat. This section discusses the fluid requirements and monitoring of fluid
therapy in feline pediatric patients.
b. Assessing requirements
i. Dehydration and overhydration are concerns; kidneys cannot concentrate or dilute urine
adequately.
ii. Monitor for under- or overhydration via accurate pediatric gram scale, weigh patient 3-4 times
per day.
ili. Baseline weight, Hct/TS {Hct decreases in first 4-6 weeks of life and TS are lower than adult
levels in normal neonate), urine specific gravity, and thoracic are radiographs helpful.
iv. Fluid overload diagnosis difficult (heart takes up more of thoracic cavity and normal neonate
lungs have more interstitial fluid) without baseline thoracic radiographs.
c. Specific recommendations
i. A fluid bolus of 10-15 mL/kg in moderately dehydrated neonates is recommended.
ii. Rapid reassessment of perfusion via mentation, urine output, pulse quality, and possibly lactate
levels should be done after each bolus. Lactate levels are higher in neonatal dogs, but normal
values have not been reported in kittens.
ii. Repeat bolus if perfusion remains compromised.
iv. Follow with constant rate infusion of 50-70 mL/kg/day of warm crystalloids.
v. A fluid warmer placed in line is a good option to keep fluids warmed.
vi. Lactated Ringer's solution is ideal {lactate is the preferred metabolic fuel in neonate during times
of hypoglycemia).
K. Hypothermia
Chapter 36  Pediatric Emergencies
495
on the degree of temperature decrease, hypothermia can cause hypoventilation, bradycardia, gas-
trointestinal ileus, and mentation changes.
b. The shivering reflex is not present at birth and may take up to a full week to develop, so frequent
temperature checks are essential.
c. Rewarming should proceed slowly and should always be completed prior to drug administration
(many drugs will not be active until rewarming) and feeding (to prevent hypothermia-induced
ileus).
d. The kitten should be placed in a neonatal incubator set at 85-90°F and approximately 60% humid-
ity, and all IV fluids should be warmed with an in-line warmer. Heat lamps and heating pads are
best avoided as they can lead to burns and overheating easily in the neonate with limited ability to
move away from the heat source.
L. Hypoglycemia
a. Hypoglycemia is very common in the pediatric patient, and the etiology and treatment are discussed
in this section.
 b. Clinical signs of hypoglycemia are challenging to recognize due to inefficient counterregulatory
hormone release during hypoglycemia in neonates.
c. In adults, counterregulatory hormones are released in response to low blood glucose and facilitate
euglycemia by increasing gluconeogenesis and antagonizing insulin. These hormones are responsible
for the majority of clinical signs of hypoglycemia.
d. Neonates ha ve immature glucose feedback mechanisms, inefficient hepatic gluconeogenesis, decreased
liver glycogen stores, and loss of glucose in urine.
e. Urinary glucose reabsorption does not normalize until ~3 weeks.
f. Brain requires glucose for energy in neonate, brain damage can occur with prolonged hypoglycemia.
g. Neonatal myocardium uses carbohydrate (glucose) for energy rather than long chain fatty acids used
by adult.
h. In summary, the healthy neonate has increased demand for, increased loss of, and decreased ability
to synthesize glucose compared with adults.
i. Vomiting, diarrhea, infection, and decreased intake contribute to hypoglycemia.
j. Clinical signs of hypoglycemia, if present, may include lethargy and anorexia.
k. Treatment for hypoglycemia
i.  Infusions of 1 mL/kg of 12.5% dextrose (i.e., dilute 50% dextrose 1:4) followed by a CRI of
isotonic fluids supplemented with 1.25% to 5.0% dextrose for hypoglycemia
ii. Always follow dextrose bolus with a CRI that is supplemented with dextrose or there is a risk
of rebound hypoglycemia.
ii. Refractory hypoglycemia may only respond to hourly boluses of dextrose in addition to a CRI
of crystalloid with supplemental dextrose.
         
M. Hypovolemia and dehydration
a. Depletion of body fluids via dehydration alone or dehydration accompanied by hypovolemia is very
common in the sick kitten. The following section discusses the most common causes and appropriate
treatment of these conditions.
b. Causes of hypovolemia/dehydration
 Diarrhea, vomiting, and decreased intake are the most common causes.
ii. Diarrhea is most commonly due to parasites, viruses, and dietary issues.
ii. Parasites
1. Common parasites in kittens include roundworms, hookworms, and a protozoal parasite,
Tritrichomonas fetus {often seen in co-infections with Giardia species).
496
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
       
immunodeficiency.
3. Roundworms can be transmitted via milk and can cause diarrhea, poor hair coat, abdominal
effusion, and failure to thrive.
a. Diagnosis made with fecal float
b. Treatment with Pyrantel (20mg/kg orally once and then repeated in 3 weeks) or
Fenbendazole (50mg/kg q24h orally for 3 days) is safe and effective in kittens that are
at least 2 weeks of age.
4. Hookworms can cross via placenta and in milk and cause fatal anemia at 2-3 weeks of
age—before patent infection; do not rely on fecal. Clinical signs include lethargy, anemia,
and melena. Hookworms are treated with the same drugs as roundworms.
 5. Tritrichomonas fetus causes large intestinal diarrhea which may be accompanied by hema
tochezia. Diagnosis is difficult but may be improved if multiple direct smears of fresh feces
are made.
a. There is no treatment for Trichomoniasis in cats, but the diarrhea is usually self-limiting
and clears within 9 months.
b. Diagnostic yield improved with fresh fecal specimen and a zinc sulfate float with
centrifugation.
6. For Giardia spp. and Cryptosporidium spp., immunoassays may be needed.
iv.Viral causes
1. Viral causes of diarrhea in kittens usually from feline panleukopenia
2. Feline panleukopenia can cause vomiting, fever, and diarrhea.
 3. Similar to canine parvovirus, and the agent of canine parvovirus has been shown to cause
diarrhea in kittens.
4. Treatment is supportive and includes warm IV fluids if dehydration is present, nutritional
support, antibiotics if infection is suspected, and antiemetics if indicated.
v.Dietary
1. One of the most common dietary causes of diarrhea in kittens is owner overfeeding with
kitten milk replacer.
2. Owners should be instructed on how to properly feed kittens. A 3-5 French red rubber
feeding tube should be used and the placement checked via injection of a small amount of
saline (coughing suggests tube is in trachea). Due to the absence of a gag reflex for up to
complication.
c. Recognition and monitoring of hypovolemia/dehydration
1.
 Hypovolemia results in decreased perfusion and subsequent decreases in oxygen delivery to
tissues.
 In adults, hypovolemia is compensated for by increasing HR, concentrating urine, and decreas-
ing urine output.
iii. In neonates, compensatory mechanisms may not be existent.
iv.Autonomic nervous system
1. Fetal and neonate myocardium has less contractile elements (30% vs. 60% in adult)
difficult to increase cardiac contractility in response to hypovolemia.
 2. Immature sympathetic nerve fibers in myocardium prevents maximal increases in heart rate
in response to hypovolemia.
3. Complete maturation of the autonomic nervous system occurs at ~8 weeks.
 Blood pressure and central venous pressure
1. Mean arterial pressure lower in normal neonates, normalizing by 9 months of age.
2. Muscular component of arterial wall immature at birth, thought to be the cause of the low
MAP.
Chapter 36Pediatric Emergencies
497
3. Central venous pressure higher in neonates
4. In adult kidneys BP is autoregulated over wide range of systemic arterial pressures. No
autoregulation in neonate kidneys so GFR decreases as systemic blood pressure decreases.
vi.  Renal regulation
 1. Immature kidneys not capable of concentrating urine in response to hypovolemia.
2. Adequate concentration and dilution of urine not seen until ~10 weeks of age.
 3. Causes include inefficient countercurrent mechanisms, decreased sodium resorption in the
thick ascending loop of Henle, short loops of Henle, and decreased urea concentration.
d. Clinical and laboratory parameters of hypovolemia/dehydration
1.
 Skin turgor cannot be used to assess dehydration due to increased fat and decreased water
content compared with adults.
ii.
 Mucous membranes cannot be used to assess dehydration as they remain moist in the face of
severe dehydration in neonates and may be hyperemic during the first week of life. However,
pale or cyanotic mucous membranes are indicative of an abnormality.
ii.A heart murmur may be indicative of sepsis, anemia, fever, a congenital cardiac defect, or
may be an innocent murmur. Innocent murmurs may be present during the first 3 months
of life.
iv.  BUN and creatinine lower in neonates—monitoring of azotemia very challenging.
e. Specific recommendations
i.
 Dehydration can progress rapidly due to higher neonatal fluid requirements and increased
losses (decreased renal concentrating ability, higher respiratory rate, higher metabolic rate).
Weigh at least every 12 hours, preferably every 8 hours.
ii. Monitor urine specific gravity. Dehydration is likely when urine specific gra vity reaches 1.020;
monitor as an indicator of rehydration.
iv.  It should be assumed {due to difficulties in assessment in neonates) that all neonates with severe
diarrhea, inadequate intake, or severe vomiting are dehydrated and potentially hypovolemic.
Treatment should be initiated immediately with fluid therapy, monitoring of electrolyte and
glucose status, temperature regulation, and nutritional support.
vi.  Start with a bolus of 25 mL/kg of warm isotonic fluids in severely dehydrated or hypovolemic
kittens.
vi.  Follow with a CRI of maintenance fluids (50-70 mL/kg/day) together with losses.
vii. Estimate losses (i.e., 2 tablespoons of diarrhea is equal to 30 mL of fluid).
ix. If hypoglycemic or not able to eat, add dextrose to IV fluids at lowest amount that will maintain
normoglycemia (i.e., start with 1.25% dextrose).
 Monitor perfusion parameters (mentation, urine output/specific gravity). Lactate and Hct
 should not be increasing.
N. Viral infections
a. Upper respiratory infections
i. Feline herpesvirus type I and calicivirus are most common causes of viral URI in kittens.
ii. These are most common at 3-4 weeks of age but can occur earlier.
ii. Clinical signs range from mild (nasal discharge, ocular discharge) to severe (dyspnea, anorexia,
dehydration).
 iv. Treatment is symptomatic and may include oxygen therapy (no higher than Fi02 of 40%), res-
r            
antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections, nutritional support, and antiviral therapy.
b. Other viral infections
i. Feline leukemia virus—can be transmitted by dam or in contact cats. Can cause thymic
atrophy and slow wasting of kittens. Treatment is supportive and includes IV fluid therapy
for dehydration, antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections, and nutritional support if
indicated.
498
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Coronavirus can cause diarrhea and FIP. Treatment is supportive and includes broad spectrum
 anthelminth treatment (e.g., praziquantel/pyrantel pamoate) since secondary parasitic infections
are commonly a source of increased morbidity in these cases.
O. Neonatal alloimmune hemolytic anemia
a. Three feline blood types: A, B, and AB
b. Type A most common in U.S. (~99% of cats in U.S.)
and British Shorthair, Cornish, and Devon Rex)
d. Type AB very rare
e. Cats have naturally occurring antibodies against other blood types at birth.
i. Type B cats have very strong antibodies against type A antigen.
ii. Transfusion of type A blood into type B cat causes rapid, often fatal, severe hemolytic
reaction.
ii. All cats must be typed before transfusing.
f. Essentially no transfer of antibodies from queen to fetus via placenta.
g. Passive transfer of antibodies occurs in first 12-24 hours of life through ingestion of colostrum.
h. If type B queen mates with a type A tom, the kittens can be born with type A blood.
i. When type A kitten ingests colostrum from type B queen, it ingests anti-A antibodies—destruction
of red blood cells of kitten.
j. Clinical signs include pale mucous membranes, weak pulses, lethargy, red or brown urine, icterus.
 and death. Occasionally sloughing of ear tips, tail tip, and toenails can occur.
k. Diagnosis via blood type of queen and kittens.
1. If queen is type B, all type A kittens should be removed immediately and fed with milk replacer.
m. If clinical signs warrant, a blood transfusion of type A blood can be given via the intravenous or
intraosseous route.
n. Serum from a healthy, well-vaccinated, type A adult cat can be given to kittens that are prevented
from ingesting colostrum.
i. The serum can be given orally (within the first 24 hours of life) or subcutaneously. Dosages of
5 mL/kitten given in three increments (at birth, 12 hours, and 24 hours) have been shown to
augment IgG levels in kittens.
P.Sepsis
a. Neonatal sepsis is most often secondary to wounds, such as umbilical cord ligation and respiratory,
urinary, and GI infections. Commonly isolated bacterial organisms include Escherichia coli, Klebsiella
spp., Enterococcus spp., Enterobacter spp., Campylobacter spp., Streptococcus spp., Stapbylococcus
 spp., Bartonella henselae, and Mycoplasmas. This section will highlight the diffculty of diagnosing,
monitoring, and treating sepsis in kittens.
b. Clinical and laboratory values often subtle, and sepsis can be difficult to detect due to immature
a utonomic nervous system (inconsistent cardiac response to hypovolemia), lower MAP, higher CVP
in normal neonate, and lack of urinary concentration.
c. Clinical signs may include crying, reluctance to nurse, decreased urine output, and cold
extremities.
d. Treatment of sepsis
Aggressive fluid resuscitation associated with decreased mortality in children with sepsis and
 in several animal models of sepsis.
i. Large volumes of fluid often needed in septic patients due to increased capillary permeability
{increased losses) and vasodilation.
ili.  Start with a bolus of 25 mL/kg of warm isotonic fluids.
iv.  Consider a CRI of fresh or fresh frozen plasma {5-10mL/kg at 1-3mL/kg/hour) from a
well-vaccinated adult cat to attempt to augment immunity and augment colloid oncotic
pressure.
Chapter 36Pediatric Emergencies
499
dosages.
vi. Submit culture and susceptibility of area of concern before beginning antibiotics.
vil. Broad-spectrum antibiotics may be required if the source of infection cannot be identified.
vii. First-generation cephalosporins are a good choice in the neonate and provide coverage for
ix.Oxygen therapy should be kept at or below an FiO2 of 0.4 to avoid oxygen toxicity.
1. Excess oxygen supplementation in neonates can cause retrolental fibroplasias and
blindness.
X.
Avoid hypothermia, provide safe heat source (i.e., warm water blanket, Bair Hugger, etc.).
xi.
Consider nutritional supplementation early if not eating.
 xil.  Consider vasopressor and/or inotropic support if hypoperfusion is refractory to IV fluid loading
(i.e., cold extremities, high lactate levels, low urine output).
xifi. Due to variations in the maturity of the autonomic nervous system, all inotropic drugs need
to be individually tailored to each kitten.
e. Monitoring the septic kitten
i. Monitor serial checks of perfusion via mucous membrane color (should be less pale), pulse
0 pinousl siaaal aieoel (dn o pnousl auneadut Aiuaxa "esuos iaa pinous Aienb
down), and mentation.
 i. Frequent electrolyte and blood glucose checks every 4-6 hours are essential with supplementa-
tion as needed.
ii.Acceptable endpoints of perfusion include increases in extremity temperature, decreases in
lactate levels, increased urine production, and improved mentation.
iv.  An index of suspicion for sepsis should be maintained for all neonates with risk factors, and
aggressive treatment should be instituted rapidly. In people, the incidence of pediatric sepsis
is highest in premature newborns. Respiratory infections (37%) and primary bacteremia (25%)
were the most common infections.
Q. Respiratory distress of the newborn kitten
a. Respiratory distress encountered at birth may be due to pulmonary hypertension, decreased surfac-
b. Congenital defects may cause persistent pulmonary hypertension and respiratory distress that is
refractory to treatment.
c. In people, ventilation of the lungs is the single most effective step in cardiopulmonary resuscitation
of the compromised infant.
d. Emergency treatment of a newborn in respiratory distress includes reversal of any drugs that were
used during anesthesia if a Cesarean section was performed. Bulb suctioning of the airways to clear
out accumulated fluid.
e. Avoid aggressive suctioning of airways (i.e., with a suctioning device)—can cause a vagal response
or laryngospasm.
f. Gentle rubbing of the neonate all over can also help stimulate respirations.
g. Do not shake or hit newborn—can cause loss of surfactant among other complications.
h. Doxapram hydrochloride (1-5 mg/kg IV or 1-2 drops under the tongue) can be given under tongue
to stimulate respirations in a newborn with no respiratory drive, although some clinicians don't
advocate this anymore.
i. At birth, physical expansion of the lungs causes release of prostacyclin, which increases pulmonary
blood flow through pulmonary vasodilation.
j. Nitric oxide contributes to pulmonary vasodilation and is thought to be released in response to
oxygenation at birth.
k. Surfactant reduces the tension of the air-fluid interface of the alveoli and prevents collapse. It is
essential to improve compliance (i.e., reduce stiffness) and therefore the work of breathing.
500
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Surfactant is released at birth in response to lung inflation.
ii. Dramatic decreases in pulmonary vascular resistance and adequate surfactant synthesis and
release are essential to neonatal survival at birth.
1. The two most important interventions for respiratory distress at birth are oxygenation and
lung expansion. These will maximize the release of prostacyclin and nitric oxide and surfactant
release.
m. Oxygen should be supplied via face mask or endotracheal tube, as adequate lung expansion is crucial
for pulmonary blood flow.
n. A tight-fitting face mask is often easier than intubation of a newborn and can be lifesaving.
o. Overexpansion can cause damage so it is essential to use the minimal amount of pressure not to
exceed 15-20 mmHg for ventilation.
i. We use an ambubag designed for pediatric use and intubate and ventilate if there are no spon-
taneous respirations at birth. Intubation is attempted with an 18-20-ga short IV catheter (remove
stylet first), and if unsuccessful after 1-2 minutes a tight-fitting face mask if attached.
ii. The neonate should be ventilated at 20-30 bpm to a maximum pressure of 20mmHg, and this
should be done for ~30 seconds before cardiac compressions are started if required.
ii. If the chest is not expanding, check the seal on the face mask or the ET tube placement, resuc-
tion the airway.
R. Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation
a. Compressions
i. Cardiac compressions are done with the thumb and forefinger on either side of the thorax with
approximately 100-120 compressions per minute.
ii. In neonates, thoracic compressions actually cause cardiac compression (vs. generalized thoracic
compression seen in larger animals).
b.Venous access
i. Intravenous access is ideal for delivery of drugs for resuscitation, but intraosseous routes work
well also.
ii. When an IO catheter is placed it is essential to remove it as soon as possible.
ii. The goal is to use the IO catheter as a bridge to increase volume and make placement of an IV
catheter possible.
c.Drugs
i.
 Epinephrine has both alpha and beta adrenergic activity and is the first-line drug during cardio-
pulmonary arrest.
ii. It is started after 30 seconds of chest compressions while the animal is effectively ventilated.
ii. The dose is 0.01 mg/kg for the first dose and then 0.1 mg/kg for subsequent doses.
iv. Recently, vasopressin has been advocated for cardiopulmonary arrest in humans with
asystole.
1. In a pediatric porcine model, vasopressin combined with epinephrine was better for resuscita-
tion than either drug alone.
2. Vasopressin is an accepted treatment for children with vasodilatory shock after cardiac
surgery and for neonatal congestive heart failure.
3. Vasopressin can be administered intravenously, via the endotracheal tube, or through an
intraosseous catheter.
4. The suggested dosage of vasopressin for CPCR is 0.8 units/kg body weight intravenously.
There are no published dosages for kittens.
v.Acidosis due to decreased perfusion (i.e., lactic acidosis) and decreased ventilation {i.e., respira-
tory acidosis) is common during cardiopulmonary arrest.
1. Ideally should be addressed by treating the primary problems {i.e., increasing perfusion and
ventilation).
2. Severe acidosis can decrease myocardial contractility; this could be critical in neonates, who
have a lower percentage of myocardial contractile fibers than adults.
Chapter 36 Pediatric Emergencies
501
3. It can also blunt responses to catecholamines, which again is critical in neonates, who have
a lower percentage of sympathetic fibers in their myocardium compared to adults.
4. The use of buffers (e.g., sodium bicarbonate) is controversial because they increase sodium
levels, cause hyperosmolality, can cause paradoxical CNS and intracellular acidosis, and
increase carbon dioxide.
5. The guidelines from the American Heart Association Mamual of Neonatal Advanced Life
Support in humans do not recommend bicarbonate as frontline therapy due to lack of evi-
dence for its efficacy.
vi. Glucose is the main energy substrate of the neonatal brain and myocardium and should
be monitored frequently during an arrest and supplemented as needed, but avoid
oversupplementation and hyperglycemia, as this can lead to further brain cellular damage post
cardiac resuscitation.
vii. Ionized calcium has been shown to be low in human neonates.
1. Neonates also have an increased requirement for calcium for contractility than adults.
 2. Calcium is not recommended for cardiopulmonary arrest in human neonates, however.
S.  Head trauma
a. Children have a higher percentage of diffuse brain injury during trauma compared with adults, and
this is thought to be due to their greater head-to-torso ratio.
b. The neonatal brain also has a higher water content, lacks complete axonal myelinization, and may
be more susceptible to hypoxia and hypotension than adults.
c. There may also be a greater susceptibility to apoptosis and delayed cell death during head trauma
in children compared with adults.
 d. With all head trauma cases, the goals are to improve oxygen delivery, decrease intracranial pressure
{ICP), and maximize cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP),
e. Children have a lower ICP as well as a lower MAP compared with adults.
i. The author is unaware of ICP values in normal kittens.
f. Since CPP is equal to the MAP minus the ICP, it can be seen that MAP must be kept high and ICP
kept low in order to maximize CPP.
npe u paisaans si shuu e aaoqe anssad pooq soisas aui day ot Adeiaui pmy aieudoiddy a
head trauma and has been associated with improved survival.
h. Since CPP depends on adequate cardiac output and adequate ventilation, these should be optimized
in head trauma patients.
i. Both hyper- and hypoventilation should be avoided in favor of normocarbia.
j. Hyperventilation to reduce PaC02 to less than 3S mmHg may be helpful as a temporary bridge
( usually to surgery to remove a subdural hemorrhage) in an emergency patient with impending signs
of brain herniation.
k. The resulting vasoconstriction caused by the hyperventilation can decrease the CPP in the healthy
brain (due to intact autoregulation), leading to decreased oxygen delivery and hypoxia.
1. Once volume has been addressed {i.e., fluid therapy), vasopressors may be administered if MAP is
still low—dosage must be tailored to each neonate. Starting at the lowest dosage for the drug chosen
(dopamine, dobutamine, epinephrine, etc.), the dosage is increased in S-10-minute increments
depending on response fi.e., increased heart rate, increased blood pressure, improved urine output,
improved mentation, etc.).
m. Seizures after head trauma appear to be more common in children than in adults and can occur
with minimal brain damage.
 n. Elevation of the head to 30 degrees has been suggested, but this must be done without compressing
the jugular veins (i.e., using a tilt table or a foam wedge).
i. The habit of placing a rolled up towel under the neck to elevate the head is potentially dangerous,
as compression of the jugular veins may increase ICP.
0. Jugular catheters or neck bandages should not be placed in head trauma patients. Any blood needed
should be drawn from a peripheral vein or a long saphenous catheter.
502
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
p. In people, measurement of ICP can be made directly, but this is impractical in most veterinary
situations.
q. The Cushing's refex can be helpful to gauge increasing ICP. In adults when ICP increases, the sys-
temic blood pressure rises, and as a response the heart rate decreases.
i. Unfortunately, this reflex has not been evaluated in neonatal and pediatric patients. Since the
autonomic nervous system does not mature until 9-10 weeks of age, there is reason to believe
that the Cushing's reflex may be unreliable in this age group.
r. In summary, the magnitude of head trauma can be difficult to assess in kittens.
s. Treatment involves optimizing systemic blood pressure using IV fluids and vasopressors as needed,
raising the head 30 degrees without compression of the jugular veins, and optimizing oxygenation
and ventilation.
T.Conclusion
treatment a challenge. Adult parameters cannot be relied upon in these patients, and an awareness
of these unique characteristics is essential for any practitioner with a feline neonatal and pediatric
patient base. In addition, many laboratory and pharmacological data differ dramatically in neonates
compared with adults of the same species. Familiarity with these variations is essential in the moni-
toring and treatment of the neonatal and pediatric illness such as hypovolemia, shock, and sepsis.
37
OCULAR EMERGENCIES
Deborah C. Mandell
Unique Features
1. Cats will prolapse their third eyelid in response to pain, and topical anesthetic may be needed to
evaluate the eye.
2. Clinically normal cats can have low Schirmer tear test results.
 3. Feline herpesvirus can cause dendritic corneal ulcers.
4. Anaphylaxis and severe chemosis can occur secondary to topical neomycin administration.
5. Debride nonhealing corneal ulcers; do not perform keratotomy.
6. Corneal sequestra are unique to cats and are more common in brachycephalic breeds. An area of
black pigment will be seen on the cornea.
7. Anterior uveitis usually has a serious underlying cause.
 8. Secondary glaucoma is more common and may be due to anterior uveitis or intraocular neoplasia.
The eye is usually blind and not painful.
 9. It takes significant blunt force to propose a cat's eye; therefore, there is usually significant concur-
rent head trauma.
10. Be very careful not to pull on the eye that is being enucleated; the contralateral eye can become
blind because the optic chiasm is very short.
11. Systemic hypertension is a common cause of retinal detachments and blindness.
12. Enrofloxacin can cause nonreversible retinal degeneration.
14. Conjunctivitis most commonly has an infectious cause. FHV-1 and Chlamydopbila felis are
common pathogens.
15. Keratoconjunctivitis sicca is not common and may be secondary to FHV-1.
16. Ocular trauma, intraocular surgery, trauma to the lens, and chronic uveitis may all lead to post-
traumatic sarcoma, an extremely malignant intraocular neoplasia.
 mag aiaa ue suis i a pa aq uo saa renoo ae 'le ou jn iso
tests. If an eye is not responding to treatment or there are multiple disease processes in the same eye, an
ophthalmologist should always be consulted.
1.
Clinical signs
A. Red eye
B. Grey or cloudy eye
C. Acute blindness—unilateral or bilateral
D. Big or enlarged eye
E. Ocular discharge
F. Blepharospasm/squinting
503
504
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
II. Ophthalmic examination
A. Look for asymmetry of face, orbits, and globes.
 B. Evaluate periorbital structures, conjunctiva, sclera, cornea, anterior chamber, lens, vitreous, and
fundus.
C. Neurological exam—menace (may be difficult to evaluate in cats), pupillary light reflex (direct and
consensual), and palpebral or corneal reflex.
D. Cats will protrude the third eyelid, which makes visualization of the globe difficult. Gentle restraint
and a dim light may help. Topical anesthetic (proparacaine 0.5%) can be used to push the third
eyelid out of the way if needed.
Il. Diagnostic and monitoring procedures
A.Schirmer tear test
1. Should be first diagnostic test performed on all cases.
2. Normal is about 17 mm/minute (see KCS below).
B. Fluorescein stain test
1. Extremely important for all feline ocular emergencies
2. Diagnoses and outlines extent of corneal ulcers, lacerations, chemical injuries, and trauma
3. Multiple techniques for performing fluorescein stain
a. Put drop of eye wash onto strip and let stain drip into eye.
b. Put fluorescein stain strip into 3-cc syringe with eye wash and put drop of stain into eye.
c. Place strip directly onto sclera/conjunctiva.
 4. A descemetocele or perforation in the cornea will not take up stain.
 5. If there is leakage of aqueous humor, can see rivulets of stain where the perforation occurs
(Seidel test).
 6. Also tests patency of tear duct (will see stain coming out of nostril).
 7. Rose Bengal stain is reported to be superior to fluorescein stain for herpetic dendritic corneal
ulcers.
C. Tonometry—useful to diagnose glaucoma and anterior uveitis; normal intraocular pressure (IOP)
is 15-25 mmHg
1. Indentation tonometry—measures intraocular pressure by determining the distance the plunger
can indent the cornea.
a. Schiotz tonometer (Miltex, Germany)—more difficult in cats than dogs (fig. 37.1)
i.  1-2 drops of topical anesthetic (proparacaine 0.5%) is placed in eye(s).
ii. Lightest weight is placed on Schiotz.
 ii. The cornea must be parallel with ground, so cat must be in dorsal recumbancy with head
up or sitting with head tilted toward ceiling.
iv. Place Schiotz on cornea, read scale, compare scale reading on chart to IOP number.
v. Can use the chart established for humans (fig. 37.2).
2. Applanation tonometry—measures IOP by determining the amount of force needed to flatten
the cornea.
a. Tonopen (Mentor, Norwell, MA)—much easier to use, flattens a small region of cornea.
Cornea does not need to be parallel to ground.
b. 1-2 drops of topical anesthetic (proparacaine 0.5 %) is instilled in eye(s). Wait 5 minutes
for full effect.
C. Place tonopen probe tip cover on tip of tonopen.
d. Holding the tonopen like a pencil, gently touch the cornea with the tip.
e. A beep will sound with each of three readings and then an average will appear after a longer
beep.
f. Tonopen should be calibrated once a day.
IV. Management of specific conditions
A. Corneal ulcer (box 37.1)
Chapter 37  Ocular Emergencies
505
Fig. 37.1. Using the Schiotz tonometer on a cat.
1. Causes include trauma, infectious (viral, bacterial), decreased tear production, underlying
ocular conditions (entropion), foreign body, and topical irritants/chemical injury.
2. Clinical signs include blepharospasm, corneal edema, corneal neovascularization, conjunctival
hyperemia/congestion and possibly a miotic pupil.
3. Diagnosed based on fluorescein stain results
a. Classification of corneal ulcer depends on amount or depth of cornea affected, whether
secondary infection is present, or if there is nonadhered epithelium (nonhealing).
4. Feline herpes virus {FHV-1) causes classic “dendritic” corneal ulcers (look like branches on a
tree; fig. 37.3).
5. Can have a reflex uveitis and miotic pupil.
6. If the cornea has perforated, then additional clinical signs can include a misshapen cornea, iris
protruding to and potentially through the cornea, a shallow anterior chamber, aqueous flaré
or fibrin strands in the anterior chamber, and a fibrin clot {red and white/tan piece of tissue)
on the area of cornea that ruptured (see below). Rivulets of fluorescein stain where the perfora-
tion is on the cornea can also be seen, if not sealed as well.
7. Treatment depends on depth and cause of ulcer.
 8. For deep to penetrating corneal ulcers, an ophthalmologist should be consulted to discuss surgi-
cal options.
 9. Anaphylaxis has been reported in a cat secondary to the neomycin in triple antibiotic ophthal-
mic preparations. More commonly, chemosis and conjunctivitis can occur. Thus, other topical
antibiotics are preferred {i.e., erythromycin 0.3% ointment) for uncomplicated corneal ulcers.
a. Superficial ulcer—involves the epithelium of the cornea (fig. 37.4)
i.Topical antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3%) every 6-8 hours for 1 week
i. Topical atropine ointment (1%) every 12 hours if miotic pupil present. Atropine oint-
ment is much less irritating than suspension for cats.
ili. Elizabethan collar
iv. Topical antiviral therapy may be indicated if recurrent, dendritic, or feline herpes virus
is suspected. Trifluridine 1% or idoxuridine 0.1 % can be compounded at a pharmacy,
use every 6-8 hours for 1-2 weeks.
Weight,grams
5.5g
7.5 g
10g
15g
Schiotz
Measurement
Intraocular Pressure,
,mmHg
0.0
41.5
59.1
81.7
127.5
0.5
37.8
54.2
75.1
117.9
1.0
34.5
49.8
69.3
109.3
1.5
31.6
45.8
64.0
101.4
2.0
29.0
42.1
59.1
94.3
2.5
26.6
38.8
54.7
88.0
3.0
24.4
35.8
50.6
81.8
3.5
22.4
33.0
46.9
76.2
4.0
20.6
30.4
43.4
71.0
4.5
18.9
28.0
40.2
66.2
5.0
17.3
25.8
37.2
61.8
5.S
15.9
23.8
34.4
57.6
6.0
14.6
21.9
31.8
53.6
6.5
13.4
20.1
29.4
49.9
7.0
12.2
18.5
27.2
46.5
7.5
11.2
17.0
25.1
43.2
8.0
10.2
15.6
23.1
40.2
8.5
9.4
14.3
21.3
38.1
9.0
8.5
13.1
19.6
34.6
9.5
7.8
12.0
18.0
32.0
10.0
7.1
10.9
16.5
29.6
10.5
6.5
10.0
15.1
27.4
11.0
5.9
9.0
13.8
25.3
11.5
5.3
8.3
12.6
23.3
12.0
4.9
7.5
11.5
21.4
12.5
4.4
6.8
10.5
19.7
13.0
4.0
6.2
9.5
18.1
13.5
5.6
8.6
16.5
14.0
5.0
7.8
15.1
14.5
4.5
7.1
13.7
15.0
4.0
6.4
12.6
15.5
5.8
11.4
16.0
5.2
10.4
16.5
4.7
9.4
17.0
4.2
8.5
17.5
7.7
18.0
6.9
18.5
6.2
19.0
5.6
19.5
4.9
20.0
4.5
Fig. 37.2.
 The conversion table for the Schiotz tonometer, redrawn from the human conversion/calibration toble
that accompanies the Schiotz tonometer.
The 5.5-g weight is the plunger, not an added weight.
506
Chapter 37Ocular Emergencies
507
Box 37.1. Corneal ulcers.
1. Look for underlying cause (Schirmer tear test for KCS).
2. Fluorescein stain to diagnose and evaluate extent of ulcer.
3. All corneal ulcers are treated with topical antibiotics.
a. Erythromycin is a common first-line topical antibiotics.
corneal ulcer is present.
4. Topical atropine should always be used if there is a refex uveitis (miotic pupil), descemetocele, or
melting or perforated cornea.
5. Systemic antibiotics and topical autologous serum should be used if the ulcer is infected/melting.
6. Systemic antibiotics and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications should be added if there is a
perforated cornea.
7. May need topical antiviral medications if secondary to FHV-1.
Fig. 37.3。 Dendritic corneal lesions secondary to feline herpes infection (photograph courtesy of Dr. Steve Gross).
v. The eye should be fluorescein stained in 1 week to evaluate response to treatment. An
uncomplicated superficial ulcer should heal in 5-7 days.
b. Deep ulcer—involves the corneal stroma (fig. 37.5)
i. Topical antibiotics (ciprofloxacin 0.3%) every 2-4 hours
i. Topical atropine ointment (1%) every 12 hours
ili. Elizabethan collar
508
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 37.4. A superficial ulcer in a cat. Reproduced from the Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Crifica!
Care, 2nd ed., edited by L. King and A. Boag. With permission of BSAVA
Fig. 37.5. A deep corneal ulcer secondary to a cat fight.
iv. Deep ulcers can take up to 4 weeks to heal. The eye should be fluorescein stained in
weekly intervals to monitor response to treatment.
V.
Surgery {e.g., conjunctival flap) is recommended if 50% or more of the corneal
s pe jo ard an a dy uo d h  ai i s
involved.
c. Descemetocele—ulcer is down to Descemet's membrane; will see a clear or black area in
the center of the ulcer.
i. Topical antibiotics {ciprofloxacin 0.3%) every 2 hours
ii. Topical atropine solution every 6 hours. Do not use ointment if the cornea is perforated.
The oily base can cause severe intraocular inflammation.
Chapter 37Ocular Emergencies
509
ili. Systemic antibiotics {amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg orally every 12 hours)
iv. Elizabethan collar
v.  Surgery (i.e., conjunctival flap) is the ideal treatment and should be performed as soon
as possible.
d. Melting ulcer-involves an infected ulcer, most commonly with Gram-negative bacteria
(Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus spp. E. coli) that produce collagenases
i.
 Should obtain a swab for cytology and aerobic culture and sensitivity
ii. Topical antibiotics (ciprofloxacin 0.3%) every 2 hours
ili. Topical atropine solution (1 %) every 4-6 hours
iv. Topical autologous serum—one drop every 2 hours; needs refrigeration; contains anti-
collagenases/alpha macroglobulins
V.
Systemic antibiotics {amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15mg/kg orally every 12 hours or
doxycycline 10 mg/kg orally every 24 hours)
vi. Elizabethan collar
vi. Surgery may be required if not responding or if underlying ulcer is deep or
perforated.
e. Perforated corneal ulcer (fig. 37.6)—-can be managed medically until surgery (e.g., conjunc-
tival flap) can be performed.
i.
Topical antibiotics (ciprofloxacin 0.3%) every 2 hours
 ii. Topical atropine solution (do not use ointment if cornea is perforated; the oily base can
cause severe intraocular inflammation) every 6 hours
ii.  Systemic antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg orally every 12 hours)
iv. Elizabethan collar
v.Systemic nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication (meloxicam 0.01 mg/kg orally once
a day for 3-5 days)
vi. If the anterior capsule of the lens was disturbed when the corneal perforation occurred
(may see tract of fibrin in the anterior chamber or fibrin or opacity on the anterior lens
capsule), then systemic corticosteroids (prednisone 0.5 mg/kg every 12 hours) are
Fig. 37.6. A perforated corneal ulcer. This cat was in a fight with another cat. The only injury he sustained was
to his eye.
510
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
indicated due to the extreme and intense lens-induced anterior uveitis that can follow.
The owner should be warned that if the anterior uveitis cannot be controlled with
medical management or is leading to secondary glaucoma, the lens may need to be
removed in the future. The eye should be reevaluated in 1-2 days.
vi. Surgery is the ideal treatment and should be performed if the rupture is not sealing or
the corneal reruptures after attempting medical management.
f. Nonhealing, indolent, or recurrent corneal ulcer
i.
 Brachycephalic breeds may be more predisposed.
ii. May be secondary to feline herpes virus.
ii. Less common in cats than dogs.
iv. Fluorescein stain extends beyond the edges of the ulcer due to non adhered
epithelium.
v. After instillation of a topical anesthetic (proparacaine O.5 %), use a cotton swab to
gently debride nonadhered epithelium (fig. 37.7).
vi. Do not perform a grid or punctate keratotomy as would be performed next in dogs.
Studies have shown longer healing times and increased risk of developing a sequestrum
when this is done.
g. Corneal sequestrum (fig. 37.8)
i. Unique to cats
eyelid, and an area of thick black pigment, which is the sequestrum.
ii. The cause is unknown, but it is more common in brachycephalic breeds.
iv. Treatment involves removing the sequestrum with a lamellar keratectomy by an
ophthalmologist.
10. All corneal ulcers should be restained and rechecked in S-7 days to ensure healing. A superficial
ulcer should be healed at this time. A deep ulcer may take 24 weeks to heal and should be
checked weekly to ensure that it is not becoming a complicated or nonhealing ulcer.
11. An ophthalmologist should always be consulted if the ulcer is not responding to treatment or
if there is more than one disease process in the same eye making treatment more
challenging.
Fig. 37.7. Facement of a cotton swab to debride a nonhealing corneal ulcer
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
511
Fig. 37.8. A corneal sequestrum. Note the corneal edema, corneal neovascularization, and black pigment located
ventral and medial.
Fig. 37.9.
 Anterior uveitis and hypopyon in a cat.
1. As opposed to that in dogs, anterior uveitis in cats usually has a serious underlying cause.
 2. A complete ocular examination including fundus examination should be performed to look for
chorioretinitis lesions or panophthalmitis (hyporeflexive or brown fuzzy areas in ta petal area;
fig. 37.10).
512
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 37.2.Anterior uveitis.
1. Clinical signs include a swollen, “fluffy” iris, aqueous flare, blepharospasm, and a miotic pupil.
2. Always look for retinal lesions.
3. Most common causes are infectious and neoplastic
4. All cats should have a thorough medical workup.
5. Treatment includes topical corticosteroids, topical atropine, and treating the underlying cause.
6. Prognosis is guarded.
7. Can develop secondary glaucoma.
Fig. 37.10.  Chorioretinitis in a 6-year-old cat diagnosed with lymphosarcoma.
3. Causes include infectious (FIP, FeLV, FIV, Toxoplasmosis gondii, Bartonella spp., fungal),
sepsis, idiopathic, neoplastic (lymphosarcoma, iris melanoma), lens-induced, immune
mediated, and trauma.
4. Can have a spectrum of inflammation from mild inflammation of the iris to severe hypopyon
(fig. 37.9).
 5. Clinical signs include blepharospasm; photophobia; conjunctival hyperemia; a red, inflamed,
"fluffy” iris; prolapsed nictatans; aqueous flare; hyphema; hypopyon; and a miotic pupil due
to ciliary spasm.
6. Can measure IOP, which will be low (<10 mmHg) due to decreased aqueous production in
acute anterior uveitis. In chronic or severe uveitis, the IOP can be elevated and secondary
glaucoma can be present due to decreased drainage (see "C. Glaucoma,” below).
7. The diagnostic plan for any cat presenting with anterior uveitis includes viral serology
(FIV, FeLV, FIP), toxoplasmosis titers (IgM and IgG), Bartonella spp. titer, complete blood
count, serum chemistry panel, chest radiographs for metastatic disease, fungal titers, possible
abdominal ultrasound for underlying neoplasia, and possible aspirates of the aqueous for
cytology.
8. Treatment includes topical corticosteroids (prednisone acetate 1%) every 6-8 hours once a
concurrent corneal ulcer is ruled out, topical atropine ointment (1%, every 12 hours) if the
 IOP is low, and treating the underlying cause. If the IOP is normal or elevated, then atropine
is contraindicated (see C. Glaucoma below)
9. If secondary to lens injury, the lens may need to be removed if the anterior uveitis cannot be
controlled with medical management or is leading to secondary glaucoma for the best chance
to preserve vision.
Chapter 37  Ocular Emergencies
513
Box 37.3.Glaucoma.
1. Primary glaucoma is uncommon in cats.
2. Secondary glaucoma is more common and due to anterior uveitis, neoplasia, or trauma.
3. An IOP of >25 mmHg is indicative of glaucoma.
 4. Cats usually present with chronic secondary glaucoma.
5. The most common sign is buphthalmia.
6. The eye is usually irreversibly blind and nonpainful.
7. Treatment for secondary glaucoma includes treating the underlying cause and topical carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors.
8. Latanoprost may not be effective in cats.
Fig. 37.11. Secondary glaucoma. Note the buphthalmia and fixed, dilated pupil in the right eye. The lef eye
has anterioruveis.Reproduced from the Manualof Canine and Feline Emergency and Critical Care,2nd ed., edied
by L. King and A. Boag. With permission of BSAVA.
10. The eye should be reevaluated in 5-7 days to determine the response to treatment and to
determine if further therapy or surgery is indicated.
11. The prognosis for resolution and vision is more guarded due to the prognosis of the underlying
diseases. Recurrence and secondary glaucoma are common.
C. Glaucoma—increased intraocular pressure (box 37.3)
1. Normal intraocular pressure in cats is 15-25 mmHg.
 2. Primary or congenital glaucoma is rare in cats but has been reported in Siamese, Burmese, and
Persian cats.
3. Secondary glaucoma (fig. 37.11) is much more common in cats.
a. Causes include anterior uveitis, intraocular neoplasia (lymphosarcoma, iris melanoma),
anterior lens luxation, hyphema, trauma with lens injury, and corneal ulcer.
b. Cats usually present with chronic secondary glaucoma.
c. The eye is usually irreversibly blind by the time the animal presents to a veterinarian.
4. The most common clinical sign of secondary glaucoma is buphthalmos. There will also be a
fixed and dilated pupil with a negative menace. Other less common clinical signs include
blepharospasm, corneal edema, and scleral injection. There can also be a secondary lens luxa-
tion. The eye is usually not painful if chronic.
5. The underlying cause of the secondary glaucoma may also be seen.
514
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
6. Diagnosis is based on IOP measurement. An IOP measurement of >2S mmHg is indicative of
glaucoma.
7. Treatment involves treating the underlying cause, increasing drainage, and decreasing produc-
tion of aqueous humor.
8. If acute glaucoma is secondary to anterior lens luxation, then removal of the lens is indicated.
If the owner cannot afford lens extraction surgery, treatment with topical carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors and beta-blockers three times a day can be tried.
 9. Since acute glaucoma is less common, aggresive emergency treatment to rapidly decreased IOP
may not be indicated as in dogs. However, if the eye is painful and there are no underlying
10. If a cat is presenting with acute glaucoma, emergency treatment is similar to that for dogs.
 Drugs used to increase drainage include mannitol and latanoprost.
a. Intravenous mannitol at 1-2g/kg over 20-30 minutes. This is an osmotic diuretic that
increases drainage of the aqueous humor.
i.Use cautiously in dehydrated animals or animals with renal or cardiac disease. Serum
sodium, packed cell volume, total solids, and renal values should be checked before
giving mannitol in dehydrated patients or patients with a history of renal disease. If
moderately to severely dehydrated, if azotemic or if the patient has a history of conges-
tive heart failure or signs of congestive heart failure, mannitol should not be used.
ii. It can significantly decrease IOP within an hour
b. Latanoprost is a prostaglandin analog that has been shown to significantly decrease IOP in
humans, dogs, and horses.
i. It works by increasing drainage through the alternate uveoscleral route. This route is
only responsible for 3% of aqueous drainage in cats.
ii. It also causes an intense miosis, and some feel that this is the major factor in increasing
drainage (constricting the pupil opens the drainage angle).
ili. Studies have mixed results in whether latanoprost significantly decreases IOP in cats.
iv. It is contraindicated if there is an anterior lens luxation and should not be used if there
is an anterior uveitis.
v. However, many ophthalmologists will use it in cases of primary glaucoma.
11. Drugs that decrease aqueous production are more commonly used in feline glaucoma.
 a. Dorzolamide 2% topically every 8-12 hours. This is a topical carbonic anhydrous inhibitor
that has fewer side effects than the systemic carbonic anhydrous inhibitors.
b. Timolol 0.5% topically every 8-12 hours {for timolol). This is a beta blocker that decreases
aqueous production. It should be used cautiously in cats with asthma due to the potential
of an increase in airway smooth muscle tone and bronchoconstriction.
c. Pilocarpine 1% topically every 15-30 minutes initially. This constricts the pupil, thus
opening the drainage angle but is used uncommonly because it is very irritating.
d. Methazolamide 2 mg/kg orally every 12 hours. This is a systemic carbonic anhydrous inhibi-
tor and thus side effects such as anorexia and vomiting are more common.
12. Medical management should be attempted and may maintain a normal IOP and comfortable
eye. Due to the chronic nature of glaucoma in cats, if medical management has failed and if
the eye is irreversibly blind and painful, surgery may be the best option.
a. Enucleation or exenteration {removing the entire contents of the bony orbit) is indicated on
any eye where intraocular neoplasia may be the underlying cause of the glaucoma.
b. If primary glaucoma is suspected and the eye is not responding to medical management,
then an ophthalmologist can perform a procedure that creates selective damage to the ciliary
body (which produces aqueous humor). Laser cycloablation uses a Nd: YAG or diode laser,
whereas cyclocryotherapy freezes the area of the ciliary body with either liquid nitrogen or
nitrous oxide.
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
515
Fig. 37.12. Severe proptosis. This cat presented after being hit by a car. He also sustained a symphyseal man-
dibular fracture. This eye was eventually enucleated after the cat was stabilized.
13. Prognosis is dependent on underlying cause and response to treatment.
14. Aqueous humor misdirection glaucoma is another less common cause of glaucoma.
The aqueous is being directed into the vitreous or posterior chamber instead of the anterior
chamber. This occludes the iridocorneal angle. Clinical signs include a uniformly shallow
anterior chamber and an anteriorly displaced lens. The exact cause is unknown, but
 one theory is that there is an abnormal anterior hyaloid. Referral to an ophthalmologist
is recommended for medical management and possible lens extraction and anterior
vitrectomy.
 D. Proptosis—forward displacement of the globe with the eyelid margins caudal to the globe (fig.
37.12).
1. It occurs secondary to head trauma, most commonly secondary to hit by car, bite wounds,
high-rise syndrome, or blunt-force injuries.
a. The amount of force required to proptose a cat's eye is much greater than the more common
brachycephalic dog. This means there is usually significant head trauma with other injuries
along with the proptosed eye.
2. Must treat and manage head trauma before attempting surgery for the eye.
3. Apply sterile lubricant every 1-2 hours {artificial tears) while waiting for surgery to prevent the
globe from drying out.
a. The decision is based on integrity of the globe and extraocular muscles and owner
compliance.
 b. The prognosis for return of vision is guarded to poor in a proptosed eye; it is replaced for
cosmetic reasons only.
c. If there is a penetrating wound in the globe, the majority (more than two) of the extraocular
muscles are avulsed, there is infected tissue, or the owners would be una ble to medicate, then
enucleation is the best option.
d. If the globe is intact, the majority of the extraocular muscles are intact (still attached to the
sclera) and healthy and the owners are able to medicate yet understand that enucleation may
still be needed, then replacement with tarsorrhaphy can be performed.
516
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
关关X
enter 6-8 mm away from the upper eyelid margin, exit through the Meibomian glands, enter the lower lid Meibomian
au ui yopq sa uu apu ai s d yonu ob ui pa m aui woy aa way xa pun 'spu
reverse direction forming a horizontal matress suture. Rubber bands, IV tubing, or French red rubber catheters can
be used for stents.
5. Replacement of the globe with temporary tarsorrhapy
a. Avoid anesthetics that can increase intraocular pressure (i.e., ketamine).
b. The cat should be placed under general anesthesia once it is deemed systemically stable.
C.
The periorbital area is clipped and gently scrubbed with betadine solution.
d.  A lateral canthotomy is performed.
e. Using 2-0 nylon, about 0.5-1 cm away from the lid margins, a stay suture is placed in the
upper and lower lid.
f.
 A generous amount of sterile lubricant is placed on the globe.
g. While liting out and up on the stay sutures, the globe is gently pushed back into the orbit
using a scalpel handle.
h. The stay sutures are crossed and held to prevent reproptosis.
Using 3-0 to 4-0 nylon or silk suture and tension-relieving stents, horizontal mattress sutures
are placed as shown in figure 37.13.
 Pieces of intravenous tubing, extension sets, sterile rubber bands, or red rubber catheters
can be used for the stents.
k. The medial canthus is left open to allow placement of medications.
1.
 The lateral canthotomy is closed using 4-0 braided absorbable suture or silk in a simple
interrupted pattern.
m. Aftercare is crucial to prevent infection and inflammation.
i.
 Topical antibiotics—tobramycin or gentamycin 0.3 % solution every 6 hours
ii. Topical atropine solution 1% every 12 hours
ili. Systemic antibiotics-amoxicillin-clavulonic acid twice a day for 2 days and once a day
for 3-4 days or enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg once a day)
iv. Short, weaning course of anti-inflammatory doses of corticosteroids (0.5 mg/kg orally
twice a day for 1-2 days then once a day for 2 days then every other day for two
treatments)
n. Remove sutures in 14 days.
0. Postreplacement complications/sequelae
i.
Infection/a bscess
ii. Reproptosis
iil. Exposure keratitis-the cornea loses innervation and thus is susceptible to irritation.
iv. Dorsolateral stra bismus—may correct itself over time
V.
May require a permanent partial tarsorrhaphy if persistent corneal disease
vi. May ultimately need enucleation if complications occur
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
517
6. Enucleation—consult a surgery text for descriptions and methods of enucleation. The most
important aspect to remember about enucleation in cats is that their optic chiasm is very short
compared to dogs. When transecting the extraocular muscles off of the sclera and lifting the eye
out of the orbit, if the eye is pulled out too vigorously or far, the optic chiasm can be stretched
 to a point where the contralateral eye becomes blind.
E. Ocular foreign body
1. The most common ocular foreign bodies are little pieces of wood, grass awns, or sticks that get
imbedded in the conjunctiva or cornea.
2. Clinical signs include blepharospasm, conjunctival hyperemia, and corneal edema around the
foreign body if it is in the cornea.
3. May need to place a topical anesthetic agent (proparacaine 0.5%) in the eye to allow visualiza-
tion of the entire globe.
4. Will most likely see the foreign body in the conjunctiva or cornea.
 5. Techniques to dislodge the foreign body depend on the depth of the penetration.
a. First, try flushing copious amounts of sterile eye wash to dislodge the foreign body.
May need to place 1-2 drops of a topical anesthetic (proparacaine 0.5%) for the cat to allow
this.
b. If this is unsuccessful, the next technique will most likely require sedation.
C. If in the conjunctiva, try to remove it with small forceps. If it will not dislodge, the area of
conjunctiva that is affected may be removed, if small enough, with the foreign body.
d. Treat the conjunctival wound with topical antibiotics {erythromycin 0.3%) every 6 hours for
1 week. If there is significant inflammation or infection, then systemic antibiotics should be
started as well (amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg orally twice a day for 1 week). The eye
should be rechecked in 1 week.
10 qems uonoo e Susn eauoo aui jo ino Apoq uaiaoy aui yl oi Aul ueo bauos aul ul fl "a
25-ga needle, being careful not to push it deeper into the cornea.
f. Fluorescein stain the cornea once the foreign body is removed.
g. Treat the remaining corneal ulcer with topical antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3% every 8 hours)
and topical atropine {1%) ointment or solution every 12 hours if there is a reflex uveitis for
7-14 days. The eye should be rechecked in 3-5 days and then weekly until resolved.
h. If the foreign body spans most of the cornea or penetrates the cornea into the anterior
chamber, then the cornea will have to be sutured and a conjunctival flap may be needed once
the foreign body is removed. Consultation with an ophthalmologist is recommended.
F.Acute blindness (box 37.4)
Box 37.4. Acute blindness.
1. Clinical signs include dilated pupils with negative menace.
 2. Can be due to primary ocular disease (e.g., glaucoma), primary neurologic disease (e.g., brain tumor),
or systemic disease (e.g., infectious).
 3. A common cause of acute blindness is retinal detachment secondary to systemic hypertension.
a. The retina can reattach and vision may return if the underlying cause can be treated
successfully
4. Can visualize detached retina with focal penlight source directed through the pupil.
 5. Always perform an indirect systemic blood pressure measurement.
6. If not hypertensive, then a more aggressive medical workup searching for infectious and neoplastic
causes is warranted.
7. Enrofloxacin can cause an irreversible retinal degeneration.
518
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 37.14. A 16-year-old cat that presented with a 2-day history of acute blindness. Note the bilateral fixed
and dilated pupils.
1. Determine if it is truly acute or if it appears acute to owner but actually is a chronic process
(i.e., progressive retinal atrophy).
2. Causes include retinal detachment, panuveitis, anterior uveitis, enrofloxacin, taurine deficiency,
encephalitis {i.e., FIP), cerebral vascular accident, brain tumor, retinal hemorrhage, and
glaucoma.
clinical signs are dependent on the underlying cause (i.e., negative menace but possible positive
PLR and neurologic signs [e.g., cortical blindness] vs. signs of anterior uveitis, glaucoma, etc).
Kittens will have a negative menace response until 10-12 weeks of age.
4. A thorough fundic examination should be performed in any animal that presents with blindness.
Look for evidence of retinal detachment, chorioretinitis, optic neuritis, or papilledema.
5. Retinal detachment is a very common cause of acute blindness in cats and is discussed below.
6. Enrofloxacin causes a nonreversible retinal degeneration. Fundic exam will reveal tapetal hyper-
reflectivity and vascular attenuation. This is thought to be a rare and idiosyncratic reaction to
the outer retinal tissues. Doses should not exceed 5 mg/kg once a day.
7. Diagnostic tests include intraocular pressure measurement, complete blood count, serum chem
istry panel, thyroid hormone level, urinalysis, and indirect blood pressure measurement. Once
systemic hypertension and glaucoma are ruled out, more extensive diagnostic tests, including
            
out metastatic disease, and abdominal ultrasound to rule out neoplasia, may be indicated.
Likewise, if primary neurologic disease is suspected, a cerebrospinal fluid tap and MRI may be
indicated
 8. Prognosis is dependent on underlying cause (e.g., grave for FIP encephalitis) and whether the
retinal lesions can resolve.
G. Retinal detachment—retinal pigment epithelium separates from photoreceptors.
1. Clinical signs include fixed and dilated pupils and negative menace response. May be unilateral
or bilateral.
2. An indirect or direct lens is usually not required to diagnose a detached retina. It can usually
be seen with a focal pen light source directed through the pupil. An indirect lens can then be
used to fully evaluate the fundus.
Chapter 37  Ocular Emergencies
519
systemic blood pressure was 280 mmHg. (Photograph courtesy of Dr. Mary Lassaline.)
3. The retina will be "ballooning" out and in multiple planes (fig. 37.15). The vessels will not be
on a smooth surface. May also see retinal hemorrhages.
4. The most common cause of retinal detachment is systemic hypertension. Other causes include
infectious (FeLV/FIV/FIP/fungal), neoplastic (lymphosarcoma), and trauma.
5. If systemic hypertension is present (Doppler blood pressure usually >200 mmHg), amlodipine
(Norvasc 0.625 mg once a day) should be started.
6. If due to systemic hypertension, the prognosis for vision is fair to guarded. The retina can reat-
tach and vision can return once systemic blood pressure is under control.
 7. Other causes of retinal detachment have a more guarded prognosis.
H. Chemical injury
1. The most common causes are topical products (shampoos, flea treatments, etc.) that accidentally
 get into the eye.
 2. Smoke secondary to being in a house fire can also lead to severe chemical injury to the corneas.
3. It leads to diffuse corneal irritation and abrasions to ulcers. Other clinical signs include chemosis
and conjunctivitis.
4. Treatment includes flushing the eyes out with copious amounts of sterile eye wash and topical
antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3% every 6-8 hours). Topical atropine ointment (1% every 12
hours) should be started if there is a reflex uveitis and miosis present.
5. The eye should be rechecked every S-7 days to determine response to treatment, and medica-
tions should be continued until the injury is healed.
I. Anterior lens luxation
1. Due to stretching of the zonules that suspend the lens
2. Clinical signs include abnormal depth to anterior chamber, corneal edema if the lens touches
the cornea, and visualizing the lens in the anterior chamber. If the lens is subluxated, may see
an aphakic crescent fthe lens is shifted down or to one side so there is an area of pupil where
520
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 37.16. An anterior lens luxation (photograph courtesy of Dr. Andras Komaromy).
gla ucoma.
3. Primary lens luxation is less common in cats but can occur due to senile zonular
degeneration.
4. Secondary lens luxation is more common and is due to chronic uveitis, chronic glaucoma, or
tra uma.
 5. Glaucoma secondary to anterior lens luxation is less common in cats as opposed to dogs due
to a deeper anterior chamber.
6. Surgery to remove the lens is not usually recommended in a secondary lens luxation since the
lens is not the primary problem. If there is a primary lens luxation and the eye is visual, then
surgery to remove the lens is recommended. There is still the potential for postintraocular surgery
glaucoma and intraocular sarcoma (see below).
J.Prolapsed nictatans
1. True prolapsed nictatans or third eyelid gland or "cherry eye" is uncommon in cats but requires
surgery to replace the third eyelid gland as in dogs. There is one report that suggested a Burmese
breed predilection (fig. 37.17); however, it is now reported in other breeds. As in dogs, it is not
a true emergency.
 2. Clinical signs include a red eye and an enlarged, prolapsed third eyelid gland. The edge of the
third eyelid will not be visible.
 3. Cats can have prolapsed nictatans very commonly secondary to a variety of diseases including
dehydration, loss of orbital fat (especially in geriatric cats), and anything that produces pain.
4. "Haws,” or a prolapsed nictatans secondary to a disparity of sympathetic innervation, can be
caused by GI disease, especially parasites, Chlamydopbilia felis, or herpes infection. Horner's
syndrome can also be seen. A drop of phenylephrine can be used to diagnose neurologic causes
if the nictatans returns to normal position. This usually spontaneously resolves in 46 weeks.
5. This should be differentiated from a true prolapsed third eyelid gland where the cartilage is
prolapsed.
K.  Corneal laceration
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
521
Fig. 37.17 Bilateral cherry eye in a Burmese cat (photograph courtesy of Dr. Steve Gross).
Fig. 37.18. A corneal laceration. Note the corneal edema. A twig caused this cat's laceration. Reproduced from
the Manual of Canine and Feline Emergency and Crifical Care, 2nd ed., edied by L. King and A. Boag. With
permission ofBSAVA.
1.Dueto trauma
2. Clinical signs depend on the depth of the laceration and include corneal edema, blepharospasm,
conjunctival hyperemia, anterior uveitis (either secondary or primary if the laceration is full
thickness), and visualization of the laceration (fig. 37.18).
3. Treatment is also dependent on the depth of the laceration.
522
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. If a superficial laceration, treat with topical antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3%, gentamycin 0.3%)
every 6 hours and topical atropine ointment (1%) every 12 hours.
5. The eye should be rechecked in 1 week. If uncomplicated, the laceration should heal in 1-2
weeks.
6. If a deep or full-thickness laceration is present, then surgery to debride the edges and then suture
the cornea with 6-0 to 9-0 absorbable (polyglactin or braided) may be needed. This may need
to be followed with a conjunctival flap/pedicle graft.
pauoad aq jouues Aiaans o pauuoad Aiaans aaeq oi aqeun Aoueuy aie siaumo aul f '2
in the near future, then treat aggressively similar to a perforated corneal ulcer—topical anti-
biotics (ciprofloxacin 0.3% suspension) every 2 hours, topical atropine solution (1%) every 6-8
hours, systemic antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg every 12 hours), and systemic
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medications (meloxicam 0.01 mg/kg once a day). The eye should
be rechecked every 1-2 days to monitor response to treatment initially to ensure that the cornea
has sealed and then weekly until resolved.
8. If the anterior lens capsule was disrupted when the laceration occurred (may see tract of fibrin
 in anterior chamber or fibrin on lens), then a tapering dose of systemic anti-inflammatory doses
of corticosteroids, instead of NSAIDs, is warranted due to the stronger anti-inflammatory prop-
erties. An extreme and intense anterior uveitis can occur and the owner should be warned that
the lens may need to be removed in the future if the eye does not respond to medical manage-
ment or if secondary glaucoma occurs. The eye should be rechecked every 1-2 days to monitor
response to treatment.
9. An Elizabethan collar should also be used.
L. Eyelid laceration
1. Due to trauma, for example, bite wounds
2. Clinical signs depend on depth and cause of laceration and include blood at the site of the
injury, blepharospasm, and pawing at the eye.
3. Treatment depends on the depth of the laceration.
4. If very superficial and the eyelid margins are apposed normally, then can treat as a superficial
wound with topical (erythromycin 0.3% every 6 -8 hours) and systemic antibiotics {amoxicillin-
clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg every 12 hours). The eye should be rechecked in 5-7 days.
5. If deep or full thickness, then surgery to reappose the eyelid margins is needed (fig. 37.19).
6. A simple interrupted pattern is used with 4-0 to 7-0 absorbable suture (braided or polyglactin)
in the subconjunctiva and then skin.
7. Extreme care must be taken to align the Meibomian glands on both sides of the wound. Once
in place, the sutures must not touch or rub against the cornea.
8. Topical and systemic antibiotics as described above are then instituted.
9. An Elizabethan collar should always be used.
10. The eye should be rechecked in 3-5 days and the cornea fluorescein stained to ensure that the
sutures are not irritating the cornea.
11. If the eyelid laceration involves the medial canthus and nasolacrimal system, an ophthalmolo
gist should perform the repair.
M. Hyphema—blood in the anterior chamber (fig. 37.20).
1. Can see flecks of blood to a pool of blood in the ventral aspect of the anterior chamber, to
the entire chamber filled with blood.
2. Causes include trauma, coagulapathy (thrombocytopenia or clotting factor deficiency), or
neoplasia (e.g., LSA).
3. May also be secondary to anterior uveitis or systemic hypertension.
4. Need to look for other signs of trauma or coagulapathy/bleeding.
5. If no other signs of tra uma, then diagnostic tests include complete blood count, serum chemistry
panel, full coagulation panel, systemic blood pressure measurement, and possibly diagnostic
tests for anterior uveitis {see above).
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
523
 Meibomian gland
Conjunctiva
1)  Enter eyelid about 3-4 mm away from margin
2) Exit through the middle of the eyelid width
3) Enter other eyelid (other part of laceration) about 2-3 mm from the margin
4) Exit through Meibomian glands
 5)  Enter first eyelid through Meibomian glands 
6) Exit through middle of eyelid width
    t    a p  
Fig. 37.19. Eyelid laceration repair. Enter the eyelid about 3-4mm away from the margin. Exit through the
middle of the eyelid width. Enter the other eyelid about 2-3 mm from the margin. Exit through the Meibomian glands.
about 3-4 mm away from the margin.
Fig. 37.20. Hyphema. Trauma, coagulapathy, and neoplasia are the most common causes of hyphema. This cat
also has thrombocytopenia and mesenteric lymphadenopathy secondary to lymphosarcoma. Reproduced from the
Manugl of Canine and Feline Emergency and Crinical Care, 2nd ed., edied by L. King and A. Boag. With permis-
sion of BSAVA.
6. Ultrasound of the eye may also diagnose an intraocular mass.
 7. An IOP measurement should be taken due to the potential of secondary glaucoma.
 8. Treatment involves treating the underlying cause. If anterior uveitis is suspected, then treat
as described above. If secondary to intraocular neoplasia, then enucleation or exenteration is
warranted.
9. Topical corticosteroids (predisolone acetate 1%) can be used three times a day once a corneal
ulcer is ruled out. Atropine ointment twice a day should be used ifthe IOPis low or low-normal
(ie., due to anterior uveitis). Atropine is contraindicated if the IOP is normal or elevated.
524
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 37.21。 Conjunctivitis in a 4-month-dd Siamese cat. He also had nasal discharge and sneezing.
10. Prognosis is dependent on the underlying cause.
11. The eye must be monitored to ensure that secondary glaucoma is not occurring. If the initial
IOP is high or high normal, then topical dorzolamide and topical timolol (see “Glaucoma"
above) should be started at three times a day. The eye should be rechecked in 1-2 days. If the
IOP is low or low normal, the eye should be rechecked in 5-7 days.
12. The blood in the anterior chamber will slowly resorb over days to weeks if the cause of the
bleeding can be controlled. Injection of “clot busters" into the anterior chamber can have
multiple complications and should be discussed with an ophthalmologist.
N. Conjunctivitis—inflammation of the conjunctiva (fig. 37.21).
1. Clinical signs include purulent ocular discharge, blepharospasm, swollen and red conjunctiva,
conjunctival hyperemia, and chemosis. There may be signs consistent with an upper respiratory
infection (e.g., nasal discharge and sneezing). Systemic signs such as fever, lethargy, and anorexia
may also be noted.
2. In cats, as opposed to dogs, it is almost always secondary to an infectious cause.
3. Common infectious agents that lead to conjunctivitis include feline herpes virus (FHV-1),
Chlamydophilia felis, and Mycoplasma spp.
4. Treatment includes topical antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3%) every 6-8 hours for 7-14 days and
supportive care.
5. Topical antiviral medications {idoxuridine 0.1%, trifuridine 1% compounded at a pharmacy)
every 6-8 hours can be used for 1-2 weeks if FHV-1 is suspected.
6. Famcyclovir, a systemic antiviral medication, can be used in adult cats with suspected FHV-1.
The dose is 14 of a 250-mg tablet once a day for 20 days. It is metabolized by the liver and
excreted through the kidneys; thus, patients must have normal liver and kidney function.
O. Exophthalmos—abnormal protrusion of globe {i.e., globe is pushed forward)
1. Causes include a retrobulbar abscess or retrobulbar mass
a. Retrobulbar abscess
i. Clinical signs include pain on opening the mouth, pain on retropulsion of the eye, facial
asymmetry, exposure keratitis and secondary corneal ulcer, and prolapsed nictatans. A
red or swollen area behind the last upper molar may be seen.
Chapter 37 Ocular Emergencies
525
Fig. 37.22. Placement of a #ll blade to lance a tooth root abscess.
ii. Systemic signs such as anorexia, lethargy, and fever may also be seen.
ii. One of the most common causes of a retrobulbar abscess is a tooth root abscess. A swell-
ing ventral to the eye with or without a draining tract may be seen.
iv. Treatment involves establishing drainage under general anesthesia. A #11 blade is
used to make an incision in the mucosa behind the last upper molar tooth (fig. 37.22).
The tips of mosquito hemostats are then pushed into the incision and opened to
create drainage of the abscess. An aerobic and anaerobic culture and sensitivity should
ideally be submitted. Sterile saline can then be used to gently fush the wound and
abscess.
v. Systemic antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulonic acid 15 mg/kg every 12 hours) are prescribed
for 14 days.
vi. If the retrobulbar abscess is secondary to a tooth root abscess, then extraction of the
tooth may be needed.
b. Retrobulbar mass
i. Clinical signs include decreased ability to retropulse the eye, prolapsed nictatans, blind-
ness, exposure keratitis with secondary corneal ulcer, and possible retinal changes. There
is usually NO pain when opening the mouth.
ii. Ultrasound of the eye and/or CT scan can help diagnose and delineate the mass.
ii. Chest radiographs should be performed if neoplasia is suspected.
iv. A needle aspirate may be feasible to diagnose the cause of the mass.
v.Exploratory orbitotomy may be needed for surgical removal of the mass.
apou paodan eiseidoau jo sadn eiseidosu jo adai aun uo suapuadap s sisouoid 
squamous cell carcinoma, fibrosarcoma, lymphosarcoma, meningioma, and osteosar-
coma/osteoma.
P. Keratoconjunctivis sicca (KCS)—decreased tear production with secondary inflammation of the
conjunctiva and cornea
1. KCS is not as common in cats as in dogs.
2. Clinical signs include blepharospasm, mucoid to mucopurulent discharge, a visibly dry cornea,
conjunctival hyperemia, mild corneal opacification, conjunctivitis, and possibly a secondary
corneal ulcer.
526
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. It is diagnosed based on Schirmer tear test results {<S mm/min). Normal Schirmer tear test is
17mm/minute. However, cats with normal tear production can have low Schirmer tear test
results (less than 5 mm/min), thus diagnosis is based mostly on clinical signs.
4. Fluorescein stain should then be used to diagnose and delineate a corneal ulcer.
5. The most common cause of KCS is chronic conjunctivitis secondary to feline herpes virus
(FHV-1) infection.
6. It can also be secondary to other causes of chronic conjunctivitis, sulfa drugs, anesthesia, trauma,
surgical removal of the gland, or idiopathic.
7. Treatment involves protecting the cornea, treating the underlying ca use, and treating a secondary
corneal ulcer if present.
a. The most important treatment is an artificial tear preparation every 4-6 hours.
b. There are longer-acting artificial tear solutions that can be used at night.
c. Topical cyclosporine (0.2%) every 12 hours to decrease immune-mediated destruction of
lacrimal glands. This can be started on a trial basis for 1 month to see if there is resolution
of clinical signs.
d. Topical antibiotics (erythromycin 0.3%) every 6-8 hours if secondary corneal ulcer present
and to prevent secondary bacterial infections.
e. Topical antiviral medications (e.g., idoxuridine solution 0.1% compounded at a pharmacy
every 6-8 hours) should be started if feline herpes infection is thought to be the underlying
cause.
f. Some ophthalmologists will use a topical antibiotic-steroid combination if there is no corneal
ulcer yet chronic disease present.
Q. Posttraumatic sarcoma
1. Extremely malignant intraocular neoplasia
2. Thought to be secondary to ocular trauma, intraocular surgery, trauma to lens, and chronic
uveitis
 3. Clinical signs include anterior uveitis, glaucoma, hyphema, and intraocular mass(es).
 4. Can use ultrasound to help diagnose an intraocular mass.
5. The neoplasia will invade the optic nerve and retina and will metastasize to regional lymph
modes and distant sites.
6. Chest radiographs to rule out pulmonary metastasis are recommended.
7. Exenteration, where the entire contents of the bony orbit are removed, is recommended.
 8. Prognosis is guarded to poor for long-term survival.
Recommended Reading
Attali-Soussay K, Jeqou JP, Clerc B. Retrobulbar tumors in dogs and cats: 25 cases. Vet Ophthalmology,
2001; 4(1):19-27.
Blocker T, van der Woerdt A. The feline glaucomas: 82 cases (1995-1999). Vet Ophthalmology, 2001;
4(2):81-85.
Brooks DE. Glaucoma in the dog and cat. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract, 1990; 20(3):775-797.
Chahory S, Crasta M, Trio S, Clere, B. Three cases of prolapse of the nictatans gland in cats. Vet
Ophthalmology, 2004; 7(6):417-419.
S    h    e s  ah  z
Crispin SM, Mould JR. Systemic hypertensive disease and the feline fundus. Vet Ophthalmology, 2001;
4(2):131-140.
as a cause of glaucoma in cats: 32 cases (1997-2003). J Am Vet Med Assoc, 2005; 227(9):
1434-1441
Chapter 37Ocular Emergencies
527
Dietrich U. Feline glaucomas. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 200s; 20:108-116.
Featherstone HJ, Sansom J. Feline corneal sequestra: a review of 64 cases (80 eyes) from 1993-2000. Vet
Ophthalmology, 2004; 7(4):213-227.
Gelatt KN, van der Woerdt A, Ketring KL, et al. Enrofloxacin-associated retinal degeneration in cats. Vet
Ophthalmology, 2001; 4(2);99-106.
Gionfriddo JR. Identifying and treating conjunctivitis in dogs and cats. Vet Med, 1995; 90:242-253.
Giuliano EA. Feline 0cular emergencies. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2005; 20:13s-141.
Glaze MB, Gelatt KN. Feline ophthalmology. In Gelatt KN, ed, Veterinary Ophthalmology,3d ed, pp.
997-1052. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
Komaromy AM, Andrew SE, Denis HM, et al. Hypertensive retinopathy and choroidopathy in a cat. Vet
Ophthalmology, 2004; 7(1):3-9.
La Croix NC. Ocular manifestations of systemic disease in cats. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2005;
20:121-128.
La Croix NC, van der Woerdt A, Olivero DK. Nonhealing corneal ulcers in cats: 29 cases (1991-1999). J
Am Vet Med Ass0c, 2001; 218(5):733-735.
Maggs DJ. Update on pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment of feline herpesvirus type 1. Clin Tech Small
Anim Pract, 2005; 20:94101.
Mandell DC. Ophthalmological emergencies. In King L, Hammond R, eds, Manual of Canine and Feline
Emergency and Critical Care, Pp. 117-126. Cheltenham, England: British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, 1999.
Mandell DC, Holt E. Ophthalmic emergencies. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract, 2005;
35:455-480.
Moore PA. Feline corneal disease. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2005; 20:83-93.
Plunkett SJ. Anaphylaxis to ophthalmic medication in a cat. J Vet Emerg Crit Care, 2000;
10(3):169-171.
Rainbow ME, Dziezyc J. Effects of twice daily application of 2% dorzolamide in intraocular pressure in
normal cats. Vet Ophthalmology, 2003; 6(2):147-150.
Sapienza JS. Feline lens disorders. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2005; 20:102-107.
Strubbe DT, Gelatt KN. Ophthalmic examination and diagnostic procedures. In Gelatt KN, ed, Veterinary
Ophthalmology, 3rd ed, pp. 427-466. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999.
Sykes JE. Feline chlamydiosis. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract, 2005; 20:129-134.
Whitley RD, Hamilton HL, Weigand CM. Glaucoma and disorders of the uvea, lens and retina in cats.
Vet Med, 1993; 88:1164-1173.
Whitley RD, Whitley EM, McLaughlin SA. Diagnosing and treating disorders of the feline conjunctiva and
cormea. Vet Med, 1993; 8:1138-1149.
Willis AM, Diehl KA, Robbin TE. Advances in topical glaucoma therapy. Vet Ophthalmology, 2002;
5{1):9-17.
38
DERMATOLOGIC EMERGENCIES
Jill L. Abraham
Unique Features
Many skin diseases present with similar clinical signs. A thorough dermatologic history, dermatologic
exam, and initial dermatologic tests, such as fea combing, skin or ear cytology, skin scrapings, and
fungal culture, may help rule in or rule out common disorders and guide the need for further workup,
treatment, or referral. The most common skin diseases encountered in cats are bite wound abscesses
Kaiale pooy auele anq eah se yns saiaiae pue 'uomsuu 'suoajui alseedoia 'seunei lauo 1o
and atopy.
A. Overview, common presenting complaints and clinical signs
a. Overview
i.
 Many skin diseases present with similar clinical signs, so the diagnosis may not be apparent based
solely on the history and dermatologic exam findings. Basic dermatologic tests allow for immedi-
ate identification of secondary infections or ectoparasites and guide initial treatment until further
workup can be provided.
ii. A basic dermatologic diagnostic workup includes:
1. Skin scrapings for ectoparasites
2. Cytology for bacterial infections
 3. Ear cytology and ear mite preps in cases of otitis
4. Fungal culture for dermatophytes
5. Historical, clinical, and laboratory findings will guide the need for additional tests such as
bacterial cultures and skin biopsies.
ili. Severe compromise to the barrier function of the skin, as occurs with generalized ulcerative
dermatoses, burns, or trauma (bite wounds, degloving injuries), may predispose to sepsis.
iv. Wear gloves when handling any cat with skin lesions, as some diseases have zoonotic
potential.
V.
 Most skin disorders are not life-threatening but may significantly impact patient comfort and
quality of life, and disrupt the human-animal bond.
b. Presenting complaints and clinical signs
1.
Pruritus
1. An unpleasant sensation that provokes the desire to scratch.
a. Manifests as licking, scratching, biting, or excessive grooming.
                 
529
530
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Dermatologic exam may reveal:
a.Broken hairs, alopecia
b. Erythema, excoriations
C. Crusts, erosions, ulcers
 3. Seasonal pruritus can be due to atopy to outdoor allergens (e.g., pollens).
4. Nonseasonal pruritus can be due to food allergy or atopy to indoor allergens (e.g., house dust
mites).
5. Ectoparasites (fleas, Cheyletiella, Notoedres, Demodex gatoi), flea allergy dermatitis, and
secondary bacterial infections can cause seasonal or nonseasonal pruritus.
a. Caudal-dorsal distribution of pruritus is seen most commonly with flea allergy
dermatitis.
6. Less common causes of pruritus include:
a. Dermatophytosis
b. Pemphigus foliaceus
c. Overgrooming secondary to hyperthyroidism
7. Most causes of pruritus are dermatologic rather than behavioral in origin.
a. Self-trauma can perpetuate the itch-scratch cycle.
i. Alopecia
 1. The most common cause of alopecia is self-trauma due to pruritus (allergies and ectoparasites
most commonly).
a. Dermatologic exam may reveal:
i. Broken hairs or other lesions associated with pruritus
ii. Or there may be minimal clinical inflammation.
2. Dermatophytosis can cause focal, multifocal, or generalized alopecia, often with scaling or
crusting. Pruritus is variable.
 3. Uncommon to rare causes of alopecia in cats include:
a. Behavioral overgrooming
b. Cutaneous lymphoma
c.Demodex cati
 d. Endocrinopathies (iatrogenic or spontaneous hypera drenocorticism)
é. Paraneoplastic alopecia
ii. Most often secondary to pancreatic carcinoma
ili. Eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions
 1. These are cutaneous reaction patterns to various underlying causes, not final diagnoses, and
are very common presenting complaints. They include:
a. Eosinophilic plaques (fig. 38.1)
i. Raised flat alopecic erythematous moist to dry or crusted lesions. May be called “hot
spots" by owners.
b. Eosinophilic granulomas
i. Linear cutaneous granulomas or oral granulomas
ii. Chin edema ("fat chin" syndrome)
c. Indolent (rodent) lip ulcers (fig. 38.2).
2. Common underlying causes include allergies:
a. Flea bite allergy
b. Food allergy
c. Atopy
d. Other insect hypersensitivities
 3. Embedded insect or mite parts (foreign bodies) or a genetic predilection may be part of the
etiology.
Fig. 38.1. Alopecia and multiple eosinophilic plaques in the inguinal region. Possible underlying causes include
Hlea allergy, food allrgy, and atopy. Secondary bacterial infection may occur.
Fig. 38.2. Bilateral indolent (rodentl ulcers on the maxillary lips. This is part of the eosinophilic granuloma
531
532
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. Secondary bacterial or concurrent dermatophyte infections may complicate lesions and inten-
sify pruritus.
5. A peripheral blood eosinophilia may be present.
iv.  Papules and intact pustules are rare in cats but may be seen with:
a. Feline acne
b. Pemphigus foliaceus
c. Ectoparasites
d. Dermatophytosis
e. Cutaneous adverse drug reactions
v.Crusting dermatitis, miliary dermatitis
1. Crusts are formed when dried exudate, serum, blood, pus, or cells adhere to the skin surface.
2. Miliary dermatitis consists of small punctate crusts and commonly occurs along the dorsum.
3. Causes include:
a. Allergies (flea allergy, food allergy, and atopy) and associated pruritus and self-trauma
b. Ectoparasites
i. Fleas, Cheyletiella, Notoedres, Otodectes, Demodex
c. Infections
i. Bacteria, fungal (yeasts or dermatophytes), or viral
1. Herpes viral infections on the face are typically erosive or ulcerative but may have
overlying crusts.
d. Autoimmune diseases (pemphigus)
e. Cutaneous adverse drug reaction
vi. Erosions and ulcers
1. An erosion is a disruption of the epidermis with an intact basement membrane.
2. An ulcer is a disruption of the epidermis through the basement membrane into the dermis.
3. Possible causes include:
 a. Severe pruritus and subsequent self-trauma from allergies or ectoparasites
b. Eosinophilic granuloma complex
c. Autoimmune diseases
d. Cutaneous adverse drug reactions
e. Mycobacterial, fungal, or viral infections
f. Neoplasia (e.g., squamous cell carcinoma, mast cell tumor, cutaneous lymphoma, lym-
phangiosa rcoma/angiosarcoma )
 g. Ischemic injury or vasculitis
h. Burns, frostbite, other trauma
4. Skin biopsies may aid in diagnosing the underlying cause.
vii. Nodules, abscesses, and draining tracts can be classified as:
1. Infectious inflammatory
a. Bite wound abscesses
b. Actinomyces/nocardia infections
C. Mycobacterial infections
d. Fungal granulomas
i. Sporotrichosis
ii. Cryptococcosis
iii. Dermatophyte pseudomycetoma
iv. Blastomycosis
2. Sterile inflammatory
a. Foreign body reactions
b. Eosinophilic granulomas
c. Injection site reactions
Chapter 38  Dermatologic Emergencies
533
3. Neoplastic
4. Excisional biopsy of a nodule and macerated tissue cultures for bacteria faerobic and anaero
bic), mycobacteria, and fungi are often indicated.
B. Diagnostic procedures
a. Basic dermatologic diagnostics help guide initial antimicrobial or antiparasitic therapy and may
support the need for further workup including cultures, biopsies, or referral to a veterinary
dermatologist.
b. Flea combing is indicated in every cat with skin disease.
i. If no fleas seen, rub collected debris onto a wet paper towel.
1. Flea “dirt" (feces = digested blood) will turn orange-red.
ii. Place collected debris onto a glass slide with mineral oil under a cover slip and examine micro-
scopically for ectoparasites.
c. Skin cytology is indicated in all cases to rule out infections. Otic cytology is indicated in all cases of
Otitis.
i. Methods of cytology collection include:
1. Direct glass slide impression smear
2. Acetate {clear) tape impression
a. Press the sticky side of the tape to the skin 3-5 times.
b. Useful for dry lesions, lesions difficult to sample with glass slides or swabs, and identifica-
tion of Malassezia.
3. Fine needle aspiration
a. Used to sample fluctuant swellings, nodules, or tumors
b. Two techniques are used most often.
i. Repeatedly insert into the lesion a 22-25-gauge needle without a syringe attached.
 Redirect the needle with each insertion. Remove the needle and attach it to a 6-cc syringe
filled with air, aim the needle bevel down at a slide, and press the plunger to “blow"
the material onto the slide. Gently smear the sample using another slide, allow to air
dry, and stain with cytology stain.
i. Insert a 22-25-gauge needle attached to a 6-cc syringe into the center of the lesion. Pull
back on the plunger to apply pressure, release, then redirect and repeat 1-3 times. Release
the plunger before removing the needle from the lesion so that negative pressure doesn't
pull cells from the hub of the needle into the syringe. If blood is seen in the hub, remove
needle from the syringe, fill the syringe with air, reattach the needle, and "blow” the
material onto a slide. Gently smear and stain the slide.
4. Otic swabs
ii. Cytological evaluation
1. Heat-fix glass slides with waxy or thick exudates and stain with modified Wright's stain
{Diff-Quick).
2. Press sticky side of tape onto a drop of blue cytology stain (e.g., blue stain of Diff-Quick) on
a slide.
3. Evaluate for (fig. 38.3):
a. Inflammatory cells
b. Bacteria
c. Fungal organisms (yeasts)
d. Neoplastic cells
é. Acantholytic cells
d. Skin scrapings are indicated in all cases to rule out ectoparasites. Negative skin scrapings do not rule
out the presence of mites.
i. Procedure
534
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig。 38.3。 Acantholytic keratinocytes surrounded by neutrophils. Impression smear cytology from a cat with
pemphigus foliaceus.
1. Gently clip hair.
suiea 1i suggnu 4q aea peadiess aut ina 'aaue saaa-st e ie piau apea pedieos ot on e asn 7
the edge of a metal table 10-15 times.
3. Coat scalpel blade and skin with mineral oil. Place a drop of oil onto a glass slide.
4. Superficial scrapings (fig. 38.4)
i. Notoedres cati, Sarcoptes scabiei, Cheyletiella spp., Otodectes cynotis, Demodex gatoi.
 b. Scrape the surface of the skin in broad strokes in the direction of hair growth.
c. Scrape multiple sites. New lesions are preferred.
5. Deep scrapings
a. To identify mites that live in hair follicles { Demodex cati). Performed less often in cats since
D. cati is rarely encountered.
b. Gently pinch the skin prior to scraping to extrude mites from follicles.
c. Scrape small area in the direction of hair growth until capillary oozing is seen.
 6. Transfer material to glass slide and place a coverslip. Examine the entire area under coverslip
with the 10x objective for mites, ova, and mite feces.
 7. Lower the microscope condenser and light intensity to enhance visualization.
e. Otic mite preps are used to evaluate for Otodectes cynotis or otic demodicosis, and are indicated in
all cases of otitis.
i. Swab ear canals as for otic cytology and roll swabs in a drop of mineral oil placed on a glass slide.
Examine as for skin scrapings.
f. Trichogram (microscopic examination of plucked hairs) can be used to evaluate for evidence of
pruritus and dermatophyte spores and/or hyphae.
i. Gently grasp a small number of hairs with fingertips or rubber-covered hemostats and epilate
hairs in direction of growth.
Chapter 38  Dermatologic Emergencies
535
Fig. 38.4. Sarcopfes scabei mite from a superficial skin scraping. Nofoedres cafi, the cause of "head mange,
 are similar in appearance.
ii. Place hairs in mineral oil under a coverslip and evaluate with the 10x objective.
1. Broken hair tips indicate pruritus and self-induced or traumatic alopecia.
2. Distorted, swollen, or fuzzy hair shafts with ectothrix spores or hyphae may be seen with
dermatophytosis (fig. 38.5)
3. Demodex cati mites may be found at the roots of hairs in infected cats (fig. 38.6).
g. Wood's lamp evaluation may be used for any cat with skin lesions to screen for dermatophytosis.
i.
 Emits ultraviolet light causing fluorescence of tryptophan metabolites of approximately 50% of
Microsporum canis strains.
 quaaam si au go ais au aseq an on roud sn s rog di au dn e 
intensity depends upon its temperature.
iii. Positive fluorescence is apple-green color fluorescence along the hair shafts.
1. Use fluorescent hairs for microscopic evaluation (trichogram) and fungal culture.
iv. Lack of fluorescence does not rule out dermatophytosis, as So% of M. canis strains and other
important ringworm species will not show fluorescence.
V.
 False positive fluorescence is typically white or blue and can be seen with scales or crusts, topical
medications, and some bacteria.
h. Fungal culture is indicated in any cat with skin lesions to confirm or rule out dermatophytosis,
particularly because of zoonotic concerns.
i. Procedure
1. Lightly disinfect the area to be sampled with 70% alcohol. Allow to air dry.
2. Pluck hairs and scale from the periphery of lesions with sterile hemostats and place onto (don't
bury into) dermatophyte test medium (DTM),.
a. DTM = Saboura ud's dextrose agar with a color indicator and ingredients to inhibit bacterial
and saprophytic fungal overgrowth.
536
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 38.5. Trichogram (hair pluck) from a cat with patchy alopecia and mild scaling. There is a distorted, swollen
hair shaft in the center with ectothrix fungal spores.
Fig. 38.6. Demodex cafi (long-bodied) and D. gatoi (short-bodied) mites from a skin scraping.
3. For cats without lesions (resolving infections or asymptomatic carriers), brush the entire hair-
coat with a sterile or new toothbrush. Place collected hairs/scale onto the media.
 4. Incubate samples with moisture
a. In the dark at room temperature or in a closed shoebox with a cup of water to provide
humidity
b. Check samples daily for 21 days.
Chapter 38  Dermatologic Emergencies
537
Fig. 38.7. Microsporum canis macroconidia. This is a tape stripping from a fungal colony grown on a DTM
culture plate that was placed onto a glass slide with a drop of blue stain.
5. Positive result
 a. Pathogenic dermatophytes produce alkaline metabolites that turn the DTM pH indicator
red as soon as a white- or beige-colored fluffy colony develops.
b. Some contaminants cause a red color change after several days, so always confirm the diag-
nosis with microscopic evaluation.
i. Touch a piece of acetate tape sticky side down onto the colony, then place the tape sticky
side down onto a drop of blue cytology stain on a glass slide and examine with the 10x
objective for macroconidia (fig. 38.7).
i. Bacterial culture and sensitivity
i.
Indications include:
1. Deep cellulitis-like lesions
2. Nodules and draining tracts
 3. Bacterial infection unresponsive to empirical therapy
ii. Methods to obtain sample
1. Sample an intact pustule.
2. Sample under crust.
3. Express fresh exudate from lesion.
4. Swab ears as for otic cytology.
S. Submit a skin biopsy for macerated tissue culture.
ili. Perform cytology to correlate with culture results.
j. Skin biopsies
i.  Indications include:
1. Suspected neoplasia
2. Vesicles or persistent ulcers
538
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
3. Unusual or severe lesions
4. Conditions failing to respond to empirical therapy
 5. Dermatoses most readily diagnosed by biopsy (suspected autoimmune disease)
6. A disease that requires therapy which may be expensive, of extended duration, or carries
significant side effect risks {e.g., autoimmune diseases, some neoplasms, or paraneoplastic
syndromes) is suspected.
ii. Perform biopsies during the initial exam with any of the above conditions, or within 3 weeks of
therapy in unresponsive cases.
1. If possible, resolve secondary pyoderma and discontinue glucocorticoids for 2-3 weeks prior
to biopsy.
ili. Procedure
1. Site selection is important.
a. Newly formed and primary lesions (vesicles, papules, pustules, etc.) are preferred over older
or secondary lesions (crusts).
b. Biopsy the center of lesions unless lesions are necrotic or ulcerated; then biopsy the edge
of the lesion.
c. Always biopsy at least three representative sites.
2. Punch biopsy using a disposable Bakers punch (0.4-0.8 mm) and local anesthesia, with or
without sedation, is accepta ble for most lesions.
3. Use heavy sedation or general anesthesia to biopsy the nose, foot pads, or pinnae.
4. Excisional or wedge biopsy is recommended for nodules or deep lesions.
5. Clip fur gently or cut fur with scissors, but do not prep the skin in any other way to avoid
distorting histology. NEVER scrub a skin biopsy site. If area is alopecic, draw a line in the
direction of hair growth with a permanent marker {to orient the pathology lab when the skin
biopsy sample is processed).
6. Apply moderate pressure and twist the biopsy punch in one direction only. When the punch
penetrates the full thickness of the skin, remove the punch, grasp the SQ tissue with forceps
(NEVER grasp the dermis or epidermis) and cut the SQ attachments.
 8. Suture biopsy sites with simple interrupted or cruciate pattern.
9. Submit skin biopsies to an experienced dermatopathologist and bacterial or fungal cultures
for sus pected infections.
C. Management of specific conditions
a. Bite wound abscesses
i.Overview
 1. More common in intact males due to roaming behavior and aggression
2. Microorganisms from the oral cavity are introduced under the skin.
a. Infection develops within 2-7 days.
b. Resident feline oral cavity organisms such as Streptococci, Bacteroides, and Pasturella are
the most common bacteria involved.
3. Small wounds often seal over and may not be visible upon initial examination.
ii. Clinical signs and diagnosis
1. The history may include exposure to the outdoors or other animals or a witnessed fight.
2. Physical examination may reveal:
a. Fever, bite wound(s), pain, firm or fluctuant SQ swelling, or purulent discharge
b. Nonspecific signs (lethargy, anorexia, lameness) and regional lymphadenopathy
3. Common locations include the face and neck, tail base, shoulder, or distal limb.
4. Clip hair to help detect small wounds and determine the extent of involved tissue.
a. Two adjacent punctures suggest a bite injury.
b. A single wound more likely indicates another cause of penetrating injury.
Chapter 38Dermatologic Emergencies
539
5. Cellulitis develops prior to abscess formation, so the absence of pus does not rule out a bite
wound. Cellulitis can often appear as just mild diffuse swelling or just pain on palpation of
the affected area.
a. Early bite wound-related cellulitis is one of the more common causes of lameness in
cats.
6. Differential diagnoses include fungal or atypical bacterial infections, so always wear gloves.
iii. Treatment
 1. Use light sedation or general anesthesia, depending upon the extent and severity of the
wound.
 2. Liberally clip fur and surgically prepare the area.
 3. Lance the abscess at the ventralmost aspect with a No. 11 or 15 blade.
4. Flush with copious volumes of sterile saline.
5. Probe the SQ space to fully assess the amount of dead space.
a. Dead space is often much larger than the area evident on initial exam.
6. Debride any necrotic tissue.
 7. Place penrose drains in large wounds or wounds with excessive dead space.
a. Multiple drains may be needed (e.g., wounds that extends across dorsal midline of neck
or lumbar area).
b. Establishing adequate ventral drainage is of utmost importance.
i. Incomplete treatment of the initial wound is the most common cause of recurrence.
8. Bite wounds should never be completely sutured closed.
9. Large wounds can be partially closed with nonabsorbable monofilament sutures, lea ving an
opening for the Penrose drain.
a. Drains should not exit through the incision but through a separate site.
10. Place an Elizabethan collar to prevent self-trauma and self-removal of drains.
11. Administer SQ or IV fluids to cats that are febrile, anorectic, or that undergo prolonged
anesthesia for wound treatment.
12. Administer broad spectrum antibiotics effective against feline oral microflora for 7-10 days:
a. Amoxicillin 22 mg/kg PO q12h
b. Amoxicillin/clavulanate 13.75-22 mg/kg PO q12h
c. Clindamycin 5-11 mg/kg PO q12h
13. Remove drain(s) in 3-5 days; remove sutures in 7-10 days.
iv. Prognosis
 1. Castrate intact males to minimize the incidence of recurrence by reducing aggression and
roaming.
 2. Refractory or recurrent abscesses most commonly result from:
a. Inadequate debridement or drainage
b. Foreign body
c. Resistant or atypical infection
 d. Underlying retroviral or other immunosuppressive disease
é. Osteomyelitis
3. Consider further diagnostics such as culture/susceptibility testing, biopsy, radiographs, or
surgical exploration if there is a poor response to initial therapy, if drainage persists greater
than 10 days, or if the abscess recurs within 1-3 weeks of apparent resolution.
b. Burns
i. Overview
1. Causes of thermal injury include hot water, grease, tar, fire, heating pads, electrical cords,
heated metal (automobile mufflers), and chemical burns.
2. Burns are classified as
a. Partial thickness
540
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Superficial
1. Affects epidermis only
 2. Wounds with an intact basal epidermal layer may heal completely or with minimal
scarring or permanent hair loss.
ii. Deep
1. Extend to dermis
b. Full thickness
i. Affects entire dermis with destruction of adnexae, nerves, and vessels
ii. May destroy subcutaneous tissue including muscle and bone
ii. Deep partial-thickness and full-thickness wounds require extensive wound management
followed by surgical closure or grafting.
iv. Significant scarring and permanent hair loss may occur.
3. Mortality is often due to systemic complications such as sepsis and multiple organ failure.
ii. Clinical signs and diagnosis
1. Superficial and deep partial thickness burns
a. Erythema, edema, +/- vesicles, +/- singed hairs or hair loss, varying degrees of inflamma-
tion, erosion, and ulceration
2.Full-thickness burns
a. May appear dry or leathery; abscessed area may be covered by an eschar.
b. Often do not bleed and are not painful due to destruction of blood vessels and sensory
nerves.
3. Chemical burns are often ulcerative and necrotic.
4. Singed facial hairs and whiskers and corneal lesions suggest possible smoke inhalation.
a. Careful monitoring of respiratory status is indicated.
 5. Various systemic signs, hematologic, biochemical, or blood gas abnormalities may be present
depending upon the severity and extent of the burn.
6. The full extent of injury may not be evident for 2-3 days or longer, so liberal clipping and
careful monitoring during initial management is indicated.
7. Biopsy may help distinguish a burn from other diseases such as severe erythema multiforme,
autoimmune disease, vasculitis, or cutaneous lymphangiosarcoma/angiosarcoma. Preferred
biopsy sites are areas of erythema without ulceration.
ili. Treatment
 1. Apply cool water to wounds immediately if exposure is recent to possibly minimize extent of
injury.
2. Superficial partial thickness wounds
a. Clip hair and lavage with sterile saline to remove surface heat, debris, and chemicals.
b. Apply silver sulfadiazine 1% cream/Silvadene 1% cream {King Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
Bristol, TN) or Thermazene 1 % cream (Tyco Healthcare/Kendall, Mansfield, MA) to keep
the wound moist and prevent secondary bacterial colonization.
i.Apply a thin layer 1-2 times daily until a healthy bed of granulation tissue develops.
i. Do not use in cats with known hypersensitivities to sulfa drugs.
C. Cover with sterile occlusive dressing.
 3. Deep partial-thickness or full-thickness wounds
a. Resuscitate patient as indicated (supplemental oxygen, IV fluids, etc.) and provide appro-
priate supportive care.
b. Sedation or anesthesia is required for adequate wound management.
i. Use injectable or transdermal narcotics and/or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medica-
tions (NSAIDs; see chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients).
1. NSAIDs should only be administered after the patient is fluid resuscitated and nor
motensive to prevent renal damage.
Chapter 38Dermatologic Emergencies
541
d. Perform aggressive la vage and debridement to remove debris and necrotic, nonvia ble tissue.
e. Apply silver sulfadiazine cream and cover the wound with sterile occlusive dressing.
f. Daily debridement is indicated until a healthy bed of granulation tissue develops.
mixing 100 U NPH into 1 oz. of silver sulfadiazine 1% cream), or synthetic matrix
materials may help promote granulation tissue formation.
1. Apply a thin layer of silver sulfadiazine cream, soak gauze with honey, or apply
enough sugar to coat wound. Change dressings once to twice daily and rinse
thoroughly with sterile saline before reapplication. Apply until a healthy bed of
granulation tissue develops.
g. Sterile technique is critical to prevent infection.
h. Use splints when necessary to prevent excessive movement during healing.
i. Surgical closure or skin grafts may ultimately be needed.
j. Systemic antibiotics are not indicated in most cases and may predispose to infection with
resistant organisms.
i. Choose antibiotics for wound infections based on full-thickness biopsy culture and
sensitivity.
ii. Administer broad-spectrum antibiotics if sepsis occurs.
k. Once healed, protect scarred or hairless skin from sun exposure by applying zinc oxide
cream.
iv. Prognosis
1. Humans with burns involving more than 40-50% of body surface area have a high mortality
rate, and survival is rare when greater than 80% of body surface area is involved.
c. Degloving injuries
i.Overview
1. Traumatic shear wounds that cause avulsion of skin and exposure of deep soft tissue structures
and bone most often occur on distal extremities when limbs are compressed between an
automobile tire and the pavement.
ii.  Clinical signs, diagnosis 
1. Loss of skin and soft tissues to varying degrees. Usually occurs on medial aspects of distal
limbs. Bleeding is often minimal due to traumatic injury to blood vessels.
 2. Severe injury commonly results in extensive damage to ligament and bone leading to exposed
and unsta ble joints.
3. Wounds are often contaminated with dirt, hair, and other debris.
4. Signs of other traumatic injuries such as shock, long bone/pelvis fractures, and respiratory
distress are often present and should be treated first (see chap. 1—Approach to the Critically
Ill Cat).
iii. Treatment
Cat).
2. Clip and lavage the wound and place a protective stabilizing bandage +/- splint until the
patient is sta bilized.
3. Sedation or anesthesia is required for adequate wound management.
4. Aggressive pain management is necessary throughout the healing process (see "Burns"; see
chap. 7—Pain Management in Critically Ill Feline Patients).
5. Treat severe injuries as open wounds with copious lavage and aggressive debridement.
6. Tendons, ligaments, or bone with soft tissue attachments are left in place.
7. Remove bone fragments that are not connected to tissue or blood vessels.
8. Evaluate muscle for viability.
542
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Consistency (firm, not friable)
b. Color (pink/red, not gray/brown)
c. Contractility (should contract when pricked—not always a reliable test for viability)
d. Circulation (should bleed when cut)
i. If viability is questioned, leave tissue and reassess at next bandage change.
9. Preserve as much skin as possible to facilitate wound closure.
10. Initially, wound edges should be partially opposed using nonabsorbable suture to permit
drainage, minimize exposure of deep tissues, and provide some stability.
11. Lavage, debride, apply sterile wet-to-dry bandages, +/- matrix materials such as sugar, honey,
or insulin mixed with silver sulfadiazine 1 % cream (see above).
a. Change bandages daily until granulation tissue forms {moist, soft, dark pink to light red,
dressings and change bandages less frequently.
12. Surgical closure or grafts may ultimately be needed.
13. Temporarily stabilize orthopedic injuries with splints or external pin splints.
a. Pins should be placed in healthy bone above and below the fracture and should be placed
as far from the wound as possible if secondary fixation is anticipated.
14. Use broad-spectrum antibiotics with efficacy against skin flora:
a. Cefazolin/Cephalexin 22 mg/kg IV or PO q12h; Cefadroxil 20 mg/kg PO q2h
b. Amoxicillin-clavulanate (Clavamox) 13.75-22 mg/kg PO q12h
15. Perform culture/sensitivity in refractory tissue infections.
iv. The prognosis is dependent upon extent of injuries and may not be evident at initial presentation.
Limb amputation may be required.
d. Parasitic diseases
i. Overview
1. All of the following parasites except Demodex spp. have zoonotic potential.
2. People may develop a transient pruritic papular rash.
a. Always ask if any in-contact person has an itchy rash as part of a dermatologic history.
b. If so, direct people to their physicians for evaluation.
3. Any suspected zoonotic parasitic disease should be empirically treated, even if diagnostic test
results are inconclusive. A therapeutic trial is often needed to confirm or negate a diagnosis.
4. Always treat in-contact animals.
5. Hypersensitivity reactions to fleas and mites may contribute to inflammation and pruritus.
ii.Fleas
1. Overview, clinical signs, and diagnosis
a. Ctenocephalides felis felis (cat flea) is the most common species.
b. Diagnosis is based on presence of fleas or flea dirt.
c. Cats are excellent groomers, so lack of fleas does not rule out a fea infestation or a fles
allergy.
d. Severe infestation can lead to life-threatening anemia in very young kittens.
e. Secondary tapeworm infections may occur and should be treated.
2. Treatment
a. Nitenpyram (Capstar) orally (kittens ≥4 weeks old and ≥2 lbs). Give one dose or repeat
up to every other day as needed until resolution.
 b. Imidocloprid (Advantage), fipronil (Frontline), or selamectin (Revolution) topically (kittens
≥8 weeks).
c. Young kittens may require manual flea removal with flea comb.
d. Indoor and/or outdoor environmental treatment may be necessary in severe infestations.
ili. Flea allergy dermatitis is the most common allergic skin disease and may be seen in combination
with food allergy or atopy.
Chapter 38  Dermatologic Emergencies
543
1. Cats may present with alopecia, miliary dermatitis, eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions,
 or open wounds secondary to severe pruritus.
2. The caudal dorsum is commonly affected, but lesions may be seen on the ventrum, hind limbs,
flanks, or neck.
3. Diagnosis and treatment
a. Presence of fleas or flea dirt and/or resolution of clinical signs with strict fea control
trial
i. Nitenpyram (see above)
ii. Imidocloprid, fipronil, or selamectin q 2-3 weeks for at least 8 weeks
1. Continue q 3-4 weeks year-round for treatment.
2. Only imidocloprid is labeled for up to weekly use.
b. Treat in-contact animals.
c. Anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids may be needed acutely or periodically to
control pruritus and other clinical signs. Example doses:
i. Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q24h × 5-7 days, then taper
i. Depo-medrol 5 mg/kg SQ or IM once
d. Antibiotics are indicated if secondary bacterial infections are present.
i.Treat superficial bacterial infections for at least 21 days.
ii. Cephalexin 22-30 mg/kg PO q12h or Cefadroxil 20 mg/kg PO q12h
ii. Cefpodoxime proxetil (Simplicef) 5-10 mg/kg PO q24h (off-label use in cats)
iv. Amoxicillin-clavulanate 15-22 mg/kg PO q12h
v.Clindamycin 5-11 mg/kg PO q12h
vi. Enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg or Marbofloxacin 2.2-5.5 mg/kg q24h
iv. Otodectes cynotis (ear mites)
1. Overview
a. The most common cause of otitis externa in cats.
2. Clinical signs may be variable and include:
a. Erythema, aural pruritus, black waxy to dry aural exudates, and excoriations of pinnae,
head, or neck
 b. Lesions may occur rarely on the body, as mites can be found outside of the ear canals.
3. Diagnosis
a. Otic mite preparations or superficial skin scrapings (see fig. 38.8)
 b. Otic cytology to rule out secondary bacterial and/or Malassezia infections.
4. Treatment
a. Daily to every other day ear cleanings to remove exudate and dead mites for 1-3 weeks
i. Examples of routine ear cleansers include Epi-otic (Virbac) and Oti-Clens (Pfizer Animal
Health).
b. Systemic treatment should be given as mites can reside on the body, and this may be the
only treatment needed in addition to ear cleanings.
i. Selamectin 6-12mg/kg topically q 2 wks for 2-3 treatments (kittens >8 wks age; off-
label use at this frequency)
i. Ivermectin 200-300μg/kg SQ or PO q 2-3 wks for 3-4 treatments (off-label use)
C. Topical otic mitacides are alternatives to systemic treatment.
i. Tresaderm (thiabendazole)
then stop.
2. Or, treat daily to every other day for 21 days.
ii. Acarexx {ivermectin 0.01%) or MilbeMite OTIC (milbemycin oxime 0.1%)
1. One dose applied in each ear (0.5 mL of Acarexx or 0.25 mL of MilbeMite)
2. Repeat treatment in 3-4 weeks if necessary. Reported safe in kittens >4 wks.
544
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 38.8. Otodecres cynoris (ear mites) from an otic swab rolled in mineral oil on a glass slide
d. Treat secondary otic infections (see “Otitis externa"). If infections are mild, ear cleanings
alone are usually sufficient.
v.Cheyletiella
1. Overview
a. Cheyletiella blakei is the most common species found on cats.
 b. Adult mites live on the stratum corneum and move through the epidermal debris. Eggs are
attached to the host's hairs.
 2. Clinical signs
 a. Excessive and often large scales, erythematous papules, miliary dermatitis, or alopecia
b. Dorsal midline is commonly affected.
C. Pruritus is highly variable.
3. Diagnosis
 a. Presence of mites and/or response to treatment. Use flea combing, superficial skin scrap-
h8g ay aas) saeos pue 1ey ioaloo oi suoissandui adei 1o 'sau!
 b. Fecal floatation may reveal mites or eggs due to grooming and ingestion of mites.
4. Treatment
a. Selamectin 6-12 mg/kg topically q 2 weeks for a minimum of three treatments (off-label
use)
b. Ivermectin 300μg/kg PO or SQ q 2 weeks for a minimum of three treatments (off-label
use)
c. Lime sulfur dips q 5-7 days for a minimum of 4-6 weeks. Place an E collar until dry to
prevent licking the dip, which may cause salivation or vomiting.
d. Environmental treatment (bedding, carpets, insecticidal sprays, etc.) is recommended.
i. Wash bedding or other linens in hot water with regular laundry detergent and dry in a
hot dryer.
Chapter 38Dermatologic Emergencies
545
Fig. 38.9.
 Cheylefiella mites and an egg attached to a hair shaft from a cat with pruritus and dorsally distributed
large white scales.
vi. Feline mange (head mange)
1. Overview
a. Notoedres cati is the cause of head mange in cats.
b. Sarcoptes scabiei (dog scabies) infections occur less commonly in cats.
c. Mites burrow into the superficial layers of the skin (stratum corneum).
 2. Clinical signs
 a. Intense pruritus, alopecia, papules, excoriations, erosions, and crusts
b. Pinnae often affected first, then upper ears, face, eyelids, and neck
3. Diagnosis
a. Superficial skin scrapings are likely to demonstrate mites or mite eggs.
b. Fecal floatation may reveal mites or eggs due to grooming and ingestion of mites.
C. Perform skin cytology to rule out secondary bacterial infections.
4. Treatment
a. Same as for Cheyletiella (see above)
C. Anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids may be necessary to alleviate the intense pru-
vii. Demodicosis occurs uncommonly in cats.
1. Overview and clinical signs
a. Demodex cati live in hair follicles and have long and slender bodies.
i. Infection is often associated with underlying immunosuppressive or meta bolic disease.
1. FIV, FeLV, or diabetes mellitus
ii. Clinical signs include:
1. Patchy alopecia, erythema, scaling, crusting, or comedones with variable pruritus
546
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Common locations include the periocular skin, head, neck, ear canals (ceruminous
otitis), or trunk.
b. Demodex gatoi inhabit the epidermal surface and have short stubby bodies.
i. May be contagious to other cats, so suspect D. gatoi if multiple cats in a household
are affected.
ii. Clinical signs include:
1. Symmetric alopecia, scaling, excoriations, or crusts
2. Pruritus is variable but can be severe.
 3. Common locations include the trunk, abdomen, head, neck, or elbows.
2. Diagnosis
a. Skin scrapings or trichograms
b. D. gatoi may not be readily found on skin scrapings; negative findings do not rule out
infection.
C. A workup for underlying disease is indicated with D. cati infection.
3. Treatment
a. Lime sulfur dips q 5-7 days for a minimum of 4-6 weeks is the treatment of choice for
both types of demodicosis.
b. Treat in-contact cats for D. gatoi.
é. Dermatophytosis
i.Overview
1. Microsporum canis is the most commonly encountered dermatophyte in cats.
2. Persians, cattery cats, and cats that travel to shows are predisposed.
 3. Transmission occurs by direct contact and via contaminated environment and fomites.
ii. Clinical signs
1. Focal, multifocal, or generalized alopecia
 2. Scaling, crusting, erythema, papules, or miliary dermatitis may be seen.
3. Pruritus is variable.
iil. Diagnosis
1. Wood's lamp and trichography may be helpful for screening.
 2. Fungal culture is needed for definitive diagnosis.
iv. Treatment
1. Inform owners of zoonotic potential.
2. Isolate infected cat(s) to one room.
a. Spores shed into the environment may remain infective for nearly 2 years.
3. Clip long-haired cats or cats with generalized infection.
a. May help shorten the course of disease and reduce environmental contagion.
b. Personnel involved must wear protective gear, dispose of hairs in biohazard waste, and
disinfect or dispose of clippers.
C. Lesions may worsen 7-10 days postclipping.
4. All cats should receive systemic treatment.
a. Itraconazole 5-10 mg/kg PO q24h (off-label use)
i.Give daily until cure, or give daily for 28 days, then as alternate week pulse therapy
{1 week on treatment, 1 week off, etc.) until cure.
i. Usually tolerated well by cats, but monthly to every other monthly monitoring of liver
enzymes is recommended.
apmod xinq wouy papunoduoo uoisuadsns y "uoisuadsns xoueods io salnsdeo asn !
may have markedly reduced bioavailability in cats.
b. Griseofulvin
i. Microsized (Fulvicin or GriFulvin V) 50-120 mg/kg PO divided twice daily and given
with a fatty meal
Chapter 38 Dermatologic Emergencies
547
ii. Ultramicrosized (Gris-PEG) S-15 mg/kg PO divided twice daily
1. Teratogenic
c. Terbinafine 30-40 mg/kg PO q24h
i. May be an effective alternative therapy (off-label use)
d. Lufenuron is often ineffective for treatment or prevention and is not recommended.
5. Adjuvant topical therapy is recommended once to twice weekly.
a. May shorten the course of disease and reduce environmental contagion.
i. Lime sulfur dips
ii. Miconazole shampoo
ii. Enilconazole 0.2% solution is an effective topical treatment but is not licensed for small
animal use in USA.
6. Environmental decontamination
a. 1:10 diluted bleach solution
b. Enilconazole (Clinafarm EC disinfectant) used as a sprayer or fogger is very effective but
is not licensed for small animal use in the USA.
C. Destroy bedding, brushes, etc.
d. Frequent vacuuming
7. Repeat fungal cultures every 2-4 weeks.
a. Owners can use the toothbrush technique at home and bring in the toothbrushes for
culture.
 8. Cats may appear clinically normal prior to mycologic cure. Treat until three negative succes-
sive cultures taken 2-4 weeks apart are obtained.
f. Otitis externa
i.Overview: The causes of otitis can be divided into the following categories. Any causes from each
category must be addressed for complete resolution of otitis. On an emergency basis, attempts
should be made to rule out ear mites, secondary infections, foreign bodies, polyps/masses, and
topical drug reactions.
1. Predisposing and primary underlying causes
a. Ear mites {most common cause of otitis in cats)
 b. Nasopharyngeal polyps (second most common cause of otitis in cats)
c. Allergies
d. Foreign bodies (e.g., foxtail)
e. Neoplasia
2. Secondary causes
a. Bacterial or yeast infections
b. Topical medication reactions
3. Perpetuating factors
a. Progressive pathologic changes in ear canals (hyperplasia, stenosis)
b. Otitis media (often underdiagnosed)
il. Clinical signs are variable.
1. Head shaking, scratching, pinnal erythema, aural exudates, malodor, or self-trauma to the
pinnae, head, or neck.
 2. Topical drug reactions often present with severe erythema and scaling +/- ulcers of inner
surface of pinna and opening of external ear canal. Discontinue use of medication and do not
use related products in the future.
3. Otitis media may present with pain upon opening the mouth, Horner's syndrome or peripheral
vestibular disease, or just a history of chronic or recurrent external ear infections.
4. Cats with allergic disease may have concurrent dermatitis, so perform a thorough dermatologic
exam.
548
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
5. Aural hematomas occur uncommonly in cats.
ili. Diagnosis
1. Otic cytology and mite preps
 2. Perform otoscopy to assess the patency of the ear canal, the tympanic membrane, and to
rule out polyps, other masses, or foreign bodies, especially in cases of unilateral
Otitis.
a. Sedation or general anesthesia may be needed.
 3. Bacterial culture and sensitivity is indicated when rods are present on cytology (suspect
Pseudomonas spp.) or when initial therapy fails.
4. Bulla radiography or CT imaging is indicated in cases of suspected otitis media, polyps, or
neoplasia.
5. A workup for underlying allergic disease is necessary if other causes of otitis are ruled out.
iv. Treatment
1. Otitis externa
a. Ear cleansing/flushing with large volumes to fill ear canal is the key to proper ear cleaning.
As cats appear to be more vulnerable to ototoxicity than dogs, be less aggressive with ear
cleanings in cats.
i. Frequency is based on the severity of otitis. Severe cases may require daily cleanings
initially.
ii. Many acidifying ear cleansers such as Epi-otic (Virbac) have mild antibacterial or
antifungal properties and may be used as the sole treatment for mild infections.
ii. Avoid chlorhexidene-based flushes, as they have the potential to cause ototoxicity.
b. Acute otitis externa
i.  Apply at least 3-4 drops of medication per dose, typically BID. Medicate topically for
minimum of 7-14 days.
c. Chronic or recurrent otitis externa
i. Medicate topically for minimum of 21-30 days.
ii. Use systemic anti-inflammatory glucocorticoids if edema, stenosis, or other progressive
cha nges are present.
ii. Use systemic antibiotics if extensive swelling, ulceration, periaural dermatitis, or otitis
media is present.
d. Bacterial and yeast infections
i.Neomycin (Tresaderm)
ii. Gentamicin (Gentocin otic or ophthalmic, Otomax, Mometamax)
ii. For resistant Pseudomonas infections:
1. Silver sulfadiazine: compound powder into 1% solution or mix cream 50/50 with
water.
 2. Enrofloxacin injectable mixed with tris-EDTA ear flush. Achieve a 10mg/mL con
centration of enrofloxacin and flush ears BID.
 3. Tobramycin or polymyxin B ophthalmic drops.
é. Yeast infection (without bacteria)
i. Miconazole (Conofite drops)
f. Use topical corticosteroids if moderate to severe inflammation or stenosis is present.
i. Combination products containing corticosteroids (Tresaderm, Otomax)
ii. Mix injectable dexamethasone with silver sulfadiazine or Conofite (8-12 mL dex per
30 mL antimicrobial).
2. Treatment of otitis media usually requires either a middle ear lavage {deep ear flush) under
general anesthesia or ventral bulla osteotomy followed by antimicrobial therapy.
a. Topical and systemic antimicrobial therapy based on middle ear bacterial culture, and
sensitivity is indicated for a minimum of 4-6 weeks.
Chapter 38 Dermatologic Emergencies
549
3. Recurrence of otitis is likely if underlying cause(s) are not addressed.
g. Autoimmune skin diseases (pemphigus foliaceus)
i.
Overview
1. Pemphigus foliaceus is the most common autoimmune skin disease seen in cats.
a. Pemphigus vulgaris, discoid or systemic lupus erythematosus, and other autoimmune skin
diseases occur rarely.
2. The pathogenesis is not well characterized in cats, but in dogs and humans it involves the
breakdown of keratinocyte adhesion molecules following autoantibody targeting. This leads
to acantholysis (keratinocytes break apart from one another).
 3. Drug-induced pemphigus may occur rarely.
 4. Perform skin biopsies at initial visit prior to glucocorticoid therapy if autoimmune disease is
suspected.
ii. Clinical signs
1. Intact pustules are fragile and transient, so the most common lesions seen are:
a. Crusts, erosions, scale, and alopecia
b. Pruritus is variable.
2. Common locations includer
a. Face/head (especially pinnae), paws/clawbeds/footpads, periareolar, or other body regions
b. Lesions may be bilaterally symmetric.
3. Lethargy, anorexia, fever, or other nonspecific clinical signs may occur.
ili. Diagnosis
1. Skin cytology is needed to rule out secondary infections and may reveal acantholytic cells:
 a. Round nucleated epithelial cells alone or in clumps surrounded by neutrophils (larger than
neutrophils; fig. 38.10).
2. Confirm diagnosis with histopathology. Biopsy intact pustules or multiple representative
lesions.
Fig. 38.10. Alopecia, erythema, crusting, and swelling of the claw folds of a cat with pemphigus foliaceus and
secondary bacterial infection.
550
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
iv. Treatment options
1. Glucocorticoids
a. Triamcinolone 0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO q12h
b. Dexamethasone 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q12h
c. Prednisolone 1-2 mg/kg PO q12h
2. Chlorambucil (Leukeran) 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q24h
a. Can combine with glucocorticoids initially, and then taper to EOD once clinical remission
is achieved.
b. Potential side effects include myelosuppression and gastrointestinal toxicity.
3. Modified cyclosporine (Neoral or Atopica) 5 mg/kg q12-24h has been anecdotally reported
to be effective in more than half of feline pemphigus cases.
a. May be effective as monotherapy, but if disease is severe combine with corticosteroids
initially.
b. Perform FIV, FeLV, and toxoplasmosis titers (IgG and IgM) prior to cyclosporine therapy
in cats.
i. Anecdotal reports of cyclosporine use in either FIV- or FeLV-positive cats have not
described an increase in side effects, but closer hematologic and biochemical monitoring
is recommended.
ii. Toxoplasma-positive cats have been treated concurrently with cyclosporine and
clindamycin.
c. Potential side effects include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, hirsutism, and at extremely high
 doses hepato- or nephrotoxicity. Hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus have been reported
anecdotally in some cats.
d. Long-term use, especially when combined with other immunosuppressive medications, may
predispose to opportunistic infections or neoplasia.
4. Treat secondary bacterial infections for at least 21 days.
a. Cephalexin 22-30 mg/kg PO q12h or Cefadroxil 20mg/kg PO q12h
b. Cefpodoxime proxetil (Simplicef) 5-10 mg/kg PO q24h (off-label use in cats)
c. Amoxicillin-clavulanate 15-22 mg/kg PO q12h
d. Clindamycin 5-11 mg/kg PO q12h
e. Enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg or Marbofloxacin 2.2-5.5 mg/kg q24h
5. Slowly taper medications to q48h then q72h when clinical remission is achieved.
v.Prognosis
1. Often a good prognosis, although cats may need lifelong therapy.
 2. Routine monitoring of complete blood counts, serum biochemical analysis, and urine analysis
is recommended throughout treatment.
h. Cutaneous adverse drug reactions
i.Overview
1. Nonimmunologic or predictable
a. Dose-dependent reaction
b. Due to pharmacologic properties of the drug
2. Immunologic or unpredictable
a. Idiosyncratic, non-dose-dependent
b. Caused by a variety of host and drug factors
3. May occur with topical, oral, or injectable medications
a. Sulfonamides, cephalosporins, penicillins, and topical neomycin are mostly commonly
involved.
4. Usually occur within 1-3 weeks after initiating therapy
ii. Clinical signs are highly variable and can mimic nearly any dermatosis.
Chapter 38  Dermatologic Emergencies
551
sensitivity vascultitis
 2. Injection site reaction
 3. Pinnal dermatitis/otitis secondary to topical otic medications
4. Erythema multiforme (EM)
a. May present with erythematous maculae or patches in various shapes, often with central
clearing (bull's-eye appearance). Commonly seen on the ventrum.
5. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN)
a. Occurs very rarely
b. Extensive necrosis and sloughing of the epidermis, which also predisposes the patient to
sepsis
c. EM or TEN may be triggered by factors other than drugs, including infections, systemic
disease, neoplasia, vaccines, or adverse reactions to food; or may occur as an idiopathic
immune-mediated dermatosis.
ili. Diagnosis
1. History of recent medication use
 2. Abatement of symptoms following drug withdrawal
 3. Skin biopsies are indicated and may confirm the diagnosis.
iv. Treatment
1. Discontinue use of prior drug(s).
a. Often symptoms begin to subside within 1-2 weeks.
2. Avoid chemically similar drugs.
s    s i s     
a. Attempt to diagnose and treat an underlying cause of EM or TEN if a drug reaction is not
suspected.
4. The use of glucocorticoids is controversial and may predispose to sepsis.
5. Chlorambucil (Leukeran) 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q24h or modified cyclosporine (Neoral or Atopica)
5 mg/kg PO q24h
a. Both medications have been used with variable success.
6. Systemic antibiotics are used for secondary bacterial infections or suspected sepsis.
a. If an antibiotic is suspected as causing a reaction, select an antibiotic from a different class.
v. The prognosis is variable. Some drug reactions persist for days to weeks after the offending drug
is withdrawn.
i. Tapazole (methimazole) reaction
i.Overview
1. Cutaneous adverse reactions to methimazole occur uncommonly.
2. When they occur, it is usually within 3-8 weeks of starting treatment.
3. The exact pathogenesis is currently unknown.
ii. Clinical signs include facial and/or neck pruritus and self-induced trauma, which may lead to
erythema, alopecia, excoriations, erosions, or ulcers and crusts.
ili. Diagnosis
1. History of methimazole use
2. Presence of facial and/or neck pruritus or dermatitis
3. Rule out differential diagnoses
a. Ectoparasites; allergies; bacterial, fungal, and viral infections; immune-mediated diseases;
neoplastic diseases; and behavioral disorders
b. Perform skin scrapings, skin and otic cytology, otic mite preps, and fungal culture.
4. Skin biopsies may help rule out differential diagnoses.
iv. Treatment
552
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Requires cessation of methimazole treatment
a. May occur with transdermal formulations of methimazole as well
 2. May be partially responsive to glucocorticoids at anti-inflammatory doses
v. Prognosis
1. Good to excellent for resolution of dermatologic signs when methimazole treatment is stopped
 2. Alternative therapy for hyperthyroidism is required.
j. Feline acne
i.Overview
1. Thought to be a localized keratinization disorder of the hair follicles
 2. Poor grooming habits, production of abnormal sebum, stress, or other factors (allergies) may
play a role in the pathogenesis.
 3. Commonly complicated by secondary bacterial infection 
4. Outbreaks have been seen in multiple-cat households and catteries, but attempts to isolate
viral or other infectious causes have been unsuccessful.
ii. Clinical signs
1. The most commonly affected site is the chin, but lesions may also be seen on the lips.
2. Lesions may include:
a. Comedones, crusts, alopecia, erythema, papules, pustules, nodules/fistulae, chin swelling,
or regional lymphadenopathy
b. Pruritus is varia ble.
C. Cysts and scarring may occur in chronic cases.
ili. Diagnosis
1. Often based on clinical appearance, but cytology, deep skin scrapings, and fungal cultures are
needed to rule out differential diagnoses and to identify secondary or concurrent infections.
 2. Bacterial culture/sensitivity and skin biopsies are indicated in persistent, refractory, or unre-
sponsive cases.
 3. Differential diagnoses include bacterial or fungal (yeast or dermatophytes) infections, demodi
cosis, eosinophilic granuloma (allergy), contact dermatitis, or idiopathic keratinization
disorders.
iv. Treatment
1. Don't make the treatment worse than the disease, as some cats are asymptomatic or mildly
affected.
2. Avoid plastic food and water bowls; wash bowls daily.
3. Mild cases
a. Benign neglect if asymptomatic
b. Wash affected areas 1-3 times per week with benzoyl peroxide, chlorhexidine-based, or
sulfur-based (antiseborrheic) shampoos or wipes.
i. Benzoyl peroxide may lead to overdrying.
4. Moderately affected cases
a. Mupirocin 2% ointment topically q12h × 3-6 weeks
b. More frequent topical cleansing (frequency depends upon severity)
S. Severe cases
a. Sedate, clip, and gently scrub with chlorhexidene or benzoyl peroxide cleanser. Warm
compress with magnesium sulfate (Epsom salt) solution (2tbsp/quart or 30 mL/L water)
for 5-10 minutes.
b. Manually express comedones and cystic lesions.
C. Topical mupirocin ointment or metronidazole gel
d. Systemic antibiotics are indicated with pustules, furuncules, or when intracellular bacteria
are seen on cytology.
i. See "Flea allergy dermatitis."
Chapter 38 Dermatologic Emergencies
553
e. Instruct owners not to express lesions at home. That may lead to internal rupture of com-
edones and more inflammation.
6. Daily oral fatty acid supplementation may benefit recurrent or persistent cases.
a. Administer a supplement containing EPA (eicospentaenoic acid) at 180 mgEPA/10 pounds
body weight/day either in capsule, liquid, or powder form.
v.Prognosis
1. Many affected cats have recurrent or persistent disease and require maintenance topical
therapy on a twice weekly or more frequent basis.
k. Eosinophilic granuloma complex
i.
 Overview and clinical signs
1. See "Clinical signs,” and "Diagnosis" above.
ii.Diagnosis
 1. Often based upon clinical appearance
2. Skin cytology
a. Often reveals a predominance of eosinophils, but neutrophils or bacteria may be present
as well
 3. Rule out ectoparasitic infection
a. Trial of selamectin topically q 2 weeks for a minimum of three treatments.
b. Trial of lime sulfur dips q 5-7 days for 4-6 treatments (to rule out D. gatoi).
4. Skin biopsies may provide the final diagnosis and aid in ruling out differential diagnoses such
as squamous cell carcinoma or other neoplasia or herpes viral dermatoses.
ili. Treatment
1. Treat ectoparasite and/or secondary bacterial infections.
 2. Anti-inflammatory doses of oral or injectable glucocorticoids can be very helpful in acute situ-
ations, but steroid therapy is not a replacement for the diagnosis and management of the
3. Modified cyclosporine (Neoral or Atopica) 5-7.5 mg/kg PO q24h
a. Treat daily × 4-6 wks and then taper over 2-4 months to lowest effective frequency.
Dermatologic history
↑
Dermatologic exam
↑
Initial dermatologic diagnostics: skin/ear cytology, flea
combirg, skinl scrapirgs, trichograms, DTM (furigal) culture
↑
If results are positive, treat with appropriate
antimicrobials and/or antiparasitic medications; consider
allergy workup/treatment.
↑
If results are legative, consider altiparasitic treatment,
allergy workup/treatmert (rule out flea allergy first, therl
food allergy, thenl atopy), skin biopsies.
Fig. 38.11. General approach to the cat with skin disease: Algorithmic overview.
Table 38.1. Drug toble.
Routes of
Contraindications
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Amoxicillin
Aminopenicillin
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects 
Known
11-22 mg/kg PO or
Bite wound infections;
antibiotic
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
SQ q12h
not useful for staph
synthesis
beta-lactams
pyoderma
Amoxicillin-
Aminopenicillin
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects
Known
13.75mg/kg PO q12h
Bite wound infections;
clavulanate
antibiotic with
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
For bite wound
 pyoderma
beta-lactamase
synthesis
beta-lactams
infections, up to
inhibitor
22mg/kg PO q12h
for pyoderma
Cefadroxil
1" generation
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects
Known
20-22 mg/kg PO
Pyoderma, trauma to
cephalosporin
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
q12hx3wks
skin with secondary
antibiotic
synthesis
beta-lactams
minimum for
bacterial infection 
pyoderma
Cefazolin
I" generation
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects
Known
22-30mg/kg IV
 Pyoderma, trauma to
 cephalosporin
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
q12h×3wks
skin with secondary
antibiotic
synthesis
beta-lactams
minimum for
bacterial infection 
pyoderma
 Cefpodoxime
 3rd generation
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects
Known
5-10mg/kg PO
Pyoderma
cephalosporin 
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
q24hx 3wks
antibiotic
synthesis
beta-lactams,
minimum for
off-label use in cats
pyoderma
Cephalexin 
I t generation
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side effects 
Known
22-30 mg/kg PO
Pyoderma, trauma to
 cephalosporin
cell wall
hypersensitivity to
q12h×3wks
skin with secondary
antibiotic
synthesis
beta-lactams
minimum for
 bacterial infection
pyoderma
Chlorambucil
Alkylating
Cross-links cellular
Gl side elffects,
Known
0.1-0.2mg/kg PO
Eosinophilic
(Leukeran@)
antineoplastic/
DNA
myelosuppression 
hypersensitivity;
q24-48h 
granuloma complex
immunosuppressive
pre-existing bone
lesions, pemphigus
agent
marrow disease;
foliaceus, erythema
infections;
multiforme/
pregnancy
cutaneous drug
reactions
Chlorpheniramine
Allkylamine
Hl-receptor
Gl side effects, CNS
Known
2-4mg/
Atopy
antihistamine
 antagonist
depression,
hypersensitivity;
paradoxical
caution with 
excitement,
hyperthyroidism or
 anticholinergic effects
cardiovascular
disease
 Clindamycin
Lincosamide
Inhibits bacterial
Gl side elffects
Known
5-1l mg/kg PO q12h
Pyoderma, otitis
antibiotic
peptide bond
hypersensitivity to
 or 1 1-22mg/kg PO
media
formation by
clindamycin or
q24hx3wks
binding to 50S
lincomycin
minimum for
ribosomal
pyoderma
subunit
Cyclosporine A
Immunosuppressant
Inhibits T cell
Gl side effects;
Toxoplasmosis;
5-7.5 mg/kg PO q24h
Allergies, eosinophilic 
(modified,
 activation by
hepatotoxicity or
several drug
for allergies or
 granuloma complex
Neoral@ or
inhibiting
renal toxicity may
interactions;
eosinophilic
lesions, erythema
Atopica@)
calcineurin
occur at extremely
hepatic or renal 
 granuloma complex
multiforme/
high blood levels;
disease; caution in
lesions, 5 mg/kg PO
 cutaneous drug
hirsutism
cats with viral
q12-24hfor
reactions,
diseases
immunosuppression
pemphigus foliaceus
(Atopica@ is
off-lbbel in cats)
Dexamethasone
Corticosteroid
Glucocorticoid
Polyuria, polydipsia,
Diabetes, severe
0.2-0.4 mg/kg PO
Autoimmune disease,
activity
polyphagia, diarrhea,
cardiovascular
q24h initially, taper 
otitis externa
weight gain,
disease, systemic
to alternate day or
iatrogenic
 Fungal infection,
less frequent
hyperadrenocorticism,
viral infection,
therapy; combine
diabetes mellitus
renal failure
 2-3 ml injectable
 dexamethasone with
30mlotic
antimicrobial
Enrofloxacin
Fluoroquinolone
Inhibits bacterial
Potential cartilage
Known
5mg/kg PO q24h, or
Pyoderma, resistant
antibiotic
DNA-gyrase
 abnormalities in 
hypersensitivity to
10mg/ml
Pseudomonas otitis
young animals; ocular
Huoroquinolones;
concentration in
media
toxicity (blindness)
caution in cats <l
tris-EDTA as an otic
year old; do not
 antimicrobial
use >5 mg/kg;
caution with known
CNS disease;
flavor tabs contain
soy and pork
 Table 38.1.
Confinued
Routes of
Contraindications
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Fipronil
Antiparasitic agent 
Inhibits GABA-
Rarely irritation or
Kittens <8 wks
Topically q 2-4wks
Fleas, ticks 
regulated
alopecia at site of
[off-label at >q 4wk
chloride channels
administration
frequency!
Griseofulvin
Fungistatic antibiotic
Arrests metaphase
Gl side effects, bone
Known
Fulvicin/GriFulvin
Dermatophytosis
of cell division
marrow suppression,
hypersensitivity:
(microsized)
by disrupting
hepatotoxicity,
liver disease; FIV;
50-120mg/kg PO
structure of cell's
photosensitivity
 pregnancy; kittens
divided dailywith
mitotic spindle
more sensitive to
fatty meal; Gris-PEG
side effects
(ultramicrosized)
5-15mg/kg PO
divided twice daily
Imidocloprid
Antiparasitic agent 
Binds to nicotinic
Rarely irritation or
Kittens <8 wks
Topically q 1-4 wks
Fleas
acetylcholine
 alopecia at site of
receptors
administration
ltraconazole
Triazole antifungal
Inhibits Fungal cell 
 Gl signs, rarely
Known
5-10mg/kg PO q24h
 Dermatophytosis
membrane
hepatotoxicity
hypersensitivity;
ergosterol
hepatic disease;
synthesis
pregnancy
Ivermectin
Avermectin
Enhances release
 Large safety margin in 
Age restrictions for
200-400μg/kg SQ or 
 Otodectes, Notoedres,
(injectable and 
antiparasitic agent
of GABA
cats but neurotoxicity
 cats not reported
PO q 1-3wks
Cheyletiella,
Acarexx@)
with massive
by manufacturers
(off-label use as
Demodicosis
overdoses have been
ectoparasiticide)
reported
Lime sulfur
Antimicrobial,
Unknown, thought
 May stain light-colored
Apply E collar until
Dilute according to
Notoedres,
(LymDyp@)
antiparasitic
to be combo of
coats, stains jewelry,
dry to prevent
label; use as a dip
Cheyletiella,
keratolytic effects
unpleasant odor;
licking
every5-7
Demodicosis,
and formation of
salivation or vomiting
days × 3-6 wks
Dermatophytosis
miticidal
if licked off hair coat
chemicals
 Marbofloxacin
Fluoroquinolone
Inhibits bacterial 
Potential carilage
Known
2.2-5.5 mg/kg PO
 Pyoderma, otitis medis
antibiotic
DNA-gyrase
 abnormalities in 
hypersensitivity to
q24h
young animals;
Hluoroquinolones;
unknown ocular
caution in cats <l
toxicity
year old; caution
with known CNS
disease
Methylprednisolone
Corticosteroid
Glucocorticoid
 Polyuria, polydipsia,
Diabetes, severe
5 mg/kg SQ or IM; do
 Allergies, eosinophilic
(Depo-medrol@)
activity
polyphagia, diarrhea,
cardiovascular
not repeat more
 granuloma complex
weight gain,
disease, systemic
frequently than q
lesions,
iatrogenic
fungal infection,
2wks, check blood
hypersensitivity
hyperadrenocorticism,
viral infection,
glucose prior to
reactions to mites,
diabetes mellitus
renal failure
injection
oral corticosteroids
preferred for
 autoimmune
diseases
Miconazole
Imidazole antifungal
 Inhibits fungal cell 
Topical contact reaction
Known
3-4 drops into ear
Yeast (Malassezia)
Conofite@ or
membrane
hypersensitivity
canal q12h x 14-30
otitis externa
shampoo
ergosterol
days
synthesis
MilbeMite OTIC
Antiparasitic agent
Inhibits GABA
None reported; consider 
Kittens <4 wks
I tube topically in
Ear mites
 (milbemycin
tppical otic reaction
each ear canal,.
0.1%
repeat in 3-4wks if
needed
Mupirocin 2%
Antibiotic ointment
Inhibits bacterial
Potential nephrotoxicity
Known sensitivity;
 Thin layer applied
Feline acne, localized
ointment
protein synthesis
 due to polyethylene
 avoid use on
topically
bacterial skin
 gycol content of
 extensive deep
qi2hx3-6wks
infections
vehicle
lesions; limit 
ingestion by cats
Nitenpyram
Neonicotinoid
Binds to nicotinic
No serious side effects
Kittens <4 wks and
11.4 mg tablet PO
Immediate kill of adult 
(Capstar@)
anti-parasific
acetylcholine
reported
<2lbs.
once; repeat as
Heas
agent
receptors
needed
Polymyxin B
 Polypeptide antibiotic
Increases
Potential ototoxicity
Known
3-4 drops in ear canal
Resistant Pseudomonas
permeability of
hypersensitivity
q12h× at least 30
otitis
bacterial cell
days
membrane
Prednisolone
Corticosteroid
Glucocorticoid and
 Polyuria, polydipsia,
Diabetes, severe
1-4mg/kg PO
 Allergies, eosinophilic
mineralocorticoid
polyphagia, diarrhea,
cardiovascular
q12-24h, eventually
 granuloma complex
activity
weight gain,
disease, systemic
taper (lower dose for
lesions, autoimmune 
iatrogenic
 Fungal infection,
anti-inflammatory
disease (pemphigus)
hyperadrenocorticism,
viral infection,
effects, higher
diabetes mellitus
 renal failure
dose for
immunosuppression!
55
Table 38.1. Confinued
Routes of
Contraindications 
Administration
Drugs
Classes
MOAS
Side Effects
or Precautions
and Doses
General Uses
Otomax@/
 Otic product
Antibacterial,
 Topical contact reaction 
Known
 3-4 drops into ear
Bacterial +/- yeast
Mometamax@
combining
 antifungal, and
hypersensitivity
canal q12h × 14-30
otitis
gentamicin,
corticosteroid
days
clotrimazole, and
effects
betamethasone or
mometasone
Selamectin
Avermectin anti-
 Enhances release
Rarely irritation or
Kittens <8 wks
Topically q 2-4wks
Fleas, Otodectes,
parasitic agent
of GABA
 alopecia at site of
[off-label at >q 4wk 
Notoedres,
administration
requency!
Sarcoptes,
Cheyletiella
Silver sulfadiazine
Topical sulfonamide 
Prevent bacterial
Topical irritation; rarely
Known
 Thin layer applied
Burns, ulcers, skin 
antibiotic
replication by
bone marrow,
GI
hypersensitivity to
topically q12-24h;
trauma, resistant
interfering with
liver, or renal
sulfonamides
1% solution or mixed
otitis externa/media
folic acid
toxicities if large
50:50 with water as
synthesis
amounts are
an otic solution
absorbed
Terbinafine
Allylamine antifungal
Inhibits fungal cell
Limited reports in cats;
Known
30-40mg/kg PO
 Dermatophytosis
membrane
consider Gl side
hypersensitivity;
q24h
ergosterol
effecis, neutropenia,
hepatic or severe
synthesis and
hepatotoxicity,
renal disease 
inhibits fungal
cutaneous drug
squalene
reaction
metabolism
Tobramycin
Aminglycoside
Inhibits protein
Topical contact reaction,
Known
 3-4 drops into ear
Resistant gram-
antibiotic
synthesis by
potential for
hypersensitivity
canal ql2h x at
negative bacterial
binding 30 s
ototoxicity
least 30 days
otitis
ribosomal
[ophthalmic drops)
subunit
Tresaderm@
 Otic product
Antibacterial,
Topical contact reaction, Known 
 3-4 drops into ear
Bacterial +/- yeast
combining
 antifungal, and
potential for
hypersensitivity
canal q12h × 14-30
otitis
neomycin,
corticosteroid
dtotoxicity
sAop
thiabendazole,
effects
and
dexamethasone
 Triamcinolone
Corticosteroid
Glucocorticoid
Polyuria, polydipsia,
Diabetes, severe
0.4-0.8 mg/kg PO
Autoimmune disease
acetonide
activity
polyphagia, diarrhea,
cardiovascular
q24h, taper as soon
(pemphigus), atopy
weight gain,
disease, systemic
as possible to
iatrogenic
fungal infection, 
 alternate day then
hyperadrenocorticism,
viral infection,
twice weekly
diabetes mellitus
renal failure
 therapy; 0.1 1-
0.22 mg/kg PO may
be used for atopy
Tris-EDTA
 Carrier vehicle or
Tris = buffer, EDTA
Topical contact reaction 
Known
Fill ear canals with
Gram-negative
 presoak ear wash
increases
hypersensitivity
Hlush q12h prior to
bacterial otitis,
permeability and
topical antibiotics or
especially resistant
sensitization of
mix with injectable
Pseudomonas
gram-negative
enrofloxacin (10mg/
bacteria to
ml concentration]
 antibiotics
560
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. Chlorambucil (Leukeran) 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO q24-48h may be useful in refractory cases.
5. Diagnose and manage the underlying allergic disease.
a. Rule out a flea allergy with strict frequent flea control.
b. Rule out a food allergy with a 10-12 week strict hydrolyzed (e.g., Hills Prescription Diet
z/d Low Allergen Feline) or novel (e.g., Royal Canin Veterinary Diet [formerly IVD] Green
Peas and Rabbit or Green Peas and Duck) protein diet trial.
c. If signs persist or recur, pursue intradermal and/or serum allergy testing to formulate
a llergen-specific immunother apy.
mentation may help reduce the clinical signs of allergic dermatitis in some cats.
Recommended Reading
Campbell KL, guest ed. Updates in dermatology. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract, 2006; 36( 1).
Greene. Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saunders, Elsevier, 2006.
Gross TL, Ihrke PJ, et al. Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat: Clinical and Histopathologic Diagnosis, 2nd
ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell, 2005.
Guaguere E, Prelaud P. A Practical Guide to Feline Dermatology. Oxford: Merial, 1999.
Matousek JL, guest ed. Ear disease. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract, 2004; 34{2)
Medleau L, Hnilica KA. Small Animal Dermatology: A Color Atlas and Therapeutic Guide, 2nd ed. St.
Louis: Saunders, 2006.
 Moriello K. Treatment of dermatophytosis in dogs and cats: review of published studies. Vet Derm, 2004;
15:99-107.
Preziosi DE. et al. Feline pemphigus foliaceus: a retrospective analysis of 57 cases. Vet Derm, 2003;
14:313-321.
Rhodes K. The 5-Minute Veterinary Consult Clinical Companion: Small Animal Dermatology. Philadelphia:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2002.
Scott DW, Miller WH, Griffin CE. Muller & Kirk's Small Animal Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphia: W.B.
Saunders, 2001.
Swaim SF, Henderson RA, Jr. Small Animal Wound Management, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Williams &
Wilkins, 1997.
White SD et al. Feline acne and results of treatment with mupirocin in an open clinical trial: 25 cases
{1994-96). Vet Derm, 1997; 8:157-164.
39
TOXICOLOGICAL EMERGENCIES
Robert H. Poppenga
Unique Features
· Cats are potentially exposed to a wide variety of toxicants and are uniquely sensitive to several,
including acetaminophen and pyrethrins.
● The incidence of intoxication in cats is low compared to dogs; this is likely due to their more dis-
criminating palate.
There are few specific antidotes for treating intoxicated cats.
●For the large majority of poisoning cases, timely decontamination and appropriate symptomatic and
supportive care will greatly increase the chances of a favorable outcome.
1. Telephone triage
a. The immediate aims of the initial telephone triage are to determine if the patient needs to be exam-
ined and what the owner can do for the pet.
b. Animals with respiratory distress, neurologic abnormalities, protracted vomiting, slow or rapid heart
rates, hemorrhage, weaknes, or pale mucous membranes should be seen as soon as possible.
C. If there is any question about poisoning, the animal should be evaluated.
d. The owner should be instructed to bring any packages or material that the patient might have had
access to, as well as any material the patient might have vomited. The material should be placed in
a plastic bag or plastic or glass container for possible evaluation.
2. Home management
a. In most instances, it is more efficient and safer to have the patient brought into the clinic rather
than managed at home by the owner.
b. Initial assessment of the poisoned cat involves applying the basic principles for assessment of ermer-
gency patients.
3. Diagnosis
a. A working diagnosis is based on a history of witnessed exposure; characteristic, suggestive, or suspi-
cious signs; and chemical analysis.
i.
 Unfortunately, results from chemical analysis are generally not available quickly enough to
influence initial case management.
b. Intoxication with some chemicals causes a characteristic group of clinical signs called toxidromes
that may narrow the list of differentials.
561
562
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Acetaminophen: depression, emesis, cyanosis, facial edema, tachycardia, tachypnea
ii. Anticholinergics: agitation, dry mucous membranes, urinary retention, tachycardia, increased
body temperature, mydriasis, decreased peristalsis
iii. Cholinesterase inhibitors and cholinergics: DUMBELS—diarrhea, urination, miosis, broncho-
spasm, emesis, lacrimation, and salivation
iv. Sympathomimetics: agitation, tremors, seizures, increased blood pressure, tachycardia, tachy-
pnea, increased body temperature, mydriasis
c. Although the majority of toxicants affect more than one organ system, identification of affected
organ systems based upon clinical signs and early diagnostic testing can substantially narrow the
differential list
d. It is common for owners to think that their pets have been poisoned whenever they become sick.
This can often be discounted based on detailed questioning of the owner.
4. Exposure assessment
 a. Proper exposure assessment is important to avoid unnecessary decontamination and/or treatment.
i. Essential information includes identification of a chemical and its concentration {e.g., in a
product), the amount of chemical/product ingested, the weight of the animal, and the toxicity
of the chemical (e.g., an oral LDso).
ii. In many cases this information is not available.
ii. Conservative estimates of exposure need to be made.
iv. Toxicity information specific to cats is often unavailable, and information from other species
needs to be extrapolated to cats.
1. This can be problematic due to metabolic or other unique physiologic differences in cats.
b. Sources of information
i.National Animal Poison Control Center: 1 (900) 680-000 or 1 (800) 548-2423 (charge per case;
credit cards only)
ii. Regional human poison control centers
1. Many human poison control centers accept calls related to animals.
2. Useful for obtaining product and toxicity information
3. Expertise to manage veterinary cases is variable
ii. Web resources can be extremely valuable to obtain information regarding the identification of
active ingredients and their toxicities.
 5. General decontamination strategies
a. Decrease further absorption
i.Skin
1. Bathe the cat with a mild pet shampoo or mild liquid dishwashing detergent. Patients with
exposure to powder should have their hair coat combed or vacuumed if possible to remove
significant amounts of the toxicant prior to bathing. Persons performing the vacuuming and/
or bathing need to wear appropriate clothing and protective gear.
ii. Eyes should be flushed with copious amounts of water if ocular exposure has occurred.
iii. Gastrointestinal decontamination
1. Induction of emesis
a. Emesis should be considered if the toxin has been ingested within the last 1-2 hours.
i. Beyond this time, it is likely that a significant amount of toxicant has either been
absorbed or has moved farther down the GI tract. Some exceptions include large inges-
tions of tablets or capsules that may form concretions in the stomach or ingestion of
toxicants that delay gastric emptying.
b. Use of an emetic should be balanced with the resulting delay in ability to administer
activated charcoal that their use causes.
c. Toxicant ingestions often cause spontaneous vomiting. If this has occurred, induction of
further vomiting is questionable.
Chapter 39 Toxicological Emergencies
563
Box 39.1. Contraindications to the vse of emetics
● Prior, significant vomiting
· Respiratory distress
● Ingestion of corrosives (acids or alkalies)
+ Ingestion of petroleum hydrocarbons
· Decreased or loss of gag reflex
●Seizures or the likelihood of the occurrence of seizures
·Extreme weakness
CNS depression or coma
· Largyngeal paralysis
· Foreign body ingestion
·● Ingestion of a known toxicant with a rapid onset of action that might compromise the airway or
stimulate or depress the CNS
d. The efficacy of emesis declines rapidly if ingestion has occurred less than 1 hour prior to
induction.
e. There are a number of contraindications to inducing emesis (see box 39.1)
f. Emetics
i.
Syrup of ipecac {3.3 mL/kg diluted 1:1 with water to increase acceptability)
1. Induces emesis by local irritation of gastric mucosa and activation of the chemo-
receptor trigger zone
 2. Advantages—-often available in the home, few side effects with single use
 3. Disadvantages-delayed onset of emesis (up to 30 minutes) or prolonged emesis
(30-60 minutes)
4. In-home use of syrup of ipecac has largely been abandoned in human medicine.
ii. 3% hydrogen peroxide
1. Induces emesis by local irritation of gastric mucosa at doses of 1-2 mL/kg
 2. Advantages—often available in the home, few side effects with 1-2 doses
 3. Disa dvantages—inconsistent induction of emesis, often not readily acceptable by
cat
ili.Apomorphine
1. Reputation for being contraindicated for use in cats due to adverse reactions;
however, used successfully by many veterinarians
 2. Safe and effective emetic doses have not been firmly esta blished for cats.
 3. CNS and respiratory depression can be reversed by naloxone but not the emetic
effect.
iv.
Xylazine
 1. Injectable emetic of choice for cats
 2. Induces emesis through centrally mediated mechanisms
 3. Advantages: in cats (0.44mg/kg IM), emesis is often rapid (3 to 5 minutes); can
be reversed (yohimbine HCl at 0.5 mg/kg IV or atapamazole at 0.32mg/kg IV),
4. Disadvantages: sedation, decreased cardiac output and prolonged hypotension
resulting in delay in administration of activated charcoal and/or oral antidotes
and the absence of evidence that use of an emetic alters case outcome. Their use
should be seriously questioned.
Other possible emetics (e.g., table salt, liquid dishwashing detergent, etc.) should
NEVER be used.
2. Gastric lavage (GL)
564
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. The main indication for GL is the presence of a contraindication to the use of an emetic.
b. The efficacy of GL declines rapidly if ingestion has been >1 hour previously.
c. Technique
i.
Anesthesia sufficient to allow placement of an endotracheal tube. Close monitoring
is essential.
ii.End of endotracheal tube should be such that gastric contents cannot be accidentally
aspirated.
ii. Premeasure as large a bore stomach tube as possible from the tip of the nose to the
end of the last rib.
iv. Lubricate the tube with K-Y gel and gently pass down the esophagus into the
stomach.
Ten to 20 mL of tepid normal saline or water should be administered through the
stomach tube. The free end of the stomach tube is then lowered below the level of the
stomach and placed into a container to allow gravity flow. Aspiration can be facilitated
by use of an aspiration bulb or 60-mL syringe. Vigorous aspiration should be avoided.
vi.
 Gentle manipulation of the stomach may assist with lavage fluid drainage.
vi.  Lavage should be repeated with the animal in different positions until the lavage fluid
is visually clear of gastric contents.
vili. Use of water has resulted in hyponatremia in human pediatric patients; for this reason
use of normal saline is preferred.
ix.  In theory, mixing the lavage fluid with activated charcoal may enhance the effective-
ness of GL, although this has not been verified.
X.
The stomach tube should be kinked when removed to prevent any drainage of lavage
fluid into the esophagus, oropharynx, or mouth.
xi. The esophagus, oropharynx, and mouth should be suctioned to prevent aspiration
of any remaining fluid.
3. Activated charcoal (AC)
a. Effective adsorbent for many organic compounds
b. Toxicants that are not well absorbed to AC include ethanol, methanol, ethylene glycol,
isopropanol, and most metals.
c. Standard dose is 1-4g/kg body weight mixed in ~6 to 12 mL/kg water
d. Some formulations contain sorbitol.
e. May be given orally or via stomach tube following GL
f. Multiple doses of activated charcoal are indicated when the ingested toxicant undergoes
significant enterohepatic recirculation (if multiple doses of AC are administered, only one
dose of a cathartic should be given).
i.
 AC should be given every 4 to 6 hours until there is a significant clinical improvement
or AC is noted in the feces.
g. The efficacy of activated charcoal declines with time after ingestion.
h. Constipation or concretion formation are rarely reported side effects.
i. AC can be very messy to administer.
 j. Owner should be advised that feces will be black for several days.
4. Cathartics
a. Assist in hastening the elimination of ingested toxicants and AC-toxicant complexes from
GI tract
b. Administer orally or via stomach tube
i.
Saccharide {sorbitol) and saline cathartics (sodium or magnesium sulfate) are most
commonly used.
ii. Sorbitol (70%)—1-3mL/kg PO; often found in combination with AC
ii. Sodium sulfate (Glauber's salt)250-500mg/kg mixed in 5-10 times as much water
Chapter 39  Toxicological Emergencies
565
Box 39.2. Contraindications to the vse of cathartics.
●Prior, significant diarrhea
● Very young or very old patients
· Patients with preexisting renal disease or known ingestion of nephrotoxicants
● Patients with volume depletion
●Hemodynamic instability
● Existing GI pathology such as ileus, perforation, colitis, megacolon, hemorrhage, or obstruction
●Recent GI surgery
iv.   Magnesium sulfate (Epsom's salt)—250-500 mg/kg mixed in 5-10 times as much
water
c. Contraindications to using cathartics are in box 39.2.
d. There is no good evidence that the use of AC + cathartic is superior to the use of AC
alone.
5. Whole bowel irrigation
a. Involves the use of large volumes of polyethylene glycol (PEG) isosmotic solution to flush
the bowel and increase toxicant elimination.
b. Concentration of PEG and electrolytes in solution causes no net absorption or secretion
of ions so there are no significant changes in water or electrolyte balance.
c. Potentially useful following ingestion of iron, lead, or zinc-containing materials
d. Contraindicated in patients with bowel obstruction or perforations, ileus, hemodynamic
instability, or compromised unprotected airways
e. Technique has not been evaluated in veterinary patients. The need to administer large
volumes of PEG solution complicates its use unless patient has an orogastric tube in place.
iv. Facilitating toxicant clearance (box 39.3)
1. Diuresis
a. The efficacy of forced diuresis by volume expansion with isotonic sodium-containing
solutions such as 0.9% NaCl or lactated Ringer's solution has not been esta blished and
its routine use is not recommended.
b. Complications of forced diuresis include hyponatremia, hypokalemia, fluid overload,
pulmonary and/or cerebral edema, and alkalemia or acidemia depending on the agent
used.
2. Ion trapping
 a. Weak acids or weak bases can be ionized and therefore retained within renal tubules by
increasing or decreasing urine pH, respectively.
 b. Urinary acidification should not be attempted due to possible complications and relative
lack of efficacy.
c. Urinary alkalinization (without forced diuresis) is only recommended to increase the clear
ance of salicylates.
Alkalinization is achieved by the intravenous administration of sodium bicarbonate
infused at 1-2 mEq/kg over 3-4 hours.
ii. The goal is to achieve a urine pH of 7-8.
uoamxa aui laeaa aut '(8~ jo Hd e ot dn) auun aui auexie auou aul "!!
3. Other extracorporeal methods
a. Although not widely available, hemodialysis and hemoperfusion are options at several
veterinary hospitals.
1.
The relative efficacy of either technique is toxicant specific. Toxicant classes that aré
effectively removed either by hemodialysis or hemoperfusion include barbiturates,
566
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 39.3. Decontamination procedures.
● Need to be matched to the individual patient's situation
● Few evidence-based studies in veterinary medicine to judge the eficacy of specific decontamination
strategies
●With a few exceptions, the efficacy of emetic and AC +/- a cathartic declines with increasing time
since ingestion.
· The efficacy of emetic + AC use compared to AC use alone has not been established.
+ Facilitating clearance of absorbed toxicants can be useful for some toxicants.
Box 39.4. Acetaminophen.
· Decontamination strategy must balance potential efficacy with seriousness of presenting clinical signs.
● Respiratory signs are more life-threatening early compared to other species.
·Hepatotoxicity should not be overlooked.
●Early administration of NAC is critical to case outcome.
analgesics, nonbarbiturate hypnotics and tranquilizers, alcohols, paraquat, cardio-
vascular drugs, antidepressants, methylxanthines, amanitin, PCBs, and some metals.
b. Peritoneal dialysis can be used in lieu of hemodialysis.
4. Acetaminophen (box 39.4)
a. Widely available analgesic and antipyretic
i.
 Formulations: capsules, tablets, chewa ble tablets, granules, liquids, powders, suspen-
sions, suppositories
1. Available in extended-release formulations
2. Up to 650-mg strengths
3. Often found in combination with other drugs
b.Toxicity
i.
Cats: typically 50-100 mg/kg is toxic, although doses as low as 10 mg/kg may be
a ssociated with signs.
C. Relevant kinetics
1.
 Rapid absorption
ii.
 Rapid metabolism in liver by glucuronidation and sulfation
1. Cats have low UDP-glucuronosyltransferase activity and thus have diminished
ability to conjugate acetaminophen
iii.
 Liver metabolism results in the formation of N-acetyl benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI)
1. NAPQI is detoxified via glutathione conjugation.
 2. Overdoses cause glutathione depletion, thus preventing NAPQI detoxification.
d. Mechanism of action
1.
 Unconjugated NAPQI is electrophilic and combines with numerous proteins.
ii.
Damage to proteins, including structural and regulatory proteins and numerous
enzymes, disrupts hepatocellular function.
ii.
 Decreased glutathione increases susceptibility of cells to oxidative damage.
1. Sensitivity of feline red blood cells to oxidative damage results in oxidation of
hemoglobin to methemoglobin.
e. Clinical signs
i.
Acute signs in cats are less commonly associated with hepatic injury than for other
species.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
567
1. Cyanotic or muddy mucous membranes, methemoglobinemia, respiratory distress,
open-mouth breathing, anxiety, edema of face and paws, depression, hypothermia,
vomiting
2. Hepatotoxicity more common with higher doses and in male cats
3. Methemoglobinemia imparts a brownish color to blood image
i. Clinical pathology: methemoglobinemia, anemia, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria,
 ↑ ALT and AST, and bilirubinemia
1. Later hepatic failure may result in coagulopathy with ↑ PT and APTT
f. Diagnosis
 Often relies on history of exposure and occurrence of typical signs
 Plasma, serum, and urine can be tested for presence of acetaminophen
1. Test results are not rapidly available to assist in case management
g. Treatment
Stabilize vital signs
1. Supplemental oxygen
ii.
Appropriate decontamination should be considered.
1. Weigh risk of handling hypoxic animal with likely efficacy of decontamination
procedures
ili.  N-acetylcysteine {NAC) is “antidotal"
1. Provides cysteine, which is the rate-limiting amino acid for glutathione
production.
2. Available as 10% or 20% sterile solution (Mucomyst)
3. Also available in a 200 mg/mL product {Acetadote) marketed specifically as an
a ntidote to acetaminophen intoxication
4. Administer undiluted or diluted in a S% dextrose solution.
a. Loading dose: 140 mg/kg IV or PO (IV administration prefered if the cat is
vomiting!
b. Maintenance dose: 70 mg/kg IV or PO q6h for S-7 treatments
5. Studies have shown that NAC is still efficacious when given PO at recommended
doses following AC administration despite adsorption to AC
iv.  Efficacy of other sulfur donors (SAMe), antioxidants {ascorbic acid), or P-450 inhibi
tors {cimetidine) is unknown and should not substitute for NAC administration.
1. SAMe administered at 180 mg PO g12h for 3 days followed by 90 mg PO q12h
for 14 days has shown protective effects in cats.
V.
 Early treatment is critical to survival.
7. Amphetamines
a. There are a number of prescription, OTC, and illicit amphetamine compounds.
i. Prescription amphetamines are used to treat obesity, narcolepsy, and attention deficit-
hyperactivity disorder.
1. Examples include methylphenidate, phendimetrazine, and sibutramine, among others
ii. OTC drugs include phenylpropanolamine and pseudoephedrine.
iii. Illicit amphetamines include methamphetamine and a variety of "designer” drugs (MDMA,
MDEA).
b.Toxicity
i.An oral LDso for amphetamine sulfate and methamphetamine chloride for dogs is 20-27 mg/kg
and 9-11 mg/kg, respectively. Toxicity is unknown for cats.
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Well absorbed following oral exposure
ii. Sustained release formulations have slower absorption rate
ii. Undergo liver metabolism and are eliminated via the kidneys
568
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Not known with certainty; sympathomimetic effect via release of catecholamines such as nor-
epinephrine or direct stimulation of α- and β-adrenergic receptors
é. Clinical signs
 i. Hyperactivity, restlessness, mydriasis, hypersalivation, vocalization, tachypnea, tremors, hyper-
thermia, ataxia, seizures, and tachycardia. Some animals may be depressed, weak, and
bra dycardic.
f. Diagnosis
i. Possible confirmation via testing of blood or urine (testing not widely availa ble from veterinary
diagnostic laboratories; human drug testing laboratories are more likely to be of assistance)
g.Treatment
i. Decontamination protocol if deemed appropriate
ii.Control seizures with diazepam or midolazepam (0.5-1 mg/kg IV)
1. Benzodiazepines may exacerbate neurologic effects.
a. Chlorpromazine {10-18 mg/kg IV) may be effective.
ii. Control hyperthermia.
iv. Tachycardias respond to β-blockers such as propanolol.
8. Anticoagulant rodenticides (box 39.5)
a. Most common type of rodenticide in use and widely available
 b. First-generation anticoagulant rodenticides include warfarin, diphacinone, and chlorophacinone.
i.Warfarin is not commonly used due to rodent resistance.
C. Second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides (those effective against warfarin-resistant rats) include
brodifacoum and bromodiolone.
d. Available in a variety of formulations, including pellets, wax blocks, and tracking powders
 compounds, although there are no documented cases involving cats.
f. Relevant kinetics
i. Readily absorbed with high-protein binding
ii. Variable half-lives, with second-generation anticoagulants having prolonged half-lives
g. Toxicity
i. Not well defined in cats; based on limited toxicity information, cats are less sensitive than dogs.
ii. Acute oral LDsos for warfarin, bromodiolone, diphacinone, and brodifacoum are 5-30 mg/kg,
>25 mg/kg, 15 mg/kg, and 25 mg/kg, respectively.
h. Mechanism of toxic action
reductase
1. Prevents the recycling of vitamin K, from inactive to active form
2. Affects clotting factors II, VIl, IX, and X
 3. Intrinsic, extrinsic, and common pathways are affected.
Box 39.5. Anticoagulant rodenticides.
+ Intoxication is uncommon in cats.
·Intoxication most often associated with hemorrhage into body cavities.
 's  a 't  yns s u s s f  u sis i ai o
pericardial sac.
·Vitamin K; is antidotal but takes time for active clotting factors to become available (12 to 36 hours)
●FFP +/- whole blood provides clotting factors immediately.
● Monitoring PT after cessation of vitamin K, therapy is important to avoid a relapse.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
569
i. Clinical signs
i. Onset of clinical signs is delayed for 3-5 days after ingestion due to lag time in consumption of
active clotting factors.
1. Clotting factor VlI has the shortest half-life and is therefore the first factor to be affected.
i. Initially, clinical signs can be vague and include lethargy, weakness, and anorexia. More signifi-
cant signs include dsypnea, epistaxis, hemoptysis, hematoma formation, bleeding into body
cavities, melena, hematuria, and gingival bleeding. Other signs can include coughing, pallor,
emesis, lameness, ecchymoses or skin bruising, acute collapse, acute upper airway obstruction,
uterine bleeding, seizures, abdominal distention, and pain.
1. Localized hemorrhage into joints, the brain, or pericardial sac many manifest as atypical
signs
iii. Radiographs may show pleural effusions or loss of abdominal detail.
1. Thoraco- or abdominocentesis produces frank blood with a high hematocrit that does not clot.
j. Diagnosis
i. Clotting time abnormalities
1. One-stage prothrombin (OSPT) time is prolonged first.
2. Often, by the time of presentation, OSPT, activated partial thromboplastin time {APTT), and
activated clotting times (ACT) are all prolonged.
 3. The PIVKA (proteins induced by vitamin k antagonists) test is also abnormal.
ii. Detection of specific anticoagulant rodenticides is widely available for serum or whole blood,
although it may take several days to receive results.
k.Treatment
i.  If the animal has been exposed to a potentially toxic amount of rodenticide but is not showing
clinical signs and if the animal is presented soon after ingestion, decontamination should be
considered.
ii. If decontamination is performed or if the animal is presented well after the exposure (too late
for decontamination to be performed), either clotting times are monitored and vitamin K
therapy instituted if they become prolonged, or prophylactic vitamin K, is administered (1.5-
5 mg/kg PO q12h for 2-4 weeks).
iii. If the animal is showing clinical signs, the first concern is to stabilize the patient (e.g., thoraco-
centesis to improve respiration).
1. Vitamin K, therapy should be instituted (1.5-5 mg/kg PO or SQ q12h) and consideration
should be given to administering fresh frozen plasma (FFP) +/- whole blood, depending on
the animal's condition.
a. IM or IV administration of vitamin K, is generally not recommended (IV administration
hematomas).
b. Administration of FFP instantly provides active clotting factors, whereas following only
vitamin K, administration, there will be a delay in formation of active clotting factors for
2-4 weeks.
2. Once patients are stable and clotting times have returned to normal, oral vitamin K; can be
started in lieu of continued parenteral administration.
3. Vitamin K, therapy may be needed for several weeks following intoxication with second-
generation rodenticides due to their prolonged half-lives.
 4. Clotting times should be monitored for up to 96 hours after cessation of vitamin K, treatment
to avoid a relapse.
5. If a queen is lactating, kittens should be weaned early and started on vitamin Kj.
6. Pregnant queens should be treated as above with vitamin Ki until queening occurs; consid-
9.Boric acid/borates
570
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
a. Boric acid is used in medical, household, and industrial setings.
i. Household products that can contain boric acid/borates include medicated powders, skin lotions,
mouthwash, toothpaste, topical astringents, and eyewashes.
ii. Boric acid is commonly used for the control of ants, roaches, and flies.
1. Insecticide formulations can contain 90% or greater concentrations of boric acid.
2. Formulations include powders, granules, and gels
b.Toxicity
i. Relatively nontoxic, but concentrated formulations increase risk.
ii. No toxicity information specific to cats; nontoxic oral doses in dogs reported to be 1 to 3g/kg.
C.Relevant kinetics
i. Readily absorbed across mucosal surfaces, abraded skin and from the GI tract
ii. Relatively short (hours) half-life expected, although cat-specific data is lacking
iii. Eliminated unchanged via kidneys
d. Mechanism of action
i.Unknown
e. Clinical signs
i. Blue-green emesis and diarrhea, ptyalism, abdominal pain, ataxia, hyperesthesia, seizures, coma,
tremors, muscle weakness, metabolic acidosis, erythroderma, desquamation and erosion of
mucosal surfaces, shock, DIC, mild hyperthermia, and renal impairment.
f. Diagnosis
i.  Measurement of serum boric acid concentrations can confirm exposure.
1. Serum boric acid concentrations do not correlate well with severity of intoxication.
 2. Acute, fatal human pediatric intoxications had serum boric acid concentrations ranging from
2 to 160 mg/dL.
g. Treatment
i.Decontamination
1. Spontaneous emesis and diarrhea often preclude use of emetics or cathartics.
 2. Boric acid is not effectively adsorbed by activated charcoal.
 3. Hemodialysis or exchange transfusions have been used in human neonates.
4. Wash skin with warm, soapy water.
5. Efficacy of induced diuresis is unknown.
ii. Fluid support
ii. Diuresis may enhance clearance
 iv. Acid-base monitoring and correction of abnormalities
v.Antiemetics
vi. Oral gastrointestinal protectants once vomiting is controlled
10. Bromethalin (box 39.6)
a. Neurotoxic rodenticide
i. Formulations: grain or all-weather (paraffin) baits, bulk pellets, or concentrated solutions
b. Toxicity
 i. Cats appear to be one of the more sensitive species; 0.54mg/kg is an oral LDso for powdered
bromethalin bait.
1. Minimum oral toxic dose is 0.3 mg/kg
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Rapid absorption
1. Peak plasma concentrations reached within 4 hours
ii. Rapid hepatic metabolism to toxic meta bolite {desmethyl bromethalin)
iii. Significant elimination via the bile with possible enterohepatic recirculation
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Uncouples oxidative phosphorylation, which reduces ATP production
Chapter 39  Toxicological Emergencies
571
Box 39.6. Bromethalin.
● Rodenticide that is used much less frequently than anticoagulants
+Neurotoxic
· Treatment goal is to decrease cerebral edema.
+ Prognosis is poor in symptomatic animals.
1. Reduced ATP-dependent sodium-potassium pumps
 2. Movement of fluid into myelinated regions of the brain and spinal cord
 3. Increased cerebral lipid peroxidation
e. Clinical signs
Onset usually within 12-24 hours of ingestion, but can be as soon as 2 hours with large
ingestions
1. Can be a delayed onset of clinical signs following exposure; 0.54 mg/kg ingestion resulted
in signs occurring after 2-7 days
Signs can be quite variable and are somewhat dose dependent.
ii.Higher doses: severe muscle tremors, hyperexcitability, hyperthermia, running fits, hyperesthe-
sia, and focal motor and/or generalized muscle tremors that may be exacerbated by light or
noise
iv.  Lower doses: hind limb ataxia, paresis, patellar hyperreflexia, upper motor neuron bladder
paralysis, loss of conscious proprioception leading to paralysis and loss of deep pain, and CNS
depression
Abdominal distention occasionally observed in cats
vi. Decerebrate posture terminally
vi. Increased CSF pressure manifested as papilloedema, abnormal pulsing of retinal vessels, depres-
sion, stupor or coma, and elevated blood pressure with bradycardia
viii. EEG changes: increase spike and spike-and-wa ve activity associated with an irritative or seizure
focus, marked voltage depression consistent with cerebral hypoxia, and abnormal high-voltage,
and slow-wave activities consistent with cerebral edema.
ix. Other signs: emesis, abnormal postures {Schiff-Sherrington syndrome) and forelimb extensor
rigidity, opisthotonus, and fine muscle tremors
f.Diagnosis
i.
 Detection of bromethalin in serum or plasma
g. Treatment
i.
 Delay in onset of clinical signs may necessitate extended observation.
ii.
Decontamination
1.Emesis
2. Gastric lavage if emesis is contraindicated
3. Activated charcoal + cathartic
a. Multiple-dose AC indicated due to likely enterohepatic recirculation
b. Avoid magnesium-containing cathartics.
C. Avoid cathartics if ileus is present.
ii. Control seizures and severe muscle tremors, keeping in mind that severe CNS depression and
coma often occur at later times.
1. Diazepam, 1-2 mg/kg IV as needed
2. Phenobarbital, 5-15 mg/kg as needed
iv.  Control cerebral edema (see chaps. 25 and 26),
1. Mannitol, 0.5 g/kg IV over 20 minutes; repeated doses are likely to be needed.
572
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Furosemide, 1 mg/kg IV
 3. Dexamethasone, 2mg/kg every 6 hours IV
4. Use colloids to avoid excessive amounts of crystalloid fluids.
V.
Maintain hydration and electrolyte balance.
vi.Prolonged recovery with associated anorexia will likely necessitate nutritional support.
vi. Poor prognosis
11. Bufo toads (box 39.7)
a. There are two species of poisonous Bufo toads: B. marirus (FL and HI) and B. alvarius (desert S.W.
U.S.).
b. Toxins are contained in parotid glands and are secreted when the toad is disturbed.
c. Dogs are more commonly affected than cats.
d.Relevant kinetics
i.
Toxins are readily absorbed across mucous membranes of the oral cavity.
e. Toxicity
i.B. marinus is more toxic than B. alvarius.
ii. Larger toads produce more secretions from parotid gland.
iii. As little as 1 mL secretions per kg can cause clinical signs.
f. Mechanism of toxic action
i.
 Secretion is a complex mixture containing dopamine, catecholamines, and a variety of bufotox-
ins that have digitalis-like effects.
ii. Bufotoxins such as the bufogenins inhibit potassium-dependent ATPases, res ulting in alterations
of sodium and potassium transport across cell membranes.
ii. Some bufotoxins have vasopressor and hallucinogenic effects.
g. Clinical signs
i.
Brick-red mucous membranes, hypersalivation, pawing at the mouth, vocalizing, restlessness,
disorientation, circling, stumbling and falling, blank stares, tachypnea, opisthotonus, seizures,
hyperthermia, and coma
ii. Cardiac arrhythmias: range from bradycardia, heart block, ventricular tachycardia, and ven-
tricular fibrillation
h. Treatment
i.
The mouth should be flushed copiously {2-3 times for 5-10 minutes at a time) with water as
soon as possible following exposure.
ii. Control seizures
1. Diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1 mg/kg IV) or phenobarbital (4mg/kg IV q6-12h)
ili. Control hyperthermia.
iv. Monitor ECG for arrhythmias and treat accordingly (see chap. 17)
1. Bradycardia or heart block: atropine (0.02 mg/kg IV as needed)
2. Tachycardia: beta-blockers
Box 39.7. Bufo toads.
● Toxicity not well defined for cats
● Intoxication generally as a result of mouthing the toads
· Initial clinical signs include red mucous membranes, salivation, and pawing at the mouth; cardiac
arrhythmias are the most serious clinical signs.
· Initial decontamination includes thorough flushing of the mouth.
most importa nt.
+ Prognosis is good.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
573
a. Propanolol (0.5-2 mg/kg IV, followed by CRI of 0.02-0.06 mg/kg/min)
b. Esmolol (0.5 mg/kg IV, followed by CRI of 50-200 μg/kg/min)
3. Ventricular tachycardias
a. 0.25-0.5 mg/kg IV (over 1 minute); CRI at 10-20 μg/kg/min—lower dose compared to
dogs because cats are sensitive to the toxic effects of lidocaine)
b. Procainaminde (1-2 mg/kg IV (over 1 minute); CRI: 10-20 μg/kg/min CRI
 c. If ventricular arrhythmias are refractory, check serum Mg concentration, and if low use
magnesium sulfate (0.15-0.3 mEq/kg IV given over 5-10 minutes).
V.
Digoxin-specific Fab fragments might be effective, but efficacy and doses have not been
established.
vi. If neurologic condition deteriorates, consider prednisolone sodium succinate or methylpredniso-
lone (10-20 mg/kg given slowly IV).
vii. Lactated Ringer's at maintenance doses of 60 mL/kg/day
12. Calcium channel blockers
a. Examples include verapamil, diltiazem, nifedipine, and nimodipine
b.Relevant kinetics
i. Rapid absorption
c. Toxicity
i. Unknown in cats; therapeutic index in people is only 2-3.
ii. One case of verapamil intoxication of a cat reported an oral dose of 14.5 mg/kg associated with
clinical signs.
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i.Prevent the opening of voltage-gated calcium channels (L-type), thus slowing calcium influx and
inhibiting calcium-dependent processes in cardiac cells.
d. Clinical signs
i. Nausea, emesis, disorientation, bradycardia, hypotension, and loss of consciousness
e. Treatment
i. Decontamination protocol if deemed appropriate
1. If sustained release medication, multiple-dose AC is warranted
ii. Monitor ECG
iii. Correct hypotension
1. Fluids IV
2. Administer calcium as calcium chloride (0.1-0.3 mg/kg IV slowly of 100mg/mL solution) or
calcium gluconate (0.5-1.5 mL/mg IV slowly of 100mg/mL solution).
3. Refractory hypotension can be treated with glucagon {recommended dose for dogs is
70 μg/kg/min IV), isoproterenol (0.01-0.2mg/kg/min CRI), or vasopressors (e.g., dopamine
2-10 μg/kg/min IV infusion).
4. In humans, severe intoxication with calcium channel blockers has been treated effectively
with hyperinsulinemia plus euglycemia therapy.
a. Insulin has positive inotropic effects.
b. In human intoxications (based upon studies in dogs), dextrose is given as an initial bolus
of 0.5-1g/kg followed by a dextrose infusion of 0.25-0.5g/kg/h. This is followed
by an initial insulin bolus of 0.1U/kg followed by an insulin infusion at the rate of
0.5 U/kg/h, which should be increased if no hemodynamic response is noted within 1 hour.
c. Increases need to be done in a stepwise manner along with increases in the dextrose infu-
sion rate to maintain a euglycemic state.
d. Serum glucose concentrations need to be monitored closely during therapy and for several
hours after cessation of therapy.
13. Carbon monoxide (box 39.8)
a. Results from the incomplete combustion of hydrocarbons
574
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 39.8. Carbon monoxide.
· Recognition of intoxication is often difficult since the gas is colorless and odorless, and bright red
mucous membrane color is uncommon.
 Carboxyhemoglobin can be measured by co-oximetry, but pulse oximeters do not differentiate car-
boxyhemoglobin and oxyhemoglobin
· Oxygen therapy is primary treatment.
· Fetal hemoglobin has greater affinity for CO than maternal hemoglobin.
i.  Automobile exhaust, propane-powered engines (e.g., forklifts, chainsaws), portable generators,
kerosene heaters, gas log fireplaces, smoke inhalation, and gas furnaces or appliances
i. CO is clear, odorless, and nonirritating.
b. Relevant kinetics
i. CO is absorbed from the lungs at a rate proportional to the respiratory exchange rate.
ii. Approximate half-life of CO in room air is 4 hours.
c. Toxicity
i. Lethal concentration is 1,000 ppm (0.1%) with a 1-hour exposure.
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. CO combines with hemoglobin to form carboxyhemoglobin.
ii. Reduces availability of oxygen to tissues
1. Direct combination with hemoglobin (displacing O)
 2. Decreases release of O from remaining carboxyhemoglobin sites
iii. Tissue hypoxia and anoxia occurs.
iv. Binding to myoglobin may be responsible for cardiac arrhythmias, ischemia, and hypotension.
v.  Binding to cytochrome oxidase may be the initiating event that leads to CNS ischemic reperfu-
sion injury and delayed neuronal death.
é. Clinical signs
i.  Nausea, emesis, ataxia, tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, syncope, hypotension, weakness, lactic
acidosis, seizures, pulmonary edema, and coma
ii. ECG: PVCs, atrial fibrillation, and heart block
iii. Intoxicated animals seldom display characteristic bright red gums or blood.
f.Diagnosis
i. Measure arterial carboxyhemoglobin
1. Carboxyhemoglobin absorbs light at the same wavelength as oxyhemoglobin, so pulse oxim-
eters can give a falsely elevated or normal oxyhemoglobin saturation level.
2. Co-oximetry on arterial blood samples directly measures oxy- and carboxyhemoglobin
percent.
3. Carboxyhemoglobin concentrations do not correlate well with severity of intoxication.
ii. Diagnosis often relies on the history, clinical signs, and response to oxygen administration.
g. Treatment
i. 100% oxygen via endotracheal tube, oxygen cage, or mask
air.
 2. Continue treatment until the patient is asymptomatic.
ii. Monitor cardiac function and correct arrhythmias.
ii. Correct hypotension.
iv. Use of bicarbonate to treat acidemia is controversial since it can exacerbate cellular hypoxia
secondary to a left shift of the oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve.
v. Fetal hemoglobin has a greater affinity for CO than does maternal hemoglobin.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
575
au xs Alaiewxodde iog ro %oo I uo paugiuieu aq pinous slewue ueuaid suewoiduas '1
length of time it requires for maternal symptoms to resolve.
2. CO exposure can increase the incidence of stillbirths.
3. CO is a known teratogen, causing limb and cranial deformities.
14. Cholecalciferol (vitamin D) and analogues (box 39.9)
a. Cholecalciferol is used as a rodenticide (0.075 %) and can be found in dietary supplements; vitamin
 D analogs such as calcipotriene and calcipotriol are found in human medications.
b. Relevant kinetics
i. Following ingestion, cholecalciferol is rapidly absorbed and transported to the liver, where it
is metabolized to 25-OH)-cholecalciferol, which is further metabolized by the kidneys to
1,25-{(OH)2-cholecalciferol (calcitriol ) and 24,25-{OH)-cholecalciferol. Calcitriol is the principal
active form and is tightly regulated.
ii. Half-lives of cholecalciferol, 25-{OH)-cholecalciferol, and calcitriol are believed to be months,
days, and hours, respectively.
ii. Elimination is primarily via bile and feces.
c. Toxicity
i. Cats are more sensitive with lethal doses of 5-10 mg/kg of cholecalciferol.
ii. Calcitriol is much more toxic (toxic doses in dogs of 50 μg/kg)
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Increases calcium and phosphorus absorption from the GI tract
ii. Increases calcium and phosphorus reabsorption from the kidneys
ii. Mobilizes calcium from bones
iv. Causes increases in total and ionized calcium and metastatic tissue mineralization
e. Clinical signs
i. Result from hypercalcemia
ii. Signs related to effects on CNS, muscles, GI tract, cardiovascular system, and kidneys
1. Depression, weaknes, anorexia, emesis, polyuria, polydipsia, constipation, dehydration,
melena, hematemesis, altered ECG {shortened QT and prolonged PR intervals), bradycardia,
seizures, shock, coma, and death
2. Increased total and ionized serum calcium concentrations, increased BUN and creatinine,
hyperphosphatemia, and decreased intact PTH
3. Radiographs may show metastatic tissue calcification of soft tissues and bronchi.
f.Diagnosis
i.  History of ingestion, increased total and ionized calcium, increased serum concentrations of
25-{OH)-cholecalciferol, and decreased intact PTH
g. Treatment
i. General decontamination procedures if presented early
Box 39.9. Cholecalciferol and analogues.
● Vitamin D analogues used in human medicine are much more toxic than cholecalciferol
rodenticide.
· Cholecalciferol has to be metabolized to active form of vitamin D to cause hypercalcemia.
resorption
● Multiple treatment interventions to try to lower hypercalcemia: diuresis, furosemide, corticosteroids,
and calcitonin or pamidronate
· Pamidronate preferred over calcitonin
+ 25-OH cholecalciferol has a long half-life, which can result in need for prolonged treatment.
576
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii. Reduce serum calcium concentrations
1. Normal saline diuresis (4-6 mL/kg/h or above)
2. Furosemide (2-5 mg/kg IV q8-12h)
3. Prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg PO, SQ, IM q12h)
4. Salmon calcitonin (4 to 6IU/kg SQ q2-3h)
a. Since this is a foreign protein, pre-evaluation with an intradermal skin test is
recommended.
5. Biphosphonates may be better than salmon calcitonin
a. Pamidronate disodium (1.3-2mg/kg in 0.9% sodium chloride slow IV over 2-4 hours.
Another infusion may be needed.)
ii. Monitor serum and ionized calcium concentrations every 24-48 hours to monitor effectiveness
of therapy. Monitoring should continue for up to 6 days after cessation of therapy.
iv. Minimize dietary calcium intake.
v.Antiemetics such as metaclopramide (0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM or IV q4-6h)
vi. Gastric mucosal protectants such as sucralfate (0.25 g PO q8-12h)
15. Cholinesterase-inhibiting insecticides (organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides) (box 39.10)
a. Although commonly used in agricultural settings, their use on animals or in home or garden envi-
 ronments has declined significantly.
b. Cats and younger animals more commonly affected
C. Relevant kinetics
i.
Good absorption via all routes of exposure
ii. Bioactivation of some organophosphorus insecticides is required for toxicity.
d. Toxicity
i.
punoy ae ieui isou tay/su ooo'l kueau 0i saue1 sy/su mol aui woy sosgiaqeuea ano
 in home or garden environments are moderately toxic (i.e., LDsos of several hundred mg/kg).
e. Mechanism of toxic action
 Inhibition of cholinesterase enzymes (specific inhibition of acetylcholinesterase) is responsible
for clinical signs.
ii.
 Acetylcholine is a neurotransmitter at several sites, including autonomic ganglia of both sym-
pathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, between postganglionic parasympathetic nerve
fibers and cardiac muscle, smooth muscle and exocrine glands, at neuromuscular junctions of
the somatic nervous system, and at cholinergic synapses in the CNS. Increased acetylcholine
at these sites is the cause of clinical signs (see fig. 39.1).
iii. Cholinesterase enzyme binding is irreversible with organophosphorus insecticides but reversible
with carbamates. This accounts for the delayed recovery following organophosphorus insecti-
cide exposure.
Box 39. 10. Cholinestera se-inhibiting insecticides (organophosphorus and carbamate insecticides).
● Intoxications are less frequent as many have been removed from the market and have been replaced
by safer insecticides.
● Acute signs are related to muscarinic and nicotinic receptor stimulation.
+ An intermediate syndrome has been described in cats.
· Atropine reverses muscarinic signs, and early administration (even before decontamination) can be
life-saving.
· Atropine is combined with 2-PAM for OP intoxications, whereas 2-PAM is not needed for carbamate
intoxications.
● Recovery from carbamate intoxication is generally much more rapid than that following OP
intoxication.
Chapter 39 Toxicological Emergencies
577
AcetyicholineNeurotransmission
Parasympathetic
Sympathetic
Somatic
CNS
 Preganglionic
Nerves
Ganglion
ACH
ACH
ACH
ACH
ACH
ACH
Neuromuscular
Junction
Postganglionic
Excitability
Nerves
Epi
：
Lethargy
ACH
ACH
NE
Agitation
Fasiculation
Coma
Weakness
Seizure
Manifestations at
Mydriasis
Effector Organs
Dumbells
Diaphoresis
Tachycardia
 Hypertension
Bronchodilation
Muscarinic
Nicofinic
Central
Fig. 39.1. Acetylcholine neurotransmission.
Death is most often due to hypoxia secondary to bronchial secretions and respiratory muscle
paralysis.
f. Clinical signs
i.
Onset is often ra pid.
ii.
Onset may be delayed in cats dermally exposed to chlorpyrifos (an OP insecticide).
iii.
Acetylcholine receptors are classified as muscarinic or nicotinic; clinical signs can be variable
due to which receptors are stimulated and to what degree.
iV.
 Signs secondary to muscarinic receptor stimulation include hypersalivation, lacrimation, urina -
tion, defecation, increased respiratory sounds, respiratory distress, bradycardia (although
tachycardia can occur), and miosis.
 Signs secondary to nicotinic receptor stimulation include skeletal muscle stiffness, muscle fas-
ciculations, tremors, weakness, and paralysis.
Vi.
sites. For example, ganglionic stimulation may predominate in some situations resulting in
tachycardia or mydriasis. CNS effects may predominate, causing restlessness, anxiety, hyper-
activity, seizures, or depression.
vi. An "intermediate syndrome" has been described with more lipophilic organophosphorus
compounds.
1. The syndrome is believed to be secondary to down-regulation of muscarinic receptors with
 sublethal, more prolonged exposures.
 a. Nicotinic signs predominate since nicotinic receptors are not down-regulated.
2. Signs associated with chlorpyrifos exposure of cats are consistent with this syndrome.
a. Generalized weakness (including ventroflexion of the neck), anorexia, muscle tremors,
seizures, and depression
578
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
g. Diagnosis
i. Cholinesterase activity can be measured in whole blood samples and compared to species-
specific normal ranges. A decrease in activity of S0% or greater is strongly suggestive of expo-
sure to a cholinesterase-inhibiting insecticide.
1. The reversibility of cholinesterase inhibition by carbamates can sometimes make test inter
pretation difficult, since spontaneous reactivation can occur following sample collection.
ii.
 Samples of stomach contents can be analyzed for specific compounds as well as possible sources
for exposure (baits, etc.).
ii. If administration of 0.02mg/kg of atropine IV does not cause anticholinergic effects such as
mydriasis and tachycardia, then cholinesterase inhibition is possible.
h.Treatment
1.
 Decontamination should be considered if appropriate following oral or dermal exposures.
ii.Atropine (0.1-0.2mg/kg, %4 dose IV and % dose IM or SQ). The goal is to relieve CNS and
respiratory signs. The amount and frequency of the dose is dependent on the occurrence of
clinical signs amenable to atropine reversal. Atropine does not relieve signs due to nicotinic
receptor stimulation.
1. Glycopyrrolate does not cross the blood-brain barrier and therefore is not as effective as
atropine for controlling CNS signs.
ii.Nicotinic signs can be ameliorated by midazolam (0.5-1.0 mg/kg IV),
1. The efficacy of diphenhydramine has not been determined.
iv.  For known organophosphorus insecticide exposures, pralidoxime hydrochloride or 2-PAM
(10 mg/kg q12h IV) should be administered in addition to atropine.
1. 2-PAM facilitates the regeneration of cholinesterase activity and is more effective the sooner
after exposure it is administered.
 2. 2-PAM should be administered at any point following exposure to an OP to see if a clinical
improvement occurs. If improvement is noted, 2-PAM administration should be continued
until the patient is asymptomatic. If no improvement is seen within 24-36 hours, then
2-PAM should be discontinued.
v. In cases of suspected cholinesterase-inhibiting insecticide intoxication in which it is unknown
whether an OP or carbamate was involved, 2-PAM should be administered to see whether a
clinical improvement occurs.
vi. In cases of known carbamate intoxication, 2-PAM is not needed due to rapid enzyme
regeneration.
vii.  Recovery following carbamate exposure is generally rapid while recovery following OP expo
sure may be prolonged.
viil. Diazepam use in combination with atropine may be beneficial for reversing some CNS effects
and bradycardia.
ix. Atropine and 2-PAM are recommended for treating the intermediate syndrome, although
atropine administration may not be needed in the absence of muscarinic signs.
16. Citrus oils
a. Examples of citrus oil extracts include d-limonene and linalool.
b. Products containing citrus oil or citrus oil extracts include insect sprays, pet dips, shampoos, and
soaps. Solvents (degreasers), fragrances, and cleansers also contain citrus oils or citrus oil extracts.
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Lipid soluble; good oral and dermal absorption
ii. Excretion via kidneys
d. Toxicity
i. Cats appear to be more sensitive than dogs.
ii. Clinical signs in cats associated with the use of a pet dip containing 78.2% d-limonene used at
Sx recommended rate; severe clinical signs in a cat following use of a 1% d-limonene shampoo
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
579
e. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Not certain; d-limonene causes direct vasodilatation.
f.Clinical signs
i.Hypersalivation (transient), ataxia, muscle tremors (shivering), and hypothermia. Other reported
clinical signs include weakness, lethargy, vocalization, aggressive behavior, recumbency, paraly-
 sis, hypotension, mydriasis, and slow PLR.
ii. Skin irritation or necrotizing dermatitis
g. Diagnosis
i. Citrus smell may be noted
h. Treatment
i. Decontamination protocol if appropriate; bathing with mild dish detergent if dermal exposure
ii. Fluids IV if hypotensive
ii. Skin reactions should be treated with antibiotics, corticosteroids, and pain medication if severe.
17. Cleaning agents
a. Common household cleaning agents include hypochlorite-containing bleaches, ammonia products,
soaps, detergents, and glass cleaners.
b. Relevant kinetics
i. Not generally applicable
c. Toxicity
 i. Concentrated product is more likely to cause signs, compared to a product that has been diluted
prior to exposure.
ii. Some ingredients can cause CNS depression (e.g., glycol ethers found in glass cleaners).
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. In general, locally irritating to mucous membranes
e. Clinical signs
i. Signs are generally soon after exposure and are rarely delayed.
ii. Primarily irritants; therefore, signs generally associated with irritation to oropharyngeal or
respiratory mucosa. Abdominal discomfort, nausea, and emesis can occur. Ocular, oral, and
upper airway exposure can manifest as lacrimation, erythema, dyspea, tachypnea, and general
discomfort.
f. Diagnosis
i. Characteristic odors can help confirm exposures.
ii. Laboratory analysis of limited value
g. Treatment
i. Oral exposures: standard decontamination approaches (emesis, AC, etc.) are generally not
recommended.
1. Dilution with milk or water should be considered, although the efficacy of dilution is not
known.
2. Neutralization of an acidic or basic product should be avoided.
ii. Dermal or ocular exposures: irrigation with tepid tap water or normal saline
ii. Respiratory care includes oxygen supplementation, airway management including intubation,
and possibly bronchodilators.
18. Cocaine
a. A rarely recognized intoxication, possibly due to low frequency of exposure, reluctance on the part
of owners to admit exposure, and lack of readily available testing for animals
b. Relevant kinetics
i. Rapid absorption with peak plasma concentrations achieved within approximately 1 hour
(humans)
ii. Rapidly metabolized with a half-life of 0.5-1.5 hours {humans)
c.Toxicity
580
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Not known
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. CNS stimulation through sympathetic discharge
e. Clinical signs
i. CNS signs range from hyperactivity and seizures to depression and coma. Tachypnea, emesis,
hypersalivation, tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, hyperthermia, and pulmonary edema are pos-
sible. Rhabdomyolysis is possible.
f.Treatment
i. Rapidity of onset of clinical signs makes use of emetics problematic.
ii. Mainstay of treatment should focus on the ABCs.
1. Control seizures with diazepam or midazolam (0.5-1 mg/kg IV), pentobarbital (2-30 mg/kg
slowly IV to effect) or propofol (6.6 mg/kg IV slowly over 60 seconds; CRI IV infusions at
5 mg/kg slowly IV followed by 100-400 μg/kg/min IV).
2. Correct hyperthermia
a. May resolve once animal is sedated
3. Monitor ECG and treat arrhythmias (see chap. 17—Management of Life-Threatening
Arrhythmias)
4. Monitor blood glucose
19. Corrosives (box 39.11)
a.Acids
i.
Acetic, boric, carbolic (phenols), chromic, formic, hydrochloric, oxalic, nitric, phosphoric, and
sulfuric acids
ii. 
 Toxicity: injury is related to factors such as pH, concentration, volume, duration of contact
with tissue, stomach contents, and titrata ble acid reserve.
iii.  Mechanism of toxic action
1. Induce tissue injury by causing protein desiccation and coagulation necrosis.
 2. Results in the formation of an eschar which generally limits deeper tissue injury
b. Alkalis
 Sodium hydroxide, sodium hypochlorite (bleach), sodium carbonate, phosphate or silicate,
ammonia, Clinitest tablets, denture cleaners, hair dyes, cement, and alkaline batteries
1i.
,    n  x
ii.  Mechanism of toxic action.
1. Alkalis cause tissue dissolution, collagen destruction, fat saponification, and cell membrane
emulsification {liquefactive necrosis)
 2. Allow for greater penetration to deeper tissue layers.
c. Clinical signs
1.
Oral burns, ptyalism, salivation, pain, vocalization, dysphagia, panting, laryngeal edema with
possible airway obstruction, abdominal pain, emesis, hematemesis, refusal to swallow, cough-
ing, and melena
i.  Perforation of esophoagus (Esophageal injury is much less common following acid ingestion
vs. alkali ingestion.)
Box 39.11. Corrosives.
● Damage from acids is less penetrating than that associated with alkalis.
● Standard decontamination protocols are not effective; evidence for the efficacy of dilution with milk
or water is lacking.
Chapter 39  Toxicological Emergencies
581
ii. Perforation of the GI tract can lead to peritonitis, pleuritis, sepsis, circulatory shock, collapse,
and death.
iv.
 Absence of clinical signs or evidence of upper GI damage (i.e., burns) does not rule out damage
to esophagus or stomach.
Most common sequela is development of strictures, although esophageal motility problems
have been described.
d. Treatment
i.
Personnel should wear protective clothes and equipment during initial examination.
 All acid or alkali ingestions should be considered life-threatening.
ii. Airway management and stabilization should be of immediate concern.
iv.I
Decontamination
1. Typical decontamination procedures are not useful.
a. Emetics re-expose the esophagus and oropharynx
b. Cathartics may extend injury farther down the GI tract.
C. Acids and alkalis are not effectively adsorbed by AC
Dilution is controversial
1. Early dilution with milk or water may decrease tissue damage.
 2. Care must be taken to avoid inducing vomiting.
 3. Contraindicated if esophageal perforation is suspected
vi. Neutralization is not recommended
vii. Corticosteroid use is controversial and is not recommended
vifi. Endoscopy may be warranted to assess the extent and severity of injury.
20. Ethylene glycol (EG) (box 39.12)
a. EG is most commonly encountered in antifreeze products.
b. Undiluted antifreeze is 9s% EG; often diluted 1:1 with water for use in vehicles.
c. Does not appear to be a seasonally dependent intoxication
d. Sweet taste so readily consumed
e. Relevant kinetics
1.
 Ra pid absorption and metabolism
ii.Metabolized to toxic products such as glycoaldehyde, glycolic acid, glyoxylic acid, and oxalic
acid
ii.
 The first step in metabolism is production of glycoaldehyde by alcohol dehydrogenase in the
liver (this enzyme is targeted by EG antidotes).
iv.   Meta bolism of EG to glycoaldehyde and glycolic acid to glyoxylic acid are rate-limiting steps.
f.Toxicity
1.
The minimum lethal dose of undiluted EG reported for cats is 1.5 mg/kg.
g. Mechanism of toxic action
1.
 Parent EG causes CNS depression and GI irritation.
Box 39.12. Ethylene glycol.
· Cats are somewhat more sensitive than dogs to EG, although most cases occur in dogs
· EG is not highly toxic; metabolites are responsible for most of the clinical signs.
· Early diagnosis often depends on occurrence of high anion and osmolar gaps and characteristic
crystalluria.
Fomepizole is an alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor that has significant advantages over ethanol as an
antidote; effective doses for cats have been esta blished.
582
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii.
Glycoaldehyde is thought to contribute to CNS effects, but it is rapidly metabolized to glycolic
acid.
iii.
 Glycolic acid is a major contributor to the occurrence of metabolic acidosis, which stimulates
respiratory compensation.
iv.(
 Glyoxylic acid is the most toxic metabolite; it inhibits cellular energy production.
V.
EG metabolites inhibit oxidative phosphorylation, cellular respiration, glucose metabolism,
 protein synthesis, and DNA replication.
vi.
The parent compound and metabolites increase serum osmolality.
vii. Meta bolites are toxic to renal tubular epithelium.
vi. Oxalic acid complexes with calcium to form calcium oxalate crystals.
1. The crystals contribute to renal tubular damage.
h. Clinical signs
1.
Signs are dose dependent and can be attributed to either the parent EG or metabolites.
ii.(
su th oi dn o isisad u sis pu aea p si e um aq ueo suis jo laso
1. Gastric irritation ca uses nausea and emesis.
2. CNS signs include depression, ataxia, knuckling, and decreased withdrawal reflexes and
righting ability.
 3. Muscle fasciculations, hypothermia, and an osmotic diuresis causing polyuria can occur
(cats remain markedly depressed and do not develop polydipsia). Diuresis without increased
water intake results in dehydration.
ii. Metabolites of EG increase the pool of unmeasured anions causing an increased anion gap.
1. The anion gap is increased by 3 hours and peaks at 6 hours postingestion; it remains elevated
for up to 48 hours.
iv.  A meta bolic acidosis occurs primarily as a result of glycolic acid accumulation (metabolism of
glycolic acid to glyoxylic acid is a rate-limiting step).
1. Evident from blood-gas analysis
 Oliguric renal failure becomes evident by 36-72 hours postingestion.
1. Signs include severe lethargy or coma, seizures, anorexia, emesis, oral ulcers and salivation,
oliguria with isothenuria, or anuria.
2. Kidneys are painful.
 3. There can be apparent recovery between the onset of early signs and the occurrence of acute
renal failure.
vi. Calcium binding by oxalic acid can result in hypocalcemia.
i. Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on the history, physical exam findings, characteristic clinical pathologic
abnormalities, urinalysis, and detection of ethylene glycol in serum, plasma, or urine.
ii. Large anion and osmolar gaps are evident.
1. Meta bolites of ethylene glycol increase the pool of unmeasured anions in the serum, result-
ing in an increased anion gap.
2. Hyperosmolality occurs because ethylene glycol is an osmotically active, small molecular
weight substance. In intoxication, measured osmolality vs. calculated osmolality increases
up to 150 mosm/kg.
 a. Multiplying the osmole gap by 5 approximates the serum ethylene glycol concentration
in mg/dL.
ii. Typical calcium oxalate crystals in large numbers are noted in urine.
1. Crystals may be observed as soon as 3-6 hours postingestion.
2. Calcium oxalate crystals are either in monohydrate (six-sided prisms; fig. 39.2) or dehydrate
forms (envelope or Maltese cross; fig. 39.3); monohydrate crystalluria is more common.
a. A less common form includes a “dumbbell" shape.
iv.   Ethylene glycol can be detected by bedside colorimetric tests of serum (e.g., PRN Pharmacal,
Pensacola, FL or Kacey, Asheville, NC)
Fig. 39.2.
 Calcium monohydrate.
Fig. 39.3.
 Calcium dihydrate.
583
584
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
1. Such colorimetric tests are relatively insensitive, so they are only useful if used soon after
an exposure (before EG is metabolized).
a. Colorimetric tests are not specific for EG; glycerol or propylene glycol can give
false + results.
V.
Commercial or veterinary diagnostic laboratories can detect EG, but results are often not avail-
able quickly enough to guide initial treatment.
1. Such tests are more sensitive than the bedside test.
vi. Early after exposure, detection of fluorescence using a Wood's lamp in the oral cavity, in
vomitus, or on face and paws can be helpful due to the presence of fluorescein dye in antifreeze
products.
j.Treatment
i. The rapidity of absorption of EG or presentation after the onset of acute renal failure often
precludes effective decontamination.
ii. In addition, the rapid metabolism of EG to toxic metabolites necessitates early antidotal admin-
istration to improve survival.
ii. Ideally, immediate hemodialysis should be provided if available.
iv. The most critical aspect of treating EG intoxication is prevention of EG metabolism.
1. Ethanol {5mL of 20% ethanol/kg [hyperosmolar and has been reported to cause
mild hemolysis] IV q6h for five treatments and then q8h for four additional treatments, or
1.3 mg/kg of 30% ethanol given IV as a bolus, followed by a CRI of 0.42 mg/kg/h for 48
hours)
a. Ethanol is a competitive substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase.
b. The CRI protocol maintains a more constant serum concentration.
C. If the situation calls for administration of ethanol before presentation to a veterinary
hospital, 1-1.5 mL/kg of an 80-proof (40% ethanol) alcoholic beverage can be used orally.
d. Ethanol causes some undesirable side effects, including CNS and respiratory depression,
impaired glucose metabolism, and exacerbation of metabolic acidosis and the osmolar
gap.
2. Fomepizole (125 mg/kg IV at 1, 2, and 3 hours postingestion followed by 31.25 mg/kg IV at
12, 24, and 36 hours) has been shown to be efficacious in cats. It is important to note the
difference in doses in cats compared to dogs.
a. Fomepizole is an alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitor (not a competitive substrate for the
enzyme).
b. It does not have appreciable side effects (in contrast to ethanol).
 3. Alcohol dehydrogenase inhibitors should be administered up to 36 hours postingestion to
prevent meta bolism of residual EG.
v. Peritoneal dialysis or hemodialysis can also be utilized.
vi. Close attention needs to be given to acid-base, electrolyte, and fluid imbalances.
1. Calcium gluconate (10%, 0.94-1.4mL/kg IV over 20-30 minutes or to effect) should be used
to correct severe hypocalcemia.
to maintain urine output.
21. Hypertonic sodium phosphate enemas
a. Intoxication most commonly seen in cats
b. Mechanism of toxic action
i. High sodium and phosphate content causes hypernatremia, hyperosmolality, hyperphosphate.
mia, and hypocalcemia.
hypocalcemia.
c. Clinical signs
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
585
i. Onset of clinical signs can 0ccur within 30-60 minutes
ii. Depression, ataxia, emesis, diarrhea (+/- bloody), stupor, coma, miosis, and tetany
d. Treatment
i. Primarily supportive with low-sodium fluids. Sodium concentrations can fall quickly since hyper-
natremia is rapid and of short duration. Fluid diuresis can help correct hyperphosphatemia. If
treatment is delayed by several hours, isotonic fluids should be used to lower sodium more slowly
to avoid cerebral edema.
ii. Extreme hypocalcemia can be treated with 10% calcium gluconate (50-100 mg/kg slow IV).
22. Lead (box 39.13)
a. Many potential sources for lead exposure: old paints, contaminated dust and soil, vehicular batter-
ies, linoleum, plumbing materials, grease, golf balls, caulking material, toys, lead weights, fishing
gear, leaded glass, and solder
b. Relevant kinetics
i.
 Bioavailability is greater in young animals.
ii. Lead can cross the blood-brain barrier.
ii.  Lead is excreted via the bile.
c. Toxicity
Acute and chronic toxicity not established for cats; an acutely toxic dose for dogs is 191 to
1,000 mg/kg, whereas a chronic cumulative toxic dose is 1.8-2.6 mg/kg.
d. Mechanism of toxic action
 Most cellular damage due to lead is caused by the ability of lead to substitute for a variety of
polyvalent cations, especially calcium and zinc, in their binding sites.
ii.
Metal transport, energy metabolism, apoptosis, ionic conduction, cell adhesion, inter- and
intracellular signaling, diverse enzymatic processes, protein maturation, and genetic regulation
can all be affected.
ii. The neurotoxicity of lead is most likely due to such diverse mechanisms as lipid peroxidation;
excitotoxicity {i.e., cell damage secondary to receptor overstimulation due to excitatory neu-
rotransmitters such as glutamate); alterations in neurotransmitter synthesis, storage, and
release; alterations in expression and functioning of receptors; interference with mitochondrial
oligodendroglia.
iv.  The mechanism of lead-induced altered GI motility is not entirely clear, but it does not appear
to be related to an effect of lead on peripheral nerves or calcium flux. Lead-induced relaxation
may be due to stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity resulting in an increase in intracellular
cyclic AMP.
 Lead causes anemia by increasing erythrocyte fragility, delaying erythrocyte maturation, and
V.
inhibiting heme synthesis.
e. Clinical signs
GI and neurologic signs are most commonly noted.
Box 39.13. Lead.
· Most intoxications result from subacute to chronic exposures.
 Clinical signs are nonspecific but most often are referable to CNS or GI dysfunction.
Diagnosis is based on whole blood lead determination; such testing is readily available and quick.
Treatment relies on chelation; succimer has several significant advantanges over the use of CaNazEDTA.
·Identification of the source of exposure is important.
 Lead is a significant public health concern; diagnosis in a household pet warrants assessment of the
pet owners for possible exposure.
586
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
ii.
Neurologic signs
1. Seizures, hysteria, behavioral changes, ataxia, tremors, blindness, and jaw clamping
iii. GI signs
1. Anorexia, emesis, abdominal pain, and diarrhea
2. Regurgitation, secondary to megaesophagus, can occur.
iv.
 Clinical pathologic changes include mild anemia, increased nucleated red blood cells, anisocy.
tosis, polychromasia, poikilocytosis, hypochromasia, basophilic stippling of red blood cells,
and elevated ALT and ALP reported in cats.
f. Diagnosis
i.
Measurement of lead concentrations in whole blood (generally >0.4 ppm is diagnostic; lower
concentrations may be significant but must be interpreted in conjunction with history and
clinical signs)
1. Most blood collection tubes, including those containing EDTA, can be used for blood col-
lection; consult laboratory to verify.
ii.F
 Radiographs may reveal radiodense material in the GI tract.
g. Treatment
Attempts to remove lead from GI tract are warranted.
ii.
 Use of cathartics or an enema may be useful.
1. Overuse of cathartics should be avoided.
 2. Magnesium or sodium sulfate may promote formation of lead sulfate, which is less
bioavailable.
ii.Whole bowel irrigation may be useful, but this approach has not been evaluated in cats.
iv. Lead chelation
1. Calcium disodium EDTA (25 mg/kg SC q4h for 2-5 days; dilute to 10 mg/mL with 5%
dextrose)
a. Total dose should not exceed 2 g/day
 b. May require multiple courses of chelation
c. Potentially nephrotoxic—monitor renal function
d. Can chelate essential elements such as zinc
2. Succimer (10 mg/kg PO q8h for 5 days followed by 10 mg/kg PO q12h for 2 weeks)
a. Not nephrotoxic
b. Does not chelate essential elements
3. D-penicillamine (33-55 mg/kg PO q6h for 7 days)
V.
A rest period should be employed after each course of chelation.
1. Whole blood lead should be determined 3-5 days after cessation of chelation; continued
chelation is warranted until blood lead <0.2 ppm.
vi.  Control seizures—diazepam or midazolam (0.5-1 mg/kg IV)
vi. Lessen cerebral edema—mannitol (0.25-2g/kg of 15-25% solution, slow IV infusion over
30-60 minutes (repeat in 6 hours if necessary); dexamethasone (2 mg/kg IV)
23. Marijuana (Cannabis sativa)
a. All parts of the plant are considered to be toxic.
i. Hashish is more concentrated
b. The psychoactive substance in the plant is 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC)
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Not known in dogs or cats, but potentially has a prolonged half-life
ii. Metabolized by the liver and eliminated via bile and feces
d. Toxicity
i. Not known for cats
é. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Specific cannabinoid receptors identified within the brain
Chapter 39 Toxicological Emergencies
587
1. Primarily a CNS depressant
 i. Stimulates sympathetic receptors and inhibits parasympathetic receptors in cardiac tissue
f. Clinical signs
i. Ataxia, emesis, depression, mydriasis, and disorientation
ii. Bradycardia or tachycardia can occur.
iii. Depression may be prolonged.
g. Diagnosis
i.History of exposure
ii. Testing urine for THC
h. Treatment
i. Decontamination protocol should be followed where appropriate.
i. Monitoring and nursing care appropriate for CNS and respiratory depression
24. Melaleuca (tea tree oil)
a. Oil derived from the Australian tea tree (Melaleuca alternifolia)
 b. The oil contains terpenes, sesquiterpenes, and hydrocarbons.
C. Variety of commercial products contain the oil and the pure oil has been sold for use on animals.
d. Relevant kinetics
i. Little information, although likely to be well absorbed following dermal application
e. Toxicity
i. Not certain
f. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Unknown
g. Clinical signs
i. Hypothermia, ataxia, dehydration, nervousness, trembling, and coma
h. Treatment
i. Dermal decontamination using mild dishwashing detergent
1. Possible decontamination if significant oral exposure
ii. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive.
25. Metaldehyde (box 39.14)
a. Used as a molluscicide (slug and snail control); present in various bait formulations (often granular)
at 1.5-5%
b. Intoxications more common in dogs
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Little information concerning kinetics
ii. In stomach, may undergo some hydrolysis to acetaldehyde
iii. Rapid metabolism is likely
d. Toxicity
i.An acute oral LDso for cats is 207mg/kg.
é. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Hypothesized to be related to decreased GABA in the CNS
f. Clinical signs
Box 39.14. Metaldehyde.
● Slug or snail products more commonly found in certain regions; high concentrations of active ingredi
ent increase risk for intoxication.
● Rapidly acting neurotoxin that causes CNS stimulation
●“Shake and bake” describes the classic clinical presentation: muscle tremors and hyperthermia.
+ Treatment relies on amelioration of CNS stimulation and correction of hyperthermia.
588
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Locomotor signs, dyspnea, hyperthermia, muscle spasms, mydriasis, opisthotonus, nystagmus,
sensitivity to external stimuli, and seizures
g. Diagnosis
i.
 Use of products in the area
ii. History of exposure
ii. Detection of metaldehyde in stomach contents, serum, or urine
h. Treatment
i.
 Standard decontamination procedures if presented early
ii. Control muscle tremors and seizures
1. Treat tremors and seizures with either diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1 mg/kg IV) or
phenobarbital (4 mg/kg IV BID to QID)
 2. If refractory to anticonvulsants, induce general anesthesia.
3. Methocarbamol (50 to 220mg/kg slow IV; total daily dose not to exceed 330 mg/kg) for
muscle tremors
iii. Control hyperthermia
1. Cold lactated Ringer's or 0.9% saline with dextrose 20-60 mL/kg/h IV
 2. Surface cooling from skin and hair using room temperature water; fans can enhance evapora-
tion and result in cooling.
iv. Correct acidosis
26. Methylxanthines
a. Includes caffeine, theobromine, theophylline, and aminophylline. Caffeine is found in many drinks,
as an OTC stimulant, in dietary supplements, and in chocolate. Theobromine is also found in
chocolate and cocoa bean mulch. Theophylline and aminophylline are respiratory smooth muscle
rela xants.
b. Concentrations of theobromine and caffeine vary depending on the type of product (table 39.1).
C. Intoxication of cats is much less frequent than that of dogs.
d. Relevant kinetics
i. Kinetics of methylxanthines not known with certainty in cats, with the exception of theophylline
Table 39.1.
 Amounts of caffeine and theobromine in various sources.
Source
Amount
Caffeine sources:
OTC stimulants (Vivarin)
200 mg/tablet
Dexatrim diet pill
200 mg/tablet 
Excedrin
 65 mg/tablet 
Coffee beans
1-2%
Tea
20-90mg/5-oz cup
 Chocolate products
2-40mg/oz
Guarana seeds
3-5%
Theobromine sources:
Cacao beans
300-1,500 mg/oz
 Unsweetened baking chocolate
390-450mg/oz
Cacao powder
400-737mg/oz
 Dark semisweet chocolate
135mg/oz
Milk chocolate
44-60mg/oz
White chocolate
0.25mg/oz
Cacao bean mulch
56-900mg/oz
Cacao bean hulls
150-255mg/oz
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
589
1. Peak plasma concentration reached at 1.5 hours after ingestion of regular release formulations
of theophylline; Tir2 of 7.8 hours
a. Delay of absorption with sustained-release formulations
2. Undergo rapid liver metabolism
 3. Evidence for enterohepatic recirculation
e.Toxicity
i. Cats more sensitive than dogs
1. Oral lethal doses of caffeine range from 80-150 mg/kg.
2. An oral LDs for theobromine is 200mg/kg.
 3. An oral LDso for theophylline is 800 mg/kg.
f. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Adenosine receptor antagonism
ii. Inhibit cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases causing an increase in cAMP
iii. Increase intracellular calcium concentrations
iv. Stimulate catecholamine synthesis and release
g. Clinical signs
i. Somewhat dependent on methylxanthine ingested
1. Emesis, diarrhea, restlessness, hyperactivity, tachycardia, tachypnea, muscle tremors, muscle
weakness, seizures, cyanosis, cardiac arrhythmias (premature ventricular contractions),
hyperthermia, and polyuria
h.Treatment
 Decontamination protocols when deemed appropriate
1. Multiple-dose AC due to likely enterohepatic recirculation
ii.
 There is no specific antidote.
ii. General principles of support for a critically ill patient
iv.Monitor ECG and blood pressure.
1. Treat ventricular tachycardia with lidocaine boluses (0.2s-0.5 mg/kg IV (over 1 minute);
CRI at 10-20 μg/kg/min.
2. Supraventricular arrhythmias may be treated with a constant rate infusion of esmolol
(10-100 μg/kg/min), propranolol (0.01-0.06 mg/kg IV over 1 minute; up to a maximum of
1 mg/kg), or metaprolol (0.5-1 mg/kg PO q8h).
W.
Treat tremors and seizures with either diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1mg/kg IV) or
phenobarbital (4 mg/kg IV BID to QID).
vi.
 Methocarbamol (50 to 220 mg/kg slow IV; total daily dose not to exceed 330 mg/kg) for muscle
vii. If refractory to anticonvulsants, induce general anesthesia.
vii. Gastric protectants may decrease GI irritation (ranitidine or famotidine and Amphojel).
27. Mushrooms (box 39.15)
a. There are a variety of mushrooms that can cause clinical signs following ingestion; the most toxic
mushrooms contain the hepatotoxic cyclopeptide toxins called amanitins and belong to the genera
Amanita, Galerina, and Lepiota.
b. Relevant kinetics
i.  Amanitins proba bly have a relatively short half-life (hours), although kinetic data following oral
exposure of animals is lacking.
ii. A high percentage is eliminated via the kidneys (80-90%); can be detected for up to 3-4 days
in urine.
iii. May be detectable in liver and kidney tissue for many days after exposure
c.Toxicity
i. Not well established in cats, although an oral LDso for methyl-y- amanitin in dogs is 0.5 mg/kg.
590
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 39.15. Mushrooms: hepatotoxic.
● Three genera of mushrooms contain the hepatotoxic amanitins.
● Early clinical signs are attributable to GI upset, but fulminant hepatic failure follows within 36-48
hours of ingestion.
● Recent availa bility of testing for amanitin can confirm exposure.
● Treatment is symptomatic and supportive, although early decontamination may be critical to prevent
onset of clinical signs.
i. An average concentration of amanitin in toxic A. phalloides is 4mg/g.
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Amanitins inhibit nuclear RNA polymerase II and interfere with RNA and DNA transcription.
They inhibit ribosomal protein synthesis leading to cell death.
i. Metabolically active cells (e.g., hepatocytes) are most commonly affected.
e. Clinical signs
i. Early clinical signs {6-24 hours) are related to GI upset and include emesis, diarrhea, and
abdominal pain; after several hours the animal may appear to recover.
ii. Subsequent clinical signs (36-84 hours) are due to liver and kidney damage.
1. Icterus and azotemia are noted.
and circulatory shock can occur.
 3. Serum liver enzyme concentrations indicative of fulminant hepatic failure are noted.
f. Diagnosis
i. Tests for amanitin in GI contents, serum, urine, and liver are available.
1. The only veterinary laboratory testing for amanitin is the California Animal Health and Food
Safety Laboratory at UC-Davis, (530)752-6322.
ii. Suspicious mushrooms should be identified by a trained mycologist.
g. Treatment
i. Decontamination protocols should be followed if appropriate.
1. Multiple doses of AC are recommended.
ii. Forced diuresis may be beneficial.
ii. Good supportive care is critical.
1. Severe hypoglycemia significant contributor to mortality.
iv. Coagulopathies should be treated with vitamin Kj.
v. Penicillin G may decrease hepatic uptake of amanitins.
vi. Silymarin (doses equivalent to 1.44.2 mg/kg/day PO for 45 days) may be hepatoprotective;
available as milk thistle
28. Paraquat (box 39.16)
a. Paraquat is a contact herbicide that is widely used in agriculture.
b. When used according to label directions, the herbicide is safe.
c. Has been used to intentionally poison pets
d. Relevant kinetics
i.Relatively low bioavailability following ingestion
ii. Highest tissue concentrations are found in the kidneys and the lungs.
iii. Slow release from select tissues such as the lungs accounts for prolonged elimination phase via
the kidneys; prolonged elimination is also due to renal impairment.
e.Toxicity
i.The oral LDso for cats is 40-50mg/kg.
f. Mechanism of toxic action
Chapter 39ToxicologicalEmergencies
591
Box 39.16. Paraquat.
● Contact herbicide that is often used for malicious poisoning of pets
sp Aieuod aqisiaa sueuais inq 'saadoid sueii shi ot anp aie suais ieu leu e
occurs within several days of ingestion.
● There are no known antidotes and significant pulmonary involvement warrants a grave prognosis.
i. Paraquat is selectively concentrated in type I and type II avelolar and Clara cells.
i. A metabolite acting as a free radical is produced in lung cells.
ii. Oxidation of NADPH also occurs; this prevents reduction of reactive metabolite.
g. Clinical signs
i. Paraquat is irritating and can cause erythema, blistering, and ulceration of skin following dermal
exposure.
ii.  Ocular exposure results in significant ocular irritation and corneal ulceration.
 ii. Initial clinical signs following ingestion (emesis, abdominal pain, and diarrhea) are due to the
irritating properties of the chemical. Gastric ulceration and perforation with associated hemor-
rhage can occur.
iv. Subsequent signs are often delayed for 2-3 days postingestion; signs are due to acute renal failure
and hepatocellular necrosis.
v. A final phase of intoxication is due to severe pulmonary edema, respiratory distress, and death.
 In animals that do not die from acute pulmonary damage, pulmonary fibrosis occurs with resul-
tant hypoxemia and delayed death.
h. Treatment
i. Decontamination procedures should be undertaken if appropriate.
1. Activated charcoal is the adsorbent of choice; it is better than Fuller's earth and bentonite.
ii. Since paraquat is primarily eliminated via the kidneys, fluids should be administered at a rate
to enhance urine flow; adequate fluid administration also helps to correct an underlying hypo-
tension associated with paraquat intoxication.
iii. Charcoal hemoperfusion increases paraquat clearance.
iv. Supplemental oxygen is contraindicated due to exacerbation of free radical-induced lung
damage.
29. Penitrem A
a. A mycotoxin produced by Penicillium crustosum. The toxin has been found in moldy dairy products,
bread, walnuts, and compost piles.
b. Reported cases only in dogs; no reported cases in cats
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Penitrem A is readily absorbed following ingestion and undergoes enterohepatic recirculation.
ii. The toxin is lipophilic and readily crosses the blood-brain barrier.
d. Toxicity
i. Specific toxicity information for cats is not available; ingestion of 0.175 mg/kg is sufficient to
cause clinical signs in dogs.
é. Mechanism of toxic action
 i. Hypothesized to alter presynaptic acetylcholine release, antagonize glycine production, or alter
GABA-mediated neurotransmission
f. Clinical signs
i. Onset can be rapid and include irritability, weakness, muscle tremors, rigidity, hyperactivity,
panting, opsithotonus, seizures, sensitivity to noise, hyperthermia, nystagmus, and recumbency
with paddling.
g. Diagnosis
592
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
i. Ingestion of moldy food
ii. Detection of penitrem A in moldy food, stomach contents, or urine
h.Treatment
i. Standard decontamination if indicated
ii. Control muscle tremors and seizures.
1. Diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1 mg/kg IV), may repeat
2. Phenobarbital (6 mg/kg IV)
3. Pentobarbital (2-15 mg/kg IV mg/kg IV—give slowly as onset is delayed for 2-3 minutes).
4. Control muscle tremors and seizures with methocarbamol (55-220 mg/kg IV; the total dose
of methocarbamol should not exceed 330 mg/kg/day).
ii. Other concerns include hyperthermia, rha bdomyolysis, meta bolic acidosis.
30. Pyrethrin/pyrethroids (box 39.17)
a. Pyrethrins are naturally occurring chemicals; pyrethroids are synthetic derivatives of pyrethrins.
b. Exposure is primarily via use of flea- or other insect-control products.
i. Intoxication frequently associated with the dermal application of concentrated pyrethroid prod-
ucts intended for use on dogs
ii. Contact with dermally treated dogs can cause intoxication of cats
c. Young female cats are most commonly affected, although the reason is unknown
d. Relevant kinetics
i. Information specific to cats is limited.
ii. Although most exposures are dermal, grooming behavior of cats results in significant oral
exposures.
e.Toxicity
i. Toxicity for cats is not well defined, although cats appear to be more sensitive than dogs.
f. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Slow the opening and closing of neural sodium channels.
ii. Repetitive discharges occur with some pyrethroids, while membrane depolarization occurs with
others.
iii. Paresthesia may be related to direct action of pyrethroids on sensory nerve endings, causing
repetitive firing.
iv. Some pyrethroids also act on GABA-gated chloride channels.
 g. Clinical signs
i. Signs can be limited to mild hypersalivation and paresthesia. Other signs include more severe
and prolonged salivation, paw shaking, ear twitching, flicking of the tail, twitching of the skin
of the back, abnormal locomotion, hiding, and reluctance to move.
ii. Permethrin intoxication is manifested by agitation, muscle tremors, and seizures. Phenothrin
exposures are associated with similar but milder clinical signs.
h. Diagnosis
i. History of exposure to a pyrethrin/pyrethroid-containing product
ii. Detection of specific compounds is possible, although testing is not frequently productive.
i. Treatment
i. Decontamination should be considered
Box 39.17. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids.
● Most cat intoxications are due to dermal application of concentrated pyrethroid products.
● Clinical signs are due to nervous system stimulation.
● Treatment is aimed at decontamination (dermal and GI) and controlling muscle tremors with
methocarbamol.
Chapter39ToxicologicalEmergencies
593
1. Bathing with mild dishwashing or keratolytic shampoo is warranted following dermal
exposure.
2. The possibility of enterohepatic recirculation suggests the need for multiple doses of activated
charcoal (1-2 g/kg q4h).
ii. Control muscle tremors and seizures with methocarbamol (5s-220 mg/kg IV; dose is admin-
istered as a bolus not to exceed 2mg/min). Once the cat relaxes, the remainder of the dose is
given to effect. The total dose of methocarbamol should not exceed 330 mg/kg/day.
ii. Refractory tremors or seizures may require use of diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-
1 mg/kg IV) along with methocarbamol.
iv. Occasionally, phenobarbital (6 mg/kg IV) or pentobarbital (4-20 g/kg IV) may be necessary to
control signs.
y. Additional concerns include hyperthermia (with possible rhabdomyolysis) or hypothermia and
hypoglycemia.
31. Pennyroyal oil
a. Essential oil derived from Mentha pulegium or Hedeoma pulegoides
 b. Has been added to a variety of products and the pure oil is available; used primarily for insect (flea)
control
c. Relevant kinetics
i. Not certain, likely to have good bioavailability after dermal application
d.Toxicity
i. Unknown for cats (approximately 2g/kg applied dermally was lethal to a dog).
e. Mechanism of toxic action
i. The primary constituent of the oil, pulegone, is bioactivated in the liver to a hepatotoxic meta bo-
lite; mechanism of hepatotoxicity is not known.
f.Clinical signs
i. Secondary to fulminant hepatic failure: lethargy, emesis, diarrhea, and coagulopathy
g. Treatment
i. Dermal decontamination with a mild dishwashing detergent
1. If oral exposure, consider routine decontamination protocol.
ii. Additional treatment involves hepatoprotective thera pies and symptomatic and supportive care
{see “Mushrooms"}.
32. Salicylates
a. Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid), oil of wintergreen (methylsalicylate), trolamine salicylate, keratolytics
containing salicylic acid, sunscreens with homomethyl salicylate, and antidiarrheals containing
bismuth subsalicylate
i.  Two types of intoxication can occur
1. Similar to that caused by other NSAIDs: renal disease, gastric ulceration, hepatotoxicity, and
inhibited platelet aggregation
 2. Acute metabolic abnormalities
b.Toxicity
i.Cats: 25 mg/kg or greater
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Rapid absorption from the stomach and proximal intestine
ii. Delayed absorption can occur following overdoses due to formation of insoluble concretions,
ingestion of coated tablets, contraction of the pylorus, or co-ingestion of drugs delaying gastric
emptying-
ii. Prolonged half-life in cats (38 hours vs. 8 hours in dogs)
1. Due to lack of glucuronidation
iv. Salicylic acid is the active form
1. 70-90% protein bound
594
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i.Acute metabolic abnormalities
1. Respiratory alkalosis
a. Direct stimulation of respiratory center
 b. Uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation resulting in ↑ O2 consumption
and CO2 production
2. Metabolic acidosis
a. Renal excretion of bicarbonate, sodium, and potassium
b. Uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation resulting in ↑ pyruvic and lactic acid
production
C. Increased ketone formation
e. Clinical signs
i. Nausea, vomiting, hyperpnea (early), depressed respiration (later), metabolic acidosis, pyrexia,
seizures, coma, and toxic hepatitis
f. Diagnosis
i. History of ingestion along with compatible clinical signs
ii. Analysis of plasma/serum or urine
1. Test results are unlikely to be available quickly.
g. Treatment
i. There is no specific treatment for salicylate intoxication.
1. Decontamination should be considered; multiple doses of AC have been shown to increase
elimination of una bsorbed salicylates over a single dose.
2. Monitor patient's volume, glucose (hypo- or hyperglycemia), and electrolyte (hypo- or hyper-
natremia and hyperkalemia) status and correct as needed.
3. Urinary alkalinization increases the renal elimination of salicylates.
a. Administer sodium bicarbonate IV to achieve a urine pH of 7-8.
33. Selective serontonin reuptake inhibitors
a. Examples include sertraline, fluoxetine, paroxetine, and fluvoxamine
i. Used to treat depression, obsessive-compulsive disorders, bulimia, panic, and other behavioral
problems in people; fluoxetine has been used to treat fear or anxiety disorders, acral lick der-
matitis, and narcolepsy in dogs.
b. Relevant kinetics
i. Well absorbed orally with peak plasma concentrations within 2-8 hours
ii. Slowly eliminated in dogs; kinetics not known in cats
c. Toxicity
i. Not considered to be extremely toxic; a minimum lethal dose of fluoxetine in cats is reported
to be >50 mg/kg.
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i.  Inhibit serotonin reuptake at presyna ptic membranes; this results in an increase of serotonin
ii. Selective: other neurotransmitters are not affected.
e. Clinical signs
i. Depression, emesis, anorexia, tremors, and cardiac arrhythmias
1. Arrhythmias vary from drug to drug.
a. Fluoxetine: tachycardia
b. Fluvoxamine: bradycardia
ii. Serotonin syndrome is described in humans and a similar clinical syndrome has been described
in dogs.
1. Seizures, tremors, emesis, diarrhea, hypersalivation, abdominal pain, and hyperthermia can
occur.
f.Treatment
Chapter39ToxicologicalEmergencies
595
i. Decontamination protocol when deemed appropriate
q1-4h until clinical improvement
ii. Seizure control using diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1 mg/kg IV)
34. Spider bites (box 39.18; see chap. 40—Environmental Emergencies)
a. The two primary toxic spiders in the U.S. are the black widow spiders (Latrodectus spp.) and the
brown recluse spiders {Loxosceles spp.)
b. Black widow spiders (five species) are found throughout the U.S.
c. Brown recluse spiders (thirteen species) are found in the South, South central, and Western U.S.
d.Venoms
i. Black widow—several toxic components, but o-latrotoxin is the most toxic constituent.
1. Neurotoxic—initial stimulation of nerve impulses, but later there is a neuromuscular block
as a result of depletion of synaptic vesicle contents.
i. Brown recluse venom consists of several constituents; primary function is to digest prey
1. Sphingomyelinase D is a dermonecrotic factor; venom also induces rapid coagulation and
occlusion of small capillaries, resulting in tissue necrosis.
 2. Immune response to venom appears to mediate the severity of the local reaction
e. Toxicity
i. Black widow venom: not determined for cats, but LDso likely <1 mg/kg
ii. Brown recluse: not known
f. Clinical signs
i. Black widow—local tissue reaction at the bite site is uncommon.
1. Signs dependent on a number of factors, including spider and victim variables
2. Apparent pain manifested as howling and loud vocalizations, hypersalivation, restlessness,
emesis, diarrhea, muscle tremors, cramping, ataxia, inability to stand and paralysis, Cheyne-
Stokes respiration pattern, and death
 3. In one experimental study, the average survival time was 11s hours.
ii. Brown recluse
1. Mild stinging sensation at bite site, pruritis, edema (characteristic bull's-eye appearance has
been described, which consists of an area of erythema within which is a dark necrotic center)
a. Bite sites can become ulcerated and be slow to heal.
2. Systemic signs are uncommon.
a. Hemolytic anemia, hemoglobinuria, fever, arthralgia, emesis, weakness, maculopapular
rash, DIC, and thrombocytopenia
g. Diagnosis
i. Difficult since bites are rarely witnessed; there are no diagnostic tests.
h. Treatment
i. Black widow—antivenin available (Lyovac antivenin)
1. Since adverse effects are infrequent when antivenin is used properly, it generally provides
quick relief (within 30 minutes of administration), and it is inexpensive. Consideration should
be given to its administration in the absence of a confirmed bite.
Box 39.18. Spider bites.
● Black widow spiders and brown recluse spiders
· Black widow venom is highly neurotoxic and does not cause localized reaction.
+ Brown recluse spider venom causes severe local reactions.
+Antivenin is available for black widow venom.
596
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Pretreat with diphenydramine {2-4mg/kg SQ) or skin test
3. Give antivenin in 100 mL saline solution over 30 minutes.
a. One vial is generally sufficient.
b. Monitor inner ear pinna closely for signs of hyperemia.
c. If hyperemia noted, stop infusion and repeat diphenhydramine dose; if hyperemia resolves,
infusion can be restarted.
4. Provide pain relief when needed (see chap. 7),
5. Fluids should be administered IV carefully since hypertension may occur as a result of
envenomation.
ii. Brown recluse—no antivenin available
1. Wound cleaning with Burrow's solution and 3% hydrogen peroxide
 2. Some wound debridment may be necessary.
3. Dapsone, a leukocyte inhibitor, has been recommended but efficacy is questionable.
4. Systemic signs can be serious if they occur.
 a. Analgesics, anti-inflammatory, and antipyretics may be useful.
b. Systemic corticosteroids early after bite
35. Smoke inhalation
a. The most common cause of mortality involving fires
 b. Complex mixture of vapors, gases, fumes, heated air, and particulate matter
c. Smoke can contain a large number of potentially toxic combustion products depending on the
material burning.
d. Toxicity
i. Quite variable due to compositional differences
e. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Toxic combustion products are classified as simple asphyxiants, irritant toxins, or chemical
asphyxiants.
 2. Irritant toxicants are chemically reactive and cause local tissue damage.
 3. Chemical asphyxiants produce systemic tissue damage (e.g., carbon monoxide).
4. Cyanide exposure is not unusual with smoke inhalation.
5. Some degree of methemoglobin formation can also occur.
f.Clinical signs
i. Signs consistent with respiratory compromise: cough, dyspnea, tachypnea, tachycardia, and open
mouth breathing. Other signs include lacrimation, conjunctivitis, pharyngitis, and rhinitis.
ii. Lung auscultation reveals rales, rhonchi, and wheezing (focal or diffuse in nature).
ili. Early thoracic radiographs can be normal.
iv. Systemic signs can include agitation, confusion, ataxia, abnormal posturing, loss of conscious-
ness, seizures, hypotension, and cardiac arrhythmias.
v. Upper airway burns are a complicating factor.
vi. Skin, eyes, and other mucous membranes can be damaged.
g. Treatment
tilation and oxygenation, and hemodynamic stability.
1. Intubation may be needed.
a. Regular suctioning is often needed.
2. Inhalant β2-adrenergic agonists may be useful to ameliorate bronchoconstriction.
3. Supplemental oxygen should be humidified to prevent drying of respiratory tissue and
secretions.
4. Mechanical ventilation (continuous + airway pressure or + end-expiratory pressure) may be
necessary
5. Tracheostomy may be necessary in cases of complete upper airway obstruction.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
597
ii. Corticosteroid use has not been shown to be efficacious and may result in increased risk of
infection.
iii. Antibiotics should be avoided unless there is a documented infection.
iv. A variety of treatment interventions have been proposed (e.g., NSAIDs, antioxidants and free
radical scavengers, inhaled nitric oxide, and hyperbaric oxygen treatment). However, their
efficacy is unknown.
v.  Fluid administration in burn patients can contribute to upper airway edema.
vi. Animals with ocular injury should have their eyes irrigated copiously with ophthalmic flush
solution or normal saline.
36. Stinging insects (see Chap. 40—Environmental Emergencies)
a. Examples include bites from bees, wasps, hornets, yellow jackets, and ants.
 b. Venoms are generally complex mixtures of biologically active agents.
c. Four types of reactions are possible: local reactions, regional reactions, an anaphylactic response,
or a delayed-type hypersensitivity (not as common).
i.Anaphylactic reactions occur very quickly.
d. Clinical signs
i. Localized swelling, erythema, and pain at sting site; more severe reactions involve regional edema
and cellulitis.
ii. Anaphylactic signs include urticaria, pruritis, angioedema, dyspnea, and cardiovascular
alterations.
ii. Uncommon delayed responses can include serum sickness, vasculitis, glomerulonephritis,
neuropathy, DIC, lymphadenopathy, low grade fever, rashes, and polyarthropathy.
e. Treatment
 i. Localized reactions may not require treatment; possible pain management or topical corticoste-
roids may be needed.
ii. Corticosteroids (prednisolone sodium succinate 10 mg/kg IV followed by 1 mg/kg PO, tapering
dose over 3 to 5 days) may be indicated for more severe reactions.
1. Fluid therapy for hypotension
2. Monitor electrolytes.
iii. Anaphylactic reactions require aggressive intervention.
1. Epinephrine 1:1000 (0.1-0.5 mL SC)
2. Fluid therapy—crystalloid fluids at shock volumes
37. Strychnine (box 39.19)
a. Primarily used to control small mammal pests
i. Baits generally 0.5-1% strychnine sulfate
ii. OTC or restricted use depending on individual states
b. Relevant kinetics
i. Rapidly absorbed and metabolized
c. Toxicity
i. Oral LDso in cats of 2.0 mg/kg
d. Mechanism of toxic action
i.Reversible, competitive inhibition of glycine at the postsynaptic receptor sites in the spinal cord
aptic neurons, causing hyperpolarization. Loss of glycine inhibition results in continuous mus-
cular stimulation.
ii. Death is due to hypoxia.
e. Clinical signs
 i. Apprehension, anxiety, salivation, muscle spasms and stiffness (often beginning with face, neck,
and limb muscles), sawhorse stance, severe extensor rigidity, tetanic seizures (often induced or
exacerbated by external stimulation) apnea, and death
f.Diagnosis
598
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Box 39.19. Strychnine.
● Still used as a rodenticide and to maliciously poison pets, although availability varies
● Rapid onset of clinical signs
Tonic-clonic seizures, often induced by loud noises, lead to hypoxia, anoxia, and death.
● Clinical signs can be treated with methocarbamol or barbiturates.
● Relatively rapid metabolism and elimination of strychnine results in rapid recovery.
i. Detection of strychnine in baits, stomach contents, serum, or urine is widely available from
veterinary diagnostic laboratories.
g. Treatment
i. Early decontamination
ii. Control muscle spasms and seizures.
1. Methocarbamol (50-220 mg/kg slow IV; total daily dose not to exceed 330 mg/kg)
2. Pentobarbital (3-15 mg/kg slow IV or to effect)
iii. Mechanical ventilation if needed
iv. Fluid and electrolyte therapy as needed
1. Correct metabolic acidosis.
2.Maintain urine flow to prevent myoglobinuria and renal damage secondary to
rha bdomyol ysis.
v.  Minimize sensory stimulation.
38. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
a. Examples include amitriptyline, amoxapine, clomipramine, despiramine, doxepin, imipramine,
maprotiline, nortriptyline, protriptyline, and trimipramine.
b. TCAs vary in their ability to block neurotransmitter reuptake and in their anticholinergic, antihis
taminic, and sedative properties.
C. Relevant kinetics
i. Good bioavailability and rapidly absorbed
 i. Liver metabolism is the primary mechanism for elimination; some metabolites contribute to
toxicity.
d.Toxicity
i.
 Therapeutic index is low; toxicity information for specific TCAs is unknown for cats
e. Mechanism of toxic action
1.
 Extension of pharmacologic effects: neurotransmitter reuptake inhibition (dopamine, norepi-
nephrine, and serotonin) and anticholinergic effects
f. Clinical signs
Ataxia, lethargy, hypotension, disorientation, hyperactivity, emesis, tachycardia, mydriasis,
dyspnea, urinary retention, ileus, cardiac arrhythmias, acidosis, hyperthermia, coma, seizures,
myoclonus, pulmonary edema, and death
g. Treatment
i.
Follow decontamination protocol if appropriate.
ii.Fluid support to maintain blood pressure (1.5-2x maintenance)
ii. Tachycardia often resolves with fluid therapy.
iv. If bradycardia is present, avoid atropine due to anticholinergic effects of TCAs.
V.
 Seizures or myoclonus generally respond to diazepam or midazolam boluses (0.2-1 mg/kg IV).
vi. Monitor blood gases due to frequency of acidosis. Maintaining blood pH between 7.5 and 7.55
can reduce cardiotoxicity (in dogs), and hypertonic sodium bicarbonate has been recommended
for treating human TCA intoxication.
Chapter 39Toxicological Emergencies
669
vi. Patients should be monitored for at least 24 hours after cessation of clinical signs for potential
 complications including pulmonary edema, coagulopathy, or pancreatitis.
39. Zinc phosphide
a. Used to control small mammalian pests
 b. Available in OTC products (2-5% zinc phosphide) or via certified pest control operators
 C. Unlike anticoagulant rodenticides, secondary intoxication from ingestion of poisoned animals is
unlikely.
d. Relevant kinetics
i.Rapidly forms phosphine gas in the acidic stomach
ii. Production of phosphine gas is delayed if the stomach is empty due to higher pH.
e. Toxicity
i.An oral lethal dose for cats is 40 mg/kg.
ii. Phosphine gas is responsible for toxicity.
f. Mechanism of toxic action
i. Not certain; phosphine gas blocks cytochrome oxidase and can increase reactive oxygen species.
g. Clinical signs
hypotension, shock, and cardiac arrhythmias (due to myocardial damage).
h. Diagnosis
i. Phosphine gas has a characteristic odor: rotten fish or acetylene.
ii. Phosphine can be detected in stomach contents or vomitus.
i.Treatment
i. Decontamination if early after ingestion
ii. Gastric lavage with 5% sodium bicarbonate may help slow phosphine gas production in the
stomach.
ii. Monitor acid-base status and correct as needed.
iv. Provide supplemental oxygen if dyspneic.
v. Provide other standard supportive care.
40
ENVIRONMENTAL EMERGENCIES
Lori S. Waddell and Elise Mittleman Boller
Unique Features
● Heatstroke from exertion occurs infrequently in cats, and environmental causes are also rare with
the exception of cats being trapped in a clothes dryer.
●Although cats' small sizes can predispose them to more severe hypothermia and frostbite, they usually
exhibit more successful behavioral responses to cold, which prevents prolonged exposure.
 Because cats have a natural dislike of water, they rarely experience drowning or near-drowning;
most drowning cases are due to intentional submersion.
· Due to their smaller size, cats that are bitten by rattlesnakes tend to get more venom per kilogram
of body weight than dogs and may be more sensitive to it, which makes their prognosis more guarded.
● Cats are much more sensitive to black widow spider venom than dogs. Signs are severe and often
include muscle spasms, abdominal and hind limb rigidity, pain, and vomiting. The spider may be
seen in the vomitus.
● Electrical injury is not uncommon in cats who are playful and have an inherent curiosity about linear
materials.
A. Heatstroke—hyperthermia
a. Definition/general points
i.
Heat cramps—characterized by dehydration, muscle cramps, and electrolyte depletion; not
recognized in cats because they do not lose excessive salts from sweating; most common heat
illness in humans
 Heat exhaustion—inability to perform work due to heat-induced illness, including headache,
na usea, vomiting, tachycardia, weakness, excessive panting
iii.
Heat stroke includes the signs of heat exhaustion but also CNS signs such as depression,
blindness, ataxia, collapse, stupor, coma, and seizures
b. Pathophysiology—nonpyrogenic hyperthermia occurs when heat-dissipating mechanisms are over-
come by heat-producing mechanisms (environmental or exercise induced), leading to increased body
temperature
Environmental—confinement to an area that is exceptionally hot, such as a car. This occurs less
frequently in cats than in dogs, as cats are less likely to be passengers in cars and are more
tolerant of heat. Even in homes or apartments without air-conditioning, cats will usually find
the coolest part of the house and remain inactive. Cats or kittens can get into dryers if left open.
If they get closed in the dryer and it is turned on, they may present with heatstroke, thermal
injuries, and blunt trauma. Dryer-induced hyperthermia is probably the most common cause of
environmental hyperthermia in cats.
ii.
 Exertional--usually not a problem in cats, but there are anectodal reports of cats chasing a bird
or other small animal in a closed, hot apartment or home becoming hyperthermic from the
activity. Very rare.
601
602
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
iii. Predisposing causes can include lack of acclimatization to increased temperature, confine-
ment, poor ventilation, high humidity, water deprivation, restriction of airway (e.g., brachy-
cephalic breeds, obesity, or laryngeal dysfunction), cardiac disease, pediatric or geriatric
status, toxicities such as amphetamines, pyrethrin toxicity, hyperthyroidism, seizures, and
ecl ampsia.
c. History/presenting complaint
i.
History of exposure to high environmental temperature
 ii. Cat may be found recumbent, open-mouth breathing/panting, tachypneic, and/or neurologically
ina ppropriate.
d. Clinical signs/PE findings
1.
Cardiovascular
 1. Tachycardia, vasodilation, initially increased cardiac output, decreased intravascular volume
as fluid loss increases
 2. Cardiac dysfunction secondary to hyperthermia, decreased perfusion of myocytes, electrolyte
and acid-base disturbances, and thromboembolism leading to poor perfusion from hypoten-
sion and arrhythmias
ii.Respiratory
 1. Direct thermal injury to pulmonary endothelium
2. Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema and/or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
3. Leads to increased respiratory rate, effort, respiratory distress
 4. Auscultation—harsh lung sound to crackles depending on severity. May develop serous to
serosanguineous nasal discharge
ii.Nervous system
1. Cerebral edema, hemorrhage, infarction, and neuronal death may be seen.
2. Disorientation, blindness, coma, and seizures 
3. Thermoregulatory center (in hypothalamus) may become damaged and predispose to future
episodes of heatstroke.
iv.Hematologic
1. Dehydration and hemoconcentration
2. Hemolysis of red blood cells and blood loss into GI tract can result in anemia in some
patients.
3. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) secondary to stasis of blood in capillaries,
endothelial damage from direct thermal injury, hyperthermia -induced platelet activation, and
decreased synthesis of coagulation factors by the liver
4. Megakaryocyte damage from hyperthermia and consumption of platelets can cause throm-
bocytopenia, which persists for several days after the hyperthermic event.
 5. Clinical signs may include petechia, ecchymoses, excessive bleeding from venipuncture sites,
hemolyzed serum, and weakness.
V.
Gastrointestinal
 1. Decreased perfusion to GI tract causes ischemia, loss of GI wall integrity, and bacterial
tra nslocation.
2. Leads to bacteremia, endotoxemia, and sepsis—important cause of death in heatstroke
patients
 3. Vomiting, diarrhea with pieces of mucosa, melena, and hemotachezia may be seen.
4. Hepatic damage results from decreased perfusion and direct thermal injury.
5. Increased values for alanine transaminase, alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin are
common.
vi.Renal
1. Acute renal failure caused by tubular necrosis from direct thermal injury, hypoxia, and
decreased perfusion.
2. Prerenal azotemia is common.
Chapter 40 Environmental Emergencies
603
3. Renal azotemia may develop, including oliguria.
4. Myoglobinuria may contribute to renal failure.
t. Diagnosis/laboratory testing
i.
 History of heat exposure with/without exertion
ii.F
PE findings
1. Hyperventilation/panting
2. Tachycardia, poor pulse quality, tacky dark red mucous membranes, rapid CRT
 3. Diarrhea—melena, mucosal sloughing, hematochezia
4. Petechia, ecchymosis
 5. Neurologic signs—ataxia, disorientation, cortical blindness, coma, seizures
ili. CBC/CS/ UA
 1. CBC—-hemoconcentration or anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, increased numbers of
nucleated red blood cells
2. Chemistry screen—hypoglycemia, increased alanine transaminase, aspartate aminotransfer-
ase, alkaline phosphatase, total bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, decreased
albumin and cholesterol
3. UA—hematuria, pigmenturia, inappropriate glucosuria, and granular casts
iv.   Acid-base—metabolic acidosis from lactate, respiratory alkalosis from hyperventilation
 Coagulation screening—thrombocytopenia, prolonged PT, PTT, ACT
f.Treatment
Cooling—should be started by owners!
1. Move to a cool environment (air-conditioned).
2.Wet down with water.
 3. Place fan blowing on cat to increase convective heat loss.
4. Shave if cat has a heavy coat.
 5. Do not place ice bags on patient-- will vasoconstrict skin vessels and decrease heat loss.
ii.IV fluids
1. Room-temperature fluids will aid in cooling.
2. Shock bolus of crystalloids (up to 45-60 mL/kg) is indicated if cardiovascular compromise
is present, then matching ins and outs (see chap. 8—Fluid Therapy).
3. Colloids (hydroxyethyl starch) may also be needed if significant hypoalbuminemia occurs
(3-5 mL/kg as a bolus over 30 minutes, 1-2 mL/kg/hr as CRI).
 4. Measurement of CVP can guide fluid therapy if central catheter placement is not contrain-
dicated because of coagulopathy (OSPT and aPTT are no more than 25-30% prolonged,
and platelets ≥50,000/uL).
ii. Oxygen—supplemental O, if hypoxemic based on pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas analysis:
SPO <93-94%, or PaO, <80-90 mm Hg.
iv.
GI protectants—H2 blocker (famotidine 0.5 mg/kg IV q12-24h), proton pump inhibitor (omepra-
zole 0.7 mg/kg PO q24h, esomeprazole 0.5-0.7 mg/kg IV q24h), or sucralfate (250 mg PO q8h
if patient is able to swallow oral medications)
 Correction of hypogl ycemia (0.5 g/kg of 25% dextrose IV), then monitor blood glucose concen-
trations closely and supplement 2.5%-5% dextrose in fluids depending on patient's needs.
Avoid hyperglycemia if possible.
vi.  Address acid base and electrolyte abnormalities.
vii. Mannitol to reduce cerebral edema if patient is showing significant neuorologic impairment
(blindness, disorientation, seizures, or coma) and to increase UOP if oliguric or anuric (oliguria:
therapy should be increased if a diuresis occurs to prevent dehydrating the patient.
viii. FFP if coagulopathy is present, 10 mL/kg
ix.  Pressors if refractory hypotension (systolic <90 mm Hg)
1. Dopamine 5-1Sμg/kg/min
604
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
2. Norepinephrine 0.05-0.3μg/kg/min
Antibiotic therapy for translocation of bacteria across GI wall
1. Not indicated in all patients
2. If severe GI signs are present, broad-spectrum coverage for gram negative, gram positive,
and anaerobes should be considered. Protocols that can be used include clindamycin 10 mg/
kg IV q12h and cefoxitin 20 mg/kg IV q6h or timentin 50mg/kg IV q6h and metronidazole
10 mg/kg IV q12h.
xi.  Corticosteroids and NSAIDS are not indicated and may be contraindicated due to increased risk
of sepsis from bacterial translocation, and risk of hyperglycemia secondary to antagonism of
 insulin. Hyperglycemia may worsen neurologic injury.
g. Monitoring
1.
Temperature—active cooling should only be performed until temperature <103.5°F. Continued
 cooling will occur, and prevention of hypothermia is indicated.
colloid, and blood product administration.
ili.Venous blood gas/electrolytes—monitor for metabolic acidosis {usually secondary to lacate),
hypernatremia, hyper- or hypokalemia.
iv.
Blood pressure
V.
ECG for arrhythmias
vi. Urine output—monitor for oliguria or anuria. If oliguria (<1-2 mL/kg/hr) occurs after the cat's
hydration status, intravascular volume, and blood pressure are normalized, treat for ARF with
furosemide and mannitol.
vi.  Neurologic function, especially mentation and cranial nerve function
h. Prognosis—associated with the severity and duration of hyperthermia, at least in other species. No
information available specifically on cats. Potential for life-threatening complications including renal
failure, liver failure, DIC
B. Frostbite—hypothermia
a. Definitions/general points
Primary hypothermia—the body possesses normal compensatory responses (thermoregulation)
to decreased environmental temperatures, but the exposure to cold is overwhelming.
ii.
 Secondary hypothermia—mild to moderate exposure to cold results in hypothermia because of
an alteration in the body's normal thermoregulatory responses.
iii.
 Frostbite results in tissue necrosis and generally occurs in the distal extremities and ears; the
b.Pathophysiology
1.
Thermoregulation involves a dynamic balance between heat production and heat loss, the overall
goal of which is to maintain the core temperature within a narrow range called the “"set point."
ii.
Mechanisms of heat loss from the body include convection, conduction, radiation, and evapora
tion. Mechanisms of heat conservation include vasoconstriction, shivering, piloerection, chemi-
cal thermogenesis, and behavioral responses.
ii. Primary hypothermia occurs when a conscious animal with normal thermoregulation is exposed
to extreme low environmental temperatures.
iv.S
Secondary hypothermia occurs with alterations in the body's normal thermoregulatory mecha
ans ro 'eisausaue deraui hp jo auanbasuoo e se 'sassaond aseasp ueiao 'aa) s
 Physiologic consequences and severity of hypothermia have been better described in the human
literature and seem based on severity of cardiovascular compromise. There is less known about
the physiologic significance of varying degrees of hypothermia in veterinary patients, especially
in cats. The following proposals have been made:
1. Mild: 32-37°C (90-99°F)
Chapter 40 Environmental Emergencies
605
2. Moderate: 28-32°C (82-90°F)
3.Severe:<28°C {<82°F)
paauooud 1o saunnaduat leuawuoaua mol oi ansodxa paauooud ot anp si Aanlui anqisoig a
contact with frozen metal objects. It starts as an initial freeze injury followed by vascular impair
ment due to inflammatory mediators and thrombosis.
c. History, presenting complaint, predisposing factors
1.
The patient may present with a history of exposure to cold temperatures {in primary hypother-
mia) or with signs attributable to, or a history of, the underlying disease process that led to the
hypothermia (in secondary hypothermia).
ii.
 Predisposing factors include small size, immobility, very young and very old age, anesthesia,
surgery, hypothyroidism, uremia, hypoadrenocorticism, shock, hypopituitarism, cachexia, mal-
nutrition, hypoglycemia, burns, trauma, and central nervous system disorders.
d. Clinical signs/PE findings
Cardiovascular-vasoconstriction (early), vasodilation (late), decreased cardiac output, hypo-
tension, arrhythmias (see below)
ii. Respiratory—bronchospasm (acute), bronchorrhea (excessive bronchial mucus production),
pulmonary congestion and edema, depression of the medullary respiratory center (decreased
respiratory rate, minute ventilation, tidal volume), respiratory arrest 
ii. Nervous system—decreased cerebral blood flow causing mentation changes, hyperreflexia,
pupillary dilation, coma
iv.
 Hematologic—coagulopathy, thrombocytopathia, platelet sequestration, decreased inhibition of
fibrinolysis, increased blood viscosity
V.
GI—decreased motility, mucosal ulceration, hemorrhagic pancreatitis
vi. Renal—"cold diuresis" (due to increased central blood volume and GFR, suppression of ADH,
decreased activity in renal tubular concentrating segments), acute tubular necrosis
vil. Metabolic—catecholamine release, insulin resistance, suppression of ADH release 
vili. Frostbite generally involves the distal extremities, tail tip, scrotum, and ear tips. The affected
areas are pale and cool to the touch. The ears may droop when frostbitten. In addition to locally
affected areas, the patient may also suffer systemic consequences of hypothermia as described
above.
t. Diagnosis/laboratory testing
History of exposure to low environmental temperatures, disappearance from home, trauma, or
a disease process that may predispose to secondary hypothermia.
ii.PE findings
1. Low measured temperature
a. Note that some thermometers have a temperature below which they will not measure,
and other methods such as esophageal or rectal probes should be employed (fig. 40.1).
 2. Mental depression or lethargy
3.Shivering
4. Muscle stiffness
5. Profoundly hypothermic animals may appear dead, as respiratory efforts and heart sounds are
difficult to detect. An adage that seems to describe a shared experience in emergency medicine
says, "A hypothermic animal should not be considered dead until it is warm and dead." This
simply states that detection of vital signs should be attempted after a patient is warmed prior
to pronouncing a severely hypothermic animal dead (e.g., ECG and end-tidal CO2).
ili. CBC/chemistry/UA
1. CBC—hemoconcentration, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia
2. Chemistry—hyper/hypoglycemia, hypo/hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, evidence of organ
insult (azotemia, increased hepatic transaminases)
3. UA—decreased urine specific gravity
606
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 40.1. Esophageal (or rectall temperature probe.
Fig. 40.2. J wave, also called Osborne deflection, as seen in hypothermia.
iv.
Acid-base—metabolic acidosis, respiratory acidosis
V.
Coagulation screening—PT and PTT prolongation, changes consistent with DIC. The enzymes
of the coagulation cascade are temperature dependent and hypothermia is associated with pro-
longation of coagulation times. Note that coagulation tests are routinely performed at 37°C and
therefore will not reflect activity of the coagulation cascade at the hypothermic patient's tem-
perature {i.e., coagulation in vivo may be more abnormal than in vitro).
vi.
ECG abnormalities include:
1. Sinus bradycardia
2. T-wa ve inversion
3. Prolonged PR, QRS and QT intervals
 4. Osborn ( J) waves-positive deflection following the S wave in the early part of the ST segment
(fig. 40.2).
5. Ventricular fibrillation
6. Asystole
f.Treatment
i.
For the previously healthy patient with mild hypothermia (32-37°C [90-99°F]), institute passive
rewarming by heating the patient's environment and wrapping the patient in dry blankets.
Active rewarming should be instituted for severely hypothermic patients (less than 32°C [90°F]}
with cardiovascular instability, loss of thermoregulation, risk factors predisposing the patient
to hypothermia or when previous attempts with passive rewarming have failed.
1. Active external rewarming of the thorax
Chapter 40Environmental Emergencies
607
XB&
Fig. 40.3.Forced air warming blanket.
a. Conductive rewarming—direct application of an exogenous heat source to the patient's
body. The heat source should not be directly applied to the patient's skin but rather on
top of a layer of dry blankets; patients may be predisposed to burns beca use of the inability
to vasodilate and conduct heat away from the heat source. Heat should be applied to the
trunk only.
i.Forced warm air blankets (fig. 40.3)
ii.  Recirculating water blankets
ili. Hot water bottles
b. Radiant rewarming
i.Heat lamps
2. Active core rewarming
a. Administration of warmed IV fluids—-up to 65°C (18F). Relatively inefficient due to large
difference between administered fluids and patient's body mass. Most useful when large
volumes of fluids are being given rapidly. Note that fluid bags cool very quickly at room
temperature.
b. Administration of warmed and humidified air either by oxygen mask or intubation.
Airway rewarming achieves a 1-2°C per hour increase in temperature. Newer commercial
ventilators and nebulizers have the capacity to heat inhaled air. One can also cover the
 patient's head and blow warm air into and under the blanket in order to force breathing
of warmed air.
c. Body cavity lavage
i.Peritoneal lavage using 10-20 mL/kg heated (40-45°C; 104-113*F) crystalloids via an
abdominal catheter. The fluid should be allowed to flow in rapidly by gravity flow and
should be removed immediately. Adequate rewarming is generally achieved with 6-8
608
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
exchanges. It should be noted that active rewarming should be discontinued prior to
reaching normal body temperature (at 37°C [98.5°F]) to avoid rebound hyperthermia.
ii. Pleural lavage with active suction via a second catheter may also be employed. No
more than 10-20 mL/kg should be in the chest at any given time.
ii. Bladder, colonic, and gastric lavage has been reported but may not be as practical and
may be complicated by electrolyte disturbances. Colonic lavage will interfere with
monitoring rectal temperature; therefore, temperature should be monitored by other
methods when using colonic lavage for rewarming.
 3. Complications of rewarming
a. Rewarming shock—with active external rewarming, there are increased peripheral meta-
bolic demands that may exceed the ability of the cardiovascular system to meet them. The
term rewarming shock describes the overwhelming effects of rewarming on the patient's
metabolism and cardiovascular system, which may lead to sudden death. It is therefore
suggested that core rewarming be combined with active external rewarming in moderately
to severely hypothermic patients. Rewarming shock is also a part of the reasoning behind
rewarming the thorax prior to the extremities so that the heart has a chance to rewarm
and is more able to perfuse the extremities.
b. Afterdrop—further decline in temperature after removal from the cold environment due
core is eliminated.
c. Movement of the patient may lead to cardiac arrhythmias, including fibrillation.
4. It may take up to 2 weeks before frostbitten areas that are irreversibly damaged become
evident. Frostbitten areas should be thawed by application of warm water. Necrotic tissue
will require resection (in some cases amputation). Experimental studies suggest that pentoxi-
fylline and topical aloe vera cream may be helpful in treating frostbitten ears.
g. Monitoring
Temperature—rectal or core (esophageal, rectal probe). With active core warming techniques,
rewarming efforts should be stopped prior to reaching normal body temperature (at 37°℃
[98.5°F]], as the patient temperature will continue to rise after active core rewarming has stopped.
ii.F
 PCV/TS/blood glucose/azo—can help assess hydration status, need for glucose supplementation,
need for colloid vs. crystalloid fluid therapy
ii. Venous blood gas and electrolytes—pH should be interpreted at 37°C and should not be cor
rected to patient temperature.
iv. Blood pressure
V.ECG
vi. Urine output—monitor for cold diuresis (which may lead to hypovolemia) or oligo/anuria.
vil.  Neurologic function—monitor serial mental status and cranial nerve function.
vii. PT, PTT, d-dimers, and CBC—monitor for abnormalities in primary and secondary hemostasis.
h. Prognosis
1.
Prognosis for hypothermia is difficult to predict and may depend to some extent on the presence
of underlying predisposing disease processes. In humans, some predictors of outcome include
prehospital cardiac arrest, low or absent blood pressure, azotemia, the need for endotracheal
intubation, severe hyperkalemia, and evidence of thromboembolism.
ii.F
Prognosis for viability of frostbitten tissue should be delayed until a distinction between viable
and nonviable tissue can be made.
C. Fresh and salt water drowning
a. Definitions/general points
1.
Near-drowning refers to submersion under water followed by some period of survival. Drowning
refers to death caused by water submersion.
ii.
 Fresh or salt water aspiration may result in laryngospasm, neurogenic pulmonary edema, and
acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Chapter 40Environmental Emergencies
609
ii. There is little available information in the veterinary literature on drowning or near-drowning
in dogs, and there is even less on drowning or near-drowning in cats.
b. Predisposing causes—because cats have a natural dislike of water, they rarely experience drowning
or near-drowning; most cases are due to intentional submersion; however, curious kittens can fall
into toilets, tubs, and so forth. In dogs and cats, near-drowning may be associated with falling into
water, swimming mis-events, seizures, and brea king through ice.
c. Pathophysiology
i．
 Fresh water near-drowning
1. Aspirated fresh water dilutes surfactant and contributes to alveolar collapse and low ventila
tion perfusion ( V/Q) mismatch. The hypotonic aspirated water is relatively quickly absorbed
and only contributes to electrolyte disturbances or hemolysis if the volume is large {via
on
ii.Salt water near-drowning
1. Aspirated salt water is hypertonic to plasma and is therefore not readily absorbed. Alveolar
flooding with hypertonic salt water causes fluid transudation from the intravascular space
into the alveoli, leading to hypoxemia, hypovolemia, hypotension, and hemoconcentration.
 Electrolyte disturbances may occur if the aspirated volume is large (via fluid shifts and added
sodium).
ii. “Dry drowning" refers to intense laryngospasm that may occur resulting in upper airway
obstruction. Intense efforts at breathing in this situation result in negative pressure pulmonary
edema. Additionally, severe drops in intrapleural pressure cause increased intrathoracic blood
volume, increased pulmonary artery pressure, and decreased pulmonary interstitial pressure.
The combination of these changes results in edema formation due to fluid movement into the
interstitial space.
iv.  Near-drowning resulting in hypoxemia is generally characterized as acute lung injury {ALI) or
ARDS.
V.
 The associated hypoxemia and hypotension may precipitate multiple organ dysfunction.
d. History/presenting complaint
Diagnosis is generally made based on the history of finding the patient submerged in or found
near a body of water.
e. Clinical signs/PE findings
1.
Cardiovascular—cardiovascular disturbances may occur secondary to hypoxemia, brain insult,
massive sympathetic discharge, and fluid fluxes. Tachycardia, arrhythmias, and hypotension
may be present.
i. Respiratory—-varying degrees of dyspnea, tachypnea, pulmonary crackles, cyanosis
ii. Nervous system—depressed mentation, obtundation, coma
iv.  The patient may be significantly hypothermic if cold water near-drowning occurred.
f.Diagnosis/laboratory testing
1.
History—-history is often diagnostic (the owner may find the patient in or near the water either
unconscious or struggling).
ii.
 PE findings—the patient may be in shock from hypoxemia +/- hypovolemia. Dyspnea, tachy-
pnea, and cyanosis may be present. The patient may be mentally inappropriate, obtunded, or
comatose. The Small Animal Coma Scale may be employed during initial evaluation and for
serial monitoring, but use of this scale has not yet been reported {see chap. 25—General
Approach and Overview of the Neurologic Cat).
iii.  CBC/chemistry/UA—changes reflective of shock (increased hepatic transaminases, stress leuko
gram, hyperglycemia). Hemolysis can occur with fresh water aspiration due to swelling and
rupture of of red blood cells secondary to rapid decrease in plasma osmolality.
iv.  Acid-base—respiratory acidosis or alkalosis, metabolic acidosis
V.
 Electrolyte disturbances may be present when aspirated fluid volumes are large (e.g., hypona-
tremia due to dilution or hypernatremia due to hemoconcentration and added sodium).
610
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
Fig. 40.4. Caudodorsal distribution of alveolar infiltrates in a patient with noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
vi. Thoracic radiographs—pulmonary alveolar infiltrates (can be diffuse or caudodorsally distrib-
uted in cases with intense laryngospasm; fig. 40.4).
g.Ireatment
Supplemental oxygen is mandatory and positive pressure ventilation (PPV) would be indicated
in most cases. As a general rule of thumb, PPV is indicated in patients that are unable to
maintain normal blood pH due to inadequate ventilation and/or are una ble to maintain adequate
tissue oxygen delivery and/or are clearly severely dyspneic. Many clinicians use the S0:S0 or
60:60 rule (PPV when PaO, <50 or 60 mmHg, or PaCO2 >50 or 60 mmHg) as a starting point
in the decision to initiate PPV. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) would enable alveolar
units to stay open throughout the respiratory cycle, optimizing gas exchange and minimizing
shear injury.
ii.
 Optimizing cerebral perfusion by maintaining normotension and normoxemia and recognizing
and treating increased intracranial pressure is mandatory.
ii.Antibiotics should be administered, as inhaled water can be contaminated with bacteria, algae,
and debris. Additionally, animals that are ventilated may be especially prone to secondary
pneumonia. Broad spectrum antibiotics should be considered. Protocols that can be used include
metronidazole 10 mg/kg IV q12h.
iv.  Balanced electrolyte crystalloid solutions +/- synthetic colloids should be administered. Note
that ALI and ARDS patients may have increased pulmonary capillary endothelial permeability
and excessive fuid rates may cause further alveolar flooding. Serial body weights, urine output
and specific gravity, measurement of albumin, total solids by refractometry, colloid osmotic
pressure, and central venous pressure may aid in choosing fluid rates and types (see chap. 8
Fluid Therapy).
V.
Diuretics may help by decreasing intravascular hydrostatic pressure, thereby aiding in fluid
movement from the alveoli to the intravascular space; however, hypovolemia and hypotension
Chapter 40Environmental Emergencies
611
should be avoided. There is no evidence to say that diuretics hasten the resolution of the disease.
0.5-1.0 mg/kg furosemide IV may be administered once, but it should be acknowledged that
near-drowning is not a primary problem of increased hydrostatic pressure.
vi. Passive or active rewarming should be commenced in hypothermic patients (see “Frostbite-
hypothermia").
h. Monitoring as for any critically ill patient with special attention to:
 Arterial blood gases, pulse oximetry, capnography
ii.E
Blood pressure, ECG, and cardiovascular function
ii.  Central venous pressure, urine output, and urine specific gravity
iv.   Neurologic function
V.
Thoracic radiographs
vi.Serial acid-base measurements
vii. Serial electrolyte monitoring
vili. Temperature
ix. Venous blood gas and electrolytes
x.ECG
 xi. Consider advanced imaging if head trauma or organic brain disease is suspected.
i. Prognosis
Prognosis for cats that suffer near drowning is unknown. In humans, prognosis is related to
level of mentation at presentation. Positive pressure ventilation will optimize the chance of a
successful outcome.
D. Snakebite
a. Pit vipers {Viperidae) include rattlesnakes {Crotalus spp-), copperheads, cottonmouths, water
moccasins (Agkistrodon spp.), and massasaugas (Sisturus spp.) and are found throughout North
America.
General points
1. These snakes strike and release prey, then find it after it dies.
2. Dry bites {no release of venom) occur in 20-2s% of bites from North American pit vipers
 3. Eastern diamondback rattlesnake is one of the most dangerous snakes in United States (long
fangs, high yield of venom, and large size and strength).
4. Most snakebites in cats occur on forelimbs, head, or neck.
obstruction.
6. Bites on the thorax often are more prone to complications and may be more common in cats
than in dogs due to their defensive posture, which exposes the lateral aspects of the thorax.
7. Agonal bites often contain the highest amount of venom.
8. Bites from larger snakes and bites that occur when snakes first come out of hibernation often
have higher amounts of venom.
ii.Pathophysiology
1. Venom contains phospholipase A, hyaluronidase, collagenase, L-amino-oxidase, and other
enzymes, proteins, and peptides.
2. Phospholipase A causes echinocytosis, spherocytosis, hemolysis, and endothelial damage.
 3. Hyaluronidase and collagenase enhance tissue penetration.
iii. History/presenting complaint
1. Exposure to snake
           
iv.  Clinical signs/PE findings
1. Usually can see two fang marks
2. Pain and swelling at site
3. May see color change of tissue around bite—-becomes dark red to black
612
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
4. May present with shock (tachycardia, poor pulses), fever, dyspnea, vomiting, hematuria,
pigmenturia, ataxia, mental dullness
Laboratory testing
1. CBC—echinocytes are common finding after rattlesnake bites, appear soon after envenom-
ation and are evident for at least 24 48 hours. Thrombocytopenia, leukocytosis, and increased
nucleated red blood cells may be seen.
 2. Chemistry screen—hypoalbuminemia, azotemia, and increased liver enzymes may be present.
 3. Coagulation tests—thrombocytopenia, prolonged PT/aPTT, ACT
 4. Urinalysis—hematuria, pigmenturia
vi.Treatment
 1. Treatment for cardiovascular and respiratory compromise
a. IV fluid therapymay require shock boluses initially (crystalloids 45-60 mL/kg/hr, col-
loids 10-15 mL/kg/hr)
b. Supplemental oxygen
2. Antivenin—produced by Wyeth Laboratories, Marietta, PA
a. Equine origin so can cause allergic/anaphylactic reaction
b. If used, 1 vial per cat is given slowly IV over 1-2 hours.
c. Intradermal testing does not accurately predict anaphylaxis.
d. Pretreatment with diphenhydramine, 1-2 mg/kg IM or IV, and close monitoring of respira-
tory {respiratory rate and effort, ausculatation) and cardiovascular parameters {heart rate,
rhythm, blood pressure) during infusion is recommended.
é. Use of antivenin may result in serum sickness {a type III hypersensitivity reaction) 5-25
days after administration (reported in humans and one dog). Signs in humans may include
fever, urticaria, lymphadenopathy, edema, vomiting, and peripheral neuritis.
3. Corticosteroids—not currently recommended
4. Antibiotics—broad-spectrum antibiotics pending culture and sensitivity results. Protocols
could include clindamycin 10 mg/kg IV q12h and cefoxitin 20 mg/kg IV q6h, or timentin
50 mg/kg IV q6h and metronidazole 10 mg/kg IV q12h.
5. Pain management is essential; sna kebites can be very painful (see chap. 7—-Pain Management
in Critically Ill Feline Patients).
6. Surgical debridement if tissue necrosis occurs.
vi.  Monitoring as for any critical cat. Especially consider:
1. Cardiovascular parameters—heart rate, ECG, blood pressure
2. Respiratory status—RR, RE, pulse oximetry
3. Urine output
4. Degree of swelling and any respiratory compromise secondary to swelling
vii. Prognosis—unknown for cats. Cats tend to get more venom/kg body weight than dogs (smaller
size resulting in higher venom dose/kg), and they may be more sensitive to it. Fair to poor
prognosis depending on severity of signs.
b. Coral snakes, cobras, mambas, kraits, and tiger snakes (Elapidae)
1.
General points
1. Eastern (Micrurus fulvius) and Western (Micruroides euryxanthus) coral snakes are the only
two species present in North America.
2. Eastern coral snake responsible for envenomations, Micrurus fulvius fulvius found in area
from eastern North Carolina through tip of Florida and in the Gulf coastal plain to the
Mississippi River, and Micrurus fulvitus tenere found west of the Mississippi River in
Louisiana, Arkansas, and Texas; western coral snake Micruroides euryxantbus found in
southeastern Arizona and southwestern New Mexico but not medically important.
3. Adult coral snake is usually 20-44 inches long, with a black nose and alternating yellow, black,
and red bands around the body. Albino, all black, and partially pigmented forms may be seen.
4. Dry bite rate of 25%-40%
Chapter 40  Environmental Emergencies
613
5. Coloration of coral snakes is very similar to nonvenomous kingsnake—use the rhyme “red
mext to yellow, kill a fellow; red next to black, venom lack" to differentiate
6. Coral snakes usually strike and hold on, using a chewing motion to introduce more
venom.
 7. Coral snakes are nonaggressive and bites are rare—only approximately 20 bites/year in
huma ns.
8. Clinical signs usually begin within a few hours but may be delayed for up to 18 hours after
the bite {at least in humans).
ii.Pathophysiology
 1. Neurotoxic venom causes postsynaptic nondepolarizing blockade of the neuromuscular junc-
tion, resulting in flaccid paralysis.
 2. May also cause intravascular hemolysis (reported in dogs and humans but not cats)
iii.History/presenting complaint
1. Exposure to coral snake
 2. May only have history of acute flaccid paralysis
iv. Clinical signs/PE findings
1. May see scratch marks or puncture wounds, mild to moderate edema, erythema, and pain
at the bite site
2. Systemic signs can include lethargy, weakness, vomiting, hypersalivation, dyspnea, seizures,
and paralysis (in humans and dogs).
3. Paralysis and death from respiratory failure can occur within a few hours.
4. Cats most often present with acute flaccid quadriplegia to paralysis.
 Diagnosis/laboratory testing
1. Identification of snake
2. Clinical signs
 3. Laboratory testing is not helpful in making diagnosis. Mild hypokalermia, hyperglycemia,
increased creatinine kinase and aspartate aminotransferase, and a stress leukogram may be
present.
 4. Electromyogram will be consistent with neuromuscular junction blockade.
vi. Treatment
1. Supportive care
2. Antivenin—produced by Wyeth Laboratories, Marietta, PA. Can administer one vial/cat
slowly IV over 1-2 hours. Monitor for allergic or anaphylactic reactions {equine origin),
including edema, urticaria, tachycardia, hypotension, arrhythmias, and increased respiratory
rate and/or respiratory distress.
vi. Monitoring
1. Monitor ability to ventilate as paralysis can be ascending and affect muscles of respiration.
This can be accomplished by observing the patient during respiration watching for signs of
paradoxical breathing as well as arterial or venous blood gases. An arterial CO, of>45 mm Hg
or a venous CO, of >50-5S mmHg indicates hypoventilation.
(aop u uoo sieo ui an sadde) sue nog i '7
3. PCV for evidence of hemolysis (appears rare in cats, common in dogs)
4. Recovery may take 7-10 days.
vifi. Prognosis—unknown as many cases may go undiagnosed. In case report of three cats, all three
survived. Same publication mentions two other cats that died either just after presentation or
en route to hospital.
E. Insect bites/stings
a. Bee and wasp stings, ant bites (Hymenoptera order—includes bees, wasps, hornets, and ants)
General points
1. Includes bees (Apidae); yellow jackets, wasps, and hornets (Vespidae); and fire ants
(Formicidae)
614
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
 2. Venom contains histamine, hyaluronidase, phospholipase, polyamines, melittin, and kinins
3. Severity of signs depends on number and location of stings, hypersensitivity, age (kittens and
older cats are more susceptible), and preexisting disease processes.
4. Yellow jackets are more aggressive in late August/September when new colonies are being
formed ("yellow jacket delirium").
5. Yellow jackets form colonies in the ground, making them more of a risk to cats than wasps
and hornets, which form nests along rooflines and in trees.
6. Africanized honey bees are more aggressive than other honey bees and more likely to swarm
and result in many stings. These are primarily present only in the southern portion of the U.S.
i.  Three categories of reaction
1. Local reaction
a. Includes pain, pruritis, erythema, angioedema, and urticaria
b. Often affects paws or head (playing with or trying to eat insect)
c. Can result in airway obstruction due to swelling if tongue or oral cavity is affected
2. Systemic toxicosis {massive envenomation)
a. Requires large dose of venom from many stings or bites
b. Severe depression, fever, neurologic signs {ataxia, seizures), vomiting, anorexia,
petechiation
C. Can result in hepatic dysfunction, hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria, acute renal failure,
DIC, cerebral and pulmonary edema, and myocardial damage
d. CBC a bnormalities may include thrombocytopenia, leukopenia or leukocytosis, and anemia
e. Chemistry screen abnormalities may include increased BUN, creatinine, liver enzymes,
and hypoalbuminemia
f. Coagulation abnormalities may include thrombocytopenia, prolongation of the PT and
aPTT, and increased FDPs and D-dimers
3. Anaphylaxis
a. A single sting or bite can cause anaphylactic reaction in a hypersensitized patient.
edema, salivation, dyspnea, bronchial constriction, pruritis, vomiting, diarrhea, salivation,
ataxia, collapse, seizures, and death.
c. Signs usually occur within 15 minutes but can be delayed for a few hours.
d. Anaphylaxis to insect bites and stings appear to be very rare in cats.
ili.Treatment
1. Localized—often self-limiting and do not require treatment
a. If more severe swelling occurs, treat with diphenhydramine, 1-2mg/kg SQ or IM. Can
continue with oral diphenhydramine at 1 mg/kg q12h if needed.
 b. Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1-0.2mg/kg can be used IV or IM, followed by oral
prednisone at 0.5-1.0 mg/kg/day tapered over 5-7 days if severe swelling.
C. Usually treated as outpatients, unless swelling is severe or compromising airway. Emergency
tracheostomy may be needed rarely.
2. Systemic toxicosis (massive envenomation)
a. Supplemental oxygen if respiratory signs are present.
b. IV fluids—may require shock bolus of crystalloids (up to 45-60 mL/kg). Given in incre-
mental doses, as needed, based on cardiovascular parameters of patient.
C. Colloids may also be required if hypoproteinemia and increased leakiness of vessels are
present {tissue edema). 3-5 mL/kg of hetastarch or Dextran-70 IV over 20-30 minutes
can be given or a CRI of 1-2mL/kg/hr. This will reduce volume of fuids needed for
resuscitation and hopefully reduce edema formation.
d. Diphenhydramine 1-2 mg/kg IM. May need to be repeated every 8 hours.
e. Dexamethasone sodium phosphate 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV
Chapter 40 Environmental Emergencies
615
f. Blood products such as FFP, whole blood, and/or pRBC if coagulopathic or anemic
g. Monitoring and treatment for cardiac arrhythmias
3. Anaphylaxis—see chap. 3—Shock.
iv.   Prognosis—depends on number of stings/bites and severity of reaction. Excellent for localized
reactions. Cats with systemic toxicosis or anaphylactic reactions are very critical and a guarded
prognosis should be given.
b. Brown recluse spider bites {Loxosceles spp.)
General points
1. This species is generally limited to central Midwestern U.S. southward to the Gulf of Mexico.
2. Has characteristic violin-shaped marking on the cephalothorax (fused head and thorax of
spider)—also called fiddleback spiders or violin spiders
a. Also has six eyes arranged in pairs—most spiders have eight eyes—and has fine hairs, not
spines, covering legs
ii.Pathophysiology
1. Venom causes a characteristic dermonecrotic lesion from the hyaluronidase, sphingomyelin-
ase D, and other proteases in the venom.
iii. History/presenting complaint
1. May have history of playing with a spider
iv.  Clinical signs/PE findings
1. Lesion on skin that is often a bull's-eye pattern with black center surrounded by white areas
from ischemia, and finally a ring of erythema
 2. Lesions are often located on extremity or face
 3. Most severe cases are those that involve adipose tissue due to poor blood supply and ischemic
effects of venom
4. Development of abscess is uncommon.
 5. Fever, lameness, seizures, renal failure, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and DIC may
develop, but these complications are all rare.
Diagnosis/la boratory testing
1. Presumptive diagnosis unless spider can be located and identified
2. Rarely, hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or DIC can be seen
Vi.
Treatment
1. Small lesions may heal without treatment but take a prolonged time to heal, often weeks to
months.
2. Larger wounds may require surgical debridement but this is rare.
 3. Reconstructive surgery involving flaps or grafts may be required for severe cases.
4. Broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated for large open lesions. Cultures should be taken
and antibiotics chosen based on culture and sensitivity.
5. Dapsone (leukocyte inhibitor) has been suggested as a therapy to decrease inflammation early
in the course of treatment in humans, although some studies have not shown a benefit. Dose:
1 mg/kg/day PO for 10 days. There are no published clinical reports of its use in cats with
brown recluse spider bites. Cats may be more prone to side effects, including hemolysis,
methemoglobinemia, and peripheral neuropathy.
6. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy and/or oxyglobin (to increase oxygen delivery to the tissues) have
been recommended for severe cases, since oxygen inactivates some of the necrotizing enzymes.
Oxyglobin should be used with caution in cats due to potential for volume overload and
pulmonary edema. Dose of oxyglobin is 5-10 mL/kg IV given over 2-3 hours, with close
monitoring of cardiovascular and respiratory parameters.
7. Corticosteroids and IV fluids are indicated if hemolytic anemia or severe thrombocytopenia
Hplatelet count <30,000/uL, consistent with an immune-mediated destruction of platelets)
develop.
616
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vi. Monitoring
1. Monitor for signs of secondary bacterial infection in wound.
2. Temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, mucous membrane color, capillary refill time, blood
pressure should be monitored for signs of secondary sepsis or SIRS
vifi. Prognosis—most cases respond well to supportive care and surgical treatment of wound, if
needed.
c. Black widow spider bites (Lactodectus spp.)
1.
General points
1. Found throughout the temperate and tropical regions of the world, including most of the
U.S.
 2. Only the females have fangs long enough to envenomate animals and humans.
 3. Female has orange to red hourglass shape on the ventral, black abdomen.
 4. Venom is more potent and bites are more common in late summer to early fall.
 5. Cats are much more sensitive to black widow spider venom than dogs.
ii.Pathophysiology
 1. The venom contains alpha-latrotoxin, which binds to sympathetic, parasympathetic, and
motor nerve terminals.
2. Membrane channels open, allowing calcium to move intracellularly and releasing neurotrans-
mitters (acetylcholine and norepineprhine).
3. This causes muscle spasm and pain, followed by flaccid paralysis. It also causes salivation,
lacrimation, tachycardia, bradycardia, and hypertension.
iii.History/presenting complaint
1. Owner may have seen black widow spider.
2. Agitation, anorexia, ataxia, pain, skeletal muscle spasms and rigidity, followed by weakness
and recumbency due to flaccid paralysis
iv.  Clinical signs/PE findings
1. Signs are severe in cats, often fatal.
2. May have a small erythematous lesion at site of bite
 3. Vocalization, hypersalivation, and severe abdominal pain are most common.
 4. Muscle spasms, with abdominal and hind limb rigidity and pain
affected
6. Vomiting may occur, and spider may be present in vomitus.
 Diagnosis/la boratory testing
 1. Often a presumptive diagnosis
2. Increased creatinine kinase and AST
3. Myoglobinuria
4. Hypocalcemia due to influx of calcium into nerve terminals
5. Hypokalemia
6.Azotemia
vi.  Treatment
1. Muscle relaxants (methocarbamol 50-100 mg/kg IV q6-8h, do not exceed 330 mg/kg/day)
during the early phase of muscle rigidity and pain control with opioids or other pain man-
2. Fluid therapy
 3. Calcium supplementation
a. Calcium gluconate 10% solution: 0.5-1.5 mL/kg slowly IV over 10-15 minutes if patient
has ionized hypocalcemia (<0.8 mmol/L). Administration of calcium may help relieve
muscle pain and is thought to antagonize the release of synaptic vesicles by the toxin while
potentiating normal neurotransmitter release.
4. Antivenin—black widow spider antivenin {Merck & Co., Inc. West Point, PA) of equine origin
Chapter40EnvironmentalEmergencies
617
a. Single vial is given after reconstitution in S0 mL 0.9% NaCl IV over 15 minutes.
b. Prior to administration, test dose of 0.1 mL is given intradermally. The cat should be
monitored for signs of anaphylaxis including tachypnea, increased respiratory effort,
tachycardia, hypotension, erythema, and edema. If noted, antivenin should not be admin-
istered. Intradermal test may not be very reliable in cats.
c. Clinical response is usually seen within 1-2 hours of administration and is characterized
by a return of muscle strength and function, initially including an improvement in respira-
tory function and ability to lay sternally.
vii.Monitoring
1. Electrolyte and acid-base monitoring
 2. Blood pressure monitoring (may become hypertensive due to the autonomic effects of the
toxin)
vili. Prognosis
 1. Incidence and mortality not known in cats, but thought to be often fatal if untreated
 2. Early recognition and appropriate therapy improve prognosis
F. Electrical injury/electrocution
a. Definitions/general points
i.
Electrical injury is not uncommon in cats that are playful and have an inherent curiosity about
linear materials.
ii.E
 Electrical injury causes a form of neurogenic pulmonary edema that is secondary to severe brain
insult and involves massive sympathetic discharge.
ii. Electrocution technically refers to death caused by exposure to electrical current; however, the
b. Pathophysiology
1.
 Predisposing causes—kittens and cats who are playful and curious may be predisposed.
ii.T
 The amount of tissue injury caused by electrocution depends upon the amount of current, dura-
tion of exposure, and tissues traversed. Generally, low-voltage exposure (e.g., household sources)
causes less injury than high-voltage exposure (e.g., lightning strikes).
iii. Electrical injury can cause acute dyspnea. The dyspnea is thought to be caused by massive release
of catecholamines resulting in intense peripheral vasoconstriction and redistribution of blood
to the pulmonary circulation. There may also be increased pulmonary capillary endothelial
permeability.
iv.
 Injury and/or death may be caused by depolarization of muscles and nerves, launching of abnor
mal electrical rhythms in the heart and brain, and production of burns.
V.
Alternating current (AC) may produce ventricular fibrillation if the path of the current traverses
the chest.
vi. Protracted exposure to electrical current may interfere with respiratory muscle movement and
can cause rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinemia, and myoglobinuria.
c. History/presenting complaint
distress, collapse, or neurologic abnormalities but without a known cause. The owner may find
the cat with the electrical cord in its mouth.
d. Clinical signs/PE findings
Tissue injury is generally the worst at the point of contact, where it causes deep focal burns
that appear pale and bloodless on examination. Cutaneous burns involving the commissures of
the lips, tongue, and hard palate may be present.
i. Cardiovascular—tachycardia, poor pulses, and arrhythmias may be present. The patient may
also suffer cardiac (or respiratory) arrest.
iii. Respiratory—varying degrees of dyspnea, tachypnea, crackles, and coughing may be present.
iv.  Nervous system—seizures, mental obtundation, unconsciousness
v. GI—vomiting and diarrhea
618
Feline Emergency and Critical Care Medicine
vi. Renal—pigmenturia
t. Diagnosis/laboratory testing
1.
History—-known exposure to an electrical source
PE findings—cutaneous burns {especially in and around the mouth), dyspnea. Note that lack of
oral or mucocutaneous burns does not rule out electrocution
ili. T
 Thoracic radiographs-caudodorsal pulmonary alveolar infiltrates consistent with neurogenic
pulmonary edema initially but can progress to diffuse changes rapidly (fig. 40.4)
iv. CBC/chem/UA—increased CK, azotemia, myoglobinemia, myoglobinuria, stress leukogram
Acid-base—metabolic acidosis, respiratory alkalosis or acidosis
vi.  ECG—ventricular arrhythmias
f. Treatment
i.
Witnessed electrical injury must initially be treated by removal of the patient from the electrical
source once the power supply has been interrupted.
Initial triage and stabilization as with any critical case with possible pulmonary parenchymal
disease (supplemental oxygen and fluid resuscitation) and is mainly supportive. Judicious IV
 fluid therapy should be employed when the patient has pulmonary manifestations. Guiding fluid
 therapy with central venous pressure monitoring, urine output, urine specific gravity, and serial
body weights may be helpful.
ii. Local burn injury should be treated by clipping and cleaning the lesion(s). If larger areas of
necrosis develop, treatment with surgical debridement may be indicated. Oronasal fistulas may
need surgical intervention.
iv.  Patients with large surface area burns will have excessive fluid losses and will require more
aggressive and tailored fluid therapy (e.g., they may require colloidal support in the form of
synthetic colloids or fresh frozen plasma if coagulopathic).
V.
In patients with signs of increasing intracranial pressure {deteriorating mentation, hypertension,
bradycardia), mannitol or hypertonic saline solution may be indicated. Mannitol at 0.5 g/kg can
be administered over 15-20 minutes. Mannitol should be avoided in hypovolemic patients, as it
will cause volume loss via osmotic diuresis. Hypertonic saline at 3 mL/kg can be administered over
15 minutes and is a better choice for hypovolemic patients. Dehydration is a relative contraindica -
tion to administration of hypertonic saline solution, and serum sodium should be monitored.
vi. Diuresis with IV fluids, mannitol (0.5-1.5 g/kg) or furosemide (0.5-1.5 mg/kg) may be warranted
in patients with rha bdomyolsis-associated myoglobinuria (suggested by presence of red-brown
pigmenturia that is positive for blood on a dipstick but is devoid of RBCs on sediment exam). Care
should be taken to strictly avoid hypovolemia and electrolyte disturbances with use of diuretics.
g. Monitoring
1.
 Arterial blood gasses, pulse oximetry, capnography
ii.E
Blood pressure, ECG and cardiovascular function
ili.
. Central venous pressure, urine output, and urine specific gravity
iv.  Neurologic function
V.
 Thoracic radiogra phs
vi.  Serial acid-base measurements
vii. Serial electrolyte monitoring
vili. Temperature
 ix. Venous blood gas and electrolytes
X.ECG
xi. Temperature
h. Prognosis
<
There is little veterinary literature to describe prognoses of cats with electrical injury. In humans
aq uo sisouaond sau Adund  f uouny Sn uo spuadap sisousond sunq ioum
excellent, even with arrest.
Page references followed by b denote boxes; those followed by f denote figures; those followed by t denote tables.
A
analgesia, 243
a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazlepropionic acid
causes of, 230b
(AMPA), 63, 64f
diagnostic imaging, 240
ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation)
flowchart,243f
access airway, 16
nutritional support, 242
breathing, 17
perception of pain, 229-230
circulation, 17-18
physical examination,230-232, 232f
external chest compressions, 17-18, 17f
stabilization of patient, 232-233
internal cardiac compressions (ICC), 18
unique features of felines, 229
Abdominal exploration, 241-243, 241b, 257
Acute renal failure {ARF), 303-312
Abdominal fluid
causes
analysis,226-227,227t,238-240
ischemia, 303
collection, 233-235,236f-238f
nephrotoxins,303-304,304t
Abdominal palpation
primary renal diseases, 303
for dystocia diagnosis, 471
systemic diseases, 304
for gastrointestinal conditions,219, 231
clinical presentation, 305
for pregnancy diagnosis, 468
definitions, 303-304
Abdominocentesis,226,233,234f
diagnosis, 305-306
Abducens nerve, 315
differentiating from chronic renal failure, 306
Abortion, 482-483, 482f
hermatology, 305
Abscess
medical management, 306-311, 309t, 311b
bite wound, 538-539
of anemia, 310
classification, 532-533
of coagulation abnormalities, 310
ACE inhibitors
fluid therapy, 306-308
for glomerulonephritis, 301
of gastrointestinal manifestations, 308
for heart failure, 185t, 187-188, 188
of hyperkalemia, 308-309, 309t
for hypertension in acute renal failure, 309
of hypertension, 309-310
nephrotoxicity of,304t
of metabolic acidosis, 309
Acepromazine
of nephrotoxicity, 310-311
for arterial thromboembolism, 194
nutritional support, 311
description of, 55
of pancreatitis, 310
in hepatic disease, 49
of pyelonephritis, 310
 in hyperthyroid cats, 46
of urolithiasis, 311
in respiratory depression, 46
monitoring,312
as sedative, 55, 55t
phases of injury, 304
in urinary disease, 48
physical examination, 305
Acetaminophen toxicity, 566-567, 566b
prognosis,312
Acetylcholine neurotransmission,577f
renal replacement therapies, 311-312
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors,329
risk factors for developing, 304-305, 305b
Acid-base status, in cardiac emergencies, 171-172
urinalysis,305-306
Acidosis
Adrenalectomy, 427
ketoacidosis, diabetic, 412-416
Aeturostrongytus,140, 141, 163
pediatric emergency, 500-501
AIGR {amended insulin-glucose ratio), 435
Acids, toxicity of, 580-581, 581b
Air bronchograms, 155f
Acne, feline, 552-553
Air embolism, 275
ACTH, measurerment of endogenous concentration, 426,
Air trapping, 138
433,434
Airway, for cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation, 16
ACTH gel, 421t, 423, 426
Albumin
ACTH stimulation test, 423,427, 433, 434
colloid fuid therapy, 79
Activated charcoal, 328, 564
in gastrointestinal conditions, 226
Activated clotting time {ACT), 361t, 363,369t
microalbuminuria in chronic renal failure, 297
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), 194-195
Albuterol
 Acute abdomen, general approach to
for lower airway disease, 145t, 147t
abdominal exploration, 240-241, 241b, 263
for respiratory emergencies, 111
abdominal fluid analysis, 238-239
Alcohol dehydrogenase, 584
abdominal fluid collection, 233-235, 236f-238f
Aldosterone, plasma concentration, 434
abdominal palpation, 231
Alfentanil,69
619
620
Index
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP), in pediatrics, 492
for respiratory disease, 110t
Alkalis, toxicity of, 580-581, 581b
for retrobulbar abscess, 525
Allergic bronchial disease, 137-140
for septic pleuritis, 120
Allergic rhinitis, 129,134
for upper respiratory complex, 134
Allodynia, 65
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
Alopecia, 430, 530
AMPA {a-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazlepropionic
Alpha 2 agonists
acid),63,64f
cardiovascular effects of, 56
Amphetamine toxicity, 567-568
in critically ill patient, 72-73
Amphotericin B
description of, 56
for Cryptococcus, 134
as sedative, 56
for nasal infections, 134
Aluminum carbonate, 299
nephrotoxicity of, 304t
Aluminum hydroxide, 299
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 158t
Amantadine
Ampicillin
in critically ill patient, 71, 72t
for aspiration pneumonia, 246
dosage, 72t
for endometritis, 481
Ambulation
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
assessment of, 313-314
for pancreatitis, 257
disorders of, 316-319
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 158t
Amended insulin-glucose ratio (AIGR), 435
for pyelonephritis, 300, 310
Amikacin
for septic pleuritis, 120
nephrotoxicity of, 304
for shock, 28
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 158t
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
for septic pleuritis, 120
Ampicillin-clavulanate, for pulmonary parenchymal
Arminogl ycosides
disease,158t
adverse effects, 304-305, 304t, 493
Analgesia
for endometritis, 481
for arterial thromboembolism, 193-194
Aminophylline
in pediatrics, 493
for lower airway disease, 145t, 146, 147t
in urethral obstruction, 285
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 158t
Anaphylactic shock, 25
for respiratory emergencies, 111
Anaphylaxis, insect stings and, 614
toxicity, 588
Ancylostoma,224f
Amiodarone, for electroconversion, 20
Anemia
Amitriptyline
in acute renal failure, 310
for feline lower urinary tract disease {FLUTD),
approach to emergent patient, 380f
283
in chronic renal failure, 297
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
clinical assessment, 381-384
Amlodipine
diagnostic tests, 381-384
for hypertension in acute renal failure, 309
history, 381
for hypertension in hyperadrenocorticism, 425
 physical examination, 381
for hypertension in hyperthyroidism,421t,422
diagnostic approach, 384-385, 386f-387f
for hypertension in retinal detachrment, 519
causes,386f-387f
Ammonia,260
hemolysis versus hemorrhage, 385, 387t
Amoxicillin
regenerative versus nonregenerative, 385, 387t
for bite wound abscess, 539
severity of anemia, classification of, 385,388t
for dermatologic conditions, 554t
diagnostic tests, 381-384
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-260t
blood smear, 382,383f, 383t
for hepatic encephalopathy, 333
bone marrow evaluation, 384
for pyelonephritis, 310
complete blood count (CBC), 381-382
for respiratory disease, 110t
in-saline agglutination test,384
for upper respiratory complex, 134
reticulocyte count, 382-383, 384f, 384t
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
erythropoiesis, decreased or ineffective, 401-407
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
anemia of inflarmmatory disease (AID), 401
for bite wound abscess, 539
anemia of renal failure,401-402
for cholangiohepatitis, 262
aplastic anemia, 403
for corneal laceration, 522
ehrlichiosis, 406-407
for corneal ulcer, 509
extramedullary disorders, 401-402
for degloving injuries, 542
feline imrmunodeficiency virus {FIV), 406
for dermatologic conditions,543, 554t
feline leukemia virus {FeLV), 405-406
for eyelid laceration, 522
hermatopoietic neoplasia, 404-405
infectious disorders, 405-407
for mastitis, 480
intramedullary disorders, 402-405
for pyelonephritis, 299-300, 310
iron-deficiency anemia, 401
for pyometra, 487
myelodysplastic syndromes {MDS), 403-404
Index
621
myelofibrosis, 404-405
Anterior uveitis, 503, 511-513, 511f, 512b,
myelophthisis, 404
512f
pure red cell aplasia (PRCA), 402-403
Antibiotics (antimicrobials)
hemolytic,385-398
for acute abdomen, 233
babesiosis, 391-392
for aspiration pneurmonia, 246
cytauxz0onosis,392-393,392f
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
Heinz body anemia,393-396,394f,395f
for bacterial cystitis, 289
hemobartonellosis {feline infectious anemia), 390-
for bacterial endocarditis,216
391,391f
for bite wound abscess, 539
hypophosphatemia, 397-398
for brown recluse spider bites, 615
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), 385,
for cholangiohepatitis, 261
388-389
for conjunctivitis, 524
rmicroangiopathic anemia, 397, 397f
for corneal laceration, 522
neonatal isoerythrolysis, 389-390
for corneal ulcer, 505,507-509,507b
transfusion reactions, 389
for cutaneous adverse drug reactions, 551
zinc toxicity, 396-397
for degloving injuries, 542
hemorrhagic, 398-401
for drowning patients, 610
acute blood 1oss, 398-399
for endometritis, 481
chronic blood loss {iron deficiency anemia),
for eyelid laceration, 522
399-401
for gastric ulceration, 249
initial stabilization and monitoring, 379-381
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
iron supplementation for, 249, 298
for hemobartonellosis, 390-391
neonatal alloimmune hermolytic anemia, 497-498
for hepatic encephalopathy, 333
presenting signs, 379
for hepatic failure, 261
Anemia of inflammatory disease (AID), 401
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), 526
Anesthesia
for lower airway disease, 146
for Caesarian section, 474
for mastitis, 480
in critically ill patient,39-51
for neonatal sepsis, 498
in airway 0r respiratory distress, 46-48, 47t
nephrotoxicity of, 304-305, 304t
jn cardiovascular dysfunction,43-45,44t
for otitis externa, 548
hepatic disease, 49-50
for otitis interna/media, 337
in hyperthyroid cat, 45-46
for pancreatitis,257
intraoperative monitoring and management, 40-43,
in pediatrics, 493
41f,42f
for pneumonia, 157
maintenance adjuncts, 41, 42t, 43
for pyelonephritis, 300, 310
neurologic disease, 50-51
for pyometra, 486, 487
pharmacologic considerations, 39-40
for respiratory disease, 109, 110t
pre-anesthetic assessrment, 39, 40t
for retrobulbar abscess, 525
in urinary tract disease,48-49,285-286
for septic pleuritis, 119,120
physical status classifications,39,40t
for shock,28
in systemically healthy cats, 53-60
for snakebite, 612
breathing circuits, 60
for stomatitis,258
complications,minimizing,54
for tetanus, 355
injectable anesthetics, 57-59, 57t
monitoring,54
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
overview,53-54
for vestibular disease, 337
sedatives,55-57,55t
Anticholinergic therapy,329
venous access, 54
Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, 568-569, 568b
volatile anesthetics, 59-60, 60t
Anticonvulsants
unique features of felines, 53
in critically ill patient, 71
Anesthetics. See also specific anesthetic agents
for seizures, 326-327
injectable, 57-59, 57t
Antiemetics, 250
dissociatives, 57-58, 57t
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
for glomerulonephritis, 301
hypnotics,58-59
Antifungals
local, 59
nephrotoxicity of,304t
tiletamine/zolazapam (Telazol), 58
for stomatitis, 259
local, 59
Antihistamines
volatile,59-60,60t
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 553
Anestrus, seasonal, 468
for vestibular disease, 337
Angiocardiography, 178, 178f
Antiprotozoals, nephrotoxicity of, 304t
Angiogram,aortic,178f
Antivenin
Ant bites, 613-615
snakebite,612,613
Antegrade pyelography, 276-277
spider bite, 596,616-617
622
Index
Antivirals
sites of, 191
for conjunctivitis, 524
systemic thromboermbolism (STE)
for corneal ulcer, 505
saddle thrombus, 189f
nephrotoxicity of, 304t
treatment of,188-190
Anuria,278,281,308
treatment,193-196
Anxiolytics, for arterial thromboembolism, 194
analgesia, 193-194
Aortic angiogram, 178f
anxiolytics, 194
Aortic thromboembolism. See Arterial thromboembolism
diuretics, 193
Aplastic anemia,403
medical/surgical options, 194
Apomorphine, for emesis, 563
monitoring, 194
Appetite stimulants, 101
oxygen therapy, 193
Applanation tonometry, 504
physical therapy, 196
APTT (activated partial thromboplastin time),
prophylactic,194-196
194-195
triage/initial assessment, 191-192
ARF See Acute renal failure (ARF)
Ascites, in hypovolemic shock, 25
Arginine,87
Aspiration pneumonia, 155f, 246
Arrhythmia, 199-209
Aspirin
in cardiogenic shock, 24
for arterial thromboembolism, 196
diagnosis, 200-201
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
overview, 199
for glomerulonephritis, 301
syncope,211
Asthma. See also Lower airway disease
in trauma,33
clinical signs, 138
treatment,201-208
definition,137
AV block,204,206, 206f
diagnosis, 139-140
bradyarrhythmia, 204-208, 206f, 207t, 208f
inhaler,146f
sinus node disturbances, 208, 208f
management of, 144-148, 145t, 146f, 147t
supraventricular tachycardia, 201-202,202f,
pathophysiology, 138-139
203t
respiratory pattern, 138
ventricular ectopy, 202, 204, 204f
Ataxia
unique features of feline, 199
cerebellar, 319, 344
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 200f, 201-
definition, 314
202,202f,204f
proprioceptive (spinal), 344
when to treat, 199-200
sensory,318
Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy,
vestibular,318-319,344
183
bilateral, 319
Arterial blood gas
central, 318
in cardiac emergencies, 171
paradoxical central, 318-319
in lower airway disease, 143
peripheral,318
in trauma, 32
ATE. See Arterial thromboembolism
Arterial blood pressure. See Blood pressure
Atelectasis
Arterial thromboembolism
absorption, 141
angiocardiography, 178, 178f
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 165
cardiac emergencies
treatment,154
diagnostics and monitoring procedures, 171-179
Atenolol
differential diagnosis, 170
for heart failure, 185t, 187
physical examination, 169-170
for hyperthyroidism, 421, 421t
cardiogenic arterial thromboermbolism (CATE),
for supraventricular tachycardia,
a,202,203t
191-197
for ventricular tachycardia, 204
clinical pathology, 193
Atopica, 555t
clinical signs, 191
Atracurium, 42t
 complications or sequelae, 196
Atrioventricular {AV) block, 169f, 204, 206
diagnosis, 200
differential diagnosis, 170
electrocardiograrm {ECG), 169f, 206f
imaging, 193
syncope,211
initial treatment,192
treatment,206,207t
overview, 191
Atropine
physical examination, 169-170
for anterior uveitis, 512
prognosis, 196-197
for bradyarrhythmia, 206, 207t, 572
prophylactic therapy, 194-196
in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 19, 19b
heparins,194-195
for corneal laceration, 522
platelet antagonists, 196
for corneal ulcer, 505, 507, 507b, 509
warfarin,195-196
for hyphema, 523
pulmonary, 154,165
NAVEL (naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
secondary assessment, 192-193
and lidocaine), 19
Index
623
for neonatal resuscitation, 476
B complex vitamins, 421t
for organophosphate intoxication, 329, 576b, 578
Bee stings, 613-615
Atropine response test, 208
Benadryl, for anaphylactic shock, 25
Auscultation
Benazepril
abdominal,219
for glomerulonephritis, 301
in arterial thromboembolism, 192
for heart failure, 188
in cardiac disease, 168, 182, 192
for hypertension, 421t, 425
larynx and pharynx, 128
Benzodiazepines
lower airway disease, 138
for amphetamine toxicity,568
nasopharynx,128
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 43, 44-45, 44t
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 152
in cardiovascular disease, 44-45
in trauma, 32
description of, 56
Autoimmune skin diseases {pemphigus foliaceus), 548-
in hepatic disease, 49-50
549,549f
metabolism of, 56
Autonomic nervous system dysfunction, 354
in neurologic disease, 50
AV block.See Atrioventricular (AV) block
in respiratory depression, 46
Azathioprine
as sedative,56
for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA), 389
for seizures, 326
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 374t
Beta-blockers
Azithromycin
avoiding in lower airway disease, 142
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
for heart failure, 187, 188
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 159t
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t
for upper respiratory complex, 134
for ventricular tachycardia, 204
Azotemia
Bethanechol
acute,303
for dysautonomia, 354
definition, 267,281,303
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
postrenal,268,281,303
for urinary system dysfunction, 355-356
prerenal, 267-268, 281,303
Bicarbonate
renal, 268, 281, 303-304
for cardiac arrest, 19
ureteral obstruction, 291
 in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 15b, 19
deficit equation, 82
B
for diabetic ketoacidosis, 414-415
Babesiosis, 391-392
fluid therapy, 82
Bacteria, in urine sediment, 271
for hypercalcemia, 453
Bacterial culture
for hyperkalermia, 309, 309t, 448
dermatological, 537
properties of,463t
endotracheal wash, 144
in urethral obstruction, 285
nasal, 132
Bile acids, 225-226, 492
neonatal sepsis, 498
Bilirubin
otitis externa, 547
in abdominal fluid, 227, 240
pleural effusion, 117-119
urinalysis dipstick, 271
Bacterial disease
Biochermical tests. See specific tests
cystitis, 289
Biopsy
lower airway disease, 140
lung, 156
neonatal sepsis, 498-499
renal, 277-278, 306
pneumonia, 152-153, 157
skin, 537-538
Bacterial endocarditis
Bismuth subsalicylate, for gastrointestinal conditions,
diagnosis, 215-216
262t-263t
history, 215
Bisphosphonates
overview, 215
for cholecalciferol toxicity,576
physical examination, 215
for hypercalcemia, 453
predisposition, 215
Bite wound, 38
prognosis,216
Bite wound abscess, 538-539
treatment, 216
Black widow spider bites, 595-596, 595b, 616-617
unique features of felines, 209
Bladder. See Urinary bladder
Bailey Chair, 246
Blastommyces dermatitidus (blastomycosis), 141, 156f
BAL (bronchoalveolar lavage), 144
Bleeding emergencies, 357-377
Ballottement, 231
approach to ermergent patient, 358f
Barbiturates
clinical assessment,359-364,360t, 361t,362f,363f
for seizures, 326-327
general,359
for strychinine toxicity, 598, 598b
history, 359-360
Barotrauma, 138
physical examination,360,360t
Basal total thyroid hormone concentration, 431
screening laboratory tests for hemostasis, 360-364,
Baytril. See Enrofloxacin
361t
624
Index
 Bleeding emergencies contd.
Brain emergencies, 331-337
diagnostic approach, 365-367
cerebellar disease, 337
algorithmic approach for primary hemostasis,
diencephalic disease, 335-336
368f
clinical signs, 335
algorithmic approach for secondary hemostasis,
emergency managerment, 336
369f
midbrain/pons/medulla, 336-337, 336t
causes of prirmary disorders, 366f
prosencephalic disease,331-335
causes of secondary disorders, 367f
seizures,325-327,332-334,333t
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
stupor/coma,334-335
376-377
tremors,335
hepatic disease, 375-376
unique features of felines, 331
inherited coagulopathy, 377
vestibular disease, 336-337,336t
initial stabilization and monitoring, 358-359, 358f
Branchial cyst, 122
laboratory tests, 360-365, 361t
Breathing
activated clotting time (ACT),
,362-363
airway obstructive pattern, 128
buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 362, 362f
cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation {CPCR), 16
D-dirmers, 364-365
open-mouth,128
fibrin split products (FSPs), 364
Breathing circuits, 60
partial thromboplastin time (PTT), 363-364
Breeding season, 467
platelet count, 361
Brodifacoum, 568
platelet estimation frorn blood smear, 362
Bromethalin,328,570-572,572b
prothrombin time {PT),364-365
Bromodiolone, 568
thrombin time (TT), 364
Bronchiectasis. See aiso Lower airway disease
overview, 357
definition, 137
presenting signs, 357
diagnosis, 139
thrombocytopenia,366f,367,370,374
management of, 148-149
thrombopathia, 374-375
radiography, 139
vitamin K deficiency, 374
Bronchitis.See also Lower airway disease
Blindness, acute, 517-518, 517b, 518f
clinical signs, 138
Blood culture, for bacterial endocarditis, 216
definition, 137
Blood gas. See Arterial blood gas
diagnosis, 139-140
Blood lactate, in trauma, 33
management of, 144-148, 145t, 146f, 147t
Blood loss, anemia from
pathophysiology, 138-139
acute,398-399
Bronchoalveolar lavage {BAL), 144
chronic, 399-401
Bronchoconstriction, 138
 Blood pressure. See atso Hypertension; Hypotension
Bronchodilators
cardiac emergencies, 179
for bacterial pneumonia, 157
in chronic renal failure, 296, 297, 298
inhaled, 148
Doppler, 179
for lower airway disease, 146, 145t, 147t,
monitoring during anesthesia, 41, 43
148
in trauma, 33
for respiratory emergencies, 111
in ureteral obstruction, 292
Bronchoscopy, 134, 144
Blood products
Brown recluse spider bites, 595-596, 595b, 615-616
blood types, 497-498
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 361t, 362,
for head trauma, 321
362f
for shock,28-29
Budesonide
for trauma, 33-34
for gastrointestinal conditions,258t-259t
Blood smear evaluation
for inflammatory bowel disease {IBD), 248
anemia diagnosis, 382, 383f, 383t
Bufo toad toxicity, 572-573, 573b
ermergenicy database, 8b,9-10
BUN (blood urea nitrogen), 8-9, 8b
Blood types, 389, 497-498
Buphthalmos, 513
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 8-9, 8b
Bupivacaine
BMBT (buccal mucosal bleeding time), 361t, 362, 362f
description, 59
Body cavity lavage for hypothermia, 607-608
regional analgesic techniques, 74, 74t
Bone marrow evaluation, 384
toxicity,59
Bordetelta bronchiseptica, 140
Buprenex, for arterial thromboembolism, 193
Boric acid/borate toxicity, 570
Buprenorphine
Bovine lactoferrin, 252
in critically ill patient, 70
Brachial plexus avulsion, 317, 353
dosage recommendation, 67t
Brachial plexus block, 74, 74t, 75f
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
Bradycardia/bradyarrhythmia
in sedation protocol, 55t
in cardiogenic shock, 24
in ureteral obstruction therapy,292
syncope, 211,212
in urethral obstruction therapy.
285
in trauma,33
Burmese cat, cherry eye in, 520, 521
Index
625
Burn
for hypocalcemia, 332, 450, 584, 585
classification, 539-540
properties of,460t
clinical signs and diagnosis, 540
in urethral obstruction, 285
electrical,618
Calcium oxalate crystals/uroliths, 283, 288, 582,
prognosis, 541
583f
treatment,540-541
Calcivirus, 497
Butorphanol
Calculi, urinary, 273-275
for anesthesia in lower airway disease, 142
Campylobacter,223
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
Cannabis sativa, 586-587
for arterial thromboembolism, 194
Capillaria, 140, 141, 163
dosage recommendation, 67t
Capstar. See Nitenpy ram
for emergency tracheostomy, 108
Carbamates, 329,354,576-578,578b
for gastrointestinal conditions, 250t-251t
Carbon monoxide, 149, 574-575, 574b
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
Carboxyhemoglobin, 149, 574
in urethral obstruction therapy, 285
Carcinomatosis, 141, 220f
Cardiac compressions, internal (ICC), 16-17
C
Cardiac disease, 181-190
Caesarian section {C-section)
arrhythmia,199-209
indications for, 473b
bacterial endocarditis, 209,215-216
technique, 474-475
clinical examination, 182-183
Caffeine toxicity, 588-589, 588t
clinical pathology, 182
Calcitonin
echocardiography,183,184f
for cholecalciferol toxicity, 575
electrocardiography, 182
for hypercalcemia, 452
physical examination,182
properties of,460t
thoracic radiography, 182, 183f
Calcitriol, 460t
general approach, 181
Calcium, 448-453
heartworm disease,209-211,210f
distribution, 448-449
monitoring chronic heart failure,188
functions of, 449
pericardial effusion, 24, 209, 212-215, 214f
homeostasis, 449
primary heart disease, 181
hypercalcemia
secondary heart disease, 181
causes of, 430,451,451t
syncope,211-212
clinical signs of, 451-452
treatment of chronic heart failure, 187-188
diagnosis of, 452
ACE inhibitors, 187-188
therapy for, 452-453, 453b
beta-blockers, 187
hypocalcemia
calcium channel blockers, 187-188
causes of, 430, 449, 450t
digoxin, 188
clinical signs of, 449
diuretics, 187
diagnosis of, 449
goals, 187
seizures from,430
taurine,188
therapy for, 450
treatment of life-threatening heart failure, 183-187,
pediatrics, levels in, 492
185t, 186f
Calcium carbonate
algorithm for treatrment, 186f
for eclampsia, 481
confounding factors, 187
for hypocalcemia, 450
diuretics, 184
properties of, 460t
drug table,185t
Calcium channel blockers
inotropic support, 187
for heart failure, 187-188
nitroglycerin paste, 187
for hypercalcemia, 453
oxygen supplementation, 186
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t
pleurocentesis, 184,186
toxicity,573
treatrment of refractory (advanced) heart failure,
Calcium chloride
188
for hypocalcemia, 450
treatment of systemic thromboembolism (STE), 188-
properties of, 460t
190, 189f
Calcium EDTA
unique features of felines, 181
for lead ingestion, 329, 586
Cardiac ermergencies, 167-179
for zinc toxicity, 396-397
diagnostics and monitoring procedures, 171-179
Calciurm gluconate
arterial blood pressure, 179
for black widow spider bites, 616
cardiovascular imaging, 173-178, 173t, 174f-178f,
for cardiac arrest, 19
177t
for dystocia rmanagerment, 473
central venous pressure {CVP), 178-179
for eclampsia,481
electrocardiography (ECG), 172-173, 172t
for hyperkalemia,309,309t,448
Holter monitor, 173, 173f
for hyperrmagnesemia, 464
laboratory tests, 171-172
626
Index
Cardiac emergencies contd.
prognosis,14-15
differential diagnosis, 170-171
treatment, 16-21
arterial thromboembolism, 170
Cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
congestive heart failure {CHF), 170
clinical signs, 14
low output heart failure {LOHF), 170
CPR box supplies, 15b, 15f
physical examination, 168-170
definitions, 13
arterial thromboembolism, 169-170
general recommendations, 15
congestive heart failure (CHF), 168
pediatric,500-501
low cardiac output heart failure (LOHF), 168-169,
precipitating factors,13,14b
169f
prognosis,14-15
signalment and history, 167-168
treatment
unique features of felines, 167
advanced cardiac life support, 18-20
Cardiac massage, 476
basic life support (ABCs), 16-18, 16b
Cardiac output, 26-27
drug volumes, 21b
Cardiac troponin I, 172
prolonged life support, 20-22, 21b
Cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism (CATE), 191-197
unique features of felines, 13
clinical pathology, 193
Cardiovascular systerm
clinical signs, 191
anesthesia in dysfunction of, 43-45, 44t
complications or sequelae, 196
managerment and monitoring, 45
irmaging, 193
pharmacologic considerations, 44-45, 44t
initial treatment, 192
pre-anesthetic assessment, 43-44
prognosis,196-197
imaging cardiac emergencies, 173-178, 173t,
prophylactic therapy, 194-196
174f-178f, 177t
heparins, 194-195
Jower airway disease and, 138
platelet antagonists, 196
primary survey, 7, 7b
warfarin, 195-196
trauma assessment,33-34
secondary assessment, 192-193
diagnostics, 33
sites of, 191
physical examination, 33
treatment, 193-196
treatment,33-34
analgesia,193-194
waiting room triage,6
anxiolytics, 194
Carnitine supplementation, in pediatrics, 495
diuretics, 193
Carotid body massage, 200, 200f
medical/surgical options, 194
Carprofen
monitoring,194
in critically ill patient, 71-72,72t
oxygen therapy, 193
dosage, 72t
physical therapy, 196
Casts, urine sediment, 271-272
prophylactic,194-196
CATE. See Cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism
triage/initial assessment, 191-192
(CATE)
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 108-109, 164, 174, 177f
Catecholamines
Cardiogenic shock, 80, 80t
for shock, 27-28
clinical signs, 24-25
urinary,435
etiology, 24
Cathartics
Cardiomyopathy. See atso Cardiac disease; Heart failure
contraindications,565b
arrhythmogenic right ventricular, 183
for gastrointestinal decontamination, 564-565
definition, 171
Catheter
dilated
central intravenous, in cardiopulmonary-cerebral
breed predisposition, 167
resuscitation, 17
treatment,167
dialysis, 278-280
hypertrophic (HCM)
nephrostomy,292,293
anesthesia in, 43-44
urinary,268-269
breed predisposition, 167
Catheter placerment
echocardiography, 174, 178f, 183
 pediatric emergencies, 494
radiography, 174, 175f-176f, 183f
urethral obstruction, 286-288, 286f
hypertrophic obstructive (HOCM)
Cavitary effusion, 419
echocardiography, 183
CBC. See Complete blood count (CBC)
treatment,185t,187-188
Cefadroxil
restrictive {RCM), 183, 184f,185t
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
unclassifed {UCM),183, 185t
for degloving injuries, 542
Cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA). See also
for derrmatologic conditions, 
554t
Cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
for otitis interna/media, 337
clinical signs, 14
Cefazolin
definition, 13
for degloving injuries, 542
pediatric,500-501
for dermatologic conditions, 554t
precipitating factors,13,14b
for endometritis, 481
Index
627
for otitis interna/media, 337
Chlorpromazine
for pancreatitis, 257
for acute renal failure GI manifestations,
for pyelonephritis, 300
308
 in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
for amphetamine toxicity, 568
Cefotaxime, for pulmonary parenchymal disease,
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
159t
Cholangiohepatitis, 255-256
Cefoxitin
Cholecalciferol toxicity, 575-576, 576b
for gastrointestinal conditions,258t-259t
Cholesterol, in pediatrics, 492
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 604
Cholinergic receptors, 329
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 159t
Chorioretinitis, 512f
for snakebite, 612
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 137
Cefpodoxime
Chronic renal failure {CRF), 295-299
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
 clinical signs and findings, 296
for derrmatologic conditions, 543, 554t
diagnostics, 296-297
Cellulitis,538
pathophysiology, 295-296
Central intravenous catheter, in cardiopulmonary-
prognosis,299
cerebral resuscitation, 17
treatment,297-299
Central sensitization, nociceptive transmission and, 63,
Chylothorax,121-122,141
64f
causes, 121
Central venous pressure (CVP)
 definition, 121
 in anesthesia in cardiovascular dysfunction, 45
diagnosis, 121
in cardiac emergencies, 178-179
predispositions, 121
in chronic renal failure, 297
signs of, 121
definition, 178
treatment,121-122
in trauma, 33
Chylous effusion, 111t, 113, 141
Cephalexin
Cimetidine, for acute renal failure GI manifestations,
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
308
for degloving injuries, 542
Ciprofloxacin
for dermatologic conditions, 543, 554t
for corneal laceration, 522
for mastitis, 480
for corneal ulcer, 507, 507b, 509
for otitis interna/media, 337
Circulation, in cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation
for respiratory disease, 110t
(CPCR), 17-18
Cephalosporins
external chest compressions, 17-18, 17f
for cholangiohepatitis, 256
internal cardiac compressions {ICC), 18
for neonatal sepsis, 498
Cisapride
Cerebellar disease
for acute renal failure Gl manifestations, 308
causes of,337
for constipation, 258-259
cerebellar ataxia, 319, 344
for dysautonomia,355
cerebellar hypoplasia, 331
for gastrointestinal conditions,258t-259t
signs of, 337
for regurgitation, 246
Cerebral edema, 35, 112, 332, 603
for urinary system dysfunction, 355-356
Cerebral perfusion pressure {CPP), 320-321,
Citrus oils, 578-579
501
Clarithromycin, for pulmonary parenchymal disease,
Cervical ventroflexion, 315
159t
Charcoal. See Activated charcoal
Clavamox. See Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
Chelation
Cleaning agents, toxicity of, 579
for lead ingestion, 329, 586
Clenbuterol, for lower airway disease, 146
Clindamycin
Chemical injury, ocular, 519
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
Cherry eye, 520,521
for bite wound abscess, 539
Chest compressions, external, 16, 17f
for dermatologic conditions, 543, 555t
Cheytetietla,544,545
for gastrointestinal conditions, 258t-259t
CHF See Congestive heart failure (CHF)
for heatstroke-hypertherrmia, 604
Chtamydia psittaci,128
for mastitis,480
Chlorambucil
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 159t
for autoimmune skin disease, 549
for septic pleuritis, 120
for cutaneous adverse drug reactions, 551
for shock,28
for dermatologic conditions, 554t
for snakebite, 612
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 553
for stomatitis, 252
Chloramphenicol
for tetanus, 355
adverse effects, 493
for toxoplasmosis, 351
Chlorpheniramine
Clonidine suppression test, 435
for dermatologic conditions,555t
Clopidogrel, for arterial thromboembolism, 196
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 560
Clostridium, 223
628
Index
CNS assessrment, 313-316
insulin, 414b
ambulation, 313-314
plasma, 498
cranial nerves, 315-316, 316f
setup,21b
mentation,313
vasopressin, 28
posture,314-315
Cooling therapy, for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
spinal reflexes, 316
Co-oximetry, 149, 157
CNS toxins, 327-330
Copperhead bites, 611-612
bromethalin, 328
Coral snakes, 612-613
lead, 329-330, 585-586, 585b
Corneal laceration, 521-522, 521f
metronidazole, 330
Corneal sequestra, 503
organophosphates and carbamates, 329
Corneal ulcer, 504-505, 507-510, 507b
pyrethrins and pyrethroids, 328-329
corneal sequestrum,503,510,511f
Coagulometer, patient-side, 363-364
deep, 507-508, 508f
Coagulopathy
dendritic, 505,507f
in acute renal failure, 310
descermetocele, 508-509
in hypothermia, 606
melting,509
inherited,377
nonhealing, 503, 510, 510f
pediatric emergencies, 492
perforated,509-510,509f
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 164
superficial, 505, 507, 508f
with synthetic colloid administration,79
Coronavirus, 497
Cobalamin, 225,258t-259t
Corrosives, toxicity of, 580-581, 580b
Cocaine toxicity, 579-580
Corticosteroids
Coccidioides immitis,141
for anterior uveitis, 512
Codeine, 260t-261t
for brown recluse spider bites, 595-596, 615
Cold diuresis, 605
for head trauma, 322
Colitis,262t-263t
for hemobartonellosis, 391
Colloid solutions, 78-79, 78t
for hyphema, 523
Colopexy, 256
for imrmune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA), 388
Coma
inhaled, 144-145
causes of, 319-320
for jnsect sting, 597
emergency diagnostic workup for, 334
for lower airway disease, 144, 145t, 146, 147t, 148
management of, 334
for myasthenia gravis, 353
Modified Glascow Coma Scale, 322
for otitis externa, 548
Complete blood count (CBC)
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 159t
anemia diagnosis, 381-382
for spinal cord trauma, 324
in bronchial disease, 139
for tetanus, 355
in cardiac emergencies, 171
Cortisol
in pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154-155
high-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 433
Compressibility of cranial thorax, 107
Compressions, cardiac, 16-17, 17f, 500
Cortrosyn, 421t, 423, 426
Computer tomography (CT)
Cottonmouth bites, 611-612
nasal, 131,132f
Cough, 128
nasopharynx,133,133f
CPA. See Cardiopulrmonary arrest (CPA)
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154
CPCR. See Cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation
tracheal adenocarcinoma, 130f
(CPCR)
urologic systerm, 277
CPP (cerebral perfusion pressure), 320-321, 501
Congenital myotonia, 317
Crackles, respiratory, 106-107, 108, 138, 168
Congestive heart failure (CHF). See atso Cardiac
Cramps, heat, 601
emergencies; Heart failure
Cranial nerves
 oa  pe ss
assessment,315-316,316f,344
differential diagnosis, 170
evaluation of in trauma, 34
physical examination, 168
Cranial vena cava obstruction, 121
pleural effusion, 114, 116
Craniectomy, decompressive, 322
diagnosis, 114
Creatinine
physical exarm findings, 114
jn abdominal fluid, 227, 239, 294
therapy, 114, 116
in pediatrics, 492
treatment,185t,187
CRF See Chronic renal failure (CRF)
Conjunctivitis,503,524,524f
CRI. See Continuous rate infusion (CRI)
Conn syndrome, 424-425,434
Critically ill cat, approach to, 3-12
Constipation, 259
algorithm for, 12f
Continuous rate infusion (CRI), 83
emergency database, 8-10, 8b
dextrose,21,495
emergency plan,10-12,10b
diazeparn,332
primary survey, 6-8,7b
fluids in pediatric dehydration, 497
secondary survey, 8, 8b
Index
629
telephone triage, 3-5, 4b
Defibrillation, 19-20
unique features of felines, 3
Degloving injuries, 541-542
waiting room triage, 5-6, 5b
Dehy dration
Crusting dermatitis, 530, 532
causes of, 495-496
Cryptococcus, 128, 134, 141
Cryptosporidium,496
fluid therapy, 80-81
Crystalloid solutions, 77-78, 78t
in hypovofemic shock, 25
for head trauma, 321
pediatric emergencies, 495-497
Crystals
physical assesstnent of, 81t
oxalate, 271
recognition and monitoring of, 496-497
struvite, 267,271
Demodex,535,536f,545-546
urate, 271
Depo-medrol. See Methylprednisolone acetate
urine sediment, 271
Derrmatologic ermergencies, 529-559
CT. See Computer tomography (CT)
algorithmic approach, 553f
Cushing's reffex, 327, 502
conditions, management of specific, 538-560
Cutaneous adverse drug reaction, 550-551
autoimrmune skin diseases {pemphigus foliaceus),
Cutaneous trunci response, 347
548-550,549f
Cuterebra,163
bite wound abscesses, 538-539
CVP. See Central venous pressure (CVP)
burns, 539-541
Cyclosporine
cutaneous adverse drug reaction, 550-551
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
degloving injuries, 541-542
for cutaneous adverse drug reactions, 551
derrmatophytosis, 546-547
for dermatologic conditions, 555t
eosinophilic granuloma complex, 553
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 553
feline acne, 552-553
for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), 389
otitis externa, 547-548
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 371, 372t
parasitic disease,542-546,544f, 545f
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca {KCS), 526
tapazole{rmethimazole)reaction,551-552
Cyproheptadine
diagnostic procedures, 533-538
as appetite stimulant, 101
bacterial culture and sensitivity, 537
for lower airway disease, 148
fea combing, 533
for selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor toxicity,
fungal culture, 536
595
otic mite prep, 534
Cystitis
skin biopsy, 537-538
bacterial,289
skin cytology, 533, 534f
feline idiopathic cystitis {FIC), 282-283
skin scraping, 533, 534f, 535, 536f
Cystocentesis,233,269-270
trichogram,534,535,536f
indications,269-270
Wood's lamp evaluation, 535
technique, 270
diagnostic workup, 529
Cystogram, contrast, 275
overview,529
in FLUTD,282-283
presenting complaints/clinical signs, 529-533
Cystoscopy,283
alopecia,530
Cytauxzoonosis,392-393,392f
crusting dermatitis,miliary derrmatitis,530,532
Cytology
eosinophilic granuloma complex lesions,530,531f
abdominal fluid analysis, 226-227, 238-240
erosions and ulcers, 532
bronchoalveolar lavage {BAL), 144
nodules, abscesses, and draining tracts, 532
endotracheal wash, 143-144
papules and pustules, 532
fecal, 223
pruritus,529-530
nasal,132
Derrmatophyte test mediurn, 536
pericardial fluid, 213
Dermatophytosis
pleural effusion, 117, 119f
management of, 546-547
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 156
Wood's lamp evaluation for, 535
skin,533,534f
Descemetocele, 508
vaginal,485
Desflurane
in neurologic disease, 51
D
properties of, 59-60, 60t
Dalteparin, for arterial thromboembolism, 195
Desoxycorticosterone pivalate {DOCP), 421t, 424, 427
Dapsone
Dexamethasone
for brown recluse spider bite, 596
for asthma, 111
for brown recluse spider bites,615
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
D-dimers, 361t, 364
for cerebral edema, 112, 571, 586
Debridement, of burns, 541
for dermatologic conditions, 555t
Decerebellate posture, 314
for head trauma, 322
Decerebrate posture, 314, 314f
for hypercalcemia, 452
Decompressive craniectomy, 322
for hyperthyroidism,421t,422
630
Index
Dexamethasone contd.
Diamidine, for cytauxzoonosis, 393
for hypoadrenocorticism, 423
Diaphragmatic hernia, 123
for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA),
Diarrhea
388
acute,256
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 371, 372t
large-bowel, 258-259
for lower airway disease, 147t, 148
Diazepam
for otitis externa, 548
adverse effects, 331,333,493
properties of, 460t
for anesthesia in lower airway disease, 142
for spinal cord trauma,324
 as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate
as appetite stimulant, 101
for insect bites/stings, 614
for arterial thromboembolism, 194
for lower airway disease, 144, 145t
constant rate infusion {CRI), 332
for shock,28
description of, 56
Dexarmethasone suppression test
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
high-dose, 433
for feline lower urinary tract disease {FLUTD),
low-dose, 426, 433
283
Dex medetomidine, 72-73
for intubation, 109, 116
Dextran 70, 79
for metronidazole neurotoxicity, 330
Dextrose
for organophosphate intoxication, 578
for cardiac arrest, 19
for penitrem A toxicity, 591-592
constant rate infusion (CRI), 21, 495
for pyrethrin/pyrethroid toxicity, 593
in dialysate, 279
rectal administration, 331
for dystocia management, 473
as sedative, 55t, 56
for hyperkalemia, 309, 309t, 448
for seizures,326,332,354,571,572,580,586,588,
for hypoglycemia, 19, 332, 495
589
for neonatal resuscitation, 476
for tremors, 335
in urethral obstruction, 285
in urethral obstruction therapy, 286
Diabetes mellitus, 409-418
for urinary systern dysfunction, 355-356
clinical signs, 410
DIC. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
definition, 409
Diencephalic disease, 335-336
diabetic ketoacidosis {DKA), 412-416
clinical signs, 335
diagnosis, 413, 417b
emergency management, 335-336
follow-up, 416
Dieresis, fuid, 83
history and physical exarmination, 412
Diestrus, 468
pathophysiology, 412
Diet. See also Nutritional support
therapy,413-416,414b,417b
for diabetes mellitus, 410
diagnostic, 410
nutritional support
history, 410
choice of diet, 101
hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar syndrome, 416-418
veterinary canined diets, 101
definition,416
veterinary liquid diets, 101
diagnosis, 416
Digibind, 217
differential diagnosis, 417
Digitalis toxicity, 216-217
treatment, 417-418
Digoxin
neuropathy in,352
for heart failure, 185t,187,188
pathophysiology, 409-410
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t
physical examination, 410
Dihydrotachysterol, 461t
signalment,410
Dilated cardiomyopathy
transient,409
 breed predisposition, 167
treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis, 413-416
treatment,167
acidosis, 415
Diltiazem
concurrent diseases, 415
for heart failure, 185t
electrolytes, 414-415
for hypercalcemia, 453
fluid therapy, 413
properties of,461t
insulin administration,413-414,414b
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t
nutrition,415-416
Diphacinone,568
treatment of uncomplicated, 410-411
Diphenhydramine
diet therapy, 410
for black widow spider bite, 595
insulin therapy, 411, 412b
for insect bites/stings, 614
oral hypoglycermic, 411
for snakebite, 612
types,409
for vestibular disease, 337
unique features of felines, 409
Diphenoxylate, 260t-261t
Dialysis
Diroflaria immitis, 209. See aiso Heartworm disease
hemodialysis, 280, 311
Disserminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
peritoneail, 278-280, 311
376-377
Index
631
Dissociative anesthetics, 57-58, 57t. See atso specifc
Dystocia, 469-475
agents
diagnosis of, 471-472
Distributive shock, 80, 80t
fetal factors leading to, 470-471
anaphylactic shock,25
fetal death, 471, 472b
septic shock,25-26
malformation, 471, 471f
Diuresis, for toxicant clearance, 565
malpresentation, 470,471b
Diuretics
oversize, 470
for acute renal failure, 308
maternal factors leading to, 469-470
for arterial thromboembolism, 192, 193
obstructive, 469-470
for cardiac disease, 184
uterine inertia,469,470b
for drowning patients, 610-611
 medical management, 472-473
nephrotoxicity of, 304t
surgical management, 473-475
Dobutamine
anesthetic considerations, 474, 474b
for bradyarrhythmia, 206, 207t
en bloc ovariohysterectomy, 475, 475b
for heart failure, 185t, 187
hysterotomy {C-section), 474-475
for hypotension during anesthesia, 43
indications for C-section, 473b
for shock,28
preanesthetic considerations, 473-474
DOCP (desoxycorticosterone pivalate), 421t, 424,
427
E
Docusate sodium, 258t-259t, 259
Ear mites,543-544
Dolasetron
Eccentrocytes, 394, 395f
for acute renal failure GI manifestations,
ECG. See Electrocardiography (ECG)
308
Echocardiography
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
bacterial endocarditis, 216
Dopamine
cardiac disease, 183, 184f
for ethylene glycol toxicity, 584
cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism (CATE), 193
for heart failure, 185t, 187
congestive heart failure (CHF), 114, 174-175, 177t,
for hypotension, 603
178,178f
for hypotension during anesthesia, 43
heartworm disease, 210, 210f
for postresusitative care, 21
pericardial disease, 213
for shock,27-28
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 157
Dorzolamide
syncope,212
for glaucoma, 514
Eclampsia, 481-482
for hyphema, 524
Ectopic pregnancy, 482
Doxapram
Edema
for laryngeal assessment, 108
cerebral,35,112,332,603
for neonatal resuscitation, 476
pulmonary
for newborn respiratory stimulation, 499
cardiogenic,108-109,153,164,174,177f
Doxycycline
noncardiogenic,153, 164
for corneal ulcer, 509
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 153, 164
for erlichiosis, 407
reexpansion pulmonary,110
for gastrointestinal conditions,258t-259t
Edrophonium chloride, for myasthenia gravis, 353
for hemobartonellosis, 390-391
EDTA
for respiratory disease, 110t
for lead ingestion, 329, 586
for upper respiratory complex, 134
for zinc toxicity,396-397
D-penicilamine, for lead ingestion, 329, 586
Effusion. See atso Pleural effusion
Draining tracts, 532
cytology,119f
Drowning, 608-611
types,111t,113,226,227t
clinical signs, 609
Ehrlichiosis, 406-407
definitions, 608
Elapidae {coral snakes), 612-613
diagnosis, 609, 610f
Electrical injury/electrocution, 617-618
dry, 609
clinical signs, 617-618
history and presenting complaint, 609
definitions, 617
monitoring, 611
diagnosis,618
pathophysiology,609
history/presenting complaint, 617
predisposing causes, 609
monitoring, 618
prognosis, 611
pathophysiology, 617
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 165
prognosis,618
treatment, 610-611
treatment, 618
Drug reaction
 Electrocardiography (ECG)
cutaneous adverse, 550-551
atrioventricular(AV)block,169f,206f
 pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 164
in cardiac emergencies, 172-173, 172t, 182
Dryer injury, 36-37
in cardiopulmonary arrest {CPA), 14, 19
Dysautonomia,264,354
challenges in interpretaion of, 201
632
Index
 Electrocardiography (ECG) contd.
Encephalopathy. See Hepatic encephalopathy
in hyperkaleia,447
Endocarditis. See Bacterial endocarditis
in hypokalermia, 445
Endocrine disease
in hypothermia, 606, 606f
clinical presentation, 429
in lower airway disease, 138
diabetes mellitus, 409-418
norrmal,174f,201f
diagnostic testing, 430-436
in pericardial disease, 213
biochemistry profile, 430
sinus arrest, 208f
complete blood count, 430
supraventricular tachycardia,201
for hyperadrenocorticism, 434
syncope,212
for hyperaldosteronism, 434-435
in ureteral obstruction, 292
hypercalcemia, 430
in urethral obstruction, 285
hyperglycemia, 430
ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 200f, 202,
hyperkalemia,430
202f,204f
for hyperparathyroidism, 436
ventricular tachycardia, 202
for hyperthyroidism, 431-432
Electrolyte disorders, 439-464
for hypoadrenocorticism,434
algorithmic overview, 459f
hypocalcemia,430
calcium, 448-453
hypoglycermia, 430
drug table, 460t-463t
hypokalemia, 430
magnesium, 455-459, 464
for hypoparathyroidism, 436
phosphorus, 453-455
for insulinoma, 435
potassurm,444-448
for pheochromocytoma, 435
sodium, 439-444
sodium-potassium ratio, 431
unique features of felines,439
urinalysis, 431
Electrolytes, fractional clearance/excretion of,
hyperadrenocorticism, 419,425-427, 426f
272-273
hyperaldosteronism,419, 424-425
Embolectomy
hypoadrenocorticism,422-424
interventional/catheter-assisted,194
medications, 421t
surgical, 194
thyroid storm, 419-422
Ermergencies
unique features of feline, 419
cardiac,167-179
Endometritis, 480-481, 480b
dermatologic,529-559
Endormyocardial fibroeleastosis (EMF), 183
environmental, 601-618
Endoscopy, 226, 248, 249
hematological
Endotracheal intubation, injectable anesthetics for,
anemia,379-407
57t
bleeding, 357-377
Endotracheal wash, 109, 143-144
neurologic
End-tidal capnography, 143
brain, 331-337
Enema,253,254
general,313-330
Enilconazole, 547
peripheral,351-356
Enoxaparin, for arterial thromboembolism, 195
spinal cord, 339-343
Enrofloxacin
ocular, 503-526
adverse effects, 245, 503, 518
pediatric,491-502
for aspiration pneumonia, 246
reproductive,467-488
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
toxicological, 561-599
for cholangiohepatitis, 262
urologic,281-302
for dermatologic conditions, 543, 555t
Emergency database, 8-10, 8b
for drowning patients, 609-610
Emergency plan, 10-12, 10b
for endometritis, 481
Emesis, induction of, 328, 562-563
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
Ermetics
for hemobartonellosis, 391
apomorphine,563
for otitis externa, 548
contraindications, 563b
for otitis interna/media, 337
for gastrointestinal decontamination, 562-563
for pancreatitis, 251
hydrogen peroxide, 328, 563
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 159t
syrup of ipecac,563
for pyelonephritis, 300, 310
xylazine,328,563
for pyometra, 487
EMF (endomyocardial fibroeleastosis), 183
for respiratory disease, 110t
Emphysema,139
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
Empyema, traurmatic. See Septic pleuritis
Enteral nutrition, 88-98,102t
Enalapril
for acute abdomen, 243
for glomerulonephritis, 301
choice of,88
for heart failure, 188
feeding tube
for hypertension, 421t,425
esophageal tubes, 90, 92f-97f, 97
En bloc ovariohysterectomy, 475, 475b
gastrostomy tubes,97
Index
633
jejunostomy tubes, 97-98
Etomidate
nasoesophageal tubes, 88-89, 89f-91f
adverse effects, 47, 49
pharynostomy tubes, 97
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t, 43, 44, 44t
Enucleation, 514, 517
in cardiovascular disease, 44
Environmental emergencies
description, 59
drowning, 608-611
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
electrical injury/electrocution, 617-618
in urinary disease, 49
frostbite-hypothermia, 604-608, 606f, 607f
Excretory urogran, 239, 291, 295,300
heatstroke-hyperthermia, 601-604
Exenteration, 514
insect bites/stings, 613-615
Exophthalmos,524-525,525f
snakebite, 611-613
Expiratory grunt, 138
spider bites, 595-596, 595b, 615-617
Expiratory push,138
Eosinophilia, in bronchial disease, 139
Extensor carpi radialis, assessment of, 347, 347f
Eosinophilicgranuloma complex, 530-532, 531f, 552-553
Exudate
Epidural,43,74,74t,75f,474
abdominal fuid, 226,227t, 238
Epilepsy, idiopathic, 331
pleural effusion, 111t, 113
Epinephrine
Eyelid laceration, 522, 523f
for anaphylactic shock, 25
Eyes. See Ocular emergencies
in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 19, 19b, 500
for insect sting, 597
F
for lower airway disease, 145t, 146
Facial nerve, 315
NAVEL {naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
Facial nerve paralysis, 315, 316f
and lidocaine), 19
Facial sensation, 344
for neonatal resuscitation, 476
Famcyclovir, for conjunctivitis, 524
for postresusitative care, 21
Famotidine
for shock,28
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
Epistaxis, 127,131
for esophageal irritation, 355
Epsom's salt,565
for gastrointestinal conditions,260t-261t
Ergocalciferol, 461t
for heatstroke-hypertherrmia, 603
Erosions and ulcers, 532
for regurgitation, 246
Erythema multiforme, 551
for vomiting in chronic renal failure, 298
Erythrocyte indices, 382
for zinc toxicity, 396
Erythromycin
Fan belt injury, 37
for conjunctivitis, 524
FAST (focused abdominal sonograrm for trauma), 288
for corneal laceration, 522
Fatty casts, 272
for corneal ulcer, 505, 507b
Fecal examination, 222-223,224f
for eyelid laceration, 522
Feeding tube
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), 526
esophageal tubes,90,92f-97f, 97
Erythropoiesis,decreasedor ineffective,401-407
gastrostomy tubes,97
Erythropoietin, 298, 401-402
jejunostomy tubes, 97-98
Esmolol
nasoesophageal tubes,88-89,89f-91f
for heart failure, 185t, 187
pharynostomy tubes, 97
for hyperthyroidism, 421t, 422
Feline acne, 552-553
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t, 589
Feline calicivirus {FCV), 128, 252
Esomeprazole, for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
Feline Cushing's syndrome, 433
Esophageal foreign body,246-247
Feline herpes virus-1 {FHV-1), 128, 497, 503, 505, 507,
Esophagea1 tubes, 90,92f-97f, 96f,97, 97f, 242
526
Esophagitis, 246
Feline idiopathic cystitis {FIC), 282-283
Esophagram, 222
clinical presentation, 282
Estrous cycle
definitions,282
diestrus, 468
diagnostics,282-283
estrus, 467,468b
treatment,283
interestrus, 467-468
Feline immunodeficiency virus {FTV), anemia from, 406
proestrus, 467
Feline infectious anemia, 390-391, 391f
seasonal anestrus, 468
Feline leukemia virus {FeLV), 405-406, 497
Estrus, 467, 468b
Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD), 282-283
Ethanol, for ethylene glycol toxicity, 311, 311b, 584,
clinical presentation, 282
584b
definitions, 282
Ethylene glycol testing, 306
diagnostics,282-283
Ethylene glycol toxicity, 274, 310-311, 311b, 581-584,
treatment,283
583f
Feline mange, 545
Etidronate
 Feline panleukopenia
for hypercalcemia, 453
cerebellar hypoplasia from, 331
properties of,461t
hypovolemia/dehydration from,496
634
Index
Feline rhinotracheitis virus {FRV), 128
shock,26-27,33,78,80,80t
 Feline upper respiratory tract complex, 128, 131
surgery and anesthesia, 54
Femoral nerve, assessment of, 345, 346f
trauma,33-34
Fenbendazole
constant rate infusion {CRI), 83, 497
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
crystalloid solutions, 77-78,78t
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 160t 
goal of, 77
for roundworms, 495
hemoglobin-based solutions, 79-80
Fentanyl
hypertonic solutions,78t, 79
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t, 43
maintenance, 82,82b
for arterial thromboembolism, 193-194
ongoing loss, 82-83
butorphanol, 70
sample case, 84b
in critically ill patient, 69, 70
sodiurm concentration of intravenous fluids,444b
dosage recormrmendation, 67t
unique features of felines, 77
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
warmed IV fluids for hypothermia, 607
transdermal patch, 70
Flumazemil, in hepatic disease, 49
Ferritin, serum, 400
Fluorescein stain test, 504, 505
Ferrous sulfate
Fluoroquinolones
for anemia, 400
adverse effects, 493
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
for pyelonephritis, 310
FHV-1. See Feline herpes virus-1 (FHV-1)
for pyometra, 487
Fibrin split products {FSPs), 361t, 364
Fluoroscopy, 291
FIC. See Feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC)
Fluoxetine toxicity,594
Fine needle aspiration
FLUTD. See Feline lower urinary tract disease (FLUTD)
renal biopsy, 277
Fluticasone, for lower airway disease, 144-145, 145t,
skin cytology, 533-534
148
Fipronil,542-543,556t
Fluvoxamine toxicity, 594
Fire, smoke inhalation and, 149
Folate, 225
First aid, advising in telephone triage, 4
Fomepizole, for ethylene glycol toxicity, 584, 584b
Flaccid paralysis/paresis, 316-317
Food aversion, 87
Flea allergy dermatitis, 542-543
Foreign body
Flea combing, 533, 544
esophageal,246-247
Fleas, 542-543, 553f
gastric,247-248
Fluconazole
gastrointestinal,220f,221f
for Cryptococcus, 134
jntestinal,247-248
for nasal infections, 134
lower airway, 141
Flucytosine
nasal, 129, 134
for nasal infections, 134
nasopharyngeal, 129-130,134
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 160t
ocular, 517
Fludrocortisone acetate, 421t, 424
pharynx/larynx,135
Fluid dieresis, 83
string,220f,247
Fluid overload, 77
tracheal,130,135
 Fluid requirements, in pediatrics, 494
Fractional clearance/excretion of electrolytes, 272-273
Fluid therapy, 77-84
Fractional excretion of potassium, 435
in anesthesia, 40
 Fragmin. See Dalteparin
calculations, 82b
Free thyroxine concentration, 432
colloid solutions, 78-79, 78t
Fresh frozen plasma {FFP), for anticoagulant rodenticide
conditions requiring, 80-83
toxicity,569
acute renal failure, 306-308
Fresh water drowning. See Drowning
bicarbonate supplementation, 82
Frostbite, 604-608, 606f, 607f
dehydration, 80-81, 81t
clinical signs, 605
diabetes mellitus, 413
definitions, 604
fluid dieresis, 83
diagnosis, 605-606, 605f, 606f
glomerulonephritis, 301
history and presenting complaint, 605
head trauma, 321-322
monitoring, 608
heatstroke-hyperthermia,603
pathophysiology, 604
hepatic failure, 261
predisposing factors, 604
insect bites/stings, 614
prognosis, 608
neonatal resuscitation, 476-477
treatment, 606-608, 607f
obstipation, 253
Fructosamine, 411
 pediatric emergencies, 494
FRV {feline rhinotracheitis virus), 128
potassium supplermentation, 81-82, 81t
Fungal culture
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 157
nasal, 132
renal failure, 297
procedure, 536
septic pleuritis,120
 Fungal infection
Index
635
dermatophytosis
peritoneal Javage, 223, 225
management of, 546-547
pneumocolonography, 222
Wood's lamp evaluation for, 535
unique features of felines, 219
lower airway disease, 141
upper and lower GI series, 222
nasal, 128, 134
management of,245-264
pneumonia,152-153,163
cholangiohepatitis, 256
Furosemide
colitis,253
for acute renal failure, 308
constipation/obstipation/megacolon, 253-254
for arterial thromboembolism, 192
diarrhea, acute, 250
for cardiac disease, 184
diarrhea, large-bowel, 252-253
for cardiogenic pulmonary edema, 109
drug chart, 258t-263t
for cerebral edema, 332, 571
dysautonomia, 264
for cholecalciferol toxicity, 575
esophageal foreign body, 246-247
for congestive heart failure (CHF), 114, 116
foreign body/obstruction/intussusception,
for drowning patients, 610
247-248
for ethylene glycol toxicity,584
gastric ulceration,248-249
for glomerulonephritis, 301
hepatic encephalopathy, 254
for heart failure, 114, 116, 185t, 187, 188
hepatic failure, acute, 254-255
for hypercalcemia, 452
inflammatory bowel disease {IBD), 248
for hyperrmagnesemia, 459
mesenteric thrombosis, 257
for pleural effusion, 110, 114, 116
pancreatitis, acute, 251
properties of, 461t
parasites, intestinal, 264
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 160t
peritonitis,257
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
rectal prolapse, 262
regurgitation,246
G
stomatitis/oral ulcers, 252
Gabapentin, 71,72t
unique features of felines, 245
Gag response, 344
vomiting, acute, 249
Gait, assessment of, 344
Gastrointestinal decontamination
Gallop rhythm, 168
activated charcoal, 564
Gastric acid secretion, inhibitors of, 308
cathartics, 564-565
Gastric foreign body, 247-248
emesis induction, 562-563
Gastric lavage, 328, 563-564
gastric lavage, 563-564
Gastric protectants, 308, 603
for lead ingestion, 329
Gastric ulceration, 248-249
for neurotoxin ingestion, 328
Gastrointestinal conditions
for organophosphate intoxication, 329
acute abdomen, general approach to, 229-243
whole bowel irrigation, 565
abdominal exploration,240-243,241b,257
Gastrointestinal protectants, 308, 603
abdominal fluid analysis,238-240
Gastrostomy tubes, 97, 243
abdominal fluid collection, 233-235,
Gentamicin
234f-238f
for aspiration pneumonia, 246
abdominal palpation, 231
nephrotoxicity of,304
analgesia, 243
for otitis externa,548
causes of, 230b
for septic pleuritis, 120
diagnostic imaging, 240
Gestation, length of, 468
flowchart,243f
Giardia,223,224f, 264,496
nutritional support, 242
GI series,222,239240
perception of pain, 229-230
Glargine insulin, 412b
physical examination, 230-232, 232f
Glauber's salt, 564
stabilization of patient,232-233
Glaucoma,503,513-515,513b,513f
unique features of felines,229
Glipizide, 411
diagnostic evaluation, 219-227
Globulin, serum, 226
abdominal auscultation, 219
Glomerulonephritis, 300-302
abdominal fluid analysis, 226-227, 227t
Glossopharyngeal nerve, 315-316
abdominal palpation, 219
Glucocorticoids
abdominal radiography, 219-220, 220f-221f,
for autoimmune skin disease, 549
222
for cutaneous adverse drug reactions, 551
abdominal ultrasound, 225
for flea allergy dermatitis, 543
abdominocentesis, 226
for head trauma, 322
blood tests, 225-226
for hypercalcermia, 452
endoscopy, 226
for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), 388
esophagram, 222
for imrmune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 371, 372t,
fecal examination,222-223,224f
373t
oral examination, 219
for shock,28
636
Index
Glucose.See atsoDextrose;Hyperglycemia;
overview,209
Hypoglycemia
physical examination, 210
in abdominal fluid, 227,240,257
treatment,210-211
ermergency database, 8b,9
unique features of felines, 209
urinalysis dipstick,271
Heat cramps, 601
Glycernic control, in shock, 29
Heat exhaustion, 601
Glycopyrolate, for bradyarrhythmia, 206, 207t
Heatstroke, 601-604
Granular casts, 272
clinical signs and physical exarmination, 602
Granulomatous meningoencephalormyelitis, 331
cardiovascular, 602
Griseofulvin, for derrmatophytosis, 546, 556t
gastrointestinal, 602
Grunt, expiratory, 138
hematologic, 602
nervous system, 602
H
renal,602-603
Hairballs, 245, 246
respiratory,602
Halothane
definitions, 601
in lower airway disease, 142
diagnosis, 603
in neurologic disease, 51
history and presenting complaint, 601
properties of, 59, 60t
monitoring, 604
Haws, 520
pathophysiology, 601
H,blockers
prognosis,604
for esophagitis, 246,247,355
treatment,603-604
for glomerulonephritis, 301
Heavy metals, nephrotoxicity of, 304t
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
Heinz body anemia, 393-396, 394f, 395f
for zinc toxicity, 396
Heticobacter, 249
HCM. See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
Hematocrit, in pediatrics, 494
Head mange, 545
Hematologic emergencies
Head trauma, 34-35, 320-323
anemia,379-407
etiology,320
in acute renal failure, 310
pathophysiology, 320-321
approach to ernergent patient, 380f
primary injury,320
in chronic renal failure, 297
secondary injury,320
clinical assessment, 381-384
pediatric, 501-502
diagnostic approach, 384-385, 386f-387f
prognosis,322-323
diagnostic tests, 381-384
stupor/coma patients, 334
erythropoiesis, decreased or ineffective, 401-407
treatment,321-322
hemolytic, 385-398
extracranial stabilization, 321
hemorrhagic, 398-401
intracranial stabilization, 321-322
initial stabilization and monitoring, 379-381
Heart auscultation, 168, 169
iron supplermentation for, 249, 298
Heart disease. See Cardiac disease; Heart failure
neonatal alloimmune hemolytic anemia, 498
Heart failure
presenting signs, 379
drug table, 185t
bleeding, 357-377
monitoring chronic, 188
approach to emergent patient, 358f
treatment of chronic,187-188
clinical assessment, 359-364, 360t, 361t, 362f, 363f
ACE inhibitors, 187-188
diagnostic approach, 365, 366f-368f, 370
beta-blockers, 187
disseminated intra vascular coagulation {DIC),
calciurm channel blockers, 187-188
376-377
digoxin, 188
hepatic disease,375-376
diuretics, 187
inherited coagulopathy, 377
goals, 187
initial stabilization and monitoring, 358-359, 358f
taurine,188
overview,357
treatment of life-threatening, 183-187, 185t,186f
presenting signs, 357
algorithm for treatment, 186f
thrormbocytopenia, 366t, 367-370
confounding factors, 187
thrombopathia, 375
diuretics, 184
vitamin K deficiency, 374-375
drug table, 185t
Hematology, in pediatric emergencies, 492
inotropic support, 187
Hemobartonellosis {feline infectious anemia), 390-391,
nitroglycerin paste, 187
391f
oxygen supplementation,186
Hemodialysis, 280, 311
pleurocentesis,184,186
Hemoglobin,fetal,575
treatment of refractory {advanced), 188
Hemoglobin-based solutions, 79-80
Heart size, vertebral, 175f
Hemoglobin casts, 272
Heartworm disease
Hemolytic anemia, 385-398
diagnosis,210,210f
babesiosis, 391-392
history, 209-210
cytauxz0onosis,392-393,392f
Index
637
Heinz body anemia, 393-396, 394f, 395f
Hydrochlorothiazide, for heart failure, 185t, 188
hemobartonellosis {feline infectious anemia), 390-391,
Hydrogen peroxide, for emesis induction, 328, 563
391f
Hydromorphone
hypophosphatemia, 397-398
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), 385,
for arterial thromboembolism, 194
388-389
in critically ill patient, 69
microangiopathic anemia,397,397f
dosage recommendation, 67t
neonatal alloimmune, 497-498
for ermergency tracheostomy, 108
neonatal isoerythrolysis, 390
for intubation, 109, 116
transfusion reactions, 389
as sedative, 55t,57
zinc toxicity,396-397
 in urethral obstruction therapy, 285
Hemorrhage
Hydronephrosis, 273, 306
in hypovolemic shock, 25
Hydroureter, 274
nasal, 127,132
Hydroxyethyl starch {Hetastarch), 79, 321
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 153-154, 164
Hyperadrenocorticism, 425-427, 426f, 433-434
Hemorrhagic anemia, 398-401
clinical presentation, 425
acute blood loss, 398-399
clinicopathologic findings, 425-426
chronic blood loss {iron deficiency anemia),
diagnosis, 426, 433-434
399-401
etiology, 425
Hemorrhagic effusion, 111t, 113
prognosis,427
Hemostasis. See atso Bleeding emergencies
treatment,419,426-427
causes of prirmary disorders, 366f
Hyperaldosteronism, 419, 424-425, 430-431, 434
causes of secondary disorders, 367f
Hyperalgesia, 63
clinical assessment, 359-364, 360t, 361t, 362f, 363f
Hypercalcemia
clinical features of primary and secondary, 360t
causes of,430,451,451t
diagnostic approach, 365-367
clinical signs of, 451-452
algorithmic approach for primary hemostasis, 368f
diagnosis of, 452
algorithmic approach for secondary hemostasis,
therapy for, 452-453, 453b
369f
Hyperglycemia, causes of, 430
laboratory tests, 360-365, 361t
Hyperglycemic, hyperosmolar syndrome, 416-418
thrombocytopenia, 367-370, 374
definition, 416
thrombopathia, 374-375
diagnosis, 416
Heparin
differential diagnosis, 417
for arterial thromboembolism, 194-195
treatment,417-418
in dialysate, 279
Hyperinsulinism,435
for disseminated intravascular coagulopathy, 377
Hyperkalermia
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
in acute renal failure,308-309,309t
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 373t
arrhythmias in,199
unfractionated, 421t, 422
causes of, 430,446,447t
Hepatic disease
diagnosis of, 447
acute failure, 254-255
signs of, 446-447
anesthesia in, 47t, 49-50
treatment,18-19,448,448b
bleeding ernergencies, 375-376
in urethral obstruction, 285
lipidosis, 87
Hypermagnesermia, 458-459
Hepatic encephalopathy, 259-260
causes of, 458
ptyalism with, 331
clinical signs of, 458-459
treatment,333
diagnosis of, 459
Hepatoxic mushrooms, 589-590, 590b
therapy for,459,459b
Hernia, diaphragmatic, 123
Hypermetria, 314
Hetastarch, 79,321
Hypernatremia, 441, 442t, 443t
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test, 433
causes of, 442,442t,443
High-rise syndrome, 36
diagnosis of, 443
Histarnine release, with opioids, 57
neurologic disease, 335
Histoplasma, 141
therapy for, 443-444, 444t
HOCM. See Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Hyperosmolar therapy, for seizure sequelae,327
(HOCM)
Hyperparathyroidism, 435-436
Holter monitor, 173
Hyperpathia, 347
Hookworms, 496
Hyperphosphatermia
Horner’s syndrome,316,317f
causes of, 430
Humulin NPH insulin, 412b
in chronic renal failure, 297
Hyaline casts, 272
Hypersthenuria, 270, 281
Hydoadrenocorticism, 430
Hypertension
Hydralazine, for hypertension in acute renal failure,
in acute renal failure, 309-310
310
in chronic renal failure, 298
638
Index
Hypertherrmia, 601-604
etiology, 422
clinical signs and physical examination, 602
monitoring,424
cardiovascular, 602
prognosis,424
gastrointestinal,602
treatment,423-424
hematologic, 602
Hypocalcemia
nervous system,602
causes of, 430, 449, 450t
renal,602-603
clinical signs of, 449
respiratory, 602
diagnosis of, 449
definitions, 601
seizures from, 429
diagnosis, 603
therapy for, 450
in dryer injury, 37
Hypoglossal nerve, 316
history and presenting complaint, 601
Hypoglycemia
monitoring, 604
causes of, 430
pathophysiology, 601
pediatric emergencies, 495
prognosis,604
treatment,19, 495
treatrment,603-604
Hypoglycermic, oral, 411
Hyperthyroidism, 431-433
Hypokalernia
anesthesia in, 45-46
causes of, 81,430,445,445f
arrhythmias in, 199
in chronic renal failure, 296, 297-298
diagnostic testing, 431-433
diagnosis of, 446
basal total thyroid hormone concentration, 431
rmyopathy from, 351,429
feline thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 432
potassium supplementation,81-82,81t,446,446t
free thyroxine concentration, 432
signs of, 81, 445-446
radionuclide imaging, 432-433
Hypomagnesemia, 456-458
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response test,
causes of,456,457t
432
clinical signs of, 456
thyrotropin-releasinghormone (TRH) stimulation
diagnosis of, 456-457
test,432
therapy for, 457-458
trial antithyroid therapy, 433
Hypormetria, 314
triodothyronine (Ts) suppresson test, 432
Hyponatremia, 439-442, 440t, 441b
neuropathy in,352
causes of, 439-441,440t
thyroid storrm,419-422
clinical signs of, 441
clinical pathology abnorrmalities, 420
diagnosis of, 441
clinical presentation, 419-420
fractional excretion of sodium, 273
diagnosis, 420
neurologic disease, 335-336
etiology, 419
therapy for,441,441b
rmanagerment, 422
Hypoparathyroidism, 436
precipitating events, 419
Hypophosphatermia
supportive care,422
causes of,454-455,454t
treatmenit,420-422
clinical signs of, 455
Hypertonic crystalloids, 77, 78t
diagnosis of, 455
Hypertonic saline
hemolytic anemia,397-398
for cerebral edema, 35
therapy for, 455
for head trauma, 322
Hyposthenuria, 270, 281
for seizure sequelae, 327
Hypotension
Hypertonic sodium phosphate enemas, toxicity of,
during anesthesia,43,45,49,51
584-585
in calciurm channel blocker toxicity, 573
Hypertonic solutions, 78t, 79
in heatstroke-hypertherrmia, 603
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). See also Cardiac
Hypothermia, 604-608
emergencies
during anesthesia, 41
anesthesia in, 43-44
clinical signs, 605
breed predisposition, 167
definitions, 604
echocardiography, 174, 178f, 183
diagnosis, 605-606, 605f, 606f
radiography, 174,175f-176f, 183f
history and presenting complaint, 605
Hypertrophic feline muscular dystrophy, 317
monitoring, 608
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM). See
neonatal resuscitation, 475
also Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM)
pathophysiology, 604-605
echocardiography, 183
pediatric ermergencies, 494-495
treatment,185t,187-188
postresusitative care, 20
Hyphema, 522-524, 523f
predisposing factors, 604
Hypnotics, 58-59. See also specifc αgents
prognosis, 608
Hypoadrenocorticism, 422-424
treatment, 606-608, 607f
clinical presentation, 422-423
warm IV fluids, 34
diagnosis, 423, 434
Hypotonic crystalloids, 77, 78t 
Index
639
Hypoventilation
Intraosseous access
respiratory emergencies,112
in cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation, 18
in trauma, 134
in pediatrics, 494, 500
Hypovolemia
Intravenous urography, 275-276, 293
in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 19
Intussusception,247-248
causes of, 495-496
Jodine, for hyperthyroidism, 420, 421t
clinical and laboratory parameters of, 497
Jon trapping, 565
in pediatric ermergencies, 495-497
JOP {intraocular pressure), 513-514
recognition and monitoring of,496-497
Jopanoic acid, for hyperthyroidism, 420, 421t
Hypovolemic shock, 80, 80t
Iron-deficiency anemia, 399-401
cinical signs, 25
Iron supplementation
etiology,25
for anemia,249,298,400-401
ferrous sulfate, 260t-261t
Ischemic neuromyopathy, 353
IBD. See Inflammatory bowel disease {IBD)
Ishemia-reperfusion {IR) injury, 196
ICC (internal cardiac compressions), 18
Isoantibodies, 389
JCP. See Intracranial pressure {ICP)
Isoflurane
Idiopathic hypereosinophilia syndrome, 163
in neurologic disease, 51
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis, 152-153, 164
properties of,59-60,60t
in urethral obstruction therapy,286
for conjunctivitis, 524
Isoproterenol, for bradyarrhythmia, 206, 207t
for corneal ulcer, 505
Isospora,224f
for keratoconjunctivitis sicca {KCS), 526
Isothenuria, 270, 281
Imidocloprid, 542-543, 556t
Isotonic crystalloids, 77, 78t
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA), 385,
Itraconazole
388-389
for derrmatophytosis, 546, 556t
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 371, 372t-373t,
for nasal infections, 134
374
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 161t 
Imodium, 260t-261t
Ivermectin
Incoordination. See Ataxia
for dermatologic conditions, 543, 556t
Indentation tonometry, 504
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 161t
Indolent {rodent) ulcer, 530, 531f
Inflammation
anemia of inflammatory disease (AID), 401
Jejunostomy tubes,97-98
vestibular disease from, 336
Jen Chung Acupuncture, 476
 Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 248
Jthrough-PEG tube, 98
Inflammatory myopathy, 351, 352t
J wave, 606,606f
Inflammatory pneumonia,152-153,163-164
Injury. See Trauma
K
In-saline agglutination test, 384
Kainite, 63
Insect bites/stings, 597, 613-615
Keppra. See Levetiracetam
Insulin
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),503,525-526
for cardiac arrest, 19, 21
Ketamine
continuous rate infusion, 414b
for anesthesia
for diabetes rmellitus
in cardiovascular disease, 44, 44t
in ketoacidotic patient,413-414,414b
in critically ill patient, 7i, 72t
in uncomplicated patient, 411, 412
in hepatic disease, 50
glargine,412b
in lower airway disease, 142
Humulin NPH, 412b
as maintenance adjunct, 42t, 44, 44t
for hyperkalemia in acute renal failure, 309, 309t
in respiratory depression, 46, 58
properties of, 463t
in urinary tract disease, 47t, 48
in urethral obstruction, 285
cerebellar disease association with, 331
Jnsulinoma, 431,435
description, 57-58
Interestrus, 467-468
dosage,72t
Interferon
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
for FeLV-associated anemia, 406
metabolisn of, 58
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
receptors,57
Jnternal cardiac compressions (ICC), 16-17
in urethral obstruction therapy,286
Interpleural analgesia, 74t
Ketoacidosis, diabetic, 412-416
Intervertebral disk herniation, 323-325
diagnosis, 413, 417b
Jntestinal foreign body, 247-248
follow-up, 416
Intracranial pressure {ICP), in trauma, 34-35, 320-322,
history and physical examination, 412
501
pathophysiology, 412
Intraocular pressure (JOP), 513-514
treatment of,413-416
640
Index
Ketoacidosis, diabetic contd.
NAVEL {naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
acidosis, 415
and lidocaine), 19
concurrent diseases, 415
regional analgesic techniques, 74, 74t
electrolytes, 414-415
toxicity, 59
fluid therapy, 413
transdermal creams, 73
insulin administration, 413-414, 414b
for ventricular tachycardia, 204, 205t, 589
nutrition,415-416
Life support
Ketoconazole
advanced cardiac, 18-20
for nasal infections, 134
basic {ABCs), 16-18, 16b
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 161t 
prolonged, 20-21, 21b
Ketones, urinalysis dipstick, 271
Lime sulfur {LymDyp), 544, 546, 556t
Key-Gaskell syndrome, 264
Line block, 59, 74, 74t
Kidney
for Caesarian section, 474
acute intrinsic renal failure, 303-312
Lip droop, 315, 316, 316f
biopsy, 277-278, 306
Lipidosis, hepatic, 87
chronic renal failure, 295-299
Lipid pneumonia, 154, 163
phases of injury, 304
Liver disease. See Hepatic disease
radiography, 274
LMWH (low-molecular-weight heparin), 195,
renal replacement therapies, 311-312
252t-253t
ultrasound, 273-274
Local anesthetics, in critically ill patient, 73
Kitten
LOHF. See Low output heart failure {LOHF)
cerebellar hypoplasia, 331
Lomotil, 260t-261t
pediatric emergencies, 491-502
Loperamide, 260t-261t
K-max, 81t, 82
Lovenox. See Enoxaparin
Low-dose dexarmethasone suppression test, 426, 433
L
Lower airway disease, 137-150
Laboratory values, in pediatric emergencies, 492
clinical signs, 138
Laceration
auscultation,138
corneal,521-522,521f
cardiovascular, 138
eyelid,522,523f
respiratory pattern,138
Lactate
definitions, 137
in abdominal fluid, 227
diagnosis, 139-140, 140f
blood lactate, in trauma, 33
diagnostic procedures, advanced, 141-144
Lactoferrin,252t-253t
differential diagnoses, 140-141
Lactulose, 253,260t-261t, 334
history and signalment, 137
Larmin alpha-2-deficiency, 317
management
Laryngeal paralysis, 108, 129, 134
of bronchiectasis, 148-149
Laryngeal tumor, 107, 107f
of bronchitis and asthma, 144-148, 145t, 146f,
Laryngoscopy, 133
147t
Laryngospasm, dry drowning and, 609
of smoke inhalation, 149-150
Larynx diseases
pathophysiology, 138-139
diagnostics, 133
physical examination, 138
differential diagnosis, 129-130
Lower motor neuron signs, 316-317
physical examination, 128
Low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), 195,
treatment/prognosis, 134-135
260t-261t
Latanoprost,for glaucoma,514
Low output heart failure (LOHF)
Laxative, 253, 254
diagnostics and tnonitoring procedures, 171-179
Lead toxicity, 329-330, 585-586, 585b
differential diagnosis, 170
Lens luxation, anterior, 503, 519-520, 520f
physical examination, 168-169, 169f
Leukeran. See Chlorambucil
Lufenuron,547
Leukotiene inhibitors, for lower airway disease,
Lung aspirate, 156
148
Lung auscultation, 152, 168
Levetiracetam, for seizures, 327
Lung biopsy, 156
Lidocaine
Lung compliance, 142-143
adverse effects, 493
Lung lobe torsion, 154, 165
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
Lung resistance testing, 142
for Caesarian section epidural, 474
Lymphangiectasia, 121
for Caesarian section line block,474
Lysine, for upper respiratory complex, 134
in critically ill patient, 73
Lysodren,427
description, 59
dosage, 72t
M
for heart failure, 185t, 187
Magnesiun, 455-459, 464
for intubation, 16
for diabetic ketoacidosis, 414-415
IV administration of, 59
distribution, 455
Index
641
for electroconversion, 20
for corneal laceration, 522
functions of, 455-456
for corneal ulcer, 509
homeostasis, 456
in critically ill patient, 71-72, 72t
hypermagnesermia, 458-459
dosage, 72t
causes of,458
Menace response, 344
clinical signs of, 458-459
Mentation
diagnosis of, 459
assessrment of, 313
therapy for, 459,459b
disorders of, 319-320
hypomagnesemia, 456-458
evaluation of in trauma, 34
causes of, 456, 457t
Meperidine
clinical signs of, 456
in critically ill patient, 69
diagnosis of, 456-457
dosage recommendation, 67t
therapy for, 457-458
histarmine release with, 57
Magnesium chloride
Mesenteric thrombosis, 257, 264
for hypomagnesemia, 458
Metabolic acidosis, in acute renal failure, 309
properties of, 461t
 Metacam, for feline lower urinary tract disease
Magnesium sulfate
{FLUTD),283
as cathartic, 565
Metaldehyde toxicity, 587-588, 587b
for hypomagnesemia, 458
Metamucil,253,262t-263t
properties of,462t
Metanephrines, 435
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Metaprolol, for supraventricular tachycardia, 589
nasal, 132
Methadone
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154
in critically ill patient, 69
Maintenance fluid therapy, 82, 82b
dosage recommendation, 67t
Matassezia,533
Methazolamide, for glaucoma, 514
Malnutrition, signs of, 88
Methemoglobin, 59,149, 395-396
Mannitol
Methimazole, for hyperthyroidism, 420, 421t
for acute renal failure, 308
Methimazole reaction, 551
for cerebral edema, 35, 332, 571, 586, 603
Methocarbamol
for electrical injury, 618
for metaldehyde toxicity, 588
for glaucoma, 514
for rmethylxanthine toxicity, 589
for head trauma, 321-322
for muscle tremors due to CNS toxins, 328, 330,
for seizure sequelae, 327
335
for vestibular disease, 337
for Penitrem A toxicity,592
Manix cats
for pyrethrin toxicity, 593
rectal prolapse in, 262
for strychinine toxicity, 598, 598b
sacrococcygeal dysgenesis in,339,341f, 342f
Methoxyflurane, 59
MAP. See Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP)
Methylprednisolone
Marbofloxacin
for dermatologic conditions,557t
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
for dermatologic conditions, 556t
for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), 248
Marijuana toxicity, 586-587
Methylprednisolone acetate
Massasaugas bites, 611-612
dosage, 421t
Mastitis, 479-480
for hypoadrenocorticism, 423
MDS {myelodysplastic syndromes), 403-404
for lower airway disease, 148
Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP)
Methylprednisolone sodium succinate {MPSS)
in cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) calculation,
for head trauma, 322
320-321
for spinal cord trauma, 324, 339
in head trauma, 501
4-methylpyrazole, for ethylene glycol toxicity, 311
in hypovolemia/dehydration,496
Methylxanthine toxicity,588-589,588t
Meclizine
Metoclopramide
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
for vestibular disease, 337
for dysautonomia, 354
Medetomidine
for gastric ulceration, 249
in critically ill patient, 72-73
for gastrointestinal conditions,260t-261t,264,355
description of, 56
for regurgitation, 246
as sedative, 55t, 56
for urinary systerm dysfunction, 355-356
Mediastinal mass, 122-123
for vomiting in chronic renal failure, 298
Medullary rim sign, 274
Metritis, 480-481, 480b
Megacolon, 253-254
Metronidazole
Megaesophagus, 246, 355
for endometritis, 481
Megakaryocytic hypoplasia,370
for gastrointestinal conditions, 260t-261t
Melaleuca {tea tree oil) toxicity, 587
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
Meloxicam
for hepatic encephalopathy, 334
642
Index
Metronidazole contd.
N
neurotoxicity,330,331
N-acetylcysteine
in pediatrics, 493
for acetaminophen toxicity, 567
for septic pleuritis, 120
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 161t 
for snakebite, 612
Naloxone
for tetanus, 355
NAVEL {naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
Miconazole, 547,548,557t
and lidocaine), 18
Microalbuminuria, in chronic renal failure, 297
for neonatal resuscitation, 476
Microangiopathic anemia, 397, 397f
Narcotics, for anesthesia in lower airway disease, 142
Microsporum canis,535-536,537f,546
Nasal discharge, 127, 131
Midazolam
Nasoesophageal tubes, 88-89, 89f-91f, 89f-95f, 243
for anesthesia in lower airway disease, 142
Nasopharynx disease
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
diagnostics, 132-133, 133f
for arterial thromboermbolism, 194
differential diagnosis, 129
description of, 56
physical examination, 128
for penitrem A toxicity,592
treatment/prognosis, 134
for pyrethrin/pyrethroid toxicity, 593
National Animal Poison Control Center, 562
as sedative,55t,56
 NAVEL (naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
for seizures, 326, 572, 580, 586, 588, 589
and lidocaine), 18
Midbrain/pons/medulla, 336-337, 336t
NCPE,110
Milbemycin, 543, 557t
Neomycin
Miliary derrmatitis,530,532
adverse effects, 503, 505
Minnesota Urolith Center, 284
for hepatic encephalopathy, 333
Misoprostol, for NSAID toxicity, 311
for otitis externa, 548
Mithramycin, 462t
Neonatal alloimmune hemolytic anemia, 497-498
Mitotane, 427
Neonatal emergencies. See Pediatric emergencies
Modified Glascow Coma Scale, 322
Neonatal isoerythrolysis, 389-390
Modified transudate
Neonatal resuscitation, 475-477
abdominal fuid,226,227t,237
Neonatal sepsis, 498-499
pleural effusion, 111t, 113
Neoplasia
Modulation, pain and, 63
hematopoietic,404-405
Mometamax, 558t
lower airway, 141
Monoleukast, for lower airway disease, 148
nasopharyngeal,129
Morphine
nose,128-129
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct, 42t
pharynx/larynx,135
for arterial thromboembolism, 193
pleural effusion and, 122-123
in critically ill patient, 69
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 164-165
dosage recommendation, 67t
tracheal, 130, 130f, 135
histamine release with, 57
vertebral,342t
in ureteral obstruction therapy, 292
vestibular disease from, 336
Motility modifers, 308
Neoral,555t
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Nephrostomy catheters, 292, 293
Mucolytics, for bacterial pneumonia, 157
Nephrotoxins, 303-304, 304b, 310-311
Mucornyst. See N-acetylcysteine
Nerve block, 59, 74, 74t, 75f
Mupirocin, for dermatologic conditions, 552, 557t
Neurological systerm
Murmurs
examination
auscultation, 168, 169
cranial nerve, 344
in hy povolermia/dehydration, 497
gait,343-344
Muscarinic receptors, 329, 577, 577f
general attitude, 343
Muscle relaxants, for black widow spider bites,
posture,343
616
proprioceptive testing, 344,345f-346f
Mushrooms, toxic, 589-590, 590b
segmental spinal reflex and limb examination, 344-
Myasthenia gravis, 317, 353
345,346f-347f
Mycoplasma spp.,140,144,390,391f
primary survey,7-8,7b
Mycotic infection. See Fungal infection
trauma assessment, 34-35
Mycotoxin, 591-592
diagnostics, 34-35
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS), 403-404
physical examination, 34
Myelofibrosis, 404-405
treatment, 35
Myelophthisis, 404
waiting room triage, 6
Myoglobin casts, 272
Neurologic emergencies
Myopathy
anesthesia in, 47t, 50-51
causes,351,352t
brain,331-337
infammatory, 351, 352t
cerebellar disease, 337
noninflammatory, 351
diencephalic disease, 335-336
Index
643
midbrain/pons/medulla, 336-337, 336t
Nitenpyram, 542, 557t
prosencephalic disease, 331-335
Nitroglycerin paste, 109
seizures,325-327,332-334,333t
for cardiac disease, 187
stupor/coma,334
for pleural effusion in congestive heart failure (CHF),
tremors,335
116
unique features of felines, 331
Nitroprusside
vestibular disease, 336-337,336t
for hypertension in hyperadrenocorticism, 425
CNS toxins, 327-330
for hypertension in hyperthyroidism,421t,422
bromethalin, 328
for pleural effusion, 116
lead,329-330
NMDA antagonists, 71
metronidazole,330
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA), 63, 64f
organophosphates and carbamates, 329
Nociceptive transmission, 63, 64f, 65
pyrethrins and pyrethroids, 328-329
Nodules, 532
general,313-330
Nonregenerative anemia, 297, 385, 387t
mentation, disorders of, 319-320
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
neurotrauma,320-325
avoiding in lower airway disease, 142
head trauma, 320-323
for corneal laceration, 522
spinal cord trauma, 323-325
for corneal ulcer, 509
peripheral,351-356
in critically ill patient, 71-72
autonomic nervous system, 354-355
nephrotoxicity, 303, 304t
clinical signs, 352b
Norepinephrine
dysautonomia, 354
for hypotension, 603
general approach, 351
for hypotension during anesthesia, 43
megaesophagus, 355
for postresusitative care, 20
muscle,351,352t
for shock,28
nerve,352-353,352t
Nose diseases
neuromuscular junction, 353-354
diagnostics,131-132,132f
tetanus,355
differential diagnosis, 128-129
urinary bladder dysfunction,355-356
physical examination, 127-128
posture and armbulation,disorders of, 316-319
treatment/prognosis, 134
flaccid paralysis/paresis, 316-317
Notoedres cati,534f
incoordination/ataxia,318-318
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs
spastic paralysis/paresis, 317-318
(NSAIDs)
secondary CNS assessment, 313-316
Nutritional support, 87-102
ambulation, 313-314
for acute abdomen, 242
cranial nerves,315-316,316f
appetite stimulants, 101
mentation,313
caloric requirements, calculation of, 99-101
posture,314-315
diet types, 101
spinal reflexes, 316
choice of diet, 101
seizures,325-327
veterinary canned diets, 101
classification, 325
veterinary liquid diets, 101
emergency diagnostic workup for, 333
enteral nutrition, 88-98,102t
etiology, 326, 333t
for foreign body/obstruction/intussusception, 248
pathophysiology, 325
importance of, 87
treatment,326-327,332-334
indications for, 87-88
spinal cord disease, 339-343
monitoring and reassessment of patient, 101-102
C1-C5 myelopathy,340t,343
parenteral nutrition,98-99,99t, 100t
clinical signs, 340t
pediatric emergencies, 492
C6-T2 myelopathy, 340t, 343
route determination for, 88
differential diagnosis, 342t
for shock,29
L4-S3 myelopathy,339-342, 340f-342f, 340t
unique features of felines, 87
T3-L3 myelopathy, 340t, 343
Nystagmus
unique features of felines, 313
cranial nerve examination, 344
Neuromuscular junction disorders, 353-354
pendular, 331
Neuropathic pain, 65
Neuropathy
O
causes,352-353,352t
Obstipation, 259
mononeuropathies, 353
Obstruction
polyneuropathies,352-353
gastrointestinal, 247-248
Neurotrauma, 320-325
ureteral,289-293
head trauma, 320-323
urethral,283-288,286f,287f
spinal cord trauma,323-325
Obstructive shock, 80, 80t
Newborn, ermergencies of. See Pediatric emergencies
Obtundation, 319-320
Nicotinic receptors, 329, 576f, 577
Occult blood, urinalysis dipstick, 271
644
Index
Ocular emergencies
Otic mite prep, 535
anterior uveitis,511-513,511f,512b,512f
Otitis externa, 547-548
blindness, acute, 517-518, 517b, 518f
Otodectes cynotis, 543-544
chemical injury, 519
Otomax,558t
clinical signs, 503
Ovariohysterectomy, en bloc, 475, 475b
conjunctivitis, 524,524f
Oxalate crystals, 271
corneallaceration,521-522,1f
Oxygen consumption (VO), causes of increased,
corneal ulcer, 504-505, 507-510, 507b, 507f-511f
23
diagnostic and monitoring procedures, 504, 505f,
Oxygen delivery (DOz), calculating, 23, 26
506f
exophthalmos,524-525,525f
for arterial thromboembolism, 192, 193
eyelid laceration, 522, 523f
for brown recluse spider bites, 615
foreign body, 517
for carbon rmonoxide toxicity, 574-575
gaucoma,513-515,513b,513f
for cardiac disease, 186
hyphema,522-524,523f
for cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation (CPCR),
keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS),525-526
17, 20
lens luxation, anterior, 519-520, 520f
for drowning patients, 610
ophthalmic examination, 504
for head trauma, 321
posttraumatic sarcoma, 526
for heatstroke-hypertherrmia, 603
prolapsed nictatans,520,521f
hyperbaric, 615
proptosis,515-517,515f,516f
for lower airway disease, 144, 145t
retinal detachment, 518-519, 519f
for neonatal sepsis, 498
unique features of felines, 503
for newborn respiratory distres, 499
Ocular pressure, for vagal stimulation, 200
pulmonary parenchymal disease from, 164
Oculomotor nerve, 315
for respiratory emergencies, 105
Odansetron, for vomiting in chronic renal failure, 298
for seizure sequelae, 327
Olfactory nerve, 315
for septic pleuritis, 119
Oliguria, 278, 281, 308
for smoke inhalation, 149-150, 597
Omeprazole
for upper airway viral infections in kittens,
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
497
for esophagitis, 246, 248
Oxyglobin, 79-80
for gastrointestinal conditions, 250, 262t-263t
advantages of, 79
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
for brown recluse spider bites, 615
for vomiting in chronic renal failure, 298
disadvantages of, 79-80
Ondansetron
dose, 80
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
for trauma, 34
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
Oxymorphone
Open-mouth breathing, 128
as anesthesia mainitenance adjunct,42t
Ophthalmic examination, 504
in critically ill patient, 69
Opioids. See atso specifc opioids
dosage recormmendation, 67t
adverse effects,53,57
for emergency tracheostomy, 108
as anesthesia adjunct, 44-45, 44t
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
behavioral effects of, 57
Oxytocin, 473,478
in cardiovascular disease, 44-45
description of, 56-57
P
dosages,67t
Pacermaker, 208
in hepatic disease, 50
Packed cell volume {PCV)
histarmine release with, 57
emergency database, 8-9, 8b
in neurologic disease, 50
in trauma, 33
in pediatrics, 493
Pain
potency,67
acute abdomen, 229-244
receptors, 56, 67
assessment, 65-66,66t
response data, 67, 68t
referred,230
as sedative, 56-57
stress response and, 65
Optic nerve,315
transmission, 63, 64f, 65
Oral examination, 219, 231,232f
types
Oral ulcers, 252
acute,65
Organic compounds, nephrotoxicity of, 304t
allodynia, 65
Organophosphates, 329,354, 576-578, 576b
chronic,65
Osborn deflection, 606, 606f
hyperalgesia, 63
Osmoreceptors, 439
neuropathic, 65
Osmotic therapy
physiologic, 63,64f
for head trauma, 321-322
somatic, 65
for seizure sequelae, 327
visceral,65
Index
645
Pain managerment
PCV. See Packed cell volurme {PCV)
choice of analgesic, 66
Pediatric emergencies, 491-502
in critically ill patient, 63-75
cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation, 500-501
alpha 2 agonists,72-73
catheter placerment, 494
anticonvulsants, 71, 72t
local anesthetics, 73
head trauma, 501-502
NDMA antagonists, 71, 72t
history, 491
nonsteroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs (NSAIDs),
hypoglycemia,495
71-72,72t
hypotherrmia, 494-495
opioids, 67, 67t, 68t, 69-71
hypovolermia and dehydration, 495-497
regional analgesics, 74, 74t, 75f
initial examination, 491
in shock,29
Jaboratory values, 492
for trauma, 34
neonatal alloimmune hemolytic anemia, 498
Pain scales, 66, 66t
nutrition,492
Palpebral blink, 344
overview, 491
2-PAM (pralidoxime chloride), for organophosphate
pharrmacology,492-493
intoxication,329,354,578
physical exarmination, 493-494
Pamidronate
radiographic imaging, 492-493
for cholecalciferol toxicity, 575, 576b
respiratory distress of newborn kitten, 499-500
for hypercalcemia, 453
sepsis,498-499
properties of,462t
viral infections, 497
Pancreatic carcinorma, 220f
PEEP (positive end expired pressure), 48
Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, 225
PEG. See Polyethylene glycol (PEG)
Pancreatitis
Pemphigus foliaceus, 534f, 549-550, 549f
acute,250-251
Penicillin G
in acute renal failure, 310
for mushroom toxicity, 590
 Panleukopenia. See Feline panleukopenia
for tetanus, 355
Papules, 530
Penitrem A toxicity, 591-592
Paracentesis, 226, 234
Pennyroyal oil toxicity, 593
Paragonimous, 140, 141, 163
Penrose drain, 539
Paralysis, 313
Pentobarbital
flaccid, 316-317
for penitrem A toxicity,592
spastic,317-318
for pyrethrin/pyrethroid toxicity, 593
Paraplegia, 313
for seizures, 326-327,580
Paraquat toxicity, 590-591, 591b
for strychinine toxicity,598
Parasites
Pepto-Bismol, 262t-263t
dermatologic disease,542-546,544f,545f
Pericardial effusion
fecal,223, 224f
in cardiogenic shock,24
hypovolemia/dehydration from, 495-496
diagnosis, 213, 214f, 215
intestinal,258,264
etiology,212-213
lower airway disease, 139-141
history, 213
Parasitic pneumonia, 152-153, 163
overview, 212
Parasitic rhinitis, 129
physical findings, 213
Parasympatholytics, for bradyarrhythmia, 206
treatment,215
Parasympathomimetics, for dysautonomia, 264
unique features of felines, 209
Parathyroid hormone {PTH), 436
Pericardial tamponade, 211, 212
Parenchymal disease. See Pulmonary parenchymal
Pericardiocentesis, 215
disease
Perineal reflex, 345
Parenteral nutrition, 98-99, 99t, 100t
Perineal urethrostomy, 288
choice of, 88, 98
Peripheral intravenous catheter, in cardiopulmonary-
partial {PPN), 98,99t
cerebral resuscitation, 18
total (TPN), 98-99, 100t
Peripheral nerve sheath tumors, 352
Paresis,313
Peripheral neurologic emergencies, 351-356
Paroxetine toxicity, 594
autonomic nervous system, 354
Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN), 98,99t
clinical signs, 352b
Partial thromboplastin time {PTT), 361t, 363-364
dysautonomia,354
Parturition
general approach, 351
dystocia,469-475
megaesophagus, 355
eonatal resuscitation, 475-477
muscle, 351,352t
normal,468-469
nerve,352-353,352t
postparturn vaginal discharge, 469
neuromuscular junction, 353-354
stage 11abor,468-469,468b
tetanus,355
stage 2 1abor, 469
urinary bladder dysfunction,355-356
stage 3 labor, 469
 Peripheral neuropathy, 317
646
Index
Peripheral sensitization, nociceptive transmission and,
Physical examination
63,64f
acute abdomen, general approach to, 230-232, 232f
Peritoneal dialysis, 278-280, 311
cardiac diseases, 182
concerns, 279-280
cardiac ermergencies, 168-170
considerations, 278
lower airway disease, 138
dialysate,279
pediatric emergencies, 491-492
indications, 278
 pulmonary parenchymal disease, 152
techniques, 278-279
respiratory emergencies, 106-107
Peritoneal lavage, 223, 225, 233-235, 236f-238f,
upper airway disease, 127-128
607
larynx and pharynx, 128
 Peritoneogram, 213
nasopharynx,128
Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia {PPDH), 213,
nose,127-128
214f,215
trachea, 128
Peritonitis,256-257
urologic system, 267
bile,257
Physical therapy, for arterial thromboembolism, 196
diagnosis, 256-257
Physostigmine, 462t,464
septic,257
Pilocarpine
surgical exploration, 257
for dysautonomia, 354
therapeutics, 257
for glaucoma, 514
Periuria, 281
Pit vipers, 611-612
Permethrin toxicity, 331
Placenta, expulsion of, 469
Pertechnetate, 433
Plasma therapy
pH, urine, 270
for albumin replacernent, 79
Pharmacology, in pediatric emergencies, 493
for anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, 569, 568b
Pharyngoscopy, 133
constant rate infusion (CRI), 498
Pharynostomy tubes, 97
for neonatal sepsis, 498
Pharynx diseases
for shock,29
diagnostics, 133
 Platelet antagonists, for arterial thromboermbolism, 196
differential diagnosis, 129-130
Platelet count, 361, 361t
physical examination, 128
Platelet estimation from blood smear, 362, 361t
treatment/prognosis, 134-135
Platelets
Phenobarbital
thrombocytopenia, 366f,367-370, 374
for penitrem A toxicity, 593
consumptive or sequestration,370-371
for pyrethrin/pyrethroid toxicity, 594
gerneral, 368-370
for seizures,326-327,332-333,571,572,588,
immune-mediated,371,372t-373t,374
589
infectious, 374
Phenothiazines
megakaryocytic hypoplasia, 371
description of, 55
throbopathia,366f,374
for gastrointestinal conditions,262t-263t
Plethysmography,whole-body,143
as sedative, 55
Pleural effusion, 113-123
Phenoxybenzamine
causes of, 114-123
for feline lower urinary tract disease {FLUTD), 283
chylothorax, 121-122, 141
for urinary systern dysfunction,355-356
congestive heart failure (CHF), 114, 116, 174
Phentolamine test, 435
diaphragmatic hernia, 123
Phenylephrine, for hypotension during anesthesia, 43
neoplasia, 122-123
Phenylpiperidine derivatives, 69
septic pleuritis, 116-121
Phenytoin, prolonged metabolism of, 331
definition,113
Pheochrormocytoma, 434-435
diagnosis of, 113-114, 118f, 119f
Phosphate/phosphorus binder, 299, 311
 in hypovolermic shock, 25
Phosphorus, 455
thoracocentesis,110b,111,114,115f,117,120,
for diabetic ketoacidosis, 414-415
123-124
distribution, 453
types,111t,113
functions of, 453-454
Pleural lavage, 120, 607
homeostasis, 454
Pleural space disease, 113-124
hyperphosphatemia
clinical signs of, 113
causes of, 430
definition,113
in chronic renal failure,297
pleural effusion, 113-123
hypophosphatermia
causes of, 114-123
causes of, 454-455, 454t
definition,113
clinical signs of, 455
diagnosis of, 113-114
diagnosis of, 455
thoracocentesis, 111b,111,114, 115f,117
hemolytic anemia,397-398
types,111t,113
therapy for, 455
pneumothorax,111, 123-124
pediatrics, levels in, 492
respiratory emergencies, 109-111, 111t
Index
647
types,113-124
hypokalemia
unique features of felines, 105
causes of,81,430,445,445f
Pleuritis. See Septic pleuritis
in chronic renal failure, 296, 297-298
Pleurocentesis, 184, 186
diagnosis of, 446
Plicamycin, 462t
myopathy from,351,429
Plugs, urethral, 283-288
potassium supplementation,81-82,81t,446,446t
Pneumocolonography, 222
signs of, 81, 445-446
Pneumocystogram, 275
supplementation
Pneumonia
in chronic renal failure, 297-298
aspiration,155f,246
fluid therapy, 81-82, 81t
bacterial, 152-153, 157
for hypokalemia, 446,446t
etiology,152-153
oral, 82
idiopathic, 152-153, 164
Potassiurm bromide
inflammatory, 152-153, 163-164
adverse effects, 331, 333, 493
lipid pneumonia, 152-153, 163
pulmonary parenchymal disease and, 164
mycotic,152-153,163
Potassium chloride
parasitic,152-153,163
dosage, 421t
protozoal,152-153,157,163
for hypokalermia, 351, 425, 446
viral,152-153
properties of, 462t
Pneumothorax
Potassium gluconate,82
causes,123-124
dosage, 421t
clinical signs of, 124
for hypokalemia, 351,422, 425, 446
definition, 123
properties of,462t
diagnosis, 124
Potassium iodate, for hyperthyroidism, 420, 421t
jatronic,111,124
Potassiurm phosphate
treatment, 124
for hypophosphatemia, 398, 455
Poiseuille equation, 138
properties of,463t
Pollakiuria, 281
PPDH (peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia), 213,
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)
214f,215
for spinal cord trauma, 324
PPN (partial parenteral nutrition), 98, 99t
for whole bowel irrigation, 565
PPV. See Positive pressure ventilation (PPV)
Polymyxin B
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM), for organophosphate
for derrmatologic conditions, 557t
intoxication,329,354,578
for otitis externa,548
Praziquantel, 162t
Polyps
PRCA (pure red cell aplasia), 402-403
nasal,129,134
Pre-anesthetic assessment, 39, 40t
nasopharyngeal, 129
Predator injury and bite wounds, 37-38
Porto-systemic shunts, 260
Prednisolone
Positive end expired pressure (PEEP), 48
for autoimmune skin disease, 550
Positive pressure ventilation (PpV), 16
for cholecalciferol toxicity, 576
 in anesthesia of cardiovascular disease patients,
for dermatologic conditions, 557t
47
for flea allergy derrmatitis, 543
for drowning patients, 610
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
 jn pulmonary parenchymal disease, 157
for glomerulonephritis, 301
in trauma, 32
for hypoadrenocorticism, 423
 Posttraumatic sarcoma, 503, 526
for immune-mediated hemolytic anermia {IMHA), 388
Posture
for imrmune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 371, 373t
assessment, 314-315,343
for inflammatory bowel disease {IBD), 248
disorders of, 316-319
properties of, 463t
Potassium, 444-448
Prednisolone acetate, for hyphema, 523
in abdominal fuid, 227,239,294
Prednisolone sodium succinate
for diabetic ketoacidosis, 414-415
for head trauma, 322
distribution of, 444
for insect sting, 597
fractional excretion of, 273, 434
Prednisone
functions of, 444
dosage,421t
homeostasis, 444
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
hyperkalemia
for head trauma, 322
in acute renal failure, 308-309, 309t
for heartworrm disease, 210
arrhythmias in, 199
for hypercalcemia, 452
causes of, 430, 446, 447t
for inflammatory bowel disease {IBD), 248
diagnosis of, 447
for lower airway disease, 146, 147t
signs of,446-447
for rmyasthenia gravis, 354
treatment, 18-19,448,448b
properties of, 463t
in urethral obstruction, 285
for spinal cord traurma, 324
648
Index
Prednisone acetate, for anterior uveitis, 512
Pulmonary edema
Prednisone sodium phosphate, for lower airway disease,
cardiogenic, 108-109,153,164,174,177f
145t
noncardiogenic, 153, 164
Pregnancy
reexpansion, 110
dystocia,469-475
Pulmonary function tests, 142-143
ectopic,482
Jung compliance, 142-143
gestation length,468
lung resistance testing, 142
Pregnancy diagnosis,468
tidal breathing flow, 143
Primaquine phosphate, for babesiosis,392
Pulmonary parenchymal disease, 151-165
Primary survey, 6-8, 7b
auscultation,152
cardiovascular system, 7, 7b
clinical signs, 152
neurological system, 7-8, 7b
diagnostic imaging,154,155f,156f
respiratory systerm, 6-7,7b
diagnostics, 154-157
urinary tract system, 7b, 8
complete blood count, 154-155
Primidone, prolonged metabolism of, 331
cytology, 156
Procainemide, for ventricular tachycardia, 204, 205t,
echocardiogram, 157
572
Jung aspirate, 156
Prochlorperazine, for gastrointestinal conditions,
lung biopsy, 156
262t-263t
pulse oxirnetry, 155
Proestrus, 467
differential diagnosis, 151, 152-154
Prokinetics, 250
etiology, 152-154
Prolapse, rectal, 256
atelectasis, 154
Prolapsed nictatans, 520, 521f
drowning, 154
Propofol
drug reaction, 154
as anesthesia maintenance adjunct,42t,43
edema,153
for Caesarian section, 474
hemorrhage, 153-154
for emergency tracheostomy, 108
lung lobe torsion, 154
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
neoplasia, 154
in hepatic disease, 50
pneumonia,152-153
in neurologic disease, 50
thromboembolism, 154
in respiratory depression, 46
toxins,154
for seizures, 327, 580
management, general, 157
thiopental compared to, 58-59
physical exarmination, 152
in urinary disease, 49
respiratory emergencies, 108-109
Propranolol
treatment,157-165
for heart failure, 185t
atelectasis, 165
for hyperthyroidism, 421-422, 421t
drowning, 165
for supraventricular tachycardia, 202, 203t, 589
drug reaction, 164
Proprioceptive (spinal) ataxia, 344
edema, 164
Proprioceptive testing, 344, 345f-346f
hemorrhage, 164
Proptosis, 503, 515-517, 515f, 516f
lung lobe torsion, 165
Prosencephalic disease, 331-335
neoplasia, 164-165
seizures,332-334,333t
pneumonia,157,163-164
stupor/coma,334
table of drugs, 158t-162t
tremors,335
thromboembolism, 165
Prostaglandin F2α (PGF2a), 487, 487b
toxins, 164
Protein
unique features of feline, 151
dietary requirement, 87
Pulse oximetry
in urine, 298
in cardiac emergencies, 171
Proteins induced by vitarmin K antagonism (PIVKA),
in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 14
375
in lower airway disease, 143
Proteinuria, in chronic renal failure, 298
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 155
Prothrombin time {PT), 361t, 364
in trauma,32
Protozoal pneurmonia,152-153,157,163
Pulse palpation, in cardiac emergencies, 168, 169
Pruritus,529-530
Pupillary light response, 344
Pseudochylous effusion, 113
Pure red cell aplasia {PRCA), 402-403
Pseudohy ponatremia, 440
Pustules, 530
Pseudopregnancy, 468
 Pyelography, antegrade, 276-277, 291
Psyllium,for gastrointestinal conditions, 254t-255t
Pyelonephritis
PTH (parathyroid hormone), 436
acute,299-300
PTT. See Partial thromboplastin time (PTT)
in acute renal failure, 310
Ptyalism, with hepatic encephalopathy, 331
Pyometra, 483-488, 485f, 486f
Pudendal nerve, assessment of, 347
Pyothorax. See Septic pleuritis
Pulmonary contusion, 164
Pyrantel, for roundworms, 495-496
Index
649
Pyrethrins, 328-329, 592-593, 592b
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
Pyrethroids, 328-329,529b,592-593
for regurgitation, 246
Pyridostigmine, for myasthenia gravis, 353
for vomiting in chronic renal failure, 298
Pyrimethamine, for toxoplasmosis, 351
Rattlesnake bites, 611-612
RCM (restrictive cardiomyopathy), 183, 184f, 185t
Q
Rebreathing systems, 60
Quadriceps, assessment of, 344, 346f
Rectal prolapse, 256
Red blood cells, in urine sediment, 271
R
Reexpansion pulmonary edema, 111
Radial nerve, assessment of, 347, 347f
Regenerative anemia, 383f, 385, 387t
Radiocontrast agents, nephrotoxicity of, 304t
Regional analgesic techniques, 74, 74t, 75f
Radiography
Regurgitation,245-246
abdominal
Remifentanil, 69-70
acute abdomen,240-241
Renal biopsy, 277-278, 306
dystocia, 472
Renal failure
foreign body/obstruction/intussusception, 247-248
acute intrinsic,303-312
gastrointestinal conditions,219-220,220f-221f,
causes, 303-304,304t
222
clinical presentation, 305
hyperadrenocorticism, 426
definitions, 303-304
pregnancy diagnosis, 468
diagnosis, 305-306
pyometra,485,485f
differentiating from chronic renal failure, 306
trauma,35
medical management, 306-311, 309t, 311b
urologic system, 274-275
phases of injury, 304
of bite wounds, 38
renal replacement therapies, 311-312
esophagram,222
risk factors for developing, 304-305, 305b
GI series, 222,240-241
anemia of, 401-402
larynx/pharynx, 133
chronic,295-299
nasal, 131
clinical signs and findings, 296
nasopharynix,132-133
diagnostics, 296-297
pediatric emergencies, 492
pathophysiology, 295-296
pneumocolonography, 222
prognosis,299
spinal,323,341f
treatment,297-299
thoracic
fractional excretion of sodium in,273
acute abdomen,240
Renal scintigraphy, 291
bacterial endocarditis, 216
Renal system, trauma assessment of, 35
cardiac,173-174, 175f-177f, 182, 183f
Reproduction
cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism (CATE),
breeding season, 467
193
estrous cycle, 467-468
diaphragmatic hernia, 123
parturition, norrmal, 468-469
heartworm disease, 210
pregnanicy diagniosis, 468
lower airway disease, 139, 140f
reproductive history, 472
pericardial disease,213
Reproductive emergencies, 467-488
pleural effusion,113-114,117,118f
abortion,482-483,482f
pneumothorax,124
dystocia, 469-475
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 155f, 156f
eclampsia, 481-482
respiratory emergencies,109,110f,112
ectopic pregnancy, 482
syncope,212
endometritis,480-481,480b
tracheal trauma, 131f
mastitis, 479-480
trauma,32
neonatal resuscitation,475-477
vertebral heart score (VHS), 109, 110f
pyometra,483-488,485f,486f
trachea,133
unique features of felines, 467
urologic system, 274-275
uterine prolapse, 477-478, 477f
acute renal failure {ARF), 306
uterine torsion, 478-479
FLUTD,282-283
RER (resting energy requirement), 99-101
glomerulonephritis,300-301
Respiratory emergencies, 105-113
pyelonephritis, 299-300
antibiotics for respiratory disease, 109, 110t
ureteral obstruction, 291
asthma,111
ureteral tear, 293
breathing
urethral tear, 288
hypoventilation, 112
uroperitoneum,294-295
loud, 107-108
Radionuclide imaging, thyroid, 432
prolonged expiration, wheezes, cough, 111
Ranitidine
rapid,smooth,shallow with crackles,108-109
for acute renal failure GI manifestations, 308
rapid shallow with abdominal component and dull
for esophageal irritation, 355
sounds, 109-111
650
Index
Respiratory emergencies contd.
Saddle thrombus, 189f
cient education, 113
S-adenosyl-methionine (SAMe), 262t-263t,
diagnostics, 112
567
initial assessment,105-107,106f
Salicylate toxicity, 593-594
physical exarm, 106-107
Saline
pleural space disease, 109-111, 111t
hypertonic
 pulmonary parenchymal disease, 108-109
for cerebral edema, 35
respiratory distress of newborn kitten, 499-500
for electrical injury, 618
signs of distress, 105
for head trauma, 322
thoracic radiography, 109, 110f, 112
for seizure sequelae, 327
thoracocentesis, 11ib, 114, 115f, 117, 121,
hypertonic solutions, 78t, 79
123-124
for pleural lavage, 120
thoracostomy, 111, 112b, 120, 124
Salt water drowning. See Drowning
thoracotomy, 120-121,123,124
Sarcoma, posttraumatic, 503, 526
tracheostomy,108,108b
Sarcoptes scabei, 535f
triage,105
Schiff-Scherrington, 315, 342
unique features of felines, 105
Schiotz tonometer, 504, 505f,
,506f
upper airway disease, 107-108, 108f
Schirmer tear test, 503, 504, 525
ventilation,109
Sciatic nerve
Respiratory system
assessrment of, 345
assessment
paralysis,353
primary survey, 6-7,7b
Seasonal anestrus, 468
waiting room triage, 5-6
Secondary survey, 8, 8b
disease
Sedation
anesthesia in, 46-48, 47t
degrees of, 53-54
lower airway disease, 137-150
protocols for healthy cats, 55t
parenchymai,151
Sedatives
upper airway disease, 127-135
alpha 2 agonists, 56
trauma assessment, 32-33
benzodiazepines, 56
auscultation, 32
opioids,56-57
diagnostics, 32
phenothiazines, 55
observation, 32
sedation protocols for healthy cats, 55t
treatment,32-33
Seizures, 325-327
Resting energy requirement (RER), 99-101
classification, 325
Restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM), 183, 184f, 185t
cluster seizures, 325
Reticulocyte count, 382-383, 384f, 384t
focal/partial seizures, 325
Retinal detachment,503,518-519,519f
generalized seizures,325
Retrobulbar abscess, 524-525, 525f
status epilepticus, 325
Retrobulbar mass, 525
emergency diagnostic workup for, 333
Retrograde urethrocystogram, 240
etiology,326,333t,429
Return of spontaneous circulation {ROSC), 14, 17, 20
pathophysiology, 325
Rewarming, 27, 27f
treatrment,326-327
active core, 607-608
further therapy, 333-334
active external, 606-607,607f
initial stabilization, 332-333
complications of, 608
Selamectin, 542-543,544, 558t
conductive, 607
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, toxicity of,
passive, 606
594-595
pediatrics, 494
Sensory ataxia, 318
shock,608
Sepsis, in pediatric emergencies, 498-499
Rhinitis, allergic, 129, 134
monitoring kittens, 499
Rhinoscopy,132
treatment, 498-499
Rhonchi,128
Septic effusion, 238
Rodenticide toxicity
Septic peritonitis,262-263
anticoagulant, 568-569, 568b
Septic pleuritis, 116-121
bromethalin,328,570-572,571b
causes, 116
strychnine,597-598,598b
clinical signs of, 117
zinc phosphide,599
definition,116
Ronidazole, 264
diagnosis,117-119,118f,119f
ROSC {return of spontaneous circulation), 14, 18, 20
etiology, 116
Roundworms, 495-496
physical exam, 117
Rutin, for chylothorax, 122
prognosis,121
treatment, 119-121
S
Septic shock,25-26,26t
Sacrococcygeal dysgenesis, in Manx cats, 339, 341f,
Serotonin receptor blocker,148
342f
Serotonin syndrome, 594
Index
651
Sertraline toxicity, 594
for hypercalcermia, 453
Sevoflurane
for hyperkalemia, 309, 309t, 448
in neurologic disease, 51
properties of,463t
properties of, 59-60, 60t
in urethral obstruction, 285
in urinary disease, 49
Sodium phosphate, for hypophosphatemia,
Shivering reflex, 494
398
Shock, 23-29
Sodium-potassium ratio
categories
cavitary effusion, 419
cardiogenic,24,80,80t
hypoadrenocorticism,419,430
distributive, 25, 80, 80t
Sodiurm sulfate, as cathartic, 564
hypovolemic, 25, 80, 80t
Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, 435
obstructive, 80, 80t
Sorbitol
clinical signs, 24
as cathartic, 564
definition,23-24
for neurotoxin decontamination, 328
rewarming, 608
Sotalol, for ventricular tachycardia, 204, 205t
in trauma,33
Spastic paralysis/paresis, 317-318
treatrment,26-29
Specific gravity, 270, 281
antibiotics,28
Spider bites
blood products, 28-29
black widow spider, 595-596, 595b, 616-617
catecholamines,27-28
brown recluse spider, 595-596, 595b,
fluid therapy, 26-27, 33, 78, 80, 80t
615-616
glucocorticoids, 28
Spina bifida, 341f
glycemic control, 29
Spinal accesory nerve, 315-316
goals of therapy, 26
Spinal ataxia, 344
nutritional support, 29
Spinal cord disease, 339-343
pain management,29
C1-C5 myelopathy, 340t,343
rewarming, 27, 27f
clinical signs, 340t
unique features of felines, 23
C6-T2 myelopathy, 340t, 343
Silver sulfadiazine, 540, 541, 542, 548, 558t
differential diagnosis, 342t
Silymarin, 590
faccid paralysis/paresis, 316-317
Sinus node disturbances, 208, 208f
L4-S3 myelopathy, 339-343, 340f-342f,
SIRS (systemic inflammatory response syndrome),
340t
25-26,26t
spastic paralysis/paresis,317-318
Skin biopsy, 537-538
T3-L3 myelopathy,340t,343
Skin cytology,533, 534f
Spinal cord trauma, 323-325
Skin decontamination, 562
diagnostics,323
Skin scraping, 533, 534f, 535, 536f
etiology, 323
Smoke inhalation, 149, 596-597
pathophysiology,323
Snakebite, 611-613
treatrment,323-325
Elapidae {coral snakes), 612-613
extra-CNS stabilization, 323
Viperidae (pit vipers), 611-612
primary injury,323-324
Sneezing
secondary injury,324-325
acute,127-128
Spinal luxation, 323, 324
chronic, 128
Spinal reflexes, assessment of, 316
reverse,128
Spinal trauma, 35
Sodium,439-444
Spirolactone
concentration of intravenous fluids, 444b
dosage, 421t
fractional excretion of, 273
for glomerulonephritis, 301
functions of, 439
for heart failure, 185t, 188
homeostasis/regulation, 439
for hyperaldosteronism,421t,425
hypernatremia,442,442t,443-444,443b
Splenectomy,for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
causes of, 441, 442t,443
{IMHA),389
diagnosis of, 443
Status epilepticus, 325, 332-333
neurologic disease,335
STE. See Systermic thrormboembolism (STE)
therapy for,443-444,443b
Stinging insects, 597,613-615
hyponatremia,439-441,440t,441b
Stomatitis, 252
causes of, 439-441, 440t
Stool softener, 253
clinical signs of, 441
Strabismus, 344
diagnosis of, 441
Stranguria, 281
fractional excretion of sodium, 273
Streptokinase, 194
neurologic disease, 335-336
Stress, pain and, 65
therapy for,441,441b
Stress leukogram, in lower airway disease, 139
Sodiurm bicarbonate
String foreign body, 247
for cardiac arrest, 19
Struvite crystals/uroliths, 267, 271, 288
in cardiopulmonary arrest {CPA), 19, 15b
Strychnine toxicity, 597-598, 598b
652
Index
Stupor
Telephone triage
causes of,319-320
approach to critically ill cat, 3-5, 4b
ermergency diagnostic workup for, 334
calming the owner, 4-5
management of,334
first aid advice, 4
Submersion injury, 154, 165
immediate aims of, 3
Succimer, for lead ingestion, 329, 586
immediate attention conditions, 4
Sucralfate
questions to ask, 3
for esophagitis,246,247,355
symptoms to determine,4b
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
respiratory emergencies, 105
for heatstroke-hy perthermia, 603
toxicological emergencies, 561
Suction drain, 241, 242f
Temperature probe, 605
Sufentanil,69
Tenesmus, 259
Sulfasalazine
Terbinafine, for dermatophytosis, 546, 558t
for colitis, 259
Terbutaline
for gastrointestinal conditions, 262t-263t
for bradyarrhythmia, 206
Sulfonamides
for lower airway disease, 145t, 146, 147t,
adverse effects, 493
148
for pyelonephritis, 310
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 161t,
Surfactant, 499
162t
Surgery
for respiratory emergencies, 111
abdominal exploration, 240-241, 241b, 263
Tetanus, 355
adrenalectomy, 427
Tetracycline, adverse effects of, 493
decompressive craniectomy, 322
9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), 586-587
enucleation,514,517
Th2 cells, 138
eyelid laceration repair, 523f
Theobrormine,588-589,588t
fluid therapy, 54
Theophylline
perineal urethrostomy, 288
for bradyarrhythmia, 207t
renal biopsy, 277-278
for lower airway disease, 145t, 147t, 148
for spinal cord trauma, 340
Thermal injury, 36, 149
splenectomy,389
Thermazene, 540
tarsorrhapy, temporary, 515-516, 516f
Thermoregulation, 604
Syrmpathetic nervous systerm, response to trauma, 31-32
Thiamine deficiency
Sympathomimetics, for bradyarrhythmia, 206, 207t
causes,331,334
Syncope,211-212
clinical signs, 334
diagnosis, 211-212
treatment,334
differential diagnosis, 211
Thiopental
etiology, 211
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
history, 211
in hepatic disease, 50
overview,211
in hy perthyroid cats, 46
physical examination, 211
jn neurologic disease, 50
treatment,212
in pediatrics, 493
Syrup of ipecac, 563
propofol compared to, 58-59
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS),
in respiratory depression, 46
25-26,26t
in urinary disease, 49
Systemic thromboembolism (STE)
Third eyelid prolapse, 503, 520, 521
saddle thrombus, 189f
Third space loss, in hypovolemic shock, 25
treatment of, 188-190
Thoracic duct ligation, 122
Thoracic empyema. See Septic pleuritis
T
Thoracocentesis,32,110,111b,114,115f,117,121,
Tachycardia/tachyarrhythmia
123-124
in cardiogenic shock, 24
Thoracostomy, 111, 112b
in congestive heart failure, 168
for internal cardiac compressions, 17
in low cardiac output heart failure, 169
for respiratory disease, 120-121, 124
supraventricular, 201-202, 202f, 203t
Thorax, compressibility of cranial, 107
syncope,211,212
Thrombin time (TT), 364
in trauma,33
Thrombocytopenia, 363f, 367-370, 374
ventricular, 202,204,205t
consumptive or sequestration, 370-371
Tactile placing and hopping, 315
general,369-370
Tapazole (methimazole) reaction,551-552
immune-mediated,371,372t-373t,374
Taurine, 87, 188
infectious, 374
TCA {tricycline antidepressant) toxicity, 598-599
megakaryocytic hypoplasia, 370-371
Tea tree oil toxicity, 587
Thromboelastography (TEG), 193
TEG (thromboelastography), 193
Thromboembolism. See Arterial thromboembolism
Telazol. See Tiletarmine/zolazapam (Telazol)
Thrombopathia, 363f, 374
Index
653
Thrombosis, mesenteric, 257, 264
skin, 562
Thymoma, 122
whole bowel irrigation, 565
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 432
diagnosis, 561-562
Thyroid-stimulating horrmone (TSH) response test, 432
exposure assessment, 562
Thyroid storm, 419-422
home managerment, 561
clinical pathology abnormalities, 420
National Animal Poison Control Center, 562
clinical presentation, 419-420
telephone triage, 561
diagnosis, 420
unique features of felines, 561
etiology,419
Toxins
management, 422
acetaminophen, 566-567, 566b
precipitating events, 419
amphetamines,567-568
supportive care,422
anticoagulant rodenticides, 568-569, 568b
treatment,420-422
boric acid/borates, 570
Thyrotropin-releasinghorrmone (TRH) stimulation test,
bromethalin,328,570-572,572b
432
Bufo toads, 572-573, 573b
Thyroxine concentration, free, 432
calcium channel blockers, 573
TIBC (total iron binding capacity), 400
carbon monoxide, 574-575, 574b
Ticarcillin/clavulanic acid
cholecalciferol (vitamin D) and analogues, 575-576,
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 162t
575b
for respiratory disease, 110t
cholinesterase-inhibiting insecticides,576-578,577f,
for shock,28
576b
Tidal breathing flow, 143
citrus oils, 578-579
Tiletarmine/zolazapam (Telazol)
cleaning agents, 579
description,58
CNS,327-330
for endotracheal intubation, 57t
cocaine, 579-580
in sedation protocol, 55t
corrosives,580-581,580b
Timentin
ethylene glycol,581-584,581b,583f
for heatstroke-hyperthermia, 603
hypertonic sodiurm phosphate enemas, 584-585
for shock,28
1ead,329-330, 585-586,585b
for snakebite, 612
marijuana,586-587
Timolol
melaleuca (tea tree oil), 587
for glaucoma, 514
metaldehyde, 587-588, 587b
for hyphema, 524
methylxanthines, 588-589, 588b
Tissue biopsy, nasal, 132
metronidazole,330
Tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), 194
mushrooms, 589-590, 590b
TLI (trypsin-like immunoreactivity), 225
nephrotoxicity of, 304t
Toad toxicity, Bufo, 572-573, 572b
organophosphates and carbamates, 329
Tobramycin
paraquat, 590-591, 591b
for dermatologic conditions, 559t
penitrern A, 591-592
nephrotoxicity of, 304
pennyroyal oil,593
for otitis externa, 548
peripheral neuropathy from, 353-354
Tonometry, 504, 505f, 506f
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 154, 164
Tonopen, 504
pyrethrin/pyrethroids,592-593,592b
Tooth root abscess, 525, 525f
pyrethrins and pyrethroids, 328-329
Total iron binding capacity (TIBC), 400
salicylates, 593-594
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 98-99, 100t
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 594-595
Total solids
smoke inhalation, 596-597
emergency database, 8-9, 8b
spider bites, 595-596, 595b, 615-617
in pediatrics, 494
stinging insects, 597
in trauma,33
strychnine,597-598,598b
Toxacara, 224f
tricycline antidepressants (TCAs), 598-599
Toxascaris teonina,224f
vestibular disease from, 336
Toxic epidermal necrolysis, 551
zinc phosphide,599
Toxicological ermergencies
Toxopiasma gondi (toxoplasmosis), 141, 157, 163
decontamination strategies, general, 562-566, 566b
myopathy from,351,352t
activated charcoal, 564
TPA (tissue plasminogen activator), 194
cathartics, 564-565
TPN (total parenteral nutrition), 98-99, 100t
diuresis,565
Tracheal collapse, 130
emesis induction, 562-563
Tracheal diseases
eyes,562
diagnostics, 133-134
facilitating toxicant clearance, 565-566
differential diagnosis, 130, 130f, 131f
gastric lavage, 563-564
physical examination, 128
gastrointestinal,562-565
treatment/prognosis,135
jon trapping, 565
Tracheal trauma, 130, 131f, 141
654
Index
Tracheostomy, 32, 108, 108b
Tricycline antidepressant {TCA) toxicity, 598-599
Trach kit,108
Trifluridine
Tramadol
for conjunctivitis, 524
in critically ill patient, 70-71, 72t
for corneal ulcer, 505
dosage, 72t
Trigeminal nerve, 315
Transduction, pain, 63, 64f
Triiodothyronine {T,) suppression test, 432
Transfusion
Trilostane, 419, 421t, 427
blood types, 498
Trimethoprim-sulfa
for hemorrhagic anemia, 399
for pulmonary parenchymal disease, 162t
for shock,28
for pyelonephritis, 310
for trauma, 33
Tris-EDTA, for dermatologic conditions, 559t
Transfusion reactions, 389
Tritrichomonas,223,496
Transplantation, renal, 311
Troclear nerve, 315
Transudate
Troponins, 172
abdominal fluid, 226, 227t,238
Tru-cut biopsy, renal, 277
pleural effusion, 111t, 113
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI), 225
Trauma,31-38
TSH (thyroid-stimulating hormone), 432
cardiovascular system assessment, 33-34
TT (thrombin time), 364
diagnostics, 33
physical examination, 33
U
treatment,33-34
Ucers
definition, 31
gastric,248-249
neurological system assessment, 34-35
oral,257-258
diagnostics, 34-35
skin, 532
physical examination, 34
Utrasound
treatment,35
abdominal
neuropathy from,353
abdominal fuid retrieval, 234
neurotrauma,320-325
cardiogenic arterial thromboembolism (CATE), 193
head trauma, 320-323
dystocia,472
spinal cord trauma, 323-325
gastrointestinal conditions, 225, 240,247,260,261
overview,31
pregnancy diagnosis, 468
physical response to, 31-32
pyometra,485,486f
renal systerm assessment, 35
urologic system, 273-274
diagnostics, 35
thoracic
physical examination, 35
diaphragmatic hernia, 123
treatment,36
pleural effusion, 114, 117, 118f
respiratory system assessment, 32-33
pulmonary parenchymal disease, 157
auscultation,32
trauma,32
diagnostics, 32
urologic system
observation, 32
acute renal failure {ARF), 306
treatment,32-33
in FLUTD,283
tracheal, 130, 131f, 135, 141
renal, 35,300, 301
ty pes
ureteral obstruction, 290
dryer injury, 36-37
Unclassified cardiomyopathy (UCM), 183, 185t
fan belt injury, 37
Unfractionated heparin, for arterial thromboermbolism,
high-rise syndrome, 36
194-195
predator injury and bite wounds, 38
UPC {urine protein-creatinine) ratio, 272, 301
unique features of felines, 31
Upper airway disease, 127-135
Tremors
diagnostics
causes of, 335
larynx and pharynx, 133
management of, 335
nasopharynx,132-133,133f
Tresaderm, 543,548,559t
nose,131-132,132f
Triaditis,245
trachea, 133-134
Triage
differential diagnosis
approach to critically ill cat
larynx and pharynx,129-130
telephone,3-5,4b
nasopharynx, 129
waiting room,5-6, 5b
nose,128-129
respiratory emergencies, 105
trachea,130,130f,131f
toxicological emergencies, 561
emergencies,107-108,107f
urologic emergencies, 281-282
physical examination, 127-128
Triamcinolone acetonide
larynx and pharynx, 128
for autoimmune skin disease, 549
nasopharynx, 128
for dermatologic conditions,559t
nose,127-128
Trichogram, 535, 536f, 546
trachea,128
Index
655
treatrment/prognosis
Urinary tract systerm
larynx and pharynx, 134-135
anesthesia in disease of, 47t, 48-49
nasopharynx, 134
primary survey, 7b,8
nose, 134
trauma assessment, 35
trachea,135
waiting room triage, 6
unique features of felines, 127
Urine cortisol-to-creatinine ratio {UC:CR), 433
viral infections inkittens,497-498
Urine culture and sensitivity, 272, 282-283
Upper motor neuron signs, 317-318
Urine output, interpretation, 278
Urate crystals, 271
Urine pH, 270
Uremia,267
Urine protein-creatinine {UPC) ratio, 272, 301
Ureteral obstruction, 289-293
Urine sedirment, 271-272
clinical presentation and clinical signs, 290
bacteria,271
definitions, 289-290
casts,271-272
diagnostics, 290-291
crystals,271
pathophysiology, 290
red blood cells, 271
prognosis,293
white blood cells, 271
treatment,291-293
 Urine specific gravity, in pediatrics, 492
Ureteral tear, 293-294
Uroabdomen, 35
Ureterolithiasis, 311
Urography, intra venous, 275-276
Ureteronephrectomy, 293
Urolith, analysis of, 284
Ureters
Urologic emergencies, 281-302
radiography,274
bacterial cystitis, 289
ultrasound, 274
definitions, 281
Urethral catheterization, 268-269
feline idiopathic cystitis (FIC), 282-283
catheters,268-269
feline lower urinary tract disease {FLUTD), 282-283
closed collection system, 269
glomerulonephritis, 300-302
iatrogenic urinary tract infection, 269
pyelonephritis,acute,299-300
indications, 268
renal failure, 295-299
technique, 268-269
triage, 281-282
Urethral obstruction,283-288,286f,287f
unique features of felines, 281
clinical presentation, 283-284
ureteral obstruction,289-293
definitions, 283
ureteral tear, 293-294
diagnostics, 284
urethral obstruction, 283-288, 286f, 287f
prognosis,288
urethral tear, 288-289
treatment,284-288,286f,287f
uroperitoneum, 294-295
Urethral tear, 288-289
Urologic systerm
Urethrocystogram, 239
antegrade pyelography, 276-277
Urethrogram, positive contrast, 275, 288
clinical signs, 267
Urinalysis, 270-272
contrast cystogram,275
in acute renal failure (ARF), 305-306
diagnosis, 267-268
in bacterial cystitis, 289
postrenal,268
dipstick analysis, 270-271
prerenal,267-268
bilirubin, 271
primary renal, 268
glucose,271
physical examination, 267
ketones,271
procedures, diagnostic and monitoring, 268-280
occult blood, 271
abdominal ultrasound, 273-274
urine pH,270
antegrade pyelography, 276-277
in pyormetra, 484-485
computer tomography (CT), 277
specific gravity, 270
contrast cystogram, 275
urine sediment, 271-272
cystocentesis,269-270
bacteria,271
fractional clearance/excretion of electrolytes,
casts,271-272
272-273
crystals,271
hemodialysis, 280
red blood cells, 271
intravenous urography, 275-276
white blood cells, 271
peritoneal dialysis, 278-280
Urinary bladder
radiography, plain, 274-275
dysfunction, 355-356
renal biopsy, 277-278
lower motor neuron, 356
urethral catheterization,268-269
upper motor neuron, 356
urinalysis, 270-272
evaluation of, 35
urine culture and sensitivity, 272
radiography, 274-275
urine output, interpretation, 278
rupture,35
urine protein-creatinine ratio,272
ultrasound, 274
unique features of felines, 267
 Urinary tract infection, iatrogenic, 269
Uroperitoneum, 239, 294-295
656
Index
Ursodeoxycholate acid {Ursodiol), 262t-263t
Viperidae (pit vipers), 611-612
Uterine inertia, 469, 470b
Viralinfections
Uterine prolapse, 477-478,477f
hypovolermia/dehydration from, 496
Uterine rupture, 470, 470f
lower airway disease, 141
Uterine torsion, 478-479
pediatric, 496, 497
pneumonia,152-153
V
Vitamin B12,225
Vagal stimulation,200, 200f
Vitamin D
Vaginal cytology, 485
oral for hypocalcemia, 450
Vagus nerve, assessment of, 315-316
toxicity,575-576,575b
Valproic acid, prolonged metabolism of, 331
Vitamin K,, 164
Vanillyl mandelic acid, 435
for anticoagulant rodenticide toxicity, 568,
Vascular access
568b
in acute abdomen, 232
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia,
for anesthesia, 40, 54
373t
in cardiopulmonary-cerebral resuscitation, 17-18
Vitamin K deficiency, 374-375
in pediatrics, 494, 500
Volatile anesthetics, 59-60, 60t
Vascular disorders, 365f
Vomiting
Vascular volume, 77
acute,249,256
Vasopressin
in chronic renal failure, 298
in cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA), 19, 500
Von Willebrand disease {vWD), 374
constant rate infusion, 28
VPCs {ventricular premature complexes), 200f, 201-202,
NAVEL {naloxone, atropine, vasopressin, epinephrine,
202f,204f
 and lidocaine), 18
for shock,28
W
Venous access. See Vascular access
Waiting room triage
Venous blood gas, in cardiac emergencies, 171
approach to critically ill cat, 5-6, 5b
Ventilation
capsule history, 
for head trauma, 321
rapid physical evaluation, 5-6
hypoventilation
respiratory emergencies, 105
respiratory emergencies,112
Warfarin
in trauma,134
for arterial thromboembolism, 195-196
for neonatal resuscitation, 475-476
toxicity,568
for respiratory emergencies, 109, 500
Warrming. See Rewarming
for seizure sequelae, 327
Wasp stings, 613-615
Ventricular fibrillation, in cardiopulmonary arrest
Water moccasin bites, 611-612
{CPA), 14, 19
Waxy casts, 272
Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs), 200f,
Wheezes, respiratory, 107, 138
201-202,202f,204f
White blood cell casts, 272
Verapamil
White blood cells, in urine sediment, 271
for hypercalcemia, 453
Whole bowel irrigation, for gastrointestinal
properties of, 463t
decontamination,565
Vertebral fracture,323,324
Withdrawal reflex
Vertebral heart score {VHS), 109, 110f
pelvic limb,345
Vertebral heart size, 175f
thoracic limb, 347
Vestibular ataxia, 318-319, 344
Wood's lamp evaluation, 535
bilateral,319
Wound
central,318
abdominal,241-243
paradoxical central, 318-319
bite, 38
peripheral,318
trauma,37
Vestibular disease, 336-337,336t
age and,331
X
bilateral, 314
Xylazine
central,336t
description of, 56
idiopathic, 331, 336
for ermesis induction, 328, 563
peripheral,336,336t
as sedative, 55t,56
unilateral, 314
Vestibulocochlear nerve, 315
Z
Vincristine
Zafirlukast, for lower airway disease, 148
for immune-mediated hemolytic anemia {IMHA), 389
Zinc phosphide toxicity, 599
for immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 373t, 374
Zinc toxicity, 396-397