Manual of
British
Small Animal.
SmallAnimal
Veterinary
Association
Reproduction
and Neonatology
General Editor
Gillian Simpson
Scientific Editors
Gary England and Mike Harvey
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
BSAVA Manual of
Small Animal
Reproduction
and Neonatology
General Editor
Gillian M. Simpson
BVM&SMRCVS
Edinburgh's Telford College
Crewe Road,Edinburgh EH42NZ,UK
ScicntificEditors
Gary C.W. England
BVetMedPhDDVetMedCertVADVRDVRepDipACTFRCVS
Royal Veterinary College,Universityof London
Hawkshead Lane,North Mymms,
Hatfield,Herts AL97TA,UK
and
Mike Harvey
BVMSPhD MRCVS
Department ofVeterinary Clinical Studies
Universityof GlasgowVeterinarySchool
Bearsden Road,earsden,Glasgow G611QII,LK
Published by:
British Small Animal Veterinary Association
WoodrowHouse,1 TelfordWay
WatervcllBusinessParkQuedgeley
Gloucester GL2 2AB,LnitedKingdom
A Company Linied by Giaran
tee inEngland
Registered Company No.2837793.
Registered as a Charity.
Copyright 199sBSAVA
15 6126
Reprinted 2004
All righsreserved.o patof this palicationmaybeepreduced,
stored inaretrieval systemr transmittednlormrbyanyeas,
clectronimechanicaltocopyinrecordinrherwiswi
pricr written permission of the copyright holder.
The Jine illistrations in thishookwere drawn by Tan Lennox and are
printed wit his pemission.
A cataloguereordfrthisbookisavailablefromtheBritishLibrary
ISBN0905214366
Thepublishersandcontributors cannottakeresponsibility for
inrormation provided on dosages and methous of application of drugs
mentioned inthis plicatinDetlsfikistbeverifiedby
individual users fromthe appropriate litcrarurc.
Td:nWm
636.082.4
SINO
Other Manuals
Other titles in the BSA VA Manuals series:
Manual of Anaesthesia for Small Animal Practice
Manual of Canine and Feline Gastroenterotogy
Manual of Coanine and Feline Nephrology and Urology
Manual of Companion Animal Nutrition and Feeding
Manuai of Canine Behaviour
Manual of Exotic Pets
Manual of Feline Behaviour
Manual of Ornamental Fish
Manual of Psittacine Birds
Manual of Raptors, Pigeons and Waterfow!
Manual of Reptiles
Manual ofSmall Animal Arthrology
Manual of Snall Aninal Cardiorespiratory Medicine andSurgery
Manual of Small Animal Clinical Pathology
Manual of Small Animal Dentistry. 2nd edition
Manual of Small Animal Dernatology
Manual of Small Animal Diagnostic Imaging
Manual of Small Animal Endocrinotogy, 2nd edition
Manual ofSnall Animul FraclureRepair and Management
Manual of Small Animal Neurology, 2nd edition
Manuat of Srnall Aninal Oncology
Manual ofSmall AnimalOphthaimotogy
i1i
1
Contents
iii
List of Contributors
V
Foreword
vi
Preface
vii
Physiology and Endocrinology of Reproduction in Female Dogs
1
Ian Jeffcoate
Physiology and Endocrinology of Reproduction in Female Cats
11
John P.Verstegen
3
The Infertile Female
17
Patrick Wright and John R. Walts
4
 Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Female
35
MikeHarvey
5
The Mammary Gland
53
David J. Argyle
6
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Male
61
Denise Hewitt
7
Conditions of the Male
71
John P. Verstegen
8
The Infertile Male
83
Laurence R.J.Kecnan
9
Mating and Artificial Insemination in the Dog
95
Wenche Farstad
10
Mating and Artificial Insemination in Domestic Cats
105
Catharina Linde-Forsberg and Eva Axner
11
Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Termination
113
Gary C.W. England
12
Parturition
127
Catharina Linde-Forsberg and Annelie Enroth
The Neonate: Congenital Defects and Fading Puppies
143
Tony S. Blunden
t
Care of Neonates and Young Animals
153
Paula Hotston Moore and Kir Sturgess
15
Surgery of the Genital Tract
171
Robert N. White
16
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch
197
Gary C.W. England
17
Pharmacological Control of Reproduetion in the Cat
219
John P.Verstegen
227
Contributors
David J. Argyle BVMS MRCVS
Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, University of Glasgow Veterinary School, Bearsden Road,
Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1QH
Eva Axner DVM
 Departiment of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, PO Box 7039, S-750 07,
Uppsala, Sweden
Tony S. Blunden BVetMed PhD MRCVS
Animal Health Trust, Balaton Lodge, PO Box 5, Newmarket, Suffolk CB8 7DW, UK
Annelie Encroth DVM
 Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, PO Box 7039, S-750 07,
Uppsala, Sweden
Gary C.W. England BVetMed PhD DVetMed CertVA DVR DVRep DipACT FRCVS
Royal Veterinary College, University of London, Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms, Hatfield,
Herts AL9 7TA, UK
Wenche Farstad MDNV PhD
 Deparlmcnt of Rcproduetion and Forcnsic Medicinc, Norwcgian Collcgc of Vclcrinary Medicine
PO Box 8146, N-0033,Oslo, Norway
Mike Harvey BVMS PhD MRCVS
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, University of Glasgow Veterinary School, Bearsden Road.
Bearsden, Glasgow G6l 1QH
 Denise Hewitt BSc
 Royal Veterinary Collge, University of London, Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms, Hatfield,
Herts AL9 7TA, UK
Paula Hotstoni Moore VN
Veterinary Nursing Department, University of Bristol School of Veterinary Science, Langford House,
Langford, Bristol BS 18 7DU, UK
 Ian A. Jeffcoate BSc PhD
Deparrment of Veterinary Physiology, University of Glasgow Veterinary Schcol, Bearsden Road,
Bcarsdcn, Glasgow G61 1QH
Laurence R.J. Keenan MVB MVM PhD MRCVS
√
Deparrment of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin,
Ballsbridge, Dublin 4, Republic of Ireland
Catharina Linde-Forsberg DVM PhD
Dcpartincnt of Obstctrics & Gynaecology, Faeuly of Veterinary Medicine, PO Box 7039, S-750 07,
Uppsala, Sweden
Kit Sturgess MA VetMB PhD CerIVR MRCVS
Royal Veterinary College, Hawkshead Lane, North Myimums, Hatfield, Herts AL9 7TA, UK
John P. Verstegen DVM MSc PhD
Bd Colonster 20, B44, Small Animal Reproduction Department, Velerinary College, University of Liege.
B 4000 Liege, Belgium
Robert N. White BSc BVetMed CertVA MRCVS
Davies White, Manor Farm Business Park, Higham Gobion, Hitchin, Herts SG5 3HR
John R. Watts BVSc
Department of Veterinary Scicnccs, Univcrsily of Melhourne, Princcs Highway, Werribcc,
 3030 Victoria, Australia
Patrick J. Wright BVSc MVSc PhD
Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Melbourne, Princes Highway, Werribee,
3030 Victoria, Australia
vi
Foreword
An appreciation of the complexity of the reproductive process and the
- ssns a m id si a pue a a Aq pad sred
ment of the problerms encountered by the owners and breeders of compan-
ion animals. The Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and
Neonatoiogy is a new addition to the BSAVA Manual Series and compre-
hensively describes the requirements for normal reproduction and the
 problems likely to be recognized in clinical practice.
The Manual reviews the normal physiology and endocrinology of the
dog and cat, looking first at female infertility, the function and dysfunc-
tion of the mammary gland and problems of the non-pregnant animal. It
then gocs on lo consider the male dog and cat in sinilar detail. Mating
 and artificial insemination in each species are discussed, followed by a
consideration of pregnancy and parturition. The care of the neonate.
including a review of congenital problems and the role of infectious
diseases and their prevention, is also described. 'The Manual concludes
with chaplers on the medical and surgical therapics applicable to repro-
ductive problems.
         n   
 internationally rccognized authors to contribute lo this projcel and the usc
 of full colour illustrations once more complements the text admirably.
have no doubt that this Manual will be widely used, not only by veteri-
nary nurscs and veterinary surgeons in praclicc and thosc in training but
also by our breeder clients who will appreciate the wealth of information
containcd hcrein.
H. Simon Or BVSc DVR MRCVS
BSAVA Senior Vice-President 1997-98
vii
Preface
The first edition of this manual has been designed for velerinary practitioners
and nurses who are presented with dogs and cats with reproductive disorders.
It is also written for undergraduates who have both a need and hopefully a
 desire to learn more about the area in order to pass their examinations and.
equally importantly, to become better clinicians. We have attempted to
 cover, in addition to all aspects of reprocduction, the related areas of the 
mammary gland and the neonate.
We accepted at the outset that there would be some duplication of
coverage of certain conditions, but felt that that would be no bad thing. There
 may even be minor differences of opinion in some areas. We have tried to
ui pauaiai juausit peoi j pom ienad e aq pom li inq esy nos
 all matters and, to say the least, veterinary science is no exception.
We have to thank a large number of people, although not necessarily by
name. Over the last two decades, the fieltl of canine and feline reproduction
has developed and progressed very rapidly. We would like to acknowledge
the many people who contributed to this explosion of this knowledge. This
manual is a tribute to them all. We much appreciate the cooperation of all the
authors, who gave much time to the writing of their chapters while at the same
time coping with extremely heavy clinical and teaching loads. Without fail,
they accepted thie suggested alterations with good nature and made the
requested changes extremely rapidly. We would like to thank the BSAVA for
commissioning this manual on Reproduction and Nconatplogy, and finally
to thank Marion Jowett, the Publishing Manager, who, withi unfailing good
manners, managed to push the whole thing through to fruition while still
allowing the Editors to feel that they were in chargc.
Gillian M. Simpson
Gary C.W. England
Mike Harvey
February 1998
CHAPTER ONE
Physiology and Endocrinology
of the Bitch
Ian Jeffcoate
INTRODUCTION TO THE
 Thc ovary, the source of the sleroid hormones
OESTROUS CYCLE
oestrogen and progesterone
The tubular reproductive tract, accessory
The oestrous cycle is a co-ordinatcd scqucncc of ovar-
scx glands and brain behavioural centres;
ian, utero-vaginal and behavioural changes which has
 the ultimate target tissues of the ovarian
evolved in mammals to ensure production and fertili-
hormones.
 zation of fcmalc gamctcs and intrautcrine dcvclop-
ment of the conccptus. Most non-pregnant domestic
This chapter will describe the canine oesrous cycle
animals show continuous oestrous cycles, each com-
and review the endocrine.features and developmental
prising the following stages: oestrus, when mature ova
processes, pointing cut when endocrine measurements
are shed into the tubal reproductive tract and sexual
 or interventions might be appropriate.
receptivity optimizes chances of intermal fertilization
occur; and finally, ifimpregnalion fails, a return to pro-
PRO-OESTRUS
oestrus, when renewed follicle development leads up
supaarq oy saoddo rany pim uan snnsao m
Various clinical signs can be taken as evidence of
to occur. Animals such as pigs, cattlc and horscs rctum
pro-ocstrus. Thcsc inclurlc vulval rcddening and cn-
 to oestrus about every 3 weeks but if pregnancy arises,
largement and, later, the appearance of a sero
there is substantial prolongation of dioestrus due to the
sanguineous vulval discharge. This discharge is
rcquircmcnts of prcgnancy.
usually taken as marking the first day of pro-oe-
 The cycle of the domestic bitch differs from this
strus. Behavioural changes can be observed which
general scheme in several respects. First, each cycle is
include urine marking. restlessness and disobedi-
at least 5 months in duration; secondly, pregnancy
ence, with a tendency to roam and increased attrac-
 Occurs within the normal dioestrous phase rather than
tiveness to dogs. These changes are attributed to
prolonging it and, thirdly, a long period of relative
increasing plasma oestradiol concentration (Figure
ovarian inactivity termed anoesirus arises betwecn
1.1) duc to the activity of developing ovarian fol-
cycles whether the bitch is pregnant or not. This has
 licles. Oestradiol promotes various processes in the.
given rise to a change in cycle terminology in bitches
reproductive tract, stimulating growth and activity
which rcquircs some explanation. Since in most spe-
 of the glandular epithelium anrl promoting mucosal
cies pro-oestrus is generally so brief that its duration
vascularity and oedema. The latter effects cause the
can be ignored, dioestrus (literally meaning 'between
mucosal capillaries to become fragile, and leaky
ocstrus') is oficn, but incorrectly, uscd to describe the
cndothclial ccll junctions pcrmit passage of blood
 inter-oestrus interval. This contains both the lureal and
plasma and cells into the uterine lumen, thus ac-
the pro-oestral phases. However, as the bitch's inter-
counting for the bloodstained vulval discharge. The
 oestrous interval consists not only of the luteal phase
general oedema of the reproductive tract during pro-
but also the extrermely long anoestrus phase, the term
oestrus can be visualized as a decrease in
^metoestrus' is often used to describe the luteal phase
ultrasonographic echogenicity. Additionally,. mu-
in preferenice to 'dioestrus'.
cosal devclopment rcsults in imprcssive ballooning
 Despite these differences , the oestrous cycle of the
and reddening of the vaginal mucosal folds, which
bitch has been shown to be controlled by the same
can be viewed directly.by endoscopy. Dramatic
hormonal intcractions as thosc demonstrated in othcr
epithelial cell proliferation also occurs in (he vagi-
animals and acting between:
nal mucosa under oestradiol stimulation. These
  i o p n s
The hypothalamus and pituitary gland, where
below in relation to their usefulness in determining
 primary control resides
the time of ovulation and optimal fertility.
2
 Manual of Small Animal Rcproluction and Neonatology
80 
35
30
60
25
ml)
(pg/
50
au)
8
20
 Oestradiol
40
au)
30
Prog
10
20
10-
-15
-10
-5
0
10
Days pre/post LH peak
Figure 1.1: Changes in plasmu concentration of oestradiot (-), luteinizing hormone ( LH, ) (nd progesterone () in the birch.
The graphs have been aligned to the day of the LH peak. Note, peuk oestradiol on dey -1 ened a detectable increase in
progesterone concentrations on day 0. (Conversion factors: 1 pg/mi oestradiol = 3.6 pnoil; 1 ng/iml progesterone = 3 nmoll.)
Pro-oestrus is associated with follicle develop-
terone circulating in pre-ovulatory bitches is still rela-
ment stimulated by the gonadotrophic hormones lutei-
tively low, and it is to be remembcrcd that ocstrus and
nizing hormone (LH) and folliclc stimulating hormone
ovulation can be reliably postponed by administration
(FSII), which are secreted by the anterior pituitary
of large doses of progestogens in pro-oestrus.
 gland under the influence of hypothalamic gonado-
The pre-ovulatory LH surge is oficn depicled as the
trophin-releasing hormone (GnRH). In the bitch, just
ccntral cvcnt of thc cyclc bccausc of its role in stimu-
 as in other animals, the peak in the plasma concentra-
lating ovulation and transition to the progesterone-
tion of oestradiol results, a day or so later, in the peak
dominated luteal phase, metoestrus. For this reason,
 concentrations of LH (Figure 1.1). The surge in plasma
and bccausc the onsel of standing uestrus varies con-
LH concentration will, therefore, always occur auto-
siderably between different bitches, pregnancy
matically after a certain level of follicular activity and
stages are best timed with respect to the day of the LH
oestradiol output has been attained and, sincc ovula-
pcak, rather than to the first day of oestrus as is the
tion follows the LH peak, it is said to be spontaneous.
 normal practice in other species.
This is in contrast to the situation in cats and mustelids.
which are described as induced ovulators, because
-nao pue asralai HT asnput ol pabru si uone ndo
OESTRUS
tion. Such animals appear to lack the ability for oestra-
diol to augment LH secretion.
Ovarian steroids and behaviour
A facilitatory level of FSH is also required to
Oestrus is derived from the Latin for gadfly, and liter-
stimulate follicle development and oestradiol secre-
 ally refers to frenzied behaviour,i.e. the transition fron
tion, but circulating FSH does not increasc as noticc-
thc atlractive but unrcccptivc hehavioural characteris-
ably as LH because the follicles secrete ‘inhibin', a
 tic of pro-oestrus, to posturally inviting and receptive
selective inhibitor of FSH secretion. Nevertheless,
 behaviour (lordosis). Pheromones are chemical sig-
FSH plays an important role in the maturation of the
nalling compounds important in delineating this tran
folliclc and in cguipping its cells for conversion to
sition. Thcy arc sccretcd by the bitch underthe influencc
 corpora lutea after ovulation. This process is of key
of oestradiol and are detected by the dogs' olfactory or
 inportance in the bitch's cycle because there is a rise
vomeronasal organs. They are produced in the kidneys
in progesterone secretion by the pre-ovulatory folliclcs
 and reproductive tract and are voided with urine or in
(see Figure 1.1), which appears to play a central role in
the vulval discharge, specifically for the purpose of
 trigering ovulation and standing oestrus. Increased
advertising scxual status. Whcn combincd with the be-
plasma progesterone concentration before ovulation in
havioural signs, pheromones increase sexual attrac-
bitches is unusual in comparison with other donestic
tiveness and stimulate male reproductive activity. One
animals, particularly ruminants, where progesterone
 bitch pheromone is methyl-p-hydroxybenzoate, and if
conccntrations must be minimal at this time to pcrnit
 this compound is applied to the vulva of anocstrous or
 oestrus and ovulation. IIowever, the amount of proges-
even spayed bitches, it will stimulate excitement and
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Bitch
3
mounting attemptsby dogs. Inaddition, bitchpheromone
until as late as 96 hours after the LH peak. Canine
effects are not restricted to dogs, since they can also
oocytes must also undergo a further meiotic
have significant oestrus-advancement or cycle-synchro
maturational stage afler ovulaticn before fertilization.
nizing effects on othcr bitches, patticularly in a kennel
This process is difficult to study, but by using carefully
environment. This shows that pheromones can influ-
timed inseminations with short-lived frozen semen.
ence the activity of GnRH centres in the hypothalamus,
from various dogs to yield identifiable puppies, it is
ultimalely learling to incrcascd avarian activity.
possible to show that oocyte maturation takes from 2 to
 Brain behavioural centres in bitches appear to be
3 days. When this figure is added to the interval
primed by rising oestradiol levels but full expression of
between thc LH pcak and ovulation, it can he seen that
oestrus requires withdrawal of oestrogen in the
fertilization of bitch oocytes cannot occur until 4 days
 presence of progesterone. Bitch cycles in which
after the LH peak, anid this might be termed the start of
follicles fail to ovulate (and enter the progesterone
the fertile period (see Figure 1.2). Confusion as to the
secreting luteal phase) are therefore likely to be
rclcvance of thc fertile pcriod can arise bccausc bitches
characterized by a period of pro-oestrous behaviour
are quite likely to be in standing oestrus up to 5 days
which wanes and then recurs later if a new cohort of
before its onset, and may continue to stand for as long
ocstrogen-secreting follicles subsequently devclop
as 5 days afier this timc, with prcgnancies still ensuing
without an intervening luteal phase. This is cormmonly
in some instances. IIowever several factors are respon-
referred to as a split oestrus.
sible for an apparently long fertile period in the bitch.
Thcsc include prolongcdl sperm survival time in the
Ovulation
bitch's genital tract, thoughtto be several days, and the
The requirement for circulating progesterone concen-
likely time-spread of ovulation and oocyte maturation
tration to increase before either full expression of
(2-3 days) and oocyte survival (1-2 days). When all
ocstrus will occur or ovulation is triggered, implies thal
these time factors are considered, the fertile period in
the onset of the initial rise in plasma progesterone
 bitches probably ranges from days 4 to 7 after the LH
should occur just before ovulation and that this might
peak. As a consequence of the variahility, however,
be a useful predictor of the same.
 gestation length caninot be related to mating date. If it
Bitches normally have multiple ovulations, and
were, pregnancy would appear to vary from 58 to 72
 histological and laparoscopic examinations show that
days, but if it is related to the day of the prc-ovulatory
although most ovulations occur in a range of 30-48
plasma LH peak, pregnancy duration is 65 days with
hours after the LH peak, some follicles may not ovulate
very little variability.
351
30
(1yau)
25
.2
15
BUU
Plas
10
 Fertile perixd
-15
-10
5
5
10
 Days pre/post LH peak
Pro-ocstrus
Ocstrus
m
relative to the day of the LH peak. Key features which nay be identified and used to predict the ferile period (for definition see
text) are: progesterone concentration is basal (maybe undetectable) during late anoesrrus (x-x) and rises to low bur detectabie
concentrations during pro-oestrus (o-o). There is a pre-ovulatory increase in plasme progesferone concentration eut ihe same
fine us the pre-ovulatory LH surge (+-+). Because fhere are relufively consistent intervals beiween the LH surge and ovulation,
theprogesterone conceniration hasrisen toquitecharacteristic values()at theonset ofthefertileperiod and should then
confinue to rise (+-O) until abouf day 30. (The conversion factor fron ng/mi to nmoll is approximaiely 3.)
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
4
Bitch
Blood on
Onset of
First day
First day
Onset of
 Onset of
Last day
number
 on vulva
vaginal
 of ocstrus
10
vaginal
mctocstrus
of
mucosal
smear
oestrus
mucosal
 oestrus
oedema
(acceptance) shrinkage
1
-5
.7
0
+3
I-
+10
+9
2
-5
-8
+1
+3
-1
+11
01+
3
-5
-6
+1
-4
-3
+13
+8
4
-12
-12
-1
+1
-1
+6
+5
5
-8
8-
+1
+1
-1. 
6+
+9
6
-3
-6
0
+2
-2
+10
+8
7
-5
-11
-3
+1
+7
+6
-11
-11
-7
-1
-7
+11
+11
Avcragc
-6.8
-8.6
-1
+1
-2.5
+9.6
'8+
Points to note are:
The ocslrous smcar may be obtained many days before pestrus.
 First day of acceptance is often close to the start of the fertile period, but this cannot be guaranteed.
The last day of acceptance can be several days after the estimated end of the fertile period, i.e. closer to the
onset of metoestrus.
of mucosal angulation (see Figure 1.3b) arise at the onset of the fertile period.
Table 1.1: Timing ofcertain key clinical signs relative to the day of the LH peak in a group of eight bitches. The presumed fertile
period is from dayy +4 to +7 for reasons stated in the text.
Fertilization
the post-ovulatory period increases tubal motility, and
The ocstrogcn priming of the mucosa is in most ani-
 embryos will arive in the uterine horms too soon, before
mals credited with stimulating secretions which favour
 proper progesterone conditioning has occurred. This is
gamete survival and transport. Oestrogen is also known
the rationale behind post-coital oestrogen therapy.
to stimulate smooth muscle excitability, probably in-
directly via adrenergic receptors. This and the stimula-
tion of tubal ciliary action promote sperm transport
TIMING THE FERTILE PERIOD
through the utero-tubal junctions and the delivery of
ovulated oocytes to the site of fertilization in the
 With the long period of sexual receptivity in bitches,
uterine tubes. Later, as follicle luteinization proceeds,
the spread in ovulation times and longer gamete matu-
thc incrcasing plasma conccntration of progcstcronc is
ration and viability than usual, fhe fertile period has
responsible for altering the characterof mucosal secre-
been set somewhere between 4 and 7 days after the LH
tions, thereby impairing further transport and survival
peak. However, fertility is probably poor towards the
of spermatozoa in thc tract and in particular the migra-
end of the fertile period, and thcrc may bc spccific
tion of spermatozoa through the cervix (see below).
instances when good timing of insemination becomes
Progesterone also decreases smooth muscle excitabil-
crucial, for example when using frozen semen or a dog
ity and is thought to slow the passage of ova or embryos
of low fertility. Various signs can bc uscd to hclp
in the uterine tubes, thereby delaying entry of embryos
pinpoint the fertile period and the optimum mating
into the uterus until conditions are more suitable.
time in bitches. These include exfoliative vaginal
Thcsc wcll dncumentcd effects of the two main
cytology (vaginal smears), vaginal endoscopy and
ovarian steroids are considered equally valid in the
plasma hormone measurements.
 bitch, despite the comparatively early decrease in the
uestrogen:progcstcronc ratio as a rcsult of pre-ovula-
Vaginal cytology
tory luteinization (Figure 1.1). We must therefore
Increasing plasma oestradiol concentration during pro-
assume that in the bitch, progesterone is facilitatory to
oestrus stimulates cell division in the basallayers of the
 gamele survival, transport and fcrilization but that
vaginal epithelium, but then as plasma ocstradiol con-
these actions may well require a long (pro-oestrous)
 centration falls, endocrine support of this new highly
period of oestradiol dominance. In the bitch, as in other
stratified epithelium diminishes and there is a Tmarked
species, unbalancing the oestrogen: progesterone ratio
increase in numbcr of dcad cornified cells, some of
by pharmacological administration ofoestrogen during
which are easily sloughed off. As pro-oestrus
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Bitch
5
progresscs,therefore,there is a decrease in the number
Vaginal cytology can undoubtedly provide useful
ofnucleated epithelial cells.Additionally, there are
information on the breeding status of the bitch,but
usually large numbers of red blood corpuscles in the
considerable variability in the timing of the main
early to mid pro-oestrous smear.Peak cornification
featurcsrclativc to the likely time ofpeak fertility
occurs as plasma progcstcrone concentration begins to
limitstheusefulnessof thetechniquein the absence of
rise,roughly at the onset ofoestrus,but there are
corroboratory evidence.
distinctive features ofvaginal cytology which can be
rclated tothetimeofpeakferilitywhichusuallyoccurs
Vaginal endoscopy
some days later (Table 1.1).Nevertheless,vaginal
The switch from oestradiol to progesterone secretion
cytology remains a popular tool for assessing sexual
by thc pre-ovulatory follicles,which was discussed
statusfihaglyauitischeapqicka
above,reduces mucosalvascularity and oedema,and
simple to perform.Cellscan beobtained using acotton
this is manifested by a marked change in the appear-
bud inserted into the vagina,preferably using a small
ance of the vaginal mucosa.Vaginal endoscopy offers
speculum,to scrape themucosa gently:or by flushing
the opportunity to observe these changes in character
with saline.Adherent cells can be transferred to a
and appearance of the vaginal mucosa,as its folds.It
microscope slide by rolling and then stained using a
firstbecomesmoreconvolutedandoedematousduring
differential (trichrome) or non-differential (c.g.Diff-
pro-oestrus and then shows progressive shrinkage and
Quik?)stain.Byusing differential staining,dead kera-
becomesverypale,evenwhiteinappearance,closet
tinizedclsappearasrangeflakewhreastheacive
the timeof thLHpeak,followedbyabrupt angulation
nuclei of lesssuperficial basal or parabasal cpithelial
as progesterone concentrationsrise and oestradiolcon-
cells stain various shades of blue to green.
centrations fall (Figure I.1). There follows a stage of
Towards the end of oestrus, the vaginal smear
progressively increasing angulation towards thetime
revealscharacteristicchangeswhichincludethereturn
of the ovulation and subscqucntly the onsct of the
of nuclcated cpitheclial cells and the appearance of
fertile period.These changes can be easily recognized
large numbers of leucocytes.These changes usually
with a little practice (Figure 1.3) and are sufficiently
commence7-9 days after the LH peak, and when seen
repcatable that cach stage can be ascribed a score.
are referred to as the ‘metoestrous vaginal smear
Vaginal endoscopyis provingvery useful in forecast-
ing the optimal mating timein individualbitches.After
‘metoestrous’ smears, when increasing numbers of
the cnd of the fertile period, i.e. at the onset of met-
nucleated cellscanbe ohserved,and thisoften starts at
the end of the fertilization period,about7-9days after
increasingly rounded folds, and perhaps most charac-
theLH peak.However,by the time such changes are
teristically,the mucosal folds in the anterior vagina
obvious,the fertilcperiod andpossibly alsooestrus
appear irritable and may be provoked to close rapidly.
may have passed (Table 1.1).
forming a rosette-like pattern.
b
d)
e
Figure1.3.Endoscopicappearanceofthevaginalmucosa atkey stages inits development during thebitchcycle.(a)Pro-oestrus;
note pink fluid and oedematous glossyfolds.(b)Onsetof oestrus;note palecolourand onset ofwrinklingof themucosa.This stage
generalyoccursjustbeforetheLIIpeak.（c)Mid-oestrusnotepalecreaycolour,markedwrinklingshrinkage)ndangular
mucosalprofilesThiscorrespondstothemiddieoftheferileperiod.(d)Earlymetoestrusmucosalfoldsareroundedwithpule
patches,and irritable,sometimes closingto forma rosettepattern as in(e).
Courtesy of F.E.F.Lindsoy
6
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Hormone measwrements
increases during the pre-ovulatory period. The cervix
Measurements of plasma progesterone concentration
then remains open untilabout 6 days after the LH peak,
 can bc very uscful in prcdicling the fcrtile period of thc
i.e. about 2 days before full cytological metoestrus, at
bitch. The background behind the changes in the
which time plasma progesterone is high and oestradiol
 concentrations of the hormones has been more fully
virtually undetectable. These results show that sper-
cxplaincd in prcccding scclions (scc Figurc 1.2).
matozua may only be able to gain access to the uterus
 Progesterone concentration should be basal (quite
during a certain proportion of oestrus, despite the
probably undetectable) during late anoestrus and will
common observation that mating can occur beforc and
risc to low but dctcctablc conccntrations (around 3
after this 'open-cervix' period. Changes in cervical
nmol/l (1 ng/ml)) by late pro-oestrus. As explained
patency may arise from the early oederma-inducing
above. plasma progesterone concentration begins to
effects of cestrogen during pro-oestrus, which close
rise at the time of the pre-ovulatory LH surge, reaching
the cervix, followed by an open period duc to the
i  r   i  h g
 mucosal shrinkage that occurs as the progesterone
6-12 nmol/1 (2-4 ng/ml) 2 days later (the day of
ratio increases. Interestingly. the 'open-cervix' period
ovulation), and by day 4, the onset of the fertile period,
correlates very well with thc optimal mating time
circulating progesterone will probably have risen to
 predicted by the appearance of the vaginal mucosa at
18-30 nmol/l (6-10 ng/ml) (Higure 1.1). Blood sam-
endoscopy. Despite the convenient interpretation, these
 ples are necessary to determine progesterone, as assays
radielogical contrast study obscrvations do not
to measure progesterone in other body fluids such as
account for the ability of blood and uterine secretions
saliva and urine are not sufficiently robust at present.
to pass through the oedematous cervix during pro-
 oestrus. Other cervical activators may be involved,e.g.
first signs of pro-ocstrus, but sanplcs should bc col-
oestrogens via their effect on smooth muscle function
lected at least every 2-3 days during late pro-oestrus or
and prostaglandins contained in semen.
 after oestrous behaviour has commenced. This will
 The importance of increasing progesterone con-
allow thc rapid periovulalory incrcasc in progcstcronc
centralions for full expression of oestrus and for induc-
to be detected to forecast possible mating dates. In
 tion of the pre-ovulatory LH surge suggests that onset
cases in which a very shoit pro-oestrus is anticipated,
of standing heat should rot occur until close to the start
thc start of blood sampling should be earlier to avoid
of the fertile period. Unfortunately, when the onset of
being too late to detect ovulation.
standing heat is related to the timing of the LH surge
Some differences arise in the values quoted for
there is considerable disparity in certain animals
 plasma progesterone concentration, depending whether
(Tahle 1. 1 ), but signs of standing ocstrus may noncthc-
radioimmunoassay orenzyme immunoassays have been
less be useful as a rough guide to the beginning of the
used, the latter giving higher but well correlated results.
fertile period, as would be entirely expected from an
Much of the published data (including thosc in thc
cvolutionary standpoint.
 present article) have been obtained using radioimmuno-
assay. If using a conimercial enzyme immunoassay,
plasma progcstcronc concentration during thc bitch's
METOESTRUS
ueslrous cycle will bc nearly doubled but the relative
changes with cycle stage will be the same. Absolute
 This phase follows oestrus, and is defined as com-
 progesterone concentrations cannot be obtained with
mencing when a bitch rcfuses to stand to be mated,
qualitative tests, but the relaive changes in plasma
usually 6-8 days after the onset of oestrus, or 810
progesterone concentration can be assessed after the
days after the pre-ovulatory LH peak. Changes in both
start of pro-oestrus as the cycle progresscs, and this
thc vaginal smear, such as ihe influx of leucocytes and
should be useful for corroborating other clinical signs.
increased number of nucleated cells and in the endo-
Progesterone is the only hormone currently of value
scopic view, with rounding and thinning of mucosal
in prcdicting the fertile pcriod LH and ocstradiel would
profilcs, may be useful in judging the end of the fertile
be equally or morc predictive but samplc collcclion and
period and transition into metoestrus. On the other
assay of these hormones is not currently practical.
hand, it is difficult to find any discrete endocrine
changes that are particularly characteristic of the onset
Other aspects defining the fertile pcriod
of mclocstrus, except plasma progesterone concentra-
 Recent work using infusion of radio-opaque contrast
tion, which should have increased progressively from
dye into the anterior vagina has revealed interesting
the onset of oestrus and bc in the range 30-90 nmol/1
links between circulating oestradiol and progesterone
(10-30 ng/ml) (see Figure 1.2). As described carlier,
concentrations and cervical opening. These findings
 the entire gestation period fits into metoestrus, which
arc relcvant to the fertile period in bitchcs bccause thc
is thercfore dominated by the cffects of progesterone.
-ad p op o got ps sui xa
si s 'sanonq ueuaaid pue quenand-uou qnq u
secreted exclusively by thecorpora lutea, since there is
 declines and the ratio of progesterone to oestradiol
no placental contribution to circulating progesterone.
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Bitch
 Metoestrus includes the early stagcs of embryo
ancestral origins in wild dog packs, in which domi-
 development, and it is intercsting toreview the timing
nant bitches would have synchronized their cycles
of certain important pre-implantation events in the
with the non-breeding females, who would then havc
been left to raise the puppies.
terone and ocstradiol concentration (scc Figure 1.1).
Times are best stated using the day of the pre-
Termination of pregnancy by interfering.
with progesterone secretion
discusscd, ovulation can be estimatcd as occurring
 Experimental studies show that the corpora lutea are
on day 2, and after a period of maturation in the
initially quite autonomous and can secrete proges-
oviduct, these ova would be ready for fertilization
teronc without pituitary lutcotrophic support for
bctwccn rlays4 and 7. Resultant embryos appear to be
about the first 20 days of metoestrus. After this, it
retained in the uterine tubes until the utero-tubal
seems likely that both LH and prolactin are neces-
junction permits their entry into the uterine horns
sary luteotrophins, with prolactin a particular
around dlay 10. An increasing ratio of progesterone to
requirement after day 30. The similarities between
oestradiol (see Figure l.1) is likely to be of vital
 pregnant and non-pregnant metoestrus reveal the
importance in the tining of this event. Blastocysts
unlikelihood of there being an important embryonic
can then be located in the ipsilateral uterine horns
signal in bitches to cnsurc continuation of proges-
until about day 13, after which time the blastocysts
terone secretion. This is quite unlike the situation
are free to migrate between horns until around day 16,
known to exist in many other domestic specics,
when endometrial swcllings indicate the prescncc of
where embryonically dlcrived factors are required to
embryonic attachment sites.
ensure survival of the new corpus luteum and thus
 Plasma progesterone concentration continues to
continuation of progesterone secretion for at lcast
increasc after thc onscl of metoestrus rcaching pcak
the first parl of pregnancy. Many of these
values (range 90-270 nmol/l; 30-90 ng/ml) about 30
embryonically initiated mechanisms for corpus
days after the LH peak. Thereafter, progesterone de-
luteum survival act through alterations in uterine
09 A3p Ao (m/su o1) llou 0e noqe mn Amos sao
prostaglandin synthesis, and termination of
aflcr the LH peak. Progesteronce conccntration in blocd
pregnancy can often be achieved simply by one
should lie within the range 30-90 nmol/l (10-30 ng/
injection of suitable prostaglandin. That such a
lutcolytic mechanism does not cxist. in bitch mel-
failure to do so is indicativc of an anovulatory cycle or
oestrus is shown by the finding that hysterectomy
an abnormality in luteal function. Until day 6O, the
has no effect on length of metoestrus. Also, thie
timing and magnitudc of the plasina progesteronc
 profile does not essentially dliffer in pregnant and non-
 of prostaglandin analogues. In bitches, single
pregnant bitches. Thereafter, differences arise as plasma
prostaglandin injections only cause transient reduc-
 progesterone concentration falls abiuptly before term
 tions in circulating progesterone, and repeated doscs
(scc later) whereas in non-prcgnant bitches levels fall
are required if circulating progesterone is to be
gradually to 3-9 nmol/l (1-3 ng/ml) over the next 30-
lowered sufficiently and for long enough to cause
60 days because of the absence of a luteolytic mecha-
aborlion, Such treatments are, howcvcr, vcry badly
nism. It is not known whethcr luteal funclion proceeds
 tolerated and cause sickness and diarrhoea.
for a programmed time period or declines due to
 Prolactin's role in supporing the corpora lutea
diminishing luteotrophic support.
aflcr about day 30, has lcd to various atlempts to
Raised plasma prolaclin concentrations, which
shorten metoestrus and induce oestrus using
were evident during the period from 30 65 days after
dopamine agonist drugs such as bromocriptine,
the LH pcak in prcgnant and non-pregnant bitches,
cabcrgoline and metcrgolinc. This will be described
 continuc to be a feature from days 60-90, cspccially
in a later chaptcr.
 in suckling bitches, as prolactin is required for milk
secretion (note: not let-down). False lactation pseudo-
Parturition
cyesis is a situation which arises spontaneously in
A pre-partum decrease in progesterone occurs in
some cycling bitches, or it may be induced in bitches
most domestic species, as a consequence of the rapid
which are spayed during metoestrus. Possible causcs
fctal acquisition of adrenal steroid sccrction leading
include raised plasma prolactin concentration in late
to cestrogen and prostaglandin secretion from the
(non-pregnant) metoestrus as a consequence of less
endometrium. In bitches, parturition is also preceded
 plasma progesterone concentration. It is also likely
tration from around 30 nmol/i (10 ng/ml) to
    sd 
<6 nmol/l (<2 ng/ml), and this is now also widely
lactin sensitivity, thus allowing prolactin to stimulate
acccptcd to be the final trigger for the initiation of
parturition. This is further confirmed by evidence
gesterone output falls. This condition probably has
that parturition can be postponed by progesterone
8
Manual of Simall Animal Rcproduction and Neonalology
administration and induced by progesterone-block-
follicles during anoestrus, they may be unresponsive
ing drugs such as epostane. It has been suggested that
to both endogenous and exogenous hormone stimu-
the timing of the fall in circulating progesterone may
lation. This may be a receptor problem, but whatcver
be reliable enough to predict the time of whelping. If,
the cause it will certainly bc one factor responsible
after analysis of a blood sample, plasma progesterone
for the difficulty encountered trying to induce fertile
 concentration is still >6 nmoll (>2 ng/ml), whelping
oestrus in bitches.
will not commence within I4 hours.
 Relatively high plasma ocstradiol concentrations
 can be measured for 10-20 days before any external
Endocrine pregnancy tests
manifestations of pro-oestrus are present in the bitch,
 As revicwcd above, plasma progcstcrone increases t0
so there may bc quite a long transitional period out of
 peak values around day 30 and then declines gradually,
anoestrus. It is interesting to speculate on mechanisms
reaching around 30 nmol/l (10 ng/ml) towards thie end
which might be involved in triggering this transition.
 of gestation. A shallower grarlicnt. to the declining
 Possibilitiesinclude increased LHsccrction, suggested
pd r e p re ad asnd 
 by some research and seen in other species at compa-
bitches has been suggested but the difference between
rable stages in the reproductive cycle, for example just
this and the profile in non-pregnant bitches is quite
prior to the transition fron anoestrus to oestrus in
 subtle, inplying that progesteronc incasurements arc
scasonal breeders likc shcep. Huwevcr, onsct of the
 not useful for pregnancy testing in bitches.
breeding season in sheep is driven by seasonal day
 Oestrogens are also essential hormones of preg-
length changes which indirectly increases pituitary
nancy. Embryo attachiment involves ocstrogen synthe-
and thcn ovarian activity, but breeding patterns in
sds uu u noudon oioiqa au A pazis
domestic bitches cannot be reliably and uniformly
and probably also in bitches. Measurement of urinary
linked to day length changes.
cestrone sulphate (the major oestrogen metabolite) at
 Alterations in prolactin secretion might offer an-
3 weeks after mating, a lime coinciding with cmbryo
-od aus 'suq ur snnsae in uoneedxa rao
attachment, has been suggested as a possible preg-
lactin concentration is raised in bitches during
 nancy test in bitches but thc idea has not been tcsted
further. Plasma oestradiol is also detectable later in
nant cycles, and in other species (e.g. sow, mare)
pregnancy, but its concentration is no higher than
prolactin is responsible for lactational anoestrus. Pro-
during metoestrus, thus ruling out the use of an ocstra-
lactin reduccs ovarian sensitivity to gonadotroplins in
 diol assay at this stage.
othcr spccies, but whcn plasma hormonc lcvcls are
Plasma proteins such as fibrinogen, one of the
studied in bitches, there does not appear to be any
 SO-called acute phase proteins, increase in pregnant
consistent temporal correlation between decreasing
bitches around day 3040 but not at cquivalent stages
 prolactin and increasing L.H sccretion at thc onsct of
of metoestrus in non-pregnant bitches. Increased plasma
pro-oestrus. If dopamine agonists (prolactin
fibrinogen
concentration
can
be
detected
suppressants) are given during metoestrus or anoestrus
immunologically, and form the basis of a commercial
however, plasma prolactin levcls are reduccd and
 pregnancy test, although to some extent the popular 
 anoestrus is shorter.
advent of ultrasonography has replaced the need for
 pregnancy tcsts at this stage of gestation.
SUMMARY
ANOESTRUS
In conclusion, thc ovarian cycle in domestic bitches
has many similarities in terms of hormonal control to
 In pregnant cycles, this phase would be defined as
 the regulatory pathways that have been closely elabo-
the interval between parturition and pro-oestrus annd
rated in more economically important domestic spe-
would normally incorporate lactation. In non-
cics. The main differences arise in thc ralc of progression
 pregnant cycles, anoestrus is the interval between the
from one cycle stage to the next. While this aspcct of
end of thc luteal phase and the onset of pro-oestrus.
bitch reproduction might cause confusion, various
 Determining the end of the luteal phase is dlifficult in
simple procedurcs havc bccn described which will
practice because of extreimely low plasma progester-
help the veterinarian to predict dates tooptimizc breed-
one concentration at this time, usually a maximum of
ing success. Additionally, there is much more informa-
 3 nmol/l (1 ng/ml) by 90 days after the LH peak (i.e.
tion availablcon proccdurcs to modifythereproductive
at least 60 days before the onset of the next
patterns in bitches with normal and abnormal cycles.
 pro-oestrus). Plasma oestradiol and LH concentra-
With the physiology of the bitch's oestrous cycle now
tions do appear to allcr throughout anocstrus, but
much morc clearly elucidatcd, the outlook for methods
these changes are subtle and require frequent collec-
to induce fertile oestrus and shorten metoestrus looks
tion of blood. Of interest is recent research which
 good, and many potential drugs and treatment protocols
shows that despite the prcscncc of small ovarian
 are already in various stages of development.
 Physiology and Enducrinology of the Bitch
+
REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
tadioimmunoassay with qualiative and quantitati veenzyme-linked
immuncassay for plasma progesterone detection in bitches.
Veternary Record 125. 107-108
Concannon PW, Morton DB und weir BJ (1989) Dog and cat
Jeffeoate IA and Lindsay FEF (1989) Ovulation detection and timing of
reproduction, contraception and atificial insenination. Jourmal of
insemination based on lorrnone concentrauions, vaginul cytology
Reproduction and Fertility, Supplement 39
and the endoscopic appearance of the vagina in dormestic bitches.
Concannon PW, England GCW, Verstegen JP and Russell HA (1993)
Journal of Reprodction and Ferility, Suppl. 39, 277 287
Fertility and infertility in dogs cats and other carnivores..Jorrual ef
Lindsay FEF(1983) The normal endoscopic appearance of the caudal
Reproduction and Fertility, Supplement 47
repraductive fract of the cyelic and non-cyelic hitch:post-uterine
England GCW, Alicn WE and Portcr DI (1989) A comparison of
enlascopyJaraifmaitAninalPractice24,115
CHAPTER TWO
Physiology and Endocrinology of
Reproduction in Female Cats
John P. Verstegen
INTRODUCTION
 queen inay enter puberty as early as 4 months of age or
 as late as 18 months, with the majority showing the first
Over the past decade, aconsiderable database has been
signs of sexual activity around 6-9 months.
 generated on behavioural-ovarian-endocrine inter-
 To a certain degree, sexual maturity may be heredi-
relationships in cats during anoestrus, oestrus, the
tary, with some breeds always showing early or dc-
luteal phase after sterile or fertile matings, during
layed puberty. Short-haired breeds such as Siamese or
pregnancy and in the post-partum period. However,
Burmese appear to be more precocious and reach
many aspccis of thc cat's reproductive physiology and
 pubcrty ata lowerbody weight than long-haircd hrccds
endocrine cycle are still poorly understood and contro-
  o    's se 
versial. The study of reproductive endocrinology in
oestrous cycle until older than 18 months. However.
 this species needs further investigation.
the main factor responsible for both sexual malurity
The cat is a seasonally polyocstrous species (but
and cyclicity appcars to be the amount and duration of
sometimes non-seasonal) and shares with other mam-
light received in relation to day length in outdoor cats,
malian species such as the rabbit, mink and ferret, the
or of artificial light in breeding colonies.
 peculiarity of being an induced ovulator.
The onset of puberty is seasonally influenced, and
usually occurs when the hours of daylight increase.
Quecns rcaching development compatible with sexual
PUBERTY
maturity at the end of summer wil, due to longer
exposure to daylight, show signs of oestrus earlier than
Thc avcragc agc of puberty in the domestic cat is
quccns who reach this stage during autumn or winter.
variable. Cats usually start to show oestrus when they
the latter showing oestrus only when day length in-
have reached about 2.3-2.5 kg body weight. The normal
 creases in the following spring.
Pregnant
Pseudopregnant
rOI
Parturition
15
15
30
45
60
75
Days in relation to mating
Figure 2.1: Changes in plasna progesterone concentrafion in the pregnant and pseudopregnant queen. Reproduced fron Lane
andCooper(1994)VeterinaryNursing,with thepermissionofButterworthHeinemann.
12
Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Neonatology
SEASONALITY AND THE OESTROUS
the vulva, but no discharge is present. The vulva may
CYCLE
present a small aperture not observed in anocstrous
quccns.
 In the absence of pregnancy or in false pregnancy.
 the cat willshow repeated oestrous cycles every 2 or
Interoestrus and anoestrus
 3 weeks in spring, summer and autumn. In brceding
In the abscncc of mating and/or spontancous ovula-
colonies with controled light and in households
with light at night, cats can become non-seasonal
 during the reproductive season. The phase observed
brceders and also show oestrus during winter.
bctwcen two pcriods of intense sexual activity and
 Photoperiods inflnence thc reproductive processcs 
vocalization during which thc cat shows no specific
via the pineal gland and its main hormone, mela-
physical or behavioural signs is called interoestrus.
tonin, in a manner believed to be similar to that seen
 Interoestrus corresponds to an apparent quiescence at
in the mare.
the lcvcl of ovaries and uterus. The uvary may, how-
ever, already be preparing for the next follicular growth
Behavioural cycle
 of the next oestrus. During interoestrus, oestrogens 
In terms of behaviour, the cycle of the cat may be
usually dccline to basal values.
divided into the heat and the non-heat period.
In some cats, however, sequential follicu lar growth
waves may overlap, oestrogen concentrations may
Pro-ocstrus and oestrus
isu ui ee r un a pu aap nou
The heal pcriod can bc divided into pro-oestrus and
oestrus. This phenomenon is often falsely called
oestrus. The behavioural pro-oestrus and oestrus period
nymphomania’' or prolonged oestrus.
together last between 3 and 10 days. It is, in contrast to
True ovarian quiesccnce is only found during an-
the bitch, rather dlifficult in cats lo scparate pro-oestrus
 oestrus which, in contrast to interoestrus, is a longer
and oestrus, because no significant external signs are
period withoutsexual activity and reproductive behav-
visible. Oestrus may be defined as male acceptance, and
iour. Anoestrus occurs when animals are living under
thc first days (from 1 to 4) of behavioural hcat, which are
vcry short natural daylight (winter) or are exposed to
associated with calling but non-acceptance of the male,
short light intervals of 4-6 h/day.
can be termed pro-oestrus. Pro-oestrus per se is clini-
Anoestrus occurs during late autumn annd early
cally difficult o etect, espccially as some cats exprcss
wintcr in queens cxposed o short hours of natural
Cestrous behaviour and accept mating without the pre-
daylight in the northern hemisphere but may be absent
liminary transitory period ofpro-oestrus. In pro-oeshus,
in animals submitted to constant long light days.
follicular growth bcgins with plasma conccntrations of
ocstradiol still low and insufficicnt to allow maximum
behavioural expression of heat.
MATING AND INDUCED OVULATION
 Oestrus begins with the queen allowing mating,
and ends whcn this behaviour ceases. Oestrus is char-
The cat is generally considered to be a reflex mediated
acterized by maximum synthesis and effects of follicular
induced ovulator, i.e. a coital stimulus (natural during
oestrogens.
copulation or arlificial luring vaginal manipulation) is
 During heat, the cat rubs against animate and inani-
 required for ovulation to take place, although evidence
mate objects, rolls, and often becomes extremely af-
is accumulating that some cats may ovulate sponta-
fectionate. She is vociferous, constantly vocalizing.
neously. Vaginal stimulation during mating induces
with much howling and calling. If stroked, cspecially
along the back, the cat will adopt the mating posture,
 thalamus, triggering an increased release of gonado-
i.e. fore-end crouched, hind-end raised, tail deflected.
trophin releasing hormone (GnRH). This GnRH release
with padidling movemcnts of the limbs. Male cats are
causes the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge to occur.
attracted to her, and when the queen is fuily in heat she
Similarly, administration of gonadotrophin or GmRH
will attempt to escape and allow mating. Male thrust-
can induce ovulation of several ova within 2448 hours
ing causes the female to vocalize violently, which is
of administration. Inierestingly, ovulation rale seems tu
followed immediately by the female forcefully and
be directly related to the amplitude of the LH surge,
 sometime aggressively freeing herself from the male's
which is itself correlated to the number, interval and the
neck grip. The quccn will then show a temporary lack
qualily of the matings. The intcrval bctwecn vaginal
of interest in mating; however, this is soon followed by
stimulation and ovulation is indirectly proportional to
multiple copulation typically observed throughout
the number of matings and the endocrine status at
ocstrus. Although controversial andl certainly difficult.
 copulation. Cats that have becn in ocstrus for several
to assess in conditions other than controlled breeding
days ovulate sooner after mating than cats that have only
colonies, it appears that oestrus is shortened by mating.
 just entered oestrns. Ovulation can therefore ocur as
External genitalia show few if any typical signs,
carly as 24 hours or as latc as 52 hours after the induced
sometimes a little reddening, softening or oedema of
 LH surge. Afterovulation, the cat goes outof heat within
Physiology and Endocrinology of Reproduction in Female Cats
13
24 48 hours. However, it is possible for an LH surge to
Ovulation and fertilization
occur spontaneously without mating or vaginal stimula-
If the cat is mated with a fertile male or is successfully
tion and to be followed by ovulation. Increases in
inseminated, the embryos develop for 4-5 days after
plasma progesterone concentration typical of those fol-
fertilization in thc oviducts and thcn migrate into the
lowing ovulation have been observed in queens which
uterine horns where implantation occurs around day
havc not been mated. Spontaneous ovulation seems to
12-16 post-mating (first mating is considered as the
occur more frequently in old cats and in breeding
ovulatory stimulus). Bcforc implantation, the
colonies where the males are housed in the same room
blastocysts move freely into the uterine horns,
as females, although there is no visual or physical
migrating from one horn to the other. These intra- and
contact. This observation may be attributable to the
 inter-horn migrations seem to cnsure an cven distri-
effects of pheromones as in other species.
bution of fetuses in both horns. After implantation,
The behavioural aspects of matings and possible
 problems cncountcrcd arc covercd in Chapter 10.
the total length of gestation is around 64 days (timed
from the first mating). As with pscudoprcgnancy,
progesterone secretion during pregnancy generally
HORMONAL CONTROL OF
prevents oestrus occurring.
OVULATION, PSEUDOPREGNANCY
When the cat ceases lactation afler kitening, ifit is
AND PREGNANCY
still the breeding season, a brief period of interoestrus
will follow until the next return of oestrus; otherwise
It is believed that follicular development in the cat is
anoestrus occurs. In lactating queens, this ocstrous
under the influence of follicle stimulating hormone
 shep siot noqn saousuuo Aensn poned
(FSH) as in other species, and oestrogen production
weaning. However, in some cases oestrus may be seen
causes the clinical and behavioural signs of pro-
in nursing fcinalcs 10-15 days after kittening. In this
oestrus and oestrus. However, at present, there are n0
case, if she is not mated or if ovulation does not occur,
convincing data concerning plasma FSH concentra-
 the queen will return to oestrus (normally)every 10 .20
tions during the oesfrous cycle. If ovulation does nol
days. Thc first mating aftcr kittening is often not fertile
occur, the follicles become atretic and oestrogen con-
due to incomplete uterine involution, but mating dur-
 centrations decline. Luteinization does not occur, and
ing the next oestrus may be fertile and it is not uncom-
newly recruited follicles may start to grow after a few
 mon to sce a nursing quccn which is pregnant again
days of interoestrus.
before weaning. Spontancous or induccd follicular
 In the case of an induced or spontaneous effective
growth with oestrous behaviour and mating have been
LH surge, avulation will cnsuc and corpora lutea de-
described during pregnancy, suggesting that the ova-
velop. Although queens may accept the male during the
ries are responsive to gonadotrophins during gcstation
in this species.
day of cestrus), some cals Imay show a sufficicnt rclcasc
of LH in response to copulation only by the fourth or
fifth day. Cats seem to require oestrogen priming for
ENDOCRINE EVENTS DURING THE
scvcral days hefore copulation can inrluce an LH surge
REPRODUCTIVE CYCLE
which is sufficient to cause ovulation. In contrast to the.
bitch, in this species, events after ovulation will depend
Oestrogens
on whether the mating was fertile or not.
Follicular phases are associated with production of 17-
β-ocstradliol sccretcd from the developing follicles
Ovulation without fertilization
with oestrus itself associated with maximal produc-
When cocytcs arc not fertilized after ovulation, cor-
tion. Oestradiol concentrations are basal in anoestrus
 pora lutea develop and produce progesterone for a
ur interoestrus (lcss than 60-70 pmol/l) and risc ovcr a
period of about 25-45 days. This luteal phase is shorter
few days from the end of anoestrus or interoestrus to
than that of pregnancy and is therefore often called
 more than 150-300 pmol/l during oestrus itself. If no
ovulation occurs, oestradiol decreases to basal concen-
fore the luteal phase following an ovulation without
trations within 5-10 days. If ovulation occurs, how-
fcrtilization or implantation, but is not, as in dogs,
ever, oestradiol concentrations will decline within 2-3
 associated with behavioural changes or lactation. Dur-
days. The jncrcasc in ocstradiol during follicular
ing this time, high concentrations of progesterone are
development and oestrus is essential for oestrous
maintaincd by a ccntrally mediated blockage of GnRH
behaviour and for priming the gonadotrophin surge
release which does not allow the cat to come inlo heat.
associated with mating and ovulation.
In some cats, follicular waves follow each cther so
brief period of interoestrus will precede the next return
closely that the follicular phase and therefore oestrous
 of oestrus provided it is still the breeding season,
hchaviour seem continuous. This phenomenon is often
 otherwise anoestrus occurs.
observed in specific breeds such as Siauese cals.
14
Manual of Sinall Animal Reproduction and Nconalology
During the first part of the huteal phase, in pregnant and
the luteal phase in pseudopregnant animals do not
non-pregnant animals, oestradiol concentrations are
change the lifespan of the corpus luteum, demonstrat-
generally bclow 70 nmoll but thcy may incrcasc
ing that thc uterus is not involved in luteolysis.
occasionally in individual animals. Increased basal
In the pregnant cat, around day 25-35 an initial
levels of 17-β-oestradiol may also be observed after
decrease in progesterone occurs, but values then
day 35-45 of pregnancy.
remain stable at approximately 15-30 mol/l
(5-10 ng/ml) and do nol decrcase below 3-5 nmol/l
FSH and LH
(1-1.6 ng/mi) until day 60. In the cat, progesterone is
Up to now, no convincing studies concerning plasma
necessary throughout gestation to maintain pregnancy,
FSH concentralion in the cat have bccn rcported. It is,
 although queens can still remain prcgnant for a few
however, believed that similar to other species, dy-
days after plasma concentrations have decreased be-
namic changes in FSH secretion at the end of anoestrus
low 3 nmoll (<1 ng/ml), the apparent minimal re-
and interoestrus arc rcsponsible for the indnction of thc
quired concentration of progesteronc to maintain
follicular growth.
 pregnancy. Corpora lutea remain the main source of
During pro-oestrus and oestrus, before tlhe stinulus
progesterone. The placenta either produces a very
triggcring the LH surge, plasma LH concentration is
 small amount insufficient to maintain pregnancy, Or
does not secrete any progeslcrone at all. In fact, ova-
vaginal stimulation or in some instances spontaneously.
 peaks within 2 hours andrcturns to basal concentrations
results in a decline of plasma progesterone below
within 12-24 hours. The amplitude and duration of the
3 nmol/l (<1 ng/ml) within 48 hours of surgery.
LHsurge is highly variable and depends on the intensity,
What causes the difference in corpus luteum activ-
duration and frequency of thc coital stinmulus. The LH
ity of pregunant versus pseudopregnant cats is still not
surge is highcr and lasts longcr whcn multiple matings
known. Prcgnancy may, as in othcr spccies, involve
Occur, compared with the LH values measured after a
some specific luteotropic factors originating from the
single coitus. The amplitude varies from less than
fetus, the placenta and/or the pituitary, and acting as a
10 ng/ml bcforc mating to more than 100 ng/ml aficr
signal to maintain the corpus lutcum and prevent its
maximal stimulation. The duration of the LH surge
regression. In fact, the initial signal is most likely to
varies from a few minutes after the coital stimulus to a
 originate from the uterus, the fetus and/or the placenta,
maximum of 24 hours. The optimal LH surge is ob-
since hysterectomics performed in carly pregnancy
served when a maximum of four matings occur within
(before dlay 20-25)are associalcd with a corpus lutcum
 a 2-4 hour interval. More coital stimulus during this
lifespan of 25-35 days, similar to that observed in
timc-frame or over a longer time interval may not
 pseudopregnant animals. This indirectly demonstrates
significantly increase the LH response. This is appar-
that the fetus and/or the placcnla is/are involved, di-
ently due to exhaustion of the pituitary LH content.
rectly orindirectly, in the prolongation of progesterone
secretion by the corpus luteum. Possible factors in-
Progesterone
volved in sustaining the corpus luteum during preg-
 Plasma progesterone concentrations are basal during
nancy are prolactin and relaxin, which have been
 anoestms, interoestrus, pro-oestrus and oestrus prior to
identified as possible luteotrophins in dogs.
ovulation.
In both pregnant and pseudopregnant cats plasma
Relaxin
progcsterone begins to increase after ovulation, begin-
 Relaxin is the only pregnancy-specific hormone in
ning between 24 hours and 50 hours affer the LH surge.
both cats and dogs. Relaxin is cssentially sccreted by
Concentrations may reach a maximum of 100-200
the placenta in camivores, although some production
 nmoll around day 20-25 after the first mating.
by the ovaries cannot be excluded. Plasma relaxin
 In pscudoprcgnant animals plasma concentrations
 concentrations increase from days 20-30 post-mating
start to decrease on about day 25 and reach basal values
exclusively in pregnant animals, suggesting its role as
around days 30-40. This slow decline in progesterone 
a luteotrophic factor specific for pregnancy. Relaxin
is characteristie of the pseudoprcgnant cat, in contrast
may act dircctly on thc corpus luteum or may indirectly
to the pregnant cat, in which progesterone concentra-
stimulate prolactin secretion at the level of the pitui-
tions rermain high before declining rapidly at the end of
 tary, or by stimulating other sill unknown luteotropic
 gestation. The slower declinc in progesterone at the
factors. It was shown that relaxin can sustain and
end of pseudopregnancy is similar to the dog, and is
increase prolactin secretion both in vivo and in vitro.
probably due to a missing luteolytic factor that is
Relaxin is measurable throughout pregnancy and dur-
 produced in pregnant cats al the cnd of pregnancy. In
ing the first fcw days after kittening.
pseudopregnant animals, the corpus luteum appears to
se ie Audone orapun on pauoid-aid aa
Prolactin
days when thcrc is no luteotrophic support from thc
 Prolactin secrelion, which is basal during thc ocstrous
embryo or placenfa. Hystcrectomies performcd during
cyclc, increases around 25-35 days afler Ihe first
Physiology andEndocrinologyofReproductioninFemaleCats
15
mating in thepregnant queen andreaches a maximum
During the follicular phase,superficial and kera-
afewdaysbeforeparturition,afterwhichitincreases
tinized cells appear on the smear,reflecting the in-
dramaticallyduring lactationThesuppressionofpro
creased effects of 17-β-oestradiol.Theproportion of
lactinbythe administrationofadopamineagonistsuch
anuclear superficial cells to nuclear superficialcells
as bromocryptine or cabcrgoline during pregnancy
does not change significantly.A main characteristic of
causes adeclineinprogesterone secretionincats,and
follicularphasevaginal smearsisthe slowreductionin
will result in abortionwhenconcentrations of proges-
nuclearintermediate andbasal cells.However,these
terone fall below3nmol/1(1 ng/ml).These observa-
changes are less impressive and characteristic than
tionsdemonstrate thecentral luteotrophicroleplayed
they arein the bitch.The most significantindication of
by prolactin in the cat, as in dogs.
oestrogen activityis the clearing of thebackground on
theslide associatedwitha dramaticreduction in the
Melatonin
cellular debris ormucus.Eosinophilic staining is less
In cats,melatonin secretion is associated with the
consistentandmarkedthanindogs,andredbloodcells
photoperiod,i.e.varying accordingto thelengthof the
are not observed.
day.Plasmamelatoninconcentrations areinsynchrony
During interoestrus,the majority of cells areinter-
with concentrations ofplasma prolactin.Melatonin
mediatewithafewbasalorparabasalandkeratinized
and prolactin concentrations appear tobe high during
nuclearcells.Generally,thereisdebriswhichgivesthe
theperiodof darkness andlowduring theperiodof
background on the vaginal smear a dirty appearance.
highlightintensity.Theexactrelationshipbetweenthe
Duringanoestrus,cells arerare,mucus sobvious
secretion ofmelatonin,prolactinandthe follicular
andabundant and the majority ofcells are basal or
growth associatedwith oestrogenproduction isnot
parabasal with someintermediate cells.Leucocytes
well understood,requiring more studies in future.
can sometimes be observed.
Melatoninandprolactinsccrctions are likelytoplaya
Vaginal cytology in cats can be used to detect or
roleinovarianfunctioninthecat,sinceconcentrations
confirm the follicular phase,namely pro-oestrus and
of both hormones are lower duringperiods of ovarian
oestrus.It allows the confirmation of mating by the
activity(oestrus) than during periods of ovarian quies-
identification of spermatozoa when carried out soon
cence(anoestrus and interoestrus).
after copulation.
VAGINALCYTOLOGY
REFERENCESANDFURTHERREADING
Vaginalcytologyinqueensreflects hormonal changes
Banks DH and StabcnfeldtGH(1982)Luteinizinghormone relcase in
(Figure 2.2),particularly during the periodof heat.In
the cat inrcsponse tocoitus onconsecutive days ofestrus.Biology
ofReproduction26,603-611
breedingmanagement vaginal cytologyislessuseful
BurkeT（1976）Felinereproduction.VeterinaryClinicsofNorh
in cats than in dogs,particularly as the cycle may be
America6,317-321
Concannon P,Hodgson B and Lein D (198O) Reflex LH release in
affected by carrying out the procedure.
Figure 2.2:Felinevaginal smears.(a)Smear rypical of the oestrous phase of the cycie.The majority ofcelis are superficial
anucleatedkeratinizedcellsorcellswithpyknoticnucleiIntermediatecellscanstill beohserved.(b)Smeartypicalofa
metoestrusrush’sometimesobservedinqueensat theendof theoestrousphase.Superficial andintermediatecellsare
observedogetherwithumerouswhitebloodcels.Thismetoestrusrushisofshortduration2448hours）inthequen
16
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
estrous cats following single and multiple copulations.Bioiogy of
Shille VM, Lundstrom KE and Stabenfeldt GH (1979) Follicular
Reproduction 23,11i-117
Goodrowe KL, Ioward JG, Schmidt PM and Wildt DE (1989) Repro-
concentrations in plasma: rclation to estrous behuvior and cornifi-
duetive biolugy of lhe domestic cat witli special reference to
cation of exfoliated vaginal epitheliun. Biology of Reproduction
cndocrinology.spermfunctionandin-vitrofertilization.Journatof
21,953-963
Reproductun andFerility Supplement 39,73-90
Sewurt DR and Stabenfeldt GH (1983) Relaxin activity in the pregnant
HurniH(1981)Daylength and hreeding inthe domesticcatLaborarory
Ccat. Biutogy of Repraduction 32, 848-854
Animats 15, 229-233
Tsutsui I and Stahenfeldt GH (1993) Biology of ovarian cycles,
Olson PN, Husted PW, Allen TA and Net TM (1984) Reproxluctive
pregnancy and pseudopregnancy in thc domestic cat.Journai of
Reproduction and Fertilty Supplcment 47, 29-35
Clinics of North Anerica: Smail Aninat Pracice 14、927.946
Verstegen JP, Onclin K, Silva LDM, Wouters-Bullnuan P, Delahaut F
Schmidt PM, Chakraborty PK and Wildt DE (1983) Ovarian activity:
circulanghomneansexulbehaviourintecatTrelation-
in the cat: studics on lhe roles ofcorpora lutea.placenta and
prolactin sceretion.JournalofReproductionand Fertility Supple-
cstrus.Biology ofReprotuelion 28,657671
mcnt 47, 165-173
CHAPTER THREE
The Infertile Female
Patrick J. Wright and John R. Watts
INTRODUCTION
Important aspects of reproductive history include:
-da snonsso jo raqnu an ishus jo Aa s
Infertility is the reduction in the ability to produce
sodes; the intervals between the occurrence of succcs-
yaung. Older (>6-7 years) bitchcs and qucens may
sive periods of pro-oestrus; the duration of stages
cycle less frequently, have reduced rates of pregnancy
(pro-oestrus, oestrus, metoestrus/anoestrus); the pres-
and litters with lower numbers than normal. Infertility
ence and nature of vulval discharges; and thc naturc
may reflect a problem with the imalc and/or the female,
and timing of sexual behaviour. Information on the
and can be associated with normal or abnormal oestrous
number of heats at which the female was mated, the
cycles, or failure to mate. Aetiologies include im-
 days on which mating occurred, whethcr prcgnancy
 proper management, as well as dlisorders of behaviour,
occurred, the number of pregnancies, the number of
development, anatomy or function of the reproductive
puppies or kittens born, normality or otherwise of
system, and may involve infection, neoplasia or be
parturition, and any losses of puppies or kittens should
iatrogenic.
bc obtained. The fertility of past sircs around the time
 The approach to the bilch or queen presented for
of infertile matings should be determined. Early cycles
investigation ofinfertility needs to be ordered, sensible
in the young bitch or queen may be irregular and
and cognizant of thc likclihood of the various disor-
 associated with infertility. Owncrs should be assured
ders. The investigation involves obtaining a history,
that this pattern may reflect the young age of the animal
performing an initial clinical examination, and then
and will most probably be self-limiting.
furihcr cxamination and tests as indicatcd.
After thc history has bccn cbtained it should be
The considerations in this section relate first to the
possible to define the presenting problem as:
bitch free from Bruceila canis. In bitches, B. canis can
cause infertility, embryonic loss, abortion, stillbirths 
Failurc to show oestrus
and death of puppies; in male dogs, it can cause
 Infertility associated with abnormal cycling
epididymitis. No cases of B. canis infection have been
activity (short inter-pro-oestrous interval, short
reported in Australia or in the UK, except in imported
pro-ocstrus, prolonged pro-oestrus/ocstrus)
animals. Nonetheless, B. canis is an important cause of
Infertility associated with apparently normal
infertility in other countries and disease caused by this
oestrous cycles
 organism is dcscribcd in the final section of this chap-
Failurc to mate or abortion.
ter. Infertility resulting from failure to mate and from
abortion is considered in other chapters.
Initial examination
Thc gcneral clinical examination of the bitch or queen
should include asscssimcnt of hcr lisposition and de-
CASE MANAGEMENT
 meanour, body weight and condition, and cardinal signs.
The ex amination of the reproductive system should
History
include the following:
The aims of obtaining a history are: to determine the
 general health and managcment of the bitch or queen;
 Palpation of the mammary glands (for cvidcncc
to define the problem; to assess the compefency and
of mastitis, tumours, nodules, lactation,
understanding of the owner; and to obtain information
hypertrophy)
relevant to thc invcstigation. The taking of the history
 Inspectiorrof the vulva (to dctcrminc ils sizc,
should be thorough, painstaking and concerned with
relative turgidity/flaccidity and presence of any
the owner's observations and not interpretations. Im-
vulvar discharge)
 portant aspects of the general history include vaccina-
 A vaginal smear, to determine the stage of the
tion and anthelmintic programmcs, past and current
oestrous cycle andi to evaluale the numbers of
illnesses and treatments.
leucocytes
18
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
If oestrus is suspected, the assessment of positive
cessation of cyclic activity. The condition may be due
postural reflexes (flagging of tail, lifting of
to a failure to observe overt signs of pro-oestrus and
yulva) may be asscssed by stroking thc perincal
oestrus, or to structural or funclional disorders within
region
the hypothalamus (or higher centres)pituitary--
The vagina of the bitch should be examined
ovarian axis.
using an endoscope and by digital palpation (the
The inter-pro-oestrous interval in bitches is 4-12
vagina of the queen is more lifficult to examinc;
months, with considerable consistency within an indi-
see Diagnostic aids, vaginoscopy)
vidual. In older bitches,the normal inter-pro-oestrous
Abdominal palpation, which may reveal fetuses
interval may be longer (e.g. 10-12 months) than in
or abnormalities of the uterus such as tumours or
younger bitches.
uterine enlargement due to pyometra.
Differential diagnoses
Thc stagc of the cycle of the normal, non-pregnant,
post-pubertal bitch can be determined from vaginal
Pre-puberral. Puberty normally occurs at 6-24
cytology and plasma progesterone concentrations
months in bitches and at around 10 months in
(Table 3.1). It should be notcd that thc findings for the 
qucens. I is associated with the allainment of
 prepubertal bitch are similar to those for the anoestrous
mature body weight, occurring approximately 2
bitch. The findings for the metoestrous and pregnant
months after reaching 70-80% of mature body
 nn sd    oe  
weight. However, up to 2-3 years can be allowed
diagnosis of pregnancy are nccded to dcterminc the
for normal puberty to occur in the bitch, and in
reproductive status.
 some Greyhounds it may not occur until their
The extent of further routine tests such as
fourth or fifth year.
haemalological and biochemical examinations, and
Ovarian aplasia/hypoplasia. The congcnital
urinalysis may reflect cultural expectations, commer-
absence or lack of developrmenl of one or both
cial imperatives, the maintenance of mystique, a liti-
ovaries is very rare. Plasma gonadotrophin
giousenvironmcnt and diagnostic incompetcnce rathcr
concentrations are elevatcd in thesc cases,
than what is appropriate for diagnosis of the problem.
indicating a lack of inhibitory effect of ovarian
It is unetlhical and unprofessional to perform unneces-
hormones on the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. A
sary tests without discussion withi the owners as to the
GnRH stimulation test would show increase in
 real value and cost of these investigations.
plasma oestradiol concentralions in cases of
 unilateral but not bilateral aplasia. Inspection, via
Disorders characterized by failure to
 a laparotomy, reveals very small or absent
obscrve ocstrus
ovarics.
Reported anoestrus may reflect the failure of
 Seasonal. Domestic dogs (with the exception of
commencement of ovarian cycling, an unexpected
 African breeds, e.g. Basenjis) do not have
prolongation of the inter-pro-oestrous intcrval (e.g-
cyclicity linked to season. Wild dogs (dingoes,
>12 months for bitches, >20 days for cats) or the
wolves) mate in autumn. Cats under natural
Diagnosis
Oestrogenic activity
 Plasma progesterone
concentrations
Anoestrus
一
<1.5 nmol/1 (<0.5 ng/ml)
Pro-oestrus
+
<6 nmol/l (<2.0 ng/ml)
Oestrus
+
>6 nmul/1 (>2.0 ng/nl)
Metoestius
carly
>32 nmol/ (>10 ng/ml)
-10 +
late
>1.5 nmol/1 (>0.5 ng/ml)
Pregnancy
>6-9 nmol/1 (>2-3 ng/ml)
Cystic follicles (oestrogen-secreting)
+
<1.5 nmol/1 (<0.5 ng/ml)
(progesterone-secreting)
一
>6 mmol/1 (>2.0 ng/ml)
'Tumour
(oestrogen-secreting)
+一
<1.5 nmol/l (<0.5 ng/ml)
(progesterone-sccreting)
>6 nmol/1 (>2.0 ng/ml)
Table 3.1: Deterninufion of the slage of the reproduciive cycle of the bitch and some conditions of the reproductive tract from
s - said + suuus uoisod usd pu  pa of pau n sonsaofouia
The Infertile Fcmale
19
photoperiod cycle in spring, summer and autumn
Ovarian cysts or neoplasia. Progesterone-
 secreting (luteal) cysts and neoplasns (e.g.
Exposure to artificial patterms of photoperiod
associated with indoor housing may influence
ovarian cyclicity by inhibiting the secretion of
their cyclic behaviour.
gonadotrophins. Plasma progesterone
 Inappropriate photoperiod. Seasonal breeders
concentrations will be >6 nmol/l (>2 ng/ml).
(cats, wild dogs) rcquire appropriate patterns of
Tumours (if largc) may be dletccted by palpation,
light/dark for normal cyclic activity. Exposure to
radiography or ultrasonography. Progesterone-
inhibitory photoperiod or to a continuous long
secreting cysts are commonly small and may be
duration of stimulatory photoperiod may result in
single or multiple, involving one or both ovaries.
acyclicity. Stimulatory photoperiod in the cat
The patterms of progesterone secretion will
would involve 12-14 hours of light and 10-12
generally be different from those of metoestrus
hours of dark, although cats are reported to cyclc
in that thc connccntration will be lower(>1.5-6
with a minimum of 10 hours of light (and [4
 nmol/l; 0.5-2 ng/ml) and elevated for a longer
hours of dark).
 period than metoestrus (60-90 days). Treatment 
Cats: social factors. Queens low on the social
of progcsterone-secreting cysts may includc thc
scale may show 'silent heat'. Bchavioural
administration of prostaglandins to induce
oestrus is not shown, but endocrine and
regression of luteal tissue, or surgical renoval.
cytological signs of oestrus are normal. Serial
Ncoplasms and cysts (e.g. rete ovari) that are not
vaginal smears should revcal ocstrogenic
hormonally active, if present on both ovaries,
 changes and indicate oestrus.
may cause anoestrus by causing ovarian atrophy.
Stress, physical training, poor nutrient status.
Prematre ('senile')ovarian failure. Thc
These factors have been shown to inhibit ovarian
duration of the functional life of the ovaries of
cyclicity in a number of species. Physical
the bitch or queen is not known. A stage of clear
training may inhibit ovarian cyclicity in
cessation of ovarian function similar to that of 
Grcyhounds. Strcss factors for the cat inclurlc
the menopausc in woimcn has not been defined.
overcrowding, extremes of temperature.
Ovarian function may decline with age, and in
inadequate diet, frequent exhibition at cat shows
some bitches, prematuely. In older queens,
and associatcd travel.
oestrous activity may be less frequent or
Inadequate observation/display of oestrous
ultimately cease. Animals with ovarian failure
signs. Factors contributing to a failure to
generally have higher gonadotrophin
obscrve signs of pro-oestrus/ocstrus may
concentrations than normal animals.
 involve the owner or the bitch or queen. Factors
Immune-mediated oophoritis. This condition is
associated with owners include lack of
 most uncommon. The diagnosis is bascd on
frequency or carc of observation, or a lack of
histological examination of thc ovary. Signs
understanding of the signs of oestrus. These 
described in affected bitches include diffuse
factors may be exacerbated in animals housed
lymphocytic inflammation, follicular
extensivcly (c.g. yard, outside kennelling. in
degeneration, dcgcncration and necrosis of
 groups) compared with those housed more
 oocytes and thickening of the zona pellucida.
intimately. Factors associated with the bitch or
Ovariectomy. Previous ovariectomy may be
quccn include motdest physical signs of pro-
indicated by an incision scar or from an ear
oestrus/oestrus (e.g. Greyhounds that may have
a less marked vulval swelling than say Boxers),
bitches. Ovariectomized bitches have
long hair coat (Newfoundlands, Samoycd),
concentrations of LH and FSH higher than
inadequate behavioural signs resulting in lack of
anoestrous and metoestrous bitches. However,
male interest, or lack of enthusiasm in the
these assays have limited availability and further
female. Closc obscrvation of the bitch's
cvidence of ovariectoiny may bc dcrivcd fron
behaviour and vulva twice a week, and
inspection by laparotomy or laparoscopy
Alternatively, a gonadotrophin or GnRH
may be ncccssary to detect pro-oestrus/oestrus.
stimulation test may bc performed (using eCG or
The determination of plasma progesterone
GnRH, see Clinical approach).
concentrations is not necessary as any increase
Cats: pseudopregnancy. Pseudopregnancy may
in concentralions would be preceded by
follow'stcrilc maling(s), spontaneous ovulation
oestrogenic signs in the vaginal smear.
or early embryonic death. The corpus luteum
However, at the time of the initial consultation,
commonly persists for 35-37 days, preventing
a progesteronc assay should be carried out to
 Ovarian cyclicity. Cyclicity cormmonly resumcs
eliminate the possibility uf an ovulation having
 7-10 days after luteal regression. The period of
occurred in the previous 2 months.
lack of oestrus is then 40-50 days. The cyclic
20
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
occurrcnce of oestrus around this interval
latrogenic. Drugs which may prevcnt the
suggests a pattern of ovulation followedl by
 Occurrence of ocstrus inclule progestogens,
pseudopregnancy. The lack of pregnancy
androgens, anabolic steroids and
following mating may reflect male infertility or
glucocorticoids. These preparations act by
female infertility resulting from a failure of
inhibiting thc secretion of gonadotrophins.
conception or a loss of embryos. To confirm the
Bitches treated with androgens may have
diagnosis of recurrent pseudopregnancy. vaginal
clitoral enlargement and a purulent vaginal
      
lischarge.
weeks to detect oestrogenic changes and plasma
Intercurrent diseases. Anoestrus can be
progesterone concentrations measured to detect
associated with disorders of other body systems,
the corpora lutea of pseudopregnancy.
e.g. poor body condition, debility.
Pseutlopregnancy may follow embryonic
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism ,
loss due to infections. Systemic infection
hypoadrenocorticism. Hypothyroidism is most
insufficient to cause clinical illness in the queen
unlikely to be a cause of anoestrus in thc
may causc ermbryonic death, abortion and
clinically normal bitch showing no signs of the
mummification . These infections include feline
disease (poor coat, lethargy, poor appetite, low
panleucopcnia and feline infectious peritonitis.
tolerance of cold, obesity, alopecia).
 Diagnosis of infection with feline panleucopenia
Pituitary insufficiency is rare, but occurs in
virus on the basis of serology is accurate only
German Shepherd Dogs with hereditary
during the stage of acute viraemia. Feline
dwarfism. Diagnosis is based on history and
leukacmia virus may spccifically infcct the
physical findings. Tests of endocrine function
reproductive tract and cause resorption, abortion
will show impaired activity of pituitary-thyroid
and infertility. Elimination of feline leukaemia
or pituitary-adrenal function.
virus requircs detection (by serological testing)
Idiopathic prolonged anoestrus. The senior
of infected cats and their removal from the
author has encountered a few bitches that do not
breeding group. Repeat testing is required to
cycle spontaneously but are responsive to
detect seronegative carriers. Testing should
treatment with gonadotrophins and have
continuc at 90 day intervals until all cals are
 prodnced norrnal healthy litters. This condition
found to be negative in two successive tests.
was probably due to a failure of the normal
The role of other infections in embryonic loss is
hypothalamic-piruitary functional changes
not clear.
associated with the onset of pro-oestrus.
Cats: lactational/post-lactational anoestrus.In
Diagnosis is on the basis of response to
the queen, cestrus is usually absent during
 gonadotrophin treatinent.
lactation and oestrous activity recommences
approximately 2-3 weeks after the end of
Clinical approach
lactation, or sooner (around 6-8 days) if the
A checklist for possible diagnoses is presented in
killens are rcnoved or dic within a fcw days of
Tahle 3.2.
birth. It should be noted that pregnancy and
lactation have little effect on the inter-
History
pro-ocstrous intcrval in the bitch.
Asscss whethcr the problem lies with the animal or
Abnormalities of sexiual differentiation. These
with thc uwncr's expcctation or management.
animals are extermally phenotypically female but
Determine whether the owner understands the signs
the vagina and vulva are small and the clitoris
of oestrus and normal patterns of reproduction and if
may be enlarged. Thc gonads arc either
observations have bcen adequate. If necessary, ex-
undeveloped testes (male pseudo-
tend the period of anticipation for the onset of first
hcrmaphrodites), undcveloped ovaries, or
oestrus in the bitch to 2-3 years of age, or to 12. -14
ovotestes (true hermaphrodites). Affecled
months after the prcvious ocstrus. Consider whether
animals commonly have complements of sex
the patient has been treated with drugs likely to inhibit
chromosomes different (e.g. 77,XO, 79,XXX,
ovarian cyclicity. Consider whether the bitch or
79,XXY, 78,XX/78,XY, 37,XO) from the
qucen shows male bchaviour suggestive of male
normal bitch or queen (78,XX, 38,XX). Such
 pseudohermaphroditism (although it should be noted
complements of chromosomes reflect tlhe
 that mounting and thrusting behaviour can also occur
processcs of non-disjunction during mciosis ur
 in normal bitchcs).
mitosis during embryonic development.
Diagnosis is confirmed by karyotypic
Initial examination
exarnination and the detection of abnormal
 Louk for cvidence of ovariectomy. Determine whether
complements of chromosormes. There is no
 the clitoris is enlarged (intersex, iatrogenic). Ensure
 treatment for these conditions.
there are no signs of disordlcrs of other body systems.
Thc Infertile Female
21
Aetiology
History
Examination
Additional tests
 Prepubertal
+
+
Ovarian aplasia/hypoplasia
Plasma LH/FSH, inspection,
gonadotrophin/GnRH stinulation test
Seasonal
Inappropriate photoperiod
+
Social factors (cats)
+
Serial vaginal cytology
Stress, training, poor nutrition
+
 Inadequate observation of
+
 Serial vaginal cytology, plasma
display of oestrus
 progesterone determinations
Ovarian cysts, neoplasia
十
Imaging, plasma progcstcronc
‘Senile’ ovarian failure
+
 Plasma LH/FSH, GnRH stimulation test
Oophoritis
 Inspection, biopsy
Ovariectomy
+
十
 Plasma LH/FSH, gonadotrophin /GnRH
stimulation test, inspection
Pseudopregnancy (cats)
+
 Plasma progesterone, serology
Lactation (cats)
+
Abnormalitics of scxual
+
 Karyotyping, inspection, plasma
differentiation
testosterone
Iatrogenic
+
十
 Intercurrent disordcrs
+
As appropriate...
+
Pititary insufficiency
+
 Pituitary function tests
 Idiopathic
 Gonadotrophin/GnRH stimulation test
Tuble 3.2: Diagnosis offailure to observe oestrus -a checklist emphasizing inportant aids for diagnosis.
Further investigation
Trcatmcnt and management
 Confirmation of ovarian inactivity can be
 Owner education concerning normal reproductive pat-
obtained from a vaginal smear and measurement
terns and the signs of oestrus may be necessary. Under-
of plasma progesterone concentrations
lying intercurrent condlitious should be trcated (c.g.
 In some cases, an eCG or GnRH stimulation test
endocrine disorders, poorbody condition) and ovarian
may be useful to determine thle presence and
cyclicity may resume. Many conditions are not treat-
functional capability of the pituitary-ovarian axis
ablc (c.g. ovarian aplasia/hypoplasia, scnilc ovarian
 Elevated plasma progesterone concentrations
failurc, ovariectomy) and discussion of the poor prog-
indicate functioning Iuteal tissue, consistent with
 nosis with the owner may be necessary.
pseudopregnancy/pregnancy (cats), normal
Treatments to induce oestrus (e.g. gonadotrophins,
metoestrus/pregnancy (bitch), luteal cysts and
see Chapler 16) may be indicated when the animal
ovarian neoplasia
appears normal, and may also have some value in
 Elevatcd plasima LH/FSH conccntralions in thc
determining whcthcr thc animal has functional ovaries
absence of signs of oestrus indicates the lack of
(gonadotrophin stimulation test). However, there is no
 inhibitory effect of ovarian steroids on LH/FSH
treatment protocol which reliably induces fertile
sccrction. Thcsc incrcased plasma concentrations
oestrus and ovulation in all bitches. This treatment
 of LH and FSHI may be present in cases of
should be instituted during anoestrus and after
 ovariectomy, ovarian hypoplasia/aplasia and
endometrial regeneration. In the authors' experience
 premature ovarian failurc.
 the animal is more likely to respond to treatment if she
has cxhibitcd cestrous cycles previously.
Other diagnostic procedures which may be indicated
arc:
ABNORMAL, CYCLING ACTIVITY
Karotyping (intersex)
 Ultrasonographic/radiographic imaging of thc
Disorders charactcrized by a short
reproductive tract (ovarian cysts, neoplasia)
pro-ocstrus followed by anoestrus (no
 Inspection of the reproductive tract at laparotomy
oestrus or ovulation)
(ovarian hypoplasia/aplasia, intersex)
These disorders may reflect factors which can cause a
An oestrous response to treatment with
reduced intensity of the visible signs of ocstrus, c.g.
gonadotrophins (gonadotrophin stimulation test)
stress, poor nutrition, training, iatrogenic and inter-
indicates functional ovarics (scc bclow).
current diseasc. They may also result from conditions
22
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
causcd by  factors involved  in shortened intcr-
inadcquate ovarian rcsponsiveness to
pro-ocstrous intervals, c.g. split heats, frequent pro-
 gonadotrophins. Oplimal regimens of treatment
oestrus. The basis of these disorders is inadequate or
have not been established. Symptomatic
inappropriate secretion of gonadotrophins, or poor
treatment could involvc the administration of
ovarian responsivcncss to gonadotrophins. The readcr
 gonadotrophins at thc start of pro-oestrus, or a
period of treatment with androgens or
further consideration of thcse disorders.
progestogens to postpone the episodc. Standard
monitoring techniques utilizing vaginal
Disorders characterized by shortened
cytology and plasma progesterone
inter-pro-oestrous interval
measurements will reveal the ovarian activity
The normal inter-pro-oestrous interval in the bitch
and detcrnine if ovulation cventually occurs,
is approximately 7 months, and in the queen
which it frequently does.
 approximately 20 days. A shortened inter-pro-oestrous
Follicuiar cysts. These cysts are more commonly
interval in the bitch can be considered as lcss than
 associated with prolonged ocstrogenic activily
44.5 months. In the unmated queen, the period
(see disorders characterized by prolonged pro-
between oestrous periods is around 8 days (range
oestrus/oestrus).
2-18 days).
 Ovulatory failure. In the bitch, this problem
may rcsult in a shortcned inter-pro-oestrous
Differential diagnoses (Table 3.3)
interval due to the absence of the period of
metoestrus (normally lasting around 60 days)
 as si d s 'u ds,
from the cycle. This shortening is similar to
commonly in young bitches and queens. Pro-
that observed when oestrus is suppressed
cestrous behaviour and physical signs occur tlien
using progestogens administered from thc
subsidc, and a normal pro-oestrus/ocstrus, Or
start of pro-oestrus. In the cat. ovulatory failure
another 'false oestrus', occurs. In the bitch,
may reflect inadequate mumbers of matings or
 Jnooo Aeui Aiaoe snonso-oid yuanbasgns
mating early in oestrus. The queen will return to
weeks or evenl up to 2 months later, but in the
oestrus in <18 days. Diagnosis of ovulatory
 queen, it occurs within a few days. This
failure as a persistent pattern requires the.
condition reflects inadequate follicular
detection of a low plasma progesterone
 developmcnt at the first pro-ocstrus. Na
 concentration during (bitch only) and
treatment is indicated, as the condition resolves
immediately after oestrus (bitch and queen).
with maturity. The condition can complicate
 Ovulation may be induced by treatment with
 regimens of treatment (short-term progestogens)
GnRH or hCG eaurly in ocstrus, although the
 for thc suppression of oestrus, sincc a prompt
timing of administration is critical.
d s sn r snsd  unn
Shorr anoestrus. This syndrome is inadequately
by the owner as a failure of treatment - which it
defined. Some individual bitches that prcscnt
 is. Young bitches may therefore require longer
with infertility show normal oestrus and
treatment periods (14 days) for the suppression
Ovulation, but have shortened inter-pro-oestrous
of oestrus than mature bitches (8 days).
intcrvals. Brccds affected inclurlc German
Frequent pro-oestrous episodes. One or two
Shepherd Dogs and Rottweilers. The basis of
pro-oestrous episodes not leading to oestrus and
infertility is not clear, but could involve
ovulation can occur in older bitches. This
insufficicnt duration of anoestrus to allow for
condition seems similar to split heats. The basis
endometrial repair after the endomeirial
 is not understood, but may reflect inadequate
exfoliation that occurs at the end of metoestrus/
stimulation of the ovaries by gonadotrophins or
early anocstrus. If this actiology is indced a
Aetiology
History
Examination
Additional tests
Split heals
+
+
Vaginal cytology, plasma progesteronc
 Frequent pro-oestrus
+
+
 Plasma progesterone, vaginal cytology
Follicular cysts
+
Vaginal cytology, ovarian imaging
 Ovulatory failurc
+
 Plasma progestcrone after oestrus
Short anocstrus
+
 Endometrial cytology, biopsy
Cats: short inter-oestrous
十
Vaginal cytology
 intervals
Table 3.3: Diugnosis of disorders characterized by short inter-pro-oewtrous intervat - a checklist, emphasizing the imporiant
aids to diagnosis.
Thc Infertile Female
23
Aetiology
History
Examination
Tests
 Young females
+
Follicular cysts
十
+
Imaging of ovaries, inspection
 Adrenal oestrogen (cats)
+
+
Response tu corticosteroid treatment
Prolonged oesirus (cats)
+
+
Vaginal cytology, plasma oestradiol
Exogenous oestrogens
+
4
Non-hormonal
+
+
Vaginal cytology
Ovarian tumours
+
Imaging of ovaries, inspection
 Hepatic disorders
 Hepatic function tests
Table 3.4: Diagnosis of disorders characterized by prolonged pro-oestrus/oestrus -a checklist inelicating imporiant aids to diagnosis.
 cause of infertility, diagnosis requires assessment
Further investigation: The determination of plasma
 of endometrial cytology or uterine biopsy at the
progesterone concentrations during and immediately
start of pro-ocstrus. Anccrlotal evidence indicales
afler ocstrus will assess the occurrence of ovulation.
that extending the inter-pro-oestrous interval by
Endometrial cytology or uterine biopsy during pro-
postponing oestius using progestogens or
oestrus may help to determine the adequacy of endo-
androgcns can rcsult in a fertile oestrus.
metrial repair in the bitch.
 However, the role of progestogens in
 endometrial exfoliation and repair is unclear.
Treatment and management: The pattern of split heats
Treatrment with progestogens to extend the intcr-
in young femalcs usually.rcsolvcs withoul ircatmcnt.
pro-oestrous interval may affect these processes.
Oestrous suppression in affected bitches using
 Some bitches showing short inter-pro-
 oestrous intervals may have ovulatory failurc anl
 mcnt, but is contraindicated in bitches in their first heat.
an anoestrus of normal duration but no
 In older bitches showing repeatable paterns, accurate
 metoestrus (see above). The fertility in these
diagnosis is required for rational treatment as.outlined
 animals at an ovulatory ocstrus shouled be
undcr the differential diagnoses. Hormonal treatment
normal,
can be instituted for conditions involving failure of
Cats: shortened inter-oestrous intervais. These
ovulation, frequent pro-oestrus and short anoestrus.
intervals can have a behavioural or an endocrine
basis (see disorders characterized by prolonged
Disorders characterized by prolonged
pro-oestrus/oestrus).
pro-oestrus/oestrus
These disorders (Tablc 3.4) reflcct thc prolongcd
 Note: In some species such as cattle and horses, acute
secretion of oestrogen. The source of oestrogen may be
endormetritis can cause shortened inter-pro-oestrous
exogenous or endogenous. Pro-oestrus can be consid-
intervals, due to the sccretion of prostaglandin fron the
crcd to bc prolongcd whcn signs pcrsist for more than
ulcrus resulting in thc demise of the corpus luteum.
 21 days, although pro-oestrus of up to 2 months has
This shortening has not been demonstrated in the bitch
been repored for wild canids. Prolonged oestrus can
0r queen. Indeed, shortened inter-oestrous intervals
 be considered to be a period longer than 21 days in
are not a reported feature of pyometra where plasma
bitches and queens.
showl to be elevated.
Diffcrential diagnoscs
Clinical approach
Young females. Early cycles, particularly the
pubertal one, may bc abnormal or abnormally
History: In ydung bitches, split heat is the most prob-
long before niormal cyclic pallerns develop. This
able diagnosis. In older bitches with a repeatable
condition resolves with maturity.
pattern, the poorly defined short anoestrus, failure of
 Follicular cysts. Oestrogen-secreting follicular
 ovulation (uncommon), or frequent pro-oestrus should
cysts are follicles that persist and do not ovulate.
be suspected.
The condition is uncommon and the cause
unclear, although in othcr spccics thc causc is
Initial examination: Signs of oestrogenic activity
failure of the marked pre-ovulatory increase in
should be assessed from vaginal cytology to distin-
secretion of LH (LH surge). Cysts are usually
guish from non-ocstrogcn producing conditions that
single or few, and lcss commonly, ovarics with
may causc vaginal discharge. Thesc conditions
many cysts (polyeystic) occur. Oeslrogenic
include vulvitis and vaginitis. which may also
activity can be determined from oestrogenic
produce vulval swelling and attractiveness to dogs.
signs (such as vaginal cytology, behaviour and
Manual or Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
 the appearance of external genitalia). Diagnosis
 bilaterai and small or large. They may be
can be confirmed in somc cases by abdominal
detected by abdominal palpation,
ultrasonography and the cysts may be larger than
ultrasonography, raliography or at laparotomy.
normal pre-ovulatory follicles. Optimal regimens
Trcatment is surgical removal.
for treatment have not been determined. The
Hepatic disorders. Oestrogen is metabolized and
condition may resolvc spontancously or the
cleared in the liver. Prolonged oestrogenic
 cysts may luteinize and secrete progesterone.
activity can be a result of inadequatc mctabolic
Treatment with hCG or GnRH may induce
clearance of oestrogen secondary to hepatic
ovulation or luteinization of thc follicle.
diseases. Such animals usually have other signs
Treatment with prostaglandin may subsequently
 of hepatic disease.
cause luteai regression. Prolonged periods of
sccretion of oestrogen followcd by thc sccretion
Clinical approach
of progesterone from luteal tissue may
predispose to the development of cystic
History: Determine the age of the animal, define the
endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra. Similarly,
pattern of occurrence of the oestrogenic signs and
whilc cyslic ovaries may be lreated with
behaviour, andl whcther thc aninal has had surgery for
progestogens, a similar risk of pyometra exists
ovariectomy.
 and such bitches are better to undergo
 ovarohystcrcctomy once the signs havc subsided.
Examination: Verify thc ocstrogenic basis to the signs
Surgical removal of the cyst or ovary with the
 d i  ra 
cyst can result in a return to normal cyclical
reveal enlarged ovaries (tumours).
activity, although in most cases,
ovarohysterectomy should be undertaken, as
Further investigation: Further investigation may
 affected bitches are usually past breeding age.
involve:
Cats: adrenal oestrogen. Exccss of oestrogen
production may come from the adrenal gland.
 Ovarian imaging (commonly using ultrasound)
Treatment with prednisolone (2.2 mg/kg orally
to detect follicular cysts or ovarian tumours
for 5 days) may result in thc disappearance of
 Measurement of basal concentrations of plasma
signs.
Cats: protonged oestrus. This may be due to a
stimulation tests can be useful to detect ovarian
mlcrging of successive wavcs of follicular
tissue
growth, or in some animals persistence of
 Surgical exploration to view ovarics or to
oestrous behaviour between waves of follicular
find ovarian tissue may be necessary in some
growih. Vaginal cytology will dislinguish thcse
cases.
conditions. This condition does not normally
warrant treatment but for convenience can be
Treatiment and management
 terminated by the induction of ovulation using
This treatiment and management can involve:
hCG or cervical stimulation.
Exogenous ocstrogen. This effect may be
 Inspired inaction (e.g. young bitches)
associated with treatmcnt aftcr mating to prevent
Hormonal therapy (e.g. follicular cysts,
 pregnancy (see Chapler 16).
prolonged oestrus in queens)
Non-hormonal causes. Signs of oestrus
Surgery (e.g. ovarian cysts or tumours, inteisex)
(attractiveness to males, swollen vulva, red
Antibiotic/antiseptic treatment (e.g. vaginitis,
vaginal discharge) may result from non-
vulvitis).
hormonal causes, e.g. vaginitis, vulvitis,
vaginal foreign body or tumour, which may
Failure to achieve pregnancy despite
be mistaken for signs of pro-oestrus/ucstrus.
normal oestrous cycles
Vaginal cytology will distinguish these
Concern is commonly expressed if the fcmale fails to
conditions, in which thcrc is no oestrogenic
 get pregnant after being mated during two normal
action, from true pro-oestrus/oestrus. Vaginitis
heats.
or vulvitis can be treated locally using douches
An absence of pregnancy despite normal oestrous
containing antiseptics or antibiotics, or
cycles may be due to female infertility, male infertility
systemically using antibiotics.
 or inadcquacy of managerment of mating or artificial
Ovarian tumours. Ovarian tumours are
insemination.
uncommon and occur mainly in older females.
Animals that have early embryonic loss may bc
Oestrogen-sccrcting tumours include granulosa
 included in this catcgory. However, the incidence of
cell tumours, cystadenomas and
 embryonic los/resorption is not known, and such loss
adenocarcinomas. The tumours can be uni- or
 is usually not detected and in thc bitch does not affect
The Infertile Female
25
Aetiology
History
Examination
Furthcr investigations
Incorrect timing of mating
+
Vaginal cytology,plasma progcsterone
determination
Infertile male
十
Examine male,semen quality assessment
Stress
+
Segmental aplasia of
Imaging,inspection
paramesonephric duct
Lterine tumours,polyps
Imaging, exploratory surgery
Cervical stenosis
Pass cannula
Non-patent oviducts
Laparotomy,tubal flushing (cats)
Failure of ovulation
Plasma progesterone determination
Embryonicloss
Early pregnancy diagnosis (ultrasound)
Hypoluteodism
Plasma progesterone
CEH
Uterine imaging,biopsy
Endometritis
+
Endomctrial cytology,bacteriology
Tabte3.5:Diagnosisofinfertility,oestrous cyclenormalachecklist indicating important aidstodiagnosis.
the inter-pro-oestrous interval.The cyclic pattern of
practice is for matings/insemination to be
the queen experiencing early embryonic loss will be
scheduledbetweendays10 and14 after the
that of pseudopregnancy. She will return to oestrus
onset of pro-oestrusbut this timing nay not.
40-50 days after the mated oestrus.
result ingoodfertility,since bitchesmay
It should be noted that not uncommonly a diagnosis
ovulate as early as5 days after the onset of
is not able to bemade.The animal may become fertile
pro-oestrus or as late as 21 days. The timing
orremaininfertile,and theveterinarianmayfeelquite
of insemination needs tobemoreprecise with
inadequate.
frozen-thawed semen where the fertilizing
lifespan of spermatozoa may be appreciably
Differential diagnosis (Table 3.5)
shorter (12 hours)than for fresh spermatozoa.
It could be speculated that this precision in the
Bitches:Incorrecttimingofmating/insemination.
timing ofinscmination may alsoherequired
Natural mating or artificial insemination with
should infertilityresult from‘inhospitable
fresh semen at any time during oestrus (period of
uterine environment or from semen of poor
acceptance of mating),except very early orin the
quality or reduced longevity.Procedurcs for the
last 2-3days,generallyresults ingoodfertility
in terms both of bitches becoming pregnant and
for mating or insemination are reviewed later in
of size of litter.This situation reflects thelong
this chapter.
life of sperm in the reproductive tract and the
Infertile male.The fertility ofmales atpast
long period over which ova may be fertilized.
matings should be assessed from history of
Sperm are present in the cndometrial glands
pregnancies resulting from matings to other
during oestrus.Capacitation of spermatozoa
females.However past fertilitymay not indicate
takes 7 hours,and then sperm are fertile for
present fertility.One such situation may be the
about 4-7 days.Ovulation occurs around 2 days
case of the youngmale in which previously
(36-50hours) after the LH surge(which is
immature(and infertile) semen(characterized by
commonly on the first day of oestrus). Ova
a high incidence of spermatozoa with proximal
require 2-3 days for maturation and are then
droplctsyctwith good motility) has matured and
fertilizableforup to24-48hours.Because these
is now fertile
figures are estimates,and there isvariation
Stress mayresult ininfertility,but the evidence
around them,fertilizable ova are considered to be
is often anecdotal and/or derivedfrom other
present in the tract over a 34 day period from
species. Such stress may be involved in the bitch
2-6 days after ovulation.Clearly, the period
following a long period of stressful travel to the
when ova are fertilizable could be expected to be
dog for mating. In cats, stress factors that may
of longer duration in bitches ovulating larger
cause failure of early pregnancy include
numbers of ova than those ovulating fewer ova.
transport,altrationofsocialstructure,oor
The most common problem in thc
nutrition,parasites and infcctious discases.
determination of the optimal time for mating is
Segmentalaplasiaof paramesonephricduct.
the variability of the day of ovulation in relation
This condition,characterized bymissing or
to the onset of pro-ocstrus.Common breeding
rudimentarymanifestations of parts of the
26
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
tubular genitalia (uterus, oviduct), is most
inbreeding. Inadequate luteal function has been
uncommon. Diagnosis is based on radiography.
postulated as a cause in some bitches but there is
ultrasonography or laparotomy. Animals which
 no evidence to support this claim (see below).
are bilatcrally affected are stcrilc.
Embryonic loss docs not affect normal pallcrns
Uterine tumours, polyps, may interfere with the
of ovarian cyclicity in the bitch. In the cat,
transport of spermatozoa or with implantation.
however, early embryonic death is followed by
 Diagnosis may involve palpation, rarliography or
pseudopregnancy (scc Disorders charactcrizcd by
ultrasonography. Treatment involves surgical
failure to observe oestrus).
removal of the lesion, and the prognosis for
Hypoiuteodism resulting in an inadequate plasma.
future fertility is guarded
concentration of progesterone is a undocumented
Cervical stenwsis is uncommon, and causcs
causc of embryonic/fctal loss in queens and
infertility by obstructing entry of spermatozoa
bitches. Experimental studies suggest that in the
into the uterus. Affected bitches do not show
 bitch a plasma progesterone concentration of at
 pro-oestrous blccding. Diagnosis is bascd on
lcast 6-9 nmol/l (2-3 ng/ml) is required l0
failure to pass a cannula through the cervix per
maintain pregnancy and that progesterone values
vaginam (bitch) or from the uterus at laparotomy
below this concentration lasting around 3 days
(bitch, cat).
results in loss of pregnancy. If failurc of
 Non-patent oviducts are uncommon, and could
 pregnancy is associated with low plasma
reflect a congenital defect or be acquired as a
 progesterone concentration it is unclear whether
sequel to infection (salpingitis). Diagnosis is
the failurc is duc to the low plasma progesterone
difficult (see Diagnustic aids) and involves
concentration, or vice versa.
laparotomy and inspection. Attempts to render
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH) is more
oviducts patent are unlikely to be successful.
common in older females. Predisposing factors
Failure of ovulation is uncommon in the hitch.
 arc age, treatment with progestogens (for thc
However, where it does occur, oestrous
 postponement of oestrus) or oestrogens (for the
behaviour is normal but there is usually a
early termination of pregnancy). Failure of
shortened intcr-pro-oestrous interval. Diagnosis
clcarance of bacteria from the uterus at the cnd
is based on failure of the normal increase in
of oestrus may also be involved in the
plasma progesterone concentration at around the
pathogenesis. Bacteria of vaginal origin are often
start of oestrus. The causc is unclear, but may
 present in thc uterus during ocstrus when the
 involve failure of the marked pre-ovulatory
cervix is open. The diagnosis of CEH with 
increase in plasma LH. If this pattern recurs,
macroscopic cysts can be made using
trcatincnt with GnRH or hCG to induce
ultrasonography. If the cysts arc microscopic.
ovulation at the start of oestrus is indicated.
histological examination of a section of uterine
Mating or artificial insemination should then be
wall is required. The clinical course and
performed 3-4 days later. Thc onsct of oestrus
trcatment of CEH are not fully undcrstood. The 
may need to bc dctcrmined from vaginal
return of fertility after treatiment with
 cytology. Treatment with GnRH or hCG later
prostaglandins for pyometra (usually associated
 than the start of oestrus may induce ovulation but
with CEH) suggests recovery is possible in the
no fertilization due to ovulation of aged ova.
 young animal. Since CEH is dependent on the
In the queen, failure of ovulation may occur
action of steroids on the uterus (oestrogen,
whcre there have been inadcquate numbers of
 progestogcns), postponement of ocstrus and
matings, or mating too early or too late in
 metoestrus using androgens may be beneficial.
oestrus. To avoid this failure, a minimum of four
Antibiotic treatment to assist the removal of
matings in 1 day when in full oestrus is
 bacteria at the end of oestrus may also be
recommentlcd. Thc occurence of mating can be
indicaled.
verified by the cry of the cat during mating and
 Endometritis. The role of endometritis (apart 
characteristic aggression towards the male and
from pyometra) as a cause of infertility is quite
rolling and licking afler mating. Failure of
unclcar. This fogginess reflects the difficulty in
ovulation in the queen is associated with a low
 making a diagnosis of endometritis in cases other
plasma progesterone concentration l week after
than those involving a purulent discharge. This
mating, with a lack of a subscqucnt pcriod of
difficully is due to thc problems of gaining
pseudopregnancy, and prompt return to oestrus.
access to the uterus to obtain samplcs for
Early embryonic loss has not been well
nicrobiology and cytology to detect
investigatcd bccause of the inaccuracy of the
in flammation. The presence of bacteria in the
diagnosis of early pregnancy. Possible causes
vagina is normal and is not diagnostic of
include endometritis, cystic endometrial
endometritis. Diagnosis of endometritis requires
hyperplasia, embryonic defects and possibly
examination of uterine fluids for the presence of
The Infertile Female
27
bacteria and leucocytes. These samples may be
values may indicale failurc of ovulation, and persist-
obtaincd in the bitch by pervaginal transcervical
ently low values may indicate hypoluteodisr.
cannulation of the uterus or at laparotomy (see
Diagnostic aids). Treatment can involve the local
Management
or systemic administration of antibiotics. As
diagnosis is inadequate, so appropriate regimens
 If the history and initial examination indicate no
 of treatment are poorly defined.
 abnormality, a non-aggressive management
 Herpes virus. The involvement of hcrpcs virus in
     a  e
  a   h a
 Male fertility should be assessed and proper
unclear. This virus has been associated with
 management of mating applied
abortions and stillbirths.
For the bitch, endometrial cytology and uterine
Anti-sperm/ova antibodies are not documented as
 microbiology should be performed early in pro-
a naturally occurring cause of infertility in the
oestrus if the technique is available
bitch or cat. Such antibodies, naturally occurring
The uterus may be defined by contrast
 hysterography using radio-opaque fluid
+
 Plasma progesterone concentrations should be
 Clinical approach
determined in the bitch to cnsure the corrcct time
of mating and that ovulation has occurred
.-....
IHistory
 Ultrasonographic examination should be
performed at 3-4 wecks to determinc prcgnancy
 Determine the likely fertility of the male(s) uscd
and to provide information as to when any failure
at past matings
of pregnancy occurs. -.
 Assess whether the management of mating
(timing and frequency) has hecn corrcct
Many females become pregnant during this surveil-
 For queens, assess the general management and
lance cycle. In animals that fail to become/remain
 programmes for the maintenance of health
pregnant, many of the more common causes have been
(feeding. vaccination, parasite control) in thc
eliminated and more interventionist (and expensive)
cattery
investigation can be considered. ‘This investigation
+
 For queens, determine whether infection with
could include laparotomy, determination of the pat-
viruses causing feline panleucopenia, feline
ency of oviducts and uterine biopsy.
leukaemia or feline infectious peritonitis are
present
Determination of the appropriate tinie for
 For queens, determine whether mating occurred
insemination of bitches
 from post-coital behaviour and the interval until
It is necessary to inseminate at the appropriate time to
subsequent oestrus
allow fertilizable ova and sperm to be present concur-
 For queens, a plasma progesterone measuremcnt
rently in thc reproductive tract. The time whcn fcrtiliz-
can be used one week after mating to determine
able ova are present and, when spermatozoa need to be
whether ovulation occurred
 in the tract, is around 5 (4-8) days after the LH surge,
 For queens, an jnterval of less than 18 days 
which commonly occurs around the start of oestrus
indicates failurc of ovulation (not mated,
(period of acceptance of male). The time when fertiliz-
inadequate timing or number of matings), whilst
able ova are present can be determined from the
 measurement of the concentrations of hormones (LH,
ovulalion has cccurred bul there was failure of
 progesterone) in the blood, or estimated from the
fertilization (male infertility or female disorder,
history, behaviour and physical signs of the bitch. The
e.g. CEH, endometritis) or embryonic loss.
measurement of hormones gives a more precise csti-
mate than the other procedures.
Examination: The detection of inappropriately in-
The time of insemination must be determined accu-
creased numbers of leucocytes within a vaginal smear
rately when using frozen-thawed semen due its short
may bc indicativc of infection: nole that increased
fertile life-span (perhaps 12-24 hours). This accuracy
numbers are normal at the end of oestrus. Uterine
is not normally needed when fresh sperm of longer life-
 microbiology and endometrial cytology may be per-
 span (47 days) are inseminated (natural mating or
furmed to assess the presence of endometritis.
insemination with fresh-collected semen). Insemina-
tion with frozen semen is recommended 5 days after
Furtherinvestigation: Ultrasonographic inaging may
thc LH surgc or about 2 days after the progestcrone
be useful to detect CEH or some anatomical defects of
concentration first rises above 30 nmol/l (10 ng/ml).
the uterus. Laparotomy for inspection of ovaries and
Fresh semen usually results in good fertility if insemi-
 oviducts may be warranted. Plasma progesterone con-
 ccntration should be mcasured aftcr ocstrus sincc low
 Over the last few lays.
28
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
History
throughout oestrus, whilst others have no or little
 An indication as to the likcly timc for fertilization in a
discharge at all during both pro-ocstrus and oestrus
current oestrous period can be obtained by estimating
("colourless heats').
the day of fertilization in a previous oestrous period(s).
'The vulva often softens at the conimencement of
This dlay can be estimaicd by rclating the day of
oestrus and ihc vaginal epithelium becomcs pavement-
 parturition back to the day when the bitch was insemi-
like when observed with an endoscope.
nated. The duration of pregnancy from fertilization to
parlurition in the bitch is approximately 60 days.
Laboratory aids
Hence, if a bitch was 1mated on day 12 of the cycle (first
Mcasurement of the concentration of plasma pro-
day of pro-oestrus = day 1) and parturition cccurred 64
 gesterone is a most useful laboratory technique for
days later, fertilization would have occurred on day 16
the determination of the appropriate time of mating.
of the cyclc. If there are a numbcr of cycles availablc
 Some hormone assays dctect an increasc in plasma
to assess this figure, it may be useful to document the
progesterone concentration; other procedures give a
variation present in an individual bitch. This informa-
 quantitative measurement of progesterone concentra-
lion will providc an estimale of thc likely time of
tions. Plasima progcstcronc concentrations incrcase
fcrtilization in a currcnt oestrus, and indicatc when
frorn thc time of the LH surge. and can be uscd
blood and vaginal smears should be collected to give a
to estimate the time of the surge (6-12 nmol/l;
more precise estimate of the time of fertility.
2-4 ng/nl), ovulation around 2 days later (12-30
nmol/l; 4-10 ng/ml) and [crtilization around 2-3
Behaviour
days after ovulation (30-75 nmol/l;10-25 ng/ml, or
Positive postural reflexes (flagging the tail, lifting the
higher). The measurement of plasma progesterone
vulva in response to attentions of the dog or perineal
concentrations in blnod samples taken every 2-3 days,
stroking) commonly first occur at the time of the LII
commencing late in pro-oestrus, will indicate the
surge (day 1 of cestrus) and the commencement of the
appropriate time for mating. However, in a few bitches
pre-ovulatory rise in the conccntration of plasma pro-
 an initial risc in thc concentration of plasma proges-
gesterone. There is some variability in the time of
terone is followed by plateau concentrations for some
occurrence of these signs, and they may occur sooner
days and then values continue to increase. This pattern
(ie beforc thc LH surge) in maturc bitches and later in
suggests that ovulation in these bitches may occur
 young bitches.
 longer after the initial increase in plasma progesterone
than in normal bitches.
Physical signs
The pre-ovulatory LH surge lasts 24 48 hours. The
The vulval dischargc oftcn changes from red (sanguin-
eous) to straw coloured (serous) at the start of oestrus.
 centrations therefore requires daily blood sampling,
Sorme hitches, however, have a sanguineous discharge
but such assays are not generally available.
Determinant
Guide
Inadequacy
Day from onset of pro-oestrus
Day 9
Variable duration of pro-oestrus
Vulval turgidity
 Softens at start of oestrus
Subjective determination
Vulval dischargc
Icsscns and clears to straw colour
 Somc bilchcs have no discharge
Some bleed into/through oestrus
Vaginal appearance
Rounded folds become angular
 Subjective determination
Behaviour
Positive postural reflexes
Between-animal variability
 Acceptance of dog
Vaginal cytology
 High proportion of superficial cels
Between-animal variability in
1
 Clearing of vaginal smear
cellular pictare at start of oestrus
 Plasma progesterone
Around 2-4 ng/ml (6-12 nmol/l)
Occasional unusual patterns
...
Glucosc in vaginal dischargc
Present
Unrcliable
pH of vaginal discharge
Falls
Unreliable
Plasma LII
Marked increase (surge)
Daily sampling required
Assays not readily availablc
Table 3.6: Guides to the various feaures commonty used to indicate the occurrence of the piasna LH surge and the first day of
standing oestrus.
The Infertile Female
29
Vaginal cytology is a usefultechnique to determine
Vaginoscopy
if a bitch is in oestrus, but does not indicate precisely
The vagina of the bitch can be inspected using a rigid
the time of endocrine (the LH surge) or physiological
endoscope. An auroscope is too short to inspect the
cvents (ovulation, the presence of fertilizablc ova).
entire vagina. Visualization of the cervix and the
Indeed vaginal cytology gives its best estimate of the
cranial part of the vagina of the bitch is difficult,
tinie of ovulation inretrospect. Ovulation occurs around
because the cranial vagina is narrow and the cervix
6 days bcfore the first day of metoestrus delcrmincd as
points ventrally with no dorsal fornix. This narrowing
when the proportion of superficial cells in the vaginal
is due to the dorsal median post-cervical fold that
smear falls by at least 20%.
extends caudally for about 2 cm from the cervix on the
dorsal wall of thc vagina. Inspcction of the cervix thus
requires a narrow endoscope. Examination may be
DIAGNOSTIC AIDS
more difficult during metoestrus and anoestrus when
the vagina is narrower and more thin-walled than at
Vestibulc, vagina, cervix
 othcr stages of the cycle. During ocstrus, pronounccd
vaginal folds may make visualization of the cervical os
Vaginal discharges
difficult.
Observation of thc vulva may rcvcal a vaginal lis-
 Examination of the vagina of thc quccn is dificult
 charge. The colour and nature of the discharge are
 because it is narrow and difficult to distend especially
indicative of the underlying condition. The discharge
 at the vestibulo-vaginal junction.
may be white - indicating cells including leucocytes,
Vaginoscopy permits the visualization of vaginal
red - indicating blood, or clear - indicating relatively
disorders such as septae, strictures, neoplasia, and
cell-free mucus. The source of the discharge may be
foreign bodies. Samples for biopsy can be taken. Small
 the reproductive or the urinary tract.
amounts of discharge may be seen in the cranial vagina
A white discharge can reflect:
or may be noticed on the endoscope after withdrawal.
 Prepubertal leucorrhoea: reflecting a low grade
Vaginal cytology
vaginitis in prepubertal bitches, usually resolves
Vaginal cytology assists in the diagnosis of the stageof
at the first oestrus
the reproductive cycle, inflammation of the vagina or
Vaginitis: may be associated with a forcign body
thc utcrus (if the cervix is open) and transmissible
 Early melocstrus: dischargc al thc cnd of ocstrus
vcnereal tumour.
(around day 1 of metoestrus) as there may be a
Oestrogens acting on the vaginal epithelium cause
purulent discharge for up to a few days
hyperplasia, hypertrophy, cornification and exfolia-
 Pyometra: open cervix
tiun of the cells. Vaginal cytology reflects thcscchanges
Cystitis.
 and is an indicator of oestrogenic action. The common
 cell in vaginal smears ofbitches at stages with minimal
A red (blood-stained) discharge can reflect:
Destrogenic activity (anoestrus, metoestrus, prepuberly)
is the parabasal cell (Figure 3.1) Parabasal cells have a
 Pro-oestrus: reflecting diapedesis from uterine
 round outline and a low cytoplasm to nucleus volume
blood vcsscls
ratio. Undcr thc action of oestrogen, hypertrophy of
1
Oestrus
vaginal epithelial cells results in small intermediate
 Persistent ovarian follicle
cells (larger than parabasal cells, round outline and
Ovarian tumour: ocstrogcn-sccrcting
with a cytoplasm to nucleus ratio higher than for
1
Transmissible venereal tumour
parabasal cells; Figures 3.1-3.3), large intermmediate
Cystitis
cells (polygonal cells with intact nuclei; Figure 3.3)
Vaginal ulceration: trauma
 and supcrficial cclls (similar to large intermediatc cclls
Coagulopathy
but commonly anuclear, or with pyknotic nuclei;
 Foreign body in the vagina
Figure 3.4). The proportion of superficial cornified
 Placcntal scparation during pregnancy
anuclear cells increases during pro-oestrus, plateaus
·
 Sub-involution of placental sites.
during oestrus (Figure 3.4), and falls sharply at the end
of oestrus. This sharp fall (by more than 20%) defines
Other dischargcs includc:
the first day of metoestrus (Figure 3.2). The oestrous
smearis chiaracteristically devoid of debris and stained
 Clear brownish glary mucus: normal
nucus, and has a clear appearance. Increased numbers
 Green black: normal parturition
of lcucocytcs may suggcst infectious process, and
 Clear watery: amniotic/allantoic fluid
abnormal cells may indicate tumours. Increased
 Brown odorous: failure of birth due to single puppy
numbers of neutrophils may be seen early during
 Thick tarry black: mummified fetus
 metoestrus (Figures 3.1 and 3.5). This increase is
·
 Brown red: metritis.
normal and does not reflect pathogcnic infcction,
30
ManualofSmallAnimal ReproductionandNeonatology
Figure3.1:Predominantlysmallintermediatecellssome
Figure3.3:Predominantly smallandsomelarge
parabasalcellsandneutrophilsinavaginalsmeartaken
intermediatecellsanderythrocytesinavaginalsmeartaken
froma bitchduring earlymetoestrus.Diff-Quik.
froma bitchduringearlypro-oestrus.Diff-Quik
Figure3.2:Predominantly smallintermediateandsome
Figure3.4:Superficialcellsinavaginalsmear takenfroma
parabasalcellsinavaginalsmeartakenfromabitchonday
bitch in oestrus.Schorr'strichrome.
2ofmetoestrus.ModifiedSchorr'strichrome.
Cytological changesincats aresimilar to those in
thebitchbutarenotaspronounced,and thereisnopro-
oestrous bleeding.
Vaginalmicrobiology
Bacteriathatoccasionallycausereproductivedisorders
can be present as part of thenormal flora.During pro-
oestrus andoestrusvaginalbacteriamaygainaccessto
the uterus through arelaxed cervix.Bacteriological
cultureofthecranialvaginaduringpro-oestrus/oestrus
thereforerevealsbacteriathatmaygainentrance tothe
uterusrather than bacteria originatingfrom theuterus.
Figure3.5:Neutrophils and small intermediate cells ina
Findingsforvaginal bactcriology therefore onlyhave
vaginalsmeartakenfromabitchinearlymetoestrus.Diff
Quik@.
relevance in the context of other signs of reproductive
tract infection,e.g.purulent discharge or excessive
allowedisnonsensical,becausenormalflora arecom
numbers of leucocytes in the vaginal smear.A wide
monlyisolatcd,and thepresence of thisnormal flora
varietyoforganismshasbeenisolatedfromthevagina,
doesnot indicate pathogenicinfection.In addition the
and thenumbers areoftenincreased duringpro-oestrus
preputial flora ofmaledogsissimilar to thevaginal
andoestrus.The onlymicrobeisolated fromthevagina
flora.Apathout of the dilemma is toobtaina detailed
that always requires treatmentisBrucella canis.The
reproductive history,examine thevagina and a vaginal
otherbacteria are normal flora oropportunistic patho
smear,and then state:On thebasisofhistory,clinical
gens.The incidence and significance of endometritis
examination,vaginal examination andvaginal cyto-
around the time of matinghasnot been determined.The
logical data,there isno evidence of pathogenic infec-
request ofstud dogownersforaclear’vaginal swab
tion of the reproductive tract in this bitch,and the
(i.e.vaginalculture freefrom bacteria)beforematingis
findings are compatible with normal fertility'
The InfertileFemale
31
Figure3.8:A large group ofnormal endometrialepithelial
cellsinanendometrialcytologicalsampletakenfrom a
Greyhound bitchduring early metoestrus.Diff-Quik
(Reproducedwithpermission fromJournal ofSmall Animal
Figure3.6:An oestrous Greyhoundbitch undergoingirans-
Practice (/998)39,2-9).
cervical uterinecannulationwith anendoscope of theuterus.
Figure3.9:Endometrial cells andmacrophages with foamy
Figure3.7:Degenerative neutrophilsin anendometrial
cytoplasminanendometrialcytologicalsampletakenfroma
cytologicalsampletakenfromabitchwithpyometra.
Greyhound bitch46days before the onsetof pro-oestrus.The
Modified Schon'strichrome.
bitchhad been inanoestrusforat least 114 days.Diff-
Quik?.(ReproducedwithpermissionfromJournal ofSmall
Vaginal radiology
Animal Practice (1998)39,2-9).
Positive contrast radiography can be used to diagnose
septae,strictures and tumours.The radio-opaque
medium may pass into the uterus during pro-oestrus,
oestrus and post partum,but not at other stagcs of
the cycle.
Uterus
Endometrial cytologyand uterinemicrobiology
Proceduresforthe collection and examination of sam-
ples for endometrial cytology and uterine microbiol-
Figure3.10:Spermatozoa and endometrialepithelialcells in
ogy have recently been developed.These procedures
anendometrialcytologicalsampletakenfromaGreyhound
involvevisualization of the cervixusing anendoscope
(Figure 3.6), transcervical cannulation of the uterus
Schorr's trichrome.
and theinjection and aspiration of 2-5mlof sterile
physiological saline.Thc aspirate is cxamincd forcells
and cultured for micro-organisms.
Micro-organisms are often detected during pro-
oestrus and oestrusbut are uncommon at other stages
of the cycle.The microbes detected during pro-oestrus
and oestrus are probably of vaginal origin,gaining
access through the relaxed cervix.A diagnosis of
endometritis requires the presence of bacteria plus
increased numbers of neutrophils (Figure 3.7). Cells
identified in normal smears include endometrial cells
Figure3.11:Degenerativeendometrialepithelialcellsfrom
(Figurc3.8),leucocytes（Figurcs3.7and3.9),crythro-
anendometrialcytologicalsampletakenfromaGreyhound
bitchduringtheperiodofendonetrialexfoliationpost
cytes,cervical cells,bacteria and sperm (Figure 3.10).
partum.Note thatmany of thecellshavea pyknoticnucleus
The endometrial cells are commonly degenerative
andvacuolatedcytoplasm.Diff-Quik
32
2Manual of Small Animal Reproduction andNeonatology
(Figure 3.11)during latemetoestrus and early tomid
anoestrus(reflectingexfoliation of theendometrium)
but arenormal at otherstages of the cycle.Thedetec-
tionof these degenerative cellsfor longer thannormal
canbeused todiagnose sub-involution of theuterus
post partum.Neutrophils are the most common
leucocytesduringr-estruestrusandmetoestu,
whilst lymphocytesarepredominant duringanoestrus.
or more after mating (Figure 3.10) and their presence
can be used to diagnose mismating.
Hysteroscopy
Arigidendoscopecanbeinsertedintotheuterusforup
to3weeks post-whelping(Figure 3.12).Such exami-
Figure3.12:View through anendoscope showing the
nation canfacilitate the diagnosis of abortion,endo-
bifurcationof theuterinehornsofacross-bredbitchonday
metritis,uterine rupture orretained placenta.
23after parturition.
Hysterography
ments of the ovary,such astumours.Ovariescannot
Thenormal non-pregnant uterusis difficult tovisual-
normallybeseenduring anoestrus.Ultrasonographyis
izeradiographically.
not useful for thedetectionofovulationbecause the
Contrast hysterography can be used to diagnose
follicularwall docsnot collapse after ovulation unlike
cystic endometrial hyperplasia,pyometra,retained
in other species.
placenta,uterine cysts,and may be of value in the
diagnosis ofuterine neoplasia,torsion and rupture.
Determination of plasma hormone
Theintroduction of contrastmedium into theuterus
concentrations
can beachievedbyuterinecannulation at any stageof
Assaysforplasma progesterone arereadily available,
the cycle,oroccasionally duringpro-oestrus,oestrus
for LH and oestradiol less so.Plasma progesterone
andpost partum byfilling thevagina with medium.
concentrations can be used toestimate the time of the
LHsugevulationandtertilriodoftvum
Ultrasonography
(see Determination of the appropriate time for the
Ultrasonography can assist the diagnosis of pyometra,
insemination of bitches).
cysticnmralylasirineplasi
Plasma oestradiol concentrations can beused to
tained placenta,puppies and uterine rupture.During
determine thepresenceofoestrogen-secreting struc
pro-oestrus,oestrus and post partum,echogenic me-
turcs such as follicles and granulosa cell tumours,
dium introduced into the vagina may pass into the
althoughit shouldberemembered thatvaginalcyto
uterus allowing clearer imaging.While thenormal
logyreflects such oestrogenproduction.Anincrease
uterus cannot usually bc sccn during anoestrus,the
in the plasma concentrations of oestradiol after the
infusion of echogenic fluid(such asnormal saline)by
administration of GnRH indicates the presence of
uterine cannulation allows its visualization.
functional ovaries(GnRH stimulation test).Lack of
an increase indicates a lack offunctional ovaries
Oviducts, ovaries
(ovariectomizedbitch,ovarian aplasia orhypoplasia,
ovarian failure).
Hysterosalpingography
Gonadotrophins arenormally elevated duringlate
Hysterosalpingographyis an unreliable procedure for
anoestrus,pro-oestrus andearly oestrus.Plasma gona-
the detectionof patencyof oviducts.Theradio-opaque
dotrophin (LH,FSH) concentrations are elevated in
medium used to outline theuterus doesnotalways
situationsofovariectomypremature ovarianfailure
enter the oviducts ofnormalbitches,in contrast to
and ovarian aplasia or hypoplasia due to thelack of
women.When thedye doesenter theoviducts,it may
inhibitoryinfluence from ovarian hormones(oestra
enter theovarianbursa,outlinethe ovariesandenable
diol,progesterone).PlasmaLHdeterminationsmaybe
thedetection of cystic ovaries.Plain abdominalradio-
used todetect theLH surge todetermine thetime of
graphs are reliable only for detecting gross ovarian
presence of fertilizableovain the oviducts(seeDeter-
enlargement.
mination of theappropriate timefortheinsemination
of bitches).
Ultrasonography
Ultrasonographic imaging maybe useful for evaluat-
Laparoscopyand laparotomy
ingovariesofbitchesduringpro-estrusestruand
These procedures permit visualizationof thereproduc-
earlymetoestrus andfordetecting abnormalenlarge
tive organsand enable thecollectionofsamplesor
The Infertile Female
33
biopsy. The ovary is difficult to visualize because it is
Diagnosis
surrounded by a bursa. The patency of oviducts may hc
tested by injecting saline into the uterus, occluding thc
Imilk, urinc, vaginal dischargcs, scmcn, placcntal tissuc,
 horn distal to the ovicluct, and observing saline pass out
prostate, testes, epididymides, lymph nodes and bone
the proximal end of the oviduct. However such passage
 marrow. The organism is difficult to culture. Diagnosis
of fluid often does not occur in the normal bitch.
o no r s q ors oq i s
      n
      
 condition) has not been documented.
 fluctuate during and decrease after bacteraemia.
Treatment
BRUCELLA CANIS
Often antimicrobial therapy does not result in the
elimination of the organism from the animal. The most
Description
appropriate antibiolic therapy appears to be a combi-
Brucella canis may cause abortion, infertility due to
nation of tetracyclines and aminoglycosides.
embryonic death and absorption or early undetected
abortions or vaginal dischargc in thc bitch. It is impli-
Control
 cated in epididymitis in the dog.
 Procedures to eliminate the infection from kennels
involve serological testing every month and the re-
Aetiology
moval of positive animals. New animals to be intro-
B. canis is an obligate intracellular Gram-negative
duced should be tested and should be negative at two
coccobacillus. Natural infection is restricted to Cani-
tests at least l month apart before their introduction.
dae. Accidental infection of humans may be asympto-
matic or may cause mild signs such as intermittenf
fever, headache, malaise, chills or lymphadenopathy.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
 Infection of humans responds readily to treatment.
READING
Transmission
 Natural transmission can be by ingestion of placental
University Press,Ames, Iowa
Burke II (1986) Small Animal Reproduetion and nfertility: A
tissue, vaginal discharge or mammary secretions,
ClinicalApproach to Diagosis and Treaiment. Lea and Febiger,
 venereally from an infected dog to a susceptible bitch
Philadelphia
Concannon Pw, McCann JP and Templc M (1989) Biology and
 Or vice versa, or it may be congenital.
Endocrinology of ovulation, prcgnancy and parturition in the dog.
Journal of Reproduction and Fertility Supplement 39, 3-25
Clinical signs
Englund GCW (1998) Atlen's Fertity ancl Obstetrics in the Dog, 2nd
edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford
Fever is uncommon and most dogs show few or no
Feldman ECandNelson RW(1996)Catine andFeline Endoerinology
systeimic clinical signs. The signs of reproductive
ad Reproduction, 2nd ern. WB Saunders, Philadelphia . .
Johnston SD and Romagnoli SF (eds) (1991) Canine reprornction. Vet-
disorder are abortion (cormmonly between days 45 and
erinary Clinies of Norti America, Small Anunai Practice 21, No 3.
59 of gestation), infertility due to embryonic death and
Schille VM and Sojka NI (t995) Feline reproduction. In: Texrhook of
Veterinary Iuerat Medicine,ed. SJ Etinger and EC Feldman, pp.
resorption, early undetected abortion, and persistent
1690-1698. wB Saunders, Philadelphiat
sero-purulent vaginal discharge. In male dogs, signs 
may include epididymitis, scrotal dermatitis (due to
nterine cannultion forcytology,microbiology andhysteroscopy.
Journgl ofSnallAnimalPractice36,201-206
licking and secondary infcction by organisims othcr
Watts JR, Wright PI and Lee CS (1998) Endometrial cytology of the
than B. canis) and testicular degeneration (secondary
normal bitch throughout the reproductive cycle. Jountal af Smal!
 to epididymitis). Orchitis is rare. Other more general-
Aninal Practice 39, 2-9.
Watts JR, Wright PJ, Lee CS and Whithear KG (1997) New techniques
izcd sigus includc cnlargcd lymph nodcs, antcrior
using Iranscervical uterinc cannulation for the diagnosis of uterine
disordcrs in the bitch.Journat ofReproditction andFertity Sup
uveitis, discospondylitis, meningoencephalitis,
plcmcnt51.283-293
 protein-losing glomerulopathy, prostatitis, arthritis/
Wats IR, Wright PJ and Whithear KG (1996) The ulerine, cervical and
polyarthritis.
vaginal microfloraof the nomalbitchthroughout thereproductive
cycle.Journal fSnallAninal Practice37,5460
CHAPTER FOUR
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Female
Mike Harvey
INTRODUCTION
 concentration falls and the progcsteronc conccntration
starts to rise prior to ovulation.
There are many conditions of the reproductive system
From the clinical point of view, care must be taken
involving the non-pregnant bitch and queen and the
in assessing the corrcct stage of the cyclc. Sonmc
approach to thc differcntial diagnosis uses a number of
bitches continue to bleed although they have ovulated.
investigative techniques.
In such bitches, if the owner chooses the 'correct' time
to mate as being after the scrosanguincous rlischargc
+
History
stops, thc rcsull could be a mating after the ova have
Clinical sigms
degenerated, leading to an infertile mating. An
Radiography
extreme example was a bitch seen recently at the
 Ultrasonography
autbor's clinic that had a haemorrhagic vulval dis-
Vaginal cytology
charge throughout pro-oestrus, oestrus and pregnancy
 Endocrine assays
but whelped normally. The bleeding then ceased, con-
Vaginoscopy
firming that the haemorrhage was not the result of
 Contrast vaginal radiography
+
trauma, but was 'normal'.
 Pregnancy diagnosis
m dan o n ar s 
·
Haematology
behaviour and hormonal events and thcrefore difficul-
Biochemistry
ties can be encountered in finding the correct time to
mate without the aid of vaginal cytology, progesterone
One of the most important facets of such diagnoses is
d full understanding of both the physiology and
endocrinology of the reproductive cycle of the bitch
Metoestrus
 and queen (see Chapters 1 and 2). This knowledgc.
 This stagc lasts approximately 2 months and during
taken together with the above investigative procedure,
this period, the ovary produces progesterone regard-
should make diagnosis relatively straightforward.
less of whether the bitch is pregnant or not. Norrmally,
no external signs are seen, with the exceptionl of some
CONDITIONS OF THE NON-PREGNANT
discharge. Such a discharge is also commonly seen
BITCH
during pseudopregnancy. If the owner is concerned,
a Diff-Quik? stained smear of the fluid will eliminate
Oestrous cycle
the presence of polymorphonuclear leucocytes,
A very brief summary of the various stages of the
 confirming the non-purulent nature of the dischargc.
bitch's oestrous cycle follows.
The most common reproductive conditions in the
bitch, namely pyometra and pseudopregnancy, occur
Pro-oestrus
during this phase.
Follicular dcvclopmcnt in thc ovarics results in rising
 oestrogen concentrations which produce the typical
Anoestrus
serosanguineous discharge from tlhe vulva, the vulval
From the clinical pointof view, the ovaries are inactive
swelling and the release of pheramoncs that attract
producing neither oestrogen nor progesterone. Al-
the male.
though small amounts of oestrogens can be measured,
no clinical signs are evident. Anoestrus lasts until the
Oestrus
next pro-oestrus, the stage varying from as short as cne
This is typified by the bitch standing to be mated. The
month up to I0 months.
vulval discharge is normally non-haemorrhagic and
 A bitch that has never been in oestrus is referred to
thc vulva loscs its tcnscncss. Plasma oestrogen
as being in primary anoestrus, whcrcas one which has
ManualofSmallAnimalReproductionandNeonatology
had at least onenormal,orin some cases a short and
abnormal oestrus,isreferred toasbeing insecondary
anoestrus. The investigation of abnormal oestrus is
covered in Chapter 3.
Cyclingabnormalities
"Silentheat'
Bitcheswith silent oestrusmayshowsome ornone of
thesignsfestrus,vulvalswelling,serosanguinu
discharge or attractiveness to themale.They will
thcrefore either present as apparently anocstrous or
Figure4.1:Vaginalcytology smearfromabitchwithsplit
withvaguesignsofoestrus.Somebitchesshownormal
oestrus.Day6following onsetofpro-oestralbleeding.The
pro-oestraldischargeduring theirfirstfewseasonsbut
cellsaremainlyintermediateandnucleatedsuperficial.
laterinlifefail to showanyvisible signs.Vaginal
cytology andplasma progesterone concentration indi-
cate that ovarianfunctionisnormalandovulationin
these bitches can be monitored using these methods.It
isdebatablewhethersuchbitchesshouldbebred asthe
condition may beinherited.
In the absence of any signs indicatingovarian activ-
ity,plasma progesterone assays can becarried out on a
being evidence ofovulation.An estimate ofwhen
ovulation took place can then bemade.Using this
informationtoanticipate thenextoestrus,vaginal cyto-
logycanbeperformed on a weeklybasis beginning
shortlybefore the expectedpro-oestrus.Once thestart
Figure4.2:Samebitch7dayslaterhavingrevertedto
anoestralsmearwithbasalplasmaprogesteroneconcentra
ofpro-oestrushasbecndetectedbycytology,continued
tion.Thecellsarenowmainly parabasal andintermediate
monitoring usingboth cytology and progesterone as-
withsignificantmoutsofmucus.hreeweekslatero
sayswill allowthetime ofovulation tobe determined.
oestralbleedingrestartedfoliowedbynormalovulation.
'Split heat'or‘split oestrus'
which cytologyandprogesteronemonitoringcanbe
Thisconditionisbetterreferredtoas'split pro-oestrus
used to indicate the time ofovulation(see Chapter 3).
(Figures 4.1and4.2).Itis notuncommonforbitchesto
Thereisnoevidence that thisconditionresultsin or
start a pro-oestral serosanguineous discharge that ter-
is associatedwith anyuterineorovarianpathology.A
minates after 4 or 5 days.The discharge then starts
split heat is likely torecur at subsequent oestrus;
again within a fewweeks and usually progresses to
however,fertility should rcmain the same as ina
ovulationandnormalfertility.Occasionally,thefalse
normal heat.
start’occurs for a second time before a normal oestrus
occurs.From the owner's point of view,the bitch is
Short pro-oestrus
perceived ashavinghadtwoheats andconfusion about
A bitchwith anextremely shortpro-oestrusoflessthan
the stageof the cycle occurs.Greyhounds are alleged
one week has similar presenting signs to one with
to havea higherincidence than otherbreeds,but there
a split heat (Figure 4.3).Where the pro-oestral
islittlepublished detail about the condition.
bleeding ceases because of a very short pro-oestrus,
The aetiology of this conditionis notknown.How-
vaginal cytology andprogesterone assayindicate that
ever,split oestrus is easily monitored by the use of
the bitch is either close to ovulation,with the
vaginal cytology andblood progesterone concentra-
progesterone concentration rising because of the
tions.When bleeding first startsvaginal cytology
pre-ovulation luteinization(>9mmol/l;>3ng/ml),or
indicates follicular activity (Figure 4.1).When the
has ovulated(>32mmol/l;>10ng/ml).Inotherwords,
scrosanguineous discharge stops,the cytology indi-
thebitch followsthenormalpatternbutmuch morc
cates that a sudden decreasein oestrogen production
rapidly than normal.
has occurred due to the cessationof the follicular
activity.Thismanifests as areappearance of nucleated
Anovulation
and parabasal cells together with a basal plasma pro-
Anovulationis anuncommon conditionwhichmay be
gesterone concentration(<3mmol/l;<1 ng/ml).When
confused withsplitoestrus.The serosanguineousvulval
pro-oestrus re-starts,cytology is typical of oestrus.
dischargein this condition tends tobe produced for a
Thebitchwill then usuallyhave anormal cycle in
prolonged period of time.
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Female
37
In attempting to understand the aetiology,it is
assumed that the animal's LHsurge iseither insufficient
orabsent.In otherdomesticspecies,cyclicityproblems
are commonly associatedwithLH deficiencies and it
seemsreasonable toextrapolatethisto thebitch
In thiscondition,thebitch starts herfirstseasonin
the usualfashion butcontinuestohavea swollenvulva
and attract males for much longer than normal. The
bitch behaves as if in pro-oestrus and the cytologyis
similar to that of a bitch in late pro-oestrus.The
discharge continues to have a fresh haemorrhagic
nature unlike cystic ovarian disease in which the dis-
Figure4.3:Vaginalcylology frombitchwithextremely short
charge tends to bccome tarry (see below).
pro-oesirus.Smear iakenday 12afferonsel ofpro-oestrus.
Treatment is usually unnecessary.as the condition
An elevated plasma progesterone conceniration plus the
will resolve after about 6 or 7weeks.Thebitchwill
largenumbersofpolymorphonuclearleucocytesindicated
thatovulationprobablyhadoccurredaboutday6after
either ovulate, or thc follicles will rcgress lcading
pro-oestrus started.
phase.These two possibilities can be differentiated by
The bitch enters pro-oestrus and appcars to follow
Imcasuring plasmaprogcstcronc concentrations.A con-
the normalpattern of cytological changes leading
towards the luteinizing hormone (LH) surge,but does
not progress to ovulation.Not uncommonly,the pre-
indicates that ovulation has taken place.Following
ovulationrisc in progesterone is seen,but values then
ovulation, the problem will resolve.
return to basal concentrations.The use of human
Chorionic gonadotrophin has been used to induce
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) at a dose of 500 IU
ovulation,but with very limited success,and as the
i.m.often results in ovulation.If not treated,the bitch
condition resolvesnaturally,any improvement with
may eithereventually ovulateuptoone week after the
treatment is probably coincidental.
presumedinitialLHsurgershemayundergofollicular
This condition does not recur at later oestruses and
atrophy and progress to anoestrus.These bitches often
fertility is not affected.The main difficulty is in per-
return to oestrus at ashorterthan normalinterval since
suading the owner that it is not a serious problem,
there is no luteal phase.
although the serosanguineous discharge and the persist-
Itisdifficulttodiffcrcntiatebctwecn thebitchwith
cnt attcntions of male dogs may become very tircsomc.
anovulation andonewitha normal butprolongedpro-
Whileit may appearlogical to use progestogens to
oestrus. The history of previous heats may help as the
supprsat,hshuldensh
bitch mayrepcat her previous patern.Itis reasonable
a risk of inducing a juvenile pyometra.
longer than about 25 days; a longer time may indicate
Cystic ovarian disease
that the bitch is anovulatory.
True cystic ovariandiseaseisoccasionallyfoundinthe
Anovulation can be differentiatedfrom split oe
bitch andisnormally follicular.However,para-ovar-
strus in two ways.First, the bitch with split oestrus
ian cysts which arise from the ovarian bursa are com-
tends to stopbleedingwithin about oneweekof start-
monly found atroutine ovariohysterectomy（Figure
ing pro-oestrus, unlike the anovulatory bitch,which
4.4).These are endocrinologically inactive and there-
tends to have a longer thannormal bleeding phase.
fore asymptomatic. In the event of these cysts being
Secondly,thebitchwith splitoestrusnormallystarts
her second oestrous phase within a fewweeks of the
first,whereas thebitch that has undergone anovulation
will not return to heat for many months.
It is probable that these conditions are recurrent;
therefore a full history indicating the nature of previ
ous heats is csscntial.
Juvenile prolonged pro-oestrus
In the mature bitch.pro-ocstrus and ocstrus lasting for
more than about 25 days is considered abnormal.
However,in the pubertal bitch,pro-oestrus,with its
accompanying serosanguineous discharge, can last
for up to 40-50 days without being considered
Figure4.4:Bitch tract with para-ovarianand uterine cysts.
abnormal.
Notethat the ovaries containcorporalutea.
38Manual ofSmallAnimal ReproductionandNeonatology
detectedultrasonographically,unlessthebitchisdem-
due to the prolonged oestrogen production followed
onstrating an abnormality of the oestrous cycle,they
by progestogens.For this reason,surgery should be
should be considered tobe incidental findings.
carriedoutvery shortly after theclinical signs cease
inordertolimitthetimeavailableforuterinechanges.
Follicular cysts:Theseare themost common cysts
In addition,because of the chance of producing a
found inthe ovary.They areusually a conditionof the
pseudopregnancywhenspayinga bitch inthe luteal
olderbitchwhich haspreviouslyhadnormal seasons.
phase (see below),this surgery is best carried out
Pro-oestrus commences normally but continues for
before thenormal increase ofprolactin occurs at
longer than expected.The serosanguineous vulval
about day30after ovulation.
discharge becomes lessfluid andmore tarry and tacky
It hasbcen reported that aspirating the cystsvia a
after about 3-4weeks.The ovarianpathologyisnor-
laparotomy canresolvethecondition,but asthebitch
mally that offollicular cysts,producingnormal con-
is unlikelytobeusedforbreeding,thisdoesnotappear
centrations of oestrogcnin the early stageswhich then
tobe aviable option.
declineswiththeadvancingageof thecysts.Itislikely
thatafailure of LHrelease hasresultedinthe animal’s
Luteal cysts:Amuch lesscommon typeof cystis one
cycle being halted at late pro-oestrus.
which produces progesterone.Instead of progester-
Vaginal cytology (Figure 4.5) reveals superficial
one productionceasing2-3months afterovulation,it
cornifiedcellsbut the degree ofcornificationdoesnot
appears to continue formany months.Asaresult,the
alteronce thebitchreacheslatepro-oestrus and blood
bitch will appear to be in prolonged anoestrus.Diag-
progesterone concentrations will remainbasal.Ultra-
nosisis eitherbyultrasonography orserial progester-
soundexaminationusingahighfrequency transducer
one assays,normallymonthly.No otherconditionis
willreveal larger than normal(>1 cm)non-ovulated
likelytoproduce aprolongedlutealphasewith an
follicles.Exploratorylaparotomycanbecarriedoutto
elevated progesterone concentration.
aid diagnosis.
It is assumed that follicularcysts are caused by a
The treatment of choice is ovariohysterectomy,as
deficiency of LH secretion,and that the bitch with
affectedbitches arenormally pastbreedingagc and the
luteal cystshasproducedsufficient LHtocausesome
conditionwillprobablyrecur at the next heat.Thereis
luteinization,butnotovulation.Itisunknownwhy
a possibility of excessive bleeding during surgery if
this luteal tissue doesnotundergoregression as do
undcrtaken while oestrogen concentrations archigh;it
normalcorporalutea.Astheutcrus appearstoplay no
may thereforebepreferabletopostpone theprocedure
partinlutealregressionitisdifficult toseewhyluteal
until after medical treatment.
cysts should have a prolonged lifespan.
Chorionic gonadotrophin has beenused in this
Whilerostaglandintherapyhasbeenusedvari
condi-tionbutitssuccessrateislow.Itmaycauseonly
hysterectomy is the treatment of choice.
partial luteinizationratherthanovulation,althoughif
theresultant progesterone suppressesthe gonadotrophin
Ovarianremnantsyndrome
output,it shouldcause atrophyof the cysts and thus
In this‘syndrome'aspayed bitchispresentedwhich
resolution of the condition.The bitch can then be
is attractive tomaleseitheronacyclical basis similar
spayedshortly after thesigns abateorlaterwhensheis
to the previous inter-oestrous intervals or,if spayed
inanoestrus.
recently,at about the time thenext heat would have
Progestogens can beused to causereduction of
been expected.
gonadotrophinproduction and cyst atrophy.How
Thebitchdoesnotnormallyshowaserosanguineous
ever,thereisapossibility that such treatment may
discharge when she cycles unless a portion of uterus
resultinapyometra,particularlyin anolderbitch,
has been left;however, the vulva may appear more
moist thannormal andmostof theothersigns ofpro-
oestrus are present.Thebitch ovulates spontaneously
and thecorporalutea aremaintained for theusual2-3
months.This is further evidence that in the bitch,
unlike most other species,theuterus playsno part in
ovarianfunction.Despite thevarietyofexplanations
given to owners to explain why a bitch that has been
spayedshould showcyclicalactivitythemajorityare
found at surgery tohave one entire ovaryremaining.In
somecasesarfnvaryabeenlfandita
beenreported occasionally that extra-ovarian ovarian
tissuecanbefound in the ovarian ligament.However,
thereisnochancethatabitch whichbecomes attractive
Figure4.5:Vaginal cytologyfrom bitchwith cysticovaries.
Pro-oestrus staried34dayspreviously.Typical latepro-
approximately every 6monthshas anything but ovar-
oestrus smearcontainingsuperficial cels.
ian tissue as the cause of the problem.
Conditions of theNon-PregnantFemale
39
Spayed bitches are seen thatapparentlybecome
suddenly attractiveanumberof yearsfollowingovario-
hysterectomy.It seemsunlikely that these animals
have ovarian tissuewhich suddenlybecomes active
aftersuchaprolongedlengthoftime,althoughthishas
beenreportedTheinvestigationdiscussedabove should
eliminate thispossibility andwill probablyreveal the
presence ofamild vaginitis which produces
pheromones attracting male dogs.
Ovarian tumour
Ovarian tumours are not particularly common.Granu-
Figure4.6:Vaginalcytologyfrombitchwithovarian
losa cell tumourshave the highestfrequency and are
remnantsyndrome，showingoestrogenicstimulationofcells
usually seen in older bitches.
duringthetimethebitchwasattractivetomaledogs.An
Themost commonlydiagnosed tumoursareinac
ovarywasremovedfollowinglaparotomy.
tivewithclinicalsignsrelatedtothelargeabdominal
Diagnosis can be carried at two stages of the
mass,namelyabdominal distension and/or ascites.
cycle.When thebitch is inpro-oestrus or oestrus,
If the tunourisendocrinologically active,thepre
vaginal cytology will demonstrate oestrogenic
senting signs will depend on which hormone is pro-
stimulation.Whileitisfeasibletocarryoutoestrogen
duced.The most frequent are oestrogen-producing
assays,it is cheaper and more convenient to use
tumourspresentingwith apersistentpro-oestrus or
cytology (Figure 4.6).
oestrus.Vaginal cytological changes are similar to
Secondlyif the oestrous signs occurred in the
thosenormallyfound atthese stages andcomparableto
previous2months,a plasma progesteroneconcentra
those of a bitchwith follicular cysts.The bitch with a
tion of >6-9mmol/1(>2-3ng/ml) indicates the pres-
tumour willnot respond to therapywith hCGor
enceoflutealtissue and confirms thepresence of
progestogens,however,andwill continue topresent
ovarian tissue.If asimple ELISA progesterone assay
the same signs.
is used,aresult showingahigher concentration than
Itispossible thatbone marrowsuppressionmaybe
the low standard (9mmol/l;3ng/ml)is diagnostic of
induced by oestrogen-producing tumours,Early diag-
the presence of luteal tissue.Itmust beremembered
nosis,including haematology to assess the degree of
thatconcentrationslowcrthanthisarefoundbothatthe
anaemia,and tumourremoval are therefore essential.
end of metoestrus and during anoestrus;therefore a
Somegranulosacell tumours canproduceproges-
basalconcentrationdoesnoteliminatethepossibility
terone,and cystic endometrial hyperplasia andpyo-
metra can be induced.
is outside the luteal phase.
Other tumours which occur are ovariancystadeno
An alternative diagnosticmethod isthe use of
mas,fibromas or adenocarcinomas.These do not nor-
GnRH(0.16mg buserelin) to induce LH release
mally present asreproductive problems,but either as
whichstimulates oestrogen productionfrom the ova-
large abdominal masses or occasionally with clinical
ries.The oestrogens can be measured in plasma or
signs of secondary spread.
serum,but thelaboratorywhichcarriesout theassay
Diagnosis isbased on abdominal palpation,radio-
shouldbecontacted fortheirrecommendedprotocol.
graphy and ultrasound investigation.Exploratory
Ovariectomyis the treatment ofchoice.If the
laparotomyallowsbothdiagnosis andremoval of the
bitchis attractive and thereforeundertheinfluence of
structurewhichisnormallyunilateral.The tumouris
oestrogens,the ovarywill be enlarged and easier to
usuallynon-malignantandovariohysterectomywill
find than in anoestrus.However,at this stage,the
resolve the problem.
surgery may be more difficult because of the
increasedvascularityproducedbythe elevated
Conditionsof thelutealphase
oestrogenconcentrations.After ovulation,theovary
is alsolargebecause of thepresence of corporalutea.
Pseudopregnancy (pseudocyesisorfalse pregnancy)
There isa slight chance ofaprolongedpseudo-
Pseudopregnancyisarelatively common condition
pregnancy if the surgery iscarried outlater than30
which presentsbetween6 and14weeks after oestrus.
days after ovulation asprolactin concentrations are
Itisthought tobedueeither to excessivelyelevated
rising (see Pseudopregnancy).Possibly the best
plasma prolactin concentrations or to the bitch’s in-
compromise is toperform thesurgery about 2weeks
creasedresponse to thishormone.In all bitchespro-
after attractivenesshas ceased.Thebitch should then
lactin increasesnaturally after day30 ofmetoestrus,
be inmetoestrus with basal oestrogens and prolactin,
acting both on the mammaryglands in preparation for
thus eliminatingboththeproblem ofhaemorrhage
lactationandasthemajorluteotrophichormone,main
and therisk ofpseudoprcgnancy.
taining the corporalutea.
40
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonalology
It has been suggested that all bitches have a
be onit of the luteal phase and prolactin concentrations
pseudo-pregnant phase but that only in some is it
should be basal or at least declining. Therefore by
 overt Because bitches in a pack or a kennel tcnd to
about 12 wccks, pseudopregnant signs should be re-
come into heat synchronously,it has been suggested
 gressing spontaneously. Treatment in many cases is
 that pseudopregnancy allows several bitches to lactate
 therefore attempting to buy time until the bitch natu-
so that the puppies may be suckled by bitches other
rally passcs out of the phase. Howcvcr, it should be
 than the natural mothcr. This would have atlvantages
 noted that in a small number of cases, pseudopreg-
in allowing the dominant bitch who has produced
 ti s ai se  sdde an nou A aou
the puppies to be able to hunt for food while her
after oestrus and the signs may then continue until as
lio Kq iae paron pue pau auaq aiam soiddnd
long as 5 montbs after the scason started.
 members of the pack.
Conservative treatment includes the use of diuret-
This common condition presents in a variety of
 ics such as frusemide with restriction of food and water
ways:
where lactation is prescnt. Where nesting behaviour
  n n  s an s
 Mammary development with or without milk
behaviour pattern can be attempted.
production
Currently, the most widely uscd drugs in all types 
 Nesting and toy fixation
of pscurlopregnancy are reproductive steroids. Thesc
Aggression or dullness
function by producing a negative feedback on the
A milky vulval discharge.
pituitary release of prolactin. A varicty of such hor-
moncs are used, the most common being progestogens
The history, clinical signs and the time after oestrus
(such as medroxyprogesterone acetate or proligestone)
usually suggest the possibility of the condition. Preg-
and oestrogens/testosterone combinalions.
nancy testing should be carried out and, if negative,
Anti-prolaclin drugs have not been widely uscd in
the diagnosis of pscudopregnancy is obvious if there
 the UK. Cabergoline, whichhas been available in other
 are lactational or nesting signs.
European countries, is an extremely efficient drug with
 In an entire bitch with aggressive behaviour, pscudo-
q  mou si p sio opis jo s ao e
pregnancy can be suspccted if she has shown similar
available in the UK.
behaviour following previous seasons. lf a bitch that
Asingle course of 5 days treatment withi cabergoline
 normally has a good tempcrament becomes aggrcssivc
is effective in ovcr 80% of cascs of primary refcrrals.
 about 2 months after her scason. pscudopregnancy
 In post-spay cases and in those which have become
should be suspected.
persistent (see below) and in which treatment has been
Some bitches, supposedly spayed, show signs of
unsuccessful with reproductive stcroids, cabergoline
aggression at 6-monthly intervals. Thcsc signs are the
has a high success rate.
result of an ovary which has been left at spaying. They
 If reproductive steroids such as progestogens or
should be investigated for ‘ovarian remmant'
syn-
 oestrogen/androgen combinations arc administered, only
drome and the prcscncc of ovarian lissue confirmed.
 One type of drug should be used. If the one selected does
1:
Finally, as will be discussed below, bitches that
not work or is only transiently effective, the same drug
 have been spayed during an overt pseudopregnancy
i
should be used again. It is assumed tlhiat a temporary
1.1
may develop a prolonged, if not pcrmanent condition.
supprcssion of the prolactin concentration occurs and
Indeed, bitches spayed at the time of rising or elevated
when the treatment is terminated prolactin rises again
 prolactin (after day 30) which showed no clinical signs
 and the condition reappears. It may help to reduce the
at the timc of the surgery (covcrl pscudoprcgnancy)
 dosagc rate towards the end of the treatment period, as
may develop the condition.
 this may reduce the rebound release of prolactin. If this
Occasionally, bitches are presented showing only a
is not successful, repeating the same course of treatment
cloudy vulval discharge and in these cases thc first
 often brings ahout a permanent cure.
 investigation should bc an examination of a smear of
It is likely that bitches that are pseudopregnant will
the discharge for the presence of polymorphonuclear
have a recurrence after subsequent heats and for this
leucocytes. In the absence of a heavy population,
 reason, unlcss bitches are going to be used for breeding.
 infection can be ruled out; however it should be borne
they should be spayed during anoestrus. It is interesting
in mind that a normal metoestral smear will show a
to note that bitches which previously have had pseudo-
certail population of polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
 pregnancies with aggressive signs tend not to have
similar bchavioural problcms whcn they are pregnant.
 Treatment: The treatment depends on the presenting
 It is vital to appreciate the potential sidc cffects of
signs (Table4.1). The main approaches to the condi-
the treatmcnt selected. If handled incorrectly, a condi-
tion are conscrvalivc Ireatment, reproduclive ster-
tion which in most cascs is no more tlhan relatively
oids or anti-prolactin drugs.
 inconvenient can become extremely serious if il be-
The physiology of the bitch must always bc bonc
 comes perimanent, and euthanasia may have to be
in 1nind, as ahout 3 months aftcr ocstrus, the bitch will
contemplatcd, especially in the aggressive type.
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Feinale
41
Type of presentation
Priority of treatments suggested
Cloudy vulval discharge
No treatment
Mammary development or milk production
No treatment; Diuretics; Anti-prolactin agent (if
cabergoline); Reproductive steroids; Anti-prolactin agent
(iC bromocriptinc)
Behavioural or nesting
No treatment; Anti-prolactin agent (if cabergoline);
 Reproductive steroids; Anti-prolactin agent (if
 bromocriptine)
Aggression
Anti-prolactin agent (if cabergoline); Reproductive
steroids; Anti-prolactin agent (if bromocriptine)
Table 4.1: Approuch to therapy in false pregnaney
The worst sequential conbination of drugs appears
lation in the discharge is similar to the normal vaginal
 to be one which contains ocstrogens followcd by a
flora. Thc bitch may or may not lick her vulval region.
 progestogen. This can exacerbate the condition, as it
 In some cases, the discharge may make her attractive
mimics the pattern of hormones at oestrus and almost
to male dogs. From the aetiological point of view, it is
appears to re-primc thc rclcasc of prolactin. Undcr
 convenicnt to sub-dividc thesc cases using the age at
 these circumstances, the condition may become much
worse and the duration prolonged.
The side effects of the anti-prolactin drugs are less 
Pre-pubertal or juvenile’ vaginifis: This is a rela
serious but more obvious; bromocriptine may cause
tively common condion in pre-pubertal bitchcs, whcrc
emesis. As previously mentioned, a much better series
 as early as 2 or 3 months of age, they produce a copious
of crgoline derivatives has been available in mainland
 purulent vaginal discharge. The bitch is fit and healthy.
 Europe, including cabergoline; the frequency of side
The condition appears to be the resull of overactive
effects of these drugs is very low.
vaginal glands, the products of which become con-
Onc trcatment which must not be carried out is
taminated with commensal bacteria.
 Ovariohystereclomy when thc signs of falsc prcgnancy
Various congenital conditions, including intersex
 are present. If performed, the precipitous drop in
and vaginal strictures, rmay producedischarges, caused
 progesterone allows prolactin to rise and bitches can
partly by blockage and contamination of vaginal secre-
develop permanent signs of pseudopregnancy. In aldi-
tions and partly by licking the vulva. Such conditions
tion, bitches are seen which develop long-term false
should be eliminated from consideration before as-
 pregnancies following spaying, even when there were
suming the bitch has a pre-pubertal vaginitis.
Do obvious signs of the condition at the time of the
Vaginal swabs for bactcriology and cytology are
surgery. These were probably spayed during the luteal
best taken from the discharge at the vulval lips, in
 phase after prolactin concentrationis started to rise alid
contrast to taking an anterior vaginal swab as for
the effcct was similar to spaying when signs were
adults. There seems to be no advantage in causing the
present. For these reasons, it would appear to be much
safer to spay bitches about 45 months after their heat
vagina when the pus at the vulva will give the same
 in the depth of anocstrus; this takcs into account the
 answer. Smears stained with Giemsa or Diff-Quik@
fact that some false pregnancies do not show signs until
show vast numbers uf polymorphonuclcar Icucocytes
almost 4 monthis after the end of oestrus.
(Figure 4.7). Bacteriology is normally uninformative,
The treatment for bitches that have been spaycd and
 as are haematology and biochemistry. Vaginoscopy
 probably will require sedation in such young bitches
ductive steroids or bromocriptine. Delmadinone ace-
 and is not normally carried cut, as the examination
tatc has also bccn found to be useful in such cases. This
usually reveals only erythema and the discharge.
author has found that bitches with aggressive and
When the bitch reaches pubcrty and has her first
behavioural signs after spaying have responded par-
oestrus, the condition spontaneously resolves due to
ticularly well to cabcrgolinc and this may he the
elevated oestrogen and the flushing effect of the pro-
 method of choice when available.
oestral discharge (Figure 4.8). It is intercsting that in
spite of the fact that there is clearly bacterial contami-
Conditions of thc vagina and vulva
nation present, no specific organisms are associated
with the condition and antibiotic treatment is com-
Vaginitis
monly unsuccessful, in spite of using a series of differ-
A bitch with vaginitis is normally clinically healthy but
ent antibiotics. Temporary improvement tends to occur
has a purulent vaginal discharge. The bacterial popu-
following antibactcrial thcrapy but invariably the con-
42
Manual ofSmallAnimalReproductionandNeonatology
dition recurs.The probable reason is the failure to
indeedpurulent,thisbeingconfirmedby thepresence
achievean adequate concentration of antibioticsin the
ofpolymorphonuclear leucocytes.Haematology and
immature vagina.
biochemistry in such caseswill tend to bewithin
There are circumstances where,in spite of assur-
normal ranges.If no specificcauses arefound for the
ances that the conditionwill resolve at thefirstheat,
discharge (see below)and the condition is therefore
owners press for treatment.If it is felt that this is
primary,the use of local antibiotics ormild disinfect-
desirable,possibly amore effective treatment than
ants is usually successful.
systemicantibiosis is theflushing of thevagina with
eitherwater-soluble antibioticsoranextremelydilute
Congenital defectsof thevagina andvestibule
disinfectant.It is likely that the flushing effect is as
Congenital defects are normally diagnosed:
useful as the antimicrobials.Careshould be taken with
such treatment,asover-frequent therapymay alterthe
Becausetheownerhasobscrvedanenlargedclitoris
vaginalfloraresultinginovergrowthwithfungiand
Ata pre-breeding examination
mycoplasms.Theuse of low doses of systemicoestro-
Afteranattemptedmating atwhichintromission
gens or creams containing oestrogenshasbeen advo-
could notbe achieved
cated as being useful in some cases.
Because the bitch has a vaginal discharge.
Cases that resolve atpuberty do not tend tore-
Almost certainly,many such defects goundiagnosed
the later development of pyometra.The major diffi-
in unmated bitches if they cause no problems.
cultyinhandlingthesecasesisinconvincingtheowner
Thevestibule should be examinedfor any struc-
that theconditionisnormal'.However,ifthebitchhas
turesprotrudingthroughthevulvallips andtheclitoris
delayedpuberty,the condition can lastfor a disturb
should be palpated to investigate if it is enlarged.If
inglylongtimeand theemptationunderwerres
nothingisseen,thelips should bepartedto checkfor
sure,is to treat the bitch.
an enlarged clitoris.This is the cardinal sign of inter-
sexuality.However,racing Greyhoundswhose sea-
‘Adult’vaginitis:Adult vaginitisisinvariablychronic
sonshavebeen suppressedwith androgenswill also
and can result from avariety ofcauses,including
commonly have an enlarged clitoris.This,on occa-
congenital and acquired defects.Both typespresent
sions,canallowvaginalsecrctions to accumulate and
withamucopurulent or purulent dischargewhich is
become purulent.
occasionallybloody orblood-tinged.These bitches
Congenital defectsof thereproductive tract are
have had at least one oestrus and there isnorecognis-
normally found at thevestibulo-vaginal junction on
able age distribution.
the vulva.As such,they are relatively easily detected.
The conditionis recognized by the presence of an
Usingauricatdglvedfingertiasynallu
overtdischargeora smallamountofcrustymaterial on
smallestbitchtoinsert afinger into thevestibule
thevulvallips;thebitchmaylick hervulvaexccssively
during pro-oestrus or oestrus.In the vastmajority of
andmale dogsmaybe attracted.Manipulation of the
bitches a finger is long enough topass through the
vulval lips usuallyproduces some of the discharge
vulva,craniallyanddorsallyintothevestibuleandthen
from thevestibule.Thebitchis healthy andnot dull or
horizontally to the vestibulo-vaginal junction,thc
lacking in appetite.
latter being about 10 cm from thevulva.The junction
Thepossibility of pyometra or pregnancy must be
is easily detected in the normal bitchby afeeling of
excludedas differentialdiagnoses.A vaginalswab
temporaryrestrictionwhichusuallydilateswithgentle
should be taken to determinewhether thedischargeis
pressure.In the maiden bitch this constriction,nor-
Figure4.7:Vaginalcyiologyfroma7montholdbitchwith
Figure4.8:Vaginal cytology from samebitch asFigure 4.7
javenilevaginitisNotethelarge numberofnon-degenerate
inpro-oestrus about3months later.Notethecomplete
polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
absenceof polymorphonuclear leucocytes.
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Female
43
mally referred to as the hymen, is more markcd and
Vulval constrictions
breeders may try to distcnd this prior to the first mating.
Occasionally bitches are seen in which the vulva is
Because of the additional advantage of feel, a
congenitally fibrosed and will not even allow the entry
digital examination is much more useful in determin-
of a fingertip. Such animals may have already experi-
ing the nature of these defects than instrumcnts such as
cnccd at lcast onc ocstrus, indicaling that cvcn clcvatcd
vaginoscopes. In spite of a relatively commonly held
Destrogen concentrations have not allowed distension
belief, it is not possible to palpate and determine
of the vulva. These bitches should be re-examined
the patency of the bitch's cervix, as the vagina may
during standing ocstrus toconfirm this fibrosis,ascvcn
measure in excess of 20 cm.
a vulva which seems tiny may be patent under oestro-
It is interesting to note that the areas which tend to
gen domination. Greyhounds, for example, have very
have congenital defects, namely the vulva, vcstibule
small vulval lips, but al mating timc arc patcnt to thc
 and vestibulo-vaginal junction, arc formed from dif-
dog's penis. Some bitches when seen early in pro-
ferent embryological structures from those forming
oestrus appear unlikely to have the potential to distend
the vagina. This may help to explain why it is very
sufficiently to allow intromission, but by the time of
uncommon to gct a truc congcnital vaginal stricture
mating are quite normal. The difference between the
and if the bitch's tract is normal as far cranially as the
vulva which distends and the abnormal one is that the
vestibulo-vaginal junction, problems are unlikely to
lattertype feels fibrotic, whereas the other feels normal
be encountcrcd.
and pliable, but small.
Digital distension does not make any difference to
Vestibulo-vaginal stricturcs
a congenital fibrotic vulval stricture. Surgical correc-
This is the most common site for strictures of the
tion is not acccptablc on thc grounds that itis changing
reproductive tract. Vestibulo-vaginal strictures are
the characteristics of the-animal. Even if episiotomy
relatively easily diagnosed by digital palpation. The
were to be carried out, mating would be inhumane. It
vestibulo-vaginal junction is felt in relativcly largc
may also bc that such condlitions are inherited.
bitches about a finger's Iength into the tract, therefore
in the majority of bitches if there is no stricture palpa-
Intersexes
ble it is unlikely that there is one present. Bitchcs 
Intcrscxuality can cxistina varicty of phenotypcs. This
examined prior to their first mating should have a
is because the gonads can contain a variety of combi-
routine digital examination to check that no such
nations of ovarian and testicular material, either func-
abnormality exists. Animals with vestibulo-vaginal
tional or inactive. The most obvious indication of
strictures do nol usually have a vaginal discharge.
 intersexuality is either an enlarged clitoris or an under-
Strictures can take an annular form which, on palpa-
 developed penis and prepuce. The genital tubercle is an
tion, feels like a ring and not unlike the normal vestibulo
embryological structure whichr is common to both
vaginaljunction, butisrigid and impassable. The maiden
sexes and is androgen sensitive, developing into either
 bitch will probably have a hymen or remnant of hymen
a clitoris or penis. In the absence of male hormones,the
which can feel similar except that it is easily broken by
clitoris remains a vcstigial structure. The presence of
gentle digital pressure. A single band of tissue is some-
testicular material has the potential effect of causing
times found which runs dorso-ventrally at the vestibulo
enlargement of the clitoris. With more extensive stimu-
vaginal junction, and this is commonly a persistent
lation, the result may be an improperly developed
esonephric duct. This is casily dliagnosed digitally or
 penis. By the lime the animal dlcvclops physical fea-
using a vaginoscope. The instrument can easily pass
tures which allow the owners to realise that it is
 round the side of such a structure during introduction
 abnormal, it is part of the family and although the
and thus the defect may be missed unless care is taken to
breeder offers a replacement, vcry few owncrs accept.
continue observation until the vaginoscope has been
Most intersexes appear to be isolated cases with no
completely withdrawn from the tract. In many cases
obvious aetiology. although intersexuality has been
these defects are found at autopsy, having caused no
reported as being inherited in some breeds such as the
 problems throughout the bitch's lifetime.
Cocker Spaniel. While chromosome analysis can be
Anmular rings of the vestibulo-vaginal junction are
used in diagnosis, the presenting signs are usually
not casily corrccted. Aucmptcd dlistcnsion is usually
dliagnostic and indccd in many intcrscxcs, thc cyto-
unsuccessful, as the fibrous nature of the ring normally
 genetic finding is a female karyotype (78XX) in an
reverts back to its original sizefollowing cessation ofthe
 animal which has a female phenotype. In such cases,
dlistension. However in a proporlion of cases distension
 the test is uninformative. In other cases, karyotyping
is successful, in these cases the defect was probably not
may be of help, in that it may show a difference from
a true stricture. Properstrictures should not be surgically
 the phenotypic appearance, thus confirming the inter-
corrected because of the ethics of correcing a congeni-
sex state.
tal defect. The single band type of defect is relatively
It has been reported that supplermentation of preg-
easily cut following episiotomy, but again the question
nant bitches with some synthetic progestogens may
of altcring congenital abnormalitics must bc considered.
 givc risc to tract abnormalitics such as intersexuality.
44
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
by external trauma.If thisis the case,removal of the
clitoris including the os is necessary.
Intersexanimals presentingas males:Masculinized
casescanbe seeninwhich the animal presentswith an
underdevcloped prepuce and penis (Figure 4.11).Oc-
casionally theremaybe haematuria andattractiveness
toothermales,theresultofpro-oestralbleedingresult-
ingfrom ovarian anduterine tissue.
Gonadectomy is the treatment of choice.If the
genital tubercle has developed to an extreme extent
theurethraruns throughtheunderdevelopedpenis
Figure4.9:Enlargedclitoris protrudingfromthevulva in an
andurinescaldingcan occurif theprepucedoesnot
intersexanimalpresentingasafemale.
cover thepenis.The ownerswill haveto ensure that
theskinof the abdominal floorandgroiniswashed
but nodetailed studieshavebeen carried out.For this
and driedfrequently to avoidskinproblems.Petro-
reason,the use of progestogens to augment the bitchs
leumjellyoremollientcreamscanbe used toprevent
ownprogesteroneshouldonlybecarriedoutwhen
irritation.Only if the scalding is aninsurmountable
thereisclearevidence that thebitch hassufferedfrom
problem does the extrememcasure of penileamputa-
lutealinsufficiency duringaprevious pregnancy.Even
tionbecome a consideration.
under these circumstances,full discussion should be
Itshould beremembered thatracing Greyhounds
carriedoutwith theowner.It isprobablysafer touse
tend tobe treatedwith testostcronecompoundsto
progesterone rather than synthetic progestogens,
supprcss their oestrous cycles as progestogens
although the former is only available in the UK as a
tend to reduce racing performance.These drugs can
short-actinginjection.Theinjections should bestopped
before the anticipatedwhelping datein order for par-
dischargc and this should not be confused with
turitiontocommence.If theinjections arenot stopped,
intersexuality.Once the medication is stopped,the
or if depot injectable progestogens are used,a pro-
longedgestationwillresult,withthesubsequcntdeath
of thepuppies and other sequelae.
Intersex animals presentingasfemales:Byfar the
mostcommon diagnosticsignis an enlarged clitoris in
an animal which appears to be female (Figure 4.9). It
caneitherbeseenprotrudingthroughthevulvallips or,
ifsmaller,afterartingthelips.Theclitorisispalpable
andcommonly contains anosclitoris.The abnormality
isnormallyfirst seenat about 3-4months of age.The
sizeof the clitoris canincrease as the testiculartissue
becomes endocrinologically functional.This com-
monly occurs at the time of expectedpuberty（4-6
months of age).
Figure 4.10:Reproductive tract froman intersex aninal,
In some olderanimals,the primarypresenting sign
presentingasfemale.Bothmale andfemalegonadaltissue
are presentwithanepididymisanduterinehorns.
isavulval dischargewhere theowner hasnotseen the
enlargedclitoris.Virtuallyallofthesebitches have not
had a season,although occasionally if the gonadal
tissue contains functional ovarian tissue,signs of
oestrus may occur.
Gonadectomy should becarried out plusremoval
ofwhatever reproductive tract ispresent.The gonads
invariably contain testicular material whichmaycon-
sist ofovo-testesortcstesandinbothsituations there
can be epididymal tissue present (Figure 4.10).In
many casesremovalof thetesticularmaterial causes
some reduction in clitoral size.If the clitoris is then
effectively covered by thevulval lips,reconstructive
surgerysunnecessary.Ifthelitorisis stillexposedt
Figure 4.11:Rudimentary prepuceand penis inan intersex
remains vulnerableto damage,either self-induced or
presentingasmoremalethanfemale.
Conditions of theNon-Pregnant Female
45
clitoris tends to regress in size.There appears to
Foreign body:Vaginoscopy should reveal the pres-
be no rcduction in subsequent fertility following
ence of anyobviousfocusofinfection,such asgrass
cessation of trcatment.
awns.Evenif missed,the usual local thcrapy of flush-
ingwith aqueous antibioticsormilddisinfectant should
Acquiredvaginal conditions
remove anyforeign body.
A visual or vaginoscopic examination should
reveal thepresence of acquiredvaginalconditions
Vaginal hyperplasia
and cytology of any discharge will confirm if it is
Vaginal hyperplasia is often improperlyreferred to as
purulent in naturc.If thc vaginitis is a sccondary
vaginal prolapse.It canpresent in one of twoways:
condition,the primary problem must be corrected
followed by therequired treatment for the vaginitis.
A circular doughnut-like structure(Figure 4.12)
protrudingfrom thevulva and representinga
Vaginal ulceration:Thiscondition,whichisnotcom
360° hyperplastic area
mon, presents as a haemorrhagic discharge that can
A single spherical swelling (Figure 4.13),which
become infected and purulent.It is most likely to
is a discrete portion of the vagina that has
follow a traumatic mating. Forcible separation of the
undergone hyperplasia.
tie canalso causevaginal damageincluding thepossi
bilityofgrossdamage orulceration.Owners should be
made aware that as the sperm-rich fraction is produced
inthefirst2orminutesofthematingseparationwill
not stop a potential pregnancy.Breeders carrying out
excessivclyrough digital cxaminationforvaginal dis-
tensionmay alsoberesponsibleformucosal damage of
the vagina.
Diagnosis is by vaginoscopy and at this cxamination,
it should be clearwhetherthere is damage present which
is causing the bleeding or a pathological condition,such
as a tumourInmostcascsulccrationwillcsolveon
taneously.If it persists,local therapy with antibiotics or
emollient creams may help the healing process.
Figure4.12:Vaginal hyperplasia ina bitchwith360°
vaginal protrusion(doughnut-type').Photograph taken
followingepisiotomy priortosurgery.
Vaginaltumours:Vaginal tumoursare normally
CourtesyofDrMarinSuti
benign,withfibroleiomyomas,fibromas andlipomas
bcing the most common.Presenting signs are vulval
bleeding or discharge.Diagnosis is normally by using
vaginoscopy.A useful technique is contrast radio-
graphy.in whicha Foley catheterisintroduced into the
vestibule and,aftcr gcntlyclamping thcvulva with
bowelclamps,contrastmediumisinfusedandalateral
radiograph taken.Thenormal vagina has avery sharp
margin,and the ouiline of the tumour,if present,is
clearly visualized.Surgical removal is normally
undertaken via an episiotomy.It has been advocated
that ovariohysterectomybe carried out atthe samc
time,as the tumours may be hormone-dependent.
Following removal,recovery should beuneventful.
Transmissible venereal tumour:In the UK,this tu-
mour is rarely seen and then onlyin animals which
have bccn mated ovcrscas.It is aninteresting tumour
in that it is spread venereally by celltransmission.All
cases appear to have a common origin,in that the
chromosome picturc of thc tumour cells from most
animals studiedis similar.TheTVThas acauliflower-
like appearance and is friable.Clinical signs include
vulval bleeding orthe appearance of the tumour at the
vulva.The tumour can be removed following an cpisi-
Figure4.13:Vaginal hyperplasia witha singlediscrete
otomy,although spontaneous regression may occur.
swelling of part of thevagina.
46
ManualofSmallAnimalReproduction andNeonatology
CONDITIONSOFTHEUTERUS
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
(CEH-pyometra
Thisis thcmost serious conditionof thebitch'srepro-
ductive system.It occurs in a uterus which has devel-
oped cystic hyperplasticchanges after a series of
oestrous cycles,commonly unaccompanied bypreg-
nancy.During oestrus, the uterus becomes infected
and,under the influence of progesterone from the
corpora lutea,develops into a pus-filled organ which
releasestoxinsintothecirculation.Thesehavemarked
deleterious effectsboth systemically and on specific
organssuchasthekidney.Theconditionmustalway
be considered as a possibility in any bitch which is
Figure4.14:Tissueremovedfollowingsub-mucosal
resection of the bitch inFigure 4.12.
unwell during the 2-month period after oestrus.It
shouldbeborneinmind thatnot everybitch that is
CourtesyfDrMarinSln.
unwell during this time is suffering from pyometra
This conditionisnormally only seen inbitchesinpro
and theconditionmustbeproven to existrather than
oestrus andoestrus,whcrethehighoestrogenconcen-
be assumed.
tration encourages the hyperplastic condition.As the
Pyometra is typically a condition of themiddle-
vulva swells and thenrelaxes,thevaginadistends and
aged to older bitch which has not had puppies,
the vaginal wall protrurdes through the vulva.The
although it may occur in both parous and young
doughnut appearance is typical and diagnostic.
bitchcs.Thc bitch typically was in season about
The conditionresolveswhen thebitchgoes out of
6-8weeks previously (Figure 4.15) and has normal
oestrus andheroestrogenconcentrations decline;how-
elevated progesterone concentrations.The condition
ever,the problem is likely to recur at the next oestrus.
may,however,occur asearly as one week afterthc
Regression of the condition can be accelerated
endof oestrus.Pyometra may alsooccur in a bitch
by the use ofprogestogens which cause follicular
whichhas‘ovarianremnant syndrome’in which a
regression,but care should be taken to select one
portion ofuterushasbeen left,the so-calledstump
which is safe touse in pro-oestrus (see Chapter 16).
pyometra'.
Once the condition has regressed,the permanent
Theremaybe ahistoryofeitheroestrogen therapy
solution is ovariohysterectomy when the bitch is in
for unwantedmating or,particularlyin thepubertal
anoestrus.
bitch,progesterone therapy for oestrous control.
If the animalisrequiredforbreeding,sub-mucosal
The bitchistypicallydull,recumbent,inappetant,
resection (Figure 4.14) can be performed during
vomiting,polydypsic and polyuric.Mostof thesigns
oestrus but the problems of haemorrhage make the
result from systemic toxaemia,with thepolydipsia
surgerydifficult.Ithasbeensuggested that thiscondi
andpolyuria being theresult ofglomerulonephritis.
The rcctal temperaturemay be elevated early in the
consideredunethical.
course of the disease,but may become normal or
subnormal as the condition progresses.Occasional
Acquired fibrosis ofthe tract
Vaginal damage caused during dystociamayresultin
strictures forming,where one part of therepairing
vagina adheres to another.Although congenital de-
fectsalmost invariably occur caudal to the vagina
proper,such acquired damage can occur anywhere
withinthebirthcanal.Thehistorywill be ofa parous
bitch which,at her next breeding,experiences a
painful mating orwhere themale dogwasunable to
gainfullintromission andno tiewas achieved.There
mayalso have been haemorrhagefollowing themat-
ing.Investigation is bydigital andvaginoscopic ex
amination andifthereismarkeddistortionofthe
vagina,contrast radiography may is useful.If the
damageinterfereswithmating,futurebreedingofthe
bitch is unlikelytobe possible as surgical repair is
Figure4.15:Ovaries fromabitchwith pyometra about6
unlikely to be successful.
weeks afterher season.Note thecorpora lutea.
Conditions ofthe Non-Pregnant Female
47
Figure 4.16:Vaginal cytology from ahitchwithopen-cervix
Figure 4.17:Lateralradiographofabitchwithpyomelra
pyometrashowing degenerate polymorphonuclear
showinguniform-contrastenlarged uterinehorns.
leucoeytes.
clinical signs includeskeletal pain and acute uveitis.
thereiscommonly an increased distance between the
Not every bitch shows all of thcsc signs;in fact nonc
bladder andrectum.Whenevcrautcrus isvisualized on
of these signs is invariable.
a radiograph,it is almost certain to be enlarged and it
Theremayor maynotbe a purulent orblood
should be noted that apregnant uterusbetween4 and 6
stained vulval dischargecontaining degeneratingpoly-
weeks,the stage before the fetal skcletons bccome
morphonuclearleucocytes (Figure 4.16).The presence
visible, can appear very similar to a pyometra. One
of a discharge is the basis for classification as either
marked disadvantage of radiography is the necessity to
‘opcn-cervix’or‘closed-cervix’pyometra.Abdomi-
sedate abitch that is already toxic.
nal distension is common as the uterus is markedly
The enlarged and fluid-filled uterus can be imaged
enlarged,weighing up to 10 kg in some large bitches.
byultrasonography,oftenshowingvaryingsizedloops
In somc highly toxic bitches,however,the uterine
(Figure 4.18). The fluid is normally anechoic but may
diametermaybe onlymodestly increased
be floccular.Differentiation of pyometra from preg-
The workof Dow (1959)indicated that the
nancy can be made by the absence of fetuses,the
repetitivc injcction of oestrogens and progesterone
floccular nature of thefluid and thefact that theloops
was most effective in inducing pyometra experimcn-
arc of varying sizcs. The additional advantage of
tally.Itis normallyconsidered that theconditionstarts
ultrasonography is that sedation isnotrequired and
as cystic endometrial hyperplasia, with ascending
frequent monitoring of the condition can therefore be
infection from the vagina through the open cervix
carried out safely.
at oestrus.The elevated progesterone concentrations
cncourage bac-terial growth.It is not venereally intro-
Treatment:The treatment of choiceis ovariohysterec-
duced,asmostbitcheswithpyometrahave neverbeen
tomy,the only permanent method of curing thc condi-
mated.Themost common bacterium is Escherichia
tion.Following analysis of blood electrolytes and
coli,although a variety of other non-specificbacteria
acid-base balance,fluid replacement should be given.
can be found in the discharge.
Immediate antibiotic therapy should be initiated and
the surgery should be carried out as soon as is practi-
Confirmatorydiagnosis:Haematologyisvaluable,with
cable using standard methods (see Chapter 15). The
mostbitcheshaving elevated polymorphonuclearleu-
cocyte counts(greaterthanabout15x10²permm²)with
a markedleftshift.Bitcheswithclosed-cervixpyometra
-NOV-9314:41:06
tend tohave highercounts than pencaseswithcounts
normallyinexcess of20x10²permm²,goingas high as
100x10²permm².lncontrast,occasionalcasesmay be
within normal range (7-10 x 10 per mm²).
Biochemistry may reveal an elevated blood urea
nitrogen due to the reversible renal damage but
frequently thc biochemistry is unhelpful.Hepato-
celular damagemay be indicated by an elevation in
serum alanine aminotransferase levels,but whether
this is caused by the pyometra or is a coincident
condition in an olderbitchmay be debatable.
On a lateralradiograph (Figure 4.17),the fluid-filled
cnlarged uterus has a softissue opacity and is imaged in
Figure 4.18:Ultrasound scan of a bitchwith pyometra.
the ventral abdomen. The intestines are displaced and
CourtfProfessorJackBo
48
Manual ofSmallAnimal ReproductionandNeonatology
Prostaglandinshave two effects,luteolysis anduter-
inecontraction,hence theirrestriction toopen-cervix
pyometra.Natural PGF2ashould be used (seeChapter
16).It has been reported that splitting the dose and
treating twice daily is morc cffective,but this is
usuallyimpracticalundermostcircumstancesinprac-
tice.Thebitchshould be hospitalizedfor at leastone
hour after treatmentas thesideeffectscan appear
distressing and include panting,retching and vomit-
ing plus signs of stress including scraping the kennel
floor.In themajority of bitches,these signsresolve
within30minutes andin many cases they appear to
becomeless severe over the course of treatment.
Figure4.19:Uterus ofa biichwith pyometra.
Appropriate antibiotictherapy against E.coli should
amountof time available tostabilize thebitchwill
be given in parallel with fluid replacement therapy.
depend on the severity of the condition.
The response to the therapy can be rapid,with the
Following surgery,in the absence of postoperative
infection,thepolymorphonuclearleucocytecountmay
two.Acopious dischargeis notalways seen,although
continue toriseduetothecontinuedproductionof the
thismayhavebeenpresent andremoved by thebitch.
cellswhichcannotnowmigrateintotheuterus,butthe
The main effect ofprostaglandins is luteolysis,
countwill gradually decline.Inbitcheswhich donot
whichisrapid;progesterone concentrations become
appeartobemaking satisfactory postoperativc rccov-
basal within 2or3days.Progcsterone concentrations
ery,thebloodureaconcentration canprovideauseful
may therefore bemeasuredtoassesstheefficacyof the
prognosticguide.If thisstayselevated for more than a
treatment,andmonitoring of the size and stateofthe
fewdayitislklyhatthkidneyamagemayt
uterus can be carried out using ultrasonography.The
reversibleand thereforerecovery maynotbemade in
uterine diameterreduces over thefirst2or3days and
spite of successful surgery.
if therapy has been successful and the progesterone
Medical treatmentwithprostaglandins canbccar-
concentration stays low,the conditionwill resolve.
riedoutunderexceptionalcircumstances,forexample
Treatedbitchesthat arespayed2or3monthslaterhave
in the high-risk surgical candidate,the extremely old
uteri which appeargrosslynormal
bitch or the good qualityyoung bitch from which the
If thereasonformedical treatment is the desire to
owner isvery keen to brced.
breedfromayoungbitchmatingshouldbecarriedout
In extremely mild open-cervix cases,pyometras
at the next oestrus.Fertility tends to be surprisingly
may be treatedwith appropriate antibiotics.This may
good andnormal littersizesare common.If breeding
prcvent disease progression while the animal passes
has becn successful,ovariohysterectomy should be
outof dioestrusandinto anoestrus.Onceprogesterone
stronglyrecommendedbeforethenextexpectedoe-
concentrations are basal,the condition will start to
strus,as thereis ahighriskof the conditionrecurring
resolve.However,following thenext season,the pyo-
following alater,ifnot thenext,season.Thisrecur-
metrawill inevitablyrecur,almostcertainlyin amore
rence occursin spiteof thebitch having anormal litter
severe degree.
which might havebeen thought to protect the uterus
As with antibiotics,the use of prostaglandin
from further changes.
F2a can only be recommended under the following
In theory,anti-prolactindrugssuchascabergoline
circumstances:
should cause lutealregression and thereforeresult in
resolution of the pyometra.Such studies donot yet
The possibility of pregnancy is eliminated
appear to have been carried out in any numbers but
It is an open pyometra
this treatment would have the advantage of having
The condition is not life-threatening
relatively few side effects in comparison with
The well-being of the bitch is the primary
prostaglandins.There has been some success using
consideration
theprogesteronereceptor antagonist aglepristone to
Thewelfare of thebitchisnotjeopardized by the
treatpyometra,butpresently this drug is only avail-
owner'swish toobtain alitter
able in France (see Chapter 16).
The candidateis anoldbitch thatisavery poor
anaestheticrisk
Stumppyometra:Bitchesthat have hadanovariohys-
The candidate is a very young bitch that is
terectomyinwhich asmall portionof uterushasbeen
intended for breeding
left may develop a'stump pyometra'.Assuming that
The owneris aware that the drug is not licensed
bothovarieshavebeenremoved,thebitchwill present
for use in the bitch
with apurulentvulval discharge,usuallywithout the
Theowneris aware of thepotential sideeffects.
clinical signs of toxaemia.Radiography or ultra-
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant Femalc
49
sonography will reveal the presence of a stump con-
cat showing either anoestrus or possibly aberrant re-
taining pus. The polymorphonuclear leucocyte count
 productive behaviour.
may be norinal.
If ovarian tissuc has been left togcthcr with thc
Chronosomal abnormalities: Cats with primary
stump, the stump pyometra may produce mild
anoestrus have occasionally been found with sex
clinical signs due to the presence and effect of
chroniosomal defects such as the XO syndrome.
circulating progcstcronc. Such a bitch would present
Laparotomy will confirm thc permanent nalure of the
 as *ovarian remnant syndrome' followed by the signs
ovarian agenesis but the precise chromosomal aetiol-
 of the pyometra.
ogy can only be diagnosed using karyotyping which
In both situations, surgical renoval of thc sturmp is
 Ieveals the abscncc of anc of the two X chromosomes.
necessary.
 These cats are physically normal but are permanently
infertile.
Uterine neoplasia
Tumours in thc uterus are uncommon, though
Cycling disorders
fibroleiomyomas are the most common. While most
Unlike the bitch cycling disorders are rare in thequeen,
may not be diagnosed, some may cause haemorrhage
mainly hecause the cat is an induced ovulator. Thc
with resultant vaginal discharge. In this situation, there
queen which is mated normally ovulates and therefore
will be no vulval sweling and a vaginal smear will
terminates the oestrus. Those which are not mated
 reveal an absence of oestrogen stimulation, ruling out
normally do not go into a luteal phase; thus, conditions
a normal or aberrant pro-ocstrus. Ultrasonugraphy,
of the luteal phase are much less common in the cat.
 the diagnosis and treatment is ovariohysterectomy.
Cystic ovarics
 Follicular cysts can occur in the queen and the condi-
tion normally presents as prclonged oestrous behav-
CONDITIONS OF THE
iour. Surgical rupture of the cysts has been carried out,
NON-PREGNANT QUEEN
with mating recommended at thc ncxt heal as the
condition will probably recur. In theory, the use of
One of the most inportant facets of investigating
 progestogens to cause follicular atrophy might be
 reproductive problems is possessing a full knowlcdgc
succcssful but in most cascs ovariohystcrcctomy is the
of the reproductive cycle of the cat (see Chapter 2).
treatment of choice.
 Disorders presenting as cycling
Ovarian remnant syndrone
abnormalities
The aetiology and approach to this condition are similar
to those for the bitch. The spayed queen shows signs of
Anoestrus
calling with regular frequency similar to that occurring
d o  s     s  
 Puberty: Queens usualy reach puberty during the year
of an ovary not removed at surgery. It is therefore always
following their birth. However, the cat which is born
worthwhile to inspect tlhe tractfollowing a routine ovario-
late in the year may not cycle until she is about 15-18
hysterectorny for the presence of two complete gonads.
months of age.
The use of vaginal cytology to confirm oestrogenic
stimulation is essential when a spayed queen is show.
Season: As the cat is a seasunal breeder, coming into
ing overt signs uf oestrus or is atracting males. At that
season in the spring when there is an increasing light
 stage she will have elevated oestrogen concentrations
 pattern, dark conditions and poor management may
 and although oestrogen assays can be used, itis cheaper
cause a markedl delay in the nccurrcncc of pubcrt y or of
and easier to use vaginal cylology. Thc use uf a
the onset of the breeding season in the adult. The
 paediatric bacteriology swab moistened with saline is
 queen's environment should always be considered
an easy way to obtain the cells. The stage of oestrus is
when investigating cases of dclaycd puberty.
 inrelevant and the diagnosis is made by the observation 
 of cornified cells indicating elevated oestrogeris.
Intersexuality: Intersexes are found in the cat, but are
If the queen is calling every 3 weeks, this suggests
uncommon. In most cases the diagnosis is made acci-
that she is not ovulating. In this case hCG or GnRH can
dentally at spaying or in the course of an investigation
be used to induce ovulation and a progesterone assay
of a cat with prinary anocstrus. In the latter case, whenl
carricd about 7-10 days Iater should reveal a proges-
other causes such as seasonal effects and management
are eliminated, intersexuality or chromosomal defects
firming the presence of active ovarian tissue.
 are possible causes. Lnlike the bitch, the primary sign
of intersexuality is not normally an cnlarged clitoris,
she is ovulating and thcrcforc is cithcr being induced
but more often underdeveloped external genitalia in a
by mating or less commonly ovulating spontaneously.
50
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
A. blood sample taken about 7-10 days after the
found in the older animal. There is little difference in
 signs of ocstrus will reveal an clevated progesteronc
the frequcncy of the condition in cats that have had
concentration.
litters compared to nulliparous queens. The lower
Following confirmation of the presence of
ovarian tissue, surgical rcmoval will resolvc thc
two factors. First, unmated cats tcnd not to ovulate,
1
problem. In the situation where the owner does not
therefore the uterus is not under the influence of
want surgery carried out for a second time, the use
progesterone and thus cystic endometrial changes do
of oestrous suppressants on a permanent basis is
not develop. Secondly, even if they do ovulate, the
an alternalivc.
lcngth of the progcstcrone phase is shorlcr in the
queen than in the bitch (45 days compared with more
Ovarian tumours
than 60 days).
As with thc bitch, ovarian tumours arc uncommon,
The systemic signs are similar to thosc in the
the most common being the granulosa-theca cell
bitch; dullness, inappetance and polydipsia/polyuria
tumour. Clinical signs are those of a large abdominal
 mass rather thian of endocrine malfunction. These
open-cervix pyometra. Open-ccrvix cases appear to
signs include abrlominal distension, ascitcs, vomit-
be much more common than closed ones in thc
ing and weight loss. If the tumour produces steroid
 queen. In both types, abdominal distension is usually
horrmones, the result may be persistent oestrus ( if
 present, and this may be the most obvious clinical
sign cspecially in closed-cervix pyometra. Elevated
plasia (if progesterone-producing). A variety of other
total white cell counts may be observed. Radiography
tumours have been reported, including dysgerini-
and/or ultrasonography are esscntial diagnostic aids,
 Doma which may producc similar signs to the granu-
with the lattcr being much morc uscful as it will
losa cell tumour. Most of these tumours are not
 differenliate pregnancy from pyometra and does not
malignant. The diagnosis can be made using either
require sedation.
radiography or ultrasonography and the treatmcnt is
The trcatmcnt of choice is ovatiohystcrcctoiny
Ovariohysterectomy.
with antibiotic cover and fluid replacement. As with
the bitch, such cases are not ideal surgical candidates.
Vaginal tumours
If the cat is young and the owners are kccn to breed
Fibroma and lciomyoma of thc vagina arc found un-
from her, or if shc is old and a poor surgical risk,
o  n ad   
medical treatment may be attempted. Prostaglandin
 purulent vulval discharge but affected cats are usually
F2α in a similar regimen to that used in bitches (see
presented with constipation associatcd with pressure
abovc) has been reporicd to bc successful in resolving
on the rectum. Ovariohysterectomy is normally rec-
the condition. Such treatment should be restricted to
Ommended, combined with excision of the tumour, as
cases of open-cervix pyometra. Evacuation of the
it has been suggcsted that these lumours may be
contents occurs rapidly and the condition of the cal
endocrine-related.
normally improves. The side effects are similar to
 those seen in the bitch. Young cats can become preg-
Pseudopregnancy
nant at subscqucnt heats, but they should bc spayed at
The term pseudopregnancy in the cat applies to the
 the earliest appropriate time as the condition is likely
normal prolonged luteal phase which follows a
 to recur, even if there has been a pregnancy.
non-fcrtilc ovulation. This may he due either to an
The use of progcstogens in aspayed quccn in which
！
1
infertile mating or because of spontaneous ovulation.
a portion of uterus has been left can induce a stump
During the 6-week period of this extended luteal
 pyometra. The approach to this situation is similar to
:
phase, the queen normally does not show the behav-
that in the bitch.
ioural signs associatcd with pseudopregnancy in the
bitch (see above) although lactational signs are
Uterine tumours
sometimes seen.
Uterine tumours are rare in the cat but a highly
When lactation docs occur in the quccn, it can be
malignant adenocarcinoma is rccognized as the most
extremely marked and is referred to as mammary
common, with fibromas and leionyosarcomas also
hyperplasia. This can be observed following the physio-
being founid. The signs associated withi a tumour are
logical pscudopregnancy, ovariohysterectomy or fol-
those deriving from its mass, obstructivc cffects or
lowing treatment with progestogens. For lctails and
malignancy rather than from any direct reproductive
treatment see Chapter 5.
effect. Occasionally vulval discharges may be found
associated with uterinc tumours. Ultrasonography
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia
will help with the diagnosis of a tumour but the
(CEH)-pyometra
precise diagnosis and organ involved relies on
CEH-pyomctra is much less common in the cat
laparotomy and pathological findings. Ovario-
than in the bitch; as in the bitch it is more commonly
hysterectomy should be carried out.
Conditions of the Non-Pregnant liemale
51
FURTHER READING
 cffcct and mechanism of the anti-pralactin drug cabcrgolinc on
Artlhur GH, Noakes DE, Pearson H and Parkinson TJ (1996) Verer-
Herrou MA (1983) Tumours of thecanine genital system.Jourmlof/he
inary Reproduction and Ohstefrics, 7th Editiont. WB Saunders,
Americar Anial Hospifal Association 19, 981-994
Philadelphia.
lIerron MA (1986) Inferility from noninfectious causes (in the cat). In
Currenr Therapy in Theriogenology. Znd Edition. WB Saunders,
pyomctracomplcx inthebitch.Jourmal ofPathologicalBacteriol
Philadelphia
ogy 78, 267-278
Jeffcoatc IA (1993) Gonatlotrophin-releasing hurrmone challengc to test
  sp  s  
for the presence of ovaries in the bieh. Jourratl of Reproduction
Bluckwell Science, Oxlord
andFerrilitySupplement 47,S36-538
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (1996) Canine and Feine Endoerinutogy
Johrson CA (1991) Diagnosis and treatment of chuonic vaginitis in the
d Repradnerior. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
bitch.Veterury Clinics fNortAmerica21,523531
Harcourt-Brown N(1996) Down the endascope; the reproriuctive tract.
Wykes PM aud Soderherg SF (1983) Congenital ahnormalities of the
Practice18,262-265
catine vaginaand vulya.Journal ofthe AmericanAnimal llospitat
Harvey MIA, Cauvin A, Dale M, Lindley S and Ballabio R (1997) The 
Associarion 19, 995-1008
CHAPTER FIVE
The Mammary Gland
David J. Argyle
INTRODUCTION
 The blood supply (Figure 5.1) originates from the
external pudendal arteries and the lateral and internal
This section provides a short synopsis of the basic
thoracic arteries. The inguinal glands and the caudal
anatomy and physiology of thc caninc and felinc
abdominal glands are supplied from the caudal super-
mammary gland, and will give an overview of the
ficial epigastric artery and branches of the cranial
common disease processes that affect the lactating and 
abdominal and deep circumflex iliac arteries. The
the non-lactating mammary gland in thcsc species.
thoracic and cranial abdominal glands are supplied
from the lateral thoracic artery, the cranial superficial
ANATOMY
epigastric artery and branches of the intercostal arter-
ies. It is generally undlcrstood that lymphatic drainage
from the thoracic and cranial abdominal glands is to the
spread along the ventral aspect of the thorax and
axillary and stemal lymph nodes, while drainage from
abdomen. The two cranial pairs are termed thoracic,
the inguinal and caudal abdoninal glands is to thc
the nexl two abdominal and the most caudal are the
superficial inguinal nodes. Ilowever, the pathways of
inguinal glands. The cat has a similar arrangement, but
there are generally four pairs of glands.
cross thc midlinc.
LYMPHATIC
DOG
VENOUS
LYMPHATIC
CAT
VENOUS
Axillary nodes
Axillary nodes
+
Inguinal nodes
Figure5.1:Blood supply und lymphetic drcinage of ihe mummary glandsof the dog and cat.
54
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatolugy
CONDITIONS OF THE LACTATING
In some highly stressed animals the production of
MAMMARY GLAND
 adrenaline can block the release of oxytocin from the
pituitary (Figure 5.2). In very nervous females, the
For thc production of milk in adequate quantity and of
judicial use of sedatives (accpromazine, 0.5-2 mg/kg
adequate quality, the health and nutrition of the bitch or
sid or bid) can settle the dam into a suckling routine.
Oxytocin (2--20 IU intramusculary or subcutaneously)
queen are of paramount importance. There are a number
of conditions which affect the mammary gland in the
can be used until milk production is cstablishcd, and
periparturient period, the prompt dliagnosis and trcat-
sucking by the litter should be encouraged. It must be
 ment of which are essential for the health of the mother
reinembered that conditions such as metritis, mastitis
and hcr litter.
 and systemic infections can also Icad to agalactia and
in these situations, treatment of the underlying cause is
Galactostasis (congestion)
essential to re-establish lactation.
This is a condition of uncertain aetiology which is seen
just prior to parturition, or shortly afterwards. There is
Mastitis
engorgement of the mammary glands, leading lo pain
 Mastitis is not a common condition encountered in
 and failure of milk let-down. Itis more commonly seen
bitches and queens, but can be associated with pro-
in bitches on a high planc of nutrition. Animals show
 longed galactostasis or where animals are kept in poor
pain and discomfort and can be anorexic. Treatment
sanitary conditions. It can occur in both acute and
involves fasting the animal for 24 hours, limited feed-
 chronic forms and is associated with pain, erythema
ing for several days and thc use of diuretics. Cold packs
and swelling of the mammary glands. In addition, thc
can be used to reducc cngorgcment, as can milking of
animal may be anorexic, pyrexic and show a marked
the mammary glands.
neutrophilia, often with left shift, on haematology. In
severe cascs abccssation can occur and there may be a
Agalactia
purulent exudate from the gland. Diagnosis is based
Agalactia may occur where there is a failure of mam-
tmary gland development, or there is failure of milk let-
aminalion of thc milk, which may revcal bacteria,
down. The former condition is uncommon, and the
white blood cells and erythrocytes. In an ideal situa-
cause may involve complex interactions between envi-
tion, culture and sensitivity testing of the milk is
 ronmental and hormonal factors. Failure of milk let-
performed before an antibiotic is choscn. Howcver, it
 down is more aimenable to therapeutic intervention,
is often the case that antibiotic therapy necds to bc
and can be suspected when the mammary glanls are
 instituted as soon as possible after diagnosis, and
firm and swollen, but there is no milk present in the teat
 gcncrally broad-spectrum antibiosis is administered
canal. This condition canl occur in highly nervous
immediately. Causal organisms include Escherichia
females who fail to settle and allow the litter lo suck.
coli, streptococci and staphylococci, and Gram stain-
ing may he helpful in choosing an antibiotic in the
：
absence of cultire and sensitivity. Where glands are
Sucking
Sucking
frankly purulent, then sucking of that gland should be
prevented by bandaging, but if the milk is grossly
normal, the continued sucking may spced resolution.
PITUITARY
In severe cases of gland abcessation, surgical drainage
may be required. If many glands are affected or the
 mother is severely systemically ill, then the litter may
Mastitis/ 4
Stress/
require to be hand-reared as orphans.
Systemic
Oxytocin
Adrenaline
infection
CONDITIONS OF THE NON-
1
LACTATING MAMMARY GLAND
Tumours of the mammary gland (dog)
MAMMARY
 In the non-pregnant, non-lactating bitch the most
GLAND
commonly encountercd abnormality of the mammary
 gland is neoplasia. Mammary neoplasia is the most
common neoplasm in the bitch and accounts for over
50% of all tumours secn, Of these tumours, about half
Milk
 are malignant, and half of these have metastasized by
production
 the time of presentation. In contrast, this tumour is
rarc in thc male dog and only accounts for around 1%
Figure 5.2: Pathophysiotogical events in agalactia.
of all tumours in malcs.
The Mammary Gland 
55
Risk factors and aetiology
because the owner has noticed a solid mass, or the
It is well recognized that the age at which ovariohystcr-
condition may be identificd during a routine clinical 
o r on oi pai A si pd si aoa
developing mammary neoplasia. Ovariohysterectomy
vary from being protracted in the case of slow growing
 prior to the first oestrus reduces the risk of developing
tumours, to advancing quite rapidly, as is the case with
 mamnary cancer to 0.05%, but this hcneficial effect
many of the anaplastic carcinomas. The majority of
 gradually reduces as the dog ages, and there is no
canine tumours develop in the caudal mammary glands
 apparent effect of ovariohysterectomy on nammary
 and often cause few overt clinical problems. However,
tumour development after 2.5 years of agc. Thcsc data
in the more severe, poorly differentiated tumours there
clearly demonslrate the prophylactic benefit of early
 can be a marked inflammatory reaction leading to pain,
ovariohysterectomy to the development of this disease.
ulceration and swelling. In some severe cases, bitches
The definitive role of sex hormones in the develop
may present with marked limb oedema because of a
mcnt of mammary neoplasia is unclcar. However,
severe inflammatory and neoplastic infiltrate into the
about half of canine mammary tumours carry receptors
dermis and lymphatic structures. These lesions carry a
for cestrogen or for oestrogen and progesterone, and
very poor prognosis and must he distinguishcd from
thcsc tumours tcnd to carry a bcller prugnosis, as
severe mastitis. Other clinical signs associated with
receptor-positive tumours tend to be benign. It has
mammary tumours may be attributed to metastatic
been suggested that the use of synthetic progestogens
 disease. In advanced cascs, wcight loss, tachypnoca/
lo control ocstrus may contribute to the development
dyspnoea and lameness may indicate metastatic
of mammary tumours, but the exact role of exogenous
disease.
hormones in mammiary carcinogenesis has yet to be
resolved. The age at which the bitch has her first litter,
Diagnosis
abnormal oestrous cycles and a history of pseudopreg-
A diagnostic database should be constructed to deter-
nancy are not associated with an increased risk of
mine the nature and extent of the disease. This database
developing the disease.
shauld include the following.
 Studies are currently underway to determine ge-
netic alterations, particularly oncogene and anti-
History and clinical examination: A full history in-
 oncogene expression,in canine mammary tumours. Of
cludes signalment, whether entire or spayed, onset and
 particular interest is the loss of normal function of the
duration of clinical signs, evidence of weight loss,
tumour suppressor gene p53. These studies on the
exerciseintolerance, coughing, lameness and an inves-
molecular mechanisms of carcinogenesis are particu-
tigation of the general hcalth status of thc animal.
larly pcrtincnt, as thcy not only provide information
Clinical examination includes a full general exami-
 about prognosis, but may also lead to the development
nation and, more specifically, examination of the mass
of improved and novel therapies.
in terms of sizc, mobility, ulccration and crythcma,
adherence to the overlying skin and evidence of pain.
Tumour pathology
 Often severely anaplastic carcinomas present as dif-
fusc inasscs which have thc appearancc of a scvere
Or malignant. Benign tumours include fibroadcnomas,
ventral dermatitis. Examination of the local lymph
simple adenomas and benign mixed mammary tu-
 nodes should be performed, and include investigation
 mours. Of the malignant tumours, carcinomas are most
 of size, mobility and adherence to underlying or over-
commanly cncountcrcd but coinplcx carcinomas and
lying structures.
sarcomas are also represented (Table 5.1).
Haematology, biochemistry and urinalysis: These
 Clinical presentation
give an indication of the overall health status of the
 Many animals with mammary rumours are presented
 animal. Many cancer patients have a mild normocytic
mouL
Classification
Incidence (%)
Carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma
60
Tubular adenocarcinoma
 Anaplastic carcinoma
Comiplex tumours
Mixed secretory and
30 *
 Imyocpithclial component
Sarcoma
10
Tahle 5.I: Incidence of malignant rumours in rhe bitch.
56
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 non-regenerative anaemia associated with chronic
firm a diagnosis. In many cases cytology is not per-
discasc. Infected mammary tumours may lcad to
formed because surgical management is invariably
increased neutrophil counts. Reduced plalclct counts,
indicated. In cerlain circumstances incisional biopsy
bleeding tendencies and an increase in blood clotting
may be utilised to rule out diffuse inflammatory
timcs should alert the clinician to the possibility of
disease.
lisseminated intravascular coagulation. Scrum bio-
chemistry and urinalysis can indicate organ dysfunc-
Staging
 The successful management of any neoplasm is based
tumour.
 upon accurately defining the nature and extent of the
discasc. Anatomical staging of the disease allows for
Diagnostic imaging (Figures 5.3 and 5.4): This is an
an accurate prognosis and correct selection of a treat-
 invaluable tocl in the overall assessment and staging of
ment protocol. The TNM (Tumour, Node, Metastasis)
a tumour patient. Thoracic and abdominal radiography
classi fication system is uscd to stage canine mamimary
should be performed to indicate any evidence of meta-
tumours (Figure 5.5).
stalic disease. It is essential that inspiratory radiograplis
are takcnof both the righit and left lateral and ventrodorsal
Prognosis
thorax to provide the optimum conditions to detect
 Table 5.3 details prognostic factors that help predict.
metastatic disease, as the most common site to find
 survival and disease-free interval.
 metastatic discase is the lungs. However, othcr sitcs
 recorded include liver, bone, pancreas, kidney, ovary
Treatment
 and urethra. Abdominal ultrasonography can be very
 'The treatment of choice for mammary neoplasia is
useful wherc transcoelomic sprcad is suspected from
 surgical cxcision. It is important to recognize that
survey abdominal radiographs, or for cvaluating ab-
 survival or dliscasc-free interval is not influcnced by
dominal viscera for metastatic deposits. Some animals
the extent of the surgical procedure. However, sev-
 present with a mild to moderate lameness because of
eral studies indicate that partial or regional mast-
metastatic sprcarl to the long boncs; thcsc arcas of bune
cctomy, with rescction of local nodes for staging, is
 are painful to manipulate and pathological fracture can
the procedure of choice. Because of its position, the
Occur. Radiography of affected limbs is essential in
inguinal lymph node is always removed when gland
these cases.
fivc is being rcscctcd. There is little cvidence to
suggcst that ovariohystcrcctomy at the time of mas-
Cytology/biopsy: Where cytology of needle biopsy
tectomy alters survival times. Table 5.4 presents a
nn mo on uu si n! pd si sodis
while false-positive cylology results are rare, false-
mary ncoplasia but the readeris referred to other texts
 negative results are more commmon and excisional cr
for a detailed account of the surgical techniques
incisional biopsy should always be performed to con-
involved.
Figure 5.4: Radiograph of the
right tarsusofadogwith
evidence of metastatic dliseuse
Figure5.3:Lateral thorucic radiogruph ofα canine patrienzwith evidence of puimonary
affecting thehockjoint and
metustatie disease.
leadingtopathologicalfracture.
The Mammary Gland
57
Factor
Effecl on prognosis
Tumour size
 Tumours <3 cm carry a better prognosis than larger tumours
Degree of invasion and ulceration
 Invading, ulcerating tumours carry a poorer prognosis
 Lymph node involvement
Metastasis to local lymph nodes increases the risk of tumour recur-
increases survival or disease-free interval
Histopathological grading
Poorly dlifferentiated tumours carry a poorer prognosis. Prcscnce of an
jinmunological infiltralc corrclatcs with incrcascd survival times
Horrnonc rcccptor status
 Progcsterone/oestrogen receptor-positive tumours are often benign
Table 5.3: Prognostic fuctors for survivul in mammury tunours.
Surgical procedure
Comments
Nodulectomy
 Used for masses <0.5 cm, but generally considered to be a biopsy
proccdurc only
Mammectomy
  d     a s e  
benign masses
Regional mastectomy
Removal of sets of glands according to lymphatic and venous drainage
 Cnilatcral mastectomy
 For multiple lesions affecting one mammary chain
 Bilateral mastectomy
Applied when there are multiple lumours affecting both Tmammary chains.
This is caried out as two unilateral mastectomies, 2-3 weeks apart
Table 5.4: Surgical procedures for mammary neoplasia.
T categories for canine marmmary tumours (Owen, 1980)
Characteristic
T1
T2
T3
T4
Size
<3 cm
3-5 cm
>5 cm
>5 cm
Skin
Minimum
Minimum
Minimum
Major
involvement
involvement
involvement
involvement
Fascia/muscle
As above
As above
As above
As above
 N categories for canine mammary tunours 
NO
No cvidcncc of rcgional lymph node
(RLN) involvement
N1a
 Ipsilateral involvement (not fixed)
N1b
 Ipsilateral involvement (fixed)
N2a
Contralateral involvement (not fixed)
Node
N2b
 Contralateral involvement (fixed)
A + or—-designation indicates wheher the nodc ishistologically positive
orneguive,resecively.
M categories for canine mammary neoplasia
Tumour
Stage
Degree of spread
MO
No cvidcncc of metastatic disease
M1
Metastalic discasc prcsent
Figure 5.5: The TNM classification system allows an objective ussessment of the extent of disease.
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
58
Adjunctive treatment
cinogenesis and significant advances in DNA manipu-
lalion and gene lelivery, itis Ccasible that gene thcrapy
Chemotherapy/hornonal manipulation: Chemo-
will cvcntually bccomc part of clinical veterinary
therapy and/or hormonal manipulation as an adjunct to
practice.
surgery is now common in the treatment of mammary
tumours in women. While attempts have been made to
In summary, thc primary trcatment modality for mam-
control mammary neoplasia in the bitch with chemo-
 mary neoplasia remains as surgical excision. Combi-
therapy, there is no ideal drug or protocol which has
nation chemotherapy, as an adjunct to surgery, may
proved particularly effective. It has been suggesled that
have bcneficial cffccts ifit is fel that surgical excision
combinations of adriamycin and cyclophosphamide
has not been complete or the histopathology suggests
 provide the most effective method of adjunctive treat-
that the tumour is very aggressive. The use of oestro-
ment but, as yet, there are no data froin large clinical
gen-blocking drugs in the dog is still experimental and
trials using these drugs to substantiate these claims.
the beneficial effects are controversial. More work is
The use of the anti-oestrogen drug tamoxifen
required to study the role of reproductive hormones in
has proved particularly effective as an adjunct in
 the development of canine mammary tumcurs to allow
the management of mammary tumours in post-
them to be exploited in treatment.
menopausal women. Tamoxifen is a synthetic
triphenylcthylene, which acts by binding to oestro-
Tumours of the mammary gland (cat)
 gen receptors. However, the pharmacology is com-
plicated by conflicting agonist and antagonist actions
Incidence and aetiology
between species and target organs within species.
While the incidence of mammary tumours in cats is
Several clinical trials havc bccn carricd out in bitchcs
half that in bitches,thc majority of tumours prcscnted
with varying results. In one trial the majority of
 are malignant adenocarcinomas (80-90%). Asin dogs,
bitches given tamoxifen developed oestrogenic side
the aetiology of feline mammary tumours is uncertain.
effects, notably vulval blccding and swelling and
It has bcen shown that intacl cats arc morc likcly to
attractiveness to males, which were attributable to the
 develop mammary neoplasia but the exact role that the
tamoxifen. Consequently, these' patients were re-
 reproductive hormones play in the development of the
moved from the trial. The oestrogenic cffects secn
discasc is unccrtain. It has bccen suggestcd tha therc is
with tamoxifen suggest that the drug in this situation
an increased risk of the development of mammary
may be acting as an agonist rather than an antagonist,
 masses with prior use of synthetic progestogens.
or that the drug may be acting as an antagonist on
mammary tissue but an agonist on endometrial tissue.
Clinical presentation and diagnosis
In addition, the fact that tamoxifen has a beneficial
Cats are usually presented when the disease is very
effect in women with receptor-negative tumours sug-
 advaniced and metastasis may have already occurred.
gests an alternative mode of action of the drug is
In many cases multiple glands are affected and the
possible. It is evident that further work is required in
masses are often ulcerated. The most common differ-
this arca to asscss fully the possible beneficial cffects
cntial diagnosis for mammary neoplasia is mammary
of this class of drug.
hypertrophy (fibrocpithclial hypcrplasia) but this usu-
ally occurs in young intact females, whilst the mean
Radiotherapy: There is little evidence in veterinary
medicine to prove or dlisprove the effeciveness of
A fulldiagnostic work-up and staging procedure should
radiotherapy in the management of mammary neopla-
include haematology/biochemical profile, urinalysis,
sia. However, it may be useful in the pre-operative
situation to reduce the size of the primary mass prior to
 only be performed ifit will alter the surgical procedure
surgery.
or the owner's willingness to treat the disease.
Immunotherapy/gene therapy: Therc is a large hody
Trcatmcnt
of data to suggest the existence of an immune response
 Because of the high incidence of malignancy in these
 to certain tumour types. Attempts have been made to
lesions, aggressive therapy should be adopted and
manipulate or enhancc thc immunc rcsponsc, particu-
surgery is the trcatmcnt of choicc. Surgical managc-
larly the cell-mediated response, against mammary
 ment of this condition is often hampered by the degree.
tumours. Original trials using non-specific biological
of invasion and ulceration, so the procedure of choice
response modifiers mel with litle success, but mcth-
 is radical mastcctomy with removal of thc rlraining
ods using substances such as liposome encapsulated
lymph nodes. If a bilateral mastectomy is indicated
muramyltripeptide phosphatidyletholamine (L-MTP-
PE) appear to he more promising. A particularly excit-
The use of chemotherapy as an adjunct to surgery has
ing field is that of gene therapy. With an increasing
 not been extensively studied in the cat. Some workers
understanding of the molecular mechanisms in car-
 have advocated the use of combinations of adriamycin
The Mammary Gland
59
and cyclophosphamide for feline mammary cancer but
bearing in mind that the lesions can take up to 5-6
furthcr studics with largerclinical trials arc rcquired to
months to regress completely after surgery. This con-
 establish the cxact rolc of adjunctive chemotherapy in
dition can, howcvcr, rcgrcss spontaneously without
this disease.
spaying. The lesions seen in this condition are often
misdiagnosed as malignancies and are treated as such.
Benign mammary gland hypcrplasia
In cases where the lesian has bccn causcd by prolonged
(fibroepithelial hyperplasia)
administration of megoestrol acetate, treatnent is based
This is not an uncommon condition and is seen in
 upon cessation of medication. In refractory cases there
young oestrous cycling cals, prcgnant cats, or neutercd
arc reports of success using thc anti-prolactin drug,
cats which are on prolonged treatment with the pro-
cabergoline (M. J. Harvey, personal communication).
 gestogen megoestrol acetate. The lesions are com-
posed of non-encapsulated growths of ductal structures
within actively proliferating connective tissue. The
FURTHER READING
similarities between the lesions seen in young cycling
fcmalcs and those in neutered cats on long-term pro-
Ettinger S (1995) Textbook of Veterinary lnternal Medicine. 4tt ed.
 gestogen therapy suggest that the lesion may result
WB Saunders, Philudelphia
Ogilvie G und Moure AS (1995) Managirg ihe Veterinury Coreer
from excessive endogenous or exogenous progester-
Putient. Veterinary Learming Systens, Trenton, New Jersey
 onc stinulation. The condition often affects multiple
Owen LN (1980) TNM Classification ofTumronrs n Domestic Aninais.
WHO, Geneva
glands and these can be so large that they affect
Slater DH(1985) Textbook of Small Animal Surgery.WB Saunders,
walking. The affected glands may be oedematous and
 Philadelphia.
 painful but ulceration is nota feature. In young cycling
Theilen GH and Madewell BR (1987) Vererhnary Cancer Medicine. Lea
&Febiger, Philadelphiu
females the treatmcnt ofchoicc is ovariohystereclomy.
White RAS (i99l) Mamal of Small Animul Oneology. BSAVA,
Chellenham
CHAPTER SIX
Physiology and Endocrinology
of the Male
Denise Hewitt
INTRODUCTION
Development of the testes is similar in all species.
In the fetus, the primordial germ cells move to a
A familiarity with the cndocrinology and physiol.
location ncar to the kidneys. At this stage, it is
 ogy of male reproduction is essential for the clini-
impossible to differentiate between an ovary and a
cian performing an andrological exanination of the
testis. Once it can be identified as a testis, the devel-
male animal, Basic knowlcdgc of norinal malc rc-
 opment of the cpididymis and the ductus deferens
productive function and the concentrations of rel-
occurs. A gubernaculum develops at the caudal end
evant hormones in the peripheral circulation is
of the testis. This enlarges and, in doing so, relocates
required, as is an understanding of how these param-
the testis to the inguinal canal. Once this reposition-
eters can be affecicd by the age and size of the
ing has occurred, thc gubcrnaculum degcnerates and
animal, environmental factors and any medication
the testis moves into the scrotal cavity where the
given. Consequently, abnormal reproductive func-
gubernaculum was located. In most of the domestic
tion can be recognized as tleviation from these
spccics, tcsticular dlcsccnt is completc by birth. Tes-
characteristics.
tes descend within an outpouching of the peritoneum,
 Male physiology and endocrinology are well
the vaginal tunic which forms within the scrotum. In
described in text buoks, but it is essential to be
the dog, thc scrotuin is pcndulous and the testes are
familiar with interspecies variations that occur. Spe-
positioned almost horizontally, whereas in the tom,
cific characteristics of the structure and function of
they are held closer to the body. Dog testes vary in
thc male reproductive system have been well docu-
size in relation to the size of the animal, but on
mented in the dog. but less information has been
average are 3 x 2 x 1.5 cm. A correlation betwecn
published for the tom.
body mass and testicular mass has been shown in the
Thc malc reproductive system performs three physi-
dog. Cat testes measure 13 x 8 x 6 mm. In both the cat
ological functions. These are: the production and matu-
and the dog, the scrotal skin is thin, with sweat glands,
ration of spermatozoa in the testes; the maturation,
no subcutaneous fat and an efficient system to allow
cooling of the arterial blood. Thermoregulatory
tem; and the deposilion of the spcrmatozoa into thc
mcchanisms prcvent incrcases in testicular tempera-
female reproductive system via the penis. The
ture which would be detrimental to the seminiferous
endocrinological role of the systeim is also three-fold,
epithelium. An additional temperature control sys-
controlling the production uf spermatozoa and thc
tem in the dog is the cremaster muscle, which can
 development of the masculine body form, and enhanc-
alter the distance of the testes from the body. In the
ing masculine behaviour (libido and aggression).
dog, the descent of the testes often occurs in the fetus
P
 so that thc puppy is born with descended testicles,
although there are reports of descent as late as 6-8
ANATOMY OF THE MALE
months after birth. Spermatogonia have been found
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
inl testicular biopsies at 8 weeks of age. Kittens'
testicles are usually descended by birth, with imatura-
The testes are the primary organs of male reproduc-
tion of the Leydig cells occurring at approximately 5
tion, producing thc malc gamctcs (spcrmatozoa)
months, and spermatozoa in the seminiferous tubules
and steroid hormones (androgens, testosterone and
by 6-7 months of age.
oestradiol). The testes differ from the female pri-
 The testis itselfis composed of two tissue types, the
mary reproduetive organs (the ovarics) in that allthc
scminifcrous tubulcs and the interstitial tissue. The
potential gametes are not present at birth. Instead,
proportion of the two tissue types varies considerably
 germ cells undergo continual cell divisions, forming
between different species. The seminiferous tubules
ncw spcrmatozoa throughout the reproductive life
open into collecting ducts called the vasa efferentia
of the male.
which in turn open into the epididymis. This is a highly
62
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
convoluted structure. The epididymis is divided into
the head, body and tail, which arise medially and are
：
located on the dorsolateral surface of the testis in the
dog. Movement of the spcrmatovoa along the epidi-
Bulbus giandis
dymis is the result of peristalsis. The tail of the epidi-
dymis acts as a store for spermatozoa awaiting
Drethra
cjaculation and leads into the vasa deferentia which
mal tail is pea-sized and can be palpated caudally
Os penis
within the scrotum. The vas deferens runs within the
vaginal sac and conveys the spermatozoa from the
testes to the penis.
Accessory glands add secrctions to the sperma-
tozoa and in most species makc up a largc volume of
the ejaculate. They may bestow important proper-
Bulbus glandis
ties, such as the correct pH, on the seminal plasna.
Thcrc is considerable vatiation in the accessory
Parslongagla
Urolhra
glands in different species. The four types which can
be present in domestic species are ampulla, prostate.
Os ponis
vesicular gland and bulbourcthral gland. The am-
pullae act as reservoirs of spermatozoa in the vasa
deferentia prior to opening into the urethra. They are
absent in the tom and prescnt in thc dog, but not
Figure 6.l: Parasagital and eross seetion of dog penis,
anatomically significant.
showinparslongalandisbusladispenisd
The prostate is present in the dog and the tom and
Wrethra. (Redrawn after Christicansen, 1954).
 is the only anatomically significant accesory gland
 in the dog, where it is large and contributes a largc
Thc glans penis is composed of two parts, differen-
volume of watery secretion to the ejaculate. This
tiated by the location of erectile tissue. The bulbus
secretion contains lactate, cholesterol and enzymes,
glandis is composed of erectile tissue surrounding the os
but only very low concentrations of reducing sugars
 penis and urethra, whereas the pars longa glandis has
compared to those found in other species. The source
erectile tissue dorsally and longitudinally to the os penis
of metabolizable energy which provides an environ-
and urethra only (Figure 6.1). The penis of the cat is
 ment suitable for spcrm motility is therefore not
vnusual in that it is directed caudally, and small spines
known in this species. In the normal dog, the prostate
or papillae are present along the glans penis. These
is positioned near to the cranial rim of the pelvis and
become fully developed at puberty. The spines are
 surrounds the terminal portion of thc ductus defcrens.
 theught to stimulalc a pituitary-mcdialcd lutcinizing
the proximal part of the urethra, and the neck of the
hornone (LH) release in the female upon intromission.
bladder. The prostatic fluid is constantly secreted into
the prostatic cxcrctory ducts which opcn inlo thc
prostatic urethra. The prostate is symmetrical and
PHYSIOLOGY OF THE MALE
divided into two lobes by the median septum. It is
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
usually about 2 cm in diameler, although this varics
with the size and weight of the animal. The cat
The processes of spermatogenesis (the production of
 prostate is 2 mm in diameter and is again divided into
spermatozoa) and steroidogenesis (the secretion of
two symmetrical halves, the right and left lobes. In
hormones) are closely related and yet performed by
contrast to the dog, the cat prostate does not cover the
spatially distinct areas of the testis. This has been
ventral aspect of the urethra.
termed “functional compartmentalism'.
The major accessory gland in the tom is not the
Spermatogenesis occurs within the seminiferous
prostate but the paired bulbourethral glands. Thesc
tubulc compartment. This compartment, which is com-
glands are positioned craniolateral to the base of the
 posed of a basal and adluminal section, containstwo cell
 pcnis and are approximaicly 3 mm in diameter.
types, the Scrtoli cclls (thc somatic cclls) and the germ
Bulbourethral glands are absentin the dog. Vesicular
cells. The basal section contains spermatogonia divid-
glands are absent frorm both the dog and the tom.
ing by mitosis, whilst the adluminal section contains
 A bone (os penis) is prcscnt within the penis of the
 prinary spermalocytes undergoing mciosis, rcsulting
dog and tom. This allows the malc to achieve intromis-
in scconcdary spermatocytes and spermnatids. The basal
sion before the attainment of a full erection. The os
 and adluminal compartments are separated bya bound-
penis of the dog has a deep groove within it, housing
ary of Sertoli cells which form junctional complexes,
the urethra (Figurc 6.1).
to crcalc a blood-testis barrier. This barrier excludes
Physiology and Endoerinology of the Male
63
 blood macromolecules and interstitial cell fluid from
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) secreted by the
the adluminal section of the seminiferous tubules, thus
anterior pituitary gland. Gonadotrophin secretion is
crcating the environment suitable for mciosis to uccur.
under the positive contrcl of gonadotrophin rclcasing
Stcroidogenesis occurs within the interstitial tissue
hormonc (GnRH), which is released in an cpisodic
 compartment of the testis, which is composed of Leydig
fashion from the hypothalamus. GnRH binds to specific
cells closely associated with blood and lymphatic vessels.
receptors on thie plasma membrane of pituitary
Leydig cclls are the only testicularcells with receptors fur
gonadotrophs and stimulates the release of LH and FSH.
LH. LII binds to the receptors on the Leydig cells and, in
GnRH is under the negative control of testosterone and
response, synthesis of several steroids, including testo-
its active metabolites oestradiol and dillydrotestosterone.
sleronc, occurs. Testosterone is essenlial for the develop-
Thc ncgalivc feedback is thought to occur at both thc
ment of the secondary sex characteristics, normal
hypothalamic and the pituitary level. This intricate
 behaviour, function of the accessory glands, production
system therefore allows communication between the
of spermalozoa and maintenance ofthe male duct systein.
hypothalamus of the central nervous system, the antc-
 The interstitial cell compartment surrounds the seminif-
  aru (g a ssn n e d 
erous tubule compartment which is consequently bathed
 be some negative control by oestradiol produced via
 in a fluid rich in testosterone.
local aromatizalion of tcstosterone. The negative feed-
In contrast to thc dog, in which semen collection
back syslem acting upon LHI and FSH release is com-
and analysis is well established, this procedure is rare
 mon to both gonadotrophins. This is an important
 in the tom except within research establishments. As a
result, there is a comparative lack of infommation on
attempt tu modify reproduction (Figure 6.3). Despite
spermatogenesis in the tom. There is no information on
this, LH and FSH concentrations do not always rise
the changing concentrations of gonadotrophin rcleas-
proportionately. As a consequcncc, thc existence of an
ing hormones, gonadotrophins or reproductive ster-
additional inhibiting factor called inhibin. solely re-
 oids in the tom. It is therefore assumed that the patterm
sponsible for the control of FSH secretion from the
of hypothalamic, pituitary and testicular function oc-
 pituitary has been proposed. Tlhere may also be other
curs in a siinilar way to that described for the dog andl
prodncts of the Sertoli cell which havc thc oppositc
 other domestic animals.
effect and stimulate FSH secretion (activins).
The negative feedback effect of the testis upon the
 Hormonal control of thc male reproductive
pituitary gland has been demonstrated by thc fact that
system
castration results in a rise in both LH and FSH concen-
 Male reproductive physiology  is controlled
tration. The stimulatory effect of GnRH upon the
p H s   ao
Leydig ccll can also be demonstrated by administra-
HYPOTHALAMUS
GnRH
ANTERIOR PITLITARY
Inhibin
Oestradiol
Activin
Testosterone
ABP?
FSH
HT
Dihydrotestosterone
Sertoli cells
TESTES
Leydig cells
Seminiferous tubule
Germ cells
Testosterone
+positivefeedhack
Spermalozoa
-negative feedhack
Figure 6.2: The hypothalcunic-pituitary-tesricuiar axis, showing the influences of steroid and gonadotrophic hormones on
testiculaer function.
ABP =Androgenbinding protetn
64
Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Nconatology
Progestogens
Gonadotrophins
Antineoplastins
Androgens
and oestrogens
(002)
Antibiotics
1+
FSH-
Sertoli cell
 Spernatogenesis
HYPOTHALAMUS
GnRH-
ANTERIOR PITUITARY
Teslis
I.H
Leydig cell
Testosterone
GnRH
GnRH
Gonadotrophins
antagonists
analoglies
(hCG)
+ positive effect
-negative effect
functions of the tesris.
tion of exogenous GnRH, which causes a rise in the
the testis are maintained partly by testosterone binding
plasma concentration of testosterone. This can be usedl
10 androgcn bindling protcin (ABP) which is produced
as a test for functionality of the pituitary and Leydig
by the Sertoli cells.
cells.
FSH acts on the seminiferous tubules together
 Following stimulation with GnRH, LH release is
with endogenous testosterone to stimulate Sertoli cell
immediate and transient, with concentrations rising
 support of the germ cells. This in turn aids spcrma-
 steeply, but quickly falling to baseline and rapidly
togenesis, in particular the development of the sper-
clcaring from the peripheral circulation. Between 5
matid. FSH receptors are present on the Sertoli cells
 and 20 L1I pulses occurring randomly over a 24-hour
and possibly also on the spermalogonia within thc
period have been measured in the dog. Testosterone
seminiferous tubules. Binding of ISH results in the
production by thc Lcydig cells occurs approximately
stimulation of adenylate cyclase activity. This in-
50 min afler the LH surgc (Figurc 6.4). Tcstostcrone
creases the production of proteins which are possibly
secretion occurs both locally and into the general
important for the regulation of spermatogenesis via
circulation. Peripheral circulating testosterone is im-
ABP and transferrin, feedback control of FSH via
portant for the maintenancc of sccondary scxual char-
inhibin, and possibly Leydig cell function. It is not
acteristics, sexual behavicur and negative feedback
known whether FSH is required for the maintenance
control of gonadotrophin secretion, whilst its local
function within the testis is important for spcrma-
 Imcchanism requires investigation and it is possible
togenesis. High concentrations of testosterone within
that it may be different between species. It is known,
(s!un
auO.
LH
1S0
sa
Testosterone
pue
IB)
LH
2
4
6
10
12
Time (hours)
Figure 6.4: The relutionship between LH and testosterone secretion in the dog.
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Male
65
Hormone concentrations in the dog and cat
cycle is constant, and unable to be accelerated, so it
The pulsatile nature of the release of LH makes its
 measurement difficult,and a single sample is thercforc
togenesis once initiated. It may be that FSH takes its
virtually mcaningless. Only serial sampling provides a
effect by dccrcasing the numbcr of germ cells that
 profile which is a rue reflection of the secretion of this
normally degenerate. Like LH, FSH secretion is
gonadotrophin. Basal serum concentrations of LH in
pulsatile, but its secretion occurs less rapidly after
the dog arc approximately 1.0-1.2 ng/ml, with surges
GnRH stimulation, and more gradually. This is re-
reaching 3.8-10 ng/ml. Basal testosterone is usually
flected in the smaller amplitude ofFSH variation seen
between 1.7 and 5.2 mmol/1 (0.5-1.5 ng/ml), rising to
in the peripheral circulation.
a peak of 12.1-20.8 mmol/ (3.5-6.0 ng/ml). Scasonal
 Prolactin is thought tu act syncrgistically with LH
shifts have been reported in the concentrations of both
 in regulating testosterone production by the Leydig
LH and testosterone, yet although there is a relation-
cells; prolactin receptors are present on the Leydig
ship hetwccn the secretion of the two hormoncs, sca-
cells. Once spermalogenesis reaches the stage of sper-
sonal variations are indcpcndcnt. Thc sccrction of
 matid production, inhibin production occurs to create
LII in the tom has been found to range between 3 and
the negative feedback for FSH secretion.
29 ng/ml. The pulsatile release of testosterone has
Sertoli cells are the only testicular cells that bind
becn shown to vary from 0.3 to 11.4 m1mol/l (0.1 to 3.3
FSH. FSH stimulates spermatogenesis indirectly by
ng/ml) within a 6-hour period.
acting on the Sertoli cells, which in turn provide the
Administration of exogenous GnRH allows the
environment necessary for germ cell developmcnt.
clinician to test the pituitary rclcasc of IH and sub-
The normal functioning of the Sertoli cells is depend-
sequent testicular release of testosterone. In normal
ent on the concentration of testosterone being consid-
males, GnRH administration causes an increase in LH
erably higher in thc tcstis than in the periphcral
sccretion in 30 minutcs and an incrcasc in tcstosterone
circulation. Scrtoliccllfunclion differs dcpcnding on
in 60 minutes.
 the developmental stage of the germ cells with which
they are associated. Sertoli cells also secrete sub-
stanccs rcsponsible for the control of stcroidlogcnesis
SPERMATOGENESIS
and spermatogenesis. ABP is thought to act by either
increasing the concentration of testosterone within the
Spermatogenesis is the sum of the transformations that
 scminifcrous tubules or aidling the transport of testo-
result in the formation of spermalozoa from spermato-
sterone to the epididymis. Inhibin may act on the
 gonia whilst spermatogonial nurmbers are maintained.
 pu uononpoid Ha sandns o Armd ioug 
In the male fetus, primordial germ cells differenti-
subsequently spermatogenesis.
ate into gonocyles which undergo mitosis during fetal
The action of these hormones, where they are
and prepubertal life and differentiate into spermato-
released from and the site at which they act are summa-
 gonia. Germ cell development is then arrested in the
rized in Table 6.1.
 scminiferous tubules until the onsct of pubcrty.
Hormone
Released from
Action
GnRH
Hypothalamus
On anterior piluitary for release of LH and FSH
LH
Anterior pituitary
On Leydig cells to stimulate steroidogenesis
HSH
Anterior pituitary
On Sertoli cells to stimulate spermatogenesis
Testosterone
Leydig cells
On Sertoli cells to stimulate spermatogenesis
Negative feedback on hypothalamus and anterior
pituitary to control release of GnRII and
gonadotrophins, respectively
Inhibin?
Sertoli cells
Negative feedback on anterior pituitary to control release
of FSHI
Activin?
Scrtoli cclls
Positive feedback on anterior pituitary to control release
of FSH
Prolactin
 Leydig cells
 Regulates testoslerone production by thc Leydig cells
 Androgen binding
 Sertoli cells
Increases testosterone in seminiferous tubules or
protein
epididymis?
Table 6.1:Summcry of reproductive hormones and iheir actions.
66
Manual ofSmallAnimalReproduction andNeonatology
Spermatocytogenesis
Initially,relativelyundifferentiatedstemcellspermato-
gonialocated along thebasementmembraneof thesem-
iniferous tubulesmultiplyby mitosis.This occurswithin
the basal compartment of the seminiferous tubule.
Spermatocytogenesisallowsboththecyclicalproduction
ofprimary spermatocytesand themaintenance of stem
cellnumber.Inadditiontothisproliferatingpool,thereis
areserve of spermatogonia which donot proliferate and
areextremelyresistanttodamagebyradiation and toxins.
Thesecellssurviveeven afterseveretraumatothe testes.
The remainder of the process occurs in the adluminal
meiosis toproducesecondary spermatocytes.These un-
dergo a furthermeiotic division to producespcrmatids.
Figure6.5:Transverse sectionof acanine seminiferous
tubule:A spermatogonia(A),Bspermatogonia(B),rounded
Spermiogenesis
spermatids(R),elongatedspermatids(E),primary
The final morphological transformation is termed
spermatocytes(P),Sertoli cells(S).H&E.
spermiogenesis and involves the differentiation of
spherical spermatidsintomature spermatidswhich
At any onepointin theseminiferous tubule,germ
willbereleasedinto thelumen of the seminiferous
cell associations of each type appearin sequence.The
tubules as spermatozoa.
whole seriesofthese associationsiscalled thesperma-
As spermatogenesisproceeds throughthese differ-
togenic cycle.Theinterval foronecycle is termed the
ent stages,the developing gametesmigrate from the
duration of the spermatogenic cycle.It is thelength of
basementmembrane of the seminiferous tubules to-
timebetweentwo consecutivereleases of spermato-
wards the lumen.
zoa.This is 13.8 days in dogs.An average of 62 days
isrequired forspermatogenesisin the dog.Thisinfor-
Spermiation
mationis currentlyunavailableintheliteratureforthe
The processwhichinvolvesthereleaseofthegermcells
tom,butit is assumed tobe similar
into thelumenof thetubule afterspermatocytogenesis
The spatial sequential order of thegermcell devel-
andspermiogenesis isknown as spermiation.There-
opment along the length of the seminiferous tubule at
leasedgermcells arenowconsideredtobespermatozoa.
anygiven time is known as the spermatogenic wave.
Sertolicells are associatedwithgermcellsthrough-
This spatial arrangement mayserve to allow aconstant
outtheirdevelopment andtheirfunctionalmorphol-
releaseofspermatozoa,reducethecompetitionforthe
ogy has been shown,in some domestic species,to
use of hormones andmetabolitesforagiven stage of
differ according to the developmental stage of the
development,reduce thecongestionthatwould othr-
germ cell with which theyare associated.This study
wise occurifspermiationwassimultaneous along the
has,however,yet tobeperformed in the dog or tom.
length of the tubule,and generally facilitate sperm
TheroleoftheSertolicellinspermatogenesisincludes
maturation and transport within the tubule.
products andsecreting essential luminal fluids.
Epididymal transport, maturation and
Leydig cells alsohave aroleinsupportingsperma-
storage
togenesis.Theinterstitial cellcompartmentsurrounds
From the seminiferous tubules, spermatozoa are
thc seminiferous tubulecompartment which is conse-
passed through therete testis and the vasaefferentia
quentlybathed in a fluid richin testosterone.In addi-
intotheepididymis.Here theyundergothe final
tion,myoidcellswhichformtheboundarytissueofthe
stages ofmaturation:the ability tobecomemotile;
sciminiferousepithelium helpinthepropulsivemove-
membrane changes;and the loss of the cytoplasmic
ments of spermatozoa andfluidin the seminiferous
droplet.Mature spermatozoa arestored inthe tail of
tubules.LikeLeydigandSertolicells,theyareaffected
the epididymis.At ejaculation, they pass along the
by testicular growth factors.
vas deferens andvarioussecretions are added bythe
Byviewinghistological transversesectionsof sem-
accessory glands.The important accessory glands in
iniferoustubules,the different organizational patterns
the dog and tom aretheprostate and thepaired
that occur may be seen (Figure 6.5）.These patterns
bulbourethral glands,respectivcly.Further changcs
dependonthegermcelltyemorphologyandstagf
ofthespermatozoaoccurwithinthefemaletract,with
development and their arrangement in layerswithin the
capacitation and acrosomereactionenablingfertiliz-
tubule.Eachlayer contains the cells from a different
ation of the oocyte.
generation ofgerm cellswhich becomeincreasingly
The events of spermatogenesis are summarized in
differentiated astheynearthelumenof the tubule.
Figure 6.6.
Physiology andEndocrinologyof theMale
67
AISPERMATOGONIA
A2SPERMATOGONTA
FSH
A3SPERMATOGONIA
A4SPERMATOGONIA
INTERMEDIATESPERMATOGONIA
BSPERMATOGONIA
Figure6.7:Photomicrographofnormal dogspermatozou.
Nigrosin&Eosin.
PRIMARYSPERMATOCYTES
ratecomparedwithotherspecies,butisprobablyrelated
TESTOSTERONE
to the long duration of sperimatogenesis in the dog.
SECONDARYSPERMATOCYTES
spermatozoa thansmall dogs.Valuesforsperm produc-
tion in thc ton cat are not available.
FSH
SPERMATIDS
The age of the male also affects the number of
spermatozoa produced.The male dog reachespuberty
SPERMATOZOA
at an average ageof9months,several weeks laterthan
the female.Similarly,the tom cat reaches puberty at
Figure 6.6:Sunumary of spermatogenesis.
8-10months,again later than thefemale.Highor low
temperatures can be detrimental to sperm production,
as can radiation, some drugs, vitamin A deficiency,
SPERMATOZOA
limited diet and toxic chemicals.The length of the
Structurally,thespermatozoon is divided into:ahead
period of abstinence influences the number of sperma
containing the nucleus and the acrosomewith the
tozoain the cjaculate.Ifitis long,the male ductsystcm
acrosomal enzymes;the mid-piece,containing the
becomescongestedwitholderspermatozoa,andthese
mitochondria forthc mctabolismofthe spermatozoon;
areeventuallyexpelledfrom thesystem,eitherinthe
and thetail,whoseflagellarmovement allowssperm
scmcn or in the urine.
movement to occur (Figure 6.7).
Dog and cat spermatozoa both have flattened spade-
shaped heads.This is similar to the human,bull and
EFFECTOFEXOGENOUSAGENTS
rabbit spermatozoa.In the dog,the spermatozoon has
UPONSTEROIDOGENESISAND
thefollowing dimensions(±SD):total lcngth68±0.3
SPERMATOGENESIS
μm;head length 7±0pm;head width5±0.1μm；mid
piece length11±0.2μm;andtaillength50±0.3μm.In
Spermatogenesis may be affected by the action of
the tom,less detailed measurements havc bccn made:
some therapeutic agents on the Sertoli cells. Drugs
the length of the spermatozoonis55-65μm,thelength
may alsoinfluencespermatozoal maturation and the
of the headis6.5μm,and the width of the head is3 μm.
storageof spermatozoainthe epididymis.Someagents
may affect androgen production (on which mciosis
andepididymalspermatozoal developmentarede-
SPERMPRODUCTION
pendent),either by directly affecting the Leydig cells,
Examination of the ejaculate provides essential informa-
or indirectly by altering the production of LH. These
tion about sperm production.Thenumberofspermatozoa
effects are summarized in Figure 6.3.
in the ejaculate isrelated tothe frequency ofejaculation
and in a sexually rested male,sufficient numbers of
Androgens
ejaculates arerequired beforeepididymal spermatozoa
Androgens affect the development of the secondary
are stabilized.Only then will the daily sperm output in
sexual characteristics andplay animportant rolein
the ejaculate reflect the daily sperm production.A good
spermatogenesis and the maintenance of libido.An-
correlation exists between total scrotal width,paired
drogens,ncluding ttostrone,have angative 
testes weight,weightof testicular parenchyma,daily
backeffectonthereleaseofGnRHbythehypothalamus
sperm production and sperm outputindogs.Thedaily
which in turn suppresses therelease of gonadotrophins
sperm production in decapsulated testis in the dogis16
by the pituitary gland.Exogenous androgcns thcrcfore
x10°pergram of testis.This appears to be an inefficient
produce a significant reductionin semen quality.
T
68
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
It has been proposed that low endogenous testoster-
the scminiferous tubules. In general, however, these
one concentration in the dog is the cause of poor libido
twu agcnts cannot be given in a physiological manner,
or impotence. Androgens (testosterone) should not be
and therefore tend to produce short-term physiological
uscd to treal this condition, hiowevcr, because of their
effects. They are not useful for treating testicular
hypoplasia or cryptorchidism. An hCG stimulation
occurs as a result of musculoskeletal pain cr psycho-
 test is however useful for demonstrating the presence
logical problems and therefore androgen supplemen-
or the absence of testicular tissue.
tation is not the treatment of choice.
GnRH analogues
Progestogens
GnRH analogues
stimulate the release(
of
Progestogens are used for their anti-androgenic
gonadotrophins from the pituitary gland. These ef-
effects. They work by inhibiting the Iclease of
fects, howevcr, arc not physiological, and prolonged
gonadotrophins. Progestogens administered to dogs at
stimulation is followed by receptor down-regulation.
the same dose as used routinely in bitches to control
 GnRH analogues may therefore be used as contracep-
cyclical aclivity have no effect on sperm production or
tive agents, causing cessation of ejaculation and a
libido; at an increased dosage, they do have an effect,
decrease in the proportion of normal motile spermato-
but one which is not sufficient to render the animal
zoa after 3 weeks of treatment, witlhi a decrease in the
 infertile. Progcstogens alone are thcrcfore not suitable
 proportion of normal motile spermatozoa. Normal
for contraception in the male dog. In combination with
sperm production returns rapidly after the ternination
testosterone, however, progestogens can be detrimen-
of treatment.
tal to semen quality for about 50 days after trcatment,
 although libido and spermatogenesis are maintained.
GnRH antagonists
Progestogens appear to reduce peripheral circulat-
GnRH antagonists oppose the effects of GnRH and
ing androgcn concentrations, which may be uscful in
 may be useful as contraceptive agents in the future.
certain clinical conditions. Both entirc and castratcd
dogs, for example, may exhibit antisocial behaviour.
Other agents
including aggression, territory marking, copulatory
 Careful attention should be paid when therapeutic
aclivity, cxcitability and destructivencss. Progestogens
agents arc administcred to malc animals, since thesc
111
have been used successfully in conjunction with
 may adversely affect reproductive function. Agents
behaviour modification training to control some of
with a known adverse effect include:
these problems. Raised conccntrations of testostcrone
in the peripheral plasrma are not thought to be related
 Antineoplastic drugs, which cause aplasia of the
to antisocial and aggressive behaviour.
germinal epithelium of the testis
 Reducing plasma testosterone concentrations
Nitrofurantoin and amphotericin antibiotics, which
(using progestagens or via castration) may bc useful in
arrcst spermatogenesis
 other androgen-dependent conditions such as benign
Griseofulvin, which in large doses causes oligo-
 prostatic hyperplasia, circumanal adenomas and some
spermia.
epileptic seizures. Some androgcns are uscd in ageing
dogs for their anabolic effects.
CONCLUSION
Oestrogens
High doses of oestrogen affect the physiology of
Recent studies have improved the understanding of
male reproduction by suppressing the release of
male reproductive function. A thorough understand-
gonadlotrophins.
ing of the normal physiology anrl cndocrinology will
 Oestrogens have been used successfully in control-
 enable the clinician to diagnose reproductive pathol-
ling some behavioural problems in dogs. The enlarge-
ogy and institute appropriate treatment.
ment of thc prostatc scen in bcnign prostatic hyperplasia
 may also be reduced by cestrogen therapy. Benign
tumours in the perineal region, circumanal adenomas,
REFERENCESAND FURTHER READING
can also be treated with cestrogens.
Allen WE and England GCW (1990) Reproductive endocrinology of
Gonadotrophins
the dog. In: Manat of Smait Animal Endocrinology, ed. M
Hutchinson, pp. 121-126. BSAVA, Cheltcnham
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) has been shown
Amann RP (1986) Reproductivc endocrinology and physiology af thc
 to produce an effect similar to LH. It should thereforc
dog. In: CurrentTherapyin Theriogenology2.Diagnosis, Treatmen
UndPrevenion of Reproduetive Diseases in Small and Large Arf.
   n    
mnls, ed. DA Morrow, pp. 532 -538, WB Saunders, Plhiladelplhia
Lcydig cells of the tcstes. Also, equine chorionic
Bedford IM and Hoskins DD (1990) The mainmalian spermatoz0on:
 gonadotrophin (cCG) acts in a similar way to FSH and
morphology, biochemistry and physiology. In: Marshiall's Physiof-
OgyfRrodionVlm2.Rproduininealet
 sis a  n  
cd. GE Lamming, Pp. 379-568. Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh
Physiology and Endocrinology of the Male
69
Butke TJ (1986) Small Animal Reproduction and Infertility, A Clinical
and Feline Endocrinoiogy and Reproduction, Znd ern, Pp. 673-
Diagnosis and Treatmer. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia
690. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Christiansen GC (1954) Angioarchitccturc of the canine penis and the
Foote RI, Swierstra EE and Hunt WL (1972) Spermatogenesis in the
process of erection. American Journal of Anatomy 95, 227-262
dog. Anatomicai Record 173, 341-351
Christiansen IBJ (1984) Reproduction in the Dog and Car. Baillierc
Schmidt PM (1986) Feline brecding manngcment. Vererinary Cinics of
Tindall, Lonlou
North America: Snail Animal Pracrice 16, 435-451
Depalatais L, Moore J and Falvo RE (1978) Plasma concentatious of
Soderberg SF(1986) Canine hreeding management. Veterinary Cliies
testosterone and LHin themale dog.JournaifRepraductionn
QfNorth Americe: Small Artinal Pracrice16, 419-433
Fertiliny 52, 201-207
Woodalt PF and Johnstone IP (1988) Dimensions and allometry of
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (I996) Canine male reproduction. Clinical
testes, epididymes and spermatozoa in the domestic dog (Canis
 and diagnostic evaluation of the male reproductive tract. In: Cantie
faniliaris).Journat of Reproduction and Femilty 82,603-609
CHAPTERSEVEN
Conditions of the Male
JohnP.Verstegen
THEMALEDOG
normally occur under theinfluence of testosterone
justbefore or after whelping.Persistentpenilefren-
Maledogsaremuchmorefrequentlypresentedfor
ulum,whichisusuallypresentontheventral mid-linc
investigationofinfertilityorreproductivetractdisease
of the penis,prevents protrusion of the penis or
than male cats.Most conditions of the male dog are
deviatesit whenerect.The treatment issurgical witha
related to prostatic or testicular disease.However,
good prognosis.
congenital or acquired abnormalities of the prepuce,
penis,scrotum,testesandprostatearealsorelatively
Intersexuality
frequent in this species.
Intersexualityrefers to congenital abnormalitieschar-
acterizedbydifferentdegreesofimpairedsexual dif-
Congenital and genetic conditions
ferentiation.An abnormal sexualphenotype then
results.The conditionis lesscommonlyencountered in
Immaturity of thegenital tract-hypoplasia/
dogs than in some otherdomestic species,e.g.goats or
aplasia
pigs.Whenobserved,itpreventsrproduction.Classi
Aplasiaof theepididymis andthevasdeferensisrarely
ficationof theconditionisbythetypeofgonadaltissue
reported in the dog but its frequency may be under-
present.
estimated.Ifbilateral,this conditionwillrender the
A truehermaphrodite animalischaracterizedby
animal sterile.
thepresence of both male andfemale gonadsin a
Penile hypoplasia may be seen in female pseudo-
combined structure(ovotestis)or as separate organs
hermaphrodite animals(see Chapter 4).
(one testis and one ovary).Thephenotypic sex of true
hermaphrodite animals isgenerally female when they
Hypospadias
areyoung,but theirsexbecomesmore ambiguous as
Hypospadiasis a congenital anomaly of the male
they mature.Truehermaphrodismmaybeassociated
externalgenitalia inwhichthe urethralorifice opens
withXX/XYorXX/XXYchimaeras.
somewhere ventrallyon the prepuce orinthe perineal
Pseudohermaphroditism is characterizedby the
area.This condition is often associated with other
presence of gonads of one sex and a phenotype am-
congenitaldefects andisparticularly observedininter
biguous in appearance or of the other sex. The
sex animals.The degree of expression of hypospadias
phenotypic expressionmayvarygreatly，so that the
isvariable,rangingfrom theopeningoccurringafew
diagnosismay sometimesbe difficult priortopuberty
centimetresfrom the tipof thepenis(glandular hypo-
or surgery.In some males,the only signs areunder
spadias),at the pars longa glandis (penile hypo-
developmentof thepenisandprepuce,ortotalabsence
spadias),at the scrotum(scrotalhypospadias)or sub-
ischially(perineal hypospadias).Hypospadias can be
inducedinfetusesby the administration ofexogenous
progesteroneoroestrogenduringpregnancy.The treat-
ment of hypospadiasisessentially surgical(see Chap-
ter 15).Reconstruction is often difficult and
urethrostomy and penile amputation may be required.
Persistentpenilefrcnulum
This conditionisrare.Itis characterized by theventral
persistence of a thin sheet of fibrous connective tissue
between the prepuce and the tip of the penis.It is
related toa failureofseparationbetween the surface
Figure7.1:Presence of a hypertrophied clitoris ina
of the penis and the preputial mucosa which should
hermaphroditebitch.
72
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 of the external genitalia. In somc females, clitoral
and the inguinal ring; inguinal or abdominal or accord-
hypertrophy is observed which reveals the presence of
ing to whether the testis is in the inguinal ring or in the
a small penis including an os penis (Figure 7.1). In
abdomen. Itis important to point out that monorchidism
other femalcs, abnormalities of ocstrous cyclcs arc
(only onc tcstis) and anorchidism (no testes at all) arc
observed, usually prolonged anoestrus. Often, the ex-
extremely rare. For this reason, in all cases of absence
 act anatomical details can only be observed at surgery.
of one or both testes, animals should be considered as
Many actiologies are suggestcd for interscxuality,
cryptorchid. A hormonal stimulation test with human
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)/luteinizing hormone
 ever, reatment with hormones during pregnancy (par-
(LH) or gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH)
ticularly between days 25 and 35) when fetal gonadal
could be used to dernionstrate the presence and produc-
differentiation is occurring has bccn implicated. Malc
tion of tcstosterone (see Chaptcr 11).
 pseudohermaphroditism can be linked to an inad-
 In dogs, the reported incidence of cryptorchidism
equate synthesis of fetal androgens, a defect in the
varies between 0.8 and 9.8%. The reasons for failure of
production or abnormality of the androgen reccptors in
descent arc not yet clear but it is likcly that endocrinc
the target cells or an ineffective response to Mullerian
(insufficient gonadotrophin stimulation) and mechani-
inhibiting factor leading to the persistence of the Mul-
cal abnormalities are involved. The origin of these
lerianl duct. This is well documented in the Schnauzer
abnormalities are to some extent inherited and related
breeds. Female pseurlohermaphroditism is mainly the
appears to be higher in bilateral than unilateral cases of
nancy, for example administration of progestogens or
cryptorchidism. Heredity is almost certainly involved,
interference withcortisol production. Surgical removal
as cryptorchidism is morc common in certain brceds
of the reproductive tract is advisable to prevent repro-
(for example Toy and Miniature Poodle, Yorkshire
ductive tract disease. Intersex disorders are more
Terrier, Chihuahua, Boxer, Miniature Schnanzer) and
oftcn scen in certain brccds such as Cocker Spaniels,
in certain families. However, this does not explain all
 Miniature Schnauzers, Kerry Blue Terriers, Beagles,
cases, as some unilateral cryplorchid dogs have been
German Shepherd Dogs, Australian Blue Terriers or
used for breeding for years and produced many litters
Gcrman Short-haired Pointcrs.
with no cvidence of defects in their offspring. Thc
exact mode of inheritance is not known. Whereas Ihe
Cryptorchidism
In dogs testicular descent is observed soon after birth,
tance, the simplest model is a sex-limited autosomal
normally bctwccn days 3 antd 10. However, accuratc
rccessive modc, whcre hoth male and femalc carry the
 palpation of the testis is only possible at 2-4 weeks of
gene and can pass it on to their offspring.
age, and is usually carried out around weaning at 5-8
All dogs of more than 6-8 months of age with
weeks. If the tcstcs arc not palpablc within the scrolum
abscnce of onc or both scrotal testes shculd bc cas-
by 8-10 weeks of age, a diagnosis of cryptorchidism
 trated as cryptorchidism is responsible for at least four
main clinical conditions:
nosis of cryptorchidism, it inay be necessary in some
 animals to wait until puberty at around 5-10 months. In
Testicular neoplasia, usually after 4-7 years
large breeds, however, where testicular descent may be
 Behavioural modifications characterized by
 apparcntly impaired by thc rapid development of the
hyperscxuality, excitability, irritability and in
animal, and where it is not uncommon therefore to see
some animals aggressiveness
testes moving into and out of the scrotum, it is generally
Decreased or modified fertility
+
 considcrcd that a testis which is not present at 4 months
An incrcascd risk of spermatic cord torsion.
of age is unlikcly to reach its normal position. For this
reason it is highly advisable that at the first visit to the
 In a normal animal, testes are located in the scrotum
veterinary surgeon at 6-8 weeks of age, all male dogs
where the temperature is estimated to be 2-3 *C
are carefully exaimincd for integrity. If testes are no.
bclow body tcmpcraturc. When testes are retaincd,
palpated, the owners should be informed of the prob-
they are submitted continuously to an increased tem-
ability of cryptorchidism. If the animal is to be used for
 perature. This is responsible for the impairment of
breeding, it may be wisc to change he animal or at leasl
spermatogenesis, and thus thc retained testis is gener-
the owner should know that fertility might be compro-
 ally stcrile. while additionally the increased tempera-
mised if the diagnosis is confirmed.
ture in some animals stimulates steroidogenesis. Those
 A cryptorchid animal may have one (unilateral
animals hccome hypertestosteronacimic and the inl-
cryptorchidism rather than monorchidism) or both
crcascd production of testosterone may be responsi-
testes (bilateral cryptorchidism and not anorchidism)
ble for both a reduction of the spermatogenesis in the
retained somcwhere along thc norrmal pathi of testicular
contralalcral tcstis (by central feed-back mcchanisms)
descent. Retention is usually classified as: subcutane-
and behavioural modifications characterized by
ous, when the testis is palpated between the scrotum
Conditions of the Male
73
 gression. During the first year of life of a cryptorchid
are roughly oval in shape, firm but not hard on
animal with onc rctaincd testis, fertility may be main-
 palpation. The testes should be of similar size, with
 tained. However, bilateral cryptorchid animals in
sometimes one slightly larger than the other. A
general become rapidly aspermic and sterile. After
marked disparity between the size of the testis should
same years, the retained testes degencratc and may
be regarded as abnormal.
often be the site of ncoplastic development. It is
The testes may be the primary or secondary site of
important to note that behavioural signs associated
disease. Primary abnormalities include crypt-
with cryptorchism are often difficult to control and
 orchidism, hypoplasia, orchitis and neoplasia. Sec-
castration in many cascs is no longer efficacious. For
ondary conditions result from systemic or endocrine
this and the previously described reasons, knowing
 diseases. Dysfunction of one testis may impair the
cryptorchidism has a high probability of bcing of
function of thc othcr onc.
genetic origin, it is wise not to use these animals
for breeding. The author considers that all crypt-
Orchitis and epididymnitis: Orchitis and epididymitis
orchid animals should be castratcd bcforc other
are not coimmonly rcportcd in European countries but
clinical signs are expressed (thus before pubcrty).
arc more frequent in Africa and in South and North
If there is a possibility that the dog will mate,
America due to the presence of Brucella canis which
 any descended testis should also be removed or a
specifically affects the reproductive system. Brucella
vasectomy performed.
abortus, B. suis or B. mellitensis can also affect the
No treatments aimed at producing testicular
dog's reproductive system. Other causes of orchitis
descent have been demonstrated to be efficacious.
 include viral (canine herpes virus, canine distemper
Teslosteronc is not recommended because the dose
virus), asccnding or haematogenous bactcrial infec-
 used is supraphysiological and may lead to develop-
tions, autoimmune disease or most commonly
trauma. Aerobic bacteria (Escherichia coli, Proteus
 ment, and growth arrcst. GnRH and hCG have been
spp., Staphylococcus spp. and Streptococcus spp.) arc
Aeqond pue mot si ssooons iuaiedde a ing 'pasn
 commonly implicated. The raised temperature may
 temporarily impair fertility, but if the condition lasts
ncous testes and in which dcsccnt would have
for more than onc day, rcsulting in local or general
 Occurred irrespective of treatment. HIowever, since 
hyperthermia,testicular degeneration with fibrosis and
there is a high probability that cryptorchidism is
atrophy can occur. Autoimmune orchitis is rare but the
inhcritcd, treatment to inducc testicular dcsccnt or
invasion of the testis by lymphocytes will result.in
orchidopexy should be discouraged and these treat-
infertility. Autoimmune orchitis has been shown to be
ments are considered unethical.
a hereditary problem.
 Clinical signs of orchitis/cpididymitis are stiff 
gait, scrotal and testicular enlargement with oedema
Acquired conditions of the genitalia
 and redness, severe pain which can be associated with
The external genitalia
yomiting, anorexia, prostration and local or general
hyperthermia. The scrotal skin may be inflamcd and
Male reproductive system trauma: Trauma due to
excessive licking may occur. However, the acute
fighting is a common feature in the dog, and licking.
signs may disappcar as the condition becomes chronic.
secondary to generalized skin problems, may also
At this stage, the scrotum may be normal but the
occur. Trauma to the reproductive tract is often very
testes may become soft or firm, irregular and small
painful and is associated with swclling and haemor-
 pun paea eaide Aeu siuiiida a pue
rhage. Lesions may affect the prepuce or both the
 than normal. Adhesions between the scrotum and the
prepuce and the scrotum with or without penile
testis are common.
damage. These lesions are il genneral difficult to
 The treatment is initially medical with appropri-
m pauqo aaean jeodon abai pue peanl
 ale antibiotics (starting with broad-spectrum agcnts
systemic antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs.
      
Cleaning of the wounds and dehridement inay be
and sensitivity assessment); anti-inflammatory drugs
necessary, with open wounds requiring surgical
to reduce swelling and pain are also administcrcd.
 closure under general anaesthesia. Castration with
Antibiotic treatment should last a minimum of 24
the total removal of the scrotum is sometimes the
weeks. As fertility is often lost after orchitis, surgi-
only solution for severe lesions.
cal removal of the testis alone or with the scrotum
should be advised.
..!
Testicular abnormalifies: The sizc and general ap-
 pearance of thc scrotum may differ dramatically
Hydrocoele: Clinical hydrocoelc is rarc in dogs; how-
from one breed to another, with some animals carry-
ever, ultrasonographic examination may demonstrate
ing their scrotum very close to the body wall, whereas
the presence of cysts inside the testicular parenchyma.
in others the scrotum is more pendulous. The testcs
Thc significance of these is not known.
74
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Testicular neoplasia: Tcsticular tumours are more
Sustenfacnlar or Sertoli cell tmour: These tumours
common in the dog than in other domestic animals.
arc the most clinically significant testicular neoplasm
This is the second most conimon type of tumour in
of the dog. They are often observed in intact animals
male dogs after skin tumours. Three types of testicular
of more than 7-12 years of age, though earlier in
tumours have been described and have been classified
following the cellular type involved: Sertoli cell, Ley-
be detected as early as 45 years of age; the mcan age
dig cells, and germ cell tumours (seminoma, teratoma
for developnent of the tumour is about 10 years. The
and cmbryonal carcinoma). The incidcnce of testicular
testis is gcnerally enlarged, irregular and hard, par-
 neoplasia is increased in cryptorchid dogs, Sertoli cell 
ticularly at the tumour site. Some of these tumours
tumours and seminomas being 23 and 16 times, respec-
develop multilocular cysts and may undergo throm-
tivcly, more frequent in cryptorchid than in normal
bosis and haemorrhage. Sertoli cell tumours are them-
animals, with Sertoli cell tumours having the highest
selves in general 1-5 cm in diameter, although the
incidence. Leydig cell tunours are most common in
size of the testis with this tumour can range from
Hormal animals. More than onc-third of dogs present-
normal to more than 30 cm in diameter (Figure 7.2a).
ing with tcsticular turmours have t wo or thrce diffcrcnt
We recenuly rcrnovcd an abdominal testis in a 6-year-
old Bichon Maltese, the size of which was greater
Tumours may be unilateral or bilateral, with the mean
than a child's head. These tumours are generally not
age at first diagnosis being about 10 years, Therc arc
malignant, but mctastascs havc heen described
breed differences, with Boxers being the most likely
particularly in cases with abdominal retention.
Between 10 and 20% metastasize to the lumbar 0r
and Shelland Shccp Dogs appear to have the highcst
iliac lymph nodes. Scrtoli ccll tumours are typified by
risk of developing Sertoli cell tumours and German
the production of oestrogen. Clinical signs associated
Shepherd Dogs a high risk of developing seminomas.
with oestrogen production are: feminization,preputial
and penile atrophy, pendulcus shcath, gynaccomastia
Interstitial or Leydig cell tumours: Interstitial cell
and enlargement of the nipples, atrophy of the contra-
lateral testis, bilateral non-pruritic symmetrical
not related to retained tcstcs. This tumour is rarely
alopecia and hyperpigmentation of the skin (Figure
diagnosed except at post mortem following macro-
7.2b,c), prostatic squamous metaplasia andi atlrac-
scopic and pathological analyses of the testes. Indeed
tiveness to other males. An increase in the plasma
many interstitial cell tumours arc simall and well cir-
oestrogen concentration or all attenuated oestrogen/
cumscribed. They are often multiple and bilateral,
testosterone ratio is generally observed. Fertility is
coexisting with other lesions and some induce degen-
usually affected, particularly in the advanced stages.
cration of non-ncoplastic germ cell parcnchyma. Fer-
Due to the incrcasc of oestrogen production in chronic
tility may thus be affected. No clinical signs are
cases, hone marrow suppression can be observed in
associated with this condition but occasionally signs
10-15 % of dogs with Sertoli cell tumours. The main
 related to hyperproduction of testosterone (behaviour
signs of this are leucopenia, pancytopenia, thrombo-
 modifications, perineal tumours or prostatic hyper-
cytopcnia characterized by haemaloma, pctcchia,
plasia) may be detected. The testes are normal in size
but may be harder with small nodules.
tion, and septicaemia.
 Adenomyosis (epithelial muscular invasion) of tbe
Gern cell (semirona) and mixed origin germ cell
epididymis is a common complication of Sertoli cell
Lumours (teratoma and embryonal carcinoma): Semi-
tumours in dogs and seems to be a consequence of
nomas are often found in middle-aged and old dogs. The
increased oestrogen production. However, adeno-
testes are homogeneously enlarged, being up to 5-10 cm
myosis of the epididymis also occurs in dogs without
in diameter and often softer than usual. Tumours are
Sertoli cell tumours.
frequently unilateral and in general not associatedl with
 Bccause of the high incidencc oaf tcsticular ncopla-
clinical signs. Some cases of hyperoestrogenism due to
sia, physical examination of all middle-aged and clder
transformation of testostcrone into oestradiol, or
dogs should always inchude an examination of the
 hyperandrogenism due to the absence of testosteronc
tcstcs. In all middle-aged or old animals with no scrotal
breakdown have been described. Seminomas are not
testes and no history of castration, testicular tumours
 generally malignant but a simall numher of seminomas
should bc considered where there are signs of derma-
have been described which have locally invaded or
tological, urinary or digestive diseases. It is particu-
occasionally metastasized, particularly in retained ab-
larly important to check for retained bilateral testes and
dominal testes (6-11%). Fertility may bc rcduced.
to considcr thc possibility of their neoplastic transfor-
 In somc canine testes, a dual population of
mation, the incidcncc of which is ccrtainly under-
mixed germ cell and gonadal-stromal tumours
estimated. We have seen many cases of presumed
(gonadoblastoma) has been identified. Teratoma and
splenic tumours which tumed out to be retained tes-
cimbryonal carcinoma are exceptional in dogs.
ticular tumours at surgcry.
Conditions of the Male
75
torsion.Thereis often acute pain of sudden onset with
areluctancetomove.Thedograpidlybecomesshocked,
anorexic, and vomits.In the acute form,this is a
surgicalemergency.In rare cases where the condition
occurs in a normal non-cryptorchid dog,the scrotum
shows swelling,oedema andredncss.The conditionis
likely to recur and may be potentially fatal.In the
cryptorchid animal,thisis a clear indicationfor the
early surgical removal of therctained testis.
Penile and preputial conditions
Balanoposthitis:Inflammation of the mucosa of the
penis(posthitis) and of the prepuce mucosa(balanitis)
is called balanoposthitis.This is a common condition
in male dogs. Two types can be described: balano-
posthitis in the young dog and balanoposthitis in the
adult. In young prepubertal dogs or those close to
puberty, yellow to green preputial discharges varying
inquantityarecommon.Thiscondition,exceptforthe
problemitausesforthownerhasnoclnical signf
cance.Topical therapy may be given but the condition
often recurs a few days or sometimes weeks after
treatment.Examination of the prepuce and the glans
penis usually shows no local inflammation.The dis-
chargecontainsmany neutrophilsbut specificbacteria
are rarely seen.Thecondition seems toberelated to
hormonal changcs rclatcd to puberty.
In the adult entire male,balanoposthitis may also
occur. The clinical signs are usually a purulent or
haemorrhagic preputial discharge with frequent licking
and possibly biting and self-mutilation and pain on
palpation.The mucosa is usually inflamed,ulcerated
with vesicles,ortheremaybe otherlocallesionsrelated
to the cause (e.g.trauma,neoplasia,burns).Identifica-
tion of the possible cause will determine the treatment
(C)
required.Bacterial cultureis usually of littlevalue as it
willrevcal thenormal cxtcnsivc andvaried commensal
Figure7.2:(a)Testicular tumour in a cryptorchid dog.
bacterialflora oftheprepuce.Staphylococcus aureusis
(b,c) Dermatological lesions associatedwith thetumour.
themostcommonlyobservedbacterium;however,many
others have bccn reportcd.Thc prescncc of Proteus or
The only treatment forall these tumoursis surgical
Pseudomonas couldbe considered significant whenin
removal.When a testis becomes neoplastic,the con-
purecultures.Mycoplasma canis and Ureoplasma have
tralateral testis undergoes atrophy and the dog be-
been incriminated;however,thereisnodifferenceinthe
comes sterile.If surgery is carried out early enough,
prevalence ofmycoplasms betweennormalanimals and
fertility can recover and the dog may continue to be
those with genital infections. Ureoplasma is more fre-
used forbreeding.
qucnt in the prepuce of infertile dogs.The presence of
small papules orvesicles can be related to herpesvirus
Testicular torsion:Torsion of the spermatic cord,
infection (also sometimecalled dogpox).As the herpes-
which is also referred to as testicular torsion,is arare
virus canberesponsibleforgenital disease,abortionor
fetal resorptions,care must be taken with these
more commonlyin retained testes,probably due to
animals.Many vesicle-likelesions arenotdue to
instability of the suspensory tissuc which allows the
herpcsvirus but are simple lynphoid hyperplasia,a
gonad to rotate.Thisleads tovascular engorgement
finding thatisnot significant;however,mating should
and testicular infarction,especially when a large
be prevented as a precaution.
tumour is present in a retained abdominal testis.The
In the adult, treatment for balanoposthitis is al-
degree of torsionmayrange from360°tomore than
ways necessary and the therapy will depend on the
720°and clinical signs will depend on the degree of
cause.Beforetreatment,thepenisshould becarefully
76
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
examined to cxcludc the prescncc of forcign bodies,
This may lead to a persistcnt protrusion of the penis.
neoplasia, ulceration or inflammatory nodules. Local
 Often the condition causes no problem, but drying
or broad-spectrum antibiotics, local flushing with
of the mucosa and trauma may necessitate local
anti-inflammatory drugs or thcir systemic adminis-
trcatment or somctimcs amputation. A suture may
tration are generally used. Castration may be usefulin
also be placed at the preputial orifice to reduce its
reducing the amount of preputial secretion in the non-
size and the risk of protrusion. However, as with the
brccding animal.
various techniqucs describcd to pull the prepuce
forward, this technique is often unsatisfactory and
Phimosis and paraphinosis: In phimosis the dog is
unsuccessful. Castration, inducing organ involution
unable to extrude its penis because of a small preputial
may be indicated.
upcning. Thc condition is gencrally congenital and
is resolved by surgery (see Chapter 15). In severe
Penile bleeding: Penile bleeding may occur spontane-
cases, urine cannot escape and therefore remains
ously or following trauma or fighting. It is important to
within the prepuce. This condition is then often
clcarly localize the origin of thc bleeding which may be
associated with a balanoposthitis.
the penis itself (e.g. trauma, herpes virus, tumours,
 In paraphimosis, the penis is unable to retract into
TVT) but could also originate from a urethral prolapse
the prepuce. This is most often due to a snall preputial
(rare but sometimes observed) or from the urethlira,
opening (congenital, traumatic or post-surgical) which
bladder or prostate.
is large enough to allow the normal and non-erect
 Penile bleeding is often observed in excited ani-
 penis to protrude but when erection is comnplete acts
mals and may be due to lesions on thc pcnilc integu-
as a tourniquel prcvcnting detumescencc. It may also
ment. Suturing or cauterizing the wound is generally
 be observed in animals with spinal lesions, foreign
effective when the lesion is fresh and not too extensive.
bodies in the prepuce, chronic balanoposthitis, swell-
Alpha-2 adrenergic agents,inducing hypotensives and
ing of the penile soft tissue from trauma or fracturc of
tranquillizers, arc uscful to reduce the risk of excilc-
the os penis, or due to long hair around the opening of
ment and erection, both of which will increase the
the prepuce causing obstruction. Indeed, inversion of
haemorrhage. In some cases amputation is required.
thc preputial skini and hair may prevent the penis from
Castration or largc doscs of progestogens may be of
 returning into the preputial cavity. This condition, if
use to prevent postoperative excitement and erection
untreated, may lead to severe penile trauma as the
which could result in haemorrhage.
 penis rapidly becomes dry, cyanotic, oedematous and
painful. Stranguria, haematuria and anuria are often
Fructure of the os penis: The os penis, whichis within
observed and finally gangrene or necrosis of the penis
the bulbus cavernosus, may occasionally be fractured
may occur. Tranquillizers and particularly alpha-2
due to a traumatic mating or attcmpts to scparate
adrenergic agents arc useful in inducing rest and
 animals which are tied at mating. The main signs are
hypotension which allow detumescence and manual
pain, bleeding, urethral haemorrhage and sometimes
replacement. After cleaning of the penile surface,
dysuria. Symptomatic treatiment should bc undertakcn.
gentle manipulation using cold water is oftcn suffi-
 but if urethral constriction occurs, penile amputation
cient if the condition is recent, It is also advisable to
 or urethrostomy may be necessary.
give progestogens with anti-androgenic potency
(dclmadinone acetate, mcgocstrol acetate) to reducc
Transmissible venereal lumour (TVT): This mucosal
sexual activity and excitability. These have to be
tumour of the dog (Tigure 7.3) affects the external
given at lhigh doses to be clinically efficacious
genitalia and other mucous mcmbranes. It is mainly
(delmadinonc acetate minimun of 2 mg/kg every 2
dans pue ion  samna pue sop  uaas
weeks). Simultancously, acepromazinc can be given
countries. Hlowever, due to the increase in exchanges
between countries, it is becoming less rare to have
hypotension and to reduce the risk of erection.
animals prcsented with this condition. TVT is now
Recurrence is not uncommon and if the animal is to
be kept for breeding. surgical enlargement of the
southern part of France, and may result from stud dogs
 prepuce has to be considcrcd. However,this procedure
that have becn takcn abroad for mating. In the male, the
 must be carefully performed. particularly tu prevent
 Iesion typically occurs on the penis and prepnce but
 too large an opening which may result in a chronic
may also be seen on other sites such as the mucosa of
paraphimosis with permanent penile extrusion. In some
the head following licking. Aftera pcriod of incuhation
extrermc cascs, the surgical ablation of the penis to-
of a few weeks (occasionally months) the animals
gether with castration is the only solution.
 develop reddish-grey friable tumours. At first, the
A similar chronic exposure of the tip of the penis
nodules are small(a few millirmetrcs) but they rapidly
is also somctimcs observed in dogs with a short
 grow and have a caulilower-like appearance, being
aq Aeu uoisnnond su suad e suo ooi no aondand
 papillary and pedunculated. After a few months spon-
permanent or only observed when the dog is sitting.
taneous regression may occur.
Conditions of the Male
77
tumours are multiple and may recur if a single cell
remains.Recurrence occurs in 50% of cases. Chemo-
therapy or radiotherapy may achicve a cure asthc
tumour is responsive to these twotreatments.As the
condition is transmitted mainly by coitus and ishighly
contagious.all brecding animals should be treatedby
chemotherapy or radiotherapy.Vincristine adminis-
tration once weekly for around 4-6weeks induces
completeremission inmore than90%ofthe animals
without any recurrence.
Prostatic disease
Discase processes in the prostate are common and may
be infectious,hormonal,anatomicalorembryological
in origin.Anincrease intheincidenceis observed with
age and could be related to the physiological
hyperdevelopment of the organ observed under the
influence of androgens.
The prostatic secretions, which are acidic, play a
bactericidal role during rest, preventing ascending
bladderinfectionsandhave amajorrole duringejacu
Figure7.3:Typical cauliflower-like appearanceof a
lation in the production ofthe seminal fluid.Indeed,n
transmissiblevenereal tumour inamaledog.
dogs the prostate is responsible for most of the volume
of ejaculate produced (more than 90-95%).
The first clinical signs detected by the owner is a
During the dog's life,the development of the pros-
preputial discharge which is often haemorrhagic, as
tate can be divided into three periods. The first one
the friablenodules bleed easily.The condition is not
correspondstotheperiodofembryogenesis andimme
initially painful but thedischargemayrapidlybecome
diate post-natal development. This phase ends when
infected and induce abalanoposthitiswith associated
the animal is around 2-3years.The second phase is
pain and licking.The tumours mayultimately protrude
one of exponential hypertrophicdevelopment.This
from the preputial orifice.The lesions are usually
phase is clearly androgen dependent and terminates
multiple and a careful invcstigation of thc preputial
when the aninal is approximatcly 12-15 ycars old.
cavitywillreveal nodulesof different sizeinthesame
Thelastphaseissenileinvolutionandbeginswhenn
animal.The tumourhasnoeffect onfertilitybut could
geriatric animals,the production of androgens slowly
preventmatingfor mcchanical rcasons or dueto sec-
begins to decrease.The clear distinction bctwcen thcsc
ondary infections.Infected animals should not be
different periods is difficult to make and is indeed
allowed to mate,as the tumour is transmitted at coitus.
highly subjective,with variation between animals.
However,theexact aetiology of this condition is still
However, itis generally accepted that afte5 yearsf
not established.Viruses have been implicated,ese
age,nearly all dogs have a certain degree of prostati
cially as in many animals spontaneous regression is
hypertrophy which may continue to develop, leading
observed.However,specificviruses havenotyetbeen
in some animals to the pathological features known as
identified.Neoplastic cells are clearly of an origin
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH).This clinical con-
other than the dog,as they have a chromosome number
ditionisobservedin60%ofdogsolderthan5years and
of59±5,whichisdistinctlydiffercntfrom thcnormal
in ncarly 100%of dogs ovcr 10-12years old.The
caninechromosome numberof78.Themode oftrans-
position of theprostate changes slowly as it increases
mission seems tobevia infected cellswhich are easily
insize.Indeed,frombeing pelvicinyoung nimals t
transplanted during coitus,or following sniffing,nuz-
prostate slowly becomes more abdominal and finally
zling or other socialinteractions.In the primary infec-
after 8-12years becomes fully abdominal.
tion,there is invasion of the mucosa and the tumour
It is beyond the scope of this text to review all
behaves as an infection with involvement of the re-
prostati diseases,linical signsnvestigationalmt
gional lymph nodes in some cases. General spread has
ods and treatments.The reader is asked to consult the
not beendescribed,buttumourshavebeendetectedin
reference list below.
the brain,eye,thoracic and abdominal viscera.The
The prostate gland may be affected by infection
treatment is multiple involving: hygienic local treat-
(acute and chronic prostatitis and abscess),endocrine
ment using antiseptics and disinfection of theinflamed
dependent disease (prostatic hyperplasia and metapla
penis and prepuce;surgical removal of the largest
sia)or tumorous processes (adenocarcinoma).Cysts
tumours (cryotherapy,cauterization by electrosurgery).
are also described,and are congenital (paraprostatic
Acomplete surgical cure is unlikely as in general the
cysts),primary （prostatic cysts) or secondary (to
78
Manual ofSmallAnimal Reproduction andNeonatology
other diseasesparticularlybenignprostatichyperpla-
tomsmay appear suddenly (abscesses or acute pros-
sia and squamousmetaplasia).
tatitis) or progressively(hyperplasia,tumours)and
Themainproblemswithprostaticdiseases are:
arerelated tolocalcompressionrelatedto theen-
largement of the prostate gland orto thepresence of
They are often complex,with different typesof
local metastasis.
lesionobservedsimultaneously
Different aetiological agents can occur
General systemicsigns ofno specific origin:Gen-
independentlyorsimultaneously
eral signs such asfever,pain,prostration,anorexia,
A“haemato-prostatic barrier'has been described
emesis andsepticaemiamaybeassociatedwith the
whichreduces treatinent penetration andefficacy
condition.They sometimes may be the only symp-
Their incidence is often underestimated.
toms detected by the owner,themore specificsigns
being more discrete.In all entire adult male dogs
Indeed,manyclinical signs associatedwithprostate
presentingwithsystemicclinical signsofnospecific
disease are non-specific （haematuria,anuria,pain,
origin,a careful completeinvestigationof thepros-
constipationorlocomotordysfunction)and areoften
tate should be carried out.
first attributed toother organs(bladder or digestive
diseases,or orthopaedic problems).
Infectiousprostaticdiseases:Bacterialprostatitisis
In allentiremaleanimalsofmore than4-5years
probablythesecondmostcommonprostaticdisorder
where oneorseveralofthefollowingclinical signs are
in dogs after benign prostatichyperplasia.Infectious
observed,theprostateshouldbecarefullyinvestigated.
causcs of canine prostatitis include E.coli,Proteus
spp.,seudomonasspp.,BrucellacanisMycobat
Urinarysymptoms:Theseincludehaematuriawhich
riumspp.,staphylococci,streptococci andoccasion
is not necessarily associated with urination(blood is
ally distcmpcr virus and Blastomyces dermatitidis.
often observedpassively in resting animals but also
Microscopicexaminationofcentrifugedprostaticfluid
during urination),urinary incontinence with a full
allowstheobservationofnormalprostaticcellswith
bladder,dysuria and anuria.
numerouspolymophonuclearcells,redbloodcellsand
sometimes bacteria (Figure 7.4).
Digestivesymptoms:Thesearenot constant,but are
Prostatitis canbe acute and associatedwithmany
sometimes the onlyclinical signsrelatedtoprostatic
clinical signs,or chronic and more discrete.During
disease.They are caused by the hypertrophy of the
acute prostatitis,the haemato-prostatic barrierisno
prostateinthepelvis,inducingconstipationwithsome-
longerfunctional andantibiotictherapyhasagood
timescharacteristicflat facces.These signsare highly
chance ofbeing effective.A broad-spectrum anti-
variable in intensity and depend on the degree of
bioticshouldbeused until antibioticsensitivityhas
prostatic enlargement and theposition of theprostate.
been assessed.Chronic prostatitis is always more
Ingeneral,theenlargedprostate moves craniallyinto
difficult to cure due to thehaemato-prostaticbarrier,
the abdominalcavity andno digestive signs areob-
reduced blood supply and organ fibrosis.The antibi-
served.When inflammation is present(due toinfec-
oticchoicehastobemadetakingintoaccountthe
tiousprocessesorabscess),thedigestive signsmaybe
results of antibiotic sensitivity and the pHof the
overexpressed andpainmaybe one of thedominant
prostatic secretion.Highdosagesand prolonged(mini-
features of the disease.
mum 46weeks) treatments are the keys to success.
Since otherconditions such asBPHor metaplasia are
Locomotorsymptoms:Stiffness,posteriorlameness,
often observed simultaneously,castration,anti-
paresis and oedema of thelegscan sometimes be
androgen drugs,progestogens or5-alpha reductase
observedin dogs with prostatic disease.These symp-
inhibitors can be used concurrently.When abscesses
Figure7.4:Prostaticfluidsmearstypicalofacuteprostatitisindogs.Manyinflammatoryneutrophilsbacteria andcelldebris
canbeidentified
Conditions of the Male
79
are present, antibiolics should be used and
Other prostatic conditions
omentalization with prostatic curettage may be nec-
essary if cavities more than l cm in dianeter are
Prostatic cysts: These are often the consequence of
detected by ultrasonography.
prostatic gland obstruction related to calculi, cellular
desquamation in metaplasia, or hyperplasia. They are
Endocrine prostatic conditions
of no clinical significance as long as their size is small
and infection does not occur. As with abscesses,
Benign prostatic hyperplasia: Benign prostatic
omentalization of the cavity is fhe best treatment and
 hyperplasia is observed in entire adult males or ani-
has replaced drainage or marsupialization.
mals that have been treated with androgenic hor-
mones. The prostate is usually homogeneously
Paraprostatic cysts: Paraprostatic cysts are found
 enlarged. The exact aetiology of this condition in the
laterally, outside the prostate and urinary bladder.
dog is not yet established but the condition is closely
 Some may become confluent and contain large amounts
rclatcd to thc cffccts of testostcronc affer transform-
Of fluid. Thc origin of thc cysts rcmains unclear, but
ation into dihydrotestosterone by the 5-alpha reduct-
suggests vestigial (Mullerian ducts of the female)
ase enzyme. Some effects of oestrogens have also
abnormalities. Surgical removal and omentalization
becn proposcd. Prostatic hyperplasia is considercd to
arc recommendcd.
be normal in animals older than 5-7 years and is only
 Prostatic calculi and calcification are sometimes
considered a disease when clinical signs related to the
observed but are of no clinical significance if no
hyperplasia arc prcscnt. Prostatic hypcrplasia may be
complications such as cysts, absccsscs or infcction
present in some animals without any clinical signs,
are observedl.
 but may be associated with mild to acute symptoms in
others. Thie symptoms are as previously described.
Castration is the most efficient treatment if the animal
THE MALE CAT
is not required for breeding. Progestogens, anti-
androgens, 5-alpha reductase inhibitors or GnRH
Male cats are not commonly presented for infertility
agonists or antagonists may be useful since they
investigations or disease of the internal or external
block the action of testosterone and of dihydro-
genitalia. Abnormalities of the genitalia other than the
tcstostcrone. These have all been shown to be clini-
cousequences of fighting or bite wounds are not often
cally cfficacious.
young age, thereby dramatically reducing the inci-
Prostatic metaplasia: Exogenous oestrogens adminis-
dence of reproductive system abnormalities.
tered as therapeulic agcnts (this is no longer acceplecl)
Thc malc gcnitalia arc composcd of: the testes,
or endogenous oestrogens from Sertoli cell tumours
epididymides, prostate, bulbourethral glands and the
may cause prostatic metaplasia. The prostate is no
 penis. The cat does not possess seminal vesicles.
longer homogeneous in shape and often cysts or ab-
 scesses develop. Numerous squamous cells are ob-
Congenital and genetic conditions
served in the prostatic fluid. Castration (in case of
Cats have 19 pairs of chromosomes. Not all con-
Sertoli ccll tumours) or withdrawal of cxogcnous ocs-
 genital defects are related to gene mutation and
 trogens is curative.
therefore it is important to separate the two concepls
of genetic and congenital disease. In genetic disease
Prostatic tumours: Prostatic tumours (mainly adeno-
 abnormality of the genome results in a congenital
carcinomas) are fortunately rare in dogs. They may
disease being present at birth. Congenital disorders
be observed in both young adults and old animals and
of sexual development may be related to abnormal
are not directly androgcn relatcd in this species. Their
chromosome numbers or abnormalities of gonadal
appearance and subsequent growth is rapid and in
or phenotypic sex.
A wide variety of congenital defects have been
nosis is rcached. Multinucleate cells can sometimes
described in cats. These may affect the nervous, cardio-
be observed in the prostatic fluid. Adenocarcinoma
vascular, gastrointestinal, ocular, urinary, intertcgu-
tends to metastasize through the external and internal
 mentary, musculoskeletal or reproductive systems. A
iliac lymph nodcs to the vertebral hodies as well as to
complete discussion of each defect is beyond the scope
the lungs. The colonic and pelvic musculatures, the
 of this chapter and the reader is encouraged to consult
lp Aq papeaul aq osie Ae en pue siaiad
the reference list and other.textbooks. Cats with herit-
 extension of the tumours. Thc prognosis is poor and
ablc defccts should not he used for breeding, and breed.
 no satisfactory treatment has yet been found. Anti-
 ing of cats with defects whose hereditability is not
androgens, castration, partial prostatectomy or chemo-
 proven should alsobe discouraged. The main congenital
therapy have been proposed but without major
 Or genetic defects are related to abnormal chromosorne
evidence of success.
nlmbers (XXY, XO, chimaeras anrl mosaics), abnor-
80
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
malities of gonadal sex (XX sex reversal, XX true
castration. Castration will, howcver, prevent breeding
hermaphrodite) or abnormalities of phenotypic sex.
 and will modify urination and reproductive behaviour
and may reduce male odour. When performing sur-
Herimaphroditism and pseudoherimaplroditism
gery, because monorchidismisrare it should always be
True hermaphrcditism and abnormality of gonadal
assumed that the animal is cryptorchid and has two
differentiation are very rare in cats. Abnormal testes at
testes. Often, when not detected in the abdomen, the
thc tip of the uterine horns of a 1 -year-old phenotypic
missing testis can be found in the inguinal ring or under
female blue tabby (male pseudohermaphroditism) havc
thc skin close to the inguinal ring.
1:
been reported. The testes contained seminiferous tu-
The median laparotomy is preferred by the all-
 bulcs lined with Sertoli cclls but no spermatogonia.
thor since the testes might be anywhere in the abdo-
men from caudal to the kidncy to the inguinal ring.
Cryptorchidism
Location of the vas deferens at the bladder neck is
The absence of one or both testes in the scrotum is
probably the easiest way to find the testis. When the
callcd cryptorchidism. This condition must be distin-
vas deferens is observed gentle traction allows the
guished from monorchidism or anorchidism which
testis to be withdrawn from its position and to be
represent the agenesis of one or both testes and are
surgically removed,
exlrcrmcly rare in this specics. Thc normal cat testis
descends into the scrotum prenatally. However, tes-
Acquired conditions of thc genitalia
tes may move freely up and down in the inguinal
canal prior to puberty so the dcfinitive diagnosis of
Trauma
 cryptorchidism should not be made in cats less than
 Injury to the external genitalia of male cats is often
7-8 months of age. Indeed, most cats presented for
 observed and usually results from bite wounds sus-
cryptorchidism at4 months havc normal testes at 5 or
 tained during fighting or mating. Clinical signs in-
6 months. Thc incidcnce of cryptorchidism in adult
clude pain, swclling and haemorrhage. Possiblc
cats ranges from 0.07 to 1.7% and is lower than in
lrethral damage may have to be investigated along
dogs. The hereditary nature of the condition is uncer-
withi any penile wounds. In these cases, catheteriza-
tain although it sccms to occur more commonly in
tion and contrast radiography may frequently be
 certain breeds such as Persians or in certain families.
lseful. Superficial penile lesions will resolve with
The mode of the possible inheritance is not yet clear
 only the topical application of disinfectant or emol-
although a simplc autosomal recessivc scx-linkcd
lient preparations. More serious lesions nay requie
model has been proposed.
surgical resection of the penis and perineal urethro-
Lnilateral cryptorchidism of either testis is more
 stomy. For scrotal lesions such as abcesses, lacera-
than three times as prevalent as bilateral cryptorchidism.
 tions or inflammation, thc gcneral principles of wound
Cnilateral cryptorchid cats are usually normal and
management have to be followed. Local disinfection.
1
fertile; only rarely are there behavioural or pathologi-
repair and drainage, with suitable antibiotics, are
cal complications.
indicated. However, if the animals are not required
1:i
The presence or absence of testes in a male without
for brecding. castration with scrotal ablation is the
scrotal testes can be assessed by the observation of the
treatment to be recommended.
six to cight rows of keratinized penile spines, which
will be absent if the male has been castrated. A hormo-
Infections
nal evaluation can also be undertaken by measuring
Bacterial cultures of the prepuce of normal entire
testusterone conccntrations before andl aficr hCG or
males revcal thc presence of bacteria in more than
GnRH injection. This stimulation test is required be-
 90% of animals. These bacteria are often: Escherichia
cause the testosterone concentration is often basal or
coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis,
close to miniinum detectablc values in nany normal
Klebsiella oxytoca, Streptococcus spp., Enteroccoci,
male cats. Low basal values are therefore not indica-
Bacilluy spp. or Staphylococcus spp. Similar organ-
tive of the presence or absence of testes.
isms can be detected in semen, but are probably of
 It appcars that medical thcrapy (using GnRH or
urethral origin. These bacteria are commensals and
exogenous gonadotrophins) does not induce testicular
do not cause disease. Bactcrial infections in cats arc
descent, and since the condition may be inherited,
usually secondary.
 treatment is unethical and the animal should be pre-
vented from breeding.
Orchitis
When the condition is considered from a therapeu-
Orchitis is rare in the cat but has been described follow.
tic or clinical point of vicw, since neoplasia in the cat
ing testicular infection (tuberculosis, feline infectious
is uncommon (only described once in a cryplorchid
 peritonitis virus or aerobic bacteria). Bacterial infec-
cat), and testicular cord torsion has not been docu-
tions may follow ascent from urinary tract disease, but
mented, treatment is not essential and it is the veteri.
are nmost often due to injuries or wounds, especially bite
narian's choice cither not to do anything or to propose
wounds. Onc or hoth testes may bc involvcd and testicu-
Conditions of the Male
81
lar, spermatic cord and epididymal enlargement may
Balanoposthitis
occur. Brucellosis is rare in cats which seem to be
This condition, which is relatively coinmon in dogs, is
resistant to natural infection with Brucella spp.
rare in cats, but may follow trauma at mating or occur
 Felinc infectious peritonitis (FIP) virus infection
 associated with penile-preputial adhesions (see later).
 may cause scrotal distension due to extension of the
 peritoneal infectious process through the inguinal ring
Penile hypoplasia
into thc scrotum. There may bc bilatcral scrotal swell-
 Penile hypoplasia has been described in cats and is
ing, fever and lethargy.
often associated with early castration or certain genetic
Orchitis due to bacterial inflammation is associated
conditions. The relation of penile hypoplasia and early
with hcat, pain, swelling. redncss and anorexia. Fur-
neutering to urethral cbstruction will certainly be a
thermore, licking of the lesion is usually observed and
major concern for the future. No specific treatment
may lead to an aggravation of the condition, sometimes
exists but urethrostomy can be carried out if the condi-
with self-mutilation.
tion is associated with urethral obstruction.
least 2 weeks may be efficacious; however, if not,
Hypospadias
curative castration may be required.
Hypospadias (characterized by an opening of the ure-
 Herpes virus infection is most commonly observed
 thra on the ventral surface of the penis or in the perineal
 as a mild respiratory disease in cats older than 12 weeks
area) has not been described in cats.
 o q  a e    o
Phimosis and paraphimosis
tomcats, preputial vesicles have been observed in
 o sd su un mn no xa o 
experimentally infected males but this has not been
prepuce are two rarely observed conditions in this
reported with naturally occurring FHV infection.
species. If prescnt, constriction of thc preputial orifice
Testicular hypoplasia
 may be congenital or acquired following infection or
 trauma. The preputial hairs of long-haired cats may
 In a normal animal, the testes are approximately the
same size and are firm but not hard in consistcncy.
entangle the prcputial orificc, causing clinical signs
sinilar to phimosis or paraphimosis. Clipping the hair
Testicular hypoplasia is rarely reported in cats since
should resolve this condition.
the vast majority are not kept entire. It may be cbserved
following infcction with panlcucopcnia virus in the
Persistent penile frenulum
 pre-pubertal cat, in cases of cryptorchidism, and in
Under thc influcncc of testosterone, the surfaces of the
 some conditions associated with chromosomal abnor-
penis and the preputial mucosa separate before or within
 malities. It may occasionally be observed in some
 a few weeks of birth. Failure of separation results in
 generalized acute diseases associated with persistent
 persistence of connective issue between the penis and
hyperthermia or in chronic metabolic disease, both of
the prepuce. Adhesions of the prepuce and penis have
which could cause the destruction of the germinal
been reported in cats castrated at, or earlier than, 5
layer. In these cases, the condition is often bilateral,
months of age. This condition is often not clinically
 with the testes being small and soft. Similarly, poor 
detectable unless the complication of balanoposthitis
libido and variable testicular degeneration leading to
occurs. lt might be advisable to check that penile-
azoospcrmia havc bccn associatcd with malnutrition,
 preputial separation has occurred bcforc castration,
obesity, hypothyroidism and hypervitaminosis A.
Prostatic diseases
Neoplasia
With the exception of a few reports of prostatic neopla-
Transmissible venereal tumours do not occur in cats.
sia, prostatic diseasc is not dcscribcd in cals. This may
 Feline leukaemia virus infection has been suggested
be related to the high incidence of castrated animals but
to be related to some tumours including testicular
also due to the difficulty in examining the organ in this
tumours and tumours of the skin overlying the genital
spccics. Clinical signs of prostatic ncoplasia (often
region.
adenocarcinoma) include haematuria, dysuria,
 Scrloli ccll tumours havc bccn dlcscribed but are
pollakiuria and outflow obstruction. Clinical signs of
 rare and when observed are often associated with an
 intra-abdominal retained testis. No significant clinical
and most often rapidly fatal. Generally, because of the
signs are observed in this specics.
rapid evolution of the disease, this condition is only
detected at necropsy.
Testicular torsion
Torsion of the spermatic cord has occasionally becn
Endocrinological and behavioural
observed. This condition is most often unilateral and is
conditions
observed in both descended and undescended testes in
animals of all agcs. Thc causc is unknown. When
Endncrinological conditions
 observed, acute pain is the main clinical sign.
Plasma testosterone concentrations in adult intact
82
Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Nconatology
lale cats has been reported to range from 0 to 23.5
m b e ro  o  i m sn
ng/ml (0-81.6 nmol/1). Castration causes an immedi-
excessive or aggressive reproductive behaviour. How-
alc declinc in testosteronc to basal (0-0.05 ng/ml;
cver, this could also be rclated to: inability to cxtrude
0-0.2 nmol/l), suggesting that in this species testo-
the penis (rare), nervous damage in the lumbar and
 sterone is of testicular origin only. In intact toms hCG
sacral regions of the spinal cord, painful conditions,
stimulation induces a 3-10 times increase after
infections of the genitalia, orchitis and/or cpididy-
 4 hours and GnRH stimulation a 3-15 times increase
mitis, or other painful or degenerative conditions
after l hour. Plasma oestradiol concentrations in1
affecting reproduction.
！
the normal adult male range from 12 to 16 pg/ml
(44.0-58.7 nmol/l) and plasma androstencdionc froml
0 to 35 ng/ml. Plasma androstenedione is not totally
FURTHER READING
suppressed by castration, suggesting another source
for this hormonc.
Allen WE (1992) Fertility andl Obstetrics irn the Dog. Blackwell
Scientific Publications, Oxford
Endocrine disorders may directly or indirectly
Aronson LR aud Cooper MI (1967) Penile spines of the domestic cat
involve the sex hormones. Hypothyroidism and
theirendocrine-hehavior relations. Anztomica! Record 157, 71-78
adrenocorticoid disorders may affect both libido and
book of Veterinary Iuternal Medicine, ed. SF Ettinger and EC
fertility.
Fcldman, pp. 1662-1685. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Basinger RR, Robinelte CL, Hurdie EM and Spamlding KA (1993) The
prostate, Lr: Texrbook of Smull Animu! Surgery, ed. D Slatter, pp.
Behavioural conditions
1349-I367. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Bloom F (1962) Retained testes in cats and dogs.Motern Veterinary
As much of the normal breeding bchaviour of thc cal is
Pracrice 43, 160
acquired learning. management of the first mating is
Brearley MI (1991) The urogenital system. In: Manuai of Sntall Anima!
important to prevent acquired behavioural problems
Oncology, ed. RAS White, pp. 297-314. BSAVA, Chelrenham
Herron MA (1988) Discascs of the external genitalia. In: Handbook of
which could reducc the ability of the male to matc.
Smali Animal Practice, cd. RV Morgan, pp. 673-678. Churchill
Acquired behavioural abnormalities of reproduction
Livingstonc, New York
 in the cat include the following.
Hombuckle WE and Kleine LI (1980) Medical managment of prostalic
disease. In: Current Veterinary Therapy VII,ed. RW Kirk, Pp.
1146-1150.WB Saunders,Philadelphia
Lack of libido: This may be related to gonadal abnor-
Johnston SD (1986) Disorders of the canine penis and prepuce. In
Current Therapyin Theriogenology,ed.DA Morrow, pp.549-550.
malities, immaturity and insufficient expertise, senil-
WB Saunders, Philadclphia
ity, managcrment conditions, health problems, timing
McEntecK(1990)ReproductivePathologyofDomesricManamaisPp.
of mating, ora painful or stressful previous experience.
224-374. Acadcmic Press, Boston
Mickelsen WD and Memuon MA (1995) Inheritcd and congenital
Excessive socialization with humans may lead to re-
disorders of the Inale and female reproductive systems. In: Text-
 duced libido, or libido dirccted towards humans. In
book of Veterinury Internat Medicine, ed. SJ Etinger and EC
Feldman, Pp. 1686-1690. WB Saunders, Philudelphia
ccrtain breeds, particularly Persians and their rclativcs
Millis DL, Hauptman JG and Jahnson CA (1992) Cryptorchidism and
(Exotic, British Blue), sexual maturity may occur later
monorchidismincats.Journai ofthe American Veterinary Medica!
(3 years or more) so that apparently adult males
Associarion 200, 1128
Onclin K, Silva LDM and Verstegen J (1994) Physiology, investigational 
prescntcd for poor scxual development are in fact
methuds and pathology of thc prostate in the domestic carnivores
only prepubertal.
purls 1&2.Annaies deMedicine VEterinaire138.529-549
Theriogenorogy, ed. DA Morruw, Pp. 821-844. WB Saunders,
Inability and/or refusal to nate: Inability and/or re-
Plhiladelphia
Stein BS(1975)The genital system.In:FelineMedicineaneSurgery
fusal to mate may be a consequence of the previously
described lack of libido. Refusal to serve is often
cations, Santa Barbara, California
ohserved in malcs which havc previously had a stress-
ment in thc dog.In: Currem Therapy in Theriogenoiogy. cd. DA
ful or painful mating. Some males with poor libido will
Morow, pPp. 567-574. WB Saunders, Philadclphia
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Infertile Male
Laurence R.J. Keenan
INTRODUCTION
Although sexual desire may be determined largely
 genetically, environmental influences play an impor-
An infertile' dog is one that has failed to impregnatc
tant rolc in modifying its expression. For this reason
it is difficult to know the frequency of truly genetic
 at the most favourable time during oestrus. Types of
causes of lack of libido. Rare congenital conditions
infertility may vary in severity and duration. Thc
such as piluitary dwarfism caused by a defect in the
infcrtility may bccomplele and permanent, and the dog
 hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis may result in
is then considered to be sterile.
low testosterone levels and poor libido. However,
However, infertility may also be incomplete, par-
 many cases of dogs with poor libido may not have a
tial, or temporary and the dog inay show a rcduced
 genetic basis. Dogs with an innate strong sex drive,
o a     
however, require more severe physical insults, or
rates and/or small litter size. While the effects of
 more protracted adverse environmcntal influenccs,
the condition may be ohvious as has bccn indicated,
 to affect their performance, than those with a weaker
identification of causal factors, specific diagnoses
sex drive.
and treatment ofinfertility nay often be problematical.
Some factors affecting stud pcrformancc includc:
Infertile dogs may csscntially bc divided into two
types:
 Management practices such as attempted
 Those unable to achieve normal mating
breeding with a bitch at the incorrect time of
 ocstrus, ovcrusc at stud, isolation from their
Those unable to achicve normal fertilization.
female peers in rearing leading to timidity,
breeding initially with inexperienced possibly
INABILITY TOACHIEVENORMAL
aggressive females, “correction? of sexual
MATING IN THE DOG
interest during racing or show career, and mating
in inappropriate or alien surroundings
Dogs unable or unwilling to mate may suffer from lack
 Injuries sustainedora 'hadcxpcricnce' at a prcvious
of libido and/or physical defcct(s). These may lead to
 breeding or attempted breeding, even though no
lack of interest in mating or mating being disagreeable
physical injuries incurred at that mating remain
to the dog, or mating may be impossible to perform.
Age: younger dogs may show poor libido duc to
delay in onset of puberty and therefore low levels
Lack of libido
 of testosterone. A similar condition may occur in
 This may be defined as an individual's unwillingness
oldcr dogs duc to scnility, overuse or disease
to perform cvilus, a process involving co-ordination of
Systemic disease including those which result in
 several behavioural, psychological and physiological
fever, anorexia and debility but also conditions
steps, i.e. sexual interest and arousal, erection, mount-
such as hypoadrenocorticism or hypothyroidism
ing. intronission and cjaculation. Clinical signs vary
 Drugs: many are responsible for decreased
from complete lack of sexual interest and inability to
testosterone production and consequently poor
mate, to slowness or delay in exhibiting libido or
libido. They include the use and ovcr-rcliancc on
attaining an crcction, aud an incrcasing inability or
testosterone administered for correction of poor
-       ns
libido. This causes a negative feedback on the
tromission. The condition may be inherent, manifest-
pituitary axis, causing a:rcduction in sccrction of
ing itself at the first time of attempted breeding in an
LH and consequently in'the production of
unproved dog or acquired in a proven dog, when it
endogenous testosterone. Other drugs may decrease
usually develops slowly. ln the latter instance, loss of
testosterone by either direct or indirect effect; these
libido may be related to destruction of thc I cydig cclls
include glucocorticoids, oestrogens, progestogens,
by an extraneous agent.
anabolic steroids, cimetidine and ketoconazole
84
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 Poor nutrition may dclay puberty while over-fat
Failure of or incomplete ejaculation
males may bccome lazy or their obesity may
This may occur where there is an inadequate tie, as
exacerbate other conditions which affect
aforementioned. It may also arise where there is fright or
performance, e.g. arthritis.
discomfort during mating or semen collection. Retro-
 grade ejaculation may occur where there is a disorder of
Physical defects
the sympathetic ncrvous syslem or an incompetence in
These conditions may arise from problems related to
the internal urethral sphincter muscle.
the dog or the bitch. Depending on the cause, they have
a variable cffect on thc dog's subsequent reproductive
Abscnce or rcduction in the number or
performance. If correction is possible, many dogs will
quality of sperimatozoa
recover to have a normal reproductive life. In more
One or more of the following abnormalities may be
chronic conditions, thc affected dog will suffer or
encountcred in semcn specimens from affected dogs:
associate pain with allempted coilus. The prognosis is
poor in these cases.
1
Azoospermia: An absence of spermatozoa in the
 Problems encountercd include the following:
ejaculate in dogs with an othcrwise normal
ejaculate
Inability to mount the bitch
This may result from painful conditions of parts of the
Oligozoospermia: A lower number of 
body unrelated to the reproductive tract such as ortho-
spermatozoa in the cjaculate than in the ejaculate
 paedic disease of the back, hips or stifle joints or
of a normal dog of similar size
painful prostatic disease.
Asthenozoospermia: An ejaculalc that contains a
Failure to achieve intromission
high percentage of spermatozoa that do not
Congenital defects of the penis or prepuce, such as
possess normal progressive motility
persistent penile frenulum, penile hypoplasia or steno-
sis of thc prepuce, may interfcre with normal coitus.
 Teratozoospermia: An cjaculate that contains an
 Unsound general conformation may make mating im-
 abnormally high percentage of spermatozoa with
 possible in certain breeds e.g. English Bulldog.
morphological defects.
Acquircd defects, such as trauma, laccrafions and
neoplasms of the penis, and/or prepuce, may make
These conditions may result from congenital or
 tmating difficult or impossible due to pain or inability
acquired factors.
to protrudc the penis or achievc pene tration,
 Premalure full attainment of erection may occur in
Congenital defects: These may be related to the
 gonads themselves, such as testicular hypoplasia, or
mally only attain engorgcment of the bulbus glandis
 result from abnormal dcvelopncnt of the repraductive
after penetration of the vagina and if this occurs toc
system.
early, intromission is impossible.
Testicular hypoplasia is a hereditary or congenital
 Persistent, or a thicker than normal hymen, or where
rlisorder, resulting from a lack of, or marked reduction
an abnormal slope of the female pelvis ('up-and-over
in, the number of spermatogonia in the gonads. To
vagina'), may make penetration difficult. Failure to
achieve the normal tie may also arise from constriction
with immaturity, diagnosis ofthis condition should not
of the female tract duc to failure of the bitch to relax
 be madc until the dog has attained full maturity. The
during the mating process. This may result from frigid-
condition is usually bilateral but may be unilateral.
ity or conforimational defects but is more likely to occur
Because of reduction in the number of scminiferous
when the tine of mating is inappropriate.
tubules, the testicles of such dogs are considerably
smaller than is average for the breed. Leydig cell
function and libido are normal. Semen specimcns are
INABILITY OF THE DOG TO ACHIEVE
 often watery and clcar in appearance because of absent
NORMAL FERTILIZATION
or severely reduced sperm numbers. Less severely
affected dogs may be partially fertile but because of the
 Thcsc dogs havc normal libido and do not appear to
 hereditary nature of thc condition they should not be
have any difficulty in mating. Infertility or reduced
used for breeding.
fertility arises because there is:
Abnormalities in spermatogenesis may have a
genetic origin Motility of sperm may be affected, as
· Failure of or incomplete ejaculation
in the immotile cilia syndrome (Kartegener's syn-
 Absence or reduction in the number and quality
 drome), or specific sperm abnormalities may occur,
of spermatozoa
such as double tails, coiled tails, double hcads and
 Abnormal seminal plasma.
retained proximal droplets. Chromosomal abnormali-
The Infertile Male
85
ties include the XXY syndrome which is character-
damage due to infections may interfere with the
izcd by a phenotypic malc with small soft hypoplastic
blood-icsticle barrier and result in the imrmunc
testicles and complete aspcrmatogenesis. The XX
syndrome, resulting in complete sterility, has been
antigens. This irmmune-mediated disease may
described in several breeds including Cocker Span-
cause fibrosis, sperm granulomas and obstruction
icl, Kcrry Blue, Wcimaraner and Short-haircd Ger-
in the duct system. Possiblc actiological agcnts
man Pointer. Testicles may be undescended in affected
include non-specific bacteria, Brucella canis and
dogs, and some have penile malformations. Congeni-
genital mycoplasms. Any increase in testicular 
tal bilatcral anomalics of epididymidcs and ducti
lemperature will havc advcrsc cffccts on spcrmn 
deferentes will result in azoospermia and possibly the
production, the duration depending on the
development of sperm granuloma and spermatocoeles.
severity of the insult. Examples include high
 Oligozoospcrmia and reduced fertility may be present
systemic fever, scrotal lcrmatitis, orchitis in the
in dogs with unilateral cryptorchidism or unilateral
other testicle and possibly excessively high
segmental aplasia of the duct systen.
environmental temperatures
 Local trauma, dog bites, lacerations, kicks or
Acquired defects: These rcsult in some degree of
blows may affcct local testicular temperature, or
testicular degeneration or atrophy. Depending on the
be responsible for disruption of the blood-
cause, duration and severity, this disorder will result in
testicle harrier resulting in immune-mediated
either incomplete or complcic shutdown in sperma-
disease
togenesis or production of abnormal spermatozoa.
 Drugs and environmental toxins. These may act
Dogs with infertility due to acquired defects of the
on the gcrminal epithelium directly affecting
reproductive tract have, in general, been previously
spermatogenesis. Examples include anti-
fertile. They may then have suffered some insult to the
 neoplastic agents (e.g cyclophosphamide,
reproductive system which changed the characteristics
chloraimbucil, cisplastin), excessive
of thc scmcn to such an extent that they arc now cither
environmental, diagnostic or therapeutic
incapable of producing offspring. or have a reduced
 radiation. Other agents may have an indirect
capacity to do so. Conditions giving rise to such a
effect, resulting in failure of spermatogenesis by
clinical picture may have an acute onsct or devclop
interfering with the hypothalamic-gonadal axis
slowly. Severely affected animals will show azoosper-
(e.g. androgens, anabolic steroids, glucocorticcids)
mia, and an increased percentage of poorly motile and
Neoplasms of the testicle, which may reduce
abnormal sperm in their ejaculatcs. The type of abnor-
sperm production by invasion and dcstruction-of
malities noted include head, mid-piece and tail defects.
 normal tissue and also by producing steroids
Some animals will recover from the original gonadal
with a tlegative feedback effect on the
dysfunction and, in time, recommcnce the formation
hypothalainic-pituitary axis, and subsequent
of sperm. Unfortumately. and more frequently, the
aspermatogenesis.
condition will be progressive and perrmanent, and such
aniinals arc, or in timc will become, completely stcrilc.
Abnormal seminal plasma
Affected animals have variable clinical signs. In acute
Abnormal seminal plasma constituents may originate
painful conditions, such as orchitis, the animal is
from parts of the body unrelated to the reproductive
syslcmically ill. More often affected aninals arc
systcm such as the urinay system, or they may be
symptomless, apart from the local changes in the
present in the semen as a result of traurma, disease or
testicles and the ensuing failure of reproductive func-
infection to the penis, prepuce, urethra or accessory
tion. Testicles of affected dogs vary from being soft
 glands.
and flabby, in protracted chronic cases, to hard and
The significance and relationship of isolated ab-
shrunken in males where evidence of a deterioration
 normalities in the seminal plasma to the development
due to agc is cvident. In some cases of infection or
 of infertility in the dog is unknown.
acute trauma, the testicles are swollen and painful.
The semen should be examined for the following
Neoplastic changes may result in enlargement of the
 abnormalities:
affcctcd tcsticlc, this condition is usually unilateral. In
such animals, the opposite testicle may be normal, or
Reduced overall volume
may show some degree of degeneration.
Prostatic secretion may be reduced due to chronic
Factors associaled with the acquired infertility in-
 prostatic hyperplasia. However, as in other spccics,
clude:
volume of semen is unlikely to be significantly corre-
lated with fertility.
· Infectious agents producing azoospermia by
directly affecting the testiclc, causing orchitis
Abnormal colour
and/or epididymitis. Severe inflammation may
Yellow or green discoloration indicates contamination
rcsult in blockagcs to the ductal system. Local
with urine or inflammatory exudate. Brown discolora-
98
 Manual of Small Animal Reproducion and Neonatology
tion is indicative of haemolysed blood and may be
cytological evaluation and bacteriological culture of
 prcsent in prostatic disease. Red colour indicates fresh
the prostatic fluid. Attempts should be made to distin-
blood and may be present due to trauma to the pcnis
guish prostatitis from urinary tract infcction.
during ejaculation or collection of semen. It may also
 criginate from the prostate and suggest prostatic dis-
 ease. Both urine and frcsh blood are spermicidal and
INVESTIGATION OF INFERTILITY IN
may influence fertility.
THE DOG
High white cell count
White blood cell counts greater than 2000/ml
 Thc infcrtile male dog presents spccial problems for the
indicate infection (see below).
attendant clinician. Inadequate or insufficient
Infection
may result in refuge being sought by the clinician in
The presence of micro-organisms should be
obscure hormonal regimens which have no rational
interpreted together with the clinical signs before
basis. While costs, lack of facilities and expertise
 attaching too much significance to the finding.
available arc limiting factors, clinicians should strive to
Infections can occur in the urinary tract, the
follow a logical sequence of investigation. This entails
epididymis, vas deferens or the prostate. The
the collection of a full clinical history from the client and
significancc of bacterial infection in causing
 a completc clinical and reproductive tract examination.
infertility is a matter of some debate but, in general
it may cause oligozoospermia, teratozoospermia and
History
asthenozoospermia, and may result in thc proruetion
 A complete prcvious and current medical and repro-
of anti-sperm antibodies.
ductive history should be obtained. This will enable the
Most normnal dogs have a variety of microflora
clinician to define the extent and duration of the
present in the prepuce and urethra. These include
 problem. Information should be sought in relation to
Pasteurella, Streptocccus, Staphylococcus,Escherichia
thc hreeding record andl hcalth staius of the dog.
coli, Mycoplasma and Ureaplasma species. These latter
Questions which may be posed include:
 organisms may cause an opportunistic infection in the
more distal portions of the reproductive tract. The pres-
How many bitches has the dog matcd?
To exclude individual bitch infertility, the
indicates infection, whilc Gram-positive bacteria prob-
numbcr of bitches shiould be as large as possible
ably indicate distal urethral contamination.
oed ari s as p poad pm ioa
In general, a total culture count of >10,000 bacteria
When was the last successful mating?
 per millilitre of ejaculate, parlicularly if accompanied
 How many mated bitches became pregnant and
by clinical signs, is significant and suggestivc of dis-
what was thc avcragc litter size? Were any
ease in the urinary or reproductive tract.
 defects noted in offspring?
 Localization of the infection may be difficult. A
Was pregnancy diagnosis carried out on the
positive diagnosis of reproductive tract infcction may
bitches thal did not whclp?
be made if a high white cell count in the semen,
 Has there been any change noted in the
particularly the prostatic portion of the ejaculate, is
conception rate, litter size or lengths of gestation
accompanied by a concomitant negative urine culture
in mated bitches?
taken by cystocentesis. Unfortunately, cross infections
 How was the time of previous matings decided?
can occur between the tracts and complicate the diag-
Was it based on bitch receptivity, or on veterinary
nosis. Hence the importance of clinical signs.
asscssment of the bitch, using appropriate clinical
Bacterial prostatitis may be acute or chronic in
protocols, or was the date of mating decided by the
 nature. Such conditions should be distinguished from
stud and/or bitch owner using imprecise arbitrary
benign prostatic hyperplasia, prostatic cysts and
methods bascd on fashion or breeder's preference?
prostatic abscesses. Dogs with acute bacterial prosta-
Was there a limitation on the number of matings
titis are unlikely to present as infertility cases. Such
to each oestrous bitch?
What was the subscquent fertility of hitches that
signs of caudal abdominal pain on digital rectal exami-
did not conceive? Did they later reproduce
nation. Diagnosis is madc on the basis of clinical,
normally or develop uterine problems such as
laboratory andulirasonographic findings. Chronicbac-
cystic hypcrplasia which would havc rendcrcd
terial prostatitis may be synptonless, although it may
them infertile at the time of mating?
follow acute episodes of the condition. Affected dogs
 Has the breeding behaviour and libido been
may show, or have a history of, hacmaluria, tenesmus,
normal and unchanged? If not, were any
constipation or recurrent urinary tract infections.
mcdication or drugs uscd in an attempt to
 Diagnosis is made from the history, clinical signs and
alleviate the problem?
The Infertile Male
87
 Has there been previous or present illness,
ment, it is prudent to warn the owner against travelling
long distances until a suitable bitch is available. In the
relation to any part of the reproductive tract?
absence of a suitable bitch, it may still be possible to
 collect semen, especially from experienced stud dogs,
Clinical examination
but youngcr less mature dogs, or dogs with poor libido,
A complete physical examination should be carried
may present a problem. Some experienced studs are
out to exclude systemic disease directly or indirectly
 only interested when an oestrous bitch is presented.
affecting reproductive funiction. However, it is the
Lcss cffcctive stimulation may he afforded by thc
examination of the reproductivc system which is of
exposure of the dlog to swabs impregnated with either
 primary importance. Some orall of the following steps
the chemical pheromone p-hydroxybenzoic acid
and procedures may be carried out in suspected infer-
rmethyl cstcr, or the vaginal discharges of a prcviously
tility cases. Although all arc desirable, the circum-
available pro-oestrous or oestrous bitch. The swabs
stances of the case, the cost, and the facilities available
taken from the latter may be stored for future use at
often dictate the extent of investigationl.
-20°C. A1 thc appropriate time, one is thawed out and
applied to the vulva of a substitutc non-oestrous bitch
 Inspection and palpation of genital organs
prior to attempted semen collection.
 The scrotum is examined for testicular content and for
The donor dog is stimulated by the bitch, if avail-
cvidcncc of reccnt or previous injuries, dermatitis or
able, by allowing him to invcstigate, smell and lick the
adhesions to the underlying testicle.
vulva. At the same time the operator massages the
The testicles, which should be freely movable
 penis through the prepuce to cause an erection. Before
within the scrotum, are examined for sizc, symmetry
full erection is attaincd, the prepuce is gently slipped
and consistency. Size should be approximately aver-
back over the penis caudal to the engorged bulbus
age for the breed, and one testicle should not be
glandis. Moderate pressure, using both thumbs, is
significantly larger than the other. Consistency should
applied behind the bulbus glantlis. If possible, touch-
be ‘plum-like', or similar lo the consistency of the
ing the exposed glans penis should be avoided. The
'webbing' between a stretched thumb and index fin-
ejaculate is collected directly into a warm plastic, or
ger. Small, excessively hard, or soft flabby' testiclcs
 glass, bcaker, best held by an assistant. Altcrnativcly.
indicate testicular hypoplasia or degeneration. En-
the dog may be allowed to ejaculate into a graduated
largement or the presence of nodules indicates inflam-
glass tube, through a latex cone or special canine
matory or ncoplastic changes.
 artificial vagina applied after cxtrusion of thc. crect
The epididymides may be palpated at the dorso--
penis. The collection vessel should be covered with an
lateral aspect of the testicles. While areas of swelling.
insulated jacket to avoid heat loss. Minimal use of
nodulcs or abscncc may indicate inflammation of the
lubricants and exposurc of thc scrmcn to latex, is 
epididymis, granulomas or segmental aplasia, negative
desirable.
findings do not exclude epididymal pathology since
The dog ejaculates in three fractions. The first is
significant non-palpable changes may have occurred.
a clcar prc-sperm fraction, during which the dog
To examine the prostate, the indlex finger of one hand
usually, but not always, makes vigorous pelvic thrust-
 is used per rectum to locate the symmetrically bilobed
ing movenents. A dog that is slow to ejaculate may
spongy structure, which is palpable cranial tothe pelvis.
bc cncouraged by gently touching the exquisitcly
The other hand also locates the prostate by abdominal
sensitive tip of the penis against the collection vessel.
palpation, and pushes the organ towards the rectally
The second cloudy sperm-rich fraction follows, Or
locatcd inrlex fingcr by trans-abdominal prcssurc,
accormpanies the pelvic thrusts. Following this stagc,
The penis and prepuce should be the last of the
the dog may attempt to turn around as happens during
normal mating. To assist the dog, the penis can be
made to collect semen, as manipulation may cause the
rotated 180° in a caudal direction and the ejaculation
dog to have an erection. They shoull be examined for
allowed to proceed. The third fraction is the clear
evidence of trauma, infection, abnormal discharges,
 prostatic fraction. This is normally not collected with
neoplasms or congcnital dcfects. Particular attention
thc scmcn sample, but a sample may be collected
should be paid to the ability of the dog to extrude the
separately for culture. The third fraction is identified
penis from the prepuce.
by observing individual clear drops being ejaculated
cvcry 1-2 scconds. Once this is observed, thc dog has
Collection of semen
ejaculated all the spermatozoa that are going to be
Collection should be carried out in quiet surroundings
 produced.
with thc dog on a non-slip surface. The owner should
be requested to bring a teaser bitch which is in ocstrus.
Evaluation of semen
While not essential with every dog, it does make
collection more certain, and ensures a good specimen.
Sperm motility: The beaker containing the semen
In some circumstances, so as not lo cause disappoint-
sample shoull be quickly transferred to a heated water
88
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
bath, or a drop applied to a warm clean glass slide,
Parameter
Measurement
covered with a cover slip, and immediately assessed
pH
6.3-6.7
under the xl00 lcns of a microscopc for forward
Volume:
1-30 ml
progressive motility. A 1:1 dilution of semen may be
1st fraction
1-12 ml
made with 0.9% citrate- or phosphate-buffered saline
 2nd fraction 
1-2 ml
at 37°C to allow asscssment of imotility in concentrated
samples. In some ejaculates, if the first and second
 3rd fraction
up to 20 ml
fractions are collected together, the nature of the first
 Progrcssive motility
%0L<
Normal sperm morphology
>80%
following dilution, the progressivc motility is mark.
Abnormal sperm morphology
<20%
edly improved.
 Sperm count per ejaculate
>200 x 106
WBCs
<2000/ml
Sperm concentration: Although a completc cxamina-
Alkaline phosphatase (IU/)
5000-40,000
tion will include a total sperm count, it is usually
Table 8.l: Normal parameters for canine ejaculate.
obvious from the initial examination of the semen drop
whethcr the sperm concentration is low. Thc concen-
- ais o   a  q  
Semen cultures: Cultures of total semen and prostatic
pending on the amount of prostatic fraction included.
portions of the ejaculate should be carried out, espe-
Many invcstigators attempt to collect only the second
cially if ejaculate cytology suggests infection.
fraction by waiting until the thrusting has finishcrl and
stopping once the third fraction is seen. However, for
Volume and plH ofthe semen sample: These should be
a variety of reasons, including inexperience, the first
determined.
and second fraction may be collected together. Obvi-
ously, this will mean that the concentration of the
Measurement of semen alkaline phosphatase: ALP
cjaculate will vary according to the mcthod used. Fol
 is present in normal dog semen and originates from the
fertility assessmcnt, the csscntial paramctcr is the total
epididymides. Low concentration or absence indicates
number of sperm in the ejaculate which is easily
incomplete ejaculation or bilateral obstruction of the
calculated by multiplying the number in the drop by
epididymides or vas deferentia.
thc total volumc. The samc rcsult will be obtained
whichever collection method is used.
 The normal paramelers for the canine ejaculate are
Precise counts can be carried out in practice using
shown in Table 8.1.
a 1/100 white blood cell dilution kit and Neubauer
Minor deviations from normal do not mcan that thc
haemocytometer. A 20 μul aliquot of diluted scmcn
dog is infertilc. Sometimcs, a less than satisfactory
(diluted according to kit directions) is loaded into the
haemocytometer chamber. The mumber of cells in the
ing excellence in another, e.g. a dog with a semen
central square millimetre x 10° x semen volume is the
samplc with less than the normal total numbcr of
number of spermatozoa per ejaculate. The daily sperm
spermatozoa may be acceptable for at least reduced
output may be determined by collecting daily for 5
stud usage if the spermatozoa have excellent motility.
days until the sperm numbers are stabilized, i.e. when
 In previously fertile dogs, or where specific diagnosis
tlhie extragonadal reserves are depleted. In the normal
is unclear, repeated semen evaluation at a later date is
fertile dog, this averages 400 x 10 spermatozoa over
prudent and essential. This is usually carried out some
5 days.
2 months aftcr the initial cxamination, which allows
time for renewed spermatogenesis to take place.
Sperm morphology: This may be evaluated after mak-
ing a smear of the scmen samplc, similar to a blood
Endocrinological evaluation
smear. After drying, the smear is stained for 5 minutes
Since many hormones are secreted in an episodic
using eosin-nigrosin, aniline blue or crystal violet
manner, caution should be used in assessing single
stain and examined under xl000 magnification with
serum samples. Many of the conditions thal might
oil immersion. At least 100 sperm cells shoull be
warrant such investigation are untreatable, so the cost
evaluated for normality, or the presence of sperm
of testing should be considered. Moreover, delays
defccts.
and exlra cxpense may be incurrcd by non-
 specialized laboratorics having to set up these assays
White cell count: The number of white blood cells
 specially.
(WBCs) per microlitre may bc calculaled by counting
The following protocols may be helpful in estab-
the number of WBCs in the four large corner squares
lishing the source of suspected endocrine dysfunction.
 g Aq n p oq a jo
infection is suspected, a differential white cell count
Testosterone production: The most reliable method of
should be performed.
asscssing testosterone production is the stimulation
The Infertile Male
89
tcst using human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
Testicular biopsy
(44 IU/kg, i.m.) or gonadotrophin-releasing hormone
This proccdurc may bc hclpful with diagnosis and
(GnRll) (2.0 μg/kg, i.m.). Serum testosterone concen-
prognosis in valuable dogs with persistcnt azoospcrTnic
tration should be measured before and 4 hours after the
or oligozoospermic semen. It should not be carried out
arlministration of hCG or before and one hour aftcr thc
in fertile dogs, as it may lead to a decrease in senen
administration of GnRH. Normal post-stimulaticn tes-
quality due to the local inflammation induccrl by thc
tosterone values range from 3.7 to 7.5 ng/ml.
procedure. Specimens can be obtained by either
incision or needle biopsy.
Serum gonadotrophins: Because of the episodic na-
ture of their secretion at least three resting samples at
Incision biopsy: A small incision is made, under
20-30 minute intervals are recommended for luteiniz-
general amaesthesia, through the skin and tunica albug-
ing hormonc (LH) and follicle stimulating hormonc
inea of the testicle, which is located and immobilized
(FSH) estimations. Normal values range from 34 to 85
 as for castration. The small wedge of tissue, containing
and 73 to.84 ng/ml, respectively. These assays may not
 a piece of the seminiferous tubules which normally
be commercially available.
bulge from the incision site, can be 'scooped' cleanly
away by using a fine blade. The specimen should be
Interpretation of endocrine values: Generally, low
placed in a preservative solution, such as Bouin's or
serum testostcronc and LH conccntrations indicatc a
forinol saline prior to examination by a veterinary
 possible hypothalamic, pituitary or testicular dysfunc-
pathologist.
tion. Persistent low LH values following challenge
testing by GnRH, 2.0 μg/kg, given i.m., suggest
Needle biopsy: This procedure can be performed
pituitary or hypothalamic involvement. However, a
under dleep scdation using a finc ncedle directed
rise in LH following such administration, indicates
posteriorly and diagonally within the ventral hemi-
normal pituitary/hypothalamic function and localizes
sphere of the testicle. Atrophy of the testicle can occur
the problem to the testicles. Low testosterone and
following needle biopsy but usually the surrounding
elevated LH indicate primary Leydig cell dysfunction.
tissues remain normal.
Conccntraticns of FSH may rise in the seruin of dogs
with gonadal dysfunction, probably reflecting reduced
inhibin feedback from the abnormal gonads with the
THERAPY AND MANAGEMENT OF
elevation correlating to the severity of the altered
INFERTILITY IN THE DOG
spermalogenesis.
In the absence of other changes, low LII levels
Many cases of infertility may be fransient.if the original
shlould be interpreted cautiously since values are low in
cause of the condition did not have a severe effect, e.g.
normal dogs. They may also be lowcred by certain drug
short fcbrile episodes, mild scrotal dermatitis, minimal
 therapies, e.g. steroids, anaesthetics and sedatives.
physical and psychological stress, some drugs or toxins.
Recovery fron such insults, with return to normal or
Radiography
near normal fertility, may take as long as
 This procedure is carried out on infertile dogs sus-
2-6 months. This is bccausc not only docs spermato
pected of lhaving prostatic disease. Survey radiographs
      si
of the caudal abdomcn may indicate enlargement or
adninu annbai ose Ae i! inq shep Sh irodsunn
irregularity of the gland. The significance of the find-
 generations of sperm to be formed in ordcr to raise vcry
ings, in relation to the effect on fertility, will obviously
low sperm counts. Itisessential, therefore, that a number
 depend on the ovcrall history and agc of the dog.
ofexaminations at intervals of2 months are made before
condemning a previously successful stud as stcrilc.
Ultrasonography
This procedure is principally used in cvaluation of thc
 Poor libido and difficulty in mating
prostate but is being used increasingly to invesligate
Trcatmcnt is dificult and often unsuccessful (Figure
testicular pathology. T'he prostate and testicles are best
cvaluatcd in thc sagittal and transverse planes using a
uted to the developnent of the condition should be
5 or preferably 7.5 MHz real-time sector scanner. An
investigalcd and corrccted. Mating with an experienced
a hss n rod p a s 
 gentle bitch should be encouraged in a suitable and
 prostatc, to climinatc colonic contents which may
unthreatening environment. A shy or timid breeder may
mimic peripheral prostatic disease. Conditions such as
be encouraged to perform if:hc obscrvcs an unaffected
cysts cr abscesses are visualized clearly. Other less
male mating a bitch. Patience, time and constant re-
distinct but echogcnically complcx areas may indicate
 enforcement and mating with a quiet mature bitch may
 neoplasia or areas of infection within thc gland. Ultra-
hclp to rcturn to stud a dog that has suffered injury at an
 sonography of the testicles may reveal non-palpable
earlier mating. Diagnosis and successful treatmcnt of
neoplasms, abscesses or areas of cavitation.
underlying systemic diseases may resultin a dogregain-
90
 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Poor libido
Poor management practices:
 Idiopathic genetic factors
 Incxperienced bitch
Inappropriate mating environment
Impaticncc with immature or
Hypothyroidism
 previously injured dog
 Painful orthopaedic
 Inadequate nutrition resulting in
conditions
 poor body condition
 Simple inherited defects 
No treatment likely to
 Correction/treatment
be successful
Improved libido?
Figure 8.1: Summary of therapy and management of dogs showing poor libido.
ing normal lihido. Thyroid gland function should be
a bitch of excellent past fertility. Changes occurring in
evaluated to exclude hypothyroidism as a factor. Non-
thc vaginal mucosa during pro-oestrus and ocstrus
Steroidal anti-inflarmmatory drugs in dogs with painful
should be observed in the bitch using a speculum;
orthopacdic conditions may allow limited use of such
vaginal smears should be taken and progesterone con-
dogs. Similarly, simple correction of acquired or con-
centration assessed to detcrmine the optimal time for
genital defects of the genitalia, such as phimosis of the
breeding (see other chapters). Pregnancy and litter size
prepuce or persistent fremulum, may be successful. Stud
 should be confirmed at 25-28 days post ovulation.
dogs should be fed a digestible, high nutrient quality,
If the imating is unsuccessful, slidlcs and formalin-
low residue diet to ensure good body condition. Suc-
fixed samples of semen shouldl be sent to a specialized
ccssful treatment of idiopathic or genetically based
institution for evaluation and electron microscopy to
cases of poor libido is unlikely to be succcssful and
identify sperm dlcfects that are not obvious but may
treatment is unwarranted. Testosterone concentrations
preclude fertility. Similarly, definitive diagnosis of
 arc not commonly low in affected dogs and treatment
q a    s p
using lcstostcronc is contraindicatcd. Its administration
submission of a blood sample to a laboratory for
will cause negative feedback to the pituitary gland,
karyotyping of peripheral blood lymphocytes.
causing decreased luteinizing hormonerelease followed
Surgical intrauterine insemination with half the
by a decrease in cndogenous lestostcrane production.
ejaculatc placed at the tip of each horn at the appropri-
Protracted use will also temporarily effect spermmatogen-
m so       a 
esis and result in increased number of sperm abnormali-
lies. The author has uscd GnRH 2.0 μg/kg,i.1m., or hCG
antibodies arc bcing produced.
500 IU s.c., twice weekly for 3 months, to stimulate
Immunosuppressivc doses of glucocorticoids to
Leydig cell function and thus enhance endogenous
suppress anti-sperm antibody production have been
used in other species but are untested in the dog. Apart
clinical requirements for testosterone are higher than
from other side-effects, such agents may decrcase
normal. Such treatments are speculative and results
sperm production.
equivocal. Scmcn may be collected from valuable dogs
Dogs with poor spcrm and semen quality
nated. However, such practices may favour perpetua-
The prognosis for recovery in such dogs is often poor
tion of the condition in offspring and are therefore
(Figure 8.3). Treatment and management protocols are
considercd uncthical.
directed at rcducing the infertility to thc point where
the stud dog may be used to a limited degree. Some
Dogs with normal semen analysis
treatments may not be practicable due to lack of
This is summarized in Figure 8.2.
facilities/expcrtise or because of expensc. Alterna-
 Individual bitch problems and poor breeding man-
tively, the client may wish to implement all of the
yim shop yons Sugeu Aq papnpoxe aa pinous yuswese
recommendations described below.
The Infertile Male
91
Infertile but with normal scmcn?
Exclude individual bitch bias
Exclude poor semen longevity.
and inappropriate mating time
 and suppress anti-sperm antibodies
Identify obscure
sperm defects
Send to specialist lab for
 evaluation, EM and karyotyping
Matc to proven bitch
 Surgical intra-uterine
Use progesterone assay kit to
insemination
determine optimal breeding time
Glucocorticoids?
 Ultrasonography at 25 days post
ovulation
Figure 8.2: Summary of therapy and management of infertile dogs with apparently nornal serum.
Reduced semen quality
 Severe testicular pathology
Do not use to breed
 Limit and time matings
Exclude infections of testicle, epididymis and prostate
Vaginal or intrauterine
insemination with low
sperm numbers on day
46 post ovulation
Evaluate HPG axis
HCG and eCG to stimulate spermatogenesis
Anti-oestrogenic preparations?
 Ensure full ejaculate
Collect semen at correct temperature
Asscss scmcn alkalinc phosphatasc to cxclude ductal blockagc
Exclude retrograde ejaculation
Repeat exarmination in previously fertile dogs
Figure 8.3: Summary of therapy and management of dogs with poor spern and semen quatity.
Azoospcrmia oligozoospermia and
4. Eliminate such causcs as immaturity, testicular
teratozoospermia
hypoplasia and pathological factors rcsulting in
testicular degeneration and age-related gonadal
 1. Ensure a full ejaculate has been collected and
failure.
rcpcat cxaminations, particularly in prcviously
5. Excludc infcctions of the rcproductive tracl as a
fertile dogs.
potential cause using the protocols described
 2. After collection, take a urine sample to eliminate
above. Treat chronic bacterial orchitis or
the possibility thal retrograde cjaculation into the
epididynitis and chronig,bacterial prostatitis
bladder has occurred.
(CBP)with long-term (4-12 weeks) antibiotics.
 3. Assess the levels of alkaline phosphatase in
The latter condition is recalcitrant to treatment
 several ejaculates to distinguish ductal blockagc
 because of difficulics of antibiotic penctration.
e.g. bilateral sperm granulomas (<10,000 IU/)
 Antibiotics with low protein binding and high
from incomplete ejaculation.
lipid solubility should be selected,
92   Manual or Small Animal Rcproduction and Neonatology
e.g. chloramphenicol and fluoroquinolones.
4. Ensure semen samples are collected and
Determination of the pH of the prostatic fluid
evaluated at the correct temperature to exclude
(usually ncutral or slightly acidic) is important 
cold shock.
prior to treatment since weak base antibiotics
 5. If no spccific causc is identified, the dog should
such as erythromycin and trimethoprim-sulpha
be sexually rested and re-examined in 2 months.
will achieve a higher prostatic concentration.
6. Evaluate the horTuonal-pituitary-gonadal (HPG)
axis with emphasis on Leydig cell function
INVESTIGATION AND CAUSES OF
because low testosterone levels may lead to
INFERTILITY IN THE CAT
morphological dcfccts. There is no cffcctivc
 treatment for dogs with primary testicular failure
A medical and reproductive history should bc ob-
evidenced by low testosterone and elevated LH
tained. In the cat this tends to be obscure, however the
and/or FSH, or for dogs with normal tcstostcrone
intention is lo define the extent and duration of the
.1
and LH, but high FSH. Dogs with low
problem as in the dog.
 testosterone and low gonadotrophins should be
A general clinical examination and specific repro-
checked for pituitary ncoplasms. Where
ductive tract examination should be performed.
gonadotrophic function is low, resuling in
The testiclcs shoull be spherical, smooth, firm,
spermatogenetic dysfunction, a recommended
bilaterally symmetrical in size and shape and non-
protocol is to give hCG at 500 IU s.c. twice
painful. Evidence ofinflammatory or traumatic changes
weekly to stimulate Leydig cell funclion, and
should be noted and trcated using general principles.
equine chorionic gonadotrophin (eCG) at
Feline infectious peritonitis has been associated with
20 IU/kg s.c. three timcs weekly to stimulate
orchitis and the development of testicular degenera.
spermatogenesis. Treatment should be continucd
tion in the cat. Cryplorchidism occurs with greater
for approximately 3 months.
frequency in pure bred cats, and as in other species, is
7. Semen evaluations should be carried out at least
 associated with aspermatogenesis. In severe forms of
one wcck prior to mating as oligozoospermic
orchitis and in cryptorchidism, castration is indicated.
dogs may be made azoospermic by repeated
Testicular hypoplasia with associatcdl azoospcrrmia
matings. Anecdotal success has been claimed for
due to chromosomal disorders such as 38,XY /57,XXY
thc usc of anti-oestrogen prcparations such as
(tortoiseshell and white colour) and 38.XXY have
clomiphene and tamoxifen in oligozoospermic
been occasionally reported in the cat.
men. Some improvement in sperm quality has
The penis is enclosed in a free prepuce and is
 been achicvcrl in a small nurmbcr of dogs using
directed backwards. The os penis is ungrooved. The
the synthetic androgen mesterolone at the dosage
Cranial two-thirds of the penis contain 100-200 corni-
rate of 0.75-1.5 mg/kg.
fied papillae which are believed to stimulate the
 8. Time and limit matings carefully with
female during mating and by so doing increase the
 oligozoospermic dogs. Appropriately timed
mumher of ovulations. Diphallus (double glans penis)
vaginal AI or surgical insemination in selected
and persistent frenulum have been reported. Urethral
bitches may achievc snccess with low sperm
obstruction is quite common in the cat and may be
numbers. Where sperm numbers are >100 x 106
associated with haematoma formation. Unsuccessful
per ejaculate, vaginal Al may be successful if
mating may result in a ring of hair being caught
 pcrformed on days 4, 5 and 6 post-LH peak, as
around the glans penis. This may be removed by
 determined by progesterone assay. If this fails, or
gently cxtruding the penis.
if normal sperm numbers are low but greater than
20 x 10° per ejaculate, surgical AI may be
Collection and evaluation of semen
performed on day 5 post LH peak.
 9. Epididymal aspirates containing viable
Artificial vagina
Up to 20% of cats can be trained in 2 weeks to use the
granulomas have been surgically inscminated in
artificial vagina (AV). This may be rmade by attach-
other species but this procedure has not been
ing a 1-2 ml rubber bulb pipette to a 3 x 44 mm test
reported in the dog.
tube, cutting the end off the rubber bulb and inserting
the adapted apparatus into a60 ml polyethylene bottle
Asthenozoospermia
filled with water at 52°C. The rolled end of the bulb
is stretched over the rim of the bottle for fixation. A
1. Excludc and trcat reproductive tract infections as
icascr gueen may be necessary to stimulatc the tom,
necessary.
who is further cncouraged by firm pressure on the
 2. Exclude incomplete ejaculation.
dorsal part of the pelvic region. On erection, the AV
3. Exclude urine contamination of thc sample by
is slipped on to the penis and ejaculation takes place
ensuring the dog urinates prior to collection.
in 1-4 minulcs.
The Infertile Male
93
Failure of mating
Parameter
Measurement
l esnone pue buunou jo ads ul mooo Ae siu
pH
7.0-7.9
cases where hair accumulates around the glans penis
as described earlier.
Volume:
Artificial vagina
0.02-0.12 ml
Retrograde ejaculation
Electroejaculation
0.233 ml
 Retrograde ejaculation has been reported, but there is
Sperm count:
 no known trcatmcnt.
Artificial vagina
13-143 x 106
 Electroejaculation
28 x 106
REFERENCES
Motility
>80(%)
 Abnormal spermatozoa
<10(%)
Axner F, Strom B, Linde-Forsherg C, Gustavsson I, Lindblad, K and
Wallgren M (1996) Reproductive disorders in 10 domestic male
Tahle 8.2: Some normal paraneters of cat semen.
cats.Journat ofSmail AnimaiPraetice37,394-401
Burke TI (1986) Small Animal Reproducrion and Ferrility. Lea and
Febiger, Philadelphia
Christianscn 1BJ (1984) Reproducrion int the Dog and Car. Baillicrc
Electroejaculation
It is ncccssary to give a general anaesthetic prior to this
'lindall, London
Ellingion JE (1994) Dingnosis, treulment and munugement of poor
procedure. A combination of xylazine 2 mg/kg and
fertility in the sud dog. Seminurs in Veterinary Medietne and
 ketamine hydrochloride 10 mg/kg or metetomidine 80
Surgery (Small Animel) 9, 46-53
England GCw (1996) Reproductive biology in the inale dog. The
μg/kg with ketamine hydrochloride 5 mg/kg, may be
Vererinary Ammual 36, 187-201
used. Atipamamezole may bc uscd 1o acccleratc rccov-
Feldman EC and Nelson RW (1996) Canine and Fetine
Endocrinology and Reproduction, 2nd edition. WB Saundcrs,
ery following collection. A lubricated Teflon rectal
Philadelphia
 probe 10 x 12 cm, with three longitudinal stainless
Johnston GR, Feeney DA, River B, und Walter PA (199t) Diuagnostic
inuging of the inale canine reproduclive organs: methods and
sleel electrodes 5 cm cach in lcngth, is inscricd into thc
limitations.Veterinary Clinies ofNortt America Soull Anima!
rectum to a depth of some 6 cm. Stimuli of 2-8 V and
Praclice 21, 553-589
 5-220 mA are applied in a series of 60 stimuli with an
 Johnston ST (1991) Perforning a complete canine semen evaluation in
asmallanimalhospital.VeterinaryClinics ofNorthAmerica Stall
interval of 2 seconds betwccn cach stimuli.
AnimfPractice 21, S45-55t
The methods used to evaluate semen are the same
Meyers-Wallen VN (1991) Clinical approach to infertile male dogs
with sperm in the ejaculate. Vererinary Clinics of North America:
as in the male dog. Normal parameters are shown in
Smutll Anunai Practice 21. 609-633
Table 8.2.
Olson PN(1991)Clinical approach forevaluatingdogs withazoospermia
r aspermiaVeernryClicfNonhArericaSmalAni!
Praciice 21, 591-608
Other causes of infertility
Root MV and Johnston SD (1994) Basics for a complete reproductive
examination ofthe male dog. Seminars in Veterinary Medicine and
Surgery (Smail Animal) 9, 41-45
Loss of libido
Sakamoto Y, Matsumoto T, Mizunoe Y, Haraoka M, Sakumota M and
New or unfamiliar surroundings, restriction to a
Kumazawa I (1995) Tcsticular injury induccs ccl-mediated
autoimmunc rcspansc to testis. Journat of Urology 153. 1316-
1320
 or permanent loss of libido. Malnutrition or obesity
WallaceMS (1992)Infertility in the male dog.Problems iVeeriry
may have a similar effect. Removal of the cause
Medicine 4, 531-544,
 may result in return to normality but treatment of a
 congenital poor libido is not advised, sincc thc
condition is hereditary.
CHAPTER NINE
Mating and Artificial Insemination
in the Dog
Wenche Farstad
INTRODUCTION
 malc a dominant bitch may show submissivc bchaviour.
 resulting in abnormal orientation when attempting to
Examination of the bitch and stud should be scheduled for
mount or during intromission. A very dominant, al-
abuut 3 wecks beforc mating. Thc smd, ifhc is provcn and
though ocstrous fcmalc may discouragc a subordinate
 has been able to sire healthy, viable puppies in recent
an m g u      a
 previous matings, may not need a fertility examination.
mate with a more dominant stud. When presented with
However, if his last fcrtilc brccdings datc back morc than
a 1mating problem with no obvious physical cxplanation,
a year, or he is okler than 7 years, a fertility examination
and where the timing in oestrus has not been inappropri-
should be carried out. This clinical examination should
ate, such psychological faetors should be considered.
include a general healthi check, semen sample examina-
tion, visual inspection of the penis and prepuce, and
palpation of the prostate, the testicles and epididymides.
MATING BEHAVIOUR OF THE BITCH
The bitch shouldundergo athorough healthi check, should
be vaccinated and treated for intermal parasites. Her vulva
There are often signs of a bitch approaching oeslrus
should beexamined visually, and the vestibule and vagina
 several weeks before pro-oestrus. She may tease or
should bc cxamincd by palpation for the presence of
mount other dogs, both males and females. She uri-
vaginal strings (remnants of thc hymcn) or stricturcs.
natcs morc frcquently, shc may lose or increase her
During oestrus, vaginal smears and/or tests for plasma
appetite or lose concentration when perforiming tasks,
 progesterone should be carried out to assess the optimal
 such as obedience training. To the experienced owner,
time for breeding. This chapter is writlen on the assump-
such bchavioural changcs can be a fairly rcliable sign
tion that these checks have been adequately considered
of an approaching heat.
and correctly undertakenl.
During pro-oestrnus, the bitch is usually more inter-
ested in interacting with othcr dogs. Shc is, howcvcr,
usually passive when approached by the male, or she
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF MATING
may snap or avoid him if he tries to sniff at her
 hindquarters. In late pro-oestrus her behaviour is more
Before attempting to perform artificial insemination
playful, and she will sniff the male, allow him to sniff
(AI) when there appears to be a mating problem, it is
her, and may often initiate a playful chase. At the onset
important both for the dog owner and thc vcterinarian
of oestrus, the bitch will show trve oestrous behaviour,
i.e. she willstand still, wagging her tail and deviating it
nisms of normal mating. The psychology of mating is
to one side ('flagging'). Some females may present their
not always understood, even among experienced
vulva by clcvating it whcn sniffed by the male, and often
breeders. The female should be brought before the
contractions may be observed in the perineal and rectal
stud at his kennels rather than bringing the male to the
muscles. The bitch often lowers her back (lordosis) if
bitch's premiscs; this is particularly important when
the dog puts a paw on her back. If the male is somewhat
presenting a young male for his first mate. It is also
timid, she may back up towards him, poke him in the
preferable for the debutant male to mate with an
side with her nose, paw on his back or even mount him.
experienced bitch, and, similarly, the maiden bitch
 When she is mounted, she will stand quietly, with her
 should be mated with an experienced male.
 hind legs placed wide, vulva elevated and tail flagging.
There are subtle interactions between the bitch and
the dog, individual likes and dislikcs, which may cause
either a stud dog or a bitch to refuse mating with a
MATING BEHAVIOUR OF THE MALE
particular individual. Altermatively, the social status of
thc dog or bitch,thc dominance factor, may be the cause
Young males who exhibit mounting and thrusting
of the problem. Young or subordinate males trying tu
behaviour towards their litterinalcs from a vcry carly
96
Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
age, i.e. 45 weeks old, are normal. These activities are
-aq aun rodoid ueal oi aui au g nuni
...
iour. Also, mounting other dogs or objects in the house.
within reasonable limits, assists in the development of
sexual performance. Such mating behaviour, how-
ever, should bc firrmly discouraged if it is dircctcd
towards humans, especially children.
Pheromones passed in the vaginal discharge and
urine froin the bitch may attract dogs from a consider-
able distance, and the dog's pursuit is persistent when
following a bitch on heat. When housed with females
un hcal, a dog may rcfuse to eat or drink for scvcral
days. Some dogs are also extremely vocal and howl
incessantly for days. Some may try to escape by
Figure 9.I: Mounting.
breaking through doors or windows, digging through
their pen or jumping fences; when prevented from
Thrusting and intromission
escaping, dogs may show destructive behaviour. Dogs
When the penis is in the vulva, the thrusting move-
with prostatic disease, such ascystic hyperplasia of the
 ments becone more powerful and deeper. To accom-
prostate gland, may start to bleed from the penis due tu
plish this, the male usually dances from side to side
emptying of blood-filled prostatic cysts during the
(treading) behind the bitch with one hind leg above the
peak of an adjacent bitch's oestrus. The dog should if
ground, and his body partly elevated above her.
 possible be moved for the time the bitch is on heal.
When a male encounters a bitch on heat, his body
Erection and swelling of the bulb
language usually indicates playfulness with a degree of
 During this phase full erection is accomplished. The
caution, depending on his social stalus. He approaches
completion of the erection involves elongation of the
 the bitch with his tail waggingandears erect, and usually
glans penis, thc bulbus glandis rcmaining fastened to
avoids staring at the bitch. He may stand next to her if
the os penis and the pars longa glandis sliding forward
allowed to approach, and lick hcr cars and mouth. If
over the os penis. The bulbus glandis undergoes swell-
encouraged, he will sniff her, and put a paw on herback
ing, whichisa prercquisitc for thctic orlockofthe penis
 Or rest his head on her back Ifabitch isreceptive, he will
in the vulva. Erection is stimulated by the sight, sound
usually try to rmount her after only ashort foreplay. Ifshe
 and smell of an oestrous female. Erection is due to
is reluctant, he may initiate play by lowering his front,
impulses from the nervi erigentes composcd of
lying down or inviting her to chase him.
parasympathetic fibres from the pelvic and sacral
nerves. These nerve impulses lead to dilation of the
extermal and internal pudendal arteries to the cavernous
NORMAL MATING
body of the penis, dueto contracfionofthe ischiourethral
muscles, and venous flow is prevented. Blood retained
This consists of six stages:
in the sinuscs of the cavernous tissue of the bulbus
glandis causes the bulbus to swell. The contraction of
1.
1. Mounting
 the bulbospongiosus and ischiocavernosus muscles of
 2. Thrusting and intromission - initial erection
the penis and vulvar constriction during the tie also aid
3. Erection
swelling of the bulb ——- release of
in the intensity of the erection. During this phase the
first fraction: clear prostalic fluid
first fraction of the ejaculate, which ranges from 1 to 2
4. Fjaculation -
 release of second fraction: white
ml of clear prostatie fluid, is rclcascd.
 sperm-rich fraction -
- rotation
5. Tie
sperm transport -
- release of third frac-
Ejaculation and rotation
tion: clcar prostatic fluid
6. Break of the tie and dismount.
Fjaculation
When the penis is fully erect, the second, or sperm-rich
Mounting
semen fraction (1-2 ml), which is normally white in
If the dog is allowed to mount the bitch (Figure 9.1), he
colour, is released. The release of the sperm-rich
will usually grasp her around her flanks and push himself
fraction takes I-2 mimutes. Ljaculation is due to stimu-
forward and initiate thrusting movements with his pelvis.
lation of thc sympathetic nerves of the penis. The
An experienced male will usually orientate his penis, with
 semen and the prostatic fluid are expelled by peristaltic
controlled movements, to locate the vulvar orifice. Erec-
contractions in the muscles surrounding the urethra.
tion is only sufficient to enable intromission with the
 particularly the bulbocavernosus and ischiocaverno-
support of thc os penis. Contact with the vulvainifiates the
sus musclcs. The thrusting inoveimcnts normally stop
involuntary powerful thrusting movements.
at the time when ejaculation starts.
Mating and Artificial Insemination in the Dog
97
Rotation
The dog lifts one leg and turns around so as to assume
a tail-to-tail position (Figure 9.2). The tip of thc penis
remains in its original position, dirccted towards the
cervicalos cf the female. The I80? turn is made possible
by a twist of the penis just behind the bulbus. The penis
is very clastic in this area, and the wisting does not secm
to cause any discomfort. Thc pcnile bone of the dog
 prevents occlusion of the urethral opening during the
Crcction and twist. It has been suggested that the rotation
causes occlusion of the emissary vcin of the glans, thus
 preventing detumescence. The dog does not have to
turn. Some dogs prefer to stay parallel to thie bitch, and
others prefer to rest on the bitch's back. This may bc
uncomforrable for the bitch if the dog is heavy, or if tie
Figure 9.3: The fie.
is of long duration, so gently lifting the dog off the bitch
May ease her discomfort.
Breaking of the tie
Before the tie is broken, the swelling of the bulbus
The tie
 goes down, allowing the partners to move apart
During the tie, the dogs usually stand quietly in a tail-
quictly. The male usually licks his penis, which then
to-tail position (Figure 9.3), and the last of the three
 retracts into the prepuce. Hairs from the abdomen and
fractions of the ejaculate, 5--20 ml of prostatic fluid,
 prepuce can be trapped between the penis and the
is released. Rhythmic contractions in the dog's peri-
 preputial orifice during the retraction, or the skin on
 neal musclcs along with pumping mavcments of the
the outer laycr of the prcpuce may be rollcrl inward.
tail are observed.
This may cause pain to the dog, and he may then
The duration of the tie varies from 10 to 45 minutes,
require some assistance. Normally, full retraction can
but thc author has observed ties lasting up to one hour.
The length of the tie does not seem to have any
2-3 cm behind the orifice, causing eversion of the
influence on whether conception results. Conception
 preputial orifice.
canl occur even without a tie as long as the second
Aftcr mating the female will usually lick her vulva
(sperm-rich) fraction has been ejaculated, usually ac-
vigorously because there is some discharge uf semen at
complished just after the dog has ceased thrusting.
 this time. Some bitches may show great excitement by
Some claim that no tic inay reduce litter size; howcver,
jumping and playing or rolling around on the ground.
this is not the experience of the author.
 There is no need to try to restrain thc bitch, or refuse to
An experienced bitch will stand firmly and quietly
allow her to urinate at this time, because most of the
through mounting, intromission and tie. Occasionally
semen has already been transporled into the uterus and
the bitch may try to walk away and the male is pullcd
oviducts during the tic.
along with her. Usually this causes no harm to bitch or
stud, but it is wise to hold the bitch by the collar to keep
her quiet.
ABNORMAL MATING
Mating problems due to the bitch
ai no ya a  pas aq A sd un
dog. Attempting to mate a bitch too carly in cestrus,
although she may accept mounting and attempts of
intromission, often leads to difficulties because the
vulva is too oedematous. This results in failure to
accomplish the tie because the male is unable to thrust
the penis far enough inside the vagina. Often, trying
with inexperienced animals, where assisting the dog
the penis into thc vulva canbe helpful.
    e  s s
tured and placid may panic during intromission and
become very aggressive towards the dog or cven try lo
bite the owner. Such bitches should be calmed with an
Figure 9.2: Rotation.
01 no op eu oi infu pioat o reznbuen aedodde
98
Manual ofSmall Animal Reproduction andNeonatology
the peoplehandling thebitch.Artificial insemination
problems (spondylosis inBoxers) or hind leg prob-
may be considered in such cases,although Kennel
lems (hip dysplasia,stifle disease).A clinical cx-
Club regulationsregarding theregistration of litters
aminationshouldestablish the causeoflack of
born as a result of AI should beconsidered.
libido. Sometimes with psychologically based
Constriction in the annularmusclesof thevagina
libidoproblems,introductiontoanotherfemalemay
either from a ring stricture,or because of a rigid
solve the problem.If the dog becomes excited
hymen,will not permit the entry of the penis to its
enough,hemay thenmate theotherbitch,or allow
full length.Apersistent hymen is a problem in some
semen to be collected for AI.Prostatic diseasc,
maiden bitches,and breaking the hymen with a
urinary calculi,epididymiditis and balanoposthitis
glovedfingermaybepossible.Surgical removal of
must be treated.If the libidoproblem is due to
the hymen can be carried out,but thepossibility of
hereditary diseasewhichmay affect the dog's off-
scar tissue formation must be considered,as this
spring,theethicalimplicationsshould bediscussed
maylead toproblems atparturition.Artificialin-
with the owner,andprobablythe animal shouldnot
seminationis thebest alternativeincases ofvaginal
be bred.
stricture or persistent hymen,provided thereisan
openinglarge enoughfor theinsemination equip-
ment to pass through.According to the author's
SEMENCOLLECTIONAND
experience this type ofvaginal stricture doesnot
PRESERVATION
result in dystocia atparturition.
Occasionally,bitchesexperienceextremeswelling
Semen collection
of thevaginal mucosa duringoestrus,whichresultsin
According to the author's experience,the best condi-
prolapse of this hyperplastic tissue.Vaginal hyper-
tionsforsemencollection arethepresence of a teaser
plasia does not permit intromission,and very often
bitch in oestrus (preferably at the peak of oestrus,
prohibits even the use ofinsemination equipment.
although any stage may work as long as the bitch is
Conservative treatment withmild astringentand disin-
held firmlysoasnot tocauseinjury tothedog),aquict
fectantsolutionsisrecommended,whilstoccasionally
room with as few people aspossible present,and
surgicalremovalof theprotrudingmucosaisneces-
accessto outsiderunsif thedogpreferstoplaywiththe
sary.An uncomplicated vaginal hyperplasia will usu-
bitchbeforecollection.Thesemenqualityimproves,
ally recede afteroestrus;thereis a tendency,however,
and the speedof thewholeprocedureisgreatlyfacili-
forabitch toexperiencevaginal hyperplasia at sub-
tatedin these circumstances.
sequent oestrus.Mating of bitches prone to vaginal
The dogisallowedtomount the teaserbitch,and as
hyperplasia istherefore notrecommended.
soon as the penis protrudes from the prepuce,the
prepuceismanuallydeflectedback and thebulbus
Matingproblemsdue to the dog
glandis is held in a firm grip.The enlarged bulbus is
One of the more commonmating problems of the dog
held inhecollectorshand,and thecollector'sfingers
is caused by inexperience.A novice male may start
constrict at thepoint of torsion,caudal to the bulbus
thrustingtowardsthe anusorbelowthevulva,oreven
(Figure 9.4).
in the airbecause he isinexperienced in the clasping
technique.Youngmalesmaybe so excited that the
bulbus swellsbeforeintromissionmaking intromis-
sion impossible.During this time,prostatic fluid is
released,nd some cleardischargemay dripfromth
urethral orifice.Usually the sperm-rich fraction has
notbeen ejaculated atthis time.Removingthe dog
from thebitchfor half an hourmay calm him enough
for a second try.If thisisnot successful,AIis thebest
alternative.
Inrare cases,young males are not able to mate a
bitch due to phimosis,i.e.adhesion between the pre-
puce and the penis,orbecause of a stricture of the
preputial orifice. Surgical correction is necessary in
both cases.
Absence of libido can be due toavariety of
factors,such as dislike of the partner or incorrect
mating time (psychological),testicular hypoplasia,
Figure9.4:Semencollection using a teaserbitch.The
prostatic problems,urethral calculi (rare),balano-
prepuceismanuallydeflectedbackandthebulbusisheldin
posthitis,pididymiditis,vertebral arthrosis(com-
afirmgripwhile thecollector'sfingers are constricting at
thepointof torsion.Semenmaybecollecteddirectly intoa
mon in Dachshunds,Pekingese),lower back
disposableplasticfunnel.
Mating and Artificial Insemination in the Dog
99
Collection should not be attemptcd until full erec-
tion has occurred and the thrusting movements have
ceased. The collecting device used by the author is a
single-use, funnel-shaped plastic cup. If thc dog is
allowed to thrust his penis into this device, rupture of
the small vessels on the surface of the corona may
 occur, and blood is mixed with the semen. Older dogs,
especially, are prone to blccding. It is not known
whether blood is harmful to the spermatozoa, but the
 presence of blood makes semen evaluation extremely
difficult. Where the ejaculatc is well fractionated, only
the sperm-rich fraction (second fraction) should be
collected if the semen is to be frozen. Where the scincn
will be used immcdiatcly for artificial inscmination,
1-2 ml of prostatic fluid can be allowed into the funnel,
and the semen may be used directly for Al with no
Figure 9.5: SpermucueTM photometer calibrated to measure
the density (spermatozoa/ml) in fresh undliluted dog and
other extender.
fox semen.
Semen examination
magnification. Progressive motility (numbcr of sper-
The scmcn should bc cxamined for colour. Normal
matozoa with a forward progression) is estimated to
colour is from that of skimmed milk to slightly cream
the nearest 5% and values are normally from 75% to
coloured, depending on density, never yellow (indicat-
90% in undiluted freshly collcctcd scmcn. If the
ing contaminaticn with urine or inflammatory cells) or
semen has been frozen, progressive motility post-
red (blood tinged). If the colour is abnormal, the cause
thaw should have a minimum value of 50% if the
should be established by microscopic evaluation. Se-
semen is to be used for Al. The speed of forward
men with leucocytes, erythrocytes or urine may be
 progression (velocity) is also important. This can be
washed by centrifugation at 300-1000 rpm for 5 min-
subjectively scored on a scale from 0 to 5, where 0
utes in TRIS extender (Table 9.1) or saline with anti-
denotes no forward progression (necrospermia) and
biotics, the supernatant discarded and the pellct
 5 the most rapid forward movement. Normal fertile
resuspended in fresh extender with antibiotics. The
 dog semen usually has a grade between 3 and 5, and
semen may then be used for AI.
seinen used for cryopreservation should show fast
forward progrcssion, i.e. preferably grade 5 prior to
Trishydroxymethyl
6.056 g
 aminomethane
and the use of a warming plate for thie microscope or
3.400 g
usc of prcwarmed slides is recommcnded, parlicu-
Citric acid
larly when frozen-thawed semen is examined. Ex-
2.500 g
Fructose
tenders, especially those containing glycerol, also
Double-distilled water
200 ml
depress motility temporarily; howcver, motility is
 usually restored in the semen after 2-3 minutes on
Crystalline penicillin
200 000 IU
the warining slide.
Dihydrostreptomycin
0.2 g
 Recently, a test for mcmbrane integrity and viabil-
ity of canine spermatozoa, called the hypo-osmotic
Add egg yolk jusl prior to dilulion with water (20% v/v):
swelling test (HOST), has been evaluated. This test
2 ml egg yolk to 8 ml of TRIS base + antibiotics
involves incubation of spermatozoa in hypo-osmotic
Table 9.1:TRIS exrenderwithout glycerolfor transportof
media which results in swelling of the tail of sperma-
fresh chilled semen. Buffer base with antibiotics.
 tozoa. It has been found to correlate well with gross
Assessment of semen density, i.e. spermatozoal
concentration.
concentration, can be made by using a counting cham-
Morphology (M) is given as the percentage of
ber and a microscope or by using photometers cali-
spcrmatozoa with normal appearancc and is cvaluated
 brated for dog semen, such as thc onc in Figure 9.5
at x200 magnilication in a phase contrast microscope,
which is used in the author's laboratory. From the
Or following staining with nigrosin-eosin, using light 
volune and concentration, the total number of sperma-
microscopy (see Chapter 8). Normal morphology of
tozoa is calculated. The total number of spermatozoa in
dog semen varies from 65% to 90%. The minimum
 dog semen varies from 200 to 1200 x 10*, with a second
 percentage of morphologically normal spermatozoa in
fraction concentration of 100-700 x 10%ml.
a dog ejaculate required to maintain normal fertility is
Progrcssive motility (PM) is usually estimated
nol established, but usually values below 60% indicate
 some disturbance in testicular or epididymal function.
 100 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
In pubertal dogs, up to 40% of the immature sperma-
following intrauterine deposition of 50-150 x 109
lozoa may havc proximal cytoplasmic droplets. For
spermatozoa
a per insemination, with two
1
semen intended for cryopreservation at least 75% of
inseminations 24 hours aparl.
spermatozoa should be morphologically normal prior
to freezing.
 Evaluation of acrosome integrity is particularly
PROCESSING AND FREEZING OF
relevant to evaluate the morphology of frozen-thawed
DOG SEMEN
spermatozoa. In the author'slaboratory the SpermacTM
stain is routinely used to evaluate the number of
Prcparation and addition of extendcr
spermatozoa with intact acrosomes.
Glycerol is added to the TRIS base solution with
antibiotics and this is used as the freezing solution
Semen preservation
(Table 9.1). The volume of glycerol added is either 12
For artificial insemination with fresh semen immedi.
ml (6% v/v) or 16 ml (8% v/v) depending on the
ately after collection, dilution of the semen is not
freezing regimen, 6% for automatic freezing and 8%
ncccssary. However, if the scimen is going to be trans-
for manual freezing (sec below). The distilled water
 ported with a delay in insemination of 2-3 hours Or
content is adjusted accordingly to either 188 ml or 184
longer, it should be diluted with a semen extender and
ml, respectively, instead of the original 200 ml.
transported at 4°C, as the longevity of dog semen is
The TRIS base solution with glycerol is mixed
considerably longcr at 4°C than at 22C. Thc author
just prior to usc with 20% cgg yolk. Thc cgg yolk is
has used two extenders for transport of fresh semen
obtained from specific pathogen-free hens for exporl,
：
with success (Tables 9.1 and 9.2)
 or from consumer's eggs for domestic use. The yolk
 In a recent expcriment with TRIS-egg yolk, egg
is scparated from the egg white, rolled ovcr a clean
 yolk-cream and egg yolk-milk extenders, the TRIS
piece of paper tissue, gently broken and allowed to
extender was found to be superior to the other two
run into a funnel. Then the yolk is broken down by
wilh respect to preserving dog semen al 4°C. In both
vigorous beating with a glass rod to minimize the size
extendcrs the egg yolk protects thg sperm mcmbrane
of thc egg yolk globules. This rcduces the frcqucncy
against cold shock. Dilution of the sperm-rich frac-
of attachment of sperm heads to the egg globules
tion is usually approximately 1:6, depending on the
which makes semen evaluation more difficult. The
initial semen concentration. It is important that the
cgg yolk is then mixcd with the TRIS buffer which is
volume of diluent is larger than the initial semen
 pre-warmed to 30°C. The mixture is stirred well, and
volume, and if the semen collected is not well
further warmed to 35?C. Premixed ready-for-use
fractioned, centrifugation of the semen is beneficial
TRIS-cgg yolk cxicnder can be frozen and kcpt
 to reduce the content of prostatic fluid in the semen.
frozen for 2 months prior to use. Gentle thawing in a
before dilution.
water bath at 35?C is recommended before immedi-
Chilled transport is obtained by using a thermos
ate use.
flask partially filled with crushed ice. A. plastic cen-
After the microscopic evaluation of the semen
 trifugation tube (e.g. 10 ml, cell culture quality with
according to the criteria described above, the sperm-
rich fraction of the ejaculate is diluted by dropwise
plastic tube should be protected by placing it into an
addition of 35°C extender, until the desired concentra-
insulating vial, such as the plastic vials used for
tion is reached. In the author's laboratory a total
transport of blood samples. The insulating vial with
concentration of 100 x 10* spermatozoa per millilitre is
the tube should then be placed in the thermos flask on 
uscd routinely for frcezing. Howcvcr, when semcn is
top of the layer of crushed ice and tissue paper
of high quality, half that concentration, i.e. 50 x 10°/ml,
wrapped around it. Thc senien should be carefully
may be used.
rewarmed to 30-35*C prior to insemination.
Cooling and equilibration
High pasteurized cream 12% fat
8 ml
After dilution, a sample is examined microscopically,.
20% v/v egg yolk
2 ml
and thc extended semcn is then poured into plastic
centrifugation tubes which are placed into a beaker
Tahle 9.2: The egg yolk-cream extenderforfresh chilled semen.
holding water at 35°C. The water beaker is then placed
into a walk-in refrigerator at 4°C and left. for 2 hours.
Semen cryopreservation
During this time the semen is cooled to 4-5*C, and the
A variety of freezing regimens, extenders and
cryoprotectant glycerol penetrates through the sper-
tha wing protocols have becn published in thc litera-
 matozoal meinbrane.
ture. The author has worked mainly with the
TRIS extender which has given good results for dog
Semen packaging
and fox semen over a number of years, yielding
The semenl is stirred gently to remix after the 2 hours
conception results of 67-80% in dogs and foxcs
Of equilibration and cooling, and is iminediately placed 
Mating and Artificial Insemination in theDog
10L
into 0.5ml plastic straws.This can be done by using
beheldvertically,filter tipdownandsealedendup,
commercially availablefillingdevicesorbysuction
thenshakento allow the air bubble in themiddleof the
through a latex tubewith a mouthpiece.The semen
strawtoescape to thetop.The strawis cut at the sealed
must befillcd in such away that thcpowder between
end and a small drop of semenis placedon a slide on
the twofilter tips at thefilterendof thestrawisfilled
the warming plate for microscopic examination of
withliquid and solidifies.The straws are first filled
post-thawquality.Often,the spermatozoa needsome
half-way,and a small air bubblc is allowed into the
time tostartmoving afterthawing,but 2minutesonthe
strawbefore therest of thestrawisfilledto approxi
warmingplate shouldensurerestoration ofmotility.
mately 1 cm from the top.The air bubble prevents
Since other laboratories may use other freezing regi-
semen from being expelled duc to thc change of
mens,it is important to follow the instructions for
pressure within the straw during thawing.Then the
thawing from the laboratory or company which has
straw is sealed using either ultrasound or commer-
provided thefrozensemen,sincefreezingand thawing
cially available sealing balls or sealing powders.
regimens are closely connected.
Freezing regimens
There are principally two alternatives for freezing.
ARTIFICIALINSEMINATION
cithcr a manual, static protocol or an automatic,dy-
namic protocol, and the glycerol content added to the
Artificial inseminationwithfresh semen
extendervariesdependingonwhich of the twofreez-
Artificial insemination with freshsemenisusually
ing methods are uscd (see earlier for adjustment of
performed because there is amating problem, the male
water content in buffer base). The manual protocol
and the female are some distance apart,one wants to
involves theuse ofapolystyrene box(30x40x30cm)
inseminatemore thanonebitchwithanejaculate,orn
with aremovable metalrackplaced10 cm below thc
order to prcvcnt contact bctwccn bitch and dog for
edge. The box is then filled with liquid nitrogen up to
reasons of disease prevention.
a level 4cmbelow the rack.
The pre-filledstraws,maximum0atatie,ar
Artificial insemination with frozcn semen
placed horizontally on top of the rack,using forcep,
Artificial insemination with frozen semen is usually
andareleft on therackin thenitrogenvapour for8
performedwhenthe distance betweenbitchand studis
minutes.The forceps are then cooled in liquid nitrogcn
such that fresh semen cannot be sent,or because
and applied on to the straws one by one to ensure
completecrystallization(seeding).The straws are sub-
semen prevent themovement of freshsemenbetween
sequently plunged into the liquid nitrogen.This freez-
countries,or the dog is no longer available,but the
ing protocol is called static because thereis aconstant
semen has been frozen and kept in a semen bank.Both
non-regulated flow ofvaporizednitrogen duringcool-
inEurope and the USA,semen banks are established
ing and freezing.
either by the national kennel clubs,university institu-
Automatic freezing involves the use of freezing
tions or private companies.
machines.It is called dynamic because vaporized nitro-
genisletinto thefreezingchamber atvariable speed by
Timing of the insemination
the pre-set freezing programme, allowing the cooling
When fresh semcn is used, the scmen should be in-
and freezing rates to be regulated.One such freezing
seminated on the day ofovulation,with a second
programme using aPlaner1orMfreezingmachinewas
insemination2dayslater.Whenfrozen semenis used,
devclopcd for fox scmcn by Hofino (1988),and is used
its longevityisreduced,and also thecapacitation te
is shorter because the freezing-thawing processinflu-
quantities ofsemen are frozen.Straws are frozen hori-
ences the stability of the sperm acrosome and mem-
zontally on a rack with a removable lid, and several
branes.Therefore with frozen semen,insemination
rackscanbeputintothefreezingchamber.Thefreezing
should be delayed until 12days afterovulation,with
programme follows the regimen:
a second insemination 24 hours after the first.Plasma
or scrum progesterone measurementsprovide a good
-2°C/minfrom+4°Cto-7°C
indicatorofthetimeofovulation,andtheprogesterone
50°C/minfrom-7°Cto-100℃
concentration(measuredbyradioimmunoassay)should
-25°C/minfrom-100°Cto-180°C
bc approximately30nmol/1(10ng/ml)onthcfirst day
and between55and75nmol/1(18-25ng/ml)on the
After the programme is completed, the whole rack is
second day of inseminaticn.Rapid enzyme-linked
removed and placcd directly intoliquid nitrogen.
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) techniques are also
availableforthe assessment of plasma progesterone in
Thawing
the practice laboratory. These may be used to give
The straws are thawed in a water bath (thermos flask)
qualitativeorquantitative assessment of the progester-
at70C for8seconds.After thawing,the straw should
one concentration.Infoxes,it hasbeen shown that two
30
102Manual of Small Animal Reproduction andNeonatology
inseminations usuallyincreaselitter size;however
tip of the catheter (Figure 9.7).The cervical canal is
conceptionratesmaybejust ashighwith oneinsemi-
straight with little folding and quite open during
nation if the timingis optimal.
oestrus,and passage through the canal is usuallyeasy.
Transcervical catheterization is donewhile thebitchis
Inseminationtechniques
standingona table andmostcommonlycarriedout
Freshsemen canbedepositedinto thevaginabyusing
without any sedation of the bitch(Figure 9.8).This
rigidplasticpipettessuchasthoseusedforintrauterine
methodrequires training,but once learned,the pro-
treatment ofcows,but cut to anappropriatelength to
cedure takes only aminute or two andcauses no
fit the bitch,with a 25ml syringe attached Figure
discomfort to thebitch.When intrauterine insemin-
9.6).Syringes withrubber stoppers shouldbe avoided,
ation isused,itisnotnecessary toelevate thebitchs
becausesometypesofrubber canbe toxic tosperma-
hindquarters after deposition of thesemen.
tozoa.
Thevolumeof theinseminate should notexceed3
mlforlargebreeds and 2mlforsmallerbreedsofdog,
inordertoreducesemcnbackflow.Theplasticcatheter
shouldbeinserted steeplyupwardsoverthebrimofthe
pelvis while the vulva is lifted upwards with the
operator's index fingcr.When the catheter is in the
vagina,thecaudalendof thecatheteriselevated,and
shouldfollowthedorsalwallofthevaginatothe
vaginalfornix avoidinginsertingthe cathetcrinto the
urinarybladder.The urethral orifice islocated at the
ventral wall of the pelvic brim.The insertion of the
catheter should be supportedwith the operator's other
hand palpating the cervix through the abdominal wall.
Thesemenshouldbedepositedslowly,andthebitch’s
Figure9.7:Arificial inseminationin thebitch using the
hindquartersshouldbeelevatedfor10min afterdepo-
intrauterinecatheter.Theguidingtubeisinsertedover the
sitionof the semen.Feathering thebitcharound the
metalcathetertoprotectthecatheterfromvaginal
vulvar area isconsideredbeneficialfor sperm trans-
contaminationand thevaginalmucosafromthetipof the
catheter.Thetubealsoaidsinstretching thevagina
port because it stimulates contractions of the uterus.
In the author's laboratory a specially designed
sufficiently tolocatethecervixthroughthe abdomen.The
cervixisfixedinaorizontalositionandthetpofthe
intrauterinecatheteris usedforbothfresh andfrozen
catheteris inserted throughthecervix and into theuterus.
semen(Figure 9.6).This equipmentconsists ofanylon
guidingspeculum anda mctal catheter on towhich a
syringeis attached.The technique involves insertion
of theguiding tubecovering themetal catheterintothe
vagina.Theguiding catheteris inserted into thevagi-
nal fornix,and themetal catheterispushed forward to
the cervical os.The cervix is held by the operators
thumb andindex finger across the abdomen of the
bitch,and the metal catheter is inserted through the
cervical canal afterthecervical osislocatedwiththe
Figure9.8:Inseminationby transcervical catheterizationis
donewhilethebitchisstandingonatable.Inoestrous
bitcheshreisuuallynedtuseedainndt
procedureoncelearnedisperformedinlessthan5minutes.
Therecommendedinsemination doseforfrozen
semenwheninseminatedtranscervicallyintotheuterus,
is 100 x 10° total spermatozoa per insemination,but
Figure9.6:Threedifferent sizesofcatheter areshownwith
litters can certainly be obtained at sperm numbers as
nylonguiding tubes intendedfortranscervical intrauterine
lowas35-40x10spermatozoaperinsemination
artificialinseminationindogs.Atthebottomisasimple
providedthetimingiscorrect and thepost-thawsemen
plasticcatheterforintrauterinetreatment incows that has
beencuttoanappropriatelengthforintravaginal
qualityishigh.The100x10/ml dose isbased on the
inseminationinthebitch.
author's results with field trials with fox semen in
Mating and Artificial Insemination in the Dog  103
which litter size was also an important parameter, and
personal cxpericnce with dog semen. Whcn surgical
silver foxes (Vuipes vulpes). Theriogenology 38, 8S3-865
Farstad W (1996) Semen cryopreservation in dogs and foxes. Proceed-
insemination is performed by laparoscopic exposure
ings, XII Intemational Congress on Animal Repioduction and
of the uterus, fewer spermatozoa may be required, but
Artificial Insemination, Sydney. Anima! Reproductive Science 42,
1-4, 251-260
to the author's knowledge, no controlled experiments
 Farstad W and Anderscn Bcrg K (1989) Factors influcncing the success
havc so far bccn conducted to verify this.
ratc of artificiul inseminution in the dog.Journat ofReproducrion
 Although pregnancies can be obtained from frozen
andFertility39.289-292
HolmoPO (1988)Studlies un Cryopreservution ofFox Spermatozoa
semen with vaginal deposition of the semen, the results
and EvaluationoftheFertilizingCapacilyofFrozen-hawedSiver
arc consistcntly better with intrauterine depusition.
Fox Spernatozoa. PhD thesis, Norwegian College of Veterinay
Medicine, Oslo
Intrauterine insemination also seems to require fewer
 Kieffer IP (1992) Accouplement dans 1'espece canine (mating in the
spermatozoa in the inseimination dose.
canine species) In: Les Inaispensables de I 'Animai de Conpagnie.
When catheterization is not possible, or when the
Reproducrion, cd. C Dumon and A Fontbonne, pp. 67-73.
P.M.C.A.C., Paris
operator is not proficient in the catheterization tech-
Kumi-Diaka J and Badtram G (1994) Effect of storagc on sperm
nique, surgical laparoscopic insemination or insemi-
 mcmbranc integrily and vlher functional charaeteristics of caninc
nation by endoscopic visualization of the cervical os is 
41, 1355-1366
recommended. Surgical intrauterine insemination is
Laing IA, Rrinley Morgan WI and Wagner WC (1988). Fertility and
Infertility in Vererary Pracrice,4h edn, pp. 1012. Balliere-
the most common insenination technique for frozen
Tindall, London
 semen in the USA and Canada. In most Europcan
Linde-Forsberg C(1995) Artificial insemination with fresh, hilled
countries, however, ethical concerns have led to the
cxtended and frozen-thawed scmen in the dog. Seninars in Vetert-
nary Medicine and Surgery (Small Animal 1, 4858
Nothling JO and Volkman DH(1993) Effect of additionof autologous
prostatie fluid on the fertility of frozen-thawed dog semen after
intravaginal inseminatiou. Journi of Reproduetion and Fertiliy
47.325-327
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
Oettle E(1986) Using a new acrosome stain toevaluate sperm morphol-
Ogy. Veterinery Medicine 3, 263-266
READING
Roberts SJ (197i)Veterinary Obstetrics and Genital Diseases
(Theriogenology),pp.609,620.Edwards Brothers Inc., Ann Arbor
Antersen K(1975) Insemination with frozendog semen bused onu new
Michigan, and Ithaca, New York
insemiaaion technique. Zuchthygiene 10, 1
Rodriguez-Gil JE, Moniserral A andl Riguu T (1994) Effects of
Evans HE and deLahunta A (1971) Miller's Guride ia fhe Disseerion of
hypoosmotic incubation on acrosone and tail sructure on canine
the Dog. Revised reprirnt. WB Saunders Company, Philadelplia
spermalozoa.7heriogenology 42,815-829
Farstad W (198da) Ritch fertility after natural mating and after artificial
Rota A, Strom B and Lindle-Forsberg C (1995) Effects of seminal
insemination with fresh or frozen semen. Joural of Snait Anim!
plasma and three extenders on canine semen stoared at 4°C.
Practice 25, 561-565
Theriogenology 44, 885-887
Farstad W (1984b) The corelation between a cyclus coeffcient based
Silva LDM, Onclin K, Snaps F and Verstegen J (1995) Laparoscopic
oncytological indices in the vaginal smcar and circulating proges-
inrauterineinscminationin thebitch.heriogenology43615-623
tcronc in ocstrous bitches. Zuchrhygiene 19, 211-217
Wilson M (1993) Non-surgical artificial inscmination in bitches using
Farstad W (1992) Thc optimum timc for arlificial insemination of bluc
frozen semen. Joumat of Reproduction and Ferrlity 47, 307-311
CHAPTER TEN
Mating and Artificial Insemination
in Domestic Cats
Catharina Linde-Forsberg and Eva Axner
INTRODUCTION
not always displayed. The queen calls, rubs against
objects and people,becomes more restless, but will not
Breeding animals should be free from defects and have
allow the male to mount her. When the queen is in
a gaod tcmpcrament. Only femalcs which havc had
oestrus, she calls with a rcpcatcd monotone, howling.
uncomplicated births and have good maternal behav.
rubs her head, rolls and crouches to the floor by
iou1 should be used for repeated breeding. Soundness
lowering her chest and elevating her pelvis. A scant
and tcmperarncnt should never be compromiscd, and
Jo seanusidau poo aq ose isne sieo panq-aind
treading of the hindlegs and lateral deviation of the tail.
their breed as described in the breed standard. The goal
can be displayed spontaneously or induced by grasp-
should be to produce cvcn litters with healthy kitltens
ing thc cat by the neck and stroking thc basc of the tail
free from defects, rather than a few show-winning cats,
or the perineal area (see Figure 10.1). It is also common
if their littermates suffer from defects or are not typical
for the queen to lose her appetite and urinate more
of the breed. Inbreeding can, in the short term, give
frequently. In some females oestrous behaviour is,
excellent-looking animals but will, in the long term, be
however, less distinct or perhaps absent despite norrmal
detrimental and should be avoided, especially in nu-
waves of active follicles and high concentrations of
merically small breeds.
oestradiol. Vaginal smcars or blood samples for oestra-
 It is inportant to understand the physiology behind
diol assay can be used to confirm oestrus in thesc
reproductive behaviour and the mechanisms of induced
 individuals. The intensity of oestrous behaviour is
ovulation, in order to be able to diffcrcntiate bctwcenl
breed related, with oricntal hreeds showing more in-
problems due to management and true reproductive
tense behaviour than Persians.
 problems. Numerous contagious diseases cause prob-
lems in caltteries and efforts must be made to avoid their
 Mating behaviour
spread. Both the fcmalc and the male should be exam-
 Thc malc is atracted to the femalc by her vocalizing.
ined before mating for signs of disease and to exclude
odours and behaviour, Before mounting he grasps the
the presence of defects that could be hereditary. It is also
female by the scruff of the neck with his teeth and will
 advisable to test the animals for feline leukaemia virus
often trcad with his hindlegs on the fcmalc's pelvis
(FeL V) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV). Cats
making the queen respond with a more pronounced
which are to be mated should bc vaccinated against
standing reflex. Intromission only takes a few seconds
feline herpes, feline calicivirus and feline panleuco-
(3-30 scconds), with the semen being depositcd in the
 penia and should also be treated for both external and
inlcrnal parasites. Andrological and gynaecological
examinalions arc not routinely performed bcforc
mating. but the male's testicles can be easily palpated
and inspection of the penis is also easy to perforn. If
there is a history of rcproductive failure, a more
thorough examination should be carried out, including
assessment of semen quality.
MATING
Oestrous behaviour of the queenl
Oestrous behaviour is induced by rising concentra-
Figure I0.1: Lordosis and treading with rhe hundlegs can be
tions of ocstradiol produced by the growing ovarian
induced by grabhing the female by the scruff of the neck and
follicles. Pro-cestrus is brief, lasting 1-2 days, and is
stroking the base of the tail or the perineai area.
106Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure I0.2: The post-coitai reaction includes rolling and licking of the genitals.
posterior vagina. The fermalccinits acharacteristic yowl,
intromissions or that thc queen was matcd too early or
which increases in magnitude to a sharp cry when the
too late in oestrus. Levels of progesterone over 15
male withdraws. An experienced male will quickly
nmol/l (5 ng/ml) indicate that the queen has ovulated.
rctreat and kccp a safe dlistance from thc qucen, as shc
A prolongcd interoestrus interval also indicates that
will strike out at him if he gets too close. The so-called
ovulation has occurred, although not all females have
'copulation cry” and the rejection of the male is part of
regular cycles.
thc female's post-coital rcaction, which also includes
intcnse rolling and licking of the genitals (Figure 10.2).
Managcmcnt of mating
The queen often allows remounting within 10 minutes
Mating is more likely to be successful if the male is in
but it may take more than an hour. If no post-coital
his home environment, and therefore the female should
reaction is seen, thcrc has probably not bccn intro-
usually be brought to the malc. If the male is calm and
mission. The post-coital reaction is thought to be caused
experienced and the female is very frightened, it can,
by vaginal stimulation by the penile spines.
however, be better to take the male to the female. The
animals may need some time to gct used to each othcr
Ovulation
and the new surroundings, and low lighting often
 The copulation stimuli trigger a release of gonado-
makes them feel safer. If the female is inexperienced
trophin rcleasing harmone (GnRH) from thc
and frightcncd and rejccts the male, shc can be held
hypothalamus which in turn causes pituitary release of
near him, grabbed by the neck and stroked over the
luteinizing hormone (LH) within minutes of copula-
 back to stimulate the mating position and to encourage
tion. When thc concentralion of LH is high enough,
thc male to mount her. Thc animals should not be
ovulation will be induced. Reproductive behaviour in
separated before the third day of oestrus, and at least
cats is characterized by nultiple matings and a single
four matings with a proper post-coital reaction should
mating is often not sufficient to release LH and allow
be observed to make sure that ovulation will occur. An!
ovulation. Some females require at least four
inexperienced male should be allowed to mate an
copulations to release enough LH. The beginning of
experienced and good natured queen tlhe first time he
oestnus docs not always coincide with the ability to
is used, and an inexpericnced female should be matched
 release LII in response to coitus, andnotall queens will
with an experienced male. Some older queens will,
ovulate when mated on the first or second day in
however, refuse a young and inexperienced male.
oestrus, probably becausc thc oocytcs arc not fully
 Some problcms encountcrcd during inating arc shown
matured. The oocytes are ovulated in an all-or-none
in Table 10.1.
fashion, which means that when there is a sufficient
amount of LH, all mature oocytes will be ovulated.
Ovulation occurs 26-29 hours after a mating whcre
SEMEN COLLECTION AND SEMEN
sufficient LH has been released. New data suggest that
EVALUATION
spontaneous ovulation is more common (35% of 20
queens in onc invcstigation) than previously believed.
Semen collection
A blood sample for analysis of progesterone from the
'The two most common methods of semen collection
queen one week after mating will show if ovulation has
from a male cat are by artificial vagina or by
occurred. A basal concentration of progestcronc indi-
clcctroejaculation. Semcn collcction by vaginal lav-
cates that there has been no mating, too few
age after mating has also been suggested. In addition
Matingand Artificial Insemination inDomestic Cats107
Problem
Action
Inexperienced femalerejectsthemale due to fear
Ifgiven sufficient time,mating usually occurs
Female still in pro-oestrus rejectsmale
Wait until female isin oestrus
Poor libido ofmale due to bad experience (aggressive
Try anotherquieterfemale
females)
Aversion to oneparticularmale or female
Change partner or use AI
Persistent frenulum allowing normal mounting but
Surgical correction of thepersistentfrenulum
failure of intromissionduetodeviation of thepenis
or pain
Penile hair rings preventing intromission
Check thepenisandremove hairrings
Dental problemsinterferingwith theneckgrip
Examineanimalsprior tomating
Clinical or sub-clinical disease causing decreased
Checkforevidence of disease and treat the
libido and/or testicular degeneration
underlying disease
Congenitalpoorlibidowithoutotherproblems
Often hereditary,donotuseforbreeding
Table10.1:Matingproblems and solutions.
Figure10.3:Anartificialvaginaforsemencollection is
madefroma cutrubberbulbforaPasteurpipetteanda
small testtube.
Figure10.4:Semen collection by an artificialvagina.
spermatozoa can be collected from the cauda
Themaleisallowed tomount anoestrousfemaleandthe
artificialvaginaisheldinapositiontofacilitateintromission
epididymidisafter castration.
by the tom.
Artificialvagina
The artificial vagina ismade from a rubber bulb fora
Pasteur pipette and a smalltest tube(Figure10.3).The
tomcat isallowed tomounta queeninheatandthe
artificialvagina is held in a position tofacilitate in-
tromission by the tom (Figure 10.4).The disadvan-
tagesofthismethodarethatateaserfemaleisrequired
and,toaccustomthemaletotheprocedure,a2-3-week
training period is usually necessary.This training is
only successful in about two-thirds of males.Collec-
tionwith an artificial vagina can be usefulwhen
workingwithacolonyoflaboratory animals,butisnot
Figure10.5:Electroejaculationequipmentforcats.An
usuallypractical in a clinical situation.
electricstimulatorandarectalprobewiththreeelectrodes.
Electroejaculation
mmx5cm)mountedlongitudinally;thetwoouter
Electroejaculationcanbe usedwithout prior training,
electrodes arelinked together,and thecentral oneisof
butrequiresgeneral anaesthesia toprevent discomfort
oppositepolarity.Itisimportant that theelectrodes are
to thecat.Arectalprobe（1x12cm)connected toan
tightlymounted totheprobe,topreventrectal mucosa
electric stimulator is uscd(Figure10.5).Theprobe is
from becoming trapped between the probe and the
made of non-toxicplastic and has threeelectrodes(1.5
electrodes.Ourlaboratory uses acustom-made50 Hz
108 Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Neonalology
Set
with rigid extension of the hindlegs, indicating that the
1
2
3
electrical stimulus has been adequate. A lack of exten-
Number
sion at 2 V or more usually indicates improper position-
of stimuli
10
10
10
10
10
10
 s   no s  a 
Voltage
proportion of the spermatozoa will be lost into the
2
3
3
4
5
1
一
urinary bladder. Retrograde flow of spermatozoa to the
Table 10.2: Electroejaculation techniquc.
urinary bladderisanormal componcntin thccjaculatory
process of the domestic cat, but is perhaps exaggerated
sine-wavc clectroejaculator with a transformer which
by the use of (o,-adrenoceptor agonists (xylazine and
makcs it capablc of delivcring a continuous range of
medetomidine) for sedation.
voltages between O and 30 V. The unit is connectedi to
 a 220 V source. Voltage and ampage are monitored
Vaginal lavage after mating
with a voltmclcr and an ammcter.
This method is not very practical in a clinical situation.
Following induction of a surgical plane of anaesthe-
since fcw cats can bc expected to try to matc within
sia, the probe is lubricated and carefully inserted ap-
reasonable time afterhaving been brought to the strange
 proximately 7-9 cm into the rcctum, with the electrodes
surroundings of a clinic. Other disadvantages are that
directed ventrally. The penis is extruded by applying a
lavage of the vagina rcquires sedation of the femalc and
gentle pressure at its base, and a small test tube is placed
that the vaginal secretions and lavage fluid may affcct
over the extruded penis. A total of 80 stimuli of between
semen quality. Vaginal lavage with saline at 37°C
2 and 5 V are delivcred for each cjaculate (Table 10.2).
offers, howcver, a possibility to collect a semen sample
'The total sequence is divided into three series of 30
if collection with an artificial vagina isunsuccessful and
stimuli (10 at 2, 3 and 4 V), 30 stimuli (10 at 3, 4 and 5
electroejaculation for some reason is not possible.
V) and 20 stimuli (10 at 4 and 5 V). The cat is rcsted for
2 -3 minutes between each series. The stimuli are ad-
Semeu collection from the epididymis
 ministered for approximately 1 second from O V to the
Spermatozoa lhave also been collected from the cauda
desired voltage, 2-3 seconds at the desired voltage and
epididymidis after castration. The epididymal duct is
an abrupt return to 0 V for 2-3 seconds. Othcr se-
lushcd with a mcdinm or spcrmatozoa are rclcased by
quences, with different numbers of stimuli and voltages
mincing the cauda. Collection from the epididymidis is
have also bccn used. For cach stimulus the cat responds
 only a practical method for collection of spermatozoa
Colour
White: high semen concentration
Translucent: low semen concentration
Yellow: urine contamination, detrimental to semen, occurring more frequently if
voltages ≥8 V are used for electroejacuiation
Volume
 Measured by a variable micropipette. Small volumes can be extended with saline 
 or a buffer before further processing. Examine sperrm rmorphology before mixing:
as differences in osmolality can affect the proporlion of abnormal spcrm tails
Motility evaluation
Use phase contrast, magnification x100 400. Sperm velocity is assessed from 0 to
5, where 0 is used for immotile spermatozoa and 5 is used for spermatozoa with a
 rapid, steady forward progrcssion
Sperm concentration
Measured using a counting chamber (e.g. Birker chanber) under a microscope.
Total number of spermatozoa is calculated from the concentration and the yolume
Evaluation of the
A stained sincar (carbol-fuchsine or nigrosin-eosin) is examined under a light
 proportion of
microscope at x I0o0. Abnormal head-forms include pear-shaped, narrow at the
 abnormal sperm heads
base, abnormal contour, undeveloped, detached and abnormal, narrow and variable size
Evaluation of other
A drop of formol-saline fixed spermatozoa is examined under a phase-contrast
sperm abnormalitics
microscope at x1000. Abnormal sperm forms include proximal droplcts, distal
droplets, loose heads, acrosomal defects, acrosomal abnormalities, mid-piece
abnormalities, single bent tails, coiled tails, doubfe bent tails. In addition the
 proporlion of sperrmatozoa dcvoid of these defccts is estimated (assumed to bc
normal)
Evaluation of other
Presence of leucocytes, spermiogenic cells and degenerative epithelial cells is
 cells in thc cjaculate
cvaluated on a staincd (Papanicolaou) smear
Tahle I0.3: Evaltation of senen. All material that cones into contact with the semen should be prewarned to 37?C to avoid cold
shock of the spermatozoa.
Mating and Arlificial Inscminalion in Domestie Cats  109
for research or for preservation of semen from rare
N-Trishydroxymethyl-methyl-
11.2 g in 150 ml
non-domcstic felids killed by accident or which havc
2-aminomcthanc-sulphonic
distilled watcr*
died in captivity.
acid (Tes)
Trishydroxymethyl-
2.9 g in 75 ml
Normal semen quality
Ejaculate volumcs arc small (<0.01-0.77 ml) bul arc
aminomethane (Tris)
distilled water*
generally larger when semen is collected by
Penicillin B
1000 IU/ml
 electroejaculation than when collected using an artifi-
cial vagina, duc to overstimulation of thc acccssory scx
 Streptomycin
1 my/ml
glands with the former method. The total number of
Tuble 10.4: TesT buffer, *Tes is titrated against Tris to pH
 sperimatozoa per ejaculate has been reported to be be-
7.4.Eggyolkund glycerol areatlded when this buffr istobe
tween 3 x 10° and 153 x 10%; this is usually higher when
Hsed for cryopreservation of semen (ahis isnonecessary
semen is collecled by artificial vagina than by
when the semen is going to be chilled).
electroejaculation. Sperm motility is highly variable
and may be related to the duration of sexual abstinence.
 Dc-ionizcd watcr
76 ml
Osmolality of fresh semen collected with an artificial
Lactose
11g
Glycerol
4 ml
with storage time. The semen is rich in alkaline phos-
phatase and has a pH between 6.6 and 8.77. Males with
Streptomycin sulphate
1000 μg/ml
more than 60% normal spermatozoa are classified as
 Penicillin G
1000 1U/ml
Egg yolk
20 ml
norTmal spcrrmatozoa are classified as teratozoospermic.
The relationship between semen quality and fertility
Table I0.5: Egg yotk-laciose huffer.
has, however, not yet been established for the domestic
cal; males with less than 40% normal spermatozoa may
a simple TesT-buffer without sugars or egg yolk could
still have good fertility under natural conditions. If two
be a suitable extender.
semen samples are collected by electroejaculation within
a short pcriad of time, the sccond sample will generally
Cryopreservation of semen
have better motility and a higher proportion of normal
Cat semen can be frozen in an egg yolk-lactosc cx-
 spermatozoa. A studyof 15 male cats of different breeds
tender (Table 10.5). Freezing in pellets and in straws
electroejaculated twice during the same anaesthesia
gives comparable results regarding post-thaw sperm
showed means of normal spermatozoa of 40.9% in the
first ejaculate and 54.6% in the second, with the first
Zona pellucida binding for this extender. Fresh semen
sample having a higher concentration of spermatozoa.
is diluted 1:3 in Ham's F10 medium (with 5% fetal calf
More than one semen sample must therefore always bc
serum), centrifugcd and rcsuspended in the extender.
 collected for evaluation of fertility.
The extended semen is filled in 0.25 ml straws, equili-
brated for 10 minutes at 22°C and manually lowered
into N, vapour, held at -10°C for 60 seconds and then
SEMEN PRESERVATION AND
frozen at -40°C/min tu -100°C beforc thc straws arc
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
plunged into the liquid nitrogen. The straws are thawed
for 10 seconds in air followed by 20 seconds in a 37*℃
Storage of semen
water bath before the semen is mixed with Ham's F10
Seinen can be stored for a short time (24 48 hours) by
 medium. Other buffers that have been used are TesT
extending it in a bulfcr and by chilling it. For long-time
and Tris buffers. For semen extended in a TesT buffer
 storage cryopreservation is necessary. Most studies have
with 20% egg yolk and 5% glycerol freezing in straws
used in viro methods to test the quality of tlie semen after
is superior to freezing in pellets. Post-thaw motility
storage and there are very few reports of pregnancy results
and tlhie proportion of intact acrosomes decreases after
after artificial insermination with stored cat semen.
freezing and thawing.
Chilled extended semen
Use of artificial insemination
The quality ofchilled cat semen has only been tcstcdlby
Artificial inscnination in the domestic cat has mostly
in vitro methods and the pregnancy results still remain
been used for research purposes, where the domestic
to bc invcstigatcd. A TcsT-buffer (Table 10.4) with
cat is often used as a mgdel for wild felids. The
10j pos uaaq sey lekl %s pue yiox 8o %07
techniqucs for artificial inscmination and storagc of
semen could also, however, be a valuable tool in cat
 the percentage of intact acrosomes decreases during
 breeding programmes. In many breeds of cat there are
storage. Inereasing amounts of egg yolk or sugars are
only a limited mumbcr of hreeding animals. This prob-
detrimental to the motility after storage, indicating that
lem is accentuated by the fact that many male cats arc
110 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
castrated becausc their bchaviour (e.g. spraying) makes
Induction of ovulation
100 IU hCG on day 3 of
 them less suitable to keep indoors. Few individuals in
oestrus
1
a breed, and imbalance between the number of intact
Ovulation
females and males, will sooner or later lead to inbreed-
26-29 hours after
ing dcgcncration and thc apcarance of defects and
injection of hCG
diseases. Freezing of spermatozoa would allow ship-
 Fertilization
 Can takc placc up to 49
ping of senmen world-wide for exchiange of genetic
hours after injection of
matcrial and would also makc it possible to use a
hCG
male's semen for breeding even after castration or
Anacsthesia
death. Artificial inseminations would also consider-
 Can inhibit ovulation
ably decrease the risk of sprcarding disease.
Combined length of the
45-50 mm
vagina and vestibulum
Method of artificial insemination
Table10.6: Aruificial insemination regimen.
Induction of ovulation
The domestic queen has a vestibulum 1-2 cm long
In the absence of the mating stimuli ovulation can be
 and a narrow vagina2.5-3.0 cm long. A 3.5 Frcnch tom
induced by an injection of human chorionic gonado-
cat catheter can be used for vaginal insemination. This
trophin (hCG), which has potent LH bioactivity. Induc-
is inserted 45-50 mum into the vagina as far as the
tion of ovulation is more successful on the third day of
cervix, where the semen is deposilcd (Figurc 10.6).
 Oestrus than on the firstor second day. When 100 1U hCG
The queen should be held with elevated hindquarters
is administcrcd intramuscularly on thc third day of
for 10 minutes after the insemination. At least 5 x 106
oestrus, most queens will ovulate; excessive doses can
s   n a p 
result in ovarian hyperstimulation and degenerated
is deposited in the vagina.
00ocyles. Anaesthesia can inhibit ovulation if adminis-
tered affer the induction of ovulation but beforc thc
 Artificial insemination with frozen semen
ovulation. An alternative to hCG is to give 25 μg gonado-
 Live young can be produced by artificial insemination
 trophin releasing hormonc (GnRH) intramuscularly.
with frozen-thawed cat semen. A pregnancy rate of
around 10% can be expcctcrl after vaginal insemination
Artificial insemination with fresh semen
 in natural and hormone-induced oestrous queens. Poor
Pregnancies have been rcported for both vaginal and
fertility after artificial inseminations with frozen-thawed
intrauterine artificial insemination using fresh cal.
cat scmen can be due to damagc to thc acrosomes after
semen. When semen extended in 0.1 ml saline is
 thawing even if the post-thaw motility is good. Timing
dcpxosited in the vagina both on the day of injection of
of insemination and site of semen deposition are also
hCG and at the time of ovulation 24 hours later, the
important factors; as in thc bitch, intrauterine
 pregnancy rate is higher than if a single insemination
 inseminations give much better pregnancy rcsulis than
is performed on the day of hCG administration. Surgi-
vaginal inseninations, particularly when frozen-thawed
cal intrautcrinc insemination gives the bcst results
 semen is uscd. Surgical intrauterine insemination is not
when carried out 31-50 hours after hCG administra-
allowed in all countries, due to animal welfare considl-
tion. Fertilization can take place up to 49 hours after
erations. A method for trans-cervical intrauterine in-
induction of ovulation. Tranquillizers arc usually not
semination would probably greatly improve pregnancy
necessary to perform vaginal inseminations.
results in feline artificial insemination.
Figure 10.6: Vaginal
insemination in the cat. The
semen is deposited in the
cranial vagina near the cervix.
Mating and Artificial lusemination in Domestic Cals  111
 Semen collection, artificial insemination and pres-
Glover TT and Watson PF (1985) Theeffect af huffer asmolality ontle
survival of cat (Felis catus) spermatozoa at 5°C.Theriogenoiogy.
ervation of cat semen are not widely used in practical
24, 449-456
cat breeding but may well become important tools in
Glover TT url Watson PF (1987) The effecls of egg yolk, the low
the not too distant future.
density lipoprotein fraction of egg yolk,and tree nonosaccharides
on the survival of cat (Felis catus) spermatozoa stored at 5oC.
Anirmai Reprodiuction Science 13, 229-237
Linde-Forsherg C(190 Achieving pregnancybyusing frozen canine
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
chilled extended semen. Veterinary Clinics of Norh America -
Small Antnal Practice 21, 467-485
READING
PlatzCCandSeagerSWJ(1978)Semencollectionbyelectroejaculation
in thc domcstic cat. Jourtai of the American Vererinary Associa-
Axner E, Strom B und Linde-Forsberg C(1997) Sperm morphology is
rion 173,1353-1355
belter in the second ejaculate than in the fist in dornestic cats
Plulz CC,Wildt DE und Seuger SWJ (1978)Pregnancy inthe domestic
electroejaculated twice during the same period of anestlesia.
Theriogenotogy, 47, 929-934
70a.fourloReproutmndFertitty52,279-282
Axner E, Surom B, Linde-Forsberg C, Custavsson I, Lindblad K and
 Pope CE, Turner JL, Quatman SP and Dresser BL (1991l) Semen
 storage in the domestic felid: a comparison of cryopreservation 
cats. Journal of Small Animal Practice 37, 394-401
methods and storage temperatures. Biology of Reproduction
Chakraborty PK, Wildt DE and Seager SWJ (1979) Serum lutcinizing
44, 257,50
hurmuneune ovulatory response loluteinizing hormone-releasing
Sojka NJ, Jcnnings LL and Hamner CE (1970) Artificial insemination
honnone in the esrous and anestrous lomeslic cat. Laboratory
in the cat (Felis caus L.). Laboratory Animat Care 20, 198-204
Anirrut Setence 29, 338 344
Watson PF and Glover TE (1993) Vaginul anutorny of the durnestic
 Dooley MP and Pineda MH (198G) Effect of method of collection on
cat (Felis calus) in relation lo copulation and artificial msenina-
seninal characteristics of the domestic cat.American Jourral of
tion. Journal of Reproduction and Ferility Supplement 47,
Vererinary Research 47, 286-292
355-359
Dooley MP, Pineda MI, Ilopper JG and Hsu WH (1991) Retrograde
Woad TC, Swanson WF, Davis RM, Anderson JE and Wildt DE(1993)
flow of spermatozoa into the wrinary bladder of cats during
Functionality ofsperm from normo-versus teratospermic domestic
elecuroejuculation, collection of semen with an arlificial vagina,
andmaling.American Jowmai afVeterinary Research52.687-691
39, 342
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Pregnancy
bnormalities of
Pregnancy and
regnancyTermination
Gary C.W. England
INTRODUCTION
higher in pregnant bitches and the progesterone pla-
tcau is broader during pregnancy, whilst the luteal
 In the majority of domestic species, pregnancy inter-
phase is slightly longer in non-pregnancy (Figure
rupts normal cyclical activity by increasing the length
11.l). Oestradiol concentration does not differ be-
of thc lutcal phasc and dclaying the return to ocstrus.
Iwecn pregnant and non-pregnant bitches, and oestra-
The physiology of the bitch is unlike other species, in
diolconcentrations tend to increase consistently during
that the luteal phase is similar in length for both
the luteal phase. There may, however, be pregnancy-
Jp leuuieuny su Aouenaid-uou pue Aoueuai
specific increases in oestronc and oestrone sulphate
concentrations. Whilst one study demonstrated an
pseudopregnancy is a common and normal event in the
increase in urine total cestrogen concentration during
bitch, and why endocrinological methods of preg-
nancy diagnosis and methods of prcgnancy termina-
tions, and thc valuc of oestrogen measurement as a
tion are dissimilar to many other domestic mammals.
method of pregnancy diagnosis remains to be eluci-
In the queen, the physiology of pregnancy is similar
dated.
tu that of the bitch, although the cndocrinology of non-
 The pregnant luteal phase lasts approximately 63
pregnancy differs considerably.
days from ovulation to parturition, and the non-preg-
nant phase lasts approximately 66 days. During thic
second half of the luteal phase the progesterone con-
ENDOCRINOLOGY OF PREGNANCY
centration starts to decline and there is a concomitant
increasc in plasma prolactin concentration. Prolactin is
Bitch
secreted by the piluitary and is luteotrophic in nature:
 Following ovulation and the formation of the corpora
by supporting the corpora lutea, prolactin tends to
lutea, there is little difference in progesterone concen-
maintain an elevated progesterone concentration. In-
Iration between pregnant and non-prcgnant biches.
hibition of prolactin sccrction, or antagonism of its
Progesterone concentration is, on average, slightly
actions, results in an abrupt termination of the luteal
Pregnant
Nun-prcgnant -
Parturition
45
-30
-15
0
15
30
45
60
75
90
105
120
135
Days in relalion lo LH surgc
Figure Il.I: Schemalic representation of the changes in plasma progesterone concentration during prcgnancy and non-
pregnaney in the bitch.
 114  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
phase. Prolactin concentration has been shoiwn to be
values are reached one month after mating. In preg-
four times greater in pregnant bitches compared with
nant queens progesterone concentration declines
non-pregnant bitches, howcvcr in some non-pregnant
slowly until day 60, andremains relatively low for the
individuals prolactin concentrations are high. Lutein-
last week before declining abruptly at parturition; the
izing hormone (LH) is another luteotrophic agent in
duration of pregnancy is usually 64-68 days from
 the bitch and its inhibition 1may result in lutcolysis. The
mating. In quccns that havc been malcd but do not
LHIsecretion pattern has not been characterized through-
become pregnant, progesterone concentration is ini-
out the pregnant or non-pregnant luteal phase. Interest-
tially identical to that of early pregnancy but then
ingly, the corpora lutea appcar to he almost autonomous
rapidly rcturns to basal valucs, with the lutcal phase
dluring the first 15 days after ovulalion, and at this time
lasting between 30 and 45 days bcfore they return to
have relatively little luteotrophic support.
oestrus (Figure 1l.2). These queens are said to be
 Relaxin is the only known pregnancy-specific hor-
mone in the bitch. It is present in plasma 25 days after
abscnce of uestrus. Non-ovulating (non-mated or
ovulation and peak values are reached at approxi-
   ou o s ( ai
mately day 50.
 phase and return to oestrus at an interval of approxi-
 In addition to thcse hormonal changes associated
matcly 21 days. Throughout prcgnancy the primary
with pregnancy, avariety of otherphysiological changes
source of progesterone is the ovary, and there does
have been observed in the bitch. Ior example, there is
 not appear to be a significant contribution from the
placenta.
contributes to a normochromic, normocytic anaemia,
 Oestradiol concentration is elevated during the last
that is associated with a significant reduction in the
week of pregnancy, and prolactin concentration is
percentage packed cell volume. Additionally, preg-
elevated in the last third of pregnancy and throughout
nancy-specific increases in plasma fibrinogen and
lactation. Prolactin has a luteotrophic action similar to
 other acute phase proteins are found fromm approxi-
that in the bitch. There are no significant changes in
mately day 20 ollwards.
prolactin concentration dluring pseudopregnancy.
Relaxin is prcsent in the plasma from approxi-
Queen
mately day 25, and, similar to the situation in the bitch,
 In most queens, ovulation is not spontaneous and must
it increases to peak values at approximately day 50.
be induced by coitus or artificial stimulation; however,
 and declines aficr parturition.
in a small number of queens, ovulation may occur
without an obvious stimulus. In the majority, copula-
tion produces a rapid pituitary-ncdiated relcasc of LH.
DIAGNOSIS OF PREGNANCY
Oncc LH concentration exceedls a thresholdl valuc,
ovulation occurs.
The peculiarities of the oestrous cycle of the bitch and
 Usually multiple copulations within a short tine
 queen mean that endocrinological mcthods of preg-
-ns jo ssns HT ue aonpoid oi pambai aue poiad
nancy diagnosis cannot simply be adapted from other
cient magnitude to induce ovulation. Progesterone
species. However, imaging technologies such as diag-
concentration remains basal until aftcr the rmating-
nostic B-modc ultrasonography and radiography are
induced Lll surge, and increases after ovulation; peak
equally applicable to all domestic species.
Pregnant
entration
Pseutloprcgnant
Non-mated -
Oestrus ....
Parturilion
Pse:ildopregnaney
Pro
Pregreir.Ly
-10
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Days in relation to LH surge
pseudopregnancy and afier non-ovuiation in the queen. Oestrus is longer for non-mated, non-ovularing individuats. A variable
period uf anoestrus follows pregnancy. In ull cases the reiurn to oestrus muy be influenced by season of the yeur.
Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Termination  H15
The diagnosis of carly pregnancy in the bitch can be
Body weight bcgins to increase from day 35 onwards.
confused because of the difference between the
and may increase by to up to 50% of normal. Abdomi-
'actual' and the ‘apparent' length of pregnancy. The
nal swelling may be noted from day 40 and this may
onset of parturition accurs over a narrow spread of 3
 progress to ahdominal distension from day 50 on-
days when considered in relation to the time of ovula-
wards. However, these changes may not be obvious in
tion. However, matings that occur before ovulation may
 primigravida or bitches with small litters. Mammary
be fertile should spcrmatozoa reside within the repro-
gland enlargcmcnt is usually obvious fronl day 40, at
ductivc tract "waiting' for ovulation. The result of au.
which time scrous fluid can be exprcssed from the
 glands. Colostrum may be present in the teats in the last
length. Conversely, after ovulation oocytes are not
7 days of pregnancy. Mammary changes may vary
immerliatcly fertilizable and must undergo further matu-
considerably bctween primigravida and multigravida.
ration which takes 2 days. Oocytes may then remain
 and care should be taken when assessing changes in
fertilizable for at least 3 further days. A late' mating, for
 mammary size and secretion, sincc similar features arc
examplc, on thc last day that cggs are fertile (5 days aficr
 common in pscurlopregnant bitches.
In thequeen, body weight and the appearance of the
nancy length. This information is relevant since bitches
 n nd p re a un 
changcs arc less obvious than in the bitch, and may not.
 in relation to an 'early' mating this may resuit in a false
be noticed until after day 50. An increase in the size and
 negative diagnosis, since the examination may be
the degree of reddening of the nipples is conmonly
undlertaken before a positive diagnosis could bc made.
secn fron day 21 onwards. Mammary enlargcmcnt
These problems do not occur in the cat, which is an
occurs from day 58 and colostrum may be present in
 induced ovulator, where in most cases pregnancy length
 the teats in the last 7 days of pregnancy. Mammary
can be estimated from the mating date.
 enlargement and the secretion of milk is not nornally
a feature of pscudoprcgnancy in the cat, and therefore
Absence of oestrus
these signs may be used as indicators of pregnancy.
 In many species the absence of oestrus at 21 days can
be uscd as an indicator of prcguancy. In the bitch,
Abdominal palpation
however, the interoestrous interval is identical in preg-
The technique of abdominal palpation can be highly
nant and non-pregnant cycles, whilst in the queen, the
 accurate, but may be difficult in obese or nervous
abscnce of a return to ocstrus indicates only that
animals, and may be inaccurate if the bitch was matcd 
 ovulation has occurred; it is not specific for pregnancy
early and pregnancy is not as advanced as anticipated.
(Figure 11.2). A failure to return to oestrus after day 45
The palpation features are similar in bitches and
in the queen may bc uscd as a positivc sign for preg-
quccns, although in thc quccn palpation may bc
nancy, although by this time the pregnant queen is
technically easier.
usually easily identified by changes in her physical
The optimum time for the diagnosis of pregnancy
appearance. Some domestic cats occasionally mate
is approximately one month after mating, al which
spontaneously during pregnancy.
time an experienced clinician should achieve an accu-
racy of nearly 90%. Before this time the conceptuses
Behavioural changes
are small tense swellings within the uterine horns and
Both pregnant and non-pregnant bitches may exhibit
may not be detected because of their small size. Fromn
 behavioural changes typical of pregnancy. These are
days 26 to 30, the conceptuses are spherical in outline,
usually associated with an increase in plasma prolactin
 and may vary between 15 and 30 mm in diameter. They
concentration and are not specific for pregnancy. Food
 are tense fluid-filled structures and can be readily
  s e aq s nn 
palpated in a relaxed bitch. From day 35, the concep-
second half of pregnancy; however, it is not uncomumon
tuses become elongated, enlarged and tend to lose their
for prcgnant bitches to have a bricf period of reduccd
tenseness. Thcy may be less easy to palpatc at this time.
appetite approximately 3-4 weeks after mating.
After day 45, the uterine horns tend to fold upon
 In the queen, behavioural changes usually only
themselves, resulting in the caudal portion ofeach horn
develop during late pregnancy, by which time the non-
 being positioncd against the ventral abdominal wall,
pregnant queen will have returned to oestrus, and
-d q  s  no d p  
 pregnant queens can beeasilyidentified by their physi-
tioned dorsally. After day 55, the fetuses can often be
cal appcarancc.
identificd, cspecially if thc forcquarters of the bitch
are elevated and the uterus,is manipulated caudally
Physical changes
towards the pelvis.
It is difficult to count accurately the numbcr of
 conceptuses by palpation, except when performing
uuaid-ou u ueas aq osje Aru sim yonoue 'su!
 an examination at approximately day 28 in a relaxed
aniinals. The teats hcgin to become pink and erect.
and thin bitch.
I16  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Identification of fetal heart beats
acute phase proteins are sensitive markers for preg-
 In late pregnancy, it is possible to auscultate fetal heart
 nancy. The initial rise in these proteins occurs from
beats in both the bitch and queen, using a stethoscope.
day 20 onwards with a peak at approximately day 40.
Tetal hearts may also be detected by recording a fctal
These methods appcar to be reliable, although false
ECG. Both of these are diagnostic of pregnancy. Fetal
 positive diagnoses may result from inflammatory con-
heart beats are not difficult to detect since the heart rate
ditions (such as pyometra, which occurs at the same
is usually more than lwice that of thc dam.
slagc of the ocstrous cycle). Thc rise in fibrinogen
 concentration is now the basis of a commercial preg-
Radiography
nancy test
In both the bitch and the queen, uterine enlargement 
can bc dletected from day 30. At this stage thc cn-
Ultrasound cxamination
larged uterus can be readily identified in the caudal
Diagnostic B-mode ultrasonography can be used
abdomen, originating dorsal to the bladder and ven-
for early pregnancy diagnosis in both the bitch and
tral to the rectum; it frequently produces cranial
thc qucen. Ultrasonography is a non-invasive
displacement of the small intestine. However, the
imaging modality which is safe both for the operator
early pregnant uterus has only soft tissue opacity and
and the patient. The most accurate time to perform
it cannot be differentiated from othcr causes of utcr-
an cxamination is gcnerally onc month after thc
ine enlargement, such as pyometra which occurs at
last mating.
the same stage of the oestrous cycle. Pregnancy
diagnosis is not possiblc until after day 45 (day 40 in
Technique
the queen) when mineralization of the fetal skelelon
In both species, the homogeneous uierus can be iden-
is detectable radiographically. Progressive minerali-
tified dorsal to the bladder (Figure 11.3). In the bitch,
zation results in an incrcasing number of bones that
conceptuscs inay be firsl imaged from 15 days after
can be identified. It is unlikely that the fetuses will be
 ovulation, at which lime they appear as spherical
damaged by ionizing radiation after day 45; however
 anechoic structures approximately 2 mm in diameter.
sedation or anaesthesia of the dam may be required
The anechoic fluid is the yolk sac, and it is not until the
and is a potcntial risk. In late pregnancy, thc number
yolk sac is fillcd with a sufficient volumc of fluid that
 of puppies can be reliably estimated by counting the
the pregnancy can first be imaged. Uterine enlarge-
number of fetal skulls.
ment occurs during the luteal phase, whether the bitch
is pregnant or non-pregnant. During early prcgnancy
Endocrine tests
 the embryo is located adjacent to the uterine wall and
Plasna concentrations of progesterone are not useful
is not imaged. The conceptus rapidly increases in size
for the diagnosis of pregnancy in the bitch and, whilst
and may lose its spherical outline, becoming oblate in
there may be pregnancy-specific changes in plasina
appearance. From day 20 after ovulation the conceptus
and urine oestrogen concentration, these have not been
is approximately 7 mm in diameter and 15 mm in
adequately evaluated to provide a clinically useful
length and the embryo can be imaged. The presence of
pregnancy test.
Thereis, however, a significant elevation of plasma
 mately 22 days after ovulation. The fetal membranes
prolactin in pregnant bitches comparcd with non-
are complicated and may appear confusing
pregnant bitches, and it is possible that prolactin assays
ultrasonographically, although the developing allan-
may, in the future, become useful as methods of
tois initially appears as a nearly spherical structure
pregnancy diagnosis.
Mcasurement of the hormonc rclaxin is diagnostic
 of pregnancy; however, at present there is no available
commercial assay for relaxin concentration.
 In the queen, plasma progeslcronc concentration is
od     
therefore measurement of this lhormone before day 45
is not diagnostic of pregnancy. Whilst a pregnancy-
specific increase of plasma relaxin concentration
occurs from day 25, assay of relaxin concentration is
not possible in the queen.
Acute phase proteins
Figure 11.3: Ultrasound image of the uterus(U)ofa bitch
An acute phase response occurs in pregnant biches at
positioned dorsal to the anechoic bladder, In this inage, the
approximately the time of implantation. This re-
bitch was examined in the standing position with the
sponse appears to bc unique to the bitch, and meas-
transducer placed on the ventral abdomen. 5.0 MHz
urement of fibrinogen, C-reactive protein, or other
fransducer, scale int cm.
Prcgnancy Diagnosis, Abnornalities of Prcgnancy and Pregnancy Termination 
117
within the conceptus which subsequently increases in
size and surrounds the yolk sac. A third fluid-filled sac,
the annion, may be noted lalcr in pregnancy since it is
surrounds, and initially is in close apposition to, the
fetus (Figure 1l.4).
IF
Figure II.6:Utrasound image of a conceprus demonstrating
the C-shaped zonary placenta (P) seen in longitudinal
section.5.0 MHz ransdticer,scale in cm.
Figure 11.4: Uitrasound inage of a singte conceptus,
demonstrating the eimbryo (E), embryonic menbranes
(arrow), and surrounding unechoic allantoie fluid. 5.0 MHz.
transducer, scale in cm
 The most rapid growth of the fetus occurs between
days 32 and 55, and during this time the limb buds
become apparent and there is cleardifferentiation of the
head, trunk and abdomen (Figure l1.5). The zonary
 placenta can usually bc casily identified from this stagc
of pregnancy onwards in both the bitch and queen
(Figure l 1.6). The fetal skeleton becomes evident from
and casts acoustic shadows. The heart can now be easily
identified as the hyperechhoic valves can be seen to
movc. The largc arteries and veins can hc sccn cranially
Figure I1.7: Ultrasound inage of a fetal thorax.
and caudally (Figure 11.7). Lung tissue surrounding the
denonstrating the heart (H), liver, (Lv), lungs (L) and major
vesseis (errowed). 7.5 MHz transducer, scale in cm.
heart is hyperechoic with respect to the liver, and the
 region of the forming diaphragin can easily be identi-
A positive diagnosis of pregnancy can bc madc
fied. From 45 days onwards, it is possible to identify the
 earlier in the queen, and it is possible to identify the
fluid-filled (anechoic) stomach, and a few days later the
fluid-filled conceptus fron 1l days after mating. At
bladder can he imagcd.
 this time the conceptus appears similar to that of thc 
 In late pregnancy, the head, spinal column and ribs
 dog. Embryonic tissue can be imaged from day 14, and
 produce intense reflections and become more easily
cardiac motion is often detected one day later. Fetal
identifiablc. In thc last 20 days of gestation, the kid-
 structures appearsimilar tothose describcd for the dog.
Deys can be seen and in late pregnancy small intestine 
 Whilst ermbryonic and fetal development may appear
may be detected.
 to occur earlier in the queen than the bitch, when events
are related to the fertilization pcriod, they are similar.
In several domcstic species and in humans, ultra-
 sonography is used to determine the gestational age.
This may also be of value in bitches with multiple or
uncertain mating times. Conventionally this is achieved
using measures of fetal size; however, these have only
becn cslablished for a few brecds of dog, and thcrcforc
an alternative approach is to use the time that specific
 Organs can be imaged using ultrasound. For example,
 the fetal bladder is usually anly imagcd during thc last
 20 days of gestation.
Figure I1.5: Utrasound image of a fetus demonstrating the
Accuracy
fetal skull (S) and trunk (T). The heart (arrowed) can be
 It is unlikely that bitches or queens examined in late
clearly identijfied. 5.0 MHz transducer, scale in cm.
- se o i   o
 118 Manual of Simall Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
pregnant. However, in the bitch, early examinations
oestrus do not always correlate with the changes in
 may be inaccurate, especially if conducted in relation
peripheral plasma hormones. However, most com-
to the time of mating and not the time of ovulation (the
monly, the problem relates to a misunderstanding of
latter is often not known by the owncr). This may rcsult
the normal reproductive physiology, and the owner's
 in a false negative diagnosis, other causes of which
desire to have their bitch mated a certain number of
include overlooking a conceptus, or acoustic artefacts
days after the onset of pro-oestrus. Bitches may
produccd by gas or faccal material hiding a conccpus.
ovulatc as early as day 5 or as late as day 30 after the
False positive diagnoses may be the result of confusion
onset of pro-oestrus; therefore, the concept of 'count-
 of enpty loops of smallintestine with early pregnancy.
ing days' is wholly inappropriate. A variety of meth-
Fetal resorption may also produce a disparity between
ods can be used to detect thc optimal timc of mating
 the nurnber of conccpluses imaged and the number of
and these are discussed in Chapter I.
offspring born.
The accuracy of detccting absolute fetal number is
Embryonic resorption
poor, and the grealest accuracy is at the first examina-
The true incidence of embryonic resorption is un-
tion one month after mating. The lowest accuracy is in
known; however, owners frequently complain about
late pregnancy. Most commonly the numbcr of fetuses
bitches which appear to havc bccn pregnant but do not
 is underestimated and the accuracy is reduced in large
suhsequently whelp. This observation is unreliable,
litters.
 although some scientific studies have shown a dispar-
ity between the mumber of puppies born and the number
of ovulated oocylcs, and a recent ultrasound study
DISORDERS OF PREGNANCY
demonstrated that resorption of one or two concep-
tuses occurs in up to 10% of pregnancies. In these cases
 Pregnancy is a normal physiological statc and it is
 thc prcgnancy continucs and normal puppies are born
often necessary to reassure owners of pregnant ani-
at term. These cases clearly differ from those reported
mals that normal exercise and minor injuries will not
by breeders when the entire litter is resorbed; the
be deleterious.
incidencc of the latter is unknown. Therc are many
potential causes of resorption, including embryonic
Bitch
 abnormalities, abnormal matemal environment and
infectious agents (see bclow). Howevcr, the most 
Normal physiological changes
likely cause of an isolated resorption is either abnormal
A number of normal physiologicalevents occur during
 development of the embryo, or competition for uterine
 pregnancy which may he mistakenly thought to bc
space. Trcatment at the timc of a resorption is not
abnormal. In the bitch, thc most common is the devel-
warranted unless the bitch becomnes systemically un-
opment of a normochromic, normocytic anaemia.
well.
associated with a significant reduction in the percent-
agc packedl ccll volume. Itis also common for prcgnant
Fetal abortion
bitches to have a reduced appetite and to demonstrate
Expulsion is the commonest sequel to fetal death in
a small volume of mucoid vulvar discharge at approxi-
the bitch. Mummification is rare and thc majority of
matcly one month aftcr mating.
bitches are presented with a dark red vulval dis-
charge; the aborted material may have been eaten by
Conception failure
the bitch and be unavailable for inspection. Fetal
The abscnce of pregnancy despite an apparcntly nor-
abortion may havc scveral causcs, including fetal
mal mating is a frequent cause for concern for many
defects, abnormal maternal environment, infectious
breeders. In these cases it is not uncomumon for the
agents and trauma. In cases of infectious abortion, thc
cause to bc altributed to an 'in fcction', and vctcrinary
bitch is usually systemically ill. Fetal death can be
surgeons are often persuaded to culture specimens
confirmed using real-time ultrasonography, when
collected fron the vagina and/or prepuce. The isola-
loss of fetal fluid and absence of heart bcats are noted.
tion of hacteria should not, howcvcr, lead to a diagno-
Radiography may be useful for the detection of fetal
jo i i a u s Aan sn j sis
Or uterine gas, overlapping of the cranial bones and
cases the organisms are commensal bacteria. T'he 'treat-
abnormal fetal posture, all of which are signs of fetal
 ment' of normal commcnsal bacteria is unnecessary.
 death. Treatimcnt airmied al prcvcnting an ongoing
inappropriate and may lead to the establishment of
 abortion is inappropriate, and it is best to encourage
resistant bacteria, yeast or fungal organisms.
expulsion, possibly by using ecbolic agents such as
The most common rcason for conception failure is
oxytocin (5-10 IU), combined with parental fluid
mating at an inappropriate time. The fertilization
therapy and antimicrobial preparations. Progester-
period of the bitch is between 2 and 5 days after
 one should not be administered during an abortion
ovulation (see Chapter l), and in some cases tlhe
since it encourages closure of the ccrvix and may
 problcm occurs bccause thc bchavioural signs of
result in endotoxaemia.
 Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Termination  119
The cause of an abortion may be established by
Canine distemper virus: Experimental exposurc of
serological examination of the dam and bacterial iso-
 prcgnant bitches to canine distempcr virus produces
lation from the fetal membranes and stomach: how-
either clinical illness in the bitch with subsequent
ever, in many cases non-specific bacteria, including
abortion, or subclinical infection of the bitch and thc 
Escherichia coli, streptococci, Proteus and Pseudo-
birth of clinically affected puppics. This provides 
monas, arc idcntified.
evidence for transplacental transmission, although the
frequency of this under natural conditions is unknown.
Infectious agents
Canine adenovirus: Infection with canine adenovirus
Brucella canis: Abortion caused by Brucella canis
 during pregnancy can result in the birth of dead pup-
occurs most commonly between days 45 and 55 of
 pies or weak puppies which dic a few days aficr
prcgnancy: however, thcrc may beearly fctal resorption.
parturition. In most cases, however, the virus is in-
or the birth of stillborn or, more rarely, weak puppies.
gested by the neonate and causes subsequent mortality.
B. canis can be transmitted in several ways including
Carrier bitches occur and may thcrefore act as a source
conlact with aborted fetal or placental tissue, contacl
of infcction for puppics.
with the vaginal dischargeofinfccted bitches, venereal
 transrmission and congenital infection. The most com
Habitual abortion
mon method of infection is venereal.
Habitual abortion is an uncommon clinical condition
Bctwccn 1.5 and 6.6% of dogs in the USA have
in the bitch. In many allged cases, pregnancy has
antibodies diagnostic of brucellosis; however, the
 never been confirmed by a reliable method, and most
organism is not present in the UK. The isolation ofthe
arc probably non-prcgnant bitches that are repeatedly
bacterium from blood or aborted tissue is diagnostic
 mated at an inappropriate time.
 of the lisease. However, there may be prolonged
Where repeated abortion has been adequately docu-
periods when the bitch is not bacteraemic, so that a
 mented there is often an abnormal uterine environmcnt
ncgative blood calturc does not rulc out infection.
(such as cystic endometrial hyperplasia), or other dis-
Fortunately, diagnosis using the plate agglutination
 ease of the uterus or placenta present. However, some
test for screening and tube agglutination for confir-
workers claim that habitual abortion is the rcsult of
mation is not difficult, titres of 1:200 or greater being
 progesterone deficiency due to poor luteal function. In
diagnostic of infection.
the bitch the corpora lutea are the principal source of
 progesterone throughout gestation, and very low coil-
Toxoplasma gondii: Infection with Toxoplayma gondii
ccntrations of progesterone (6 nmol/l; 2 ng/ml) are
is an uncommon cause of abortion in the bitch. The
 required to support the pregnancy. Measurement of
 public health consequences of Toxoplasma infection
plasma progesterone at the time of an abortion often
should be considered whcnever it is diagnosed.
reveals that conccntralions are basal; however, this is
T. gondii may also cause premature birth, stillbirth
likely to be the result of the abortion rather than its
 and neonatal deaths. Surviving infected puppies may
cause. It is not appropriate to supplement bitches with
carry the infection.
 progcsterone to prevcnt habitual abortion unlcss a
persistently low plasma progesterone concentration
Canine herpes virus: The outcome following expo-
 has been documented. Progesterone or progestogen 
sure to canine herpes virus depends largely upon the
supplcmentation during prcgnancy may produce
time of infection. Abortion generally follows infection
masculinized female puppies orcryptorchid male pup-
in mid-pregnancy, whilst infection during early preg-
pies, and may possibly impair or delay parturition,
 nancy may result in fctal dcath and subscqucnt inum-
rcsuling in fetal death. Progestogen therapy should be
Inification, and infection during latc prcgnancy results
restricted to those cases in which a true luteal insuffi-
in premature birth. It appears that infection of the
ciency has been diagnosed, and then only short acting
 pregnant bitch results in the production of placcntal
 progestogcns adiministered orally should be uscd.
lesions and direct transmission to the fetus. Infected
 placentas are macroscopically underdeveloped and
Diabetes mellitus
 possess small greyish-white foci which are character-
 During thc pregnant and non-pregnant luteal phasc, there
ized by focal necrosis and thc presence of eosinophilic
 is increased secretion of growth hormone. This results in
intranuclear inclusion bodies.
 peripheral insulin antagonism, resulting in a transient
The virus has also been recovered from vesicular
reversible type II diabetes (although the clinical signs
lcsions on the genitalia of bitches. Frequently, these
may bc scvere and thc changes are not always reversible).
lesions develop during pro-oestrus, suggesting
 In non-pregnant animals, ovariohysterectomy is useful,
that venereal transmission is important in adult
since it reduces the period of instability associated with
dogs. Recrudcsccnt canine hcrpes with virus shed-
 thc lulcal phasc. In pregnant animals, the diabetes may be
d no ssn e Aa pes aq  
 severe, and the sensitivity to insulin may be reduced as
and parturition.
early as 35 days after ovulation. These animals can be
120 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
difficult to manage, and often ovariohysterectomy after
these queens, LH fails to exceed the threshold concen-
parlurition is the best option to allow stabilization of the
tration ncccssary to stimulate ovulation. Such cases arc
 bitch and prevent further breeding.
      e  
(Figure 11.2). Queens which ovulate following mating
Hypocalcacmia
but do not becomc pregnant, and those which sponta-
Hypocalcaemia (cclampsia, puerpcral tctany) occurs
ncously ovulate, havc an intcroestrus interval of bc-
most frequently during late pregnancy or in early
tween 30 and 45 days. An alternative method of
lactation. It is seen more commonly in small to
diagnosing ovulation failure is to measure plasma
mcdium sizecl bitches. The early clinical signs are
 progestcrone concentration 7-10 days aftcr mating.
 restlessness, panting, increased salivation and a stiff 
A low progesterone concentration demonstrates an
gait which progress to muscle fasciculations and
absence of luteal tissue and therefore a failure of
 pyrexia. If untreated, tetany and death result. The
ovulation.
acliology of hypocalcaemia is probably rclated to
Mulliple matings within a short period of timc are
calcium loss in the milk, combined with poor dietary
required to ensure an adequate release of LH; alterna-
availability. Slow intravenous administration of a 10%
tively, human chorionic gonadotrophin (500 IU) can
calcium gluconalc solutian to effcct (5-i0 ml) is
bc administcred on day one of ocstrus. This mimics an
Usually curative. During administration, heart rate and
Lll surge and results in ovulation,
rhythm should be carefully monitored.
After recovery, further supplementation may be
Embryonic resorption and fetal ahortionl
given subculaneously and orally to prcvcnt recurrence.
Isulalcd embryonic resorption with conlinuation of the
Hypocalcaemia may be prevented using oral calcium
pregnancy may be recognized in the queen at routine
supplementation in the last few days of pregnancy and
ultrasoundexamination. The incidence ofresorption is
during lactation. In sevcral specics, excessive oral cal-
unknown; howevcr, it probably has a similar actiology
cium administration has been shown to reduce the
to that in the bitch.
intestinal absorption of calcium and inhibit the secretion
Other causes of resorption and abortion include
 of parathyroid hormonc. This docs uot, however, appcar
cnvironmental, nutritional, genelic and infcctious
 to be a clinically significant problem in the bitch.
factors.
Pregnancy hypoglycacmia
Infectious agents
Low blood glucosc concentration and kctosis 1may occur
during pregnancy in the bitch. The condition is uncom-
Feline leukaemia virus: Feline leukaemiavirus (FeLV)
mon, but may result in weakness that progresses to coma
may cause a variety of reproductive tract diseases
and death. The diagnosis of the condition is bascd upon
including embryonie rcsorption; fetal abortion and
the clinical signs and the measurement of plasma
the birth of permanently infected kittens also occur.
glucose concentration. Following the intravenous ad-
The virus appears to cross the placenta; however,
ministration of glucose, these cases respond rapidly.
the actual abortion may bc the rcsult of sccondary
bacterial infection following FeLV-induced immuno-
diagnosed as being hypocalcaemic, based upon the
suppression,
clinical signs. These animals 1nay tcrmporarily respond
FeLV may be suspected clinically on the basis of
to the intravenous administration of calcium gluconate
tumour development or signs of other FeLV-related
solution, but relapse. This should raise the suspicion of
 disease, including a history of reproductive failure
alother cause.
or deaths in young cats. FeLV infection can be
 certain, as during progesterone dominance glucose
plasma), immunofluorescence (detection of virus
concentration is normally elevated.
protein p27 within neutrophils), or enzymc-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA; detection of virus
Queen
protein p27 in plasma).
A cat that is positive by immunofluorescence
Normal physiological changcs
for p27 is likely to be excrcting FeLV; most of
Progressive enlargement and reddening of the nipples
these cats remain positive for life. A cat that is
is a common and norimal feature of pregnancy in the
    o q a
quccn. A small volume of mucous material may be
dclcctable in fccted blood cells. A positive ELISA
prcsent at thc vulva, although this is not obscrvcd as
resull for p27 demonstrates circulating p27, and
frequently as in the pregnant bitch.
most of these cats are excreting FeLV. As with a
negativc immunofluorescence rcsult a ncgativc
Conception failure
ELISA result demonslrates no detectable p27,
Conception failure in the queen is most commonly due
but does not exclude the possibility that the virus
 toa low plasma LH concentration following mating. In
is being incubatcd.
Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Termination  121
 Several studics havc founrd somc cats that are posi-
prcscntin somc normal cats. In many cascs a diagnosis
tive by ELISA but negative by immunofluorescence, or
is only confirmed at post-mortem examination, when
by virus isolation. It appears that these cats do not give
 mesothelial hyperplasia and granulomatous infiltrates
birth to infected kittens and do not excrete the virus.
withi focal necrosis are found.
 Owners shoull bc cncouragcd to test queens before
mating, and discouraged from breeding from affected
Toxoplasma: Abortion may rarely be the result of
queens, since their offspring are born persistently
Toxoplasma gondil infection. Some kittens are, how-
infected. Infccted kittcns usually develop an FeLV-
ever, born congenitally infcctcd with thc protozoan.
related disease soon after birth. Vaccination is avail-
The role of this organism in abortion can be demon-
able to provide protection against FeL V and its related
 strated using serological screening.
diseases,
Chlamydia: The feline strain of Chlamydia psittaci
Feline herpes virus: Abortion during the fifth or sixth
may cause abortion in the queen. The aetiology of the
n       
abortion and the mode of transmission has not been
herpes virus I. In experimental studies both uterine and
elucidated, although the organism may be found within
placental lesions have been demonstrated, although in
the reproductive tract of aborting queens. Direct isola-
the clinical situation abortion may be the result of a
non-specific reaction to the infection, such as pyrexia.
be diagnostic of infection, although these findings
The virus is norrmally transmitted via the respiratory
should be interpreted with care, since the organism
tract, and approximately 80% of cats exposed remain
may be opportunistic.
chronically infected. Accurate diagnosis can he diffi-
cult, although intranuclear inclusion bodies within
Habitual abortion
nasal or conjunctival smears can be detected by indi-
There is only anecdotal evidence to suggest that habitual
Icct immunofluoresccnt tcchniques. The virus may be
abortion is a clinical problem in the queen. As in the
confirmed by isolation in tissue culture. Ilerpes virus
bitch, habitual abortion has been suggested to be the
abortion is normally diagnosed on the basis of the
fesult of a low plasma progesterone concentration.
clinical signs and isolation of thc virus. All brccding
Howcvcr, thc minimum plasma progesterone concen-
animals should be vaccinated, since this provides solid
 tration required to maintain pregnancy is 3-6 nmol/l (1l--
immunity against infection.
2 ng/ml), and in the author's experience values this low
are uncommcn, even immediately prior to an abortion.
Feline panleucopenia virus: Whilst abortion is a
Most cases of habitual abortion are thc rcsult of an
relatively common complication of feline panleuco-
abnormal uterine environment such as endometrial
penia virus infection, in many cases the clinical signs
hyperplasia. The administration of progesterone 01
are stillbirths, neonatal deaths and the birth of kittens
progestogens to 'prevent* habitual abortion would there-
with cerebellar hypoplasia. The virus passes across the
pus sae as pe pman aq o redde a
placenta and the outcome depends upon the time of
be used with care because they may produce masculinized
infection; infection in early pregnancy results in fetal
female kittens and cryptorchid male kittens. Depot.
abortion, whilst infection later in pregnancy results in
progestogens may also impair or delay parturition.
cerebellar hypoplasia and stillbirths. The virus is trans-
Progestogens should be used only in those cases in
mitted by dircct contact with saliva, facccs and urinc,
which a truc lutcal insufficiency has been diagnosed.
and diagnosis is made on the basis of the clinical signs,
histopathological findings, virus isolation and a rising
Hypocalcaemia
antibody titre. Serological diagnosis can bc made by
Hypocalcacimia (eclampsia, puerperal tetany) is rare in
virus neutralization or ELISA assay with paired serum
cats, but it may be seen during late pregnancy or in
samples. All breeding animals should be vacinated.
early lactation. The aetiology, clinical signs and treat-
ment arc similar to thosc sccn in the bitch. Thc condi-
Feline infectious peritonitis virus: Abortion during
tion can be treated by the slow intravcnous
the last 2 weeks of pregnancy is not uncommon follow-
administration of a l0% calcium gluconate solution to
ing infcction with feline infcctious peritonitis virus.
effect (2-5 ml). During administration heart rate and
The virus may also cause endometritis, stillbirths, and
rhythm should be carefully monitored.
chronic upper respiratory tract disease and fading
kiten syndromc.
At the time of abortion, queens are not always ill
UNWANTED MATING AND
and the abortion may be unnoticed by the owner.
PREGNANCY TERMINATION
Diagnosis is made by serological and pathological
investigation. Antibody can be delccted by indirect
Unwanted mating in the bitch and queen is a common
immunofluorescence or ELISA; however, whilst very
clinical problem in veterinary practice. Bitches are
high titres may be diagnostic, moderate titres may be
frequently presented during oestrus soon after an
122 Manual of Small Aninal Reproduction and Neonatology
owner has observed a mating, or is suspicious that a
physiological saline in a small test-tube for 10 minutes.
mating has occurred. In the queen, mating is fre-
The swab should then be squeezed dry, and the saline
quently not observed and the animal is often pre-
centrifuged at 2000 rpm for 10 minutes. Spermatozoal
sented when thc owner is concerned ovcr the
hcads can be identified by microscopic cxamination of
 development of a pregnancy.
the sediment after staining with Diff-Quike as for
There are several options that may be considered in
vaginal cytology (see Chapters 3 and 4). Using this
 the animal that has had an unwantcd mating, including
tcchnique, spcrmatozoa can be found in 100% 0f
those which prevent or interfere with implantation,
sarnples in which mating occurred within the previous
24 hours, and in 75% of samples in which mating
and induce resorption or abortion, and those which are
 occurred within the previous 48 hours.
directly embryotoxic. It is noteworthy that of the
agents discussed below, oestradiol benzoate is the only
Plasma progesterone concentration: Several ELISA
 product licensed in the UK for treating bitches for
techniques are commercially available for the
unwanled mating, and no products are licensed for use
 mcasurement of plasma progestcrone concentration.
in the cat.
These assays give either qualitative or quantitative
results within a short time (45-60 minutes) of sample
Bitch
collcction. In the bitch, plasma progcsterone conccn-
 In the bitch, the treatment chosen following an un-
tration is low during anoestrus and pro-oestrus. Con-
centrations increase when preovulatory, follicular
tation to the veterinary clinic in rclation to thc
 luteinization occurs, and there is a rapid rise in pro-
presumed mating, and the likelihood of the animal
gesterone concentration after ovulation. Basal pro-
becoming pregnant. In some cases, the risk of a
gesterone concentrations (<6 nmol/l; <2 ng/ml)
 prcgnancy is low and it may be prudcnt to wait until
 generaly indicate a low risk of conccption, elevated
a diagnosis of pregnancy is made before instituting
concentrations (>32nmol/l; >10 ng/ml) indicate a
treatment. In other cases the animal may only be
high risk of conception, and intermediate concentra-
presented when there is concern that a pregnancy has
tions have a medium risk. Progesterone concentra-
becn cstablishcrl.
tions remain clcvatcd after the fertile period, and
values should be interpreted in the light of the clinical
Bitches presented immcdiately following a mating
Therc are several options when a bitch is prcscnted
14 days after mating:
Bitches presented several days after mating
There are several options for bitches that are presented
 If thc bitch is nol rcquired for brecding. an
 more than 5 days afler a mating including:
ovariohysterectomy may be performed after the
end of oestrus
 Treatment with agents that will induce luteolysis
 If thc risk of pregnancy is high, the bitch may bc 
(and thcrefore resorption) regardlcss of whether 
the animal is pregnant
 If the risk of pregnancy is low, it may be prudent
 Diagnosis of pregnancy at approximately 28 days
to wait until a positivc rliagnosis of prcgnancy
after mating, and, if positivc, terinination of
can be made (requires ultrasound examination,
 pregnancy either by altering the endocrine
measurement of acute phase proteins, or accurate
environment or using agents with direct toxic
palpation at approximately 28 days after mating)
effects upon the embryo.
before initiating therapy to terminate pregnancy.
Prevention of implantation
The risk of a pregnancy can be deternined by the usc
of vaginal cytology and measurement of plasima con-
Oestrogens: Oestrogens are widely used to prevent
centrations of progesterone.
unwanted pregnancies. It is thought that they act by
altering the transport timc of zygotes, and interfering
Vaginal cytology: Vaginal cytology can be performed
with implantation. In some bitchcs given oestrogcns
to assess the stage of the oestrous cycle (see Chapter 1)
during oestrus, a subsequent early luteolysis has been
noted, and this effect may be mediated either directly
vagina. Norrmal vaginal cyiological techniqucs are
upon luteal progesterone production orby inhibition of
however not reliable for detecting spermatozoa within
LH release which is luteotrophic.
the vagina when the interval between mating and
 Diethylstilboestrol, oestradiol benzoate, oestradiol 
examinalion is more than 24 hours. After this timc, a
cypionate and mestranol have been widely used to
 modified technique is required. This involves placing
 prevent implantation. Only oestradiol benzoate is li-
a cotton swab moistened with saline into the vagina for
censed for the treatment of unwanted mating in the
one minute, and then incubating the tip with 0.5 ml
UK. This is administered within 4 days of mating, or at
Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Termination  123
a low dose (0.01 mg/kg), using a rcpcated arlministra-
cvcr, 1morc common treatment regimens utilize twice-
tion regimen, at 3 and 5 days (and possibly also 7 days)
 daily administration from 23 days after ovulation on-
after mating. The low dose regimen has been advo-
wards for approximately 5 days.
cated in an attempt to reduce the possibility of adverse
cffccts.
 Prolactin antugonists: Prolactin is a principle luteo-
Oestrogens may result in the development of pyo-
trophic agent in the bitch. Prolactin antagonists such as
metra, since they potentiate the stimulatory effects of
 bromocriptine and cabergoline reducc plasma proges-
 progestcronc on the uterus and thcy causc ccrvical
tcronc concentration, and are especially efficacious
relaxation, thus allowing vaginal bacteria to enter the
when administered during the second half of the luteal
uterus. Oestrogens may also produce dose-related bone
phase.
marrow supprcssion, and thc toxic dosc for an indi-
 Bromocriptine is less specific than cabergoline and
vidual may lie within the therapeutic range. Other less
 produces some adverse effects, of which the most
severe effects include alopecia, skin hyperpigmentation
common is vomiting. When administered daily for 7
a uo (ayai o) ounduoq st Aep iae sep
Used to terminate pregnancy, although the efficacy of
Tamoxifen: Tamoxifen is an anti-oestrogen which can
the regimen is low. Cabergoline (5 μg/kg), howevcr,
 be used to prevent or terminate pregnancy in the bitch,
can be used successfully whcn given daily for 7 days
 although the exact mechanism of action is unknown. It
after day 40, and treatment even as early as day 30 is
efficacious in the majority of bitches. Treatment bc-
tion. Relatively high doses of the drug given twice
fore day 40 usually results in resorption, whilst later
daily orally during pro-oestrus, oestrus, or carly met-
trcatmcnt resulis in expulsion.
oestrus (dioestrus) are efficacious. A. high incidence of
Combination of prostaglandin and prolactin antago-
is induced by tamoxifcn, including ovarian cysts and
nists: Thc combination of cabergoline and the syn-
endometritis, and the compound is therefore of little
 thetic analogue of prostaglandin PGF, cloprostenol,
value for potential breeding animals.
induces pregnancy termination from day 23 aftcr ovu-
 lalion. Cabergoline (5 μg/kg) can be administered
Termination of pregnancy
orally daily, and cloprostenol (5 μg/kg) subcutane-
Progesterone is the principal hormone of pregnancy,
ously every other day. This regimen rcduccs thc ad-
and is produced throughout gestation by the corpora
verse effects of prostaglandin thcrapy alone, and
lutea. Therapies directed against progesterone are there-
increases the efficacy of prolactin antagonists. When
bitches are treated for approximately 9 days, 100% will
 duce either resorption (treatment early in pregnancy)
resorb, and there arc gencrally no arlverse effects.
 Or abortion (treatment later in pregnancy). Strategies
for pregnancy termination include inducing lysis ofthe
Progesterone synthesis inhibitors: Progesterone pro-
corpora lutea, removing support for the corpora lutca
duction can bc blockcrl by hydruxysteroid dehydro-
(by inhibiting LHI and prolactin release which are the
genase isomerase enzyme inhibitors, which prevent
primary luteotrophic factors), orby blocking the action
the conversion of pregnenolone to progesterone. Preg-
Of progesterone. A further method of pregnancy termi-
nation is the use of specific embryotoxic agents.
 gesterone support for the pregnancy is lost, resulting in
 resorption or abortion,
Prostaglandins: Prostaglandins cause lysis of the cor-
Epostane is one such enzyme inhibitor that has no
 pora lutea and reduce plasma progeslerone concentra-
 intrinsic oestrogenic, androgenic or progestogenic ac-
tion. In addition, they stirmulate uterine contraction.
tivity. When administered subcutaneously at the onset
Canine corpora lutea are, however, more resistant to
 of metoestrus (dioestrus), cpostanc will prevent or
the action of prostaglandin than those of other species,
 terminate pregnancy. This route of administration is
and repeated therapy for several days is necessary to
associated with a high incidence of injection site
induce complete luteolysis. Prostaglandins have a va-
abscessation. However epostane given in high doscs
liety of adverse effects in the bitch including, saliva-
(5.0 mg/kg) orally for 7 days will successfully termi-
tion, vomiting, pyrexia, hyperpnoea, ataxia and
nate pregnancy without apparent adverse effects.
 diarrhoea; high doses may be lethal. In general there-
Epostane is not available in the UK.
fore low doses of dinoprost (150 μg/kg) givcn twice
daily for 5 days are most suitable since this regimen
Progesteronc antagonists:Mifepristone (RU486) is
minimizes the adverse effects.
all orally administered progcstcronc and glucocorti-
Prostaglandins may be used as early as 5 days after
coid receptor antagonist. After the administration of
the onset of metoestrus (dioestrus) to induce luteolysis.
 RU486. peripheral progesterone concentration is un-
They may therefore be used in bitches in which a
altered but its action is blocked. Whenn administered
diagnosis of prcgnancy has nol yct. becn made. How-
from onc month after ovulation fetal death occurs
124 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
within 5 days of trcatment. Bitches can be treated
rapidly die. Many of thcsc agents have toxic side
earlier in pregnancy, although the treatment period
effects, including vomiting. diarrhoea, weight loss,
must be increased. Pregnancy loss is characterized by
 pyrexia, lethargy, purulent meningitis and immuno-
resorption during carly pregnancy or ahortion during
supprcssion. For this rcason these products arc not
late pregnancy. Adverse effects have not been noted
presently available for clinical use.
with this treatment. A similar progesterone antagonist,
aglepristonc (RUJ46534) has reccntly been markciedl
Queen
for subcutaneous use in bitches in France. The product.
 Many owners are unaware when their queen is in
oestrus, and frequently there is littie evidence of mat-
rated by 3 days, and has been found to be efficacious
 ing. Therefore few queens are presented immediately
and to pruduce minimal adverse cffecls.
following an unwanied mating. It is more common for
 queens to be presented when there are clinical signs of
GnRH agonists and antagonists: Specific LH ant.
a pregnancy. The physiology and endocrinology of
agonists arc nat available; howcvcr, the continuous
prcgnancy are similar in the queen and the bitch, and
administration of gonadotrophin releasing hormone
whilst it is likely that similar regimens can be used to
(GnRH), or GnRH agonists causes a down-regulation
prevent implantation or to terminate pregnancy, many
cffect which may be used to withdraw gonadotrophin
treatments have not been adequately investigated in
support of the corpora lutea. This results in a decline in
this spccies.
 progesterone concentration and resorption or abortion.
Similarly. the daily administration of GnRH an-
 Queens prescntcd immcdiately following a mating
lagonists successfully suppresses luteal function.
It is uncommon for owners lo be suspicicus that a
The agent most widely tested is detirelix, which is
queen has been mated unless this has been witnessed.
a GnRH antagonist. The daily administration of detirelix
Even in the case of an observed mating, itis difficult to
prodnccs abortion or rcsorption depending upon the
determinc thc risk of pregnancy. Therc arc therefore
stage of pregnancy; however, this agent is not available
several treatment options if the queen is presented
in the UK. Administration very early in the pregnancy
1-4 days after mating, including the following:
is notcfficacious even whcn the dose is increascd. This
reflects the relative independence of the corpora lutea
 If the queen is not required for breeding, an
 from gonadotrophin support during early pregnancy.
ovariohysterectomy may be performed
and attempts to overcome this have been made by
immediately, or one week after oestrus, when the
combining the GnRH antagonists with prostaglandin.
queen will either be intcroestrus or in early
The action of these twc agents appear to be synergistic.
pregnancy
 d jo uoan a ron as aq e a pu
 The queen may be treated in an attempt to
nancy as carly as day 4 of mctocstrus (dioestrus),
prcvent implantation
although reported success rates are only 80%.
 The queen may be examined for an early
pregnancy diagnosis at 3 wceks, and, if
Corticosteroids: In many species, glucocorticoids are
 positivc, therapy to terminalc thc prcgnancy cali
administered during late pregnancy to indlucc abortion.
be initiated.
Glucocorticoid administration results in the produc-
tion of oestrogen and prostaglandin by the feto-
Quccns presented several days after mating
placental unit.
There are several options for queens that are presented
Single doses of glucocorticoids are not efficacious in
more than 5 days after a mating. including:
thc bitch, although dexamcthasone, when administcred
twice daily for 10 days, commcncing one month aficr
 Treatment with agcnts that will induce luteolysis
 Ovulation, produces abortion. The mechanism of action
(and therefore resorption) regardless of whether
the animal is pregnant
high doses imake the methord impractical for clinical usc.
sp i Arruxde je Aad jo siso
after mating, and, if positive, termination of
Enmbryotoxic agents: Several novelembryotoxic agents
pregnanicy.
have been evaluated in the bitch. Thesc drugs are often
 If the queen is not required for breeding, an
phenyltriazole isoindule and isoquinoline compounds.
ovariohysterectomy rmay be performed as
They are most effective when given around the time of
described above.
implantation and often only a single administration is
required. Onc agcnt, lotrifen, has a slow release from
Prevention of implantation
stcred any time during the first 15 days after mating.
Oestrogens: Therc is limited informalion concerning
Success rates havc bcen shown to be up to 90%; how-
the use of oestrogens to prevent implantation in queens.
ever, some bitches may deliver weak puppies which
Diethylstilboestrol (0.5 mg/cat) has been shown to be
Pregnancy Diagnosis, Abnormalities of Pregnancy and Pregnancy Teriminalion
125
efficacious when givcn 12 days post mating, and in the
Combination of prostaglandin and prolactinantago-
USA oestradiol cypionate (0.25 mg/cat) is widely used
 nists: The combination of cabergoline (5 μg/kg daily
in a similar regimen. Oestradiol benzoate has been
for 10 days) and the synthetic analogue of prostaglan-
reported anecdotally to be a suitable treatmcnt. Nonc of
din PGF2 cloprostenal (5 μg/kg cvcry other day for 10
these agents is liccnsed for this purpose.
 days), may be used to induce pregnancy termination
Qestrogens have adverse effects in queens that are
from day 30 after mating. This regimen allows the dose
similar to those reported in the bitch.
 and frequcncy of prostaglandin administration lo be
 reduced, and increases the efficacy of cabergoline.
 Progestogens: There is limited evidence to show that
In all cases, fetal abortion results, however the
several progestogens, including megoestrol acetate
queens remain well and rctums to normal fertility.
and delmarlinonc acelate, may be used to prevent
implantation if given on the day of mating. The mecha-
Other agents: There are no studies of the use of
nism of action has not been elucidated and these agents
 progesterone synthesis inhibitors or progesterone an-
 are not licensed for this purpose in the UK.
tagonists in the quccn; howcvcr, it is likely that these
agents, and others such as GnRH agonists and antago-
Termination of pregnancy
nists, would terminate pregnancy. Similarly.
In the queen, the primary source of progcstcronc
cmbryotoxic agcnts havc not bccn evaluated.
throughout pregnancy is the ovary. Pregnancy termi-
 nation can therefore be achieved by influencing pro-
 gesterone production or its action.
CONCLUSION
 Thc principal luteotrophic agcnt in thc quccn ap-
 pears to be prolactin, similar to the situation in the bitch.
Recent studies have improved the understanding of
 normal reproductive physiology of the bitch and queen,
Prostaglandins: Prostaglandin F。 (dinoprost; 0.4 mg/
and have allowed major developments in the areas of
kg) can be used to induce abortion when administered
 pregnancy detection,treatment of diseases duringpreg-
daily for 5 days after day 33. The mechanism of action is
nancy, and pregnancy termination. These areas of
rclatcd to lysis of the corpora lutca and utcrine spas-
research are extremely imporlant, considering the pol-
mogenic activity. Similar to the bitch, repeated therapy is
arity associated with dog reproduction; on the one
required, since the corpora lutea appear to be relatively
 hand attempting to increase productivity for show and
insensitive to the action of prostaglandin. Adverse effects
research animals, and on the other, aiming to prcvent.
are frequently noted following prostaglandin administa-
reproduction because of the considerable pet over-
tion and include nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea.
population problems.
Prolactin antagonists: Prolactin is the principle luteo-
trophic agent in the queen and inhibition of prolactin
FURTHER READING
secretion results in the demise of the corpora lutea.
Prolactin antagonists such as bromocriptine and
Cancannan PW (1991) Reprodncrion in the dog and cat. In: Reprodie.
cabergoline may therefore be used to terminate preg-
tion in Domestic Animals, 4th edn, ed. PT Cupps, pp. 517-554.
Academic Press, San Dicgo
nancy. Bromocriptine is less specific and produces
Concannon PW, England GCW. Verstegen JP and Russell HA (1993)
morc advcrsc cffccts than cabcrgoline. Cabcrgolinc
Fertilityand infertility in dogscats und thercurnivores.Proceed
(5 ug/kg daily for 7 days) can be useful for pregnancy
ings of the Second International Sympusiurn on Canine und
Feline Reproduction. Journal of Reprorluction und Fertility.
termination as early as day 30, and when treated at this
Supplement 47
timc, cinbryonic rcsorplion is the common outcomc.
Concannan Pw, England GCw, Rijnherk A, Verstegen JP
and Doberska C (i997) Reproduction in dogs, cats and exotic
Some early treatments are, however, not successful
carnivores. Journal of Reproduction and Fertlity, Supple-
 and treatment should be delayed until after day 40,
ment51
when efficacy is 100%. Later lreatments are associaledl
England GCW (l9y5) Small animal reproductivc ultrasonography. In:
Veterinary Uitrasonography, ed. PJ Goddard, pp. 55—85. CAB
with fetal abortion.
lntermational, London 
CHAPTER TWELVE
Parturition
Catharina Linde-Forsberg and Annelie Eneroth
NORMAL PARTURITION
(before 45 days of pregnancy) and spontaneous abor-
tion in the bitch and queen is unknown, and may be
Duration of pregnancy
Jifficult to delermine since the condition may pass
 Apparent gestation length in the bitch averages 63 days,
unnoticed. The female may consume aborted fetuses,
with a variation from 56 to 72 days if calculated from the
day of the first mating to partiurition, This surprisingly
pregnancy without noticeable signs. In pigs the
large variation is due to the long behavioural oestrous
embryonic wastage is reported to be 30-50%.
 period of the bitch. Actual gestation length determined
endocrinologically is much lcss variable, parturition
Perinatal loss
occurring 65 ± 1 days from the preovulatory LII peak,
 Based on a number of surveys, puppy losses up to
i.e. 63 ± 1 days from the day of ovulation.
pue %oe pue oi uamieg sauer oi leadde ase suueam
 In the queen, ovulation occurs in rcsponsc to mat-
avcragc around 12% in the dog. More than 65% of
ing, between 24 and 48 hours after coitus. Because of
repeated coitus, parturition can be expected between
first week of life; few puppies die after 3 weeks of age.
63 days after the first mating to 63 days (plus 2448
 Perinatal dcath is 12.8% hy weaning agc in thc cat.
hours) after the last mating. Teline gestation periods of
 Inbreeding is said to be associated with a high inci-
56-71 days have been reported, but the average ranges
dence of fetal and neonatal mortality. An apparently
bctwcen 63 and 67 days.
short gestation length (less than 61 or 62 days) appears
Gestation length both in the dog and cat has been
to increase the risk of mortality for kittcns.
reported to be shorter for larger litter sizes, but this
 remains unccrtain. Brecd differences in gestation length,
Physiology of parturition
although not well documented, have been postulated
An understanding of the course and control of normal
for both dogs and cats.
parturition (eutocia) is necessary for the diagnosis and
treatment of abnormal parturition (dystocia). Exact
Litter size
mcchanisms which allow parturition to coimmence and
The litter size in dogs varies, ranging from as few as
Is ane uaanb pue yq a u Aieu paod
 one puppy in the miniature breeds to more than 15 in
unknown. Studies of canine and feline parturition and
some of the giant breeds. It is smaller in the young
cxtrapolations from other species provide information
bitch, increases up to 3-4 years of age, and decreases
on the physiological and endocrinological changes
again as the bitch gets older. A litter size of only one or
important for normal parturition.
two puppies predisposes to dystocia because of insuf-
Strcss produccd by thc rednclion of thic nutritional
ficient uterine stinulation and large puppy size, 'the
supply by the placenta to the fetus stimulates the fetal
singlc-puppy syndrome'. This can be seen in dog
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis; this results in
breeds of all sizes. Breedcrs of thc iminiaturc brceds
the release of adrenocorticosteroid hormone and is
tend to accept small litters, but should be encouraged
thought to be the trigger for parturition. An increase in
to breed for litter sizes of at least three to four puppies
fetal and maternal cortisol is believed to stimulate the
to avoid these complications.
release of prostaglandin Fzα, which is luteolytic, from
In cats, litter size may vary between one and nine
the feto-placental tissue, resulting in a decline in
kittens, with an average-size litter being 3.5-4.6 kit-
plasma progesterone concentration. Increased levels
tens. For primiparous females, it has bccn found that
 of cortisol and of prostaglandin Fza-metabolite have
litter size is smaller, averaging 2.8 kittens. Small litter
been measured in the prepartum bitch. Withdrawal of
sizc appcars not to predispose to inertia in cats.
the progesterone blockade of pregnancy is a prerequi-
site for the normal course of canine and feline parturi-
Early fetal loss
tion; females given long-acting progcsteronc during
The true incidence of early embryonic or fetal death
pregnancyfail to deliver. In correlation with the gradual
128  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
decrease in plasma progesterone concentration during
rectal temperature (Figure 12.1) caused by the final
the Ilast 7 days before whelping, there is a progressivc
abrupt dccrease in progesterune concentration. In the.
qualitative change in uterine electrical activity, and a
last week before parturition, the rectal temperature of
significant increase in uterine activity occurs during
the bitch fluctuates, and drops sharply approximately
 the last 24 hours before parturition with the final fall in
 8-24 hours before parturition and 10-14 hours after
 plasma progesterone concentration. The change in the
the concentration of progesterone in peripheral plasma
oestrogen:progesterone ratio is probably a major cause
has declined to less than 6 nmol/l (2ng/ml). This drop
of placental separation and cervical dilation, although
in rectal temperature is individual but also to a certain
in the dog oestrogens have not been unambiguously
extent. seems to depend on body size. Thus, in mini-
shown to increase before parturition as they doin many
ature-breed bitches it can fall to 35°C, in medium-
other species. In the queen, a slight rise in oestradiol
sized bitches to around 36°C, whereas it seldom falls
just before parturition has been observed. Oestrogens
below 37°C in bitches of the giant breeds. This differ-
sensitize the myometrium to oxytocin, which in tum
ence is probably an effect of the surface area:body
initiates strong contractions in the uterus when not
volume ratio. Several days before parturition, the bitch
under the influence of progesterone. Sensory receptors
may become restless, seek seclusion or be excessively
within the cervix and vagina are stimulated by the
 attentive, and may refuse all food. The bitch may show
distension created by the fetus and the fluid-filled fetal
nesting behaviour 12-24 hours before parturition,
membranes. This afferent stinulation is conveyed to
concomitant with the increasing frequency and force
the hypothalamus and results in the release of oxy-
of uterine contractions, and shivering. attempting to
tocin. Afferents also participate in a spinal reflex arch
increase the body temperature.
with efferent stimulation of the abdominal muscula-
turc to prodnce abdominal straining. Relaxin causes
Queen
the pelvic soft tissues and genital tract to relax which
 A decrease in rectal temperature during the preceding
facilitates fetal passage. In the pregnant bitch, this
12 hours or in the first stage of labour may be noted in
hormonc. is produced by the ovary and the placenta;
the queen, although this sign is not as rcliablc as in thc
it rises gradually over the last two-thirds of pregnancy.
 bitch. During the ninth week, the queen is generally
Prolactin, the hormone responsible for lactation,
less active. The primiparous queen especially may
bcgins to inercase 3-4 weeks following ovulation and
become more anxious and apprchcnsivc during thc last
 surges dramatically with the abrupt decline in serum
2 days of pregnancy, searching for a place in which to
progesterone just before parturition.
deliver. Some queens will refuse all food from 12-24
hours before delivery, while others may not become
Signs of impending parturition
 anorcxic atl all and may cven feed during parturition.
 In primiparous bitches and queens, lactation may
Bitch
be established less than 24 hours before parturition,
Relaxation of thc pclvic and abdominal musculaturc is
whilc aficr scveral pregnancies, colostrum can be
a consistent but subtle indicator of impending parturi-
detected as early as l week prepartum.
tion. The clinically most important sign is the drop in
Stages of parturition
Parturition is divided into three stages, with the last two
stages being repeated for each puppy or kitten delivered.
First stage
37.5
 The duration of the first stage is normally between 6
and 12 hours. It may last for up to 36 hours, cspccially
36.5-
in the nervous primiparous animal, but for this to be
ctal
Purturilion wilthin
considered normal, the rectal temperature must remain
36
12 hours
low. Vaginalrelaxation and dilation of the cervix occur
during this stage. Intermittent uterine contractions,
9
with no signs of abdominal straining, are present. The
Weeks after mating
 dam appears uncomfortable, occasionally glancing at 
hcr abdomen, and the restless behaviour becomes
Figure 12.1: The best sign of impending parturition in the
bichisthenarkeddropinrectaltemeratureDuringth
more intense. Panting, tearing up and rearranging of
las! weck of pregnancy, the temperature will fluctuate
bedding, shivering and occasional vomiting may be
because releare of prostaglandins causes a transient fall in
seen in the bich. The queen may vocalize, tum around
peripheral plasma progesterone concentration, and
in circles and wash herself constantly. Some dams
progesterone is thermoreguiatory.During first sage labour,
show no behavioural evidence of first stage labour.
the drop is more pronounced, and the bitch shouid be in
second stage labour within 12 hours after reaching the lowest
The weak uterine contractions incrcasc both in frc-
temperature, and before temperaure has returmed to normal.
 quency and intensity towards the end of the first stage.
Parturition129
Therc are three signs which inlicate that the bitch
 or queen has entered into second stage labour:
 Thc passing of fetal fluids (first water bag bursts)
Visible abdominal straining
 The rectal temperature returning to normal level.
If onc or more of thesc signs has been observed ihc
female is in second stage labour.
In normal labour, the female may show weak and
infrcqucnt slraining for up to 2 and at the most 4 hours
before giving birth to the first fetus. If the female is
Figure 12.2: Schematic picrure of thefetus and the fetal
showing strong, frequent straining without producing
menbrunes in the dog.
a puppy or kitten, this indicalcs the presence of samc
 During pregnancy the oricntalion of the fetuscs
obstruction and shc should not be left for morc than 20
within the uterus is 50% directed caudally and 50%
 30 minutes before seeking veterinary advice.
cranially, but this changes during first stage labour as
The dam should be examined if:
the fetus rotates on its long axis, extending its head,
neck and limbs to attain normal birth position, result-
She has a greenish/red-brownish discharge but
ing in 60% of puppies and kittens being born in anterior
no puppy/kitten is born within 2-4 hours
and 40% in posterior prescntation. The fluid-filled
Fetal fluid was passcd more than 2-3 hours ago
fetal membranes are pushed ahead of the fetus by the
 but nothing more has happened
 uterine propulsive efforts and dilate the cervix.
The dam has had weak, irregular straining for
more than 24 hours
Second stage
The dam has had strong, regular straining for
The duration of the second stage is usually 3-12 hours,
more than 20-30 minutes
inrare cases up to 24 hours. Atthe onset of sccond stage
More than 2-4 hours lhave passed since the birth1
labour, the rectal temperature rises and quickly returns
of the last puppy/kitten and morc rcmain
to normal or slightly above normal. The first fetus
'The dam has been in second stage labour for
engages in the pelvic inlet, and the subsequent intense,
more than 12 hours.
expulsivc utcrinc contractions arc accompanied by
 abdominal straining. On entering the birth canal, the
allantochorionic membrane may rupture and a dis-
chargc of some clear fluid may bc noted. Covered by
the amniotic membrane, the first fetus is usually deliv-
ered within one hour after onset of second stage labour
in thc cat and within 4 hours in the dog. Norimally, the
bitch or queen will break the membrane, lick the
neonate intensively and sever the umbilical cord. At
limes the dam will nccd some assistance to opcn the
fetal membranes to allow the newborn to breathe, and
sometimes the airways will have to be emptied of fetal
fluids (see the chapler on the neonate). The umbilicus
should be clamped with a pair of forceps and cut with
a blunt pair of scissors to minimize haemorrhage from
the fctal vessels, leaving ahout 1 cm of the umbilicus.
 In cases of continuing hacrnorrhage the umbilicus
should be ligated (see Chapter 14).
Diagnosing second stage lubour: It is of utmosl
importance that the clinician is able to determine
whether the cdam is in the second stage or still in
first stagc labour. Inexperienced hreeders tend to get
 nervous during first stage, not fully understanding
the function of this preparatory stage of parturition
during which recurring uterinc contractions, the
Figure 12.3: (a) A puppy in inact fetal membranes, foliowing
softening of the birth canal and opening of the cervix
detivery by Caesarian operation. (b) The fetut membranes
take place.
have been opened and the puppy is gasping for cir.
130 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Figure I2.4: Normal birth ofa puppy in anterior and posterior presentation.
Third stage
Interval between births
The third stage of parturition,expulsion of the placenta
Expulsion of the first fetus usually takcs thc longest.
and shortening of the uterine horns, usually follows
The interval between births in normal uncomplicated
within 15 minutes of the delivery of each fetus. Two or
 parturition is from 5-120 minutes. In almost 80% of
threc fctwscs may, howevcr, be bom before the passage
cases, the fctuscs are delivered alternately from the two
of their placentas occurs. The dam should be discour-
Uterine horns. When giving birth to a large litter, a bitch
aged from eating more than one or two of the placentas
or a queen may stop straining and rest for more than 2
becausc shc may develop diarrhoca and vomiting.
hours betwccn thc delivcry of two consecutive fetuses.
Aspiration pneumonia due to placental vomitus could
 The second stage straining willresume, followed again
be life threatening. Lochia, i.e. the post-partum dis-
 by the third stage, until all tlhe fetuses are born.
charge of fctal fluids and placental rcmains, will be
seen for up to 3 weeks or more, being most profuse
 Completion of parturition
during the first week. The discharge is greenish in
Parturition is usually completed within 6 hours after
colour in the bitch, and red-brown in the queen.
the onset of second stage labour, but it may last up to
Uterine involulion is completed after 12-15 weeks in
 12 hours, It should never be allowed to last for morc
the bitch.
 than 24 hours because of the risks involved both for the
The dam should be cxamined if:
dam and the fetuses.
 All placentas have not been passed within 4--6
DYSTOCIA
 difficult to determine because of the dam eating
Definition
them)
 The lochia are putrid aud/or foul snclling
 Dystocia is defincd as difficult birth or the inability
 Thcrc is continuing genital haemorrhagc
t0 cxpel the fetus through thc birth canal without
 The rectal temperature is higher than 39.5°℃
assistance.
 The general condition of the dam is affected
 The general condition of the puppies/kittens is
Frequency
affected.
 Dystocia is a frequent problem in both the dog and the
Parturition 131
cat. The tue incidence of dystocia in the bitch is
tone of the uterus. Pronounced tone of the anterior
01 junoue Aeu 1! 1nq 'inao %s punoe Aiqpqoid
vagina may indicate satisfactory muscular activity in
almost 100% in some breeds of dog, especially of
the uterus, whereas flaccidity may indicate uterine
 the achondroplastic type and those selected for large
inertia. The character of the vaginal fluids also will
heads. The risk of dystocia appears to bc significantly
indicate whether the cervix is closed, with the
higher in pedigree cats than in cross-bred cats. The
 production of a fluid which is scant and sticky creating
litter prevalence of dystocia in the dolichocephalic
a certain resistance to the introduction of a finger, or
breeds (Siamese-type and Cornish Rex) appears to
open when fetal fluids lubricate the vagina making
 be around 10%, in thc brachycephalic brccis (Persian,
thc cxploration easy. Whcn thc ccrvix is closed the
British Shorthair and Devon Rex) it appears to be
vaginal walls alsofit quite tightly around the exploring
around 7%, and in the mesocephalic breeds (mixed
finger, whereas with an open cervix the cranial vagina
breeds, Abyssinian, Burmese and Manx) it is as
appcars more open.
low as around 2%.
 Radiographic examination is valuable to assess
 gross abnormalities of the maternal pelvis, number
Clinical assessment
and location of fetuses, to estimate their size, detect
When a case of dystocia is presented, an accuralc
congenital defccts, or signs of fetal death. In the
history and a thorough clinical examination of the
dead fetus, intra-fetal gas will appear 6 hours after
paticnt are important prerequisites for proper manage-
death and can be detected in the radiograph, while
ment. The three criteria for being in second stagc
overlapping of cranial bones and collapsc of thc
labour, namely passage of fetal fluids, visible abdomi-
spinal column will not be seen until 48 hours have
nal straining and temperature returmed to normal,
passed after the death of the fetus. Ultrasound
should be assessed. An cvaluation of thc fcmale's
examination will determine fetal viability or distress,
 general health status should be made and signs of
normal heart-rate being 180-240 per minulc, decreas-
any adverse effects of parturition noted. Observation
ing in the compromised fetus.
should he madc of bchaviour, characterand frcqucncy
of straining, examination of the vulva and perineum
Diagnosis
noting colour and amount of vaginal discharge.
The range of normal variations observed in dogs and
Mammary gland development, including congeslion,
cats at parturition makes recognition of dystocia diffi-
distension, size and presencc of milk, should be
cult, cspecially for the incxpcricnced observer. The
evaluated. Palpation of the abdomen, roughly esti-
following criteria for dystocia may assist in making the
 mating the number of fetuses and degree of distension
diagnosis:
of the uterus, should be carricd out. Digital examina-
tion of the vagina using aseptic technique should be
The rectal temperature has been down and
undcrtaken to detect obstructions and determine the
returned to normal with no signs of Jabour
presence and presentation of any fetus in the pelvic
Green vulvar dischargc (dog), red-brown
canal (Figure 12.5). In most bitches, it is not possible
discharge (cat) but no fetuses delivcrcd. (Thcse 
to reach the cervix during first stage, but an assessment
discharges emanate from the marginal
of the degrcc of dilation and tone of thc vagina may
haematoma of the placentas and indicate that at
give some indication of the status of the cervix and the
least one placenta is beginning to bccome
separated from the maternal blood supply. They
are normal once birth is underway)
Passing of fetal fluids 2-3 hours bcforc and no
signs of labour
Absence of labour for more than 2 hours or
weak, infrequent labour for more than 24 hours.
Strong and persistent non-productive labour for
more than 20-30 minutes
Evidence of an obvious cause of dystocia, c.g.
pelvic fracture or a fetus stuck in the birth canal
and partially visible
Signs of toxaemia (disturbed general condition,
 general oedcma, shock) when parturition should
be occurring.
Maternal causes of dystocia
Traditionally. dystocia is classified as being of either
Figure 12.5: Assessing ferat disposition in the bitch in
maternal or uf fetal origin, or a combination of both
second stage labour. Redrawn after Shile (1983).
(Table 12.1).
132  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
female with insufficient labour is by feathering of the
Cause
Biteh (%)
Quecn(%)
dorsal vaginal wall (Figure 12.6). Feathering is accom-
Malernul:
75.3
67.1
ta  a s oa  a s  p
 Primary complete inertia
48.9
36.8
of the queen or bitch, respectively, and to push or
 Primary partial ineria
23.1
22.6
'walk' with them against the dorsal vaginal wall thus
inducing an episode of straining (the Ferguson reflex).
Birth canal too narrow
1.1
5.2
Feathering can also be effective in initiating labour
Uterine torsion
1.1
after correetion of thc position or posture of a fetus.
Uterine prolapsc
0.6
Nervous voluntary inhibition of labour due to psy-
一
Uterine strangulation
0.6
chological stress may occur, mainly in the nervous
Hydrallantois
0.5
primiparous animal. Rcassurance by the owner or
Vaginal septum formation
0.5
administration of a low dose tranquillizer may remove
the inhibition. Once the first fetus is born, parturition
Fctal:
24.7
29.7
will usually proceed normally.
 Malpresentations
15.4
15.5
 The female with complcic primary uterine inertia is
Malformations
1.6
7.7
 often presented with a bright and alert appearance, a
Fetul oversize
6.6
1.9
normal rectal temperature, and no evidence of labour.
Fetal death
1.1
1.1
The cervix is often dilatcd, and vaginal exploration
 easy to perform due to the presence of fetal fluids, but
Table 72.I: Causes of dystocia in bitches and queens.
the fetus may be out of reach because of the flaccid
uterine wall. Before initiation of mcdical treatment of
Uterine inertia
uterine inertia any obstruction of the birth canal must
Uterine inertia is by far the most common cause of
be excluded.
 dystocia in dogs and cats. It is classified into primary
Calcium solutions and oxytocin are the drugs of
and secondary inertia.
 choicc in cases of uterine inertia. Oxylocin has a dircct
 ln primary inertia the uterus may fail to respond to
 action on the rate of calcium influx into the inyometrial
the fetal signals because there is only one or two
 cell, which is essential for myometrial contraction.
 puppies, and thus insufficient stimulation to initiate
Many do not respond to oxytocin alonc but rcquire
 prior administration of a calcium solution. Therefore,
ovcrstretching of the myometrium by large litters,
some 10 minutes before thie administration of oxy-
excessive fetal fluids or oversized fetuses. Other
(ocin, 10% calcium gluconate, 0.5-1.5 ml/kg body
causes of primary inertia may be an inherited predis-
 q s ( 97 1o p 1 07  1m
 position, nutritional imbalance, fatty infiltration of
by slow i.v. infusion (1 ml/min) with careful monitor-
the myomctrium, age-relatcd changcs, deficiency in
ing of thc hcart ratc. Bitches of some of the saller
neuro-endocrine regulation, or systemic disease in
breeds may be especially prone to hypoglycaemia,
the dam. Primary compiete uterine inertia is the
particularly after prolonged straining. In such cases, a
failure of thc uterus to begin labour at full term.
dilute (10-20%) glucosc solution can be added to the
Primary partial uterine inertia occurs when there is
infusion or given i.v. in doses of 5-20 ml. The recom-
enough uterine activity to initiate parnurition but
insufficienl. to complete a normal birth of all fctuscs
in the absence of an obstruction.
Secondary uterine inertia is always due to exhaus-
of the birth canal and should be distinguished from
Anus
primary inertia.
Management: In cases of primary uterine inertia, the
 owners should initially be instructed to try to induce
straining by actively excrcising thc dam, for instance
by running aroiund the house or up the stairs with her.
A considerable number of puppies and kittens are born
in the car on the way to thc vctcrinary surgery. Most of
these wouldl probably have been delivered in the calm
and quiet of home had the owners tried to induce
straining themselves, thus giving the puppies and
kitltcns a better start in lifc and possibly also rcsulting
Vulva
in the whole litter being born without further interven-
Figure 12.6: “Feathering'. The roof of the vagina is ‘tickled’
tion. Another means of induction of straining in the
with the fingers to stiulate contractions.
Parturition 133
mended dose of oxytocin for the bitch is 1-5 IU given
markedlly disturbcd. Somctimcs thc carly stages
i.v. or2.5-10 IU i.m. and for the queen 0.5 IU given i.y.
may be mistaken for mastitis of the rear
or i.m., which can be repeated at 30-minute intervals.
 mammary glands. The condition is corrected by
The total maximum dose should never exceed 3 IU in
surgery, whereby the uterine horn(s) are
the cat. The response to treatment will hc rcduccd with
repositioncrl and the hcrniation sutured. In cases
each repeated administration. Higher doses than rec-
with circulatory disturbance and advanced tissue
ommended or too frequent administration may result
damage the uterus will have to be removed
in prolonged contracture of the myometrium, prevent-
Congenital malformationsofthe uterus,c.g, partial
ing fetal expulsion and impeding utero-placental blood
Or complete aplasia or hypoplasia of one or both
flow. The disadvantages of oxytocin include a ten-
uterine horns, or of the corpus uteri or the cervix,
dency to cause premature induction of placental sepa-
are rarc canscs of malcrnal obstructivc dlyslocia.
ration and cervical closure. If there is no rcsponsc to
 Symptoms depend on the character and degree of
 treatment after a second administration of oxytocin the
the malformation. In cases of unilateral aplasia of
 dam should be delivered without further delay, either
an entire uterine horn, small litter size may be the
with the aid of obstetrical forceps if only onc or two
 only presenting sign. Retained fetuses behind
puppies or kittens remain and are within easy reach in
partial occlusions require surgery, and the final
the uterine corpus, or by Caesarean operation.
diagnosis is usually made during the operation
The long-acting ergotaimines should ncvcr bc uscd
Soft tissue abnormalities such as neoplasms,
in connection with parturition.
vaginal septa or fibrosis of the birth canal may
cause obstructive dystocia. The prepartum
Treatment regimen:
relaxation of thie vagina will often allow the
passage of fetuses in cases of neoplasia,
 Running with the dam, and feathering of the
especially if the tumour is pedunculated. Vaginal
vaginal vault
septa may consist of rennants frorm the fetal
 A 10% solution of calcium gluconate is given
Millerian duct system, but can also occur
slowly i.v. while carefully checking the heart rate
secondary to vaginal trauma or infection, and if
 The dam is given 30 minutes to respond to
extensive may prevent the passage of the fetuscs.
treatment. If straining begins, the treatment can
Often, however, they are not so extensive, and
be repeated if necessary or continued with
vaginal relaxation is sufficient to allow the
oxytocin
fetuses to pass. Cervical or vaginal fibrosis are
If the calcium infusion has no effect within 30
usually sccondary to trauma or inflammalory
minutes, oxytocin is given i.v. or i.m.
 processes and in severe cases. will cause dystocia.
 The dam again is given 30 minutes to respond to
Surgical intervention may save the puppies/
treatment. If straiming begins, the trcatiment. can
killens in thesc cases, and tumours and septa
 be repeated if necessary, although each additional
formations may be removed. In cases of fibrosis,
 administration will elicit a weaker response
however, surgery is seldom successful because
If nothing happens within 30 minutes, it is not
of new scar formation during the healing process
likcly that furthcr treatment will be successful.
 Narrow pelvic canal causing obstructive
The dam should be delivered, either by forceps if
dystocia. This may result from previous pelvic
only one or two fetuses remain and are within
fractures, inmaturity or congenital malformation
easy reach, or by Caesarean operation.
of the pelvis. The normal pelvis has a vertical
diameter greater than the horizontal (Figure
Obstruction of thc birth canal
12.7). Congenitally narrow birth canals exist in
Obstruction of the birth canal may be of maternal or
some brachycephalic and terrier breeds; in
fetal origin. Some maternal causes for obstruction are:
addition, their fetuses have comparatively large
heads and wide shoulders. When achondroplasia
Uterine torsion, and uterine rupture. Thcsc are
cxists, as in thc Scollish Tcrricr, dorso-ventral
acute, life-threatening conditions that can occur
flattening of the pelvis modifies the normal
during late pregnancy or at the time of
pelvic inlet, which creates an obstruction to the
parturition. Somctimes a fcw fctuscs are bon
engagement of the fetuses. In the Bulldog, the
before parturition stops and the condition of the
very large, deep chest and pronounced waist
 dam may quickly deteriorate. Surgery is always
results in the gravid uterus dropping down, and
required and a quick diagnosis essenial for the
the fetuses being presented at arelatively acute
survival of the dam
angle to the pelvic inlet. Bulldogs sometimes
Uierine malposition resulting from inguinal
 also have slack abdominal nmusculature, leading
herniation usually is detected around week 4 of 
to insufficient uterine contractions and
pregnancy, as the fetal uterine enlargements are
abdominal straining to lift the fetus up into the
growing and the contour of the abdomen is
pelvic cavity.
134Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
In dystocia due to an oversized fetus, sometimes a
portion of the fetus may protrude from thc vulva. In
anterior presentation the head may be born, and thc
shoulders andchestcauseobstruction,whilstinposterior
presentation the hind limbs and hips may protrude.
Posterior presentation
This is considered normal in dogs and cats,occurring n
40% of fetal deliveries (Figure 12.4). Posterior presen-
tationshave,however,beenrelated to apredisposition
fordystocia,as mechanical dilationofthe cervix maybe
inadequate,particularly where this involves the first
fetus to be delivered.In addition the expulsion is ren-
deredmore difficultbecause thefetusisbeing delivered
againstthe directionofitshaircoat and becausethefetal
chest instead of being compressed becomes distended
by the pressure from the abdominal organs through the
diaphragm.Occasionally thefetus mayhave theelbows
hooked around the pelvic brim, preventing further ex-
pulsion.Should the fetus become lodged in the pelvic
canal,pressureontheumbilicalvesselstrappedbetween
thefetal chestwallandmaternal pelvicfloormaycause
Figure12.7:Thenormal caninepelvis.Itis evident that the
hypoxia andreflex inhalation of fetal fluids.
innerpelvicarea isslighilyoval.Thediagonalis longerthan
the transverse conjugata;twisting apuppy thet is stuck in a
Breech presentation
diagonalpositionmay thereforehelp.
Breech presentation,ie.posterior presentation with
hindlegsflexed forwardcanbea serious complication,
especially inmedium sized and small breeds.Vaginal
Fetal causes of dystocia
exploration willreveal a tail tipand perhaps the anus and
Fetal obstructionsmaybe caused byoversized fetuses,
the bony structure of thepelvis of thefetus.
malpresentations/malorientations ormonstrositics.
such as hydrocephalus,oedema or various duplica-
Lateral or downward deviation of thehead
tions. Oversize in itself is a cause for malpresentation.
These are two of the most common malpositionings in
Fetaldeathmayresultindystociaduetomalpositioning
thc dog and thc cal. Latcral deviation is considered to
or inadequate stimulation for parturition to begin.A
be especially associated with long-necked breeds such
hcalthyfetusisvery activeduringexpulsionxtnd
as RoughCollies,whereas downward deviationisseen
ing its head and limbs,twisting and rotating to get
in brachycephalic breeds andlong-hcaded brcedssuch
through.In most breeds,the greatest bulk of the fetus
asSealyham andScottish Terriers.Inlateral deviation,
lies inits abdominal cavity,whereas thebonyparts,the
vaginal exploration will reveal just one front leg,the
head and the hips,are comparatively small.The limbs
one contralateraltothedirectionofthedeviationofthe
are short andflexible andrarely cause serious obstruc-
head,i.e.when the head is deviated to the left the right
tion to delivery inthenormal-sizedfetus.
front pawwill befound andviceversa.When there is
a downward deviationof thehead.eitherbothfront
Oversized fetuses
legs and sometimes thenapeof theneck ofthefetuscan
A puppy weight of 4-5%of the weight of the bitch is
bepalpated,orbothfront legs may be flexedback-
considered the upperlimit for uncomplicaled birth.
wards and only the scull of the fctus bereached.
In the absence of monstrosities,oversized fetuses
are often associated with small litter size.In breeds
Backward flexion offrontlegs
in which miniaturizing exists,great isparity ofsize
This condition is especially common when the fetus is
of fetuses within litters may occur,with some greatly
weak,or dead,and is sometimes seen in combination
oversized individuals.Inbrachycephalic breeds like
with deviation of the head,especially downward.or
theBostonTerrier.dystocia occurs from the combina-
bitches of the larger or even medium sized breeds,it
tion of a flattened pelvic inlet and puppies having a
may be possible to deliver a puppy with one or both
large head. The cobby-type cat breeds, such as
front legs flexed.
Persians and Himalayans,with rclativcly lowfertility
and therefore few and large fetuses and also bcing
Transverse or bi-cornual presentation
selected for a large,flat head,may be predisposed
Sometimes a fetus,instead of progressing from the
to obstructive dystocia.
uterine horn through the cervix to the vagina,will
Parlurition 135
 pushed into the uterus, to lie in front of the pelvic girdle
where corrections of position or posture are easier to
perform. This should be done between periods of strain-
ing of the dam, ncvcr working against the uterine
contractions. It should also be remembered that the
widest part ofthe pelvic girdle is usually on the diagonal,
thus rotating thc fctus 45° may crcalc sufficient room for
passage. Generous application of obstetrical lubricant,
for instance liquid paraffin or petroleum jelly or a sterile
water-solublc lubricant, is helpful, especially if the dam
has been in second stage labour for some time.
Depending on the position and posture of the fetus,
a grip should be applied around its head and neck, from
abovc or below (Figure 12.8), whichever is most
convenient, around its pelvis, or around the legs. Care
Figure 12.8: When the puppy's head is within reach, the index
should be taken as the neck and lirmbs of the fetus arc
and rmiddle fingers are used to grusp itfrom below, orcbove, antd
casily tomm when pulled. Correction of posture may be
caudo-veniral Iracfion is applied. Redrawn cfler Shille (1983).
a qno sg a go uogndu a puo
proceed into the contralateral uterine horn, possibly
abdominal wall with one hand, and concurrent trans-
due to some obstruction. Another reason may bc thal
vaginal manipulation with the other. A finger may be
the fetus was implanted close to the corpus uteri. If at
introduced into the mouth of the fetus to help correct a
all possible to reach, the only thing that can be feltis the
downward deviation of the.head. Should it be neces-
back, the ribcage or the ahdomen of the fetus. These
sary to changc the posturcs of the limbs, a fingcr is
cases always require surgery, as there is no possibility
inserted past the elbow or knee and the limb moved
for manual correction.
medially in under the fetus and corrected.
A gently applicd alternating right-to-left tractiou of 
Two fetuses presenting simultaneously
the puppy or kitten (Figure 12.9), gently rocking it
Sometimes one fetus from each horn is presented at the
samc timc, jamming the birth canal. Whcn possible, if
une is coming back wards, this one should be reimovcd
first, as it occupies more space.
Management of fetal malpresentations
If a fetus is present in the birth canal, manipulation by
hand or by obstetrical forceps may be aftempted, more
easily inthebitch than in thequeen. Inbitchesof thelarger
breeds it may even be possible toinsert one hand through
 the vagina into the utenus and thus extract the puppy.
During natural birth,thcpuppy willalmost make afull
somersault, emerging from the loop of the uterine horn,
 progressing upwards to passthrough the pelvic canal and
then down again through the long vestibulum of thc bitch,
the vulva being situated some 5-15 cm below the level of
the pelvic floor. In the queen, the vagina and vestibulum
are placed rmore in alignment with the pelvic floor. Thus,
after seizing the fetus, a gentle traction in posterio-ventral
(bitch) or posterior (cat) direction is applied.
The position of thc fetus imust bc asscsscd. If it has
advanced into and partly through the pelvic canal, it will
in the bitch create a characteristic bulge of the perineal
region, below the tail. Easing thc vulvar lips upwards
may reveal the amniotic sac and the position of the fetus.
Vaginal exploration and maybe also a radiographic
examination will aid in making a diagnosis in the cases
when the fetus has not advanced as far.
Figure 12.9: The puppy should be rurned aiternatetly to each
 The narrowest part of the birth canal is within the
sicle to euse the shoulders and the rest of the body free. It
rigid pclvic girdle. If manipulation is to be attempted,
should also be twisted intoa diagonal position to create
the fetus that cannot easily be pulled out rmay havc to hc
more space for tlelivery.
136ManualofSmallAnimal Reproduction andNeonatology
backand forth or from side tosideandpossibly
twistingit to adiagonal positionwithin thepelviswill
helpfreetheshouldersorthehipsoneatatime.Aslight
pressure appliedover theperineal bulgemayprevent
thefetusfrom slidingback into theuterus again be-
tween strainings.
Obstetrical forceps (Figure 12.10) should only be
usedfor assisted traction of arelativelyoversized
fetus,whenitislikelytherestofthepuppiesinthelitter
are smaller orwhen justone or twofetusesremain.
Guide the forceps with a finger and never introduce
themfurtherthantotheuterinebodybecauseoftherisk
of getting part of the uterine wall within the grip,
therebycausing seriousdamage.Ifthehead ofthefetus
can bereached,thegripshouldbe appliedaround the
neck (Palsson’s forceps)or across the cheeks.In post-
eriorpresentation,the grip should be around the fetal
Figure12.10:Various obstetrical forceps.From left:
pelvis.If the legs can bereached the grip should be
Berlirkfrprhtrp
around those,not around the feet.
Berlinerforceps,Robertson'forceps,andwotypesf
Palsson'sforceps.
Outcome of obstetrical treatment:Studiesreporting
Neglected dystocia
ontreatmentoutcomeshowthat digital manipulation
Prophylaxis (history of previous deliveries).
includingforcepsdeliveryand/ormedicaltreatment
for dystocia is successfulin only 27.6% of cases
ProphylacticCaesarean operation should be ques-
in bitches and 29.9% in cats.Around 65% of
tioned on ethicalgroundsifitisperformed to assistthe
bitches and almost80%ofqueensbrought to theclinic
propagation ofabreedlinethatcannotreproduce
because of dystocia thus enduphavinga Caesarean
successfullywithout intervention.
operation.
Once a decision hasbeenmade todeliverthelitter
In our study,fetal dcath increased from 5.8%in
by Cacsarean operation shouldbecarried outwithout
bitchesbrought inwithin1-4.5 hours after thebegin-
delay.Thedam has oftenendurcd hoursof moreor less
ning of second stage labour to 13.7% in the period
intensivelabour,andmaybesufferingfromphysical
between5and24hours.Overallfetaldeathwas
exhaustion,dehydration,acid-base disorders,hyo
22.3%.Early diagnosis and prompt treatment is there-
tension,hypocalcaemia and/or hypoglycaemia.Thc
fore crucial inreducingpuppy orkitten deathrate in
prognosisforbothdamandoffspringisgoodif surgery
cases of dystocia.
isperformedwithin12hours after theonsetofsecond
stagelabour;itcontinues tobefairlygoodforthedam
after12hoursbutguardedforthefetuses.If more than
CAESAREANOPERATION
24hourshavepassed after theonset of second stage
labourtheentirelitterisusuallydead andfurtherdelay
Criteria
compromises the lifeof the dam.
The indicationsfor Caesarean operation include:
Anaesthesia
Completeprimaryuterine inertia that doesnot
respondtomedicaltreatment
Special considerations
Partial primary uterine inertia that isrefractory to
Maternal physiological alterationsduringpregnancy
medicalmanagement
increasetheriskof anaesthetic-related complications
Secondary uterine inertiawith inadequate
for the dam.The functional residual capacity(FRC)is
resumption of labour
decreasedbyanteriordisplacement of thediaphragm
Abnormalities of the maternal pelvisorsoft
by the gravid uterus,andoxygen consumption during
tissuesof thebirthcanal
pregnancy increases by 20%,which makes pregnant
Relativefetal oversize,ifconsideredlikelyto be
animalssusceptibleto hypoxia.Consequently supple
repeated in several fctuses
mental oxygen is advisable during induction and
Absoluteoversize,singlepuppy syndromeor
anaesthesia.
fetal monstrosity
Increased sensitivity ofthe respiratory centre to
Excess or deficiency of fetal fluids
arterial carbon dioxide tension duringpregnancy rc-
Fetalmalpositionnotamendabletomanipulation
sultsinincreasedminute volume ofventilation and
Fetal deathwithputrification
respiratory alkalosis.Thematernal pHisnot affected
Toxaemia of pregnancy andillness of the dam
due torenal compensation.Duringfirst stage labour,a
Parturition 137
further increase in minute volume due to an incrcasc in
dosages (0.03-0.05 mg/kg) and whcn absolutcly nec-
respiratory ralc, causcd by pain and anxiety, may result
essary, since they cause maternal hypotension. They
in aninitial rise inpH which, as labourprogresses, may
cross the placenta rapidly but do not affect the fetus
change into a metabolic acidosis. The acid-base status
when given in clinically useful doses.
of animals presented for emergeiicy Caesarcan scction
varies widely from respiratory alkalosis to metabolic
Anticholinergics: Atropine or glycopyrrolate can be
acidosis.
administered as premedication to patients in which
In the normal dam, increased blood volume pro-
excessive salivary sccrction or brardycardia is likcly, or
vides an adequate reserve to compensate for the large
to prevent vagal reflexes when the gravid uterus is
quantities of blood and fluid lost at parturition. Nor-
lifted out of the abdomen. The cat is prone to vagal
mally the bitch and queen are relatively resistant to
reflexes which makes thc ardministration of
supine hypotension due to partial vcna caval occlusion
anticholincrgics bcncficial. Doses of atropine are
 and aortic compression when placed in dorsal recum-
0.02-0.1 mg/kg in the dog and 0.045-0.1 mg/kg in the
 bency. However, dehydration, bleeding and inhibition
cat (s.c.). Glycopyirolate does not cross the placental
of maternal compensatory mechanisms by anacsthetic
harricr and thcrcfarc docs nol alter fetal heart rate
 drugs increase the risk of supine hypotension. Changes
which makes it preferable. The recommended dose of
in position (tilting laterally to left or to right), reduction
glycopyrrolate is 0.0l mg/kg i.m. in the dog and cat.
 of the time spent in dorsal recumbency and additional
cardiovascular support (intravenous fluids and ino-
Benzodiazepines: Diazepam and midazolam produce
tropic agents) may be necessary. Regardless of physi-
minimal cardiopulmonary depression in bothi dam and
cal status, all animals undergoing Caesarean operation
fetus and are therefore useful premedications. Unfor-
- a) sunos piosao saq qid pnors
- d  s a   
tated Ringer solution) given i.v. at 10-20 ml/kg/h.
 citement in the patient. Diazepam can be given to the
Catecholamines with predominantly β-adrenergic
cat in doses up to 0.5 mg/kg i.n. and to the dog 0.1-0.5
activity, such as dlobutamine ur ephedrine, are pre-
mg/kg i.v. or from 0.3-l mg/kg i.m. Midazolam is
ferred as inotropic agents. Dobutamine is administered
twice as potent as diazepam and can be administered to
as a continuous i.v. infusion at 1-10 μg/kg per mimute,
the dog in dosages of 0.2-0.5 mg/kg. Flumazcnil, a
and ephedrine can be administered at a dosage of 0.03-
specific benzodiazepine antagonist, may be adminis-
0.06 mg/kg i.v.
tered to reverse maternal or fetal lethargy and muscle
 Animals presented for Caesarean operation should
relaxation in a ratio of 1:13 (flumenazil: benzo-
 be assumed to have a full stomach, as thc timc of thc
diazcpinc).
last feeding is unknown. Pregnant animals also have
delayed gastric emptying,resulting in an increased risk
Regional anaesthcsia
 of vomiting and rcgnrgitation during anacsthesia.
Regional anaesthesia by lumbo-sacral epidural a-
Anaesthetic techniques for Caesarean operation
 αqesthesia causes minimal fetal depression. Require-
should provide adequate surgical anaesthesia for the
ments for sedation of the nervous dam may necessitate
darn whilc minimizing maternal and fetal depressiun.
the administration of depressant sedative drugs. The
Selection of the anaesthetic technique depends on the
spinal cord terminates more caudally in the cat than in
status of the dam, viability of the fetuses, expected
the dog making the technique more risky, and in
advantages and disadvantages of the techniques avail-
addition the temperament of the cat almostcxclusivcly
able and experience of the veterinary surgeon. Speed is
necessitates sedation. Disadvantages of the technique
an important consideration; increased anaesthesia time
include prolonged (over one hour) paralysis of the
may lead to increased neonatal dcprcssion and
hindlcgs, and the possible inrluction of matcrnal hypo-
asphyxia. The surgical preparations of the dam should
tension from sympathetic blockade. The cranial infil-
preferably be performed prior to the induction of
tration of local anaesthetic into the epidural space may
anacsthcsia. Drugs affect thc fctus cithcr dircctly by
 lead to paralysis of the respiratory muscles in the dam
CTussing thc placcntal barrier or indirectly by altering
and thereby respiratory arrest. Elevation of the dam's
maternal cardiopulmonary function, Drug-induced
head, administration of intravenous fluids and avoid-
cardiopulmonary depression is dose-dependent.
ance of excessive doses of local anaesthetic minimize
necessitating the use of low doses of anaesthetic.
 maternal and fetal depression. The addition of adrena-
For details of different anaesthetic drugs and
line decreases the risk of cranial infiltration, but also
techniques a textbook in veterinary anaesthesia is
prolongs the effect of the local anaesthetic. Rc-
recommended.
commended doses of lidocaine 2% are 0.2 ml/kg in
the cat and 0.1-0.3 ml/kg in the dog, injected into the
Premedication
cpidural spacc in small aimounts until thc desircd cffect
is achieved. Pregnancy decreases the dosc rcquired in
Phenothiazine tranquillizers: Acepromazine or pro-
the dog. and 1 ml/6 kg is generally satisfactory in
mazine for premedication should only be used at low
 bitches presented for Caesarean operation.
138 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Regional anaesthesia by local infiltration in the
rccovcry and lcss vigorous offspring. Propofol can
 abdominal wall requires sedation of the dam which can
also be given as intermittent injections or as a continu-
 be achieved by administration of the α2-adrenoreceptor
ous infusion (0.8 mg/kg/min in the dog, 0.5 mg/kg/min
agonist medctomidinc. The depressant effect on the 
in the cat) but because of placental diffusion this
fetuses may be reversed by the application of one drop
Tcgimen is nol advisablc for Caesarean operation.
 of the specific antagonist atipamezole on the tongue of
the felus.
Saffan (Maltinckrodt Veterinary Ltd): Thisis a steroidal
 preparation of alphaxalone and alphadolone acetate
General anaesthesia
which may be used for induction of anaesthesia in the
 The main disadvantage of general anaesthesia com-
cat. Reconimended doses for the unsedated cat are
 pared to regional anaesthesia is that it induces greater
from 3 mg/kg up to 18 mg/kg i.v. or i.m. depending on
 neonatal depression.
the required duration of action (9 mg/kg givcs 10-15
Advantages of general inhalation anaesthesia, a
 minutes). The use of Saffan in the dog is contraindi-
technique wcll known to most veterinary surgeons,
cated. as it causes a massive release of histanine.
include optimum operating conditions and tracheal
intubation, which ensures control of the matermal air-
Ketamine: Ketamine can be used for general anaesthe-
way and provision of a routc for maternal oxygen
sia or for induction prior to inhalation anaesthesia.
administration. All inhalant anaesthetics rapidly cross
Ketamine should not be used as the solc anacsthctic
the placental barier, and the degree of neonatal de-
agent as it causes convulsions and hallucinations,
pression is depcndlcnt on thc agcnt, the duration and
especially in the dog. however the prior administration
depth of anaesthesia. Due to prcgnancy-inrluced in-
of medetomidine prevents these adverse reactions.
 creases in respiratory rate and decreases in lung vol-
The use of xylazine as a sedative in the dam is not
umc, alveolar concentrations of inhaled anaesthetics
recommended because it induces severe respiratory
rise more rapidly in pregnant than in non-prcgnanf
dcpression in both the mother and the fetuses, and
animals. The dose required of the inhalant anaesthetic
impairs uterine and placental blood flow by increasing
can he decreased by addition of 50% nitrous oxide in
peripheral vascular resistance. Ketamine rapidly crosses
 a non-rebreathing or semi-closed circuit. Isofluranc is
thc placcntal barrier, causing dose-dependent fetal
useful for Caesarean operation because it is mostly
depression. It is often used in cats for general dissocia-
Si %i  ssn p an qno p
tive anaesthesia and causes minimal neonatal depres-
melabolizcd in the body.
sion administered in low doses (1 mg/kg i.v., 5 mg/kg
 Induction of anaesthesia by face-mask is an alter-
i.m.) after sedalion with medletomidinc (80-100 mg/
native in the quiet bitch but requires adequate gas
kg). The dose of medetomidine in the dog varies from
scavenging. Anxicty and rcluctance to breathe through
30 to 80 mg/kg, depending on the size of the dog
the mask causes uneven supply of the drug to the bitch
(higher dose to smaller dogs) in the combination of a
alld may induce hypotension. An option in the queen is
subsequent i.m. injection of 5 mg/kg ketamine.
to induce anaesthcsia in a gas-chambcr.
Atipamezole, an antagonist to medetomidine, given to
the fetuses (one drop on the tongue) reverses thc
Barbiturates: These are often used as a single bolus for
depressant effect of medetomidine. The dosage of
induction of anaesthesia. Barbiturates cross the pla-
atipamezole in the cat is 2.5 tines the dosage of
cental barrier and cause great respiratory depression in
medctomidinc administercd and in the dog 5 times
the fetuses but short-acting barbiturates such as thio-
(measured in volumes this gives the same volume of
pentonc and the ultra-short-acting barbiturate
atipaniezole as of medetomidine in the dog and half the
methohexitone affect the fetus minimally if adminis-
volume of atipamezole as of medetomidinc in thc cat).
tered in low doses (<8 mg/kg). Pentobarbitone should 
The antagonist should not be administered to the dam
not be used bccausc of its association with prolonged
until the effects of ketaimine have disappeared, if the
anaesthetic recovery, neonatal respiratory depression,
combination is used.
and high incidence of neonatal mortality.
Narcotic agonists: These can be used in combination
Propofol: An alkyl phenol anaesthetic, propofol bas a
with scdatives and tranquillizers in neuroleptanalgesic
short duration of action making it useful for Caesarean
mixtures to produce analgesia and sedation in the dog.
operation. In the dog an i.v. bolus (4-6 mg/kg) can be
The commercially available mixture of fentanyl and
used for induction of anaesthesia. The technique em-
(luauison causcs lcss nconatal dcprcssion than barbitu-
ployed is to wait until propofol is eliminated (about 18
rates but is said by owners to alter maternal behaviour
 minntcs) and then maintain anaesthesia by inhalation
in the bitch. Recomumended dose is 0.3-0.5 ml/kg. The
of gas before removal of the fetuses. This has given
Use of fentanyl in the cat is contraindicatcd, as it causes
good results with live puppies and a rapid recovery in
violent excitement. Opicids readily cross thc placenta,
the bitch. For Caesarean operation in the queen (bolus
s  ss is s  
6-7 mg/kg) propofal seems less uscful, giving slower
ratory depression in neonates, which can be reversed
Parturition 139
by administration of naloxone, an opinid antagonist.
Examples of premedication:
Neonates should, however, be closely observed for 
Acepromazine, 0.03-0.05 mg/kg: tranquilliz-
any signs of relapse of depression as it takes several
ing effect
days for thein to eliminate the opioids.
Diazcpam, ≤ 1 mg/kg (dog), ≤0.5 mg/kg (cat):
tranquillizing and musclc rclaxing cffccts 
Neuromuscular blockers
Atropine, 0.02-0.1 mg/kg (dog), 0.045-0.1
Neuromuscular blocking agents such as succinyl-
mg/kg (cat) or glycopyrolate 0.01 mg/kg:
choline, pancuronium, vcrcuronium, and alracurium 
anticholinergic effects
 may be useful to improve skeletal muscle relaxation
during light anaesthesia. Maternal ventilation and an-
1. Induetion of gcncral anaesthesia, without
algesia must, howcver, be provided. Thesc drugs do
premedication:
not cross the placenta in a quantity sufficient to induce
Gas mask (dog), gas chamber (cat)
fetal depression. When using succinylcholine, atro-
 Uira-short-acting barbiturate, <8 mg/kg
pine should be given to prevent bradycardia in the dam.
Propofol bolus, 4-6 mg/kg (dog), 6-7 mg/kg
Suggested anaesthetic protocols for Cacsarcan
(cat)
operation are listed in Figure 12.11.
Maintenance of general anaesthesia by inhalation
of volatilc agent; isoflurane (or halothane); and
remove the fetuses as soon as possible
POST-PARTURIENT CONDITIONS
2. Induclion of gcncral anaesthcsia, with pre-
It is normal for the bitch and qucen to have a slighily
medication:
 elevated rectal temperature, up to 39.2 *C, for a couple
 Saffan in the cat, 3-18 mg/kg
of days after parturition. It should, however, notexceed
Short-acting barbiturate, <8 mg/kg
 39.5 °C. Fcvcr during this pcriod usually emanates from
Ketamine 5 mg/kg (dog), 1 mg/kg i.v. (cal).
conditions of the uterus or the mammary glands.
Maintenance by inhalation of volatile agent;
isoflurane (or halothane); and delay removal of
Uterinc disorders
fetuses to allow rcdistribulion/ mctabolism of drugs
Haemorrhage
3. Lumbo-sacral epidural anaesthesia:
Some haemorrhage from the female genital tract after
Lidocaine 2%, 0.1-0.3 m1/kg (dog), 0.2 1nl/kg
parturition is normal, but maternal blood loss should
(cat), injected into the epidural space; often
never exceed a scant drip from the vulva. True haem-
rcquircs premedication
orrhage should be distinguished from normal vaginal
Causes minimal felal depression, but may cause
post-parturient discharge. Excessive haemorrhage
hypotension in the dam
after parturition may indicate uterine or vaginal tear-
4. Reversible, dissociative anaesthesia by the
ing coagulation defect. The haematocrit should be
combination of:
checked, remembering that 30% is normal for the bitch
Medetomidine, 30-80 mg/kg (dog), 70-100
al tcrrn. Inspcction of the vulva and vagina should be
mg/kg (cat)
 performed in an atternpt to locate the source of the
AND
bleeding. Oxytocin can be administered to promote
Ketainine, 5 mg/kg i.m. (dog, cat)
uterine involution and contraction of the uterine walls;
Reverse deprcssant cffccts of mcdctomidinc with
in more severe cases of uterine haemorrhage an ex-
the antagonist atipamezole:
ploratory laparotomy may be necessary. The dan
dog: sane volume as medetomidine i.m.
should be monitored closely for signs of impending
cat: balf the volume as medetomidine i.m.
shock, and blood transfusion may be required while
 neonates: one drop on the tongue
attempting to determine the cause of the haemorrhage.
Retained placentas/fetuses
Figure 12.ll: Suggested anuesthetie protocols for
Retained placentas in the bitch or queen may cause
Caesarean operation.
tained fetuses or infection. Clinical signs of retained
forceps is souetimes possible: Treatment with oxy-
placenta include a thick dark vaginal discharge. Re-
tocin 1-5 IU (bitch) or 0.5 IU (queen) s.c. or i.m. 2. 4
Aq no uonedied fq penmuap! aq uea sasnay pauei
times daily for up to 3 days can help expulsion of
ultrasound or radiographic cxamination. A retained.
rctained placcntas. Thc long-acting crgot alkaloids
 placenta is often palpable, depending on the size of the
should not be used, as they may cause closure of the
dam and degree of involution of the uterus, and extrac.
cervix. Antibiotic treatment is advisable if the dam is
tion by careful 'milking' of the utcrine horn or by using
showing signs or illncss.
 140 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Acute metritis
Uterine rupture
 Acute metritis is an ascending bacterial infection of the
Uterine rupture should be considered a possible but
Uerus in the immediate post-partum period. Dystocia,
uncommon cause of illness in the post-parturient
obstctrical manipulation, retained fetuses or placental
period, less frequently seen in the queen than in the
membranes, orparturition in an unsanitary environmcnt
bitch. Uterine rupture can occur when prostaglandin or
 predispose to metritis. Metritis may rarely occur after
oxytocin has been administered for treatment of pyo-
norimal parturition, natural mating or artificial insemi-
metra, metritis or dystocia, or as a complication during
nation or following an abortion. The infecion is usually
 ovariohysterectomy. The condition may occur sponta-
！!
 ascending through an open cervix, and is often caused
neously as a result of dystocia or during an apparently
by Gram-negative bacteria. Clinical signs include: fe-
a ui suno Anfu oi anp no 'uomed jeou
ver, dehycdration, dcprcssion, anorexia, poor lactation
 i nn jo sis io a d
and mothering. and a purulent or sanguino-purulent
clude abdominal pain and distension, and a rapid
vaginal discharge. A doughy enlarged uterus may be
deterioration of the condition of the dam. The diagno-
palpated.
Abdominal
radiographic
and/or
sis is confirmed by exploralory laparolomny, andovario-
ultrasonographic cxamination is indicated to evaluate
hystcrcctomy is the usual treatment combined with
the uterine size and uterine contents. A vaginal culture
 intravenous fluids and antibiotic therapy.
is recommended. Vaginal cytology will show large
numbers of degeneratc neutrophils, red blood cells,
Uterine prolapse
bacteria and debris. The complete blood cell count often
 Uterine prolapse is an uncommon complication during
shows leucocytosis with a left shift. Therapy consists of
parturition. It occurs in primiparous as well as multi-
immediate administration of intravenous fluids and
parous bitches and queens, but is less frequently mani-
antibiotics, and evacuation of uterine contents. The
fested in the bitch than in the queen. The prolapse
lattcr may be accomplishcd hy administering oxytocin
usually occurs immediately or within a few hours after
Orprostaglandin F2a. There is one high-dose regirmen for
delivery of the last neonate. The prolapse can be
administration of prostaglandin Fzα (0.1-0.25 mg/kg
complete with both uterine horns protruding from the
given s.c. once or twice daily for 3-8 days) and one low-
vulva or limited to the uterine body and one horn.
dlose rcgimcn (0.025-0.05 mg/kg s.c., 6-8 times daily
 Treatments includc manual rcposilion, reposition by
for 2-3 days). The high-dose alternative may cause
means of laparotomy, and amputation. Ovariohyster-
adverse reactions such as abdominal pain, increased
ectomy is usually performed.
pulse and respiratory rate, salivary secrction and swcat-
ing. These reactions appear within 10 minutes of admin-
Toxic milk syndrome
 istration and normally disappear again after 30 minutes
 The toxic milk syndrome is poorly documented.
to 1 hour. It should be renembered, howcvcr, thal thc
Pathological conditions in the uterus of the darm may
prostaglandins are not licensed for lse in dogs and cats.
cause toxins to be excreted in the milk. Suckling
In more severe cases ovariohysterectomy is the recom-
offspring that are affected by toxic milk syndrome
 mended treatment.
become vocal and uncomfortahle. Other -signs arc
 diarrhoea, salivation, bloating and a reddened anus.
Subinvolution of placental sites
 Treatment consists of removing the offspring from
In the post-parturient period it is normal for the bitch to
 the dam, and thc arlministration of fluid therapy and
have a serosanguineous vaginal discharge for up to
oral glucose until bloating resolves. If the dam is
3-6 weeks. Normally the uterine involution is com-
 successfully treated for her uterine condition the litter
plctcd within 12 weeks aflcr whclping. Subinvolution
can be returmcd to hcr afler 24-48 hours, otherwise it.
of placental sites is suspected if a sanguineous vaginal
requires hand-rearing.
logy of this condition is unknown, and the bitch often
Mammary gland disorders
shows no symptoms afillness. Vaginal cylology shows
predominantly red blood cells, with syncytial tropho-
Agalactia
blast-like cells being a useful confirmatory finding.
Agalactia, or absence of milk after parturition, may be
Subinvolution of placental sites almost exclusively
(luc to a failure of milk let-down or milk produclion.
affects the young primiparous animal, and in the ma-
True agalactia, failure of milk production, is uncom-
jority of cases resolves spontaneously, with the prog-
 mon but may be obscrvcd after premature parturitions
 or Caesarean operations. Failure of milk let-down may
increased risk of anaemia, secondary bacterial infec-
occur as a consequence of excessive secretion
of
tion or rupture of the affected placcntal sites withl
adrenalinc, resulling from fright or pain, which has a
subsequent peritonitis, the bitch should bc supcrviscd
blocking efect upon the release of oxytocin. Oxytocin
until the disordcr resolves. Ovariohysterectomy is in-
can be administered repeatedly for a few days until
 dicated in rare cases of profound permanent bleeding
nilk flow has been established. Primiparous, nervous
or uterine infection.
 Or confused queens or bitches may expericncc tcimpo-
Parlurition  141.
rary agalactia. Reassurance by the owner and adminis-
Miscellaneous disorders
 the female to settle down, and subsequent suckling by
Pucrperal tctany
the puppies or kittens will enhance milk flow. Other
An acute decrease in exiracellular calcium concenira-
causes of agalactia are physical exhaustion, under-
tion is the cause of puerperal tetany (eclampsia).
nourishment, shock, mastitis, metritis, systemic infec-
Eclampsia occurs most comnionly in dogs of the
tion, and enducrine imbalances.
small breeds, usually within the firsl 21 days afer
 whelping, but occasionally during late pregnancy or
Galactostasis
 at parturition. It has also been reported in cats, but is 
Milk stasis, galactostasis, causes enlarged and wede-
rare. Early signs are restlessness, panting, pacing.
 matous mammary glands which are firm and warm to
whining. salivation, tremors and stiffness. The
the touch. 'The dam shows signs of discomfort and
symptoms aggravate to clonic-tonic muscle spasms,
 pain, and fails to let down milk. The condition should
fever, tachycardia, miosis, seizures and death.
be differentiated from mastitis and agalactia. The aeti-
Treatment must be instigated immediately and con-
ology is unknown in dogs and cats but it mostly occurs
sists of slow intravenous infusion of a 10% calcium
in the most productive glands (the rwo most caudal
 borogluconate solution. The dosage required yaries
pairs) in dams with a high milk production and/or few
from 2 to 20 ml in the dog and from 2 to 5 ml in the
puppies, or in glands with malformed teats that the
cat, depending on the degree of hypocalcaemia and
offspring avoid when suckling. Anothcr cause can be
the size of the dam. Careful cardiac monitoring
that nursing comes to an abrupt end due to death of the
for bradycardia and arrhythmias is important. If
litter or sudden weaning. Torelieve mammary conges-
arrhythmia or vomiting occurs, the infusion must be
tion the owner can apply gentle massage and warm-
temporarily halted, then if necessary resuned at a
watcr comprcsses to the mammary glands and carcful
slowcr ratc. As hypoglycaemia may follow hypo-
milking relieves some of the pressure. Sometimes it
calcaemia, the intravenous administration of a 10%
 dextrose solution has been recommended. The puppies
neonatcs to thc dan. Treatment includes reducing food 
or kittens should be rcmovcd from the dam and
intake and the administration of a mild diuretic. Ne-
 hand-fed acanine/feline milk supplement for 24 hours.
glected galactostasis may lead to mastitis or involution 
If the litter is 4 weeks old or more, it is advisable to
 of the mainmary gland. Cabcrgolinc, a dopaminc ago-
wcan thcm. Oral supplcmcntation of the lactating
nist, at 2.5-5 μg/kg per day orally for4-6 days reduces
dam (having experienced eclampsia) with calcium
prolactin secretion and thereby lactation. The use of
 carbonate at 100 mg/kg body weight per day, divided
 dopamine agonists should be restricted to dams who
with meals, and vitamin D is recommended. Prophy-
have either lost their litter or have a litter old enough to
lactic calcium treatment during the course of preg-
be weaned.
 probably is contra-indicated, as it may cause a distur-
Acute mastitis
bance of the calcium homeostasis.
Acute mastitis in the bitch and the queen occurs from
haematogenously spread bacterial infections or from
Disturbances in maternal behaviour
bacteria ascending thraugh the tcat orificcs. Prcdispas-
Good malcrnal bchaviour includes nest building.
ing factors include mammary gland congestion, trauma
 nursing, protecting and for the dam to spend most of
and poor sanitary conditions. The mammary glands
the time with the litter for at least the first 2 weeks.
become hot, painful and enlarged; thc milk shows
Most bitches and qucens have strong maternal in-
increased viscosity and changes in colour from yellow
stincts but their behaviour depends strongly upon
to brown depending on the amount of blood and
their hormonal balance, general health and the envi-
purlent exudate present. Clinical signs include fever,
ronmcnt. In somc brecds, thcre is a higher occurrencc
anorexia, and depression in the dam, The offspring
of bad mothering, suggesting a heritable factor. Sub-
may be restless and crying. Milk cytology reveals the
limation, close emotional attachment to a human
presencc of dcgcncratc ncutrophils, red blood cells and
being, inay cause problems at parturition when the
bacteria. Culture of the milk often shows growth of
dam may manifest panic andl *regard hcr olfspring
Staphylococcus spp.,Streptococcus spp.or Escherichia
with horror and disgust'. In contrast, a dam may
coli. Trcatmcnt consists of adcquate antibiotics, appli-
resent human intervention, not accepting assisted-
cation of warm-water compresses and massage of
birthing and Cacsarean-delivered offspring and may
 mammary glands. If abscessation of the glands occur,
sometimes even kill them.:Major disturbing factors
surgical debridemcnl and drainagc is essential.
during and after parturition, mental instability or pain
Untreated acute mastitis may result in gangrenous
po su r i in ra a a a
 mastitis and septic shock. Depending on the severity of
health, quiet and familiar surroundings and, most
the condition the litter may stay with the dam or has to
important of all, presence of her young will promote
be separated and hand-reared.
normal matcrnal behaviour.
142 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
REEERENCESANDFURTHERREADING
Linde-Forsberg C and Forsberg M (1993) Results of 527 controlled
urtificial inseninalions in dogs. Journuai of Reprucluetiarr und
Feriliy、47 (Suppl.), 313-323
Concanuon PW, McCann JP and Temple M ([989) Biology and
 Long S (1996) Abnormal development of the conceptus and its
endocrinology of ovulation, pregnancy and parturition in the dog.
consequences. In: Vererinary Reprodiction and Obsterrics, 7tht
Joumal of Reprodiction and Feriity, 39(Suppl.), 3-25
ednt, ed. GH Arthur er a., p 110-133. WB Saunders, London
Darvelid AW and Linde-Forsberg C (1994) Dystocia in thc bitch: a
Mosicr JE (1978) Intraduction to caninc pcdiatrics. Vererinary Ciunies
retrospective study of I82 cascs. Jouat ofSmmit Aninat Pracrice
of North America: Small Animal Practice 8, 3-5
35,402407
Okkens AC,Hekermun TWM, de VogelIWA and vun Hualten B (1993)
Ekstrand C and Linde-Forsberg C (1994) Dystucia in the cat: a
Inluenceo liter sizeand breedon yarintiouinlengthof gestation
,.
retruspeclive strdy of 155cases. Jourwat ofSmaitAnimut Practice
in the dog. The Vererirury Qurerly IS, 160..161
35, 459-464
Freak MJ (1948) The whelping litch. The Vererinary Record 60, 295-
rate, gestation and parturition lengths, liter size, and juvenile
30t
mortality in thedomestic cat.JournalofAmerican Animal llospirat
Gunn-Moore DA and Thrusfield MV(195) Teline dystocia: prevalence.
Associarion, 31, 429-433
andassociationwithcranialconformationandbreed.TheVererinary
Record136,350-353
Shillte VM (1983) In: Curren Techiques in Small Animal Sugery, ed.
Hall LW and Clurke KW (1991) Veterinury Anaesihesia. Otr edht.
MJ Bojrab, pp. 338-346. Lea and Febiger, Philadelphia
Balliere Tindall, London
 Steinetz BC, Goldsmith LT, Hasan SHI and Lust G (I990) Diurnal
Hellyer PW (1993) Anaestlesia for cesarean section. Iu: Texrbook of
variation of scrum progcstcronc, but not rclaxin, prolactin or
SmglAriargery,dSlae,p2302303WBars
oestradiol-17beta in the prcgnant bitch. Endocrmnotogy 127,
Philadelphia
1057-1063
Jackson PGG (ed.) (1995) flandbook of Veterinary Obsterrics. WB
van der Weyden GC,Tuverne MAM,Dielemun SI und Fomijue P(198 1)
Saunders, London
The inlauterine position of canine feuses and their sequence of
Jones DE and Joshua JO (1988) In: Reproducrive Ctimical Probiems in
explsionat bithJourtofSlAimlPrice22,503510
the Dog, 2nd edn, cd. N King. Butterworth, Oxford
van der Wayden GC, Taverne MAM, Dieleman SI, Wurth Y, Bevers
MM and van der Qard HA (1989) Physiological aspects of preg-
nancy and parturition in the bich. Jourmat of Reproducrion and
ml). Abstract. Proceedings, Syrpesinn nn Canine and Feline
Ferri/iry 39. 211-224
Wallace MS (1994) Manugement of purlurition and problems of the
Reproduction, Sydney
anaraa ey arag sma pm ssop Jo pouad uuduad
Laliherte I. (1986) Pregnancy, obstetrics and postpartum management
MedicineundSurgerySrulAninu）928-37
of thequeen. In: CurrenrTherapy inTheriogenology Il,ed. Morrow,
pp. 812-821. WB Saunders, Philadelphia
Verlhage HG, Baemer NB and Brenner RM (1976) Plasma levels af
estradiol and progesterone in the cat during polyestnus, pregnancy
Linde-Forsberg C and Forsbcrg M (l98y) Fertility in dogs in rclation to
and pseudopregnanacy. Rioiogy of Reproduction 14, 579-585.
Willis MB (1989)The inheritance of reproductive traits. In: Generics 0
trozcn semen. Journa! of Reproluetion cnd Fertility, 39 (Suppl.),
rhe Dog, ed. MB Wills, pp. 33-62. IF&G Witherby Ltd, London
299-310
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Congenital Defects
and Fading Puppies
Tony S. Blunden
CONGENITAL DEFECTS
multiple alleles. The passage of genes fron one gen-
cration to the ncxt is called inheritance.
Introduction
Genetic diseases may be caused by a pair of mutant
Congenital defects are defined as abnormalities of
genes, by a single mutant gene or by polygenic inher-
 structurc or function prcscnt at birth and havc bccn
itancc. Thc phenotypic cxprcssion of a genetic dcfect
identified in most major breeds of dog and cat. They
 may be altered by environmentalinfluences or by other
 arise from disruptive events at one or more stages from
 genes.
formation of the blastocyst through embryonic and
fetal development. Although these defects are fre-
Recessive traits
quently thought to have a genetic origin, they may be
The simple autosomal recessive mode of inheritance is
the result of maldevelopment through a variety of
the most common inheritance pattern. The trait is hard
causes. The term 'congenital' does not mean ‘inher-
 to control as the defect only becumes obvious in the
ited', although a defect may be both congenital and
homozygous state (aa) after two heterozygotes (Aa),
inherited. Many defects cannot be identified without
 apparently normal animals, have been mated. The
clinical or pathological investigation. It is estimated
affected offspring receives the abnormal gene from
that congenitaldefects that are severeenough tothreaten
both parents. If there are continued attempts to breed
the viability of the neonate occur at a rate of about
carrier parents, 25% of the offspring will manifest the
1-2% of pcdigrec puppies borm, but only a few studics 
trait but 50% will bc normal carriers. Table 13.1 shows
 are available which record their frequency.
the predicted outcome of all possible matings in rela-
tion to a single autosomal recessive trait.
Inherited diseases
A sudden increase in the occurrence of congenital
Type of mating
Segregation ratio
defects in a breeding colony or breeding line would
Aa
aa
warrant further investigation as lo the cause. A complele
family history and pedigree analysis is required. If is of
AA x AA
1
0
0
 great importance to recognize which defects are of
AA x Au
1
1
0
genetic origin so that controls may be introduced to limit
the breeding from affected animals. Although breerding
AA x aa
0
1
0
from animals with proven or suspected genetic traits is
Aa x Aa
1
2
1
not recommended, confirmation may be obtained by
Aa x aa
0
1
1
 test matings and the mode of inheritance determined so
that possible carrier status may be assessed and testing
D X D
0
0
schcrncs pul in placc to detect carricrs. Eventually
Table 13.1: Predicted outcone of all possible matings i
 genetic screening tesis should become availablc for
relation to a single autosomat recessive trait.
identifying major defects.
Eliminating defective animals usually means that
Inheritance patterns
recessive type anomalies are kept at a low level.
The different forms of a gene that can exist at a
particular site in a chromosome are called alleles. The
Dominant traits
particular site of a gene in a chromosome is called the
 In contrast, with dominant inheritance the particular
locus. The word ^gene' is commonly used in the sense
 trait is cxpresscd in thc hcterozygous state. Normal
of cither allele or locus. Although any one animal can
animals breed true but abnormal parents may produce
havc a rnaximum of only two diffcrcnt alleles at a
both normal and abnormal offspring and therefore
locus, the number of different alleles in a population
dominant diseases can be easily eliminated by remoy-
can be greater than two; the locus is then said to have
ing defective animals from the breeding programinc.
144Manual of Small Animal Reprorduction and Neonatology
These traits,e.g. Factor X and Factor XI coagulopathies,
although exhibiting a narrow range of expression;
are uncommonl.
depcnding on the number uf genes involved there is a
 thrcshold at which the feature changes from one form
No dominance or incomplete dominance
 to the next, e.g. patent ductus arteriosus where the
Sometimes genes have several alleles but do not func-
ductus may be partially closed or completely open.
tion in the usual dominant/recessive manner, so that
 Othcr cxarnples inelude cryptorchidism and umbilical
 the heterozygote exhibits the effect of both alleles. In
and inguinal hernias.
this case, the trait is controlled by eliminating all
abnormal animals from the breeding programmc. Nor.
Sex-linked traits
maland severely abnormalanimals breed true. Slightly
Any trait carried on either of the sex chromosomes
will, by definition, be sex-linked. However it does
25% normal, 50% slightly abnormal and 25% severely
seem that the Y chroinosome is largely inert. The X
abnormal offspring.
chromosume carries the gene for haemophilia A and a
few other defects. The dam can transmit the gene to
Incomplete penetrance
offspring of either sex but a male carrying a certain
Sonctimcs a gene docs not cxprcss itsclf as it should.
 gene on his single X chromosome can only pass this on
If a gene is dominant, then a cormbination such as AA
 to female offspring since male offspring will inherit his
should be identical to Aα because / is dominant to a. If
Y chromosome.
 thc A allcle is 100% pcnctrant, thrcc distinct gcnotypes
(AA, Aa and aa) and two phenotypes (AA and aa)
Sex-limited traits
result, and A always expresses its dominance. How-
 A sex-limited trait is one seen only in one sex, e.g.
ever, if the Aa combination sometimes results in a
lactational yield is only cxprcscd in fcrmalcs but
phenotypic appcarancc of aa, then penetrance is not
inheritance is determined by genes transmitted in both
complete. If Aa showed the dominant trait 75% of the
sexes; cryptorchidism can be transmitted by females
time, this would be termed 75% penetrance. The rea-
but is only manifest in malcs. The traits arc not carried
 on the X and Y chromosomes, but the expression is
limited to the specific gender.
Polygenic inheritancc
Polygenie inheritance is where a trait is controlled by
Chromosomal aberrations
 a number of genes, each with a relatively small effect.
Chromosomal abnormalities are not commonly re-
while in addition there are environmental factors that
ported in the dog and cat. They may arise spontane-
influence the trait to.a greater or lesser degree, c.g.
ously, be inhcritcd or induced by environmental factors.
conformational traits.
Sometimes a chromosome may be duplicated or lost
and an odd number result. The duplication can apply to
Threshold traits
a singlc chromosome or to a whole set. Probably most
     i   
chromosomal abnormalities result in embryonic loss
Defeet
Cumment
Head:
Cle:l pulule/lip
VaiousmhdriesileaeivraitEnglishBldgan
Overshotjaw (rerpgnathia)
IrhetdasasmlrecessiveLongaredDchhdCkeaielgthisafectsrsdPersnad
orundershot jaw (prognathia) h
hreed s:andard) cats
Crenioschisis
Openingtcil vt inckernilmineritedaalhalrat
Otocephalic syndrome
Reportd in the eage a anatsmal recive rait with gade form chacrzedby patial agnahia hydrecephals ad
Axial skeleton:
Verebr:l anomalies:
Congenitahysia of conoid pree (dens) and/rits no-uni with C scon in scvcral smallbreds (eg Pmeranin,
Attantoaxial instabity
Chihuahua)
Spina bifida
ncmn anedslpifvRtediManMaeeacrseSieeat
Dew claws ou lind feet
Autosomal dormirent trait in most breeds
Muscle:
Myapathy
nGolen Reriever onset fom 68 weeks), there s a seveemsaophyoftge/ciapragm.ierited s sex-lnke  
nypyfRevrs)sieridsaivetraitstmlsh
scx-linked irheriedmyopathy manifest from8wccks
Myotonia
[nheried defct ofinaceluarcalcim pmpsstemn Chow and Safforshre llTeier
Defects in body wall:
Umbilical hermia
Inhernteds teshltrait nBasenj,AiedlePekingesandWeraer
Inguinal henia
Inhernted as ehl it inWest Highd White Temer, Basenji Caim, Bsst Hod and Pekingc
Table I3.2: Inherited defects of the musculoskeletal system.
The Neonate: Congenital Defects and Fading Puppies  145
Defect
Comment
Gonadal agcncsis or hypoplasia
Uilateral or bilateral. Probably not inhe:ited
Jntersexuality
Tre cr pseudhemaprodies Disorders of sexual diferentiation involving anomals f XY chromoscmes, gnads nd phenolpe.
Intersexuality can he hereditary or indncer by non-hereditary fac:ors such as progestagen given in pregnancy
Hypaspadias
Abnomal lcationf urinry meals dtncmpletluf eal fds
Persislent Mulleriun duet
Usually see in rylorhid dgs, btowis rmal males Interally boh eses uthed tocranial ends of bieuate us
Cryptorchicism
Unilaeral obilateral, consideedlobe inherited tisder, common in dwarf andbachycephalic hreeds. Persiar andother cat breds
Table 13.3: Inherited defects of the reproductive system.
rather than in congcnital defects. Anomalies of chro-
Types of congenital defect
mosome number can also apply to sex chromosomes,
Congenital defects may affect only a single structure or
leading to XXX, XXY and other combinations such as
reported in the Weimaraner and Cocker Spaniel result-
defects and can often be breed-rclatcd, Thc truc fre-
ing in intersex conditions.
quency of congenital defects is unknown as not all
defects will be manifest at birth or lead to death in the
Non-genetic causes of congenital defects
nconatal pcriod. Some abnormalitics, such as cardiac
These include the use of pharmaceutical drugs in
 defects, only become apparent as the puppy grows
heavier and exercises more, and several eye defects.
with microphthalmos in kittens and cleft palate in
such as progressive retinal atrophy, havc a latc onset of
 puppies; progestational agenls given to the bitch in
progression. Some defects-will only be recognized on
early pregnancy have been reported to cause mascu-
 detailed necropsy or by biochemical/haematological
 linization of the external genitalia of female puppies,
tests in laler life.
with hypcrtrophy of thc clitoris. Corticostcroids arc
 Inborn errors of mctabolism arc cnzyme deficien-
 thought to increase the numbers of anasarcous pup-
cies caused by gene abnormalities. Any metabolic
pies in brachycephalic breeds and have also been
 pathway cann be affected. The defects are usually auto-
linked with skcletaldeformities. Anticonvulsantdrugs
somal recessivc or scx-linkcd recessive. Two main
have been associated with cardiac defects, cleft pal-
types of enzyme deficiency exist: one type results in
ate, microcephaly and othier skeletal anomalies. There-
abnormal storage of metabolic intermediates and the
forc carcful considcration needs to bc given to the
second type involvcs lysosoimal cnzyme deficiencies
 use of any drugs during pregnancy and to possible
which impair degradation of complex carbohydrates.
teratogenic effects.
Many abnormalities are likely to go unrecognized or
 Nutrilional components havc somctimes been in-
are unreported for cconomic reasons. The most fre-
criminated; hypervitaminosis A (125,000 mg/kg) be-
 quently reported defects involve the central nervous,
tween days 17 and 22 has been reported to cause cleft
 ocular, musculoskeletal and cardiovascular systems.
 palates, kinked tails and dcformed auricles in kittens.
 In thc author's own studies on neonatal mortality.
Excess vitamin D has been linked with tissue calcino-
skeletal abnormalities, such as cleft palate and hare lip,
 sis, premature closure of fontanelles, enamel hypo-
were the most common defects encountered. Pure bred
plasia and supravalvular stcnosis.
 dogs arc more frequently affected hy gcnctically causcd
Environmental chemicals are sometimes suspected
 congenital defects than are cross-breeds.
teratogens but are difficult to prove as such. lnfective
The more common congenital defects recognized in
 agents arc occasionally linked with congenital defeccts
C is  Aade um u pu Adnd su
such as feline parvovirus which is known to be a cause
months are summarized in Tables 13.2-13.12 (refer-
of cerebellar hypoplasia in kittens. Observations sug-
ences taken from Leipold, 1978; Willis, 1992; Jubb et
 gest that the effect of a teratogen depends on the stage
αl., 1993; Casal, 1995; Hoskins, 1995a,b). Where inher-
of fetal development. Ifexposurc cccurs during organo-
itability is known, this is indicalcd in the Comment 
 genesis in the first trimester the predominant lesions
column. The prevalence of a condition in a breed is not
involve cephalic, ocular, otic and/or cardiac structures.
 given in the tables, and the order in which the breeds are
If exposure occurs during the transitional period, after
 given tloes not reflect prevalencc ratcs. Since accurate
day 26, the predominant lesions generally involve the
incidence rates are not known, anestimate of prevalence
palate, cerebellum, cardiovascular system and/or the
is considered unwise. The data in different texts may
urogenital system.
diffcr because brecd incidences may differ between
It has to be said that, in many cases, where there is
 countries. With some traits definitive breeding studies
 no clearly inherited pattern, the causes of birth defects
 have elucidated inheritance but in many cases observa-
arc not idcntified or are speculative and the anomalies
 tion of the disease in spccific brccdlines strongly sug-
occur as single, isolated events.
 gests but does not prove inheritance.
146 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Defect
Commen
Malformations:
Cercbellar hiypoplasia
One of the most commor congenital CNS defects Evidence of inheriarce in Chow. Possibly viral causes sch as parvovirus infection
i he cat, or foxic agent also suggested in some cases. Cerhelar dysfuneon fom hith, but nct progressive
Cerebellar abioatraphy
PrmldenentsAtemu1weked
severalbrsnligirdalTieGordtCollitdstaniralarlllvaygt
nccurs in Kerry Blue Temier, autosomal recessive rait probably
Intcrnal hydroceptalus
Nted piaynhCkepai gbmcae byhee,gtyRt
Siamese and other breeds
Spinai dysraphism
Dupliation, aee at  cn l n at46 weeks ndin Wemar psly lo siv it
:1.
Myelinopathies:
Heredilay myelapathy
Progressive aaxia seen in Alghan llund (3-I2 months): may hc inberited as a sirple autosmal rait. Myelinlysis and caviteion
focused iniharacic spinal cord.
Hereditary utaxia
RedFdckliitttiy
Demyclination of ceruin spinal corc tracts
Cental hypomyelinztion znd
Generalized emor by 2-3 wecks of age. Reored in scveral breeds including Chow, English Springcr Spaniel, Samycd, Wcimaanr
clysmyelination
and Bermese Mountain Dog,X-linked inheritancein English Springer Spaniel
:
Xedemu daadH
RecdditaMatifdlisleafCidaylfch
ells O0weeksnidetereessveerit
Axonopathies and neuronopulhies;
Progressive axonopathy
Repordinox,inwhichsidasantmaleceivc at. Lios apat inptbrstm sil
cord. Onse frem & weeks
11
Lysosomal storage diseases:
Globoid eel leroxlystrophly
Ooset al 3-6 monhs ierited in Cair:t and West Highand Temiers and Miniatue Poode as simple amtosoal recessive trait,leading
galactccerebroside β-galacte-
to a dysmyelinogenesis. Also sen in Domesic calt with onset fromn 2 weeks
sidase deficincy
Gangliosidases
Glucocerebrosidosis
Sydney Silky Terrier
Sphingoinycinosis
Miniuture Poodle, Demestic cat, Samese, Balirese
L-L-fucosidosis
Spngamiat
C-1-iduronidosis
Plo:r House, Domestic cat
Anyla-1,6 glucosidosis
German Shepherd Dng, Domesic cat
Paospbafructuskinosis
English Springer Spaniel
Ceroid-lipofuscinosis
Manybrccds includng EnglishSeter, Chaa, Dachshd, Suki ordr Colic, Tian Teir ad mixd brces; Sia
Table 13.4: Inherited defecis of the central nervous system.
Comment
Kidneys:
 Renal agenesis
Bilateraluilateral. Famiial precisposition has bccn notcd in Bcagle, Sheland Shccpdog and Dobermann Pinschcr. May occur with
Renal hypuplasia
Spadiaaelisfakwddfsgalml
Renal dysplasia and aplasia
Dysplaseeetalamaliwheslasnvaleveltf wlekiel laaisfilal
sy ssqu psp s 
Chow and Miniature Schnauzer, Renal dysplasia has also bccn associated with canine herpes virus infecicn
Polycyslic renal disease
Vanable mmerf fuifdcyrs in real arenchyma dividals my he asympmatic ordevelop essive renal fail.
Reportsal in Persian cat and Cairn Terier
Renaf ectopia and lusion
Congenamsfbkiylffmlllt
unknown
Duplex and supernemerary
The presence of ane ar mre accessory kidneys (supemmerary) or an organ comprising wo kineys, pelves and wreters duplex).
Rare
Fanconi syndrome
Generalizd uaydiedinBenjiaEkdheShedheIiy
confirmed
Primary renalglucosuria
o p sap peoq pyu pue n ueao ru pos u poda sn joudoqi e uirad jo vo
inheritance unknown
Cystinuria
 s dsq Apds e pasjdm  jo 
recessive mode of iphcritane in lrish and Seouish Terricrs
Hyperuricuria
Hyperricia pdcn ofuicacideo dfciey ofurase intheDamaan tansmited oy aecessivenon-ex inkedmde
of irheritance
Prinary hypcroxaluria
AcuterlfbioxlaryslaletdiDit
Nephrogeni insipidus diabees
saddnd unnai iond pue emou nsod pue eunod aas 
Ureters:
Agenesis
Lniluteral er bilateral. Unilateral mst commoa, and uscally accompamied by ipsilateral renal alasia
Dupiieation
Associaed with duplex and supernumcrary kidneys
Urereral valvcs
Persistent ransverse folds of vestigial muccsa and smoth muscle
Ectopic lrelers
Lnilateralhilatral; maybeinralrextaraland caneasocate wihhranalf thrigeal actMany
1
ane s rsupalo s rssad   g spp x s
English Blg, West Higland Wht, Sye and Fox e, WehCogi, Golen Rev ad Miniae and y Pol.
Ureterocneles
Congenital cysic dilation of terminal submucosal segment of thc inr2vesicular urer
Table 13.5: Inherited defects of the urinury trucl.
The Neonate: Congenital Defects and Fading Puppics  147
Defect
Comment
Patent ducus arteniosus
Most comnngenit f adishetasaplygeeies tait wi aheefheabiltyino. 
fequemy occus in Poerenn, Cole, la Sleepdg, Mase ud Engish Singer Spails but ny bred my b afcd
Also Siuese, Persian and other cat breds
Subacrtic stenosis
This is the sccond most common defect, and is inherited as a polygenelic threshold trait in the Mewfoundland Iris also common in the
GenRerieveRtwelaoxerMosonlytttioissuba
Pulmanic stenosis
Mnialrunaldlasiaismmcasniridinealasapleneit
Vascular ring ancmalies
Fourth mst mmndfet InhritdithGeman ShehedDg andherat anealsh ahrd predispsiioThy ar 
fanmali whihe fmlmarainfthryniatiache esistengltichwi
ductus alteriosusj being the most comnon form
Ver:lriculur septal defect
LsuallyinlctdhthmjustlwthruidadricalebdedieablisMa
occur in conjunctic: with other ane:malies
Tetralogy of Fa.lol
Thisinlly
aona tha accepts hlood from hoth ventricles. A golygenetic threshold trait l:asbeen estabfished in Keeshonds
Tricuspid valve dysplasia
Reported in lare breed dogs
Milal valve malortion
Reported in Great Dane anl Gernan Sbepherd Dog
Atrial anomalics
Atrial septal defects are suaily fomd in associatn wih oher cardiac anmalies
Endecardial fibroelastosis
Cgealdisehatridylfrfesticlawil
d
Congenitul Hlythun disorders
Venliacxitncisladabmalityndnnionitnmiclnenisionataveri
arthythmias are beritable in some bloedines af German Shepherd Deg. Persistent atial sandstil has been reported in young English
Spnge Sieticthsaysitd wi
afrest, as been descriled ia t Pug
Inbum erors of metabolism
A.pha-glucosidase deficincy alfcting mycardial wction in Lpland Dog andmucopolysaccharidosis I (lysosma nzyme
Q-L-iduronidasc dcficicrcyl in young Ploxt Hound
Extacardiac arteriovcnous
These maye coerialraquidamayffetanypat fth vaar system,t ualle geat vesk,intml  r
fisulas
distal extmemiries
Table 13.6: Inherited defects of ihe cuardiovascular system.
Cormnent
Juvenile onset diabetes
Iosulin depcnent diabetes whichcccus before 1months. te Keeshond, affcteddogs inhrtB-cellatopy as anuosmal
mellius
recessive rait with incomplee penetrance. I is also helieved tnbe inherited as a recessive tait in Golden Reiver
Pitnitary land hypoplasia
PituitywafisstdasaeesirGeprDgandinelanerg
Congenilal iliopathic
This has been seen in he male Toy Poodlc
cenlral diabces insipid:15
Congenital bypotbyroidisnl
Caused by cysgenesis, dyshermonogenesis, serum transport abnormalities, congenital TSH ceficieny, goitrogens and severe iod:ne
deficiyfeiceveib
Table 13.7: Inherited defects of the endocrine system.
Comment
Epiheliogenss ipereta
Rare congenital disconlinuity of scuameus cpithelium
Ichthyosis
Genealz,exteerkeratis adsanDed  Dema nhe, WetH Whte eie, sh e,Co
Hull Terrier, BstonTerier, 1.aralor Retiever, Jack Rusell Terrie
Co:ngenital seborrhoea
Reported in English Springer Spaniel, Puppies levelop patches of hyperkeratusis ur.d seule
Nevus
Circumsribeddvelpmetaldfctithskinarisngfrmpihlalordemalstursracmbinainofboh
Dermoid sinus or cyst
Ocurence is alrg he drsal midine and the sinus rns from skin 1o supraspinous ligzment It is a neral be defct resulting fr
incomplete sepation of skin ad neural tube duing embryogenesis, paticularly in Rhodesian Ridgeback i whichit is aberilable rat
(possibly un uulosonmal recessive)
Hereditary alopccia and
A rare disasc characlerizedby varying degrees of alopecia from birth. Affecied animals have dimmished number of acnexal structures
hypctrichosis cctodermal
in afected aeas. The condition mayoccuralne orin associaticn wit oer ecodemal dfects e.g. abnomal dentition. Mak sex
defecis and dysplasia)
LabdrReiveranRolweileSphixCohRexexiHseni
Ellers-Danlus sypdrome
Suctur tfnin thtsibilfsnlishnlloxG
(cuancous asthcmia)
DogrhadIlahtmaaria
inherited as a doninant autnsomal rait
Acrodermatis
American Bul Terier Ppisshow gowhelardation d ger skin pienati tol, ande walw wellB 6
wecks lesions appear on footpads,cars, muzzlc and around orifices 
Junclional epidermolysis bullosa
 Reporied in nera:al Toy Poodle
年
Pigmentary derects:
Linked witlh deafness
Parillaismyned esngeallwhiuealawidmld
almatianadwhitc cats,and aybe asociatd withcularefcts.Auosmal dminant wihincomleteeneace
Familial vitilgo anc poliosis
Scen in the Rotwciler, usually dats bat somctimcs yong Fppies
Leucotrichia (poliosis)
Repoted i litte of Labrdor Retiever puppies 
Table 13.8: Inherited defects of the skint.
148 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Defeet
Conment
Ilypoplasia of larynx
Inherited as a simple sutosomal recessive trait in Skye Teicr
Tracheal hygoplasia
Seen in frsmnths oflifpeciallyEnlihuldg
Cugeilal diaphagmatichemia
May be ioherited as simple ntosomel ecessive tat
Primary ciliury dyskinesia
Jsa 
SpaniclColinishee,DaiaDbmninhrhhaGnReicvrldEnlishheh
 Bichon Frise
Table 13.9: Inherited defects ofthe respiratory system,
Defeet
Comment
Digestive Tract:
Congenital mega-aesophagus
Iis consiered b aneuromslar dvelopmental diorder orimmaity andis eped Great Dae, GemanShee Dog ad
Irise,  lt wMh
soan jo apot aaissana pmosons aienecad aog t 1o puop [nmese a[durs nm aqnrdmos
Scgmcntal plasia of the
Dca:hin carly nconaal period The auchor has nocd seg mental eplasia of the smallin:cscinc in particular
alimentay tract
Inperfora:e anns
Congerital pyloric stenosis
otedl in Boxer and Boston Terier; Siumese
L.hver:
Peitosystemic venous sunt and
Most commncongenital abnommalies of hepatobiliary system ae alenations of te potal ciaulatin
jintrahepatic arerioportal fstula
Congenital rmelabolic
Mucopolysaecheride sto:age disorders. Copper slorage disorer in Bedlinglon Terier (aulosomul recessive trait)
abnormalitics
Table 13.10: Inherited defects of the alinentary systenn.
Defeet
Comment
Congenital Coagulopathies:
Faclor VIHlI deficiency
One of e st cmmninhetelatic defcs X-lirked ecesive e ihriteiish Setr, St Bem Shel
(Hecmophilia A)
Shr, eg, Coll, Gean Shphd Dg,English e, Ghund, Vizla,Weirae, Chahu, Ca Te, ayd
and Husky. Defccl i mild in cats
Factor IX
X-linked recessive disorder, nt as common as Factor VHl. It has been escrihed inthe Cain Terter, St Bernard, as well as a mixed
(Heenophilia B)
hreed dog, British Shortair, iaese, ontic Sothr
Factor Vll
Miniaure Schnazer, Alaskn Malamutc, Baxer, Bulldog and Beugl; a mild coagulation disorder
Factor X
labcitedmlditpiblinhimdadgi
in malcre adcls Rare disorder
Factor XT (Plasma
throm:boplaslin antececent
ischaraedbyileingpisebepslnghbinyrMtainD
Weimaraner and KeryBleTerricr and is rclativcly rae
Congenital Extrinsic Platelet
Funelion Disorder:
aSaSIT S,FuqlM uoa
Ducto dfctiveor fnt VonWilebrard factor(Factr Vl).Thisis the mos commn incricd bleeding diserer indg: alo
[VWD]
snilayaddsmtnfieriaimalwihnmlydmnantxesi
(most dog breeds); also atosomal recessive mode af inbertance. Facter VR is imptant in mediatin the adhesin f plalelets t
subencothelial surfaces
Congenital Intrinsic Platelet
Function Disorders:
Cani:ne Lhrombopathy
 Described in Basset Hound
Thromtasenic it.rombupaliy
Inhntedaulosml reesive rait inOtter Homd izare iut plalles seen
Spitz thrombopathy
DescribedinwoSpitzfcmals
Cyclic haematopoiesis
Autosomal recesive disorderin grey Colie characterized by cyclic fctations ofcirclating neurophils, reticulytes and plaets
due to bome marow stem celdefect. Most puppies die hefore months
Anaemia:
Pyruvate kinase delicicncy
Inerited asimple autosoma] reessve train n Basenjil Non-sherocytic haemolytic anaemia
Haemolytic anaemia
Rehllpedediiwianlsivichdsiaeitla
Malamtle
Nor-spherocytic haenelyic
More severe in Pbodke but ulso the Bcagc, in whichitis fatal by 3 yeers. Causc un known
ar.aemia
Phosphofuctokinase deficiency
Conichemolysis with haemolyicrises and mild myopathy. Specifc to English Springe Spanil
Table 13.11: Inherited defects of the biood and lymphutic sysien.
The Nconatc: Congenital Defects and Fading Puppies 1
149
Defect
Comment
Eyelidl:
Ectropion
Inheritd in St Bemard Bloedhoud, Bullog, Chow, Ish Seter and Cocker Spaniel but mae secndary to raa/conjnctiviis
En:rcpion
Iheritedi Ch, ld Gr e, Laa, Bllg B Maiff paniel (Snge cker), Papill, t
Diamord eyelid malormation
Distrchiasis
DublwfPiP
Trichiasis
Nietiteting memhrane scrling
Prerlisposition in German Shepherd Dog, Great Dane
Agenesis
Aecevnmnyldinmaecnidbytrsuhasisbadd
Various dog brceds, also Domestic Shorthair ard Persian cats
Micropunctum orimperferate
Bedllington Temier, Cocker Spaniel, Sealyham Terier, Golden Reriever
lacrimal punchum
The Globe:
Microphthalmos
Mabelid willesehsMiizis
(cor.plele absence is 1ee)
Akiu, CavalierKing Chales Spaniland inmerlc to merl maings, In the AustralianShpherd Dog microphhalmos is ascciated wit
mulipe colotomasandberiedasanatsmarecesiveaitlnked wih coatcolourMicropamshasbeenrepedi
ofsping f pregnacats reate wih gsefulvin
Str:bisnus - divergent
Recognized in bracbyocephalic dogs e.g. Boslon Terrier
Sturbisus-convergent
Siamese
Nystagmus, spcrtancous
Siamese, resuls frc:m an anomalous visual parhway development
The Cornea:
Deep comeal apacily
Lhue fo remnants of embyenic pupilary menbrane that adhere to nrer comea; inberiled in Basenji. Sporalie in otler breeds
Epioulhar der.noids
Anyedtdteti
Dunestic Shorthair cuts
Co:ncal dystrophy
Familial bilatcrally symmeric comeal opacies urrclated to previous ocular disease. Most caninestromal comeal dysrophies (with
depsitf ps arent maifes ilafr I yeaf age. A pgeivecmeal dsthyhaheensdin Max cas wih
tmall,tnelyasmblril e
Anterior Uvea:
Persislent papillary memtranes
Inberited in Bascnji
Iris cysts
Foaing fluid-filed vesicles arising from posterior irisepihelum: usually foundin anterior chamher
 Pupillary anomalies
Corectopeccntri puilmaaayltecuar dets initdAstahedog
Heterochromia of the iris
Vaialblrdld
indognasociatinwihpaialalbnimanddeafs
lricocomcal abnoralities 
Congenital mcsoccrmal remants prcsentin idocor.cal anglc.Basct Hound
Lens and Vireous:
Alteration of sze & shape of lens
Asemryicsesvlnfililfctsarfeciatd wnby
Conganital cataracts
adg rayro aag an m pauodai uaeq a spereo puaaug soangu aua-nu o fepoas jo peuauuaq fur asa
Cali
Retriever Ivenile catarcts develp frm the enatal perid unl 6 years of age. reditary is a major factor, bt infammatry.
metaholic, til, xi adraiccse st albcsided Alspe netiShthair,Ps, d
Himaleya cats
Hyaoid remmant
Mostcommonvitreou anomaly
Persistent, hyperplastic
Frbrovascular mmbranepresent nposteirn suface, vausbreeds Inbriance dmsratedn Dema Pir
primary vitreous
Stafldl
secomdary glailcoma
Jack Rtssel Sealylam, Tibetan and Wirehared anc Smoothaired Miniate Bul Terriers. Auosomal recessive tait
Peclinate ligarment
Inlenitel in Busset Hund, Sibetian Husky, Americun Cocker Spaniel, Cecker Spaniel, Dundie Dinmont Teier, Elkhound, Great Danc.
goniodysgcncsis witht
Welsh Sprirger Spanicl. welsh Terier
gaucoma
Retina and Optic Nerve:
Collie eye anonaly
IneritouhhelallAusedasaaliai
choriorctinal hypoplasia, opie dise colobomas and rcinal detachmcnt
Mulifocal retinal dysplasia
Inberited in EnglishSpringe paniel LabradrRerieveas amosal esive ait, withmtifocalrenal folds and eal
detachment. Asepedin seveal ohr breds, with or witt oteocla defects: Anerican CockerSpaniel eagle, Akita
 pda ma a msg  pann
Total rctinal dysplasa
Inrtdnniaainalha
[Hemeralopia
Day binss ce aene nlaskaMalte, nafnsRed frm0eek alMniateey12weks.
Autosomal recessive treit
Congenitul salionury
Evideat by 6 weeks in the Briard and Tibelun Terrier. Possbly an ulosomal recessive trait
night blindncss
Opic ne:ve hypoplasia
Any breed may be affected Small optic disc. Bilateralrunilaleral
Generalized progressive retinal
Inherited concii; generalized PRA commences ftom a fw menths to few yers depending on breed; present in Rough Colle,
atropby (PRA)
Miniature Schmauzer, Gordon Seter, Inish Seter, Miniature anl Toy Poolles, American Coeker Spaniel, Norwegian Elkhourd.
Longhaired Miniature Dachshund, Cheapcakc Bay Rcrievcr, Golden Rericver, Tibean Spaniel,Cardgan Corgi, Iish Wolhound ad
JapanesAkafinamlreiIrtahalqtldi
aam nropont ms aa sesp ps a ue sa o ae a m npan sqy
affectdcalbmtiingdsln
an autosomal rcccssiv rait
Table I3.12: Inherited defects of the ocuiar systent.
150 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
FADING PUPPIES
2 weeks of age. It is important that the neonate
should feed regularly from birth to maintain
Definition
hydration.
The fading puppy syndrome has bccn a recuring
 problem for breeders and veterinary surgeons for dec-
 Risk of hypoglycaemia. The puppy is born with a
ades. Various theories have been formulated to ac-
relatively small reserve of glycogen, mainly in
count for this syndrome and soe have doubted that it
the liver. Failure to suck results in rapid
is a genuine disease entity. One source of confusion
deplelion of this reserve and development of
 has been to incorporate all conditions leading to poor
hypoglycaemia by the second day. The puppy
weight gain and ill-thrift in the first months of life
should make regular daily weight gains from
under this oic syndromc. In fact, a study of neonatal
day 1, with the birthwcight normally doubled
 mortality by the authorshows that there is a narrow age
by day 10.
band when most of these puppy mortalities occur,
betwecn 3.5 and 5 days after hirth. Thc puppies arc of
Immunological inmaturity. It is important that.
adequate birth weight for breed and would be consid-
colostrum is ingested during the first 12-24
ered to have good survival prospects but subsequently
hours of life, as only 5% of the maternal
fail to thrive and thcn die, usually betwccn days 3 and
antibody is acquired across the placenla. The
5, without obvious cause. The dlams are in good health.
immunological system is considered to be
with unremarkable pregnancies of normal gestational
immature and although capable of stimulation, it
length. There is no association with dystocia, poor
mothering or obvious lactational deficit.
34 months.
The vulnerability of the neonate
 Normal behaviour and appearance of the
 In order (o appreciatc the normal appearance and
neonatc
 responses of the neonate at clinicalexamination it must
 The neonate spends long periods in deep sleep, inter-
 be remembered that the newborn puppy is an immature
rupted by short periods of body twitching; this behay-
aninal, dependcnt on its darm for survival in thc first 3
iour disappears after 4 wccks. Loss of activated slccp
weeks and is particularly vulnerable because of four
 patterns indicates ill health. Considerable maturation
major factors, listed below:
of the central and peripheral nervous systems occurs
rluring the first 3 weeks of lifc and thereforc neurologi-
Thernoregulatory mechanisms are poorly
cal responses are different from the adult. Flexor
developed. At 24 hours the body temperature is
 dominance involving body and neck muscles at birth is
35.5 °℃, rising to 38 °C by the seventh day and
replaced by extensor dominancc by the third day of
38.5 °C by the fourth week. The zone of thermal
life. Puppies can stand at 3 weeks with normal tone and
neutrality falls between 27.5 and 36 *C. Initially,
postural reflexes. The eyes do not open until 10--15
brown fat metabolism, under the control of the
days and sight is poor until 45 wccks. Thc cxternal
 sympathetic nervous system, is inportant in heat
sAep tlzI un uado jou soop euno Aome pun
production (non-shivering thermogenesis).
after which time there is a definite startle response. The
Shivering mechanisims begin around days 6-8
healthy nconate only crics when roused or hungry:
 and by the fourth week the puppy is a good
increased vocalization indicates some abnormality.
homeotherm. Probably as long as the dam is an
The puppy exhibits ^rooting’ behaviour as it crawls
attentive mother and the puppies can maintain
purposefully and searches for a teat; the sucking reflex
cluse contact with the mammary area, thcre will
is depcndent on thc contact of the teat with the oral
be sufficient heat in their microenvironment to
cavity. The normal puppy has a rounded abdomen with
maintain thermal balance. Where this natural
a stomach full of milk but is not tympanic, a sleek hair
system is disruptcd, such as occurs with poor
coaf, warm body and elastic skin.
mothering or hand-rearing, there is a danger of
The immaturity, small size and vulnerability of the
chilling and hypothermia.
neonate renders inappropriate diagnostic tcchniques
used in the adult. Therefore abscrvation of behavioural
·Risk of dehydration. As 82% of body weight is
changes, evidence of dehydration, chilling and loss of
water and kidney function is immature, the
body weight or failure to gain weight are particularly
neonatc is particularly susceptible to
helpful signs whcn assessing nconatal health, Examina-
dehydration. Glomerular filtration increases from
tion should also involve checks for congenital defects,
21% at birth to 53% at 8 weeks and tubular
e.g. cleft palate, imperforate anus, evidence of traumatic
 secrelion maturcs at & wccks. The watcr
injurics (areas of swclling, rib/limb fracturcs, haemor-
requirement is 60-90 g/450 g body weight per
rhage) and evidence of infection of the umbilicus,
day and the water turnover is about twice that of
docking sites and eyelids (ophthalmia neonatorum).
an adult. Glucosuria is common in neonates until
The neonate is dependcnt on the dam for licking stimu-
The Neonate: Congcnital Defects and Faling Puppies  151
lation around the urogcnital region, for regular urina-
Quality of staff
 tion/defecation and for cleaning and grooming. A dirty,
 Presence of disease vectors, e.g. birds, mice
 unkempt coat indicates poor mothering.
 Risk of infection through introduction of outsidc
animals, e.g. stud dogs
The fading puppy -- clinical and post-
 Nutritional and health status of breeding stock
mortem findings
Worming programme
Although there is no obvious abnormality at birth, thc
Vaccination policy.
puppies begin to luse weight (often in the first 24 hours),
show poor sucking responses and display either lassi-
The first five factors probably have most significance
tudc or unusual restlessness, with plaintive and pcrsisl-
for thc neonate as they have bearing on the most critical
 early days of life and interrelate with maternal influ-
generalized weakness and death. Sudden and unex-
ences.
 peclcd dcath is not typical. Post-mortem examination
It is csscntial that the breeder keeps accuratc rccords
reveals that body weight is well below birth weight, the
of all litters for inspection, including details of
stomach and intestines are largely devoid of contents
birthweights and daily weight gain for the first 3
and there is a general absence of gross lesions or defects.
weeks, so that a complctc picture of the problems can
The liverto body wcight ratio changes from 1: 10to 1:20.
be obtained. The examination of one moribund puppy
 Histopathological examination of all main organ sys-
tems does not reveal any evidence of an infective
to yield meaningful rcsults.
aetiology or othcr spccific lcsions.
However, in spite of the author's own detailed
investigations, about 50% of cases showed no specific
Effects of management systems
cause of death. Although signs and post-mortem find-
In the author'sown study,a variety of breeding manage-
 ings were not diagnostic, it was established that there
 ment systems were involved and no conmon manage-
 was a common pattern to the clinical presentation and
ment-linked factors were associated with the mortalities,
that this group of mortalities constituted a large group
alihough there is a strong tenclency for ccrlain dams
within a narrow time frame, withoul. cvidencc of an
within particular kennels to have successive fading
infective aetiology and probably death results from a
litters, whilst other bitches experience no problems.
process initiated on day 1 (or even just before birth).
Thus until demonstrated otherwise, il would sccm
Approach to investigation
reasonable to term these fading puppies'.
As clinical signs are not specific, post-mortem investi-
 gation is idcally required to rule out other causcs of
 Possible causes of fading puppy syndrome
neonatal mortality,e.g septicaemia, congenital defects,
A whole range of aetiological possibilities have been
Imaternal trauma. It is necessary to examine puppies
considered to bc a cause of fading, including mater-
from as many affected litters as possible over a long
nally related factors such as poor mothering. inade-
enough period in order lo ubtain a representative view of
 quate lactation, trauma and inadequate nutrition of the
the causes of perinatal mortality. Puppies even within
dam in pregnancy, and also congenital anomalies,
 one litter may die of differcnt. causcs. Thc puppics
neonatal isoerythrolysis, low birthwcight, thymic atro-
should be kept at +4 *C until post-mortem investigation
 phy and infectious agents including bacteria, viruses,
can be undertaken (not frozen because of freezing/
 protozoa and parasites. However, approximately 50%
thawing artcfacts). The most comnon causcs of dcath in
of nconatal deaths in the author's invcstigation could
the author's own study, which accounted for about 50%
 not be ascribed to these causes. It has also never been
 of mortalities in liveborn puppies, were: l) infections
established whether the aetiology is related to one
(mostly bacterial); 2) maternal and management-related
prcdominating factor or if it is multifactorial.
factors, e.g poor mothcring qualities in the dam; 3) low
In d study of lung surfactant composition, there
birthweight; and 4) congenital abnormalities.
was found to be a significant reduction in the
A conchusion as to the causc of rlcath nccds to be
made in the context of clinical signs and evaluation of
sented similarities to findings in babies dying of sudden
kennel management practice. Some time should be
infant death syndrome. Lung surfactant is required for
at time of whelping and through the neonatal period.
ing birth. Abnormality of lung surfactant composition
Important factors to consider are:
could predispose to hypoxia and breathing/suckling
difficulties. Howcver,it wasnpt dcicrmined if abnormal
 Kennel construction and whelping facilities
surfactant was fundamental to the death of the puppies
"Type of heating, risk of draughts and heat loss
 or a byproduct of some other pathological process or
Whelping routine and supcrvision, especially
defect, such as a central respiratory drive deficit.
over the first 2-3 days
As thc initial signs of fading can often be lclcctcd
Hygiene practice
in the first 24 hours of life, it is possible that this group
 152  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
of puppics is not completcly viable from birth anrl that
Blunden AS (1988) Diagnasis and trcatment of common disordcrs of
 there may be prenatal factors involvcd which are not 
newborn puppies. in Pracrice 10, 175-184
Blunden AS. Hill CM, Browa BD and Morley CJ (1987) Lung
immediately apparent. As mentioned, some dams
 appear to be more at risk from fading litters than others.
Casal, ML (1995) Feline paediatrics. Veterinary Amurat 35, 210-228
A genctic prerlisposition is possiblc although thc
Detweiler DK, Iubben K and Patterson D (1960) Survey of
occurrence of large numbers of puppies (often whole
cardiovascular discase of dogs. Anerican Journat of Vererinary
Kesearch 21,329-359
litters) affected in many breeds, without evidence of
Evuns JM (1978) Neonatal rnortality in puppies.In: Refresier
linked close brceding, docs not support an inhcrited
Coursr in Cunine Medicine. Proceedings Nu 37. Universily of
defect alone.
Sydney. Sydney, p 127-139
Fox MW (1970) Inherited structural and functional abnormalities in 
the dog. Canadian Veterinary Journai 11, 5
Approach to treatment
Hodgman SFJ (1963) Abnormalities and defects in pedigree dogs. 1.
An investigation into the cxistcncc of abnommalities in pedigree
There arc no consistent reporls of successful treatmcn.
dogs in the British Islcs. Journal of Snall Animat Pracrice 4,
 for fading puppies, and antibiotics appear to be of little
447
value. As these puppies probably enter a fatal cycle of
Huskins, JD (1995a) Congenital tlefecls of the cat. In: Textbook of
Veteriery Interal Medieine:Disease of fheDog and Cat4i
dehydration, hypoglycaemia and weight.loss soon allcr
birth, it is possible that there is some fundamental
Saunders, Philartelphia
Hoskins, JD (1995h) Congenital defects of the dog. In: Texrhook of
problen of bonding withi the dam and tlie suckling
Vererinary Inremal Medicine: Disease of the Dog and Cat, 4th
response. Research into the physiology of birth adapta-
edn, ed, S! Ettinger and EC Feldrman, pp. 2115-2129. WB
tion and feerling responses in thc first 2448 hours might
Suunders,Philadelphia
Huskins JD (1995c) Puppy and kiten losses. In: Veterinary
provide more answers to this very old problem. Until
Pediatrics, 2m! edn, ed JD Hoskins, pp. 51-S5. WB Saunders,
more information is available, early supplementary
Philardelphia
fceding of suspect fading litters might improvc survival.
Animais, 4th edn. Acaremic Press, London
 In practice, supportive therapy is often given too late to
Leipold HW (1978) Nature and causes of cangenital defects of dogs.
Veterinary Clinics of North America 8, 47-77.
n   r  o s 
Mulvihill JJ and Pricster WA (1971) The frequency of congenital
invcstigation of neonalal mortalities and managcmcnt 
beart defects (CHD) in dogs.Teratology4,236
 to assess causes of breeding loss accurately.
Nicholas FW (1996) Infroducion ia Veterinary Genetics. Oxford
University Press, Oxford. pp. 97-104
Priester WA, Glass AGi and Waggoner NS (1970) Congenital defects 
in domestic animals: general considerations. American Joumal
REFERENCES
of Vererinary Researcht 31, 1871
Roth JA (1987) Possible association of thymic dysfunction with
fading syndromes in puppies and kittens. Veterinary Clinics of
Blunden AS (1983) Neonatai cnd Perinatai Moraity in the Dog:
North America: Smatl Animat Practice 17, 603616
Clirnical. Pathologicai and Managenentat Srudies. PhD Thesis,
Willis, MB (1y92) Praeticat Genetics for Dog Breeders. HF & GF
Lundon
Wiuherby Ltd, London, p 131-162.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Care of Neonates and Young Animals
Paula Hotston Moore and Kit Sturgess
INTRODUCTION
 and kittens enter a period of socialization from 3 weeks
 of age lasting untilabout 3 months of age, during which
By definition, the neonatal period covers the first 7-10
 time feeding and sleeping occupy progressively less of
days of life and is characterized by poor neurological.
thc day, being replaced by social activity. There is
function, the progressive development of spinal re-
 maturation of the nervous system and hepatic and renal
flcxcs and a total dependency on the dam. This period
functions develop. For the purposes of this discussion.
is followed by a transitional period (10-21 days of age)
discase problems of young puppics and kittens will be
characterized by the development of a competent au-
 considered up to the point at which maternally derived
dio-visual system, further neurological development
antibodies are thought to he no longer protective, at
and an increasing independcnce from the dam. Puppies
around 5-6 wceks of age.
1
CHAPTER FOURTEEN (i)
Care and Management of the Neonate
Paula Hotston Moore
The neonate is defined, in this instance, as a newly born
ensure acceptancc by the dam and also that fceding is
puppy or kiucn, up to ihc agc of 10 days. The newborn
occurring every 2-3 hours.
is totally dependent on the dam not only for nutrition
 Occasionally the dan will attack the neonate. In
but for warmth, comfort, encouragement to urinate and
this situation, it is ncccssary cithcr lo tranquillizc or
dcfccalc and gcneral wcll being. It is important to
 muzzle her for a short period of time until the problem
remember the nursing considerations not only of the
of rejection is overcome.
 neonate which is born and reared naturally, but also
As the newhorn fccds, itls mctabolic rale inercases,
 those of the neonnate delivered by Caesarcan opcration
which raiscs the body lenperalure. Theneonate has come
and of the orphaned neonate.
from within the uterus, where the temperature remains
constant, to a variable outside environment. It has little
subcutaneous fal, soits insulation is poor, and as heat loss
NATURAL BIRTH
is greatest in smaller individuals with alarger surface area
 per unit of body weight, it is therefore important to help
Following a delivery per vaginum, thc dam usually
 the neonale maintain its body temperature.
attends to the neonate herself. The following steps
 The environmental temperature for the initial 24
should be performed by the dam:
hours should be maintained at 30-33°C, which can be
reduced to 26-30°C ovcr the following 3-4 days.
 Licking thc fctal membranes away from the
Bedding in the dam's pen should be suitable for nest-
mouth and.nose
ing: this allows the neonate to have good insulation.
 Licking and nuzzling to maintain body
When the newborn huddlcs with thc dain, this rcduccs
temperature
exposed surface area and thus reduces heat loss.
Biting off the umbilical cord
The healthy neonate shouldincrease in body weight
 Encouraging the neonate to suck.
by 5-10% pcr day. Daily recording of body weight
ensures that progress is closely monitored. Tempera-
Should any of these steps not be performed by the dam.
ture generally falls from approximately 36°C at birth to
assistance is required to ensure neonatal survival.
30°C within a few hours and then increases to 38°C
Thc rcmoval of fctal 1ncmbranes is performed by
over the first 7 days. Respiratory rate should be 15-40
briskly wiping the neonate with a towel, with particular
per minute, depending on size, with a regular rhythm
 attention to the mouth and nose.
and without respiratory noise.
 The umbilical cord should be clamped with a pair
 No discharge should be present from the eyes, ears
 of sterile forceps 4 cm from the umbilicus. The forceps
or nose. A healthy neonate will crawl around and be
 should be removed after 10 minutes and if haemor-
very mobile. Ten days after birth it will stand and at 3
rhage occurs a ligafure of absorbable suture should be
weeks of age begin to walk, Ten to 14 days after birth,
 placed around the umbilical stump.
 the eyes will open; although the cormea may be cloudy,
A healthy neonate at an ambient temperature
this will clear during the next 2 weeks. Strabismus is
will bc activc and will find thc dam's tcat and
 common in thc nconatal kitten, but declines gradually
begin to suck. If one of the newborn has difficulty
 after & weeks of age.
finding the milk supply, its mouth should be placed
 The dam should not be allowed to become over-
aver the teat. By pressing on cither sidc of the tcat
hcated. Ideally, thc cncloscd housing area for neonate
with a finger and massaging the mammary gland,
 and dam should have a part which is not directly heated,
milk is released and the neonate will be able to
enabling her to seek a cooler environmcnt, if ncccssary.
feed.
Shredded ncwspaper is preferred as a bedding material,
Should the dam reject one of her offspring, rubbing
as it is both cheap and easily disposed of. Soiled material
- m r dy a  an  si 
 should be removed and replaced frequently to provide
nize it as her own. The nconate should be monitored to
clean and dry berlding fur both neonate and dam.
156  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Initially, the dam will lick the perineal area of her
Hypothermia will occur quickly in neonates ex-
offspring to stinulate urination and defecation, At
posed to a cool temperature. The newborm should be
2-3 wccks of age, the nconate begins to urinate and
placed in a pre-warimed environment of 30-33"C. A
defecate voluntarily. As soon as possiblc, it should he
paediatric incubator purchascd sccond hand is an ideal
encouraged to urinate and defecate away from the
environment, since it can be thermostatically conirol-
nesting area, making it easier to keep the bedding clean
led. Alternatively, the neonate can be placed in a box
and dry: this will also hasten toilct training.
on a heat pad covercd with towels. When a heat pad or
 All neonates, whatever the method of delivery.
 Other dlirect source of heat is used to supply warnth, it
 should be examined for any gross clinical abnormali-
must be covered with a towel or blanket to prevent
tics such as cleft palate, atrcsia ani or limh deformity.
contact with thc skin. A thermometer is placed at the
 level of the neonate to enable constant monitoring of
the temperature.
SPECIAL CARE OF THE NEONATE
When both the dam and her offspring have recov-
DELIVERED BY CAESAREAN
ered from the anaesthetic, the neonate is placed with
OPERATION
the dam, who should be in an enclosed environment
such as a whelping pen, make-shift kennel or a card-
Following delivery, the airways of thc nconate should
board box.
be cleared immediately of any fetal membranes. A soft
The dam is observed to ensure a smooth recovery
towel can be used gently to wipe away nucus. Fluid
from both surgery and anaesthetic.
can bc rcmoved from the nosc and mouth by suction
using a bulb syringe or alternatively, a length of soft
narrow tubing attached to a syringe. The neonate
CARE OF THE ORPHANED NEONATE
should be cupped in the nurse's hands with the hcad
tilted downwarris and the hindquarters elevated; this
An orphaned neonate needs to have allits requirements
position allows fluid to drain away from the respiratory
 supplied by a source other than its mother.
tract. It should have its head and neck supported and
The best possible nutrition for the neonate comes
then be rocked forwards and backwards in an arc,
from thc dam's milk. When this is unavailable, a well
releasing fluid and mucus from the respiratory tract.
formulated milk replacer should be used. It is important 
Gentle, brisk rubbing of the newborn animal withi a
for the milk replacer to be of a similar gross composition
towel, especially over the thorax, stimulates breathing.
to the milk of the dam. The quality of cow's milk is the
By removing the amniotic membranes and fetal fluids
same as milk froni a bitch or queen; however, the
from the hair of the neonatc, heat loss due to evapora-
quantity of protcin, fat and carbohydrate differs in each.
tion is avoided.
The milk replacer should bea *perfect' substitute for the
 Survival of the neonate is dependent upon the rapid
mother's milk. Commercially available species-
onset of normal, spontanecus respiration. If the neonate
specific milk replacers should be used in preference to
is not brcathing, respiration can bc stiimulatcd
home-made preparalions. In an cmcrgcncy, whcn a
pharmacologically, using doxopram hydrochloride (20
commercial milk replacement product is unavailable, a
mg/ml) 1-2 drops sublingually, having ensured the
'o al  ah aq  adiai ap
airways are clcar. Oxygen can be aciministered by
An cxample of a home-made diet for a puppy is: 1
mask or tracheal catheter intubation.
litre whole cow's milk, 4 egg yolks and 1 tablespoon
A regular, strong heartbeat should be detectable
corn oil.
over the thoracic wall. If a heartbeat cannot be found,
An cxample of a home-made diet for a kitten is:
external cardiac massage should be gently attempted.
3 oz condensed milk, 3 oz water, 4 oz plain full fat
Artificial respiration, when required, is performed by
yoghurt and 3 large egg yolks.
 gently blowing into the mouth and nosc of thc animal.
Diets using cow's milk havc a highcr lactose con-
Revival techniques should be performed for 5 minutes
tent than maternal milk and often result in diarrhoea. A
 post-delivery, when required.
home-made diet should only be fed when no alterna-
 If the dam was given opioids prior to dclivery.
tive is available and only for a few hours, nntil a
naloxone hydrochloride (0.4 mg/ml) should be admin-
commercial milk replacer is purchased.
istered to the neonate. T'wo to 5 drops can be given
Correctly formulated milk replacer will support the
nconatc dluring the critical first few weeks of life. Thc
neonate should then be monitored for several hours to
milk replacer has been manufactured to provide a
ensure respiratory depression does not recur.
highly digestible diet which closely resembles the
At delivery, a clamp is placed around the umbili-
composition of dam's milk. There are a numher of such
cus. The clamp is removed 10 minutes post-delivery
products available (Table 14.1).
and the umbilical stump dipped in a solution of
The optimum caloric intake has been studied for
chlorhcxidine. If haemorrhagc ocurs, thc umbilicus
 each of the commcrcially availablc milk rcplacers and
should be ligated with an absorbable sutuire.
therefore the suggested feeding guide should be fol-
Carc and Managcmcnt of the Neonate  157
Product
Spccies
Manufaeturer
head too far back or to pour in the milk too fast, as
 excess milk will coine out of the nose. This is to he
Welpi
Puppics
Pct Life
avoided, as aspiration can occur. The neonate will
Cimicat
 reject the bottle when it has received enough feed.
Kittens
Pet Life
A common problem in orphaned neonates is diar-
Esbilak
Puppies
PctAg
rhoea, usually an indication of overfeeding.
Distributed in
When the neonate is approximately 14 days old, it
UK by Kruuse
can be encouraged to lap from a shallow bowl. The
K.M.R. (Killen
Killcns
PcrAg
 muzzle is placed in the bowl and milk splashed onto the
 Distributed in
lips to encourage lapping. To begin with, the feed may
Milk Replacer)
have to be finished by bottle but it will soon lap each
UK by Kruuse
 meal voluntarily.
Whiskas? Instant
Kittens
Pedigree
Thc growth ratc of a hand-rcarcd nconate will hc
Milk Substitute
Petfoods
lower than that of an animal reared naturally. Once
 Pedigree@ Instant
Puppies
Pedigree
the hand-reared neonate is a few months old, how.
 Milk Substitute
Petfoods
cvcr, it should bc a normal, hcalthy animal and
indistinguishable from a naturally reared puppy or
Lactol Milk
Puppies!
Shirley's
kitten of the same age.
Powdcr
kittens
 Thc animal orphancd at birth is of parlicular conccr 
because it is deprived of colostrum and is more suscep-
Table 14.1: Recommended milk products for orphuned
puppies and kittens.
tible to disease. In this situation, it must be closely
 monitored and at the first sign of ill health or reluctance
lowed. The milk replacer should be made up and fed to
to feed should be brought for velerinary atlention.
the manufacturer's recommended quantity and fre-
 An important nursing procedure for the orphaned
 quency. It is important to increase the amount of food
neonate is to encourage urination and defecation
 given as the neonate grows.
manually. The dam's licking and stimulating the geni-
A nursing bottle with an appropriately sized teat
tal area of the neonate is copied by rubbing the area
should be uscd 1o feed the neonate. If such a nursing
with a piece of damp cotton wool. This is carried out
bottle is not available a 1 ml syringe or dropper can be
 after each feed, until the neonale is able to urinate and
used until a bottle can be purchased. The neonate is
defecate voluntarily.
held in one hand with the head held up and slightly
 In conclusion, it is of great importance to provide a
stretched out. The tcat is placcd in thc animal's mouth
 controlled environment in which the neonate can thrive.
and is pulled away slightly: this elevates the head and
 Nursing the neonate is very time consuming and has its 
 cncourages sucking. Care should be taken not to tilt the
difficulties but is, however, extremely rewarding.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN (li)
Infectious Diseases of Young Puppies
and Kittens
Kit Sturgess
Puppy andkitten mortality is around 15-40% in the first
and kittens is around 35.5°C (±0.8) rising gradually over
12 weeks of life, with the majority of dcaths occurring
the first week of life to around 37.5°C. Adult tempera-
in the first week. Infectious disease accounts for a
relatively small percentage of deaths, but it is a major
14.2). Thermoregulation in the newbom is poor as their
cause of morbidity in pacdiatric paticnis. Therc is
ability to shiver and vasoconstrict in response to falling
nothing unique about the spectrum of infections which
body temperature is limited. The ability to shiver devel-
can occur in neonates, however the prevalence, clinical
ops at around 6-8 days of age, prior to which, brown
signs and prognosis of various diseases in young ani-
adipose tissue is the main source of thermogenesis.
mals may vary considerably from those in adulls.
Haematology and biochemistry
Normal ranges for haematological and biochemical
REVIEW OF PHYSIOLOGY
paramelers are different from adults, thercforc rcsults
need to be interpreted with reference to the age of the
During the first few weeks of life, significant physiologi-
puppy or kitten (Tables 14.3 and 14.4). It must be
cal changes occur which will directly affect the clinical
remembered that the circulating blood yolume of pup-
signs shown and the ability of the neonate to respond to
pies and kittens can be small(25-40 ml in a4-week-old
disease. A basic understanding of neonatal physiology is
kitten). Repeated blood sampling can cause severe
vital tuenable clinical findings to bc cvaluatcd accuratcly.
 anaemia and should, therefore, be kept to a minimum.
With separation of the placenta, the peripheral resistance
increases and hypoxia developsrapidly inducing gasping
Glucoregulation
respiration. Constriction of the umbilical vein squcezcs
Newhorn puppics and kittens have linited reserves of
significant quantities of blood from the placenta into the
glycogen and poor hepatic gluconeogenic responses to
neonate and therefore, when possible, should be left
low blood glucose. A fasted puppy, however, is able to
intact. In response to the increasing oxygen tension the
maintain blood glucosc conccntrations for as long as
ductus arteriosus narrows (complete closure in I-2 days)
24 hours provided it remains healthy.
and the pulmonary vessels dilate. Increased left sided
pressure rcsults in thc closurc of the foramen ovale
Hepatic and renal function
between the atria. Fetal PO, rises from 20 mm Hg to
Hepatic microsomal cnzyncs which are involved in
around 50-60 mm Hg. With time, the PO, rises further,
many metabolic functions including drug metabolism
corecting the acidosis thal devclops in thc ncwborn.
may not be fully functional until 45 months post
 partum, though near normal liver function is probably
 Rectal temperature and thermoregulation
 present from around 8 weeks of age. Albumin levels in
The rectal temperalure of dry, healthy dlay-old puppics
neonates are significantly lower than in adults which
Age (days)
Rcctal
Hcart rate
Respiratory rate
Environmental
temperature (°C)
(beats/min)
(/min)
temperature (°C)
0-7
36±1
200-250
15-35
29-32
8-14
38
70-220
15-35
27
15-28
70-220
15-35
27
29-35
Adult
70-220
15-35
21-24
>35
Adult
70-220
Arlull.
21
Table 14.2: Physiological values in young puppies and kittens.
160  Manual of Small Animal Reproduclion andi Nconatology
Parameter
Puppies (mean ±SD or range)
Kittens (mean or range)
0-3 days
0-2 weeks
 2-4 weeks
6 weeks
0-3 days
2 weeks
4 weeks
6 weeks
PCV (%)
46.3± 8.5
33-52.5
27-37
34
41.7
33.6-37.0
25.7-27.3
26.2-27.9
(Ip/) qH
15.8±2.9
1417.5
8.5-11.6
9.59
11.3
11.5-12.7
8.5-8.9
8.3-8.9
RBC (x10/)
4.8 ± 0.8
3.6-5.9
3.4 4.9
4.91
5.11
5.05-5.53
4.57-4.77
5.66-6.12
MCV (fl)
94.2±5.9
89-93
!78-83
ND
81.6
65.5-69.3
52.7-55.1
44.346.9
MCH (pg)
32.7 ±1.8
28-30
23-25.5
ND
24.6
22.4-23.6
18.0-19.6
14.2-15.4
MCHC (g/dl)
34.6±1.4
32
32
ND
27.3
33.7-35.3
32.5-33.5
31.3-32.5
WBC (x10/)
16.8 ±5.7
6.8-23
23-25.5
15.00
7.55
9.1-10.2
14.1-16.5
16.1-18.8
Table 14.3: Haematotogical valtes in youg kitrens and puppies.
ND = No dala
Parameter
Puppies (range or median)
Kittens (range)
0-2 wccks
6 wccks
2weeks
4 weeks
Total protein (g/l)
34-52
44.5
40-52
46-52
Albumin (g/l)
15-28
26
20-24
22-24
Sodium (mmol/l)
ND
148
ND
149-153
Potassium (mmol/l)
ND
5.3
ND
4.0-4.8
Chloride (minol/l)
ND
105
ND
120-124
 Inorganic phosphate (mmol/l)
ND
2.96
ND
2.03-2.41
Calcium (mmol/l)
ND
3.53
ND
2.35-3.24
Urea (mmol/l)
ND
1.2
5
5
Creatinine (μumoll)
ND
36
ND
36-54
Cholesterol (mmol/l)
2.93-9.01
4.11
4.29-11.59
0.58-11.36
ALP (IU/I)
176-8760
131.5
68-269
90-135
ALT(IU/l)
10-337
16.5
11-24
14-26
Creatinine kinase (IU/1)
ND
210
ND
ND
Glucose (mmol/l)
4.16-11.68
10.08
6.08-10.32
7.92-8.96
Bilirubin (μmol/l)
1.7-16.9
5.1
1.7-16.9
1.7-3.4
Bile acids (μmol/l)
<10
ND
<10
10
Table14.4: Serum biochemistry vaiues in young puppies und kitens.
ND = No danta
can result in increased circulating drug levels. Glomeru-
responses. IgM (rather than IgG or IgA) antibodies
prcdominatc with rcrluced T cellactivily in response to
levels and tubular secretion mechanisms do not mature
stimulation, this is probably due to the thymus not
until approximately 8 weeks of age. This means that
being fully mature until 12 weeks of age. Reduced
glucosuria is common and urinc spccific gravily is low
aclivity of cells involved in non-specific immune re-
(1.006-1.007). Puppies and kittens have a limited
sponses, such as neutrophils, are also reported in some
ability to conserve fluid and fluid requirements are
species though relatively little work has been done i1
puppies and kittens. With a poorly functioning im-
mune system in terrms of speed, magnitude and breadth
Immune function
of response, the importance of passively acquired
Nconatcs possess a degree of immune competencc, but
 immunity in providing resistancc to infcctious discasc
do not have a fully matured spectrum of immune
cannot be over-emphasized.
Infectious Diseases of Young Puppies and Kittens
161
Passivc immunity
ing history of the household, kennel/cattery manage-
More than 90% of passive immunity in the dog and cat
ment (hygiene, worming, vaccination), the health of
is provided from colostral intake; however, the protec-
the dam during the pregnancy, the healthi of the remain-
tion afforded depends on the previous cxposurc of thc
 der of the littcr, agc of thc puppy/kitten and pattern of
dam and hcr immunc slatus. Gut permeability to
the illness to date.
immunoglobulins begins to decline within 8 hours of
birth and no further absorption is possible after 48-72
Clinical examination
hours. Passi vc immunc protection of the intestinal tract
Examination of the neonate can be difficult, becoming
continues during the whole period of suckling as IgA.
more rewarding as the puppy/kitten gets older and
antibodies resist gastric degradation and can bind
begins to devclop adull responscs. Neonatcs tcndl to
-and ung n a u suoed u nod
 show limited responses to disease, initially becoming
venting them from altaching to or penetrating the
agitated and crying. progressing to inactivity, hypother-
intestinal mucosa, Colostrum also contains cellular
mia and loss of the sucking reflex. Such changes can be
conponents though their precise role is unclcar.
vcry rapid in the face of severe infection and it is
As the majority of cases of neonatal infections are
important that the owner is made aware of the potential
not caused by agents for which vaccines are available,
significance of these signs to allow aggressive, early
it is vital that the puppies or kittens are born into thc
trcalmcnt. I ack of weight gain can be a sensitive indica-
same environment as the one in which the dam has
tor of developing problems and can be easily measured
been housed. If queens or bitches are to be moved into
  o   n    
 a new environment before parturition, sufficicnt line
pcriod is worthy of further investigation (Figure 14. 1).
 must hc allowcd for thern to develop an immune
As with any clinical examination, a systematic
response to new environmental pathogens prior to de-
approach is essential in order to make sure all parts of
 livery. Giving colostrum-deprived puppies or kittens 
all systems are examined.
plasma from adults or commcrcial immunoglobulin
 preparations has not been shown to be beneficial.
External features: body weight; hair coat
(amount, condition, parasites); state of hydration;
Cardiovascular function
signs of injury; appearance of umbilicus; dew
 Inlikc adults, heart ratcs in ncwbam puppies may
claws; (docking site); discharge from nose; urine
respond to hypoxia by falling rather than rising. This is
staining (patent urachus); diarrhoea/rectal
 patcncy; congcnital malformation
 demand in the face of hypoxia. However, a falling
 Eyes: swelling under lids indicates pus formation
 heart rate has to be inlerpreied with care as it may
(often Staphylococcus spp., very rarely
Chlamydia psittuci); eyes open between 5 and 14
ily deteriorating condition). Normal blood barorecep-
days in kittens and between 10 and 14 days in
 tor function is present by 4 days of age. Responses to
 puppies; pupillary light response is usually
cardioactive drugs are less profound than those of
present within 24 hours of the eyes opening, mild
 adults until puppies are 9-10 weeks of agc.
 corneal cloudiness is usually present as eyes open
Ears: external auditory meatus is closed at birth
Neurological development
 and opens between 6 and 14 days; check for
 Over the first I1-12 weeks of life, puppies and kittens
 mites; middle ear infection indicated by a
develop normal adult reflexes and responses. Until that
timc, they display prinitivc rcflcxcs which gradually
disappear, while the adult reflexes gradually become
dominant. The time sequence of these events has been
sludicd in puppies and is prcsented elsewhere. Not
Only are reflexes immature but behaviour patterns tend
a pue jauny aq uaap suag 'raids yn ag o
1es
search for warmth. Newborn puppies and kittens will
sleep for more than 80% of the time and will tend to lie
005
quietly when replete and warm. When stressed (for
whatever reason) they will cry and crawl around,
making side-to-side head movements.
EVALUATION OF THE NEONATE
(sken)y
Case history
Figure I4.l: Weiginr gain in a litter of Burmese kittents.
Basic information is essential to evaluate clinical and
laboratory findings. The history should include a breed-
162Manual of SmallAnimal Reproduction and Neonatology
bulging tympanum
Mouth:mucous membrane colour;evidence of
cleftpalate
Thorax:heartrate around200-220beatsper
minute;respiration 15-35 perminute;regular
rhythm;heart murmurs may be functional
(usually soft);lung sounds difficult to distinguish
but should be present；check for symmetry or
malformation of the thoracic cavity
Abdomen: should feel full but not swollen or tight;
liverandleenotpalpablentestinessoftmobile
and non-painful;urinary bladder freely movable
Neurologicalassessment:alertness,responseto
stimulation,suckingreflex;otherreflexcs
appropriate to age (scc above); gait(walking
from around 4 weeks old);posture.Flexor and
Figure14.2:Bloodsamplinga7-day-oldkitten.
extensor dominance appearsmore variable in
。
Few drugs have had doserates calculated for use
kittens than in puppics.
in the neonate.Therefore an incrcase in initial
dosemay berequired with a lengthening of the
interval between doses
INVESTIGATIONOFSUSPECTED
Great care should be taken when administering
CASESOFNEONATALINFECTION
some typesof antibiotics orallybecause of the
potentiallyadverse effects on the developinggut
Routinebiochemistry andhaematology canbeper-
formed from a very carly age on blood obtained by
microflora
Subcutaneous and intramuscular absorption of
jugular puncture (Figure 14.2)but must be interpreted
drugsis slower and lessreliable than in adults
using reference ranges forthe same age group Tables
14.3and 14.4).Many infcctious diseases develop to0
Antibioticsadministered tothedamdonotreach
therapeutic concentrations in the milk
rapidlytoobtainresultsquicklyenoughtobeofvalue
Fluidrequirements are higherinneonates than
tothatindividual,especially bacterial culture and
adultsBUT totalvolumes canbe low
sensitivity.However,as infections are frequentlya
litter problem,laboratory data canimprove manage-
Nutritional requirements arehighin theface of
sepsis (about 1.5 times maintenance energy
ment and treatment of any subsequent cases.Radio-
requirements)and every effort shouldbemade to
graphs can be difficult to evaluate in young puppies
providenutritional support cither by naso-
andkittensasmineralizationof theskeletonispoorand
oesophageal orgastricintubation.
usefulinformation.ThekVshould bereduced tohalf
Formany of thebacterial infections encountered in
thatused for an adult ofsimilarbody thickness.Faccal
puppies and kittens,clavulanic acid potentiated
examinations can be easilyperformed and are ofpar
amoxycillinrepresentsalogicalfirstchoice drug inthe
ticularvalue where protozoan parasites are suspected.
absence of culture and sensitivityresults.When ad-
Many young animals,however,will die before an
ministeringfluidsor drugstocriticallyill neonatesthe
infectionis diagnosed.Maximum information can be
intravenous,intraosseusorintraperitonealroutesshould
obtainedfrompostmortemif thecarcassisfresh and
be considered.
ifnotmmediatelyavailableforpostmortem,thebody
shouldbestoredintherefrigerator andnotthefreezer.
Fluid therapy
A systematic approach to theexaminationisvital and
In many cases, the neonate will be acidotic but
details should berecorded.
reduced hepaticfunctioncanmean thatitis less able to
metabolizelactateintobicarbonate.Inthemajority of
CONSIDERATIONSAFFECTINGTHE
cases lactated Ringers solution with added
maintenance potassium (at 20mmol/l) is suitable,if
TREATMENTOFNEONATALDISEASE
not ideal.If acidosis is likely to be severe, then
There are special considerations when giving drugs
bicarbonate can be given.In the absence of a known
or fluids to paediatric patients and the following
acid-base statusthenapproximatcly 2mmol/kgcan be
should be borne in mind:
given over 10-15 minutes.Glucose can be replaced
usinga5%dextrose solutionmixed50:50with
Absorption,distribution,metabolism and
lactatedRingersorbygiving1-2mlof10-25%
excretionofdrugscanbesignificantlydifferent
glucoseintravenouslytoaprofoundlydepressedpuppy
frominadults
or kitten.
Infcctious Diseases of Yuung Puppies and Kittens  163
requirements should be calculated and the volume
divided, to be given 2-3 times daily
 Intraosseus - in the absence of venous access,
Greater
chanler
 intraosseus therapy represents a logical alternative.
CRANIOCAUDALVIEW
 In most young puppies and kittens, the cortical
 bonc is sufficiently soft that a hypodermic needle
OF FLUID
(18-19 gauge) can be placed. The area should be
surgically prepared and the needle placed in either
(hc proximal tibia or proximal fcmur (Figure 14.3).
Only one attempt should be made at each site as if
the bone is already punctured it will result in fluid
lcaking out. Fluids, drugs or wholc blood can be
Figure 14.3: Intraosseus fluid administration into the
 given at the same rates as for i.v. therapy.
Fluid requirements of a neonate are high, but total
volumes are low. A syringe punp can be of grcat
SPECIFIC INFECTIONS AFFECTING
value and is significantly cheaper than fluid pumps;
THE NEONATE
otherwise a burette with a paediatric giving set (60
drops per ml versus 10-15 rlrops per ml for a convcn-
Ectoparasites
tional adult giving set) will ensure that the puppy or
Ectoparasites commonly affecting young puppies and
kitten is not over-hydrated.
kittens are listed in Table 14.5.
A variety of products isavailable for treatment of
Example
ectoparasites (Table 14.6) but not all are licensed for
 T'wo-week-old kitten weighing 250 g and estimated to
use in puppies and kittens less than 12 weeks old. The
be 6% dehydrated
'cascade system' of drug usagc should bc followed
Maintenance
6 ml/kg/h
=1.5 ml/h
whenever possible. Flea control can often be achieved
Deficit
0.06 x 250
= 15 ml
using a flea comb and treatment of the dam and
Total requirement for first 6 hours = maintenance
cnvironment. Fipronil provides a safc trcatment in
(9 ml) + 50% of deficil (7.5 ml) = 16.5 ml
puppies over 2 days and kittens over 7 days old,
Hourly requirement = 2.75 ml/h or 2.75 drops/min
though alcohol toxicity has been reported in neonates
(paediatric giving set)
 sprayed in baskets. Ivcrmcctin, which has been suc-
cessful in the treatment of ear mites, Demodex and
Methods of drug and fluid administration
 Sarcoptes in adults, is unlikely to be contraindicated
 Intravenous -- a 23 or 25 gauge catheter can be
in puppies and kitlens, although idiosyneratic reac-
placcd in thc ccphalic vein of many small puppies
tions can occur. Kittens are relatively less susceptible
or kittens; however, their short legs can make the
to ivermectin toxicity, though this has been reported.
catheter placement and flow difficult to maintain
Ivermcctin can be particularly useful if large nurmhcrs
Intraperitoneal - not ideal, as absorption can be
of cats need to be treated, e.g. for ear mites, with the
relatively slow especially in the face of hypo-
dose being repeated in 2--3 weeks. Other products
volaemia and this route is poorly suited to long-
that can bc used include amitraz and seleniuin sul-
term fluid therapy. Risks of puncturing viscera are
phide. When treating a Sarcoptes infestation, all
 low but aseptic technique is mandatory. Fluid
members of the litter plus the dam should be treated
Parasite
Comments
Common flea
Commonly encountered, more rarely clinically significant. Can result in anaemia if
burden heavy
 Far mitcs
Very common in nconales, passed on from dam, rarcly causc scvcrc discasc
Denodex
Rare in kittens, more common in puppies. Primary immunodeficiency has not been
demonstrated. 30-50% of puppies less than 1 year old recover spontaneously.
Generalizcd or localived. Typically scaling, seborrhocic and pustular lesions. Puppies
 usually infected within first few days of life. Diagnosis on skin scraping: Secondary
pyoderma common
Sarcoptes
sa od i s  s r o s 
erythematous. Diagnosis on skin scraping
Lice
 Generally indicates poor husbandry. Pruritic
Table 14.5: Ectoparasites commonly affecting young puppies and kitens.
 164 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
and environmental decontamination considered. The
Piperazine, though widely used, is potcntially toxic.
particularly in cats, and overdosageis common due tu
cidal shampoos can be helpful. The treatment of
the size of the tablets. The benzimidazole group or
Dermodex is outwith the scope of this discussion;
 pyrantel embonate are more efficacious, safer and
concomitant antibiotic use is rccammended.
easily administered.
In general, organophosphorus-containing com-
pounds are best avoided in the treatment of ectoparasites
Bacterial infections
in neonates. Pyrethrins and pyrethroids are safer but
A variety of bacterial infections havc bccnn associated
pverdosage is still common.
with nconatal septicaemias in puppies and kittens.
The incidence of protozoan parasites (Table 14.7)
Bacteria involved are usually common, such as
will be minimized by gocd husbandry, hygiene, daily
Staphylococcus,Escherichia,Klebsiella,Enterohacter,
disposal of facccs and avoiding both ovcrcrowding
Streptococcus, Enterococcus, Pseudomonas, Clostrid-
and the use of outside runs which cannot be effec-
ium,Bacteroides, F'usobacterium and Salmonella spp.
tively disinfected. Potentiated sulphonamides need
 Of these, Gram-negative bacilli arc found rnost fre-
to he used with care in neonates due to their reduccd
quently. Dcath can occur suddenly with Icw clinical
hepatic metabolism and they are not recommended as
signs but more commonly frequent crying, restless-
a routine antibiotic.
ness, hypothermia, diarrhoea, dyspnoea, haematuria
and cyanosis arc seen. In more chronic discasc, ani-
Endoparasites
 mals fail to gain weight as expected. Diagnosis is based
Toxocara spp. and Toxascaris leonina are almost
on history and clinical examination. Ideally, blood
ubiquitous parasites of puppies and kittens, being
cultures should bc obtaincd but their results arc only
transmittcd in the dam's milk. Hcavy infestations arc
likcly to he of value to othcr littcr mates, as those first
associated with unthriftiness, diarrhoea, poor coat
infected are likely to die before a diagnosis can be
condition and a ‘pot-bellied' appearance. Rarely,
complctc bowel ohstruction is causcd. Regular worm-
ment needs to be aggressivc, with antibiotics, fluids.
ing should be performed in all puppies and kittens.
 glucose and oxygen.
Drug
Dose rate in
Dose rate in
Use
Licensing
puppies
kittens
Ivermectin
200 μg/kg
200-400 μg/kg
 Sarcoptic mange, demodectic
NLC/D
mange, ear mites
Amitraz
As adult
LETHAL
Demodectic mange
NL <12
NLchi
Selenium sulphidc
As adull
As dog
ILicensed for seborrhoeic
NLC
 dermatitis but effective in
treatment of Cheyletiella
Clindamycin
11 mg/kg bid 
11 mg/kg bid 
Toxoplasmosis
LP
Trimethoprim/
 30 mg/kg sid;
 30 mg/kg sid
Coccidiosis
LP
sulphadiazine
15 mg/kg bid
(kittens >1 kg)*
 Metronidazole
25 mg/kg bid
As puppy
Giardia
NLC/D
for 5 days then
10 mg/kg bid
Tenbendazole
50 mg/kg sid for
As puppy
Giardia
LP
3 days
Doxycyclinet
N/A
10 mg/kg sid
Haemobartonella felis
LP
Clavulanic acid
12.5-25
As puppy
Broad-spectrum antibiotic
LP
polentiatcd
mg/kg bid
amoxycillin
 Augmentin
As above
As puppy
Intravenous use
NLC/D
Table I4.6: Suggested dose rates for drugs in puppies and kittens.
Taleshdndeeddah45%e
Infcctious Diseases of Young Puppics and Kittens  165
Parasite
Comments
Treatment
Coccidia
 Usually scen in large breeding establishments.
Trimethoprim/
Acute diarrhoea often haemorrhagic coinciding
sulphonamide
with bouts of oocyst production. Acquired from dam
Neospora
Hindlimb parcsis dleveloping in puppies at 5-8
? Clindamycin or
weeks of age. Antibodies detected using
potentiated sulphonamides
immunofluorescent antibody testing.
 Polyradiculoncuritis and granulomatous
polymyositis at post mortem
Toxoplasna
Puppies born to infected bitches show diarrhoea,
Unlikely to be effective;
respiratory distress and ataxia with extensive
?clindamycin
inflammatory change in the CNS at post mortem.
Kittens from infected queens most commonly show
anorexia, lethargy and hypotherimia. Field cases of
nconatal toxoplasmosis are not common as most.
queens and bitches will have been exposed prior to
pregnancy
Giardia
Acute small intestinal diarrhoea. Diagnosis can be
Metronidazole
difficult, repeated faecal examination using zinc
(neurological side-effects
sulphide flotation
not uncommon) or
fenbendazole
Haemobartonella felis
Depression, lethargy, dyspnoea and severe anaemia
Blood transfusion
in young kittens
 Doxycyclinc and
 prednisolone 2 mg/kg sid
 and reducing
Tahte I4.7: Prorozoan parasites common in youmg puppies amd kiens.
Diarrhoea is common in nconales but ihe role of
complex but, like the other viral diseases, most kit-
bacteria is less clear. The majority of cases are self-
limiting and can be treated using dietary manipulation
Canine hcrpes virus is a well reported cause of
(starvation followcd by frcquent, small, bland mcals)
nconatal dcath, with infection occurring in utero, al
and fluid therapy (oral electrolyte soluticns). Antibac-
whelping, from other dogs or via fomites. Affected
terial agents should be avoided if possible as they can
puppies show abdoninal pain and cry continually.
furthcr disrupt the developing bowcl microflora.
Death occurs in 2448 hours, with trcatimcnt rarely
There have been a number of reports of Bordetella.
being effective. Post-mortem findings include pe-
bronchiseptica infection causing fatal respiratory
techial haemorrhages, an enlarged spleen and exces-
disease in kittens. Clinical signs rcportcd include
sive pleural and abdominal fluid. Occasionally,
acute dyspnoea and cyanosis. In older kittens a more
 neonatal infection is associated with the ocular form
causing panuveitis and retinitis. Older puppies tend
signs occurs. Diagnosis is bascd cn culture of oro-
t0 acquire a much milder mucosal form with upper
pharyngeal swabs using selective media. B.
 respiratory tract signs prcdominating.
bronchiseptica has, however, been found as a normal
Transplacental spread of feline parvovirus (feline
comincnsal in adult cats.
 panleucopenia, feline infectious enteritis) is well
documented, causing ccrcbcllar alaxia. Many kittens
Viral infections
appear normal at birth, with their neurological
Viral infcctions arc uncommon in puppies and kittens
deficits becoming obvious as they develop grcatcr
until maternally derived immunity begins to wane at
 mobility. The condition is non-progressive and many
around 5-6 weeks. Feline immunodeficiency virus
kittens will learn to cope well, making good pets.
(FIV) and feline leukaemia virus (FeLV) can both
 Frequently, cases of transplacental sprcard arc associ-
 s    s 
 ated with the usc of modified live vaccines in preg-
via body fluids and milk. Rarely are clinical signs of
 nant queens. Canine parvovirus does not appear to
FeLV or FIV infection evidcnt by 56 weeks of age.
 cross the placenta; infection in young puppies is now
Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)has bccn reported in
very rarc but does still occur, particularly in colos-
America as a possible cause of a kitten mortality
trum-deprived individuals, and is associated with
 166 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 myocarditis. In very young puppics, this causes sud-
 nent immunodeficiencies. CDV infection in young
 den death due to arrhythmias and mortality can reach
 puppies can also result in severe damage to the dental
 70%. As puppies becomc older, infection results in
enamel of the permanent teeth.
 more slowly progressive heart failure which may not 
 become evident until 1-2 years of agc. Puppics ovcr
Fading puppies and kittens
 5-6 wceks of age usually develop the enteric form of
the disease.
of infectious and non-infectious conditions of thc
 Transplacental spread of canine distcmpcr virus
(CDV) will occur causing the development of neuro-
to gradually become inactive, loose their suckle reflex
 logical signs in puppies al 4-6 weeks of age. Depend-
 and die in the first 2 weeks of life (see Chapter 13).
 ing on the stage of gestation, abortion, stillbirths or
Localizing signs are usually absent. This condition
fading puppies are also associated with CDV infec-
represents aclinical description rather than a diagnosis
tion. Puppies which survive may suffer from perma-
 and requires investigation as outined above.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN (II)
Vaccination
Kit Sturgess
A wide choice of vaccines is available for use in
 isolates, infectious dose and differences in an individu-
 puppies and kitens (Table 14.8). The precise choice of
al' s immune response, no vaccine can beexpected to be
vaccine will vary between practices and will depend on
100% effective. Vaccination should forin an integral
client/animal factors, disease prcvalcnce within the
 part of a wider discase control strategy.
practice area and practice purchasing considerations
 T'wo basic types of vaccines are available:
Vaccines (with the possible exception of intranasal
products) do not prevent infection but are designed to
Attenuated live vaccines
produce a rapid and strong anamnestic response to the
Dead vaccines: whole killed adjuvanted or
 pathogen on fieldchallengc. This enables an individual
subunit adjuvanted.
to develop a protective immune response within the
incubation period of the disease, and hence it will not
show clinical signs of the disease. Therefore despite
MODIFIED LIVE VACCINES
bcing fully vaccinated, infection can still accur but
with very low grade or inapparent clinical signs mean-
Modified live vaccines generally provide a longer,
ing that animals can still become carriers and shedders
stronger more complete immune response. These
of the infcctious agcnt. This means that it is nol neccs-
yaccines undergo some mltiplication within the host
sarily safe to house a vaccinated animal with a suscep-
causing a low grade (usually unnoticeable) infection.
tible individual. Due to strain variations between
 Most attenuated vaccines are replication deficient; the
Agcnt/Discase
Vaccines available
 Feline herpes virus type-1
ML; KA; SU; i/n
Feline calicivirus
ML; KA: SU; i/n
Feline parvovirus (feline infectious enteritis/panleucopenia)
ML; KA
Chlamydia psittaci
ML; KA
Feline lcukacimia virus
SU; KA
 Feline infectious peritonitis virus*
i/n
Distemper
ML; measles (ML)
Canine parvovirus
ML; KA
Canine adenovirus-1 (canine infectious hepatitis)
CAV-2 ML; KA
Canine adenovirus-2 (CAV-2)
ML; KA
Leptospira (L. canicola; L. icterohaemorragiae)
KA
Parainfluenza virus
ML
Bordetella bronchiseptica
i/n
Rabiest
K.A.
Table 14.8: Vaccines avallabie in UK (December 1996).
*Not cwrentyaiabie in UK
ML-modiedive,RA-killedaaneS-snni -inanai
168Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 strain is fully pathogenic but being slower to divide,
spond. Recent improvements in vaccine inmunogenicity
thc host immune responsc becomes dominant. It is
have led to fcwer problems associatcd with the persist-
essential, therefore, that the host has a competent
ence cf maternally derived antibodies in 12-week-old
inmune system; otherwise overt, clinical disease can
puppies or kittens blocking their response to vaccina-
develop. Live vaccincs are contraindicatcd in
tion. Vaccination can be performed carlierthan 6 weeks
immunosuppressed animals and immune incompetent
in high risk groups, but should be as an additional
animals, e.g. the very young or during pregnancy or
immunization and is outside the manufacturer's recom-
following recent parturition. Contamination of live
mendations. The use of some of the relatively poorly
vaccincs with other infeclious agents has very occa-
attenuated livc vaccines in puppies and kittens younger
sionally been reported. Modified live vaccines are
than 6 weeks should be avoidled, as there is a risk of
generally preferred, particularly when the infectious
vaccine-induced disease. Because the eficacy of intra-
nasal vaccincs is unaffected by matcrnally derived im-
or Chlamydia.
munity or immune competence, these vaccines can be
 Currently available modified live vaccines acting at
used from birth if required (Table 14.9).
 the mucosal surface have attenuated pathogenicily. As
 In situalions where repeated outbreaks of a specific
they are ternpcrature-sensitivc mutants and thereforc
vaccinable diseasc occurs, incrcased frequency of vacci-
incapable of invading the body, the immune status of the
nation may not necessarily be the bestsolution. The likely
individual is less critical. Such vaccines may prevent
source of infection should be considered and the suscep-
infeclion by blocking the siles of cntry of the pathogen
tiblc puppies/kittens isolated In many cases this is likely
and can therefore provide very rapid protection.
to be the dam, in which case early weaning at 3-4 weeks
may provide a better approach to disease control.
KILLED VACCINES
VACCINE CHOICE
Thcrc are many typesofkilled vaccine with very diverse
formulations, and thcrcfore very differcnt dcgrces and
In gencral, modified live vaccines, where available,
types of protection. Originally, killed vaccines were
are preferred for routine vaccination. However, certain
inactivatcd whole organisins plus an adjuvant. Now,
 modified live panleucopenia vaccincs arc not recom-
this group contains many subunit vaccines which may
 mended for use in oriental kiltens. When vaccinating
be genetically engineered and presented in more
 puppies and kittens younger than 6 weeks, the use of
immunogenic foms, e.g. immune stimulating com-
dead vaccines may be more appropriate. The choice of
plexes (ISCOMS). Most killcd vaccines contain adjuvant.
which vaccincs to usc will depend on geographical
 area, likely lifestyle of the puppy or kitten and owner
of adverse drug reactions, primarily malaise and
finances and is reviewed elsewhere.
inappetance for 2448 hours following vaccination and
local inflammation at the injection site. In the 1992
FeLV vaccines
report of suspected adverse reactions, 135 cases of drug
The fieldefficacy of currently available FeLV vaccines
reactions were recordedincats, of which 69 (51%) were
have not becn established, nor havc they been directly
associated with vaccination, the majority with inacti-
compared using a natural challenge system. Like all
vated vaccines (47 inactivated; 22 live).
vaccines, it is unlikely that any will provide 100%
protection, particularly against transient infcction and
hence there is a possibility of latent or focal FeLV
VACCINATION SCHEDULES
occurring. The following should be considered:
Most manufacturcrs rccommend an initial vaccination
 Only immunity to subgroup A virus is required
at 6-9 weeks of age and a second injection at 12-14
 for protection
wecks. Essentially, this schedule is designed to begin
 There is no evidence that anti-FOCMA (feline
vaccination as soon as 1matemally deri vcd imrmunity has 
cncornavirus cell membrane-associated antigen)
waned in a significant number of individuals and to give
antibodies are involved in protection against
 persistcnt infection
Age
0-3 days
1-3 weeks
3-6 weeks
>6 weeks
Dose
1 drop
3 drops
1/4 vial
Full dose
Route
Intraocular and intranasal
 Intraocular and intranasal
Intranasal
 Intranasal
Table 14.9: Suggested vaccination regimen for iniranasai respiratory virus vuccine in kittens. Repeut vuccination every 3 wecks
from slarting age to 12 weeks.
Vaccination    169
 Cellular and humoral immunity to viral proteins
the efficacy of vaccination is in question then it is less
other than gp70 (surface protein) may be relevant
 expensive to re-vaccinate the puppy or kitten than to
to protection.
measure antibody titres. Further, what constitutes a
 protective titre is not always clear and in many cases,
   a j r  a 
the induction of cell mediated responses is more
lished, unnecessary exposure of vaccinated cats should
important than circulating antibody levels.
bc avoided and periodic testing of colonics should be
continued.
REFERENCES AND FURTHER
PRE-VACCINATION TESTING FOR
READING
FeLV
Blunden T (1988) Diagnosis and treatment of common disorders of
The possibility that a kitten is persistently viraemic at
newhorn puppies. in Pracrice 10. 175-184
Boothe DM and Tannert K (1992) Special considerations for drug
presentation for vaccination (following intrauterine or
and fluid therapy in the pediatic patient. Conpendiun on
 postnatal infection) necrls to hc considercd. Idcally all
Continuing Eaucation for the Pracricing Veterinarian 14,
cats should be tested prior to vaccination, as vaccina-
313-328
e sop o jo usu d pue sso (t) a pu
tion of a persistently infected cat:
cat. In: Veterinary Nursing. ed. DR Lane and B Cooper, pp. 409-
430. Butierworth-Heinemann, Oxford
Wastes the client's money
Fisher Ew (1982) Neonatal diseases of dogs and cats, British Veteri-
 Exposcs the cat to all the risks associated with
nary Jowrmal 138, 277-284
Hoskins JD(1990) Clinical evaluation of the kiten: Fron birth to eiglt
vaccination without bcncfit
weeks of age. Compendium on Conrinuing Educarion for rhe
 Risks the cat being considered safe to be mixed
Practicing Veterinarian 12, 1215-1225
with other cats
Hoskins JD (1993a) Fclinc nconatal scpsis. Veterinary Clinics ofNorht
Anerica: Sinait Animal Pracuice 23, 91-100
 Risks FeLV not being considered as the cause of
Hoskins ID (1993b) Fading puppy und kitten syndromes. Feline Pruc-
 disease that subsequently develops
fice 21(5), 19-22
Johnson CA, Grace JA (1994) Care of neonalal puppies and kittens. In:
 Does not allow the true efficacy of the vaccine to
Nursing Care in Veterinary Praclice, pp. 207-211. Veterinary
be established
Learning Systems, Trenton, New Jersey
 Miller E (i995) Diagnostic stmdies and sample callection in
neanatal dogs and cats. In: Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy
Such arguments only hold true if FeLV positive cats
Xll, ed. JD Bonagura and RW Kirk, Pp 27-30. WB Saunders,
 can be identified with complete reliability, unfortu-
Philadclphia
nately, this is not the case. Whilst the sensitivity and
Monson WJ (1987) Orphan reuring of puppies and kittens. Veterinary
Ciinies of North America: Small Animai Practice. 3, 567-576
specificity of currently available ELISA tests are high
Monson WJ (1993) Care and nanagenent of orphaned puppies and
(98-99%), because the prevalence of infection in the
kittens. In: Narsing Care in Veterinary Pracfice, Pp. 101-I05.
Veterinary Leaming Systens,Trenton,New Jersey
healthy cat population is low, the risk of a result being
 O'Brien D (1994) Neuralogical examination and development of the
a falsc positivc in a hcalthy kitten may bc as high as 25-
neonatal dog. Compendiun on Coninmuing Education for the
50%. Any healthy kitten with a positive ELISA test
Pracricing Verermarian 12, 1601-1609
 Poffenbarger EM, Ralston SL, Olson PN and Chandler ML (1991)
should have the result confirmed either by virus isola-
Canine neonatology. Part II. Disorders of thc nconatc. Conpent
tion or by rctcsting in 1-3 months.
dium on Continuing Edicationforthe Pracricing Veterinarian 13,
25-37
Scott FW, Weiss RC, Post JE, Gilmartin JE and Hoshiuo Y (1979)
a g g le  x  
POST-VACCINATION ANTIBODY
44-56
TITRES
Sturgess CP (1996) Feline vaccination. Vererinary Aruual 36,
202-216
Tennant B (1994) Nurition of companion animals. In: Veterinary
Measurement of antibody titres following vaccin-
ation is generally unnecessary and, in most cases, if
Hcinemunn, Oxford
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Surgery of the Genital Tract
Robert N. White
INTRODUCTION
 Stabilization of bitches suffering from diabetes
mellitus
It is not thc purposc of a manual of this size to describc
Utcrine torsion
all the commonly performed genital tract surgical pro-
 Uterine prolapse
·
cedures in great detail. For instance, each individual
+
Uterine rupture
surgeon has thcir own preferred technique for perform-
Prevcntion ofclinical signs associated with pscudo-
ing the procedures of castration and ovariohyster-
pregnancy (bitch)
ectomy; to describe them all would not be possible.
 Prevention of the recurrence of vaginal hyperplasia
Some of these techniqucs would probably not be considl-
(bitch).
ered correct to the surgical technique purist, but in the
hands of that particular operator are techniques that
Procedure in the bitch
work in practice. Rather, this chapter will attempt to
Elective ovariohystcrcctomy should not be performed
review the cormmonly performed procedures, highlight-
during oesirus because of the increased vascularity and
ing the possible complications and their treatment.
turgidity of the genital tract at this time. Ideally, neither
should the proccdurc bc performed in dioestrus
(the luteal phase) since it is possible that this will result
OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
in the development of clinical pseudopregnancy
(pseudocyesis) (see Chapicr 4).
Ovariohysterectomy is the most common abdominal
The approach to the peritoneal cavity when under-
taking the ovariohysterectomy procedure is a natter of
 Ovariectomy on its own is an uncommon operation in
 personal preference, although the majority of surgeons
the bitch or queen, and it is usually assumed that a
employ a vcntral midline coeliotomy. Thc urinary
hysterectomy is an indispensable part of the procedure.
bladder should be expressed prior to surgery since
In Fact, for elective neutering it is only ncccssary to
bladder distension rcsults in cranial displaceiment of
remove the ovaries because pyometritis, the commonest
the trigone with slackening of the ureters, making the
 possible spontaneous uterine disorder, is dependent on
possible inadvertent ligation of a ureter potentially
cyclical ovarian activity. Ovariectorny is widcly prac-
more likely. The distcnsion will also reduce the expo-
tised in Europe, although largely for historical reasons;
sure of the ulerine body.
ovariohysterectomy is perforned in the UK.
1.
 The proposcd surgical site is clipped giving gen-
Indications
crous margins and cleancd.
2.
 The bladder should be manually expressed.
Elective
3.
The bitch is moved to the operating theatre, posi-
Elective indications for ovariohysterectomy include:
tioned in dorsal recumbency and the surgical sitc
 prepared for surgery.
 Preventing unwanled pregnancies
4.
A skin incision is madc in the midline from the
 Preventing the unwanted behavioural signs which
level of the umbilicus in a caudal direction for a
can he associated with ocstrus
distance sufficient to allow access and exteriori-
Protection from subsequent development of certain
zation of the reproductive visccra.
manmmary neoplasms.
5.
The subcutaneous fascia and fat are cleared from
the linea alba.
Therapeutic
Therapeutic indications for ovariohysterectomy include:
6.
The linea alba is incised to allow access and
cxteriorization of the reproductive visccra.
Pyometritis
7.
A. uterine horn is located and exteriorized; its
Ncoplasms of the ovaries and utcrus
associated ovary is grasped and pulled through
172 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
the wound withi gentle traction.
Procedure in the queen
8.
 It is usual to brcak the ovarian suspensory liga-
Ideally, the procedure should not be performed in the 
ment either manually or with thc aid of hacmo-
quccn in oestrus because of the increased vascularity
static forceps.
and turgidity of the genital tract. Unfortunately, the
9.
 Theoretically, correct surgical techinique would
cat's oestrous cycle is such that it is not uncommon for
suggest thal thrcc haemostatic forceps (three-
the procedure to be performed during this period.
forceps technique) are now placed on the
Similarly to the bitch, the approach to the perito-
ovarian blood vessels; the nost proximal being
neum is a matter of personal preference, with some
removcd so thal a ligaturc may he tied snugly
surgeons employing a flank approach, while others 
..
around the crushed tissues. The lack of space,
prefer a ventral midline coeliotomy. It must be remem-
amount of fat and friability of the blood vessels
bered that should a surgical emergency develop, it is
often allows only one or two forceps to be placed
more likely to be successfully resolved if the abdomen
adjacent to the ovary, with the ligature being ticd
has becn approachcd via the midlinc, as (he cxposurc
so that it cuts into the fatty pedicle containing the
achieved with this approach is superior to that obtained
vessels. Alternatively, the ligature may be placed
via the flank approach. In the cat, it is considerably
through the perivascular tissues of the pedicle
more difficuli to rcach and cxtcriorize the ccrvix via
and tied as a transfixing suture. In general, a
the flank approach. It is often the case, therefore, that
single ligature of appropriate suture material
uterine tissue remains in siu following ovariohyster-
will be sufficient.
ectomy via this approach, making the occurrence of
10. Once the ligature is tied the pedicle is transected
uterine stump pyometra a significant possibility. In
between the two proximal forceps, or between the
colour point' cats, the ventral midline coeliotomy will 
ligaturc andl the forceps, allowing the ovary to be
ensure that any discoloured hair regrowth occurs sym-
lifted clear of the abdomen.
Imetically and ventrally. The ovariohysterectomy pro-
11. The pedicle is grasped with thumb-forceps and the
cedure carried out via the midline approach is similar
hacimnostalic forccps rcmaining on the ovarian
in procedhure to that described for the bitch. The inci-
 vessels are removed, allowing an assessment of
sion is made an equal distance caudally and cranially
haemorrhage to be made.
from a point midway between the umbilicus and brim
12.
 The pedicle is rcplaced into thc pcritoncal cavity.
af thc pclvis. Great carc sheuld cxcrciscd if the ntcrinc
13. The broad and round ligamcnts of thc utcrinc horn
body is to bc clampcd in thc qucen; in the author's
are torn manually; any vessels encountered may
experience, it is not uncommon for the tissue to be
require ligation or electrocautery (some surgeons 
friable and the haemostatic forceps to cut into and
prefer toligate the broad ligament on both sides in
transect the structure.
its entirety).
 The flank approach can be described as follows:
14.  A similar procedure is carried out on the opposite
 ovary and uterine horn.
1.
 The proposed surgical site is clipped, giving gen-
15. Both horns oftheuterus should now be outside the
erous margins and cleaned.
 pcritoncal cavity, and with gentle traction the
2.
The bladder is manually expressed.
cervix andl cranial vagina should bc visiblc.
3.
The cat is movcd to thc opcrating thcatrc, posi-
16. The uterine vessels situated on both lateral as-
tioned in lateral recumbency (either side) and the
 pects of the cervix should be ligated at the level of
 pelvic limbs extended in a caudal direction.
the proximal cervix (this procedure can be accom-
4.
 Aiaains ioj pdad st is leoans s
plished in many ways, most including a transfixion
5.
A vertical skin incision is made 2-4 cm caudal to
suture which also ligates the cervical lumen). The
the last rib (the dorsoventral level of the incision
use and manner of application of crushing forceps
is often estimated by considering the incision sile
on the uterus and cervix is a matter of personal
l salaososi Aren ue jo xade an eq 0
prcfcrencc (remcmber, it is possible for forceps
whose base is a line between the crest of the ilium
used on tissuc of this thickness to cut rather than
and thc greatcr trochanter of the femur).
to clamp).
6.
The subcutaneous fat is incised or a small portion
17.
 The uterus is transected either on the cranial pole
is resected, revealing the fascia of the external
of the cervix or through the body of the ccrvix.
abdominal abliquc musclc.
 18. The cut end of the cervix does not require closure
7.
The external abdominal oblique, internal abdomi-
or inversion and once haemorrhage has been
 lal oblique and transverse abdominal niuscles are
assessed, the ‘stump’ may be replaced in the 
 separated, in turn, along their natural muscle fibre
peritoneal cavity.
planes.
19.
 Thc pcritoneal cavity, ovarian pedicles and cervi-
8.
 The peritoneum is commonly incised by blunt
cal stump should be asscssed for haemorrhage, 
penetration with atraunatic thumb forceps.
swab count performed, and the peritoneal cavity
The greater omentum should be retracted in a
closed in a routine manner.
cranial direction.
Surgery of the Genital Tract  173
10. By gently grasping intra-abdominal Lissue in a
 associated with severe haemorrhage may be present;
dorsal direction, thc ncarest uterine horn, or its
these includc pale mucous membranes, delaycd capil-
broad ligament, can be exteriorized (some
lary refill time, weak pulses, tachycardia, tachypnoea,
 surgeons prefer to use a spay hook for this
hypothermia, abdominal distcnsion and leakage of
procedure).
bluod from thc abdominal wound. Abdominocentesis
11.
Gentle traction will reveal the ovary and its sus-
 or lavage may be performed to confirm the presence of
pensory ligament.
blood within the peritoneal cavity. During activc haem-
12.‘
 The ovarian vesscls should be ligated in a similar
 orrhage, the packed cell volume (PCV) of this fluid
manner to that described for the bitch.
will be similar to that of a venous blood sample.
13.
 The broad ligament may be carefully torn on both
Once intraperitoneal haemorrhage has occurred, it
sides with little risk of hacmorrhage.
 is often difficult to assess whether conscrvativc therapy
14.1
 It is often easier lo ligale and transect the uterine
will result in the cessation of the bleeding or not. If
body without prior placement of haemostatic
there are any doubts as to whether the haemorrhage is
clamps, bccause these will commonly transect thc
ongoing, it is advisablc that surgical intcrvention is
undertaken following the stabilization of the patient.
oestrus.
Intravenous fluid administration should be instigated
15. A single encircling ligature will suffice.
in an attempt to stabilize the haemody namic status of
16.'
 The uterus should bc excised as closc to the cervix
the individual prior to surgical intcrvention.
as possible.
Surgically, the approach to the abdomen is the
17.
The individual muscle layers may be closed sepa-
same as that for the original ovariohysterectomy pro-
rately, but commonly, they are closed as one;
cedure, although the length of thc incision should bc
subcutaneous fascia and skin are closed in a
extended so that the ligature sites can be clearly exam-
routine manner.
ined. Some form of suction system is extremely useful
for removing thc blood which has accumulated within
Complications
the peritoneal cavity. It is often necessary to exteriorize
The more common complications associated with
the spleen and the small intestines to allow for better,
ovariohystcrectomy include:
unobstructed visualization of the ovarian pedicles.
These structures should be placed carefully on sterile
Haemorrhage
saline-soaked abdominal swabs.
+
 latrogenic injury to the urinary tract
The right ovarian pedicle may be approached by
 Utcrine/ovarian stump granuloma and sinus tract
locating the duodenum, which lies against the right
+
development
lateral abdominal wall, and retracting it towards the
 Uterine stump pyometra
left abdominal wall. The mesoduodenum acts like a
Ovarian remnant syndrome
dam, trapping the abdominal contcnts medial to ilsclf
 Urinary incontinence
 and allowing an unobstructed view of the right ovarian
Weight gain/obesity.
1
pedicle. A similar procedure can be carried out using
thc descending colon and the mesocolon to retract thie
As well as the complications listed above, which are
abdominal conlents towards the right abdominal wall,
specifically associated with the ovariohysterectomy
 thus exposing the left ovarian pedicle.
 procedure, thcrc are a number of complications which
The uterine sturnp may be approached by cxterior-
are associated with surgical wounds of the abdomen.
izing the urinary bladder and retracting it in a caudal
These include haematoma and seroma formation, in-
direction. The uterine stump may have retracted to an
fection, wound dchisccnce and hcrniation, and tissue
intrapclvic position requiring its manual relraction into
reaction to the sulure matcrials. The readcr is rcfcrrcd
the caudal abdomen before thc utcrine vessels can bc
to standard surgical textbooks for further discussion
assessed for haemorrhage. Haemorrhage at any of
on the management of these general surgical compli-
these sites will require the placement of further liga-
cations.
tures. Ideally, these ligatures should be placed as
Haemorrhage is reported as the most common
 transfixing ligatures so that they cannot slip from their
cause of dcath following ovariohystercctomy. Bleed-
placement site. All other bleeding points should be
 ing is associated with ligature failure of the ovarian or
assessed and the haemorrhage stopped either with
uterine vessels, but may also occurin some individuals
electrocautery or ligation. Care should be taken to
as a result of poor haemostasis of the smaller vessels
assess the remnants of the torn broad ligament for any
within structures such as the hroad ligament. Hacnmor-
cvidence of haemorrhagc. Should multiplc blccding
   i   r
points be found, especially if they are at different sites.
haemoperitoneum may develop in the post operative
consideration should be given to the animal's blood
clotting status.
pected in the individual that takes longer than expected
 Inclusion of either the proximal ureter in an ovarian
to recover from the surgical procedure. Clinical signs
pedicle ligature or the distal ureter in the uterine
 174  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
 pedicle ligature is an uncommon, but well recognized
tion with poor surgical technique. Poor asepsis and the
possible complicatjon of the surgical procedure. If
vascular compromise of remaining tissuc may rcsult in 
both ureters are involved, the obstruction will cause
abscess formation at the ligature sites. This abscess
anuria and a post-renal azotaemia. More commonly,
may be contained within the abdominal cavity or a
only one of the ureters is involved and the functional
cfficicncy of thc contralateral kidney rmakes observa-
thc flank should an ovarian pediclc ligalure site be the
tion of clinical signs associated with renal inpairment
 source of the problem. Radiography and ultrasono-
unlikely. There may be behavioural changes attribut-
graphy may be useful in confirming the diagnosis.
ahlc to abdominal dliscomfort and there may hc a
Contrast radiography of a discharging sinus will often
reduction in urine production. Hydronephrosis and the
reveal the site of the source. Treatment consists of
back pressure of urine may produce nephromegaly of
stabilizing the individual prior to surgical exploration
the associated kidncy in the longer term. These changcs
and removal of the offcnding ligatures. All non-
may be detected radiographically or with abdominal
essential infected and devitalized tissue should also
ultrasonography. The affected kidney may develop
 be debrided; the tissue.may be cultured and bacterial
abscessation and necrosis. Complete blood counts
sensitivities assessed.
Imay be useful in assessing such proccsscs. Unfortu-
Ovarian rcmnant syndrome will most commonly
nately, in most instances, by the time the problem has
result from improper surgical technique resulting in
been diagnosed, the affected kidney and ureter are
severely damaged and trcatmcnt consists of
possible that thc syndrome may result from the vascu-
nephroureterectomy. In cases diagnosed shortly after
larization of a ^dropped' portion of ovarian tissue into
 the peritoneal cavity during the ovariohystcrectomy
funetion may return. Stricture formation of the ureler
 procedure (the author knows of a number of surgeons
at the site of the injury may subsequently lead to a
who consciously place one of the ovaries within the
further obstruction. Inclusion of the distal ureter in the
omentum at the time of ovariohystcrcctomy in an
uterine Higaturc may also result in the formation of a
allempt (o miinimize the devclopment of post-ovario-
ureterovaginal fistula. These intdividuals are likely to
hysterectomy conditions associated with the loss of
present with a sudden onset urinary incontinence a few
 ovarian hormonal activity). A third cause of the syn-
days after thc avariahysterectomy. Contrast radio.
dlrome is the prescncc of ovarian ‘rest' tissue in a
 graphic studies may be used to confirm the diagnosis.
location other than the immediate ovarian area. This
A ureterovaginal fistula may be successfully treated by
tissue may become functional at almost any time.
ligation of thc fistula and performing a urcteronco-
 Diagnosis of ovarian rcmnant syndrome should be
cystostomy.
straightforward so long as the dog is not receiving
There is the possibility for a uterine stump pyo-
exogenous oestrogens. Diagnosis may be based on thc
mctra to devclop in a dog or cat in which a porlion of
 appearancc of morc than 80-90% superficial cells on
the uterus is left in situ at the timc of ovariohyslerec-
vaginal cylulogy during a period of oestrus or the
tomy. The development of the pyometra requires
demonstration of elevated oestrogen and progesterone
endogenous or exogenous progesterone priming of the
concentrations. The subject is more fully covered in
ulerine tissue. The ·sourcc of progesterone is com-
Chapter 4.
 monly either residual ovarian tissue or the exogenous
Treatment consists of the surgical removal of the
administration of thc progestational drugs. Clinical
Temainingovarian tissuc which may beeasiertolocate
signs are similar to those seen wilh a 'standard' pyo-
when the animal is in oestrus or early dioestrus. If n0
metra, except that an obvious abdominal mass cannot
obvious ovarian tissue can be located, it is prudent to
hc palpatcd. Radiographically, a soft tissue mass may
resect both ovarian pcdicles in the hope that these will
be seen between the urinary bladder and the descend-
 include any potential ectopic cvarian tissue. Care should
ing colon. Ultrasonography will often confirm ques-
be taken not to include the ureters in this resection.
tionable cases. As with other cases of pyometra, the
 Urinary incontinence may occur following ovario-
patient should be stabilizcd prior to surgical cxplora-
hysterectomy for various reasons, but the commonest
tion. At surgery, the pus-filled residual uterine body
cause of incontinence in spayed dogs is urethral
should be removed and, if suspected as the underlying
sphinctcr mechanism incompctcnce (SMI). The ae-
 cause, residual ovarian tissuc should be located and
tiopathogenesis of this condition is multifactorial,
removed. Uterine stump pyometra can be avoided by
complex and poorly understood, but ovariohysterec-
ensuring that all utcrinc and ovarian tissue is removcd
lomy appears to bc a contributing factor. Although
at the time of ovariohysterectomy. It must be remem-
the mechanism is not known, possible explanations
bered that this is technically much easier to achieve via
include neurological, vascular and hormonal changes
a midline coeliotomy than via a flank approach to the
following surgical removal of the reprodnctivc tract
peritoncal cavily.
in the bitch. The majorily of bitches that develop
 Uterine and ovarian stump granuloma result from
the use of non-absorbable suture material in combina-
nary incontinence within one year of the procedure.
Surgery of the Genital Tracl  175
In bitches with suspected urethral SMl, a com-
The scrotal wall is grasped over one testis,forcing
3.
plete clinical examination should ideally he under-
the gonad to a point in the midline cranial to the 
taken prior to instituting any medical management.
base of the scrotum.
This should include routine urinalysis, abdominal
4.
With the testis in this position, a skin incision is
radiographs, urethral catheterization and more in-
made in the median raphe by cutting down on to
valvcd contrast radiographic studics. Thc main aim
 the gonad.
when treating SMI is to restore continence by increas-
5.
 The incision with the blade is cxtcnded throngh
 ing urethral tone. This may be achieved medically
the tunica vaginalis to expose the testis; pressure
using cxogenous oestrogcns to improve smooth
exerted behind the testis will result in its emer-
muscle contractility and sensitize the urethra to
gcncc from the vaginal sac.
Q-adrenergic stimulation or sympathomimetic
6.
The mesorchium is divided and the scrotal liga-
drugs, such as ephedrine and phenylpropanolamine
ment is separated from the caudal pole of the testis.
(1.5 mg/kg twice daily) to act on the α-receptors
7.
Thc ductus deferens and bloodl vesscls in the
within the urethral smooth muscle resulting in in-
 spermatic cord are ligated and transected (three-
 creased urethral tone. Surgical options for the condi-
forceps technique) separately, commonly, all these
tioninclutle colposuspension, cystourethropcxy, sling
structures arc ligatcd together using a single or
 urethroplasties and the creation of an artificial sphinc-
 double ligature. The ligature may be placed as a
ter. The reader is referred to the Further Reading
 transfixing ligature by passing it through the
section for texis covcring this subject in more detail.
perivascular and pcriductal tissues prior to tying.
Studies indicate that ovariohysterectomy may ad-
8.
The cavity of the scrotal vaginal sac may be
versely affect the ability of dogs toregulate food intake
obliterated with sutures to prevent abdominal
making them likcly to ovcreat and, thus, predisposc
organ herniatian.
 them to obesity, but when food intake is controlled and
9.
The second testis is removed in the same manner
dogs are regularly exercised, no significant increase in
through the same skin incision.
wcight should occur.
10. The subcutaneous tissues and skin are closed in a
routinc manner.
CASTRATION
Closcd technique
 The technique is initially the same as that per formed
Indications
for the open procedure:
Elective
1.
The skin incision in the median raphc is not
Elective indications for castration include:
extended to penetrate the vaginal tunic, rather, the
 subcutancous lissucs are bluntly dissected to ex-
 Sterilization
pose the vaginal sac on onc side.
 Preventing the unwanted behavioural signs
2.
Firm pressure on the testis will release the sac
associated with a sexually mature male.
 through the skin incision.
3.
 The sac may be grasped and pulled in a caudal
Therapeutic
 direction to place the entire scrotal portion exte-
Thcrapcutic indications for castration include:
rior to the body cavity; this procedure may be
mardc casier by breaking the fascial attachments
Testicular neoplasia
 bluntly with the aid of a swab.
 Cryptorchidism
4.
The vaginal sac is exteriorized sufficiently to
 Benign prostatic hyperplasia
expose the tunic covered spermatie cord.
Perineal herniation
5.
 The spermatic cord portion is cleared of extrane-
Testicular torsion
ous fascia and ligated by placing an absorbable
Orchitis.
transection suiure through thc cremaster muscle
prior to ligating the remaining cord.
Procedure in the dog
 Clamping with haemostatic forceps (two or three
forccps technique) may bc undertaken, but is
Open technique
often considered unnecessary.
7.
 The spermatic cord distal to the ligature is clamped
1.
 The proposed surgical site including the scroturn
with a single pair of forceps prior to transecting
is clipped; care should be taken when clipping and
the cord between these forceps and the ligature.
scrubbing the scrotal skin.
During this transection procedure, the cord proxi-
2.
The dog is movcd to the operating room, posi-
maltothe ligaturc nay bc grasped with atraumatic
tioned in dorsal recumbency and the surgical site
forceps so that it can be safely observcd for
 prepared for surgery.
 haemorrhage following the transection procedure.
176 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
There should be minimal tension on the cord
should be sufficient to divide thc skin and thc
tluring this assessment and should hacmorrhage
underlying fascia.
11
be observed, a further ligature should be placed.
4.
8.
 The ligated spermatic cord can then be allowed to
 continue the incision through the vaginal tunic,
retract through thc incision towards the exteral
allowing the testicle to be cxtcriorizcd by gentle
inguinal ring.
 pressure behind the testicle.
9.
The castration is completed by displacing the
5.
The spermatic cord structures may be ligated with
remaining testis to the skin incision, incising the
 overlying fascia and rcpcating the procedure de-
prefer to separate the ductus deferens from the
scribed above.
testicular vessels and then tie these two structures
 10. The subcutaneous tissue and skin are closed in a
togcther into a square knot.
routine manner.
6.
A similar procedure is undertaken on the opposite
side.
Scrotal ablation (scrotectomy)
7.
Thc tied spermatic cord will usually rctract into
Under ccrtain circumstances, the scrotum may bc
the vaginal tunic following the procedure, and no
removed as an integral part of the castration procedure.
 attempt is made to close the scrotal incisions with
In the aged dog, the scrotum has often become a
sutures.
pendulous structurc which may become oedcmalous
and swollen in the days following routine castration. In
"Closed’ castration may be carried out by not incising
the longer term, the dog may be left with an unsightly
into the vaginal tunic.
scrotal sac which may be liable to inadvertent trauma.
 The tunic-covered testicle is exteriorized by
ing a scrotectomy at the time of castration. If there is
mamually squeezing it out of the scrotum and
any discase process involving the scrotum such as
applying traction to il until the tunic-covered 
spermatic cord is exposed.
dermatitis, a scrotectomy should be considered part of
2.
The spermatic cord is ligated and transected.
the castration procedure.
3.
 Clamping with haemostatic forccps (two or three
forceps technique) may be undertaken, but is
1. The dog is positioned in dorsal recumbency, simi-
often not required for structures of this size.
larly to a routine castration.
4.
A similar procedure is undcrtakcn on the opposite
 2. The whole of the scrotum and surrounding skin is
side.
prepared for aseptic surgery.
5.
 The tied spermatic cord will retract into the vagi-
3. An elliptical skin incision is made around the base
nal tunic following the proccdure and no attempt
of the scrotum.
is made to close the scrotal incisions with sutures.
4.
 The subcuticular fascia is undermined and incised,
freeing the edges of the scrotal skin.
Complications
 5. Each testis is identified within its tunic and sepa-
 Complications associated with castration include:
rated from the other.
6.
 The vaginal tunic is cleared of extraneous fat and
·
Haemorrhage
the castration proceeds on both sidcs in a similar
·
 Incisional irritation and scrotal swelling
manner to that described for closed castration.
■
 lndirect scrotal herniation.
7. After both cords have been ligated and transected
any remaining fascia is scparaled allowing the two
I aemorrhage from the testicular vessel following cas-
testes and scrotum to be removed together.
 tration may present in differing ways depending on tlhie
8. The subcutaneous fascia is closed using a simple
 manner in which the castration was performed. In the
continuous sulure pattern of synthetic absorbable
dog, the bleeding may ciher enter the abdominal
material.
cavity resulting in haemoperitoneum or it may enter
9. The skin wound is closed routinely.
the scrotum resulting in a scrotal haematoma. In the
cat, the opcn scrotal incisions commonly result in
Procedure in the tom (open and closed)
haemorrhage from the site of incision. Scrotal hae-
matomas are generally treated conservativcly, althoughi
1.
 The anaesthetized animal is cither placed in lat-
in severe cases they may require evacuation and ligation
eral recumbency with its legs tied forwards or it is
of the offending spermatic artery. An Elizabethan
placed in dorsal recumbency.
collar may be required to prevent sclf-irauina lo the
 Thc scrotal fur is cither plucked or clipped and thc
incision and scrotum. Should scvere intra-abdominal
 area prepared for surgery.
haemorrhage occur, the dog will require surgical
3.
The scrotum is opened from dorsal to ventral with
exploration of the caudal abdomen to locate and ligate
a scalpcl blade on both sides; the depth of incision
the retracted blccding spcrmatic artery.
Surgcry of the Genital Tract 177
 Indirect scrotal heniation is a rare occurrence in
 syndrome. The cryptorchid testis may be found any-
thc dog, and is unlikely to occur in the cat due to the
wherc from just cranial to the scrotum in thc subcuta-
long length of the inguinal canal in this species. It can
 neous tissue of the groin region, to the position in
 be prevented by performing a closed castration, but
embryonic organogenesis. just caudal to the kidney.
even when open castration is performed the occur-
Careful palpation will usually detect most testes which
rencc of thc problein is vcry rare.
arc placcd distal to the superficial inguinal ring in thc
subcutaneous tissue of the groin.
Cryptorchid syndrome
Abdominally placed testes will require exploratory
Testicular dcsccnt is normally complete vcry shorily
cocliotomy for confirmation of thcir pasition andl their
after birth. Testes not located within the scrotum by 6
 removal. Surgical approach is via a parapenile skin
 incision and a ventral midline coeliotomy. It is com-
relained. Unilatcral or bilateral cryptorchidism, cspc-
mon to findl the testes located in a inid-abdominal
cially in the dog, is a common finding. It is considered
 position. Location may be aided by initial recognition
hereditary in the dog, and in affected breeds is trans-
of the ductus deferens at the level of the prostate. This
mitted in a sex limited autosomal recessive manner.
structure may be followed from the prostate on thie
The right testis is more commonly rctained than the left
relevant side and will lead to the cryptorchid testis.
(ratio of2.3: 1). The inguinally or abdominally retained
Examination may reveal the testes to be in a caudal
 testis is predisposed to malignant changes (seminoma
 abdominal position at the level of the inguinal ring.
and Sertoli cell tumour) in latcr life and it is, therefore,
Again, the ductus deferens may be traced proximally to
advisable that the dog be castrated to remove the
locate the testes.
retained testis (Figure 15.1) and also to prevent the
Once thc cryptorchid testis is located, testicular
possibility of the dog fathering further litters with the
vessels and ductus are isolated, triple clamped and
condition.
ligated in a similar fashion to that described for routine
The diagnosis is usually made following clinical
castration. If the retained testis is located subcuta-
cxainination and a palpable absence of onc or both
ncously through the inguinal ring, it may be rcmovcd
testes. Spasm of the cremaster muscle can cause appar-
by a standard pre-scrotal incision with manipulation of
ent elevation of a normally descended testis in sone
 the testis into the incision by digital pressure.
Agenesis of the testis has becn rcported, but is vcry
be required to confirm the diagnosis of cryptorchid
 rare, and a surgeon should be completely confident that
REMOVAL OF INTRA - ABDOMINAL TESTIS
{u)
(b
Figure 15.1: Remeval of intra-abdominal testis. (a) A parapenile skin incision reveais the scrotal ligament as it passes through
the inguinal canal. (b) Alternatively, the testis may be locaied by initial recognition of the ductus deferens at the level of the
and ligated. (d) The spermatic cord is transected and the testis removed by severing the scrotal ligament.
178 Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Nconatology
a retained testis does not exist before this dliagnosis is
increascd fetal asphyxia and depression. Comprcssion
made. Assessment of endogenous testosterone can
of the posterior vena cava with the gravid uterus
leduces caudal vena cava venous return. In humans,
 gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) or human
this condition is describcd as supine hypotcnsion syn-
chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) stimulation test. The
drome. In the small animal species, it is generally not
GnRH slimulation test is preferred. For the GnRH
 considered a problem, although it may possibly occur
stimulation test, 0.5-1.0 μg GnRH per kilogram of
in dogs hcavier than 30 kg and can be prcvcnted by
body weight is administered i.m., and blood for testo-
tilting the patient through 10-15° of lateral tilt from
sterone determination is obtained immediately prior to
dorsal recumbency.
and 1 hour after GnRH administration. In a normal
 Care should be taken during linea alba incision to
dog, pre- and post-GnRH testosterone concentrations 
ensure that the gravid uterus is not inadvertenily in-
are 1.7-17 mmol/1 (0.5-5.0 ng/ml) and >17 mmol/l
cised. The skin and subcutaneous incisions should be
(>5 ng/ml), respecti vcly.
performed carcfully toensure that hypertrophied mam-
 mary gland tissue is not invaded. The length of ab-
 dominal incision depends entirely on the estimated
CAESAREAN OPERATION
size of the uterus and the fetuses it contains. Ideally, the
ulerus should bc cxteriorized and packcd off with
Indications
 moistened laparotomy sponges to prevent abdominal
The following have been cited as guidelines for the use
contamination with uterine fluids. Both horns may
of the Caesarean operation:
bc cxtcriorized at oncc, although somc surgcons prefer
to move only the horn from which they are removing
 Prolonged gestation; normal parturition is not likely
the fetuses.
to occur after 70 days gcstation
The uterus is incised with a scalpel in a relatively
Complete primary inertia
 avascular area on the dorsal or ventral aspect of thc
Incomplete primary inertia, especially if several
uterine body. Care must be taken not to lacerate a fetus
puppies remain and ecbolic agcnts have failcd
with the blade. Scissors may be used to extend the
Secondary uterine inertia when several fetuses re-
incision to a sufficient length for easy rermoval of thc
maitl
fetuses. In dystocic individuals, it is best to remove the
 Abnormalities of the malermal pelvis or soft tissues
fetus within the uterine body first.
which may impedc the passage of a fctus (pelvic 
Thc fetuses may be brought to the utcrine incision
fractures, vaginal tumours or imperforate hymen)
by gently *milking' them along the uterine horn. Once
Rclative and absolute fetal oversize
at the uterine incision, the fetus may be gently grasped
Tetal monstrosities
and thc amniolic sac rupturcd to allow removal of the
 Fetal malpositioning that cannot be corrected to
fetus. As each amniotic sac is broken the fetal fluids
allow dclivery through the vagina
should ideally be removed by suction. The umbilical
Fetal death with putrefaction.
vessels arc clamped some 2-3 cm from the fetal
abdominal wall and severed, allowing the neonate to
In both the cat and the dog, it is often not possible to
be passed to an attendant for resuscitation. After each
identify the cause of dystocia and thcrefore the deci-
nconate is removcd, the associated placcnta should be
sion to perform a caesarean operation is based largely
removed by gentle traction. Placentae that are well
on subjective assessment of the circumstances of
attached may be left in situ. This procedure is repeated
each individual case, rather than on a prccise diagno-
until all fetuses and placentae have becn rcmoved.
sis of the cause of the dystocia. This assessment is
 Itis very important that all fetuses are removed, and
based on criteria such as the duration and progress of
this can be ensured by careful assessment of both
the whelping, thc mumber and viability of the fetuses
uterine lhorns, the uterine body and the vagina for
born and still unborn, the nature of vaginal dis-
remaining fetuses. Preoperativc and/or postoperativc
charges, changes in the pattern of straining and the
radiography may be useful in ensuring accurate count-
often uninformativc findings on vaginal examina-
ing of the fctuses and also their entirc removal.
tion. The assessment process and anaesthesia are
 It is possible to remove the fetus and placenta with
covered in Chapter 12.
the umbilical cord and fetal membranes still intact. The
amniotic sac is ruptured and the cords are severed once
Procedure in the bitch and queen
the nconate has been handcd to an attendant. This
'The approach to the peritoneal cavity is by a ventral
method of delivery possibly results in more maternal
midline cocliotomy, This surgical approach is similar
haemorrhage.
to that described for ovariohysterectomy in the bitch.
The utcrus should be asscsscd after the removal of
Operative speed is important during the procedure
the fetuses and ovariohysterectomy is recommended
bccause surgical delay and prclonged time from anacs-
if uterine viability is questionable. Some surgeons
thetic induction to fctal delivery is associated with
suggest that thc Cacsarean operation should not be
Surgcry of the Genital Tract  179
combined with an eleclive ovariohysterectomy, avoid-
airways by centrifugal force. The chest should be pal-
ing longer anaesthetic time, and reducing fluid and
pated forevidence of a heart beat. The neonate should be
blood losses.
yigorously driedbecauscskinstimulationreflexly stimu-
A tcchnique of en bloe resection of thc ovarics and
latcs respiratory drive. In the normal situation, thc
uterus with the fetuses and the subsequent removal and
neonate should be breathing by this stagc and should
resuscitation of the neonates by assistants has recently
 possess a strong pulse. If spontaneous rcspiration is still
not cvident, cndotracheal intubation with a plastic intra-
isolated and the pedicles clamped just prior to removal
vencus catheter (16-20 gauge) or mouth-to-nouth, or
of the uterus. Neonatal survival has been reported to be
mouth-to-nose, resuscitation may be attempted. Rcspi-
 similar 1o conventional Cacsarcan opcration, bul. a
ration can bc stimulated with doxopram (1-2 drops
considerable number of assistants are necessary to
 orally) and opioid narcotics may be reversed using the
 resuscitate the entire litter simultaneously.
 antagonist naloxone (0.01 mg/kg). Oxygen supplenen-
 Following a conventional Caesarean operation,
tation should be provided in any case showing rcspira-
once all the fetuscs havc becn removed, the uterus
 tory compromise. The haemostatic clamp is removed
should rapidly begin to contract. It is recommended
from the umbilical cord, which is checked for haenmor-
that if the uterus has not begun to contract at the time
rhage. Should bleeding ocur the cord may hc ligated
uf closure, oxytocin (5-20 IU i.m.) should be used to
with a suitable suture. The neonates should be placed in
promote uterine involution. This uterine contraction is
a warm environment until they can be returned to the
important in arresting any haemorrhage.
dam. Early discharge of the dam and offspring from the
 The uterus may be closed in a single or double
practice is recommended to minimize exposure of
layer closure pattern. Most surgeons prefer a double
 neonates to hospital pathogens.
layer closure and an inverting continuous pattern
It is important that the-dam is retumed to her litter
such as a Cushing or Lembert is uscd. An absorbablc
as soon as shc has rccovcrcd from the anaesthctic to
suture material such as polyglactin 910, glycolic acid,
ensure her acceptance of the young. All the neonates 
poliglecaprone 25 or polydioxanone is preferred.
should be thoroughly inspected for any evidence of
Hopcfully, abdominal contamination with fctal flu-
congcnital abnormalities prior to discharge from the
ids will be minimal, but should contamination have
 practice. Itis important that the neonates receive colos-
 occurred, the abdomen should be liberally lavaged
trum from thie dam and her milk let-down should be
with warm stcrilc salinc solution prior to coeliotomy
assessed prior to tlischarge.
closure. Omentum may be placed over the uterine
incision to minimize adhesion formation. The coeli-
otoiny may be closed in a routine manner, although
SURGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE
some surgeons prefer to place buried subcuticular
FEMALE
sutures rather than skin sutures to ninimize neonate
interference with the wound.
 The majority of the following conditions arc only
There are few data on the effect of Caesarean
 observed in the bitch and the descriptions should be
operation on postoperative fertility, but it appears
 considered specific to this species unless otherwise
that fertility is not markedly affected by surgery. There
stated.
 is certainly an increased likelihoud that subsequent
litters will require delivery by Caesarean operation,
Vulva, clitoris, vestibule and vagina
and owners of breeding bitches should be inforined
appropriately.
Rectovaginal and rectovestibular fistulae
 Milk production should normally start within hours
T'hese are congenital conditions occurring in both the
 of the Caesarean operation. Agalactia may be treated
bitch and queen and are commonly seen in conjunction
with oxytocin (0.5 IU/kg i.m.). Ovariohysterectomy
with an imperforate anus. There is an abnormal com-
does not affect milk production, as prolactin and cor-
 munication between the rectum and either the vagina
tisol maintain lactation.
(Figure 15.2) or the vestibule. The vulva serves as the
common orifice for both the urogenital and the
Neonatal resuscitation
gastrointestinal tracts. In individuals that cannot
poxia, which can be minimized by the rapid removal of
This is cspccially likely in individuals in which atresia
the fetuses from the amniotic sac and effective resus-
 ani is also present. Diagnosis can usually be made on
citation.
clinical examination and conformation of the site of
The assistant resuscitating the neonate should ensure
the fistula into the urogenital tract may be confirmed
that all fetal membranes are removed. The oral cavity
with either a positive contrast enema or a positive
 and nostrils should be cleared of fluid using suction,
contrast retrograde vaginourethrogram.
cotton swabs, or by gcntly swinging thc neonale in a
Surgical trcal1ncnt consists of locating the fistula
downward arc to remove the fluids from the upper
between the ventral rectum and the dorsal vagina via a
180  Manual of Small Animal Reproducticn and Neonatology
RECTOVAGINAL FISTULA
Rectum
[a)
Fistul
deo
(a)
d
Rec
lovaginal
Cervix
Fistula
Utenus
Bladder
(b)
Figure I5.3: Repair of an anovulvular clef. (a) There is
incomplete closure of skinfromthe anus to thedorsal vutlvar
Figure 15.2: Two types of rectovaginal fistuia.(c) The
commisure. (b) Incisions are nade bilateraity atong the
rectum conmumicates directlywiththevaginabutterminates
nucocutarcous junction between theanusand thevulvar
in α normat anus. (b) The recrwn terminatey at its
labia, joining at she dorsal vuivar commisure. (c) The
comnication with the vagina and there is atresia cni.
vestibular wafl is closed using simpte interrupted sutures.
(d) Simple interrupted suture closure of the skin.
perineal incision between the anus and the vulva. The
fistula should be divided and oversewn, so that it
Clitoral hypertrophy
cannot redevelop at a later time. In thc largcr individual 
 Clitoral hypertrophy in the dog may bc associated with
 the procedure is relatively straightforward, but in the 
intersexuality and an os clitoris or os penis may be
 puppy it is tcchnically demanding. If atresia ani is also
prescnt, although hypertrophy of the clitoris may also
present, this condition should be corrcctcd at the saine
occur in the normal female. Animals arc often pre-
time. The prognosis is guarded especially in individu-
sented for aesthetic reasons or because the animal
als with chronic megacolon in which it is common for
continually licks at the inflamed tissue. An individual
the colonic function not to rcturn.
presenting with an cnlarged clitoris shiould be carefully
assessed for evidence of intersexuality. The hyper-
Anovulvar cleft
trophy of the clitoris will often fail to regress following
 An anovulvar cleft is a rarc congenital abnormality
the removal of the gonads in cither the intersex or the
 occurring in both the bitch and queen which resulis
 normal female individual.
from failurc of the urogenital folds to fuse. The incom-
Thc clitoris can be dissected from its fossa using a
 plete closure of the skin betwecn thc dorsal vulvar
combination of sharp and blunt disscction. The expo-
commissure and the anus allows the vestibular floor
 a   pa  q  a
and clitoris to be directly observed. The defect is
 performed. This will allow the clitoris to be safely
sometimes seen in thc intcrsex individual but can also
removed from thc vcntral floorof the vestibule without
 occur in the normal female. Clinical signs arc often
damaging the more cranial urethral opening. Great
rclatcd to the soiling of the clitoris and the vestibule
care should be taken to ensure that this stoma is
with faecal material and thc cxposure of thiese struc-
undamaged during the lisscction procedure. Once the
tures to the air.
clitoris has been resected, the clitoral fossa may bc
 Treatmcnt attempts to create a dorsal vestibular
ovcrsewn with a continuous pattern absorbable suture.
wall by making an inverled *V' pcrineoplasty incision
along the mucocutaneous junction between the anus
Persistent hymen
and the vulva. The two sides of the “V' are sub-
This is a relatively common congenital lesion in the
 sequently closcd in two layers to create a dorsal vesti--
bitch which rcsults from failure of the paramesonephric
bular wall (Figure 15.3).
ducts to unite with each other, the failurc ofthcir fusion
Surgery of the Genital Tract  181
or cannulation with the urcgenital sinus. The incom-
broken down manually per vaginam. Annular strictures
plete perforation of the hymen results in stenosis of the
vaginovestibular junction, and can take two forms; an
Generally, they can be excised at the vestibulovaginal
annular fibrous stricturc and a vcrlical scptum.
 junction and the vaginal mucosa either left to granulate
Often the condition will only be recognized follow-
or closed with an absorbable sufure if haemorrhage is
ing failed attempts to breed from the individual or,
present. Care should be taken not to damage the opening
sometimes, al the timc of whclping when birthing
of the urcthra at the urethral tubercle.
difficulties are encountered. The condition may be
 associated with a chronic vaginitis due to inadequate
Vaginalprolapse
drainage of the cranial portion of the vagina. Thc
Vaginal prolapse is an uncommon condition in the
diagnosis may be confirmed by digital examination of
bitch. It can present as either a complete or a parlial
the vagina. Further confirmation can be achieved fol-
prolapse. In both instances a doughnut-shaped ever-
lowing visual exainination of the vestibule/vagina
sion of the complete vaginal circumference protrudes
using a speculum or endoscope. Contrast radiography
through thc vul var labia. Carcful cxamination reveals
may be helpful in detecting individuals with a severe
 the urethral tubercle to be included in the prolapse. In
form of thc ahnormality in which a double vagina is
cases of complete vaginal prolapse, the cervix is exte-
present.
riorizctl in the prclapsc proccss. It is important that the
 In many individuals, the condition will be detected
condition of vaginal prolapse is differentiated from
as an incidental finding requiring no treatment, but in
vaginal cedema (hyperplasia) and vaginal and vestibu-
animals in which a medically unresponsive vaginitis is
lar neoplasms. Brachycephalic brccds arc apparcntly
present for which no other underlying cause can be
 predisposed to the condition of prolapse, and a hercdi-
found, and in those individuals showing breeding inter-
tary weakness of the perivaginal tissue is considered a
ference, the surgical correction of the lcsion may bc 
 prcdisposing factor. It has been suggested that forced
indicated. Simple dorsoventral bands may be
separation of a tied mating pair, abdominal straining
EPISIOTOMY-
[a)
（cl
Urethral
Urethra
catheter
{e]
elevated with sandbags.(b,c) A purse-string suture is placcd around the anus.A skin incision is made from the vuivat tips
a uosi upma un u upd q ou sros ipsnun i ot yospuozi uuuuin snun o spuomot
the vestribuiar muscle and mucosa.(e)The cut edges may he refracted using stay suures and the urethral tubercle exposed,
allowingplacenent ofacatheterfThevestiarcosavestiblarmuscleubcaneousfarandthekinareclosedin
separate fzyers.
182  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
resulting from constipation, and mating with a dispro-
Vaginal oedcma (hypcrplasia)
 portionately large malc may have a role in the aetio-
Vaginal hyperplasia is a condition of the bitch in which
logy of the condition. Generally, thc condition occurs
there is a thickening and an increased vascularity to the
 during normal cestrus when oestrogcn lcvcls arc high.
vaginal and vestibulartissue during the follicular phase
In cases of mild prolapse, no treatment may be
of the oestrous cycle. In some bitches, this thickening
 necessary, and the prolapse may regress during the
 becomes exaggerated and the ventral vagina cranial to
dioestrus period. In the more sevcrc prolapsc. thc
the urethral tubercle becomes so oedematous that it
vaginal tissue should be protected until the sponta-
protrudes from the vulvar labia. This oedematous
neous resolution of the condition can occur in dioe-
process is most cormmonly seen in a bilch's first
strus. Protection will usually require rcplaccmcnt of
nestrus, but regardless at which cycle in the dog's life
thc vaginal tissue under general anaesthesia or heavy
the problem occurs, itusually spontaneously regresses
sedation. The cleansed lissue may be manually re-
during the subsequent luteal phase. Once theconlition
turned and maintained in position by placing a mumbcr
has occurred, it is likely to recur at subsequent oestrous
 Of sutures across the vulvar labia. It may be necessary
 periorls. It is important to differentiate this condition
l0 placc a urinary catheter to ensure that the urethra is
from other conditions with similar appearance such as
unobstructed during the resolution period. Longer
vaginal prolapse and vaginal/vestibular neoplasia. With
term prevention of further prolapse may require utero-
vaginal ocdlema, the urethra does not become exterior
 pexy to thc abdominal wall via a coeliotomy.
and can usually bc cathctcrized without difficulty. The
Chronic or very severc vaginal prolapse may re-
- so s i i se au sq  
quire the surgical resection of the traumatized and
 monly in brachycephalic breeds such as English Bull-
devitalized vaginal tissnc. The entire circumference of
dogs and Boxers.
the prolapsed vagina is rescctcd and the cut internal
 Management of vaginal oedema can be difficult.
and external mucosal edges sutured together (Figure
Virlually all prolapses will shrink and disappear dur-
15.5). The urethral tubercle should be protected by
 ing dioestrus. Therefore, conservative management is
 placing a urinary catheter and the exposure can be
ained at keeping the prolapsed tissue clean and non-
 greatly improved by performing an episiotomy. Brccd-
traumatized. The ability of the bitch to pass urine
ing is undesirable in animals with a tendency to pro-
should be continually assessed, as it is possible for thie
lapse and, therefore, ovariohysterectomy should be
oedematous process to involve the urethral papilla.
 peiformed if at all possible.
Thc condition is prevented in the long term by ovari-
ectomy or ovariohysterectomy, although it is unlikely
VAGINAL PROLAPSE
that performing this procedure during an episode of
7
fa}
vaginal ocdema will hasten the shrinkage of the mass.
Prophylactically, in individuals with a predisposition
Eladder
to the condition, the synthetic progestogcn mcgocstrol
acetate (2 mg/kg daily orally for 7 days) may be
Recturm
administercd in early pro-oestrus to antagonize the
effects of oestrogens on the vaginal tissue. This therapy
fagina
cannot be reconimended because of the potential side-
effects and complications associated with use of such
agents.
 Thc surgical management of the condition con-
sists of performing an cpisiotomy, placing a urinary
catheter into the urethra and resecting the redundanf,
oedematous vaginal tissue at its base on the vaginal
floor cranial to the urethral tubercle. The vaginal
mucosal defect is closed with absorbable suturcs
(Figurc 15.6).
tubercle
Vulvar hypoplasia (infantile vulva)
Thc clinical signs seen with this condition are most
Figure I5.5: Repair of a vaginal prolapse. (a) A urinary
commonly associated with a localized vulvar and
catheter is placed to ensure that the prolapsed vaginal tissue
is resccted distal to the urethral tubercle. A finger may be
perivulvar dermatitis. The condition may be seen in
inserted into thelumen oftheprolapse togivefurther
bitches prior to their firstseason, but is most frequently
guidanuce to the ievei of resection. (b) The prolupse is
observed in the spayed individual. In some individu.
resected by making staged ftli-thickness incisions in the
als, the onset of their first oestrus will resolvc ihc
circumferenceofthevaginaiwall.Horizontalmatress
condition. In others, the high circulating oestrogen
sutures are placed to ciose theincised edges ofthe vaginal
wall. It should be noted that the circumferential incision is
levels at this time will not irmprove the situation. When
distaltotheurethraltubercie.
the condition is seen in the immature bitch, it is
Surgery of the Genital Tract 183
Anus
Episiotomy
incision
(a)
(b)
(d)
Figure I5.6: Surgicat correction of vaginal oedem. (a) An episiotony is performed to allow better exposure of the redundant
vaginat rissue. (b) The mass is lifted off the vestibutar floor, exposing the urethral tuhercle, and a urinary catheter is ptaced inio
the urethra. (c) The mars is renoved by making a transverse etliptical intcision (dotted line] at its base, just craniat to the
urethrat tubercle.(d) The vaginat mucosal defect is closed with absorbable sutures, fotlowed by ciosure of the episiotomy.
recommended that she be left to undergo her first
females. In some individuals a secondary vaginitis
oestrus. In intractable cases, episioplasty should be
may also be present.
considered with the resection of the perivulvar folds.
Surgical excision via an episiotomy should be
curative in individuals withi a leiomyoma, as long as an.
Trauma
ovariohysterectomy is performed at the same time.
Vulvar and vaginal trauma is a rare occurrence in both
Leiomyomas are usually well encapsulated, allowing
the bitch and the queen, and most cases are associated
their blunt dissection from the vaginal wall. Malignant
with thc usc of obstetrical instrumcnts during assistcd
parturition. Superficial mucosal tears may be left un-
cal resection,
treated; full thickness tears should be more carefully
assessed with surgical dcbridcmcnt. and closurc in
Uterus
many instances.
The uterus comprises the cervix, a body, and two
horms. The horns lie within the abdominal cavity and
Neoplasms
extend fron the uterine tubcs to thc uterine body. Thc
 Excluding mammary gland neoplasia, vaginal and
vestibular tumours are the most common female repro-
lies between the urinary bladder and the descending
ductivc tract ncoplasms in the bitch. Vaginal neo-
colon.
 plasms in the queen are considered very rare. Many
different vaginal neoplasms have been reported, but
Congenital anomalies
the commoncst is thc bcmign lciomyoma. In the Unitcd
Congcnital abnormalitics of thc utcrus in the bitch or
Kingdom the transmissible venereal tumour is only
queen are uncommon. Reported anomalies include
occasionally seen in imported bitches, although in
hyperplasia, agenesis, atresia, septate uterine body.
countries where the disease in cuzootic, it is probably
rloublc ccrvix and various degrces of cornual fusion.
 the second most common vaginal tumour. It is sug-
Of these anomalies, uterus unicornis is the most com-
 gested that the leiornyoma is hormonally influenced by
mon. Most anomalies are incidental findings diag-
ocstrogcn in thc bitch, but reports are conflicting and
 nosed during routine ovariohysterectomy.
since the tumour may occur in both the spayed and
intact bitch, some authorities conclude tlhat there is no
Pyometra
conncclion bctwcen bload acstrogen conccntrations
Thc actiology and pathophysiology of cystic endo-
and the incidence of this neoplasm. On the other hand,
 metrial hyperplasia and pyometra are discussed in
it is not uncommon for a leiomyoma to develop rapidly
Chapter 4, where the treatment of the condition and its
following an uestrous cycle.
 complications are well reviewed.
Clinical signs associated with vaginal neoplasia are
The diagnosis of pyometra in dogs and cats is
variable, but are mostly related to size and position of
usually uncomplicated. The diagnosis is based on the
the mass. Signs inay include bulging of thc pcrincum,
clinical history, the clinical findings on examination,
prolapse of tissue from the vulva, dysuria, stranguria,
radiography and laboratory findings. In cascs in which
tenesmus and obstruction to copulation in intact
these routine diagnostic methods are not definitivc,
：
 184 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconalology
sary to confirm thc diagnosis. ldeally, an exploratory
Serum K+
mEqKCl
Maximum* infusion
 laparotomy should not be uscd as an aid to diagnosis.
(mEq/l)
250 ml Huid
ratc (ml/kg/h)
There are numerous perioperative problems asso-
 ciated with pyonietra in both the dog and cat. Animals
2.0
20
6
with pyormctra should bc assessed rapidly and thor-
2.1-2.5
15
8
initiated without delay. Once the individual is consid-
2.6-3.0
10
12
is recommended as the most appropriate treatment.
3.1-3.5
 Medical management of the condition is discussed in 
7
16
Chaptcr 4. Thc most frequently encountered
Umgs c'n paxe 1ol ok
perioperative problems include:
Table 15.1: Composition of imaintenunce fluids.
 Fluid, electrolyte and acid.-base imbalances
Renal dysfunction
to correct many of thc acid-base and electrolyte abnor-
·
Sepsis
malities in vivo. Assessment of renal function should
Hypo- or hyperglycaemia
p   d oi s  
Liver damage
 parameters fall within their normal ranges.
Cardiac dysrhythmias
Sepsis and septic shock in animals with pyometra
Clotting abnormalities.
is common and may result in a depletion of glycogen
stores, an incrcased peripheral use of glucose and a
Intravenous fluid therapy is indicated in any individual
decrease in gluconeogenesis leading to hypogly-
with suspected pyometra, to support the cardiovascu-
caemia. Any concurrent acidosis will also impair gluco-
lar system and combat clectrolyte and acid-base dis-
neogenesis, possibly worsening the hypogl ycacmia. I.
turbances. In general, a balanced electrolyle solution
 is important, therefore, to measure the blood glucose
such as Hartmann's solution is suitable. The rate of
concentration in individuals with pyometra and treat
administration of thc fluid should be assessed on an
any hypoglycaemia detectcd. Trcatment should in-
individual basis, but it is not uncommon for animals to
clude correction of any fluid, electrolyte or acid-base
present with cardiovascular collapse and hypo-
 abnormalities and in addition glucose may be admin-
volacmic shock rcquiring an initial infusion rate of up
istered intravenously. This can often be achieved by
to 90 ml/kg/h to restore a circulating volume.
the addition of dextrose (2.5-5.0% solution) to the
A metabolic acidosis is the most common acid-base
crystalloid fluid being administered. In severe cases,
abnormality associated with pyometra. This may some-
 50% dlcxtrose may be administered directly as a slow
times result in a compensatory rcspiratory alkalosis. The
bolus at a rate of I-2 ml/kg. Blood glucose measure-
lactate bicarbonate precursor in Hartmann's solution
 ments should be repeated frequently and should be
will generally be sufficicnt to maintain the blood pH
continucd into the post operative period.
within acceptable limits. Should thc blood pH drop
Escherichia coli is the most commonly cultured
below 7.2, bicarbonate therapy may be indicated.
organism from the uterus of the dog with pyometra, but
Idcally, thc clcctrolytc status of the aninal's blood
other organisms such as Staphylococcus spp., Strepro-
 should be assessed. If the animal is hypokalaemic.
coccus spp. Pseudomonas spp., Proreus spp. and
potassium should be added to the maintenance fluids.
Klehsiella spp. have also been isolated. Intravenous
The amount of potassium added to the fluids and thc
broad-spectrum bactcricidal antibiotics with both
rate of administration of these fluids aftcr thc first hour
Gram-negative and Gram-positive activity should be
should be based on the serum potassium concentra-
routinely administered. A combination of first genera-
tions. These data are summarized in Table 15.1
tion ccphalosporin, cefuroxime at 20 mg/kg and the
The use of corticosteroids in hypovolacmic and
fluoroquinalone enrofloxacin at 20 mg/kg will often
septic shock is controversial. A short-acting, intra-
prove effective.
vcnous agcn1 such as methylprednisolone sodium
Hyperglycaemia may also occur as a resull of the
succinate (30 mg/kg) is probably the drug of choice.
bacterial sepsis, but is usually a transient, self-lmiting
Renal function should be assessed preoperatively
 problen requiring no treatment. Should the problem
 and supporlcd with intravenous fluid therapy. Plasma
 persist, the animal should bc asscssed for evidence of
creatinine and urea concentralions should be measured
diabetes mellitus.
 along with a full urinalysis (care should be taken not to
 Liver damage can occur with pyometra, and is
 perforate the distended uterus if the urine sample is to
associatcd with toxicity secondary to sepsis Or
obtained by cystocentesis). Idcally, urinc output should
endotoxaemia, or poor hepatic perfusion secondary
be maintained at 1-2 ml/kg/h. Restoring fluid balance
to hypovolaemia and circulatory coliapse. Biocheni
and supporting kidncy function will allow the kidneys
cally, liver enzymes may be elevatcd, but in most
Surgery of the Genital Tract 185
instances, the problem is self-limiting and will re-
 absorbable suture material is reconmendcd rather than
solve with adequate patient support following the
 a permanent suturc material, when sutures are to be
removal of the ulcrus.
 placed through contaminated tisue. This will mininize
A. non-regenerative, normocytic, normochromic
the likelihood of the suture acting as a niclus for infec-
 anaemia often accompanies pyometra as a result of
tion, which could result in abscess formation and fistu-
chronic jnflammation causing crythropoietic bone
 lous tract development.
marrow suppression, diapedesis into the uterus, blood
 On occasion, the surgeon may be presented with an
 individual in which the uterus has ruptured prcopera-
aggressive intravcnous fluid thcrapy. Before treat-
 tively, or, in which iatrogenic intraoperative uterine
ment, the packed cell volume (PCV) and plasma total
rupture occurs. Remaining pus should be removed from
 protein concentration may be used to assess the hydra-
the uterus with suction, to prevent furthcr contamina-
tion status. Folowing aggressivc fluid therapy, the
tion, and the ovariohysterectomy should be completed.
results of PCV may be inaccurate in the assessment of
The peritoneal cavity should then be lavaged with
anaemia. A blood transfusion should only be consid-
copious amounts of body tcmperalure sterile salinc, then
ered should the PCV fall below 20%.
 aspirated with suction. The flush/aspirationcycleshould
Fortunately,
disseminated
intravascular
be continued until the aspirated fluid is clear of gross
contamination, This proccdure will prove very difficult
pyomctra, but it should be considercd a possiblc diag-
to achievc cffectivcly if surgical suction facilities are
nosis in individuals showing unexpected haemorrhage,
unavailable. T'he intra-abdominal instillation of antibi-
haemolysis, haemoglobinuria, delayed blood clotting
otics is unnecessary, but the animal must reccive imme-
and shock. The diagnosis and treatimcnt of DIC is
dliatc broad-spectrum systemic antibiosis intravenously.
beyond a text of this size, and the reader is referred to
a standard medical textbook for further information.
cases; however, most animals can bc treated cffectivcly
 The prognosis for this condition is poor.
with abdominal lavage andl prolonged systemic broad-
Cardiac dysrhythmias are commonly encountered
 spectrum antibiotic administration.
in animals with pyometra and often result from the
Postoperative complicalions of a pyometra aresimi-
toxic effccts of the discase, shock, acid-base abnor-
lar to fhose encountered following routine ovario-
malities, respiratory dysfunction and electrolyte im-
 hysterectomy. These are discussed under the section
balances. Ventricular premature complexes (VPCs)
 on ovariohysterectomy. Thc preopcrative complica-
 arc most likely. Dysrhythmias shoull be asscssed
tions will continue into the post operative pericd and
electrocardiographically and managed accordingly in
should be addressed as described above until they
conjunction with restoration of the physiological
have resolved.
 paramelers discussed above.
 The aim of surgical management is to remove the
Metritis
infected uternus without causing it to rupture and to
 Acutc inflammation of the uterus is most commonly
ensure that intraopcrative and pust operative haemor-
observed in the early postpartum period, and may be
rhage is kept to a minimum. Careful attention to anaes-
 associated with dystocia, obstetric fetal manipulation,
thetic detail is requircd and drugs causing
fctal or placental retention.
cardiorespiratory depression should be avoided.
Both medical and surgical treatment for the condi-
Intraoperative haemorrhage should be guarded against
tion has been attempted. The treatment of choice,
with the judicious use of cautery and careful attention to
following patient stabilization, is ovarichysterectomy,
surgical tcchnique. The procedure should not be consid.
 although conservative medical treatment may
be
ered as routine as an elective ovariolysterectomy for
 attempted in a valuable breeding bitch. This consists of
sterilization.
systemic antibiotics and prostaglandlins (described in
The ulcrus should be cxteriorizcd carefully, so as not
 Chapter I2) or surgical uterine drainage.
to tear associated vessels or rupture the viscus. 'The
stiucture should be handled gently, avoiding excessive
Torsion
 manipulation. Oncc exteriorized it should be packed off
 Uterine torsion is an uncommon condition in the bitch
 from the remaining abdominal contents with numerous
 and queen. Reported cases are commonly associated
sterile saline-soaked swabs. Vessels in the broad liga-
with uterine distension, a prcgnant gravid uterus or
ment will often require ligation. The uterine pedicle
 pyometra. The torsion may be uni- or bilateral. Clinical
should be transected through the cervix or cranial vagina
signs are very variable; the animal may be clinically
in individuals with a 'closed' pyometra so as to avoid
normal or, at thc other cxtreme, may prcscnt collapsed
leakage of uterine contents. It is unnecessary to oversew
in shock. More commonly, 'signs of dystocia, abdomi-
and invert the uterine pedicle in either a *closed’ of
 nal pain, anorexia and vomiting are seen. Abdominal
'open' pyomctra. If the surgcon is conccrned about
 palpation and abdominal radiographs may be sugges-
contamination from this structure, omentum should be
tive of a torsion, but diagnosis is often only confirmed
sutured over the stump prior to abdominal closure. An
during exploratory laparotomy. In the pregnant indi-
186 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
vidual, torsion may develop following the delivery of
endomctrial carcinoma has bcen most frequently
a puppy or kitten. Viable fctuscs Tmay be present in the
reported.
twisted horn and a Caesarean operation or ovariohys-
 Large masses may interfere with urinary function,
terectomy may allow delivery of live young. Reduc-
causing dysuria. Many smaller tumours are found
tion of a torsion may be possible but commonly
incidentally during ovariohystercctormy.
treatment consists of patient stabilization followed by
Surgical treatment is ovariohysterectomy.
ovariohysterectomy.
Ovaries
Prolapse
 In both the bitch and queen, the ovaries are located at
Prolapse of one or both uterine horns is rare, and
the caudal poles of the kidneys close to the abdominal
follows uterine contraction. Parturitionl or abortion
wall. In the bitch, the ovary is within a pouch of
usually precede the prolapsc. Single horn prolapse is
peritoneun lermed the ovarian bursa. This bursa is
termed partial and prolapse of both homs is termed
closed except for a small opening ventrally. In the
complete. The prolapse process will commonly
 quecn the ovarian bursa is smaller, covering only thc 
occlude or rupture thc ovarian vessels rcsulting in
latcral surface of thc ovary.
haemoperitoneum. The prolapsed tissue can easily be
 In both species, the ovary is attached to the abdomi-
 palpated and/or observed at the vulva.
 nal wall by the mesovarium which is continuous crani-
If replacemcnt is to be attemptcd, it should be
ally with the suspcnsory ligament and caudally with
performed early following the prolapse, but it is often
the mesometrium. The ovarian blood vessels are found
easier to treat the condition by ovariohysterectomy.
within the mesovarium. The proper ligament of the
- osisns oui jo nuoo us n s e
Uterine rupture
ment connecting the caudal end of the ovary to the
Rupture of a gravid uterus can occur following ab-
 cranial end of the uterine horn.
dominal trauma or spontaneously during parturition. It 
is a rare finding, but should bc consilered in near-tcrmn
Congenital anomalies
individuals that have received abdominal trauma. There
Reported congenital anomalies of the ovaries include
are reports ofintra-abdominally expelled fetuses main-
 agenesis, hypoplasia and accessory ovaries. Ectopic 
taining circulation and living to term, but it is imore
supernumerary ovaries have also been reported. Con-
likely that the rupture will result in peritonitis.
 genital ovarian abnormalities are rare and are usually
Complete ovariohysterectomy is indicated in most
discovered incidentally during routine ovariohyster-
instances, although small ruptures may bc sutured.
cctamy.
There are also reports of unilateral ovariohyster-
Hermaphroditism refers to the presence of both
 ectomy to preserve breeding potential.
 male and female sex organs in the same individual.
Rupture of thc uicrus may also occur with pyo-
True hermaphroditism is unusual and may be bilateral,
metra. Commonly, the rupture occurs at the time of
with male and female gonads on both sides, unilateral
ovariohysterectomy for this disease and results in
with male and female gonads on one side, or contra-
extensive peritoneal contamination with the uterine
lateral with a male gonad on one side and a fcmalc
 gonad on the cther. In these individuals secondary sex
aggressively to combat this life-threatening peritonitis
organs may be male, female, or a combination of both.
(see Pyometra).
 Pscurdlohermaphroditism refers to a conrdition in
which the external genitalia and some of the internal
Subinvolution of placental sites
structures resemble the opposite sex to that repre-
 Subinvolution of placcntal sites may follow a distur-
scntcd by the gonads. For examplc. male
bance in the normal post-parturient placcntal degen-
pseudoherimaphroditcs may have tcsticular gonads but
eration and endometrial reconstruction processes. A.
female-like external genitalia. The abnormalities are
 persistent serosanguineous vaginal discharge occurs
not always evident until the internal genitalia havc
7-12 wccks aficr parturition. It is rcportcd to occur
  sa   s s   s
following their first or second whelping.
Cysts
The discasc is usually sclf-liniting, rarely rcquir-
 A number cf ovarian cystic structures coccur in the bitch.
ing medical or surgical therapy. In individuals with
and queen.
severe anaemia and continuous bleeding, ovario-
The most common cystic structure occurs within
hysterectomy is recommended.
thc ovarian bursa, and may originate from either the
 mesonephric or paramesonephric tubules and ducts.
Uterine neoplasms
Uterine tumours in thc bitch and qucen arc rare. In
cals, and are not cndacrinologically active. The
the hitch, reported tumours include the leiomyoma
follicular cyst is the most common true ovarian cyst.
and the less frequent leiomyosarcoma. In the queen
These may be single or multiple and histologically
Surgery of the Genital Tract  187
they contain remnants of granulosa or theca cells.
Clinical signs associated with follicular cysts include
Normal
prolonged cestrus with a serosanginous vaginal dis-
urethral
 charge, cystic mammary hyperplasia and genital
meatus
fibraleiomyomas.
L uteal cysts are usually mulliplc in the bitch and
 Glandular
 queen, and have been associated with prolonged met-
oestrus or anoestrus and with pyonctra. They form
hypospadias
from the corpus luteum following ovulation.
Most cystic structures of the ovary are encountered
incidentally during ovariohysterectomy. Follicular
Penile
cysts producing clinical signs have bccn trcated suc-
hypospadias
cessfully with luteinizing hormone, excision or rup-
ture of the cyst. Attempts to manage luteal cysts
medically with ocstrogen and prostaglandins are rarely
 successful. Most cystic structures are managed surgi-
 cally by ovariectomy during the ovariohysterectomy
procedure.
Scrotal
Ovarian neoplasms
hypospadias
Ovarian tumours occur more frequently in older,
nulliparous jindividuals, but they arc rare in both dogs
and cats.
Reported tumour types relate to the tissue types of
the ovary. Thc granulosa-theca ccll tumour is the
commonest ovarian tumour in the bitch. The neoplastic
cells of this neoplasm may differentiate into female-
type cclls, producing clinical signs in affccted indi-
viduals associated with elevated levels of oestrogen,
Perinea!
 for example, vaginal hyperplasia.
hypospadias
The sccond most common sex cord-stromal
tumour is the Sertoli-Leydlig cell tumour. The cells of
Anal
 this neoplasm differentiate into male-type cells which
hypospadias
are often hormonally active, producing cystic endo-
mctrial hyperplasia and pyomelra.
 Ovariohysterectomy is recommended as the surgi-
Figure 15.7: Types of hypospadias,
cal therapy for sex cord-stromal neoplasms. Local
 invasion is not uncommon, and may necessitate body
location of the external urethral orifice (Figure 15.7).
wall resection and unilateral nephrectony.
Hypospadias is usually associated with other develop-
 mcntal abnormalities, such as failure of fusion of the
 prcpuce and underdevelopment of the penis. Thc diag-
SURGICAL CONDITIONS OF THE MALE
Hosis of hypospadias is made by close examination of
 the penis and perineal region. Surgical correction is not 
Genital tract surgical diseascs of the tom are rare, and
usually atteinptcd in the dog bccause thc urethra cra-
the majority of the following conditions are only
nial to the abnormal orifice is deficient. Severe defects
 observed in the dog.
of the penis may necessitate the forimation of a scrotal
uretbrostomy, but in most instances (hc abnormal
Penis and prepuce
urethral orifice can be maintained.
Hypospadias
Persistcnt pcnilc frenulum
Hypospadias is the most common developmental
Persistencc of the pcnile frenulum is not uncommon in
anomaly of the male genitalia. The condition results
the dog. In some individuals there is an obvious devia-
from failure of fusion of thc urogenital folds and
tion of the glans penis in a yentral dlircction. In others,
incomplete formation of the penile urethra. The exter-
d   q   o 
nal urethral orifice can be located anywhere on the
of sexual excitement, when the ventral tethering of the
vcntral aspcct of thc penis fron thc normal opcning to
glans may cause pain. Trcatment is usually slraight-
thc perineal rcgion. Hypospadias may be glandular,
forward and involves the sevcring of thc avascular
penile, scrotal, perineal or anal, depending on the
connective tissue ventral to the glans.
 188 Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Nconatology
Phimosis
Paraphimosis
Phinosis refers to the inability to extend the penis from
Paraphimosis refers to the inability to retract the penis
the prepucc because of a congenital or acquired stric-
once it is protruded from the prepuce. The condition is
lure of the preputial orifice. It occurs in both the dog
associated with some degree of phimosis. It usually
and cat. Usually, careful examination of the prepuce
occurs after mating or masturbation when the penis has
will confirm the diagnosis. A secondary balanopos-
 been ercct. The glans pcnis becomcs trapped outsitlc
thitis may also be evident. Treatment invulves the
the prepuce because of a constricting band of prepuce
resection of a small wedge of prepuce from the ventral
which prevents the subsidence of the erection. The
 preputial opening resulting in a significant widening of
glans remains erect and becomes congested and cn-
the orificc (Figure 15.8).
gorgcd, thus furthcr constricting the penis. Thc penis
and prepuce should be examined for any other injuries
PREPUTIAL WEDGE RESECTION
and they should be cleansed with warm and cold saline
The dashes mark the line of prepuial indl
in an altcmpt to reducc the erection. Lubricants Tmay be
used to help replace the penis within the prepuce. In
long standing cases, a urethral catheter should be
placcd to allow thc animal to urinate. Temporary or
 permanent enlargement of the preputial orifice may be
necessary. Penile necrosis will require partial penile
amputation. Recurrence of the paraphimosis is com-
mon. In cascs whcre an inappropriately short prepuce
is associated with the condition, it may be possible to
extend the coverage of the penis by performing a
Repair of the preputial woung
 prcputial advanccment.
Technique for partial amputation of the penis
(Figure 15.9)
I.
The dog is placed in dorsal recumbency.
2.
 Cathctcrize the urcthra with thc largest urinary
catheter that can be passed comfortably; the blad-
der may be expressed of urine.
Figure 15.8: Prepufiul wedge resection.
3.
Rcflcct the prepucc and tightly tie on a 2.5 cm
 bandage proximal to the bulbus glandis; this acts
Technigue for preputial wedge resection
as a tourniquet and can be used to secure the penis
vertically.
1. Thc prepuce and surrounding parapenile skin arc
Make a stab incision into the midline of the dorsal
clipped and cleaned.
 surface of the penis and incise distally and later-
2.
 The bladder is expressed manually or with the aid
ally away from this point on both sidcs to producc 
of urethral cathcterization.
a 'V'-shaped cut down to the os penis.
3. The dog is moved to the operating theatre, placed
Gently dissect the urethra off the os penis with a
in dorsal recumbency and the surgical site prepared
blade, keeping the cutting surface towards the bone.
for surgcry.
6.
Frcc the urethra for about 1 cm distal to thc base
 4. If the penis can be exposed, remove any secretions 
of incision and incise around its circumference at
from its surface with moist swabs; try to prevent
its distal attachment.
disinfcctants or spirit cntering the preputial cavity.
7.
Cut the os pcnis as short as possible with bone-
 5. Insert the blunt tip of a pair of straight scissors into
cutting forceps.
the preputial orifice, whilst stretching the prepuce
8.
 Push the amputated distal portion of the penis
forwards.
along the cathcter and out of the operalive field.
6. Cut caudally in the ventral midline for approxi-
9.
The two sidies of the *V'-shaped flap are sutured
mately l cm; the extent to which the orifice requires
together using a 3-0 absorbable suture in a simple
opening depends on its original size, and the size of
interrupted pattern.
the dog, but should bc sufficient to allow free
10. The urethra is then slit longitudinally with a blade,
protrusion of the penis.
on a lateral surface, to its point of emergence from
 7. The edges of the cut mucosa and skin are co-apted
the pcnis, and sutured back ovcr the stump.
 on each sirlc using a sinple interrupted or simple
11. The toumiquet may then be removed and any
continuous suture pattern.
haemorrhage assessed.
 8. An Elizabethan collar may be required to prevent
12. An Elizabethan collar may be required to prevent
sclf-trauma to thc wound during hcaling.
 self-trauma to the woundl during healing.
Surgcry of the Genital Tract 189
PENILE AMPUTATION
(e)
Figure 15.9: Pariat amputation of the penis.(a)The urethra is catheterized and a bandage used to refect the prepuce and also
to act as a fourniquet. (b) A V-shaped incision is mude through the penis down to the os penis on the dorsal aspect, taking care
Hot to cut the urerhra on rhe ventral aspect. (c) The ampurated porrion of penis is removed along the cafheter. (d) The incision is
closed uxing simpie interrupted suures. (e) The urethra is suttred back over the penile stump.
Technigue for preputialadvancement(Figure I5.10)
1. The prcpuce and surrounding parapenile and ab-
dominal skin are clipped and cleaned.
 2. Placement of a urethral catheter may aid in the mani-
pulation of the penis during the surgical procedure.
 3. Thc dog is inoved tothc operating theatrc, placed in
a
dorsal recumbency and the surgical site prepared
for surgery.
 4. An elliptical skin incision is made cranial to thc
 prepuce passing laterally on both sides to a distance
of 5-10 cm froni the midline depending on the size
of the dog.
 5. A second elliptical skin incision is made cranial to
the first, having a shorter radius of circumference.
 6. On joining the latcral incisions of the ellipses on
b
both sides, a crescent moon-shaped piece of skin is 
removed.
 7. The bilaterally placed preputial muscles which
ex tend from thc area of the xiphoid cartilage to thc
(d)
dorsal wall of the prepuce are located and a 1--5 cm
Figure 15.10: Surgicat preputial advancement. (a)An elliptical
myectomy is pcrformed on both sides, depending
skin tncisionismade cranial torhe prepnice, passing laterally on
on the size of the dog and the degree of cranial
both sides to a distance of 5-12 cmfrom the midine. (b) The
advancement of the prepuce required.
preputial skin is pulled cranially until the prepuce fully covers
 8. The muscles are repaired with an absorbable suture
the penis. This gives un indication of the site for the second
in their ncw forcshortened position so that thc pre-
cranial eliptical skinincision（doted line).(c)Abilateral
puce has been advanced cranially to cover the penis.
myectomy cnrejoining of the preputialmusciesis
performed.(e) The two elliptical skin incisions are co-apted
9. The two elliptical skin incisions are co-apted with
with simple interrupted skin sutures. The crescent moon-
simple intcrruptcd skin suturcs.
shaped piece of skin that has been renioved is aiso shown.
190Manual of Small Animal Rcproduclion and Neonatology
Deformity of the os penis
Rarely, the os penis of the dog may develop with an
 penile irritation leading to rubbing of the structure
abnormal curvature. This rcsults in an abnormal pcnile
 along houschold furniture and carpets in an attempt to
curvature, which may make full retraction of the glans
ease the discomfort. Thcse activitics may rcsult in
into the prepuce impossible, The exposed penis is
 penile and preputial infection, and eventual prolapse of
liable to infcction. Straightening of thc penis by osteo-
the urethra. The condition may be associated with
tomy of the os penis is pussible, but is rarely per-
intermittent haenorrhagc from the pcnis. Diagnosis is
formed. Partial or complete penile amputation may be
confirmed by examination of the external urethral
rcquired in some cases.
orifice on the end of the penis. The presence of a red
pea-shaped mass at this site usually indicates a urethral
Fracture of the os penis
prolapse. Conservative trealment by reducing the ure-
Fracture of the os penis is a rare occurrence. Most
 thral prolapse is seldom effective in the long term, and
reported fractures arc (ransversc in nature. Clinical
rcsolution of the problcm can he better achicved fol-
 signs depend on the degree of soft tissue damage and
 lowing the amputation of the prolapsed portion of the
fracture displacement. Radiography isrequired to char-
urethra and anastomosis of the urethral and penile
aclerizc thc fracture fully. Conscrvative managcment
mucosa.
of most fractures will be successful, although certain
fractures will be amenable to internal fixation with
Trauma
sinall finger plates. Urinary catheterization may be
Trauma to the penis is rare. Malicious application of a
requircd for sevcral days in both conservativcly and
rubber band around the penis will lead to pcnile stran-
surgically managed cases.
gulation. The penis and prepuce should be carefully
inspected for any evidence of such malicious acts.
Preputial foreign bodies
 Chronic strangulation of thc penis will necessitalc
Foreign bodies such as grass awns and stalks, and
 partial or complete penile amputation. Accidental
urinary calculi may occasionally become lodged within
 trauma to the external prepuce is more common and
thc prepuce. Thcy will usually cause some iritation to
should be treated in a similar manner to any other skin
 the area, resulting in licking of the prcpuce. Carcful
wound.
 retraction of the prepuce and examination of the inter-
nal lining will reveal the cause of the irritation and
Ncoplasms
allow its removal.
 Neoplasms of the cat penis are very rare, although they
are encountered on occasion in the dog. Reported
Balanoposthitis
lumours include squamous cell carcinoima, papilloma
 Infection of the penis and the prepucc is nol uncommon
and, in countries whcre it is cnzoctic, or occasionally
in the dog. It is often accompanied by a copious yellow
 in imported dogs in the United Kingdom, transmissible
or blood-tinged preputial discharge. A slight creamy
venereal tumour. Diagnosis should be confirmed by
preputial dischargc is normal in thc maturc dog. Treat-
cytological and histolugical cxamination of aspiratcs
ment of balanoposthitis should be aimed at trying to
 and biopsies. Most penile tumours require aggressive
 establish an underlying cause for the infection (e.g.
foreign body). rcinoving the underlying cause, im-
 proving preputial hygiene (irrigation of the prepuce
stances. Transmissible venereal tumours may be treated
with warm saline) and in some instances the use of
with radiation therapy, chemotherapy and surgery.
systcmic antibiosis (consider culture and sensitivity of
the discharge). The prostate should be assessed to
Prostate
ensure that disease of this structure is not the source of
 Prostatic disease is common in the older entire dog.
thc discharge,
Most discases that affect the prostate rcsult in
prostatomegaly, and dogs are generally presented with
Priapism
clinical signs associated with prostatic enlargement.
 Priapisin is persistent pcnile erection not associated
 Although the male cat possesscs a prostatc gland.
with scxual excitcmcnt. It is very rare in small animals
prostatic rliseascs are only rarely dcscribed in this
 and should be differentiated from paraphimosis. With
species.
priapism, the penis can be manually replaced into the
 The prostate gland is the only accessory sex gland in
 prepuce. Treatmcnt may prove difficull, as the condi.
the imale dog. It complelcly encirclcs the urethra from
tion may result from a spinal cord injury. Spontaneous
the bladder neck to the post prostatic membranous
resolution of the condition has been reported.
urethra. It is a bilobed stucture, with a prominent dorsal
longitudinal groove separating the prostate into lcft and
Prolapse of the urethra
  s nd anns  sa 
Prolapse of the penile urethra is associated with exces-
retroperitoneal space, having a bilateral neurovascular
sive sexual cxciteiment and genitourinary infcction.
supply entcring dorsnlaterally on thc left and right sides.
Surgery of the Genilal Tract  191
The vasa deferentia enter the craniodorsal surface of the
 urethral catheter as it is moved back and forth across
prostate before coursing in a caudoventral direction to
the prostatic urethra. Care should be taken not to
cnter the urethira at thc colliculus seminalis.
induce scrious iatrogenic damage to thc urethra when
Physiologically, the prustate contributes the frac-
performing this technique.
tion of semen that is delivered in the third phase of
 Percutaneous prostatic biopsy can be achieved
cjaculation. There is some dcbate conccrning thc clas-
eithcr perircctally (Figure 1 5.11) or transabdoninally.
sification of prostalic diseases, but the following de-
 uonedd Aq papin iseq si apaou Asdo a
scriptions are generally accepted in the clinical situation.
combination with ultrasonography. Parenchymal cystic
It should he rcinembered that there is oftcn histological
st1 uctures may be aspirated rather than biopsied. Place-
evidence of more than one disease process occurring in
ment of a urethral catheter will help the operator avoid
the prostatic tissue of the same individual.
penetrating the prostatic uretlra. This procedure should
 In the intact malc dog, the yearly check-up cxami-
Hot he performed in dogs thought to be suffering from
nation performed at booster vaccination should always
prostatic abscessation, since large numbers of bacteria
include a per rectum palpation of the prostate to screen
may be seeded along the needle tract or a localized
for the presencc of carly prostatic dliscase.
pcritonitis may dcvclop.
Open surgical prostatic biopsy is performed via a
Diagnostic approach to prostatic diseasc
parapenile abdominal incision and will allow the whole
Ultrasonography provides the safest and most informa-
of the prostate to be examined extcrnally. Cysts or
tivc screening icst of thc prostatc and this imaging
abscesses may be drained. A biopsy may be taken
modality can be used to guide the operator when
either using a skin punch or by resecting a wedge of
prostatic parenchyma biopsies are required. Diagnosis 
prostatic parcnchyma (Figurc 15.12). Again, the posi-
may involve the following:
· Complete history and thoroughclinicalexamination
 Palpation of thc prostale gland by concomitant
rectal and abdominal palpation
 Routine haematology and serum biochcmistrics
Urinalysis and urine culture
 Lvaluation of prostatic fluid obtained by
ejaculation or after prostatic massage
Ultrasonography
 Survey and contrast radiography
 Prostatic aspiration
 Prostatic biopsy:
Percutaneous biopsy
 Open surgical biopsy.
 Fluid may be obtained from the prostate following 
Figure I5.11: Perireclal percutaneous aspiration/biopsy of
prostatic massage. A urethral catheter is placcd asep-
the prostute. A catheler may be placed in the urethru to help
avoid peneirafion of the iniraprostalic urethra.
tically and passed into the urinary bladder. The bladder
is emptied and a sample of urine saved for urinalysis
PROSTATIC BIOPSY
 and urine culture. The bladder is flushed several times
with sterile saline to ensurc that it is empty. Thc last
 flush of 5-10 ml is saved as the pre-prostatic massage
{a]
samplc. The cathetcr is thcn retracted to a position
distal to the prostate. Rectal palpation will ensurc the
correct positioning of the catheter. 'The prostate is
massagcd boih per rectum and via thc abdominal wal!
for 1-2 minutes. Sterile saline (5-10 ml) is injected
slowly through the catheter and the catheter is slowly
 advanccd to the bladclcr with repeated aspiration across
the prostatic urethra. Most of the fluid may not be
aspirated until the bladder is reached. All samples
shouldl bc cytologically cxamined and culturcd.
In certain circumstances in which the prostatic
q Au  sod as a u pas si en
Figure 15.12: Surgical hiopsy of the prostate. (a) A wedge
incision is made ino the prostatic parenchyma. A catheter
possible toachievc acytological biopsy of the prostatic
has been piaced in the urethra to minimize the risk of cutting
epithelial cells by applying negative pressure to the
it. (b) The incision is closed using horizontal mattress sutures.
192 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
tion of the prostalic urethra can be located and avoidcd
initially. Medical trcatments for thc condition include
if a urethral catheter is in placc. The biopsy sitc is
cxogenous ocstrogen, megoestrol acetate and thc an-
apposed with an absorbable suture material in a mat-
drogen receptor antagonist, flutamide. In general, these
tress pattern through the parenchyma.
medical therapies are not recommended.
 isday sd ui jo sis s
Prostatic metaplasia
commonly made from clinical examination alone.
Excessive endogenous or exogenous oestrogens will
Therefore, should castration fail to initiate a decrease
induce prostatic cpithelium toundergo squamous mcla-
in prostatic size, prompt investigation of other causcs
plasia. Oestrogens will also produce stromal hyper-
of prostatomegaly should be pursued.
trophy of the gland. The major endogenous cause of
hyperoestrogenism is a functional Sertoli cell tumour.
Bacterial prostatitis
The prostatoimcgaly associatcd with mctaplasia is
 Bacterial infecction of the prostate is not uncommon,
usually symmetrical although the process of meta-
and may result from ascending or descending urinary
 plasia may lead to prostatic fluid stasis predisposing to
tract infection, haematogenous infection and infected
infection with abscessation. In these individuals
semen. Ascent of bacteria up the urethra is considered
prostatic enlargement may be asymmetrical. In some
the usual cause. Often, there are changes in prostatic
individuals the secretory stasis may predispose to
architecture such as cysts, squaimous metaplasia, 0r
cyst forrmation.
neoplasia associated with the bacterial prostatitis. A
 The clinical signs associated with prostalomegaly
lower urinary fract infection is almost always seen in
and prostatic disease include faecal tenesmus, dysuria
conjunction with bacterial prostatitis in the dog.
alld urinary incontinencc, urethral discharge, and in
Clinical presentation may vary from signs of low
 p s i ss oss ss a
 grade infection to overt sepsis. Cultured organisms
renmember that any prostatic disease, with the excep-
commonly include Escherichia coli, Proteus, Staphy-
tion of acute prostatitis, can occur with no abnormal
lococcus, Streptococcus, Klebsiella and Pseudomonus
clinical signs evident to the owner. The reatment of
species. Micro-ahscesses develop within the prostatic
squamous metaplasia requires removal of the oestro-
parenchyma, coalescing, leading to larger parenchymal
 gen source. In the majority of cases, this means castra-
abscesses. Eventually, a prostatic abscess may rupture,
tion for the removal of a functional Scrtoli cell tumout
rclcasing bacteria and endotoxins into thc retro-
 or the discontinuation of oestrogen-containing medi-
cation. Once the source of oestrogen has been removed
resulting in life-threatening septic peritonitis. Clinical
thc histological appearance of thc prostatic tissue
signs may vary from a low gradc urinary tract infeclion
returns to normal.
to septic shock and collapse. Often individuals are
pyrexic, showing signs of caudal abdominal pain.
Benign prostatic hyperplasia
They resentrectal palpation of the prostatc. Diagnostic
Benign prostatic hyperplasia occurs in the older dog
aids include radiography, ultrasonography, ultra-
and requires the presence of the testes. It is associated
sonographically guided aspiration and biopsy, with
with an agc-related changc in the androgen to oestro-
cytology of urethrally aspirated prostatic fluid follow-
 gen ratio within the affecterd individual. The process
ing prostatic massage.
more commonly occurs in individuals above 4 years of
Treatment of acute bacterial prostatitis
agc. The process is arguably a normal ageing changc,
During acute bactcrial prostatitis, the blood prostatic
although the physiological process of hyperplasia may
fluid barrier may not be intact due to acute inflamma-
becoime associated with pathological changes. Two
tion of the gland. This should allow good antibiotic
typcs of benign prostatic hyperplasia have hecn (le-
 pcnelration to thc prostate. The choice of antibiotic
 scribed. These are: glandular hyperplasia, occurring in
should be based on results of urine culture and/or
the younger population of dogs with a peak prevalence
prostatic wash culture. Tlie course of treatment should
 of 5-6 years of agc; and complex or cystic hyperplasia.
Jast for 21-28 days. Following thcrapy,the dog should
-6 01 -8 jo boz suoae pue siop sapio u sunooo
 be re-examined at regular intervals to ensure that the
year-old animals. It is suggested that intraprostatic
acute infection does not progress to a chronic infection.
cystic hypcrplasia may hc an extension of glandular
This re-examination should includc urinalysis, urine
hyperplasia.
culture and ideally examination of prostatic fluid.
Treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia may
 only bc required if the prostatomegaly is associated
Trcatinent of chronic bacterial prostatitis
with clinical signs. The most effective form of treat-
 In cases of chronic bacterial prostatitis, the blood-
ment for the disease is castration. This procedure
prostatic fluid barrier is likely to be intact. Factors such
gencrally results in a 70% decreasc in prostatic size.
as lipid solubility, ionization, and protein binding
Sometimes, syrnptomatic trcatment for the clinical
affect the ability of antibiotics to cross this blood--
signs associated with prostatomegaly may be required
prostatic fluid barrier. Current recommendations de-
Surgery of the Genital Tract 193
pend on whether the infectious agent is a Gram-
 Following surgery, affccted dogs must continue to
positive or Gram-ncgative organism. If the causative
have antibiotics administcrcd, based on culture and
 organisn is Gram positive,erythomycin, clindamycin,
 sensitivity results. Similarly to chronic bactcrial pros-
chloramphenicol or trimethoprim may be chosen, based
tatitis, thesc animals should be monitored for further
 prostatic disease for a number of months following the
tive, chloramphenicol, trimethoprim or enrofloxacin
resolution of the problem.
may be indicated. Antibiotic thierapy should be contin-
Prostatic abscessation could prove a difficult and
ued for at lcast 6 weeks and similarly to cases with
expensive dlisease to manage, with many potential
acute bacterial prostalitis, continued surveillance of
complications. Aggressive therapy is associated with
chironic bacterial prostatitis should be performed fol-
the best long terrn outcome, but the prognosis should
luwing resolution of clinical signs and discontinuance
slill bc cansidered guarded.
 of antibiotic therapy.
In both acute and chronic bacterial prostatitis it is
Prostatic neoplasia
recommendcd that castration bc performed as part of
 Reported primary prostatic neoplasms in the dog in-
the treatment rcginen. This proccdurc will rcducc the
 clude adenocarcinoma, transitional cell carcinoma,
quantity of prostatic tissue and may hasten the resolu-
 squamous cell carcinoma and lymphoma. Of thesc, thc
tion of infection.
conumonest is thc adcnocarcinoma. All of the primary
 prostatic neoplasms are considered malignant.
Treatment of prostatic abscessation
Clinicai signs are usually relatcd to the
Prostalic ahscessation is a severe fonn of chronic bactc-
prostatomegaly associatcd with thc neoplastic condi-
rial prostatitis. Prostatic micro-abscesses coalesce lopro-
tion. In adition, and unlike benign prostatic hyper-
duce larger areas of septic purulent exudate. Escherichia
 trophy, prostatic carcinomacommonly causes urinary
coli is the predominant organism cultured from such
 signs including dysuria and haeimaturia. Somctimcs
absccsses. The disease seems to occur most coinmonly in
 clinical signs may also be assuciated with metastatic
 the older intact male dog. Many individuals present in
 spread to the lumbar vertebrae and bones of the pelvis.
 septic shock; in some, the abscesses will have burst,
Radiographic and ulrasonographic studics should bc
leading to generalized peritonitis. Frequently, long-term
uscd to invcstigate the disease and look for metastatic
antibiotic therapy in combination with castration will fail
 spread. Contrast radiography may be useful to demon-
to resolve the condition of prostatic abscessation. Surgi-
strate an irregular prostatic urethra. Unlike benign
cal therapy offers the best chance of resolution of signs.
 prostatic hypcrtrophy. palpation of the prostate per
Various techniqucs have been described, bul all rcly on
rectum often reveals an enlarged irregular, immobile,
the surgical drainage of the abscess cavities.
 In a dog showing signs of peritonitis on examination
 Diagnosis is confirncd with needle biopsy or
(painful abdomen, wcak pulse, prolonged peripheral
 incisional biopsy of the prostate. Urethral washings
time, tachycardia, pale mucous membranes), abdomi-
may reveal malignant cells, but this method is
nocentesis or a diagnostic peritoneal lavage should be
unreliable.
 perlormed to confirm the condition. Peritoneal lavage
may be performed therapeulically to stabilize the dog
Treatment of prostatic neoplasia
 prior to surgical exploration.
Total transurethral prostatectomy has bccn dcscribcd
The prostatc is exposed via a candal midline coeli-
as thc trcatiment of early lesions without metastatic
 otomy and the abscesses are burst and explored in a
 spread. However, this procedure is technically de-
controlled fashion with the aid of suction to remove the
manding and commonly results in urinary inconti.
purulent material. Al of the abscessations should be 
nence. In the author's opinion, there israrely an instance
opened, usually with the aid of a fingcr. Carc should be
where undertaking this procedure is justified.
taken not to damage the prostatic urethra, which can
Intraoperative external beam radiation therapy has
been used in thc trcatiment of prostatic carcinoma, but
placement of a urinary cathcter. The gland should be
is rarely available.
flushed with copious amounts of sterile saline, while the
The prognosis of prostatic carcinoma is poor, with
remaining abdominal organs are packed off with
local metastasis almost invariably present at the time a
laparotomy swabs. Penrose drains may be placed within
diagnosis is made. It should be remembered that clini-
the prostate parenchyma; these exit via separate ventral
cal signs associated with prostatic disease relate pri-
abdominal stab wounds. Considerable success has been
marily to prostatomegaly and; therefore, prostatic
achieved by the placement uf omentum around the
neoplasia should always beconsidered a differential
prostatic urethra following the breakdown of the ab-
diagnosis which requires ruling out.
scess cavities. The prostatic omentalization procedure
does not require the placement of Penrose drains. The
Paraprostatic and prostatic cysts
reader is referred to a standard surgical text for the
 The origin of most paraprostatic and prostatic cysts is
description of these procedures.
a a siso au e pesn i l reaun Ansn
194  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
remnants of the uterus masculinus or of prostatic
to scrotal strangulation. Clinical signs associated with
origin. The tcrminology for these large cysts varies
testicular trauma include local pain and swclling of the
belwcen different authoritics, although most usc the
testis involved, hind limb lameness, scrotal swelling
 term paraprostatic cyst to describe a large cyst outside
and oedema, and in severe cases, scrotal haematoma
the prostatic parenchyma which does not have a patent
formation. Cascs of minor testicular trauma may be
conncction to the prostatic gland. The term prostatic
treated conservatively, although regular re-examina-
retention cyst is reserved for those cysts with a patent
tions should be made to ensure the testicular swelling
connection, especially if the structure seems to arise
is reducing and that interscrotal haemorrhage is not
from thc parenchyma of the prostate gland. Clinical
occurring. Ii inorc scvcre cases, thc trcatmcnt of
signs are usually related to the size of the cyst antl the
choice is either unilateral or bilateral orchidectomy,
effects of this space occupying lesion on the adjacent
 possibly including a scrotal ablation.
 a h pon oi a a sa
 diagnosed incidentally during investigation of an
Testicular neoplasia
unrelated disorder.
Testicular tumours occur relatively frequently, and
represent 5-15% of all tumours in miale dogs. Testicu-
Treatment of paraprostatic and prostatic cysts
lar lumours are very rarc in thc cat. There are three
The recommended treatment for the condition is surgi-
tumour types which are seen most commonly; the
 cal drainage with excision or marsupialization of the
Sertoli cell tumour, the seminoma and the interstitial
cyst. Castration is also recomncnded. A prostalic
ccll tumour. Cryplorchid dogs arc at least I0 times
biopsy should be taken to rule out any other prostatic
 more at risk of developing Sertoli cell tumour and
disease, which-may be the primary or secondary to the
seminoma than normal dogs. Metastatic spread is
 cyst formation. Prognosis depends on the underlying
unusual with scminona and interstitial cell tumour,
actiology of the condition. If this is benign, thcn the
although it occurs in about 10% of individuals suffer-
prognosis is very favourable.
ing from Sertoli cell tumour. Regional lymph nodes,
liver and lung arc most likely to be affectcd. Scrtoli cell
Testes and cpididymides
tumour and seminoma offen show the paraneoplastic
syndrome of feminization due to their excretion of
Anorchism and monorchism
 Oestrogen-like substances. Feminization will usually
Congenital absence of both tcstes in small animals is
 present as gynaecomastia, pendulous prepucc, bilal-
rare. Monorchism is more commonly recognized, with
 eral flank alopecia, prostatic metaplasia, atrophy of the
the left testis usually being absent. A very careful
contralateral testicle and attractiveness to other male
intraoperative examination should be made in a crypt-
dogs. Fcw clinical signs othcr than mild testicular
orchid individual before a dliagnosis of monorchism is
enlargement are associated with interstitial cell
made. It is much more likely that the undescended
 tumour. Surgical castration will prove curative in
testis has bccn missed rather than is abscnt, necessital-
ing a thorough cxainination.
TESTHCULAR BIOPSY
Orchitis and cpididymitis
Infcction of the testis and cpididymis is nol unusual in
the dog. Signs will often include testicular pain, ten-
derness and scrotal oedema. The animal may show
syslemic signs ofillness andinfection. Infection reaches
{a]
the testis most commonly via the ductus deferens from
the urinary bladder, urethra or the prostate. Escherichia
coli is oftcn isolated from thc Icsion. The affected
 testicle will often be inflamed and enlarged, although
in chronic cases, the testicle may be small, irregular
 and firm. In most individuals the treatmcnt of choice is
 orchidectomy. Breeding individuals may be medically
 managed with systemic antibiotics, but the condition is
(c)
(a)
likely to return in the long term. It is important that
possible underlying causes for the problem be ex-
Figure 15.13: Biopsy of the testis. (a) The site of the skin
cluded such as prostatic disease and chronic urinary
incision (dotted line) is in the midline caudal to the scrotum
tract infcctions.
(b) Menual pressure on the testis in a caudal direction will
Testicular trauma
incised, revealing the testicular paraenchyma. (d) A blade is
used to slice a biopsy specimen. The tunica albuginea is
Testicular trauma is rare in dogs and cats. Malicious
closed with an absorbable suture using a continuous patternt
placement of rubber bands sometimcs occurs leading
and the skin incision closure is rourine.
Surgery of the Genital Tracl  195
jndivirluals with no Tmclastatic disease. Owners of
 Apparent male behaviour in a phenotypically
cryptorchid dogs should be advised to have their
female individual
dogs castrated at an early age.
 Individuals of either sex which assume a
micturition posture opposite to that of their
apparent sex.
INTERSEX
There are a number of problems which can be encoun-
An intersex animal is one possessing the characteris-
tered in both the intersex and normal individual and
tics of both sexes. They are classified as either true
these include:
hermaphrodites or pseudohermaphroditcs and as
either male or fenale on the basis of their gonads.
·
 IIypoplasia of the penis and prepuce
 Clitoral hypertrophy
 Pseudohermaphrodites possess the gonads of one
Cryptorchidism
sex hut the secondary sex charactcristics and
?
Pyomelra
external genitalia of the opposite sex. Female
 Sertoli cell tumour development.
 pseudohermaphrodites have ovaries but are
phenotypically male in appcarancc. Malc
 Anecdotally, many veterinary surgeons report the diag-
pseudoherrmaphrodites have testes while
nosis of intersex at the time of presumed routine
possessing mixed or female genitalia
 Ovariohysterectomy. In individuals with a normal uri-
Truc hcrmaphroditcs posscss both lcsticular and
nary system the management is often straightforward,
ovarian tissuc in various combinations:
with the removal of the internal genitalia in a similar
A testis may be found on one side and an
 manner to a routine ovariohysterectomy. The type of
ovary on the contralateral side
hermaphroditism may bc dcicrmincd by the histologi-
An ovatestis (both testicular and ovarian tissue
cal evaluation of the resected gonadal tissue.
found in a single gonad) only may be present 
The management of diagnosed hermaphrodites and
 An ovatestis may be paired with a testis or
pscudohcrmaphradites is determined by the degree of
ovary.
abnormality of the genitourinary system that exists in
the affected individual. This deterinination may be
Intersex animals should not be confused with those
difficult to ascertain on physical examination alone.
 animals with insufficicnt gcnital dcvclopment. The
 Survey and contrast radiographic studies including a
latter animals are infertile males and females, typically
 retrograde urethrogram and an intravenous urogran
 possessing abnormal sex chromosome make-ups. The
will be required to determine the anatomy of thc
definitivc diagnosis of inlcrscxuality can only be made
 animal's urogenital tract more fully.
on histological examination of the gonads. Both
The aims of management include:
gonads should be evaluated so that the possible com-
bination of an ovary and testis will not be overlooked.
 Removal of the internal genitalia
 Pseudohermaphroditism is more commonly recog-
Determination of the anatomy and function of the
nized than true hermaphroditism and male pseudo-
animal's urogenital tract
hermaphroditism is recognizcd more commonly than
Surgical reconstruction of the external genitalia to
the very rarely encountered female pseudo-
improve urinary function.
hermaphroditism.
Thcrc arc a number of rcasons why an intcrscx
 Suspected and confirmed intersex individuals should
animal may be presented to the veterinary surgeon and
 not be used for breeding.
in many instances the reason for presentation is un-
rclatcd to thc abnormal scxual devclopincnt of the
Associated problems
animal. Owners will often be unaware that any prob-
lem exists. The veterinary surgeon may be unaware of
Hypospadias
the condition, which is subsequently encountercd at
Hypospadias is a congcnital anomaly, which is occa-
surgery for neutering when testes are found in place of
sionally seen in pseudohermaphrodite dogs, in which
the expected ovaries. Some of the more common
the penile urethra terminates along the ventral surface
reasons for presentation include:
of thc penis proximal to its normal opening. The
condition andits management are more fully discussed
 Difficulty in determining the aninal's sex on
in the section on penile conditions.
examination of the cxtcrnal gcnitalia
 Males which are attractive to other male dogs
Os clitoris and os penis
and may show signs of oestrus
This condition may be seen in phenotypically female
 Females which possess an enlarged clitoris
individuals. Examination will revcal thc prcsencc of an
 protruding from the vulva
Os clitoris or os penis protruding from the vulva. An os
 196 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
clitoris may be differentiated from an os penis depend-
urethra and a pcrsistcnt urogenital sinus. Surgical
ing onl whether a urcthra is identified within thc struc-
 managemenl of these conditions may inmprove or
ture. If a urethra is present within the structure, it is
classified as an os penis.
 due to urethral sphincter mechanism incompctcnce is
 An os clitoris may cause no clinical problcms in
 also a possible differential diagnosis which may
 some dogs, and in these individuals no treatment for the
require investigation.
 condition is necessary. On the other hand, the structure
 may become an irritation to the animal, resulting in
Testicular neoplasia
unacceptable licking of the area and self-trauma. In
Similarly to the normal male with a retained testicle.
 these individuals, amputation ofthe os clitoris isrecom-
the presence of a rctained testicle in a malc pscndo-
 mended. If significant clitoral hypertrophy is present,
hermaphrodite predisposes to malignant testicular
as is commonly the casc, it is recommended thal a total
changes (commonly a Sertoli cell tumour). A Sertoli
clitorectomy be performed. The procedure for
cell tumour in thc male pseudohermaphroditc will
clitorectomy is described in the section on clitoral
behave similarly to that in the normal male. Clinical
conditions. The procedure of amputation of thie os
signs of hyperoestrogenism, including attraction to
clitoris involves the resection of the os from within the
other male dogs. gynaecomastia and bilaterally sym-
clitoris. Care should be taken to ensure that the urethral
metrical alopecia, may be prcscnt. If the male pseudo-
opening into the vestibule is prcserved. In individuals
hermaphrodite possesses a uterus it may be enlarged as
with an os clitoris, the junction between the cranial limit
 a result of the endometrial response to the hyperoestro-
of the clitoris and the urethral opening may be very
genism.
short. It is imperative that the urethral opening is
 Management consists of removal of the neoplastic
recognizcd and a urinary catheterplaccd. Thc os clitoris
 testicle and the other internal genitalia. Removal of the
can be removed via al ventral incision of the clitoral
accessory sexual organs such as the uterus should be
mucosa following manual eversion of the clitoris from
 pcrforrncdl at the same time.
its fossa. Thc os is separated and removcd from the 
surrounding soft tissue with sharp and blunt dissection.
Pyometra
T'he mucosal defect can then be closed with an absorb-
The uterus of a pseudohermaphrodite can undergo
able suturc using a continuous suturc pattcrm. An Eliza-
 pathological changes similar to those seen in the nor-
 mal female. Documented conditions includc cystic
period to prevent interference with the surgical site.
endometrial hyperplasia, mucometra and pyometra.
 Resection of an os penis is technically demanding.
 The diagnosis of pyometra in a phenotypically male
sincc the urethral opcning is abnormally placcd at
 dog can be very challenging. These unusual, but pos-
 some point along the length of the structure. Resection
 sible findings make a full examination and diagnostic
requires the dissection of the distal urethra from thc
investigation essential in such cases. Surgical treat-
 ment is recommcnded and is similar to that for pyo-
dorsal aspect of the os pcnis and the repositioning of
the urethral opening on the ventral wall of the vesti-
metra in the lormal femalc.
bule. Similarly to all cases of intersex, a careful assess-
 ment of thc rcmaining urogenital tract should be made
REFERENCES ANDFURTHER READING
Persistent penile frenulum
Howard PE and Bjorling DE (1989) The intersexual animal. Probies
in Veteritary Medicine 1. 7484
 Persistent penile frenulum is seen occasionally in male
GregorySP(1996Management ofuriuarincninenceMur
Canine and Felinu Nephrology and Urology,ed.I Rainhridge and
pseudohermaphrodites. The condition and its manage-
J Elliot, pp. 161-173. BSAVA, Cheltenham
ment is discussed in the section on penile conditions.
 Kyles AE, Aronsohn M and Stone EA (1996) Urogenital surgery. In:
ComplicationsnSmallAniatSurgery,cdAILipowitz era.
Urinary incontinence
455-525. Williams & Wilkins, Balimore
Manfra Marretla S, Matthiesen DT and Nichals R (1989) Pyomctra and
It is not uncommon for individuals with hermaphra-
ils complications. Problems in Veterinary Medicine 1, 50-62
ditism and pseudohermaphroditism to suffer from uri-
bitch. Journal of Smell Animal Practice 14. 257-266
nary incontinence. Concurrent urinary incontinence
PearsonH(1996)GenitalsurgeyinehichandatIn:Vey
with intersex conditions is often of non-neurogenic
Reprodutction and Obstetrics,7th edn,ed. GH Arthur et ai,pp.
332-341. WB Saunders, London
origin associatcd with developmental anomalies of the
Slatter D (cd.) (1993) Textbook of Smalt Aninal Surgery, Znd edn. WB
vagina, the urethra, or both. Developmental anomalies
Saunders, Philadclphia
reported include urethrovaginal fistula, vaginal mem-
Texibook of Smail Aninat Surgery, ed. D Slatter, pp. 1689-1691.
brane obstructing thc norrmal outflow of urinc, double
WB Saunders, Philatlelphia.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction
in the Dog and Bitch
Gary C.W. England
INTRODUCTION
Bitch
 Figure 16.1 demonstrates thechanges in selected hormone
Recently there has been a significant increase in our
concentrations during thie pregnant cycle of the bitch.
knowledge of reproducti ve biology in dogs and bitches.
Combining this knowledge with the increased avail-
During late anoestrus, the pulse frequency and
 ability of new hormonal preparations has allowed
 mean concentration of luteinizing hormone (LH)
treatment options to be improved for many clinical
 and the mean concentration of folicle stimulating
disease conditions.
hormone (FSII) are increased
This chapter aims to review the main categories of
Follicular development isinitiated and oestrogen
drugs that may he used to control reproductivc activity,
 conccntrations arc clcvaled
to highlight the availability of drugs within each group
 Oestrogen has a negative feedback effect on the
and to discuss the specific clinical applications of the
hypothalamus-pituitary, and LH and FSH
 availablc agcnts.
conccntration is rcduced
 Oestrogen concentrations peak and then decline,
reinoving the negative feedback effect which
REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY
potentiates a surge release of LH and FSH
Progesterone concentration increases from the time of
Female and male reproductive endocrinology are
 the LH surge andis dramaticallyraised afterovulation
fully discussed in Chapters l, 2 and 6. For the
Progesterone concentrations are similar in
present chapter, however, a simplistic overview is
 pregnancy and non-pregnancy
suitable to allow an understanding of the normal
Prolactin is elevated during the late luteal phase and
biology and the mechanisms of action of various
is a principal luteotrophic factor
pharmacological preparations.
After the luteal phase the bitch enters anoestrus
where gonadotrophin and steroid hormone release 
are basal.
LIO
LH
Progesterone
Hormor
Qestrogen
-50
50
100
150
Days from LH surge
Figure I6.l: Representation of the hormonat changes during the oestrous cycle of a preguant bitch.
198Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Thefeedbackcontrol mechanisms and site of ac-
PRODUCTSUSEDTO CONTROL
tion of exogenous drugs are shown in Figure 16.2.
THEREPRODUCTIVESYSTEM
Dog
Avarietyofphysiological processes and disease con-
Gonadotrophin controlof testicular activity is
ditionsmay be influenced by the administration of
provided by LH (also called interstitial cell
pharmacologicalpreparations.InTablcs 16.1and 16.2,
stimulating hormone),and FSH.
common conditions are listed,together with agents
·LH stimulates the interstitial(Leydig)cells to
that may be usedfor their control or treatment.The
produce testosterone and small quantities of
agents, their effects and advcrse cffects, and clinical
oestradiol.
uses are described later in the chapter.
LH secrctionisregulatedbya feedback mechanism
Throughout the text,referenceisgiven topharma-
involving lestosteronc and possibly oestradiol.
ceutical products thatmaybeuseful for the control of
FSH stimulates spermatogenesis indirectly by an
reproduction. Not all of these agents have a licensed
action upon the Sertoli cells.
indicationin the dog,and some are asyetunavailable
Androgen binding proteinissccrctcd by theSertoli
in theUK.For reference theUK-licensed products are
cells andisinvolvedinregulating theconcentration
given in Table 16.3.
and transport of testosterone within the
epididymides.
Inhibinis secreted by the Sertoli cells and acts upon
PROGESTOGENS
the pituitary to regulate the secretion of FSH.
Progesterone isproduced by the corporalutea of the
The feedback control mechanisms and sites of
bitch,andis not naturally produced by the dog.Endo-
action of exogenous drugs are shown inFigure 16.3.
genous progesterone suppresses spontaneous myo-
Androgens
HYPOTHALAMUS
GnRH
antagonists
GnRII
GnRH agonists
+
ANTERIOR
Oestrogens
PITUITARY
Progestogens
Inhibins
FSH
Human chorionic
gonadotrophin
Fquine chorionic
gonadotrophin
LII
Activins
LH
Progesterone
Antioestrogens
Oestroge
Prolactin
Prolactin
antagonists
Ovulation
CORPLS
FOLLICLE
LLTEUM
Figure16.2:Schematicrepresentationofhormonalactionandfeedbackcontrol.Thered arrows indicatethe actionsof
exogenous drugs in thebitch.+= stimuiation;-=inhibition.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in theDog andBitch199
Androgcns
HYPO-
IHALAMUS
GnRH
antagonists
EnRH
GnRH agonists
Oestrogens
ANTERIOR
Progestogens
PITUITARY
Human chorionic
gonadotrophin
Equine chorionic
FSH
gonadotrophin
Antioestrogens
Oestro
LEYDIGCELL
stostcron
Inhibin
Antioestrogens
SERTOLI
CELI.
Figure16.3:Schemalicrepresentationofhormonal actionandfeedbackcontrol.Theredarrows indicatetheactions of
metrial activity and stimulates endomctrial growth;it
actions upon gonadotrophin secretion.
is alsoresponsibleformammarygland development
A further effect demonstrated by high doses of
during theluteal phase.Progesterone has a negative
progesterone and progestogens is that they are cen-
feedback effectupon the hypothalamus and pituitary
trally sedative in action.
gland (Figure 16.3).Progestogens are compounds with
Progesterone and progestogens are commercially
progesterone-like activity,and therefore they exhibit
availablein avariety offormulations including oral
the actions above. It is,however, their negative feed-
therapy thatmustbegivcn daily,andoily suspensions
back effect upon the hypothalamus and pituitary gland
andimplants that provideaslowrelease overseveral
thatistheprincipalreasonwhytheyaresowidelyused
weeks or months (Table 16.4).
for the control of reproduction.
It was initially thought that the negative feedback
Adverseeffectsofprogestogens
was directly against FSH and LH;however,recent
evidence suggests that whilst there is a reduction in
Gcncral
circulatingFSH concentration,thereisno changein
Many transient effects may follow the administration
plasma LH concentration, only a decreased respon-
of progestogens.Theseincludeincreased appetite and
siveness togonadotrophin-releasinghormone(GnRH).
weight gain, lethargy, mammary enlargement and
occasional lactation(following the withdrawal of the
preventing a riseingonadotrophin secretion,whichis
agent),hair and coat changes,and temperament varia
the trigger for the transition from one phase of the
tions.Thesc effectsvaryin theirincidence bctwcen thc
oestrous cycle to anothcr.Progestogens do however
different progestogens, although in general they are
have a negative feedback effect upon the release of
lessfrequent with themorerecently developed ones.
prolactin,and canreduce,to some extent,circulating
The subcutaneous administration of some
progestogens (especially the depot preparations) may
 200  Manual of Small Animal Rcproduction and Neonatology
Classification
Condition
Potential treatments
 Prepubertal
Juvenile vaginitis 
Ocstrogcns
 Delayed puberty
Gonadotrophins
Oestrogens
Prolactin antagonists
Mature
Control of ocstrus
Progestogens
 Prolonged GnRH agonists and antagonists
(ovariectomy / ovariolysterectomy)
Prolonged anoestrus
Gonadotrophins
Oestrogens
 Prolactin antagonists
 Prolonged pro-oestrus
hCG
GnRIl agonists
Unwantcd maling
Oestrogens
 Prolactin antagonists
Prostaglandins
Prolactin antagonists + prostaglandins
Progesterone antagonists
GnRIl agonists and antagonists 
Synthetic antioestrogens
Pseudopregnancy
Progestogens
Androgens ÷ oestrogens
 Prolactin antagonists
Pyometra
Prostaglandins
Progesterone antagonists (ovariohysterectomy)
 Pregnant
 Termination of pregnancy
See unwanted mating (above)
Habitual ubortion
?Progestogens
 Uterine inertia
{)xytocin
 Ergot preparations
Dystocia
Oxytocin
 Ergot preparations
Post-parhum
 Fetal and/or placental retention 
Oxytocin (hysterotomy)
 Post-partum haemorrhage
 Ergot preparations
Oxytocin
Post-partum mctritis 
Oxylocin
Prostaglantlins
Ergot preparations
Subinvolution of placental sites
? Oxytocin as prevention
Agalactia
Oxylocin
Ovariectonized
 Urinary incontinence
Oestrogens (phenylpropanolamine)
Alopecia
Oestrogens
Vaginitis
Oestrogens
Identification of remmant ovarian tissue
hCG
GnRH (laparotomy)
Ageing
Mammary tumours
Progestogens
Androgens
Synthclie antioestrogens
(surgcry + ovaricctomy Or ovariohysterectomy)
Debility
Androgens
Table 16.1: Common clinical conditions in bitches(classified according to approximate age of occurrence and possibie
phamacoiogicaltreatments.reatmntsrlistdwiththemostsuitbiegenfistreltedtoprodutvaiabiltywithinh
UK. Further details of the treatrnent rationale and therapeutie reginens are given in the iext.
Pharmacological Control ofReproductionin theDog andBitch201
Classification
Condition
Potential trcatments
Prepubertal
Cryptorchidism
None
(bilateral castration)
Testicular hypoplasia
None
Identification of testicular tissue
hCG
Adult
Antisocial andbehavioural problems
Progestogens
Oestrogens
(behaviour modification therapy)
(castration)
(euthanasia)
Contraception
Progestogcns
Androgens
Progestogens+ androgens
Prolonged GnRH agonists and antagonists
(castration)
Poorlibido
Gonadotrophins
hCG
Poor semen quality
Synthetic androgens
Synthetic antioestrogens
Epilepsy
Progestogcns
Ageing
Benign prostatichyperplasia
Progestogens
Synthetic antiandrogens
Oestrogens
GnRHagonists
(castration)
Prostatic neoplasia
Progestogens
Synthetic antiandrogens
Oestrogens
GnRH agonists
Circum-analademomata
Progestogens
Oestrogens
(castration)
Feminization causedby tcsticular tumours
Androgens
(castration)
Debility
Androgens
Table16.2:Commonclinicalconditionsinmaledogs（classifiedaccordingtoapproximateageofoccurrence)and possible
pharmacologicaltreatments.Treatmentsarelistedwiththemostsuitableagentfirstrelatedtoproductavailabilitywithinthe
UK.Further detailsof thetreatmentrationaleand therapeuticregimens aregiveninthe text.
producehairdiscolorationandlocalalopeciaat thesite
action appears tobepotentiatedbyoestrogen,andfor
ofinjection.It is thereforerecommended that admin-
thisreason certaindepotprogestogens(medroxy
istrationshouldbe performedinaninconspicuous site,
progcsterone acctate)are not licensed forusewhen the
although this is usuallyimpractical.
bitchisinpro-oestrus(whenoestrogenconcentrations
All progestogens may potentially induce the pro-
are elevated);they arethereforenot advised for the
duction of growth hormone.Chronic over-secretionof
suppression of oestrus.Other depot progestogens
growth hormonemay result in the clinical signs of
（proligestone and delmadinone acetate)have been
acromegaly andperipheral insulin antagonismwhich
showntobesafewhenadministeredatpracticallyany
may result in diabctcs mellitus.
stage of the oestrous cycle,although delmadinone
Progestogen therapy may also produce adrenocor-
acetate is only licensed for use in themale dog.Oral
tical suppression.
therapy with megoestrol acetate andmedroxy-
progesterone acetate hasbeenshown to produce only
Specificadverse effectsin thebitch
alowincidence ofadverseeffects.
Progestogensmay result inthe development of cystic
There are nopreparationsrecommendedforuse on
endometrial hyperplasia and pyometra.The risk is
thefirst oestrous period orin prepubertal bitches.
related to the particular progestogen used,the amount
Benignmammarynodulescan beinduced bypro-
administered,and the duration of treatment.This
gestogen therapy, and it has been suggested that
202Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Drug
Trade nane
Formulation
IDose
Distributor
PROGESTOGENS
Progesterone
Progesterone Injection
 25 mg/ml for injection
1-3 mg/kg
Intervet UK Lid
Medrxyprogesteroe acetate
Perlutex for Injection
 25 mg/ml for injection
2.5-3.0 mg/kg at
Leo Laboratories Ltd
intervals of 5 monthis
Perlutex tablets
 5 ng tabletrs
10 ng/bitch/day for 4 days
Leo Laboratonies Ltd
then 5 ng/bitch/day for 12
days (double the dose if
weighs more than 15kg)
Promone-E
 50 mg/ml for injection 
 50 mg/bitch at
 Pharmacia and Upjohn Ltd
intervals of 6 months
Megoestrol acetate
Ovarid
 5 mg and 20 mg tablets
0.5 1ng/kg/day for up to
Mallinckrodt Veterinary Lid
 40 days commencing in
anoestrus of.
2.0 mg/kg/day for 8 days
commencing in pro-ocstrus Of,
2.0 mg/kg/day for 4 days then
0.5 mg/kg/day for 16 days
commencing in pr0-cestrus
Proligcstonc
Delvosterun
100 mg/ml far injectiuon
ssoo-rd u ax/u c-0
Intcrvct UK Ltd
Or, a scries al3,4, and thcn
5month intervals
Dclmadinone acetale
10 mg/m for injection
1.0-2.0 mg/kg
Pfizcr Ltd
OESTROGENS
Oestradiol benzoate
Mesalin
0.2 mg/ml for injection
0.01 mgkg on day 3 and
Intervet LK Ltd
 5 post maling (a 3rd dose
may be given an day 7)
Ithinyl oestradiol
Sesoral
(0.005 mg tablets
0.0008 mg/kg Ffor5 to 10 days
Intervet UK Ltd
(+ methyltestosterone)
(sut+)
(+ 0.7 mg/kg)
ANDROGENS
Methyltestosterone
5 mg tablets
0.5 mg/kg daily
Intervet UK Ltd
Methylteslustcrore
Sesoral
 4 mg tablels
0.7 mg/kg for 5 to 10 days
Inlervet LK Ltd
[+ ethinyl oestradiol)
(+ 0.005 mg)
(+ 0.0008 mg/kg)
Teslostcrons phenylpropionale
Androjecl
 10 mg/ml for injcction
0.5 - 1.0 rng/kg
Intcrvet UK Ltd
cvcry 7-10 days
Testostcrone propionalc +
Duraleston
50 mg/mI for injection
2.5 - 5.0 mg/kg
Intcrvet UK Ltd
lestostcronc phenylpropionatc -
cvery 6 months
testosterone isocaprocte +
testosterone decanoale
GONADOTROPHINS
 Serum gonadotrophin
Folligon
1000 IU crystal + solveat
20 IL/kg daily for 10 days
Intervet UK Ltd
(FSH-like)
PMSG-Intervet
 5000 1U crystal + solvent
20 IU/kg daily for 10 days
Intervet UK Lid
 Chorionic gonadotrophin
Chorulon
1500 IU erystal + solvent
100-500 IU/animal
Intervet UK Lid
(LH-like)
ECBOLIC AGENTS AND DRLGS PROMOTING MILK LETDOWN
1
Oxytocin
Oxytocin-S Injection
10 IU/ml for injection
2-10IL/btch
Intervet UK Ltd
Piruitary extract
Hyposton
10 IU/ml for injection 
2.5-20 IU/bitch
 Pharmacia and Upjohn Ltd
 Pituitary exract (synthetic)
Piteitary Exract
10 IU/nl for injection
2-10 IU/bitch
Aninalcare Ltd
(Synthetic)
Table I6.3:Commercially available products icensed in the UK that may be usefulforthe manipulation of reproduction in the
dog and bitch. Drug data sheers should be consulled for full dose regimens.-
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch203
Drug
Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
Progesterone
Progesterone Injection
 25 mg/ml for injection
Intervet L'K Ltd
Medroxyprogesterone 2cetate
Perlutex for Injection
25 mg/ml for injection
Lco Lahoratories Ltd
Perlutex tablets
5 mg tahlers
Lco Lahoratorics Lid
Promonc-E
 50 mg/ml for injection
Upjiohn Ltd
Megoestrol acctate
Ovarid
5 mg and 20 mg tablets
Mallickrodt Veterinary Ld
Proligcstomc
Delvosteron
100 mg/ml for injcction
 Inlervet LK Lid
Dclmadione acctatc
Tardak
10 mg/mt for injection
Plizcr Ltd
Altrenogest
# Regumate Equine
2.2 mg/mnl solution for oral admin.
Hoechst Rousell Vel Lid
* Regunate Porcine
4.0 mg/ml solution for oral admin.
Hoechst Rousell Vet Ltd
Norethisterone acetate
tPrirmolut N
5 mg tabletrs
Schering Health Care
tMicronor
350 ug tabletrs
Ortho Division of Cilag Ltd
Table I6.4: Commercially cvailable progestogens that may be useful for the manipulation of reproduction in the dog and bich.
* Veterinary producrs available in the UK hut not licensed for use in this species.
 Iluman medical preparanions.
progestogens may inducemaminary neoplasia, although
 progesterone acetate, delmadinone acetate, and
this does not appear to be the case with proligestone.
proligestone) administered subcutaneously during
anoestrus will prevent a subsequent ocstrus, and rcgu-
0r prevent parturition, and may produce masculinized
Iar repeated dosing (at 4- to 6-month intervals) can be
fcmale and cryptorchid male fetuses.
used to prevent oestrus on a long-term basis.
 Medroxyprogesterone acctate and proligestuone arc
Specific adverse effects in the dog
 licensed for this purpose; delmadinone acetate is unli-
High doses of progestogens cause marked changes in
semen quality, the majority of which are relaled toa direct
because of its shorter duration of action.
effect upon the epididymides. Changes in semen quality
 It may be inadvisable to prevent oestrus for more
may result in infertility. It is, however, surprising that
than 2 years, since this may increase the risk of cystic
lower doscs administered for shorl pcriods of tinc pro-
cndometrial hypcrplasia and pyometra. However, pro-
 duce no measurable effect on semen quality or fertility.
viding that a breakthrough cycle does not occur, pro-
 longed prevention may have few adverse effects,
Clinical use of progestogcns
cspecially when the morc recently developed
progestogens are used. Indeed it has been reported that
Bitch
 the incidence of pyometra and marnmary tumours are
reduced compared with untreated females. When
Control of oestrus: Administration of progcstogens 10
therapy is ccased, most fcmales cyclc normally, al-
bitches in anoestrus prevents gonadotrophin secretion
though progestogens may induce cystic endometrial
incrcasing abovc hasal values, and thereforc prevents
hyperplasia and therefore reduce fertility. The time to
a return to cyclical activity. If given when there is
return of oestrus is variablc.
follicular activity (pro-oestrus orearly oestrus), ovula-
tion is inhibited and the bitch rcturns relatively quickly
Oral administration of progestogens during anl-
to anoestrus. This sccond aclion of progestogcns is
vestrus: Low doscs of orally active progestogens
probably mediated by inhibition of increasing concen-
(megoestrol acetate, medroxyprogesterone acetate,
tration of gonadotrophins, although in other species
altrenogest, norethisterone acetate) can be used to
 there is evidcnce that progcstogens 1may have a diect.
prevent ocstrus for as long as adlministration conlinues.
 action upon the ovary.
Megoestrol acetate and medroxyprogesterone acetate
When progestogens are given daily or as a depot
 are licensed for this purpose in the bitch. The drugs are
 best given during late anocstrus beforc the anticipated
lowed by a state of anoestrus. Therefore cyclical
 oestrus. However, should the animal enter pro-cestrus
activity is inhibited for longer than the duration of
 during the first few days of treatment, the dosage can
progcstogen trcatment.
bc increased. A period of anoestrus usually follows
 Progestogens are generally administercd in one of
therapy so the animal does not return io oestrus imme-
four regimens to control oestrus in the bitch. A large
diately after cessation of treatment.
number of agents anrl formulations are available and
 the reader should consult specific dala sheet recom-
Oral adninistration of progestogens during pro-
 mendations for doses and treatment regimens.
oestrus:
High rloses of orally active progcstogens (megocstrol
Subcutaneous administration of depoi preparations
acctatc, medroxyprogcsterone acctatc, allrenogcst,
during anoestrus: Depot progestogens (medroxy-
 204 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
lo suppress the signs of ocstrus. Megoestrol acetate and
 following thc administration of progestogens.
metlroxyprogestcronc acctate are liccnscd for this pur-
 Other oplions for the treatment of pscudopreg-
pose in the bitch. Lsually the signs of pro-oestrus/
nancy include the administration of androgens, estro-
oestrus disappear within approximately 5 days. Treat-
gens, or combinations of these, or the use of prolactin
Imcnt during late pro-ocstrus may not prcvent ovulation
antagonists such as bromocriptine or cabergoline.
in the bitch, although conception is unlikely to occur.
However, treatment too early may lead to a returm to
Treatnent of manmary tumours: Both oestrogen and
ocstrus soon after dosing. A reducing dose regimen
 progesterone receptors have been identified in canine
administered from the first signs of pro-oestrus and
mammary tumours. Until recently, some clinicians
continued for up to l6 days is usually efficacious. This
have used progestogen therapy (megoestrol acetate)
regimen is frequently followed by a variable period of
anocstrus, and oestrus will return hclwccn 4 and 6
mours. This therapy is crnpirical, and may not be
months after the end of medication.
efficacious since many advance tumours possess few
steroid receptors and appear to have an autonomous
Subcuaneous administration of depot preparations
growth palicrn. Care should be taken if progestogen
during pro-oestrus: Administration of the new genera-
use is contemplated, since these agents may promote
mammary tumourigenesis via their induction of growth
early pro-oestrus may be used to suppress the signs of
hormone overproduction. Other agents that may be
that oestrus. Older gencration progestogcns
 used to control mammary lumours inelude androgcns.
(medroxyprogesterone acetate) which have potent
and the anti-oestrogens like tamoxifen.
effects upon the uterus are not recommended, since they
increase the risk of utcrine diseasc, cspecially pyomctra.
Treaiment of hahitual abortion: Thcrc is only ancc-
The signs of pro-oestrus/oestrus disappear within ap-
dotal evidence that habitual abortion occurs in the
 proximately 5 days. Following the depot progestogen,
bitch; in many alleged cases pregnancy has never been
there is a variable anoestrus, and oestrus rcturns ap-
confirmed by a reliablc method, and most are probably
proximately 6 months later (range 39 months).
 non-pregnant bitches that are rcpeatedly maicd at an
Other agents that may be used for the control of
inappropriate time. An abnormal uterine environment
oestrous cyclicity include long-term adiministration of 
ai  s a  s )
androgens commencing in anoestrus.
Icpcated pregnancy failure; however, there is no evi-
dence that a low progesterone concentration is the
Treatment of pseudopregnancy: Administration of
cause of repcated pregnancy loss.
 progestogens to bitches with clinical signs of pseuclo-
 It is therefore not appropriatc to supplerment bitches
pregnancy produces a suppression of prolactin secre-
with progestogens to prevent habitual abortion unless
tion, and clinical signs rapidly disappear. Prolactin
a persistently low plasma progesterone concentration
conccntrationis reduccd for the duration of progestogen
has been documented. Progcstogen supplcmentation
administration, but may increase again if progestogen 
during pregnancy may produce masculinized female
therapy is rapidly withdrawn. In this situation there
puppies and cryptorchid male puppies, and may possi-
may bc a return of the clinical signs.
 Progestogens may be adrministered either orally
 Progestogen use should be restricted to those cases in
daily (megoestrol acetate 2 mg/kg/day), or by depot
 which a true luteal insufficiency has been diagnosed:
injection (proligestone 20 mg/kg or delmadinone ace-
 in these cases oral therapy is most appropriate.
late 1.0 mg/kg), although soime of these producls are
not licensed for this purpose. First-generation
Dog
progestogens such as imedroxyprogesterone acetate
 are not recommended, since they have marked effects
Antisocial behaviour and other behavioural prob-
upon the uterus and might potentiate the development
lems: Problems such as aggression, roaming, territory
of a pyormctra.
marking, copulatory activity, destuction and excitabil-
 In general, depot progestogen therapy wurks well,
ily exhibited by both entire and castrated dogs may be
since the progestogen concentration gradually reduces
controlled in some cases by progestogen administration.
 in the circulation. Oral therapy is often associated with
The action of progestogens in these cases relates
relapsc of the clinical signs if therapy is terminated to0
hoth to their anti-androgenic effect and their ccntral
quickly; this can usually be prevented by gradually
 sedative action. Depot progestogen therapy may need
 reducing the dose over a period of approximately 7 0r 
to be repeated every month for the shorter acting
10 days.
prcparations (dclmadinone acctate I-2 mg/kg) up to
Care must be taken to ensure that the bitch is not
every 6 months for the longer acting preparations
pregnant, especially if depot progestogens are to be
(medroxyprogesterone acetate 3.0 mg/kg and
used, since these can delay or prevent parlurition.
 proligestone 20 mg/kg). Oral therapy has also becn
It is likely that the rcturn to oestrus will be delayed
shown to be effective and has the advantage that the
dose may be adljusted to thc cffcct. Commonly oral
 Imours. Tumours with central nccrosis may not respond
therapy commenccs with an initial high dosc for 2
well, and the rermission time is related to the duration
weeks and a reduction over several months.
 of action of the progestogen used. In dogs not required
Behaviour modification training is an essential
for breeding, castration is the treatment of choice.
adjunct lo progeslogcn therapy, and entire dogs should
Other agents that may be uscd include oestrogens.
be considered for castraticn.
Contraception: Long-term administration of high doses
Benign prostatic hyperplasia: Prostatic enlargcment
may encroach upon the structures within the pelvic
 abnormalities and possible suppression of spermatogen-
cavity and produce clinical signs of dysuria or faecal
esis. The concurrent administration of depot androgens
tenesmus. These signs are often preceded by
appears to be more efficacious and allows the pro-
 haemosperinia, which progresses to hacmaturia.
geslogen dlose to be rcduced. Castration is the mcthod of
Progestogens are both anti-androgenic and have a
 choice in dogs that are not required for breeding.
directeffect upon the prostate gland (see anti-androgens
later), and thcse actions arc responsible for the rapid
Epilepsy: Castraticn and/or progcstogen thcrapy has
reductionin theclinical signs associated with regression
 been used for the control of some epileptiform convul-
 of the prostate gland. Depot therapy usually causes
sions. The actions of progestogens may be related to
rcmission of clinical signs within 4 days, although a
 their central sedative effect. Only delmadinone acetate
 second treatment may be necessary after a short time in
(1-2 mg/kg) is licensed for this purposc, although any
some individuals. In stud dogs delmadinone acetate (1-
 depot or oral progestogen may be useful.
2 mg/kg) is comnonly used bccause of its short period 
of action and its relative sparing effects upon sperm
 production. However, the use of other depot or orally
OESTROGENS
aclivc progestogens is equally effcacious, and high
 doses or long treatment periods are necessary to inter-
Oestrogen is produced by ovarian folliclcs of the bitch,
fere with fertility. In dogs not required for breeding
and the Leydlig cells of the dog. Entdogenous oestrogens
castration in the treatment of choice.
(Table 16.5) are responsible for the development of the
Othcr agents that may be uscd for the treatimcnt of
fcmale sexual characteristics, including uterine growth,
benign prostatic hyperplasia include oestrogens and
the production of pheromones, swelling of the vulva,
 anti-androgens such as flutamide and finasteride.
thickening of the vaginal mucosa, secretion from the
ccrvical glands, and mammary development. Oestro-
Prostaric neoplasia: Some clinical improvement may
 gens are necessary for normal secreticn and functioning
 be seen in dogs with prostatic neoplasia following the
 of the uterine tubes, and changes in oestrogen concentra-
 administration of progestogens. The effect is, how-
tio regulate the gonadotrophin surge which stimulates
ever, usually only shorl term, and progcstogens offer
ovulatian. In laie prcgnancy, oestrogcn conccntrations 
little relief in metastatic disease. Other agents that may
are elevated and may be involved in the initiation of
 bc used includc oestrogens, anti-androgens such as
 parturition. In the male, oestrogens are involved in the
 flutamide and finasteride, and GnRH analogues such
feedback control of Lcydig cell funclion.
as buserelin.
In both the male and female, high doses of exo-
 genous oestrogens cause a negative feedback at the
Circum-anzl adenomata: The anti-androgcnic effect
hypothalamic-pituitary axis (Figures 16.2 and 16.3)
of progestogens given as a depot (delmadinone acetate
 and subsequcnt suppression of gonadotrophin secre-
1-2 mg/kg) or oral preparation is useful in causing
tion, but at low doses oestrogens enhance the release of
temporary rcduction of the sizc of these bcnign tu-
FSH.
Drug
Trade name
Farmulation
Distributor
Oestradin! benzoate
*Oestradiol benzoate
5 mg/ml for injcctioa
Intervet UK Ltd
Oestradiol benzoale
Mcsalin
0.2 mg/ml for injection
Intervct UK Ld
Hthinyl estradiol (+ methyltestostcrome)
Scsoral
0.005 mg (+ 4 mg) tablels
Intervct UK Ltl
Ethinyl pestradiol
*Ethinyloestradiol
10 μg, 50 μg anl 1 tng tablels
Evans Mctlical Ltd
Stilbocstrol
Apstil Tablels
1 umg and 5 mg lablets
Approved Prescription Services Lid
Ocstradiol valerate
Clinaval
1 mg and 2 mg lablets
Novartis Phermaceuticals UK Ltd
Oestradiol
Oestradiol Inplants
25 mg. 50 mg and 100 mg inplants
Organon Laboratories Ltd
Dicroestrol
*Orlho-dienoestrol
0.01% crcan for topical applicationt
Janssen-Cilag Ltd
Table I6.5: Commercially available oestrogens that may be usefui for the manipuiation of reproduction in the dog and bitch.
*Veterinary products availabie in th UK but not licensed for use in this species.
↑Human medical preparations..
206Manual of Small Aninal Reproduction and Neonatology
Oestrogens incrcase osteoblastic activity and causc
after mating. Oestrogcns may also produce a short
the retention of calcium and phosphorus, producc an
u jo nodns HT nm suuou Aq ssud le
increase in total body protein and metabolic rate, and
corpora lutea.
 affect skin texture and vascularity.
In clinical practice, diethylstilboestrol, oestradiol
cypionalc and imestranol have been widcly used to trcat.
Adverse effects of oestrogens
unwanted matings, Only oestradiol benzoate is
licensed for the treatment of unwanted mating in the
General
UK. This is atlministcrcd at a low dosc (0.01 mg/kg),
Oestrogens have been shown to produce a dose-related
3 and 5 (and possibly also 7) days after mating. The low
bone marrow suppression which results in a severe and
 i   poe q s a ao
 possibly fatal anaemia and thrombocytopenia. There is
reduce the possibility of adverse effects.
considerable indi vidual variation in the toxic dosc, which
 Other treatmcnt options arc lo induce resorption or
for some animals may lie within the manufacturer's
abortion by the use of prostaglandins, prolactin ant-
normal recommended dose range. Toxic effects are
agonists or combinations of these after pregnancy has
however generally duse-relaterl and oxicity is lcss likely
becn diagnoserd (Chapter 1 1).
if low doses are given over a long period of time. Oral
therapy should be prescribed whenever possible, so that
Pseudopregnancy: Oestrogens may be used to pro-
administration can cease if adverse effects are noted.
duce an inhibition of prolactin secretion in bitches with
 Prolonged oestrogen therapy may produce a non-
pseudopregnancy. Both parenteral and oral diethylstil-
 pruritic bilaterally symnetrical alopecia and skin
boestrol and parenteral oestradiol benzoate have been
hyperpigmcntation.
used, but neither is specifically licensed for this pur-
pose. A preparalion of ethinyl oestradiol (0.8 μg/kg/
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
day) combined with methyltestosterone (0.7 mg/kg/
Whilst ocstrogens do not stimulate cystic cndometrial
day) is available, and produces a good clinical re-
hyperplasia or pyometra per se they potentiate the
sponse, although the dose suggested seems arbitrary.
stimulatory effect of progesterone on the uterus. Addi-
Recurrence of the clinical signs may follow abrupt
tionally, they cause cervical relaxation and allow vagi-
termination of treatment, and a reducing dose reginen
nal bactcria to entcr thc ulerus. For these reasons,
 Imay bc nccessary cspccially in bitchics with recurrcnt.
oestrogen administration may result in the develop-
Or persistent clinical signs.
Other treatment options include the administration
Large doses of oestrogens may stinmulate signs of
 of progcstogens, androgens or spccific prolactin ant-
oestrus in both entire and ovarichysterectomized
agonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline.
bitches, whilstadministration during oestrus may cause
the signs of that oestrus to be lengthened.
Juvenile vaginitis: A mucoid vulval discharge, which
If oestrogens arc administcrcd during prcgnancy,
may become purulent, is commonly seen in bitches
 they may cause cervical relaxation and abortion, possi-
from 8 weeks of age onwards. Signs may also include
bly as a result of the inhibition of LH, which is a major
frequent licking and attractiveness to male dogs. The
luleotrophic faclor. Oestrogen atlministration during
condition usually regresses alier the first oestrus and
often does not warrant treatment; however, if the
ing fetuses including abnormalities of phenotypic sex.
clinical signs are severe sornc control may bc effected
using low doses of oral ocstrogens daily for 5 days.
Specific adverse effects in the dog
Oestrogens are not licensed for this purpose and should
The anti-androgenic effects of oestrogen administra-
not be given to bitches required for breeding. An
tion may, after prolongcd thcrapy, result in abnormali-
alternative therapy is thc topical application of ocsto-
ties of semen quality and a resultant reduction in
gen-containing creams (Vagifem: NovoNordisk Phar-
fertility. Prostatic size initially decreases during ces-
maceuticals Ltd).
 trogcn therapy, although subscquently reversiblc
prostatic metaplasia may result, causing the gland to
Oestrus induction: Low doses of oestrogen enable
increase in size.
FSH to stinulate the formation of LH receptors on
 Prolonged oestrogen administration may resuit in
granulosa cclls, and thereforc increase thc rcsponsive-
gynaecomastia.
ness to basal concentrations of LH. The result is
follicular growth and production of oestrogen; gona-
 Clinical use of oestrogens
dotrophin concentrations arc low due to thc negativc
feedback effect. As follicles mature, their walls lutein-
Bitch
ize and progesterone is produced. The decline in the
oestrogcn:progesterone ratio facilitates thc pre-ovula-
Unwanted mating: Ocstrogens alicr zygote transport.
 tory LH surge.
timc and impair implantation when administered soon
The induction of oestrus with diethylstilboestrol
Pharnacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch 
207
has been uscd clinically for some time. Good results
he uscful in dogs with antisocial behaviour. However,
can bc achicved using 0.3 mg/kg/day for up to 10 days
rle to thc potential adverse cffects of long-tcrm oes-
(treatment is stopped 1 day after the onset of a sanguin-
 trogen therapy, and the superior action of progestogens,
eous vulval discharge).
the latter are more commonly used in clinical practice.
Other trcatment rcgimens include thc arlministra-
tion of equine chorionic gonadotrophin combined with
Benign prostatic hyperplasia: Repeated administra
human chorionic gonadotrophin, or the use of prolac-
tion of oestrogens will result in a reduction in prostatic
tin antagonists such as broinocriptine and cabcrgoline.
size and thc amelioration of clinical signs. The effcct of 
 oestrogens upon semen quality and fertility have not
Attractiveness in ovariectomized bitches: Some bitches
been documented, and the treatment of choice is prob-
may bccome atractive to male dogs several years after
ably low dose progestogens which have a mininal
 ovariohystereclomy. Thesc bitches do not havc an
cffect on fcrtility, or castration in thc animal that is not
 ovarian remnant (although this should be eliminated as
required for breeding. Prolonged oestrogen therapy
a diffcrential diagnosis), and appear to have a low
may result in prostatic metaplasia and a resultant
grade vaginitis. Bacterial cxamination usually rcvcals
increase in the size of the prostatc gland. Othcr treat-
 commensal organisrms. A good clinical response may
ment options include the use of anti-androgens and
be achicved using low doses of diethylstilboestrol (0.06
GnRH agonists.
mg/kg/day) or othcr orally active oestrogens such as
ethinyl oesradiol (0.06 mg/kg/day) for up to 7 days, or
Prostatic neoplasia: Clinical signs of prostalic nec-
the topical application of oestrogen-containing creams
plasia may be controlled in the short term by the
(Vagifeni: NovoNordisk Pharmaceuticals Ltd).
administration of oestrogens (diethylstilboestrol, 0.03
mg/kg/day). Progestogens may also be useful in the
Alopecia in ovariectomized bitches: Some ovariect-
short term, whilst in man anti-androgens and GnRH
 omized bitches devclop poor hair growth and alopecia.
analogues are widely used.
Unsuitable terminology has been used to describe
these cases, which are often refered to as having
Circun-anal adenomata: The anti-androgenic effect
ovarian imbalance. Oestrogen-responsive alopecia has
of oestrogens inay be useful to cause a decrease in the
a poorly undcrstood actiology and the clinical re-
size of thesc tumours. Other options are thc administra-
sponse to exogenous oestrogen administration prob-
 tion of progestogens, although the treatment of choice
ably relates to the epitheliotrophic action of oestrogen,
is castration in dogs that are not required for breeding.
the primary effccts of which are to promote kcratiniza-
 tion and to suppress sebum production.
ANDROGENS
Urinary incontinence: Urinary incontinence is frequently
described as a complication of ovariectomy or
The naturally occurring androgens testosterone and
ovariohysterectomy. The aetiology of the condition is
uncertain, but it may rclate to changes in thc thickness of
cells of the teslcs. In the male, androgcns mediate the
the urethral mucosa in the absence of oestrogen. Inconti-
 development and maintenance of primary and second-
nence may occur between months and many years after
ary sexual characteristics and normal sexual behaviour
 dreu uonso on pdsai ssno og rams s
whilst in othcrs the response is short lived or abscnt.
initiation and maintenance of spermatogcncsis (Table
Parenteral oestradiol benzoate has been recom-
16.6).
 mended daily for 3 days, with subsequent injections
Androgens are generally not present in significant
every third day. The usc of ural dicthylstilbocsirol
 concentrations in the non-pregnant fcmale; however, it
 is clear that androgen receptors are present in oestro-
day) is also efficacious. Daily therapy is administered
gen target tissues and that androgen administration can
for up to 3 weeks, with a response being cbserved after
antagonize oestrogenic function.
a few days; the length of treatment is kept to a mini-
Androgens also have a negative feedback effect
mum required to produce a clinical effect, and treat-
upon the hypothalamic-pituitary axis (Figures 16.2
mcnt is repcated as nccessary.
and 16.3), and will influencc, among other things, the
Other agents that may be used include the drugs that
 release of the gonadotrophins and prolactin.
 act directly upon the urethral muscle such as phenyl.
Several synthetic androgens are available, and the
 propanolaminc (Propalin Syrup).
duration of their activity is relatcd to the nature of thc
synthetic ester. Androgens may be considered to have
Dog
either primarily virilizing actions, or primarily ana-
bolic actions. Thc virilizing cffccts includec the devcl-
Antisocial behaviour and other behavioural prob-
opment of the secondary sexual charactcristics,
lems: The anti-androgenic actions of oestrogens may
including physical changes and the promotion of
 208  Manual of Simall Animal Rcproduction and Neonatology
Drug
 Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
Methyltestosterone
Orandrone
 5 mg tablers
 Intelvet UK Ltd
Methyltestosterone (+ethinyl estadiol)
Sesoral
4 mg (+ 0.005 mg) tablers
Intervet UK Ltd
Testosterone phenylpropionate
Androject
10 mg/ml for injection
Intervet UK Ltd
Testosterone propionate +
Durateston
50) mg/ml for injection
Intervet UK Ltd
testosterone isocaproate +
testosterone decanoalc
Mibolerune
* Cheque Drops
1.0 mg/ml for oral admin.
Upjoln Company Lld, USA
Mcsterolone
1 Pro-Virun
25 mng tablets
Schering Hah Care Ltd
Tahle I6.6: Commercially avaiiable androgens that may be useful for rhe manipulation of reproduction in the dog and bitch.
Products not availabie in theUK.Human medical preparations.
libido and spermatogenesis. The anabolic effects
not useful for inhibiting oestrus in females with follicular
include· the stimulation of appetite, pronotion of
activity (pro-oestrus or early oestrus), and administra-
 protein synthesis and musclc deposition, and thc rctcn-
tio1 must commence in latc anoestrus, morc than 30
tion of certain elements including nitrogen, potassium,
 days before the onset of pro-oestrus. When androgens
 phosphorus and calcium.
n a  o op  ru s  psn n
phase, and thcre is no suhscqucnt anoestrus. Thcrefore
Adverse effects of androgens
cyclical activity returns rapidly after the cessation of
treatment.
General
 In the UK, the most common regimen is the admin-
 Androgen therapy may produce virilizing cffccts such
 istralion of depot androgcns dluring anocstrus either as
 as aggression, and their use may be contraindicated in
a prolonged release implant, or depot injection of
dogs with existing behavioural problems. In prepuber-
mixed testosterone esters. It is not uncommon for
tal animals, prcmaturc cpiphyseal growth platc closure
depot thcrapy to hc supplcmented by daily oral therapy.
may occur.
For example, mixed testosterone esters (25 mg/kg)
Androgens are contraindicated in nephrotic condi-
may be given intramuscularly every 4-6 weeks, and
tions, since the anabolic component causes both
 methyltestosterone (0.25-0.5 mg/kg) is given orally
sodium and water retention. Hcpatic dysfunction has
daily.
 also been reported following androgen administration.
In other countries including the USA, an orally
 active synthetic androgen, mibolcrone, is availablc.
Specific ad verse effects in the bitch
This has been shown to be effective for the long-term
Prolonged androgen administration in bitches may
 prevention of oestrus in bitches. The compound has
result in clitoral hypertrophy. and very rarely the
 adverse effects typical of other androgens, including
development of an os clitoris. Repeated or prolonged
clitoral hypertrophy, vaginitis, and bchavioural
changes. In addition, anal gland abnormalities, obnox-
and severe urogenital abnormalities may develop in
ious body odour and obesity have also been recorded.
female fetuses if androgens are administcrcd to bitches
Other agents that may be used to control oestrus
during pregnancy.
 include the progestogens.
Specific adversc cffccts in the dog
High doscs of androgen produccs scvere changes in
d yo  e and  naq  s
 spermatozoal morphology and fertility. This effect is
secretion in bitches with pseudopregnancy. This re-
probably mediated by the negative feedback mecha-
sults in a rapid resolution of thc clinical signs. Andro-
nism described above.
gens may be more useful than either progestogens or
oestrogens, since they do not have any adverse effects
Clinical use of androgens
on the uterus. Oral methylicstosterone or parcnteral
lestosterone esters are cfficacious; howcvcr, an orally
Bitch
active licensed preparation of methyltestosterone
(0.7 mg/kg/day) combined with ethinyl oestradiol
Control of oesfrus: Anlrogens may he administered to
(0.8 μg/kg/day) is available which produces a good
 bitches in anoestrus to prevent a return to cyclical
clinical response.
activity. The exact mechanism of action has not been
 Other treatment options for pseudopregnancy in-
determincd, although it is likely to bc similar to that of
 cludc the administration of progestogcns, oestrogens
progestogens in preventing the increase in gonado-
alone, or specific prolactin antagonists such as
trophin secretion above basal values. Androgens are
bromocriptine and cabergoline.
Pharmacological Control of Rcproduction in the Dog and Bitch 209
Mammary tumours: Androgens may be useful for the
 esis. The concurrent administration of progestogens
control of certain mammary tumours. Their action is
 appears to be more efficacious, although castration is
 related cither to a negativc feedback upon gonaclo-
thc method of choice in dogs that arc not requircd for
trophin release or to a direct local anti-oestrogenic
breeding.
effect.
Androgen therapy is empirical, and may not be
Cryptorchidism: Cryptorchidism means hidden tcsti-
efficacious, sincc many advanced tumours possess
 cle and rcfers to the failurc of one or both tesles to
few steroid receptors and appear to have an auto-
 descend into the scrotum. It is believed to be a sex-
nomous growth pattern.
limited, autosomal recessive trait with a definite brccd
Other agenis which may be used to control mam-
predisposition. Cryptorchid dogs and their parents
mary tumours include the anti-oestrogens like
should not be used for breeding because of the heredi-
tamoxifen.
tary nature of the disorder; however, this is not always
practical for the dog breeder. Castration of affeclcd
Anabolic therapy: Various androgens both as depot or
aninals should bc advised bccause of the increased
repeated oral therapy may be used for their anabolic
risk of testicular neoplasia and testicular torsion, and to
effct in agcd or dcbilitated dogs. Parenteral therapy
prevent breeding. Medical therapy with androgens has
(mixed testosterone esters, 25 mg/kg) is usually given
not been shown lo bc efficacious and is unethical.
every 1 or 2 weeks, whilst oral therapy (methyl testo-
 sterone 0.25-0.5 mg/kg) is recommended daily.
Feminization: Testicular tumours may be endo-
crinologically active and produce ocstrogen. This may
Dog
produce a variety of clinical signs including
feninization. The feminizing effects ilay be sup-
Poor libido: There is no cvidence in the dog that poor
 prcsscd by the anti-oesirogenic propcrties of various
libidlo is causedl by low circulating androgen concen-
androgcns, although the trcatment of choice is castra-
trations. The condition is more likely to have a psycho-
tion. Mixed testosterone esters have been used to
logical background or to be thc result of musculoskeletal
reverse the oestrogenic effects after castration.
pain during copulation. Although both oral and depot
 although the clinical signs should subside naturally
androgen administration have been advocated for the
 provided that there are no metastases.
treatment of poor libido, androgens should be used
with care since they producc significant changcs in
Anabolic therapy: Various androgens, as depol or
spermatozoal morphology and fertility via the nega-
repeated oral therapy, may be used for their anabolic
tive feedback mechanism (Figure 16.3).
effect in aged or debilitated dogs. Parenteral therapy is
 Other agents that may be uscful in dogs with poor
usually given every 1 or 2 weeks, whilst oral therapy is
libido include human chorionic gonadotrophin, which
 recommendcd daily.
 the cfficacy of this regimen has not been proven.
GONADOTROPHINS
Poor semen quality: There are many causes of poor
The gonadotrophins FSH and LH are secreted by the
semen quality in the dog. Those related to inadequate
anterior pituitary gland. In the bitch, FSH stimulates
cndocrine suppor have not been fully elucidated in
 initial follicular dcvclopment and its surge release is
males of any species. Itis not appropriate to administer
associated with the process of ovulation. LH also
androgens without a definitive diagnosis; nevcrthe-
 stimulates follicular growth and is the trigger for
lcss, anclrogen supplementation is commonly used.
 ovulation. ILH is onc of the principal luteotrophic
and this may produce disastrous results because the
agents in the bitch (Tigure 16.2) and is responsible for
androgens suppress spermatogenesis via thc negative
 prolonging the lifespan of the corpora lutea in the late
fecdback incchanism.
lutcal phase of pregnancy and non-prcgnancy. In the
An analogue of dihydrotestosterone, mesterolone,
is available in the UK for human use and is unusual in
action upon the Sertoli cells, and LH stimulates the
 that it is not aromatizedl to oestradiol and therefore, at
Leydig cells to produce lestostcrone (Figure 16.3).
 therapeutic doses, does not significantly suppress the
'Neither FSII nor LH is available for use in the dog:
release ofpituitary gonadotrophins. It has been used in
however, equine chorionic gonadotrophin (eCG) and
dogs (1.5 1mg/kg/day) but its cffects have not, as yct,
hunan chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) arc commer-
bcen fully evaluated.
cially available (Tablc 16.7). eCG is produced in the
mare during pregnancy and is mainly FSH-like in
Contraception: Long-tcrin administration ofhighdoses
activity, but it does have some IH activily. hCG is
uf androgens may be useful for reducing semen quality
extracted from the urine of pregnant women and is
by a negative feedback suppression of spermatogen.
 primarily LH Hike in effect.
210  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Drug
Trade name
Formulationl
Distributor
Serum gunadotrophin (PMSG)
 PMSG-Tntervet
5000 IU vials + solvent
Intervet IK L.td
Falligon
1000 1U vials + solvent
lntervet UK Ltd 
* Hostim
6000 1U vials + solvent
Pharmacia & Upjchn Lid
 Chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
Chorulon
1500 1U vials + solvent
Intcrvct UK Ltd
Table I6.7: Conumercially available gonadotrophins that may be usefulfor the manipulation of reproduction in the dog aned bitch.
#Veterinary products available in the UK but not licensed for use in this species.
Adverse effects of gonadotrophins
 Other agents which may be uscful for the induction
 of oestrus include low dose oestrogens, or prolactin
General
antagonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline.
 Thcrc is a risk of inducing anaphylactoid reactions and
antibody formation following the injection of these
Delayed puberty: Some bitches, especially those of the
protein preparations.
larger breeds, do not reach the first oestrus at the
anticipatcd agc. Puberty may normally occur as late as
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
2.5 years, and therefore treatment is not warranted
The administration of a single dose of either gonado
 until after this age. Therapy to induce oestrus may then
trophin to anoestrous bitchcs is unlikely to have any
be attempted using an eCG / hCG regimen.
effect. However, eCG if given lo ocstrous bitches may
cause luteinization of follicles and interfere with ovu
Hastening of ovulation: Bitches that repeatedly fail to
lalion. Hyperstimulation of the ovary by the adminis-
conccivc arc sometimes given hCG at the time of
tration of high doscs or thc usc of repeated therapy may
mating on the assumption that ovulation has not
result in non-ovulating follicles and persistent oestrous
 Occurred or that early development of the corpora lutea
 behaviour. A persistent elevation in plasma oestrogen
is inadequate. There is no evidence that this is the case,
  a   e 
and such “blind' therapy cannot bc rccomincnded.
oestrogen toxicity.
However, some bitches may have prolonged pro-
 oestrus or oestrus and the administration of hCG (25
 Specific adverse effects in the dog
IU/kg)may possiblyhastenovulationInthcsc case,
hCG administration causes an endogenous rise of
hCG is administered when more than 90% of vaginal
 plasma testosterone. This effectis short lived, however
epithelial cells are anuclear, or when a slight rise in
 so An s jo ru s e 
 plasma progesterone conccntration has bcen detected.
 temperament may cccur.
Premanure administration ofhCG may resultin follcular
luteinization and failure of ovulation. GnRH may be
Clinical use of gonadotrophins
used in a siimilar manner to hasten ovulation.
Bitch
Identification of ovarian tissue: It may be difficult to
deterininc clinically whether a bitch has becn
Induction of oestrus: When rcpcated doses of eCG
 ovariohysterectomized (or ovariectomized - which is
(20 IU/kg for 5 days) are given to anoestrous bitches,
comnon in Europe). The administration of hCG
follicular growth and the production of oestrogen are
(25 IU/kg) to bitches withi ovaries results in an incrcasc
stimulated. Ovulation may occur spontaneously, fol-
in plasma oestrogen concentration; in the absence of
lowing an endogenous surge of LH, or may be induced
ovaries, this does not occur. This method may there-
using hCG (25 IU/kg on day 5). These regimens are
fore be clinically useful for detecting the presence of
morc effeclive in late anoestrous bitches compared with
ovaries, although it has not bccn fully investigaled.
those in early anoestrus. Care must be observed when
Similarly, the administration of GnRH may be clini-
using eCG and hCG combinations, since endogenous
cally useful for the identification of spayed bitches.
hyperoestrogenism may occur and result in inhibition of
implantation, bone marrow suppression and death. Low
Dog
doses of gonadotrophins are suggested to produce more
physiological plasma oestrogen profilcs.
Diagnosis of testicular tissue: In male dogs with no
A relatively low plasma progesterone concentra-
 scrotal testes, the presence of testicular tissue can be
tion or short luteal phase following gonadotrophin-
confirmed by performing an hCG stimulation test.
induced oestrus is cominon. This effect might be
 Plasma tcstosterone concentration is mcasurcd bcforc
 mediated by the high endogenous or exogenous oes-
and 60 minutes after the i.v. administration of 50IU/kg
trogen concentrations inhibiting release of the luteo-
hCG; a significant rise in testosterone concentration is
trophic gonadotrophin LH.
diagnostic of testicular tissue.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch
211
Dogs with functional testicular tissue, whether intra-
Several synthetic GnRH agonists are available
 abdominal or extra-abdominal gencrally have a higher
(Tablc 16.8) although none is licensed for usein the log.
The administration of these agents causes an increase in
dogs. However, there are large fluctuations in plasma
the production of FSH and LH (Figures 16.2 and 16.3),
testostcronc throughout the day and therefore the hCG
and in general it is the action of these gonadotrophins
stimulation test is the preferred method of diagnosis.
which produces any clinical effect.
An alternate method of use of GnRH agonists is
Cryptorchidism: Cryptorchid dogs do not respond to
their repeated administration resulting in a down-
the administration of gonadotrophins. The condition is
 regulation of the receptors in the pituitary. preventing
 the release of FSH and LH.
ment is unethical; these dogs should be bilaterally
 GnRH antagonists produce a reduction in circulat-
castrated torcrmovc them from the brecding programme
ing gonadotrophins within a few hours. The most
 and to prevent the development of testicular tumours
commonly investigated agent, detirelix, is not avail-
and the risk of testicular torsion.
able in the UK.
Hypogonadisn: In somc dlogs, the abnormal develop-
 ment of the germinal epithelium causes the formation
Adverse effects of GnRH agonists and
antagonists
and azoospernia. The condition may be congenital
 and possibly hereditary. Treatment with gonadotrophins
General
is not successful.
 No general adversc cffccts have been reporicd with
thesc agcnts in dogs.
Poor libido: A transient increase in libido may follow
the adiministration of hCG to dogs. This effect is the
Specific adversc cffects in the bitch
result of inercascd cndogenous testostcronc concentra-
 Repcatcd administration of both GnRH agonists and
tions.
 antagonists may result in absence of oestrus.
Speciflic adverse effects in the dog
GONADOTROPHIN RELEASING
 Repeated administration of both GnRHI agonists and
HORMONE AGONISTS AND
 antagonists may cause a reduction in libido, and long-
ANTAGONISTS
term administration may cause reduced spcrmalozoal
morphology and fertility.
 Gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) controls
gonadotrophin synthesis via a neuroendocrine mecha-
 nisim. GnRH is released by hypothalamic nerve end-
Clinical use of GnRH agonists and
ings into the portal capillaries and is delivered to the
antagonists
 anterior pituitary gland by the hypophyseal portal
veins. The GnRH neuronal network is cxtrcimcly com-
Bitch
plex and is influenced by several different areas of the
brain. Both the frequency and the amplitude of GnRH
Identification of ovarian tissue: The i.v. administra-
release are important features of its function in stimu-
tion of GnRH (0.01 μg/kg) to intact bitches produces
lating the release of FSH and LH.
an increase in LH and subsequent rise in plasma
Drug
Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
GnRH AGONISTS
Buserelin
* Recepital
0.004 mg/ml for injection
Hoechst Rousell Vet E.d
 Fertirelin
*Ovaiysc
 50 μg/ml for injecrion
Pharmacia & Upjohn Ltd
Gonadorclin
*Fertagyl
0.1 my.iml forinjection
Intervet UK Ltd
Buserelin
↑Suprelact
1.0 mg/inl for injection
Hocchst UK Lid
Goserelin
↑7oladex
3.6 mg depot implant for I month therapy
 Zeneca Pharmacculicals
↑7oladex LA
10.8 rng depot implant for 3 mouths therapy
Zeneca Pharmaceuticals
Nafarelin
Synare]
nasal spray - no suitable veterinary formulation
Searle DG and Co. Ltd
GnRH ANTAGONISTS
Detirelix
Nat available
Not available
TableI6.8:CommerciallyavailableGnRHagonistsandantagonists ihatmay beusefulforthemunipulalionofreproductioninthe
dog and bitch.
* Veterinary prodncts avaiabte in the UK bu not licensed for ise in this species. I Hunan medical preparations.
 212  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Oestrogen concentration, This test may bc uscful for
causing rcduced libido and infertility. In particular,
the detection of bitches that have been ovariectomized
depot preparations appear to be useful as reversible
0r ovariohysterectomized where no rise in oestrogen
methods of contraception. Since these agents are not
will occur. An alternative mcthod is to administcr hCG
widely commercially availablc, othcr products such as
and monitor plasma oestrogen concentration, which
progestogens, androgens or progestogen-androgen
 increases in bitches with ovaries but not those that have
combinations may be considered, although castration
becn ovariectomized.
is the mcthod of choice in thc animal that is not
requircd for breeding.
Hastening of ovulation: Single i.v. doses of GnRH
(0.01 μg/kg) may be useful to hasten ovulation in
Prostatic disease: Repeated or depot administration of
bitchcs in oestrus. Thc usc of hCG, howevcr, imay be
GnRH agonists may he uscful in dogs which havc
more efficacious, although neither drug has been
benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatic neoplasia,
adequately evaluated for this purpose.
although no clinical trials with these agents have been
reportcd.
Control of oestrus: Analogues of GnRH, such as
nafarelin, may be used to prevent reproductive cyclicity,
 since they cause initial stimulation and then receptof
PROSTAGLANDINS
dlown-regulation. Prevcntionof oestrus may bc achieved
using s.c. implanted sialastic devices providing a sus-
The reproductive prostaglandins are synthesized in the
tained release of GnRH for up to l year; however,
endometrium and are luteolytic and spasmogenic in
suitable preparations of these agents arc not commer-
naturc. In the bitch, prostaglandin relcasc is involved
cially availablc.
 in the termination of the luteal phase and the initiaticn
GnRII antagonists may be used to prevent cyclical 
of parturition.
activity when administered during pro-oestrus, be-
There are no naturally occurring or synthetic pros-
cause thcy produce a reduction in circulating
taglandin analogucs licensed for use in the bitch. The
 gonadotrophins within a few hours. Bitches therefore
use of the naturally occurring prostaglandin F,c,
rapidly return to anoestrus.
dinoprost, and several synthetic prostaglandin alna-
logues, especially cloprostenol and luprostiol, have,
includc progestogens and androgens.
however, been widely described (Table 16.9).
When administered to bitches, they cause lysis of
Unwanted mating: The down-regulation effects of
 the corpora lutea and the termination of the prcgnant
continuous GnRH administration may be used in
and non-pregnant luteal phase. However, bitch cor-
 attempts to withdraw gonadotrophin support of the
pora lutea are not very responsive to the action of
corpus Iuteun. Similarly, the daily administration of
prostaglanrlin, and repeated thcrapy (often twicc daily)
GnRII antagonists successfully suppresses luteal func-
 n se   
tion. A single dose of detirelix produces resorption or
 also cause uterine contractions via its direct spasmo-
abortion depending upon the stage of pregnancy. Ad-
genic effect.
 ministration very carly in thc preg nancy is however not
efficacious even when the drug dose is increased.
Adverse effects of prostaglandins
Other agents that may be used to induce resorption
 Orabortion inclndc ocstTogens, prostaglancdins, prolac-
General
tin antagonists and progesterone antagonists.
Prostaglandin administration may be followed by
restlessness. hypersalivation, vomiting, abdominal
Dog
 pain, pyrexia, tachycardia, ataxia and diarrhoea; high
doses may be lethal. These effects may develop
Contraception: Both GnRH agonists and antagonists
quickly after administration and usually persist for up
may he useful for the suppression of LH and FSH,
to 60 minutcs.
Drug
Trade nane
Formulation
Distributor
Cloprostenol
+Estumate
265 μg/ml for injection
Mallickrxdt Velerinary Ltd
* Planate
87.5 μg/ml for injectiun
Mallickrol Veterinary Ltd
Dinoprost
*Lutalyse
5 mg/ml for injection
 Pharnacia & Upjohn Ltd
Tiaprost
*Ilien
0.15 mg/iml for injection
Hoechst UK Ltd
Luprostiol
*Prosolvin
7.5 mg/ml for injection
Intervet UK Ltd
Table 16.9: Commercially available prostaglandins that may be usefulfor the manipulution of reproduction in the bitch.
*Veterinary producis uvaitablein theUKbut not liensedforuse inthis species.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch213
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
 their luteolytic action). Dinoprost administered at low
Prostaglandin administration to pregnant bitches may
doses (150 μg/kg) twice daily for 5 days, combined with
cause resorplion or abortion. Cascs of clased-ccrvix
appropriatc antibiotic and fluid therapy may be uscd as
pyometra given prostaglandin may develop uterine
a successful treatment. Following treatment approxi-
rupture.
mately 20% of bitches returm to fertility. The long-term
complications include recurrence of pyonetra, anoe-
Specific adverse effects in the dog
strus, failure to conceive and abortion.
Prostaglandins are not used in male dogs.
Other agents that may be used to treat cases of
 pyometra include progesterone receptor antagonists
such as RU486 and RU46534.
Clinical use of prostaglandins
Post-partum metrifis: Post-partum metritis in the bitch
Bitch
may be treatcd by using prostaglandins to induce
uterine evacuation. Antimicrobial preparations are
Termination of pregnancy: Low doses of dinoprost
 mandatory; however, in these cases there is no under-
(150 μg/kg) or cloprostenol (0.025 mg/kg) given daily.
lying hormonal componcnt (plasma progcsterone con-
or twice daily, for several days can bc used to produce
centration is low) and therefore a rapid resolution
luteal regression. Repeated low doses cause lysis of the
should be expected. A regimen similar to that used for
corpora lutea and induce abortion, especially when
the treatment of pyometra may be employed. Other
givcn later than 23 days after ovulation. Earlier treat-
treatmcnt options include the aclministration of oxy-
ment may not be efficacious, since developing corpora
tocin or ergometrine.
lutea are more resistant to the effects of prostaglandin.
Recent studies have, however, showi1 that daily treat-
Induction of oestrus: Whilst prostaglandins may be
ment coinmencing 5 days after the onset of mctoestrus
uscd to inducc luteolysis, the lutcal phasc is followcd by
(dioestrus)using high doses (250μg/kg)ofdinoprost may
 a variable period of anoestrus. Therefore shortening of
be efficacious, although adverse effects are common.
the luteal phase does not produce a rapid return to
Cloprostenol can be uscd to produce abortion 23
 oestrus. Methods of ocstrus induction include the use of
days after ovulation when administered as a prolonged
gonadotrophins, oestrogens and prolactin antagonists.
release intravaginal device, however, such a productis
not coimmercially available.
Dog
A better therapeutic option is to use a combination
There are no therapeutic roles for reproductive
of prostaglandin (dinoprost, 5.0 μg/kg every other day
 prostaglandins in the dog.
for 10 days) and a prolactin antagonist such as
cabergoline (5.0 μg/kg/day for 10 days), although the
 latter agents may also be used alone.
OXYTOCIN AND ERGOT
PREPARATIONS
Treatment of pyometra: Cystic cndometrial hyper-
 plasia and pyometra occur during the luteal phase of the
Oxytocin is synthesized within the supraoptic nucleus
oestrous cycle.
Progesterone-induced cystic
ald is transported axonally to storage areas in the
cndometrial hypcrplasia usually prcccdes the develop-
 postcrior pituitary gland. Oxytocin relcase is stimu-
 ment of pyometra which is associaicd with bacterial
lated by mechanical-neural reflexes. Oxytocin
invasion of the uterus during oestrus. These cases may
receptors develop on the myoepithelial cells of the
be dcscribcd as either open-cervix or closed-cervix
mammary gland shortly bcfore parturition. Oxytocin
 pyometras. In the former, there is usually a copious
release stimulated by sucking results in contraction of
vulval discharge, and following its diagnosis,
 the myoepithelial cells and causes active milkejection.
 prostaglandins may be uscd to jnduce utcrine emptying
Uterinc oxytocin rccepiors also incrcase in number
(the rcsult of thcir spasmogenic activity) and to removc
closc to parturition, and oxylocin relcase stimulates
the stimulatory effects of progesterone (the result of
contraction of the oestrogen-primed uterus. Oxytocin
Drng
T'rade name
Formulation
Distributor
Oxylocin
Oxytocin-S Injectiou
 10 IU/ml for injcction
 Intervet.,UK Ld
Oxylocin Leo
10 IU/ml for injection
Leo Laboratories Itd
 Pituitary extrect
Hyposton
10 IU/ml forinjection
 Pharmacia & Ugjohn Ltd
Piwitaryexract (sythetic)
Pituitary Ixract (Synthetic)
10 IU/ml for injection
Animalcare Ltd
Ergometrine (+ oxy tocin)
 Synlomelrine
 500 μg/ml (+ 5 IU/ml) for injection
 Novartis Pharm2centicals UK Ltd
Table16.10:Comnerciallyavaablexytocinnd ergotpreparalionsthatmaybe usefulforthemaipulionofreproductionin
the bitch.
Human'nedical preparations.
 214 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
is also released in some spccies at coitus and is in-
diagnosis requires ulirasound examination. Parenteral
volved in the transportation of gametes within the
administration of oxytocin (0.5 IU/kg) is usually effec-
lubular genital tract.
tive at producing uterine contraction and expulsion of
Several formulations of oxylocin and posterior
the puppy and/or placenta. The responsc to oxytocin
pituitary extract are available commercially, and can
rapidly decreases after parturition, and in cases that are
be uscd to stimulate the smooth muscle of the mam-
mary and genital tract (Tablc 16.10).
ssat ane inq sos esn u pasn sq reu suoudaid
Ergotamines are alkaloid extracts of a rye fungus.
efficacious because uf the prolonged contractions that
They are ecbolic agents like oxytocin, however, they
they produce.
produce a prolonged spasm of uterine msclc. Rclaxa-
tion occurs only after 1 or 2 hours when the unterus thcn
Post-partum haemorrhage: Physical damage to the
contracts rhythmically in a similar manner to that
uterine wall may occur during parturition. Bleeding
produced by oxytocin. There are no prcparations
may thercforc continue after parturition but usually
licensedl for use in the dog, although parenteral
rapidly decreases as the uterus involutes. Persistent
preparations of ergometrine maleate combined with
Oxytocin are available.
tration. Ergometrine may be a more useful agent in
thesc cascs because of thc initial prolonged utcrinc
Adverse effects of oxytocin
contractions. Excessive haemorrhage, although very
General
correct thc cause.
There is a low incidence of skin sloughing or abscess
forrmation recorded by some manufacturers following
Post-partun metrifis: Uterine evacuation may be in-
the subcutaneous administration of oxytocin. The agent
duced by oxytocin administration in cases of post-
is therefore bcst givcn by the i.m. routc.
partum metritis. In thcse cases, appropriatlc antibiotic
Ergot alkaloids may produce emesis and slight
therapy is mandatory. Other treatment options inchude
stimulation of the central nervous system.
the administration of prostaglandins or ergometrine.
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
Subinvolution of placental sites: Partial uterine non-
Oxytocin administration to a bitch in late pregnancy
involution may occur in the bitch after parturition. The
may initiate premature parturition.
 aetiology of the condition is not known, but cases arec
characterized by an intermittent haemorrhagic dis-
 Specific adverse effects in the dog
charge from the vulva for 3-6 months after parturition.
Oxytocin and ergot preparations have no clinical indi-
 cations in the dog.
returned to oestrus. Oxytocin has little effect once the
clinical signs are established, but some anecdotal re-
Clinical use of oxytocin
 ports suggest that treatment at the time of parturition
may prevent thc condition from developing.
Bitch
Agalacfiz: Lack of milk production is rare in the bitch.
Uterine inerfia: Cases of prinary uterine inertia or
However, an abscnce of milk letdown is relalively
secondary uterine inertia (following correction of the
common. The former condition has no treatment whilst
dystocia) may respond to parenteral oxytocin adminis-
the latter can be treated by the administration of oxy-
tration (0.5 IU/kg). Oxytocin has a short half-lifc and
tocin. Oxytocin does not inereasc imilk production.
therefore repeated administration (every 15-30 min-
utes) may be necessary to maintain a clinical effect.
Dog
Thc use of a continuous low dose intravenons infusion
 Therc arc no clinical applications for oxytocin thcrapy
does not appear to have been investigated in bitches,
in male dogs.
 although itis a conmon treatment regimen in humans.
Oxytocin is contraintdicated in obstructive dys-
tocia, sincc ulcrine ruplure may result.
PROLACTIN ANTAGONISTS
Ergot preparations may also be used in cases of
inertia; however, they produce prolonged uterine con-
Prolactin is the primary luteotrophic factor of the
fractions and are less suitablc.
odo u osd gn n-u pe and
Placental retention or fetal retention: Retention of a
concentratians increase from day 20 onwards, and arc
puppy or a placenta is rare in the bitch. A presumptive
then rmaintained for the duration of the luteal phase.
diagnosis may be made by the persistence of a green-
The use of prolactin antagonists (Table 16.11)
coloured vulval discharge after parturition. Accurate
 causes a rapid decrease in prolactin concentration
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch
215
Drug
aueu ape,L
Farmulation
Distributor
Cabergoline
Gialastop
50 μg/ml for oral admin.
Boehringer Ingelheim Ltd
↑Dostinex
0.5 mg tablets
Pharmacia
Brumocriptine
↑ Parlodcl
1 mg and 2.5 mg tablets
Novartis Pharmacenicals UK Ltd
Table Ih.1l: Commercially availabie prolactin antagonists that may be usefitl for the maniputation of reproduction in the bich.
Human medical preparations.
(Figure 16.2) and a subsequent decline in plasma
Bromocriptine (20 μg/kg/day) has been used for
 progcsterone conccntration. Prolonged prolactin sup-
this purposc for some time; howcver, its effecl of
pressionresults in a terminationofthe luteal phase, and
causing vomiting is a common reason for owner non-
the bitch cnters anoestrus. Continual administration of
compliance and cessation of treatment. Vomiting can
 prolactin antagonists during ancestrus causcs a rcturn
be reduccd by starting with a vcry low dose anl
to oestrus sooner than anticipated, The mechanism of
increasing this gradually over several days until a
this oestrus-inducing action is unknown.
clinical effect occurs. Mixing the drug with food, or the
Bromocriptine and cabergoline are ergot derivativcs
prior administration of metoclopramide may also be
which inhibit prolactin release by direct stimulation of
useful as discussed above.
dopaminergic receptors of prolactin-releasing cells in
Cabergoline (5.0 μg/kg/day) is widely available
 the antcrior pituitary gland. Cahcrgoline appears to bc a
 in Europe and has a higher activity, longer duration
 more specific agent that has fewer side effects attribut-
of action, has better tolerance, and produces less
able to dopaminergic stimulation of the central nervous
vomiting than bromocriptine. The human medical
system. Neither bromocriptine nor cabergoline is
 preparation of cabergoline available in the UK is
liccnsed for usc in dogs in the LK. Cabcrgoline is
expcnsivc.
licensed for this species in Europe, and both agents are
 Other agents that may be used for the treatment of
available as human preparations in the UK.
pseudopregnancy include progestogens, androgens,
ocstrogcns and androgen/ocstrogcn combinations.
Adverse effects of prolactin antagonists
Terminafion of pregnancy: Repeated administration
Gcneral
of the prolactin antagonists produccs a reduction in
 Dopaminergic stimulation may result in nausea and
 plasma progesterone concentration and resorption Or
vomiting and this is the most common adverse effect
abortion. Both agents are more effective when given in
reported following bromocriptinc administration. Leth-
the second half of pregnancy, since thc role of prolactin
 argy and occasional constipation may aiso be noticed.
is more important at this time. Efficacy can be in-
These effects are uncommon following the administra-
creased, and treatiment may be given earlier, when
tion of cabergoline. The adversc cffects of bromo-
prolactin antagonists and prostaglandins arc given
criptine can bc reduced by using the minimal cffcctive
simultancously (see prostaglandins above). One rcgi-
 dose and mixing the drug with food. Specific anti-
 men is touse a combination of prostaglandin (dinoprost,
 emetics such as metoclopramide may prevent vomit-
5.0 μg/kg) evcry other day for 10 days and a prolactin
ing. but whilst they are clinically uscful, their
 antagonist such as cabergoline (5.0 μg/kg) daily for 10
 administration does not make pharmacological sense
days.
because they also work via dopamine receptors.
 Other agents that may be used to terminate preg-
nancy include prostaglandins or progesterone
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
antagonists.
 Administration of prolactin antagonists during preg-
nancy may causc abortion.
Induction of oesirus: Apparently normal antl fcrtilc
Repeated administration will result in a shortening
 oestrous periods may be induced in anoestrous bitches
 of anoestrus and a return to oestrus.
following continual administration of bromocriptine
(20 μg/kg/day) or cahergolinc (5.0 μg/kg/day). Thc
Specific adverse effects in the dog
time to the onset of oestrus seems to relate to the stage
 There are no clinical applications of prolactin antago-
of anoestrus; bitches in late anoestrus respond more
nists in malc dogs.
quickly than those in early anoestrus. Trcatinent start-
ing in the luteal phase Imay also bc effective but the
Clinical use of prolactin antagonists
treatment period is longer. 
 Thc induced oestrus appears to bc physiological,
Bitch
 and whist the mechanism of action is uncertain it may
be the result of inhibition of remnant progesterone
Pseudopregnancy: Suppression of prolactinl causes a
 production by the corpora lutea.
rapid resolution of thc clinical signs of pscudopregnancy.
Othcr agcnts that may bc uscd to inthuce oestrus
216  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Drug
Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
Mifepristone (RU486)
↑ Mifegyne Tablers
200 mg tablets
Roussel Laboratorics Ltd
Aglepristanc (RU46534)
* Alzin
30 rng/ml for injection
Huechst Roussel Vet, France
Table 16.12: Commercially available progesterone antagonists that may he usefu for the manipriation of reproduction in the
dog and bitch.
* Products not available in the UK. t Human medical preparations.
include low dose oestrogens or gonadotrophin combi-
 Clinical use of progesterone antagonists
nations.
Bitch
Dog
There are no therapeutic roles for prolactin antagonists
Pregnancy termination: The administration of
in the male dog.
 mifepristone to prcgnant bitches at 28 days after ovu-
lation produces fetal death and resorption within 5
days of treatment. Earlier administration requires a
PROGESTERONE ANTAGONISTS
longer treatmcnt pcriod. In later pregnancy.
 mifepristone administration results in abortion, or pre-
Specific progesteronereceptor antagonists (Table 16.12)
mature parturition. RU46534 (4.0 mg/kg) may be used
have antiprogestogenic effects in several spccics.
o uaa Aru ii raaeis Aue je Aoueuand seuai 0
The availability of these agents varies from one
ately after ovulation. Mifepristone administered orally
to be most widely obtainable. This product is available
 n se    tt 
as an orally activc product, and sale is limiled in somc
ciated with any adverse clinical cffects.
countries because of the potential human misuse. A
similar progesterone antagonist (RU46534) has re-
Pyometra: RU46534 has been investigated in bitches
cently been markcicd for use in bitches in Francc, and
with pyometra. Administration on days 1., 3, 5, 8 and 16
is available as an injectable solution.
 Administration of these agents produces no initial
 both open- and closed-cervix pyometra in the majority
change in plasma progcstcrone concentration; how-
of bitchcs. The regimen produccd no advcrsc cffects.
ever, progesterone action is blocked.
 and emptying of uterine fluid occurred quickly pro-
ducing resolution of the clinical signs. Some of the
Adverse effects of progesterone antagonists
bitches retumcd to normal fertility afler trealment.
General
Dog
Arlvcrsc effects following thc administration of these
There are no clinical indications for the use of proges-
products have not been reported.
 terone antagonists in male dogs.
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
Administration of progesterone antagonists to preg-
SYNTHETIC ANTI-OESTROGENS
 nant bitches will result in resorption, abortion or pre-
mature parlurition depending upon thc timc of
The pharmacolugy of the anti-ocstrogcns, clomiphene
administration.
 citratc and tamoxifen, may superficially appcar con-
fusing. These agents (Table 16.13) are antagonists at
Specific advcrsc cffects in the dog
the hypothalamic receptor level; thiey displace oestro-
 There are no therapeutic uscs of progesterone antagu-
 gen from thc receptor and lead to a decreased negalive
nists in male dogs.
feedback of the oestrogen. As a result, gonadotrophin
Drug
Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
Tanoxifen
↑ Tanofenr
10, 20 and 40 mg tablets
Pharmacia
↑Nolvadex
20 mg and 40 mg tablets
 Zeneca Phanmaceuricals
Clomiphene citrate
 Serophene
 50 mg tablers
Serono Laboratories UK I.td
↑ Clonid
 5( mg tablees 
Merrel Dow I.td
Table 16.13: Commercially availahle antioestrogens that nay be usefulforthe munipuiation of reproduction in the dog and bitch.
↑Human medical preparutions.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Dog and Bitch  217
release is increased, and in humans this may result in
 Mammary neoplasia: There is little evidence of clini-
follicular growth and ovulation. Peripheral receptor
cal response of canine mammary tumours to therapy
antagonism also occurs and this may be uscful in
with anti-oestrogens. Howcvcr, tamoxifen is used by
conditions that arc stimulated by oestrogen.
some clinicians, and aneclotally may control progres-
These agents also have important action on the uterus;
sion of the tumour. The high incidence of oestrogenic
they may interfere with normal endometrial maturation,
adverse effects (see above) results in therapy being
and therefore prcvcnt implantation. Anfi-oestrogens also
withdrawn in a large number of cascs.
inhibit progesterone production from the corpora lutea
and therefore interfere with the luteal phase.
Dog
In males, the cnhanccd secretion of LH and FSH
 may stimulate spermatogenesis and Leydig cell func-
Poor semen quality: There are many causes of poor
tion. However, clomiphene has significant intrinsic
semen quality in dogs, the majority of which have not
oestrogenic activity which may directly impair spcr-
heen adequately invcstigatcd. In humans, both clomi-
matogenesis. Tamoxifcn has no such oestrogenic
 phene and tamoxifen have been reported to improve
activity and may be more suitable in the male.
 semen quality in cases of oligozoospermia. The intrin-
These agents are not licenscd for use in the dog, and
sic oestrogenic property of clomiphene (which may
formed.
tamoxifen is more widely used. Neither agent has,
however, been investigated for use in the dog. Other
Adverse effects of synthetic anti-oestrogens
products which may be used in thcsc cascs include
synthetic androgens such as mesterolone.
General
The anti-oestrogens have been reported to produce
SYNTHETIC ANTI-ANDROGENS
 gastrointestinal disturbances in man.
Specific adverse effects in the bitch
Anti-androgens (Table 16.14) may have several mecha-
nisms of action. Cyproterone acetate is a progestogen
A high incidence of pathological changes of the bitch's
which is principally anti-androgenic. Flutamide inhibits
ovarian cysts and cndometritis. This drug cannot be
androgen uptakc and/or nuclear binding of androgen.
Finasteride is a specific 5-alpha reductase inhibitor
recommended for use in animals required for future
breeding.
which prevents the conversion of testosterone into
 Tamoxifen may producc some oestrogenic adversc
dihydrotestostcronc. Formestane is alnl aromatase
inhibitor which inhibits the conversion of androgen to
effects including vulval swelling and discharge and
attractiveness to male dogs. These effects may be
oestrogen in peripheral tissue. There has recently been
considerable interest in finasteride in dogs since it has no
mcdiated by anl oestrogenic mctabolitc of tamoxifen.
intrinsic androgenic, oestrugenic or progcstogenic
Specific adverse effects in thc dog
properties and it has no affinity for the androgen receptor.
 No inalc-specific abnormalities havc bccn reportcd.
However, wlilst all of these anti-androgens are com-
 Mercially available, none is licensed for use in thc dog.
Clinical use of synthetic anti-oestrogens
Adverse effects of synthetic anti-androgens
Bitch
General
Adverse effects of these agents have not been reported
Termination of pregnancy: Tamoxifen has been shown
 in dogs, but in humans include nausca, gastrointestinal
tively high doses twice daily during pro-oestrus, oestrus,
upsets and gynaecomastia.
Or carly metoestrus (dioestrus). Thc mode of action
Specific adverse effecis in the bitch
during pro-oestrus and oestrus may relate to changes in
These agents have no clinical indication in the bitch.
the rate of zygote transport, or there may be a direct effect
upon thc uterns preventing implantalion, In the lutcal
Specific adverse effects in the dog
phase the action may be relatedl to theeffect upon proges-
Prolonged anti-androgen administration may result in
terone production, although this has not beeni evaluated.
a reduction in semen quality.and poor fertility.
Othcr agcnts that may be uscd for the tcrmination of
 pregnancy includc oestrogens, prostaglandins, pra-
Clinical use of synthetic anti-androgens
lactin antagonists and combinations of these.
The
majority of thiese regimens are more suitable than
Bitch
tamoxifen because of its high incidcncc of pathologi-
There are no clinical indications for the usc of thcse
cal changes induced in the reproductive tract.
products in the bitch.
 218  Manual of Small Aninal Reproduction and Neonatology
Drug
Trade name
Formulation
Distributor
PROGESTOGENS
Cyproterone acetate
50 mg tablets
 Schering Health Care Lid
↑Cyptostat
50 mg and 100 mg tablets
 Schering Health Care Ltd
see also Table I6.3
INHIBITORS OF ANDROGEN UPTAKE
 Flutamide
↑ Drogcnil
 250 mg tablets
Schering-Plough Lid
REDUCTASE NHIBITORS
Finusteridc
Proscur
5.0 mg tablets
MSD,Belgium
AROMATASE INHIBITORS
Formestare
↑Leataron
250 ng vial + solvent
Ciba Laboratories
Table 16.14: Commercially availabte anti-androgens that maybe usefulforthe mnipulationof reproduction in thedog and bich.
*Products not availabie in rhe UK. Hunan medicai preparations.
Dog
CONCLUSIONS
Benign prostatic hyperplasia: Dogs with prostatic
Recent studies have improved our understanding of
 hyperplasia may respond to the administration of anti-
reproductive physiology in dogs and the mechanism of
androgcns by a reduction in prostatic size and dis-
action of specific hormones. It is clear that, with the
 appearance of the clinical signs. The concerm with the
increascd availability ofspecific pharmaceutical prepa-
use of these products is that there may also be a
rations, there is considerable potential for the manipu-
 reduction in fertility. However, flutamide has been
lation of reproductive function, to prevent reproduction.
shown to reduce prostatic size with no change in libido
 or sperm output. More recently, finasteride (0.3 mg/
reproductive performance.
kg/day) has been shown to produce a dramatic de-
crease in prostatic size and a rcduction in the secretion
 of prostatic fluid. However, total spermatozoal output
REFERENCES AND
did not change and fertility remained unaltered.
FURTHER READING
Formestanc has not been evaluatcd for use in dogs.
Other preparations that may be used to treat benign
England GCW (1994) Ilormonal manipulation of breeding in the bitch.
The Vererinary Anmat 34, 189-200
 prostatic hyperplasia include progestogens and oestro-
England GCW (1994) Reproductivecndoerinology in the dog and bitch.
gcns.
In pructiee, Jounat of Postgradate Clinicat Sudy 16, 275-279
Englana GCW ( 1996) Reproductive biology in the dog. The Veterinary
Amuai 36, 187-201
Prostatic neoplasia: Anti-androgens have not been
England GCW and Allen WE (1991) The effect. of the synthetic
 reported for use in cases of prostatic neoplasia; how-
androgenmesterolaneupon seminal characteristics of dogs..ourmal
of Small Aninal Pracrice 32, 271-274
ever, flutamide, finastcridc and formestane havc all
 been shown to be useful for the control of clinical signs
in man.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Pharmacological Control of
Reproduction in the Cat
John P. Verstegen
INTRODUCTION
Many treatments have been proposed to induce
Oestrus in cats and these arc summarized in Table 17.2.
 This author's preferred treatment is: 100 IU pregnant
be used in cats is limited, particularly in the field of
mare serum gonadotrophin (PMSG; also called equine
reproduction. Many of the drug regimens used are
chorionic gonadotrophin, eCG) in a singlc bolus admin-
extrapolated from the dog. The dramatic increase in
istered to anoestrous cats, followed 5-7 days Iater by an
our knowledge of reproductive biology in dogs has
injection of hCG (50 IU). This treatment produces
provcdl bencficial forcats too, forcxample in the use of
prostaglandins or antiprolactin agents. The aim of this
matings. However, it is important to note that repeated
chapter is to review the main clinical problens en-
injections of exogenous gonadotrophins may lead to the
counlcred in cats and to refer to catcgorics of drugs that
produclion of antibodics against PMSG which thcn
may be used in treatment (Table 17. 1).
results in a decreased response to stimulation. It is highly
advisable not to repeat this kind of treatment.
 In bitchcs with prolonged anoestus, induction of
THE QUEEN
Oestrus by the use of buserelin implants or antiprolactin
drugs has been successful. The possibility of using
Oestrus induction, infertility.
 these approaches in cats should be investigated. Re-
superovulation
cen1 data from our laboratory suggest that cabergoline,
Induction of follicular growth, oestrous behaviour and
a dopamine agonist, is efficient at 5 μg/kg per day to
ovulation can easily be achieved in queens. Reasons
induce a fertile oestrous in cats as in dogs. GnRH las
for oestrus incluction arc delayed puberty, prolongcd
 been recommended al 1 μg/kgs.c. until signs ofoestrous
 anoestrus or for synchronization purposes. These con-
 behaviour are noted or for a maximum of 10 days.
ditions must be fully investigated before deciding to
induce vestrus.
Oestrus prevention and/or suppression
Progestogens are routinely used to control or suppress
Dclayed pubcrty
ocstrus in thc queen, The side-cffects inl cats are similar
It is important nol to diagnose this too early, since
to those in the dog and include: uterine disease, in-
the onset of puberty may vary greatly from one
creased body weight, mammary tumours, hypoadreno-
animal to another and froni one breed to another. It is
corticism and diabetus mellitus.
nol exccptional to havc a pcdigrcc longhair cat
In cats, oeslrus prcvention is commonly achicved
reaching puberty at 18 or 24 months of age. Thus a
using orally administered megoestrol acetate at a dose
clear history and physical examination has to be
of 2.5 mg/cats once weekly or 5 mg/cat every 2 weeks
 pcrformed bcfore making this diagnosis and dcciding
for up to several months.
on treatment.
Oestrus suppression is only advisable if treat-
ment commences a maximum of 1-3 days after the
Prolonged anoestrus
beginning of pro-oestrus. Experience has indeed
Many cases of prolonged anoestrus are either related to
demonstrated that successful mating can occur if
 poor oestrus detection and managenent, or secondary
trcatment commcnces late. If it is essential ta sup-
to progestogen administration.
press an ocstrus that has begun, injcctablc agcnts
It is important to recognize that cats are highly
cannot be used. If treatment is begun too late,
responsive to oestrus induction treatment and
queens may still be mated, and become pregnant.
 ovcrstimulation Icading to superovulation or the
Sincc the injectable progcstogcn acts for morc than
production of many anovulatory follicles with a
 3 months, the progesterone concentration will still be
cystic appearance is not rare. This is particularly
elevated at the expected time of parturition, and there-
fore kiltening will not occur.
 220  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Main hormone
Administration
Clinical use
Dosage
Analogues
Male hormones
Testosterone (T)
i.m., s.c., oral,
Infertility.
Highly variable:
Testosterone phenyl
implants
hypogonadism, poor
 low tlose stimulates。 propionate, methyl
libido, skin diseases,
 high dose inhibits
testosteronc
testicular descent (?)
Female
hormones
Ocstrogen
i.m1., s.c., oral
 No longer used
10-100 μg/kg
Oestradiol cypionatc,
 depending on the
diethylstilboestrol,
snp pasn
 oestrodiol, benzoate
Progcsterone
i.m., s.c., oral,
Hypoluteism,
Medroxyprogesteronc
implants
contraception,
 acetate. proligcstonc,
satyriasis,
delmadinone,
hyperactivity,
 megoestrol acetate
urination
Prostaglandin
s.c.
Abortion, metritis,
Natural:
Dinoprost, cloprostenol
100-500 μg/kg
pyometra
Synthetic:
2-5 μg/kg
Oxytocin
i.v., s.c., i.n.
Myacontraction,
0.5-1 IU/kg every
uterine bleeding.
 20-30 minutes
 placental retention
Ergot derivatives
Oral, s.c.
Abortion, lactation
Variable
Bromocriptine
inhibition
10-25 μg/kg.
mctcrgoline,
 cabergoline 5 μg/kg
Pituitary
hormones
Prolactin
Not clinically
 Stinulation of
Unknown
 Dopamine antagonist:
available
lactation, control of
stimulates prolactin:
fertility in both
metoclopramide
 genders
(5 mg/kg)
 Dopamine agonists:
inhibit prolactin 
secretion: cahergoline,
 metergoline.
bromocriptine
LH
i.v., s.c., i.m.
Oestrus induction,
Unknown for
hCG (50-100 IU
ovulation induction
 natural product
Chorulon)
testicular descent
FSH
i.v., s.c., i.m.
 Oestrus induction
Unknown for
PMSG (100-500 IL
 naural product
Folligon)
Hypothalamic/
brain hormones
GnRH
i.v., i.m., s.c.
 Oestrus induction,
Gonarlorclin, buserelin
infertility, testicular
(0.5-5 μg)
desccnl, ovulation
Melatonin
Oral patches,
 Oestrus control
NA
NA
i.m., s.c.,
 Skin diseases
implants
Table I7.I: Main hormones and analogues used in cats.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Cat  221
Protocols
Dosages
Results
Comments
PMSG alone
100-1000 IU 5-7 days
 Poor, large number of
Cline et al., 1980
unovulatcd folliclcs
PMSG + hCG
100-150 IU once day 1 +
Good, similar to natural
Cline et al., 1980;
50-100 IU once day 5 -7
oestrus
 Donoghue et al., 1997
FSH + hCG
2 mg/day 4-5 days +
Good
Dresser et al., 1987;
50-250 IU
Goodrowe et al., 1988
Prolactin inhibitors
Cabergoline 5 jig/kg per
Good in terms of oestrous
Verstegen, unpublished
day up lo oestrous
 bchaviour. Not enough
behaviour maximun
data in terms of
15 days
pregnancy
Table 17.2: Described treatments to induce oestrus in cats.
For suppression of oestrus, oral progestogens can
oedema and alteration of the uterine milk, therefore
be givcn: 2.5 mg/cat per day for 2 weeks. If the
preventing normal enbryo migration and embryo
administration is then stopped, the cat usually returns
implantation. In cats, fewer side-effects are obscrved
to oestrus a few days or sometimes several weeks later.
after oestrogen treatment than in dogs. Bone marrow
If the trcatmcnt has to he continued, 2.5 mg/cat cvery
aplasia and uterine disease is rarely observed. Never-
theless, the use of oestrogen is considered inadvis-
able, as new treatments with fewer side-effects exist.
Ovulation induction, nymphomania,
Prostaglandins can be used. Doses of up to 500 μg/kg
ovarian cysts
of natural analogues 2-3 times a day for 5 days may
During oestrus, ovulation can be induced mechani-
-pis pasouap uaeq sey Aouensaid sanre uaaia aa
cally by vaginal stimulation. Exogenous hormones can
effects are less severe than in dogs, and these gener-
also be used: GnRH (5-25 μg/cat) or hCG at
 ally incrcase with the dosc adininistered but decrcase
50-250 IU may be administered i.m. or i.v. to induce
with the repetition of treatment. Among the side-
ovulation and therefore terminate oestrus. Ovulation
effects are: emesis and muscle jerking. No data exist
Occurs 24-36 hours after the injection which will thien
concerning the use of synthetic analogues (e.g.
 be followed by 30-45 days of pseudopregnancy. Care
cloprostenol) alone in this spccies.
has to be taken to ensure that the queen is not mated in
 Prolactin inhibitors have been demonstrated.to be
the fcw days following injection, otherwise pregnancy
 potent abortion induction agents in cats as in dogs.
may result.
Recently, we have demonslrated thal after day 25 of
Nymphormania is a complex syndrome in queens
pregnancy, abortion can be induced in cats using
and can be related to frequent overlapping follicular
three injections of cloprostenol (5 μg/kg) at 48-hour
waves (often observed in Siamesc cats), thc presencc
intervals associatcd with every day oral treatment
 of ovarian cysts (old animals or after oestrus induction
and superovulation), or may be of central (pituitary or
Cabergoline treared cats
hypothalamic)origin. Ovulation induction using GnRH
30dny9p-matng
or hCG can tempurarily block thc symptoms when
they are related to ovarian activity. Central origin
nymphomania is a rarc condition sometimes observed
in sterilized animals (particularly Siamese cats) con-
hdd
tinuously showing oestrous behaviour. The exact cause
of this condition is still unknown; however, it may
s0metimes be associated with pituitary tumours. Whcn
central in origin, the administration of progestogens
 may be uscfui.
Abortion induction
Veterinary surgeons are less frequently requested to
inlucc abortion in cats than in dogs. However, when
Days of pregnancy
it is necessary to inducc an abortion, this can bc
achieved in the same way as for the bitch. Oestrogens
Figure I7.1: Progesterone evotution in queens during anti
protactin and prostaglandin ahorion induction reatment.
can be used bcfore implantation (before day 10 after
Abortion is ohserved when progesterone plasma
mating). Oestrogen treatment induces congestion,
concentration decreases below I ng/mi (3 mmol/l).
222 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Pregnancy naintenance
As in dogs, there is no clear evidence that habitual
abortion due to hypolutcism exists in cats. Howcver, at
around day 30-45 of pregnancy some significant
changes occur in the function of the corpora lutea in
cats. The pregnant corpus lutcum differs from the
pseudopregnant one, and it is possible that poor luteal
support and transition may lead to an abortion. Oral
progestogen (megoestrol acetate,2.5 mg/catevery other
day up to day 5S of pregnancy) may bc used as a
 precaution, but should be restricted to cases in which
true Iuteal insufficiency has clearly been diagnosed
(see below). Progesterone during pregnancy may
cause developmental defects (feminization of male
kittens, cryptorchidsim) and parturition may be
.10
inpaircd (delayed parturition). Thc minimum progcs-
terone requirement in cats during pregnancy is 3 nmol/
I (1 ng/ml) (less than in dogs). The side-effects of high
 progestogcn administration during pregnancy arc the
same as in dogs.
Uterine inertia
Cascs of primary or secondary ulcrine inertia may res-
pond to administration of oxytocin. A dosage of 0.5 1
IU/kg may be given and repeated a maximum of 3 times
 at 20-30 minute intervals. The cause of thc sccondary
 inertia has to be carefully determined before administer-
ing oxytocin. Cases of obstructive dystocia are a clear
contra-indication, since uterine rupture may result.
Lactation: stimulation or inbibition
 Stimulation of lactation can be ohtained by the arl-
ministration of dopamine antagonists such as
given oncc or twice daily to stimulate lactation after
parturition and particularly aficr Caesarian operalion.
Dopamine antagonists stimulate prolactin release. Milk
Figure 17.2: Sonographic pictures of (a, b) a nornal 38 day
post-mating pregnancy and (c) a uterus with fetal resorption
induced by cabergaline associated with prostaglandin.
with the prolactin inhibitor cabergoline (5 μg/kg once
a day for 8 days). Abortion is observed along with a
 drop of progesterone below the threshold required to
maintain pregnancy in this species (Figure 17.1) . The
main bcncfit of this treatment is that it is not associ-
ated with any side-effects. If abortion is induced
sion of fetuses. If administcrcd latcr, expulsion of
—霍——Finst signd lact
cn inibiGor
Tolc!nhihilinn nf laetalir
perfectly normal kittens may occur (Figure 17.2).
Figare 17.3: Efects of an anti-prolactinic drug on post-partum
Table 17.3 summarizes the different abortion induc-
lactation andmammnarygland hyperplasia.Queens were freated
tion treatment available for cats.
from dery 10 post-kitening.
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Cat  
223
Protocols
Dosages
Results
Comments
Natural prostaglandin
 250-500 μg/kg 1-3 times a
Good. Ideally this
Some side-effects can be
alone: dinoprost
day for 5-7 days from
treatment has to be used
observed: prostration.
(Lutalyse, Dinolityc)
pregnancy diagnosis
before fetal ossification to
emesis, salivation,
ensure resorption. Not to
 muscle jerking
be used after day 50
Synthetic
2.5-5 μg/kg 1-3 times a
Good. Ideally this
 Tewer side-effects are
 prostaglandin alone
day for 5-7 days from
treatment has to be used
observed than with
 pregnancy diagnosis
before fetal ossification to
natural PGF20c:
cnsure resorption. Not to
prostration, cmesis of
be used after day 50
short duration
 Oestrogen: oestradiol
2-3 injections of 0.01-0.1
Good but no longer
 Oestradiol benzoate is
benzoalc or
mg/kg every 2 days from
advisable
less toxic than cypionate.
cypionate
 mating. Not later than
Side-effects are less
day 10
frequent.in cats thani in
dogs. Have to bc given
before a pregnancy
diagnosis is made
Prulactin inhibitors:
Cabergoline 5 μg/kg per
 Contradictory results exist
Cabergoline scems to be
cabergoline,
day for 7 days from
concerning the efficacy of
 more efficacious than the
bromocriptine,
pregnancy diagnosis.
this treatment before day
two other agents due to
melergoline
Bromocriptinc 25-50
40. Seem to bc efficacious
longer duralion of action
μg/kg 3 times/day for
after that period but
and a more important
I week
unfortunately abortion is
inhibitory effect on
thcn associated with fetal
prolactin secretion.
expulsion. Nut to be given 
Side-effects are weak or
after day 55 because will
 absent with cabergoline
 thcn induce premat.urc
compared to
parturition instead of
bromocriptine
abortion
Combined
5 μg/kg per day for 7-10
Good. When thc
No side-effects are-
cabergoline
days orally + 2.5 μg/kg s.c.
treatment is applied
observed. This is the.
 (prolactin inhibitor)
 at days 1, 3 and 5. This
before fetal ossification
author's recommended
and cloprostenol
trcatment can bc
(day 40-45) abortion
trcatmcnt: efficacious;
(synthelic
administered as soon as
occurs by resorption
early in pregnancy,
prostaglandin)
 pregnancy diagnosis can be
no side-effects
performed: approximately
day 25
Tahle I7.3: Described treatiments to induce aborrion in cats.
letdown but not production can be stimulated by the
particularly since specific therapies devoid of any
use of oxytocin post-partum.
side-effects cxist.
 Lactation can be inhibited by inhibiting prolactin
 release directly at the level of the pituitary by giving
Metritis/pyometra, placental retention
dopamine agonists (bromocriptine 10-25 μg/kg or
Natural prostaglandins such as dinoprost imay he used
cabergoline 5 μg/kg for 5 days; Figure 17.3) or indi-
lo induce stimulation of the uterine smooth muscle
rectly by modifying dopamine release at the
and to cause luteolysis in order to treat cases of
hypothalamic lcvcl by giving scrotonin antagonists
pyonetra. The mechanism of action is to inducc a
(metergoline). Progestogens, androgens and andro-
functional arrest and a luteolysis of the corpora lutea,
gen-oestrogen combinations will also create a nega-
promote the opening of the cervix, and induce uterine
tivc feedback and rcduce prolactin secrelion and
contractions. Natural prostaglandins may also bc uscd
lactation. However, they are non-specific agents, asso-
jn cascs of metritis and retained placenta, although
ciated with effects not desired in the lactation inhibi-
here the action is solely uterine contraction. Doses of
tion. They are therefore no longer recoimmended,
20-50 μg/kg administercd 3-5 times a day or
 224  Mamual of Simall Animal Reproduction and Nconatology
200-500 μg/kg once or twicc a day for 5-7 days
 associated with medical treatment.
associated with the appropriate antibiotic, and fluid
therapy is the most successful treatment. Fertility
Cryptorchidism
appears to rcmain normal affcr rcsolution of thc
Noreal treatmcnt exists to stimulate testicular descent in
condition. However, iffertility is not required, ovario-
cats. Furthermore, such treatments are probably
hysterectomy is the preferred option. No significant
unethical because of the probable inhcrited nature of the
data are availablc concerning thc usc of progesteronc
condition. In othcr species, successful treatment has,
antagonists such as RU486 or RU46534 in cats.
however, been claimed using GnRH, LH or testoster-
Placental retention can also be treated using the
one, although the results must be considered equivocal.
adininistration of oxytocin if diagnosed early after
Testosteronc cannot be recommcnrlcd due to its gcncral
kittening. as utcrinc sensitivity 1o oxytocin rapidly
androgenic and anabolic effects. Indeed, testosterone
decreases after parturition.
 administration in prepubertal animals will not only have
an irreversiblc negative feedback on the hypothalarmus
Post-partum haemorrhage
but will also have anabolic effects and block the
Post-parlum hacmorrhage can be treated using oxy-
 development of the growth plates. Bilateral castration
tocin and/or ergot derivatives such as ergometrine
should be the treatment of choice.
which induce uterine contraction and vasoconslric-
tion. Howevcr, the cause of thc uterine haermorrhage
Stimulation of libido
has to be clearly ascertained, as such treatment is
Poor libido related to gonadal abnormalities, imma-
contraindicated in uterine rupture.
 turity or bchavioural inhibition can be trcatcd using
repeated low dloses of testosterone, GnRlI or exo-
genous gonadotrophins (hCG). Itis, however, impor-
THE TOM
tant to note that there is no evidence that poor libido
is rclated to low plasina levels of tcstosterone. For
Table 17.4 gives conditions, dosage and effects of
each of the above therapies, no real dose-titration
studies have been performed. As androgens may have
ncgati ve effects on spcrrnatozoal morphology or con-
Urine spraying, aggression and excitability,
tinuous negative feedback effects on the
 overt sexual behaviour
hypothalamus, the use of GnRH and hCG is prefelred
Urination in tomcats is used as a communication tool
by the author. Doses of 1-2 μg of GnRH or 50-100 IU
to mark a territory. This behaviour is observed equally
of hCG (Chorulon), or 0. 1-1 mg methyl testosterone
in neufered and entire male cats. Whilst accepted as
or testosterone propionate every 48. 72 hours on
normal in feral cats, in the house cat urination is
three to five occasions are suggcstcd. As reproductivc
considered unplcasant by Ihe owncr. It may be relatcd
 behaviour in cats is essentially an acquired trained
to the presence of other cats or animals, or possibly to
behaviour, often a temporary stimulation of libido is
social, environmental or emotional changes. In entire
sufficient to permanently correct the problem.
 males, castration decreases plasma testosteronc con-
centratians and can diminish or abolish the behaviour
Other conditions in tomcats
and reduce the odour of the urine. The specific male
odour is due both to testosterone and to rctrograde
Epilepsy
ejaculation which is normal in the cat. Both are
 As describedin dogs, castration and progestogen therapy
 prevented by castration.
may be useful as main or adjunct therapy to control some
Administration of progestogens can be useful in
types of epileptic behaviour. Thc progestogen action is
dccreasing this bchaviour. Medroxyprogesteronc
related to its ccntral sedative effects.
acetate, megoestrol acetate, injectable delmadinone
acetate, MAP (100 mg s.c.)or proligestone, act by their
Contraception
central hormonal fccrdback and ccntral nervous relax-
 Drugs of the GnRH family, both analogues or antago-
ing effects, and may be effective. Repeated high
nists, can be used to block FSH and LH production.
dosages need to be given to gain significant effects;
The antagonists directly block the receptor, whilst
however, there may be decreasing effcctivcncss
agonists produce down-rcgulation aftcr an initial stimu-
following repeated administration. Prolonged admin-
lation. Both agents therefore reduce spermatogenesis
istration of such agents cannot be recommended
 and androgen production. Significant results have been
because of their metabolic and hormonal sidc-cffects
 obtaincd in other spccies but have not yet been ob-
at the high dosages used (diabetus mellitus,
tained or clearly demonstrated in cats. Furthermore,
hypoadrenocorticism, increase in body weight). Seda-
such drugs are presently unavailablc for clinical usc.
tive or psychoactive drugs (diazepaim, carbamazepine)
Immunostcrilization is another way to control
can bc used to control these bchavioural changcs
reproduction; however, to date, results have been
temporarily. Behavioural training should always be
disappointing, mainly due to the need for an adjuvant
Pharmacological Control of Reproduction in the Cat
225
Drug
Indication
Dosage
Side-effects
Trade name/
Comments
Testosterone
Infertility:
0.1-1mg cvcry 48-
High doses can
Androjcct
 phenylpropionate
reduced libido
72 h, 3-5 injections 
affect fertility
i.m. or s.c.
 Early growth plates
closure
Testosterone
 Infertility,
0.1-1 mg every 48-
High doses can
Durateston
esters
reduced libido
72 h, 3-5 injections
 affect fertility
i.m, or s.c.
 Early growth plates
closure
hCG, chonionic
Infertility,
 50-100 IU repeated
None
Chorulon
gonadotrophin
rcduced libido,
if necessary
 testis descent,
hormonal testing
Medroxy-
 Overt malc
 25-100 mg to be
Mammary
 Depo-promonc
progesterone
behaviour,
 repeated every 2
 development and
Depo-Provera
acetate
epilepsy,
weeks, then every
benign tumours after
contraception at
month, then cvery 2
long-term usc
Consistency of the
high doses,
months at half the
Hypoadrenocorticism
contraceptive effects
psychogenic
initial dose. s.c.
Diabetus mellitus
in male cats is poor
alopecia
injection,
Growth of whitc hair
For contraception
 or disappearance of
use more than 50 mg
the hair at injection
with repeated dosing
side
Urine spraying :100
mg s.c.
 Megocstrul
Overl malc
2.5 mg/cat every day
Mammary
Ovarid
acetate
behaviour
for 2 weeks, then to
 development and
Megecal
 Skin diseases
effect
benign tumours after
Ovaban
(psychogenic
 Doses for
long-term use
alopecia,
dermalological
Hypoadrenocorticism
eosinophilic
 problems are
Diabetus mellitus
granuloma
empirical
complex)
Tabte 17.4: Maint treatment, indications and dosage for reproductive problens in tomcats.
to stimulate immunity. Morc rccently, a ncw approach
Davidson A, Feldman E and Nelson R (1992) Treatment of feline
to cat neutralization (destruction of spermatogenesis
nai of the American Vererinary Medicat Association200,825-
832
sterilization (definitc functional arrest and fibrosis
Donoghue A, Johnston L, Munson L, Brown J anel wildt D (1992)
Inluence of gonadotropin treaiment interval on follicular
of the testes) using sclerosing agents has been
maturiation, in viuo fertilisation, circulating steroidconcenrations
 proposed, but with unsatisfactory results. Castration
and subsequent luteal function in the domestic cat. Biology of
remains the melhod of choice in animals not requircd
Reproduction 46, 972-980
Dresser B, Sehlhorst C, Wachs K, Keller G, Gelwicks F and Turner I
for breeding.
(1987) Homonal stimulation andembryo collection in the domes-
tic cat. Theriogenology 28, 915-927
Feldman E und Neison R (1y89) Diagnosis and treutmcnt alternalives
for pyomeua in dogs and cats, In: Current Veterinary Therapy X,
REFERENCESANDFURTHERREADING
ed. R Kirk, WB Saunlers, Philudelphia
Guodrowe KL, Howard J and Wildl D (1988) Comparison of enbryo
lecovery, embryo quality, oestradiol, and progesterone profiles in
Allen D, Pringle J, Smith D and Conlon P (1993) Handbook of
domestic cats at natrral or induced nestrus. Journal of Reproduc-
Veterinary Drugs, p. G78. Lippineott, Philadelphia
tion andFertlity 82,553-561
Chuslain C, Grahum C and Nichois C (1981} Adrenncorlical suppres-
sion in cats given megestrol acetaie. American dournal of Veteri-
biology ofthe domestuic cat with specialreference to endocrinology.
nary Reseurch 42,2029-2035
sperm function and in-vitro fcrtilisation. Journai of Reproducrion
Cline L, Jennings L and Sojka N (1980) Brexding laboratory cats
and Fertiity 39, 73-90
during arificially induccd cstrus. Laboratory Anima! Science.
1003-1005
Compendium on Confinaing Eeducation for the Pruetising Veteri-
 226  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
narian 7, 132-144
Lein D andConcannon P(1983) Infertility andinfertility treatments and
Johnston S (i989) Premuture gonadal failure in female dogs and cats.
Jornal of Reproduction and Ferriliry 39, 65-72
LeinD (199)MalerepductionInTheCaiDiseemdCl
Schwartz S (1994) Carbamazepine in the control of aggressivebehuv-
Managemeyr,ed. RSherding, p. 1475. Churchill Livingslone, New
iourincats.JouatoftheAmericanAnimatHospitatAssocition
York
30, 515-51y
 Numbers in italics represent figures
 Ahdominal palpation, 115
Artificial vagina, 107
Ahortion
Asthcnozoospermia, 92
bitch,118-19
Augmcntin, use in thc young unimal, 164
habitual, 119
Azoospurmia, 91-2
queen, 120,221-2
habitual, 121
Bacillus spp. genital infection, 80
Acute phase proleins, in pregnancy. 116
 Bacterial infections in neonates, 164-5
Agalactia, 54, 140-1
Bacteroides spp, in neonates, 164
Aggression, treatment of, 224
Balanoposthitis. 75-6, 81,190
 Alkaline phosphatase, in semen, 88
Barbiturates, use in Caesareananaesthesia, 138
 Amitraz, use in the young animal 164
Benign mammary gland hyperplasia, 59
 Renzodiazepines, as premedication, 137
control of reproduction, 207-9
Hitch
adverse effects, 208
cycling abnormalities, 36-7
 clinical use, 208-9
cysie ovarian disease, 37, 38
effccts on spermatogcncsis, 67-8
juvenile prolonged pra-oestrus, 37
see also Testostcronc
Ovarian remnani syndrome,38,39
Anoestrus, 21-2
ovarian lumour, 39
bilch, 8. 35-6
short pro-oestrus, 36, 37
idiopathic prolonged, 20
'silent heat', 36
queen, 12
'split heat/oestrus', 36
 lactational/post-lactational, 20
infertility see Infertlity, females
 prolonged, 219
mating, 25, 95,97-8
short, 22-3
 parturition see Parurition
Anorchism, 194
physiology and endocrinology of, 1-9
Anovulation, 36-7
anocstrus, 8
Anavulvar clcft, 180
mctocstrus, 68
 cndocrine prcgnancy tests, 8
 Anticholincrgics, as premcdication, 137
interferencc with progestcronc sccretion, 7
Anti-ocstrogcns, symthctic, conirol of rcproduction in dogs,
parturition, 7-8
216-17
oestrus, 1, 2-4
Anti-spcrm/ova antibulies, 27
fertilization, 4
 Artificial insemination
ovarian steroids and behaviour, 2-3
cats, 109-11
ovulation, 3
 chilled extended serum, 109 
pro-oestms, 1-2
cryopreservation of serum, 109
timing of fertile period, 46
with fresh semen, 110
 hormone measurements, 6
with frozen semen, 110-11
vaginal cytology, 45
induction of ovulation, 110
vaginal endoscopy, 5
method, 110-11
prcgnancy Fee Pregnancy
storage of semen, 109
rcproduetive endocrinology, 197
use of, 109-10
dos
see clso Non-pregnant fenales, conditions of
with fresh semcn, 101
Bordetella bronchiseptica, in neonates, 165
with frozcn serum, 101
Brucella abortus, orchitis and epididymitis, 73
processing and freezing of scmen, 100-1
Brucella canis, 17,33
cooling and equilibration, 100
aetiology,33
freezing regimens, 101
clinical signs, 33
preparaiion and addition of exlender. 100
control, 33
semen packaging, 100-1
description, 33
thawing, 101
diagnosis, 33
rechniques, 102-3
orchitis and epididymitis, 73
timing of, 101-2
in pregnancy, 119
 see ziso Mating; Semen
transmission, 33
 228 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
trcatncnt, 33
gonadotroplins. 209-11
Brucella mellitensis, orchitis and cpididymitis, 73
oestrogens, 205-7
Brucella suis, orchitis and epididymitis, 73
oxytocin and ergot preparations, 213--14
 progesterone antagonists, 216
Caesarean operation, 136-9, 178-9
progcstogens, 198-205
care of neonate, 156. 179
prolactin antagonists, 214-16
general anaesthesia, 138-9
prostaglandins, 212-13
indications, 136, 178
synthetic anti-androgens, 217-18
premedication, 137
synthetie vesurogens, 216-17
proccdurc, 178-9
See also Surgery of genital tract
rcgional anacsthesia, 137-8
Corticosteroids, pregnancy termination, 124
Canine aicnovirus, in prcgnancy, 119
Cryptorchidism. 72-3, 80, 224
Canine distemper virus, in prcgnancy, 119
Cryptorchid syndrome, 177-8
Canine hepes vins, prenny,19
Cycling abnormalities
Castration, 175-8
bitch
complications, 176-7
anovulation, 36-7
cryptorchid syndrome, 177-8
cystic ovarian disease, 37, 38
dog, 175-6
 juvenile prolonged pro-oestrus, 37
indications, 175
ovarian rcmnant syndrome, 38, 39
tom, 81-2, 176
ovarian tumour, 39
Chlamydia psitlaci
short pro-0cstrus, 36,37
 in neonates, 161
'silen heat', 36
 in prcgnancy. 121
'split heat/ceslrus', 36
Clindamycin, usc in the young animal, 164
and infertility, 21-9
Clitoral lhypertrophy, 180
prolonged pro-oestrus/0estrus, 23-4
Clostridim pp, in eonates, 164
short pro-oestrus followed by anoestrus. 21-2
Coccidia, in neonates, 165
shortened inter-pro-oestrous interval, 22-3
Conception failure
queen, 49-50)
bitch, 118
 chromosomal ahnormalities, 49 
queen,120
cystic ovaries, 49
Congenital defects, 143-9
intersexuality, 49
inheritance patterms, I43-5
 Dvarian reimnant syndrome, 49-50
chromosomal aberrations, 144-5
puberty, 49
dominant traits, 143-4
season, 49
ineomplete penctrancc, 144
Cystic ovarian disease, 37, 38, 49
110 dominance or incomplctc dominance, 144
polygenic inhteritancc, 144
Demodex, in neonates, 163
recessive traits, 143
Diahetesmelius,n prenancy,1120
sex-limited traits, 144
Doxycycline, use in the young animal, 164
sex-linked traits, 144
Drugs
threshold traits, 144
 causing infertility. 20
 inherited diseases, 143
use in cats, 220, 221,223, 225
non-genetic causes, 145
use in dogs, 198-218
types of, 145-9
Dystocia, 130-6
 Control of reproduction and reproductive dlisorders 
clinical assssmcnt, 131
cats, 219-26
definition, 130
qucen, 219, 221-4
dliagnosis, 131
abortion induction, 221, 222
fetal causes, 1346
lactation stimulation/inhibition,222-3
backwardl flexion of front lcgs, 134
mctritis/pyomctra and placental retention, 223-4
breech presenlalion, 134
oestrus incduetion, infcrtility and superovulation, 219
lateral/downward deviation of hcad, 134
oestrus prcvention and/or suppression, 219, 221
management of fetal malpresentations, I35, 130
 ovulation induction, nymphomania and
oversized fetuses, 134
ovarian cysls, 221
posterior presentation, 134
 post-partuin haeinorrhage, 224
tansverse or bi-cornual presentalion, 1345
pregnancy maintenance, 222
two fetuses presenting simultaneously, 135
uterine inertia, 222
frcqucncy 130-1
tom, 224-5
matcrmal causes, 131-4
contraception, 224
obstruction of birth canal, 133, 134
cryptorchidism, 224
utcrinc inertia, 132-3
epilepsy, 224
stimulation of libido, 224
Early embryonic loss, 26
Eclopurasites, in nconatcs, 163-4
sexual behaviour, 224
Ejacutation, 96
dogs, 197-218
failure, 84
rcproductivc cndocrinology, 197, 198, 199
retrograde, in cals, 93
diugs
See also Electroejaculation
androgens,207-9
Electroejaculation in cats, 93, 107-8
gonadotroplin releasing lormone
Emhryonic resorption, 118, 120
 agonists/antagonists, 211-12
Emhryotoxic agents, 124
Index 229
Endocrine pregnancy tests, 8
serum levels, 89
Endometritis, 26 7
Endoparasites, in neonates, 164
Haenoburionella felis, in neonates, 165
Enterobacter spp., in neonates、 164
 Hermaphroditism 
Enterococcus spp, in neonates164
cats, 20, 80
Epididymitis,73,194
dogs, 43, 44-5
Ergot preparations, 220
Herpes virus, 27
 control of reproduction, 213-14
 Hluman chorionic ganadotrophin, 225
Escherichia spp., in nconatcs, 164
Hydrocoele, 73
Escherichia colt
Hymen, pcrsistence of, 180, 181
genital infeclion, 80
Hypocalcacmia
 orchitis and epididymilis, 73
and purturition, 132-3
prostatitis, 192
 in pregnuncy, 120, 121
pyometra, 184
Hypoglycuemia, in pregnancy, 120
Hypoluteodisn. 26
 Fading kittens, 166
Hypospadias, 71. 81, 187
Fading puppies, 150-2, 166
intersexes, 195
causes, 151-2
IHypothalamic-pituitary-testicular axis, 63, 64
clinical and post-mortem findings, 151
definition, 150
Infectious diseases of neonates see Neonatc
effcct of managcment systems, 151
Infertility
invcstigation, 151
females,17-33,219
normal behaviour/appcarancc of neonate, 150-1
abnormal cycling, 21-9
treulment,152
appropriatc inscmination time forbitches, 25, 27,289
yullerabiliy of neont, 50
failure to achieve prcgnancy with nornal oestrus
False pregnancy see Pseudopregnancy
cycles, 24, 25-7
Feline herpes virus, in pregnancy, 121
prolonged pro-oestus/oestus, 23-4
Feline infectious peritonitis virus, in pregnancy, 121
shortened inter-pro-oestrus interval, 22, 23
Feline leukaemia virus, in pregnancy, 120-1
short pro-oestrus followed by anoestnis, 21-2
Feline panleucopenia virus, in pregnancy, 121
Brucella canis, 33
 Female cat see Queen
case management, 17-21
Female dog see Bitch
 clinical approach, 20, 21
Female intersexes, 20, 44, 145
failure to cbserve oestrus, 18-20
Fenbendazole, use in the young animal, 164
history, 17
Fcrtile period
initiat examination, 17, 18
bitch, 3
diagnostic aids, 29-33
tining of, 46
oviducts and ovaries, 32-3
hormone measurenents, 6
hysterosalpingogruphy.32
vaginal cytology, 45
laparoscopy and laparotomy, 32-3
vaginal endoscopy, 5
plasina hormone concentrations, 32
queen, 12-13
ultrasonography, 32
Fertilization
uterus, 31--2
hitch, 4
endometrial cytology and uterine
queen, 13
microbiology, 3}-2
 Fetal hcart bcat, 116
hysterography, 32
Fluid thcrapy in the young animal, 162, 163
hysteroscopy, 32
 Follicle stimulating hormonc
ultrasonography, 32
bitch, 2
vestibulc, vagina and cervix, 29-31
dog, pharmacological usc, 220
vaginal cytology, 29, 30
queen
vaginal discharges, 29
oestrous cycle, 13
vaginal mierobiology, 30
reproductive cycle, 14
vaginal radiology, 31
Follicular cysts, 22. 23-4, 38
vaginoscopy. 29
Fusobacterium spp, in neonates. 164
male cats, 92-3
failure of mating,. 93
Galactostasis, 54, 141
loss of libido, 93
Giardia spp, in neonates, 165
retrograde ejaculation, 93
GnRH analogues
semen collcction/evaluation, 92-3
control of reproduction, 211-12
male dogs, 25, 83-92
effccts on spcrimatogenesis, 68
inability to achieve normal fcrtilizaion, 846
pregnancy tcrmination, 124
abnornal seminal plasmu, 85-6
GnRH antugonists
absence/reduction in number/qualily of
conlrol of reproduction, 211-12
spermatozoa, 84-5
cffecls on spermatogenesis, 68
failure of/incomplele ejaculation, 84
prcguancy termination, 124
 inability to achieve normal mating, 83-4
Gonadotrophins
lack of libido, 834
coutrol of reproduction, 209-11, 220
physical defects, 84
adverse effects, 210
investigation, 86-9
clinical nse, 210-11
 clinical examination, 87
effects on spermatogenesis, 68
endocrinological evaluation, 88 9
 230 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
history, 86-7
cffects of cxogcnous agents on, 67-8
radiography, 89
cpididymal ranspor, maturalion and storage, 66, 67
semen collcction, 87-8
spermatocytogenesis, 66
testicular biopsy, 89
spermiation. 66
ultrasonography. 89
spermiogenesis, 66
therapy and munagement, 89-92
spermatozoa.67
normal senen amalysis, 90, 91
sperm prodnction, 67
pour libido and difficulty in mating, 89, 90
surgery for see Surgery of genital tract
poor sperm and semen quality, 90,912
Mammary gland, 53-9
Inseninatiou of bitches. appropriate time for, 19, 27, 28-9,
anatomy, 53
89-90, 92, 95, 97-8
non-lactating, 54-9
Interoestus in queens, 12
post-partum, 140-1
Intersexes, 20,43-5, 49,1956
acute mastitis, 141
female, 20, 44, 145
agalactia, 140-1
hypospadias, 195
galactostasis, 141
os clitoris and os pcnis, 195-6
tumours of
 persistcnt penilc frenulum, 196
bitclh, 548
prcscnting as fcmales. 44
 adjunctive treatment, 58
prcscnting us mules, 445, 71-2
clinical presentation, 55
pyomelra, 196
diagnosis, 55, 56
leslicular tumours, 196
pathology,55
urinary incontinence,196
prognosis, 56, 57
Intromission, failure to achieve, 84
risk factors and aetiology, 55
Ivermectin, use in the young animal, 164
staging,56, 57
(rcaumenl, 56, 57
 Keramine, use in Caesarean anaesthesia, 138
qucen,58-9
Kittens see Neonates
benign marmmary gland hyperplasia, 59
Klehsiella spp.
clinical presentation and diagnosis, 58
in neonates, 164
incidence and aetiology. 58
prostatitis, 192
treatment, 58 9
pyomctra, 184
See aiso Lactation
Kiebsiela oxytoca, genital infection, 80
Mastitis, 54, 141
Mating
Lactation, 54
abnormal, 97-8
agalactia, 54
bitch, 95
galactostasis, 54
incorrect timing. 25
mastitis, 54
problcms of, 97-8
(t6 'Koueubauclopnasd pue
cats, 105-9
stimulation/inhibition, 222-3
managcmcnt of, 106
see aiso Mammary gland
normal semen quality, 100
Lihido, lack of
vulalion,106
cat, 93
queen, 12-13, 105, 105, 106
dog, 83-4, 89, 90, 98
semen collection, 106, 107
Luteal cysts, 38
artificial vagina, 107
Luleinizing hormone
electroejaculation, 107-8
pliarmacological use in dog, 220
frotm epididymis, 108--9
plasma concentration, 2, 65
vaginal lavage after mating, 108
and testosterone secretion, 64
tom, 105-6
failure of, 93
Male intersexes, 44 -5
See aiso Queen, physiology and endocrinology of
See also Intersexes
dogs, 95-103
Males
male, 95-6
conditions of, 71-82
failure to achicvc, 83-4, 89, 90
cats, 79-82
problcins of, 98
acquired conditions af genitalia, 80-1
normal, 96-7
congcnital and genctic contditions, 79-80
breaking of tie, 97
cndocrinological and behavigural conditions, 8l-2
ejaculation and rotation, 96, 97
dogs, 71-9
erection and swelling of bulb, 96
aequircd condilions of genitalia, 73-4, 75
mounting.96
congenial and genetic conditions. 71-3
thrusting and intromission, 96
endocrine prostatic conditions, 79
tie. 97
penile and preputial conditions, 75-6, 77
psychology of, 95
prostatic disease, 77, 78-9
semen coflection, 98-9
infertility see Infertility
semen cryopreservation, 100
physiology and endocrinology, G1-9
semen examination, 99-100
anatomy of male reproductive system, 61, 62
semcn prcscrvation, 100
 physiology of male reproductive system, 62-5
See aiso Artificial inseminalion; Bitch, physiology und
hormonal control, 63, 64-5
cndocrinology of
hormone concentrations, 65
Medroxyprogesterone acelale, use in cas, 225
spermatogenesis, 65-6
Megocstrol acelale, use in cats, 225
lndex 231
Melatonin, 220
ovarian tumour, 39
reproductive cycle, 15
short pro-oestrus, 36, 37
Metoestrus, 6-8, 35. 39-40
'silcnt heal', 36
endocrine pregnancy tests. 8
"split leat/oesrus', 36
interference with progesterone secretion, 7
luleal phase, 39-40, 41
parturition. 7-8
oestrus cycle, 35-6
Metritis, 140, 185, 223,224
uterus, 46-9
 Metronidazale, use in the young animal, 164
pyonetra,46,47,48-9
Monorchism, 194
uterine tumours, 49
Mouning, 96
vagina and vulva, 41-6
failure to achicvc, 84
acquircd conditions, 45
Mycoplasna canis, balanoposthitis, 75
acquired fibrosis, 46
congenital defccts, 42-3
Narcotic agonists, use in Cacsarean anaesthesia, 138-9
intcrsexes, 20,43,445,145
Neunates.143-52
See aiso Intersexcs
cure anc management, 1547
vaginal hyperplasia, 45, 46
Caesarean operation, 156
vaginitis, 41, 42
 See also Caesarean operation
vestibulo-vaginal strictures, 43
orphaned neonates, 156-7
vulval constrictions, 43
congenital defects, 143-9
queen, 49-50
 inheritance patferns, 143-5
cycling abnormalities, 49-50
inhcrited diseases, 143
anoestrus, 49
non-gcnctic causes, 145
cystic ovaries, 49
lypcs of, 145-9
ovarian remnant syndrome, 49-50
evaluaion of, 161-2
ovarian tumours, 50
case history, 161
pscudopregnancy, 50
 clinical examination, 161-2
pyomctra, 50
fading puppies, 150-2, 166
ulerine tumours, 50
causes,151--2
See dso Infertlity Surgery of genital tact
 clinical and post-inortenm findings, 151
 Nutrition, and inhibition of ovariart cyelicity, 19
definition, 150
investigation, 151
Oestradiol, plasma concentrations: 2, 32
 management systems, 151
Oestrogens, 220
normal hehaviour/appearance of neonate, 1501
 and behaviour in the bitch, 2-3
trcatmcnt, 152
control of reproduction, 205-7
vulnerability of nconate, 150
adverse cffects, 206
infeclious diseuses of, 159-66
clinical usc, 206-7
 bacterial infections, 164-5
cffects on spermatogcnesis, 68
ectoparasiles, 163-4
cxogenous, 24
endoparasites, 164
prcvention of implantation, 122-3, 1245
investigation, 162
quccn
treatment, 162-3
adrcnal, 24
fluid therapy, 162, 163
reproductive cycle, 13-14
viral infections, 165-6
Oestrous cycle
see also Fading kittens; Fading puppies
bitel, 1, 35-6
 physiological considerations, 159-61
queen, 12, 13
 cardiovascular function, 161 
Oestrus
glucorcgulation, 159
bitch,2-4, 3.5
hacmatology and biochemisury, 159
fertilization, 4
hcpatic and rcnal function, 159-60
Ovarian steraids and behaviour, 2-3
immunc function, 160
ovulation, 3
neurological developmenl, 161
failurc to observc, 18-20
passive immunity, 161
prevention see Control of rcproduction und reproductivc
rectal temperature and thermoregulation, 159
disorders
vaccination, 167-9
prolonged, 23-4
killed vaccines, 168
queen,12,105
modified live vaccines, 167-8
induction,219
post-vaccination antibody titres, 169
prevention and/or suppression, 219, 220
 pre-vaccination testing for FeLV, 169
prolonged, 24
vaccination schedules, 168 
 supprcssion see Control of reproduction and reproductive
vaccinc choicc, 168-9
dlisordcrs
Neospora spp,in nenatc 5
Oligoz0ospermia, 912
Neuromusculur blockers, in Caesarcan anaesthesia, 139
Oophoris, inune-mcdiated, 19
Non-pregnant females, conditions of, 35-51
Orchitis, 73, 80-1, 194
bitch, 3S-49
Os clitoris, 195-6
cyeling abnormalities, 36-9
See aiso Intersex
anovulation, 36-7
Os penis, 195- 6
cystic ovarian disease, 37, 38
deformily of, 190
juvenile prolonged pro-oestrus, 37
fracture of, 76, 190
 ovarian remnant syndrome, 38, 39
Ovarian aplasia, 18
 232  Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
Ovarian cysts, 19, 186-7,221
toxic milk syndrome, 140
 Ovarian hypoplasia, 18
uterine prolapse, 140, 186
Ovarian remnant syndrome, 24, 38, 39
uterine rupture, 140, 186
Ovariectomy, and infertility, 19
signs uf, 128
Ovariohysterectony. 171-5
stages of, 128-30
bitch, 171-2
first stage, 128-9
complications, 173-5
second stage, 129
indications, 171
third stage, 130
queen, 172-3
see atso Pregnancy
Ovary, 32-3, 186-7
Penis
congenital anomalics, 186
balanoposthitis, 75-6, 81, 190
hysterosalpingography, 32
bleeding, 76
laparoscopy and laparotomy, 32-3
rleformity af os penis, 190
plasima hormone concentralions, 32
fracturc of os penis, 76, 190
tumours,187
hypoplasia, 81
bitch, 19, 24, 39
hypospadias, 81, 187
queen.50
persistenl penile frenulun, 71, 81, 187
ultrasonography, 32
phimosis and paraplimosis, 76,81, 188、189
Oviduct, 32-3
preputial foreign bodies, 190
hysterosalpingography, 32
priapism, 190
laparoscopy and laparotomy, 32-3
transmissible venereal tumour, 76, 77
non-patency, 26
trauma,73,80,190
plasma hormone concentrations, 32
tunnours, 190
ultrasonography,32
Persistent penile frenulum, 71, 81, 187
Ovulation
intersexes, 196
bitch, 3
Phenothiazines, as prcmcdication, 137
induced,210,212,213,215
Phimosis, 76, 81, /88, 189
queen, 10G
Ihotopcriod, and inferlility, 19
horinonal control. 13
lhysical training, and inhibition of ovarian cyclicity, 19
induced, 12-13, 110,221
Pituitary insufficiency, 20
problems of,18-20,22,26,367
Post-parlum haemorrhage, 139, 224
 Sec also Cycling ahnormalities
Pregnancy, I13-25
Ovulatory failure, 18-20, 22, 26, 36-7
diagnosis,114-18
Oxytocin,220
abdouminal palpation. 115
control of rcproduction, 213-[4
 absence of oestrus, 115
uterinc inertia,132-3
 See ziso Bitch, physiology and cndocrinology;
Queen, physiology and cndocrinology
Paramcsonephric ducl, segmental aplasia of, 25--G
acute phase proteins, 116
Paraphimosis, 76, 81, 188, 189
 behavioural changcs, 115
Parturition, 127-42
endocrine tcsts, 116
bitch, 7-8
fetal hcart bcat, 116
Caesarean operation, 136-9
physical changcs, 115
completion of, 130
radiography,116
duration of pregnancy, 127
ultrasound exanination, 116, 11718
dystocta, 130-6
disorders of, 118-21
clinical assessment, 131
bitch, 118-20
definition, 130
conception failure, 118
diagnosis, 131
diabetes mellituis, 119-20
fetal causes, 134, 135, 136
embryonic resorption, 118
frequency. 130-1
fetal abortion, 1i8-19
maternal causcs, 131, 132-3,134
 habitual abortion, 119 
early fetal loss, 127
hypocalcaemia, 120, 121
intcrval bctween births, 130
hypoglycaemia, 120
littcr sizc, 127
infecrious agens, 119
perinatal loss, 127
normal physiological changc,118
physiology of、 127-8
quccn, 120-1
post-parturient conditions, 139-41
conception failure, 120
disturbances in maternal hehaviour, 141
einbryonic resorption and fetal abortion, 120
nammary gland disorders, 140-1
habilual abortion, 121
acute mastitis, 141
hypocalcaemia, 121
agalactia,140-1
infectious agents, 120-1
galactostasis, 141
normal physiological changes, 120
See also Lactation; Mammary gland
enlocrinology of, 113-14
 puerperal tetany, 141
bitch, 113-14
See also Hypocalcacmia
See aiso Bitch, physiology and endocrinology
ulerine disorders, 139-40
queen, /14
acute metritis, 140
See also Quecn, physiology and cndocrinology
haemorhage, 139
failure to achievc, 24, 25-7
retained placentas/fetuses, 139
termination
 subinvolution of placental sites, 140, 186
bitch, 123-4
Index 233
queen, 125
Pscudohcrinaphroditism
See aiso Control of reproduction
rats, 80
unwanted mating
See also Hermaphroditism; Inersexes
bitch, 122-3
Psexdomonas spp.
immediately following mating, 122
 balanoposthitis, 75
prevention of implantation, 122-3
in neonates, 164
several days after mating, 122
prostatitis, 192
queen, 124-5
pyometra, 184
 immediately following mating, 124
Pseudomonas αeruginosa, genital infection, 80
 prcvcntion of implantation, 124
Pseutiopregnancy
 scvcral days after maring, 124
bitch, 39-40,41
See aiso Control of reproduction
qucen, 13, 19-20, 50
see atsoParturition
See also Control of reproduction
 Premature ovarian failurc, 19
Pubcrty, 11, 18
 Pre-pubertal vaginilis, 41, 42
delayed, 219
 Priapisn, 190
Puerperal tctany, 141
Progesterone, 220
See also Hypocalcaemia
plasma concentrations
 Puppies see Neonates
hitch, 2, 3, 6, 32
Pyometra, 183-5, 223-4
measurement of, 122
bitch, 26, 46, 47-9
in pregnancy, 113
confirmatory diagnosis, 47
queen, in pregnancy, 714
stump pyometra, 48-9
 and reproductive cycle, 14
treatment, 47, 48
 secretion by corpus luteum, 7
intersexes, 196
l'rogcstcronc antagonists
queen, 50
control of rcproduction, 216
 prcgnancy tcrmination, 123-4
Qucen
Progesteronc synthesis inhibitors, pregnancy lenninalion, 123
cycling abnommalies, 49-50
Progestogens
chromosomal abnormalities, 49
control of reproduction, 198, 199, 201, 203-5
cystic ovaries. 49
adverse effects, 199, 201, 202
intersexuality, 40
clinical use, 203-5
ovarian remnant syndrome, 49-50
effects an spermatogenesis, 68
puberty, 49
 prevention of pregnancy, 125
season,49
Prolactin, 220
infertility see Infertilty, females
reproductive cycle, 14-15
lactationalpost-lactational anoestrus, 20
support of corpus luteum, 7
mating, 12-13, 105, 705, 706
Prolactin antagonists
parturition see Parturition
 control of reproduction, 214-16
physiology and endocrinology of, 11-16
prcgnancy termination, 123, 125
endocrine events during reproductive cycle, 13-15
Pro-oestrus
FSH and LH, 14
bitch, 1,2.35
mclatonin, 15
 juvenile prolonged, 37
oestrogens, 13-14
short,36,37
progesterone, 14
Sec also Infertility, females
prolactin, 1415
frequent, 22
relaxin, 14
prolonged, 23-4
horimonal control of reproduction, 13
queen, 12
mating and induced ovulation, 12. .13
shortened inter-pro-oestrus intcrval, 22, 23
puberty. 11
Propofol,in Caesarean anaesthesia, 138
seasonality and oestrous cycle, 12
Prostaglandins, 220
vaginal cytology, 15
contro] of reproduction, 212-13
 pregnancy see Pregnancy
prcgnancy termination, 123, 125
pseudopregnancy, 19-20
Prostatic discasc, 77-9, 81, 1904
'silent heat' in, 19
benign prostatic hypcrplasia,79, 192
surgery of gcnital tract see Surgcry of genital tract
cysls, 79, 193-4
see aiso Non-pregnant fcmalcs, conditions of
diagnosis,191-2
digestive syunptoms, 78
Radiogruphy
general systemic signs, 78
 infertility investigation, 89
locomotor syumptoms, 78
pregnancy diagnosis. 116
prostatic metaplasia,79,192
Rectovaginal fistula, 179, 180
prostatitis,78-9,1923
Rectovestibular fistula, 179, 180
tumnours, 79, 193
Relaxin, and reproductive cycle.
urinary symptams, 78
bitch, 114
Prostariris,78-9,1923
queen, 14
Proteus spp.
 orchitis and epididynitis, 73
 Saffan, in Caesarean anaestlesia, 138
prostatitis, 192
Sulmonella spp., in neonates, 164
pyomctra, 184
Sarcoptes, in neonates, 163
Proteus mirabilis, genital infection, 80
Seasonalily end oestrous cycle, 12, 18-19
 234 Manual of Small Animal Reproduction and Neonatology
 Seleniun sulphide, 164
Stress
Semen
 and infertility, 25
chilled extended, 109
 and inhibition of ovarian cyclicity, 19
collection
Stump pyomctra, 48-9
in cats, 92-3, 106-7
Surgery of genilal tract, 17196
 artificial vagina,107
Caesarean operation see Caesarean operation
clectroejuculalion, 107-8
castration, 175-8
frum epididymis, 108-9
complications, 176-7
vaginal lavage after mating, 108
s
in dogs, 87. 98-9
dog, 175-6
cryopreservation. 100, 109
indications, 175
evaluation
tom,176
in cats, 92-3, 109
females, 179-87
in dogs, 87-8, 99-100
ovaries, 186-7
 alkaline phosphatase, 88
congcnital anomalics, 186
culture, 88
cysts,186-7
sperm conccntration, 88
tumours, 187
sperm morphology. 88
uterus, 183-6
sperm motility, 87-8
congenital anommies, 183
volume anl pH, 88
metritis, 185
white cell count, 88
prolapse, 186
exuminaion, 99-100
pyometra, 183-5
preparation for artificialinsemination
 subinvolution of placental sites. 186
dogs, 100-1
torsian, 185-6
cooling and equilibration, 100
uterine rupture, 186
freezing regimens, 101
uterine tumonrs, 186
 packaging, 100-1
vulva, clitoris, vestibule and vagina, 179-83
 preparation and addition of extender, 10D
 anovulvar cleft, 180
thawing, 101
clitoral hyperrophy, 180
preservation, 100, 109
pcrsistcnt hymcn, 180, 18f
qualiry, 109
rcctovaginal and rcctovcstibular fistuiac, 179, 180
fee also Artificial inscmination; Malcs, physiology and
trauma, 183
cndocrinology
tumours, 183
Scminal plasma, abnormalities of, 856
vaginal oederma (hyperplasia), 182, 183
 abnormal colour, 85.- 6
vaginal prolapse, 181, 182
high white cell count, 86
vulvar hypoplasia, 182-3
infection, 86
intersex,195-6
 reduced overall volume, 85
hypospadias, 195
 Sexual differentiation, abnormalities of, 20
05 clitoris and os penis, 195-6
sec also Intersexes
persistent penile frenulum, 196
'Silent heat', 36
pyometra, 196
Spermatocytogenesis, 66
testicular tumours, 196
Spermatogenesis, 65-7
urinary incontinence, 196
 effect of exogenous agents on, 67-8
males, 187-95
cpididymal transport, maturation and slorage, 66.67
 penis undl prepuce, 187-90
spcrmatocylogenesis, 66
balanoposthitis, 190
spcrmiation, 66
deformity of os penis, 190
 spermiogenesis, 66
fracture of os penis, 190
Spennalozon,67
hypospadias,187
absence or reduced number, 845
paraphimosis,188.189
concentration, 88
phimosis, 188
norphology, 88
preputial foreign bodies, 190
motility, 87-8
 persistent penile frenulum, 187
production of, 67
 priapism, 190
Spermiation, 66
trauma, 190
Spermiogenesis, 6
tumours, 190
'Split heats', 22, 36
urcthral prolapse, 190
Staphylococcus spp.
prostatc, 190-4
genital infection, 80
bactcrial prostatitis, 192-3
in neonates, 161
 bcnign prostatic hypcrplasia, 192
orchitis and epididymitis, 73
diagnosis, 191-2
prostatitis, 192
paraprostatic and prostatic cysts, 193-4
pyomctra, 184
prostatic abscess, 193
proslalic metaplasia, 192
Streptococcus spp.
tunours, 193
genital infection. 80
testes and epididymides, 194-5
 in neonates, 164
 anorchism and monorchism, 194
 orchitis and epididymitis. 73
 orchitis and epididymitis, 194
prostatitis, 192
testicular trauma, 194
pyometra, 184
tumours, 194-5
Index235
ovariohysterectomy, 171-5
acute metritis, 140
bitch,171-2
haemorrhage, 139
complicatians, 173-5
retained placentas/fetuses, 139
 indications, 171
subinvolution of placental sites, 140, 186
quccn,172-3
toxic milk syndrome, 140
uterinc prolapse, 140
Tamoxifen, prevenion of inplantation, 123
uterinc rupture, 140
Teralozoospermia, 91-2
prolapsc, 186
！
Testicular torsion, 75, 81
pyometra
Testis, 194-5
bitch,26,46,47-9
abnormalities of, 73
confirmatory diagnosis, 47
 anorchism and monorchisn, 194
stump pyometra, 48-9
biopsy. 89
treatment, 47. 48
cryptorchidism, 72-3, 80, 224
queen, 50
hydrocoele, 73
mpture, 186
hypoplasia, 81
torsion, 185-6
orchitis and cpididymitis, 73, 80-1
tumours, 186
torsion, 75, 81
bitch, 26, 49
trauma, 73,80,194
qucen, S0
tumours,74-5,81,194-5
ultrasonography, 32
germ cell, 74
intersexes, 196
Vaccination, 167-9
interstilial or Leydig. 74
killed vaccines, 168
sustentacular or Serloli cell, 74. 75
modified live vaccines, 167-8
 see also Spermatogenesis; Spermatozoa
 post-vaccination antibody titres, 169
Testosterone, 220
pre-vaccination testing for FeLV, 169
1
plasma concentrations, cat, 812
vaccination schedules. 168
praduction, 88-9
vaccine choice, 168-9
secrelion, 64
Vagima, 41-6
See aiso Males, physiology and cndocrinology
artificial, 107
 Testosterone phenylpropionate, 225
congenital dcfects, 42-3
Tic, 97
cytology,29,30,42
Toxascaris teonina, in nconates, 164
birch, 4-5
Toxic milk syndromc, 140
queen, 15
Toxocara spp, in ncanates, 164
discharge, 29, 41-2
Toxoplasna spp., in neonatcs, 165
cndoscopy, bileh, 5
Toxaplas gondi,n pregnany,119, 
forcign body,45
Transimissible venereal tumour, 76, 77
hypcrplasia, 45,46, 182, 183
 Trimethoprin/sulphadiazine, use in young animals, 164
interscxcs,20,43-5,49,1956
prescnting as females, 44
Uitrasonagraphy
presenting as males, 44-5
 infertility investigation, 32, 89
microbiology, 30
ovary, 32
prolapse,181, 782
oviduct, 32
radiology. 31
pregnancy diagnosis, 176, 117-18
transmissible venereal tumour, 45 
uterus, 32
tumours,45,50,183
Ureoplasma, balanoposthitis, 75
ulceration, 45
Urcthra. prolapsc, 190
vaginis, 41,42
Urinc spraying. trcatment of, 224
vestibulo-vaginal strictures, 43
 Utcrinc prolapsc, 140
vulval constrictions, 43
Utcrinc rupturc, 140, 186
Vaginitis, 41, 42
Utcrus,31-2,46-9.183-7
adult, 42
congenital anomalies, 183
pre-pubertal. 41.42
endomerial cytology and uerine microbiology, 312
Vaginoscopy, 29
hysterography.32
Vestibulo-vaginal strictures, 43
hysteroscopy. 32
Viral infeclions in neonates, 165. 6
inertia, 132-3, 222
Vulva
metritis,140,185, 223, 224
constrictions of, 43
post-partum, 139-40
infantile, 182-3
Veterinary
Association
British
BIBLIOTECAGERAL
1081678
Manual of Small Animal
Withby
CEOY
tonen
ma
dtheproblems