3rd Edition
ANESTHESIA
FOR THE PET PRACTITIONER
Banfield
PET HOSPITAL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
ANESTHESA
FORTHEPET PRACTITIONER
3rd Edition
@20l0 Banfield Pet Hospital
ISBN 978-0-9743 262-4-5
All rights reserved. Reproduction in whole or in part without the express writter permission
of Banfield Pet Hospital, is prohibited.
ANESTHESIA
Dedication
FOR THE PET PRACTITIONER
In the summer of 2009, we began the process of revising
CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS
the Second Edition of Anesthesia for the Pet Practitioner, with
Karen Faunt, DVM, MS, DACVIM
the goals of improving the safety of anesthetic procedures 
Vice President
 Medical Quality Advancement
and the quality of pain management for the pets in our care.
We're proud to offer this resource, which includes a wealth
Sharon Grahamn, DVM
Medical Adviso1
of new information, from updated protocols and drug
dosages to new sections on pain assessment, prevention
Ashley Harris, DVM, DABVP
Medical Advisor
and treatment. We've redesigned the algorithms and added
Dr. Faunt
section tabs to ease navigation through the manual.
Robyn Hauser, DVM, DABVP
Medical Advisor
A number of individuals were instrumental throughout the process of creating
Michele King, DVM
this book. I'd like to extend my appreciation to the two anesthesiologists, Nora
Medical Advisor
Matthews, DVM, ACVA, and Robert Meyers, DVM, ACVA, who volunteered to help
Alison Marsh, DVM, JD
us with this edition and whose input was invaluable in this review. Appreciation
Medical Adviso1
also goes to J. Jill Heatley, DVM, MS, DABVP (Avian), and Nigel Caulkett, DVM,
 Deborah Miller, DVM
MVetSc, ACVA, for their review of our section on Anesthetic Considerations for
Medical Advisor
Small Exotic Pets. A special thank you to our medical advisors, who contributed
Thomas Mohn, DVM
their knowledge, experience and editing skills: Sharon Graham, DVM; Ashley
Medical Advisor
Harris, DVM, DABVP; Robyn Hauser, DVM, DABVP; Michele King, DVM; Alison
Rachel Beck, CVT
Marsh, DVM, JD; Deborah Miller, DVM; and Thomas Mohn, DVM. I'd also like
 Implementation Specialist
 Medical Support
to thank Heather Stratton, CVT, team lead of Medical Support, and Rachel
Beck, CVT, Medical Support Implementation Specialist, for their significant
Heather Stratton, CVT
Team Lead, Medical Support
contributions, as well as Amy Walker, PMP, and James Vatert, CPM, MBA, project
managers, for their efforts in coordinating workflow with everyone involved.
Gary Goldstein, DVM, FAVD, DACVD
Associate Medical Director
 University of Minnesota
In addition, I'd like to thank the Publishing Team-Sharon DeBusk, Executive
Veterinary Medical Center
Editor, Nina Silberstein, Medical Writer/Copy Editor, and Eric Jensen, Graphic
C. Lee Tyner, DVM
Designer-for their help in editing and designing this book and making it coherent
 Professor, Director of Special Operations
and user-friendly.
Collge of Veterinary Medicine
 Mississippi State University
I also want to thank David Clark, DVM, DABVP,and his entire team at our teaching
EDITORIAL TEAM
hospital at Western University for trialing these new protocols and providing
 Sharon DeBusk
Executive Editor
feedback for this Third Edition.
Nina Silberstein
Medical Writer/Copy Editor
Finally, I want to acknowledge our medical directors and doctors who serve
on our Peer Review Committee, Formulary Committee and Care Guidelines
Eric Jensen
Graphic Designer
Committee. They provided the real-world experience and knowledge, which
sassanoid mau ino jeul pue suanadxa snoaand oi pauieai am jeul pansu
Laurie O'Keefe
Medical llustrator
would work in our hospitals.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
It is my hope that the information within the pages of this manual will help us all
Amy Walker, PMP
in giving pets the same care we want for ourselves.
Project Manager
James Vatert, CPM, MBA
Project Manager
8000 N.E. Tillamook St.
 Portland, OR 97213
800.838.6738
Karen K. Faunt, DVM, MS
www.banfield.net
 Diplomate ACVIM Small Animal
Vice President, Medical Quality Advancement
Banfield
Banfield Pet Hospital
PET HOSPITAL
Table of Contents
 Section 1: Introduction to Anesthesia
Anesthetic Depth Estination..
70
Autononic Nervous Systenl....
Pulse Oximetry.
70
Fractious Pet Physiology
6
Interventions for Hypoxia.
70
Perfusion...
Electrocardiogran
.71
Interventions for Heart Rate and ECG Abnornalities.
71
I Section 2: Banfield Requirements.
.9
Blood Pressure...
73
General Requirenents for Anesthesia and Definitions.
.9
Interventions for Blood Pressure Abnornalities
74
Tranquilization/Sedation...
10
End Tidal CO
.74
Immobilization
11
 Interventions for Hyper- and Hypocarbia
75
General Anesthesia.
.12
Tenperature.
.76
Perioperative Antibiotics
13
Preventing Heat Loss and Interventions for Hypothernia.
77
Patient Anesthesia Monitoring Forn.
78-79
 Section 3: Pain Management, Drugs 
Anesthesia Monitoring and Ernergency Algorithn..
80
 and Fluid Therapy.
.15
Pain Management.
.15
 Section 8: Recovery
.81
Colorado State University Acute Pain Scales
16-17
Extubation
.81
Anesthesia Task Pain Chart.
. 18-19
Monitoring During Recovery.
.81
Opioids.
20
Fentanyl Constant Rate Infusion (CRI) Recipe .
.21
 Section 9: Protocols
83
Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflanmatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
22
General Anesthesia Considerations for All Protocols.
83
Dental Nerve Blocks
24
Healthy Pet Protocol: Soft Tissue Surgery.
85
Techniques for Local and Regional Anesthesia.
30
Fractious Pet Protocol
86
Techniques for Epidural Analgesia.
32
Feline Declaw Protocol.
89
Prenedications
34
Abdoninal Protocol.
.91
Induction Agents.
37
Cardiac Protocol
6
Fluid Therapy...
39
Hepatic Protocol.
95
Stable Diabetic Protocol.
96
I Section 4: Equipment.
43
Pulnonary Protocol.
97
Intravenous (IV) catheters.
43
Obesity Protocol.
99
Laryngoscopes..
43
Renal Protocol.
100
Endotracheal Tube Selection
43
Post-Renal Protocol..
101
Breathing Circuit Guidelines.
44
Orthopedic Protocol
102
Non-Rebreathing Circuit.
44
Ear Surgery Protocol.
103
Care and Cleaning of Circuits
45
CNS & Eye/Globe Protocol.
105
Anesthetic Rebreathing Bags.
45
Energency Surgery Protocol.
106
Oxygen Cylinders.
45
Cesarean Protocol
108
Soda Line Canister
46
Ped iatric Protocol .
110
Evacuation Systen..
47
Anesthesia Protocols Sunnary Chart..
.112-117
Regulator.
48
Manoneter..
49
 Section 10: CPR.
119
Oxygen Flush Valve.
49
Special Considerations for CPR Protocol.
119
Safety Pressure Relief Valve.
49
Cardiopulnonary Arrest Algorithn .
120-121
Vaporizer and Anesthesia Machine Service
49
Anesthesia Systen Flow (Chart..
50
 Section 11: Anesthetic Considerations for
Pop-ofValve Functional Settings
51
Small Exotic Patients.
123
Troubleshooting
52-53
Introduction.
123
Special Considerations for Exotic Patient Anesthesia.
123
 Section 5: Preanesthetic Evaluation.
55
Preanesthetic Evaluation.
124
Preanesthetic Evaluation..
55
Preanesthetic Preparation..
125
Gathering Information...
55
Snall Marmals
127
Anesthesia Decision Algorithn..
56
Intranasal Intubation of Rabbits.
128
Evaluating Preanesthetic Patients.
57
Reptiles.
129
ASA Status.
57
Avian Species.
131
Physical Exanination.
57
Anesthetic Monitoring
131
Banfield Anesthesia Protocol
58
Anesthetic Induction and Maintenance.
133
Assessing Cardiovascular Function and Overall Health 
59
Postoperative Care..
134
Anesthesia Cycle.
59-60
Postoperative Pain Control.
134
Canine/Feline Anesthesia Physical Exanmination.
.61
Enmergency Drugs: Quick Reference Chart
Laboratory Data .
62
for Exotic Animals
136-137
Practice Tips
62
Avian Species Anesthesia Protocol
138
Preanesthetic Blood Work Evaluation...
63
Reptile Anesthesia Protocol.
140
Ferret Anesthesia Protocol..
142
 Section 6: Induction and Intubation.
65
Rabbit Anesthesia Protocol..
144
Intubation ...
65
Guinea Pig and Chinchilla Anesthesia Protocol.
146
Tips for Intubation and Airway Managenent in Cats.
66
Rat, Mouse, Gerbil and Hanster Anesthesia Protocol.
148
Oxygen Flow Rates During Anesthesia..
67
Hedgehog Anesthesia Protocol.
150
Assisted Ventilation.
67
Exotic Patient Anesthesia Monitoring Forn.
152-153
 Section 7: Monitoring.
69
 Section 12: Appendix
155-183
Monitoring.
69
Manual Assessnment.
69
AVOIDABLE SITUATIONS:
ANESTHESIA COMMITMENT
DOCUMENT
1. Aggressive pet: It is not worth risking injury to your
team or the pet if it requires excessive restraint or
you have a failed attempt at sedation. STOP! Start the
As medical professionals, we are often driven by
the dictum,"First, do no harm." Holding ourselves
process another day, if possible, with a different,
better plan.
 accountable to that guiding principle may require that we
elect to not continue with a procedure due to the risk of
2. Blocked cat: Do not anesthetize a cat with urethral
injury or death to the pet At Banfield, we expect doctors
obstruction without first administering pain medication,
to make the best decision for the pet at all times. It takes
performing cystocentesis, and stabilizing the patient
knowledge, experience and courage to ensure that you do
with intravenous fluids and electrolyte abnormality
 not allow outside forces such as scheduling, production
correction. The blockage is not the emergency; renal
value, client perception, or any other circumstance to
influence you to proceed with an anesthetic procedure that
heart stopping due to hyperkalemia may be life-ending
is contraindicated based on any abnormal preanesthetic
long before the post-renal effects of physical obstruction
test or physical exam finding.
on the patient are.
After years of performing peer reviews on cases
3. Immobilization of brachycephalics (Persians,
with unexpected or poor outcomes, one of the most
Bulldogs, Pugs, etc.): Place an endotracheal tube in
 common threads among them, in hindsight, is poor
decision-making. If even mild abnormalities exist in the
able to manage their own airway. These pets need
preanesthetic blood work or physical examination findings.
constant monitoring to avoid airway compromise.
heed the warning. It makes no sense to do the test if you
are not going to consider the results. lf a cat or dog cannot
It is also important to remember that patients in your
be handled in a reasonable manner, or you have already
hospital that are receiving care from an outside surgeon
lost control of the pet, STOP! If you have a gut feeling that
or consultant are still your responsibility as it pertains
 you should not go forward, pay attention to that feeling.
to anesthesia protocol, monitoring guidelines and
It's not just how much knowledge you have, but how you
documentation. Remember: Stop. Think. Make a
apply it that counts.
good decision.
Throughout this manual, you will see the following red
stop sign icon:
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
Each time you see it, remember to stop and make sure what
you are about to do is the right course of action for the pet
in your care.
iv
SECTION 1:
Introduction to
Anesthesia
SECTION 1
Introduction to Anesthesia
Welcome to the Third Edition of Anesthesia for the Pet
dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor) in combination
Practitioner. Our anesthesia manual is a living document-a
with ketamine and butorphanol (Torbugesic?) (DKT);
work-in-progress that continues to evolve as we learn
removed Telazol@ for fractious cats
more about pain management and keeping anesthetized
■ Added dexmedetomidine immobilization option for dogs
patients safe. Since publishing the Second Edition in
■ Added fentanyl constant rate infusion (CRI) for
2008, Banfield has worked in close collaboration with
 postoperative pain control in orthopedic protocols
respected veterinary medical professionals to gather the
 Added pain assessment tool from Colorado State
 most up-to-date information for this edition as possible.
University
We drew on the expertise of anesthesiologists and pain
■ Increased the utilization of local blocks
professionals, and reviewed the current literature. We
also took into account learnings from the thousands of
The largest philosophical change we are making is to
5
patients we anesthetize each year within our hospitals. All
embrace more rigor in basic preparation before beginning
itro
of this information and experience was used to deter mine
anesthetic procedures. We can take a lesson from human
the changes we made to our standards and protocols.
medicine, where mortality and complication rates are
.
significantly reduced when clinicians use the now-
luction
Our primary goals for this edition include improving
 popular World Health Organization (WHO) Surgical
Aaenb aui pue sainpasoid sauisaue jo Aiaes aui yiog
of pain management for our patients. It's important
to be read aloud in the operating room, similar to a
 a ls s si a i  ran o
pilot's checklist before takeoff and landing. The checklist
 practice in anesthetic procedures: The preoperative exam,
reinforces accepted safety practices and ensures that all
An
knowing how the drugs work, understanding the patient's
team members in the operating room communicate the
physiology, knowing the equipment and monitoring the
most critical infor mation during three key junctures: 1)
 pet are all key factors in successful anesthetic outcomes.
Before induction; 2) Before the first incision, and 3) Before
Hte
the patient leaves the operating room. The checklist is a
1S
You'll find a number of major medical changes in this
simple, powerful tool for preventing human errors. After
edition of Anesthesia for the Pet Practitioner. The following
all, even the best, most conscientious practitioners can
partial list of changes reflects our decision to move
make mistakes. We are adapting this checklist for our
for ward to industry standards:
practices and will include it in future versions of this
■ Units of measurement: doses changed to mg/kg
manual once we have proven its utility in our hospitals.
 Premedications: all maximum mg doses eliminated
except for acepromazine
We hope that the Third Edition of Anesthesia for the Pet
Practitioner serves as a useful guide in your hospital. As
 Replaced ketoprofen with meloxicam (Metacam?)for
you put it to use, we are already gathering questions to
cats and carprofen (Rimadyl) for dogs
■ Added heating device to standard equipment
consider for the next edition. Remember, in the end, that
successful anesthesia depends not only on the leadership
requirements
of the doctors, but every member of the hospital team
 Fluids:
doing the right thing for every pet, every single time.
● Reduced intravenous (IV) fluid rate
● Changed standard fluid type to Lactated Ringer's
Suggested reading:
Solution (LRS)
1. http:/ www. who.int/patientsafety/safesurgery/en/
2. Gawande A. The Checklist Manifesto-How to Get Things
Right. New York, N.Y. Henry Holt and Co. 2009.
Other changes (also a partial list) include:
 Changed feline Fractious Pet Protocol to include
Introduction to Anesthesia  |  1
Figure 1.1: Autonomic Nervous System: Drugs and Their Cardiovascular Effects
KEY
 ACH = Acetylcholine
(+) Dexmedeto midine
Eye - contract inis
(+) Xylazine 
NE = Norepinephrine
(miosis-miotic)
(-) Yohimbine 
Heart - A-V block,
(+) Bethanechol
HR = Heart rate
(-)Atipamezole
decrease HR and 
(-) = Inhibition
conduction velocity
(-) Atropine
(antagonist)
Lung - stimulate
Nicotinic (-) Glycopyrrolate
secretion
(+) = Stimulation 
(agonist)
Parasympathetic
Cholinergic
*Ephedrine causes
(+) Norepinephrine
a release of
(+) Epinephrine
norepinephrine
(+) Dopamine
S SYSTEM
Nicotinic
(+) Ephedrine*
(phenylephrine)
Arterioles (Coronary, skeletal,
α.
 cerebral, skin, and viscera) - Constrict 
N
(-) Phenoxybenzamine
NERVOU
Veins - Constrict
(-) Acepromazine
PHERAL
(+) Norepinephrine
(+) Epinephrine 
(+) Isoproterenol
 (+) Dobutamine & Dopamine 
Heart - Increase HR, contractility.
EN
β1
 automaticity, conduction velocity 
sthesi
(-) Propranolol
 Adipocytes - Lipolysis
(-} Atenolol 
Anes
(+) Epinephrine 
(+) Isoproterenol
Sympathetic
(+) Albuterol & Terbutaline
Arterioles - Dilate peripheral vessels
β2
 Veins - Dilate peripheral vessels 
01
(-) Propranolol
 Lungs - Relax bronchial muscles 
Introduction t
PHARMACOLOGIC INFLUENCE
■Dobutamine
ON THE AUTONOMIC NERVOUS
■ Propofol
 Ketamine/tiletamine
SYSTEM (ANS)
A review of the autonomic nervous system (ANS) will
The nervous system can be divided into two broad
 assist in developing an understanding of how drugs used
during anesthesia affect both neurologic and cardiac
3). The CNS is composed of the brain itself (including the
function. Our primary goals in this discussion are:
cranial nerves) and the spinal cord, while the peripheral
1) Review the effect these drugs have on the central
nervous system (PNS) is composed of those nerves with
nervous system (CNS) in modulating consciousness and
 their cell bodies located outside the spinal cord extending
 pain perception, and 2) Review how these drugs affect
into the “periphery." Anesthesia will have effects on both of
 cardiac function and perfusion. The following are key
these systems in different ways, depending on the specific
drugs utilized in our anesthesia protocols that we will
 subset of receptor molecules associated with the nervous
address in our review of anesthesia (Figure 1. 1).
tissue in these different regions.
Atropine, glycopyrrolate
Midazolam, zolazepam, diazepam
The CNS is further divided into the regions of the
■ Lidocaine, bupivacaine
brain (telencephalon, diencephalon, mesencephalon,
 Hydromorphone, fentanyl, buprenorphine,
metencephalon, myelencephalon and spinal cord).
butorphanol (Torbugesic), tramadol
These various sections of the brain are associated with
different clusters of nervous tissue with unique functions.
 Dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor?)
Atipamezole (Antisedan?)
Anesthetic induction and maintenance agents affect these
Ephedrine
areas to cause the unconsciousness, hypnosis and amnesis
2
| Introduction to Anesthesia
associated with anesthesia. Some agents also modulate the
causes the classic "sympathetic" response-mydriasis,
centrally mediated perception of pain.
bronchodilation, increased heart rate (HR), increased 
cardiac contractility, and peripheral vasoconstriction
The PNS includes the 12 pairs of cranial nerves that
leading to increased shunting of blood to the larger
originate from various areas of the brain stem and 36
vessels and dilation of skeletal blood vessels. These effects
pairs of spinal nerves arising from the spinal cord. This
 are mediated through both alpha and beta adrenergic
section of the nervous system is involved with the control
receptors. Alpha and beta adrenergic receptors are
 and sensation of the various effectors (muscles, sensory
subclassified into alpha-1, alpha-2, beta-l and beta-2
systems) outside of the brain and spinal cord. This system
receptors, and are illustrated in Table 1.l, page 4.
includes both autonomic and somatic subsystems (also
called involuntary and voluntary, respectively). The
Alpha-1 sympathetic pathway
involuntary or autonomic subsystem is further divided
 Systemic vasoconstriction: increased blood pressure
into the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system.
(Figure 1.3,page 4)
Both of these functional systems of the ANS are acutely
 Important agonists: ephedrine, epinephrine
important in an understanding of anesthesia and the
 Important antagonists: acepromazine
drugs that modulate anesthesia.
 Stimulation results in arteriole and venuole
constriction leading to increase in blood pressure.
Sympathetic response and control is often described as a
■ Blockade results in arteriole dilation leading to
"fight or flight" response. Acute stimulation of this system
 decrease in blood pressure.
causes rapid release of epinephrine from the chromaffin
 For example, administering ephedrine, an alpha-l
cells in the adrenal medulla, as well as acetylcholine
agonist, induces vasoconstriction. Administration
5
at the preganglionic synapse and norepinephrine at
itro
of acepromazine, an alpha-l antagonist, blocks this
the postganglionic synapse (Figure 1. 1, page 2). This
pathway in a dose-dependent manner. Blockade of
.
Figure 1.2: The Nervous System
cti
ion
 to
KEY
Central Nervous System (CNS)
Structure
 Brain and spinal cord 
Function
Ane
■Integrative and control centers 
stl
hesi
Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
→ Cranial nerves and spinal nerves 
■ Communication lines between the CNS
 and the rest of the body
 Sensory (afferent division
 Motor (efferent) division
■ Cranial nerves and spinal nerves 
■ Motor nerve fibers 
 Communication lines between the CNS
 Conducts impulses from the CNS to
 and the rest of the body
effectors (muscles and glands)
Sympathetic division
■Mobilizes body systems during
 Autonomic nervous system (ANS)
 Somatic nervous system
activity ("fight or flight")
■ Visceral motor (involuntary)
Somatic motor (voluntary)
 Conducts impulses from the
 Conducts impulses from the CNS
 CNS to cardiac muscles, smooth 
 to skeletal muscles
Parasympathetic division
muscles, and glands 
 Conserves energy
■ Promotes "housekeeping"
functions during rest 
Introduction to Anesthesia |  3
Table 1.1: Alpha and Beta Adrenergic Receptors
Receptor
Apha-1
Alpha-2
Beta-1
Beta-2
Type
Stimulation
 Peripheral vasoconstriction 
CNS: sedation and mild
Cardiac effects prevail:
 Respiratory effects prevail:
results in:
analgesia 
increased HR, increased 
 bronchodilation and skeletal
PNS: peripheral
contractility
vasodilation
vasoconstriction, transient 
 hypertension reflex
bradyca rdia
Agonists
Epinephrine, ephedrine 
 Dexmedetomidine
Epinephine, ephedrine,
Epinephrine, albuterol
dobutamine
Antagonists
Acepromazine
Atipamezole
Atenolol, propranolol 
 Propranolol
Comments
"Epinephrine-reversal" can
Alpha-2 agonists are
Beta-1 effects are typically
Beta-2 effects are typically
 occur when acepromazine
 powerful sedatives with the
cardiac in nature. Atenolol 
 respiratory in nature.
 is blocking alpha-1 
 potential for significant side
is a relatively specific beta-1
 Abuterol is a relatively
receptors limiting reflex
effects. They must be used
antagonist.
specific beta-2 agonist.
vasoconstriction, but 
with caution. Atipamezole
Introduction to Anesthesi
 epinephrine is stimulating 
 is a direct antagonist for
 beta receptors leading to
 dexmedetomidine and acts
vasodilation of the large
as a reversal agent.
vessels and increased 
cardiac output leading to
 peripheral pooling of blood.
the pathway limits vasoconstriction and may result in
■Agonists: dexmedetomidine
lower blood pressure.
■Antagonist to dexmedeto midine: atipamezole
 Alpha-l stimulation causes arteriole constriction.
 Alpha-I blockade results in arteriole dilation.
Alpha-2 adrenergic receptor agonists have been used
patients. Alpha-2 receptors are located both pre-
Central/peripheral alpha-2 pathway
synaptically and post-synaptically. Analgesia appears to
■ CNS: sedation and analgesia
be mediated at both sites. Activation of alpha-2 receptors
 PNS: transient peripheral vasoconstriction, reflex
results in decreased release of norepinephrine; this
bradycardia
 decrease increases release of norepinephrine in adjacent
 nuclei. The final result is activation of spinal pre-synaptic
 Figure 1.3: Alpha-1 Sympathetic Pathway
and post-synaptic alpha-2 receptors to produce analgesia.
Alpha-2 agonists can be used as a component of total IV
anesthesia, as a preanesthetic sedative-analgesic agent;
as a constant rate infusion (CRl) supplement to inhalant
anesthesia and in the postoperative period; in epidural
and intrathecal injections; intra-articularly, and as a
 nerve blocks. Banfield currently only employs them as
 premedications in the feline Fractious Pet Protocol and to
immobilize non-fractious dogs.
4 |  Introduction to Anesthesia
Although powerful analgesics and sedatives, the alpha-2
Beta-1 adrenergic pathway
agonists can have very significant linical side effects. Of
■ Cardiac effects predominate: increased heart rate,
these, the most important are the cardiovascular effects.
 increased cardiac output (Figure 1.4)
Alpha-2 agonists bind to post-synaptic alpha-2 receptors
■Agonists: epinephrine, ephedrine, dobutamine
causing constriction of blood vessels. This results in a
■ Antagonists: “beta-blockers" such as atenolol,
propranolol
with a decrease in heart rate. Thus cardiac output is
diminished by as much as 40% to 50%. Clinically
The beta adrenergic pathway is characterized by two
the peripheral vasoconstriction can cause significant
primary receptor types, beta-1 and beta-2. Stimulation of
blanching of the gums and, sometimes, decreased
beta-l receptors located in the heart leads to increased
 palpable pulse pressure. Use of dexmedetomidine in
heart rate and contractility, thus increasing cardiac output
combination (usually with ketamine and butorphanol)
if all else remains normal.
helps to decrease the dose required and mitigates these
effects. This is why Banfield uses this drug only in
■ Dobutamine is an
Figure 1.4: Beta-1 Pathway
combinations and at a lower dose.
example of a beta
I specific agonist.
Because of these effects, alpha-2 agonists are not utilized
in Banfield's healthy pet protocols nor are these agents
Beta-2
utilized in fractious dogs, as fractious dogs can still be
adrenergic
roused under the influence of an alpha-2 and as such
pathway
the patients still pose a danger to the team. There is less
chance of this happening with a dissociative, so Banfield
■ Respiratory effects
itro
continues to use Telazol? with fractious dogs. For these
 predominate:
reasons, dexmedetomidine is included only in Banfield's
bronchodilation,
.
uction
aul pue suondo uoezqoui auue snooe-uou
 peripheral
feline Fractious Pet Protocol-and for fractious cats only
vasodilation
when used in combination with a dissociative and/or
 Agonists:
opiate analgesic and at much lower than manufacturer
epinephrine,
to
recommended doses.
albuterol,
terbutaline
An
 Alpha-2 agonists significantly lower or eliminate the
■Antagonists: propranolol
need for induction agents (up to 45%); therefore,
st
induction doses of propofol may be as low as l mg/
Stimulation of the beta2 receptors leads to vasodilation
kg. Titrate propofol carefully. This is also true for
within the skeletal vasculature and bronchodilation due to
minimum alveolar concentration of sevoflurane. Pets,
relaxation of bronchiolar smooth muscle.
therefore, require significantly less anesthetic gas.
 The alpha-2 agonist medetomidine has been shown to
 Albuterol is an example of a beta-2 specific agonist.
decrease the cardiac outflow obstruction associated with
occult hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats, making
Parasympathetic cholinergic pathway
this drug of potential great value in providing a safer
■ Cholinergic effects predominate: decreased heart
alternative for sedation in this specific subset of our pets.
rate; stimulated respiratory secretion; increased
 Alpha-2 agonists can be reversed through the use of
 gastrointestinal motility
specific reversal agents. This can add to the safety of
■Agonists: acetylcholine, bethanechol
these agents.
■ Antagonists: atropine, glycopyrrolate
 Xylazine, medetomidine and dexmedetomidine are
examples of alpha-2 agonists. Tolazoline, yohimbine
The parasympathetic, cholinergic system is functionally
 and atipamezole are alpha-2 receptor antagonists used
and anatomically separate from the adrenergic pathway
to reverse the effect of the alpha-2 agonists.
and is primarily responsible for effects essentially opposite
 May cause vomiting in 20% to 30% of dogs and
of the sympathetic effects (decreased heart rate, increased
close to 90% of cats. This is not typically clinically
secretion of gastric fluid and increased intestinal motility,
 significant except in situations of megaesophagus and
 increased respiratory secretions).
the potential for aspiration.
Introduction to Anesthesia |  5
Tips for utilizing anticholinergics:
FRACTIOUS PET PHYSIOLOGY
 Administration of an anticholinergic (glycopyrrolate
or atropine) does not increase the heart rate above
the basal rate but decreases vagal tone by blocking
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
the effects of acetylcholine on the sinoatrial node.
Heart rate may be elevated after administration of
Fractious pets release a significant amount of
these drugs due to the presence of epinephrine in the
catecholamines that lead to physiological effects such as
 system affecting the beta-l pathways.
tachycardia, hypertension, tachypnea, anxiety, muscle
 The beta-l pathway must be stimulated if the
splinting, twitching, shivering, hyperthermia, salivation
heart rate is to be increased above the basal rate, as
and mucus membrane color changes.
seen with norepinephrine or epinephrine release/
administration or dobutamine administration.
All these effects increase the risk of anesthesia in fractious
■ Anticholinergic administration blocks the ability of
pets. Close monitoring of the cardiovascular, respiratory
 the heart to slow in response to appropriate vagal
stimulation. In Banfield's experience, this may result
complications and prevent anesthetic accidents.
in unwanted tachycardia. Patients with a normal
heart rate and blood pressure before anesthesia
A fractious pet is defined as:
rarely benefit from pre-emptive anticholinergic
■ Requiring more than one member of the hospital
administration. This, however, is not the case with
team to restrain
pediatric pets.
 Requiring more than one attempt at venipuncture
 Pediatric pets cardiac output is much more
 because of aggression or demonstrating any signs
sthesi
 dependent upon heart rate. Therefore, preventing
of aggression
bradycardia is very important in pediatric pets.
 Any and all overt displays of aggressive behavior
For this reason, glycopyrrolate is included as a
Anes
 premedication in Banfield pediatric protocols.
With feline patients, cardiomyopathy is often subclinical
 Tachycardia after anticholinergic administration is
and not evident until the cat is challenged or the disease is
difficult to manage. Supporting subsequent increased
very advanced. One study demonstrated cardiomyopathy
to
myocardial oxygen demand with supplemental
in 15% of apparently normal cats.' Hypertrophic
ction
oxygen, and administering IV fluids to support
cardiomyopathy is the most common cardiac disease in
circulating volume, are helpful.
cats; hypertrophic myocardial changes render patients
●If tachycardia is present prior to anticholinergic
more susceptible to myocardial hypoxia, ischemia and
Introduc
Al pue uxo peuaaldans aaig onnse
cardiac arrhythmias. During stressful episodes such as
fluids and postpone induction of anesthesia until
anesthesia and surgery, activation of the sympathetic
the heart rate normalizes or the primary cause is
identified and treated.
decreased cardiac filling time and myocardial perfusion,
 Due to the reasons noted above, Banfield protocols
and increased myocardial oxygen demand.
call for anticholinergic administration only when
the pre-operative physical examination reveals
Acepromazine in fractious pets and epinephrine
bradycardia or if significant bradycardia associated
reversal:
with hypotension/poor perfusion develops
 Epinephrine (natural catecholamine) is often released
during a procedure.
endogenously during stressful events, as with a
fractious pet. Epinephrine stimulates both alpha and
beta-l and 2 receptors.
 When an alpha-l antagonist, such as acepromazine,
is given as a premedication, it blocks the effect of
epinephrine on alpha-l receptors, but not beta-l and
2 receptors. As a result, arteriole constriction does
not occur, although heart rate and contractility are
increased. Vasodilation results in pooling of
the circulatory volume in the vascular bed of
skeletal muscle, which inhibits venous return and
decreases cardiac output.
6 |  Introduction to Anesthesia
These cumulative effects may result in relative
PERFUSION
hypovolemic shock. As a result, it is imperative to avoid
acepromazine in the fractious pet. The Fractious Pet
Defining good perfusion (Figure 1.5, page 8)
Protocols do not include acepromazine.
 A state of adequate blood flow and volume to push red
blood cells to the lungs, pick up oxygen and deliver
Treatment of epinephrine reversal requires the
it to the tissues. Or more simply, “nicely filled blood
administration of crystalloid fluids and/or colloids:
■ Dogs: 20 ml/kg bolus (Repeat as needed up to
blood volume, blood pressure, oncotic pressure and
80 mL/kg)
cardiac output (CO) to maintain normal perfusion.
■ Cats: 5 ml/kg bolus (Repeat as needed up to
40 mL/kg)
Anesthesia maintenance
 All anesthetic drugs affect perfusion to some extent.
Hetastarch may also be administered if needed:
Most drug effects are dose dependent, therefore one
 must understand the mechanisms of how drugs
■ Dogs: 5 mL/kg bolus (Repeat as needed or begin CRI
up to 20 mL/kg/day)
alter perfusion during anesthesia. Understanding
■ Cats: 2.5 ml/kg bolus (Repeat as needed, or begin
 this is the first step toward maintaining perfusion
CRI up to 10 mL/kg/day)
during anesthesia.
 CO = heart rate (HR) x stroke volume (SV)
References
 Stroke volume is dependent on venous return
(preload), total peripheral resistance (afterload) and
1. Paige CF, Abbott JA, Elvinger F, Pyle RL. Prevalence of
 cardiac contractility. The heart acts as a pump that
cardiomyopathy in apparently healthy cats. JAVMA. June
5
 pushes a certain volume of blood to the body. The
itro
2009;234:11;1398-1403.
amount depends on how much blood there is inside
the pump before it is pushed out (preload); the
.
luction
resistance (afterload) the pump has to work against.
 It is important to note that preload (venous return) and
 afterload (peripheral resistance) affect cardiac output.
to
In patients with systemic hypertension, resistance
to left ventricular outflow (afterload) is increased
An
and cardiac output can be decreased because the
heart is pumping against higher pressures. Pets with
st
hypotension often have reduced preload (filling) and
therefore decreased cardiac output. These pets must
be stabilized prior to anesthesia. These are all factors
that can affect the outcome of anesthesia and must be
 considered prior to administration of anesthetic drugs.
 Cardiac output is fundamental to perfusion. Patients
with excessively high heart rates or excessively
 small chamber sizes such as occurs in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) may have stroke volumes so
 small that cardiac output is severely compromised.
This is especially true in cats with occult feline HCM.
These pets are often subclinical upon presentation
and decompensate rapidly under anesthesia. Because
 of this, and knowing that we expect the heart rate to
decrease after administration of premedications, it
aid aul ol uouae aso ed oi iuiodi Aaa s
induction, post-premedication heart rate in cats. If the
heart rate does not decrease after premedications, or
if it is increased, then Banfield recommends stopping
and re-evaluating whether anesthesia is appropriate.
Introduction to Anesthesia |  7
 Circulating blood volume is critical to maintaining
blood flow. Banfield protocols include IV fluids
(colloids and crystalloids) to help maintain
cardiovascular volume and tissue perfusion that
could be compromised during anesthesia (See Fluid
Therapy, page 39).
 Oncotic pressure also affects perfusion. If albumin 
and total protein levels are significantly below normal.
 pulmonary edema can result from fluid movement
into the interstitium.
Figure 1.5: Good Perfusion and Receptor Sites
Introduction to Anesthesia
31
B2
α.
B2
8 |  Introduction to Anesthesia
SECTION 2:
Requirements
SECTION 2
Banfield Requirements
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR
 Immobilization and general anesthesia protocols
require a member of the hospital team to monitor the
ANESTHESIA AND DEFINITIONS
patient and document/record monitoring parameters
 from induction through recovery. This includes dental
General information
procedures in which one hospital associate should
At all times, every medical team must comply with
monitor anesthesia while another hospital associate
individual state practice acts. It is each doctor's
 performs the procedure, as allowed by individual state
responsibility to know and understand the requirements
practice acts.
of his/her specific state, as well as Banfield's policies
 Drugs affect individual patients differently. The
and procedures. Specifically, the doctor must ensure
attending doctor is responsible for knowing the
compliance with state regulations regarding the handling
patient's history, performing a complete physical
and administration of controlled substances, intubation
exam, interpreting diagnostic tests and understanding
of pets, anesthetic monitoring and drug administration
sanfield
documentation, and deter mine which hospital associates
 protocols and determine specific drug dosages.
can legally perform dental prophylaxis and all other
■ Changes in drug dosages should be based first on
medical procedures.
 the health status and second on the temperament of
The following are Banfield's standards which must be
the patient. The doctor is responsible for defining the
ed
met in addition to all state regulations:
safe dosage for the individual patient. Do not exceed
maximum dosages.
3
■ All patients must be examined by the doctor prior to
 When selecting a dosage, remember that minimal
D
being sedated, irmmobilized or premedicated (fractious
dose usually equals minimal risk, however it is
pets are the exception, but medications can only be given
nen
important to keep in mind that the lower dose
under the direction of the veterinarian in compliance
with all state laws) and again prior to induction of
on pain medications will also mean less pain
management And, if alower dose of tranquilizer in
 amesthesia. The results of these examinations should be
the premeds is used, a higher dose of induction agent
 documented in the medical notes.
 and maintenance agent will be needed.
 When initially following new anesthesia protocols
■ It is best to avoid vaccinations in association with
the entire medical team should always monitor and
closely observe the patient, from premedication
the pet has been fully recovered for at least two hours.
administration through recovery from anesthesia This
close observation provides a greater understanding of
how each drug affects the patient. Particularly close
Definitions and requirements
observation should occur for the first five anesthetic
The requirements isted in the following pages are the
 procedures in which a new protocol is employed.
 minimum practice standards. If additional measures such
■ All anesthesia protocol information is based on the
as an IV catheter for an immobilized patient are prudent,
expectation that anesthetic delivery and monitoring
please proceed accordingly.
equipment is in proper working order. It is the
responsibility of the attending doctor to ensure
that the equipment is working correctly prior to
 proceeding with premedication and anesthesia.
Banfield Requirements |  9
TRANQUILIZATION/SEDATION
 Placing a favorite blanket in the carrier and feeding
the pet or offering treats while in the carrier also
helps. Dog Appeasing Pheromone (D.A.P?) collars
Definition:
anpai day ues Aeids gaemiah pue siasn pue
The patient can walk.
anxiety while acclimating the pet to the carrier as well
 Use tranquilization/sedation for procedures such
as during travel. Clients should start acclimating their
 as blood collection and otoscopic exam, to assist in
 pet at least two weeks before their departure.
restraint for non-painful procedures, such as orogastric
tube passage, and to help decrease anxiety.
For pets traveling by air:
 Recommend nonstop flights to minimize stress. Pets
Requirements:
often get cold or hot while the plane is sitting on the
 A complete and deliberate physical examination (PE)
ground.
 Monitoring of temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR)
● Alprazolam:
 and pulse quality every 15 to 60 minutes depending
 Dogs: 0.025 to 0.1 mg/kg PO (maximum dose 2
on patient, with visual observation at alltimes
mg), usually 0.25 mg to 2 mg total dose) q eight
■ Depth of tranquilization is such that endotracheal
to 12 hours
tube placement is not possible
 Cats: 0.1 mg/kg PO usually 0.125 mg to 0.25
■ Electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse oximeter and blood
mg total dose qeight to 12 hours
 pressure monitor to be used at the doctor's discretion
OR
 IV catheter to be used for emergency venous access at the
● Diphenhydramine: 2 mg/kg PO (maximum dose
 doctor's discretion, recommended for pets older than 5.
50 mg) q six to eight hours
 Requirements
 Banfield will not give or prescribe acepromazine
For tranquilizing a patient in the hospital:
■ Butorphanol (Torbugesic): 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg SC,
traveling by air. Phenothiazine derivatives, such as
 IM AND acepromazine: 0.05 mg/kg SC, IM (1.5 mg
acepromazine, block alpha-l adrenergic receptors
maximum dose)
in the circulatory system, resulting in vasodilation.
OR
 Butorphanol: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg SC, IM
Infield 
an inability to respond to changes in atmospheric
AND
 pressure and temperature should a pet be in the
 Midazolam: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM
cargo hold when something goes wrong. It is possible
OR
for pets to die during air transport as a result of
Bal
■ Acepro mazine or midazolam can be used alone, but
phenothiazine tranquilization.
will not provide analgesia.
I Do not use acepromazine on a fractious pet.
For pets traveling by ground:
 Oral agents that can be prescribed:
For air and ground travel:
● Alprazolam:
 Inform owners that oral sedatives have variable effects
 Dogs: 0.025 to 0.1 mg/kg PO (maximum dose 2
on pets and are more effective when administered
mg), usually 0.25 mg to 2 mg total dose q eight
before the pet becomes anxious or excited. Owners
to 12 hours
will need to closely monitor their pet's reaction to
 Cats: 0.1 mg/kg PO usually 0.125 mg to 0.25
the sedative and consult with the doctor for dosage
 mg total dose q eight tol2 hours
adjustments. It is best to start with minimal doses
OR
■ Recommend a "test" dose at least 24 hours in advance of
● Diphenhydramine: 2 mg/kg PO (maximum dose
 travel to evaluate pet's response. This will help the owner
50 mg) q six to eight hours
deter mine the dose needed as well as ensure that the
OR
pet doesn't have an adverse response to the medication.
● Acepromazine: 0.25 to 1 mg/kg PO q eight to 12
hours. See precautionary notes in previous section
alprazolam; in these cases, the dose may be halved, or
 on phenothiazine prior to prescribing.
another class of medication may be recommended.
 Pets should be acclimated to their carrier to
decrease the stress that leads to barking, anxiety
 and hyper-excitability.
10 丨  Banfield Requirements
The following agents are used to immobilize
IMMOBILIZATION
patients:
Definition:
Dogs:
The patient cannot walk, is experiencing a non-surgical
 Telazol@: 1 to 4 mg/kg IM AND butorphanol: 0.2
plane of anesthesia, can be aroused with minimal effort,
 mg/kg IM. Use low doses, or avoid use in debilitated
 and maintains laryngeal and withdrawal reflexes.
patients.
■ Use immobilization for procedures that can be
OR
 Propofol: 2 to 6 mg/kg slow IV to effect. Propofol
completed in less than l0 minutes, are not painful and
alone does not provide analgesia.
do not require general anesthesia, such as:
OR
● Clipping matted hair
■ Dexmedetomidine: 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg IM AND
● Radiographs that do not require special positioning
● Mild ear cleaning
butorphanol: 0.2 mg/kg IM. Use low doses, or avoid
use in debilitated patients.
● Pedicure in aggressive patients
● Minor wound care
Cats:
■ To enable handling of fractious pets requiring general
 Propofol: 2 to 6 mg/kg slow IV to effect. Propofol
 anesthesia, see Fractious Pet Protocol, page 86.
 alone does not provide analgesia.
OR
Requirements:
■ Dexmedeto midine, ketamine and butorphanol
 A complete and deliberate physical examination (PE)
(Torbugesic?) (DKT): 0.065 mL/kg IM of mixture. See
except for fractious pets (for fractious pets, complete
the PE once immobilized)
anfield
■ Depth of anesthesia is such that endotracheal tube
DO NOT immobilize brachycephalic dog or cat breeds.
placement is not possible. (If an endotracheal tube can
be placed, the patient is considered to be experiencing
■ Because of the potential for apnea and/or air way
 general anesthesia, and all required supportive
obstruction resulting in hypoxemia and/or
and monitoring measures noted in the General
hypercarbia in apparently healthy brachycephalic
2
 Anesthesia Considerations for All Protocols, pages 83,
breeds (Figures 2.1 and 2.2, page 12) during
immobilization, Banfield recommends general
3
are necessary.) Even if an endotracheal tube cannot
anesthesia in all patients with potential for upper
be placed, the proper endotracheal tubes should be
Q
airway or pulmonary compromise. These include:
ment
readily available in case of an emergent need.
■ Continual monitoring and observation of all vital
● All brachycephalic breeds (dogs and cats)
 functions. Record pulse, pulse quality, temperature,
● Those with excessive pharyngeal folds, such as
respiration and depth every five to 10 minutes until
Shar Peis
recovery.
● Any pet with concern for abnormalities of the
auss fuoou ainssad pooia pue Aauixo ssind 
pharynx, larynx, trachea and esophagus, i.e..
 a swallow reflex is still present, the pulse oximeter
trauma, mass lesions, etc.
sensor will likely have to be used on alternative areas
 This allows for immediate maintenance of a patent
of the body-i.e., ventral tail base, rectum, toe web,
 airway with an endotracheal tube and ventilatory
vulva, prepuce, ear, lip.
support with 100% oxygen. All general anesthesia
■ An IV catheter can be placed for emergency
prerequisites and monitoring procedures are
access at the doctor's discretion for Telazol@ or
necessary in these cases.
 The goal is preventing unnecessary deaths during
dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor?) combinations
■ An IV catheter is required for propofol.
immobilization in a high-risk group of patients.
■ Direct venous access for administration of fluids or
drugs is highly recommended and decreases patient
risk, especially for those of uncertain health status.
 If a pet is immobilized and the doctor finds the
 procedure is more extensive than anticipated and
requires general anesthesia, then preanesthetic
blood work, IV catheter insertion and appropriate
preanesthetic medications MUST be completed prior
to induction of general anesthesia.
Banfield Requirements |  11
Figure 2.1: Brachycephalic Breed (Bulldog)
Figure 2.2: Brachycephalic Breed (Persian)
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
■ Complete blood count (CBC) and internal organ
function screen (IOF) and electrolytes within 48
Definition:
hours prior to anesthesia for pets over 2 years of age,
 Requirements
or any ill patients or for nonelective procedures. CBC.
The patient cannot walk, has no gag reflex, is unconscious
 preanesthetic IOF and electrolytes within 14 days
 and has greatly diminished pain response.
prior to anesthesia for patients under 2 years of age
■ Use for radiographs requiring special positioning
for elective procedures.
(hips, etc.), surgical procedures, invasive diagnostic
■ IV catheter
 procedures and painful procedures.
■ Endotracheal tube placement
■ ECG, pulse oximeter and blood pressure monitoring 
Patient evaluation:
 Continual monitoring and manual assessment-record
Banfield
■ Perform preanesthetic physical exam and blood work
in medical record every five minutes until recovery
as required. See Canine/Feline Anesthesia Physical
(See Anesthesia Monitoring and Emergency Algorithm,
Examination Algorithm, page 6l, and Preanesthetic
page 80).
Blood Work Evaluation Algorithm, page 63.
■ IV fluid support for procedures longer than
■ Address all abnormalities prior to proceeding
10 minutes
with anesthesia.
 Review the patient's medical record completely.
Use the following for general anesthesia:
 Confirm that medical team is aware of every
 Premedications according to anesthesia protocols
 procedure being performed on the patient.
■ Induction according to anesthesia protocols
■ Maintenance with oxygen and sevoflurane
Requirements:
■ Monitor according to anesthesia flow chart and
■ A complete and deliberate PE
monitoring algorithms. Be sure to comply with all
 State regulations in addition to those listed in the
 Food should be withheld for a minimum of two
hours up to 12 hours. The attending doctor should
monitoring algorithms.
 determine the appropriate fasting time depending
 Supportive care, recovery monitoring and post-
on pet and procedure, use shorter fasting periods
operative pain management according to
for young patients who may be susceptible to
anesthesia algorithms
hypoglycemia. Water should be withheld for a
minimum of two hours prior to the procedure. There
 are separate guidelines for exotic patients. (See
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Pets,
starting on page 123).
12 丨  Banfield Requirements
PErIOPeRATIVE ANTIbIOTICS
Perioperative antibiotics are in no way intended to
reduce the need for proper patient preparation, sterile
The Banfield Care Guidelines Committee continues
surgical practices, proper tissue handling or proper
to review published papers in human and veterinary
 postoperative care.
medicine on the usage of perioperative antibiotics.
Non-elective or elective complicated
Historically, administration of perioperative antimicrobials has
procedures
been an accepted practice for pets undergoing most surgical
 procedures including clean,elective procedures. However,
Banfield continues to recommend the use of prophylactic
the blanket use of perioperative antibiotics in dlean, elective
antimicrobial use in all non-elective or elective
surgical procedures has become increasingly controversial.
complicated procedures. Research continues to suggest 
 There is concern that prophylactic antimicrobial use may
that prophylactic antimicrobial treatment is useful in
contribute to super-infections, colonization with resistant
preventing development of postoperative infections in
bacterial species or nosocomial infections.' In the American
pets undergoing surgical procedures associated with high
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine (ACVIM) consensus
risk of infection. The selection and timing of prophylactic
statement on Antimicrobial Drug Use in Veterinary
antibiotics is important.
Medicine, it was recommended that veterinarians should
Administration must occur prior to surgery or at the
research or clinical experience has clearly shown that
time of incision to be effective. The type of surgery and
these applications provide measurable clinical benefit. In
the type of preoperative contamination are factors in
deter mining which antibiotic is most appropriate.
 one prospective report, no significant association between
administration of antimicrobial prophylaxis and the surgical
site infection rate was identified.3Another study indicated a
Soft tissue surgery: To reduce the chances of
anfield F
significantly lower infection rate if prophylactic antibiotics
 protein-binding interferences with the anesthetic
agents, ampicillin should be administered at least one
were administered and surgical duration exceeded 90
hour pre-induction. Two hours would be more ideal
minutes, but not for a shorter surgical time.3
So pets can be observed for any potential anaphylactic
 Following the guidance of ACVIM, Banfield no longer
reactions. Ampicillin can be useful for complicated
2
leq
recommends perioperative antibiotic administration in
Sterilization surgeries and other soft tissue surgeries.
clean, elective procedures including canine and feline
ovariohysterectomies and castrations. It is not necessary
bacteremia associated with dental scaling. It has excellent
to use antimicrobial drugs in all surgical cases to prevent
efficacy against beta-hemolytic Streptococci, Enterococcus
infections. It is possible to effectively minimize the
faecalis, obligate anaerobes and Pasteurella multocida.
likelihood of postoperative infections by vigorously
 Ampicillin should be dosed at 10 mg/kg IM and repeated
promoting aseptic technique, minimizing surgical time
 at six to eight hour intervals if necessary.
and minimizing tissue manipulation.2 Following is a list
of risk factors that studies have determined increase the
Dental procedures: The use of systemic clindamycin
 likelihood of postoperative infection.
and topical chlorhexidine is associated with the highest
levels of reduction in oral bacterial levels.4 Clindamycin
 Surgical time (risk of infection may double every
ideally should be started two to three days prior to the
70 minutes)
dental procedure, but the oral absorption rate is very
■ Experience of the surgeon
rapid and it could be administered in the hospital setting a
■ Wound contamination level presurgery
minimum of two hours prior to anesthesia Clindamycin
■ Obesity
 does have an intrinsic neuromuscular blocking activity
 The number of paraprofessionals in the surgical room
and should be used cautiously with other neuromuscular
 Patient debilitation (need for ICU care)
blocking agents. It is also highly protein-bound. The
 Presence of foreign material such as a drain
recommended oral dosage is 5.5 to 1l mg/kg PO
Clindamycin should be continued for a minimum of five
As such, we continue to recommend the usage of
days post-cleaning if there is evidence that the pet needs
preoperative prophylactic antibiotics in circumstances
the benefit of extended antibiotic therapy Chlorhexidine
that would qualify under the risk factors stated above.
oral rinse solution should be applied to the teeth and
However, at all times the practitioner's clinical
gums as soon as proper endotracheal tube placement has
judgment should prevail.
Banfield Requirements |  13
occurred to ensure that aspiration of the product does not
References
occur. It has the most benefit if allowed to stay in place for
1. Whittem TL, Johnson AK, Smith CW, et al. Effect of 
10 minutes before proceeding with the dental cleaning.
 perioperative prophylactic antimicrobial treatment in
dogs undergoing elective orthopedic surgery. JAVMA.
Orthopedic procedures (including declaws):
1999;215:212-216.
Cefazolin is a first generation cephalosporin and has
2. Morley P, Apley M, Besser T, et al. Antimicrobial
excellent efficacy against Staph intermedius, beta-hemolytic
drug use in veterinary medicine. ACVIM consensus
Streptococci and Pasteurella multocida.s It has good efficacy
statement. J Vet Intern Med. 2005;19:617-629
against E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae and most obligate
3. Eugster S, Schawalder P, Gaschen F, et al. A prospective
anaerobes. Cefazolin is the most appropriate antibiotic
study of postoperative surgical site infections in dogs
for orthopedic procedures or patients with infected skin.
and cats. Vet Surg. 2004;33:542-550.
 Cefazolin can be administered as a slow intravenous
4. Bowersock TL, Wu CC, Inskeep GA, Chester ST.
(IV) injection at any time during the preoperative or
 Prevention of bacteremia in dogs undergoing dental
intraoperative period because it is not protein bound. It is
scaling by prior administration of oral clindamycin or
 most effective when given just prior to the skin incision
chlorhexidine oral rinse. J Vet Dent. 2000;17(1): 11-16.
being made. Cefazolin should be re-dosed if the surgery is
5. Vasseur PB, Levy J, Dowd E, et al. Surgical wound
longer than 90 minutes.7 The recommended dosage is 22
infection rates in dogs and cats. Vet Surg. 1988;17:60-64.
mg/kg slow IV.
6. Aucoin D. Target: The Antimicrobial Reference Guide to
Effective Treatment. 2nd ed. New York, N.Y. 2000. Alfred
Miscellaneous procedures: For applications not
A. Knopf.
listed above, it is recommended that the veterinarian
 7. Budsberg SC, Kirsch JA. Antibiotic prophylaxis in
ents
research which bacteria are most likely to be present at
veterinary orthopaedic surgery. Vet Comp Orthop
the surgical site on the pet and select the antibiotic most
Traumatol. 200l;14:185-189.
 appropriate for the application based on sensitivities.
Requireme
 Caution should be used with highly protein-bound drugs,
and the possibility of any interactions with medications
used for anesthesia should be researched.
Additional notes
Infield
We recommend keeping the number of paraprofessionals
 present in the surgical suite to the minimum number
needed for anesthetic monitoring and proper pet care.
Bai
14 |  Banfield Requirements
SECTION 3:
Pain Management, Drugs
and Fluid Therapy
SECTION 3
Pain Management, 1
Drugs
and Fluid Therapy
PAIN MANAGEMENT
● Local blocks are now standard level of care and
should be part of every feline declaw procedure.
Appropriate pain management is a significant and
● Banfield strongly encourages the use of local
important part of any anesthetic procedure that causes
blocks for the following procedures:
 pain or inflammation in the pet It is not appropriate to
 Neuters-intratesticular blocks
Pain
forego appropriate pain management for any reason. It
 Ovariohysterectomy (OHE)-line block for
is the attending doctor's responsibility to ensure that
incision
3
appropriate pain management is employed through the
 Dental extractions
procedure and through recovery (See Anesthesia Task Pain
 Epidurals for hind limb orthopedic procedures
Chart, pages 18-19).
●See Techniques for Local and Regional Anesthesia,
 page 30, for performing relevant blocks for these
 Appropriate pain management is paramount to a
procedures.
successful anesthetic procedure. Premedication 
 Banfield's recommended premedications are designed
with pain medications and postoperative anti-
inflammatories is just the beginning of managing
 management drugs in a multimodal fashion.
Drugs
 pain associated with anesthetic procedures.
 See the Banfield Protocols, starting on page 83,
Depending on the duration and extent of the
for specific postoperative pain management
procedure, it is important to recognize the signs of
recommendations.
and
 intraoperative pain such as increased heart rate,
blood pressure, or respiratory rate that may need
 to provide adequate pain management in the
to be treated with a repeated dosage of butorphanol
postoperative period. Remember that each patient is
T
versus increasing the sevoflurane concentration.
individual and will have varying reactions to pain and
luid
Butorphanol can typically be administered safely
varying responses to medications. Postoperative pain 
every one to four hours.
management must be tailored to each individual's
Therapy
■ Mulimodal pain management provides the best
 needs. In an effort to assist postoperative monitoring.
results. It begins prior to anesthesia and continues
 acute pain scales have been developed for the dog and
until all inflammation and pain has resolved.
the cat These scales are meant to be a tool to help the
● Multimodal pain management simply means
practitioner facilitate patient pain management (See
 addressing pain management in more than one
Colorado State University Canine and Feline Acute Pain
manner and/or at more than one level in the
Scales, pages 16-17). Remember to provide additional
pain pathway.
pain management when a score of 2 or higher is noted
● The use of local blocks, nonsteroidal anti-
during assessment of the patient
inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), narcotics and
dissociatives are all examples of pain medications
that can be used together in various combinations
 to address pain management
● The use of local blocks should be strongly
considered, as there is good evidence to show
that if transmission of pain can be prevented,
the patient will experience less pain from the
procedure even after the local anesthetic wears off.
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 15
Figure 3.1: Colorado State University Canine Acute Pain Scale
CANINE ACUTE PAIN SCALE
Colorado State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital
PAIN SCORE FOR DOGS
PSYCHOLOGICAL&BEHAVIORAL
RESPONSETO PALPATION
BODYTENSION
0
Comfortable whenresting
Nontender topalpation of
Happy,content
wound orsurgery site,orto
palpationelsewhere
Not bothering wound or surgery site
Interested in or curious about
surroundings
MINIMAL
Content to slightly unsettled or
Reacts to palpation of
restless
wound,srgerysite,r
Distracted easily by surroundings
other body part by looking
around,flinching,or
whimpering
MILD
Looks uncomfortable when resting
Flinches, whimpers cries,
Maywhimperorcryandmaylickor
or guards/pulls away
rubwoundorsurgery sitewhen
unattended
MODERATE
Droopyears,worriedfacialexpression
(arched eyebrows,dartingeyes)
Reassess
Reluctant torespondwhenbeckoned
analgesic plan
Not eager to interact with people or
surroundingsbutwillook aroundto
see what isgoingon
Unsettled, crying, groaning,
May be subtle (shifting
biting or chewingwound when
eyesorincreased
unattended
respiratoryrate) if dogis
Guards or protectswound or surgery
toopainful to move or
is stoic
MODERATE
site by altering weight distribution
(ie.,limping,shiftingbodyposition)
May be dramatic,such
Reassess
3
May be unwilling to move all or part
asa sharpcry,growlbi
analgesic plan
of body
or bite threat,and/or
pullingaway
Constantly groaning or screaming
 Cries at non-painful
when unattended
palpation (may be
May bite or chewat wound,but
experiencing allodynia,
MODERATE
wind-up,orfearful that
TO SEVERE
unlikelytomove
pain could be made worse)
Potentially unresponsive
May be rigid
May react aggressively
tosurroundings
to avoid painful
topalpation
movement
Difficult to distract from pain
Reassess
analgesic plan
Ifthe pet can't be aroused to be evaluated for pain, check vital signs, assess therapy, and rescore when awake.
rsaal uied aldne woy saneah naa Ae stuaed s aoqe au uo paseg uied ane sof aeniensm
Banfield
Colorado
HOSPITAL
State
icted Educa
eed with perr
Figure 3.2: Colorado StateUniversity Feline Acute Pain Scale
FELINE ACUTEPAIN SCALE
Colorado State University Veterinary Teaching Hospital
PAIN SCORE FOR CATS
PSYCHOLOGICAL & BEHAVIORAL
RESPONSE TO PALPATION
BODYTENSION
Content and quiet when unattended
Not bothered by
0
Comfortable whenresting
palpation of wound or
surgery site,orto
Interested in or curious about
palpation elsewhere
surroundings
MINIMAL
Signs areoften subtle and noteasily
May or may not react
Pain
detectedinthehospital setting;more
to palpaticn of wound
likelytobe detected by the owner(s)at
or surgery site
home
Ma
Earliest signs at home may be
withdrawal from surroundings or change
MILD
innormal routine In the hospital,may be
ina
content or slightly unsettled
Less interested in surroundings but will
6
look around to seewhat is going on
D
ment,
Decreased responsiveness,
Responds aggressively
seekssolitude
or tries to escape if
Quiet, loss of brightness in eyes
painful area is palpated
Lays curled up or sits tucked up (al four
orapproached
Tolerates attention,
Drug
feetunderbody,shouldershunched,head
held slightlylowerthanshoulders,tail
MODERATE
may even perk up when
curled tightly around body)witheyes
petted as long as
Reassess
partially or mostly closed
RAI
Hair coatappearsrough or fluffedup
painful area
analgesic plan
SIHI
isavoided
Mayintensively groom an area that is
 and
painfulorirritating
NIHI
Decreased appetite,not interested in food
W
IFI
Constantly yowling,growling,orhissing
LS
Growls or hisses at
when unattended
non-painful palpation
luid
May biteor chew at wound,but unlikely
(may be experiencing
PET
tomove if left alone
allodynia,wind-up,or
fearful that pain could be
MODERATE
IF
 Theral
IN
madeworse)
Reassess
Reacts aggressively to
analgesic plan
palpation,adamantly
pulls awayto avoid
anycontact
PAIN
SS
Prostrate
May not respond to
SSE
Potentially unresponsive to orunaware
MODERATE
REA
of surroundings,difficult odistract
May be rigid to avoid
TOSEVERE
frompain
painful movement
May be rigid
Receptive to care (even mean or wild
to avoid painfu
cats will be more tolerant of contact)
movement
Reassess
analgesic plan
If the pet can't be aroused to be evaluated for pain, check vital signs, assess therapy, and rescore when awake.
 Evaluate for acute pain based on the above scale. Patients may exhibit features from multiple pain levels.
Determine the final pain score based on the relative distribution of findings and overal clinical impression.
5
Banfield
Colorado
PETHOSPITAL
State
onal Grant from Pfi
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
17
Table 3.1
Anesthesia Task Pain Chart
Recommended Analgesic(s)
Expected Level
Surgical Procedure or
(In addition to local or regional nerve
of Pain
Disease Process
blocks when appropriate)
Severe to
 Neurotic pain/central nervous system (CNS):
 Multimodal pain control including 
Excruciating
 nerve entrapment, cervical intervertebral
opioids (hydromorphone, fentanyl) and 
disk disease (IVDD), herniations, severe
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
This level of pain can kill.
inflammation, meningitis, CNS infarcts/tumors 
(NSAIDs), where appropriate
■ Multiple fractures or fracture repair with
extensive soft tissue injury, pathological
fractures
■ Extensive inflammation: peritonitis, fascitis,
rapy
severe cellulitis
■ Postsurgical pain after extensive tissue injury
or inflammation
■ Necrotizing pancreatitis
■ Necrotizing cholecystitis
Fluid
■ Bone neoplasia
Moderate to
■ Musculoskeletal: osteoarthritis; acute
Multimodal control including opioids
and
Severe
polyarthritis; some intra-articular surgical
(hydromorphone, fentanyl for
procedures (i.e., large dogs, extensive
severe pain, butorphanol, tramadol,
(Varies with degree
Drugs
manipulation); fracture repair; hypertrophic
buprenorphine for moderate pain) and 
of illness, tissue 
osteodystrophy; panosteitis; some dental
NSAIDs (where appropriate)
 manipulation or injury)
extractions (multiple rooted teeth, some
canine teeth, extensive handling or difficult 
removal, extensive soft tissue involvement):
onychectomy
 Sof tissue surgery: total ear canal ablation;
post-laparotomy (extensive tissue handling
or inflammation); post-thoracotomy; traumatic
diaphragmatic hernia repair (associated with 
 organ or extensive tissue injury); extensive 
 mass removals; extensive soft tissue injury
repair (extensive laceration repair, etc.)
Pain 
 Peritonitis (i.e., bacterial, urine, bile,
pancreatic)
 Early or resolving stages of soft tissue injuries!
inflammation/disease
 Capsular pain due to organomegaly (i.e.,
 pyelonephritis, hepatitis, splenitis, splenic 
torsion)
■ Mesenteric, gastric, testicular, or other 
torsions, hollow organ distention
 Pleuritis; trauma (i.e., orthopedic, extensive
soft tissue, head ); thoracolumbar disk disease;
rewarming after accidental hypothermia;
frostbite; cancer pain; mucositis; thrombosis/
ischemia (arterial or venous); aortic saddle
thrombosis; ocular: corneal abrasion/
ulceration, glaucoma, uveitis; reproductive
tract: whelping/queening, mastitis.
18 |1
 Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
Anesthesia Task Pain Chart (cont'd)
Recommended Analgesic(s)
Expected Level
Surgical Procedure or
(In addition to local or regional nerve
of Pain
Disease Process
blocks when appropriate)
Moderate
 Minimally invasive orthopedic procedures:
Multimodal pain control including opioids
 extracapsular cruciate repair; external fixator
(butorphanol, tramadol, buprenorphine)
placement for fracture repair; tail amputation; 
 and NSAIDs (where appropriate)
simple dental extractions (incisors, some small 
pre-molars, uncomplicated removal).
 Sof tissue surgery: laparotomy (short,
minimal tissue manipulation or inflammation); 
uncomplicated inguinal hernia repair;
 diaphragmatic hernia repair (acute, simple, no
 organ injury); some external mass removals/
Pain
laceration repairs (less extensive than noted
above); ovariohysterectomy/castration
(older or obese patients, or extensive
3
tissue handling), enucleation.
■ Some dental procedures (simple gingival
flaps); some soft tissue injuries (less 
extensive than noted above); urethral
obstruction; resolving pancreatitis, early or 
resolving surgical procedure; illness; injury
Mild to Moderate
■ Soft tissue surgery: ovariohysterectomy!
 For moderate pain: multimodal pain
control including opioids (butorphanol,
Drug
(Varies with degree of
castration (young animals); some lacerations;
 small mass removals; chest drains
illness or tissue
tramadol, buprenorphine) and NSAIDs
■ Some dental procedures
(where appropriate)
manipulation/injury)
For mild pain: butorphanol,
 and
■ Cystitis
buprenorphine or NSAIDs 
■ Otitis
■ Early or resolving surgical procedure,
 illness, injury
luid
Mild
 Therapy
 Early, resolving, or simple involvement of sur-
Butorphanol, tramadol, buprenorphine
gical procedure, illness, or injury
(low end dose) or NSAIDs
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 19
Banfield's most commonly used drugs
dog and cat for one to two days. Dose frequency may need
for pain management
to be decreased if patient is inactive or lethargic.
OPIOIdS
Example: 10 kg dog
Butorphanol dose: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg x 10 kgs = 2 mg
Buprenorphine
to 4 mg
■ A partial opiate agonist/antagonist
Conversions: 1 tsp = 5 mL; 6 tsp = 1 oz; 1 oz = 30 mL;
■ Partial mu agonist and antagonist on the kappa
4 oz = 120 mL
receptor
Injectable butorphanol: 10 mg/mL
■ Onset of action within 30 to 60 minutes; dependent
To make a 2-oz. bottle: 6 mL butorphanol (60 mg) + 54
on route of administration
mL cherry syrup = 60 mL of 1 mg/mL butorphanol
 Duration of approximately six to 12 hours
Dosage: Give 0.5 to I tsp (2 to 5 mL) of syrup
 Highly bound to plasma proteins (96%)
q five hours as needed
■ Metabolized in the liver and eliminated mainly in the
 feces (70%), with 30% excreted in the urine
■ Efficacious for moderate to severe pain 
Fentanyl
herapy
■ Analgesic effect created by the binding of opiate
 Class II controlled substance
receptors in the central nervous system (CNS)
■ Metabolized in the liver 
 Dogs: 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q six to
■ Protein-bound
12 hours (transmucosal absorption in the dog is still
■ Pure mu agonist
under question and review)
 Duration of effect is 30 to 45 minutes.
 Cats: 0.005 to 0.0l mg/kg IM, IV, SC, transmucosal
■ For postoperative pain management in orthopedic or
q six to 12 hours
ear surgery. Loading dose is given if no other opiate
 has already been given.
Butorphanol injectable
 Fentanyl injectable: Dogs and cats: Loading dose:
0.003 mg/kg IV; use only as a loading dose prior to
 Mixed agonist/antagonist. Primary agonist at the
 kappa receptor and antagonist at the mu receptor.
starting a fentanyl constant rate infusion (CRI)
■ Fentanyl CRI: 0.02-0.06 μg/kg/min. See Orthopedic
 May interfere with or reverse effects of pure mu opioids
Protocol, page 102; Ear Surgery Protocol, page 103; and
 Efficacious for mild to moderate pain 
Fentanyl CRI Recipe, page 21.
Well-tolerated by cats
 Produces less respiratory depression than does
Hydromorphone
 morphine or oxymorphone
 No histamine release
■ Partial mu agonist
■ Duration of action:
 Injectable opiate sedative/restraining agent, analgesic
● Dogs: 30 minutes to one hour
and preanesthetic
● Cats: one to three hours
■ Onset of action within 15 to 30 minutes depending on
 Can be repeated as needed every one to four hours
route of administration
u!
 Dogs: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM, SC
 Bradycardia commonly seen after administration
 Cats: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM, SC
 May cause vomiting: do not use as premedication
■ Time to effect: 15 to 30 minutes
for suspected cases of gastric dilatation volvulus or
 Metabolized in the liver and excreted in the
intestinal obstruction.
urine and feces
 Duration of effect is four to six hours
■ IV use is not associated with histamine release.
Source
 Provides management for moderate to severe pain
 1. Hellyer PW, Gaynor JS. Acute postsurgical pain in dogs
control
and cats. Comp Cont Educ Pract Vet. Feb 1998;20(2)
 Metabolized in the liver, primarily by glucuronidation.
140-153.
 Because cats are deficient in this metabolic pathway.
half-lives may be prolonged. Metabolite excreted by
Butorphanol oral
the kidney.
Combine butorphanol injectable at dose of 0.2 to 0.4 mg/
 Dogs: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q two to
six hours
kg with cherry syrup. Mixture may be administered post-
 Cats: 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IM, IV, SC q two to six hours
operatively every four to six hours as needed for pain in
 20 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
a i t aed aas se u e iaad sne a 
■ Use with caution with other CNS depressants and in
discussion.
 patients with history of seizures.
 Epidural: 0.03 to 0.04 mg/kg q eight to 24 hours
■ Dose may need to be reduced in patients with hepatic
or renal disease
Tramadol oral
■ Dogs and cats: 2 to 4 mg/kg PO q eight hours (dogs),
■ Synthetic opiate agonist analgesic (not a federally
q 12 hours (cats), for five to seven days
■ Can be used in conjunction with NSAIDs or 
scheduled drug)
corticosteroids
■ Onset of action is within 60 minutes
 Mild to moderate pain relief 
■ Moderate duration of action
■ Metabolized in the liver and excreted in the urine
 Tolerated by dogs and cats
■ Synthetic mu-receptor opiate agonist and inhibitor of
reuptake for both serotonin and norepinephrine
Pain
Table 3.2
Fentanyl Constant Rate Infusion (CRl)*Recipe
na
6
1. Remove 24 mLs of 0.9% NaCl from the
Considerations for fentanyl CRls
1 L bag of 0.9% NaCl.
Jo suydiow) uanis uaaq sey isjuobe nu snoiaid ou jI 
nent,
 2. Invert and add 24 mL of fentanyl (50 μg/mL)
hydromorphone), administer 0.003 mg/kg of fentanyl IM or IV
into this 1 L bag of 0.9% NaCl = 1.2 μg/mL.
 or hydromorphone was given as a premedication less than two
Drug
3. Mix well.
hours previously, then no loading dose is typically needed.
4. Deliver at a rate of 1 mL/kg/hr with an
■ Fentanyl's duration of effect is about 30 minutes.
IV-infusion pump.
 Undesirable effects will not linger as long as when morphine,
 and
■ This equals a CRl of 0.02 μg/kg/min or
hydromorphone, or oxymorphone are used.
0.0012 mg/kg/hr.
 30 minutes prior to the discontinuation of the fentanyl CRl,
 This is an appropriate dose for both 
administration of a final dose of hydromorphone (0.2 mg/kg IM,
dogs and cats.
luid
IV, SC) will allow for a smoother transition onto oral tramadol
5. For dogs, the fluid rate can be increased,
and NSAID.
TH
if clinical signs warrant up to 3 mL/kg/hr.
■ As with any CRl of an opiate, give special consideration to:
herap
■ This would equate to a fentanyl CRl of
● Heart rate: Significant bradycardia can occur. If associated
0.06 μg/kg/minute or 0.0036 mg/kg/hr.
 with hypotension, or if severe, then recommend
 anticholinergic (glycopyrrolate, 0.01 mg/kg IV, IM)
6. LABEL THE CRI BAG APPROPRIATELY
WITH THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:
administration.
● Respiration: Significant decreased respiratory rate,
■ Drug name
 recommend administering preanesthetic dose of
■Concentration
 buprenorphine or butorphanol as a partial antagonist. If
■ Type of base solution: NaCl
severe, then administer naloxone and discontinue the CRl.
■ Rate of infusion
● Body temperature: If hypothermic, provide active heating
■ Date of reconstitution
 and decrease CRI.
■ 24 hour expiration
■ Name of associate making the CRI
 3 mLs/kg/hr in dogs and 1 mL/kg/hr in cats.
FACILITY, THE CRI BAG CAN BE SENT WITH THE PET iF THE BAG IS APPROPRIATELY LABELED WITH DRUG,
DoSE, FLUId RATE AND DATE OF RECONSTITUTION.
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 21
NONSTEROIDAL
● Metabolized in the liver and excreted through the
bile into the feces
ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS
● Mild to moderate pain relief
(NSAIDS)
 Dogs may be more sensitive to renal injury if they are
 dehydrated or on diuretics
Because hypotensive or hypovolemic episodes may
 Do not use in the presence of renal disease or liver
occur during anesthetic procedures, do not give
disease.
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
 Do not use with other NSAIDs or corticosteroids, or in
 preoperatively to decrease risk of renal injury from
 patients with risk of bleeding.
decreased perfusion.
■ 10 to 14 mg/kg PO in dogs once daily for five to
seven days
Carprofen (Rimadyl) oral and
Meloxicam (Metacam) oral
injectable (dogs only)
■ COX-2 preferential NSAID
 Anti-inflammatory analgesic
 Honey-flavored base in two strengths:
herapy
● Peak effect: one to three hours
● 0.5 mg/mL 15 mL (equivalent to 0.016 mg per
● Long duration
drop); 1.5 mg/mL 10 mL (equivalent to 0.05 mg
● Metabolized in the liver, with the majority (70%
per drop)
to 80%) eliminated in the feces and remainder
■ Dogs: Meloxicam is well-absorbed by dogs after oral
eliminated in the urine
administration and can be administered directly into
p!n
● Mild to moderate pain relief
the mouth or mixed with food. Food does not alter
 Potent inhibitor of cyclooxygenase, phospholipase A2
absorption. Recommended initial dose is 0.18 mg/
元
and prostaglandin synthesis
kg PO the first day of treatment, and then subsequent
 Do not use in the presence of renal disease or
doses of 0.09 mg/kg PO once per day.
liver disease.
 Cats: Meloxicam can also be used orally in cats, but it
 Do not use with other NSAIDs or corticosteroids,
is considered off-label use of the product due to lack
 or in patients with risk of bleeding.
of efficacy and safety studies in the United States. Use
■ Injectable: 4 mg/kg SC once, then switch to
the 0.5 mg/ml solution. Dosage schemes for cats for
 oral dosing
 osteoarthritis and inflammation or chronic pain are
■ Oral 4 mg/kg PO in dogs once daily or divided into
as follows: The initial dose given should be 0.1 to 0.2
two equal doses for three to seven days
mg/kg PO depending on the severity of the pain. This
can then be followed by a daily dose of 0.05 mg/kg
Deracoxib (Deramaxx) (dogs only)
PO for a maximum of two to three days. Due to the
potential for NSAID toxicity in cats, prolonged use
 COX-2 selective NSAID
should be evaluated carefully for each patient.
 Reaches peak plasma concentration within two hours
following administration
 Reaches peak plasma levels at seven to eight hours
2
 post-administration
u!
 Highly protein bound (90%)
■ Duration of 24 hours
 Metabolized into four metabolites in the liver and
 Highly protein bound (97%)
eliminated with the feces
 Metabolized in the liver, mainly eliminated in the feces
■ Inhibits prostaglandins that contribute to pain and
 Inhibits cyclooxygenase, phospholipase A2 and
inflammation by inhibiting COX-2
 prostaglandin synthesis by preferentially inhibiting COX-2
 Provides management of postoperative pain and
 Provides analgesic, anti-inflammatory and antipyretic
 treatment of pain associated with osteoarthritis
 0.90 to 1.8 mg/kg PO once daily to manage pain
effects similar to other NSAIDs
 Provides control of pain and inflammation associated
associated with osteoarthritis
with osteoarthritis
 2.6 to 3.6 mg/kg PO once daily for postoperative pain
management
Meloxicam (Metacam?) injectable
Etodolac (Etogesic) oral (dogs only)
 Cats: 0.2 mg/kg SC. Used as a single, postoperative
injection in healthy, well-hydrated patients.
 Anti-inflammatory analgesic
 Dogs: 0.2 mg/kg SC. Used to initiate osteoarthritis
● Time to effect: two hours
 therapy prior to continuation with oral dosing.
● Long duration
 22 | Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
ClEARANCE OF NSAIDS
 Although analysis of serum half-lives of the NSAlDs
indicates that they would be cleared within eight to
12 hours, there is a prolonged clinical effect for many
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
 of these medications.
 Therefore, a rule of thumb for washout is five to
 There may be situations where you need to switch
10 half-lives following the first NSAID (Table 3.3).
 from one NSAID to another in an attempt to improve
anti-inflammatory and analgesic efficacy. It is
important to take into consideration how long the
period of time following one NSAID administration is,
before the administration of a different NSAID.
 Clinicians have empirically recommended various
washout periods, ranging from 24 hours to seven days
after use of an NSAID and before administration of
another NSAID or a glucocorticoid.
Pain
Table 3.3
NSAIDs Washout Chart for Dogs1
Product
Est. serum half-life (hours)
5X half-lives (days)
10X half-lives (days)
Aspirin
7.5 -12
10 - 14 recommended 
10 - 14 recommended 
Drug
(aspirin triggering lipoxin)
5 - 8 (oral)
4 (oral)
Carprofen (Rimadyl)
2 (oral)
 22 - 23 (injectable)
 and
5 (injectable)
10 (injectable)
 Deracoxib (Deramaxx)
2
3
Next day
luid
Etodolac (EtoGesic?)
9.7 - 14.4
3
6
Therapy
Flunixin (Banamineg)
3.7
Next day
2
Ketoprofen (Ketofen)
4 -5
Next day
2
Meloxicam (Metacam°)
20 - 30
7
14
Phenylbutazone
2.5
Next day
2
Piroxicam (Feldene)
40
9
18
Tepoxaline (Zubring)
2-3
Next day
2
This table is a guideline for washout based on NSAID halflives. Wait at least five to l0 halflives between NSAIDs.
Reference
 1. Papich MG. An update on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in small animals. Vet Clin North Am Small
Anim Pract. 2008;(38):1243-1266
 Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 2
23
DENTAL NERVE BLOCKS
Dental nerve block techniques
 Most dental procedures produce strong sensory stimuli that 
Why use local dental blocks
affect general anesthesia requirements and postoperative
 Oral procedures are painful.
recovery. Dental nerve blocks interrupt these sensory
■ Analgesia should be a part of every anesthetic protocol
stimuli locally and should be a component of overall
 because it is good medicine, humane and decreases
 pain management. Regional dental nerve blocks can
 anesthetic maintenance drug dosages.
decrease the concentration of inhalant anesthesia required,
which reduces adverse side effects, such as hypotension.
 bradycardia and hypoventilation. In addition, dental nerve
When to use local dental blocks
 blocks ease the patient's recovery from anesthesia because
Dental extractions
adverse side effects, such as hyper tension, tachycardia and
 Painful oral surgery (e.g., oronasal fistula repair)
 Tumor removal
decreased oral pain.2
 Fracture repair
Local anesthetics completely block sensory nerve
How to use local blocks
transmission and prevent secondary (central) pain
Therap
 As part of balanced analgesia-it enhances pre-emptive
sensitization. For this reason, local blocks are often
 and multimodal pain control.
used in conjunction with other injectable and systemic
■ Local anesthetics block painful impulses to the spinal
pain medications.3
cord and decrease wind-up.
Fluid
 Local anesthetics will wear off therefore, the
Perioperative pain management is required for tissue
concurrent use of other agents is required to provide
injury resulting from noxious stimuli and a subsequent
long-ter m multimodal pain management.
decreased pain threshold at the surgical site. Analgesics
I pue
Commonly used local blocks for
insufficient because of the ongoing postoperative
oral pain
inflammatory reaction involving the injured hard and soft
s6n.
 tissue. The resultant inflam matory mediator release can
■ Infraorbital
cause peripheral and central sensitization.4 Practitioners
6
■Caudal maxillary
 should consider a multimodal pain management approach
■Middle mental
t
to prevent pain hypersensitivity.4
ment
 Inferior alveolar
Figure 3.3: Anatomy of a tooth
Local anesthetic agents
Bupivacaine (0.5%)-Most commonly used for dental
Enamel
nerve blocks due to longer duration of action
Dentin
M
 Fairly slow onset: 10 to 15 minutes.
Cingulum
 Long duration of action: approximately three to
Gingival
Pain
Margin
eight hours
 Maximum dose is 2 mg/kg for dogs and l mg/kg for cats
/Periodontal
o T I on so si ans uau ad ano da 
Pulp
ligament
dogs and 0.2 to 0.3 ml for cats
fibers
 Highly protein bound (95%)
■ Metabolized in the liver and excreted through
the urine
■ Blocks the generation and conduction of nerve impulses
■ Should not be administered intravenously
 More toxic to the heart than lidocaine
 24 | Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
The benefits of implementing multimodal pain
just before it enters the mandibular foramen and provides
management for dental and oral surgery, specifically
sensory innervation to the tongue and the inferior alveolar
dental blocks, include:
nerve, this nerve branches into the rostral, middle and
 Owners expect effective pain management.
caudal mental nerves, which provide sensory innervation
 Pets often are discharged the same day after dental
to the lower molars, premolars, canines, incisors and soft
procedures, and owners want their pets to be as alert
and hard tissues of the rostral mandible.
and pain free as possible.
 Pets recover faster and with fewer complications.
The infraorbital, caudal maxillary, middle mental foramen
■ The minimum alveolar concentration required for
and inferior alveolar (mandibular) blocks are the most
inhalant anesthetics is decreased, therefore reducing
common regional dental nerve blocks used in veterinary
medicine. There are several variations on the technique,
 They eliminate the pain perception, decrease
including intraoral and extraoral positioning of the
anesthesia levels and result in a smoother anesthesia
 needle. Gentle insertion of the needle into the soft tissue
experience.6
or foramen will minimize tissue trauma. Once inserted
 Local blocks continue to provide analgesia in the
 in the proper location, aspirate to ensure that there is no
postoperative period, keeping the pet comfortable
vascular access and then inject slowly. If aspiration yields
while using fewer systemic pain medications.78
blood, remove the needle and syringe and start over with a
Pain
 Signs of pain after dental procedures, such as rough
clean needle and syringe. This section will emphasize only
recoveries, vocalization, restlessness, pawing at
intraoral techniques.
M
 the mouth, behavior changes, inappetence and
depression, are minimized when regional oral nerve
Administration of nerve blocks
blocks are used. 9
Materials and equipment needed for dental nerve blocks
are minimal and include bupivacaine (0.5%); 1 mL
Many dental surgical procedures produce strong
syringes; 25-gauge, 5/8-inch needles; surgical scrub, and a
stimulation, and pets undergoing them often manifest
dog and cat skull to help you locate the foramina.
variable depths of general anesthesia due to poor or
inadequate analgesic administration.0
Drugs
 Bupivacaine (0.5%) is the agent of choice for these
 procedures. Its onset of action is 10 to 15 minutes, and
Common dental and oral surgical procedures for which
the duration of action is three to eight hours. '2 It offers
gs and Fluid
dental nerve blocks are indicated include:
a higher degree of sensory block than other injectable
■ Surgical and nonsurgical extractions
agents, such as lidocaine (which is ideal for sensory nerves
■ Advanced periodontal treatments, such as root
of the head) with less tissue irritation.? Bupivacaine is
planing, periodontal debridement and periodontal
more toxic than lidocaine to the heart, so the lowest
flap surgery
Oral rauma that involves lacerations of the lips, gums
possible dose is used (i.e., do not exceed 2 mg/kg for a
total cumulative dose in dogs and l mg/kg for a total
and tongue, foreign bodies; and jaw fractures that
Therapy
cumulative dose in cats during any given procedure).12.4
 require soft and hard tissue surgical intervention
Generally, the dose per site is 0.5 to l mL in dogs and 0.2
■ Incisional and excisional biopsies
to 0.3 mL in cats. Keep in mind that in a small dog (e.g.
■ Soft- and hard-tissue oral surgery, such as oronasal 
3 kg), you will need to reduce the recommended dose of 0.5
fistula repair, palatal surgery, maxillectomies,
mL per site so you don't exceed the total cumulative dose.
 mandibulectomies and reconstruction surgery
Infraorbital nerve block
Anatomy of oral nerves
 Infraorbital nerve blocks affect the maxillary incisors;
Sensory innervation to the oral structures arises from the
canines; and the first, second and third premolars as well
trigeminal nerve In the maxila, the upper teeth, soft and
as the soft and hard tissues rostral to the upper fourth
hard tissue and palate are innervated by the maxillary
premolars. The nerve can be palpated as an indentation
nerve that enters the maxillary foramen and infraorbital
at the bony ridge in the maxilla dorsal to the distal root
canal from the sphenopalatine fossa. The maxillary
of the third maxillary premolar in dogs. It is halfway
nerve branches into the infraorbital nerve, which in tur n
between a line drawn from the apex of the canine tooth
branches into the caudal, middle and rostral superior
to the dorsal border of the zygomatic arch. In cats, the
alveolar nerves. In the mandible, the lower teeth and soft
infraorbital foramen is palpated as a bony ridge dorsal
and hard tissues are innervated by the mandibular nerve.
to the second premolar just ventral to the eye, where the
The mandibular nerve branches into the lingual nerve
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 25
Figure 3.4
Zygomatic arch meets the maxilla. In cats, the infraorbital
block affects all the teeth on the ipsilateral side where the
block is done.
 Once the location is identified, clean the area with surgical
scrub and palpate the infraorbital foramen. Insert the
needle to the hub through the buccal mucosa in a caudal
direction parallel to the dental arcade, into the entrance of
the foramen. Aspirate and then inject slowly (Figures 3.4-
3.8, pages 26-27).
Caudal maxillary nerve block
This block affects the maxillary fourth premolar, upper
molars and the soft and hard tissue caudal to the
maxillary fourth premolars, including the hard and soft
I Therapy
 palate. This block mimics a splash block-you are not 
Location of the infraorbital nerve block.
actually entering a foramen as you do with the infraorbital
block, but you rely on anatomical direction to affect the
Figure 3.5
maxillary nerve by injecting in the area where the nerve
branches around the upper molars and fourth premolar.
 Drugs and Fluid 
This block is only used in dogs.
Clean the area with surgical scrub and insert the needle to
the hub into the area of soft tissue just caudal to the last
molar at a 30 to 45 degree angle with the dental arcade.
Aspirate and then inject slowly (Figures 3.9-3.10, page 27).
Middle mental nerve block
The middle mental block affects primarily the mandibular
incisors and surrounding soft tissue.Ili2 The middle
mental foramen is the largest of the three mental foramina
and is the one used most often. It is located and can be
palpated ventral to the mesial root of the lower second
premolar, just caudal to the mandibular labial frenulum.
Infraorbital nerve block on a dog skull.
In cats and small-breed dogs, the middle mental
foramen is difficult to palpate; therefore, the inferior
Figure 3.6
alveolar nerve block is used in those cases.
Once identified, clean the area with surgical scrub, insert
the needle into the submucosa in a rostral to caudal
direction and advance it into the middle mental foramen.
Aspirate and inject slowly. In most dogs, the needle will 
not penetrate completely to the hub as it does with the
 infraorbital dental block (Figures 3.11-3.13 pages 27-28).
Inferior alveolar nerve block
The inferior alveolar, or mandibular block, affects all the
teeth in the mandible, including the soft and hard tissues.
If the local anesthetic infiltrates in a more lingual caudal
direction, the tongue may be affected; therefore, it is
important to make sure the needle is directed toward the
Infraorbital nerve block in a dog.
caudal ramus of the mandible when inserting to prevent
 26 | Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
Figure 3.7
Figure 3.8
OUOIGCL
Infraorbital nerve block on a cat skull
Infraorbital nerve block in a cat.
Pain 
Figure 3.9
Figure 3.10
Caudal maxillary nerve block on a dog skull.
Caudal maxillary nerve block in a dog.
Figure 3.11
Figure 3.12
Location of the middle mental nerve block.
Middle mental nerve block on a dog skull.
 Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 27
 the bupivacaine from anesthetizing the tongue.
Figure 3.13
The mandibular foramen is located two-thirds of the
 distance from the last molar to the angular process. The
foramen is one-half to one inch from the ventral surface
of the mandible in dogs and one-quarter inch from the
 ventral surface of the mandible in cats. Palpate the angular 
 process extraorally (as the most caudal and ventral
 projection of the mandible) and the mandibular foramen
intraorally with a forefinger. Insert the needle just caudal
to the last molar in a direction toward the angular process,
and advance the needle along the lingual surface of the
 mandible adjacent to the mandibular foramen. Aspirate
and inject slowly (Figures 3.14-3.18, pages 28-29).
Discussion
Therapy
Regional dental nerve blocks are relatively safe when used
Middle mental nerve block in a dog.
correctly. Complications resulting from oral nerve blocks
 have been described in human dentistry, however, the
incidence is extremely low. 3 Toxic doses of bupivacaine
Figure 3.14
have been reported to cause cardiovascular toxicity and
 Fluid
death in people, although this is also very rare. 4
Even though these complications are uncommon in 
pets, practitioners still need to ensure correct dosing.
choose an appropriate needle size and length, identify
 appropriate locations, insert and advance the needle
 gently to avoid unnecessary sof tissue trauma and
 aspirate before injecting the bupivacaine. With practice
 and proper training, dental nerve blocks are inexpensive
Pain Management,
to perform and easy to learn. They will significantly
ued 1mok oi uonippe alqenea e aq pue aies jad aaoidu
management armamentarium for your dental and oral
surgical procedures.
Location of the inferior alveolar nerve block.
Figure 3.15
Inferior alveolar nerve block on a dog skull.
 28 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
Figure 3.16
References
1. Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Eisner ER. Veterinary Dental
Techniques. Philadelphia, Pa. Saunders. 1998;492-493
2. Rochette J. Local anesthetic nerve blocks and oral
analgesia. In: Proceedings, 26th WSAVA Congress. 2001.
3. Lemke KA, Dawson SD. Local and regional anesthesia.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2000;30:839-842.
4. Beckman BW. Pathophysiology and management of
surgical and chronic oral pain in dogs and cats. J Vet
Dent. 2006;23:50-59.
 5. Lantz G. Regional anesthesia for dentistry and oral
surgery. J Vet Dent. 2003;20:81-86.
6. Ruess-Lamky H. Administering dental nerve blocks.
JAAHA. 2007;43:298-305.
 7. Haws IJ. Local dental anesthesia. In: Proceedings, 13th
Annual Veterinary Dental Forum. October 1999.
 Inferior alveolar nerve block in a dog.
 Jo uoseduo  en ' pio-ouoo  yney 8
postoperative bupivacaine with lidocaine on pain and 
analgesic use following periodontal surgery. J West Soc
Figure 3.17
Periodontal Abstr. 1997;45:5-8.
9. Robinson P. Pain management for dentistry and oral
surgery: Pain management symposium. In: Proceedings.
AAHA Conference. March 2002.
10. Duke T. Dental anaesthesia and special care of the
dental patient In: BSAVA Manual of Small Animal
Dentistry. 2nd ed. BSAVA Cheltenham, UK. 1995;27-34.
11. Klima L, Hansen D, Goldstein G. University of
Minnesota Veterinary Medical Center. Unpublished
data. 2007.
12. Robinson E. University of Minnesota College of
Veterinary Medicine. Personal communication, 2002.
13. Pogrel MA, Thamby S. Permanent nerve involvement
resulting from inferior alveolar nerve blocks. JADA.
2000;131:901-907.
Inferior alveolar nerve block on a cat skull.
14. Younessi OJ, Punnia-Moorth A. Cardiovascular effects
of bupivacaine and the role of this agent in preemptive
dental analgesia. Anesth Prog. 1999;46:56-62.
Figure 3.18
Inferior alveolar nerve block in a cat.
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 2
29
TECHNIQUES FOR LOCAL
nervous system (CNS) symptoms such as twitching,
tremoring and seizures in awake patients, or cardiac
AND REGIONAL ANESTHESIA
depression in anesthetized patients. Bupivacaine can
Local Anesthetic Agents
cause a fatal cardiac toxicity if injected intravenously.
Treatment for local anesthetic toxicity involves
Lidocaine: Dose l to 2 mg/kg in dogs and cats. Cats are
discontinuing the drug, or reducing the dosage, and
very sensitive to the side effects of lidocaine so use lower
providing supportive care. Diazepam can be used to help
end of dose when possible. Dogs can tolerate lidocaine
 manage seizures if needed.
doses up to 4 mg/kg if absolutely necessary, unless the
injection is given in an area of high vascular absorption,
Local Anesthetic Techniques
such as the intercostal region or inflamed areas.
Splash blocks are generally considered inconsistent
Bupivacaine: Dose 2 mg/kg in dogs and l mg/kg in
and ineffective and should not be relied upon to provide
 cats. Always aspirate to ensure intravenous injection
analgesia in patients.
is not occurring. The closer an injection of bupivacaine
occurs to the nerve, the quicker the onset of action. For
Line blocks (Figure 3.19) can be very effective in
example, dental nerve blocks or intracostal nerve blocks
 situations such as cesarean sections and abdominal
Therap
take effect quicker than a skin block for a mass removal.
am uo nauaa pnoo iu suaed ue u io sins
A good working knowledge of anatomy allows injections
doses of inhalant maintenance agents. Local infiltration
is performed with 0.3 to 0.5 mL per site. Do not exceed
near the nerve, which results in a much quicker onset of
action. While bupivacaine may take 15 to 20 minutes
maximum doses; if further volume is required, dilute
Fluid
50:50 with sterile saline. Lidocaine has a very quick onset
to take full effect, it usually is providing effective analgesia
of action and will prevent the body's reaction to surgical.
 areas where the skin, and not a particular nerve, is being
 pain, which can result in dorsal horn windup and make
I pue 
postoperative pain more difficult to manage. In cases
blocked, onset of action may take the full 15 to 20
where significant postoperative pain is anticipated, the use
minutes total.
 of bupivacaine can provide a more prolonged duration
It is not recommended to mix lidocaine and bupivacaine,
of analgesia. Remember to decrease the dose of local
 anesthetics by 50% to 75% in pregnant patients.
as mixing increases the time of onset and decreases the
duration of either product when used individually. When
ment,
using both products in one patient at separate sites
Field blocks (Figure 3.20) are an excellent technique
remember the doses are cumulative, do not exceed l to 2
to provide analgesia for small and/or superficial mass
mg/kg either lidocaine and/or bupivacaine total.
removals. They can also be helpful with larger mass
Managen
Signs of local anesthetic toxicity can include central
removals under general anesthesia, but be careful not to
Figure 3.19: Line Block
Figure 3.20: Field Block
Pain 
01/04/2010
mlaw
Used wlth permlsslon from Mark E. Epsteln, DVM, DABVP (CF).
The production of walls of anesthesia enclosing the surgical field.
Thuman JC, Tranqull WJ, Benson GJ. Essentialis of Small Animai Anesthesila and
 30 | Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
exceed the maximum dosage of local anesthetic agents; if
Figure 3.21: Intratesticular Block
a large area is involved, dilute the maximum dose 50:50
with sterile saline to provide a larger volume for injection.
Bupivacaine is the local anesthetic agent of choice for
this type of block, especially since it will provide a more
 prolonged analgesia postoperatively. Ideally, the block
should be performed post premedication and pre
induction to allow for l0 or l5 minutes for full effect.
Peripheral/ring blocks are most often employed
during feline declaw procedures, but can also be useful for
canine dewclaw removal, digital mass removals or digital
amputations. Bupivacaine is the local anesthetic of choice
for these procedures. The block should be performed post
premedication and pre-induction to allow for full effect.
When appropriately applied for a feline declaw procedure,
Medlcal lllustratlon by Laurle O'Keefe
ring blocks with bupivacaine can begin providing effective
Pa
 analgesia within three to five minutes (See Feline Declaw
Figure 3.22: Intercostal Block
Protocol, page 89).
Intratesticular blocks (Figure 3.2l) have routinely
been employed in canine and feline neuters and can
greatly decrease the amount of general anesthesia required
for maintenance as well as provide significant analgesia
 during clamping of the spermatic cord during castration.
Following induction and prior to surgical preparation: 2 mg/
kg lidocaine is injected via a 22-gauge 1 to 1 1/2-inch needle
6n
(medium to large dogs), or 1 to 2 mg/kg lidocaine is injected
via a 25- gauge 5/8-inch needle (cats and small dogs).
 Insert needle into the caudal pole and advance to the
center of the testicle.
5
■ Aspirate to ensure inadvertent intravascular injection
does not occur.
 Slowly inject one-third to one-half of the volume
Needle placement for inducing intercostal nerve block. a, skin; b,
of lidocaine, expect backpressure, until the testicle
subcutaneous tissue; c, intercostal muscles; d, rib; e, subcostal
palpates turgid. Repeat with the second testicle.
space; f, pleura costalis and fascia; g, interpleural space; h, pleura
pulmonalis; i, intercostal artery, vein and nerve; j, lung.
a
 Perform surgical site preparation.
 Onset of action occurs within one to two minutes.
manJC,Tranc
ulllWJ, Ben
Intra-articular blocks can be performed with
lidocaine prior to arthrotomy, and/or bupivacaine can be
placed into the joint prior to closure. If using more than
the area of concern. A minimum of three consecutive ribs
one local anesthetic, remember that doses are cumulative;
should be blocked. This is a highly vascular area and has
 do not exceed 2 mg/kg total dose. Bupivacaine typically
a high level of systemic absorption, so calculate maximum
provides four to six hours local analgesia postoperatively.
doses very carefully. This block can be repeated every
eight hours as needed. Monitor closely for any signs of
Intercostal blocks (Fgure 3.22) are an excellent
local anesthetic overdose, such as tachycardia, tremoring,
etC., and decrease doses as needed. The injection should 
ribs, chest tube placement or postoperative thoracotomy.
be given at the proximal, caudal border of each rib.
Bupivacaine is the local anesthetic of choice and should
Always aspirate to ensure that an intravascular injection
be injected two spaces ahead of and two spaces behind
is not occurring
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 31
Figure 3.23: Soaker Catheter
TECHNIQUES FOR EPIDURAL
ANALGESIA
For epidural analgesia, patients are typically sedated or
 anesthetized and placed in sternal or lateral recumbency.
 Sternal recumbency facilitates the hanging drop technique
whereas lateral recumbency facilitates positioning of
patients with fractures. Next, the cranial edges of the
wings of the ilia are palpated (Figures 3.24-3.25). A line
 connecting these two points typically overlies the vertebral.
body of L7. Just caudal to this line, an indentation can
 be felt which corresponds to the lumbosacral junction.
Location can be verified by palpating the dorsal spinous
07/16/2010
process of the seventh lumbar vertebra rostral to this
indentation. Once located, a 10 cm by 10 cm area of hair
directly over the lumbosacral junction is clipped and the
Therap
Soaker catheters (Figure 3.23) can be placed intra-
skin is surgically prepared.
operatively for procedures such as limb amputation,
large mass removals and total ear canal ablation (TECA)
Needle insertion is made directly over the depression
surgeries, where significant postoperative pain is expected.
formed by the lumbosacral junction with the needle initially
Drugs and Fluid
A red rubber tube can be fenestrated using a surgical
positioned perpendicular to the skin (Figures 3.26-3.27
scalpel blade and then sutured into the surgical area, very
similar to the placement of a Penrose drain. Fixation to
the skin can be accomplished using butterfly tape or a
Figure 3.24
Chinese finger snare suture. A male adapter plug should
be used to cap the open end of the tube which should
be easily accessible. The dose of bupivacaine should be
calculated, diluted 50:50 with sterile saline and injected
into the tube, followed by l to 2 mL of sterile saline for
flushing. This can be repeated every eight to 12 hours
as needed. Monitor the patient closely for any signs of
toxicity and decrease the dose of bupivacaine if needed.
A soaker catheter can remain in place for up to five days
with careful attention to cleanliness, removal rarely
requires sedation.
Epidural blocks (See Techniques for Epidural Anesthesia).
Figure 3.25
Crest of Ilium
 32 | Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
Figure 3.26
within the needle to prevent transplantation of skin into the
epidural space. When using the hanging drop technique,
the stylet is removed after penetrating the skin and placed
on a sterile area (typically the sterile paper glove liner).
Then, a few drops of sterile solution are placed in the hub
of the needle until a meniscus is formed. The needle is
slowly advanced until it encounters bone or punctures
the ligamentum flavum. If bone is struck, the needle is 
withdrawn to the subcutaneous tissue and redirected. If
 the ligamentum flavum is punctured and the needle tip
enters the epidural space, fluid will typically flow from the
hub of the needle into the space (Figures 3.28-3.29).
 If the epidural is being performed while the pet is in
lateral recumbency, the stylet is left in the needle until
 a characteristic pop is felt as the ligamentum flavum
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
is punctured.
Figure 3.27
 Figure 3.28
Lig.flavum
Figure 3.29
oinalnoedle
L-7 spinous
process
lumbosacral
sacrum
space
Araohnoidmembran
 Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 33
With both techniques, following insertion and removal of
PREMEDICATIONS
the stylet, the needle is observed for flow of cerebral spinal
fluid or blood. Once the tip of the needle is confir med to
Purpose
be in the epidural space, the syringe is attached to the hub
1. Calm the patient and reduce stress.
of the epidural needle and a slow injection of the analgesic
2. Decrease dose of induction and maintenance drugs.
agent is begun (Figure 3.30).
 3. Improve induction and recovery quality.
 4. Provide initial aspects of multimodal pain
Observation of the lack of compression of a small (l mL)
 management.
air bubble in the syringe helps to ensure that there is no
resistance to injection. Following injection, the needle is
Note: Do not rely on premedications alone to facilitate
withdrawn and the surgical site is placed ventrally in order
venipuncture or catheter placement in fractious pets.
to facilitate the movement of analgesic drug to the correct
Move directly to Fractious Pet Protocol, page 86.
side of the spinal cord. Other signs indicating correct
needle placement may include twitching of the tail muscles
This section includes information on drugs used for
and a change of respiratory pattern during injection. If
premedications and pain management, including the time
blood flows out of the needle, it can be withdrawn and
to effect, duration of action, where it is metabolized and
flushed, then reinserted (with the stylet in place).
Therap
how it is excreted. There is also information about the
protein-binding property of each drug. Protein-binding
Materials Needed
is important as it is the property of the drug that limits
 Spinal needle: 22- to 20-gauge, 2.5 to 3.5 inches long
distribution and availability in the bloodstream. Only the
Fluid
 Sterile gloves
unbound portion of the drug exhibits the phar macologic
effects and is available for metabolism and excretion. If a
Drugs and Dosages
drug overdose occurs, the protein-binding capacity may
I pue
be exceeded, which leads to excess amounts of free drug
■ Hydromorphone 0.03 to 0.04 mg/kg
in the bloodstream that must be accounted for when
 Dilute with sterile water to a volume of l mL/4.5 kg.
 attempting to reverse an overdose.
Maximum volume 6 mLs.
 Duration: eight to 24 hours
Acepromazine
 Minimal systemic effects; bradycardia can occur.
Monitor for urinary retention in the immediate
■ A phenothiazine sedative/ tranquilizer
ment,
postoperative period and provide bladder expression
 Onset is fairly slow. Peak effects are seen 30 to 60
or catheterization as needed.
minutes post administration.
 Duration of approximately six to eight hours
 For further information on epidurals, epidural
■ 99% protein-bound 
 medications and dosages, please call your medical director
 Metabolized in the liver, with conjugated and
 or the medical advisors
unconjugated metabolites excreted in the urine 
■ An alpha-l antagonist:
Pain 
● Results in vasodilation of arterioles
● Action is dose-dependent, so low doses result in
Figure 3.30
slight vasodilation, and a large dose can result in a
relative hypovolemic shock.
● Helps counteract the hypertension often seen in
stressed patients
● Should predilute to l mg/mL to allow for proper and
more precise drug measurement (Table 3.4, page 35).
● Protects against some arrhythmias including
ventricular premature complex (VPC) and ventricular
fibrillation associated with epinephrine release
● Provides anti-emetic action
● Provides no pain control
● Reminder: Anything Ace does, fluids can fix.
● Avoid using in fractious pets as it can cause
epinephrine reversal syndrome.
34 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
Maximum total dose of acepromazine for any pet is 1.5
Consider the timing and extent of the procedure to be
mg. Acepromazine may be used with caution or at half
 performed when deciding whether to administer SC
the calculated dose in Boxer breeds or sighthound breeds.
or intramuscularly (IM).
However, keep in mind, when premedication doses
are reduced, the amount of induction medication and
IM administration in the epaxial or caudal thigh muscles
inhalation anesthetic required are often increased, which
helps to ensure absorption, especially with a low-volume
can have adverse effects on the pet as well.
dosage.
Table 3.4
 Butorphanol is a mixed agonist/antagonist; therefore,
 a ceiling is reached on its analgesic properties--
Directions for Dilution of Acepromazine
higher doses do not proportionally equal more
pain management As higher doses are given, the
likelihood of adverse effects developing increases (i.e.,
s e    i  r ais n
dysphoria). May need to be re-dosed every one to two
vials through BanfieldDirect or other medical supply
hours to maintain pain control.
source.
 Class IV controlled substance. Follow Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) regulations
Pain
Draw up 27 mL of sterile water with a sterile syringe and
regarding storage, usage and documentation.
add it to the empty sterile vial.
Recommended reading
Draw up 3 mL of 10 mg/mL acepromazine and add to the
 same vial-this results in a 1 mg/mL solution.
The following articles discuss the effects of butorphanol
and other analgesics:
Vial with diluted Ace should be labeled and dated.
1. Lascelles BDX, Roberston SA. Use of thermal threshold
response to evaluate the antinociceptive effects of
The solution is light-sensitive; therefore, the vial should
butorphanol in cats. Am J Vet Res. 2004;65:1085-1089.
be completely wrapped with opaque tape or CoFlex@ (or 
a similar product). If protected from light, the solution is
2. Ko JCH, Lange DN, Mandsager RE, Payton ME, Bowen
Drug
 stable at room temperature.
C, Kamata A, et al. Effects of butorphanol and carprofen
 on the minimal alveolar concentration of isoflurane in
Do not keep the 10 mg/mL acepromazine in an area
dogs. JAVMA. 2000;217:1025-1028.
 and
where it could be easily accessed by mistake.
3. Romans CW, Gordon WJ, Robinson DA, Evans R,
 Conzemius MG. Effect of postoperative analgesic
Butorphanol
protocol on limb function following onychectomy in
luid
cats. JAVMA. 2005;227:89-93
 Partial opiate agonist/antagonist
I Therapy
 Onset begins within a few minutes post IV
4. Gellasch KL, Kruse-Elliot KT, Osmond CS, Shih ANC,
 administration, and within 15 minutes after IM
Bjorling DE. Comparison of transdermal administration
administration.
of fentanyl versus intramuscular administration of
■ Generally lasts one to two hours
butorphanol for analgesia after onychectomy in cats.
 Highly protein-bound
JAVMA. 2002;220:1020-1024.
 Metabolized in the liver. Metabolites excreted in the
5. Ilkiw JE, Pascoe PJ, Tripp LD. Effects of morphine,
urine (86% to 89%) and feces (11% to 14%).
aui uo Hsstosn pue auqdiouaidnq 'joueqdioinq
■ Antagonist to mu receptors and can be used as a
minimum alveolar concentration of isoflurane in cats.
reversal agent for pure opioids whose analgesic
Am J Vet Res. 2002;63:1198-1202.
action is mediated through mu receptors, i.e.,.
hydromorphone
■ Provides pain management through effects on kappa
Dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor)
and sigma receptors
Alpha-2 agonist
 Provides good visceral analgesia by acting at the
 Alpha-2 agonists have good analgesic properties,
subcortical and spinal levels
 however, they are not appropriate as sole analgesic
 Has little to no respiratory depression
agents. Therefore, they are combined with opiate
■ Butorphanol administered subcutaneously (SC) in
 analgesics in our protocols.
cats is less painful, but absorption may be delayed
 Effects on the higher centers in the CNS
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 35
 Will cause a transient peripheral vasoconstriction and
Diphenhydramine
 reflex bradycardia that is significant. Cardiac output
■ An Hl-antihistamine
can be decreased up to 40%.
■ Rapid onset of action
 For these reasons, dexmedetomidine is only used
 Duration of approximately six to eight hours
 in combination with a dissociative and/or opiate
■ Highly protein-bound
analgesic and at much lower than manufacturer 
 Metabolized in the liver and mostly excreted as
recommended doses (1 to 3 μg/kg).
metabolites in the urine
 Dexmedetomidine, ketamine, butorphanol
1 Competitively antagonizes histamine at Hl receptor sites
(Torbugesic?) combination (DKT) is made by adding
■ Used to help prevent transfusion reactions, when
1 mL of dexmedetomidine, 1 mL of ketamine and 1
a patient has received or is anticipated to receive a
mL of butorphanol into a sterile vial. The mixture is
transfusion
 stable for up to two months at room temperature. Be
■ Used when a patient is undergoing surgery for a mast
sure to label the container appropriately as DKT and
cell tumor
include the date it was mixed.
 Has a high first-pass effect when given orally. Only
 Alpha-2 agonists significantly lower the need for
40% to 60% will reach the systemic circulation, thus
 induction agents (up to 45%); therefore induction
herapy
injections are more effective.
 doses of propofol may be as low as l mg/kg. Titrate
 propofol dose carefully. This is also true for minimum
Hydromorphone
alveolar concentration (MAC) of sevoflurane. Pets,
 therefore, require significantly less anesthetic gas.
■ An opiate agonist
 The alpha-2 agonist, medetomidine, has been shown
■ Good analgesic properties
 to decrease the cardiac outflow obstruction associated
 Onset of action occurs within 15 to 30 minutes
with occult hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats
paqiosqe sinou xis oi oml Aaeuixoidde jo uoneing 
making this drug of potential great value in providing
rapidly after injected; concentrates in the kidney,
 a safer alternative for sedation in this specific subset
 liver and lungs; lower levels are found in the CNS.
 of our pets. Therefore, dexmedetomidine is included
 The maximum effect is reached four hours after
in the feline Fractious Pet Protocol, page 86.
administration.
 Pets under the influence of an alpha-2 can still be
 Only 30% to 40% protein-bound
 roused; this is why Banfield is not recommending its
 Metabolized in the liver, primarily by glucuronidation,
 use as an immobilization agent in fractious dogs
 so half-life in cats may be prolonged. Metabolites
■ Alpha-2 agonists can be reversed through the use of
excreted by kidneys.
 specific reversal agents. This can add to the safety of
■ Agonist at mu and kappa opioid receptors
these agents.
■ Less likely to cause histamine release or vomiting
 Practitioners can expect to see a significant
 Hydromorphone may cause hyperthermia in cats (See
bradycardia (usually up to 50% of the resting 
 page 84 for further discussion).
 Vomiting and defecation can occur after dosing
heart rate), blanching or paleness of the mucus
membranes and decreased respiratory rate. Pulse
■ Used in the Orthopedic, Ear and Declaw Protocols
u!
oximetry readings can be lower as well if peripheral
■ Class I controlled substance. Follow DEA regulations
Pai
vasoconstriction is profound.
regarding storage, usage and documentation.
 Xylazine, medetomidine and dexmedetomidine are
examples of alpha-2 agonists. Tolazoline, yohimbine
Midazolam
 and atipamezole are alpha-2 receptor antagonists
■ A benzodiazepine
used to reverse the effect of the alpha-2 agonists.
■ Rapid onset of action
 Atipamezole will be used to reverse dexmedetomidine
 Duration of approximately six to eight hours
when needed.
 Highly protein-bound
 Metabolized in the liver to active metabolites that are
Source
excreted in the urine
1. Lamont LA, Bulmer BJ, Sisson DD, Grimm KA,
 Potentiates action of gamma-aminobutyric acid
 Tranquilli WJ. Doppler echocardiographic effects of
(GABA) resulting in neural and CNS depression.
medetomidine on dynamic left ventricular outflow tract
 A sedative
obstruction in cats. JAVMA. 2002; Nov. 1;221(9): 1276-81
 A muscle relaxant
■ Anticonvulsant-of great benefit in the CNS & Eye/
Globe Protocol, page 105, as it will help to prevent
 36 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
 seizures in higher risk patients, such as the stabilized
INDUCTION AGENTS
epileptic requiring a surgical procedure.
 Class IV controlled substance. Follow DEA regulations
 Prior to anesthetizing the patient, verify that pre
regarding storage, usage and documentation.
anesthesia blood tests were completed within two
 Note: Diazepam is substituted for midazolam when it is
weeks prior to induction for healthy patients less than
unavailable-the diazepam dose is 0.2 mg/kg SC or IM.
2 years of age (elective procedures) or 48 hours prior
to induction for all others. Address any abnormalities
Telazol
found. If abnormalities are noted and anesthesia
 is necessary, choose the appropriate protocol. See
 See the following Induction Agents section for complete
 Preanesthetic Evaluation, page 55, for more information.
infor mation.
 Used as a premed in fractious dogs in conjunction
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
with butorphanol
■ Dose is 1 to 4 mg/kg IM. Use low doses with
 debilitated or ill pets.
 Make sure premeds have had 30 minutes to take
 effect. If insufficient time is given, a much higher dose
 Wait a full 30 minutes before deciding the first dose
of induction agent will be required.
 has been ineffective before administering more
 Telazol to achieve desired effect. Some pets take up to
 Re-evaluate cardiovascular system after premeds have
 taken effect.
3
30 minutes to succumb to the effects
■ Induction agents are used to facilitate intubation.
 See page 38 for more information on Telazol as an
 Induction doses are administered carefully and to
1
induction agent.
effect.
 Induction methods should provide a smooth and
calm transition to unconsciousness
■ The induction phase is one of the two most common
times when adverse anesthesia events occur, recovery
 being the other.
 It is important to monitor patients carefully during
the induction phase to prevent occurrence of adverse
6n
events.
■ See individual anesthesia protocols for appropriate
 induction agents.
nd
 Mask induction is highly stressful and causes
catecholamine release and tachycardia. Mask
L
Tuid
 induction should only be used when specifically
instructed by the protocol.
■ Tank induction has special Occupational Safety and
ne
Health Administration (OSHA) restrictions in addition
to being stressful for the pet, so it is prohibited at
ra
Banfield.
Ketamine
■ Used as an induction agent for some exotic species
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Pets, page
123).
■ Also a part of the premedication combination
(dexmedetomidine/butorphanol/ketamine) used in
fractious cats (See Fractious Pet Protocol, page 86).
Propofol
■ A hypnotic sedative
■ An alkylphenol derivative
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 37
■ Insoluble in water
involves disinfecting the top of the vial with isopropyl
 Formulated as an emulsion. The emulsion
 alcohol prior to inserting the needle, drawing up the 
components of soybean oil, ovolecithin and glycerol
propofol as close to injection time as possible; and
 are media that allow bacterial growth; therefore, the
allowing the product to remain in predrawn syringes
 product has limited shelf life after opening.
no longer than six hours. Because it contains no
■ Highly protein-bound
preservatives, the use of a single bottle of propofol
 Metabolized in the liver to inactive metabolites that
is limited to one day. Once a botle is opened, it is
 are excreted in the urine
thrown away at the end of the day. With the potential
 Propofol has three main uses: (in the hospital, it is
for bacterial growth, it cannot be kept overnight.
used primarily for induction and immobilization,
The product is not designed to be refrigerated or
and rarely for anesthetic maintenance. If you need it
frozen, so this will not help extend the shelf life.
for other uses, please contact a medical director or
advisor for further information).
Telazol
1. Induction agent
(Zolazepam and Tiletamine)
● Prior to inhalant gas maintenance
■ Similar to diazepam/midazolam and ketamine but
● Given at least 30 minutes after premeds
rapy
with greater synergism.
2. Immobilization/chemical restraint for short (less
■ This drug is NOT an analgesic and provides little to
than 10 minutes) procedures
no effective analgesia; therefore, appropriate analgesics
● Minimally painful examinations or diagnostic
must be administered concurrently.
procedures
● Radiology positioning in minimally painful,
 Major uses include:
Pinid
● Canine immobilization-routine cases
stable pets
● Must "convert" to general anesthesia if procedure
● Canine Fractious Pet Protocol
● Induction for the Ear Surgery Protocol if no other
and
is going to require more than 10 minutes
health problems. Provides better immobilization 
 eissge eddde apoid sn 
during anesthesia.
Drugs 2
 an adequate amount of time PRIOR to
 Zolazepam is similar to diazepam, which is a minor
immobilization) for painful procedures. See
tranquilizer. Duration of action: one to two hours,
Immobilization, page ll, for more information.
dogs, three to four hours, cats.
 3. Anesthetic maintenance
● When intubation is not possible (i.e., tracheoscopy
■ Tiletamine is a dissociative like ketamine. Duration of
u
action: two to three hours, dogs; one and a half to two
 or bronchoscopy)
● Status epilepticus that is refractory to diazepam/
hours, cats.
■ In cats, zolazepam is metabolized slower than in dogs;
 midazolam or phenobarbital injections
 therefore, cats experience a much smoother recovery
96eu
● Constant rate infusion: 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg/min
 from Telazol anesthesia than dogs. Dogs having a
 Duration: Five to l0 minutes. It is redistributed to
rough recovery from Telazol may benefit from an
Mal
 adipose tissue fairly quickly after injection.
additional dose of midazolam 0.05 to 0.1 mg kg IM, IV.
■ Analgesia: Only during unconsciousness. Appropriate
Pain 
 Not an ideal choice for pets with known cardiac disease
 preanesthetic analgesia is required.
 Phar macokinetic data is limited. Ketamine, a similar
 Side effects: apnea (especially when administered to0
drug, is only 50% protein-bound.
quickly), cyanosis, hypotension, bradycardia (rate and
 See Premedications, page 34.
dose dependent).
 Extravasation outside the vein causes little tissue
irritation
 It is recommended to give one-quarter to one-third of
 and give the rest as needed to allow for intubation.
■ After induction, keep any remaining propofol in the
syringe for the same patient If the patient needs
a small dose of agent during the transition from
 propofol to sevoflurane, it will be readily available.
 Proper handling of propofol: Adherence to the
 highest sterile practices when handling propofol
can minimize the postoperative infection rate. This
38 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
FLUID THERAPY IN PETS
of isotonic replacement solutions, such as LRS or
Normosol@-R are considered balanced crystalloid
Introduction
solutions if they closely resemble the composition of
extracellular components (Table 3.5, page 40). LRS
Most anesthetic drugs affect the circulatory system and
and Normosol-R provide electrolytes and buffers in
renal function, thus fluid administration for patients under
concentrations similar to normal plasma. These solutions
 general anesthesia is Banfield's practice standard. IV fluid
 may be administered without inducing changes in
therapy also maintains venous access and enables the
management of fluid and electrolyte disturbances. The
electrolyte composition of the patient It is important
to remember that even though LRS and NormosolR
 patient's current health status, underlying disease, and
 are balanced and contain potassium typical of
fluid and electrolyte status were taken into consideration
 normal plasma levels, they will not prevent ongoing
when our anesthesia protocols were in development
potassium loss or correct hypokalemia. Nor mal saline
Please refer to the individual protocols for the specific
(0.9% NaCl) can be used as a replacement fluid even
fluid type, volume and rate of fluid administration.
The following is a general overview of fluid therapy
though it is not a balanced solution, as it only provides
sodium and chloride. In a normal patient, 75% to 80%
considerations surrounding anesthesia.
of the isotonic crystalloids administered IV moves to the
extravascular space within two hours and serves primarily
Pain
Types of fluids
as a replacement of extracellular fluid (ECF). In most
The broad types of fluids that can be administered
anesthetic procedures, rehydration and resuscitation
 intravenously are crystalloids, colloids and oxygen-
with crystalloids is best accomplished by using an
carrying fluids. The only oxygen-carrying fluids available
isotonic, balanced electrolyte solution such as LRS or
to the veterinary market now are fresh whole blood
Normosol-R. Both 0.9% NaCl and 2.5% dextrose/0.45
transfusions or packed red cell transfusions, since
% NaCl solutions are also isotonic and can be used as
Oxyglobin? (a bovine hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier),
replacement fluids in select situations where Normosol-R
is off the veterinary market. More comprehensive and
 ead se ys dde iou ae t 
alkalosis. In many situations, potassium supplementation
vitally important details regarding administration of
oxygen-carrying colloids and accomplishing blood
Drugs
with potassium chloride should not be used where rapid
transfusions are beyond the scope of this book, but can be
found in other references.
infusion of large volumes may occur, as this can induce
gs and
cardiac abnormalities.
Crystalloids are aqueous solutions that contain
electrolytes and non-electrolyte solutes which can pass
The goal of fluid therapy in anesthetized patients is to
easily through capillary membranes. The crystalloid
maintain a normal physiologic state or return it to close
FI
 solutions currently used in the Banfield practice are:
to normal before anesthesia. The most common changes
luid
during anesthesia are related to volume or composition of
 0.9% sodium chloride (0.9% NaCl)
the extracellular fluid. Selection of the appropriate fluid
 Therapy
 0.45% sodium chloride with 2.5% dextrose
type and fluid rate for a patient, should be based on the
(2.5% dextrose/0.45% NaCl)
 needs of the patient and it is important to evaluate the
■ Lactated Ringer's Solution (LRS)
patient before, during and after anesthesia to determine if
Normosol-R
the fluid rate and type are meeting the patient's needs.
Colloids are aqueous solutions that contain both small
For hypovolemic states, crystalloid fluids such as 0.9%
and large molecules that are often too large to filter
NaCl, LRS or Normosol®-R should be used initially
ai ui is sun pu suqau Aieideo qno
Volumes one and a half to three times the calculated
intravascular space. Colloids are divided into natural
blood volume of the pet (blood volume of the dog is
and synthetic forms. Natural colloids consist of plasma
80 to 90 mL/kg; blood volume of the cat is 45 mL/
packed red blood cells and whole blood preparations.
kg) may be required to restore cardiovascular values to
Synthetic colloids available include hetastarch, which
 acceptable levels.
Banfield currently carries.
 Dogs: 20 mL/kg bolus (up to 80 mL/kg). Cats: 5 mL/kg 
bolus (up to 40 mL/kg)
Crystalloids
Crystalloids are used primarily for interstitial volume
 be required to achieve these fluid volume rates.
replacement and maintenance fluids. The composition
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 39
Table 3.5
Electrolyte Composition of Commercially Available Fluids
Glucose
Na+
CI-
K+
Ca2+
Mg2+
Buffert
Fluid
Osmolarity
Cal/L
PH
(g/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mEq/L)
(mOsm/L)
Acid
Dextrose and Electrolyte Solution Composition
2.5% dextrose
Elect
ders.
25
77
77
0
0
280
85
4.5
in 0.45% NaCl
0.9% NaCI
0
154
154
0
0
0
308
5.0
Lactated
Ringer's
130
109
4
3
28 (L)
272
9
6.5
to
ed
uO
Solution 
rapy
Normosol-M
ac
50
40
40
13
0
3
16 (A)
364
175
5.5
 in 5% dextrose+
nan
Ani
Normosol-R+
140
86
5
0
3
27 (A)
296
18
6.4
Fluid
品
tola
rsn
Plasma-Lytes
140
103
10
5
3
47 (A)
312
17
5.5
Bar
de
and
!L
50% dextrose
500
0
0
0
0
0
2780
1700
4.2
se
Drugs
十 Buffers used: A, acetate; B, bicarbonate; G, gluconate; L, lactate
 CEVA Laboratories. Overland Park, Kan.
§ Travenol Laboratories, Deerfield, Ill.
1u
Colloids
111
 Synthetic colloids should be used with caution and at
 Colloids are primarily intravascular volume-replacing
reduced dosage rates in patients with congestive heart
fluids. Colloids may be used in hypovolemic patients and
failure and in those with renal disease.
in those with severe hypoalbuminemia (serum albumin
 Hetastarch can be used for resolution of volume
levels are less than 2 g/dL). The benefits of colloid
depletion (due to hypovolemia, shock, blood loss).
M
It can be used in combination with plasma or whole
of hypovolemia. Resuscitation of perfusion deficits
in
blood for ongoing hemorrhage from traumatic loss, or
associated with hypovolemia requires rapid intravascular
Pai
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
volume expansion by IV or interosseous (lO) routes of
● Dogs: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 20 mL/kg/day)
administration. Colloids and crystalloids are equally
● Cats: 2.5 mL/kg bolus (up to 10 mL/kg/day)
 effective in expanding the plasma compartment; however,
● Evaluate ECG.
● Hetastarch has a moderate colloid effect for
 approximately 24 hours.
volumes of crystalloids rapidly administ
stered IV can lead
■ Fresh whole blood contains red blood cells,
to extrava
ionintotheinterstitiur
otentially, the
 coagulation factors, platelets, albumin, fibrinogen,
ripheral edema.
1. Colloids are needed
globulins, white blood cells and antithrombin. A
starting dosage is 10 to 22 mL/kg.
■ Packed red blood cells contain red blood cells only.
 encountered with rapid natural colloid infusion. They can
 Starting dose is 10 mL/kg.
also be used in conjunction with whole blood or plasma.
 Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains coagulation factors,
They are not, however, to be considered a substitute
 albumin, fibrinogen, globulins and antithrombin.
for blood products when albumin, red blood cells or
 Starting dosage for FFP is 6 to 10 mL/kg.
coagulation proteins are needed.
40
 Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
■ Blood products should always be administered warm
pressure or, if necessary, a back-and-forth screwing
(never exceed 99°F) with an in-line blood filter.
motion through the cortex. Puppies and kittens have
■ Cross-matching should be performed for patients
very soft bones, and very little pressure is needed.
receiving blood products containing red blood cells.
■ Once the needle is in the marrow cavity there should
1 In normovolemic patients, the recommended infusion
be no resistance. If there is resistance, the needle is
rate for whole blood or plasma products is 6 to
cortical bone and may need to be withdrawn partway
 22 ml/kg/day In hypovolemic patients, the rate
and redirected. Continue through the cortical bone to
should not exceed 22 mL/kg/hr.
 a       
■ For patients with compromised cardiac function, the
millimeters to see if the needle is hitting the cortical
rate should not exceed 4 ml/kg/hr.
bone on the opposite side of the marrow cavity.
 To confirm correct placement, remove the stylet,
Intraosseous route (lo) for fluid
attach a sterile 3 ml syringe and aspirate. A small
therapy
amount of marrow should be visible in the hub.
Marrow is not always retrieved, especially in exotics.
It is often very difficult or impossible to deliver fluid
If the needle is well-seated you should be able to
 therapy intravenously to pediatric patients, other small
move the limb by moving the hub of the needle and
 exotics and pets in shock. In these cases, where peripheral
sterile fluid should flow easily into the needle with no
Pa
veins are small and collapsed, it is very important
 subcutaneous build-up of fluid.
ain
 to supply the patient with fluids. Placement of an
 Secure the hub of the needle with tape and/or suture.
intraosseous catheter is a simple and lifesaving procedure.
 F-collars are highly recommended to prevent patient 
2
aggravation of the site.
Materials:
■ Attach IV fluids. Anything that can be administered IV
■ IV fluids
(with the exception of chemotherapeutic agents), can
■ IV drip set
also be administered via IO catheter. Follow the same 
 22-, 20- or 18-gauge short spinal needle is preferred
dose and fluid rate as used for IV.
n
to prevent bone plugs, however syringe needles of the
 If fluids are not to be continuous, a catheter male
appropriate gauge can be used
adaptor plug may be inserted and the site padded
■ Surgical gloves
with gauze and vet-wrapped to protect the hub.
ug
■ Most critically ill pets will not need to be sedated for
 IO catheters may be left in place for up to 72 hours in
IO catheter placement. If sedation is necessary, use
 a critically ill patient. The IO catheter must be pulled if
midazolam 0.2 mg/kg plus butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg
the patient beco mes active and bends the needle.
IM for both dogs and cats. (For exotic patients, please
refer to the Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic
T
Pets, starting on page 123, and proceed with the steps
3
for the particular species or class).
■ Shave and perform a surgical prep of the area over the 
Figure 3.31: Placement Sites for Interosseous Catheter
二
insertion site. See Figure 3.3l for recommended sites.
 After surgical prep, a sterile paper glove liner can be
TrochantericFossa
used to create a clean field over the insertion site.
■ Block the skin over the site and the deep tissues,
including the periosteum, with lidocaine. Calculate
the lidocaine dose carefully to avoid toxicity due to
Greater
overdose. The maximum lidocaine dose for a local
Tubercle
ofthe
block is 2 mg/kg.
Humerus
 If the site cannot be easily palpated because of fat/
 muscle tissue or tough skin, make a small stab
incision to facilitate insertion of the needle into the
bone. Note: Difficult insertion can result in a bent/
?
dulled needle or tissue trauma.
Proximal
Tibia
 Insert the needle, with the stylet in place (See Figure
3.31 for location and orientation of the needle), into
the trochanteric fossa of the femur, greater tubercle of
the humerus or proximal tibia. Use moderate direct
Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy | 41
Possible complications
 Infection resulting in cellulites, subcutaneous
 abscess or osteomyelitis. Proper sterilization and
 prep of area before catheter placement will greatly
reduce the chance of infection.
 Extravasation of fluid around the puncture site.
This will be absorbed once fluids are stopped.
 Needle breaks off in the bone. As long as there is
no infection or tissue irritation, this is unlikely to
be a problem. If a portion of the needle is in the
subcutaneous space, then you can attempt retrieval
with a cut-down.
Possible reasons for therapeutic
failure
rapy
■ Misplacement, bending or clogging of the needle
■ Puncture through the bone
■ Replacement of the marrow cavity with fat or
fibrous tissue
Fluid
Complications of fluid therapy
Fluid overload can be a major complication of IV fluid
and
 therapy. Patients with underlying cardiac, renal or
pulmonary dysfunction are particularly susceptible
Drugs
to fluid overload. Symptoms of fluid overload include
 serous nasal discharge, coughing, restlessness, dyspnea,
pulmonary crackles, chemosis, ascites, diarrhea and
fluid extravasation from the catheter site. These clinical
u
signs can resolve when IV fluids are discontinued. Cats
 are more susceptible to fluid overload and should be
 monitored closely whenever fluids are being administered.
a
Other complications that should be monitored include
9
catheter site complications, hypoproteinemia and/or
 hypoalbuminemia and electrolyte disturbances.
Mal
Reference
Pain
1. Chan DL, Rozanski EA, Freeman LM, Rush JE. Colloid
 Osmotic pressure in heath and disease. Compendium.
2001;23(10):896-904.
 42 |  Pain Management, Drugs and Fluid Therapy
SECTION 4:
Equipment
Equipmer
SECTION 4
Equipment
ANESTHESIA EQUIPMENT
inducing coagulation defects in small pets with repeated use
or accidental mixture of too strong of a solution.
This section reviews specific recommendations for various
anesthetic-related items. While other members of the
Laryngoscopes
hospital team can select and prepare equipment, it is the
 A laryngoscope should always be used to aid in
responsibility of the attending doctor to ensure that the
intubation. This is especially important when intubating
proper anesthetic equipment is chosen for each pet and
cats and brachycephalic dogs. Using a laryngoscope to
that the equipment is in good working order prior to
visualize the trachea reduces the risks of complications
induction (See Anesthesia System Flow Chart, page 50).
during intubation. Test the laryngoscope prior to inducing
anesthesia. The small blade is typically used for cats
Intravenous (IV) catheters
and small dogs, and the large blade is typically used for
medium and large dogs.
Table 4.1
Recommended IV Catheter Size
Endotracheal tube selection
Figure 4.2
Wt. (kg)
Catheter Size
Eq
juipment
> 16 kg 
18-gauge
9to 16 kg
 20- 18-gauge
2 to 8.9 kg
22- 20-gauge
^ 2 kg
 24- 20-gauge
When selecting catheter sizes (Figure 4. 1), the largest catheter
 that will not traumatize the vein should be used. This allows
for the rapid administration of fluids and drugs if needed
in an emergency situation. The ranges listed above can be
used as a guideline to aid in selecting catheters, and should
Endotracheal tubes
 be used in conjunction with evaluating the patient's size and 
condition. Nor mal saline should be used to flush catheters.
■ Selecting the correct tube size will depend on the
Heparinized saline is not recommended due to risk of
breed and body condition of the patient (Figure 4.2)
Selecting tubes based on patient weight can lead to the
Figure 4.1
wrong tube size being used; this is especially true in
overweight or brachycephalic patients.
 The largest tube that will fit easily and not irritate or
 traumatize the trachea is recommended.
 There are two methods to assist in selecting an
endotracheal tube:
● The endotracheal tube size should be as close as
 possible to the diameter of the trachea. Digitally
palpating the patient's trachea will often help to
indicate optimal tube size.
● The distal end (end going into the patient) of
V catheters
the endotracheal tube can be measured against
Equipment | 43
Figure 4.3
■ Breathing circuit selection should be based on the
patient's ideal body weight. A patient's ideal body
weight may be different from actual body weight. Using
what the patient should weigh is important as lung size
and breathing capacity do not change with weight gain.
Figure 4.4
The distal end of the ET tube can be measured against the width
of the patient's nasal septum.
the width of the patient's nasal septum. While
this method is effective, there is the possibility of
selecting a size too small (Figure 4.3).
 It is recommended to have three endotracheal tubes
ready prior to intubation-the tube intended for use,
Universal F circuit: rebreathing circuit
along with one larger and one smaller in diameter.
This will ensure that additional tubes are at hand if the
Non-rebreathing circuit
Equipment
tracheal diameter is over- or underestimated
The non-rebreathing (Bain, Jackson-Rees) circuit should
■ Cuffs should be tested for integrity before use. When
be utilized on pets that are 2 kgs or less (Figure 4.5). It is
checking the cuff for leaks, do not over-inflate the
important to remember that the non-rebreathing circuit is a
cuff as this will destroy the cuff (See Induction and
 semi-closed system and does not utilize the CO, absorbent.
Intubation, page 65, for additional infor mation).
In order to prevent rebreathing of CO, the flow rate of oxy-
■ Tubes must be clean and in good condition.
gen must be higher than the patient's respiratory volume.
● Endotracheal tubes should be rinsed after every use
Therefore, the oxygen flow rate should never be below 2 1
with a mild detergent or antiseptic (antibacterial
 per minute when using a non-rebreathing system.
hand soap or dilute chlorhexidine).
● The tubes can soak in plain water when necessary to
Figure 4.5
 aid in removing mucus or other debris.
● Always ensure the cuff is inflated during the
● Endotracheal cleaning brushes MUST be used to
 clean the internal surfaces of the tube to remove any
mechanical obstruction within the tube.
● ALL cleaning residue MUST be rinsed completely with
water. Residual chlorhexidine has been associated with
 epithelial ulceration and chemical burns in the oral
cavity and trachea of cats exposed to it. Be careful and
 thoroughly remove any detergent residue.
● After cleaning, deflate the cuff and hang to dry.
Non-rebreathing circuit
Tips for connecting the non-rebreathing circuit:
Breathing circuit guidelines
■ The patient end is the portion of the breathing circuit
■ 2 to 10 kgs use pediatric (pink) rebreathing circuit
that is connected to the endotracheal tube or mask
(Figure 4.4)
on the patient. (Banfield only recommends the use of
 O to 2 kgs use non-rebreathing circuit (Fgure 4.5)
masks for exotic or pocket pets.)
■> 10 kgs use adult (blue) rebreathing circuit
44丨 Equipment
 The quick-disconnect connects to the anesthesia
Table 4.2
 machine by inserting it into the female end of the
Anesthetic Rebreathing Bag Size
tubing that comes out of the vaporizer.
■ The exhalation limb on the non-rebreathing circuit
Wt. (kg)
Bag Size
 should be inserted into the scavenger hose that is a
0-4.5 kg
%-L bag
part of the hospital's anesthesia scavenger system.
4.6-9 kg
1-L bag 
Always verify that the pop-off valves on the non-
rebreathing circuit are open before connecting to
9.1-27.2 kg
2-L bag
the scavenger system.
27.3-54.4 kg
 3-L bag
 Always trace the flow of gas through the anesthesia
machine to ensure that the non-rebreathing circuit has
 54.5 and above
5-L bag
 been set up properly.
Oxygen cylinders
Care and cleaning of circuits
There are various sizes of oxygen cylinders in our practice.
Breathing circuits should be leak tested before each use
The approximate minutes of oxygen remaining in a partial
Buei yea jo oml ia ne da siseq Ao e uo pe
tank can be calculated based on the oxygen tank's capacity
circuits on hand in case of a leak. Breathing circuits are
and the oxygen flow rate (L/min). Full tanks, regardless of
 consumable items and should be replaced every six months.
 size, are pressurized to approximately 2,000 psi (pounds
Auonodoid saseaoap ainsand siu (uut arenbs iad 
Rebreathing circuits and non-rebreathing circuits should
 as the tank empties.
be cleaned daily in a dilute chlorhexidine solution. Tubing
■ The small E tanks hold 600 liters of oxygen. If there
and bags should be soaked for no more than l0 minutes
are no backup E tanks in the hospital, surgery should
 and then thoroughly and completely rinsed in water after
not be attempted with less than 500 psi remaining in
soaking. Remove as much of the water as possible from
the tank.
the circuits and bags by using centrifugal force. Hang
Eq
■ The watermelon tanks that fit into the back of the
circuits to dry after cleaning. Do not leave them attached
anesthesia cart hold 1,200 L of oxygen. With 500 psi,
ui
to the anesthesia machine.
 there are 300 L of oxygen.
m
■ The large H tanks hold 7,000 I of oxygen, and at
Anesthetic rebreathing bags
lent
500 psi (1/4 left), 1,750 I of oxygen remains. If 
When selecting which size bag to use, the decision should
running a flow rate of l L/minute, there is adequate
be based on the patient's ideal body weight (See Figure
 oxygen delivery for 1,750 minutes or 29 hours of
4.6 and Table 4.2). Anesthetic rebreathing bags should be
anesthesia time.
leak tested before each use and on a monthly basis. Keep
at least two of each bag size on hand in case of a leak. Bags
Capacity (in L)/ service pressure (in psi) = remaining
are consumable items and should be replaced every three
contents (in L)/gauge pressure (in psi)
to six months.
OR
Capacity (in L)/ service pressure (in psi) x gauge
Figure 4.6
pressure (in psi)/(L/min to be delivered) = minutes left
at the flow rate.
Anesthetic rebreathing bags
Equipment | 45
Figure 4.7
When checking a rebreathing system, make sure that
the CO, absorbent is functional. CO, absorbents can
become exhausted or desiccated when used beyond their
capacity to hold carbon dioxide. Desiccation occurs when
the absorbent becomes “dried out" whether from being
utilized within the breathing circuit, sitting in the canister
 during periods when it is not in use, or if left unsealed
in storage. Whereas fresh granules will be soft enough to
crush, the exhausted granules are chemically altered and
hard. Once the granules become hardened, they will no
longer absorb carbon dioxide and should be thrown away
and replaced im mediately. Indicators of pH are added
to the absorbents so that as chemical reactions happen,
the color of the granules changes. Most CO, absorbents
will turn from white to violet as the granules become
exhausted. However, not all absorbents will maintain the
violet color and the granules will revert back to white after
a period of time. This does not indicate that the granules
are safe to continue using. CO, absorbents should be
 changed routinely; do not wait for color change to
MEDICALS
replace absorbent.
877.620-18
When the granules are exhausted and carbon dioxide is
not effectively removed from the rebreathing system, there
 is an increased potential for hypercapnia. Hypercapnia can
lent
lead to respiratory acidosis, and is also associated with
Soda lime canister
Equipme
sympathetic stimulation and cardiac arrhythmias that
 can lead to cardiac arrest. High levels of carbon dioxide
Soda lime canister
 can also depress the central nervous system and have
a uo sal aua juodn so al jo auo
anesthetic effects.
anesthesia machine is the absorber assembly, which
contains the canister for the CO, absorbent (soda lime,
Another risk related to continued use of exhausted or
Carbolime, Amsorb?, etc.) which removes carbon
desiccated CO, absorbent is that dangerous levels of
dioxide from the rebreathing circuit. The canister filled
carbon monoxide gas and compound-A may be generated
with absorbent is a common area for malfunctions in the
within the anesthesia system. These chemicals are released
anesthetic system and is a source of resistance during
through a reaction that occurs between the absorbent
and the anesthetic agent (sevoflurane). These reactions
absorbent and leaks can result from failure to create a tight
 are typically seen when absorbents that contain sodium
seal when replacing the canister. Proper packing of the
hydroxide (NaOH) and/or potassium hydroxide (KOH)
are still used after they have become desiccated.
pathway inside, which can lead to excessive dead space.
Gently shake the canister when filling it with soda lime to
Routinely changing the CO, absorbent will help prevent
prevent loose packing and reduce channeling. Packing
this reaction from occurring. The CO, absorbent should
too tightly causes dust formation and increases resistance
be changed based on anesthesia time. The following
to ventilation.
are recommendations based on the type of canister and
amount of absorbent each canister holds. Please note that
It is important to understand the function of the chemical
these are general recommendations only:
 absorbent. Calcium hydroxide is the primary component
■ The tidal volume of the patient is the determining
of CO, absorbents. Depending on the fresh gas inflow,
factor; i.e., the larger the patient, the more carbon
all or part of the exhaled carbon dioxide may be absorbed
dioxide is produced and the faster the granules may
chemically. Chemical absorption of carbon dioxide
be exhausted.
enables a lower flow of fresh gas, reduces waste of
 The soda lime canisters are l,800 to 1,850 mL and
inhalant anesthetics and oxygen and minimizes the
hold approximately one full three-pound bag of
cost of anesthesia.
46 丨 Equipment
absorbent. Any absorbent left in the bag after filling
machine. Note: Do not connect 22 mm tubing from
the canister should be discarded and not stored in the
the ceiling directly to the pop-off valve or bag
hospital. The absorbent has an expected life of 10 to
bleed valve.
12 hours of anesthesia time or four weeks maximum
■ One end of the l9 mm evacuation, blue corrugated
exposure to room air. If unsure of how long the
tubing attaches to either the pop-off valve on the
absorbent has been in use, check the consistency of
rebreathing head or the bag bleed valve on the non-
 the granules before using.
rebreathing system; the other end attaches to the waste
■ Remermber that the absorbent MUST be changed
 gas interface valve on the machine.
 every 30 days, even if the color has not changed or
the maximum anesthesia time has not been reached.
Figure 4.9
 When pouring the absorbent into the canister,
 avoid allowing granules to get in the center tube
of the canister. Granules in the tube have the
 potential to enter the breathing circuit and the
patient's airway.
 In an effort to ensure that absorbent is changed in the
appropriate time frame, use soda lime stickers, 3- by
5-inch stickers that are placed on the absorbent canister
(Figure 4.8). For each 15 minutes of anesthesia, one box
is checked off. When the maximum amount of anesthesia
time has been reached:
■ The CO, absorbent is changed.
 The sticker is removed. A new sticker is placed on
the canister.
Egl
uipment
Figure 4.8
Date Changed:
Initials:
D0OO
00O
000000
口口
口口
Evacuation system
123
10
11
12
sco/Surgivet
MatrxVMS
LEI Medical
 The ceiling adjustment handle, if the hospital is equipped
8-10 hours
and VASCO
10-12hours
with one, must be in the proper position to attain the
● Check 1 box for every 15 minutes of anesthesia time
 proper negative pressure. This is at approximately a
- Replace Soda Lime once maximum time is reached
45-degree angle (adjustments may be needed). Newer
·Change Soda Lime every 30 days, even if the
maximum anesthesia time has not been reached
Banfield
hospitals will not have an adjustment handle because the
new waste gas interface has an auto-regulation feature
Soda lime sticker
 If the waste gas interface valve is bypassed and the
Evacuation system
negative pressure from the evacuation system in the
 If the active waste gas evacuation (scavenger) system is out
ceiling is applied directly to the anesthesia system's pop-
of balance, anesthetic gases willfollow the path of least
off valve or bag bleed valve, it will be difficult to maintain
resistance. If negative pressure is applied to the pop-off valve
 an appropriate plane of anesthesia, and the patient may
on the rebreathing head or the bag bleed valve on the non-
not stay anesthetized (Refer to Iroubleshooting, page 52-53,
rebreathing system, the patient may not be getting the proper
for more information). All Banfield hospitals should have a
 dose of anesthetic. To prevent this, the evacuation system
 Scavenger system. This system has been installed for
 must be hooked up and adjusted properly.
the safe removal of waste anesthesia gases generated
during anesthesia. It is utilized in conjunction with
One end of 22 mm translucent, white corrugated
 the anesthesia machine. If your hospital has an "F-Air
tubing attaches to the fitting in the ceiling, the other
Canister" and not a fan-style system, contact the CTS
end attaches to the waste gas interface valve on the
Facilities Hotline (ext. 5566).
Equipment | 47
The scavenger unit is a UL-approved, custom-made exhaust
Regulator
fan housed in a 12-by 12- by 6-inch stainless steel box. This
box is mounted above the ceiling tile in your hospital. It has
Figure 4.10
been designed to draw in waste anesthesia gases and then
expel those gases through a pipe in the roof of the building
to the outside.
 The system itself consists of preset balancing valves-gate
valves with a 1 1/2-inch diameter copper or white-painted
pipe extending 7 to 18 inches below it-that descend
from the ceiling in the surgery and treatment rooms
The clear plastic tubing that comes with the anesthesia
machine connects from the anesthesia machine to the
end of the balancing valve pipe. The balancing valves are
connected above the ceiling tile in both rooms to a series
of horizontal 3-inch copper piping, which is connected
directly to the scavenger unit intake opening.
Oxygen regulator
aul yanoiui dn umeip aie sasea paeuxa aui aouo
balancing valve and piped into the unit, they are expelled
The oxygen regulator is a medical grade, preset, non-
into a copper pipe leading up through the roof to
adjustable regulator designed to reduce oxygen tank
 pressure from approximately 2,000 psi, when full,to
the outside.
approximately 50 psi. The oxygen regulator can fail,
resulting in pressure being too high or too low.
This unit is turned on and off by a lighted wall switch
 commonly located inside or directly outside the surgery
Equipment
A high-pressure failure of the regulator may result in one
'o paua e jou s jeidsoy mon u yms aul jl uooi
or more of the following:
contact CTS Facilities Hotline (ext. 5566) for assistance. All
juaand ol yu aiqin e ym paddmba aie siun sauaes
■ Failure of the oxygen quick-disconnects
motor damage or tripping of the electrical circuit. It is very
 Failure of the oxygen check valves in dual gas supply
important to turn off the scavenger unit when not in use.
 Failure of tubing
This unit was not designed to run continuously and, if left
 Failure of oxygen flush
on, the life of the unit will be severely compromised. Older
 Oxygen leak from regulator
hospitals may have a scavenger unit located below the
ceiling tile in the maintenance room. This unit is turned
A low-pressure failure of the regulator may result in one or
on and off by means of a toggle switch located on the unit
more of the following:
itself. This unit's piping system above the ceiling is the same
as all others.
 Improper or insufficient oxygen delivered to patient
lenai aui yanou ssed oi uxo jo ain 
 In order to help all associates in the hospital quickly
recognize the on-off switch for the scavenger system, use
Solution: If any one of the above conditions exists, replace
oxygen regulator. Call CTS Facilities Hotline (ext. 5566)
the switch cover plate. It is the doctor's responsibility to
before proceeding.
ensure each veterinary technician/assistant understands
how the scavenger system works and why it is important
to utilize it correctly.
48 丨Equipment
Manometer
Figure 4.12
Figure 4.11
Manometer
When not in use, the needle on the manometer gauge
Safety pressure relief valve
should be at zero. The re-zero screw is located at the
12 o'clock position under the crystal manometer cover.
Vaporizer and anesthesia machine
Remove the cover by turning counter-clockwise. Adjust
service
the screw mechanism until the needle is zeroed. Replace
Vaporizer service: Because sevoflurane is a relatively clean
manometer cover.
 anesthetic, it is reco mmended that sevoflurane vaporizers 
be professionally cleaned and calibrated every one to
 If the manometer will not re-zero, or if the needle will
 three years, depending on the type of vaporizer. Vaporizer
not deflect proper pressure, it should be replaced.
 maintenance includes the following.
Eq
■ If the manometer cover is cracked, broken or missing.
 Leak test the vaporizer.
uipm
it should be replaced
■ Output test of the vaporizer using Lamtec? 605
infrared spectrophotometer or Riken analysis.
Oxygen flush valve
■ A written report on the status of the vaporizer.
ent
 The oxygen flush valve allows the delivery of a high
flow rate of oxygen (35 to 75 L/min), while bypassing
Fill new/empty vaporizers with sevoflurane 45 minutes
the vaporizer. Using the flush valve will quickly fill the
prior to use to saturate the wick.
breathing system with pure oxygen, which can produce
a rapid decrease in anesthetic depth. The flush valve is
Anesthesia machine service: The entire anesthesia device
not intended for routine use when a patient is attached
will be serviced every two years. The service will include,
to the anesthesia machine, especially not when a non-
but is not limited to, the following:
rebreathing circuit is used or when the safety pressure
■ Replace all tubing.
relief valve is closed.
■ Replace all seals.
■ Replace top canister gasket.
The flush valve should be used when performing a leak
■ Replace bottom canister gasket.
test on the anesthesia machine (See Figure. 4.14, page
■ Replace dome "O" rings (two each).
51). The flush valve should not be used to inflate the
■ Replace downtube“O” ring.
rebreathing bag during an anesthetic procedure. Instead
 Leak test high pressure system.
turn up the oxygen flow rate until the bag fills.
 Leak test low pressure system.
■ Inspect pop-off valve pressure.
Safety pressure relief valve
■ Inspect waste gas interface device.
 Re-zero manometer.
This valve is designed to stay open and can only shut
 Install mechanical stop oxygen flow control assembly.
when it is forcefully pressed down (See Figure 4.14,
if not previously upgraded.
page 51).
■ Adjust existing mechanical stop oxygen flow control
 assembly if necessary.
Equipment | 49
■ Inspect all components for proper fit, alignment,
■ Anesthesia machine: It is imperative that the entire
adjust ment and operation.
team associated with anesthetizing a pet understands
■ Consumable items will not be inspected or replaced
how the machine works and can trace how oxygen
at the two-year service. It is up to individual hospitals
flows through the unit to the pet (Figure 4.13).
 to ensure that their rebreathing sets, rebreathing bags
 and non-rebreathing systems are in proper condition 
for use.
Figure 4.13: Anesthesia System Flow Chart
Key
Adjustable component
Oxygen
To Ceiling ExhaustVent
Oxygenw/sevoflurane
Oxygen w/ exhaled
so that used gas willeave
sevofluraneandcO2
the system.
Waste Gas
Interface
(Scavenger)
Flowmeter
Soda
Lime
Measures
Canister
amountof
oxygenflowing
Equipment
M
Adds anesthesia
tooxygen
Vaporizer
Tank
Regulator
Pop-off
valve
xpirator
valye
Oxygen
Flush
Rebreathing
Bag
Pop-off valve can be
Oxygen
closedtostopgas
Tank
fromleavingthe
system.This isdone
inconjunctionwith
squeezingthe
rebreathingbag tofi
thePet'slungsto
Only flows when oxygen
assist in breathing
flush button is pushed.
Inhaled
Exhaled
Thisdeliverspureoxygen
To Pet
mustbereopened
after thisprocedure
toPet.
50丨Equipment
Figure 4.14
Pop-off Valve Functional Settings
Normal Operation
 Screw-down pop-off valve is open and push-button valve is up.
■ In this position, the system is fully open and 
 gas will pass freely.
■ The manometer should read "o" with slight
 fluctuations during respiration.
■ Squeezing the rebreathing bag should not
Screw-down
create pressure in the system.
pop-off valve in
 open position.
High Pressure Leak Check
Screw-down pop-off valve is closed and push-button valve
is depressed.
very high pressures can be obtained. This allows a
high pressure check for system leaks.
 This position should never be used with a patient
connected to the system.
Equipment
■ The screw-down pop-off valve should be opened 
after the high pressure leak check is completed.
Manual Ventilation
Screw-down pop-off valve is open and push-button valve
is depressed.
■ In this position, the system is closed but will leak
at pressures of 20 to 25 cm H,0.
■ This allows enough pressure to manually ventilate
the patient without risking excessive pressure, which
 can cause pulmonary damage and death.
User Error Safety
Screw-down pop-off valve is closed and push-button valve
is open.
■ In this position, the system is partialy closed but
will leak at 0.5 cm H,O. This will not cause injury to
the patient but depressing the push-button valve to
ventilate the patient would allow excessive pressure
 and could injure the patient.
■ This setting is designed to stop patient deaths
associated with leaving the pop-off valve closed, but 
 it is not recommended for normal operation.
Equipment |51
TROUBLESHOOTING
 If the pressure remains fairly constant, with the
oxygen turned off,the machine can be considered free
When performing any troubleshooting on the anesthesia
of leaks on the low pressure side.
machine, it is imperative to consider how each part works
 If the manometer reading drops rapidly, the bag
 together, and to check each par to accurately identify any
deflates rapidly, or there is a hissing sound, there is a
 leaks or broken equipment.
 leak. See below on identifying and correcting leaks in
the circuit.
For example, if patients are not staying anesthetized even
■ While still covering the end of the anesthesia tube.
with the vaporizer set to 4% or higher, complete the
 reopen the pop-off valve to the usual setting.
following steps using information oulined in the sections
■ Make certain that the pop-off valve is reopened; a
below:
 dosed pop-off valve can result in serious anesthesia
1. Check for right bronchus intubation. When the
complications including the death of the pet.
endotracheal tube is placed in the right bronchus,
■ While still covering the end of the anesthesia tube,
anesthetic gas is only administered to one lung. If this
 squeeze any remaining gas in the rebreathing bag to
occurs, back out the endotracheal tube and repeat
ensure the gas has an unobstructed way out through
intubation.
the evacuation system.
 2. Check the breathing circuit and endotracheal tube for
physical obstructions-if found, remove.
Identifying and correcting leaks:
3. Check the system for any leaks-check the entire
 If the system does not maintain pressure, check
system as there may be more than one leak.
all hoses, including the rebreathing circuit; the
4. Check the evacuation system for the appropriate
rebreathing bag; the area around the pop-off valve,
balance of positive and negative pressure.
vaporizer inlet and outlets; any mechanical fittings; the
"O" rings; the CO, absorbent canister for cracks and
 5. Check the oxygen flowmeter and regulator.
proper seating; and any other fittings or seals.
lipment
6. Check that the vaporizer is filled and working correctly
1 Windex? can be sprayed on the hoses and around the
connections while performing the leak test to identify
Note: Questions can be directed to your medical
where a potential leak may be. Keep in mind that it
director, a medical advisor (ext. 7800), or the CTS
may take a few seconds for bubbles to appear around
Inba
Facilities Hotline (ext. 5566).
a leak after application of the Windex?. To correct,
replace the hose, bag seal or equipment where the
leak has been identified.
Checking for leaks:
■ Performing a leak test will verify that the system is
Checking for leaks around the
 maintaining pressure.
endotracheal tube:
■ This should be performed prior to every anesthetic
procedure.
■ While the patient is still intubated and connected
 to the anesthesia machine, close the pop-off valve
Performing the leak test on the
 and squeeze the rebreathing bag until an inspiratory
 pressure of 18 to 20 cm H,0 is reached.
anesthesia cart:
■ Do not hold the breath for longer than two to three
■ Close the pop-off valve and cover the end of the
seconds.
anesthesia tube with your palm or finger, or utilize the
■ While administering the breath, listen for a hissing or
small, white plastic cylinder found on the back of the
leaking sound around the endotracheal tube.
 anesthesia cart as a plug.
 If a leak is NOT heard, do not add/remove air from
■ Push the oxygen flush bag (not to be used when
the cuff.
a patient is attached to the anesthesia system) or
■ Checking the cuff for leaks and cuff inflation may
turn the flowmeter on until the manometer reads
 need to be repeated three to five minutes after the
approximately 20 cm HO, or the rebreathing bag
anesthetic inhalant has been started. As the patient
is filled.
becomes anesthetized, the muscles in the trachea and
■ While still covering the end of the anesthesia tube.
larynx will relax, which may cause a leak to develop.
monitor the manometer-it should stay at a fairly
constant pressure.
52 丨Equipment
Correcting leaks around
concentration of anesthetic in the breathing circle.
the endotracheal tube:
Solution: Replace entire oxygen flowmeter and flush
assembly (rail system).
■ If a leak is heard around the endotracheal tube while
● Loose fitting on back of flowmeter (rare). Solution:
performing a leak test, only add air to the cuff until
the sound stops.
Tighten fitting with crescent wrench.
● Faulty check valve in dual gas supply (very rare).
■ Air should be added in small increments to prevent
 over-inflation from occurring.
Solution: Replace check valve.
■ Check the oxygen flowmeter control/knob (identified
by a green plastic knob). Oxygen flow control
Checking the evacuation system:
assembly, found on earlier models, may be damaged.
■ The scavenger drop tubes should have negative air
Over-tightening of oxygen flow control assembly
pressure present at the opening. A very slight intake of
results in damage to seat (where oxygen can leak past
air should be felt when placing your hand near
seat so that oxygen flow cannot shut off) or damage to
the opening. To test the level of suction of the 
needle valve (where needle valve can break off in seat
evacuation system, hold a tissue to the opening and
which prevents the flow of oxygen-knob and shaft
watch to ensure that the tissue is gently drawn to the
continue to turn without oxygen flowing).
scavenger tube. Do not allow the tissue to be drawn
 If oxygen flush does not work, check to ensure that
into the tube.
 Oxygen tank is on. Open tank valve by several turns.
■ Ensure that the evacuation system is turned on prior
 If oxygen flush and oxygen flowmeter do not work
to testing.
and tank is on, the regulator needs to be replaced or
 If there is too much suction or negative pressure, the
the oxygen tank needs to be replaced. Solution: Try
another oxygen tank,if problems persist, change out
system along with the waste gases.
regulator.
 If there is not enough negative pressure, waste gases
■ If the oxygen flowmeter control/knob is deemed
will not be pulled from the breathing circuit and
 defective (you are able to continually turn it past the
Equipment
 may cause potential harm to patients and hospital
 point of normal function), it will be replaced with
a flowmeter control/knob that contains a built in
associates.
mechanical stop.
■ If your hospital evacuation system has an adjustment
handle, ensure that it is set to approximately a
45-degree angle.
Checking the vaporizer:
■ To correct a pressure imbalance, contact the CTS
 Facilities Hotline (ext S566) for assistance.
■As vaporizers begin to fail, the amount of anesthetic
 gas produced may be less than the percentage noted
 on the dial. Before calling for service, check the
Checking the oxygen tanks
following:
and flowmeter:
● Ensure the vaporizer is not empty.
■ Turn off oxygen flowmeter. Turn on oxygen tank.
● Check the evacuation system as noted above.
oenai aui uo sneg anssaid yuei usskxo yoiem
● Check for any leaks in the breathing circuit as
When the needle on the gauge is stable, turn off
 noted above.
Oxygen tank If needle drops, there is a leak. The faster
● Check the regulator and oxygen flowmeter as
 noted above.
the needle drops, the bigger the leak.
■ Possible sources of leak:
● The vaporizer drain and fll cap are both
● Oxygen regulator or hose nut is not tight Solution:
tightened down.
Tighten oxygen regulator and hose nut.
● The inlet and outlet adaptors on the vaporizer
fit snugly.
● Oxygen flowmeter flow control assembly stuck in
 open position. Float (ball) in flowtube will not go to
zero. The float may be stuck in the flowmeter such
that it is perceived that oxygen is flowing, when
it is not Debris in the flowmeter may be causing
it to fail. Solution: Replace oxygen flow control
assembly.
● Oxygen flush seal defective (very rare). Oxygen
Equipment | 53
54 丨 Equipment
SECTION 5:
Preanesthetic
Evaluation
etic
Fvaluati
SECTION 5
Preanesthetic Evaluation
PREANESTHETIC EVALUATION
The most important step of the preanesthetic examination
is to accurately determine the patient's health status.
All anesthesia protocols begin with a thorough patient
The preanesthetic evaluation is critical in minimizing the
risk of morbidity and mortality, enabling the clinician to
 determining anesthetic risk. Why is this important? Most,
anticipate and possibly prevent potential complications
if not all, clients are very concerned about anesthetic risk.
during anesthesia.
Even when their pet appears healthy and the procedure is
routine, clients want to be accurately informed of all risks
Proper assessment of a patient's health, use of the safest
anesthetic agents, and diligent monitoring and support
The majority of clients view their pets as family members.
of perfusion allow most procedures to be done with
According to the American Animal Hospital Association
reasonable safety and produce the desired outcome.
(AAHA), 70% of pet owners think of their pets as children.
Appropriate anesthetic protocols and support of perfusion
Caring clients will avoid unnecessary risk. How do we best
reanesthetic
require understanding of the overall objectives of
manage risk, assuring our clients, and ourselves, that we
anesthesia and surgery.
are doing everything possible to maximize patient safety?
Evaluating the patient may reveal reasons to delay, cancel
Using a systematic approach to preanesthetic patient
or reschedule the procedure until the pet is stable. This
evaluation is one essential step that, as part of an entire
will also allow time for additional testing, to obtain more
anesthetic system, has improved outcomes in Banfield
information on the pet's health or, if necessary, find a
hospitals. The goals of a preanesthetic medical
 more experienced team to manage the high-risk patient
Evaluation
assessment are to:
■ Decrease morbidity and mortality with anesthesia
Banfield believes a standardized, systematic approach is
■ Determine the health status of a patient to minimize
the best method to minimize risk. Consistency eliminates
the risk of adverse events
confusion that may occur in busy hospitals with multiple
■ Increase quality of care
doctors using different protocols. A consistent protocol
■ Promote a problem-oriented approach to the
also permits analysis and aids in the establishment of best
 procedures
practices. An evidence-based approach shows that some
■ Earn clients' trust by ensuring their pet's safety and
protocols are safer than others, and objective data further
well-being
defines and improves patient care.
■ Provide baseline test results for future health care
when applicable
Another goal of preanesthetic testing is the establishment
of baseline data Despite practitioners' efforts, lient
Gathering information
compliance with preanesthetic testing is still an issue. In
many cases, collecting the preoperative blood sample
The preanesthetic evaluation answers three questions
may be the only opportunity to determine baseline linical
1. Is the patient in the best possible condition or optimal
pathologic data. Practitioners and clients should not
health to undergo anesthesia?
underestimate the value of establishing a biochemical and
hematologic baseline for patients. Charting trends over
 2. Does the patient have a concurrent condition that
should be addressed before the anesthetic procedure?
time is one of the best opportunities for early diagnosis
and treatment of disease.
3. Does the health status or concurrent medication
influence the anesthetic event, or delay or even cancel
the procedure?
Preanesthetic Evaluation |  55
Anesthesia Decision Algorithm
Are there
Perform procedure with anesthesia
abnormalities
to address?
as planned.
YES
is the
 Postpone procedure until abnormalities
procedure
 are addressed and patient is stabilized.
elective?
Evaluation
Evaluation
of history,
physical
Is there an
Proceed as carefully and
examination,
immediate
quickly as possible.
CBC with
emergency?*
Diff, IOF and 
electrolytes
Preanesthetic
NO
Try to stabilize the patient as quickly as
is this an
possible (i.e., fluids, pain management,
emergency?
 antibiotics, hot/cold therapy)
 and proceed.
NO
Is the pet's
Determine the best anesthesia protocol
condition chronic and
for the patient and proceed.
stabie?
Determine what additional diagnostics are needed, begin
NO
appropriate therapy, and stabilize condition before
proceeding with anesthesia.
* An immediate emergency is when a patient cannot breathe or is bleeding from a major vessel and needs to be under anesthesia in
less than 15 minutes.
56 |  Preanesthetic Evaluation
Evaluating preanesthetic patients
A complete patient evaluation-performed before any
The ASA Scale
anesthetic procedure-should consider signalment, medical
history, physical examination findings and laboratory
Grade 1
A normal, healthy pet
potential complications and take action to prevent them
Grade 2
A pet with mild systemic disease
which may or may not be associated
pet's health status and disease history are critical factors
with the surgical complaint (i.e., mild
anemia, obesity or geriatric patients)
Banfield Anesthesia Protocol, page 58), evaluation involves
more than performing a battery of tests. It requires
using the information to deter mine the safest method if
Grade 3
A pet with moderate systemic disease
anesthesia is appropriate. A pet's signalment may warrant
(fair)
which may or may not be associated
special consideration, as age, gender and breed are equally
with the surgical complaint and which
important elements to the preanesthetic assessment
limits activity, but is not incapacitating
(i.e., mitral valve insufficiency or
A thorough medical history is particularly important as it
collapsing trachea)
 may reveal previous disease and anesthetic complications,
concurrent medications or other facts, such as a recent
 meal, that may impact procedures. The veterinary team
Grade 4
A pet with severe systemic disease that
also needs to document preventive care treatments such
(poor)
interferes with the pet's normal function
as vaccinations, parasite control, dental care and disease
and is incapacitating and a constant
reanesthetic 
threat to life (ie., uncompensated
screening tests. If you find preventive care deficiencies,
take steps to correct them before performing an elective
heart failure, severe traumatic
procedure. f the procedure cannot be postponed, avoid
pneumothorax or severe abdominal
administering vaccinations and deworming medications
bleed from a ruptured mass)
until the patient fully recovers from anesthesia. It is also
important to inform the medical team of every procedure
being performed on the patient, as wellas any medical
Grade 5
A pet that is moribund and requires 
(critical, grave)
history that could lead to an anesthetic complication.
 immediate surgery and is not 
expected to live 24 hours, with or
Evaluation
This ensures that the entire team has received the
same information, which minimizes the chance of
without surgery
miscommunication during anesthesia.
Physical examination
ASA status
 Before any anesthetic procedure, conduct a thorough
and deliberate physical examination. Record findings in
The American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) has
established guidelines for overall health status in human
the patient's medical record. When possible, resolve any
issues before anesthetizing the pet A detailed evaluation
patients and has devised a Physical Status Classification
System. This is a quick and effective tool designed to allow
of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems is vital, as all
anesthetic drugs depress cardiovascular and pulmonary
doctors to be able to standardize (as much as possible)
function to some extent The liver and kidneys also need
physical status and, in many cases, to help predict
specific assesment because of their role in metabolizing
anesthetic risk. In veterinary medicine, it has been shown
that ASA status can be used as a predictor of anesthetic
and eliminating anesthetic drugs. Again, any findings
risk. In pets scoring a 1 to 2 on the ASA, there is little to no
that are not within normal limits should be evaluated
significant increase in anesthetic risk, but in pets scoring
to determine if it is more appropriate to postpone the
anesthetic event and work up the abnormality or to go
a 3, 4 or 5, the risk goes up significantly. Therefore, we
recommend assigning an ASA status to every pet before
for ward with anesthesia. Practitioners may need to adjust
the anesthesia protocol to ensure the pet's safety.
proceeding with anesthesia. If a patient scores a 3, 4 or
5, consider whether to proceed with anesthesia (after
informing the clients of increased risk with anesthesia),
further stabilize the patient, or cancel the procedure.
Preanesthetic Evaluation |  57
Banfield Anesthesia Protocol
History
Fractious
Fractious Pet
NO
pet?
Protocol
Evaluate
Physical
Blood Work
Exam
 Healthy Pet
Normal?
Protocol
Preanesthetic Evaluation
NO
Cesarean
CNS&
Abdominal
Cardiac
Ear Surgery
Protocol
 Protocol
Protocol
Eye/Globe
 Protocol
Protocol
Emergency
Surgery.
Feline Declaw
Hepatic
Obesity
 Orthopedic
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Pediatric
Post-Renal
Pulmonary
 Renal 
Stable Diabetic
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
 Postoperative Pain
Management
58
| Preanesthetic Evaluation
Assessing cardiovascular function
 Many times in patients with respiratory symptoms,
and overall health
the problem can be localized with a thorough
 physical exam. Noises heard without a stethoscope
Banfield practice uses a five-step approach in conjunction
'eseu rem ne raddn aui on panelan Aunban ane
with a full physical exam before any anesthetic procedure
to assess cardiovascular function and the pet's overall
pharyngeal/laryngeal or tracheal areas. Cough can be
due to airway disease, pulmonary or cardiac disease
health (See Canine/Feline Anesthesia Physical Examination
or a combination of both. Rapid respirations are not
 page 6l). Any abnormalities noted should be addressed
always associated with pulmonary disease and can
 prior to proceeding with anesthesia.
be a result of fever, acidosis or fear. In patients with
respiratory distres, close observation of the timing
1. Monitor heart rate, pulse quality and assess the heart
may help narrow the possible etiologies. Inspiratory
rate to femoral pulse ratio. These parameters are key
seasp aoeds penad 1o Aemne 1addn sssns ssans
to evaluating perfusion prior to anesthesia. Adequate
expiratory distress suggests lower airway disease; rapid,
 perfusion is vital to a successful anesthetic outcome.
shallow respirations suggest pleural space disease; and
Bradycardia, tachycardia, poor or bounding pulses, or
 labored or deep respirations may indicate an upper
heart rate: pulse rate ratio that is not l:1 may indicate
airway obstruction. In cats, an expiratory wheeze may
significant underlying abnormalities.
be heard with bronchial spasms.
 2. Evaluate mucus membrane color and capillary refill
 5. Evaluate the patient's temperature, prior to
time. Abnormal mucus membrane color can indicate
premedication as well as following premedication, and
underlying problems: pale (anemia, hypovolemia
 prior to induction, for hypothermia or hyperthermia.
or shock), brick red (sepsis, hyperthermia of
 polycythemia/hemoconcentration) icterus (liver disease
If the temperature is not within normal ranges, the
 cause should be identified, corrected or appropriately
 or hemolytic disease) and cyanosis (poor oxygenation
ea
addressed prior to proceeding with anesthesia.
secondary to cardiac or pulmonary disease). Capillary
refill time should be < 2 seconds.
Anesthesia cycle
3. Auscultate the heart for murmurs or obvious
To ensure safety, we recommend following the Anesthesia
arrhythmias. Murmurs in cats should be considered
Cycle Protocol, page 60, which provides step-by-step
significant unless proven otherwise. Perform an ECG
guidelines to follow during anesthesia-from checking
Eval
and recommend referral for a cardiac workup with
anesthesia equipment to patient observation following
echocardiography. Remember, the grade of murmur
the procedure.
 in cats does not correlate with the degree of disease
 present and cats may have significant cardiac disease
ion
even if a mur mur can't be auscultated. Murmurs in
murmur, which should resolve with a stress test, or
congenital. In general, congenital heart defects pose a
considerable risk for an adverse anesthetic event. Such
patients should be considered high-risk and undergo
 anesthetic procedures only at a practice equipped to
address these special needs. In adult canine patients,
it is important to determine if the murmur is a new
finding or if there is evidence of disease progression or
signs of heart failure. It is ideal to perform preanesthetic
 chest radiographs on all cases of known cardiac
disease. If any concerns exist, a cardiac workup with
echocardiography should be recommended prior to
 proceeding with anesthesia.
4. Auscultate the entire lung field to ensure normal
sounds, airflow, oxygenation and ventilation. Step
back from the patient to determine respiratory rate
 and pattern and to listen for any abnormal sounds.
Preanesthetic Evaluation   59
Anesthesia Cycle
Phase 1: Preanesthetic Evaluation
Check Anesthesia Equipment*
Phase 2: Induction and Intubation
Review Medical Records 
Evaluate Patient/Cardiovascular System**
Fractious Pet Protocol, Perform PE,
Draw Blood, & Place IV Cath
Administer Induction Agent
Review & Document PE Findings**
 Place Endotracheal Tube & Secure
Review Blood Test Results**
Attach Patient to Anesthesia Machine
Select Anesthesia Protocol
 Attach Monitors
Select and Administer Premeds***
Evaluate Patient/Cardiovascular System
Evaluation
Wait 30 minutes for Premed Effect
Phase 4: Recovery
 Discontinue Sevoflurane
Phase 3: Monitoring
tic
 Continue Oxygen for 3-5 Minutes
Perform Surgical Prep and Move Patient
Preanesthet
 Evaluate Patient Cardiovascular System
Evaluate Patient/Cardiovascular System
 Perform Procedure
Remove ET Tube When Patient Swallows
Evaluate and Document Patient Anesthesia 
 Monitor Continuously Until Patient 
 Monitoring Parameters Every 5 Minutes 
 Sternal and TRP WNL
 Record Anesthesia in Medical Records
Adjust Anesthesia Based on Patient Needs
Using Anesthesia Stamp*****
Evaluate Patient Temp Every 5 min***
Update Soda Lime Hour Usage
 Observe Patient for Minimum of 2 Hours
 All anesthesia equipment should be checked and working properly. Check anesthesia machine for leaks and ensure the remaining 
hour usage for soda lime meets or exceeds expected procedure time.
** Abnormalities should be evaluated and corrected prior to anesthesia, then documented in patient file.
***If patient is apparently healthy and may be dificult to handle a second time, healthy pet premeds may be given at the time blood is
drawn and catheter placed; if abnormalities are discovered on blood work, anesthesia should be delayed for at least 24 hours.
*** If temperature is low, actively warm patient (See page 77).
*** Indicate rebreathing vs. non-rebreathing system: initial and maintenance oxygen flow rates and sevoflurane percentage: pulse
:(tdl) uojenidsen asind 'ainenedwa, :sajnoi pue (wybw) gu jo bu ui sesop bnip :azis aqn, (ia) jeeyoenopua :shupeai jajewixo
(pre-induction, intra-op, postop, and pre-release); fluid type and rate; anesthesia and recovery time.
60 |  Preanesthetic Evaluation
Canine/Feline Anesthesia Physical Examination
Evaluate
 Fractious pet
 Obtain an accurate
Weigh
 Goal is to immobilize, place IV catheter,
 and thorough history.
 obtain blood and perform physical exam.
 See Fractious Pet Protocol.
Perform complete physical exam including TPR, IOF,
electrolytes, CBC with Diff. Determine ASA status.
3
4
G
Heart Rate
Mucus Membrane
Auscultate
Auscultate
Body
and Pulses
Color and CRT
Heart
Lungs
Temperature
If mucus membrane is abnomal
 Recommend cardiac
 (pale, icteric or cyanotic) and/
workup for any cats
or if CRT > 2 sec, stop and 
with undiagnosed
 perfom additional diagnostics 
 heart mumurs.
If abnormal
Normal T 99.5 -
for a definitive diagnosis.
 breathing patterm,
102.5°F.
rate or abnormal
lung sounds noted,
 Normal beats per minute
stop.
 Perform chest rads
Hypothermia
(awake pets):
Murmur present*
 and/or additional
ifT < 99°F, provide
Large dogs: 60-100
dagnostics as
 supplemental heat, 
Med dogs:80-140
 indicated.
warm IV fluids 
rean
 Small dogs: 100-140
 Cats: 120-160
and correct the
underlying cause.
 Juvenile patient, 
Mature patients, suspect
If no improvement
 consider congenital
 acquired cardiac disease.
is noted, postpone
 If low heart rate, stop
heart disease or 
Perform ECG and chest
 the procedure and
and perform ECG. If
 physiologic murmur.
rads and recommend 
perform additional
ECG normal, Tx with
echo.
diagnostics for a
glyco and reassess in 15
 Use cardiac protocol.
 definitive diagnosis.
min. Further diagnostics
if still significantly
 Perform ECG and
Evaluation
bradycardic.
 exercise tolerance
 If high heart rate, stop.
test (murmur
will resolve if 
YES
is thepetobese or
perform ECG, assess for
NO
physiologic),*
brachycephalic?
causes (pain, anxiety.
 hypotension, anemia,
 cardiac disease, etc.).
 If murmur persists,
 Proceed with
 Continue physical
perform chest rads
 Pulmonary 
exam and perform 
 and recommend 
Protocol.
 Evaluate pulse quality.
 If weak, thready or
echo.
if needed.
bounding, stop and
evaluate.
 Evaluate pulse rate: HR
Hyperthermia
ratio. If not 1:1, stop,
If T > 103°F, differentiate between fever (lethargy, elevated 
 perform ECG, perform
WBC infections, etc.) and hyperthermia (secondary to
further diagnostics as
excitement, exercise, etc.).
indicated.
I If fever, perform additional diagnostics for a definitive diagnosis.
If hyperthermia, presedate and recheck temp prior to induction,
 postpone if no temperature change and treat as needed.
*Murmur present
Patient < 3 years old with murmur 
 Patient <3 years old: Consider congenital diseases and characterize the murmur ba sed on timing and the point of maximal intensity (PMl). See 
 appropriate cardiac references or call a medical advisor for further guidance.If the patient exhibits clinical symptoms such as cough, exercise intolerance,
inadequate development, cardiac cachexia, ascites, collapse or respiratory distress, consider echocardiogram and refer unless it's an emergency.
Mature patient with murmur
 Mature patients with acquired murmurs typically develop degenerative valvular disease (primarily dogs) or myocardial disease (cats and dogs). Obtain 
 thoracic radiographs and ECG. If the patient exhibits clinical symptoms, postpone the procedure and consider echocardiogram and treat the patient 
accordingly. If the patient has no clinical signs of cardiac disease, recommend echocardiogram and proceed to the Cardiac Protocol if condition has been 
stable over a reasonable period of time and pet will benefit immediately from the procedure to be done.
*Exercise tolerance test: Perform ECG and immediately walk dog vigorously for 1 0 minutes. Recheck ECG. Normal = heart rate increase is lessthan 25%
 of pre-walk HR and returns to normal within five minutes.
Preanesthetic Evaluation |  61
Laboratory data
tests to determine whether anesthesia is safe and in the
 Perform a routine complete blood count and serum
pet's best interest
chemistry profile to evaluate the pet's current health
This approach to evaluating the preanesthetic patient
 status. Laboratory data are especially important in
helps determine the best anesthesia protocol for the
apparently healthy patients to ensure that potential
pet (See Banfield Anesthesia Protocol, page 58). Once
 problems are uncovered. Practitioners may need to
premedications have been administered, and before
request additional diagnostics depending on the
induction, it is essential to re-evaluate the pet's major
results. Address any abnormalities before anesthesia.
organ systems using the five-step approach previously
Try to correct them before anesthesia, with the goal
discussed, because administered drugs can have
of preventing or minimizing adverse events and
 profound effects on cardiovascular and pulmonary
 addressing any underlying conditions. An ill patient's
S onid an sr A unnaa si sss
condition and laboratory values can change in just a
intended anesthetic protocol or prompt postponement of
few hours. In these situations, it is best to collect and
evaluate the complete blood cell count (CBC), serum
chemistry profile and electrolytes just before the
Conclusion
anesthetic procedure.
When preanesthetic evaluation reveals abnormalities, it is
Using a systematic approach to evaluate laboratory data
lets practitioners address abnormal results in a timely
fashion (See Preanesthetic Blood Work Evaluation, page
 address" defined? There is no simple answer; it depends
 63). Much like the physical examination algorithm, this
 on the situation and the abnormality.
e  un sued s uss
diagnostic tests, such as urinalysis, bile acids testing.
Ideally, the practitioner decides if further diagnostics or
e
 electrocardiogram (ECG), ulrasound and supportive
 supportive care are necessary. How long to administer
care, depending on the findings. Thoroughly addressing
supportive care before the anesthetic procedure (minutes,
 aberrant findings before anesthesia places the patient in
hours, days, weeks) is based on the practitioner's
the best possible condition to undergo the procedure.
assessment In emergency situations, the patient may
reanesthetic
be stabilized for only a short time such as when there is
Many compromised patients have electrolyte
only enough time to administer shock fluids to optimize
 abnormalities. Depending on the underlying
perfusion. On the other hand, elective procedures may be
 cause, abnormalities may or may not be clinically
delayed until the abnormalities are resolved or stabilized.
significant In addition to evaluating serum
 In all cases, the practitioner's goal is to place the patient
electrolytes, an ECG can provide information
in the best condition possible before the anesthetic
 about clinical effects of electrolyte abnormalities.
 procedure or decide anesthesia is not in the pet's best
P
For example, hyperkalemia frequently produces
interest
decreased P waves, increased PR intervals, spiked T
 waves and bradycardia. Address any abnormalities
In the end, the patient's condition on recovery should be
before anesthesia.
as good as or better than before anesthesia.
Practice tips
Lipemic blood samples may be seen if the patient has
recently eaten or if there is an underlying condition such
 as hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis or
 primary hyperlipidemia. Additionally, lipemia can interfere
with some serum chemistry profile results. If lipemia
is discovered, wait a few hours and draw a new blood
sample for evaluation. If the second sample is also lipemic,
evaluate further.
Additional preanesthetic diagnostics may include specific
 serum chemistries, blood pressure testing, radiography,
ultrasound, microbiology, toxicology, cytology,
 coagulation tests or serum electrolytes. Choose the best
62 |  Preanesthetic Evaluation
Preanesthetic Blood Work Evaluation *
HCT, Hgb, RBC
 Platelets, Clotting 
Albumin!
BUN/Creatinine
Factors
ALT/Bilirubin/ALP
Count
Total Protein
If< 25% (dogs) or
IfPLT<200,000,
BUN
 If elevated, perform
If TP < 4.5 and/
< 20% (cats), perform
confirm with blood
If BUN < 8 (dogs) or
pre- and post-BA (if
or albumin < 2,
further diagnostics for
smear (# PLT per
< 15 (cats), perform
TBili > 2 or if patient 
postpone and
a definitive diagnosis.
100x field x 15,000).
pre and post BA.
 is icteric, BA will be 
perform additional
Postpone or transfuse
Perform BMBT.
elevated and the test
diagnostics for a
 prior to non-elective
If PLT < 125,000,
will be redundant).
 definitive diagnosis.
surgery.
 postpone all elective
If BUN > 27 (dogs) or
 If BA normal, and 
If surgery is non--
If > 55% (dogs) or 
procedures until PLT
>35(cats) and Crea
surgery non-elective,
 elective, administer 
>45% (cats), look for
 normalizes.
> 1.8 (dogs) or > 2.2
proceed with Hepatic
 fresh frozen plasma
underlying causes
If abnormal BMBT,
(cats), palpate bladder
Protocol.
prior to surgery.
(dehydration, hypoxia,
ACT, PT or PTT,
 If BA abnormal,
 Use appropriate
HCM in cats).
 postpone or transfuse
and/or perform abdo
perform further 
 protocol, but do not
 Perform further
rads to rule out urinary
(fresh frozen plasma
 obstruction or rupture
diagnostics to obtain
use acepromazine.
diagnostics for
 or fresh whole blood)
a definitive diagnosis
IfTP < 3 and/or
 definitive diagnosis.
prior to surgery.
and check urine
 specific gravity.
(abdo rads, abdo U/S,
 albumin < 1, critical, 
If non-elective surgery,
IfPLT<60,000,
liverFNA/BX,coag
If USG > 1.030 (dogs)
 STOP and address
use Pre-renal Protocol.
 critical, STOP and
or > 1.035 (cats), look
tests, etc.)
immediately.
If HCT< 15% or
 address immediately.
>60%**, critical,
for causes of pre-renal
STOP and address
azotemia, rehydrate 
immediately.
and recheck values 
 prior to proceeding 
Potassium
Glucose
with pre-renal azotemia
rean
protocol.
IfUSG <1.030 (dogs)
WBC/Neutrophils
MCV, MCH, MCHC#
If K >6, stop, perform
If BG > 175 (dogs)
or < 1.035 (cats),
ECG and further
or > 250 (cats), stop
nestheti
perform additional
diagnostics for a
diagnostics to check 
 and repeat values in 
If WBC <4,000 and/
If abnormal, check
definitive diagnosis;
 for urinary obstruction,
 several hours.
or Neut < 2,000,
 pulse oximetry
consider renal disease 
renal disease, ruptured 
 If still elevated,
 confirm with manual
 or pre-renal factors like
bladder, etc.
 stop and submit 
values.
differential. If any
 Addison's disease. If
 Calculate Na:K ratio,
fructosamine and
If MCV is low, check 
if < 27, perform
ic
 abnormalities noted, 
 pre- and post-BA to
 non-elective surgery.
perform a UA,
an ACTH stim for
postpone surgery
Evaluatio
 postpone and perform
rule out liver shunt.
proceed with Renal
Protocol.
 Addison's disease.
further diagnostics for
 pending results.
If non-elective surgery,
if not DM, and
 a definitive diagnosis.
If non-elective
 proceed using 0.9%
values remain 
surgery, proceed with
NaCI for IV fluids.
elevated, check for
 Abdominal Protocol.
If K < 3.5, STOP,
hyperthyroidism or
IfWBC >20,000,
perform ECG and
Cushing's disease.
Calcium
Lipemia
further diagnostics to
If non-elective 
perform manual 
3
check for Gl potassium 
surgery, proceed with
differential. If not 
stress leukogram,
loss, renal disease,
 appropriate protocol.
hyperthyroidism, etc.
If BG <70, stop,
perform additional
If Ca > 12, perform
 Recheck blood test
 If non-elective 
diagnostics for a
assess patient and
surgery, proceed
recheck in several
 definitive diagnosis 
 additional diagnostics,
in several hours, 
with appropriate
hours.
(infl ammation,
including iCa;
if lipemia persists,
infection,
IV fluid potassium
 If still decreased,
 check for renal 
 evaluate diet, check
 supplementation and 
perform diagnostics
immune disease,
disease, neoplasia,
for hypothyroidism,
DM, pancreatitis, etc.
reassess K levels
to check for juvenile
corticosteroids,
Addison's disease,
 Cushing's disease,
frequently.
hypoglycemia, sepsis,
 hyperparathyroidism,
If non-elective
bone marrow disease,
If K<2.5 or > 7.5,
Addison's disease,
etc.
 surgery, proceed with
 critical, stop and
most appropriate
etc.
neoplasia).
 If non-elective
 address immediately.
 If non-elective
protocol.
If non-elective
 procedure, proceed 
procedure, proceed 
procedure, proceed 
with Abdominal
with Cardiac Protocol.
with IV dextrose
If Ca < 8, check
supplementation
Protocol.
albumin levels.
WBC < 2.000 and/or
 and frequent BG
lf Ca > 16 or< 7,
Neut < 1,000, critical,
rechecks.
 critical, STOP and
STOP and address
If BG > 600 or < 40,
 address immediately.
 immediately.
critical, STOP and 
 address immediately.
* Normal adult versus pediatric values will vary.
**Pets living in higher altitudes and some breeds such as Greyhounds may have naturally occuring hematocrit elevations.
Preanesthetic Evaluation | 63
Preanesthetic Evaluation
64  |  Preanesthetic Evaluation
SECTI0N 6:
Induction and
Intubation
SECTI0N 6
Induction and Intubation
INTUBATION
Figure 6.1
Endotracheal (ET) tubes must be used during general 
anesthesia to properly manage the patient's airway. The cuff
is an inflatable balloon-like device near the end of the FT
tube designed to fill the air space between the outer walls
of the tube and the inner walls of the trachea, so that the
patient cannot breathe around the tube and thus receive
an inadequate or inappropriate amount of oxygen and
anesthetic gas. Inflating the cuff also prevents contaminants,
such as vomitus or water, from entering the patient's
following directions to intubate a patient:
Ind
 Have the proper equipment ready to intubate before
Iuction and Intubation
anesthetic induction.
■ Choose an appropriately sized ET tube (See
Measure the ET tube so it will reach only to the thoracic inlet.
Endotracheal Tube Selection, page 43). Have two or
Figure 6.2
three sizes readily available.
 Before using the ET tube, check the cuff for leaks as
follows:
● Gently inflate the cuff using a syringe of air inserted
 at the end of the air line. Watch the cuff inflate.
Over-inflation will destroy the cuff.
● Remove the syringe and gently squeeze the cuff to
determine if there are any leaks.
● Once you have confirmed there are no leaks, deflate
the cuff by reattaching the syringe and withdrawing
the plunger to remove the air from the cuff. The cuff
must be deflated before intubation.
 During intubation, a member of the hospital team
supports the patient in sternal recumbency, on its
chest, with the head up.
 Measure ET tube so that it will reach only to the
thoracic inlet. Mark this location on the tube and tie
Intubating a cat
gauze around the spot (Figure 6.1).
■ Using an appropriate stylet in flexible tubes is helpful.
laryngoscope to visualize the laryngeal folds, place the
 If using a stylet, ensure it does not protrude beyond
ET tube into the trachea, taking care that the end of
the distal end of ET tube or through the Murphy eye.
the ET tube does not pass beyond the thoracic inlet.
An sn i aui on un d 
■Once the tube is in place, palpate the end of the tube
assists in sliding the ET into place, thus preventing
through the trachea to ensure the tip is just cranial
tissue damage.
to the thoracic inlet. Grip trachea with thumb and
■While supporting the patient, the hospital team
forefinger and slide tube in and out a few millimeters.
member opens the patient's mouth wide and gently
You should be able to feel the end of the tube slide
pulls the tongue forward (Figure 6.2). Using a
past your fingers.
Induction and Intubation |  65
■ Auscultate all lung fields to detect and correct
laryngospasms are bothersome; severe laryngospasms can
intubation; this will ensure proper placement
result in death.
and airflow. If inadequate airflow is noted, deflate
the endotracheal tube cuff and back the tube out
 Make sure the cat is adequately anesthetized before
until good airflow is auscultated. Movement of the
attempting intubation. Attempting to intubate a cat
rebreathing bag is a good indicator of airflow as is
in a light anesthetic plane is likely to cause coughing
ventilatory effort.
and laryngospasm. Simply increasing the depth of
 If poor flow is noted, inspect the endotracheal tube for
anesthesia will allow intubation in most cases.
kinking. If mucus is noted in the oral cavity, inspect
I Use topical viscous lidocaine to desensitize the larynx.
the endotracheal tube for a mucus plug. This may
 Do not use benzocaine (Cetacaine?)it causes
require extubation.
methemoglobinemia in cats. Dip the end of a Q-tip?
■ To decrease the risk of ET tube migration, secure tube
in topical lidocaine, as it works faster than using
around the patient's maxilla/nose or the back of head,
injectable lidocaine. If the viscous isn't available, place
using the gauze strip. A rubber band may be used for
a few drops of injectable lidocaine on a Q-tip?, gently
small dogs and cats.
swab the laryngeal area, wait 60 to 90 seconds, then
attempt intubation. Avoid using too much lidocaine; it
absorbs systemically and could cause toxicity.
■ Once the patient is intubated, inflate the cuff as
 Extend the cat's neck, pull the tongue forward, and
follows:
open the mouth by pulling down on the jaw. Use a
● Listen for leaks before inflating the ET tube; if
small blade laryngoscope to aid visualization. Place
the ET tube is a tight fit, little to no cuff inflation
the lubricated endotracheal tube just in front of the
bation
is necessary. Using the manometer as a guide,
larynx with the bevel ventral. Without touching the
only inflate to prevent a leak at a pressure of
arytenoids, wait for a breath, then gently insert the
approximately 18 to 20 cm H,0.
 tube while rotating the tip.
● If the cuff needs inflating, insert the syringe at the
Intut
 If a patient laryngospasms and is in danger, place
end of the air line. Inject air into the line;, the cuff
 a large-gauge needle into the trachea percutaneously
at the other end will inflate. Do not overfill the
 and administer pure oxygen until swelling decreases
 pue
 cuff, as excessive pressure can injure the patient's
airway. A recommended method is to inflate the cuff
ction 
by incrementally adding O.5 mL of air until a leak
cannot be heard.
● Pressure-check the cuff-the cuff should restrict
Induc
air flow at 18 to 20 cm H,O, and should leak
before the pressure is 25 cm H,O.
 Tracheal damage can easily occur if you aren't
careful. Mucosal irritation can cause a severe
cough after recovery. Tracheal lacerations
can lead to subcutaneous (SC) emphysema,
pneumo mediastinum, pneumothorax and death. Most
lacerations are caused by inappropriate use of stylets,
improper lubrication, over-inflation of the cuff or
twisting of the ET tube when repositioning the patient.
 Always disconnect the ET tube from the breathing
system before repositioning the patient. Twisting of
the tube in the airway can cause serious damage.
Use caution when moving an intubated patient.
Tips for intubation and airway
management in cats
A cat's larynx is very sensitive to mechanical stimulation,
is easily irritated and can be damaged if mishandled.
Laryngospasm is most likely to occur if forced intubation
is attempted while the cat is too lightly anesthetized. Mild
66 |  Induction and Intubation
OXYGEN FLOW RATES DURING
ASSISTED VENTILATION
ANESTHESIA
■ An anesthetized patient breathing spontaneously
should be bagged twice per minute, not to exceed the
Rebreathing circuit
 pressure listed below. This ensures full inflation of the
■ Current anesthesia protocols call for a transition
entire lung field and helps reduce atelectasis.
phase with oxygen flow rates of 3 L/min and
 Patients that are not breathing spontaneously require
sevoflurane level at 3% during the first three minutes
assisted ventilation at l0 to 12 breaths per minute, not
of anesthesia when pets are induced with propofol
to exceed the pressure listed below.
and dexmedetomidine is not on board. This is
■ Ventilation should be delivered in a manner similar
because propofol is rapidly redistributed from the
aul oi anssaid Apeis Aidde-uoedsau peuou ol
blood to tissues so the pet will tend to wake rapidly
bag and avoid holding inspiratory pressure. The
after induction. The transition phase will result in a
 manometer should return to zero between breaths.
smooth transition from induction to maintenance
 It is important to deliver the correct inspiratory
 anesthesia. These same settings are not necessary
 pressure to avoid adverse pulmonary function or
with Telazol? induction or in patients with
complications:
dexmedetomidine on board.
● 12 to 15 cm H,O for small pets and pets with
 Sevoflurane requirements are significantly lowered
chronic pulmonary disease.
when using dexmedetomidine as a premedication.
● 20 cm H,O for medium to large pets.
 Following the transition phase, oxygen flow rates
● 25 cm H,O may be required for giant pets.
are decreased to 1 to 1.5 L/min. In the majority of
■ The pressure relief "pop-off" valve should be open 
patients, higher oxygen flow rates are not necessary to
when not assisting ventilation, and should only be
Ind
 maintain oxygen saturation greater than 94%. Higher
dosed to reach desired positive pressure during
duction
Oxygen flow rates vaporize sevoflurane at a faster
assisted ventilation.
rate, thus increasing the cost of anesthesia. Higher
Oxygen flow rates may also contribute to hypothermia,
especially in small pets.
 and
Non-rebreathing circuit (Bain's)
Intub
■ Generally, flow rates around 3 L/minute will be
needed for the duration of anesthesia (See Non-
ba
rebreathing circuit, page 44).
ation
Induction and Intubation |  67
Induction and Intubation
68 |  Induction and Intubation
SECTION 7:
Monitoring
SeCTI0N 7
Monitoring
MONItOrING
Three goals of monitoring
Anesthetic drugs depress the autonomic nervous system
■ Anticipate complications
■ Recognize complications
(ANS), decreasing the ability of the ANS to maintain tissue
perfusion. Without proper perfusion, vital organs and
 Correct complications
Anesthetized patients should be continuously monitored,
results in significant, and sometimes deadly, complications
and assessments recorded at a minimum of five-minute 
Careful and constant monitoring is imperative to a positive
intervals, then documented in the medical notes. Patients
 anesthetic outcome. The primary cause for crisis during
should be constantly monitored (i.e., temperature,
 or after anesthesia is the failure to notice a problem
pulse, respiration (TPR), physical exam (PE) and level of
when it first occurs (See Anesthesia Monitoring and
consciousness are all normal) until they can maintain a
Emergency Algorithm, page 80).
sternal position, then evaluated every 15 to 30 minutes until
discharge (See Recovery, page 8l). The purpose of monitoring
Make every attempt to maintain the following
critical values in anesthetized pets:
and documenting values is to look for adverse trends that can
be addressed before they cause har m.
Table 7.1
3
Critical Values
Monitoring
MANUAL ASSESSMENT
PARAMETER
GOAL
 Temperature 
100°F to 102.5°F
The most important monitor is the associate who is
dedicated to monitoring the patient This person should be
Systolic:
100 to 120 mmHg
actively monitoring the patient, not merely relying on the
values provided by monitoring equipment The following
Mean:
Blood pressure
80 to 100 mmHg
parameters should be continuously monitored and
recorded in the medical notes:
Diastolic:
60 to 80 mmHg
■Mucus membrane (MM) color
 Pulse quality
Strong
 Capillary refill time (CRT)
Mucus membrane color
Pink
■Heart rate
 Capillary refll time 
< 2 seconds
■ Respiratory rate
■ Temperature
 Respiratory rate
15 to 20 breaths/minute
■ Thoracic auscultation
SpO, (oxygen saturation)
95%-100%
■ Pulse quality
ETCO, (end-tidal carbon
35 to 40 with normal
■ Pain assessment
dioxide)
capnogram
■ Anesthetic depth estimation
Large dogs:
Heart rate
60 to 100 bpm
(without dexmedetomidine).
Medium dogs:
(See Bradycardia associated
80 to 100 bpm
With dexmedetomidine
 Small dogs:
 premedication, page 71, for 
80 to 120 bpm
heart rate minimums with
dexmedetomidine)
Cats:
120 to 180 bpm
ECG
 Normal sinus rhythm
Monitoring 丨 69
ANESTHETIC DEPTH
Figure 7.2: Oxyhemoglobin Dissociation Curve
ESTIMATION
HbPercent Saturation
H+decrease
Anesthetic depth and concurrent patient plane of
100%
P-CO2decrease
Temp.decrease
 anesthesia are dose-dependent on the ongoing percentage
LEFTSHIFT
(increased Hb-02affinity)
of anesthetic gas being delivered. As anesthesia dosage
increases, depth is enhanced and the anesthetic safety
%08
H+increase
margin decreases. In other words, the deeper the patient is,
P-CO2increase
Temp.increase
 the less leeway for monitoring error exists. Anesthetic depth
DPGincrease
 may be estimated by skeletal muscle tone, selected reflexes
60%
(i.e., withdrawal) and central or ventral eye position. Blood
RIGHTSHIFT
(decreased Hb-O2affinity)
 pressure is another indication of anesthetic depth. Direct
response to surgical stimulation is the most reliable method
40%
of deter mining depth of anesthesia. If uncertain about a
patient's anesthetic depth, assume they are too deep!
20%
PULSE OXIMETRY
Pulse oximetry is a noninvasive method of monitoring both
20
40
60
80
100
pulse rate and the percentage of oxygenated hemoglobin in
Po2(mmHg)
the arterial blood. The monitor works by differentiating the
Used with permission of AC Brov
ratio of light absorption during pulsatile and non-pulsatile
 Normal oxygen saturation in the blood is > 98% when
blood flow. Most pulse oximeters provide a pulse wave and
breathing room air. Patients under anesthesia breathing
 a digital display of pulse rate and the percent of hemoglobin
100% O, should remain at or near 99% to 100% SpO,
saturated with oxygen (SpO).
Due to the oxygen hemoglobin dissociation curve, pulse
 oximeters are best used to detect hypoxemia (PO, < 60
Figure 7.1: SpO, Waveform
to 65 mmHg) as indicated by SpO, values below 95%.
Hypoxia is a life-threatening condition in which oxygen
delivery is inadequate to meet metabolic demands.
Hypotension, tachycardia, hypothermia, movement and
poor probe placement can create measurement errors.
Pulse oximeter probes should be placed in non-pigmented
areas that have little to no hair, such as the tongue, lip, ear,
Pulse oximetry helps evaluate the ability of the lungs to
toe web, vulva and prepuce.
 deliver oxygen and is an indirect indicator of the partial
pressure of blood oxygen (PO,) available to perfuse
INTERVENTIONS FOR HYPOXIA
tissues. Normal arterial PO, is between 80 to 1l0 mmHg
There is not a l:1 correlation between SpO, and PO, and
If SpO, is < 95:
 this relationship is demonstrated by the oxyhemoglobin
dissociation curve.
■ Decrease sevoflurane by 25%.
■ Increase O, to 2L/min.
The amount of available oxygen (PO) in the blood drops
 Check endotracheal (ET) tube visually for placement
off sharply at SpO, values below about 95%. In general.
● Bronchial-intubation
 an SpO, of 98% correlates to a PO, of 100 mmHg: SpO,
● Esophageal intubation
of 95% correlates to PO, of 80 mmHg; and SpO, of 90%
 Check ET tube visually for obstruction to airflow
correlates to PO, of 60 mmHg. This demonstrates that
(mucoid plug, blood clot, foreign object).
a SpO, of 90% indicates moderate to severe hypoxemia
■ If ET tube cannot be placed, then perform needle
while an SpO, of 95% is within the commonly accepted
 tracheocentesis and supply 100% O2-
normal PO, range, although at the lower end of that
● If ET tube placement can be verified, start assisted
acceptable range. SpO, should be maintained above 95%
ventilation. See Assisted Ventilation section on page
 in anesthetized patients.
67 for more information.
70 丨Monitoring
■ Check pulse quality.
INTERVENTIONS FOR
■ Increase fluid to 20 to 80 mL/kg/hr.
HEART RATE AND ECG
■ If patient is hypotensive, refer to hypotension
ABNORMALITIES
 treatment on page 74.
The first step in intervention should be manually assessing the
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
 patient to determine if the changes are equipment artifacts or
actual changes within the patient Changing lead placement,
re-wetting the leads with alcohol and/or conductive gel can also
the electrical activity in the heart The amplitude and duration
help in determining the cause of the changes.
of that electrical activity combine to provide a wavefor m.
The parts of an ECG tracing are associated with the waves of
Figure 7.4: Bradycardia
electrical activity that spread through the myocardium
Bradycardia
Figure 7.3: Normal ECG
R
Bradycardia associated with
dexmedetomidine premedication:
Dexmedetomidine is expected to cause a significant bradycardia.
This effect is a physiologic response to the associated peripheral
onitori
vasoconstriction and increase in systemic blood pressure seenl
■ P wave: Atrial depolarization
with this dlass of drugs and does not usually require intervention.
■ PR interval: Time between the start of atrial systole
and the start of ventricular systole
Severe bradycardia for patients medicated with
ing
dexmedetomicdine is defined as:
■ QRS complex: ventricular depolarization
 Large dogs: < 45-50 bpm
 T wave: Repolarization of the ventricular myocardium
■ Medium dogs: < 50-60 bpm
 ECGs should be monitored for arrhythmias, conduction
■ Small dogs: < 60-70 bpm
■ Cats: < 90-100 bpm
abnormalities and heart rate. Evaluate the waveforms
and intervals for morphology, uniformity and regularity.
Lead II is most commonly monitored in small animal
Treatment:
■ Reverse dexmedetomidine:
veterinary medicine.
● Dogs: Administer atipamezole (Antisedan) IM
Common ECG artifacts are:
at the same volume of dexmedetomidine used.
■ Respiratory appears as an uneven baseline correlated
 Dexmedetomidine should only be used in dogs
 to the patient's breathing. Can be caused by dyspnea
for immobilization, not for premedications prior to
or deep respirations.
 general anesthesia.
■ Movement: appears as baseline changes during patient
● Cats: Administer atipamezole IM at same volume of
or ECG lead movement.
dexmedetomidine used (l/3 volume of DKT).
■ Electric: appears as jagged baseline. Can be caused by
electrical devices plugged into the same circuit as the
Do NOT administer atropine or glycopyrrolate unless
 ECG monitor or by other medical equipment being
the dexmedetomidine has been fully reversed.
used nearby the patient.
Monitoring 丨  71
Bradycardia not associated with
o Cats: 0.6 to 1 mL/kg/hr
dexmedetomidine premedication:
● Slow or stop CRI if bradycardia develops.
Bradycardia is defined as HR < :
Sinus tachycardia
 Large dogs: 60 bpm
■ Medium dogs: 80 bpm
Figure 7.6: Sinus Rhythm with an Increased Ventricular Rate
■ Small dogs: 100 bpm
■ Cats: 120 bpm
Treatment:
■ Decrease sevoflurane by 25%.
■ Increase O, flow rate.
 Increase fluids to?
● Dogs: 20 mL/kg bolus (up to 80 mL/kg)
● Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 mL/kg)
Treatment when sinus tachycardia is associated
■ Monitor blood pressure
with movement:
■ If heart rate continues to decrease:
■ Address pain first.
● Give glycopyrrolate (0.0l mg/kg IV)
● Consider additional analgesia for painful procedures
 If glycopyrrolate is ineffective:
(increase sevoflurane or administer analgesics,
● Give atropine (0.02 to 0.04 mg/kg IV)
dental blocks, local nerve blocks, etc.).
 If atropine is ineffective after two minutes
■ Assess anesthetic circuit for leaks, sevoflurane content
● Give epinephrine (0.0l to 0.02 mg/kg IV)
in vaporizer, O, flow and tank for appropriate O, level.
Treatment when sinus tachycardia is not associated
Ventricular premature contractions
with movement:
Figure 7.5: Ventricular Premature Contractions
■ Decrease sevoflurane by 25%.
■ Increase fluids to:
● Dogs: 20 mL/kg bolus (up to 80 mL/kg)
● Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 mL/kg)
 Watch for VPCs.
■ Address hypotension if present.
Ventricular tachycardia
A ventricular premature contraction (VPC) is a contraction
Figure 7.7: A Series of More Than Three to Four VPCs in a Row
originating in the ventricle that happens before a
 contraction is expected.
■ Decrease sevoflurane 25% to 50%.
N
WA
■ Increase O, to 2 L/min.
■ Increase IV fluids to:
● Dogs: 20 mL/kg bolus (up to 80 mL/kg)
● Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 mL/kg)
 Assess for pain and treat.
 If ineffective and the patient is hemodynamically unstable
Treatment:
(HR > 200, sBP <80, MAP<60 and/or SpO,<95):
■ Lidocaine bolus:
● Lidocaine bolus:
● Dogs: 2 to 4 mg/kg IV
 Dogs: 2 to 4 mg/kg IV
● Cats: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg IV
 Cats: 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg IV
● Use second IV line.
 Use second IV line.
 If effective, convert to CRI:
● If lidocaine bolus is effective, convert to constant
● 1 Liter NaCl + 50 mLs 2% lidocaine (1,000 mg)
rate infusion (CRI):
 Dogs: 4 mL/kg/hr to control VPCs
 1 liter NaCl + 50 mLs 2% lidocaine (1,000 mg)
 Cats: 0.6 to 1 mL/kg/hr
o Dogs: 4 mL/kg/hr to control VPCs
● Slow or stop CRI if bradycardia develops.
72 | Monitoring
BLOOD PRESSURE
signals into electrical energy, which is typically
 displayed on a monitor as a continuous pressure
Yool 0i si uoisnjad uelio inuou ol shem aul jo auo
waveform as well as a numeric reading. This type of
at the patient's blood pressure values. Anesthetized
blood pressure monitoring provides accurate readings,
patients are at risk for hypotension due to depression of
Jo jaaal uaiu e pue juaudinba eiads sanbai ing
cardiac output due to inhaled and injectable anesthetics.
technical proficiency for placement
Unaddressed hypotension will compromise perfusion of
■ Indirect measurements are obtained by using an
the kidneys, heart and brain, leading to organ dysfunction
inflatable cuff that detects blood flow after occlusion
or even death. Blood pressure is also a key measurement
to monitor for significant internal bleeding, to titrate
flow oscillations in the cuff or detection of sound
IV fluid administration, monitor anesthetic depth and
waves traveling through the artery. This technique
evaluate the patient's overall health status. It is important
is noninvasive and requires less technical skill. The
to remember that blood pressure is only one component
two different methods are known as oscillometric or
of a complex system of hemodynamics and not an exact
Doppler indirect blood pressure detection.
indicator of cardiac output or organ perfusion.
The Doppler blood pressure method uses cuffs that are
Blood pressure parameters, systolic, diastolic and mean
blown up by a hand pump and a transducer to emit
arterial pressure (MAP) contribute to the bigger clinical
and receive ultrasonic waves. Doppler monitoring only
picture of perfusion.
measures systolic blood pressure, therefore the MAP
cannot be determined when using this method.
 Systolic pressure is the measurement of the maximum
 arterial pressure during ventricular contraction (systole).
Oscillometric measurement is a type of indirect
■ Diastolic pressure is the measurement of the
measurement that detects periodic fluctuations produced
minimum arterial pressure during ventricular
by movement of the arterial wall. As the cuff is deflated,
relaxation (diastole).
oscillations rapidly increase at systolic pressure, reach a
■ MAP is the time-weighted average of arterial pressure
an ie aseaap Aiidei uaui pue d aui ie unixu
3
Aonitoring
exerted during the cardiac cycle (one heartbeat). MAP
diastolic pressure. Inflation and deflation of the cuff are
cannot be directly averaged since the duration of
usually automated and most oscillometric devices will 
 diastole is typically longer than the duration of systole.
provide systolic, diastolic and MAP. Because this type of
The following equation is used to approximate MAP:
 monitoring is based on fluctuations occurring underneath
MAP = diastolic BP + 1/3 (systolic BP - diastolic BP).
 the cuff, several factors can affect the accuracy of readings.
The simplest way to define MAP is to think of it as the
"average" blood pressure for the patient MAP is the
■ The width of the cuff should be 40% of the
most important blood pressure-related parameter to
circumference of the patient's limb. If the cuff is too
 help us evaluate overall tissue perfusion.
large, readings will be underestimated. If the cuff is
■ Pulses are created by the difference in systolic and
too small, the readings will be overestimated. The cuff
diastolic arterial pressures.
should fit snugly. Tape or other materials should not
● Strong pulse: The arterial pulse is easily and
 be used to secure the cuff.
 consistently palpable in the peripheral arteries.
■ The cuff should be placed on a limb or at the base of
● Decreasing pulse quality: This is likely due to
the tail. It is important to keep the cuff at the same
 a decrease in systolic pressure and, therefore, a
level as the heart, regardless of where it is placed. Cuff
 decrease of the pulse pressure.
 placements higher than the heart will produce low
● "Thready" quality: This is due to a further decrease
readings and placements lower than the heart will
 in systolic blood pressure.
 produce high readings. The best cuff placements are
su Aaenb asind auueyianem, ao suunog. 
 over the brachial or median arteries on the front leg or
is due to systolic hypertension or volume overload-
the medial coccygeal artery on the tail
fluid overload, congestive heart failure (CHF),
■ The tubing connecting the cuff to the monitor should be
kidney failure.
free of kinks and kept from bouncing. The movement of
 the tubing may be interpreted as fluctuations occurring
There are several methods for measuring blood pressure
 during the blood pressure reading.
■ Direct measurements can be obtained by placing
■ Accuracy depends on proper cuff placement and size.
a catheter into an artery and connecting it to a
■ Cuffs should not be placed on any extremity being
transducer. The transducer converts the mechanical
used for IV fluids or for pulse oximetry monitoring.
Monitoring 丨 73
INTERVENTIONS FOR bLOOD
END TIDAL CO,
PRESSURE ABNORMALITIES
Monitoring carbon dioxide (CO,) by capnometry and
Goal to maintain systolic blood pressure at:
■Systolic: 100 to 120 mmHg
of what is happening in the anesthetized patient. Both
■ Mean: 80 to 100 mmHg
 capnometry and capnography provide information about
■ Diastolic: 60 to 80 mmHg
patient ventilation, cardiac output, pulmonary perfusion
and systemic metabolism.
Hypotension is defined as:
■ Decreasing pulse quality
Infrared light absorption via mainstream or sidestream
■ Systolic pressure < 100 mmHg
is the most common method for measuring CO, in
■ Mean arterial pressure < 80 mmHg
respiratory gases.
Treatment:
■ In mainstream capnometers and capnographs, the
 CO, measurement sensor and sampling tube is
■ Increase IV fluid rate:
located berween the endotracheal tube and breathing
● Dogs: 20 mL/kg bolus (up to 80 mL/kg)
● Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 mL/kg)
circuit Advantages include real-time measurement of
● Frequently reassess for response to therapy.
CO,-typically a response rate of <l00 milliseconds.
■ If continued decrease or *thready” pulse quality, and
ai u aeds peap paseaui apnui saleueapes
patient breathing circuit produced by the sensor; kinking
still hypotensive, maintain increased fluid rate and add
of the endotracheal tube caused by the weight of the
hetastarch as follows:
● Dogs: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 20 mL/kg/day)
sensor, sensor contaminated caused by secretions and
● Cats: 2.5 mL/kg bolus (up to 10 mL/kg/day)
condensation which can destroy the sensor and cause
 sensor interference; and sensor damage from improper
●Evaluate ECG
■ If no response:
handling.
● Give ephedrine (0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg IV)
■ In sidestream c
capnometers and capnographs, the CO,
sampling tube is located between the endotracheal
 Best to dilute 0.1 mL ephedrine in 0.9 mL NaCl
 ube and the breathing circuit, and the sensor is
to = 5 mg/mL
● May repeat dose in 15 to 20 minutes if effective
inside the equipment away from the sampling tube.
■If no response to above:
Advantages include a lightweight sampling tube that
● Give dobutamine (1l to 5 μg/kg/min CRI).
will not kink the endotracheal tube, less chance of the
● 25 mg dobutamine in 1 liter of normal saline via
sensor becoming damaged or contaminated because
it is located away from the patient and sampling tube,
microdrip. This equals 25 pg/mL CRI.
● Deliver at this rate:
and less dead space added to the patient breathing
 3 kg pet = 1 drop/4 sec
circuit. Disadvantages include a two to three second
 5.4 kg pet = 1 drop/2 sec
delay in CO, readings, and the sampling line can
become plugged by secretions and condensation.
 1ll kg pet = l drop/sec
 22 kg pet = 2 drops/sec
■ End-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO,) value estimates
 34 kg pet = 3 drops/sec
 arterial CO2
 45 kg pet = 4 drops/sec
■ The capnogram waveform displays expired CO, over
time. This waveform validates the ETCO, value and
Hypertension is defined as:
provides the opportunity to monitor trends in the
■ “Bounding" pulse quality
 patient's CO, levels.
■Systolic > 120 mmHg
● The expiratory baseline is the beginning of
■Mean > 100 mmHg
exhalation and should be at zero. If the baseline
is above zero or begins to rise, this can signify
Treatment:
desiccated CO, absorbent, a calibration error in
the sensor itself or the presence of water on the
■ Treat underlying causes
 Fluid overload
sensor windows.
● A normal waveform will have a sloped rise as gas is
Fever
Heart failure
exhaled from the lungs.
■ Frequent reassessment of BP and pulse quality
● Abnormal waveforms can indicate esophageal
 intubation, disconnection of the breathing circuit.
74 | Monitoring
hypoventilation, hypotension or airway obstruction 
Hypercarbia is defined as ETCO, > 45 mmHg and is
 among many other situations. For more information,
usually due to:
see Abnormal Capnography Trends, page 76.
■ Decreased ventilation
■Airway disease
Figure 7.8: Normal Capnogram
■Air way obstruction
■ Anesthesia machine malfunction.
Treament
ETCO2
■ Verify O, supply and anesthesia machine function.
Phase Ill
ETCO2 (mmHg)
■Verify ET tube patency and placement
40
Beta
■ Decrease sevoflurane by 25%.
Alpha
■Ventilate pet See Assisted Ventilation section on page
 Phase 0
67 for more information.
Phase ll
■ Reassess ETCO, and SpO, frequently.
 Evaluate capnograph and capnograph trends.
Phase I
Expiration
 Inspiration
When monitoring capnography and ETCO, in a patient.
it is important to keep the larger clinical picture in mind.
A change in ETCO, may be the first indication of an event
occurring within the patient, so when an abnormality
 is noted, the trends of all other vitals being monitored
should be taken into consideration before making a
 decision to intervene.
3
Aonitoring
INTERVENTIONS FOR HYPER
AND HYPOCARBIA
(See Abnormal Capnography Trends, page 76.)
Hypocarbia is defined as ETCO, as < 35 mmHg and can
be due to:
■ Over-ventilation (by far most common cause in
 anesthetized patients)
■ Very poor tissue perfusion
Treatment
■ Evaluate ventilation and SpO
● lf spontaneously breathing at increased rate and
 SpO, is > 95%, evaluate depth of anesthesia and
analgesia.
  Increase sevoflurane if appropriate.
  May need to administer additional analgesia
if anesthetic depth is appropriate and over-
yentilation is not occurring.
● If overventilation is occurring:
 Do not ventilate as frequently and reassess
ETCO, every two minutes until stable.
 Evaluate blood pressure and CRT
Monitoring 丨 75
Abnormal Capnography Trends
= Exponential decrease
in CO
 Circulatory arrest
= Slow decrease in ETCO
■ Air/clot embolism
■ Sudden, severe hyperventilation
■ Hyperventilation
■ Fall in body temperature
■ Falling lung/body perfusion
■ Intervene:
● With fluid support
■Monitor BP
● Active war ming
 =Gradual increase in CO:
■ Hypoventilation
■ Absorption of CO,from peritoneum
■ Rapidly rising body temperature
= Sudden drop to zero in a
 spontaneously breathing pet:
Monitoring
■ Kinked ET tube
■ Extubated patient
■ Disconnected sensor
■Disconnected circuit
= Sudden rise in CO
■ Injection of sodium bicarbonate 
■ Release of tourniquet
■ Sudden increase in BP
 = Sudden drop not to zero:
 Leak in circuit
TEMPERATURE
■ Deflated cuff 
■Obstruction
Goal temperature is 100°F to 102.5°F. Proactive
■ Acute bronchospasm
preservation of body temperature is superior to reactive
below 98°F-is common after 30 minutes of surgery and
should actively be avoided and proactively managed to
keep the pet's body temperature normal at all times.
Hypothermia is detrimental in a variety of ways:
 Correlated with increased mortality in humans
= Sudden rise in baseline:
■ Significant consequences of hypothermia such as:
■ Flutter valve stuck in absorber system
● Mild hypother mia causes peripheral vasoconstriction
■ Bad soda lime
leading to increased heart rate and mean arterial
■ Calibration error
pressure; severe hypothermia causes decreased
 Interventions: Evaluate system
responsiveness to catecholamines and bradycardia,
hypotension and decreased cardiac output.
76 | Monitoring
● Decreased oxygen carrying capacity of hemoglobin
● Prevent further heat loss by placing blankets or
due to a left shift in the oxygen hemoglobin
 insulating pad berween kennel or surgery table to
dissociation curve leading to hypoxia, pulmonary
reduce conductive heat loss.
 edema, acute respiratory distress syndrome or
● Keep the pet covered (place towels over the
pneumonia.
 nonsurgical fields or a warming blanket).
● Decrease in cerebral blood flow (by 6% to 7%
● Consider wrapping the extremities of small or at-
0l peal ues (aimeraduai Apoq u doip 4.8't 1ad
risk patients with heat loss barrier material such as
neurologic impair ment.
aluminum foil or plastic bubble wrap (be sure to
● Decrease in need for anesthetic agents to maintain
 remove before the patient is conscious).
appropriate depth of anesthesia and if not
■ Active surface heating:
recognized by decreasing the inhalant anesthetic,
● Forced air and conductive polymer warming
this can result in excessive anesthetic depth
blankets will prevent hypothermia as well as warm
 For every degree body temperature falls
hypothermic pets. These blankets can be used
 below 10o°F, the anesthesia requirements
under, over or wrapped around patients during
 decrease by approximately 5%. For example,
anesthesia. Anesthetized and immobile patients
if the vaporizer is set at 2.5 and the patient
are at a greater risk for thermal burns. The lowest
temperature drops from 100°F to 98°F, the
effective temperature setting should be selected and
anesthetic decrease is 2°F x 5% = 10%, i.e., a
 the patient should be carefully monitored to avoid
25 vaporizer seting x 10% = 0.25 decrease. The
ther mal bur ns.
anesthetic requirement, with all else being the
● A kennel heating pad can also be used pre- and
same, results in a vaporizer setting of 2.25.
 post-anesthesia as long as the patient is awake and
● Mild-moderate hypothermia can cause a “cold
mobile enough to move off the heat source.
diuresis" due to decreased response to anti-diuretic
 if needed.
hormone (ADH) and peripheral vasoconstriction.
■ Active core warming:
● Severe hypothermia can cause significant decrease
● Administer warm IV fluids using an IV fluid warmer.
 in renal blood flow leading to tubular necrosis.
Place this device as close to the patient as possible
● Decreased platelet function leads to increased 
to maximize its effectiveness and minimize heat loss
bleeding tendencies.
 to the cooler air surrounding the IV tubing.
● Prolongs recovery
 It is not recommended to place the IV line in 
 hot water to warm fluids. Temperature control is
Ing
Signs of significant hypothermia
 harder to maintain and the hot water could spill
and burn the patient. IV fluid bags should not
■ Hypotension
be placed in the microwave to warm as this may
■ Cyanosis
cause hot spots in the fluids that could burn
 Arrhythmias
 the patient.
 Cool extremities
● Use of warm abdominal lavage solutions can
■ Decreased respiratory rate
■ Shivering which increases oxygen and glucose demand
significantly increase core temperature. Abdominal
lavage solutions can be warmed to temperatures of
Hypoglycemia and hypothermia can occur
104°F to 109°F before instillation to the abdomen
simultaneously, especially in pediatric or small pets. If a
and will help re-warm the pet.
hypothermic patient is NOT shivering, check the blood
glucose levels and correct any hypoglycemia that is noted.
 Other war ming methods:
■ Use warm surgical scrub solution in only the
PREVENTING HEAT LOSS
 necessary amount (do not drench the patient).
■ Use a minimal amount of alcohol during the surgical
AND INTERVENTIONS FOR
 prep or use sterile saline instead of alcohol.
HYPOTHERMIA
■ Reduce oxygen flow rates during anesthesia to
 maximize the effects of warming in the rebreathing
■ Proactive maintenance of body temperature is superior
circuit, but maintain an adequate flow rate to support
to reactive reheating of a hypothermic patient.
proper oxygenation (See Oxygen Flow Rates During
 Prevention should begin when premedications are
Anesthesia, page 67).
given prior to anesthesia. Several ways exist to prevent
body heat loss and correct hypothermia:
■ Hair dryers can cause thermal burns, thus they should
 not be used for patient warming.
 Passive warming:
Monitoring 丨 77
PATIENT ANESTHESIA MONITORING FORM
TE
E
Associate
Associate
Total Volume Administer
Associate
Associate
Respiratory Rate: .
Respiratory Rate:
Date:.
Amount Given
E
Time Given
Time Given
Drug, Strength, Dose, Duration
Time Given
nE
Route of Admin
47E
Block Type
WIJOS
orIM
after 1st hour under anesthesia
Pulse Quality: ,
 Pulse Quality: 
( 0, ))
(give to effect)
Endotracheal Tube Size:
=6y
Kg=
(maximum single dose 1.5 mg)
(suaed jueuaid ui yse os aseaisap oyow l asop aual wnwim)
Route of Admin
SC or IM or IV
Procedure(s):
AIJ0
2.5 mL/kg/hr x
2.5 to 5 mL/kg/hr x 
NI
>
A
(suaed 1ueuaaid u %2 os asai) 
NII
Heart Rate/Pulse:.
E
Heart Rate/Pulse: 
Respiratory Rate:
Antibiotic TGH:
NSAID TGH:
Opioid TGH:_
百
E
TE
二
=/b 0 + 6x
Monitoring
Catheter Gauge:_
=by
kg ÷ 0.2 mg/mL =
kg ÷1mg/mL=
_kg÷20mg/mL=
_kg ÷20 mg/mL =
=6y
kg ÷ 5 mg/mL =
=y
ASA Status:.
E
kg ÷ 10 mg/mL =
kg÷100mg/mL=
=6
_kg ÷ 1 mg/mL =
=山山
Temperature:
g÷
0.012 to 0.021 mL/kg x
1st hour under anesthesia
1to5μg/kg/min x
Amount Given  Route of Admin
PO SCIMIV
PO SC IM IV
PO SCIM IV
x byb山 g o 
 Temperature: .
=6x
6y
Pulse Quality: 
÷
"E
0.2mg/kg x
xby/WL0°0
2 to 4 mg/kg x
0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg x
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg x
0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg x
Time Surgery Started:
x6x/600 0 2000
xBx/6w500
10 mL/kg/hr x_
5mL/kg/hr x_
1to 4 mg/kg x
 5 to 10 mL/kg/hr x
x 6y/6
=÷6
=/b 0z÷6x
Time Sternal:,
Weight (kg): .
Species: Dog Cat
( esop z rsn oz Aa) (wbu g) apda
x
NSAID/Opioid /AntibioticMedication
Heart Rate/Pulse:
1 to 2 mg/kg x_
Time Extubated:
Lactated Ringer's Solution (LRS) (canine dose)
Lactated Ringer's Solution (LRS) (feline dose)
imeIntubated:
Telazol (100 mg/mL) (fractious dogs)
Local & Regional Blocks
Emergency Medications
Epinephrine (1 mg/mL) (CPR dose)
(snog auu) (w/bw oz) aueon
Bupivacaine 0.5% (5 mg/mL)
Butorphanol (10 mg/mL)
Midazolam (1 mg/mL)
Propofol (10 mg/mL) IV 
Lidocaine 2% (20 mg/mL
Fluid Therapy
Time Surgery Ended:
Premedication
Date of Birth:
10S %9
Pet Name: .
Induction
Intubation
Dobutamine
Recovery
NSAID:_
id
78
Monitoring
PATIENT ANESTHESIA MONITORING FORM
St
 Monitoring
8
Induction
Fluid Rate (mL/hr)
Heart/Pulse Rate
BP (Sys/Dia/MAP)
(1yn aey pine
BP (Sys/Dia/MAP)
Heart/Pulse Rate
Anesthtie Depth
Pet's Name:
() mo o
Pulse Quality
ECG Rhythm
emperature
Pulse Quality
ECGRhythm
%OAaS
CRT/MM
Sevo %
CRT/MM
"ods
6pD2
#
R
R
Monitoring
79
Anesthesia Monitoring And Emergency Algorithm
Procedures to be used during anesthesia: Monitoring by surgical assistant required. Record pulse, pulse quality, blood pressure, RR, O2
saturation, ECG q 5 minutes, and record temperature q 5 minutes or as your state practice act requires.
BLOOD PRESSURE
OXYGENATION
ECG
Monitor blood pressure,
Monitor pulse ox
END TIDAL CO,
femoral pulse and mucus
Monitor continuously
 membrane every 3 to 5
and respirations 
continuously.
 Bradycardia
(optional).
 minutes.
Has the pet received dexmedetomidine?
 Systolic < 100 or mean
 Decreased saturation
<80 mmHg
(pulse ox reading <95)
VPC
CO2
 Increase fluid rate:
Decrease sevo 25%.
 Look for causes of
2nd heart block or
 > 50 ventlate patient 
 Dogs: 20-80 mL/kg/hr
 Increase 0, to 2 L/min 
 pain and treat.
bradycardia:
<35 stop
 Cats: 20-40 mL/kg/hr
 Start ventilating.
 Decrease sevo 50%.
 ig dogs: ≤s 60/min.
hyperventilation
Decrease sevo 25%.
 Increase fluid to:
Increase O, to
■Med dogs: < 80/min
 Increase O, L/min.
Dogs: 20-80 mL/kg/hr
 2 L/min.
Sm dogs: ≤ 100/min
 If no improvement 
Cats: 20-40 mL/kg/hr
 Increase fluid to:
■Cats: < 120/min
 in 2 minutes, proceed.
 Check pulse quality.
Dogs: 20-80 mL/kg/hr
If no improvement,
Cats: 20-40 mL/kg/hr
proceed.
Decrease sevo 25%.
 Increase fluid to
20-80 mL/kg/hr.
 Give hetastarch:
■ Dogs: 5 mL/kg slow IV bolus over 10 min
 Cats: 2.5 mL/kg bolus slow IV over 10 min
 If no improvement give
If no improvement 
lidocaine bolus.
Atropine
If no improvement within 2 minutes, check ECG.
 Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg IV
glycopyrrolate
0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV
6
 If ECG normal and pulse quality still decreased, 
 Cats: 0.25-0.5 mg/
0.01 mg/kg IV or IM.
Give slowly over30
lonitoring
proceed.
lf no improvement. go
kg Iv
seconds and volume 
 If positive response and no VPCs, can repeat dose.
 Given slowly to effect 
to atropine.
dilute if needed.
 If no improvement in pulse quality within 2 minutes 
 and ECG normal, proceed.
 Alpha-2 agonists cause a peripheral
 vasoconstriction, leading to an increase in blood 
 Ephedrine (0.1-0.2 mg/kg) IV
 pressure in the vital organs.This can cause:
 Dilute 0.1 mL ephedrine in 0.9 mL
Dogs
■ Pale pink or grey mucus membranes 
Cats
 saline to = 5 mg/mL
Start lidocaine
■ Systemic hyperfension followed by hypotension
 Start lidocaine
 Dose every 15-20 minutes PRN.
 Compensatory bradycardia: Often 50% of
drip for
drip for
 Limit of two doses
premedication heart rate 
maintenance at
 maintenance at
4 mL/kg/hr.
0.6-1 mL/kg/hr.
 Decrease drip
 Decrease drip
If no response, give dobutamine
rate if bradycardia
rate if bradycardia
 Reverse dexmedetomidine if heart
1-5 μg/kg/min in saline drip.**
develops.*
develops.*
rate below:
Dobutamine microdrip:
■Lg dogs: < 45-50 bpm
■3kg = 1 drop per 4 sec 
■Med dogs: < 50-60 bpm
■5.4kg = 1 drop per 2 sec
■Sm dogs: < 60-70 bpm
■ 11 kg = 1 drop per sec
Tachycardia:
■ Cats: < 90-100 bpm
■ 22 kg = 2 drops per sec
Lg dogs: > 120/min 
 Reversal instructions
■34 kg = 3 drops per sec
■Med dogs: > 140/min
■ Dogs: Administer atipamezole IM at same
■ 45 kg = 4 drops per sec
Sm dogs: > 140/min
volume of dexmedetomidine used.
■Cats: >180/min
■ Cats: Administer atipamezole IM at same
volume of dexmedetomidine used (1/3 
volume of DKT).
If in arrest, use
epinephrine (1:1,000)
0.2 mL/kg IV.
Begin CPR.
With movement:
Without movement:
(See CPR Protocol).
 Increase sevo and 
 Decrease sevo. Increase fluid to 20-80
Watch for
 address analgesia.
 mL/kg/hr and check pulse quality.
VPCs
* Lidocaine drip = 1,000 mL saline plus 50 mL of 2% lidocaine = 1 mg/mL. Lidocaine drip cannot be used for volume loading, s0 a second
 IV catheter and line will be needed.
** 25 mg dobutamine in 1 liter of normal saline via microdrip. 25 mg/1,000 mL = 0.025 mg/mL = 25 μg/ml: 11 kg dog @ 2 μg/kg/min 
= 1 mL/min-administer 1 drop/sec (via microdrip) monitor pulse and ECG. As pulse increases, decrease dobutamine. If VPCs and 
tachycardia develop, decrease dobutamine.
80
Monitoring
SeCtI0N 8:
Reco
Recovery
SECTION 8
Recovery
RECOVERY
Electrocardiogram
 Anesthetic-induced cardiovascular depression is
(See the Pain Management section, starting on page 15, and
not eliminated once the gas anesthetic is turned off.
 Banfeld Protocol sections, starting on page 83, for managing
 Cardiovascular function improves over time. The ECG
 postoperative pain.)
should be monitored until the patient is extubated.
Patients with cardiovascular risks may need ECG
Extubation
monitoring throughout recovery.
Continue oxygen for three to five minutes after
Blood pressure
discontinuation of sevoflurane. After an anesthetic
As stated above, anesthetic-induced cardiovascular
procedure, patients should stay intubated until they have
 depression is not eliminated once the gas anesthetic is
regained the ability to swallow, but before being able to
 turned off, and cardiovascular function improves over time.
move their heads. For brachycephalic pets, keep them
 Blood pressure should be monitored until extubation.
intubated as long as possible. Keeping patients intubated
 Patients at high risk for cardiovascular depression
until they can swallow increases the likelihood that they
may need intermittent or continuous blood pressure
can protect their own airways.
monitoring throughout recovery.
Recovery
Monitoring during recovery
End-tidal CO,
ETCO, should be monitored until extubation.
 Along with induction and intubation, the recovery period is
one of the most critical phases of an anesthetic procedure.
Temperature
Monitoring during recovery will allow intervention if an
Hypothermia will prolong recovery. Keep patients warm
adverse event occurs.
during recovery by:
Patients that develop pulmonary edema during anesthesia
■ Placing blankets or insulating pad between kennel or
may not show signs until several hours later. This is one
surgery table to reduce conductive heat loss.
of many reasons that patients must be monitored for at
■ Keeping the pet covered (place towels or a warming.
least two hours postanesthesia and why preanesthetic
blanket over the pet).
stabilization and evaluation are so critical to successful
■ Using forced air and conductive polymer warming
anesthesia outcomes.
blankets. These blankets can be used under, over 
 or wrapped around patients during anesthesia.
Manual assessment
Anesthetized and immobile patients are at a greater
Continuous manual assessment is required until the
risk for thermal burns. The lowest effective temperature
patient is sternal. The patient should then be monitored,
setting should be selected and the patient should be
including pain assesment, every 15 to 30 minutes until
carefully monitored to avoid thermal burns.
discharge. A final TPR should be taken just prior to
■ A kennel heating pad can also be used post-anesthesia
discharge. The patient should not be released unless the
as long as the patient is awake and mobile enough to
TPR is normal. Transfer to an overnight care facility for
move off the heat source if needed.
continued monitoring and treatment as indicated by
the patient's condition.
IV catheter removal
Pulse oximetry
It is recommended to keep IV catheters in until patient is
 SpO, should be monitored until the patient is extubated
fully recovered. Some protocols specify that the IV catheter
should not be removed until just prior to discharge. Having
SpO, monitored until they are sternal.
Jo aheis siun dunp sueiodui si ssasoe snoua Ausia
the anesthetic cycle.
Recovery |  81
Recovery
82 |Recovery
SECTION 9:
Protocols
SECTION 9
Banfield Protocols
GENERAL ANESTHESIA
 Antibiotics other than cefazolin must be administered
CONSIDERATIONS FOR
ALL PROTOCOLS
■ Allow 30 minutes for premedications to take effect
Preoperative assessment
 Perform a complete physical examination (PE) and
 Repeat PE, temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR)
preanesthetic blood work before administering any
after premedications to assess cardiovascular
 preanesthetic or anesthetic drug.
parameters after premeds have taken effect and before
● All abnor malities noted on PE and preanesthetic
 induction. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is helpful.
 lab work must be addressed. This may mean
Heart rate is expected to decrease as sedation occurs
 and anxiety is controlled. Some cats with hypertrophic
postponement of general anesthesia, further diagnostic
workup and selection of a specialized protocol.
cardiomyopathy will have the same or higher heart rate
 following premedication-re-evaluate pet if this is noted.
● Fractious patients are the exception, and the
 If premeds are given more than thre hours before induction,
Fractious Pet Protocol should be followed.
■ Preanesthetic blood work includes a complete blood
 repeat premeds at half dose 30 minutes before induction.
cell count (CBC) with manual differential (Diff)
and internal organ function (IOF) screen including
Induction
rot
electrolytes (lytes). These tests must be performed
■ Propofol should be administered slowly (over 30
tocol
during the following intervals:
to 60 seconds in l/4 dose increments), to effect, to
● For healthy (no pre-existing disease), young pets
minimize adverse cardiovascular effects. Bradycardia
(< 2 years of age) for elective surgery: CBC with Diff,
and apnea may develop after rapid administration.
■ The average dose of propofol following premedication for
● Non-elective procedures and/or > 2 years of age: CBC with
healthy pets is 2 to 4 mg/kg for dogs and 2 to 6 mg/kg
 Dif full IOF with lytes within 48 hours of procedure.
for cats. Dose for ill pets may be significantly reduced.
■ Because of propofol's rapid induction and rapid
Premedications
elimination-
an approximately three- to five-minute
■ Maximum total dose of acepromazine for any pet is
window of duration-the technique of "overpressure"
is required to ensure a smooth transition to
1.5 mg. Acepromazine may be used with caution
 or at half the calculated dose in Boxer breeds or
sevoflurane. For overpressure, sevoflurane delivery
concentrations should be set at 3% using an oxygen
sighthound breeds. Keep in mind, however, when
flow rate of 3 L/minute for the first three minutes
 premedication doses are reduced, the amount of
(3%/3 L/3 min). For this technique to be effective,
induction medication and inhalation anesthetic
the respiratory rate must be near normal, or assisted
required are often increased, which can have adverse
effects on the pet as well.
ventilation is used to assure adequate intake and
■ Dilute premedications administered subcutaneously
uptake of the inhalation agent. Following the initial
three minutes, the oxygen flow only is decreased to
(SC) or intramuscularly (IM) to a total volume of 0.5
1 to 1.5 L/min (rebreathing circuit), and sevoflurane
to 3 mL depending on the patient's size. Dilute with
 concentration is adjusted, to effect. Overpressuring
sterile water. Volume dilution improves accuracy of
is not done if Telazol or dexmedetomidine
dosing, especially in small pets.
(Dexdomitor?) combination is used.
■ Acepromazine should be pre-diluted to l mg/ml in a
 If running sevoflurane at 4% or above, look for system
separate vial to allow proper dose administration (See
(seageduvuodayfouon xof suoa
leaks, improper intubation or inadequate oxygen flow
rate, or inadequate pain control.
Banfield Protocols | 83
■ It is best to avoid vaccinations in association with
transmucosal (cats) can be substituted
general anesthesia. If vaccines must be given, wait until
for butorphanol for postoperative pain
the pet has been fully recovered for at least two hours.
 management. This drug has a longer duration of
effect (up to six to eight hours reliably) but may
Maintenance and monitoring
take up to an hour to reach peak effect. This
drug can be administered by applying the drug
Local blocks:
 transmucosally in cats, NOT by swallowing.
■ Drug doses for local blocks are cumulative doses per
OR
 pet and drug (add lidocaine and bupivacaine)
 Hydromorphone: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
■ Testicular block for neuters
q4 to 6 hrs (dogs) and 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC,
●Lidocaine
IV q4 to 6 hrs (cats) Be sure to closely monitor
 Small dogs and cats: 1 to 2 mg/kg divided
body temperature in cats as hydromorphone can
per testicle
cause significant hyperthermia in felines. Should
 Medium and large dogs: 2 mg/kg divided
a cat's temperature increase to > 103°F, then
 per testicle
administration of buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.0l mg/
■ Line block
 kg IV will generally reverse most of the hyperthermic
● Lidocaine: 1 to 2 mg/kg dogs and l mg/kg cats
effect and maintain the analgesic effect.
OR
OR
sies By/Bu I pue saop By/Bu 7 ol I auleoeaidng ●
 Fentanyl CRI as described on page 21.
■ Field block
● Bupivacaine l to 2 mg/kg dogs and l mg/kg cats
■ NSAIDs can be given when sevoflurane is
Perioperative antibiotics are not recommended for
discontinued as long as pet: has no underlying
clean elective procedures lasting < 90 minutes:
condition contraindicating NSAID use (renal failure,
● Ampicillin: 10 mg/kg IM
liver disease, significant gastrointestinal compromise
● Cefazolin: 22 mg/kg slow IV
or recent corticosteroid administration); is well-
Protocols
● Clindamycin (dental): 5.5 to 1l mg/kg PO
hydrated; has received intraoperative fluids; and no
risk of significant hemorrhage exists.
See Perioperative Antibiotics, page I3, for more information.
● Carprofen (Rimadyl@) at 4 mg/kg SC, initial dose
only (dogs)
Postoperative pain management
● Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC,initial dose only (cats)
 Postoperative analgesic options should include a
■ Dysphoria: Do not confuse pain with dysphoria. If 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) and
 patient seems excitable or agitated, an additional dose of
opioid depending on procedure, health status of pet
acepromazine or midazolam may be necessary if it has
 and pain scale recommendation.
been at least four hours for acepromazine, or two hours for
■ Opioids:
midazolam since the previous dose, and pulse quality and
● General considerations for opioid administration
mucus membrane color are good. Give 1/2 of the premed
 postop: can be given when sevoflurane is
dose of acepromazine or midazolam IM (dogs), SC (cats).
discontinued as long as last dose of butorphanol
was at least one hour prior and the pet's
To go home
temperature is greater than 98°F.
■ Go home with NSAIDs and/or opioid as
● Hydromorphone or fentanyl CRl can be initiated
 appropriate for health status and pain level.
 postoperatively as long as i's been two to four hours
1 NSAID: Dispense same NSAID that was utilized
postoperatively.
the patient's temperature is above 98°F.
● Carprofen 4 mg/kg PO once daily or divided into
● Options: (Choose one)
two equal doses for three to seven days (dogs)
 Butorphanol: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM. Continue
● Meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg PO daily for a maximum of
butorphanol at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM q one to
[wo to three days (cats). Use with caution.
two hours PRN if NSAID alone is not controlling
■ Opioid:
 pain. Dysphoria can be seen with butorphanol,
● Oral tramadol 2 to 4 mg/kg q 8 hrs (dogs) and
especially with multiple doses.
2 to 4 mg/kg q 12 hrs (cats)
OR
OR
 Buprenorphine: 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg SC,
● Oral buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg transmucosal
IM (dogs) and 0.005 to 0.0l mg/kg SC, 1M,
q8 hrs (cats)
84  |  Banfield Protocols
Healthy Pet Protocol: Soft Tissue Surgery
Premedication:
 Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg (max dose 1.5 mg)
AND
Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM (dogs), SC (cats)
 Wait 30 minutes.
Postoperative pain management:
Induction:
 Dogs: Carprofen 4 mg/kg SC once
 Propofol
 Cats: Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC once
Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
And, if needed for pain:
Cats: 2-6 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM q 2 hours 
Maintenance:
OR
 Dogs: Buprenorphine 0.005-0.02 mg/kg SC, IM q 6-12 hrs
 Sevoflurane 1%-4% in 100% O,to effect.
 Cats: Buprenorphine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg SC, IM q 6-12 hrs 
Local block:
 Intratesticular and line blocks as indicated.
Discharge instructions:
Lidocaine or bupivacaine 1-2 mg/kg (dogs),
 Dogs: Carprofen 2 mg/kg PO q 12 hours for 3-5
 additional days.
1 mg/kg (cats)
 Cats: Meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 3
Antibiotic:
additional days. Use with caution.
As appropriate; ampicili 10 mg/kg IM 
 Add opioid as indicated for pain level.
:uoddns
 Dogs: LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV
 Cats: LRS at 5 mL/kg/hr IV
Decrease rate by 50% after one hour if
hemodynamically stable.
HEALTHY PET PROTOCOL:
 received intraoperative fluids and no risk of significant
L
hemorrhage exists.
rot
SOFT TISSUE SURGERY
■ Continue butorphanol or buprenorphine if NSAID
tocol
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
 alone is not controlling pain.
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
■ Do not confuse pain with dysphoria If patient
seems excitable or agitated, an additional dose of
Postoperative pain management
acepromazine may be necessary if it has been at least
 Postoperative analgesic options include:
 four hours since the previous dose and pulse quality
■ An NSAID and an opioid depending on procedure
and mucus membrane color are good. Give half of the
 completed, health status of the pet and pain scale
premed dose of acepromazine IM (dogs), SC (cats).
recommendation.
■ Butorphanol at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM can be given
To go home
when sevoflurane is discontinued as long as previous
■ Go home with NSAIDs and/or opioid as appropriate
dose was at least one hour prior and the pet's
 for health status and pain level (Please refer to pages 84
temperature is greater than 98°F.
and the Anesthesia Task Pain Chart, pages 18-19).
OR
■ NSAID: Dispense the same NSAID that was utilized
■ Buprenorphine: 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg SC, 1M (dogs)
postoperatively.
and 0.005-0.0l mg/kg SC, 1M, transmucosal (cats)
● Carprofen 4 mg/kg PO once daily or divided into
 can be substituted for butorphanol for postoperative
[Wo equal doses for three to five days (dogs)
pain management. This drug has a longer duration of
● Meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg PO daily for a maximum of
effect (up to six to eight hours reliably) but may take
two to three days (cats). Use with caution.
up to an hour to reach peak effect. This drug can be
■ Opioid:
administered by applying the drug transmucosally in
● Oral tramadol 2 to 4 mg/kg (dogs) q 8 hrs and
 cats, NOT by swallowing.
2 to 4 mg/kg q 12 hrs (cats)
AND
OR
 Carprofen at 4 mg/kg SC, initial dose only (dogs),
● Oral buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg transmucosal q 8
meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC, initial dose only (cats),
hrs (cats)
can be given as long as pet is well-hydrated, has
Banfield Protocols | 85
Fractious Pet Protocol
Canine:
Canine
Feline:
Feline
Healthy
Older, Sick
Healthy
Older, Sick
or Unknown
Brachycephalic
Feline
or Unknown
Brachycephalic
Canine
Breed
 Health Status
Breed
Health Status
TelazoP 2-4
TelazoP 1-2
Telazol2-4
 Dexmedetomidine,
DKT 0.035 mL
 DKT 0.065 mL/
mg/kg
mg/kg
mg/kg
 ketamine and 
kg IM
kg IM 
AND
AND
AND
butophanol
 Intubate or
Butorphanol
Butorphanol
 Butorphanol
(DKT) 0.065 mL/
provide flow
(Torbugesic)
0.2-0.4 mgy
0.2-0.4 mgy
kg IM 
by oxygen as
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM 
kg IM
kg IM 
 Can repeat 1/2
soon as safely
 Intubate or
dose if cannot
possible.
provide flow
handle pet in 
 Constant
by oxygen as
5-10 min
 monitoring 
soon as safely
possible.
 Constant 
monitoring
Protocols
Perfom exam and temperature, pulse, respiration (TPR).
 Place IV catheter if indicated.
 Obtain blood, urine and/or fecal samples.
 Peifom minor, non-painful procedures, if needed.
 Proceed to general anesthesia if indicated.
 If general anesthesia is required: Induce with 1-4 mg/kg propofol if
needed. Propofol may not be needed in DKT cats.
 Maintenance with 0.5%-2% sevoflurane if needed.
pue suonenipawaid asau ylm papaau Aaiei si anssaidiaao 
 sevoflurane dose needed may be very low in pets that have received
dexmedetomidine.
 Brachycephalic breeds should be extubated as late as possible and 
should be constantly monitored until stemal and awake.
 Fractious or compromised cats can be reversed using atipamezole 
IM, after all procedures are completed.
 Cats: Administer atipamezole IM at same volume of dexmedetomidine
used (1/3 volume of DKT).
 Give appropriate pain medications (NSAID and/or opioid injections)
prior to full recovery.
(See page 84).
86 |  Banfield Protocols
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
left ventricular outflow in cats with hypertrophic
FOR FRACTIOUS PET PROTOCOL
cardiomyopathy. While no anesthetic is safe for cats
with underlying heart disease, the judicious use
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
ul papuuosan auaiins s sisiuole zeudie jo
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
fractious patients when occult heart disease has not
Preoperative assessment
been ruled out.
■ Telazol@ should be volume-diluted with sterile water
prior to injection to a total volume of 0.5 to l mL
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
for improved absorption. If the initial dose does not 
 provide adequate immobilization within 20 minutes,
 Fractious pet is defined as:
it can be repeated, but do not exceed 4 mg/kg. Most
● It takes more than one member of the hospital
 dogs, depending on temperament, will be lateral in
team to restrain
[wo to three minutes. Telazol@ will provide eight to 30
● More than one attempt to draw blood is made
minutes of restraint time.
 because of patient movement
■ For fractious patients requiring general anesthesia,
● Any signs of aggression
allow 30 minutes for premedications to take effect
This protocol should be used before the pet is becoming
before induction, except in the case of brachycephalic
out of control.
 pets which should be induced and intubated as
quickly as safely possible. During this time, an IV
Premedications
catheter should be placed and blood and urine
 samples drawn as needed. The pet should be kept 
 If acepromazine has been given, and pet becomes
warm, provided flow by oxygen as needed and
fractious, STOP! DO NOT PROCEED with this
 monitored closely. Assess cardiovascular parameters
protocol if Ace has already been given. Postpone
after premeds have taken effect and before induction.
treatment for another day and begin with the
An ECG may be beneficial during cardiac assessment.
 Fractious Pet Protocol prior to excitement.
■ The use of Telazol? or dexmedetomidine combination
L
Induction
rot
IM early in the course of events helps prevent
 Remember: Telazol? or dexmedeto midine
tocols
catecholamine release and thus the adverse
physiological events associated with catecholamines.
combinations will usually lower propofol induction
Using the Fractious Pet Protocol after losing control
of the pet is not the right decision unless the patient's
for it in some cases. Assess depth of immobilization;
injury or illness is life-threatening. Postpone treatment
some patients can be intubated without further
for another day if possible and immobilize the patient
induction agents.
 prior to excitement.
■ Overpressure is rarely needed when these premeds
■ Dexmedetomidine can cause nausea and vomiting
are used, and the maintenance requirements for
following administration. Use of the DKT combination
sevoflurane are frequently decreased by approximately
 decreases the incidence of nausea and vomiting.
50% or more.
but cats should be monitored closely following the
injection of DKT.
Maintenance and monitoring
■ Dexmedetomidine combinations usually begin to take
■ Dexmedetomidine can cause significant decreases
effect within two to l0 minutes, resulting in lateral
in heart rate. While the addition of ketamine to
recumbency in four to 17 minutes and providing
the combination helps balance this effect, it is not
30 to 40 minutes of restraint time, with one to two
unusual for cats under dexmedetomidine sedation
hours for full recovery. Use caution when handling
to have heart rates from 100 to 120 bpm and pale
these patients as some are occasionally capable of
mucus membranes. Because of the unique actions
rousing enough to bite. Therefore, Banfield does not
of dexmedetomidine, this is only considered a
recommend this combination for fractious dogs.
 problem if significant bradycardia occurs (HR < 90-
■ The incidence of occult hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
100) and/or blood pressure or SpO, are abnormal.
 in apparently healthy cats has been estimated to be as
The first step if problems are noted is to reverse
high as 15%. For this reason, we do not recommend
 the dexmedetomidine. Reversal instructions: Cats:
using Telazol@ in fractious cats. Dexmedetomidine
Administer atipamezole IM at same volume of
d s  io de  s
dexmedetomidine used (l/3 volume of DKT).
vasoconstriction. It has also been shown to increase
Banfield Protocols |  87
 Avoid the use of atropine or glycopyrrolate in pets
that have received dexmedetomidine, as they can
cause significant tachycardia and hypertension.
Once dexmedeto midine has been fully reversed, these
drugs can be used on an emergency basis if needed.
■ Pulse oximetry monitoring can be more of a challenge
 in patients that have received dexmedetomidine. The
tongue may turn bluish as a result of pooling blood,
so it may not be possible to get accurate SpO, readings
from the sensor. Try placing the probe on the pinna,
toes or inguinal areas if possible.
■ Blood pressure is expected to remain within normal
limits with dexmedetomidine. If sBP < l00 or MAP
< 80, follow the protocol for addressing this problem
(See Anesthesia Monitoring and Emergency Algorithm,
page 80).
■ Continuous monitoring of patients during the
recovery phase is just as important as during the
procedure itself. Leave the endotracheal tube in place
until the pet is able to swallow several times and/
or is fighting the tube. This is especially true for
brachycephalic pets.
■ Because the tiletamine portion of Telazol@ lasts
longer in dogs than the zolazepam portion, some
dogs may have a rough recovery following Telazol@
Protocols
administration. The addition of butorphanol will
usually help smoothe the dog's recovery, however
piu io sioan apsn e saisnxa f!
thrashing, vocalizing or hyper ther mia occurs,
midazolam can be administered at 0.1 mg/kg IM.
 For brachycephalic or compromised cats, consider
 reversing the dexmedetomidine following the
aaonai pidei aou e amsua i ampand
Postoperative pain management
and to go home
■ Make sure patients are fully recovered prior to
releasing them to their owners.
■ See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
recommendations, page 85.
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
recommendations, page 102.
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets on page 9l.
88 |  Banfield Protocols
Feline Declaw Protocol
Premedications:
Post surgical pain management:
 Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg SC
Day 1:
AND
 Hydromorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC, IM
■Buprenorphine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM 
Wait 30 minutes.
q 6-12 hrs
Induction:
AND
■Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC
 Propofol to effect 2-6 mg/kg slow IV
Day 2:
Local block:
■Buprenorphine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg 
 Bupivacaine 1 mg/kg total
transmucosal q 6-12 hrs 
Antibiotic:
AND
 Cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV
■Meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg PO. Use with
Maintenance:
caution.
 Sevoflurane 1-4% to effect
Support:
LRS at 5 mL/kg/hr IV
To go home:
 Decrease rate by 50% after one hour if
→ Meloxicam suspension 0.05 mg/kg PO
hemodynamically stable.
q 24 hrs x 2 days. Use with caution.
+-
→ Burprenophine 0.01 mg/kg
transmucosal q 8 hrs 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
(around five minutes) than previously believed when
FOR FELINE DECLAW PROTOCOL
injected adjacent to nerves.!
rot
● Calculate bupivacaine dose carefully to avoid
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
 toxicity due to overdose. Remember, when using
tocol
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
local anesthesia in more than one region (e.g.
Premedications
declaw with neuter) that the maximum doses are
cumulative. Do not exceed l mg/kg of bupivacaine.
■ Hydromorphone: Be sure to closely monitor body
● Use a 25- to 22-gauge needle for subcutaneous
temperature in cats as hydromorphone can cause
injection. Avoid intravascular injection.
significant hyperther mia in felines. Should a cat's
■ Regional blocks:
temperature increase to > 103°F, then administration
● Carpal blocks provide three to five hours of
of buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg IV will
 postoperative analgesia using bupivacaine O.5%.
generally reverse most of the hyperthermic effect and
● Superficial branches of the radial nerve are
 maintain the analgesic effect.
 blocked by injecting the local anesthetic solution
■ Cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV at induction and
subcutaneously on the dorsomedial aspect of the
repeated every 90 minutes until skin closure is
carpus just proximal to the joint (Figure 6.1,
page 90).
 procedures.
● The median nerve and the palmar and dorsal
cutaneous branches of the ulnar nerve are
Maintenance and monitoring
 blocked by injecting local anesthetic solution
■ Apply the tourniquet distal to the elbow. Improper
 subcutaneously medial and lateral to the carpal pad
placement may cause neurapraxia, tissue necrosis and
(Figure 6.1, page 90).
lameness. The radial nerve is most often affected, so it is
 important to place the tourniquet distal to the elbow.
 Local blocks:
● It is standard of care to provide local analgesia when
 declaws are performed.
● Bupivacaine is now recommended over lidocaine
 as it has been shown to have a faster onset of action
Banfield Protocols |  89
Postoperative pain management
home post-declaw. Adult cats may need prolonged
 Duration of action for hydromorphone is
hospitalization and bandage care.
 approximately four hours. When used as a
premedication, pain assessment or time since
Source
administration should be considered prior to giving
1. Alhelail M, Al-Salamah M, Al-Mulhim M, Al-Hamid
buprenorphine postoperatively.
S. Comparison of bupivacaine and lidocaine with
■ Postoperative buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg IM-can be
epinephrine for digital nerve blocks. Emerg Med J. 2010
 given when sevoflurane is discontinued as long as the
Apr;27(4):335.
 pet's temperature is greater than 98°F.
■ Upon completion of surgery, administer one dose of
 meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC if renal and liver function
are within normal limits, pet is normotensive and
 no hypotensive or hypoperfusion episodes occurred
during the procedure. Use with caution.
To go home
■ The following morning, administer a second dose
of meloxicam at a decreased dose of 0.l mg/kg PO
(and buprenorphine if an adult or heavy cat) before
removing bandages.
■ Meloxicam should be prescribed as additional go-
home pain management. A maximum of two doses of
 meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg q 24 hrs should be sent home.
 Use with caution. In addition, buprenorphine should
Protocols
 be prescribed along with meloxicam in felines with
additional pain concerns (i.e., a difficult declaw), or in
 adult or heavier cats. Buprenorphine can be prescribed
at O.0l mg/kg TID as a transmucosal administration
option. Due to buprenorphine's duration of analgesia
(six to eight hours), it is superior to butorphanol as
 post-declaw pain management.
■ Bandages should be removed prior to any feline going
Figure 6.1: Regional Carpal Block
Median n.
Infusion
area
Infusion
ae
-Dorsal br.
Radial n.
Palmarbr
Ulnar n
From left, dorsal and palmar views of the front feline paw
90 l  Banfield Protocols
Abdominal Protocol
 Stabilize Before Surgery
Candidates:
Stabilization:
Premedications:
Induction:
Pyometra
 Place IV catheter.
Midazolam 0.1-0.2 mg/
→ Pre-oxygenate for five
 Gastrointestinal
Treat shock (see
kg IM
minutes via mask.
foreign bodies
below).
AND
Propofol
 Cystitis/uroliths
→ Comect electrolyte,
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4
■Dogs: 1-4 mg/kg slow
 Peritonitis 
calcium or blood 
mg/kg IM
 IV to effect
 Abdominal
 glucose abnomalities.
OR
■Cats: 1-6 mg/kg slow
masses
 Transfuse if needed.
 Dogs: Hydromorphone
IV to effect
 Intussusceptions
Keep warm.
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
GDV
→ Mnimize stress.
 Cats: Hydromorphone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
Support:
 Dogs: LRS at 
 Wait 30 minutes.
Maintenance:
10 mL/kg/hr IV
 Use lowest effective
Cats: LRS at
 sevoflurane level.
 5 mL/kg/hr IV
 Perfom line block with 
 Decrease rate by
 lidocaine (do not exceed 
 50% after one hour
2 mg/kg total dose.
if hemodynamically
 dilute with sterile saline if
stable.
needed).
 Antibiotic as appropriate
 Provide appropriate
 postoperative pain 
management 
(See page 92).
rot
tocol
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
 Gastric dilatation volvulus (GDV) cases are not
FOR AbDOMINAl PrOTOCOL
immediate surgical emergencies and require
stabilization and decompression before general
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
anesthesia. Passage of an orogastric tube or needle
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
Preoperative assessment
preoperative stabilization. True surgical emergencies
are cases that require anesthesia within 15 minutes
 Stabilize prior to anesthesia.
to save the patient's life and are not commonly seen
● Manage shock. Initiate shock treatment with the
in private practice (See Emergency Surgery Protocol,
 appropriate crystalloid fluid. Dogs: 20 ml/kg bolus
page 106).
(up to 80 mL/kg). Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 mL/
■ Recheck packed cell volume/total protein (PCV/TP),
kg). Hetastarch may also be administered if needed.
blood glucose (BG) and electrolytes as needed before
Dogs: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 20 mL/kg/day). Cats: 2.5
proceeding to surgery.
mL/kg bolus (up to 10 mL/kg/day).
■ Appropriate antibiotics should be administered based
● Manage arrhythmias. If Vtach or > 30% VPC AND
on the individual case. Antibiotics other than cefazolin
sBP < 90, MAP <60 or pulse-ox < 95 (on oxygen)
must be administered a minimum of one hour before
administer lidocaine 2 to 4 mg/kg (dogs) or 0.25 to
 anesthesia or following complete recovery.
0.5 mg/kg (cats) IV, then place a second IV catheter
 and begin a lidocaine constant rate infusion (CRI).
Premedications
● Correct any hydration deficits and electrolyte
abnor malities prior to anesthesia
 Do not use acepromazine.
● Provide blood or plasma transfusion if needed.
 If premeds are given more than three hours before
induction, repeat premeds at half dose 30 minutes
● Provide pain management (butorphanol 0.2 to 0.4
before induction.
mg/kg IM q l to 4 hours as needed).
Banfield Protocols |  91
Induction
 Severe pain:
■ Propofol should be administered slowly to effect, to
● Hydromorphone: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
q4-6 hrs (dogs) and 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
minimize adverse cardiovascular effects. Bradycardia
q4-6 hrs (cats). Be sure to closely monitor body
 and apnea may develop after rapid administration.
■ The average dose of propofol is often less than is
temperature in cats as hydromorphone can cause
required by healthy pets. Err on the side of caution.
significant hyperther mia in felines. Should a cat's
postoperative temperature increase to >103°F , then
Maintenance and monitoring
administration of buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.01 mg/
kg IV will generally reverse most of the hyperther mic
■ Sevoflurane concentration necessary to keep these
effect and maintain the analgesic effect.
patients in a general plane of anesthesia is usually
OR
significantly lower than is required by healthy pets.
● Fentanyl CRI as described on page 21.
compromised pets.
To go home
■ Repeat lab work as needed during anesthesia,
especially in surgeries lasting more than one hour,
■ Avoid the use of NSAIDs, or use with extreme caution,
consider rechecking PCV/TP, BG and/or electrolytes.
 in patients with significant dehydration, shock, renal
impair ment or underlying gastrointestinal disease.
 Critically ill patients may be slow to recover from
 anesthesia Monitor and document temperature, pulse,
The most recent research indicates that COX-2 is an
respiration (TPR) and other vitals frequently and
important component in gastrointestinal healing and
 provide supportive care, heat supplementation and
that COX-2 NSAIDs such as carprofen or meloxicam
should be avoided in cases where gastrointestinal
pain management as necessary.
■ Provide appropriate pain medications postoperatively
injury may be present, either as a result of protracted
(See Anesthesia Task Pain Chart, pages 18-19). See note
 yomiting, primary gastrointestinal disease or
umder special considerations below regarding NSAIDs.
 gastrointestinal surgery.
Protocols
■ Opioid:
Postoperative pain management
● Oral tramadol 2 to 4 mg/kg q 8 hrs (dogs) and
■ Postoperative analgesic options should include an
2 mg/kg 4 mg/kg q 12 hrs (cats)
NSAID and an opioid depending on procedure
OR
completed, health status of the pet and pain scale
● Oral buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg transmucosal
recommendation. Continue an opioid for pain
q8 hrs (cats)
management.
■ Injectable NSAIDs should be avoided in cases where
there was significant dehydration, shock, renal or liver
impair ment, gastrointestinal irritation, compromise or
surgery to Gl tract.
 Mild to moderate pain:
● Butorphanol: 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM. Continue
butorphanol at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM q one to two
hours PRN if NSAID alone is not controlling pain.
 Dysphoria can be seen with butorphanol, especially
with multiple doses.
OR
● Buprenorphine: 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg SC, IM (dogs)
and 0.005-0.0l mg/kg SC, 1M, transmucosal (cats)
can be substituted for butorphanol for postoperative
 pain management. This drug has a longer duration
of effect (up to six to eight hours reliably) but
 iaa yed yoeai ol ou ue ol dn ayei e
drug can be administered by applying the drug
transmucosally in cats, NOT by swallowing.
92 | Banfield Protocols
Cardiac Protocol
 If ECG nomal, pulse
quality good and MAP is
nomal (90-110 mmHg 
If still bradycardic,* stop
dogs) and (110-130
 and review diagnosis.
mmHg cats) no clinical
Premedications:
 Perfom cardiac workup.
signs of cardiac disease
are present, proceed to
Healthy Pet Protocol.
0.01 mg/kg IM 
 If bradycardia resolves,
bradycardia is vagally.
mediated. Proceed with
 appropriate protocol.
 Sinus
 Bradycardia
Premedications:
 Midazolam 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg IM
 If ECG abnomalities 
AND
 other than VPC or heart
 Soft tissue surgery:
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM 
block, consider significant.
 Perfom further cardiac
OR
 evaluation (radiographs,
 Orthopedic surgery:
echocardiogram). Proceed
 Dogs: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
ONLY if anesthesia is 
 Cats: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
ECG and
 absolutely necessary.
 Wait 30 minutes.
BP
 evaluation
 If ECG nomal, but there 
Preoxygenate with 100% 0, by face mask for 5 minutes prior to
are clinical signs of cardiac
induction. Antibiotic and local block as appropriate.
disease, consider further
evaluation (radiographs,
Induction: Propofol slow IV 2-4 mg/kg dogs, 2-6 mg/kg cats, slow IV
cardiac ultrasound).
 to effect (allow intubation)
Protocols
Proceed ONLY if
 Maintenance: Sevoflurane 1%-4% in 100% O, to effect 
anesthesia is necessary.
(se2 pue shop) Al 1y/by/w tz 1e s87 :uoddns 
Premedications:
IfVPCs, avoid
(See premedications
VPCs gone
glycopymolate and atropine 
even if bradycardia exists.
box above)
 Recommend further
evaluation before
proceeding or proceed if 
 anesthesia necessary.
Lidocaine bolus
 If VPCs still present,
Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg IV
 postpone anesthesia,
 Cats: 0.25-0.50 mg/kg IV
if possible. Otherwise,
 Given slowly to effect
start lidocaine.
Hypertension (MAP >130
in dogs or 150 in cats)
 STOP and evaluate pet
:s6oa
further.
Lidocaine dlip (50 mLs of lidocaine 2% in 1 L NaCl) give 4
Hypotension (MAP < 80
mL/kg/hr until VPCs are gone and then slow to 2 mL/kg/hr
in dogs or < 90 in cats)
 and monitor for bradycardia. If bradycardia develops, slow or
 then STOP and provide
stop drip and monitor for VPCs.
 cardiovascular support 
 Lidocaine requires a second IV catheter and line.
with IV fluids/colloids/
medications as appropriate.
Evaluate pet for underlying
Cats:
disease.
Lidocaine dhip (50 mLs of lidocaine 2% in 1 L NaCl) give
0.6-1 mL/kg/hr until VPCs are gone and then monitor for
bradycardia. If bradycardia develops, slow or stop drip and
monitor for VPCs.
 Lidocaine requires a second IV catheter and line.
* Patients that are bradycardic after glycopyrolate or atropine may stil have a vagal stimulus present. Check for increases in ocular or intracranial pressure or
 full bladder.
Banfield Protocols |  93
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
 anesthesia. Monitor and document temperature,
FOR CARDIAC PROTOCOL
pulse, respiration (TPR) and other vitals frequently
and provide supportive care as necessary. Continue
(For standard reco mmendations, see General Anesthesia
monitoring ECG, blood pressure and maintain on
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
IV fluids until pet is sternal and extubated. Do not
Preoperative assessment
 at all possible in case there is a need for immediate
■ Cardiac patients should be stabilized as much
IV access.
 aS possible before proceeding with anesthesia. It
is strongly recommended to take preanesthetic
Postoperative pain management
thoracic radiographs in any patients with known
and to go home
cardiac disease. An ECG should be assesed prior to
administering any medications.
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
recommendations, page 85.
Premedications
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
recommendations, page 102.
■ Avoid Telazol and acepromazine in patients with
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets, page 91.
known underlying cardiac disease.
■ Heart rate should decrease post premedication
administration. Should the heart rate increase,
then evaluate pet, perform an ECG and consider
 postponing anesthesia to further evaluate the heart if
 at all possible.
Induction
Protocols
■ Monitor an ECG throughout the preanesthetic and
 anesthetic periods.
■ Preoxygenate with 100% O, by face mask or
flow-by for 5 minutes PRIOR to induction and
minimize stress while handling cardiac patients.
 Because propofol has significant adverse
cardiovascular effects when bolused rapidly IV,
ensure that the rate of administration is at least
over one minute.
Maintenance and monitoring
■ Anesthetic monitoring is especially important in
cardiac patients because they are more predisposed
to adverse anesthetic events. Monitor ECG for
bradycardia, tachycardia or arrhythmias. Monitor
 pulse oximeter for hypoxia and monitor MAP
for hypertension or hypotension throughout the
 procedure and recovery periods. Intervene according
to the Anesthesia Monitoring and Emergency Algorithm,
page 80.
 IV fluid rates should be closely monitored as cardiac
 patients are more predisposed to fluid overload (watch
for tachypnea, dyspnea, tachycardia, pale mucus
 membrane, chemosis, peripheral edema, pulmonary
Crackles, nasal discharge, watery vomiting and diarrhea).
can put an undue stress on the heart.
■ Critically il patients may be slow to recover from
94 |  Banfield Protocols
Hepatic Protocol
Activated cloting 
Premedications:
Induction:
Recovery:
time (ACT) or
Mdazolam
 Propofol
 During recovery.
cloting profile (PT,
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM 
■Dogs: 1-4 mg/kg slow IV
LRS at
PTT, platelet count)
AND
 to effect
 5 mL/kg/hr
prior to procedure 
 Soft tissue surgery:
 Cats: 1-6 mg/kg slow IV
 If recovery greater
whenever significant 
Butorphanol
to effect 
 than 20 minutes,
liver disease is
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
Maintenance:
wam patient
suspe cted.
OR
 Sevoflurane 1%-4% to effect,
and check blood
 Orthopedic surgery:
inhaled.
glucose.
 Dogs: Hydromorphone
 May need to add 
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
Local block: as appropiate
 additional dextrose
 If cloting tests are
 Cats: Hydromorphone
to the fluids to
abnomal, postpone 
Antibiotic: as appropriate
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
maintain BG
and transfuse (FFP.
Support:
between 100-150
fresh whole blood).
Wait 30 minutes.
Dogs: LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV
mg'dL.
 Repeat clotting tests
 Cats: LRS 5 mL/kg/hr IV
 Provide
 post transfusion and 
 Decrease rate by 50%
postoperatively
re-evaluate the
after one hour if 
analgesia as
need for general
hemodynamically stable.
appropriate.
anesthesia.
If clotting tests
are abnomal and 
anesthesia is deemed 
necessary, then refer 
to specialty facility for
appropriate care.
activity, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
rot
and portal hypertension-induced vascular congestion
FOR HEPATIC PROTOCOL
and fragility.
tocol
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
severe hepatobiliary disease and is associated with a
poor prognosis.
Preoperative assessment
■ Recommend having fresh frozen plasma (FFP) or blood
■ If a transfusion is given, premed with
 available even if coagulation parameters are nor mal.
diphenhydramine (2 mg/kg IM) and postpone
 anesthesia until pet is more stable.
Induction
 Significant liver disease will affect the metabolism and,
■ The average dose of propofol is often less than is
therefore, duration of action of most anesthetic drugs.
required by healthy pets. Err on the side of caution.
For this reason, most drug doses should be based on
 the lower end of the dosage range.
Maintenance and monitoring
■ If serum albumin is below 2 g/dl then plasma
 transfusion and/or hetastarch 20 ml/kg/day (dogs),
■ Critically ill patients may be slow to recover from
 10 mL/kg/day (cats) must be given for oncotic
anesthesia. Monitor and document TPR and other
vitals, including blood glucose, frequently, and
 support and the need for anesthesia should be
provide support. Give care as necessary.
reassessed.
■ Coagulation testing (ACT, PT, PTT) should be
performed the day of surgery. Buccal mucosal
Postoperative pain management
 bleeding time (BMBT) is not a valuable test for
and to go home
patients with liver disease as it only indicates
■ NSAIDs should be avoided in patients with liver
functionality of platelets, not clotting factors.
disease.
■ Clinical and subclinical coagulopathies can occur
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
with severe hepatobiliary disease since most clotting
recommendations, page 102.
factors are synthesized in the liver. Some patients with
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets on page 9l.
normal coagulation tests can still have bleeding
tendencies due to changes in coagulation factor
Banfield Protocols | 95
Stable Diabetic Protocol
Premed:
 Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg, max dose 1.5 mg
Check ECG
AND
 If abnomalities, use 
Soft tissue surgery:
Cardiac Protocol.
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM 
OR
Orthopedic surgery:
 Dogs: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
 Instead of regular meal
 Cats: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
Postop care:
and insulin dose, feed half
 Wait 30 minutes.
 Check glucose
meal and administer half 
Induction:
every 2-4 hrs until
dose insulin 2 hours prior
 Propofol dogs 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect; cats 2-6
pet is awake and 
to anesthesia.This should
mg/kg slow IV to effect 
stable.
be perfomed as close 
 as possible to the pet's
Maintenance:
Provide
regular feeding and insulin
 Sevoflurane 1-4% in 100% O,to effect
administration time.
 postoperative pain
Local block: as appropriate
 Check glucose (N 110-175)
management.
Antibiotic: as appropriate
 just before anesthesia.
 If possible, set up 
Support:
 0.9% NaCl at 10-20 mL/kg/hr in dogs and
anesthesia time based on
 5-10 mL/kg/hr in cats.
nomal feeding schedule.
Reduce rate by 50% after one hour if
hemodynamically stable.
 Check blood glucose every 30 minutes* while under
 general anesthesia.
* If hypoglycemia develops (BG <100 mg/dL), take appropriate steps to comect, i.e., start 2.5% dextrose/0.9% NaCl IV.
rotocols
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Al jo asn aul yanoiu eiahodau jo uoezqeis 
FOR STABLE DIABETIC
dextrose boluses (1 ml 50% dextrose per kg of body
weight) or CRI.
PROTOCOL
■ The goal of anesthetizing a diabetic patient is to
(For standard reco mmendations, see General Anesthesia
 achieve full consciousness and recovery as quickly as
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
possible so the patient can return to a normal feeding
schedule and metabolic state.
Preoperative assessment
■ Ideal blood glucose levels will be between l50 and
Non-stable diabetics should not be anesthetized unless
250 mg/dL.!
there is a critical emergency that warrants the risk. If a
Postoperative pain management
 procedures are recommended:
and to go home
■ Correction of hypovolemia secondary to dehydration
■ See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
 Thorough evaluation and correction of any electrolyte
recommendations, page 85.
abnormalities
 See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
recommendations, page 102.
Maintenance and monitoring
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets, page 91.
■ 0.9% NaCl is used as the IV fluid choice in diabetic
Reference
patients.
 Continuous evaluation of the blood glucose levels
1. Thurman WJ, Grimm KA. Lumb & Jones' Veterinary
(minimally every 30 min) and the addition or deletion
Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4th ed. Oxford, England.
of dextrose from the patient's IV fluids.
Blackwell Publishing. 2007; 933.
■ Stabilization of hyperglycemia through the use of
regular insulin injections (e.g., Humulin? R) or CRI.
96 |  Banfield Protocols
Pulmonary Protocol
Check oxygen
saturation now
 Pulse ox normal and normal air
 Pulse ox abnormal or respiratory distress present:
 movement present:
 Consider radiographs and thoracocentesis (look for 
 Proceed.
 pneumothorax, pleural effusion or diaphragmatic hemia).
 If pneumonia or asthma present,
DO NOT overly stress*-consider butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mgy
 consider radiographs.
kg IM to calm.
If sedation needed for diagnosis, use acepromazine 0.05
 mg/kg (max dose 1.5 mg) plus butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg
SC/IM.
Premedications:
Note: If high risk, avoid acepromazine-use midazolam
 Acepromazine 0.05 mgikg, max dose 1.5 mg 
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM instead.
AND
 Avoid stress* and provide O2
 Soft tissue surgery:
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
OR
 Orthopedic surgery:
■Dogs: Hydromophone
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
■Cats: Hydromorphone
Protocols
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
Pneumothorax or pleural
Diaphragmatic
 Wait 30 minutes.
 effusion present:
hermia
 Pre-oxygenate three to five minutes.
 Drain chest & stabilize.
 Local blockimmobilization
 prefemed for chest tube
placement.
 Induction:
 Dogs: Propofol 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Cats: 2-6 mg/kg slow IV. Use rapid sequence
ECG:
induction** & be prepared to ventilate.
 If ECG nomal, proceed. IfECG 
Maintenance:
abnomal, see Cardiac Protocol.
 Sevoflurane 1-4% in 100% O,to effect
 Resolve ECG abnomalities, then use 
 Local block: as appropriate
 Pulmonary Protocol for induction and 
maintenance.
 Antibiotic: as appropriate
Support:
 LRS IV 10 mL/kg/hr dog and 
 5 mL/kg/hr cat for first hour, decreasing rate 
 by 50% if hemodynamically stable.
 Manual ventilation may be required. Provide
appropriate postop pain management.
* Avoid stress = the heart rate does not increase by 25% or more.
** *Rapid sequence induction" = have all needed supplies available at induction for quick intubation. Any delay in providing oxygen and
 an open ainrway increases isk of death.
Banfield Protocols | 97
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Maintenance and monitoring
FOR PULMONARY PROTOCOL
 Monitor pulse oximeter readings often as manual
ventilation or thoracocentesis may be required.
(For standard reco mmendations, see General Anesthesia
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
 When ventilating patients with chronic pulmonary
disease, be sure to watch the manometer. Pressures
Preoperative assessment
should not exceed 12 to 15 cm H,0. Higher
pressures can cause micro hemorrhage in the
■ Stabilize prior to anesthesia:
alveoli of comprormised lung tissue. Such patients
● Provide oxygen and check pulse oximeter.
may wake up from anesthesia, only to die within a
● If upper airway is blocked, provide oxygen
few hours of recovery.
through an 18-gauge catheter needle placed into
the trachea between the trachea rings as short-
Postoperative pain management
term emergency support.
● Thoracocentesis may be required prior to anesthesia
and to go home
if pneumothorax or pleural effusion is present.
 Critically ill patients may be slow to recover from
● Butorphanol (low dose recommended 0.2 mg/kg
anesthesia. Monitor and document TPR and
IM) may be required to calm a distressed pet.
other vitals frequently and provide supportive
● Perform as complete a physical examination as
care, supplemental heat and pain management as
 possible. Obtain radiographs if possible, however it
necessary.
is imperative to minimize stress.
pue ponooid aedodde ss uaaeuu uied 
● Assess cardiovascular parameters before induction
consider premeds that are on board.
An ECG may be beneficial during cardiac
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
assessment.
recommendations on page 85.
 It is important to choose the largest endotracheal
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
tube that will fit easily and not irritate or traumatize
recommendations, page 102.
Protocols
the trachea (See Endotracheal Tube Selection, page 43).
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets on page 9l.
 Inserting too small an endotracheal tube can cause
a buildup of carbon dioxide and cause post-anesthesia
STOP
Think. Make a good decision.
complications.
Premedications
Bradyarrythmias are common in patients with respiratory
■ Ensure premedications have taken effect before
disease due to increased vagal tone, e.g., brachycephalic
induction. An ECG may be beneficial during cardiac
 breeds and patients with intrathoracic disease. Patients
 assessment. See algorithm, page 97.
 symptomatic for bradyarrythmias may display weakness,
■ Monitor pulse oximetry and continue to provide oxygen.
lethargy, depression and syncope. Sinus bradycardia is
■ Pulse oximetry readings should be assessed before
most often seen with increased vagal tone. Treatment
and after premedication administration. Carefully
is based on management of the underlying cause. A
assess cardiovascular parameters after premeds.
vagalytic/parasympathetic agent (atropine, 0.02-0.04 mg/
kg) may be used in the awake, unmedicated patient to see
Induction
if increased vagal tone is the source of the bradycardia
This dose is less likely to cause rebound sinus tachycardia
■ Preoxygenate three to five minutes prior to induction.
and is much lower than the dose used to treat bradycardia
■ Use the minimum amount of drugs for induction and
 that develops under anesthesia.
the lowest sevoflurane percentage possible for the
situation. The average dose of propofol is often less
than is required by healthy pets. Err on the side
of caution. Propofol should be administered slowly
to effect, to minimize adverse cardiovascular effects.
Bradycardia and apnea may develop after
rapid administration.
98 | Banfield Protocols
Obesity Protocol
Premedications:
Pre-oxygenate 3-5 minutes.
Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg
Induction:
max dose 1.5 mg
Propofol
AND
■ Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
Soft tissue surgery:
■ Cats: 2-6 mg/ kg slow IV to effect
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
 Normal oxygen
OR
Maintenance:
 saturation and
Orthopedic surgery:
 Sevoflurane 1%-4% to effect
normal
 Dogs: Hydromorphone
Local block: as appropriate
respiration.
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
Antibiotic: as appropriate
 Cats: Hydromorphone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
:uoddns
Check
 Wait 30 minutes.
 LRS IV 10 mL/kg/hr dog and 
oxygen
 5 mL/kg/hr cat decreasing
saturation
Note: Calculate doses by
by 50% after first hour if 
lean body weight to prevent
hemodynamically stable.
 over-sedation
 Monitor oxygen saturation 
carefully.
 Intemmittent manual ventilation 
 may be needed in significantly
Abnormal
obese patients.
oxygen
Go to Pulmonary Protocol
→Provide postoperative analge sia
saturation
if non-elective procedure. If 
as appropriate.
OR abnormal
elective, postpone procedure
respiration.
and work up abnormalities
Protocol:
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Premedications
FOR OBESITY PROTOCOL
S
 Calculate doses by lean body weight.
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
Induction
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
■ Pre-oxygenate three to five minutes prior to
■ It is important to adequately monitor oxygenation
induction.
 status in obese pets.
■ Use the minimum amount of drugs for induction and
 the lowest sevoflurane percentage possible for the
 to lean body weight.
situation.
■ Choose the largest endotracheal tube that will fit easily
 and not irritate or traumatize the trachea.
Maintenance and monitoring
Preoperative assessment
■ Monitor oxygen saturation carefully during post-
operative recovery.
 Obesity protocol is designed for the obese but other wise 
healthy pet. If obese and ill, please follow the appropriate 
Postoperative pain management
protocol guidelines.
and to go home
 Orthopedic surgery: See Orthopedic Protocol, page 102
pue posoioid aedoidde aas juasaeue uied 
 Ill pet: See Hepatic Protocol, page 95, Renal Protocol,
consider premeds that are on board.
 page l00, Abdominal Protocol, page 91.
■ See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
recommendations, page 85.
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
recommendations, page 102.
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets, page 91.
Banfield Protocols | 99
Renal Protocol
 Correct dehydration with 
 Recheck HCT & TP.
Pre-renal azotemia:
fluid therapy at 10 mL/kg/
 If nomal, proceed with Healthy Pet Protocol.
 Elevated HCT, BUN 
hr (dogs) and 5 mL/kg/hr
& Creat w/urine
(cats) for 1-2 hours prior to
 specific gravity > 1.030
anesthesia.
dogs/1.035 cats
Premedication:
 Midazolam 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM
AND
Soft tissue surgery:
:uoddns
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM 
Renal azotemia:
 LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV
OR
 Evaluate for severity and 
(dogs): 5 mL/kg/hr IV (cats)
 Orthopedic surgery:
 underlying cause.
 Dogs: Hydromophone 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
 Cats: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
 Wait 30 minutes.
Induction:
Propofol
 Post-renal azotemia:
■Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Blocked urethra*
■ Cats: 2-6 mg/kg slow IV to effect
Maintenance:
 Sevoflurane 1-4% in 100% O,to effect
 Local block: as appropriate
 Antibiotic: as appropriate
 Dogs: LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV
 Cats: LRS at 5 mL/kg/hr IV
 Decrease rate by 50% after one hour if
Protocols
 hemodynamically stable.
Provide appropriate postoperative pain 
management.
*See Post-renal Protocol, page 101.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Induction
FOR RENAL PROTOCOL
■ The average dose of propofol is often less than is
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
required by healthy pets. Err on the side of caution.
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
Maintenance and monitoring
Preoperative assessment
 Critically ill patients may be slow to recover from
■ Kidney disease will affect the clearance and, therefore,
 anesthesia. Monitor and document temperature pulse
duration of action of most anesthetic drugs. For this
respiration (TPR) and other vitals, including blood
reason, most drug doses should be based on the lower
glucose, frequently, and provide support. Give care as
end of the dosage range.
necessary.
■ If serum albumin is below 2 g/dl, then plasma
 transfusion and/or hetastarch must be given for
Postoperative pain management
oncotic support, and the need for anesthesia should
and to go home
be reassessed.
 NSAIDs should be avoided in patients with renal
disease.
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
recommendations, page 102.
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets, page 91.
100
|  Banfield Protocols
Post-Renal Protocol
 Wait 30 minutes, then place IV catheter, empty bladder.
Post-renal azotemia:
collect blood sample, check ECG.
 Blocked urethra, ruptured bladder
 Recheck any electrolyte abnomalities if needed.
 Stabilize pet:
If pet is too fractious to
 Check ECG.
allow placement of IV
 If unable to get blood 
 Attempt to relieve
catheter, ECG, blood 
 Start LRS or
sample, empty bladder
urethral obstruction.
0.9% NaCl at
draw, cystocentesis or
or place IV catheter, give
(Cats: Place 0.1 mL
10-20 mL/kg/
 urethral catheterization,
Telazol 0.5 mg/kg IM 
of 2% lidocaine in 
 give the following:
hr IV and empty
(dogs); DKT 0.035 mg/kg
urethra.)
bladder via
Premedications:
IM (cats)
cystocentesis.
Midazolam
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM
 Perfom
AND
 If general anesthesia needed, stabilize pet first.
electrolyte assay.
Butorphanol
Induction:
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
 Propofol 
IM (dogs) SC (cats)
■Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg IV to effect
Cats: 1-6 mg/kg IV to effect
Maintenance:
 Sevoflurane 1-4% in 100 % O2 to effect
Antibiotic:
As appropriate; ampicilin 10 mg/kg IM
Support:
 LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV (dogs); 5 mL/kg/hr IV (cats)
Prot
 Decrease rate by 50% after one hour if hemodynamically
 stable.
tocols
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Induction
FOR POST-RENAL PROTOCOL
 If general anesthesia needed, stabilize pet first.
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
Recovery
■ Continuous ECG monitoring
(See Renal Protocol, page l00, for additional details.)
■ Recheck electrolytes q 2 hours initially until nor mal.
Preoperative assessment
■ Post-obstructive diuresis commonly occurs. Make sure
■ Bladder rupture by cystocentesis is rare, while anesthesia
 to manage fluid therapy appropriately.
 death in patients with urethral obstruction is common.
aa nssiod au iam oi s! e ed a
Postoperative pain management
 The most common ECG abnormalities are due to
and to go home
hyperkalemia (ECG abnormalities: bradycardia, lst
■ NSAIDs should be avoided in patients with renal
degree AV block, dropped P waves, spiked T waves)
disease.
 and need to be corrected before heavy sedation or 
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets on page 91.
 general anesthesia.
 If the patient is shocky, anesthesia is contraindicated.
Correct shock before induction. Propofol should be
administered slowly to effect, to minimize adverse
cardiovascular effects. Bradycardia may develop after
rapid administration.
Banfield Protocols | 101
Orthopedic Protocol
Premedications:
Postsurgical pain management:
 Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg SC, IM (max dose 1.5 mg)
 Fentanyl CRI t as detailed below (as long as cardiovascular
AND
function is nomal)
Hydromorphone: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg SC, IM in dogs;
OR
0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC, IM in cats
Wait 30 minutes.
 Dogs: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, IV q 4-6 hrs
 Cats: Hydromorphone 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC, IV q 4-6 hrs 
Induction: Propofol
AND
 Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Dogs: Carprofen 4 mg/kg once SC
 Cats: 2-6 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Cats: Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg once SC
Maintenance: Sevoflurane 1%-4% to effect, in 100% O2
 Discharge instructions:
Local block: +/- epidural*
 Dogs: Carprofen 2 mg/kg PO q 12 hours for 3-5 additional days
Antibiotic: Cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV q 90 min
 Cats: Meloxicam 0.05 mg/kg PO q 24 hours for 3 additional
days. Use with caution.
hr IV (cats). Decrease rate by 50% after one hour if
hemodynamically stable.
Add opioid as indicated for pain level.
* Doctor needs to be certified by medical director in order to perfom epidurals (See Techniques for Epidural Anaigesia, page 32).
+ See Fentanyt Constant Rate infusion (CRl) Recipe, page 21.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
 recent corticosteroid administration) and is well-
FOR ORTHOPEDIC PROTOCOL
hydrated, has received intraoperative fluids and has no
risk of significant hemorrhage.
(For standard reco mmendations, see General Anesthesia
● Dogs: Carprofen at 4 mg/kg SC (initial dose only)
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
● Cats: Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC (initial dose only)
Protocols
 Dysphoria: Do not confuse pain with dysphoria. If
Premedications
 patient seems excitable or agitated, an additional dose of
■ Cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV at induction and repeated
acepromazine or midazolam may be necessary if it has
nd aeaa si anso us n sn o ar
been at least four hours for acepromazine or two hours for
midazolam since the previous dose and pulse quality and
mucus membrane color are good. Give l/2 of the premed
Postoperative pain management
dose of acepromazine or midazolam IM (dogs) SC (cats).
■ Postoperative analgesic options should include an
NSAID and an opioid depending on procedure
To go home
    a  si  
■ Fentanyl CRls are discontinued as above prior to
recommendation.
discharging to home, but may be left in place if pet
 Opioids:
r Ae eads Araaa e oi paise s
● Hydromorphone: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
overnight care.
q 4 to 6 hrs (dogs) and 0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC, IV
■ Go home with NSAIDs and/or opioid as appropriate
(cats). Be sure to closely monitor body temperature
for health status and pain level (Please refer to pages
in cats as hydromorphone can cause significant
84 and the Anesthesia Task Pain Chart, pages 18-19).
hyperthermia in felines Should a cat's postoperative
 NSAID: Dispense the same NSAID that was utilized
temperature increase to > 103°F, then administration
postoperatively.
of buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.01 mg/kg IV will
● Carprofen in dogs 4 mg/kg PO once daily or divided
generally reverse most of the hyperther mic effect and
into two equal doses for three to five days.
maintain the analgesic effect.
● Meloxicam in cats 0.05 mg/kg PO daily for a
OR
 maximum of two to three days. Use with caution.
● Fentanyl CRI as described on page 2l.
 Opioid:
AND
● Tramadol 2 to 4 mg/kg PO q 8 hrs (dogs)and
■ NSAID can be given when sevoflurane is discontinued
2 to 4 mg/kg q 12 hrs (cats)
as long as pet has no underlying condition
OR
contraindicating NSAID use (renal failure, liver
● Buprenorphine 0.0l mg/kg ransmucosal q 8 hrs (cats)
disease, significant gastrointestinal compromise or
102 | Banfield Protocols
Ear Surgery Protocol
Candidates:
Premedications:
 Consider "soaker" catheter
 Total ear ablation
 Acepromazine 0.05 mg/kg SC, IM 
 Go home on an opioid and/or an
Lateral ear
(max dose 1.5 mg)
 NSAID as appropriate for health
resection
AND
status and pain level.
 Bulla osteotomy
Hydromorphone
 Dogs:
Dogs: 0.05-0.2 mg/kg SC, IM
● Carprofen
Cats: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC, IM 
 2 mg/kg PO q 12 X 3-5 days
 Wait 30 minutes.
+/-
Induction:
● Tramadol
 Telazol 1-2 mg/kg IV slow to effect 
 24 mg/kg PO q 8 hrs 
(Telazol* should be diluted with sterile
 Cats:
water to a volume of 1-3 ml and given to
● Meloxicam suspension 
effect to allow for intubation.)
0.05 mg/kg PO q 24 X 3 days. Use
Sevoflurane 1%-3% to effect in 100% O2
with caution.
+/-
Support:
● Tramadol
 LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV (dogs): 5 mL/kg/
 2-4 mg/kg PO q 12 hrs 
hr IV (cats). Decrease rate by 50% after
OR
one hour if hemodynamically stable.
Buprenophine
0.01 mg/kg transmucosal q 8 hrs 
* See Fentanyl Constant Rate infusion (CRl) Recipe, page 21.
rot
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
Postoperative pain management
tocol
FOR EAR SURGERY PROTOCOL
 Postoperative analgesic options include the use of an
(OTHER THAN PINNA)
opioid with an NSAID and possibly a regional block:
● Hydromorphone: 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC, IV q 4-6
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
hrs (dogs) and 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC, IV (cats). Be
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
sure to closely monitor body temperature in cats as
Premedications
hydromorphone can cause significant hyperther mia
in felines. Should a cat's postoperative temperature
■ Cefazolin (22 mg/kg slow IV at induction and
increase to > l03*F, then administration of
repeated every 90 minutes until skin closure) is
buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.0l mg/kg IV will
 generally preferred perioperatively.
generally reverse most of the hyperthermic effect
 Hydromorphone (0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg SC, IM in dogs; 0.05
and maintain the analgesic effect.
to 0.1 mg/kg SC, IM in cats) and acepromazine. This will
OR
 allow for fentanyl CRI to be instituted upon recovery.
● Fentanyl CRI as described on page 21.
AND (optional):
Induction
● “Soaker" catheters can be placed prior to surgical
■ Induce healthy pets for ear surgery with Telazol? 1 to
closure as described on page 32 and remain in place
2 mg/kg IV, rather than propofol. This helps avoid the
for several days postoperatively.
pau nuaaid ol aueanoaas jo sasop iuau ioj paau
AND
 movement during surgery. Telazol@ should be diluted
● NSAID can be given when sevoflurane is
with sterile water to a volume of l to 3 ml and given,
discontinued as long as pet has no underlying
to effect, to allow for intubation.
condition contraindicating NSAID use (renal failure,
■“Overpressure" technique is not needed when using
liver disease, significant gastrointestinal compromise
Telazol as induction agent.
or recent corticosteroid administration); is well-
hydrated; has received intraoperative fluids, and has
 no risk of significant hemorrhage.
Banfield Protocols | 103
 Carprofen at 4 mg/kg SC, initial dose only (dog)
 Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg SC, initial dose only (cats)
 Dysphoria: Do not confuse pain with dysphoria. If
patient seems excitable or agitated, an additional dose
of acepromazine or midazolam may be necessary if
it has been at least four hours for acepromazine or
two hours for midazolam since the previous dose
and pulse quality and mucus membrane color are
good. Give 1/2 of the premed dose of acepromazine or
midazolam IM (dogs) (SC cats)
To Go Home
■ Fentanyl CRls are discontinued prior to discharging
to home, but may be left in place if pet is transferred
 to a veterinary specialty facility for overnight care.
■ Pre-loaded lidocaine syringes or loaded soaker
catheter reservoir can be dispensed with the client to
 be used at home for several days postoperatively as
described on page 32.
■ Dispense the same NSAID that was utilized
 postoperatively (carprofen in dogs and meloxicam
 in cats-use with caution.).
■ For most aural procedures, NSAIDs alone are
 not expected to provide sufficient analgesic. Oral
Protocols
tramadol (2 to 4 mg/kg in dogs q eight hrs and
2 to 4 mg/kg in cats q 12 hrs) or transmucosal
buprenorphine (0.0l mg/kg q 8 hrs in cats) should
 also be sent home for analgesia. Both tramadol and
buprenorphine can be used with NSAIDs
or corticosteroids.
104 |  Banfield Protocols
CNS & Eye/Globe Protocol
Head trauma:
Premedications:
 Preoxygenate 100% O,for five minutes.
Midazolam
Assess risk
Induction: Propofol
versus benefit of 
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM
Wait 10 minutes.
 Dogs: 2-4 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 anesthesia.
 Cats: 2-6 mg/kg slow IV to effect
 Stabilize and 
 Soft tissue surgery:
assess risk prior to
 Butorphanol
 Antibiotic and local block as appropriate
anesthesia.
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
OR
Maintenance:
Epileptics:
 If well-controlled,
Orthopedic surgery:
 Sevoflurane 1%-4% in 100 % O,to effect
proceed to Healthy
Dogs: Hydromorphone
:uoddns
Pet Protocol.
0.05-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
LRS at 10 mL/kg/hr IV (dogs): 5 mL/kg/hr
Cats: Hydromorphone
IV (cats). Decrease rate by 50% after one
0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
hour if hemodynamically stable.
 Consider glycopyrolate
0.01 mg/kg IM for globe
Monitor:
 Keep ETCO, between 30-40 mmHg.
procedures.
 If ETCO, is elevated, there is higher
 Wait 30 minutes.
seizure risk from increased intracranial 
pressure.
 If cerebral edema present, maintain ETCO2
between 28-35 mmHg to help decrease
 intra cranial pre ssure.
rot
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR
Premedication
tocol
CNS & EYE/GLOBE PROTOCOL
 Administer midazolam 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM 10 minutes
 prior to butorphanol administration.
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
 Telazol@, ketamine and opiate drugs that can cause
S
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
yomiting (morphine, hydromorphone) use is
 contraindicated in head trauma patients at this time.
Preoperative assessment
■ Preoxygenate with l00% O, for five minutes by face
 Critically assess the need to go to anesthesia in
mask if possible.
any patient with head trauma. Most pets should be
stabilized with appropriate fluid support, O, support,
Maintenance and monitoring
 analgesics as needed and referred for specialty level
■ Keep ETCO, between 30 to 40 mmHg.
care. If that is not possible, proceed with caution.
 If ETCO, is elevated there is higher seizure risk from
 Most important caveat: Do nothing that could
cause increase in intracranial pressure (ICP) such
increased ICP.
■ If cerebral edema present, maintain ETCO, between
as coughing, vomiting, jugular occlusion (for
28 to 35 mmHg to help decrease ICP.
venipuncture) or drug effects.
 Monitor head trauma patients frequently for
■ Tonometry can be used to evaluate for increased ICP.
 Marked bilaterally increased intraocular pressures can
changing neurological status.
 indicate increased ICP.
Postoperative pain management
 Globe caution: Bradycardia can occur due to the
 trigeminovagally mediated oculocardiac reflex. If
and to go home
 this is severe and associated with hypotension, then
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft tissue surgery
glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg IV may be used.
recommendations, page 85.
OK to premedicate with glycopyrrolate if globe
■ See Orthopedic Protocol for hard tissue
 traction expected.
recommendations, page 102.
■ See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets, page 9l.
Banfield Protocols | 105
Emergency Surgery Protocol
Stabilization:
Premedications:
Induction:
Recovery:
 Place IV catheter.
Midazolam
 Preoxygenate via mask:
Monitor very closely
 Begin shock
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV
induce with lowest effective
during recovery
 treatment.
AND
dose of propofol, 1-4 mg/
 Keep intubated and 
kg slow IV (dogs), 1-6 mg/kg
 Begin to comect
 Butophanol
 provide oxygen until
0.2-0.4 mg/kg IV
slow IV (cats)
electrolyte
 stemal.
abnomalities.
 Continue appropriate IV fluid
 Keep wam.
Transfuse if
therapy for condition.
 Provide adequate
Local block: as appropriate
needed.
 pain management 
 Keep warm.
 Antibiotic: as appropriate
 postoperatively (See
→Minimize stress.
page 84).
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
caution, in patients with dehydration, shock, renal
FOR EMERGENCY SURGERY
impair ment or underlying gastrointestinal disease.
PROTOCOL
For this reason, the use of NSAIDs in critical
patients is limited until they are stabilized. The most
(For standard reco mmendations, see General Anesthesia
recent research indicates that COX-2 is an important
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
component in gastrointestinal healing and that
COX-2 NSAIDs such as carprofen or meloxicam
Preoperative assessment
Protocols
should be avoided in cases where gastrointestinal
 Stabilize prior to anesthesia:
injury may be present, either as a result of vomiting.
+ Manage shock.
primary gastrointestinal disease or gastrointestinal
● Initiate shock treatment with the appropriate
surgery. In these cases, the use of opioids is more
crystalloid fluid. Dogs: 20 ml/kg bolus (up to 80
 appropriate postoperatively.
mL/kg). Cats: 5 mL/kg bolus (up to 40 ml/kg).
● True emergencies requiring immediate anesthesia
Hetastarch may also be administered if needed at the
are rare. A true emergency requiring immediate
following doses: Dogs: 5 ml/kg bolus (up to 20 mL/
surgery would include an airway obstruction
kg/day). Cats: 2.5 mL/kg bolus (up to 10 ml/kg/day).
+ Manage arrhythmias.
will have a better outcome if stabilized before
● If ventricular tachycardia (V tach) or > 30%
anesthesia or surgery. For example, the survival
ventricular premature contractions (VPC) AND
rate for patients
withtraumaticdiaphragmatic
systolic blood pressure (sBP) < 90, mean arterial
nernias grez
catly increases if the pet is stabilized at
pressure (MAP) <60, or Sp0, <95 (on oxygen)
administer lidocaine 2 to 4 mg/kg (dogs) or 0.25 to
volvulus (GDV) cases require stabilization and
0.5 mg/kg (cats) IV, then place a second IV catheter
 decompression before general anesthesia for
and begin a lidocaine CRI.
the best patient outcome. These examples don't
● Begin to correct dehydration and electrolyte
meet the definition of "emergency”
 as used in
abnor malities.
 this protocol. Emergencies are surgical cases that
● Begin transfusions on significantly anemic patients
 require anesthesia within 15 minutes to save the
  e  a  s
patient's life.
occurred.
● Perform as complete a physical examination as
● Provide oxygen if indicated.
possible. If the urgency of the situation precludes
● Provide pain management (butorphanol 0.2
preanesthetic blood work, run it as the patient is
to 0.4 mg/kg SC, IM q one to four hours
being examined and anesthetized.
as needed).
● Assess cardiovascular parameters before induction.
● Avoid the use of NSAIDs, or use with extreme
An electrocardiogram (ECG) may be beneficial
during cardiac assessment.
106
|  Banfield Protocols
Premedications
Postoperative pain management
■ Do not use acepromazine.
and to go home
 The IV route is preferred for premedication in true
■ Critical patients should be transferred to an overnight
emergency cases to allow for rapid induction and
emergency clinic or 24-hour referral hospital for
intubation and the establishment of a patent airway
continued care postoperatively.
(See Special Considerations for Emergency Surgery
■ Postoperative pain management is imperative to the
Protocol, page 106).
successful surgical and medical management of the
 With true emergency anesthesia, premeds, including
emergency or critical patient. Pain management must
butorphanol, may not have had time to take complete
be tailored to the individual patient. Refer to the
effect prior to induction.
General Anesthesia Considerations for All Protocols on
page 83 for treatment options. Utilize the Colorado
Induction
State University acute pain scale guidelines on pages
■ Use the minimum amount of drugs for induction
16-17, to closely and frequently monitor the patient
 and the lowest sevoflurane percentage possible for
and provide adequate pain control.
the situation. The average dose of propofol is often
less than is required by healthy pets. Err on the side
of caution. Propofol should be administered slowly
to effect, to minimize adverse cardiovascular effects.
pidei rale donaaap keu eaude pue eipreskpeig
administration.
Maintenance and monitoring
■ Overpressure may not be necessary in severely
compromised patients.
■ Monitor closely to see if patient is getting deeper
Prot
because of premeds, and decrease sevoflurane, if
appropriate.
tocols
■ Repeat lab work as needed, especially in surgeries
lasting more than one hour, consider rechecking
packed cell volume, total protein (PCV/TP), blood
glucose (BG) and/or electrolytes.
 Critically ill patients may be slow to recover from
anesthesia. Monitor and document temperature, pulse
and respiration (TPR) and other vitals frequently and
provide supportive care, supplemental heat and pain
management as necessary.
■ Provide appropriate pain medications postoperatively
(See Anesthesia Task Pain Chart, pages 18-19; see notes
at top of page 106 regarding NSAIDs).
Banfield Protocols | 107
Cesarean Protocol
Premedications:
 Stabilization:
 Preoxygenate 3-5
 Induction:
 Butorphanol
Lminute via mask
 Propofol
 Place IV catheter.
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
for five minutes
■ Dogs: 1-4 mg/kg slow IV
IM, SC
 Start IV LRS:
through induction.
 to effect
■Dogs: 10-20 mL/kg/hr
 Cats: 1-6 mg/kg slow IV
 Cats: 5-10 mL/kg/hr
 Minimize stress.
to effect
 Decrease by 50%
If significant 
after one hour if
 bradycardia occurs
hemodynamically
following premeds,
stable.
 Maintenance at lowest effective
> 30% decreased
 Corect electrolyte,
sevoflurane level 
heart rate, give
calcium and blood 
 Perfom line block with lidocaine
atropine
0.2 mg/kg SC
 glucose abnomalities.
 or bupivacaine 0.25-0.5 mg/kg.
 Keep wam.
Administer buprenorphine
Minimize stress.
at recovery:
■ Dogs: 0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM
 Clip abdomen.
■ Cats: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM
 To go home:
■ Dogs: Tramadol 2-4 mg/kg PO
q 12 hrs
Cats: Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/
kg transmucosal q 8 hrs 
rotocols
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ Perioperative antibiotics should be used in critical
FOR CESAREAN PROTOCOL
 Or compromised patients as well as those where
 any contamination occurred during the surgical
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
 procedure. Cefazolin IV is the antibiotic of choice and
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
 postoperative period as needed.
Preoperative assessment
■ Stabilization and correction of dehydration and
Induction
electrolyte abnormalities should be perfor med prior
■ Continue oxygenation via mask until the patient
to anesthesia. Radiographs or ultrasound should
is intubated; this helps prevent maternal, and
be performed to allow for complete assessment,
 subsequent fetal, hypoxia. The lowest effective dose
 prognosis and treatment plan development.
 of propofol should be used. Propofol should be
 administered slowly to effect, to help prevent apnea
Premedications
and hypotension which has been associated with
 All drugs that cross the blood brain barrier can cross
rapid boluses.
the placenta and effect fetus(es)
 Premedications decrease maternal stress and anxiety
Maintenance and monitoring
and help prevent the adverse effects associated with
 While it is important to deliver the puppies or kittens
catecholamine release such as decreased blood flow
as quickly as possible to reduce the length of exposure
to the uterus and fetus(es). Premedication also allows
to inhalation anesthetics, the surgeon should wait at
for lower doses of induction and inhalant anesthetics,
least 15 to 20 minutes post-induction before removing
which can have significant cardiovascular and
them from the uterus to allow for redistribution and
respiratory depressant effects on the fetus(es).
 metabolism of the injectable anesthetic agents which
 Studies have shown that alpha-2 agonists, ketamine
were administered. During this time, a surgical prep,
 and benzodiazepines cause reduced puppy and kitten
line block and opening of the abdominal cavity should
vigor, and should be avoided. Acepromazine should
occur. Lidocaine and bupivacaine doses should be
 not be used in pregnant patients.
decreased by 50% to 75% in pregnant patients.
108
|  Banfield Protocols
 It is imperative to monitor oxygenation, blood
pressure and body temperature of the patient and
address any abnormalities as quickly as possible.
■ Puppy or kitten resuscitation should involve providing
war mth, gentle stimulation during drying and oxygen.
When respiration is not occurring, intubation, oxygen
supplementation and injection of a drop of naloxone
sublingually can be tried. It is not recommended
to swing newborns, or to use Dopram?, which
significantly increases cerebral oxygen demand and is
contraindicated during hypoxic episodes.
■ Newborns should be placed with the mother as soon
as recovery occurs. Do not leave puppies and kittens
unobserved until the mother makes a full recovery;
crushing injuries can be fatal to the newborn. Provide
a war m, safe environment.
Postoperative pain management
■ Buprenorphine 0.005 to 0.02 mg/kg SC, IM (dogs)
and 0.005-0.0l mg/kg SC, 1M (cats) when sevoflurane
is discontinued, as long as last dose of butorphanol
was at least one hour prior and the pet's temperature
is greater than 98°F.
To go home
Protocols
 Oral tramadol can be used for dogs and cats, and
 transmucosal buprenorphine should be prescribed for
cats for postoperative pain management.
● Oral tramadol 2 to 4 mg/kg q 8 hrs (dogs) and
2 to 4 mg/kg q 12 hrs (cats)
● Oral buprenorphine: 0.0l mg/kg transmucosal
q8 hrs (cats)
■ The use of NSAIDs postoperatively is controversial
because there is a concern about the effect on the
renal development of puppies and kittens and is not
recommended at this time.
Banfield Protocols | 109
Pediatric Pet Protocol (<16 weeks of age)
Premedications:
 Glycopymolate 0.01 mg/kg IM
AND
 Midazolam 0.1 mg/kg IM
Postoperative pain management:
PLUS
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM or IV
 Butorphanol 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM
q 2-4 hours for pain
Wait 30 minutes.
OR
Induction:
 Buprenorphine 0.005-0.01 mg/kg IM
 Propofol to effect 1-4 mg/kg slow IV
 or transmucosal (cats) q 8-12 hours
 for pain
Maintenance:
 Sevoflurane 1-4% in 100% O,to effect
+
Local block:
To go home:
→As appropriate; lidocaine 1 mg/kg
Puppies: Butorphanol 0.2-04 mg/kg
PO q 4-6 hrs
Antibiotic:
 As appropriate; cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV q 90 min
→Kittens: Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg
q 8-12 hrs transmucosal
Support:
 LRS 4-10 mL/kg/hr IV. Decrease by 50% in one 
hour if hemodynamically stable.
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
■ In puppies and kittens < 6 weeks of age, urine should 
FOR PEDIATRIC PET PROTOCOL
be clear and colorless, and any color tint indicates
rotocols
(≤ 16 WEEKS 0F AGE)
dehydration.
■ Preanesthesia blood work includes a complete blood
(For standard recommendations, see General Anesthesia
 count (CBC) with differential and internal organ 
Considerations for All Procotols, page 83.)
function (lOF) screen. Perform these tests within
48 hours of anesthetic induction. Sample size may
Preoperative examination
be limited, therefore packed cell volume (PCV),
■ Puppies and kittens develop hypother mia,
evaluation of white blood cell morphology, blood
 glucose and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) are the
older patients. It is unnecessary to withhold food from
 priorities. A complete urinalysis may be helpful as well.
 nursing puppies and kittens before anesthesia. In
● High PCVs are common the first few days of life.
weaned puppies and kittens, fasting should not be for
more than one or two hours.
thereafter increase to normal adult levels.
■ The normal heart rate of puppies and kittens is 200 or
● Puppies and kittens have higher white blood cell
 more beats per minute.
counts in the first few days of life than adults. By 3
■ Normal respiratory rate is 15 to 35 breaths per
weeks of age, white blood cell counts decrease, then
 minute. Respiratory system is best evaluated by
 peak again at 7 weeks of age.
 observation of the rate, rhythm and character
● Albumin levels in puppies <4 weeks of age are lower 
 of breathing.
than adult levels-adult levels are attained by 8 weeks
■ Normal body temperature for patients < 2 weeks of
 of age-consequently, puppies and kittens have a
 age is 96°F to 97°F, which increases to 100°F by 4
 greater sensitivity to highly protein-bound medications.
weeks of age.
● BUN and urine-specific gravity levels are lower in
■ Dehydration occurs rapidly in puppies and kittens.
 puppies and kittens than in adults because renal
Hydration status can be assessed by moistness
function is undeveloped.
of mucus membranes, position of eyes in their
■ Puppies and kittens have lower blood pressures,
 orbits, heart rate, character of peripheral pulses
stroke volumes and peripheral vascular resistance, but
and capillary refill time. Skin turgor is not useful
higher heart rates, cardiac outputs, plasma volumes,
 for assessment of hydration status in puppies and
 and central venous pressures than adult cats and dogs.
kittens < 6 weeks of age.
The pediatric heart is less able to increase the stroke
110
|  Banfield Protocols
volume (force of contraction) and, therefore, cardiac
Maintenance/monitoring
 output depends primarily on heart rate. Bradycardia
■ The oxygen demand of puppies and kittens is two to
is defined as < l50 beats/min and should be
three times that of adult dogs and cats. The respiratory
addressed quickly.
rate must be two to three times greater than the adult
rate to meet the minute ventilation necessary for
Premedication
the greater oxygen demand. A high respiratory rate
■ Pet owners will occasionally request that l- to 3-day-
during anesthesia must be maintained. This will also
old puppies have their dewclaws removed. Banfield
cause a more rapid induction and recovery inhalation
does not condone performing ear cropping or tail
 anesthesia due to the increased rate of exchange of
docking for cosmetic reasons, but dewclaws in
gases in the lungs.
neonatal pups are often removed to prevent future
 rauma. While there is ambiguity in the veterinary
needed to prevent hypoventilation and atelectasis.
community with regards to appropriate anesthesia
Airway pressures should not exceed 15 cm H,O.
for this procedure, a frequently practiced procedure
Extreme care is required to prevent lung trauma and
involves the placement of an SC drop of 0.5% to 1%
pneumothorax. Pets >4 weeks of age can be allowed
lidocaine over each dewclaw to be removed, waiting 10
to ventilate spontaneously.
minutes, then proceeding with dewclaw removals.
■ If running sevoflurane at 4% or above, look for
 Midazolam requires hepatic metabolism, and duration
system leaks, improper intubation or inadequate
of action may be prolonged in pets <8 weeks of age. It
oxygen flow rate.
produces good muscle relaxation with minimal central
■ During prolonged procedures, blood glucose should
nervous system (CNS) and cardiovascular depression.
 be checked periodically.
However, it does have a dose-dependent respiratory
depressant effect and may cause hypoventilation or
Postoperative pain management
apnea, so careful monitoring of the respiratory system
■ Uncontrolled pain in neonates and pediatric patients
is necessary. In debilitated patients, it may be best to
can lead to per manent alternations in CNS responses
avoid its administration.
L
to nociceptor input later in life and set them up for
rot
■ Because cardiac output in puppies and kittens is
chronically elevated responses to pain.
heart-rate dependent and they inherently have high
tocol
■ Postoperative butorphanol at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg IM or
vagal tone, administration of an anticholinergic is
IV q i to 2 hrs PRN can be given when sevoflurane is
necessary before induction of general anesthesia
discontinued as long as the previous dose was at least one
S
This also decreases respiratory tract secretions, which
ueu iaea s ameiadual sjuaed su pue ioud mou
reduce the potential for airway obstruction and/or
98°F.
laryngotracheal aspiration. This may not be effective in
■ Buprenorphine can be substituted for butorphanol
patients < 2 weeks of age.
and can be given at a dose of 0.005 to 0.0l mg/kg SC
■ Allow 30 minutes for premedications to take effect
or transmucosal q 8 to 12 hrs (cats).
prior to induction of general anesthesia. Assess
 If patient is dysphoric, midazolam 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg IV
cardiovascular parameters after premedications have
 can be given slowly to effect, and monitor temperature
taken effect and prior to induction
and cardiovascular function closely
Induction
To go home
■ Propofol should be administered as a slow bolus over
■ Avoid NSAIDs
one to two minutes until desired effect is achieved.
■ Dogs: Butorphanol 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg PO q 4 to 6 hours
Bradycardia, hypotension and respiratory depression
■ Cats: Buprenorphine transmucosal 0.0l mg/kg
may develop after rapid administration. Care should
q8 to 12 hours
be taken in puppies and kittens < 8 weeks of
age. Debilitated patients may be mask induced
Source
with sevoflurane.
 1. Hoskins J. Veterinary Pediatrics: Dogs and Cats from Birth
■ Intubation may be difficult in small patients. Care
to Six Months. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pa. Saunders. 2001;
must be taken to avoid laryngeal trauma, which
525-547.
may induce swelling. If intubation cannot be
performed, a tightly fitting mask can be used to
minimize dead space.
Banfield Protocols |  111
[esoonusuen by/bu 10'0
TO GO HOME
 Buprenorphine
OR
Buprenorphine
-/+
 caution.
q8 hrs 
 Cats:
+
口
口
口
 su z1-9 b Wl /0s 6y6w L0'0-900'0
POSTOPERATIVE
  Administer when discontinuing
significant hemorrhage exists.
 ANALGESIA
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine
Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart
AND
 Day 2.
心
口
Od bybu Ll-s's (euap upweu
Protocols
 CONSIDERATIONS
elective
 auoydiowoipAy oj Aepuooas
ADDITIONAL
 Testicular block for neuters 
WI/AI 6y/6 10'0'0-9000
develops, administer:
Bupivacaine
Buprenorphine
1 mg/kg in cats 
 Line block 
  
induction
nuro
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
INDUCTION
AGENTS
Propofol 
to effect 
口
口
PREMEDICATIONS
AND
AND
口
PROTOCOL
112
Banfield Protocols
 See Orthopedic Protocol if 
 health status and pain level.
Meloxicam suspension
0.01mg/kg transmucosal
doing hard tissue surgery.
TO GO HOME
 2-4 mg/kg PO q 8 hrs
0.05 mg/kg PO q 24
Buprenorphine
 2 mg/kg PO q12 
Buprenorphine
 2-4 mg/kg PO 
avoid NSAIDs.
Carprofen
Tramadol
 Tramadol
 Tramadol
q8 hrs
q8 hrs
q8 hrs
 Dogs:
 Cats:
Cats:
心
+
口
口
 auenngoaas buinuuoosin i
0.005-0.02 mg/kg SC/IM q 6-12 hrs 
since hydromorphone premed and the 
 Dogs 0.05 to 0.2 mg/kg IM SC, IV
asit has been1 hour since
 Cats: 0.05-0.1mg/kg IM, SC, IV
Fentanyl CRI (see CRI protocol)
 POSTOPERATIVE
ANALGESIA
4.86 soqe sl ainjeledwa
slu z b 2s 6yb6u t0-z0
0.005-0.01 mg/kg SC/IM
 Meloxicam injectable
● Dogs: 4 mg/kg SC
● Cats: 0.2 mg/kg SC
Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart
Butorphanol
q 4-6 hours
q 4-6 hours
q 6-12 hrs
OR
OR
AND
as long a
premed
e
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
Hyperthermia can be seen in cats
 Support with IVfluids prior to
● Local blocks as appropriate
epidural for hind limb procedure
u 00-soo auydoua.dng
Local block (see Healthy Pet 
secondary to hydromorphone
administration.if temp > than 
CONSIDERATIONS
 Begin shock treatment.
I See Heaithy Pet Protocol.
Protocols
 ADDITIONAL
 Manage arrhythmias.
 Manage arrhythmias.
 Manage pain.
Pre-oxygenate.
anesthesia.
Abdominal
Emergency
Hepatic
kg IV/l1M.
Renal
口
口
INDUCTION
 Cats: 1-6 mg/kg 
sow IV to effect
AGENTS
Propofol
口
PREMEDICATIONS
Cats: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
 For orthopedic surgery
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM 
Emergency
Emergency
● 0.2-0.4 mg/kg
 Hydromorphone
max dose 1.5 mg 
Butorphanol
Mid azolam
WI :s6o
0S :s1e0
Protocol
 Protocol
OR
AND
IMSC
IMSC
IV for
IV for
心
心
口
口
PROTOCOL 
Abdominal
Protocol
1
Orthopedic
Protocol
Protocol
Banfield Protocols |
113
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft 
 See Oirthopedic Protocol for 
 TO GO HOME
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
 orthopedic surgery.
 tissue surgery.
口
口
I See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft
 See Abdominal Protocol foril 
 POSTOPERATIVE
 See Orthopedic Protocol for 
 ANALGESIA
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
orthopedic surgery.
 tissue surgery.
 Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart 
口
口
口
口
口
Local block/immobilization preferred for 
radiographs
wen ot WI 6y/6u t0-z'g joueydiojng 
 Ventilate, pressures should not exceed 
oughout procedure.
 Pneumothorax or pleural effusion 
 Pulse ox abnomal or respiratory
K. pleural effusion or 
 CONSIDERATIONS
-consider
Evaluate ECG pio toand
ADDITIONAL
eadde se s
 Antibiotic as appropriate
 Local block as appropniate
Protocols
diaphragmatic hemia).
DO NOT overly stress-
I tube placement.
12 to 15 cm H,0.
pneumothorax,
and O2.
chest t
+
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
INDUCTION
AGENTS
Propofol
口
口
口
bw s'l asop xeu by/bw g00
 PREMEDICATIONS
 surgery
In high isk patients avoid 
 For soft tissue surgery:
 For orthopedic surgery:
Cats: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
acepromazine and use:
0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM
Acepromazine
tissue
 Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg 
Dogs: IM
Cats: SC
 OR
AND
 Dogs: IM
oS :s1e0
IM/SC
IM/SC
口
口
口
口
口
口
PROTOCOL
 Pulmonary
Cariac
Protocol
114
 Banfield Protocols
See Healthy Pet Protocol for
 See Abdominai Protocol for ill 
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for
 See Abdominai Protocl for ill
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
 See Heathy Pet Protocol for
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
TO GO HOME
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
 pets (renal iver, etc.).
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
 soft tissue surgery.
 orthopedic surgery.
 orthopedic surgery.
 sof tissue surgery.
soft 
口
口
口
口
口
 See Abdominal Protocol for ill 
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for 
See Abdominal Protocol for il
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
 POSTOPERATIVE
 ANALGESIA
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
pets (renal iver, etc.).
pets (renal, liver, etc.).
orthopedic surgery.
orthopedic surgery.
 softisue surgery.
 Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
 Monitor ECG prior to and continuously
 Monitor ECG prior to and continuously
 Maintain ETCO, between 30-40 mm
 Glycopyrrolate 0.01 mg/kg IV
CONSIDERATIONS
 Bradycardia can occur due to
 0.9 % NaCl is fluid of choice
CALCULATE DOSE ON LEAN
the trigeminovagally meciate
 2 hours prior to anesthesia.
Local block as appropriate
Local block as appropriate
ADDITIONAL
 See Heathy Pet Protocol.
 See Heathy Pet Protocol.
 Antibiotic as appropriate
 throughout procedure.
Protocols
 BODY WEIGHT!
 Globe caution:
develops.
邮
邮
邮
邮
?
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
.
 Cats: 2-6 mg/kg
slow IV to effect
NOIONONI
AGENTS
 Pre-oxygenate 
Propofol
 Propofol
WEIGHT!
口
口
Cats: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IMSC
 PREMEDICATIONS
 see Healthy Pet Protocol.
aes Xiains anss os
 Healthy Pet Protocol.
 Softissue surgery.
 Orthopedic surgery.
WAIT10 MINUTES
 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg IM 
 For soft issue:
0.2-0.4 mg/kg 
Midazolam
Dogs: IM
3
procedures.
OR
Cats:
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
PROTOCOL
 Stable Diabetic
CNS & Eye!
Protocol
Obesity
Protocol
Banfield Protocols | 115
Tramadol: 2-4 mg/kg PO q 12 hrs 
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft 
 See Abdominal Protocol for ill pets 
See Orthopedic Protocol for
 TO GO HOME
ns 
(renal, liver, etc.).
tissue surgery.
gueens.
口
口口
口
口
口
口
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
 See Abdominal Protocol for ill
POSTOPERATIVE
 ANALGESIA
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart
queens.
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
se uabAxo Aq mo apkaid o aleqnul 
 CONSIDERATIONS
 Do not overpressure upon 
 Local block as appropriate
Protocols
 See Healthy Pet Protocol
 Antibiotic as appropriate
ADDITIONAL
isition to sevoflurane.
 Brachycephalic breeds
 soon as safely possible.
a Line block
fazolin
+
口
口
口
口
口
INDUCTION
AGENTS
 May not be
Propofol 
needed!
口
口
口
口
 PREMEDICATIONS
If significant bradycardia 
Heatthy pet:24 mg/kg
 l pet: 1-2 mg/kg 
 0.2-0.4 mg/kg IM 
Butorphanol
AND
口
口
口
口
口
口
PROTOCOL
Protocol Canine:
 brachycephalic
 Healthy and ill 
Fractious Pet
(Aabuns
canine
Canine
breed
日
116
 Banfield Protocols
 See Abdominai Protocol for il pets
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for soft
 See Orthopedic Protocol for
TO GO HOME
 See Abdominal Protocol.
 Avoid use of NSAIDs.
 orthopedic surgery.
Buprenorphine
(renal, liver, etc.).
 PO q 4-6 hours
Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
Dogs:
Cats
口
口
口
口
M or Vq 2-4 hours prn for pain
 See Abdominai Protocol for ill 
 See Healthy Pet Protocol for
POSTOPERATIVE
  See Abdominal Protocol.
ANALGESIA 
 pets (renal, liver, etc.).
 Avoid use of NSAIDs.
 orthopedic surgery.
Buprenorphine
0.005-0.01 mg/kg
SC or q 8-12 hrs
 Butorphanol 
0.2-0.4 mg/kg 
Anesthesia Protocols Summary Chart
OR
口
口
口
口
口
WI (IXa Jo aunjoA E/L) ajozawedny ●
ueur juapuedep ajel jeay alow yonu
 Do not overpressure upon transition 
 si siad oueipad jo jndino seipien aul a 
 Recheck electrolytes every 2 hours as
I Can reverse afer all procedures are
 Cefazolin 22 mg/kg slow IV at 
 CONSIDERATIONS
 pue spinu Al yym saewouqe
 as soon as safely possible.
 Local block as appropriate
 Antibiotic as appropriate
 Corect electrolyte and fluid
ADDITIONAL
 See Healthy Pet Protocol.
 Ampicillin 10 mg/kg IM
Protocols
 Start with 0.5% to1%
 Antibiotic as needed 
 Local block as needed 
● Lidocaine 1 mg/kg
 Antibiotic as indicated
urethra if needed.
 sevoflurane.
adult patients.
induction 
 completed.
needed.
口
口
口
口
口
 0-4 mg/kg slow
1-4 mg/kg slow
INDUCTION
AGENTS
 May not be
IV to effect
Propofol
 Propofol
Propofol
 IV to effect
 If needed: 
Dogs:
effect 
Cats:
effect
needed!
口
口
PREMEDICATIONS 
WI 6y/6u s0 :s600 
Healthy pet: 0.065
 Start LRS or saline at
 Dexmedetomidine,
(a) loueydiojng 
 Evaluate electrolytes.
 0. 1-0.2 mg/kg IM 
Cats: 0.035 mL/
l pet: 0.035mL/
10-20 mL/kg/hr IV.
 Empty blader via 
Glycopyrrolate
Butorphanol
0.2-0.4 mg/kg
ketamine and 
cystocentesis.
 Midazolam
mL/kg IM
 Micdazolam
AND
oss
If needed:
  If needed: 
kg IM 
AND
+ DKT
口
+
口
口
口
口
口
口
口
PROTOCOL
 Brachycephalic
Protocol Feline:
Fractious Pet
 Healthy and
(< 16 weeks of
Pediatric Pet
 ill feline 
Post-Renal
feline
Protocol
Protocol 
(abe
口
Banfield Protocols | 
117
Protocols
118 |  Banfield Protocols
SECTI0N 10:
CPR
SECTI0N 10
CPR
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
 4. Rotate teams and individual responsibilities during the
code drill so that each team member is comfortable
FOR CPR PROTOCOL
doing each job during a code.
Cardiopulmonary arrest is defined as “the abrupt and
 5. Determine division of labor during a code by the
unexpected cessation of spontaneous and effective
number of associates available. A person may have
ventilation and circulation." This can be the natural
more than one job responsibility. Assigned roles of
ending of a full life or the result of trauma or disease
responsibility include:
States. If cardiopulmonary arrest is because of a potentially
■ Running the code 
reversible traumatic or medical condition, then prompt
Ventilations
application of sound cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)
■ Chest compressions: 100-120/min. Rotate the
techniques while addressing the underlying cause of the
person doing compressions every three to
ar rest may allow restoration of life signs.
Jo yiauais aenbape dn daay ol sainuiu anoy
compressions.
Effective CPR requires a highly trained, efficient and
Attach monitors (ECG, pulse ox, etc.).
■ Evaluate/ monitor patient.
medications, and prompt application of CPR techniques.
 Place and maintain IV catheter.
Even with aggressive and effective CPR, survival rates
 Administer drugs-record doses, time, pet response.
are low-less than l0%. Controversy exists as to the
■ Supportive care (lube eyes, heating pad, etc.)
best CPR techniques and protocol. Therefore, we have
Gopher
PR
combined recommendations from many sources to
■Monitoring
produce a reasonable CPR protocol that will benefit
■ Recording
the greatest number of patients and utilize equipment,
techniques and medications that should be available in all
This CPR protocol does not replace the Anesthetic
of our hospitals.
Monitoring and Emergency Algorithm on page 80. The
The goal of the following CPR protocol is to provide
cardiopulmonary arrest is noted.
an outline for closed-chest CPR in dogs and cats. This
protocol is a template. To be effective, it will require
Cardiopulmonary arrest
training of a team of hospital associates who can work
 Cardiopulmonary arest: Drug choice is based on
together efficiently.
ECG rhythm.
 NOTE: All ECGs are recorded at 50 mm/sec and
Recommended team training should include:
1 cm = l mv.
1. All doctors and paraprofessionals must familiarize
themselves with the protocol.
2. Develop a hierarchy of who will be “running the code"
according to who is available. The doctor present will
usually be running the code, but a lead veterinary
technician/assistant may need to initiate the code.
 3. Have frequent drills with your team to rehearse CPR.
Consider bringing in a stuffed animal as the dummy.
This should include the leader assigning duties and
directing the code.
CPR| 119
Cardiopulmonary Arrest Algorithm
Ventricular tachycardia
Lidocaine
Evaluate for
 response,
No respiration.
No respiration.
reassess patient.
Pulse present.
No pulse.
No heartbeat.
IV fluids
 Sinus tachycardia
Assess blood volume,
Establish airway.
 continue to ventilate.
Establish airway.
Intubate.
Intubate.
Ventilate with oxygen
Ventlate with oxygen
(connect to
Evaluate for
(connect to anesthetic machine
 anesthetic machine 
 response,
with oxygen only).
with oxygen only).
reassess patient.
 Nomal rate & rhythm
Monitor, provide
Connect to
 Cardiac compressions
supportive care.
monitors
100-120/min
(continuous ECG &
pulse ox).
Evaluate for
 Place IV
 response,
catheter.
 Connect to monitors 
reassess patient.
Start IV fluids.
(continuous ECG & pulse ox)
 Place IV catheter.
Start IV fluids.
Bradycardia
Atropine: 1st
Diagnose &
 epinephrine: 2nd 
treat
if necessary.
underlying
 Doctor or lead veterinary
disorders.
technician/assistant to
PR
assign duties
Evaluate for
■Ventilations
response,
C
 Reassess patient.
■ Compressions
reassess patient.
■Attach monitors (ECG, pulse
ox, etc.).
Asystole
■ Evaluate/monitor patient.
Atropine: 1st
■ Place & maintain IV catheter.
 epinephrine: 2nd
■ Administer drugs—record 
if necessary.
doses, time, pet response.
■ Supportive care (lube eyes,
heating pad, etc.)
Evaluate for 
■Gopher
response,
 Electromechanical
 reassess patient.
dissociation:
■ Any and all pulseless rhythms 
MONITORING INCLUDES:
 Difficult to rule out weak
。
■ Heart rate
 ventricular function
 Epinephrine: 1st 
■ ECG hythm
dexamethasone: 2nd
■ Dogs: Femoral pulse
Pulse quality/deficits
if necessary.
 disappears with a systolic
■ Capillary refill time and mucus membrane 
 pressure of 60 mm of Hg and 
color
 heart sounds disappear below
■ Respiratory rate (assisted or spontaneous)
 Evaluate for
 a systolic blood pressure of
Pulse oximetry
 50 mm of Hg.
response,
■ Temperature 
reassess patient.
Blood volume—(PCV/TP, hemorrhage,
 pulse quality, heart rate)
■ Pupillary light response & other cranial
Ventricular fibrillation 
Epinephrine: 1st
nerve reflexes (note any changes &
puz rsnog auel
presence or absence of reflexes)
Iif necessary.
■ Level of consciousness 
■ Urine production (place urinary catheter if
 stable, monitor output)
 Evaluate for
■Blood glucose
response,
reassess patient.
120
|CPR
VENTILATION (100% 0xygen)
IV DRUGS
 Establish airway (laryngoscope, endotracheal tube, tie in place).
Always bolus 10-30 mL 0.9% NaCl after each medication.
 Connect to anesthesia machine with O, only.
Raise extremity for 10-20 seconds & wait 30 seconds to two
minutes for response; repeat drug doses as necessary.
 Give two long breaths (1.5-2 seconds each), monitor for
Atropine IV or I0 (0.54 mg/mL)
 spontaneous ventilation.
0.04 mg/kg IV or I0 (0.33 mls for a 4.5 kg pet)
 If spontaneous ventilation does not resume, continue at 10-15
Epinephrine IV or I0 (1:1000 = 1 mg/mL)
 breaths per minute (two for every 15 chest compressions).
Start with low dose and progress to high dose.
Dogs: 15-20 cm H,0
(ad by 9'te 1o, s7w g0'0) 011o A1 by/bu 100 = asop m07o
● Cats: 12-17 cm of H,0
(ad 6y 9'te 10g s7w g'0) 0l10 A1 by/bw 1'0 = asp yo
■ Chronic lung disease: < 12 cm of H0
■Lidocaine IV or IO (2% solution = 20 mg/mL)
■Monitor with ECG, use with caution in cats. Start with bolus
and if successful convert to CRl.
EXTERNAL CHEST COMPRESSIONS
●Dog bolus: 2-4 mg/kg IV or IO (0.5-1 mL for a 4.5 kg dog)
< 4.5 kg, lateral recumbency
●Cat bolus: 0.2 mg/kg (0.04 ml for a 4.5 kg cat)
■ Place fingers of one hand on one side of the chest and thumb
■Lidocaine CRI (lidocaine drip - 1 L saline and 50 mL
 cn the other side at level of 4th-5th intercostal space, avoid
2% lidocaine)
 cmmpressions with fingertips.
●Dog: 4 mL/kg/hr to control VPCs. Decrease drip rate 
■100-120 compressions/minute
if bradycardia develops. Use second IV catheter for
 Should decrease chest diameter by 25%-33%.
administration.
● Cats: 0.6-1 mL/kg/hr to control VPCs. Use caution in
>7 kg, lateral recumbency
cats, monitor closely for bradycardia and decrease drip
 Stand with patient's spine closest to you.
rate if bradycardia develops. Use second IV catheter for
■ Center over highest portion of chest wall at level of 4th-5th
administration.
 intercostal space.
Dexamethasone sodium phosphate IV (4 mg/mL)
 100-120 compressions/minute
4.4 mg/kg (5 ml for a4.5 kg pet)
 Should decrease chest diameter by 25%-33%, chest wallshould
INTRATRACHEAL DRUGS
be allowed to completely recoil between compressions.
Atropine, epinephrine, lidocaine
 Double the IV dose.
■ Administer through a red rubber catheter advanced beyond the
 end of endotracheal tube.
FLUIDS
 Follw with 5-10 mL 0.9% NaCl to flush drug through red
 Place largest catheter possible, central preferred, f.e.
 rubber catheter.
 Hyperventilate after administration for 10 seconds.
 jugular catheter. 0.9% NaCl.
 Give following dose as initial bolus, then reassess for
8
ongoing rate.
●Dogs: 20 mL/kg
POST RESUSCITATION
Cats: 5 mL/kg
Monitor: (See Cardiopuimonary Arrest Aigorithm, page 120).
 Adjust continued fluid therapy for underlying disease,
 Support organ systems: Consider all appropriate measures.
f.e. congestive heart failure.
■ Respiratory: Supplemental oxygen (nasal or e-collar) 
● Dogs: 40-80 mL/kg/hr
● Cats: 20-40 mL/kg/hr
■ Cardiac: Supplemental oxygen (nasal or e-collar), furosemide,
lidocaine, dobutamine, IV fluids, continued positive pressure 
 Assess need for colloids: (TP < 3.5, Alb < 1.5, poor pulse quality
ventilation with oxygen.
wy adequate crystalloid administration, need for rapid volume
expansion. Establish second IV line). 
 Neurologic: Supplemental oxygen (nasal or e-collar),
 continued ventilation with oxygen to reduce carbon dioxide
 Hetastarch:
levels, mannitol, corticosteroids, furosemide, dobutamine.
● Dogs: 10-20 mL/kg over first hour in increments of
 5 mL/kg/5-10 min
 Renal: Continued fluid therapy. If normovolemic and 
● Cats: 5-10 mL/kg over first hour in increments of
normotensive and oliguric (less than 1 mL of urine/kg/hr 
 5 mL/kg/5-10 min
produced) consider mannitol or furosemide with or without a
dobutamine drip-dogs only.
 Fresh frozen plasma: 5-10 mL/kg at 20 mL/kg/hr
Assess need for oxygen carrying fluids: (HCT or PCV  25%
 Drugs to consider!
 or significant hemorrhage. Establish second IV line).
Furosemide (2-4 mg/kg IV)
 Packed red blood cells: 5-10 mL/kg at 10-20 mL/kg/hr
● Dobutamine (4-20 pig/kg/min IV: 25 mg in 1 L of saline via
● Dogs: No need for cross match with first transfusion.
● Cats: Always blood type or cross match.
microdrip = 25 μg/mL. Monitor pulse and ECG-as pulse 
increases, decrease dobutamine. If VPCs or tachycardia 
 Fresh whole blood: 5-20 mL/kg at 10-20 mL/kg/hr, cross
develop, decrease drip rate).
match as above
+ Lidocaine CRl, corticostercids (dexamethasone SP
 4-10 mg/kg IV or methylprednisolone, Na succinate
10-30 mg/kg IV)
Think. Make a good decision.
0 auwedop) anuw/bybnd e-go (Auo sbop) auedoa 
STOP
mg/mL add 1/2 mL = 20 mg to 1 L 0.9% NaCl = 20 μg/mL,
microdrip set = 60 drops/mL, 9 kg dog at 2 μg/kg/minute =
 antibiotics. Consider referral for 24-hour care when stable 
NTRACARDIAC INJECTIONS NOT APPROPRIATE.
for transport.
DO NOoT ADMINISTER.
CPR| 121
CPR
122 | CPR
SECTION 11:
Exotics
SECTI0N 11
Anesthetic Considerations
for Small Exotic Patients
■Birds Reptiles  Ferrets  Rabbits  Guinea Pigs Chinchillas ■ Rodents  Hedgehogs
INTRODUCTION
Proper application of these six steps must address the
following issues:
Many resources exist for those interested in anesthesia
 Evaluation of medical history, physical state and
of exotic patients. This section is not meant to be
laboratory data
inclusive of allresources, but is designed to provide
 Stabilization of physiological status before induction
 general practitioners with clinically practical, effective,
safety-oriented guidelines based on commonly accepted
of anesthesia
 Minimization of anesthetic time-preparation is key
 Correct anesthetic drug dose selection (consider
no guideline is perfect for every individual patient. The
health status, species, breed, and pre-existing
best formula for a positive anesthetic outcome involves
conditions and complications)
 good medical judgment, and careful attention to the whole
 Maintenance of patent airway, oxygen support and
patient-from initial evaluation and preparation through
monitoring
anesthesia, recovery and post-procedure care.
■ Monitoring and support of cardiovascular function
(fluids and adrenergic drugs)
Exotic patient anesthesia is essentially the same as
 Monitoring and support of body temperature
feline and canine anesthesia. However, application
for
(supplemental heat, reduction of body heat loss)
requires modification of apparatus due to small patient
 Continued monitoring and support until complete
size, recognition of variable drug sensitivities, species
idiosyncrasies, challnges of restraint and monitoring
recovery
 Analgesia/tranquilization to decrease pain, stress and
limitations. The six basic steps of anesthesia apply to
excitement during induction or recovery
exotic patients as well as dogs and cats.
 Preparation (adequate hospital team training and
1. Preanesthetic evaluation: Client education, patient
equipment) for normal and complicated cases;
history and health status, laboratory information
 prepare to address potential adverse outcomes
2. Preanesthetic preparation: Fasting (when
appropriate), stabilization of systemic status,fluid and
Special considerations for exotic
oxygen supplementation, equipment and hospital team,
patient anesthesia
premedication, venous access if appropriate
3. Monitoring: Cardiopulmonary parameters, end-tidal
The small body size of many exotic mammals and avian
CO, monitoring (CO, is ideal in larger patients, but
species equates to increased metabolism compared
not currently available at all Banfield hospitals),
to dogs and cats; reptiles generally have slower
blood pressure, pulse oximetry, temperature, plane of
 metabolism. This variability has a significant impact
anesthesia, hydration status
on anesthetic considerations. Metabolism levels may
4. Induction: Provides a smooth transition into
increase or decrease drug requirements or duration
unconsciousness and allows airway to be established
of action compared to dogs and cats, increase the risk
and secured (tracheal intubation is not recommended
of hypoglycemia due to fasting and increase oxygen
 in all species-see individual protocols)
requirements in many species. Most exotic patients are
5. Maintenance: Temperature maintenance, prevention of
extremely sensitive to any period of apnea or hypoxemia,
hypoglycemia, hypovolemia and hypothermia
no matter how short. For example, reptiles may survive an
 6. Postoperative care: Recovery, temperature
initial hypoxemic anesthesia episode, only to die days or
maintenance, pain control, fluid balance
weeks later from hypoxic renal damage.
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients | 123
High body surface area to volume ratio predisposes small
Perform preanesthetic blood work whenever possible.
patients to significant body heat loss during anesthesia.
 This includes complete blood cell count (CBC)/
Hypothermia produces prolonged drug metabolism and
differential and a chemistry profile. It may not be
recovery. Small size makes intubation, venous access
possible to obtain adequate blood sample volumes
and anesthetic monitoring difficult and often requires
from very small patients. However, a sample adequate
size-specific or adapted equipment A high level of skill
to perform a packed cell volume (PCV), total protein
is imperative to provide the specialized care needed for
(TP), blood glucose and blood smear/differential
successful exotic patient care and anesthesia.
is usually obtainable from all but the very smallest
patients. Consider urinalysis, fecal examination and
PREANESTHETIC EVALUATION
 other blood tests as appropriate to the case.
 The current in-house blood chemistry machine will
 Discuss realistic expectations and potential outcomes
run chemistries on rabbits, ferrets, many avian species,
with the client.
reptiles and rodents. The in-house CBC machine 
S1
 Provide client education about aftercare and present
will run CBCs on rabbits and ferrets. Practitioners
Patient
an accurate treatment plan before the procedure.
will have to refer to a text for ferret normals. "Rabbit
Include client education about prognosis and
normal" cards are available for the in-house Scil
anesthetic risk, exotic patients can respond differently
machines. A "rabbit" card for CBCs can be obtained
to anesthetic procedures compared to dogs and cats
eipan on unoy uonisimbai sseuind e gunuqns Aq
Exotic
 Due to small body size and related factors, exotic
Resources (See instructions in SmartHelp). In most
patients are more prone to anesthetic and surgically
cases, CBCs for reptiles and avian species will need
related complications.
to be sent to a reference lab. A manual count can
be performed in-house if practitioners have skill in
Obtain an accurate body weight, usually in grams.
reading avian and reptile blood smears.
 Accurate body weight is imperative to calculate correct
 Address any preanesthetic blood work abnormalities
drug and fluid doses.
before proceeding with anesthesia. When emergency
for
surgery is truly necessary, stabilize the patient as
Perform as complete a physical exam as possible.
much as possible before anesthesia. Situations where
rations
surgery is required before any stabilization has been
 Obtain a complete history and determine if the
 performed are extremely rare.
 patient can reasonably be handled. Evaluate the
patient's health status-healthy or compromised?
 Determine "awake" resting pulse rate, temperature
Blood Sample Guidelines
and respiratory rate when possible. Patients that
for Healthy Patients*
cannot be examined without chemical restraint should
 be evaluated based on visual observation and history.
Handle stressed patients for as short a period as
Species
Blood Sample Volumes**
Anesthetic
 possible. In some cases, sedation or anesthesia of sick
patients to allow evaluation is preferable to the stress
Reptiles:
Up to 0.5 ml per 100 grams of body weight
 induced by struggling and restraint
(0.5% of body weight)
Examples:
 Become familiar with common ailments of each species.
 100 gram patient, can take 0.5 mL
 1,000 gram patient, can take 3 to 5 mL
 Evaluate any pre-existing conditions or clinical signs
including anemia, cyanosis, cachexia or obesity,
Rabbits,
Up to 0.5 mL per 100 grams of body weight
anorexia (fasting), icterus, weakness or central
Ferrets &
(0.5% of body weight)
nervous system (CNS) depression, dehydration,
Rodents:
Examples:
ascites, respiratory or cardiovascular abnormalities,
 100 gram patient, can take 0.5 mL
tissue trauma and clotting abnormalities. Use
1,000 gram patient, can take 3 to 5 mL
 appropriate caution in patients with hepatic, renal
or other compromise. Stabilize systemic status if
Avian Species:
Up to 1 mL per 100 grams body weight
possible, including treatment for pain if appropriate.
*Adapted from ANTECH Diagnostics sample collection information.
** Take smaller armounts from cormpromised patients.
124 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Reference laboratories can often supply micro-sized
3q ueo 1eu 1oddns 1o aoe1q e Aq papie a1e suoas1ns auos
blood collection tubes to facilitate send-out diagnostic
placed over small patients to allow a place for the hands
workups for small patients. Check the comments below
to rest while performing surgery These can be fashioned
each exotic patient blood test in the current reference lab
from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe cut into various
services directory. The reference lab information indicates
lengths and placed over part of the patient.
which collection tubes or containers are best and specifies
minimum volume amounts for each test The most
 Become familiar with preanesthetic fasting
accurate result will be obtained by following these sample
recommendations. Some exotic patients should not be
container guidelines
fasted or fasted for only short periods before anesthesia to
 prevent hypoglycemia.
PREANESTHETIC PREPARATION
 Ensure that the proper supplies and equipment
Recommended Preoperative
are available.
Fasting/Water Withholding Times
for Exotic Patients
The following items will be needed:
 Non-rebreathing circuit (at 2 L O, flow)
Fasting Time
Water Withdraw
Species
 Warm fluids: 0.9% NaCl is recommended. Use
Recommendations
Recommendations
intravenous fluid war mer.
 Supplemental heat source: conductive warming
Ferret
4 hrs (don't fast
2 hrs
patients with
blanket (HotDog? blanket), warm air incubator, or
insulinomas)
 heating pad at minimum (with towel layers between
 patient and heat source)
Rabbit
30 min
0-30 min (mouth
should be empty of
■ Pulse oximeter, ECG, blood pressure (BP) unit,
food and water)
 thermometer, stethoscope, CO, monitoring for
Guinea Pig/
 patients > 2 kg if available
4 hrs
2 hrs
Chinchilla
● Small BP cuffs: #l size cuffs are available
Optimal: 24-gauge, 3/4-inch intravenous (IV) catheters
 or 23- to 20-gauge needles or bone marrow needles for
 Small Rodents
0
for
intraosseous (IO) catheters
Hedgehogs
2-4 hrs
2hrs
■ Appropriately sized face masks or intubation supplies
including:
Reptiles
4-6 hrs (or longer in
0-1 hrs
large species)
● Small face masks:
When using a face mask, it may be necessary to
Smaller Avian
4-6 hrs
 0-2 hrs (want empty
 make or obtain special oxygen delivery equipment,
Species
crop)
 including tiny masks made from syringe cases
Larger
8-12 hrs
 0-2 hrs (want empty
with a latex glove diaphragm over the end.
 Psittacines
crop)
● Endotracheal tubes:
 Large, over-the-needle-catheters or red rubber
1
 tubes with homemade gas adaptors
Allow stressed patients to calm before anesthesia
Overstimulation and high sympathetic tone can override
 2 mm and larger endotracheal tubes 
 Specialty endotracheal tubes also exist (<2 mm
sedatives and predispose to vasoconstriction, increased
myocardial workload and cardiac arrhythmias. Some
sizes, +/- uncuffed types)
● Mouth gags (to prevent unexpected tube bite-
exotic patients (particularly rabbits and many birds) may
benefit from hospitalization the night before anesthesia
through)
● Laryngoscope or otoscope to facilitate intubation
to allow acclimatization to the hospital environment and
● Lidocaine gel: use very small amounts and only
to gather samples for preanesthetic testing. This reduces
when needed to facilitate endotracheal intubation.
stress in the immediate preanesthetic period
Lidocaine toxicity is possible in small exotic
Maintenance of correct body temperature is imperative.
patients.
1oj Aeadsa aeuosu lo sunepad geq nqu .
Warm subcutaneous (SC), IV or IO fluids should
be administered before, during and after anesthesia.
reptiles-see reptile section)
Provide supplemental heat as needed, especially during
surgery and recovery-use heating blankets, warm air or
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  125
incubators. Avoid thermal burns-monitor heat sources
 closely. Place a dry barrier (towel layers) between patients
and heating blankets to reduce potential for burns.
Incubators pre- and postsurgically are ideal.
 Prepare to perform anesthesia in a warm immediate
environment. Clip hair or pluck feathers cautiously
 as possible prior to induction (wait until patient is
Woy Aeme siauieay adei oi pasn aq uen aden guryseu
 the surgical site. Use warmed surgical prep solutions.
Substitute warm, diluted chlorhexidine or saline for scrub
rinses, avoid alcohol. Cover as much of the patient as
S
tient
 possible during surgery to retain body heat Use clear,
 adhesive plastic surgery drapes whenever possible. Use
 adhesive tape sparingly, the delicate skin of small patients
ed
can tear easily. Masking, paper or autoclave tape may be
Exotic
better choices.
Start fluid administration before anesthesia. Be sure
to use warmed fluids. Choose a balanced crystalloid
fluid for routine perioperative fluid administration; 0.9%
ew
NaCl is recommended. Set an IV or IO catheter when
5
possible; IV is generally preferred. Whenever possible, a
fluid pump and microdrip set should be used to ensure
for
 accurate delivery rates and volumes. SC fluids should be
administered if IV or IO access is not available. Be aware
S5
that SC fluid therapy may not be adequate to correct
ratiol
 pre-existing dehydration in the immediate preoperative
 period. Stabilize and correct dehydration before
anesthesia.
Consid
IV, 10 catheter placed:
■ Begin administration of warm IV or IO fluids at 5 to
10 mL/kg/hr before induction of anesthesia when
Anesthetic 
possible. Continue fluids until recovery is complete.
No IV, IO catheter placed:
■ Begin administration of warm fluids at 5 to l0 mL/
kg/hr SC. Administer 1/4 of the calculated hourly
dose every 15 minutes starting before induction of
anesthesia, continuing through recovery.
Fluid support is vital to maintain hydration, blood volume
 amd fluid balance. Measure fluids, control fluid rates, and
 monitor patients carefully to prevent fluid overload.
Fluid Rates
Maintenance fluid rate:
1.5-4 mL/kg/hr
Anesthesia fluid rate:
5-10 mL/kg/hr
 Shock fluid rate:
30-80 mL/kg/hr
126
6|Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
SMAll MAMMAlS
atropine. When an anticholinergic is desired, use glycopyrrolate instead.
Recommended Injection Sites for Small Mammals
Comments
Species
Injection and
Catheter Sites
Use 25-gauge needles for venipuncture and 24-gauge IV catheters
for venous placement
Ferret
SC, IM 
SC, IM: Medication administration
lO: Proximal femur 
lO: Medication administration, catheterization 
IV: cephalic, jugular, lateral saphenous, lateral tail 
(IV: Medication administration (all), catheterization (not tail vein)
An
Rabbit
SC, IM 
SC, IM: Medication administration
nesthetic
lO: Trochanteric fossa of femur, tibia
lO: Medication administration, catheterization
IV: Marginal ear, cephalic, lateral 
|IV: Medication administration (all), catheterization (lateral saphenous poor for
saphenous, jugular
catheter).
Guinea Pig
SC, IM
SC, IM: Medication administration
lO: Trochanteric fossa of femur
lO: Medication administration, catheterization 
IV: Marginal ear, medial saphenous, lateral
IV: Medication administration, catheterization (difficult)
saphenous proximal to hock, jugular
General: Self-mutilation can occur with IM injections, vascular access often 
difficult due to short, mobile, friable veins.
 Rat and
SC, IM
SC, IM: Medication administration
lel
Mouse
lO: Proximal femur
l0: Medication administration, catheterization 
IV: Jugular, lateral tail
IV: Medication administration
 General: Lateral tail veins are difficult to obtain blood from except by capilary action.
tions
Gerbil
SC, IM
SC, IM: Medication administration
lO: Proximal femur 
lO: Medication administration, catheterization 
IV: Lateral tail, saphenous, metatarsal
IV: Medication administration
for
Hamster
SC, IM
SC, IM: Medication administration, IM maximum volume is 0.25 mL
lO: Proximal femur, tibial crest 
|O: Medication administration, catheterization
IV: Lateral tarsus, cephalic
IV: Medication administration, IV access difficult
-use 27 or smaller gauge needles
Chinchilla 
SC, IM 
SC, IM: Medication administration, IM maximum volume is 0.3 mL, IM use 23-
lO:Proximal femur
gauge or smaller needles 
Exoti
IV: Femoral, cephalic, lateral saphenous,
lO: Medication administration, catheterization
 jugular, auricular, lateral abdomen, tail 
IV: Medication administration, use 25-gauge or smaller needles
Hedgehog
SC, IM 
SC, IM: Medication administration, IM maximum volume is 0.3 mL, IM use 23-
lO: Tibia, proximal femur
 gauge or smaller needles 
Patients
IV: Jugular, cephalic, lateral saphenous,
l0: Medication administration, catheterization
femoral
IV: Medication administration, use 25-gauge or smaller needle 
Premedication is recommended for all small mammals:
 concentrations of inhalant anesthesia. Use small masks
 It calms, improves handling, reduces the amount of
and monitor for apnea.
induction and maintenance agents needed, smoothes
 recovery, reduces vagal effects and may prolong
Appropriate pain con trol is extremely important. Small
analgesia. Premedication is optimal if it can be performed
 mammals, especially rabbits, often react poorly to pain 
without causing excess stress. See species-specific
 and become anorexic, lethargic and may self-mutilate.
recommendations in the individual protocols that follow.
 Suggested reading for injection and catheter sites in small mammals:
When mask anesthetic induction is used, small
1. Heard D (ed). Vet Cltn North Am Exotic Anim Pract. 200l Jan;4(1).
 mammals often hold their breath. Deep, rapid
2. Quesenberry K, Carpenter J. Ferrets, Rabbtts, and Rodents, Clinical
Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Pa. Saunders. 2004.
respiration occurs after "breath holding," leading to
 3. Longley L. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Philadelphia, Pa. Saunders.
rapid uptake and anesthetic overdose. Use low induction
2008.
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients | 127
Technigue for Intranasal lntubation of Rabbits
 the practitioner has little experience with tracheal intubation in rabbits.
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Step 1:
Using a 4 to 8 French red rubber 
catheter, estimate the distance from
the nasal opening to the level of the 
 pharynx and mark the tube. After
 induction, instill two to three drops of 
lidocaine into one nostril.
Step 2:
 Direct the lubricated red 
 rubber catheter in the 
 ventral meatus and pass
to premeasured mark.
Step 3:
The catheter should 
 be passed to the level of the
pharynx, but not into the trachea.
Avoid inserting the tube too deeply
as it may pass into the esophagus.
Step 4:
The catheter can be connected to a
 small tracheal tube adaptor and then
 hooked to the existing anesthetic machine
 tubing. Deliver oxygen and gas anesthetic as
 with a tracheal tube. Higher gas concentrations 
may be needed as the patient may breathe 
around the tube. Secure the tube by placing it
up over the head and taping to the fur or ear.
 Biological illustration by Laurie O'Keefe
128 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
REPTILES
 The following information covers recommended injection sites, premedication usage and the special respiratory support
needs of reptiles.
Historically,it has been preferable to administer injections into the cranial half of the body of reptiles to decrease drug
passage through the renal portal system. Recent studies indicate that the injection site may be less significant on the
anesthetic drugs are best administered in the cranial half of the body in reptiles
Recommended Injection Sites for Reptiles
An
Reptile
Injection and
Use
Comments
lestheti
Type
Catheter Sites
 Snake
IV: Jugular (right),
IV: Medication
Right jugular vein is larger than left-—-incise 4 to 7 scutes cranial to the heart at the 
coccygeal, heart 
 administration,
 junction of the ventral scutes and right lateral body scales. Jugular is identified by 
(recommend 
 catheterization
 blunt dissection just medial to tips of ribs.
 to reserve for 
(difficult in 
urgent need),
 general, use 
Coccygeal vein is located on ventral midline of tail. Use 27- to 22-gauge needle
onsid
 palatine (medium 
 jugular if 
'soes jeue pue (sajew) sauadjway ploae oh liel oi eneog wony auejsip jo c/l pasu!
to large snakes
 attempting)
Aspirate until blood or bone encountered. If unsuccessful, reposition cranially or 
 once already 
 caudally. Difficult to use in small snakes.
anesthetized)
IM: Medication
 administration 
 Heart (recommend to reserve for urgent need). Use 27- to 25-gauge needles in
IM: Paravertebral
smaller snakes, 22-gauge in very large snakes. Insert needle at a 45-degree angle to
musculature
ventricles and aspirate gently.
ns
preferred 
 Palatine vein is not routinely recommended. Usually accessed while patient is under 
for
anesthesia or a secure mouth gag is in place. Difficult to control hemorrhage if vein is
lacerated. Located medial to palatine teeth in roof of mouth.
Lizard
IV: Cephalic, ventral
IV: Medication
Jugular vein is located on lateral neck, more dorsal than would be expected in
abdominal, jugular, 
 administration,
 mammals. Requires a longitudinal incision and blunt dissection to visualize.
Exoti
coccygeal
 catheterization
(cephalic,
Coccygeal vein is located on ventral midline of tail. Insert small gauge needle 
IM: Proximal limbs 
+/-jugular)
 sufficiently caudal to the cloaca to avoid hemipenes (males) and anal sacs. Vessel
(shoulder to elbow)
is entered directly from ventral midline or laterally. Insert needle ventral to transverse
Patients
recommended
IM: Medication
 process and advance until vertebral body is contacted. while gently aspirating, walk 
 administration 
 needle ventrally around vertebral body until vessel is found.
lO: Distal femur,
proximal tibia 
IO: Medication
 Cephalic vein is located on dorsal (anterior) surface of the foreleg-a cut down incision 
administration,
 from the elbow distal and medial over the dorsal forearm may allow visualization of 
 catheterization,
Not recommended:
vein. This vein can be difficult to locate or maintain a catheter in for some patients.
 Distal limb (below
IO is preferred 
elbow) IM, SC
 catheterization 
Ventral abdominal vein is located on ventral midline and can be entered 
 injections may
 site in most
percutaneously following small skin incision on midline to visualize vessel. Can also
cause tissue
lizards
 be catheterized in some patients.
necrosis.
O site access:
 Proximal tibia: Differentiate from lateral fibula. Pass catheter through tibial crest and
 advance needle to medial surface of leg as it is passes into the bone.
 Distal femur: Flex stifle. Curve in distal femur usually allows catheter to be 
 introduced proximal to the joint.
juawaoeld oi lpaon ssaooe ol inydjay aie (smala z) sydeiboipea 
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients | 129
Recommended Injection Sites for Reptiles (cont'd)
Reptile
Injection and
Use
Comments
Type
Catheter Sites
Turtle and
IV: Jugular, dorsal
IV: Medication
Jugular vein is located on lateral surface of neck auricular scale, usually near the 10 
Tortoise
coccygeal, brachial,
administration,
and 2 o'clock positions. The right jugular is often larger than the left. Some patients may
subcarapacial 
catheterization
(supravertebral)
(jugular)
Dorsal coccygeal vein is located in midline of tail, dorsal to vertebrae. Clean injection 
IM: Proximal limbs
IM: Medication
sites of feces or debris. Insert needle in midline and advance until bone is contacted.
(shoulder to elbow)
administration
Gentle aspiration allows identification of vessel.
recommended
lO: Medication
Subcarapacial (supravertebral) venous sinus: located beneath the carapace on
lO: Carapace/
administration,
midline just caudal to the last cervical vertebrae and just in front of the first thoracic
plastron bridge
catheterization
vertebrae. This is midline on the underside of the carapace, usually just caudal to
tient
(difficult), distal
(difficult)
where the skin meets the carapace. The patient's head must be extended or retracted
femur, proximal 
to allow access to the site.
Pat
tibia
lO site access:
 Not recommended:
 Carapace/plastron bridge: Pass needle at an acute angle through the bony bridge
Exotic
 Distal limb (below
between carapace and plastron. This is difficult to do, and catheter usually enters
elbow) IM/SC
 the coelomic cavity rather than the intramedullary space.
injections may
 Distal femur, proximal tibia: similar to lizards (above), but generally more difficult to
cause tissue
place due to curved femur shape. Catheters can become dislodged as patient pulls
necrosis.
Imb into shell.
 Small
■ Radiographs (2 views) are helpful to access comect I0 placement.
Premedication is recommended for all reptiles: It calms,
 Due to the need for PPV during anesthesia, reptiles
improves handling, reduces the amount of induction and
often become hyperoxygenated. Room air (rather
for
maintenance agents needed, smoothes recovery, reduces
 than 100% oxygen) is recommended during
S5
vagal effects and may prolong analgesia. Premedication
recovery for most reptile species. After anesthetic
is optimal if it can be performed without causing excess
 gas is discontinued, provide one to two minutes
 stress. See species specific recommendations noted in the
of PPV (not to exceed 10 to 12 cm water pressure)
individual anesthetic protocols that follow.
with 100% oxygen supplementation to allow
excretion of anesthetic gas from the lungs. Then
 Reptiles have unique respiratory physiology:
 disconnect the oxygen and, using room air only,
provide occasional PPV breaths until spontaneous
 More recent evidence suggests that low oxygen
respirations are stimulated; attempt to mimic the
 patient's preanesthetic respiratory rate and depth. Use
etic
a pediatric or neonatal Ambu bag Monitor patients
 depression in some
carefully. Recovery progresses caudal to cranial.
Extubate when movement has begun to occur.
routinely recommended in most
t otherwise healthy
reptiles. However, reptiles can suffer from hypoxemia
 and survive the initial insult only to die days or
In cases where mask/chamber anesthetic induction is
used, reptiles can be resistant, with some species being
weeks later from hypoxic renal damage. Therefore.
 nearly impossible to induce by mask or chamber alone
supplementation with 100% oxygen is required
(especially turtles/tortoises and aquatic species). If mask/
during induction and anesthesia; intubation is
chamber induction is attempted, use small masks/
 strongly recommended. Room air is recommended
during recovery.
chambers and low induction concentrations of inhalant
anesthesia-do not exceed 5% sevoflurane.
 Intubation is recommended whenever possible.
Reptiles lack a functional muscular diaphragm and
Suggested reading for injection and catheter sites in reptiles:
will benefit from assisted ventilation [manual or
1. Heard D (ed). Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anirm Pract. 200l. Jan;4(1).
 positive pressure ventilation (PPV)] with anesthetic
2. Bonagura, JD (ed). Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl, Small Animal
 gas and oxygen (via tracheal tube) during anesthesia.
Practice. Philadelphia, Pa. WB. Saunders. 1995.
This supports adequate tidal volume and oxygen
3. Longley L. Andesthesia of Exotic Pets. Philadelphia, Pa. W.B. Saumders.
delivery. An assistant can provide PPV as needed
2008.
130 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
AVIAN SPECIES
The following information outlines recommended injection sites, considerations for the use of premedications, and
induction techniques for avian species.
Recommended Injection Sites for Avian Species
Injection and
Use
Comments
Catheter Sites
Avian
V: UInar (basilic,
V: Medication
Uinar (basilic, brachial) is located near elbow on ventral aspect of wing. Use for
Species
 brachial), medial
administration,
 birds over 150 grams. Hematoma forms easily—apply pressure for 2 to 3 minutes
metatarsal (caudal
catheterization 
postvenipuncture.
tbial), right jugular 
(not jugular)
Medial metatarsal is located on medial aspect of proximal metatarsus.
Anesthetic
IM: Pectoral
IM: Medication
Jugular (right side)-extend neck and part or wet feathers to visualize. This is the 
muscles
administration
easiest vein to access in small birds. Hematoma forms easily--apply pressure for 2
recommended
 to 3 minutes postvenipuncture. Take care to not occlude the trachea.
lO: Medication
administration,
Birds often attempt to damage catheters. When a catheter is placed, secure it well
lO: Distal ulna
with sutures and/or tape and a dressing.
(birds > 500 
catheterization
grams), proximal
l0 access sites:
tibiatarsus (birds
Consid
■ Distal ulna: Flex carpus. Identify dorsal condyle of distal ulna, insert needle just 
< 500 grams)
 behind it. Direct needle under dorsal condyle and proximally into ulnar shaft.
 Proximal tibiatarsus: Identify cranial cnemial crest of proximal tibiatarsus between
 and just distal to the femoral condyles. Direct needle into the tibial plateau just
 posterior to cnemial crest and distally into manrow cavity.
 Radiographs (2 views) are helpful to access conrect I0 placement.
itions
Premedication is recommended for most birds.
ANESTHETIC MONITORING
Although some practitioners do not routinely use
Careful and continual patient monitoring is an absolute
premedications in birds, they are recommended as
requirement of quality care during anesthesia and can
they calm, improve handling, reduce the amount of
be the difference between a sucesssful procedure and
induction and maintenance agents needed, smoothe
one that ends in severe complications or even death.
recovery, reduce vagal effects and may prolong analgesia.
Monitoring should be performed continually through
Premedication is optimal if it can be perfor med
induction, anesthesia and recovery. This includes
Exotic
without causing excess stress. See species-specific
anesthetic depth, cardiopulmonary status (ECG, BP, pulse
recommendations noted in the individual anesthetic
oximetry, end-tidal CO2), temperature, and hydration
protocols that follow.
status as much as is allowed by patient size.
Patients
When mask anesthetic induction is used, birds often
Routine monitoring methods are useful in larger rabbits,
hold their breath. In birds, deep, rapid respiration 
ferrets, guinea pigs, chinchillas, reptiles and avian species.
occurs after "breath holding.," leading to rapid uptake and
Pulse oximetry, ECG, and BP or end-tidal CO, monitoring
anesthetic overdose. Use low induction concentrations of
can be used in larger patients. However, end-tidal CO, may
inhalant anesthesia-do not exceed S% sevoflurane. Use
not be accurate and adds considerable dead space to the
small masks and monitor for apnea.
breathing circuit if used in patients under 2 kilograms.
Pulse oximetry and ECG monitoring can be used on most
patients with some equipment modification. However,
Suggested reading for catheter and injection sites in avian species:
some monitors cannot read the rapid heart rate of small
1. Heard D (ed). Analgesia and anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am Exotic
mammals and pulse oximetry provides variable results in
Anim Pract. 200l. Jan; 4(1).
2. Bonagura, JD (ed). Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XII, Small
birds, making careful manual monitoring imperative.
 Animal Practice. Philadelphia, Pa. W.B. Saunders. 1995.
3. Manual of Psttactne Btrds. British Small Aninal Veterinary
Pulse oximetry probes are useful on ears, tongue, tail, and
Association. Ames, Lowa. lowa State University Press. 1996.
feet/toes. Rectal pulse oximetry probes are appropriate
4. Longley L. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. London, England. W.B.
Saunders. 2008.
for ferrets, rabbits and larger rodents. Rectal probes can
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  131
be used in the cloacas of some reptiles. Oxygen saturation
Loss of response to a toe pinch indicates a surgical
 below 94% indicates hypoxemia; take immediate steps
anesthetic plane has been reached. Blink response is
to correct it Be aware that pulse oximetry monitors
 not a reliable indictor of anesthetic depth in all exotic
have variable sensitivity in avian species. They should be
patients. Blink response may be impossible (snakes)
used as an adjunct to manual monitoring and can show
or difficult to access in reptiles and very small patients
trends in oxygenation, but should not be relied upon as a
 Rabbits especially may exhibit a variable blink response
primary monitoring tool in birds. Probes can be placed in
 even at deeper planes of anesthesia.
the cloaca or on the tongue of some larger birds.
Corneal response varies from species to species. Loss
ECG leads can be attached directly to the skin, to paper
 of a previously present corneal response is an indicator
dlips placed on skin folds, stainless steel sutures placed
of excessive anesthetic depth; anesthetic concentration
 in the skin, or small 25-gauge needles placed just into
should be decreased.
 the skin. However, do not waste anesthetic time placing
 sutures, paper clips, or needles if regular ECG leads will
Prevent hypoglycemia. If hypoglycemia is present or
S1
work. If the leads are too tight for delicate skin, loosen
suspected, warm fluids with 2.5% dextrose should be
them before use. Triangulate the heart for the best
 given, preferably IV. If this route is not available, fluid can
reading. Use contact gel rather than alcohol-based contact
be given IO or SC, but absorption time lags significantly
solutions. Additionally, some ECG monitors have plastic
for SC administration. Additionally, some consider SC
Exotic
ECG clips that are less traumatic for delicate skin.
dextrose administration concerning in patients with
concurrent infections.
 Blood pressure can be monitored in rabbits, ferrets, larger 
birds, and some larger chinchillas.
Minimize blood and body fluid losses and provide
maintenance and replacement fluids as needed. Avoid
hypovolemia by administering fluids at a rate of 5 to 10
patients. During anesthesia, pulse rate and character can
mL/kg/hr.
be expected to decrease by roughly 20% compared to
for
awake resting rates. If they fall below this range, reduce the
anesthetic concentration being used. Respirations should
be slow, regular and stable.
Monitor respiration carefully. Most exotic patients are
hypoxemia. Small airways and endotracheal tubes are
prone to obstruction with respiratory secretions (See
 page 129 for more information on reptiles). Chest wall
and rebreathing bag movement as well as condensation
etic
 and clearing of the face mask/endotracheal tubing
aid in the evaluation of respiratory rate and effort
Anesthe
Increased respiratory effort or abnormal respiratory
sounds (squeaking, wheezing, unexpected silence) are
indictors of impending airway obstruction. Rabbits,
guinea pigs, and chinchillas are especially at risk for
respiratory obstruction due to excess salivation during
 mask delivery of anesthetic gases. Birds are at risk of
endotracheal tube obstruction due to the relatively
thick respiratory secretions of some species.
 Maintenance and measurement of body temperature
is imperative. Small patients can lose as much as 10°F
in 15 minutes (See Exotic Patient Anesthesia Monitoring
Form, pages 152-153).
132 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
ANESTHETIC INDUCTION
multiple times. This results in a diluted Telazol
AND MAINTENANCE
solution of 50 mg/mL (a 1:2 dilution). 5 mg of a 50
mg/mL solution (mL/50 mg x 5 mg) = 0.1 mL per
Induction
dose. Depres plunger to eject excess air and solution
until desired amount, in this case, O.l mL.
The goal of induction is a smooth transition into
unconsciousness and to allow placement of an
When mask anesthetic induction is used, small patients
endotracheal tube if possible. Tracheal intubation is
 often hold their breath. In mammals and birds, deep,
optimal. However, it is not routinely recommended in
rapid respiration occurs after "breath holding." leading to
all species due to the difficulty and potential to inflict
rapid uptake and anesthetic overdose. Use low induction
life-threatening laryngeal injury in some species (especially
 concentrations of inhalant anesthesia-do not exceed 5%
rabbits and rodents). See individual species protocols for
sevoflurane. Use small masks and monitor for apnea.
induction medications and doses.
Reptiles can be resistant to mask induction, with some
species being nearly impossible to induce by mask alone
 Compromised patients should receive at least 1/4
(especially turtles/tortoises and aquatic species).
of their hourly fluid requirement volume before
premedications are given whenever possible.
Tracheal tube sizes of 2 to 3 mm are useful in larger
 Reptiles: Reptiles should be intubated whenever
patients (> 2 lbs). Smaller patients may require specialty
 possible. Assisted ventilation is recommended (via
 endotracheal tube) in anesthetized reptiles as they are
 tubes available from exotic anesthesia specialty
manufacturers (such as Cook's Veterinary Products).
 prone to respiratory depression during anesthesia,
For very small patients, 18-gauge IV catheters with the
 needle stylet removed or red rubber feeding tubes with
for more information on reptiles).
 opened ends and homemade adaptors can sometimes
 Do not exceed 5% sevoflurane for mask induction.
be substituted. Tube tie-ins (gauze or tape strips, IV line
 Provide oxygen at 2 L/minute.
or latex tubing) should be attached to these small tubes
 Avoid the stress of struggling. Use a sedative dose
 of ketamine, midazolam, or Telazol depending on
before intubation. A very small amount of lidocaine
gel (endotracheal tube lubricant) should facilitate tube
 species (See individual protocols).
placement Use small amounts of lidocaine gel; lidocaine
 Pre-oxygenation is recommended if it can be
 toxicity is possible in small patients.
performed without stress (except in most reptiles).
fol
 Rabbits: Intubation is optimal when it can be
Maintenance
performed without causing laryngeal irritation or
trauma. (Rabbits are especially prone to laryngeal
Maintenance of small mammals is very similar to that of
rauma. See Technique for Intranasal Intubation of
dogs and cats. Careful and continual patient monitoring is
Rabbits, page 128). Nasal intubation is strongly
an absolute requirement of quality care during anesthesia
recommended when unable to perform tracheal
and can be the difference between a successful procedure
intubation.
and one that ends in severe complications or even death
 Minimal injectable volume of Telazol is 0.1 mL. If the
(See Anesthetic Monitoring, page 131) Protective eye
 patient's needed dose will be a smaller volume than
ointment should be used. Body temperature must be
0.1 mL, dilute to at least O.1 mL total volume in sterile
 maintained during induction, anesthesia and through
1
water before injection (See below).
recovery. Perform anesthesia in a warm immediate
environment and keep surgical and anesthetic time
Example Telazol? dilution:
to a minimum. Heat is easily lost through exposed
extremities—cover them (See Preanesthetic Preparation.
 Patient needs 5 mg Telazol. Telazol is 100 mg/mL,
 so 5 mg would be 0.05 mL. Minimal desired volume is
page 125).
0.1 mL/dose (mL/100 mg x 5 mg = 0.05 mL).
 Draw up 0.1 mL of 100 mg/mL Telazol in a TB
Special note: If glycopyrrolate is used as a
 syringe and 0.1 mL of sterile water in a separate TB
premedication, atropine adminisration for reatment
syringe.
of bradycardia during anesthesia must be adjusted
accordingly. Give 1/4 to 1/2 the usual atropine dose
 Using a third TB syringe with the capped needle
 in such cases. Remember that glycopyrrolate is a better
detached and the plunge partially pulled out, add the
Telazol and the sterile water into the third TB syringe
anticholinergic choice in rabbits.
through the needle attachment opening. Replace the
capped needle firmly. Mix well by flicking the syringe
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients | 133
POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Continue fluid support, as drinking may be decreased
during this period. Continue to provide postoperative
Monitor respiratory function carefully, as obstruction
analgesia. Monitor and record vitals in the medical record
can easily occur before the patient is fully awake. For
as with dogs and cats.
reptiles and birds, it is especially important to minimize
orthostatic hypotension by maintaining the patient in a
Postoperative pain control
natural body plane (horizontal and sternal for reptiles
and mammals, horizontal and lateral for birds) and by
Exotic patients benefit from analgesics just as dogs and
 performing changes in body position slowly.
if postsurgical pain is not controlled. Small mammals,
Recover exotic patients in a war m environment-an incubator
especially rabbits, are very reactive to pain; pain control is
is ideal. Dry areas of wet hair or skin to decrease conductive
strongly recommended. Most anesthesiologists recommend
pre-emptive analgesia, including lc
function and monitor body tempe
 until patient is fully
appropriate.Anal
lset of pain or
S
recovered. As with dogs and cats, this includes supplemental
before recovery
from anesthesia is thought to
be most
qua
heat and fluid support until the patient is able to swallow,
effective. Recovery is improved if pre-emptive as well as
sit sternal and is at normal body temperature. Mammals
postsurgical analgesia is provided
(except for chinchillas and some rabbits) and avian species
The duration of opioid analgesia can vary greatly by species
68°F to 77°F during the first 24 hours
post-anesthesia
and by individual. For instance, some patients may need
Keep chinchillas below 75°F (optimal: 68°F t
to 72°F) as
repeat dosing of butorphanol as often as every one to two
hours, while othe
12 to 24hours
they easily become over-heated. Monitor chinchillas and
rabbits carefully when providing supplemental warmth;
Monitor all re
o
pain or excess
ew
both species are prone to heat stress. Reptiles benefit from
sedation. Multime
i.e.,an
poid plus an
 g  1 s   
temperate and aquatic reptiles, 86°F for tropical reptiles).
alone. However, NSAIDs may not be the right choice for
for
 Be sure to avoid hyperther mia in all species.
every individual; use them as appropriate for each patient
rations
Analgesic Drug Doses for Exotic Patients
Considel
 Pain Management
Butorphanol
Buprenorphine
Meloxicam
Carprofen
Ferret
0. 1-0.5 mg/kg
0.01-0.03 mg/kg IM, SC
1 mg/kg PO
q 2-4 hrs IM, SC
q 8-12 hrs
q 12-24 hrs
Anesthetic 
Rabbit
 0. 1-1 mg/kg
0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM, SC
0. 1-0.2 mg/kg PO
1-2.2 mg/kg PO,
q 2-4 hrs IM, SC
q 6-12 hrs
q 24 hrs
SC q 12 hrs
Mouse, Gerbil, Hamster
2 mg/kg q 2-4 hrs SC
0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC
q 6-12 hrs
 Guinea Pig, Chinchilla
1-2 mg/kg
0.05 mg/kg SC
1-2 mg/kg PO
q4 hrs SC
q 8-12 hrs 
q 12-24 hrs
Rat
2 mg/kg q 2-4 hrs SC
0.05-0.1 mg/kg SC
0.2 mg/kg PO, SC q 24 hrs
q 6-12 hrs 
Hedgehog
0.2 mg/kg q 6-8 hrs SC
0.01-0.5 mg/kg SC, IM 
q 6-12 hrs 
Reptile
1 mg/kg 
0.01 mg/kg IM (best), SC
0.1 mg/kg IM (best), SC
14 mg/kg PO, SC, IM,
q 12-24 hrs IM
q 24 hrs
q 24 hrs
IV q 24 hrs one time; fol-
lowed with half dose
q 24-72 hrs if needed.
Avian
1 mg/kg 
0.01-0.05 mg/kg
0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO,
1-2 mg/kg PO,
q 24 hrs IM
IM q 8-12 hrs 
IM q 24 hrs
IM, SC, IV q 12-24 hrs 
134 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Note on individual protocols: Each patient should be
8.Beynon PH (ed). BSAVA Manual of Psittacine Birds. British
 SmallAnimal Veterinary Association. Ames, Iowa. lowa State
University Press. 1996.
strains and individuals exist This individuality influences
9.Pettifer G (ed). Seminars in Avian and Exotic Pet Medicine.
which anesthetic drugs are appropriate, and whether mask,
Orlando, Fla. Elsevier. 2005. Oct.14(4).
tracheal or injectable anesthesia maintenance is best
10. Longley L. Anaesthesia of Exotic Pets. Philadelphia, Pa. W.B.
Saliniders. 2008.
Inhalant anesthesia via an endotracheal tube is the first
11. Mitchell M, Tully T. Manual of Exotic Pet Practice.
choice if reasonably possible. In some species, tracheal
Philadelphia, Pa. W.B. Saunders. 2009.
 intubation is difficult (guinea pigs/rabbits) or impractical
12. West G, Heard D, Caulkett N. Animal & Wildlife
(very small patients). Multiple attempts at intubation
Immobiization and Anesthesia. Oxford, England. Blackwell
should be avoided as laryngeal edema and subsequent
Publishing. 2007.
respiratory obstruction can occur. Rabbits are especially
13. Muir W, Hubbell J, Bednarski R et al. Handbook of Veterinary
paneadai j useds Aemie io euapa jeaguAiel on auoid
Anesthesia. 4th ed. St. Louis, Mo. Mosby Elsevier. 2007.
attempts are made at tracheal intubation.
Anesthetic
 Mask maintenance is appropriate when an endotracheal
tube (or nasal tube for rabbits) is not in place, but great
care must be taken to decrease the risk of respiratory
obstruction or possible aspiration of gastrointestinal tract
 contents. The head and neck of exotic patients can be
Consid
slightly raised to reduce the potential for aspiration in
susceptible species. Positioning reptiles and small mammals
with the head and neck extended, tongue pulled out,
and in sternal recumbency will reduce the potential for
obstruction. Birds should be placed lateral recumbency
Buiiuui oy nuaiam Aoq nuaand on aiou is e e
ations
nor mal thoracic movement Prolonged dorsal recumbency,
and to a greater extent, ventral recumbency, can reduce
avian ventilation. Guinea pigs and rabbits may benefit from
 having the front half of the body raised slightly to reduce
 pressure of abdominal organs on the diaphragm. Reptiles
can be resistant to mask induction, with some species being
as ao y    iso 
turtles/tortoises and aquatic species).
Exoti
Sources
1. Quesenberry K, Carpenter J, Stein G. Ferrets, Rabbits, and
 Rodents, Clinical Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed. Philadelphia,
Patients
Pa. W.B. Saunders. 2004.
2.
Mader D (ed). Reptile Medicine and Surgery. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Pa. W.B. Saunders. 2005.
3.Heard D (ed). Analgesia and anesthesia. Vet Clin North Am
Exotic Antm Pract. 200l. Jan; 4(1)
4. Meredith A, Redrohe S (eds). BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets.
4th ed. Gloucester, England. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association. 2002.
 5. Harrison G, Lightfoot T. Clinical Avian Medicine and Surgery.
Palm Beach, Fla. Spix Publishing, Inc. 2006.
6.Bonagura J (ed). Kirk's Current Veterinary Therapy XIl, Small
Animal Practice. Philadelphia, Pa. W.B. Saunders. 1995.
7.
o  qun (spa) o uosuag m mbuein 'f uonu
Veterinary Anesthesia. 3rd ed. University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign. 1996.
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients | 135
EMERGENCY DRUGS: QUICK
Because the highest dose and general weight range were
REFERENCE CHART FOR
used for the pre-calculated portion of the chart, caution
is advised. For multiple administrations of specific
EXOTIC ANIMALS
drugs, doses should be accurately calculated to prevent a
Jack Kottwitz, DVM and Susan Kelleher, DVM
potentially fatal overdose.
The effective use of appropriate drugs during an
References
1. Burgmann PM, Srmith DA: Forrmulary. In: Hillyer E, Quesenberry
 emergency situation can mean the difference between life
KE (eds)Ferets, Rabbit and Rodents: Clinica Medirine andSurgery.
and death for exotic patients. This chart was developed to
Philadelphia Pa.: WB Saunders Co.;1997:392-403.
2. Carpenter JW, Mashima TY, Rupiper DJ. ExoticAnimal Formulary Znd ed.
compile information that is widely scattered throughout
 Philadelphia, Pa.: WB Saunders Co.;2001.
the literature and provide accurate doses of emergency
3. Donnelly TM, Oreutt CJ. Acute ataxia in a young ferret following canine
 drugs for exotic species commonly encountered in a
distermper vaccination. Renal failure after epinephrine overdose. Lab Anim.
2001;30(8):25-27.
private practice.
4. Klingenberg RJ. Therapeutics. In: Mader DE (ed). Reptile Mediine and
Surgery. Philadelphia, Pa.: WB Saunders Co.1996:299-321.
S
 5. Mason DE. Anesthesia, analgesia and sedation for srmall marmrmals. In:
tient
The chart has combined two different formats: l) specific
Hillyer E, Quesenberry KE (eds). Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents: Clinica!
doses for the veterinarian to calculate and administer in
Medirine and Surgery. Philadelphia, Pa.: WB Saunders Co.;1997:378-391.
 precise amounts, and 2) drug volumes pre-calculated (at
6.
 Quesenberry KE, Hillyer EV. Supportive care and ermergency therapy. In:
ed
Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ, Harrison LR (eds). Avian Medirine: Principles and
the highest dose in a given dose range) for incrementally
Application. Delray Beach, Fla.: HBD Intl. 1999:382-416.
increasing weights of individual species. This format
7. Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ.Formulary. In: Ritchie BW, Harrison GJ,
Exotic
 allows for easy tracking of necessary drug doses by
Harrison LR (eds). Avian Medirine: Principles and Application. Delray
Beach, Fla.: HBD Intl. 1999:458-478.
technical staff during anesthesia and can lessen the
8. Rupley AE (ed). Vet Clin North Am Exotic Anim Prart. 2000: 3(1).
burden of the veterinarian in the event of an emergency.
9. Stein G. Reptile and amphibian formlary. In: Mader DE (ed). Reptile
 Medirine and Surgery. Philadelphia, Pa. WB Sauncders Co.; 1996:465-472.
mew
Rabbits
Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.25 kg
S
0.5 kg
0.75 kg
1 kg
1.5 kg
2 kg
2.5 kg
3 kg
3.5 kg
4 kg
5 kg
6 kg
Epinephrine
for
0.25
0.5
0.75
1.5
2.5
3
3.5
4
5.0
5
Atropine*
0.1-0.5mg/kg
0.2
0.5
0.7
0.9
1.4
1.9
2.3
2.8
3.2
3.7
4.6
5.6
(0.54 mg/mL)
IM, SC
rations
Glycopyrrolate
0.02mg/kg
SC,IM
0.03
0.05
0.08
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.5
0.6
(0.2 mg/mL)
Dexamethasone
2 mg/kg Iv, IIv 
(NaSP) (4 mg/mL)
0.13
0.38
0.5
0.75
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
2.5
(use with caution)
3
Doxapram
0.06
0.13
0.19
0.25
0.38
0.5
0.63
0.75
0.9
1 
1.3
1.5
(20 mg/mL)
Diazepam
(5 mg/mL)
0.15
0.3
0.45
0.6
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.8
2.1
2.4
3
3.6
Midazolam
0.5-2 mg/kg
0.5
1
1.5
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10
12
(1 mg/mL)
IM, Iv, intranasally
Furosemide
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.12
0.16
0.2
0.24
0.28
0.32
0.4
0.48
(50mg/mL)
Fluids
50-100mL/kg/day
(LRS, 0.9% saline)
25
50
75
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
500
600
Anesthetic
Iv, 10, sc
'aaua asuidoe au o asneaag essaau s bussop-au puanba ao pue saads lauo uu aesop lauu e ng slgge u aaae si auidoa
Ferrets
Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.25 kg 
0.5 kg
0.6 kg 
0.7 kg
0.8 kg 
0.9 kg
1 kg
1.2 kg
1.4 kg
1.6 kg 
1.8 kg
2 kg
Epinephrine*
0.02-0.2 mg/kg
(1 mg/mL = 1:1000)
IV, IM
0.05
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.24
0.28
0.32
0.36
0.4
Atropine
0.02-0.055 mg/kg
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.12
(0.54 mg/mL)
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
V, IM, SC
GlycopyTolate
0.01 mg/kg
0.01
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
(0.2 mg/mL)
IV
Dexamethasone
4-8mg/kg
0.5
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.4
2.8
3.2
3.6
(NaSP) (4 mg/mL)
IV, IM
4
Doxapram
1-2 mg/kg
SC, IV, q15 min 
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
(20 mg/mL)
1-2 mg/kg IM, IV 10.
0.1
0.2
0.24
0.28
0.32
0.36
0.4
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
0.8
intranasally, rectally
Midazolam
0.5-1 mg/kg
0.25
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.2
1.4
0.6
IM, IV, SC
1.8
2
(1 mg/mL)
Furosemide
0.02
(50 mg/mL)
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.1
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.16
Diphenhydramine
1-2 mg/kg
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
(50 mg/mL)
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
IM, IV
Fluids
70 mL/kg/day
(LRS, 0.9% saline)
17.5
35
42
49
56
29
70
84
98
112
126
140
VSC
*Use lower dose of epinephrine for anaphylaxis. Use with caution if concurrent administration of diphenhydramine.
Article reprinted with permission from Zoological Education Network. Kottwitz J, Kellher S. Emergency drugs: quick references chart for exotic animals.
ExoticDVM.2003;5(5):23-25.
136
|Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Birds (PSITTACINES)
Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.05 kg 
0.1 kg 
0.2 kg
0.3 kg 
0.4 kg
0.5 kg
0.6 kg
0.7 kg 
0.8 kg 
0.9 kg 
1 kg
1.5 kg
Epinephrine
0.05
(1 mg/mL = 1: 1000)
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.5
Atropine
M, mgkg
(0.54 mg/mL)
0.05
0.09
0.19
0.28
0.37
0.46
0.56
0.65
0.74
0.83
0.93
1.4
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.5
~4mo/kg
(NaSP) (4 mg/mL)
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.5
Ca-gluconate
(100 mg/mL)
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.5
-1mgkg
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
0.18
0.2
0.3
Fluids
50-100mL/kg/day
(LRS, 0.9% saline)
VICe, Sc, 10
5
10 
20
40
50
60
70
80
06
100
150
 Chinchillas
Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.25 kg
9 0.5kg0.6 kg0.7kg
0.8 kg 0.9 kg 
1 kg
1.2 kg 
1.4 kg1.6 kg
1.8 kg  2 kg
Epinephrinet
0.01
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.03
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.06
(0.1 mg/mL)
nes
Atropine
0.09
0.19
0.22
0.26
0.3
0.33
0.37
0.44
0.52
0.59
0.67
0.74
(0.54 mg/mL)
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
20'0
SC,IM
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16 
0.18 
0.2
he
Dexamethasone
0.31
0.63
0.75
0.88
1
1.13
1.25
1.5
1.75
2
2.3
2.5
(NaSP) (4 mg/mL)
eoxapram
0.13
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
oizepam
0.5-3 mg/kg IM, IV, 1O,
0.15
intranasally,rectally
0.3
0.36
0.42
0.48
0.54
0.6
0.72
0.84
0.96
1.08
1.2
Midazolam
0.5-1 mg/kg
0.25
IM, IV
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
(1 mg/mL)
2
Furosemide
0.02
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.1
0.11
0.13
0.14
0.16
(50 mg/mL)
100 mg/kg
Ca-gluconate
0.25
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
(100 mg/mL)
IP
Fluids
50-100mL/kg/day
(LRS, 0.9% saline)
25
50
60
70
08
90
100
120
140
160
180
200
IV, 10, SC
*Dilute standard concentration epinephrine 10x to 0.1 mg/mL for use in chinchillas.
 Rodents and Guninea Pigs
 for
 Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.05
0.075
0.1 kg 
0.2 kg
0.3 kg
0.4 kg
0.5 kg
0.6 kg
0.7 kg
0.8 kg
0.9 kg 
kg
1 kg
Epinephrine*
0.02
0.02
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.12
0.15
0.18
0.21
0.24
0.27
0.3
 Small
(0.01 mg/mL)
Atropinet
0.05-0.4 mg/kg
(0.54 mg/mL)
IM, SC
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.15
0.22
0.3
0.37
0.44
0.52
0.59
0.67
0.74
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
SC, IM
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
Av6mikg
Exotic
0.06
0.09
0.13
0.25
0.38
0.5
0.63
0.75
0.88
1 
1.13
1.25
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Diazepamtt
0.5-3.0 mg/kg
(5 mg/mL)
IM, IV, IO,intranasally
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.24
0.3
0.36
0.42
0.48
0.54
0.6
0.05
0.08
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Patients
1
Furosemide**
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.16
0.24
0.32
0.4
0.48
0.56
0.64
0.72
80
(5mg/mL)
50-100mL/kg/day
V 10, SC
5
7.5
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
08
90
100
* Dilute stand ard concentration epinephrine 100x to 0.01 mg/mL for use in rodents.
Diute standard concentrationfurosemide10xto5mg/mLforuse in rodents.
+ Guinea pigs' atropine dosage is 0.2 mg/kg. Some rats have atropinase.
Reptiles
Drug/Strength
Dosage/Route
0.1 kg 
0.3 kg 
0.5 kg
0.75 kg
1 kg
2 kg
3 kg
4 kg
5 kg
6 kg
7 kg
8 kg
Atropine
0.01-0.04 mg/kg
(0.54 mg/mL)
V, IM, SC
0.01
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.07
0.15
0.22
0.3
0.37
0.44
0.52
0.59
oyeayrlate
0.01 mg/kg
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.1
0.15
IM,IV
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Dexamethasone
0.1-0.25 mg/kg
(NaSP) (4 mg/mL)
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.06
0.13
0.19
IV, IM
0.25
0.31
0.38
0.44
0.5
0.05
0.15
0.25
0.38
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3.5
4
100 mg/kg
V (slowly), IM, ICe
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.75
1
2
3
4 
5
6 
7
8
Fluids*
2.5
7.5
12.5
18.75
25
50
75
100
125
150
175
200
*Reptile fluid solution: 1 part LRS, 2 parts 2.5% dextrose/0.45% NaCl, OR 1 part 5% dextrose in NaCl and 1 part 0.9% NaCl
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
137
Avian Species Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation
Fluid support/preparation
 Medical history
 Place IV, IO catheter if possible; IV prefenred.
 Temperament 
 IV, I0 catheter in place:
 Physical exam 
■ Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr IV, IO, continue
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
through recovery.
→Determine health status:
 No catheter in place:
Healthy or compromised?
■ Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr SC, continue
 Detemine if IV/lO catheter will be
through recovery.
placed.
 Give 1/4 the calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
 Intubation optimal:
(intubation optimal).
■ Is endotracheal tube placement required for successful
 Fast appropriately.
 anesthesia/procedure?
S1
 Provide client education/communicate 
■ Do you expect successful placement of endotracheal
tient
 expectations.
tube by second try?
Pat
Exotic
Requires intubation, but can't do:
Needs
Can
→ Consider refenal to skilled exotic
intubation, but 
intubate or not
 practitioner.
can't do
required
mall 
Induction
 Premedication optional
S
Pre-oxygenate if possible without causing stress.
→ Premedicate 30-60 minutes before anesthesia.
for
Healthy or compromised patient:
 Mask with sevo (2-5%)/O, and intubate (optimal)
Healthy or compromised patient:
 or use face mask.
Midazolam: 0.2-0.3 mg/kg IM
rations
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance 
AND
 Butorphanol: 0.4-1 mg/kg IM
Keep patient warm and monitor.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
Mask induction:
Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) and oxygen via
G
 mask or endotracheal tube.
Anesthetic
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L'min maintenance.
Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane
necessary.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
Recovery
 Continue to provide wam fluid support through 
recovery.
Provide pain control:
 Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM q 24 hrs 
OR
 Buprenorphine 0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM q 8-12 hrs 
And, if needed 
Meloxicam 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO, IM, SC q 24 hrs 
OR
Carprofen 1-2 mg/kg PO, IM, SC, IV q 12-24 hrs 
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
138
|  Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
AVIAN SPECIES ANESTHESIA
Premedications
PROTOCOL
Use is optional. Generally calms induction/recovery, but
may also cause delayed recovery in some cases. Administer
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients,
30 to 60 minutes before induction.
pages 123 to 137, before proceeding.)
Healthy or compromised patient:
 Consider all avian species as high-risk patients.
 Midazolam 0.2 to 0.3 mg/kg IM
 Keep restraint time to a minimum. Stressful restraint
AND
 and handling can cause death.
 Butorphanol 0.4 to 1 mg/kg IM
 Address life-threatening emergencies immediately.
 Delay further procedures until patient is stabilized.
Induction
 Birds are particularly susceptible to body heat loss; use
 a warming blanket (forced air/conductive polymer),
Pre-oxygenate (before induction) if possible without causing
radiant heat source (heat lamp at safe distance),
stress, then mask with sevoflurane/O, Intubation is optimal.
elevated ambient temperature (incubator). Use caution
 to avoid burns or over-heating.
Maintenance: Deliver sevoflurane/O, via mask/
 Intubation is optimal. Positive pressure ventilation
endotracheal tube to effect, maintain body temperature,
 may be needed to prevent hypoxia during inhalant
monitor, provide fluid support and supplemental oxygen.
anesthesia. An appropriate mouth gag can be used to
prevent tube “bite-through."
 Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support
 Use non-cuffed endotracheal tubes or do not inflate
cuffs if they exist The tracheal mucosa is fragile and
 Pain control:
 the complete tracheal rings of birds do not allow for 
 Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM q 24 hrs
significant expansion.
OR
 Do not exceed 10 cm of water pressure during assisted
■ Buprenorphine 0.0l-0.05 mg/kg IM q 8-12 hrs
ventilation. Mimic “awake" respiratory rate and depth.
And, if needed
 If unable to place endotracheal tube but intubation is
 Meloxicam 0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO, IM, SC q 24 hrs
required (such as respiratory compromise, surgery that
OR
will compromise airway, anesthesia time > 30 minutes
 Carprofen 1-2 mg/kg PO, IM, SC, IV q 12-24 hrs
expected), refer patient to skilled exotic practitioner.
 Pulse oximetry has variable usefulness in birds-
Dosages are suggested guidelines only-tailor actual
 attempt its use to track oxygenation trends, but don't
amounts to individual patient needs.
 rely on it as heavily as done with mammalian patients.
 Provide supplemental oxygen throughout induction,
 anesthesia and recovery.
Equipment and supplies: Face mask or intubation
+
supplies (including lidocaine gel), non-rebreathing
circuit, IV, IO catheter supplies, 0.9% NaCl (SC, IV, IO),
supplemental heat source, monitoring equipment
Evaluation: History, physical exam, laboratory data
(including uric acid), health status, determination if
intubation required, client education
 Preanesthetic preparation: Fast appropriately (small
birds: four to six hrs; large birds: eight to 12 hrs), withhold
water 0 to two hrs, IV, IO catheterization optimal (may
need placement after induction), start fluid support at 5 to
10 mL/kg/hr (IV preferred)
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  139
Reptile Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation
Fluid support/preparation
Medical history
 Place IV, IO catheter if possible.
Temperament 
 IV, IO catheter in place:
 Physical exam
■ Start warm 0.9% NaCI at 5 mL/kg/hr IV, IO, continue through recovery.
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
 No catheter in place:
 Detemine health status:
■ Start warm 0.9% NaCl at 5 mL/kg/hr intracoelomic (ICe), SC, continue 
Healthy or compromised?
through recovery.
 Determine if IV, IO catheter will be placed.
■ Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
 Intubation strongly recommended 
(intubation optimal).
■ Is endotracheal tube required for successful anesthesia/procedure?
 Fast appropriately.
■ Do you expect successful placement of endotracheal tube upon induction?
 Provide client education/communicate 
■ Reptiles usually need positive pressure ventilation (PPV), via an 
expectations.
 endotracheal tube, to prevent hypoxemia during anesthesia.
lent
 Requires intubation,
but can't do:
Needs
intubation, but
Can
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes
 Consider refenal
intubate
can't do
 before anesthesia:
to skilled exotic 
practitioner.
 Healthy or compromised patient: 
otic
Midazolam 1 mg/kg IM 
AND
Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM 
Yes Iv, I10
No iv, 10
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
catheter
catheter
S
 Induction (No catheter in place):
for
Healthy patient:
Induction (IV, IO catheter in place):
 Attempt mask induction with sevoflurane (2-4%)/O, (first choice) or give ketamine
Su
 Healthy or compromised patient: 
 5-10 mg/kg IM, then mask with sevoflurane (1-4%)/O2
Propofol 3-5 mg/kg IV,IO slowly
 O, at 3 L'minute initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
ratiol
 Some reptiles can hold their breath for extended periods so mask induction not
to effect.
■ Give slowly in small boluses
 always an option.
to reduce apnea.
 Compromised patient:
■Monitor for apnea.
 Mask with sevoflurane (2-5%)/O, (best choice).
 Intubation strongly recommended
If struggling or significantly holding breath, give 5 mg/kg ketamine IM, then mask
with sevoflurane (1-4%)O, if needed.
(otherwise use face mask).
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/minute for maintenance
 Reptiles usually need PPV
 Ketamine can cause prolonged recovery times in debilitated reptiles.
G
to prevent hypoxemia during 
 Some reptiles can hold their breath for extended periods; mask induction not
anesthesia.
sthetic
always an option.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
 Intubation strongly recommended (otherwise use face mask).
 Reptiles usually need PPV to prevent hypoxemia during anesthesia.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
Recovery
 Propofol/mask induction:
 Continue to provide wam fluid support through
 Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) oxygen via endotracheal tube (by mask if 
recovery.
not intubated).
 Provide pain control:
I Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 12-24 hrs 
 If intubated, ventilate at 2-6 bpm and don't exceed 10-12 cm water
OR
pressure.
 Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 24 hrs 
 Ketamine induction:
And, if needed
 Provide supplemental O, via endotracheal tube (mask if not intubated).
 Carprofen 1-4 mg/kg PO, SC, IM, IV q 24 hrs one 
time; followed with half dose q 24-72 hrs if needed
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
OR
 If intubated, ventilate at 2-6 bpm and don't exceed 10-12 cm water
 Meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 24 hrs 
pressure.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
140
|Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Premedications
REPTILE ANESTHESIA
30 to 60 minutes before induction
PROTOCOL
Healthy or compromised patient:
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients,
 Midazolam l mg/kg IM
pages 123 to 137, before proceeding.)
AND
■ Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM
 Intubation is strongly recommended. Positive
pressure ventilation (PPV), via an endotracheal tube, is
Induction
usually needed to prevent hypoxemia during inhalant
anesthesia and when propofol is used in most species.
Healthy patient:
1 Use non-cuffed endotracheal tubes or do not inflate
 Propofol 3 to 5 mg/kg IV, 1O to effect Give slowly in
cuffs if they exist Ventilate at 2 to 6 bpm (with no
small boluses to reduce apnea. If no IV, IO catheter,
more than l to 2 seconds inspiration time) and don't
attempt mask induction with sevoflurane/O, or give
exceed 10 to 12 cm of water pressure.
ketamine 5 to 10 mg/kg IM wait for effect, then mask
Anesthetic
 Reptiles may survive an initial hypoxemic anesthesia
with sevoflurane/O, to effect Some reptiles (especially
turtles/tortoises) can hold their breath for extended
Aq uoneussKxo iadoid apinoid-sgeuep peuai
periods, so mask induction is not always an option.
performing PPV whenever possible.
 If unable to place endotracheal tube, consider
 Compromised patient:
referral to skilled exotic practitioner, especially for
 Propofol 3 to 5 mg/kg IV, IO, to effect Give slowly in
Consid
patients with respiratory compromise, surgery that
small boluses to reduce apnea. If no IV, IO catheter,
will compromise air way or with anesthesia time >15
attempt mask induction with sevoflurane/O, (best
minutes expected.
choice). If struggling or significantly holding breath,
 Reptile respiration is stimulated by low oxygen
give 5 mg/kg ketamine IM, wait for effect, then mask
derations
concentrations. Supplemental oxygenation before
with sevoflurane/O, to effect Ketamine can cause
induction and during postoperative recovery may not
 prolonged recovery times in debilitated reptiles. Some
be needed-room air can speed recovery in some cases.
reptiles (especially turtles/tortoises) can hold their
 Provide supplemental oxygen during induction and
breath for extended periods, so mask induction is not
 al ways an option.
anesthesia.
■ Perioperative fasting is recommended to reduce
visceral volume (improves tidal volume) and because
Maintenance: Intubation strongly recommended, provide
 digestion is impaired during anesthesia and recovery.
sevoflurane/O, via endotracheal tube to effect (or mask
if no tube), maintain body temperature, monitor, give
 IV or IO fluid administration best, intracoelomic
(ICe) second best and SC is better than none. SC
fluid support and provide supplemental oxygen during
Exotic
administration may not be adequate for correction of
induction and anesthesia.
dehydration or blood loss in the perianesthetic period.
Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support.
 Debilitated, dehydrated or chilled reptiles have
 prolonged absorption times for fluids given SC.
 Pain control:
Patients
 Optimal temperatures: temperate and aquatic reptiles,
■Butorphanol 1 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 12-24 hrs
77°F to 86°F; tropical reptiles, 86°F.
OR
■ Buprenorphine 0.01 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 24 hrs
Equipment and supplies: Face mask or intubation
And, if needed
supplies (including lidocaine gel), non-rebreathing circuit,
IV, 1O catheter supplies, 0.9% NaCl (SC, IV, IO, ICe),
 Carprofen 1-4 mg/kg PO, SC, IM, IV q 24 hrs one
time; followed with half dose q 24-72 hrs if needed
supplemental heat, monitoring equipment
OR
 Meloxicam 0.1 mg/kg IM (best), SC q 24 hrs
Evaluation: History, physical exam, laboratory data, health
status, evaluate ability to intubate, client education.
 Dosages are suggested guidelines only-tailor actual
amounts to individual patient needs.
Preanesthetic preparation: Fast four to six hours (longer
 in large species), withhold water zero to one hr, IV, IO
catheterization optimal, start fluid support at 5 mL/kg/hr
(IV, I0 preferred).
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  141
Ferret Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation
 Fluid support/preparation
Medical history
 Place IV, IO catheter if possible; IV preferred 
Temperament 
IV, IO catheter in place:
Physical exam
 Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr IV, IO, continue through recovery.
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
 Detemine health status:
 No catheter in place:
Healthy or compromised?
■Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr SC, continue through recovery.
 Detemine if IV/lO catheter willbe placed.
■ Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
→ Detemine if patient will be intubated 
 Intubation optimal and should be attempted in adults and large juveniles.
(intubation optimal).
■ Is endotracheal tube required for successful anesthesia/procedure?
 Fast appropriately.
A puos Aq agmg jeauoenopua jo juawaneld inyssanns padxa no oa 
 Provide client education/communicate
expectations.
S1
tient
 Premedications 
 Requires intubation,
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes 
Needs
Can
but can't do:
 before anesthesia
Pat
 intubation, but
 intubate or not
 Consider refemal
can't do
required
 Healthy patient:
Exotic
to skilled exotic 
Acepromazine 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
 pra ctitioner.
AND
Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC 
Compromised patient:
Midazolam 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
Yes Iv, I0
No Iv, 10
AND
mall
catheter
catheter
 Butorphanol 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
Keep patient warm and monitor.
S
for
 Induction (No catheter in place): 
rations
Healthy patient:
Induction (IV, IO catheter in place):
 Telazol@ 6 mg/kg IM, then mask w/sevoflurane (1-4%)/O, if needed.
O2 at 3-L/min initially, then 2 Lmin maintenance. If initial Telazol dose
Healthy or compromised patient: 
 Propofol 2-6 mg/kg IV, IO to effect.
 Intubation optimal, otherwise use 
Compromised patient:
face mask.
Mask w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2
O, at 3- L/min initialy, then 2 Lmin maintenance.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
 If struggling, give additional dose of midazolam 0.5 mg/kg (first choice)
IM or TelazoP 1 mg/kg IM, wait 20 min, repeat mask attempt.
→Repeat Telazol at 1 mg/kg dose once if needed.
Anesthetic
I Intubation optimal, otherwise use face mask.
I Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
Recovery
 Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
 Continue to provide wam fluid support 
Propofol/mask induction:
through recovery.
 Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) and oxygen via mask or endotracheal tube.
 Provide pain control:
 O, at 3-4 L/min initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
 Butorphanol 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC 
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
q 2-4 hrs
Telazol induction:
OR
Allemu uw e le aqnt leaynenopua jo ysew en o lejuawaiddns apiaaid 
 Buprenorphine 0.01-0.03 mg/kg IM, SC
 then 2 L/min for maintenance.
q 8-12 hrs
'aueid snauisue panisap uieuiew oi papeau se %t-l le aueanjoaas ppy 
And, if needed 
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 Carprofen 1 mg/kg P0 q 12-24 hrs, 
three days maximum (make sure patient 
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
is hydrated)
Keep patient warm and monitor.
142
2|Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
FERRET ANESTHESIA
Induction
PROTOCOL
 Pre-oxygenate (before induction) if possible without
causing stress, then:
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients,
Healthy patient with IV, 1O catheter:
 pages 123 to 137, before proceeding.)
 Propofol 2 to 6 mg/kg IV, 10 to effect
 Use gauze strips to hold the mouth open, allowing
Healthy patient without IV, 1O catheter:
visualization of the larynx.
 Telazol@ 6 mg/kg IM, wait for effect and mask with
 Tracheal intubation is optimal and should be
sevoflurane/O, if needed. If initial Telazol? dose has
attempted in adult and large juvenile ferrets with
no effect after 20 minutes, can repeat 1/4 to 1/2 dose
a 2 to 3 mm endotracheal tube. Do not try more
of Telazol? once.
 than twice; repeated attempts can cause significant
laryngeal edema.
Compromised patient with IV, I0 catheter:
 If unable to place endotracheal tube but intubation
required (such as respiratory compromise, surgery
 Propofol 2 to 6 mg/kg IV, 10 to effect
Anesthetic
 that will compromise airway, anesthesia time > 30
Compromised patient without IV, IO catheter:
minutes expected), refer patient to skilled exotic
Mask with sevoflurane/O, to effect If struggling, give
 practitioner.
additional dose of midazolam at O.5 mg/kg (first
se pens eiesiaq ae saxai reade 
choice) or Telazol@ (second choice) 1 mg/kg IM, wait
 plane.
20 minutes and mask again. Repeat Telazol@ at l mg/
■ Underlying potential disease states to consider
Consid
kg dose once if needed.
 include adrenal tumors, cardiomyopathy, anemia,
hypoglycemia and endocrinopathies.
Maintenance: O, /sevoflurane via mask/endotracheal
■ Provide supplemental oxygen throughout induction,
tube to effect, maintain body temperature, monitor,
derations for Small Exotic 
 anesthesia and recovery.
provide fluid support and supplemental oxygen.
Equipment and supplies: Face mask or intubation
supplies (including lidocaine gel), non-rebreathing
Recovery: maintain heat and fluid support
circuit, IV, IO catheter supplies, 0.9% NaCl, SC, IV, 1O,
Pain control:
supplemental heat source, monitoring equipment
■ Butorphanol 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg IM, SC q 2 to 4 hrs
Evaluation: History, physical exam, laboratory data,
OR
■ Buprenorphine 0.01 to 0.03 mg/kg IM, SC q 8
health status, determination if intubation required, client
to 12 hrs
education
And, if needed
 Preanesthetic preparation: Fast most patients four hours
 Carprofen l mg/kg PO q 12-24 hrs for no longer than
(don't fast patients with insulinomas), withhold water
three days total (make sure patient is hydrated)
two hours, IV, IO catheterization optimal (may need to be
Dosages are suggested guidelines only-tailor actual
Patients
placed after premed or induction), start fluid at 5 to 10
mL/kg/hr (IV best).
amounts to individual patient needs.
Premedications
 30 to 60 minutes before induction
Healthy patient:
■Acepromazine 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
AND
 Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
Compromised patient:
 Midazolam 0.1 mg/kg IM 
AND
 Butorphanol 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg IM, SC
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  143
Rabbit Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation
Fluid support/preparation
 Medical history
 Place IV, IO catheter if possible; IV prefened.
 Temperament 
 IV, I0 catheter in place:
 Physical exam
 Start wam 0.9% NaCI at 5-10 mL/kg/hr IV, IO, continue through recovery.
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
Detemine health status:
 No catheter in place:
 Healthy or compromised?
■ Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr SC, continue through recovery.
 Determine if IV, IO catheter will be placed.
■ Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
 Intubation optimal. If unable to easily perfom tracheal intubation
(intubation optimal).
(which can be difficult), nasal intubation strongly recommended.
 Fast appropriately.
Provide client education/communicate
 Exception:
■Pre-existing airway compromise or procedures that require tracheal
expectations.
S1
intubation to protect airway may need referral to a skilled exotic practitioner.
tient
Pat
Requires tracheal intubation:
Needs
Tracheal
otic
 Consider referral to skilled exotic 
 tracheal
intubation not
 required
practitioner.
intubation
(use nasal)
Induction
 Pre-oxygenate if possible without causing stress.
S
 Premedications
 Healthy patient:
for
Ketamine 10-20 mg/kg IM, wait 20 min, perform nasal intubation. Deliver
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes before
 sevoflurane (1 -4%)/0, via tube as needed.
anesthesia.
 O, at 3 L'min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance.
Healthy or compromised patient:
Su
 If unable to perform nasal intubation, can maintain via face mask w/
 Midazolam 0.2 mg/kg IM (can go up
ratiol
sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2
 to 1 mg/kg midazolam if fractious).
O2 at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance, but intubation 
AND
 preferred.
 Butophanol 0.2 mg/kg IM 
 Compromised patient: 
 Mask w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O, to effect, perfom nasal intubation.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
 Deliver sevoflurane (1-4%)o, via tube as needed.
 O, at 3 Lmin initially, then 2 Lmin maintenance.
 If unable to perfom nasal intubation, can maintain via face mask 
G
w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2*
Anesthetic
 O, at 3L/min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance, but intubation preferred.
If struggling give ketamine 10 mg/kg IM, wait 20 min, perfom nasal
 intubation and sevoflurane/O, delivery as above.
Recovery
 Continue to provide warm fluid support 
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
throu gh recovery.
 Provide pain control:
 Butorphanol 0.1-1.0 mg/kg IM, SC q 2-4 hrs*
Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
OR
Mask induction:
 Buprenorphine 0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM, SC q 6-12 
Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) and oxygen via nasal tube (face mask if 
hrs *
no tube).
And, if needed
 O, at 3 L'min initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
 Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg P0 q 24 hrs (make sure 
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 patient is hydrated)
OR
Ketamine induction:
 Carprofen 1-2.2 mg/kg PO, SC q 12 hrs 
 Provide supplemental O, via nasal tube (face mask if no tube) at
(make sure patient is hydrated)
 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
 Add sevoflurane at 1-4% as needed to maintain desired anesthetic plane.
* Limit to two doses to reduce potential for Gl
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
motility issues.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
144 | Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
RABBIT ANESTHESIA
Premedications
PROTOCOL
 30 to 60 minutes before induction
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients, pages
Healthy or compromised patient:
123 to 137, before proceeding.)
Midazolam 0.2 mg/kg IM (can go up to 1 mg/kg
midazolam if fractious)
 Difficult to anesthetize as they are easily stressed and
AND
can injure themselves, often have underlying lung
disease, are prone to respiratory depression, can be
 Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg IM
 difficult to intubate, may have significant anorexia
Induction
postsurgically, and have great variability in drug
response between breeds and individuals.
Pre-oxygenate (before induction) if possible without
 Excess salivation can occur and can lead to air way
causing stress, then:
 obstruction. Monitor respiration carefully.
Anesthetic
 Intubation is optimal. Great care must be used-
Healthy patient:
repeated attempts at tracheal intubation can
 Ketamine 10 to 20 mg/kg IM, wait 20 minutes,
cause significant laryngeal edema or spasm. Nasal
 perform nasal intubation, then sevoflurane/O, to
intubation strongly recommended when unable to
effect if needed.
perform tracheal intubation on the first attempt or
 Compromised patient:
intubation in rabbits
 Mask with sevoflurane/O, to effect, perform nasal
Consid
 If tracheal intubation required (such as respiratory
intubation. If struggling, give ketamine 10 mg/kg
compromise, surgery that will compromise airway
IM, wait 20 minutes, perform nasal intubation, then
 anesthesia time > 20 minutes expected), but first
sevoflurane/O, to effect if needed.
derations for Small Exotic
attempt is unsuccessful, refer patient to skilled exotic
practitioner.
 Maintenance: O, /sevoflurane via nasal tube
 Palpebral reflex is highly variable. Do not rely on it as
 to effect (face mask if no tube), maintain body
 an indicator of anesthetic depth.
temperature, monitor, provide fluid support and
 Ear pinch reflex is lost at a surgical plane of
 supplemental oxygen.
anesthesia.
Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support
 Particularly vulnerable to corneal damage from drying
or mechanical trauma during anesthesia. Lubricate
Pain control:
 eyes well. Use adequate padding or place "donut'
■ Butorphanol 0.1-1.0 mg/kg IM, SC q 2-4 hrs*
 pads around eyes to prevent trauma.
OR
 Provide oxygen throughout induction, anesthesia and
 Buprenorphine 0.01-0.05 mg/kg IM, SC q 6-12 hrs *
recovery.
And, if needed
 Pulse oximetry is critical during maintenance to
 Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg PO q 24 hrs (make sure patient
monitor for hypoxemia.
 is hydrated
Patients
OR
Equipment and supplies: Face mask and intubation
 Carprofen 1-2.2 mg/kg PO, SC q 12 hrs (make sure 
supplies (including lidocaine gel), non-rebreathing circuit.
 patient is hydrated)
0.9% NaCl (SC, IV, IO), IV, IO catheterization supplies,
supplemental heat source, monitoring equipment
* Limit to two doses to reduce potential for Gl
motility issues.
Evaluation: History physical exam, laboratory data.
 health status, determination if intubation required, client
education.
amounts to individual patient needs.
 Preanesthetic preparation: Fast and withhold water 30
minutes (be sure mouth is clear of food/liquid before
induction), IV, IO catheterization optimal (may need to be
placed afer premed or induction), start fluid 5 to 10 mL/
kg/hr (IV best).
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  145
Guinea Pig and Chinchilla Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation
 Fluid support/preparation
 Medical history
 Attempt 24-gauge IV catheter once. Can also attempt I0 catheter.
 Temperament
 Physical exam
 Supply fluid support:
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
 IV, IO catheter in place:
 Determine health status:
 Start wam 0.9% NaCI at 5-10 mL/kg/hr IV, IO, continue through recovery.
Healthy or compromised?
 No catheter in place:
Determine if IV, IO catheter will be 
 Start wam 0.9% NaCl at 5-10 mL/kg/hr SC, continue through recovery.
placed.
Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
(intubation optimal).
 Intubation not routinely recommended 
 Fast appropriately.
 Exception: Pre-existing airway compromise or procedures that require
 Provide client education/communicate 
tient
 intubation to protect airway may need refemal to a skiled exotic practitioner.
expectations.
Pat
Exotic
Requires tracheal intubation:
Intubation
→ Consider refenal to skilled exotic
Needs
intubation
not
practitioner.
required
mall
S
Induction 
for
 Pre-oxygenate if possible without causing stress.
 Healthy patient:
rations
 Telazolp 5 mg/kg SC, then mask w/sevoflurane (1-4%)/
 Premedication
O, if needed.
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes before anesthesia.
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance.
 If initial TelazoP dose has no effect after 20 minutes, can
 Healthy or compromised patient:
Midazolam
repeat 1/4-1/2 dose of Telazop once.
1 mg/kg SC
AND
Compromised patient:
Butorphanol
0.1 mg/kg SC 
 Mask w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2. O, at 3 L/min initially.
then 2 L/min maintenance.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
 If struggling can give TelazoP 1 mg/kg SC, wait 20 min,
G
 repeat ma sk attempt.
 Repeat Telazol at 1 mg/kg dose once if needed
Anesthetic
Keep patient warm and monitor.
 Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
Recovery
Mask induction:
 Continue to provide wam fluid support
 Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) & O, via face mask.
through recovery.
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
I Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
Provide pain control:
 Butorphanol 1-2 mg/kg SC q 4 hrs 
Telazol induction:
OR
 Provide supplemental O, via face mask at 3 L/min 
 Buprenorphine 0.05 mg/kg SC q 8-12 hrs 
 initially, then 2 L for maintenance.
And, if needed
 Add sevoflurane at 1-4% as needed to maintain desired 
 Carprofen 1-2 mg/kg P0 q 12-24 hrs
 anesthetic plane.
(make sure patient is hydrated)
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
Keep patient warm and monitor.
146
| Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
GUINEA PIG AND CHINCHILLA
Induction:
ANESTHESIA PROTOCOL
Pre-oxygenate (before induction) if possible without
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients, pages
causing stress, then:
123 to 137, before proceeding.)
Healthy patient:
 Potential for anesthetic complication is high as
 Telazol@ 5 mg/kg SC, wait for effect, then mask with
these patients stress easily, are difficult to intubate,
sevoflurane/O, if needed. If initial Telazol? dose has
 are prone to postoperative complications, and have
no effect after 20 minutes, can repeat 1/4 to l/2 dose
differing drug responses per individual.
of Telazol? once.
 Intubation not recommended unless surgical
procedures may compromise the airway or patient
 Compromised patient:
 is significantly compromised. If intubation required
 Mask with sevoflurane/O, to effect If struggling, give
(such as respiratory compromise, surgery that will
sedative Telazol? dose l mg/kg SC, wait 20 minutes
and mask again. Repeat Telazol@ at 1 mg/kg dose once
An
 compromise airway, anesthesia time > 30 minutes
if needed.
nesthetic
expected) refer patient to skilled exotic practitioner.
■ Often need to clean out mouth prior to induction;
 have tendency to retain food in oral cavity.
Maintenance: O /sevoflurane via mask to effect, maintain
 body temperature, monitor, provide fluid support and
24-gauge IV catheter in cephalic vein.
 supplemental oxygen.
■ Anticholinergics can be used if excess respiratory
Consid
secretions are present.
 Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support.
 Ear pinch and pedal withdrawal reflexes are lost at a
 surgical plane of anesthesia.
Pain control:
derations
 Provide oxygen throughout induction, anesthesia
■ Butorphanol 1 to 2 mg/kg SC q 4 hrs
 and recovery.
OR
■ Buprenorphine 0.05 mg/kg SC q 8-12 hrs
Equipment and supplies: Face mask or intubation
And, if needed
supplies (including lidocaine gel), non-rebreathing
 Carprofen 1 to 2 mg/kg PO q 12-24 hrs (make sure
s for Small Exotic
 circuit, 0.9% NaCl SC, IV, 1O, supplemental heat source,
 patient is hydrated)
 monitoring equipment
Dosages are suggested guidelines only; tailor actual
Evaluation: History, physical exam, laboratory data,
amounts to individual patient needs.
 health status, determination if intubation required, client
education
Preanesthetic prep: Fast four hours and withhold water
two hours, start fluid at 5 to 10 mL/kg/hr SC. Be sure
Patients
mouth is clear of food/fluid before induction.
Premedication:
30 to 60 minutes before induction; in healthy patients,
can be diluted in first dose of SC fluids
Healthy or compromised patient:
■ Midazolam l mg/kg SC
AND
■ Butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg SC
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  147
Rat, Mouse, Gerbil and Hamster Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation:
 Medical history
 Temperament
Fluid support/preparation
 Physical exam
 Start wam 0.9% NaCI at 5-10 mL/kg/hr SC, continue through recovery.
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose q 15 min.
Determine health status:
 Intubation & IV, IO catheterization not routinely recommended.
Healthy or compromised?
Exception:
Determine if IV, IO catheter will be 
 Pre-existing airway compromise or procedures that require intubation to
 placed.
 protect airway may need referral to a skilled exotic practitioner.
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
 Is endotracheal tube required for successful anesthesia/procedure?
(intubation optimal).
tients
 Fast appropriately.
 Provide client education/communicate
expectations.
Pat
Exotic
Requires intubation:
Needs
 Intubation
 Consider referral to skilled exotic
intubation
not
 practitioner.
required
mall
S
Induction
for
 Pre-oxygenate if possible without causing stress.
 Healthy patient:
 TelazoP 5 mg/kg SC, then mask w/sevoflurane (1-4%)/O2
Premedications
if needed.
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes before anesthesia
 O, at 3 L/'min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance.
(doses given SC)
If initial Telazol dose has no effect after 20 minutes, can 
 Healthy or compromised patient:
repeat 1/4-1/2 dose of Telazol@ once.
Butorphanol
0.1 mg/kg SC
 Compromised patient:
AND
 Mask w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2
Midazolam
1 mg/kg SC
 O, at 3 L'min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance.
 If struggling, can give TelazoP 1 mg/kg SC, wait 20 min,
Keep patient warm and monitor.
G
 repeat mask attempt.
 Repeat Telazol at 1 mg/kg dose once if needed.
Anesthetic
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
Recovery
 Continue to provide wam fluid support through recovery.
 Provide pain control:
 Mouse, Gerbil, Hamster:
 Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
 Butorphanol 2 mg/kg SC q 2-4 hrs 
Mask induction:
OR
 Administer sevoflurane (2-4%) and oxygen via face mask.
 Buprenorphine 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg SC q 6-12 hrs 
 O, at 3 L/minute initially, then 2 L'min for maintenance.
 Rat:
I Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 Butorphanol 2 mg/kg SC q 2-4 hrs 
Telazol induction:
OR
 Provide supplemental O, via face mask at 3 L/minute
Buprenorphine 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg SC q 6-12 hrs 
 initially, then 2 L/min for maintenance.
And, if needed
 Add sevoflurane at 1-4% as needed to maintain desired 
Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg PO, SC q 24 hrs
anesthetic plane
Keep patient warm and monitor.
→ Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
148
|  Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Induction:
RAt. MOUSe, GERBIL AND
HAMSTER ANESTHESIA
Pre-oxygenate (before induction) without stress if
PROTOCOL
possible, then:
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients, pages
Healthy patient:
123 to 137, before proceeding.)
 Telazol@ 5 mg/kg SC, wait for effect, then mask with
sevoflurane/O, if needed. If initial Telazol? dose has
 Intubation not recommended unless surgical
a 7/ on +/ ieadai ues 'u  iae ia ou
 procedures may compromise airway or patient is
of Telazol? once SC
significantly compromised. If intubation required
Compromised patient:
(such as respiratory compromise, surgery that will
 Mask with sevoflurane/O, If struggling, give sedative
compromise airway, anesthesia time > 30 minutes
Telazol@ dose 1 mg/kg SC, wait 20 minutes and mask
expected) refer patient to skilled exotic practitioner.
Papsau j asuo sy/lu I ie asop elozei ieada uiese
■ IV, IO catheter insertion not routinely recommended.
Anesthetic
 Provide supplemental oxygen throughout induction,
Maintenance: Sevoflurane/O, via mask to effect, maintain
 anesthesia and recovery
body temperature, monitor, provide fluid support and
 Tail and ear pinch, as well as pedal withdrawal reflexes
supplemental oxygen.
disappear at a surgical anesthetic plane.
 Common diseases include respiratory infections
Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support
(subclinical disease is common) and chronic otitis
Consid
media.
Pain control:
 Mouse, gerbil, hamster:
 Equipment and supplies: Face mask, non-rebreathing
● Butorphanol 2 mg/kg SC q 2-4 hrs
 circuit, 0.9% NaCl, supplemental heat source, monitoring
OR
derations
equipment
● Buprenorphine 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg SC q 6-12 hrs
 Rat:
 Evaluation: History, physical exam, laboratory data,
● Butorphanol 2 mg/kg SC q 2-4 hrs
 health status, determination if intubation required, client
OR
education
s for Small Exotic I
● Buprenorphine 0.05- 0.1 mg/kg SC q 6-12 hrs
And, if needed
Preanesthetic prep: DO NOT fast or withhold water. Start
● Meloxicam 0.2 mg/kg PO, SC q 24 hrs
fluid at 5 to 10 mL/kg/hr SC.
Premedication:
30 to 60 minutes before induction; in healthy patients, can
be diluted in first dose of SC fluids
Healthy or compromised patient:
Patients
■ Midazolam l mg/kg SC
AND
■ Butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg SC
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  149
Hedgehog Anesthesia Protocol
Evaluation:
Medical history
Fluid supportpreparation:
 Temperament 
 Start wam 0.9% NaCI at 5-10 mLkg/hr SC, continue through
 Physical exam
recovery. Give 1/4 calculated hourly dose every 15 minutes.
 Gather & evaluate lab data.
I Intubation & IV, IO catheter not routinely recommended.
 Determine health status:
Healthy or compromised?
Exception:
 Determine if IV/IO catheter will be placed.
Pre-existing airway compromise or procedures that require intubation
 Detemine if patient will be intubated 
to protect airway may need referral to a skilled exotic practitioner.
Patients
(intubation optimal).
 Is endotracheal tube required for successful anesthesia/procedure?
 Fast appropriately.
 Provide client education/communicate
 Extra care and specialized tubes are usually required in hedgehogs.
expectations.
Exotic
Requires intubation:
Intubation
 Consider refemal to skilled exotic
Needs
mall 
intubation
not
practitioner.
required
S
for
Induction
rations
 Pre-oxygenate if possible without causing stress.
 Healthy or compromised patient:
 Premedication:
 Mask w/sevoflurane (2-4%)/O2
 Premedicate 30-60 minutes before anesthesia
 O, at 3 L/min initially, then 2 L/min maintenance.
 Healthy or compromised patient:
 Butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC under fumed skin 
 If significant struggling, give sedative dose of ketamine/
diazepam (ketamine 5 mg/kg + diazepam 0.5 mg/kg, in 
Keep patient warm and monitor.
separate syringes) IM, SC (under fured skin), wait 20
min, then mask again.
G
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
Anesthetic
Maintenance (use non-rebreathing system):
Recovery:
Mask induction:
I Continue to provide warm fluid support through recovery.
 Provide pain control:
 maintenance and sevoflurane (0-4%) via face mask.
 Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg SC (under fured skin) q 6-8 hrs 
 Use minimal concentration of sevoflurane necessary.
OR
 If the patient has received ketamine/diazepam, litle to
 Buprenorphine 0.01-0.5 mg/kg SC (under fumed skin),
IM q 6-12 hrs
 no sevoflurane may be needed, but continue to provide 
oxygen.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
 Keep patient warm and monitor.
150
|Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
Induction
HEDGEHOG ANESTHESIA
PROTOCOL
 Pre-oxygenate (before induction) without stress if
possible, then:
(See Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients, pages
123 to 137, before proceeding.)
Healthy or compromised patient:
 Mask with sevoflurane (2-4%)/O,. O, at 3 L/min
 Intubation is very difficult and not recommended
initially, then 2 L/min maintenance. If significant
unless surgical procedures may compromise the
struggling, give sedative dose of ketamine/diazepam
airway or patient is significantly compromised.
(ketamine 5 mg/kg + diazepam 0.5 mg/kg, in separate
■ IV, IO catheter insertion not routinely recommended
syringes) IM, SC (under furred skin), wait 20 min,
due to small body size.
then mask again.
 If intubation required (such as respiratory
compromise, surgery that will compromise airway.
Maintenance: O/sevoflurane via mask/endotracheal tube
to effect, maintain body temperature, monitor, provide
Anesthetic
to skilled exotic practitioner.
fluid support and supplemental oxygen
■ Provide supplemental oxygen throughout induction,
anesthesia and recovery.
Recovery: Maintain heat and fluid support.
■ Common health problems include oral disease
(including masses that can compromise respiration)
Pain control:
dilated cardiomyopathy, hepatic lipidosis, obesity,
 Butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg SC (under furred skin), IM q
renal disease and various types of neoplasia.
Consid
 Provide supplemental oxygen throughout induction,
6-8 hrs
OR
 anesthesia and recovery.
 Buprenorphine 0.0l-0.5 mg/kg SC (under furred
■ Administer SC drugs under furred skin. Skin under
skin), IM q 6-12 hrs
derations
areas with spines can have very slow absorption.
 Dosages are suggested guidelines only, tailor actual
Equipment and supplies: Face mask, non-rebreathing
amounts to individual patient needs
circuit, 0.9% NaCl, supplemental heat source, monitoring
equipment
s for Small Exotic I
 Evaluation: History, physical exam, health status,
determination if intubation required, client education
hours, withhold water two hours, start fluid at 5 to 10 mL/
kg/hr SC under furred skin.
Premedications
Patients
 30 to 60 minutes before induction
 Healthy or compromised patients:
 Butorphanol 0.l mg/kg IM best if can be given
without causing patient trauma, otherwise SC under
furred skin. Premedications can be diluted in first
dose of SC fluids, as long as fluids are administered
under furred skin.
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients |  151
Associate
Associate
Time given
 Sedation Level: none / mild / adequate / excessive
Route of adminAmount given
Respiratory Rate:,
Date:
 Respiratory Rate:
Associate:
Route of admin
WI OOS
WI O DS
SC or IM
WI0 DS
SC or IM
WI 5S
IV
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
 affer 1st hour under anesthesia 
(give to effect)
(give to effect)
(give to effect)
mL (give to effect)
Catheter Gauge:
:esind
 Drug, Strength, Dose Duration 
 Pulse:
(NA uoeqnu esen
 Exotic Patient Anesthesia Monitoring Form
mL/kg/hr x
mLkg/hr x
山
W
NSAID TGH:
Opioid TGH:
rmL
Other TGH:
Temperature:
Procedure(s):
Temperature:
kg ÷ 10 mg/mL=
kg ÷ 100 mg/mL=
kg ÷ 100 mg/mL=
=b
Time Given
kg ÷ 1 mg/mL =
kg ÷ 10 mg/mL =
kg ÷ 1 mg/mL =
kg ÷mg/mL =
kg ÷ mg/mL =
=/bu
=/b
mL/hr
Respiratory Rate:
kg÷
Catheter Placed (Y/N):
÷by
 Route of Admin 
PO SC IM IV
÷by
=by
PO SC IM IV
POSC IM IV
Weight (kg):
xbyb
xby/6
xbybu
xbyyb
mg/kg x
 1st hour under anesthesia 
Time Sternal:
Endotracheal Intubation (Y/N): 
xbyb山
x bybu
xby/b
 mL/kg/hr x
mL/kg/hr x
 Amount Given (Mg)
Pulse Quality:
 Species:
Evaluation Ater Premedications & Prior to Induction
Time Extubated::
(w/bu
(w/bu
(w/bu
(wbu
(wbu
NSAID / Opioid / Antibiotic Medication 
SC / Iv / Io (circle one)
Pulse:
Intubation Performed (Y/N): 
Acepromazine (1 mg/mL)
Butorphanol (10 mg/mL)
Midazolam (1 mg/mL)
Ketamine (100 mg/mL)
Propofol (10 mg/mL)
Telazol (100 mg/mL)
Time Surgery Ended:
Patient's Name:
Premedication
Date of Birth:
Time Intubated:
Temperature:
Intubation 
Recovery
Induction
0.9% NaCI
NSAID:_
:piodo
152
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
 45 min 
 95 min
 40 min 
 90 min
 35 min 
min
6
Anesthetic
 30 min
 80 min
Form
 Exotic Patient Anesthesia Monitoring P
 25 min 
75 min
ler
 20 min 
 70 min
rations for Small Exotic
15 min
 min
5
10 min 
 60 min 
 Patients
uu S
 55 min
 Induction 
 50 min 
Pain Assessment (0-4)
Pain Assessment (0-4)
Monitoring Chart
Fluid Rate (mL/hr)
BP (Sys/Dia/MAP)
Monitoring Chart
Fluid Rate (mL/hr)
Heart/Pulse Rate
BP (Sys/Dia/MAP)
Patient's Name:
Heart/Pulse Rate
Sevoflurane %
O, Flow (L/min)
O, Flow (L/min)
Sevoflurane %
ic
 Pulse Quality
ECG Rhythm
Pulse Quality
ECG Rhythm
Temperature
CRT/MM
CRT/MM
SpO2
ETCO,
ETCO,
SpO,
RR
RR
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
153
Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
154|  Anesthetic Considerations for Small Exotic Patients
SECTI0N 12:
Appendix
Appendix
12
Acepromazine
1 mg/mL*
*Acepromazine should be prediluted to 1 mg/mL to better allow accurate drug measurement.
DOsE: 0.05 mg/kg, IM in dogs and SC in cats for anesthesia protocols
Maximum single dose of acepromazine 1 mg/mL is 1.5 mg
· Order sterile water for injection and 30 mL empty sterile vials through BanfieldDirect
· Draw 27 mL of sterile water with a sterile syringe and add it to the empty sterile vial.
· Draw 3 mL of 10 mg/mL acepromazine and add to the same vial—-this wilresult in a 1 mg/mL solution.
· Vial should be labeled appropriately and dated.
· The solution is light sensitive. Protect it from light by wrapping the vial completely. If protected from light, the
solution is stable at room temperature.
Pet weight
 Pet weight
mL to administer
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
Ibs
kg
0.45
0.02mL
51
22.95
1.15 mL
0.90
0.05mL
52
23.40
1.17 mL
1.35
0.07 mL
3
53
23.85
1.19 mL
1.80
0.09 mL
54
24.30
1.22ml
2.25
0.11 mL
55
24.75
1.24 mL
6
2.70
0.14 mL
56
25.20
1.26 ml
3.15
0.16 mL
57
25.65
1.28 ml
3.60
8
0.18 mL
58
26.10
1.31 ml
9
4.05
0.20 mL
59
26.55
1.33 ml
10
4.50
0.23mL
60
27.00
1.35ml
4.95
0.25 mL
61
27.45
1.37 ml
12
5.40
0.27ml
62
27.90
1.40 ml
13
5.85
0.29 mL
63
28.35
1.42 ml
Appendix
14
6.30
0.32 mL
64
28.80
1.44 mL
15
6.75
0.34 mL
65
29.25
1.46 mL
16
7.20
0.36 mL
66
29.70
1.49 mL
17
7.65
0.38 mL
67
30.15
1.50 mL
18
8.10
0.41 mL
68
30.60
1.50 mL
19
8.55
0.43 mL
69
31.05
1.50 mL
20
00'6
0.45 mL
70
31.50
1.50 ml
21
9.45
0.47 mL
71
31.95
1.50 mL
22
9.90
0.50 mL
72
32.40
1.50 mL
23
10.35
0.52 mL
73
32.85
1.50 ml
24
10.80
0.54 mL
74
33.30
1.50 mL
25
11.25
0.56 mL
75
33.75
1.50 mL
26
11.70
0.59 mL
76
34.20
1.50 mL
27
12.15
0.61 ml
77
34.65
1.50 mL
28
12.60
0.63mL
78
35.10
1.50 mL
29
13.05
0.65 ml
79
35.55
1.50 ml
30
13.50
0.68 mL
80
36.00
1.50 mL
31
13.95
0.70 mL
81
36.45
1.50 mL
32
14.40
0.72 mL
82
36.90
1.50 mL
33
14.85
0.74 mL
83
37.35
1.50mL
34
15.30
0.77 mL
84
37.80
1.50 mL
35
15.75
0.79 ml
85
38.25
1.50ml
36
16.20
0.81 mL
86
38.70
1.50ml
37
16.65
0.83 mL
87
39.15
1.50 mL
38
17.10
0.86 mL
88
39.60
1.50ml
39
17.55
0.88 mL
89
40.05
1.50 ml
40
18.00
0.90 mL
90
40.50
1.50 ml
41
18.45
0.92 mL
91
40.95
1.50 mL
42
18.90
0.95 mL
92
41.40
1.50 ml
43
19.35
0.97 mL
93
41.85
1.50 ml
44
19.80
7 660
94
42.30
1.50 mL
45
20.25
1.01 mL
95
42.75
1.50 mL
46
20.70
1.04 mL
96
43.20
1.50 mL
47
21.15
1.06 mL
97
43.65
1.50 mL
48
21.60
1.08 mL
98
44.10
1.50 mL
49
22.05
1.10 mL
99
44.55
1.50 mL
50
22.50
1.13 mL
100
45.00
1.50 mL
Appendix|155
Atropine
0.54 mg/mL
· Give slowly to effect.
·IV for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
· Atropine can cause an initial slowing of the heart rate that usually resolves within a few seconds.
Pet weight
 mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.04 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.04 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.02 mL
0.03 mL
51
22.95
0.85 mL
1.70 ml
2
0.90
0.03 mL
0.07 ml
52
23.40
0.87 mL
1.73 ml
3
1.35
0.05 mL
0.10 ml
53
23.85
0.88 mL
1.77 mL
4
1.80
0.07 mL
0.13 mL
54
24.30
0.90 mL
1.80 mL
5
2.25
0.08 mL
0.17 mL
55
24.75
0.92 mL
1.83 mL
6
2.70
0.10 mL
0.20 mL
56
25.20
0.93 mL
1.87 mL
7
3.15
0.12 mL
0.23 mL
57
25.65
0.95 mL
1.90 mL
8
3.60
0.13 mL
0.27 mL
58
26.10
0.97 mL
1.93 mL
9
4.05
0.15 mL
0.30 mL
59
26.55
0.98 mL
1.97 mL
10
4.50
0.17 mL
0.33 mL
60
27.00
1.00 mL
2.00 mL
11
4.95
0.18 mL
0.37 mL
61
27.45
1.02 mL
2.03 mL
12
5.40
0.20 mL
0.40 mL
62
27.90
1.03 mL
2.07 ml
13
5.85
0.22 mL
0.43 ml
63
28.35
1.05 mL
2.10 ml
14
6.30
0.23 mL
0.47 mL
64
28.80
1.07 mL
2.13 mL
15
6.75
0.25 mL
0.50 ml
65
29.25
1.08 mL
2.17 mL
16
7.20
0.27 mL
0.53 ml
66
29.70
1.10 mL
2.20 mL
pendix
17
7.65
0.28 mL
0.57 mL
67
30.15
1.12 mL
2.23 mL
18
8.10
0.30 mL
0.60 mL
68
30.60
1.13 mL
2.27 mL
19
8.55
0.32 mL
0.63 mL
69
31.05
1.15 mL
2.30 mL
20
9.00
0.33 mL
0.67 ml
70
31.50
1.17 mL
2.33 ml
21
9.45
0.35 mL
0.70 mL
71
31.95
1.18 mL
2.37 mL
22
06'6
0.37 mL
0.73 mL
72
32.40
1.20 mL
2.40 mL
23
10.35
0.38 mL
0.77 mL
73
32.85
1.22 mL
2.43 mL
24
10.80
0.40 mL
0.80 mL
74
33.30
1.23 mL
2.47 mL
25
11.25
0.42 mL
0.83 mL
75
33.75
1.25 mL
2.50 mL
26
11.70
0.43 mL
0.87 mL
76
34.20
1.27 mL
2.53 mL
27
12.15
0.45 ml
0.90 ml
77
34.65
1.28 mL
2.57 mL
28
12.60
0.47 mL
0.93 mL
78
35.10
1.30 mL
2.60 mL
29
13.05
0.48 ml
0.97 ml
79
35.55
1.32 mL
2.63 ml
30
13.50
0.50 mL
1.00 mL
80
36.00
1.33 mL
2.67 mL
31
13.95
0.52 ml
1.03 ml
81
36.45
1.35 mL
2.70 ml
32
14.40
0.53 mL
1.07 mL
82
36.90
1.37 mL
2.73 mL
33
14.85
0.55 mL
1.10 mL
83
37.35
1.38 mL
2.77 mL
34
15.30
0.57 mL
1.13 ml
84
37.80
1.40 mL
2.80 mL
35
15.75
0.58 mL
1.17 mL
85
38.25
1.42 mL
2.83 mL
36
16.20
0.60 mL
1.20 mL
86
38.70
1.43 mL
2.87 mL
37
16.65
0.62 mL
1.23 mL
87
39.15
1.45 mL
2.90 mL
38
17.10
0.63 mL
1.27 ml
88
39.60
1.47 mL
2.93 ml
39
17.55
0.65 mL
1.30 mL
89
40.05
1.48 mL
2.97 mL
40
18.00
0.67 ml
1.33 mL
06
40.50
1.50 mL
3.00 ml
41
18.45
0.68mL
1.37 mL
91
40.95
1.52 mL
3.03 mL
42
18.90
0.70 mL
1.40 mL
92
41.40
1.53 mL
3.07 mL
43
19.35
0.72 ml
1.43 ml
93
41.85
1.55 mL
3.10 mL
44
19.80
0.73 mL
1.47 mL
94
42.30
1.57 mL
3.13 mL
45
20.25
0.75 mL
1.50 mL
95
42.75
1.58 mL
3.17 mL
46
20.70
0.77 mL
1.53 mL
96
43.20
1.60 mL
3.20 mL
47
21.15
0.78 ml
1.57 mL
97
43.65
1.62 mL
3.23 ml
48
21.60
0.80 mL
1.60 mL
98
44.10
1.63 mL
3.27 mL
49
22.05
0.82 mL
1.63 mL
66
44.55
1.65 mL
3.30 mL
50
22.50
0.83 ml
1.67 ml
100
45.00
1.67 ml
3.33 ml
156
Appendix
Bupivacaine Local Anesthetic Blocks
0.5% (5 mg/mL)
DOSE: Dogs: 1 - 2 mg/kg for local blocks. Cats: 1 mg/kg for local blocks
· Doses are cumulative.
· Do not mix with lidocaine.
Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
 mL to administer
Ibs
kg
1.0 mg/kg
2.0 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
1.0 mg/kg
2.0 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
51
22.95
4.59 mL
9.18 mL
2
0.90
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
52
23.40
4.68 mL
9.36 mL
3
1.35
0.27 mL
0.54 mL
53
23.85
4.77 mL
9.54 mL
4
1.80
0.36 mL
0.72 mL
54
24.30
4.86 mL
9.72 mL
5
2.25
0.45 mL
0.90 mL
55
24.75
4.95 mL
9.90 ml
6
2.70
0.54 mL
1.08 mL
56
25.20
5.04 mL
10.08 ml
7
3.15
0.63 mL
1.26 ml
57
25.65
 5.13 mL
10.26 ml
8
3.60
0.72 mL
1.44 mL
58
26.10
5.22 mL
10.44 mL
9
4.05
0.81 mL
1.62 mL
59
26.55
5.31 mL
10.62 mL
10
4.50
0.90 mL
1.80 ml
60
27.00
5.40 mL
10.80 ml
11
4.95
0.99 mL
1.98 mL
61
27.45
5.49 mL
10.98 mL
12
5.40
1.08 mL
2.16 mL
62
27.90
5.58 mL
11.16 ml
13
5.85
1.17 mL
2.34 mL
63
28.35
5.67 mL
11.34 ml
14
6.30
1.26 mL
2.52 mL
64
28.80
5.76 mL
11.52 mL
15
6.75
1.35 mL
2.70 mL
65
29.25
5.85 mL
11.70 ml
16
7.20
1.44 mL
2.88 mL
66
29.70
5.94 mL
11.88 mL
17
7.65
1.53 mL
3.06 mL
67
30.15
6.03 mL
12.06 mL
Appendix
18
8.10
1.62 mL
3.24 ml
68
30.60
6.12 mL
12.24 ml
19
8.55
1.71 mL
3.42 ml
69
31.05
6.21 mL
12.42 ml
20
9.00
1.80 mL
3.60 mL
70
31.50
6.30 mL
12.60 mL
21
9.45
1.89 mL
3.78 ml
71
31.95
6.39 mL
12.78 ml
22
9.90
1.98ml
3.96 mL
72
32.40
6.48 mL
12.96 ml
23
10.35
2.07 mL
4.14 mL
73
32.85
6.57 mL
13.14 ml
24
10.80
2.16 mL
4.32 mL
74
33.30
6.66 mL
13.32 mL
25
11.25
2.25 mL
4.50 mL
75
33.75
6.75 mL
13.50 mL
26
11.70
2.34 mL
4.68 mL
76
34.20
6.84 mL
13.68 mL
27
12.15
2.43 mL
4.86 mL
77
34.65
6.93 mL
13.86 mL
28
12.60
2.52 mL
5.04 mL
78
35.10
7.02 mL
14.04 ml
29
13.05
2.61 mL
5.22 mL
79
35.55
7.11 mL
14.22 ml
30
13.50
2.70 mL
5.40 ml
80
36.00
7.20 mL
14.40 ml
31
13.95
2.79 mL
5.58 mL
81
36.45
7.29 mL
14.58ml
32
14.40
2.88 mL
5.76 mL
82
36.90
7.38 mL
14.76 ml
33
14.85
2.97 mL
5.94 mL
83
37.35
7.47 mL
14.94 mL
34
15.30
3.06 mL
6.12 ml
84
37.80
7.56 mL
15.12 ml
35
15.75
3.15 mL
6.30 mL
85
38.25
7.65 mL
15.30 ml
36
16.20
3.24 mL
6.48 mL
86
38.70
7.74 mL
15.48 mL
37
16.65
3.33 mL
6.66 ml
87
39.15
7.83 mL
15.66 ml
38
17.10
3.42 mL
6.84 mL
88
39.60
7.92 mL
15.84 ml
39
17.55
3.51 mL
7.02 mL
89
40.05
8.01 mL
16.02 mL
40
18.00
3.60 mL
7.20 ml
90
40.50
8.10 mL
16.20 ml
41
18.45
3.69 mL
7.38 mL
91
40.95
8.19 mL
16.38 ml
42
18.90
3.78 mL
7.56 mL
92
41.40
8.28 mL
16.56 mL
43
19.35
3.87 mL
7.74 mL
93
41.85
8.37 mL
16.74 ml
44
19.80
3.96 mL
7.92 mL
94
42.30
8.46 mL
16.92 ml
45
20.25
4.05 mL
8.10 mL
95
42.75
8.55 mL
17.10 mL
46
20.70
4.14 mL
8.28 ml
96
43.20
8.64 mL
17.28 ml
47
21.15
4.23 mL
8.46 mL
97
43.65
8.73 mL
17.46 ml
48
21.60
4.32 mL
8.64 ml
98
44.10
8.82 mL
17.64 ml
49
22.05
4.41 mL
8.82 mL
66
44.55
8.91 mL
17.82 mL
50
22.50
4.50 mL
9.00 mL
100
45.00
9.00mL
18.00mL
Appendix | 157
Buprenorph
lne
0.3 mg/mL
DOSE:
Dogs: 0.005 - 0.02 mg/kg SC, IM postoperatively
Cats: 0.005 - 0.01 mg/kg SC, IM, transmucosal postoperatively
Pet weight
Dose for dogs
Dose for cats
Ibs
kg
0.005 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.01 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.01 ml
0.03 mL
0.02 mL
2
0.90
0.02 ml
0.06 mL
0.03 ml
3
1.35
0.02 ml
0.09 mL
0.05 mL
4
1.80
0.03 ml
0.12 mL
0.06 mL
5
2.25
0.04 ml
0.15 ml
0.08 ml
6
2.70
0.05 ml
0.18 mL
0.09 ml
7
3.15
0.05 mL
0.21 mL
0.11 mL
8
3.60
0.06 ml
0.24 ml
0.12 ml
9
4.05
0.07 ml
0.27 ml
0.14 ml
10
4.50
0.08 ml
0.30 ml
0.15 mL
11
4.95
0.08 ml
0.33mL
0.17 mL
12
5.40
0.09 ml
0.36 ml
0.18 ml
13
5.85
0.10 ml
0.39 mL
0.20 ml
14
6.30
0.11 mL
0.42 ml
0.21 mL
15
6.75
0.11 mL
0.45 mL
0.23 ml
16
7.20
0.12 ml
0.48 ml
0.24 ml
17
7.65
0.13 ml
0.51 mL
0.26 ml
Appendix
18
8.10
0.14 ml
0.54 mL
0.27 ml
19
8.55
0.14 ml
0.57 mL
0.29 ml
20
9.00
0.15 mL
0.60 ml
0.30 ml
21
9.45
0.16 ml
0.63 mL
0.32 ml
22
066
0.17 ml
0.66 mL
0.33 ml
23
10.35
0.17 ml
0.69 mL
0.35ml
24
10.80
0.18 ml
0.72 ml
0.36 ml
25
11.25
0.19 ml
0.75 mL
0.38 ml
26
11.70
0.20 ml
0.78 ml
27
12.15
0.20 ml
0.81 mL
28
12.60
0.21 ml
0.84 mL
29
13.05
0.22 ml
0.87 ml
30
13.50
0.23 mL
0.90 mL
31
13.95
0.23 ml
0.93 mL
32
14.40
0.24 ml
0.96 mL
33
14.85
0.25 ml
0.99 mL
34
15.30
0.26 ml
1.02 mL
35
15.75
0.26 ml
1.05 mL
36
16.20
0.27 ml
1.08 mL
37
16.65
0.28 ml
1.11 mL
38
17.10
0.29 ml
1.14 mL
39
17.55
0.29 ml
1.17 mL
40
18.00
0.30 ml
1.20 mL
41
18.45
0.31 mL
1.23 mL
42
18.90
0.32 ml
1.26 mL
43
19.35
0.32 ml
1.29 mL
44
19.80
0.33 ml
1.32 mL
45
20.25
0.34 ml
1.35 mL
46
20.70
0.35 ml
1.38 mL
47
21.15
0.35 ml
1.41 mL
48
21.60
0.36 ml
1.44 ml
49
22.05
0.37 ml
1.47 ml
50
22.50
0.38 ml
1.50 mL
158 | Appendix
Buprenorphine, cont'd
0.3 mg/mL
DOSE:
Dogs: 0.005 - 0.02 mg/kg SC, IM postoperatively
Cats: 0.005 - 0.01 mg/kg SC, IM, transmucosal postoperatively
Pet weight
Dose for dogs
Ibs
kg
0.005 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
51
22.95
0.38 ml
1.53 ml
52
23.40
0.39 ml
1.56 mL
53
23.85
0.40 ml
1.59 mL
54
24.30
0.41 mL
1.62 mL
55
24.75
0.41 ml
1.65 ml
56
25.20
0.42 ml
1.68 mL
57
25.65
0.43 ml
1.71 mL
58
26.10
0.44 ml
1.74 ml
59
26.55
0.44 ml
1.77 mL
60
27.00
0.45 ml
1.80 mL
61
27.45
0.46 ml
1.83 ml
62
27.90
0.47 ml
1.86 ml
63
28.35
0.47 ml
1.89 mL
64
28.80
0.48 ml
1.92 mL
65
29.25
0.49 ml
1.95 ml
66
29.70
0.50 ml
1.98 mL
67
30.15
0.50 ml
2.01 mL
68
30.60
0.51 ml
2.04 ml
Appendix
69
31.05
0.52 ml
2.07 ml
70
31.50
0.53 ml
2.10 mL
71
31.95
0.53 mL
2.13 ml
72
32.40
0.54 ml
2.16 ml
73
32.85
0.55ml
2.19 mL
74
33.30
0.56 mL
2.22 mL
75
33.75
0.56 ml
2.25 ml
76
34.20
0.57 ml
2.28 ml
77
34.65
0.58 mL
2.31 ml
78
35.10
0.59 ml
2.34 ml
79
35.55
0.59 ml
2.37 ml
80
36.00
0.60 mL
2.40 mL
81
36.45
0.61 mL
2.43 mL
82
36.90
0.62 ml
2.46 ml
83
37.35
0.62 ml
2.49 ml
84
37.80
0.63 mL
2.52 mL
85
38.25
0.64 ml
2.55 ml
86
38.70
0.65 ml
2.58 ml
87
39.15
0.65 ml
2.61 mL
88
39.60
0.66 ml
2.64 mL
89
40.05
0.67 mL
2.67 ml
90
40.50
0.68 ml
2.70 ml
91
40.95
0.68 ml
2.73 ml
92
41.40
0.69 mL
2.76 ml
93
41.85
0.70 ml
2.79 ml
94
42.30
0.71 ml
2.82 ml
95
42.75
0.71 ml
2.85 mL
96
43.20
0.72 ml
2.88 mL
97
43.65
0.73 ml
2.91 ml
98
44.10
0.74 ml
2.94 ml
99
44.55
0.74 ml
2.97 ml
100
45.00
0.75 ml
3.00 ml
Appendix | 159
Butorphanol (Torbugesic)
10 mg/mL
DOSE: Dogs: 0.2 - 0.4 mg/kg IM. Cats: 0.2 - 0.4 mg/kg SC, for anesthesia protocols.
· There is no maximum single dose for butorphanol.
·
Butorphanol can be repeated as needed every one to two hours.
Pet weight
mL to administer
 Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.4 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.4 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.01 mL
0.02 mL
51
22.95
0.46 mL
0.92 mL
2
0.90
0.02 mL
0.04 ml
52
23.40
0.47 ml
0.94 ml
3
1.35
0.03 mL
0.05 mL
53
23.85
0.48 mL
0.95 mL
4
1.80
0.04 mL
0.07 mL
54
24.30
0.49 mL
0.97 mL
5
2.25
0.05 mL
0.09 mL
55
24.75
0.50 mL
0.99 ml
6
2.70
0.05 mL
0.11 mL
56
25.20
0.50 mL
1.01 mL
7
3.15
0.06 mL
0.13 ml
57
25.65
0.51 ml
1.03 mL
8
3.60
0.07 mL
0.14 ml
58
26.10
0.52 mL
1.04 ml
9
4.05
0.08 mL
0.16 mL
59
26.55
0.53 mL
1.06 mL
10
4.50
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
60
27.00
0.54 ml
1.08 mL
11
4.95
0.10 mL
0.20 mL
61
27.45
0.55 mL
1.10 mL
12
5.40
0.11 mL
0.22 mL
62
27.90
0.56 mL
1.12 mL
13
5.85
0.12 mL
0.23 ml
63
28.35
0.57 mL
1.13 ml
14
6.30
0.13 mL
0.25 mL
64
28.80
0.58 mL
1.15 mL
15
6.75
0.14 mL
0.27 mL
65
29.25
0.59 mL
1.17 mL
16
7.20
0.14 mL
0.29 mL
66
29.70
0.59 mL
1.19 mL
17
7.65
0.15 mL
0.31 mL
67
30.15
0.60 mL
1.21 mL
pendix
18
8.10
0.16 mL
0.32 mL
68
30.60
0.61 ml
1.22 ml
19
8.55
0.17 mL
0.34 ml
69
31.05
0.62 ml
1.24 ml
20
9.00
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
70
31.50
0.63 mL
1.26 mL
21
9.45
0.19 mL
0.38 mL
71
31.95
0.64 mL
1.28 mL
22
066
0.20 mL
0.40 mL
72
32.40
0.65 mL
1.30 mL
23
10.35
0.21 mL
0.41 mL
73
32.85
0.66 mL
1.31 mL
24
10.80
0.22 mL
0.43 mL
74
33.30
0.67 mL
1.33 mL
25
11.25
0.23 mL
0.45 mL
75
33.75
0.68 mL
1.35 mL
26
11.70
0.23 mL
0.47 mL
76
34.20
0.68 mL
1.37 mL
27
12.15
0.24 mL
0.49 mL
77
34.65
0.69 ml
1.39 mL
28
12.60
0.25 mL
0.50 mL
78
35.10
0.70 ml
1.40 mL
29
13.05
0.26 mL
0.52 mL
79
35.55
0.71 ml
1.42 ml
30
13.50
0.27 mL
0.54 mL
80
36.00
0.72 mL
1.44 mL
31
13.95
0.28 mL
0.56 mL
81
36.45
0.73 mL
1.46 mL
32
14.40
0.29 mL
0.58 mL
82
36.90
0.74 ml
1.48 mL
33
14.85
0.30 mL
0.59 mL
83
37.35
0.75 mL
1.49 mL
34
15.30
0.31 mL
0.61 ml
84
37.80
0.76 ml
1.51 mL
35
15.75
0.32 mL
0.63 mL
85
38.25
0.77 ml
1.53 mL
36
16.20
0.32 mL
0.65 mL
86
38.70
0.77 mL
1.55 mL
37
16.65
0.33 mL
0.67 mL
87
39.15
0.78 mL
1.57 mL
38
17.10
0.34 mL
0.68 mL
88
39.60
0.79 mL
1.58 mL
39
17.55
0.35 mL
0.70 mL
89
40.05
0.80 mL
1.60 mL
40
18.00
0.36 mL
0.72 ml
90
40.50
0.81 ml
1.62 mL
41
18.45
0.37 mL
0.74 mL
91
40.95
0.82 mL
1.64 mL
42
18.90
0.38 mL
0.76 mL
92
41.40
0.83 mL
1.66 mL
43
19.35
0.39 mL
0.77 mL
93
41.85
0.84 mL
1.67 mL
44
19.80
0.40 mL
0.79 mL
94
42.30
0.85 mL
1.69 mL
45
20.25
0.41 mL
0.81 mL
95
42.75
0.86 mL
1.71 mL
46
20.70
0.41 mL
0.83 mL
96
43.20
0.86 mL
1.73 mL
47
21.15
0.42 mL
0.85 mL
97
43.65
0.87 mL
1.75 mL
48
21.60
0.43 mL
0.86 mL
86
44.10
0.88 mL
1.76 mL
49
22.05
0.44 mL
0.88 mL
99
44.55
0.89 mL
1.78 mL
50
22.50
0.45 ml
.060
100
45.00
 060
1.80 ml
160
Appendix
Carprofen (Rimadyl) Injectable
50 mg/mL
DOSE:
Dogs: 4 mg/kg SC
Pet weight
mL to administer
 Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
4 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
4 mg/kg
0.45
0.04 mL
51
22.95
1.84 mL
2
0.90
0.07 mL
52
23.40
1.87 mL
3
1.35
0.11 mL
53
23.85
1.91 mL
4
1.80
0.14 mL
54
24.30
1.94 ml
5
2.25
0.18 mL
55
24.75
1.98 mL
6
2.70
0.22 mL
56
25.20
2.02 mL
7
3.15
0.25 mL
57
25.65
2.05 mL
8
3.60
0.29 mL
58
26.10
2.09 mL
6
4.05
0.32 mL
59
26.55
2.12 mL
10
4.50
0.36 mL
60
27.00
2.16 mL
11
4.95
0.40 mL
61
27.45
2.20 mL
12
5.40
0.43 mL
62
27.90
2.23 mL
13
5.85
0.47mL
63
28.35
2.27 mL
14
6.30
0.50 mL
64
28.80
2.30 mL
15
6.75
0.54 mL
65
29.25
2.34 mL
16
7.20
0.58 ml
66
29.70
2.38 ml
17
7.65
0.61 mL
67
30.15
2.41 mL
18
8.10
0.65 mL
68
30.60
2.45 mL
Appendix
19
8.55
0.68 ml
69
31.05
2.48 ml
20
9.00
0.72 mL
70
31.50
2.52 mL
21
9.45
0.76 mL
71
31.95
2.56 mL
22
9.90
0.79 mL
72
32.40
2.59 mL
23
10.35
0.83 mL
73
32.85
2.63 mL
24
10.80
0.86 mL
74
33.30
2.66 mL
25
11.25
0.90 mL
75
33.75
2.70 mL
26
11.70
0.94 mL
76
34.20
2.74 mL
27
12.15
0.97 mL
77
34.65
2.77 mL
28
12.60
1.01 mL
78
35.10
2.81 mL
29
13.05
1.04 mL
79
35.55
2.84 mL
30
13.50
1.08 mL
80
36.00
2.88 mL
31
13.95
1.12 mL
81
36.45
2.92 ml
32
14.40
1.15 mL
82
36.90
2.95 mL
33
14.85
1.19 mL
83
37.35
2.99 mL
34
15.30
1.22 mL
84
37.80
3.02 mL
35
15.75
1.26 mL
85
38.25
3.06 mL
36
16.20
1.30 mL
86
38.70
3.10 ml
37
16.65
1.33 mL
87
39.15
3.13 mL
38
17.10
1.37 mL
88
39.60
3.17 mL
39
17.55
1.40 mL
89
40.05
3.20 mL
40
18.00
1.44 mL
90
40.50
3.24 mL
41
18.45
1.48 mL
91
40.95
3.28 mL
42
18.90
1.51 mL
92
41.40
3.31 mL
43
19.35
1.55 ml
93
41.85
3.35 ml
44
19.80
1.58 mL
94
42.30
3.38 mL
45
20.25
1.62 mL
95
42.75
3.42 mL
46
20.70
1.66 ml
96
43.20
3.46 ml
47
21.15
1.69 mL
97
43.65
3.49 mL
48
21.60
1.73 mL
98
44.10
3.53 mL
49
22.05
1.76 mL
66
44.55
3.56 mL
50
22.50
1.80 mL
100
45.00
3.60 mL
Appendix | 161
Dexamethasone sp
4 mg/mL - CPR
DOSE: 4.4 mg/kg IV
Pet weight
mL to administer
 Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
4.4 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
4.4 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.50 mL
51
22.95
25.25 mL
2
0.90
 66:0
52
23.40
25.74 mL
3
1.35
1.49 mL
53
23.85
26.24 mL
4
1.80
1.98 mL
54
24.30
26.73 ml
5
2.25
2.48 mL
55
24.75
27.23 mL
6
2.70
2.97 mL
56
25.20
27.72 ml
7
3.15
3.47 mL
57
25.65
28.22 mL
8
3.60
3.96 mL
58
26.10
28.71 mL
9
4.05
4.46 mL
59
26.55
29.21 mL
10
4.50
4.95 mL
60
27.00
29.70 mL
11
4.95
5.45 mL
61
27.45
30.20 mL
12
5.40
5.94 mL
62
27.90
30.69 ml
13
5.85
6.44 mL
63
28.35
31.19 mL
14
6.30
6.93 mL
64
28.80
31.68 mlL
15
6.75
7.43 mL
65
29.25
32.18 mL
16
7.20
7.92 mL
66
29.70
32.67 mL
17
7.65
8.42 mL
67
30.15
33.17 mL
18
8.10
8.91 mL
68
30.60
33.66 mL
19
8.55
9.41 mL
69
31.05
34.16 mL
20
9.00
w 06'6
70
31.50
34.65 mL
21
9.45
10.40 mL
71
31.95
35.15 ml
22
9.90
10.89 mL
72
32.40
35.64 mL
23
10.35
11.39 mL
73
32.85
36.14 mL
24
10.80
11.88 mL
74
33.30
36.63 mL
25
11.25
12.38 mL
75
33.75
37.13 mL
26
11.70
12.87 mL
76
34.20
37.62 mL
27
12.15
13.37 mL
77
34.65
38.12 mL
28
12.60
13.86 mL
78
35.10
38.61 mL
29
13.05
14.36 mL
79
35.55
39.11 mL
30
13.50
14.85 mL
80
36.00
39.60 ml
31
13.95
15.35 mL
81
36.45
40.10 mL
32
14.40
15.84 mL
82
36.90
40.59 mL
33
14.85
16.34 mL
83
37.35
41.09 mL
34
15.30
16.83 mL
84
37.80
41.58 mL
35
15.75
17.33 mL
85
38.25
42.08 mL
36
16.20
17.82 mL
86
38.70
42.57 ml
37
16.65
18.32 mL
87
39.15
43.07 mL
38
17.10
18.81 mL
88
39.60
43.56 mL
39
17.55
19.31 mL
89
40.05
44.06 mL
40
18.00
19.80 mL
90
40.50
44.55 ml
41
18.45
20.30 mL
91
40.95
45.05 mL
42
18.90
20.79 mL
92
41.40
45.54 mL
43
19.35
21.29 mL
93
41.85
46.04 mL
44
19.80
21.78 mL
94
42.30
46.53 mL
45
20.25
22.28 mL
95
42.75
47.03 ml
46
20.70
22.77 mL
96
43.20
47.52 ml
47
21.15
23.27 mL
97
43.65
48.02 mL
48
21.60
23.76 mL
98
44.10
48.51 mL
49
22.05
24.26 mL
66
44.55
49.01 mL
50
22.50
24.75 mL
100
45.00
49.50 mL
162
| Appendix
Dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor)
and Atipamezole (Antisedan?)
0.5 mg/mL
DOSE: Dogs: 0.005 - 0.02 mg/kg IM for immobilization
· Atipamezole (Antisedan?) is used to reverse dexmedetomidine as necessary.
· To reverse dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor?), give IM an equal volume of atipamezole as the amount of
 atipamezole is 5 mg/mL vs dexmedetomidine's 0.5 mg/mL.
Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.005 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
0.005 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.45
0.005 mL
0.02 ml
51
22.95
0.23 ml
0.92 mL
2
0.90
0.01 ml
0.04 mL
52
23.40
0.23 ml
0.94 ml
3
1.35
0.01 ml
0.05 mL
53
23.85
0.24 ml
0.95 mL
4
1.80
0.02 ml
0.07 mL
54
24.30
0.24 ml
0.97 ml
5
2.25
0.02 ml
0.09 ml
55
24.75
0.25 ml
0.99 ml
6
2.70
0.03 ml
0.11 mL
56
25.20
0.25 mL
1.01 mL
7
3.15
0.03 ml
0.13 mL
57
25.65
0.26 ml
1.03 ml
8
3.60
0.04 ml
0.14 mL
58
26.10
0.26 ml
1.04 ml
9
4.05
0.04 ml
0.16 ml
59
26.55
0.27 ml
1.06 ml
10
4.50
0.05 ml
0.18 ml
60
27.00
0.27 ml
1.08 ml
11
4.95
0.05 ml
0.20 ml
61
27.45
0.27 ml
1.10 ml
12
5.40
0.05 ml
0.22 ml
62
27.90
0.28 ml
1.12 ml
13
5.85
0.06 ml
0.23 ml
63
28.35
0.28 ml
1.13 ml
14
6.30
0.06 ml
0.25 ml
64
28.80
0.29 ml
1.15 ml
15
6.75
0.07 ml
0.27 ml
65
29.25
0.29 ml
1.17 ml
16
7.20
0.07 ml
0.29 mL
66
29.70
0.30 ml
1.19 ml
1
17
7.65
0.08 ml
0.31 ml
67
30.15
0.30 ml
1.21 ml
opendix
18
8.10
0.08 ml
0.32 ml
68
30.60
0.31 ml
1.22 ml
19
8.55
0.09 ml
0.34 mL
69
31.05
0.31 mL
1.24 ml
20
9.00
0.09 mL
0.36 ml
70
31.50
0.32 ml
1.26 mL
21
9.45
0.09 ml
0.38 mL
71
31.95
0.32 ml
1.28 ml
22
9.90
0.10 ml
0.40 ml
72
32.40
0.32ml
1.30 ml
23
10.35
0.10 ml
0.41 ml
73
32.85
0.33 ml
1.31 ml
24
10.80
0.11 ml
0.43 ml
74
33.30
0.33 ml
1.33 ml
25
11.25
0.11 ml
0.45 ml
75
33.75
0.34 ml
1.35 ml
26
11.70
0.12 ml
0.47 ml
76
34.20
0.34 ml
1.37 ml
27
12.15
0.12 ml
0.49 ml
77
34.65
0.35 ml
1.39 ml
28
12.60
0.13 ml
0.50 ml
78
35.10
0.35 ml
1.40 ml
29
13.05
0.13 ml
0.52 mL
79
35.55
0.36 ml
1.42 ml
30
13.50
0.14 ml
0.54 ml
80
36.00
0.36 ml
1.44 ml
31
13.95
0.14 ml
0.56 mL
81
36.45
0.36 ml
1.46 ml
32
14.40
0.14 mL
0.58 mL
82
36.90
0.37 ml
1.48 ml
33
14.85
0.15 ml
0.59 mL
83
37.35
0.37 ml
1.49ml
34
15.30
0.15 ml
0.61 mL
84
37.80
0.38 ml
1.51 ml
35
15.75
0.16 ml
0.63 ml
85
38.25
0.38 ml
1.53ml
36
16.20
0.16 ml
0.65 ml
86
38.70
0.39 ml
1.55 ml
37
16.65
0.17 ml
0.67 ml
87
39.15
0.39 ml
1.57 ml
38
17.10
0.17 ml
0.68 ml
88
39.60
0.40 ml
1.58 ml
39
17.55
0.18 ml
0.70 ml
89
40.05
0.40 ml
1.60 ml
40
18.00
0.18 ml
0.72 ml
90
40.50
0.41 ml
1.62 ml
41
18.45
0.18 ml
0.74 ml
91
40.95
0.41 ml
1.64 ml
42
18.90
0.19 ml
0.76 ml
92
41.40
0.41 ml
1.66 ml
43
19.35
0.19 ml
0.77 ml
93
41.85
0.42 ml
1.67 ml
44
19.80
0.20 ml
0.79 mL
94
42.30
0.42 mL
1.69 ml
45
20.25
0.20 ml
0.81 mL
95
42.75
0.43 ml
1.71 mL
46
20.70
0.21 ml
0.83 ml
96
43.20
0.43 ml
1.73 ml
47
21.15
0.21 ml
0.85 mL
97
43.65
0.44 ml
1.75 ml
48
21.60
0.22 ml
0.86 mL
98
44.10
0.44 ml
1.76 ml
49
22.05
0.22 ml
0.88 ml
99
44.55
0.45 ml
1.78 ml
50
22.50
0.23 ml
0.90 ml
100
45.00
0.45 ml
1.80 ml
Appendix|163
Diphenhydramine
50 mg/mL
DOSE: 2.2 mg/kg for anesthesia protocols
· Maximum single dose is 50 mg.
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
1
0.45
0.02 mL
2
0.90
0.04 mL
3
1.35
0.06 mL
4
1.80
0.08 mL
5
2.25
0.10 mL
6
2.70
0.12 mL
7
3.15
0.14 mL
8
3.60
0.16 mL
9
4.05
0.18 mL
10
4.50
0.20 mL
11
4.95
0.22 mL
12
5.40
0.24 mL
13
5.85
0.26 mL
14
6.30
0.28 mL
15
6.75
0.30 mL
16
7.20
0.32 mL
17
7.65
0.34 mL
18
8.10
0.36 mL
Appendix
19
8.55
0.38 mL
20
9.00
0.40 mL
21
9.45
0.42 mL
22
06'6
0.44 mL
23
10.35
0.46 mL
24
10.80
0.48 mL
25
11.25
0.50 mL
26
11.70
0.51 mL
27
12.15
0.53 mL
28
12.60
0.55 mL
29
13.05
0.57 mL
30
13.50
0.59 mL
31
13.95
0.61 mL
32
14.40
0.63 mL
33
14.85
0.65 mL
34
15.30
0.67 mL
35
15.75
0.69 mL
36
16.20
0.71 mL
37
16.65
0.73 mL
38
17.10
0.75 mL
39
17.55
0.77 mL
40
18.00
0.79 mL
41
18.45
0.81 mL
42
18.90
0.83 mL
43
19.35
0.85mL
44
19.80
0.87 mL
45
20.25
0.89 mL
46
20.70
0.91 mL
47
21.15
0.93 mL
48
21.60
0.95 mL
49
22.05
0.97 mL
50
22.50
7W 660
50+
>22.5
1.00 mL
164
 Appendix
DKT-Dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor),
Ketamine, Butorphanol (Torbugesic?)
DOSE: 0.065 mL/kg for healthy fractious cats, 0.035 mL/kg for ill fractious cats
· Dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor?), ketamine, butorphanol (Torbugesic?) (DKT) is made by adding 1 mL of
dexmedetomidine (0.5 mg/mL), 1 mL of ketamine (100 mg/mL) and 1 mL of butorphanol (10 mg/mL) into a sterile vial.
as DKT.
· Atipamezole (Antisedan?) is used to reverse dexmedetomidine as necessary.
· To reverse DKT 0.035 mL/kg (ill patients), give 0.12 mL/kg atipamezole IM (1/3 volume of DKT used); to reverse
minutes if needed.)
mL of DKT
mL of DKT
mL of
Pet
mL of
Pet
to administer
to administer
atipamezole
atipamazole
weight
weight
(healthy
(ill patients)
for reversal
for reversal
patients)
Ibs
kg
0.035 mL/kg
0.012 mL/kg
Ibs
kg
0.065 mL/kg
0.021 mL/kg
1
0.45
0.02 mL
0.01 mL
1
0.45
0.03 mL
0.01 mL
2
0.90
0.03 mL
0.01 mL
2
0.90
0.06 mL
0.02 mL
3
1.35
0.05 mL
0.02 mL
3
1.35
0.09 mL
0.03 mL
4
1.80
0.06 mL
0.02 mL
4
1.80
0.12 mL
0.04 mL
5
2.25
0.08mL
0.03mL
5
2.25
0.15 mL
0.05 mL
2.70
2.70
0.18 mL
0.06 mL
6
0.09 mL
0.03 mL
6
opendix
7
3.15
0.11 mL
0.04 mL
7
3.15
0.20 mL
0.07 mL
8
3.60
0.13 mL
0.04 mL
8
3.60
0.23 mL
0.08 mL
9
4.05
0.14 mL
0.05 mL
9
4.05
0.26 mL
0.09 mL
10
4.50
0.16 mL
0.05 mL
10
4.50
0.29 mL
0.09 mL
11
4.95
0.17 mL
0.06 mL
11
4.95
0.32 mL
0.10 mL
12
5.40
0.19 ml
0.06 ml
12
5.40
0.35 mL
0.11 mL
13
5.85
0.20 mL
0.07 mL
13
5.85
0.38 mL
0.12 mL
14
6.30
0.22 mL
0.08 mL
14
6.30
0.41 mL
0.13 mL
15
6.75
0.24 mL
0.08 mL
15
6.75
0.44 mL
0.14 mL
16
7.20
0.25 mL
0.09 mL
16
7.20
0.47 mL
0.15 mL
17
7.65
0.27 mL
0.09 mL
17
7.65
0.50 mL
0.16 mL
18
8.10
0.28 mL
0.10 mL
18
8.10
0.53 mL
0.17 mL
19
8.55
0.30 mL
0.10 mL
19
8.55
0.56 mL
0.18 mL
20
9.00
0.32 mL
0.11 mL
20
9.00
0.59 mL
0.19 mL
21
9.45
0.33 mL
0.11 mL
21
9.45
0.61 mL
0.20 mL
22
9.90
0.35 mL
0.12 mL
22
9.90
0.64 mL
0.21 mL
23
10.35
0.36 mL
0.12 mL
23
10.35
0.67 mL
0.22 mL
24
10.80
0.38 mL
0.13 ml
24
10.80
0.70 mL
0.23 mL
25
11.25
0.39 mL
0.14 ml
25
11.25
0.73 ml
0.24 ml
26
11.70
0.41 mL
0.14 ml
26
11.70
0.76 mL
0.25 mL
27
12.15
0.43 mL
0.15 mL
27
12.15
0.79 mL
0.26 mL
28
12.60
0.44 mL
0.15 mL
28
12.60
0.82 mL
0.26 mL
29
13.05
0.46 mL
0.16 mL
29
13.05
0.85 mL
0.27 mL
30
13.50
0.47 mL
0.16 mL
30
13.50
0.88 mL
0.28 mL
Appendix  | 
165
Dobutamine
25 mg dobutamine in 1 liter normal saline for IV drip (0.025 mg/mL)
DOSE:1-5μg/kg/min
Pet weight
mL/hr to administer
Pet weight
mL/hr to administer
Ibs
kg
1 μg/kg/min 
5 μg/kg/min
Ibs
kg
1 μg/kg/min
5 μg/kg/min
1
0.45
1 mL/hr
 5 mL/hr
51
22.95
55 mL/hr
275 mL/hr
2
0.90
2 mL/hr
11 mL/hr
52
23.40
56 mL/hr
281 mL/hr
3
1.35
3 mL/hr
16 mL/hr
53
23.85
57 mL/hr
286 mL/hr
4
1.80
4 mL/hr
22 mL/hr
54
24.30
58 mL/hr
292 mL/hr
5
2.25
 5 mL/hr
27 mLhr
55
24.75
59 mL/hr
297 mL/hr
6
2.70
6 mL/hr
32 mL/hr
56
25.20
60 mL/hr
302 mL/hr
7
3.15
8 mL/hr
38 mL/hr
57
25.65
62 mL/hr
308 mL/hr
8
3.60
9 mL/hr
43 mL/hr
58
26.10
63 mL/hr
313 mL/hr
9
4.05
10 mL/hr
49 mL/hr
59
26.55
64 mL/hr
319 mL/hr
10
4.50
11 mL/hr
54 mL/hr
60
27.00
65 mL/hr
324 mL/hr
11
4.95
12 mL/hr
59 mL/hr
61
27.45
66 mL/hr
329 mL/hr
12
5.40
13 mL/hr
65 mL/hr
62
27.90
67 mL/hr
335 mL/hr
13
5.85
14 mL/hr
70 mL/hr
63
28.35
68 mL/hr
340 mL/hr
14
6.30
15 mL/hr
76 mL/hr
64
28.80
69 mL/hr
346 mL/hr
15
6.75
16 mL/hr
81 mL/hr
65
29.25
70 mL/hr
351 mL/hr
16
7.20
17 mL/hr
86 mL/hr
66
29.70
71 mL/hr
356 mL/hr
17
7.65
18 mL/hr
92 mL/hr
67
30.15
72 mL/hr
362 mL/hr
18
8.10
19 mL/hr
97 mL/hr
68
30.60
73 mL/hr
367 mL/hr
pendix
19
8.55
21 mL/hr
103 mL/hr
69
31.05
75 mL/hr
373 mL/hr
20
9.00
22 mL/hr
108 mL/hr
70
31.50
76 mL/hr
378 mL/hr
21
9.45
23 mL/hr
113 mL/hr
71
31.95
77 mL/hr
383 mL/hr
22
06'6
 24 mL/hr
119 mL/hr
72
32.40
78 mL/hr
389 mL/hr
23
10.35
25 mL/hr
124 mL/hr
73
32.85
79 mL/hr
394mL/hr
P
24
10.80
26 mL/hr
130 mL/hr
74
33.30
80 mL/hr
400 mL/hr
25
11.25
27 mL/hr
135 mL/hr
75
33.75
81 mL/hr
405mL/hr
26
11.70
28 mL/hr
140 mL/hr
76
34.20
82 mL/hr
410 mL/hr
27
12.15
29 mL/hr
146 mL/hr
77
34.65
83 mL/hr
416 mL/hr
28
12.60
30 mL/hr
151 mL/hr
78
35.10
84 mL/hr
421 mL/hr
29
13.05
31 mL/hr
157 mL/hr
79
35.55
85 mL/hr
427 mL/hr
30
13.50
32 mL/hr
162 mL/hr
80
36.00
86 mL/hr
432 mL/hr
31
13.95
33 mL/hr
167 mL/hr
81
36.45
87 mLhr
437 mL/hr
32
14.40
35 mL/hr
173 mL/hr
82
36.90
89 mL/hr
443 mL/hr
33
14.85
36 mL/hr
178 mL/hr
83
37.35
90 mL/hr
448 mL/hr
34
15.30
37 mL/hr
184 mL/hr
84
37.80
91 mL/hr
454 mL/hr
35
15.75
38 mL/hr
189 mL/hr
85
38.25
92 mL/hr
459 mL/hr
36
16.20
39 mL/hr
194 mL/hr
86
38.70
93 mL/hr
464 mL/hr
37
16.65
40 mL/hr
200 mL/hr
87
39.15
94 mL/hr
470 mL/hr
38
17.10
41 mL/hr
205 mL/hr
88
39.60
95 mL/hr
475 mL/hr
39
17.55
42 mL/hr
211 mL/hr
89
40.05
96 mL/hr
481 mL/hr
40
18.00
43 mL/hr
216 mL/hr
90
40.50
97 mL/hr
486 mL/hr
41
18.45
44 mL/hr
221 mL/hr
91
40.95
98 mL/hr
491 mL/hr
42
18.90
45 mL/hr
227 mL/hr
92
41.40
99 mL/hr
497 mL/hr
43
19.35
46 mL/hr
232 mL/hr
93
41.85
100 mL/hr
502mL/hr
44
19.80
48 mL/hr
238 mL/hr
94
42.30
102 mL/hr
508 mL/hr
45
20.25
49 mL/hr
243 mL/hr
95
42.75
103mL/hr
513 mL/hr
46
20.70
50 mL/hr
248 mL/hr
96
43.20
104 mL/hr
518 mL/hr
47
21.15
51 mL/hr
254 mL/hr
97
43.65
105 mL/hr
524 mL/hr
48
21.60
52 mL/hr
259 mL/hr
98
44.10
106 mL/hr
529 mL/hr
49
22.05
53 mL/hr
265 mL/hr
66
44.55
107 mL/hr
535 mL/hr
50
22.50
54 mL/hr
270 mL/hr
100
45.00
108 mL/hr
540 mL/hr
166
| Appendix
Ephedrine
5 mg/mL-AMEP
DOSE: 0.1 - 0.2 mg/kg for Anesthesia Monitoring and Emergency Algorithm
· Limit to three doses-start at low end.
· Stock solution is 50 mg/mL (0.1 mL stock solution added to 0.9 ml of sterile saline = 5 mg/ml solution).
Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.03 mg/kg
0.1 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
0.03 mg/kg
0.1 mg/kg
0.45
0.003 mL
0.01 mL
51
22.95
0.14 mL
0.46 mL
2
0.90
0.01 mL
0.02 mL
52
23.40
0.14 mL
0.47 mL
3
1.35
0.01 mL
0.03 mL
53
23.85
0.14 mL
0.48 mL
4
1.80
0.01 mL
0.04 ml
54
24.30
0.15 mL
0.49 mL
5
2.25
0.01 mL
0.05 mL
55
24.75
0.15 mL
0.50 mL
6
2.70
0.02 mL
0.05 mL
56
25.20
0.15 mL
0.50 mL
7
3.15
0.02 mL
0.06 mL
57
25.65
0.15 mL
0.51 mL
8
3.60
0.02 mL
0.07 ml
58
26.10
0.16 mL
0.52 mL
9
4.05
0.02 mL
0.08 ml
59
26.55
0.16 mL
0.53 mL
10
4.50
0.03 mL
0.09 mL
60
27.00
0.16 mL
0.54 mL
11
4.95
0.03 mL
0.10 mL
61
27.45
0.16 mL
0.55 mL
12
5.40
0.03 mL
0.11 mL
62
27.90
0.17 mL
0.56 mL
13
5.85
0.04 mL
0.12 mL
63
28.35
0.17 mL
0.57 mL
14
6.30
0.04 mL
0.13 ml
64
28.80
0.17 ml
0.58 mL
15
6.75
0.04 mL
0.14 ml
65
29.25
0.18 mL
0.59 mL
16
7.20
0.04 mL
0.14 mL
66
29.70
0.18 mL
0.59 mL
17
7.65
0.05 mL
0.15 ml
67
30.15
0.18 mL
0.60 mL
18
8.10
0.05 mL
0.16 mL
68
30.60
0.18 mL
0.61 mL
Appendix
19
8.55
0.05 mL
0.17 mL
69
31.05
0.19 mL
0.62 mL
20
00.6
0.05 mL
0.18 ml
70
31.50
0.19 ml
0.63 mL
21
9.45
0.06 mL
0.19 mL
71
31.95
0.19 mL
0.64 mL
22
9.90
0.06 mL
0.20 mL
72
32.40
0.19 mL
0.65 mL
23
10.35
0.06 mL
0.21 mL
73
32.85
0.20 mL
0.66 mL
24
10.80
0.06 mL
0.22 mL
74
33.30
0.20 mL
0.67 mL
25
11.25
0.07 mL
0.23 mL
75
33.75
0.20 mL
0.68 mL
26
11.70
0.07 mL
0.23 mL
76
34.20
0.21 mL
0.68 mL
27
12.15
0.07 mL
0.24 mL
77
34.65
0.21 mL
0.69 mL
28
12.60
0.08 mL
0.25 ml
78
35.10
0.21 mL
0.70 mL
29
13.05
0.08 mL
0.26 ml
79
35.55
0.21 ml
0.71 ml
30
13.50
0.08 mL
0.27 mL
80
36.00
0.22 mL
0.72 mL
31
13.95
0.08 mL
0.28 mL
81
36.45
0.22 mL
0.73 mL
32
14.40
0.09 mL
0.29 mL
82
36.90
0.22 mL
0.74 ml
33
14.85
0.09 mL
0.30 mL
83
37.35
0.22 mL
0.75 mL
34
15.30
0.09 mL
0.31 ml
84
37.80
0.23 mL
0.76 mL
35
15.75
0.09 mL
0.32 mL
85
38.25
0.23 mL
0.77 mL
36
16.20
0.10 mL
0.32 ml
86
38.70
0.23 mL
0.77 mL
37
16.65
0.10 mL
0.33 mL
87
39.15
0.23 mL
0.78 mL
38
17.10
0.10 mL
0.34 ml
88
39.60
0.24 mL
0.79 mL
39
17.55
0.11 mL
0.35 ml
68
40.05
0.24 mL
0.80 mL
40
18.00
0.11 mL
0.36 mL
90
40.50
0.24 mL
0.81 mL
41
18.45
0.11 mL
0.37 mL
91
40.95
0.25 mL
0.82 mL
42
18.90
0.11 mL
0.38 ml
92
41.40
0.25 mL
0.83 mL
43
19.35
0.12 mL
0.39 mL
93
41.85
0.25 mL
0.84 mL
44
19.80
0.12 mL
0.40 mL
94
42.30
0.25 mL
0.85 mL
45
20.25
0.12 mL
0.41 ml
95
42.75
0.26 ml
0.86 mL
46
20.70
0.12 mL
0.41 mL
96
43.20
0.26 mL
0.86 mL
47
21.15
0.13 mL
0.42 mL
97
43.65
0.26 mL
0.87 mL
48
21.60
0.13 mL
0.43 ml
98
44.10
0.26 mL
0.88 mL
49
22.05
0.13 mL
0.44 mL
99
44.55
0.27 mL
0.89 mL
50
22.50
0.14 mL
0.45 mL
100
45.00
0.27 mL
0.90 mL
Appendix |
167
Epinephrine
1:1,000 = 1 mg/mL-
-CPR
LOW D0SE: 0.01 - 0.02 mg/kg IV
HIGH DoSE: 0.1 - 0.2 mg/kg IV for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Pet weight
Low dose
High dose
Ibs
kg
0.01 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.005 ml
0.01 ml
0.09 mL
2
0.90
0.01 mL
0.02 mL
0.18 mL
3
1.35
0.01 mL
0.03 mL
0.27 ml
1.80
0.02 mL
0.04ml
0.36 mL
5
2.25
0.02 mL
0.05 mL
0.45 mL
6
2.70
0.03 ml
0.05 ml
0.54 mL
7
3.15
0.03 ml
0.06 ml
0.63 mL
8
3.60
0.04 ml
0.07 ml
0.72 mL
9
4.05
0.04 mL
0.08 ml
0.81 mL
10
4.50
0.05 mL
0.09 mL
0.90 mL
11
4.95
0.05 ml
0.10 mL
0.99 mL
12
5.40
0.05 ml
0.11 mL
1.08 ml
13
5.85
0.06 ml
0.12 ml
1.17 mL
14
6.30
0.06 mL
0.13 mL
1.26 mL
15
6.75
0.07 ml
0.14 ml
1.35 mL
16
7.20
0.07 mL
0.14 mL
1.44 ml
17
7.65
0.08 ml
0.15 mL
1.53 mL
ppendix
18
8.10
0.08 ml
0.16 ml
1.62 mL
19
8.55
0.09 ml
0.17 mL
1.71 mL
20
9.00
0.09 mL
0.18 ml
1.80 mL
21
9.45
0.09 ml
0.19 mL
1.89 mL
22
06'6
0.10 mL
0.20 mL
1.98 mL
23
10.35
0.10 ml
0.21 ml
2.07 ml
24
10.80
0.11 ml
0.22ml
2.16 mL
25
11.25
0.11 mL
0.23 mL
2.25 mL
26
11.70
0.12 mL
0.23 mL
2.34 mL
27
12.15
0.12 mL
0.24ml
2.43 ml
28
12.60
0.13 mL
0.25 mL
2.52 mL
29
13.05
0.13 ml
0.26 ml
2.61 mL
30
13.50
0.14 mL
0.27 ml
2.70 ml
31
13.95
0.14 mL
0.28 ml
2.79 ml
32
14.40
0.14 mL
0.29 ml
2.88 mL
33
14.85
0.15 mL
0.30 mL
2.97 ml
34
15.30
0.15 mL
0.31 ml
3.06 mL
35
15.75
0.16 ml
0.32 ml
3.15 mL
36
16.20
0.16 mL
0.32 mL
3.24 mL
37
16.65
0.17 ml
0.33 mL
3.33 mL
38
17.10
0.17 mL
0.34 ml
3.42 ml
39
17.55
0.18 ml
0.35 mL
3.51 mL
40
18.00
0.18 ml
0.36 ml
3.60 mL
41
18.45
0.18 ml
0.37 ml
3.69 mL
42
18.90
0.19 mL
0.38ml
3.78 mL
43
19.35
0.19 mL
0.39 ml
3.87 mL
44
19.80
0.20 ml
0.40 ml
3.96 mL
45
20.25
0.20 mL
0.41 mL
4.05 ml
46
20.70
0.21 ml
0.41 ml
4.14 mL
47
21.15
0.21 ml
0.42 ml
4.23 ml
48
21.60
0.22 mL
0.43 mL
4.32 ml
49
22.05
0.22 mL
0.44 mL
4.41 mL
50
22.50
0.23 ml
0.45 mL
4.50 mL
168 | Appendix
Epinephrine, cont'd
1:1,000 = 1 mg/mL CPR
LOW D0SE: 0.01 - 0.02 mg/kg IV
HIGH DoSE: 0.1 - 0.2 mg/kg IV for cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Pet weight
Low dose
High dose
Ibs
kg
0.01 mg/kg
0.02 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
51
22.95
0.23 ml
0.46 mL
4.59 mL
52
23.40
0.23mL
0.47 mL
4.68 ml
53
23.85
0.24 ml
0.48 mL
4.77 ml
54
24.30
0.24 ml
0.49 mL
4.86 mL
55
24.75
0.25 mL
0.50 mL
4.95 mL
56
25.20
0.25 ml
0.50 mL
5.04 mL
57
25.65
0.26 ml
0.51 mL
5.13 mL
58
26.10
0.26 ml
0.52 mL
5.22 ml
59
26.55
0.27 mL
0.53 mL
5.31 mL
60
27.00
0.27 ml
0.54 ml
5.40 ml
61
27.45
0.27 ml
0.55 mL
5.49 ml
62
27.90
0.28 ml
0.56 mL
5.58 ml
63
28.35
0.28 ml
0.57 mL
5.67 mL
64
28.80
0.29 ml
0.58 mL
5.76 mL
65
29.25
0.29 mL
0.59 mL
5.85 mL
66
29.70
0.30 ml
0.59 mL
5.94 ml
67
30.15
0.30 ml
0.60 mL
6.03 ml
68
30.60
0.31 ml
0.61 mL
6.12 ml
Appendix
69
31.05
0.31 ml
0.62 mL
6.21 ml
70
31.50
0.32 mL
0.63 mL
6.30 mL
71
31.95
0.32 ml
0.64 mL
6.39 mL
72
32.40
0.32 ml
0.65 mL
6.48 ml
73
32.85
0.33 ml
0.66 mL
6.57 mL
74
33.30
0.33 ml
0.67 ml
6.66 mL
75
33.75
0.34 mL
0.68 mL
6.75 mL
76
34.20
0.34 ml
0.68 mL
6.84 ml
77
34.65
0.35 ml
0.69 mL
6.93 mL
78
35.10
0.35 mL
0.70 mL
7.02 mL
79
35.55
0.36 ml
0.71 mL
7.11 mL
80
36.00
0.36 ml
0.72 mL
7.20 ml
81
36.45
0.36 ml
0.73 mL
7.29 ml
82
36.90
0.37 mL
0.74 mL
7.38 mL
83
37.35
0.37 ml
0.75 mL
7.47 ml
84
37.80
0.38 ml
0.76 mL
7.56 mL
85
38.25
0.38 ml
0.77 mL
7.65 mL
86
38.70
0.39 mL
0.77 ml
7.74 mL
87
39.15
0.39 mL
0.78 mL
7.83 ml
88
39.60
0.40 mL
0.79 mL
7.92 mL
89
40.05
0.40 ml
0.80 mL
8.01 mL
90
40.50
0.41 ml
0.81 mL
8.10 mL
91
40.95
0.41 ml
0.82 ml
8.19 mL
92
41.40
0.41 ml
0.83 mL
8.28ml
93
41.85
0.42 mL
0.84 mL
8.37 mL
94
42.30
0.42 ml
0.85 mL
8.46 ml
95
42.75
0.43 ml
0.86 ml
8.55 mL
96
43.20
0.43 ml
0.86 ml
8.64 mL
97
43.65
0.44 ml
0.87 ml
8.73 ml
98
44.10
0.44 mL
0.88 mL
8.82 mL
99
44.55
0.45 mL
0.89 mL
8.91 mL
100
45.00
0.45 ml
0.90 mL
9.00 mL
Appendix|169
Fentanyl Injectable
0.05 mg/mL
 DOSE: 0.003 mg/kg IV loading dose. Must be followed by 0.02 - 0.06 μg/kg/min constant rate infusion
(CRl)--refer to CRl mixing instructions, page 21.
Pet
mL/hr to administer
mL to administer
weight
for CRI
for IV loading dose
Ibs
kg
0.02 μg/kg/min
0.06 μg/kg/min
0.003 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.45 mL
1.35 mL
0.03 mL
2
0.90
0.90 mL
2.70 ml
0.05 mL
3
1.35
1.35 mL
4.05 mL
0.08 ml
4
1.80
1.80 mL
5.40 ml
0.11 mL
5
2.25
2.25 ml
6.75 ml
0.14 mL
6
2.70
2.70 ml
8.10 mL
0.16 ml
7
3.15
3.15 ml
9.45 mL
0.19 ml
8
3.60
3.60 ml
10.80 ml
0.22 ml
9
4.05
4.05 ml
12.15 mL
0.24 ml
10
4.50
4.50 ml
13.50 ml
0.27 ml
11
4.95
4.95 ml
14.85 ml
0.30 ml
12
5.40
5.40 ml
16.20 ml
0.32 ml
13
5.85
5.85 mL
17.55 mL
0.35 mL
14
6.30
6.30 ml
18.90 ml
0.38 ml
15
6.75
6.75 ml
20.25 mL
0.41 ml
16
7.20
7.20 ml
21.60 ml
0.43 mL
17
7.65
7.65 mL
22.95 mL
0.46 ml
Appendix
18
8.10
8.10 ml
24.30 mL
0.49 ml
19
8.55
8.55 ml
25.65 ml
0.51 ml
20
9.00
9.00 ml
27.00 ml
0.54 mL
21
9.45
9.45 mL
28.35 mL
0.57 ml
22
066
9.90 ml
29.70 ml
0.59 ml
23
10.35
10.35 ml
31.05 ml
0.62 ml
24
10.80
10.80 mL
32.40 mL
0.65 mL
25
11.25
11.25 mL
33.75 ml
0.68 mL
26
11.70
11.70 ml
35.10 ml
0.70 ml
27
12.15
12.15 mL
36.45 mL
0.73 mL
28
12.60
12.60 ml
37.80 mL
0.76 ml
29
13.05
13.05 ml
39.15 mL
0.78 ml
30
13.50
13.50 ml
40.50 ml
0.81 ml
31
13.95
13.95 mL
41.85 mL
0.84 mL
32
14.40
14.40 ml
43.20 ml
0.86 ml
33
14.85
14.85 ml
44.55 mL
0.89 ml
34
15.30
15.30 mL
45.90 mL
0.92 mL
35
15.75
15.75 mL
47.25 mL
0.95 ml
36
16.20
16.20 ml
48.60 mL
0.97 ml
37
16.65
16.65 ml
49.95 mL
1.00 ml
38
17.10
17.10 mL
51.30 mL
1.03 ml
39
17.55
17.55 mL
52.65 mL
1.05 mL
40
18.00
18.00 ml
54.00 mL
1.08 mL
41
18.45
18.45 mL
55.35 mL
1.11 mL
42
18.90
18.90 mL
56.70 mL
1.13 ml
43
19.35
19.35 mL
58.05 mL
1.16 ml
44
19.80
19.80 ml
59.40 ml
1.19 ml
45
20.25
20.25 mL
60.75 ml
1.22 mL
46
20.70
20.70 ml
62.10 ml
1.24 ml
47
21.15
21.15 mL
63.45 mL
1.27 mL
48
21.60
21.60 ml
64.80 ml
1.30 ml
49
22.05
22.05 ml
66.15 ml
1.32 ml
50
22.50
22.50 ml
67.50 ml
1.35 ml
170 | Appendix
Fentanyl Injectable, cont'd
0.05 mg/mL
DOSE: 0.003 mg/kg IV loading dose. Must be followed by 0.02 - 0.06 μg/kg/min constant rate infusion
(CRl)—-refer to CRl mixing instructions, page 21.
Pet
mL/hr to administer
 mL to administer
weight
for CRI
for IV loading dose
Ibs
kg
0.02 μg/kg/min
0.06 μg/kg/min
0.003 mg/kg
51
22.95
22.95 ml
68.85 mL
1.38 mL
52
23.40
23.40 ml
70.20 mL
1.40 ml
53
23.85
23.85 ml
71.55 mL
1.43 mL
54
24.30
24.30 ml
72.90 mL
1.46 mL
55
24.75
24.75 ml
74.25 ml
1.49 ml
56
25.20
25.20 ml
75.60 ml
1.51 mL
57
25.65
25.65 ml
76.95 ml
1.54 ml
58
26.10
26.10 ml
78.30 ml
1.57 mL
59
26.55
26.55 mL
79.65 mL
1.59 ml
60
27.00
27.00 ml
81.00 ml
1.62 mL
61
27.45
27.45 ml
82.35 mL
1.65 mL
62
27.90
27.90 ml
83.70 mL
1.67 ml
63
28.35
28.35 mL
85.05 mL
1.70 ml
64
28.80
28.80 ml
86.40 ml
1.73 mL
65
29.25
29.25 ml
87.75 ml
1.76 mL
66
29.70
29.70 ml
89.10 ml
1.78 ml
67
30.15
30.15 ml
90.45 mL
1.81 mL
68
30.60
30.60 mL
91.80 mL
1.84 ml
Appendix
69
31.05
31.05 ml
93.15 ml
1.86 ml
70
31.50
31.50 ml
94.50 mL
1.89 mL
71
31.95
31.95 ml
95.85 ml
1.92 mL
72
32.40
32.40 ml
97.20 ml
1.94 mL
73
32.85
32.85 ml
98.55 ml
1.97 ml
74
33.30
33.30 ml
0666
2.00 mL
75
33.75
33.75 ml
101.25 mL
2.03 ml
76
34.20
34.20 ml
102.60 ml
2.05 ml
77
34.65
34.65 ml
103.95 mL
2.08 mL
78
35.10
35.10 ml
105.30 ml
2.11 mL
79
35.55
35.55 ml
106.65 ml
2.13 ml
80
36.00
36.00 ml
108.00 ml
2.16 ml
81
36.45
36.45 ml
109.35 mL
2.19 ml
82
36.90
36.90 ml
110.70 ml
2.21 ml
83
37.35
37.35 ml
112.05 ml
2.24 ml
84
37.80
37.80 ml
113.40 mL
2.27 mL
85
38.25
38.25 ml
114.75 ml
2.30 ml
86
38.70
38.70 ml
116.10 ml
2.32 ml
87
39.15
39.15 ml
117.45 ml
2.35 ml
88
39.60
39.60 mL
118.80 mL
2.38 ml
89
40.05
40.05 mL
120.15 ml
2.40 ml
06
40.50
40.50 ml
121.50 mL
2.43 mL
91
40.95
40.95 mL
122.85 mL
2.46 ml
92
41.40
41.40 ml
124.20 ml
2.48 ml
93
41.85
41.85 ml
125.55 ml
2.51 ml
94
42.30
42.30 ml
126.90 ml
2.54 ml
95
42.75
42.75 mL
128.25 mL
2.57 ml
96
43.20
43.20 ml
129.60 ml
2.59 ml
97
43.65
43.65 ml
130.95 mL
2.62 mL
98
44.10
44.10 ml
132.30 ml
2.65 mL
99
44.55
44.55 ml
133.65 ml
2.67 ml
100
45.00
45.00 ml
135.00 ml
2.70 ml
Appendix |171
Glycopyrrolate
0.2 mg/mL
 DOSE: 0.01 mg/kg for Anesthesia Monitoring and Emergency Protocol
· Glycopyrrolate can cause an initial slowing of the heart rate when given IV.
Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.01 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
0.01 mg/kg
0.45
0.02 mL
51
22.95
1.15 mL
2
0.90
0.05 mL
52
23.40
1.17 mL
3
1.35
0.07 mL
53
23.85
1.19 mL
4
1.80
0.09 mL
54
24.30
1.22 mL
5
2.25
0.11 mL
55
24.75
1.24 mL
6
2.70
0.14 mL
56
25.20
1.26 mL
7
3.15
0.16 mL
57
25.65
1.28 mL
8
3.60
0.18 ml
58
26.10
1.31 ml
9
4.05
0.20 mL
59
26.55
1.33 mL
10
4.50
0.23 mL
60
27.00
1.35 mL
11
4.95
0.25 mL
61
27.45
1.37 mL
12
5.40
0.27 mL
62
27.90
1.40 mL
13
5.85
0.29 mL
63
28.35
1.42 mL
14
6.30
0.32 mL
64
28.80
1.44 mL
15
6.75
0.34 mL
65
29.25
1.46 mL
16
7.20
0.36 mL
66
29.70
1.49 mL
17
7.65
0.38 mL
67
30.15
1.51 mL
18
8.10
0.41 mL
68
30.60
1.53 mL
19
8.55
0.43 mL
69
31.05
1.55 mL
20
9.00
0.45 mL
70
31.50
1.58 mL
21
9.45
0.47 mL
71
31.95
1.60 mL
22
066
0.50 mL
72
32.40
1.62 ml
23
10.35
0.52 mL
73
32.85
1.64 mL
24
10.80
0.54 mL
74
33.30
1.67 mL
25
11.25
0.56 mL
75
33.75
1.69 mL
26
11.70
0.59 mL
76
34.20
1.71 mL
27
12.15
0.61 mL
77
34.65
1.73 mL
28
12.60
0.63 mL
78
35.10
1.76 mL
29
13.05
0.65 mL
79
35.55
1.78 mL
30
13.50
0.68 mL
80
36.00
1.80 mL
31
13.95
0.70 mL
81
36.45
1.82 mL
32
14.40
0.72 mL
82
36.90
1.85 mL
33
14.85
0.74 mL
83
37.35
1.87 mL
34
15.30
0.77 mL
84
37.80
1.89 mL
35
15.75
0.79 mL
85
38.25
1.91 mL
36
16.20
0.81 mL
86
38.70
1.94 mL
37
16.65
0.83 mL
87
39.15
1.96 mL
38
17.10
0.86 mL
88
39.60
1.98 mL
39
17.55
0.88 mL
89
40.05
2.00 mL
40
18.00
0.90 mL
90
40.50
2.03 mL
41
18.45
0.92 mL
91
40.95
2.05 mL
42
18.90
0.95 mL
92
41.40
2.07 mL
43
19.35
0.97 mL
93
41.85
2.09 mL
44
19.80
0.99 mL
94
42.30
2.12 mL
45
20.25
1.01 mL
95
42.75
2.14 mL
46
20.70
1.04 mL
96
43.20
2.16 mL
47
21.15
1.06 mL
97
43.65
2.18 mL
48
21.60
1.08 mL
86
44.10
2.21 mL
49
22.05
1.10 mL
99
44.55
2.23 mL
50
22.50
1.13 mL
100
45.00
2.25 mL
172
Appendix
Hetastarch
6% in 0.9% Sodium Chloride
DOSE:
Dogs: 5 mL/kg IV bolus up to 20 mL/kg/day
Cats: 2.5 mL/kg IV bolus up to 10 mL/kg/day
mL to
mL to
mL to
Pet weight
administer
administer
Pet weight
administer
in cats
in dogs
in dogs
Ibs
kg
2.5 ml/kg
5 ml/kg
Ibs
kg
5 ml/kg
1
0.45
1.13 mL
2.25 mL
51
22.95
115mL
2
0.90
2.25 mL
4.50 mL
52
23.40
117 mL
3
1.35
3.38 mL
6.75 mL
53
23.85
119 mL
4
1.80
4.50 ml
9.00 mL
54
24.30
122 mL
5
2.25
5.63 mL
11.25 mL
55
24.75
124 mL
6
2.70
6.75 mL
13.50 mL
56
25.20
126 mL
7
3.15
7.88 mL
15.75 mL
57
25.65
128 mL
8
3.60
9.00 mL
18.00 mL
58
26.10
131 mL
9
4.05
10.13 mL
20.25 mL
59
26.55
133 mL
10
4.50
11.25 ml
22.50 ml
60
27.00
135 mL
11
4.95
12.38 mL
24.75 mL
61
27.45
137 mL
12
5.40
13.50 mL
27.00 mL
62
27.90
140 mL
13
5.85
14.63 mL
29.25 mL
63
28.35
142 mL
14
6.30
15.75 mL
31.50 ml
64
28.80
144 mL
15
6.75
16.88 mL
33.75 mL
65
29.25
146 mL
16
7.20
18.00 ml
36.00 mL
66
29.70
149 mL
17
7.65
19.13 ml
38.25 mL
67
30.15
151 mL
Appendix
18
8.10
20.25 mL
40.50 mL
68
30.60
153 mL
19
8.55
21.38 ml
42.75 ml
69
31.05
155 mL
20
9.00
22.50 ml
45.00 mL
70
31.50
158 mL
21
9.45
23.63 mL
47.25 mL
71
31.95
160 mL
22
9.90
24.75 mL
49.50 mL
72
32.40
162 mL
23
10.35
25.88 mL
51.75 mL
73
32.85
164 mL
24
10.80
27.00 mL
54.00 mL
74
33.30
167 mL
25
11.25
28.13 mL
56.25 mL
75
33.75
169 mL
26
11.70
58.50 mL
76
34.20
171 mL
27
12.15
60.75 mL
77
34.65
173 mL
28
12.60
63.00 mL
78
35.10
176 mL
29
13.05
65.25 mL
79
35.55
178 mL
30
13.50
67.50 ml
80
36.00
180 mL
31
13.95
69.75 mL
81
36.45
182 mL
32
14.40
72.00 mL
82
36.90
185 mL
33
14.85
74.25 mL
83
37.35
187 mL
34
15.30
76.50 mL
84
37.80
189 mL
35
15.75
78.75 mL
85
38.25
191 mL
36
16.20
81.00 mL
86
38.70
194 mL
37
16.65
83.25 mL
87
39.15
196 mL
38
17.10
85.50 mL
88
39.60
198 mL
39
17.55
87.75 mL
89
40.05
200 mL
40
18.00
90.00 mL
06
40.50
203 mL
41
18.45
92.25 mL
91
40.95
205 mL
42
18.90
94.50 mL
92
41.40
207 mL
43
19.35
96.75 mL
93
41.85
209 mL
44
19.80
066
94
42.30
212 mL
45
20.25
101 mL
95
42.75
214 mL
46
20.70
104 mL
96
43.20
216 mL
47
21.15
106mL
97
43.65
218 mL
48
21.60
108 mL
98
44.10
221 mL
49
22.05
110 mL
99
44.55
223 mL
50
22.50
113 mL
100
45.00
225 mL
Appendix|173
Hydromorphone
2 mg/mL
DOSE: Dogs: 0.05 - 0.2 mg/kg IM, IV, SC for anesthesia; 0.03 - 0.04 mg/kg for epidurals
Cats: 0.05 - 0.1 mg/kg IM, IV, SC for anesthesia
Pet weight
mL to administer
For epidurals
Ibs
kg
0.05 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.03 mg/kg
0.04 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.01 ml
0.05 ml
0.01 mL
0.01 ml
2
0.90
0.02 mL
0.09 ml
0.01 mL
0.02 mL
3
1.35
0.03 mL
0.14 ml
0.02 mL
0.03 mL
4
1.80
0.05 ml
0.18 ml
0.03ml
0.04 ml
5
2.25
0.06 ml
0.23 ml
0.03 mL
0.05 mL
6
2.70
0.07 ml
0.27 ml
0.04 mL
0.05 ml
7
3.15
0.08 ml
0.32 ml
0.05 mL
0.06 ml
8
3.60
0.09 ml
0.36 ml
0.05 mL
0.07 ml
9
4.05
0.10 mL
0.41 ml
0.06 mL
0.08 ml
10
4.50
0.11 mL
0.45 ml
0.07 ml
0.09 mL
11
4.95
0.12 ml
0.50 ml
0.07 mL
0.10 ml
12
5.40
0.14 ml
0.54 ml
0.08 ml
0.11 ml
13
5.85
0.15 ml
0.59 ml
0.09 mL
0.12 mL
14
6.30
0.16 mL
0.63 mL
0.09 mL
0.13 mL
15
6.75
0.17 ml
0.68 ml
0.10 mL
0.14 ml
16
7.20
0.18 ml
0.72 ml
0.11 mL
0.14 ml
17
7.65
0.19 ml
0.77 ml
0.11 mL
0.15 mL
18
8.10
0.20 ml
0.81 ml
0.12 mL
0.16 ml
ppendix
19
8.55
0.21 ml
0.86 ml
0.13mL
0.17 mL
20
9.00
0.23 ml
0.90 mL
0.14 mL
0.18 ml
21
9.45
0.24 ml
0.95 ml
0.14 mL
0.19 ml
22
9.90
0.25 ml
0.99 ml
0.15 mL
0.20 ml
23
10.35
0.26 ml
1.04 ml
0.16 ml
0.21 ml
24
10.80
0.27 ml
1.08 ml
0.16 mL
0.22 ml
25
11.25
0.28 ml
1.13 mL
0.17 mL
0.23 ml
26
11.70
0.29 ml
1.17 mL
0.18 mL
0.23ml
27
12.15
0.30 ml
1.22 ml
0.18ml
0.24 ml
28
12.60
0.32 mL
1.26 mL
0.19 mL
0.25 ml
29
13.05
0.33 mL
1.31 ml
0.20 mL
0.26 ml
30
13.50
0.34 ml
1.35 ml
0.20 ml
0.27 ml
31
13.95
0.35 mL
1.40 ml
0.21 ml
0.28 ml
32
14.40
0.36 mL
1.44 ml
0.22 ml
0.29 ml
33
14.85
0.37 mL
1.49 ml
0.22 mL
0.30 mL
34
15.30
0.38 mL
1.53 ml
0.23 mL
0.31 mL
35
15.75
0.39 mL
1.58 ml
0.24 ml
0.32 ml
36
16.20
0.41 mL
1.62 mL
0.24 mL
0.32 mL
37
16.65
0.42 mL
1.67 mL
0.25mL
0.33 mL
38
17.10
0.43 ml
1.71 mL
0.26 ml
0.34 ml
39
17.55
0.44 ml
1.76 ml
0.26 ml
0.35 mL
40
18.00
0.45 ml
1.80 ml
0.27 mL
0.36 ml
41
18.45
0.46 ml
1.85 ml
0.28 ml
0.37 ml
42
18.90
0.47 ml
1.89 ml
0.28ml
0.38mL
43
19.35
0.48 ml
1.94 ml
0.29 mL
0.39 ml
44
19.80
0.50 mL
1.98 ml
0.30 mL
0.40 ml
45
20.25
0.51 mL
2.03 ml
0.30 mL
0.41 mL
46
20.70
0.52 ml
2.07 ml
0.31 ml
0.41 ml
47
21.15
0.53 ml
2.12 ml
0.32 ml
0.42 ml
48
21.60
0.54 ml
2.16 mL
0.32 mL
0.43 mL
49
22.05
0.55 ml
2.21 mL
0.33 mL
0.44 mL
50
22.50
0.56 ml
2.25 ml
0.34 ml
0.45 mL
174 | Appendix
Hydromorphone, cont'd
2 mg/mL
DOSE: Dogs: 0.05 - 0.2 mg/kg IM, IV, SC for anesthesia; 0.03 - 0.04 mg/kg for epidurals
Cats: 0.05 - 0.1 mg/kg IM, IV, SC for anesthesia
Pet weight
mL to administer
For epidurals
Ibs
kg
0.05 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.03 mg/kg
0.04 mg/kg
51
22.95
0.57 ml
2.30mL
0.34 ml
0.46 ml
52
23.40
0.59 mL
2.34 mL
0.35 ml
0.47 ml
53
23.85
0.60 mL
2.39 mL
0.36ml
0.48 mL
54
24.30
0.61 ml
2.43 ml
0.36 ml
0.49ml
55
24.75
0.62 mL
2.48 mL
0.37 ml
0.50 ml
56
25.20
0.63 ml
2.52 ml
0.38 ml
0.50 mL
57
25.65
0.64 ml
2.57 ml
0.38 ml
0.51 mL
58
26.10
0.65 ml
2.61 mL
0.39 ml
0.52 ml
59
26.55
0.66 mL
2.66 mL
0.40 ml
0.53 ml
60
27.00
0.68 ml
2.70 ml
0.41 mL
0.54 ml
61
27.45
0.69 ml
2.75 ml
0.41 ml
0.55 mL
62
27.90
0.70 ml
2.79 ml
0.42 ml
0.56 ml
63
28.35
0.71 ml
2.84 ml
0.43 mL
0.57 mL
64
28.80
0.72 ml
2.88 mL
0.43 mL
0.58 mL
65
29.25
0.73 mL
2.93 mL
0.44 mL
0.59 mL
66
29.70
0.74 ml
2.97 ml
0.45 ml
0.59 mL
67
30.15
0.75 mL
3.02 ml
0.45 ml
0.60 ml
68
30.60
0.77 ml
3.06 ml
0.46 ml
0.61 ml
0.62 mL
Ap
69
31.05
0.78 ml
3.11 mL
0.47 ml
70
31.50
0.79 mL
3.15 mL
0.47 ml
0.63 mL
opendix
71
31.95
0.80 mL
3.20 ml
0.48 ml
0.64 ml
72
32.40
0.81 mL
3.24 ml
0.49 mL
0.65 mL
73
32.85
0.82 ml
3.29 ml
0.49 ml
0.66 ml
74
33.30
0.83ml
3.33 ml
0.50 ml
0.67 ml
75
33.75
0.84 mL
3.38 ml
0.51 mL
0.68 mL
76
34.20
0.86 mL
3.42 ml
0.51 mL
0.68 ml
77
34.65
0.87 ml
3.47 ml
0.52 ml
0.69 ml
78
35.10
0.88 mL
3.51 ml
0.53 mL
0.70 ml
79
35.55
0.89 ml
3.56 ml
0.53 ml
0.71 ml
80
36.00
0.90 ml
3.60 ml
0.54 ml
0.72 ml
81
36.45
0.91 ml
3.65ml
0.55 ml
0.73 ml
82
36.90
0.92 ml
3.69 ml
0.55 mL
0.74 ml
83
37.35
0.93 mL
3.74 ml
0.56 mL
0.75 ml
84
37.80
0.95 mL
3.78 ml
0.57 ml
0.76 ml
85
38.25
0.96 ml
3.83 ml
0.57 ml
0.77 ml
86
38.70
0.97 mL
3.87 mL
0.58 mL
0.77 ml
87
39.15
0.98 ml
3.92 mL
0.59 mL
0.78 ml
88
39.60
 66 0
3.96 ml
0.59 ml
0.79 ml
89
40.05
1.00 ml
4.01 ml
0.60 ml
0.80 mL
90
40.50
1.01 mL
4.05 mL
0.61 ml
0.81 ml
91
40.95
1.02 mL
4.10 ml
0.61 ml
0.82 ml
92
41.40
1.04 mL
4.14 ml
0.62 ml
0.83mL
93
41.85
1.05 mL
4.19 mL
0.63 ml
0.84 mL
94
42.30
1.06 mL
4.23 ml
0.63 ml
0.85 ml
95
42.75
1.07 mL
4.28 mL
0.64 mL
0.86 mL
96
43.20
1.08 ml
4.32 ml
0.65 ml
0.86 ml
97
43.65
1.09 ml
4.37 ml
0.65 ml
0.87 ml
98
44.10
1.10 mL
4.41 mL
0.66 mL
0.88 mL
99
44.55
1.11 mL
4.46 mL
0.67 mL
0.89 ml
100
45.00
1.13 ml
4.50 mL
0.68 ml
0.90 ml
Appendix | 175
Lidocaine for VpCs
20 mg/mL
DOSE:
Dogs: 1 - 4 mg/kg--administer slowly to effect IV for VPCs.
Cats: 0.25 - 0.5 mg/kg-administer slowly to effect IV for VPCs.
· Note: Can cause bradycardia.
· Lidocaine dose is the same for both AMEP and CPR charts.
Pet weight
Dose for dogs
Dose for cats
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
0.25 mg/kg
0.5 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.02 ml
0.05 mL
0.01 ml
0.01 mL
2
0.90
0.05 ml
0.09 ml
0.01 ml
0.02 ml
3
1.35
0.07 ml
0.14 ml
0.02 ml
0.03 mL
4
1.80
0.09 mL
0.18 ml
0.02 mL
0.05 mL
5
2.25
0.11 ml
0.23 ml
0.03 ml
0.06 mL
6
2.70
0.14 ml
0.27 ml
0.03 ml
0.07 ml
7
3.15
0.16 ml
0.32 ml
0.04 ml
0.08 ml
8
3.60
0.18 mL
0.36 ml
0.05ml
0.09 mL
9
4.05
0.20 ml
0.41 ml
0.05ml
0.10 mL
10
4.50
0.23 mL
0.45 ml
0.06 ml
0.11 mL
11
4.95
0.25 ml
0.50 ml
0.06 mL
0.12 mL
12
5.40
0.27 ml
0.54 ml
0.07 ml
0.14 mL
13
5.85
0.29 ml
0.59 ml
0.07 ml
0.15 mL
14
6.30
0.32 ml
0.63 ml
0.08 ml
0.16 mL
15
6.75
0.34 ml
0.68ml
0.08 ml
0.17 ml
16
7.20
Appendix
0.36 ml
0.72 ml
0.09 ml
0.18 ml
17
7.65
0.38 ml
0.77 mL
0.10 mL
0.19 ml
18
8.10
0.41 ml
0.81 ml
0.10 ml
0.20 mL
19
8.55
0.43 ml
0.86 mL
0.11 ml
0.21 ml
20
00'6
0.45 ml
0.90 ml
0.11 ml
0.23mL
21
9.45
0.47 ml
0.95 ml
0.12 ml
0.24 ml
22
9.90
0.50 ml
0.99ml
0.12 ml
0.25 mL
23
10.35
0.52 ml
1.04 ml
0.13 ml
0.26 mL
24
10.80
0.54 ml
1.08 ml
0.14 ml
0.27 ml
25
11.25
0.56 ml
1.13 ml
0.14 mL
0.28 ml
26
11.70
0.59 ml
1.17 ml
0.15 ml
0.29 ml
27
12.15
0.61 ml
1.22 ml
0.15 ml
0.30 ml
28
12.60
0.63 mL
1.26 mL
0.16 ml
0.32 ml
29
13.05
0.65 mL
1.31 ml
0.16 ml
0.33 ml
30
13.50
0.68 mL
1.35 ml
0.17 ml
0.34 ml
31
13.95
0.70 ml
1.40ml
32
14.40
0.72 ml
1.44 ml
33
14.85
0.74 mL
1.49 ml
34
15.30
0.77 mL
1.53 ml
35
15.75
0.79 mL
1.58 mL
36
16.20
0.81 mL
1.62 mL
37
16.65
0.83 ml
1.67 ml
38
17.10
0.86 mL
1.71 mL
39
17.55
0.88 mL
1.76 ml
40
18.00
0.90 mL
1.80 ml
41
18.45
0.92 ml
1.85 ml
42
18.90
0.95 ml
1.89 mL
43
19.35
0.97 mL
1.94 ml
44
19.80
0.99mL
1.98 mL
45
20.25
1.01 ml
2.03 ml
46
20.70
1.04 mL
2.07 ml
47
21.15
1.06 ml
2.12 mL
48
21.60
1.08 ml
2.16 ml
49
22.05
1.10 ml
2.21 ml
50
22.50
1.13 ml
2.25 mL
176|Appendix
Lidocaine for Vpcs, cont'd
20 mg/mL
DOSE:
Dogs: 1 - 4 mg/kg-administer slowly to effect IV for VPCs.
Cats: 0.25 - 0.5 mg/kg-administer slowly to effect IV for VPCs.
· Note: Can cause bradycardia.
· Lidocaine dose is the same for AMEP and CPR charts.
Pet weight
Dose for dogs
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
51
22.95
1.15 mL
2.30 ml
52
23.40
1.17 mL
2.34 mL
53
23.85
1.19 mL
2.39 ml
54
24.30
1.22 mL
2.43 ml
55
24.75
1.24 ml
2.48 ml
56
25.20
1.26 mL
2.52 ml
57
25.65
1.28 ml
2.57 ml
58
26.10
1.31 mL
2.61 ml
59
26.55
1.33 mL
2.66 ml
60
27.00
1.35 mL
2.70 ml
61
27.45
1.37 mL
2.75 ml
62
27.90
1.40 ml
2.79 ml
63
28.35
1.42 mL
2.84 ml
64
28.80
1.44 mL
2.88 ml
65
29.25
1.46 mL
2.93ml
66
29.70
1.49 ml
2.97 ml
Ap
67
30.15
1.51 mL
3.02 ml
68
30.60
1.53 mL
3.06 ml
opendix
69
31.05
1.55 mL
3.11 mL
70
31.50
1.58 mL
3.15 mL
71
31.95
1.60 mL
3.20 ml
72
32.40
1.62 mL
3.24 ml
73
32.85
1.64 ml
3.29 ml
74
33.30
1.67 mL
3.33 mL
75
33.75
1.69 mL
3.38mL
76
34.20
1.71 mL
3.42 ml
77
34.65
1.73 mL
3.47 ml
78
35.10
1.76 ml
3.51 ml
79
35.55
1.78 ml
3.56 ml
80
36.00
1.80 mL
3.60 ml
81
36.45
1.82 mL
3.65 ml
82
36.90
1.85 mL
3.69 ml
83
37.35
1.87 mL
3.74 ml
84
37.80
1.89 mL
3.78 ml
85
38.25
1.91 mL
3.83 mL
86
38.70
1.94 ml
3.87 ml
87
39.15
1.96 mL
3.92 ml
88
39.60
1.98 mL
3.96 mL
89
40.05
2.00 ml
4.01 mL
90
40.50
2.03 ml
4.05 ml
91
40.95
2.05 ml
4.10 ml
92
41.40
2.07 ml
4.14 ml
93
41.85
2.09 ml
4.19 mL
94
42.30
2.12 mL
4.23 ml
95
42.75
2.14 ml
4.28 mL
96
43.20
2.16 ml
4.32 ml
97
43.65
2.18 ml
4.37 ml
98
44.10
2.21 ml
4.41 ml
99
44.55
2.23ml
4.46 ml
100
45.00
2.25 mL
4.50 ml
Appendix|177
Lidocaine Local Anesthetic Blocks
2% (20 mg/mL)
DOsE: 1 - 2 mg/kg for local blocks; doses are cumulative; do not mix with bupivacaine.
Pet weight
mL to administer
Petweight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.02 ml
0.05 mL
51
22.95
1.15 ml
2.30 ml
2
0.90
0.05 ml
0.09 mL
52
23.40
1.17 ml
2.34 ml
3
1.35
0.07 mL
0.14 mL
53
23.85
1.19 ml
2.39mL
4
1.80
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
54
24.30
1.22 ml
2.43 ml
5
2.25
0.11 mL
0.23 mL
55
24.75
1.24 mL
2.48 mL
6
2.70
0.14 mL
0.27 mL
56
25.20
1.26 mL
2.52 mL
7
3.15
0.16 ml
0.32 mL
57
25.65
1.28 mL
2.57 mL
8
3.60
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
58
26.10
1.31 mL
2.61 mL
9
4.05
0.20mL
0.41 mL
59
26.55
1.33 mL
2.66 mL
10
4.50
0.23mL
0.45 mL
60
27.00
1.35 mL
2.70 mL
11
4.95
0.25 mL
0.50 mL
61
27.45
1.37 mL
2.75 mL
12
5.40
0.27 mL
0.54 mL
62
27.90
1.40 mL
2.79 ml
13
5.85
0.29 mL
0.59 mL
63
28.35
1.42 mL
2.84 mL
14
6.30
0.32 ml
0.63 mL
64
28.80
1.44 ml
2.88 mL
15
6.75
0.34 ml
0.68 mL
65
29.25
1.46 ml
2.93 ml
16
7.20
0.36 ml
0.72 mL
66
29.70
1.49 mL
2.97 mL
17
7.65
0.38 ml
0.77 mL
67
30.15
1.51 ml
3.02 ml
18
8.10
0.41 ml
0.81 mL
68
30.60
1.53 ml
3.06 ml
19
8.55
0.43 ml
0.86 mL
69
31.05
1.55 ml
3.11 ml
pendix
20
9.00
0.45 ml
0.90 mL
70
31.50
1.58 ml
3.15 ml
21
9.45
0.47 ml
0.95 mL
71
31.95
1.60 mL
3.20 mL
22
9.90
0.50 ml
 66:0
72
32.40
1.62 ml
3.24 ml
23
10.35
0.52 ml
1.04 mL
73
32.85
1.64 mL
3.29 mL
24
10.80
0.54 mL
1.08 mL
74
33.30
1.67 ml
3.33 mL
25
11.25
0.56 mL
1.13 mL
75
33.75
1.69 mL
3.38mL
26
11.70
0.59mL
1.17 mL
76
34.20
1.71 mL
3.42 mL
27
12.15
0.61 mL
1.22 mL
77
34.65
1.73 mL
3.47 mL
28
12.60
0.63 mL
1.26 mL
78
35.10
1.76 mL
3.51 mL
29
13.05
0.65 mL
1.31 mL
79
35.55
1.78 mL
3.56 mL
30
13.50
0.68 mL
1.35 mL
80
36.00
1.80 mL
3.60 mL
31
13.95
0.70 ml
1.40 mL
81
36.45
1.82 ml
3.65 ml
32
14.40
0.72 ml
1.44 mL
82
36.90
1.85 mL
3.69 mL
33
14.85
0.74 ml
1.49 mL
83
37.35
1.87 ml
3.74 mL
34
15.30
0.77 ml
1.53 mL
84
37.80
1.89 mL
3.78 ml
35
15.75
0.79 ml
1.58 mL
85
38.25
1.91 ml
3.83 ml
36
16.20
0.81 ml
1.62 mL
86
38.70
1.94 ml
3.87 ml
37
16.65
0.83 ml
1.67 mL
87
39.15
1.96 ml
3.92 mL
38
17.10
0.86 mL
1.71 mL
88
39.60
1.98 ml
3.96 ml
39
17.55
0.88 ml
1.76 mL
89
40.05
2.00 mL
4.01 mL
40
18.00
0.90ml
1.80 mL
90
40.50
2.03 ml
4.05 ml
41
18.45
0.92 mL
1.85 mL
91
40.95
2.05 mL
4.10 mL
42
18.90
0.95mL
1.89 mL
92
41.40
2.07 mL
4.14 mL
43
19.35
0.97 mL
1.94 mL
93
41.85
2.09 mL
4.19 mL
44
19.80
7w 660
1.98 mL
94
42.30
2.12 mL
4.23 ml
45
20.25
1.01 mL
2.03 mL
95
42.75
2.14 mL
4.28 mL
46
20.70
1.04 mL
2.07 mL
96
43.20
2.16 mL
4.32 mL
47
21.15
1.06 ml
2.12 ml
97
43.65
2.18 ml
4.37 ml
48
21.60
1.08 ml
2.16 ml
98
44.10
2.21 mL
4.41 mL
49
22.05
1.10 mL
2.21 ml
66
44.55
2.23ml
4.46 ml
50
22.50
1.13 mL
2.25 mL
100
45.00
2.25 mL
4.50 mL
178
Appendix
Meloxicam Injectable
5 mg/mL
DOSE: 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg SC as part of declaw protocol in cats. 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg dose is one-time only.
Pet weight
mL to administer in cats
Ibs
kg
0.1 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.01 ml
0.02 mL
2
0.90
0.02 mL
0.04 mL
3
1.35
0.03 mL
0.05 mL
4
1.80
0.04 mL
0.07 mL
5
2.25
0.05 mL
0.09 mL
6
2.70
0.05 mL
0.11 mL
7
3.15
0.06 mL
0.13 mL
8
3.60
0.07 mL
0.14 mL
9
4.05
0.08 mL
0.16 mL
10
4.50
0.09 ml
0.18 mL
11
4.95
0.10 mL
0.20 mL
12
5.40
0.11 mL
0.22 ml
13
5.85
0.12 mL
0.23mL
14
6.30
0.13 mL
0.25 mL
15
6.75
0.14 mL
0.27 mL
16
7.20
0.14 mL
0.29 mL
opendix
17
7.65
0.15 mL
0.31 mL
18
8.10
0.16 mL
0.32 mL
19
8.55
0.17 mL
0.34 mL
20
9.00
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
21
9.45
0.19 mL
0.38 mL
22
9.90
0.20 mL
0.40 mL
23
10.35
0.21 mL
0.41 mL
24
10.80
0.22 mL
0.43 mL
25
11.25
0.23 mL
0.45 mL
Appendix|179
Midazolam
1 mg/mL
DOSE: 0.1 - 0.2 mg/kg IM (IV for Emergency Surgery Protocol)
 Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
0.1 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.4 mg/kg
lbs
kg
0.1 mg/kg
0.2 mg/kg
0.4 mg/kg
0.45
0.05 mL
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
51
22.95
2.30 mL
4.59 mL
9.18 mL
1
2
0.90
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
52
23.40
2.34 mL
4.68 mL
9.36 mL
3
1.35
0.14 mL
0.27 ml
0.54 mL
53
23.85
2.39 mL
4.77 mL
9.54 mL
4
1.80
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
0.72 mL
54
24.30
2.43 mL
4.86 mL
9.72 ml
5
2.25
0.23 mL
0.45 mL
0.90 mL
55
24.75
2.48 mL
4.95 mL
9.90 ml
6
2.70
0.27 mL
0.54 mL
1.08 mL
56
25.20
2.52 mL
5.04 mL
10.08 ml
7
3.15
0.32 mL
0.63 mL
1.26 mL
57
25.65
2.57 mL
 5.13 mL
10.26 mL
8
3.60
0.36 mL
0.72 ml
1.44 mL
58
26.10
 2.61 mL
 5.22 mL
10.44 mL
9
4.05
0.41 mL
0.81 mL
1.62 mL
59
26.55
2.66 mL
5.31 mL
10.62 mL
10
4.50
0.45 mL
0.90 mL
1.80 mL
60
27.00
2.70 mL
5.40 mL
10.80 mL
11
4.95
0.50 mL
0.99 mL
1.98 mL
61
27.45
2.75 mL
5.49 mL
10.98 mL
12
5.40
0.54 ml
1.08 mL
2.16 ml
62
27.90
2.79 mL
5.58 mL
11.16 mL
13
5.85
0.59 ml
1.17 mL
2.34 mL
63
28.35
2.84 ml
5.67 mL
11.34 ml
14
6.30
0.63 mL
1.26 mL
2.52 mL
64
28.80
2.88 mL
5.76 mL
11.52 mL
15
6.75
0.68 mL
1.35 mL
2.70 mL
65
29.25
2.93 mL
5.85 mL
11.70 mL
16
7.20
0.72 mL
1.44 mL
2.88 mL
66
29.70
2.97 mL
5.94 mL
11.88 mL
17
7.65
0.77 ml
1.53 mL
3.06 ml
67
30.15
3.02 ml
6.03 mL
12.06 ml
18
8.10
0.81 mL
1.62 mL
3.24 mL
68
30.60
3.06 mL
6.12 mL
12.24 mL
Appendix
19
8.55
0.86 mL
1.71 mL
3.42 mL
69
31.05
3.11 mL
6.21 mL
12.42 mL
20
9.00
0.90 ml
1.80 mL
3.60 mL
70
31.50
3.15 mL
6.30 mL
12.60 mL
21
9.45
0.95 mL
1.89 mL
3.78 mL
71
31.95
3.20 mL
6.39 mL
12.78 mL
22
06'6
0.99 mL
1.98 mL
3.96 mL
72
32.40
3.24 mL
6.48 mL
12.96 mL
23
10.35
1.04 mL
2.07 mL
4.14 mL
73
32.85
3.29 mL
6.57 mL
13.14 mL
24
10.80
1.08 ml
2.16 mL
4.32 mL
74
33.30
3.33 mL
6.66 mL
13.32 mL
25
11.25
1.13 mL
2.25 mL
4.50 mL
75
33.75
3.38 mL
6.75 mL
13.50 mL
26
11.70
1.17 mL
2.34 mL
4.68 mL
76
34.20
3.42 mL
6.84 mL
13.68 mL
27
12.15
1.22 mL
2.43 mL
4.86 mL
77
34.65
3.47 mL
6.93 mL
13.86 mL
28
12.60
1.26 mL
2.52 mL
5.04 mL
78
35.10
3.51 mL
7.02 mL
14.04 ml
29
13.05
1.31 mL
2.61 ml
5.22 mL
79
35.55
3.56 mL
7.11 mL
14.22 mL
30
13.50
1.35 mL
2.70 mL
5.40 mL
08
36.00
3.60 mL
7.20 mL
14.40 mL
31
13.95
1.40 ml
2.79 mL
5.58 mL
81
36.45
3.65 ml
7.29 mL
14.58 ml
32
14.40
1.44 ml
2.88 mL
5.76 ml
82
36.90
3.69 ml
7.38 mL
14.76 ml
33
14.85
1.49 mL
2.97 mL
5.94 mL
83
37.35
3.74 mL
7.47 mL
14.94 mL
34
15.30
1.53 mL
3.06 mL
6.12 mL
84
37.80
3.78 mL
7.56 mL
15.12 mL
35
15.75
1.58 mL
3.15 mL
6.30 mL
85
38.25
3.83 mL
7.65 mL
15.30 ml
36
16.20
1.62 mL
3.24 ml
6.48 mL
86
38.70
3.87 mL
7.74 mL
15.48 mL
37
16.65
1.67 mL
3.33 mL
6.66 mL
87
39.15
3.92 mL
7.83 mL
15.66 mL
38
17.10
1.71 mL
3.42 mL
6.84 mL
88
39.60
3.96 mL
7.92 mL
15.84 mL
39
17.55
1.76 ml
3.51 mL
7.02 mL
89
40.05
4.01 mL
8.01 mL
16.02 mL
40
18.00
1.80 mL
3.60 mL
7.20 mL
90
40.50
4.05 mL
8.10 mL
16.20 mL
41
18.45
1.85 mL
3.69 mL
7.38 mL
91
40.95
4.10 mL
8.19 mL
16.38 mL
42
18.90
1.89 mL
3.78 mL
7.56 mL
92
41.40
4.14 mL
8.28 mL
16.56 ml
43
19.35
1.94 ml
3.87 mL
7.74 mL
93
41.85
4.19 ml
8.37 mL
16.74 mL
44
19.80
1.98 ml
3.96 mL
7.92 mL
94
42.30
4.23 mL
8.46 mL
16.92 mL
45
20.25
2.03 mL
4.05 mL
8.10 mL
95
42.75
4.28 mL
8.55 mL
17.10 mL
46
20.70
2.07 mL
4.14 mL
8.28 mL
96
43.20
4.32 mL
8.64 mL
17.28 mL
47
21.15
2.12 mL
4.23 mL
8.46 mL
97
43.65
4.37 mL
8.73 mL
17.46 mL
48
21.60
2.16 mL
4.32 mL
8.64 mL
98
44.10
4.41 mL
8.82 mL
17.64 mL
49
22.05
2.21 mL
4.41 mL
8.82 mL
99
44.55
4.46 mL
8.91 mL
17.82 mL
50
22.50
2.25 ml
4.50 mL
9.00 mL
100
45.00
4.50 ml
9.00 mL
18.00 ml
180
 Appendix
Propofol
10 mg/mL
 DOsE: 1 - 6 mg/kg IV for immobilization and induction for anesthesia protocols
Pet weight
mL to administer
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
2 mg/kg
4 mg/kg
6 mg/kg
Ibs
kg
2 mg/kg
4 mg/kg
6mg/kg
0.45
0.09 mL
0.18 mL
0.27 mL
51
22.95
4.59 mL
9.18 mL
13.77 mL
2
0.90
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
0.54 mL
52
23.40
4.68 mL
9.36 mL
14.04 mL
3
1.35
0.27 mL
0.54 ml
0.81 mL
53
23.85
4.77 mL
9.54 mL
14.31 mL
4
1.80
0.36 mL
0.72 mL
1.08 mL
54
24.30
4.86 mL
9.72 mL
14.58 mL
5
2.25
0.45 mL
06'0
1.35 mL
55
24.75
4.95 mL
9.90 mL
14.85 mL
6
2.70
0.54 ml
1.08 mL
1.62 mL
56
25.20
5.04 mL
10.08 mL
15.12 mL
7
3.15
0.63mL
1.26 mL
1.89 mL
57
25.65
5.13 mL
10.26 mL
15.39 mL
8
3.60
0.72 mL
1.44 mL
2.16 mL
58
26.10
5.22 mL
10.44 mL
15.66 mL
9
4.05
0.81 mL
1.62 ml
2.43 ml
59
26.55
5.31 mL
10.62 ml
15.93 ml
10
4.50
0.90 mL
1.80 mL
2.70 mL
60
27.00
5.40 mL
10.80 mL
16.20 mL
11
4.95
0.99 mL
1.98 mL
2.97 ml
61
27.45
5.49 mL
10.98 mL
16.47 mL
12
5.40
1.08 mL
2.16 mL
3.24 mL
62
27.90
5.58 mL
11.16 mL
16.74 mL
13
5.85
1.17 mL
2.34 mL
3.51 mL
63
28.35
5.67 mL
11.34 mL
17.01 mL
14
6.30
1.26 mL
2.52 mL
3.78 mL
64
28.80
5.76 mL
11.52 mL
17.28 mL
15
6.75
1.35 mL
2.70 mL
4.05 mL
65
29.25
5.85 mL
11.70 mL
17.55 mL
16
7.20
1.44 mL
2.90 mL
4.32 mL
66
29.70
5.94 mL
11.88 mL
17.82 mL
17
7.65
1.53 mL
3.06 mL
4.59 mL
67
30.15
6.03 mL
12.06 mL
18.09 mL
18
8.10
1.62 mL
3.24 mL
4.86 mL
68
30.60
6.12 mL
12.24 mL
18.36 mL
19
8.55
1.71 mL
3.42 ml
5.13 mL
69
31.05
6.21 mL
12.42 mL
18.63 mL
20
9.00
1.80 ml
3.60 ml
5.40 mL
70
31.50
6.30 mL
12.60 mL
18.90 mL
21
9.45
1.89 mL
3.78 mL
5.67 mL
71
31.95
6.39 mL
12.78 mL
19.17 mL
22
9.90
1.98 mL
3.96 mL
5.94 mL
72
32.40
6.48 mL
12.96 mL
19.44 mL
23
10.35
2.07 mL
4.14 mL
6.21 mL
73
32.85
6.57 mL
13.14 mL
19.71 mL
24
10.80
2.16 mL
4.32ml
6.48 mL
74
33.30
6.66 mL
13.32 mL
19.98 mL
25
11.25
2.25 ml
4.50 ml
6.75 mL
75
33.75
6.75 mL
13.50 mL
20.25mL
26
11.70
2.34 mL
4.68 mL
7.02 mL
76
34.20
6.84 mL
13.68 mL
20.52 mL
27
12.15
2.43 mL
4.86 mL
7.29 mL
77
34.65
6.93 mL
13.86 mL
20.79 mL
28
12.60
2.52 mL
5.04 mL
7.56 mL
78
35.10
7.02 mL
14.04 mL
21.06 mL
29
13.05
2.61 ml
5.22 mL
7.83 mL
79
35.55
7.11 mL
14.22 mL
21.33 mL
30
13.50
2.70 ml
5.40 ml
8.10 mL
80
36.00
7.20 mL
14.40 mL
21.60 ml
31
13.95
2.79 ml
5.58 ml
8.37 mL
81
36.45
7.29 mL
14.58 mL
21.87 mL
32
14.40
2.88 mL
5.76 mL
8.64 mL
82
36.90
7.38 mL
14.76 mL
22.14 mL
33
14.85
2.97 mL
5.94 mL
8.91 mL
83
37.35
7.47 mL
14.94 mL
22.41 mL
34
15.30
3.06 ml
6.12 mL
9.18 mL
84
37.80
7.56 mL
15.12 mL
22.68 mL
35
15.75
3.15 ml
6.30 mL
9.45 mL
85
38.25
7.65 mL
15.30 mL
22.95 mL
36
16.20
3.24 mL
6.48 mL
9.72 mL
86
38.70
7.74 mL
15.48 mL
23.22 mL
37
16.65
3.33 ml
6.66 mL
7w 66:6
87
39.15
7.83 mL
15.66 mL
23.49 mL
38
17.10
3.42 mL
6.84 mL
10.26 ml
88
39.60
7.92 mL
15.84 mL
23.76 mL
39
17.55
3.51 ml
7.02 ml
10.53 mL
89
40.05
8.01 mL
16.02 mL
24.03 mL
40
18.00
3.60 mL
7.20 ml
10.80 mL
06
40.50
8.10 mL
16.20 mL
24.30 mL
41
18.45
3.69 ml
7.38 ml
11.07 ml
91
40.95
8.19 mL
16.38 mL
24.57 ml
42
18.90
3.78 ml
7.56 ml
11.34 mL
92
41.40
8.28 mL
16.56 mL
24.84ml
43
19.35
3.87 mL
7.74 mL
11.61 mL
93
41.85
8.37 mL
16.74 mL
25.11 mL
44
19.80
3.96 mL
7.92 mL
11.88 mL
94
42.30
8.46 mL
16.92 mL
25.38 mL
45
20.25
4.05 mL
8.10 mL
12.15 mL
95
42.75
8.55 mL
17.10 mL
25.65 ml
46
20.70
4.14 mL
8.28 mL
12.42 mL
96
43.20
8.64 ml
17.28 mL
25.92 ml
47
21.15
4.23 ml
8.46 ml
12.69 ml
97
43.65
8.73 ml
17.46 ml
26.19 ml
48
21.60
4.32 mL
8.64 mL
12.96 mL
86
44.10
8.82 mL
17.64 mL
26.46 ml
49
22.05
4.41 mL
8.82 mL
13.23 mL
66
44.55
8.91 mL
17.82 mL
26.73 ml
50
22.50
4.50 mL
9.00 mL
13.50 mL
100
45.00
W 00'6
18.00 mL
27.00 mL
Appendix | 181
Telazol
100 mg/mL
uonpu! Aabuns jea loy Ai by/bw z - 1 pue shop snoioey hoy Wi by/bw t - 1 :soa
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
3 mg/kg
4 mg/kg
1
0.45
0.005 ml
0.01 mL
0.01 mL
0.02 ml
2
0.90
0.01 ml
0.02 mL
0.03 ml
0.04 ml
3
1.35
0.01 ml
0.03 ml
0.04 ml
0.05 ml
4
1.80
0.02 ml
0.04 ml
0.05 ml
0.07 ml
5
2.25
0.02 mL
0.05 mL
0.07 ml
0.09 ml
6
2.70
0.03 mL
0.05 mL
0.08 ml
0.11 mL
7
3.15
0.03 ml
0.06 ml
0.09 ml
0.13 ml
8
3.60
0.04 ml
0.07 ml
0.11 ml
0.14 ml
9
4.05
0.04 ml
0.08 ml
0.12 ml
0.16 ml
10
4.50
0.05 mL
0.09 mL
0.14 mL
0.18 ml
11
4.95
0.05 mL
0.10 mL
0.15 mL
0.20 ml
12
5.40
0.05 mL
0.11 mL
0.16 ml
0.22 ml
13
5.85
0.06 ml
0.12 mL
0.18 ml
0.23 ml
14
6.30
0.06 ml
0.13 mL
0.19 ml
0.25 ml
15
6.75
0.07 ml
0.14 ml
0.20 ml
0.27 ml
16
7.20
0.07 mL
0.14 mL
0.22 ml
0.29 ml
17
7.65
0.08 mL
0.15 mL
0.23 ml
0.31 ml
ppendix
18
8.10
0.08 ml
0.16 mL
0.24 ml
0.32 ml
19
8.55
0.09 mL
0.17 ml
0.26 ml
0.34 ml
20
9.00
0.09 mL
0.18 ml
0.27 ml
0.36 ml
21
9.45
0.09 mL
0.19 mL
0.28 mL
0.38 ml
22
9.90
0.10 mL
0.20ml
0.30mL
0.40 ml
23
10.35
0.10 mL
0.21 ml
0.31 ml
0.41 ml
24
10.80
0.11 mL
0.22 ml
0.32 ml
0.43 ml
25
11.25
0.11 mL
0.23 ml
0.34 ml
0.45 ml
26
11.70
0.12 ml
0.23 ml
0.35 ml
0.47 ml
27
12.15
0.12 ml
0.24 ml
0.36 ml
0.49 ml
28
12.60
0.13 ml
0.25 mL
0.38 ml
0.50 ml
29
13.05
0.13 ml
0.26 mL
0.39 ml
0.52 mL
30
13.50
0.14 ml
0.27 ml
0.41 ml
0.54 ml
31
13.95
0.14 ml
0.28 ml
0.42 ml
0.56 ml
32
14.40
0.14 mL
0.29 mL
0.43 ml
0.58 ml
33
14.85
0.15 ml
0.30 mL
0.45 mL
0.59 ml
34
15.30
0.15 mL
0.31 mL
0.46 mL
0.61 mL
35
15.75
0.16 ml
0.32 ml
0.47 ml
0.63 ml
36
16.20
0.16 ml
0.32 mL
0.49 ml
0.65 ml
37
16.65
0.17 ml
0.33 ml
0.50 ml
0.67 ml
38
17.10
0.17 ml
0.34 ml
0.51 ml
0.68 ml
39
17.55
0.18 mL
0.35 mL
0.53 ml
0.70 ml
40
18.00
0.18 mL
0.36 mL
0.54 ml
0.72 ml
41
18.45
0.18 ml
0.37 mL
0.55 ml
0.74 ml
42
18.90
0.19 ml
0.38 ml
0.57 ml
0.76 ml
43
19.35
0.19 ml
0.39 mL
0.58 ml
0.77 ml
44
19.80
0.20 ml
0.40 mL
0.59 mL
0.79 ml
45
20.25
0.20 ml
0.41 ml
0.61 mL
0.81 ml
46
20.70
0.21 ml
0.41 mL
0.62 ml
0.83 ml
47
21.15
0.21 ml
0.42 ml
0.63 ml
0.85 ml
48
21.60
0.22 ml
0.43 ml
0.65 ml
0.86 ml
49
22.05
0.22 ml
0.44 ml
0.66 ml
0.88 ml
50
22.50
0.23ml
0.45mL
0.68 ml
0.90 ml
182 | Appendix
Telazol, cont'd
100 mg/mL
uonpui Aabns sea lot Ai by/bw z - 1 pue shop snoioey doy Wi by/bw t ot 1 soa
Pet weight
mL to administer
Ibs
kg
1 mg/kg
2 mg/kg
3 mg/kg
4 mg/kg
51
22.95
0.23 ml
0.46 mL
0.69 ml
0.92 mL
52
23.40
0.23 mL
0.47 ml
0.70 ml
0.94 ml
53
23.85
0.24 ml
0.48 mL
0.72 ml
0.95 ml
54
24.30
0.24 mL
0.49 ml
0.73 ml
0.97 mL
55
24.75
0.25 mL
0.50 mL
0.74 ml
0.99 ml
56
25.20
0.25 ml
0.50 mL
0.76 ml
1.01 mL
57
25.65
0.26 mL
0.51 mL
0.77 ml
1.03 ml
58
26.10
0.26 mL
0.52 ml
0.78 ml
1.04 mL
59
26.55
0.27 ml
0.53 ml
0.80 ml
1.06 ml
60
27.00
0.27 ml
0.54 ml
0.81 ml
1.08 ml
61
27.45
0.27 ml
0.55ml
0.82ml
1.10 ml
62
27.90
0.28 ml
0.56 ml
0.84 ml
1.12 ml
63
28.35
0.28 mL
0.57 mL
0.85 ml
1.13 mL
64
28.80
0.29 mL
0.58 mL
0.86 ml
1.15 mL
65
29.25
0.29 mL
0.59 mL
0.88 ml
1.17 mL
66
29.70
0.30 mL
0.59 mL
0.89 ml
1.19 ml
67
30.15
0.30 ml
0.60 ml
0.90 ml
1.21 ml
68
30.60
0.31 ml
0.61 mL
0.92 ml
1.22 ml
69
31.05
0.31 ml
0.62 ml
0.93 ml
1.24 ml
0.32 ml
0.63 mL
Ap
70
31.50
0.95 ml
1.26 mL
71
31.95
0.32 mL
0.64 ml
0.96 ml
1.28 mL
opendix
72
32.40
0.32 ml
0.65ml
0.97 ml
1.30 ml
73
32.85
0.33 mL
0.66 mL
0.99 ml
1.31 mL
74
33.30
0.33 ml
0.67 ml
1.00 ml
1.33 ml
75
33.75
0.34 mL
0.68 mL
1.01 ml
1.35 mL
76
34.20
0.34 mL
0.68 mL
1.03 ml
1.37 mL
77
34.65
0.35 ml
0.69 ml
1.04 ml
1.39 mL
78
35.10
0.35 mL
0.70 mL
1.05 mL
1.40 mL
79
35.55
0.36 mL
0.71 mL
1.07 ml
1.42 mL
80
36.00
0.36 mL
0.72 ml
1.08 ml
1.44 ml
81
36.45
0.36 mL
0.73 ml
1.09 mL
1.46 mL
82
36.90
0.37 mL
0.74 mL
1.11 ml
1.48 ml
83
37.35
0.37 mL
0.75 mL
1.12 ml
1.49 ml
84
37.80
0.38 mL
0.76 mL
1.13 mL
1.51 mL
85
38.25
0.38 mL
0.77 mL
1.15 mL
1.53 mL
86
38.70
0.39 mL
0.77 mL
1.16 ml
1.55 mL
87
39.15
0.39 mL
0.78 mL
1.17 mL
1.57 mL
88
39.60
0.40 ml
0.79 mL
1.19 ml
1.58 ml
89
40.05
0.40 ml
0.80 ml
1.20 ml
1.60 ml
90
40.50
0.41 ml
0.81 ml
1.22 ml
1.62 ml
91
40.95
0.41 ml
0.82 ml
1.23 ml
1.64 ml
92
41.40
0.41 mL
0.83 mL
1.24 ml
1.66 mL
93
41.85
0.42 mL
0.84 ml
1.26 mL
1.67 ml
94
42.30
0.42 mL
0.85 mL
1.27 ml
1.69 ml
95
42.75
0.43 mL
0.86 mL
1.28 ml
1.71 mL
96
43.20
0.43 ml
0.86 ml
1.30 ml
1.73 ml
97
43.65
0.44 mL
0.87 mL
1.31 ml
1.75 mL
98
44.10
0.44 mL
0.88 mL
1.32 mL
1.76 mL
99
44.55
0.45 mL
0.89ml
1.34 ml
1.78 mL
100
45.00
0.45 mL
0.90 mL
1.35 mL
1.80 mL
Appendix | 183
184 | Appendix
Banfield
PET HOSPITAL